


Cover images 0 
Murray Robertson/visual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table. available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-61 7-8 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2000 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4OWE UK 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 2 1, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

Preface 
More than in any other region of the Periodic Table, the main group (s- 
and p-block) elements are diverse, ranging from highly reactive non- 
metallic elements such as fluorine, through semi-metals (e.g. silicon) to 
the highly reactive alkali metals. The Periodic Table itself is an excellent 
framework for the discussion of the trends in physical and chemical prop- 
erties of the main group elements and their compounds. This book has 
been written with the aim of summarizing some of the more important 
features of the vast and varied chemistry of the main group elements, 
emphasizing some of the more important periodic trends and principles 
for rationalizing the properties. Discussion of the descriptive chemistry is 
backed up by worked examples and problems. Space restrictions have lim- 
ited discussion of several areas where main group elements are significant 
players, such as bio-inorganic chemistry and industrial chemistry. 
I would like to thank Professor Brian Nicholson, Dr. Richard Coll and 
Dr. Michael Taylor for many helpful comments on various drafts of the 
manuscript. I am also indebted to my wife, Angela, for giving me a 
teacher’s point of view on the material. 
Further problems, with answers, are available on the RSC’s Tutorial 
Chemistry Texts website at http://www.chemsoc.org/tct/maingrouphome. 
htm 

This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject. embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  I N  T H F  S E K l E S  
F O R T H  CO M I N G T I T  L ES 
Stereochemistry D G‘ Morris 
Reactions and Charxterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henikc~rsori 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry .4 F Hill 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hmroii 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C Jofirs 
M eclia n isms i n Organic Reac t i oils 
S E Dmii 
D 0 Hy,>Ituril 
J D Golo titid J M Sdtkoti 
R A J d x ) i i  
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
Electrochemistry 
X-ray Crystallography 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Structure and Bonding 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Spectroscopy: Physical 
Spectroscopy: Organic 
Biology for Chemists 
Fwt l i ~ r  
ill jorr i i(i t ioii i r ho I I t t Ii is series is ci viiilrrhlo N 1 I 13 I I* 
I 1: dim isoc. o rglt ci 
0rikor.s cind iviipirics slioultl he scrit to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas @aham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB40WF. U K  
Tel: +44 I223 432360; Fax: +44 I233 423429; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
I .  1 
Introduction 
1 
1.3 Periodic Trends among the Main Group Elements 
5 
I .4 Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion Theory 
7 
1.2 Ionization Energy, Electron Affinity and Electronegativity 
2 
1.5 Molecular Orbital Theory 
15 
2.1 
Introduction 
20 
2.2 The Element 
21 
2.3 The Chemistry of Hydrogen 
23 
2.4 Hydrides 
24 
2.5 Compounds containing Hydrogen formally as H+ 
27 
2.6 The Hydrogen Bond 
28 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
3.8 
3.9 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The Elements 
Chemistry of the Alkali Metals 
Siniple Salts of the Alkali Metals 
Compounds with Oxygen and Sulfur 
Compounds with Nitrogen 
Hydrides 
Compounds with Carbon 
Alkali Metal Complexes 
33 
34 
35 
36 
39 
40 
41 
41 
42 
V 

vi 
Main Group Chemistry 
3.10 Similarities in the Chemistry of Lithium and Magnesium 
43 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4.5 
4.6 
4.7 
4.8 
4.9 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
5.4 
5.5 
5.6 
5.7 
5.8 
5.9 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
6.7 
6.8 
6.9 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The Elements 
Simple Compounds and Salts 
Compounds with Oxygen and Sulfur 
Compounds with Nitrogen 
H ydrides 
Compounds with Carbon 
Group 2 Metal Complexes 
Similarities in the Chemistry of Beryllium and Aluminium 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The Elements 
Chemistry of the Elements 
Borides 
Halides 
Hydrides and Organometallic Compounds 
Oxides, Hydroxides and Oxyanions 
Compounds with Groups 15 and 16 Elements 
Aquated and Related Complex Cations 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The Elements 
Chemistry of the Elements 
Group 14 Hydrides and Organometallic Compounds 
Group 14 Halides 
Carbides and Silicides 
Oxides 
Sulfides, Selenides and Tellurides 
Polyatomic Anions of the Group 14 Elements 
46 
47 
47 
50 
51 
52 
52 
54 
55 
57 
58 
59 
59 
60 
63 
69 
71 
73 
76 
77 
80 
81 
82 
84 
85 
88 
88 

Contents 
vii 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
7.4 
7.5 
7.6 
7.7 
7.5 
8. I 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
8.5 
8.6 
8.7 
8.8 
9.1 
9.2 
9.3 
9.4 
9.5 
9.6 
9.7 
9.8 
lntroduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The Elements 
H ydrides 
Oxides 
Sulfides 
Oxyanions and Oxyacids 
Halides 
Nitrides and Phosphides 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The Elements 
Hydrides and Related Species 
Halides 
Oxides 
Oxyhalides of Sulfur, Selenium and Tellurium 
Oxyacids of Sulfur, Selenium and Tellurium 
Polychalcogen Cations 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The Elements 
Chemistry of the Elements 
Hydrogen Halides, HX, and Halide Salts, X 
Halogen Oxides 
Oxyacids and Oxyanions of the Halogens 
Interhalogen Compounds 
The Chemistry of Astatine 
92 
93 
95 
102 
103 
105 
107 
98 
110 
111 
113 
118 
120 
121 
122 
124 
128 
129 
130 
131 
132 
134 
137 
142 
10. I Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
146 
10.2 The Elements 
148 
10.3 Noble Gas Halides 
149 
10.4 Reactions of Noble Gas Fluorides with Fluoride Ion 
Acceptors and Donors 
151 
10.5 Xenon-Oxygen Compounds 
152 

viii 
Main Group Chemistry 
10.6 Xenon and Krypton Compounds with Bonds to Elements 
other than 0 and F 
154 
1 1.1 Introduction 
11.2 The Elements 
11.3 Chemistry of the Elements 
11.4 Halides 
11.5 Chalcogenides and Related Compounds 
1 1.6 Oxygen Compounds 
1 1.7 Formation of Coordination Complexes 
1 1.8 Low-valent Compounds 
12.1 Introduction 
12.2 Polyphosphates 
12.3 Silicates 
12.4 Silicone Polymers 
12.5 Polyphosphazenes 
157 
158 
158 
158 
159 
160 
161 
162 
165 
165 
168 
173 
174 

.- 
Some Aspects of Structure and 
Bonding in Main Group 
Chemistry 
I .I Introduction 
As a prelude to discussion of the chemistry of the main group elements, 
this chapter aims to introduce aspects of the structure and bonding of 
main group compounds. It is assumed that the reader has a basic under- 
standing of atomic structure and bonding. We will start by discussing 
the concepts of ionization energy, electron affinity and electronegativi- 
ty, which provide a framework for a brief overview of the chemistry of 
the main group elements, setting the scene for the detailed chemistry 
described in subsequent chapters. Valence shell electron pair repulsion 
theory (VSEPR), a powerful but simple theory for predicting and ration- 
alizing the shapes adopted by main group compounds, is then discussed. 
The concept of molecular orbital theory will then be briefly covered. 
I 

2 
Main Group Chemistry 
I .2 
Ionization Energy, Electron Affinity and 
Electronegativity 
When an element forms a chemical compound, electrons are either lost, 
gained or shared with other atoms. These tendencies can be assessed by 
the parameters of ionization energy (IE), electron affinity (EA) and elec- 
tronegativity. Prediction of bond types as either ionic or covalent allows 
prediction of the chemical and physical properties of chemical sub- 
stances. 
IE refers to the loss of an electron from a gaseous atom or ion (equa- 
tion l. l). Successive loss of electrons from an atom becomes increasing- 
ly difficult (because the resulting positive ion holds on to its remaining 
electrons even more strongly), so, for example, third IEs are always high- 
er than second IEs, which in turn are higher than first. 
Going down a group, IEs decrease. Atoms increase in size and the elec- 
tron to be removed is further from the nucleus; although the nuclear size 
is much increased, outer electrons are shielded by completed, filled, inner 
shells, so the effective nuclear charge felt by an outer electron is much 
less. 
Crossing the Periodic Table, first IEs increase because extra protons 
are being added to the nucleus, and electrons are being added to the 
same electron shell (Figure 1.1 ). These electrons are not very efficient at 
screening each other from the nuclear charge, so they are attracted more 
strongly by the nucleus and are harder to ionize. Removal of an elec- 
Figure 1.1 First ionization 
energies for the elements Li to 
Na 

Some Aspects of Structure and Bonding in Main Group Chemistry 
3 
tron from a filled shell requires a large amount of energy: the first IE of 
neon is very high in comparison to the next element, sodium, where loss 
of an electron will leave a filled shell; Group 1 metals therefore have low 
first IEs but very high second IEs. 
Superimposed on the general trend of increased IE with atomic num- 
ber within a period, are ‘kinks’ at boron and oxygen, For beryllium, the 
2s level is filled, so going to boron involves adding an electron to one of 
the 2p orbitals. Despite the increase in nuclear charge there is a decrease 
in I E  because of the relatively efficient shielding of the 2p electron by 
the 2s electrons. At nitrogen, the three 2p orbitals each contain one elec- 
tron (Hund’s rule), so going to oxygen involves pairing an electron in 
one of the 2p orbitals. The two electrons in the same orbital repel 
each other, so the first IE of oxygen is lower than that of nitrogen, 
because loss of one of the paired electrons is assisted by electron-electron 
rep u 1 s i o n s . 

4 
Main Group Chemistry 
Electron affinity (EA) is defined as the energy change on addition of an 
electron to a gaseous atom or ion (equation 1.2). 
EAs are most negative for elements in the top right of the Periodic Table 
(i. e. the halogens), while second and higher EAs are always positive because 
it is more difficult to add an electron to an already negatively charged ion. 
EAs also become positive on adding electrons to a new shell, so the first 
EAs of oxygen, fluorine and neon are -141, -322 and +29 kJ mol-', respec- 
tively. Trends in EA are generally less simple than trends in IE. 
When we consider IEs and EAs together, elements in the bottom-left 
corner of the Periodic Table have low IEs and EAs and readily lose elec- 
trons to form cations, whereas elements in the top-right corner (the halo- 
gens, oxygen and sulfur) have high IEs and large negative EAs and 
readily gain electrons to form anions. Elements in the middle (particu- 
larly the lighter elements) have intermediate IEs and EAs and generally 
form covalent bonds in their compounds. However, unequal electron 
sharing results in polar bonds, and this is best discussed in terms of atom 
electronegativi ties. 
Electronegativity refers to the tendency of an atom, in a molecule, to 
attract electrons to itself. A scale of electronegativity was devised by 
Linus Pauling, based on bond energies. While several other electroneg- 
ativity scales have been developed, the one by Pauling is still widely used. 
The most electronegative elements are in the top right of the Periodic 
Table, with fluorine being the most electronegative with the maximum 
value of 4.0 on the Pauling scale. 
Electronegativity is a useful general parameter for predicting the gen- 
eral chemical behaviour of an element, and gives good indications of 
bond types. In general terms, two elements with a large electronegativi- 
ty difference will tend to form ions, though smaller electronegativity 
differences are needed when one of the compounds is a highly elec- 
tropositive metal (e.g. of Group 1). Two elements with similar and inter- 
mediate electronegativities (around 2.5) will tend to form covalent 

Some Aspects of Structure and Bonding in Main Group Chemistry 
5 
compounds. This is illustrated by C and H, which form an extensive 
range of covalently bonded organic compounds. 
1.3 
Periodic Trends among the Main Group 
Elements 
The main group elements, and their chemical compounds, cover a wide 
range of bonding types, from ionic, through polymeric, to molecular. In 
this section we will survey the general features of the chemistry of the 
main group elements and selected compounds, using the variation in elec- 
tronegativity of the elements as a qualitative tool for rationalizing the 
features. The compounds surveyed are the hydrides, oxides and chlo- 
rides, which are some of the most important compounds, and which illus- 
trate the general features very well. More detailed discussion of individual 
compounds can be found within the appropriate chapter. 
1.3.1 The Elements 
It is noteworthy that the p block is the only part of the Periodic Table 
to contain non-metallic elements. There is a general trend from metallic 
elements at the bottom left of the Periodic Table (the s-block metals) to 
non-metallic elements at the top right of the Table (the halogens and 
noble gases) (Figure 1.3). This correlates very well with the electroneg- 
ativities of the elements. Metals are good conductors of heat and elec- 
tricity, and in solid metals the electrons are extensively delocalized over 
the whole material. Non-metallic elements are insulators and have no 
delocalized bonding, instead being formed from localized covalent bonds. 
In the centre of the p block, there are also so-called metalloid elements 
such as boron and silicon, which show intermediate electronegativities; 
they also show relatively low electrical conductivity (compared to met- 
als), but it increases with temperature. 
The change in properties is nicely illustrated by looking at the first 
long period, Na to Ar. Na and Mg are both electropositive metals; the 
next element, aluminium, is a metal, but shows several characteristics of 
non-metals in forming many covalent compounds. In Group 14, silicon 
is a metalloid, the element being a semiconductor, and has compounds 
which show characteristics of both metal compounds and non-metal 
compounds. By the time we get to phosphorus in Group 15, we are truly 
in the domain of non-metals; phosphorus exists in several elemental 
forms, all of which contain covalent P-P bonds. In Groups 16 (sulfur) 
and 17 (chlorine) the elements are also true non-metals, sulfur existing 
as covalent S, rings (and other forms), and chlorine forming diatomic, 
ambient conditions, and does not participate in chemical bonding owing 
Figure ,,3 Variation 
Periodic Table 
metallic 
covalently bonded molecules. Argon exists as a monoatomic gas under 
and non-metallic character in the 

6 
Main Group Chemistry 
to the filled valence shell of electrons, and high ionization energy. 
in character, paralleled by a decrease in electronegativity. 
Going down any of the main groups, elements become more metallic 
1.3.2 Main Group Element Hydrides 
The properties of the main group element hydrides range from ionic (for 
the s-block metals, with the exception of beryllium), through polymeric 
(AlH,), to molecular covalent hydrides for the elements of Groups 14-17. 
In Groups 1 and 2, the metals are less electronegative than hydrogen 
(Pauling scale electronegativities: Na 0.9, H 2.1), so the bonding in the 
hydrides of these metals is predominantly ionic, as M+H ; these hydrides 
react violently with water, generating H, gas. For boron and beryllium, 
the electronegativity diference between- the element and hydrogen is 
small. BeH, is covalent and boron hydrides are covalent clusters. In 
Group 14 <he hydrides are all covalent molecular species, typified by 
CH,. Continuing across the Periodic Table, to Groups 15, 16 and 17, 
the hydrides are all molecular covalent species, with acidity in aqueous 
solution increasing on moving to the right, as the electronegativity dif- 
ference between the element and hydrogen increases and the H-X bond 
becomes more polarized: H6'-X8 . This has a marked effect on the phys- 
ical properties ( ~ . g .  
boiling points) of the hydrides of electronegative ele- 
ments. as described in Section 2.6.1. 
I .3.3 Main Group Element Chlorides 
Like the hydrides, the properties of the chlorides follow a broadly sim- 
ilar pattern, with chlorides of metals being ionic and of non-metals being 
covalent molecular in structure. Thus, for the Group 1 and 2 metals 
(except beryllium) the chlorides are ionic solids which form neutral solu- 

Some Aspects of Structure and Bonding in Main Group Chemistry 
7 
tions in water. The chlorides of small, highly polarizing metal ions such 
as beryllium, aluminium, gallium and some other elements are polymer- 
ic in the solid state. The majority of the chlorides of the Groups 14 and 
15 elements, and BCl,, are molecular covalent species. The chlorides of 
the p-block elements and beryllium generally give acid solutions in water, 
because they react with it rather than simply dissolving. It is notewor- 
thy that CCl,, unlike SiCl,, does not react with water to give an acidic 
solution; this is purely a kinetic effect, and is discussed in Section 6.5.1. 
1.3.4 Main Group Element Oxides 
For main group oxides, there is a similar trend from ionic oxides for the 
bottom left elements, through polymeric oxides in the centre (many of 
which are amphoteric), to molecular covalent oxides for the elements of 
higher electronegativity on the right-hand side of the p block. 
Oxygen is the second most electronegative element, so in combination 
with (low electronegativity) Group 1 and 2 metals at the left-hand side 
of the Periodic Table, the resulting oxides are ionic. Examples include 
Na,O and CaO. Such oxides are basic oxides, giving highly alkaline solu- 
tions in water (equation 1.3). On moving to the right, to Group 13, the 
oxides such as B,O, and A1,0, are polymeric and A1,0, is amphoteric. 
In Group 14 thebxides of the lightest element, carbon, such as CO and 
CO,, are molecular oxides; in marked contrast, SiO, is a polymeric oxide. 
CO, is an example of an acidic oxide, since it dissolves in water giving 
an acidic solution (see Section 6.7.1). In Groups 15 and 16 the oxides of 
nitrogen are all molecular covalent species, many of which are acidic, 
while those of sulfur (SO, and SO,) are both acidic oxides (equation 1.4). 
Likewise, in Group 17, and for xenon in Group 18, the oxides are molec- 
ular species. 
1.4 
Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion Theory 
1 .4.1 Introduction 
A cursory inspection of the compounds formed by the p-block elements 
in subsequent chapters reveals that many structures are observed. Even 
for a certain fixed number of groups around a central atom, there are often 
different geometrical ways of arranging these; for example, five-coordinate 
species may be either trigonal bipyramidal or square pyramidal. 

a 
Main Group Chemistry 
The simplest and most widely practised method for shape prediction 
is valence shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPK), originally devel- 
oped in the 1960s' and recently redeveloped by Gillespie.' Prediction (or 
ideally knowledge) of molecular shapes is important for prediction of 
properties dependent on molecular shape, for example boiling points. 
The knowledge of bond polarity, determined using the concept of elec- 
tronegativity, is also important. 
1.4.2 Basic Principles of VSEPR 
The basic premise of VSEPR is that puirs of electrons in the valence shell 
of the central atom of a molecule repel each other and take up positions 
as far apart as possible. The core electrons, which cannot easily be polar- 
ized, are conveniently ignored. The shape of a molecule thus condenses 
to a simple geometrical 'points-on-a-sphere' model, and the basic shapes 
adopted by molecules with between two and six pairs of electrons on the 
central atom are given in Table 1.1. In order to predict the basic shape 
of a molecule or ion by VSEPR, the general procedure in Box 1.1 should 
be followed. It is important to note that the shape of a molecule or ion 
can be predicted without knowing anything about the bonding in that 
species (see Section 1.5). 
Table 1.1 Shapes of molecules and ions 
Number of 
Bonding 
Non- 
Shape 
central atom 
pairs 
bonding 
electron pairs 
pairs 
Example 
2 
3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
5 
5 
5 
5 
6 
6 
6 
2 
3 
2 
4 
3 
2 
5 
4 
3 
2 
6 
5 
4 
0 
0 
1 
0 
1 
2 
0 
1 
2 
3 
0 
1 
2 
Linear 
Triangular 
Bent 
Tetrahedral 
Pyramidal 
Bent 
Trigonal bipyramidal (tbp) 
Pseudo4 bp 
T-shaped 
Linear 
Octahedral 
Square pyramidal 
Square planar 
BeCI, 
SnCI, 
BF3 
CCI, 
NH3 
H*O 
PF5 
BrF,+, SF, 
BrF, 
XeF, 
SF,, 
PF,- 
XeF,, 
IF,- 
1% 

Some Aspects of Structure and Bonding in Main Group Chemistry 
9 

10 
Main Group Chemistry 
I .4.3 Molecules containing Non-bonding Pairs of 
Electrons 
A bonding pair is shared by two atoms whereas a lone pair is only held by 
one atom. A lone pair therefore occupies more space in the valence shell of 
the atom to which it belongs, and it will exert a larger repulsive influence 
on the other pairs of electrons on that atom. Therefore, in general terms: 
lone pair-lone pair repulsion > lone pair-bonding pair repulsion > bond- 
ing pair-bonding pair repulsion 
This is best illustrated by two worked examples: ammonia, NH,, and 
water, H,O. 

Some Aspects of Structure and Bonding in Main Group Chemistry 
11 
1.4.4 Molecules with Multiple Bonds 
A double bond contains both 0 and n: components. For the purposes of 
VSEPR, both can be considered to point in the same direction, and we 
can thus treat a double or triple bond as one ‘superpair’ of electrons, the 
effect of which is rather similar to that of a lone pair. As an example, 
consider the molecule COF,. The molecule will be trigonal, but the 
greater space occupied by the double bond will make the fluorine atoms 
move closer together, decreasing the F-C-F bond angle. 
1.4.5 Molecules with Five Electron Pairs 
In a tetrahedron or octahedron, all of the vertices are identical; however, 
this is not the case for a trigonal bipyramid, where there are two differ- 
ent types of vertex: axial and equatorial. This is best illustrated by an 
example, that of PCL, in the gas phase, shown in Figure 1.4. The mole- 
cule is a regular trigonal bipyramid. 
Figure 1.4 The structure of 
gas-phase PCI,, showing the 
presence of CI atoms in axial and 
equatorial positions 
This has implications for molecules which contain five electron pairs, 
with one or more lone pairs, since there will be a choice of putting the 
lone pair(s) in axial or equatorial positions. However, on considering the 
various repulsions in such species, it can be concluded that: lone pairs uf’ 
electrons, or niult@le bonds, always adopt equatorial positions in trigonal 
hipyramids, owing to the greater space occupied in the valence shell of the 
central atom. This can be illustrated by species such as SF,, BrF,’, 
ClF, 
and XeF,. 

12 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 1.5 The structure of gas- 
phase SF,, showing the presence 
of F atoms in axial and equatorial 
positions. The strong repulsing 
effect of the equatorial lone pair 
is clearly shown 
1.4.6 Molecules and Ions with Seven or More Electron 
Pairs 
When seven electron pairs are present in the valence shell of the central 
atom, the shape is more difficult to predict; there are often a number of 
different arrangements with similar energies. The three most important 
regular shapes are the monocapped octahedron, the monocapped trigo- 
nal prism and the pentagonal bipyramid, shown in Figure 1.6. 
Figure 1.6 Common shapes 
adopted by seven-electron pair 
species: (a) monocapped 
octahedron; (b) monocapped 
trigonal prism; (c) pentagonal 
bipyramid 
In certain cases, for the heavy p-block elements such as selenium, tel- 
lurium, bromine and bismuth, lone pairs occupy spherical s-orbitals, 
which do not influence the geometry of the species. As an example, 

Some Aspects of Structure and Bonding in Main Group Chemistry 
13 
TeC16* has one lone pair and six C1 atoms, but it is a regular octahe- 
dron; SeCl? and BrF,- are also octahedral for the same reason. 
An example of a species with eight electron pairs is XeF,'-, which has 
a square antiprism shape, shown in Figure 1.7. 
1.4.7 Resonance 
Figure 1.7 The square antipris- 
matic arrangement of eight fluo- 
rines around a central xenon 
atom in the ion XeF,2-, (A square 
antiprism can be derived from a 
When there are two or more resonance forms for a molecule or ion, it 
is essential that these are considered before predictions of bond angles 
are made. This can be illustrated by the example of the carbonate ion, 
CO,? . This ion has six electrons (three pairs) around the carbon atom, 
and so is trigonal. As shown in Scheme 1.1, there are three resonance 
hybrids of the carbonate ion, so the true structure is a blend of all three, 
structure 1.1, and all of the 0-C-0 bond angles are exactly 120". If one 
of the resonance forms was taken in isolation, with a C=O double bond 
and two C-0 single bonds, it would be (incorrectly) predicted that the 
O=C-0 bond angles would be > 120" and the 0-C-0 bond angle < 120". 
The importance of considering all resonance forms before predicting 
bond angles can be clearly seen. 
cube by rotation of one of the 
faces through 450) 
1.4.8 Dative Bonds 
A dative bond is fundamentally identical to a 'normal' two-electron cova- 
lent bond except that in our electron 'book-keeping' we consider both 
electrons in the bond to originate from the same atom. 

14 
Main Group Chemistry 
lonepair 
t- 
The structure of Et20-BF3 
I 
.4.9 Atom Electronegativities 
In an A-X bond between atoms A and X, as the atom X becomes more 
electronegative, the bonding pair occupies less space in the valence shell 
of atom A. In practice, this means that in a related series of compounds, 
bond angles of the type F-A-F are typically smaller than Cl-A-Cl or 
Br-A-Br 
angles, as illustrated in Figure 1.8. The greater size of a Cl 
atom compared to an F atom also contributes to the widening of the 
Cl-A-CI angle. 
Figure 1.8 Effect of atom 
electronegativity on bond angle 

Some Aspects of Structure and Bonding in Main Group Chemistry 
15 
CH, and CF, have regular tetrahedral shapes, but CF,H, is a distorted 
tetrahedron with the F-C-F bond angle smaller than the H-C-H angle. 
Following the same logic as in worked problems 1.8 and 1.9, this is 
because the electronegative fluorines attract electrons in the C-F bonds, 
decreasing the space they occupy in carbon’s valence shell, causing the 
F-C-F angle to decrease. 
I .5 
Molecular Orbital Theory 
In molecular orbital (MO) theory, rather than having localized orbitals 
which form bonds between pairs of atoms, we construct molecular 
orbitals which extend over all atoms in a molecule. Space prevents more 
than a brief summary of the MO treatment of bonding, and in this sec- 
tion it is intended to illustrate the application of MO theory to main 
group molecules. The discussion will be illustrated by considering the 
properties of various 0, species (O,+, 0,, 0,- and 07,-). 
We will start by looking at a very simple molecuie: dihydrogen, H,. 
Each H atom has a 1s atomic orbital (AO) available for bonding, and 

16 
Main Group Chemistry 
these can interact in two ways. In-phase interaction gives a bonding MO, 
o, 
while out-of-phase interaction gives an antibonding MO, o*, 
as shown 
in Figure 1.9. The bonding MO is symmetrical about the centre of the 
molecule, and there is an increase in electron density in the internuclear 
region compared to the two H 1s orbitals; the bonding MO 0 therefore 
has a lower energy than the energy of the hydrogen 1s atomic orbital. 
In contrast, the antibonding MO o* has a decrease in electron density 
Figure 1.9 Molecular orbitals of 
H,. 
The small black dots indicate 
the nucleus; these are omitted on 
subsequent diagrams 
A I ~  
antibonding MU IS denoted by 
Ihe ' symbol 
in the internuclear region (when occupied by electrons), and is higher in 
energy than the 1s atomic orbitals. Figure 1.10 shows an energy level 
diagram for the H, molecule. The two electrons (one from each hydro- 
gen atom) enter the bonding MO o, corresponding to a net H-H single 
bond. If two more electrons are added to H,, the antibonding MO o* 
becomes filled. In this case, equal numbers of electrons are present in 
bonding and antibonding MOs, there is no net bonding, and H22- is 
unfavoured relative to its dissociation product, two H- (hydride) anions. 
Figure 1.1 0 MO energy level dia- 
gram for H, 
In dioxygen species 0,, the MO scheme is slightly more complex because 
each 0 atom has both 2s and 2p AOs available for bonding. The MO 
energy level diagram is shown in Figure 1.1 1. Similar to H,, the 2s AOs 
of the oxygen atoms interact to form bonding o1 and antibonding 02* 
MOs. The pz orbitals point towards each other (the molecular axis is 
defined as the z axis) and can interact to form o bonding (03) 
and anti- 
bonding (04*) 
MOs. The p, orbitals on each oxygen can interact in a 
side-on manner, to form n bonding (nI) and antibonding (n2*) MOs, 
respectively. In the same way, the py orbitals interact to form IT bond- 
ing (IT,) and antibonding &*) MOs which are degenerate with the p,- 
derived n: MOs. The MO diagram in Figure 1.1 1 can be used to describe 
Degt3nerate orbitals are 
the same energy 
with 

Some Aspects of Structure and Bonding in Main Group Chemistry 
17 
the bonding in O,+, 0,, 0, and 0,’ . As with atoms, electrons enter 
MOs from the lowest energy levels first, and if there are degenerate 
orbitals, electrons initially singly occupy each with parallel spins. 
Figure 1 .I 1 MO energy level 
diagram for dioxygen, 0, 
For 0, it can be seen that the n?* MO contains two unpaired electrons, 
Bond order IS defined as 9.: x 
and hence 0, is predicted to be-paramagnetic and attracted by a mag- 
netic field. This fits very well with the physical properties of 0,, which 
I” bor’dlng 
Inlnus 
electrons in antibonding MOs]. 
is indeed paramagnetic. It is important to note that a simple valence 
bond description of 0, (as O=O) does not predict any unpaired elec- 
trons, and this therefore represents one of the major triumphs of MO 
theory. The total bond order for 0, from the MO diagram is 2, in accor- 
dance with the simple valence bond description of O=O. 
The oxygenyl cation, O,+, has one less electron in the antibonding n,* 
MO, so the bond order is-2.5. Similarly, 0,- and 07,- 
have respectiveiy 
one and two more electrons in n,*, so the bond orders are 1.5 and 1, 
respectively. The predicted bond orders correlate very well with the 
experimental bond lengths, with a larger bond order giving a shortened 
bond, as shown in Table 1.2. Similarly, O,+, 
-
*
 
0, and 0,- contain unpaired 
electrons and are paramagnetic, while O,?- has no unpaired electrons and 
is diamagnetic. 
Table 1.2 Bond lengths of some dioxygen speciesa 
Species 
Name 
Bond order 
Bond length (pm) 
~~ 
- 
0, 
+ 
Oxygenyl 
2.5 
02- 
Superoxide 
1.5 
0, 
Dioxygen 
2.0 
022- 
Peroxide 
1 .o 
11 2.3 
120.7 
128 
149 
a Refer to Chapter 8 for further details on the chemistry of these species. 
_
_
~
_
 

18 
Main Group Chemistry 

Some Aspects of Structure and Bonding in Main Group Chemistry 
19 

The Chemistry of Hydrogen 
2.1 
Introduction 
Hydrogen is the simplest element in the Periodic Table, yet its chemistry 
is among the most diverse. It does not satifactorily belong to any single 
group of the Periodic Table, but has an electron configuration (s') similar 
to those of the alkali metals, and is sometimes shown at the top of this 
group. 
Hydrogen has, in simplistic terms, three different ways in which it 
forms chemical compounds: 
It can lose its single electron to form a proton, H+, which has no 
chemical existence on its own, but is always solvated, owing to its 
extremely high charge density. 
It can share an electron through formation of covalent bonds with 
many other elements. 
It can gain an electron, to form the hydride ion, H-, which has a s2 
electronic configuration isoelectronic with the noble gas helium. 
20 

The Chemistry of Hydrogen 
21 
2.2 
The Element 
2.2.1 Occurrence and Manufacture 
Hydrogen is the most abundant element in the universe, followed by 
helium. However, in Nature, free dihydrogen (H,) is very reactive, and 
the majority of the element exists in chemical combination with other 
elements, particularly as water in the oceans and in hydrated minerals, 
as well as organic compounds. H, can be prepared by several methods: 
Electrolysis, either of water itself (equation 2.1), or the electrolysis 
of brines (using Hg as an electrode) to produce chlorine, where ele- 
mental hydrogen is formed as a by-product (equation 2.2). 
Reforming of hydrocarbons: hydrocarbons react with steam over a 
nickel catalyst at around 800 O C ,  c g .  equation 2.3 for the reforming 
of methane. This is the main industrial niethod for H, manufacture. 
CH, + H,O += CO + 3H, 
(2.3) 
Thermal cracking of hydrocarbons: hydrogen is produced as a by- 
product when large hydrocarbons (alkanes) are thermally broken up 
into smaller alkenes. 
Hydrolysis of an ionic hydride, such as NaH or CaH, (equation 2.4). 
CaH, + 2H,O += Ca(OH), + 2H, 
(2.4) 

22 
Main Group Chemistry 
2.2.2 Isotopes of Hydrogen 
There are three isotopes of hydrogen, listed in Table 2.1. The isotope 'H 
is the dominant one; however, natural hydrogen also contains around 
0.02% deuterium. All three isotopes are chemically identical, except that 
the different isotopes react at different rates. This difference in reaction 
rate is used in the production of deuterium (D2). An example is the 
electrolysis of water (equation 2. l), where the hydrogen gas produced is 
enriched in I H and the residual water is enriched in the heavier, and more 
slowly reacting, D. 
Table 2.1 The isotopes of hydrogen 
Isotope Name (symbol) 
Protons Neutrons Stability 
'H 
Protium or hydrogen (H) 1 
0 
Stable 
*H 
Deuterium (D) 
1 
1 
Stable 
3H 
Tritium 0 
1 
2 
Radioactive (half-life 12.26 years) 
Tritium is formed by cosmic ray bombardment of 14N in the upper 
atmosphere, or in a nuclear reactor, where Li is bombarded with neu- 
trons (n) (equation 2.5). 
6Li + n + 3H + 4He 
(2.5) 

The Chemistry of Hydrogen 
23 
D,O and T,O are the common commercial sources of deuterium and tri- 
tium. Deuterated and tritiated compounds are produced using straight- 
forward reactions, such as the preparation of deuterobenzene ( C6D,), 
D,SO, or ND, (equations 2.6-2.8). 
3CaC, + 6D,O + 3DC = CD [+ 3Ca(OD)J 
C,D, 
(2.6) 
SO, + D,O + D,SO, 
(2.7) 
Li,N + 3D,O -+ ND, + 3LiOD 
(2.8) 
2.3 
The Chemistry of Hydrogen 
The bond dissociation energy of H, is high, +436 kJ mol I ,  and so it is 
relatively unreactive at room temperature. However, in the presence of 
a catalyst, or at elevated temperatures, hydrogen is very reactive towards 
most elements. Atomic hydrogen (produced by passing an electrical dis- 
charge through a low pressure of H,) is very reactive, because the strength 
of the H-H bond has been overcome by a non-chemical method. 
Hydrogen combines with nitrogen, oxygen and the halogens directly, 
to give covalent hydrides (Section 2.4.2); the reactions often require ini- 
tiation. Elemental hydrogen is a good reducing agent, and will reduce 
many metal oxides to the metal (plus water), and will hydrogenate many 
unsaturated organic compounds containing C=C, C=C and C=O bonds 
to their saturated analogues (hydrocarbons and alcohols). 

24 
Main Group Chemistry 
2.4 
Hydrides 
Eqcration 2.1 1 is essentially 
H + H- + H,,. 
The chemistry of Na[BH,] and 
Li[AIH,] is described in Section 
5.6. 
The chemical combination of an element with hydrogen produces com- 
pounds called hydrides. Generally, the p-block elements produce cova- 
lent hydrides, the s-block metals (except Be and Mg) produce ionic 
hydrides, while the transition metals and lanthanides produce metallic 
hydrides, which have the appearance of metals, have electrical conduc- 
tivity, but which (unlike metals) are brittle. Going across a period, there 
is a transition from ionic (e.g. NaH), to covalent polymeric (e.g. AlH,), 
to covalent molecular hydrides (e.g. H,S, PH,). The different types of 
hydrides will be discussed in turn. 
2.4.1 Ionic Hydrides 
Reaction of Group 1 and 2 metals with hydrogen gas produces colour- 
less hydrides containing the H- ion, with an s2 electronic configuration. 
When the electronegativity of the metal is less than about 1.2, then the 
hydride is ionic. 
In the formation of ionic hydrides, hydrogen is mimicking the chem- 
istry of the halogens, which are also one electron short of a noble gas 
electronic configuration. The formation of C1- (equation 2.9) is more 
favourable than H- (equation 2.10) owing to the large electron affinity 
of C1(-369 kJ mol-I) versus H (-69 kJ mol-I), and the weaker Cl-Cl bond 
compared to H-H. 
> CI I,, 
overall AH = -248 kJ mol - 
-36YkJ ~nol-l 
0.5C1, + e - 
+"I 
> Cl,,, 
(2.9) 
> H -,,, 
overall AH = +148.5 kJ mol - I 
-hY kJ mo-' 
0.5H2+ e - 
+?I7' >H,,, 
(2.10) 
Unlike halide ions, which are stable in water, hydride ions are readily 
hydrolysed (equation 2.1 1). 
H- + H,O 
& + H, + OH- 
(2.11) 
The hydrides of the alkali metals (Section 3.7) and of calcium, strontium 
and barium (Section 4.6) are essentially ionic materials. In contrast, 
hydrides of aluminium (Section 5.6.2), magnesium and beryllium 
(Section 4.6) are polymeric solids. 
2.4.2 Covalent Hydrides 
Hydrogen is able to form covalent bonds with other atoms by sharing 

The Chemistry of Hydrogen 
25 
its Is electron; elements with electronegativities as low as 1.5 form 
hydrides with mainly covalent character. 
There is a full range of bond polarities, from where the hydrogen is 
polarized 6+ (e.g. H-S) to where it is 6 
(e.g. B-H or Ga-H). The most 
important covalent hydrides formed by the p-block elements are sum- 
marized in Table 2.2. Elements in Groups 14 to 17 form hydrides with 
'normal' covalent bonds. 
Some elements which form 
covalent hydrides, and their 
electronegativities (Pauling scale): 
P 
2 :) 
S 
2 
MgH is intermediate between 
covalent and ionic CuH, ZnH, 
and CdH art? intermediate 
between covalent and metallic. 
Table 2.2 lrriportant covalent hydrides of the p-block elements 
~~ 
Group 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
B2H6 
CflH2fl+2a 
NH3 
H2O 
HF 
CflHZfl 
N2H4 
H202 
C,H,,-, 
etc. 
P2H4 
H2Sn 
(A'HJ, 
SinH2fl+2 (0 5 8) 
PH3 
H2S 
HCI 
Ge,H,,+, 
(n I 
9) 
ASH, 
H,Se 
HBr 
SnH, 
SbH, 
H2Te 
HI 
aThere is no apparent limit to the length of chains formed by carbon atoms. 
____ 
CnH2,,+, = alkanes 
C,H,, 
= alkenes 
CnH2,F-2 
= alkynes 
A second major class of hydrides are the electron-deficient hydrides, 
typified by B,H, (and higher hydrides of boron) (Section 5.6). 

26 
Main Group Chemistry 
Synthesis 
Covalent hydrides can be synthesized by several methods: 
Direct combination of the elements (equations 2.12 and 2.13). 
2H, + 0, + 2H,O 
(2.12) 
H, + C1, + 2HCl 
(2.13) 
Reduction of a halide or oxide (e.g. equation 2.14); this is generally 
the most widely applicable method. 
SiCl, + LiAlH, + SiH, + LiAlCl, 
(2.14) 
Hydrolysis of a metal phosphide, carbide, silicide, boride, etc. (e.g. 
equation 2.15). 
Ca,P, + 6H,O + 2PH, + 3Ca(OH), 
(2.15) 
Interconversion of hydrides, for example with an electrical discharge 
(e.g. equation 2.16). 
(2.16) 
nGeH, + Ge,H, + Ge,H, + higher hydrides 
A reducing agent is easily 
Generally, hydrides of p-block elements are reducing agents; some (such 
oxidized; this Is the process 
2.18 
as SiH,) spontaneously combust in air (e.g equation 2.17), while others 
such as CH, require a spark to initiate the reaction (equation 2.18): 
operating in equations 2.17 and 
SiH, + 80, -+ SiO, + 2H,O 
(2.17) 
CH, + 20, + CO, + 2H,O 
(2.18) 

The Chemistry of Hydrogen 
27 
Both Na and Na[BH,] are 
reducing agents. 
2.4.3 Metallic (Interstitial) Hydrides 
A number of the transition metals, lanthanides and actinides absorb 
hydrogen to variable extents, giving metallic hydrides which have many 
of the properties of the metals, such as hardness, conductivity and lus- 
tre. These hydrides are non-stoichiometric, with compositions such as 
PdH,,., and VH,.,, with the hydrogens in tetrahedral sites (‘interstices’) 
in a close-packed metal lattice. The lanthanide hydrides can also take up 
hydrogens in octahedral sites, giving ionic MH, phases. 
2.5 
Compounds containing Hydrogen formally as H+ 
Hydrogen is able to form compounds by loss of its sole 1s electron, giv- 
ing the H+ ion. The conversion of H, into gas-phase protons requires a 
large amount of energy (equation 2.19). 

28 
Main Group Chemistry 
H2(g) - 2e + 2H+,g, AH = + 3054 kJ mol-' 
(2.19) 
If a proton is generated in aqueous solution, it is solvated by water to 
form the hydroxonium ion, H,O+, sometimes called hydronium or 0x0- 
nium. This ion has hydrogens bearing a partial positive charge, and so 
it will be further solvated by water molecules of the bulk solvent. A pro- 
ton dissolved in water can be approximated by the species [H,O(H,O),]+, 
or [H904]+, which has the structure shown in Figure 2.1, where each H 
atom of H,O+ is hydrogen bonded (Section 2.6) to the 0 atom of a water 
molecule. I 
Figure 2.1 The structure of 
H$4+ 
2.6 
The Hydrogen Bond 
2.6.1 General Features 
When hydrogen is bonded to the highly electronegative elements F, 0, 
Cl or N, a secondary interaction - a hydrogen bond - occurs between 
A "ydrogen bond between two 
water molecules: 
the partially positively charged hydrogen of one molecule and a partial- 
ly negatively charged atom. 
6+ 
H 
This hydrogen bonding effect is only important for hydrogen (and not 
other electropositive elements) because of the small size of hydrogen, and 
the absence of inner electron shells which could shield the nucleus. 
Hydrogen bonding is clearly illustrated by comparing the boiling 
points of the hydrides of the Group 16 elements (EH,) with the Group 
14 elements (EH,), shown in Figure 2.2. For the EH,-compounds there 
is an increase in boiling point with relative molar mass (owing to increas- 
ing van der Waals forces), and the same trend is observed for H,S, H,Se 
and H,Te. However, the boiling point of water is anomalously high, and 
this is due to extensive hydrogen bonding (Section 2.6.2). Hydrogen 
bonding does not occur to any significant extent in H,S or the other 
heavier hydrides. The same trend for the Group 16 dihydrides is also 
seen on examination of: 
6- 0-H- 6+ - -. 
6-/ 
- 0 
6+ H' 
1 A& 
A hydrogen bond 

The Chemistry of Hydrogen 
29 
Boiling points of the Group 15 hydrides (NH, to SbH,) and the 
Group 17 hydrides (HF to HI). 
Other properties which are affected by internzoleculur bonding in the 
liquid and solid states, such as latent heats of vaporization and 
fusion, and melting points. 
100 
50 - 
0 
-50 
-1 00 
-1 50 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I
I
 I 
1 
I 
I 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
Molecular mass 
I 
I 
Figure 2.2 Boiling points of 
some covalent p-block hydrides 
2.6.2 Some Examples of Hydrogen-bonded Species 
Water is an important example of a substance which has substantial 
hydrogen bonding in its liquid and solid forms. Without hydrogen bond- 
ing, the boiling point of water is estimated to be about -75 
O C ,  and so 
life as we know it could not have evolved. In solid ice, hydrogen and 
oxygen atoms are involved in extensive directional hydrogen bonding, 
with each 0 atom bonding to four hydrogens, resulting in an open struc- 
ture (see Figure 10.1). Liquid water has a less extensive, but more com- 
plicated, dynamic hydrogen-bonded network than ice; protons are 
rapidly being transferred between water molecules.2 
Compounds containing H-F bonds are often extensively hydrogen 
bonded. Hydrogen fluoride has a polymeric zigzag chain, and the struc- 
ture is discussed further in Section 9.4. Very strong symmetrical hydro- 
gen bonds occur in the anion HF,-, formed by addition of fluoride to 
HF (equation 2.20). 
HF + F-- + [F-.H-F]- AH c'a. -243 kJ mol-' 
(2.20) 
M 
The HF2- ion 
Ammonium fluoride has a structure different from the other ammo- 
nium halide salts and has a very open structure in the solid, as a result 
of strong, directional H-F hydrogen bonding (Figure 2.3). 

30 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 2.3 Hydrogen bonding 
interactions involving NH,+ and F- 
ions in solid NH,F 
2.6.3 The Magnitude and Importance of Hydrogen 
Bonding 
In general, hydrogen bond enthalpies lie in the range of about +4 to +40 
kJ mol I .  They are therefore relatively weak in comparison with normal 
covalent bonds (for example, the H-Cl bond enthalpy, +431 kJ mol-I). 
Nevertheless, by comparison with the weak van der Waals forces pres- 
ent between all molecules, hydrogen bonds are relatively strong. They 
are therefore extremely significant structure-determining bonds in many 
important materials. Elegant natural examples are the complex struc- 
tures which can be adopted by ice, the hydrogen bonding interactions 
responsible for the double helix structure of DNA, and the structures 
and activities of biologically important proteins and enzymes. 

The Chemistry of Hydrogen 
31 

32 
Main Group Chemistry 

The Group 1 (Alkali Metal) 
Elements: Lithium, Sodium, 
Potassium, Rubidium, Caesium 
and Francium 
3.1 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
~~ 
The chemistry of the alkali metals is dominated by the tendency to lose 
the single s-electron and attain a noble gas electronic configuration. The 
elements have low first and very high second ionization potentials, and 
so the dominant feature of their chemistry is the formation of M+ cations, 
Going down the group, there is a decrease in first ionization energy, as 
the valence rzs electron is further from the nucleus (Figure 3.1). For Rb 
and Cs the values are higher than expected, because these elements have 
filled inner d-shell(s) with relatively poor shielding of the outer M S  elec- 
tron. There have been some indications that caesium may be able to exist 
in a higher oxidation state (+3), though no compounds have yet been 
isolated. I 
33 

34 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 3.1 The first ionization 
energies of the Group 1 metals 
In Group 1, there is less variation in the chemistry than for elements 
of any other main group, though there are some subtle trends in the 
degree of solvation and complex formation (which is most important for 
the small Li' ion) and in the stabilities of certain compounds, such as 
carbonates and nitrates (Section 3.4). 
3.2 The Elements 
Sodium is the most abundant alkali metal, occurring in large under- 
ground deposits of sodium chloride. Seawater contains a high concen- 
tration (10,800 ppm) of Na+, and 390 ppm of K+. All isotopes of 
francium are radioactive. It is formed naturally in trace amounts by the 
decay of actinium. 
The chlorides, MCl, are the common commercial products; lithium 
carbonate is also made on a large scale. Lithium and sodium metals are 
obtained by electrolysis of molten LiCl or NaCl (equation 3.1). 
NaCl + Na + OSCl, 
( 3 4  
Potassium is obtained by reduction of KCl with sodium vapour at 850 
"C (equation 3.2). 
(3 -2) 
KCl + Na 
NaCl + K 

The Group 1 (Alkali Metal) Elements 
35 
The alkali metals crystallize in body-centred cubic lattices (Figure 3.2). 
Figure 3.2 Body-centred cubic 
lattice adopted by the alkali 
metals 
See Section 1.5 for discussion 
of MO theory. 
3.3 
Chemistry of the Alkali Metals 
All the alkali metals are highly reactive, combining readily with most 
other elements, often explosively. Almost all derivatives are ionic, though 
some lithium compounds (especially the organolithium compounds) can 
have appreciable covalent character. The metals themselves are very pow- 
erful reducing agents. Li has the most negative E" value (see Table 3.1), 
because of the very high hydration energy (Box 3.1) of the Group 1 metal 
cations. However, in terms of absolute reactivity the metals become much 
more reactive going down the group. 
The for inatit i n  of monovalent M ' 
don 
the che,,,,stry 
of the GroLip 1 tl1etals. 
Table 3.1 Standard redox potentials for the alkali metals 
€qua tion 
Eo value (V) 
Li+ + e- 
Li 
-3.05 
Na+ + e- 
Na 
-2.71 
K+ + e- S K 
-2.94 
Rb+ + e- * Rb 
-2.94 
Cs+ + e- * Cs 
-3.02 

36 
Main Group Chemistry 
3.4 
Simple Salts of the Alkali Metals 
Soine insoluble potassium, 
rubidium and caesium salts 
Salt 
Anton 
M[CIO,] Chlorater\/ll) (perchlorate) 
M WI,,] 
Hexachloro~latinate(IV) 
M ,[SiF,,I Hexafluorosilicate 
M(RPh .] Tetraphenylborate 
Salts of the alkali metals tend to be very soluble in water, especially for 
lithium and sodium, though a few salts of potassium, rubidium and cae- 
sium are also insoluble, and LiF and Li,co, are also only sparingly sol- 
uble in water. The solubility of a salt is dependent on two opposing, and 
typically large, energies: the lattice energy (holding the solid together) 
and the hydration energy of the ions (which tends to dissolve the solid). 

The Group 1 (Alkali Metal) Elements 
37 
The metals react with water, lithium relatively slowly, but with increas- 
ing vigour going down the group, giving the hydroxide plus hydrogen 
gas (equation 3.3). 
2M + 2H,O + 2MOH + H, 
(3.3) 
The hydroxides are useful starting precursors for the synthesis of other 
salts by neutralization with the appropriate acid. The hydroxides absorb 
CO, to give the alkali metal carbonate M,CO, or (with all except lithi- 
um, the hydrogencarbonate (bicarbonate) MHCO,. The hydrogencar- 
bonates decompose on heating to give the carbonates, which themselves 
decompose on stronger heating to give the oxide plus carbon dioxide 
(equation 3.4). 
The small, highly polarizing Li, ion 
aids decomposition of larger 
oxlanions, e g  NO, and CO,:-, 
the Li-0 that IS formed has a 
high lattice energy, which is a 
decornpositim 
2MHC0, + M,CO, (+ H,O + CO,) + M,O (+ CO,) 
(3.4) 
The nitrates MNO, (M = Na, K, Rb, cs) decompose to the nitrites on 
heating (equation 3.5), while, in contrast, LiNO, decomposes to Li,O. 
force +or the 

38 
Main Group Chemistry 
2MN0, -+ 2MN0, + 0, 
(3.5) 
The alkali metal halides are well-known compounds. CsC1, CsBr and 
Csl crystallize with the same structure (the caesium chloride type) (Figure 
3.3), while the other salts crystallize in the sodium chloride structure 
(Figure 3.4). In the CsCl structure the cation and anion are both eight 
coordinate, while in the NaCl structure they are six coordinate. Both the 
CsCl and NaCl structure types are important, and commonly adopted 
by many other ionic compounds with a 1:l ratio of cation and anion. 
In the CsCl structure, each CI loll 
Only contributes "8th 
Its 
volume 
to the unit cell shown in Figure 
Thus There is one cat,on 
aP 101 1 
Figure 3.3 The structure of 
CsCl; each of the CI- ions is also 
surrounded by a cube of Cs+ ions 
from adjacent unit cells 
Figure 3.4 The structure of 
NaCI; the structure is derived 
from a face-centred cube of CI- 
ions, with Na+ ions in all the 
octahedral holes 

The Group 1 (Alkali Metal) Elements 
39 
3.5 
Compounds with Oxygen and Sulfur 
The products of combustion of the alkali metals in air or oxygen vary 
with the metal; three different oxygen-containing anions are formed, 
which are distinguished by the different products formed by hydrolysis 
Na 
+ 
2NaOH 
with water (Table 3.2). 
The oxides ot the Group 1 metals 
bas’c, Since they react 
water to gib? the hydroxide, e g  

40 
Main Group Chemistry 
‘The bonding in the superoxide 
and peroxide anions is described 
n Chapter 1, and Chapter 8 dis- 
cusses peroxides in more detail. 
Ozone: see Section 8.2.1. 
The nitride anion N%{ is 
soelectronic with carbide (CI-), 
Imde (O>-) 
and fluoride (F-). 
Table 3.2 Products of combustion of alkali metals in air, and the products formed 
upon hydrolysis of these oxides 
Metal 
Salt 
Anion 
Hydrolysis product(s) of salt 
~ 
~~ 
Li 
Li,O 
0’- 
(oxide) 
OH- 
Na 
Na,O, 
+ Na,O 
0;- (peroxide) 
OH-, 
H,O, 
K, Rb, Cs 
MO, 
0; (superoxide) 
OH-, H,O,, 
0, 
Lithium does not form a superoxide, and lithium peroxide (Li,O,, 
formed by the reaction of LiOH with hydrogen peroxide, H,O,) is unsta- 
ble, decomposing to Li,O and oxygen gas. Going down the group, the 
superoxides and peroxides become more stable; this is another example 
of the stabilization of a large anion by a large cation (compare nitrates 
and carbonates, Section 3.4). The monoxides (M20) of sodium to cae- 
sium can be formed from oxygen and an excess of the metal (to avoid 
the formation of the superoxide and/or peroxide). The excess of metal is 
removed by evaporation. An improved synthesis is to reduce the metal 
nitrite with metal (equation 3.6). 
6M + 2MN02 -+ 4M,O + N, 
(3.6) 
Reaction of the alkali metals with ozone (0,) gives ozonide salts (MO,), 
which are paramagnetic. The alkali metals react with sulfur to form sul- 
fides and polysulfides of composition M,S.v; these are discussed separately 
in Section 8.3.5. 
3.6 
Compounds with Nitrogen 
Lithium is the only alkali metal which combines with nitrogen gas, giv- 
ing lithium nitride (equation 3.7). The salt is presumably stable because 
of the very high lattice energy from the very small Li’ ion and the small, 
highly charged N3 ion, despite having to break the strong N=N bond. 
Hydrolysis of Li,N gives ammonia (equation 3.8). 
6Li + N, + 2Li,N 
(3.7) 
Li,N + 3H,O + 3LiOH + NH, 
(3.8) 
When alkali metals are dissolved in anhydrous liquid ammonia, intense- 
ly blue, electrically conducting solutions are formed. These solutions con- 
tain solvated (‘ammoniated’) alkali metal cations together with solvated 
electrons, and are powerful reducing agents. Addition of a catalytic 
amount of a transition metal complex [such as iron(II1) nitrate] results 

The Group I (Alkali Metal) Elements 
41 
in a reaction to form the alkali metal amide (MNH,) and hydrogen gas 
(equation 3.9). 
2M + 2NH, + 2M+NH,- + H, 
(3.9) 
(or 2e- + 2NH, -+ 2NH2' + H,) 
Liquid ammonia is used as a non-aqueous solvent, and there are many 
comparisons with water and related compounds, Just as sodium hydrox- 
ide is a base in water, sodium amide (NaNH,) is a base in liquid ammo- 
nia, because it is able to deprotonate acidic molecules R-H (equation 
See alsc Worked Problem 7.1 
3.10). 
R-H + NaNH, -+ NaR + NH, 
(3.10) 
3.7 
Hydrides 
The alkali metals combine with hydrogen on heating to give ionic ('salt- 
like') hydrides, containing the colourless hydride ion, H- (equation 3.1 1). 
2M + H, + 2M+H- 
(3.1 1) 
The hydrides have the sodium chloride structure (Figure 3 4 ,  and read- 
ily hydrolyse on reaction with water (equation 3.12). The H- anion is a 
Further detaiis on ionic hydrldes 
are given in Section 2.4.1 
strong base, and can be used to deprotonate organic molecules contain- 
Other comnion hydride materials 
which contairi alkali metal cations 
ing relatively acidic C-H groups, e.g. equation 3.13. 
are sodium borohydride, Na[BH ,I, 
Li[AIH ,I, which are discussed in 
Chapter 5. 
Na+H- + H,O -+ NaOH + H, 
Na'H 
+ CH,S(O)CH, -+ Na+[CH,S(O)CH,]- + H, 
(3.12) 
and lithium alLlminium hydride, 
(3.13) 
3.8 
Compounds with Carbon 
-~ 
The alkali metals readily react with ethyne (acetylene, HC=CH) to form 
metal ethynides (acetylides), containing singly or doubly deprotonated 
ethyne (equation 3.14). 
2HC = CH -J% 2M(C = CH) (+H?) M--) 2M2(C = C) (+H,) 
(3.14) 
In this reaction the ethyne is reacting as an acid. 
There is an extensive organometallic chemistry of the alkali metals, 
An organometallic compound is 
- 
especially for lithium. Lithium metal reacts with alkyl or aryl chlorides 
(and bromides) in a dry hydrocarbon or ether solvent to give organo- 
One which fortnally contains a 
metal-carbon bond (except to 
cvanlde), 
lithium compounds (equation 3.15), which are largely covalent. 

42 
Main Group Chemistry 
R-X + 2Li + LiR + LiX 
(3.15) 
Figure 3.5 The tetrameric struc- 
ture of methyllithium, (CH,Li), 
[Li(NH,),]’I- 
is an example of a 
simple coordination complex: 
In 18-crown-6 there are 18 
atoms in the ring, of which six 
arE oxygens. In cryptand [2,2,2] 
there are two oxygen atoms in 
each of the three ‘branches’ 
linking the two nitrogens together. 
Organolithium compounds are usually extensively aggregated together 
in the solid and solution states; for example, methyllithium exists as a 
tetramer, CH,Li),, which has the structure shown in Figure 3.5. 
The organolithium compounds have similarities to the organomagne- 
sium compounds RMgX and R,Mg (R = alkyl or aryl) (see Section 4.7). 
3.9 Alkali Metal Complexes 
Because of their relatively low charge density, the alkali metals form rel- 
atively few complexes with neutral ligands, though lithium, with the high- 
est charge density, forms the most stable complexes. Lithium salts are 
often more soluble than their sodium counterparts in solvents such as 
alcohols and ethers owing to the coordination of the solvent oxygen 
atoms to the lithium cation. Lithium ions are generally four coordinate, 
while sodium and potassium ions are six coordinate. 
The most stable complexes are formed by multidentate ligands, which 
can encapsulate the metal ion, forming numerous metal-ligand bonds. 
Examples include crown ethers and cryptands; an example of each class 
of ligand is shown in Figure 3.6. 
When the size of the cavity in the ligand is changed (by varying the 
number of -OCH,CH,- groups), the selectivity for different alkali metal 
cations with diffeient ionic radii can be altered. 
Figure 3.6 Examples of some 
multidentate ligands which form 
stable alkali metal complexes 

The Group 1 (Alkali Metal) Elements 
43 
3.10 Similarities in the Chemistry of Lithium and 
Magnesium 
~__________ 
Some of the properties of the main group elements can be rationalized 
in part by the diagonal relationship, where an element has a similarity 
to the element 'one down to the right'. Thus, lithium shows many sim- 
ilarities to magnesium rather than to the heavier alkali metals sodium 
and potassium. The higher charge of the Mg'+ ion is partly offset by its 
larger size, so Mg" and Li' have similar charge densities. 
Some of the similarities between lithium and magnesium are: 
Direct formation of the nitride and carbide 
Combust in air to the normal oxides, Li,O and MgO (sodium forms 
mostly the peroxide Na,O,) 
Stability of oxysalts, e.g. Li2C0, and MgCO, give Li,O and MgO 
on heating; Na,CO, is stable to moderate heating. 

44 
Main Group Chemistry 
Li+ and Mg” are more strongly complexed by ammonia (and other 
donor ligands in general) than Na+ and Ca2+ ions 
Formation of covalent organometallic compounds 

The Group 1 (Alkali Metal) Elements 
45 

The Group 2 Elements: 
Beryllium, Magnesium, 
Calcium, Strontium, Barium 
and Radium 
4.1 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The Group 2 metals are chemically similar in a number of respects to 
the Group 1 metals. All are true metals, but there are some important 
differences between the two groups, and within the Group 2 metals them- 
selves. All Group 2 metals form M2+ ions, but the high charge density 
of Be2+ means that the free ion cannot exist, and all its compounds are 
either covalent or contain solvated ions such as [Be(H,0)J2'. Beryllium 
therefore shows properties markedly different from the other elements 
in Group 2. The higher charge density of the 2+ ions for the Group 2 
metals, when compared to the 1+ charge of the Group 1 metals, results 
in the M2+ ions being markedly smaller. They are therefore more strongly 
hydrated and form more complexes than the alkali metals. In addition, 
because of the higher lattice energies (see Box 3.1) involving 2+ ions, 
many salts are less soluble than their Group 1 metal analogues. For 
example, potassium sulfate is readily soluble in water, but calcium and 
strontium sulfates are not. 
The diagonal relationship in the Periodic Table applies well for these 
main group elements; the similarities between Li and Mg have been 
46 

The Group 2 Elements 
47 
mentioned in Section 3.1 1, and those between Be and A1 are discusssed 
in Section 4.10. 
4.2 
The Elements 
Beryllium is a relatively rare element, but occurs mainly in the mineral 
beryl, Be,AI,Si,O,, (see Section 12.3), which is heated with Na,[SiF,] to 
give Na,[Be-F,]. Sodium hydroxide is then added to give beryllium 
hydroxide (equation 4. l), which reacts with NH,[HF,] 
to give 
(NH,),[BeF,] and then, on heating, BeF, (equation 4.2). Beryllium metal 
is obtained by magnesium reduction of-BeF, (equation 4.3). 
Na,BeF, + 2NaOH + Be(OH), + 4NaF 
(4.1 ) 
Be(OH)? + 2NH,[HF,] + (NH,)?[BeF,] 
”‘“l 
> BeF, 
(4.2) 
BeF, + Mg + MgF, + Be 
(4.3) 
Magnesium is widespread in the Earth’s crust, but the main commercial 
sources are from seawater and the minerals mugnesite, MgCO,, and 
dolomite, (Ca,Mg)CO,. Calcium similarly occurs widely as limestone, 
CaCO,. Strontium and barium occur naturally in several minerals includ- 
ing cvlestine, SrSO,, and bcirps, BaSO,. All isotopes of radium are 
radioactive; it occurs naturally as a decay product of uranium, and is 
long-lived enough to be isolated as a pure substance. 
4.3 
Simple Compounds and Salts 
The simple unhydrous compounds of beryllium tend to be covalent in 
nature, though when crystallized from water, salts containing the hydrat- 
ed [Be(H,O),]” ion can be formed. The [Be(H,O)J’+ ion, similar to 
[A1(H20)J3+, is acidic, as a result of the high polarizing power of the 
small Be2+ ion which results in hydrolysis (equation 4.4). The other 
hydrated Group 2 cations are not acidic, owing to their lower charge 
densities. 
[Be( H,O),]’+ therefore only exists in strong acid solutions. On increas- 
ing the pH, hydroxide-bridged ions (containing Be-OH-Be groups) such 
as [Be(OH),],’- form, before the precipitation of Be(OH),. In excess 
hydroxide, Be0 and Be(OH), dissolve to give the beryllate ion, 
[Be( OH),]’ , demonstrating the amphoteric nature of beryllium. 
Beryllium chloride (BeCl,) is a covalent polymer in the solid state, 
Emerald is the green gem form 
of beryl. 
Beryllium and its compounds are 
extremely toxic, second only to 
plutonium and its compounds. As 
a result, chetnists often prefer to 
undertake theoretical rather than 
practical beryllium chemistry. 
Zinc and beryllium show some 
common chemical properties; see 
Section 11 .I 
H 
An amphoteric oxide is one 
which reacts with both acid and 
base: AI.,O, IS another example. 
3- 

48 
Main Group Chemistry 
containing Be-C1-Be bridges (Figure 4.1). In the vapour the polymer is 
broken up to give a mixture of the monomer (BeC1,) and the dimer 
(Be,Cl,), which are in equilibrium (Figure 4.1). Anhydrous beryllium 
halides are soluble in many solvents, owing to the formation o f  com- 
plexes. 
Figure 4.1 Structures of BeCI, 
in the solid state and gas phase 
The chlorides, bromides and iodides of Mg, Ca, Sr and Ba are all typ- 
ical ionic, water-soluble salts, but the fluorides are only slightly water 
soluble, owing to the high lattice energies (see Box 3.1) for dipositive 
cations and small F- ions. The structure offluorite, CaF, (Figure 4.2), is 
adopted by many MX, ionic solids. The structure is based on a face-cen- 
tred cubic lattice of Ca2+ ions, with F- ions in all of the tetrahedral holes 
(two per Ca). 
Figure 4.2 The structure of 
CaF,. The tetrahedral coordination 
around F- is indicated by dashed 
lines 

The Group 2 Elements 
49 
Compare Worked Problem 3.2. 
The sulfates MSO, are all known, and decrease in solubility going from 
The insolubility of BaSO, is used 
the soluble BeSO, to sparingly soluble BaSO,. All the Group 2 metal 
sulfates lose SO, to form the oxide on strong heating (equation 4.5). 
as a qualitative test for sulfate (or 
Fa’::,)o::?T 
~
~
~
~
k
’
’- 
MSO, + MO + SO, 
non-toxic imaging agent for 
(4.5) 
diagnosing gastrointestinal 
conditions, such as ulcers. 
The tendency for beryllium salts to decompose more readily than their 
other Group 2 counterparts is again illustrated by the carbonates MCO,, 
which increase in stability going down the group. Beryllium carbonate 
only exists when crystallized under an atmosphere of CO,, while 

50 
Main Group Chemistry 
magnesium, calcium and strontium carbonates give the oxide only on 
heating (equation 4.6). Barium carbonate is stable to heat. 
MgCO, + MgO + CO, 
(4.6) 
The carboxylate salts of the metals Mg to Ba of the type M(O,CR), are 
all normal salts; however, reaction of Be(OH), with carboxylic acids gives 
basic carboxylates, Be,0(02CR)6. These have a molecular structure con- 
taining a central oxygen tetrahedrally surrounded by four Be atoms, with 
each edge of the Be, tetrahedron bridged by a carboxylate ligand (Figure 
4.3). Zinc (see Section 11.1) shows similar behaviour. 
Figure 4.3 The structure of 
[Be,O(O,CCH,),]: 
(a) tetrahedral 
arrangement of four Be atoms 
around the central 0 atom: (b) 
bridging of one of the Be-0-Be 
units by the CH,CO, 
group 
4.4 
Compounds with Oxygen and Sulfur 
Barium peroxide IS a source of 
hydrogen peroxide (see Section 
8.3 4 and Box 8.1): 
BaO, + H:,SO, + BaS0,4 + H,O, 
Combustion of the Group 2 metals in oxygen gives the monoxides MO; 
SrO and BaO will absorb oxygen under pressure to give peroxides MO,. 
However, the peroxides (and superoxides) are not formed by combus- 
tion and tend to be unstable, because the smaller M2+ ions are highly 
polarizing and cause the peroxide and superoxide salts to decompose to 
the monoxides MO, which have high lattice energies (see Section 3.4). 
This is nicely illustrated by the melting points of the MO compounds, 
which increase with increased lattice energy (Table 4.1). Peroxides of Mg, 
Ca, Sr or Ba can alternatively be made by reaction of the metal hydrox- 
ide with hydrogen peroxide (equation 4.7). 
(4.7) 
Ca(OH), + H202 + 6H,O + Ca0,.8H20 
Table 4.1 Melting points and lattice energies of Group 2 monoxides 
Oxide 
Lattice energy (kJ mo1-I) 
Melting point (“C) 
Be0 
MgO 
CaO 
SrO 
BaO 
-4298 
-3800 
-341 9 
-3222 
-3034 
2507 
2800 
1728 
1635 
1475 

The Group 2 Elements 
51 
The monoxides are bmic (see Section 3.5) and react with water to give 
Saturated solutions of Ca(OH), 
the hydroxides M(OH), (equation 4.8), which can also be formed by 
addition of OH ions td solutions of M'+ ions (equation 4.9). 
[''Irne water', contalnlng j.5 
lo-. mol L- Ca(OH),] are 
commonly used to test for 
CaO + H,O + Ca(OH), 
Mg" + 20H- -+ Mg(OH), 
carbon dioxide gas. through the 
formation of a white precipitate of 
calcium carbonate: 
(4.8) 
Ca(0H) + CO, -+ CaCO, + H,O 
(4.9) 
Ba(OH), is the most stable and most soluble hydroxide. 
4.5 
Compounds with Nitrogen 
All of the Group 2 metals form the nitride (M,N,) on heating the metal 
and nitrogen; the nitrides react with water to produce ammonia, e.g. 
equations 4.10 and 4.1 1. 
Recall from Chapter 3 that lithium 
1s the only alkali metal to g'ive a 
nitride, Li,N. 
(4.10) 
Mg,N, + 6H,O + 3Mg(OH), + 2NH, 
(4.1 1) 
The Group 2 metals dissolve in liquid ammonia to form blue solutions 
containing solvated electrons (compare the analogous behaviour of the 
alkali metals, Section 3.6); however, their solubilities are much lower. 

52 
Main Group Chemistry 
4.6 
Hydrides 
~ 
In this reaction, the hydrogen or1 
All of the Group 2 metals except beryllium form an ionic dihydride, 
beryllium is 
from One Of 
the CH, groups of the fed-butyl 
arouD, which forms 2- 
MH,, on heating the metal in hydrogen. BeH,, which is stable, must be 
synthesized indirectly by pyrolysis of di-tert-butylberyllium (But,Be), 
.
.
I
 
methylpropene. 
H2C-H 
H3C-C-Be 111 
I 
CH3 
CH2 H 
H3C-C 
+ Be 
I 
11 
I 
which itself is made from BeC12 and the Grignard reagent (see Section 
4.7) Bu'MgCl (equation 4.12). 
BeCl, + 2ButMgC1 + But,Be (+ 2MgC1,) -+ BeH, + 2Me,C=CH, 
(4.12) 
CH3 
BeH, is a polymeric solid (Figure 4.4) containing Be-H-Be bridges which 
are two-electron, three-centre bonds, very similar in type to those in dib- 
orane (B2Hb) and other boranes (see Section 5.6). 
Figure 4.4 Solid-state structure 
of BeH, showing three-centre, 
two-electron Be H Be bridges 
4.7 
Compounds with Carbon 
~~ 
Carbides are classified by the 
type of hydrocarbon they 
produce on hydrolysis; see 
Section 6.6. 
The Group 2 metals form several different types Of carbides. Mg, Ca, Sr 
and Ba form ethynides (acetylides) of the type MC,; an example is cal- 
cium ethynide, CaC,, the structure of which is given in Figure 6.6. These 
ethynides contain the C,'- ion. Beryllium and magnesium also form two 
other types of carbides.-Beryllium forms Be,C on direct combination of 
Be and C, and the main hydrolysis product is CH,, suggesting it con- 
tains isolated C atoms. 

The Group 2 Elements 
53 
The most important organometallic compounds of the Group 2 metals 
are the Grignard reagents, RMgX, where X is a halide.' They are very 
similar to organolithiums, and are formed from the halide and magne- 
sium metal in a solvent such as diethyl ether (equation 4.13). 
R-Cl + Mg + RMgCl 
(4.13) I----
Et, 
,Et 
0 
I 
E
t
-
,
 
/Mg,ci 
P 
R 
Et 
~_ 
Grignard reagents are solvated by the ether, giving four-coordinate Mg 
centres (Figure 4.5)' Grignard reagents are widely used as reagents for 
the formation of carbonxarbon bonds, via addition to carbonyl groups, 
for example equation 4.14, and for the transfer of R groups to other het- 
eroatoms by halide displacement, e.g. equation 4.15. 
Figure 4.5 A Grignard reagent, 
RMgCI, solvated by diethyl ether 
R3 
H+ 
I 
- 
(4.14) 
R' \ 
R3MgCI + 
,C=O - 
R2 
PC1, + 3EtMgBr + PEt, + 3MgBrCl 
(4.15) 
The organomagnesium compounds R,Mg are known, but much less stud- 
ied than the Grignard reagents. Dirn&hylberyllium (and also dimethyl- 
magnesium) have the polymeric structures shown in Figure 4.6, 
analogous to those of solid beryllium hydride (Figure 4.4) and berylli- 
um chloride (Figure 4.1). The sp, hybridized methyl group bridges by 
forming three-centre, two-electron electron-deficient bonds to the sp3 
hybridized metal atoms (Figure 4.7). 

54 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 4.7 Three-centre, two- 
electron bonds in solid Be(CH,), 
Water is a stronger acid than 
ethane. 
4.8 
Group 2 Metal Complexes 
Owing to their having a higher charge density than the alkali metals, the 
Group 2 metal ions form many more coordination complexes, though 
the tendency to form complexes decreases going down the group because 
of the larger ionic size and reduced strength of ion-dipole interactions. 
All of the M'+ cations form complexes with oxygen and nitrogen donor 
ligands, and with the lighter halides preferentially. Beryllium, owing to 
its small size, is restricted to a maximum coordination number of four, 
but magnesium and calcium are commonly six coordinate, and stron- 
tium and barium can have even higher coordination numbers. 

The Group 2 Elements 
55 
4.9 
Similarities in the Chemistry of Beryllium and 
Aluminium 
The diagonal relationship (see Section 3.1 1) is also illustrated by these 
two elements, which share much common chemistry. The A13+ ion is larg- 
er than Be3+, so both have similar, high charge densities, and the free 
cations do not exist. Instead, both beryllium and aluminium form cova- 
lent compounds or strongly solvated cations which are acidic and read- 
ily hydrolysed. Both metals dissolve in non-oxidizing acids (such as HCl) 
or alkalis with liberation of hydrogen gas, and both form polymeric 
hydrides, chlorides and alkyls. 

56 
Main Group Chemistry 

The Group 13 Elements: 
Boron, Aluminium, Gallium, 
Indium and Thallium 
5.1 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
In Group 13, boron is typically regarded as a non-metallic element, 
though with some metallic characteristics. The other elements are all met- 
als. This is illustrated by the considerably higher first, second and third 
ionization energies (IEs) of boron compared with the other elements 
(Figure 5.1). There are many similarities but also many differences in the 
chemistry of boron and the other elements. Aluminium has many simi- 
larities to beryllium (see Section 4.9). 
For the Group 13 elements, +3 is the stable oxidation state; however, 
we see the stabilization of a lower oxidation state (+I) for the heaviest 
element in the group, thallium, for which the +3 state is oxidizing. This 
tendency (the inert pair effect) becomes even more pronounced as we 
move to the elements in Groups 14, 15 and 16. 
57 

58 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 5.1 First ionization 
energies (kJ mol-’) for the 
Group 13 elements 
5.2 
The Elements 
Boron occurs naturally as borax, Na,B,0,.4H20 and Na,B,O,. 10H,O. 
Acidification of this gives boric acid, B(OH), (also written as H,BO,), 
which is dehydrated to boric oxide, B,O, (Section 5.7.1), by heating. 
Amorphous (non-crystalline) boron is then obtained by reduction of the 
B20, using sodium or magnesium. Crystalline boron is obtained by the 
reduction of a mixture of boron trihalide (e.g. BCl,) and hydrogen over 
a heated tantalum wire (equation 5.1). Boron crystallizes in a variety of 
forms, all containing the icosahedral B,, unit (Figure 5.2). The propen- 
sity of boron to form such polyhedral clusters is a commonly occurring 
theme of the chemistry of this element in low oxidation state compounds, 
especially hydrides (Section 5.6) and some halides (Section 5.5.2). 
Figure 5.2 The icosahedral B12 
unit found in crystalline boron 
(and some metallic borides) 
After oxygen and silicon, aluminium is the most common element in the 
Earth’s crust (8.1%), where it can replace silicon in silicates, giving a h -  
minosilicates (see Section 12.3). The most important ore of aluminium 

The Group 13 Elements 
59 
is huuxitt., AI,O,.H,O, which is purified by dissolving it in strong NaOH 
solution, removing-the insoluble iron impurities, and reprecipitating the 
aluminium as A1,03.3H,0 (hydrated alumina). The metal is obtained by 
electrolysing thebried alumina in molten Na,AIF,. 
The other three elements, gallium, indium and thallium, are of fairly 
low abundance, occurring as minor components of a range of minerals, 
such as sphderite (ZnS) (see Section 11.5). 
5.3 
Chemistry of the Elements 
Elemental boron combines with oxygen, halogens, sulfur and nitrogen, 
and with many metals. It is resistant to acids, and only reacts with molten 
sodium hydroxide above 500 "C. 
Aluminium, while being a very reactive metal, is usually made unre- 
active ('passivated') by a thin coating of aluminium oxide. Aluminium 
dissolves in HC1 to give the [Al(H,O),]"+ ion plus hydrogen, and in strong 
hydroxide solutions, giving alumhates and hydrogen (equation 5.2). 
2A1 + 2NaOH + 6H,O + 2NaAI(OH), + 3H, 
(5.2) 
Gallium, indium and thallium are reasonably reactive metals which read- 
ily dissolve in acids to give trivalent cations for Ga and In but TI+ for 
thallium (equations 5.3 and 5.4), illustrating the greater stability of the 
+ I  oxidation state for this element. 
(5.3) 
(5.4) 
5.4 
Borides 
When boron is heated with most metals, metal borides are formed; in 
this aspect of its chemistry, boron shows similarities with carbon and 
silicon, which form carbides and silicides, respectively. The structures of 
these borides are dependent on the metal-to-boron ratio, and contain 
single, pairs, chains, double chains, sheets or clusters of boron atoms. 
Compounds with composition M,B (e.g. Fe,B) have single boron atoms, 
while those with a 1:l ratio (e.g. FeB) have single chains of boron atoms 
running through the metal lattice (Figure 5.3). In materials of composi- 
tion MB, (e.g. MgB,, TiB,) the material has a sheet structure (Figure 
5.3), while in MB, (e.g. MgB,) there are clusters of six boron atoms con- 
tained within a cube of metal atoms, in a caesium chloride-type struc- 
ture (see Figure 3.3). Finally, in compounds of composition MB,, (e.g. 

60 
Main Group Chemistry 
AIB,,) the boron atoms form a network of linked icosahedral B,, clus- 
ters (Figure 5.2), as found in crystalline boron itself. 
Figure 5.3 The structures 
adopted by some metal borides 
5.5 
Halides 
5.5.1 Trivalent Halides, MX, 
All combinations of M and X occur in the trivalent MX, halides, with 
the exception of thallium(II1) iodide. 
The boron trihalides BX, are planar molecules, having an empty 
p-orbital perpendicular to the molecular plane. In BF, (and to a far less- 
er extent in BCl,) 7c back-donation from filled halogen p-orbitals into the 
empty boron p-orbital can occur (Figure 5.4). Back donation is effective 
for fluorine, with small p-orbitals, which gives very effective overlap, and 
essentially some partial multiple 7c-bond character in the B-F bonds. For 

The Group 13 Elements 
61 
BCl,, overlap with the larger chlorine orbitals is poorer (Figure 5.4), so 
the boron is more electron deficient and a more powerful Lewis acid than 
BF,. 
acceptor, whereas a Lewis 
A Lewis acid IS an electron-pair 
base IS an electron-pair donor. 
Figure 5.4 Back donation from 
filled halogen p-orbitals into an 
empty boron p-orbital in the 
halides BX, 
While all of the boron trihalides BX, are monomers, the structures of 
the AlX, compounds are dependent on the halide X. AlF, is a high-melt- 
ing polymeric solid built from fluoride-bridged AlF, octahedra. The 
structure of AICI, in the solid state similarly has six-coordinate A1 cen- 
tres, with chloride bridges. However, in the liquid and gas phases the 
dimer Al,Cl, (5.1) is formed, where one of the chlorides forms a dative 
bond to the other aluminium centre, completing its octet. AlBr, and All, 
are dimeric in all states. 
All the trihalides MX, are powerful Lewis acids, forming adducts of 
the type MX,L. Indeed, BF, is often used in this form, as an adduct (5.2) 
with diethyl ether. The formation of anions MX,- from MX, by addi- 
tion of halide can also be viewed as Lewis acid-Lewis base complex for- 
mation, e.g. the formation of BF,- from BF,. For aluminium and the 
other heavier group members, more than one ligand is able to be added, 
up to a maximum of six coordination. 
5.2 Structure of BF3.Et20 
Examples of halide complexes: 
AIF, j- (octahedral) 
lnCl 2 
(both trigonal-bipyramidal 
and square-pyramidal forms exist) 
GaBr (tetrahedral) 

62 
Main Group Chemistry 
5.5.2 Lower Oxidation State Halides 
All the Group 13 elements form diatomic halides MX, although all except 
thallium are unstable towards disproportionation to the metal and the 
trivalent halide (even gaseous TlCl is unstable to disproportionation). As 
an example, AlCl and GaCl can be formed by the reaction of alumini- 
G'sproportionation is where Some 
atorns of the same element are 
oxidized and others reduced in 
um or gallium metal with HC1 gas at high temperature and low pres- 
sure, giving red AlCl or GaC1, which are condensed at low temperature 
the same reaction. 
(77 K). On warming, they disproportionate (equation 5.5). 
3MC1 + MCl, + 2M 
(5.5) 
CI\ 
,Cl 
CI /YCl 
5.3 
Boron is notable for lower oxidation state halides containing B-B bonds. 
Thus B,C14 (5.3) is made by passing an electrical discharge through BCl, 
using mercury electrodes (equation 5.6), or by condensing copper atoms 
with BCl, (equation 5.7). B2F4, B2Br4 and B214 are also known. 
2BC1, + 2Hg + B.,Cl4 + Hg2Cl, 
(5.6) 
2BC1, + 2Cu(atoms) + B2Cl, + 2CuCl 
(5.7) 

The Group 13 Elements 
63 
Boron forms a number of halides which contain clusters of boron atoms, 
with each boron bearing a halogen atom. B,Cl, is a by-product of reac- 
tion 5.6, while B,Cl, and B,Cl, (and the larger clusters B,,Cl,,, B,& 
and B,,Cl,,) are formed progressively by decomposition of B,Cl, at room 
temperature. The structures of B,Cl, and B,Cl, are shown in Figure 5.5. 
Gallium(I1) occurs in the species Ga,X,'- 
(X = C1, Br or I), formed by 
electrolysis of gallium metal in strong acid. These contain a Ga-Ga bond 
(thus accounting for the +2 oxidation state), but are readily oxidized, 
e.g by halogens X, to GaX,-. 
Figure 5.5 Structures of some 
boron chloride clusters 
5.6 
Hydrides and Organometallic Compounds 
5.6.1 Boron Hydrides 
Boron forms more hydrides than any other Group 13 element; there are 
very extensive series of electron-dejcient hydride compounds, where the 
usual two-centre, two-electron covalent bonds (formed in hydrides such 
as PH, and H,S) are supplemented by three-centre, two-electron bonds. 
Some of the bitter-known boranes are listed in Table 5.1; the compounds 
fall into two types, having compositions B,,H,+, and B,IH,1+6. 
The simplest possible borane is BH,, but this compound has never been 
isolated. Instead, the smallest borane is the dimer B,H,, diborane, formed 
by the reduction of a boron trihalide with Li[A1H4i (equation 5.8). 
Table 5.1 Some boron 
h ydrides 
B2H6 
B4HlO 
B5H9 
BSH,, 
BGHlO 
B6H12 
B8H12 
B8H 14 
B10H14 
4BF, + 3Li[AlH,] + 2B,H, + 3Li[AlF,] 
(5.8) L
I
B,H, has the structure shown in Figure 5.6. with four terminal B-H 
L
O
 
" 
bonds (which are normal two-electron covalent bonds), and two three- 
centre, two electron B-H-B bonds. Each boron atom is sp, hybridized; 
The 
B,H, is similar to that in solid 
B;Me,, (see Chapter 4), AIMe, 
bonding in 
two hybrids are used to bond the terminal H atoms, while the other two 
form three-centre bonds with hydrogen 1s orbitals, as shown in Figure 
5.7. 
and (AIH:J\ (Section 5.6.2). 

64 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 5.6 The structure of dib- 
orane, B,H, 
Figure 5.7 Three-centre, 
two-electron bonds in B,H, 
Nomenclature: pentaborane-9 
the borane 
five 
atorns ('penta') and nine 
hydrogens. B H.,. 
Higher boron hydrides contain the same structural features as B,H,, with 
one or more B-B bonds present. The molecules have 'open' polyhedral 
cluster structures; the structures of tetraborane (B,H ,J and pentaborane- 
9 (B,H,) are shown in Figure 5.8. These higher boron hydrides can be 
formed by heating B,H,; different reaction conditions give different 
boron hydrides, for example equations 5.9 and 5.10. 
2B,H, + 6H, 
(5.10) 
5B2H6 
1*o-22""c > 
B 
O H  
d 
L. 
B4H10 
Figure 5.8 The structures of (a) 
B,H,,and 
(b) B y ,  

The Group 13 Elements 
65 
As well as the neutral boranes, there is an extensive series of boron 
hydride anions, which have closed polyhedral skeletons. Thus, [B6H6I2- 
and [Bl2HI2l2- 
have octahedral B, and icosahedral B,, cages, respective- 
ly, and terminal B-H bonds, as shown in Figure 5.9. Carboranes are 
obtained by replacing one or more BH units with C atoms. 
Figure 5.9 The structures of the 
closo boron hydride anions (a) 
[B,Hd2- and (b) [Bl2Hl2I2- 

66 
Main Group Chemistry 
Wade’s rules can be applied to a 
The shapes of the various borane clusters can be rationalized using 
wide range of other cluster 
species of main group and 
transition metals. 
Wade’s rules, which consider the total number of skeletal electron pairs 
(SEP) available for cluster bonding. 

The Group 13 Elements 
67 
5.6.2 Hydrides of the Other Group I 3  Elements 
In contrast to boron, few other hydrides are known. For aluminium, the 
only stable hydride is polymeric alane (AIH,),y. For gallium, the reaction 
of the dimeric [H,GaCl], with Li[GaH,] gives gallane [GaHJI, which 
mainly occurs as the rather thermally unstable diborane-like dimer 
Ga,H, in the gas phase.' In some respects the chemistry of gallane more 
resembles that of borane than alane, because the electronegativity of gal- 
lium (1.8) is higher than that of aluminium (1.5) and closer to boron 
(2.0). 

68 
Main Group Chemistry 
5.6.3 Hydride Adducts 
A common example of a donor 
([I) is an amine (e~g. 
Me,N.GaH,. 
The hydrides of the Group 13 elements form donor-stabilized monomers, 
MH,.D (where D is the donor), as illustrated by the formation of BH, 
adducts (equation 5.1 1). 
as in 
B2H, + 2D -+ 2BH,,.D 
(5.11) 
Salts containing the tetrahedral MH,- ions are obtained by various 
reactions, including where the donor D in equation 5.14 is a hydride ion, 
H-. Sodium tetrahydridoborate(III), Na[BH,] (commonly called sodium 
borohydride), is produced from trimethyl borate (see Section 5.7.1) and 
sodium hydride (equation 5.12), and is widely used as a reducing agent 
for carbonyl groups, e.g. equation 5.13. 
B(OMe), + 4NaH + Na[BH,] + 3NaOMe 
(5.12) 
Me,CO + Na[BH4] -+ Me,CHOH 
(5.13) 
Sodium borohydride is particularly useful as a mild reducing agent 
because it is soluble and relatively stable in water. In contrast, Na[AlH,] 
and Li[AlH,] [lithium tetrahydridoaluminate(III), lithium aluminium 
hydride] react extremely violently with water (equation 5.14). 
Na[AlH,] + 4H,O + NaOH + Al(OH), + 4H2 
(5.14) 
Li[AlH4] is obtained by reaction of anhydrous AlCl, with lithium hydride 
(equation 5.15) or, more recently, directly, by reaction of Li and A1 met- 
als with hydrogen at elevated temperature (equation 5.16). 
4LiH + AlCl, + Li[AlH,] + 3LiCl 
(5.15) 
Li + A1 + 2H, + Li[AlH,] 
(5.16) 
Li[AlH,] is a powerful reducing agent, widely used in the laboratory, e.g. 
for conversion of chlorophosphines into primary or secondary phos- 
phines (by conversion of P-Cl bonds into P--H bonds) (equation 5.17). 
2PhPC1, + Li[AlH,] + 2PhPH, + Li[AlCl,] 
(5.17) 

The Group 13 Elements 
69 
5.7 
Oxides, Hydroxides and Oxyanions 
All of the oxides M,O, can be made by heating the element in oxygen, 
and are summarizedin Table 5.2. Reaction of aqueous solutions of the 
metal trihalides with hydroxide gives the oxides in hydrated form. Going 
down the group, there is a transition from acidic oxides, through ampho- 
The Same trend in acidity,basicity 
is &.elTed 
for oxides of Groups 
teric, to basic, owing to increasing metallic character of the element 
concerned. 
14-16. 
Table 5.2 Oxides of the Group 13 elements 
Oxide 
Properties 
4 0 3  
Weakly acidic 
A1203 
Amphoteric 
Gap03 
Amphoteric 
In203 
Weakly basic 
Basic, oxidizing 
5.7.1 Boron 
Boric oxide (B,O,) is an acidic oxide, readily hydrated to form boric acid, 
Acidic oxides dissolve in water to 
-
-
 
B(OH),, which is a weak acid, with a hydrogen-bonded layer structure 
(Figure 5.11 1. Its acidic nature is due to the reaction shown in equation 
5.18. 
release H'; Other examples Of 
acidic oxides are CO,, SO, and 
p,o,,, 
B(OH), + 2H,O + B(OH),- + H,O' 
(5.18) 

70 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 5.11 The hydrogen- 
bonded layer structure of boric 
acid, B(OH), 
Boric acid reacts with alcohols to form borates, for example trimethyl 
borate (equation 5.19). 
B(OH), + 3MeOH -+ B(OMe), + 3H20 
(5.19) 
This reaction occurs particularly readily with 1,2-dialcohols (such as 
are formed (see structure 5.4). There is a very extensive chemistry of 
borate anions, which are based on planar BO, groups or tetrahedral BO, 
groups (or both), and a vast array of compounds are known. The struc- 
tures of some selected, commonly occurring borate anions are shown in 
Figure 5.12. Complex equilibria serve to interchange the various anions. 
ethane- 1 ,2-dio17 HOCH,CH,OH), because stable five-membered rings 
H2c-o/h,,.., 
H26-OwB 
5.4 
The simple borate anion B0,3- is 
rsoelectronic with both the 
(:arbonate 
and nitrate NO,- 
anions. 
5.7.2 Aluminium 
Gem forms of AI,O,: 
There are two forms of A1,0,; the high-temperature a form (which occurs 
White sapphire 
Ruby (contains traces of Cr3+) 
Blue samhire (contains traces of 
as the hard mineral corundum) has a cubic close-packed array of oxide 
ions with the A13+ ions regularly arranged in octahedral holes, while the 
, .  
Fe2+, Fe3+ or Ti4+) 
lower-temperature y form has a more complex but open structure. 
Aluminium forms two hydrated oxides, MO(0H) and M(OH),. 
Aluminum oxide is amphoteric (see Section 4.3) and dissolves in con- 
centrated hydroxide solution to give aluminate solutions containing the 
[Al(OH),]- ion. 

The Group 13 Elements 
71 
13- 
0 \ 
0 /”-O 
2- 
‘Perborate’; used as a bleaching agent 
PH 
2- 
5.8 
Compounds with Groups 15 and 16 Elements 
Figure 5=12 The structures Of 
some borate anions 
5.8.1 Compounds with P, As, S, Se and Te 
Heating the Group 13 elements (M) with elemental sulfur, selenium or 
tellurium (E) gives the chalcogenides M,E,, which contain either four- 
or six-coordinate M atoms. Materials such as InP and GaAs are impor- 
tant semiconductor materials (termed ‘111-V semiconductors’). 
5.8.2 Compounds with N: Borazines and Boron Nitride 
As mentioned in Section 5.6.3, BH, forms adducts with a wide range of 
donor ligands, such as Me,N.BH,. When the donor is also a hydride, 
loss of hydrogen can also occur. For example, B,H, and NH, initially 
form the expected H,N.BH,, which gives the compound borazine, 
B,N,H, (5.5)’ on warming to room temperature. 
Borazine is isoelectronic with benzene (C,H,, 5.6) and also has a delo- 
calized structure, with all B-N bond lengths identical (144 pm). However, 
in borazine the electronegative N atoms are polarized 6 
and the elec- 
tropositive B atoms 6+, so the reactivity of borazine is rather different 
to that of benzene, and the sometimes-used term ‘inorganic benzene’ is 
not a good description of borazine. 

72 
Main Group Chemistry 
H 
I 
C', 
,N, 
,C' 
y-J 
B
H
 
I 
CI 
5.7 g,B,g-Trichloroborazine 
There are many other derivatives of this type, involving different sub- 
stituents on B and/or N. The reaction of NH,Cl with BCl, gives B,B,B- 
trichloroborazine, B,N,H,Cl, (5.7) (equation 5.20). 
/ \ 
3NH,Cl + 3BC1, + B,N,H,Cl, + 9HC1 
(5.20) 
Just as borazine is isoelectronic with benzene, the material boron nitride 
(BN) is isoelectronic with carbon. Both carbon and BN form diamond- 
and graphite-like structures. The graphite-like structure of BN (Figure 
5.13) has layers consisting of planar, hexagonal B,N, rings (with BN dis- 
tances similar to those in borazine). These layers stack on top of each 
other such that the B6+ and NL atoms lie on top of each other; this con- 
trasts with the staggered arrangement found in graphite (see Figure 6.1) 
and borazine itself. 
Figure 5.13 The structure of the 
layered form of boron nitride 
(BN). Alternate layers stack 
6. N 6-N 

The Group 13 Elements 
73 
5.9 
Aquated and Related Complex Cations 
5.8 
The B3+loql ion is unknown owing to the extreme polarizing power to be 
expected of a B3+ cation. However, salts containing the [AI(H,O),]?' 
cation are known, such as potash alum, KAI(SO,),. I2H,O. In sdlution 
the CAI( H,O),]'+ cation tends to undergo hydrolysis by loss of protons 
From cooi'dinated H,O molecules (equation 5.2 1 ). 
Compare ~
~
~
(Section 4.3) 
[AI(H,O),I3+ * [AI(H,O),(OH)]'+ + H' 
[Al(H,O),(OH),]' + H' * 
[Al(H,O),(OH),I + €3' 
(5.21) 
The behaviour of the gallium and indium ions, [M(H,0)J3+, resembles 
the aluminium case, but there is a greater tendency to form complex 
anions if a suitable ligand. such as halide, is present, c.g. equation 5.22. 
[In(H20),l3+ + 5C1 -+ [InCl,]' + 6H,O 
(5.22) 

74 
Main Group Chemistry 

The Group 13 Elements 
75 

The Group 14 Elements: 
Carbon, Silicon, Germanium, 
Tin and Lead 
6.1 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
~~ 
~ 
The Group 14 elements lie in the centre of the main group elements (if 
the Group 1 and Group 2 elements are included), and they show major 
differences from the lightest element carbon (a typical non-metal) to the 
heaviest element lead (a typical main group metal). The group oxidation 
state is +4, and for C and Si this is an important and stable state. In 
hydrocarbons the oxidation state of carbon is formally -4; these com- 
pounds are tlzcrr?ioc!l.'nuriii('LiIl?' unstable, but an extremely important class 
of compound upon which organic chemistry is based. For Ge the +2 
state has some stable compounds, such as GeI,, although the +4 state is 
predominant. Tin forms compounds in the +4 and +2 oxidation states, 
both of which are stable, although tin(+2) is a reducing agent, whereas 
for lead the +4 state is generally oxidizing and the +2 state is stable. 
Some lead conipounds such as PbO, are powerful oxidizing agents. 
so we might expect all these elements to form divalent compounds, form- 
ing two bonds using the two p-electrons. Proniotion of an electron from 
ns2 into the empty wp orbital requires energy, but the atom can now form 
four bonds. More energy is produced by bond formation for carbon and 
This trend (the inert pair effect) 
The Group 14 ekmentS have the ns'np' electronic configuration, and 
in oxidation state stabilities 
parallels those for the 
Group 13 (oxidation states +1 
sta:es +3 and +5). 
Of 
+3) and Group 15 
76 

The Group 14 Elements 
77 
(to a lesser extent) for silicon (which forms short, strong covalent bonds), 
which offsets the cost of promoting an 17s electron. The tetravalent state 
is very stable for these two elements. For the heavy elements (Ge. Sn. 
Pb), bond strengths decrease, so the formation of four bonds cannot pro- 
vide enough energy to stablize the +4 oxidation state. Thus, for lead 
(and, to a lesser extent, tin) the +2 state is the most stable. 
A very important feature of Group 13 element chemistry is catena- 
tion; an enormous number of carbon compounds containing C-C bonds 
are known. Catenation becomes less important going down Group 14, 
owing to the decreased bond energies and the stabilization of the +2 oxi- 
dation state. 
6.2 
The Elements 
6.2.1 Carbon 
Important sources of carbon are coal and crude oil; there are also sub- 
stantial deposits of natural gas, which is mainly methane, CH,. Carbon 
occurs as several allotropes, which have very different structures and 
properties. Until recently, only two cvy:ytcilIirw forms of carbon - dia- 
mond and graphite - were known [many ciniovplzous (non-crystalline) 
iorms of carbon are Fdmiliar, c.g. soot]. 
In graphite, the carbon atoms form planar sheets of fused six- 
membered rings (Figure 6.1 ). Each carbon atom uses sp' hybrids to bond 
to other carbons within the sheet, and its remaining p- orbital forms an 
extensive delocalized x-system over the sheet. Attraction hetit-een adja- 
cent sheets is weak, and so the graphite layers slide over each other very 
easily. The graphite structure is unique to carbon among the Group 14 
elements, because the small p- orbitals on C can overlap effectively to 
form the delocalized n-system. 

78 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 6.1 The structure of 
graphite, showing the 
superposition of alternating layers 
In contrast, diamond has an infinite three-dimensional network structure 
built up from tetrahedral carbon atoms forming strong covalent bonds 
with each other (Figure 6.2). Diamond is therefore one of the hardest 
substances known. 
Figure 6.2 The three- 
dimensional network structure 
of diamond 
Fullerenes and nanotubes are 
made by passing an electrical arc 
two graphite 
under a helium atmosphere. 
In recent years there has been an explosion of research into new rnolec- 
ulur allotropes of carbon called fullerenes, typified by the first compound 
discovered, C,,, shown in Figure 6.3.’ There is an extensive series of such 
materials, also termed Buckminsterfullerenes or ‘buckyballs’ after the 
architect R. Buckminster Fuller who designed geodesic domes. There are 
also so-called carbon nanotubes, ‘buckytubes’, which consist of a 
graphite-like tube, capped at both ends by a fullerene hemisphere. 

The Group 14 Elements 
79 
6.2.2 Silicon and Germanium 
Silicon is the second most abundant element (after oxygen) in the Earth’s 
crust, where it occurs as SiO, and silicate minerals. Germanium, the least 
common of the Group 14 elements, occurs in some zinc and silver ores, 
and also in flue dusts and the ashes of certain types of coal. Silicon and 
germanium adopt diamond-like structures (Figure 6.2). 
6.2.3 Tin and Lead 
Figure 6.3 The structure of 
Buckminsterfullerene, CeU. The 
structure of the molecule, built 
from pentagons and hexagons of 
carbon atoms, is the same as a 
soccer ball 
Tin mainly occurs naturally as the mineral cassiterite, SnO,, from which 
metallic tin is obtained by reduction. 
The main ore of lead is the mineral gcrlenu, PbS, which is roasted in 
air to form lead oxide, which is then reduced to the metal using carbon 
monoxide in a blast furnace. Lead is a typical heavy metal. 

80 
Main Group Chemistry 
6.3 
Chemistry of the Elements 
All of the Group 14 elements are fairly unreactive. Tin and lead dissolve 
in a number of oxidizing and non-oxidizing acids, though silicon and 
germanium are rather inert and only attacked by HF. All of the Group 
14 elements are reactive towards halogens. 
While diamond is particularly inert, other forms of carbon are more 
reactive. Graphite has an extensive chemistry and can form two types of 
products with either buckled or planar sheets, depending on whether the 
delocalized n-system is, or is not, disrupted. Thus, reaction of graphite 
with fluorine at 400 "C gives graphite fluoride, (CF,,))!, which is colour- 
less when s = 1. One of the possible structures for (CF))], shown in Figure 
6.4, consists of fused cyclohexane rings; each C atom bears a single flu- 
orine, apart from those at the edges of sheets which will be CF, groups. 
The fluorination prises apart the graphite layers, which become non-con- 
ducting, since delocalized electrons are no longer present. 
Other graphite compounds, with planar graphite sheets, are inclusion 
compounds, formed when graphite is reacted with a reducing agent, typ- 
ically an alkali metal, c.g. for KC, in equation 6.1.* . 
Figure 6.4 The proposed 
structure of graphite fluoride, 
w,, 
In this compound (and related materials) the interlayer separation 
increases to accommodate the alkali metal atom, which forms a 
C,-metal-C, sandwich. In KC, there are alternating layers of C and K 
(Figure 6.5); in materials with less potassium (e.g. KC2,)I K layers are 
inserted into alternate carbon layers. 

The Group 14 Elements 
81 
Figure 6.5 Formation and lay- 
ered structure of KC, with planar 
graphite sheets 
6.4 
Group 14 Hydrides and Organometallic 
Compounds 
Methane, CH,. is the simplest hydride of carbon; the corresponding 
hydrides MH, of the other Group 14 elements are less stable owing to 
the size mismatch between the Group 14 atom and the very small H 
atom. Silane, germane and stannane are all known, but plumbane is very 
unstable and no chemistry has been determined. General methods for 
the synthesis of hydrides, including organo derivatives which are gener- 
ally more stable than the simple hydrides, use hydrides such as Li[AIH,], 
as shown in equations 6.2-6.4. 
SiCl, + LiAlH, + SiH, + LiAlCI, 
(6.2) 
GeO, + LiAlH, + GeH, + LiAlO, 
(6.3) 
4PhSiC1, + 3LiAlH, + 4PhSiH, + 3LiAIC1, 
(6.4) 
The chemistry of longer-chain carbon hydrides and derivatives thereof 
is covered by the subdiscipline of organic chemistry. We will say no more 
about these important compounds other than to stress again the propen- 
sity of carbon to form catenated compounds, with very strong bonds 
between two or more C atoms, which provides the diversity and stabil- 
ity of organic compounds. The stability of long-chain compounds 
markedly decreases for the heavier Group 14 elements. Catenation up 
to Si,[)H,., is established for silicon and to Ge,H2,, for germanium, but 
for tin, only Sn,H, is known. As with hydrocarbons, different chain- 
branched isomers can often be formed for silanes and germanes. 

82 
Main Group Chemistry 
/R 
R \ 
\ 
R /pb=Pb 
R 
H 3 C T 3  
CH3 
The first example of a compound 
with a Pb-Pb double bond 
A wide range of alkyl and aryl compounds of Si, Ge, Sn and Pb have 
been prepared, e.g. Me,SnCl and Et,Pb. The latter has historically been 
used as an anti-knock additive in petrol. 
For carbon, compounds containing double (C=C, C=O, C=N, etc.) 
and triple (e.g. C=C, C=N, C=P) bonds are well known, but analogous 
compounds of the heavier elements are rare and require bulky organic 
groups on the multiple bond in order to stabilize them; compounds con- 
taining Si=Si, Ge=Ge, Sn=Sn and Pb=Pb bonds are all known,3 the lat- 
ter only re~ently.~ 
The instability of multiple bonds between heavy 
p-block elements is largely due to poor orbital overlap. 
6.5 
Group 14 Halides 
6.5. I Tetrahalides, EX, 
All of the Group 14 tetrahalides exist, except for PbI, where the lead(1V) 
centre is too strong an oxidizing agent to co-exist with the reducing 
iodide; PbBr, is thermally very unstable, for the same reasons. The tetra- 
halides can be made by direct combination of the elements, sometimes 
via the dihalides (equations 6.5 and 6.6) or by treatment of the oxide 
with HX (equation 6.7). 
Si + 2C1, + SiCl, 
(6.5) 
Sn + 21, -+ SnI, + SnI, 
(6.6) 
GeO, + 4HBr -+ GeBr, + 2H,O 
(6.7) 
Most EX, compounds are tetrahedral molecular mecies. and are auite 
-l 
1 

The Group 14 Elements 
83 
volatile. However, the fluorides of tin and lead (SnF, and PbF,) are solids 
with polymeric structures composed of fluoride-bridged MF, octahedra, 
with a significant ionic contribution to the bonding. This trend matches 
other p-block groups, such as Group 13 (where BF, is molecular but 
AIF, is polymeric) and Group 15 (where NF, and PF,-are molecular but 
BiF, is ionic). In forming such polymeric compounds the larger Group 
14 elements increase their coordination number. Silicon, germanium, tin 
and lead tetrahalides (EX,) form coordination complexes with electron- 
pair donors (D), EX,.D (with trigonal bipyramidal geometry) and 
EX,.2D (with octahedral geometry). The donors may be neutral ligands, 
such as ethers, or anionic ligands such as halides. Thus, addition of C1- 
to SnCl, can give SnCl, and SnCI,'-. 
The tetrahalides of Si, Ge, Sn and Pb (with the exception of SiF,) 
hydrolyse rapidly to the hydrated dioxide (equation 6.8). 
SiCl, + excess H,O -+ SiO,.nH,O 
-
-
 + 4HCl 
(6.8) 
Carbon tetrahalides are kinetically stable towards hydrolysis, because 
carbon (unlike the heavier group elements) is not able to increase its 
coordination number. For silicon and the heavier elements, an incom- 
ing water molecule can readily add to the Six, group to form a five- 
coordinate intermediate which can then lose HCl. 
6.5.2 Dihalides, EX, 
The +2 oxidation state is the important stable state for lead and it is also 
quite stable for tin, which forms all four dihalides by reaction of the 
metal with anhydrous HX (equation 6.9). 
Sn + 2HX -+ SnX, + H, 
(6.9) 
SnCl, in the gas phase has a bent structure (since it is a three-electron 
pair molecule, with two Sn-C1 bonds and a lone pair on Sn). In the solid 
state it forms a chain polymer through the formation of chloride bridges. 
Germanium( 11) halides are known for all halides, formed by the reduc- 
tion of GeX, with elemental Ge (equation 6.10), which is an example of 
cornproportionation. GeI, disproportionates into GeI, and Ge on 
heating. 
GeX, + Ge -+ 2GeX, 
(6.10) 
Adduct formation by addition 
of X-to SnX, 
9 
$" 
Jr 
SF, is siinilarly stable towards 
hydrolysis; see Section 8.4.2. 
The C-CI bond itself shows no 
special stability towards 
hydrolysis; et hanoyl chloride 
(acetyl chloride, MeCOCI) very 
rapidly hydrolyses to ethanoic 
acid (acetic acid, MeCO'-H) 
because the water can readily 
attack the three- coordma te 
carbon atom 
cl/sn\cl 
Gas phase 
Solid state 
Coniproportionation is the 
opposite of disproportionation 
(page 62). 

84 
Main Group Chemistry 
6.5.3 Halides with E-E Bonds: Catenated Halides 
C)lsproportionation 
is where some 
:itoms of the same element a-e 
and Others reduced in 
the same reaction. 
For carbon, just as there is a diverse range of hydrocarbons known, there 
is a similarly extensive range of halocarbons; perhaps the best example 
is poly(tetrafluoroethene), PTFE, an extremely stable polymer finding 
numerous applications (see Section 9.2.1). 
For silicon, a large number of higher halides are known, containing 
chains of Si atoms, analogous to the polysilanes described in Section 6.4. 
Germanium, tin and lead form few analogues of the silicon compounds, 
because of the lower stability of the E--E bonds going down the group, 
and the increased stability of the divalent halides (equation 6.11). 
Ge,Br, -llrdt GeBr, -t- GeBr, 
(6.1 I) 
This reaction, when reversed, forms a convenient synthesis for com- 
pounds such as Ge,Br6 and Ge,Cl,. 
6.6 
Carbides and Silicides 
When carbon or silicon is heated with many elements (especially met- 
als), carbides and silicides are formed. There are many different types of 
carbides, which are classified by their reaction (or lack of it) with water, 
and the products formed therefrom. 
Transition metals typically form interstitial carbide compounds, in 
which the individual carbon atoms occupy holes in close-packed metal- 
lic lattices; these materials are also very hard. Some interstitial carbides 
hydrolyse to give hydrogen and hydrocarbons, but others such as tung- 
sten carbide (WC) are very hard, inert materials. 
The carbides of reactive metals tend to be ionic in nature; some car- 
bides (such as Na4C, Be$) formally contain C4 ions and give methane 
(CH,) on hydrolysis, while others contain the acetylide ion (C,* ) and 
give ethyne (acetylene) (equation 6.12). The best-known example of this 
type is calcium carbide, CaC,, which has an elongated sodium chloride- 
type structure (see Figure 3.4) with the C: 
ions arranged in a parallel 
fashion (Figure 6.6). 
Compare the formation of 
mterstitla1 hydrldes (Section 2.4.3). 
CaC, + 2H,O -+ C,H, 
-
-
 + Ca(OH), 
(6.12) 
Other carbides give longer-chain hydrocarbons on hydrolysis; Li4C, gives 
propyne (MeCrCH) (equation 6.13). 

The Group 14 Elements 
85 
Figure 6.6 The structure of cal- 
cium carbide, CaC, 
Li,C, + 4H,O -+ MeC-CH + 4LiOH 
(6.13) 
6.7 
Oxides 
The oxides of carbon, being gases, are quite different from those of the 
other Group 14 elements. The structural difference results from the pres- 
ence of strong pn:- pn: bonding between carbon and oxygen; carbon oxides 
(and anions such as CO,' ) are discrete (non-polymeric) species. In con- 
trast, for silicon the si-0 double bond is unstable with respect to two 
Si-0 single bonds, and so silicon oxides and many oxyanions have infi- 
nite, covalent network structures of Si-0 bonds (see Chapter 12). 
There are some similarities in the preparations, if not in the structures, 
of the Group 14 oxides; heating the element in oxygeii forms the diox- 
ides, EO,. 
Group l 4  
CO 
linear niolecule, weak acid 
s,O 
dioxides' 
covalt:nt polymer, weak 
acid 
amph3teric 
SnO- amphoteric 
PbOL 
to acids and bases; 
oxidizing 
6.7.1 Carbon Oxides 
Carbon forms three main oxides, CO, CO, and C,O1. 
acid (formic acid) using concentrated H,SO, (equation 6.14). 
Carbon monoxide (C-0) is obtained by ;he dehydration of methanoic 
HCO,H - H,O + CO 
(6.14) 
CO could, therefore, be viewed as the anhydride of methanoic acid, but 
it is not a true anhydride because it is poorly soluble in water and does 
not react with it. It does, however, react with concentrated hydroxide 
solutions on heating, to give the methanoate (formate) anion (equation 
6.15). 
C O + O H  +HCO, 
(6.15) 

86 
Main Group Chemistry 
co 
N2 
M 13 ( C )  -205 
-210 
CO is isoelectronic with nitrogen (N,) and has similar physical proper- 
ties. However, CO, which is very poisonous, is much more reactive than 
nitrogen. It combines with the halogens (except iodine) directly, for 
example with chlorine to give the highly poisonous phosgene (equation 
6.16). 
E3 11 ( C) -190 
-196 
CO + C1, -+ COC1, (phosgene) 
(6.16) 
A fuller account of metal carbonyl 
compounds, their chemistry, 
structures and bonding is to be 
found in the Tutorial Chemistry 
Texts book Organotransition 
Metal Chemistry. 
Carbon monoxide forms numerous complexes with metals in low and 
intermediate oxidation states,s where it bonds through the carbon alone. 
Some examples are given in Figure 6.7. 
oc soco 
\;I 
Figure 6.7 Some metal 
carbon y Is 
Carbon dioxide (CO,), the most stable carbon oxide, is produced on 
an enormous scale industrially by the combustion of coal, oil and natu- 
ral gas. Alternatively, it may be generated by the thermal decomposition 
of limestone (calcium carbonate) (equation 6.17). 
CaCO, + CaO + CO, 
(6.17) 
Carbon dioxide is soluble in water, mostly as dissolved CO, molecules, 
but a small amount of CO, is hydrated to give carbonic acid, H,CO,. 

The Group 14 Elements 
87 
This is a weak acid, only partly dissociated to hydrogencarbonate (bicar- 
bonate, HCO,-) or carbonate (CO,,-) ions. The carbonate ion is obtained 
when CO, is passed through an aqueous hydroxide solution (e.g. NaOH) 
(equation 6.18). Passage of more CO, gives the hydrogencarbonate ion. 
When carbonates of Group 1 or 2 metals are treated with CO, (and 
water), bicarbonates are formed (equation 6.19). 
Unlike NaHCO,, Group 2 
hyclrogencal-bonates cannot be 
obtained as solids 
20H- + COz -+ CO,?- + H20 
m*ru('02 
> 2HCC1,- 
(6.18) 
This eyciilibticim is very important 
in geochemistry, for example in 
the deposition and redissolution 
of limestone rock (principally 
CaCO ) during weathering. 
(6. 19) 
Most metal carbonates are insoluble in water, except for ammonium car- 
bonate and the alkali metal carbonates, and so can be prepared by adding 
a sodium carbonate solution to the aqueous metal ion, e.g. equation 6.20. 
However, this cannot be used for Al,(CO,), since the aqueous AP+ ion 
is highly acidic, simply decomposing -the carbonate ion to CO,. 
(6.20) 
The carbonate ion is planar, with equal C-0 bond distances. 
propanedioic acid (malonic acid) with P,O,, (equation 6.2 1). 
Carbon suboxide (C,O,) is the third oxide, made by dehydrating 
CH,(CO,H), - 2H,O + O=C=C=C=O 
(6.21) 
The C,O, molecule is linear, with pn-pn bonding similar to that in car- 
bon dioxide. 
6.7.2 Silicon, Germanium, Tin and Lead Oxides 
The structural chemistry of SiO, is extremely complex; the stable form 
of SiO, under ambient conditions is quartz, and other high-temperature 
(tridymite and cristobalite) modifications are known. The various SiO, 
structures differ in the way in which SiO, tetrahedra are linked togeth- 
er. A vast number of polymeric silicates occur naturally; a brief survey 
of their structural features is presented in Chapter 12. 
The dioxides GeO,, SnO, and PbO, have considerable ionic charac- 
ter and adopt the rutile (TiO,) structure (Figure 6.8), with a six-coordi- 
nate metal atom and three-coordinate oxygen. The monoxides of tin 
(SnO) and lead (PbO, litharge) are also well known. Addition of hydrox- 
ide to aqueous solutions of Ge2+ (in the absence of air), Sn7+ or Pb'+ 
precipitates the hydrated oxides (equation 6.22). 
Figure 6.8 The solid-state rutile 
(TiO,) structure adopted by MO, 
(6.22) 
(M I Ge, Sn or Pb) 

88 
Main Group Chemistry 
These oxides are amphoteric, and dissolve in both acids and bases. The 
hydrated Sn7+ and Pb'+ ions undergo substantial hydrolysis. 
Removal of water: Ac,O 
+ H,O 
+ 2AcOH 
6.8 
Sulfides, Selenides and Tellurides 
~~ 
Compare metal-CO complexes 
(Section 6.7.1). 
Carbon disulfide (CS,) is a molecular substance, analogous to CO,. The 
species CS (the sulfur-analogue of carbon monoxide) is unstable as-a free 
molecule, but can be stabilized by coordination to a metal. Several transi- 
tion metal-CS complexes are known, for example [RhCl(CS)( PPhJ2]. The 
compounds ME and ME, (E = S, Se, Te) are known for Ge, Sn and Pb. 
6.9 
Polyatomic Anions of the Group 14 Elements 
~ _ _ _  
When alloys of heavy Group 14 elements (Ge, Sn and Pb) and alkali 

The Group 14 Elements 
89 
metals are dissolved in liquid ammonia or ethane-l,2-diamine (ethyl- 
enediamine, NH,CH,CH,NH,), polyatomic anions are produced; these 
can be crystalliz6d if-a donor ligand, such as a crown ether (see Section 
3.9), is added to the solution to complex the alkali metal cation. A wide 
variety of such polyanions have been prepared, such as Snt-, Ge,'- 
(which are tetrahedral), Sn,'- , Pb,'- (trigonal bipyramidal) and Sn:- 
(a 
capped square antiprism, Figure 6.9). 
Wade's rules (Section 5.6.1 and Box 5.1) can be used to rationalize 
the structures of many of these clusters, with one additional step. Each 
(non-hydrogen bearing) atom generally retains a lone pair of electrons, 
so these must be subtracted from the total electron count when deter- 
mining the number of skeletal electron pairs (SEP). 
Figure 6.9 Structures of some 
tin polyanions 

90 
Main Group Chemistry 

The Group 14 Elements 
91 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) 
Elements: Nitrogen, 
Phosphorus, Arsenic, Antimony 
and Bismuth 
7.1 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The Group 15 elements, in the centre of the p-block, display a wide range 
of chemical and physical properties in both their elements and chemical 
compounds. The lightest element (nitrogen) is a typical non-metal, while 
the heaviest (bismuth) has characteristic properties of a main group 
metal; there is a gradual decrease in the first (and also second and third) 
ionization energies on progressing from nitrogen to bismuth (Figure 7.1). 
Oxidation states of +3 and +5 occur for all elements, with the +3 state 
being most stable for bismuth as a result of the inert pair effect (see 
Section 5.1). The +5 oxidation state is very stable for phosphorus, but 
acts as an oxidizing agent with nitrogen, arsenic and antimony. However, 
arsenic, being in the row of non-metals following the 3d elements 
(with a filled 3d inner shell which is relatively poorly shielding) is 
rather more difficult to oxidize to the +5 oxidation state than might be 
expected, because the s-electrons are tightly held and so are less likely 
to be involved in bonding. The -3 oxidation state occurs in the hydrides 
such as NH,, and in anions such as P3- (in Na,P). 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) Elements 
93 
Figure 7.1 First ionization 
energies for the Group 15 
elements 
7.2 
The Elements 
Nitrogen is the most abundant gas in the atmosphere, constituting 
78.1% by volume (Figure 7.2). Elemental nitrogen occurs exclusively as 
the triply bonded dinitrogen molecule, N,, and is generally considered 
to be extremely unreactive. Other high-energy allotropes of nitrogen are 
also possible (Box 7.1). 
Figure 7.2 The composition of 
dry air 

94 
Main Group Chemistry 
Simplified Lewis diagram for N5+ 
Azidopentazole 
Figure 7.3 The structure of 
white phosphorus, P, 
The principal source of phosphorus is phosphate rock, a complex calcium 
phosphate. Reduction of phosphate rock gives white phosphorus, with a 
tetrahedral structure (Figure 7.3) which persists in solid, liquid and 
gaseous phases. When P4 vapour is heated above 800 “C, however, appre- 
ciable quantities of the triply bonded P, molecule are formed. Prolonged 
heating of white phosphorus in a sealed vessel results in the formation of 
red phosphorus, a relatively inert form of the element, with a poorly 
defined but complex structure.2 However, the most stable allotrope is 
black phosphorus, formed by heating phosphorus at high pressure, which 
has several structures; the rhombohedral form has a layer structure shown 
in Figure 7.4. 
Arsenic, antimony and bismuth occur predominantly as sulfides. The 
three elements form layered structures related to black phosphorus. 
Figure 7.4 The structure of 
rhombohedral black phosphorus 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) Elements 
95 
7.3 
Hydrides 
7.3.1 Hydrides of the Type EH, 
All five Group 15 elements (E) form hydrides EH,, though there is a 
marked and systematic trend in their physical and chemical properties. 
Thus, the boiling points increase on going down the group, with the 
exception of the anomalously high boiling point of NH,, which is due 
to H-N-H hydrogen bonding (compare Section 2.6.1). The H-E-H bond 
angles also decrease going down the group; see Worked Problem 7.2. 
Owing to the decreasing E-H bond strengths (Table 7.2), thermal sta- 
bilities decrease down the group. The enthalpies of formation (Table 7.2) 
parallel the E-H bond energies for these compounds. 
Table 7.2 Standard enthalpies of formation, AV, and average E-H bond energies 
for the Group 15 hydrides EH, 
A,Ho (kJ mol-l) 
f-H bond energy (kJ mol-') 
NH3 
-46.2 
+391 
PH3 
+9.3 
+322 
ASH, 
+172.2 
+247 
SbH, 
+142.8 
+255 
Table 7.1 E-E single, dou- 
ble and triple bond energies 
for nitrogen and phospho- 
rus 
Bond 
Bond energy 
(kJ mol-l) 
N-N 
+160 
P-P 
+200 
N=N 
+419 
P=P 
+310 
N=N 
+945 
PEP 
+490 

96 
Main Group Chemistry 
Nomenclature 
Traditional 
IUPAC" 
name 
name 
NH, 
ammonia 
azane 
PH 
phosphine 
phosphme 
ASH< arsine 
arsane 
SbH, 
stibine 
stibane 
B I H 
b i s m u t h i ne 
b i s m u t h an e 
"International Union of Pure and 
Applied Chemistry 
Ammonia is manufactured on a huge scale by the chemical industry, by 
the reaction of nitrogen with hydrogen carried out over a catalyst (equa- 
tion 7.1). 
This synthesis is called the 
Haber Process. 
Liquid ammonia (boiling point -33 "C) has comparisons with water as 
a solvent; H,O+ and OH- are respectively an acid (a proton donor) and 
a base (a proton acceptor) in water, while in ammonia, NH,+ is an acid 
and NH,- is a base. 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) Elements 
97 
Na in liquid NH,: see Section 3.6. 
Phosphine, PH,, is made by reaction of P, with water (equation 7.2). 
2P, + 12H,O + 5PH, + 3H,PO, 
(7.2) 
Ultrapure PH,, required by the electronics industry, is manufactured by 
the thermal disproportionation of phosphorous acid, H,PO, (equation 7.3). 
4H,PO, + PH, + 3H,PO, 
(7.3) 
The other hydrides, ASH,, SbH, and BiH,, can be synthesized by the 
reduction of the corresponding halide with a hydride source, such as 
Li[AlH,] (see Section 5.6.3); however, the yield of BiH, is low. The 
hydrolysis of phosphides, arsenides and antimonides of reactive metals 
such as calcium and aluminium can also generate phosphine, arsine or 
stibine (see also Section 2.4.2). 
7.3.2 Other Hydrides 
Of these, hydrazine, N,H,, is the most well-known compound, prepared 
by the oxidation of ammonia with chlorate(1) (hypochlorite) (equations 
7.4 and 7.5). 
NH, + C10- + NH,Cl + OH- 
NH,Cl + 2NH, + N,H, + NH,Cl 
(7.4) 
(7.5) 
then 
The structure of hydrazine consists of two NH, groups connected by an 
N-N bond, the molecule adopting the gauche conformation in the gas 
phase (Figure 7.5). 
Phosphine is a highly toxic gas. 
Phosphorous acid: Section 7.6.2. 
H\ 
H H N  
Figure 7.5 The structure of 
hydrazine, N,H, 
Compounds E,H, 
are known for 
E = N, P and As. 

98 
Main Group Chemistry 
The same reason for a weak N--N 
boiw also accounts for the 
relative weakness of related 
r riolecules containing 0-0 
and 
F-F bonds (see Section 9.2). 
/H 
H 
N=N 
cis 
\ 
H 
N=N 
trans 
\ 
H 
\ 
Figure 7.6 The cis and trans 
forms of diazene, N,H, 
+
-
 
NEN-N \ 
H 
- 
N=N=N 
\ 
H 
Figure 7.7 Two resonance 
forms of hydrazoic acid, HN, 
Diazenes of the type RN=NR (R = H or F) containing a nitro- 
gen--nitrogen double bond are known, but N,H, has only a transient 
existence. Cis and t r i m  isomers are possible (Figire 7.6). The other ele- 
ments show a decreased tendency to form this type of doubly bonded 
compound, owing to the decreased E=E bond strength on going down 
the group (see Table 7.1 for N and P), though a number of P=P and 
As=As containing compounds have recently been synthesized. 
Another compound which can formally be considered as a nitrogen 
hydride is hydrazoic acid, HN,, with the structure shown in Figure 7.7. 
The linear azide ion, N, , can be formed by deprotonation of HN,, and 
is symmetrical with two identical N-N bond lengths of 116 pm. The azide 
ion is an example of a pseudohalogen (see Box 9.2). 
7.4 
Oxides 
~ 
~~~ 
All of the Group 15 elements form a wide range of oxides, particularly 
nitrogen and phosphorus. 
7.4.1 Nitrogen Oxides 
Oxides of nitrogen cover a range of oxidation states, from + 1 to +5, and 
in all compounds there is significant N-0 pn-pn bonding. Shapes of the 
main nitrogen oxides are shown in Figure 7.8. 
Figure 7.8 The shapes of 
nitrogen oxides 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) Elements 
99 
Dinitrogen oxide (nitrous oxide, N,O), made by heating ammonium 
nitrate (equation 7.6), has a linear N-N-0 structure. 
NH,NO, -+ N,O + 2H,O 
(7.6) 
a 
** 
Nitrogen monoxide (nitric oxide, NO) is a reactive molecule containing 
one unpaired electron, but with little tendency to dimerize (to N,O,) 
except at low temperatures. NO reacts with halogens (X,) to give nitro- 
syl halides of the type X-N=0, which have bent structurk. Reaction of 
nitrosyl halides with a halide acceptor (e.g. AlCl,) gives compounds con- 
taining the nitrosonium cation, NO+ (equation 7.7). NO is easily oxi- 
dized by air to give brown NO,. 
O=N-Cl + AlCl, + NO+AlCl, 
(7.7) 
Lewis dot diagram 
for nitric oxide, NO 
:N : O r  
Lewis dot diagram for 
nitrosonium ion, NO+ 
0 
Odd-electron molecules formed 
by main group elements are 
relatively rate. Another example is 
CIO,. 
NO and N:?O are neutral oxides: 
solutions in water are neither 
acidic nor basic. 

100 
Main Group Chemistry 
MO diagrams: Section 1.5 
NO is a biologically important 
molecule, e.g. in the control of 
blood pre~sure.~ 
The formation of N,O, 
and N20, 
occurs by pairing up odd 
(electrons from NO + NO, and 
NO + NO,, respectively. 
r\J a,, 
NO,, N20, and NLO, areh 
acidic oxides. 
Other nitrogen oxides are N,O,, N,O,, N,O, and N,O, shown in Figure 
7.8. N,O, is formed from N O  and NO, at low temperatures, where it is 
a blue solid or liquid, but it dissociates-back to NO and NO, in the gas 
phase. N,O, is colourless and diamagnetic when pure, but it readily dis- 
sociates upon warming to give the brown, paramagnetic NO, (equation 
7.9). N,O, contains covalent molecules in the gas phase, but crystallizes 
as nitronium nitrate, NO,+NO,-. It is usually formed by dehydrating 
nitric acid (equation 7.8), to which it is converted on reaction with water. 
2HN0, - H,O -+ N,O, 
(7.8) 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) Elements 
101 
Le Chatelier's principle: for an 
equilibrium system, application of 
any disturbance will result in a 
shift in the position of equilibrium 
to try and eiirninate the effect 
7.4.2 Phosphorus Oxides 
A vcry wide range of phosphorus oxides are known.4 the most impor- 
tant oxide being 'phosphorus pentoxide' [phosphorus( V) oxide, P,O ,o], 
formed by the combustion of phosphorus in an excess of oxygen 
(equation 7.10). 
(7.10) 
It reacts violently with water, ultimately forming orthophosphoric acid 
on boiling (Section 7.6.2). Combustion of P, in a limited supply of oxy- 
gen gives the P(II1) oxide P,O,. Related phosphorus oxides derived from 
the same basic P,O, skeleton contain different numbers of terminal P=O 
groups; the structures of P,O,, P,O, and P,OI0 are shown in Figure 7.9. 
7.4.3 Arsenic, Antimony and Bismuth Oxides 
Oxides of composition M,05 are also formed for arsenic, antimony and 
bismuth, though the latter cannot be obtained pure. The structure of 
Figure 7.9 The structure of 
some important phosphorus 
oxides and sulfides 
As,O, is based on linked AsO, tetrahedra, while Sb,O, is thought to con- 
taih linked MO, octahedra. Arsenic and antimony oxides E,O, exist both 
The heavier Group 15 elements 
tend to have hiaher 
- 
as polymeric forms with edge-sharing E 0 3  pyramids, and also in molec- 
iilar E,O, species, analogous to the phosphorus species P,O, (Figure 7.9) 
Bi703 is polymeric with five-coordinate bismuth. 
numbers. 

I02 
Main Group Chemistry 
7.5 
Sulfides 
There are few sulfides directly analogous to the wide range of molecu- 
lar nitrogen oxides which are known. 
The most well-known sulfur-nitrogen compound is the explosive S4N4, 
prepared by the reaction of SC1, with ammonia. The structure of the 
molecule is given in Figure 7.10; it contains delocalized .n-bonding. 
Reaction of S N with silver gives firstly S,N, and then a polymeric sub- 
stance (SN).v (Figure 7. lo), which has very high electrical conductivity. 
, 
.4 
Figure 7.10 Some 
sulfur-nitrogen species 
The most important sulfide of phosphorus is P,S,,, which has a struc- 
ture analogous to the oxide shown in Figure 7.9. Mixed oxide-sulfide 
compounds are also known, such as P,0,S4, which has terminal P=S 
groups and bridging oxygens (Figure 7.9). A wide variety of lower oxi- 
dation state phosphorus sulfides exist and, as with the oxides, these can 
conceptually be derived from the tetrahedral P, molecule by addition of 
terminal P=S groups and insertion of S into P-P bonds; some of the 
compounds retain some P-P bonds, and are shown in Figure 7.11. 
Arsenic forms a number of sulfides. As2S, exists as As,S,, with the same 
structure as P406 (Figure 7.9). There are also As4S, (which occurs natu- 
rally as the mineral realgar), As4S, and As4S,,. The compound As4S, 
exists in a number of forms, one of which is similar to that of S4N4 
(Figure 7.10). 
Figure 7.11 Some lower 
oxidation state phosphorus 
sulfides with P-P bonds 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) Elements 
103 
7.6 
Oxyanions and Oxyacids 
Oxyanions form an extremely important role in the chemistry of the 
Group 15 elements, in particular for nitrogen and phosphorus and to a 
slightly lesser extent for arsenic. On going down the group, to antimo- 
ny and bismuth, oxyanions play a much smaller role in the chemistry of 
these elements, and they begin to show more cationic chemistry. 
7.6.1 Oxyacids of Nitrogen 
In all nitrogen oxyacids the nitrogen atom is either two or three coor- 
dinate (which contrasts with phosphorus and arsenic oxyacids, which are 
invariably four coordinate), and all contain N-0 and sometimes N-N 
pn---pn bonding, which is favourable for the smaller p-block element. The 
anions derived from the main oxyacids are shown in Figure 7.12. 
Figure 7.12 The shapes of the 
main nitrogen oxyanions 
Nitric(V) acid is commercially the most important, and is manufzictured 
on a large scale by the oxidation of NH, to NO under platinum-catalysed 
conditions (equation 7.1 1). 
4NH, + 50, + 4 N 0  + 6H,O 
(7.1 1) 
Nitrogen monoxide is then converted to nitric acid by air and water 
(equations 7.12 and 7.13). 
2NO + 0, + 2N0, 
(7.12) 
3N0, + H,O + 2HN0, + NO 
(7.13) 
Lower oxidation state acids are typically unstable, though their conju- 
gate anions are often stable. These include nitric(II1) acid (nitrous acid, 

104 
Main Group Chemistry 
HNO, is commonly used in 
organic chemistry, where it reacts 
VA t h phenylamtne derivatives 
PNH, to give diazonium salts 
RN,’, used in the manufacture of 
azo compounds RN=NR‘, man) 
of which are dyes HNO, 
solutions decompose on warming 
to give nitric acid, nitrogen 
monoxide and water 
‘OH 
Phosphonic acid 
(Phosphorous acid) 
HP(O)(OH)2 
Dibasic 
‘OH 
Phosphinic acid 
(Hypophosphorous acid) 
H2P (0)O H 
Monobasic 
HNO,), formed by acidification of the nitrite anion (NO,-), and perox- 
onitric(II1) acid (pernitrous acid, HOONO), formed by reaction of 
nitrous acid with hydrogen peroxide. A fourth acid, nitric(1) acid 
(hyponitrous acid, H,N,O,), 
-
-
-
 formed by reaction of silver nitrate(1) with 
dry HCl, readily decomposes to N,O, but it can be stabilized in crys- 
talline form by hydrogen bonding. The nitrate(1) anion itself is formed 
from reduction of NaNO, with Na/Hg, and has a trans configuration. 
In contrast, nitrate(1) formed by an alternative reaction of Na,O with 
nitrous oxide, N,O, has the cis structure (Figure 7.12). 
7.6.2 Oxyacids of Phosphorus 
A diverse range of phosphorus acids exist, with phosphorus in the +1, 
+3 and +5 oxidation states, The lower oxidation state compounds con- 
tain either P-P or (non-acidic) P-H bonds. Phosphoric(V) acid, H,PO,, 
commonly known as orthophosphoric acid, is the most well known, and 
is triprotic, all three hydrogens being able to be replaced by metals to 
give dihydrogenphosphate (H,PO, ), monohydrogenphosphate (HPO,’ ) 
and phosphate (PO,‘ ) salts. A diverse range of condensed phosphates 
exist, containing P-0-P linkages (see Section 12.2). 
Phosphoric acid is manufactured industrially by dissolving P401 
(Section 7.4.2) in boiling dilute phosphoric acid (see Worked Problem 
2.3). An increasingly used, and less energy-intensive, route uses an acid 
displacement reaction with sulfuric acid (equation 7.14). 
Ca,(PO,), + 3H,SO, + 6H20 + 2H,PO, + 3CaS04.2H,0 
(7.14) 
Phosphonic acid (H,PO,) contains one non-exchangeable hydrogen and 
is manufactured by the hydrolysis of PCl, (equation 7.15). 
PCl, + 3H,O + H,PO, + 3HC1 
(7.15) 
Phosphinic acid, H,P02, contains two non-exchangeable hydrogens, and 
is made industrially by reaction of white phosphorus with sodium 
hydroxide to give the anion H,PO, , followed by acidification (equations 
7.16 and 7.17). Both H,PO,-and H,PO, are strong reducing agents, 
because they formally contain phosphorus in the +3 and +1 oxidation 
states, respectively. 
P, + 4H,O + 40H- + 4H,PO,- 
*
-
 + 2H, 
(7.16) 
H,PO,- + H’ + H,PO, 
(7.17) 
&
L
 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) Elements 
105 
7.6.3 Oxyacids of Arsenic, Antimony and Bismuth 
Arsenic acid, H,AsO,, analogous to orthophosphoric acid, is made by 
dissolving elemental arsenic in nitric acid; it is also a triprotic acid, but 
is moderately oxidizing in ucid solution. Arsenites (in the +3 oxidation 
state) are well known, such as in H,AsO,, but in contrast to the P-H 
bond in phosphites they contain no As-H bond. 
For the heavier members of Group 15 there is little resemblance to 
the chemistry of phosphorus and arsenic; by comparison, antimonates 
and bismuthat es are less well-defined compounds. 
7.7 
Halides 
7.7.1 Pentavalent Compounds 
The pentafluorides MF, are all known and stable, with the exception of 
NF, (which does not exist) since nitrogen only has four valence orbitals 
available. Fluoride ligands are able to stabilize the highest oxidation state 
of the Group 15 elements. The MF, halides are powerful fluoride accep- 
tors (with the exception of BiF,), giving the stable MF,- anions, and this 
property is widely used, for example in studies of noble gas chemistry 
(see Chapter 10). Antimony can form a dimeric ion Sb,F,,-, which has 
two SbF, octahedra joined by a common bridging fluoride (see Figure 
10.6). The pentachlorides PCl, and SbCl, are, by contrast, well known, 
but AsCl, is a rather unstable substance. While PBr, is also known, other 
combinations, particularly involving the heavier Group 1 5 members and 
the heavier halides, are unstable owing to the combination of a Group 
15 element in a high oxidation state and a reducing halide. 
In the gas phase the pentahalides adopt trigonal bipyramidal geome- 
tries, as expected from VSEPR (see Section 1.4). In the solid state, how- 

106 
Main Group Chemistry 
ever, the situation is more complicated, as illustrated by several phases 
of PCI, being characterized, none of which contain molecular PC1,. PCl, 
crystallizes as an ionic solid PCI,+PCI, , though a metastable form has 
been found to have the composition (PCI,+),(PCI,-)Cl . In contrast, solid 
PBr, contains PBr,+ and Br ions. A number of mixed halide species are 
also known, including the full range of EFIIC1,-,, species of P and As, e.g. 
PF,CI,. The compounds EF,Cl, exist as trigonal-bipyramidal molecular 
substances in the gas phase,-but in the solid form they ionize to 
ECl,+EF, , so that the less electron-withdrawing halogen is contained 
within the cationic species to minimize destabilization. 
P 
7.7.2 Trivalent Compounds 
All combinations of trivalent Group 15 elements E with halides X (EX,) 
are known. This contrasts with the pentavalent species EX,, which 
become increasingly oxidizing on going down the group. There are the 
usual gradations in properties on descending the group for a given halide. 
NF,, PF, and AsF, exist as molecular substances, whereas SbF, is poly- 
meric with fluoride bridges (reflecting the tendency for the heavier ele- 
ments to have higher coordination numbers) and BiF, is ionic. NF, is 
the only stable nitrogen(II1) halide; NCl, and N1, are highly explosive? 
PF, is one of the more widely studied trihalides of the Group 15 ele- 
ments, because of its similarity to carbon monoxide (CO) in comdexes 
p ~ ,  
Is a poor o-donor becaljse of 
the pronounced electron- 
.
,
 
with transition metals (see Section 6.7.1). Both ligands are able to act as 
o-donors and as n-acceptors, and a wide range of analogous compounds 
withdrawing effect of the three 
fluorine atoms; it is, however, a 
powerful rc-acceptor ligand. 
such as Ni(PFJ4 and Ni(CO), are known. 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) Elements 
107 
7.7.3 Oxyhalides 
While trivalent oxyhalides of nitrogen are known, e.g. NOCl (Section 
7.4. I ), related compounds of phosphorus and arsenic are restricted to 
the pentavalent state. Thus, phosphorus and arsenic form many oxy- 
POCI, is manufactured on a large scale industrially, either by reaction 
of P3OIo with PC1, (equation 7.18) or, increasingly, by oxidation of PC1, 
(equation 7.19). 
0, S or Se 
P 
halides of the type MOX,, which have approximately tetrahedral shapes. 
A0 
halogen 
P,O,,, + 6PC1, -+ IOPOCI, 
(7.18) 
2PC1, + 0, + 2POC1, 
(7.19) 
7.8 
Nitrides and Phosphides 
Certain reactive metals, such as lithium and the Group 2 metals, form 
The N atom in N'- has a 
nitrides which appear to contain the nitride N3 ion, because on hydrol- 
ysis ammonia is produced, e.g. equation 7.20. 
complete octet of electrons~ and 
is isoelectroric with F- and 0' , 
but is highly reactive due to the 
three negati\ie charges. 
Li,N + 3H,O -+ NH, + 3Li' + 30H 
(7.20) 
In contrast, compounds of other semi-metallic elements such as boron 
are viewed as covalently bonded compounds. 
Phosphorus and arsenic similarly form phosphides and arsenides, 
which give PH, and ASH, on hydrolysis; this is one method of synthe- 
sizing PH,, and others are described in Sections 7.3.1 and 2.4.2. 
Boron nitride (BN) is discussed 
in Section 5.8.2. 

108 
Main Group Chemistry 

The Group 15 (Pnictogen) Elements 
109 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) 
Elements: Oxygen, Sulfur, 
Selenium, Tellurium and 
Polonium 
8.1 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
~~ 
The Group 16 elements are the last group to contain a true metal, polo- 
nium. However, the same general periodic trends are maintained as in 
the previous two groups, with the characteristics of the elements rang- 
ing from true non-metals (oxygen and sulfur), through semiconductors 
(selenium and tellurium) to metallic polonium. The formation of rings 
and chains of an element, ‘catenation’, is an important aspect of sulfur 
chemistry in particular, and also occurs in some compounds of selenium 
and tellurium, but hardly ever in oxygen compounds. The group oxida- 
tion state is +6. and while this is the stable oxidation state for sulfur, it 
does not exist for oxygen (which is restricted to a maximum positive oxi- 
dation state of +2 in OF,) and becomes increasingly oxidizing on going 
from Se to Te to Po. There is the usual (for p-block elements) stabiliza- 
tion of lower oxidation states going down the group. 
110 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) Elements 
11 1 
8.2 
The Elements 
8.2.1 Oxygen 
Oxygen is the second most abundant gas in the Earth's atmosphere (see 
Figure 7.2) and it is obtained industrially from liquid air by fractional 
distillation. The most important allotrope of oxygen is 0,, which is blue 
in the liquid and solid states. Oxygen is used directly -in combustion 
processes, or reacted with alkenes to give epoxides which are used in the 
inanufkcture of surfactants. Its compounds often find uses as sterilizing 
agents and bleaches. 
Exposure of oxygen to an electric discharge converts it into ozone, 0,, 
which is a diamagnetic, but extremely reactive, non-linear allotrope. 
Ozone is an extremely important molecule in the stratosphere, where it 
is produced by the reaction of oxygen atoms (formed by dissociation of 
0, molecules, equation 8.1) with 0, (equation 8.2). 
0, + 0. -+ 0, 
(8.2) 
0, + IZV -+ 0, + 0. 
(8.3) 
The ozone itself is photolysed (dissociated) by UV radiation (equation 
8.3), at wavelengths which 0, cannot absorb, thus giving protection from 
the harmful effects of short-wavelength UV. 
8.2.2 Sulfur 
he bonding in the 0, molecule is 
discussed in Section 1.5. 
Allotropes and polymorphs: 
Section 6.2.1, 
Ozone, O,, 
IS tsoelectronic with 
the nitrite anion. NO,-, since N- 
has the same number of 
electrons as an 0 atom. 
Sulfur occurs naturally in several forms: as the element, in sulfate min- 
erals such as gypsum (CaS0,.2H,O) and in sulfide minerals (for exam- 
ple pyrite), FeS,). Elemental sulfur occurs in underground deposits, and 

112 
Main Group Chemistry 
I? the Frasch process, 
superheated water is passed 
down a borehole, which melts 
the sulfur and allows it to be 
pumped to the surface by 
compressed air. 
s8 
is extracted by the Frasch process. It is also obtained in relatively large 
amounts from the processing of crude oil. 
Sulfur exists in numerous allotropes, with chain and ring structures; 
indeed, sulfur probably forms more allotropes and polymorphs than any 
other element. The most common form is rhombic sulfur, with S, rings 
(Figure 8.1). There is also a monoclinic polymorph of S, rings, which 
has a different packing arrangement in the crystal. Molten sulfur con- 
tains a myriad of ring and chain forms of sulfur, of different sizes, 
depending on the conditions. At the melting point (ca. 115 "C), sulfur is 
a yellow, low-viscosity liquid comprising mainly S, rings, with traces of 
other rings ranging in size from S, (Figure 8.1) to S,, or more. Further 
heating initially decreases the viscosity of the molten sulfur, but then it 
increases above cci. 159 OC, reaching a maximum at 170 "C, as high 
molecular mass rings and chains are formed. At the boiling point (444 
Figure 8.1 Some sulfur rings; S, 
is much more common under 
normal conditions 
"C), sulfur vapour consists mainly of S, (40%). S, (30%) and S, (20%), 
with smaller amounts of S,, S, and S,. 
S:, is analogous to dioxygen, 0,, 
and can be condensed to form a 
purple paramagnetic solid. 
8.2.3 Selenium, Tellurium and Polonium 
Grey (crystalline) selenium and tellurium contain long spiral molecules 
with weak metallic interactions between adjacent chains, which break 
down into smaller rings and chains on melting. 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) Elements 
113 
Polonium occurs naturally as a trace component of uranium ores, but 
is made artificially by the irradiation of lo9Bi with neutrons (equation 
8.4). 
8.3 
Hydrides and Related Species 
8.3.1 Compounds of the Type H,E 
These are known for all the Group 16 elements, but become increasing- 
ly unstable on going down the group, as shown by their enthalpies of 
formation (Table 8.1). This instability is paralleled by compounds such 
as the EH, series (E = N to Bi; see Section 7.3.1) and the HE' series (E' 
= F to I; see Section 9.4). 
Nomenclature: the IUPAC names 
for H,O and H,S are oxane and 
sulfane. respectively. 
Laboratory synthesis: 
M,E + 2HCI -+ H,E 
+ 2MCI 
(e.g. M.E = Na,S, Na,Se). 
Table 8.1 Enthalpies of formation of the hydrides H2E. 
H,E 
AF" (kJ mol-l) 
H P  
-241.8 
H2S 
-20.1 
H2Se 
+85.8 
H,Te 
+154.4 
The boiling points of the H,E compounds reveal the anomalously high 
boiling point for water, owing to very strong hydrogen bonding (see 
Figure 2.4 and Section 2.6.2). Water is, of course, an extremely familiar 
substance, with complex structures involving extensive hydrogen bond- 
ing in both the solid and solution states. In marked contrast to water, 
H,S, H,Se and H,Te are highly toxic, foul-smelling gases. 
-Water undergoes self-ionization (equation 8.5), with an equilibrium 
constant of 10 I4 at 25 "C. Acids are substances which increase the con- 
centration of H,O+ (Section 8.3.3) while bases increase the concentration 
of OH . 
2H,O 
H,O+ + OH- 
(8.5) 

114 
Main Group Chemistry 
8.3.2 Chalcogenide Anions 
All the chalcogens form chalcogenide anions E2- (i. e. oxides, sulfides, 
selenides and tellurides). These are formed by double deprotonation of 
H,E; a corresponding series of anions EH- also exist, typified by the well- 
known sodium hydroxide, NaOH. Experimentally, chalcogenide salts are 
usually formed by direct combination of the elements (sometimes using 
a non-aqueous solvent such as liquid ammonia), e.g. equation 8.6. 
2Na + Se + Na,Se 
(8.6) 
By forming these ions the chalcogen attains a noble gas electronic con- 
figuration, and the E2- ions are isoelectronic with the corresponding 
halide anions (also with the nitride N3- and phosphide P3- anions). The 
chalcogenide anions become increasingly unstable going down the group, 
because the increasing size means the electrons are less tightly held, so 
oxidation occurs more readily. Many compounds containing E2- ions are 
water sensitive, especially for Group 1 and 2 metals, and the degree of 
hydrolysis is greater for Se and Te (equations 8.7 and 8.8). 
Na2S + H,O + NaSH + NaOH 
(8 - 7) 
Na,Te + 2H,O + H,Te + 2NaOH 
(8.8) 
Sulfides and selenides of soft, polarizable, heavy metals (e.g. Cd, Pb, Hg) 
often occur naturally, are moisture stable, and precipitate readily when 
H,S or H,Se is passed through an aqueous metal ion solution (equation 
8.5). 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) Elements 
115 
There is a vast solid-state chemistry of metal oxides, sulfides and 
selenides. 
8.3.3 Cationic Onium (H,E+) Ions 
The oxonium ion, H,O+, is well known; see Section 2.5. The sulfonium 
and selenonium cations H,S' and H,Se+ can also be made (despite the 
lower basicity of H2S and HzSe compared to water, which makes pro- 
tonation more difficult) by using the very strong acid H'SbF; 
(gener- 
ated from HF and SbF,) (equation 8.10). 
H,S + HF + SbF, -+ H,S+SbF,- 
(8.10) 
Organic derivatives of these sulfonium salts are widely known; Me,O+ 
salts are reactive, and widely used as reagents for transferring a Me+ 
group. 
8.3.4 Hydrogen Peroxide and Peroxides 
Hydrogen peroxide, H,O,, is the most well-known peroxide. The mole- 
cule adopts a guuclze structure both in the gas phase and in the solid 
state (Figure 8.21, owing to repulsion of the lone pairs on the oxygen 
atoms. Hydrogen peroxide undergoes a similar self-ionization to water 
(equation 8.5), but to a slightly greater extent (equation 8.1 1). 
I .' 
l.' 
90.2" 
2H202 * H,O,+ + HO, 
Figure 8.2 The structure of 
hydrogen peroxide, H,O, 
(8.1 1 ) 
The H 0,- ion is formed by 
protonation of HLOL, just as H -0' 
IS formed bv wotonatton of 
The equilibrium constant is 1.5 x 10 I?, whereas for water it is 10 1 4 .  
water. 

116 
Main Group Chemistry 
Hydrogen peroxide is stuhlt, towards decomposition into hydrogen and 
oxygen, as shown by the large, negative enthalpy of formation (A,H" 
-187.8 kJ mol I ) ;  however, it is unstable towards decomposition to water 
and oxygen (equation 8.12). 
[ H-OC] + 
The H30+ ion 
[".-O;] 
+ 
The H302+ ion 
2H,O, -+ 2H,O + 0, 
AH = -98.3 kJ mol 
(8.12) 
Hydrogen peroxide finds various 
uses, two of which are as 
bleaching and sterilizing agents. 
Alkali metal peroxides: Section 
3.5. 
Peroxide salts, containing the singly bonded 0,2 anion, are formed by 
the Group 1 and Group 2 metals, and exampies are barium peroxide 
(BaO,; Box 8.1) and sodium peroxide (Na,O,). Hydroperoxides (con- 
taining the OOH anion) are also formed by the Group 1 metals, such 
as NaOOH. 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) Elements 
117 
All compounds which contain peroxo groups are oxidizing agents, and 
this is the main feature of their chemistry. No compounds are known 
which have greater than two oxygens in a chain terminated by hydro- 
gens (such as HOOOH), but related fluorine-containing compounds such 
as FOOOOF and CF,OOOCF, are known.' 
8.3.5 Sulfur, Selenium and Tellurium Hydrides and 
Anions with Chalcogen-Chalcogen Bonds 
A number of hydrides are known which contain one or more -S--S-, 
- Se-Se- or -Te-Te- 
linkages. The longest chains are found for sulfur, 
with compounds of composition H,S, being stable for up to 8 sulfur 
atoms, and possibly more. This is not unexpected, since elemental sul- 
fur itself has a strong tendency to form long chains (catenation); see 
Section 8.2.2. A mixture of polysulfanes can be prepared by the addi- 
tion of acid to a polysulfide solution (equation 8.14). 
(S,I)z + 2H' -+ H--(S),-H 
(polysulfane mixture, n = 2-6) 
(8.14) 
Compounds of the type H,E.v (E = S, Se or Te) tend to be unstable, giv- 
ing the element and H,E (equation 8.15). 
H-(E),*-H + H,E + (n-1)E 
(8.15) 
Longer-chain polychalcogenide anions of S, Se and Te are generally 
prepared by reaction of an alkali metal (M) with the element (using a 
non-aqueous solvent, e.g. liquid ammonia) or from the salt (M,E) by 
reaction with the chalcogen (E), e.g. equations 8.16 and 8.17. 
4Na + 5Te -+ Na2Te, + Na2Te, 
(8.16) 
cs,s + 4s + csp, 
(8.17) 

118 
Main Group Chemistry 
8.4 
Halides 
8.4.1 Oxygen Halides 
The 
known oxygen fluorides: 
OF 
0 ,F_ 
0,F 
0. 
F- 
dation states. 
* t L  
Oxygen forms six fluorides, which have chains of from one to six oxy- 
gen atoms, terminated by fluorines. Since fluorine always has a negative 
oxidation state (being the most electronegative element), these oxygen 
fluorides are rare examples of compounds with oxygen in positive oxi- 
OF, is the most stable compound, formed by reaction of fluorine with 
dilute sodium hydroxide solution (see Section 9.5.1). The other com- 
pounds are prepared by an electrical discharge on mixtures of 0, and F, 
at low temperatures (ca. -185 “C). Reaction of O,F, with a fluoride ion 
acceptor, such as BF, or PF,, gives salts containing the dioxygenyl cation 
(O,+) (equation 8.18). The dioxygenyl cation is also obtained by direct 
oxidation of 0, using platinum hexafluoride (PtF,) (equation 8.19), 
which led to the discovery of the very first noble gas compound, by 
Bartlett (see Section 10.3.2). 
0 F, 
20,F, + 2PF, -+ 2(O,)+(PF,) + F2 
(8.18) 
- -  
0, + PtF, + (O,)+(PtF,)- 
(8.19) 
There is a wide range of other chlorine, bromine and iodine oxides 
known, for example C1,0, Cl,O,, I,O,, etc., described in Chapter 9. 
8.4.2 Sulfur Halides 
Known sulfur halides 
Odation Examples 
state 
< + I  
S,,CI, (n = 3-8), S,,Br, 
(n = 3-8) 
+1 
s,F,, 
S,CI,, 
S,Br,, 
S,I, 
t 2  
SF,, SCI, 
+5 
S,Fm 
t 6 
SF, 
> 
different oxidation states (Figure 8.4). 
Sulfur forms a wide range of halides, particularly with fluorine, in oxi- 
dation states ranging from low, fractional positive oxidation states [in 
halosulfanes of the type X-(S),,X] through to the group oxidation state 
of +6 (in SF,). 
The so-called ‘monohalides’, S,X,, have structures similar to hydro- 
gen peroxide (Figure 8.2), but S,F, has been found to exist in two forms, 
one being the hydrogen peroxide type and the other having sulfur in two 
t 4  
SF,, SCI, 
Figure 8.4 The two isomers of 
S82 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) Elements 
119 
The compounds S2C1, and S,Br, are the smallest members of a series of 
chloro- and bromosulfanes of the type SMX2, which have sulfur-sulfur 
bonds and up to eight sulfur atoms. They are analogous to the polysul- 
fanes H(S)nI-I themselves (Section 8.3.5), but with chain-terminating 
halogens instead of hydrogens. These compounds, like the sulfanes and 
the element itself, show the strong tendency of sulfur to form catenated 
species. S,Cl, and S,Br2 are formed by direct combination of the elements 
(equation 8.20). 
S, + 4C1, + 4S,CI2 
(8.20) 
The only stable sulfur dihalide is the bent SCl,, which disproportionates 
to give S2Cl, and C1, (equation 8.21). SF, is even less stable. 
2sc1, + S,Cl, 
-
-
 + Cl, 
(8.21) 
Sulfur(1V) halides are restricted to SF, and SCl, (the latter being the less 
stable, and only occurring in the solid state where it is thought to exist 
in an ionic form as SCl,+Cl-). SF, has a structure derived from a trigo- 
nal bipyramid; see Worked Problem 1.6. Although highly moisture-sen- 
sitive (equation 8.22), it is finding use as a fluorinating agent in organic 
chemistry. 
Structure of SF,: 
0 s  
O F  
SF,+ H,O + SOF, + 2HF 
(8.22) 
Stricture of SF,,: 
In contrast to the high reactivity of SF, and SF,, sulfur hexafluoride 
(SF,) is unreactive. The hydrolysis of SF, is thermodynamically very 
favourable, indicated by the large, negative AGO value (-301 kJ mol-I) 
calculated for the hydrolysis reaction in equation 8.23. 
SF,(&) 
+ 3H.20(g) 
+ "3(g) 
+ 6HF(g) 
(8.23) 
However, the hydrolysis (and other reactions of SF,) does not proceed 
because of kinetic reasons, because the sulfur atom is sterically protected 
by the six fluorine atoms, preventing attack by an incoming nucleophile. 
8.4.3 Selenium and Tellurium Halides 
The halides of selenium and tellurium are similar to those of sulfur, but 
there are some notable differences: 
The tendency to form catenated compounds is markedly less for Se 
and Te. 
Selenium and particularly tellurium halides, especially in the +4 oxi- 

120 
Main Group Chemistry 
dation state, may be polymeric. TeF, is polymeric, but for SeCl,, 
SeBr,, TeCl,, TeBr, and TeI,, tetramers (MX,), occur (Figure 8.5). 
Selenium and tellurium halides have a greater tendency to form com- 
plex anions by addition of halide anions. Thus, for example, SeCl, 
adds one or two chloride ions to form SeCl; or SeC1,'- ions, respec- 
tively. 
Figure 8.5 Structure of the 
tetrameric unit in the compounds 
(MX,), (M = Se, Te; X = halide) 
8.5 
Oxides 
8.5.1 Dioxides, EO, 
The dioxides EO, are known for S, Se, Te and Po, and are formed by 
heating the elements in air, for example sulfur (equation 8.24). 
s, + 80, + 8S0, 
(8.24) 
The dioxides have very different structures. SO, is a covalent molecular 
substance, SeO, has an infinite covalent chain structure in the solid state 
(and a molecul~r SO,-type structure in the gas phase) (Figure 8.6), while 
TeO, and PoO, have-ionic structures. The different structures reflect the 
increasing metallic character of the elements going down the group, and 
the tendency for only the light elements (Se and particularly S) to engage 
in E=O mbonding. For SeO,, some 7c-bonding is sacrificed to provide 
extra 0-bonding; the same reasons account for the different structures 
of (molecular) CO, and (polymeric) SiO, in Group 14. 
Figure 8.6 Structures of SO, 
and SeO, 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) Elements 
121 
8.5.2 Trioxides, EO, 
The trioxides are known for S, Se and Te. SO, in the gas phase is a trig- 
onal-planar molecule. In the solid state, SO, forms several different struc- 
tures (Figure 8.7), where some S=O .n-bonding has been sacrificed for 
additional o-bonding. SeO, is more strongly oxidizing than SO,. 
soJ IS manufactured on a huge 
Scale industrially by the "20,- 
catalysed oxidation of SO,, 
most 
of the so, Is converted 
sulfuric acid (see Section 8 7 2) 
8.6 
Oxyhalides of Sulfur, Selenium and Tellurium 
!
&
'
~
~
~
~
~
~
72: 
(a) 
solid state 
The most important compounds are the hexavalent compounds of the 
type EO,X, and the tetravalent compounds EOX,. The sulfuryl halides 
(or more systematically, sulfur dihalide dioxides)-SO,X, (known for X 
= chlorine or fluorine) and the selenyl fluoride SeO,-F, are known. 
Thionyl halides (sulfur dihalide oxides) of the type SOX, are known for 
fluorine, chlorine and bromine, and the selenium analogues SeOX, also 
exist. All sulfuryl and thionyl halides, and their selenium analogues, are 
powerful halogenating agents and find applications in inorganic and 
organic chemistry. Examples include the preparation of chlorides from 
alcohols (equation 8.25) and the preparation of anhydrous metal halides 
(equation 8 26). 
R-OH + SOCI, + 
NiC1,.6H,0,s, 
-
I
 + excess SOCl,o, 
R-Cl + SO, + HCl 
(8.25) 
Sulfur dichloride oxide 
(T h i on y I c h I o r id e) 
SOCI;! 
Trigonal pyramidal 
0 
II 
o//s.."", 
'$I 
Sulfur dichloride dioxide 
(Sulfuryl chloride) 
S02Cl* 
Tetrahedral 

122 
Main Group Chemistry 
8.7 
Oxyacids of Sulfur, Selenium and Tellurium 
A very wide range of oxyacids and/or their anions is known for the 
Group 16 elements, and the widest range is formed by sulfur. Sulfur and 
selenium can have a coordination number of up to four, while tellurium 
tends to be six coordinate. Compounds with S-S bonds are also known. 
8.7.1 Sulfurous, Selenous and Tellurous acids, H,EO, 
Sulfur dioxide is very soluble in water and dissolves largely without reac- 
tion, forming an acidic solution commonly referred to as ‘sulfurous acid’ 
(H,SO,). The free acid has never been isolated, and is either absent or 
present in only trace amounts in aqueous SO, solutions.2 
Selenium dioxide and tellurium dioxide behave similarly, although the 
solutions are less acidic than H,SO,. A solution of SO,, SeO, or TeO, 
in aqueous hydroxide solutions gives EO,,- or HE0,- anions. Sulfite 
reacts with sulfur on heating to give the well-known thiosulfate anion 
sulfite  SO^*- 
thiosulfate S20s2- 
(equation 8.27). 
so,2- + s + s,0,2- 
(8.27) 
Thiosulfate is widely used in redox titrations involving iodine (see equa- 
tion 9.28). In this reaction the tetrathionate ion (S406,-) 
is formed, which 
contains a chain of four S atoms. Tetrathionate is one member of a series 
of (unstable) sulfur-bridged polythionates of composition -O,S-Sn-SO,- 
where n can be any value from 0 to 22. 
8.7.2 Sulfuric, Selenic and Telluric Acids 
tetrathionate S4062- 
The p ~ o s e  
of dlssolvlng the 
Sulfuric acid is well known and is prepared by the oxidation of sulfur 
dioxide to sulfur trioxide (Section 8.5.2), followed by hydrolysis of the 
so, in sulfuric acid to give pyrosulfuric acid (often called oleum), which 
is then hydrolysed (equations 8.28-8.30). 
SO in H SO, IS to moderate the 
~ m l e r i t  reaction which would 
,:)(:cur between SO and water 
2s0, + 0, + 2s0, 
(8.28) 
SO, + H,SO, + H,S,O, (pyrosulfuric acid) 
(8.29) 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) Elements 
123 
H2S,0, + H,O 3 
2H,SO, 
(8.30) 
Sulfuric acid and the sulfate anion (SO:-) 
are difficult to reduce, and 
sulfuric acid is a very strong acid (pK, < 0). 
Selenic acid, H,SeO,, is similar to sulfuric acid; however, the corre- 
sponding acid containing tellurium(V1) is the diprotic hexahydroxy acid, 
Te(OH),. This occurs formally by addition of water to Te=O groups, 
and thus tellurium is showing the characteristic increase in its coordina- 
tion number observed for other heavy p-block elements, such as iodine 
(Section 9.6.4). 
8.7.3 Other Sulfur Acids and their Anions 
Many sulfur acids can formally be derived by substitution reactions of 
other sulfur acids, as shown in Figure 8.8. Thus, starting with sulfuric 
acid, one of the OH groups may be replaced by a hydroperoxo group 
(OOH) to give monoperoxosulfuric acid (Section 8.3.4). An OH group 
can also be replaced with a halogen, an NH, (or organic substituted 
RNH) group, or an organic group, e.g. Me. The thiosulfate anion S,O,,- 
has the same structure as sulfate (SO,'-) but with an oxygen replaced by 
a sulfur. 
Other sulfur oxyanions, shown in Figure 8.9, are the dithionite ion 
(S,O,, ) and the pyrosulfite anion (S,OS2-); the next member of this series 
is the dithionate anion, S,O,'-. 
Figure 8.8 Some sulfuric acid 
derivatives 
Figure 8.9 Schematic 
relationship between some sulfur 
oxyanions 

124 
Main Group Chemistry 
8.8 
Polychalcogen Cations 
There are many examples of polychalcogen cations. Oxygen, with its very 
limited tendency towards catenation, only forms 02+, 
but the other 
Group 16 elements, particularly sulfur and selenium, form a range of 
species, some of which are listed in Table 8.2. The structures of S t +  and 
SS2+ are shown in Figure 8.10. These are prepared by oxidation of the 
elements using strong oxidizing agents, in non-aqueous solvents, for 
example equations 8.31 and 8.32. 
In equation 8 31, AsF, is both an 
(8.3 1) 
sulfur) and a source of the non- 
coordinating AsF,- anion (by 
addition of F-). 
6Te 
> Te;' 
(8.32) 
St+ (AsF,), + AsF, 
oxidizing agent (to oxidize the 
S, + 3AsF, 
IlquldSQ > 
Table 8.2 Important polychalcogen cations 
Element 
Important cations 
Oxygen 
0 2 '  
Sulfur 
s;+, 
s;+, s,;+ 
Selenium 
Sed2+, Se,2', SelDi+ 
Tellurium 
Ted2+, Te,4+ 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) Elements 
125 
Consistent with the increasing metallic character of the Group 16 ele- 
ments going down the group, tellurium forms the most highly oxidized 
cations (Te,"+), whereas sulfur forms both the largest and the least oxi- 
dized clusters, such as S1:+. 
As with many other main group cluster ions, Wade's rules (see 
Sections 5.6.1 and 6.9) can be used to rationalize structures. 
Figure 8.10 Structures of some 
polychalcogen cations 

126 
Main Group Chemistry 

The Group 16 (Chalcogen) Elements 
127 

The Group 17 (Halogen) 
Elements: Fluorine, Chlorine, 
Bromine, Iodine and Astatine 
9.1 
Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
~~ 
The halogens, like all of the p-block elements, span a range of reactivi- 
ties. This ranges from the most electronegative and most reactive ele- 
ment in the Periodic Table (fluorine), to some of the least reactive, iodine 
and astatine. 
The -1 oxidation state occurs in the halide anions (e.g. Cl-). This oxi- 
dation state becomes increasingly reducing on going down the group. 
Iodide, I-, is a moderate reducing agent, while chloride shows few reduc- 
ing characteristics, except with very strong oxidizing agents. The trends 
in the stabilities of the main group halide compounds illustrate this, for 
example in Group 14. PbI, is a non-existent compound, owing to the 
combination of an oxidizing metal centre, Pb(IV), and a reducing iodide 
anion. In contrast, PbCl, and PbF, are more stable. 
Positive oxidation states, + I ,  +3, +5 and +7, occur for chlorine, 
bromine and iodine, mainly in oxyanions and interhalogen compounds. 
Compounds in the highest oxidation states generally contain the elec- 
tronegative elements oxygen and fluorine, e.g. IF, and 10,-. Fluorine, 
128 

The Group 17 (Halogen) Elements 
129 
with its small size and high electronegativity, coupled with the weakness 
of the F-F bond, means that it is able to stabilize the very highest oxi- 
dation states of elements, e.g. AuF,, NiF,, PtF,. 
Iodine (and to a lesser extent bromine) forms solvated cations (with 
iodine in the + I  oxidation state) such as [I(pyridine),]+, by reaction of 
I,, pyridine and AgNO, in a non-aqueous solvent (equation 9.1). 
The structure of the [I(pyridine)*]+ cation 
I, + AgNO, + 2 pyridine + [I(pyridine),]+NO,- + AgI 
(9.1) 
9.2 
The Elements 
All the elements are reasonably abundant in Nature, but always in com- 
pounds. In pure form they exist as diatomic molecules, X,. At room tem- 
perature, F, and Cl, are both gases (yellow and pale green, respectively), 
Br2 is a deep red liquid, while I, is a metallic purple solid, showing the 
increasing intermolecular (van der Waals) forces for the heavier halo- 
gens. For chlorine, bromine and iodine the bond dissociation energies 
decrease going down the group (Figure 9.1), owing to poorer overlap 
between increasingly large atoms with diffuse orbitals. Fluorine has an 
anomalously low bond dissociation energy, because of increased repul- 
sion of lone pairs on adjacent fluorine atoms, owing to their closer prox- 
imity in F, compared to C1, (see also Worked Problem 7.4). 
Figure 9.1 Bond dissociation 
energies of the halogens X, 
9.2.1 Fluorine 
Fluorine is used to manufacture 
Fluorine occurs in the mineral fluorspar, CaF,, and also fluorapatite, 
CaF,.3Ca,(P0,)2. Elemental fluorine is obtained by the electrolysis of 
non-stick polymers [such as 
poly(tetrafluoroethene)] and 
fluorocarbon refrigerants. 

130 
Main Group Chemistry 
potassium fluoride dissolved in anhydrous hydrogen fluoride (equation 
2HF + 2KF + 2KHF, 4 2KE; + H, + F, 
(9.2) 
Poly(tetraf1uoroethene) PTFE 
9.2.2 Chlorine 
Chlorine occurs as sodium chloride in large underground salt deposits 
(formed by the evaporation of ancient seas), from which it is obtained 
commercially. Alternatively, sea water contains a relatively high chloride 
concentration (1 5,000 ppm). Elemental chlorine is obtained by the elec- 
trolysis of ucluc.ous salt solutions, which produces sodium hydroxide as 
a by-product. Chlorine compounds have numerous industrial and house- 
hold applications. 
9.2.3 Bromine 
Bromide ions occur in seawater (concentration 30 ppm), from which Br, 
is obtained by reaction with chlorine (equation 9.3). 
C1, + 2Br + 2C1 + Br, 
(9.3) 
9.2.4 Iodine 
Iodine is found naturally as sodium iodate (NatO,), from which ele- 
mental iodine is obtained by reduction. Iodine ions are found in some 
brines, from which the element is obtained by oxidation with chlorine 
(compare equation 9.3). Iodine begins to show some properties reminis- 
cent of metals, such as the lustrous semi-metallic appearance of the ele- 
ment (and high electrical conductivity under pressure). 
9.2.5 Astatine 
All isotopes of astatine are radioactive, and trace amounts occur in ura- 
nium ores. More usually, astatine isotopes are manufactured by the irra- 
diation of a bismuth target with a particles, from which elemental 
astatine (possibly in the At, form) is obtained in the form of the isotopes 
The longest-'lved astatine 
"'At, has a half-life of 8.3 h. 
209At, ?loAt and 21 'At. 
9.3 
Chemistry of the Elements 
All of the elemental halogens are oxidizing agents, with the reactivity 
decreasing going down the group. Elemental fluorine is the most 
reactive of any element, and spontaneously forms chemical compounds 

The Group 17 (Halogen) Elements 
131 
with all other elements except the lighter noble gases helium, neon 
and argon. Reactions with fluorine must be carried out in special 
vessels, such as poly(tetrafluor0ethene) (PTFE), in metals such as nick- 
el which form a passivating layer of the metal fluoride, or in very dry 
glass vessels. Chlorine and bromine are far less reactive than fluorine, 
but they still react with many elements directly, while iodine is the least 
reactive of the four, and it often requires heating for reaction to 
proceed. 
9.4 
Hydrogen Halides, HX, and Halide Salts, X- 
All hydrogen halides are known, and stability decreases down the group, 
owing to the increasing mismatch in atomic sizes. HI is rather unstable 
(the A,Ho is positive, +26.5 kJ mol-I), and HI exists in equilibrium with 
H, and I,. The melting and boiling points increase going down the group, 
with theexception of HF which has an anomalously high boiling point 
due to hydrogen bonding (compare Figure 2.4). This hydrogen bonding 
also occurs in the gas phase, where HF vapour mainly exists as a hexa- 
mer, (HF),, up to 60 "C. In the solid state, H F  exists in a polymeric 
zigzag chain, (HF),I, with strong F-H-F hydrogen bonds (Figure 9.2). 
The F-H-F unit is always linear about the hydrogen, and also occurs 
in so-called hydrogenfluoride salts such as K'HF,-. 
The hydrogen halides dissolve in water to give highly acidic solutions 
(equation 9.7). 
HX + H,O 
H30+(aq) 
+ qaq) 
(9-7) Figure 9.2 The structure of 
HF in the solid state 
HCl, HBr and HI are all very strong acids and are essentially fully dis- 
sociated in dilute solution; however, HF is a much weaker acid. Aqueous 
HF solutions contain undissociated HF, together with fragments of the 
(HF),, polymeric chain such as H,F,- and H3F4--, held together by the 
strong H-F hydrogen bonding that is so important in this system. 

132 
Main Group Chemistry 
9.5 
Halogen Oxides 
~ 
~~~ 
All of the halogens form oxides; those of iodine are the most stable, while 
those of bromine tend to be the least stable; all are oxidizing agents. 
9.5.1 Dihalogen Monoxides, E,O 
Fluorine, chlorine and bromine form compounds of the type E,O. OF, 
is the most stable, and is prepared by reaction of elemental fluorine with 
dilute aqueous sodium hydroxide (equation 9.8). 
2F, + 20H- -+ OF, + 2F + H,O 
(9.8) 
However, OF, is a powerful oxidizing agent, and will oxidize water to 
oxygen (equation 9.9). It explodes when mixed with halogens, but a spark 
is required to ignite mixtures of OF, and hydrogen or CO. 
OF, + H,O -+ 0, + 2HF 
(9.9) 
C1,O and Br,O are prepared by the reaction of chlorine or bromine with 
mercury(I1) oxide (equation 9.10). 
2C1, + 2Hg0 -+ Cl,O + HgCl,.HgO 
(9.10) 

The Group 17 (Halogen) Elements 
133 
9.5.2 Chlorine Dioxide, CIO, 
C10, is prepared as a yellow gas, explosive in high concentrations, by 
the ieduction of potassium chlorate (KClO,) in acidic solution. ClO, is 
a paramagnetic molecule with a bent shape (Figure 9.3a); it shows liitle 
tendency to dimerize, because the unpaired electron is delocalized over 
the whole molecule. However, in the solid state it forms very loose 
dimers, with a C1 0 distance of 270.8 pm compared to the C1-0 bond 
lengths of around 147 pm (Figure 9.3b).' 
Chlorine dioxide IS commercially 
Important as a bleaching and 
sterilizing agent 
Figure 9.3 The structure of CIO, 
in (a) the gas phase and (b) the 
solid phase 
9.5.3 Other Chlorine and Bromine Oxides 
The oxides of chlorine (and to a lesser extent bromine) show some struc- 
tural similarities in that many of them contain halogen-oxygen-halogen 
linkages, where the halogen atoms can be in various oxidation states: 
+1, +3, +5 and +7. 
The structures of selected chlorine and bromine oxides of this type are 
shown in Figure 9.4. Of these, Cl,O, is the most stable, and is the anhy- 
Figure 9.4 Chlorine and bromine 
oxides containing two halogen 
dride of chloric(VI1) acid, HC104. Cl,O, ionizes to C10,'ClO; 
in the 
solid state. The monomer c10, is formed by pyrolysis ofchlorine chlo- 
rate(VII), C10CI03 (Cl,O, in Figure 9.4).2 
atoms 

134 
Main Group Chemistry 
The bromine oxides are less stable than the chlorine analogues, and stable 
compounds are constructed from -0-Br 
and -0-BrO, 
units. Isomers 
may occur; for example, in materials of stoichiometry BrO, there may 
be 0,Br-BrO,, OBr-0-BrO, and Br-0-BrO, ['bromine bromate(VI1)'l; 
Br,O, is shown in Figure 9.4.3 
9.5.4 Iodine Oxides 
Of all the halogen oxides, the ones of iodine, particularly in higher oxi- 
dation states, are the most stable. Iodine(V) oxide, I,O,, which decom- 
poses only at temperatures greater than 300 "C, is made by heating HTO,, 
of which it is the anhydride (equation 9.1 1). Iodine oxides, unlike the 
chlorine and bromine ones, have polymeric structures. 
2HI0, 
I,O, + H20 
(9.1 1) 
9.6 
Oxyacids and Oxyanions of the Halogens 
Acid 
Acid dissociation 
HOCl 
2 8  x lor3 
HCIO 
1 0 x lo-' 
HCIO, 
10 
HCIO, 
lo3 
There are well-established series of oxyacids and their conjugate anions 
for each halogen, though not all halogens form all types of species. 
Structures of the different types of acids are shown in Figure 9.5. For a 
given element, the strength of the acid increases with oxidation state. 
constant, K 1  
Figure 9.5 Oxidation states 
and nomenclature of halogen 
oxyacids 
9.6.1 Halic(1) Acids (HOX) and Halate(1) Salts (OX-) 
The only oxyacid of fluorine which is known is fluoric(1) acid, HOF, 
obtained by the fluorination of ice at low temperatures (equation 9.12). 
F, + H,O + HF + HOF 
(9.12) 

The Group 17 (Halogen) Elements 
135 
The other halogens show the same general behaviour, though the sta- 
bility of the HOX formed decreases dramatically on going from F to C1 
to Br to I. Halic(1) anions can be obtained by reaction of the halogen 
with hydroxide solutions, and for chlorine the equilibrium lies far to the 
right-hand side (equation 9.13). 
X, + 20H * XO + X- + H,O 
(9. 3) 
Equilibrium constants (K) for 
equation 9.13: 
X 
& 
CI 
However, the halic( I) anions tend to undergo disproportionation reac- 
i x 10'' 
2 x 10'' 
3 0 
tions (see Section 6.5.2), to give halide and halate(V) (XO, ) anions 
(equation 9.14). 
Fr 
i. c 
(9.14) 
Equilibrium constants (K) for 
3 x 0  C XO, + 2 X  
equation 9 14 
X 
K 
Br 
10' 
halate(1) S halate(V) + halide 
CI 
1 0  
I 
10 If 
Since the equilibria in reactions 9.13 and 9.14 lie to the right-hand side, 
the actual products formed are dependent on the relative rates of reac- 
tions. When chlorine is dissolved in hydroxide solution, C10 is formed, 
but the rate of disproportionation at room temperature to C10, and C1 
(equation 9.14) is very slow (C10, can be obtained by passing C1, into 
hot OH solution). For bromine, both reactions 9.13 and 9.14 are- fast, 
so ii mixture of BrO , BrO, and Br is obtained (the proportions being 
temperature dependent), while for iodine, reaction 9.14 is fast, and so I 
and 1 0 ,  are essentially the only products formed. 
9.6.2 Halic(ll1) Acids (HXO,) and Halate(lI1) Salts (XOJ 
Chloric( 111) acid (HClO,) is the only free acid definitely established 
(although HBrO, may exist), but it is unstable. In contrast, chlorates(II1) 
(C10, ) and bromates(II1) (BrO, ) are well known! HClO, is formed by 
acidification of the chlorate(III)anion, which in turn is formed by reac- 
tion of ClO, with hydroxide (equation 9.15). 
2C10, + 20H + C10, + C10,- + H,O 
(9.15) 
9.6.3 Halico Acids (HXO,) and Halate0 Salts (XO,') 
Halic(V) acids can be isolated for C1, Br and 1, with iodic(V) acid (HIO,) 
being the most stable and the only one which can be isolated as a solid. 
The halic(V) acids are weaker oxidizing agents and stronger acids than 
the corresponding halic(II1) acids; refer to Box 9.3 for E" values. 

136 
Main Group Chemistry 
Chlorate(VI1) salts are often 
referred to as perchlorates. 
Structure of H5106 = I(O)(OH)s 
Structure of the 12094- anion 
OH 
0 
0 
OH 
Structure of the H2l2OIo4- anion 
9.6.4 Halic(VI1) Acids (HXO,) and Halate(Vl1) Salts (XOJ 
Halic(VI1) acids of chlorine, bromine and iodine are known. Chloric(VI1) 
acid is a strong oxidizing agent, but the least strongly oxidizing of all 
chlorine oxyacids. The chlorate(VI1) anion can be used to crystallize large 
cations. However, there are numerous reports, anecdotes and warnings 
on the explosive nature of chlorate(VI1) salts of oxidizable cations. 
Iodic(VI1) acid (HIO,) and iodate(VI1) salts, containing the tetrahe- 
dral 10, anion, exist. However, the chemistry of iodine(VI1) oxyacids 
and oxyanions is dominated by compounds with higher coordination 
numbers for iodine. This occurs by addition of water across two 1=0 
bonds to give two I-OH groups, and formation of 1-0-1 bridges. Iodine 
therefore shows similarities to the other heavy p-block elements telluri- 
um (see Section 8.7.2) and bismuth (see Section 7.4.3) in this aspect of 
its chemistry. Thus, acidic, aqueous iodate(VI1) solutions contain a vari- 
ety of species including H,IO, and various deprotonated forms of this 
acid. In strongly acidic solution the 1=0 group of H,IO, can be proto- 
nated to give I(OH),+. H,IO, has two of the five protons readily 
exchangeable. Heating H,IO, causes loss of water in two stages 
(equation 9.16). 
Salts containing the [I,O,I4 ion are known, and contain two face-shar- 
ing 10, octahedra, while in the related ion [H2120,J4- there are two edge- 
sharing 10, octahedra. 
In contrast to chlorates(VI1) and iodates(VII), which have been known 
for many years, bromic(VI1) acid eluded synthesis until 1968. This 'mid- 
dle element anomaly' manifests itself on numerous occasions in the chem- 
istry of As, Sb and Br, because these elements (which form after the 
poorly screening 3d shell has been filled) are more difficult to oxidize 
than expected. Bromate(VI1) was eventually obtained by oxidation of 
bromate(V) in alkaline solution by F, (equation 9.17), and bromic(VI1) 
acid was obtained from it by protonation. The salts exist solely as the 
tetrahedral Br0,- ion, with no evidence for higher coordination number 
adducts as with iodic(VI1) acid. The bromate(VI1) ion is a strong oxi- 
dizing agent. 
BrOF + F, + 20H- + BrO, + 2F- + H 20 
(9.17) 

The Group 17 (Halogen) Elements 
137 
9.7 
lnterhalogen Compounds 
9.7.1 Neutral Compounds 
There is a wide range of interhalogen compounds (containing two or 
more different halogens), with many examples of neutral, cationic and 
anionic compounds. The simplest are the heteronuclear diatomic mole- 
cules X-Y, all of which are known. These are formed by simply mixing 
the two component halogens, e.g. for IBr (equation 9.18). 

138 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 9.6 Values of E" (V) for 
chlorine-containing species in 
acid and alkaline solution 
I, + Br, + 21Br 
(9.18) 
Thus, IF is the most stable with respect to the parent I, and F,, because 
of a dipolar contribution I*+-F8- to the bonding. 

The Group 17 (Halogen) Elements 
139 
F 
CI F3 
Other neutral interhalogens include compounds of the type EF,, EF, 
(known where E = Cl, Br and I, though some are unstable) and, for 
iodine, IF,. Direct combination of the elements provides a general 
method for the synthesis of many of this type of compound. 
Organic derivatives such as MeIF, and PhIC1, are well-known com- 
pounds. PhICl,, a crystalline solid, is- sometimes used as a conveniently 
prepared and handled oxidizing agent, formed by passing excess C1, 
through a trichloromethane solution of iodobenzene (equation 9.20). 
Indeed, all of the interhalogens are strong oxidizing agents, the most 
reactive being ClF, which is as powerful as elemental fluorine. 
PhI + C1, + PhICl,,s, 
(9.20) 
I 
CI-F 
I 
F 
T-shaped 
BrF5 
F 
Square pyramidal 
The shapes of all of these interhalogen molecules are readily predicted 
by VSEPR (see Section 1.4). Selected examples are illustrated and cov- 
ered in the worked examples and problems. 

140 
Main Group Chemistry 
9.7.2 lnterhalogen Cations and Anions 
Many interhalogen cations and anions are also known; a selection is 
given in Table 9.1. The fluoride compounds are generally formed by 
addition or removal of F from a parent neutral compound (e.g. ClF, in 
equations 9.21 and 9.22), similar to the formation of the related noble 
gas compounds (see Chapter lo), with which the interhalogens share 
much common chemistry. For example: 
Fluoride addition: 
ClF, + Cs'F -+ Cs'ClFi- 
(9.2 1) 
Fluoride removal: 
CIF, + AsF, 3 ClF,+AsF,-- 
(9.22) 
(hidation and fiuorlde ion removal 
1s e~lvalent to the addltlon of F i l  
\vhich IS not stable on its own. 
Alternatively, vigorous oxidation (using KrF,, see Section 10.3.1) of a 
lower oxidation state compound can be used (equation 9.23). 
ClF, + KrF, + AsF, -+ CIF,fAsF; + Kr 
(9.23) 
-- 
Table 9.1 Selected interhalogen cations and anions 
Oxidation state 
+7 
+3 
+5 
+7 
Cations 
CIF,' 
CIF,+ 
CIF,' 
la*+ 
BrF,' 
BrF,;' 
Anions 
BrCI,- 
CIF,- 
BrF,- 
IF,' 
IF,' 
ICI,- 
. 
BrF,- 
IF,- 
IF,- 
lBr,- 
ICI,- 
13- 

The Group 17 (Halogen) Elements 
141 
In this case, the compound ClF, does not exist (seven fluorines cannot 
fit around a C1 atom), but by forming a six-coordinate ClF,+ cation the 
chlorine(VI1) oxidation state is stabilized. 
Related to the interhalogen compounds are mixed oxide-halide 
species, of the type IOF,, [IOF,] , etc. Many of these species have anal- 
ogous xenon compounds. 
9.7.3 Polyiodide Anions 
Polyiodide anions are one type of interhalogen species commonly 
encountered in the laboratory and are prepared from mixtures of iodine 
and a suitable iodide salt, in appropriate proportions. The tri-iodide 
anion, I, , is the best known (equation 9.24). 
I, + I -  * 13- 
(9.24) 
The I, anion is most commonly encountered during redox titrations 

142 
Main Group Chemistry 
involving iodine, where an excess of iodide ions is added to convert any 
iodine formed (which is only sparingly soluble in water) to the soluble 
I, ion. Indeed, equation 9.25, which is very widely used in high school 
and undergraduate chemistry, is more correctly represented as 9.26. 
I, + 2S,O,'- 3 21- + s4062-- 
(9.25) 
I,- + 2S,O,' + 31- + S,O:- 
(9.26) 
The solubility of a tri-iodide salt M+I,- is dependent on the size of the 
cation M+, and to precipitate the I,- ion from solution, large cations such 
as Me,N+ or Ph4As+ are often used. The cation also has a marked influ- 
ence on the structure of the anion, as shown in Figure 9.8; the smaller 
Cs' ion distorts the I, ion, whereas the larger Ph,As+ does not. 
Recall from Section 3.5 that a 
large cation stabilizes a large 
;mion. 
Figure 9.8 Structures of the l i -  
anions in two different salts, with 
bond lengths (pm) 
Longer polyiodide anions, such as 15-, I,- and 19-, are also known in the 
solid state, formed by addition of iodide to two, three and four I, mol- 
ecules, respectively. 
9.8 
The Chemistry of Astatine 
Owing to the radioactivity and limited availability of astatine, the chem- 
istry of this element is done usirg tracer studies. The chemistry can be 
followed by adding trace amounts of astatine to iodine and then fol- 
lowing the chemistry of astatine by monitoring the radioactivity. 

The Group 17 (Halogen) Elements 
143 
Like iodine. astatine forms compounds in at least four oxidation states 
(- 1, 0, + 1, +5 and possibly +3), although unlike iodine it does not appear 
to form compounds in the +7 oxidation state. In the -1 state the At- ion 
is formed, and in the higher oxidation states the AtO-, AtO, and AtO, 
ions appear to exist. The elemental form, which may be of the form At, 
(although this has not been proven), is volatile, soluble in non-polar 
organic solvents (such as CCl,) and is reduced to At using reducing 
agents such as SO,. 
The properties of At are as 
expected for the element’s 
position in the group, based on 
F, ci, Br and I. 
(,+ 
the 
for 

144 
Main Group Chemistry 

The Group 17 (Halogen) Elements 
145 

10 
The Group 18 (Noble Gas) 
Elements: Helium, Neon, 
Argon, Krypton, Xenon and 
Radon 
10.1 Introduction and Oxidation State Survey 
The noble gases are characterized by extremely high ionization energies 
(Table 10. l), and for a long time it was thought that chemical compounds 
of these elements could not be formed. The first xenon compounds were 
synthesized in 1962, and since then the chemistry of xenon has become 
reasonably extensive; a few compounds of krypton have also been report- 
ed. There are several summaries of the early historical developments in 
noble gas chemistry.' 
Many of the noble gas compounds have analogues in the chemistry 
of the heavier Group 17 elements, particularly iodine. VSEPR (see 
Section 1.4) is a powerful technique for rationalizing and predicting the 
shapes of many noble gas compounds, which have relatively large num- 
bers of electron pairs in the valence shell of the central atom. 
Noble gas atoms have filled shells, and so in order to form chemical 
compounds, electrons must be promoted into the next shell. Depending 
on the number of electrons promoted, compounds of the noble gases in 
oxidation states +2, +4, +6 and +8 have all been synthesized. With 
146 

The Group 18 (Noble Gas) Elements 
147 
Table 10.1 Atomic masses, first ionization energies (IEs), boiling points and van der 
Waals radii of the noble gases 
Atomic mass 
First IE 
Boiling point 
van der Wads 
(g mol-') 
(kJ mol-l) 
(K) 
radiusa (pm) 
He 
4.0 
2379 
4.2 
- 
Ne 
20.2 
2087 
27.1 
157.8 
Ar 
39.9 
1527 
87.3 
187.4 
Kr 
83.8 
1357 
121.3 
199.6 
Xe 
131.3 
1177 
166.1 
21 6.7 
Rn 
222.0 
1043 
208.2 
- 
aValues for the noble gases in the solid state from: S. S. Batsanov, J. Chem. Soc., 
Dalton Trans., 1998, 1541. 
increasing atomic size, the outer electrons are more easily removed and 
there is a decrease in first ionization energy, so there are many xenon 
compounds but few for krypton, and none have been isolated for argon. 
All compounds tend to be strong oxidizing agents, and the fluorides are 
also powerful fluorinating agents. The formation of mimic noble gas 
compounds (such as caesium neonide, Cs'Ne-) with electropositive met- 
als is an intriguing possibility, though none has yet been isolated.2 
Compare Worked Problems 3.2 
and 4.1. 
First ionization energy of Cs: 
Figure 3.1. 

148 
Main Group Chemistry 
10.2 The Elements 
Urmimi isotopes undergo 
radioactive decay to give (I.- 
particles (.He nuclei), e y. 
v I-I -+ -+ -+ 
(\j electron) 
'' Pb + 8tr + 68 
The noble gases are used as 
low-temperature refrigerants, to 
provide an inert atmosphere, anc 
liquid xenon has found 
applications as an extremely 
urireactive solvent. 
10.2.1 Occurrence 
All of the elements exist as highly unreactive monatomic gases, with very 
low boiling points (Table 10.1). Argon is the most abundant, compris- 
ing 0.93% of the atmosphere (see Figure 7.2). Helium, neon, krypton and 
xenon are trace constituents of air, and with the exception of helium are 
obtained by fractional distillation of liquid air. All isotopes of radon are 
radioactive, and are formed naturally from the decay of heavy radioiso- 
topes such as those of radium and uranium.3 
10.2.2 Noble Gas Clathrates 
In the 1920s and 1930s there was considerable interest in materials 
formed between noble gases (particularly Ar, Kr and Xe) and strongly 
hydrogen-bonding compounds such as water or polyphenols. These have 
subsequently been shown to be not chemical compounds of the noble 
gases, but clathrate compounds (also known as inclusion compounds), 
where the gas atoms occupy voids in the hydrogen-bonded lattice of the 
host compound when the host is crystallized under a noble gas atmos- 
phere. 
Xenon forms a clathrate with water of approximate composition 
Xe(H,O),, (12 = 5 or 6), which has a melting point of 24 "C. Figure 10.1 
shows a schematic diagram of ice (which normally crystallizes with a dia- 

The Group 18 (Noble Gas) Elements 
149 
mond-like structure) with an encapsulated noble gas atom. On melting 
such substances, the noble gas escapes. 
Figure 10. I Schematic 
diagram of ice containing an 
encapsulated noble gas atom in 
a void in the lattice. Hydrogen 
atoms of water molecules are 
omitted for clarity 
10.3 Noble Gas Halides 
These are the most important compounds of the noble gases; fluorine is 
the most electronegative element and is able to stabilize the highly oxi- 
dizing noble gas compounds. The vast majority of compounds are fluo- 
rides of xenon (and to a far lesser extent of krypton), though some 
chemistry of radon is known, hampered by its radioactivity and avail- 
ability in only small quantities. 
Fluorides are the most important 
cornpounds formed by the noble 
gases. 
10.3.1 Krypton Difluoride 
For krypton, the only known halide is KrF,, which is synthesized by 
passing an electrical discharge through a fluorine-krypton mixture. KrF, 
is a powerful fluorinating agent, and is more reactive than XeF,. It wili 
oxidize Xe to XeF, and metallic gold to AuF, (equations 10.1 and 10.2). 
3KrF, + Xe -+ XeF, + 3Kr 
(10.1) 
7KrF, + 2Au + 2KrF’AuF, + 5Kr 
( 10.2) 
10.3.2 Xenon Fluorides 
A xenon fluoride, ‘XePtF,’, was the first noble gas compound to be syn- 
thesized by reaction of Xe with the strong oxidant PtF,, and later shown 
to be probably a mixture of [XeF]+[PtF,] and [XeF]’[Pt,F,,] .4 This her- 
alded the start of intensive investigations into noble gas chemistry, which 
has continued to the present day. 

150 
Main Group Chemistry 
Xenon forms three neutral fluorides, XeF,, XeF, and XeF,, by the 
reaction of fluorine and xenon under different conditions. The simplest 
synthesis of XeF, is to expose a fluorine-xenon mixture (contained in a 
dry glass bulb) to sunlight; colourless crystals of XeF, are deposited on 
the walls of the flask. The sunlight causes dissociation of the relatively 
weak F-F bond in elemental fluorine to form fluorine atoms, which then 
react with the xenon. With larger mole ratios of fluorine to xenon, high- 
er temperatures and higher pressures, XeF, and XeF, can be synthesized. 
XeF, and XeF, have the expected shapes predicted by VSEPR (see 
Section& 1.4), as shown in Figure 10.2. XeF, is a seven electron-pair mol- 
ecule, and may theoretically have an octahedral structure (where the lone 
pair is in a spherically inactive s-orbital) or a distorted octahedral struc- 
ture (where the lone pair is active). In fact, XeF, is fluxional in the gas 
phase, interchanging between structures where the lone pair points 
through the centre of an F, triangle (one face) of a distorted octahedral 
XeF, molecule (Figure 10.2). 
Figure 10.2 The shapes of 
xenon fluorides, showing the 
positions of the lone pairs 
All of the xenon fluorides are powerful fluorinating agents, able to 
oxidize a wide range of compounds. In many cases XeF, is a very selective 
oxidant, able to oxidize the central heteroatom of a main group com- 
pound (such as As, P, etc.) but not organic substituents (e.g. methyl, 
phenyl) bonded to it, as illustrated in equations 10.3 and 10.4. 
Me,As + XeF, --+ Me,AsF, + Xe 
(10.3) 
Ph,PH + XeF, + Ph,PHF, + Xe 
( 10.4) 
XeF, also oxidizes water to oxygen (equation 10.5), while XeF, can oxi- 
dize platinum metal to PtF, (equation 10.6). 
2H,O + 2XeF, + 0, + 4HF + 2Xe 
(10.5) 
XeF, + Pt + PtF, + Xe 
(10.6) 

The Group 18 (Noble Gas) Elements 
151 
10.4 Reactions of Noble Gas Fluorides with 
Fluoride Ion Acceptors and Donors 
There is an extensive chemistry where noble gas fluorides react with 
strong fluoride ion acceptors, such as the pentafluorides MF, of As, Sb, 
Bi, Ta, Ru or Pt. XeF, forms the greatest number of compounds by this 
type of reaction, followed by XeF, and then XeF,. KrF, forms many 
similar compounds to XeF,. In some cases the fluoride anion is com- 
pletely transferred to the Lewis acid MF,, leaving cationic xenon species 
(for example. XeF, gives the XeF' cation which can be solvated, e.g. by 
a nitrile RCN; see Section 9.6), but in most cases the fluoride is only 
partly transferred, resulting in compounds with Xe-F-M fluoride bridges 
(Figure 10.3a). The XeF+ cation is also able to lose its fluoride ion on 
reaction with reducing agents, or with a mixture of HF and SbF, under 
a xenon atmosphere, to give the green [Xe,]+ cation.6 
Figure 10.3 Types of fluoride 
bridges involving xenon 
Different types of cations and anions tend to be obtained depending on 
the stoichiometry of noble gas fluoride to MF,. As an example of a com- 
pound formed from a 1 : 1 ratio, solid XeF, reacts with liquid AsF, (equa- 
tion 10.7) to give a salt with fluoride bridging between the [XeF]+ cation r 
and [AsF,]- anion (Figure 10.4). 
Figure 
l o r n 4  
Structure Of 
[XeF]+[AsFd- 
214 pm 
XeF,(q + ASF,(I, + [XeFl+CAsF,l-(s, 
When a 2:l ratio of noble gas compound to MF, is used, the adducts 
tend to contain cations with Xe-F-Xe bridges (Figure 10.3b), such as the 
[Xe,F,]+ cation which occurs in [Xe,F,]+[AsF,]-. The [Xe,F,]+ cation 
(Figure 10.5) can alternatively be viewed as an XeF+ cationsolvated by 
XeF,. For compounds containing a 1:2 molar ratio of noble gas fluoride 
to MF,, they tend to contain [M,F,,]- anions (e.g. Sb,F,,-, Figure 10.6) 
which are linked to the noble gas cation (e.g. XeF+) b i a  fluoride bridge. 
Noble gas fluorides are able to act as fluoride acceptors themselves, and 
will add one or two fluoride anions. Examples include the addition of F- 
to XeF, to give the pentagonal planar [XeF,]- anion, or to XeF, to give 
either [XeF,]- or [XeFJ2-, depending on the amount of fluoride added. 
' 
Figure 10.5 Structure of the 
[Xe,F,]+ 
cation 0
>.\\do 
Figure 10.6 Structure of the 
[Sb,F,,]- anion 

152 
Main Group Chemistry 
10.5 Xenon-Oxygen Compounds 
These compounds generally result from hydrolysis of the fluorides XeF, 
and XeF,. As described in equation 10.5, hydrolysis of XeF, results in 
oxidation of water to oxygen, and formation of xenon gas. However, 
when XeF, is hydrolysed, some xenon gas is liberated and some XeF, is 
converted to xenon trioxide (XeO,) which remains in solution. In this 
reaction the xenon(1V) (in XeFb is undergoing disproportionation to 
Xe(0) (in xenon gas) and Xe(V1) (in XeO,) (equation 10.8). 
6XeF, + 12H,O -+ 4Xe + 2Xe03 + 24HF + 30, 
(10.8) 
XeO, is also obtained by the hydrolysis of XeF, (equation 10.9). 
XeF, + 3H,O + XeO, + 6HF 
(10.9) 
XeO, is a highly explosive white solid, soluble in water in which it appears 
not to be ionized. In strong alkaline solution, however, XeO, behaves as 
a weak acid, giving the xenate(V1) anion, [XeO,(OH)]-, by addition of 
OH- (equation 10.10). 
Shape of Xe03 
,X$oo 
0 
XeO, + OH- 
[XeO,(OH)]- 
(10. lo) 
The xenate(V1) anion is unstable in aqueous solution, and undergoes a 
disproportionation reaction to give xenon gas and the xenate(VII1) 
anion, XeO,& (equation 10.1 I), which contains xenon in the +8 oxida- 
tion state. 
Shape of XeO& 
0 
4- 
2XeO,(OH)- + 20H- i, XeO," + Xe + 0, + 2H,O 
(10.1 1) 

The Group 18 (Noble Gas) Elements 
153 
Acidification of xenate(VII1) solutions gives xenon tetroxide, XeO,, again 
with xenon in the +8 oxidation state. XeO, is highly unstable, decom- 
posing rapidly to xenon gas plus 0,, often explosively. 
Oxyfluorides are also well-known species. The xenon(V1) compound 
XeOF, can be prepared by partial hydrolysis of XeF, (equation 10.12), 
but this route is less favoured than the reaction of XeF, with sodium 
nitrate (equation 10.13) or the reaction of XeF, and POF, (equation 
10.14) since they do not generate the explosive XeO,. 
XeF, + H,O + XeOF, + 2HF 
(10.12) 
XeF, + NaNO, + XeOF, + NaF + FNO, 
( 10.1 3) 
XeF, + POF, + XeOF, + PF, 
(10.14) 
The reaction of XeF, with Na,XeO, gives the oxyfluorides XeOF, and 
XeO,F,; XeO,F, is also known. 

154 
Main Group Chemistry 
The pentafluorophenylxenon 
cation [C6F5Xe]+ 
In MeCN solution, the [C,F,Xe]+ 
cation is solvated to give 
[C,F,Xe(NCMe)]+, which has the 
expected linear N-C-Xe 
geometry. 
Other xenon-oxygen compounds can be formed from XeF,, XeF, and 
XeF, by substitution of one or more fluorides by reaction of strong oxy- 
acids (XOH) such as CF,SO,H, MeSO,H, CF,CO,H, FS0,H or 
TeF,OH, with elimination of HF (equation 10.15). 
F-Xe-F + XOH + F-Xe-OX (+ HF) + XO-Xe-OX (+ HF) 
( 1 0.1 5) 
Alternatively, fluoride exchange yields analogous products, e. g. equation 
10.16. 
XeF, + 2B(OTeF,), + Xe(OTeF,), + 2BF, 
( 1 0.1 6) 
The compounds have similar shapes to the fluorides, e.g. XO-Xe-OX 
and XeF, are both linear. 
10.6 Xenon and Krypton Compounds with Bonds to 
Elements other than 0 and F 
While the initial studies on xenon chemistry revealed the existence of 
compounds with small, highly electron-withdrawing atoms (namely oxy- 
gen and fluorine) bonded to xenon, in recent years there has been a surge 
in activity on the synthesis of compounds with bonds between xenon and 
elements of lower electronegativity . In order to stabilize such compounds, 
electron-withdrawing groups, typically with fluorine substitution, 
are often necessary. Thus, the highly electron-withdrawing amide 
[(FSO,),N]- forms the xenon compound FXeN(SO,F),, which has a 
linear F-Xe-N group. The XeF+ and KrF' cations have also been iso- 
lated as species solvated by nitriles such as [(C,F,CN)XeF]+ and 
[(HCN)KrF]'.7 
Xenon-carbon bonded compounds include pentafluorophenyl species 
such as [C,F,Xe]+, obtained by transfer of pentafluorophenyl groups 
from boron to xenon (equation 10.17). 
XeF, + B(C,F,), + [C,F,Xe]+[C,F,BF,]- + [C,F,Xe]+[(C,F,),BF,]- 
( 1 0.1 7) 
Alkynyl species of the type [R-C=C-Xe]', 
where R can be a range of 
non-fluorinated groups such as ethyl or trimethylsilyl (SiMe,) have been 
made. Thus, there appears to be a rather extensive organic chemistry of 
xenon which awaits discovery. 
In contrast, few compounds containing bonds from xenon to other 
elements have been synthesized. Reactions of the [C,F,Xe]+ cation with 
C1- gives C,F,XeCl, and with Me,SiCl gives [(C,F,Xe),Cl]'.* 

The t3roup 18 (Noble Gas) Elements 
l S 5  

156 
Main Group Chemistry 

I 1  
The Group 12 Elements: Zinc, 
Cadmium and Mercury 
I I .I Introduction 
Zinc, cadmium and mercury, while formally part of the d-block series of 
elements, have properties much more in keeping with main group ele- 
ments than transition metals, and are therefore often considered in dis- 
cussions of the former. All three elements have the dIos2 electronic 
configuration, and the group oxidation state is +2, formed by loss of the 
two s-electrons, though it has been speculated that Hg(1V) may be 
obtainable as HgF,.' In many cases, zinc and cadmium compounds are 
similar to the analogous magnesium compounds, and often have the 
same structures. Mercury compounds have a greater degree of covalent 
character, often with low coordination numbers. The + 1 oxidation state 
is well established for mercury, but is very unstable for zinc and 
cadmium. 
Zinc shows several similarities to beryllium: both metals have similar 
first and second ionization energies, though the Zn2+ ion is larger than 
Be2+, often resulting in differences in coordination numbers in complex- 
es (zinc can be four, five or six coordinate, but beryllium has a maxi- 
mum coordination number of four). Thus, for example, both metals react 
157 

158 
Main Group Chemistry 
Because the ns electrons in Zn, 
Cd and Hg are tightly bound, 
they are relatively unavailable for 
metallic bonding and so the 
metals are volatile, with low 
melting and boiling points. 
Mercury is a unique metal, being 
a liquid at room temperature and 
forming a monoatomic gas. 
Metal 
Mp ("C) Bp ("C) 
Zn 
420 
907 
Cd 
320 
767 
Hg 
-39 
357 
with acids and alkalis, and both form a basic ethanoate (acetate) of the 
type M,O(O,CMe), (see Section 4.3). 
11.2 The Elements 
Zinc, cadmium and mercury are chalcophilic, that is they show a strong 
aflfinity for the chalcogens sulfur, selenium and tellurium. They occur 
naturally as sulfide minerals, in a concentrated form, from which they 
are easily extracted. The main ore of zinc is zinc blende (sphalerite, ZnS), 
which often contains cadmium. Mercury occurs as cinnabar (HgS). The 
sulfide ores are roasted in air, whereupon zinc and cadmium sulfides are 
converted to the oxide (equation 11.1). HgS is unstable above 400 "C 
and decomposes to the metal (equation 11.2). The ZnO (and CdO) are 
reduced to the metals using carbon (equation 11.3). 
2ZnS + 30, + 2Zn0 + 2S0, 
(11.1) 
HgS + 0, + Hg + SO, 
(1 1.2) 
ZnO + C + Zn + CO 
(1 1.3) 
I I .3 Chemistry of the Elements 
The reactivity of the metals decreases going down the group; although 
zinc and cadmium have high first ionization energies, their redox 
potentials are quite large and negative (Table 11.1) owing to the high 
solvation energy that drives the reaction, so they readily dissolve in non- 
oxidizing acids (equation 1 1 A). In contrast, mercury will only dissolve 
in oxidizing acids, such as nitric acid. 
(11.4) 
Table 11 .l Standard redox potentials for zinc, cadmium and mercury at 25 "C 
Reaction 
E"M 
Zn2+ + 2e- + Zn 
Cd2+ + 2e- e Cd 
Hg2+ + 2e- * Hg 
-0.76 
-0.40 
+0.85 
11.4 Halides 
All combinations of halide and metal are known for the group. The flu- 
orides are ionic with high melting points. ZnF, crystallizes with the rutile 

The Group 12 Elements 
159 
structure (see Figure 6.9), while CdF, and HgF, have the fluorite struc- 
ture (see Figure 4.2). ZnF, and CdF, resemble MgF, in being poorly sol- 
uble in water. The chlorides, bromides and iodides of zinc and cadmium 
are largely ionic, but with increasing covalent character for the combi- 
nation of cadmium with heavier halides. In contrast, mercury(I1) halides 
(HgX,) are covalent solids, which are only slightly soluble in water and 
are only slightly dissociated into Hg2+ and X- ions. 
I I .5 Chalcogenides and Related Compounds 
From zinc to cadmium to mercury, there is an increasing tendency to 
form stable compounds with the chalcogens S, Se and Te. The chalco- 
genides can be formed either by direct combination, e.g. equation 11.5, 
or by reaction of aqueous M2+ ions with H,S, H,Se or H,Te (or a salt 
thereof, e.g. Na,S) (equation 1 1.6). 
Hg + S + HgS 
(1 1.5) 
Cd(NO,), + H,S + CdS + 2HN0, 
(1 1.6) 
ZnS crystallizes in two forms: the low-temperature zinc blende (spha- 
lerite) form and the higher-temperature wurtzite form. The sphalerite 
structure (Figure 11.1) is related to that of diamond (see Figure 6.3) with 
a cubic close-packed lattice of sulfur atoms, and zinc atoms in half of 
the tetrahedral holes (there are two holes per close-packed atom). The 
wurtzite structure (Figure 11.2) is based on a hexagonal close-packed lat- 
tice of sulfur atoms, again with zinc atoms in half the tetrahedral holes. 
Mercury (and, to a lesser extent, cadmium and zinc) has a very strong 
affinity for thiolate ligands, RS-; indeed, thiols (RSH) have been tradi- 
tionally known as mercaptans for this very reason. Thiolate complexes 
of zinc, cadmium and mercury are very important in biological systems; 
for example, in enzymes zinc is often bonded to the S atom of the amino 
acid cysteine. 
ZnS is an important phosphor 
used in 
screens. 
,NHZ 
‘copti 
HS-CH2-CH 
Cysteine 
Figure 11.1 The structure of the 
sphalerite form of ZnS 

160 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 11.2 The structure of the 
wurtzite form of ZnS 
I I .6 Oxygen Compounds 
Zinc has a relatively high affinity 
for oxygen, whereas mercury 
does not. 
The metals react directly with oxygen on heating; however, above 
400 "C, HgO decomposes back to the metal plus oxygen. ZnO adopts 
the wurtzite (ZnS) structure (Figure 1 1.2) which has tetrahedral coordi- 
nation of the zinc ions, whereas in CdO the larger Cd2+ ion is better 
accommodated by the sodium chloride structure (see Figure 3.4), which 
has six-coordinate Cd ions. 
ZnO is amphoteric, dissolving in both acids and bases. With excess 
base, the hydrated zincate anions [Zn(OH)x(H,0)yl~x-2~ 
are formed, and 
solid salts such as Na[Zn(OH),] and Na,[Zn(OH),] can be crystallized. 
In contrast, CdO is not amphoteric. However, analogous cadmate anions 
may be formed in small amounts, since Cd(OH), dissolves in hot and 
very concentrated KOH solution, though no cadmate salts can be iso- 
lated. Addition of hydroxide to solutions of M2' ions precipitates 
Zn(OH), and Cd(OH),; however, Hg(OH), does not exist and instead 
yellow HgO is formed (equations 11.7 and 11 3). Zinc and cadmium 
hydroxides also dissolve in aqueous ammonia solutions by the forma- 
tion of ammonia complexes such as [Zn(NH,),(H,0),]2'. 
Zn2+ + 20H- + &(OH), 
(1 1.7) 
Hg2+ + 20H- + HgO + H,O 
(1 1.8) 
A wide range of salts of oxyacids are known for all three metals, includ- 
ing nitrates, sulfates, chlorates(VII), etc. Many are easily synthesized by 
reaction of the oxide with the acid, followed by crystallization, e.g. equa- 
tion 11.9. 
ZnO + 2HC10, + 5H20 + Zn(ClO,),.GH,O 
(1 1.9) 

The Group 12 Elements 
161 
Zinc and cadmium carbonates are rather unstable to heat as a result of 
the polarizing effect of the small Zn2+ and Cd2+ ions, causing decompo- 
sition to the oxide (equation 11.10). In this way they resemble magne- 
sium carbonate (see Section 4.3). 
CdCO, + CdO + CO, 
(11.10) 
I I 
.7 Formation of Coordination Complexes 
The formation of coordination complexes by the zinc group elements is 
See 
Section 
.6. 
a trait more allied with the transition metals than with main group ele- 
ments, illustrating the intermediate character of the group. Tetrahedral 
four-coordination is common among the complexes, which are formed 
from a wide range of donor ligands. Examples include cationic com- 
plexes such as [Zn(NH,)J2+, neutral complexes such as [HgCl,(PPh,),] 
and [Zn(pyridine),Cl,] and anionic complexes such as [Zn(CN)J2- and 
[CdIJ2-. Complexes of cadmium are often more stable when in six coor- 
dination. Many hydrated salts of strong acids [e.g. Zn(C103,, Cd(BF,),] 
contain the [Zn(H,0)J2+ or [Cd(H,O) J2+ ions. 
Mercury has a strong tendency to adopt lower coordination numbers 
than cadmium or zinc; it often displays linear two-coordination such as 
in the organometallic derivatives R,Hg and RHgX (X = halide), though 
four-coordination is quite common, e. g. the colourless [HgIJ2- formed 
when red HgI, dissolves in KI solution (equation 11.11). 
Q 
Pyridine 
HgI, + 21- + [HgIJ2- 
(11.11) 

162 
Main Group Chemistry 
I I .8 Low-valent Compounds 
See Section 1.5 for 
paramagnetism and 
diamagnetism. 
discussion on 
The Cd:+ 
and Zn:+ 
species are known, but unstable; they are formed 
only in anhydrous conditions and readily disproportionate in water to 
give the metal and Zn2+ or Cd2+. In contrast, the Hg:+ 
ion is the most 
stable, and the best known example of a monovalent species formed by 
the group. The Hg:+ 
ion is diamagnetic (with no unpaired electrons); an 
M+ ion would be paramagnetic with one unpaired electron, so dimer- 
ization occurs through Hg-Hg bond formation, giving the Hg:+ 
ion. 
There is an equilibrium between Hg:+ 
and Hg2+ (equation 1 1.12), which 
has an equilibrium constant [Hg:+]/[Hg2+] of about 170. 
Hg2+ + Hg * Hg;+ 
(11.12) 
Thus, in an aqueous solution of a mercury(1) salt there will be >0.5% of 
Hg2+ present in solution. If Hg2+ ions are removed by complexation with 
ligands which form stable complexes or insoluble compounds with it 
(such as cyanide), then the disproportionation goes to completion, e. g. 
equation 1 1.13. 
(11.13) 

The Group 12 Elements 
163 

164 
Main Group Chemistry 

12 
Selected Polymeric Main 
Group Compounds 
12. I Introduction 
Modern society utilizes a wide variety of polymers; these occur in many 
natural and synthetic forms, with different properties. Historically, syn- 
thetic polymers have been largely organic-based, and the development 
of synthetic inorganic polymers has lagged far behind. While some poly- 
meric inorganic materials, e.g. the silicates, have existed for billions 
of years, it is only recently that there has been an upsurge in activity in 
the synthesis of novel inorganic polymers which possess interesting 
properties, some of which may be complementary to those of organic 
polymers. 
The purpose of this chapter is to discuss some of the more important 
types of polymers and both natural silicates and a selection of synthet- 
ic polymers are described. A polymer is here considered as a material 
built up from essentially covalent bonds, so that ionic substances and 
metals are excluded but silicates and polyphosphates are included. 
Other polymeric systems: 
(Chapter 8) 
carbon (Section 6.2.1) 
boron nitride (Section 5.8.2) 
(Section 5.7.1) 
electron-deficient compounds 
(Sections 4.3, 
4.7 and 5.6.2) 
12.2 Polyphosphates 
If acid phosphates, such as NaH,PO, or Na,HPO,, containing P-OH 
groups are heated, a condensation reaction (eliminating water) occurs, 
165 

166 
Main Group Chemistry 
with the formation of a P-0-P linkage, as shown schematically in equa- 
tion 12.1. 
P-0-H + H-0-P + P-0-P + H20 
(12.1) 
Cyclic phosphates are also called 
metaphosphates (compare 
metasilicates, Section 12.3.3). 
In its simplest form, when disodiurn hydrogenphosphate (Na2HPOJ is 
heated, the pyrophosphate [P2O7I4 anion (Figure 12.1) is formed. If sodi- 
urn dihydrogenphosphate (NaH2P04) is heated, since each phosphorus 
has two P-OH groups then cyclic phosphates [(POJJ- can be formed, 
where n is usually 3 or 4, but may be up to 10. The structures of the 
trimetaphosphate [P30,l3- and tetrametaphosphate [P40,2]k anions are 
shown in Figure 12.2. 
Figure 12.1 The pyrophosphate 
anion 
Figure 12.2 Structures of the 
cyclic phosphates [P,O$- 
and 
[P,O,,I" 
Linear polyphosphates, containing long chains of [(PO;)Jn- groups ter- 
minated by -0-PO:- 
groups, can also be formed by heating mixtures 
of HP0;- 
and H,PO,. 
When trimetaphosphate [P,OJ3- is treated with 
hydroxide ions, one of the P-0-P groups undergoes hydrolysis giving 
the triphosphate [P,0,J5- ion (Figure 12.3); sodium triphosphate is used 
in detergents. 
Polyphosphate groups are 
important in biochemical systems 
Figure 12.3 Structure of the 
triphosphate anion, [P,0,d5- 

Selected Polymeric Main Group Compounds 
167 
An alternative way of representing the phosphate groups in polyphos- 
phates is as a tetrahedral framework unit (Figure 12.4). The tetrameta- 
phosphate [P,0,2]6 ion can therefore be represented as in Figure 12.5. 
This type of framework representation is widely used for silicate mate- 
rials (Section 12.3). 
Figure 12.4 A PO, tetrahedron 
Figure 12.5 Framework 
representation of the 
tetrametaphosphate [P,0,,l4- 
ion 

168 
Main Group Chemistry 
By condensing all three OH 
groups of phosphoric acid, 
materials called ultraphosphates 
are formed 
12.3 Silicates 
12.3.1 Overview 
Silicates account for ca. 74% of 
the Earth’s crust. 
The structural chemistry of silicates is extremely diverse, and these mate- 
rials are of significant importance as the major rock-forming minerals. 
Almost all silicates are based on the SiO, tetrahedron, which like phos- 
phates is often represented as a framework. There are rare examples of 
minerals (e.g. the stishovite form of SiO,), formed under extreme condi- 
tions of temperature and pressure, which have Si in octahedral six- 
coordination. As with polyphosphates, SiO, tetrahedra can link together, 
usually by sharing one to four vertices to form large polysilicate anions. 
Each terminal oxygen bears a negative charge, but each bridging oxy- 
gen is neutral. The negative charge of the silicate anion is neutralized by,. 

Selected Polymeric Main Group Compounds 
169 
cations, which, in natural minerals, are often mixtures of cations with 
similar sizes, for example Mg2+ and Fe2+. 
Silicates can be classified into various types, according to how the SiO, 
tetrahedra are linked together, and these are discussed in Sections 
12.3.2- 12.3.5. 
12.3.2 Simple Silicates: Orthosilicates (Si04&) and 
The orthosilicate anion is a simple tetrahedron (Figure 12.7). The min- 
eral olivine (believed to be a major component of the Earth's mantle), 
Mg,SiO,, contains isolated SiO, tetrahedra. The semiprecious stone gar- 
net, with composition (M2'),(M3'),(Si0,4-),, 
also contains isolated SiO, 
tetrahedra. 
Pyrosilicates (Si2o7&) 
Orthosilicate anion, Si04" 
Pyrosilicate anion, Si20T6- 
Figure 12.6 Ortho- and 
pyro-silicate 
Pyrosilicate (similar to pyrophosphate) consists of two tetrahedra with 
a shared oxygen (Figure 12.6) and is relatively rare. 
12.3.3 Ring and Chain Silicates 
When SiO, tetrahedra share two vertices with each other, rings or chains 
can be formed, with general composition [Si0,2-ln. Cyclosilicates are ana- 
logues of the cyclic phosphates (Section 12.2), and rings have generally 
This type of silicate has been 
hlstorlcalty called a metasilicate. 

170 
Main Group Chemistry 
Figure 12.7 The hexametasili- 
cate anion, [Si60J2-, which 
occurs in the mineral beryl, 
Be,AI,Si,O,,,the 
gem form of 
which is emerald 
Figure 12.8 A silicate chain in 
pyroxene minerals: [Si032-], 
Amphiboles, u n I i ke pyroxenes, 
tend to be hydrated minerals, 
with hydroxyl groups. 
Figure 12.9 A silicate double 
chain in amphibole minerals: 
"p, 
JGI" 
(si4Ol1 6, repeat unit 
Bridging oxygen (Si-0-Si) 
No contribution to charge 
Terminal oxygen (Si-0-) 
Contributes 1- charge 
either three, four or six SiO, tetrahedra each with two shared vertices, 
e.g. the hexametasilicate anion [Si,0,8]12- (Figure 12.7). 
Silicate chains, such as in Figure 12.8, are found in the pyroxene group 
of minerals; there are many different ways in which the SiO, tetrahedra 
can be arranged in the solid, leading to different minerals. An example 
is diopside, CaMg(SiO,),. 
Another series of silicates occur which have two pyroxene chains joined 
together (with SiO, tetrahedra sharing two or three vertices, Figure 12.9), 
giving the amphibole minerals, containing [(Si,O, 1)"], double chains. The 
asbestos range of minerals are examples of amphiboles, for example 
tremolite, Ca,Mg,( Si,O, 1)2(OH)2. 

Selected Polymeric Main Group Compounds 
171 
12.3.4 Sheet Silicates 
When SiO, tetrahedra share three vertices with adjacent tetrahedra, sheet 
silicates result (Figure 12.10) with the formula [(Si40,0)4-],,. The bonding 
within these silicate sheets is very strong, but between them is weak, so 
the compounds tend to cleave into thin sheets. In talc, Mg3(0H),Si,0,,,, 
cations only reside between alternate silicate layers, as shown schemati- 
cally in Figure 12.1 1. In this structure, there are 'sandwiches' of two 
(Si,O ,()), 
sheets with Mg'+ and OH- ions; these silicate-metal-silicate 
sandwiches then stack together. The bonding between the sandwiches is 
weak van der Waals forces, so talc is a very soft mineral. 
Figure 12.11 The sheet silicate 
structure of talc 
In a related series of imDortant sheet silicate minerals, one in four sili- 
Materials  here ~orne silicon 
con atoms in the Si,O,o sheet is replaced by an aluminium atom. In order 
to maintain charge balance an extra I +  cation is required. These min- ~
~
~
m
c
s
,
,
~
~
~
erals are called micas, such as phlogopite, KMg,(OH),( Si,AlO,,). In 
micas, the additional cations (K' in phlogopite, Li+ in the lithium ore 
Lepidolite) lie between the silicate sheets, and thus they are bonded more 
strongly by ionic interactions (compared to the weak van der Waals 
forces of talc); the cleavage of mica is still into thin sheets. 

172 
Main Group Chemistry 
Other important minerals which have sheet silicate structures are the 
clay minerals. 
12.3.5 Network Silicate Materials 
If an SiO, tetrahedron shares all four of its vertices, a three-dimension- 
al network structure results. 
A negative charge is readily introduced into the framework by replace- 
ment of some silicon atoms by aluminium atoms (see Section 12.3.4). A 
commercially important class of network aluminosilicate is the zeolites; 
a large range of both synthetic and natural zeolites is known. One of the 
basic building blocks for several zeolites is the sodalite cage (Figure 
12.12), which is typically drawn showing the positions of the A1 and Si 
atoms (rather than the network of linked tetrahedra used for other sili- 
cates). By connecting sodalite cages, either through their square faces or 
their hexagonal faces, regular, large, open cages and channels are gen- 
erated in a three-dimensional network structure. Zeolite A is formed by 
connecting sodalite cages through square faces (Figure 12.13). Small mol- 
ecules are able to diffuse into the cavities, but large molecules are exclud- 
ed. Zeolites are commonly referred to as molecular sieves for this reason. 
Because of the negative charge on the framework (owing to the alu- 
minium-for-silicon substitution), cations are also contained within the 
lattice. Zeolites can therefore be used as ion-exchange materials; for 
example, they are commonly added to detergents, where they remove 
Ca" (and Mg") 
ions (equation 12.2) which are responsible for hard 
water formation. 
Na,[~eolite],~, 
+ Ca2+(aq) + Ca[~eolite],~, 
+ 2Na+iaq) 
(1 2.2) 
Figure 12.12 The sodalite cage, 
one of the basic building blocks 
in a number of zeolites 

Selected Polymeric Main Group Compounds 
173 
Figure 12.1 3 The structure of 
Zeolite A, composed of 
intarconnected sodalite cages 
12.4 Silicone Polymers 
~~ 
~~ 
~~ 
Organosilicones of composition ( R,SiO),l are the most important syn- 
thetic polymers with a purely inorganic ‘backbone’. They are synthesized 
by hydrolysis of dialkylsilicon dichlorides, e.g. Me,SiCl, (Scheme 12.1 ). 
The monomeric unit, Me,Si=O, is a highly reactive species, in contrast 
to the carbon analogue [acetone (ethanone), Me,CO] so the silicones have 
polymeric structures with strong Si-0 single bonds. 
Me-SICI 1s n~nufactured by the 
react ion 
SI + 2MeCI a 
Me SICI, 
Scheme 12ml 
The synthesis of 
silicone polymers 
R R  
R R  
l!,$ 
H 2 0 _ [  
12 ] - { \ ?  
\ ?  
\ ?  
\ ?  
o,Si, 
,Si, 
,Si, 
,Si, 
/ 
CI’ 
‘CI 
HO’ 
‘OH 
0 
0 
0 
0 
n 
Silicone polymer 
Unstable 
\p \: 
7; 
Chain terminating groups: ,si, 
,si, 
,si, 
0 
0 
R 
I 
j c  
1 s  
R R  
O R  
R R  
R R  
Chain branching groups: ,Si,o,Si, 
“ 
,Si, 
,Si, 
0 
0 -  
- 
Depending on the conditions used, cyclic siloxanes such as (Me,SiO), 
(12.1) can also be obtained. The chain length of the polymer is moder- 
Me 
ated by adding some R,SiCl to the hydrolysis mixture; this forms some 
Me, 
’ 0 %  
si , ,,Me 
Me O-Siw 
terminal Si-0-SiR, groups (Scheme 12.1 ), which decreases the viscosi- 
ty. Similarly, branches in the silicone chains can be incorporated by 
,? 
F 
0 
h 
including some RSiCl,, which increases the viscosity and decreases the 
be tailored. 
Me 
solubility. In this way the physical properties of the silicone polymer can 
12.1 

174 
Main Group Chemistry 
-L 
CI 
12.2 
P HN- 
I 
12.3 
CI CI 
CI CI CI CI 
\ 4p\ 
4p\ 
N 
N 
N 
12.4 
Silicones are robust materials, resistant to high temperatures and 
hydrolysis, and find a range of applications, including lubricants, 
sealants, hydraulic oils, cosmetics, car and furniture polishes, medical 
implants and contact lenses. 
12.5 Polyphosphazenes 
~~ 
When PCI, and NH,Cl are heated together in a chlorinated hydrocar- 
bon solvent at around 130 OC, a mixture of cyclic phosphazenes 
(C12P=N), (n = 3 or 4) is formed, and, depending on the conditions, 
chain compounds of the type Cl4P-(N=PCl,),,-N=PCl3. The cyclic trimer 
has a planar six-membered ring structure-12.2, however, the tetramer 
12.3 has a puckered eight-membered ring. In both the cyclic trimer and 
tetramer the P-N bonds are all the same, indicating that delocalized (n;) 
bonding occurs between the filled N p-orbitals and empty acceptor 
orbitals (which may be d-orbitals) on the P atom. 
When the cyclic trimer 12.2 is heated more strongly it polymerizes, 
forming (Cl,P=N),? (12.4), a rubbery material. The P-Cl bonds are sus- 
ceptible to hydrolysis, but can be replaced by nucleophiles such as alkox- 
ides (OR-) to give 12.5, or amides (NR,-) to give 12.6, or a wide range 
of other functional groups, to form more stable polymers with a wide 
range of properties. 
The P=N group is isoelectronic with the Si-0 group, so the phosphazene 
materials are isoelectronic with the siloxanes described in Section 12.4. 
Thus, the trimer (Cl,P=N), (12.2) is isoelectronic with (Me,SiO), (12.1). 
Polyphosphazene polymers, like their siloxane counterparts, contain flex- 
ible P-N and 
erties even at 
Si-0 bonds, and so maintain their flexible, rubbery prop- 
low temperatures. 
12.5 
L 
12.6 

Selected Polymeric Main Group Compounds 
175 

I76 
Main Group Chemistry 

Further Reading 
General Inorganic Chemistry 
F. A. Cotton, G. Wilkinson, C. A. Murillo and M. Bochmann, Advuneed 
Inorgunic Chemistry, 6th edn., Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1999. 
K. M. Mackay, R. A. Mackay and W. Henderson, Introduction to 
Modern Inorgunic Chemistry, 5th edn., Blackie, London, 1996. 
D. F. Shriver and P. W. Atkins, Inorgunic Cliemistry, 3rd edn., Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 1999. 
J. E. Huheey, E. A. Keiter and R. L. Keiter, Inorgunic Cliemistrj*, 4th 
edn., HarperCollins, New York, 1993. 
C. E. Housecroft and E. C. Constable, Cliemistrji - An Integruted 
Appruuch, Longman, Harlow, UK, 1997. 
J. D. Lee, Concise Inorgunie Cliemistrjt, 5th edn., Chapman & Hall, 
London, 1997. 
N. N. Greenwood and A. Earnshaw, Chemistry of the Elements, 2nd 
edn., Butterworth-Heinemann, Oxford, 1997. 
D. M. P. Mingos, Essentiuls of Inorgunic Chemistry, Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, 1995. 
I>. W. Smith, Inorgunic Substances, Cambridge University Press, 
Cambridge, 1990. 
Multi-volume Reference Series 
Eneylopediu of Inorganic Chemistrj?, ed. R. B. King, Wiley, New York, 
1994. 
Comprel?ensive Inorgunic Cliemistrj~, ed. J. C. Bailar, H. J. Emeleus, R. 
S. Nyholm and A. F. Trotman-Dickenson, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 
1974. 
C3mprehcnsive Cuordinution Chemistrjy, ed. G. Wilkinson, R. D. Gillard 
and J. A. McCleverty, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1987. 
177 

I78 
Main Group Chemistry 
Miscellaneous 
G. Aylward and T. Findlay, SI Chemical Data, 4th edn., Wiley, Brisbane, 
J. Emsley, The Elements, Clarendon Press, Oxford, 1989. 
J. D. Woollins, Inorganic Experiments, VCH, Weinheim, 1995. 
199%. 
Main Group Chemistry 
A. G. Massey, Main Group Chemistry, Ellis Horwood, Chichester, 1990. 
C. E. Housecroft, Cluster Molecules of the p-Block Elements, Oxford 
J. D. Woollins, Non-metal Rings, Cages and Clusters, Wiley, Chichester, 
University Press, Oxford, 1994. 
1988. 
Solid-state Chemistry (includes silicate materials) 
U. Miiller, Inorganic Structural Chemistry, Wiley, Chichester, 1993. 
A. F. Wells, Structural Inorganic Chemistry, 5th edn., Oxford University 
D. M. Adams, Inorganic Solids, Wiley, New York, 1974. 
M. T. Weller, Inorganic Materials Chemistry, Oxford University Press, 
Press, Oxford, 1984. 
Oxford, 1994. 
Organometallic Chemistry 
C. Elschenbroich and A. Salzer, Organometallics, VCH, Weinheim, 1989. 
Comprehensive Organometallic Chemistry, ed. G. Wilkinson, F. G. A. 
Stone and E. W. Abel, Pergamon, Oxford, 1982; Comprehensive 
Organometallic Chemistry IZ, ed. G. Wilkinson, F. G. A. Stone and E. 
W. Abel, Elsevier, Oxford, 1995. 
Periodicity and the Periodic Table 
D. M. P. Mingos, Essential Trends in Inorganic Chemistry, Oxford 
N. C. Norman, Periodicity and the s- and p-Block Elements, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 1998. 
University Press, Oxford, 1997. 
Industrial Chemistry 
T. W. Swaddle, Inorganic Chemistry: an Industrial and Environmental 
W. Biichner, R. Schliebs, G. Winter and K. H. Buchel, Industrial 
Perspective, Academic Press, San Diego, 1997. 
Inorganic Chemistry, VCH, Weinheim, 1989. 

Answers to Problems 
179 

180 
Main Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
181 

182 
Main Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
183 

184 
Main Group Chemistry 
An octahedron, showing 
the positions of the two 
missing vertices (X) in 
B4H 10 

Answers to Problems 
185 

186 
Main Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
187 

188 
Main Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
189 

190 
Main Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
191 

192 
Main Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
193 

Subject Index 
Acetylides 41, 52 
Alkali metal oxides 39 
Alkali metals 33 
Allotropes 77 
Aluminium 57 
Aluminium halides 6 1 , 
62 
Aluminium hydride 67 
Ammonia 
shapelbonding 10, 96 
solvent properties 41, 
synthesis 96 
96 
Amphoteric oxides 7, 47, 
70, 88 
Antimony 92 
Argon 146 
Arsenic 92 
Astatine 128, 142 
Barium 46 
Bent’s rule 15 
Beryllium 46 
similarity with 
aluminium 55 
Beryllium chloride 47 
Bismuth 92 
Body centred cubic 
lattice 35 
Boranes 63-68 
Borates 70 
Borazine 71 
Borides 59 
Born-Haber cycle 37, 
49, 147 
Boron 57 
occurrence 58 
Boron halides 60-63 
Boron hydrides 63-68 
Boron nitride 71 
Bromine 128 
Bromine oxides 133 
Buckminsterfullerenes 78 
Cadmium 157 
Caesium 33 
Caesium chloride, 
structure 38 
Calcium 46 
Calcium carbide, 
structure 84 
Carbides 84 
Carbon 76 
allotropes 77 
Carbon monoxide, 
complexes 86 
Carbon oxides 85 
Carbonate ion 13, 87 
Catenation 77 
Group 14 halides 84 
Group 16 compounds 
Chalcogenide anions 1 14 
Chalcogens I 10 
cations 124 
Chlorides, trends in 
properties 7 
Chlorine 128 
Chlorine oxides 133 
Clathrates 148 
Complexes 
112, 117, 124 
alkali metals 42 
Group 2 metals 54 
Group 13 metals 73 
Zn, Cd, Hg 161 
Comproportionation 83 
Crown ether ligands 42 
Cryptand ligands 42 
Deuterium 22 
Diagonal relationship 46 
Be and A1 55 
Li and Mg 43 
Diamond 78 
Disproportionation 62, 
83, 135, 152 
Electron affinity 4 
Electronegativity 4 
effect on bond angles 
14 
Fluorine 128 
chemistry 118, 129, 
Fluorite, structure of 48 
Fullerenes 78 
149-1 52 
Gallium 57 
Gallium hydride 67 
Germanium 76 
Graphite 77 
chemistry 80 
Grignard reagents 53 
Halides 
alkali metal 34, 36 
Group 2 metal 47, 48 
Group 13 60 
Group 14 82 
Group 15 105 
194 

Subject Index 
195 
Group 16 118-120 
hydrogen 131 
Halogen oxides 132 
Halogen oxyacids 134 
Halogens 128 
Helium 146 
Hybridization, atomic 
Hydration energy, ion 36 
orbitals 10 
Hydrazine 97 
Hydrides 24 
alkali metal 41 
boron 63 
covalent 24 
Group 2 metal 52 
Group 14 elements 
Group 15 elements 
Group 16 elements 
113 
ionic 24 
metallic 27 
trends in properties 
bond dissociation 
energy 23 
chemistry 20 
isotopes 22 
Hydrogen 
Hydrogen halides 13 1 
81 
95 
6 
Hydrogen bonding 28 
hydrogen fluoride 13 1 
water 1 13 
Hydrogen fluoride 29, 
Hydrogen peroxide 1 15 
Hydroxonium 28, 1 15 
131 
Indium 57 
Inert pair effect 57, 76 
lnterhalogens 137-142 
Iodine 128 
Ionization energy 2, 33, 
57, 157 
Krypton 146 
Lattice energy 36, 48, 50 
Lead 76 
Lewis acid/base 61 
Lithium 33 
Magnesium 46 
Mercury 157 
Molecular orbital 
NO/NO+ 100 
0, species 16 
theory 15 
Neon 146 
Nitric acid 103 
Nitrides 40, 51, 107 
Nitrogen 92 
Nitrogen oxyacids/ 
oxyanions 103 
Nitrogen oxides 98 
Nitrogen sulfides 102 
Noble gases 146 
high-energy species 94 
Organometallic 
compounds 41, 52, 
81 
Oxides 
88 
amphoteric 7, 47, 70, 
Group 1 elements 39 
Group 2 elements 50 
Group 13 elements 69 
Group 14 elements 85 
Group 15 elements 98 
Group 16 elements 
halogen elements 132 
noble gas elements 152 
trends in properties of 
120 
7 
Oxyacids 
Group 15 elements 
Group 16 elements 
Group 17 elements 
103 
122 
134 
Oxygen 1 10 
molecular orbital 
diagram 17 
Oxygen fluorides 11 8 
Ozone 111 
Peroxides 1 15 
Phosphides 107 
Phosphine 97 
Phosphorus 92 
Phosphorus halides 105 
Phosphorus oxides 101 
Phosphorus oxyacids/ 
Polonium 110 
Polyiodides 141 
Polymorphs 77, 112 
Polyphosphates 165 
Polyphosphazenes 174 
Potassium 33 
Proton 27 
Pseudohalogens 98, 132 
oxyanions 104 
Radius ratio rules 39 
Radon 146 
Redox potentials 
alkali metals 35 
halogen acidslanions 
127 
Rubidium 33 
Rutile structure 87 
Selenium 110 
Silicates 168-1 72 
Silicides 84 
Silicon 76 
Silicon halides 82 
Silicon oxides 87 
Silicones 173 
Sodium 33 
Sodium chloride, 
structure 38 
Sphalerite, structure 159 
Strontium 46 
Sulfides 114 
Group 15 102 
Sulfur 
allotropes 1 12 
Sulfur acids 122 
Sulfur halides 118 
Sulfur oxides 120 
Sulfuric acid 122 
Talc 171 
Tellurium 110 
Tetrathionate 122 
Thallium 57 
Thiosulfate 122 
Tin 76 
Tritium 22 
VSEPR 7 
Wade’s rules 66, 89 

196 
Main Group Chemistry 
Water 11 3 
Xenon 146 
Zeolites 172 
hydrogen. bonding 28 
oxygen compounds 
Zinc 157 
shape 11 
152 
Wurtzite, structure I59 
Xenon fluorides 149 



