

An Independent Study Guide to
Reading Greek
SECOND EDITION 
First published in 1978 and now thoroughly revised, Reading Greek is a best-selling one-
year introductory course in ancient Greek for students of any age. It combines the best of 
modern and traditional language-learning techniques and is used in schools, summer 
schools and universities across the world. This Independent Study Guide is intended to 
help students who are learning Greek on their own or with only limited access to a teacher. 
It contains notes on the texts that appear in the Text and Vocabulary volume, translations 
of all the texts, answers to the exercises in the Grammar and Exercises volume and cross-
references to the relevant fifth-century background in The World of Athens. There are 
instructions on how to use the course and the Study Guide. The book will also be useful 
to students in schools, universities and summer schools who have to learn Greek rapidly.


THE JOINT ASSOCIATION OF CLASSICAL TEACHERS’ GREEK COURSE
An Independent Study Guide to
Reading Greek
SECOND EDITION 

CAMBRIDGE UNIVERSITY PRESS
Cambridge, New York, Melbourne, Madrid, Cape Town, Singapore, São Paulo
Cambridge University Press
The Edinburgh Building, Cambridge CB2 8RU, UK
First published in print format
ISBN-13    978-0-521-69850-4
ISBN-13
978-0-511-39356-3
© The Joint Association of Classical Teachers’ Greek Course 1995, 2008
2008
Information on this title: www.cambridge.org/9780521698504
This publication is in copyright. Subject to statutory exception and to the provision of 
relevant collective licensing agreements, no reproduction of any part may take place 
without the written permission of Cambridge University Press.
Cambridge University Press has no responsibility for the persistence or accuracy of urls 
for external or third-party internet websites referred to in this publication, and does not 
guarantee that any content on such websites is, or will remain, accurate or appropriate.
Published in the United States of America by Cambridge University Press, New York
www.cambridge.org
eBook (EBL)
paperback

v
Contents
Authors’ note 
page vi
Author’s note on the revised edition 
vii
Preface 
 
ix
Abbreviations used in the text 
xi
Grammatical Introduction 
1
Section One: The insurance scam 
3
Section Two: The glorious past 
20
Section Three: Athens and Sparta 
30
Section Four: Lawlessness in Athenian life 
42
Section Five: ‘Socrates corrupts the young’ 
57
Section Six 
71
Section Seven: Socrates and intellectual inquiry 
84
Section Eight: Aristophanes’ Birds 
101
Section Nine: Aristophanes’ Wasps 
113
Section Ten: Aristophanes’ Lysistrata 
137
Section Eleven: Aristophanes’ Akharnians 
149
Section Twelve: Neaira as slave 
158
Section Thirteen: Neaira as married woman 
180
Section Fourteen: Guarding a woman’s purity 
200
Section Fifteen: Alkestis in Euripides’ play 
208
Section Sixteen: Ofﬁ cial justice: ships, state and individuals 
211
Section Seventeen: Private justice: trouble down at the farm 
225
Section Eighteen: How Zeus gave justice to men 
239
Section Nineteen: The story of Adrastos 
246
Section Twenty: Odysseus and Nausikaa 
255

vi
Authors’ note
This study guide has been written by members of the JACT Greek Committee for 
use by those who are using the JACT course Reading Greek published by the 
Cambridge University Press. It is intended primarily for those who are learning 
Greek on their own, or with only limited access to a teacher. However we hope 
that it may also prove useful to pupils in schools, universities and summer schools 
who have to learn Greek rapidly and intensively.
The authors would like to express their gratitude for the helpful comments they 
have received from those who have used the Independent Study Guide in its trial 
stages, and from those fellow teachers who have read it with a critical eye. In 
particular they would like to thank Professor Malcolm Willcock who has saved 
them from innumerable errors by his meticulous proof-reading of the trial stages. 
They are also very grateful to him and to Professor Eric Handley for reading the 
page-proofs and to the copy-editor Susan Moore for all her skilled assistance.
Jeannie Cohen 
James Morwood
Carol Handley 
James Neville

vii
Author’s note on the revised edition
A new edition of Reading Greek has been prepared, which gives the reader very 
much more information about the grammar and syntax of Greek and has added a 
great many more exercises to help consolidate learning and understanding.
This revised edition of the Independent Study Guide contains answers to all the 
new exercises and all references are to the new edition of Reading Greek. The 
notes to help with the passages in Reading Greek Text are largely unchanged, in 
spite of the fact that much of the grammatical material in them is also explained 
in the new Grammar and Exercises volume of Reading Greek. It was felt that 
different learners ﬁ nd different forms of explanations helpful, and so it is hoped 
that some duplication may prove to be an advantage rather than an irritant.
I am extremely grateful to Anthony Bowen for his meticulous proof-reading and 
numerous suggested improvements.
Carol Handley


ix
Preface
How to use this course
You have three books:
Reading Greek: Text and Vocabulary (RGT)
Reading Greek: Grammar and Exercises (GE)
Independent Study Guide to Reading Greek (ISG)
In addition there is a CD Speaking Greek which illustrates pronunciation, and 
records readings from passages in RGT.
You may also like to have The World of Athens (second edition 2008), which 
gives you background information about Athenian history and life.
The ﬁ rst two books, RGT and GE, were designed to be used together so that
1. You read the passage in RGT with the aid of the running vocabulary for the 
section.
2. Then you look at the explanations of the grammar in GE.
3. Then you learn the grammar and the lists of ‘vocabulary to be learnt’ in 
GE.
4. Then you do the exercises for the section to make sure that you have 
understood the grammar. You may want to do each section of the exercises 
as you study the grammar in GE, so that you get immediate practice in a 
new feature of language. It is not essential to do all the exercises on 
morphology and syntax, but they will help you to practise the language and 
to make sure that you understand the grammar. However, you should 
always do the ﬁ nal ‘Test Exercise’ in each section, as it is an important 
check on your grasp of the section.
The Independent Study Guide (ISG) contains notes on translating the text of RGT, 
translations of the text, and a key to the exercises in GE.
The notes will give you some general advice at the start of a new section and 
some additional help as you read the text. They are designed to help you with the 
reading and to amplify the explanation of the grammar in GE; they will refer you 
to relevant pages and paragraphs in GE and in RGT.
The translations of the text and the exercises will help you if you get stuck, and 
will also allow you to check whether you have got everything right. Since the 

x 
Preface
translations are there to help you to understand the Greek, they are literal rather 
than elegant in style.
Some people prefer to look at the explanations of the grammar in a new section 
before they embark on reading the text. It is a matter of personal choice whether 
you prefer to look out for new forms in reading, and then ﬁ nd out how they work, 
or whether you like to look at a new pattern of grammar and then see how it is 
used in the text.
In the ﬁ rst section, ISG assumes that you will be using the ﬁ rst procedure, but 
it will work just as well if you prefer the second.
It is always a good idea to re-read the text of a section after you have ﬁ nished 
it. You will be surprised at how much more you remember if you do this. It will 
also help you to absorb more of the very varied vocabulary which is used in 
Reading Greek to provide a greater range of interest and a wider experience of 
the language from an early stage.

xi
Abbreviations used in the text
ISG = The Independent Study Guide
RGT = Reading Greek: Text and Vocabulary
GE = Reading Greek: Grammar and Exercises
WA = The World of Athens
References with no preﬁ x are to the text of this ISG, giving chapter and paragraph 
numbers.


1
Grammatical Introduction
In the Introduction to Grammar and Exercises you will ﬁ nd the Greek alphabet 
and a guide to pronunciation (GE pp. 1–3), as well as a description of the basic 
terms used to describe the grammar (GE pp. 4–7 #1–7).
Reading and writing
Look at the alphabet and the pronunciation guide in GE pages 1–3. If you have 
the Speaking Greek CD it is very helpful to listen to the ﬁ rst section, ‘The sounds 
of Greek’, at the same time.
Exercise 1
Try the exercise on the alphabet on GE p. 3. In their English form the words will 
be:
Byzantium (Busdantion) 
Parthenon
Dicaeopolis or Dikaiopolis 
Chios (Khios)
Euboea or Euboia 
acropolis (akropolis)
Zenothemis or Sdenothemis 
emporium (emporion)
Hegestratus or Hegestratos 
As you see, this is not straightforward. For centuries it was common practice in 
English usage to turn all Greek spellings into their Latin equivalents. More 
recently it has been fashionable to keep to a spelling that is closer to the original 
Greek, but the difﬁ culty with this practice is that some words and names, in par-
ticular, have become so much part of our English heritage that they look strange 
and unfamiliar in their ‘Greek’ form. E.g. we all recognise ‘Achilles’, but 
‘Akhilleus’ comes as a shock.
Editors therefore have to make a decision whether to be consistently ‘Latin’ or 
consistently ‘Greek’, or whether to keep the familiar words in their ‘Latin’ form 
while treating the less familiar words in a ‘Greek’ way. The latter course has been 
followed in this book.
Exercise 2
The words in their Greek form (without accents) are:
 
drama 
δραμα 
comma 
κομμα
 
panthēr 
πανθηρ 
cōlon 
κωλον

2 
Grammatical introduction
 
crocus 
κροκος 
Sōcratēs 
Σωκρατης
 
geranium 
γερανιον 
Zeus 
Ζευς
 
hippopotamus 
ἱπποποταμος 
Artemis 
Ἀρτεμις
 
ibis 
ἰβις 
*Hēraclēs 
Ἡρακλης
 
asbestos 
ἀσβεστος 
asthma 
ἀσθμα
 
charactēr 
χαρακτηρ 
dyspepsia 
δυσπεψια
 
scēnē 
σκηνη 
cinēma 
κινημα
 
Periclēs 
Περικλης 
orchēstra 
ὀρχηστρα
 
Sophoclēs 
Σοφοκλης 
mēlon 
μηλον
 
Euripidēs 
Εὐριπιδης 
iris 
ἰρις
 
*Hippocratēs 
Ἱπποκρατης
Case: Subject and object (pp. 6–7, #7)
1. ὁ Ἡγέστρατος is the subject.
 
τὸν Ζηνόθεμιν is the object.
2. ὁ Ζηνόθεμις is the subject.
 
τοὺς ναύτας is the object.
3. ἡ γυνὴ is the subject.
 
τὸν Ἡγέστρατον is the object.
Hegestratos as subject will be 
ὁ Ἡγέστρατος
Hegestratos as object will be 
τὸν Ἡγέστρατον
Zenothemis as subject will be 
ὁ Ζηνόθεμις
When you have studied the Grammatical introduction you will be aware that in 
reading Greek it is necessary to learn not only to interpret the new script, but also 
to look closely at the endings of words. This is something which we do not need 
to do in English. You will have to train yourself consciously to notice the endings, 
or you will ﬁ nd that you are making avoidable mistakes in understanding 
Greek.
You will ﬁ nd more information about the Greek language in Part B of GE in 
the Reference Grammar (GE pp. 369–463, #340–406) and in Part C Language 
Surveys (GE pp. 465–495, #408–454). However, most of this will be of future 
interest, and you should certainly not try to absorb it all at this stage.

3
Section One: The insurance scam
Section 1A–G
1A
Speaking Greek CD
First, read the English introduction at the beginning of Section 1A.
Now listen to the whole of Section 1A as read on the Speaking Greek CD.
Replay the ﬁ rst paragraph (lines 1–7), pausing at the end of every sentence and 
repeating the Greek aloud.
Then try working out the translation of that ﬁ rst paragraph, with the aid of the 
running vocabulary on p. 5. You will ﬁ nd that several complete phrases are listed 
(e.g. ἐν Βυζαντίῳ) and that all the nouns appear with their articles (e.g. ὁ 
κυβερνήτης).
If you are uncertain, check with the translation suggested below.
NB. This procedure is recommended for the whole of Section 1. It should help 
you to get used to the script and the sound of the language.
If you think you would prefer to ﬁ nd out about the grammar and how it works 
before you start reading, then look at GE pp. 8–12, #8–11. You will ﬁ nd the 
answers to the exercises in this volume after our grammar and notes on 1A and 
1B (p. 6).
Translation for 1A (ll. 1–7)
The ship is in Byzantium. And in Byzantium, Hegestratos goes into the ship, then 
Sdenothemis goes into the ship, and ﬁ nally the captain and the sailors go into the 
ship. The ship sails to Chios. In Chios, the rhapsode boards. Then the ship sails 
to Euboea. And in Euboea, Dikaiopolis gets on board. Finally, the ship sails to 
Athens and the Piraeus.
Grammar
1. Greek, as you see, does not always have the same word order as English. 
This is because in Greek (as in Latin) case-endings, not word order, determine 
the functions of words in the sentence – the subject and object. (If these terms are 
not familiar to you, please see the Grammatical introduction GE 1–7 pp. 4–7, and 
the Grammar for Section 1A–B #8–11.)

4 
Section 1B
2. Notice the various different forms of the deﬁ nite article. They can be 
tabulated as follows:
 
Singular 
 
 
Plural
Nominative ὁ 
ἡ  
τό 
οἱ 
αἱ 
(τά)
Accusative 
τόν 
τήν 
τό 
(τούς) 
τάς 
(τά)
(You may be puzzled by the change in accent. An acute accent on the last syllable 
usually changes to a grave when it is followed by another word. It is a printing 
convention to change this grave back to an acute when the word is printed in 
isolation with no word following it. So you will see τὸ πλοῖον in the text, but τό 
in the above table.)
3. Note also the change in verb-ending between βαίνει (line 2) and 
εἰσβαίνουσιν (line 3):
 
βαίνει is 3rd person singular (‘he, she, it goes’).
 
βαίνουσι(ν) is 3rd person plural (‘they go’).
4. The preposition πρός (‘towards’) in line 6 is followed by the accusative 
case (τὰς Ἀθήνας, τὸν Πειραιᾶ).
5. The preposition ἐν (‘in’) is followed by the dative (ἐν Χίῳ, ἐν Eὐβοίᾳ).
Now move on to the second paragraph of 1A, using the same method.
Translation for 1A (ll. 8–14) (continued)
So the ship sails, and Sdenothemis looks towards the land. What does Sdenothemis 
see? Sdenothemis sees the acropolis and the Parthenon. Then both Dikaiopolis 
and the captain look towards the land. What do Dikaiopolis and the captain see? 
Dikaiopolis and the captain see the acropolis and the Parthenon. Suddenly, 
Dikaiopolis and the captain hear a noise.
Grammar
1. Notice again the ﬂ exibility of Greek word order: you will ﬁ nd that it is 
essential to concentrate upon word-endings and not word order to 
determine the structure.
2. Note slight variation in the verb-ending -ῶσι(ν) in ὁρῶσι(ν) (lines 11, 13). 
If the -ουσι or -ῶσι ending is followed by a word beginning with a vowel, 
or is the last word in a clause, then the (ν) is added.
3. Notice that Greek often includes a τε and καί to form a closely linked pair; 
it means (literally) ‘both … and’, though in English this often seems 
strained, and it may seem more natural, when translating, to omit the ‘both’.
1B
Using the same method as that recommended for Section 1A, listen to Section 1B 
on the CD. Then read it to yourself, before trying to translate it.

 
Section 1B 
5
Notice that in Greek a semicolon is used as a question mark.
Note that καί can mean ‘and’, ‘also’ or ‘even’. Often here it is used in phrases 
like ‘I too’, or ‘you too’.
Page 6
 
3 ἆρα καὶ σὺ τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ὁρᾷς; ‘Can you too see the Acropolis?’ καί 
means ‘also’ and σύ emphasises you. Cf. line 11 ὁρῶ καὶ ἐγώ.
 
12 There is no indeﬁ nite article (‘a’, ‘an’) in Greek, only the absence of the 
deﬁ nite article. Thus ὁ ψόϕος = ‘the noise’, but ψόϕος = ‘a noise’.
 
15 μὴ ϕρόντιζε ‘Don’t worry!’ μὴ is the negative used with imperatives. οὐ is 
used with statements. Thus, ‘He doesn’t worry’ would be οὐ ϕροντίζει.
Translation for 1B
SDENOTHEMIS Come over here, Dikaiopolis, and look. For I see the acropolis. Can you 
also see the acropolis?
DIKAIOPOLIS Where is the acropolis? For I cannot see the acropolis.
SDΕN. 
Come over here and look. Do you not see the Parthenon?
DIK. 
Yes. Now I too can see the acropolis.
SDEN. 
Ο Zeus! How beautiful is the Parthenon, and [how] beautiful [is] the acropolis.
CAPTAIN You are right, Sdenothemis. (Lit. You speak the truth.)
 
 Listen! A noise. Do you hear? What is the noise? Do you also hear the noise, 
Sdenothemis?
SDEN. 
No, by Zeus, I hear nothing, captain. Don’t worry. But come over here and 
look. For I see the dockyard and the Piraeus. Do you also see the dockyard?
CAPT. 
Yes.
SDEN. 
Ο Zeus, how beautiful is the dockyard, and [how] beautiful the Piraeus.
CAPT. 
You are right, Sdenothemis. Hey! A noise. For again I hear the noise.
DIK. 
I too hear the noise again, captain, clearly. So you and I hear the noise.
Grammar
Verbs. Here the other person-endings of the present tense are introduced. Note 
the pattern of endings (GE p. 14, #12):
the regular 
-ω 
-εις 
-ει 
-oμεν 
-ετε 
-ουσι(ν)
the variant 
-ῶ 
-ᾷς 
-ᾷ 
-ῶμεν 
-ᾶτε 
-ῶσι(ν)
Learn the regular ones ﬁ rst. The other endings, which are logical variants, are set 
out fully in GE pp. 19–20, #23–25 and are explained in 1E–F.
EXERCISES
Translate the following sentences: (p. 9)
The rhapsode goes.
The ship is at Byzantium.
The sailors see the land and the rhapsode.

6 
Section 1C
Practice (p. 10)
feminine, accusative, singular  
the city
masculine, accusative, singular  
the king
masculine, nominative, plural  
the old men
feminine, accusative, plural 
 
the triremes
feminine, genitive, singular 
 
of [the] democracy
masculine, dative, singular 
 
for [the] Homer
m., f., or n., genitive, plural 
 
of the atoms
feminine, dative, plural 
 
by the skills
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 1A–B
1A–B: 1
1. fem. dat. sing. 
 6. neut. nom/acc. sing.
   stage 
    breathing, gasping
2. fem. nom. sing. 
 7. masc. dat. pl.
   democracy 
    masters
3. neut. nom. acc. sing. 
 8. fem. gen. pl.
   nerve, sinew 
    sponges
4. masc. gen. sing. 
 9. neut. nom. acc. pl.
   skeleton 
    heads
5. masc. acc. pl. 
10. fem. gen. sing.
   eyes 
    tragedy
ADJECTIVES
1A–B: 2
1. ὁ καλὸς κυβερνήτης 
 6. τὴν καλὴν ἀκρόπολιν
2. τὸ καλὸν πλοῖον 
 7. τὸν καλὸν Παρθενῶνα
3. τοῦ καλοῦ ἔργου 
 8. ταῖς καλαῖς βοαῖς
4. τὰς καλὰς Ἀθήνας 
 9. τῷ καλῷ πλοίῳ
5. τοῖς καλοῖς ἀνθρώποις 
10. τῇ καλῇ ἀκροπόλει
Note that the accent on καλός has changed from acute in the table to grave καλὸς 
in the exercise. This is because an acute accent on the last syllable of a word 
changes to grave when it is followed by another word (unless that word is an 
enclitic GE p. 30, #42). Unless you are planning to learn to use all accents, you 
need not remember this.
1C
Now you will have more practice with the different persons of the verb. Go on 
reading and listening to the CD.

 
Section 1D 
7
Notice the words for ‘where from’ πόθεν and ‘where to’ πoῖ.
The same sufﬁ x -θεν as in πόθεν appears in κάτωθεν ‘from below’.
Translation for 1C
SDENOTHEMIS I do not hear [it], friends. Don’t worry. But come over here and look, 
over here. For I see the markets and the merchant ships. Do you also see the 
markets?
CAPTAIN AND DIKAIOPOLIS We also see them. So what?
SDEN. 
Ο Poseidon, how beautiful are the merchant ships, how beautiful are the 
markets. But look over here, friends.
CΑΡΤ. 
Listen, Sdenothemis, and don’t say ‘How beautiful are the markets.’ For we 
hear the noise clearly.
DIK. 
But where is the noise [coming] from?
CΑΡΤ. 
From below, Dikaiopolis. Why don’t we go down? Come on, 
Dikaiopolis –
SDEN. 
Where are you going? Where are you going? Why don’t you stay, friends? 
Don’t worry. For I see –
Grammar
In this section you met the remaining person-endings:
2nd person plural: βαίνετε (14) and imperative plural: ϕροντίζετε (1).
1D
In this section you will meet another contracted verb, one with an -ε- rather than 
an -α-. You should have no difﬁ culty in recognising the person from the ending 
(GE p. 20, #24).
Page 10
 
1 καταβαίνει μὲν …, καταβαίνουσι δὲ … Notice the word order. The verb is 
particularly important here, so it is brought forward to the beginning of the 
phrase.
 
3 Similarly notice that τὸν ‘Hγέστρατον is brought forward for emphasis. The 
only way we can express this emphasis in English is to say something like ‘It is 
Hegestratos whom …’
 
8 τί with an accent means ‘what?’, but τι without an accent (see line 13) means 
‘something’. διὰ τί, literally ‘on account of what?’, means ‘why?’
Translation for 1D
So down goes the captain, and down go both Dikaiopolis and the sailors. For the 
noise [is] from below. And below, it is Hegestratos that the captain and the 
sailors see. Hegestratos is making the noise below.
CAPTAIN Hey, you! What are you doing? But what are you doing, Hegestratos? What [is] 
the noise?

8 
Exercises for section 1C–D
HEGESTRATOS I am not doing anything, captain, nor do I hear any noise. Don’t worry.
DIKAIOPOLIS Come over here and look, captain. For Hegestratos has something in his 
right hand.
CΑΡΤ. 
What have you in your right hand, Hegestratos?
HE. 
I have nothing, friend, not me.
DIK. 
Ο Zeus! For Hegestratos is not telling the truth. For Hegestratos has an axe in 
his right hand. The fellow is sinking the ship.
CAPT. 
What are you saying, Dikaiopolis? Hegestratos is sinking the ship? But why 
don’t you catch the man, sailors? Over here, over here.
HE. 
Ο dear, I’m off, and I’m throwing myself out of the ship.
CAPT. 
Help, sailors, help and pursue [him].
Grammar
Notice again the way in which the pronouns can be used to emphasise the person 
in the verb-ending, e.g.:
τί πoιεῖς σύ;
οὐδὲν ἔχω ἔγωγε.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 1C–D
VERBS IN -ω
1C–D: 1
1. you (s.) don’t hear 
 6. they go
2. we are looking 
 7. you (pl.) are not looking
3. they remain 
 8. he/she hears
4. he/she does not ﬂ ee 
 9. you (s.) are running away
5. you (s.) are pursuing 
10. he/she/it remains
1C–D: 2
1. ἀκούουσι(ν) 
 6. φεύγει
2. βλέπει 
 7. διώκουσι(ν)
3. διώκετε 
 8. βλέπεις
4. βαίνω 
 9. μένομεν
5. οὐ μένουσι(ν) 
10. οὐκ ἀκούει
IMPERATIVES
1C–D: 3
1. go! (s.) 
 6. don’t look! (pl.)
2. look! (s.) 
 7. go down! (pl.)/ you (pl.)are going down
3. Sailors, pursue! (pl.) 
 8. you (pl.) are going/ go! (pl.).
4. listen! (s.) 
 9. Hegestratos, don’t wait! (s.)
5. ﬂ ee!(pl.)/ you (pl.) are ﬂ eeing 10. don’t go in! (pl.)

 
Section 1F 
9
1E
Page 12
 
1 ὁ μὲν ‘Hγέστρατος … oἱ δὲ ναῦται … The particles μέν and δέ are 
frequently used to make a contrast. They can never be the ﬁ rst word in a 
phrase.
Notice the word order in this passage. The important words are often brought 
forward to the beginning of the sentence or phrase.
Translation for 1E
Hegestratos ﬂ ees from below, and the sailors help, and chase Hegestratos. 
Sdenothemis remains above. Hegestratos looks towards Sdenothemis, 
Sdenothemis towards the sailors. For the sailors are coming up and are in 
pursuit.
SDENOTHEMIS But what are you doing, Hegestratos?
HEGESTRATOS Look, the sailors are chasing me, Sdenothemis. I’m running away. Don’t 
wait, but run away yourself as well, and throw yourself out of the ship. For the 
men are coming up here now.
SDΕN. 
Oh dear! For now I see the sailors clearly. Where are you running away to?
HE. 
I’m escaping into the sea, I am. For the lifeboat is in the sea. Come along, save 
yourself. Throw yourself into the sea, and don’t wait around.
1F
Translation for 1F
Hegestratos and Sdenothemis do not wait around but run away. For the men 
throw themselves into the sea and look for the lifeboat. The sailors clearly see 
their ﬂ ight from the ship, and the captain unties the lifeboat. The lifeboat drifts 
away from the ship.
SDENOTHEMIS Oh dear! Where is the lifeboat? Where is it, Hegestratos?
HEGESTRATOS I can’t see the lifeboat, Sdenothemis – oh dear!
SDEN. 
We are dying, Hegestratos. Help, sailors, help!
ΗΕ. 
I’m dying –
DIKAIOPOLIS Do you see those men, captain? The men are dying. For the lifeboat is 
clearly drifting away from the ship.
CAPTAIN Don’t worry about it. For the men are bad, Dikaiopolis, and they are dying 
badly.
The main new point of grammar here is the conjugation of ‘contract’ verbs, verbs 
ending in -εω, -αω and -οω. GE pp. 19–21, #23–25 sets this out and shows how 
the stem vowel contracts with the endings.You will ﬁ nd it easy to recognise the 
persons from the pattern of the endings.

10 
Exercises for section 1E–F
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 1E–F
CONTRACT VERBS
1E–F: 1
1. you (s.) see 
 6. you (s.) help
2. he/she sees 
 7. you (s.) show
3. they see 
 8. you (s.) make/do
4. we are doing/making 
 9. you (pl.) show
5. they show 
10. he/she helps
1E–F: 2
1. ὁρῶσι(ν) 
 6. ποιεῖ
2. ποιεῖ 
 7. ποιοῦσι(ν)
3. ποιεῖτε 
 8. δηλοῖς
4. δηλῶ 
 9. ὁρῶμεν
5. βοηθοῦσι(ν) 
10. ποιεῖ
1E–F: 3
1. τιμῶ 
 6. ἀσθενεῖ
2. γαμεῖς 
 7. ἐλευθεροῦμεν
3. οἰκοῦσι(ν) 
 8. ἐξαπατᾷ
4. σιγῶμεν 
 9. νοσῶ
5. ἀσεβεῖτε 
10. τιμᾶτε
CONTRACT IMPERATIVES
1E–F: 4
1. see! 
 6. stay (s.)
2. do/make! (s.) 
 7. you (pl.) go, Go!
3. he/she is doing/making 
 8. you (s.) are doing/making
4. he/she sees 
 9. don’t show!
5. don’t show! (pl.) 
10. he/she is showing
1E–F: 5
1. μὴ μένετε 
 6. ποιεῖ
2. δίωκε 
 7. μὴ ποίει
3. δηλοῦτε 
 8. ὁρᾷ
4. μὴ ἄκουε 
 9. ὅρα
5. βοήθει 
10. μὴ βαῖνε

 
Exercises for section 1G 
11
1G
Page 16
 
2  σῶοι δὲ καὶ ἡμεῖς Notice that the verb ‘to be’ is often left out in Greek if the 
meaning is clear. You will meet this repeatedly in this section.
 
 καί Here means ‘also’.
 
3  περι-σκοπῶ Compound verb. It means ‘to look (σκοπῶ) round’ (περι).
 
5 ἡ ἡμετέρα σωτηρία Notice that Greek normally uses only the deﬁ nite article 
where we in English would often use the possessive adjective. Greek will say 
‘the father’ or ‘the safety’ if it is clear from the context that it means ‘his father’ 
or ‘our safety’. The possessive is normally only used to stress ownership, or if 
the context is ambiguous.
 
9 τοὺς ἀνθρώπους Another of the differences in the way Greek uses the article. 
When English speaks of a class of people it does not use the article. We say 
‘Men are lazy’ or ‘Women are clever’, but Greek will use the article in this 
situation. Thus the Greeks would say ‘The men are lazy’, ‘The women are 
clever.’
 
16 σῶον μέν … σῶοι δέ … Note the contrast pointed by μέν and δέ.
Translation for 1G
CAPTAIN But is our ship safe, and are we safe as well? Why don’t I go down below and 
look around carefully? For I [am] the captain: so it [is] my job, and our safety 
[depends] on me.
 
(The captain goes down and looks round. But Dikaiopolis remains 
above.)
DIKAIOPOLIS Now, Ο Poseidon, save us [bring us safely] into the harbour. For we 
always make sacriﬁ ces to you, and you always save people from the sea. We 
are now dying badly: for our ship is clearly sinking into the sea, our lifeboat is 
clearly drifting away and our safety [is] not assured.
 
(The captain comes up.)
CAPT. 
Be quiet, Dikaiopolis. Our ship is safe and we also are safe. So we are not in 
danger. And moreover the harbour is near by. So our safety [is] assured.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 1G
THE DECLENSIONS
1G: 1
1. ἄνθρωπον 
5. ἀνθρώπῳ, ἔργῳ
2. ἀνθρώπων, ἔργων 
6. ἀνθρώπους
3. ἄνθρωποι 
7. ἀνθρώπῳ, ἔργῳ
4. ἀνθρώποις, ἔργοις 
8. ἔργον

12 
Revision exercises
1G: 2
1. ἐστι(ν) 
4. ὁρᾷ
2. διώκουσι(ν) 
5. ἐστι(ν)
3. ποιεῖ 
MORE ADJECTIVES
1G: 3
1. τὴν καλὴν γῆν 
5. τὰ καλὰ ἔργα
2. τοῖς ἡμετέροις ἔργοις 
6. τῷ ἡμετέρῳ πλοίῳ
3. τῶν κακῶν ἀνθρώπων 
7. τῶν καλῶν ἐμπορίων
4. τοὺς ἡμετέρους ἀνθρώπους 
8. τοῖς κακοῖς ἀνθρώποις
1G: 4
1. ἄνθρωπον acc. s. 
4. ἀνθρώποις dat. pl.
2. ἀνθρώπων gen. pl. 
5. ἀνθρώπου gen. s.
3. ἀνθρώπους acc. pl.
PREPOSITIONS
1G: 5
1. in the markets 
 6. from the ships
2. into the ships 
 7. towards the markets
3. in the work 
 8. into the ship
4. from the men 
 9. in the lifeboats
5. from the market 
10. towards the men
1G: 6
1. ἐκ τοῦ πλοίου 
5. πρὸς τὸν λέμβον
2. εἰς τὸν λέμβον 
6. εἰς τὸ πλοῖον
3. ἀπὸ τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
7. πρὸς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
4. ἐν τοῖς πλοίοις 
8. εἰς τὰ ἐμπόρια
REVISION EXERCISES
As you are advised in GE, you should do the revision exercises only after com-
pleting work on text, grammar and vocabulary.
How many of the exercises you do will depend upon your own choice and 
interest. The more you do, the more competent you will become.
The exercises on Word shape and Syntax are designed to help you absorb and 
retain particular features of the language; if you feel you have grasped these 
aspects, then you can omit these exercises or do them quickly.
The Test Exercises, however, you should regard as essential. They have been 
carefully designed so that, if you have mastered all elements of the language 

 
Revision exercises for section 1A–G 
13
required so far (vocabulary, morphology and syntax), you will be able to do the 
Test Exercises without any looking up at all.
If you ﬁ nd you do have to look up a word or an ending, or if you make a mistake 
in your translation, the error or omission should alert you to the area needing 
further consolidation.
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 1A–G
Note the advice on tackling these exercises in GE pp. 33–35
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
 
I go 
I go out
 
I chase 
I chase out
 
sea 
belonging to the sea, maritime, nautical
 
helmsman 
I steer
 
sailor 
nautical, to do with sailing
 
I see 
I see/look into
 
I ﬂ ee 
I run away, run from
B – WORD SHAPE
1. you (s.) go 
pl. βαίνετε
 
I see 
pl. βλέπομεν
 
he/she makes, does 
pl. ποιοῦσι(ν)
 
he/she sees 
pl. ὁρῶσι(ν)
 
help! (s.) 
pl. βοηθεῖτε
2. worry (pl.) 
s. φρόντιζε
 
 or you (pl.) are worrying 
s. φροντίζεις
 
they go down 
s. καταβαίνει
 
we come up 
s. ἀναβαίνω
 
you (pl.) see 
s. ὁρᾷς
 
 or see! (pl.) 
s. ὅρα
 
you (pl.) are going away 
s. ἀποχωρεῖς
 
 or go away! (pl.) 
s. ἀποχώρει
3. οἱ ἄνθρωποι, τοῖς ψόφοις, τὰ πλοῖα, τῷ λέμβῳ, τὸ νεώριον, τῶν 
ἀνθρώπων
4. a. ὁ καλὸς ἄνθρωπος
 
b. τὰ καλὰ νεώρια
 
c. τῷ καλῷ ἐμπορίῳ
 
d. τοῖς καλοῖς ἀνθρώποις
 
e. τὸν καλὸν ἄνθρωπον
Notes on English into Greek
Don’t worry about word order yet. But go on noticing how it works in Greek.

14 
Revision exercises for section 1A–G
If you used ἀνήρ ἀνδρ- for ‘man’ in 3 and 5, you may have got it wrong. Don’t 
worry. You have not yet learned the pattern for this noun, although it has occurred 
in the Text. It would be ὁ ανὴρ in 3, τοὺς ἄνδρας in 5.
C – SYNTAX
1. Hegestratos sees the acropolis.
 
 τὸν Ἡγέστρατον.
2. The sailors pursue Sdenothemis.
 
 ὁ Ζηνόθεμις 
3. Dikaiopolis saves the men.
 
 ὁ ἄνθρωπος 
4. The helmsman casts off the life-boats.
 
 ὁ λέμβος 
5. The men don’t see the life-boats.
 
 τοὺς ἀνθρώπους.
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. Sdenothemis goes into the ship.
 
ὁ ἄνθρωπος/ὁ ανὴρ (ἀπο)φεύγει πρὸς τὸ πλοῖον.
2. The sailors don’t see Hegestratos.
 
ὁ Ἡγέστρατος οὐχ ὁρᾷ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους/τοὺς ἄνδρας
3. Can you not see the Acropolis?
 
ἆρα ὁρᾷς τοὺς ἀνθρώπους/τοὺς ἄνδρας καὶ σύ;
4. Come over here and look.
 
ἔλθετε καὶ βοηθεῖτε. διώκετε τὸν ἄνθρωπον/τὸν ἄνδρα. μὴ 
(ἀπο)ϕεύγετε.
5. The men are coming up.
 
oἱ ϕίλοι οὐ μένουσιν.
E – TEST EXERCISE 1 A–G
The ship departs from Euboea and sails towards the Piraeus. Sdenothemis is 
looking towards the land. But Hegestratos remains below and is sinking the ship. 
For the fellow has an axe. The captain and Dikaiopolis are up above. They look 
towards the land and see both the dockyards and the Parthenon. But suddenly 
they hear the noise. Then they go down.
CAPTAIN Who is making the noise? Do you see, Dikaiopolis?
DIKAIOPOLIS Yes, I see. For Hegestratos is making the noise. For he has an axe in his 
right hand.
CΑΡΤ. 
Don’t wait around, sailors, but help and chase the man.
Hegestratos ﬂ ees from below, while Sdenothemis remains above. The sailors 
come up from below. The men see the sailors clearly and throw themselves into 
the sea. The men escape into the sea, and in the sea they die.

 
Section 1H 
15
1H
Page 18
 
1 λιμένα Check the English introduction above.
 
1–2 ναύτης δέ τις This is the indeﬁ nite τις, without an accent, which follows the 
word it agrees with. τίς with an accent, coming ﬁ rst, would mean ‘Who?’ or 
‘What sailor?’
 
3 λέγει ὅτι Remember ὅτι carefully: it is extremely common, and extensively 
used in this and subsequent sections.
 
4 ῥαψῳδός τις ‘a rhapsode’. A rhapsode is a professional, itinerant reciter of 
Homer, rather like a medieval troubadour.
 
5 ὁμηρίζει Transliterate ﬁ rst, then see if you can identify the person. Note also 
the English explanation in introduction. The -ιζω ending in Greek verbs is like 
our ‘-ize/-ise’ ending. Thus this might be translated ‘Homerise’.
 
 παίζει πρός It means ‘makes fun of’.
 
8 ἐσμεν New here, but the ἡμεῖς indicates which person of the verb this is.
 
 οἶσθα Also new, but pronoun σύ should help. See GE p. 36, #44.
 
9 οἶδα Yet another new form, again reinforced by the inclusion of the pronoun.
 
13 οἴνοπα πόντον A lovely phrase and frequent in Homer, but a problem for 
translators. Literally it means ‘wine-faced’ but it is usually rendered, more 
poetically, as ‘wine-dark’.
 
17 ἐν νηὶ μελαίνῃ This is another common Homeric phrase. νηί is irregular 
dative of ναῦς (line 28) meaning ‘ship’.
 
18 τί τὸ … Literally, ‘What (is) the …?’, i.e. ‘What’s that …?’
 
19 μῶρος English ‘moron’ suggests the answer, though note that μῶρος is an 
adjective.
 
 εἶ Another new person of the verb, also explained by its pronoun σύ. See GE 
p. 36, #44.
 
21 ἐν νηὶ θοῇ, and κοίλῃ ἐνὶ νηί Two more common Homeric phrases.
Translation for 1H
So the captain steers the ship towards the harbour. A sailor asks the captain 
where they are. For the sailor does not clearly know where they are: for it is 
night. So the captain says that they are sailing into the harbour. There is on the 
ship a rhapsode. The rhapsode is always quoting Homer. Dikaiopolis makes fun 
of the rhapsode like Socrates with his students.
SAILOR 
Where are we, captain? Do you know? For I do not clearly know. For I see 
nothing, because of the night, and I do not know where we are.
CAPTAIN I know clearly. We are sailing towards the harbour, sailor.
RHAPSODE ‘We are sailing on the wine-dark sea.’
SAIL. 
What’s the fellow saying?
DIKAIOPOLIS It’s clear that the fellow is quoting Homer. He’s a rhapsode.
RHAP. 
You are right, my friend. ‘We are sailing in a black ship.’

16 
Section 1J
DIK. 
What are you saying, rhapsode? What’s that ‘in a black ship’? For our ship 
isn’t black. It is clear that you are stupid, and don’t know anything, but are 
joking at us.
RHAP. 
Be quiet. ‘In a swift ship’ we are sailing, ‘in a hollow ship.’
DIK. 
Do you hear, sailors? Come here and listen. It is clear that our rhapsode is 
stupid. For the fellow does not know anything accurately, but is joking at us.
1I
Page 20
 
1 εἰμί A new form, person indicated by pronoun.
 
 γιγνώσκω A new word (Latin cognosco).
 
2 ἀπαίδευτος The preﬁ x α- is often a negative one in Greek (cf. English 
‘amoral’, ‘asymmetrical’); παιδ- is the root of the English word ‘p(a)
edagogue’, so the whole Greek word means ‘uneducated’.
 
6 διότι ‘because’.
 
7–12 The various -ικος adjectives here correspond to many -ic/ical adjectives in 
English: e.g. ‘polemics’, ‘nautical’ and ‘strategic’ should help to establish the 
meaning of three. στρατηγός was so called because he was an army (στρατός) 
leader (ἄγω – ‘I lead’). Similarly a στρατιώτης was a member of the army, i.e. 
a soldier; hence στρατιωτικά refers to soldiering, the business of the soldier.
Note the thrust of the rhapsode’s argument: he knew much about Homer – 
Homer knew much about everything – therefore he (the rhapsode) knew much 
about everything. This form of argument reﬂ ects some forms of Socratic and 
Platonic dialectic where an attempt is made to use words in as deﬁ ned a way as 
numbers. Here the effect is ludicrous, although the original idea resulted in a new 
and valuable tool of reasoning.
1J
Page 21
 
1 μία Feminine form of εἷς, meaning ‘one’ (here = ‘one and the same’).
 
5 ἄριστος An aristocracy is rule by the ‘best’ people.
 
11 δήπου Like ‘of course’ in English, δήπου is often heavily sarcastic in its 
meaning.
Translation for 1I–J
RHAPSODE But I am not stupid: I know many things.
DIKAIOPOLIS How do you know many things? It is clear that you are uneducated, 
rhapsode. For you do not know whether our ship is ‘black’ or ‘swift’ or ‘hollow’.
RHAP. 
No, by Zeus, I am not uneducated about Homer. I know much because Homer 
knows much. For Homer knows matters of war, and matters nautical, tactical, 
strategic –
DIK. 
So you also know matters of strategy?

 
Exercises for section 1H–J 
17
RHAP. 
Of course. It’s my job.
DIK. 
What? Are you then experienced in matters of strategy, rhapsode?
RHAP. 
Yes. For Homer is experienced in matters of strategy, and I also am 
experienced [in them].
DIK. 
Are then the skill of a rhapsode and the skill of a general one [and the 
same]?
RHAP. 
One [and the same] skill, Dikaiopolis.
DIK. 
So good rhapsodes are at the same time also good generals?
RHAP. 
Yes, Dikaiopolis.
DIK. 
And you are the best rhapsode of the Greeks?
RHAP. 
Certainly, Dikaiopolis.
DIK. 
Are you then, rhapsode, the best general of the Greeks?
RHAP. 
Of course.
DIK. 
What do you say, sailors? Is the rhapsode a fool or not?
SAILOR 
By Zeus, the rhapsode is indeed a fool, Dikaiopolis. The fellow is, of course, 
the best general of the Greeks, but he does not know precisely whether 
the ship is ‘black’ or ‘swift’ or ‘hollow’. So the best general of the Greeks 
is a fool.
RHAP. 
It is clear, Dikaiopolis, that you are Socratising and joking with me. For 
Socrates always jokes in this way at his students.
DIK. 
Yes. The Greeks are always children.
Grammar
Note carefully the conjugation of both irregular verbs εἰμί and οἶδα (GE p. 36, 
#44): it is essential to know both thoroughly – and although most of εἰμί has 
appeared in the Text, the plural forms of οἶδα have not. Nevertheless it is sensible 
to learn them now and it is worth learning them very carefully. You will, in fact, 
meet them in Test Exercise 1H–J.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 1H–J
IRREGULAR VERBS
1H–J: 1
1. he/she/it is 
 6. you (s.) are
2. we know 
 7. you (s.) know
3. you (pl.) are 
 8. they are
4. you (pl.) know 
 9. I am
5. we are 
10. they know
1H–J: 2
1. οἶδα 
 4. ἐστί(ν)
2. εἶ 
 5. ἴσασι(ν)
3. εἰσί(ν) 
 6. οἶδε(ν)

18 
Revision exercises for section 1H–J
7. ἐσμέν 
 9. οἶδε(ν)
8. ἐστί(ν) 
10. ἐστέ
1H–J: 3
1. You (s.) know about both seafaring and generalship.
2. We both know and see much.
3. You (pl.) both exist and do not exist (are and are not).
4. You know much (many things).
5. Do they know about both soldiering and generalship?
1H–J: 4
1. πολλὰ ἴσασιν.
2. ἔστι καὶ οὐκ ἔστιν.
3. οὐκ οἶδε τὰ στρατηγικά.
4. οἶδα καὶ οὐκ οἶδα τά τε ναυτικὰ καὶ τὰ στρατηγικά.
5. ἐσμέν τε καὶ ἴσμεν.
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 1H–J
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
1. I go away 
I go round
 
I go, come 
I go (or come) round
 
clear 
I make clear, reveal
 
I am 
I am in
 
a Greek person 
Greek (adjective)
 
I wait 
I wait around
 
a general 
I command (an army)
B – WORD SHAPE
1. you (pl.) are 
εἶ
 
he/she knows 
γιγνώσκουσι(ν)
 
you (s.) know 
ἴστε
 
he/she is 
εἰσί(ν)
 
they know 
οἶδε(ν)
 
play! (s.) 
παίζετε
 
I am 
ἐσμέν
 
we know 
οἶδα
C – SYNTAX
1. a. The rhapsode is a Greek.
 
b. The Greek is a rhapsode.
 
c. Rhapsodes (as a class of people*) are the best generals.
 
d. The rhapsode is a fool.

 
Revision exercises for section 1H–J 
19
 
e. The rhapsode is a captain.
 
f. The captain is a rhapsode/A rhapsode is captain.
*This is where Greek uses the def. art. and English does not, to denote a class of 
people.
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. It is clear that Dikaiopolis is teasing the rhapsode.
 
δῆλόν ἐστιν ὅτι ὁ ῥαψῳδὸς πολλὰ γιγνώσκει.
2. I am expert in many things.
 
(σὺ) οὐκ ἔμπειρος εἶ περὶ τὸ ἔργον.
3. Rhapsodes are the best generals.
 
ὁ ἄριστος στρατηγός ἐστι ῥαψῳδός.
4. Do you not know that the man is always joking?
 
ἆρ᾽ οὐκ οἶδεν ὅτι ὁ ῥαψῳδὸς ἀκριβῶς λέγει;
5. You are not skilled, but foolish.
 
ἀλλὰ μῶρος μὲν οὔκ εἰμι, πολλὰ δὲ γιγνώσκω.
Note: μῶρος δὲ μέν and μῶρος μὲν δέ are not permitted. μέν and δέ are never 
used side by side. Likewise οὐ δέ εἰμι is not on: μέν and δέ do not follow nega-
tives.
E – TEST EXERCISE 1H–J
So the ship sails towards the Piraeus, but the sailors do not know where the ship 
is. So they ask the captain where it is. The captain says that the ship is near the 
harbour. Suddenly the rhapsode recites Homer. It is clear that the man knows 
much about Homer. Dikaiopolis teases the rhapsode.
DIKAIOPOLIS Do you know the business of a rhapsode, rhapsode?
RHAPSODE Of course. I also know the skills of a general.
DIΚ. 
What do you mean? (Lit. What are you saying?) For you are a rhapsode, not a 
general.
RHAP. 
Do you not know that the good rhapsode is at the same time also a good 
general?
DIΚ. 
No, but I know that you are a fool, rhapsode. For you are the best rhapsode of 
the Greeks and expert in Homer. On matters of strategy, however, you are not 
expert, nor do you know anything accurately.

20
Section Two: The glorious past
In this section you will practise a third variant of the contracted verbs that you met 
in Section 1. You will add -οω verbs (GE p. 20, #24) to -αω and -εω ones. It is easy 
to recognise which person the ending indicates. These are all in the active voice.
You will also meet a new pattern of verb in what is called the middle voice (GE 
pp. 43–46, #52–54). The active voice describes what the subject does to the 
object. The middle describes what the subject does for (or to) himself, or does for 
his own advantage, and it often does not have an object. The verbs you will meet 
in this section occur only in the middle and do not have an active voice.
You may want to make a chart of the present indicative middle and to add the 
new endings as you meet them, or you may just prefer to keep referring to GE 
pp. 44–45, #52–53.
You will also meet some more noun types (GE pp. 46–48, #55–58) which you 
will eventually have to learn, but you will be able to recognise what case they are 
in from the article used with them.
2A
After reading the English introduction, try reading through the whole of the ﬁ rst 
page (aloud, if circumstances permit!). Then try translating the paragraph, using 
the running vocabulary and the following notes for guidance if you need them.
Page 22
 
1 ἡ μὲν ναῦς The article shows this is nominative; μέν warns you that there 
will be a contrast in the following clause or sentence marked by δέ, as in ὁ δὲ 
Δικαιόπολις. See GE p. 30, #43.
 
 βραδέως The ending in -ως shows that this is an adverb (see GE pp. 22–23, 
#28–29).
 
 ἔρχεται New ending; which person of the verb must it be? What should it 
mean? Sense demands a verb of motion – in fact, the verb can mean either 
‘come’ or ‘go’, and is very common.
 
2 πρὸς ἀλλήλους πρὸς should be known, ἀλλήλους – leave blank for a moment.
 
3 ἡδέως Part of speech? (English ‘hedonism’ may guide you to the meaning of 
this word.)
 
 διαλέγονται Note the person ending; for meaning, English ‘dialogue’ may 
help; then back to ἀλλήλους = ‘each other’.

 
Section 2A 
21
 
4–5 διὰ τί ὁ ῥαψῳδὸς οὐ διέρχεται…; Notice διὰ τί οὐ followed by a question 
mark, ‘Why doesn’t … ?’ You will see the same pattern in ‘διὰ τί οὐ λέγει…;’
 
4 διέρχεται Both elements have been met – the ἔρχεται = ‘come’/’go’, δι- = 
‘through’, hence ‘go through’ as in ‘relate’, ‘recount’.
 
 τὴν περὶ Σαλαμῖνα ναυμαχίαν This is a phrase within a phrase as is shown 
by the linking device connecting τήν with ναυμαχίαν; so the meaning is: ‘the 
around-Salamis sea-battle’. See GE p. 49, #62. μάχη means ‘battle’ and ναῦς 
‘ship’, hence ναυμαχία ‘sea-battle’.
 
5 τί γίγνεται The context should help, ‘what happens’;
 
 ἐν τοῖς Μηδικοῖς (literally) ‘in the Medic (things)’, Μηδικοῖς being neuter 
plural; the Greeks used ‘Medes’ and ‘Persians’ almost interchangeably; the 
phrase means ‘in the Persian Wars’.
 
6 τίνα ἔργα τολμῶσι The context should help you towards the general sense of 
‘what deeds they did’; τολμῶσι = ‘dare’ (τολμάω and its noun τόλμα are much 
used later in this section).
 
9–11 The ﬁ rst three lines are mostly recapitulation of words/phrases occurring earlier.
 
10 ῥητορικά Cf. ‘rhetoric’.
 
11 ἄγε δή GE gives ‘come!’ for ἄγε, but notice that here it is not used like 
δεῦρο ἐλθέ, but more like English ‘Come on!’ – a spur to action and not 
necessarily an instruction to move.
Page 23
 
12 ἐρχόμεθα The verb has occurred earlier in the sense ‘come’, ‘go’; ἡμεῖς 
indicates the person.
 
15 ἡμετέραν Possessive adjective, derived from ἡμεῖς (‘we’), therefore = ‘our’. 
τόλμαν See note earlier (line 6).
 
 νικῶσιν Here the verb is encountered for the ﬁ rst time. See also the noun νίκην.
 
20 οὐδὲν ἴσμεν ἀκριβῶς ἡμεῖς oἱ ναῦται Notice the word order.
 
21 κάλλιστον ποίει τὸν λόγoν The word order shows that this means ‘make the/
your story very beautiful’, rather than ‘make the very beautiful story’.
 
23 ἡσυχάζετε Imperative. GE gives ‘keep quiet’, but note that as well as 
meaning ‘be silent’, it can also mean something like ‘settle down’ or ‘calm 
down’.
Translation for 2A
The ship goes slowly towards the Piraeus. Dikaiopolis and the sailors and the 
captain and the rhapsode are talking happily to each other. The ship is already 
going past Salamis and the captain says: ‘Why does the rhapsode not relate the 
sea-battle at Salamis, and why doesn’t he tell what happened in the Persian Wars 
and how the Greeks and Persians fought and what deeds they dared and how 
many fell?’ The rhapsode gladly relates the sea-battle.
CAPTAIN You, rhapsode, know much about Homer. You therefore know much about 
rhetoric also (for Homer [is] rhetorical, [is he] not?). Come along then, come 

22 
Section 2B
over here and tell us the events at Salamis. For there is the island of Salamis, 
and we are going slowly past Salamis towards Athens. Tell us then the Persian 
Wars and the sea-battle at Salamis and our daring and victory. The Persians do 
not defeat us nor do they enslave us. Tell us what happened in the Persian Wars 
and how the Greeks and foreigners fought and how many fell. For you, my 
friend, know clearly the events at Salamis, and the sailors know nothing.
SAILORS Yes. We sailors know nothing accurately. So we gladly listen. But speak, 
rhapsode, and make your story very ﬁ ne.
RHAPSODE Of course. I always make my stories very ﬁ ne. Keep quiet then, sailors, and 
listen.
2B
Page 24
 
1 These lines are adapted from the opening lines of the Iliad, so they may present 
a few problems.
 
 μῆνιν ‘wrath’ (acc.); this, in the Iliad, announces at the very outset a central 
theme of the poem – the wrath of Achilles, which dominates throughout and is 
ﬁ nally resolved only in Book 24, the very last book.
 
 ἄειδε Imperative, ‘sing’, the invocation of the Muse, goddess of memory, to 
help the poet in telling his story.
 
 Θεά ‘Goddess’.
 
 Ξέρξου θείου βασιλῆος ‘of Xerxes, the god-like king’: in the original it is 
Πηληϊάδεω Ἀχιλῆος ‘of Achilles, son of Peleus’.
 
 οὐλομένην ‘accursed’: in the Iliad, because the quarrel of Agamemnon and 
Achilles led to near-disaster for the Greeks; here, because the invasion of 
Xerxes threatened the freedom of the Greeks.
 
3 ἀποροῦσι A verb for which there is no direct English equivalent: it means ‘be 
in a state of not knowing what to do’. A common enough occurrence – it’s 
surprising we have no verb for this, although nouns like ‘perplexity’, 
‘quandary’, ‘helplessness’, etc. give the idea.
 
 ϕοβοῦνται Another new verb: what are phobias?
 
 πολλή ‘much’, ‘many’, ‘large’.
 
4 στρατιά στρατηγός has been learnt (Section 1J); στρατιά was what the 
στρατηγός led, viz. an army.
 
 ὀλίγοι ‘small’, ‘few’. An oligarchy is rule by a few.
 
5–6 αἱ νῆες αἱ τῶν Ἀθηναίων Notice the repeated αἱ which adds a description, 
‘the ships, the ones of the Athenians’. See GE p. 49, #61.
 
7 κίνδυνος You have not yet been asked to learn this word, but it occurred on 
p. 16, line 16: ‘We are safe, therefore we are not ἐν κινδύνῳ.’
 
 ἀπορία The noun form of ἀπορέω (see above in line 3).
 
8 θυσίας Also above, 1G, line 9.
 
9 εὔχονται ‘they pray’. This is not in the vocabulary for 2B, though it is in the 
Total Vocabulary.

 
Section 2C 
23
 
10 ὑπὲρ τῆς ἐλευθερίας A crucial phrase for a crucial concept to the Greeks, 
ὑπέρ = ‘for’, ‘on behalf of’; τῆς ἐλευθερίας = ‘freedom’. Herodotus describes 
the Persian Wars in terms that often sound surprisingly familiar, the struggle of 
the free peoples of the West against the totalitarian regime of the East.
 
 ἀγαθόν ‘good’ – but neuter gender, whereas ἐλευθερία is feminine. This is a 
common idiom in Greek: ‘freedom is a good thing’. Note that Greek uses the 
article with ἐλευθερία because it is a general idea, whereas English does not.
 
12 τόλμα Not yet learnt, although the verb τολμάω has occurred (2A, line 6), 
and the accusative τόλμαν (ρ. 23, line 15).
 
13 ὅσαι This means ‘How much/many …’ as used in exclamations.
 
14 ἱκετεῖαι ‘supplications’.
 
16 τὴν Ἑλλάδα Note the word order (the subject is after the verb); and this is the 
object. Notice also that it is accusative singular and feminine, so that it is not 
‘the Greeks’, but ‘Greece’.
 
18 ὕβριν Difﬁ cult because not exactly like the English usage of ‘hubris’. Here 
the sense is ‘violence’, ‘aggression’.
 
 τὸ πλῆθος This is a neuter noun (of a type you have not yet met), so the 
accusative is the same as the nominative.
 
19 βεβαία … ἡ … σωτηρία Cf. 1G, line 18.
Translation for 2B
‘Sing, goddess, the destructive wrath of Xerxes the god-like king.’ So the foreign-
ers slowly approach the city, while the Athenians are at a loss and are afraid. For 
the Persian army [is] large, and the Athenians few. Many [are] the Persian ships, 
but few the ships of the Athenians. Great then [is] the danger of the Athenians, 
great their perplexity and great also their fear. So the Athenians sacriﬁ ce their 
sacriﬁ ces to the gods and pray much; they go quickly into their ships and ﬁ ght for 
their freedom. For freedom [is] a good thing.
Finally the Persians arrive and the Greeks ﬁ ght. Great [is] the daring of the 
Greeks and their generals. And in the sea-battle, how many are the shouts, how 
great the perplexities, how many the supplications to the gods! Finally the 
Athenians defeat the Persian ﬂ eet and the Persians fall and they do not enslave 
the Athenians. The Athenians free Greece and save their country through their 
daring. For courage and daring always defeat aggression and superior numbers. 
So thus the salvation of the Greeks becomes secure.
2C
Page 26
 
1 οὐδὲν λέγει Literally ‘says nothing’, i.e. says nothing worth-while, talks 
rubbish.
 
4 οὐκ οἶσθα οὐδέν Notice the reinforcing negative, ‘you don’t know anything’.
 
11 πολλάκις The πολ- element should be familiar; here with the adverbial sufﬁ x 
-άκις or -κις it means ‘many times’, ‘often’.

24 
Section 2D
 
15 ὧδε Means ‘like this’, when it refers to what is going to follow. οὕτως means 
‘like this’, when it refers to what has gone before.
Page 27
 
20 ἔνθα καὶ ἔνθα ἔνθα literally means ‘then’, ‘there’, ‘when’, ‘where’ 
according to context. Here it is used idiomatically to mean ‘this way and that’.
 
21 ἅμα ἕῳ Perhaps needs some explanation: ἅμα is an adverb meaning ‘at the 
same time as’; ἕῳ is dative of a very irregular noun meaning ‘dawn’. The 
phrase thus means ‘at dawn’.
 
22 σάλπιγξ ἠχεῖ Illustrated on RGT p. 26.
 
23 ἐκ … πετρῶν What is the meaning of the English name ‘Peter’? Cf. Matthew 
16.18, and note also ‘petrol’, ‘petroleum’ ( =‘rock-oil’).
 
25 This is taken from Aeschylus, Persae 353–5, completely unadapted.
 
 ἴτε An irregular imperative (corresponds with Latin ite) meaning ‘come!/go!’
 
 ἀγών ‘struggle’, as in English ‘antagonist’.
Translation for 2C
The rhapsode is silent. The captain says that the rhapsode is speaking rubbish. 
Then the captain also relates the events at Salamis.
CAPTAIN You are talking rubbish, friend, and you don’t know anything. So you do not 
make your story very ﬁ ne.
RHAPSODE What are you saying? In what way am I not making my story very ﬁ ne?
CΑΡT. 
Consider. We are looking for the truth, and you are telling us falsehoods.
RΗAP. 
But how do you know whether I am telling the truth or falsehoods?
CΑΡT. 
Listen, friend. My grandfather is a Salamis-ﬁ ghter and he often tells me the events 
at Salamis truly, but not falsely, like you. For you perhaps tell us a ﬁ ne story, my 
grandfather [tells] the facts. Be quiet then, and hear again, sailors, the ﬁ ne deeds 
of the Greeks. For my grandfather tells the events at Salamis as follows.
The sailors settle down.
The Persian ﬂ eet arrives, and stays near Salamis, while we Greeks keep quiet. 
When night comes, the Persian ships sail slowly this way and that. But at dawn a 
shout arises (occurs) and when the trumpet echoes from the rocks, fear develops 
(occurs) at the same time in the foreigners. For they now clearly hear the shout:
‘O Children of the Greeks, go!
Free your country, free your children, your wives!
Now [is] the struggle for everything!’
2D
Page 28
 
2 θεᾶται What one does in a θέατρον, viz. ‘watches’.
 
3 ἀναχωροῦσιν Both elements have been met: χωρεῖ ‘go’, ἀνά ‘up’, here 
combined in the sense of ‘retreat’, ‘back water’.

 
Section 2D 
25
 
4 ϕαίνεται … ϕάσμα ϕάσμα = ‘apparition’. Cf. English ‘phenomenon’ which 
is derived from ϕαίνομαι ‘I appear’.
 
 δεινόν ‘terrible’, occurring in English ‘dinosaur’, a ‘terrible lizard’ (σαῦρος).
 
7–9 ἐπιπλέω ἐπι- in compounds often has the sense of ‘against’, so here ‘sail 
against’/ ‘attack’; likewise ἐπέρχονται (line 1).
 
9 κόσμῳ ‘order’ – with interesting derivations: cosmos = ‘ordered state of the 
universe’, cosmetic = ‘ordered state of the dress/face’. κοσμέω also means ‘I 
decorate’.
 
10 τάξιν ‘arrangement’ – taxonomy is the classiﬁ cation, or arrangement, of 
organisms into named groups (ὄνομα = ‘a name’). In modern Greek ἐν τάξει 
means ‘in order’, ‘OΚ’.
 
 ἀκόσμως … ἀτάκτως Opposites of the previous two words, α- being the 
regular Greek negative preﬁ x.
 
12 oἱ μὲν … oἱ δέ … It means ‘Of the Persians, some … others …’
 
22 μεταβολή Means ‘change’. Metabolism is the change of food into energy; 
similarly, other ‘meta-’ compounds in English have a sense of ‘change’, e.g. 
‘metamorphosis’.
 
23 ὁμονοοῦσιν The elements of the word may help, ὁμο- in compounds = 
‘same’; ‘nous’ has been adopted as a word for intelligence, actually itself the 
Greek word for ‘mind’, which has the same root as the verb νοέω. So here it is 
‘be like-minded’, or ‘agree’.
 
 μισοῦσιν Again English compounds may help – as well as the context. 
Clearly here the clause after ἀλλά is going to mean something contrasted with 
the clause before it; and a few English compounds beginning ‘mis-’ may help 
towards the meaning e.g. ‘misanthrope’, ‘misogynist’.
 
25 ϕεῦ Exclamation of despair or disgust.
 
 τῶν ‘Ελλήνων, τοῦ πολέμου causal genitives.
Translation for 2D
CAPTAIN So the enemy ships approach quickly for a sea-battle (Xerxes the king is 
watching the sea-battle with pleasure), and I back water. And the other Greeks 
retreat. Suddenly there appears the phantom of a woman, very terrible. I am 
afraid of the phantom. But the phantom says: ‘Friends, why are you still 
retreating? Do not be afraid of the Persians but go to the rescue and be bold.’ 
And I quickly sail to the attack and am no longer afraid, and the rest of the 
Greeks also sail swiftly to the attack and move against the Persians. Now we 
are ﬁ ghting in good order and in rank, while the foreigners are ﬁ ghting in 
disarray and out of rank since they are not bold like us.
Finally of the Persians, some ﬂ ee, and others remain and fall. And of the 
Greeks, some pursue the Persians, and others capture their ships and their sailors. 
When the Athenians pursue the Persians, Xerxes also ﬂ ees and no longer watches 
the sea-battle. So the Greeks become free through their courage. In this way the 
gods punish the aggression of the Persians and save the city. And the Persians do 
not enslave the Athenians.

26 
Exercises for section 2A–D
DIKAIOPOLIS You speak well, captain. Now we know clearly and accurately about the 
Persian Wars. But the change in events is now great: for at that time the Greeks 
were friends with each other. Now they no longer agree, but hate each other 
because of the war. Then there was agreement among the Greeks, and now 
there is hatred. Alas, alas for the Greeks, alas for the war!
Grammar
Contracted verbs in -όω: there should be little difﬁ culty in recognising the person 
of these verbs from the endings you already know. Perhaps the most important 
thing to notice is how -ο- predominates throughout.
Much more important are the middle verbs in GE pp. 19–21 #23–25.
Feminine nouns: if you are doing English–Greek exercises, it is important to 
notice the differences between the different types of feminine noun. (See GE pp. 
46–47, #55–57.) For recognition of the case of the noun, it is enough to remember 
the endings for the feminine of the deﬁ nite article and the fact that nouns of the 
ﬁ rst declension may have either -α- or -η- in the singular endings, while all the 
plurals are the same. Notice also the masculine nouns (1d #58) which are slightly 
different in some cases of the singular and the same as the feminines in the 
plural.
Note also the extra vocabulary on p. 51, to be learnt before attempting the 
exercises.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 2A–D
MIDDLE VERBS
2A–D: 1
1. he/she/it becomes/ 
 8. go (pl.) and ﬁ ght
 
happens/occurs 
    or you (pl.)are going and ﬁ ghting
2. we are not going 
 9. he/she/it is afraid
3. they enslave 
10. he/she is enslaving
4. they are ﬁ ghting 
11. he/she is watching
5. don’t ﬁ ght! 
12. you (s.) are afraid
6. we are enslaving 
13. I am not watching
7. go (s.) 
14. he/she/it shows
2A–D: 2
1. μὴ θεᾶσθε 
 7. ἐρχόμεθα
2. ἔρχονται 
 8. φοβοῦνται
3. οὐ φοβεῖται 
 9. δουλοῦται
4. γίγνεσθε 
10. θεᾶται
5. δουλοῦσθε 
11. οὐ γίγνονται
6. φοβοῦμαι 
12. ἔρχῃ

 
Exercises for section 2A–D 
27
NOUNS, TYPES 1a, 1b, 1c, 1d
2A–D: 3
 1. τὸν ναύτην, νεανίαν
 2. τῶν βοῶν, ἀποριῶν, θαλαττῶν, ναυτῶν, νεανιῶν
 3. ταῖς βοαῖς, ἀπορίαις, θαλάτταις
 4. ἡ βοή, ἀπορία, θάλαττα
 5. τοὺς ναύτας, νεανίας
 6. αἱ βοαί, ἀπορίαι, θάλατται
 7. τοῖς ναύταις, νεανίαις
 8. ὁ ναύτης, νεανίας
 9. τὴν βοήν, ἀπορίαν, θάλατταν
10. τῷ ναύτῃ, νεανίᾳ
2A–D: 4
1. τὰς βοάς 
5. οἱ ναῦται
2. τῷ ναύτῃ 
6. τῇ βοῇ
3. ἡ τόλμα 
7. τὴν τόλμαν
4. τῶν ἀποριῶν 
8. τὸν νεανίαν
PREPOSITIONS
2A–D: 5
1. because of the war 
 7. against the enemy
2. against the barbarians 
 8. because of the sea-battle
3. alongside the ship 
 9. because of the perplexity
4. away from the friends 
10. from the armies
5. because of the sailors 
11. alongside, beside the man
6. alongside the Athenians 
12. away from the Athenians
2A–D: 6
1. διὰ τὰς βοάς 
 6. παρὰ τὰς θεάς
2. ἐκ τῶν πλοίων 
 7. διὰ τὰς ὁμολογίας
3. παρὰ τοὺς φίλους 
 8. ἀπὸ τῶν πολεμίων
4. ἐπὶ τὴν στρατιάν 
 9. ἐπὶ τοὺς ἀνθρώπους
5. διὰ τὴν ἐλευθερίαν 
10. διὰ τὴν νίκην
2A–D: 7
1. ἐν τοῖς βαρβάροις 
among the barbarians/foreigners
2. ἐν τῇ ναυμαχίᾳ 
in the sea-battle
3. ἐν τῷ ἔργῳ 
in the deed/task
4. εἰς τὴν γῆν 
into the land
5. ἐν τῷ Πειραιεῖ 
in the Piraeus

28 
Revision exercises for section 2
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 2
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
true  
 
 
the truth
accurately 
 
 
accuracy
man  
 
 
woman
a shout 
 
 
I shout
experienced, expert 
 
experience, expertise
work, task 
 
 
I work, carry out a task
pleasantly 
 
 
I am pleased, pleasure
bad  
 
 
evil, wickedness
I ﬁ ght 
 
 
the warrior, the battle, unﬁ ghtable
stupid 
 
 
stupidity, folly
ship/I ﬁ ght 
 
 
I ﬁ ght a sea-battle
victory/I win  
 
unconquered, unconquerable
I make/do/create 
 
the maker/creator/poet
war  
 
 
the warrior/ﬁ ghter, I make war
I am silent 
 
 
silence
army  
 
 
the army, I campaign, the soldier
I dare 
 
 
the daring man, lacking courage, I lack courage
dear, a friend  
 
I love, friendship/love
I fear  
 
 
fear
falsely 
 
 
I tell lies
B – WORD SHAPE
1. we relate, go through 
διέρχομαι
 
he/she ﬁ ghts 
μάχονται
 
you (s.) fear 
ϕοβεῖσθε
 
they watch 
θεᾶται
 
You (pl.) enslave, enslave! (pl.) 
δουλοῖ, δουλοῦ
 
you (pl.) watch or watch! (pl.) 
θεᾷ or θεῶ
 
he approaches 
προσέρχονται
 
they fear 
ϕοβεῖται
 
I fear 
φοβούμεθα
 
they happen 
γίγνεται
 
you attack 
ἐπέρχεσθε
 
you (pl.) ﬁ ght or ﬁ ght! (pl.) 
μάχῃ, μάχου
2. ὁ ναύτης, τὴν τόλμαν, τῷ ναύτῃ, τὰς βοάς, αἱ νῖκαι, τῶν ναυτῶν, τὴν 
στρατιάν, τοῖς κυβερνήταις, τὴν νίκην, ἡ ἀπορία.
3. ἡ καλλίστη βοή, αἱ ἐμαὶ βοαί, τῇ ἐμῇ ἀπορίᾳ, τὴν πολεμίαν βοήν, ταῖς 
καλαῖς νίκαις

 
Revision exercises for section 2 
29
C – SYNTAX
1. a. τὰ ἔργα τὰ τῶν Περσῶν 
The deeds of the Persians
 
  τὰ τῶν Περσῶν ἔργα
 
b. ἡ στρατιὰ ἡ τῶν βαρβάρων 
The army of the barbarians
 
  ἡ τῶν βαρβάρων στρατιά
 
c. ἡ βοὴ ἡ ἐν τῷ λιμένι 
The shout in the harbour
 
  ἡ ἐν τῷ λιμένι βοή
 
d. οἱ ναῦται oἱ ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ 
The sailors in the ship
 
  oἱ ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ ναῦται
 
e. τὸ πλοῖον τὸ τῶν πολεμίων 
The ship of the enemy
 
  τὸ τῶν πολεμίων πλοῖον
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. The ship goes towards the sea-battle.
 
oἱ ναῦται πρὸς τὸν ῥαψῳδὸν διαλέγονται.
2. The best rhapsode always makes his stories very beautiful.
 
ὁ κυβερνήτης ἡδέως διέρχεται τὴν ἡμετέραν ναυμαχίαν.
3. Then the Athenians ﬁ ght, and the Persian generals are afraid.
 
τέλος οἱ μὲν Ἀθηναῖοι νικῶσιν, oἱ δὲ τῶν Ἀθηναίων πολέμιοι πίπτουσιν.
4. Don’t retreat, friends, but ﬁ ght!
 
μὴ ϕοβεῖσθε, ὦ ναῦται, ἀλλὰ μάχεσθε καὶ ἐλεύθεροι γίγνεσθε.
5. We know that the Greek army is approaching.
 
ἴστε ὅτι oἱ τῶν Περσῶν στρατηγοὶ ἀναχωροῦσιν.
E – TEST EXERCISE 2
So when the Persian army and ﬂ eet are approaching, the Athenians quickly 
embark on their ships and sail towards Salamis. Then both the Athenians and the 
rest of the Greeks keep quiet. Finally the Persian ﬂ eet arrives, and, when night 
comes, their ships sail slowly up and down. And when the day comes, the 
Persians advance swiftly to battle, but the Greeks are at a loss and are afraid. 
Finally they are no longer afraid, but are daring and attack the foreigners. So they 
ﬁ ght in good order and defeat the foreigners. So the foreigners ﬂ ee, and Xerxes 
also ﬂ ees. So in this way the Greeks become free through their courage.

30
Section Three: Athens and Sparta
3A
In this section you will meet the 3rd declension nouns formally. There are a number 
of variants which will be introduced gradually. It is not difﬁ cult to recognise the case 
if you are working from Greek into English, but if you want to feel really conﬁ dent 
and to cope with English into Greek, you should learn each new noun, its gender 
and its stem and any peculiarities as you meet it. See GE pp. 54–56, #66–68.
A simpliﬁ ed form of the patterns can be summarised as follows:
 
s. 
m. + f. pl. 
neut. pl.
Nominative 
various 
-ες  
-α
Accusative 
-α 
-ας  
-α
Genitive 
-ος 
-ων  
-ων
Dative 
-ι 
-σι(ν) 
-σι(ν)
This covers most of the forms you are likely to encounter in this section.
Page 30
 
1 πρὸς τὸν λιμένα The phrase should be familiar, but attention now focuses on 
the ending of λιμένα. τόν indicates masculine accusative singular: the ending 
itself is -α, as above, which may be entered in a grid for 3rd declension endings.
 
2 λαμπάδα τινά Another accusative singular. Notice that the indeﬁ nite τις, 
which regularly follows its noun, is also 3rd declension.
 
3 ἡ λαμπάς The article indicates that this is nominative singular. Note that 3rd 
declension nouns have a number of different forms in the nominative. It is 
important to learn the stem to which the other case-endings are attached (as in 
Latin).
 
10–11 Note the way that Greek echoes the interrogative πόθεν by its indirect form 
ὁπόθεν in reply to the question.
 
13 τὰ πυρά The article indicates neuter plural, as above. πῦρ, ‘ﬁ re’, gives us 
‘pyromaniac’, ‘pyrotechnics’ etc. Enter neuter plural (nom. + acc.) in grid, both 
ending in -α (for neuter nouns in the nominative and accusative always have 
the same ending).
 
15 σῷζε ἡμᾶς εἰς τὸν λιμένα Note the difference in usage in Greek and English. 
Literally, ‘Save us into the harbour’, but ‘Bring us safely into the harbour’ 
sounds better.

 
Section 3B 
31
 
 τίς not interrogative, but indeﬁ nite! The accent comes from enclitic ἐστιν (GE 
p. 30, #42b.)
 
20–21 εὖ οἶδα ὅτι ‘I know that well.’ This is an idiom. No clause follows the ὅτι.
 
21 τὰ πυρὰ δηλοῖ Notice that
 
 a. τὰ πυρά is neuter plural (as above in line 13)
 
 b. neuter plural subjects have a singular verb (GE p. 26, #35)
 
 c. δηλοῖ is here a verb, 3rd person singular (GE p. 20, #25).
 
23 σαϕῶς δηλοῖ The subject is τὰ πυρά (n. pl. subj. followed by singular verb) 
from the line before. ‘They show clearly that …’
 
 νῆες ναῦς is highly irregular (GE p. 64, #74 gives full forms), although the 
-ες ending is also the regular nom. pl. ending and may be entered on the grid.
Translation for 3A
Thus then the ship goes slowly towards the harbour. Dikaiopolis sees a light on 
Salamis. So the captain asks where the light is from. When he sees the light, he 
immediately hurries towards the harbour.
CAPTAIN Come over here and look. We are now approaching the harbour.
DIKAIOPOLIS (Looks towards Salamis.)
 
Look, captain: I see a light on the island.
CAPT. 
What are you saying? Where is the light [coming] from?
DIK. 
Where from? Look!
CAPT. 
(The captain also looks towards the island.)
 
Ο Zeus! It is not a light you are seeing, but ﬁ re signals.
SAILOR 
What are you saying? Do you say ﬁ re signals? Ο Zeus! Come along, captain, 
hurry, hurry and get us safe into the harbour.
CAPT. 
But I am saving you. Don’t be afraid. I am hurrying, and the ship is already 
turning into the harbour.
DIK. 
But why are we hurrying? Is there some danger for us? 
SAIL. 
[Yes], by Zeus. We are in danger, Dikaiopolis, I know that well. We are 
hurrying because the ﬁ re signals show some danger.
DIK. 
What do the ﬁ re signals show?
SAIL. 
They show clearly that enemy ships are coming against us.
3B
New in this section is the word οὗτος ‘this’: so you may wish to have an empty 
grid ready to ﬁ ll in its forms as they occur, or you may prefer to look at GE pp. 
60–61, #69.
οὗτος can be used by itself as a pronoun to mean ‘this man’, or it can be used 
as a demonstrative adjective with a noun (οὗτος ὁ θόρυβος) to mean ‘this din’. 
You will see that in the latter case the article is also used: ‘this the din’. ἐκεῖνος 
‘that’ (GE p. 61, #69) is used in the same way.

32 
Section 3B
Page 32
 
1 oἱ ἐν τῷ Πειραιεῖ See GE p. 49, #63; this is a very common type of phrase. 
‘The [people] in the Piraeus’. Here the article is followed by a prepositional 
phrase instead of a noun.
 
 ταῦτα τὰ πυρά Neuter plural of οὗτος; note the use of the article as well.
 
1–2 πολύς … πολλαί Both are parts of πολύς ‘many’ (as in English ‘poly-’ 
compounds). The full pattern is given in GE p. 63, #73. Notice that in the masc. 
and neuter nom. and acc. singular the stem is πολ- not πολλ- as in the rest of 
the cases.
 
3 ἐν ταῖς ὁδοῖς There is just a small number of 2nd declension nouns which are 
feminine, and this is one of them.
 
8 μέγας ‘big’ (as in English ‘mega-’ compounds) has slight irregularities, like 
πολύς. See GE p. 63, #73. The stem μεγαλ- is the norm except in masc. and 
neuter nom. and acc. singular.
 
8–9 ἡ βοὴ ἡ ἐν τῷ λιμένι Notice the repeated article, ‘the shout, the one in the 
harbour’.
 
14, 15 Notice how ποῖ ‘where to’ is answered by οἴκαδε ‘to my home’, 
‘homewards’.
Page 33
 
20 τροπωτῆρα … ὑπηρέσιον There is no point in trying to guess these! The 
former is an ‘oar-loop’, to secure the oar to the thole-pin (a pin fixed in the 
port-hole) and/or the rower’s wrist; the latter is a ‘cushion’ (usually tallowed 
underneath) to assist the rower in sliding backwards and forwards whilst 
rowing. Each member of the trireme’s crew kept his own.
 
23 παῖς This means ‘child’ or ‘boy’ but is frequently used with the meaning of 
‘slave’ i.e. someone with no authority. This is the meaning given in the running 
vocabulary for 3B and is the meaning throughout this section.
Translation for 3B
When the people in the Piraeus see these ﬁ re signals, much confusion occurs in 
the harbour, and many shouts, and nowhere [is there] order. For it is night, and 
many men appear in the streets and watch the ﬁ re signals. Protarchos and Polos, 
his neighbour, see the men.
POLOS 
(Runs out of his house.)
 
Tell me, what is this shouting? What is this confusion, neighbour? Do you 
know? For great is the confusion, great the shouting in the harbour.
PROTARCHOS (Runs homeward.)
 
Come over here, neighbour, and look over there. Do you not see those ﬁ re 
signals? Look: it is clear that Salamis is in danger.
POL. 
Tell me, neighbour, where are you running to?
PROT. 
I am running home for my weapons. And then I am going quickly to my ship. 
For this danger is terrible and great. But why don’t you come with me?

 
Exercises for section 3A–B 
33
POL. 
Indeed I am coming with you. But wait, friend.
PROT. 
But where are you running to?
POL. 
I’m [going] home for my oar-loop and cushion. For it is clear that we are going 
to a sea-battle.
 
So Polos brings out his oar-loop and cushion, and Protarchos’ slave brings out 
his weapons and his torch. Then the men go towards the harbour.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 3A–B
THIRD DECLENSION NOUNS
3A–B: 1
1. τὸν ἄνδρα, γείτονα, λιμένα, παῖδα, σωτῆρα
2. οἱ ἄνδρες, γείτονες, λιμένες, παῖδες, σωτῆρες
3. τὰς λαμπάδας, νύκτας, πατρίδας
4. ἡ λαμπάς, νύξ, πατρίς
5. τοὺς ἄνδρας, γείτονας, λιμένας, παῖδας, σωτῆρας
6. αἱ λαμπάδες, νύκτες, πατρίδες
7. τὴν λαμπάδα, νύκτα, πατρίδα
8. ὁ ἀνήρ, γείτων, λιμήν, παῖς, σωτήρ
3A–B: 2
1. τῆς πατρίδος 
5. τοῖς λιμέσι(ν)
2. τῶν παίδων 
6. τῶν γειτόνων
3. τοῦ σωτῆρος 
7. ταῖς νυξί(ν)
4. τῷ ἀνδρί 
8. τῇ λαμπάδι
3A–B: 3
1. παρὰ τὸν λιμένα 
 6. εἰς τοὺς λιμένας
2. εἰς τὴν πατρίδα 
 7. ἐπὶ τὸν γείτονα
3. ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄνδρας 
 8. διὰ τὴν νύκτα
4. πρὸς τοὺς γείτονας 
 9. ἐπὶ τοὺς παῖδας
5. διὰ τὸν παῖδα 
10. διὰ τὴν πατρίδα
PERSONAL PRONOUNS
3A–B: 4
1. We are ﬁ ghting, but you (pl.) are keeping quiet/doing nothing.
2. I [can] see you (s.), but you cannot see me.
3. Our safety is in your (pl.) (hands), not in ours.
4. Which of you (pl.) or which of us is afraid of the men?
5. Your (pl.) freedom is in my hands/ is in my power/ is my responsibility.
6. The wicked men defeat you (pl.), but not us.
7. Don’t chase us, men.
8. We are dying, but you (s.) do nothing, but watch us.

34 
Revision exercises for section 3A–B
3A–B: 5
1. ἡμᾶς 
5. ἀπὸ ὑμῶν
2. ὑμεῖς ἡμεῖς 
6. ἡμῶν
3. ἐν ἐμοί 
7. ἐμὲ σέ
4. πρὸς σέ 
8. ἐν ἡμῖν
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 3A–B
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
1. a man 
manly, brave
 
earth/work 
farmer, I farm
 
I know 
I do not know
 
to there 
there, from there / thence
 
experienced 
without experience
 
I watch 
the spectacle, the spectator, the theatre
 
a din, commotion 
I create a disturbance
 
the danger 
I am in danger of, without danger
 
I learn 
the student
 
house 
belonging to the house or family, domestic
 
weapons 
hoplite (heavy-armed soldier)
 
a child 
education, I educate, uneducated
 
I appear 
apparent, obvious
B – WORD SHAPE
1. a. τὸν ἔμπειρον ἄνδρα
 
b. τὴν κακὴν νύκτα
 
c. τὸν σῶον παῖδα
 
d. τὴν καλὴν πατρίδα
2. a. ὁ ἀγαθὸς γείτων
 
b. ἡ καλλίστη λαμπάς
 
c. ὁ πολέμιος λιμήν
 
d. ἡ ἐλευθέρα πατρίς
3. a. τοῦ ἐμπείρου ἀνδρός
 
b. τῆς κακῆς νυκτός
 
c. τοῦ σώου παιδός
 
d. τῆς καλῆς πατρίδος
 
a. τῷ ἐμπείρῳ ἀνδρί
 
b. τῇ καλλίστῃ λαμπάδι
 
c. τῷ πολεμίῳ λιμένι
 
d. τῇ ἐλευθέρᾳ πατρίδι

 
Section 3C 
35
C – SYNTAX
the expert man
the bad night
the saved child
the beautiful fatherland
the good neighbour
the most beautiful light/lamp
the enemy harbour
the free fatherland
3C
Page 34
 
4 δεινὸς ὁ ἐν Σαλαμῖνι κίνδυνος Supply ἐστί.
 
7–8 πτώσσει … ὥσπερ Ἀχαιὸς ὑϕ’ Ἕκτορι The sailor is ‘Homerising’.
 
10–11 μὴ ποίει τοῦτο μηδὲ ϕοβοῦ … Notice that the negatives οὐ and οὐδέ are used 
in negative statements, whereas μή, which will be followed by μηδέ, is used in 
negative commands or prohibitions.
 
17 οὐδεμία Feminine of οὐδείς (GE p. 75, #86).
 
17–18 οὐκ ἀϕικνεῖται Λακεδαιμόνιος οὐδείς, οὐδὲ λαμβάνει οὐδένα … Notice 
that additional compound negatives simply strengthen the negative sense (GE 
p. 75, #86).
 
21 τίνες οἱ λόγοι; Supply εἰσί.
 
24 κρατοῦσι κράτος is the Greek for ‘power’, from which we get our ‘-cracy’ 
words, ‘democracy’, ‘aristocracy’, ‘bureaucracy’ etc.
 
26 Notice the contrast between ἐμπειρίαν τινά and οὐδεμίαν … ἐμπειρίαν.
Page 36
 
28 καὶ δὴ καί Often used at the end of a string of points as a ﬁ nal ‘clincher’: 
‘and what’s more’.
 
29 γεωργοί Compounded from γῆ ‘land’ and ἔργον ‘work’, hence ‘farmer’ (note 
Virgil’s Georgics (farming matters) if that helps ﬁ x the meaning).
 
30 τὸ … ναυτικόν ‘the nautical thing’, i.e. ‘expertise at sea’.
 
 ταύτην Refers back to τέχνη.
 
2 ἄλλως δὲ οὐδαμῶς ‘otherwise nowise’ i.e. ‘otherwise there’s no way [they 
can learn]’.
 
32–33 Notice the order of the words and the ideas, ‘not easily, but with difﬁ culty and 
with much practice …’
 
34–35 ϕησί τις ὑμῶν A typical rhetorical trick, the imagined interjection, ‘says one 
of you’.
 
41 τριηράρχων The -αρχ- element means ‘ruler’, τριηρ- ‘of a trireme’, hence 
‘captain of a trireme’ or ‘trierarch’.

36 
Section 3D
Translation for 3C
Meanwhile Dikaiopolis and the sailors are still talking to each other.
DIKAIOPOLIS Ο Zeus! Terrible is the danger in Salamis and great. Look, rhapsode: but 
where is the man? For I cannot see that man.
SAILOR 
Look, this rhapsode ‘is cowering’ in the ship ‘like an Achaean at Hector’s 
mercy’. He’s afraid of the Spartans.
DIK. 
Tell me, rhapsode, what are you doing? What fear takes hold of you? For you 
are the best general of the Greeks. Don’t do this, and don’t be afraid of these 
Spartans. Look, we are already near the harbour. So don’t be afraid.
RHAPSODE What are you saying? Are the Spartans arriving? I am afraid of the Spartans, 
I am. For those men take sailors and kill them.
SAIL. 
But no ship is arriving, my friend, and it is clear that not one of the Spartans is 
arriving, nor taking anybody, nor killing anybody. Do you not remember the 
words of Pericles?
RHAP. 
What are the words? Tell me: for I do not remember.
SAIL. 
Listen then to what Pericles says in the ecclesia (assembly) about the war and 
about nautical matters: ‘Do not be afraid, Athenians, of the Spartans. For those 
men have supremacy on land, we [have supremacy] at sea. But we too have 
some experience on land, while they have no experience in nautical matters. 
And moreover, the Spartans do not easily learn nautical matters, I know that 
well, since they are farmers and not seafarers. Nautical [expertise] is a skill: and 
this “skill” men learn through practice, as they do other skills, and no other way. 
For you know well that not easily, but with difﬁ culty and with much practice, do 
you learn this skill. “But the Spartans”, one of you says, “do they not practise?” 
I reply “No, but we, since we have supremacy at sea, are preventing them.” ’
DIK. 
And now see the harbour! How many torches [there are], how many warships, 
how much confusion, how many men! Look! Like ants, those sailors are 
swarming into the harbour. Great is the number both of ships and of 
trierarchs.
3D
Page 36
 
2 θόρυβος γίγνεται πολύς Notice the word order. πολύς is delayed to the end 
to make it more emphatic.
 
3 κελευστής Derived from κελεύω. ‘The one who orders’, translated in English 
above as ‘boatswain’ because he was the one who gave orders to the rowers.
Page 37
 
6 οἴκοι ‘at home’. Cf. οἴκοθεν ‘from home’, and οἴκαδε ‘to home’.
 
 που (Without an accent.) This is the indeﬁ nite form of ποῦ ‘where’. It can 
mean ‘somewhere’, but it often makes the statement vague and tentative, like 
‘I suppose’ in English.

 
Section 3D 
37
 
14 παῖ ‘Boy’ is being used in the sense of ‘slave’.
 
19–20 ἢ οὐχ οὕτως; ‘or not thus?’ (literally), i.e. ‘or isn’t he?’ Greek will often add 
the alternative – and note the form of reply, οὕτως γε ‘[He] certainly [is] thus’, 
γε emphasises οὕτως. The answer to questions is often given in the form of a 
positive statement: ‘Is he there?’ is more often answered by ‘He is there’ than 
by ‘Yes’.
 
21 ϕέρε, ὦ παῖ ϕέρε is like ἄγε and means ‘come on, do something’.
 
25 βάλλε εἰς κόρακας Literally, ‘throw [yourself] to the crows’ – a colloquial 
Greek expression meaning ‘go to hell’.
Page 38
 
29 Κυδαθηναιεύς A member of the deme (roughly ward/parish in Attica) 
Kydathenaion, from which Polos came – a normal method of identiﬁ cation.
Translation for 3D
When Dikaiopolis and the rhapsode arrive on land, there is much confusion 
going on. The men keep quiet and watch the spectacle. Near the ship is a boat-
swain, and this man is shouting.
BOATSWAIN Tell me, where is our trierarch?
POLOS 
Clearly at home, boatswain. He’s asleep, presumably.
BOA. 
Alas! Terrible is the danger of the Athenians, and that man is asleep at home. So 
hurry, Polos, and look for the trierarch and tell him about this danger in Salamis.
POL. 
Of course, boatswain.
 
So Polos runs quickly towards the trierarch. Finally he arrives at the door.
POL. 
Boy! Boy! What are you doing? Is the boy asleep? Boy! Boy!
BOY 
Who is it? Who is shouting? Why are you calling me? Who are you looking for?
POL. 
Tell me, is the trierarch inside? Or isn’t he?
BOY 
He is.
POL. 
Come along then, boy, why are you still waiting? Why don’t you call your 
master? For I am looking for him.
BOY 
But it’s impossible. The master is sleeping soundly.
POL. 
What are you saying? Impossible? Go to hell! Don’t joke with me. Why don’t 
I knock on this door? Trierarch! Trierarch! I’m calling you!
TRIERARCH Go to hell! But who’s knocking at the door? What’s this business? Who’s 
calling me? Who’s shouting?
POL. 
Polos, from the deme Kydathenaion, is calling you – me!
TRI. 
But I’m sleeping soundly –
POL. 
But don’t sleep, trierarch: Salamis is in danger. Come and look over there. Do 
you not see those ﬁ re signals?
TRI. 
What are you saying? Are you joking with me?
 
(He sees the ﬁ re signals on the island.)
 
Alas! Wait, Polos. I’m coming quickly.

38 
Section 3E
3E
Page 39
 
6 ὠὸπ ὄπ Not meaningful words – just a sort of ‘in, out’.
 
7–8 τὰς εὐχὰς εὔχομαι Greek likes these repetitive phrases; cf. σπονδὴν σπένδω, 
and θυσίας θύομεν. It would be the normal practice to pour a libation and to 
say a prayer at the start of a voyage.
 
16 κατακέλευε Compound indicates giving time to rowers – ‘Now call the time.
Translation for 3E
Finally the sailors and the boatswain embark on the ships, and the trierarch also 
embarks. And when he gives the order, the boat sails away.
TRIERARCH Call the time, boatswain.
BOATSWAIN In, out, in, out …
TRI. 
Well done! Now I pour a libation to the gods and pray prayers.
 
(He prays his prayers.)
 
Ο Lord Poseidon – for you are the best saviour of sailors and we often sacriﬁ ce 
our sacriﬁ ces to you for our safety – get us safely back to our country.
 
(He pours the libation.)
 
Now call the time again, boatswain.
BOA. 
In, out, in, out. Well done, men. Our ship is sailing away.
TRI. 
Quickly now, boatswain. Give the order.
BOA. 
In, out, in, out, in, out.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 3C–E
ADJECTIVES/PRONOUNS: οὗτος , this; ἐκεῖνος , that
3C–E: 1
 1. τοῦτον τὸν λιμένα 
this harbour
 2. αὗται αἱ λαμπάδες 
these torches/lights
 3. οὗτος ὁ γείτων 
this neighbour
 4. τούτους τοὺς παῖδας 
these children
 5. ταύτην τὴν πατρίδα 
this country
 6. τούτους τοὺς ἄνδρας 
these men
 7. τοῦτο τὸ ἔργον 
this deed/task
 8. αὗται αἱ νύκτες 
these nights
 9. οὗτοι οἱ σωτῆρες 
these saviours
10. ταῦτα τὰ ὅπλα 
these weapons
3C–E: 2
 1. ἐκεῖνοι οἱ λιμένες 
those harbours
 2. ἐκείνας τὰς λαμπάδας 
those lamps/lights

 
Exercises for section 3C–E 
39
 3. ἐκεῖνον τὸν γείτονα 
that neighbour
 4. ἐκεῖνοι οἱ παῖδες 
those children
 5. ἐκείνη ἡ πατρίς 
that country/fatherland
 6. ἐκεῖνοι οἱ ἄνδρες 
those men
 7. ἐκεῖνος ὁ σωτήρ 
that saviour
 8. ἐκεῖναι αἱ νύκτες 
those nights
 9. ἐκεῖνο τὸ ἔργον 
that deed/task
10. ἐκεῖνα τὰ πυρά 
those ﬁ re-signals
3C–E: 3
1. τούτου, ἐκείνου τοῦ γείτονος
2. ταύτῃ, ἐκείνῃ τῇ λαμπάδι
3. τούτων, ἐκείνων τῶν παίδων
4. τούτῳ, ἐκείνῳ τῷ λιμένι
5. τούτοις, ἐκείνοις τοῖς ἀνδράσι
6. ταύτης, ἐκείνης τῆς πατρίδος
7. ταύταις, ἐκείναις ταῖς νυξίν
8. τούτων, ἐκείνων τῶν ἔργων
MANY, GREAT: πολύς , μέγας
3C–E: 4
1. πολλοὺς λιμένας 
many harbours
2. πολλαὶ λαμπάδες 
many lights/lamps
3. πολλοὶ γείτονες 
many neighbours
4. πολὺς πόλεμος 
much war
5. πολλὰ ὅπλα 
many weapons
6. πολλὰς νύκτας 
many nights
7. πολλὴ ἀπορία 
much perplexity
3C–E: 5
1. μέγαν λιμένα 
a big harbour
2. μεγάλη λαμπάς 
a great light
3. μεγάλοι γείτονες 
big neighbours
4. μέγα ἔργον 
a great deed
5. μεγάλας πατρίδας 
large countries
6. μέγας ἄνηρ 
a big man
3C–E: 6
1. πολλοῦ καὶ μεγάλου λιμένος
2. πολλῷ καὶ μεγάλῳ ἀνθρώπῳ
3. πολλῆς καὶ μεγάλης λαμπάδος
4. πολλῶν καὶ μεγάλων λόγων

40 
Revision exercises for section 3C–E
5. πολλοῖς καὶ μεγάλοις ἐργοῖς
6. πολλῇ καὶ μεγάλῃ ἀπορίᾳ
IRREGULAR NOUNS
3C–E: 7 
1. διὰ τὸν Δία 
4. πρὸς τὸν Δία
2. παρὰ τὰς ναῦς 
5. ἐπὶ τὰς ναῦς
3. εἰς τὴν ναῦν
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 3C–E
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
1. οὕτως ‘thus’, οὗτος ‘this’;
 
βοηθέω ‘I help’, βοή ‘a shout’ + θέω ‘I run’ = ‘I run to the help of’;
 
κελεύω ‘I order’, κατακελεύω ‘I give the time’, κελευστής ‘orderer’, i.e. 
 (speciﬁ cally in this chapter) ‘boatswain’;
 
ὑμέτερος ‘your’ (belonging to lots of you), ὑμεῖς ‘you’ (pl.);
 
σπένδω ‘I pour a libation’, σπονδή ‘libation’;
 
ἐκεῖσε ‘over there’, ἐκεῖνος ‘that (there)’;
 
ἔνδον ‘inside’, ἐν ‘in’;
 
βοή ‘a shout’, βοάω ‘I shout’;
 
ἔμπειρος ‘experienced’, ἐμπειρία ‘experience’;
 
εὔχομαι ‘I pray’, εὐχή ‘prayer’;
 
ἡμεῖς ‘we’, ἡμέτερος ‘our’.
B – WORD SHAPE
1. a. τοῦτον τὸν ἄνδρα
 
b. ταῦτα τὰ ἔργα
 
c. ταύτην τὴν λαμπάδα
 
d. τὰς βοὰς ταύτας
 
e. τούτους τοὺς λιμένας
2. a. οὗτος ὁ γείτων
 
b. αὗται αἱ λαμπάδες
 
c. τὰ πυρὰ ταῦτα
 
d. ἡ πατρὶς αὕτη
 
e. οὗτοι oἱ ἄνδρες
3. a. μέγα τὸ ἔργον
 
b. πολλὴν ἐμπειρίαν
 
c. μέγαν λιμένα
 
d. πολλὰ δεινά

 
Revision exercises for section 3C–E 
41
C – SYNTAX
1. this man; these deeds; this lamp; these shouts; these harbours.
2. this neighbour; these lamps; these ﬁ re-signals; this country; these men.
3. great is the deed; the men have much experience in naval matters; the 
captain steers towards a great harbour; the sailor sees many strange things.
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. So the captain looks quickly towards Salamis.
 
ἡ οὖν ναῦς πρὸς ἐκεῖνον τὸν λιμένα βραδέως πλεῖ.
2. For great is the danger of the Athenians, and great the confusion of the 
men.
 
μέγας μὲν γὰρ ὁ θόρυβος, πολλαὶ δὲ αἱ βοαί, πολλοὶ δὲ (ἄνθρωποι/
ἄνδρες) ϕαίνονται.
3. Don’t you know whether those men are sailors or not?
 
οὐχ οἶδα πότερον ἐκεῖνος (ὁ ἄνθρωπος/ἀνήρ) στρατηγός ἐστιν ἢ οὔ.
4. This good captain does not hear these shouts.
 
ἐκεῖνος ὁ μῶρος ῥαψῳδὸς ϕοβεῖται τούτους τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους.
5. That man is stupid about many things, but this man [is stupid] about 
nothing.
 
ἐκεῖναι μὲν γὰρ ἔμπειροι περὶ πολλά, αὕτη δὲ οὔ.
E – TEST EXERCISE 3C–E
While this ship is sailing past the island, Dikaiopolis sees a light on the island. 
The captain knows well that it is not a light but the ﬁ re signals. So he hurries into 
the harbour: for those ﬁ re signals reveal that the enemy are attacking the 
Athenians. The men in the harbour watch the ﬁ re signals and run home for their 
weapons. For they know that the danger is great. Great fear seizes the rhapsode. 
For he fears the Spartans. The sailors say that the Athenians are supreme at sea, 
and the Spartans by land. And the Spartans do not easily learn nautical technique. 
So when the ship arrives in the harbour, Dikaiopolis and the rhapsode go towards 
the ships. And it is clear that these ships are going to a sea-battle. For the boat-
swains are looking for the trierarchs, but they are sleeping peacefully. Finally 
these trierarchs arrive at the harbour and get on board. Then they offer their sac-
riﬁ ces and pour their libations and put out to sea.
EXERCISE
Note: there are many more possible answers
 
1. εἰς τὸν λιμένα (3) 
ἐπὶ τοὺς Ἀθηναίους (4)
 
2. ἐπέρχονται (4) 
θεῶνται (4) 
τρέχουσιν (5)
 
3. λαμπάδα ὁρᾷ (1) 
θεῶνται τὰ πυρά (4, 5)
 
4. (a) μέγας (5) 
(b) ναυτικήν (9) 
(c) δῆλον (11)

42
Section Four: Lawlessness in Athenian life
In this Section, the new grammatical material includes the use of participles – of 
the verb ‘to be’ in Sections A–B, of active and middle verbs in Sections C–D.
Participles are very widely used in Greek: this means, in effect, that you 
should observe carefully the way they are used and not move on from Section 4 
until you are quite happy with all the usages of participles encountered in this 
Section.
There are also more types of 3rd declension nouns, adjectives and pronouns 
(see GE pp.70–72, #77–80).
4A
Page 42
 
1 ὅσον πλῆθος Once again the exclamatory use of ὅσος. πλῆθος is neuter (GE 
p. 71, #78) so the two agree. ‘What a great crowd … !’
 
2 τὰ τείχη τεῖχος is another neuter noun of the 3rd declension like πλῆθος. The 
Long Walls joined Athens to the Piraeus. See the map on page 38 of RGT.
 
3 πυράς τινας The meaning should be clear (cf. τὰ πυρά in Section 3) but note 
that here we have the acc. pl. of another noun, ἡ πυρά ‘funeral pyre’.
 
4 πρὸς τῶν θεῶν ‘by the gods’ – the case usage will be explained later.
 
 δαίμων English ‘demon’ is derived from this word, but note that the Greek 
has no ‘bad’ implications – it is a neutral term meaning ‘god’, ‘divine spirit’.
 
6 κακοδαίμων ‘ill-starred’ is perhaps the closest English can get to this idea. 
It means the opposite of ‘divinely favoured’: some god is wishing evil upon 
you. This is a 3rd declension adjective (see GE p. 73, #82). The endings are 
just the same as in the nouns like λιμήν, which you have learned (see GE p. 54, 
#66).
 
8 Notice πρῶτον μὲν …, ἔπειτα δέ …, a common pairing.
 
10–11 ναύτης ὤν ‘being a sailor’. This is the ﬁ rst example of the present participle. 
Participles have a wide range of usages in Greek (see GE p. 77–78, #88). When 
translating, it is often best to translate literally ﬁ rst, however un-English it may 
seem, then re-phrase more idiomatically. Here, for example, you might begin 
with ‘he, being a sailor, likes Pericles’ before modifying to another clause 
– ‘because/as/since he is a sailor, he likes Pericles’.
 
11 Similarly, γεωργὸς ὤν ‘because/as/since I’m a farmer’.

 
Section 4A 
43
Page 43
 
12–13 Note how μέν and δέ are used to point the contrast between ‘us’ and the 
Lacedaemonians.
 
 κρατοῦμεν As on p. 36 line 35, ‘we are superior/supreme’, and then 
understand κρατοῦσι in the next phrase.
 
13 καταλείπετε Note the -λειπ- element in the middle, with the basic sense of 
‘leave’. The policy of Pericles explained here was that it was not safe to risk a 
major land battle against the Spartans; therefore the countryside of Attica could 
not be defended and the advice was given to farmers to abandon their property 
and take refuge in Athens where the city, the Long Walls and Piraeus, could be 
defended, while Athens waged war by sea (Thucydides 2.13–17).
 
15–16 πόλις … ἄνδρες Cf. Thucydides 7.77; ‘It is men who make a city 
and not walls or ships with no men inside them.’ See also Sophocles, O.T. 
56–7.
 
19–20 τὰ δὲ πρόβατα … διαπεμπόμεθα So that’s what Dikaiopolis was doing over 
in Euboea way back in Section 1A!
Page 44
 
21 πολλοὶ ὄντες Another form of the participle. Deduce number, case and 
gender from πολλοί and enter in grid. See GE p. 77, #87 for the full 
paradigm of the participle. Notice that the endings are almost the same as the 
adjectives, but that the stem of the adjectives is -oν- and the stem of the 
participle is -oντ-. Also there is a separate feminine, as you will see in line 40 
below.
 
23 οὔσας Use ὀλίγας to determine which form this is. This is the feminine form 
of the participle. The number, case and gender show that it agrees with τὰς 
οἰκήσεις.
 
24 νόσος Distinguish carefully from νήσος. The English introduction, RGT 
p. 41, has already mentioned the plague which devastated Athens: νόσος 
generally means ‘disease’, here speciﬁ cally ‘the plague’.
 
25 οὖσα δεινή is here the clue to determining the form.
 
27 ὀλοϕύρομαι You may be able to deduce the meaning of this from the 
illustration on p. 42.
 
28 τὸν ἐμὸν υἱόν, οὐκέτ᾽ ὄντα ‘my son, no longer being’, ‘my son who is no 
longer alive’. The verb ‘to be’ is often used in the sense of ‘to be alive’, ‘to 
exist’.
 
29 οὖσαν Agreeing with τὴν ἐμὴν γυναῖκα, so which form?
 
30–31 κακοδαίμονα ὄντα, κακοδαίμονα … οὖσαν, κακοδαίμονας ὄντας These 
show clearly the similarities and differences between the participle and the 
adjective. Note the adjective stem without a ‘τ’ and the participle stem with 
one, and that the adjective does not have a separate feminine form whereas the 
participle does.
 
31 τοὺς ἐν τῇ πόλει ‘the people in the city’ (remember GE p. 49, #63).

44 
Section 4B
Translation for 4A
RHAPSODE Heracles! What a lot of people! The walls seem full. Why has the city such a 
great crowd, Dikaiopolis? Alas! What’s this? I see funeral pyres. Tell me, by 
the gods, what’s the reason? Indeed it is clear that some evil god is punishing 
the city.
DIKAIOPOLIS The city is indeed unfortunate, rhapsode, the crowd is unfortunate and the 
farmers in particular are unfortunate. The war is primarily responsible, and then 
also Pericles. 
RHAP. 
But Pericles [is] a very good general. For the sailor – 
DIK. 
But it is clear that that man likes Pericles because he’s a sailor. But I’m not a 
sailor but a farmer. Since I’m a farmer, I think Pericles [is] responsible. For he 
says: ‘We have supremacy at sea, but the Spartans [have supremacy] on land. 
So leave your homes, farmers, and your land, and bring your property into the 
city. Do not worry. For a city is not dwellings or land, but men.’
 
 So, in this way Pericles persuades us, since he is a persuasive orator. We 
bring in from the country our children and our wives and the rest of our 
property. The ﬂ ocks we transport across to Euboea.
 
 When we – and there are many of us – arrive in the city, the situation 
becomes difﬁ cult. The city-people have the houses, which are few, and we live 
ﬁ rst in the Long Walls, then in the temples. After this the plague occurs; it is 
terrible and destroys many men, many women, many children. The plague also 
destroys my household. For I am still lamenting my own son, who is no longer, 
and my own wife, who is no longer. There you have the situation. You see me, 
rhapsode, who am ill-starred. You see the city, also ill-starred. You see the 
[people] in the city, also ill-starred.
4B
Page 45
 
2 βαρύς ‘heavy’, cf. English ‘barometer’ etc. You will not meet this type of 3rd 
declension adjective properly until Section 10.
 
3 νεκρός Cf. English ‘necromancy’, ‘necrophilia’.
 
 βαρὺν ὄντα This is accusative and refers to the νεκρός, which is now the 
object of ϕέρω. ‘I carry it, being heavy, slowly.’
 
11 ὦ ’νθρωπε = ὦ ἄνθρωπε.
 
12 ὢ τῆς ὕβρεως The case is a genitive of exclamation. It will be explained later 
– for the present, ‘What violence/aggression!’ Similarly with ὢ τῆς ἀνομίας 
(15) and ὢ τῆς ἀσεβείας (16).
Page 46
 
21 σέβομαι Cf. ἀσέβεια, and τοὺς ἀσεβεῖς (line 28) and τοὺς εὐσεβεῖς (line 
28). They are all from the same root.
 
25 ὥσπερ πρόβατα Our idiom is ‘like ﬂ ies’.

 
Section 4B 
45
 
33 ἐϕήμεροι English ‘ephemeral’ helps, but note the literal meaning ‘lasting for 
one day’ (ἡμέρα ‘day’).
 
35 Pindar quotation, ‘Man is the dream of a shadow’, a comment on the 
transience of human existence. The young man is depicted here as exhibiting 
the sort of moral deterioration which Thucydides describes as one of the 
effects of the plague (Thuc. 2.53). He no longer sees any point in trying to 
observe the old religion and morality. The only deity he has any time for is 
Aphrodite.
 
39 ἡ θεός There is a noun ἡ θεά, but θεός as a feminine form is more common.
Translation for 4B
YOUNG MAN Look, a pyre. Come here, boy, quickly!
SLAVE 
Wait, master, wait and don’t hurry. For this corpse is heavy, and as it’s heavy, 
I’m carrying it slowly.
DIKAIOPOLIS What are you saying? You are carrying a corpse?
Y.Μ. 
Come on, boy, throw the corpse onto this pyre.
DIK. 
But what are you doing? Don’t do this, by the gods, stop!
Y.Μ. 
Don’t get in my way, fellow.
DIK. 
Foul [man]! Are you hitting me, a citizen? What aggressive behaviour! Don’t 
hit [me].
OLD MAN What’s this? What are these shouts? You there, what are you doing? Are you 
hitting a citizen? What lawlessness! Stop! Alas, what’s this? Are you throwing 
a corpse onto that pyre? What irreverence! Stop –
Y.Μ. 
Don’t get in my way, old man.
O.Μ. 
But today I am burying my son, and it is my pyre.
Y.Μ. 
I don’t care.
O.M. 
Do you not reverence the gods? Do you not honour the laws of man? Does  
nothing stop you, neither fear of the gods nor the laws of men?
Y.Μ. 
What are you saying? Corpses are falling upon corpses, men are dying like ﬂ ies 
in their homes and in the temples. And do you speak to me of gods and laws? 
You fool – the gods either don’t exist or don’t care about us, since the plague is 
destroying both the pious and the impious alike. Where are my mother and 
father, who were always pious? Now where is my brother, the most pious of 
men? Look.
 
 And don’t talk to me about laws and aggressive behaviour. For I’m not afraid 
of punishment. Don’t you know that men are short-lived? What are we? What 
are we not?
 
‘Man is the dream of a shadow.’
O.Μ. 
Stop, stop! You are dishonouring the gods, though you are a mortal.
Y.M. 
But I don’t dishonour the gods. I honour Aphrodite particularly. She is a 
beautiful and kindly goddess. Since the goddess is beautiful and kindly, she 
makes life happy. So I’m turning to Aphrodite and pleasure, because they are 
ﬁ ne.

46 
Exercises for section 4A–B
DIK. 
Are you surprised, rhapsode, that I hate the city because I am a farmer, and 
long for my own deme? For in the city there is nothing other than lawlessness 
and impiety and plague and a great quantity of corpses.
Grammar
Grammar for this part of Section 4 is given at GE pp. 70–72, #77–80 and pp. 
73–76, #81–86.
Check that you know it and understand it.
There is also some vocabulary to be learnt (p. 70), before you try the exercises.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 4A–B
TYPE 3 NOUNS
4A–B: 1
 1. οἱ πρέσβεις
 2. τὴν οἴκησιν, πόλιν, τάξιν
 3. τὰ ἄστη, πλήθη, πράγματα, σκεύη
 4. τοὺς πρέσβεις
 5. τὰς οἰκήσεις, πόλεις, τάξεις
 6. ὁ πρέσβυς
 7. τὸ ἄστυ, πλῆθος, πρᾶγμα
 8. τὸν πρέσβυν
 9. ἡ οἴκησις, πόλις, τάξις
10. αἱ οἰκήσεις, πόλεις, τάξεις
4A–B: 2
1. τῷ πλήθει 
 6. τῷ ἄστει
2. τοῖς ἄστεσι(ν) 
 7. τοῦ πρέσβεως
3. τῇ πόλει 
 8. τοῦ πλήθους
4. τοῦ πράγματος 
 9. τῷ πράγματι
5. τῶν πρέσβεων 
10. ταῖς πόλεσι(ν)
TYPE 3 ADJECTIVES, τις, τι, οὐδείς οὐδεμία οὐδέν
4A–B: 3
1. πλῆθος – εὖφρον, τι, οὐδέν
2. πόλιν – εὔφρονα, τινά, οὐδεμίαν
3. πρέσβεις – εὔφρονες, τινες, εὔφρονας, τινάς
4. ἄστυ – εὔφρον, τι, οὐδέν
5. οἰκήσεις – εὔφρονες, τινές, εὔφρονας, τινάς
6. τάξις – εὔφρων, τις, οὐδεμία
7. σκεύη – εὔφρονα, τινά

 
Revision exercises for section 4A–B 
47
4A–B: 4
1. πλήθει – εὔφρονι, τινί, οὐδενί
2. πράγματος – εὔφρονος, τινος, οὐδενός
3. πρέσβεων – εὐφρόνων, τινῶν
4. τάξεως – εὔφρονος, τινός, οὐδενός
5. πόλει – εὔφρονι, τινί, οὐδενί
6. ἄστεσι – εὔφροσι(ν), τισι(ν)
Check that you understand GE pp. 76–78, #87–88 before trying the next exer-
cises.
PRESENT PARTICIPLES
4A–B: 5
1. ὄντες 
 6. ὄντες
2. οὖσα 
 7. ὄν
3. ὄντες, ὄντας 
 8. οὖσαν
4. ὄντα 
 9. οὖσαι
5. ὄντα 
10. ὤν
4A–B: 6
1. οὖσαν
2. ὄν
3. ὄντες
4. ὤν
5. οὖσαν
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 4A–B
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
Once again, do not be surprised if you cannot ‘deduce’ all the meanings.
Note that nouns which end in -σις normally express the doing of something, 
whereas nouns which end in -μα describe a thing done: e.g. ποίησις = ‘making 
poetry’, but ποίημα is ‘a poem’.
1. Uneducated 
education, lesson
 
I die, mortal 
immortal, death
 
I become 
origin, genesis
 
I reveal, show 
revelation
 
I embark 
embarkation
 
I ask 
question
 
I seek 
search
 
I watch 
spectacle
 
I call 
calling, summons

48 
Revision exercises for section 4A–B
 
beautiful 
beauty
 
I am powerful 
strength, power
 
I learn 
learning (the process), learning (the 
 
thing learned)
 
I make, do, create 
poem, poetic art
 
general 
stratagem
 
army 
army, expedition
 
quickly 
speed
 
I honour 
honour, dishonoured
 
I dare 
recklessness, daring deed
 
falsely 
falsehood, lie
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1. a. κακοδαίμων ὤν / οὖσα (masc. or fem.) …
 
b. ἡμεῖς ὀλίγοι ὄντες … ὑμᾶς πολλοὺς ὄντας.
 
c. ϕίλαι οὖσαι, ὦ γυναῖκες …
 
d. ἐγώ, Ἀθηναῖος ὢν καὶ εὐδαίμων, … σέ, Λακεδαιμόνιον ὄντα καὶ 
  κακοδαίμονα.
 
e. τίς ὢν σύ … ;
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. Since I am a mortal, I do not dishonour the gods.
 
σὺ γεωργὸς ὢν οἶσθα τοὺς νόμους.
2. The Athenians defeat by sea those men who are experienced on land.
 
ναῦται ὄντες, κατὰ θάλατταν κρατοῦμεν.
3. I do not honour the city, though it is beautiful.
 
τὸ τῶν νεκρῶν πλῆθος, μέγα ὄν, οὐ ϕοβοῦμαι.
4. This general, since he is very good, is not afraid of the Spartans who are 
hostile.
 
ἡ ἐμὴ γυνή, κακοδαίμων οὖσα, ϕοβεῖται τὴν νόσον, κακὴν οὖσαν.
5. The people, who are unlucky, honour the gods’ laws, which are very good.
 
τὸ πλῆθος, ἀγαθὸν ὄν, οὐκ ἀτιμάζει τοὺς θεούς, μεγάλους ὄντας.
E – TEST EXERCISE 4A–B
YOUNG MAN Come over here and tell [me]. Why are you lamenting, friend? Are you 
lamenting a son, who is ill-fated, or a daughter or a wife?
OLD MAN I am doing this because I am ill-fated, friend. For I am lamenting both my son, 
who is no more, and my daughter who is now a corpse.
Y.Μ. 
You seem to be ill-fated indeed. But what is the reason? How are the people dying?
Ο.Μ. 
Because of the plague, friend, corpses fall upon corpses and people die because 
they are ill-fated.
Y.M. 
We have many problems because of the plague. For I see the multitude of 
people are ill-fated, the city is in much perplexity and the people are short-lived 
and ill-fated.

 
Section 4C 
49
O.M. 
So do not dishonour the gods and do not commit irreverent acts against the city, 
but be resolute and honour the gods.
EXERCISE
1. ὄντα lines 2 and 4, m., s., agrees with υἱόν
 
οὖσαν line 4, f., s., agrees with θυγατέρα [nb. there are more examples at 
lines 10 and 11]
2. ἔλθε εἰπέ line 1, sing.
 
ἀτίμαζε, ἀσέβει, τόλμα, τίμα lines 13 and 14, sing.
3. κακοδαίμονες line 8
 
ἐφημέρους line 11, κακοδαίμονας line 12
4. φίλε is vocative
 
ἀπορίᾳ is dative
4C
This section introduces the present participle of active verbs: as above (Sections 
A–B), you may like to make an empty grid in which to ﬁ ll in the various cases as 
they occur, using as your example the verb παύω. The endings are exactly the 
same as those for the verb ‘to be’ which are set out in GE p. 77, #87. You can 
also see the present participle of παύω set out on GE pp. 82–83, #90 followed by 
the participles of contract verbs GE #91.
Page 48
 
6 λανθάνει A very awkward verb to translate as English has no direct 
equivalent. GE p. 86, #95 gives ‘escape the notice of’, which is the nearest 
English phrase: it means to do something either intentionally or accidentally 
unnoticed by yourself or another. The action that is ‘not noticed’ is expressed 
as a participle (in this case τρέχων). It is probably best to stick to the literal 
translation to begin with, ‘Or does the man escape your notice running?’ before 
trying to rephrase more idiomatically, ‘Are you unaware of the man running?’, 
‘Do you not notice the man running?’
 
7 προστρέχοντα You can tell from the -οντα ending that it agrees with αὐτόν.
 
9 ἀποφεύγων τυγχάνει τυγχάνω is another verb that is normally accompanied 
by a participle (see GE p. 86, #95). It means ‘to happen to be doing something’ 
or ‘to be really doing something’.
 
10 ὁδοιπόρος Both elements have been met, ὁδός ‘road’ and πορεύομαι ‘I 
travel’. The noun means ‘traveller’.
 
11 χλαμύδα This is the garment worn in the illustration on p. 52 (not the hat or 
sticks!).
 
14 πάσχει GE gives as ‘suffer’, ‘experience’, ‘undergo’. The Greek usage is often 
not as strong as English ‘suffer’: here it’s almost ‘What’s the matter with him?’
 
16 δῆλοί εἰσι διώκοντες δῆλοι is used personally here, in place of δῆλον ὅτι. 
Literally, ‘they are clear pursuing …’ You will probably want to translate as ‘it 
is clear that they are pursuing’; or ‘they are clearly pursuing’.

50 
Section 4C
 
18 ϕθάνει Another awkward verb to translate and another of the group in GE p. 86, 
#95. GE gives as ‘anticipate X (acc.) in -ing’: the basic sense is usually of doing 
something either before another can stop you, or of doing it before they can do it. 
Here the former is more likely: the fugitive escapes into the sanctuary before the 
Eleven can prevent him from doing so. Once again it helps if you translate it 
literally, before turning your literal translation into acceptable English.
 
23 ὁ φεύγων Literally ‘the running away one’, or ‘the fugitive’.
 
28 τὸν ϕεύγοντα As above, ‘the fugitive’, this time as the object.
 
 καίπερ ‘although’ is always followed by a participle.
 
31–32 This quotation from Homer, Odyssey Book 6 can be found in its original 
context in RGT p. 260, lines 207–208.
Page 49
 
35 δυστυχής The force of δυσ- in compounds is the opposite of εὐ- and often 
has the sense of ‘with difﬁ culty’, ‘hard’ or ‘bad’. Cf. English ‘dyslexia’, 
‘dyspepsia’, ‘dystrophy’.
Translation for 4C
Dikaiopolis and the rhapsode travel towards the city. Suddenly a man runs up to 
them.
DIKAIOPOLIS Tell me, rhapsode, what’s the din? What are those shouts? What’s 
happening?
RHAPSODE 
Look, Dikaiopolis, a man is running this way. Do you see the man? Or are 
you not aware of the man running this way?
DIK. 
No, by Zeus. For I see him running towards [us]. But the situation is strange. 
Whoever is it?
RHAP. 
Perhaps he is a slave and happens to be running away.
DIK. 
But he is not a slave and he seems to be a traveller. Or do you not notice that 
the man has a cloak?
RHAP. 
You speak rightly, Dikaiopolis. But perhaps he is a foreigner.
DIK. 
Look! The man is running into the shrine of Heracles. What’s the matter with 
him, that he’s running into the shrine?
RHAP. 
It’s clear that he’s turning in for sanctuary. And now some men are 
approaching. Clearly they are pursuing the man.
DIK. 
But what’s this situation? A herald is approaching and – the Eleven and the 
public slaves. But the man has anticipated the Eleven by running into the 
shrine.
SATYROS Where is the Spartan ﬂ eeing to? Where is he?
 
You there – do you know where the fugitive is? Or are you not aware of the 
man ﬂ eeing?
RHAP. 
I am aware of him. But he’s in that shrine, as a suppliant. 
SAT. 
Come here, slaves, into that shrine! Quickly lead away the stranger, as he’s a 
Spartan.

 
Section 4D 
51
DIK. 
Don’t drag away the fugitive, herald, although he’s a Spartan. The stranger 
happens to be a suppliant, and he anticipated you by running into the shrine. 
Because he’s a suppliant, he is sacrosanct. 
RHAP. 
‘All strangers are under the protection of Zeus.’
HERALD 
Don’t worry about that, slaves, but lead the man away. 
DIK. 
What lawlessness! Indeed the stranger appears to be unlucky.
4D
Now the middle participles are introduced (GE pp. 84–85, #92–93) and the par-
ticiples of the contracted verbs (GE p. 84, #93) and one further type of 3rd declen-
sion noun (GE p. 87, #97).
The middle participles are easily recognised.
παύομαι gives παυόμενος παυομένη παυόμενον, like καλός καλή καλόν
Page 50
 
2 καθίζεται … ἱκέτης ὤν Illustrated at RGT p. 52, which may help towards 
meaning.
 
11  ἀπόκοπτε τὰς χεῖρας Sounds rather drastic, but such an event is recorded by 
Herodotus, 6.91.
 
13 ὦνδρες = ὦ ἄνδρες.
 
15 ἐπικαλούμενος The ﬁ rst example of a middle participle. ἐπικαλοῦμαι is a 
contracted verb: the regular participle-ending is -όμενος, seen below in 
ὀλοφυρόμενος (18).
 
19 τοὺς … ἔχοντας Article + participle ‘the ones having …’; often this is best 
translated by a relative clause, ‘those who have …’
 
21 καθορᾶτε This could be either indicative or imperative, ‘you see’ or ‘see!’ 
The context favours the latter.
 
21–22 τοὺς ἀσεβοῦντας As above in line 19, ‘those who …’
 
 περὶ Δία ἱκέσιον καὶ ξένιον Zeus was regarded as protecting suppliants as 
well as strangers and foreigners.
 
23 τὸν τοὺς θεοὺς ἐπικαλούμενον Notice that the participle can be itself an 
object, and govern an object, ‘the man (obj.) calling upon the gods’.
 
29 ναὶ τὼ σιώ GE translates as ‘by the two gods’ (σιώ is Doric dialect for θεώ). 
The two gods are the twins Castor and Pollux, and the oath is a 
characteristically Spartan one.
 
32 πρεσβευτής As an ambassador he would of course (as today) be regarded as 
having diplomatic immunity.
 
35–36 πρὸς βασιλέα τὸν μέγαν βασιλεύς (without the article) is regularly used of 
the King of Persia (contrast our usage: to emphasise, we would say ‘the king’). 
Here the article is used to link the noun to the adjective μέγαν. The especial 
signiﬁ cance here is that throughout the Peloponnesian War, both Athens and 
Sparta at different times asked Persia for help, thinking that if they succeeded 
in obtaining Persian support they would be victorious. In fact, Sparta’s later 

52 
Section 4D
success in securing Persian support undoubtedly contributed to her victory in 
the end.
 
36–37 σὺ δὲ δῆλος εἶ φιλῶν τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους Literally ‘But you are clear 
loving the Lacedaemonians’, or ‘you are clearly in favour of the Spartans’. 
Once again notice the personal use of δῆλος with the participle.
Page 51
 
43 νέμεσις μεγάλη The concept of divine retribution for wrongdoing is common 
in Greek Tragedy and in Herodotus (see Section 19 in RGT p. 230, line 1 for 
one instance in the original context). Nemesis can fall upon the wrongdoer 
himself or upon any one of his descendants. Here it is assumed that the extreme 
ill-fortune of the stranger can only be explained by the belief that he is being 
punished for the wrongdoing of one of his forebears. Cf. ‘visiting the iniquity 
of the fathers upon the sons unto the third or fourth generation’ (Exodus 20.5).
 
47–48 εὐνομία and εὐπορία are contrasted with ἀνομία and ἀπορία. εὐνομία is the 
opposite of ἀνομία; εὐπορία is the opposite of ἀπορία though here in a slightly 
different meaning from ‘perplexity’ which you met before. ἀπορία can mean 
‘shortage of provisions’, so εὐπορία means the opposite, ‘abundance’, 
‘plenty’.
 
49 Δυσνομία A personiﬁ ed variation of ἀνομία, and the opposite of Εὐνομία.
 
50 In the second line of the quotation from Solon:
 
 (a)  ἀποϕαίνει is active in form, therefore transitive, hence ‘makes to appear’, 
‘reveals’.
 
 (b)  εὔκοσμα and ἄρτια are neuter plural, agreeing with πάντα.
Translation for 4D
DIKAIOPOLIS Look, rhapsode, do you see? What impiety! For the unfortunate stranger is 
sitting on the altar, as a suppliant, but the public slaves are dragging him away 
while the stranger is holding on to the altar and calling upon the gods. Ο city, city!
SATYROS Drag away this man, since he’s a Spartan, away from the altar.
STRANGER I call upon the gods –
PUBLIC SLAVE But the stranger is holding on to the altar, Satyros. 
SAT. 
Cut off his hands.
STR. 
I call upon you, men!
DIK. 
The stranger is calling upon us, rhapsode and doesn’t stop calling upon us.
RHAPSODE 
(The rhapsode is silent, and ﬁ nally speaks.)
 
But nevertheless, be quiet yourself too, Dikaiopolis, and stop lamenting, and 
don’t do anything. Don’t you see those public slaves, who have their daggers? 
STR. 
(He does not stop calling upon the gods.)
 
Oh gods, look down upon what I am suffering. Look down upon those who are 
committing impiety against Zeus, god of suppliants and strangers.
 
The public slaves drag away from the altar the man who is calling upon the gods.
SAT. 
Stop calling upon the gods, fellow. You, slaves, drag the fellow away to the 
other Spartans.

 
Exercises for section 4C–D 
53
STR. 
Do you, Athenians, drag away those who ﬂ ee into shrines? Do you kill those 
who turn aside for sanctuary? By the twain, you are clearly being unjust 
towards men and impious towards the gods.
DIK. 
But who is that stranger? 
SAT. 
He happens to be an ambassador – 
DIK. 
What are you saying? An ambassador? What lawlessness! Are you killing 
ambassadors?
SAT. 
He is an ambassador and happens to be travelling towards the great King. 
But you clearly love the Spartans. Shut up then and stop bewailing the 
Spartan.
 
The public slaves drag the Spartan away towards the market-place. The 
stranger does not stop shouting and revealing what he is suffering at the hands 
of the Athenians.
DIK. 
It is clear that the gods hate the man. For they are killing him, although 
he is an ambassador and a suppliant. Surely great retribution from the 
gods is coming upon him because of his ancestors and the aggression of his 
ancestors. 
 
 But what’s the matter with our city? What’s happening? War seems to be a 
violent instructor, rhapsode. For in peacetime these things do not happen. In 
peacetime there is good order and plenty in the city, but in war there is 
lawlessness and shortage.
RHAP. 
 
‘So bad government brings very many evils to the city.
 
 
But good government makes all appear well-ordered and perfect.’
Grammar
Check that you understand the participles (GE pp. 82–85, #89–93), including the 
forms for the contracted verbs, and their various uses listed in GE pp. 85–86, #94, 
95.
Notice also βασιλεύς (GE p. 87, #97), and the useful notes (GE pp. 87–88, 
#98–100) on elision and crasis.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 4C–D
MORE PRESENT PARTICIPLES
4C–D: 1
1. τρέχοντας, παυομένους 
5. τρέχοντες, παυόμενοι
2. τρέχουσαι, παυόμεναι 
6. τρέχουσαν, παυομένην
3. τρέχων, παυόμενος 
7. τρέχων, παυόμενος
4. τρέχοντα, παυόμενον 
8. τρέχον, παυόμενον
4C–D: 2
1. τρέχοντι, παυομένῳ 
3. τρέχοντος, παυομένου
2. τρεχούσης, παυομένης 
4. τρεχόντων, παυομένων

54 
Revision exercises for section 4C–D
5. τρέχουσι(ν), παυομένοις 
7. τρέχοντι, παυομένῳ
6. τρεχούσῃ, παυομένῃ 
8. τρέχουσι(ν), παυομένοις
4C–D: 3
1. τὸν θεώμενον 
the one watching 
m. acc. s.
2. τὰς ὁρώσας 
those/ the women seeing  
f. acc
3. τοὺς ποιοῦντας 
the ones doing 
m. acc. pl.
4. αἱ δηλοῦσαι 
the ones/the women showing  
f. nom. pl.
5. οἱ φοβούμενοι 
those afraid 
m. nom. pl.
6. ἡ ποιοῦσα 
the one/the woman doing 
f. nom. s.
7. τὴν ὁρῶσαν 
the one/the woman seeing 
f. acc. s.
8. τὸ δηλοῦν 
the one/it showing 
n. nom./acc. s.
4C–D: 4
1. τοῖς θεωμένοις 
to/for those watching
2. τῇ ὁρώσῃ 
to/for the woman who sees
3. τῶν ποιούντων 
of those doing, of the doers
4. ταῖς δηλούσαις 
to/for the women who are showing
5. τοῦ φοβουμένου 
of the one who is afraid
6. ταῖς ποιούσαις 
to/for the women who are doing
7. τῷ ὁρῶντι 
to/for the one who sees
8. τοῖς δηλοῦσι(ν) 
to/for those who show
4C–D: 5
1. βαίνουσα 
4. φεύγοντας
2. παίζων 
5. τρέχοντα
3. φεύγων, βοῶντας
ELISION AND CRASIS
4C–D: 6
1. ὁ δ’ ἀνήρ 
4. ἐφ’ ὑμᾶς
2. ἆρ’ ὁρᾷς; 
5. εἴμ’ Ὀδυσσεύς
3. ἀφ’ ἡμῶν
4C–D: 7
1. νῦν δὲ ἐπὶ οἰκίαν 
4. κακός ἐστὶν ὁ πόλεμος
2. ἀλλὰ ἐγώ 
5. ἆρά εἰμι ἔμπειρος;
3. ἐν δὲ ἀπορίᾳ
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 4C–D
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
1 
impiety 
reverence
 
temple, sacred thing 
priest

 
Revision exercises for section 4C–D 
55
 
a suppliant 
I beseech
 
I hate 
hated
 
stranger, guest, host 
hospitality/I entertain
 
I happen/unlucky, unhappy 
chance
 
offence 
I assault, outrage
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1. a. Who is running? I do not see the man running, τὸν τρέχοντα
 
b. Who are lamenting? Where are the people who are lamenting? οἱ 
  ὀλοϕυρόμενοι;
 
c. I know who is escaping. The man escaping does not escape my notice 
  (i.e. I am aware of the man who is escaping). ὁ ἀποϕεύγων
 
d. Who are ﬂ eeing? Do you see them ﬂ eeing? τοὺς ϕεύγοντας
 
e. The king is running away and does not stop running away. ἀποτρέχων
 
f. Women (in general) are always afraid. Why don’t they stop being afraid? 
  ϕοβούμεναι;
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. I do not see any Spartan escaping.
 
ὁρῶμεν τοὺς ἀνθρώπους/ἄνδρας τρέχοντας.
2. Don’t you see that the master has some gear?
 
(Does the master escape your notice having some gear?)
 
ἆρα λανθάνει σε ὁ δοῦλος τὸν ἱκέτην ἀϕέλκων;
 
(Does the slave escape your notice dragging away the suppliant?)
3. For the ambassadors anticipate the public slaves (by) running away.
 
ὁ γὰρ Λακεδαιμόνιος φθάνει τοὺς διώκοντας τρέχων εἰς τὸ ἱερόν.
 
(The Lacedaemonian anticipates the pursuers running into the shrine.)
4. The herald does not stop hating the strangers and being afraid.
 
ὁ ξένος οὐ παύεται ἡμᾶς ἐπικαλούμενος καὶ βοῶν.
5. But you are clearly a suppliant and you happen to be lamenting the situation.
 
ὁ δ’ ἀνὴρ δῆλός ἐστι πρεσβευτὴς ὢν καὶ ἀποϕεύγων τυγχάνει.
E – TEST EXERCISE 4C–D
A stranger happens to be running into the shrine of Heracles. The stranger is 
clearly suffering something dreadful, because some men are approaching quickly, 
pursuing him. The stranger eludes his pursuers [by] running into the shrine which 
is nearby. The pursuers arrive and ask the rhapsode where the stranger happens 
to be. For the rhapsode is clearly aware that the stranger is running away. (Lit. 
For it is clear that the stranger does not escape the rhapsode’s notice running 
away.) When the pursuers see him in the shrine, they drag him away, although he 
is shouting and calling upon the gods. The stranger does not stop lamenting and 
revealing what he is suffering, but the rhapsode and Dikaiopolis keep quiet, as 
they are afraid of the Eleven.
So in this way lawlessness and impiety occur in the city of the Athenians.

56 
Revision exercises for section 4C–D
EXERCISE
1. (a) m. s. nom. 
(b) m. pl. nom. 
(c) n. s./acc. 
(d) m. pl. nom.
2. (a) 3rd pl. 
(b) 3rd pl. 
(c) 3rd s.  
(d) 3rd pl.

57
Section Five: ‘Socrates corrupts the young’
This is a vital section, in which you will meet new tenses of the verb; so far the 
narrative has been conﬁ ned to the present tense alone.
In 5A–B the imperfect tense is introduced; and in 5C–D the future.
If you are not happy with the term imperfect, it may be helpful to look at the 
explanation in GE p. 93, #103.
Note: In Section 6 you will met another past tense called the aorist. The 
meaning of ‘imperfect’ in this context is ‘incomplete’, ‘unﬁ nished’, while ‘aorist’ 
means ‘undeﬁ ned’. For example:
‘I was going’ indicates an event that was taking place and not necessarily 
completed (consider its likely context: ‘I was going to the shop when …’, 
where the ‘when’ clause is likely to explain why I never reached the 
shop).
‘I went’, by contrast, indicates a deﬁ nitely completed action – but at an 
undeﬁ ned time (yesterday / last week / ten years ago etc.).
Greek also has a perfect tense: this expresses a completed action in present 
time, ‘I have just come in’, ‘I have shut the door’. It is much less common than 
the aorist, and it is not introduced until Section 13E.
Before beginning 5A you may ﬁ nd it helpful to write out the present tense 
(active and middle) of παύω, and another table for εἰμί, leaving room to the right 
of the table to enter imperfect endings as they occur. Or see GE p. 92, #102, and 
GE p. 98, #110.
A checklist of the active forms appears at the end of the notes to 5A, and a list 
of the middle forms and εἰμί at the end of 5B.
5A
Page 54
 
2 χρήματα Illustrated at bottom of page 53.
 
 ὀϕείλει The root cause of Strepsiades’ problem (see English note at top of 
page).
 
3 ἱππομανής Break it up into its constituent parts: ἱππος (illustrated p. 53) + 
μανης (cf. English ‘mania’).
 
4 ὕπνος Cf. English ‘hypnosis’ (and again note English at top of page).
 
6 τὸ χρῆμα τῶν νυκτῶν Literally ‘the business of the nights’ – GE glosses 
χρῆμα here as ‘length’.

58 
Section 5A
 
12 δάκνει Here = ‘worry’, though note its literal meaning is ‘bite’, which is used 
later in this section.
 
13 τουτονί Adding the -ι to τοῦτον makes it even more demonstrative, ‘this son 
of mine here’.
 
16 χθές ‘yesterday’, which indicates that ἦ is the past tense of εἰμί.
 
17 ἐκάθευδον First example of the normal imperfect. Past tenses in Greek 
have ἐ- as a preﬁ x. This is called the ‘augment’. καθεύδων (9) and καθεύδει 
(9) indicate that 1st person singular of the present indicative must be 
καθεύδω. Note that the person is indicated by ἐγώ. Using these indicators, 
what would you deduce to be the 1st person singular of the imperfect of 
παύω?
 
 ὅλην τὴν νύκτα The accusative case without a preposition is used to express 
duration of time, ‘for the whole night’. Similarly ὀλίγον χρόνον means ‘for a 
short time’.
 
18 ἐδίωκον Which person (oἱ χρῆσται is the subject)? You can conﬁ rm the 
formation by comparing ἐλάμβανον. Note that in the imperfect, the 1st person 
s. and the 3rd person pl. have the same ending.
 
20–21 ἔσῳζεν, ἐλάμβανεν Identify the person of the verb by looking at the 
respective subjects (οὐδείς, ὁ υἱός) and use the endings to form the 
corresponding person of παύω.
 
23 ἦν Past tense of εἰμί – person?
 
24 ἐλάμβανε Compare ἐλάμβανεν (21). Can you explain the variation?
 
 δι-ελέγετο First example of a middle imperfect – which person? Note that 
when the verb has a preposition as a preﬁ x the augment is attached to the verb 
stem and not to the preposition. See GE p. 95, #105.
 
25 ἤκουε This is what happens when the augment merges with a vowel, ε + α = 
η. See GE p. 94, #105.
 
28 ἐπαυόμεθα Which person? Notice that the subject is delayed and the verb 
comes ﬁ rst for emphasis: ‘we never ceased…’, and then you have to wait until 
the end of the sentence to ﬁ nd out what we never ceased doing.
 
30 γάμους English ‘monogamy’, ‘polygamy’, etc. should help with the 
meaning.
 
 πικρούς ‘bitter’. Cf. ‘picric acid’. Note that πικρόν is brought forward to 
emphasise it.
 
31–34 Note the contrast between rustic simplicity and urban extravagance – 
Aristophanes makes much more of this than the text here does.
Interim check: the imperfect so far. If you followed the suggestion above, your 
present + imperfect table (active only) could look like this. Note that the augment 
and the ending have been spaced so that you can see the stem clearly:
1st s. 
παύω 
ἔ -παυ -ον
2nd s. 
παύεις 
3rd s. 
παύει 
ἔ -παυ -ε(ν)

 
Section 5B 
59
1st pl. 
παύομεν 
2nd pl. 
παύετε 
3rd pl. 
παύουσι (ν) 
ἔ -παυ -ον
Translation for 5A
Strepsiades happens to be lamenting because he owes a lot of money. For his son, 
being horse-mad, always takes much money. Now the son happens to be sleeping 
deeply, but the father cannot sleep (lit. sleep does not hold the father).
STREPSIADES Alas, alas! Ο king Zeus! The length of the nights – how great it is! Day is 
not yet coming. See! My son is sleeping deeply and does not cease sleeping. 
Alas unhappy me! Deep sleep does not yet come to (lit. hold) me. I am 
unfortunate and sleepless. While I am sleepless, my debts which are heavy 
worry me. For I owe much money because of this son of mine, and because I 
owe [much money] my creditors pursue me and are always exacting their 
due.
But I am still sleepless and at a loss. And yesterday I was sleepless, for almost 
the whole night. For I was sleeping for a short while. But when I was sleeping, 
then my creditors kept on pursuing me in my dreams and kept on exacting their 
due because of my son. And while I was at a loss, nobody was saving me, but for 
the whole night I was always escaping from these lawsuits, and this son of mine 
kept on taking lots of money because he was horse-mad. And moreover even 
when sleeping the young man dreams of horses. Yes, certainly, even when a boy 
he kept dreaming of horses. Alas! Who was responsible? My wife [was] respon-
sible, I know that well. For she always used to take her son and talk to him about 
horses. So her son always listened and learnt about horses.
But you, just as you are, sleep deeply! For the debts, as you well know, fall (lit. 
turn) onto my head. Alas! We never stopped arguing about the boy, my wife and 
I: we were always arguing. Ο king Zeus! Why do you make marriages so bitter? 
For always my wife makes my life bitter. How sweet was the country life! 
Marriage – how bitter! For my wife happens to be from the city, and being a city-
woman she started to bring in much expense. This expense already then was 
ruining me. It is still ruining me even now.
5B
Page 56
 
2 ἅπτε λυχνόν λυχνός is illustrated opposite, which should help with the 
meaning of this phrase.
 
4 ἔλαιον ‘olive oil’, a vital commodity for the Athenians.
 
5 κλαῖε Literally ‘weep’. Strepsiades intends to hit the slave, blaming him for 
the lack of oil – he should have ﬁ lled the lamp.
 
8 ἀργούς Compounded from ἀ- (negative preﬁ x) + ἔργoν, ‘not working’ i.e. 
‘lazy’, ‘idle’.

60 
Exercises for section 5A–B
 
9 οὐ πείθονται The middle of πείθω means ‘I obey’.
 
 ἦμεν The past tense of εἰμί; ἡμεῖς indicates the person.
 
10 ἦσαν The past tense of εἰμί – person?
 
11 τοὺς δεσπότας κακὰ ἐποίουν ποιῶ here seems to take two objects. In fact, it 
does, because κακὰ ποιῶ (‘I do bad things’) was treated as a single idea, 
‘I harm’, taking a direct object.
 
 ἐπείθοντο Imperfect middle ending. What would be the corresponding 
formation for παύομαι?
 
14 ἐμαυτόν and σεαυτόν (line 17) are reﬂ exive pronouns: ‘myself’, ‘yourself’.
By now the tables for παύομαι and εἰμί should look like this:
Ist s. 
παύομαι 
 
εἰμί 
ἦ(ν)
2nd s. 
παύει 
 
εἶ 
3rd s. 
παύεται 
ἐ -παύ -ετο 
ἐστί(ν) 
ἦν
1st pl. 
παυόμεθα 
ἐ -παυ -όμεθα ἐσμέν 
ἦμεν
2nd pl. 
παύεσθε 
 
ἐστέ 
3rd pl. 
παύονται 
ἐ -παύ -οντο 
εἰσί(ν) 
ἦσαν
For other persons, see GE p. 92, #102 and p. 98, #110.
Translation for 5B
STREPSIADES But what do I owe? Slave! Come here! Light the lamp. For I can’t see 
anything now; for it is deep night.
SLAVE 
How can I light the lamp, master? Look! There is no oil in the lamp.
STR. 
What are you saying? The lamp has no oil? Unhappy me! Come here and 
weep! How evil is the war! I no longer punish my slaves, although they are 
idle. For the war stops [me]. Alas for my troubles! For now we give orders, but 
they do not obey. But when we were young, then the old men always used to 
punish their slaves. So they were not idle, nor did they treat their masters badly, 
but were good and always obeyed. For they were afraid of punishment. But 
why don’t I save myself and my son from our debts? Why don’t I look for 
some scheme, and put an end to these debts? Now, Strepsiades, save yourself! 
Hurray, hurray! I have a plan! Now why don’t I stop this young man sleeping?
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 5A–B
THE IMPERFECT
5A–B: 1
1. he/she was stopping 
ἐπαύετο
2. I/they were carrying 
ἐφερόμην, ἐφέροντο
3. you (s.) were taking 
ἐλαμβάνου

 
Exercises for section 5A–B 
61
4. we were learning 
ἐμανθανόμεθα
5. you (pl.) were sacriﬁ cing 
ἐθύεσθε
AUGMENTS
5A–B: 2
1. we hear 
ἠκούομεν
2. they have 
εἶχον
3. you (pl.) lament 
ὠλοφύρεσθε
4. he owes 
ὤφειλε
5. they pray 
ηὔχοντο
5A–B: 3
1. he came down 
καταβαίνει
2. you (s.) killed 
ἀποκτείνεις
3. I/they drove away 
ἀπάγω, ἀπάγουσιν
4. we were destroying 
διαφθείρομεν
5. you (pl.) were bringing in 
εἰσφέρετε
IMPERFECT OF CONTRACT VERBS AND VERB ‘TO BE’
5A–B: 4
1. he was stopping 
 7. I was, he/she/it was
2. we were honouring 
 8. I was freeing, they were freeing
3. I was doing, they were doing 
 9. you (s.) were owing
4. you (s.) were showing 
10. he hears
5. you (s.) are punishing 
11. we were remaining
6. he found out, learned 
12. he was doing
5A–B: 5
1. ἐτίμων 
4. ἐκώλυον
2. ἔπασχε(ν) 
5. ἐκελεύετε
3. ὠφείλομεν
ADDITIONAL IMPERFECT PATTERNS
5A–B: 6
1. he was ceasing 
 7. he was afraid
2. you were obeying 
 8. they are ﬁ ghting
3. they were conversing 
 9. I was calling to witness
4. we are afraid 
10. we were turning
5. they were 
11. you (s.) were seeming
6. they were showing 
12. he was lamenting

62 
Revision Exercises for section 5A–B
5A–B: 7
1. ἐπείθοντο 
4. ἐφαινόμην
2. ἐφοβεῖτο 
5. διελέγεσθε
3. ἐμαχόμεθα
5A–B: 8
1. ἐκώλυε 
 6. ἐβοᾶτε
2. ἐπαύετο 
 7. ἐδουλοῦντο
3. ἐπεκαλούμεθα 
 8. ἐτίμων
4. ὤφειλες 
 9. ἐποιεῖτο
5. ἤκουον 
10. διελέγοντο
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 5A–B
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1. a. I am sleeping, but these men are still pursuing me.
 
  ἐκάθευδον … ἐδίωκον.
 
b. Who is responsible? My wife. For she always takes her son and talks to 
  him about horses.
 
  ἦν … ἐλάμβανε … διελέγετο.
 
c. How bitter is marriage! For my wife always makes our marriage 
  bitter.
 
  ἦν … ἐπoίει.
 
d. We are young and punish the house-slaves. For in this way the house-
  slaves become good.
 
  ἦμεν … ἐκολάζομεν … ἐγίγνοντο.
 
e. The slaves do not fear their masters nor do they obey 
  them.
 
  ἐφοβοῦντο … ἐπείθοντο.
2. we were conversing διελεγόμην
 
we were watching ἐθεώμην
 
they were bringing in εἰσέϕερεν
 
you (s.) owed ὠϕείλετε
 
we were in ἐνῆ
 
you (pl.) were watching ἐθεῶ
 
you (s.) used to obey ἐπείθεσθε
 
they were afraid ἐϕοβεῖτο
 
I was calling upon ἐπεκαλούμεθα
 
I was stopping ἐπαύομεν
 
he/she was ἦσαν
 
you were afraid ἐϕοβεῖσθε
 
he/she was watching ἐθεῶντο

 
Section 5C 
63
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. The young man was shouting, but the sailor did not stop chasing.
 
βαθέως ἐκάθευδον ἀλλ’ ὁ υἱὸς οὐκ ἐπαύετο βοῶν.
2. The farmers always used to honour the gods.
 
ὁ πατὴρ ἀεὶ ἐκόλαζε τὸν υἱόν.
3. The sons owed much money.
 
οἱ νεανίαι χρηστοὶ (ἀγαθοὶ) ἦσαν καὶ ἐπείθοντο.
4. We used to pray to the goddess, but we did not make sacriﬁ ces.
 
ἡμεῖς μὲν ἐκελεύομεν, οἱ δὲ δοῦλοι (οἰκέται) ἡμᾶς κακὰ ἐποίουν.
5. You (s.) stopped the woman punishing the household slaves.
 
ἐβοῶμεν καὶ τοὺς δούλους (οἰκέτας) ἐπαύομεν διαλεγομένους.
5C
In this section you will meet the future tense. In almost all verbs the distinguish-
ing mark is a ‘-σ-’, although when this is merged with a consonant stem it is not 
always apparent. See GE pp. 102–103, #112–114.
Page 58
 
1 Φειδιππίδιον Note the diminutive form – affectionate?
 
5 αὔριov ‘tomorrow’; this should alert you to what tense is coming next!
 
 ϕιλήσεις The ﬁ rst example of the future – note ending -σ-εις.
 
6 ϕιλήσω … παύσομαι 1st person singular of active and middle respectively. 
Note the -σ- inserted between present stem and person-ending. (With ϕιλήσω, 
ϕιλήσεις there is an additional point to note: contracted verbs lengthen the 
vowel at the end of the stem before adding the same endings as uncontracted 
verbs; see GE pp. 103–104, #115–116
 
6 τουτονί τὸν ἵππιον Pheidippides swears by Poseidon, god of horses (as well 
as god of the sea). The point will be further developed later.
 
9 πείθου This is the middle imperative, ‘obey!’
 
10 πείσομαι Also future. Note that verb-stems ending in dentals -τ/-δ/-θ/-ζ lose 
the ﬁ nal consonant of the stem before adding -σ- and regular endings.
 
12 πείσῃ 2nd s. future middle of πείθω, ‘Will you obey?’
 
13 Obediently, Pheidippides changes his oath to swear by Dionysus.
 
17 ἀκούσομαι Some verbs change from present active to future middle with no 
change in meaning.
 
20 λέξω Verbs with stems ending in -γ/-κ/-χ combine the ﬁ nal consonant of the 
stem with the -ς- to form -ξ-. See GE p. 103, #114.
 
22 σώσει See note above on p. 58 line 10.
Translation for 5C
STREPSIADES Pheidippides, Pheidippidikins!
PHEIDIPPIDES What, father?

64 
Section 5D
STR.  
Tell me, son, do you love me?
PHEI. 
I [do], and I don’t ever stop [loving you].
STR. 
Will you love me tomorrow?
PHEI. 
By Poseidon here, god of horses, I shall love you tomorrow and I shan’t stop 
ever.
STR. 
Don’t ever mention that horsey one, son – for that one has the responsibility for 
my troubles – but listen and obey.
PHEI. 
Look, I am listening and obeying and I shall always obey. So speak then! What 
are you ordering?
STR. 
I shall order a small thing, my son, a very small thing. For I have a plan and I 
am planning something. Will you obey?
PHEI. 
I will obey, by Dionysus. Don’t worry, father.
STR. 
Were you listening? Or weren’t you listening? Or am I speaking in vain? I’ll 
stop you sleeping.
PHEI. 
Yes. I was listening and I am listening and I shall listen. What were you telling 
me?
STR. 
I was telling you that I have an idea.
PHEI. 
What is your idea? What have you in mind and what are you planning? Were 
you saying?
STR. 
No, but I will [tell you]. For perhaps this idea will stop us somehow from our 
debts. I’m planning something big.
PHEI. 
Tell [me]. What is your plan, father? What will you order? How will your idea 
save us? How shall we stop from our debts?
STR. 
You will do it?
PHEI. 
I will do it, by Dionysus.
5D
Page 60
 
1 οἰκίδιον The diminutive form of οἶκος/οἰκία.
 
3 ϕροντιστήριον An Aristophanic coinage, constructed from ϕροντίζω ‘I think’, 
‘I consider’ with the sufﬁ x -ηριον, which corresponds to English ‘-ery’ sufﬁ x in 
e.g. ‘bakery’, ‘brewery’ – the place where something is done. Hence 
ϕροντιστήριον means ‘thinkery’.
 
5 πνιγεύς Ilustrated on next page – these are bowl-shaped, earthenware 
ovens.
 
 ἄνθρακες English ‘anthracite’ may help towards meaning: ‘coals’.
 
6–7 Notice the implication that Socrates and his associates are well paid for their 
teaching – something which Socrates always vigorously denied.
 
9 μαθήσονται The future of μανθάνω (μαθ-). Some irregular verbs use the 
stem given in brackets to form the future. See GE p. 105, #120 for a list of 
‘important futures’.
 
13 λόγον Always a difﬁ cult word to translate. Here perhaps ‘argument’ ﬁ ts the 
meaning most closely. Socrates is depicted as having two ‘arguments’ in his 

 
Section 5D 
65
‘thinkery’ (in the original play these ‘arguments’ actually appear as characters): 
the ‘right’ argument, which argues correctly, and the ‘wrong’ argument, which, 
by verbal trickery etc., can make the weaker argument appear the stronger. 
Hence Strepsiades’ interest in the latter argument.
 
16 σοϕισταί Originally a neutral term for philosophers, but later acquiring 
pejorative overtones – hence the disgusted reaction from Pheidippides.
 
18 ὠχρούς … ἀνυποδήτους Ochres are pale yellowish shades, which gives the 
meaning of ὠχρούς. To be pale was a sign of spending too much time indoors, 
and was hence a derogatory description for a man. ἀν-(negative) ὑπο- (‘under’) 
-δητους (‘bound’): ‘unbound-under’ meant ‘shoeless’; here it is also 
derogatory, as a sign of poverty. In addition, Socates went unshod.
 
23 οἱ ἔνδον ‘those inside’.
 
24 σὺ δὲ διὰ τί οὐκ εἰσέρχῃ μαθητής; ‘But you, why don’t you go in (as) a 
student?’
 
27 διαϕθερεῖ One of only two examples in this section of a grammatical point 
that is easily overlooked (see GE p. 104, #117). Verbs with a present stem 
ending in -λ-, -μ-, -ν- or -ρ- do not insert -σ- to form future, but have a 
contracted future in -έω.
 
28 λήψονται The future of λαμβάνω (λαβ-), is again based on the bracketed 
stem but with the vowel lengthened.
 
29 ἄριστε ἀνθρώπων Strepsiades reverts to his wheedling.
 
32 εἴσειμι The irregular future of εἰσέρχομαι. This is doubly confusing because 
εἶμι (‘I shall go’) is identical in spelling with εἰμί (‘I am’). However, the accent 
distinguishes the two when not prefixed.
 
34 οὔκoυν πείσῃ; ‘Won’t you obey?’
 
35 γενήσομαι The future of γίγνομαι (γεν-), again based on the bracketed stem. 
See GE p.104, #117.
 
36–38 εἴσει, εἴσεισι, εἴσιμεν The future of εἰσέρχομαι again (cf. note on 
line 32).
Page 62
 
41 ἐκβαλῶ βάλλω has shortened the present stem to βαλ- and added -έω to form 
future (see GE p. 104, #117).
 
50 γνώσομαι The future of γιγνώσκω (γνω-), based on the bracketed stem. See 
GE p. 105, #120.
 
57 κόψω Notice how the -σ- in the future can combine with a labial consonant 
stem (κοπ-) to produce -ψ-. See GE p. 103, #114.
Translation for 5D
STREPSIADES Look over here. Do you see this door and the house?
PHEIDIPPIDES I see it. What is it, Father?
STR. 
This is the thinkery of wise souls. Inside live wise men, and speaking they 
persuade their pupils that the heaven is a bell-oven and this bell-oven is around 
us and we are the coals. These men persuade their pupils, always teaching and 

66 
Section 5D
receiving a lot of money. And by Zeus no one of them will stop receiving much 
money from their pupils.
PHEI. 
But what do the men teach? What will young men learn, becoming [their] pupils?
STR. 
The pupils will learn arguments.
PHEI. 
Which arguments do you mean, Father?
STR. 
Which? I mean the just and unjust argument.
PHEI. 
The students will learn these arguments?
STR. 
[Yes], by Zeus. And what’s more in lawsuits they will always defeat their 
opponents.
PHEI. 
Who are these men? What is the name of the men?
STR. 
I do not know the name. But they are ﬁ ne, noble sophists.
PHEI. 
Yuck! Awful [people], I know. You mean the pale shoeless [people], wretched 
Socrates and Chaerephon.
STR. 
Hey, hey, be quiet! Will you not listen?
PHEI. 
 I will listen. What will you tell me?
STR. 
But as I was saying, those inside have two arguments, the just and the unjust. 
Why do you not go in as a student? For this way we shall stop ourselves from 
our debts.
PHEI. 
What will I learn?
STR. 
The unjust argument. For the unjust argument will put a stop to our debts, the 
just one won’t. So learn: in this way the creditors will not recover any of these 
debts. Why don’t you go into the thinkery, best of men?
PHEI. 
What are you saying? I, [go] into the thinkery? By Poseidon, god of horses, I 
won’t do this. I’m not going in today, I won’t go in tomorrow and I won’t do so 
in any way. For I love horses, not sophists.
STR. 
Won’t you obey and do this?
PHEI. 
I won’t obey and I won’t do this. I shall become pale, being a student.
STR. 
But if you won’t go in, who will go in? Shall we go in together, you and I?
PHEI. 
I won’t.
STR. 
Then I’ll chase you out of the house and send you to hell!
PHEI. 
I’ll run away. I’ll go into the house, but not into the thinkery of the 
sophists.
STR. 
What shall I do? Pheidippides will not win, but I shall become the winner. 
I know: I myself will go into the thinkery and will become a pupil of the 
sophists and I will learn the unjust argument. In this way I shall stop those 
creditors taking their money. But how shall I, an old man and slow in exact 
arguments, learn philosophy? All the same I’ll go in. Why don’t I knock at this 
door and shout? I’ll do this and I’ll knock at the door and shout.
Grammar
Do not neglect the very useful table of indeﬁ nites and interrogatives in GE p. 109, 
#125. And learn to decline Σωκράτης in GE p. 110, #127a.
At this point you may ﬁ nd it useful to revise the different formations of the 
future tense, before you go on (GE pp. 102–103, #112–114). You may ﬁ nd it 

 
Exercises for section 5C–D 
67
helpful to make a chart like this, leaving the third column free to add the ﬁ rst 
person of the aorist tense as you learn it in the next section.
  
Present 
Future 
Aorist
Vowel stems 
παύω 
παύσω 
Consonant stems 
 
 
 
κ, γ, χ 
εὔχομαι 
εὔξομαι 
 
π, β, ϕ 
κόπτω 
κόψω 
 
τ, δ, θ 
πείθω 
πείσω 
 
most ζ 
θαυμάζω 
θαυμάσω 
 
μ, ν, λ, ρ 
διαϕθείρω 
διαϕθερῶ (έω) 
 
most –ιζω 
νομίζω 
νομιῶ (έω) 
Contracted verbs 
ποιέω 
ποιήσω 
 
 
τιμάω 
τιμήσω 
 
 
δηλόω 
δηλώσω 
The future of contracted verbs has ordinary, not contracted, endings: -ω, -εις, -ει 
… , but the stem vowel is lengthened.
Irregular verbs 
μανθάνω 
μαθήσομαι 
 
 
λαμβάνω 
λήψομαι 
 
 
γιγνώσκω 
γνώσομαι 
 
 
γίγνομαι 
γενήσομαι 
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 5C–D
THE FUTURE TENSE
5C–D: 1
1. they will hinder 
κωλύουσι
2. he will order 
κελεύει
3. we shall travel 
πορευόμεθα
4. you (s.) will cease 
παύῃ
5. you (s.) will prevent 
κωλύεις
CONSONANT STEMS
5C–D: 2
1. they pray 
εὔξονται
2. he hits 
τύψει
3. you (s.) keep quiet 
ἡσυχάσεις
4. we turn 
τρεψόμεθα
5. you (s.) persuade 
πείσεις

68 
Exercises for section 5C–D
CONTRACT VERBS
5C–D: 3
1. we shall defeat 
νικῶμεν
2. he will love 
φιλεῖ
3. I shall hold power over 
κρατῶ (έω)
4. you (pl.) will seek 
ζητεῖτε
5. they will set free 
ἐλευθεροῦσιν
ADDITIONAL FUTURE PATTERNS
5C–D: 4
1. he will stop, you (s.) will cease 
 7. you (pl.) will do
2. they will obey, they will suffer 
 8. they will destroy
3. they will persuade 
 9. we prevent
4. you (s.) are knocking 
10. he will converse
5. we shall pray 
11. he will consider
6. you (s.) were ordering 
12. I shall show
5C–D: 5
1. κελεύσουσι(ν) 
4. τιμήσω
2. πείσει 
5. ποιήσετε
3. πείσεται
IRREGULAR FUTURES
5C–D: 6
1. he will take 
 7. they will go
2. they will become 
 8. they will be
3. we shall be 
 9. I shall go
4. you (pl.) will learn 
10. you (s.) will know
5. they will ﬁ nd out 
11. he will become, it will happen
6. he/she/it will be 
12. he/she will go
5C–D: 7
1. ἴασι(ν) 
 6. λήψονται
2. ἔσται 
 7. μαθήσομαι
3. γνωσόμεθα 
 8. ἔσεσθε
4. γενήσῃ 
 9. ἴμεν
5. εἶσι(ν) 
10. ἔσεσθε
5C–D: 8
1. πρὸς τὰς τριήρεις οὔσας, ἰούσας.
2. τῶν μητέρων οὐσῶν, ἰουσῶν.

 
Revision exercises for section 5C–D 
69
3. ἀπὸ τοῦ Περικλέους ὄντος, ἰόντος.
4. τὸν Σωκράτη ὄντα, ἰόντα.
5. οἱ πατέρες ὄντες, ἰόντες.
6. ταῖς θυγατράσιν οὔσαις, ἰούσαις
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 5C–D
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
1.
responsible/cause I blame
I teach 
the teacher 
teaching,  
to do with
 
 
 instruction 
 teaching
justice/ right 
just 
the contestant in 
unjust
 
 
 a lawsuit
 
I do wrong 
the juror 
I judge
unfortunate 
I am unfortunate
I learn 
the pupil 
ignorant 
to do with
 
 
 
 learning
mind/sense 
I consider 
an idea 
I think 
I understand
a household slave a little house 
the house 
I live in
 
the household 
belonging to the
 
 or house 
 house or family
wise 
wisdom 
a sophist 
philosophy 
I love
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1. a. The father orders his son. κελεύσει
 
b. What are you saying, sir? λέξεις
 
c. We do not teach the teachers. διδάξομεν
 
d. The men receive much money. δέξονται
 
e. We do not hear the words. ἀκουσόμεθα
 
f. I am wise, this (man) does not defeat me. ἔσομαι … νικήσει
 
g. The son does not love his father. ϕιλήσει
 
h. The idea saves us. σώσει
 
i. I knock at the door and shout. κόψω … βοήσομαι
 
j. Who wins the lawsuits? νικήσει
 
k. The pupils do not stop learning. παύσονται
 
l. Who are the wise men? ἔσονται
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. The sophists will teach you tomorrow.
 
oἱ νεανίαι τήμερον μαθήσονται τὸν ἄδικον λόγον.
2. I shall never hate the gods.
 
ὁ ἀγαθὸς υἱὸς ἀεὶ ϕιλήσει τὸν πατέρα.

70 
Revision exercises for section 5C–D
3. The sailors will not stop looking for the captain.
 
οὖτος ὁ ἵππος οὐ παύσεται τρέχων.
4. The master will punish the slave.
 
ὁ μαθητὴς εἴσεισιν εἰς τὸν οἶκον/τὴν οἰκίαν.
5. The women will listen to the words.
 
οἱ σοϕοὶ ἔσονται δίκαιοι.
E – TEST EXERCISE 5
DIKAIOPOLIS Slave, slave, come here.
SLAVE 
Who is this? Who won’t stop calling me?
 
You there! Who was shouting?
DIK. 
Who? I was shouting, boy. But tell me: is Euripides in?
SLAVE 
He is not in and he is in, if you get the idea.
DIK. 
How do you mean, boy? How can a man be in and not in? It is clear that you 
are talking nonsense.
SLAVE 
I was speaking correctly/ the truth. His mind is collecting words and is not in, 
but the man is in, writing a tragedy.
DIK. 
O thrice blessed Euripides, in having such a clever slave. How beautifully he 
speaks! But now, stop teasing me, and call him, boy.
SLAVE 
But it is impossible.
DIK. 
Why is it impossible? Call Euripides.
I won’t go away. No, by Zeus, but I will knock on the door and call Euripides 
again.
Euripides, dear Euripides. Don’t you hear? It’s me, Dikaiopolis calling you, 
from the deme of Cholleidae.
EXERCISE
1. (a) imperfect 
(b) imperfect 
(c) future 
(d) present
2. (a) m., s., nom. 
(b) m., s., nom. 
(c) m., s., acc. 
(d) n., s. nom.

71
Section Six
In this section the aorist tense is introduced (if you are uncertain of terminology, 
please refer back to the note at the beginning of Section 5). You may want to look 
at GE pp. 115–118, #128–138. You will ﬁ nd that in most cases the aorist adds a 
sigma before the ending, just like the future; but, as it is a past tense, it will also 
have an augment, like the imperfect.
6A
Page 63
 
3 ἔκοψε, ἐβόησεν The ﬁ rst examples of the aorist. Note (a) the augment ἐ- (as 
for imperfect); (b) -σε in the ending; note also that π + ς = ψ. The contracted 
verb lengthens the stem vowel before adding the ending, just as in the future.
 
5 ἔκοψα, ἐβόησα 1st person singular (as ἐγώ indicates). Note ἐ- (augment), 
-σα (person-ending).
 
6 τίς ὢν σὺ τούτο ἐποίησας Literally ‘You being who did this?’ or ‘Who are 
you that you did this?’ (2nd singular aorist indicated by σύ). Again, ἐ- 
(augment), -σας (person-ending), and the lengthening of the stem vowel.
 
10 ποιήσω, κόψω What tense?
 
12 τίς ὁ κόπτων; ‘Who is the one knocking?’ Note the use of the participle.
 
 ἐπαύσατο The ﬁ rst example of the middle aorist. Note ἐ- (augment), -σατο 
(person-ending).
Page 64
 
17 ἐπαυσάμην Which person do you think this is? Cf. ἐπαυόμην.
 
 ὦ ᾽γαθέ = ὦ ἀγαθέ.
 
19 μόνοι ‘alone’. Cf. ‘monopoly’, ‘monarchy’, ‘monoplane’ etc.
 
22 ψύλλα … ὀϕρύν There is no point in trying to guess here! ψύλλα is ‘a ﬂ ea’; 
δάκνει has occurred at the beginning of the section 5A (p. 54, line 12), and is 
here used in its basic sense of ‘bite’; and ὀϕρύς is ‘an eyebrow’. To explain the 
humour of the situation, the scholiast (ancient commentator) informs us that 
Chaerephon had shaggy eyebrows and that Socrates was bald.
 
25–26 ὁπόσους … πόδας ‘how many of its own feet’, i.e. how many ‘ﬂ ea-feet’?
 
30–31 πρῶτον μὲν … εἶτα … τέλος δέ … Three stages of the experiment.
 
35 ἐμβάδας Illustrated below, though in the experiment something slightly less 
monstrous is envisaged: ‘slippers’, perhaps.

72 
Section 6A
 
40 ἐποίησαν Resumption of aorist endings. ἐ- (augment) and -σαν (person-ending).
 
42 ὡς ἔλεγον ‘as I was saying’. Notice the difference between the imperfect 
tense and the aorists which follow, ‘they made the wax warm etc.’
Page 65
 
46–47 If the apparent lack of connection here is confusing, it is designed to convey the 
ignorance of Strepsiades. ‘Knowing the ﬂ ea’s leap’ = ‘being educated’, and if 
he’s educated, then he’s sure to win his lawsuits.
Translation for 6A
Strepsiades knocks at the door and shouts
STREPSIADES Boy! Young boy!
STUDENT Go to hell. Who knocked at the door? Who shouted?
STR. 
I knocked at the door and I shouted.
STU. 
Who are you that you did that? Some ignoramus, I know well.
STR. 
Strepsiades, from the deme Kikynna.
STU. 
Go to hell, again.
STR. 
Alas! What shall I do? Well, I’ll knock again.
 
(He knocks at the door again.)
STU. 
Who’s that knocking? Why did this fellow not stop knocking, when I told him 
to? Why are you knocking again? What do you have in mind? You’ve knocked 
away my thought [by] doing that.
STR. 
But I’ve just stopped, my dear fellow. For you told me to. Don’t throw me out, 
although I’m a rustic and ignorant. But what was your thought? Tell me.
STU. 
It isn’t right. Only the students learn these thoughts of the sophists.
STR. 
Tell me then. For I have come to the thinkery as a student of the sophists.
STU. 
I will tell you. A ﬂ ea bites Chaerephon’s eyebrow. When it jumps onto 
Socrates’ head, the men converse as follows.
SOCRATES Look, Chaerephon. The ﬂ ea does not escape my notice being worthy of 
an Olympic crown. But tell [me], how many of its own feet did the ﬂ ea leap?
CHAEREPHON I do not know, Socrates. But why don’t we measure the distance?
SOC. 
How shall we measure it, Chaerephon?
CHA. 
Look. First I take some wax, then I make the wax warm. Finally I put the ﬂ ea’s 
feet into the wax.
SOC. 
What then?
CHA. 
Now the wax is becoming cold. Look, Socrates: for the ﬂ ea has slippers.
SOC. 
But what are you doing now?
CHA. 
Now I am loosing the slippers. Look!
STR. 
Ο king Zeus! Oh the wisdom of the men! But tell me, whatever did the men do, 
student?
STU. 
You don’t escape my notice being a rustic, Strepsiades, not knowing anything. But 
as I was saying, ﬁ rst they made the wax warm. Then they put the ﬂ ea’s feet into 
the wax. Finally they loosed the slippers and measured – of course – the distance.

 
Section 6B 
73
STR. 
Ο king Zeus! The men appear to be wise. Why then do we marvel at that 
[famous] Thales? Indeed I shall easily escape justice. For I shall know the ﬂ ea’s 
leap. Open, open the door!
6B
Page 66
 
1 θηρία GE gives ‘beasts’ – perhaps ‘monsters’ conveys the sense better.
 
4 οἱ … βλέποντες As before: article + participles = relative clause.
 
5 τὰ κατὰ γῆς As before: a very common idiom, using neuter plural of article + 
adjective/adjectival phrase. Literally ‘the things beneath the earth’. Here 
something like ‘subterranean phenomena’ might convey the meaning.
 
6 Strepsiades, of course, takes the words at face value: ‘They must be looking for 
trufﬂ es.’
 
7 πρωκτός If the students are bent double, what is pointing towards the 
heavens?
 
12 ἀστρονομία Possibly in the original production represented by some 
elaborate instrument. Likewise γεωμετρία (14).
 
15 The explanation of the original meaning of ‘geometry’, from γῆ ‘land’ and 
μετρέω ‘measure’.
 
19 περίοδος Both elements are known, ὁδός ‘journey’, περί ‘round’, hence the 
meaning ‘map’.
 
23 A stock joke in comedy was that Athens was litigation mad. Hence, to 
Strepsiades’ over-literal mind, a map couldn’t represent Athens without 
depicting a lawcourt and jurors.
 
30–31 Another over-literal interpretation: on the map Sparta looks too close, so 
Strepsiades suggests moving it further away.
 
35 κρεμάθρας See stage directions (line 34).
 
36 αὐτός ‘Himself’, ‘The Master’.
Translation for 6B
STREPSIADES Heracles! What are these monsters?
STUDENT Hey you! Why are you amazed? Why did you yell again?
Are you amazed at these students?
STR. 
Yes, by Zeus, I am amazed. But what are these ones doing, who are looking 
into the ground?
STU. 
These are investigating subterranean phenomena.
STR. 
Then they are looking for trufﬂ es. Don’t worry about it any more, monsters: I 
know where there are some lovely big ones. But who’s this? Why is his bottom 
looking towards the sky?
STU. 
Because his bottom is studying astronomy.
STR. 
Look! What’s this? Tell me!
STU. 
This is astronomy.
STR. 
And what’s this?

74 
Exercises for section 6A–B
STU. 
Geometry.
STR. 
And what use is this? Tell [me]!
STU. 
With this we measure the land. This is a map of the world.
Do you see? This is Athens.
STR. 
What are you saying? I don’t believe [you]: I don’t see any one of the jurors 
sitting. Where is my deme?
STU. 
It’s here. Do you see Euboea?
STR. 
I see [it]. But where does Sparta happen to be?
STU. 
Where? Here.
STR. 
Alas! Go away, go away! How near us Sparta is. But why don’t you drag this 
away from us a very long way?
STU. 
Impossible.
STR. 
By Zeus, you’ll regret it. But tell me, who’s this who is in the basket?
STU. 
Himself.
STR. 
Who’s Himself?
STU. 
Socrates.
Grammar
At this point your chart should look like this:
 
Present 
Future 
Aorist
Vowel stems 
παύω 
παύσω 
ἔπαυσα
Consonant stems 
 
 
 κ, γ, χ 
εὔχομαι 
εὔξομαι 
ηὐξάμην
 π, β, ϕ 
κόπτω 
κόψω 
ἔκοψα
 τ, δ, θ 
πείθω 
πείσω 
ἔπεισα
 most ζ 
θαυμάζω 
θαυμάσω 
ἐθαύμασα
 μ, ν, λ, ρ 
διαϕθείρω 
διαϕθερῶ (έω) 
διέϕθειρα
 most -ιζω 
νομίζω 
νομιῶ (έω) 
ἐνόμισα
Contracted verbs 
ποιέω 
ποιήσω 
ἐποίησα
 
δηλόω 
δηλώσω 
ἐδήλωσα
 
τιμάω 
τιμήσω 
ἐτίμησα
Note once again that the aorist of contracted verbs has ‘ordinary’ endings -α, -ας, 
-ε … You will meet the aorists of the irregular verbs in the next section.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 6A–B
THE AORIST
6A–B: 1
 
1. ἔθυσε(ν)  
he sacriﬁ ced 
ἔθυσαν 
they sacriﬁ ced
 
2. ἐκέλευσε(ν) he ordered 
ἐκέλευσαν  
they  ordered

 
Exercises for section 6A–B 
75
 
3. ἐκώλυσε(ν) 
he hindered 
ἐκώλυσαν  
they hindered
 
4. ἔλυσε(ν) 
he set free 
ἔλυσαν 
they set free
6A–B: 2
1. you (pl.) pray 
ηὔξασθε
2. they hit 
ἔτυψαν
3. he keeps quiet 
ἡσύχασε(ν)
4. we turn 
ἐτρεψάμεθα
5. I persuade 
ἔπεισα
6A–B: 3
1. we defeated 
νικῶμεν
2. he loved 
φιλεῖ
3. I held power over 
κρατῶ (έω)
4. you (pl.) sought 
ζητεῖτε
5. they set free 
ἐλευθεροῦσι(ν)
6A–B: 4
1. ἤκουσε(ν) 
he heard 
 8. ἐδίδαξε(ν) 
he taught
   ἤκουσαν 
they heard 
    ἐδίδαξαν 
they taught
2. ἀνεχώρησε(ν) 
he retreated 
 9. ἐθαύμασε(ν) 
he marvelled
   ἀνεχώρησαν 
they retreated 
    ἐθαύμασαν 
they marvelled
3. ἠτίμασε(ν) 
he dishonoured 
10. ἔθυσε(ν) 
he sacriﬁ ced
   ἠτίμασαν 
they dishonoured 
    ἔθυσαν 
they sacriﬁ ced
4. ἔβλεψε(ν) 
he looked 
11. ἐνίκησε(ν) 
he defeated
   ἔβλεψαν 
they looked 
    ἐνίκησαν 
they won
5. ἐβόησε(ν) 
he shouted 
12. ἐθεάσατο 
he watched
   ἐβόησαν 
they shouted 
    ἐθεάσαντο 
they watched
6. ἐδέξατο 
he received 
13. ἐτρέψατο 
he turned
   ἐδέξαντο 
they received 
    ἐτρέψαντο 
they turned
7. ἐλύσατο 
he ransomed 
14. ἔκοψε(ν) 
he knocked
   ἐλύσαντο 
they set free 
    ἔκοψαν 
they knocked
 
 
15. ἐχώρησε(ν) 
he went
 
 
    ἐχώρησαν 
they went
6A–B: 5
1. ἠκούσαμεν 
 6. ἐβόησατε
2. ἐδέξαντο 
 7. ἐνόμισε(ν)
3. ἀνεχώρησας 
 8. ἐδήλωσα
4. ἐδίωξε(ν) 
 9. ἔμειναν
5. ἐκόλασαν 
10. διέφθειραν

76 
Revision exercises for section 6A–B
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 6A–B
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1. a. Who is knocking at the door? ἔκοψε(ν)
 
b. Who is going into the thinkery? ἐχώρησε(ν)
 
c. But I knock again and do not stop knocking. ἔκοψα, 
  ἐπαυσάμην
 
d. I will tell you. ἔλεξα, εἶπον
 
e. Finally we shall release the slipper. ἐλύσαμεν
 
f. Why do we admire that Thales? ἐθαυμάσαμεν
2. a. The ﬂ ea leaps onto Socrates’ head. ἐπήδησεν
 
b. But how will you measure, Chaerephon? ἐμέτρησας
 
c. Finally we measure the distance. ἐμετρήσαμεν
 
d. These are seeking things below the ground and do not stop seeking. 
  ἐζήτησαν, ἐπαύσαντο
 
e. What does the matter reveal, Socrates? ἐδήλωσε(ν)
3. a. αὐδάω 
they spoke 
f. ὠθέω 
I pushed
 
b. ἐλπίζω 
you (s.) hoped 
g. ἐρωτάω 
they asked
 
c. ὁμολογέω 
you (pl.) agreed 
h. οἰκέω 
I lived, dwelt
 
d. ἡγέομαι 
I considered, led i. ἀσπάζομαι 
they greeted
 
e. ἄρχομαι 
they began 
j. ἐκπέμπω 
he sent out
4.
present 
imperfect 
future 
aorist
κελεύω 
ἐκέλευον 
κελεύσω 
ἐκέλευσα
κωλύω 
ἐκώλυον 
κωλύσω 
ἐκώλυσα
παύομαι 
ἐπαυόμην 
παύσομαι 
ἐπαυσάμην
βλέπω 
ἔβλεπον 
βλέψω 
ἔβλεψα
κόπτω 
ἔκοπτον 
κόψω 
ἔκοψα
κρύπτω 
ἔκρυπτον 
κρύψω 
ἔκρυψα
δέχομαι 
ἐδεχόμην 
δέξομαι 
ἐδεξάμην
διώκω 
ἐδίωκον 
διώξω 
ἐδίωξα
πράττω 
ἔπραττον 
πράξω 
ἔπραξα
ἀτιμάζω 
ἠτίμαζον 
ἀτιμάσω 
ἠτίμασα
κολάζω 
ἐκόλαζον 
κολάσω 
ἐκόλασα
σπεύδω 
ἔσπευδον 
σπεύσω 
ἔσπευσα
διαφθείρω 
διέφθειρον 
διαφθερέω 
διέφθειρα
μένω 
ἔμενον 
μενέω 
ἔμεινα
ἀπορέω 
ἠπόρουν 
ἀπορήσω 
ἠπόρησα
δηλόω 
ἐδήλουν 
δηλώσω 
ἐδήλωσα
μισέω 
ἐμίσουν 
μισήσω 
ἐμίσησα
νικάω 
ἐνίκων 
νικήσω 
ἐνίκησα

 
Section 6C 
77
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. The woman looked for her son.
 
ὁ γεωργὸς ἐβόησε καὶ ἔκοψε τὴν θύραν.
2. Don’t they know that you did this job easily?
 
ἆρ’ οὐκ ἴσασιν ὅτι σὺ/ὑμεῖς ἡδέως ταύτην τὴν γνώμην 
ἐδέξω/ἐδέξασθε;
3. The suppliant did not respect/honour the goddess.
 
ὁ σοϕιστὴς οὐκ ἔπεισε τοὺς σοϕοὺς νεανίας.
4. Even though they were wicked, the neighbours did not punish the young 
man.
 
ὁ δίκαιος, καίπερ σοϕὸς ὤν, ἐθαύμασε τὸν ἄδικον λόγον.
5. She stopped looking at the stranger.
 
ἐπαύσαντο βλέποντες τοὺς ἵππους.
6C
New in this section is the second aorist; see GE pp. 124–126, #144–146. As you 
meet them, make a list of these verbs with their principal parts (present, future, 
and aorist).
The aorist tense in Greek is formed in one of two ways:
1. First aorist, which has an augment at the beginning of the word and sufﬁ x 
at the end – compare English ‘regular’ past tenses adding ‘-d’ or ‘-ed’ to 
the present stem (e.g. ‘walk’, ‘walked’). This is the sort you have just 
learned.
2. Second aorist, which still has the augment but it is added to a stem changed 
in some way – compare English ‘irregular’ past tenses (e.g. ‘sleep’, 
‘slept’). The endings are the same as those for the imperfect, but the 
imperfect uses the present stem, while the aorist has its own stem which is 
always different from the present stem.
Note that, again as in English, most verbs have either a ﬁ rst or a second aorist: 
they are not alternative forms for the same verb.
Page 68
 
2 ἐλθέ You have met this already (in fact, three of the most irregular past stems 
have been introduced). ἐλθ- is the second aorist stem of ἔρχομαι.
 
6 ὦ ἐϕήμερε ἐϕήμερος has been met in section 4A (p. 46, line 33) with the 
meaning ‘ephemeral’, ‘short-lived’. Here Socrates uses it for comic effect.
 
 ἦλθες 2nd singular of the second aorist.
 
8 εἰπέ εἰπ- is the second aorist stem of λέγω.
 
 Notice the word order in πῶς δ’ ἤκουσάς με ὡς σοϕός εἰμι; Literally, 
‘How did you hear me that I am wise?’ or ‘How did you hear that I was 
wise?’

78 
Section 6C
 
11–16 The content is repeated from earlier in the chapter, but note the presence of 
second aorists – ἔδακε (second aorist of δάκνω), ἤρου (second aorist of 
ἐρωτάω), ἐλάβετε (second aorist of λαμβάνω), ἐγένετο (second aorist of 
γίγνομαι), and ἔθετε (aorist of τίθημι, a verb which you have not yet learned 
in detail).
 
18 εἶδον ἰδ- is the second aorist stem of ὁράω.
 
19–20 πόθεν ὢν τυγχάνεις ‘Where do you happen to come from?’
 
27 ἐξευρίσκεις εὑρίσκω has perfect tense ηὕρηκα, familiar from Archimedes’ 
cry on discovering the principle of displacement. Second aorist stem εὑρ- is 
met in the next line.
 
29–30 ἔμαθον, ἔτυχε Second aorists respectively of μανθάνω, τυγχάνω.
Translation for 6C
The student goes away. Strepsiades calls Socrates.
STREPSIADES Socrates! Dear little Socrates! Come here!
SOCRATES Who called? Who forced his way into the thinkery of the 
sophists?
SRT. 
I shouted, Strepsiades from the deme Kikynna. But I didn’t force my way into 
the thinkery.
SOC. 
Why call’st thou me, Ο creature of the day? For what purpose have you 
come?
STR. 
I have come as a student into the thinkery. For I have already heard that you are 
wise.
SOC. 
Tell me, who said that? How did you hear that I was wise?
STR. 
One of the students said this.
SOC. 
What did the student say? Tell [me].
STR. 
The student said that a ﬂ ea bit Chaerephon’s eyebrow. Then it jumped onto 
your head. You asked Chaerephon how many of its own feet the ﬂ ea leapt. 
You measured it thus: ﬁ rst you took the ﬂ ea and put it into warm wax. When 
the wax became cold, the ﬂ ea had Persian slippers. Then you measured the 
distance. I have never seen anything so wise.
SOC. 
You have never seen anything so wise? But where do you actually come 
from?
STR. 
Kikynna.
SOC. 
You did not escape my notice being a rustic, and ignorant.
STR. 
Don’t blame me. But tell me, what are you doing in that basket, 
Socrates?
SOC. 
I am walking on air and contemplating the sun.
STR. 
Why are you doing that from a basket and not from the ground? What are you 
discovering or learning, being in a basket?
SOC. 
I never discovered meteoric phenomena nor learnt anything, looking from the 
ground. For the earth happened to prevent thought.

 
Section 6D 
79
Grammar
The second part of your verb chart should now look like this:
Irregular verbs 
present 
future 
aorist
 
μανθάνω 
μαθήσομαι 
ἔμαθον
 
λαμβάνω 
λήψομαι 
ἔλαβον
 
γίγνομαι 
γενήσομαι 
ἐγενόμην
and you should also have added:
 
ἔρχομαι 
εἶμι 
ἦλθον
 
ὁράω 
ὄψομαι 
εἶδον
 
εὑρίσκω 
εὑρήσω 
ηὗρον
Remember to add other verbs with second aorists to the list as you meet them.
6D
This section contains mainly further practice in second aorist stems: these have 
been given in vocabularies so (it is hoped) they should pose few problems.
Page 70
 
3–5 πάσχεις … ἔπαθον The question–answer format may help to link these two.
 
4 ἔλαθον Second aorist of λανθάνω, cf. λαμβάνω, ἔλαβον.
 
6 λήψονται Irregular future of λαμβάνω.
 
7 ἕτερον ‘one of two’. Cf. line 8 πότερον ‘which of two?’
 
10–12 τί δράσω ‘What shall I do?’ is answered by ὅ τι; ‘What?’
 
12 κατακλίνηθι An irregular imperative form. The -κλιν- (Latin clin-) stem may 
guide you towards the meaning ‘lie down’ (‘recline’), and the noun κλίνη is 
anticipated in the stage directions ‘couch’.
 
20 λήσω Irregular future of λανθάνω.
 
28 ἔχεις τι ‘Do you have something?’ meaning ‘Have you an idea/suggestion?’, but 
the literal translation is probably better to lead into the vulgarity which follows.
 
38 γυναῖκα ϕαρμακίδα ‘a woman sorceress’, a ‘witch’ in the sense of a woman 
with supernatural powers.
 
38–43 In ancient Greece the months were lunar, and interest was due at the start of the 
month when the moon rose. Thus no moon = no month = no interest due. In the 
original, Socrates is more impressed with Strepsiades’ reasoning than the 
abrupt termination to this chapter would suggest.
Translation for 6D
STREPSIADES But, Socratikins, why don’t you come down? For I have come into the 
thinkery because, owing much money, I am in debt.

80 
Exercises for section 6C–D
SOCRATES But how did you become a debtor? How do you suffer this?
STR. 
I escaped my own notice having a horse-mad son. So I became a debtor. And I 
suffered this through horse-fever and my son. For my creditors always exact 
justice, and unless I do something they will always exact [justice]. So teach me 
one of your arguments.
SOC. 
One of my arguments? Which do you mean? The greater or the lesser?
STR. 
I mean the unjust one, the lesser, the one stopping debts. For this argument will 
win lawsuits, the greater won’t. What shall I do?
SOC. 
What? First lie down on the couch. Then think out some way out of your affairs.
STR. 
Alas for me! The bedbugs will exact their penalty today.
SOC. 
You there, what are you doing? Aren’t you thinking?
STR. 
I? [Yes] by Poseidon.
SOC. 
And what did you think?
STR. 
Whether I shall escape the bedbugs, which are biting me terribly.
SOC. 
You are talking rubbish.
 
But the fellow’s silent. What’s he doing?
 
(He addresses Strepsiades.)
 
You there, are you asleep?
STR. 
By Apollo, I am not.
SOC. 
Do you have something?
STR. 
By Zeus, I haven’t.
SOC. 
Nothing at all?
STR. 
I have my penis in my right hand.
SOC. 
To hell with you! Don’t joke, fellow.
STR. 
Socratikins!
SOC. 
What, old man?
STR. 
I have an idea.
SOC. 
Tell [me] your idea.
STR. 
I shall take a witch woman and I shall steal the moon by night.
SOC. 
What are you saying? You will steal the moon? Tell [me] – how is this useful?
STR. 
How? Listen. The creditors lend money by the month. So I will steal the moon. 
The moon will no longer rise. How then will the creditors take their money?
SOC. 
To hell with you! You are a peasant and ignorant. I will not teach you any 
longer, since you are ignorant.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 6C–D
THE SECOND AORIST
6C–D: 1
 1. εἶπε(ν), εἶπον 
he, they spoke
 2. ἔλαβε(ν), ἔλαβον 
he, they took
 3. ἔμαθε(ν), ἔμαθον 
he, they learned
 4. ἦλθε(ν), ἦλθον 
he, they went

 
Revision exercises for section 6C–D 
81
 5. ἐγένετο, ἐγένοντο 
he, they became
 6. ἔδραμε(ν), ἔδραμον 
he, they ran
 7. ηὗρε(ν), ηὗρον 
he, they found
 8. εἶδε(ν), εἶδον 
he, they saw
 9. ἔτυχε(ν), ἔτυχον 
he, they happened to…
10. ἔσχε(ν), ἔσχον 
he, they had
6C–D: 2
1. ἐγένοντο 
5. ἤλθετε
2. εἴδομεν 
6. εἶπες
3. ηὗρες 
7. ἔμαθον
4. ἔλαβε(ν) 
8. ἔδραμον
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 6C–D
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1. βιασα- ἐβιασάμην
 
κλεψα- ἔκλεψα
 
θαυμασα- ἐθαύμασα
 
διδαξα- ἐδίδαξα
 
δεξα- ἐδεξάμην
 
ϕιλησα- ἐϕίλησα
 
δηλωσα- ἐδήλωσα
2. μαθ- ἔμαθον
 
ἐλθ- ἦλθον
 
ἐξευρ- ἐξηῦρον
 
διελθ- διῆλθον
3. I saw (ὁράω)
 
I said (λέγω)
 
I escaped notice (λανθάνω)
 
I found (εὑρίσκω)
 
I learned (μανθάνω)
 
I went (ἔρχομαι)
 
I became (γίγνομαι)
 
I suffered (πάσχω)
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. The sailors said that the captain had ﬁ nally learned the truth.
 
ὁ μαθητὴς εἶπεν ὅτι ἐξηῦρεν ὁπόσον ἐστὶ/ἦν τὸ χωρίον.
2. The young men happen to be suffering terribly.
 
ὁ γεωργὸς ἔτυχεν ἀμαθὴς ὤν.
3. The suppliants ran into the temple/shrine.
 
ὁ γέρων ἀπῆλθεν εἰς τὴν πόλιν.

82 
Summary exercises for section 6
4. The women saw the moon.
 
ὁ πατὴρ ἄδικος ἐγένετο.
5. You (pl.) took the money because of your debts.
 
οὐκ ἔλαθές με ἄγροικος ὤν.
SUMMARY EXERCISES FOR SECTION 6
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
1. impossible 
power 
I am able 
 
   I force 
forceful 
force 
 
   I do 
drama 
 
 
   I am amazed 
amazing 
wonder 
wonderful
 
   horse-mad 
I am mad 
madness 
 
   horse 
horsey 
horsemanship 
horseman
 
   I steal 
thief 
theft 
2. All in the right-hand column are diminutives.
 
old man 
little old man
 
child 
baby
 
door 
little door
 
house 
little house
 
father 
daddy
 
Socrates 
Socratikins
 
Pheidippides 
Pheidippidikins
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
When the Persian army and ﬂ eet approach (προσῆλθον), the Athenians quickly 
embark (εἰσέβαινον) on their ships and sail (ἔπλευσαν) towards Salamis. Then 
the Athenians and the other Greeks keep quiet (ἡσύχαζον). Finally the Persian 
ﬂ eet arrives (ἀϕίκετο) and when night comes (ἐγένετο), the ships sail (ἔπλευσαν) 
slowly this way and that. And when day comes (ἐγένετο), the Persians approach 
(προσῆλθον) quickly for a sea-battle, the Greeks are at a loss (ἠπόρησαν) and 
afraid (ἐϕοβοῦντο). Finally they are no longer afraid (ἐϕοβοῦντο) but are daring 
(ἐτόλμων) and advance (ἐπῆλθον) against the barbarians. So they ﬁ ght (ἐμάχοντο) 
in good order and defeat (ἐνίκησαν) the barbarians. And Xerxes also ﬂ ees 
(ἔϕυγε). In this way the Greeks become (ἐγένοντο) free through their courage.
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
γέρων δέ τις καὶ ὁ υἱός, νεανίας ὤν, διελέγοντο περὶ χρημάτων. ὁ δὲ νεανίας 
ἔτυχεν ὀϕείλων πολλὰ χρήματα. καὶ διὰ ταῦτα, οἱ χρῆσται οὐκ ἐπαύοντο 
διώκοντες τὸν πατέρα. ὁ δὲ πατὴρ οὐκ ἐκόλαζε τὸν υἱόν (ἡ γὰρ μήτηρ ἔπαυεν 
αὐτὸν κολάζοντα) ἀλλὰ διενοεῖτο μηχανήν/γνώμην δεινήν τινα. ἐπεὶ οὖν ὁ 
πατὴρ ἔπεισε τὸν υἱόν, ὁ νεανίας πειθόμενος ἦλθε πρὸς τοὺς σοϕιστὰς καὶ 
πολλὰ ἔμαθεν. οἱ γὰρ σοϕισταὶ ἀεὶ ἔπειθον αὐτόν, καὶ πολλὰ καὶ σοϕὰ 

 
Summary exercises for section 6 
83
ἐδίδασκον καὶ πολλὰ χρήματα ἐδέχοντο. οὗτος οὖν ὁ υἱὸς μανθάνων ταχέως 
τὸν δίκαιον καὶ τὸν ἄδικον λόγον, ἀεὶ τὰς δίκας ἐνίκα, ἀλλὰ ἐπεὶ ὁ υἱὸς 
ἐπανῆλθεν οἴκαδε, αὕτη ἡ γνώμη οὐκ ἔπαυε τὰ χρέα τὰ τοῦ πατρός. ὁ γὰρ 
νεανίας οὐκ ἐϕίλει τὸν πατέρα, ἄγροικον ὄντα, ἀλλὰ ἐμίσει. καὶ οὐκ ἐπαύετο 
παίζων πρὸς τὸν πατέρα. τέλος δὲ ὁ γέρων ἐξέβαλεν αὐτόν.
E – TEST EXERCISE 6
A young man happened to owe much money because of his horse-fever. So, while 
the father was always defending the lawsuits of his creditors, the creditors 
pursued him and did not stop exacting their dues. So the father and mother 
converse.
FATHER 
You, wife, appear to be responsible for my troubles. For who took our son and 
talked to him about horses, except you? Who made our son horse-mad, except 
you? Now what shall I do? How shall I stop our debts?
MOTHER You are responsible, husband. As you are ignorant and a yokel, the young man 
does not love you or obey you, but since I am from the city he loves me 
particularly.
 
 But don’t worry about it. For I have an idea. I will persuade and teach our 
son, and by persuading [him] I will stop [him] from his horse-madness.
But [despite] teaching and persuading, the mother did not stop the young man, 
nor did their son stop being horse-mad. Finally the young man went into the 
thinkery of the sophists and became a student. He saw and heard many wise 
things, and the sophists taught him much. When the son learnt the just and the 
unjust argument, the father said:
FA. 
Hurrah hurrah! For now the creditors will not get their money any longer. For 
my son will win the lawsuits through the unjust argument, which is stronger, 
and we shall escape our creditors.
EXERCISE
 
1. (a) aorist 
(b) imperfect 
(c) imperfect
 
   (d) present 
(e) aorist 
(f) future
 
   (g) aorist
 
2. (a) m. pl. nom. 
(b) f. s. acc. 
(c) m. s. acc.
 
3. (a) vocative  
(b) genitive

84
Section Seven: Socrates and intellectual inquiry
This is another very important section which introduces some more extremely 
valuable grammar: inﬁ nitives in 7A (GE pp. 134–135, #150–152), and then in 7D 
the aorist participle is introduced (GE pp. 142–145, #162–166).
You will ﬁ nd the style of these passages, which are only slightly adapted from 
the original, rather different from the style you have met before. In the ﬁ rst 
(7A–C), taken from Plato’s version of Socrates’ defence at his trial (see 
Introduction), you will ﬁ nd some rhetorical features mixed with a discursive, 
almost colloquial style. In the second (7D–F) you will meet the typical style of 
the Platonic dialogue, reﬂ ecting a technical philosophical argument, and in the 
third (7G–H) you will meet the narrative style that Herodotus uses in his 
History.
You may ﬁ nd that it takes you a little while to get used to these changes of style 
and at ﬁ rst the Greek may seem more difﬁ cult. But once you adapt, you will enjoy 
the variation and will have acquired a new skill.
Make sure that you read the ‘Introduction’ to each passage so that you under-
stand the context.
7A–C Plato: Apology 20c–23b
7A
Page 74
 
1 ἐρωτῶσιν οὖν τινες ‘some people ask, therefore …’: a typical rhetorical 
device which allows the speaker to pose the question which he wants to 
answer.
 
3 οὐ βουλόμεθα διαβάλλειν σε ‘we don’t want to slander you’: βούλομαι + 
the inﬁ nitive – a very common pattern.
 
4 διέβαλον, ἐγένοντο Tense?
 
6 ϕανοῦμαι Tense?
 
 ὅτι οὐδὲν ἄλλο ἢ τὴν ἀλήθειαν λέγειν βούλομαι ‘that I want to speak 
nothing other than the truth’.
 
8 εἰδέναι Learn carefully to distinguish the three inﬁ nitives εἶναι, ἰέναι, 
εἰδέναι, GE p. 135, #152.
 
10 ἀνάγκη ἐστί … See GE p. 135, #153.
 
11 που The particle means something like ‘I suppose’, although it is literally the 
indeﬁ nite form of ποῦ ‘where?’

 
Section 7B 
85
 
14 σοϕώτερος ἤ … ‘wiser than …’ See GE p.136–138, #155–160 for 
comparison of adjectives.
 
 σοϕώτατος ‘wisest’.
 
14–15 τί οὖv ποιεῖv με δεῖ ‘What is it necessary for me to do? ‘What must I do?’
 
17 ᾔει What verb does this come from? See vocabulary and GE pp.138–139, #161.
 
18 μὴ θορυβεῖτε The jurors are reacting unfavourably. This is a frequent plea by 
orators who are battling to be heard. 
 
 ὦvδρες = ὦ ἄvδρες.
Translation for 7A
Some people therefore are asking ‘But, Socrates, why are these men slandering 
you? What do they have in mind? From where do these slanders arise and this 
reputation of yours? Speak, then, and explain to us. For we do not want to slander 
you.’ Therefore I want to explain to you and tell you why these men slandered 
me and from where the slanders and this reputation arose. Listen then. And know 
well that I do not want to joke with you, for perhaps I shall appear to be joking, 
but you must be assured (know well) that I wish to speak nothing but the truth.
For, gentlemen of Athens, I happen to have this reputation on account of some 
kind of wisdom. Do you want to know what this wisdom is? As witness, I want 
to bring the god at Delphi. For the god at Delphi will bear witness to my wisdom. 
And indeed it is necessary for the god to speak the truth.
You know Chaerephon, I suppose. He was my companion from childhood, and 
you know how impetuous Chaerephon was about everything. And Chaerephon 
once reasoned thus to himself. ‘That Socrates is wise, I know well. But I want to 
know if anyone is wiser than Socrates. For perhaps Socrates is the wisest of men. 
What then must I do? It is clear that I must go to Delphi and consult the oracle. 
For there is great necessity for the god to speak the truth.’
So Chaerephon went to Delphi and he obtained this oracle in the presence of 
the god. Do not make a din, gentlemen! For, indeed, he asked whether there is 
anyone wiser than Socrates, and the Pythia answered that no one is wiser.
7B
Page 76
 
1–2 λέγει … λέγων You may want to translate this as ‘What does the god mean 
when he says?’
 
5 πολὺν μὲν χρόνον ‘for a long time’. Accusative of duration of time.
 
 ἠπόρουν What verb? What tense?
 
 ἐτραπόμην Second aorist middle of τρέπω. Lit.: ‘I turned myself towards’.
 
9 πολιτικόν τινα ὄντα Agrees with τοῦτον τὸν σοϕόν and refers to him. We 
might say ‘who was a politician’.
 
10 ᾤμην Tense? Verb? The vocabulary will tell you.
 
 ἔδοξέ γε σοϕὸς εἶναι, οὐκ ὤν ‘He thought he was wise, not being.’ Note the 
use of the participle. ‘He thought he was wise, though, in reality, he was not.’
 
 ἐπειρώμην ‘I tried’: the imperfect of πειράομαι.

86 
Section 7B
 
10–11 ἀποϕαίνειν αὐτὸν δοκοῦντα σοϕὸν εἶναι, οὐκ ὄντα ‘to show him that he 
thought he was wise, though when he wasn’t’. Cf. line 13.
 
11 πολλοὶ τῶν παρόντων ‘many of those present’.
 
12–13 οὗτος δοκεῖ τι εἰδέναι, οὐδὲν εἰδώς ‘this man thinks he knows something, 
though he knows nothing’. Cf. lines 10 and 11.
 
 εἰδώς -οτος This is the participle of οἶδα.
 
16 ᾖα Cf. note on 7A line 17, if you are stuck.
 
 ἐπὶ τοὺς ἄλλους τοὺς δοκοῦντάς τι εἰδέναι Cf. line 11.
 
21–22 τοὺς δὲ λόγους τούτους οὐκ ἴσασιν ὅ τι νοοῦσιν ‘they do not know these 
words what they mean’ – ‘they do not know what these words mean.’ This is a 
very common pattern of word order in Greek, which can be difﬁ cult for 
speakers of English. See p. 77, note on 6C line 8.
 
23 ἀπῇα What verb? What tense?
Translation for 7B
When I heard this, I reasoned in this way to myself: ‘What does the god wish to 
say? For I know that I am not wise. What then does the god mean when he says 
that I am the wisest and that no one is wiser? It cannot be that he is lying; for it 
is not lawful for him. It is necessary for the god to speak nothing but the truth.’ 
And for a long time I was at a loss to know what he meant, and then I turned to 
a search [to ﬁ nd out] whether the god was speaking the truth or not. For I did not 
want to be in doubt about the oracle.
Therefore I went to a wise man (at least he thought he was wise). For I wanted 
to test the oracle and to show that ‘You, Apollo, said that I was the wisest, but 
this man is wiser.’ Therefore I spoke with this wise man, who was a politician. 
And the man, as I thought, considered himself to be wise, though he was not. And 
when I tried to show him that he considered himself to be wise, though he was 
not, he and many of those present began to hate me. So, to myself, I reasoned that 
‘I am wiser than this man. For this man thinks that he knows something, though 
he knows nothing. but I, though I know nothing, do not think that I know any-
thing.’ From there, I went to another wise man and he too thought that he knew 
something, though he knew nothing. As a result of this (from this) that man and 
others of those present hated me.
After this, I went to the others who thought that they knew something. And, 
by the dog, those who thought that they knew something were more foolish, as 
I thought, while those who thought they knew nothing were wiser. For after the 
politicians, I went to the poets. And I am ashamed to tell the truth, gentlemen, 
but nevertheless I must tell it. For the poets do not make up their poems by 
wisdom, but by instinct and inspiration, like the prophets and soothsayers. For 
indeed they say many beautiful things, but they do not know what these words 
mean. And, at the same time, the poets thought that they had knowledge, through 
their poetry, though they had none, and they thought they were the wisest of men, 
though they were not. So I went away from there thinking that I was wiser than 
the poets.

 
Section 7C 
87
7C
Page 78
 
4 τοιοῦτον πάθος ἐϕαίνοντο οἱ ποιηταί πάσχοντες ‘such an experience the 
poets seemed to be suffering’. τοιοῦτον πάθος is the object of πάσχοντες: 
‘such was the experience they seemed to be experiencing’.
 
9–10 εὑρίσκουσι πολὺ πλήθος τῶν δοκούντων μέν τι εἰδέναι, εἰδότων δ’ ὀλίγα ἢ 
οὐδέν ‘They ﬁ nd a large number of those who …’ Note μέν … δέ making 
the contrast between what people think they know, and what they actually 
know.
 
13–14 ἔχουσι μὲν οὐδὲν λέγειν ἐκεῖνοι ‘they have nothing to say’, ‘they can say 
nothing’.
 
17 κατάδηλοι ‘obvious’ – the preﬁ x κατα- sometimes simply adds 
emphasis.
Translation for 7C
Finally I went to the craftsmen (artists). For I knew that I knew nothing and that 
the craftsmen knew many beautiful things. Therefore, knowing many things the 
craftsmen were wiser than I. But, as I thought, they considered that because of 
their skill/art they were the wisest in many other respects, though they were not. 
Such was the experience which both the poets and the craftsmen were clearly 
experiencing.
From this search, gentlemen of Athens, arose the slanders against me, which 
are serious, and my reputation. And, moreover, the young men, who are wealthy 
and have most leisure, enjoy listening to my words and often try to examine 
others in the way that I do. For young men are arrogant and very much enjoy 
examining their elders. And, as I think, in the course of examining them, they 
discover a great number of those who consider that they know something, but 
know little or nothing. Therefore, as a result of this, those who think that they 
know something become angry and say that ‘Socrates is a most disgraceful 
person and corrupts the young men.’ But I want to ask ‘How does Socrates 
corrupt the young men? What does he do or what does he teach to corrupt them?’ 
And they have nothing to say, but not wishing to seem to be at a loss, they say 
that, like the other sophists, Socrates teaches ‘the things in the air and the things 
beneath the earth’ and ‘not to believe in the gods’ and ‘to make the weaker argu-
ment the stronger’. For they do not wish, as I think, to tell the truth, that they have 
been revealed as thinking that they know something, when, in fact, they know 
nothing.
Grammar
Do not forget to learn εἶναι, ἰέναι, εἰδέναι, GE p. 135, #152 and the past tense 
of εἶμι ‘I shall go’, GE p.139, #161.
Note also the irregular comparative forms, GE p. 137, #159.

88 
Exercises for section 7A–C
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 7A–C
PRESENT INFINITIVE
7A–C: 1
 
1. διαβάλλειν 
 7. παρεῖναι 
13. θαυμάζειν
 
2. εὑρίσκειν 
 8. νομίζειν 
14. πείθεσθαι
 
3. πειρᾶσθαι 
 9. ἰέναι 
15. δέχεσθαι
 
4. εἰδέναι 
10. κλέπτειν 
16. ποιεῖν
 
5. δηλοῦν 
11. ἀπιέναι 
17. μανθάνειν
 
6. λογίζεσθαι 
12. βιάζεσθαι 
18. λαμβάνειν
7A–C: 2
1. βούλομαι ἰέναι 
5. δεῖ με, ἡμᾶς, ὑμᾶς παρεῖναι
2. βούλονται πιστεύειν 
6. τὸν Σωκράτη δεῖ διδάσκειν
3. φαίνεται νομίζειν 
7. ἀνάγκη ἐστὶν ἀπιέναι
4. φαίνονται διαβάλλειν 
8. ὑμῖν ἀνάγκη ἐστὶ μανθάνειν
COMPARATIVE AND SUPERLATIVE OF ADJECTIVES
7A–C: 3
1. τόν πολεμιώτερον, πολεμιώτατον ναύτην
 
the more hostile, most hostile sailor
2. τοὺς βεβαιοτέρους, βεβαιοτάτους λιμένας
 
the safer, safest harbours
3. τὴν ἀμείνονα, ἀρίστην θεάν
 
the better, best goddess
4. αἱ πλείονες, πλεῖσται νῆες
 
more ships, most ships (αἱ technically makes this ‘the great majority of’, 
‘the huge majority of’)
5. οἱ μείζονες, μέγιστοι βασιλῆς
 
the greater, greatest kings
6. τὰς κακίονας, κάκιστας γυναῖκας
 
the more wicked, the worst women
7. τὸ κάλλιον, κάλλιστον ἄστυ
 
the more beautiful, most beautiful city
8. ἡ δηλoτέρα, δηλοτάτη ἀνομία
 
the clearer, most obvious lawlessness
7A–C: 4
1. τῷ πολεμιωτέρῳ, πολεμιωτάτῳ ναύτῃ
 
to, for the more hostile, most hostile sailor
2. τῶν βεβαιοτέρων, βεβαιοτάτων λιμένων
 
of the safer, safest harbours
3. τῆς ἀμείνονος, ἀρίστης θεᾶς
 
of the better, best goddess

 
Revision exercises for section 7A–C 
89
4. τοῖς μείζοσι, μεγίστοις βασιλεῦσι
 
to, for the greater, greatest kings
5. τῇ κακίονι, κακίστῃ γυναικί
 
to, for the worse, worst woman
6. τοῦ καλλίονος, καλλίστου ἄστεως
 
of the more beautiful, most beautiful city.
PAST OF εἶμι I SHALL GO
7A–C: 5
1. ᾖμεν 
 7. εἰσί(ν)
2. ἦμεν 
 8. ἦμεν
3. ἴασι(ν) 
 9. ᾖτε
4. ἐστί(ν) 
10. ᾔεισθα
5. ᾔει 
11. ἐσμέν
6. εἶσι(ν) 
12. ἦσαν
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 7A–C
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1a.
 
1. λέγειv 
 6. διαϕθείρειν
 
2. διαβάλλειν 
 7. εὑρίσκειν
 
3. δοκεῖν 
 8. ἰέναι
 
4. ἀποϕαίνειν 
 9. εἶναι
 
5. διαλέγεσθαι 
10. εἰδέναι
1b. a. δεῖ ὑμᾶς τὴν ἀλήθειαν λέγειν, καὶ μὴ διαβάλλειν Σωκράτη.
 
  You must tell the truth, and not slander Socrates.
 
b. oὐ βουλόμεθα δοκεῖν ἄριστοι, ἀλλ᾽ εἶναι.
 
  We do not want to seem the best, but to be the best.
 
c. oἱ σοϕοὶ δοκοῦσί τι εἰδέναι, οὐκ εἰδότες.
 
  The wise men seem to know something, although they do not.
 
d. ἀνάγκη ἦν Σωκράτη ἰέναι πρὸς τοὺς σοϕοὺς καὶ διαλέγεσθαι περὶ 
  σοϕίας.
 
  It was necessary for Socrates to go to the wise men and talk about 
  wisdom [with them].
 
e. Σωκράτης, ὡς ἐγὼ οἶμαι, οὐ πειρᾶται διαϕθείρειν τοὺς νέους.
 
  Socrates, as I see it, is not trying to corrupt the young men.
 
f. Σωκράτης ἐβούλετο εὑρίσκειν πότερον τὴν ἀλήθειαν λέγει ὁ ἐν 
  Δελϕοῖς θεὸς ἢ οὔ. καὶ πολλάκις ἐπειρᾶτο Σωκράτης δηλοῦν τὸν θεὸν 
  οὐ τἀληθῆ λέγοντα.
 
  Socrates wanted to discover whether the god in Delphi was telling the 
  truth or not. And Socrates often tried to show that the god was not telling 
  the truth.

90 
Section 7D
2. ἀγαθός ἀμείνων ἄριστος
 
βέβαιος βεβαιότερος βεβαιότατος
 
δεινός δεινότερος δεινότατος
 
κακός κακίων κάκιστος
 
καλός καλλίων κάλλιστος
 
μέγας μείζων μέγιστος
 
μῶρος μωρότερος μωρότατος
 
πολέμιος πολεμιώτερος πολεμιώτατος
 
πολύς πλείων πλεῖστος
 
ϕίλος ϕίλτερος ϕίλτατος
 
χρήσιμος χρησιμώτερος χρησιμώτατος
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. The farmers must go to the city.
 
ἔδει με πρὸς τοὺς ποιητὰς ἰέναι.
2. We must make sacriﬁ ces and pray to the gods.
 
δεῖ σε ἐξετάζειν ἐμὲ καὶ ἀκριβῶς σκοπεῖν.
3. The women are trying to watch the play.
 
πειρῶμαι εὑρίσκειν ὅπως οἱ ποιηταὶ τὴν σοϕίαν ἀποϕαίνουσιν.
4. We know that the king wanted to punish the herald.
 
οἶσθα/ἴστε ὅτι ἐβούλου/ἐβουλόμεθα διαβάλλειν ἐμέ.
5. You seem to be stupid, although you are a teacher.
 
ἐντεῦθεν οὖν ἐδόκουν τοὺς νέους διαϕθείρειν, καίπερ οὐδὲν εἰδώς.
7D–F Plato: Euthydemos 275–277c
Here you meet the dialogue style of Plato, and the aorist participle, GE pp. 142–145, 
#162–166. Note that the aorist participle is formed from the aorist stem.
7D
Page 79
 
5 ἦν δ᾽ ἐγώ ‘I said’ these phrases only occur in direct speech and are very 
common in Platonic dialogue
 
6 ἢ οὔ; ‘or not?’ In Platonic dialogue most questions are asked in the form ‘Is 
X true, or not?’
 
7 ἦ δ᾽ ὅς ‘he said’
Page 80
 
8 εἶεv ‘so be it’, ‘well all right then’. Another very common feature of dialogue 
style.
 
17 ἀκούσας Nom. s. masc. aor. part. act., GE p.142, #162. Note the ‘echo’ 
effect: ἄκουε οὖν, ὦ Kλεινία, ἀκούσας δέ … ‘Listen then, Kleinias, and 
having listened …’

 
Section 7E 
91
 
18 ἀποκρινοῦμαι Tense? Cf. ἀποκρίνομαι.
 
21 πότεροι … ἤ … A double question, ‘are they … or …?’
 
23 … ἠπόρησεν. ἀπορήσας δ᾽ … Cf. line 17.
 
27 … ἐγέλασεν, γελάσας δέ … Cf. lines 17 and 23.
Translation for 7D
Yesterday I went to the Lyceum, Kriton, and I found Euthydemos and 
Dionysodoros conversing with many others. And you know that both these men 
have a good reputation, turning men to philosophy. Therefore, wanting to hear 
their arguments, I said: ‘Do you, Dionysodoros, have a reputation for turning 
people to philosophy and virtue or not?’
‘We certainly seem to, Socrates’, he said.
‘So be it’, I said. ‘Then you must turn this young man to philosophy and virtue. 
They call him Kleinias. He is young. But why don’t you question the young man 
closely, talking here in front of us?’
Euthydemos immediately answered boldly: ‘We are certainly willing to talk 
here, Socrates. But the young man must answer.’
‘But’, I said, ‘the fact is that, Kleinias, enjoys answering. For his friends often 
go to him, asking questions and discussing, and they always question him closely 
while he is speaking and answering.’
And Euthydemos said: ‘Listen then, Kleinias, and answer when you have 
listened.’
Kleinias said: ‘I will do this and answer. For I enjoy answering. Speak then, 
Euthydemos, and question me. For it is by speaking and questioning that a sophist 
turns his students to virtue.’
And Euthydemos said: ‘Tell me then, which people learn, the clever or the 
ignorant?’
And the young man – for it really was a big question – was at a loss. And being 
at a loss he looked at me and blushed.
I, seeing him blush, said: ‘Don’t worry, and don’t be afraid, but answer boldly.’
And at this moment Dionysodoros laughed and with a laugh said: ‘Indeed I 
know very well that Euthydemos will defeat him in discussion.’
I did not answer. For while Dionysodoros was saying this, Kleinias happened 
to answer that the people who learn are the clever people.
7E
Page 81
 
3 ὡμολόγει ‘he agreed’. ὁμολογέω is another common word in Plato.
 
6 ᾖστε What verb does this come from? See vocab., and GE p.146, #167.
 
7 ᾖσμεν Cf. line 6.
 
10 ἀμαθεῖς You can work out the meaning from μανθάνω and then make it 
negative with ἀ-, thus ἀ-μαθεῖς.
 
11 πάνυ γε ‘certainly’.

92 
Section 7F
 
12 ἄρα This particle shows that you are reaching the climax of the argument 
– see also in line 14.
Translation for 7E
And Euthydemos said: ‘But who teaches those who learn, the teacher, or someone 
else?’
He agreed that the teacher teaches those who learn.
‘And when the teacher was teaching you as children, were you pupils?’
He agreed they were.
‘And when you were pupils, you knew nothing yet?’
‘No, by Zeus! For since we were pupils we knew nothing.’
‘Were you then clever, when you knew nothing?’
‘No, indeed, we were certainly not clever since we knew nothing’, said 
Kleinias.
‘Therefore, if you were not clever, were you ignorant?’
‘Certainly.’
‘So then, when you were pupils you knew nothing, but being ignorant you were 
learning?’
The young man agreed.
‘Then it is the ignorant who learn, Kleinias, but not the clever, as you believe.’
7F
Page 82
 
2 ἐπῄνεσαν From ἐπ-αινέω.
 
 ὥσπερ σϕαῖραν ‘just like a ball’, σϕαῖρα = ‘sphere’.
 
2–3 ἐξεδέξατo … ἐκδεξάμενος δὲ … Aor. mid. indic… . aor. mid. part… .
 
4–5 πότεροι … ἤ … ‘are they … or …?’: a double question.
 
7 ἄρα Climax again.
Translation for 7F
So said Euthydemos. The students, making a din and laughing at the same time, 
praised this cleverness. And Dionysodoros at once caught up the argument, like a 
ball, and, having received it, he said: ‘What then, Kleinias? Let’s suppose the 
teacher speaks some words. Who learns these words, the clever or the ignorant?’
‘The clever,’ said Kleinias.
‘Then it is the clever who learn, but not the ignorant, and you did not answer 
well just now.’
At this point the students, laughing vigorously and making a din, immediately 
praised this cleverness. But we, falling into perplexity, were silent.
Grammar
Do not forget to learn ᾔδη, the past tense of οἶδα (see GE p. 146, #167), and ϕημί, 
ἔϕην ‘I say’, ‘I said’ (GE pp. 146–147, #168).

 
Revision exercises for section 7D–F 
93
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 7D–F
AORIST PARTICIPLES
7D–F: 1
1. m. pl. nom.  παύω 
 6. m. pl. nom.  βλέπω
2. m. pl. acc. 
λύω 
 7. f. s. nom. 
δηλόω
3. m. s. nom. 
ζητέω 
 8. m. s. acc. 
πείθω
4. f. pl. acc. 
ζητέω 
 9. m. s. nom. 
βοάω
5. f. s. nom. 
δέχομαι 
10. m. pl. acc. 
τρέπομαι
7D–F: 2
1. βλέψασαν 
 6. βιασάμενοι
2. θαυμάσας 
 7. κολάσαντας
3. τρεψάμενον 
 8. μισήσασα
4. διωξάσας 
 9. δουλωσαμένους
5. ποιήσαντες 
10. δεξαμένη
7D–F: 3
(a) With one look at Penthesilea, Achilles burned with passion.
(b) While he gazed at Penthesilea, Achilles burned with passion.
ᾖδη I knew, and φημί I say
7D–F: 4
1. ἴσμεν 
 6. ἔφη
2. ἔφασαν 
 7. ᾔδη
3. ᾔδει 
 8. φησίν
4. φαμέν 
 9. ἔφατε
5. οἶσθα 
10. ᾔδεσαν, ᾖσαν
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 7D–F
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1.
 
1. βλέψας 
 6. δεξάμενος
 
2. φροντίσας 
 7. βιασάμενος
 
3. ῥίψας 
 8. λογισάμενος
 
4. σώσας 
 9. μαχεσάμενος
 
5. παυσάμενος 
10. ἀποκρινάμενος
2.
 
1. ποιήσας 
4. ἐλευθερώσας
 
3. βοηθήσας 
5. τολμήσας
 
4. ἀπορήσας 
6. θεασάμενος

94 
Revision exercises for section 7D–F
3.
 
a. ἀποροῦντες
 
b. βλέψας
 
c. ἀκούσαντες
 
d. γελῶν
 
e. ἐκδεξαμένη
 
f. ἀποκρινόμενος
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. The students said in answer that lawlessness is not just.
 
ὁ διδάσκαλος ἀποκρινόμενος εἶπεν ὅτι ἀρετή τις ἐστὶv ἡ 
ϕιλοσοϕία.
2. Socrates, hearing the argument, laughed.
 
ὁ Διονυσόδωρος γελῶν/γελάσας τὸν λόγον ἐξεδέξατο.
3. The suppliants hurried to the shrine and prayed to the gods.
 
ὁ σοϕιστής, πρὸς ἐμὲ βλέψας, ὡμολόγησεν.
4. With a glance at me, the woman was silent.
 
ἐπαινέσας αὐτοὺς ‘προτρέπετε’, ἦν δ᾽ ἐγώ, ‘εὐθύς αὐτούς.᾽
5. Having stolen the money the young man shouted loudly.
 
ἀπορήσας ὁ μαθητὴς ἐπειρᾶτο ϕεύγειν.
E – TEST EXERCISE 7D–F
‘You, Socrates,’ I said, ‘question [me] carefully, and I shall reply.’
‘Consider then,’ said Socrates, ‘and if you have anything to object, make your 
objection, and I, for my part, shall obey.’
‘You seem to speak well,’ I said, ‘as I think.’
‘Well then,’ he said, ‘does a philosopher who says that we must not praise all 
the opinions of men speak the truth? What do you say? Do you think he is speak-
ing the truth (lit. does he seem to you to speak the truth) in saying this, or not? 
Answer.’
‘The truth,’ I said.
‘So should we praise and honour good opinions, but not bad ones?’
I agreed.
‘Come then,’ said Socrates, ‘when the plague fell upon the city and destroyed 
it, where did you go, to your friends or to the doctor?’
‘I went to the doctor,’ I said, ‘and my friends went there too. For the doctor 
knew about the plague, being more skilled than the others.’
‘The doctor seemed to be most skilled, then,’ said Socrates. ‘So did you have 
to go to the doctor, and to no one else?’
‘I did,’ (lit. it was necessary) I said.
‘So we shouldn’t praise and respect the opinions of the many about the plague, 
but that of any skilled doctor who happens to be [available]. Do we agree so or 
not?’
‘We do by Zeus,’ I said.

 
Section 7G 
95
EXERCISE
1. (a) present indicative 
(b) future indicative
 
(c) imperfect indicative 
(d) imperfect indicative
2. (a) acc. 
(b) acc.
 
(c) acc. 
(d) nom.
 
(e) m. acc. 
(f) s.
7G–H Herodotus: Histories 4.110–116, the Amazons
Now we change to Herodotus and the narrative style. You will often ﬁ nd that the 
sentences are longer, but the syntax will usually follow the sequence of events, 
with a series of participles leading on to the ﬁ nal event in the main verb.
Aorist participles are frequent, for where in English we would write ‘they 
attacked them and fought them’, the Greeks preferred to have only one main verb 
and to say ‘having attacked them, they fought them’.
The second aorist participle has the same endings as the present participle, but 
has the aorist stem, GE pp. 151–152, #169–171: e.g. λαμβάνων present partici-
ple, λαβών aorist participle.
7G
Page 83
 
1 εἰσπεσόντες Nom. pl. masc. aor. part, of εἰσπίπτω (second aor. ἔπεσον).
 
2 αὐτάς ‘them’, see GE p. 153, #172–173. There are other uses and meanings 
(GE pp. 153–155, #174–176) which will be gradually introduced.
 
2–3 τὰς ἐκ τῆς μάχης περιούσας περιούσας agrees with τὰς Ἀμαζόνας and is the 
acc. pl. fem., participle of περίειμι ‘I survive’.
 
 ἔλαβον. λαβόντες δ’ αὐτάς Note the ‘echo’ effect. Cf. 7D lines 17 and 23 
and 7F lines 2–3.
Page 84
 
5 ἰδοῦσαι εἶδov (second aorist of ὁράω) drops the augment to give the stem 
ἰδ-, therefore the participle is ἰδών, ἰδοῦσα, ἰδόν.
 
6 ἀποκτείνασαι Cf. ἀπέκτειναν line 5.
 
8–9 ἀϕικόμεναι … ἀποβᾶσαι Remember that the Amazons are feminine. Note: 
participle … participle … main verb.
 
10–12 Note the structure: οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι / οὐ γιγνώσκοντες τὴν ϕωνὴν / καὶ ἄνδρας 
νομίζοντες τὰς Ἀμαζόνας / ἐμπεσόντες καὶ μαχεσάμενοι / τοὺς νεκροὺς 
ἀνεῖλον (subject / pres. part. / pres. part. / aor. part. and aor. part. / main verb).
 
12 ἀνελόντες What verb is this from? ἀν-αιρέω, second aorist εἷλον, stem ἑλ-.
 
13 γνόντες From γιγνώσκω, second aorist ἔγνων; the aorist participle is γνοῦς 
γνόντος.
 
 ἐξ αὐτῶν ‘from them’.

96 
Section 7H
 
14 τοὺς ἑαυτῶν νεανίσκους ‘their own young men’ (lit. the young men of 
themselves).
 
 ἕπεσθαι Note the rough breathing. It is from ἕπομαι ‘I follow’.
 
15 εἵποντο What verb? What had they been told to do?
 
16 ἀπῆλθον … ἀπελθοῦσαι The pattern as before.
Translation for 7G
When the Greeks came upon the Amazons and were ﬁ ghting them, they defeated 
them in the battle. And having defeated them, they captured the Amazons who 
survived the battle. And having captured them, they went away in three ships. 
They did not, however, arrive at their native land. For while they were on the sea 
they did not guard the Amazons. And the Amazons, seeing that the men were 
not guarding [them], killed [them]. But the Amazons were not experienced in 
seafaring, and so, having killed the men, they sailed where the wind carried 
[them].
Finally having arrived at the land of the Scythians and having disembarked 
from the ships, they found a herd of horses, and taking the horses they laid waste 
the land of the Scythians. But the Scythians, not knowing the language, and think-
ing the Amazons were men, attacked and having fought a battle (lit. having 
attacked and fought) took up the corpses. Thus, then, they discovered that they 
were women, on taking up the corpses.
Having discovered this, and not wanting to kill [them] any more, but to have 
children by them, they sent their own young men to them, ordering them not to 
ﬁ ght, but to follow and to make camp near the Amazons. So, coming near, the 
young men followed [them] and made camp. And ﬁ rst the Amazons went away, 
but on going away they saw the men following. So the Amazons gave chase, and 
the men ﬂ ed. Seeing the men ﬂ eeing, the Amazons became quiet. In this way, 
then, having learned that the men were not hostile, they did not worry about them 
any longer.
7H
Page 86
 
3 εἰς τὸ αὐτὸ χωρίον ‘to the same place’, αὐτός preceded by the article always 
means ‘the same’. See GE pp. 153–155, #172–176 for the different uses of 
αὐτός. Be careful to distinguish between αὐτόν ‘him’ and ἑαυτόν (or αὑτόν) 
reﬂ exive ‘himself’.
 
4 τὸ αὐτό ‘the same thing’.
 
 ἄξει What tense? What verb?
 
5 τῇ δ’ ὑστεραίᾳ ‘on the next day’. Dative of time when.
 
 αὐτός ‘himself’, emphatic; agrees with the subject: ‘coming himself …’
 
6 τὴν Ἀμαζόνα αὐτήν ‘the Amazon herself’ (emphatic).
 
8 ἐποίουν τὸ αὐτὸ καὶ αὐτοί Cf. lines 4 and 5 ‘they did the same thing 
themselves also’.

 
Section 7H 
97
 
9 συνῴκουν If you cannot identify it, try taking it apart: συν- preposition, -ῳ- = 
ε + οι (i.e. augmented or), therefore the stem is οἰκ- from οἰκέω.
 
14–15 οὐ γὰρ oἱ αὐτοὶ οἵ τε ἡμέτεροι νόμοι καὶ oἱ τῶν Σκυθῶν ‘For our customs 
and the Scythians’ customs are not the same (oἱ αὐτοί).’
 
18–19 δεῖ ὑμᾶς There are two sets of actions which they must perform: (i) ἐλθόντας 
… μέρος and (ii) καὶ ἔπειτα … ἡμῶν.
Grammar
Don’t forget to learn δύναμαι, GE p. 156, #177, and make sure that you under-
stand GE pp. 153–155, #172–176, αὐτός / ἑαυτόν / ὁ αὐτός.
Translation for 7H
So then a young man, on coming across an Amazon who was alone, immediately 
had intercourse with her. And the Amazon did not prevent [him]. And she was 
not able to speak [his language], but by means of a sign she ordered the young 
man to come to the same place on the next day and to bring another young man, 
giving a sign that she herself would do the same thing and would bring another 
Amazon. And the young man went away and told this to the others, and on the 
next day, on coming himself to the same place, bringing another young man, he 
found the Amazon herself who had brought another Amazon. The two young 
men, on ﬁ nding the Amazons and having had intercourse with them, went away. 
But the rest of the young men, on learning what had happened, did the same thing 
themselves also.
After this the Scythians and the Amazons began to live together. The men 
could not learn the language of the Amazons, but the women learned that of the 
Scythians. At last the young men said to them: ‘We have parents and possessions. 
Why, then, don’t we go away to our people? We shall have you as our wives and 
no others.’ But they said to this: ‘We cannot live with your women. For our 
customs and the Scythians’ customs are not the same. For we use bows and 
arrows and ride horses, and we have not learned women’s tasks. But your women 
do none of these things, but do women’s tasks, staying in the wagons and not 
using bows and arrows or riding horses. But if you want to have us as your wives, 
you must go to your parents and obtain [your] portion of the possessions, and then 
come back and live with us.’
Having said these things, they convinced the young men. So the young men, 
on obtaining their portion of the possessions, came back again to the Amazons. 
So the Amazons said to them: ‘But a great fear holds us. For we cannot live in 
this region, having laid waste the land. But if you want to have us as your wives, 
why don’t we get up and go off from this land and, crossing the river Tanais, live 
there?’ And the young men obeyed these things too. So having got up and left, 
and having arrived at the place, they inhabited it.

98 
Revision exercises for section 7G–H
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 7G–H
SECOND AORIST PARTICIPLES
7G–H: 1
1. τὸν λαβόντα 
5. οἱ γενόμενοι
2. τοὺς ἐλθόντας 
6. τὰς ἀφικομένας
3. τὴν μαθοῦσαν 
7. τὸ πεσόν
4. αἱ ἰδοῦσαι 
8. ἡ ἑλοῦσα
7G–H: 2
1. τῷ μαθόντι 
5. τῇ εἰπούσῃ/λεξάσῃ
2. τῆς τυχούσης 
6. τοῖς γενομένοις
3. ταῖς δραμούσαις 
7. τῷ εὑρόντι
4. τοῦ ἀφικομένου 
8. τοῦ λαβόντος
ADJECTIVES/PRONOUNS: αὐτός-ή-όν
7G–H: 3
1. I saw the man 
5. I myself saw the same man
2. I saw him 
6. I myself saw the same man
3. I saw the man himself 
7. He himself saw him (someone else)
4. I myself saw the man himself 
8. He himself did the same thing
7G–H: 4
1. τὸν αὐτὸν ἄνδρα 
5. αὐτοὶ ἀφίκοντο
2. ἆρ’ εἶδες αὐτάς; 
6. τὴν γυναῖκα αὐτήν
3. αὐτὴ ἦλθεν 
7. οἱ αὐτοὶ νόμοι
4. ἔλαβεν αὐτόν 
8. εἶδεν αὐτό
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 7G–H
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1. 1. ἐγένομην γενόμενος 
6. ἔλαβον λαβών
 
2. ἔμαθον μαθών 
7. ηὗρον εὑρών
 
3. εἶδov ἰδών 
8. εἷλov ἑλών
 
4. ἀϕικόμην ἀϕικόμενος 
9. ἔπεσον πεσών
 
5. ἦλθον ἐλθών
2. a. The young men went away and said these things to the rest. 
  ἀπελθόντες
 
b. The Amazons came across the young men and conversed with them. 
  καταλαβοῦσαι
 
c. The young man saw the Amazon and went towards her. 
  ἰδών

 
Summary exercises for section 7 
99
 
d. The Scythians ﬁ nd the Amazons and come closer. εὑρόντες
 
e. The young men came closer and pitched camp. ἀϕικόμενοι
 
f. The Scythians, having picked up the corpses and found them to be 
  women, were amazed. ἀvελόντες, μαθόντες
3. a. αὐτούς
 
b. ὁ αὐτός
 
c. αὐτή
 
d. τὴν αὐτήν
 
e. αὐτός
 
f. περὶ τὰ αὐτά
 
g. αὐτός
 
h. αὐτούς τοὺς νεανίας 
 
i. αὐτάς, αὐτούς
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. The women, seeing the old man, went away.
 
οἱ ἄνδρες ἀνελόντες τοὺς τῶν γυναικῶν νεκροὺς ἀπῆλθον.
2. Saying this/with these words, the sailor laughed
 
εὑρόντες ταύτας τὰς γυναῖκας, oἱ νεανίαι ἐθαύμασαν.
3. Having become pupils, the young men wanted to learn.
 
ϕίλοι γενόμενοι, oἱ νεανίαι δύνανται διαλέγεσθαι πρὸς ἐκείνας τὰς 
γυναῖκας.
4. On discovering the men, the women stopped worrying.
 
ταῦτα εἰποῦσαι αἱ γυναῖκες ἔπεισαν τοὺς νεανίας.
5. After this the boy ran into the house and looked for his father.
 
διὰ δὲ ταῦτα oἱ νεανίαι πρὸς τὰς οἰκίας ἐπανελθόντες τὰ κτήματα 
ἔλαβον.
SUMMARY EXERCISES FOR SECTION 7
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
1.
necessity, necessary, I compel
I laugh, laughter, laughable
I cross, the crossing
I destroy, the destruction
I am able, powerful, force/power
I praise, the praise
a possession, I possess, the (act of) possessing
I reason, the reasoning
I agree, the agreement
I try, the attempt
I guard, the guard (person), the guard (act of guarding), unguarded

100 
Summary exercises for section 7
2.
 
 μάχη battle, μάχομαι I ﬁ ght; ἀληθής true, ἀλήθεια truth; διαβάλλω I slander, 
διαβολή slander; σοϕία wisdom, σοϕός wise; ἀποϕαίνω I reveal, ϕάσμα 
apparition, ϕαίνομαι I appear; λόγος word, argument, λογίζομαι I reason; 
ἡδέως with pleasure, ἥδομαι I have pleasure; νέος young, νεανίας young man; 
οἰκέω I live, οἰκία house; δοκέω I seem, δόξα reputation
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
αἱ δ’ Ἀμαζόνες τοὺς Ἀθηναίους ἀποκτείνασαι πρὸς τὴν τῶν Σκυθῶν γῆν 
ἀϕίκοντο. ἀϕικόμεναι δὲ καὶ ἵππους εὑροῦσαι πρὸς τοὺς Σκύθας ἐμαχέσαντο. 
οἱ δὲ Σκύθαι αὐτὰς νικήσαντές τε καὶ περὶ αὐτῶν γνόντες ϕίλοι γίγνεσθαι 
ἐβούλοντο. οἱ οὖν νεάνιαι πλησίον ἑπόμενοι οὐκ ἐμαχέσαντο. αἱ δ᾽ Ἀμαζόνες 
ταῦτα ἰδοῦσαι αὐταὶ ἡσύχαζον. τέλος δὲ ϕίλοι γενόμενοι συνῴκησαν ἀλλήλοις, 
ἀλλὰ ἔδει τούς τε νεανίας καὶ τὰς γυναῖκας διὰ τὸν ποταμὸν διαβαίνειν καὶ 
ἄλλην τινὰ χώραν οἰκεῖν. ‘τὴν γὰρ ὑμετέραν γῆν’, ἔϕασαν αἱ Ἀμαζόνες, ‘οὐ 
βουλόμεθα οἰκεῖν, ἐπειδὴ ἀϕικόμεναι πρὸς ὑμᾶς ἐμαχεσάμεθα.’
E – TEST EXERCISE 7
Some Amazons arrived in the land of the Scythians and disembarked from their 
boats, and falling on the land they laid it waste. The Scythians defeated them in 
battle, and taking up their corpses and ﬁ nding them to be women, wanted to have 
children by them. So they ordered their young men never to ﬁ ght, but to go closer 
and become friends, and they sent them towards the Amazons. The Amazons, on 
seeing them following close by but not ﬁ ghting, no longer worried about them. 
Then a Scythian, coming across an Amazon who was on her own, and becoming 
friendly [with her], advised the others to do the same, and, if they came on any 
Amazons, to become friends. So the others obeyed, and eventually the Scythians 
and the Amazons began to live together. But the Amazons did not wish to go back 
to the mass of the Scythians. ‘For’, they said, ‘we cannot live with your women. 
For our customs and those of the Scythians are not the same.’ So, taking their 
possessions and crossing the river, they found a land near by and lived in it.
EXERCISE
 
1. (a) aorist 
(b) aorist 
(c) present 
(d) aorist
 
   (e) present 
(f) aorist
 
2. (a) imperfect 
(b) aorist 
(c) imperfect 
(d) aorist

101
Section Eight: Aristophanes’ Birds
Now we return to Dikaiopolis and the rhapsode, and to an episode based on 
another play of Aristophanes, where he escapes into fantasy from the bitter 
realities of life in Athens during the Peloponnesian War. The social comment, 
however amusingly expressed, is deeply serious.
This section introduces the genitive case formally. You have already met it 
frequently, but now all forms of it are laid out (GE pp. 160–161, #178–179) and 
the main uses are listed (GE pp. 163–165, #180). You will also meet other forms 
of the comparative (GE pp. 165–167, #181–182) as well as the optative mood 
(GE pp. 167–169, #183–186).
8A
Page 90
 
1 Look for the subject and the two aorist participles before you go on to the main 
verb.
 
4 ἀπιόντα Remember the difference between ὤν (‘being’) and ἰών (‘going’). 
The ‘going’ verb has an iota, the ‘being’ verb does not.
 
3–4 καθορᾷ …, κατιδών If you remove the preﬁ x, καθ-, κατ-, you should be able 
to recognise the verb. ἰδ is the stem of the second aorist εἶδoν.
 
8 λαμβάνεται τοῦ ἱματίου He takes hold of his tunic. The genitive is used 
because he takes hold of part of his tunic (not the whole thing). This is called a 
partitive genitive.
Page 91
 
11 τίς ὢν σύ … Note the idiomatic use of the participle, ‘Who are you to take 
hold of…?’
 
13 τυγχάνω + participle ‘happen to be …’
 
19 ὑμῶν ἕνεκα ἕνεκα follows the word it governs.
 
20 περιμενοῦμεν Tense? Cf. περιμένομεν: which is future and which is present 
and how can you tell? See GE p. 104, #117. 
 
21 φθάνω + participle ‘to do something before someone else’. See GE p. 86, 
#95.
 
23 ποῖ δὴ καὶ πόθεν; You will need to supply verbs in English, but the meaning 
should be clear.

102 
Section 8A
 
25 κυρία ἐκκλησία There was a ‘sovereign’ assembly once a month unless 
additional emergency ones were needed. κύριος is a word with a wide range of 
meanings, all of which are concerned with authority or power. The head of the 
family is ὁ κύριος, and the word is also used in the New Testament for Jesus 
Christ.
Page 92
 
27–28 μῶν εἰς κόρακας; Joke! Cf. 6A line 4 βάλλ᾿ εἰς κόρακας.
 
29 ἀνιστάμεθα See GE p. 170, #187.
 
30 λέγοιτ᾿ ἄν This is a new mood, called the optative (GE pp. 167–169, 
#183–186). Don’t try to learn it now, but you may want to start making a 
chart to ﬁ ll in. You can usually recognise it easily because of -οι- in the 
ending. The optative + ἄν means ‘could’ or ‘would’. It is called the potential 
optative.
 
31 ἂν ἀκούοιμι Another one.
 
32 λέγοιμι ἄν And another.
 
 ἀπράγμονα ἀ-πράγμων = ‘not busy’ or more often ‘not meddlesome’, or 
‘trouble-free’. It is the opposite of πολυπράγμων ‘meddling’. Cf. πράττω and 
πρᾶγμα.
Translation for 8A
Dikaiopolis, having observed the lawlessness of the Eleven and having heard the 
words of the suppliant, goes away through the crowd of citizens towards the 
agora with the rhapsode. And Euelpides the son of Polemarchos sees him going 
away with the rhapsode towards the market-place. Having seen them, he sends 
his slave to them. Thus Euelpides’ slave approaches Dikaiopolis and shouts, as 
he comes up.
SLAVE 
Wait, Dikaiopolis, wait!
DIKAIOPOLIS What shout is that? Who is responsible for that shout?
 
The slave runs up and grabs his tunic.
SL. 
I was the cause of the shouting.
DIK. 
Who are you, and why are you holding my tunic, my good fellow?
SL. 
I am a slave.
DIK. 
But whose slave are you? Who sent you?
SL. 
I am the slave of Euelpides, and he happened to send me. For Euelpides, the 
son of Polemarchus, greets you.
DIK. 
But where is he?
SL. 
Here he is, he is coming up behind. Do you not see him, running through the 
crowd of people? And a friend of his is following with him, Peisetairos, the son 
of Stilbonides. It is clear that he is running after you. But wait!
DIK. 
We will wait.
 
Euelpides runs up, holding a basket in his hand. He gets there before 
Peisetairos and taking Dikaiopolis’ hand he greets him.

 
Section 8B 
103
EUELPIDES Greetings, my dear Dikaiopolis, where are you going and where have you 
come from?
DIK. 
From the Piraeus, my friend, and I am on my way to the assembly. It will be a 
sovereign assembly today.
 
Meanwhile Peisetairos comes up, with a crow on his wrist.
DIK. 
Greetings to you too, Peisetairos, but where on earth are you going with that 
crow? Could it be that you are going to the crows?
PEISETAIROS Of course! We are leaving the country, our fatherland.
DIK. 
But why do you want to leave like this, my friends? Please tell me, for I would 
be very glad to know the reason.
EU. 
I will tell you. We are looking for a peaceful place. We shall go there, and 
when we get there, we shall settle in a peaceful city.
DIK. 
But why do you want to carry that crow on your wrist?
EU. 
This crow is guiding us, and we are following it. For who can lead us to the 
crows better than a crow?
DIK. 
He is certainly the best guide.
8B
Page 94
 
1 μείζονα Comparative. See GE pp. 136–138, #154–160 for more forms. Note 
that there are two ways of saying more … than …: GE pp. 137, #158 and GE 
p. 164, #180(e).
 
4 εὐδαιμονεστέραν This is another form of the comparative; see GE p. 166, 
#182. It is easily recognisable, as is the superlative which follows in the next 
line.
 
9 τί παθόντες Aorist participle of πάσχω, second aor. ἔπαθον. Literally 
‘having experienced what, and wanting what, are you leaving?’
 
13 τοιοῦτον τὸ πάθος πάθος is a neuter noun 3c. τοιοῦτον = ‘such’.
 
13–14 εἰς τὸ δικαστήριον Note the -ηριον ending which denotes a place where an 
activity takes place. Cf. ϕροντιστήριον.
 
16 κατεψηϕίσαντο ψηϕίζομαι means ‘I vote’. καταψηϕίζομαι means ‘I 
condemn’, ἀποψηϕίζομαι means ‘I acquit’.
 
20 οἱ μὲν γὰρ τέττιγες … For the Athenian love of litigation see also Section 6B 
lines 23–24, where Strepsiades cannot believe that it is Athens on the map 
because there are no jurors sitting.
 
30 ἀποκρινοῦμαι What is the tense? Cf. ἀποκρίνομαι.
Translation for 8B
DIKAIOPOLIS Are you looking for a greater city than Athens?
EUELPIDES No, by Zeus, I do not mean that. There is no greater city than this one. For, in 
the name of Zeus, Athens is clearly the greatest.
RHAPSODE 
Are you looking for a wealthier city than this one?
EU. 
There is no city wealthier than this one. For Athens is the wealthiest.

104 
Section 8C
DIK. 
What then? What do you have in mind? Do you perhaps hate the city?
PEISETAIROS No, by Zeus, we do not hate the city itself.
DIK. 
Tell me then, my friends, what happened to you, or what is it that you want that 
makes you leave the city?
EU. 
Peisetairos here and I have had a terrible experience, Dikaiopolis, and so we 
want to go away. For we ﬁ nd the affairs of the city hard to bear, especially the 
lawcourts. So great was the misfortune we suffered when we entered the 
lawcourts.
RΗAP. 
What sort of misfortune? What had you done, or what wrong did you do so that 
you suffered this misfortune?
EU. 
We did nothing and we did no wrong, but the jurors condemned us, even 
though we were innocent, because of the false testimony of the witnesses.
DIK. 
I am not surprised that you are setting off to ﬁ nd another city, since you give a 
just account of the lawcourt and the jurors. For the crickets sing for a little 
while in the branches, but the Athenians sing all the time in their lawsuits. You 
are doing this with reason. And it is with reason that I shall not do this. For I, 
like the orators, love the city and I shall never cease to love the city.
PEI. 
Dikaiopolis, what are you saying? Do you really think that the orators love the 
city?
DIK. 
I do. Why not?
PEI. 
But how do the orators show their love for the people? Consider. The war drags 
on, everywhere there is lamentation and funeral pyres because of the plague: 
everywhere there are corpses, there is much lawlessness. Do the orators show 
pity for the people? Do they pity them or not? Tell me. Why are you silent? 
You will not say? They do not pity them, but they will destroy the city, you 
know it well. I will answer for you. The land is full of their audacity, the 
assembly is full of it and the lawcourts are full of it, but the people are full of 
distress.
8C
Page 96
 
3–4 οἴκοι μέν … ἐν δὲ τῇ ἐκκλησίᾳ … Note the contrast.
 
13 βελτίους Not what it seems at ﬁ rst glance – see GE p. 166, #181.
 
15 χείρους What case is it?
 
16 βελτίους What case is it?
 
 κλοπήν Pericles was suspended from his ofﬁ ce of strategos and ordered to 
submit his accounts for inspection. They were found to be ﬁ ve talents adrift and 
he was convicted. His conviction was largely a political move, and he was 
re-elected the following year.
 
21 τὸ ἀγαθόν Plato’s lectures on ‘The Good’ were said to be the ultimate in 
obscurity. But the remark was made by a slave in comedy, and should not 
perhaps be taken too seriously.
 
23 γνούς Aorist participle of γιγνώσκω, from the second aorist ἔγνων.

 
Section 8C 
105
 
25 δύναται GE p. 156, #177.
 
25–26 οἱ μέν … οἱ δέ … ‘some … others …’
 
27–30 A rather touching personal view. It shows Aristophanes’ sympathy with ‘honest 
country folk’, and a glimpse of the pre-war Athens.
 
32 ἂν βουλοίμην ἄν + optative again – ‘could’, ‘would’.
 
 ἀναπείσω What verb does this come from? Try πείθω.
 
33 εἶμι (not εἰμί) ‘I shall go’.
 
34 ἄλλο τι πλήν … ‘anything else but …’
 
42–44 Note ἄν + optative repeatedly.
Page 97
 
46 A quotation from Homer, Odyssey 1.267.
 
48–49 Two lines from the Homeric Hymn to Demeter 216–217. The vocabulary 
should give you all the help you need.
Translation for 8C
DIKAIOPOLIS You seem to speak the truth, Peisetairos. But who will save the 
city, since the orators seem to be worth nothing? Perhaps the people 
themselves?
EUELPIDES Ο Herakles, don’t say that! For the people are most skilled at home, but 
absolute idiots in the assembly.
RHAPSODE But if Pericles –
DIK. 
Don’t speak of Pericles!
RΗAP. 
What do you mean, my friend? Pericles seemed to be the best of them all, so 
they say.
PEISETAIROS But the good citizen makes the citizens better instead of worse. Did 
Pericles do this or not?
RΗAP. 
He did it, by Zeus!
PEI. 
When Pericles began to speak in the assembly, therefore, were the Athenians 
worse, and when he died were they better?
RHAP. 
It is probable that they were. For the good citizen makes the others 
better.
PEI. 
But we know clearly, you and I, that at ﬁ rst Pericles was well thought of when 
the Athenians were, as you say, worse; but when they became better, because 
of him, they condemned him for theft, and it is clear that he was a villain.
DIK. 
You speak the truth, I know it well. Who will save the city? A man who loves 
the city will save it and not destroy it. What must we do?
RHAP. 
Dikaiopolis, you must seek the good of the city.
DIK. 
But what is the good, rhapsode? For I don’t know what it is that is the good [of 
the city].
RHAP. 
You don’t know what ‘the good’ is? But on the ship you seemed to be some 
sort of a philosopher, knowing their jargon.
DIK. 
Don’t mock me, rhapsode! For the philosophers search, as I hear, for ‘the 
good’, but no one can discover it. Some think that it is virtue, and others think 

106 
Exercises for section 8
that it is justice, but they do not know. But the farmers know what is good. 
They have found it in the ﬁ elds. It is peace. For war is full of events, perplexity 
and plague and ﬁ tting out ships; but peace is full of weddings, feasts, relations, 
children, friends, wealth, health, food, wine and pleasure. I do not know if 
anyone else wants to make a treaty and to live at peace, but I would like to, 
myself. But how shall I alone persuade the people? What shall I say or shout or 
order, if I am going to make a treaty? But I shall go, ready to shout and abuse 
anyone who speaks about anything else except peace. Come on now, 
Dikaiopolis, off to the assembly!
EU. + PEI. Yet we are setting off for a place that is peaceful. Farewell!
RHAP. 
I think these men are stupid. I wouldn’t do that. I wouldn’t hurry off to the 
assembly, nor would I want to ﬂ ee from my own country. Don’t they know that 
the poet spoke truly who said
 
‘These matters lie in the lap of the gods’
 
For we must accept the gifts of the gods with resignation, both the bad and the 
better.
 
‘We men must endure the gifts of the gods,
 
 
though grieving. For the yoke lies
 
 
upon our necks.’
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 8
THE GENITIVE CASE
8A–C: 1
1. lawlessness 
τῆς ἀνομίας, τῶν ἀνομιῶν
2. peace 
τῆς εἰρήνης, τῶν εἰρηνῶν
3. market-place 
τῆς ἀγορᾶς, τῶν ἀγορῶν
4. assembly 
τῆς ἐκκλησίας, τῶν ἐκκλησιῶν
5. battle 
τῆς μάχης, τῶν μαχῶν
6. voice 
τῆς φωνῆς, τῶν φωνῶν
7. virtue, courage 
τῆς ἀρετῆς, τῶν ἀρετῶν
8A–C: 2
1. citizen 
τοῦ πολίτου, τῶν πολιτῶν
2. juror 
τοῦ δικαστοῦ, τῶν δικαστῶν
3. poet 
τοῦ ποιητοῦ, τῶν ποιητῶν
4. a sophist 
τοῦ σοφιστοῦ, τῶν σοφιστῶν
8A–C: 3
1. trireme 
τῆς τριήρους, τῶν τριηρῶν
2. Socrates 
τοῦ Σωκράτους
3. relation, kinsman 
τοῦ συγγενοῦς, τῶν συγγενῶν
4. Pericles 
τοῦ Περικλέους

 
Exercises for section 8 
107
8A–C: 4
1. food 
τοῦ σίτου, τῶν σίτων
2. a philosopher 
τοῦ φιλοσόφου, τῶν φιλοσόφων
3. the people 
τοῦ δήμου, τῶν δήμων
4. lawcourt 
τοῦ δικαστηρίου, τῶν δικαστηρίων
5. time 
τοῦ χρόνου, τῶν χρόνων
6. river 
τοῦ ποταμοῦ, τῶν ποταμῶν
7. young man 
τοῦ νεανίσκου, τῶν νεανίσκων
8. heaven, sky 
τοῦ οὐρανοῦ, τῶν οὐρανῶν
8A–C: 5
 1. worthy 
τοῦ ἀξίου, τῆς ἀξίας, τοῦ ἀξίου, τῶν ἀξίων
 2. that 
ἐκείνου τοῦ, ἐκείνης τῆς, ἐκείνου τοῦ, ἐκείνων τῶν
 3. right 
τοῦ δεξιοῦ, τῆς δεξιᾶς, τοῦ δεξιοῦ, τῶν δεξιῶν
 4. ready 
τοῦ ἑτοίμου, τῆς ἑτοίμης, τοῦ ἑτοίμου, τῶν ἑτοίμων
 5. himself 
τοῦ αὐτοῦ, τῆς αὐτῆς, τοῦ αὐτοῦ, τῶν αὐτῶν
 6. difﬁ cult 
τοῦ χαλεποῦ, τῆς χαλεπῆς, τοῦ χαλεποῦ, τῶν χαλεπῶν
 7. your (pl.) 
τοῦ ὑμετέρου, τῆς ὑμετέρας, τοῦ ὑμετέρου, τῶν 
 
ὑμετέρων
 8. greatest 
τοῦ μεγίστου, τῆς μεγίστης, τοῦ μεγίστου, τῶν 
 
μεγίστων
 9. best 
τοῦ βελτίστου, τῆς βελτίστης, τοῦ βελτίστου, τῶν 
 
βελτίστων
10. your (s.) 
τοῦ σοῦ, τῆς σῆς, τοῦ σοῦ, τῶν σῶν
11. much 
τοῦ πολλοῦ, τῆς πολλῆς, τοῦ πολλοῦ, τῶν πολλῶν
12. this 
τούτου τοῦ, ταύτης τῆς, τούτου τοῦ, τούτων τῶν
8A–C: 6
1. suffering 
τοῦ πάθους, τῶν παθῶν
2. number, crowd 
τοῦ πλήθους, τῶν πληθῶν
3. wall 
τοῦ τείχους, τῶν τειχῶν
8A–C: 7
 1. thing, affair 
τοῦ πράγματος, τῶν πραγμάτων
 2. herald 
τοῦ κήρυκος, τῶν κηρύκων
 3. possession 
τοῦ κτήματος, τῶν κτημάτων
 4. speaker 
τοῦ ῥήτορος, τῶν ῥητόρων
 5. old man 
τοῦ γέροντος, τῶν γερόντων
 6. foot 
τοῦ ποδός, τῶν ποδῶν
 7. thought 
τῆς φροντίδος, τῶν φροντίδων
 8. thing, object 
τοῦ χρήματος, τῶν χρημάτων
 9. god 
τοῦ δαίμονος, τῶν δαιμόνων
10. woman 
τῆς γυναικός, τῶν γυναικῶν

108 
Exercises for section 8
8A–C: 8
1. ill-fated 
κακοδαίμονος, κακοδαίμονος, 
 
κακοδαιμόνων
2. going 
ἰόντος, ἰούσης, ἰόντος, ἰόντων
3. being 
ὄντος, οὔσης, ὄντος, ὄντων
4. better 
βελτίονος, βελτίονος, βελτιόνων
5. having set free 
λύσαντος, λυσάσης, λύσαντος, λυσάντων
6. worse 
χείρονος, χείρονος, χειρόνων
7. someone 
τινός, τινός, τινῶν
8A–C: 9
1. Zeus 
τοῦ Διός
2. I 
ἐμοῦ, μου, ἡμῶν
3. ship 
τῆς νεώς, τῶν νεῶν
4. king 
τοῦ βασιλέως, τῶν βασιλέων
5. you 
σοῦ, σου, ὑμῶν
6. eyebrow 
τῆς ὀφρύος, τῶν ὀφρύων
7. old woman 
τῆς γραός, τῶν γραῶν
8A–C: 10
1. juror 
τοῦ δικαστοῦ, τῶν δικαστῶν
2. child, slave 
τοῦ παιδός, τῶν παίδων
3. sun 
τοῦ ἡλίου, τῶν ἡλίων
4. dwelling 
τῆς οἰκήσεως, τῶν οἰκήσεων
5. possession 
τοῦ κτήματος, τῶν κτημάτων
6. plan 
τῆς διανοίας, τῶν διανοιῶν
7. temple, shrine 
τοῦ ἱεροῦ, τῶν ἱερῶν
8. city 
τοῦ ἄστεως, τῶν ἄστεων
8A–C: 11
1. μετὰ τοῦ Σωκράτους 
 8. ἄξιος τῆς ἀρετῆς
2. ἀπὸ τῆς ἐκκλησίας 
 9. αἴτιος τῆς ἀνομίας
3. διὰ τοῦ πλήθους 
10. μετὰ τοῦ κήρυκος
4. ἐκ τοῦ πλοίου 
11. διὰ τοῦ ποταμοῦ
5. καταδικάζω τοῦ ἀνθρώπου 
12. περὶ τοῦ νόμου
6. ἀκούω τῆς γυναικός 
13. ἀπὸ τῶν Ἀθηνῶν
7. λαμβάνομαι τοῦ πολίτου 
14. ἐκ τῆς οἰκίας
ALTERNATIVE COMPARATIVE FORMS
8A–C: 12
1. τὸν βελτίονα, βελτίω ναύτην 
the better sailor
2. τοὺς βελτίονας, βελτίους λιμένας 
the better harbours

 
Exercises for section 8 
109
3. τὴν βελτίονα, βελτίω θεάν 
the better goddess
4. αἱ βελτίονες, βελτίους νῆες 
the better ships.
5. οἱ βελτίονες, βελτίους γεωργοί 
the better farmers
6. τὰς βελτίονας, βελτίους γυναῖκας 
the better women
7. τὸ βέλτιον ἄστυ 
the better city
8. τὰ βελτίονα, βελτίω πλοῖα 
the better ships
COMPARING ADJECTIVES LIKE εὔφρων
8A–C: 13
1. ὁ εὐδαιμονέστερος, εὐδαιμονέστατος ναύτης
 
the more fortunate, most fortunate sailor
2. τὸ κακοδαιμονέστερον, κακοδαιμονέστατον ἄστυ
 
the more unfortunate, most unfortunate city
3. τὴν εὐφρονεστέραν, εὐφρονεστάτην θεάν
 
the more gracious, most gracious goddess
4. τὰς κακοδαιμονεστέρας, κακοδαιμονεστάτας γυναῖκας
 
the more unlucky, most unlucky women
5. ἡ εὐδαιμονεστέρα, εὐδαιμονεστάτη νῆσος
 
the more fortunate, most fortunate island
6. τοὺς κακοδαιμονεστέρους, κακοδαιμονεστάτους διδασκάλους
 
the more unfortunate, most unfortunate teachers
THE OPTATIVES
8A–C: 14
 
1. they ﬁ nd 
εὑρίσκουσιν 
εὑρίσκοιεν
 
2. he/she examines 
ἐξετάζει 
ἐξετάζοι
 
3. we reckon 
λογιζόμεθα 
λογιζοίμεθα
 
4. he/she becomes 
γίγνεται 
γίγνοιτο
 
5. you (s.) marvel 
θαυμάζεις 
θαυμάζοις
8A–C: 15
 
1. you (s.) love 
φιλεῖς 
φιλοίης
 
2. they intend 
διανοοῦνται 
διανοοῖντο
 
3. he conquers 
νικᾷ 
νικῴη
 
4. he/she tries 
πειρᾶται 
πειρῷτο
 
5. they dare 
τολμῶσιν 
τολμῷεν
ἄν + OPTATIVE
8A–C: 16
1. φέροιεν ἄν 
 4. πέμποιμι ἄν
2. διαλεγοίμεθα ἄν 
 5. δέχοιο ἄν
3. σκοποίη ἄν 
 6. ἀδικοῖεν ἄν

110 
Summary exercises for section 8
7. ὁρῷη ἄν 
 9. φυλάττοιμεν ἄν
8. πείθοιτε ἄν 
10. πείθοιντο ἄν
ἀνίσταμαι, I LEAVE, EMIGRATE
8A–C: 17
1. you (s.) leave 
 6. they are able
2. he/she is able 
 7. being able
3. leaving (n.m.s.) 
 8. he/she leaves
4. to be able 
 9. we are able
5. you (pl.) leave, leave! 
10. to leave
SUMMARY EXERCISES FOR SECTION 8
A – VOCABULARY-BUILDING
1. I wrong 
the wrongdoing
   I stand up 
the awakening, 
 
 resurrection
   worthy 
important
   people/I am 
the power of the 
    powerful 
 people
   leader 
the leadership
   I am powerful 
most powerful
   I send 
the procession
   citizen 
constitution 
I engage in 
political/to do with the
 
 
 government 
 city
   difﬁ cult 
I am difﬁ cult/angry
   hand 
I set my hand to 
 
 something, I try
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1.
A But who is responsible for this war and this perplexity? (τούτου τοῦ 
πολέμου, ταύτης τῆς ἀπορίας)
Β 
The orators are responsible for this matter, I know it well. For the city is 
full of noise and shouting because of the war and the boldness of the 
orators. For who does not know about their boldness? (τούτου τοῦ 
πράγματος, θορύβου, βοῆς, τῶν ῥητόρων, τῆς τόλμης, αὐτῶν)
A But I don’t think the orators are responsible for these matters, but [I 
consider them] the best of men. For they always ﬁ ght for the people and 
the city, as they themselves say. (τούτων τῶν πραγμάτων, ἀνθρώπων, τοῦ 
πλήθους, τῆς πόλεως)
Β 
Yes. But they tell lies. For the mass of these men is bad and no 
one is worse than an orator. For the orators seize the assembly and the 

 
Summary exercises for section 8 
111
lawcourt, (τούτων τῶν ἀνδρῶν, ῥήτορος, τῆς ἐκκλησίας, τοῦ 
δικαστηρίου)
2. 1. μένοις ἄν You could wait 
5. ἀποκρίνοιο ἄν You could answer
 
2. λέγοιμι ἄν I might speak 
6. κελεύοις ἄν You would order
 
3. βουλοίμεθα ἄν We would like to 7. παυοίμην ἄν I could stop
 
4. πείθοισθε ἄν You would obey 
8. ϕέροιμεν ἄν We would carry
3. a. i(i) The foreigner sits on the altar. (ἐπί + gen.)
 
  (ii) The ship goes towards the enemy. (ἐπί + acc.)
 
b. (i) I shall go tomorrow into the agora with my friends. (μετά + gen.)
 
  (ii) After this I shall go back home. (μετά + acc.)
 
c. (i) The ship sails past the island. (παρά + acc.)
 
  (ii) The sophist receives much money from the pupils. (παρά + gen.)
 
d. (i) The slave ran towards us, forcing his way through the crowd. (διά + 
     gen.)
 
  (ii) My wife is afraid of the city because of the plague. (διά + acc.)
4. 1. Διονυσόδωρος καλλίων ἐστὶν Eὐθυδήμου
 
  ἢ Eὐθύδημος
 
2. Διονυσόδωρος μείζων ἐστὶν Eὐθυδήμου
 
  ἢ Eὐθύδημος
 
3. Διονυσόδωρος κακοδαιμονέστερός ἐστιν Eὐθυδήμου
 
  ἢ Eὐθύδημος
 
4. Διονυσόδωρος εὐϕρονέστερός ἐστιν Eὐθυδήμου
 
  ἢ Eὐθύδημος
 
5. Διονυσόδωρος ἀμείνων ἐστὶν Eὐθυδήμου
 
  ἢ Eὐθύδημος
 
6. Διονυσόδωρος μωρότερός ἐστιν Eὐθυδήμου
 
  ἢ Eὐθύδημος
 
7. Διονυσόδωρος σοϕώτερός ἐστιν Eὐθυδήμου
 
  ἢ Eὐθύδημος
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1.
 
1. The herald’s son listens to the speaker.
 
  ὁ παῖς ὁ τοῦ ἀνδρὸς τῆς τοῦ ῥαψῳδοῦ χειρὸς λαμβάνεται.
 
2. Who is responsible for this lawlessness, which is so dreadful?
 
  τίς ἐστιν αἴτιος ἐκείνων τῶν βοῶν, μεγίστων οὐσῶν;
 
3. Since we are Athenians we are worth much.
 
  σοϕιστὴς ὤν, οὐδενὸς ἄξιος εἶ.
 
4. Why do you say that no one is wiser than Socrates?
 
  διὰ τί οἱ ῥήτορες πλουσιώτεροί εἰσιν ἢ τὸ τῆς πόλεως πλῆθος/[no ἢ] 
  τοῦ τῆς πόλεως πλῆθος; εἰπέ μοι.
 
5. We made our way through the city of the Lacedemonians.
 
  πολλὰ κακὰ παθόντες πρὸς τοὺς Πέρσας ἐμαχεσάμεθα ὑπὲρ τῆς 
  ἐλευθερίας.

112 
Summary exercises for section 8
2.
ΔΙΚΑΙΟΠΟΛΙΣ ἰδού, ὁρῶ γὰρ παῖδά τινα πρὸς ἡμᾶς προστρέχοντα. τίνος εἶ σὺ παῖς;
ΔΟΥΛΟΣ 
παῖς ὢν τυγχάνω τοῦ Eὐελπίδου, τοῦ σοῦ ϕίλου.
 
εἴποις ἂν ὅτι βούλῃ, καὶ τί βουλόμενος πρὸς ἐμὲ προσέδραμες;
ΔΟΥ. 
ὅ τι; εἴποιμι ἄν. δεῖ γὰρ ἐμέ, ὡς ἐκέλευσεν ὁ Eὐελπίδης, κελεύειν ὑμᾶς 
μένειν.
ΔΙΚ. 
μενῶ οὖν. χαίρετε, ὦ Eὐελπίδη καὶ Πεισέταιρε. τί βουλόμενοι ἀπὸ τῆς 
πόλεως ἀπέρχεσθε; ποῖ διανοεῖσθε ἀπιέναι;
ΠΕΙΣΕΤΑΙΡΟΣ πρὸς πόλιν τινὰ νέαν καὶ χρησιμωτέραν δεῖ ἡμᾶς ἀπελθεῖν.
E – TEST EXERCISE 8
A slave, going through the crowd of citizens, ran towards Dikaiopolis and, taking 
hold of his hand, asked him to wait. Then those who had sent the slave, Euelpides 
and Peisetairos, who were friends of Dikaiopolis, came towards Dikaiopolis and 
greeted him. He, however, since he did not know what their object was in leaving 
the city, asked them where they intended to go and for what reason. They 
answered that they had to look for Cloud-Cuckooland, and, when they had found 
it, to live there. Dikaiopolis thought that Athens was the most prosperous, and 
that no city was better than Athens. So at ﬁ rst he could not understand why they 
were leaving, then having heard about the dikasts and the lawcourt and the politi-
cians, he agreed. For the dikasts seemed to be wronging the good men, and the 
politicians (as it seemed) were actually destroying the people and not pitying 
them. So Dikaiopolis’ friends went away. But he, ﬁ nding the affairs of the city 
and the people hard to bear and thinking that peace was best, decided to make a 
treaty in the assembly. But the rhapsode, who thought that the men were ignorant 
and stupid, did not himself want to accompany him, but went away alone.
EXERCISE
 
1. (a) aorist 
(b) aorist 
(c) present 
(d) aorist
 
   (e) aorist 
(f) present 
(g) present 
(h) present
 
2. (a) genitive 
(b) genitive 
(c) accusative 
(d) nominative
 
   (e) genitive 
(f) accusative

113
Section Nine: Aristophanes’ Wasps
This is a long section with a lively story which introduces several important items 
of grammar, the dative case (GE pp. 176–180, #189–190), the aorist inﬁ nitive 
(GE pp. 187–189, #195–197), the aorist imperative (GE pp. 189–191, #198–200), 
γιγνώσκω (GE p. 201, #209), and the principal parts of common and very irregu-
lar verbs (GE p. 202, #211). None of this is difﬁ cult, but it pays to learn the new 
grammar carefully after each section in which it is introduced.
Before you start you may like to look at the table (GE pp. 176–177, #103) 
where the forms of the dative are set out. Notice the predominance of ι:
in -ᾳ -ῃ -ῳ -ι -ει in the singular
in -αις -οις -σι in the plural
The various uses of the dative are well described in GE pp. 179–180, #190.
9A
Page 100
 
10 τί βουλόμενος As before, ‘wanting what, do you … ?’
 
 ἀπολεῖς με … ‘you will destroy me’, ‘you will be the death of me’. The 
future of ἀπόλλυμι.
 
11 βοῇ χρῶμαι χράομαι (‘I use’) takes the dative (GE p.180, #190 (e)). The 
meaning is the same as if βοῶ had been written.
 
17 ἐμπεσεῖται Future of ἐμπίπτω – πίπτω πεσοῦμαι ἔπεσον.
 
18 τυγχάνεις εἰδώς εἰδώς -ότος is the participle of οἶδα; the inﬁ nitive is εἰδέναι.
 
20 οὑτοιί οὗτος αὕτη τοῦτο + ι is even more demonstrative. ‘These spectators 
here’. (Note that the neuter is τουτί ταυτί.)
 
20–21 κάτειπε…. τοῖς θεαταῖς, πολλοῖς δὴ οὖσιν ‘Tell the spectators, being many 
indeed’. What part of the verb is οὖσιν? Can you recognise it? It is the dative 
plural of the participle ὢν οὖσα ὄν.
 
22 καταλέξω From καταλέγω. What tense?
Translation for 9A
In front of the house are two slaves. They ﬁ rst converse with each other, then with 
the spectators.
SOSIAS 
Hey you, what is the matter with you? (what are you suffering?) Hey you, what 
is the matter with you? I’m talking to you, Xanthias.

114 
Section 9B
XANTHIAS What’s the shouting? To whom are you speaking, Sosias? Wanting what do 
you shout thus? You will destroy me by shouting.
SOS. 
I’m talking to you, unlucky Xanthias, and it’s for your sake that I’m shouting. 
But what are you suffering?
XAN. 
I’m sleeping with pleasure.
SOS. 
You’re sleeping? But I would like to say something to you, ill-favoured man 
that you are, and unlucky.
XAN. 
What would you like to say to me?
SOS. 
I’d like to say to you that a great evil will befall you. For the master will kill 
you. So don’t sleep. Don’t you happen to know what sort of beast we are 
guarding?
XΑΝ. 
I certainly think I know.
SOS. 
But these spectators here don’t know. So tell the story of the play to the 
spectators, who are many.
ΧAN. 
All right, I’ll tell the large number of spectators the story of our play.
9B
Page 101
 
1 ἐκεινοσί Compare οὑτοιί (line 20). ‘That is our master there.’
 
4 τῷ δὲ δεσπότῃ Possessive dative, see GE p. 180, #190 (b).
 
5 κελεύοντι ἐπιθόμεθα πείθομαι takes the dative; ἐπιθόμην is the second 
aorist. ‘We obeyed him ordering.’
 
6 ἐνέπεσεν For the principal parts of πίπτω see 9A line 17.
 
 ἔγνω What is it? Aorist of γιγνώσκω γνώσομαι ἔγνων: see GE p. 201, 
#209.
 
9 ὑμεῖς δ’ ἀποκρίνεσθε ἡμῖν ἐρωτῶσιν Note the dative plural of the participle 
agreeing with ἡμῖν. ‘You answer us asking.’
 
16 οὗτος δέ μοι ἐρομένῳ ἀποκρίνεται ‘This man answers me, having asked.’ 
Note the aorist participle ἐρόμενος from ἐρωτάω ἐρωτήσω ἠρόμην.
 
18 ϕιλόξενος … Φιλόξενος This is the joke we have been working up to, with 
all the words beginning ϕιλ-, a pun on the name of Philoxenos.
Translation for 9B
XANTHIAS That is our master there, who is sleeping above peacefully. Can’t you see him 
sleeping? So this is our master here. But the master has a very old father. The 
master ordered us to guard his father, and we obeyed his orders. For the master 
fell into perplexity about his father, since he knew that he was more wicked than 
the others in the city, and responsible for many evils. For the master’s father has a 
certain illness. So I ask you, spectators, what happens to be the name of this 
illness? You answer us asking. Come now, what does this man say?
SOSIAS 
He in answering us thinks that the old man is ‘a lover of dice’. But I say to the 
man that it is clear that he is speaking nonsense, answering such things. None 
the less ‘love-’ is the beginning of this evil.

 
Section 9C 
115
XAN. 
Yes, the old man loves something. But what does this man say?
SOS. 
This man answers me, having asked, that he thinks the father is ‘a lover of 
sacriﬁ ces’ or ‘a lover of strangers’.
XAN. 
By the dog, old fellow, he is not a lover of strangers (philoxenos), since 
Philoxenos, at any rate, is a homosexual.
9C
Page 102
 
1 ἐξευρήσετε What tense? What verb? If you do not know, look up εὑρίσκω in 
the list of irregular verbs (GE pp. 436–442, #389). You will ﬁ nd this very 
helpful when you need to hunt for an unfamiliar form or if you are not quite 
sure which verb it comes from.
 
2 ἐμπεσοῦσα What verb does this come from? What is it? Try the aorist 
participle of πίπτω.
 
 ὑμῖν ἐν ἀπορίᾳ οὖσι Note that οὖσι agrees with ὑμῖν ‘you being in 
perplexity’.
 
4–5 τῆς μὲν ἡμέρας … τῆς δέ νυκτός Genitive of the time within which, ‘during 
the day and during the night’. See GE p. 181, #191 for time phrases.
 
8–9 ἐπεὶ τὸν πατέρα ἔμαθεν ϕιληλιαστὴν ὄντα ‘When he learned that his father 
was ϕιληλιαστής’. Verbs of knowing and perceiving are often followed by a 
participle, ‘learned his father being …’ The rest of the story will explain why 
his father’s mania was such a bad thing.
 
12 παύσῃ Can you recognise this? (2nd person singular future indicative 
middle.)
 
 πείσῃ Can you recognise this? It comes from πείθω.
 
13 ὁ δὲ πατήρ ‘But his father did not obey him (αὐτῷ) persuading (ἀναπείθοντι) 
him not to go out.’
 
14 ἐκορυβάντιζεν We do not know why he enrolled his father as a Korybant. 
Was it just to take his mind off being a juror, or does Aristophanes say this 
simply for the ridiculous picture of him sitting in court banging his 
tambourine?
 
15 ἐμπεσών What is it? It should be familiar by now! If not see 9A line 17, and 
learn the principal parts of πίπτω.
Translation for 9C
XANTHIAS You will never ﬁ nd [it] out, spectators. Indeed, if you want to know what the 
illness is that has befallen the father, be silent now. For I shall tell you, being in 
perplexity, the illness of the old man. He is a lover of being a juror in the court 
of the Eliaia, like no man. For he is always being a juror and loves the lawcourt, 
sitting in the lawcourt during the day and dreaming of cases during the night. 
Indeed, lovers write on a door ‘Demos is beautiful’, but this man, on seeing and 
approaching, writes alongside near by ‘Kemos (a voting funnel) is beautiful.’ 
So we are guarding this man, having shut him in with these bars which are 

116 
Section 9D
many and big. For when his son learned that his father was a lover of being a 
juror in the lawcourt of the Eliaia, ﬁ nding the illness hard to bear, ﬁ rst he tried 
to persuade him not to go out of the house, saying such things: ‘Why’, he said, 
‘do you always judge cases, Father, in the lawcourt? Won’t you stop being a 
juror in the Eliaia court? Won’t you obey your son?’
But the father didn’t obey him persuading [him] not to go out. Then the son 
introduced the father into the Korybantic rites. But the father, having fallen [head-
long] into the lawcourt, was a juror, drum and all. From that time, having shut 
him inside, we have been guarding him with these nets. The name of the old man 
is Philokleon, while the name of this son is Bdelykleon.
9D
Page 104
 
6 τίσι Dative plural of τίς. ‘To whom is the man speaking?’
 
7 ὡς ἐμοί δοκεῖ This is the impersonal use of δοκεῖ, ‘as it seems to me’.
 
8 ἐντυχών τυγχάνω takes the dative in the sense of ‘ﬁ nding’, ‘happening 
upon’, ‘meeting with’.
 
11 λόγῳ μέν … ἔργῳ δέ … ‘in word … in deed …’; ‘in theory … in practice 
…’ a very frequent contrast.
 
20 καπνῷ ἐξιόντι οὐχ ὅμοιος εἶ ὅμοιος takes the dative (‘like to’): ‘You are not 
like smoke coming out, but more like …’
 
22 oὐδενὶ … ἤ … ‘He seems to me to be more like to no one than 
Philokleon.’
Translation for 9D
BDELYKLEON (Shouts to the slaves from the roof.)
 
Xanthias and Sosias, are you asleep?
XANTHIAS Oh dear, poor me!
SOSIAS 
What is it?
XAN. 
The master is no longer sleeping, but is already standing and shouting.
SOS. 
But to whom is the man speaking?
XAN. 
Bdelykleon is saying something to us, as it seems to me. And our master, on 
happening upon us sleeping, will destroy [us].
SOS. 
He seems to me too to be saying something, Xanthias. But wanting what are 
you standing up/what need makes you stand up, master?
ΒDΕL. 
What need? In theory my father is quiet, Sosias, but in practice he wants to 
go out. And my father always uses audacity when he wants to go out. But 
now, as it seems to me at any rate, my father, having gone into the oven, is 
seeking a hole with great zeal. Lord Poseidon, whatever noise is the chimney 
making?
Out of the chimney comes Philokleon.
 
You, who are you?
PHILOKLEON Me, I’m smoke coming out.

 
Section 9E 
117
ΒDΕL. 
Smoke? But you are not like smoke coming out, as it seems to me, but more 
like Philokleon. What do you think, Xanthias?
XAN. 
He seems to me to be more like to no one than Philokleon, master.
ΒDΕL. 
Here now, look for some other scheme.
9E
Page 105
 
6 νουµηνία The ﬁ rst day of the month was market day.
 
11 τὸν ἡμίονον The ‘half-donkey’ is a mule, offspring of a horse and a 
donkey.
 
12 αὐτοῖς τοῖς κανθηλίοις ‘pack-saddle and all’. See GE p. 180, #190 (h).
 
15 ἄμεινον ἢ σύ Both this phrase and σοῦ ἄμεινον in the next line have the 
same meaning. 
 
17 εἰσιών, ἔξαγε Note the preﬁ xes, ‘going in, bring out …’
 
20–21 εἰ μὴ φέρεις Ὀδυσσέα τινά ‘If you are not carrying an Odysseus’. The 
picture of Odysseus escaping from the Cyclops under a ram should make the 
reference clear.
Page 106
 
25 Οὖτις Odysseus also tricked the Cyclops by telling him that his name was 
Οὖτις ‘Nobody’. (See Homer, Odyssey 9 for the story.)
 
27 Ἰθακήσιος Odysseus came from Ithaka, but he was not ‘the son of runaway 
horse’!
 
31 γιγνώσκω γάρ σε πάντων πονηρότατον ὄντα ‘I know you are (participle) the 
most wicked of all men.’
 
35 λίθων From λίθος we get ‘monolith’, ‘megalith’, ‘lithograph’, etc.
 
37 ἐνέπεσε What tense? What verb? Try πίπτω.
 
41 ϕθήσεται The future of ϕθάνω. For the meaning of ϕθάνω and of λανθάνω + 
participle see GE p. 86, #95.
Translation for 9E
PHILOKLEON But open the door.
BDELYKLEON By Poseidon, Father, never at all.
PHIL. 
But it is the ﬁ rst of the month today.
ΒDΕL. 
This man is preparing a great mischief, as it seems to me at any rate. What do 
you think, Xanthias?
XANTHIAS It seems so to me too.
PHIL. 
By Zeus, not at all, but I am coming out, since I want to sell the mule in the 
market-place, pack-saddle and all.
ΒDEL. 
You want to sell the mule, pack-saddle and all? But I could do this.
PHIL. 
I could do this better than you.
ΒDEL. 
No, by Zeus, but I [could do it] better than you.
PHIL. 
Well, go in and lead out the mule.

118 
Exercises for section 9A–E
ΒDEL. 
But suffering what are you groaning, mule? Is it because today we are going to 
sell you? But don’t groan any longer, mule. What is this affair? Why are you 
groaning, if you are not carrying an Odysseus?
SOSIAS 
But by Zeus it is carrying this certain someone underneath, at any rate.
ΒDΕL. 
Who is the mule carrying? Who are you, fellow?
PHIL. 
Nobody by Zeus.
ΒDΕL. 
You, Nobody? From which country are you?
PHIL. 
An Ithakan, the son of runaway horse.
ΒDΕL. 
Drag him from beneath. Ο most foul man. I know you are the most wicked of 
all men. For my father is most like Odysseus, as it seems to me at any rate. But, 
Father, push the mule and yourself into the house with, all urgency. You then, 
Sosias, push many of the stones towards the door with your hands.
SOS. 
Alas poor me! What is this? From wherever did the clod of earth fall on 
me?
ΧΑΝ. 
Look, master. The man is becoming a sparrow.
ΒDEL. 
Alas wretched me! For it does not escape my notice that my father is becoming 
a sparrow. But he will anticipate us by escaping. Where, where is my net? 
Shoo, shoo, shoo back!
 
(He pursues the father with the net.)
SOS. 
Come now. Since we have shut him in, and the old man will not again give 
trouble to us who have shut him in and are guarding him, nor will he escape our 
notice by running away, why don’t we sleep for a little while?
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 9A–E
DATIVE CASE
9A–E: 1
1. sea τῇ θαλάττῃ, ταῖς θαλάτταις 
5. goddess τῇ θεᾷ, ταῖς θεαῖς
2. perplexity τῇ ἀπορίᾳ, ταῖς ἀπορίαις 
6. victory τῇ νίκῃ, ταῖς νίκαις
3. freedom τῇ ἐλευθερίᾳ, ταῖς 
7. harmony τῇ ὁμονοίᾳ, ταῖς
   ἐλευθερίαις 
 
   ὁμονοίαις
4. safety τῇ σωτηρίᾳ, ταῖς σωτηρίαις 
8. daring τῇ τόλμῃ, ταῖς τόλμαις
9A–E: 2
1. spectator 
τῷ θεατῇ, τοῖς θεαταῖς
2. poet 
τῷ ποιητῇ, τοῖς ποιήταῖς
3. captain 
τῷ κυβερνήτῃ, τοῖς κυβερνήταις
4. sophist 
τῷ σοφιστῇ, τοῖς σοφισταῖς
9A–E: 3
1. trireme 
τῇ τριήρει, ταῖς τριήρεσιν
2. Socrates 
τῷ Σωκράτει
3. relation 
τῷ συγγενεῖ, τοῖς συγγενέσιν

 
Exercises for section 9A–E 
119
9A–E: 4
1. mule 
τῷ ἡμιόνῳ, τοῖς ἡμιόνοις
2. ship 
τῷ πλοίῳ, τοῖς πλοίοις
3. man 
τῷ ἀνθρώπῳ, τοῖς ἀνθρώποις
4. lawcourt 
τῷ δικαστηρίῳ, τοῖς δικαστηρίοις
5. time 
τῷ χρόνῳ, τοῖς χρόνοις
6. friend 
τῷ φίλῳ, τοῖς φίλοις
7. word 
τῷ λόγῳ, τοῖς λόγοις
8. god 
τῷ θεῷ, τοῖς θεοῖς
9A–E: 5
 1. wicked 
τῷ πονηρῷ, τῇ πονηρᾷ, τῷ πονηρῷ,
 
 
τοῖς πονηροῖς, ταῖς πονηραῖς, τοῖς πονηροῖς
 2. that 
ἐκείνῳ τῷ, ἐκείνῃ τῇ, ἐκείνῳ τῷ, ἐκείνοις τοῖς, 
 
ἐκείναις ταῖς, ἐκείνοις τοῖς
 3. disgraceful 
τῷ μιαρῷ, τῇ μιαρᾷ, τῷ μιαρῷ, 
 
 
τοῖς μιαροῖς, ταῖς μιαραῖς, τοις μιαροῖς
 4. like 
τῷ ὁμοίῳ, τῇ ὁμοίᾳ, τῷ ὁμοίῳ
 
 
τοῖς ὁμοίοις, ταῖς ὁμοίαις, τοῖς ὁμοίοις
 5. bad 
τῷ κακῷ, τῇ κακῇ, τῷ κακῷ
 
 
τοῖς κακοῖς, ταῖς κακαῖς, τοῖς κακοῖς
 6. safe 
τῷ σώῳ, τῇ σώᾳ, τῷ σώῳ
 
 
τοῖς σώοις, ταῖς σώαις, τοῖς σώοις
 7. greatest 
τῷ μεγίστῳ, τῇ μεγίστῃ, τῷ μεγίστῳ
 
 
τοῖς μεγίστοις, ταῖς μεγίσταις, τοῖς μεγίστοις
 8. clear 
τῷ δήλῳ, τῇ δήλῃ, τῷ δήλῳ
 
 
τοῖς δήλοις, ταῖς δήλαις, τοῖς δήλοις
 9. your (s.) 
τῷ σῷ, τῇ σῇ, τῷ σῷ, τοῖς σοῖς, ταῖς σαῖς, τοῖς σοῖς
10. much 
τῷ πολλῷ, τῇ πολλῇ, τῷ πολλῷ
 
 
τοῖς πολλοῖς, ταῖς πολλαῖς, τοῖς πολλοῖς
11. this 
τούτῳ τῷ, ταύτῃ τῇ, τούτῳ τῷ
 
 
τούτοις τοῖς, ταύταις ταῖς, τούτοις τοῖς
12. such 
τοιούτῳ, τοιαύτῃ, τοιούτῳ
 
 
τοιούτοις, τοιαύταις, τοιούτοις
9A–E: 6
1. suffering 
τῷ πάθει, τοῖς πάθεσιν
2. crowd, mass 
τῷ πλήθει, τοῖς πλήθεσιν
3. wall 
τῷ τείχει, τοῖς τείχεσιν
9A–E: 7
 1. drama, play 
τῷ δράματι, τοῖς δράμασιν
 2. lord, king 
τῷ ἄνακτι, τοῖς ἄναξιν

120 
Exercises for section 9A–E
 3. name 
τῷ ὀνόματι, τοῖς ὀνόμασιν
 4. thing, (pl.) money 
τῷ χρήματι, τοῖς χρήμασιν
 5. neighbour 
τῷ γείτονι, τοῖς γείτοσιν
 6. lamp, torch 
τῇ λαμπάδι, ταῖς λαμπάσιν
 7. night 
τῇ νυκτί, ταῖς νυξίν
 8. fatherland 
τῇ πατρίδι, ταῖς πατρίσιν
 9. leader, guide 
τῷ ἡγεμόνι, τοῖς ἡγεμόσιν
10. woman 
τῇ γυναικί, ταῖς γυναιξίν
9A–E: 8
1. better 
ἀμείνονι, ἀμείνοσιν
2. going 
ἰόντι, ἰούσῃ, ἰόντι, ἰοῦσιν᾽ ἰούσαις, ἰοῦσιν
3. being 
ὄντι, οὔσῃ, ὄντι, οὖσιν, οὔσαις, οὖσιν
4. having sacriﬁ ced 
θύσαντι, θυσάσῃ, θύσαντι, θυσᾶσι, θυσάσαις, 
 
θυσᾶσιν
5. fortunate 
εὐδαίμονι, εὐδαίμοσιν
6. someone 
τινί, τισίν
9A–E: 9
1. Zeus 
τῷ Διί
2. I 
ἐμοί, μοι, ἡμῖν
3. ship 
τῃ νηί, ταῖς ναυσίν
4. king 
τῷ βασιλεῖ, τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν
5. you (s.) 
σοί, σοι, ὑμῖν
6. eyebrow 
τῇ ὀφρρύι, ταῖς ὀφρύσιν
7. old woman 
τῇ γραί, ταῖς γραυσίν
9A–E: 10
1. juror 
τῷ δικαστῇ, τοῖς δικασταῖς
2. boy, slave 
τῷ παιδί, τοῖς παισίν
3. river 
τῷ ποταμῷ, τοῖς ποταμοῖς
4. dwelling 
τῇ οἰκήσει, ταῖς οἰκήσεσιν
5. possession 
τῇ κτήματι, τοῖς κτήμασιν
6. battle 
τῇ μάχη, ταῖς μάχαις
7. temple, shrine 
τῷ ἱερῷ, τοῖς ἱεροῖς
8. city 
τῷ ἄστει, τοῖς ἄστεσιν
9A–E: 11
1. δοκεῖ τῷ Σωκράτει 
 7. σὺν ἡμῖν
2. ἕπομαι ὑμῖν 
 8. χρῶμαι σοί
3. ἐντυχάνω τῷ βασιλεῖ 
 9. ἕπομαι αὐτοῖς
4. ἐν ταῖς ναυσί(ν) 
10. ἐν τῷ πλήθει
5. δοκεῖ ἡμῖν 
11. ἐπὶ τῇ νίκῃ
6. πρὸς τοῖς θεαταῖς 
12. λόγῳ μὲν … ἔργῳ δέ

 
Revision exercises for section 9A–E 
121
TIME PHRASES
9A–E: 12
1. We went away in the night.
2. The suppliant stayed in the shrine for two days.
3. I shall go within two days.
4. He met the man on the ﬁ rst day.
5. He was shouting all night.
PRINCIPAL PARTS OF VERBS
9A–E: 13
1. λήσει 
 6. ἀνισταῖτο ἄν
2. ἤροντο, ἠρώτησαν 
 7. ἤρετο, ἠρώτησεν
3. δύναιτο ἄν 
 8. ἐροῦσι(ν)
4. ἐροῦμεν 
 9. δύναιντο ἄν
5. ἔλαθεν 
10. ἠρόμεθα, ἠρωτήσαμεν
REVISION EXERCISES FOR 9A–E
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
 1. He is my father, a very wicked man. ἡμῖν
 2. Α great evil will befall you, since you are accursed. ὑμῖν, κακοδαίμοσιν 
οὔσιν
 3. In theory no one in the city is better than your father, but in fact no one is 
worse. ἐν ταῖς πόλεσιν.
 4. Tell the spectator the plot of the play with full (all) enthusiasm. τοῖς 
θεαταῖς
 5. We shout loudly (use great shouts). μεγάλῃ βοῇ
 6. The sailors happened to be on the ships. ἐν τῷ πλοίῳ
 7. We must obey those who give orders. τῷ κελεύοντι
 8. What is the name of the king? τοῖς βασιλεῦσιν
 9. Why do you (pl.) try to persuade me with this argument? τούτοις τοῖς λόγοις
10. On the next day the son chased his father back into the house with the big 
nets. τῷ μεγάλῳ δικτύῳ
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. This woman’s plan is dangerous/terrible.
 
τὸ ὄνομα τούτῳ τῷ θεατῇ ἐστι Φιλόξενος.
2. They are speaking to us and our children/slaves.
 
λέγει ὑμῖν καὶ τοῖς θεαταῖς.
3. He was bringing the man on to the ship with the help of the sailors.
 
χαλεπῶς οἴσουσι καθίζοντες ἐν τῷ δικαστήριῳ.

122 
Section 9F
4. I stole the money with (using) my right hand.
 
ἐνέκλεισα τὸν πατέρα πολλοῖς δούλοις χρώμενος.
5. He is destroying Socrates with a wicked slander.
 
καλοῖς λόγοις ἔπεισαν τὸν δῆμον οἱ ῥήτορες.
9F
Page 107
 
2 ἐάσω The future of ἐάω ‘I allow’.
 
3 λήσεις The future of λανθάνω.
 
5 οὐκ ἐάσας What is this? Compare it with εἴασας. Remember that the aorist 
indicative has an augment. The participle has not.
 
7 πιθέσθαι Aorist inﬁ nitive from ἐπιθόμην (second aorist of πείθομαι). For 
aorist inﬁ nitives see GE pp. 187–189, #195–197. Here the aorist is used to 
emphasise the aspect. ‘You must (χρή) stay here (present inﬁ nitive = 
all the time, a process) and obey me [now] (aorist inﬁ nitive denotes a single 
event).’
 
10 δικάσαι First aorist inﬁ nitive active from δικάζω.
 
 δυνήσῃ The future of δύναμαι: ‘you will be able’.
 
11 μοι … ἐνθάδε μένοντι Note the agreement: ‘How will it be possible for me 
remaining here to be a juror?’ ‘How will it be possible … if I stay here?’
Page 108
 
16 παύσασθαι First aorist inﬁ nitive middle.
 
17 κατάσκοπον κατά, σκοπέω. Cf. the various English ‘-scope’ words. Most 
relevant here is ‘episcopal’, from ἐπίσκοπος an ‘overseer’ or a ‘bishop’ in 
Christian Greek.
 
 γενέσθαι What is this? What are the principal parts of γίγνομαι?
 
19 ἐξευρεῖν What is it? Try the principal parts of εὑρίσκω. Remember that the 
inﬁ nitive does not have an augment.
 
 λαβεῖν What is it? Try the principal parts of λαμβάνω.
 
25 λήψῃ What tense? What person? What verb? Try the future of λαμβάνω.
 
28 ποιῆσαι ποιέω ποιήσω ἐποίησα. Therefore aorist inﬁ nitive active.
 
40 ἐξήνεγκον For the principal parts of φέρω see GE p. 202, #211.
 
47 ἐσθίειν Another very irregular verb: ἐσθίω ἔδομαι ἔφαγον ‘I eat’.
Translation for 9F
Bdelykleon speaks to the father.
BDELYKLEON Listen, Father, I shall not allow you to go out to the courtroom any longer, 
nor will you escape my notice by trying to go out.
PHILOKLEON What’s this? But you will destroy me, not allowing me to go out.
ΒDΕL. 
You must stay here, Father, and obey me.
PHIL. 
But nevertheless I want to be a juror.
ΒDΕL. 
Get up, Father, since today you will be able to be a juror.

 
Section 9G 
123
PHIL. 
But how will it be possible for me to be a juror if I stay here?
ΒDΕL. 
There will be a courtroom for you in your own house and you will be able to 
judge the members of the household.
PHIL. 
What do you say? But in what way and about what?
ΒDEL. 
About many things. Come then. For you have many household slaves, but you 
know well that the slaves do not want to stop doing wrong, but are responsible for 
many bad things. So you must become a spy of the affairs which happen in the 
house. And it will be possible for you being a spy to discover these evils today, 
and having discovered them to exact justice. So wouldn’t you like to do this, and 
to force the household slaves to cease from their evils and become better?
PHIL. 
I certainly would like to. For you convince me with your words. But you have 
not yet said this, from where I shall be able to get the pay. Wouldn’t you like to 
reveal the matter?
ΒDΕL. 
You will get it from me.
PHIL. 
You speak well.
ΒDΕL. 
And you would be willing to do this?
PHIL. 
I would do this.
ΒDΕL. 
Hold on now. For I shall come quickly bringing the things of the lawcourt in 
my hands. By Zeus, I shall bring everything out.
 
The old man waits around, but the son goes into the house. After a short while 
Bdelykleon, on coming out, carries the things of the lawcourt in his hands with 
difﬁ culty.
ΒDΕL. 
Look. For at last I have brought out the things of the lawcourt.
PHIL. 
Indeed, have you brought out everything?
ΒDEL. 
[Yes] by Zeus, I think at any rate that I have brought everything. And I have 
brought out this ﬁ re, at least. Look, near the ﬁ re there is some lentil soup for 
you.
PHIL. 
Hurrah, hurrah! For it will be possible for me to eat the lentil-soup while I am 
judging. And by Zeus I shall eat it, as it seems to me, with all eagerness, being 
clever at eating. But wanting what have you brought out the cockerel?
ΒDEL. 
What? The cock will be able to wake you up with its voice. For the speeches of 
the prosecutors are long, and you are clever at sleeping, although sitting in the 
lawcourt.
Grammar
Make sure that you have learned the principal parts of the irregular verbs you have 
met in this section before you go on further, and check that you can recognise the 
aorist inﬁ nitives active and middle.
9G
Page 110
 
4 ἄκουσον What is it? 2nd person singular of the aorist imperative. See GE 
p. 189, #198. Note this form of the aorist imperative active in -σον.

124 
Section 9G
 
5 ἴθι See GE p. 191, #201 for the imperatives of εἰμί, εἶμι and οἶδα.
 
 λέξον Another aorist imperative.
 
11 κάδων ἕνεκα There were two voting-urns, one for guilty and one for 
innocent. Jurors placed their pebbles in one or the other.
 
12 μὴ ἄπιθι μηδαμῶς, ἀλλ’ ἐμοὶ πιθοῦ καὶ ἄκουσον, ὦ πάτερ More 
imperatives. Note πιθοῦ, the 2nd person singular second aorist middle 
imperative from ἐπιθόμην.
 
14 ἔασον The -σον ending again from the aorist imperative of ἐάω.
 
17 παῦσαι 2nd person singular of the aorist imperative middle of παύω. The 
spelling is exactly the same as the aorist inﬁ nitive active παῦσαι from ἔπαυσα, 
but the context will almost always make the meaning clear.
Page 111
 
24 ἡ κλεψύδρα The water clock was used to measure the time allowed for the 
prosecution speech and the defence speech.
 
32 παῦσαι See the note on line 17 above. Note all the other aorist imperatives 
that follow. The 2nd persons plural are much easier to recognise than the 2nd 
persons singular, because they are like the 2nd person plural of the aorist 
indicative, though without the augment.
 
34 κατηγορεῖτε The κατά- preﬁ x suggests ‘I speak against’, ‘prosecute’, 
‘accuse’.
Translation for 9G
BDELYKLEON Does everything please you, Father? Tell me.
PHILOKLEON Everything does indeed please me, know that well.
ΒDEL. 
Therefore sit down, father. Look, I am calling the ﬁ rst case.
PHIL. 
Don’t call the case, child, but listen.
ΒDEL. 
Well, all right, I’m listening. What do you say? Go on, Father, speak.
PHIL. 
Where are the voting-urns? For I cannot place the vote without voting-urns, 
know it well.
 
The old man begins to run out.
ΒDΕL. 
Hey, you, where are you hurrying?
PHIL. 
I’m running out because of the urns.
ΒDΕL. 
Don’t go away in any way, but obey me and listen, Father.
PHIL. 
But, child, I must look for the voting-urns and place my vote. But let 
[me].
 
(Again begins to run out.)
ΒDEL. 
Stop running out, Father, since I happen to have these cups. So don’t go 
away.
PHIL. 
Fine! For everything of the lawcourt is here – except –
ΒDΕL. 
Speak; what is it?
PHIL. 
Except the water clock. Where is the water clock? Bring it to me.
BDEL. 
Look!
 
(He shows his father’s chamber-pot.)

 
Exercises for section 9F–G 
125
Speak, what is this? Do you not think that this chamber-pot is an excellent 
water clock? Everything is now here.
Sit down, then, Father, and stop worrying. Listen, slaves, and obey me, and 
bring out the ﬁ re. You pray to all the gods, and after praying, prosecute.
 
After bringing out the ﬁ re all the slaves go away, while those present pray to 
the gods.
Grammar
Make sure that you know these forms of the imperative before you go on to the 
next section.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 9F–G
AORIST INFINITIVES
9F–G: 1
 1. to learn 
μαθεῖν
 2. to run out 
ἐκδραμεῖν
 3. to begin 
ἄρξασθαι
 4. to lead out 
ἐξαγαγεῖν
 5. to make, do 
ποιήσασθαι
 6. to wrong (someone) 
ἀδικῆσαι
 7. to consider 
νομίσαι
 8. to guard 
φυλάξαι
 9. to turn towards 
προτρέψαι
10. to sacriﬁ ce 
θῦσαι
9F–G: 2
 
1. to make, do 
aorist 
 7. to judge 
aorist
 
2. to conquer 
present 
 8. to see 
aorist
 
3. to speak 
present 
 9. to begin 
present
 
4. to set free 
aorist 
10. to become 
aorist
 
5. to learn 
present 
11. to go 
aorist
 
6. to run 
aorist 
12. to lead, drive present
AORIST IMPERATIVES AND MORE PRESENT IMPERATIVES
9F–G: 3
1. learn (pl. aor.) 
 7. become (s. aor.)
2. speak (s. pres.) 
 8. receive (s. aor.)
3. speak (s. aor.) 
 9. obey (s. aor.)
4. stop (s. aor) 
10. ﬁ nd (pl. aor.)
5. seek (s. pres.) 
11. stop (pl. aor.)
6. stay (pl. aor.) 
12. let go, loose (s. aor.)

126 
Revision exercises for section 9F–G
VOCATIVES
9F–G: 4
1. voc. 
 7. nom.
2. nom., voc. 
 8. nom., voc.
3. nom. 
 9. voc.
4. nom., voc 
10. voc.
5. voc. 
11. voc.
6. nom., voc. 
12. voc.
πᾶς παντ- ALL, WHOLE, EVERY
9F–G: 5
 1. Be, know
 2. All of you women, go!, all you women are going
 3. It was possible for you all to bear everything
 4. Everyone be brilliant at selling. (Only the accent shows it is imperative)
 5. All of you leave and do not remain but go
 6. It will be possible for all to leave
 7. Everybody come and carry everything
 8. It is not possible for me to carry all these things
 9. Get up and go (s)
10. Go (pl.) and carry all the equipment
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 9F–G
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1. ἐπαυσάμην 
παύσασθαι
 
ἤκουσα 
ἀκοῦσαι
 
ἐποίησα 
ποιῆσαι
 
ἠδίκησα 
ἀδικῆσαι
 
εἶπoν 
εἰπεῖν
 
ἤνεγκον 
ἐνεγκεῖν 
or 
ἤνεγκα  
ἐνέγκαι
 
ἐγενόμην 
γενέσθαι
 
ἔμαθον 
μαθεῖν
 
ἔλαβον 
λαβεῖν
 
ἀϕικόμην 
ἀϕικέσθαι
 
εἶδoν 
ἰδεῖν
 
ἐπιθόμην 
πιθέσθαι
 
ἔπεσον 
πεσεῖν
2. 1. run away, ﬂ ee (pl., pres.) 
 4. show (s., aor)
 
2. know, be (s., pres.) 
 5. arrive (pl., aor.)
 
3. look, see (s., pres.) 
 6. bring (s., aor.)

 
Section 9H 
127
 
7. go (s., pres) 
 9. look (s., aor.)
 
8. be afraid (pl., pres) 
10. cease (s., aor)
3.  1. I want to be a juror in the house, but my son does not allow me to be a 
   juror here.  δικάσαι δικάζειν
 
 2. We must all go out into the market-place.  ἐξιέναι
 
 3. What must you do?  ποιῆσαι
 
 4. It is permissible for Philokleon to prosecute.  κατηγορεῖν
 
 5. The son did not allow his father to go out to the lawcourt.  ἐλθεῖν
 
 6. How shall I persuade you, father, to listen to all the 
   speeches?  ἀκοῦσαι
 
 7. Why aren’t you willing to bring out Philokleon, mule?  
   ἐξενεγκεῖν
 
 8. You (s.) must become a juror in the house.  γενέσθαι
 
 9. They must learn the words of the play.  μαθεῖν
 
10. He himself wants to keep taking the whole fee from his 
   son.  λαμβάνειν
 
11. I shall not allow him to reach the lawcourt.  ἀφικνεῖσθαι
 
12. It is possible for me both to take the whole reward here and eat 
   it.  λαβεῖν, φαγεῖν
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. General, we must stay here and ﬁ ght.
 
ὦ πάτερ, δεῖ σε μένειν ἐνθάδε και δικάζειν.
2. It is possible for me to listen to the orators.
 
ἐξέσται πᾶσιν ὑμῖν πωλεῖν τοὺς ἡμιόνους.
3. I learn many things, but I do not understand everything.
 
πάντα πάρεστιν ἐνθάδε πλὴν τοῦ πυρός.
4. Look at the ships, boys/slaves.
 
ἐξενέγκετε τὰ πυρά/τάς λαμπάδας, ὦ παῖδες.
5. ‘Tell me, what did you want when you knocked on the door?’ ‘What did I 
want? The master.’
 
‘εἰπέ μοι, τί βουλόμενος ἐξέδραμες;’ ‘ὅ τι; τὰ πάντα.’
9H
This section introduces the 3rd person of the imperative, which we have to trans-
late as ‘let him/her …’ or as ‘let them …’ See GE pp. 197–199, #206–207 for the 
full paradigm.
The 3rd person endings of the imperative are easy to recognise:
 
Active 
 
Middle
Singular 
-έτω 
-άτω 
-έσθω 
-άσθω
Plural 
-όντων 
-άντων 
-έσθων 
-άσθων

128 
Section 9H
But it is easy to confuse the active endings -όντων and -άντων with the genitive 
plural of the present and aorist active participles which are the same in spelling. 
Once again only the context will help you.
Page 112
 
1, 3 εἰσίτω and προσίτω Note the 3rd s. imperative of εἶμι ‘I go’.
 
3 ὁ ϕεύγων ‘the defendant’. Cf. ὁ διώκων ‘the prosecutor’ in line 11.
 
5 ἀκούσατε ‘Listen to …’ This must be imperative because there is no 
augment. Compare ἠκούσατε ‘you heard’.
 
7 Λάβης From λαμβάνω. The dog is called ‘Grabber’. There is probably a 
topical reference here to a case which Kleon, the politician, may have been 
intending to bring against a man called Lakhes.
 
11–12 ἐξαπατήσειν µ’ ἐλπίζεις ἐλπίζω is normally followed by a future indicative: 
‘You hope to deceive me.’
 
14 Dogs say αὖ αὖ, and sheep say βῆ βῆ. This is part of the evidence for the 
pronunciation of vowel sounds in the ﬁ fth century BC.
 
16 ‘This seems to me to be another Labes (i.e. Grabber, i.e. thief).’
 
 λόγῳ μέν…. ἔργῳ δέ … Note the contrast. Cf. 8D line 11.
Page 114
 
18 ἀναβάς This is the aorist participle. Note the principal parts βαίνω βήσομαι 
ἔβην.
 
19 ἀναβῆναι Aorist inﬁ nitive of ἀναβαίνω.
 
23 οὗτος ὁ ἀδικήσας ‘the one having done wrong’, ‘the criminal’, ἀδικήσας is the 
aorist participle of ἀδικέω.
 
24 ὅτε ‘When’. Cf. τóτε ‘then’, and do not confuse it with ὅτι ‘that’, ‘because’.
 
 ᾔτησα From αἰτέω αἰτήσω ᾔτησα ‘I ask’.
 
25 οὐ παρεῖχέ μοι αἰτοῦντι ‘did not give it to me asking’. Note that αἰτοῦντι 
agrees with μοι.
 
27 ἑλεῖν αἱρέω αἱρήσω εἶλoν. This usually means ‘to take’ (middle ‘to choose’), 
but in the context of a lawcourt it will usually mean ‘to convict’.
 
29–30 δεῖ σε … ‘You must hear them both, and, having heard them, on that basis 
(οὕτω) cast your vote.’ σε is accusative after δεῖ, and ἀκούσαντα is accusative 
agreeing with σε. The two inﬁ nitives are governed by δεῖ.
 
31 ὡς ὄντα … ‘as being …’ ‘on the grounds that he is …’
 
 κυνῶν … ἄνδρα An intentional absurdity, like μονο-ϕαγίστατον. Note 
μονο- and ϕαγ- and the superlative ending.
 
35 προσιόντων πάντες What is προσιόντων? What makes sense in the context? 
See introduction to 9H.
 
40 κατάβηθι ‘get down’. Note that the 2nd s. aorist imperative of βαίνω is βῆθι.
Translation for 9H
BDELYKLEON If any juror happens to be outside, let him come in and make haste.
PHILOKLEON Who is the defendant? Let him come forward.

 
Section 9I 
129
 
The defendant, who is a dog, comes forward.
ΒDΕL. 
Listen now to the charge. Dog of the deme Kydathenaion has indicted dog 
Labes of the deme Aixone for theft. For the defendant has done wrong by 
eating up the cheese on his own. And indeed the defendant Labes here is 
present.
PHIL. 
Let him come forward. Ο foul one here, I know that you are a thief. But you 
hope to deceive me, I know it. But where is the prosecutor, the dog from the 
deme of Kydathenaion? Come, dog.
DOG 
Woof woof!
ΒDΕL. 
He is here.
ΧAN. 
This one seems to me to be another Labes, who is in word innocent, but in deed 
himself also a thief, and good at eating all the cheese.
ΒDΕL. 
Be quiet, sit down. But you, dog, come up and prosecute.
 
But the dog, not wanting to come up, runs away.
PHIL. 
Hurrah. For at last the dog has come up. But I, at the same time as judging, will 
eat all the lentil soup, and I shall listen to the prosecution while eating.
DOG 
You have heard the charge, men of the jury. For this dog, the one who has done 
wrong, escaped my notice by going off alone and eating all the cheese. And 
when I asked for a share, he did not give [it] to me asking. I shall stop 
prosecuting. Judge.
PHIL. 
But, good fellow, the matter is clear. For it cries out. So I must cast my vote, 
and convict him.
ΒDEL. 
Come, father, by the gods, obey me and don’t prejudge. For you must hear 
both, and having heard on that basis place your vote.
DOG 
Punish him, since he is moreover much the most selﬁ sh eater of all dogs, and 
convict him.
ΒDEL. 
Now I for my part shall call in the witnesses. Let all the witnesses of Labes 
come in, the cup, the cheese-grater, the cooking-pot, and all the other 
equipment. Come, dog, come up, make the speech for the defence. Suffering 
what are you silent? You should speak. For it is possible; and indeed you must 
make the speech for the defence.
PHIL. 
But this one at least is not able, as it seems to me. For he doesn’t know how to 
speak.
ΒDΕL. 
Get down, dog. For I intend to make the speech for the defence, as I know well 
about legal matters.
9I
Page 116
 
2 This is a typical beginning for a speech in a lawcourt. ὦνδρες = ὦ ἄνδρες 
‘gentlemen’.
 
 τοσαύτης διαβολῆς ‘such a great slander’. Do not confuse τοσοῦτος ‘so 
great’ with τοιοῦτος ‘of such a kind’.
 
3 γιγνώσκω αὐτὸν … γιγνώσκω is followed by accusative and participle.

130 
Section 9I
 
7 ἑλεῖν … ἑλόντα … From αἱρέω meaning ‘convict’. See RGT 9H line 27.
 
9 ‘Able to guard many sheep’. This is a character reference. It was normal, and 
indeed expected, in the Athenian courts to smear your opponent’s character and 
to build up your own. As most cheese was made of sheep’s milk, this is not a 
completely irrelevant characteristic. The better the sheep are guarded, the more 
milk, and the more cheese.
 
10 ὑϕαιρεῖται The preﬁ x ὑϕ- suggests stealth. The middle of αἱρέω means ‘to 
take for oneself’.
 
12 κιθαρίζειν γὰρ οὐκ ἐπίσταται Literally ‘he does not know how to play the 
lyre’. The meaning is ‘he is not educated’, or even, ‘he has not had a good 
education’.
 
30 ποῦ τὰ παιδία; It was normal practice in an Athenian lawcourt to parade the 
children of the defendant, weeping to arouse the pity of the jurors. In this case, 
the children are, of course, puppies.
Translation for 9I
Bdelykleon speaks, beginning the defence.
BDELYKLEON It is difﬁ cult, gentlemen, to reply on behalf of a dog who has met with 
such a great slander, but none the less I shall speak. For I know that he is good 
and chases the wolves.
PHILOKLEON No, rather this one seems to me to be a thief and worthy of death. So I 
must convict him as a thief, and having convicted him, judge another case as 
well.
ΒDEL. 
By Zeus, but he is the best of all the dogs now [alive], since he is able to guard 
many sheep.
PHIL. 
So what is the use, if he steals the cheese and, having stolen it, eats it up?
ΒDΕL. 
What use? For he also guards the door. But if he stole the cheese, forgive him. 
For he does not know how to play the lyre. Listen, my good fellow, to the 
witnesses. Come up, cheese-grater, and speak loudly. For you happened to be 
guarding the cheese.
 
The cheese-grater comes up.
 
Answer clearly; did you grate the cheese for both the dogs? She says that she 
grated it all for both.
PHIL. 
By Zeus, but I know she is lying.
BDEL. 
But, good fellow, pity those who suffer evil things. For this Labes never stays 
in the house, but goes out of the house looking for food. But the other dog only 
guards the house. For by staying here he hopes to steal the food from the others. 
And when he steals nothing, he bites.
PHIL. 
Arghh! Whatever evil is this? An evil surrounds me, and the speaker persuades 
me with his words.
ΒDΕL. 
Come, I beg you, pity him, Father, who has suffered evil things, and acquit 
him. Where are the children? Come up, wretched ones, ask and plead 
weeping.

 
Section 9J 
131
PHIL. 
Get down, get down, get down, get down.
ΒDΕL. 
I shall get down. And yet, this ‘get down’ deceives many very much. For the 
jurors order the defendant to get down, then when he has got down, they ﬁ nd 
him guilty. But none the less I shall get down.
9J
Page 118
 
2 ἀπεδάκρυσα Philokleon cannot bear to admit that he could pity 
a defendant, so he has to blame the lentil soup. It must have disagreed with 
him.
 
7 βελτίω = βελτίονα. Did you recognise this form of the comparative? τά should 
have provided a useful clue.
 
9 ὑστέρῳ Juries ﬁ led past two urns: the one they came to ﬁ rst (the earlier or 
nearer) was for condemnation and the next (the later or further) for 
acquittal.
 
14 περίπατον Cf. ‘peripatetic’.
 
21 οὐχ ἑκών ‘not willingly’. This has the same meaning as ἄκων ‘unwillingly’ 
(line 34).
 
22 ἠγωνισάμεθα, See ἀγωνίζομαι. Here it is almost in the sense of ‘to settle a 
contest’.
 
27 ἔπαιρε σεαυτόν ‘Lift yourself up’ from αἴρω ἀρῶ ἦρα ‘I raise’.
 
 ἀνίστασο 2nd persons. imperative of ἀνίσταμαι.
 
33 πείσομαι Can be the future of either πάσχω or πείθομαι. See GE p. 202, 
#211. The context will give you the right meaning here.
Translation for 9J
PHILOKLEON Go to hell. How bad (not good) I consider the lentil soup. For I burst into 
tears as I ate this lentil soup.
BDELYKLEON The dog is acquitted, then?
PHIL. 
It is difﬁ cult for me to know.
ΒDEL. 
Come, Daddy dear, turn to better things. Taking this voting-pebble in your 
hand, put it into the further voting-urn, and acquit (him), Father.
PHIL. 
No indeed. For I do not know how to play the lyre.
ΒDΕL. 
Come now, let me take you round this way.
 
(So taking him round a big walkabout, he walks to the further voting-urn 
ﬁ rst.)
PHIL. 
Is this the nearer?
ΒDEL. 
This is it. Place the voting-pebble.
PHIL. 
This voting-pebble is in here.
ΒDΕL. 
(Speaks to himself.)
 
Hurrah! I have deceived him. For Philokleon has acquitted the dog unwillingly, 
by putting the voting-pebble in the further voting-urn.
PHIL. 
How then have we contested?

132 
Exercises for section 9H–J
ΒDEL. 
I intend to reveal [it]. You have been acquitted, Labes. Father, Father. What are 
you suffering? Alas, where is water? Lift yourself up, stand up.
PHIL. 
Now tell me that, has he really been acquitted? You will destroy me with the 
word.
BDΕL. 
[Yes] by Zeus.
PHIL. 
Then I am nothing.
ΒDΕL. 
Don’t worry, my good fellow, but stand up.
PHIL. 
But did I acquit the man who was the defendant with the voting-pebble? What 
do I suffer? Whatever shall I suffer? But, Ο much-honoured gods, forgive me, 
because I did that by placing my voting-pebble involuntarily and not 
convicting.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 9H–J
THIRD PERSON IMPERATIVES
9H–J: 1
1. let him/her hear 
 6. be victorious (pl.)
2. let them retreat 
 7. let him/her carry
3. let him/her converse 
 8. let them release
4. let him/her learn 
 9. let him/her/it begin
5. let them be silent 
10. let them turn
9H–J: 2
 1. let him/her/it be.
 2. It is possible to see everything in the house.
 3. let him/her learn everything.
 4. let every one arrive.
 5. let them leave and let them not remain/ let them leave without waiting.
 6. let him/her/it go.
 7. let everyone carry the man out.
 8. let it be impossible to ﬁ nd these things in the harbour.
 9. let him/her know.
10. put all these things here.
FUTURE INFINITIVES
9H–J: 3
 1. κελεύσειν 
to be about to order
 2. κωλύσειν 
to be about to hinder
 3. ζητήσειν 
to be about to seek
 4. πείσεσθαι 
to be about to obey
 5. δέξεσθαι 
to be about to receive
 6. ἐξαπατήσειν 
to be about to deceive

 
Revision exercises for section 9H–J 
133
 7. ἀπολογήσεσθαι 
to be about to defend oneself
 8. κατηγορήσειν 
to be about to accuse
 9. γράψεσθαι 
to be about to write/ indict
10. βιάσεσθαι 
to be about to use force
IRREGULAR PRINCIPAL PARTS
9H–J: 4
1. αἱρήσω 
 7. ὑπισχνεῖται ἀπιέναι
2. ἐπίστανται πείθειν 
 8. ἔπαθον
3. ἐλπίζει αἱρήσεσθαι 
 9. ἔπεισαν
4. εἷλον 
10. εἷλετο
5. ἔβη 
11. εἷλεν
6. πείσονται 
12. ἔβης
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 9H–J
B/C – WORD SHAPE AND SYNTAX
1. Present: 
πλεῖν, ἀποχωρεῖν, σπεύδειν, ὀϕείλειν,
 
Aorist: 
βοηθῆσαι, μαχέσασθαι, ἀϕικέσθαι, κρατῆσαι, 
 
βιάσασθαι
 
Future: 
ϕροντιεῖν, διώξειν, ἔσεσθαι, μαθήσεσθαι, ὀλοϕυρεῖσθαι, 
 
ποιήσειν, παύσεσθαι, δέξεσθαι, λήψεσθαι.
2. δέξαι, δέξασθαι, δεξάμενος -η -ον
 
δρᾶσον, δρᾶσαι, δράσας -ασα -αν
 
ἐλθέ, ἐλθεῖν, ἐλθών -οῦσα -όν
 
γενοῦ, γενέσθαι, γενόμενος -η -ον
 
κώλυσον, κωλῦσαι, κωλύσας -ασα -αν
 
ἐπαίνεσον, ἐπαινέσαι, ἐπαινέσας -ασα -αν
 
βάλε, βαλεῖν, βαλών -οῦσα -όν
 
παῦσον, παῦσαι, παύσας -ασα -αν
 
3. λήσειν 
escape notice (fut. inf.) 
λανθάνω
 
   λάβετε 
take (aor. imperative pl.) 
λαμβάνω
 
   ἑλεῖν 
take (aor. inf.) 
αἱρέω
 
   ἰδών 
see (aor. part. m. s. nom.) 
ὁράω
 
   λαθών 
escape notice (aor. part. m. s. nom.) 
λανθάνω
 
   ἐλθέ 
go (aor. imperative s.) 
ἔρχομαι
 
   λήψεσθαι 
take (fut. inf.) 
λαμβάνω
 
   ἀπέθανε 
die (aor. 3 s. indic.) 
ἀποθνῄσκω
 
   γενήσεσθαι 
become (fut. inf.) 
γίγνομαι
 
   ἐρόμενος 
ask (aor. part. m. s. nom.) 
ἐρωτάω
 
   μαθόντες 
learn (aor. part. masc. pl. nom.) 
μανθάνω
 
   γένεσθε 
become (aor. imperative pl.) 
γίγνομαι
 
   δραμεῖν 
run (aor. inf.) 
τρέχω

134 
Summary exercises for section 9
 
   οἴσει 
will carry (3 s. fut.indic.) 
ϕέρω
 
   τυχούσῃ 
happen (aor. part. fem. s. dat.) 
τυγχάνω
 
   ἐνέγκατε 
carry (aor. imperative pl.) 
ϕέρω
 
   εἶναι 
be (pres. inf.) 
εἰμί
 
   ἰόντος 
go (fut. part. masc./neut. gen. s.) 
εἶμι
 
   ᾔδεσαν 
know (past indic. 3 pl.) 
οἶδα
 
   ᾔεισθα 
go (impf. 2 s.) 
εἶμι
 
   βαλεῖν 
throw (aor. inf.) 
βάλλω
 
   εἰδότες 
know (pres. part. masc. nom. pl.) 
οἶδα
 
   εὑρήσειν 
ﬁ nd (fut. inf.) 
εὑρίσκω
 
   πεσόντι 
fall (aor. part, masc./neut. dat. s.) 
πίπτω
 
   σχές 
have/hold (aor. imperative s.) 
ἔχω
 
   πεσοῦμεν 
fall (fut. part, masc./neut. dat. s.) 
πίπτω
 
   ἕξειν 
have (fut. inf.) 
ἔχω
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. Let the children play.
 
εἰσελθόντων οἱ κύνες.
2 
Let the herald enter the city.
 
ὁ κλέπτης ὑϕελέσθω τὸ μέρος τὸ τούτου τοῦ κυνός.
3. He expects/hopes to pursue/prosecute the wicked citizen.
 
ἐλπίζω τοὺς ϕεύγοντας καλῶς ἀπολογήσεσθαι.
4. This woman intends to listen to the stranger.
 
οὗτος ὁ δικαστὴς τὸν θάνατον μέλλει καταδικάσειν τοῦ κυνός.
5. Let the suppliants pray to the gods.
 
ὁ διώκων ἀρχέσθω κατηγορεῖν.
SUMMARY EXERCISES FOR SECTION 9
A – WORDS
 I take 
I destroy 
 I write down 
letter
 I hope 
hope
 I know how to 
knowledge, understanding
 witness 
evidence, I bear witness
 name 
I name
 wretched 
wretchedness
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1.
νεανίᾳ τινὶ ἦν πατήρ, γέρων ὤν. τὸ δ’ ὄνομα τῷ μὲν νεανίᾳ ἦν Bδελυκλέων, 
τῷ δὲ γέροντι Φιλοκλέων. ὁ δὲ γέρων ἐτύγχανεν ἔχων νόσον τινὰ δεινήν. 
οὐδέποτε γὰρ ἐπαύσατο βουλόμενος δικάζειν ἐν τοῖς δικαστηρίοις. ὁ δὲ 

 
Summary exercises for section 9 
135
νεανίας ἐπειρᾶτο αὐτὸν πεῖσαι μὴ δικάζειν, ὁ δὲ γέρων αὐτῷ οὐκ ἐπείθετο 
καίπερ πολλὰ πείθοντι. τέλος δὲ ὁ μὲν νεανίας αὐτὸν ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ ἐνέκλεισεν, 
ὁ δὲ ἀπορῶν ἐπειρᾶτο φεύγειν, πολλοῖς λόγοις χρώμενος. ἀλλὰ οὐκ ἐδύνατο 
λαθεῖν τοὺς δούλους τοὺς τὴν οἰκίαν φυλάττοντας.
2.
ΒΔΕΛYΚΛΕΩΝ ἄκουσον γάρ, ὦ πάτερ, καὶ ἐμοὶ πιθοῦ. οὐ γάρ ἐάσω σε λιπόντα τὴν
οἰκίαν ἐν τῷ δικαστηρίῳ δικάζειν.
ΦΙΛΟΚΛΕΩΝ ἀλλὰ διὰ τί οὐκ ἐάσεις ἐμέ; ἐλπίζω γὰρ σέ μοι πάντα λέξειν.
ΒΔΕΛ. 
διότι πονηρότατος εἶ τῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει.
ΦΙΛ. 
τί οὖν ἐάσεις με ποιεῖν; τί μέλλεις ποιήσειν;
ΒΔΕΛ. 
ἔξεσται σοι δικάζειν ἐνθάδε ἐν τῇ οἰκίᾳ. ταῦτα δὲ βούλοιο ἂν ποιῆσαι;
ΦΙΛ. 
βουλοίμην ἂν ἔγωγε. εἰπέ μοι ταχέως, τί δεῖ με ποιεῖν;
ΒΔΕΛ. 
μεῖνον ἐνθάδε. ἐξοίσω γὰρ τὰ τοῦ δικαστηρίου.
 
(ἐκφέρει μὲν τὰ σκεύη. τὸ δὲ δικαστήριον ποιεῖται.)
 
προσελθέτω ὁ ἀντίδικος. ἡ δὲ δίκη ἀρχέσθω. ποῦ ἐστιν ὁ κατήγορος; δεῦρο 
ἐλθέ, ὦ κύον, καὶ κατηγόρησον. ἀνάβηθι καὶ εἰπέ. λέγε ἡμῖν τίς καὶ τί 
βουλόμενος τὴν γραφὴν ἐγράψατο. ὦ πάτερ, ἐλπίζω σε προσέξειν τὸν 
νοῦν.
ΦΙΛ. 
μὴ φρόντιζε. ἄγε δή, ὦ κύον, εἰπὲ δή.
E – TEST EXERCISE 9
PHILOKLEON Come, all [my] friends, come. For I hear you singing, but am not able to 
sing myself. What shall I do? For these men are guarding me, although I want 
to come with you to the lawcourt and make some trouble. But, Ο Zeus, stop 
giving me troubles and become my friend and pity my suffering. Save me, Ο 
Zeus. Either make me suddenly into smoke, or indeed make me a stone, on 
which they count the votes. Lord, dare to save me.
JURORS 
Who is it who is shutting you in? Speak, we beg you.
P H I L . 
My son, know it well. But don’t shout. For he’s actually to be asleep here in 
front.
JUR. 
Why isn’t it possible for you to come along with us and listen to the prosecutors 
and those defending themselves?
PHIL. 
Men, my son doesn’t allow me to pass judgement or to do anything bad. But 
look for some device, I beg you. For I intend to hear both the prosecutors and 
the defendants today.
JUR. 
We can’t save you, friend. For all the members of your family are guarding 
you, and it is not possible for you to escape.
PHIL. 
Therefore I must pray to the gods, in hope of escaping. May the gods hear, 
then, and help. Ο lord Lykos, neighbouring hero – for you love the lawcourt 
– pity me and save me in my perplexity.
JUR. 
You too, slaves, run and shout and tell Kleon this and order him to come. For 
Bdelykleon says that it is necessary not to pass judgement on cases. So let 
Kleon come and become a saviour to the old man.

136 
Summary exercises for section 9
EXERCISE
1. (a) 2nd s., aor. 
(b) 2nd s., aor. 
(c) 2nd s., aor. 
(d) 2nd pl., pres.
 
(e) 2nd pl., pres. 
(f) 3rd pl., pres. 
(g) 2nd s., aor 
(h) 3rd s., aor
2. (a) voc.  
(b) acc.  
(c) voc.  
(d) nom.  
(e) voc.  
(f) dat. 

137
Section Ten: Aristophanes’ Lysistrata
We now embark on one of Aristophanes’ most famous and delightful plays. With 
its female lead (though played by a man, of course), it brings back women into 
the text, alive and very decidedly kicking.
The grammatical input here is challenging, consisting of the aorist optative 
active and middle (GE pp. 210–211, #212), δίδωμι (GE pp. 212–214, #214), 
ἀμελής and γλυκύς (GE pp. 214–215, #215) and the relative pronoun (GE pp. 
216–219, # 216–219). It is worth mastering this material very thoroughly. δίδωμι, 
of which GE says comfortingly that ‘there is little here that is difﬁ cult to recog-
nise’, is the valuable gateway to a family of verbs which end in -μι.
10A
Page 120
 
1 ἥ Your ﬁ rst relative pronoun: feminine because it goes with Lysistrata, 
nominative because it is the subject of the verb in its clause.
 
3 καταλύσασαι What part of the verb is this? Women are the subject of the 
sentence.
 
5 ἴδοιμι From ὁράω. The second aorist is εἶδον, the aorist stem is ἰδ- and this is 
the aorist optative.
 
6–7 καὶ Κλεονίκη … κἀμοί = καὶ ἐμοί; what does καί mean in both these 
phrases?
 
8 οὔσαις What part of the verb? It’s a participle, and we are still talking about 
women.
 
 οἵ What gender, what case? Why? See GE p. 216, #216. Note that in the 
nominative case m.s., f.s., and pl. the relative pronoun has an accent, whereas 
the article has none.
 
11 ἀναγκάσειν What inﬁ nitive? Cf. ἀναγκάζειν.
 
12 λέξον Aorist imperative from λέγω. ἔλεξα is an alternative form for the 
aorist.
 
 ἐκεῖνο ὅ Literally ‘that which’.
 
15 τῶν ἀϕροδισίων Cf. Aphrodite, the goddess of sex, and ‘aphrodisiac’.
 
16 οὕς You have now met seven forms of the relative pronoun. Learn it (GE 
p. 216, #216).
 
19 ποιήσαιμι We now meet the ﬁ rst aorist optative. Note that -σαι- is a 
characteristic element of this. Contrast with -οι- in the present optative (and in 

138 
Section 10A
the second aorist optative – see GE pp. 210–211, #212 and cf. ἴδοιμι in line 5 
on this page). Don’t overlook the ἄν.
 
 ἑρπέτω What part of the verb is this? See GE pp. 197–198, #206–207.
 
20 κέλευσον If you cannot recognise this, see GE p. 189, #198 .
 
21 ἐθελήσαιμι 1st person singular aorist optative. Note the ἄν.
 
 μᾶλλον … ἤ ‘rather than …’
 
25 ποιήσειας Which part of the aorist optative is this? (GE p. 210, #212).
Page 121
 
27 ποιήσειε Which part of the aorist optative is this?
 
29–30 συμψηϕίσαιο, σώσαιμεν Look at the aorist optatives active and middle of 
παύω (GE pp. 210–212, #212) and learn them. Note that the endings of the 
second aorist optative are identical with those of the present optative.
 
31 ναὶ τὼ σιώ This is a particularly Spartan oath. ‘The Two’ are Castor and 
Pollux, the divine brothers of Helen of Troy, who were born in Sparta to Leda 
in an egg, as the result of her liaison with Zeus in the guise of a swan.
Translation for 10A
Lysistrata, who is an Athenian woman, comes forward and speaks.
LYSISTRATA Do you hope, women, to bring the war to an end with me? For you know 
well that once we have brought the war to an end we shall see peace again.
MYRRHINE (Myrrhine, who is a friend of Lysistrata, agrees.)
 
By the gods, I would gladly see peace after bringing the war to an end.
KLEONIKE (Kleonike, who is another friend, also agrees.)
 
To me also it seems a good idea to bring the war to an end. But how is this 
possible for us, women that we are? Do you have some plan? For it is necessary 
that the men, who ﬁ ght the battles, should bring the war to an end and make a 
treaty.
LYS. 
Let me speak. For one mustn’t keep silent. But, women, if we are going to force 
the men to make peace, we must refrain from …
ΜYR. 
From what? What is the plan? Say what you have in mind.
LYS. 
So will you do what I order?
ΜYR. 
We shall do everything you tell us to.
LYS. 
Then we must refrain from sex.
 
All the women, after hearing the words which Lysistrata says, begin to go 
away.
LYS. 
Where are you going? Why are you weeping? Will you or won’t you do what I 
order? Or what do you intend?
ΜYR. 
I couldn’t do what you say, Lysistrata; instead let the war take its course.
KLE. 
By Zeus, I won’t either; instead let the war take its course. Order me to go 
through ﬁ re. I would be willing to do that rather than to refrain from sex. For 
nothing is like sex, my dear Lysistrata. I won’t do it – no way.
LYS. 
What about you then? Would you do what I tell you?

 
Section 10B 
139
ΜYR. 
I too would be willing to go through ﬁ re. No, by Zeus, I would not do it.
LYS. 
Oh how totally lascivious is all of our sex! Will no one do what I propose? But, 
my dear Spartan, would you vote with me? For if so, we might still save the 
whole business.
LAMPITO By the two gods, it’s difﬁ cult for us to sleep without sex. But we must bring the 
war to an end and have peace. I would vote with you.
LYS. 
Ο you my dearest friend and the only true woman among them.
ΜYR. 
Then if these things seem good to you, they seem a good idea to us too.
10B
Page 122
 
2 πεῖσαι What part of the verb? GE pp. 187–188, #195–196. Triremes and the 
silver to ﬁ nance them were the basis of Athenian naval power.
 
5–6 αὐτῷ τῷ ἀργυρίῳ ‘with silver and all’. The Athenian reserves of silver were 
kept in the treasury on the Acropolis.
 
9 τῆς θεοῦ Don’t worry about the apparently masculine ending of θεοῦ. The 
word θεός can refer either to a god or to a goddess.
 
16 ὡς ‘to’, ‘towards’, normally only with persons.
 
21 ἔγνω The paradigm for this aorist (of γιγνώσκω) is in GE p. 201, #209. Learn it.
 
22 ᾤμωξε Take the augment out of this (so that ω becomes ο) and put the iota 
subscript back above the line (οἰ-). You should then be able to identify the word.
 
24 γνῶναι The aorist inﬁ nitive of γιγνώσκω, GE p. 201, #209.
 
27 συνοικεῖς This is the normal word for a man and woman living together in 
marriage.
Translation for 10B
LAMPITO So we shall persuade our husbands and force them to make peace. In what way 
will you be able to persuade your men, who have the triremes and the silver? 
By money or gifts or by doing what?
LYSISTRATA Oh, but we have prepared this well too, because today we shall take the 
Acropolis, by seeming to be sacriﬁ cing. Having taken it we shall guard it, 
money and all.
 
Suddenly Lampito hears a shout and, having heard it, she speaks to Lysistrata.
LAM. 
Who shouted? Who was responsible for the shout?
LYS. 
This is what I was talking about. For the old women, who had to take the 
Acropolis of the goddess, now hold it. But, Lampito, you go off home and put 
affairs among you [Spartans] in good order, while we go into the Acropolis, 
which the old women have just taken, and guard it.
 
Lampito, going away, walks along the road which leads to Sparta, while the 
other women go into the Acropolis and guard it. Suddenly Lysistrata shouts 
having spotted a man who is approaching.
LYS. 
Oh, oh, women! Come here to me quickly.
KLEONIKE What is it? Tell me, what is the shout?

140 
Section 10C
LYS. 
I see a man approaching, a man. Look. Does any one of you recognise the man 
who is approaching?
MYRRHINE My god!
KLE. 
It’s clear, Lysistrata, that Myrrhine has recognised him. For after seeing him 
and recognising him she cried ‘My god!’
LYS. 
Speak, Myrrhine. Does Kleonike speak the truth? Have you recognised the 
man? For to me as well you seem to recognise the man.
MYR. 
By Zeus, I do recognise him. For he is Kinesias, whose wife I am.
LYS. 
It’s your job now to trick and love and not to love this man who you live with.
MYR. 
I shall do these things.
LYS. 
Look, I’ll join you in tricking him by waiting here after sending away the old 
women whose job it is to guard the Acropolis.
10C
Page 124
 
2 σπασμός GE gives ‘discomfort’. Presumably Kinesias’ problem was a 
massive erection. Comic actors wore a padded costume with a large phallus 
attached, so Kinesias’ condition would be clear for all to see.
 
7 ἀνὴρ δῆτα ‘Indeed I am a man.’ Kinesias conﬁ rms the obvious.
 
12 πρὸς ἑαυτὸν λέγων ‘speaking to himself’. Remember the reﬂ exive ἑαυτόν or 
αὑτόν.
 
13–14 oἱ θεοί, οἷς εὔχομαι … ‘the gods to whom I pray …’
 
 δώσουσι ‘will grant’. δίδωμι now makes many appearances. Learn GE pp. 
134–136, #131.
 
18 ἐκ-κάλεσον ‘call out’, aorist imperative from ἐκ-καλέω.
 
22  εὐξαμένῳ Agrees with μοι: ‘to me having prayed’.
 
26 The gift of an apple could be an erotic token.
 
27 τοῦτ᾽ ἂν διδοίην You should be able to work out that this is an optative and 
to guess what verb it comes from.
 
30 νὴ τὴν Ἀϕροδίτην Who else would she swear by?
Page 125
 
54 οἷον τὸ τεκεῖν ‘What it is to be a mother!’, literally ‘What a thing it is to bear 
a child!’
Translation for 10C
The old women go away while Kinesias arrives, and as he approaches, he laments.
KINESIAS Oh, poor me, what discomfort tortures me!
LYSISTRATA (Speaking from the wall.)
 
Who is this man who has forced his way through the guards without our 
noticing?
KIN. 
It’s me.

 
Section 10C 
141
LYS. 
Are you a man?
KIN. 
Yes, a man.
LYS. 
Won’t you get the hell out of here then?
KIN. 
Who are you, who are chucking me out?
LYS. 
A guard.
KIN. 
My god!
 
(Speaking to himself.)
 
It’s clear that I must, unlucky as I am, pray to all the gods. Perhaps the gods, to 
whom I am praying, will grant that I can see my wife.
 
(The man prays.)
 
Ο all you gods, grant that I may see my wife.
 
(Again he addresses Lysistrata.)
 
By the gods, call Myrrhine out here now.
LYS. 
Who are you?
KIN. 
Her husband, Kinesias of the deme Paionis, with whom she lives.
 
(Speaking to himself.)
 
Hurrah! Because I’ve prayed, the gods have granted that I can see Myrrhine.
LYS. 
Hello, dearest Kinesias. For we too know your name well. For you are always 
on your wife’s lips. Taking an apple, she says, ‘How gladly would I give this to 
Kinesias.’
KIN. 
Oh by the gods, am I the man to whom Myrrhine wants to give apples?
LYS. 
[Yes] by Aphrodite. Indeed, even yesterday, when some discussion concerning 
men arose, your wife said, ‘I consider Kinesias the best of all.’
KIN. 
Then go and call her.
LYS. 
What then? Will you give me something?
KIN. 
By Zeus, I’ll give you something. I have this. So what I have I give you. So 
you, to whom I give this, call her.
 
(He gives what he has in his hand to Lysistrata.)
LYS. 
Well then, I’ll go down and call her for you.
 
(She goes down from the wall.)
KIN. 
Quickly.
MYRRHINE (Inside.)
 
Don’t you call me to him, Lysistrata. For I don’t want to go down.
KIN. 
Myrrhine baby, why are you doing this? Come down with all haste and come 
here.
ΜYR. 
By Zeus, I won’t. I’ll go away instead.
KIN. 
Don’t go away, but listen to our baby at any rate.
 
(He speaks to the baby, which a servant carries.)
 
You there, won’t you call mummy?
BABY 
Mummy mummy mummy.
KIN. 
You there, what’s up with you? Don’t you pity the baby, which is unwashed?
ΜYR. 
In that case I do pity it.
KIN. 
Come down then, my dear lady, for the sake of our baby.
ΜYR. 
What it is to be a mother. I must go down.

142 
Section 10D
10D
Page 126
 
3ff. γλυκύς and ἀμελής are used frequently. Learn these adjectives either now or at 
the end of this section (GE p. 215, #215). For γλυκύς cf. ‘glucose’.
 
11 πιθομένη Second aorist participle middle from πείθω, ‘having obeyed’, or 
‘having been persuaded by’.
 
 τοιαύταις ‘by such women’.
 
13 παῦσαι The context will tell you whether this is aorist imperative middle or 
aorist inﬁ nitive active.
 
15 βαδιῇ (What part of the verb is this?). Many -ιζω verbs have futures of this 
type. This one is middle, βαδιοῦμαι, as in the next line.
 
19 κατακλίνῃ Notice also κλινίδιον ‘bed’. Cf. ‘recline’, ‘incline’.
 
20 ἐρῶ ‘I shall say’, ὡς here means ‘that’.
Translation for 10D
Myrrhine, coming down and reaching the gate, speaks to the baby.
MYRRHINE My child, how sweet you are. Come, I’ll kiss you. For your mother’s kiss is 
sweet. Your mother is sweet too; but you do not have a sweet father, but an 
uncaring one. I ﬁ nd fault with your father since he’s uncaring. Child, how 
unlucky you appear to be because of your father.
KINESIAS But do you call your husband uncaring? For there’s no one more uncaring than 
you and no one more unlucky than me.
 
(Stretching out his hand to his wife, he speaks.)
 
What is it that you want, you bad woman, that you do these things, obeying 
such women?
MYR. 
Stop, you vilest of men, and don’t stretch out your hand to me.
KIN. 
Won’t you come back home?
MYR. 
By Zeus, I won’t go home. Before I do, the men must cease from the war and 
make a treaty. Will you do this?
KIN. 
Why won’t you lie down with me for a short time?
MYR. 
No. And yet I won’t say that I don’t love you.
KIN. 
You love me? So why don’t you lie down?
MYR. 
You silly fellow, in front of the baby?
KIN. 
[You’re right] by Zeus. Manes, take the baby home.
 
The servant, who is carrying the baby, goes off home.
 
Look, the baby is out of the way, so won’t you lie down?
MYR. 
But where should one do this? For ﬁ rst I must bring a little couch.
KIN. 
Not at all, since it is possible for us to lie down on the ground.
MYR. 
By Apollo, I shan’t allow you to lie down on the ground despite the state you’re 
in.
 
(She goes out.)
KIN. 
Oh what good luck! It’s clear that my wife loves me.

 
Section 10E 
143
10E
Page 127
 
11 προσκεϕάλαιον How does this word come to mean ‘pillow’?
Page 128
 
17 ἀνίστασο ‘stand up’.
 
19 Literally ‘Now I have all things, as many as I need’ (δέομαι takes the genitive), 
i.e. ‘Now I’ve got everything I want.’
 
32 ἀμέλει This is, strictly speaking, an imperative of ἀμελέω, so ‘Never mind’, 
but it comes to be used as if it were an adverb: ‘of course’.
 
 ταχύ The neuter (singular or plural) of the adjective is often used in place of 
the adverb, ‘quickly’.
 
35 ἡ ἄνθρωπος This is a derogatory expression here.
Page 129
 
40 μυριῶ Future of μυρίζω.
 
46 διατριβῆς ‘delay’. The verb διατρίβω means ‘I wear away something’, hence 
‘I spend time’, ‘waste time’ and thus ‘delay’.
 
50 ἔα From ἐάω ‘I allow’ or ‘let pass’. Perhaps translate ‘Forget it!’
 
 κάκιστ᾽ ἀπόλοιτο There is no ἄν with this optative, so it must express a 
wish. ‘May he perish most wretchedly, who ﬁ rst …’
 
52 νὴ τὴν Ἄρτεμιν An ominous change of oath from the goddess of love to the 
virgin huntress, goddess of chastity.
 
53 ψηϕιεῖ From ψηϕίζομαι. You should now be able to recognise the tense, and 
ὦ ϕίλτατε should help you to recognise the person.
 
55 ψηϕιοῦμαι See above.
 
57–58 τί πάσχω; τί πείσομαι; Present followed by future.
Translation for 10E
Myrrhine returns bringing a little couch.
MYRRHINE Look, I’m undressing. And yet I must bring a mattress.
KINESIAS What kind of mattress? Don’t bother just for me. Let me kiss you instead.
ΜYR. 
There.
 
(After kissing her husband she goes out again. She comes back very quickly 
bringing a mattress.)
 
Look, a mattress. Why don’t you lie down? And indeed I’m undressing. And 
yet you don’t have a pillow.
KIN. 
But I don’t need one.
ΜΥR. 
By Zeus, but I need one.
 
(She goes out again. She returns bringing a pillow.)
 
Stand up, jump up.

144 
Exercises for section 10
KIN. 
I’ve now got everything I need.
ΜYR. 
Everything?
KIN. 
Come here then, Myrrhine baby.
ΜYR. 
Now I’m untying my sash. But take care not to cheat me over the treaty which 
we recently discussed.
KIN. 
By Zeus, may I die [if I cheat you].
ΜYR. 
(Suddenly she stops undressing.)
 
You don’t have a blanket.
KIN. 
By Zeus, I don’t need one, but I want to screw you.
ΜYR. 
Of course you’ll do this. For I’m coming back quickly.
 
(She goes out.)
KIN. 
The creature will kill me with her blankets.
 
Myrrhine returns bringing a blanket.
 
Now I’ll love you. Look.
ΜYR. 
Hang on. Shall I anoint you with myrrh?
KIN. 
By Apollo, not me.
MYR. 
By Aphrodite, I shall do this. Stretch out your hand and take what I shall give 
you and anoint yourself.
KIN. 
The myrrh which you have given me is not pleasant. For it smells of delay, but 
it doesn’t smell of marriage.
MYR. 
Poor me, I’ve brought the myrrh from Rhodes.
KIN. 
Good. Let it be, my dear lady. May the man who ﬁ rst made myrrh die very 
horribly. But lie down and don’t bring me anything.
MYR. 
I’ll do this, by Artemis. I’m undoing my shoes at any rate. But, my dearest 
husband, will you vote to make a treaty?
KIN. 
I’ll vote.
 
Myrrhine runs away.
 
What’s going on here? The wife’s gone off and left me. Oh dear, what am I 
suffering? What shall I suffer? Oh dear, the wife will destroy me. Who shall I 
screw now? Alas! I’m the unluckiest man alive.
Grammar
Now learn GE p. 219, #219 to master two further forms of the relative pronoun, 
ὅσπερ and ὅστις. You have met them a few times. Notice that both parts of ὅστις 
decline.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 10
AORIST OPTATIVE
10: 1
 1. he saved 
σῴζοι, σώσειεν
 2. they make/do 
ποιοῖεν, ποιήσειαν
 3. they refrained from 
ἀπέχοιντο, ἀπόσχοιντο

 
Exercises for section 10 
145
 4. he ﬁ nishes 
καταλύοι, καταλύσειεν
 5. we lived together 
συνοικοῖμεν, συνοικήσαιμεν
 6. I voted 
ψηφιζοίμην, ψηφισαίμην
 7. we cease 
παυοίμεθα, παυσαίμεθα
 8. you compelled 
ἀναγκάζοις, ἀναγκάσειας
 9. he blamed 
μέμφοιτο, μέμψαιτο
10. I ﬂ ee 
φεύγοιμι, φύγοιμι
δίδωμι
10: 2
1. you were giving 
 6. give!
2. he/she gives 
 7. giving (f.s. pres. participle)
3. he/she gave 
 8. you (s.) will give
4. to give (aor.) 
 9. to give (pres.)
5. giving (m. s. pres. part.) 
10. they were giving
10: 3
1. ἔδοτο 
 6. δώσομαι
2. δώσεται 
 7. δούς
3. δοίη 
 8. δώσετε
4. δώσουσι 
 9. δοῖτο
5. δότε, ἔδοτε 
10. δώσεσθαι
ἀμελής and γλυκύς
10: 4
1. τοὺς ἀμελεῖς, γλυκεῖς φύλακας 
7. ἀληθεῖς, βραχεῖς
2. τῆς ἀμελοῦς, γλυκείας μητρός 
   ἀληθοῦς, βραχείας
3. τὰ ἀμελῆ, γλυκέα παίδια 
   ἀληθῆ, βραχέα
4. τοῖς ἀμελέσι, γλυκέσιν ἀμφοτέροις 
   ἀληθέσι, βραχέσι
5. οἱ ἀμελεῖς, γλυκεῖς μάρτυρες 
   ἀληθεῖς, βραχεῖς
6. τῶν ἀμελῶν, γλυκέων υἱέων 
   ἀληθῶν, βραχέων
THE RELATIVE PRONOUN
10: 5
 1. who 
ὅς, ὅστις
 2. whom 
οὕς, οὕστινας
 3. whose 
ἧς, ἧστινος
 4. to whom 
αἷς, αἷστισι(ν)
 5. whom 
ἅς, ἅστινας
 6. who 
οἵ, οἵτινες
 7. (those) whom 
οὕς, οὕστινας, ἅς, ἅστινας, ἅ, ἅττα
 8. whose 
ὧν, ὧντινων, ὅτων

146 
Revision exercises for section 10
 9. what 
ὅ, ὅτι ἅ, ἅτινα, ἅττα
10. what 
ὅ, ὅτι, ἅ, ἅτινα, ἅττα
10: 6
1. ᾗ, ᾗτινι
2. ὧν, ὧντινων, ὅτων
3. ὧν, ὧντινων, ὅτων
4. ᾧ, ᾧτινι, ὅτῳ
5. ὧν, ὧντινων, ὅτων
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 10
A –WORDS
1. uncaring 
it concerns
   I give 
I give back 
the act of giving 
giving in return,
 
 
(dose) 
repayment (antidote)
   a gift 
the gift, bribe 
I give a present,
 
 
I bribe
   a scheme 
I plan, contrive
   zeal, haste 
I am zealous, busy 
eager, serious, 
 
 
important
   I live with 
a living together,
 
marriage
   a wall 
I fortify
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. You could speak to me. προσαγορεύσαις
 
b. I would gladly give up the war. παυσαίμην
 
c. We should like to make a truce with great eagerness. ἐθελήσαιμεν
 
d. I could not do this, Mother. ποιήσαιμι
 
e. I could see the city. ἴδοιμι
2. a. Will you give me what you have? δώσεις
 
b. He was giving the money to the woman. ἐδίδoυ
 
c. Why are you not willing to give me what I ask for? διδόναι
 
d. Why are you giving me this apple, Myrrhine? δίδως
 
e. Suddenly giving (aorist participle) the woman the money which she 
  demanded, the man went away. δούς
3. a. Kinesias is the husband of Myrrhine. Kinesias goes to the Acropolis.
 
  Κινησίας, ὃς ἀνήρ ἐστι Μυρρίνης, βαδίζει πρὸς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν.
 
b. The women are on the Acropolis. The women are shouting.
 
  αἱ γυναῖκες, αἵ εἰσιν ἐν τῇ ἀκροπόλει, βοῶσιν.
 
c. The men are ﬁ ghting the battles. The men do not in any way want to end 
  the war.

 
Revision exercises for section 10 
147
 
  oἱ ἄνδρες, oἳ τὰς μάχας μάχονται, οὐκ ἐθέλoυσιν οὐδαμῶς τὸν 
  πόλεμον καταλῦσαι.
 
d. What is this? What do you want to say?
 
  τί ἐστι τοῦτο ὃ ἐθέλεις λέγειν;
 
e. The women want to hear the words. Lysistrata speaks the words.
 
  αἱ γυναῖκες ἐθέλoυσιν ἀκούειν τοὺς λόγους οὓς λέγει Λυσιστράτη.
 
f. The old women hold the Acropolis. I can see the old women.
 
  αἱ γρᾶες ἔχουσι τὴν ἀκρόπολιν ἃς ἐγὼ ἰδεῖν δύναμαι.
 
g. Where is Kinesias? Myrrhine is his wife.
 
  ποῦ ἐστι Κινησίας οὗ Μυρρίνη ἐστὶν ἡ γυνή;
 
h. Where are the old women? It is their task to guard the money.
 
  ποῦ αἱ γρᾶες ὧν τὸ ἔργον ἐστὶ ϕυλάττειν τὰ χρήματα;
 
i. Do you recognise the man? The man is approaching.
 
  ἆρα γιγνώσκεις τὸν ἄνδρα ὃς προσέρχεται;
 
j. We must keep peace. Peace is the cause of many good things.
 
  δεῖ ἡμᾶς εἰρήνην ἄγειν ἣ αἰτία ἐστὶ πολλῶν καλῶν.
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1.
 
1. ἆρα αἱ γυναῖκες ἀϕέξονται τῶν δώρων ἃ oἱ ἄνδρες δώσουσιν 
αὐταῖς;
 
2. οὗτοι οἱ ϕύλακες, ἀμελεῖς ὄντες, οὐδεμίᾳ σπουδῇ ϕυλάττουσιν.
 
3. αἱ γρᾶες μηχανὴν μηχανῶνται ᾗπερ τὰ τείχη λήψονται.
 
4. δοκεῖ ἡμῖν, αἳ γυναῖκές ἐσμεν (γυναιξὶν οὔσαις), καταλῦσαι τὸν 
  πόλεμον.
 
5. ἆρ᾽ οὐδεὶς ἀναγκάσει τοὺς ἄνδρας παύεσθαι τοῦ πολέμου;
2.
ΛYΣΙΣΤΡΑΤΗ δεῖ ἡμᾶς, τὸν πόλεμον καταλυσάσας, σπονδὰς ποιεῖσθαι, καὶ πείσομεν 
τοὺς ἄνδρας, ὧν τὸ ἔργoν ἐστὶ μάχεσθαι, ποιεῖν ἃ ἐθέλομεν.
ΓYΝΗ 
κἀγὼ δὴ ἐθελήσαιμ᾽ ἄν. ἀλλὰ πῶς (τίνι τρόπῳ) ἔξεστιν ἡμῖν, γυναιξὶν 
οὔσαις, τοῦτο ποιεῖν; εἰπέ μοι ἃ ἐν νῷ ἔχεις.
ΛYΣ. 
ἆρα ποιησαιτ᾽ ἂν ἃ κελεύω;
ΓYΝΑΙΚΕΣ ποιήσαιμεν ἄν, νὴ Δία.
ΛYΣ. 
χαλεπὴ οὖσα τυγχάνει ἡ μηχανὴ, ἣν ἐν νῷ ἔχω. ἀκούετε οὖν τοὺς λόγους 
οὓς λέγω, καὶ πίθεσθε. δεῖ τοίνυν ἡμᾶς ἀπέχεσθαι πάσας τῶν ἀϕροδισίων.
ΜYΡΡΙΝΗ οὐ ποιήσω τοῦτο οὐδαμῶς.
ΚΛΕΟΝΙΚΗ οὐδ᾽ ἐγώ.
ΛYΣ. 
ἆρ᾽ ἐστὶν ἥτις ποιήσει ἃ κελεύω;
ΛΑΜΠΙΤΩ ἀλλὰ δεῖ ἡμᾶς εἰρήνην ἄγειν, παυσάσας τοὺς ἄνδρας οἳ τὰς μάχας 
μάχονται. ἐγὼ οὖν συμψηϕιοῦμαί σοι.
ΛYΣ. 
ἀλλ᾽, ὦ ϕίλη Λαμπιτώ, δός μοι τὴν χεῖρα.
ΛΑΜ. 
ἰδού.
ΛYΣ. 
ἄπιθι δῆτα πρὸς τὴν Λακεδαίμονα, καὶ πεῖσον τοὺς Λακεδαιμονίους.
ΛΑΜ. 
εὐθὺς δ’ ἄπειμι.

148 
Revision exercises for section 10
F – TEST EXERCISE 10
LACEDAEMONIAN Where is the Athenian Council? I would like to report something 
new.
ATHENIAN Who are you who come here to the wall, walking with such great eagerness?
LAC. 
I am a herald, by the twin gods, and I have just come from Sparta about peace.
ATH. 
What is this thing of yours which you have got in your hands?
LAC. 
It is a Spartan code-staff.
ATH. 
I know what you mean. But what is happening in Lacedaemonia? Could you 
say?
LAC. 
I would gladly tell you. For a great evil has befallen us; and Lampito is 
responsible, who came back from Athens and persuaded the women to refrain 
from sex.
ATH. 
And how are you getting on? You are suffering severely, from what you say.
LAC. 
I am really suffering severely, by the twin gods. Therefore, we must obey the 
women and make the truce, which they themselves will tell us to make, and end 
the war.
ATH. 
Why then don’t we call Lysistrata, who alone could make a treaty for us? For 
we too have suffered this evil.
LAC. 
Yes, by the twin gods! Who could tell us where Lysistrata is?
ATH. 
Oh, there is no need for us to call her; for here she is herself, coming, having 
heard what we were saying.
LYSISTRATA Come, men. Listen to the words which I speak. I am a woman, but I have 
sense. Why are you ﬁ ghting now in this way, and why do you not cease from 
your nastiness, you who have the same altars and the same sacriﬁ ces? Why do 
you destroy Greek men and cities, when instead of this it is possible for you 
(lit. ‘to whom it is possible …’) to see peace and to be friends and allies?
LAC. & ATH. And yet we ask for no other gift than to be able to make love.
LYS. 
All of you, therefore, make a treaty and end the war. And then let each one take 
his own wife and go off home.

149
Section Eleven: Aristophanes’ Akharnians
There is relatively little grammatical input in this section. You learn the present 
and imperfect tenses passive (GE pp. 226–227, #220), which are the same as the 
middle, the genitive absolute (GE p. 228, #222), comparative adverbs (GE pp. 
229–230, #225) and the optative of ϕημί (GE p. 231, #227).
The concept of the passive will present no problem to Latinists. GE p. 227, 
#221 will be useful.
Aristophanes’ comedy Akharnians tells us much about Athenian politics and 
the feelings of the countrymen of Attica cooped up inside the city during the 
Peloponnesian War. It holds out a tantalising vision of peace.
11A
Page 132
 
1 κυρία ἐκκλησία See RGT p. 91, Section 8A line 25 and the map on RGT 
p. 92.
 
2 ἡ Πνὺξ αὑτηί αὑτηί is the extra demonstrative form. Cf. οὑτοσί.
 
 ἐρῆμος Why no feminine ending? It’s a two-termination adjective, i.e. it has 
no separate feminine ending. Compound adjectives (e.g. ἀ-θάνατος, 
εὐ-δόκιμος) mostly fall into this category, as well as a number of other 
adjectives. See GE pp. 230–231, #226.
 
5 σχοινίον A rope with vermilion dye was swept across the agora to push 
people towards the Pnyx (the hill on which the ecclesia was held). The 
Assembly itself was proclaimed by a trumpet call; any citizen arriving with 
vermilion dye, and therefore touched by the rope, could be ﬁ ned for arriving 
late.
 
 ἥξουσιν This is a future tense. To ﬁ nd out what the present stem is, remove 
the ς from the ξ and you will be left with three possibilities, ἥκω, ἥγω or ἥχω. 
If you now check with the vocabulary or a dictionary, you will ﬁ nd ἥκω ‘I 
come’.
 
10 The Prytaneis: ‘presidents’ acting as chairmen for the meetings of the 
assembly. The ten tribes between them subdivided the year into ten parts, each 
tribe having a spell of providing these presidents.
 
 οὑτοιί See note on line 2 about the extra demonstrative.
 
13 ἐντὸς τοῦ καθάρματος A puriﬁ cation ceremony was held before each 
meeting of the βουλή and the ἐκκλησία. It involved the sacriﬁ ce of a pig.

150 
Section 11A
 
14 παρελθόντων … πάντων The genitive absolute – see GE pp. 228–229, 
#222–223 – ‘all having come forward’, i.e. ‘when all had come forward’. Don’t 
worry too much about this construction. It occurs mainly in stage directions in 
this section and is thoroughly revised in Section 12.
 
18 μένοντος … Ἀμϕιθέου Another genitive absolute – ‘Amphitheos remaining’, 
i.e. ‘since Amphitheos stays there’.
 
26 Amphitheos claims to be a god, but he complains that the prytaneis are not 
granting him his travel expenses.
 
31 oἱ τοξόται ‘the bowmen’: these were Scythian mercenaries, hired by the state, 
who obeyed the orders of the state executives. One of their duties was keeping 
order in the ἐκκλησία.
 
32 ἀπαγόντων … αὐτῶν ‘them leading him away’, i.e. ‘as they lead him 
away’.
Translation for 11A
DIKAIOPOLIS But what’s this? For I know that the sovereign assembly is going to be 
held today. But the Pnyx here is empty. The men in the agora are talking to 
each other as they run from the rope all over the place. The prytaneis will 
come in late, I know it well. But nobody thinks how peace will happen. But I 
always come into the assembly and sit down ﬁ rst, and on my own I look out 
to the country, loving peace but hating the city and longing for my own 
deme. But here are the prytaneis coming in late. This is precisely what I was 
saying.
HERALD 
(He makes a proclamation.)
 
Come forward to the front. Come forward inside the puriﬁ ed 
place.
 
All those present come forward to the front. When all have come forward, 
suddenly someone called Amphitheos addresses the herald.
AMPHITHEOS Has anyone spoken yet?
 
Amphitheos waits, but the herald doesn’t answer. As Amphitheos waits he 
continues his proclamation.
HER. 
Who wishes to speak?
AMP 
(Again he addresses the herald.)
 
I do.
HER. 
Who are you?
AMP. 
Amphitheos.
HER. 
Not a man?
AMP. 
No, but an immortal whom the gods have ordered to make a treaty with the 
Spartans. But since I’m an immortal, gentlemen, I don’t have the travelling 
expenses which I need. For the prytaneis don’t give them to me. So I hope to 
receive the travelling expenses …
A SPEAKER Know well, Athenians, that I am well disposed to the people. So don’t listen 
to this man unless he speaks about war.
 
The Athenians praise this and raise a clamour.

 
Section 11B 
151
HER. 
Archers!
 
The archers come in and lead off Amphitheos. As they are leading him off, 
Dikaiopolis becomes angry.
DIK. 
Prytaneis, you wrong the assembly by leading off the man who was going to 
make a treaty for us.
HER. 
Shut up and sit down.
DIK. 
By Apollo, I won’t, but you do business about peace.
HER. 
The ambassadors from the king.
11B
Page 134
 
1 ὄλοιντο Note the stem ὀλ- (cf. ἀπόλοιντο in line 4). What verb? 
Note that there is no ἄν with the optative and therefore this is a 
wish.
 
4 ‘For we are always being deceived and wronged and ruined by them.’ The 
verbs are passives. Write out this sentence in English with the verbs in the 
active beginning with ‘For they …’
 
  At this stage all passives are used with ὑπό + gen. meaning ‘by’ when it is a 
person, or with the dative when it is a thing.
 
5 ἀδικουμένοις Passive participle: ‘being wronged’.
 
6–7 πειθόμενος, θωπευόμενος, ἐξαπατώμενος, διαϕθειρόμενος These are 
passive participles: the ﬁ rst one means ‘being persuaded’. What do the others 
mean?
 
10 ϕαίη Optative of ϕημί. Learn GE p. 231, #227.
 
12 ἔστω ‘so be it’.
 
13ff. A further statement of Pericles’ policy at the beginning of the Peloponnesian 
War.
 
14 ἄκοντες ‘unwilling’, the opposite of ἕκοντες.
 
 ἀπολλύμενοι Present passive participle of ἀπόλλυμι: ‘being destroyed by …’ 
The datives here mean ‘by’ (dative of instrument).
 
22 ἐξισταμένοις What verb?: Hint: -στα-. GE p. 170, #187.
 
23ff. This is quite a complicated looking sentence, but the structure is clear: γνούς (a 
participle, ‘realising’) followed by acc. and participle (twice) ἐμαυτὸν … ὄντα, 
and οὐκ ἀναγκαζόμενον … ποιεῖν ἃ μὴ ἐθέλω, then a genitive absolute τῶν 
ἄλλων πολεμούντων, then the main clause ἐγὼ … οὐ πολεμήσω, ἀλλ᾽ εἰρήνην 
ἄξω (future of ἄγω).
 
25 μοι This is an ethic dative, sometimes called the dative of the person concerned. 
You could translate it ‘please tell me’.
 
28, 31 δούς, τοῦ Δικαιοπόλεως δόντος Note the aorist participles of δίδωμι.
 
33 πρεσβεύεσθε, ἐκδικάζετε, χρηματίζετε Indicative or imperative?
 
36 δεῖται + genitive = ‘needs’.

152 
Section 11C
Translation for 11B
DIKAIOPOLIS Death to all the Athenians who praise and obey what the prytaneis say, and 
the worst death of all to those speakers who ﬂ atter the people and always 
deceive them. For what do we farmers not suffer at their hands? For we are 
always being deceived and wronged and ruined by them. But what can we do 
when we are always being wronged by them in this way? For the people seem 
to enjoy being persuaded by the speakers and being ﬂ attered and cheated and 
ruined by their words. For the man who says ‘I am well disposed to the crowd’ 
is always honoured by the people, but the good man who gives good advice is 
never honoured by them.
But perhaps someone may say, ‘So what? The people are free and rule them-
selves and are not ruled by any other. If they want to be deceived and persuaded 
and ﬂ attered by the speakers, so be it.’
But I answer, ‘And yet the sailors have power in the assembly while the 
farmers are forced against their will to live in the city, being destroyed by the way 
they live, their lack of provisions and the plague.’
Perhaps this man might answer ‘But aren’t you free? So don’t worry 
at all, either about the people or the speakers or the war or the written or unwrit-
ten laws. For in this city nobody is ever forced by anyone to do what he doesn’t 
want. I consider utterly free the horses and the mules in the city, who as they 
go along the roads love to bump into the travellers who don’t get out of their 
way.’
All right, then. Realising that I am free and not being forced by anyone to do 
what I don’t want to, while the others are making war, I myself shall not make 
war but shall live in peace. Amphitheos, come here. But please, where is 
Amphitheos?
AMPHITHEOS Here I am.
DIK. 
(Giving to Amphitheos eight drachmas.)
You take these eight drachmas and make a treaty with the Spartans for just me 
and my children.
After Dikaiopolis has given him the travelling expenses, Amphitheos goes 
away.
You deal with ambassadors, then make judgements, then do business about the 
war and about ways of raising money and about making laws and about allies and 
about triremes and about dockyards and about sacriﬁ ces. But the city needs 
neither triremes nor dockyards if it is going to be happy, nor great numbers nor 
great size, without peace.
11C
Amphitheos is now back from Sparta. He is being hotly pursued by Akharnians, 
angry old men eager to go on with the war because their vineyards are being burnt 
by the Spartans.

 
Section 11C 
153
Page 136
 
2 Δικαιοπόλεως δὲ ταῦτα εἰπόντος Genitive absolute, ‘when Dikaiopolis had 
said this …’
 
9 Genitive absolute, ‘the Spartans having destroyed our land’, i.e. ‘although the 
Spartans have wrecked our land’. Note how, in the genitive absolute 
construction, we often have to supply a word (e.g. ‘when’, ‘since’, ‘although’) 
in English and create a clause.
 
9–10 λίθους δὲ λαβόντων αὐτῶν See note above. What English word should we 
supply here?
 
11 βοώντων GE #206–207.
 
23 ὀξύτατα Superlative adverb, ‘most sharply’. Learn the comparative and 
superlative adverbs. GE pp. 229–230, #225.
Page 137
 
26 The Rural Dionysia was a festival held in winter. The central feature was a 
procession bearing a phallus to promote the fertility of the autumn-sown crops. 
In Akharnians Dikaiopolis emerges from his house leading his family in a 
mini-procession of the Rural Dionysia.
Translation for 11C
DIKAIOPOLIS But here’s Amphitheos back from Sparta. Greetings, Amphitheos.
Though Dikaiopolis has said this, Amphitheos keeps running.
AMPHITHEOS Not yet, Dikaiopolis. For I must ﬂ ee and escape from the 
Akharnians.
DIK. 
What’s up?
AMP. 
I was hurrying here bringing a treaty for you. But I didn’t evade the 
Akharnians. Those old men, being ﬁ ghters at the battle of Marathon, the 
moment they spotted me bringing the treaty, all shouted, ‘You foulest of 
creatures, are you bringing a treaty when the Spartans have destroyed our 
land?’ And they took up stones. And when they took up stones, I ran away. But 
they were following me and shouting.
DIK. 
Let them shout, then. But are you bringing the treaty?
AMP. 
I’ll say. Here are three samples.
 
(He gives him one sample.)
 
This is for ﬁ ve years. Take it and taste.
DIK. 
(After Amphitheos has given it him, Dikaiopolis tastes it.)
 
Yuk!
AMP. 
What is it?
DIK. 
It doesn’t please me because it smells of equipping of ships.
AMP. 
(Giving him another sample.)
 
You take this ten-year treaty instead and taste it.
DIK. 
It smells too – very pungently of ambassadors to the cities.
AMP. 
But here is a thirty-year peace by both land and sea.

154 
Exercises for section 11
DIK. 
Ο festival of Dionysos, this smells of ambrosia and nectar. I’ll choose this with 
the greatest pleasure, bidding a long farewell to the Akharnians. Ceasing from 
war and its evils I intend to go in and celebrate the country Dionysia.
AMP. 
(Seeing the Akharnians approaching.)
 
And I’ll run away from the Akharnians.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 11
THE PASSIVE
11: 1
 1. κηρύττεται, ἐκηρύττετο 
it is/was being announced
 2. φιλῇ, ἐφιλοῦ 
you (s.) are/were being loved
 3. ἄρχονται, ἤρχοντο 
they are/were being ruled
 4. ἐλευθερούμεθα, ἠλευθερούμεθα 
we are/were being freed
 5. τιμᾶσθε, ἐτιμᾶσθε 
you (pl.) are/were being honoured
 6. δίδοται, ἐδίδοτο 
he is/was being given
 7. ἀναγκάζομαι, ἠναγκαζόμην 
I am/was being compelled
 8. καταλύεται, κατελύετο 
it is/was being ended
 9. διώκονται, ἐδιώκοντο 
they are/were being pursued
10. ἐξαγόμεθα, ἐξηγόμεθα 
we are/were being driven out
11: 2
1. ἐφιλοῦντο ὑπὸ τοῦ κήρυκος, ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνδρῶν.
 
they were loved by the herald, by the men.
2. κηρύττεται ὑπὸ τοῦ κήρυκος, τοῖς λόγοις.
 
it is announced by the herald, with the words.
3. ἐφυλαττόμην ὑπὸ τῶν φυλάκων, τῷ τείχει.
 
I was guarded by the guards, by the wall.
4. ἐκωλυόμεθα ὑπὸ τοῦ διδασκάλου, ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνδρῶν.
 
we were prevented by the teacher, by the men.
5. ἐξεφέρετο ὑπὸ τῶν ἀνδρῶν, ὑπὸ τῶν φυλάκων.
 
it was carried out by the men, by the guards.
6. πείθονται τοῖς λόγοις, τῇ ἀληθείᾳ.
 
They are persuaded by the arguments, by the truth
 
N.B. There are a number of possible answers in this exercise, but the 
important thing is that agents (people) are in the genitive with ὑπό, while 
instruments are translated by the dative alone, without a preposition.
GENITIVE ABSOLUTE
11: 3
1. ἡμῶν φυγόντων εἰς τὴν ἀκρόπολιν
2. τῶν ῥητόρων ἀκουσάντων τῶν λόγων

 
Revision exercises for section 11 
155
3. σοῦ δόντος ἡμῖν τὰ σῖτα
4. τῶν δούλων ἐλευθερουμένων
5. τῶν σοφιστῶν τοὺς νεανίσκους διδαξάντων
6. λαβόντων τῶν Περσῶν τὰς ναῦς
7. ἐλθόντος ἐμοῦ πρὸς τὴν πόλιν
8. τοῦ δώρου διδομένου τῇ γυναικί
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 11
A – WORDS
1. I perceive 
perception
 
unwilling 
willing
 
the prytanis (see vocab. for 10A) 
 the prytaneion (the building in 
     which the prytaneis lodged during 
     their term of ofﬁ ce. It was called the 
     tholos.)
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. The people honour good men. 
 
  oἱ χρηστοὶ τιμῶνται ὑπὸ τοῦ δήμου.
 
b. Lysistrata compels us to make peace.
 
  ἀναγκαζόμεθα σπονδὰς ποιεῖσθαι ὑπὸ τῆς Λυσιστράτης.
 
c. The orators/politicians wrong the city.
 
  ἀδικεῖται ἡ πόλις ὑπὸ τῶν ῥητόρων.
 
d. The politician deceives the people.
 
  ἐξαπατᾶται ὑπὸ τοῦ ῥήτορος ὁ δῆμος.
 
e. We ﬂ atter the assembly with our words/speeches.
 
  ἡ ἐκκλησία θωπεύεται τοῖς ἡμετέροις λόγοις.
 
f. You persuade the citizens to maintain peace.
 
  oἱ πολῖται πείθονται ὑϕ᾽ ὑμῶν εἰρήνην ἄγειν.
 
g. The gifts/bribery persuaded the people.
 
  ἐπείθετο τοῖς δώροις ὁ δῆμος.
 
h. The speeches of the politicians were unjust to / wronged the assembly.
 
  ἡ ἐκκλησία ἠδικεῖτο τοῖς λόγοις τοῖς τῶν ῥητόρων.
 
i. The walls used to guard the city.
 
  ἡ πόλις ἐϕυλάττετο τοῖς τείχεσιν.
 
j. The schemes of the women compelled the men to make a truce.
 
  ταῖς μηχαναῖς ταῖς τῶν γυναικῶν ἠναγκάζοντο oἱ ἄνδρες σπονδὰς 
  ποιεῖσθαι.
2. a. The men went away, but we went on towards the city.
 
  ἀπελθόντων τῶν ἀνδρῶν, ἡμεῖς πρὸς τὴν πόλιν ἐπορευόμεθα.
 
b. The woman gave me the money, and I went away.
 
  δούσης μοι τὸ ἀργύριον τῆς γυναικός, ἀπῆλθον.

156 
Revision exercises for section 11
 
c. The god is waiting, but the Athenians do not want to listen.
 
  τοῦ θεοῦ μένοντος, οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι οὐ βούλονται ἀκούειν.
 
d. The rest are at war, but I shall not go to war.
 
  τῶν ἄλλων πολεμούντων, ἐγὼ οὐ πολεμήσω.
 
e. The city is wronged by the politicians. but the Athenians do not care.
 
  τῆς πόλεως ἀδικουμένης ὑπὸ τῶν ῥητόρων, οἱ Ἀθηναῖοι οὐδὲν 
  ϕροντίζουσιν.
 
f. The assembly was discussing/doing business about the war but 
  Dikaiopolis did not care.
 
  τῆς ἐκκλησίας περὶ τοῦ πολέμου χρηματιζούσης, ὁ Δικαιόπολις 
  οὐδὲν ἐϕρόντιζεν.
 
g. The assembly is ruled by no one and the people do what they like.
 
  τῆς ἐκκλησίας ὑπ᾽ οὐδενὸς ἀρχομένης, ὁ δῆμος ποιεῖ ἃ ἐθέλει.
 
h. The Akharnians picked up (aorist) stones. I started to run away 
  (imperfect).
 
  τῶν Ἀχαρνέων λίθους λαβόντων, ἐγὼ ἔϕευγον.
 
i. Amphitheos presented treaties, and Dikaiopolis received them.
 
  τοῦ Ἀμϕιθέου δόντος τὰς σπονδάς, ὁ Δικαιόπολις ἐδέξατο.
 
j. The herald made a proclamation, but the god was silent.
 
  τοῦ κήρυκος κηρύξαντος, ὁ θεὸς ἐσίγησεν.
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1.
 
1. τοῦ κήρυκος κηρύττοντος, οἱ πρυτανεῖς εἰσέβαινον εἰς τὴν 
  ἐκκλησίαν.
 
2. ὁ δῆμος ἐπείθετο πολεμεῖν ὑπὸ τῶν ῥητόρων, τῶν γεωργῶν πρὸς τοὺς 
  ἀγροὺς βλεπόντων.
 
3. λέγεται ὅτι οἱ ῥήτορες εὐνοῖ εἰσι τῇ πόλει.
 
4. ἡμῶν ὑπὸ τῶν ῥητόρων ἐξαπατωμένων, οἱ Λακεδαιμόνιοι 
  διαϕθείρουσι τὴν γῆν.
 
5. ἡ ἐκκλησία ὑπ᾽ οὐδενὸς ἄρχεται.
2. ἀλλ᾽ οἱ πρυτάνεις οὑτοιὶ ἥκουσιν. καὶ ἡκόντων αὐτῶν, εὖ οἶσθ᾽ ὅτι οἱ 
ῥήτορες παρίασι, λέγειν βουλόμενοι. ἡμεῖς δέ, γεωργοὶ ὄντες, ἡσυχίαν 
ἄξομεν, εἰς τοὺς ἀγροὺς βλέποντες, ἄκοντες μὲν γὰρ ἀναγκαζόμεθα 
ἀκούειν τὰ ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν λεγόμενα. οἱ δὲ τἀληθῆ οὐ λέξουσιν. ἀεὶ γὰρ 
λέγουσιν ὅτι ἡ πόλις ἄρχεται αὐτὴ ὑϕ᾽ αὑτῆς ϕιλουμένη ὑπὸ πάντων τῶν 
ῥητόρων, oἱ δὲ οὐδενὶ ἀλλῷ ἢ ἑαυτοῖς εὐνοῖ ὄντες τυγχάνουσι. τῆς δὲ 
πόλεως ὑπ᾽ αὐτῶν διαϕθειρομένης, οὐδεὶς ἑκὼν χρηματιεῖ οὔτε περὶ 
τούτων οὔτε περὶ τῆς εἰρήνης. οὐκ ἀρέσκει μοι οὐδαμῶς τὸ πρᾶγμα.
E – TEST EXERCISE 11
This is a difﬁ cult passage based on a later extract from the Akharnians when 
Dikaiopolis has persuaded the chorus to listen to his anti-war argument. He also 
refers to an occasion when Kleon had indicted Aristophanes for abusing the 

 
Revision exercises for section 11 
157
Athenian people in public when there were foreigners in the audience. That was 
at the City Dionysia, the big spring festival; this is at the Lenaia, a festival held 
in winter when few foreigners could sail to Athens.
DIKAIOPOLIS Don’t make a noise, spectators, if I come as a beggar and begin speaking 
among Athenians about the city, even though I am taking part in a comedy. For 
even comedy knows what justice is. And I shall tell you terrible but just things. 
For Kleon will not now abuse me for speaking ill of the city when strangers are 
present. For we are on our own, and no strangers are here yet. I hate the 
Lacedaemonians very much. May they perish, themselves, their wives and their 
children. My vineyard is being cut down by them, and we are shut up in the city 
against our will, being destroyed by the plague and always gazing out at our 
ﬁ elds. But (for you who are here are friends) how are the Lacedaemonians 
responsible for these disasters? There are men among us (I do not mean the 
city, remember this, that I do not mean the city) who are responsible, most 
particularly Pericles, the Olympian, who proposed the law that Megarians must 
not remain on land, nor in the market, nor on the sea, nor on the mainland. And, 
though the Megarians and the Lacedaemonians often asked and begged us to 
withdraw the decree, we were not willing to do so. For it was not pleasing to 
Pericles.
This was the start of the war.

158
Sections Twelve–Fourteen: The prosecution of Neaira
The next three sections are taken from a lawcourt speech, with imaginary conver-
sations between three jurors at intervals, which ingeniously reinforce the new 
points of grammar and syntax that have been introduced. Rhetorical Greek is 
often elaborately structured and you may ﬁ nd that you have to analyse the sen-
tences carefully as a whole, before you can translate them in detail.
The case is also fairly confusing, so it is well worth reading the introduction 
before you start. The speech throws some interesting light on the position of 
women in Athenian society.
A great deal of new grammar and syntax is introduced in these sections and so 
it is wise to do the exercises when they occur to consolidate your learning with 
practice, or, if you ﬁ nd that makes you lose track of the story, ﬁ nish reading 
Section 12 and then go back to revise the grammar and do the exercises.
Section Twelve: Neaira as slave
12A
Page 144
 
1–2 ἄλλος ἄλλον ὡς ὁρῶσιν ἥκοντα ‘as they see one another coming’.
 
3 οὗ ‘where’, relative. Cf. ποῦ ‘where?’ interrogative.
 
 μέλλουσι δικάσειν μέλλω + future inﬁ nitive, ‘I am about to do 
something’.
 
9 οὐκ ἤλπιζον ἐντεύξεσθαι ἐλπίζω + future inﬁ nitive, ‘I did not expect to 
meet.’
 
9–10 Στρυμοδώρῳ … διατρίβοντι … νέῳ ὄντι καὶ ἀπείρῳ All agree.
 
11 ἐξέσται The future of the impersonal verb ἔξεστι: ‘it will be possible’.
 
15 ὄλοιο 2nd. s. aorist optative of ὄλλυμι: ‘may you perish’.
Translation for 12A
When the herald summons them the dikasts come into the courtroom. And as they 
see one another coming in, they immediately greet one another, shaking hands. 
When Komias and Euergides come into the lawcourt – where they are going to 
judge a case about Neaira – they greet one another.

 
Section 12B 
159
EUERGIDES Greetings, Komias.
KOMIAS 
And [greetings] to you too, Euergides. What a big crowd! But who is this? It’s not 
really our neighbour Strymodoros, is it? Yes, by Zeus, it is indeed the man himself. 
Oh what luck! But I did not expect to meet Strymodoros spending his time in the 
lawcourt, since he is a young man and without experience in judicial matters.
EU. 
Why don’t you call him over here? It will be possible for him to sit with us.
KOM. 
A good suggestion (you speak well) and we will call him. Strymodoros, 
Strymodoros!
STRYMODOROS Greetings, neighbours. Oh the size of the crowd!
 
(He is pushed by a juror who is holding his tunic.)
 
You, what did you mean by holding my tunic? To hell with you! (May you 
perish!)
EU. 
Well done. Sit down.
12B
Page 145
 
5 oὐδεν διαϕέρει ‘it makes no difference’.
Page 146
 
12 πάνυ δεινὸν λέγειν ‘very clever at speaking’, an idiomatic use of δεινός + 
the inﬁ nitive.
 
 ὁ διώκων = ‘the pursuer’, ‘prosecutor’; ὁ ϕεύγων = ‘the ﬂ eer’, ‘the defendant’.
 
16 οὐκ ἂν σιγῴης καὶ προσέχοις τὸν νοῦν; ἄν + optative expresses a polite 
request, ‘Won’t you be quiet and concentrate?’
 
19 ὅπως σιωπήσεις ὅπως, ὅπως μή + future indicative expresses a caution ‘see 
that you …’ (GE p. 260, #245).
 
20 καὶ προσέξεις τὸν νοῦν See above on line 16.
Translation for 12B
Apollodoros the prosecutor comes in.
STRYMODOROS But who is that, who is approaching the rostrum, walking quickly?
KOMIAS 
This happens to be the prosecutor in the trial, whose name is Apollodoros, and 
he has a meddlesome nature.
EUERGIDES But it makes no difference if his nature is meddling or not. For we must 
show common goodwill for the contestants and listen in the same way to the 
arguments which each of them uses, according to the oath which we swore. 
And indeed Apollodoros seems to himself and to many others to be beneﬁ ting 
the city and making the laws valid by bringing a charge against Neaira for 
being an alien.
KOM. 
Perhaps Apollodoros is naturally patriotic. But I know that you, Euergides, as a 
prosecutor are very clever at speaking. For such things are always said by the 
accusers. And Apollodoros, I know it well, will say the same things; ‘I did not 
begin the enmity’, he will say, and ‘The defendant did me the greatest 

160 
Section 12C
injustice’, and ‘I want to be revenged on him.’ But I am not always persuaded 
by such statements.
EU. 
Reasonably. But now won’t you be quiet and concentrate? For Apollodoros is 
already clearing his throat, as people do who are starting to speak, and he is 
standing up.
KOM. 
I shall be silent, Euergides. But see that you are silent too, Strymodoros, and 
concentrate.
12C
Page 146
 
2 ἠδικήθην 1st s. aorist passive of ἀδικέω: ‘I was wronged’ (GE pp. 236–237, 
#228).
 
2–3 οὗ γυνή ἐστιν … ‘Whose wife is …’ oὗ = ‘whose’, genitive of ὅς.
 
3 κατέστην From the verb ἵστημι. Some tenses are transitive and have an 
object, some have not and are intransitive. If it has an object it will mean 
‘place’, ‘set up’; if it does not have an object it will mean ‘stand’, ‘be set up’, 
‘set myself up’. Similarly, καθίστημι εἰς + object means ‘I put someone into a 
state’; but καθίσταμαι εἰς (without an object) means ‘I get into a state’. See GE 
p. 242, #234.
 
 ἀδικηθείς Nom. s. m. aorist passive participle of ἀδικέω.
 
7 ἀδικηθέντες Nom. pl. m. aorist passive participle of ἀδικέω.
 
11–12 τίς γὰρ οὐκ ἂν βούλοιτο … ‘Who would not want?’ Potential expressed by 
ἄν + optative.
Page 147
 
14 ὅπως μὴ … πιστεύσεις ‘See that you don’t trust …’ (see note on 12B, line 
19).
 
17 ἡδέως ἄν τι μάθοιμι Cf. line 21, potential ἄν + optative. ‘I would gladly learn 
something.’
Translation for 12C
Apollodoros speaks.
APOLLODOROS For many reasons, gentlemen of Athens, I wanted to bring this charge 
against Neaira, which I am now pursuing, and to come before you. For I was 
greatly wronged by Stephanos whose wife this Neaira is. And having been 
wronged by him, I was placed in extreme danger, not only myself, but my 
daughters and my wife. It is therefore for the sake of revenge that I am 
engaging in this contest, having been placed in such danger. For I did not begin 
the enmity, but Stephanos did, [although] he had not been wronged in any way 
yet by us in word or deed. I want to give you a preliminary outline of 
everything we suffered and [to tell you] how, having been wronged by him, we 
were placed in extreme danger of poverty and loss of citizen rights.

 
Section 12D 
161
STRYMODOROS Apollodoros, who was wronged by Stephanos, is a clever speaker, as it 
seems. I feel goodwill towards him because it was Stephanos who began the 
enmity. For who would not want to take vengeance on an enemy? Everyone 
wants to do good to their friends and harm to their enemies.
KOMIAS 
Take care that you do not easily trust the contestants, Strymodoros. For when 
they stand up in court the contestants use every art to win the goodwill of the 
jurors.
STR. 
But I would gladly learn something. For Apollodoros says that being wronged 
by Stephanos he was placed in danger of poverty. What did Stephanos do to 
bring Apollodoros into this danger?
EUERGIDES Listen. For Apollodoros is continuing to speak about the beginning of the 
conﬂ ict.
12D
Page 148
 
3 ἑλών Nom. s. m. aorist participle of αἱρέω from εἷλον.
 
 ᾔτησε 3rd s. aorist indicative from αἰτέω.
 
4 ὃ οὐχ οἷός τ᾽ ἦ ἐκτεῖσαι ‘Which I was not able (οἷός τ᾽ ἦ) to pay’.
 
7–9 μοι … καταστάντι … οὐ δυναμένῳ … ὀϕείλοντι Note the agreement of all 
the participles with μοι.
 
9 oἳ οὐκ ἐπείσθησαν ‘who were not persuaded’. Aorist passive.
Page 149
 
19–21 ϕάσκω Στέϕανον τοῦτον συνοικεῖν … εἰσαγαγεῖν … ἐγγυᾶν … 
ἀσεβεῖν ‘I allege that Stephanos does …’ (a series of things in the 
inﬁ nitive). The grammar of this is explained later in GE pp. 247–249, 
#235–236.
Translation for 12D
When I was acting as a member of the Council I proposed a decree which I 
brought before the people. But this Stephanos indicted my decree as illegal, and 
thus began our enmity. For, having secured a conviction against the decree, and 
having brought false witnesses, he asked for a large ﬁ ne which I could not pay. 
For he was seeking, having placed me in extreme embarrassment, to deprive me 
of my citizen rights, because I owed money to the state and was unable to 
pay.
Therefore we were all going to be placed in poverty. The disaster and the dis-
grace was going to be great for me in regard to my wife and daughters if I had 
been bankrupted and could not provide a dowry and owed the amount of my ﬁ ne 
to the state. I am deeply grateful to the jurors who were not persuaded by 
Stephanos, but who inﬂ icted a lesser penalty on me.
Stephanos therefore became the cause of such great evils for us all, though he 
had never been wronged by me. And now with all my friends encouraging me 

162 
Section 12D
and urging me to take vengeance on Stephanos, by whom I was so wronged, I 
bring this case before you. For my friends reproach me and call me the most 
cowardly of men if I do not exact vengeance on behalf of my daughters and my 
wife.
Therefore I bring this Neaira before you and charge her, she who is irreverent 
to the gods, insulting to the city and contemptuous of your laws. For Stephanos 
was trying to deprive me of my family against the laws. Thus I have come to 
you and I declare that this Stephanos is living with a foreign woman contrary 
to the law, and that he has introduced alien children into the phratries and to 
the demesmen, and that he gives in marriage the daughters of prostitutes as if 
they were his own daughters, and that he is committing sacrilege against the 
gods.
That I was formerly wronged by Stephanos you know well. That Neaira is an 
alien and that she is living with Stephanos against the laws, this I want to prove 
to you clearly.
Grammar
You should now learn the grammar for 12A–D before you go on.
1. The aorist passive (GE pp. 236–237, #228–229) indicative and participle. 
This is easy to recognise because of ‘θ’ but make sure you also read the 
notes!
2. The verb ἵστημι ‘I set up’. This is difﬁ cult and seems complicated at ﬁ rst. 
It may be helpful if you look back over the passage you have just read in 
this section and see how it has been used, then go on and try the exercises 
to conﬁ rm your understanding.
 See GE pp. 238–242, #230–233. Below is a simpliﬁ ed version in chart form.
The verb ἵστημι
 
Transitive 
 
Intransitive
Pres. Act. 
ἵστημι (ἱστάς) 
Pres. mid. 
ἵσταμαι (ἱστάμενος)
 
I am setting up 
 
I am standing up
Fut. Act. 
στήσω (στήσων) 
Fut. mid. 
στήσομαι (στησόμενος)
 
I will set up 
 
I will stand up
Imperf. Act. 
ἵστην 
Imperf. mid. 
ἱστάμην
 
I was setting up 
 
I was standing up
1st aor. act. 
ἔστησα (στήσας) 
2nd. aor. act. 
ἔστην (στάς στᾶσα στάν)
 
I set up 
 
I stood up
1st aor. mid. 
ἐστησάμην (στησάμενος) 2nd. aor. act. (intrans.) has taken place of 1st aor. mid., 
 
I set X up for myself 
so 1st aor. mid. becomes transitive and ‘true’ middle.

 
Exercises for section 12A–D 
163
Note on καθίστημι
In its transitive forms it means ‘I put someone in a certain position’, ‘elect’, 
e.g. κατέστησα αὐτὸν εἰς πενίαν ‘I reduced him to poverty’ (‘I placed him in 
poverty’).
In its intransitive forms it means ‘I am put in a certain position’ or ‘I am 
elected’, ‘I am made’, ‘I become’, e.g. κατέστην εἰς πενίαν ‘I was reduced to 
poverty’ (‘I was placed in poverty’).
Examples
12C (pp. 146–147)
 
3 εἰς κινδύνους τοὺς ἐσχάτους κατέστην.
 
5 καταστὰς εἰς τοιοῦτον κίνδυνον …
 
8–9 εἰς τοὺς ἐσχάτους κινδύνους κατέστημεν περί τε τῆς πενίας καὶ περὶ 
ἀτιμίας.
 
17–18 ἀδικηθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ Στεϕάνου, εἰς κίνδυνον κατέστη περὶ τῆς πενίας.
 
18–19 τί ποιῶν ὁ Στέϕανος κατέστησε τὸν Ἀπολλόδωρον εἰς τοῦτον τὸν κίνδυνον;
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12A–D
THE AORIST PASSIVE
12A–D: 1
 1. ἐκωλυθήσαν 
they were prevented
 2. ἐπέμφθημεν 
we were sent
 3. ἐλύθη 
he/she was set free
 4. ἐπείσθητε 
you (pl.) were persuaded
 5. ἐδόθην 
I was given
 6. ἐφυλάχθη 
he was guarded
 7. ἐδιώχθης 
you (s.) were chased
 8. ἐγράφησαν 
they were indicted/ written
 9. ἐτιμήθη 
he/she was honoured
10. ἐποιήθητε 
you (pl.) were made
12A–D: 2
1. τοὺς πολεμίους πεισθέντας
2. τῷ δούλῳ λυθέντι
3. τῶν χρημάτων δοθέντων
4. αἱ γυναῖκες κελευθεῖσαι
5. τοῦ ἀνδρὸς ἀδικηθέντος
12A–D: 3
1. ἵσταμεν 
we are setting up
2. ἵσταναι 
to set up

164 
Revision exercises for section 12A–D
3. ἵστης 
you (s.) were setting up
4. ἱστᾶσα 
setting up (n.f.s. pres. part.)
5. ἱσταίη 
may he set up
12A–D: 4
1. ἵστασθαι 
to be being set up
2. ἵσταντο 
they were setting themselves up/being 
 
set up
3. ἱστάμενοι 
being set up (n.pl.m. pres. part. 
 
pass.)
4. ἐστάθη 
he/it was set up
5. ἵσταται 
he/she/it is being set up
12A–D: 5
 1. he/she/it stood up
 2. they were setting up for themselves, they were being set up
 3. setting up for himself, being set up
 4. set up! (2.s.1st aor. imperative.)
 5. we are setting up, we were setting up (if iota is long)
 6. stand up! (you pl. 2 aor. imperative), set yourselves up
 7. they will set themselves up
 8. he set up for himself
 9. I set myself up, I stood up
10. to set up for oneself (1st aor. inﬁ nitive active)
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12A–D
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. Apollodoros wronged me greatly and placed (κατέστησεν transitive) us all 
in great despair. For, having set up (ἀναστήσας trans.) lying witnesses in 
the lawcourt, he convicted me and asked for a large ﬁ ne. I, therefore, 
owing the ﬁ ne to the city, and being placed (καταστάς intrans.) in the 
position of loss of citizen’s rights, emigrated (ἐξανέστην intrans.) from the 
city. Then, having left (ἀναστάς lit. having got up from) my fatherland, 
I went to Megara, where, reduced (καταστάς intrans.) to a state of poverty, 
I remained for two years.
2. a. For my daughter is getting into a state of poverty because of this case. 
  κατέστη
 
b. Therefore the Athenians move the Aeginetans from Aegina. 
  ἀνέστησαν
 
c. But you, gentlemen of the jury, are placing my daughters in great 
  despair by condemning (having condemned) me. 
  κατεστήσατε

 
Revision exercises for section 12A–D 
165
 
d. This prosecutor stands up in court and terriﬁ es (brings to fear) the 
  defendant. ἀνέστη κατέστησεν
 
3. ἐκλήθησαν 
they were called 
καλέω
 
   ἐλήϕθη 
he was taken 
λαμβάνω
 
   ἠπορήθην 
I was at a loss 
ἀπορέω
 
   κατεδικάσθητε 
you (pl.) were condemned 
καταδικάζω
 
   ἐξηλέγχθης 
you (s.) were convicted 
ἐξελέγχω
 
   ἐξεδόθημεν 
we were given in marriage 
ἐκδίδωμι
 
   ὑβρίσθη 
he was insulted 
ὑβρίζω
 
   διηλλάχθησαν 
they were reconciled 
διαλλάττομαι
 
   ἐγράϕην 
I was written 
γράϕω
 
   ὠργίσθητε 
you (pl.) were made angry 
ὀργίζομαι
 
   ἐλέχθη 
it was said 
λέγω
 
   ἐβιάσθημεν 
we were forced 
βιάζομαι
 
   κατηγορήθη 
he was accused 
κατηγορέω
 
   ἀπελύθης 
you were acquitted, released 
ἀπολύω
 
   ἀπεπέμϕθησαν 
they were sent away 
ἀποπέμπω
 
   ἐξηπατήθης 
you (s.) were deceived 
ἐξαπατάω
 
   ἐπείσθην 
I was persuaded 
πείθω
4. a. The jurors were not persuaded by the defence, and I was 
  condemned. ὁ μὲν δικαστὴς οὐκ ἐπείσθη … ἡμεῖς δὲ 
  κατεδικάσθημεν
 
b. But indeed it makes no difference to me if you were not acquitted but 
  condemned. ἀπελύθητε κατεδικάσθητε
 
c. For this speech was made by the opponent. οὗτοι oἱ λόγoι 
  ἐλέχθησαν
 
d. You were greatly wronged by this man. σὺ δὲ ἠδικήθης
5. a. I am well disposed towards the man who was wronged by Stephanos. 
  ἀδικηθέντα
 
b. We, being persuaded by the opponent, exacted the penalty. 
  πεισθέντες
 
c. Since the woman had been deceived by the one who had lost his 
  citizen’s rights, her husband despised her. ἐξαπατηθείσης
 
d. When I was forced to introduce the child to the clan, my daughter 
  became hostile. βιασθέντος
 
e. My friends helped me when I lost my citizen’s rights and was in despair. 
  ἀπορηθέντι
 
f. We gave many drachmas to the old men who had been deceived by 
  Kleon. ἐξαπατηθεῖσι
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. ὁ Ἀπολλόδωρος ἠδικήθη μεγάλα ὑπὸ Στεϕάνου καὶ Nεαίρας.
2. τίμημά τι μέγα ᾐτήθη ὑπὸ Στεϕάνου.
3. ὁ Ἀπολλόδωρος ἔμελλε καταστήσεσθαι εἰς τὴν ἐσχάτην ἀπορίαν.

166 
Section 12E
4. ὁ Στέϕανος κατέστησε τὸν Ἀπολλόδωρον εἰς κίνδυνον μέγαν.
5. ὁ Ἀπολλόδωρος ἐπείσθη τιμωρεῖσθαι τὸν Στέϕανον.
12E
This section introduces the accusative (or nominative) and inﬁ nitive construction 
to express an indirect statement after verbs of saying and thinking (GE pp. 
247–249, #235–236).
Page 150
 
3 ϕησὶ γὰρ ὁ Ἀπολλόδωρος Followed by the accusative (τὸν Στέϕανον) and 
inﬁ nitive (ἄρξαι) construction, and then the nominative (αὐτός) and inﬁ nitive 
(ἀγωνίζεσθαι) construction. ‘Apollodoros says that Stephanos began the 
enmity, and that he (Apollodoros) is bringing the case for the sake of 
revenge …’
 
6–7 ἀλλ᾽ ἡγοῦμαι … Introduces more accusative and inﬁ nitive: ‘I think that 
Apollodoros …’
 
7–9 πρῶτον μὲν γὰρ ἔϕη Ἀπολλόδωρος … καταστῆναι … οὐ δυνήσεσθαι 
… This time the construction is nominative and inﬁ nitive with the 
nominative left out: ‘Apollodoros said that he (Apollodoros) had been in 
danger …’
 
11ff. ἄν + the optative. A series of potential optatives (‘could’ or ‘would’). ‘How 
could Apollodoros not be ashamed …?’
Translation for 12E
KOMIAS 
Don’t you see? This is just what I was saying. The contestants always say such 
things. But I am not persuaded by them, myself.
STRYMODOROS Rightly, indeed. For Apollodoros says that Stephanos began the enmity 
and that he himself is bringing the action for revenge because he has been 
wronged by him. All this is what you said, Komias.
EUERGIDES These things were said by Apollodoros, but I think that perhaps Apollodoros 
is saying something important. For ﬁ rst of all Apollodoros said that he had been 
put in danger of poverty and loss of citizen rights, and that he would not be able 
to give his daughters in marriage. Then he said that Stephanos and Neaira were 
contemptuous of the laws and irreverent to the gods. Who would not be 
concerned about this?
STR. 
No one, by Zeus. For how could Apollodoros not feel ashamed at having 
unmarried daughters? And who would marry a woman from such a father who 
did not have a dowry?
EU. 
But perhaps Komias would not agree?
KOM. 
About poverty I would agree, of course. But about the laws and the gods I do 
not know clearly. When trustworthy evidence is brought by Apollodoros we 
shall ﬁ nd out in detail.

 
Revision exercises for section 12E 
167
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12E
INDIRECT SPEECH USING THE INFINITIVE
12E: 1
1. I said to be about to arrive.
 
I said I would arrive.
 
‘I will arrive.’
2. I said that man to be about to arrive.
 
I said that man would arrive.
 
‘That man will arrive.’
3. He thought himself to be wise.
 
He thought he (himself) was wise.
 
‘I am wise.’
4. He thought him to be wise.
 
He thought he (someone else) was wise.
 
‘He is wise.’
5. We think not to be able to see.
 
We think we cannot see.
 
‘We cannot see.’
6. They thought Stephanos not to have deceived the woman.
 
They did not think that Stephanus had deceived the woman.
 
‘Stephanos did not deceive the woman.’
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12E
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. The prosecutor is the most eager of men.
 
ϕημὶ τὸν κατήγορον σπουδαιότατον εἶναι τῶν ἀνθρώπων.
 
I say that the prosecutor is the most eager of men.
 
ἔϕην τὸν κατήγορον σπουδαιότατον εἶναι τῶν ἀνθρώπων.
 
I said that the prosecutor was the most eager of men.
2. I was placed in great danger.
 
ϕησὶν ἐμὲ εἰς μέγαν κίνδυνον καταστῆναι.
 
He says that I was placed in great danger.
 
ἔϕη ἐμὲ εἰς μέγαν κίνδυνον καταστῆναι.
 
He said that I had been placed in great danger.
3. The antagonists always say something dreadful/clever.
 
ἡγοῦμαι ἀεὶ λέγειν τι δεινὸν τoὺς ἀντιδίκους.
 
I consider that the antagonists always say something clever.
 
ἡγούμην ἀεὶ λέγειν τι δεινὸν τoὺς ἀντιδίκους.
 
I considered that the antagonists always said something clever.
4. Stephanos introduced the alien children to the brotherhood.
 
ϕασὶ τὸν Στέϕανον εἰσαγαγεῖν εἰς τoὺς ϕράτερας τoὺς ἀλλοτρίους παῖδας.

168 
Section 12F
 
They say that Stephanos introduced the alien children to the brotherhood.
 
ἔϕασαν τὸν Στέϕανον εἰσαγαγεῖν εἰς τοὺς ϕράτερας τoὺς ἀλλοτρίους 
παῖδας.
 
They said that Stephanos had introduced the alien children to the brotherhood.
5. Neaira is not ashamed of despising the laws.
 
τίς οὐκ ἂν οἴοιτο τὴν Νέαιραν οὐκ αἰσχύνεσθαι καταϕρονοῦσαν τῶν 
νόμων;
 
Who would not think that Neaira is not ashamed of despising the laws?
 
τίς οὐκ οἴεται τὴν Nέαιραν οὐκ αἰσχύνεσθαι καταϕρονοῦσαν τῶν νόμων;
 
Who does not think that Neaira is not ashamed of despising the laws?
6. We wanted to be revenged on our enemies at that time.
 
ϕαμὲν βούλεσθαι τότε τιμωρεῖσθαι τοὺς ἐχθρούς.
 
We say that we wanted to be revenged on our enemies at that time.
 
ἔϕαμεν βούλεσθαι τότε τιμωρεῖσθαι τοὺς ἐχθρούς.
 
We said that we wanted to be revenged on our enemies at that time.
12F
Page 151
 
2–4 ὅτι … τοῦθ’ ‘That Neaira is not only … this is what I want to prove.’
Page 152
 
9 ἔδoξεν αὐτῷ ‘It seemed good to him to’, ‘he decided to’.
 
10 βουλομένῳ Dative in apposition to αὐτῷ in line 9.
 
13 ᾐσχύνετο γὰρ τὴν γυναῖκα ‘He felt ashamed in respect of his wife.’
 
16–18  ὡς οὖν ἀληθῆ λέγω, ὅτι …, τούτων ὑμῖν αὐτὸν τὸν Φιλόστρατον μάρτυρα 
καλῶ ‘that (ὡς) I am speaking the truth [when I say] that (ὅτι) … I call 
Philostratos himself as witness to you of these things (τούτων)’. Note that the 
main clause is delayed to the end of the sentence.
Translation for 12F
Apollodoros continues.
Now then, you have heard the law, judges, this law which does not allow an 
alien woman to live with a male citizen nor a female citizen to live with an alien 
man, nor to have children. That Neaira is not only an alien but also a slave and a 
prostitute, I want to prove to you in detail from the beginning.
For Neaira was ﬁ rst of all a slave of Nikarete in Corinth. She had been brought 
up by her from the time when she was a small child. And this is clear and reliable 
proof of this. For Nikarete had another slave called Metaneira, whose lover, the 
sophist Lysias, paid many drachmas for her. But since all the money which he 
had paid for her had been taken by Nikarete, he decided to make her an initiate 
and to spend a lot of money on the feast and on the ceremonies, wanting to spend 
his money on Metaneira and not on Nikarete. And Nikarete was persuaded to go 

 
Exercises for section 12F 
169
to the mysteries taking Metaneira. When they arrived, Lysias did not take them 
to his own house (for he felt shame before the wife whom he had and his mother, 
who was an old woman and lived in the house). Lysias established them in the 
house of Philostratos, who was still a bachelor and was a friend of his. Neaira 
came with them to Athens, being herself also the slave of Nikarete and already 
working with her body, but being somewhat younger. That I am telling the truth 
and that Neaira was the property of Nikarete and came with her, I call Philostratos 
himself as witness.
Grammar
You now need to learn τίθημι (very important), GE pp. 251–253, #237–238 and 
δείκνυμι (less important) GE pp. 254–255, #239.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12F
τίθημι
12F: 1
 
 1. he gives 
τίθησι(ν) 
he puts
 
 2. you (pl.) were putting 
ἐδίδοτε 
you (pl.) were giving
 
 3. we gave 
ἔθεμεν 
we placed
 
 4. he was placed 
ἐδόθη 
he/it was given
 
 5. to give (aor.) 
θεῖναι 
to put, to have put
 
 6. he placed 
ἔδωκε 
he gave
 
 7. having given (n.pl.) 
θέντες 
having put
 
 8. put (s.) 
δός 
give! (s.)
 
 9. to give (pres.) 
τιθέναι 
to place
 
10. you (pl.) will place 
δώσετε 
you (pl.) will give
δείκνυμι
12F: 2
 
1. you (pl.) are placing 
δείκνυτε 
you (pl.) are showing
 
2. we shall show 
θήσομεν 
we shall put
 
3. they placed 
ἔδειξαν 
they showed
 
4. he was showing 
ἐτίθη 
he was placing
 
5. placing (n.pl.f.) 
δεικνῦσαι 
showing
12F: 3
ἐδείχθημεν 
we were shown
ἐτέθησαν 
they were placed
ἐδεικνύμεθα 
we were being shown (could be middle)
δειχθέντες 
having been shown (n.pl.m.)

170 
Section 12G
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12F
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. The sophist pays many drachmas on behalf of Metaneira. ἔθηκε
 
b. Although the sophist was paying money on behalf of Metaneira, 
  Nikarete did not give her anything, but she was reducing the girl to 
  despair. θέντος δίδωσι κατέστησεν
 
c. But then, when the girl had been reduced to despair, the sophist 
  decided to pay many drachmas for the mysteries. καθισταμένης 
  θεῖναι
 
d. ‘But’, he said, ‘acting thus, I shall put down this money on behalf of 
  Metaneira herself.’ ἔθηκα
 
e. Lysias, having gone to Athens and paid many drachmas, establishes 
  Nikarete and Metaneira at Philostratos’ house. τιθείς κατέστησε
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. ὁ Στέϕανος ϕήσει τὸν Ἀπολλόδωρον ὑπάρξαι τῆς ἔχθρας.
2. ὁ Ἀπολλόδωρος ἔϕη βούλεσθαι τιμωρεῖσθαι τὸν Στέϕανον.
3. ὁ Ἀπολλόδωρος οὐ* ϕήσει ἀδικῆσαι τὸν Στέϕανον.
4. πολλοὶ πολλὰ χρήματα ὑπὲρ τῆς Nεαίρας ἔθεσαν.
5. ὁ Ἀπολλόδωρός ϕησι τὸν Στέϕανον δούλῃ συνoικεῖν ὡς γυναικί.
*The negative is always attached to φημί (GE p. 247, #224).
12G
This section introduces conditional (‘if’) sentences with ἄν + the optative (GE 
pp. 257–258, #240–241) and ἄν + the imperfect indicative (GE pp. 258–259, 
#243). Wishes for the future are expressed by the optative without ἄν and wishes 
for the past (GE p. 259, #244) by the imperfect indicative. Note also GE p. 260, 
#245: ὅπως, ὅπως μή + future indicative expresses a caution, ‘see to it that …’ 
‘take care that you don’t …’
Page 154
 
1 ἀπολοίμην The optative is used to express a wish ‘may ‘I perish’ Cf. ‘I am 
damned if I can remember’ (GE p. 212, #213).
 
6–7 βουλοίμην μεντἂν μεντἄν = μέντοι ἄν. Therefore we have the optative + ἄν 
and therefore the meaning is potential: ‘I would like, however …’
 
7 εἴθε μνημονεύοιμι ‘Would that I could remember’. εἴθε + optative expresses 
a wish (GE p. 259, #244).
 
8 πῶς γὰρ ἄν δικαίως τιθεῖτό τις ‘For how could anyone justly cast his vote?’ 
Potential ἄν + optative.
 
9 μὴ μνημονεύσας τοὺς λόγους; ‘If he does not remember the arguments?’ 
Note that a participle is used instead of an ‘if’ clause: ‘not having 
remembered’. Note also μὴ, the proper negative in a conditional clause.

 
Section 12G 
171
 
10 χαλεπὸν δή ἐστι τῷ δικαστῇ διακρίνειν τὴν δίκην, μὴ μνημονεύοντι  
μνημονεύοντι agrees with τῷ δικαστῇ: ‘It is difﬁ cult for a juror to judge the 
trial, if he does not remember (lit. not remembering).’
 
11–13 εἰ μέντοι σοφιστὴς γένoιo σύ, ῥᾳδίως ἂν μνημονεύσαις … καὶ οὐκ ἂν 
ἐπιλάθοιο ‘If you became a sophist you would easily remember … and 
would not forget.’ A conditional sentence with optative and ἄν. See GE 
pp. 258–259, #151. This is called a remote future condition.
 
15 εἴθε Ἱππίας γενοίμην ἐγώ cf. RGT 12G p. 154 line 7. εἴθε + optative (no ἄν) 
expresses a wish.
 
16 εἰ νῦν Ἱππίας ἦσθα, οἷός τ᾽ ἂν ἦσθα ‘If you were Hippias, you would be 
able’, ἄν + the indicative expresses an unfulﬁ lled condition (GE p. 167, #242). 
The imperfect indicative is used to express present time and the aorist 
indicative to express past time.
 
19 εἴθε μνημονεύσαιμι A wish.
 
20 εἰ πάντες οἱ σοϕισταί με διδάσκοιεν, οὐκ ἂν οἷοί τ᾿ εἶεν ‘If all the sophists 
taught me, they would not be able’. A remote future condition.
 
21–22 ἀλλ᾿ εἰ Ἱππίας ἡμῖν νῦν συνεγίγνετο, πῶς ἂν ἐδίδασκέ με, καὶ τί ἂν 
ἔλεγεν; καὶ πῶς ἂν ἐμάνθανον ἐγώ; ἄν + imperfect indicative. A 
series of unfulﬁ lled conditions in present time. ‘If Hippias were with us 
now, how would he teach me, and what would he be saying, and how would I 
learn?’
 
23 εἴθε ταῦτα εἰδείην A wish.
 
23–24 εἰ ταῦτα ᾔδη ἐγώ, πλουσίος ἂν ἦ τὸ νῦν An unfulﬁ lled condition in present 
time. ‘If I knew this, I would be rich now.’
 
26–27 εἰ δέ τις ἐπιλάθοιτο, πῶς ἂν δικάσειε What sort of condition?
 
28–29 οὐ γὰρ ἂν γένοιτο … εἰ μὴ μνημονεύσειε What sort of condition?
Page 155
 
30 ἀλλ᾿ ὅπως προθύμως προσέξεις τὸν νοῦν ὅπως + future indicative (GE 
p. 260, #245), ‘see that you …’, ‘take care that you …’
 
33 ἀπόλοιντο … ‘May they perish!’
Translation for 12G
STRYMODOROS I’m damned (May I perish!) if I can remember –
KOMIAS 
You seem to me to be in some perplexity, Strymodoros. Don’t cover up your 
perplexity, feeling ashamed in front of Euergides, but tell me what is 
perplexing you.
STR. 
I will tell you, Komias, what is perplexing me. Why did Apollodoros mention 
Lysias and Metaneira? For I don’t remember. And, by Zeus, I would like to 
remember what the contestant says. Would that I could remember everything 
he says, and I am damned if I can remember. For how could anyone cast his 
vote justly, if he cannot remember the arguments?
KOM. 
It is difﬁ cult for the juror to judge the case if he can’t remember everything 
which the prosecutor says. If you were a sophist, you would easily remember 

172 
Exercises for section 12G
all the arguments, Strymodoros, as it seems, and you would not forget the 
things that have been said. But, like a Hippias, you would remember 
everything, having heard it once.
STR. 
Like Hippias? Would that I were Hippias!
KOM. 
If you were Hippias now, you would be able to list all the archons from Solon. 
For Hippias, having heard them once, used to remember ﬁ fty names.
STR. 
What skill! Would that I could (if only I could) remember so much! But I am 
not clever by nature. If all the sophists taught me, they would not be able to 
make me a sophist. But if Hippias were here, how would he be teaching me, 
and what would he be saying? And how would I learn?
KOM. 
I wish I knew this, Strymodoros! For if I knew that I would be rich now, and 
not a poor man and a juror.
SΤR. 
Oh dear! For, like an old man, I forget everything I hear, of the laws and the 
arguments and the evidence. If anyone forgets so much, how could he judge the 
case and cast his vote?
KOM. 
I do not know, Strymodoros. For he would never be a good juryman if he could 
not remember the things said by the prosecutor … But see to it that you 
concentrate on the arguments and the laws and the evidence. For by doing this 
the jurors cast their votes easily.
STR. 
May they perish, whoever are jurors and forget what the contestants say.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12G
CONDITIONAL SENTENCES AND WISHES
12G: 1
1. εἰ μὴ ἀκούοις, οὐκ ἂν μένοιμι.
2. εἰ ὑμεῖς ἐκελεύετε, ἐπειθόμην ἂν ἐγώ.
3. εἰ μὴ φιλοίης, φιλοίην ἂν ἐγώ.
4. εἰ μὴ ἐτρέχομεν, οὐκ ἂν ἐφεύγομεν.
5. εἰ μὴ ζητήσειας, οὐκ ἂν εὕροις.
12G: 2
1. εἰ γὰρ ἐξεφεύγομεν
2. εἴθε ἔδωκε, ὤφελε δοῦναι
3. εἰ γὰρ ἔστη, ὤφελε στῆναι
4. εἴθε ἐτίθεσαν
5. εἴθε ἀπεθνῄσκον
ὅπως + FUTURE INDICATIVE
12G: 3
1. ὅπως μὴ εἶ, See to it that you (s.) do not go.
2. ὅπως ἀκούσεσθε, See to it that you (pl.) listen.

 
Revision exercises for section 12G 
173
3. ὅπως κολάσεις, See to it that you (s.) punish.
4. ὅπως μὴ γενήσῃ, See to it that you (s.) do not become.
5. ὅπως εἴσῃ (fut. οἶδα ‘know’) or ὅπως ἔσῃ (= fut. εἰμί ‘be’), see to it that 
you (s.) know/see to it that you (s.) are.
12G: 4
1. εἰδείης, ἴοις
2. εἶεν, ἴοιεν
3. εἶμεν, εἰδεῖμεν
4. εἰδείη, ἴοι
5. εἴην, εἰδείην
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12G
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. I want to be appointed as a juror and to cast my vote.
 
  εἴθε δικαστὴς καθισταίμην καὶ τιθείμην τὴν ψῆϕον.
 
b. You want to be a sophist.
 
  εἴθε σοϕιστὴς γένοιο.
 
c. I want you to put down money for me.
 
  εἴθε θείης χρήματα εἰς ἐμέ.
 
d. I do not want to perish.
 
  μὴ ἀπολοίμην.
 
e. I don’t want you to know this.
 
  ταῦτα μὴ εἰδεῖτε.
 
f. He wants to make the boy a sophist.
 
  σοϕιστὴν τὸν παῖδα ποιήσειεν.
 
g. I want him to remember the evidence.
 
  εἴθε μνημονεύσειε τὴν μαρτυρίαν.
 
h. I want them to forget these arguments.
 
  ἐπιλάθοιντο τούτων τῶν λόγων.
 
i. You (pl.) want to be rich.
 
  εἴθε πλούσιοι εἶτε (εἴητε).
 
j. I don’t want my family to be rich.
 
  εἴθε οἱ ἐμοὶ οἰκεῖοι μὴ πλούσιοι εἶεν.
2. a. I receive a big ﬁ ne / the opponent exacts the penalty.
 
  εἰ ἐτίμων τίμημα μέγα, δίκην ἐλάμβανεν ἂν ὁ ἀντίδικος.
 
  εἰ τίμημα μέγα τιμῴην, δίκην λαμβάνοι ὁ ἀντίδικος.
 
b. The jurors are persuaded by the prosecutor / they condemn the defendant.
 
  εἰ oἱ δικασταὶ πείθοιντο ὑπὸ τοῦ κατηγόρου, τοῦ ϕεύγοντος ἂν 
  καταδικάζοιεν.
 
  εἰ ἐπείθοντο oἱ δικασταὶ ὑπὸ τοῦ κατηγόρου, τοῦ ϕεύγοντος ἂν 
  κατεδικάζον.

174 
Section 12H
 
c. You begin the enmity / the evidence is clear.
 
  εἰ ὑπήρχετε τῆς ἔχθρας, τὰ τεκμήρια ἂν ἦν ϕανερά.
 
  εἰ ὑπάρχοιτε τῆς ἔχθρας, ϕανερὰ ἂν εἰή τὰ τεκμήρια.
 
d. You mention the citizens / the accuser does not forget.
 
  εἰ μνείαν ποιοίης τῶν ἀστῶν, οὐκ ἂν ἐπιλανθάνοιτο ὁ κατήγορος.
 
  εἰ ἐποίεις μνείαν τῶν ἀστῶν, οὐκ ἂν ἐπελανθάνετο ὁ κατήγορος.
 
e. The citizens have children from the prostitutes / we know clearly.
 
  εἰ oἱ ἀστοὶ ἐξ ἑταιρῶν ἐπαιδοποιοῦντο, σαϕῶς ἂν ᾖσμεν.
 
  εἰ παιδοποιοῖντο oἱ ἀστοὶ ἐξ ἑταιρῶν, σαϕῶς ἂν εἰδεῖμεν.
 
f. The rich men do not have dealings with prostitutes / those women 
 
welcome the poor men.
 
  εἰ μὴ oἱ πλούσιοι ταῖς ἑταίραις συγγίγνοιντο, τοὺς πένητας 
  ἀσπάζοιντ᾿ ἂν ἐκεῖναι.
 
  εἰ μὴ oἱ πλούσιοι ταῖς ἑταίραις συγγίγνοντο, τοὺς πένητας ἠσπάζοντ᾿ 
  ἂν ἐκεῖναι.
3. a. Concentrate your mind and listen.
 
  ὅπως προσέξεις τὸν νοῦν καὶ ἀκούσῃ.
 
b. Don’t ﬂ atter the jurors.
 
  ὅπως μὴ θωπεύσετε τοὺς δικαστάς.
 
c. Don’t forget the arguments.
 
  ὅπως μὴ ἐπιλήσῃ τῶν λόγων.
 
d. Recite the plot of the play.
 
  ὅπως κατερεῖς (καταλέξεις) τὸν τοῦ δράματος λόγον.
 
e. Remember the words.
 
  ὅπως μνημονεύσεις τοὺς λόγους.
 
f. Don’t have children from prostitutes.
 
  ὅπως μὴ παιδοποιήσεσθε ἐκ τῶν ἑταιρῶν.
 
g. Arrange the affair well.
 
  ὅπως εὖ θήσεις τὸ πρᾶγμα.
 
h. Don’t despise your friend.
 
  ὅπως μὴ καταϕρονήσεις τοῦ ἑταίρου.
12H
This section introduces accusative (or nominative) and participle construction 
after verbs of knowing or perceiving (GE pp. 264–265, #247), and the future 
passive (GE pp. 265–266, #248).
Page 156
 
1 ᾤχετο Past tense of οἴχομαι.
 
4 ᾤετο Past tense of οἴμαι.
 
12 ᾔδει γὰρ ‘For she knew’: a verb of knowing followed by three participles.
 
14 δοῦσα … πάντα τὰ αὑτῆς ‘Giving all her own things (lit. the things of 
herself)’.

 
Section 12I 
175
Translation for 12H
Apollodoros resumes.
Phrynion, then, having paid the money on behalf of Neaira for her freedom, 
went to Athens, taking her with him. But when he arrived in Athens, he treated 
her disgracefully, and he used to go to dinners everywhere, taking her, and 
always went to riotous parties with her. Neaira, since she was being treated like 
dirt in a shameful way by Phrynion, and since, as she thought, she was not loved, 
collected all Phrynion’s belongings from the house, and the clothes and the gold 
jewellery which Phrynion had given her. Taking all these, and two slave girls, 
Thratta and Kokkaline, she ran away to Megara. She spent two years in Megara 
but she could not make an adequate income for the management of the house-
hold (to meet the household expenses). Then this Stephanos travelled to Megara 
and lodged with her, as she was a hetaira. Neaira, having described the whole 
affair and the insolence of Phrynion, gave Stephanos all the things she had 
brought with her when she came from Athens, being very eager to live here, but 
being afraid of Phrynion. For she knew that Phrynion had been wronged by her 
and was angry with her, and that he had a pompous and contemptuous character. 
Neaira therefore gave everything she had to Stephanos and made him her 
 protector.
12I
Page 158
 
1 τῷ λόγῳ ‘by his word’, ‘by his promise’.
 
2 ἐκόμπαζε Followed by accusative and inﬁ nitive: ‘He boasted that Phrynion 
would not touch her’, and then by nominative (αὐτός) and inﬁ nitive (ἕξειν) 
‘that he would have her as his wife’.
 
3–4 ἔϕη δὲ ‘he said that he’, followed by inﬁ nitive (the nominative is omitted), 
but at ἀδικηθήσεσθαι αὐτήν the subject of the clause is someone else, and so 
appears in the accusative.
 
4 ὡς αὑτοῦ ὄντας ‘as being his own children’. Note that αὑτοῦ = ἑαυτοῦ ‘of 
himself’ i.e. belonging to the subject of the sentence. There are several more 
examples of this usage in this passage.
 
7–8 παρὰ τὸν ψιθυριστήν ‘next door to the Whisperer’. This was the title of a 
statue of Hermes.
 
10–11 εὖ γὰρ ᾔδει Στέϕανος … Followed by nominative and participle ‘For 
Stephanos knew very well that he had no other income, unless he …’
 
12–14 Note the structure of the sentence: ὁ δὲ Φρυνίων, πυθόμενος … (followed by 
accusative and participle), παραλαβὼν … ἦλθεν … ὡς ἄξων αὐτήν (ὡς + the 
future participle expresses purpose, ‘in order to take her’).
 
14–15 ἀϕαιρουμένου δὲ … εἰς ἐλευθερίαν A genitive absolute. ἀϕαιρεῖσθαι τινα 
εἰς ἐλευθερίαν has the technical meaning ‘to claim as free’. So this awkward 
sentence will mean ‘Although Stephanos claimed her as free according to the 

176 
Exercises for section 12H–I
laws, Phrynion compelled her to give securities to the polemarch, believing that 
she was his own (αὑτῷ) slave, since he had paid money for her.’ καταθέντι 
(dative) agrees with αὑτῷ.
Translation for 12I
Apollodoros goes on speaking.
This Stephanos ﬁ lled Neaira with great hope in Megara by this promise. For 
he boasted that Phrynion would never touch her, and that he himself would take 
her as his wife. And he said that her children would be introduced into the phra-
tries as if they were his own, and they would become citizens, and she would not 
be harmed by anyone. Having said this he arrived here from Megara, bringing her 
with him and her three children with her, Proxenos and Ariston and a girl child 
who is now called Phano.
And he brought her and the children to a little house which he had in Athens 
next to the Whisperer Hermes, between the house of Dorotheos the Eleusinian 
and the house of Kleinomachos. He came with her for two reasons: so that he 
would have a beautiful hetaira for free and so that she would work and look after 
his household. For Stephanos knew very well that he had no other income or 
livelihood, unless he earned something by informing. But Phrynion, having found 
out that Neaira was living in Athens and with Stephanos, took young men with 
him and went to the house of Stephanos to take her away. Although Stephanos 
claimed her as free in accordance with the law, Phrynion compelled her to give 
securities before the Polemarch, regarding her as his slave since he had put down 
money on her behalf.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12H–I
INFINITIVE AND PARTICIPLE IN REPORTED SPEECH
12H–I: 1
a. 
I know I am wise.
b. I know you are not foolish.
c. 
We learned they were ﬂ eeing.
d. They heard that we had gone.
12H–I: 2
1. We say that politicians do not speak the truth.
 
ὅτι + indicative clause.
2. He said he would be present.
 
nom. + inﬁ nitive construction.
3. He found out the enemy had ﬂ ed.
 
acc. + participle construction.
4. They hoped to arrive quickly/they hoped they would arrive quickly.
 
nom. + fut. inﬁ n. after verb of hoping or expecting.

 
Revision exercises for section 12H–I 
177
5. He knew that they (the women) had obeyed.
 
acc. + participle construction
THE FUTURE PASSIVE
12H–I: 3
1. ἀκουσθήσομαι 
I shall be heard
2. δουλωθήσεται 
he will be enslaved
3. δοθήσονται 
they will be given
4. τεθήσεται 
he/she/it will be placed
5. σταθήσεται 
it will be set up
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 12H–I
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. I shall be brought into 
εἰσάγω
 
we shall be convicted 
ἐξελέγχω
 
you (s.) will be compelled 
ἀναγκάζω
 
he will be angry 
ὀργίζομαι
 
to be going to be ﬁ ned 
ζημιόω
 
they will be wronged 
ἀδικέω
2. a. The woman will be wronged by no one.
 
  οὔ ϕαμεν τὴν γυναῖκα ἀδικηθήσεσθαι ὑπ᾿ oὐδενός.
 
  We say that the woman will not be wronged by anyone.
 
  οὐκ ἔϕαμεν τὴν γυναῖκα ἀδικηθήσεσθαι ὑπ᾿ oὐδενός.
 
  We said that the woman would not be wronged by anyone.
 
b. The prostitute’s children will become citizens.
 
  οἴεται τοὺς τῆς ἑταίρας παῖδας πολίτας γενήσεσθαι.
 
  He thinks that the prostitute’s children will become citizens.
 
  ᾤετο τοὺς τῆς ἑταίρας παῖδας πολίτας γενήσεσθαι.
 
  He thought that the prostitute’s children would become citizens.
 
c. Stephanos and Neaira will arrive in Athens from Megara.
 
  ἡγεῖται τὸν Στέϕανον καὶ τὴν Νέαιραν ἀϕίξεσθαι ἐκ τῶν Μεγάρων 
  Ἀθήναζε.
 
  He thinks that Stephanos and Neaira will arrive in Athens from 
  Megara.
 
  ἡγήσατο τὸν Στέϕανον καὶ τὴν Νέαιραν ἀϕίξεσθαι ἐκ τῶν Μεγάρων 
  Ἀθήναζε.
 
  He thought that Stephanos and Neaira would arrive in Athens from 
  Megara.
 
d. I shall be compelled to take Neaira away from Phrynion.
 
  ϕησὶν ἐμὲ ἀναγκασθήσεσθαι παρὰ Φρυνίωνος τὴν Νέαιραν 
  ἀϕαιρεῖσθαι.
 
  He says that I will be compelled to take Neaira away from Phrynion.

178 
Revision exercises for section 12H–I
 
  ἔϕη ἐμὲ ἀναγκασθήσεσθαι παρὰ Φρυνίωνος τὴν Νέαιραν 
  ἀϕαιρεῖσθαι.
 
  He said that I would be compelled to take Neaira away from Phrynion.
3. a. Phrynion was wronged by me and was angry with me.
 
  οἶδα τὸν Φρυνίωνα ἀδικηθέντα ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ καὶ ὀργισθέντα ἐμοί.
 
  I know that Phrynion was wronged by me and was angry with me.
 
  ᾔδη τὸν Φρυνίωνα ἀδικηθέντα ὑπ’ ἐμοῦ καὶ ὀργισθέντα ἐμοί.
 
  I knew that Phrynion had been wronged by me and had been angry with me.
 
b. Neaira was living in town (imperfect) and went to Stephanos.
 
  ὁρᾷ τὴν Νέαιραν ἐπιδημοῦσαν καὶ ἐλθοῦσαν ὡς Στέϕανον.
 
  He sees that Neaira is resident in the town and has gone to Stephanos.
 
  εἶδε τὴν Νέαιραν ἐπιδημοῦσαν καὶ ἐλθοῦσαν ὡς Στέϕανον.
 
  He saw that Neaira was resident in the town and had gone to Stephanos.
 
c. We were wronged by the prosecutor and condemned by the jurors.
 
  αἰσθάνονται ἡμᾶς ἀδικηθέντας ὑπὸ τοῦ κατηγόρου καὶ 
  καταδικασθέντας ὑπὸ τῶν δικαστῶν.
 
  They perceive that we were wronged by the prosecutor and condemned 
  by the jurors.
 
  ᾔσθοντο ἡμᾶς ἀδικηθέντας ὑπὸ τοῦ κατηγόρου καὶ καταδικασθέντας 
  ὑπὸ τῶν δικαστῶν.
 
  They perceived that we had been wronged by the prosecutor and had 
  been condemned by the jurors.
 
d. You wronged the city and despised the laws and were irreverent to the 
  gods.
 
  γιγνώσκετε ἀδικήσαντες τὴν πόλιν καὶ τῶν νόμων καταϕρονοῦντες 
  καὶ ἀσεβοῦντες εἰς τοὺς θεούς.
 
  You know that you have wronged the city and are despising the laws 
  and are being irreverent to the gods.
 
  ἔγνωτε ἀδικήσαντες τὴν πόλιν καὶ τῶν νόμων καταϕρονοῦντες καὶ 
  ἀσεβοῦντες εἰς τοὺς θεούς.
 
  You knew that you had wronged the city, were despising the laws and 
  were being irreverent to the gods.
 
e. You are a prostitute and you are having children by citizens.
 
  οἶσθα ἑταίρα οὖσα καὶ παιδοποιουμένη ἐξ ἀστῶν.
 
  You know you are a prostitute and that you are having children by citizens.
 
  ᾔδεισθα ἑταίρα οὖσα καὶ παιδοποιουμένη ἐξ ἀστῶν.
 
  You knew you were a prostitute and that you were having children by 
  citizens.
D – TRANSLATE INTO GREEK
1. Sentences
 
1. εἴθε μνημονεύσαιμι τοὺς λόγους τοὺς τοῦ κατηγόρου.
 
2. εἰ σοϕιστὴς ἦν, ἐμνημόνευον ἂν τούτους τοὺς λόγους.
 
3. εἰ δυναίμην μνημονεύειν τὰς μαρτυρίας, δικαίως ἂν θείμην τὴν ψῆϕον.

 
Revision exercises for section 12H–I 
179
 
4. ὁ Φρυνίων ᾔδει τὴν Νέαιραν ἐπιδημοῦσαν καὶ τὰ χρήματα ἔχουσαν.
 
5. ὁ Στέϕανός οὔ ϕησι τὴν Νέαιραν ἀδικηθήσεσθαι ὑπ’ οὐδενός.
2. Prose
ὁ δὲ Ἀπολλόδωρος, ἀδικηθεὶς ὑπὸ τοῦ Στεϕάνου καὶ εἰς κίνδυνον καταστάς, 
ἀγωνίζεται ταύτην τὴν δίκην. οὐ γὰρ ἐῶσιν oἱ νόμοι ἑταίρᾳ ὡς γυναικὶ 
συνοικεῖν ἀστὼν οὐδένα. καὶ ὁ Ἀπολλόδωρος λέγει ὅτι σαϕῶς ἐπιδείξεται τὸν 
Στέϕανον αὐτὰ ταῦτα ποιεῖν. εἰ γὰρ ὁ Στέϕανος ταῦτ’ ἐτύγχανε ποιῶν, 
χαλεπώτατον ὂν ἂν ἐϕαινετο. ἐντεῦθεν οὖν ἐλπίζω ἔγωγε τὸν Ἀπολλόδωρον 
νικήσειν τὴν δίκην. εἰ γὰρ καὶ νικῴη οὗτος, ἀγαθὸν ἂν εἴη τῇ πόλει.
E – TEST EXERCISE 12
But I shall tell you what came next (the things after this). See that you listen care-
fully, gentlemen of the jury. For when this Timarkhos here was released from 
Antikles, he used to spend his days in the gambling-den. One of the gamblers is 
a certain Pittalakos, a slave of the city. This man, seeing Timarkhos in the 
gambling-den, took him to his home and kept him with him.
And, as for the outrages, which I know clearly were inﬂ icted on Timarkhos by 
this man, by Zeus the Olympian, I would not dare to speak of them before you. 
By Zeus, may I perish most miserably, if I mention such things. For, if I were to 
speak in your presence of the things that this man did, I would not be able to go 
on living.
Meanwhile Hegesandros is sailing here from the Hellespont, Hegesandros, 
whose character you know even better than I do, to be unjust and disdainful. He 
went regularly to visit Pittalakos who was a fellow-gambler, and ﬁ rst seeing 
Timarkhos there, wanted to take him to his own home. For he thought that he was 
close to his own nature.
When Timarkhos had been detached from Pittalakos and taken up by 
Hegesandros, Pittalakos was angry, realising that he had spent so much money 
on Timarkhos in vain, and he kept visiting the house of Hegesandros. But when 
Hegesandros and Timarkhos got angry with him for coming so often, they forced 
their way during the night into the house where Pittalakos lived, and they ﬁ rst of 
all smashed up the furniture, and ﬁ nally beat up Pittalakos himself for a long time. 
On the next day, Pittalakos, being angry about the affair, went naked into the 
market-place and sat on the altar of the mother of the gods. When a crowd ran up, 
Hegesandros and Timarkhos hurried to the altar and standing beside it they kept 
begging Pittalakos to get up, claiming that the whole affair had been a drunken 
brawl. And Timarkhos himself kept declaring that everything would be done by 
him, if only Pittalakos would get up (genitive absolute). Finally they persuade 
him to get up from the altar.

180
Section Thirteen: Neaira as married woman
This section continues the story of Neaira. As in Section 12 there are long exer-
cises which practise the grammar which has been introduced. Once again you 
may decide to do the exercises when they occur, or to continue reading to the end 
of Section 13 and then go back to revise the grammar and do the relevant 
exercises.
13A
Page 162
 
1–4 The main clause (δῆλά ἐστι τὰ τεκμήρια ‘There are clear proofs that …’) is 
delayed until the end of the sentence. The subordinate clauses (ὅτι μὲν … 
δούλη ἦν Nέαιρα … καὶ ἀπέδρα … καὶ ὁ Φρυνίων … κατηγγύησε …) come 
ﬁ rst. These clauses are all subordinate to the main clause.
 
8 πρὶν Ἀθήναζε ἐλθεῖν πρίν + inﬁ nitive, GE pp. 272–273, #252: ‘Before she 
came to Athens’. You will meet lots of examples of this in 13A and B.
 
8–9 ὥσπερ αὑτοῦ θυγάτηρ οὖσα ‘as his own daughter’. Note the breathing: 
αὐτοῦ could have meant someone else’s daughter αὑτοῦ or ἑαυτοῦ ‘his own’ 
belongs to the subject of the main verb.
 
10–11 καὶ δὴ ἴστε τὴν Φανώ … μαθοῦσαν Accusative and participle: ‘You know 
that Phano had learned’.
 
14–16 Note the structure: ‘Phrastor seeing (ὁρῶν) that (acc. + participle twice) …, and 
having found out (ἅμα δὲ πυθόμενος) that (acc. + participle) … was very angry 
(ὠργίσθη μάλιστα) … considering (ἡγούμενος) that he … (nominative + 
inﬁ nitives).’
 
17 πρὶν εἰδέναι ‘Before he knew that …’ Followed by accusative and participle 
construction.
 
18–20 εἰ … μὴ ἐξηπατήθη ὁ Φράστωρ καὶ Φανὼ γνησία ἦν, ἢ οὐκ ἂν ἐξέβαλεν 
αὐτὴν … ἢ ἀπέδωκεν … An unfulﬁ lled condition in past time: ἄν + the 
aorist indicative. Note the negative in the ‘if’ clause is μή and in the main 
clause οὐ: ‘if Phrastor had not been deceived and if Phano had been legitimate, 
either he would not have divorced her or he would have given back the dowry’.
 
21 ἐκπεσούσης δὲ Φανοῦς ἐκπίπτω is used as the passive of ἐκβάλλω. Note 
that this is a genitive absolute construction.
 
25–26 γνοὺς δὲ Στέϕανος ὅτι ἐξελεγχθήσεται … καὶ ὅτι ἐξελεγχθεὶς κινδυνεύσει 
… διαλλάττεται … ‘Stephanos, realising that he would be convicted, and 

 
Section 13A 
181
that, having been convicted, he would be in danger of … was reconciled 
with …’
Page 163
 
28–29 ἀλλ’ εἰ ἀστῆς θυγάτηρ ἦν Φανώ, οὐκ ἂν διηλλάχθη Στέϕανος What sort of 
condition? Is there an ἄν? Are the verbs indicative or optative? What tense are 
they? ‘If Phano had been the daughter of a citizen, Stephanos would not have 
been reconciled.’ See GE p. 276, #254.
Translation for 13A
That Neaira was from the beginning a slave and a hetaira, and that she ran away 
from Phrynion to Megara and that when she returned to Athens Phrynion 
demanded securities from her before the polemarch on the grounds that she was 
an alien, [of all this] there is clear evidence.
Now I want to demonstrate to you that Stephanos himself provides evidence 
against Neaira that she is living with him as his wife although she is a 
foreigner.
For Neaira had a daughter, whom she brought with her to the house of 
Stephanos. And when they came to Athens they called the girl Phano. Formerly 
she had been called Strybele, before she came to Athens. This girl was given in 
marriage by Stephanos here, as if she had been his own daughter from a citizen 
wife, to an Athenian man, Phrastor of the deme of Aigileia. And Stephanos gave 
her a dowry of thirty minas. And furthermore you know that Phano, before she 
lived with Phrastor, had learned her mother’s character and extravagance. 
Therefore when she went to Phrastor, who was a working man and reckoned his 
income with precision, she did not know how to make herself pleasing to 
Phrastor’s ways.
Phrastor, seeing that she was neither well behaved nor willing to obey him, and 
at the same time having found out clearly that Phano was not the daughter of 
Stephanos but of Neaira, was very angry, thinking that he had been insulted and 
tricked by Stephanos. For he had married Phano before he knew that she was the 
daughter of Neaira. Therefore he divorced Phano, having lived with her for a 
year; she was pregnant, and he did not give back the dowry. If Stephanos had not 
deceived Phrastor and if Phano had been legitimate, either Phrastor would not 
have divorced her or he would have given back the dowry.
When Phano had been divorced, Stephanos brought a suit against Phrastor, in 
accordance with the law which requires a man who divorces his wife to give back 
the dowry. But when Stephanos had brought this suit, Phrastor brought a charge 
against Stephanos here in accordance with the law which does not allow anyone 
to betroth the daughter of an alien to an Athenian man. Stephanos, realising that 
he would be convicted of doing wrong and that having been convicted he would 
risk meeting with the most severe penalties (for Phano was the daughter of an 
alien woman), was reconciled with Phrastor and gave up his claim to the dowry 
and withdrew the charge. And, before the case came to court, Phrastor also 

182 
Section 13B
withdrew his charge. But if Phano had been the daughter of a citizen woman, 
Stephanos would not have been reconciled.
13B
Page 164
 
3 ἐξεπέμϕθη What tense? It comes from ἐκπέμπω.
 
4 διετέθη What tense? It comes from διατίθημι.
 
7 ὡς θεραπεύσουσαι καὶ … ἐπιμελήσομεναι ὡς + the future participle expresses 
purpose (GE p. 271, #251): ‘They went to him to look after him and …’
 
13–14 καὶ πρὶν ὑγιαίνειν ὑπέσχετο δὴ τοῦτο ποιήσειν ὁ Φράστωρ ‘And before 
he got better, Phrastor promised that he would do this.’ Note the future 
inﬁ nitive.
 
17–18 εἰ γὰρ ἄπαις ἀπέθανε Φράστωρ, οἱ οἰκεῖοι ἔλαβον ἂν τὰ αὐτοῦ What sort 
of condition? Is there an ἄν? Are the verbs indicative or optative? What tense 
are they? ‘For if Phrastor had died childless, his relatives would have taken his 
property.’ See GE p. 276, #254.
Translation for 13B
I want to provide you with another piece of evidence from Phrastor and the 
members of his phratry and of his clan that this Neaira is an alien. For not long 
after Neaira’s daughter was divorced, Phrastor fell ill and was in a very bad way 
and was in total need. Before he was ill there had been a long-standing difference 
with his relations, and anger and hatred. And Phrastor was childless. But in his 
state of need he was courted by Neaira and Phano. For they went to him, to look 
after him and to care for him enthusiastically (for Phrastor had no one who would 
look after him), and they brought remedies (things useful) for the illness and 
visited him. I am sure you know yourselves, jurors, how valuable is a woman in 
time of sickness when she is at the side of a man who is suffering.
Since they were doing this, Phrastor was persuaded, before he got better, to 
take back Phano’s child and to make him his son. This was the child which Phano 
had borne when she had been sent away in a pregnant state by Phrastor. Before 
he got better, Phrastor promised that he would do this, making the natural and 
reasonable calculation that he was in a poor condition and did not expect to 
survive, but he wanted to take back Phano’s child before he died (although he 
knew that he was not legitimate), since he did not want his relations to inherit his 
property, nor did he want to die without a child. For if Phrastor had died without 
a child, his relations would have got his property.
Grammar
Now make sure that you know the aorist inﬁ nitive passive (GE p. 270, #249) and 
the future participle passive (GE pp. 271–272, #250) and that you can recognise 
ὡς + the future participle used to express purpose (GE p. 271, #251) and πρίν + 
the inﬁ nitive = ‘before’ (GE pp. 272–273, #252).

 
Exercises for section 13A–B 
183
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13A–B
THE AORIST INFINITIVE PASSIVE
13A–B: 1
δοθῆναι, πεισθῆναι, ἐνεχθῆναι, λυθῆναι, τεθῆναι
FUTURE PARTICIPLES ACTIVE, MIDDLE, PASSIVE
13A–B: 2
λύσων -ουσα -ον 
 
 
about to loose
λυσόμενος -η -ον 
 
 
about to ransome
λυθήσομενος -η -ον  
 
about to be loosed, ransomed
πείσων -ουσα -ον 
 
 
about to persuade
πεισόμενος -η -ον 
 
 
about to obey
πεισθησόμενος -η -ον  
 
about to be persuaded
οἶσων -ουσα -ον 
 
 
about to carry
οἰσόμενος -η -ον 
 
 
about to carry off for oneself, win
οἰσθησόμενος/ἐνεχθησόμενος -η -ον about to be carried
στήσων -ουσα -ον 
 
 
about to set up
στησόμενος -η -ον 
 
 
about to stand, set up for oneself
σταθησόμενος -η -ον  
 
about to be set up
ληψόμενος -η -ον 
 
 
about to take
ληψόμενος -η -ον 
 
 
about to take for oneself, take hold of
ληφθησόμενος -η -ον  
 
about to be taken
ὡς + FUTURE PARTICIPLE
13A–B: 3
1. ὡς ληψομένη αὐτήν
2. ὡς σώσοντας ἑαυτούς
3. ὡς πείσων αὐτήν
4. ὡς δώσοντες
πρίν + INFINITIVE
13A–B: 4
1. πρὶν π(ε)ίθεσθαι, πεισθῆναι
2. πρὶν τοὺς ἄνδρας ἀπιέναι, ἀπελθεῖν
3. πρὶν ἐσθίειν, φαγεῖν
4. πρὶν ἐκβάλλειν, ἐκβαλεῖν

184 
Revision exercises for section 13A–B
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13A–B
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
 
1. ἐκβαλοῦντι 
ἐκβάλλω 
I throw out, divorce
 
ἐντευξομένῃ 
ἐντυγχάνω 
I meet
 
εἰσαχθησόμενος 
εἰσάγω 
I introduce, lead in
 
καταστήσοντι 
καθίστημι 
I establish, set up
 
παρέξοντες 
παρέχω 
I provide
 
ἐκδώσοντα 
ἐκδίδωμι 
I give in marriage
 
ἐρῶν 
λέγω 
I speak, tell
 
θησόντων 
τίθημι 
I place
 
ἀϕαιρησόμενος 
ἀϕαιρέω 
I take away
 
γνωσομένην 
γιγνώσκω 
I know
 
λήσουσαν 
λανθάνω 
I escape notice
 
ἐσόμενον 
εἰμί 
I am
 
ἀναγκασθησομένῳ 
ἀναγκάζω 
I compel
 
ἐπιδειξουσῶν 
ἐπιδείκνυμι 
I show, prove
 
πευσομένων 
πυνθάνομαι 
I ﬁ nd out
 
ἀποθανουμένῃ 
ἀποθνῄσκω 
I die
 
παραληψομένῃ 
παραλαμβάνω 
I receive from
 
ἐκπεσούμενοι 
ἐκπίπτω 
I fall out, I am thrown out, 
 
 
 
get divorced
2. Aorist passive inﬁ nitives
 
πεισθῆναι 
πείθω
 
ἐκπεμϕθῆναι 
ἐκπέμπω
 
ἐξαπατηθῆναι 
ἐξαπατάω
 
ἐξελεγχθῆναι 
ἐξελέγχω
 
ὑβρισθῆναι 
ὑβρίζω
 
ἐκβληθῆναι 
ἐκβάλλω
 
διατεθῆναι 
διατίθημι
 
Other inﬁ nitives
 
εἶναι 
εἰμί
 
εἰδέναι 
οἶδα
 
ἀποδιδόναι 
ἀποδίδωμι
 
θεῖναι 
τίθημι
 
δεικνύναι 
δείκνυμι
 
ἀπολλύναι 
ἀπόλλυμι
 
ἀποδοῦναι 
ἀποδίδωμι
 
ἀϕιστάναι 
ἀϕίστημι
 
τιθέναι 
τίθημι
Exercise 3 is on the use of ὡς + future participle to express purpose, while 
Exercise 4 gives you practice in πρίν + inﬁ nitive = ‘before’.

 
Section 13C 
185
3. a. Those men came to the house of Stephanos to take away Neaira. ὡς 
  ἄξοντες
 
b. The women went off to Athens to live (spend time) in Stephanos’ house 
  and to work. ὡς διατρίψουσαι καὶ ἐργασόμεναι
 
c. Therefore I am going to him to speak the truth and listen to lies. ὡς 
  ἐρῶν… καὶ ἀκουσόμενος
 
d. The man went into the lawcourt to defend himself and to be acquitted. 
  ὡς ἀπολογησόμενος καὶ ἀπολυθησόμενος
4. a. Stephanos brought Phrastor to the lawcourt
 
ii(i) πρὶν τὸν Φράστορα γράψασθαι γραϕήν before Phrastor indicted him
 
i(ii) πρὶν τὸ τῆς Φανοῦς παιδίον γενέσθαι before Phano’s child was born
 
(iii) πρὶν τὸ παιδίον ἀναληϕθῆναι ὑπὸ Φράστορος before the child was 
    taken back by Phrastor
 
(iv) πρὶν γνῶναι ὅτι ἐξελεγχθήσεται ἀδικῶν before he knew that he 
    would be convicted of wrong-doing.
4. b. Phrastor withdrew the charge
 
ii(i) πρὶν εἰσελθεῖν εἰς τὸ δικαστήριον before he came to court
 
i(ii) πρὶν ἐκπέμψαι τὴν Φανώ before he divorced Phano
 
(iii) πρὶν ὑπισχνεῖσθαι ἀναλήψεσθαι τὸ παιδίον before he promised that 
    he would take back the child
 
(iv) πρὶν λεχθῆναι τούτους τοὺς λόγους ὑπὸ τῆς Νεαίρας before these 
    words were spoken by Neaira.
13C
Page 165
 
1–2 ὅτι οὐκ ἂν ἔπραξε τοῦτο ὁ Φράστωρ, εἰ μὴ ἠσθένησε ἄν + the aorist 
indicative expresses an unfulﬁ lled condition in past time (GE p. 276, #254): 
‘Phrastor would not have done that if he had not been ill.’
 
2 ὡς … τάχιστα ‘as soon as …’
 
4–5 ὅτι οὐχ ἑκὼν ἀνέλαβε τὸ παιδίον οὐχ ἑκών ‘not willingly’: ‘that he did not 
willingly take back the child’.
 
5 ἀλλὰ βιασθεὶς διὰ τὸ νοσεῖν ‘but forced by his illness’. Here the inﬁ nitive is 
used as a noun with the article. See GE p. 279, #257. This example is followed 
by three more: διὰ τὸ ἄπαις εἶναι καὶ τὸ θεραπεύειν αὐτὰς αὑτὸν καὶ τὸ τοὺς 
οἰκείους μισεῖν. Note that a whole accusative and inﬁ nitive phrase can be used 
in this way (GE p. 280, #258).
 
6–7 εἰ μὴ ἠσθένησε … οὐκ ἂν ἀνέλαβε … What sort of condition? Is there an 
ἄν? Are the verbs indicative or optative? What tense are they?
Page 166
 
10 εἰδότες Can you recognise this participle? It comes from οἶδα.
 
10–13 The structure of the sentence is as follows: ἀλλὰ οἱ γεννῆται, εἰδότες … καὶ 
ἀκούσαντες … ἀποψηϕίζονται τοῦ παιδὸς καὶ οὐκ ἐνέγραφον … There is an 

186 
Revision exercises for section 13C
accusative + participle clause depending on εἰδότες and an accusative + 
participle + inﬁ nitive clause depending on ἀκούσαντες. ‘But the clansmen, 
knowing that the woman was the daughter of Neaira, and having heard that 
Phrastor, having divorced her, had then taken back the child, because of his 
illness, voted against the boy and …’
 
13–14 Note that this is another unfulﬁ lled condition.
 
14 λαχόντος οὖν τοῦ Φράστορος Genitive absolute.
 
16–17 προκαλουμένων δ’ αὐτὸν τῶν γεννητῶν Another genitive 
absolute.
 
18 ἀλλ’ εἰ ὁ παῖς … What sort of condition? Is there an ἄν? What mood and 
tense are the verbs?
Translation for 13C
Now I shall prove to you by a great and clear piece of evidence that Phrastor 
would not have done this if he had not been ill. For as soon as Phrastor recovered 
from that illness, he took a citizen wife according to the laws, the legitimate 
daughter of Satyros of the deme of Melite, the sister of Diphilos. This is proof for 
you that he did not willingly take back the child, but was forced to do it because 
of his sickness and the fact that he was childless and because the women were 
looking after him and because he hated his relations. For if Phrastor had not been 
ill, he would not have taken back the child.
And furthermore, I want to show you another proof that this Neaira is an alien. 
For Phrastor, when he was ill, introduced Phano’s son into the phratries and into 
the Brytidae, of whom Phrastor is a member. But the members of the clan, 
knowing that his wife was the daughter of Neaira, and having heard that Phrastor 
had divorced her and had then because of his illness taken back the child, voted 
against the child and did not register him in the clan. But if Phano had been the 
daughter of a citizen, the members of the clan would not have voted against the 
child, but would have registered him in the clan. Therefore when Phrastor brought 
a suit against them, the members of the clan challenged him to swear by the sacred 
mysteries that he truly believed the child to be his own son from a citizen wife 
legally married in accordance with the law. When the members of the clan chal-
lenged him, Phrastor abandoned the oath and went away before he could swear 
that his son was legitimate. But if his son had been legitimate and born from a 
citizen wife, he would have sworn.
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13C
1. a. εἰ ἄπαις ἀπέθανε Φράστωρ, οἱ οἰκεῖοι ἂν ἔλαβον τὰ αὐτοῦ.
  If Phrastor had died childless, his relatives would have taken his 
  possessions.
 
b. εἰ ἀστῆς θυγάτηρ ἦν Φανώ, οὐκ ἂν ὠργίσθη Στέϕανος.
  If Phano had been the daughter of a female citizen, Stephanos would 
  not have been angry.

 
Section 13D 
187
 
c. εἰ ᾔδει Φανὼ Nεαίρας οὖσαν θυγατέρα ὁ Φράστωρ, ἐξέβαλεν ἂν ὡς 
  τάχιστα.
  If Phrastor had known that Phano was the daughter of Neaira, he would 
  have thrown her out (divorced her) as quickly as possible.
 
d. εἰ Φανὼ ξένης θυγάτηρ ἐκλήθη, Φράστωρ οὐκ ἂν ἐξηπατήθη.
 
  If Phano had been called the daughter of a foreigner, Phrastor would not 
  have been deceived.
 
e. εἰ μὴ ἔλαχε Στέϕανος τὴν δίκην ταύτην, οὐκ ἂν ἐγράψατο Φράστωρ 
  αὐτὸν γραϕήν. If Stephanos had not brought this suit against him, 
  Phrastor would not have brought this accusation against him.
N.B. Neither εἰμί nor οἶδα have an aorist, so the context will determine 
the translation.
13D
Page 167
 
3–4 ὁ μὲν γὰρ Στέφανος … ‘For Stephanos bears witness against Neaira through 
his unwillingness (διὰ τὸ μὴ ἐθελῆσαι) to engage in litigation on behalf of her 
daughter about the dowry.’
 
5–9 Φράστωρ δὲ μαρτυρεῖ ἐκβαλεῖν … καὶ οὐκ ἀποδοῦναι … ἔπειτα δὲ αὐτὸς 
… πεισθῆναι διὰ τὴν ἀσθένειαν καὶ τὸ … οἰκείους ἀναλαβεῖν τὸ παιδίον 
καὶ … ποιήσασθαι, αὐτὸς δὲ εἰσαγαγεῖν … ἀλλ’ οὐκ ὀμόσαι … ὕστερον δὲ 
γῆμαι … A string of inﬁ nitives depends on μαρτυρεῖ: ‘Phrastor bears witness 
that he divorced … and did not give back the dowry, but then, was persuaded 
by … on account of his illness and because he was childless and because of his 
hostility to his relations, to take back the child and make him his son,… and 
that he himself introduced him to the clan, but he did not swear that … and that 
later he married a citizen woman …’
 
11–13 Look to see if there is an ἄν and note the mood and tense of the verbs.
Translation for 13D
Therefore I clearly demonstrate to you that the very members of Neaira’s own 
family have furnished proof that she is an alien, both Stephanos here who has her 
now and is living with her and Phrastor who married her daughter. For Stephanos 
bears witness against Neaira because he was not willing to go to court on behalf 
of her daughter about her dowry, and Phrastor bears witness that he divorced the 
daughter of this Neaira and did not give back the dowry, and then was himself 
persuaded by Neaira and Phano, on account of his sickness and childlessness and 
his hatred of his relations, to take back the child and to make him his son, and he 
himself introduced the boy to the members of the clan, but did not swear that he 
was the son of a citizen woman, and that he later married a citizen wife according 
to the law. These actions are perfectly clear and form great proofs that they knew 
that this Neaira was an alien. For if Neaira had been a citizen, Phano would not 
have been sent away. For Phano would have been a citizen. And furthermore, if 

188 
Revision exercises for section 13D
Phano had been a citizen, the clan members would not have voted against her son. 
Because of the fact that Phrastor was not willing to swear an oath, and because 
the members of the clan voted against the boy, Stephanos is clearly committing 
an injustice towards the city and irreverence towards the gods.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13D
VERBS IN THE INFINITIVE USED AS NOUNS
13D: 1
1. διὰ τὸ φυγεῖν 
 6. ἄνευ τοῦ μισεῖν
2. μετὰ τὸ μέλλειν 
 7. διὰ τὸ διανοεῖσθαι
3. ἀντὶ τοῦ παύσασθαι 
 8. τοῦ θορυβῆσαι ἕνεκα.
4. τῷ μάχεσθαι 
 9. τῷ ἀπορεῖν
5. τοῦ φυλάξαι ἕνεκα 
10. διὰ τὸ βοᾶν
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13D
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. Illness is an evil. τὸ ἀσθενεῖν
 
b. Phrastor took back the child on account of his illness and his hatred of 
  his relations and his childlessness. διὰ τὸ νοσεῖν καὶ τὸ μισεῖν τοὺς 
  οἰκείους καὶ τὸ ἄπαις εἶναι 
 
c. Stephanos was clearly doing wrong because he did not swear. διὰ τὸ μὴ 
  ὀμόσαι
 
d. The child clearly belongs to an alien woman, because the clansmen 
  voted against him and did not register him in the clan. διὰ τὸ τοὺς 
  γεννήτας ἀποψηϕίσασθαι αὐτοῦ καὶ μὴ ἐγγράψαι εἰς τὸ γένος 
 
e. The clansmen were forced to vote against the child, because they knew 
  that he was not legitimate. διὰ τὸ εἰδέναι
 
f. Care is a good thing. τὸ θεραπεύειν
 
g. And he made mention of these facts, that he was weak and that he was 
  depressed and that he was being looked after by Neaira. τοῦ ἀσθενεῖν 
  τε ἕνεκα καὶ εἰς ἀπορίαν καταστῆναι καὶ ὑπὸ τῆς Νεαίρας 
  θεραπεύεσθαι
 
h. Impiety is a great evil. τὸ ἀσεβεῖν
 
i. I was compelled to go in by force (being forced). τῷ βιάζεσθαι
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. ὁ Στέϕανος ἦλθε πρὸς τὸν Φράστορα ὡς ἐγγυήσων αὐτῷ τὴν Φανώ.
2. ὁ Φράστωρ ἔγημε τὴν Φανὼ πρὶν εἰδέναι αὐτὴν Νεαίρας θυγατέρα οὖσαν.
3.  εἰ μὴ ἐθεράπευσε τὸν Φράστορα ἡ Φανώ, οὐκ ἂν ἀνέλαβεν ἐκεῖνος τὸ 
παιδίον.

 
Section 13E 
189
4. Φράστωρ ἀνέλαβε τὸ τῆς Φανοῦς παιδίον διὰ τὸ νοσεῖν καὶ τὸ τὴν Φανὼ 
θεραπεύειν αὐτόν.
5. εἰ γνήσιος ἦν ὁ παῖς, Φράστωρ ἂν ὤμοσεν.
13E
In this section you will meet a new tense, the perfect active (I have -ed). If you 
want to ﬁ nd out about it before you meet it in reading, see GE pp. 282–283, 
#260–262. It is very easy to recognise.
Page 168
 
2 σκοπεῖτε τοίνυν ‘Consider then’, followed by two clauses, ὁποία … 
Nεαίρας and ὅπως … ἠδίκησαν: ‘what sort of shamelessness …’ and ‘how 
they wronged the state’.
 
4 ἦν γάρ ποτε Θεογένης τις … ‘There was a man called Theogenes.’
 
6 ὡς πάρεδρος γενησόμενος ὡς + future participle expresses purpose.
 
9–10 οὐ γὰρ ᾔδει ὁ Θεογένης ὅτου θυγάτηρ ἐστὶ οὐδὲ ὁποῖά ἐστιν αὐτῆς τὰ 
ἔθη ‘for Theogenes did not know whose daughter she was nor what sort of 
character she had’ (‘what sort were the characteristics of her’).
 
11–12 καὶ εἶδεν ἃ οὐ προσῆκεν αὐτῇ ὁρᾶν, ξένῃ οὔσῃ ‘and she saw what it was 
not ﬁ tting for her to see, being an alien’. Notice that ξένῃ οὔσῃ is dative 
agreeing with αὐτῇ.
 
11 καὶ εἰσῆλθεν οἷ ‘and that she went in to where’. Cf. ποῖ ‘where to?’
 
15–16 οὐ μόνον … ἀλλὰ καί … ‘not only … but also …’
 
15–20 A series of examples of the perfect tense!
 
18 ἐκδούς Can you recognise this? It comes from ἐκδίδωμι and agrees with the 
subject, Stephanos.
 
20 ὅτι δ’ ἀληθῆ λέγω, αὗται αἱ πράξεις δηλώσουσιν Note the rhetorical inversion 
of the clauses again: ‘That I am speaking the truth, these actions will prove.’
Translation for 13E
Because of this, everyone knew that Phano was clearly an alien and not a citizen. 
Consider then what shamelessness Stephanos and Neaira showed and how they 
wronged the city. For they openly dared to allege that the daughter of Neaira was 
a citizen. There was once a certain Theogenes who was elected as basileus (King 
Archon), being well born but poor and inexperienced in affairs. Before Theogenes 
entered on his ofﬁ ce, Stephanos gave him money so that he would become his 
assistant and share in his position. When Theogenes took up ofﬁ ce, this Stephanos, 
becoming his assistant by giving him money, gave the daughter of Neaira to 
Theogenes as a wife and betrothed her as being his own daughter. For Theogenes 
did not know whose daughter she was nor what sort of habits she had. So greatly 
did this man despise you and the laws. And this woman made the secret sacriﬁ ces 
for you on behalf of the city, and saw what it was not ﬁ tting for her to see, being 
a foreigner. And she went into the place where no other Athenian goes except the 

190 
Section 13F
wife of the basileus, and she was presented to Dionysos as his bride, and she 
performed on behalf of the city the ancestral rites to the gods which are numerous, 
sacred and secret.
I want to tell you in greater detail about these things. For you will be casting 
your vote not only on your own behalf and on behalf of the laws, but for respect 
towards the gods. I have shown you then that Stephanos has acted most irrever-
ently. For he has made the laws invalid and has shown contempt for the gods, by 
giving the daughter of Neaira as a wife to Theogenes when he was holding the 
ofﬁ ce of basileus. And then this woman has performed the rites and sacriﬁ ces on 
behalf of the city. That I am speaking the truth, these events will prove.
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13E
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. τετ- τεθ- μεμ- γεγ- πεϕ- πεπ- ἐπιδεδ- ἐπιδεδ- κεκ-
 
τεθ- πεπ- ἐκβεβ- γεγ- ἐκπεπ- πεπ- βεβ- λελ- λελ-
 
νεν- κεχ- πεϕ- γεγ-
 
2. they have set free 
λύω 
λέλυκεν
 
you have borne witness 
μαρτυρέω 
μεμαρτύρηκας
 
he has conquered 
νικάω 
νενικήκασι(ν)
 
we have honoured 
τιμάω 
τετίμηκα
 
you (s.) have lived in 
ἐπιδημέω 
ἐπιδεδημήκατε
 
I have written 
γράϕω 
γεγράϕαμεν
 
you (pl.) have shouted 
βοάω 
βεβόηκας
 
he has ordered 
κελεύω 
κεκελεύκασι(ν)
 
we have done 
πράττω 
πέπραχα
 
I have loved 
ϕιλέω 
πεϕιλήκαμεν
 
you (s.) have gone 
χωρέω 
κεχωρήκατε
 
they have worried 
ϕροντίζω 
πεϕρόντικεν
13F
Here you will meet:
1. The aorist optative passive, which is easily recognised by -θ- and -είην 
(GE p. 285, #263).
2. The use of the optative in indirect speech (GE pp. 285–286, #264 (this is  
worth studying before you go on reading).
3. The future optatives (GE p. 287, #266). These are formed just as you 
would expect by adding the optative endings to the future indicative stems.
Page 170
 
2–3 γενομένων … ἱερῶν, ἀναβάντων … ἀρχόντων Two genitive absolutes.
 
3–4 ἤρετο ἡ βουλή ‘the council asked’. Followed by two indirect questions: τίς 
αὐτὰ ποιήσειε and πῶς πράξειαν οἱ ἄρχοντες.

 
Section 13F 
191
 
5–7 The pattern continues.
 
7 ἐζημίου This is a special use of the imperfect tense, ‘proposed to punish’, 
‘was inclined to punish’.
 
7–10 The structure of this sentence is: genitive absolute, genitive absolute, genitive 
absolute + ὅτι clause with two verbs in the optative (λάβοι, ἐάσειε) + 
inﬁ nitive, main verb (ἐδεῖτο) subject + participle + participle.
 
10 ἔλεγεν γὰρ ὅτι ‘for he said that’. Note that the verbs in the ὅτι clause are all 
in the optative. This shows that they are part of what he said.
 
13–14 Here the construction changes to nom./acc. + inﬁ nitive. Greek does not repeat 
‘he said’, but shows by the use of nom./acc. + inﬁ nitives that this is indirect 
speech. But the sentence starts with an inﬁ nitive which follows διὰ … τὸ: 
‘because of his inexperience in affairs and his innocence he had made 
Stephanos …’
 
17–19 The structure is: genitive absolute, ἡ βουλή (subject) ἅμα μὲν ἐλεήσασα … 
ἅμα δὲ ἡγουμένη + inﬁ nitive, ἐπέσχεν (main verb).
 
23 ἐξαπατηθέντι ‘granted a pardon to him having been deceived’, ‘on the 
grounds that he had been deceived’.
Translation for 13F
Stephanos, then, married his daughter to Theogenes while he was holding the 
ofﬁ ce of basileus, and this woman performed these holy rites. When these 
sacred rites had taken place, and the nine archons had gone up onto the Hill of 
Ares (Areopagos), the Council on the Areopagos inquired about the sacred 
rites, who had performed them and how the archons had acted. And immedi-
ately the Council started to ask who was this wife of Theogenes. And when it 
found out whose daughter Theogenes had as a wife, and what sort of things 
she had done, it showed concern about the rites and proposed to punish 
Theogenes. When arguments had taken place and the Council of the Areopagos 
was angry and punishing Theogenes on the grounds that he had taken such a 
wife and allowed her to perform the secret rites on behalf of the city, Theogenes 
began to beg them, imploring and entreating. For he said that he did not know 
she was the daughter of Neaira, but he had been deceived by Stephanos, and 
had himself accepted Phano as being his (Stephanos’) legitimate daughter in 
accordance with the law. But on account of his inexperience in affairs and his 
naivety he had made Stephanos his assistant so that he could administer the 
ofﬁ ce. He said that Stephanos appeared to be well disposed towards him; 
because of this he had allied himself to him by marriage before he found out 
clearly what sort of person he was. ‘That I am not lying’ he said ‘I shall dem-
onstrate to you by a great proof. I shall send the woman away from my house, 
since she is not the daughter of Stephanos but of Neaira.’ Since Theogenes 
promised that he would do this and was entreating, the Council of the 
Areopagos, at once pitying him for his innocence and at the same time thinking 
that he had truly been deceived by Stephanos, held back. When Theogenes 
came down from the Areopagos, he immediately banished the woman, the 

192 
Revision exercises for section 13F
daughter of Neaira, from his house, and removed Stephanos, who had deceived 
him, from the council board. When Phano had been sent away, the Areopagites 
ceased judging Theogenes and being angry with him, and pardoned him 
because he had been deceived.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13F
THE AORIST OPTATIVE PASSIVE
13F: 1
βληθείην, τιμηθείην, πεμφθείην, εὑρεθείην, δουλωθείην, διαφθαρείην,
δοθείην, ληφθείην, τεθείην, κελευθείην, πεισθείην, ποιηθείην.
THE FUTURE OPTATIVE
13F: 2
I shall vote ψηφισοίμην 
he will be guarded φυλαχθήσοιτο
you (pl.) will be saved σωθήσοισθε 
they will be given δοθήσοιντο
you (pl.) will blame μέμψοισθε 
we shall invite προσκαλοῖμεν
Ι shall run δραμοίμην 
we shall carry οἰσοίμεθα
13F: 3
1. He answered that the king had died. 
ἀποθάνοι
2. He said that the citizens would not be present. 
παρέσοιντο
3. You (pl.) will see why they are angry.
4. You (pl.) knew where the enemy were assembling. 
συνίοιεν
5. I know why he does not obey/ is not persuaded.
6. I knew why he would punish the slave. 
κολάσοι
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13F
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. The jurors asked what Stephanos had done, and what was the impiety of 
  Neaira and how she had wronged the city. ὅ τι πράξειεν ὁποία εἴη 
  ὅπως ἀδικήσειεν
 
b. For Theogenes did not know whose daughter she was nor that she had 
  worked with her body. ὅτου θυγάτηρ εἴη, ὅτι ἐργάζοιτο
 
c. Theogenes said that he did not know what were Phano’s habits and that 
  he had been persuaded by Stephanos to do this. ὅτι οὐκ εἰδείη ὁποῖοι 
  εἶεν, ὅτι πεισθείη
 
d. The council was annoyed at the affair, that Phano had been given in 
  marriage to Phrastor and that the sacred rites on behalf of the city had 
  been performed by a foreigner. ὅτι Φανὼ ἐκδοθείη, ὡς τὰ ἱερὰ 
  πραχθείη

 
Section 13G 
193
 
e. Didn’t you hear that we went into the lawcourt and that those men were 
  condemned and didn’t you hear what was said in the prosecution? ὡς 
  εἰσέλθοιμεν, ὡς καταδικασθεῖεν, ἅττα λεχθείη
2. a. Who did this? 
  ἠρόμην ὅστις ταῦτα ποιήσειεν.
 
b. How did the archons behave?
  ἠρόμην ὅπως πράξειαν οἱ ἄρχοντες.
 
c. Who was Theogenes’ wife?
  ἠρόμην ἥτις εἴη ἡ γυνὴ ἡ Θεογένους.
 
d. What sort of woman was Phano?
  ἠρόμην ὁποία γυνὴ εἴη ἡ Φανώ.
 
e. From where (for what cause) did Theogenes divorce his wife?
  ἠρόμην ὁπόθεν ἐκβάλοι τὴν γυναῖκα ὁ Θεογένης.
13G
Here you will meet the perfect middle and passive, the perfect inﬁ nitives and 
participles and some important irregular perfects (GE pp. 291–295, #267–273).
Page 171
 
2 πεποιήκασι What tense?
Page 172
 
4 καταπεϕρονήκασιν What tense?
 
5 μεμαρτυρήκασιν What tense?
 
 καταπεϕρονηκέναι What is it? Perfect inﬁ nitive active. See GE pp. 292–293, 
#270. The inﬁ nitive shows that this is an indirect statement. ‘For many people 
have borne witness that they have shown contempt for the city and for the gods.’
 
8 πεπολίτευμαι, γεγένημαι These are perfect middle (GE pp. 291–292, 
#267–268).
 
 The rest of this section is full of various forms of the perfect active and middle. 
The perfect middle and passive are the same.
 
12–13 οἳ ἂν ἀποϕαίνωσι ‘whoever show’: ἄν + subjunctive makes the relative 
clause ‘indeﬁ nite’. You will meet this construction later in GE pp. 304–305, 
#282.
 
14 ἀλλ’ εὖ ἴσμεν ‘But we know very well that’ is followed by a series of 
accusative + participle phrases; τὸν Στέϕανον is the subject of all the 
participles.
Translation for 13G
STRYMODOROS Oh what lawlessness! For Stephanos committed many disgraceful acts.
EUERGIDES If indeed Apollodoros is speaking the truth, Stephanos and Neaira have done 
the most sacrilegious things. For they have shown contempt for the laws of the 
state (lit. on behalf of the state) and the gods.

194 
Section 13H
SΤR. 
It is probable, at least. For many people have borne witness that they have 
shown contempt for both the city and the gods. I wonder what Stephanos will 
ever say in his defence.
KOMIAS 
Stephanos will say the sort of things which all defendants say in their defence, 
that ‘I have been a good citizen’ and ‘I have been responsible for no disaster in 
the city.’ For you know well that all the defendants claim that they have 
performed their state duties patriotically and that they have won many glorious 
victories in the games (contests) and that they have accomplished much good 
for the city.
EU. 
Reasonably. For the dikasts have often acquitted those who have done wrong 
who can point out the virtues of their ancestors and their own good services. 
But we know well that Stephanos is not rich, nor has he been a trierarch, nor 
has he been appointed choregos, nor has he been a good citizen, nor has he 
done any good to the city.
13H
Page 172
 
3 κέχρηται What tense? What verb? It comes from χράομαι, which takes the 
dative.
 
5 ἐξελεγχθήσεται What tense? What verb? Try ἐξελέγχω.
 
7 εἴληϕε This is an irregular perfect from λαμβάνω. See list at GE p. 295, 
#272.
Page 173
 
8 Στέϕανος αὐτὸς ὑϕ’ αὑτοῦ ‘Stephanos himself has been condemned by 
himself.’
 
12 εἴρηται Perfect passive from λέγω: see GE p. 295, #272.
 
15 πεϕύκασι ‘They have been born’, i.e. ‘they exist’, ‘they are born to make 
mistakes’. This shows clearly how close the perfect is to the present in 
meaning.
Translation for 13H
STRYMODOROS What then? What will Stephanos say in his defence? Will he say 
that Neaira was a citizen and that he lives with her in accordance with the 
laws?
KOMIAS 
But Apollodoros has employed the strongest evidence, proving that Neaira 
was a hetaira and became the slave of Nikarete, and was not born a citizen. 
So that it is clear that Stephanos will be convicted of lying, if he says such 
things.
STR. 
What then? That he did not take Neaira as his wife but as a concubine in his 
house?
EUERGIDES But Stephanos has brought evidence against himself. For the children, who 
were Neaira’s, and who were introduced to the phratries by Stephanos, and the 

 
Section 13I 
195
daughter, who was given in marriage to an Athenian man, these clearly prove 
that Neaira was living with Stephanos as his wife.
STR. 
Yes, and it is clear that the truth has been spoken by Apollodoros. Therefore 
Neaira has been put in the most terrible danger on account of the things that 
have been done by Stephanos.
EU. 
And Stephanos also is done for, as it seems to me; all men indeed are born to 
make mistakes.
13I
Page 173
 
1–3 μεμαθήκατε This is followed by two sets of accusative + participle phrases, 
followed by two sets of nominative + participle phrases.
 
2 ἠσεβηκυῖαν Acc. s. fem. of the perfect participle of ἀσεβέω. Note the form 
of the reduplication when the verb starts with a vowel, also ἠδικημένοι and 
ὑβρισμένοι.
 
3–4 ὁ Στέϕανος ἄξιός ἐστιν οὐκ ἐλάττω δοῦναι δίκην … ἀλλὰ καὶ πολλῷ 
μείζω ‘Stephanos is worthy to pay no less penalty than …, but a much bigger 
one.’
Page 174
 
8 πεϕυκότας Cf. p. 173, line 15 ‘those who have been born to …’: ‘those who 
by nature are more inclined to impiety rather than piety’.
Translation for 13I
You have heard the evidence, judges, and you have learned in detail that 
Neaira is an alien and has shown a lack of reverence towards the gods, and 
that you yourselves have been greatly wronged and insulted. Before you pass 
judgment, know that this Stephanos deserves to pay no lesser penalty than 
this Neaira, but a much greater one for what he has done. For I have proved 
that he, by declaring himself to be an Athenian, has thus shown much contempt 
for the laws and you and has been irreverent to the gods. You must therefore 
take vengeance upon those who have been impious to the gods and you must 
punish those who have wronged the city and are disposed to sacrilege rather 
than to piety.
Grammar
Now make sure that you know both active and passive forms of the perfect 
indicative, and their participles and inﬁ nitives (GE pp. 291–294, #267–271), and 
make sure also that you look at the lists in GE pp. 294–295, #272–273, which 
show awkward cases where you cannot use an ordinary reduplication, and some 
irregular perfects. You will need to learn these by heart.

196 
Exercises for section 13G–I
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13G–I
PERFECT INDICATIVE MIDDLE AND PASSIVE
13G–I: 1
κεκώλυται 
he has been prevented
τεθύμεθα 
we have been sacriﬁ ced
γεγάμημαι 
I have been married
τετιμημένοι εἰσίν 
they have been honoured
δεδήλωσθε 
you (pl.) have been shown
13G–I: 2
κεκωλῦσθαι, τεθύσθαι, γεγαμῆσθαι, τετιμῆσθαι, δεδηλῶσθαι
13G–I: 3
 
κεκωλυκότος 
κεκωλυκυίας 
κεκωλυκότος
 
κεκωλυκότες 
κεκωλυκυῖαι 
κεκωλυκότα
 
κεκωλυμένου 
κεκωλυμένης 
κεκωλυμένου
 
κεκωλυμένοι 
κεκωλυμέναι 
κεκωλυμένα
 
τεθυκότος 
τεθυκυίας 
τεθυκότος
 
τεθυκότες 
τεθυκυῖαι 
τεθυκότα
 
τεθυμένου 
τεθυμένης 
τεθυμένου
 
τεθυμένοι 
τεθυμέναι 
τεθυμένα
 
γεγαμηκότος 
γεγαμηκυίας 
γεγαμηκότος
 
γεγαμηκότες 
γεγαμηκυῖαι 
γεγαμηκότα
 
γεγαμημένου 
γεγαμημένης 
γεγαμημένου
 
γεγαμημένοι 
γεγαμημέναι 
γεγαμημένα
 
τετιμηκότος 
τετιμηκυίας 
τετιμηκότος
 
τετιμηκότες 
τετιμηκυῖαι 
τετιμηκότα
 
τετιμημένου 
τετιμημένης 
τετιμημένου
 
τετιμημένοι 
τετιμημέναι 
τετιμημένα
 
δεδηλωκότος 
δεδηλωκυίας 
δεδηλωκότος
 
δεδηλωκότες 
δεδηλωκυῖαι 
δεδηλωκότα
 
δεδηλωμένου 
δεδηλωμένης 
δεδηλωμένου
 
δεδηλωμένοι 
δεδηλωμέναι 
δεδηλωμένα
13G–I: 4
it has been announced, they are standing, he has gone, you (pl.) have hurled you 
(s.) have suffered, he has been wronged.

 
Revision exercises for section 13G–I 
197
13G–I: 5
εἰρήκασι, πεπόνθαμεν, ἕστηκα, ἐζήτηκας, ἀφῄρηται, ἐστέρηται, ἠδίκημαι
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 13G–I
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. You have governed well. εὖ πεπολίτευσθε
 
b. We have been greatly wronged by Stephanos. ἠδίκημαι
 
c. These words have been spoken by Neaira. εἴρηται
 
d. You have used clear proof, gentlemen. κέχρησαι
 
e. I myself have been condemned by myself (lit. I have had witness borne 
  against me by myself). καταμεμαρτυρήμεθα
 
f. Those men have done these things. διαπέπρακται
 
g. Phano’s son has been introduced to the brotherhood by Stephanos. 
  εἰσηγμένοι εἰσίν
 
h. These men have been the cause of many evils in the city. γεγένηται
 
i. You have been treated most violently, gentlemen, and you have been 
  greatly wronged. ὕβρισαι ἠδίκησαι
 
j. The prosecutor has accomplished this. εἰργασμένοι εἰσίν
2. a. οἶδα σε εὖ πεπολιτευμένον.
  ϕάσκω σε εὖ πεπολιτεῦσθαι.
 
b. οἶδα ἡμᾶς ἠδικημένους μεγάλα ὑπὸ Στεϕάνου.
  ϕάσκω ἡμᾶς ἠδικῆσθαι μεγάλα ὑπὸ Στεϕάνου.
 
c. οἶδα τούτους τοὺς λόγους ὑπὸ τῆς Νεαίρας εἰρημένους.
  ϕάσκω τούτους τοὺς λόγους ὑπὸ τῆς Νεαίρας εἰρῆσθαι.
 
d. οἶδα ὑμᾶς τεκμηρίῳ ϕανερῷ κεχρημένους.
  ϕάσκω ὑμᾶς τεκμηρίῳ ϕανερῷ κεχρῆσθαι.
 
e. οἶδα καταμεμαρτυρημένος αὐτὸς ὑπ’ ἐμαυτοῦ.
  ϕάσκω καταμεμαρτυρῆσθαι αὐτὸς ὑπ’ ἐμαυτοῦ.
 
f. οἶδα ἐκείνους τοὺς ἄνδρας ταῦτα διαπεπραγμένους.
  ϕάσκω ἐκείνους τοὺς ἄνδρας ταῦτα διαπεπρᾶχθαι.
 
g. οἶδα τὸν Φανοῦς παῖδα εἰσηγμένον ὑπὸ Στεϕάνου εἰς τοὺς ϕράτερας.
  ϕάσκω τὸν Φανοῦς παῖδα εἰσῆχθαι ὑπὸ Στεϕάνου εἰς τοὺς ϕράτερας.
 
h. οἶδα τούτους αἰτίους γεγενημένους πολλῶν κακῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει.
  ϕάσκω τούτους αἰτίους γεγενῆσθαι πολλῶν κακῶν ἐν τῇ πόλει.
 
i. οἶδα ὑμᾶς μεγάλα ὑβρισμένους καὶ ἠδικημένους.
  ϕάσκω ὑμᾶς μεγάλα ὑβρίσθαι καὶ ἠδικῆσθαι.
 
j. οἶδα τοῦτο εὶργασμένον τὸν κατήγορον.
  ϕάσκω τοῦτο εἰργάσθαι τὸν κατήγορον.
3. a. Stephanos has never paid the penalty.
  ἴσμεν τὸν Στέϕανον οὐδέποτε δίκην δεδωκότα.
  οὔ ϕαμεν τὸν Στέϕανον δίκην ποτε δεδωκέναι.

198 
Revision exercises for section 13G–I
 
b. Phano is an alien by birth (has been born).
  εὖ οἶδα τὴν Φανὼ ξένην πεϕυκυῖαν.
  ϕημὶ τὴν Φανὼ ξένην πεϕυκέναι.
 
c. Neaira has been irreverent towards the gods.
 
  ᾔδεισθα τὴν Νέαιραν ἠσεβηκυῖαν εἰς τοὺς θεούς.
 
  ἔϕασκες τὴν Νέαιραν ἠσεβηκέναι εἰς τοὺς θεούς.
 
d. You have been appointed jurors.
  ἴστε δικασταὶ καθεστηκότες.
  ϕατὲ δικασταὶ καθεστηκέναι.
 
e. Stephanos has given Phano in marriage as his own daughter.
  οἶσθα τὸν Στέϕανον ὡς τὴν αὑτοῦ θυγατέρα τὴν Φανὼ ἐκδεδωκότα.
  ϕὴς τὸν Στέϕανον ὡς τὴν αὑτοῦ θυγατέρα τὴν Φανὼ ἐκδεδωκέναι.
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. Sentences
 
1. ἐπιδέδειχα τὴν Φανὼ τεθυκυῖαν τὰ ἱερὰ ὑπὲρ τῆς πόλεως.
 
2. ἡ βουλὴ ἤρετο ὁποίαν γυναῖκα ἔγημεν ὁ ἄρχων βασιλεύς.
 
3. Θεογένης ἔϕη ἐξαπατηθῆναι ὑπὸ τοῦ Στεϕάνου.
 
4. Στέϕανος εὖ πεπολίτευται καὶ πολλὰ καὶ καλὰ πεποίηκεν.
 
5. εὖ ἴσμεν πάντες ὅτι οὐδὲν καλὸν οὔτε εἴρηται οὔτε πεποίηται 
  οὐδέποτε ὑπὸ τοῦ Στεϕάνου.
2. Prose
τὴν οὖν Φανὼ τῆς Νεαίρας θυγατέρα οὖσαν ἐπιδεδειγμένην εὐθὺς ἐξέβαλεν 
ὁ Φράστωρ. ἡ δὲ ἐκβεβλημένη ὀλίγον χρόνον ἔμεινεν, βουλομένη τὸν 
Φράστορα τὸ παιδίον ἀναλαβεῖν. καὶ οὐ διὰ πολλοῦ ἠσθένησεν ὁ Φράστωρ. 
καὶ διὰ τὴν ἔχθραν τὴν πρὸς τοὺς οἰκείους καὶ διὰ τὸ μὴ ἐθελῆσαι αὐτοὺς 
λαβεῖν τὰ αὑτοῦ, ἀνέλαβε τὸ παιδίον πρὶν ἀναστῆναι, οὐ βουλόμενος ἄπαις 
τελευτᾶν. ὁ γὰρ Φράστωρ οὐδέποτ’ ἂν ἀνέλαβε τὸ παιδίον, εἰ μὴ ἠσθένησε, 
δῆλον ὅτι. ἀναστὰς γὰρ γυναῖκα γνησίαν κατὰ τοὺς νόμους ἔγημεν.
E – TEST EXERCISE 13
After this, Menekles began to take thought so that he might not be childless, but 
that he might have a child who would look after him before he died, and who 
would bury him when he had died and would carry out the customary tasks on 
his behalf in the period after his death.
Since, then, he found no other relation closer to him than us, he started to enter 
into an agreement with us and he said ‘Fate did not allow me to have children 
with your sister. But, indeed I would have had children from this family, if I had 
been able. Therefore I want to make one of you my son.’ And when my brother 
heard this, he praised his words and said that because Menekles was an old man 
and alone he needed me to look after him. ‘For’, he said, ‘I am always abroad, as 
you know; but my brother here’, meaning me, ‘who is always at home, will look 
after your affairs and mine. Make him your son.’ And Menekles said that it was 
a good idea (that he was speaking well) and so adopted me.

 
Revision exercises for section 13G–I 
199
My opponent here wishes now to disinherit me and to render the dead man 
childless and nameless. Do not therefore, gentlemen of the jury, being persuaded 
by him, take away the name from me. Instead, since the matter has come to you 
and you have become responsible for it, help us and that man who is now in the 
house of Hades, and bearing in mind the law and the oath which you have sworn 
and the things that have been said about the matter, vote for justice in accordance 
with the laws.

200
Section Fourteen: Guarding a woman’s purity
14A
Page 176
 
1 ἐάσετε Future of ἐάω.
 
2 ἥν This is accusative s. fem. of the relative pronoun: ‘she whom …’
 
3 ἥ What is this?
 
4 ἤ This has a smooth breathing, so it cannot be a relative pronoun. Try ‘or’.
 
5 ἐλήλυθεν What tense? What verb? Learn it!
 
6 ψηϕιεῖσθε This comes from ψηϕίζομαι, whose future is ψηϕιοῦμαι. Cf. 
νομίζω νομιέω.
 
8–9 πρίν is followed by two accusative and inﬁ nitive clauses ‘before she did x and 
y, and before you did z’. Do not translate πρότερον, which prepares for πρίν.
 
10 ἐπειδὴ δὲ πέπυσθε καὶ ἴστε … Notice the present force of the perfect ‘since 
you have found out and you all know (now, at this moment)’.
Translation for 14A
Gentlemen of the jury, will you then allow this Neaira to insult the city so dis-
gracefully and so contemptuously, [this woman] who was neither left a citizen by 
her parents nor was she made a citizen by the people? Will you allow her to act 
irreverently towards the gods with impunity, she who has openly prostituted 
herself throughout the whole of Greece? For where has she not worked with her 
body? Or where has she not gone for her day-to-day earnings? Now that Neaira 
is clearly known by all as the kind of woman she is, will you vote that she is a 
citizen? And if you vote in this way, what ﬁ ne thing will you say that you have 
accomplished to those who ask you?
For [formerly] her crimes existed, and the city was indifferent (lit. to the crimes), 
before this woman was charged by me and brought to trial and before all of you found 
out who she was and what sort of impiety she had committed. But, since you have 
found out and since you all know, and since you are able to punish her, you your-
selves will be acting impiously towards the gods if you do not punish this woman.
14B
You now meet the subjunctive (GE pp. 300–304, #274–281) and one of its com-
monest uses with ἄν. This makes a clause indeﬁ nite (GE pp. 304–305, #282), 

 
Section 14B 
201
‘when he says’, ‘whenever he says’. Do not confuse this ἄν with ἄν + optative, 
which is potential and means ‘could’ or ‘would’ (GE #283) or ἄν + indicative in 
unfulﬁ lled conditions.
Page 177
 
1 τί δὲ ϕήσειεν ἄν ἄν + optative: ‘What would each of you say …’
 
2 ἐπειδὰν γάρ τις ἔρηται ὑμᾶς ἄν + subjunctive ‘when someone asks (if they 
actually do ask).’
 
3 ἐρήσεται What tense is this? You may ﬁ nd it useful to look up the 
principal parts of ἐρωτάω in the irregular verb list on pp. 436–442, #389 of 
GE.
 
4 ὅτι should probably be translated as ‘because’.
 
4–6 Look carefully at all the tenses here.
 
6 διηγήσεσθε What tense is this?
 
7 κατηγορήθη What tense is this?
 
8–11 οὔκουν ἤδη αἱ σωϕρονέσταται τῶν γυναικῶν and καὶ δὴ καὶ ταῖς ἀνοήτοις 
γυναιξί. This gives the predicted reaction of thoughtful women and foolish 
women.
 
 Note that ἀνόητος is a compound adjective and has only two terminations, i.e. 
m. and f. endings are identical. Cf. ἀτιμώρητος p. 176, l. 3.
 
9 ἐπειδὰν πύθωνται ‘When they ﬁ nd out’. This is the indeﬁ nite construction 
expressed by ἄν + the subjunctive (GE pp. 304–305, #282).
 
11 ἄδειαν διδόναι ποιεῖν ‘To grant licence to do.’
 
 ὅ τι ἂν βούλωνται Another indeﬁ nite clause: ‘what(ever) they like’.
Translation for 14B
And what would each one of you say when you go back to the house to your wife 
or your daughter or your mother if you have voted (having voted) to acquit 
Neaira? For when (whenever) someone asks you ‘Where were you?’ and you 
say ‘We were trying a case’, that someone will immediately ask ‘Whom were 
you trying?’ and you will say ‘Neaira’ (of course) ‘because, though an alien, she 
lived with a citizen against the law and because she married her daughter to 
Theogenes when he was basileus and she performed the sacred and secret rites 
on behalf of the city and was given as a bride to Dionysos.’ (And you will go 
through the other things about the charge saying how well and carefully and 
accurately on each point she was prosecuted.) And they, hearing this, will ask 
‘What then did you do?’ and you will say ‘We acquitted her.’ Will not the most 
self-controlled of women, when they ﬁ nd out, be angry with you because you 
thought it right that Neaira should equally with them have a share in the business 
of the city and in the sacred rites? And moreover, you will seem to be granting 
licence to foolish women to do what(ever) they like. For you will seem to be 
contemptuous and yourselves to be in agreement with Neaira’s standards of 
behaviour.

202 
Section 14D
14C
Page 178
 
6 ἐπειδὰν γάρ τις καλῶς λέγῃ An indeﬁ nite clause: ‘when anyone speaks 
well’.
 
9 ἐὰν γὰρ ἀποψηϕισώμεθα Nεαίρας, ἐξέσται ‘For if we acquit Neaira, it will 
be possible’: see GE p. 198, #176. It is normal to express a future condition as 
an indeﬁ nite.
 
10–11 ἄν + subjunctive. More indeﬁ nite clauses.
 
12–13 Note the opposites ἄκυροι, κύριαι.
 
19–20 What sort of condition is expressed here by ἄν + imperfect indicative?
Translation for 14C
STRYMODOROS But why are you silent, Euergides, and why do you neither praise nor 
criticise the arguments? For I am very pleased, now I have heard the speech 
which Apollodoros has made. What do you say about what he has said? Are 
you, too, pleased by his words?
EUERGIDES I am certainly very pleased, Strymodoros, with the speech which 
Apollodoros made. For whenever anyone speaks well and truthfully, who does 
not enjoy listening?
STR. 
What then? Must we condemn Neaira?
EU. 
Of course. For if we acquit Neaira it will be permissible for prostitutes to live 
with whoever they like, and to declare that their children belong to whoever 
they happen to ﬁ nd [to father them].
STR. 
Not only that, Euergides, but there is also the fact that the established laws will 
become powerless, and hetairas will have the power to do whatever they like. 
What do you say, Komias? Do you think the laws will become powerless?
KOMIAS 
You are concerned with hetairas and the laws, but I am concerned with none of 
these things. My concern is with female citizens.
STR. 
Your concern is with female citizens? How do you mean? Perhaps you are 
saying something important, but I don’t understand.
KOM. 
If you were a woman, Strymodorus, you would understand, and you would be 
concerned about female citizens. Consider, then, Strymodoros.
14D
This section is full of future conditions (ἐάν + subjunctive) and indeﬁ nite relative 
and adverbial clauses (‘whoever’, ‘however’, ‘in whatever way’, etc.) expressed 
by ἄν + the subjunctive.
Page 179
 
1 ἀπορηθῇ Can you recognise this? It is 3rd s. of the aorist passive subjunctive 
of ἀπορέω.

 
Section 14E 
203
 
 καθεστήκῃ Can you recognise this? It is 3rd s. of the perfect active subjunctive 
of καθίστημι. The perfect is used because ‘he has been placed in a situation’ = 
‘he is in a situation’, -ῃ indicates the subjunctive, as it does in ἀπορηθῇ.
 
5 ἐάν τις βούληται ‘If someone wants’: ἐάν + subjunctive.
 
6 εἰ καὶ πένητος ὄντος ‘Even if he is a poor man’, πένητος ὄντος is genitive in 
apposition to ἀστοῦ in the previous line.
 
 σκοποῦσιν ὅπως + future indicative: ‘see to it that …’, ‘take care that …’
 
8 ἀποδῷ 3rd s. aorist active subjunctive of ἀποδίδωμι.
 
10 ἐὰν δὲ ἀπολυθῇ Nέαιρα ‘If Neaira is set free’, ‘acquitted’: ἀπολυθῇ is the 
3rd s. of the aorist passive subjunctive of ἀπολύω.
 
21 διελήλυθε 3rd s. perfect indicative of διέρχομαι, ‘has gone through the 
argument’.
Translation for 14D
KOMIAS 
For now, even if a woman is in dire straits and her father has fallen into poverty 
and cannot give his daughter a dowry, the law provides a sufﬁ cient dowry.
STRYMODOROS What do you mean?
KOM. 
If someone wants to rear children that are citizens, he must marry the daughter 
of a citizen, even if that citizen is poor. In this way the lawmakers take care that 
the daughters of citizens will not be unmarried –
STR. 
If nature grants a girl moderate beauty.
EUERGIDES What then?
KOM. 
If Neaira is acquitted (freed), it will be permissible for the Athenians to live 
with hetairas and have children however they please. But if the Athenians have 
children however they please, how will it be possible for us to distinguish 
between the citizen and the alien? And if we cannot distinguish between the 
citizen and the alien, it will not be necessary for Athenians to marry citizen 
women, but they will be able to marry whomsoever they like. Therefore, if 
Athenians marry whomsoever they like, who will marry the daughters of poor 
men, who do not have a dowry? The function of prostitutes will come 
completely to the daughters of citizens because they have no dowry and the 
reputation of free women will come to hetairas. For hetairas will be allowed to 
have children with whomever they like and to share in mysteries and sacred 
rites and honours in the city. This is why I am concerned about citizen women.
EU. 
Apollodoros has delivered his speech well, but this matter has been expressed 
by Komias even better and more sincerely. But be quiet, friends, for 
Apollodoros is ending his speech.
14E
Page 180
 
3 ὁμοίως Nεαίρᾳ τῇ πόρνῃ ‘in the same way as Neaira the prostitute’.
 
6 καὶ ὅταν μὲν τοῦ κατηγορεῖν γένησθε ‘and whenever you are concerned 
with prosecution’.

204 
Section 14F
 
8 ὅταν δὲ ἐπὶ τοῦ ἀπολογεῖσθαι ἦτε ‘and whenever you are concerned with 
the defence’.
Translation for 14E
I want each one of you to know that you are casting your vote, one of you on 
behalf of his wife, another on behalf of his daughter, another of his mother, 
another of his city and its laws and its religion. Do not show respect for these 
women in the same way as for Neaira the prostitute. Look after them, gentlemen 
of the jury, look after them with much good discipline and care, and give them in 
marriage in accordance with the laws. But Neaira with her many disgraceful ways 
has had intercourse with many men many times each day. And when you are 
concerned with prosecution, listen to the laws themselves, the laws through 
which we live in the city, and by which you have sworn to give judgment. And 
when you are concerned with the defence, remember the condemnation of the 
laws and the proof of the things which have been said which you have heard. And 
when you look upon the face of Neaira, think only of this one thing, whether, 
being Neaira, she has done these things.
14F
There are many more examples of the use of ἄν + the subjunctive in this 
section.
Page 181
 
10 ὡς ἀπολογησόμενος ὡς + the future participle expresses purpose.
 
 σιγῴης ἄν … προσέχοις ἄν ἄν + optative = a polite request, ‘would you be 
quiet and concentrate?’
 
11–12 ὅπως + the future indicative: ‘Take care that you…’
Translation for 14F
EUERGIDES Good. So great then is the prosecution which Apollodoros has delivered. But 
now we must hear the defence of Stephanos and when we have heard it we 
must cast our vote.
STRYMODOROS But what shall I say when my children and my wife ask whether I 
condemned or acquitted her?
EU. 
If Neaira is condemned, Strymodoros, you will say that you condemned her, 
and if she is acquitted, you will say that you acquitted her.
STR. 
Of course. But, although I am eager to do it, I cannot remember the 
prosecution; for the prosecutor leads me round in a circle, like a sophist, and 
puts me in great perplexity.
KOMIAS 
And the defendant too will drag you round in a circle, as it seems, Strymodoros.
STR. 
How then will it be possible for me to judge the trial?
ΕU. 
First listen and then decide (judge).
STR. 
Good. But when we have cast our vote, what next?

 
Revision exercises for section 14 
205
KOM. 
What next? When we have got up from our seats and cast our votes, we shall 
receive our three obols, Strymodoros. It is very pleasant when I go home with 
my three obols in my mouth, and all the household welcome me because of the 
three obols.
EU. 
With reason! But stop chattering, Komias. For Stephanos is now standing up to 
make his defence. Would you please be quiet and pay attention. And as for you, 
Strymodoros, see that you remember the things said by Apollodoros and that 
you pay attention to everything which Stephanos may say.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 14
THE SUBJUNCTIVE
14: 1
he made a mistake 
 
 
ἁμάρτῃ
he was stopping 
 
 
the imperfect subjunctive shares the 
 
 
 
 
 
expect of the present subj. παύῃ
he will persuade/you (s.) will obey 
no future subjunctive
he fell out/was thrown out 
 
ἐκπέσῃ
they had 
 
 
 
σχῶσι(ν)
14: 2
I have married 
 
γεγαμήκω
he will go 
 
 
ἴῃ
they are 
 
 
ὦσι(ν)
we have become 
 
γεγενημένοι ὦμεν
they placed 
 
 
θῶσι
we make/do (for ourselves) 
ποιώμεθα
they see 
 
 
ὁρῶσι(ν)
they knew 
 
 
γνῶσι(ν)
they were giving 
 
imperfect (pres. subj. is διδῶσιν; see above)
he carried 
 
 
ἐνέγκῃ
14: 3
ἐὰν ὁρῶσιν/ἰδῶσιν ἐπειδὰν ἀκούω/ἀκούσω ὅστις ἂν ἴῃ/ἔλθῃ,
ὅπου ἂν ᾖ ἐπειδὰν ἀπίωσιν/ἀπέλθωσιν ἐὰν δουλῶμεν/δουλώσωμεν,
ὅστις ἂν ὦσιν, ἐπειδὰν εἰδῶ.
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 14
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. Whatever evidence the witnesses give and whatever they say, we always 
  judge carefully. μαρτυρῶσι λέγωσιν

206 
Revision exercises for section 14
 
b. When(ever) the prosecutor speaks and persuades us, we condemn. λέγῃ 
  πείθῃ
 
c. When(ever) a citizen goes to law or the clansmen reject (vote against) a 
  child born from an alien, the laws are preserved. ἀγωνίσηται 
  ἀποψηϕίσωνται
 
d. Whoever is not condemned but acquitted by the jurors, we regard as 
  innocent. μὴ καταδικασθῇ ἀπολυθῇ
 
e. If an evil man loses his citizen’s rights (is placed in loss of citizen’s 
  rights), all the citizens are pleased. καταστῇ
 
f. Whenever you want to say something terrible and you reveal the truth, 
  your enemies will always take vengeance on you. βούλῃ δηλοῖς
 
g. Whatever ﬁ ne you think just and inﬂ ict, that is the penalty that the man 
  who has been condemned owes to the city. ἡγῆσθε τιμᾶτε
 
h. The law provides an adequate dowry to any woman whose father does 
  not give a dowry. μὴ δῷ
 
i. If you concentrate your mind carefully on the prosecution and are eager, 
  you will condemn (vote against) Neaira. πρόσσχητε προθυμῆσθε
 
j. When you enter the house and your wife meets you, see that you ﬂ atter 
  her. εἰσίῃς ἐντύχῃ
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. Sentences
 
1. ὅταν οἱ δικασταὶ οἴκαδε ἔλθωσιν, αἱ γυναῖκες ἀσπάζονται αὐτοὐς.
 
2. ὅταν γυνή τις χρήματων λάβηται, χαλεπὴ γίγνεται.
 
3. ἐὰν προσέχῃς τὸν νοῦν πρὸς τὴν ἀπολογίαν, ἀπολύσεις τὸν ϕεύγοντα.
 
4. ἐπειδὰν οἱ κατήγοροι λέγωσιν, ἀεὶ τὰ αὐτὰ λέγουσιν.
 
5. ἐὰν ϕιλῇ ὑπὸ τῶν θυγατέρων, δώσουσί σοι ὅ τι ἂν βούλῃ.
2. Prose
ἀπολογούμενος οὖν τί λέξει ὁ Στέϕανος; ϕήσει, δῆλον ὅτι, εὖ πεπολιτεῦσθαι 
καὶ πολλά τε καὶ ἀγαθὰ διαπεπρᾶχθαι. καίτοι εὖ ἴσμεν πάντες ὅτι οὐδὲν οὔτε 
καλὸν οὔτε ἀγαθὸν διεπράχθη ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ οὐδέποτε. ἢ τοιοῦτό τι πρᾶγμα 
ἀκηκόατέ ποτε; οὐ δῆτα. οὔτε γὰρ οὑτοσὶ οὔτε οἱ πρόγονοι πρὸς τὸ εὐσεβεῖν 
πεϕύκασιν ἀλλὰ πρὸς τὸ ἀσεβεῖν.
Note that it is possible to translate this passage into Greek in a number of dif-
ferent ways. This is only one of them. You may, therefore, ﬁ nd that you have 
constructed a different version and are still perfectly correct.
E – TEST EXERCISE 14
I want to tell you how they frame the laws in Lokris (among the Lokrians). For 
there they think the citizens ought to observe the long-established laws and pre-
serve tradition. So that, if someone wants to make a new law, he proposes it with 
his neck in a noose. And if the law seems to be good and useful, the proposer lives 
and gets away. But if it does not, he is killed when the noose is drawn tight. In 
fact they do not dare to propose new laws, but they observe the ancient laws 

 
Revision exercises for section 14 
207
strictly. In the course of many years, only one new law is said to have been passed. 
For there is a law established in Lokris that, if a man knocks out an eye, the one 
who knocked out the eye must offer his own eye to be knocked out in return. An 
enemy is said to have threatened his enemy, who happened to have one eye, that 
he would knock out this one eye. When this threat had been made, the one-eyed 
man was upset, and thinking that his life would be unliveable if he suffered this, 
he is said to have dared to put forward the following law: if anyone knocks out 
the eye of a one-eyed man, he will have to give both his eyes to be knocked out 
in return. For in this way they would both suffer the same injury. And the 
Lokrians are said to have passed this law alone in more than two hundred years.

208
Section Fifteen: Alkestis in Euripides’ play
In this section you are introduced to the verse of Greek Tragedy in a touching 
scene from Euripides’ Alkestis (produced in 438 BC). Consult GE p. 310, #286 
for a list of tragic usages. Note (e) here contains the warning: ‘Word order in verse 
can be far more ﬂ exible than in prose; again, utterances can be far more oblique 
and tightly packed with meaning.’ While it is probably true that you will ﬁ nd an 
increase of difﬁ culty in this section, the Greek should prove manageable. We 
have tried to keep the translation as literal as possible throughout.
15A
Page 184
 
1 ἴστω The third person singular imperative of οἶδα (GE #207). οἶδα is 
followed by a participle (‘know that …’, see GE #247). The vocabulary tells 
you that κατθανουμένη is the future participle of καταθνῄσκω.
 
 εὐκλεής = ‘a glorious [woman]’. It is easiest to translate it as an adverb, 
‘gloriously’.
 
3 πῶς δ’ οὐκ …; πῶς γὰρ οὔ; (literally ‘for how not?’ = ‘of course’) has 
appeared from Section 1 onwards.
 
4–5 Difﬁ cult. Consult the translation.
 
11 ἐκ … ἑλοῦσα This splitting of a verb from its prepositional preﬁ x is called 
‘tmesis’ (‘cutting’). It is quite common in verse authors, but it is not always 
easy to recognise whether the preposition is there in its own right or if it is a 
case of ‘tmesis’.
 
13 ‘Εστία Hestia is the goddess of the hearth, crucial for the continued existence 
of the home.
 
15 πίτνω This form of πίπτω is very common in poetry.
 
16 τἀμά See GE p. 310, #286. This squashing together of two separate words (τὰ 
ἐμά) is called ‘crasis’.
Translation for 15A
CHORUS 
Let her know then [that she] is going to die gloriously and by far the best 
woman of those under the sun.
FEMALE SERVANT Of course [she is] the best. Who will disagree? What should this 
outstanding woman be called (how should she be described)? How could 
anyone declare more [clearly] that she holds her husband in honour than by 

 
Section 15B 
209
being willing to die for him? And the whole city knows these things; but you 
will wonder as you hear what she did in the house. For when she realised that 
the appointed day had come, she washed her white skin in waters from the 
river, and, having taken out from their cedar home (i.e. chest) clothes and 
decoration, she adorned herself becomingly, and standing before the Household 
Hearth, she prayed: ‘Mistress – [I am addressing you] for I am going beneath 
the earth – appealing to you for the last time, I shall beg you to look after my 
orphaned children. And join a dear wife in marriage to the boy and a noble 
husband to the girl. And may the children not die – as I their mother am being 
destroyed – before their time, but may they happily complete a pleasant life in 
their father’s land.’
15B
Page 186
 
1 δόμους Poetic plural – the house is in fact singular, but this use of the plural, 
which is fairly common in poetry, adds a sense of grandeur.
 
3 Note the preﬁ x ἀ- (‘not weeping, not lamenting’).
 
4 μεθίστη Imperfect (GE #230–234).
 
5 κἄπειτα Crasis (GE p. 310, #286).
 
6 ᾽δάκρυσε The ﬁ rst syllable (ε) is elided (struck off) after the vowel at 
the end of the previous word (prodelision). As you will remember, elision 
usually works the other way round, i.e. the vowel at the end of a word 
disappears.
 
8 ἐκ + gen. Here means ‘from the action of …’
 
 περί + gen. Here means ‘for the sake of …’
 
11 κεκτήσεται Future perfect. Have a look at this rare form at GE pp. 309–310, 
#284–285. You will see that it is middle or passive, has reduplication and uses 
future endings.
Translation for 15B
She approached all the altars which [are] throughout the house of Admetos and 
she garlanded them and addressed them in prayer, unweeping, without lamenta-
tion, and the coming disaster did not change the graceful nature of her complex-
ion. Then rushing into her bedroom and [falling onto] her bed, then indeed she 
wept and said these things: ‘O bed, where I lost my virgin maidenhood to this 
man for whose sake I die, farewell. For I do not hate you; you have destroyed me 
alone; for shrinking from betraying you and my husband, I die. Some other 
woman will have you for her own; she could not be more chaste, but perhaps [will 
be more] fortunate.’

210 
Section 15C
15C
Page 187
 
5 πολλά Neuter plural used as an adverb, meaning ‘often’.
 
10 ἄλλοτ’ ἄλλον ‘at one time one, at another time another’. 
 
12 κοὔτις Crasis of καὶ οὔτις.
page 188
 
16 λελήσεται Future perfect of λανθάνομαι (GE pp. 309–310, #284–285).
 
17 που The enclitic που can mean ‘I suppose’. Here it gives the answer ‘I 
suppose he does’ to the question the Chorus ask.
 
19 χεροῖν This is a dual ending. You will have this explained to you in Section 
17. Translate ‘in both hands’.
 
22 χειρός Literally ‘of his hand’. Translate ‘in his hands’.
Translation for 15C
FEMALE SERVANT And embracing [the bed], she kissed it and bedewed all the bed with 
a ﬂ ood [of tears] welling from her eyes. But when she had had enough of many 
tears, she went headlong, throwing herself from (lit. falling out of) the bed, and 
often going out of the bedroom she turned back and ﬂ ung herself back again on 
the bed. Her children, clinging to their mother’s robes, were weeping. She, 
taking them into her arms, embraced now one, now the other, as she was on the 
point of dying. All the servants were weeping throughout the house, pitying 
their mistress. She stretched out her right hand to each of them, and no one was 
so low-born that she did not speak to him – and was addressed by him in return. 
Such are the evils in the house of Admetos. And, if he had died (lit. having 
died), he would, to be sure, have perished, but escaping death he has so much 
grief – which he will never have forgotten.
CHORUS 
Does Admetos grieve over these evils, if he must be deprived of a good 
woman?
F.S. 
Yes, he weeps, holding his dear wife in his arms, and begs her not to forsake 
(lit. betray) him, seeking the impossible. For she is dying and wastes away 
through the disease. Exhausted, a pathetic weight in his arms, but nevertheless 
still breathing (although [just] a little), she wishes to look towards the rays of 
the sun – as [she] never [will] again – but now for the last time.
Tragic verse metre
Read GE pp. 311–313, #287–290 and try to scan the ﬁ rst four lines of section 
14B. Then read aloud to yourself as much of 14B as you can, trying to bring out 
the iambic rhythm first of all. Then read it naturally.

211
Section Sixteen: Ofﬁ cial justice – ships, state and 
individuals
In this section you will meet a number of different features of grammar and syntax 
that are clearly described in GE pp. 315–318, #291–294. Notice particularly μή 
+ aorist subjunctive = ‘don’t …’ (GE #292), and ϕοβοῦμαι μή + subjunctive = 
‘I am afraid that something may happen’ (GE #293).
Also there are verbal nouns ending in -τέος which express obligation (‘must’), 
GE #294–295.
16A
Page 192
 
3 ἀθύμως ἔχοντι Agrees with Ἀριστάρχῳ. ἔχω + adverb expresses the state that 
someone is in, e.g. καλῶς ἔχω ‘I am well’, κακῶς ἔχω ‘I am in a bad way.’
 
10 τοὺς ἐξηγητάς These were state ofﬁ cials who advised what to do in cases of 
murder. Apollodoros’ next question shows two of the procedures which they 
might advise on.
 
13 ἐπεποιήκει What tense? see GE p. 315, #291.
 
 ἠδικήκει What tense?
 
17 διεξελθόντι δέ μοι … οὐκ ἔϕασαν ἐξεῖναι … Literally ‘to me having related 
… they said that it was not possible to …’
 
 ἐπεπόνθη What verb? What tense? Try πάσχω πείσομαι ἔπαθον πεπόνθα.
Translation for 16A
Apollodoros is going straight towards Ilisos, walking along the road outside the 
wall, beneath the wall itself. When he is at the gate, there he meets Aristarchos 
the son of Ariston, who is very depressed. Apollodoros, seeing Aristarchos 
coming towards him, addresses him.
APOLLODOROS Where are you going to and where have you come from, Aristarchos?
ARISTARCHOS From the agora, Apollodoros, and I am going home.
AP. 
But, my friend, you seem to me to be depressed. For you seem to be upset 
about something. Tell me then, for what purpose were you spending your time 
in the agora?
AR. 
I went to the ofﬁ cials, Apollodoros.
AP. 
What do you say? Did you go to them about puriﬁ cation, as it seems, or about 
burial?

212 
Section 16B
AR. 
Yes, my friend. I went for this reason (thus) being angry with a violent man, 
Theophemos by name, for what he had done. For this man had wronged me 
particularly, going into the farm and offering violence to my family and what is 
more killing an old woman who was a freedwoman. Taking this tragedy to 
heart and wanting to take revenge on this man, I went to the ofﬁ cials, but when 
I had told them what I had suffered and what Theophemos had done, they said 
that it was not possible to take revenge in the way I had in mind.
16B
Page 194
 
1 μὴ ἀπορήσῃς, μηδὲ ἀθυμήσῃς μή + aorist subjunctive = ‘Don’t …’ (GE pp. 
315–316, #292).
 
2 ἀθυμητέον, προθυμητέον See GE pp. 317–318, #294–295. Verb forms in 
-τέoς mean ‘must’.
 
5 διέξει What tense? What person? This is the second person singular of διέξειμι.
 
6 ϕοβοῦμαι μὴ σ’ ἀπολέσω See GE p. 316, #293. Fears for the future in 
primary sequence can be expressed by μή + subjunctive. That is what we have 
here. Note that although this looks like a future indicative at ﬁ rst sight, it is in 
fact the aorist subjunctive. The future is ἀπολῶ, the ﬁ rst aorist indicative is 
ἀπώλεσα and its subjunctive is therefore ἀπολέσω.
 
15 βοηθήσω What mood and tense is this? compare ἀπολέσω. ἵνα + subjunctive 
expresses purpose.
 
18 συμβουλεύσωμαι What mood and tense after ἵνα?
 
19 χάριν γὰρ εἴσομαι Have you remembered that εἴσομαι is the future of οἶδα?
Translation for 16B
APOLLODOROS Don’t despair, Aristarchos, and don’t be despondent any longer. For you 
must not be upset by what has happened nor be despondent. One must not 
despair but take heart. We must consider this matter from the beginning. 
Therefore don’t regard me without respect (do not hold me in dishonour), but 
take heart, concentrating in every way on this, how you will relate the affair to 
me as clearly as possible. Speak now, my friend, and do not conceal anything.
ARISTARCHOS But I am afraid that I may ﬁ nish you off in telling you. For it is not a 
short story.
AP. 
Don’t be afraid that this will happen. For I have time to spare (leisure). Tell me 
therefore, and don’t hold back.
AR. 
Then I must tell everything from the beginning, as it seems. And indeed, 
Apollodoros, it is ﬁ tting for you to hear it (the hearing is ﬁ tting for you), for 
you are a clever prosecutor and reasonably experienced in legal matters. What 
then?
Do you want to listen while we go for a walk or while we sit down? The 
path along the Ilisos is in every way suitable for us to speak and to listen as we 
go.

 
Exercises for section 16A–B 
213
AP. 
Why not? For it is not yet the stiﬂ ing midday heat. I am very eager to listen, so 
that I can help you in your despair and despondency. So that, if in your walk 
you go all the way to Megara, I shall not stop accompanying you, so that I can 
learn what has happened. You speak, so that when I have heard I can take 
counsel with you.
AR. 
Certainly. I shall be grateful to you, if you listen.
AP. 
And indeed I shall be grateful to you if you speak.
AR. 
The gratitude would be twofold. Listen, then.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 16A–B
THE PLUPERFECT
16A–B: 1
ἐτετιμήκης 
 
you (s.) had honoured
ἐτεθήκει 
 
he had placed
ἐτεθνήκεμεν  
we had died
ἐβεβλήκεσαν  
they had thrown
ἐβεβήκη 
 
I had gone
ἐπεφιλήμεθα  
we had been loved
ἐδεδούλωντο  
they had been enslaved
ἐκεκρατήκετε 
you (pl.) had conquered, held power
μή + SUBJUNCTIVE
16A–B: 2
1. don’t (s.) do this 
μὴ τοῦτο ποίει
2. don’t (pl.) run 
μὴ δράμητε
3. don’t (pl.) stay 
μὴ μένετε
4. don’t (s.) fall, die 
μὴ πέσῃς
5. don’t (pl.) say this 
μὴ λέγετε ταῦτα
VERBS OF FEARING
16A–B: 3
1. they are afraid he came, arrived
 
φοβοῦνται μὴ ἀφίκηται
2. we are afraid they ﬂ ed
 
φοβούμεθα μὴ φύγωσιν
3. he is afraid we stayed
 
φοβεῖται μὴ μείνωμεν
4. you (pl.) are afraid he was enslaved
 
φοβεῖσθε μὴ δουλωθῇ
5. I am afraid they did not ﬁ ght
 
φοβοῦμαι μὴ οὐ μάχωνται

214 
Section 16C
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 16A–B
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. Prevent the man. 
μὴ κωλύσητε τὸν ἄνδρα.
 
b. Take revenge on your friends. μὴ τιμωρήσησθε τοὺς ϕίλους.
 
c. Despise the gods. 
μὴ καταϕρονήσῃς τῶν θεῶν.
 
d. Cast your vote. 
μὴ θῇ τὴν ψῆϕον.
 
e. Forget this matter. 
μὴ ἐπιλάθησθε τούτου τοῦ πράγματος.
 
f. Tell the argument of the defence. μὴ κατείπῃς τὸν τῆς ἀπολογίας λόγον.
 
g. Remember all the arguments. 
μὴ μνημονεύσητε πάντας τοὺς λόγους.
 
h. Take the young men. 
μὴ παραλάβῃς τοὺς νεανίσκους.
 
i. Hold back. Restrain yourself. 
μὴ ἐπίσχῃς.
 
j. Be eager. 
μὴ ἐπιθυμήσητε.
 
k. Be despondent. 
μὴ ἀθυμήσῃς.
2. a. We are afraid that, hearing this, the man may be disheartened.
 
b. I am dreadfully despondent in case my friend may not do this.
 
c. Take care (see that) you do not tell lies to the jurors about what happened.
 
d. I am afraid that Demosthenes did not save the men.
3. a. We must consider these things in detail. ἡμᾶς/ἡμῖν ἀκριβῶς σκεπτέον 
  περὶ ταῦτα.
 
b. You must go home. σοὶ/σὲ ἰτέον οἴκαδε.
 
c. They must help. βοηθητέον αὐτοὺς/αὐτοῖς.
 
d. The man must endure the disaster. τῷ ἀνδρὶ/τὸν ἄνδρα οἰστέον τὴν 
  συμϕοράν.
 
e. You must make war. ὑμᾶς/ὑμῖν πολεμητέον.
 
f. It is necessary to send you home. οἴκαδε πεμπτέον σέ.
16C
Page 196
 
1 ὅθεν ‘from where’; this is the relative form of the interrogative πόθεν ‘from 
where?’.
 
 ἵνα μάθῃς ‘so that you may learn’. ἵνα + subjunctive expresses purpose.
 
4–5 ἐξιούσης τῆς ἀρχῆς Genitive absolute, ‘the ofﬁ ce ﬁ nishing (going out)’.
 
6 καίπερ δέον καίπερ + participle = although … δέον is the neuter singular of 
the participle of δεῖ, used impersonally ‘although it being necessary …’ (GE 
p. 320, #296).
 
7 ἦν τότε, ὅτε … ‘There was at that time, when …’ Note τότε and ὅτε.
 
10 ὡς τάχιστα See GE p. 321, #297. ὡς + superlative = ‘as … as possible’.
 
13 ἐξῆν What verb does this come from? Imperfect of ἔξεστι.
 
 οὐκ ἐξόν Accusative absolute ‘it not being possible …’
 
14 γράϕει Χαιρέδημος Note the change to present tense for vividness.
 
14–15 ἵνα … προστάττωμεν καὶ ἀναγκάζωμεν Purpose clause.

 
Exercises for section 16C 
215
 
15 ὃς ἂν μὴ ἀποδιδῷ Indeﬁ nite clause: ‘whoever does not return them’.
 
18 ἦν Back to the past tense. Note that as the main verb is now in the past we are 
in historic (or secondary) sequence and so the verbs in the ἵνα clause which 
follows are in the optative mood, not in the subjunctive, as they were before, in 
primary sequence. See GE p. 286, #265.
 
19 δέον Accusative absolute again. ‘It being necessary …’
Translation for 16C
I want therefore to tell you the origin of the enmity towards Theophemos (from 
where it arose) so that you may learn what happened and know that he wronged 
not only me but also the people and the Boule (Council). For I happened to be 
holding the ofﬁ ce of trierarch, and as trierarch I had to receive the equipment and 
the trireme from Theophemos; for you know very well that it is necessary for 
someone who has been a trierarch, when his term of ofﬁ ce expires, to hand over 
the trireme and its equipment to the person who is going to become trierarch, so 
that he too can prepare the ship. But although it was obligatory for Theophemos 
to hand over the equipment, I received none of the equipment from him. And 
moreover, there was at that time, when I was about to become a trierarch, great 
danger to the city because of the rebellion of the allies, so that it was necessary 
for the trierarchs to send out a rescue operation of triremes quickly. But although 
it was necessary for us to send out the ships as quickly as possible, there was no 
supply of equipment for the ships in the dockyard. For those who owed it had not 
given back the equipment, among whom was Theophemos.
In addition to this, there was not in the Piraeus an unlimited supply of sailcloth, 
tow and rope, so that it was not possible to buy them. And since it was not pos-
sible to buy them, and the people who owed them had not given them back, 
Chairedemos proposes a resolution so that we who have been appointed as trier-
archs may order and compel those who had been trierarchs (whoever had not 
given it back) to give back the equipment. And the resolution orders us to get the 
equipment in whatever way we can so that we may prepare the ships as quickly 
as possible and send out the rescue mission.
Therefore there was great necessity for me to get the equipment so that I could 
prepare the ship and, having prepared it, send it out as quickly as possible. Since 
it was necessary for me to do this, I went to Theophemos in order to get the 
equipment.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 16C
THE ACCUSATIVE ABSOLUTE
16C: 1
1. ἐξὸν ἡμῖν ἀπιέναι
 
it being possible for us to go away
 
since we can go away

216 
Revision exercises for section 16C
2. δέον ὑμᾶς θεραπεύειν τὰς γυναῖκας
 
it being necessary for you to look after the women
 
since you must look after the women
3. δόξαν/δοκοῦν μοι ποιῆσαι τοῦτο
 
it seeming best to do this
 
because I thought it best to do this
4. τοῖς παῖσιν ἐξὸν παίζειν
 
it being possible for the children to play
 
since the children are allowed to play
5. δέον τοὺς ἄνδρας ἐκδοῦναι τὰς θυγατέρας
 
it being necessary for the men to give their daughters in marriage
 
since the men/husbands must give their daughters in marriage
16C: 2
ὡς ἄριστος, βέλτιστος  
the best possible
ὡς ἐλάχιστος  
 
the least/smallest possible
ὡς σαφέστατος 
 
the clearest possible
ὡς σωφρονέστατος 
 
the most prudent possible
ὡς φοβερώτατος 
 
the most frightening possible
ὡς ἀδικώτατος 
 
the most unjust possible
ὡς μέγιστος  
 
the biggest/greatest possible
ὡς κάκιστος, χείριστος 
the worst possible
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 16C
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. It is necessary for the one who owes it to the city to give back the 
  equipment to the one who is about to become trierarch. I went to 
  Theophemos.
 
  δέον τὸν ὀϕείλοντα τῇ πόλει τὰ σκεύη παραδιδόναι τῷ 
  τριηραρχήσοντι, ἐγὼ ὡς τὸν Θεόϕημον προσῆλθον.
 
b. Then it is not possible for me to prepare the trireme. I went to the 
  Council.
 
  εἶτα οὐκ ἐξόν μοι τὴν τριήρη παρασκευάζειν, προσῆλθον πρὸς τὴν 
  βουλήν.
 
c. It was necessary for us to prepare the ships as quickly as possible. 
  Chairedemos proposes a resolution.
 
  δέον ἡμᾶς παρασκευάζειν ὡς τάχιστα τὰς ναῦς, γράϕει Χαιρέδημος 
  ψήϕισμα.
 
d. It was not possible to buy any of the things needed in the Piraeus.
 
  The trierarchs were not able to prepare the ships.
 
  οὐκ ἐξὸν ἐν τῷ Πειραιεῖ οὐδὲν πρίασθαι ὧν ἔδει, οἱ τριήραρχοι οὐκ 
  ἐδύναντο παρασκευάζειν τὰς ναῦς.

 
Exercises for section 16D 
217
16D
You have already met the idea of sequence of tenses in clauses in indirect speech 
introduced by ὅτι. See GE p. 286, #265, where the verb in the subordinate clause 
is indicative in primary sequence and optative in secondary sequence.
In purpose clauses (and indeﬁ nite clauses and fears for the future) the sequence 
of tenses is: primary – subjunctive, secondary – optative. See GE p. 323, #299, 
and p. 325, #300.
Page 198
 
1 Note genitive absolute followed by accusative absolute followed by aorist 
participle agreeing with the subject of the verb.
 
2 ἐκέλευoν αὐτὸν ϕράσαι ‘ordered him to tell’ (aorist inﬁ nitive).
 
3 ὁπόταν ‘when(ever)’; ὁπότε + ἄν denotes an indeﬁ nite clause.
 
5 Note the use of the imperfect. The situation was continuing until the action in 
the next sentence.
 
6–7 ἠρόμην … πότερον … εἴη, ἀπεκρίνατο … ὅτι … εἴη Two clauses in indirect 
speech in secondary sequence with the verb in the subordinate clause in the 
optative.
 
10 ἦλθον … ἵνα ἴδοιμι Purpose clause in secondary sequence: ‘so that I might 
see him’.
Translation for 16D
But since Theophemos was not there and it was not possible for me to see him, 
going to Euergos, the brother of Theophemos, I asked for the equipment and told 
him to tell Theophemos. For there is a resolution of the Boule to get the equip-
ment in whatever way we can, whenever the people who owe it do not return it. 
Therefore I made my request and delayed for some days so that Euergos might 
tell Theophemos, but Euergos did not give back the equipment, but kept abusing 
me. So, having taken as many witnesses as possible, I asked him whether the 
property was shared or not, and when I asked, Euergos answered that the property 
was not shared and that his brother lived separately.
Having found out, therefore, from somewhere else where Theophemos lived, 
and taking an ofﬁ cial from the board of ofﬁ cials, I went to the house of 
Theophemos to see him.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 16D
PURPOSE CLAUSES
16D: 1
1. The woman came to take her.
 
ἵνα λάβοι αὐτήν
2. I saw the men ﬂ eeing with the intention of saving themselves.
 
ὅπως σώσειαν αὑτούς

218 
Section 16E
3. The man gave money to the woman in order to persuade her.
 
ἵνα πείσαι αὐτήν
4. Where shall we go to give the food to the poor?
 
ὅπως διδῶμεν
REVISION EXERCISE FOR SECTION 16D
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. μὴ ἀθυμήσῃς, ὦ βέλτιστε.
2. ἆρα ϕοβῇ μὴ αὖθις πάσχῃς τι ὑπὸ τούτων τῶν πονηρῶν;
3. καίπερ τὸν Θεόϕημον δέoν ἀποδοῦναι τὰ σκεύη, οὐ δύναμαι 
ἀναγκάζειν αὐτὸν ταῦτα ποιῆσαι.
4. πρόσειμι πρὸς τὴν βουλὴν ἵνα ψήϕισμα γράϕωσιν.
5. ἦλθον πρὸς τὴν ϕίλου τινὸς οἰκίαν ἵνα πυθοίμην ὅπου οἰκοίη ὁ 
Θεόϕημος.
16E
Notice GE p. 325, #300 about indeﬁ nite clauses in primary and secondary 
sequence. Note that in primary sequence the indeﬁ nite clause has subjunctive + 
ἄν, in secondary sequence it has the optative without ἄν.
Page 199
 
1–2 Note the use of the imperfect, here and later in this section. Aristarchos was in 
the process of making his demands, and Theophemos kept refusing.
 
2 ὅπου ἂν νῦν γε τυγχάνῃ ὤν Primary sequence.
 
3 ὅπου ὢν τυγχάνοι Secondary sequence.
 
10 εἴ τινας ἴδοι Indeﬁ nite clause in secondary sequence.
 
 ἵνα μάρτυρές μοι εἶεν … Purpose clause in secondary sequence.
 
10–11 καλέσαντος δὲ τοῦ παιδὸς καὶ παρόντων μαρτύρων τῶν ὑπ’ αὐτοῦ 
κληθέντων Genitive absolutes.
 
11–13 ἐκέλευον … ἢ … ἢ … ‘I ordered him … either to … or to …’
 
13 ληψοίμην Notice the future optative, representing a future indicative in direct 
speech, the sequence being historic (secondary).
Translation for 16E
Having knocked at the door, I asked where he was, and the woman answered that 
‘he was not inside, wherever he now happened to be’. Finding that he was not 
inside, I told the woman who answered to go after him, wherever he happened to 
be. And when Theophemos arrived, after the woman had fetched him, I asked 
him for the register of the equipment and showed him the resolution of the Boule, 
which ordered me to get the equipment in whatever way I could. And indeed I 
was not the only one who acted in this way, but others of the trierarchs [did] too, 
whenever someone did not give back the equipment.

 
Revision exercises for section 16E 
219
But when the resolution had been shown to him, and the register had been 
requested, Theophemos did not hand it over. Therefore, before I did anything 
else, I ordered my slave to summon the citizens from the road, if he could see any, 
so that they might be witnesses for me of what had been said. And when the boy 
had summoned them, and when the witnesses summoned by him were present, I 
began to request Theophemos again either himself to follow me to the Boule, if 
he said that he did not owe the equipment, or to return the equipment. If not, I 
said that I would take securities from him in accordance with the laws and the 
resolutions.
EXERCISE FOR SECTION 16E
INDEFINITES IN SECONDARY SEQUENCE
16E: 1
1. If he does not do this … εἰ μὴ ποιοίη τοῦτο…
2. When(ever) I see him … ὁπότε ἴδοιμι αὐτόν…
3. Who(ever) they order … ὅντινα κελεύοιεν…
4. When(ever) I learn … ἐπειδὴ μάθοιμι…
5. If you give me those things … εἴ μοι διδοίης ταῦτα…
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 16E
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. He wanted to collect the equipment so that he could prepare the trireme.
 
  βούλεται κομίζεσθαι τὰ σκεύη, ἵνα τὴν τριήρη παρασκευάζῃ.
 
b. I am afraid that Euergos may not explain the matter to Theophemos.
 
  ἐϕοβούμην μὴ Εὔεργος οὐ δείξειε τὸ πρᾶγμα τῷ Θεοϕήμῳ.
 
c. I was telling the slave to summon the citizens, so that they might be 
  witnesses for me of what had been said.
 
  κελεύω τὸν παῖδα καλέσαι τοὺς πολίτας, ἵνα μάρτυρές μοι ὦσι τῶν 
  λεχθέντων.
 
d. They do not cease following so that they may learn what has happened.
 
  οὐκ ἐπαύοντο ἑπόμενοι, ἵνα τὰ γεγενημένα μάθοιεν.
2. a. i(i) Whenever he came in, he used to see the woman sitting down.
 
  (ii) When he came in, he saw the woman sitting on the altar.
 
b. (i) I asked the slave where his master was.
 
  (ii) I was asking the woman to fetch her master, wherever he was.
 
c. (i) I had already found out that he happened to be married.
 
  (ii) The master ordered him to give back to the city whatever he 
   happened to have.
 
d. (i) The slave summoned all the citizens whom he could see from the 
   road so that they could be witnesses.

220 
Section 16F
 
  (ii) The slave was ordered to summon any citizens he saw from the 
   road to be witnesses
 
e. (i) It seemed to us that each word we spoke about Love should be as 
   beautiful as possible.
 
  (ii) Lysander, having arrived in Aegina, gave back the city to the 
   Aeginetans, having collected as many of them as he could.
16F
Page 200
 
2 ἑστηκυῖαν Perfect participle of ἵστημι: ‘standing’.
 
5 ἐπεπύσμην What tense is this? It would have been a gross breach of good 
manners and of social conventions for a man to enter another’s house without 
invitation if that house contained a wife. This convention is further illustrated 
in Section 17.
 
 γεγαμηκὼς εἴη This is the perfect optative, made up of the perfect participle 
+ the optative of εἰμί. See GE p. 328, #301.
 
8 πεπονθὼς ἦ This is the equivalent of the pluperfect indicative, made up of the 
perfect participle + the imperfect indicative of εἰμί: ‘all I had suffered’.
 
9 ἐπεπόνθη This is the usual form of the pluperfect indicative.
 
10 ἁλῶναι See GE p. 329, #302 for the principal parts of ἁλίσκομαι, ‘to be 
captured’ or ‘to be convicted’.
Translation for 16F
Since he was willing to do none of these things, although he was ordered by me, 
I started to lead away the woman who had been standing at the door, the one who 
had gone to fetch him, so that I might have a witness. And Theophemos took her 
away from me, and I let the woman go, but went into the house to get some secu-
rity for the equipment. For the door happened to be open (to have been opened). 
And before going in, I had found out that he was not married. As I went in, 
Theophemos struck me on the mouth with his ﬁ st and I, having called those 
present to witness, defended myself.
Since, then, the securities were taken away by Theophemos, and I had been 
struck by him, I went to the Boule to show my bruises and to tell all that I had 
suffered while trying to fetch the equipment for the city. And the Boule, being 
annoyed at what I had suffered and seeing what state I had been reduced to by 
Theophemos, wanted him to be convicted and ﬁ ned. Therefore I was ordered by 
the Boule to impeach him on the grounds that he was committing a crime and 
hindering the expedition. For the Boule considered that it was not I who had been 
insulted but itself and the people and the law. For indeed the Boule knew very 
well that once Theophemos was impeached he would be convicted and ﬁ ned. 
Then when the judgment was passed in the Boule, and when the members of the 
Boule found out that the city had been offended and that I had been wronged, 
Theophemos was convicted and ﬁ ned. And although it was possible for him to 

 
Section 16G 
221
be ﬁ ned ﬁ ve hundred drachmas, I, although I had been wronged, was moderate 
and reasonable and agreed to a ﬁ ne of twenty-ﬁ ve drachmas.
EXERCISE FOR SECTION 16F
ἁλίσκομαι
16F: 1
 
1. ἔγνω 
ἔβη 
ἑάλω
 
2. βάντες 
γνόντες 
ἁλόντες
 
3. ἁλοίη 
βαίη 
γνοίη
 
4. βῆναι 
γνῶναι 
ἁλῶναι
 
5. γνῷ 
βῇ 
ἁλῷ
16G
Page 201
 
4 παυώμεθα See GE p. 330, #303; ‘let us cease’.
 
 ἕως ἄν + subjunctive. See GE pp. 330–331, #304; ‘until (ever) …’ 
 
4–6 παυώμεθα, καθιζώμεθα, ἕως ἂν … γένηται Note the subjunctives.
Page 202
 
15 πῶς πρὸς σε διέκειτο ὁ Θεόϕημος; διακεῖμαι + adverb describes someone’s 
attitude or state of mind. ‘How was Theophemos disposed towards you? What 
was his attitude to you?’
 
 κακῶς Answers πῶς in the previous sentence.
 
15–16 τεκμαιρομένῳ Agrees with ἔμοιγε: ‘it seems to me inferring …’
Translation for 16G
APOLLODOROS You were indeed moderate and reasonable about the things which 
Theophemos had done, Aristarchos. But why don’t we stop walking? 
For the heat is now stiﬂ ing, and if I walk more, I shall ﬁ nd myself in a state 
of great distress. Let us stop then, until I can recover myself from my 
weakness.
ARISTARCHOS We must certainly do this if you want. (This must be done if it seems 
good to you.) Let us stop therefore and sit in peace beside the Ilisos, until the 
heat becomes gentler.
AP. 
Lead on then, and let us consider where we shall sit down.
AR. 
Do you see that very tall plane tree?
AP. 
Of course.
AR. 
There is shade there and a slight breeze and grass to sit on, if we like. Let us go 
there then, so that we can sit and rest.
AP. 
Would you lead on? By Hera, it is a beautiful spot. Now that we have got here, 
let us remain until I recover from my weakness.

222 
Section 16H
 
But you, Aristarchos, as you were saying, won the impeachment case. What 
[happened] after that? How was Theophemos disposed to you? (What was his 
attitude to you?) Badly, as it seems to me judging from the evidence of your 
despondency. Why then do you not ﬁ nish telling me the story, if nothing prevents 
you? Since it seems to me that I shall keep you here until you tell me everything.
AR. 
But naturally nothing prevents me from going through the story, until 
everything has been told. Listen then, so that you may learn more clearly.
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 16G
‘LET US…’ (SUBJUNCTIVE)
16G: 1
1. ἀκούσωμεν
2. μὴ ἀπίωμεν
3. λαβώμεθα
4. στῶμεν
5. μὴ δῶμεν
ἕως ἄν ‘UNTIL’
16G: 2
1. ἕως ἂν ὁρῶμεν τοὺς ἄνδρας
 
until (such time as) we see the men
2. ἕως ἂν ὑπισχνῆται ἀκούσεσθαι
 
until (such time as) he promises to listen
3. ἕως ἂν διδῶσι τὰ χρήματα
 
until (such time as) they give the money
4. ἕως ἂν παραλαμβάνητε τοὺς μάρτυρας
 
until (such time as) you (pl.) hand over the witnesses
5. ἕως ἂν εὑρίσκω τὴν ναῦν
 
until (such time as) I ﬁ nd the ship
16H
Page 202
 
1 ἐνενικήκη Tense?
 
2–3 Notice the use of the participles in the narrative. They match the order of 
events: ἐνθυμούμενος … βουλόμενος … ἔλαχε … ϕάσκων … (the main verb 
is underlined).
 
6–8 More participles: παρασχόμενος … ὑποσχόμενος … ἐξηπάτησε …
 
9–10 Again: ζημιωθείς … προσελθὼν … ἐκέλευον …
 
11 ἀντὶ τοῦ καταδίκην ἀπολαβεῖν Here ἀντί + genitive is followed by the 
inﬁ nitive used as a noun: ‘instead of accepting the ﬁ ne’.

 
Revision exercises for section 16F–H 
223
Translation for 16H
I had in fact won the impeachment case, but this, as they say, was the start of the 
trouble. For Theophemos at once took the ﬁ ne very much to heart and, wanting to 
be revenged, he brought a suit for assault against me, declaring that I had begun the 
blows at the door. I kept quiet, not fearing that the jurors would condemn me. For I 
least of all expected that I would be convicted, since I was innocent. But Theophemos, 
having produced lying witnesses, Euergos his brother and Mnesiboulos his cousin, 
and promising that he would hand over [for torture] the body of the woman who had 
been standing at the door (which he has not done), deceived the jurors, who were 
persuaded to cast their vote for Theophemos. When I had incurred a ﬁ ne in this way, 
not many days later, going to Theophemos I asked him to accompany me to the bank 
to collect the ﬁ ne. But Theophemos instead of collecting the ﬁ ne went to my farm.
EXERCISE FOR SECTION 16H
SEQUENCE OF TENSES
16H: 1
1. φοβοῦνται μὴ αὐτοὑς ζημιώσῃ.
 
They are afraid that he may punish them.
2. ᾖα ἵνα εἰσαγγείλαιμι τὸν μάρτυρα.
 
I went to summon the witness.
3. εἴ σοι πείθοιμι πείσοιο ἂν σύ.
 
If I were to persuade you, you would persuade me.
4. ἐφοβεῖτο μή τις ἐκφύγοι.
 
He was afraid that anyone might escape.
5. ἐὰν εἴπῃ, ἀκούω ἀκούσομαι
 
If you speak, I listen, Ι will listen.
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 16F–H
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. Sentences
 
1. τὸ ψήϕισμα ἐκέλευσε τοὺς τριηράρχους κομίζεσθαι τὰ σκεύη ᾧ 
  τρόπῳ ῥᾷστα δύναιντο.
 
2. ὁπότε οἱ τριήραρχοι καταλάβοιέν τινα μὴ ἀποδιδόντα τὰ σκεύη, 
  ἐπανῆλθον πρὸς τὴν βουλήν.
 
3. παυώμεθα πορευόμενοι καὶ καθιζώμεθα.
 
4. ἐνταῦθα μενοῦμεν ἕως ἂν ἐκ τῆς ἀσθενείας συλλέγωμεν ἡμᾶς 
  αὐτούς.
 
5. πρὶν οἰκάδε ἐπανιέναιι, ἐκεῖ καθιζώμεθα ἕως ἂν ἠπιώτερον γένηται 
  τὸ πνῖγος.

224 
Revision exercises for section 16F–H
2. Prose
οὐκ ἐξὸν κομίζεσθαι τὰ σκεύη, καὶ τῆς πολέως ἐν μεγάλῳ κινδύνῳ οὔσης, τὴν 
βουλὴν ἔδει πράττειν τι ἵνα τριήρων βοήθειαν ὡς τάχιστα παρασκευάζοιμεν. 
ἐγὼ μὲν οὖν προσελθὼν πρὸς τὴν τοῦ Θεοϕήμου οἰκίαν, καὶ αὐτὸν οὐκ ἔνδον 
ὄντα καταλαβών, ἐϕοβούμην μὴ τὰ σκεύη οὐκ ἀποδιδοίη. ὥστε ὁ μὲν 
Χαιρέδημος ψήϕισμα ἔγραψεν, οἱ δὲ τριήραρχοι τῷ μὴ ἀποδίδοντι, εἴ τινα 
εὕροιεν, ἐδείκνυον τὸ ψήϕισμα.
E – TEST EXERCISE 16
When this man arrived in Thasos, I collected as many of the citizens as I could 
as witnesses, and the marines, and I went to him in the agora in Thasos. I told him 
to take over the ship from me as my successor, and to pay me the expenses for 
the period which I had served as trierarch beyond my time. I wanted to calculate 
this with him in detail while witnesses of what had been spent were with me, so 
that, if he objected to anything, I could refute his objection at once. For I had 
written down all the expenses in detail. But when I made this challenge, Polykles 
answered that he could not care less what I said (that there was no concern to him 
of what I said).
Having found Polykles there and the trierarchs and their successors and some 
others of the citizens, I went in immediately in front of the general and began to 
speak with him [i.e. Polykles]. I asked him to take over my ship from me, and to 
pay me the expenses for the extra time that I had served. When I challenged him 
in this way, he said: ‘Who could endure your madness and extravagance, you who 
alone of the trierarchs have your own private equipment and pay a great deal of 
money to the sailors? You have become a teacher of bad habits in the army, cor-
rupting the sailors and the marines, when you ought to be doing the same as the 
other trierarchs.’ When he said this, I answered him: ‘As for the sailors and the 
marines, if you say they have been corrupted by me, take the trireme yourself and 
provide sailors and marines for yourself who will sail with you without receiving 
any money. Take the ship, for it is no longer my business to be trierarch.’ When 
I said this, he answered that his joint-trierarch had not come to the ship: ‘I will 
not therefore take over the ship on my own.’

225
Section Seventeen: Private justice – trouble down 
at the farm
This continues the story begun in Section 16. Much of the syntax introduced 
continues to illustrate the primary – subjunctive, secondary – optative pattern. An 
important item of grammar is the verb (ἀϕ)ἵημι (GE pp. 336–339, #308). There 
will be more about this after 17A, before the exercise on it.
17A
Page 205
 
1–2 ἕως τὰ χρήματα παρέχοιμι See GE p. 336, #307. ἕως (‘until’) (ever) can 
introduce an indeﬁ nite clause with, in primary sequence, ἄν + subjunctive and, 
in secondary, optative without ἄν. See also GE p. 341, #309–310
Page 206
 
8 ᾖξαν This comes from the verb ᾄσσω ‘to dash’ or ‘to dart’. See 
vocabulary.
 
 ἕως ἅλοιεν. See GE p. 336, #307. An indeﬁ nite clause in secondary 
sequence.
 
10 ἐκβληθείσης δὲ τῆς θύρας Genitive absolute. This is the aorist passive 
participle. Can you recognise the verb it comes from? If not, look up (ἐκ)
βάλλω in the list of irregular verbs on GE pp. 436–442 #389.
 
10–11 εἰσελθόντες ἐπὶ τὴν γυναῖκά μου Notice the disgraceful intrusion into the 
women’s quarters. Compare this with Hagnophilos’ punctilious attitude in 17B.
 
11–12 πάντα τὰ σκεύη, ὅσα ἔτι ὑπόλοιπά μοι ἦν ‘all the furniture, as much as was 
still left to me’.
 
12 ἃ βούλοιντο Indeﬁ nite clause in secondary sequence: ‘whatever they wanted’.
 
15–16 Note the parts of ἀϕίημι. ἐλευθέρα ἀϕειμένη: perfect passive participle, 
‘having been released free’, i.e ‘having been freed’ (GE p. 338, #308).
 
22 ἕως εἰσέλθοιεν ‘until they came in’. Indeﬁ nite clause in secondary sequence.
Translation for 17A
Theophemos then did not allow me to pay him the money. For he did not wait 
until I produced the money, but going off, he took ﬁ fty soft-ﬂ eeced sheep of mine, 
which were being pastured by the shepherd. Before I knew what had happened, 
Theophemos had taken not only the sheep but also everything that was 

226 
Section 17A
accompanying the herd, and the shepherd along with them and then also a boy 
servant, who was returning a bronze water jar that had been borrowed from a 
friend and was very valuable. When all these things had been taken, Theophemos 
and Euergos went into the farm (I farm near the racecourse, and I have lived there 
since I was a youth), and ﬁ rst of all they dashed at the household slaves. But when 
the household slaves did not wait to be caught but escaped ﬁ rst (anticipated them 
escaping), they went to the house and broke open the door that leads into the 
garden. And when the door had been broken down, they rushed in on my wife 
and children, and carried out all the furniture that was left to me in the house, and 
they went off, taking whatever they liked.
In addition to this, before they entered the house, my wife happened to be 
having breakfast with the children in the courtyard, and with her was my old 
nurse, elderly now, a kindly and loyal creature who was a freedwoman (for my 
father had freed her. When she was freed by my father, she had lived with her 
husband. But when her husband died, since she was an old woman and there 
was no one to look after her, she came back to me. It was obligatory for me to 
look after her, since she had been my nurse). While they were having breakfast 
in the courtyard, these men charged in and found them and seized the furniture. 
While the furniture was being seized by them, the rest of the women servants 
(for they were in the tower, where they lodge) when they heard the tumult and 
the shouting, did not wait until they came in, but closed the tower before they 
charged it.
Grammar
ἵημι (stem ἑ) behaves exactly like τίθημι (stem θε) but it looks more complicated 
because its stem starts with a vowel instead of a consonant. Compare some of the 
tenses:
 
Present 
Imperfect 
Future 
Aorist 
Aorist pass.
Active 
τίθημι 
ἐτίθην 
θήσω 
ἔθηκα 
ἐτέθην
 
ἵημι 
ἵην 
ἥσω 
ἧκα 
εἵθην
Middle 
τίθεμαι 
ἐτιθέμην 
θήσομαι 
ἐθέμην
 
ἵεμαι 
ἱέμην 
ἥσομαι 
εἵμην
Participles 
τιθείς 
 
θήσων 
θείς 
τεθείς
 
ἱείς 
 
ἥσων 
εἵς 
ἑθείς
It is worth taking a great deal of trouble to learn ἀϕίημι, and to avoid confusing 
it with both εἰμί and εἶμι.
NB. εἰμί and εἶμι do not have rough breathings and ἵημι does; thus in com-
pounds the difference can be clearly seen, as for example in the inﬁ nitive ἀϕιέναι, 
whereas parts of εἰμί and εἶμι will appear as (e.g.) ἀπεῖναι or ἀπιέναι.
When you have learned it, try the following exercise, 17A: 2. (You may prefer 
to leave this until you have ﬁ nished reading the whole section.)

 
Exercises for section 17A 
227
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 17A
ἕως ‘until’
17A: 1
1. μένομεν ἕως ἂν ἔλθῃ.
 
We are staying until he comes.
2. ἐμάχοντο ἕως νικῷεν.
 
They were ﬁ ghting until they were victorious.
3. δραμεῖν βούλονται ἕως ἂν στῆναι μὴ οἷοί τ’ ὦσιν.
 
They are willing to run until they are unable to stand.
4. ἔδει σε εὔχεσθαι ἕως σωθείης.
 
You (s.) ought to have prayed until you were saved.
5. βουλεύονται ἕως ἂν συγχωρήσωσιν.
 
They are debating until such time as they agree.
(ἀφ)ἵημι ‘RELEASE, LET GO, SHOOT’
17A: 2
 1. ἔδωκε 
he gave 
ἀφῆκε 
he let go
 2. θές 
put! 
ἄφες 
let go!
 3. στήσουσιν 
they will set up 
ἀφήσουσιν 
they will let go
 4. διδοίη 
ἀφιείη 
 5. τιθέναι 
to place 
ἀφιέναι 
to let go
 6. ἵσταται 
he is rising 
ἀφίεται 
he is being released
 
it is being set up
 7. δόντας 
having given 
ἀφέντας 
having released
 
(m.acc.pl.)
 8. θῇ 
ἀφῇ
 9. στήσασθαι 
to set up 
ἀφέσθαι 
to release (for oneself)
 
(for oneself)
10. δώσεις 
you (s.) will give 
ἀφήσεις 
you (s.) will let go
11. ἔθεντο 
they placed 
ἀφεῖντο 
they let go
12. ἐστάθη 
it was set up 
ἀφείθη 
he/it was released
13. δεδώκασιν 
they have given 
ἀφείκασιν 
they have released
14. θείη 
ἀφείη
15. ἱστάμενοι 
setting up 
ἀφιέμενοι 
letting go
 
(for oneself) m.pl.
16. δοῦναι 
to give/have given 
ἀφεῖναι 
to release/have 
 
 
 
released
17. τεθήσεται 
it will be placed 
ἀφεθήσεται 
he/it will be released
18. σταθῆναι 
to have been set up 
ἀφεθῆναι 
to have been released
19. δοῦ 
give! 
ἀφοῦ 
let go!
20. θεῖσαι 
having put (f.pl.) 
ἀφεῖσαι 
having released

228 
Section 17B
EXERCISE FOR 17A
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. The slave girl has been set free by my father.
 
  (was set free (aor. pass.) / will be set free / is being set free / was being 
  set free)
 
b. My father released the slave girl.
 
  (is releasing / has released (perf. act.) / was releasing / will 
  release)
 
c. The slave girl, having been set free by my father, married a man who 
  had also been released by his master (perfect passive participles).
 
  (having been set free / having been released (aor. pass. part, f./m.))
 
  (while being set free / while being released (present passive participles 
  f./m.))
 
  (being about to be set free / being about to be released (future passive 
  participles f./m.))
 
d. The Athenians released the slaves who had fought in that sea-
  battle.
 
  (have released / are releasing / will release / were releasing)
17B
Page 207
 
2 τετιμημένα Perfect passive participle from τιμάω, which here means ‘valued’ 
or ‘reckoned’.
 
2–5 The words in parenthesis explain how Aristarchos’ wife knew the facts which 
she is speaking about. She knew the sheep had been taken because a neighbour 
had told her, and she knew that the money was at the bank because she had 
heard it from Aristarchos.
Page 208
 
7 οὐ παύονται πρὶν ἂν λάβωσι For πρίν meaning ‘until’ see GE p. 342, #311. 
It follows the normal pattern for indeﬁ nite clauses, with subjunctive + ἄν in 
primary, and optative without ἄν in secondary sequence.
 
9 εἰς τὸν κόλπον The basic meaning of κόλπος is ‘a curve’. Hence it can 
mean ‘breast’, ‘lap’, ‘the fold of a garment’, ‘a bay in the coastline’; cf. Latin 
sinus.
 
10 ἀϕείλοντο What verb does this come from? Try ἀϕαιρέω.
 
10–11 οὕτω διέθεσαν τὴν γραῦν ὥστε … ‘They treated the old woman in such 
a way that …’; διατίθημι + adverb is a common idiom. See GE pp. 342–343, 
#313.
 
13–14 οὕτω πονηροὶ ἦσαν ὥστε … ‘They were so wicked that …’ οὕτως … ὥστε 
…, ‘so … that, as a result …’ This expresses a result clause. See GE 

 
Section 17B 
229
pp. 345–346, #314–317. The use of indicative shows that the result actually 
happened.
 
19–21 Notice that Hagnophilos, in contrast with the unprincipled brothers, observes 
the conventions and will not enter Aristarchos’ house while he is absent.
παρόντος δὲ τοῦ κυρίου, εἰσῆλθεν ἄν ‘If the master had been present he 
would have gone in.’ This represents an unfulﬁ lled condition in past time 
(ἄν + aorist indicative), but instead of the ‘if’ clause, there is a genitive 
absolute.
 
24–25 ἕως … εἶπεν ‘until he told them’. Here ἕως is followed by the indicative 
because this is a deﬁ nite time (not an indeﬁ nite time). See GE p. 341, #309.
 
 εἴη The optative is used because this is indirect speech in secondary 
sequence.
Translation for 17B
So they did not get in there, but they carried out the furniture from the rest of the 
house. My wife told them not to do this, saying that the furniture was hers and 
was valued as part of her dowry, and said that ‘You have the ﬁ fty sheep and the 
boy and the shepherd, which are equal in value to the ﬁ ne.’ (For one of the neigh-
bours had knocked on the door and reported this.) ‘And the money is waiting for 
you at the bank.’ (For she had heard this from me.) ‘Therefore do not take the rest 
of the furniture before my husband returns with the ﬁ ne, particularly as you also 
have the value of the ﬁ ne.’
Although my wife said this, they did not stop until they had taken very many 
things. But the nurse, when she saw them inside, took the cup which was lying 
beside her from which she had been drinking, and put it in the fold of her dress, 
so that they should not take it. But Theophemos and Euergos, his brother, seeing 
her, snatched it away and treated the old woman so badly that her arms and wrists 
were blood-stained when she was pinioned and dragged along by them. And she 
had scratches on her throat, and was being throttled by them and her chest was 
bruised. They were so shameless that they did not stop trying to strangle the old 
woman and beating her until she fell to the ground, and then they took the cup 
from the fold of her dress.
When the neighbours’ servants heard the noise and the shouting, they saw my 
house was being plundered by them. Some of them called to the passers-by from 
their own roof-tops, and others, going into the other road, and seeing Hagnophilos 
passing, told him to stand by. And Hagnophilos came, summoned by Anthemion, 
who is my neighbour, but he did not enter my house (for the master of the house 
was not present; if the master had been present, he would have gone in), but, 
being in Anthemion’s farm, he saw the furniture being carried out and Euergos 
and Theophemos coming out of my house. And they were going away not only 
taking my furniture, but also leading my son, as if he were a household slave, 
until Hermogenes, one of my neighbours, met them and said that he was my 
son.

230 
Revision exercises for section 17B
EXERCISES FOR 17B
ἕως ‘UNTIL, WHILE’ and πρίν ‘UNTIL’
17B: 1
1. until he fell, should fall Used indeﬁ nitely, optative shows this must be in 
secondary sequence, therefore in the past.
2. until he fell Used deﬁ nitely, indicative shows it happened.
3. until such time as he falls Indeﬁ nite in primary sequence.
4. before falling πρίν + inﬁ nitive.
5. until such time as we fall Indeﬁ nite in primary sequence.
Nos. 3 and 5 might change in poetry by dropping the ἄν.
διατίθημι, διάκειμαι ‘TREAT, BE TREATED’
17B: 2
1. διετίθετο 
he was treated
 
διέκειτο
2. διατιθέμενοι 
being treated (m.n.pl.)
 
διακείμενοι
3. διατιθεῖτο 
optative
 
διακέοιτο
4. διατίθεσθe 
you (pl.) are being treated /be treated!
 
διακεῖσθε
5 
διατίθενται 
they are being treated
 
διακεῖνται
NB. All the διατίθημι items have been treated as passive, but could equally 
well be middle.
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 17B
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
1. a. The slave girls stayed in the tower until the men went away.
 
b. The woman asked Theophemos not to take the furniture until her 
  husband returned.
 
c. ‘But do not ask this either’, said the neighbour. ‘For these men are 
  violent and will not cease plundering the house until they have taken 
  everything away.’
 
d. I was in the Piraeus while my house was being robbed, and I did not go 
  home until the things that had happened were reported to me there.
 
e. Before I left my house, I had told my wife that the money was lying at 
  the bank.
2. a. ἡ γραῦς κακῶς διέκειτο διὰ τὸ συγκοπῆναι.
 
  The old woman was in a bad way because she had been beaten up.

 
Section 17C 
231
 
b. Θεόϕημος καὶ Eὔεργος οὕτω διέθεσαν τὴν γραῦν ὥστε ὕϕαιμοι 
  ἐγένοντο oἱ βραχίονες.
 
  Theophemos and Euergides treated the old woman in such a way that 
  her wrists were blood-stained.
 
c. ἡ γυνὴ εἶπε τῷ Θεοϕήμῳ ὅτι τὸ ἀργύριον κεῖται ἐπὶ τῇ 
  τραπέζῃ.
 
  The woman told Theophemos that the money was lying in the 
  bank.
 
d. ἡ γραῦς ἐνέθηκεν εἰς τὸν κόλπον τὸ κυμβίον ὅ παρέκειτο αὐτῇ.
 
  The old woman put the cup, which was lying beside her, in the fold of 
  her dress.
17C
Page 209
 
1 τὰ γεγενημένα This is the neuter plural of the perfect participle of γίγνομαι, 
‘the having happened things’.
 
3 τὰ ἐκπεϕορημένα Perfect passive participle.
 
3–4 τὴν γραῦν οὕτω διακειμένην ὥστε … See GE pp. 342–343, #313 for the 
relationship between διατίθημι and διακεῖμαι. See GE pp. 345–346, #314–317 
for the use of ὥστε + inﬁ nitive to express a result clause: ‘in such a state that 
(as a result) she was in danger of her life’. Note that ὥστε + the indicative 
stresses that the result actually happened.
 
4–5 καὶ ἀκούων τῆς γυναικὸς τὰ γενόμενα Remember that after ἀκούω 
the source of the sound (his wife) is in the genitive, and the thing heard 
(the happenings) are in the accusative. Cf. ‘He heard the words of the 
woman.’
 
6–8 ἐκέλευον δ᾿ αὐτὸν … ἀπολαμβάνειν … ἀκολουθεῖν … θεραπεύειν … 
εἰσάγειν … ἐκέλευον is followed by a series of inﬁ nitives, ‘ordered him 
to …’
 
8 ὃν βούλοιντο Why is the optative mood used here? See GE p. 325, #300 for 
indeﬁ nite clauses in secondary sequence.
 
9 κακά με πολλὰ εἶπεν Note that κακὰ λέγειν, like κακὰ ποιειν (53), takes a 
double accusative: ‘to speak bad words [to] someone’, ‘to abuse someone’.
Page 210
 
11 μεθ᾿ ἑτέρων ὁμοίων αὑτῷ ‘with others like himself’. Note that αὑτῷ = 
ἑαυτῷ (the reﬂ exive form) and so has a rough breathing.
 
15–16 This might be the moment to learn the numerals at GE pp. 346–347, 
#318. You will ﬁ nd useful resemblances to Latin and to mathematical terms 
(pentagon, hexagon, octagon, decimal, kilometre) as well as correspondence 
between the cardinal, ordinal and adverb forms. NB. also μύριοι and 
myriads.
 
17 τὰ ἡρπασμένα What participle? What verb? Try ἁρπάζω.

232 
Section 17C
 
17–18 οὐκ ἔϕη ἀποδώσειν … ‘He said that he would not give back …’ Note the 
position of οὐ. It is always placed before ϕημί (rather than before the inﬁ nitive), 
meaning ‘He refused …’ or ‘He denied …’
 
20 εἰσεληλυθότα Can you recognise this? If not, look up the principal parts of 
ἔρχομαι, GE pp.436–442, #389.
 
21 οὕτως ἐπλεονέκτει … ὥστε … A result clause is introduced: ‘was so 
grasping that…’
 
22 ἐκτετεισμένης τῆς δίκης Genitive absolute. You should be able to recognise 
the participle from the context. If not, check ἐκτίνω in the vocabulary.
 
23 οἴχοιτο Why is the optative used here? Because it is indirect speech in 
secondary sequence.
Translation for 17C
Well then, when these events were reported to me in the Piraeus by neighbours, 
I went to the country, but I was not now able to catch these men (for I did not 
arrive until they had gone), but seeing all the things that had been carried off 
from the house, and the old woman in such a state that she was in danger of her 
life, and hearing from my wife what had happened, I was very angry and went 
to Theophemos on the next day at dawn in the city, taking witnesses. I told him 
ﬁ rst to accept the ﬁ ne and to follow (me) to the bank, then to look after the old 
woman whom they had beaten and to bring in whatever doctor they liked. While 
I was saying this and earnestly entreating him, Theophemos got angry and 
abused me vigorously (lit. said many bad things to me). But then Theophemos 
came along with reluctance, causing delays and saying that he wanted to get 
witnesses himself. But this Euergos immediately set out from the city with 
others like himself to go to my farm. The remaining furniture, whatever had 
been in the tower on the day before and did not happen to be outside, had been 
carried down by me because of our need. Euergos, breaking open the door 
(which they had broken open on the previous day as well), went off taking my 
furniture.
Meanwhile I was paying the money to Theophemos, one thousand, three 
hundred and thirteen drachmas and two obols, in the presence of many witnesses, 
and I asked him to give back the sheep and the slaves and the furniture which had 
been seized by him, but Theophemos refused to give them back to me (said he 
would not give them back to me) .When he gave this answer, I made those present 
witnesses of this reply, and I paid the ﬁ ne. For I did not know that Euergos had 
gone to my house on that day, but I paid the ﬁ ne at once. But Theophemos was 
so grasping that he took the ﬁ ne and kept the sheep and the slaves and the furni-
ture, and, the moment the ﬁ ne had been paid, a messenger came to me, a stone-
mason who was working on the monument near by, saying that Euergos had gone 
away again, after carrying off the rest of the furniture from the house.
Grammar
Don’t forget to learn the numerals.

 
Section 17D 
233
EXERCISE FOR SECTION 17C
RESULT CLAUSES
B/C – MORPHOLOGY AND SYNTAX
Note that ὥστε + inﬁ nitive has negative μή, while ὥστε + indicative states a 
matter of fact and therefore has negative οὐ.
1. a. Those men were so wicked that they (actually) beat the woman and took 
  away the cup from her.
 
  ὥστε τύπτειν τὴν γυναῖκα και ἀϕελέσθαι ἀπ᾿ αὐτῆς τὸ κυμβίον.
 
  The men were wicked enough to beat the woman and take away the cup 
  from her.
 
b. Those men were so abominable that they were (actually) not ashamed to 
  rush in to my wife.
 
  ὥστε μὴ αἰσχυνέσθαι εἰς τὴν γυναῖκα εἰσιόντες.
 
  Those men were so abominable as not to be ashamed at going in 
  to my wife.
 
c. They are doing everything so that they do not (as a result) pay the 
  penalty.
 
  ὥστε μὴ δίκην διδόναι.
 
  They do everything so as not to pay the penalty.
 
d. The fellow reached such a pitch of impiety that, coming into the shrine, 
  he (actually) dragged a suppliant away from the altar.
 
  ὥστε εἰσελθὼν εἰς τὸ ἱερὸν ἱκέτην ἀϕελκύσαι ἀπὸ τοῦ βωμοῦ.
 
  The fellow reached such a pitch of impiety as to come into the shrine 
  and drag a suppliant away from the altar.
Note that GE pp. 345–346, #314–317 suggest that ὥστε + inﬁ nitive should be 
translated by ‘so as to’ and ὥστε + indicative by ‘so that’. This may be useful for 
the exercise, and the distinction between the ‘potential’ and the ‘actual’ result is 
a valid one; but in practice it will often sound more natural to translate ὥστε + 
inﬁ nitive by ‘so that’, which is the commonest way to express result in English, 
just as ὥστε + inﬁ nitive is the commonest way to express result in Greek.
17D
Page 211
 
1 Note that ἔδει is past: ‘What then was I to do?’ or ‘What ought I to have done?’
 
3–4 συνεκόπη Can you recognise this? It is 3rd s. second aorist passive (i.e. 
no θ).
 
4–5 ἐβουλήθη, ἐδυνήθην See GE p. 350, #324 for a list of deponent verbs which 
have their aorists in passive form.
 
6 ἕκτῃ oὔσῃ ἡμέρᾳ Dative expressing a point of time: ‘on the sixth day’.
 
 ὕστερον ἤ ‘later than …’, ‘after …’

234 
Section 17D
 
7–8 ἵνα εἰδείην ‘so that I might know’. Purpose clause in secondary sequence.
 
 ὅ τι ποιητέον ‘what must be done’.
 
9 τό τε ὁρμηθῆναι αὐτούς … καὶ ἐλθεῖν τό is followed by two inﬁ nitives used 
as nouns with the subject in the accusative: ‘the fact that they had charged … 
and that they had come …’
 
 εἰς τοῦτο ἀσελγείας ἐλθεῖν ὥστε … ‘to reach such a pitch of depravity that 
…’ Literally ‘to reach this [point] of depravity that …’ See GE pp. 345–346, 
#317.
 
12 διὰ τὸ μὴ ἀϕεῖναι Once again the inﬁ nitive is used as a noun: ‘owing to 
the fact that she did not give up the cup’, ‘because she would not give up the 
cup’.
 
15 εὐλαβήθητι Aorist passive imperative. See GE p. 349, #321.
 
 εὐλαβήθητι μή … ‘take care lest …’ The construction is the same as after a 
verb of fearing. See GE p. 316, #293 and p. 332, #305.
 
16 The case for prosecution could only be brought by a relation or the master of 
the deceased. The old woman was neither family nor slave. Therefore 
Aristarchos could not legally bring a case against Theophemos and Euergos for 
her murder. All he could do was to go through a ritual of puriﬁ cation to free 
himself and his household from the pollution of the death, and try to think up 
some other means of vengeance.
Translation for 17D
What should I have done, Apollodoros, and where should I have turned, since 
the furniture had been carried off, the old woman was in danger of her life, and 
the ﬁ ne had been paid? But then, if nothing else, I ordered Theophemos to look 
after the old woman who had been beaten and to bring in whatever doctor he 
wished. But when Theophemos was not willing and I could not persuade him, I 
brought in a doctor whom I had used for many years. But yesterday, on the sixth 
day after they had charged into the house, my old nurse died. I was at once very 
angry, and I went early (as I have said) to the ofﬁ cers to ﬁ nd out what should be 
done about this, and I told them all that had happened, the fact that they had 
charged into the farm and reached such a pitch of depravity that they had not 
been ashamed to burst in on my wife and children, and to beat up the old woman 
for the sake of a cup, and to carry off the furniture. In addition to this I recalled 
the goodwill of the woman and that she had died because she would not give up 
the cup.
Having heard the story from me, the ofﬁ cers gave this advice: ‘Since you 
yourself were not present, but your wife and children, and since other witnesses 
did not appear for you, take care that you do not make a public denunciation of 
anyone by name, and that you do not bring a suit for murder before the king 
archon. For the woman is not one of your family, nor is she a slave, from what 
you say. But having puriﬁ ed yourself on behalf of your household and yourself, 
bear the tragedy as easily as you can, and take vengeance in any other way you 
like.’

 
Section 17E 
235
EXERCISES FOR SECTION 17D
MORE IMPERATIVES
17D: 1
1. λυθήτω 
let him/her be set free (s.)
2. κολασθέντων 
let them be punished
3. λήφθητε 
be taken (pl.)
4. τιμήθητι 
be honoured (s.)
5. γράφητε 
be written (pl.)
17D: 2
 
1. γνῶτε 
3. στήτω 
5. γνώτω
 
2. βῆθι 
4. φαθί
17E
This section introduces two new pieces of syntax, the deliberative subjunctive 
(GE p. 351, #325–327), and correlatives (GE pp. 351–352, #328). Otherwise it 
brings in as much as it can of the syntax that you have learned in Sections 16 and 
17. Make sure that you have digested it and fully understand it all.
Page 212
 
1 ποιήσω, τράπωμαι, γένωμαι All these are deliberative subjunctives. See GE 
p. 351, #325. ‘What am I to do?’, ‘Where am I to turn?’ etc.
 
2 χρῶμαι χράομαι + dative means ‘to use’ or ‘to treat someone’. Here ‘I do not 
know what to do with myself’ (GE p. 351, #327).
 
2–3 οὕτως … ὥστε … + inﬁ nitive indicates result.
 
 ἄν + optative expresses potential: ‘could’ or ‘would’.
 
3 οὐδ᾿ ἄν … ‘Nor would I dare to lie even if I knew well that …’ Here you 
need to understand ‘dare to lie’ repeated from the previous line.
 
4–5 οὐ γὰρ οὕτω τούτους μισῶ ὡς ἐμαυτὸν φιλῶ For the use of correlatives see 
GE pp. 351–352, #328. ‘I do not hate them in such a way as I like myself.’ 
‘I do not hate them as much as I like myself.’
 
5 τί δρῶμεν Why is the subjunctive used here?
 
6 σκοπῶμεν ‘Let us consider’.
 
 μὴ φοβηθῇς μή … ‘Don’t be afraid lest …’ μή + aorist subjunctive expresses 
the prohibition, and the second μή introduces the fear for the future with its 
verb in the subjunctive in primary sequence (optative in secondary): GE #292, 
and #293, or Reference Grammar 404.
 
7 δεινὸν ἂν εἴη Note the ἄν. What effect does it have?
 
7–8 The desire to inﬂ ict vengeance on one’s enemies was regarded as natural and 
proper by the majority of people in the ancient world. (Socrates was unusual in 
taking the opposite view that it is never right to do wrong, even in retaliation.) 

236 
Section 17E
In general, vengeance was just as much a matter of honour for the man in the 
street as for the Homeric hero. Thus a friend could be expected to give all 
possible help in making plans for revenge.
 
10 χάριν εἴσομαι What tense of οἶδα is this?
 
11 ποιώμεθα, ἀναλάβωμεν What mood and why?
 
12 οὐ κυνὶ πλανητέον ‘It ought not to be wandered by a dog,’ ‘Not even a dog 
should be wandering about.’ See GE p. 317, #294 for verbal nouns expressing 
obligation. The idea comes from the opening of Menander’s Misoumenos.
 
12–13 ποίησον, ἀϕικοῦ What part of the verb is this? Revise aorist imperatives, if 
you are not sure: GE #198–199, and #206–207.
 
13 καὶ μὴ ἄλλως ποιήσῃς Literally this means ‘Don’t do otherwise’, but it is 
frequently used to beg someone to do what you suggest: e.g. the Greek for ‘Do 
please come’ would be ‘Come and don’t do otherwise.’
 
 ἵνα βουλευσώμεθα Why the subjunctive? It is the verb in a purpose clause in 
primary sequence. See GE #298–299 or Reference Grammar #399.
 
16 πρὶν ἂν συμβουλεύωμαι For πρίν meaning ‘until’ see GE #311–312 and 
compare this with indeﬁ nite clauses in general. See GE Reference Grammar 
p. 457, #398.
 
16–17 ἐὰν θεὸς ἐθέλῃ ‘If god is willing.’ For future conditions see GE pp. 
304–305. #282, and for conditions in general, Reference Grammar p. 460, 
#402.
Translation for 17E
ARISTARCHOS So be it. You have the story. What am I to do? Where am I to turn? 
What will become of me? For I do not know what to do with myself. For 
surely I would not be so foolish as to dare to lie to the jurors, nor would 
I do so, even if I knew that I would convict my enemies of doing wrong. For 
I do not dislike them as much as I like myself. Consider then what we are 
to do.
APOLLODOROS Let us consider together, my good friend, and do not be afraid that 
I won’t share your enthusiasm. For indeed it would be a terrible thing 
for a good friend not to share his friends’ desire to be revenged on their 
enemies. So it is necessary for me most of all to help you in your 
perplexity.
AR. 
Indeed I shall be grateful to you, my excellent friend, for sharing my 
enthusiasm.
AP. 
But let us do this later and resume our talk. For it is raining, and, by the Gods, 
not even a dog should be wandering about now. But you act thus for me. Come 
to my house tomorrow at dawn, please come (and don’t do otherwise), so that 
we can take counsel about these very things.
AR. 
I am delighted by what you say, Apollodoros, and I agree that I must do 
nothing before I have consulted with you. I will come to you tomorrow, if God 
wills it.
AP. 
Let us do this. Let us be going, then.

 
Revision exercises for section 17 
237
REVISION EXERCISES FOR SECTION 17
D – ENGLISH INTO GREEK
1. Sentences
 
1. αἱ θεράπαιναι οὐκ ἔμειναν ἕως ἅλoιεν.
 
2. οὐκ ἐπαύσαντο ἐκϕοροῦντες τὰ σκεύη ἐκ τῆς οἰκίας πρὶν πάντα 
  ἁρπάσειεν (ἁρπάζοιεν).
 
3. τὸν ἐμὸν υἱὸν ἦγον ἕως γείτων τις εἶπεν ὅτι υἱὸς οὐ δούλου ἀλλὰ 
  πολίτου εἴη.
 
4. ὠργίσθην ὅτι ὑβρισταὶ ὄντες οὕτω διέθεσαν τὴν τίτθην ὥστε περὶ 
  ψυχῆς ἐκινδύνευεν.
 
5. οὕτως ὠλιγώρουν ὥστε εἰσελθόντες εἰς τὴν οἰκίαν ἐκϕορεῖν τὰ 
  σκεύη.
2. Prose
There are a several alternative ways of translating the English into Greek. It is 
quite possible, for example, to use a subordinate clause instead of a participle, or 
to choose a different Greek word in some places.
ἡ δὲ ἐμὴ γυνὴ ὀργισθεῖσα, ‘μὴ τὰ σκεύη λάβητε’, ἔϕη. ‘ἆρ’ οὐκ ἤδη 
πεντήκοντα ἔχετε πρόβατα; περιμένετε δή· οὐ γὰρ δεῖ ὑμᾶς ἀπελθεῖν πρὶν 
ἂν ἐπανελθῇ ὁ ἐμὸς ἀνήρ.’ οἱ δὲ οὐκ ἀκούσαντες τῆς γυναικὸς ταῦτα 
λεγούσης, πάντα λαβόντες ἀπῆλθον. μετὰ δὲ ταῦτα, ἄγγελός τις προσελθὼν 
πρὸς τὸν Πειραιᾶ ἐπήγγειλεν ἐμοὶ τὰ γεγενημένα. ἐγὼ δέ, πάντ᾿ ἀκούσας, 
ἐκινδύνευσα οὕτως ὀργισθῆναι ὥστε τὸν Θεόϕημον αὐτὸς παίειν. τῇ δὲ 
ὑστεραίᾳ, προσελθὼν πρὸς αὐτόν, ἐκέλευσα ἀκολουθεῖν ἐμοὶ ἐπὶ τὴν 
τράπεζαν ἵνα τὸ ἀργύριον τὸ ἐνταῦθα κείμενον συλλάβῃ.
TEST EXERCISE 17
SOCRATES Let us talk then, my dear Phaedrus; certainly we have the time, it seems (lit. 
there is leisure, as it seems). And at the same time the cicadas seem to me to be 
watching us, singing and talking to one another. If they were to see us, like 
most people, at midday not talking but sleeping and being bewitched by them 
through idleness of thought, they would rightly laugh at us, regarding us as 
slaves who sleep like sheep round the spring. But if they see us talking and 
sailing uncharmed past them as if they were the Sirens, perhaps they would be 
pleased and grant us the gift which they have from the gods to give to men.
PHAEDRUS What is the gift? Don’t keep it a secret. For I really am unaware of it, as it 
seems.
SOC. 
What am I to do? It is clear that I must tell you. For, although it is proper to call 
you a lover of music and literature, I am afraid that you may appear to be 
uncultured if you are ignorant of such matters. It is said that once upon a time 
cicadas were men, before the Muses existed. But when the Muses were born 
and song appeared, then some men of that time were so astounded and listened 
with such delight that while singing they neglected food and drink and did not 

238 
Revision exercises for section 17
notice that they were dying. And from these men the race of cicadas later 
sprang, receiving this gift from the Muses, that they should need no food, but 
that without food or drink they should sing until they died, and after that, going 
to the Muses, they should tell them which of men honoured the Muses. 
Therefore, for many reasons we must have some conversation and we must not 
sleep in the middle of the day.
ΡΗ. 
We must indeed make conversation.
From now on you may ﬁ nd it increasingly useful to use the Reference 
Grammar.
# 352–388 
has tables of nouns, adjectives, pronouns, verbs.
# 389  
provides an essential list of irregular verbs and their principal 
 
    parts
  
 
(ultimately you should make it your goal to know all these by 
 
 
heart).
# 390–391 
gives lists of prepositions and particles.
# 392–394 
give uses of ὡς,(ὥς), participles and inﬁ nitives.
# 396–406 
gives a summary of the main syntactical constructions.

239
Section Eighteen: How Zeus gave justice to men
This passage is reproduced unadapted from Plato, Protagoras 320c–323a. The 
style is not typical of Plato. It is likely that he is here imitating the style of the 
sophist Protagoras, into whose mouth he puts the speech, but the iambic rhythms 
also suggest that the myth may be based on a long established story which had 
been told often in verse, perhaps in tragedy. Whatever its origins, it is a fascinat-
ing passage which describes the creation of the world and the social necessity for 
man of possessing δίκη and αἰδώς (a sense of right and a moral awareness of 
others and their response to one’s actions). The introduction to this section in 
Reading Greek is important.
18A
Page 216
 
1 The verb ‘to be’ is often used in the sense of ‘to exist’.
 
2 χρόνος εἱρμαρμένος ‘allotted’ in the sense of ‘allotted by destiny’, ‘fated’.
 
 γῆς ἔνδoν ‘within the earth’.
 
3 τῶν = ἐκείνων. Here the article is used as a demonstrative pronoun. This is rare 
in Attic Greek, though normal in Homer.
 
 ὅσα πυρὶ καὶ γῇ κεράννυται ‘as many as are mixed with ﬁ re and earth’. This 
refers to air and water, the other two elements. (Some Greek philosophers 
believed that all things were composed of four elements, earth, air, ﬁ re and 
water.)
 
5–6 νεῖμαι, νείμαντος, νέμει, νέμων Note the repetitions, and also that the aorist 
stem of νέμω is νειμ-.
 
6 ἐπίσκεψαι Can you recognise this? What kind of imperative is it? (2nd s. 
aorist.)
 
6–9 Note the careful patterning of the phrases:
 
 τοῖς μέν … τοὺς δέ …, τοὺς δέ … τοῖς δέ … (ABBA) followed by ἃ μὲν 
γὰρ σμικρότητι ἤμπισχε … ἃ δὲ ηὖξε μεγέθει …
 
10 καὶ τἆλλα = καὶ τὰ ἄλλα ‘and he assigned the other qualities also …’
Translation for 18A
There was once a time when gods existed but mortal creatures did not. When the 
appointed time came for these also to be born (time of birth), the gods formed 
them within the earth out of a mixture (having mixed) of earth and ﬁ re and of the 

240 
Section 18B
things that are compounded with ﬁ re and earth. And when they were ready to 
bring them to the light, they ordered Prometheus and Epimetheus to equip them 
and assign powers suitable to each one. Epimetheus asked Prometheus [to allow 
him] to do the distributing himself, ‘And when I have done it’, he said, ‘you 
review it’. Having thus persuaded him, he began to distribute the powers. In his 
distribution, he gave some creatures strength without speed, but to the weaker he 
gave speed; some he armed with weapons, while for others, to whom he gave an 
unarmed nature, he devised some other power for their protection. To those on 
whom he bestowed smallness, he allotted winged ﬂ ight or an underground dwell-
ing; those whom he enlarged in size, he protected by that very quality; and he 
assigned the other qualities also, balancing everything in this way. He planned 
these things, taking care that no species should be destroyed.
18B
Page 218
 
1 ἀλληλοϕθοριῶν This is made up of two words: ἀλλήλους which means ‘One 
another’, and the root ϕθορ as in διαϕθορά ‘destruction’. Cf. διαϕθείρω.
 
 ὥρας ‘hours’ or ‘seasons’.
 
2 στερεοῖς ‘thick’, ‘solid’. Steroids thicken your physique, stereophonic sound 
is ‘dense’ or ‘thick’.
 
 δέρμασιν Cf. ‘dermatology’, ‘dermatitis’, ‘epidermis’, ‘pachyderm’.
 
3 Notice ἱκανοῖς μέν … δυνατοῖς δέ … and understand a repeat of ἀμῦναι in 
the second phrase.
 
 εἰς εὐνὰς ἰοῦσιν ‘for them going to bed’. What part of the verb is ἰοῦσιν?
 
4 τὰ αὐτὰ ταῦτα ‘these same things (i.e. skins)’. This is the subject of ὑπάρχοι. 
Remember that a n. pl. subject has a singular verb.
 
5 ἄλλοις ἄλλας ‘different foods for different creatures’.
 
6–7 ἔστι δ᾿ οἷς ἔδωκεν … ‘and there were some to whom he gave …’ This use of 
ἔστι + relative pronoun is a fairly common idiom.
 
7, 8 ὀλιγο-γονία, πολυ-γονία These should be guessable. The root γεν-, γον- 
stands for ‘race’, ‘birth’, ‘family’. Herodotus (3.108) also points out that 
animals that are preyed on reproduce rapidly.
Translation for 18B
When he had provided enough means of escape for them from mutual slaughter, 
he contrived comfort against the seasons sent from Zeus, clothing them with thick 
hair or tough skins, sufﬁ cient to ward off the winter’s cold and capable of with-
standing also the summer’s heat; and he planned that when they went to bed, the 
same skins should serve as individual and natural coverings for each one. And he 
shod them too, some with hooves and some with tough and bloodless skin. Next 
he provided different sorts of food for them; for some grass from the earth, for 
some fruit from the trees, and for some roots. And there were some to whom he 
gave the ﬂ esh of other animals for their food. These he made less fertile, while 

 
Section 18C 
241
those on whom they fed, he made more fertile, thus conserving the species (pro-
viding safety for the race).
18C
Page 219
 
1 ἅτε + participle means ‘since’, ‘in as much as’. See GE p. 356, #330.
 
 καταναλώσας ἀναλίσκω (ἀναλωσ-) means ‘I spend’ or ‘I expend’.
 
2 τὰ ἄλογα ‘the speechless ones’. The power of speech is what distinguishes 
man from beasts, and so τὰ ἄλογα becomes the normal word for ‘beasts’.
 
3 ἠπόρει ὅ τι χρήσαιτο This is a deliberative question in secondary sequence: 
‘What am I to use?’ becomes ‘He was in doubt what he was to use.’ See GE p. 
356, #329.
 
 ἀποροῦντι δὲ αὐτῷ ἔρχεται Προμηθεύς ‘to him being in doubt, Prometheus 
comes …’
 
6–7 ἀπορίᾳ οὖν σχόμενος … ἥντινα σωτηρίαν … εὕρoι See note on line 3 
above.
 
8 τὴν ἔντεχνον σοϕίαν ἔντεχνον is a compound adjective and has only two 
terminations; thus it does, in fact, agree with σοϕίαν.
 
 Hephaistos is the god of ﬁ re and the master-craftsman. Athene is the goddess of 
wisdom, and so both their attributes are reﬂ ected in the phrase. In addition, 
τέχνη covers both the skill of the craftsman and the creative genius of the artist, 
and so this phrase encompasses both meanings. It is difﬁ cult to ﬁ nd an adequate 
translation; possibly ‘technical knowledge’ would suit the context best here.
 
8–9 ἀμήχανον … γενέσθαι ‘for it was impossible for it (αὐτὴν = τὴν ἔντεχνον 
σοϕίαν) to be possessed (κτητήν) by anyone (τῳ = τινί) or to be useful 
(χρησίμην) without ﬁ re’.
 
9–10 Notice the contrast between τὴν περὶ τὸν βίον σοϕίαν and τὴν πολιτικήν. Man 
now has the skills to stay alive, but has not yet acquired social skills which 
enable him to live in a community.
 
10 ταύτῃ ‘in this way’.
Page 220
 
13 ἐϕιλοτεχνείτην This is a dual. See GE pp. 356–358, #331–332. The dual can 
be used in verbs, and in nouns and adjectives, when two people or things are 
the subject, usually when they are a pair, e.g. two hands, a chariot team or, as 
here, a couple. It is worth looking at the pattern of the duals, but it is not 
essential to learn them by heart. You will probably be able to recognise them 
when you meet them.
Translation for 18C
Now, since Epimetheus was not particularly brilliant, he did not notice that he 
had used up all the powers on the animals (he escaped his own notice having used 
up the powers). But the human race was still left over for him, without any 

242 
Section 18D
attributes, and he did not know what to do. While he was still at a loss, Prometheus 
came to inspect the work (the distribution) and he saw that the other creatures 
were well provided with everything, but that man was naked, unshod, without a 
bed and without weapons; and already the appointed day had come on which man 
too had to emerge from the earth into the light. Prometheus, therefore, being at a 
loss to ﬁ nd any protection for man, stole from Hephaistos and Athene the gift of 
technical skill together with ﬁ re – for without ﬁ re it was impossible for anyone 
to possess or use this skill – and so he gave it to man. In this way man acquired 
skill to keep him alive, but he did not have political skill; for that was in the 
keeping of Zeus, and Prometheus no longer had permission to enter the acropolis, 
the house of Zeus – moreover, the sentinels of Zeus were terrible. And so he 
secretly entered the house shared by Athene and Hephaistos in which they prac-
tised their art, and stealing Hephaistos’ art of working with ﬁ re and the other art 
of Athene, he gave them to man. As a result of this man had the means of life, but 
Prometheus, thanks to Epimetheus, so the story goes, had later on to stand trial 
for theft.
18D
Page 221
 
1 μοίρας Here this simply means ‘portion’, but it can mean ‘one’s portion in 
life’, hence ‘destiny’, ‘doom’. It can also mean ‘that which is rightly one’s 
portion’, hence ‘one’s due’. Μοῖρα (personiﬁ ed) is the goddess of fate. The 
μοῖρα referred to here is the skill of ﬁ re and the technical skill to use it, which 
were divine prerogatives.
 
2 θεoὺς ἐνόμισε Here νομίζω means ‘to acknowledge’, not ‘to think’.
 
 As Xenophanes (fr. 6) points out, man imagines gods in his own 
image:
 
 ‘But if cattle and horses and lions had hands or could draw and make works of 
art with their hands as men do, then horses would draw the images of their gods 
and make their bodies like horses, and cattle would make them like cattle, just 
like the body that each species possesses.’
 
5–11 This is a most ingenious explanation of the need for social skills. Men had to 
live in scattered groups because they had not the πολιτικὴ τέχνη to live 
peacefully and cooperatively in cities (or to organise an army). Whenever they 
tried, they had to give up and then in their small groups they once again fell 
prey to wild beasts.
 
5 κατ᾽ ἀρχάς This means ‘in the beginning’, ‘at ﬁ rst’.
 
 σποράδην This is an adverb, cf. English ‘sporadically’.
 
7 δημιουργική Α δημιουργός is a craftsman (from δῆμος and ἔργον).
 
9–10 ὅτ’ οὖν ἀθροισθεῖεν ‘whenever they gathered together’. The verb in the 
optative shows that this is an indeﬁ nite clause.
 
10 ἅτε οὐκ ἔχοντες ‘since they did not have’, ἅτε + participle expressing the 
cause.

 
Section 18E 
243
 
10–11 ὥστε … διεϕθείροντο The verb in the indicative, rather than the inﬁ nitive, 
shows that this is an actual result, something that actually took place.
Translation for 18D
Since man had a share in the portion of the gods, ﬁ rst of all, because of his divine 
kinship, he alone of living creatures believed in the gods and set to work to build 
altars and images of the gods; and secondly, he quickly discovered speech and 
names by his art, and invented houses and clothes and shoes and bedding and food 
from the earth. Thus provided for, men lived to begin with in scattered groups, 
and there were no cities. Therefore they were destroyed by the wild beasts, since 
they were in every way weaker than them, and the technical skill which was suf-
ﬁ cient help to them in getting food was not adequate for ﬁ ghting the beasts – for 
they did not yet have the political skill of which the art of war is a part. They did 
indeed seek to come together and to protect themselves by founding cities, but 
whenever they gathered in communities, they injured one another because they 
did not have political skills, with the result that they scattered again and were 
again devoured.
18E
Page 222
 
1 δείσας This is in no way related to δεῖ, but is the aorist participle of δείδω, 
an irregular verb. See vocabulary.
 
 Notice the position of πᾶν at the end of the clause, making it emphatic: ‘lest it 
might be destroyed totally’.
 
2 αἰδῶ τε καὶ δίκην Two immensely important words which have a wide range 
of meanings.
 
 αἰδώς means ‘shame’, ‘modesty’, the capacity to feel ashamed if you act 
wrongly to others; hence, respect for others and their rights. It contains an 
element of fear – men behave well through fear of what others may think of 
them if they do not. E. R. Dodds in The Greeks and the Irrational discusses the 
nature of the ‘shame culture’, and it is everywhere apparent in Homer – the 
heroes must not ‘lose face’.
 
 δίκη is here more abstract, although, as you already know, it can range from 
abstract justice to a legal case or the penalty inﬂ icted.
 
 In this passage the two words express the two qualities which make community 
living possible: respect for others and a sense of justice and the rule of law, or 
private morality and public observance of the law.
 
2 ἵν᾽ εἶεν … ‘so that they might be …’ A purpose clause in secondary 
sequence; the main verb πέμπει is a ‘historic present’. That means the present 
is used instead of the past to make the story more dramatic, but the narrative is 
still about a past event and the verbs in the subordinate clauses still reﬂ ect a 
secondary sequence.

244 
Section 18E
 
 κόσμοι κόσμος is another important and wide-ranging word. It means 
‘decoration’ (‘cosmetic’), ‘order’, and then ‘the thing that is ordered’, ‘the 
universe’ (‘the cosmos’) or the ‘world’ (‘cosmopolitan’). Here the sense is 
‘order’.
 
 δεσμοί These are ‘bonds’ or ‘fetters’. (Cf. δεσμωτήριον ‘a prison’.)
 
 Note once again the chiasmus (ABBA pattern) in πόλεων κόσμοι τε καὶ 
δεσμοὶ ϕιλίας, i.e. genitive, nominative – nominative, genitive.
 
3 ἐρωτᾷ Continuing use of the historic present. You will see that δοίη is 
optative, and thus reﬂ ects secondary sequence.
 
 τίνα οὖν τρόπον ‘in what way’. The accusative is used adverbially.
 
4 νείμω Can you recognise what mood this is, and why? It is not the future 
(νεμῶ), but it is the aorist subjunctive (aorist stem νειμ-), used in a deliberative 
question, ‘Am I to assign these (qualities) in this way?’ See GE p. 351, 
#325–326.
 
4 Be careful not to confuse εἷς with εἰς.
 
5 ἰδιώταις Often ἰδιώτης means ‘a private individual as opposed to one of a 
citizen group’, but here it simply means ‘individuals’. Notice how the meaning 
has deteriorated over the centuries into ‘idiot’.
 
6 θῶ, νείμω Do you recognise the deliberative subjunctives?
 
7 μετεχόντων Can you recognise this? ‘Let them all have a share …’
 
7–8 οὐ γὰρ ἂν γένοιντο πόλεις, εἰ ὀλίγοι αὐτῶν μετέχοιεν The optative mood of 
the verbs and presence of ἄν will tell you what sort of a condition this is. See 
Reference Grammar #402, p. 460.
 
8–9 τὸν μὴ δυνάμενον … κτείνειν, ὡς νόσον πόλεως This is the law they must 
enforce. The use of μή, rather than οὐ, makes the participle phrase indeﬁ nite: 
‘whoever is incapable of …’ rather than ‘the one who is not capable …’ Here 
the difference in meaning is slight, but in some cases it can be signiﬁ cant. The 
brutal extermination of those without the right qualities underlines the 
importance which Zeus attaches to them.
 
 κτείνειν Poetic. The normal prose use would be ἀποκτείνειν.
 
 οὕτω δή Introduces the conclusion, the summing-up of the meaning of the 
myth, which illustrates the difference between specialist knowledge and 
expertise, and the basic human qualities which all should share.
 
9–10 οἵ τε ἄλλοι καὶ Ἀθηναῖοι Literally this means ‘both the others and the 
Athenians’. In effect it means ‘the Athenians in particular’.
 
10 ὅταν μὲν … ᾖ λόγος ‘whenever the argument is concerned 
with …’
 
12–13 ὅταν δὲ … ἴωσιν A balancing and contrasting clause to the previous 
one.
 
14 προσῆκον Accusative absolute. See GE p. 320, #296, or Reference Grammar 
#395.
 
15 αὕτη, ὦ Σώκρατες, τούτου αἰτία Q.E.D. Protagoras rests his case.
 
 He goes on to describe how Athenian education was aimed, from earliest 
childhood, at developing the potential for political skill.

 
Section 18E 
245
Translation for 18E
Therefore Zeus, fearing that our whole race would be destroyed, sent Hermes to 
take to men the qualities of respect for others and a sense of justice so that there 
could be order in the cities and bonds of friendship uniting men. Hermes asked 
Zeus in what way he was to give justice and respect to men: ‘Am I to distribute 
these gifts in the same way as the skills have been allocated? They have been 
distributed in this way: one man having the skill of a doctor is sufﬁ cient for many 
individuals (laymen), and the same is true of other experts. Am I then to give 
justice and respect to men in this way, or am I to assign them to all men?’ ‘To all 
men’, said Zeus, ‘and let all men have a share; for there could never be cities if 
only a few people shared in these qualities as in the other arts. And moreover lay 
it down as a law from me that if anyone is incapable of sharing in justice and 
respect he must be put to death as a plague to the city.’
Thus it is for these reasons, Socrates, that, whenever the debate is about skill 
in architecture or any other expertise, the Athenians, like other people, believe 
that only a few are capable of giving advice, and if anyone outside these few gives 
advice, they do not tolerate it, as you say – reasonably in my view – but whenever 
they seek advice on political wisdom, which must always follow the path of 
justice and moderation, they rightly listen to every man, since they think it is 
proper for every man to have a share in this virtue or there would not be any cities. 
That, Socrates, is the reason for this.

246
Section Nineteen: The story of Adrastos
This passage is reproduced unadapted from Herodotus, Histories 1.34–45. 
Herodotus writes in the Ionic dialect (see Introduction). You will ﬁ nd that you 
get used to this quite quickly, and the vocabularies will help you as well. How-
ever, before you start, you may want to look at GE pp. 359–360, #333–334 ‘The 
Dialect of Herodotus’.
It is very important to read both the introduction on pp. 225–226 of RGT and 
the beginning of the story, pp. 227–229, which is translated for you.
19A
Page 230
 
1 νέμεσις ‘retribution’. This is not punishment for an evil act, but punishment 
for ‘thinking more than mortal thoughts’. Perpetual happiness is the prerogative 
of the gods and not of man. Croesus commits an act of ‘hubris’ by exhibiting 
pride in his continuing happiness, and thus attracts the vengeance of the gods.
 
2 ἑωυτόν = ἑαυτόν.
 
 ὀλβιώτατον Note the emphatic position.
 
 oἱ ‘to him’.
 
2–3 ἐπέστη ὄνειρoς The dream is personiﬁ ed; it ‘stood over him’, or ‘stood 
beside him’.
 
4 διέϕθαρτο Literally this means that ‘he had been destroyed’, a brutal word for 
‘handicapped’ (cf. ‘written off’), but it shows Croesus’ feeling that he had only 
one son, for all practical purposes.
 
5 ὦν = οὖν. Note this carefully. You will meet it frequently, and it is always easy 
to confuse it with ὤν ‘being’. Apart from the accent, its position near the 
beginning of a sentence should help to distinguish it.
 
6 ἀπολέει Here the future of ἀπόλλυμι means something like ‘will lose’ rather 
than ‘will destroy’. The form is uncontracted, as are many of the verbs.
 
 μιν ‘him’.
 
8 ἐωθότα δὲ στρατηγέειν μιν … Object of ἐξέπεμπε in the next line.
 
 οὐδαμῇ ‘nowhere’.
 
9–10 ἀκόντια δὲ καὶ δοράτια καὶ τὰ τοιαῦτα πάντα Objects of both ἐκκομίσας 
and συνένησε.
 
11 μή τί oἱ κρεμάμενον … ‘lest anything having been hung over him 
might…’

 
Section 19B 
247
Translation for 19A
After Solon had gone, great retribution from god, to make a reasonable guess, 
overtook Croesus, because he thought himself to be the happiest of all men. 
Straightaway a dream came to him when he was asleep which revealed to him the 
truth of the evils which were going to happen with regard to his son. Croesus had 
two sons, of whom one was disabled (for he was deaf and dumb), but the other was 
far superior to his contemporaries in every way; his name was Atys. And it was this 
Atys that the dream pointed out to Croesus that he would lose, struck by an iron 
spear-head. Then when he woke up and took counsel with himself, fearing the 
dream, he ﬁ rst brought a woman in marriage for the boy, and then, although he had 
been accustomed to command the Lydians in battle, Croesus no longer sent him 
out on this sort of venture anywhere, and he also removed javelins and spears and 
all such weapons as men use in war from the men’s quarters and stacked them in 
the inner chambers, lest anything hanging over the boy might fall on him.
19B
Page 232
 
1 ἔχοντος … τὸν γάμον ‘(with) his (οἱ) son having his marriage in hand …’
 
 ἀπικνέεται = ἀϕικνεῖται.
 
1–2 συμϕορῇ ἐχόμενος Literally ‘being held by disaster’, perhaps ‘gripped by 
disaster’.
 
 οὐ καθαρὸς χεῖρας ‘not clean in respect of his hands’. This is an accusative 
of respect. See GE p. 360, #335.
 
 ἐών = ὤν ‘being’.
 
3 καθαρσίου The neuter of the adjective καθάρσιος, ‘puriﬁ catory’, is used 
here as a noun; it is the object of ἐπικυρῆσαι. Catharsis is the rite of 
puriﬁ cation which the perpetrator of a crime (whether voluntarily or 
involuntarily committed) must undergo before he can cease to be regarded as 
polluted and return to normal life and relationships.
 
5 ἐπυνθάνετο The imperfect tense suggests that Croesus ‘began the process of 
ﬁ nding out’ or ‘wanted to ﬁ nd out’.
 
6 ὁκόθεν = ὁπόθεν; also in the next line κόθεν = πόθεν.
 
7 ἐπίστιος = ἐϕέστιος. This means literally ‘by the hearth’. A suppliant would sit 
by the hearth and was under the protection of Zeus Epistios. (Cf. 19F, line 10, 
p. 239.) Once he had been accepted into the house, the relationship of guest-
friendship would be established. Thus ξένος can mean ‘stranger’, ‘guest’, 
‘host’ and ‘friend’.
 
 ἀμείβετο There is no augment, but you can tell that the verb is past because 
of the ending.
 
9 ἐμεωυτοῦ = ἐμαυτοῦ.
 
 ἀέκων is the uncontracted form of ἄκων.

248 
Section 19C
 
 ἐξεληλαμένος From ἐξ-ελαύνω ἐλάω ἤλασα ἐλήλακα ἐλήλαμαι ἠλάθην. 
See list of irregular verbs, GE pp. 436–442, #389.
 
12 ἐν ἡμετέρου ‘in [the house] of ours’. Cf. ‘at the doctor’s’,’at the dentist’s’.
Translation for 19B
While his son was occupied with his wedding, there arrived in Sardis a man who 
was beset by misfortune and whose hands were polluted (not pure), being a 
Phrygian by birth, and related to the royal family. This man, coming to the house 
of Croesus, begged him to cleanse him of his blood-guilt in accordance with the 
laws of the country. And Croesus did cleanse him. The process of puriﬁ cation is 
very similar in Lydia and in Greece (among the Lydians and among the Hellenes). 
When Croesus had performed the customary rites, he started to ask who he was 
and where he came from, saying these words: ‘You, sir, who were my suppliant, 
who are you and where in Phrygia do you come from? What man or woman did 
you kill?’ And he answered, ‘O King, I am the son of Gordias, the son of Midas. 
I am called Adrastos, and I am here because I killed my own brother by accident; 
I have been driven out by my father and deprived of everything.’ Croesus 
answered him in these words; ‘You are the son of men who are my friends and 
you have come to friends, where you shall be in need of nothing while you remain 
in my house. It will be best for you (you will proﬁ t most) if you bear this misfor-
tune as lightly as possible.’
19C
Page 233
 
2 ὑὸς χρῆμα μέγα Literally ‘a great thing of a boar’. Cf Section 5A line 6, p. 
54: ‘τὸ χρῆμα τῶν νυκτῶν’.
 
3 διαϕθείρεσκε The ending in -έσκω is ‘frequentative’, and shows that the 
action took place repeatedly. Cf. ποιέεσκον later in the same line. No augment 
for either.
 
4 ἀπικόμενοι = ἀϕικόμενοι.
Page 234
 
10 οἱ ‘to him’.
 
11 τοῖσι ἰοῦσι ‘to those going’. Dative plural of the participle.
Translation for 19C
So he took up residence in the house of Croesus, and at this same period, on the 
Mysian Mount Olympus, a huge monster of a boar appeared. Making forays from 
this mountain, this creature used to destroy the Mysians’ crops, and the Mysians, 
often setting out against it, did it no harm, but were harmed by it. Finally, coming 
to Croesus, messengers from the Mysians spoke thus: ‘O King, a huge monster 
of a boar has appeared in our land, which is destroying our crops. Although we 
are eager to destroy it, we cannot do so. Now therefore we ask you to send us your 

 
Section 19D 
249
son and a selected band of young men and hounds, so that we may rid our country 
of it.’ They made these requests, but Croesus, remembering the words of the 
dream, spoke these words to them; ‘Do not mention my son any more; for I would 
not send him to you; he is newly married and this is what concerns him now. 
However, I shall send selected bands of Lydians and the whole pack of hounds 
and I shall order those who go to be as eager as possible to join in ridding your 
land of this creature.’ This was his answer.
19D
Page 234
 
2 οὐ ϕαμένου See GE p. 361, #336 for the meaning of οὔ ϕημι. Cf. Latin nego.
 
 σϕι ‘to them’.
 
3–4 τὰ κάλλιστα … ἡμῖν ἦν … ϕοιτέοντας εὐδοκιμέειν Literally ‘the most 
glorious and noble deeds were once formerly to us (mine), going to wars and to 
hunts to win fame’, ϕοιτέοντας does not agree with ἡμῖν, because it is seen as 
part of an accusative and inﬁ nitive phrase which explains the ﬁ rst statement.
 
5 ἀποκληίσας ἔχεις Herodotus often uses a past tense made up of ἔχω + aorist 
participle.
 
6 τέοισι ὄμμασι τέοισι = τίσι: ‘with what eyes?’ How will he look to 
observers? What will people think of him? How will he appear in their eyes?
 
7 κοῖος = ποῖος.
 
7–8 Notice the crescendo of indignant questions.
 
8 μέθες ‘Let me go.’ This is the aorist imperative from μεθίημι.
 
11 ὄψις ὀνείρoυ … ἐπιστᾶσα This echoes the ἐπέστη in Section 18A.
 
 ὀλιγοχρόνιον You will be able to guess this if you derive it from the two 
words you know.
 
12 πρός ‘with regard to’, ‘in consideration of’.
 
13–14 εἴ κως … ‘if in some way …’
 
 διακλέψαι ‘steal you (from death or Fate)’.
 
14 τυγχάνεις ἐών Here the meaning is ‘you really are’ rather than ‘you happen 
to be’.
 
15 διεϕθαρμένον τὴν ἀκοήν ‘destroyed in respect of his hearing’, i.e. ‘deaf’. τὴν 
ἀκοήν is an accusative of respect.
 
16 τoι = σοι.
 
17 τό is both the object of μανθάνεις and accusative of respect with λέληθέ σε 
‘there is something which you do not understand, and in respect of which the 
dream has escaped your notice (which you have failed to observe in the 
dream)’.
Page 236
 
19–21 εἰ μὲν γὰρ … εἶπε … , χρῆν … This is an unfulﬁ lled condition, but, as often, 
there is no ἄν used with χρῆν, for χρῆν was felt to be virtually potential on its 
own.

250 
Section 19E
 
20 ὀδόντος Cf. ‘odontology’, ‘orthodontist’. τοι = σοι.
 
 ἢ ἄλλου τευ ὅ τι τούτῳ οἶκε ‘or of anything else which seems like to this’. 
τευ = τινός, οἶκε = ἔοικε.
 
23 ἔστι τῇ ‘there is a way in which …’, ‘somehow’; Cf. ἔστι τις ‘there is a sort 
of person who …’, ‘someone’.
Translation for 19D
Although the Mysians were contented with this, the son of Croesus went to him, 
having heard what the Mysians were asking. Since Croesus was refusing to 
send his son to them, the young man spoke thus to him: ‘Previously, Father, it 
was most honourable and noble for me to go to war and to the hunt to win glory. 
But now you have barred me from both these activities, although you have 
noticed no cowardice or lack of spirit in me. Now to what eyes must I appear 
as I walk to and from the agora? (What must people think of me?) What sort of 
person shall I seem to the citizens, what sort of man to my new-wed wife? With 
what sort of husband will she seem to be living? You must therefore either let 
me go to the hunt, or persuade me by reason that these things are better for me 
if done this way.’ Croesus answered in these words: ‘My son, it is not because 
I have noticed any cowardice or any other disagreeable trait in you that I do 
this, but because the apparition of a dream came to me in my sleep, and stand-
ing by me said that you would be short-lived, and that you would perish by an 
iron spearhead. Because of this dream, I hastened this marriage of yours and I 
do not send you on this undertaking, taking precautions to see if I can somehow 
steal you [from death] for as long as I live (for the period of my life). For you 
are in reality my only son; for the other one is deaf (disabled in respect of 
hearing), and I do not consider that he exists, as far as I am concerned (for 
me).’
The young man answered with these words; ‘I forgive your protectiveness for 
me, Father, since you have had such a dream; but what you do not understand and 
have failed to observe in respect of the dream, it is right that I should point out to 
you. You say that the dream says that I will die by an iron spearhead; but what 
sort of hands does a boar have, what sort of iron spearhead does it have that you 
should fear? For if it had said to you that I would be killed by a boar’s tusk, or 
something else like this, then you ought to be doing what you are doing. But, as 
it is, it is a weapon that is to kill me. Since therefore our ﬁ ght is not against men, 
let me go.’ Croesus answered, ‘My son, it is the case that you conquer me, 
showing me your opinion about the dream. So, then, defeated by you, I change 
my mind and let you go to the hunt.’
19E
Page 237
 
1 εἴπας This is the aorist participle formed from the ﬁ rst aorist εἶπα which is 
the alternative to εἶπον.

 
Section 19E 
251
 
3  ὑποδεξάμενος ἔχω Another example of this form of past tense. Cf. 19D line 
5, ἀποκληίσας ἔχεις.
 
4 προποιήσαντος χρηστὰ ἐς σέ ‘having done good things for you 
previously’.
 
 χρηστοῖσί με ἀμείβεσθαι ‘to repay me with good things’.
 
5 What does ὁρμωμένου agree with?
 
6 ἐπὶ δηλήσι = ἐπὶ δηλήσει ‘with a view to harm’.
 
 ϕανέωσι Can you recognise this? ϕαίνω has a second aorist passive ἐϕάνην. 
This is the aorist subjunctive, in an uncontracted form. Here the aorist passive 
form is used instead of the aorist middle.
 
7 ἀπολαμπρυνέαι For -έεαι, 2nd person sing. of future tense.
 
8 ἄλλως ‘otherwise’, ‘in other circumstances’.
 
 ἔγωγε ἂν οὐκ ἤια ἄν + the past tense of εἶμι (‘I go’) make this an unfulﬁ lled 
condition, ἤια = ᾖα.
Page 238
 
9 οἰκός = ἐοικός ‘likely’ or ‘ﬁ tting’.
 
10 πάρα = πάρεστι ‘it is present’; τὸ βούλεσθαι = ‘the will’, ‘the wish’ – the 
inﬁ nitive is used as a noun.
 
 ἂν ἶσχον ἄν + the imperfect indicative continues the unfulﬁ lled condition: 
‘I would be holding myself back.’
 
11–13 Notice the highly dramatic use of short phrases as the climax is reached: ‘I am 
ready to do this / your son / whom you order me to guard / unharmed / thanks 
to his guardian / expect to return to you.’
Translation for 19E
Having said this, Croesus sent for the Phrygian Adrastos, and when he arrived he 
spoke to him like this; ‘Adrastos, I gave you puriﬁ cation when you had been 
stricken by an unpleasant misfortune (for which I do not blame you), and I have 
received you in my household, providing for all your expenses; now therefore, 
because you owe it to me, who ﬁ rst did you a good turn, to return my generosity, 
I ask you to be the guardian of my son when he sets out for the hunt, lest any evil 
thieves appear to do you harm on the road. In addition, it is right for you to go 
where you can distinguish yourself by your deeds; it is your birthright and besides 
you have the strength.’
Adrastos answered: ‘O King, under other circumstances I would not go to 
such a contest; for it is not seemly for a man who has experienced such a 
disaster to join his peers who are more fortunate, nor could I wish it, and for 
many reasons I would restrain myself. But now, since you are eager, and it is 
my duty to please you (for I owe it to you to return your generosity), I am 
ready to do these things, and you can expect to see your son, whom you 
command me to guard, return to you unharmed so far as depends on his guard-
ian.’

252 
Section 19F
19F
Page 239
 
2–5 Notice the succession of short clear phrases as the dramatic climax is reached. 
Notice also the formal description of Adrastos as ‘the stranger, the one who had 
been cleansed of blood-guilt, called Adrastos’. This reminds us of Adrastos’ 
history, Croesus’ act and the bond of guest-friendship between them. Similarly, 
‘he struck the son of Croesus’ reminds us of the full signiﬁ cance of the 
relationship with Croesus. The formal expression seems to give a ritual quality 
which emphasises the universal truth underlying the story and to make it more 
than the personal fate of individuals. This technique is used even more 
forcefully later in this passage. The brief plain phrases leading inexorably to the 
disaster are deeply moving.
 
2, 3 ἐζήτεον, ἐσηκόντιζον Imperfect: ‘they began to …’
 
5 ἁμαρτάνει, τυγχάνει The present tense is used for dramatic effect.
 
5–6 The emphasis is on the fulﬁ lment of the prophecy, and its effect on Croesus.
 
6 ἀγγελέων Future participle expressing purpose. (You can tell it is future by 
the single λ and the -εω ending.)
 
8 συντεταραγμένος A very strong word, ταράσσω means ‘to throw into 
confusion’, as with a defeated army, so ‘overwhelmed’, ‘distraught’, ‘shattered’.
 
9–13 Croesus calls on Zeus in three capacities, καθάρσιος, ἐπίστιος and ἑταιρήιος, 
illustrating the tragic consequences of his observance of the proper duties in 
each case. Under the auspices of Zeus Katharsios he had puriﬁ ed the stranger, 
under the auspices of Zeus Epistios he had taken him into his house and under 
the auspices of Zeus Hetairesios he had befriended him and sent out as guardian 
of his son the man who proved to be his murderer. Once again the inevitable 
progress of predestined events is made clear.
 
10 πεπονθὼς εἴη The perfect optative is used because this is in indirect speech in 
secondary sequence: ‘bearing witness to the things which he had suffered’.
 
12 τὸν ξεῖνον ϕονέα τοῦ παιδός The contrast is enhanced by the juxtaposition.
 
13 ϕύλακα … πολεμιώτατον Here the antithesis is marked by placing the 
contrasting words at the beginning and the end of the clause.
 
13–14 The focus of attention moves from the Lydians (‘there they were’), then to the 
corpse and then to the solitary ﬁ gure of the killer, following behind. He is given 
no name and he dominates the coming passage.
Page 240
 
14–17 Again the short, clear phrases, and the succession of vivid impressions. The 
killer and the killed, the attitude of surrender, the plea for death with the brutal 
word ἐπικατασϕάξαι thrown into prominence as the ﬁ rst word in its clause, 
and ﬁ nally the quiet statement of utter despair.
 
15 ἐπικατασϕάξαι σϕάζω means ‘to kill with a sword’, and is often associated 
with sacriﬁ cial slaughter.

 
Section 19F 
253
 
17–21 The reaction of Croesus. Among mortals there can be pity, nobility and 
forgiveness, in contrast perhaps to the relentless force of destiny fulﬁ lling the 
design of the gods. Cf. Euripides’ Hippolytus, where the reconciliation of 
Theseus and his son contrasts with the unrelenting vengefulness of Aphrodite.
 
20 εἶς = εἶ ‘you are’.
 
21–25 The climax opens quietly. Κροῖσος μέν … buries his son; then our attention 
moves to Ἄδρηστος δέ … (Adrastos is now given his full formal name at this 
ﬁ nal moment of the story.) Next, ὁ ϕονεὺς μέν … , ϕονεὺς δέ … the repetition 
recalls the double tragedy. (Adrastos is the ‘destroyer’ of the man who puriﬁ ed 
him, in the sense that by killing his son he has destroyed his life.) Finally, when 
all is quiet and the mourners have gone from the tomb, ‘realising that, of all the 
men whom he knew, he was βαρυσυμϕορώτατος’ (a most weighty and 
impressive word saved to the last to make it even more emphatic), 
ἐπικατασϕάζει τῷ τύμβῳ ἑωυτόν. A digniﬁ ed and moving end.
Translation for 19F
When he had answered Croesus with these words, they set off after this accom-
panied by the selected young men and the hounds. When they arrived at Mount 
Olympus, they started to look for the boar, and having found it and surrounded 
it they began to hurl javelins at it. And there the stranger, the one who had been 
ritually cleansed of murder, the man called Adrastos, hurled his javelin at the 
boar, missed the boar, but hit the son of Croesus.Then indeed he, being hit by a 
spearhead, fulﬁ lled the prophecy of the dream; and someone ran to tell Croesus 
what had happened, and when he reached Sardis, he told him about the ﬁ ght and 
the fate of his son. But Croesus, overwhelmed by the death of his son, was even 
more grieved because he himself had cleansed of murder the man who had 
killed him. In his grief at this tragedy, he called in anger upon Zeus the Puriﬁ er, 
bearing witness to the things that he had suffered at the hands of the stranger, 
and he called upon him as the god of the hearth and the god of friendship, 
naming this same god, calling upon him as the god of the hearth because having 
received the stranger into his house he had unwittingly nurtured the murderer 
of his son, and calling upon him as the god of friendship on the grounds that he 
had sent him as a guardian for his son and found him to be a most deadly 
enemy.
After this, the Lydians came bearing the corpse, and the murderer followed 
behind. And standing before the body, he offered himself to Croesus, and stretch-
ing out his hands, he begged him to slay him over the corpse, and, speaking of 
his former disaster, and how in addition to it he had destroyed the man who had 
cleansed him, he said that life was no longer liveable for him. But Croesus, 
hearing this, pitied Adrastos, even though he was in such personal distress, and 
spoke thus to him: ‘Stranger, I have full justice from you, since you condemn 
yourself to death. You are not the one who is responsible for this tragedy, except 
in so far as you unintentionally did the deed, but it was some god, who prophesied 
to me long ago the events that would come to pass.’

254 
Exercise for section 19
Croesus then buried his son as was ﬁ tting. But Adrastos, the son of Gordias the 
son of Midas, the one who had been the killer of his own brother, and the 
destroyer of the man who had cleansed him, when it was quiet and the crowd of 
people had gone from the tomb (when it was quiet of people about the tomb), 
regarding himself as the most accursed of all men whom he knew, killed himself 
upon the tomb.
Note
You may perhaps want to read through this whole section again, so that, without 
having to struggle quite so hard to understand the Greek, you can appreciate fully 
both the dramatic effect of the story and the varied artistry of Herodotus’ narrative 
technique.
EXERCISE FOR SECTION 19
THE DIALECT OF HERODOTUS
(a) νεανίας, συμφορά
(b) πράττω, φυλάττω
(c) μόνος, ἕνεκα
(e) ἐγένου, καλούμενος, ἀπολεῖ, ποιοῦμεν
(f) Περσῶν
(g) ταύταις, χρηστοῖς

255
Section Twenty: Odysseus and Nausikaa
Here you have the whole of Odyssey 6, partly in Greek and partly in translation. 
Make sure you read the excellent Introduction, RGT pp. 243–244, and notice GE 
p. 362, #337 on some vital features of Homeric dialect and syntax, and GE pp. 
362–364, #338–339 on Homeric hexameters and Greek metre. There is also the 
Reference Grammar pp. 378–382, #349–352 ‘Homeric dialect – the main 
features’.
Remember that this is poetry in the oral tradition. Oral poets did not commit a 
poem to memory verbatim, but they had in their minds a huge collection of for-
mulaic phrases which ﬁ tted neatly into a hexameter line and they could use these 
to tell the story. Do you remember the rhapsode in Section 1H, with the ‘wine-
dark sea’ (ἐπὶ οἴνοπα πόντον) and the ‘black, hollow or swift ship’? These were 
‘formulas’. You will quickly come to recognise such phrases, and it is interesting 
to consider how Homer uses them.
20A
Page 246
 
1 ὥς with an accent = οὕτως ‘so’, ‘thus’.
 
 ἔνθα Odysseus is sleeping under an olive bush, having covered himself with 
leaves.
 
 καθεῦδε = καθηῦδε. The absence of the augment is very common in Homer. 
See GE p. 362, #337(a).
 
 πολύτλας δῖος ’Oδυσσεύς A formulaic phrase; Odysseus is often referred to 
by this description, and it is entirely apt. πολύτλας: πολύ = ‘much’, -τλας is 
from τλάω ‘I endure’, thus ‘much-enduring’.
 
3 βῆ = ἔβη. No augment.
 
 ῥ’ = ῥά. An abbreviated form of ἄρα: ‘then’.
 
4ff. The passage in English gives the earlier history of the Phaeacian people, and 
then returns to where it started, with Athene making her way to Phaeacia. This 
is known as ‘ring composition’ and is a common feature in Homer.
page 247
 
20 ἀνέμου Cf. ‘anemometer’ = ‘wind-measurer’, ‘anemone’ = ‘wind-ﬂ ower’.
 
21 στῆ = ἔστη; μιν = αὐτήν.

256 
Section 20A
 
 πρὸς … ἔειπεν ‘spoke to’, ‘addressed’. The preposition is ‘cut off’ from its 
verb. This is called ‘tmesis’ (‘cutting’), GE p. 362, #337(j). Here the verb is 
used with two accusatives, ‘addressed her a word’.
 
22 ναυσικλειτοῖο Genitive ending (GE p. 362, #337(d). The Phaeacians were 
famed for their nautical skills.
 
23 οἱ = αὐτῇ (GE p. 280, #350); ἔην = ἦν.
 
 κεχάριστο This is the pluperfect of χαρίζομαι (not the perfect, as GE says in 
the vocabulary for 19A). You can see it is pluperfect because, although it has 
no augment, it ends in -στο, not -σται.
Page 248
 
24 γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη Another formula. This is a standard epithet for Athene; it 
means either ‘grey-eyed’ or owl-faced’, ὤψ = ‘face’ or ‘eyes’, γλαυκός = 
‘gleaming’ or ‘grey-green’, ἡ γλαύξ is ‘the owl’, the bird of Athene, as seen on 
the Athenian silver drachma.
 
25 τί νύ σ’ ὧδε … Literally ‘How did your mother bear you thus lazy?’, ‘How 
did your mother come to have such a lazy daughter?’
 
26 τοι = σοι. This is the ‘dative of the person concerned’. There is also a particle 
τοι which means ‘in fact’, ‘look here’. It is usually the second word in the 
sentence, but only the context will help you to decide between them. Here it is 
almost certainly the pronoun: compare this example with 20B line 59, where 
μοι is equivalent to τοι in this line.
 
27 ἵνα + indicative means ‘where’, and does not express purpose.
 
 καλά Understand εἵματα from the previous line.
 
 αὐτήν Agrees with σε (understood).
 
28 τὰ δὲ τοῖσι The article is normally used for ‘them’ or ‘these’ in Homer 
instead of αὐτόν and οὗτος, GE p. 362, #337(i)). ‘And you must provide others 
for those who …’
 
 οἵ κέ σ’ ἄγωνται κε or κεν = ἄν. Therefore this is an indeﬁ nite clause, 
although in Homer an indeﬁ nite is very close to a future: ‘those who will lead 
you’. See GE p. 362, #337(k).
 
29 τοι Here this probably means ‘in fact’, and is not equivalent to σοι, another 
ethic dative ‘as far as you are concerned’; but it could be either in the context.
 
 ἀνθρώπους ἀναβαίνει Understand another ἀνά before ἀνθρώπους: ‘goes up 
among men’. In poetry the preposition is often left out if it is used as the preﬁ x 
to the verb.
 
30 πότνια μήτηρ πότνια is a stock epithet for goddesses and great ladies, and is 
frequently found with μήτηρ. It is often translated ‘lady’.
 
31 ἴομεν = ἴωμεν. Present subjunctive, ‘let us go’.
 
 πλυνέουσαι Future participle expressing purpose.
 
32 τοι = σοι. ἕπομαι takes the dative.
 
32–33 ὄϕρα …ἐντύνεαι ὄϕρα + subjunctive/optative expresses purpose.
 
33 τοι Here probably the particle ‘indeed’.
 
 ἔσσεαι = ἔσει ‘you will be’.

 
Section 20A 
257
 
35 τοι = σοι. Possessive dative, ‘where is the race to you yourself also’, ‘where is 
your race too’, ‘and they are your nation too’.
 
36 ἄγ᾽ = ἄγε. ‘Come on’, followed by a command.
 
 ἐπότρυνον Aorist imperative (GE pp. 189–190, #198–199).
 
37 ἡμιόνους ‘mules’ as in Section 8E.
 
 ἄμαξαν ‘wagon’ as in Section 6H.
 
 ἐϕοπλίσαι Aorist inﬁ nitive of ἐϕοπλίζω.
 
38 ῥήγεα σιγαλόεντα Cf. line 19 ἀκηδέα σιγαλόεντα.
 
39 πολὺ κάλλιον Understand ἐστί.
 
40 ἀπὸ … εἰσί Tmesis again, ‘are distant from’.
 
41 ὣς εἰποῦσα ‘so speaking’, ὥς with an accent = οὕτως ‘so’, ‘thus’.
 
42 Οὔλυμπόνδε The sufﬁ x -δε means ‘towards’, e.g. οἰκάδε.
 
43 ἔμμεναι = εἶναι This is a common form of the inﬁ nitive in Homer. See GE p. 
381, #351(iv).
 
47 διεπέϕραδε Aorist of διαϕράζω. Cf. ‘phrase’.
 
41–47 Ring composition again: (line 4) ἀπέβη γλαυκῶπις Ἀθήνη … ἔνθ᾽ ἀπέβη 
γλαυκῶπις (line 10). In between these repeated phrases there is a marvellous 
description of Olympus, the home of the gods. It was copied by Lucretius in De 
rerum natura 3. 18–22, and by Tennyson:
 
 Where falls not hail, or rain, or any snow,
 
 Nor ever wind blows loudly. (Idylls of the King 1.428–9)
Translation for 20A
So much-enduring, godlike Odysseus slept there, overcome by sleep and weari-
ness; but Athene went to the people and the city of the Phaeacian men …
* * *
She, like a breath of wind, hurried to the bed of the girl, and stood above her 
head and addressed her a word, making herself like the daughter of Dymas, 
famous for ships, who was of the same age as her and was very dear to her heart. 
Likening herself to her, the grey-eyed Athene addressed her.
‘Nausikaa, how has your mother borne such a lazy [daughter as] you? The 
shining clothes are lying uncared for by you (as far as you are concerned) – and 
your wedding is near, when you must wear ﬁ ne [clothes] yourself and provide 
others for those who will escort you. For from these things indeed a good reputa-
tion spreads among men, and a father and lady mother rejoice. But let us go and 
do the washing as soon as dawn appears; and I will go with you as a helper, so 
that you may get ready very quickly, since you will not be a maiden much longer; 
for already the noblest of all the Phaeacian men throughout the people are court-
ing you – you are of the same race as them. But come, ask your famous father 
before dawn to equip you with mules and a wagon to take the girdles, the robes 
and the shining covers. And it is much better for you yourself to go in this way 
than on foot; for the washing-places are far from the city.’

258 
Section 20B
So speaking, the grey-eyed Athene went away to Olympus, where they say the 
safe seat of the gods is for ever; it is not shaken by winds, nor wet by showers, 
nor does snow come near, but a very clear sky spreads over it, cloudless, and a 
white radiance covers it; in it the blessed gods enjoy themselves all their days. 
There the grey-eyed one went, when she had spoken to the girl.
20B
Page 250
 
48 μιν ‘her’, explained by Ναυσικάαν εὔπεπλον in the next line.
 
50 βῆ δ᾽ ἴμεναι Literally ‘she went to go’, a very common idiom in Homer. It 
means ‘she went’, ἴμεναι is a form of inﬁ nitive. See GE p. 381, #351(iv).
 
 ἵν᾽ ἀγγείλειε ἵνα + optative expresses purpose in secondary sequence.
 
 τοκεῦσι ‘to her parents’, itemised in the next line, and then described more 
fully with ἡ μέν … in line 52, and τῷ δέ … in line 53.
 
52 σὺν ἀμϕιπόλοισι γυναιξίν Another formula which ﬁ ts the second half of the 
hexameter.
 
53 ἠλάκατα στρωϕῶσ’ ἁλιπόρϕυρα ‘spinning the sea-purple wool’, ἁλι- is from 
the word meaning ‘salt’ or ‘sea’. ‘Sea-purple’ because purple, or crimson, dye 
came from the murex (a shell-ﬁ sh). It was particularly valuable, hence ‘royal 
purple’, ‘in the purple’. Nausikaa uses this same phrase (p. 265, line 308) when 
speaking to Odysseus.
 
53–54 τῷ δὲ … ξύμβλητο ‘She met him …’ ἐρχομένῳ agrees with τῷ.
 
53 θύραζε = θύρασδε. 
 
54 βασιλῆας ‘chieftains’, ‘nobles’ (not ‘kings’), as often in Homer.
 
55 ἵνα + indicative means ‘where’.
 
56 μάλ᾽ ἄγχι ‘very close’, ‘right up close’, as daughter to father.
 
57 πάππα ϕίλ’ This is informal: ‘Daddy, dear’.
 
 οὐκ ἂν δή μοι ἐϕοπλίσσειας A polite request: ‘Wouldn’t you provide me 
with …’
 
59 τά = ἅ ‘which’.
 
 µοι Another ethic dative (dative of the person concerned). Cf. 19A line 19.
 
60 σοὶ αὐτῷ ἔοικε This is followed by accusative + inﬁ nitive: ‘it is right for you 
yourself to discuss plans (βουλὰς βουλεύειν) being among the foremost men 
(ἐόντα) having (ἔχοντα) clean clothes on your body’.
 
66 αἴδετο ‘felt reticent about’. Nausikaa was modest about her marriage, not 
ashamed.
 
 θαλερὸν γάμον ‘fruitful marriage’, almost certainly a stock epithet.
 
68 τευ = τινος. See GE p. 380 #350.
 
71 τοί = οἱ ‘they’. Note the accent. It cannot be τοι = σοι.
Translation for 20B
At once fair-throned dawn came and she woke fair-robed Nausikaa; at once she 
was amazed at the dream and she went through the palace to tell it to her parents, 

 
Section 20C 
259
her dear father and mother. She found them indoors; she (her mother) was sitting 
by the hearth, with her servant women, spinning sea-purple wool; him she met 
going towards the door, on his way to his distinguished counsellors to a council 
to which the Phaeacian nobles called him.
She stood very close to him and addressed her dear father: ‘Daddy dear, won’t 
you get ready for me a high well-wheeled wagon, so that I may take the lovely 
clothes to the river to wash them? They are lying there, I know, dirty. And it is 
ﬁ tting for you yourself, when you are with your nobles, to discuss plans with 
clean clothes on your body. Five dear sons have been born to you in the palace; 
two are married and three are thriving bachelors; they all wish to go to the dance 
with newly washed clothes. All these things are a concern to my mind.’
So she spoke; for she was hesitant to mention fruitful marriage to her dear 
father; but he realised all and replied: ‘I do not be grudge you mules, child, nor 
anything else. Go. The servants will equip for you a high well-wheeled wagon, 
ﬁ tted with a canopy.’
So saying, he ordered the servants and they obeyed.
20C
Page 252
 
110 ἔμελλε ‘She was going to return home.’ Almost ‘It was time to go home.’
 
112 ἄλλ’ ἐνόησε Note the accent on ἄλλο: ‘planned something else’. ἀλλά (as in 
line 110) means ‘but’.
 
113 ὡς + optative expresses purpose in secondary sequence.
 
114 oἱ = ‘him’ (dative), ἡγήσαιτο takes the dative and it is in the optative because it 
continues the purpose clause started in line 113.
 
 πόλιν ‘to the city’. The preposition is omitted.
 
115 σϕαῖραν ‘sphere’. Remember the sophist in Section 6F ‘catching up the 
argument like a ball’.
 
 βασίλεια Nominative and feminine.
 
117 ἐπὶ μακρόν Adverbial, = ‘loudly’.
 
 ἄϋσαν Three syllables; the breathing (ἀ) and the diaeresis (ϋ) show this.
Page 253
 
119 ὤ μοι ἐγώ Difﬁ cult to translate naturally. Perhaps ‘Oh dear me!’
 119–121 A most important consideration on arriving in a strange land. If the inhabitants 
are ‘god-fearing’, they will respect the laws of hospitality and look after the 
stranger kindly. Odysseus had the same thoughts before he met the Cyclops, 
but here he is more fortunate.
 
119 τέων = τίνων.
 
121 σϕίν ‘to them’. See GE p. 380, #350. It is a possessive dative.
 
123 νυμϕάων This recalls the simile likening Nausikaa to Artemis and her 
nymphs on p. 173, lines 33–39.
 
 ἔχουσι ἔχω often has the sense of ‘have (as their home)’, i.e. ‘inhabit’.

260 
Section 20D
 
126 πειρήσομαι ἠδὲ ἴδωμαι These verbs are both subjunctives, ‘let me …’
 
 ἠδέ ‘and’. Cf. ἠμέν … ἠδέ … ‘both … and …’
Translation for 20C
But when she was about to go back home again, after yoking the mules and 
folding the ﬁ ne clothing, then again the grey-eyed goddess Athene planned 
something else, that Odysseus should wake up and see the beautiful girl who 
would lead him to the city of the Phaeacian men. The princess then threw a ball 
to a hand-maiden; it missed the handmaiden and fell into the deep eddy, and 
they shrieked loudly. Godlike Odysseus awoke, and, sitting up, considered in 
his heart and mind.
‘Oh dear me, to the land of what people have I come this time? Are they 
violent, savage and not just, or are they hospitable and have a god-fearing mind? 
The female shriek of maidens surrounded me – of nymphs, who inhabit the steep 
peaks of mountains and sources of rivers and grassy meadows. Or am I now 
somewhere near men who speak with human voices? But come, let me try and 
see for myself.’
20D
Page 254
 
128 κλάσε = ἔκλασε. Aorist of κλάζω without the augment.
 
 παχείῃ Cf. ‘pachyderm’, a thick-skinned animal.
 
129 ϕύλλων Goes with πτόρθον in the previous line, ‘a leafy branch’.
 
 ϕωτός Be careful not to confuse ϕώς ϕωτός ‘man’ and τὸ ϕῶς (ϕάος) ‘light’.
 
130 βῆ δ᾽ ἴμεν See note on 20B line 50 above.
 130–134 Just as our attention was drawn to Nausikaa with a simile (Artemis and the 
nymphs), so at this point it is focused on Odysseus. The simile of the mountain 
lion, driven down from the hills by hunger to raid the village animals, is apt. 
Odysseus appears as savage and terrible as a lion to the girls; and he too is 
storm-tossed and driven by desperate necessity to come from the wild to seek 
help in a civilised community.
 
131 εἶσ’ = εἶσι: 3rd s. of εἶμι, ‘who goes’.
 
 ὄσσε A dual (GE #331–332). Note that the verb (δαίεται) is singular, as with 
a neuter plural subject, ἐν probably belongs to δαίεται and is cut off by tmesis. 
οἱ is a possessive dative, ‘his eyes’.
 
132 ὀΐεσσιν Four syllables. Cf. note on 20C line 117 ἄϋσαν.
 
133 ἑ = ‘him’, accusative. See GE p. 380, #350. 
 
 γαστήρ Cf. ‘gastric’, ‘gastritis’ etc.
 
134 δόμον Here referring to the ‘pens’ where the sheep and cattle were kept.
 
136 περ = καίπερ.
 
137 ϕάνη = ἐϕάνη, the aorist of ϕαίνομαι.
 
138 ἄλλυδις ἄλλη The whole phrase means ‘in different directions’ (as in GE); 
literally, ‘a different one in a different direction’.

 
Section 20E 
261
 
139 οἴη The feminine of οἶος ‘alone’. Do not confuse this with οἷος ‘such as’.
 
141 σχομένη Middle participle of ἔχω. Literally ‘maintaining herself’, so 
‘holding her ground’.
 
142 γούνων … λαβών Touching or clasping the knees was a sign of supplication.
 
 εὐώπιδα κούρην Another formulaic phrase. Cf. p. 252, line 113.
 
143 μειλιχίοισι GE gives this as ‘winning’, ‘soothing’. Its basic root is μέλι 
‘honey’, and ‘honeyed’ would be equally appropriate here. ‘Honeyed words’ is 
a frequent formula; they are often employed by Odysseus, the arch-persuader. 
 
144 δοίη Aorist optative of δίδωμι. δείξειε is also an aorist optative. Both are in 
an indirect question in secondary sequence, ‘to see if she would show him the 
city and give him clothes’.
 
145 κέρδιον ‘more proﬁ table’, ‘more advantageous’. This shows the shrewdly 
calculating mind of Odysseus, and is picked up by κερδαλέον (‘subtle’, 
‘crafty’) in line 148.
 
147 μὴ … χολώσαιτο ‘lest she be angry’.
Translation for 20D
Speaking thus, godlike Odysseus emerged from the bushes; with his broad hand 
he broke a leafy branch from the thick-foliaged bush so that shielding (around) 
his body he could hide his male genitals. He went forward like a mountain-bred 
lion trusting in his strength, who goes on, though rained upon and blown upon, 
and his eyes burn; but he attacks the oxen or sheep, or goes after the wild deer; 
hunger orders him to go even into the densely-packed pens, to make trial of the 
sheep. So Odysseus was going to meet the maidens with beautiful hair, naked 
though he was; for need was upon him. He seemed terrible to them, disﬁ gured 
with brine, and they ran in different directions along the jutting shores. Alcinous’ 
daughter alone remained; for Athene put courage in her heart and removed the 
fear from her limbs. She stood and faced him, holding her ground; Odysseus 
debated whether to take her knees and beseech the beautiful girl or simply with 
honeyed words at a distance to beseech her to show him the city and give him 
clothing. It seemed to him, as he thought about it, to be better to beseech her 
with honeyed words from a distance, in case the girl should grow angry in her 
heart with him for taking her knees. At once he addressed to her a honeyed and 
cunning speech.
20E
Page 256
 
149 γουνοῦμαι GE gives this as ‘beseech’. It literally means Ί clasp your knees’ 
– the very thing that Odysseus has not done!
 
 θεός νύ τις ἦ βροτός ἐσσι; ‘Are you a god or a mortal?’ A splendid piece of 
ﬂ attery and also of reassurance, for no man is going to offend or rape a 
goddess.

262 
Section 20E
 
150 θεός … τοί τοί is a plural relative pronoun, after a singular antecedent 
θεός. The construction follows the sense: ‘if you are one of the gods 
who’.
 
151 Ἀρτέμιδι This recalls the simile on p. 252, lines 102–109, where Nausikaa is 
likened to Artemis. It is also particularly suitable, since Artemis is a virgin 
goddess.
 
152 εἶδός τε μέγεθός τε ϕυήν τ’… All these are accusatives of respect: ‘I liken 
you to Artemis in appearance, etc. …’
 
153 εἰ δέ τίς ἐσσι βροτῶν … More ﬂ attery and reassurance as Odysseus develops 
the second possibility, that she may be a mortal.
 155–157 There are more constructions here that go with the sense rather than with 
strict grammar. λευσσόντων ‘agrees’ with σϕισι in line 155 ‘when they see …’, 
and the feminine participle εἰσοιχνεῦσαν ‘agrees’ with the neuter noun 
θάλος.
 158–159 The climax and another reference to Nausikaa’s marriage. This is a recurring 
theme in the Phaeacia story, and both Nausikaa and her parents hope at some 
time that Odysseus might perhaps remain and become her husband.
 160–165 Note the transition from his admiration and awe at the beauty of Nausikaa to 
his own story and the ‘hint’ to her (mentioned in the introduction), that 
he has been a person of some importance: line164 πολὺς δέ μοι ἕσπετο 
λαός.
 
162 Delos was sacred to Apollo. It was there that Leto gave birth to Apollo and 
Artemis and in honour of this their father, Zeus, created the palm and the bay 
tree.
 162–163 Note the order in which the ideas are presented: ‘in Delos once … such a … by 
the altar of Apollo … of a palm … the young shoot springing up … I saw’, 
τοῖον agrees with ἔρνος. The point of the comparison is the slender beauty of 
the palm and the awe it induces in the beholder.
 
167 δόρυ This refers to the palm, and brings us back in the ‘ring-composition’ 
structure to the starting-point of the simile.
 168–169 δείδια … γούνων ἅψασθαι Another example of ring composition. Cf. 
γουνοῦμαι in line 8 at the start of the speech. Odysseus has, of course, also to 
explain to Nausikaa why he is not clasping her knees in the attitude of formal 
supplication.
Page 258
 170–174 Now he speaks of his past sufferings and his foreboding for the future.
 
170 χθιζός An adjective agreeing with the subject Odysseus. Literally 
‘yesterday’s’. Translate ‘yesterday’.
 
 οἴνοπα πόντον ‘the wine-dark sea’, a formulaic phrase.
 
172 νήσου ἀπ᾽ Ὠγυγίης This was the island of Calypso where Odysseus was 
detained for seven years.
 
173 ὄϕρα … πάθω ὄϕρα + subjunctive expresses purpose: ‘so that I may suffer 
some trouble (κακόν) here as well (καί)’.

 
Section 20E 
263
 173–174 οὐ γὰρ ὀΐω παύσεσθαι ‘I do not think it will cease.’ παύσεσθαι = future 
middle inﬁ nitive of παύω.
 
174 τελέουσι In form this could be present or future. The sense suggests 
future.
 
175 σε Governed by ἐς in the next line: ‘I came to you ﬁ rst.’
 
178 δεῖξον Aorist imperative of δείκνυμι.
 
 ῥάκος Very close to ‘rag’. He means any old piece of material, whatever 
they wrapped the washing in.
 
 ἀμϕιβαλέσθαι An explanatory inﬁ nitive, ‘a rag to put round me’.
 
180 δοῖεν Optative for a wish, ‘may they give’.
 
181 ὀπάσειαν Another optative expressing a wish, ‘may they grant’.
 
182 τοῦ Genitive of comparison, ‘than this’. ‘This’ is explained in the next line, 
ἢ ὅθ’ ‘than when …’
 
183 ὁμοϕρονέοντε, ἔχητον These are both duals; the subject is ἀνὴρ ἠδὲ 
γυνή.
Translation for 20E
‘I beseech you by your knees, princess; are you a god or a mortal? If you are a 
god, such as inhabit the broad heaven, I liken you most closely to Artemis, daugh-
ter of great Zeus, in appearance, stature and beauty. If you are one of the mortals 
who live upon earth, thrice blessed are your father and lady mother, and thrice 
blessed are your brothers; for surely the heart within them always warms very 
much with pleasure through you when they see such young beauty entering the 
dance. But he in his heart is most blessed above [all] others who, after loading 
you with gifts, leads you home [as his wife].
‘I have not seen with my eyes such a one, neither man nor woman; awe holds 
me as I look. In Delos once, near the altar of Apollo, I saw such a young shoot 
of a date-palm growing up; I had gone there, and a large company followed me, 
on that journey on which evil troubles were destined to befall me. In the same 
way as, when I saw it, I delighted in my heart for a long time, since no such 
shoot ever yet came up from the earth, so, lady, I look at you in awe, I am aston-
ished and I am terribly afraid to touch your knees; but hard grief has come upon 
me.
‘Yesterday, on the twentieth day, I escaped from the wine-dark sea; for so long 
the waves and swift storms carried me always from the island of Ogygia; now a 
god has cast me up here, so that I may suffer some evil here too; for I do not think 
it will stop, but the gods will accomplish even more before that. But, princess, 
have pity; after suffering many evils I have come to you ﬁ rst, and I do not know 
any other of the people who inhabit this city and land. Show me the city, give me 
a rag to put round myself, if you had any wrapping for the clothes when you came 
here.
‘To you may the gods give all that you desire in your heart, a husband and a 
home, and may they grant beautiful harmony: for there is nothing greater and 
better than this, than when in harmony of mind a man and woman share a home; 

264 
Section 20F
they are a great grief to their enemies and a delight to their friends; they them-
selves are greatly respected.’
20F
Page 260
 
186 λευκώλενος ‘white-armed’. This is an epithet which is applied only to 
women, and women who do not work in the ﬁ elds and get sun-burned. It is 
therefore complimentary. On Minoan frescos women are conventionally 
coloured white and men terracotta. It is a compound adjective with only two 
terminations, so that the -ος ending can be feminine.
 187–189 Nausikaa means that since Odysseus is sensible and intelligent he must accept 
whatever fate Zeus sends him.
 
189 ἐθέλῃσιν = ἐθέλῃ, 3rd s. pres. subj., ‘just as he pleases’.
 
190 τετλάμεν Inﬁ nitive of τλάω. Odysseus is described in the ﬁ rst line of this 
book as πολύτλας.
 191–193 A complicated clause. The meaning, starting with the previous line, is ‘So you 
will lack neither clothing nor anything else which it is right for a poor suppliant 
[to have] when he has met [someone to help him].’ In grammatical detail: 
‘You will not lack (+ gen.) clothing or anything else which (ὧν is genitive by 
relative attraction, see 218b) it is right (ἐπέοιχ᾽) for a poor suppliant (ἱκέτην 
ταλαπείριον) not to lack (μὴ δεύεσθαι is understood from οὐ δευήσεαι in the 
previous line) having met [someone].’
 
194 ἐρέω Future of λέγω.
 
197 GE tells you that ἐκ governs τοῦ and that ἔχεται ἐκ means here ‘depend on’, 
hence, ‘On him the power and might of the Phaeacians depend.’
 
198 ἦ ῥα A common formulaic phrase: ἦ = ‘she spoke’. Cf. ἦ δ᾽ ὅς in sections 7D 
and 7E (Plato, Euthydemos). ῥά = ἄρα.
 
199 στῆτέ μοι ‘stop, please’. The μοι is rather like our colloquial phrase ‘Will you 
do this for me?’
 
200 ϕάσθ᾽ Here this is more like ‘consider’ than ‘say’. 
 
 ἔμμεναι = εἶναι.
 
201 This is easy to mistranslate: – not ‘this is not a mortal man’, but ‘there is not a 
mortal man living who …’ The accent on ἔσθ᾽ shows that it means ‘exists’ 
rather than ‘is’. διερός occurs in Homer only here and in Od. 9.43.
 204–205 ἀπάνευθε, ἔσχατοι The Phaeacians live far away on the edge of the known 
world, almost in a fairy-tale land, beyond the reach of pirates and enemies and 
with their magic ships that need no helmsman to take them anywhere they wish 
to go. Tradition has it that Phaeacia is the modern Corfu.
 
207 πρὸς Διός πρός here means ‘under the protection of’. You ﬁ rst met these lines 
in Section 4C p. 48, lines 31–32. Once again the religious requirement of 
hospitality is emphasised.
 
210 λούσατε Note that this is active. Nausikaa tells her maids to wash Odysseus, 
not to take him to a place where he can wash himself.

 
Section 20G 
265
Translation for 20F
Then white-armed Nausikaa answered him in reply: ‘Stranger, since you seem to 
be neither an evil nor a foolish man, Olympian Zeus himself apportions happiness 
to mankind, to good and bad, just as he pleases, to each; and so he has given you 
these things, and you must doubtless endure them. But now, since you have come 
to our city and land, you will not lack for clothing nor anything else which it is 
right for a poor suppliant [to have] when he has met [someone to help him]. I will 
show you the city and tell you the name of the people. The Phaeacians inhabit 
this city and land; I am the daughter of great-hearted Alcinous; on him the power 
and might of the Phaeacians depend.’
She spoke, and gave orders to her handmaidens with pretty hair: ‘Stop, hand-
maidens; where are you ﬂ eeing after seeing a man? Surely you do not think this 
is one of the hostile men? That mortal man does not exist, nor will he ever be born, 
who would come to the land of Phaeacian men bringing slaughter; for we are very 
dear to the immortal gods. We live far away in the loud-roaring sea, the furthest 
[of peoples], nor does any other of mortals have dealings with us. But this is some 
poor wanderer who has arrived here, whom we must now look after; for all stran-
gers and beggars are under the protection of Zeus, and a gift is small but welcome. 
But, handmaidens, give the stranger meat and drink, and wash him in the river, 
where there is shelter from the wind.’
20G
Page 261
 
211 ἔσταν = ἔστησαν ‘they stopped’.
 
212 κάδ … εἷσαν Note κάδ = κατά; the root of ἕζω = ἕδος. They escorted 
Odysseus to a sheltered spot and sat him down there.
 
214 πάρ = παρά Note the shortening of some prepositions to monosyllables – κάδ 
has just occurred and recurs in line 230; ἀνά can be treated in the same way.
Page 262
 218–220 ὄϕρ᾽ … ἀπολούσομαι … χρίσομαι ὄϕρα + subjunctive expresses purpose. 
The two verbs look  like futures, but are in fact aorist subjunctives.
 
219 ὤμοιϊν Dual – he has two shoulders, although the ordinary plural is used in 
lines 225 and 235.
 
221 αἰδέομαι It was normal practice in the world of Homer for girl-slaves to bath 
male visitors. Odysseus refuses their assistance because his body is in such a 
dreadful state after his hardships that he ‘is ashamed to be naked among 
maidens with well-ordered hair’.
 
224 νίζετο The verb takes two accusatives here, ‘washed his body’ and ‘washed 
the brine’, where we would have to say ‘washed the brine from his body’.
 
226 ἀτρυγέτοιο A regular epithet for the sea. It means ‘unharvested’ and so 
‘unharvestable’ and so ‘barren’.

266 
Section 20G
 
228 ἕσσαθ᾽ First aorist middle of ἕννυμι: ‘he put on’.
 
230 εἰσιδέειν An explanatory inﬁ nitive, ‘greater to look upon’.
 
231 ὑακινθίνῳ ἄνθει ὁμοίας Presumably thick, clustering curls are like the wild 
hyacinth petals.
 232–234 In this simile Athene enhances the appearance of Odysseus as a skilled 
craftsman puts the ﬁ nishing touches to a work of art.
 
233 δέδαεν Takes two objects, ‘whom … have taught all skill’. You may 
remember the passage from Plato in Section 18, where Athene and Hephaistos 
are the gods who are the masters of the craftsman’s art.
 
235 τῷ Indirect object, ‘on him’, with ‘on his head and shoulders’ in apposition.
 
238 μετηύδα From μεταυδάω ‘I speak to’.
 
244 αἲ γάρ = εἰ γάρ; εἰ γάρ + optative expresses a wish.
 
 πόσις ‘husband’.
 
245 οἱ ἅδοι ‘and that it might be pleasing to him …’ ἅδοι is the aorist optative of 
ἁνδάνω.
 
248 πόσιν Here = ‘drink’.
 
 Once again the marriage theme. Nausikaa is to be disappointed. The last we 
hear of her is in Book 8, lines 457–468, where there is an underlying pathos 
when Odysseus speaks his last words to her the day before he leaves for Ithaca, 
never to see her again.
Then Nausicaa, with the gods’ loveliness on her stood beside the pillar that 
supported the roof with its joinery, and gazed upon Odysseus with all her eyes 
and admired him, and spoke to him aloud and addressed him in winged words, 
saying:
 
 ‘Goodbye, stranger, and think of me sometimes when you are back at home, 
how I was the ﬁ rst you owed your life to.’ Then resourceful Odysseus spoke in 
turn and answered her: ‘Nausicaa, daughter of great-hearted Alkinoos, even so 
may Zeus, high-thundering husband of Hera, grant me to reach my house and 
see my day of homecoming. So even when I am there I will pray to you as a 
goddess, all the days of my life. For, maiden, my life was your gift.’
Translation for 20G
So she spoke, and they stood and encouraged each other. They sat Odysseus down 
in shelter, as Nausikaa daughter of great-hearted Alcinous ordered; next to him 
they put a cloak and a tunic as clothing and gave him moist olive-oil in a golden 
oil-jar, and they told him to wash in the stream of the river. 
Then indeed godlike Odysseus said to the handmaidens: ‘Handmaidens, stand 
thus far off, so that I myself may wash the brine from my shoulders and anoint 
myself with olive-oil. For indeed ointment has been absent from my body for a 
long time. But I will not wash in front of you ; for I am ashamed to be naked 
coming among maidens with lovely hair.’
So he spoke, and they went far off and told the girl. But from the river godlike 
Odysseus washed from his body the brine which lay thick upon his back and 

 
Section 20G 
267
broad shoulders. From his head he wiped the scum of the unharvested sea. But 
when he had washed all and richly anointed himself, and put on the clothes which 
the unmarried girl provided for him, then Athene, daughter of Zeus, made him 
taller and broader to look upon; down from his head she sent bushy hair, like the 
hyacinth ﬂ ower. As when a skilled craftsman, whom Hephaistos and Pallas 
Athene have taught all skill, lays gold on silver and completes graceful work, so 
she poured on him grace, on his head and shoulders. Then going along the sea-
shore, he sat far off, shining with beauty and grace; the maiden watched him 
admiringly. Then indeed she spoke to her beautiful-haired handmaidens.
‘Listen to me, white-armed handmaidens, so that I may say something. Not 
against the will of all the gods who inhabit Olympus has this man come among 
the godlike Phaeacians. Earlier he seemed to me to be wretched, but now he is 
like the gods who inhabit the broad heaven. Would that such a man might be 
called my husband dwelling here, and that it might please him to remain here. 
But, handmaidens, give the stranger meat and drink.’
So she spoke, and they readily heard and obeyed her, and put beside Odysseus 
meat and drink. Then indeed much-enduring godlike Odysseus drank and ate 
greedily, because for a long time he had not tasted food.
Now read on in English to the end of Book 6.
In Book 7 Odysseus follows Nausikaa’s advice and, with Athene’s help, he 
goes to the palace and appeals to the Queen. He is welcomed and, after some 
debate, given hospitality. On the next day (Book 8) the Phaeacians hold games at 
which Odysseus establishes his prowess. In the evening there is a banquet, and 
after the banquet the singer Demodocus tells the story of the wooden horse at 
Troy. Odysseus is moved to tears, and Alcinous at last asks him who he is. 
Odysseus reveals his identity and starts to tell his story. In Books 9–12 he tells 
what has happened to him since he left Troy until the time he was washed up on 
the shore of the island of Calypso. In Book 13 he departs from Phaeacia and the 
story moves forward again to his return to Ithaca and all the problems which await 
him there.

