Polymers 
Properties and Applications 
Editorial Board: 
Prof Campbell Brown 
Dept. of Industrial Chemistry 
University of Liverpool 
P. O. Box 147, Liverpool L 693 BX/UK 
Prof Hans-Joachim Cantow 
Institut fUr Makromolekulare Chemie der Universitiit 
Stefan-Meier-Stra13e 31, 7800 Freiburg/Germany 
Prof H. James Harwood 
Institute of Polymer Science, University of Akron 
Akron, OH 44325/USA 
Prof Joseph P. Kennedy 
Institute of Polymer Science, University of Akron 
Akron, OH 44325/USA 
Prof. Anthony Ledwith 
Dept. of Inorganic, Physical and Industrial Chemistry 
University of Liverpool 
P. O. Box 147, Liverpool L 693 BX/UK 
Prof Joachim MeijJner 
Techn.-Chem. Lab., Eidgenossische Techn. Hochschule 
Universitiitsstra13e 6, CH-8006 Zurich, Switzerland 
Prof Seizo Okamura 
No. 24 Minami-Goshomachi 
Okazaki 
Sakyo-ku, 606 Kyoto, Japan 
Dr. G. Henrici-OIive/Prof S. Olive 
Monsanto Triangle Park, Development Center, Inc. 
P.O.B. 12274, Research Triangle Park, NC 27709/USA 
4 

A. Hebeish . 1. T. Guthrie 
The Chemistry and 
Technology of 
Cellulosic Copolymers 
With 91 Figures 
Springer -Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg New York 1981 

Professor Dr. Ali Hebeish 
National Research Center 
Dokki, Cairo, Egypt 
Dr. James Thomas Guthrie 
University of Leeds 
Leeds, U.K. 
This volume continues the series Chemie, Physik und Technologie der Kunst-
stoffe in Einzeldarstellungen, which is now entitled Polymers/Properties and 
Applications. 
ISBN-13: 978-3-642-67709-0 
e-ISBN-13: 978-3-642-67707-6 
DOl: 10.1007/978-3-642-67707-6 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data: 
Hebeish, Ali, 1936 ~ The chemistry and technology of cellulosic copolymers. (Polymers; 
v. 4). Includes bibliographical references and index. I. Guthrie, James Thomas, 1943 ~ 
joint author. II. Title. 
QD32l.H42 547.7'82 80-19442 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part 
of the material is concerned, specifically those of translation, reprinting, re-use of 
illustrations, broadcasting, reproduction by photocopying machine or similar means, 
and storage in data banks. Under § 54 of the German Copyright Law where copies are 
made for other than private use a fee is payable to "Verwertungsgesellschaft Wort", 
Munich. 
© by Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1981 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1981 
The use of registered names, trademarks, ctc. in this publication does not imply, even 
in the absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
2152/3020-543210 

To our families 
A. H.jl. T. G. 

Preface 
Many excellent volumes have been written on the chemistry of cellulose and 
its derivatives. Judging by the number of conferences which have been assembled 
to deal with the topic, cellulose and its derivatives continue to arouse great 
scientific interest. Matching this interest has been the development in copolymer 
science and technology. In both instances the driving force has been the search 
for products having useful, new or interesting properties. It appeared inevitable 
that these two concepts would be brought together at some time in the research 
and development of cellulosic copolymers. That time has arrived. 
In assembling this text our aim was to present an informative account of the 
chemistry and technology of cellulosic copolymers. As such, we intended that 
the contents be of interest to all those concerned with the production and use 
of cellulosic products whether in academic or industrial circles. Sections of the 
text should be of value in undergraduate and post-graduate teaching, provided 
the student is given guidance in following the text. The volume is divided 
into eight chapters, each dealing with factors which are relevant to an under-
standing of cellulosic copolymers. Each chapter carries its own bibliography and 
is reasonably self-contained. 
In assembling the text we have drawn on the experience of many individuals and 
organizations whose interest we acknowledge. We are very grateful to various 
publishers and authors for granting permission to use their diagrams in this 
text. We extend our thanks to Mrs. Leisel Carter and her colleagues for their 
efficient typing, and we are indebted to Mr. A. Kazlauciunas for his interest 
and enthusiasm in reproducing the figures contained in the text. We acknowledge 
the help given by the publishers in preparing the manuscript in its final 
form as well as in the removal of ambiguities or errors. 
However, there may be some errors which have been too well hidden for our 
detection. We would be indebted if these were brought to our attention by 
readers. 
Cairo and Leeds, October 1980 
A. Hebeish, J. T. Guthrie 
VII 

Table of Contents 
1. 
The Homopolymeric Species . 
1.1. 
Introduction........ 
1.2. 
Cellulose......... 
1.2.1. 
Structural Features of Cellulose 
1.2.2. 
Reactivity of Cellulose . . . . 
1.3. 
Synthetic Polymers. . . . . . 
1.3.1. 
Radical Addition Polymerization. 
1.3.1.1. Free Radical Initiation 
1.3.1.2. Propagation. . . . . . . 
1.3.1.3. Termination. . . . . . . 
1.3.2. 
Kinetics of Polymerization 
1.3.2.1. Initiation . . 
1.3.Z.2. Propagation. 
1.3.2.3. Termination. 
1.3.2.4. Steady State. 
1.3.2.5. Degree of Polymerization . 
1.3.2.6. Transfer Reactions. . 
1.3.2.7. Effect of Temperature 
1.3.2.8. Rate Constants . . . 
1.3.2.9. Initiation Rates . . . 
1.4. 
Vinyl Copolymerization. 
1.4.1. 
Copolymer Formation . 
1.4.2. 
Kinetics of Copolymerization 
1.5. 
Molecular Mass Distribution 
1.6. 
Polymer Structure 
2. 
2.1. 
2.2. 
2.2.1. 
2.2.2. 
2.2.3. 
2.3. 
2.4. 
2.4.1. 
References . . . . . . . . 
Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose . 
Introduction. . . . . . . . . 
Conditions Affecting Grafting . 
Chemical Conditions . 
Physical Condition~ 
Nature of Substrate . 
Grafting Reactions. . 
Mechanism of Free Radical Formation on Cellulose 
Chain Transfer ............... . 
1 
1 
2 
3 
7 
11 
11 
11 
12 
12 
13 
13 
15 
16 
17 
18 
20 
21 
22 
23 
23 
23 
26 
29 
29 
30 
32 
32 
34 
34 
35 
37 
41 
42 
43 
IX 

Table of Contents 
2.4.2. 
2.4.3. 
2.5. 
2.6. 
2.7. 
2.8. 
2.9. 
3. 
3.l. 
3.l.l. 
3.2. 
3.2.l. 
3.2.2. 
3.2.3. 
3.2.3.l. 
3.2.3.2. 
3.2.3.3. 
3.2.3.4. 
3.2.3.5. 
3.2.4. 
3.2.4.1. 
3.2.4.2. 
3.2.4.3. 
3.2.4.4. 
3.3. 
3.3.1. 
3.3.2. 
4. 
4.l. 
4.2. 
4.2.1. 
4.2.2. 
4.2.3. 
4.2.4. 
4.2.5. 
4.2.6. 
4.2.7. 
4.2.8. 
4.2.9. 
4.2.10. 
4.2.1l. 
x 
Physical Activation. . . . . . . . . . 
Chemical Activation . . . . . . . . . 
Charge-Transfer Mechanism of Grafting 
Grafting by Chain Transfer . . . . . . 
Grafting by Mechanochemical Activation of Cellulose 
Uncatalyzed Grafting. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
The Kinetics of Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics. 
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics . . . . . . 
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Radiation Units; The Concept of Dose and Dosimetry . 
Grafting by High Energy Radiation . . . . . 
Energy Transfer in the Irradiation of Cellulose. 
The Radiation Protection of Cellulose . . . . 
The Radiation Chemistry of Cellulose . . . . 
Molecular and Structural Properties of Irradiated Cellulose 
Chemical Properties of Irradiated Cellulose . . . . . . . 
Effect on Storage on the Properties of Irradiated Cellulose 
Location of the Free Radicals in the Cellulose Structure after 
43 
44 
46 
47 
50 
51 
54 
61 
64 
64 
66 
68 
71 
72 
76 
77 
82 
85 
Irradiation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
87 
Mechanisms of Radiation-Induced Reactions in Cellulose. 
High Energy, Radiation-Induced Grafting of Cellulosics 
Radiochemical Yields of Irradiated Cellulose 
Radiochemical Yield of Irradiation Grafting 
Techniques of Radiation-Induced Grafting . 
Mechanisms of Irradiation Grafting . . . . 
Grafting by low Energy Radiation in the Presence of Sensitizers . 
Photo-tendering in Ultraviolet-Light-Sensitized Grafting 
Photoionitiated Grafting Reactions. 
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose . 
Introduction. . . . . 
Free-Radical Initiation . . . 
Persulfate Initiation . . . . 
Hydroxyl Radical Initiation . 
CelV Ion Initiation . . . . . 
Initiation by Pentavalent Vanadium 
Initiation by Manganese'" Ions 
. . 
Initiation by ManganeselV • 
. 
• 
• 
• 
Initiation by Ozone-Oxygen Mixtures. 
Initiation by Periodate Ions . . . . . 
Initiation by Aryl Diazonium Groups. 
Initiation by Radical Attack on Unsaturated Groups. 
Initiation by Dimethylaniline . . . . . . . . . . . 
91 
96 
97 
98 
100 
121 
127 
128 
132 
138 
146 
146 
146 
146 
152 
155 
168 
168 
169 
171 
172 
173 
175 
176 

4.3. 
4.3.1. 
4.3.2. 
5. 
5.1. 
5.2. 
5.3. 
Ionic Initiation . 
Cationic Grafting 
Anionic Grafting. 
References . . . 
Grafting of other Types of Monomers onto Cellulose. 
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Step-Growth Polymerization of Cyclic Compounds. 
Preformed Polymers 
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Table of Contents 
179 
179 
180 
183 
187 
187 
187 
190 
194 
6. 
Grafting on Chemically Modified Celluloses 
196 
6.1. 
Introduction........... 
196 
6.2. 
Grafting on Cellulose Xanthogenate . 
198 
6.3. 
Grafting on Acetylated Cellulose. . . 
202 
6.4. 
Grafting on Cyanoethylated Cellulose 
206 
6.5. 
Grafting on Partially Carboxymethylated Cellulose. 
212 
6.6. 
Grafting on Acrylamidomethylated Cellulose . . . 
223 
6.7. 
Grafting on Cellulose Treated with N-Methylolacrylamide in an 
Alkaline Medium . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 
225 
6.8. 
Grafting on Carbamoylethylated Cellulose 
. . . . . . . .. 
227 
6.9. 
Grafting on Cellulose Bearing Carboxymethyl and Cyanoethyl 
Groups. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .. 
228 
6.10. 
Grafting on Cellulose Bearing Cyanoethyl and Carboxyethyl Groups 229 
6.11. 
Grafting on Phosphorylated Cellulose 
231 
6.12. 
Grafting on Crosslinked Cellulose . 
235 
6.13. 
Grafting on Aldehyde Cellulose . . 
237 
6.14. 
Grafting onto Methylol Cellulosics. 
238 
7. 
7.1. 
7.2. 
7.3. 
7.3.1. 
7.3.2. 
7.3.3. 
7.3.4. 
7.3.5. 
7.3.6. 
7.3.7. 
7.4. 
7.5. 
7.6. 
7.6.1. 
7.6.2. 
References . . . . . . . . . . . 
241 
Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Introduction. . . . 
Proof of Grafting . . . . . . . . . . 
Molecular Structure . . . . . . . . . 
Molecular Mass of Cellulose Backbone . 
Molecular Masses of Grafted Branches . 
Average Molecular Masses of 'True' Cellulosic Copolymers . 
Preferential Adsorption by Cellulosic Copolymers in 
Mixed Solvents . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Molecular Mass Distribution of Grafted Branches 
Frequency of Branching 
. 
Site of Branch Attachment 
Morphology. . 
Fine Structure. . . . . . 
Properties. . . . . . . . 
Textile Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers. 
New Cellulosic Materials . . . . . . . . . . . 
245 
245 
246 
250 
250 
251 
257 
261 
262 
262 
262 
262 
276 
277 
278 
311 
XI 

Table of Contents 
7.6.3. 
7.6.4. 
8. 
8.1. 
8.2. 
8.2.1. 
8.2.2. 
8.3. 
8.4. 
8.5. 
XII 
Properties of Grafted Paper. . . . . . 
Properties of Grafted Pulp and Timber . 
References . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Industrial Application of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Wood-Plastic Composites (WPC) 
. . . ..... 
The Geographical Distribution of WPC Development. 
Uses and Properties . . . 
Grafted Textile Products . 
Grafted Pulps and Papers . 
Miscellaneous Examples 
References ...... . 
313 
316 
322 
326 
326 
326 
329 
332 
334 
336 
337 
338 

1. The Homopolymeric Species 
1.1. Introduction 
A consideration of the chemical structure of natural high polymers such as 
cotton, wool, silk, starch, gums, and rubber reveals that in all these substances, a 
very large number of identical or similar atoms or groups of atoms are linked 
by primary valency forces to form macromolecules. Thus, each of the high poly-
mers is composed of certain fundamental repeat units in the molecular 
structure whereby it acquires some useful properties. Such structural features 
common to all high polymers impart similar physical properties to these 
substances, even if they are chemically different. The fibrous structure of 
asbestos and cellulose, the elastic properties of poly(phosphonitrilic chloride) 
and rubber, the optical properties of inorganic and organic glasses, and the 
optical anisotropy of cellulose and nylon are examples. 
Some of the high polymers described above are fiber-forming while the 
others are not. One difference between these two classes of high polymers is 
that fiber forming polymers, though they are of the same size as ordinary 
molecules in two directions (breadth and depth), are hundreds or even thousands 
of times as long in the third dimension (length), i.e., they are similar in shape 
to the fibers they form (very long when compared with their diameter), 
whereas in the n6n-fiber-forming high polymers, the molecules are roughly of the 
same dimensions in each direction. This may be explained by giving an analogy. If 
a sugar molecule is enlarged to the size of the head of an ordinary match stick, 
a cellulose molecule will, on the same scale, correspond to a match stick 
6 meters long. 
All natural fiber forming substances consist of macromolecules built up from 
a large number of fragments of smaller molecules of non-fiber forming sub-
stances. 
Though textile fibers share the property of being fibrous, they differ in many 
other important properties. The differences lie largely in physical properties, such 
as moisture uptake, tensile strength, elasticity, and luster. Differences in 
chemical properties include their dye-ability and their resistance to various 
chemicals commonly employed in bleaching and other processes. Thus, cotton, 
wool, acetate rayon, and terylene have to be dyed by different classes of dyes 
having entirely different chemical properties. Wool is quite resistant to fairly high 
concentrations of acids but is easily damaged by boiling with even dilute caustic 
liquors, while the reverse is the case with cotton. In fact, cotton acquires useful 
properties, such as increased luster and tensile strength, on treatment with 
caustic soda (mercerization). 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
Examination of the properties of natural high polymers useful as textile fibers 
has yielded some important observations, which have led to a greater appreciation 
of the prime requirements of fiber-forming polymers. A high polymer should 
have at least some of the fo)1owing characteristics if it is to serve as a fibrous 
material: 
(l) The polymer must have a comparatively high molecular mass. The average 
length of its molecular chain should be on the order of I x 10-7 m or more. 
This requirement may be relaxed depending on the chemical nature of the 
polymer and on the arrangement of the polymer molecules. 
(2) The macromolecules of the polymers must be linear in structure, and possess 
a high degree of symmetry so as to allow for good orientation of the molecules 
and the build-up of an ordered structure. The molecules should not contain 
bulky side chains. 
(3) A high degree of orientation of the molecules in the polymer is a prerequisite 
for producing good tensile strength. 
(4) The chemical nature of the materials should be such that the polymer has a 
high melting point and the ability to maintain orientation. To ensure these 
requisites, the molecular chains should have a sufficient number of sites of 
attraction (certain chemical groups such as hydroxyl groups), having 
pronounced secondary valency forces which allow the material to acquire a 
high degree of intermolecular cohesion. The arrangement of such macro-
molecules in the fiber produces ordered regions and amorphous regions, 
often better considered as the inaccessible and accessible regions respective-
ly. 
Synthetic fibers have come to occupy a very important position in the 
textile field. Some synthetic polymers have better properties than the natural 
fibers in several respects. The main advantages of synthetic fibers, as compared 
to cellulosic fibers, may be summarized as follows: (i) high resistance to 
chemicals, (ii) high resistance to micro-organisms and moulds, (iii) low inflamm-
ability, (iv) high elasticity and, hence, higher resistance to distortion and 
creasing, and (v) high resistance to abrasion. Nowadays, there is no doubt that 
with the introduction of various synthetic fibers, which can be made to suit many 
end uses, all natural fibers are facing stiff competition. Statistics from the 1960's 
and 1970's show this to be so, though recent figures show the natural fibers to be 
more than holding their ground. Carothers has shown that synthetic polymers can 
be classified according to the chemistry of their preparation. He identified two 
broad categories: namely, polymers made via (a) a step-growth reaction and (b) 
an addition reaction. Our interest is mainly in addition polymerization methods. 
1.2. Cellulose 
The term cellulose in the strict scientific sense applies only to the plant cell 
materials consisting of macromolecules of at least several hundred to several 
thousand anhydroglucose units. It is the carbohydrate part of the cell 
wall of plants, formed out of only glucose molecules condensed and linked 
together linearly by means of 1,4-fJ-glucosidic bonds. 
2 

1.2. Cellulose 
1.2.1. Structural Features of Cellulose 
The nature of the building units and their linking, toether with the average 
molecular length and its range, are of primary importance in the establishment of 
the structure of macromolecules. These aspects have been thoroughly studied for 
cellulose. 
On hydrolosis with inorganic acids, cellulose gives almost a quantitative 
yield of glucos~ (90.7 %). Completely acetylated cotton on methanolysis gives an 
equilibrium mixture of methyl ex- and fJ-glucosides, which accounts for 98.1 % 
of cellulose. As the products of reaction are only glucosides, and as the reaction 
mixture fails to give the furfural test for pentosans, this is taken as good 
evidence to show that cellulose is built up only of glucose. The lower-than-
theoretical yields are attributed to reversion and/or decomposition of glucose by 
strong acids. Purified cotton and cellulose acetate are hydrolised with 40 % HCl 
to glucose, which is estimated as CO2 by catalytic oxidation with FeC~. Results 
show 99.1 % of glucose in the original cellulose in both cases. Sugar iden-tification 
by chromatography shows that very pure forms of cellulose, such as ramie, 
yield on hydrolysis only glucose. All the above tests show that the basic unit of 
cellulose is glucose. 
The reaction of one ex- or fJ-glucose form with an alcoholic group of another 
glucose molecule gives ex- or fJ-bonded dimers, trimers or higher polymers 
bonded through the acetal group. Maltose is the ex(l-4)-linked dimer of glucose. 
This is the repeating unit found in starch dextrins and amylose. Likewise, 
cellulose is the fJ(l-4)-linked dimer of glucose and the polymeric chain built up 
of cellobiose residues in cellulose. 
~
HCH20H 0 H H 
HO 
0 
H 
HO 
OH 
HO 
H 
H 
Maltose (ex - anomer) 
H 
Cellobiose (C% - form) 
The crystalline and molecular structure of cellobiose, one of the major 
products of the hydrolysis of cellulose under acid conditions, has been reviewed 
by Wunderlich et al.l). Cellulose itself has, therefore, been shown to be 
poly-( 1-4)-fJ-D-glucopyranose. 
Carefully isolated cellulose shows very little reducing power, but it develops 
this property on hydrolysis. This fact, as well as the production of a nearly 
theoretical yield of cellobiose, indicates that the bond is glucosidic in nature. 
The bond involves the potential aldehyde group of one glucose molecule and a 
hydroxyl group of another. 
Cellobiose octaacetate, obtained by hydrolysis of fully acetylated cellulose, has 
been shown by Skraup and Konig2) to resist the yeast ferment maltase, which 
readily hydrolyses the ex-glucosidic bonds in the starch degradation product, 
maltose. It is interesting to note that cellobiose may be hydrolysed to glucose 
by emulsin, which establishes the disaccharide linkage in the beta configuration. 
Work on the infrared absorption of cellulose and starch compared with known 
3 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
oligomers has reconfirmed the beta configuration as the only interglucosidic 
valence bond in cellulose3l• 
Cellotriose, cellotetraose, cellopentaose, cellohexaose, and celloheptaose have 
been identified as products of hydrolysis of cellulose. From a comparison of the 
physical data obtained from compounds of increasing anhydroglucose (gluco-
pyranose) content, and from the fact that they showed no chemical differences, 
it became evident that their formulae should extrapolate to cellulose when the 
number of anhydroglucose units was assumed to be very large. 
Methylated cellulose, obtained by treating sodium hydroxide-soaked cotton 
with dimethyl sulphate, yields upon hydrolysis only the 2,3,6 trim ethyl ether of 
glucose. It was therefore established that the three free hydroxyl groups in the 
cellulose occupy the 2, 3 and 6 positions. The groups have decreasing acidic 
properties in the order 2, 3 and 6. The primary hydroxyl group at position 6 is 
sterically the most unhindered. 
Methylation of cellobiose gave the crystalline heptamethyl derivative, which 
upop. acid hydrolysis produced 2,3,4,6-tetra-O-methyl-p-D-glucopyranose in 
equimolecular amounts. Cellobiose could therefore only be O-P-D-glucopyranosyl-
(1-4) or (1-5)-P-D-glucopyranose. The fact that no 5-methyl derivative was 
found in either of the two fractions supported the formula already established 
theoretically, that the 5 position in the molecule was inaccessible for chemical 
reactions. This was finally proved when the D-glucose-2,3,5,6-tetramethyl ether 
was obtained with 2,3,4,6-tetramethyl ether from an octamethyl-cellobionic acid. 
This acid was prepared by eliminating the cyclic structure in the reducing half of 
the cellobiose by oxidation with bromine water. Cellobiose was thus established 
to be O-J1-D-gluco-pyranosyl-(I--4)-P-D-glucopyranose. 
Four types of evidence for the uniformity of the linkage in cellulose have 
been seen. This is accurate up to an extent of about 99 %. Chemical evidence 
is derived from methylation studies of glucose, other oligomers, and cellulose. 
Polarimetric evidence is based on optical rotation of methyl cellulose in suitable 
solvents. The values show very good agreement with the theoretical value based 
on considering the chain to be built up of only P-glucopyranose units. Studies on 
cellopentaose, cellohexaose, and celloheptaose further confirm the results. 
Kinetic evidence is obtained from the change in rate, optical rotation, and 
reducing power during acid. hydrolysis. These can be quantitatively accounted 
for by assuming that all the hydrolysable links in a uniform chain are equal 
and equivalent except for the reducing terminal units which can be neglected 
when the chains are infinitely long: otherwise, a correction can be made for the 
faster rate of the cleavage of the bonds adjacent to the reducing end of the 
chain molecules. Static evidence consisted in the assessment of the. actual 
quantities of oligosaccharides formed during hydrolysis. By assuming all bonds 
to be equivalent, Kuhn4l explained, by a mathematical treatment, the low yields 
of intermediate compounds. The higher yield of cellobiose was attributed to its 
ready crystallisation, which prevented further breakdown. 
As cellulose chain molecules are very long, it is very difficult to detect a small 
number of bonds other than the J1-glucosidic, if present. Even the best evidence 
applies only to 99 % of the bonds. Further work incorporating advanced techni-
ques and mathematics in the study has reduced the extent of error in the 
4 

1.2. Cellulose 
proof to about 0.1 %. The uncertainty about the nature of this 0.1 % of bonds in 
cellulose itself has for some time resulted in a heated controversy over the 
existence of weak bonds in cellulose. Certain studies indicate the absence of such 
bonds in native cellulose, but it is possible that there can be a few p-glucosidic 
bonds which are sensitized to certain reactions, such as acid hydrolysis by 
induction effects or physical strains in the molecules. 
The chain molecules in natural cellulose are not of the same length. The 
number of glucose units in different chains varies. This is revealed by different 
samples of cellulose of no detectable chemical difference giyihg different alkali 
solubilities and viscosities. A given sample represents a molecular homologous 
series in which there is no molecular heterogeneity. We have to deal with 
averages, such as average molecular mass and average chain length. The degree 
of polymerization (D.P.) of unopened cotton has been reported at 15,300; this 
value decreases rapidly to 8,100 on exposure to the atmosphere. Bast fibers have 
an average D.P. of 9,900, while wood species vary between 7,500 and 10,500. 
The long cellulose molecule effectively camouflages the presence of the two end 
groups in chemical analysis. Upon methylation the non-reducing end group should 
give a D-glucose-2,3,4,6-tetramethyl ether; this has been obtained under very 
careful reaction conditions. 
The reducing end, on the other hand, could never be isolated, presumably 
because of the fast demethylation of the C1 methyl group during acid 
hydrolysis. 
Six-membered rings can assume either a boat (a) or chair (b) conformation 
according to their energy level. The pyranose ring assumes a chair form in 
a 
b 
preference to the boat form because of internal strain in the latter. In cellulose, 
the chair" form will fit the periodicity of 1.03 nm. Two possible chair 
conformations will exist in the case of the pyran ring; these are chain (c) and (d) 
for glucose. 
H 
HO 
H 
OH H 
c 
d 
In (c) the oxygen-bearing substituents lie mainly in the same plane as the 
pyranose ring (equatorial), and the hydrogen atoms stand away from the ring 
('axial'); the situation is reversed in (d). Reeves5) showed that D-glucopyranosides 
exist and react in the chair conformation. The transition into a boat form, under 
certain strains or activating-energy influences, might be the cause of differences in 
5 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
physical structure and chemical reactivity of cellulose under these conditions. 
Similar conclusions have been obtained from x-ray diffraction patterns and from 
infrared spectroscopy. 
Whenever the distance between the various oxygen and hydrogen atoms in the 
cellulose molecule reaches 0.3 nm or less, they interact with each other to form 
intramolecular and intermolecular hydrogen bonds. Infrared spectroscopy has 
verified the existence of these hydrogen bonds. The intramolecular hydrogen 
bridges anchor the anhydroglucose units to a very limited region of free play 
around the acetal linkage. Thus, they impart a certain stiffness to the 
cellulose molecule: 
Intramolecular hydrogen bonds in the cellulose molecule 
This, and the fact that the (l-4)-fJ-bond demands a rotation of 180 0 of each 
subsequent glucose unit to fit the fJ-configuration of the connecting hemiacetal 
linkage, gives the cellulose molecule a rod-like chain structure: 
The fJ-glucosidic linkage in cellulose and the resulting intramolecular hydrogen 
bonds render the cellulose molecule straight and stiff. 
On the other hand, in starch the glucose units can be arranged in a helix-like 
chain molecule: 
o 
6 
H 
3 
H 
~H20H 
"--_-0 
5 
H 
H 
H 

1.2. Cellulose 
The involvement of the hydroxyl groups in hydrogen bonding, as well as 
general dispersion forces, determined by the proximity of neighbouring atoms, 
impart a different reactivity to the three hydroxyl groups available for chemical 
reactions. Esterification and etherification studies have shown that the C-6 group 
is esterified ten times faster than the other groups, whereas on etherification 
the C-2 group is etherified twice as fast as the C-3. The primary alcoholic 
group at C-6 is distinguished from the other two secondary alcoholic groups in 
that it has an axis of free rotation around the C-5 to C-6 bond6), which 
is, however, somewhat restricted by the hydrogen bonds. It has been observed 
by infrared spectroscopy7) that rotational isomers must exist especially in the 
alkali-swollen cellulose. The reactivity of the primary alcoholic groups seems to 
be related to this isomerisation. Structural differences between cotton, wood 
cellulose and mercerised cellulose appear to be due to this rotational isomerisa-
tion. Equally relevant are aspects of cellulose reactivity. 
1.2.2. Reactivity of Cellulose 
Cellulose reacts as a trihydric alcohol with one primary and two secondary 
hydroxyl groups per glucose unit. The relative reactivity of the hydroxyl groups 
of both low molecu~ar mass carbohydrates and cellulose has been studied. In the 
former, the 2- and 6-hydroxyl groups are usually the most reactive. With 
cellulose, certain data indicate the preferential reactivity of the 2-hydroxyl and 
others of the 6-hydroxyl group. 
The manifold reactions of cellulose may be conveniently divided into two main 
kinds: those involving the hydroxyl groups and those comprising a degradation 
of the chain molecules. The former includes the following reactions: (1) Esterifica-
tion: nitration, acetylation and xanthation. (2) Etherification: alkylation and 
benzylation. (3) Replacement of -OR by -NR2 and halogen. (4) Replacement 
of -R in -OR by Na. (5) Oxidation of -{:R20R to -{:OOR. (6) Oxidation 
of secondary -OR groups to aldehyde and carboxy\. (7) Formation of addition 
compounds with acids, bases, and salts. 
These reactions taking place without breakdown of the chain may have only a 
local effect, e.g., causing change in the terminal groups or in individual 
members of the chain, or they may affect all, or the majority of, the members of 
the chain simultaneously. In the former case it is exceedingly difficult to 
detect the changes analytically in high molecular products, for which reagents of 
the utmost sensitivity are required. Sometimes, however, these reactions are 
manifested indirectly. Changes in the cellulose molecule resulting from oxidation 
in an acid medium affect only a few members of the chain and are scarely to be 
detected by direct means; yet, later on they become clearly noticeable in that the 
chain splits up at the affected parts upon subsequent contact with alkaline 
liquids. There are many chemical reactions -
the esterification and etherification 
of the hyroxyl groups in particular -
which are liable to take place over the 
entire chain more or less uniformly, with often little difference in reactivity of the 
-OR groups in positions 2, 3 and 6, though occasionally probable distinctions 
have been made. 
7 

1. The Homopoiymeric Species 
Of importance among the degradative rea<;tions are those brought about 
by hydrolysis of the glucosidic bonds and by oxidation. Hydrolytic breakdown 
takes place in the presence of acids, while oxidation may occur in an alkaline, 
acid or neutral medium. 
As hydrolytic degradation involves the scission of the cellulose acetal bonds 
(i.e., the p-glucosidic bonds) by acids, the resulting increase in reducing power, 
the decrease in D.P. of cellulose, and the extent of oligosaccharide formation 
provide methods to study the kinetics of this reaction. Hydrolysis of cellulose 
can be either homogeneous or heterogeneous, i.e., intracrystalline or inter-
crystalline, being dependent upon the swelling capacity of the acid used. 
In the case of homogeneous hydrolysis, the end products are the monomer 
(glucose) and some reversion products of the gentiobiose 1-6 linked type. 
With heterogeneous hydrolysis, the rate of reaction decreases as the reaction 
progresses to regions of high lateral order. There is an initial rapid rate which 
gradually decreases to a leveling-off D.P. stage. The first effect of hetero-
geneous acid hydrolysis is the formation of hydrocelluloses. 
When the cellulose is oxidized, the chain usually breaks down, probably 
as the result of opening and cleavage of the monomeric rings. Side by side 
with this, other reactions not interfering with chain length may occur, such 
as oxidation of the primary hydroxyl groups in the C-6 position to aldehyde 
or carboxyl groups, oxidation of the secondary hydroxyl groups at C-2 and 
C-3 to ketone groups, oxidative opening of rings to form two aldehyde or 
carboxyl groups, etc. According to the conditions of oxidation, the resulting 
products have either a marked acidic or equally pronounced reducing character. 
While the former exhibit intensified sorption towards basic dyes, the latter 
show an increased copper number. Mixed types also occur. 
The various possible types of oxidized groups formed in the cellulose molecule 
are shown below: -
H 
r.---------------, 
'C_~Nitrogen dioxide oxidation leadstol 
H/ I®\ 
L _____ ..:~.2t:i. ______ J 
H 
/~® r\---------, 0\ 0-
1/' I Random oxidation leads I 
r 
C® 
I to aldehyde, keto and 
I 
<DC 
/ \ 
!carboxy group tormationjl /1 
-0-1 
~7---:---~~ H 
C 
: 
CQ) 
I~: LI 
H 
I 
OH 
rn---- ------ -----, 
I Periodate oxidation le~ds to dialdehyde I 
L ______ ~::!:,~I~ ______ --.1 
The formation of reducing groups is determined by conventional copper 
number and by several other methods. Carboxyl groups are determined by 
their ion exchange properties or by infrared analysis. 
Heuser'll has classified the main reactions of cellulose into four 'possibilities' 
which are derived from the two-phase crystalline-amorphous structural concept, 
8 

1.2. Cellulose 
and the physical and chemical reactivities of the hydroxyl groups. These 
possibilities are: 
(i) 
Reaction takes place exclusively with one of the two types of hydroxyl 
groups (either primary or secondary), and is topochemical (micellarj 
heterogeneous). Duality of the sUbmicroscopic structure determines the 
rate, e.g., periodic acid oxidation. 
(ii) Reaction takes place preferentially with one of the two types of hydroxyl 
groups and is permutoid (quasi-homogeneous). The difference in reactivity 
of the hydroxyl types determines the rate, e.g., tritylation. 
(iii) Reaction takes place equally with hydroxyls of the two types, and the 
reaction is topochemical. Duality of the submicroscopic structure deter-
mines the rate of reaction, e.g., water sorption. 
(iv) Reaction takes place equally with the two types of hydroxyl group, and 
the reaction is permutoid. The rate of reaction is uniform throughout, 
e.g., nitration. 
One might be tempted to regard cellulose as a trihydric alcohol similar to 
sugars in the type of its reactions. This, however, has been definately shown 
not to be the case when reactions with cellulose take place, with all the 
properties of cellulose as a fiber-forming, high polymeric substance then coming 
into play. The following division accounts for most cellulose reactions, although 
it naturally represents a considerable simplification of the extremely complex 
state of the matter: (A) Heterogeneous reactions [which include surface 
reactions, macro heterogeneous reactions, micellarheterogeneous reactions and 
permutoid (or quasi-homogeneous) reactions] and (B) Homogeneous reactions. 
Surface r~actions are limited to the fiber surface, with the capillary system 
of pores and cracks remaining closed throughout the reaction due to the 
absence of any form of swelling, e.g., treatment of un swollen fibres with 
diazo methane or thallous ethyl ate and alkylation of trisodium cellulose. In 
other cases the molar volume of the reagent may be too great to allow the 
penetration of the latter into the pores and interstices, for example, in the 
case of isoalkyl halides9l. 
Macroheterogeneous reactions are characterized by the fact that the con-
version starts on the substrate surface and then proceeds through the fiber 
from layer to layer. Two different processes may occur: (a) If the secondary 
wall is penetrable but the primary wall is only partially swelled, then the reaction 
will start at the points of the fiber surface at which the cuticle has been damaged. 
A typical topochemical type of reaction is thus obtained. The capillaries, 
which may regarded as sUbmicroscopical reaction rooms, serve as supplying 
canals for the reagent. If they contain a liquid, immiscible with the reagents, 
the penetration of the latter will naturally be opposed, and a topochemical 
macroheterogeneous reaction will be obtained. The acetylation of fibrous 
cellulose with acetic anhydride in benzene furnishes a typical example. Another 
is the denitration of nitrocellulose in alcohol. (b) If the primary wall is swelled 
but the secondary wall is only slightly penetrable, the reaction will begin 
simultaneously all over the fiber surface and then proceed from layer to 
layer in the secondary wall. An example of this type is the denitration of nitro-
cellulose in aqueous media. 
9 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
If both the primary and the secondary wall are swelled in a cellulose reaction, 
the reaction is of the micro heterogeneous type. Microheterogeneous reactions 
in turn consist of two very different types: 
(i) micellar heterogeneous reactions, i.e., they involve a rapid and complete 
conversion of the micellar surface, after which the micelle itself undergoes a 
reaction layer after layer. An inner core of unchanged cellulose remains until 
the very end; (ii) permutoid reactions, which refer to the ability of the per-
mutites to exchange quantitatively and rapidly ions or molecules in the lattice 
with other ions or molecules, the crystal structure still being retained. 
The general concept of inter- and intramicellar types of reaction was first 
presented in 1925. Intercrystalline or intermicellar reactions take place in the 
amorphous regions or on the surface of crystallites, intracrystalline or intra-
micellar reactions within the crystallites. The former involve no changes in 
the X-ray diagram of the sample in question, whereas the latter lead to the 
formation of a new pattern, the two types being distinguished in this way. 
Reactions of cellulose in dispersion conditions produce a very uniform 
distribution of the entering groups along the chain molecules, as indicated 
by the good solubility properties of the product obtained. Several cases are 
known in which cellulose is converted quite homogeneously. An example is 
the acetylation of cellulose dispersed in phosphoric acid. The reaction of 
cellulose derivatives, dissolved in pyridine, with tosyl chloride is a homogeneous 
esterification reaction. All kinds of cellulose ethers can also be prepared 
homogeneously with the help of quaternary ammonium bases. 
Swelling 
A solid is said to swell when it takes up a liquid while at the same time (a) it 
does not lose its apparent homogeneity, (b) its dimensions are enlarged, and 
(c) its cohesion is diminished. This swelling is not to be confused with 
capillary imbibition, which is due to the fine structure of cellulose with its 
capillaries and interstices. As the dimensions of the latter are partially sub-
microscopic, there is a continuous transition from swelling to capillary im-
bibition. 
The swelling phenomena of cellulose are suitably subdivided through inter-
micellar or intramicellar swelling, each with either limited or unlimited swelling. 
Intermicellar swelling is restricted to the amorphous domains of the fiber, 
and in X-ray diagrams the diffuse halo of the swelling agent is therefore super-
imposed upon the original cellulose pattern. If only a limited amount of reagent 
is absorbed, the swelling will be limited; otherwise it would be unlimited. In 
the case of intramicellar swelling, the reagents penetrate the crystallites. If the 
swelling is limited, formation of an addition (swelling) compound takes place 
between the cellulose and the swelling agent. This compound has a distinct 
X-ray pattern. In the case of unlimited swelling, the uptake of the reagent 
continues until the crystallites are completely dispersed. 
Cellulose undergoes swelling in solutions of acids, bases, and salts as well 
as in some organic solvents. Swelling generally involves breaking of inter-
molecular bonding of cellulose and, in many cases, formation of new bonds 
with the swelling agents to give swelling compounds. As will be seen later, 
10 

1.3. Synthetic Polymers 
such swelling is an important feature of cellulose modification through graft 
polymerization whether to cellulose or one of its derivatives. 
Various reasonably recent texts dealing with aspects of cellulose accessibility 
and reactivity are availablelO -13). These are significant since they provide 
information relevant to more efficient grafting reactions and to novel cellulosic 
products. 
1.3. Synthetic Polymers 
1.3.1. Radical Addition Polymerization 
Addition (chain) polymerization consists simply of the union of several mole-
cules with a redistribution of the valency bonds, but with no splitting off of 
simple by-products as in step-growth polymerization. Addition polymers can 
be formed from unsaturated compounds or through ring opening procedures. 
Many unsaturated compounds, particularly ethylene and its derivatives, will 
polymerize under suitable conditions. 
The simplest case, in theory, is the polymerization of ethylene to give 
polyethylene, which may be illustrated as follows: 
H2H:CH2 + H2C:CH2 + H2C:CH2 .. · + H2C:CH2-. 
ethylene 
-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2-CH2- . 
polyethylene 
This reaction may be brought about by applying high pressure and high 
temperature, usually in the presence of a catalyst. 
Polymerization of vinyl compounds of the general formula H2C=CHX 
involves three stages: initiation, propagation (growth), and termination. 
1.3.1.1. Free Radical Initiation 
A free· radical is a molecular fragment carrying an unpaired electron. It is 
usually unstable and ready to combine to a more complete state. Free radicals 
can be produced by the homolytic cleavage of chemical bonds. Such homolytic 
cleavage may be assisted using ultraviolet light or high energy irradiation, 
catalysts of the peroxide type, the persulfate type, redox systems, or thermally 
unstable aliphatic azo compounds. When the free radical comes in contact with 
a vinyl compound, it disturbs the electronic structure of the carbon atoms at 
either end of the double bond, breaking the 1£ bond. This is represented by 
saying that the double bond opens. If R' is the free radical and CH2 = CHX 
is a vinyl monomer: 
R' + CH2 = CHX ~ RCHi:HX. 
The two have combined together to form another free radical, which 1S 
itself capable of further growth; the reaction has been initiated. 
11 

1. The Homopolymeric Species 
1.3.1.2. Propagation 
In a step-growth polymerization the small polymers that are formed early in 
the reaction, such as the dimers and trimers, react together. As a result, none 
of the original monomer is left after a short time, even though the average 
degree of polymerization may still be very low. This is not the case with 
addition polymerization, in which a partially polymerized mixture will consist 
of high molecular mass polymer and of unchanged monomer with virtually 
no constituents at intermediate stages of growth; some individual polymer 
molecules grow to maturity, while most of the monomer molecules remain 
unchanged. A given molecule of very high D.P. (degree of polymerisation) is 
formed by consecutive steps of a single chain process initiated by a free radical. 
The propagation step can be illustrated, using a free radical R' as the initiator, 
as follows: 
RCHr---CHX' + CH2 = CHX -+ RCH2-CHX-CH2--{;HX' 
RCH2-CHX-CH2--{;HX' + CH2 = CHX -+ 
RCH2-CHX-CH2-CHX-CH2--{;HX' 
and so on. Ultimately, the chain may contain several thousand monomer 
units. 
1.3.1.3. Termination 
When the free radical at the end of one chain meets that at the end of another 
chain, the two combine. Through such combination termination the long 
molecule is completed. It cannot grow any more unless reinitiated through 
chain transfer. Combination termination may be represented as 
Alternatively, instead of joining together, the two active chain ends may 
disproportionate, one giving up a P hydrogen atom to the other, so that both 
molecules are deactivated and can grow no more, unless reinitiated by chain 
transfer. Disproportionation termination, which is much less common than 
combination termination, may be shown as 
R-(CH2-CHX)y-CH2--{;HX' + R1-(CH2-CHX)z-
-CH2CHX' -
R-(CH2-CHX)y-CH = CHX + Rl_ 
-(CH2-CHX)z-CH2-CH2X. 
Termination of the propagating chain in radical polymerizations may also 
occur by chain transfer. Chain transfer reactions provide many subtle means 
of termination which may be unpredictable. In cellulose modification through 
grafting, chain transfer can sometimes be used to advantage. Chain transfer 
reactions are usually hydrogen abstraction reactions which may involve transfer 
12 

1.3. Synthetic Polymers 
of the radical activity to the solvent, monomer, dead homopolymer, or the 
substrate. The transfer of radical activity to cellulosic substrates through 
hydrogen abstraction reactions is one important feature of grafting to cellulosics. 
Most of the vinyl and acrylic graft polymerizations onto cellulose, which have 
provoked interest either in research or industry, involve a free radical mechanism, 
thus, the provision of detailed information on various aspects of radical poly-
merization is called for. For the more basic aspects of radical and ionic addition 
polymerization, the reader is referred to one or more of the excellent relevant 
texts on this subject14 - 19). 
1 .3.2. Kinetics of Polymerization 
The kinetics of vinyl polymerization of the various monomers vary con-
siderably with the nature of the monomers and the conditions of polymeri-
zation. Discussion of the kinetics will be confined here to homogeneous 
systems, since these systems form a basis which can be extended to hetero-
geneous conditions. 
1.3.2.1. Initiation 
As previously pointed out, the first step in initiation is the decomposition of the 
initiator, I, into two radicals, R', 
(1) 
If ki is the reaction constant for this reaction, the rate of production of radicals 
may be expressed as 
d~~ '] = 2kJI] , 
(2) 
The factor 2 is introduced to take care of the fact that the radicals must be pro-
duced in pairs, The radical R' is capable of initiating the reaction chain, 
(3) 
in homopolymerization, where M represents the monomer and Mi is the 
first member of the propagation chain. The rate of initiation, Rp of chain 
radicals can be written in the form 
R. = d[M'] = 2jk.[I] 
'dt 
' 
(4) 
where f is a factor which represents the fraction of primary radicals R', 
which initiate chains. This is tantamount to saying that reaction (3) is fast, for, 
if it is not, the factor f will be dependent on the monomer concentration. 
However, a large fraction of the primary radicals may react with the other 
molecules in the system to yield an inactive product. Such a reaction will make f 
13 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
less than unity. Another possibility is that the radicals which are formed in 
pairs can recombine before they escape from one another. This "cage" effect 
is a first order combination and will again make fless than unity and a function of 
monomer concentration. 
It is possible, in a case such as the polymerization of acrylonitrile with redox 
catalysts, to show that the radical concentration is maintained constant when 
the rate-determining step is as shown by reaction (3), giving the velocity of 
initiation as 
d[M'] 
. 
R; = dt = kJR ] [M] . 
(5) 
This state of affairs corresponds to the factor f being linearly dependent on the 
monomer concentration. 
The initiator efficiency,f, may be determined by a number of methods: 
(a) by comparison of the amount of initiator decomposed with the number 
of initiator fragments which start the polymer chain; 
(b) by determining the number average molecular mass of the polymer and 
hence calculating the number of molecules formed. If the reaction involves 
no transfer and termination is by coupling of radicals, the number of 
combined primary radicals is twice the number of molecules; 
(c) by using inhibitors which can react stoichiometrically with the chain 
radicals giving products of very short chain lengths, one molecule of inhi-
bitor being used per chain initiated. In the inhibition period, the number 
of chains started is assumed to be equivalent to the number of inhibitor 
molecules used and, hence, from the knowledge of the rate of decomposition, 
the efficiency may be calculated. 
Polymerization may also be initiated by means of high energy irradiation, 
a complex process with many side reactions. It has been widely studied in 
reference to grafting upon cellulose, as will be discussed in Chapter 3. 
When polymerization is initiated by irradiation of the monomer soluti'on 
with light, absorption of light by a monomer molecule will give rise to a radical 
of some kind and may be formally expressed as 
M + hv~M·. 
The rate of production of the radicals will depend on the amount of light 
energy absorbed. The quantum yield now corresponds to the efficiency, f 
If irradiation of intensity 10 passes through the solution of thickness x, with 
concentration of monomer [M], the energy absorbed is given according to the 
Beer/Lambert law by 10 (I -
e-t[M1x) where E is the extinction coefficient. The 
rate of radical production will be 
(6) 
Initiation in such a system is thus dependent on the monomer concentration. 
14 

1.3. Synthetic Polymers 
Polymerization by photochemical initiation is another method worth men-
tioning. In this method a photo-chemical initiator, which releases free radicals 
at a wavelength where the monomer is unaffected, is put into the system. Such a 
substance may be benzoin or azobisisobutyronitrile, which is decomposed to 
free radicals on irradiation with light from a -mercury arc in the region of 
360 nm. In this case, the velocity of initiation will depend upon the intensity, 
the absorption of light by initiator, and the concentration of the initiator. The 
reaction may be represented as: 
I + hv -+ 2 R' , 
R' + M-+M·. 
As previously indicated, photochemical techniques may be performed at low 
temperatures when thermal polymerization is absent. Further, photochemical 
initiation is useful in fundamental studies because the production of free 
radicals may be instantaneously controlled by variation of the light intensity. 
Photochemically induced grafting is considered later. 
1 .3.2.2. Propagation 
The reaction of the monomer molecules with the reactive centers at the end 
of the chains may be written as: 
M~ + M-+M;, 
M; + M-+M~, 
M~ + M --.. M~, 
M~ + M -t M~ + 1 ' 
where M~ refers to a chain radical containing n units. 
Each of these steps could be described by means of the rate of loss of 
monomer. 
(d~~]) 2 = -k2[M~] [M], etc. 
where 
«d[M]}/dt)n 
refers to the change monomer concentration due to 
reaction of, M~ with monomer. The overall rate of change of monomer con-
centration can be measured, and these equations can be summed to give the 
velocity of propagation, Rp 
(7) 
15 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
The loss of monomer is a measure of the rate of polymerization or the velocity 
of polymerization. 
To render the kinetic treatment possible, it is assumed that the reaction 
constants are identical, Le" kl = k2 ... = kn = kp , the propagation constant. 
Equation 7 then becomes: 
(8) 
The quantity in the braces is the total concentration of the radicals taking 
part in the reaction and may be written simply as [Ml Equation 8 then 
becomes: 
d ~~] = -k p[M] [M'] , 
(9) 
1.3.2,3. Termination 
On the assumption that the termination of the reaction is the union of two 
radical ends to annihilate both, the equation can be written: 
and the loss in radicals is given by 
d[M'] 
-- ~ -2k [M'] [M' ] 
dt 
mn 
n 
m 
(10) 
where kmn is the termination constant. 
Again, a kinetic scheme in which each coupling reaction has a different 
constant would be incapable of solution. The reaction between two radicals 
is fast; the rate will be determined by the number of times per second that the 
reactive heads are in the correct position. It is difficult to calculate the rate 
at which small radicals collide in a liquid, and any calculation with a polymer 
radical will be further complicated by the fact that each segment of the polymer 
chain is capable of free rotation around the single bonds comprising the back-
bone of the polymer. This means that the mobility of the radical head will be 
much greater than for a rigid molecule, and the mobility may not be much less 
than that of a small radical. Thus, the rate of termination may be taken to be 
independent of molecular mass, and equation 10 may be written in terms of a 
single termination constant, kr; 
d[M'] = -2k [M']2 . 
dt 
r 
(11) 
This step would seem justified on the basis of the fit of the overall kinetics 
to the data. 
16 

1.3. Synthetic Polymers 
However, the rate at which the growing chain ends collide need not, under 
all conditions, be independent of molecular mass. Since the diffusion of large 
radicals may be slow, it is to be expected that a point may be reached when the 
termination step is diffusion-controlled. A reduction in the rate of the termi-
nation step would give more time for the radicals to grow and hence give a 
product of higher molecular mass. Since the diffusion coefficient is inversely 
proportional to the viscosity, the effect is to be expected in bulk polymerization 
when a considerable quantity of monomer is converted and the reaction mass 
becomes very viscous. This is referred to as the gel effect. The reaction is also 
diffusion-controlled when the mobility of the active head is reduced by causing 
the growing molecule to coil itself up. This shields the radical end and may be 
carried out by conducting the reaction in the presence of a precipitant such 
as methanol. A reduction of the rate of termination would be accompanied by an 
increase in the overall rate of polymerization. It rpust be pointed out that the 
termination step differs from the propagation step by the fact that in the 
termination step both the reacting species are large molecules, i.e., growing 
polymer chains. With the propagation reaction, the supply of monomer units is 
governed by the diffusion of small molecules even if the movement of the large 
ones is restricted. 
1.3.2.4. Steady State . 
In irradiation polymerization, for example, the formation of radicals occurs 
at a constant rate Ri . When irradiation is stopped, the radicals formed will 
combine with the monomer. As a result, the growing polymer chains increase 
and so will their rate of destruction until a stage is reached at which the rate 
of production of radicals is approximately equal to their rate of destruction. 
Under such conditions, the concentration of radicals and the rate of reaction 
vary little with time except for effects brought about by changes in the 
concentration of reactants. The rate of change of radical concentration is 
given by the difference between the rate of formation and the rate of destruction 
of the radicals, i.e., 
d[M·] = Ri _ 2k,[M"]2 . 
dt 
Since Ri is constant, Eq. 12 may be integrated to give 
( R )1/2 
[M"J = 
_i 
Tanh (2k,Ri/2 t 
2k, 
provided that [M·] = 0 when t = O. 
(12) 
(13) 
Now Tanh x is a function which increases rapidly from zero and approaches 
unity asymptotically. When t approaches infinity, [M·] approaches a maximum 
value, [M·]s. [M.] approaches within I % of this value when (2k, Ri)I/2 t is ~3. 
When this situation is reached, the concentration of [M.] does not substantially 
change and the system may be described as being in the "steady state". 
The steady state principle or hypothesis states that a reaction involving a 
transient species is characterised by having rates of formation and disappearance 
17 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
of this species, which are equal. The previous discussion would indicate that this 
is an approximation, but one which has been amply justified by the consistency 
of the results obtained, The condition for this stationary state is d [M ']/dt = 0 
and, hence, from Eq, (12), 
( R )1/2 
[M']. = 
2~t 
(14) 
In accepting the stationary state principle, one must realize that the rate of 
destruction must be fast. 
The rate of radical decay can be determined by stopping the initiation, 
Ri now equals zero, and Eq, (12) becomes: 
d[M'] 
-- = -2k [M']2, 
dt 
t 
(11) 
This equation integrates to 
(15) 
where [M'Jo is the radical concentration at the time when Ri becomes zero and 
equals [M']s if the stationary concentration had been attained prior to switching 
off the light. A knowledge of kt again shows that the change of [M'] is rapid, 
Thus, in this system the radical concentration is rapidly built up and will 
decay rapidly when the source of initiating radicals is removed, 
In addition, it can be shown that the steady state concentrations of the indi-
vidual radicals will be constant. The rate of change of the concentration of the 
radical M~ is given by: 
Equation 16 may be equated to 0 for all values of n, 
When this steady state is reached, the concentration of radicals in the system 
is given by Eq, (14), Substituting this into Eq, (9) and using the value ofRi in Eq, (4) 
for the radical-initiated polymerization, the rate of polymerization becomes: 
d[] 
jl/2k 1/2 
~ 
= 
i 
k [Ir/2[M], 
dt 
k l /2 
p 
t 
(17) 
This equation reveals that the rate of build-up of the polymer (or loss of monomer) 
is first order with respect to the monomer concentration but only of half 
order with respect to the concentration of initiator. 
1.3,2,5, Degree of Polymerization 
In order to known how many units of monomer are used up (on an average) for 
each radical which starts a chain, the ratio of the rate at which the monomer 
18 

1.3. Synthetic Polymers 
is consumed to the rate at which the chains are started must be determined. 
This quantity is called the kinetic chain length, usually written as v, i.e., 
At the steady state, the velocity of initiation is identical to that of termination, 
so that 
Substituting the value from Eqs. (9) and (11) gives: 
(18) 
Since it is the steady state which is considered, the radical concentration may 
be eliminated using Eqs. (4) and (14) to give: 
(19) 
or in terms of the rate of propagation (Eq. 17) to give 
k~ [M]2 
V=---. 
2kr Rp 
(20) 
It is therefore possible to calculate the kinetic chain length, provided that the 
constants as well as the concentrations of both monomer and initiator are 
known. Furthermore, the number average degree of polymerization, Pn, is 
equal to the rate of polymerization/rate of termination of radicals. Hence, the 
kinetic chain length is related to Pn by Pn = 2v. According to Eq. (20), a 
straight line should result if the degree of polymerization, D.P., were plotted 
against the polymerization rate, Rp' for a constant monomer concentration, 
on the assumption that termination occurs by coupling. 
Results for methyl methacrylate were found to be satisfactorily in agreement 
with this theory for some initiators and not for others. Generally, Pn was 
reported to be less than 2v. A lower D.P. than that calculated may arise if ter-
mination occurs by disproportionation. When all radicals are terminated by this 
method, two molecules will be produced for every reaction so that the D.P. 
will be equal to the kinetic chain length, i.e., Pn = v. Thus, depending on the 
proportion of mutual termination to disproportionation, Pn lies between 2v 
and v. Termination of a growing polymer chain by disproportionation does 
not alter the kinetics since the reaction may be written as: 
(21) 
19 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
This process Is essentially a bimolecular one, i.e., 
d[M·] 
- -- = 2k [M·]2 
dt 
d 
assuming kd to be independent of the size of the molecule. 
1.3.2.6. Transfer Reactions 
(22) 
In a polymerization system, propagation occurs when a growing radical collides 
with a monomer. Alternatively, a hydrogen atom may be transfered to a 
monomer molecule ending one chain and producing a radical which will 
initiate another; thus 
-CH2---CHX + CH2=CHX-+-CH=CHX + CH3CHX. 
In the presence of a solvent, transfer of an atom from the solvent to the 
growing radical may take place. Also, a radical may react with the initiator, 
thereby ending one chain and starting another. These reactions may be re-
presented as follows: 
M· 
M k,rM M 
M· 
n+ 
--+ n+ 
, 
k,rs M 
S· 
M~+S --+ n+ 
, 
k,r, 
M 
I· 
M~+I --+ n+ , 
transfer to monomer, M, 
transfer to solvent, S, 
transfer to initiator, I. 
The effect of any of these reactions is to increase the number of polymer molecules, 
thereby decreasing the D.P. However, the number of radicals in the system 
remains unaltered provided the radicals formed in these reactions set new chains 
going. Consequently, the rate of polymerization is unchanged. 
Termination reactions of the type 
S· + M~-+ MnS, 
S· + S· -+ Sl ' 
are usually considered to play little part and may be neglected. However, each 
transfer reaction will certainly terminate a chain so that, for the purpose of 
calculating the rate of chain termination, each is making its contribution. The 
average degree of polymerization, Pn, is given by the ratio of the rate of propa-
gation to the rate of termination by all processes thus: 
-
kp[M] [M] 
p = 
(23) 
n 
k,[M"]2 + k"M[M][M"] + k"s[M"][S] + k",[M"] [I] , 
where [M·] is the concentration of all the radicals. If all transfer reactions are 
ignored except that of solvent, Eq. 23 may be- written as: 
I 
k,[M·] 
k"s [S] 
Pn = kp[M] + k; [M]· 
(24) 
20 

1.3. Synthetic Polymers 
For purposes of simplification, the first term on the right-hand side may be 
maintained constant provided [1]1/2 [M] is kept constant. Under these con-
ditions, II Fn, may be plotted against [S] I [M] to give a straight line of slope 
ktr)kp • The literature contains examples in which the symbols CM' Cs and C1 
are used to denote the ratio of the rate constant for transfer (to monomer, 
solvent, and initiator respectively) and the constant for propagation. 
1.3.2.7. Effect of Temperature 
The dependence of the D.P. on the reaction constants and transfer reactions 
has already been dicussed. The D.P. might also be expected to depend on the 
temperature, since the reaction constants are temperature-dependent. As will 
be seen below, the effect of increasing the temperature is to reduce the length 
of the chain. 
The changes in rate constants with temperature are given by the Arrhenius 
equation 
where 
k = A e- E/RT , 
A = the collision frequency factor 
E = the energy of activation 
T = the absolute temperature 
R = the gas constant. 
The equation for the D.P. is: 
(25) 
(26) 
the value of k)k~/2 may be obtained from eqs. (19) and (26). Both these con-
stants obey Eq. (25) so that, in terms of the activation energies for the propa-
gation and termination reactions (Ep and Et), the relationship of this quantity 
with temperature may be written as 
(27) 
Thus, a plot of log (kplk~ /2) against liT gives the values of (Ep -
Et12) and 
these turn out to be 21-25 kllmol, which corresponds to an increase in kplk~/2 
of around 30-35 % for a temperature rise of 10 dc. Photochemical polymeri-
zations, having initiation reactions which are independent of temperature, 
have a temperature dependence which is determined by the changes in kp 
and k t • 
In radical-initiated reactions, on the other hand, the reaction velocity is 
determined by (k)ky /2 kp' and hence, the overall activation energy is given 
by (E)2 + Ep -
Et12) where Ei is the activation energy for the decomposition 
of the initiator. 
21 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
The D.P. given in Eq. 26 may be written in terms of activation energies as: 
(28) 
so that the changes in D.P. are dependent on the value of Ep -
[(Ei + Et)/2]. 
Since this quantity is negative, increases in temperature are accompanied by a 
decrease in D.P. 
With some polymers, depolymerization occurs through a stepwise loss of 
monomer units if the temperature is high enough. At room temperature, this 
process is normally so slow that it can be ignored, but, since the activation 
energy is high, the rate of depolymerization becomes faster, with rising tempera-
ture, than that of polymerization. A temperature (the ceiling temperature) may 
be reached at which the two rates are equal. Above this temperature, the 
growing polymer chains depolymerize instead of increasing in size. 
l,3,2,S, Rate Constants 
For a polymerization system with initiation, propagation, and mutual termi-
nation, Eqs. (19) and (26) may be used to obtain knowledge of the initiation rate 
constants ki' but the propagation rate constant, kp' and the termination rate 
constant, kt' cannot be obtained separately since both equations are dependent 
on kp/k:/2. Although numerical values of this ratio may be assigned for any reac-
tion, a further measurement is necessary to obtain the reaction constants them-
selves. One way to meet this need is to measure the average life time, 1:, of the active 
center, i.e., the period over which the radical exists from initiation to termi-
nation. The value of 1" will be equal to the concentration of radicals divided by 
the rate of their destruction, i.e., 
[M'l 
I 
kp [M] 
1: = 2kt[M'j2 = 2kt [M] = 2kt Rp 
at steady rate. 
(29) 
1: is the time during which the radical concentration [M'l disappears, so that 
Ri1: = [M"j. Since 1: is the average lifetime of the kinetic chain, during time 1: 
each radical consumes v monomer molecules. Hence v is related to 1:, 
1: 
d[M] 
v=-----. 
[M"] 
dt 
(30) 
1: itself is a quantity which must be deduced from a knowledge of [M'l and 
is not directly measurable. Direct measurements of the concentration of 
radicals by techniques such as paramagnetic resonance are unfortunately not 
practical as yet and, since the concentrations involved are extremely small, 
[M'l must be deduced from sector disc techniques. 
Thus, the three measurements give ki' kp/k:/2 and kp/kt ; hence, the individual 
rate constants may be calculated. The method most amenable to the determi-
22 

1.4. Vinyl Copolymerization 
nation of T is photochemical. Irradiation of monomer systems has the advantage 
that, during a period of illumination, radicals are being created and their 
creation can be controlled at will. 
1.3.2.9. Initiation Rates 
It is possible to determine k;, provided that the rate of polymerization and the 
D.P. under steady state conditions are known. Independent values for k; may 
also be found from observing the kinetic chain length using the equation 
v = Rp/R;. The measurements of v could be made by determining the number 
of initiator fragments in the polymer. One of the simplest experimental methods 
is to label the catalyst with a radioactive atom and to measure the degree of 
radioactivity in the polymer. 
Moreover, determination of k; may be accomplished by means of inhibitors 
such as p-benzoquinone and di-phenylpicrylhydrazyl. 
These substances, when added to a monomer, suppress the formation of polymer 
until they are used up, when the rate of propagation becomes normal. It is 
assumed that inhibitors react with initial radicals to give products incapable 
of initiating polymerization. The rate of initiation is given by the inhibitor 
consumption, provided it is known how many radicals react with each in-
hibitor molecule. The weakness of this method often lies in lack of knowledge 
of this number and indeed of the actual reaction of the radical with the 
inhibitor. 
1.4. Vinyl Copolymerization 
A very wide range of uses of individual vinyl polymers is attained because 
polymer properties are dependent on the functional groups contained in the 
chain backbone. However, there are some applications which demand a com-
bination of properties not available in any single homopolymer. It might 
seem possible to develop a material with a combination of properties by com-
bining different homopolymers. Unfortunately, the mixing together of two 
dissimilar homopolymers usually does not result in a single compatible material, 
but rather it gives a biphasic mixture. The properties of such a mixture are 
frequently unattractive because of defects arising from weakness, opacity and 
so on. 
lt is possible to circumvent this problem by polymerizing a mixture of the 
two monomers in order to obtain a mixture of the functional groups along the 
polymer chain. This process, called copolymerization, results in a copolymer 
with properties which are dependent on its composition and are often inter-
mediate between those of the individual homopolymers. 
1 .4.1. Copolymer Formation 
When two monomers A and B are polymerized together, the following types 
of copolymers are obtained, depending on the technique used and on the 
reactivities of the monomers: 
23 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
Random copolymer 
... AAABBBBBAABBBBAAAABBBBBAAABBAA ... 
Alternating Copolymer 
... ABABABABABABABABABABABABABABABABAB ... 
Block Copolymer 
... AAABBB ... BBBAAA ... or ... AAAAABBBBB ... 
Graft Copolymer 
... AAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAAA ... 
I 
I 
I 
... BBBBBBBB 
BBBB ... 
BBBBB ... 
Crosslinked Structure 
AAAAA 
AAAA ... 
I 
I 
ABBBB ... BBBBA 
I 
I 
.. , AAAAA 
AAAA ... 
Although commercial free radical copolymerization leads to random copoly-
mers, it is also possible to use radical reactions to prepare copolymers con-
sisting of long sequences of the individual monomers, i.e., block and graft 
copolymers. The sequence of 'A' units in the graft copolymer shown is 
referred to as the backbone, and the sequence of branches of 'B' units is 
termed the grafted polymer. 
In general, the formation of graft copolymers can be brought about by either (i) 
initiation of chain growth of monomer B on a prepolymer molecule formed 
from monomer A, or (ii) termination of chain growth of polymer B by a 
prepolymer molecule formed from monomer A. Block copolymers can be pro-
duced either by linking reactive end groups of two different polymers or by 
initiating the polymerization of another molecule on the reactive end groups 
of a polymer chain. Thus, initiating the polymerization of, for example, 
monomer B with polymeric radicals derived from polymer A, where the free 
radicals are situated at the ends of the pre-polymer chain or at random 
positions along the prepolymer backbone, would give rise to block or graft 
copolymer respectively. The exact structure, or distribution of structures, found 
in the resultant copolymer depends on two main factors: 
(1) the mechanism by which the polymeric radicals are formed, and 
(2) the termination reaction in the polymerization of B. 
When the production of the initiating radicals for the second stage, i.e., poly-
merization of monomer B, is by simple fission of a weak link at the end of, or on 
the side chain of, the prepolymer, two initiating radicals may be formed, a 
polymeric radical and a small radical derived from the end group or side chains. 
The polymeric radicals induce polymerization and yield the desired block or 
graft copolymer, while the small radicals lead to formation of homopolymer 
of the second monomer unattached to a prepolymer chain. However, homo-
24 

1.4. Vinyl Copolymerization 
polymer formation of the second monomer may be avoided if the initiation 
mechanism can be modified to prevent the formation of small radicals. A mixture 
of block and graft copolymers may be formed if the initiating radicals are 
generated simultaneously at the ends of prepolymer chains as well as along 
the prepolymer backbone. Initiating radicals can also be produced by random 
main-chain scission of the pre-polymer, leading exclusively to polymeric 
radicals with the radical in the terminal positions. The formation of homopolymer 
of the second monomer is avoided and only block copolymers are produced. 
Polymerization of the second monomer can be initiated by a conventional 
initiator in the presence of prepolymer, depending on transfer to either reactive 
terminal groups or side chains in the prepolymer, to produce polymeric radicals. 
J ncorporation of a divinyl monomer or diene in the formation of the prepolymer 
leads to vinyl groups pendant to the main prepolymer chain. Formation of 
nonrandom copolymers then depends on the incorporation of these vinyl groups 
during the polymerization of the second monomer, effectively giving rise to two 
branches from the same point on the pre-polymer chain. Alternatively, the unsa-
turated links may be in the backbone of the prepolymer, as in cis-I,4-polyisoprene, 
when radicals used to initiate the second stage of the polymerization may add to 
the double to produce a polymeric radical resulting in a branched structure. 
Incorporation of weak linkages in the terminal positions of prepolymer mole-
cules may be achieved by using dihydroperoxides and other multifunctional 
initiators, or peroxy radicals, in the formation of pre-polymer. For instance, per-
oxy linkages have been introduced into the main chain of the prepolymer by 
copolymerization of monomer A with oxygen and into the side groups of the 
prepolymer by a variety of techniques. It is advantageous to use hydroperoxides 
at the terminal positions or on the side chains of the prepolymer. In this way, 
homopolymer formation in the second stage can be avoided when redox 
initiation is employed. 
Polymerization of monomer A in the presence of trichlorobromomethane20l 
or certain sulphur compounds21l gives rise to a prepolymer with photosensitive 
terminal groups, while formation of the prepolymer in the presence of tri-
ethylamine introduces terminal amino groups. These terminal groups act as 
strong transfer agents during the polymerization of the second monomer22l. 
Side chain radicals of the prepolymer can be introduced without simultaneous 
formation of small radicals in certain cases. These include the abstraction of 
chlorine atoms from suitable chlorine containing polymers, e.g., poly(vinyl-
trichloroacetate), by the use of a metal in its zero oxidation state23l, as in 
metal carbonyls, hexaphenylisocyanides, and similar derivatives. Cerium1v ions 
may also be used to produce such polymeric radicals from polymers containing 
oxidizable side groups24l. An advantage of employing these techniques is that they 
can be used to study termination processes in free radical polymerizations. 
The y-Irradiation of prepolymers usually leads to the random formation 
of free radicals. Even in the absence of a second monomer, this method can be 
used directly to produce branched and crosslinked structures. Trapped radicals 
obtained by irradiation can be used to initiate polymerizations by introducing 
the monomer. Surface grafting may be achieved by use of a second monomer which 
does not swell the prepolymer. Radiation grafting may be carried out by 
25 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
irradiation of a prepolymer dissolved in or swollen by the second monomer. 
Other techniques include the use of spark discharges, ultrasonics, mastication, 
vapor phase swelling, and bond scission arising from repeated freezing and 
thawing. 
1.4.2. Kinetics of Copolymerization 
Copolymerization in its simplest form consists of four propagation reactions where 
chains ending in units of monomer 1, (M~) or monomer 2, (M;) add MI or M 2 : 
(3) 
(31) 
(32) 
(33) 
Each of these reactions will have its own reaction rate constant. These have been 
written with two suffixes, the former of which refers to the kind of reacting 
radical, the latter to the kind of monomer being added to the chain. 
Reactions 3 and 33 are analogous to homopolymerization, while the "crossover" 
reactions 31 and 32 represent the tendency for alteration in the chain structure. 
Statistical reasoning demands that the rates of reactions 31 and 32 be the 
same: 
(34) 
This leads to the composition equation 
FI = (rJi + fth)!(rJ? + 2fJz + r2fD = 1 -
F2· 
(35) 
FI and J; are the mol fractions of monomer 1 in the polymer and in the feed 
respectively. F2 and h are the values of mol fractions of monomer 2. The 
reactivity ratios, 'I and r2, may be defined as 'I = ku!kl2 and '2 = k22!k21 · 
These reactivity ratios represent the relative tendency of a given chain end to 
add its own type of monomer rather than to add a different monomer. A 
reactivity ratio less than unity denotes a tendency to alteration; one greater 
than unity denotes a tendency to formation of blocks of similar monomer units 
along the chain. The implications pertaining to physical-organic chemistry of 
particular r values for given monomer pairs have often been discussed. 
The reactivity ratio product 
(36) 
is used to characterize alteration. If 1t ~ 1, there is a tendency toward alteration. 
If 1t = I, the copolymerization is said to be "ideal", since Eq. 35 becomes 
simply: 
(37) 
26 

1.4. Vinyl Copolymerization 
In free radical copolymerization, 1t is frequently very much less than unity and 
only rarely greater than unity. In ionic copolymerization, 1t is often, but not always, 
found close to unity. 
Values of reactivity ratios have been tabulated for many hundreds of monomer 
pairs2S ). 
The copolymerization process is, in its mathematical essence, a formal analogue 
of an coin-tossing game where the previous events do not influence the suc-
ceeding one. Probability considerations are therefore very useful in describing 
copolymerization progress. Let us define the conditional probability, P12' that 
a chain ending in monomer I will add monomer 2: 
(38) 
and 
(39) 
Given the symmetry of Eqs. (3) and (31) to (35) with respect to interchange 
of the subcripts in Eqs. (3) and (31), we can write immediately 
P 21 = 1/(1 + r2iz/f..) , 
P 22 = 1 -
P 21 . 
It can be shown from Eqs. (37), (38) and (40) that 
(40) 
(41) 
(42) 
Furthermore, the sequence of monomer units along the chain is well 
described by these probabilities. Actually, there the distribution of sequences 
will be such that we must describe them by average values. For example, 
there are three types of pairs of diads: -MIMI-, -MIM 2-, and -M2M 2-. 
(It should be noted that formation of diad -MI M;- at the chain end can be 
distinguished from -M2M~, but not its presence in the completed chain). The 
mol fraction of diads, then, is given as follows26): 
111 = P21 Pl1/(normalizing factor) , 
h2 = izl = P21 P12/(normalizing factor) , 
iz2 = P12P22/(normalizing factor) . 
(43) 
The normalizing factor is the sum of the numerators P 21 P l1 + 2P21 P 12 
+ P 12P 22 . Using Eqs. (39) and (41), the normalizing factor becomes (P12 + P 21 ). 
If one wishes to consider sequences of three units, i.e., triads, they can be 
described by equations such as 
etc. 
(44) 
27 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
Diad, triad and higher sequences are measurable271 for some copolymers by a 
variety of wet analytical and instrumental techniques, the most common of which 
is nuclear magnetic resonance (N.M.R.). If adequate information on intra- and 
interchain potentials is available, then sequence distribution can, in principle, 
be used to describe copolymer chain physics and, therefore, properties. 
It is important to note that the kinetic model in Eqs. (3) and (31 )-(35) is some-
times violated by real systems for reasons other than experimental problems 
associated with carrying out a copolymerization, such as poor mixing or poor 
heat transfer. Great care must be taken to recognize those copolymerizations 
which do not conform to the simple models. Examples of causes of deviations 
include: 
a) Penultimate unit effects; 
b) Non-steady-state behavior; 
c) Complex formation; 
d) Reversibility of propagation. 
Penultimate unit effects occur when the rate constant for propagation is a 
function not only of the monomer and the chain end unit, but also of units 
preceding the chain end. 
KI2 
MM' 
-
.. ~ I 
2 
. 
KII2 
. 
~ MIMI + M2 --.. ~ MIMIM2 
~ M2M·1 + M2 K212 .. wwo M2MIM~ . 
K1l2 
is not equal to 
K 212 • 
(31) 
(45) 
(46) 
(47) 
Kinetic equations have been developed for these situations to describe copolymer 
composition as a function of monomer feed. It is important to point out that 
sequence distribution is more sensitive to penultimate unit effects than is 
composition281. 
Non-steady-state behavior occurs when equation (34) is not satisfied. This is 
especially important in the case of low molecular mass copolymers, where the 
influence of the initiation reaction may affect the short chain composition. 
It is sometimes important in the case of ionic copolymerization; a good example 
is the anionic copolymerization of styrene and methyl methacrylate where a 
methyl methacrylate chain end cannot add a styrene monomer. 
Complex formation between chain ends and monomer is quite commonly 
used as an explanation for some anomalous ionic copolymerization results291. 
Charge transfer complex formation between monomers has been the subject of 
work by Gaylord and Takahashi30I, which has revolutionized some of our 
thinking on the general topic of copolymerization. 
The reversibility of copolymerization would also be expected to be quite 
important when considering copolymerization at or near the ceiling temperature 
of one or both of the comonomers being polymerized. 
28 

1.6. Polymer Structure 
1.5. Molecular Mass Distribution 
During the course of polymerization, a radical may undergo a number of 
reactions: propagation, transfer and termination. The sequence of reactions of 
individual radicals will differ. As a result, the polymer obtained will consist 
of molecules of various molecular masses. The actual distribution is determined 
by the reaction kinetics prevailing during the polymerization reaction. A change 
in the reaction conditions definitely influences the molecular mass distribution of 
the polymer which, in turn, alters the properties of the polymer. 
1.6. Polymer Structure 
The polymer structure depends mainly on the mode of addition in the propagation 
reaction, for which there are four possible reactions: 
-CHz----CXY + CH2 = CXY -t -CH2-CXY -CH2-----CXY, 
(48) 
-CH2-CXY + CXY = CH2 --+ -CH2-CXY-CXY-CH;, (49) 
-CXY-CH; + CXY = CH2 --+ -CXY-CH2-CXY-CH;, (50) 
-CXY-CH; + CH2 = CXY --+ -CXY-CH2-CH2-CXY·. (51) 
Reactions (48) and (50) give rise to a regular structure, termed the head-to-tail 
structure, while reactions (49) and (51) lead to the incorporation of head-to-head 
and tail-to-tail linkages. All processes functioning simultaneously would bring 
about a random structure in the polymer. 
A number of reports show that free radical polymerization leads to predo-
minantly head-to-tail addition. Destructive distillation of polystyrene yielded a 
series of products with phenyl groups on alternate carbon atoms; no products 
with phenyl groups on successive carbon atoms could be detected. Oxidation 
of poly(vinyl alcohol), derived from poly(vinyl-acetate), with periodic acid was 
used to detect the glycol structure. No reduction in the periodic acid concentra-
tion could be detected, thereby demonstrating that the polymer contains a 
predominantly 1,3 structure. Futhermore, the viscosity of an aqueous solution 
of poly(vinyl alcohol) decreases on reaction with periodic adic, or periodate 
ions. These cause chain scission of 1,2-glycol units and a reduction in the 
molecular mass of the polymer corresponding to 1 % of the total number of 
1,2 units in the polymer. 
Evidence for head-to-head structure in free radical polymerized poly(vinyl 
fluoride) and poly(vinylidene fluoride) and their copolymers has been obtained 
from nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR) studies. In poly(vinylidene fluoride) 
it was estimated that at least 5 % of the monomers are reversed. 
In head-to-tail addition reactions, reaction (48) is more likely than (50) due to 
higher stability of the radical produced by the former reaction. This arises from 
the fact that the radical will be stabilized by the substituent groups on the 
carbon atom associated with the unpaired electron. Direct evidence that propaga-
tion occurs by reaction (48) has been obtained by e.s.r. techniques. 
29 

I. The Homopolymeric Species 
In head-to-tail addition polymers, every alternate carbon atom in the back-
bone is asymmetric. In free radical polymerization, these asymmetric centers will 
be controlled by steric and electronic interactions of the substituent groups on the 
monomer. According to the definition of Natta et ai., an isotactic chain is one in 
which all the asymmetric carbon atoms have the same configuration (all d- or 1-); 
in a syndiotatic chain the configurations are alternately d- and 1-; and in an 
atactic chain the arrangement is random. On the basis of these definitions, 
polymers prepared by a free radical mechanism are atactic. 
To obtain a detailed knowledge of the polymer structure, it is necessary to 
define tacticity in terms of local structure. Natta described tacticity in terms of 
the bonding between adjacent units in the chain and considered two units to be 
isotactically bonded if their asymmetric carbon atoms were in the same 
configuration, and syndiotactically bonded if in the opposite configuration. 
Tacticity has been defined in terms of triads of monomer units. An isotactic 
sequence is defined as ddd or Ill, when the central unit is an isotactic unit. 
Syndiotactic sequences are defined as Idl and did, and heterotactic sequences as 
ddl, dll, lid, or Idd. This definition is the most convenient for NMR studies 
of the substituents on the (X-carbon atom, and the relative proportions of these 
sequences can be determined experimentally for certain polymers. For studies 
on the methylene resonance it is more convenient to consider the chain 
structure in terms of diads. 
On the basis of polymers, for which a detailed structural analysis has been 
achieved, it may be concluded that, in free radical vinyl polymerization and in 
the absence of overiding electronic interactions, there is some preference for 
syndiotactic addition, particularly at low temperatures. It has been pointed out 
that the relative proportions of iso- and syndiotactic linkages in polymers pre-
pared by free radical polymerization and their temperature dependence can be 
predicted from a consideration of preferred conformation of the propagating 
radical, which results from hindered rotation about the terminal carbon-carbon 
bond. 
References 
1. Jackson, E., Wunderlich, J. A., Lipscomb, w. N.: Acta Cryst. 14,598 (1961) 
2. Skraup, L. H., Konig, J.: Monatsh. 22,1011 (1901) 
3. Barker, S. A., Bourne, E. J., Stacey, M., Whiffen, D.: J. Chern. Soc. 171 (1954) 
4. Kuhn, W.: Ber. 63,1503 (1930) 
5. Reeves, R. E.: Advan. Carbohydrate Chern. 6, 107 (1951) 
6. Skrigan, A. I., Shishko, M. A., Zhbanov, R. G.: Vesti Akad, Nauk Belarusk, SSR, Ser. 
Fiz Tekhn. Nauk 61, 4 (1962): Through Abstr. Bull. Inst. Paper Chern. 33, 8492 (\963) 
7. Stepanov, B. I., Zhbanov, R. G., Marupov, R.: Vysokomol Soedin 3, 1633 (1961) 
8. Heuser, E.: Textile Res. J. 20, 828 (\950) 
9. Timell: Studies on Cellulose Reactions, Handlingar N.R. 205 (1950) P. 105 
10. Turbak, A. F., ed.: Cellulose Technology Research, A.C.S. Symposium Series, No. 10., Amer. 
Chern. Soc., Washington: D.C. 1975 
II. Goldstein, I. S., ed.: Wood Technology; Chemical Aspects, A.C.S. Symposium Series. No. 43. 
Amer. Chern. Soc., Washington: D.C. 1977 
12. Arthur, J. C. Jr. ed.: Cellulose Chemistry and Technology, A.C.S. Symposium Series No. 48, 
Amer. Chern. Soc., Washington: D.C. 1977 
30 

References 
13. Arthur, J. C. Jr., ed.: Textile and Paper Chemistry and Technology A.C.S. Symposium Series, 
No. 49, Amer. Chern. Soc., Washington: D.C. 1977 
14. Allen, P. E. M., Patrick, C. R.: Kinetics and Mechanisms of Polymerization Reactions, Ellis 
Herwood 1974 
15. Jenkins, A. D., Ledwith, A. eds.: Reactivity, Mechanism and Structure in Polymer Chemistry, 
New York: Wiley 1974 
16. Odian, G.: Principles of Polymerization, McGraw-Hill 1970 
17. Blackley, D. c.: Emulsion Polymerization, Applied Science 1975 
18. Schildknecht, C. E., Skeist, 1., eds.: Polymerization Processes, Wiley -
Interscience 1977 
19. Ceresa, R. J., ed.: Block and Graft Copolymerization, Vols I & II, New York: Wiley 1977 
20. Dunn, A. S., Stead, B. D., Melville, H. W.: Trans, Faraday Soc. 50, 279 (1954) 
21. Otsu, T.: J. Polymer Soc. 26, 236 (1957) 
22. Bamford, C. H., White, E. F. T.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 52, 716 (1956) 
23. Bamford, C. H., Eastmond, G. C., Robinson, V. J.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 60, 751 (1964) 
24. Hebeish, A., Kantouch, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: J. Appl. Polymer Sci. 15, 1921 (1971) 
25. Young, L. J. in: Polymer Handbook, BrandruB, J., Immergut, E. H. (eds.): Ind. Edition, 
1974, P. 11-105 
26. Fischer, T., Kinsinger, J. B., Wilron, C. W. III: J. Polymer Sci. B 4,379 (1966) 
27. Harwood, H. J.: Angew. Chern. (IntI. Ed.) 4394 and 1051 (1965) 
28. Berger, M., Kuntz 1.: J. Polymer Sci. A 2,1687 (1964) 
29. O'Driscoll, K., Patsiga, R.: J. Polymer Sci. A 3, 1037 (1965) 
30. Gaylord, N. G., Takahashi, A.: J. Polymer Sci. B6, 743 and 749 (\968) 
31 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization 
onto Cellulose 
2.1. Introduction 
Cellulose, in particular cotton, is the most widely used textile fiber. This pre-
eminence is due to a happy combination of properties, such as abundance, low 
cost, fine cross-sectioQ, high strengh and durability, high thermal stability, good 
mechanical properties, ability to absorb moisture, easy dyeability, wearing com-
fort, etc. However, cellulosic fibers have some inherent drawbacks which can be 
briefly enumerated as follows: (a) poor solubility in common solvents, which 
makes improvements in fibers and yarns through spinning processes almost 
impossible; (b) poor crease resistance, which makes garments made from cellulosic 
fibres crumple easily during wear ; (c) lack of thermoplasticity, which is a require-
ment for heat setting and shaping of garments; and (d) poor dimensional 
stability, resulting in distortion of the garments during laundering and ironing. 
These drawbacks, and the fact that cellulose has encountered stiff competition 
from synthetic fibers, have directed attention toward improving the properties 
of cellulose. To achieve such improvements, the physical and/or chemical 
structure of cellulose must be changed. 
The physical structure of cellulose can be changed either by swelling or by 
regeneration. Cellulose can be swollen in a suitable swelling agent and then parti-
ally deswollen by removal of the swelling agent. There is practically no change in 
the chemical structure of the cellulose, whether fiber, crumb, or film, but there are 
considerable changes in the physical fine structure, resulting in an enhancement 
of strength, luster, and reactivity. In regeneration, the native cellulose is treated 
to render it soluble and then is regenerated from solution. This process, which is 
the basis of rayon and cellophane manufacture, gives rise to a transformation of 
the crystal structure from a Cellulose I lattice to a Cellulose II lattice and results 
in a corresponding modification of the physical structure. 
The chemical structure of cellulose can be changed in several ways: 
a) By substitution of the cellulose hydroxyls whereby the cellulose molecules 
are altered through introducing side groups, usually by an etherification or 
by an esterification reaction. The effect of this is to eliminate or at least to 
reduce some of the outstanding drawbacks of the cellulose, such as flammabil-
ity, susceptibility to rot and mildew, swellability, etc., and is dependent on the 
type and extent of the reaction as well as on the nature of the substituent 
groups (see Chapter 6). 
b) By reacting cellulose with bi- or polyfunctional compounds, which results 
in the production of cross-links or resinification products in the cellulose, 
thereby stabilizing its structure. Such treatments impart crease resistance, 
shrink resistance, and a number of other properties to the cellulose!). 
32 

2.1. Introduction 
c) By preparing a branched cellulose or what is called a graft copolymer of 
cellulose, a process in which attempts have been made to combine synthetic 
polymers with cellulose to produce material with the best properties of both. 
This process is known as grafting, usually done by modifying the cellulose 
molecules through creation of branches of synthetic polymers that confer 
certain desirable properties on the cellulose without destroying its intrinsic 
properties. 
The amount of grafted monomers is usually taken as the increase in weight 
after solvent-extraction of homopolymer and drying. The percent grafting is 
defined as the ratio of the increase in weight to the initial cellulose weight as 
follows: 
% G f · 
(Final cellulose weight - Initial cellulose Weight) 
o 
ra tIng = 
x 100. 
Initial cellulose weight 
(52) 
The efficiency of grafting is defined as the ratio of the amount of grafted 
monomer to that of polymerized monomer. 
Efficiency of Grafting = 
(
Final cellulose weight - Initial cellulose weight 
\ 
. 
" 
. . 
. 
x 100. 
Total polymer weIght after reactIOn - InItIal cellulose WeIght) 
(53) 
During synthesis of cellulosic graft copolymers, block copolymers may form if 
the initiating centers are formed at the end of cellulose molecules or at broken 
chain ends of the cellulose. The block and graft copolymers to be considered 
here are defined by the schematic structure shown in Figure 1. The block 
copolymer is .composed of a cellulose chain to which synthetic polymer segments 
are chemically linked to form a linear molecule. It is believed that though block 
copolymers of cellulose would usually be expected to resemble the schematic 
structure A, schematic structure B cannot be ruled out. The graft copolymer is 
comprised of a linear backbone polymer, i.e., cellulose, containing branches or 
"grafts" of the synthetic polymer, C. These branches may vary considerably in 
length depending on particular requirements and copolymerization conditions. 
A 
l...--_---'_ 
• .~ 
Block (A. B) and graft (C) copolymers 
Fig. 1. Schematic representation of block and graft 
copolymer (white and black segments represent the 
cellulose backbone and the synthetic polymer, re-
spectively). 
33 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
2.2. Conditions Affecting Grafting 
2.2.1. Chemical Conditions 
The preparation of cellulose graft copolymers differs from the preparation of 
fully synthetic graft copolymers because cellulose is insoluble in all common 
organic solvents. Grafting onto cellulose is therefore a heterogeneous reaction in 
which the physical structure and the state of aggregation of the cellulose playa 
significant role. There are, however, two approaches to homogeneous grafting 
onto cellulose. One involves the use of soluble cellulose derivatives2); the other, 
the preparation of "inclusion celluloses,,3). In the latter, the monomer to be 
grafted is introduced into the cellulose lattice by a series of consecutive solvent 
exchanges. 
Regardless of the type of reaction involved in grafting, the synthetic polymer 
is generally formed in the presence of cellulose, usually with the intention of 
linking the synthetic polymer chains to the cellulose by primary valence bonds. 
Whether or not chemical bonding is actually achieved, the synthetic polymer is 
usually so intimately associated with the cellulose that the components cannot 
be separated by any of the normal fractionation techniques. Thus, in the 
conventional method of grafting, cellulose, initiator, monomer, and solvent are 
all present. In a complex system like this, several reactions take place simultane-
ously and the ultimate graft formation depends on the influence of the following 
factors: (a) solution of the monomer in the solvent and its diffusion from the 
solution phase to the cellulose, (b) adsorption of the monomer on the cellulose 
(c) initiation of the active sites on the cellulose backbone, (d) formation and 
propagation of graft on the cellulose, (e) termination of the active sites on the 
cellulose backbone, and (f) homopolymerization in solution. 
The first four factors cause increased graft formation; the last two, a decrease. 
In general, these factors are favored by higher concentrations, longer times, and 
greater temperatures, and there are usually optimum conditions for maximal 
grafting. The reason for this is that as the grafting reaction proceeds, the mono-
mer and initiator concentrations decrease, as does the number of available 
grafting sites4 ). 
To achieve increased amounts of graft formation, various approaches may be 
undertaken. These approaches are based on the fact that two competitive 
reactions occur simultaneously during the grafting process, i.e., grafting and 
homopolymerization. Depressing the latter would be expected to promote the 
graft formation. Among these approaches are (i) carrying out the initiation 
(reaction of cellulose with the initiator to produce activated cellulose) and grafting 
(reaction of the activated cellulose with the monomer) separately, (ii) allowing the 
monomer to be absorbed on the substrate first (to increase availability of the 
monomer for grafting), (iii) portion-wise addition of the monomer and initiator 
during the grafting operation, and (iv) inclusion of the monomer in the cellulose 
lattice by a series of solvent exchanges prior to activation for grafting. 
It is important to note, however, that modification of the technique of grafting 
as given above depends on the reactivity of monomer and type of initiator, for 
not all monomers respond to all types of initiators under all conditions. The 
34 

2.2. Conditions Affecting Grafting 
nature of the activated center depends also on the initiator. Hence, the choice 
of a modification of the grafting technique requires an understanding of the 
nature of monomer and initiator. 
It is also of importance to point out that whether grafting takes place near 
the site of production of primary radicals or through some chain-transfer 
process after the growth of the macroradical, will depend on the catalyst system 
concerned, the nature of the cellulose material, and the nature of the growing 
macro radical. The various macro radicals are known to have different activities 
with regard to abstracting hydrogen atoms from carbohydrates or other 
materials. 
Differences in stability of macroradicals initiated on cellulose and starch are 
to be expected because of significant differences in their physical structure. How-
ever, one cannot be certain that creation of such radicals will lead to initiation 
of polymerization, since these radicals may be destroyed by other processes. Such 
processes might involve coupling to form crosslinks in cellulose, abstraction of 
hydrogen from water, or reaction with impurities that may be present in the 
grafting medium. Thus, the chemical composition of the starting material has to 
be well defined; that is to say, the presence of traces of inorganic impurities, the 
presence of transition metal cations, or the presence of organic contaminants with 
reducing properties, must be avoided if the kinetics and mechanism of the 
grafting system are to be studied. 
Any foreign matter might act as either a promotor or an inhibitor for the 
polymerization system, affecting the rate and extent of grafting consider-
ably. 
2.2.2. Physical Conditions 
Although favorable chemical conditions and suitable techniques are necessary for 
promoting grafting, they are not the only factors of importance. Most of the 
earlier attempts to achieve grafting onto cellulose gave poor results. The reasons 
for the greater success of the more recent work are related to modifications 
to physical rather than chemical conditions. Most of the work has been done 
with fibers and films, and it is now realized that swelling is an important 
prerequisite to making the cellulosic material accessible to the monomer, thus 
enhancing diffusion processes. With the relatively higher concentration of 
cellulose in swollen fibers or films compared to that of monomer, the cellulose-
monomer reaction, i.e., grafting, will be preferred over a monomer-monomer 
reaction, i.e., homopolymerization. Indeed, studies of the effect of the cellulose 
fine structure on the grafting reaction show that the graft yield is a function of 
the cellulose accessibility 5 -7). Nevertheless, the possible role of swelling and 
diffusion will often render quantitative interpretation of grafting studies a very 
difficult task. Even if none of the reactions is diffusion-controlled, the composi-
tion of the fiber of film changes gradually as grafting proceeds, and the 
solubility of the compounds may also change correspondingly. This has been 
noted in tht:: grafting of cellulose and modified cell uloses with vinyl and 
acrylic monomers8). 
35 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
Another point which may be made is that the physical characteristics of 
grafting onto different cellulosic substrates are not necessarily comparable. For 
example, grafting onto hydrocellulose, where most of the amorphous portion of 
the cellulose is removed, is more of a surface phenomenon, whereas grafting onto 
swollen cottons and viscose takes place inside the fiber as well at the surface. 
The cross-sectional area of native cotton, cotton treated with sodium hydroxide, 
and viscose was found to be enlarged and round after grafting when compared 
with ungrafted samples. With hydrocellulose, on the other hand, it was diffi-
cult to distinguish between the cross-sections of untreated and grafted hydro-
cellulose9). In their work on graft polymerization of acrylonitrile to cellophane 
film using the photo-initiation technique, Geacintov et al.10) reported that grafting 
is predominantly a surface reaction and that the amount of grafting is relatively 
independent of the thickness of the film. Their results indicate that the amount 
of grafting varies directly with the surface area of the film, the amount of graft 
per unit area remaining constant. In another communication, the same outhorsll ) 
report that this is only approximately true and that the experimental evidence 
obtained so far is not sufficient to conclude that grafting is exclusively a 
surface reaction. The rate of the grafting reaction was also found to vary with 
the physical state of the cellulose substrate. As can be seen from Figure 2, there is 
a considerable difference in the rates of grafting obtained with fibers, yarn, 
and fabric. This difference is unequivocally due to the physical restriction on 
swelling introduced when the fibers are twisted into yarns and woven into 
fabrics 12). 
450'---'---'---~---r--o~---'---' 
400 r----+-:::c;c---+----~'9---_+--__+-
350 
300 
53 250 
E 
>. 
-0 
~ 200 
2 '§ 
'-" 150 
50 
36 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Reaction time (hi 
30 
35 
Fig. 2. Post· irradiation grafting of 
acrylonitrile in 75 % aqueous ZnCl2 
to cotton fibers, yarns, and fabrics 
at about 23°C. Irradiation condi-
tions: dry and in nitrogen, 106 R. 
Reprinted from Ref. 12), p. 312, by 
courtesy of Textile Research Insti-
tute. 

2.2. Conditions Affecting Grafting 
2.2.3. Nature of Substrate 
Cellulose is composed of anhydroglucose units joined through a hemiacetal 
linkage into long, linear, chain-like molecules held together laterally by hydrogen 
bonds. X-ray analysis has shown that cellulose fibers contain both amorphous 
(disordered) and crystalline (ordered) regions. For cellulose to give an X-ray 
diffraction pattern, the anhydroglucose units must be arranged in a regular and 
repeated manner. Hence, the fibers are thought to consist of alternating regions 
of amorphous and crystalline structure, but with certain molecular chains 
running through both regions to give an irregular flexible network. There is no 
sharp boundary between the crystalline and disordered areas. Owing to this 
heterogeneous nature, graft copolymerization, particularly when performed in 
an aqueous medium, would be expected to be affected by the pore size of 
cellulose, the crystalline-amorphous ratio, the degree of orientation, the size of 
crystallites and, in the case of chemically modified celluloses, the nature, amount 
and distribution of the substituent groups. 
During a copolymerization reaction, grafting starts on the amorphous parts of 
the fiber. Localization of the grafted polymer in those areas causes the more 
regular areas to become more porous; the grafting reaction then proceeds in these 
regIOns. 
Since cellulose fibers possess a high structural regularity, the cellulose acts as 
a matrix under whose influence a directed graft polymerization of several 
synthetic polymers can occur. This process is not confined to grafting in the gas 
phase where there is no disorientation because of the solvent effect. It has been 
shown13l by X-ray analysis and the determination of dichroism in the infrared 
region, that grafting acrylonitrile and vinyl chloride onto hydrated cellulose 
fibers produces an orientation of the grafted chain. Such orientation takes 
place if the polymer formed does not dissolve in its own monomer. Conversely, 
the presence of monomer always brings about disorientation of the grafted chain. 
The degree of orientation of a grafted crystallizable polymer is always greater 
than that of a non-crystallizable polymer. A number of polymers, for instance, 
poly(methyl methacrylate), do not generally crystallize on grafting. Obviously, the 
degree of orientation of the grafted chain is greater when the degree or regularity 
(orientation) of the structural elements of the cellulose fiber is greater. This 
effect is, therefore, more clearly shown in the last stages of the grafting process 
when grafting occurs on the oriented structural elements of the fiber14l. 
The intercrystalline swelling of cellulose by water occurs predominantly in the 
accessible, less ordered regions of cellulose. Diffusion, and, therefore, the 
grafting ofa monomer, is probably restricted to these regions. Sakurada et al.15l 
have shown that no change in the X-ray diffraction pattern was observed in 
poly(vinyl alcohol) grafted with large amounts of methyl methacrylate and report-
ed that grafting probably occurred only in the disordered regions. That grafting 
occurs exclusively in the accessible regions of cellulose has recently been 
supported by conductivity data and dielectric constant measurements of 
irradiated celluloses16l. Figure 3 shows the graft yields obtained with native 
cotton, viscose, ramie, hydrocellulose, and cottons treated with sodium hydroxide 
(24%, w/w), ethylenediamine, EDA (78%, w/w), or zinc chloride (70%, w/w) 
37 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
55 
50 
45 
40 
35 
-c:J 30 
2 
"E 
~25 
« 
0.. 
20 
15 
10 
5 
o 
/l_l_·t-.1 
/+ x_ _1_ 
1/£ 
~-
-' ----
F::?""" 
IJ Y 
,,-;>-" 
/ ,-----
i,'l ~. l/ 
~/; V 
~ 
30 
60 
90 
120 
150 
180 
Reaction time (min) 
Fig. 3. Grafting of polyacrylonitrile on dif-
ferent cellulosic materials with CAN at 40 DC: 
(0) native cotton; (+) NaOH-cotton; (.) 
EDA-cotton; (x) ZnC12-cotton; (LJ.) hydro-
cellulose; (V) viscose; (e) ramie; [CeIV] = 
0.006 Min 1 % HN03 ; cellulose, 1 g; acrylo-
nitrile, 1 cm3 ; liquor ratio 30. Reprinted from 
Ref. 6); p. 1629, by courtesy of John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc. 
using CelV ammonium nitrate (CAN) and acrylonitrile (AN) as initiator and 
monomer respectively. It can be seen that less grafting was obtained with native 
cotton, ramie, and hydrocellulose than with the three swollen cottons. This 
was expected, since swollen cottons have higher accessibility and, therefore, 
greater reactivity than native cotton, hydrocellulose, and ramie6). 
With viscose, the grafting curve (Fig. 3) shows a higher initial rate than 
that of many other substrates. However, this levels off to give a maximum graft 
yield which is less than those obtained with swollen cottons. With viscose, 
grafting appears to occur at the point of maximum swelling in the CeIV_ 
acrylonitrile-water system. Beyond this, the polyacrylonitrile probably forms a 
diffusion barrier and inhibits the diffusion of acrylonitrile monomer. It is well 
known that the average pore size in cotton is considerably larger than in viscose. 
Huang and Rapson1?) have reported that radiation grafting of cotton yarn in 
styrene solution containing methanol, ethanol, and acetic acid was found to 
proceed without the presence of water, whereas with viscose no grafting took 
place under these conditions. Thus, smaller pore sizes and the rapid slowing down 
of diffusion of initiator (CeIV ions) and monomer, i.e., acrylonitrile as grafting 
proceeds favors the formation of homopolymer in solution rather than 
grafting. This may explain the low value of maximum graft yield obtained with 
viscose. 
It is interesting to point out, in this connection, that when treatments of 
cell uloses with CAN, namely, initiation followed by exposure to monomer to 
38 

2.2. Conditions Affecting Grafting 
100 f------+---+--- f--! 
/' 
V-
80 t---t---f-----1V~~I--- -+--+---+-----1 
~ 
x/ 
0 7 
f-:7 
i" 
- __ 
~ 60 t--- --~+----+--+----+I---=".., 
~-. 2-
i
40 
(~:~ ~_,,_ 
T~ >--3 
~<"' --t-v-
i 
--r-. 4_ 
~ 
I 
I 
I 
i 
~::-_J 
! 
•• 4_ 
-., 
--y-- -
~--
x 
...... t....Y_- -,,-_..::- 1----- 3 
20 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
Accessibility (%J 
Fig. 4. Relationship between maximum graft yields and accessibility of different substrates; (--) 
percent PAN grafted; (- - - -) percent homopolymer formed in solution; (.) native cotton; (T) 
NaOH-cotton; (''7) EDA-cotton; (x) ZnCI2-cotton; (6) hydrocellulose; (.) viscose; (0) ramie. 
Curves: (1-4) percent graft yields obtained by methods I-IV, respectively; [CeIV] = 0.006 M in 1% 
HN03 ; cellulose, 1 g; temperature 40 DC; reaction time 3 hr. Acrylonitrile: (1, 2) 15 cm3 ; (3, 4) 1 cm3. 
Reprinted from Ref. 6), p. 1639, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
provide grafting, were carried out separately and sufficient monomer used, or 
when sufficient time was given for diffusion and adsorption of monomer before 
commencing the grafting reaction, viscose showed higher graft yields than swollen 
cottons. This may be seen from Figure 4. Kesting and Stannett18) reported higher 
graft yields for cellophane than for cotton when both substrates were first 
irradiated with y-rays from Co-60. The irradiated celluloses were than immersed 
in the monomer solution. Styrene, dioxane, and water formed the monomer-
solvent system. The high yields of grafting obtained with viscose would also be 
anticipated in view of its greater swelling and accessibility when compared with 
cotton fibers. A similar pattern was observed when grafting was initiated by 
mutual irradiation with gamma rays from Co-60 (Fig. 5)19). 
Turning now to the data presented in Figure 4, in method 1, the substrate 
(1 g) was reacted with CAN (0.006 M in 1 % HN03) for 3 hours at a liquor 
ratio of 30.1. The excess CeIV ion was then drawn off by suction. AN monomer 
(15 cm3) was then introduced and grafting was conducted for 3 hours. The 
entire sequence of operations was carried out under nitrogen. Thus, the two 
reactions, i.e., initiation and grafting, were carried out in two separate steps and 
homopolymer formation was practically avoided. Method II was identical to 
method I, except that the reactions were performed in air instead of nitrogen. 
In method III, the cellulose sample (1 g) was immersed for 3 hours in 
30 cm3 1 % HN03 to which 1 cm3 of AN was added. Then 1 em3 of 0.18 M CAN 
39 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
280 
240 
-
,/' 
200 
V 
/ 
-
l--=l 
./f / 
80 I /1 ._-
uP 
;; 
I 
I 
40 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
Dose (M rod) 
I 
I 
o 
2 
3 
4 
5 
Exposure time (h) 
Fig. 5. Grafting of polyacrylonitrile 
(PAN) on different cellulosic materials 
using the mutual irradiation technique: 
(0) native cotton; (6) mercerised cot-
ton; (e) viscose; cellulose = O.Sg; 
AN = 15 cm3, water 0.4 cm3 . Reprinted 
from Ref. 19), p. \071 by courtesy of 
Textile Research Institute. 
was added, making an initiator concentration of 0.006 M in the reaction mixture, 
and the reaction was allowed to proceed for a further 3 hours. In method IV, 
simultaneous initiation and grafting were carried out using 1 g cellulose, 1 cm3 
AN, and 30cm3 of 0.006 M CAN. The reaction temperature in all cases was 40°C. 
Obviously, graft yields are linearly and directly related to accessibility only 
when the grafting reaction is conducted under conditions which suppress 
homopolymerization. In method I, it is clear that a linear relationship could be 
obtained where there was no chance for the homopolymer to be formed. 
Method II was conducted under conditions identical to method I, but in the 
presence of air it did not show the same relation. The graft yields obtained 
by method I are also considerably higher than those of method II. This must be 
due to the presence of oxygen in the system which would accelerate the decay 
of free radicals produced by CeIV • The decay effect seems to be more pronounced 
in the case of more accessible substrates. 
In methods III and IV (cf. Fig. 4), as expected, the homopolymer formed in 
solution during the grafting reaction decreased with increasing graft yields and 
vice versa. This clearly indicates that, for a given substrate, grafting and homo-
polymerization in solution are inversely related, both being dependent on the 
efficiency of the grafting reaction. In method III, the graft yields increased with 
increasing accessibility of the substrate. This is probably due to a greater availab-
ility of physically absorbed monomer on the more accessible substrate. Methods I 
and II showed higher graft yields than methods III and IV due to the significantly 
larger quantity of monomer used, as well as to the suppression of homopoly-
merization. 
40 

2.3. Grafting Reactions 
Here, too, it is worth noting that hydrocellulose, in spite of its high 
crystallinity and low reactivity, showed a substantial graft yield which was nearly 
equal to that of cotton, particularly when grafting was performed under nitrogen 
by separate initiation and grafting (Method I). On the other hand, when grafting 
was carried out under the same conditions but in air (Method II), hydrocellulose 
proved considerably less amenable to grafting than native cotton. This may be 
because the active sites produced by CeIV on the cellulose backbone would be 
expected to occur mainly on the surface of the fiber in case of hydrocellulose. 
These would be more susceptible to termination by atmospheric oxygen, thereby 
reducing the graft yield. 
Etherification, esterification, or crosslinking of cellulose causes a considerable 
change in the physical and chemical structure of cellulose. Such changes 
has been found to have a significant influence on the susceptibility of cellulose 
toward grafting. This susceptibility depends on the nature, amount, and distribu-
tion of the substitutent groups in the modified celluloses. For example, while 
cellulose bearing either cyanoethyl or carboxymethyl groups showed higher graft 
yields, cellulose bearing both groups showed lower yields. The presence of acryl-
amidomethyl groups in the cellulose molecule reduces the reactivity of cellulose 
to grafting. 
The reactivity decreases as the amount of acrylamidomethyl groups increases. 
The same holds true for acetylated and crosslinked celluloses. On the other hand, 
the presence of carbamoylethyl or cyanoethyl groups in the cellulose molecules 
enhances the susceptibility of cellulose to grafting, which increases with the 
amount of the introduced groups. Details of these studies will be given later 
(see Chapter 6). 
2.3. Grafting Reactions 
Vinyl monomers are unsaturated compounds having the general formula 
CHzCHX, where X is a functional group of the type -OH, -CI, --C=N, etc. 
Their reaction with cellulose in the presence of a catalyst involves either a free 
radical mechanism or an ionic mechanism. Because the free radical mechanism 
is more usual, this will form the main part of the present discussion. However, 
ionic grafting has also been discussed (see Chapter 4). 
Grafting of a vinyl monomer to cellulose is a typical free radical polymerization 
reaction which involves three distinct aspects, namely, initiation, propagation, 
and termination. Initiation consists of two steps. The first step is to produce free 
radicals on the cellulose backbone from the initiator. This is generally achie\'ed 
by abstraction of a hydrogen atom from the cellulose molecule. 
The second step entails the additon of a monomer molecule to the cellulose free 
radical, resulting in the formation of a covalent bond between the monomer and 
the cellulose and in the creation of a free radical on the newly formed 
branch. Thus, a chain is initiated. This is followed by many subsequent additions 
of monomer molecules to the initiated chain, thereby propagating the chain. 
41 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
Termination occurs by combination, where the radicals of two growing poly-
mer chains are coupled: 
H 
I 
+ .C-CH2ICHX-CH2)m-O-Cell-
I x 
(54) 
C.ll-O-fcH,-;V;-H)-O-C.ll 
\ 
HDH 
!/m.l 
or by disproportionation where a hydrogen atom is abstracted by one chain from 
the other: 
C,"-o-C,-iLH,-j. 
\ xl-
x 
+ COl-O-fcH,-jLH,-j.-
\ xl 
x 
(55) 
Termination may also occur by reaction with impurities, initiator, or activated 
monomer, or by a chain transfer process. 
If, on the other hand, a monomer molecule is activated by the initiator, 
homopolymerization takes place. 
2.4. Mechanism of Free Radical Formation 
on Cellulose 
In one form or another, cellulose is perhaps the most abundant organic 
compound occuring in nature, since it forms the skeletal frame work of all high 
plants. The purest form of naturally occurring cellulose is obtained in cotton, 
where the cellulose constitutes some 90 % of the fiber, but wood and bast fibers 
such as flax, ramie, jute, etc., also contain a high proportion of cellulose. In jute, 
for example, which is composed chiefly of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin, 
the proportions are roughly 64 % cellulose, 24 % hemicellulose, and 15 % lignin. 
F or this discussion pure cellulose, or what is called IX-cellulose, will be considered. 
The chemical structure of cellulose is now well established and consists of 
long chains of P anhydro-D-glycose units combined through a hemiacetal bridge 
between carbons I and 4 (Fig. 6). The primary hydroxyl groups (at carbon atom 6) 
lie alternately on either side of the chain so that cellobiose forms the repeating 
unit. It is apparent from the structure of cellulose that one of its terminal 
42 

2.4. Mechanism of Free Radical Formation on Cellulose 
H 
H 
H 
o 
0 
~
HR 
0 
HO 
H 
OH 
HO 
H 
H 
Fig. 6. Cellulose molecule. 
groups is potentially aldehydic, while the other is a non-reducing hydroxyl 
group. 
The formation of free radicals on the cellulose molecule can occur by the follow-
ing possible homolytic cleavage processes: dehydrogenation, dehydroxylation, 
depolymerization, or cleavage of the glucopyranoside ring20 - 27). The location of 
the free radical sites on the cellulose molecule and within the fibrous structure 
will depend on the method of initiation of such sites and on the physical and 
chemical properties of the cellulose28 -30). Formation offree radicals on the cellu-
lose molecule can be achieved in a number of ways. These may conveniently be 
classified into three main types: chain transfer, physical activation, and chemical 
activation. 
2.4.1. Chain Transfer 
A normal free radical polymerization is carried out in the presence of cellulose 
or a cellulose derivative. Termination of a growing polymer chain by abstracting 
a hydrogen atom from the cellulose molecule gives rise to a cellulose radical which 
itself initiates graft copolymerization. The chain transfer process which leads to a 
grafting reaction can be significantly promoted by introducing groups with large 
chain transfer constants into the cellulose molecule (see Chapter 6). 
2.4.2. Physical Activation 
Free radicals capable of initiating polymerization of vinyl monomers may be in-
troduced into the cellulose by physico-chemical or mechanical techniques. 
These activation processes include: 
I. Use of high energy irradiation methods, such as the gamma rays from a Co-60 
source. The irradiated cellulose is activated for graft formation (see 
Chapter 3). 
2. Use of low energy irradiation methods, such as ultra-violet light rays from a 
mercury lamp in the presence of a photosensitizer. The latter absorbs the 
ultraviolet light and is activated; the active centers are then transferred to the 
cellulose molecule to initiate a graft chain. Increasing interest is being shown 
in non-sensitized systems (see Chapter 3). 
3. Mechanical working of the cellulose material can produce radicals, which, 
in the presence of a suitable vinyl monomer, can produce graft and block 
copolymers. Mastication, ultrasonic wave-induced degradation, vapor swell-
ing, and even freezing and thawing methods have been investigated using this 
method. 
43 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
2.4.3. Chemical Activation 
There are a number of strictly chemical processes which have been used to 
activate the cellulose through the introduction of free radicals by an independent 
chemical reaction. The following are typical examples of these processes: 
1. Use of redox (reducing-oxidizing) systems, such as glucose hydrogen peroxide, 
whereby free radicals are first generated outside the cellulose molecules. 
These free radicals then transfer the active sites to the cellulose molecules by 
a charge transfer mechanism (see Chapter 4). 
2. Use of the cellulose itself as the reducing component in the redox system. Thus, 
the active centers are directly produced on the cellulose backbone and no 
charge transfer mechanism is necessary to initiate cellulose graft copolymer 
formation. This system requires the use of such powerful oxidizing agents as 
cerium salts (CeIV) (see Chapter 4). 
3. Initiators, such as organic peroxides or diazonium salts, are built into the 
cellulose molecule. The peroxide groups may be generated by treating the 
cellulose with an ozone-oxygen mixture, whereas the diazonium salt of cellulose 
can be prepared by reacting a halogenated amine with cellulose and reacting 
the product with nitrous acid to form the diazonium salt. The peroxide 
groups or diazonium salts can be decomposed into radicals situated on the 
cellulose backbone by heating, ultraviolet light, or by redox systems (see 
Chapter 4). 
Graft copolymerization reactions involving cellulose and brought about by a 
radical mechanism using chemical initiation have certain characteristics which 
may be summarized as follows31 ,32): 
(i) 
The graft copolymerization reaction is usally carried out in a heterogeneous 
medium and the cellulose conversion is relatively low, not exceeding 
20-30 % of the weight of the initial cellulose. Even in grafting large quantities 
of synthetic polymer (200-500 % of the initial cellulose weight), the 
conversion of the cellulose does not exceed 70-80 %. Consequently, grafting 
results in a product which contains both the graft copolymer and a greater 
or lesser quantity of unchanged cellulose. In a number of cases, synthetic 
homopolymer is also formed as a result of side reactions. This mixture of 
products may be separated by the use of different methods into their 
main components. In this way the composition of the reaction products can 
be determined. A cellulose graft copolymer in actual use in the Soviet Union 
has the following composition: 30-50 % cellulose, which did not participate in 
the graft copolymerization, and 50-70% graft copolymer with 10-30% of 
grafted polymer. 
(ii) The molecular mass of the grafted chain is considerable and is comparable 
to a degree of polymerization of between 1000 and 15,000. Consequently, 
there is one grafted chain to 5-15 cellulose macromolecules. Depending 
on the conditions of carrying out the reaction, and, in particular, on the 
method of initiation and the degree of swelling of the cellulose, the grafted 
chains are localized on the surface of the cellulose fiber or on the super-
molecular structure. The high molecular masses of the grafted chains are 
caused by the special conditions of radical polymerization in a heterogenous 
44 

2.4. Mechanism of Free Radical Formation on Cellulose 
phase. In these conditions, the chain termination process is hindered by the 
decreased interaction of growing macromolecules whose mobility, because 
of the chemical combination with such a rigid chain polymer as cellulose, 
is sharply decreased. This conclusion is confirmed in that the degree of 
polymerization of homopolymer formed under the same conditions is 
10-15 times less than the degree of polymeri7<ation of the grafted chain32), 
(see also Chapter 7). It is important to note that the molecular mass, of the 
grafted ·synthetic polymer in the heterogenous medium may be considerably 
decreased by the addition of a regulator, i.e., a chain terminator32). 
(iii) The hindered chain termination of the growing chain in a heterogeneous 
medium determines another characteristic of cellulose graft polymerization. 
The radical initiator (or component of the redox system) takes part in the 
chain termination, reacting not only with the macroradical but also with 
cellulose radicals formed in the first stage of its oxidation. Using the condi-
tions re.quired for carrying out graft polymerization, there take place two 
competitive reactions: the first is between cellulose macro radicals and the 
initiator, while the second is between cellulose macroradicals and the 
monomer. In the majority of cases the rate of the first reaction is considerably 
greater (5-10 times) than that of the second reaction, which leads to a general 
characteristic of cellulose graft copolymerization, namely, the low effective-
ness of initiation. The initiator effectiveness of graft copolymerization as a 
rule does not exceed 10-20%32). 
(iv) The graft copolymerization reaction in a heterogeneous medium and the 
participation of the radical initiator in the chain termination lead to the 
formation of grafted chains with a narrow molecular mass distribution. The 
molecular mass distribution of grafted chains is considerably less broad than 
that of homo polymers obtained under the same reaction conditions. As a rule, 
for grafted polymers the ratio MW/Mn is not greater than 2; with graft 
polymerizations in aqueous emulsions, however, this ratio is lowered to 
1.5-1.432). 
(v) On carrying out the graft polymerization reaction from binary mixtures of 
monomers, yet another characteristic becomes evident. In this case, there 
is observed a synergistic effect on the graft yield for any pair of monomers. 
This was established earlier by Sakurada33) during his investigation of radical 
grafting reactions. This is of great practical interest. For example, under 
certain conditions acrylonitrile can be grafted to cellulose fiber to the extent 
of 30 %; the grafting of styrene under these conditions does not take place. 
However, the graft copolymerization of a mixture of acrylonitrile and styrene 
proceeds to 140 %32); the grafted chain is made up of copolymers of both of 
the monomers used in grafting and is not a mixture of chains, each consisting 
of a single monomer34). 
In a more recent development, graft copolymerization has been accomplished 
by the "uncatalyzed" polymerization of vinyl monomers in the presence of 
cellulose and water and in the absence of a conventional polymerization 
initiator (see Section 2.8). 
There are evidently a number of methods for initiating vinyl graft poly-
merization onto cellulose by a radical mechanism. It is of prime importance to 
45 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
emphasize that the most promising methods are those which meet the following 
requirements32) . 
1. The synthesis of a graft copolymer without the simultaneous formation of 
homopolymer or with a minimum of this side reaction. 
2. The minimum degradation of cellulose and its ·derivatives in the grafting 
process. 
3. The ready availability of the initiator, and the possibility of using it while 
carrying out the reaction in an aqueous medium. 
4. A wide field of application, that is, the possibility of performing the grafting 
of a large variety of monomers. 
5. Low unit cost for the initiation procedure. 
2.5. Charge-Transfer Mechanism of Grafting 
Graft copolymerization of polar vinyl monomers onto cellulose by chemical 
activation and by irradiation has often been presumed to be solely the result of 
propagation from radical sites generated on the cellulose. However, in the 
case of grafting cellulose with CeIV ions and acrylamide, it has been proposed that 
the graft polymerization reaction is initiated on cellulose as a result of (1) an 
un hydrated CeIV ion-cellulose redox reaction which generates a radical site on the 
cellulose, which in turn propagates by the addition of uncomplexed acrylamide 
and, concurrently, (2) a hydrated CeIV ion-cellulose, or a hydrated CeIV ion-
complexed acrylamide-cellulose reaction, which presumably generates a radical 
site on the cellulose and then propagates by the addition of CeIV ion-complexed 
acrylamide35) . 
It has also been proposed that the nature of the copolymer bonding and the 
adsorption characteristics of monomers are related and that a charge transfer 
mechanism could explain the predominant type of bonding in cellulose 
copolymers36). Irradiation of cellulose produces trapped free radicals which may 
participate in the charge transfer bonding process. Detailed ESR evidence of 
radiation-induced trapped free radical formation has been included16, 37, 38). 
The possible relation between copolymerization and radical formation has also 
been considered37, 39,40); the results strongly support a predominant free radical 
mechanism in grafting39). 
Nevertheless, the formation of grafted alternating copolymer from the 
radiation-induced polymerization of styrene-acrylonitrile and butadiene-acrylo-
nitrile, and the radical-catalyzed polymerization of styrene-methyl methacrylate 
and styrene-acrylonitrile-ZnCI2, as well as the uncatalyzed copolymerization of 
methyl methacrylate with other monomers in the presence of cellulose and water, 
have been suggested as indicating the participation of comonomer charge 
transfer complexes in the graft polymerization33,41-51). Consequently, it is pro-
posed35) that cellulose acts as a complexing agent for the activation of acceptor 
monomers and as a matrix for the alignment of acceptor monomer complexes 
(A + ... -A-Cellulose-water) 
and 
donor-acceptor 
comonomer 
complexes 
(0 + ... -A-Cellulose-water). 
46 

2.6. Grafting by Chain Transfer 
However, the charge transfer mechanism is somewhat speculative and, until 
more data are available, ought to be considered unreliable, 
2.6. Grafting by Chain Transfer 
Growing polymer chains are capable of transferring their radical character to 
certain compounds called chain transfer agents, The process is called chain trans-
fer; it terminates the polymer chain and leaves the chain transfer agent in the form 
of a radical that may subsequently initiate another polymerization reaction52 -63), 
The ratio of the frequency of any transfer reaction to propagation is called the 
transfer constant, C, and is defined64) as 
where krr and kp are the rate constants for chain transfer and propagation, 
respectively, 
F or the synthesis of graft copolymers, chain transfer with the polymer is of 
great interest. Thus, during polymerization of monomer (M) by initiator (I), a 
growing chain radical (P~) is formed: 
1--+ 2R', 
R' + M --+ M~, 
RM' + nM ~ P~, 
(1) 
(3) 
(56) 
In the presence of a polymer (A - B), where (A) is a labile atom (usually hydrogen 
or halogen), the growing radical may terminate by abstraction of (A) from the 
polymer to give rise to a free radical formation on the polymer backbone 
(i,e" B'). Addition of the monomer to this new macro radical produces graft 
copolymer: 
P~ + A-B --+ PnA + B', 
B' + M --+ BM' ~ 
graft copolymer, 
(57) 
(58) 
An alternative mechanism, leading to the same type of macro radical as illustrated 
in Eq, 57, is the transfer reaction between the primary radical and the polymer. 
R' + A -
B-+ RA + B', 
(59) 
F or efficient grafting initiation, it is essential that' the polymer to be grafted 
successfully competes for the primary (Eq, 59) or growing radical (Eq, 57) with the 
monomer (Eq, 3), the homopolymer of the monomer, the solvent, or other 
species present. The relative vaiues of the various transfer constants determine 
the outcome of this competition, Transfer constants for polymers can be obtained 
from data on low-molecular-mass compounds of similar structures65 -67), 
assuming identical reactivity toward the attacking radical. Indeed, the validity 
47 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
of this assumption has been confirmed by transfer constant determinations in the 
presence of 0ligomers68 -70). 
The importance of chain transfer of the polymer backbone with the primary 
radicals is demonstrated by the variation in grafting efficiency with the nature 
of the initiator, a phenomenon commonly called the initiator effect. Smets 
et al.71) have shown that the poiymerization of methyl methacrylate in the 
presence of polystyrene gives appreciable amounts of graft copolymer, if the 
reaction is initated with benzoyl peroxide. Using azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN) 
or ditertiarybutyl peroxide, the degree of grafting is not significant. Their 
explanation of the inability of AIBN to initiate graft copolymerization is that the 
(CH3)2C-CN radical from AIBN in appreciably less reactive than the C6H; 
and C6HsCOO' radicals from benzoyl peroxide because of resonance stabili-
zation71). Although the (CH3)2C-CN radical is sufficiently reactive to polymerize 
monomers, it does not undergo reaction with polymers. In similar experiments 
carried out with vinyl acetate and poly(methyl methacrylatefl), graft copolymer 
formation is seen to be independent of the nature of the initiator. These results 
reveal that the relative reactivities, toward chain transfer differ considerably for 
the growing radicals and the polymer backbone, as well as for the primary 
radicals. 
An increase in the temperature may enhance the efficiency of grafting72, 73). 
This finding is in agreement with the higher activation energy of the transfer 
reaction compared to the propagation reaction. The efficiency of grafting also 
increases as the concentration of initiator increases. The presence of good low 
molecular mass chain transfer agents, such as dodecylmercaptan, decreases 
considerably the efficiency of grafting72), showing that the low molecular mass 
transfer agent competes with the polymer for the free radicals. 
The general utility of chain-transfer reactions in obtaining graft copolymers is 
seriously limited in many cases by the reluctance of the backbone to undergo 
free radical attack. Several efforts have, therefore, been made to synthesize 
polymers with reactive sites characterized by high transfer constants63, 74, 75). 
For instance, methyl methacrylate-glycidyl methacrylate copolymers containing 
small amounts of epoxide groups have been synthesized62,75). By reacting these 
materials with thioglycollic acid or H2S, thiol groups are incorporated on the 
polymer backbone: 
48 
HS-CH,- COOH .. 
CH3 
CH3 
I 
I 
-C-CH -c-
I 
z 
I 
COOCH3 
c=o 
I o 
I 
o 
CHz 
II 
I 
HS-HzC-C-O-CH 
I 
HS-HzC-C-O-CHz 
II o 

2.6. Grafting by Chain Transfer 
Grafting may occur by a process of chain transfer when cellulose is present 
during a polymerization reaction. The growing polymer chain may terminate by 
abstraction of a hydrogen atom from the cellulose. This leaves an unshared 
electron, Le., a free radical on the cellulose chain which is capable of initiating 
grafting. The reactions involved are similar to those shown in Eq. (1), (3), (56), 
(57), and (58). Termination occurs by combination, by disproportionation, or 
both76). 
The efficiency of grafting is quite low, however, as cellulose is a very poor 
transfer agent77 ), but it may be increased by forming a cellulose derivative with a 
substituent group that is more susceptible to chain transfer78.79). For example, 
by introducing a mercapto group, -SH, into the cellulose molecules, the chain 
transfer process is greatly enhanced owing to the ease with which the hydrogen 
atom of the mercapto group is abstracted by the growing chain radicaF9). A simple 
method has been described for the introduction of the -SH group into the 
cellulose by reacting the latter with ethylene sulfide79). 
The addition reaction of a cellulosic with ethylene sulfide takes place readily 
when cellulose acetate is first swollen in benzene. To achieve the same result with 
cellophane, it is necessary first to solvent-exchange the water, via alcohol, with 
benzene. After washing the film with benzene, styrene is added and its polymeriza-
tion initiated by azobisisobutyronitrile (AIBN)79). Grafting of vinyl monomers 
other than styrene, such as methyl methacrylate via chain transfer on mercapto-
ethyl cellulose, has been possible. 
It has been shown that the initial rate of grafting is proportional to the square 
root of the AIBN concentration and roughly proportional to the concentration 
of the monomer. Rates of grafting were on the order of 10-15 weight percent per 
hour79). 
It is of interest to point out that the same principle (Le., grafting to a backbone 
containing groups susceptible to chain transfer) prompted the synthesis of a 
polyester from pentaerythritol dibromide and adipic acid80): 
In this case, the bromomethyl groups serve as reactive sites for grafting with 
styrene by chain transfer. 
49 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
2.7. Grafting by Mechanochemical Activation 
of Cellulose 
When stresses are applied to macromolecules, both local segmental motions and 
molecular flow occur. Scissions may take place if stress of sufficient magnitude 
is localized in one segment of a molecule. Such scissions can lead to the formation 
of free radicals. Block and graft copolymers can be formed via these free 
radicals by subjecting polymer mixtures or polymer-nonomer mixtures to bond-
breaking stresses. The various methods which have been employed are mastica-
tion, milling, ultrasonic irradiation, high frequency discharge, freezing and thaw-
ing, and vapor phase swelling. 
Cold mastication of bulk polymer mixtures or polymer-monomer mixtures in 
an inert atmosphere is the most frequently used method for making graft and 
block copolymers of fully synthetic polymers using mechanochemical synthe-
SiS81-86l. 
The efficiency of bond breakage is directly related to the plasticity of the 
system during mastication. The more plastic the mixture, the less is the chance 
that localized stresses will cause scission before flow of the molecules occurs. 
The ideal condition for efficient chain scission lies between the viscous and 
vitreous states. However, even glassy polymers can be sheared to yield free radi-
cals87l. Milling efficiencies have been studied by use of electron spin resonance 
measurements in various polymers88l. 
Mastication of polymer-monomer mixtures has been extensively studied89l. 
The influence of experimental variables on the reaction depends mainly on their 
effect on the plasticity of the mixture. Efficiency of copolymerization generally 
increases with: 
I. Increase in the initial molecular mass of the polymer. 
2. Decrease in temperature. 
3. Decrease in the monomer (and/or solvent) concentration. 
4. Increase in internal viscosity (and thus, also the resistance to shear) of the 
copolymer being formed. 
The rate of shear and design of the masticator will also affect the efficiency, de-
pending on the opposing effects encountered when an increase in shear rate 
causes an increase in the energy input to the system. 
Intensive mechanical disintegration of inorganic substances, such as metals, 
salts, and oxides, can lead to formation of specific active centers of an ionic or 
free radical nature on the freshly formed surfaces87l. These centers can react with 
monomers causing polymerization90l or with polymers causing grafting87l. 
It should be possible to form graft and/or block copolymers with inorganic links 
between some of the copolymer segments by masticating mixtures of monomers 
and polymers with the inorganic solids. 
A general description of the mastication process may be given as follows9l). 
Polymers are first swelled by monomer, generally to 15-50% monomer content, 
in an inert atmosphere. Equilibration often takes place up to 16 hours or more. 
Then the swollen mixtures are masticated under nitrogen at IS-50°C for times 
generally under 1 hour. The product may be extracted with selected solvents and 
then fractionally precipitated or turbidimetrically titrated. A few systems have 
50 

2.S. Uncatalyzed Grafting 
been studied in detail, e.g., poly(methyl methacrylate)-styrene and polystyrene-
methyl methacrylate91 ). 
Swelling of lightly crosslinked polymers by solvent vapors may lead to chain 
rupture due to stressing of molecular entanglements at a critical solvent 
concentration92). If the solvent is a monomer, block copolymerization can 
result. 
Copolymerization of various vinyl monomers with different polymers has been 
achieved by using the ultrasonic irradiation technique93 - 97). Ultrasonic irradiation 
of polymer solutions leads to chain rupture where cavitation occurs in the 
solution98.99). If the solution contains a monomer or another polymer, block 
copolymers may be formed. The efficiency of the degradation and, thus, copoly-
merization depends upon the efficiency of cavitation. This is a function of the 
gases dissolved in the solution, the vapor pressure of the solvent, the surface 
tension of the solution, and the minimum sonic frequency. Moreover, the 
presence of high molecular mass polymer is vital, since below a critical 
minimum molecular mass, degradation will not occur. 
Block and graft copolymers of cellulose can be prepared by forming cellulose 
radicals by mechanical scission of the cellulose molecule, e.g., by ball milling 
cellulose acetate in the presence of vinyl chloridelOO), by applying high shearlOl), 
or by subjecting cellulose'to swelling and freezing cycles102). It is important to note 
that the mechanochemical techniques which have been used for the preparation 
of block and graft copolymers are not very specific, since these methods are 
usually accompanied by considerable homopolymer formation. 
2.S. Uncatalyzed Grafting 
The grafting of cellulose and cellulose derivatives with different vinyl monomers, 
in methanol or ethanol in the presence of promoters such as alkyl halides, and in 
the absence of conventional initiators, has been studied in detaiP03.104). Such 
investigations were first undertaken by Japanese researchers led by Imoto105,llO). 
When a vinyl monomer is heated in an aqueous suspension with cellulose 
at 85°C in the absence of a conventional initiator, graft copolymerization 
readily occurs and the graft copolymer is accompanied by a high yield of high 
molecular mass homopolymer. Addition of small amounts of carbon tetrachloride 
to the system proved to be a good promoter of the processl04,106). With 
some kinds of cellulose which are not able to initiate aqueous vinyl polymeri-
zation, the presence of carbon tetrachloride is essentiaP06). 
Acrylates and methacrylates showed a specificity for the polymerization 
initiated in the system of cellulose (or silk) and waterl09). The same situation 
was also encountered even when carbon tetrachloride was included in the 
systemllO). For instance, polymerizations of methyl methacrylate, n-butyl 
acrylate, acrylonitrile, and styrene (2 cm3 each) were conducted at 85°C for 
5 hours in the presence of cupra-rayon (0.2 gm), water (10 cm3), and carbon 
tetrachloride (0.2 cm3). Results of this investigation showed that acrylonitrile 
and styrene have no tendency to polymerize, whereas polymerization of methyl 
51 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
methacrylate and n-butyl acrylate resulted in a weight increase of the rayon 
of 490 % and 303 % respectivelyllO). 
It was suggested that uncatalyzed grafting proceeds via a radical mechanism. 
With partially acetylated cellulose fiber, for example, some active sites were 
assumed to be present which would react with carbon tetrachloride to form 
initiating radicals108). This postulation was confirmed by the following obser-
vations: (a) hydroquinone was found to act as inhibitor; (b) copolymerization 
of methyl methacrylate and styrene (at a molar ratio of I: 0.99) with the cupra 
rayon-carbon tetrachloride-water system yields a copolymer consisting of 
43.2 % styrene and 56.8 % methyl methacrylate, which is close to the calculated 
proportions, (50:50)110); and (c) grafting ofvinylidene chloride, which can only 
polymerize by a radical mechanism, has been possible by using the methyl 
cellulose-methanol (or ethanol)-carbon tetrachloride systems104). 
The mechanism which has been proposedll1) for the polymerization of 
methyl methacrylate in the presence of cellulose (or other effective polymer) 
and water involves the formation of a complex between the polymeric -OH 
(or -CONH- in the case of silk) groups, water, and monomer as shown 
in Eq. 60: 
-HC--CH-
I 
I 
....... ° '" . ,/ ° " 
CHz 
H 
H 
I 
CH30" /c" 
/0" 
C 
I 
H 
H 
II 
CH3 
° 
(60) 
-HC----CH-
-HC----~H-
I 
I 
I 
The macromolecule provides two hydroxyl groups, one serving as donor 
and the other as acceptor. The -OH group in the complex breaks, forming 
a new bond between oxygen and monomer and liberating atomic hydrogen. 
The hydrogen atom initiates the homopolymerization of the monomer or 
the graft polymerization on the polyoI35). 
As already indicated, carbon tetrachloride has a dramatic effect on the 
cellulose-water-vinyl monomer system105). In the presence of a small amount 
of carbon tetrachloride, the conversion of monomer to polymer, after 5 hours 
52 

2.8. Uncatalyzed Grafting 
at 85°C, increases rapidly and then decreases as the carbon tetrachloride 
content is increased further. The conversion is zero in the absence of water. 
Although the conversion increases in the presence of carbon tetrachloride, the 
grafting efficiency decreases exponentially with increasing amounts of carbon 
tetrachloride in the cellulose-water-methyl methacrylate system at 85°C. The 
molecular mass of the homopolymer decreases with increasing carbon tetra-
chloride content, apparently due to conventional chain transfer. 
Since the grafting efficiency in the cellulose-water-carbon tetrachloride 
system is lower than that in the cellulose-water system, the proposed reaction 
mechanism for initiation of methyl methacrylate polymerization has been 
modified, as shown in Eq. (61)35). 
-CH--CH-
-CH--CH-
I 
I 
I 
I 
o 
o --
0 
o 
\ 
\ 
\ 
H 
H 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
, 
, , 
/1~CCI3 
, 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
H 
CH2 
\ 
# 
o---c 
/ /\ 
H 
CH3 C 
#\ 
o 
OCH3 
\ 
H 
H 
H 
H 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
/ 
/ 
/ , 
\ o 
/ 
, , 
CI 
/ . 
(61) 
Some samples of cellulose have been found to be ineffective in initiating 
polymerization while others have been effective106). The efficiency of an 
inferior grade of wood pulp is greatly improved by the addition of a small 
amount of carbon tetrachloride, although no polymerization of methyl metha-
crylate occurs in the absence of either water or wood pulp. When the grade 
of wood pulp that is effective in the presence of carbon tetrachloride is either 
boiled in water, extracted with ethanol or ether, boiled in a dilute sodium 
hydroxide solution, or immersed in a dilute sodium borohydride solution, its 
effectiveness in the presence of carbon tetrachloride is somewhat reduced. 
The addition of CUll ions to a mixture of methyl methacrylate and purified 
cotton in the presence of water greatly increases the polymer yield in the 
absence of carbon tetrachloride112). Consequently, it has been proposed that 
CUll ion plays an important role in polymerization in the presence of cellulose-
water, and the earlier mechanism shown in Eq. (60) has been revised35), as 
shown in Eq. 62 and 63. 
-CH-
OCH) 
I 
I 
-CH-
OCH3 
I 
I 
H-O 
o=c 
CH3 
\ 
I 
\/ 
Cun 
c-
I 
\ 
/~ 
H-O 
0- H 
CH2 
I 
I 
H -
0 
0= C 
CH3 
\ 
I 
\/ 
Cun 
CH 
I 
\. 
\. 
H -
0 
0 
CH2 
I 
I 
(62) 
-CH-
H 
-CH-
H 
53 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
-CH-
CH3 
0 
I 
I 
II 
-CH-
CH3 0 
I 
I 
II 
O-H O-C 
O-H O-C 
\ 
I 
\ 
\ 
I 
\ 
Cu· 
C -
CH 3 
/ 
\ 
I 
cu· 
C· -
CH 
I 
\ 
/ 
3 
H -
0 
0--- CH2 
H-O 
O-CH 
I 
I 
2 
I 
/ \ 
-CH-H 
H 
-CH-
H 
(63) 
Notwithstanding the various cellulose-monomer complexes which have been 
proposed and the great care taken to exclude air or peroxides from the 
reaction mixture, the participation of oxygen in the initiation step in the 
uncatalyzed graft copolymerization has been considered and not completely 
disproved106, 112, 113). 
2.9. The Kinetics of Radiation-Induced 
Grafting onto Cellulosics 
As we have seen, work has been devoted to the mechanics of grafting onto 
cellulose using a variety of irradiation procedures. Much more attention has 
been given to the effects on bulk physical properties of graft copolymerization. 
By contrast, the interest in studies of the kinetics of grafting has been meager, 
perhaps because of the complexities of such systems, 
Odian and coworkers have provided the basis for an understanding of the 
kinetics of the grafting reactions involving polyethylene and styrene114, 115). 
The principles have also been applied to nylon-styrene composites116). Styrene 
has proven to be a popular choice for fundamental study because of its low 
G (radical) value relative to that of cellulose, nylon, or polyethylene (See 
Chapter 3), The model used is partly developed from the simple kinetics of 
radiation-induced homopolymerization reactions (See Section l.2.5.). This 
model assumes that the polymerization system has come to equilibrium before 
the irradiation program is started. Omichi and ArakP 17) have examined the 
styrene -
pre-irradiated poly (isobutylene oxide) system in an attempt to under-
stand the kinetics of the grafting process, though the radiation was generated 
by a (2 Mev, 1 rnA) resonance transformer electron accelerator at -78°C, 
as described by Sekiguchi et aIYS). Under these circumstances, grafting is 
non-steady state, and thus, the radical concentration [M'] is given byllS) 
r 
r 
[M] = f Rj dt - f Rr dt , 
o· 
0 
(64) 
while the degree of polymerization, Pn, is given by 
(65) 
54 

2.9. The Kinetics of Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
where the symbols have the same meaning as given in 1.2.5. A combination of 
Eqs. (5, 9, 22, 64 and 65), together with the representation of the chain 
transfer reaction (through the rate of transfer) as 
M' + XY -
MX + Y' 
giving 
Rtr = ktr[M'] [XY] , 
provides Eqs. (66) and (67) where the concentration of monomer is assumed 
to be constant throughout the reaction time 
(66) 
(67) 
where [XY] denotes the chain transfer agent. 
Omichi and Araki have shown this approach to be a reasonable indi-
cation of the non-steady state situation. Various relevant values of parameters 
are given in Table 1. These data indicate the presence of a viscosity or Tromms-
dorff effect. The model could be usefully applied to pre-irradiated cellulose 
grafting, thus filling a long existing gap in the general understanding of cellulose 
grafting when carried out under such conditions. 
Fortunately, the situation with regard to simultaneous grafting from mono-
mer solutions is now quite clearly understood from the kinetic standpoint. 
Table 1. Kinetic values of the graft copolymerization of styrene on pre-
irradiated P.I.B.O. [poly (isobutylene oxide)] at 25 °e. Taken from Ref. (117) 
p. 186 by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons Inc. 
Parameter 
, 
f Rj dr, mol/g 
0 
kp[M], min-I 
[M], mol/g PIBO 
kp' limo I sec 
k,,[XY], min-I 
[XV], mol/g 
k", I/mol sec 
k" I/mol sec 
k!lk" I/mol sec 
Suspension 
Irradiation 
2.0 x 10- 7 
0.46xllf 
2.8 x 10- 3 
0.32 
5.0 x 10- 2 
l.4xlO- 2 
7.1 x 10- 5 
11.3 
9.1 x 10- 3 
Powder Irradiation 
Styrene-Methanol 
Styrene 
(I: I) 
1.7 x 10- 7 
2.1 X 10- 7 
0.56 x Ilf 
1.1 x Ilf 
4.5 x 10- 3 
8.6 X 10- 3 
0.24 
0.27 
1.7 x 10- 2 
2.9 x 10- 2 
l.4xlO- 2 
l.4xlO- 2 
2.4 X 10- 5 
4.4 X 10-5 
1.0 
2.3 
5.8 x 10-2 
3.0 X 10-2 
55 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
Guthrie et al. have examined the grafting of styrene onto cellulosel19,120) and 
selected derivatives121 ,122). In their discussion of the kinetics of grafting in the 
dioxan-styrene-water-cellulose system, certain assumptions were made: 
(i) The monomer solution is available at all the grafting sites on the cellulose. 
(ii) Grafting takes place in the accessible regions of the backbone polymer. 
In view of the small film thickness used and the high efficiency of swelling 
obtained, such an assumption is reasonable. 
(iii) In the expression of grafting rates and monomer concentrations, the 
individual volumes of cellulose, styrene, dioxan, and water are additive 
without contraction or expansion of volume. Though a considerable over-
simplification, this assumption is thought unlikely to affect the relative 
validity of the various calculated terms. 
(iv) The grafting reaction is not diffusion controlled. This assumption is 
justified, since equilibrium swelling is attained in all cases prior to the 
commencement of irradiation. If grafting were essentially diffusion con-
trolled, then the method of Omichi and Araki117) should be used. Since 
consistency of technique was maintained throughout and factors thought 
likely to influence grafting were investigated successfully, the mechanism 
of the grafting and homopolymerization processes can be considered. It 
is of interest to determine the specific rates of graft copolymerization and 
homopolymerization together with the k!/kt values for the various cellulose-
styrene-dioxan-water systems. Data used in determination of reaction 
rates 'were restricted to the initial stages of grafting and homopolymeri-
zation. 
The rate of graft polymerization and homopolymerization is given by 
( R.)1/2 
Rp = kp 2k't 
[M] 
(68) 
where kp and kt = propagation and biomolecular-termination rate con-
stants, respectively; Rp == RG ~ mol of styrene grafted per liter of cellulose-
styrene-dioxan-water per second, in the grafting reaction; Rp == RH = mol 
of styrene converted to homopolymer per liter of bulk monomer solution 
per second, in the homopolymerization reaction; [M] is the monomer concen-
tration (in grafting this is expressed as mol of styrene per liter of bulk solution) 
as see in Tables 2 and 3; and Ri = mol of free radicals produced on the cellulose 
polymer per liter of swollen film per second (in homopolymerization Ri is 
expressed as the concentration of homopolymer radicals per liter of bulk 
solution per second). The rate of initiation for both grafting and homo-
polymerization is obtained by 
R _ 
G<P(}p 
i -
NA X 100 
(69) 
where G = the number of free radicals produced in the system per 100 eV 
of absorbed radiation energy, NA = the Avogadro number, <P = the radiation 
intensity in eV per gram of cellulose per second (= 2.26 X 1013 eV/g sec), and 
56 

2.9. The Kinetics of Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
Table 2. Liquid composition of the bulk medium and concentration of monomer in regenerated 
cellulose film for various concentrations in the bulk medium. Reprinted from Ref. (120), p. 1032 
by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Concentration of cellulose-dioxan-styrene-water system, 
Monomer concn. Styrene concn. 
g/1. 
in film, mol/I. 
in bulk medium 
of swollen film 
mol/I. 
Styrene 
Dioxan 
Cellulose 
Water 
X 102 
2.16 
160 
1252 
3.53 
2.08 
0.432 
6.51 
202 
1187 
4.10 
6.26 
0.896 
12.8 
242 
1125 
6.50 
12.3 
1.73 
15.7 
230 
1124 
6.90 
15.1 
2.59 
26.5 
310 
1028 
11.1 
25.5 
3.43 
Impregnation carried out at 30°C. Styrene concentrations followed by extraction of swollen films 
with 98: 2, dioxan/water mixtures and measurement of Amax at 282 and 291 nm (123). 
(!p = the concentration of accessible cellulose in grams per liter of swollen 
film in grafting, or the number of grams of monomer solution per liter of 
swollen film in homopolymerization. 
The results of the monomer and intensity dependence found in this study 
are consistent with Eq. (68), and hence this approach seems to be valid. 
Rearrangement and squaring of Eq. (68) gives 
(70) 
Calculated values for R; and k!/kr for the grafting of styrene to cellulose in 
a dioxan-water medium are given in Table 3. Since only qualitative importance 
is attached to values of k!/kr' the use of this approach, which neglects termi-
nation between graft copolymer and homopolymer radicals, is justified. 
Table 3. k;/k, in grafting for the bulk monomer concentrations in the grafting media. Values 
obtained from Rp and Ri employing a literature value (121) for the G (radical) of cellulose. Reprinted 
from Ref. (120) p. 1034 by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Monomer 
Monomer 
Rp (mol 
Rp 
Pp' g/1. of k;/k" 
Monomer 
Swelling 
concn. in 
concn. in 
grafted. 
moiL-I 
swollen 
I. mol-I 
concn. in 
at equi-
bulk 
film, 
I-I of 
sec-I 
film 
sec-I 
bulk, % 
librium 
grafting 
mol/I. 
swollen 
x 109 
(v/v) 
based on 
medium, 
of swollen 
film. sec -I) 
initial 
mol/I. 
film x 102 
film 
weight, 
% 
0.432 
2.08 
4.24 
1.34 
1252 
62.2 
5 
13.2 
0.863 
6.26 
11.9 
1.27 
1187 
57.1 
10 
18.0 
1.73 
12.3 
22.4 
1.20 
1125 
54.2 
20 
21.5 
2.59 
15.1 
27.4 
1.20 
1124 
54.8 
30 
23.3 
3.46 
25.5 
46.4 
1.10 
1028 
60.5 
40 
32.8 
57 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
The rates of initiation, Ri' were calculated using a G (radical) value for 
cellulose radical production of 2.88121 ). Values of p were calculated from the 
known weight fractions of each of the components of a swollen film and their 
respective densities, measured at 30°C. The density of regenerated cellulose 
film, measured by the flotation technique using benzene and carbon tetr<j.-
chloride, was found to be 1.47 g/cm3 • Accepted values for k!/ kt in the free-
radical polymerization of pure styrene at 25°C are of the order 1 x 10 -4 I mol- 1 
sec- 1 124), which is smaller by 6 x 105 than the values obtained in the above-
mentioned styrene-cellulose copolymerization (see Table 3). The values of 
Guthrie et aI. 120) compare favorably with those of Odian et aI., in their grafting 
of styrene onto nyloni16), of 20 I mol- 1 sec-i. Odian's study of grafting onto 
polyethylene produced values ranging from 0.12 to 8.3 I mol- 1 sec -1 for k!/kt' 
depending on the physical nature of the polymerization medium114). 
The rate of initiation (Ri) in the radiation-induced grafting carried out by 
Guthrie et aI.120), together with the values of Rp' p and k!/kt' are given in 
Table 4. 
Values for the rate of initiation, Ri' for the homopolymerization reaction 
were obtained through use of a composite G (radical) value. This assumes that each 
of the components of the monomer solution contributes to the initiation of 
homopolymerization to an extent dependent on its G (radical) value and its 
weight fraction in the mixture. The individual G values used were cellulose, 
2.88121 ); water, 4.8125); styrene, 0.69126); and dioxane, 2.0127). 
Thus, denoting the weight fraction by Wand letting the symbol G denote 
the G (radical) value, we obtain 
G composite = (G (styrene) x W (styrene)) 
+ (G (water) x W (water)) 
+ (G (dioxan) x W (dioxan)) . 
This calculated composite G (radical) value provides a realistic approach to 
the mechanism of homopolymerization. Since composite G values are used, com-
posite values for {! (monomer and solvent) were calculated. Thus, {! (compo-
Table 4. k;/k, in homopolymerization (h) attendant during grafting, for various bulk monomer 
concentrations. Values obtained from rates of homopolymerization Rih) together with values of 
R j calculated from the composite G (radical) of each bulk medium. Reprinted from Ref. (120), 
p. 1035, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Monomer 
G (radical) 
p (composite) 
Rj(h), mol 
Rih), mol 
~/k, 
concn. in bulk, composite 
g/1. x 10-3 
I -I 
-I 
I. -I sec-I 
I. mol-I sec-I 
. 
sec 
mol/I. 
x 1010 
x 107 
X J(f 
0.432 
2.10 
1.017 
8.01 
1.39 
2.58 
0.864 
2.0 
LOll 
7.57 
2.97 
3.\3 
1.73 
1.8 
0.999 
6.74 
5.97 
3.54 
2.59 
1.7 
0.986 
6.29 
9.05 
3.86 
3.46 
1.6 
0.973 
5.84 
11.2 
3.58 
58 

2.9. The Kinetics of Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
site) = (weight of styrene + weight of dioxan + weight of water) in g/dm3 of 
the monomer solution. 
The values of k;/kt obtained in this study of styrene homopolymerization 
are in good agreement with those of other studies and with the accepted value 
for the free-radical polymerization of the pure styrene. An increase of e / kt is 
observed with increasing concentration of monomer due to changes fn the 
viscosity of the monomer solution ar.d consequent restriction of movement 
of the growing polymer chains. 
Utilization of the known values of k~/kt and kp for the free-radical polymeri-
zation of styrene, I x 10 -4 I mol- 1 sec -1 and 55 I mol- 1 sec -1 128), respectively, 
enables values for kt to be calculated. 
Rearrangement of Eq. (69) and (70) gives 
(71) 
and 
(72) 
Hence, values for G (composite) may be derived. Table (5) shows values of the 
composite G (radical) obtained for various monomer concentrations. It is seen 
that these compare favorably with those used in the experimental ~/kt values 
for homopolymerization. 
Experimentally determined k~/kt values are in close agreement with those 
obtained using a literature value for kp and a value of kt calculated from 
quoted values of /C/kt and kp • This indicates that the individual experimental 
values of kp and k: for the radiation-induced homopolymerization of styrene, 
as described, are probably of similar order to the literature values of kp 
andkt• 
Studies by Guthrie and Haq. on grafting to hydroxyethyl cellulose film 
(degree of substitution = 0.4) produced the data given in Table 6 for a range 
initial bulk monomer concentrations129). Again we see evidence of the Tromms-
dorff type of effect, though the values of ~/k, are significantly less than those 
Table 5. Calculated G (radical) values for the homopolymerization of styrene, attendant during graft-
ing. Obtained from R/h) together with values of Rj calculated on the basis of literature values of 
!C;/k,. Reprinted from Ref. (120), p. 1036, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Monomer 
p (composite), 
Rj(h) cal-
Rp(h), mol 
!C;/k" 
G (radical), 
concn. in bulk, g/1. of 
culated, 
xl.- 1 sec-1 
1. mol-l sec-I composite, 
mol/I. 
bulk solution 
mol 1-1 
x 107 
x 10-4 
calculated 
x 10-3 
sec-1 x 1010 
(from literature 
values) 
0.432 
1.017 
7.17 
1.39 
2.88 
1.9 
0.864 
1.0J1 
8.23 
2.97 
2.88 
2.1 
1.73 
0.999 
8.29 
5.97 
2.88 
2.2 
2.59 
0.986 
8.44 
9.05 
2.88 
2.3 
3.46 
0.973 
7.25 
11.18 
2.88 
2.0 
59 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
Table 6. Grafting of styrene and hydroxyethyl cellulose film, various initial bulk monomer con-
centrations. k!/k,. Reprinted from Ref.129) p. 73. Courtesy of I.P.C. Science and Technology 
Press. 
Monomer 
p gl-I 
Rj 
Rp = RG 
k!/k, 
concentration 
of swollen film 
moll-I sec-I 
(% Wt/wt)x 10-4 I mol-I sec-I 
x 10-9 
0.864 
1187 
1.595 
1.123 
0.213 
1.73 
1125 
1.511 
1.684 
0.166 
2.59 
1124 
1.509 
2.237 
0.134 
3.46 
1028 
1.381 
3.188 
0.110 
Table 7. k2/k, values for carbanilated celluloses having various degrees of substitution. 
from Ref.1~1) p. 753 courtesy of Pergamon Press, Ltd. 
Taken 
D.S. 
RG 
[M] 
G (radical) 10- 3 x p 
lOS x Rp 
IQ2 X 
109 x Rj 1010 x k;/k, 
(% wt. 
[mol (I. 
in vacuo 
[g. substi-
[mol sty-
[M]2 
(moll-I (2R/ (I mol-I 
hr-I) 
swollen 
tuted 
rene 
sec-I) 
sec-I) 
film)-I] 
cellulose 
grafted 
(I. swollen 
(I. swollen 
film)-I] 
film)-I 
sec-I] 
0.0 
0.74 
0.123 
2.90 
1.122 
2.24 
1.51 1.20 
10.0 
54.2 
0.02 
0.51 
0.142 
2.45 
1.120 
1.52 
2.02 1.03 
4.62 
22.3 
0.27 
0.45 
0.874 
1.50 
0.761 
0.92 
76.4 
0.43 
1.68 
0.512 
0.52 
0.30 
1.110 
1.10 
0.590 
0.48 
123.0 
0.24 
0.49 
0.159 
obtained with regenerated cellulose film. This indicates the more open mor-
phology of hydroxyethyl.cellulose film relative to the unsubstituted variety. 
In their work on grafting to cellulose carbanilates (degrees of substitution 
in the range 0.0 to 0.51), Guthrie et al. reported data whereby values of 
IC/k; could be calculated. The relevant details are given in Table 7. Thus, 
f6r fixed values of the styrene concentration and intensity, plots of per cent 
grafting against time for each degree of substitution were seen to be accurately 
linear, no induction periods being observed. Values of RG (= Rp) were 
obtained from the slopes and ratio of k!/kt calculated from a knowledge of the 
density of the substituted celluloses, the rate of initiation, and the composite 
densities130l. 
The procedure was as described above. Grafting was carried out in the 
styrene-dioxan-cellulose-water system. It is clear that the value of k!/kt falls 
regularly with increasing degrees of carbanilation. Since cellulose tricarbanilate 
is soluble in dioxan, it is not surprising that these substituted products should 
have a high affinity for the dioxan component of the bulk monomer system. 
Thus, the c:lrbanilated substrate is much more open and, consequently, 
accessible to monomer/solvent than is non-substituted ·cellulose. The Tromms-
dorff type of effect becomes less pronounced as the degree of substitution 
increases. 
60 

References 
This kind of kinetic analysis could be applied to a wide variety of grafting 
systems, provided the data are processed in the prescribed manner. 
References 
1. Hebeish, A.: L'Industrie Textile 991, 415 (1970) 
2. Stannett, V., Wellons, J. D., Yasuda, H.: J. Polymer Sci. C4, 551 (1964) 
3. Huang, R. Y-M., Immergut, B., Immergut, E. H., Rapson, W. H.: J. Polymer Sci. A 1, 
1257 (1963) 
4. Hebeish, A.: Kolorisztikai Ertesito 13, 12 (1971) 
5. Hebeish, A., Mehta, P. c.: Text. Research J. 37, 911 (1967) 
6. Hebeish, A., Mehta, P. c.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 12, 1625 (1968) 
7. Kulkarni, A. Y., Hebeish, A., Mehta, P. c.: Proc. 9th Tech. Conf. ATIRA, BITRA and 
SITRA, India 1968, P. 367 
8. Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: European Polymer J. 6,1575 (1970) 
9. Hebeish, A., Thesis, Ph. D.: Gujarat University, India 1967 
10. Geacintov, N., Stannett, V., Abrahamson, E. W.: Makromo!. Chern. 36, 52 (1959) 
II. Geacintov, N., Stannett, V., Abrahamson, E. W., Hermans, J. J.: J. App!. Polym. Sci., 3, 54 
(1960) 
12. Blouin, F. A., Morris, N. J., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Text. Research J 36,309 (1966) 
13. Sidykov, T. S., Shablygin, M. V., Livshitz, R. M., Rogovin, Z. A.: Vysokomol. Soedin 8, 
2035 (1967) 
14. Livshitz, R. M., Sidikov, T. S., Rogovin, Z. A.: Cellulose Chern. Techno!. 2, 3 (1968) 
15. Sakurada, 1., Okada, T., Uchida, M., Kugo, E.: Doitai To Hoskasen 2, 316 (1959) 
16. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L., Martin, E. c., Phuoc, D. H.: J. Polymer Sci. C 2,169 (1963) 
17. Huang, R. Y-M., Rapson, W. H.: J. Polymer Sci. C 2,169 (1963) 
18. Kesting, R. E., Stannett, V.: Makromo!' Chern. 65, 248 (1963) 
19. Hebeish, A., Mehta, P. c.: Text. Research J. 38,1070 (1968) 
20. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Text. Research J. 28, 204 (1958) 
21. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Blouin, F. A.: Text. Research J 34,733 (1964) 
22. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Blouin, F. A., Demint, R. J.: Am. Dyestuff Reptr. 49, 383 (1960) 
23. Arthur, J. C.Jr., Demint, R. J.: Text. Research J 32,108, (1962) 
24. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Am. Dyestuff Reptr. 53, 951 (1964) 
25. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Chern. Eng. Data. 5, 470 (1960) 
26. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Text. Res. J 28,198 (1958) 
27. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr., Orr, R. S., Ott, V. J.: Text. Res. J 31,597 (1961) 
28. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Baugh, P. J., Hinojosa, 0.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 10, 591 (1966) 
29. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Hinojosa, 0., Bains, M. S.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 12, 1411 (1968) 
30. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Mares, T., Hinojosa, 0.: Text. Research J 36,630 (1966) 
31. Rogovin, Z. A., Livshitz, R. M.: Bull. Inst. Politech. 16,297 (1970) 
32. Rogovin, Z. A.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37, 221 (1972) 
33. Sakurada, 1., Akada, T., Hatakayama, S., Kimura, F.: J. Polymer Sci. C 4,1233 (1963) 
34. Stanchenko, G. 1., Livshitz, R. M., Loffe, T. A., Rogovin, Z. A.: Cellulose Chern. Techno!. 3, 
367 (1969) 
35. Gaylord, N.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37,153 (1972) 
36. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: J. Polymer Sci. A 14. 2323 (1966) 
37. Dilli, S., Ernst, 1. T., Garnett, J. L.: Austral. J. Chern. 20, 911 (1967) 
38. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: Nature, 198, 984 (1963) 
39. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: Austral. J. Chern. 23,1163 (1970) 
40. Stan nett, V.: IUPAC Conference, Syndney, Australia 1968 
41. Gaylord, N. G.: J. Polymer Sci C 31,247 (1970) 
42. Gaylord, N. G., Patnaik, B.: J. Polymer Sci. B 8,401,549 (1970) 
43. Gaylord, N. G., Patnaik, B.: J. Polymer Sci. B 8, 411 (1970) 
44. Gaylord, N. G., Takahashi, A.: Advan. C!1em. 91, 94 (1969) 
45. Gaylord, N. G., Takahashi, A., Anand, L. c.: J. Polymer Sci. B 9, 97 (1971) 
61 

2. Vinyl Graft Copolymerization onto Cellulose 
46. Imoto, M., Takemoto, K., Kondo, M.: Makromol. Chern. 98, 74 (1966) 
47. Nara, S., Matsuyama, K.: Kobunshu Kagaku 25, 840 (1968) 
48. Takahashi, T., Hori, Y., Sato, I.: J. Polymer Sci. AI, 6, 2091 (1968) 
49. Gaylord, N. G., Antropivsova, H., Patnaik, B. K.: J. Polymer Sci. B 9,387 (1971) 
50. Gaylord, N. G., Kikawa, E., Takahashi, A.: J. Polymer Sci. B 9,379 (1971) 
51. EI'garph, S. A., Konkin, A. A., Rogovin, Z. A.: Vysokomol. Soedin. 8, 42 (1966), Polymer Sci. 
USSR 8, 41 (1966) 
52. Houtz, R. c., Adkins, H.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 55, 1609 (1933) 
53. Carlin, R. B., Shakespeare, N. E.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 68,876 (1946) 
54. Carlin, R. B., Hufford, D. L.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 72,4200 (1950) 
55. Roland, J. R., Richards, L. M.: J. Polymer Sci. 9, 61 (1952) 
56. Bevington, J. C., Guzman, G. M., Melville, H. W.: Nature, 170, 1026 (1952) 
57. Flory, P. J.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 59, 241 (1937) 
58. Angier, D. J., Watson, W. F.: J. Polymer Sci. 18, 129 (1955) 
59. Hayes, R. A.: J. Polymer Sci. 13,383 (1954) 
60. Immergut, E. H., Mark, H.: Makromol. Chern. 18/19,322 (1956) 
61. Fox, T. G., Gratch, S.: Ann. N.Y. Acad. Sci. 57, 367 (1953) 
62. Fox, T. G., Gluckman, M. S., Gornick, F., Graham, R. K., Gratch, S.: J. Polymer Sci. 37, 
397 (1959) 
63. Jahn, E. C.: Paper presented at the Internatl. Symp. Macromol. Stockholm: 1953 
64. Walling, c.: In Free Radicals in Solution. New York: Wiley 1957, p. 150 
65. Basu, S., Sen, J. N., Pal it, S. R.: Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 202,485 (1950) 
66. Gregg, R. A., Mayo, F. R.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 75, 3530 (1953) 
67. Lim, D., Wicherle, 0.: J. Polymer Sci. 39, 579 (1958) 
68. Morton, M., Piirma, I.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 80, 5596 (1958) 
69. Okamura, S., Hayashi, K., Kitanishi, Y.: Isotopes Radiation Tokyo, 3,398 (1960) 
70. Schulz, G. V., Henrici, G., Olive, S.: J. Polymer Sci. 17, 45 (1955) 
71. Smets, G., Roovers, J., Van Humbeek, W.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 5,149 (1961) 
72. Hayes, R. A.: J. Polymer Sci. 11,531 (1953) 
73. Smets, G., Claesen, M.: J. Polymer Sci. 8, 289 (1952) 
74. Bamford, C. H., White, E. F. T.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 52, 716, (1956); 54, 268, 278 (1958) 
75. Gluckman, M. S., Kampf, M. J., O'Brien, J. L., Fox, T. G., Graham, R. K.: J. Polymer 
Sci. 37, 411 (1959) 
76. Hermans, J. J.: Pure App!. Chern. 5,147, (1962) 
77. Machell, G., Richards, G. N.: J. Chern. Soc. 3308 (1961) 
78. Burroughs, R. H.: Thesis, State Univ. Coll. Forestry, Syracuse, N.Y., June 1955 
79. Chaudhuri, D. K. R., Hermans, J. J.: J. Polymer Sci. 51, 373 (1961) 
80. Schonfeld, E., Waltcher, I.: J. Polymer Sci. 35, 536 (1959) 
81. Kargin, V. A., Kovarskaya, B. M., Golubenkova, L. I., Akutin, M. S., Slonimskii, G. L.: 
Khim. Prom. 77 (1957) 
82. Kargin, V. A., Plate, N. A., Dobrynina, A. S.: Kolloid Zhur. 20, 232 (1958); through C.A., 
52,21215 (1958) 
83. Berlin, A. A., Kronman, A. G., Yanovskii, D. M., Kargin, V. A.: Yysokomol. Soedin. 2,1839 
(1960) 
84. Berlin, A. A., Makarova, T. A.: J. Gen. Chern., USSR., (English Translation) 21,1383 (1951) 
85. Bateman, L. c.: Ind. Eng. Chern. 49, 704 (1957) 
86. Ceresa, R. J.: Polymer 1, 72 (1960) 
87. Kargin, V. A., Plate, N. A.: J. Polymer Sci. 52,155 (1961) 
88. Butyagin, P. Yu.: Dokl. Akad. Nauk. SSSR. 140, 145 (196"1) 
89. Ceresa, R. J.: Block and Graft Copdymers, Washington: Butterworths 1962 
90. Kargin, V. A., Kabanov, V. A.: J. Polymer Sci. 52, 71 (1961) 
91. Angier, D. J., Ceresa, R. J., Watson, W. F.: J. Polymer Sci. 34, 699,1959 
92. Ceresa, R. J.: Polymer 2,213 (1961) 
93. Akutin, M. S.: Trans. Plastics Inst. (London) 28, 216 (1960) 
94. Akutin, M. S., Parlashkevich, N. Ya., Kogan, I. N., Kalinina, S. P., Menes, L. I.: 
Primenenie ul'braakustiki K Issled Veshchestva 10, 47 (1960); through C.A. 56,13086 (1962) 
95. EI'Piner, L. E.: Russian Chern. Rev. (English translation) 29, I (1960) 
62 

References 
96. Henglein, A.: Makromol. Chern. 14, 128 (1954) 
97. Henglein, A.: Makromol. Chern. 18/19, 37 (1956) 
98. Grassie, N.: Chemistry of High Polymer Degradation Processes, New York: Interscience 1956 
99. Jellinek, H. H. G.: Degradation of High Polymers, New York: Academic Press 1955 
100. Deters, W., Huang, D.: Faserforsch. Textiltech. 14, 183 (1963) 
101. De Bataafsche, N. Y.: Petroleum Maatschappij, British Pat. 679562 1952; through C.A. 47, 
7825 (1953) 
102. Ceresa, R. J.: Paper presented at the A.C.S. 138th meeting, New York, N.Y., September 1960 
103. Simionescu, G. I., Ciubotariu, M.: Paper presented at the 39th Internatl. Congress of Indust. 
Chern. Bucharest, Romania, September 1970 
104. Simionescu, G. I., Feldman, D., Ciubotariu, M.: J. Polymer Sci. C. 37,119 (1972) 
105. Imoto, M., Takemoto, K., Sutch, M.: Makromol. Chern. 110,3((1967) 
106. Imoto, M., Iki, Y., Kinoshita, M., Takemoto, K.: Makromol. Chern. 122,287 (1969) 
107. Kubushiro, K., Takemotot, K., Imoto, M.: Makromol. Chern. 120, 139 (1968) 
108. Kubushiro, K., Takemotot, K., Imoto, M.: Makromol. Chern. 138, I (1970) 
109. Imoto, M., Takemoto, K., Azuma, H., Kita, K., Kendo, H.: Makromol. Chern. 107, 188 
(1967) 
110. Imoto, M., Ueda, K., Takemoto, K.: Makromol. Chern. 138, 11 (1970) 
Ill. Imoto, M., Takemoto, K., Otsuki, T.: Makromol. Chern. 104,244 (1967) 
112. Imoto, M., Iki, Y., Kawabata, Y., Kiroshita, M.: Makromol. Chern. 140, 281 (1970) 
113. Ko, K., Sato, K.: Kobunshi, 19, 439 (1970) 
114. Odian, G., Rossi, I., Trachtenberg, E. N.: J. Polymer Sci. 42, 575 (1960) 
115. Odian, G., Rossi, I., Sobel, M., Klein, R.: J. Polymer Sci. 55, 663 (1961) 
116. Odian, G., Sobel, M., Rossi, A., Klein, R., Ackers, T.: J. Polymer Sci. A 1, 639 (1963) 
117. Omichi, H., Araki, K.: J. Polymer. Sci., Polymer Chern. 16, 179 (1978) 
118. Sekiguchi, A., Yoshida, K., Araki, K.: Proc. 23rd Conf. High Polymers, Japan 4A05, 4A06 
(1974) 
119. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: J. Polymer Sci., C. 37, 205 (1972) 
120. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 16, 1017 (1972) 
121. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: Eur. Polymer J 8,747 (1972) 
122. Guthrie, J. T., Haq, Z.: Polymer 15, 133 (1974) 
123. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: Angew. Makromol. Chern. 13, 199 (1970) 
124. Tobolsky, A. V., Mesrobian, R. B.: Organic Peroxides. New York: Interscience 1954, 
P.I44 
125. Hochandel, C. J., Lind, S. c.: Ann. Rev. Phys. Chern. 7,83 (1956) 
126. Chapiro, A.: Radiation Chemistry of Polymeric Systems. New York: Wiley 1962, P. 174 
127. Seitzer, W. H., Tobolsky, A. V.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 77,2687 (1955) 
128. Matheson, M. S., Auer, E. E., Bevilacqua, E, B., Hart, E. J.: J. Arner. Chern. Soc. 73, 1700, 
5395 (1951) 
129. Haq, Z. M. Sc.: Thesis submission, University of Leeds 1973 
130. Guthrie, J. T., Ph. D. Thesis: University if Salford, U. K. 1971 
63 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting 
onto Cellulosics 
3.1. Introduction 
Grafting by irradiation of polymers in the presence of, or followed by, treat-
ment with monomer has been one ef the most successful of all grafting methods 
and has been applied to an enormous number of polymer-monomer systems. 
Chemical bonds are ruptured in organic materiais when they are irradiated 
with electromagnetic or particulate radiation of 100 eV or greater. Among 
the commonly used energy sources are Cobalt-60, electron accelerators, and 
nuclear reactors. Free radicals have been detected in irradiated organic systems, 
and if vinyl monomers are irradiated, polymerizations take place through a free 
radical mechanism. When organic polymers are irradiated, simultaneous cross-
linking and degradation of the chains occur due to the formation of free 
radicals on the polymer backbone. Irradiation in the presence of oxygen, an 
effective free radical scavanger, produces peroxides and hydro peroxides within 
the polymer. In amorphous polymers which are in the vitreous state or in 
highly crystalline polymers, irradiation in vacuum, or even in the presence of 
oxygen, may lead to trapped radicals. Free radicals or peroxides formed on 
the polymer backbone by the radiation can be used to initiate the polymeri-
zation of different vinyl monomers, leading to graft copolymer formation. 
The initiation of chemical reactions by photolysis is also well known. Selective 
absorption of electromagnetic radiation in the visible and ultra-violet region 
causes the rupture of chemical bonds and the production of free radicals. 
Some bonds are efficient absorbers of certain wave lengths of the incident 
radiation and are easily ruptured. Photolysis of polymers containing such 
bonds can lead to the formati(;)fi of free radical sites on the polymer backbone. 
In the presence of a monomer, graft copolymers as well as homo polymers may 
be formed. When none of the bonds within a system is ruptured by this low-
energy radiation, copolymerization can be otherwise promoted by the addition 
of photosensitizers. These are molecules which can absorb the radiation energy 
and transfer some of this energy to the other chemical species present. Photo-
sensitizers may also decompose into active free radicals which can initiate the 
polymerization of a monomer in the presence of the polymer. In addition, these 
active species may abstract an atom from the polymer backbone. The ease of 
formation of the free radicals within any irradiated system, their concentration, 
stability, and location are dependent on the type of radiation, the total energy 
absorbed, the depth of penetration, the degree of localization and the radiation 
sensitivity of the material. Subsequent chemical reactions are dependent on 
variables such as the temperature, concentration, radical activity, and the 
immediate environment. 
64 

3.1. Introduction 
Polymer modification using radiation-induced processing offers various 
advantages over currently accepted processes. However, there are also certain, 
difficulties. These are discussed in detail by Liepins et al.l) in their review of 
radiation-induced processing of textiles. This review, though dealing mainly 
with the flammability resistance of textile polymers, gives an excellent summary 
of the state of the art, the types of radiation source, and their characteristics, 
Of all the sources so far considered, the gamma (y) source is the only one 
which does not require electrical power for activation. 
Two common y sources are available Co-60 and Cs-137, though Co-60 is 
the one used in commercial isotope radiation plants. The reasons for this are 
not difficult to find. Co-60 is relatively cheap, has a useful half life of 
5.25 years, is unaffected by high energy radiation from external sources, and 
may be used up to temperatures of 1300 K. The emission of two gamma rays 
per disintegration provides a total of 2.5 MeV energy per disintegration. 
Commercial operations require the use of multi-kilocurie sources, with conti-
nuous exposure providing high penetration levels. Several source geometries 
are available to satisfy particular requirements. Co-60 sources used on a 
commercial scale lend themselves to ready automation, are reliable and highly 
penetrating, and provide continuous irradiation during exposure. As stated 
above, these sources gradually lose strength, though in a controlled manner. 
This loss of strength means that the sources need replacing at approximately 
2-5 year intervals. The need for automation in product delivery for irradiation 
is a limiting factor in the degree of flexibility in exposure doses in terms 
of the distance between the radiation sources and the samples being irradiated. 
Since the irradiation step would normally be part of an on-line system, this 
need not be too serious a restriction. Most commercial operations are based 
on a continuously moving conveyor belt system which operates in the radiation 
chamber. 
There are several important types of electron beam radiation sources2). 
These include the Van de Graff accelerator, the resonant transformer, the 
linear accelerator, the Dynacote, the Dynamitron, and the insulating core 
transformer. In terms of radiation processing, the following features are 
relevant. The sources require regular maintenance, provide limited product 
penetration, are of constant strength, give high dose rates in the absorbing 
regions, require power for operation, but can be activated or deactivated as 
required, and are relatively inexpensive to operate. 
Ultra-violet radiation-induced processing is now well established in several 
fields, including the curing of surface coatings and the drying of printing 
inks. In terms of the modification of textiles, this technique is still in its 
infancy. 
Additional radiation sources include low-pressure plasma radiation sources 
and corona discharge. Low-pressure plasma radiation is used commercially 
to graft acrylic acid to polyester fabric and could easily be extended to provide 
surface modification of cellulosic textiles3). Corona discharge is commonly used 
to provide surface activation of plastic films in an attempt to improve their 
adhesion characteristics. This is used especially in the printing of flexible 
packaging films. It is somewhat doubtful if this technique has much to offer in 
65 

3. Radiation·Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
terms of modifying the physical or chemical properties of cellulosics through 
graft copolymerization. 
3.1.1. Radiation Units; The Concept of Dose and Dosimetry 
The term 'dose' is used to denote in a quantitative manner, the radiation 
received by a particular substance in a radiation field. Prior to the Copenhagen 
and Geneva meetings of the International Commission of Radiological Units4 ,5), 
considerable confusion existed regarding units of radiation dose. Until this 
time, it was common practice to express dose in terms of the roentgen, a unit 
of radiation flux based on the ionization produced in air. By definition, the 
roentgen is a unit of incident radiation dose as distinct from absorbed radiation 
dose. When substances of different chemical nature are irradiated in the same 
field, the energy dissipation in the various systems may vary greatly for the 
same incident radiation dose. A unit of absorbed dose, namely the RAD 
introduced by the above-mentioned commisions, has done much to clarify 
the position. As stated above, in the history of radiation-induced grafting, various 
terms have been used to indicate levels of exposure in a quantitative manner. 
In polymer processing, the three most commonly encountered units are the 
rad, the rep, and the roentgen. In terms of the S.1. convention, 1 rad = 10-2 J/kg. 
The absorbed dose in a specified medium was, until recently, expressed as 
rads per second, megarads per hour, electron volts per gram per second, or 
ergs per gram per second, etc. For convenience, various conversions are 
presented here: 
1 rad 
= 10-2 J/kg = 100 ergs/g = 6.24 x 1013 eV/g , 
1 rad/sec 
= 10- 2 W/kg, 
1 Mrad/hour = 2.78 W /kg , 
1 eV/g 
= 1.602 x 10- 16 W/kg, 
I rep 
= approximates to 0.93 rad , 
1 roentgen of x of gamma radiation is approximately equal to 
0.96 rad when dealing with energy absorption in most organic polymer 
systems. 
1 Curie (Ci) = 3.7 x 1010 disintegrations/sec. 
Generally, one can achieve between 0.5 and 100 rads/minute for I Ci of 
Co-60, depending on the geometry of the source, the sample arrangement, and 
the absorbing efficiency of the sample. 
The scientific literature contains many references to the design and cali-
bration of equipment for measuring the radiation dose. For any specific 
application, the most suitable technique depends on the type of radiation, the 
dose, the radiation intensity, and also on the accuracy, simplicity, and speed 
of measurement required. 
Techniques for determining absorbed doses can be divided into two classes: 
absolute methods and those involving secondary standards. Absolute methods 
66 

3.1. Introduction 
of dosimetry include the ionization chamber, of which those defined for use with 
fast electron beams are described by Boag et al.6), Laughlin et al.7), McEhinney 
et al.8), Hochanadel and Weiss9), and by Lazo et aUO). There are often serious 
difficulties with absolute physical methods of determining radiation dose, and for 
many purposes, secondary standards based on a chemical change taking place 
within the system being irradiated have been adopted. Examples of chemical 
dosimeters include the oxidation of aqueous solutions of Fellsulfate to FeIllsul-
fatell ), the reduction of aqueous solutions of CeIV sulfate12•13), the decoloration of 
methylene blue in organic solvents14.15), and the decomposition of nitrous 
oxide16). Colorimetric methods of dosimetry include, for example, the coloration 
of glasses and of ionic solids17 - 19), the optical absorption in polystyrene and 
poly(methyl methacrylate )20), dye-impregnated plastics21), and cellophane films22). 
The most commonly used secondary dosimeter involves the oxidation of 
Fell ions to FeIII ions and is known as the Fricke dosimeter. The standard 
solution consists of 1 mM of Fell sulfate in an air-saturated 0.4 M aqueous 
solution of sulfuric acid. The FeIII ion is monitored by spectrophotometric 
measurement of the absorption at 304 nm. The characteristics of the Fricke 
system are well documentedll,23,24). However, certain points are noteworthy. 
The number of oxidation events is dependent on the type of radiation used24 - 26). 
Also, the oxidation process depends on the presence of oxygen in the system. 
In using this chemical dosimeter, it is essential that the exposure be controlled 
so that sufficient oxygen is present at all times, if the oxidation is to proceed 
in a standard manner. In practice, using this dosimeter limits the total dose 
measureable to about 40,000 rads for gamma radiation. For polymer research, 
this can be a limiting factor since, unless a low intensity source is used with 
correspondingly long exposure times, considerable inaccuracies in dosimetry 
may result. 
The G Value 
Although the individual reactions may not be known, the senSitiVIty of a 
system to radiation-induced change may be expressed in terms of the number 
of changes produced by a given absorbed dose. This yield is usually expressed 
as the G value27), which is defined as the number events of a given kind produced 
per 100 eY'of energy absorbed. In using G values it is not implied that all the 
energy absorbed is used to produce the resultant entities. Likewise, in the 
definition no assumptions are made as to the mechanisms of the reaction and, 
for any given system, different G values can be given to denote each of a series 
of products formed in the course of a single irradiation. For example, G (radical) 
-
styrene = 0.6928). Thus, on average, 0.69 styryl radicals are produced in 
the irradiation of bulk styrene for each 100 eY of gamma radiation energy 
absorbed. 
In any detailed analysis of a radiation-induced polymerization or degradation, 
a knowledge of the G value of each of the components is invaluable. For 
example, the grafting of styrene onto regenerated cellulose using a solvent for 
the monomer and a swelling agent for the substrate requires that the G value 
of each component be known and considered. This is because the radio lysis 
products may have a marked effect on grafting efficiency. 
67 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
The interaction of high-energy radiation (gamma, electron beam, etc.) with 
polymers, such as cellulose and cellulosics in the solid state, induces an inter-
esting type of radiochemical reaction29). 
Polymeric molecules are more or less held in a fixed lattice, and ordinary 
collision mechanisms are probably largely inoperative. The molecular activation 
or excitation induced in the cellulosic by the absorbed radiation is not hindered 
by the crystalline-amorphous nature of the cellulose structure. However, the 
nature of the cellulose structure affects the accessability of the activated or excited 
sites with respect to initiation of chain reactions or to interaction with chemical 
reagents. Thus, for chemical modification of cellulose it is perhaps preferable 
to think in terms of relative accessability, since terms based on crystallinity 
and amorphous character do not lead to accurate descriptions of practical 
situations. It is likely that the half life of the activated or excited states, particularly 
in the more ordered regions of the cellulose, is several hours, perhaps days. 
This has been shown by Guthrie et al. in their examination of 'Y irradiated 
regenerated cellulose films30•62). Samples of regenerated cellulose were dissolved 
in Cadoxen [tris(ethylene diamine) cadmium dihydroxide] after exposure to 
known levels of 'Y radiation. Figure 7 shows the effect of exposure on the 
intrinsic viscosity of cellulose, expressed as the per cent decrease in intrinsic 
viscosity versus the log of the total dose62). Irradiations were carried out both 
in air and in vacuum. Vacuum-irradiated samples, on exposure to the atmo-
sphere, undergo rapid secondary degradation. The Mark-Houwink values 
2.5 
2.0 
~1.5 
.£ 
.~ 
OJ 
(/) 
o 
~ 
~ 1.0 
0.5 
E / 
[...0/ 
o 
1.0 
68 
/ 
/ 
c/ / 
i/ 
! 
A 
/ 
1;, / :I 
/1;' --
/ 
I/v","", 
/' 
BI 
1.5 
2.0 
2.5 
log Dose (J kg!) 
Fig. 7. Determination of the threshold dose 
for radiation damage on irradiation of cellu-
lose; (0) radiation in air. (.0.) radiation 
under vacuum. 
Re~rinted from Ref. 62). 
p. 1025. by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, 
Inc. 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
for cellulose in Cadoxen at 25°C are K = 1.8 X 10-2 dl g-l and v = 0.77 
as obtained from light-scattering studies of standard samples3oa), such that 
['7] = kzv. and Alv = Zv x 162, 
where Zv is the viscosity-average degree of polymerization, and Alv is the 
viscosity-average molecular mass. 
The effect of air in the cellulose degradation was shown by irradiating two 
series of samples, one in air, the other under vacuum. The intrinsic viscosity, 
['7], for different cellulose samples was determined in the normal manner in a 
suspended-level dilution viscometer. Using the Mark-Houwink values quoted, 
the viscosity-average molecular masses were obtained. These viscosity-average 
molecular masses were converted to number-averages using the equation appro-
priate for a random distribution30b,30C), (v13 ) 
where r denotes the gamma function. For cellulose ill Cadoxen, v = 0.77, 
which gives the relationship 
whereby the number-average molecular masses are derived. 
From the variation of the number-average molecular mass with total dose, for 
cellulose it is possible to acquire information regarding the de-polymerization 
3.45 f-----f----+-----,'---I-----I 
3.40 r-----+----+t---+----i 
~ 
x 3.35 r-------1f------tT-o.------'~T'-"---i 
c;:;? 
3.30 I--:,~,L-_t_----t---+----i 
3.25 0 
4 
6 
10'2 x Dose (J kg'!) 
Fig. 8. Determination of G (scission) for 
cellulose on irradiation in (0) air and (.6.) 
vacuum. Reprinted from Ref. 62), p. 1024, 
by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
69 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
process through the determination of G values for SCISSIOn of the cellulose 
backbone. Thus, 
NAIMn = NAI(Mn)o + (6.242 x 1017 x G) r 
where NA = the Avogadro number, (Mn)o = the number average molecular 
mass of unirradiated cellulose, Mn = the number-average molecular mass 
of the irradiated cellulose, r = the total dose in J/kg x Hr, and G = the 
num:ber of scissions produced in the cellulose backbone per 100 eV of absorbed 
radiation energy. 
From this 
liMn = 1/(Mn)o + (6,242 x 1017 x G16.023 X 1023) r . 
Thus, liMn' when plotted against the absorbed dose expressed in J/kg x 104, 
gives a linear plot (Fig. 8)62). From the slope, a value for G (scission) is obtained, 
since slope = 1.036 x 10-6 x G (scission). 
For celluloses irradiated under vacuum, the value of G (scission) was found 
to be 13.5, whereas that in. air was 24.6. This shows conclusively that oxygen 
enhances the radiation-induced degradation of the cellulose backbone. 
Corresponding measurements made at various intervals after removal from 
the irradiation 'source gave values for G (scission) of 186 and 144 for samples 
irradiated in air or vacuum (Fig. 9)62). Electron spin resonance (e.s.r.) spectro-
scopic examination of samples irradiated under conditions similar to the above 
have demonstrated the presence of a weak, residual signal in the cellulose four 
years after removal of the evacuated, degassed samples from the irradiation 
source. 
1.7 ,----------,-------,----------,-----, 
1.6 H.;---+----P-~---+-__l 
r 
-i' 1.5 t-----
01 
E 
:£ 
70 
1.4 f----+-----+-----""-<>---+--1 
Ai~ 
.. 
I 
2 
4 
10-1• Dose (J kg"') 
Fig. 9. After-effect degradation of irradiated 
cellulose: (0), (,6.), ['11 measured immediately 
after irradiation; (e), (.&.), ['11 measured after 
21 days. Reprinted from Ref. 62), p. 1026 
by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Such longevity of active sites belongs to those sites which are located in the 
inaccessible regions of cellulose. Sites located in the accessible regions are much 
more prone to termination or quenching by one of several possible terminating 
species. The half life of such species is highly dependent on their particular 
environment. The presence of active species in the more ordered regions 
(so-called trapped radicals) offers the possibility of post-irradiation reactions 
under many experimental conditions. The mechanism, providing relatively 
long-term activity, is one of energy transfer within the cellulose substrate. 
This will depend to a great extent on the chemical nature of each particular 
cellulose derivative. Hence, it is unreasonable to make generalizations regarding 
the suitability of particular .cellulosics for post-irradiation modification. The 
effect of high-energy radiation on cellulose in the absence and presence of vinyl 
monomers will now be discussed. 
3.2.1. Energy Transfer in the Irradiation of Cellulose 
When carbohydrates are irradiated in the solid state by high energy radiation, 
energy transfer effects lead to localization of the energy within the molecule. 
These energy transfer effects are generally considered to be dependent on 
the mechanism of energy loss by the incident radiation to the chemical molecule, 
and initial random non-localized deposition (and subsequent dissipation) of 
the energy within the molticule and the rapid localization of the energy within 
the molecule. The localization of the energy in the m9lecule results in physical 
and chemical cHanges depending on the nature of the matter irradiated, such as 
degradation, activation of long-lived excited sites. degradation of the molecule, 
or depolymerization31). The time required for this presumed localization process 
is estima.ted not to exceed 10-13 sec. Furthermore, it has been suggested that the 
effects of an initial non-localized deposition of high energy within matter can 
extend over distances ranging to 10 nm32). 
The intermolecular and intramolecular transfers of high energy in the 
localization process in carbohydrates in the solid state have been shown to be 
dependent on the physical structure of the carbohydrate33), on certain complex 
formations of other molecules with the carbohydrates34), and on substituent 
groups on the molecule35•36). The higher acid yields for irradiated tX-D-glucose 
in the polycrystalline state as compared with the acid yields from irradiated 
tX-D-glucose in syrup or freeze-dried states were interpreted to indicate a mecha-
nism of energy transfer which was facilitated by the crystalline state33). On 
irradiation, complexes of Schardinger dextrins with p-nitrophenol gave the 
characteristic electron spin resonance spectrum for irradiated p-nitrophenol. 
The absence of the characteristic electron spin resonance spectrum for the 
irradiated dextrin was interpreted to indicate a mechanism of energy transfer 
from the dextrin to the p-nitrophenoI34). The radiation protection of tX-D-glucose 
involved relatively large amounts of energy. From the dimensions of tX-D-glucose 
crystals and the dimensions of fJ-cyclic dextrin, it is obvious that intermolecular 
energy transfer occurs over some distance. Perhaps, in the case of freeze-dried 
crystals of tX-D-glucose about 1 ~m in diameter, intermolecular energy transfer 
71 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
occurs over distances greater than 10 nm, the diameter of a spur of non localized 
energy deposition32). 
In his excellent review of radiation-induced grafting onto cellulosic substrates, 
Moore gives comprehensive coverage to the action of ionizing radiation on 
cellulose37). He points out the established fact that the chemical and physical 
effects of radiation on cellulosics are dependent on the type of radiation, 
the dose rate and total dose, and the presence or absence of oxygen and 
moisture. Among the major changes are chain 'scission'38 -41), carboxyl for-
mation; and carbonyl formation in the ratio 1: 1 : 2if2). The solubility of cellu': 
lose in water and sodium hydroxide increases with increasing doses, and 
evidence is available to show that peroxides are formed on irradiation ·of 
cellulose in ai~3). Charlesby has shown that the accessible and inaccessible 
regions in cellulose are equally subject to main chain cleavage, although those 
celluloses showing the greater level of accessibility (e.g., rayon) are more easily 
degraded than the less accessible forms of cellulose (e.g., native cotton)44). 
Although'main chain cleavage is a major event in radiation-induced damage, 
some degradation of the glucosidic rings also takes place since hydrolysis of 
strongly irradiated cellulose yields xylose, arabinose, and glucoronic acid, 
as well as glucose45 ). 
Since cellulose and its derivatives may be irradiated for purposes unrelated to 
grafting reactions (examples include sterilization of packaged pharmaceuticals 
and the curing of coatings containing cellulose derivatives), conditions asso-
ciated with the protection of celluloses against radiation-induced damage 
deserve attention. 
3.2.2. The Radiation Protection of Cellulose 
Radiation protection of the glycosidic linkages in the glucosides and in cellu-
lose by the introduction of aromatic groups into the molecules was interpreted 
to indicate that the introduction of aromatic groups into those carbohy-
drates affected energy transfer, particularly localization of the energy. Hence, 
it was suggested that intramolecular energy transfer could occur from the 
aromatic groups through linkage to the carbohydrate molecule, before localiza-
tion of the energy, to cause chemical change. Alternatively, energy deposited 
within the carbohydrate molecule could be rapidly localized, possibly through 
transitions between electronic levels, in an essentially inert group, such as an 
aromatic group, from which it could be dissipated37). 
Grafting reactions and chemical substitution have provided considerable 
information concerning the processes of intramolecular energy transfer of 
high energy in carbohydrates35 •36). Such information is important since the 
concept offers a means of protecting cellulose against otherwise inevitable 
damage when it is irradiated. However, such protection is achieved only at the 
expense of the number of activated sites which are available for any subsequent 
radiation-induced process such as graft copolymerization. As such, radiation 
protection is an important factor in any commercial application. 
Arthur et al.46 -49) have investigated the protection against radiation given 
to cellulose through introduction of a wide variety of aromatic groups. These 
72 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
include phenylcarbamoyl, benzyl, naphthoyl, cinnamoyl, benzyl, benzydryl, 
and trityl groups. Only the benzyl group failed to give some measure of 
protection. The extent of substitution required to impart a standard level of 
protection was found to depend on the nature of the group, the type of linkage 
to the cellulose backbone, and the stability of such a linkage. It was found 
that where the absorbed radiation cleaved the aromatic group from the main 
chain, no protection against radiation effects took place. It has been shown that 
a modification of the aromatic group, thus bringing about a reduction in the 
effective number of available 1t electrons, results in a corresponding decrease 
in the level of protection given to the cellulose. Studies by Chidambareswaran 
et al.50), Guthrie et al.51 ), and Singh et al.52) have confirmed this protective 
nature of aromatic groups toward cellulose. Chidambareswaran et al. compared 
benzoylation of cellulose with allylation in terms of their effect on radiation 
protection and found that, while allyation influenced both the nature and yield 
of free radicals of the cellulose as seen through e.s.r., benzoylation affected 
only the yield. 
Guthrie et al. have examined the carbanilated cellulose system in some detaiI51 ). 
Carbanilate groups are effective in protecting cellulose from radiation-induced 
damage, even at relatively moderate degrees of. substitution (D .S.), as seen 
using e.s.r. spectrocopy. Irradiation of carbanilated cellulose in vacuo produces 
the cyclohexadienyI radical. No cyclohexadienyl radicals were observed with 
samples irradiated in air since they nad been quenched by atmospheric oxygen 
and moisture. Ultimately, the e.s.r. signal degenerates to one similar to that 
provided by cellulose which has been irradiated in air, though of much reduced 
intensity. Typical G (radical) values, obtained from controlled radical yield 
3.2,--------,-----------,----,----,--, 
I 
i 
1 
' 
i 
1 
2.4 I--~----+---~-r----r~---: -
<3 
I 
I 
I 
u '5 e1.6l----
! 
j 
--=---Y-"'-----------+_ C Vacuum 
----
0.8f---~. 
o 
0.5 
1.0 
1.5 
2.0 
Degree of substitution, OS 
Fig. 10. Change in G (x radical) value with increasing substitution. A (e), x = G (total radical) in 
vacuum, i.e., inaccessible + accessible + cyclohexadienyl radicals. B (.6.), X = G (total radical) 
in air, i.e., inaccessible and cyclohexadienyl radicals. c: (0), x = G (cyclohexadienyl radicals) in 
vacuum. Reprinted from Ref. 51), p. 753, by courtesy of Pergamon Press Ltd. 
73 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
studies, are as follows: unsubstituted cellulose (D.S. = 0.0) 2.86; carbanilated 
cellulose (D .S. = OJ), 2.20; carbanilated cellulose (D .S. = 1.0), 1.33; carba-
nilated cellulose (D.S. = 2.0), 1.19, (Fig. 10). In the spectra of carbanilated' 
cellulose (shown in Fig. 11), two radical species are indicated, those in the 
accessible and inaccessible regions of cellulose and the cyclohexadienyl radicals. 
Figure 12 gives an indication of the decay of the cyclohexadienyl species after 
irradiation under vacuum. 
The lifetime of the species producing the nine line signal was found to be 
approximately 5 hr, after which a spectrum similar to that of an air-irradiated, 
substituted cellulose was obtained, but of reduced intensity. It is noteworthy 
that the cyclohexadienyl radical was not observed with the carbanilated cellulose 
that had been irradiated in air. 
Quenching of radical activity in the inaccessible regions is best explained 
in terms of transfer of energy to the aromatic group from the cellulose back-
bone, since the substitution reaction can only occur in the accessible regions. 
74 
~ 
25 Gauss 
Vacuum 
5 h 
r----i 
Fig. 11. E.s.r. spectrum of a typical cellulose carbanilate 
25 Gauss 
(D.S. = 2.0), irradiated under vacuum. Reprinted from 
Ref. 51 ), p. 750, by courtesy of Pergamon Press, Ltd. 
Fig. 12. Lifetime of the cyc10hexadienyl radical from 
carbanilated cellulose, irradiated under vacuum as de-
tected by e.s.r. Reprinted from Ref.51), p. 751, by cour-
tesy of Pergamon Press, Ltd. 

45r---,----,----r---~--_n-
40r---~--~----+----+--~~ 
35~--~---r----r_--_r~--~ 
30~--~----+----+-~~----~ 
_25~--~----~---H~-+ 
~ 
a 
<.'3 20 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Time (h) 
3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Fig. 13. Variation i~ the extent of grafting 
with degree of substitution of carbanilated 
celluloses, D.S.: (0), D.S. = 0; (6), D.S. 
= 0.2; (.), D.S. = 0.27; and (e), D.S. 
= 0.50. Reprinted from Ref. 51), p. 750, 
by courtesy of Pergamon Press, Ltd. 
This should provide a means of protecting cellulose against damage without 
altering the nature of the cellulose too drastically. In this way, grafting to reason-
able levels should still be possible. Justification for this statement is found 
in Figure 13, which shows the changes in grafting behavior, for the grafting of 
styrene onto cellulose and carbanilated cellulose, with increasing substitution 
of the parent polymer. The decrease in grafting is marginal when compared to the 
protection against damage which is provided by carbanilation. 
Graft polymerization reactions may be used to impart stability to radiation-
induced damage in certain instances. In an e.s.r. study of cellulose acetate-
styrene grafting, Campbell et al. observed a slow decay in the concentration 
of trapped radicals after the addition of monomer to the system53). Such a 
reduction in radical concentration may be explained through energy transfer 
to the grafted areas of the copolymer and ultimate dissipation of the energy 
as heat. Since grafting occurs only in the accessible regions, transfer of 
energy from the inaccessible to the accessible regions is indicated. Evidence 
supporting the above view has been accumulating54 - 56). More tangible evidence 
of the effectiveness of aromatic groups in protecting cellulose against radiation-
induced damage is seen in the retention and frequent improvement of the 
mechanical properties and the corresponding reduction in main chain cleavage. 
Radiation doses required to start deterioration of celluloses containing a low 
degree of substitution by aromatic groups are usually at least ten times those 
required for sterilization (of unsubstituted cellulose) and thirty times those 
needed to induce grafting. 
75 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
In proposing that protection be used on a routine basis, we must be aware 
of changes which may take place in the behavioral characteristics of the substrate 
and the uses to which the cellulose will ultimately be put. As an example, 
we have problems which arise when protected celluloses are expected to 
withstand high temperature processing, even on a molecular, localized scale. 
Under such conditions, cleavage of these protective groups may occur, rendering 
the cellulosic useless for a particular application. 
3.2.3. The Radiation Chemistry of Cellulose 
The penetrating power of high energy radiation, particularly gamma and 
X-rays, is not influenced by the order-disorder character of cellulose and its 
derivatives47l. However, secondary adjustments and rearrangements are very 
much dependent on the physical structure of the irradiated material. Electronic 
equilibrium must be attained between the radicals and excited molecules, 
whose freedom of movement is restricted by their solid state environment and 
by other activated species which are in close proximity. Such an equilibrium 
may be achieved by intramolecular rearrangement, by energy transfer, or by 
interaction with any mobile molecules or activated species present, or it 
may be produced during irradiation. 
The nature of the structure of cellulose affects the accessibility of the 
activated or excited sites to chemical reagents and to initiation of chain reactions. 
Cotton cellulose is itself a unique polymeric product. Cellulose consists of long 
linear chains which pass through both highly ordered and highly disordered 
regions. The ordered areas of the cellulose are almost impenetrable to most 
gaseous and liquid systems. Temperature elevation does not produce chain 
mobility. Even the less ordered portions of the structure are relatively fixed. These 
properties of cellulose are the result of linearity of the chain, of the steric 
requirements of the monomer units, and especially of the strong hydrogen 
bonds formed between hydroxyl groups of neighboring chains that are in 
proper alignment. 
Cellulose is made up of repeating anhydroglucose units, w~ch contain carbon, 
oxygen, and hydrogen atoms. Each anhydroglucose unit has an equal probability 
of being affected by the radiation, and each carbon and oxygen atom of this 
unit has at least a similar probability of being ionized. However, the chemical 
adjustment and rearrangements which take place after initial ionization and 
excitation are very much dependent on the chemical structure of the irradiated 
material. That is, the nature of the changes produced in the cellulose by high 
energy radiation is dependent upon the particular carbon atom ionized or the 
particular carbon atom' to which the ionized atom is bound, the chemical 
nature (primary hydroxyl, secondary hydroxyl, potential aldehyde) and position 
of this carbon atom in the basic glucose unit, and the atmosphere under which 
the cellulose is irradiated or the atmosphere to which it is thereafter exposed. 
Thus, in order to determine truly definite mechanisms for the' radiation 
chemistry of cellulose, both the chemical and physical properties of the cellulose 
after irradiation must be evaluated. 
76 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
3.2.3.1. Molecular and Structural Properties of Irradiated Cellulose 
Opinions vary as to the sensitivity of cellulosics to high energy ionizing radiation 
and also to lower energy exciting ultra-violet energy. However, there is little 
doubt that some forms of cellulose are more prone to degradation than are 
others. Here we view the problem through changes observed in the physical 
properties, which can be interpreted in terms of the sensitivity and structure of 
particular cellulosics. Several factors contribute to the overall deterioration, 
including the presence of moisture, oxygen, additives, sensitizers, protecting 
groups, the dose rate and total dose, and the ppysical form of the cellulosic 
(powder, film, pulp, etc.). It is generally accepted that the dose levels needed to 
encourage grafting are significantly below those likely to cause extensive damage 
to the cellulosic. However, such a generalization may be somewhat misleading. 
Factors of importance to any detailed study of the changes in the molecular 
and structural properties of cellulose and its derivatives are the reaction condi-
tions, substrate composition and morphology, previous chemical and physical 
modifications, sample purity, and the presence of trapped radicals. 
When cellulose acetate is exposed to X-rays for various periods to time up to 
190 hours, the well-defined rings observed in X-ray diffraction photographs of the 
original sample show an increasing diffuseness for irradiated samples as the 
exposure time is increased. Based on the diffuseness of the X-ray diffraction Hnes 
of the irradiated samples and on phenol delustering tests, it has been suggested 
that X-ray irradiation decreases the crystallinity of the samples57). Studies of 
the effect of high energy cathode rays on wood, wood pulp, and cotton 
linters have shown that the irradiated cellulose has a higher rate of hydrolysis 
and a greater quantity of easily hydrolyzed material than the unirradiated 
sample36). This would also seem to indicate that irradiation produces a reduction 
in the level of order, resulting from a disruption of the ordered regions of 
cellulose. However, the order -
disorder nature of cotton cellulose apparently 
is not changed by gamma radiation. The infrared absorption spectrum of irradiat-
ed cellulose retains all the absorption bands of the purified cotton control' 
Table 8. Some chemical and physical properties of purified ceJlulose irradiated with gamma rays 
in oxygen atmosphere. Adopted from Ref.61), p. 384, by courtesy of A. Howes Publication 
Dosage 
Zero 
I x 105 
I X 106 
5 X 106 
I X 10' 
5 X 10' 
I X 108 
(roentgens) 
Degree of polymerization 
4400 
3100 
800 
290 
180 
72 
39 
Carbonyl Groups 
0.00 
0.01 
0.06 
0.29 
0.58 
1.92 
3.04 
(mmol/g) 
Carboxyl Groups 
0.002 
0.004 
0.007 
0.022 
0.039 
0.107 
0.155 
(mmol/g) 
Water Solubility 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
4.5 
9.7 
(%) 
Alkali Solubility 
0.8 
1.5 
4.0 
15.8 
30.1 
61.4 
74.4 
(%) 
Pressley Index 
7.61 
7.78 
7.12 
5.86 
4.31 
(lb/mg) 
77 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
without a lessening of intensity. It was also shown that a loss in crystallinity of 
cellulose results in a broadening and smoothing-out of the series of sharp bands 
given by cellulose in the 7.0 through 9.5 ~m region. The irradiated cellulose 
did not show this behavior. Further radial X-ray spectrometer tracings of the irra-
diated samples indicate that irradiation does not decrease the level of apparent 
order in the cellulose. The substantial increase in the rate of acid hydrolysis 
and the amount of iodine sorption of irradiated cellulose, as compared to the 
control, could be due to the chemically altered structure rather than to an 
alteration of the crystalline structure of celluloses8 -60). 
The major molecular changes which occurred on irradiation of cellulose with 
high energy radiation, such as gamma rays from CobaIt-60, thermal neutrons, etc., 
have been shown to be depolymerization and formation of acid and reducing 
groupS.61). The ratio of the number of chain changes to the number of acid 
groups formed to the number of reducing groups formed was 1 :0.5: 19. Over a 
dosage ranging from 105 to 108 roentgens, these molecular properties of the cellu-
lose molecule (initial degree of polymerization 4,400 or 700,000 g/mol weight 
average molecular mass) were related to dosage, as follows, 
In P = K' In Nn + /(' 
(64) 
where P = molecular property, Nn = dosage in roentgens, K' and K" = constants. 
P is expressed as degree of polymerization, or in mols of acid groups, or reducing 
groups per unit mass of cellulose. 
Guthrie et a1.62) have shown that regenerated cellulose films, on irradiation in 
a 98/2 (dioxan:water) mixture have a very low threshold for the commencement 
of radiation-induced damage. Irradiation in air or under vacuum gives a threshold 
for damage, assessed viscometrically, of less than I krad (Fig. 7). The role of the 
liquid medium in this degradation is not clear. However, the radiolysis products 
of both the components of the liquid medium are potentially good radical 
initiating species and would tend to enhance the prevailing degradation pro-
cesses. It is unlikely that this low radiation dose has any influence on the bulk 
properties of cellulose or its derivatives. The threshold for notable changes in 
mechanical or tensile properties is thought to be considerably in excess of 
I krad. In a relatively early study, it was noted that the fibrous structure 
of cellulose disintegrated at dosages higher than five to 10 million roentgens, 
with a resultant loss of textile properties. Tables 8 and 9 show the properties 
of purified cellulose irradiated with gamma rays under a variety of conditions61). 
Similar results were obtained when irradiation was performed in a "pure" 
source of thermal neutrons in the dosage range of 5 x 1014 through I x 1017 neu-
trons63). 
At lower radiation dosages, where cotton cellulose retains its fibrous properties, 
small increases in tensile strength have been reported by some investigators, with 
decreases being observed at higher incident doses59, 64, 65). Also, it has been report-
ed that when water-soluble derivatives of cellulose in dilute aqueous solution were 
irradiated, a gel formation was noted46 -48). These changes could indicate increas-
ed intermolecular bonding. However, decreased intermolecular bonding on 
irradiation of cotton cellulose was determined from the viscous flow of dilute 
solutions of irradiated cotton. The enthalpy of activation of viscous flow of dilute 
78 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Table 9. Some chemical and physical properties of purified cellulose irradiated with gamma rays 
in nitrogen atmosphere. Adapted from Ref.61 ), p. 384 by courtesy of A. Howes Publication 
Qosage 
0.0 
I x HP 
I x IW 
5x IW 
I X 107 
5x 107 
I x lOS 
(roentgens) 
Degree of polymerization 
4400 
3100 
880 
320 
210 
79 
56 
Carbonyl Groups 
0.00 
0.01 
0.05 
0.22 
0.36 
1.30 
2.66 
(mmol/g) 
Carboxyl Groups 
0.002 
0.002 
0.005 
0.015 
0.023 
0.070 
0.139 
(mmol/g) 
Water Solubility 
0.1 
0.0 
0.0 
0.1 
0.5 
3.3 
10.4 
(%) 
Alkali Solubility 
0.8 
1.0 
4.9 
15.9 
24.1 
57.8 
71.1 
(%) 
Pressley Index 
7.61 
7.80 
7.11 
5.79 
4.81 
(lb/mg) 
solutions of purified or irradiated cottons was relatively constant. In the case of 
irradiated cottons, the lower negative value for the entropy of activation of viscous 
flow of dilute solutions indicated that less alignment of the irradiated cellulose 
molecules was required for viscous flow than in the case of purified cellulose 
molecules. Consequently, higher values for the free energy of activation of viscous 
flow of dilute solutions of purified cellulose were obtained than in the case of 
irradiated cellulose. This decreased bonding in irradiated cellulose is probably due 
to the decrease in the number of interacting anhydroglucose units in the mole-
cule691. 
The moisture regain of cellulose is not greatly changed by irradiation. Changes 
in moisture regain are usually interpreted as reflecting changes in the submicros-
copic structure of the cellulose if the treatment has not altered the chemical com-
position of the cellulose. The small changes in moisture regain values on 
irradiation of cellulose would suggest that there is no marked alteration of the 
submicroscopic structure of the fibers, and that the observed chemical changes do 
not markedly affect the regain values59). 
Changes in the fibrillar organization of cotton fibers after exposure to gamma, 
high-energy electron, and thermal neutron radiations in various ambient atmos-
pheres were evaluated by the techniques of optical and electron microscopy701. 
Radiation exposures evaluated were: gamma rays, 105 to 108 r. (roentgens); 
2 Mev electrons, 5 x Hr to lOS rep. (roentgens equivalent physical); integrated 
thermal neutron fluxes, 5 x 1014 to 1017 nvt (thermal neutron/crn2/sec. x exposure 
time in seconds). Figure 14-17 show the progressive decrease in the size of fibrillar 
fragments of gamma-irradiated fibers with increasing dose. Distinctive changes 
in the fibrillation pattern of either unpurified or purified cotton did not Qccur 
at levels of 105 and 106 r., but fibers receiving up to 107 r. formed shorter 
fragments, and at 108 r. some of the sheets of fibrils broke into short 
fragments and particles. The fragmentation pattern of the electron-irradiated 
fibers differed from unexposed fibers only at dose levels of 108 rep., but the same 
type of change as seen in gamma-irradiated fibers was found. The only changes 
noted in the pattern of neutron-irradiated samples were the formation of spicules, 
or loose ends of fibrils within the sheets of fibrils, and some evidence of 
79 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
Fig. 14. Electron micrograph of fragment of unexposed purified cotton. Reprinted from Ref. 70), 
p. 513, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute. 
-' 
I 
IOOILm 
a 
b 
Fig. 153, b. Photomicrographs of fragments of gamma-irradiated purified cotton a unexposed, 
b 108 r. Reprinted from Ref.70), p. 513, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute. 
shortening of the individual fibrils. These indications of chain cleavage were not 
truly distinctive except in samples exposed to 1017 nvt (Fig. 16 b). 
The effects oflarger doses of gamma radiation on purified cotton are illustrated 
in Figure 17. Although excessive chain scission must have occurred to produce 
the small particles seen in most of the photographs, the predominant change 
in pattern is in the formation of the short chunks of fibrils which appear 
fused and brittle. Most of the microfibrillate texture has been lost, and the 
smooth appearance suggests that interfibrillar fusion has occurred45 ). 
Scanning electron microscopy was used by Guthrie and Percival in their 
examination of the effects of high energy radiation on the fibrous character 
80 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Fig. 16a, b. Electron micrographs of fragments of irradiated purified cotton (compare with fig. 14). 
a Gamma-irradiated, 108 r, N2 atmosphere; b neutron-irradiated, 1017 nv!. in air. Reprinted from 
Ref. 70), p. 514, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute. 
Fig. 17. Electron micrograph showing typical appearance offragments of gamma-irradiated cotton, 
4 x 108 r, in air. Reprinted from Ref. 70), p. 514, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute. 
of regenerated celluloses 71). Samples of both irradiated and unirradiated cellulose 
film were converted to the carbanilate and the resulting derivatives examined. 
Damage was seen through the breakdown of the micro fibrils and the formation of 
a layer-like structure. Thermal analysis of the same samples demonstrates the 
complexity of the consequences of irradiation of cellulosics. Unirradiated 
81 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
Ol 
E 
160,-------,-----,------, 
120 I----------'~-----+------l 
; 
80 f-----~-+"r_ 
Ol 
~ 
40 
.... " '\ 
"'-,,-
O~------~------~------= 
200 
300 
400 
500 
Temperature (OC) 
80,----,---,---,----. 
...... 0_ -°-0_0 
OL-____ L-__ 
~ 
___ _L __ 
~ 
320 
360 
400 
440 
480 
Temperature (OC) 
Fig. 18. Differential thennograms of A, unirradiated cellulose tricarbanilate (CTC); B, irradiated 
CTC; C, the C.T.C. -
polystyrene copolymer. Inset (B', C) expansion of Band C at elevated 
temperatures. Reprinted from Ref. 71), p. 532, by courtesy of I.P.c., Science and Technology Press, 
Ltd. 
cellulose, on conversion to the carbanilate, shows a reasonably straight-
forward thermal profile. This observation is supported by thermogravimetric 
analysis which carries a single weight loss versus temperature increase profile. 
Irradiated cellulose converted to the carbanilate shows complex thermal pro-
perties. The details are shown in figure 18. The thermograms shown in Figure 18 
relate to unirradiated cellulose converted to the tricarbanilate (A), irradiated 
cellulose extracted from the apparently grafted copolymer and subsequently 
converted to the tricarbanilate (B), and the cellulose -
PS copolymer whose 
cellulose component has been converted to the tricarbanilate (C). Thus, we have 
unirradiated CTC (A), irradiated CTC (B), and the CTC-PS, (PS denotes 
polystyrene), copolymer (C). 
From C, the composition of the copolymer was calculated at 76 % cellulose 
tricarbanilate and 24~:' polystyrene. This result is in reasonable agreement with 
those obtained by other methods of analysis: elemental analysis (70.6 %: 
29.4 %), differential refractometry (70 %: 30 %), and gravimetric procedure 
(67.6%:32.4%). Hence, we have another satisfactory means of obtaining the 
composition of cellulose copolymers. The observed differences between the 
thermo grams A and B and the similarities between Band C in the 320°-420 °C 
temperature range give an indication that high energy gamma radiation causes 
pronounced changes in the reactivity of cellulose which are maintained in 
subsequent carbanilation. Thus, the CTC-PS copolymer has similarities with 
the irradiated CTC, though it possesses the added stability afforded by the 
grafted polystyrene. This topic is covered more fully in Chapter 7. 
3.2.3.2. Chemical Properties of Irradiated Cellulose 
The changes in the chemical sttucture of cellulose brought about by irradiation 
have been extensively studied38.72-79). For this purpose, analyses were made of 
82 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
the volatile products, residual cellulosic products, and products obtained by 
fractionation of the residues. 
The gases, evolved or absorbed by cotton cellulose in atmospheres of nitrogen, 
oxygen, and air, were determined. Absolute changes in pressure measured at 
constant volume and constant temperature, during irradiation of cotton 
cellulose in sealed containers, were determined. The initial decrease in pressure 
of the oxygen atmosphere indicated that oxygen was reacting with the 
activated cellulose at a faster rate than gases were being evolved. The initial 
decrease and subsequent increase in pressure in the air atmosphere indicated 
reaction of oxygen with the activated cellulose and evolution of gases61). 
Mass spectrometry indicated complete reaction of oxygen present in the air 
atmosphere and almost complete reaction of the oxygen atmosphere with activat-
ed cellulose at the massive doses investigated. Mass spectrometry also indicated 
that the principal gases evolved were hydrogen, carbon monoxide, and carbon 
di@xide. Infra-red spectroscopy confirmed the presence of carbon monoxide, 
carbon dioxide, and water vapor. After irradiation of cotton cellulose in an oxygen 
atmosphere to a dosage of 108 roentgens, the composition of the gaseous 
atmosphere was carbon monoxide (60 %), carbon dioxide (20 %), hydrogen (9 %), 
and oxygen (11 %). The magnitude of the amount of oxygen consumed indicated 
that it was an important effect in the irradiation of cellulose61l. 
Irradiation of basswood with high velocity electrons altered its structure in such 
a manner that some of the insoluble carbohydrate become available to rumen 
bacteria. Maximum availability occured at a dose of 108 equivalent roentgens, 
and at this point the wood becames hydroscopic and friable. Formation ofreduc-
ing sugars in the soluble products was also estimated76). Exposure of wood, wood 
pulp, and cotton linters to cathode rays at a dosage of 108 equivalent 
roentgens caused a substantial destruction of the carbohydrates, as measured by 
quantitative determination of the potential sugar content, before and after irradia-
tion. The percentage ofthe carbohydrate destroyed upon irradiation at this dosage, 
based upon the differences between these two values, was found to be 14% for 
cotton linters, 17 % for wood pulp, and 9 % for wood. On the other hand, at a 
dose of 5 x 108 equivalent roentgens, the cellulose was so degraded that it was 
found to be completely water soluble3ll. 
Irradiation of cotton cellulose with beta rays was found to increase the water 
SOlubility slightly. The water-soluble portion exhibited an increased acidity. 
The irradiated samples reduced Fehling's solution and showed a greater 
affinity for methylene blue (basic dye) than did the controls. The irradiated 
yarns showed a decreasing affinity on pretreating for 30 minutes with a boiling 
sodium hydroxide solution. The water-extracted, irradiated samples were found 
to reduce KI, but this property was not exhibited by the water extract. It was 
then concluded from these results that irradiation produced an oxycellulose of 
the acidic type in which some cellulose peroxides were present64). 
With increasing radiation doses, the solubility of degradation products in 
water and in dilute sodium hydroxide increased. Cellulose, after receiving a dose of 
108 roentgens, was about 10 percent soluble in water and about 70 percent soluble 
in one percent sodium hydroxide solution. The high solubility of the irradiated 
cellulose in sodium hydroxide solution, as compared to solubility in water, may 
83 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
be due to the formation of a great number of reducing groups. In basic solution, 
the interaction of sodium hydroxide with irradiated cellulose may lead to 
further chain cleavage and, consequently, to a marked increase in solubility in 
base as compared to that in water (Tables 8 and 9)61). 
Using radioactive tracer cations, it was demonstrated that irradiated cotton 
cellulose had base-exchange properties. Salt bonds were probably the major link-
ages involved, since any cation could be replaced with another cation by varying 
their relative concentrations61 • 77). 
The distribution of acid and reducing groups in different fractions of the irradiat-
ed cotton cellulose was determined. The number of acid groups increased as the 
molecular mass of the fractions decreased, probably indicating a chain end 
effect. At a massive dosage of 108 roentgens, about one acid group was formed 
for each two chain cleavages. The infra-red data on the various fractions indicated 
that the band at 5.75 ~m (-C=O) showed a distribution among the fractions 
of irradiated cellulose similar to that obtained by acid group titration. Considering 
the large number of reducing groups formed, the relatively weak intensity of the 
band at 5.75 ~m indicated that the reducing groups were probably combined 
with water to form hydrates, or that they internally formed hemiacetals. 
Apparently, the band at 5.75 ~m indicated the ~C=O of the acid group59. 78). 
Paper chromatographic data established the presence of glucose, cellobiose, 
and a homologous series of cellulodextrins. The alcohol-soluble fraction of the 
irradiated cotton cellulose exhibited about 17 components. One of the major acid 
monosaccharide units prodced was 2-keto-gluconic acid. The other major low 
molecular mass acid components were at least partially identified as the lactones 
of 2-ketogluconic acid and 2-ketocellobionic acid. Ultraviolet spectral data also 
indicated the presence of a chromophore group of the keto acid, 2-ketogluconic 
acid. The group was present in the low molecular mass fraction and in the 
intermediate fraction in approximately the same ratio as was found by acid 
titration of these same fractions4 7). 
Arthur et al.72) have examined in considerable detail the oxidative reactions 
of cellulose initiated by free radicals. The formation of free radicals through 
exposure to high energy radiation increases the reactivity of cellulose mainly 
through dehydrogenation and the occurrence of oxidative depolymerization 
reactions. Evidence of secondary reaction has been supplied by Panchenkov et 
al.73) from their work on the mechanical properties of cellulose and its esters. 
A significant reduction in the breaking strength and elongation at rupture was 
observed to occur on irradiation in the absence of a monomer. The rate of 
decomposition was found to be rapid at high dose rates. It appears that the 
degradation effects are markedly enhanced by the presence of air and moisture. 
Imamura and Ueno have provided insight into the influence of radiation 
exposure on dissolving pulps79-82). It has been shown that both gamma and 
X-radiation produce the same chemical and physical effects. The rate of main 
chain cleavage was found to be directly proportional to the dose rate and to be 
markedly enhanced by elevation of the temperature. Potential industrial process-
ing is suggested by this work, especially in aspects of cellulose solution and 
derivativization. Here the molecular mass and the molecular mass distribution 
84 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
are important properties. Further investigation has shown that xanthation of 
irradiated wood pulp, having an average degree of polymerization of approximate-
ly 400, provides, on coagulation and regeneration in the standard manner, films 
of superior properties to those derived from oxidation-induced degradation83l. 
The effect of gamma-radiation on the low temperature, dilute acid hydrolysis 
of cellulose has been investigated by Kunz et a1.84l, who obtained greater yields 
of glucose with irradiated samples than with the unirradiated ones. This work 
indicates that low molecular mass products of crude cellulosic materials are 
obtainable in resonable yields through extensive preliminary irradiation, provided 
the cellulosic substrate does not have the means to undergo extensive delocaliza-
tion of the incident energy. 
3.2.3.3. Effect of Storage on the Properties of Irradiated Cellulose 
Irradiation of cellulose with high energy radiation yields products containing 
relatively stable free radicals, easily shown by electron spin resonance spectro-
scopy38.85 -88l. Differences in the crystallinity of celluloses seem to have no 
obvious effect on the yield of free radicals, though differences can be seen in the 
nature of the e.s.r. spectra. These depend greatly on the conditions of preparation 
and measurement. Hence, the type of cellulose used, its physical form, chemical 
composition, the total radiation dose, the gaseous environment, the presence 
of moisture, and the temperature all have an effect on the nature of the signal 
as well as on the radical yield. Generally, the e.s.r. spectra of gamma-irradiated 
cellulose and its derivatives are asymmetric, though the level of symmetry is 
significantly greater for pure cellulose than for its derivatives or for regenerated 
cellulose87.88l. Benzoylated cotton has been shown to provide an e.s.r. spectrum 
similar to that of unmodified cellulose. This is in marked contrast to carbanilated 
cellulose, which exhibits a marked tendency toward the generation of the 
cyclohexadienyl radical. This indicates the enhan(;ed protection given by the 
carbanilate group relative to the benzoyl group. However, the radical yield, as 
seen in the spectra of benzoylated cellulose and carbanilated cell diose, is 
markedly reduced relative to unmodified cellulose38. 39, 51). 
A knowledge of the method of production, nature, and half-lives of the 
free radicals on the cellulose backbone would be of particular interest for a num-
ber of reasons. First, it would assist in further evaluating the reactions involved 
in the radiation chemistry of cellulose, particularly with respect to the initial 
degradation process. Secondly, using high energy radiation, post-irradiation 
degradation reactions could be a disadvantage in the development of commer-
cially useful products. Thirdly, the presence of a long-lived radical could, on the 
other hand, have a practival advantage in graft polymerization reactions, since 
a wider range of experimental conditions could be used. 
The intrinsic viscosity of irradiated wood cellulose (ca. 0.3 % moisture, ca. 
0.5 x 106 roentgens, initial intrinsic viscosity of unirradiated cellulose ca. 4) has 
been found to decrease for post-irradiation periods up to 30 days to a value of 
about 2. This post-irradiation decrease in intrinsic viscosity accounted for 
considerably more than half of the total decrease observed. Post-irradiation 
effects in low molecular mass cellulose (tilter paper, initial intrinsic viscosity 
85 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
of unirradiated cellulose ca. 4.6, degree of polymerization ca. 880) were 
similarB9• 90). 
The effect of Co-60 irradiation, fission-products irradiation, and electron irra-
diation on the post-irradiation stability of irradiated cotton cellulose, as measured 
by changes in the tensile strength, specific viscosity, and reducing and acid group 
content are shown in Tables 10, II and 12. Apparently, there is not a great effect 
on the stability of the irradiated, purified cellulose when related to type of 
radiation, dose rate, or atmosphere in which the irradiation occurred. However, 
at dosages which are normally used to sterilize cotton products (2.3 x 106 roent-
gents or higher), and for post-irradiation times of one year or less, the decreases 
in the Pressley index and specific viscosity of the irradiated cellulose were small 
for both electron and cobalt-60 irradiation. For fission-products irradiation and 
for post-irradiation of more than 3 years at 0.1 x lQ6 roentgens, the specific 
viscosity of the irradiated cellulose decreased measurably with time. 
The radiation-induced depolymerization of rayon cellulose, in comparison to 
cotton cellulose, in the presence and absence of air has been studied92). The 
presence of air has only a slight effect on the depolymerization of cellulose. 
This was observed with rayon and cotton. However, the degree of polymerization 
of cotton drops to about half, whereas the degree of polymerization of rayon 
Table 10. The effects of cobalt-60 irradiation on some properties of cotton cellulose·. Adapted 
from Ref.91 ), p. 733, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Post-irradiation time, days 
Pressley Index 
Specific viscosity 
Ib/mg 
Irradiation atmosphere 
Air 
Nitrogen 
Air 
Nitrogen 
0 
7.5 
6.9 
2.7 
2.9 
1 
7.0 
7.0 
2.7 
2 
2.6 
6 
2.6 
7 
7.1 
6.8 
8 
2.3 
14 
6.8 
2.5 
2.3 
21 
6.9 
27 
2.5 
42 
6.9 
50 
6.7 
77 
6.8 
2.4 
104 
6.9 
121 
133 
6.3 
152 
6.2 
364 
6.9 
378 
6.7 
• Dose rate: 0.44 x 1()6 r/hr; dosage: 2.3 x 1()6 r; samples irradiated in air contained about 6.8 % 
moisture, and those in nitrogen contained about 0.5 % moisture. Irradiated samples stored in 
air at 21°C and 65 % R.H. 
86 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Table 11. The effects of fission products irradiation on some properties of cotton 
cellulose*. Adapted from Ref.91 ), p. 734, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Property and Post-irradiation 
Dosage, r 
time 
0.1 x 1(1' 
I x l(t 
5 x \06 
Oxygen irradiation atmosphere 
Pressley index, Ibjmg 
3- 4 months 
7.8 
7.1 
5.9 
40-41 months 
7.2 
6.7 
5.2 
Specific viscosity 
3- 4 months 
26 
3.9 
0.98 
40-41 months 
17 
2.9 
0.82 
Reducing groups, mmoljg 
3- 4 months 
om 
0,06 
0.29 
40-41 months 
0.02 
0.09 
0.29 
Acid groups, mmol/g 
3- 4 months 
0.004 
0.007 
0.022 
40-41 months 
0.003 
0.006 
0.018 
Nitrogen irradiation atmosphere 
Pressley index, Ib/mg 
3- 4 months 
7.8 
7.1 
5.8 
40-41 months 
7.5 
6.7 
5.4 
Specific viscosity 
3- 4 months 
27 
4.4 
1.1 
40-41 months 
19 
3.6 
0.95 
Reducing groups, mmolfg 
3- 4 months 
0.01 
0.05 
0.22 
40-41 months 
0.01 
0.07 
0.26 
Acid groups, mmol/g 
3- 4 months 
0.002 
0.005 
0.015 
40-41 months 
0.004 
0.007 
0.017 
* Dose rate: 3 to 6x l(t r/hr; samples contained about 6.8% moisture. 
drops to three-quarters of the initial value after irradiation of I Mrad and 
storing for 2 months. It has also been reported that the number of scissions 
of chemical bonds of cellulose molecule is not only independent of the radiation 
dose, but also independent of the degree of polymerization and of the micro-
structure of the initial cellulosic fibre. 
3.2.3.4. Location of the Free Radicals in the Cellulose Structure 
after Irradiation 
Evidence from various sources has shown that the radicals formed on cellulosics 
by radiation are located in both the accessible and inaccessible regions. In 
terms of secondary reactions, however, it is those radicals which are present 
in the accessible regions which are the more significant. The main sources of 
support for this view are (i) the dramatic effect of water on grafting reactions, 
(ii) localization of the grafted polymer in the accessible regions, (iii) conductivity 
measurements, (iv) dielectric constants, and (v) e.s.r. studies. 
87 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
Table 12. The effects of electron irradiation on some properties of 
cotton cellulose*. Adapted from Ref.9\), p. 734, by courtesy of 
Textile Research Institute 
Post-irradiation time, days 
Pressley index, Specific 
lb/mg 
viscosity 
Dosage: 2.3 x 106 r 
14 
7.3 
2.1 
21 
6.7 
2.1 
28 
7.1 
2.1 
42 
7.0 
2.1 
70 
7.0 
2.0 
133 
6.7 
2.0 
197 
6.6 
2.0 
Dosage: 4.9 x 106 r 
14 
6.4 
l.l 
21 
6.0 
l.l 
28 
6.5 
l.l 
42 
6.3 
1.1 
70 
6.1 
l.l 
133 
6.1 
l.l 
197 
5.9 
1.0 
* 7-MeV linear accelerator for electrons; dose rate: about 280 x 
x 106 r /hr; samples contained about 6.8 % moisture and were 
irradiated in air. 
Reducing groups (mmol/g) and acid groups (mmol/g) at 2.3 x 106 r 
were respectively 14 days, 0.11 and 0.008; 197 days, 0.12 and 
0.010. At 4.9 x 106 r, the values were 14 days, 0.22 and 0.016; 
197 days, 0.26 and 0.016 
It is known that cellulose can absorb large amounts of water vapor on its 
internal surface (8 % (w/w) of water under atmospheric conditions and at room 
temperature. Adsorption is ascribed to the hydrogen bonding of water molecules 
by the available cellulose hydroxyl groups in the accessible regions. In addition, 
there is the possibility of a small contribution from the fringes of the more 
ordered zones93 ). The highly ordered regions are not penetrated by water 
vapor94 - 96). From infra-red data, a direct relationship has been found between 
the extent of water adsorbtion and the size of the non-ordered fraction. Hence, 
only those cellulose hydroxyl groups which are not hydrogen-bonded in a 
regular, ordered manner are available as adsorption sites for water molecules. 
As has already been pointed out, grafting occurs exclusively in the accessible 
regions of cellulose. The presence of water also has a dramatic effect on irra-
diation grafting. The influence of water on trapped radical formation in irra-
diated celluloses is shown in Table 13. The conductivity data (Tables 14 and 15) 
are of a significantly greater magnitude for non-dry celluloses, irradiated 
under three different conditions, namely, in air, under vacuum, and in potassium 
iodide solution. This observation holds true, even on increasing the total 
absorbed dose leveI97 ). However, depending on the particular monomer, the 
copolymerization medium, and the nature of the substrate, there arises the 
88 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Table 13. ESR spin concentrations for irradiated ceJluloses. Reprinted from Ref.97), p. 108, by 
courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Irradiation Conditions 
Air 
Vacuum 
KI solution 
'Non-Dry' 
106 rads 
5.14x 1015 
8.87 X 1015 
4.63 X 1015 
'Dry' 
108 rads 
106 rads 
4.53 x 1015 
5.23 X 1015 
8.18x1016 
9.02 X J015 
9.99 X 1015 
4.31 X 1015 
Table 14. Conductivities of cellulose samples (NO)" Reprinted from Ref.97), 
p. 109, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Irradiation Dose 
l(f rads 
106 rads 
108 rads 
Cellulose 
Conductivity (ohm- 1 em-I) 
Irradiated 
Irradiated 
Irradiated 
in Air 
under Vacuum in KI Solution 
3.l7x 10- 16 
6.93x 10- 16 
2.24 x 10- 14 
2.48 X 10- 16 
3.00 X 10- 16 
7.IOx 10- 16 
2.60 x 10- 14 
2.30 X 10-16 
6.00 x 10- 16 
8.87x 10- 15 
a Measured with gold guard electrode. 
ND = non-dry 
Table 15. Conductivities of cellulose samples (D)" Reprinted from Ref.97 ), 
p. 109, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Irradiation Dose 
IW rads 
106 rads 
108 rads 
Cellulose 
Conductivity (ohm -1 em -1) 
Irradiated 
in Air 
2.29 x 10- 16 
2.39 x 10- 16 
S.12x 10- 16 
2.17xlO- 16 
Irradiated 
Irradiated 
under Vacuum in KI Solution 
2.07 X 10- 16 
2.11 X 10- 16 
5.08 X 10- 16 
2.40 X 10- 16 
2.28 X 10- 16 
3.46 X 10- 16 
a Measured with gold guard electrode. 
D = Dry 
108 rads 
4.75 X 1016 
8.73 X 1016 
1.18 X 1016 
possibility that grafting may enhance the availability of accessible sites by opening 
up the internal structure of the substrate. This allows access to otherwise in-
accessible zones. For most systems, however, grafting in such zones will always 
be a minor component of total grafting. 
The conductivity data have been taken as further evidence that radiation 
grafting in cellulose occurs exclusively in the accessible regions. Furthermore, 
89 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
conductivities for non-dry samples, irradiated in air and under vacuum, were 
similar for a particular radiation dose, but the conductivities of samples 
irradiated in KI solution were lower. The decrease in values for the KI samples are 
in agreement with the e.s.r. measurements of unpaired spin concentrations. Thus, 
it does appear that the conductivity may be determined, at least in part, by the 
concentrations of alkoxy radicals, since potassium iodide inhibits the formation 
of alkoxy radicals9B), resulting in a lower number of unpaired spins as found by 
e.s.r.97). 
That grafting occurs essentially in the accessible regions of cellulose has been 
indicated by dielectric constant measurements97). The data of Table 16 reveal 
that the higher dielectric constants for "nondry" cell uloses, under all irradiation 
conditions, are consistent with Rosenberg's theory99) in which the dependence of 
dielectric constant on adsorbed water is represented by the equation 
K' = Kj(1 -
Kxm) , 
whre K is the static dielectric constant, K' is the effective dielectric constant, 
m is the amount of adsorbate, and x is a constant. 
Additionally, it has been found that variations in dielectric constant of various 
celluloses are in agreement100-101) with X-ray determinations of the degree of 
order in similar celluloses; thus, an increase in dielectric constant is associated 
with decreasing order. In Table 16, though slight differences were found between 
values in the non-dry and dry series, the dielectric constants within each 
series were essentially the same. It follows from this that the degree of crystallinity 
in cellulose is not markedly affected by radiation up to lOB rads. This conclusion 
is consistent with X-ray and infra-red measurements59•61,102). 
E.s.r. spectra generated by predried irradiated cellulose I and predried irradiated 
cellulose II showed only small differences in the trapped radical spectra103). 
Most of the free radicals formed in the irradiated celluloses are apparently trapped 
in the amorphous, or less ordered, regions of the cellulosic structure104). About 
70 % of the radicals formed in irradiated cellulose I and about 90 % of the radicals 
Table 16. Dielectric constants for cellulose and irradiated 
cellulose samples. Reprinted from Ref.97), p. Ill, by cour-
tesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Sample 
Cellulose 
l(f rads (air) 
l(f rads (vacuum) 
l(f rads (KI) 
l(f rads (air) 
l(f rads (vacuum) 
l(f rads (KI) 
lOS rads (air) 
lOS rads (vacuum) 
lOS rads (KI) 
90 
Dielectric Constant 
'Non-dry' 
'Dry' 
2.21 
2.19 
2.20 
2.17 
2.15 
2.16 
2.16 
2.13 
2.15 
2.14 
2.00 
1.99 
1.97 
1.99 
1.95 
1.98 
1.96 
1.94 
1.93 
1.95 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
formed in cellulose II are scavenged by contacting the sample with water. The 
spectra of the free radicals scavenged by water are almost indentical for both 
irradiated celluloses. Contact of the irradiated celluloses with ammonia (liquid) 
scavenged most of the trapped free radicals104). 
It is accepted that e.s.f. investigations are closely dependent on the conditions 
of measurement and sample environme'1t. Hence, the relatively simple picture 
given above should be examined in hlore detail, expecially with regard to 
radical type and location. 
It has recently been shown lOS) that the extent of copolymerization of cellulose 
I and II with ethyl acrylate from methanol-water solution by y-radiation was 
directly related to the initial concentration of free radicals in the irradiated 
cellulose. However, a fraction of the radicals, about 10 % of the maximum con-
centration in cellulose obtained at a dosage of 5.2 x 1019 eVjg, was apparently in 
the highly ordered regions of the cellulosic structure. These radicals were not 
scavenged and did not initiate copolymerization reactions. 
3.2.3.5. Mechanisms of Radiation-Induced Reactions in Cellulose 
Studies on the e.s.r. of irradiated crystalline sugars related to cellulose suggested 
that, on the basis of the chemical structure of glucose, the most reasonable 
positions for formation of stable radicals would be the C1 and Cs positions. The 
spectra obtained on irradiated glucose three months after irradiation were inter-
preted to indicate the presence of two radical species, one of which was attributed 
to a radical at the C1 position and the other to a radical at either the Cs or C6 
position106). However, other studies on the irradiation of crystalline sugars 
suggested involvement of the C1, C2, and C6 positions in stable free radical 
formation107 -110). 
In proposing mechanisms of interaction of high energy radiation with cellulose, 
the interaction of radiation with each carbon atom in the anhydroglucose unit 
of the cellulose molecule will be considered independently. For example, the 
mechanism involved in the formation of a reducing group at the C1 position would 
not be that involved in the formation of the same group at the C6 position. 
The C1 position is potentially an aldehyde group, while the C6 position is a 
primary hydroxyl group. The proposed mechanism will be concerned with the 
method of activation of each particular carbon atom, each atom being activated 
by the ionization of the carbon atom itself or by the ionization of one of the 
atoms or groups bound to it. Since the energy of incident radiation would be 
sufficient to activate any carbon, oxygen or hydrogen atom with which it 
interacts, the activity reactions should be chemically non-specific and random in 
nature. The secondary reactions, initiated by the activation, will probably be 
chemically specific in nature61). 
At massive dosages, when the radiation interacts with the C1 carbon, chain 
cleavage results with the formation of 2-ketogluconic acid on the reducing end 
of the chain utilizing one mol of oxygen in the formation of the acid and leaving 
an unaltered glucose unit on the non-reducing end of the other chain. Inter-
action with the C4 carbon results in a chain cleavage, with the reducing end of the 
chain being liberated as an unaltered glucose unit and the production of a ketone 
group in the C4 position of the nonreducing end of the other chain, using half 
91 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
a mol of oxygen. On the other hand, interaction of radiation with the 
C2, C3 , Cs, and C6 carbons results in reducing group formation with evolution 
of hydrogen and without chain cleavage. The distribution of reducing groups in 
the various fractions of the irradiated cellulose indicated that these groups were 
equally distributed along the cellulosic chain, suggesting involvement of the 
C2, C3, Cs' and C6 carbons in the interaction47 ). 
When available, considerable quantities of oxygen were consumed47 ). The 
oxygen consumed in the reaction could go into formation of acid groups or into 
formation of carbon dioxide, but this would account for only a small 
fraction of the oxygen. Peroxide groups could be formed in the cellulose, 
consuming oxygen, or oxygen could react with hydrogen, liberated in the 
formation of reducing groups, to form water. Apparently, the predominant 
reaction on irradiation of cellulose is dehydrogenation with the production of 
reducing groups, which could be either ketones or aldehydes. It is interesting to 
point out here that the carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide evolved in the 
irradiation are considered to be secondary degradation products formed by ce-
composition of aldehydes and/or ketones in the case of carbon monoxide and in the 
case of carbon dioxide, by decarboxylation of carboxyl groups. Irradiation pro-
duced a much greater quantity of reducing groups than acid groups; thus, a greater 
yield of carbon monoxide than carbon dioxide is formed. 
A comparison of the e.s.r. spectra of cellulose I and II irradiated in air, nitrogen, 
and oxygen atmospheres is shown in Table 1711 1). Irradiated cellulose I had a 
three-line spectrum in each case. Equal interaction of two hydrogen nuclear spins 
with the free radical would be required to give the three-line spectrum. Due to the 
Table 17. A comparison of the e.s.r. spectra of gamma-irradiated cellulose I and II. Adapted from 
RefYI), p. 634, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Property 
Atmospheric Conditions of Irradiation 
Air* 
Spectrum, lines 
Cellulose I 
3 
Cellulose II 
5 
Line width, gauss Cellulose I 
major peak 
13 
minor peak 
46 
Cellulose II 
major peak 
II 
Nearest to 
major peak 
38 
Other peak 
56 
Relative Signal Strength 
Cellulose I 
56: 100:56 
Cellulose II 
39:63:75:63:39 
* Radiation dosage 2.1 x 1020 eVjg 
** Radiation Dosage l.Ox 1019 eVjg 
*** Estimated from one-half of spectra 
92 
Nitrogen** 
3 
5 
19 
(48)*** 
21 
(38)*** 
(57)*** 
100 
(major) 
49 
(major) 
Oxygen** 
3 
5 
18 
(48)*** 
20 
(38)*** 
(57)*** 
67 
(major) 
48 
(major) 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
delocalizing energy available from the oxygen atoms, the formation of radicals 
at Cs' C1 or C4 by dehydrogenation would be possibilities. Dehydrogenation 
at Cs would give the radical 
0, 
which, due to interaction with the equivalent hydrogen atoms on C6 , would give 
a three-line spectrum in the ratio of about 1: 2: 1. This is approximately the 
experimentally determined ratio of the relative signal strength of the three lines 
in the spectrum obtained (56: 100: 56), I: 1.8: 1. 
Two other possible radicals which would give a three-line spectrum would 
be: 
0, 
'0 
0, 
The H or OH on C6 would be cleaved by gamma radiation. However, due to the 
lower delocalizing energy available at C6 , compared with that at Cs• after inter-
molecular energy transfer, the formation of a radical at Cs would be more likely 
to occur in cellulose I. 
The e.s.r. spectrum of irradiated cellulose II consisted of five lines. This could 
occur by the formation of two free radicals which individually yield three lines. 
The principal lines of the spectra of these radicals would occur at about the same 
value, and the less intense lines, due to equivalent hydrogen interactions of each 
spectrum, would occur at different line widths. One radical would likely form at 
Cs' as described for cellulose I, and the second radical at C6 on the same 
anhydroglucose unit cell by either H atom or OH group cleavage. The formation 
of this second radical in cellulose II, compared with one radical in cellulose I, 
is further evidence of difference in the internal forces in the unit cell on 
changing the lattice type from I to II. The formation of the free radical at C6 in 
cellulose II would indicate an increase in delocalizing energy at C6, probably result-
ing from rearrangement in hydrogen bonding at C6 in the unit cell of cellulose II. 
In an e.s.r. study of the post-irradiation reactions of cellulose and acrylonitrile, 
Baugh et a1.74) followed the effects of atmosphere, moisture content, and solutions 
93 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
of acrylonitrile on the yield and stability of free radical sites in irradiated 
cellulose. Evidence is given supporting the formation of long-lived radicals within 
the molecular lattice. In addition, short-lived radicals are formed from chain cleav-
age, giving singlet spectra which were readily accessible to interaction with water. 
However, other free-radical sites were formed in the inaccessible areas. These were 
unaffected by exposure of the irradiated cellulose to moisture or aqueous solutions, 
even after contact times as long as three days. The suggestion has been made that 
the long-lived radical sites in cellulose I (containing regain moisture) result from 
dehydrogenation at Cs of the anhydroglucose unit. The long-lived radical sites in 
cellulose II (containing regain moisture) are thought to arise from dehydrogena-
tion at Cs' together with dehydrogenation of the -OH group or dehydroxylation 
at C6 • Baugh et al. also observed that contact of irradiated cellulose with solutions 
of acrylonitrile in 75 % aqueous ZnCl2 produced a decrease in the signal strength 
with an increase in the contact time. A residual signal providing an ill-defined 
spectrum was assigned to the inaccessible radicals located within the cellulose 
matrix. 
Other observations regarding the location of radical sites on the anhydro-
glucose unit have been made. Together with radicals produced as a consequence 
of main chain cleavage, such sites have been the subject of considerable interest. 
94 
Vacuum 
f----I 
25 Gauss 
Fig. 19. E.s.r. spectrum of cellulose, irradiated under 
vacuum. Reprinted from Ref.30l, p. 214, by courtesy of 
John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Fig. 20. E.s.r. spectrum of cellulose, irradiated in air. Re-
printed from Ref. 30l, p. 214, by courtesy of John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc. 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Figures 19 and 20 represent data obtained by Guthrie et al. in their examina-
tion of regenerated cellulose films, irradiated under high vacuum and air 
respectively, using e.s.r. spectroscopy35). Samples irradiated under vacuum gave 
rise to an asymmetric doublet, while those irradiated in air exhibit a four-line 
signal. On exposure of vacuum-irradiated cellulose to the atmosphere, a spectral 
change was observed indicating a gradual conversion to the four-line signal 
previously referred to (Fig. 20). The doublet obtained with vacuum-irradiated 
cellulose may be satisfactorily explained by the formation of a radical at C1 of 
the anhydroglucose unit through hydrogen abstraction: 
The doublet arises through interaction between the unpaired electron on C1 and 
the proton bonded to C2. Deformation in the anhydroglucose unit, relative to the 
undamaged glucose moleculeI12), is taken as supporting the occurrence of coupling 
between the unpaired electron on C1 and the proton on C2. The formation of a 
quartet on irradiating cellulose in air or on exposing vacuum-irradiated samples 
to the atmosphere does not concur with most e.s.r. investigations of irradiated 
cellulose II. One explanation involves scission of the main chain to produce two 
species, a singlet and a quartet. However, the overall spectrum emerges as a 
quartet because of overlapping of the singlet. A radical on the bridging 
oxygen atom would give rise to a singlet spectrum, while a radical at C1, due 
to scission of the C1-O bond, would lead to a quartet being observed. The 
overall spectrum emerges as a quartet. The change from a doublet to a quartet 
signal indicates the possibility that main chain cleavage is closely associated with 
secondary reactions arising from contact of the primary radical sites with air and 
moisture. It. would appear that such a scission is not a significant factor in the 
irradiation of cellulose under vacuum until exposure to external agencies takes 
place. From this work, Guthrie et a1.30) obtained a G (radical) value of 2.9 for 
vacuum-irradiated cellulose, which is in good agreement with that of other wor-
kers83). However, their value of 1.6, observed for cellulose irradiated in air, is high 
when compared to other observations of similar systems, namely 0.5285) and 
1.231 ,44,59,74,113), but using cellulose I. 
Dilli et a1.98) have carried out a comprehensive program of cellulose irradiation 
and have arrived at various important conclusions from a qualitative examination 
of the e.s.r. spectra they obtained. Thus, irradiation in air favors alkoxyl radical 
formation (relative to triplet species) to a greater extent than does irradiation 
in vacuum. Also, decay appears to involve the preferential disappearance of the 
'triplet' relative to the singlet species. Dilli et a1.98) concluded from their work 
that substantially the same types of radiolytic processes operate in air as in 
vacuum, but at different rates. In addition, they observed that water accelerates 
the relative decay of the triplet, while potassium iodide inhibits alkoxyl radical 
formation. Such observations are consistent with the general picture formed 
95 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
regarding primary and seondary reactions of irradiated celluloses; the main 
impression is that of the complex nature of the system. 
Various groups have attempted kinetic analyses of the reaction profiles obtained 
from studies of radical yields and decay. Kesting and Stannett33) reported that 
the radical yield build-up in cellulose in the range 0 to 4.5 Mrad could be 
described by a steady-rate equation of type 
a- 1 tanh-1 (Bla) = t + c, 
where B is the concentration of radicals which decay to non-radical products; 
a and c are constants with a = k1lk2 ; kl is the rate constant for the formation 
of radicals, B, at a given radiation intensity; and k2 is the rate of their 
decay. This decay is usually assumed to be second order in character. Experimental 
data98) provided by Dilli et al. are consistent with this steady state expression 
if a more complex structure is taken of the model for the cellulose used in 
their experiments. Such a model must make allowances for the existence of 
long-lived radical species. 
In concluding this section on radical type, yield, and location, we must 
add a cautionary note regarding the concept of G (radical) values. It is 
possible to make comparisons between G (radical) values from e.s.r. measUre-
ments and G (chemical products) as derived from monitoring secondary chemical 
reactions which arise from exposure to radiation. Such secondary reactions in-
clude chain scission and graft copolymerization. It is generally accepted that 
G (radicals) is lower by an order of magnitude than G (chemical products) in 
cellulose irradiation, especially if attention is focused on chain scission events. 
However, it is misleading to seek quantitative relationships between these two 
types of G value, since chemical yields are determined by methods which convert 
some of the radicals into measurable chemical products. Nonetheless, as will 
be seen later, each type of G value is useful in its own right. 
3.2.4. High Energy Radiatjon-Induced Grafting of Cellulosics 
Gamma radiation, X-rays, alpha particles, and protons have been applied to a 
very large number of polymer-monomer systems for a wide variety of 
reasons112-146). These cited references give a reasonable indication as to the 
manner in which grafting technology has developed. Early applications to cellulose 
were not very successful because, although appreciable grafting was achieved 
in certain instances, this occurred only at the cost of excessive degradation 
which led to deterioration in the physical properties of the cellulosic substrate. 
As described earlier, such degradation can be reduced by partial radiation 
protection and by ensuring that the cellulose is in a highly swollen state (more 
accessible to monomer) before commencement of irradiation. This second point 
ensures that the conditions most conducive to grafting are achieved. Again, as 
more information became available regarding effective radical yields, it became 
possible to predict that grafting, rather than involuntary homopolymerization, 
would be the prevalent process. Hence, the more efficient processes are those 
in which the G (radical) value of the substrate is considerably in excess of that 
96 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
of the monomer. One example of such a system is provided by the cellulose-
styrene composition which has the G (radical) values of2.88 and 0.69 respectively. 
With all types of high energy irradiation, the primary event consists of the 
formation of ions resulting from the scission of C-C or C-H bonds belonging 
to either the cellulose, the monomer, or the solvent. The ions are rapidly converted 
into free radicals and in nearly every known case of irradiation polymerization 
or irradiation grafting, a radical mechanism, rather than an ionic mechanism, 
accounts for the initiation and growth steps147). Thus, the reactions of cellulose 
with vinyl monomers are apparently initiated at free radical sites, which are 
formed on the cellulose by interaction and localization of the energy of the ioniz-
ing radiation. 
Judging from what is known of the effect, discussed earlier, of high energy 
irradiation on cellulose it is possible to assume that hydrogen atoms are abstracted 
from the cellulose. If this takes place in the presence of the monomer, grafting 
can occur immediately. Although direct hydrogen abstraction is a likely process, 
it must still be considered a hypothesis, and it is almost certain that, in the 
presence of water, hydroxyl radicals playa prominent part148). Leavitt66) has 
observed crosslinking of cellulose derivatives in aqueous solutions when exposed 
to gamma irradiation and formulated the hypothesis that the first step in this 
process is the production of the 'OH radicals from water. It is believed that 
these 'OH radicals subsequently abstract hydrogen atoms from the cellulosic 
macromolecules. 
If significant graft polymerization of monomer or polymers on to cellulose 
is to be initiated by high energy radiation and, at the same time, the relative 
high molecular mass and fibrous structure of the cellulose are to be retained, 
several important factors are worthy of consideration. These include the radio-
chemical yields of cellulose reactions, the radiochemical yields of graft copoly-
merization reactions, and those experimental conditions needed to increase the 
accessibility of activated sites in the cellulose to monomers. 
3.2.4.1. Radiochemical Yields of Irradiated Cellulose 
The radiochemical yields of the major molecular changes in cotton cellulose in an 
oxygen atmosphere are about 14 electron volts of energy per chain cleavage, 
1.4 per reducing group formed, and 12 per acid group formed. These relatively 
high values indicate that, at least in the case of cleavage and acid groups, chain 
reactions were not initiated in the cellulose molecule by radiation. Irradiated 
cellulose depolymerized on standing and had a small, but measurable, increase in 
acid groups; however, these changes did not significantly increase the radio-
chemical yields. In a nitrogen atmosphere, the energy required per molecular 
change was slightly higher than in an oxygen atmosphere61 ). 
At dosages of5.2 x 1019 electron volts per gram of cellulose (about 106 roentgens 
of Co-60 gamma radiation) or less, little or no visible change in the fibrous struc-
ture of cellulose occurred. The number of chain cleavages per molecule was less 
than five reducing the average molecular mass from about 700,000 to 130,000. 
At this molecular mass the physical properties of fibrous cotton cellulose were 
only slightly changed, as compared with those of unirradiated cellulose54). 
97 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
3.2.4.2. Radiochemical Yield of Irradiation Grafting 
Some of the most important factors influencing the radiochemical yield of 
graft polymerization reactions of various monomers onto cellulose and its deri-
vatives are (i) the concentration of monomer in the treating solution; (ii) the 
solvent; (iii) the ratio of the monomer concentration to cellulose concentration; 
(iv) the ratio of the monomer concentration to the solvent concentration; 
(v) prior chemical modification of the cellulose, and (vi) the absence of oxygen 
and other quenchers, particularly in post-irradiation reactions. 
These factors have led to the utilization of several different approaches for 
developing practical techniques in grafting reactions. The indirect effects of the 
solvent used to disperse the monomer (and the monomer concentration), on the 
interaction of acrylonitrile or styrene with irradiated cellulose, have been 
clearly demonstratedl26, 136, 146). For example, the radiochemical yield of 
acrylonitrile grafted to cellulose (expressed by the authors as molecules of 
monomer per hundred electron volts) was 82 using a medium containing 65 % 
(w/w) of zinc chloride, 1400 using 75% (w/w), and 8100 using 81 % (w/w) of zinc 
chloride. The yield of styrene grafted to cellulose was zero using pure monomer. 
However, for mixtures of styrene and methanol the radical yield values were 
99-1, 440; 98-2, 5100; and 70-30, 4300. The indirect effects of the solvent on the 
radiochemical yield were probably due for the most part, to the interaction of the 
solvent with both the monomer and the activated cellulose through increasing 
18 
·10 
] 
16 
~12 
c 
.2 
U 
c 
::;10 
'"5 
u 
.!!l 
'" 
~ 8 
'0 
:g} 
>-
~ 6 
E 
cu 
.t:: 
U 
'" 
'6 
c 
"'" 
98 
o 
/ 
V 
/1 
/ 
! 
! 
I./t. 
/ / 
I 
I 
/t'j ~ V·I 
/ /! L.---~/ 
I 
6P 
.... 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Time (h) 
60 
Fig. 21. Effect of dosage on the radio-
chemical yield of acrylonitrile-cellu-
lose copolymer (post-irradiation pro-
cedures; about 25 DC; 32 % acrylo-
nitrile in 80% ZnCI2); (0), 5.2 x JOl9 
e.V.(gcellulose;(.6), 12x 101g e.V.(g; 
(e) 32'x 1019 e.V.(g. Reprinted from 
Ref. 136', p. 2820, by courtesy of John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc. 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
the accessibility of the activated sites to the monomer. In addition, account must 
be taken of the radiolysis products obtained from irradiating methanol, since 
these have the potential of acting as secondary initiators. With the methanol-
styrene system, the increased activation of the styrene is important since it 
leads to involuntary homopolymerization, a process which is wasteful of mono-
mer. Such homopolymerization provides problems in subsequent graft copolymer 
characterization (Chapter 7), 
Irradiation of a solution of styrene-methanol, in which cotton cellulose is 
immersed, yields an initial rate of polymerization which is about three times the 
rate obtained in the absence of cellulose. Apparently, the presence of radiation-
activated cellulose increases the rate of effective activation of styrene and, conse-
quently, the rate of styrene homopolymerization. This has been termed an 
indirect effect of cellulose136). Prior chemical modification of cellulose by 
cyanoethylation also increases the radiochemical yield of the reaction between 
acrylonitrile and cellulose. At a degree of cyanoethylation of zero, the yield 
was 8'100; at OJ, 12,000; at 0.7, 14,000; at 1.0, 18,000; and at 1.3 it was 
.30,000136). 
As shown in Figure 21, irradiation of cotton cellulose under nitrogen and post-
irradiation reaction of the activated cellulose with solutions of acrylonitrile in 
the absence of oxygen gave graft polymers of acrylonitrile and cellulose with high 
:> 
QJ 
Cl 
Cl 
3 
40 
·10 
36 
32 
:::: 28 
QJ 
Cl-
--0 
.-~, 16 
-a 
u ·e 
.2! 12 
u o 
'i5 
o 
"" 8 
4 
o 
I 
-+-
I 
/ 
/ 
/ 
I 
/' 
I I __ 
e y 
.P-
rr-
~ 
:::-
.(c> 
10 
20 
30 
40 
Time (h) 
e 
---
50 
60 
Fig. 22. Effect of composition of 
solvent-monomer mixture on radio-
chemical yield on acrylonitrile-cellu-
lose copolymer (post-irradiation pro-
cedure; about 25 DC; cellulose-irra-
diated dry in nitrogen to 12 x 1019 
e.V.jg: (0) 16% acrylonitrile in 75 % 
ZnCI2 ; (.6.) 16 % acrylonitrile in 80 % 
ZnCI2 ; (.) 32 % acrylonitrile in 80 % 
ZnC~. Reprinted from Ref. 136), 
p. 2821, by courtesy of John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc. 
99 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
radiochemical yields136). The composition of the solvent-monomer mixture is 
an important factor in achieving a high radiochemical yield136). Figure 22 shows 
that high radiochemical yields of graft copolymers were obtained when aqueous 
ZnCl2 was used as the solvent. Water and N,N'-dimethylformamide as solvents 
gave low yields. This, then, sets the scene for examining the techniques used in 
radiation-induced grafting reactions137). 
3.2.4.3. Techniques of Radiation-Induced Grafting 
Generally, the experimental procedures designed to give maximum yields in 
graft copolymerization reactions can be classified Into two types: 
A. Mutual Irradiation Grafting. Here the monomer and the substrate are irradiated 
together. This technique, usually referred to as the simultaneous technique, has 
the apparent advantage of making use of both the short-lived and long-lived 
active sites. However, as mentioned before, the formation of homopolymer may 
cause problems. 
B. Post-Irradiation Grafting. This term is used to define the approach in which 
the substrate is irradiated first and exposed to the monomer at a later stage. The 
time lapse between irradiation and exposure is one of the important features of 
this technique, which has the advantage of minimizing homopolymer formation. 
However, because of the time lapse, the long-lived radical sites are a major 
factor in the initiation of graft polymerization. 
Obviously, the radiolyses of all components of the grafting system i.e., cellu-
lose, monomer and solvent, are factors in initiating graft polymerization when the 
simultaneous procedure is used. In both procedures, the initiation of grafting by 
activated sites trapped in the cellulose molecule is important. It follows from 
this that, regardless of the technique employed, the accessibility of the trapped 
activated sites to the vinyl monomer can determine the radiochemical yields of 
given reactions. The use of selected solvents for the monomers which can pene-
trate the more ordered regions of cellulose would also be advantageous in increas-
ing radiochemical yields, as was indicated earlier. We shall now deal with each 
class in some detail. 
A. Mutual Irradiation Grafting 
When cellulose is immersed directly in the monomer and then exposed to high 
energy radiation, such as high energy electrons or gamma radiation from a 
cobalt 60 source, only a small amount of graft copolymerization usually takes 
place. This is because cellulose is a highly hydrogen-bonded polymer, and most 
vinyl and acrylic monomers are unable to penetrate beyond the surface of the 
cellulose substrate. Obviously, the significance of this problem varies with modi-
fied celluloses in a way which depends on the particular modification, as well 
as the monomer used. There are two ways to make cellulose accessible for 
grafting: use of a swelling agent for the cellulose in the reaction mixture, and 
introduction of the monomer throughout the substrate via the inclusion technique. 
The former approach is that adopted by most workers114.216) irrespective of the 
substrate form, the monomer used, or the physical modification required from the 
grafting program. In the latter approach, the cellulose is first swollen in water 
or a similarly good swelling agent. The water is then replaced by methanol; the 
100 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
methanol is exchanged with a liquid having similar characteristics to the 
monomer, e.g., benzene if styrene is to be used, or pyridine for vinyl pyridine; 
and this liquid is finally replaced by the monomerl7). In this way the monomer 
is introduced throughout the substrate at a high internal concentration and made 
available for grafting as soon as the cellulose is activated. Although this approach 
is less wasteful of the monomer than that involving a swelling agent directly, 
the multiple stages make the process cumbersome and inconvenient. However, 
in certain instances, e.g., timber modification or pad-batch textile processing, 
the inclusion technique is viable. 
Role of Solvents in Mutual Irradiation Grafting 
A number of investigators have shown that irradiation of cellulose, together with 
monomer and solvent, brings about a substantially increased grafting level when 
compared with irradiation of cellulose and monomer alone97,114,213). Okamura 
et al.l14) irradiated cellulose, that was preswollen in 5-10% formamide in methanol 
solution, with gamma rays in the presence of a methanol solution of styrene. Poly-
merization on the fiber reached several hundred percent. The concentration of 
formamide in methanol affected the amount of grafting (on viscose rayon). The 
maximum weight increase of the fiber was found at 70 % styrene concentration 
in methanol. 
Sakurada et al.115 -119) employed gamma irradiation in inducing graft copoly-
merization of vinyl monomers onto poly(vinyl alcohol) and cellulose. When the 
dry substrate was suspended in a large excess of the monomer, no grafting occur-
red and only homopolymer was formed. Grafting proceeded smoothly only when 
the substrate contained more than 5 % water. They attributed this to the enhanced 
diffusion of monomer into the polymer substrate and also postulated the increased 
formation of polymer radicals by secondary abstraction by R' or OR' radicals 
produced in the radiolysis of water. 
A Canadian patent by Hendricks125) describes the effect of water and other 
aqueous swelling agents in the direct radiation grafting of vinyl monomers onto 
cellulose. The patent refers to a substantial improvement in grafting brought 
about by swelling the substrate in various liquids. Chapiro and Stannett120) 
report that grafting of poly(vinyl alcohol), cellophane, and cotton with vinyl 
monomers by irradiation in the absence of any swelling agents leads only to 
surface grafting, whereas considerable depth of grafting is achieved in the 
presence of water. Kenaga et aU45 ) impregnated wood cross-sections with water-
saturated dioxane solutions of styrene and irradiated with cobalt-60 gamma rays; 
they noted that the percent of polymer retention decreased with increasing dose 
rate, thereby showing the importance of monomer diffusion to free radical sites 
in determining the rate of polymerization. 
Huang and Rapsonl44) studied the effect of different swelling agents, both 
miscible and immiscible, on the direct radiation graft copolymerization of 
styrene onto cotton cellulose and rayon by gamma-ray irradiation from 
Cobalt-60. They stated that direct radiation grafting onto cellulose is a hetero-
geneous reaction in which the diffusion of the styrene monomer into the 
cellulose plays a key role. No grafting was obtained when unconditioned cellulose 
was irradiated in bulk styrene. Grafting took place readily, however, when 
101 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
cellulose was first preswollen with a polar swelling agent such as water, formamide, 
formic acid, or dimethyl sulfoxide, and then placed in bulk styrene, together with 
methanol, ethanol, or acetic acid, and irradiated. The same holds true when 
grafting is carried out in solutions containing swelling agents. This may be 
observed in Figure 23. 
The enhanced grafting obtained by preswelling the cellulose, or by carrying 
out the grafting in solutions containing swelling agents, has been interpreted 
in terms of "a plasticizing effect". This effect is believed to be caused by the 
breaking of hydrogen bonds with water or other swelling agents, thus providing 
greater segmental mobility of the cellulose molecules and facilitating the 
diffusion of the monomer. Furthermore the fact that anhydrous swelling agents 
caused styrene to graft onto cellulose indicates that swelling of cellulose is 
more important than increased formation of cellulose radicals by secondary 
abstraction with 'H or 'OH radicals produced in the radiolysis of water, as 
postulated by Sakurada et al. 115 -119). 
The effect of increasing radiation dose on the grafting of rayon with styrene 
was also examined by Huang and Rapson l44). This is shown in Figure 24. 
Grafting increase linearly with radiation does until approximately 100 % grafting 
and then le\'els off. Leveling off of grafting could be traced back to the fact that 
at higher levels of grafting, the reaction becomes diffusion-controlled. The effi-
ciency of grafting is shown in the same figure and is seen to decrease with 
increasing radiation dose, a phenomenon which is similar to that reported by 
Kenaga et al.145). 
Another comprehensive study of the effect of various swelling agents on grafting 
cellulose with a vinyl monomer was reported by Majumdar and Rapson14l). 
320 ,-----,--,-.,.--,---.,---...,--,------,---,-----, 
280 
120 f---+-~r------,01"'-----'f" -..::-f---+-
80 
40f--~~_f_-+--f__-+-+--~--+--+-~ 
• 
o 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
200 
Swelling agent added (based on weight % bone dry rayon) 
Fig, 23, Effect of nonaqueous swelling agents on the direct radiation grafting of styrene onto rayon. 
Total dose 4 Mrads; temperature 37 dc. Reprinted from Ref.I44J, p. 176, by courtesy of John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
102 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
120 r------+--~~4==i!-
.:" 
! 
100 
L --
._+8.o..~r .--+--------i100 
~ 80 
I -UI 
H! I U.-+I-----+----i 80 i';' 
. 
60 :~ 
'0 
G 60 
40 
20hr'-+--~----~-~--
1.0 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
6.0 
7.0 
Radiation dose (M rod) 
40 '§ 
20 
o 
8.0 
= 
Fig. 24. Effect of radiation dose 
on grafting and grafting efficiency 
in the direct radiation grafting of 
styrene on rayon: CA.) grafting 
on rayon swollen with 80 % water; 
(e) grafting of rayon without 
pres welling 
with 
water; 
( 0 ) 
grafting efficiency of rayon swol-
len with 80 % water. Reprinted 
from Ref. 144), p. 176, by courtesy 
of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
They grafted polystyrene onto bleached jute yarn by irradiating jute-styrene 
mixtures with gamma rays from cobalt-60 under a variety of conditions. Some of 
the results obtained are given in Figures 25 and 26. It is obvious that no grafting 
occurred unless a swelling agent for jute was added, such as water, methanol, 
ethanol, formic acid, acetic acid, dimethyl-formamide, or dimethylsulfoxide. 
160 
120 f-----...Jf-r--r---+---"<:--+-----+---' ........ -~ 
e 80 
= 
o 
40 
80 
120 
160 
200 
Water (% on bleached jute yarn) 
Fig. 25. Effect of water on grafting of styrene onto jute yarn at different dose levels: 10 cm3 styrene, 
0.5 g jute. Symbols: (x), 0.5 MR (megarad) water added to bleached jute yarn, CA.), 1.0 MR, water 
added to bleached jute yarn; (0), 2.0 MR, water added to bleached jute yarn; (e), 4.0 MR, water 
added to bleached jute yarn; (-+ -), 4.0 MR, bleached jute yarn, water added to styrene; (T), 4.0 MR 
water added to unbleached jute yarn. Reprinted from Ref. 141), p. 1011 by courtesy of Textile Research 
Institute. 
103 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
240 r-----,-----:-------,-----, 
200 
160 
~ 
:::: 120 
~ 
'-" 
80 
40 
o 
----" 
-e __ 
o 
i . 
20 
40 
60 
80 
% Solvent (v/v) added to 10 ml styrene per 0.5g jute 
Fig. 26. Effect of cellulose swelling 
solvents on the grafting of styrene 
onto bleached jute yam. Dose, 
4 MR, moisture, 6 %. Symbols: 
(T, water; (e), methanol; (6.), 
ethanol; ( x), acetic acid; (\7), for-
mic acid; (.), dimethyl sulfoxide; 
(0), dimethylformamide. Reprint-
ed from Ref.141), p. 1013, by cour-
tesy of Textile Research Institute. 
Increasing amounts of water to jute gradually increased the amount of polystyrene 
added on, up to a maximum at 80-100 % water on jute (Fig. 25). More water 
decreased the amount of grafting; this was probably due to saturation of the 
jute by excess liquid water and formation of a barrier to diffusion of 
styrene. 
With other swelling agents, grafting increased as the amount of solvent was 
increased up to a certain point, and then it decreased (Fig. 26). The increase may 
be attributed partly to the radiolysis of the solvent, partly to the enhanced swell-
ing of cellulose, and partly to the increased compatibility of the hydrophobic 
styrene and the hydrophilic cellulose. The decrease with larger amounts may be 
due to the increasing rate of termination of polymerization, producing smaller 
polystyrene branches, or to dilution of styrene with solvent. The effect of water 
on the grafting of chemically modified cellulose depends on the particular type 
of substitution, as well as the degree of substitution involved. Hence, the role 
of water as a swelling agent is reversed when grafting onto cellulose tricarbanilate 
is attempted. In the absence of water, little or no grafting occurs in the styrene,. 
rayon-methanol system and in systems in which the methanol is replaced by 
ethanol or acetic acid. However, these solvents show efficient grafting on cotton 
even in the absence of water. Sakurada and Sakaguchi have shown that a 60 percent 
water content in cotton is the optimum for grafting with styrene214). DasGupta209• 
211.215) has reported a 10- to 12-fold increase in the rate of grafting of 
104 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
styrene on cotton when water is added to the grafting solutions in amounts 
of up to 20 percent. Water has been found to be essential for the graft-
ing of methyl methacrylate to filter paper from acetone solution216) and to 
newsprint209), although a 20 percent graft of vinyl acetate to newsprint has 
been achieved in the absence of water. 
Dilli et a1.97) have shown that the structure of the solvent has a strong effect on 
grafting of vinyl monomers by irradiation. When a suitable solvent (e.g., a solvent 
which swells cellulose, is miscible in all propertions with the monomer, and can 
form radicals from the primary radiation), was used at a correct dose and dose 
rate, an accelerated grafting reaction (Trommsdorff effect) was observed. Indeed, 
this gel effect is valuable for an understanding of the fundamental mechanism 
of the reaction, and also for possible commercial utilization of the process. The 
peak in the Trommsdorff effect can be significantly enhanced or decreased by 
the use of certain organic additivesI50). Attention has been paid to the cellulose-
styrene-methanol system using dose rates in the 0.045 to 0.77 Mrad/hr range in a 
Cobalt-60 facility. The irradiations were carried out in airI50). The additivies used 
by Dilli and Garnett included glycol. acetic acid, ethyl acetate, chloroform, 
acetone, aniline, benzaldehyde, hydroquinone, thiourea, thiophen, pyridine, 
benzene, naphthalene, pyrene, phenanthrene, durene, hexamethylbenzene, stil-
bene, acridine, fluorobenzene, chlorobenzene, and bromo benzene. It has been 
shown that a low concentration (10- 2 M) of the non-aromatic additives results 
in a reduction in grafting yields; while a higher concentration (10-1 M) gives 
sensitization as a common feature. Radical scavengers such as hydroquinone and 
thiourea suppress grafting, provided their concentration is sufficiently high. 
Of the aromatic additives, only anthracene and acridine show any influence 
on the grafting reaction. Studies of this kind are important since certain commer-
cial outlets for radiation grafting will involve the use of additives. An example 
is provided by grafting reactions in whole timber, which must be efficient even 
in the presence of lignins and other impurities. 
Dilli and Garnett have carried out a study of the grafting of styrene, methyl 
methacrylate, vinyl acetate and 2- and 4-vinyl pyridine to cellulose in solvents 
of the non-wetting typeI58). Generally poor grafting levels were achieved, irrespec-
tive of variables such as the dose rate, the total dose and the monomer concentra-
tion. The solvents for the monomer used in this study include benzene, cyclo-
hexane, hexane, ethyl acetate, n-butanol, n-hexanol, and n-octanol. Grafting was 
carried out in air and under vacuum. An oxygen effect on the grafting reactions 
was found with the hydrocarbon solvents and the alcohol solvents in that much 
lower, or negligible, grafting was observed as compared to grafting carried out 
under vacuum. However, it must be pointed out that even the grafting levels 
obtained under vacuum were much less than those acquired using wetting 
solvents under otherwise identical conditions. The influence of benzene on graft-
ing in solutions of styrene in methanol has been shown to be one of reducing 
the level of grafting over a range of different monomer concentrations. This 
is not really surprising, since it has been shown that benzene can efficiently 
scavenge methanol fragments which are formed during the radiolysis of 
benzene-methanol solutions218.219). Thus, we can see that the role of the 
wetting solvent is not restricted to that of providing enhanced access to the 
105 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
active sites in the substrate. Dilli and Garnett158) have interpreted the part 
played by non-wetting solvents in terms of radical scavenging and, in particular, 
by a charge transfer theory which will be discussed later. 
As an extension to their study of the influence of solvent type on grafting, 
Garnett et al. have examined the contribution made by mineral acids during 
grafting167, 168). It has been decisively shown that in the absence of air, at both 
high a low dose rates, the presence of certain mineral acids enhances the grafting 
of styrene in methanol to cellulose when the mutual irradiation technique is used. 
Sulfuric acid is the most effective of the mineral acids in this enhancement 
(Tables 18 and 19). In the presence of air, enhancement of grafting is observed 
only at high dose rates. The use of mineral acids induces a Trommsdorff peak 
in the grafting system and may also enhance any tendency toward Tromms-
dorffbehavior, which is prevalent with the system in the absence of acid (Table 20). 
These enhanced acid effects in radiation grafting are attributed to an increase 
in the hydrogen atom yields. For the actual specific mechanism of the acid 
Table 18. Radiation -
induced grafting of styrene in methanol, to cellulose, in the presence of 
mineral acids. Reprinted from Ref. 168), p. 1460, by courtesy of the Commonwealth Scientific and 
Industrial Research Organization (C.S.I.R.O.), Melbourne, Australia 
Styrene % 
Graft (%) in presence of 
by Volume 
No acid 
H2SO4 
HCI 
HN03 
ACOH 
(1 M) 
(2M) 
(2M) 
(2M) 
10 
6.2 
27.8 
26.5 
1.0 
5.8 
20 
30.3 
82.7 
-
(A) 
7.5 
23.2 
30 
41.3 
33.7 
18.3 (A) 
9.1 
38.8 
40 
19.7 
19.1 (A) 
11.2 
36.8 
50 
38.6 
60 
25.5 (A) 
15.1 (A) 
20.6 
42.5 
80 
56.1 
20.6 (A) 
8.6 (A) 
8.0 
42.2 (A) 
(A) signifies that phase separation occurred. Dose rate 26.4 krad/hr. Total dose -0.20 Mrad. 
Irradiations in evacuated vessels. 
Table 19. Effect of molarity of sulfuric acid on radiation grafting of styrene in methanol to I:ellulose 
at constant dose rate. Reprinted from Rer.t 68), p. 1460, by courtesy of the Commonwealth Scientific 
and Industrial Research Organization (C.S.I.R.O.), Melbourne, Australia 
Styrene % 
Graft t %) at Sulfuric Acid Concentrations of (M) 
in Methanol 
0 
0.0011 
0.0054 
0.011 
0.054 
0.11 
0.54 
l.l 
10 
1.2 
5.4 
15.1 
7.5 
8.8 
11.0 
19.4 
21.2 
20 
8.9 
22.6 
28.6 
28.7 
38.4 
48.2 
58.5 
74.7 
30 
13.9 
41.0 
lost 
44.7 
47.5 
49.6 
39.3 
27.0 
40 
16.3 
27.5 
37.1 
17.8 
34.0 
30.2 
20.2 
16.1 
60 
29.8 
31.2 
28.0 
29.1 
26.8 
23.0 
16.5 
15.1 
80 
34.1 
24.8 
21.7 
26.5 
19.3 
21.3 
12.4 
10.1 
Irradiation in evacuated vessels. Dose rate 27.3 krad/hr to a total dose of 200 krad. 
106 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Table 20. Effect of mineral acid on the Trommsdorff effect in radiation-induced 
grafting of styrene in methanol to cellulose. Reprinted from Ref.1 68l, p. 1464, by 
courtesy of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization 
(C.S.I.R.O.). Melbourne, Australia 
Styrene % 
Graft (%) at Sulfuric Acid Concentrations (M) of 
by volume 
0.0 
0.00009 
0.0009 
0.009 
0.D7 
IS 
35.1 
38.4 
31.5 
50.8 
78.7 
20 
61.9 
69.3 
65.6 
87.2 
109.8 
25 
99.3 
112.5 
110.8 
123.3 
162.7 
30 
104.5 
113.9 
98.8 
109.6 
(A) 
35 
100.9 
102.8 
80.0 
90.7 
124.0 
45 
80.5 
52.6 
42.0 
48.4 
82.5 
(A) denotes that a very high level of graft conversion was achieved. 
Dose rate 6.77 krad/hr. Irradiation time 17 hrs. Irradiations in deoxygenated 
solutions under nitrogen. 
effect on grafting, the data are consistent with Dilli and Garnett's model involving 
charge transfer complexes (Section 2.4.4). However, the possibility of the involve-
ment of other mechanisms, including energy transfer and ionic processes, should 
also be considered. 
Of greater importance, perhaps, than the choice of particular monomer-
solvent media is the actual ratio of the monomer to its solvent. Of the 
monomers which have been grafted to cellulose, styrene and methyl metha-
crylate are the most easily grafted. Butadiene, acrylic acid, acrylic esters, 
vinyl pyridines, and vinyl acetate have also been grafted, usually from methanol 
solutions. 
Binary and tertiary mixtures of styrene, butadiene, and acrylonitrile have 
produced grafting of 10,000 percent at high graft rates210, 212, 214, 220 - 222). 
Methanol is widely accepted as being the most useful solvent in grafting to 
cellulose. The other solvents vary in usefulness according to the conditions, but 
an approximate order may be given as formamide, ethanol, dimethylformamide, 
dimethyl sulfoxide, acetone, acetic acid, dioxan, n-propanol, n-butanol, n-amyl 
alcohol, and benzene. Recent developments in non-aqueous solvents for cellulose 
may improve the rating of dimethylformamide and dimethylsulfoxide in the 
near future, especially if the current aspirations are realized. Listings are available 
for optimum ratios of a range of monomer-solvent compositions and are given 
in the excellent review provided by Moore37). 
Arthur and Blouin136) reported that in the mutual irradiation procedure, 
grafting is probably initiated in part by radiation-activated sites on the surface 
of the cellulosic polymer; however, the importance of the accessibility of the 
activated sites to the initiation of graft polymerization is shown by the effects 
of solvent, the concentration of the solvent-monomer mixture, and the relative 
amount of cellulose to the solvent-monomer mixture, on the radiochemical 
yields. Typical examples of the results obtained are given in Tables 21, 22, 
and 23(36). The radiochemical yield of styrene grafted to cellulose was zero when 
107 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
Table 21. Effect of composition of solvent-monomer mixture on the radio-
chemical yields of graft copolymers of cellulose and styrene·. Adapted from 
Ref.136), p. 2818, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Composition 
Radiochemical yield, 
molecular actions/I 00 e.V. 
Styrene 
Solvent 
Methanol 
N,N'-Dimethyl-
% 
% 
formamide 
100 
0 
0 
0 
99 
I 
440 
220 
98 
2 
5100 
1000 
97 
3 
5000 
3300 
96 
4 
4600 
3400 
95 
5 
3600 
94 
6 
4000 
92 
8 
4000 
90 
10 
4200 
85 
15 
4300 
4700 
80 
20 
4800 
75 
25 
4800 
5000 
70 
30 
4300 
5000 
67 
33 
4800 
4300 
60 
40 
4600 
4200 
50 
50 
4500 
3300 
40 
60 
4500 
2200 
33 
67 
4000 
1400 
30 
70 
1200 
25 
75 
3300 
20 
80 
2200 
440 
15 
85 
1800 
220 
0 
100 
0 
0 
• Simultaneous procedure; radiation dosage: 5.2 x 1019 e.V./g cellulose; 
monomer-solvent/cellulose = 10/1; temperature, about 25°C. 
Table 22. Effect of composition of solvent-monomer mixture on the radio-
chemical yields of graft copolymers of cellulose and acrylonitrile·. Adapted from 
Ref.136), p. 2818, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Solvent 
(aqueous ZnCI2) 
% 
65 
75 
75 
75 
80 
Monomer concentration 
% 
32 
20 
32 
40 
32 
Radiochemical yield, 
molecular actions/ 
100 e.V. 
80 
1100 
1400 
1800 
8100 
• Simultaneous procedure; radiation dosage; 4.2x 1019 e.V./g cellulose; 
solution/cellulose = 25/1 overnight at about 25°C, then padded to 2-4/1, 
prior to irradiation at about 25 °C. 
108 

Table 23. Effect of solvent monomer mixture of cellulose 
on the radiochemical yields of graft copolymers of cellu-
lose and styrene·. Reprinted from Ref. 136), p. 2819, 
by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Monomer-Solventj 
Cellulose, gjg 
I 
2 
3 
5 
10 
20 
50 
100 
Radiochemical yields, 
molecular actionsjlOO e.V. 
o 
430 
1200 
4100 
4300 
4500 
4600 
4600 
• Simultaneous procedure; radiation dosage = 5.2 x 
x 1019 e.V.jg cellulose; monomer-solvent = 70% 
styrene -
30 % methanol; temperature about 25°C. 
3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
a pure monomer was used but significantly increased in the presence of a 
solvent. The indirect effects of solvents on radiochemical yields were probably due 
primarily to the interaction of solvent with both the monomer and the activated 
cellulose leading to an increase in the accessibility of activated sites to mono-
mers. For instance, more free radicals were produced in methanol than in 
styrene, and the interaction of activated methanol with styrene may have in-
creased the effectiveness of styrene, as shown in Table 21. Demint et a1.146) 
studied the radiation-induced interaction of styrene with cotton cellulose. With 
radiation excited cellulose, methanol and N,N' dimethylformamide increased 
the efficiency of activation and interaction of styrene with fibrous cotton cellu-
loses. The importance of these phenomena in the interaction, during high 
energy irradiation of acrylonitrile in aqueous zinc chloride with cotton cellulose, 
was also reported123,128,129,137) 
Inclusion Technique: Instead of using solvents, Huang et a1.217) brought styrene 
into close contact with cellulose by extension of the "inclusion" technique of 
Staudinger24) and Krassig22S). A 5 g. portion of cotton cellulose of known dry 
weight was treated in a Hydrapulper with distilled water for 10 minutes and 
then allowed to swell for 2 hours. The water was removed under suction and 
gradually exchanged for methanol. The methanol was exchanged five or six 
times, 100 cm3 of methanol being. used each time, and the time between 
exchanges was 2 hours. The methanol was exchanged twice with benzene by 
adding 100 cm3 of benzene and allowed to stand 6 hours. The benzene was, in 
turn, finally exchanged twice with styrene. The included samples were placed 
in test tubes, stoppered in air, flushed with nitrogen, or sealed in vacuum prior 
to irradiation. Some of the results of the gamma-ray-induced graft copolymeriza-
tion of styrene onto cotton cellulose using this technique are presented in Tables 
24 and 25217). As can be seen, when styrene was not "included" in the cellulose, 
very little grafting occurred, as compared to the considerable amount of grafting 
109 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
Table 24. Styrene-cellulose graft copolymers formed by gamma-irradiation 
in vacuum. Reprinted from Ref.217l, p. 1263, by courtesy of John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc. 
Graft copolymer 
Radiation dose, 
Grafting 
Grafting 
sample no. 
x 10- 6 r 
OJ , ° 
Efficiency 
4-0 
0 
I.7 
4-1 
0.25 
7.7 
2.84 
4-2 
0.50 
14.3 
1.91 
4-3 
1.00 
50.0 
1.72 
4-4 
2.00 
66.4 
1.53 
4-5 
4.00 
51.4 
0.99 
4-7* 
1.00 
177.0 
4-8* 
1.00 
169.2 
4-9* 
2.00 
158.3 
4-10* 
2.00 
166.7 
* Post irradiation heat treatment, 100°C, 48 hr. 
Table 25. Styrene-cellulose graft copolymers formed by gamma-irradiation in air. Adapted from 
Ref.217l, p. 1263, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Radiation dose 
x 10-6 , r 
1.00 
2.00 
4.00 
1.00 
2.00 
4.00 
1.00 
1.00 
2.00 
0.50 
1.00 
2.00 
4.00 
6.00 
Grafting 
% 
27.8 
82.9 
111.2 
26.4 
71.6 
124.9 
107.4 
110.2 
197.0 
4.9 
4.5 
3.3 
4.6 
4.2 
Grafting efficiency Note 
1.59 
1.39 
1.08 
1.03 
1.00 
l.IO 
Styrene included in cellulose 
Styrene included additional styrene 
added 
styrene included in cellulose and post-
irradiation heat treatment 100°C, 48 hr. 
Styrene not included 
obtained after the inclusion treatment of the cellulose irradiated in vacuum or in 
air. The presence of air appears to enhance, rather than inhibit, the grafting 
reaction at radiation doses above 2 x 106 roentgens. In the low reaction dose 
range, grafting is more effective in vacuum. Oxygen seems to playa role in the 
intermediate radical formation at low dosage ranges. 
The Effect of Temperature on Grafting 
In many studies, little effort is made to control the temperature during graft 
copolymerization through radiation induction. This is surprising, especially in 
view of the significant effect which temperature can have on grafting. Highly 
accessible cellulose usually requires higher grafting temperatures than are 
110 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
normally used with cotton. Dilli and Garnett have examined the styrene-cellulose-
methanol system in great detail throughout the range 40° to -196°C (Tables 26 
and 27). The aim of this study was an observation of possible ionic contributions 
to the grafting reaction mechanism. The study was extended to include a series 
of substituted styrenes with both electron-donating and electron-withdrawing 
substituents157}. In total, seventeen monomers were used, including 0-, m-, and 
p-mono halogenated styrenes, a number of alkyl.styrenes, and p-methoxystyrene. 
We shall now consider some of the aspects of temperature dependence of 
grafting reactions involving cellulose as the trunk polymer. For the styrene-
cellulose-methanol system (grafting on Whatman No I filter paper), the apparent 
overall activation energy for the grafting process in 80 percent and 60 percent 
monomer solutions was obtained using the data plotted in Figure 27 and estimated 
at 22 and 24 kJ mol-1 respectively, for the temperature range varying from 
40°C to 1°C, which agrees favorably with the value reported by Miyama226-227} 
and those found for the liquid phase polymerization of styrene228 -229}. Dilli and 
Table 26. Effect of temperature on grafting yields for styrene on cellulose 
in methanol. Reprinted from Ref.iS?), p. 1165, by courtesy of the Common-
wealth Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (C.S.I.R.O.), Mel-
bourne, Australia 
Temperature 
Grafting (%) at Monomer Concentration (% V/V) 
°C 
20 
40 
60 
80 
I 
1.5 
6.2 
10.8 
13.3 
11 
2.5 
11.1 
17.9 
22.4 
23 
8.4 
23.5 
30.6 
35.3 
31 
14.9 
29.7 
34.6 
42.5 
40 
21.1 
34.2 
38.5 
43.1 
Irradiation for 213 minutes at 0.145 m rad/hr using styrene-methanol 
mixtures. Extraction was in benzene (100 hr) and chloroform (48 hr) to 
constant weight. The figures represent mean values of S determinations. 
Table 27. Low temperature grafting of styrene to cellulose in methanol. 
Reprinted from Ref. iS?), p. 1166, by courtesy of the Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organization (CSIRO), Melbourne, 
Australia 
Reaction 
Grafting (%) at Styrene Concentration (%) 
Temp. Cc) 
20 
40 
60 
80 
25 
15 
32 
33 
48 
0 
2 
7 
12 
19 
-
78 
2 
2 
5 
23 
-196 
2 
2 
2 
2 
Irradiation in air at 0.045 M rad/hr for 4 hours. Figures represent the 
mean values of 4 determinations. 
111 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
Garnett157) suggest that, for such results, the kinetics can be expressed by 
simple kinetic schemes in which the overall activation energy, E, is equated with 
the difference between the activation energies for propagation (Ep) and termina-
tion (EI); thus, E = Ep -
1/2 EI • This activation energy (E) is approximately, 
20-40 kJ mol-I, assuming the energy, Ei> associated with initiation by y radiation, 
to be zero. Further dilution of the monomer solution leads to an increase in 
the overall activation energy. At temperatures below -78°C, grafting is much 
reduced, though there is evidence that an ionic mechanism operates at these 
temperatures. In other examples in which the temperature has been controlled, 
grafting is increased markedly as the temperature is raised to 60 or 
70°C181.187,201-203). 
Types of Copolymers Formed by High Energy Radiation Grafting 
Possible products from the irradiation of cellulose can be presented as 
follows: -
° 
° 
0, ---.. '0 4 
0, or 
(a) 
° 
° 
0, 
or 
0, or 
(b) 
(c) 
° 
0 
0· 
or 
(d) 
(e) 
HO 
3 
H 
More recent evidence suggests the following as possible products62, 74, 89): 
° 
° 
'0 
0" 
or 
'0 
0", or 
(t) 
(g) 
H 
H 
° 
'0 
0, 
(h) 
H 
In the presence of a monomer, chain ,'adicals such as (a), (b), (c), (t), (g), and 
(h) will lead to the formation of graft copolymers, whereas (d) and (e) 
112 

-2.2,----------------, 
Q; 
15 
-2.4 
-2.6 
-2.8 
~ -3.0 
:§ e ! -3.2 
.3 
-3.4 
-3.6 
-3.8 
-4.0 '-----'_-.l.._-'--__ 
-'--_----"_---' 
3.19 
3.21 3.38 
3.52 
3.65 
103fT (K-1)_ 
3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Fig. 27. The effect of temperature on graft-
ing yields in grafting to cellulose. Arrhenius 
plots, A, B, C, and D are for solutions 80, 
60, 40, and 20 % styrene in methanol 
respectively. Grafting rate initially ob-
tained in % S-I. Reprinted from Ref. IS7 }, 
p. 1165, by courtesy of the Commonwealth 
Scientific and Industrial Research Organi-
zation (C.S.I.R.O.), Melbourne, Australia. 
will give rise to block copolymers. Actually, there arises the possibility of 
several different types of radicals being present in a given chain. The lifetime 
of such species will be very dependent on the particular environment in which 
they are generated. Although the available evidence suggests that sites are formed 
on the anhydroglucose unit in preference to inter-unit positions, it is known that 
in many examples both types of reaction are found to take place. In addition, there 
will be radicals formed by radio lysis of the monomer and, if there is a solvent, 
by radiolysis of the solvent. These monomers and/or solvent radicals lead to for-
mation of homopolymer. Use of mutual irradiation techniques, therefore, always 
yields a mixture of graft copolymer and homopolymer. The ratio of graft 
copolymer to homopolymer will be determined by the relative rates of grafting 
and homopolymerization. To achieve maximum grafting, a monomer should 
be selected which requires very large radiation doses in order to polymerize, i.e., 
a monomer with a very low value of G, where G is the number of molecules 
converted per I ()() electron volts of energy absorbed139, 140,234,235). Fortunately, 
however, initiation of free radicals on the cellulose backbone is more likely to 
occur than initiation of free radicals on the monomer, since the cellulose 
molecule interacts more readily with high energy radiation, particularly through 
dehydrogenation47, 61), than the vinyl monomer. Also, the activated sites on the 
cellulose molecule will probably tend to be longer-lived, particularly in crystalline 
regions, than the activated sites on the vinyl monomer. 
B. Post-irradiation Grafting 
This technique consists of the irradiation of cellulose in the absence of the 
monomer, followed by its immersion in a solution of the monomer. Pre-
irradiation may be carried out in the presence or absence of air. In the presence 
113 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
of air, the irradiated cellulose contains peroxy-carbonyl and carboxyl groups, as 
well as trapped radicals. The latter are formed by breaking C-C, C-H, or 
C-O bonds in the cellulose and are long-lived because of their inability to come 
sufficiently close to another radical for a reaction to occur. 
In a number of patents, is has been stated that irradiated cellulose acetate, 
and possibly irradiated cellulose, can initiate post-irradiation graft polymerization 
reactions236 - 239). 
Kobayashi has described the grafting of rayon with styrene by pre-irradiating 
the rayon in the presence of hydrogen peroxide solution, water or air, and 
subsequently heating it with styreneI22). More grafting occurred after irradiation 
in hydrogen peroxide solution than after irradiation in either air or oxygen. 
The graft yield increased with increasing concentration of hydrogen peroxide. 
There was a non-linear correlation between the number of active sites and the 
extent of grafting. Both of these increased with radiation dose and decreased if the 
pre-irradiated samples were heated before exposure to the monomer, i.e., 
styrene. 
Chapiro240, 241) reported that peroxides are formed when a polymer is irradiated 
in air. These peroxides are subsequently decomposed at an elevated temperature, 
inducing graft copolymerization in the presence of vinyl monomers. Ballantine 
et a1.242) have reported that free radicals are formed when a polymer is irradiated 
in vacuum; these are trapped in the polymer and subsequently behave as graft 
copolymerization initiators. Even in the presence of air, some radicals result. 
Shinohara and Tomioka243) studied graft copolymerization by irradiation of 
polyethylene in air and reported that free radicals, as well as peroxides, are 
formed. This is in apparent contrast to the findings ofChapiro240), who could not 
detect any free radicals on irradiation of polyethylene in air. The disagreement 
seems to be due to differences in irradiation conditions. The free radicals are 
capable of inducing graft copolymerization at low temperature, where peroxide 
grafting is very slow. The trapped free radicals disappear on standing in air, 
probably by combining with oxygen. In styrene grafting, copolymerization is 
induced by both free radicals and peroxides when the temperature is elevated. 
Sakurada et al.244) carried out experiments on the grafting of styrene onto cellu-
lose fibers by post-irradiation techniques where the irradiation was performed by 
electron beams, in air, at atmospheric pressure and 65 % relative humidity, and the 
grafting at 50°C. They reported the following: 
(l) The activity for the grafting of the irradiated cellulose decreases only a little 
when it is kept for a long time (10 days), in vacuum at room temperature, or 
in air at a temperature as low as -78°C. 
(2) The activity decreases remarkably when the irradiated cellulose comes into 
contact with water or humid air at room temperature. 
(3) The activity decreases on heating the irradiated cellulose above room tempera-
ture. The higher the temperature, the greater the rate ofloss of the activity. 
From the above observations, Sakurada et al. came to the conclusion that 
the reaction might be regarded as being initiated not by peroxides, as often 
believed, but rather by trapped radicals215 -216). 
Studies on grafting onto poly(vinyl alcohol) fibers were also carried out with 
similar results to those obtained with cellulose92). It was observed by a quantita-
114 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
tive measurement of the oxygen consumption that an appreciable amount of 
oxygen was taken up by the poly(vinyl alcohol) during irradiation in the air. It 
is therefore probable that some peroxides are formed during pre-irradiation, but 
the presence of air or the amount of combined oxygen on poly(vinyl alcohol) had 
practically no effect on the rate and extent of the grafting. These results may 
be regarded as indicating very strong support for the argument that trapped 
radicals, and not peroxides, play the more important role in grafting onto 
poly(vinyl alcohol) by the post-irradiation technique. 
Post-irradiation grafting onto cellulose and polyethylene has been shown92) 
to provide further support for the argument that grafting by this technique is 
initiated not by peroxides, but by trapped radicals independent of the presence 
or absence of air during pre-irradiation. The main difference between poly-
ethylene and cellulose may be traced back to two factors, i.e., hygroscopicity 
and the glass transition temperatures. Polyethylene is not hygroscopic, whereas 
cellulose is. The glass transition temperature of dry cellulose is above room tem-
perature; therefore, radicals formed are stable as long as they are not heated 
or in contact with water. On the other hand, the glass transition temperature of 
polyethylene is below room temperature, so that the trapped radicals are not 
stable and oxygen can easily penetrate into polyethylene during irradiation to 
form peroxides92 ). 
When cotton, regular viscose rayon, and polynosics were pre-irradiated with 
gamma rays from Co-60 and then grafted (under different conditions) with styrene 
at 50°C, no difference in the percent graft between vacuum and dry-air 
irradiated fibers was observed. This was the case with the three cellulosic 
materials. On the other hand, the presence of water has a dramatic effect on the 
grafting. With respect to cotton, the percent graft drops to ca. 113 of the 
value which was obtained in vacuum or dry air irradiation, whereas in the 
case of regular viscose rayon and polynosics, the presence of water exerts a more 
pronounced effect so that the wet-air irradiated fibers have practically no activity 
for grafting92). As previously shown2441, dry irradiated fibers lose their activity 
for grafting when they are brought into contact with water. These phenomena 
cannot be explained if the active species are peroxides. 
It is known that the glass transition temperature of cellulose is lowered by the 
presence of water, dropping below room temperature24B). If it is assumed that 
radicals are initiators for the graft polymerization, the above-mentioned pheno-
mena may be explained quite simply, because above the glass transition tempera-
ture, radicals formed on cellulose molecules disappear by mutual reaction or by 
reaction with water molecules. 
Since the reaction temperature of 50°C is not a suitable temperature to 
decompose peroxides and initiate polymerization, grafting onto polynosics was 
performed at 80°C and 117°C. Results of these experiments showed that vacuum 
or dry-air-irradiated fibers had much greater activity for grafting then wet, air-
irradiated fibers. It was therefore concluded that radicals formed by irradiation 
play the most important role in the grafting249). 
When the grafting is initiated by peroxides, the influence of temperature on 
percent graft is completely different. For instance, reported experimental results 
of grafting acrylonitrile on polyethylene film revealed that only vacuum-irradiated 
115 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
film acquired a tendency to be grafted at 50 DC. On the other hand, films irradiated 
in the presence of air exhibited almost no tendency to be grafted at this tempera-
ture. It follows from this that the activity of vacuum-irradiated film is due to free 
radicals. At 80 DC, the air-irradiated and wet-irradiated films begin to show activi-
ty towards grafting, whereas the activity of the vacuum-irradiated film remains 
almost unchanged. When the reaction temperature was elevated to 115 DC, the 
activity of films irradiated in the presence of air was enormous; this is 
unequivocally initiated by decomposition of peroxides72). 
Kesting and Stannett246) measured the build-up and decay of free radicals 
in the process of gamma post-irradiation grafting of styrene onto cotton cellulose 
from electron spin resonance measurements, as well as the decrease in grafting 
after storing the irradiated materials before immersion in monomer. Their 
results indicate that the grafting· is initiated by trapped radicals. They also ob-
tained some evidence for the occurrence of peroxide-initiated grafting at higher 
polymerization temperatures. These authors suggest that the peroxides might 
have arisen from the reaction between cellulose and water rather than oxygen. 
During irradiation, the small amount of water present tended to increase the 
amount of polymerization. The greater yields are presumably due to the greater 
accessibility of the moist samples to the monomer, particularly in the early 
stages of the reaction. The effects of water confirm similar results with cellulose 
and poly(vinyl alcohol)120). 
Majumdar and Rapson250) reported that where both styrene and bleached jute 
containing 80 % water were separately irradiated and subsequently heated to-
gether, grafting of polystyrene onto the bleached jute increased steadily with time, 
and that the percent grafting was greater than when the components were not 
pre-irradiated or when only the bleached jute was pre-irradiated. When styrene 
alone was irradiated, grafting on subsequent heating was substantial and even 
greater than that of simultaneous grafting233). This great increase in grafting 
in these two cases may be due to the formation of peroxides in the air-
saturated styrene by irradiation in the presence of oxygen; such peroxides 
subsequently initiate grafting on heating. This explanation is, plausible, since 
styrene dissolves substantially more oxygen from air than does water. 
Blouin and Arthur1.l4) studied the post-irradiation reactions of the irradiated 
cellulose with acrylonitrile under a variety of conditions. Variables studied in-
clude atmosphere of irradiation, temperature of grafting, nature of the swelling 
agent, irradiation dose, and time of grafting reactions. Irradiation was performed 
by using high-energy gamma radiation from Co-60 at selected dosages up to 
6 X 108 roentgens. Some of the results obtained are given in Table 28 and Figure 28. 
It was observed that treatment of irradiated cellulose with acrylonitrile alone 
gave extemely low graft yields at the higher dosages studied, even at high tempera-
tures. Treatment of the irradiated cellulose with 5 % aqueous acrylonitrile gave 
somewhat higher yields, particularly at elevated temperatures. No significant 
differences in yield were observed with this treatment in the range of 60 to 
100 DC. Somewhat higher graft yields were obtained on treatment of the 
irradiated cellulose with 32% acrylonitrile in N,N'-dimethylformamide, both at 
23 D and 80 DC, than with the other two systems. It was also observed that 
maximum graft yields were attained after 3 to 7 hours and no additional 
116 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Table 28. Post-irradiation graft polymerization reaction of irradiated cotton 
with acrylonitrile at various temperatures·. Reprinted from Ref.'34), p. 731, 
by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Dosage 
roentgens 
2.3 x lit 
6.1 x lit 
Reaction Conditions·· 
Monomer and solvent 
5 % Acrylonitrile in H20 
32 % Acrylonitrile in DMF 
Acrylonitrile 
5 % Acrylonitrile in H20 
32 % Acrylonitrile in DMF 
• Irradiated, vac.-dry, in N2 
•• 22 hr. 
240 
V 
/ 
C16%ANin 
/ 
200 
~ 160 
75%aq'~~1 
~~ 
... 
'" 
E 
>-g 120 
-0 
.2! 
'§ 
C,!) 80 
40 
o 
/ 
I 
/'t 
I~&B 16%AN in 
80% aq. ZnCl1 
t/ 
V 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Reaction time (h) 
Grafted 
Polymer, 
Temp.,oC 
% 
80 
80 
23 
80 
23 
60 
80 
100 
23 
80 
9.3 
20.4 
0.4 
3.5 
5.1 
15.1 
13.7 
12.8 
15.5 
26.9 
Fig. 28. Post-irradiation reaction of irradiated 
cotton (2.3 x 106 roentgens) with acryloni-
trile (16%) in aqueous ZnCI2 (75% and 
80 %) at about 23°C. Irradiation conditions; 
A and C vac.-dry, in N2 and B air-dry, in air 
(marked X). Reprinted from Ref. 134), p. 732, 
by courtesy of the Textile Research Institute. 
increases occurred on prolonged heating. The authors pointed out that if 
cellulose irradiated in an air-dry state to a dosage of 6.1 x 106 roentgens was 
treated with 5 % aqueous acrylonitrile at 23° or 80 °C, no significant poly-
merizatiQn occurredl34). 
Higher graft yields could be achieved by irradiating cellulose and subsequently 
treating it in acrylonitrile dissolved in aqueous zinc chloride solution, as can be 
seen from Figure 28. It was then concluded that post-irradiation graft copoly-
merization of acrylonitrile onto cotton cellulose was initiated by the long-lived 
free radicals produced in the cotton by the radiation. Irradiation in an inert amos-
117 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
phere (absence of moisture and oxygen) produced free radicals in the accessible 
and inaccessible (crystalline) regions of the cellulose structure. Free radicals in the 
accessible regions of the cellulose structure initiated low yields of graft polymeriza-
tion of acrylonitrile onto cotton in various non-swelling solution media. High 
graft yields were attained even at low dosages when the treating solution was 
able to penetrate the crystalline regions of the cellulose structure135). 
Blouin et al.135) irradiated dry cotton in a nitrogen atmosphere with gamma 
ray (Co-60 source) to a dosage of 106 roentgens. The irradiated cellulose was 
then t.reated with acrylonitrile, methyl methacrylate, or vinyl acetate in 70, 75, 
or 80 % aqueous zinc chloride. The rates of graft polymerization of these vinyl 
monomers were studied, and the radiochemical yields calculated from these con-
ditions and based on the maximum graft polymer content, are given. Some of these 
results are shown in Figure 29 and Table 29. Obviously, the vinyl acetate 
reacted with irradiated cotton cellulose at a slower rate and to a lower extent 
than the other monomers studied. However, the radiochemical yields were good. 
The most interesting feature of this study is that a wide range of graft polymer 
contents could be attained at dosages low enough to avoid serious radiation 
damage. 
The post-irradiation technique has the advantage that the grafting reaction may 
be carried out at different times and locations than the irradiation operation. 
Furthermore the same pre-irradiated substrate may be subjected to a variety of 
different monomers, depending on the end use desired under certain conditions. 
It is also possible to prepare graft copolymers uncontaminated by homopolymer. 
The post-irradiation technique leads to high graft yields and longer branches251 ). 
This may be seen from the data given in Table 30. However, it is more likely 
to cause cellulose degradation than the mutual irradiation technique. 
Imrisov and Maryska252,253) employed i.f. spectroscopy in an attempt to 
quantify the extent of grafting in a more realistic manner than is apparent with 
gravimetric methods. Samples of graft copolymer (cellulose or derivatives copoly-
700 
600 
/ 
II 
500 
~ 
~ 400 
>-
(5 
D. 
"j / 
100 
! V 
I~ 
/~ 
IL 
.--;-' 
200 
o 
118 
! . I 
I 
A 15% MM In 75% aQ. ZnCI2 
" 
V 
u 
" 
I 
B 15% AN in 75% aq. ZnCI) 
0 
0 
C 15% VA in 75% aQ. ZnCI) 
xTxt-
10 
15 
20 
25 
Reaction time (h) 
" 
0 
I 
30 
35 
Fig. 29. Post-irradiated grafting of A 
methyl methacrylate, B acrylonitrile 
and C vinyl acetate in 75 % aqueous 
ZnC~ at about 23 °e. Irradiation 
conditions; dry and in nitrogen, 106 R. 
Reprinted from Ref.135), p. 311, by 
courtesy of Textile Research Insti-
tute. 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Table 29. Radiochemical yields of post-irradiation graft polymeri-
zation reactions of vinyl monomers. With irradiated cotton cellu-
lose·. Reprinted from Ref.13S), p. 311, by courtesy of Textile Research 
Institute 
Monomer 
AqueousZnCI2 
Molecular actions/ 
% 
100 e.V. 
Vinyl acetate 
70 
6,400 
75 
6,700 
Acrylonitrile 
70 
43,000 
75 
75,000 
80 
68,000 
Methyl methacrylate 
75 
63,000 
80 
65,000 
• Purified cotton fibers irradiated dry and in nitrogen to a dosage 
of 106 r and after irradiation treated with 15 % monomer in 70, 
75 or 80 % aqueous ZnCI2 at about 23°C. 
Table 30. Mutual versus pre-irradiation grafting of styrene to cellulose·. Adapted from ReUS!), 
p. 249, by courtesy of Huthig & Wepf Verlag, Basel 
Substrate 
Dose 
% Graft 
Mol. Wt. (visc.) . 10-6 % Graft 
Mol. Wt. (vise.) . 10-6 
MR 
mutual 
Side Chains (mutual) 
Pre-Irrad. 
Side Chains (Pre-irrad.) 
Cellophane 
0.32 
69.6 
1.42 
64.7 
1.99 
0.97 
71.8 
1.08 
84.0 
1.67 
1.62 
72.6 
0.97 
90.0 
1.52 
2.92 
76.0 
0.90 
96.0 
1.30 
3.89 
77.4 
0.92 
98.7 
1.28 
Cotton 
0.32 
19.6 
1.07 
22.6 
3.02 
0.65 
22.7 
0.90 
45.6 
2.89 
0.97 
25.9 
0.67 
55.2 
2.78 
1.30 
30.1 
0.60 
63.0 
2.45 
3.24 
47.5 
0.3\ 
83.4 
2.26 
• Dose rate 3.24' lOS R per hr, time of contact between monomer and pre-irradiated cellulose, 
72 hrs at 25°C; contact time between monomer and cellulose, 3 days at 25°C before irradiation 
and one day after irradiation in the mutual method. 
merized with acrylonitrile), were prepared for analysis using the KBr, pressed disc 
method. The absorption band at 2249 cm -1 was monitored. For a similar program 
using cellulose-co-styrene, the band at 700 cm - 1 was used to determine the 
extent of grafting. Although quantitative infra-red spectroscopic analysis of 
cellulose cannot be applied generally, there are instances when it may prove 
useful149). Nakamura et al. have used electron spin resonance spectroscopy in 
their study of post-irradiation grafting254-256). E.s.r. was used in an assessment 
of radical accessability during the grafting of ethyl acrylate ttl cotton cellulose. 
Water was seen to accelerate the rate of grafting, and maximum grafting was 
achieved at phase boundary regions, presumably through the operation of a 
Trommsdorff type of effect. Grafting in acetone was found to be much less 
119 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
efficient than grafting in a mixture of methanol and water. With acetone/water, 
no Trommsdorff effect was observed. In acetone/water system, the e.s.r. spectra 
of the scavenged free radicals appeared as singlets. This supports radical 
formation at C1 or C4 or the anhydroglucose unit, as found by Guthrie 
et al.89). The lack of a Trommsdorff effect with acetone/water as the solvent 
medium arises from the much greater solubility of poly( ethyl acrylate) in acetone/ 
water than in methanol/water mixtures. As may be expected, decreased grafting 
rates were observed with an increase in the temperature and time of irradiation 
storage. A corresponding decrease in the moisture regain of the irradiated cellulose 
was also observed, Oxygen atmospheres caused a greater decrease in grafting than 
did exposure in nitrogen atmospheres256). For these decreases, it was concluded 
that increased intermolecular bonding occurred during radiation storage in both 
nitrogen and oxygen. From the study of the temperature dependence of graft-
ing in the range 25-60°, it was concluded that there was no evidence for the 
formation or decomposition of cellulose peroxides during these reactions, and 
that formation of graft copolymer depended primarily on the concentration of 
free radicals in the irradiated cellulose at the time of copolymerization. These 
observations are somewhat contrary to those observed in grafting to other 
substrates, e.g., polyethylene, in which it has been reported that the thermal 
decomposition of peroxide groups in the polyethylene leads to enhanced post-
irradiation grafting229. 240. 242). A mechanism for this post-irradiation-induced 
intermolecular bonding has been proposed by Nakamura et al. This mechanism 
can be seriously considered for post-irradiation grafting to the various forms of 
cellulose, but it cannot be entertained for derivatives because of effects such as 
steric interference and energy transfer reactions. The suggested mechanism is as 
follows: 
Cell-H 
~Celr+H' 
(73) 
Cell' + Cell' 
~Cell-Cell 
(74) 
Cell' + O2 
-Cell-O-O' 
(75) 
Cell' + Cell-O-O' 
~ Cell-O-O-Cell 
(76) 
Cell-O-O' + Cell-H ~ Cell-O-OH + Cell' 
(77) 
Celr-nM 
-Cell-(M)~ 
(7S) 
Cell-O-OH 
~ Cell-O' + 'OH 
(79) 
Cell-O'+ nM 
-
Cell-O-(M)~ 
(SO) 
nM+'OH 
-(M)~ + HOH 
(SI) 
where Cell-H represents the cellulose molecule; Cell', the cellulose radical; 
M, the monomer; and M', the monomer radical. The formation of trapped 
radicals in cellulose probably results from dehydrogenation (Eq, 73), In nitrogen, 
heating of irradiated cellulose allows increased mobility of the free radical sites, 
particularly in the more ordered regions, leading to increased intermolecular 
120 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
bonding (Eq. 74). In view of the size of individual chains, depending on their 
excluded volume, there also arises the possibility of intramolecular crosslinking, 
though this would be a minor event relative to intermolecular crosslinking. Intra-
molecular crosslinking does not give a fully satisfactory explanation for the 
reduced moisture regain. 
Heating of irradiated cellulose in oxygen provides the possibility of reactions 
(74) to (77) occurring, particularly in less ordered regions. Such reactions could 
lead to the formation of intermolecular bonds and an ultimate reduction in the 
number of sites otherwise available for grafting. Grafting polymerization is 
possible, as shown by Eqs. (78-80). Homopolymerization becomes a reality if 
Eq. (81) is followed. Again, it should be stressed that his sequence has general 
application. 
Hinojosa and Arthur257) have examined the significance of the propagating 
radical in the copolymerization of methacrylic acid with gamma-irradiated 
cellulose. In an e.s.r. spectroscopic investigation of irradiated poly(methacrylic 
acid), Abraham et a1.258) concluded that the propagating radical was 
-CHz-C-COOH 
I 
CH3 
This conclusion is supported by Hinojosa and Arthur, who used the cellulose-
poly (methacrylic acid) radical in copolymerization reactions through immersion 
in solutions of other monomers such as acrylonitrile or acrylic acid. This 
approach provides useful insight into ways of preparing grafted block copolymers 
of cellulose255). 
Post-irradiation grafting onto cellulose using a variety of monomers has been 
attempted. Points which have been investigated include those outlined above. 
Additional aspects covered are grafting from binary mixtures of monomers259), 
one of which was acrylonitrile; the temperature dependence of grafting styrene 
under both dry and aqueous conditions in the range 50°-117 °C260); the effect 
of dimethylformamide on the grafting of methyl vinyl ketone from a methanol/ 
water medium261); the effect of grafted acrolein on the crosslin king tendencies 
of cellulose262); an apparent activation energy of 640 kJ /mol in the grafting of 
methyl methacrylate in the temperature range from room temperature to 
65 °C263); and comonomer distribution in the grafting of butyl methacrylate 
onto cotton fiber64). Also covered are the characteristics of vapor phase grafting 
using vinyl fluoride and vinylidine fluoride as the comonomers, in which it was 
found that water vapor markedly enhanced the level of grafted add_on265-266), 
and the grafting of butyl methacrylate and acrylonitrile, singly and in mixtures, 
with a view to control of structural modifications and changes in the dyeing 
behavior of the cellulose267). 
Post-irradiation grafting techniques have also been applied to modified cellu-
loses. Here we include rayon268-270), cellulose acetate166,269,271 ,272), ethyl 
cellulose273), nitrocellulose274), and cellulose carbanilates51). 
3.2.4.4. Mechanisms of Irradiation Grafting 
It has been reported that a reasonable proportion of the radiation-induced 
radicals in cellulose have lifetimes of years and are generally inaccessible to 
121 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
molecules in non-swelling media85, 98, 275), since the radicals effectively become a 
characteristic of the bulk system. Thus, in terms of the grafting mechanism, two 
general types of copolymer bonding may be considered. First, those radicals 
which are accessible may form conventional bonds (grafts) with the monomer, 
presumably a-bonds. Other types of bonding in copolymerization are also possible, 
though their significance will vary depending on the substrate (substituted or 
unsubstituted celluloses). Most mechanistic studies have been applied to the more 
simple cellulosics. The reasons for this are not difficult to understand, since 
they are mainly associated with the demand for new materials. Thus, little 
effort has been expended on mechanistic studies of their formation. A different 
mechanism for bonding in graft copolymerization to cellulose is that the so-called 
"inaccessible" radical sites may contribute to the bonding if charge transfer 
interactions are involved276). The proposed types of charge-transfer species97) 
are discussed below. 
a) General Charge-Transfer Complex Formation 
U sing styrene and irradiated cellulose as the simplest example, the n-electrons of 
styrene may be delocalized to form a stable charge-transfer bond with the free 
valencies of irradiated cellulose. Analogous bonding is known in inorganic 
complexes277 , 278) and conventional aromatic substitution reactions. Thus, as the 
first step in grafting, styrene is complexed in a flat position (for maximum 
overlap) on the surface of the irradiated cellulose (Eq. 82), with P' denoting a 
radical either on the surface or within the cellulose, whether the radical 
indicated by P' is at the end of a growing chain or otherwise: 
2p· 
+ 
@-CH=CH2 -
~CHTCH2 
(82), 
P 
P 
(l) Grafting at the Surface: Two reactions from Eq. (82) are now possible, in-
volving radicals at the surface or in the bulk. Because of ease of accessibility of 
radical sites at the surface of the cellulose, further (n-a reaction) may occur to give 
stable a-bonded species, similar to inorganic (n-a) conversion278, 279), Eqs. (83) 
and (84), 
@-CH=CH2 + 
p. -
(83) 
(84) 
122 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
Analogous (CT-1t) conversions can be shown for CT-bonding with the side chain 
(Eq. 85 and 86) 
(Qj-CH=CH2 
-
(Qj-iH-
CH2 
P 
H 
(Qj-t- CHZR 
P 
If R is a monomer, grafting will occur. 
(85) 
(86) 
(ii) Grafting in Bulk: Here the mobility of polystyrene chains and radicals is 
impeded and the (1t-CT) conversions are restricted; however, the long polystyrene 
chains can still be grafted by a series of charge-transfer bonds (Eq. 87). Such 
bpnding would be extremely strong and would tend to keep homopolymer 
locked between the chains as "graft". 
(87) 
The charge-transfer mechanism can also be used to interpret bonding involving 
radiation-induced grafts between cellulose and monomers other than styrene, 
e.g., acrylonitrile, methyl methacrylate, etc. With certain of these monomers, the 
functional group could act as the donor for charge-transfer bonding in the 
bulk [Eq. (88)]. 
-CH-CHZ-CH-CHZ-CH-CHZ-
I 
I 
I 
C 
C 
C 
III 
III 
III 
N 
N 
N 
(88) 
~ 
+ 
+ 
p. 
p. 
p. 
Evidence consistent with this type of bonding in Eq. (88) is provided by the effect 
of ammonia on the e.s.r. signal of irradiated cellulose135l. Ammonia completely 
removes the signal. Part of this effect could be attributed to delocalization of the 
nitrogen lone-pair, as in Eq. (89). 
H 
p.-
I 
H-N-H 
(89) 
~ p. 
Futhermore, compounds containing NH2 or heterocyclic nitrogen groups gener-
ally appear both to inhibit the grafting of styrene and also to reduce the intensity 
123 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
of the TrommsdorfT peak134). This is obviously due to strong adsorption of the 
inhibitor, presumably bonding by charge-transfer forces similar to those 
depicted in Eq. (89). 
Grafting with monomers other than styrene 
Dilli and Garnett have devoted much attention to the grafting of substituted 
styrenes onto cellulose157). There is little published work on this topic, yet it 
provides an excellent system for obtaining an understanding some of the 
mechanisms of grafting because of the ease of substituting into the benzene 
ring one or more electronegative or electropositive groups. The reactivity of 
styrenes in free radical polymerizations has been shown to be as follows: 
styrene with electron-donating groups < styrene < styrene with electron-with-
drawing groups280). It may be noted that a head-to-tail addition of monomers to 
the growing radicals will be encouraged .because of the greater resonance 
stabilization possible i.n the radicals so formed. 
Dilli and Garnett157) have verified this classification through examination of 
various substituted styrenes. Table 3 I contains the monomers used and the 
Table 31. Grafting with substituted styrenes in methanol. Reprinted from 
Ref.IS?), p. 1169, by courtesy of the Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial 
Research Organization (C.S.l.R.O.). Melbourne, Australia 
Monomer 
Grafting Yields (%) 
Hammett 
Subst. Const. 
A 
B 
styrene 
30 
16 
-0.268 
p-methoxystyrene 
0 
o-methylstyrene 
110 
-0.170 
p-methylstyrene 
6 
-0.151 
p-ethylstyrene 
2 
p-n-butylstyrene 
2 
2,4-dimethylstyrene 
10 
2,5-dimethylstyrene 
19 
2,4,6-trimethylstyrene 
0 
o-chlorostyrene 
74 
23 
m-chlorostyrene 
a 
93 
+0.373 
p-chlorostyrene 
a 
90 
+0.227 
o-bromostyrene 
27 
m-bromostyrene 
a, b 
a 
+0.391 
p-bromostyrene 
c 
+0.232 
m-fluorostyrene 
a 
44 
+0.337 
p-fluorostyrene 
a 
56 
+0.072 
2-vinyl pyridine (d) 
3 
4-vinyl pyridine (d) 
0 
Notes a) Reaction was too great to measure under the specified conditions. 
124 
b) After repeated extraction in boiling chloroform (ten extractions) 
the original mass of cellulose was recovered, i.e., there was no 
grafting. Infrared spectrum confirmed the nature of the residue. 
c) Extraction of the homopolymer-incomplete with this monomer. 
d) Although not styrenes, these monomers are included for comparison. 

3.2. Grafting by High Energy Radiation 
extents of grafting achieved. Where available, the Hammett substitution constants 
are given. As can be seen from Table 31, the results of grafting for the 
substituted styrenes fit reasonably into the approximate grading. Low grafting 
yields are obtained for those monomers containing electron-donating substituents, 
whereas extensive grafting occurs with monomers in which electron withdrawing 
groups were substituted into the benzene ring. The grafting yields obtained by 
Dilli and Garnett for the p-alkylstyrenes and p-methoxystyrene were consistent 
and appreciably smaller than for styrene. The decrease arises as a consequence of 
deactivation reSUlting from the combined conjugative ( + M) and inductive ( + I) 
effects in these compounds. It follows that the tautomeric component contribut-
ing to deactivation can be eliminated by metasubstitution of these groups in 
styrene; enhanced grafting yields should then be observed. 
o-Methylstyrene provides us with a departure from the trend among the 
electron-donating substituents. Examination of molecular models indicates 
that steric hindrance to conjugation is significant in this monomer. Such 
hindrance is even more severe with 2,6-dimethylstyrene, and no grafting 
occurs with 2,4,6-trimethylstyrene. 
Dilli and Garnett have provided a comprehensive discussion of these obser-
vations157). With 2,4,6-trimethylstyrene, the deactivation due to the three 
methyl groups is large. The stability of the radical will also be considerably 
reduced as a result of the reduced degree of conjugation imposed by the two 
ortho-substituents, forcing the vinyl group out of the plane of the benzene ring. 
In this respect, the stability of the radical is important for singly substituted 
o-methylstyrene, since a very stable 1t-allylic system is produced only with this 
compound; this could be responsible for the exceptional tendencies toward 
grafting which are shown by the monomer (110 % cf styrene, 30 % and p-methyl-
styrene, 6 %, under identical conditions). Thus, we have 
c~ 
- H' 
.c~ -cf) 
.H· d? 
--
-. 
~ 
.H 
-H 
CHz 
CH 
CH 
/ \ 
CH 
CH 
II 
II 
H 
H I 
I 
CHz 
CHz 
CH; 
CH3 
Some of this reactive character is possessed by 2,4-dimethylstyrene and 
2,6-dimethylstyrene. In 2,4-dimethylstyrene, the methyl group at the 4-position 
can transfer charge to the vinyl double bond by hyperconjugation and reinforce 
the inductive effect ( + I) of the methyl group, leading to an overall decrease in 
grafting tendencies. When the methyl group is in the 5-position, as in 2,5-
dimethyl styrene, the inductive effect operates alone since no tautomerism is 
possible. This explains the higher grafting yield as seen with 2,5-dimethylstyrene. 
For substituted styrenes containing electron withdrawing groups, the grafting 
results are generally consistent with the theory outlined above. The major excep-
tions are m-bromostyrene and p-bromostyrene. With m-bromostyrene, no graft-
ing was observed. This result is ascribed to the inductive effect (-I) and is 
contrary to what might normally be expected, considering the electronegativities 
125 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
of the halogens. The picture presented by p-bromostyrene is complex owing to 
its strong tendency toward crosslinking on polymerization. 
For the remaining monomers in Table 31, with the exception of meta-substitut-
ed compounds, inductive and tautomeric effects operate. A consideration of the 
opposing electronic effects suggests that the expected order of reactivity would be 
greater for ortho- and meta- than for para- substituted monomers in a series. 
The comparison of ortho and meta derivatives is more complex but will be in the 
order meta > ortho, provided that the tautomeric and inductive effects for the 
ortho position are equal to, or less, than the inductive effect of the meta-
substituent. 
With these guidelines in mind, let us examine the halogen-substituted monomers 
in Table 31 157). The results show a deviation away from the predicted order, 
which indicates that grafting efficiency ought to proceed F > CI > Br. The 
practical order is CI > F > Br. Simple tautomeric and inductive effects are not 
adequate alone in providing an explanation for these results. The grafting yields 
are given added significance by the Hammett (J constants for the relevant meta- and 
para-substituents. The constants show the directional influence of the substituent 
in the transfer of charge to and from the ring and clarify the interpretation of, 
for example, the result obtained with m-bromostyrene. The relative magnitude of 
(J does not explain the high grafting yields obtained with para-fluorostyrene. 
However, arguments based on structural considerations should not be over-
emphasized, and due account must be taken of the particular conditions under 
which a study is carried out. This is especially true in grafting reactions, parti-
cularly where cellulose is concerned. The picture with regard to cellulose deriva-
tives is even more in need of examination than is that of grafting to cellulose 
itself. This is one area of investigation which could be usefully expanded. 
b) Radical Scavenging in Copolymerization 
The predominant participation of free radical processes in the grafting reaction 
has been shown by the effects of hydro quinone and thiourea on grafting yields97). 
In terms of radiation chemistry, grafting of styrene in methanol may be consider-
ed16O) as the radiolysis of a binary mixture in the presence of a heterogeneous 
additive (cellulose). In radiation chemical studies of binary mixtures144• 281. 282), 
aromatics such as benzene and styrene were shown to scavenge radiolytically-
produced free radicals by both addition and substitution processes (Eq. 90--92). 
H 
©+~ - ct: 
(90) 
(91) 
(92) 
126 

3.3. Grafting by low Energy Radiation in the Presence of Sensitizers 
Thus, at low monomer concentration (0-10%) the solvent will be in large excess 
and the behavior of the system will depend essentially on the radiation chemistry 
of methanol. Under these conditions, styrene will scavenge solvent radicals 
predominantly by an addition mechanism (Eq. 91), yielding essentially homopoly-
mer at the expense of graft. Similarly, at high monomer concentrations (70%), 
the relative amounts of methanol and styrene are not sufficient to prevent styrene 
from scavenging other styrene radio lytic fragments yielding extensive homopoly-
merization again at the expense of grafting. In the 30-70 % region, a compromise 
between the two extremes occurs and the most favorable grafting conditions 
are obtained.97). 
c) Energy Transfer and Electron Scavenging Processes 
The sensitization effect of napthalene at very low concentrations (10-4 M) and 
low dose rates suggests that energy transfer and/or electron scavenging processes 
are taking place in these solutions97). At low solute concentrations, naphthalene 
can scavenge solvated electrons to give the naphthalene negative ion (Eq. 93). 
(93) 
These solvated electrons participate actively in the fundamental radiolysis pathway 
of simple compounds, and they obviously will also contribute to radiation grafting 
processes. Naphthalene also scavenges hydrogen atoms, particularly in methanol, 
but this process does not become appreciable unless the concentration of naphtha-
lene exceeds 10-3 M. Thus, in the concentration range (10-4 M) where naph-
thalene sensitizes the reaction, the mechanism of the enhanced grafting effect may 
well be due to energy transfer or electron scavenging. 
These discussions make it evident that the charge-transfer theory can be used 
to explain the graft copolymerization of vinyl monomers onto cellulose by high 
energy radiation. It may also apply to grafting induced by ultraviolet radiation 
and CeIV ions. 
3.3. Grafting by low Energy Radiation in the Presence 
of Sensitizers 
Low energy photons may initiate polymerization of a vinyl or acrylic monomer if 
the irradiation is carried out in the presence of a sensitizer. Such a sensitizer must 
become active on exposure to the particular wevelength range of the incident 
radiation283 -285). In addition, the lifetime of the activated species must enable 
secondary reactions, such as initiation of polymerization, to take place. The 
efficiency of sensitization is often enhanced through use of a synergist, though 
this is not always necessary. Certain monomers can be activated without the need 
for a sensitizer. However, even here, the use of a sensitizer/synergist combination 
can dramatically improve the efficiency of a polymerization process. 
Low-energy, radiation-induced grafting involves the use of ultraviolet or 
visible light supplied by a suitable source. The energy is used to cause excitation of 
127 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
the sensitizer, causing the generation of radical species which may then attack the 
substrate283). Generation of active radical sites on the substrate is followed by 
grafting. Thus, the possibility of post-irradiation and simultaneous irradiation 
processes arises as with high energy, radiation-induced grafting. However, there 
are major mechanistic differences. Another feature in common with high 
energy processing is that of substrate damage. With low energy sources, this is 
termed photo-tendering. Thus, during the grafting process, deterioration of the 
substrate may occur either by localization of incident energy or by direct attack 
at main chain links by activated species. 
Harries et a1.286) have examined the value of ultraviolet light as an initiator of 
free radical chain reactions in cellulosic substrates. Four classes are suggested: 
graft copolymerization reactions of vinyl monomers to modify the cellulosic 
substrate macromolecularly; crosslinking reactions within the s.!lbstrate; homo-
polymerization within the substrate to provide occluded compokite systems and 
oxidative depolymerization reactions. Modifications of the properties of cellulose 
in the solid state by photo-initiated reactions have been reported. These include 
oxidative depolymerization287 - 295), crosslinking296 - 300), and graft and homopoly-
merization301-315). Homopolymer formation on or within the cellulosic substrate 
usually imparts nondurable properties while increasing the general stiffness, 
especially with textiles. Oxidative depolymerization leads to a loss in tensile 
properties and hen~ will be discussed in some detail here. 
3.3.1. Photo-tendering 
in Ultraviolet-light-Sensitized Grafting 
The mechanism of photo tendering by sensitizers has received considerable atten-
tion. Some of this attention has been aimed at cellulosics316.317), using low 
molecular weight compounds as models318). It is generally accepted that photo 
tendering action is due to radical reactions. However, some controversy has arisen 
over the mechanism of photo-tendering. Since some photo-tendering during 
ultraviolet-light-induced processing is almost inevitable unless precautions are 
taken, we shall consider the point here. 
Light of wavelengths less than 340 nm cannot induce degradation of cellulose. 
Hence, u-v absorbers are used as photo initiators. However, certain dyes and 
compounds. such as zinc oxide and titanium dioxide, are capable of absorbing 
light in the near ultra-violet or visible part of the spectrum and use this energy to 
induce the degradation of cellulose. One may therefore consider photo-tendering 
a common phenomenon in many composite systems. The more general problem 
of photosensitized processes in polymer chemistry has already been exhaustively 
treated319) and will not be covered further. 
The photoinitiated tendering of cellulose by vat dyes has been recognized for 
many years320-.329). The anthraquinone vat dye (AQ) is photosensitized byexpo-
sure to ultraviolet or visible light forming an excited dye molecule. This excited 
dye molecule may then proceed to create radical sites in the· parent cellulose sub-
strate containing the (AQ) dye and provide a route to graft copolymerization. The 
mechanisms which are involved in the absence of, as well as in the presence of, air 
appear to be328): 
128 

3.3. Grafting by low Energy Radiation in the Presence of Sensitizers 
(i) Absence of oxygen 
AO" + hv 
-
AO* (excited dye) 
/OHd 
AO* + Cell=C 
-
'H 
OH 
'b 
I 
AOH + Cell=~ 
(2AOH -
AOH~ + AQ) 
/OH 
Cell=C, 
OH 
/OH 
+ 
MHO _ 
Cell=C 
-
Graft 
'MH' 
I 
/~ 
Cell=C, 
+ 
MH(orSH') -
Cell=C 
+ M'(orS') 
'H 
MH + M' or (5') __ homopolymer 
10H 
Cell=C 
\(MH)~ 
/OH 
+ SH- Cell=C 
+ 
5' 
\(MH)n H 
AQ* + 
MH -
AQH' + 
M' -
homopolymer 
(ii) Presence of atmospheric oxygen: 
AQH' 
+ 
Oz -
HOO' + 
AQ 
/OH 
/OH 
Cell=C, 
+ 
Oz· -
Cell=C 
\00' 
10H 
'OOH 
Cell-\ 
+ 
-Oz+ Cell=C=O + 
00' 
/OH 
/OH 
HzOz 
'OOH 
Cell=C 
+ 
'H 
Cell=C, 
+ 
HzOz 
10H 
+ 
'OH 
Cell=C 
'H 
/OH 
Cell=C, 
+ 
HzO 
MH + 
'OOH 
-
M' 
+ 
HzOz 
-
homopolymer 
MH + 
'OH 
-
homopolymer 
MH 
+ 
'OH 
--.~ HOMH' 
-- homopolymer 
(94) 
(95) 
(95 a) 
(96) 
(97) 
(98) 
(99) 
(100) 
(101) 
(102) 
(103) 
(104) 
(105) 
(106) 
(107) 
(108) 
129 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
d Cellulose 
O' 
~S~ 
eOJS~ 
b 
OH 
e Monomer 
c 
OH 
f Solvent, possible hydrogen donor 
At first sight, it is apparent that the entire process is initiated by step (94). 
Grafting is initiated by (95) and (96). Homopolymerization can be initiated by 
(97-100). Under the conditions reported328) reaction (100) appears to be predo-
minant, since the amount of homopolymer produced is large and not dependent 
on the presence of cellulose. The dye molecule may be regenerated by the bimole-
cular combination of two dye semiquinones. However, the mechanism is more 
complicated in the presence of oxygen, since the number of possible reactions 
increases. The following differences seem to be important when oxygen is 
present; 
1. The amount of dye, AQ, capable of further hydrogen abstraction may be in-
creased by step (101). 
2. The possibilities for initiation of grafting are increased by steps (104) and (105), 
but decreased by step (101). 
3. The number of ways leading to homopolymerization is increased by reactions 
(106-108). 
Figure 30 shows that the amount of grafting in the presence of air is 
twenty percent higher than that in vacuo after a twelve-hour irradiation has been 
exceeded. It lias also been reported328) that the extent of monomer conversion 
was up to three times as great in the presence of air as when carried out in 
vacuo. When air was bubbled through the reaction mixture, both grafting and 
homopolymerization were inhibited. In the mechanism proposed, this would in-
dicate that under these conditions, reactions (102) and (103) predominate and in-
hibit grafting. Homopolymerization is inhibited by a similar mechanism. 
With regard to the attendant photo-tendering reactions, two mechanisms have 
been proposed for the primary events leading to photo-tendering, one based on 
hydrogen abstraction reactions and the other on direct attack by singlet oxygen. 
Davies et a1.330-331) have shown that hydrogen abstraction reactions are 
130 

120 
100 
~ 80 
QJ 
Vl 
Cj 
b 60 
.S 
20 
o 
,,/,," 
/ V 
I /ry 
If 
4 
3.3. Grafting by low Energy Radiation in the Presence of Sensitizers 
/ ~ 
V ,; 
~ ..... ;'-
I 
/ 
// 
/ 
/ 
1 
o in air 
• in vacuum 
8 
12 
16 
20 
Time (h) 
24 
Fig. 30. Effect of irradiation time on amount 
of grafting. Reprinted from Ref. 328), p. 56, 
by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
implicated in phototendering. This observation is supported by the fact that 
grafting can be made to occur during phototendering using active radical sites330). 
The oxygen activation (singlet oxygen) mechanism of phototendering was pro-
posed by Egerton324,332), though until recently this mechanism was without 
realistic corroboration. Work by Griffiths and Hawkins333.334), has now provided 
substantiation for the singlet oxygen mechanisms role as at least one factor in 
the photo-tendering of cellulose. In reality, it is difficult to show unambiguously 
that singlet oxygen will react with cellulose substrates, since almost all efficient 
sensitizers of singlet oxygen are good hydrogen abstractors as well (quinonoid 
vat dyes, heterocyclic cationic dyes, and porphins). It follows that photodegrada-
tion studies with such compounds will produce results which are ambiguous. 
Non-photochemical sources of singlet oxygen must also be suspect, as these sub-
stances are usually contaminated with other oxidizing species which could play 
a definite though uncertain role in the degradation of cellulose. 
Griffiths and Hawkins334), in their search for new, stable, singlet-oxygen quen-
chers that have a minimal tendency to undergo photochemical reduction, obtained 
the compound 
Ph 
OMe 
s~ 
~N 
N~ 
}-s 
OMe 
Ph 
by reductive methylation of Vat Yellow 2 (CI 67300) using zinc and methyl-p-
toluene sulphonate. This product of the reductive methylation is particularly 
resistant to photo-oxidation and is an efficient singlet oxygen generator, though 
the singlet oxygen generation can be suppressed using diazabicyclo [21212]-
octane335). Photodegradation of cellulose films was followed viscometrically by 
131 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
measurement of the intrinsic viscosity of solutions in Cadoxen at 30°C using an 
Ubbelhode, suspended-level viscometer. Samples were irradiated under standard-
ized conditions for various known times, after treatment with the sensitizer. 
Unsensitized controls were used. The levels of degradation with sensitized and 
unsensi.tized regenerated cellulose film were 30 % and 13 % respectively after 
530 hours of irradiation with an 8 W fluorescent lamp. Thus, it can be stated that 
singlet oxygen plays a direct part in the photodegradation 'of cellulose. Griffiths 
and Hawkins conclude, from this and further experimental observations, that it is 
evident that singlet oxygen can cause degradation of cellulose at a rate which is 
a least equal to that of the hydrogen abstraction mechanism. 
Perhaps one should state that the main point from this controversy is the danger 
which may lie in interpreting experimental results, considering any particular 
mechanism to the exclusion of others. It appears quite feasible that photo-tender-
ing reactions involving cellulose operate through both hydrogen abstraction and 
singlet oxygen mechanisms. Indeed, these two ought not to be considered 
sacrosanct since other aspects of photo-tendering may be of importance. 
3.3.2. Photoinitiated Grafting Reactions 
In photoinitiated grafting reactions, a distinct advantage lies in the fact that 
a much lesser extent of degradation occurs than with high energy radiation 
for given levels of grafting. On the whole, graft yields obtained in this way compare 
very favorably with yields obtained using other radical dependent routes. For 
instance, irradiation of cellophane, together with a 20 % aqueous solution of 
acrylamide at 0.01 M concentration of dye for 24 hrs in presence of air, gives a 
weight increase of cellophane on the order of 150%, based on its original 
weight. Under similar conditions, a 45 % solution of acrylonitrile, 45 % of di-
methylformamide, and 10% water leads to a 120% weight increase. Replacing 
about two-thirds of the acrylonitrile by styrene leads to a 365 % weight 
increase. In addition, films of cellulose derivatives, which are soluble in organic 
solutions, can be easily grafted in this system. For example, acrylamide has been 
grafted onto cellulose acetate and ethyl cellulose328). 
Reine and Arthur have successfully grafted methacrylamide onto cotton cellu-
lose using light of 350 nm. This photo initiated grafting was unsensitized336). 
Oxygen acted as an efficient inhibitor. The extent of copolymerization was shown 
to be dependent on the irradiation time and monomer concentration. These 
findings agree well with those of Needles and Walsey, though these researchers 
used a riboflavin sensitized graft polymerization procedure337) and achieved 
significant grafting levels with a range of monomers. Comprehensive studies 
of photoinitiated graft polymerization have been carried out by Kubota et aU8l , 
338-340), who reported on the decay behavior of cellulose radicals generated 
by photoirradiation at room temperature. The characteristics of subsequent 
grafting with methylmethacrylate were also examined. E.s.r. spectra, taken 
of untreated swollen, oximated, and FellI ion-sensitized samples, irradiated 
at room temperature, provided mainly a singlet absorption line with a line width 
of20 to 22 gauss and a g value of2.003. They assert that this spectrum is evidence of 
radical location on the C1 or C4 atoms arising from scission of glucosidic 
132 

3.3. Grafting by low Energy Radiation in the Presence of Sensitizers 
bonds. This assertion is supported by observations made in e.s.r. measurements 
of gamma-irradiated cellulose. 
The decay of these radicals was seen to be accelerated by contact of the samples 
with various solvents340), the activity decreasing in the order, water ~ methanol 
> acetone> dioxane (Fig. 31, upper). On the other hand, the decay of radicals 
by vinyl monomers was shown to decrease in the order, methacrylic acid > methyl 
methacrylate = styrene (Fig. 31, lower). From this work one may speculate that 
since only radicals at the C1 and C4 positions are indicated, as seen in the 
e.s.r. spectra, arising from scission events, the possibility of block copolymer 
formation becomes strong. This could be a significant feature of such irradiation 
procedures and provides the basis of a major difference between high and low 
energy radiation-induced processes. The ability of V.V., pre-irradiated cellulose 
samples to initiate graft polymerization with methyl methacrylate is indicated in 
Table 32. 
Such general observations may be extended to various forms of cellulose when 
grafted with methyl methacrylate. Kubota et al. have studied this point in 
detaiI181.339), using various types of cellulose (untreated samples - adsorbent cot-
ton, sulfite pulp, dissolving pulp, and semichemical pulp; extracted samples -
1 % sodium hydroxide, methanol and an ethanol-benzene mixture as extraction 
solvent; oxidized samples -
periodic acid, sodium hypochlorite, hydrogen 
:0 04 r-\--+----+----+--4 -----4---J.----1 
'c . 
::::J 
1:-
,g 0.2 
--~-+=~~ 
:e 
E 
'" 
.2! 
~ 0.6 f-----v--- "d--·-+----jf----f--==-b.rl 
"" 
0.4 
0.2 f----i---+---+-
10 
20 
30 
Time (min) 
40 
I 
Styrene 
MMA -----
50 
60 
Fig. 31. Effect of various solvents on 
decay of radicals produced by photo-
irradiation. 
The 
Felli 
ion-sensitized· 
sample was irradiated at room tempera-
ture for 30 min in a quartz glass system. 
Reprinted from Ref. 340), p. 2817, by 
courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
133 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
Table 32. Ability of pre-irradiated cellulose to initiate graft 
copolymerization with methyl methacrylate after photo-irra-
diation. Reprinted from Ref.3401, p. 2818 by courtesy of John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Solvent 
Waler 
Methanol 
Acetone 
Dioxane 
Grafting ( %) at various 
pre-irradiation times 
o 
o o o o 
30 min 
20.0 
25.1 
o o 
60 min 
6.9 
4.3 
o 
o 
Graft copolymerization of methyl methacrylate ontt> an 
Felll-ion-sensitized sample carried out at 40 °C for 60 min 
in the system with a 20 % solvent concentration. 
peroxide, and nitrogen dioxide; a reduced sample; an oximated sample; and an 
Felli ion-adsorbing sample) in experiments. It was clearly shown that impurities 
within the sample, as well as the oxidized states, noticeably affected the initiation 
reaction. It was also noted that these factors were especially significant in 
irradiation systems employing a wavelength > 300 nm. However, with sensiti-
zers or light of shorter wavelengths, initiation occurred irrespective of the 
cellulose characteristics. Work carried out by Kubota et al. on aldehyde celluloses 
is covered fully in Chapter 6. 
Davis et al. have carried out a comparison of photosensitized and gamma 
ray-induced graft copolymerization of various monomers onto cellulose341I. 
Low molecular mass alcohols are found to be particularly effective as grafting 
solvents in both systems, especially with styrene (Table 33) and methyl metha-
Table 33. Photosensitized grafting of styrene to cellulose by using simple alcohols as 
solvents. Reprinted from Ref.341), p. 293 by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Monomer Concentration 
%V{V 
20 
40 
60 
80 
90 
Alcohol 
% Graft 
Methanol 
13 
28 
34 
53 
64 
Ethanol 
9 
17 
22 
50 
70 
n-Propanol 
5 
12 
18 
30 
20 
Isopropanol 
< 5 
7 
5 
14 
8 
n-Butanol 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
Isobutanol 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
t-Butanol 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
n-Octanol 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
< 5 
The solutions contained 1% (w/v) of uranyl nitrate and were irradiated for 24 hr, at 
24 em from a 90-W high pressure lamp. 
134 

3.3. Grafting by low Energy Radiation in the Presence of Sensitizers 
crylate. Unfortunately, polyfunctional acrylates, acrylonitrile and acrylic acid 
undergo homopolymerization rather than grafting, whereas vinyl acetate and 
4-vinyl pyridine graft with little competing homopolymerization, although vinyl 
acetate requires an appreciable irradiation time to produce a reasonable grafting 
yield (Table 34). Various sensitizers were used in this work (see Table 35) and a 
comparison was made between quartz and pyrex vessels (see Table 36). The 
sensitizers included uranyl nitrate, anthraquinone-2,6-disulphonic acid sodium 
salt, biacetal, manganese carbonyl, and benzoin ethyl ether. In the absence of a 
sensitizer, no grafting was obtained with the styrene/methanol/cellulose system. 
In order of sensitizing efficiency for a given geometrical arrangement and light 
intensity, we have biacetal > uranyl nirate > benzoin ethyl ether> anthraqui-
none-2,6-disulphonic acid disodium salt > manganese carbonyl. The standard 
irradiation conditions involved solutions of styrene (30% v/v) in methanol 
contained in pyrex tubes with wetted-out cellulose. These were irradiated 
with a high pressure UV lamp at a nominal sensitizer concentration of 
1.0% (WfV). Grafting was carried out on Whatman No 41 filter paper at 21°C. 
Replacement of pyrex containers by silica vessels produced very little difference 
in graft levels, though the slight differences which were observed were toward 
increased grafting. With styrene, a dramatic effect of alcohol chain length, 
(alcohol-styrene-cellulose system), on copolymerization, was observed. Thus, 
there is a progressive decrease in the grafting yield with increasing alcohol chain 
length, copolymerization ceasing with n-butanol. Such results compare favorably 
with those obtained via gamma irradiation. However, the addition of small con-
centrations of higher chain alcohols to the methanol-styrene-cellulose was found 
to sensitize the system toward photoinitiated grafting. An increase in the sensi-
tizer concentration produced an increase in the yield up to a maximum value. 
Table 34. Ultraviolet grafting of acrylic acid, Acrylonitrile, 4-vinyl pyridine, 
and vinyl acetate in methanol to cellulose. Reprinted from Ref.341), p. 292, by 
courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Run Monomer 
No 
I 
acrylic acid 
2 
acrylic acid 
3 
acrylonitrile 
4 
acrylonitrile 
S 
acrylonitrile 
6 
4-vinyl pyridine 
7 
4-vinyl pyridine 
8 
vinyl acetate 
Sensitizer 
uranyl nitrate 
benzoin ethyl ether 
uranyl nitrate 
benzoin ethyl ether 
benzophenone 
uranyl nitrate 
benzoin ethyl ether 
uranyl nitrate 
Time of 
Graft (%) 
Irradiation 
(hr) 
4 
3 
IS.3 
3 
10.6 
3 
IS.8 
3 
10.3 
24 
7.S 
3 
10.1 
3 
11.1 
3 
2.0 (B) 
The conditions used a solution of monomer (30% (v/v» in methanol containing 
sensitizer and cellulose, irradiated 24 cm from a 90-W high pressure ultraviolet 
lamp except run number S, where the monomer concentration was 90 % (v/v). 
(8) Vinyl acetate was studied at many concentrations in the range 1-100% (v/v) 
but graft was always less than the 2.0% level observed with the 30% (v/v) 
monomer concentration. 
135 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
Table 35. Effect of various sensitizers in the ultraviolet 
grafting of styrene in methanol to cellulose. Reprinted 
from Ref.341), p. 289, courtesy of J. Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Run 
Sensitizer 
Distance from 
Graft 
u-v lamp (cm) 
(%) 
I 
none 
24 
0.0 
2 
none 
24 
0.0 (a) 
3 
none 
12 
0.0 (a) 
4 
uranyl nitrate 
24 
3.4 
5 
uranyl nitrate 
12 
10.9 
6 
ADS 
24 
1.8 
7 
ADS 
12 
3.7 
8 
biacetal 
12 
0.0 (a) 
9 
biacetal 
24 
3.8 
10 
biacetal 
12 
11.0 
II 
benzoin 
ethyl ether 
24 
1.4 
12 
benzoin 
ethyl ether 
12 
5.6 
13 
manganese 
carbonyl 
24 
0.9 (a) 
14 
manganese 
carbonyl 
24 
1.5 
Conditions include solutions of styrene (30 % (v/v» 
in methanol contained in pyrex tubes with cellulose, 
irradiated for 3 hours with a 90-W high-pressure ultra-
violet lamp, except runs 13 and 14, where styrene (25 % 
(v/v» solutions were used. 
Sensitizer concentration \ % (w/v) 
ADS ~ anthraquinone-2,6-disulfonic acid, disodium salt. 
(a) ~ denotes that the ultraviolet light was excluded. 
Table 36. Comparison of quartz with pyrex vessels for the ultra-
violet grafting of styrene onto cellulose. Reprinted from Ref.341 ), 
p. 290, by courtesy of J. Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Run No. 
Sensitizer 
Irradiation 
Graft 
Vessel Type 
(%) 
I 
none 
quartz 
0.0 (a) 
2 
none 
quartz 
0.3 
3 
uranyl nitrate 
quartz 
1.6 (a) 
4 
uranyl nitrate 
quartz 
\5.2 
5 
uranyl nitrate 
pyrex 
3.4 
6 
benzoin ethyl ether 
quartz 
0.0 (a) 
7 
benzoin ethyl ether 
quartz 
6.7 
8 
benzoin ethyl ether 
pyrex 
1.4 
Conditions include solutions of styrene (30% (v;v)) in methanol 
irradiated for 3 hr at a distance of 24 em from a 90-W high 
pressure ultraviolet lamp. 
(a) ~ denotes that the ultraviolet light was excluded. 
136 

3.3. Grafting by low Energy Radiation in the Presence of Sensitizers 
Thus, for the methyl methacrylate-methanol-cellulose system with uranyl nitrate 
as the sensitizer, a maximum value of 300 % graft was achieved at a sensitizer con-
centration of 3.0 % (w/v). The grafting level at a sensitizer concentration of 
10% (w/v) was only 36%. 
Davis et al. used the uranyl nitrate system in their proposed mechanism for 
u-v initiated grafting341). The photochemistry of the uranyl ion has been fully 
reviewed and copolymerizations in two reaction sequences dominate: intermole-
cular hydrogen atom abstraction and energy transfer342, 343). In the styrene-metha-
nol-cellulose system, inter-molecular hydrogen abstraction can be used in 
several ways to promote copolymerization. Thus, radicals may be formed in the 
methanol: 
(109) 
(uo2 +)* + CH OH -+ CH 0' + H+ + uO+ 
2 
3 
3 
2 . 
(110) 
With pure methanol, the methoxy radical (CH30') is the principal species form-
ed, while with aqueous methanol, CH20H predominates344). These solvent radi-
cals can then abstract hydrogen atoms from the cellulose trunk polymer to provide 
sites for subsequent grafting. However, the sensitizer may also diffuse into the 
swollen substrate and either directly abstract hydrogen atoms from the substrate 
or bring about main chain cleavage345 ). 
The role of energy transfer reactions in copolymerization reactions of this type 
are more difficult to evaluate. However, their participation in certain polymeriza-
tion reactions involving uranyl cation sensitization has been proposed346, 347). 
No doubt some energy transfer must occur in the grafting process, though the 
level and significance of such a contribution awaits evaluation. 
In a comparison between photochemical grafting and high-energy-radiation-
induced grafting, one major difference concerns the occurrence of Trommsdorff 
effects. Using the styrene-methanol-cellulose system as an example341), with 
gamma irradiation the peak occurs at approximately 30 % (v/v) concentration 
of monomer in methanol, whereas with the analogous ultraviolet radiation 
grafting sequence, the peak occurs with the 80-90 % (v/v) monomer concentration. 
This difference may be associated with the location of active sites within the sub-
strate. With ionizing radiation, sites are randomly located volumetrically through-
out the substrate. A large proportion of these are accessible to the monomer 
solution. A charge-transfer mechanism would apply and grafting would occur 
in confined environments. Although the rates of propagation and termination 
would both be adversely affected by such a situation, that of termination would 
be the more seriously influenced. This is because chain termination would become 
hindered by the viscosity of the localized medium and consequently there would be 
reduced chain mobility. 
In ultraviolet light-sensitized grafting, the active sites will be located at points 
accessible to the sensitizer or at surfaces. Hence, mobility is enhanced relative 
to the high energy counterpart, which would mean that termination is not as 
seriously affected. 
However, the actual mechanism of the grafting process produced by ultraviolet 
137 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
light sensitization is probably quite similar to the mechanism proposed for the 
gamma radiation-induced process. 
The current popularity of radiation-induced grafting processes as a means of 
modifying cellulosics is shown in papers presented at recent A.C.S. conferences. 
Garnett summarized the work carried out by his group on grafting with u-v and 
high energy radiation348); Phillips et aI. presented a detailed account of the inter-
action of radiation with cellulose in the solid state349); and Nakamura and Shimada 
studied the effect of various solvents on the grafting of styrene with y-irradiated 
cellulose350). However, despite the interest shown in radiation-induced grafting 
onto celluloses and other natural and synthetic polymers, there are still several 
problems requiring solution. These have been summarized by Stannett and 
Memetea351 ). 
References 
1. Liepins, R. Stannett, v., Walsh, W. K.: Progr. Polym. Sci. 6, I (1978) 
2. Brobeck Associates, Particle accelerator safety manual, U.S. Dept. of Health, Education 
and Welfare publication, PH-86-67-193 Oct. 1973 
3. Suchecki, S. M.: Text Inds. (1975) P. 91 
4. International Commission on Radiological Units and Measurements, Copenhagen (1953). 
Nucleonics (1954),12, II and Brit. J. Radiology 27, 243 (1954) 
5. International Commission on Radiological Units and Measurements, Geneva (1956). Natl. 
Bureau of Standard (U .S.) Handbook (1957), 62 
6. Boag, J. W. Pilling, F. D., Wilson, T. Brit. J.: Biology 24, 341 (1951) 
7. Laughlin, J. S., Beattie, J. W., Henderson, J., Harvey, R. A.: Amer. J. Roent. 70,2(1953) 
8. McEhinney, J., Zendle, B., Domen, S. J.: Res. Natl. Bureau Standards 56, 9 (1956) 
9. Hochanadel, G. R., Weiss, J.: Proc. Roy. Soc., A 240, 189 (1957) 
10. Lazo, R. M., Dewhurst, H. A., Burton, M. J.: J. Chern. Phys. 22,1370 (1954) 
II. Hochanadel, C. J.: O.R.N.L. 87 (1950) 
12. Weiss, J.: Nucleonics 10,28 (1952) 
13. Hardwick, J. T.: Canad. J. Chern. 30, 17 (1952) 
14. Shekhtman, Y. L.: Dok!. Akad. Nauk. S.S.S.R. 74, 767 (1950) 
15. Goldblith, S. A., Procter, B. E., Hammerle, O. A.: Industr. Eng. Chern. (Indust.) 44, 310 
(1952) 
16. Hartek, P., Dondes, S.: Nucleonics, 14, 66 (1956) 
17. Schulman, J. H., Klick, C. c., Rabin, H.: Nucleonics 13, 30 (1955) 
18. Kreidl, N. J., Blair, G. E.: Nucleonics 14, 56 (1956) 
19. Balestio, F., LeClerc, P., Bonnaud, M. J.: J. Appl. Rad. Isotopes 2,252 (1957) 
20. Fowler, J. F., Day, M. J.: Nucleonics, 13, 52 (1955) 
21. Day, M. J., Stein, G.: Nucleonics, 8,34 (1950) 
22. Henley, E. J.: Nucleonics 12, 62 (1954) 
23. Schuler, R. H., Allen, A. 0.: J. Chern. Phys. 24, 56 (1956) 
24. Miller, N.: In Actions Chimiques et Biologiques des Radiations (A. Haissinsky, ed) Paris: 
Masson 1956 
25. Day, M. J., Brit. J. Radiol.: 29, 358 (1956) 
26. Haybittle, J. L., Saunders, R. D., Swallow, A. J.: J. Chern. Phys. 25,1213 (1956) 
27. Burton, M.: Disc. Faraday Soc. 12, 317 (1952) 
28. Chapiro, A.: Radiation Chemistry of Polymeric Systems New York: Interscience 1962 
29. Weiss, J.: J. Polymer Sci., 29, 425 (1958) 
30. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: J. Polymer Sci. C., 37, 205 (1972) 
30. a Henley, D. Arkiv Chemie, 18, 328 (1961) 
30. b Alexander, P., Black, P. M., Charlesby, A.: Proc. Roy. Soc. Ser. A. (London) 232,31 (1955) 
30. c Alexander, P., Charles by, A., Ross, M.: Proc. Roy. Soc. Ser. A. (London) 223, 392 (1954) 
138 

References 
31. Saeman,1. F., Millett, M. P., Lawton, E. 1.: Ind. Eng. Chern. 44, 2848 (1952) 
32. Burton, M.: Discussions Faraday Soc. 36, 7 (1963) 
33. Phillips, G. 0., Baugh, P., Nature: 198,282 (1963) 
34. Phillips, G. 0.: Discussions Faraday Soc. 36, 281 (1963) 
35. Phillips, G. 0., Blouin, F. A., Arthur, 1. C. Jr.: Nature 202,1328 (1964) 
36. Phillips, G. 0., Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Radiation Res. 23, 527 (1964) 
37. Moore, P. W.: Rev. Pure and Appl. Chern. 20, 139 (1970) 
38. Kobayashi, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. 51, 359 (1961) 
39. Huang, R. Y-M., Immergut, B., Immergut, E. H., Rapson, W. H.: J. Polymer Sci. A. I, 
1257 (1963) 
40. Arthur, J. c., Diagle, D. J.: Textile Res. J. 34, 653 (1964) 
41. Teszler, 0., Rutherford, H. A.: Nud. Eng. Sci. Conf. Chicago, Preprint 48, V. (Amer. Inst. 
Chern. Eng.) 1958 
42. Lawton, J. E., Bellamy, W. D., Hungate, R. E., Bryant, M. P., Hall, E.: Science, II3, 
380 (1951) 
43. Gilfillan, E. S., Linden, L.: Textile Res. J. 27, 87 (1957) 
44. Charlesby, A. J.: J. Polymer Sci. 15,79 (1955),15,263 (1955) 
45. Horio, M., Imamura, R., Mizukami, H.: Bull. Inst. Chern. Res. Kyoto Univ. 41, I, 17 
(1963); through C.A., 60, 9468 
46. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: In Energy Transfer in Radiation Processes (Phillips, G. 0., ed.) Amsterdam: 
Elsevier 1966, P. 29 
47. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Mares, T.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 9, 2581 (1965) 
48. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Mares, T., George, M.: Text. Res. J. 35,1116 (1965) 
49. Sarkar,1. M., Arthur, J. C. Jr., George, M.: Text. Res. J. 38,1145 (1968) 
50. Chidambareswaran, P. K., Sundaram, V., Prakash, J., Verma, N. c., Singh, B. B.: C.T.R.L. 
Publ. No. 25 1971 also J. Polymer Sci. (A-12) 9, 2651 (1971) 
51. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: European Polymer. J., 8, 747 (1972) 
52. Singh, S., Hinojosa, 0., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci., /4,1591 (1970) 
53. Campbell, D., Williams, J. L., Stannett, V. T.: J. Polymer Sci. (A-I) 7, 429 (1969) 
54. Chapiro, A.: Radiat. Phys. Chems., 9, 55 (1977) 
55. Ang. C. H., Davis, N. P., Garnett, J. L., Naguyen, T. Y.: Int. J. Radiat. Phys. Chern. 4~, 831 
(1977) 
56. Tabata, Y.: Radiat. Phys. Chern., 9, 31 (1977) 
57. WinogradofT, N. N.: Nature 165, 72 (1950) 
58. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Macromol. Sci. Chern. A. 4,1057 (1970) 
59. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 28,198 (1958) 
60. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Paper presented at the 136th National Meeting of the Amer. 
Chern. Soc., Atlantic City, N.Y. Sept. 13th-18th 1959 
61. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Blouin, F. A., Demint, R. J.: Am. DystufT Reptr. 49, 383 (1960) 
62. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 16, 1017 (1972) 
63. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr., Orr, R. S., Ott, V. J.: Textile Res. J. 31, 597 (1961) 
64. Gilfillan, E. S., Linden, L.: Textile Res. J. 27, 87 (1957) 
65. Pan, H. P., Proctor, &. E., Goldblith, S. A., Morgan, H. M., Naar, R. Z.: TextileRes. J. 29, 
415 (1959) 
66. Leavitt, F. C.: J. Polymer Sci., 45, ?36 (1960) 
67. Mares, T., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Polymer Sci. (B) 7, 419 (1969) 
68. Johanson, F., Back, E. L.: Svensk Pappstid: 69, 199 (1966) 
69. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J.: Textile Res. J. 32, 108 (1962) 
70. Porter, B. P., Tripp, V. W., de Gruy, 1. V., Rollins, M. L.: Textile, Res. J. 30, 510 (1960) 
71. Guthrie, J. T., Percival, J.: Polymer 18, 531 (1977) 
72. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Hinojosa, 0.: J. Polymer &i., C. 36, 53 (1971) 
73. Panchenkov, G. M., Kaushanski, D. A., Gel'tser, G. A.: Dokl. Akad. Nauk S.S.S.R. 16, 
42 (1972) 
74. Baugh, P. J., Hinojosa, 0., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. II, 1139 (1967) 
75. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Hinojosa, 0., Tripp, V. W.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 13, 1497 (1969) 
76. Lawton, E. J., Bellamy, W. D., Hungate, R. E., Bryant, M. P., Hall, E.: Science 113, 380 
(1951) 
139 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
77. Demint, R. 1., Arthur J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 29, 276 (1959) 
78. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Advances in Chern. Series No. 91 (1969) P. 574 
79. Ueno, T., Yamauchi, T., Imamura, R.: Kami Pa Gi-yoshi 25, 242 (1971) 
80. Imamura, R., Ueno, T., Murakami, K.: Bull. Inst. Chern. Res. Kyoto Univ. 50, 51 (1972) 
81. Imamura, R., Ueno, T.: Kami Pa Gi-yoshi 25,121 (1971) 
82. Ueno, T. Murakami, M., Imamura, R.: Kami Pa. Gi-yoshi 26,164 (1972) 
83. Irklei, V. M., Alexsandrovich, I. F., Inozemtseva, S. I., Goldinets, N. L., Nosov, V. E.: 
Khim. Volokna 2,40 (1978) 
84. Kunz, N. D., Grainer, J. L., Kelly, J. L.: Nuc!. Techno!. 16, 556 (1972) 
85. Florin, R. E., Wall, L. A.: J. Polymer Sci. 1, 1163 (1963) 
86. Abraham, R. J., Whiffen, D. H.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 54, 1291 (1958) 
87. Park, G. S., Ward, J. C.: Nature 202,389 (1964) 
88. Guthrie, J. T.: Polymer 16,134 (1975) 
89. Guthrie, J. T.: Ph. D. Thesis, Univ. of Salford U.K. 1971 
90. Glegg, R. F., Kertesz, Z. I.: J. Polymer Sci. 26, 289 (1957) 
91. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Blouin, F. A.: Textile Res. J. 34, 733 (1964) 
92. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Kaji, K.: J. Polymer Sci., C. 37, I (1972) 
93. Urquhart, A. R.: In Recent Advances in the Chemistry of Cellulose and Starch (J. Honeyman, 
ed.) New York: Interscience 1959, P. 240 
94. Mann, J., Marrinan, H. J.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 52, 481 (1956) 
95. King, T., Quellet, c.: Can. J. Res. 14 B, 444 (1936). 
96. Valentine, L.: J. Polymer Sci. 27, 313 (1958) 
97. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L., Martin, E. c., Phuoc, D. H.: J. Polymer Sci. C. 37, 57 (1972) 
98. Dilli, S., Ernst, I. T., Garnett, J. L.: Australian 1. Chern. 20, 911 (1967) 
99. Rosenberg, B.: J. Chern. Phys. 36, 816 (1962) 
100. Calkins, C. R.: Tappi. 33, 278 (1950) 
101. Dakin, T. W.: Natl. Res. Council, Div. of Eng. Ind. Res., Ann. Rep. 92 (1950) 
102. Arthur, J. c., Jr.: in Cellulose and Cellulose Derivatives (Bikales, N. M. and Segal, L. eds.), 
Vol. 5. New York: Wiley-Interscience 1971, P. 937 
103. Hinojosa, 0., Makamura, Y., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37,27 (1972) 
104. Howsmon, J. A., Sission, S. W.: In Cellulose and Cellulose Derivatives (Ott, E., Spurlin, H. M., 
Graffiin, M. W. eds.) 2nd Edn., Part I, New York: Interscience 1954, P. 231 
105. Nakamura, Y., Hinojosa, 0., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: 1. Polymer Sci., <,:. 37, 47 (1972) 
106. Collins, M. A.: Nature, 193,1061 (1962) 
107. Bailey, A. J., Barker, S. A., Brimacombe, J. S., Pooley, D., Spence, D. H.: Nature, 190,259 
(1961) 
108. Ueda, H., Kuri, Z., Shida, S.: J. Chern. Phys., 35, 2145 (1961) 
109. Williams, D., Geusic, J. D., Wolfrom, M. L., McCabe, L. J.: Proc. Nat!. Acad. Sci., U.S. 44, 
1128 (1958) 
110. Williams, D., Schmidt, B., Wolfrom, M. L., Michelakis, A., McCabe, L. J.: Proc. Nat'!. Acad. 
Sci., U.S. 45,1744 (1959) 
Ill. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Mares, T., Hinojosa, 0.: Textive Res. J. 36, 630 (1966) 
112. Neubacher, H.: Biophysic, 6, 161 (1969) 
113. Kesting, R. E., Stan nett, V.: Makromol Chern. 55, I (1962) 
114. Okamura, S., Iwasaki, T., Kobayashi, Y., Hayashi, K.: Paper presented at the International 
Atomic Energy Conference on the Application of Large Radiation Sources in Industry 
Specially to Chemical Processes. Warsaw, Poland Sept. 1959 
115. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Akiyama, Y.: Doitai to Hoshasen 3,35 (1960) 
116. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Kugo,E.: Doitai to Hoshasen 21, 297 (1959). 
117. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Kugo, E.: Doitai to Hoshasen 2, 306 (1959) 
118. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Kugo E.: Doitai to Hoshasen 2, 316 (1959) 
119. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Uchida, M., Kugo, E.: Doitai to Hoshasen 2,581 (1959) 
120. Chapiro, A., Stannett, V.: Intern. J. App!. Radiation Isotopes S, 164 (1960) 
121. Shin ohara, Y.: Kobunshi Kagaku 17, 197 (1960) 
122. Kobayashi, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. 51,359 (1961) 
123. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J., McSherry, W. F., Jugens, J. F.: Text. Research J. 29, 759 
(1959) 
140 

References 
124. Usmanov, Kh. U., Aikhodzhaev, B. I., Azizov, V.O.: Vysokomolekulyarnye Soedineniya 1, 
1570 (1959) 
125. Hendricks, R. W.: Canad. Pat 644, 643 
126. Arthur, 1. C. Jr., Blouin, F. A.: Am. Dyestuff Reptr. 51, 1024 (1962) 
127. Arthur, 1. C. Jr., Blouin, F. A.: U.S. At. Energy Document, TID-7643, 319 (1962) 
128. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J.: Text. Research J., 30,505 (1960) 
129. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J.: Text. Research J. 31, 988 (1961) 
130. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J.: U.S. Pat. 3, \09,798 (1963) 
131. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J.: U.S. Pat. 3,157,460 (1964) 
132. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Grant, J. N.: Text Research J. 36, 934 (1966) 
133. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Markezich, A. R., McSherry, W. F.: Text. Research J. 33, 896 (1963) 
134. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Text. Research J. 33, 727 (1963) 
135. Blouin, F. A., Morriss, N. J., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Text. Research J. 36, 309 (1966) 
136. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Blouin, F. A.: J. Appl. Polymer Sci. 8, 2813 (1964) 
137. Demint, R. J., Arthur, J. C. Jr., McSherry, W. F.: Text Research J. 31, 821 (1961) 
138. Ramalingham, K. V., Werezak, G. N., Hodgkin, J. W.: J. Polymer Sci. (C) 2,153 (1963) 
139. Wellons, J. D., Stannett, V.: J. Polymer Sci. (A) 3, 847 (1965) 
140. Putman, E. S.: J. Polymer Sci. (C) 2, 377 (1963) 
141. Majumdar, S. K., Rapson, W. H.: Text. Res. J. 34, \007 (1964) 
142. Rapson, W. H.: Amer. Chern. Soc. 138th Meeting. New York, N.Y. Sept. 14th 1960 
143. Huang, R. Y-M.: J. Polymer Sci. 51, 368 (1961) 
144. Huang, R. Y-M., Rapson, W. H.: J. Polymer Sci., C 2,169 (1963) 
145. Kenaga, D. L., Fennessey, J. P., Stannett, V. T.: Forest Prod. J. 12,161 (1962) 
146. Demint, R. J., Arthur, J. C. Jr., Markezich, A. R., McSherry, W. F.: Textile Res. J. 32, 918 
(1962) 
147. Odian, G., Kruse, R. L., Kho, J. H.: J. Polymer Sci. (A-I) 9, 71 (1971) 
148. Detrick, C. A., Kelly, J. L.: Nucl. Appl. Technol. 7,472 (1969) 
149. Guthrie, J. T., Haq, Z.: Polymer 15,133 (1974) 
ISO. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: Austral. J. Chern. 23, 1767 (1970) 
lSI. Sakurada, I.: Cellulose Chern. Technol., 6,35 (1972) 
152. Vlagiv, I., Petrus, I., Niculescu, E.: Rev. Roum. Chim. 15, \077 (1970) 
153. Sakurada, I., Ikada, Y., Nishizaki, Y.: J. Polymer Sci., C 37, 265 (1972) 
154. Dilh, S. et al.: J. Macromol. Sci. (A) 6,719 (1972) 
ISS. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: Austral. J. Chern. 21, 1827 (1968) 
156. Garnett, J. L., Martin, E. c.: J. Macromol. Sci., A. 4,1193 (1970) 
157. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: Austral. J. Chern. 23, 1163 (1970) 
158. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: Austral. J. Chern. 21, 397 (1968) 
159. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. Il, 839 (1967) 
160. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 11,859 (1967) 
161. Byrne, G. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 14,3093 (1970) 
162. Mares, T., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Polymer Sci. C. 37, 349 (1972) 
163. Das Gupta, S.: J. Polymer Sci. C. 37, 333 (1972) 
164. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: Int. Symp. on Macromolecules, Preprints Vol. I, 
Paper 11,26 Helsinki 1972 
165. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: Polymer 18, 521 (1977) 
166. Campbell, D., Williams, J. L., Stan nett, V. T.: J. Polymer. Sci., A. 17,429 (1969) 
167. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L., Phuoc, D. H.: J. Polymer Sci., B. 11,711 (1973) 
168. Garnett, J. L., Phuoc, D. H., Airey, P. L., Sangster, D. F.: Austral. J. Chern. 29, 1459 
(1976) 
169. Garnett, J. L., Phuoc, D. H.: J. Macromol. Sci. Chern., A. 10,709 (1976) 
170. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: Austral. J. Chern. 24, 981 (1971) 
171. Sakurada, I.: Chern. Techol. 2, 376 (1972) 
172. Matsuzaki, K., Nakamura, S., Shindo, S.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 61, 1339 (1972) 
173. Yasukawa, T., Sasaki, Y., Murakami, K.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. (A-I) 11, 2547 (1973) 
174. Hopfenberg, H. B., Stan nett, V. T., Kimura, F., Rigney, P. T.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. Polym. 
Symp. 13, 139 (1970) 
141 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
175. Borisevich, V. A., Rodzyalovskaya, L. A., Pinchuk, V. M.: Westi-Akad Navuk B. S.S.R. 
Ser. Khim. Navuk 13, 138 (1976); through C.A. 85, 79478 (1976) 
176. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Macromol. Sci. Chern. A. 10,653 (1976) 
177. Stannett, V. T., Williams, J. L.: J. Macromol. Sci. Chern. A. 10,637 (1976) 
178. Davis, N. P., Garnett, J. L., Urquhart, R. G.: J. Polymer Sci. B 14,537 (1976) 
179. Davis, N. P., Garnett, J. L., Urquhart, R. G.: J. Polymer. Sci. C 55,287 (1976) 
180. Murakami, K., Sasaki, Y., Yasukawa, T.: J. Polymer Sci. 13, 17 (1975) 
181. Kubota H., Ogiwara, Y., Yamoto, H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 18,887 (1974) 
182. Bentvelzen, J. M., Kimura-Teh, F., Hopfenberg, H. B., Stannett, V. T.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
17, 809 (1973) 
183. Kubota, H., Murata, Y., Ogiwara, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. 11, 485 (1973) 
184. Vandana, I. Ya., Zoldners, J., Surna, J.: Khim. Drev. 4, 39 (1976) 
185. Zoldners, Z., Paelglitis, D., Surna, J.: Khim Drev 5,115 (1976) 
186. Zoldners, J., Pauls, R., Surna, J.: Khim Drev. 4, 43 (1976) 
187. Yoneho, T.: Kasen Geppo 29, 60 (1976) 
188. Ley, F. J.: J. Soc. Cosmet. Chern. 27, 483 (1976) 
189. Yasakawa, T., Sasaki, Y., Murakami, K.: J. Polymer Sci. (Chern.) 13, 7 (1975) 
190. Gamova, I. A., Natkina, L. N., Shiryaeva, G. V., Prishcepa, N. D.: Isv. Uchebn. Zaed. 
Lesn. Zh. 19, 112 (1976) 
191. Charlesby, A.: Int. J. Radiat. Phys. Chern. 9, 17 (1977) 
192. Kalontarov, I. Ya., Makhkamov, K. M., In, O. A., Smirnov, R. F.: Dokl. Akad. Nauk. Tadzh. 
S.S.R. 20, 34 (1977); through CA 87,69992 (1977) 
193. Ermolenki, I. N.: Vysokomol. Soed. B. 17,538 (1975) 
194. Cunanan, S. A., Bunoan, L. S., Verceluz, F. P., Azucena, E. A.: Phillippine A.E.C. 
Report 1976 PAEC (D)-76032. Available through INIS Atomindex 8. Abst. No. 299354 
(1977) 
195. Usmanov, Kh., Yunusov, M., Azizov, U., Sadykov, M.: Radiats. Graftpolimerizatsiya 
26-32 (1976) 
196. Azizov, U., Mirkamilov, I., Usmanov, Kh.: Radiats. Graftpolimerizatstya 42-47 (1976) 
197. Hinojosa, 0., A.C.S. Symp. Ser. 49, 46 (1977) 
198. Gorskii, G. M., Zhonina, T. A.: Tsellyul., Bum Karton 11,7 (1977) 
199. Meleshevich, A. P., Vishev, Yu. V., Gordienko, L. L., Richko, N. T., Yurganova, L. G., 
Voitsekhovskii, R. V.: Khim. Technol. (Kiev) 4,59 (1977) 
200. Needles, H. L.: 1. Consum. Prod. Flammability. 4,156 (1977) 
201. Stannett, V. T., Walsh, W. K., Bittencourt, E., Liepens, R., Surles, 1. R.: Appl. Polym. Symp. 
31,201 (1977) 
202. Lebedev, V. T., Suminov, S. I., Voronina, T. A.: Plast. Massy. 7,66 (1977) 
203. Dziedziela, W., Wiesielowska, R.: Radiats. Graftpolymerizatsiya, 69 (1976) 
204. Onetiu, M., Bacalu, M., Belcetianu, N.: Radiats. Graftpolimerizatsiya 301 (1976) 
205. Mirkamilova, G., Sadykov, M., Azizov, U. A., Usmanov, Kh. U.: Radiats. Graftpolimeri-
zatsiya 58 (1976) 
206. Pesek, M., larkovsky, 1., Pultar, F.: Radiats. Graftpolimerizatsiya 208 (1976) 
207. AI-Siddique, F. R., Zaman. M. A.: Nucl. Sci. Appl. Ser. B 9, 80 (1976) 
208. Onetiu, M., Baicon, R., Andreikovich, G.: Radiats. Graftpolimerizatsiya 293 (1976) 
209. Das Gupta, S.: Can. Spect. 10,9 (1965) 
210. Sakurada, I., Okada, N., Hayatama, N.: AEC-tr-6316 2, 84 (1960) 
211. Das Gupta, S.: Amer. Dyestuff Reptr. 55, 211 (1966) 
212. Sakurada, I., Okada, N., Kimura, F., Minegawa, N.: AEC-tr-6372 3, 103 (1961) 
213. Usmanov, Kh. U., Aikhodzhaev, B. I., Azizov, U.: AEC-tr-6398 I, 386 (1961) 
214. Sakurada, I., Sakaguchi, Y.: Sen-i-Gakkaishi 18, 834 (1962) 
215. Das Gupta, S.: Can. Textile 1.18,57 (1964) 
216. Sakura, I., Okada, K., Akiyama, Y.: AEC-tr-6231 1, 102 (1958-1959) 
217. Huang, R. Y-M., Immergut, B., Immergut, H. E., Rapson, W. H.: 1. Polymer Sci. A 1, 1257 
(1963) 
218. Ekstrom, A., Garnett, 1. L.: 1. Amer. Chern. Soc. 86, 5028 (1964) 
219. Ekstrom, A., Garnett, J. L.: 1. Phys. Chern. 70,324 (1966) 
220. Sakurada, I., Okada, N., Kimura, F., Minegawa, N.: AEC-tr-6372 3,109 (1961) 
142 

References 
221. Sakurada, I., Okada, N., Kimura, F.: Sen-i-Gakkaishi 18,692 (1962) 
222. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Hatakeyama, S., Kimura, F.: 1. Polymer Sci. C 4, 1233 (1964) 
223. Moore, P. W.: AAECjTM540 (1970) 
224. Staudinger, H., Eicher, T.: Makromol. Chern. 10,254 (1953) 
225. Krlissig, H., Schrott, E.: Makromo!. Chern. 13, 179 (1954) 
226. Miyama, H.: J. Chern. Soc. Japan (Pure Chern. Sect.) 76,658 (1955) 
227. Miyama, H.: Bull. Chern. Soc. Japan 2, 711 (1956) 
228. Chen, C. S. H., Stamm, R. F.: J. Polymer Sci. 58, 369 (1962) 
229. Chapiro, A.: J. Polymer Sci. 29, 321 (1958) 
230. Sakurada, I., Okada, N., Hatakeyama, N.: AEC-tr-6372 3,83 (1961) 
231. Amamiya, A., Ogawa, S.: AEC-tr-6372 3, 593 (1961) 
232. Sakurada, I., Okada, N., Minegawa, N.: AEC-tr-6372 3, 117 (1961) 
233. Immergut, E. H.: In Enc\opaedia of Polymer Science and Technology, (Mark, H. E., 
Gaylord, N. G., Bikales, N. M., eds.) Vo!. 3, Interscience, New York, N.Y. 91965, 
P.242 
234. Selected Constants-Radiolytic Yields, Tables des Constantes Vo!' 13, I.U.P.A.C., New York: 
1963 Pergamon Press 
235. Chapiro, A.: Radiation Chemistry of Polymeric Systems, New York: Interscience Wiley 
1962, P. 566 
236. Centre Nationale de la Recherche Scientifique, British Pat. 809, 838 (1959) 
237. Dupont de Nemours and Company, British Pat. 845, 890 (1960) 
238. Smith, R. R.: (to Box Plastics, Ltd.) British Pat. 862, 610 (1961) 
239. Smith, R. R.: (to Box Plastics, Ltd.) British Pat. 863, 211 (1961) 
240. Chapiro, A.: J. Polymer Sci. 23, 377 (1957) 
241. Chapiro, A.: J. Polymer Sci. 34, 439 (1959) 
242. Ballantine, S., Glines, A., Adler, G., Metz, D. J.: J. Polymer Sci. 34,419 (1959) 
243. Shinohara, Y., Tomioka, K.: J. Polymer Sci. 44,195 (1960) 
244. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Kimura, F., Minakawa, N.: Ann. Rept. Japanese Assoc. Radiat. 
Chern. 2, 62 (1960) 
245. Atlas, S. M., Mark, H.: Cellulose Chern. Techno!. 3, 325 (1969) 
246. Kesting, R. E., Stan nett, V. T.: Makromol Chern. 55, I (1962) 
247. Battaerd, H. A. J., Tregear, G. W.: Graft Copolymers, New York: Interscience 1967 
248. Bryant, G. M., Walker, A. T.: Textile Res. J. 29, 211 (1959) 
249. Okada, T., Kohdera, K., Sakurada, I.: Ann. Rept. Osaka Lab. Radiat. Chern. 2, 69 (1969) 
250. Majumdar, S. K., Rapson, W. H.: Textile Res. J. 34,1015 (1964) 
251. Kesting, R. E., Stan nett, V. T.: Makromol. Chern. 65, 248 (1963) 
252. Imrisova, D., Maryska, S.: J. App!. Polym. Sci., 12, 2007 (1968) 
253. Imrisova, D., Maryska, S.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 11, 901 (1967) 
254. Nakamura, Y., Hinojosa, 0., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 13,2633 (1969) 
255. Nakamura, Y., Hinojosa, 0., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 14, 789 (1970) 
256. Nakamura, Y., Hinojosa, 0., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 15, 391 (1971) 
257. Hinojosa, 0., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Polymer Sci. B 10,161 (1972) 
258. Abraham, R. J., Melville, H. W., Overnall, D. W., Whiffen, D. H.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 
54, 1\33(1958) 
259. Harris, J. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Polymer Sci. B 14,3113 (1970) 
260. Okada, T., Kohdera, K., Sakurada, I.: Jap. Atom. Energy Res. Inst. Osaka Rep. JAERI-5022, 
P.59 
261. Reine, A. H., Arthur, J. C. Jr., George, M.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 16, 1893 (1972) 
262. Ishanov, M. M., Nikonovich, G. V., Usmanov, Kh. U.: Vysokomol Soed. B 11,763 (1969) 
263. Yunusov, M. Yu., Azizov, U. A.: Uzb. Khim. Zh. 5, 64 (1971) 
264. Harris, J. A., Carra, J. H., DeGruy, I. V., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 42, 14 (1972) 
265. Yul'chibaeva, S. G., Yusupalaev, R. M., Usmanov, Kh. U.: Uzb. Khim. Zh. 7,60 (1973) 
266. Yusupalaev, R. M.: Nauch. Trudy Tashkent, Univ., 403, 75 (1971) 
267. Goynes, W. R., Harris, J. A.: J. Polymer Sci., C 37, 277 (1972) 
268. Sakurada, I.: Chern. Techno!. 2, 376 (1972) 
269. Matsuzaki, K., Kanai, T., Morita, N.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 16, 15 (1972) 
143 

3. Radiation-Induced Grafting onto Cellulosics 
270. Williams, J. L., Woods, D. K., Stannett, V. T., Roldan, L. G., Sello, S. B., Stevens, C. V.: 
Textile Res. J. 43, 205 (1973) 
271. Matsuzaki, K., Nakamura, S., Shindo, S.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 16, 1339 (1972) 
272. Yasukawa, T., Sasaki, Y., Murakami, K.: J. Polymer Sci. (A-I) II, 2547 (1973) 
273. Hayakawa, K., Yamakita, H., Kawase, K.: J. Polymer Sci. (A-I), 8, 1227 (1970) 
274. Chapiro, A., Foex, M., Jendrychowska-Bonamour, A. M.: Europ. Polymer J. 13,637 (1977) 
275. Kuri, Z., Fujiwara, Y., Veda, 1-1., Shida, S.: J. Chern. Phys. 33,1884 (1960) 
276. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L.: J. Polymer Sci. (A-I) 4,2323 (1966) 
277. McClellan, W. R., Hoehn, H. H., Cripps, H. M., Muetterties, E. L., Howk, B. W.: J. Amer. 
Chern. Soc. 83, 1601 (1961) 
278. Garnett, J. L., Sollich-Baumgartner, W. A.: Adv. in Catalysis 16,95 (1966) 
279. Garnett, J. L., Sollich-Baumgartner, W. A.: J. Phys. Chern. 69, 1850 (1965) 
280. Chen, C. S. H., Stamm, R. F.: J. Polymer Sci. 58, 369 (1962) 
281. Arifov, V. A., Klein, G. A., Filipov, A. N., Amirova, N. Yu., Adikhodzhaeva, G. A., Okun, 
J. S., Osipova, L. K.: Izv. Akad. Nauk. Vzbek. SSR. Ser. F12. Mat. Nauk. No.4, 59 (1960); 
Through C.A. 55, 7848 (1961) 
282. Okamura, S., Iwasaki, T., Kobayashi, Y., Hayashi, K.: I.A.E.A. Conf. Appl. Large Radiation 
Sources Ind. Spec. Chern. Proc. Warsaw (1959) 
283. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Mares, T.: V.S. Pat., 3, 443, 879 (1969); Abdel-Hay, F. I., Guthrie, J. T., 
Ryder, M.: Polymer Bulletin I, 509 (1979) 
284. Choudhuri, B. K.: Labdev, Part A (Kanpur, India) 6,26 (1968) 
285. Zhbankov, R. G., Zhdanovskii, V. Z., Kiselevskii, L. I., Snopko, V. N., Firsov, S. P.: 
Zh. Prikl. Spektrosk. 20, 317 (1974) 
286. Harris, J. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr., Carra, J. H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 22, 905 (1978) 
287. Ogiwara, Y., Kubota, H.: J. Polymer Sci., Chern. II, 3243 (1973) 
288. Baugh, P. J., Phillips, G. 0., Worthington, N. J.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 85, 241 (1969) 
289. Baugh, P. J., Phillips, G. 0., Worthington, N. J.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 86, 19 (1970) 
290. Virnik, R. B., Ershov, Y. A.: Khim Tekhnol. Proizvod. Tsellyul., 333 (1971) 
291. Kudrna, S. K.: Vysokomol. Soedin. 7, 557 (1965) 
292. Kudrna, S. K.: Vysokomol. Soedin. 8,1823 (1966) 
293. Kudrna, S. K.: Vysokomol. Soedin. 8,1828 (1966) 
294. Daruwalla, E. H., Moonim, S. M., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 45, 592 (1972) 
295. Akhmedova, Kh. R., Tulyaganov, M. M., Gafurov, T. G., Vsmanov, Kh. V.: Dok\. 
Akad. Nauk. Vzb. SSR. 28, 24 (1971) 
296. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Hinojosa, 0.: App\. Polym. Symp. 26, 147 (1975) 
297. Bertoniere, N., Frankling, W. E., Rowland, S. P.: J. App\. Polym. Sci. 15, 1743 (1971) 
298. Bertoniere, N., Franklin, W. E., Rowland, S. P.: Textile Res. J. 1,41 (1971) 
299. Semchuk, R. D., Gordinskii, B. Y.: Nov. Poligr. Tekh. 73 (1971) 
300. Portnoy, N. A., Nelson, M. c., Margavio, M. F., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 44, 449 
(1974) 
301. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Macromol. Sci. Chern. A. 10, 653 (1976) 
302. Cremonesi, P., Focher, B., D'Angiuro, L.: Chim. Ind. (Milan) 54,871 (1972) 
303. Focher, B., D'Angiuro, L., Cremonesi, P.: Cell. Chern. Technol. 6, 277 (1972) 
304. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Sen'i To Kogyo 4, 212 (1971) 
305. Ichimura, S.: Japan. Pat. 72, 12560 (1968) 
306. Lagache, M., Chateau, M., Pomey, J.: Compte. Rendu 251, 2353 (1960) 
307. Morimoto, S., Inoshita, K., Toda, T., Masai, N.: Japan. Pat. 7876 (1963) 
308. Morimoto, S., Okada, T., Toda, T., Nakagawa, H.: Japan. Pat. 13, 881 (1962) 
309. Naito, M., Sakiyama, S., Kubota, M.: Japan. Pat. 7900 (1962) 
3\0. Oster, G.: Brit. Pat. 856, 884 (1960) 
311. Reine, A. H., Arthur, J. C. Jr., Portnoy, N. A.: V.S. Pat. 3, 926, 555 (1975) 
312. Reine, A. H., Hinojosa, 0., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 17, 3337 (1973) 
313. Reine, A. H., Portnoy, N. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 43, 638 (1973) 
314. Simionescu, C., Feldman, D., Oprea, S.: Rev. Roum. Chim. 9, 65 (1964) 
315. Tonami, H., Watamoto, H.: Nippon Kagaku Kaischi 4, 789 (1974) 
316. Symposium of Photochemistry in Relation to Textiles, J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 65, 585 
(1949) 
144 

References 
317. Bridge, N. K.: 1. Soc. Dyers Colourists 76, 484 (1960) 
318. Bamford, C. H., Dewar, M. 1. S.: 1. Soc. Dyers Colourists 65, 674 (1949) 
319. Rabek, 1. F.: Photochem. and Photo bioI. 7, 5 (1968); also G. Scott in 'Singlet Oxygen' 
(Randby, B. and Rabek, J. F. eds.) New York: 1. Wiley and Sons Inc. 1978, P. 230 
320. Egerton, G. S.: Niature 204, 1153 (1964) 
321. Egerton, G. S.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 64, 659 (1948) 
322. Egerton, G. S.: J. Textile Inst. 39, T305 (1948) 
323. Egerton, G. S.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 63,161 (1947) 
324. Egerton, G. S.: Amer. Dyestuff Reptr. 36, 561 (1947) 
325. Phillips, G. 0., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J., 34, 47 (1964) 
326. Egerton, G. S., Assaad, H. E. N., Uffindell, N. D.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 84,220 (1968) 
327. Geacintov, N., Stannett, V. T., Abrahamson, E. W.: Makromol. Chern. 36, 52 (1959) 
328. Geacintov, N., Stannett, V. T., Abrahamson, E. W., Hermans, J. J.: J. Appl. Polymer Sci. 3, 
54 (1960); Allen, N. S., McKellar, J. F.: In Developments in Polymer Photochemistry 
(Allen, N. S., ed.) Appl. Sci. Publ. Ltd., London 1980, P. 191 
329. Stannett, V. T., Hermans, J. J., Geacintov,. N.: 138th Meeting, Amer. Chern. Soc., Cell. 
Division New York (1960) 
330. Davies, A. K., Gee, G. A., McKellar, J. F., Phillips, G. 0.: Chemistry and Industry 431 
(1973) 
331. Davies, A. K., Ford, R., Gee, G. A., McKellar, J. F., Phillips, G. 0.: Chern. Commun. 
373 (1972) 
332. Egerton, G. S.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 65,679,764 (1949) 
333. Griffiths, J., Hawkins, C.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 89,173 (1973) 
334. Griffiths, J., Hawkins, c.: Polymer 17, 1113 (1976); Griffiths, J.: In Developments in Polymer 
Photochemistry (Allen, N.S., ed.) Appl. Sci. Publ. Ltd., London 1980. P. 145 
335. Carlsson, D. J., Mendenhall, G. D., Suprunchuk, T., Wiles, D. M.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 
94, 8960 (1972) 
336. Reine, A. H., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 42,155 (1972) 
337. Needles, H. L., Walsey, W. L.: Textile Res. J. 39, 97 (1969) 
338. Ogiwara, Y., Hayase, K., Kubota, H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 23, I (1979) 
339. Kubota, H., Murata, Y., Ogiwara, Y.: J. Polymer Sci., Chern. 11,485 (1973); Hon, D. N-S., 
J. Polymer Sci., Chern. 17,441 (1979) 
340. Kubota, H., Ogiwara, Y., Matsuzaki, K.: J. Polymer Sci., Chern. 12,2809 (1974); Arthur, 
J. C. Jr.: In Developments in Polymer Photochemistry (Allen, N. S., ed.) Appl. Sci. Publ. 
Ltd., London 1980, P. 69 
341. Davis, N. P., Garnett, J. L., Urquhart, R. G.: J. Polymer Sci. C 55, 287 (1976) 
342. Burrows, H. D., Kemp, T. J.: Chern. Rev. 3,139 (1974) 
343. Naite, N., Sakiyama, S., Kubota, M.: Jap. Pat. 7900 (1962) 
344. Ledwith, A., Russell, R. J., Sutcliffe, L. H.: Proc. Roy. Soc. (London) A 332,151 (1973) 
345. Greatorex, D., Hill, R. J., Kemp, T. J., Stone, T. J.: J. Chern. Soc. Faraday I 68, 2059 (1972) 
346. Venkatarao, K., Santappa, M.: J. Polymer Sci. (A-I) 8,1785 (1970) 
347. Venkatarao, K., Santappa, M.: J. Polymer Sci. (A-I) 8,3429 (1970) 
348. Garnett, J. L.: In Cellulose Chemistry and Technology (Arthur, J. C. Jr., ed.) A.C.S. Symp. 
Series No. 48 A.C.S. Washington, D.C., P. 334 (1977) 
349. Phillips, G. 0., Baugh, P. J., McKellar, J. F., Von Sonntag, C.: In Cellulose Chemistry and 
Technology (Arthur, J. C. Jr., ed.) A.C.S. Symp. Series. No. 48, A.C.S. Washington, D.C., 
P. 313 (1977) 
350. Nakamura, Y., Shimada, M.: In Cellulose Chemistry and Technology (Arthur, J. C. Jr., 
ed.) A.C.S. Symp. Series, No. 48, A.C.S., Washington, D.C., P. 298 (1977) 
351. Stannett, V. T., Memetea, T.: J. Polymer Sci., c., Polymer Symposia 64, 57 (1978) 
145 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
4.1. Introduction 
Activation of cellulose, that is, introduction of active centers into the cellulose 
molecule, has been successfully achieved by a number of chemical means. By and 
large, the mechanisms proposed for graft initiation and chain growth have been 
either free radical or ionically based, the radical methods being the more common. 
Most of 'the recent work in this field has featured reactions in special systems 
where oxidation of cellulose precedes grafting via a free radical intermediate1). 
In the homolytic oxidation of cellulose, a hydrogen atom is abstracted, not by a 
growing chain, but by an independent chemical reaction. The formation of active 
centers in cellulose can also be achieved by the influence of certain metallic halides 
such as BF3, i.e., cationic initiation, or in the presence of a variety of bases 
such as sodium alkoxides, i.e., anionic initiation. In this section acrylic and 
vinyl graft copolymerization by chemical activation of cellulose, by introduction 
of free radicals. and by ionic mechanisms are independently discussed. 
4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
Free radicals capable of initiating graft polymerization may be introdu~ed into 
cellulose by various chemical methods. Iri addition to well-established initiators 
such as peroxides and persulfates, the CeIV salt system has been widely exploited. 
Other chemical methods of initiating grafting onto cellulose require chemical 
modification of the cellulosic substrates so that they can participate in initiation 
reactions, for example, through the introduction of diazonium groups or un-
saturated side chains. Such modifications may be permanent or temporary. 
4.2.1. Persulfate Initiation 
Kolthoff and Miller) have shown that when heated, persulfate ions in aqueous 
solution decompose to produce sulfate ion-radicals: 
S20~- -
2 SO~ , rate constant ko 
(111) 
This is a first order reaction. The sulfate radicals may react with water to produce 
hydroxyl radicals and finally oxygen: 
146 
so~ + H20 -
HSO; + HO' 
2HO' -
H20 2 -
H20 + lh O2 
(112) 
(113) 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
In addition, a decomposition takes place that does not produce radicals, but the 
rate of this second process is very small compared with that of the first when the 
pH = 4. Vinyl polymerization may thus be initiated by either the SO'4" radicals 
or the HO' radicals. That SO~- radicals take part in the initiation is shown by the 
fact that sulfur is present in the polymer31. 
It has been reported that methanol accelerates the decomposition of persulfate 
salts451• Bartlett et al.51 attributed this to a reaction between persulfate ions and 
alcohol radicals (Reaction 115). 
SO'4" + Alc' -
HS04" + Alc'; 
rate constant kl 
Alc' + S20~- -Aldehyde + HS04" + SO~-
2 SO~ - -
End products; rate constant, A. . 
(114) 
(115) 
(116) 
In the absence of reducing agents, the SO'4 radicals disappear (according to 
reaction 116), whereas in the presence of an alcohol, the initiation of free 
radicals appears to be a continuous process. 
In the presence of a vinyl monomer, the rate of persulfate decomposition is 
reduced to the much lower value observed in the absence of methanol. This 
suggests that a reaction occurs between persulfate ions and alcohol radicals61• 
In this case, the SO'4 radicals, generated by reaction (111) react with the 
monomer: 
SO~ - + M -
p'; rate constant, k j 
(117) 
where M represents a vinyl monomer and P' is the polymer radical. 
Obviously, then, reaction (114) and, therefore, also reaction (115) are suppress-
ed. It is also possible, however, that only reaction (115) is suppressed and that the 
alcohol radicals react with the monomer. Thus, vinyl polymerization initiated by 
persulfate in the presence of cellulose would be expected to lead to grafting onto 
cellulose. 
Some experiments were done with cotton in acrylonitrile vapor by Haydel et 
al.71, but these researchers did not investigate whether real grafting occurred and 
referred to the process as deposition in (and coating of) the cotton. Hayes81 
reported that grafting took place when the (emulsion) polymerization was initiat-
ed by persulfate in the presence of highly crosslinked polybutadiene and attributed 
this result to chain transfer. Although chain transfer from growing polymer chains 
to cellulose molecules cannot be ruled out, reaction (114) between SO'; radicals 
and methanol suggests that a similar reaction occurs between the SO'; radicals 
and cellulose to form cellulosic radicals directly. The direct formation of cellulose 
radicals may also be substantiated by the fact that cellulose is a very poor 
transfer agent91, as discussed earlier (see Chapter 2). At any rate, however, the 
cellulose radical formed could then initiate polymerization and form a graft. 
Based on the reactions considered by both Bartlett and Kolthoff5,61, the 
efficiency of grafting of a vinyl monomer to cellulose using persulfate ions is 
determined by the relative rates of grafting and homopolymer formation. To 
147 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
achieve maximum grafting, it is necessary that the reaction between the SO'; 
radicals and cellulose take place to an appreciable extent even when monomer is 
present and that the cellulose radicals formed take part in the initiation of the 
polymerization. Consequently, the ultimate graft formation will depend on the 
conditions of the experiment. 
In trying to achieve favorable experimental conditions for grafting, Sankalia 
et al.10) soaked gel cellophane in an aqueous solution of persulfate and sub-
sequently brought the material into contact with pure monomer. Since the 
monomer is a poor solvent for the persulfate, only small amounts of catalyst will 
diffuse from the gel into the monomer phase, so that little, if any, homopolymer 
is formed outside the cellophane. Since the concentration of cellulose in the gel 
is high, the rate of cellulose radical formation is large, so that the monomer which 
diffuses into the gel finds a high concentration of cellulose radicals to react with. 
These authors performed all experiments in a nitrogen atmosphere. After 
completion of the reaction, the film was thoroughly extracted with a solvent 
for the homopolymer, then dried in a vacuum oven at 60°C for 48 hrs and 
weighed. It is possible that part of the weight increase observed is due to homo-
polymer that could not be removed by solvent extraction. However, when the 
product containing 80 g poly(vinyl acetate) per 100 g dry cellulose was hydrolyzed 
with 0.25 M alcoholic sodium hydroxide solution at about 50°C for 20 hr, under 
nitrogen to minimize cellulose degradation, the poly(vinyl acetate) chain was 
converted to poly(vinyl alcohol), and the product was completely soluble in 
cupriethylenediamine. Acidification of this solution with 4 % HCI resulted in a 
precipitate, which was washed with Rochelle salt solution and then water. The 
infrared spectrum of this product (KBr pellet) showed absorption in the region 
12-13 ~, due to the presence of poly(vinyl alcohol) in the precipitate. This 
absorption is absent when the same procedure is followed with a physical 
mixture of 1 g dry cellophane and 0.8 g poly(vinyl alcohol), indicating that at 
least part of the weight increase was due to grafting. 
In order to shed more insight on the mechanism of persulfate-initiated grafting 
onto cellulose, studies were made on model compounds, such as serine methyl 
ester, pinacol, and D-glucose10). Table 37 shows the rate of decomposition of 
persulfate in the presence and absence of pinacol and acrylonitrile. Apparently, 
Table 37. Rate of decomposition (% per hour) of 0.01 M 
persulfate in various mixtures at 50 DC, pH = 7. Adapted 
from Ref. tO), p. 2252, by courtesy of the National Research 
Council of Canada 
Pinacol 
Acrylonitrille 
Rate 
(mol/I) 
(mol/I) 
(% per hr) 
0 
0 
0.79 
0.05 
0 
1.17 
0.10 
0 
1.30 
0 
0.3 
0.72 
0.05 
0.3 
0.71 
0.10 
0.3 
0.67 
-0.30 
0.3 
0.65 
148 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
the presence of pinacol increases the rate of decomposition when no monomer 
is present. On the other hand, the rate of persulfate decomposition is reduced 
to the original value or even slightly less when the monomer is added with the 
pinacol. 
Fig. 32 shows the monomer conversion as a function of time under the 
conditions listed in Table 37. The inset in Figure 32 gives the amount of polymer 
formed after 4 hours reaction time as a function of pinacol content, showing that 
the rate of polymerization first increases but subsequently decreases with increas-
ing pinacol concentration. 
That the rate of persulfate decomposition is increased by the presence of pinacol 
is substantiated by reaction (115). This effect is not very significant and is 
suppressed by acrylonitrile. Reaction (114) is not suppressed, since addition of 
alcohol causes an enhancement in the rate of polymerization. Free radicals are 
produced from the alcohol and these alcohol radicals progressively participate 
in the initiation step, 
Alc' + M ~ p'; rate constant k; . 
(118) 
However, at higher radical concentrations, destruction of these alcohol radicals 
~ould be expected to occur, 
2 Alc' ~ end products, rate constant J1 • 
(119) 
As a result, the rate of polymerization decreases again. This would account for 
the lower rate of polymerization at high pinacol content. This argument can be 
given in more quantitative terms as follows 
P' + p. ~ polymer; rate constant kt • 
30r---~-----r-----r----'----' 
........- 0.05 
25~----~--~~a~--+-----~--~ 
.~20~--~Y----7~----+------t-----~ 
QJ 
> 
c: 
o 
u 
~ 15~--+-¥---~+-----~ 
-a-
15 H-~--t----l 
c. 
~ 10~+4~~----t__----+-
o c: 
o 
::E 
a 
4 
B 
12 
Time (h) 
10 ff---+------+----='" 
a 
0.1 
0.2 
OJ 
16 
20 
(120) 
Fig. 32. Percent conversion of mono-
mer as a function of time for pinacol 
concentrations 0 ..... 0.05 ..... 0.2 and a-
bout 0.3 M. Inset: % conversion after 
4 hours as a function of pinacol 
concentration. 
Reprinted 
from 
Ref.lO), p. 2252, by courtesy of the 
National Council of Canada. 
149 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
If we add the termination step, the kinetics are described by the reactions (111 to 
120).,..Qf these reactions (112) and (113) will not be considered. Also, reaction 
(115) will be omitted due to its suppression in the presence of monomer. Then, 
if C is the concentration of persulfate, A that of the alcohol, M that of monomer, 
and if x, y, and r represent the concentrations of SO'; radicals, alcohol radicals, 
and polymer radicals respectively, we have 
-2111 + klAx - k;My = 0, 
KiMx + k;My - 2k/ = 0 , 
(121) 
(122) 
(123) 
(124) 
where kp is the propagation rate constant. The Eqs. (121-123) give the expressions 
for dx/dt, dy/dt, and dr/dt respectively. They have been equated to zero on the 
(usual) assumption that 'quasi steady state' conditions prevail. Eliminating r 
from Eqs. (123) and (124), it is seen that the rate of polymerization for a given 
value of M is determined by the quantity 
R = kix + k;y, 
and thus 
-dM/Mdt = R + CR1/2, 
where 
(125) 
It will be shown that R increases on addition of alcohol but may decrease again 
on the addition of more alcohol. To this end, Eqs. (121) and (122) are differentiated 
with respect to A at constant C and M. From the equations obtained, one 
can solve for dx/dA and dy/dA, with the result: 
dx/dA = -(klx/N) (411Y + k;M) , 
dy/dA = (klx/N) (4AX + kiM) , 
N = (411Y + k;M) (4h + kiM + k,A) . 
(126) 
(127) 
This shows that dx/dA is negative and dy/dA positive for all values of A. 
Using the definition of R given in Eq. (125), it follows from Eqs. (126) and 
(127) that: 
(128) 
At low concentrations of alcohol, y is small, so that (dR/dA) is positive. However, 
on increasing A, we know that x decreases and y increases, so that dR/dA will 
become smaller and may eventually become negative. 
150 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
Kilkarni et alY) grafted polyacrylonitrile onto cotton fabrics using the persul-
fate-thiosulfate redox system as initiator for grafting under a variety of conditions. 
They reported that in the absence of any reducing agents, the grafting reaction 
is accompatlied by a relatively long induction period, with homopolymer forma-
tion visible to a considerable extent. The induction period as well as homopoly-
merization were greatly reduced when a reducing agent, such as potassium thio-
sulfate, was added to the grafting reaction. The rate of grafting was also higher in 
the presence of reducing agent than in its absence. A further increase in the rate 
of grafting could be achieved by including copper sulfate traces in the reaction 
mixture. This may be seen in Figure 33. These authors observed also that when 
the fabrics were first padded with the reducing solution, polymerization was 
initiated mainly in the fabrics, with comparatively lesser quantities of homo-
polymer visible. The electrografting of acrylonitrile onto cellophane pellicles 
in the presence of Fe III sulfate and potassium peroxy-disulfate has been reported12). 
Fell ions formed at the cathode participate in the mechanism of electro-
grafting. It was also shown that much homopolymer was formed. 
Gaylord and Tomon013) have examined the preparation of alternating copoly-
mers in aqueous media by the polymerization of a mixture of a donor and an 
acceptor monomer, for example, styrene and acrylonitrile either in the presence 
of a complexing agent, such as zinc chloride or magnesium chloride14) or in 
the presence of cellulose15). It has been shown that alternating copolymers and 
graft copolymers are produced in the presence of cellulose, in the absence15,17) 
as well as in the presence of a metal halide16, 18, 19). The formation of alternating 
copolymers in the presence of cellulose and the absence of a metal halide is 
assumed by Gaylord and Tomono to involve the complexation of the acceptor 
monomer by cellulose, followed by the generation of an alignment of comono-
mer charge-transfer complexes on the cellulose matrix2o,21). Grafted as well. 
as ungrafted alternating copolymers are formed in the presence of a water 
soluble catalyst, provided the water and cellulose contents of the system are 
maintained within critical ranges17). The sodium metabisulfite -
potassium 
persulfate system has proven to be effective, as have ammonium persulfate 
and ceriumlV ammonium nitrate18). The copolymerization process was shown 
to operate at temperatures as high as 70°C and to require efficient stirring. 
~ 
OJ 
E 
-5'1 
c... 
, 
,-I 
, 
, 
/-(1 
/ V 
/ 
/ 
'2 
/ 
/ 
/ /v 
.. / 
o 
2.5 
5.0 
7.5 
10.0 
12.5 
15.0 
17.5 
20.0 
Reaction time (min) 
Fig. 33. Effect of copper sulfate 
traces on AN polymerization. Ma-
terialfliquor ratio 1:50; K 2Sps' 
0.2%; AN on K2S20 S' 5% (v/v); 
sodium thiosulfate, 2 %; tempera-
ture 65°C; 1 with copper sulfate; 
2 without copper sulfate. Reprinted 
from Ref. 11). p. 1585, by courtesy 
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
151 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
Rowland et aI.22) have used ammonium persulfate in their study of the cross-
linking of N-methylol acrylamide in cotton fabric. It has been shown that 
vinyl polymerization and etherification of the monomer occur simultaneously 
in dry pad-cure operations at elevated temperatures. This provides a facile 
route to the modification of properties in that the tensile strength, abrasion 
resistance, and durability of the treated cotton were comparable to those 
obtained with conventional agents. 
Bardhan et aI.23) have examined the grafting of acrylamide onto methyl cellulose 
in aqueous solution. Grafting achieved using conditions described by Mukhopad-
hyay et aI.24) was found to be critically dependent on the initiator concentration, 
with maximum grafting observed at an initiator (potassium persulfate -
added to the reaction medium at the desired temperature) concentration of 
3. 7 x 10 -4 mol/I. Grafting was found to increase steadily with an increase in the 
monomer/polymer ratio and with tempeJ;atures up to 40°C. Grafting was carried 
out under apparently homogeneous conditions in a nitrogen atmosphere. 
Purification of the copolymer, often a problem with cellulosic copolymers, was 
facilitated by the insolubility of the copolymer above 70°C. Since the homo-
polymer remained soluble at this temperature, its removal was easily accomplish-
ed. The influence of urea on the precipitation temperature was measured and 
shown to progressively increase the precipitation temperature through its ability 
to form hydrogen bonds with methyl cellulose in aqueous solution, thus retard-
ing the formation of intra-molecular hydrogen bonds. 
4.2.2. Hydroxyl Radical Initiation 
When Fell ions are mixed with H20 2, HO', radicals are generated25 - 27). Faber 
and Weiss28. 29) have developed the following reaction scheme for the decompo-
sition of hydrogen peroxide in the presence of Fell ions: 
The HO' radicals further decompose H20 2 
(129) 
(130) 
(131) 
(132) 
However, decomposition of H20 2 by the HO' radicals takes place to an app-
reciable extent only if H20 2 is present in large excess over Fell ions30). 
In order to detect the free radical formation in the cellulose upon Fell-H202 
treatment, fibrous cellulose was immersed in 0.1 M FeS04 for about 15 minutes, 
in order to wet the fiber thoroughly, and then dried in a flowing stream of nitrogen. 
This dried cellulose was placed in a quartz tube; then, 0.3 M H20 2 was drawn 
onto the cellulose. Immediately, the tube and its contents were immersed in liquid 
nitrogen. The e.s.r. spectrum generated was recorded at -11 0 °e. 
152 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
The e.s.r. signal was very weak and short-lived. The spectrometer was operated 
at high amplification, and the signal was accumulated by a time-averaging 
computer to obtain the spectrum shown. The three intense lines appeared to be a 
triplet and could be attributed to a radical formed on abstraction of a hydrogen 
atom from the hydroxyl group on carbon C6. The two equivalent hydrogen atoms 
on Carbon-6 would split the e.s.r. spectrum to form a triplet. The e.s.r. spectrum 
was very sensitive to temperature; even at temperatures as low as -60°C, the 
spectrum became very weak and undefined within a few minutesz6l. 
The graft copolymerization reaction produced the e.s.r. spectrum shown in 
Figure 34. The intensity of this spectrum was several times greater than that 
generated in cellulose by the Fell-HzOz system alone. The triplet spectrum 
disappeared during the copolymerization reaction, and an e.s.r. spectrum, generat-
ed by the free radical on the growing polymer chain and probably by a free radical 
formed on oxidative depolymerization of the cellulose molecule, was recorded. The 
e.s.r. spectrum appeared to be a combination of two singlet spectraZ6l. 
Merz and Waters were among the first to suggest the use of hydroxyl radicals, 
formed in the FelljHzOz reaction, to abstract a hydrogen atom from cellulose 
in the presence of vinyl monomers31l. Later, Landells and Whewell reported the 
successful grafting of several vinyl monomers onto regenerated cellulosic fibers 
by using FelljH20z in solutions of either acetic or sulfuric acid3z.33l. 
Kim et al. have used a Fell-redox system in a study of the grafting of viscose-
type cord fibers with various vinyl and diene monomers34l. Here, rayon was graft-
ed with acrylonitrile using diazonium salts, while isoprene was grafted using an 
Fell-cumene hydroperoxide-initiating stytem. The radical mechanism of this pro-
cess was monitored by e.s.r. It was found that grafting and crosslinking reactions 
occurred simultaneously and that the thermal stability of the fibers increased with 
increased grafting. 
Focher et al. have begun work on a series of functional cellulose copolymers35l. 
Part of this study concerns the synthesis and evaluation of cellulose-poly(p-
nitrophenyl acrylate) copolymers and their reactions with amino acids and enzy-
----'1---t-250 Gauss 
i----\---t--- 250 Gauss 
Fig. 34a, b. E.s.r. spectra of cellulose after copolymerization with acrylonitrile initiated by 'OR 
radicals formed in Fe2+ -R20 2 system recorded at -40°C. a Attenuation 10 db, b Attenuation 
13 db. Reprinted from Ref.26), p. 1418, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
153 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
meso This work forms part of a novel area in immobilized enzyme systems. The 
copolymers are prepared via the decomposition of peroxidized cellulose with 
Fell in a dimethylsulfoxide water medium at room temperature. A maximum 
conversion of II % was observed after 24 hours' immersion. The couplings of the 
copolymers with amino acids show apparent first order kinetics, through the rate 
increase with increasing ionic strength of the reaction medium. These rates were 
also shown to depend on the particular salt used, KCI or (CH3)4NCI respectively. 
A catalytic effect was observed which was dependent on the pH (7.65 to 8.95) 
but not on the concentration of amino acid used. A decreased reaction coupling 
rate was found with albumin compared with glycine. The enzymic activity of the 
copolymer-enzyme systems, when treated to IX-chymotrypsin, was found to be 
relatively low. 
Hamada and Maeda36) have used the Fell/H202 initiating medium in their 
grafting of methyl methacrylate onto wood pulp. Successful grafting was followed 
by molding operations at elevated temperature (220°), over an extended period 
(5 min), and under load (20-30 kg/cm2). The phys~cal properties of the modified 
boards were markedly influenced by the poly(methyl methacrylate) content. 
Mikolajczyk has examined the effect of initiation methods on the composition 
of cellulose-methyl methacrylate copolymers37). He has shown that the molecular 
mass of the pendant chains of the grafted cellulose can be reduced, while the 
number of chains is increased, by increasing the concentration of reactive sites 
in the cellulose, prior to grafting. A similar effect was observed by increasing the 
time of heating of cellulose, previously impregnated with a Fell/H202 solution, 
before grafting. This markedly increases the concentration of peroxy groups within 
the substrate, which are available for eventual grafting. Lawniczak has issued a 
cautionary note regarding thermally induced grafting via hydroperoxide groups. 
Although this approach leads to high grafting levels, degr<j.dation of the cellu-
losic may be excessive. This leads to mixed block/graft copolymer formation and 
a deterioration in the mechanical properties38). Lawniczak has taken great interest 
in timber modification, an interest which is shared by other groups, using the 
Fell/H20 2 system. Young has examined the grafting of acrylonitrile, styrene, and 
acrylamide onto xanthated pulp in the presence of Fell 39). Chemical pulps were 
found to produce greater grafting levels than mechanical pulps, an indication of 
the greater accessibility of chemical pulps. Styrene/acrylonitrile mixtures were 
found to be less efficient than was the grafting of acrylonotrile alone. 
Baxendale et a1.4) showed that HO'radicals can initiate vinyl polymerization; 
at sufficiently high monomer concentrations, the termination of HO' radicals 
by Fell ions can largely be suppressed so that most of the HO' radicals are 
captured by monomer molecules leading to initiation of polymerization. 
Cellulose and a vinyl monomer react in the presence of H20 2 and Fell ions to 
produce a graft copolymer41,42). The reaction which is believed to be responsible 
for this is the abstraction of a hydrogen atom from cellulose. 
In the Fell-H202 technique, the grafting reaction depends to a large extent on 
the conditions of the experiment. The best technique appears to be first to subject 
the cellulose to a solution of Fell salt. The Fell ions are absorbed by the 
cellulose, and the subsequent reaction with H20 2 in the presence of monomer 
will therefore take place in close proximity to the cellulose molecules43 -45) as 
154 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
is clearly shown by Ogiwara et al.44,45). These reachers examined the decomposi-
tion of hydrogen peroxide by Felli ions absorbed on cellulose, the lowering of 
the degree of polymerization of the bleached softwood sulfite pulp used for graft-
ing, and the resultant grafting in systems containing methyl methacrylate. It 
was found that an increase in the concentration of Felli ions adsorbed on the cellu-
lose, or in the concentration of hydroger: peroxide, resulted in an increase in both 
the extent of decomposition of hydrogen peroxide and the number of scissions of 
cellulose chains with higher rates at the initial stages of reaction. A relationship 
was found between the concentration of Felli ions adsorbed on the cellulose and 
the initiation efficiency of hydrogen peroxide in graft polymerization44). 
Synthesis of cellulose graft copolymers from the vinyl monomer mixtures -
N-vinylpyrrolidone and butyl methacrylate, N-vinylcaprolactam and butyl 
methacrylate -
has been made possible using the FeIl-H202 redox system. An 
interesting feature is that the solubility and composition of the vinylpyrrolidone-
butyl methacrylate and vinyl caprolactam-butyl methacrylate grafted chains are 
similar to those of the bulk copolymers which were obtained under identical 
conditions46) . 
It should be pointed out that with the FeIl-H202 and persulfate systems, the 
redox reactions generate radicals unattached to cellulose. Grafting thus depends 
on the abstraction of hydrogen atoms from the cellulose by HO' or SO'; radicals. 
Since these radicals are also capable of attacking the monomer, homopolymer 
formation is more extensive in these systems than with the CeIV ion, where the 
free radicals are formed exclusively on the cellulose backbone (see below). 
4.2.3. Ce1vlon Initiation 
Due to its ease of application as well as its grafting efficiency, the CeIV ion 
method has gained considerable importance in the grafting reaction. This techni-
que is based on the fact that when cellulose is oxidized by a CeIV salt such as 
CeIV ammonium nitrate, free radicals capable of initiating vinyl polymerization 
are formed on the cellulose by a single electron transfer47- 96). Since the radicals 
produced are almost exclusively on the cellulose, homopolymer formation is 
minimized. 
Early research47) showed that CeIV ammonium nitrate exists as a complex 
salt and is ionized in solution, yielding free ammonium ions and nitrato-
cerate ions. The nitratocerate ions subsequently decompose to yield CeIV cations 
and nitrate anions. 
(NH4)2Ce(N03)6 ¢ 
Ce(N03)~ - + 2 NH: ' 
Ce(N03)~- ¢ Ce4- + 6 NO; . 
In the presence of glycol groups, tetravalent cerium is capable of forming 
mono-, di- and triglycolated intermediates. 
CeIV (X)6 + G ¢ CeIV G(X)4 + 2 X , 
CeIVG(X)4 + G ¢ CeIVG2(X)2 + 2 X, 
CeIVG2(X)2 + G ¢ CeIVG3 + 2 X , 
155 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
where G represents the glycol, and X, the groups coordinated with the tetra-
valent cerium, e.g., HO-, NO;, or H20. 
There is considerable evidence48 -55) to indicate that disproportionation of 
these intermediate complexes results in the formation of free radicals capable of 
initiating vinyl polymerization. 
H H 
I 
I 
R-C-C-R' ~ 
B --
I I 
HO 
OH 
H 
H 
I 
I 
R-C=O + R'-C' + H$ + Ce3• + 6X 9 
I 
OH 
The rate-determining step is presumably the disproportionation of the cerato-gly-
col complex, B. 
Of great interest in the understanding of grafting is the study of oxidation of 
pinacols by CeIV sulfate-published by Mino et al.50). The CeIV salt concentration 
varied from about 2 x 10-3 to 10 X 10-3 M, and the pinacol concentration from 
0.03 to 0.16 M. The rate at which CeIV was reduced was proportional to both the 
CeIV and the pinacol content, and 2 mols of acetone were produced for every 
2 mols of CeIV reduced. The reactions describing this are: 
OH OH 
I 
I 
CeN + 
(CH3)2-C-C-(CH3)2 -
(CH3)2CO + (CH3)2 COH + Hal + Cem 
where the first of the two is rate-determining. 
In the presence of (excess) acrylamide, only one mol of acetone was produced 
per mol of CeIV reduced. Since it is known from kinetic studies of a polymeri-
zation that the termination step involves a reaction with CeIV, the following 
reactions are believed to take place. 
(CH3)l:OH + M -
RM' (initiation), 
RM' + nM -t RM(n+1) (propagation), 
RM' 
+ CeIV -Polymer + H+ + CeIIl (termination). 
(n+1) 
It is clear that if the initiation step involves the addition of the alcohol radical, 
and if the cellulose reacts similarly, one may expect grafting48 ). 
The mechanism and kinetics of polymerization involving CeIV and alcohol 
systems have been studied in detail48 , 50, 51, 54). The proposed mechanism and 
kinetic scheme have been based on an important simplification of the systems 
studied, viz., that the rate of initiation is equal to one-half the rate of disappear-
ance of CeIV, as described earlier in the case of pinacol. There is evidence, how-
156 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
ever, that other glycol-reducing agents do not allow a similar simplification in 
their kinetic treatment. Studies on ethylene glycoI54), for example, showed that 
the reaction scheme, 
CH 20H 
I 
+ 
CeN --·CH 20H + H(I! + Cell[ + HCHO 
CH 20H 
where the ratio of CeIIl to formaldehyde is 1: 1, was not obeyed. 
The observed value was nearly 2: I, suggesting that the formaldehyde had 
been further oxidized to formic acid52• 55). 
The polymerization of acrylonitrile in the presence of an aqueous CelV sulfate-
ethylene glycol solution was investigated as a model system for cellulose graft 
copolymerization54). Results of this work reveal that the rate of polymerization, 
Rp ' is directly proportional to the square of the monomer concentration; that it 
is linear with alcohol concentration; and that it is inversely related to the 
concentration of CelV ion. The rate of CelV ion reduction was proportional to the 
initial CelV ion concentration and linear with the initial concentration of monomer 
and alcohol. To account for this, the following reaction scheme was proposed: 
Iv 
k 
kd 
Ce + A ~ B -+ A' + HCHO + Celli + H+ , 
A'+ M 
k 
• 
-+ M, 
I 
k' 
CelV + M ~ M' + Celli + H+, 
kp 
M' + Mn -+ M(n+l)' 
M' + CelV kr M + Celli + H+ 
n 
---+-
n 
, 
A' + CelV ~ Oxidation products + CeIIl + H+ . 
(133) 
(134) 
(135) 
(136) 
(137) 
(138) 
CelV denotes a cerium ion of high oxidation state, or any inorganic complex 
thereof; M is the monomer (acrylonitrile); A is an alcohol (ethylene glycol); 
k (with subscripts) denotes the rate constants for various reactions; k is an 
equilibrium constant; and B denotes a CelV ion-alcohol complex. 
Data in Table 3854) indicate that the amount of polyacrylonitrile formed 
in the absence of alcohol is by no means negligible, and that the ratio of the 
Table 38. Rate of polymerization of acrylonitrile in the presence and absence of ethylene glycol 
at [CefV] = 0.025 moll I at 35 °C.Reprinted from Ref.54), p. 405, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. 
[M] 
[A] = 0.5 molll 
[A] = 0 
RpIR~ 
molll 
Rp (gil hr) 
Rp[Mf 
Rp (gil hr) 
R~/[Mf 
0.10 
0.12 
12 
0.060 
6.0 
2.0 
0.25 
1.04 
17 
0.364 
5.8 
2.9 
0.50 
6.40 
26 
1.38 
7.5 
3.4 
157 

4, Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
rates of propagation (rate of polymerization, Rp) of comparable systems in the 
presence and absence of alcohol is about 3. Previous results50) showed that the 
termination reaction, i,e" Eq, (137), involves the CeIV ion, Thus, the kinetics 
of CeIV -initiated polymerization of acrylonitrile can best be represented by 
reactions (133-135) as initiation steps, reaction (136) as propagation, and 
reaction (137) as termination, This leads to the expressions: 
d[Mle/dt = kJM] [CeIV] , 
d[M']A/dt = kJM] [A'] , 
-d[M]/dt = Rp = kp[M] [M'] , 
-d[M']/dt = kt[M'] [CeIV] , 
(139) 
(140) 
(141) 
(142) 
Applying the steady state assumption to both (M') and (A') separately, and assum-
ing that the equilibrium between CeIV and alcohol to form the complex is establish-
ed rapidly, as compared to the rate at which the complex is decomposed, one 
obtains the following expression for the rate of polymerization: 
R - kp M 2 {k~ 
k dk(A) 
} 
p - kt [] 
I + [M] + (ko/k;) [CeIV] , 
(143) 
Eq, (143) shows a square dependence on the monomer concentration in the absence 
of alcohol. However, when alcohol is present the extent of deviation from this 
square dependence is obtained by the magnitude of [M] versus (ko/k) [CeIV], 
The initial rate of polymerization is directly proportional to the alcohol 
concentration; therefore, an initial Rp versus [A] plot at a particular monomer 
concentration should yield a straight line, It is noteworthy that the rate of 
polymerization is inversely related to the CeIV ion concentration, This leads to 
the interesting situation where the rate of polymerization at low CeIV ion concen-
trations may actually be greater than at high CeIV ion concentrations, 
Kinetic equations involving the disappearance of the CeIV ion due to reaction 
with alcohol, alcohol radical, monomer, and polymer radical lead to the following 
expression: 
(-I/[Ce1v]) d[Ce1v]/dt = 2[k dk[A] + kaM]] , 
(144) 
Eq, (144) represents the relationship that governs the CeIV ion disappearance in 
a relatively easily verifiable form, In addition, a more comprehensive relationship 
was derived taking into consideration the constants governing the various equili-
bria involving CeIV ions and sulfate ions, This equation can be written as 
follows: 
where [CeIV1o refers to the concentration of uncomplexed CeIV ion, and 
f[SO,;-] is a cubic function of the sulfate concentration, 
158 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
Evaluation of the rati~ kp/kt (where kp is rate constant for propagation and 
kt is the termination constant) showed that these two constants were of 
similar magnitude, contrary to the usual results for free radical systems, 
wherein kt is several orders of magnitude greater than k p • It was then con-
cluded that propagation and termination are similar processes54). 
According to Mino et al.50), the termination of free radicals during oxidation 
and that of growing polymer chains during grafting occur through conversion 
of CeIV ions to CeIII (reactions 133 and 137) respectively, where A represents 
cellulose. Taking this into consideration, Kulkarni and Mehta56) assumed 
that the total consumption of CeIV ions should be more or less equal for 
oxidation (reactions 133 and 138) and grafting (reactions 133 and 137), if all 
the monomer is effectively grafted onto cellulose. On the other hand, the 
CeIV ions consumed during grafting win be more than that during oxidation of 
cellulose if some homopolymer is formed [reactions (135) and (139)]. 
To test the validity of this assumption, Hebeish and Mehta57) have deter-
mined the CeIV consumption during grafting and oxidation of various cellulosic 
substrates, such as native cotton, cotton treated with sodium hydroxide 
(NaOH-Cotton), viscose, and ramie. Some of the results obtained are given in 
Figures 35 and 36. It is apparent that under similar conditions of reaction, the 
CeIV ion consumption during grafting is higher than that consumed during 
oxidation. This is observed in all the substrates studied, in accordance with 
the assumption of Kulkarni and Mehta56). The latter was obtained by mea-
suring the cummulative difference in area under the two appropriate curves 
up to the particular reaction time. There is a direct relation (linear in almost 
cases) between the extent of homo polymerization and the excess CeIV ions 
consumed in grafting. It has also been shown that each substrate shows a 
uniqueness in this relation, and for a given value of excess CeIV ions consumed 
in grafting, the amount of homopolymer formed varies widely with different 
substrates. This is probably a result of the different efficiencies of these 
35 
30 
15 
--= 
..:--~ -
+ 
/:'--: ~ -- --
, 
>t~ 
,/ 
--
,.......... 
,,/ 
If 
/ 
----+---
~'f / 
I 
III 
"I 
I +-1 
,Y 
I 
/ 
30 
60 
90 
120 
150 
180 
Reaction time (min) 
Fig. 35. Consumption of cerium during graft-
ing and oxidation of native cotton at different 
temperatures. Grafting at CC): (0) 20; 
( x) 40; (+) 60; oxidation at CC), (T) 20; 
(.6.) 40; (.) 60; reaction conditions as in 
Figure 3. Reprinted from Ref. 57), p. 1631, 
by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
159 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
35 
I 1 
_x __ 
/ 
1 __ ,--' 
:.---f 
/x __ , __ 
I 
x 
,...--
_'_ -. 
30 
//~~ 
---) 
/; 
/~. 
'/ 
/ 
l/ 
~'" 
, 
~ 
i 
I 
/ 
~ 
I 
w 
V> 
~ 
~ 20 
L.> 
10 ,/ 
,/ ,/ 
/ 
/ , 
",/ 
I 
30 
60 
90 
120 
150 
180 
Reaction time (min) 
Fig. 36. Consumption of cerium during graft-
ing and oxidation of viscose at different 
temperatures. Grafting at CC); (0) 20; 
(x) 40; (e) 60; oxidation at (0C): (.) 20;-
(L'l.) 40; (V) 60; reaction conditions as in 
figure 3. Reprinted from Ref. 57), p. 1633, 
by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
substrates with respect to grafting that leads to different amounts of monomer 
available in solution for homopolymerization. 
Various monomers, such as acrylamide, acrylonitrile, and certain esters of 
acrylic and methacrylic acid, have been successfully grafted onto cellulosic 
materials using the CeIV ion type catalyst56 -83). Kaizerman et a1.61 ) have polymeriz-
ed acrylonitrile, acrylamide, and methyl acrylate within the fibers of cotton and 
viscose rayon. They reported that the maximum amount of polymer which could 
be deposited in cotton or rayon varied according to the nature of the monomer. 
Details of the treatment and the resulting increase due to polymer deposition are 
presented. The researchers have also mentioned that similar weight increases were 
obtained under comparable treatment conditions with viscose rayon. 
Cumberbirch and Holker62) grafted poly(acrylic acid) onto cotton, mercerized 
cotton, viscose, and oxycellulose. Mercerized cotton, in spite of its higher 
reactivity, showed lower graft yields than native cotton. Brief hydrolysis lowered 
the cellulose reactivity toward grafting. They also reported that the introduction 
into rayon fabric of a large number of aldehyde groups, which are more readily 
oxidized by CelV salts than alcoholic hydroxyls, did not increase its sus-
ceptibility to grafting with acrylic acid. 
Hebeish and Mehta80,81) reported a detailed study on grafting of various 
vinyl monomers and their binary mixtures on different cellulosic materials 
using the CeIV -cellulose redox system. Table 39 contains the results obtained 
on grafting of acrylonitrile (AN), methyl methacrylate (MMA), and methyl 
acrylate (MA) to native cotton, hydrocellulose, viscose, ramie, and cottons 
swollen with sodium hydroxide (NaOH-cotton), ethylene-diamine (EDA-cotton), 
and zinc chloride (ZnCI2-cotton). 
It is clear that the graft yields achieved with swollen cottons, on grafting with 
MA and MMA, are marginally higher than those with native cotton. This 
160 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
Table 39. Grafting various vinyl monomers onto different cellulosic substrates. Reprinted from 
Ref. 80), p. 177 
Substrate 
Graft Yield % 
AN 
MA 
MMA 
40°C 
60 °C 
40°C 
60 °C 
40°C 
60 °C 
Native cotton 
43.00 
27.53 
62.54 
55.41 
43.31 
45.72 
NaOH-Cotton 
52.84 
32.05 
8.87 
56.19 
42.59 
62.79 
EDA-Cotton 
48.38 
26.60 
65.91 
55.16 
45.00 
51.29 
ZnCl2-Cotton 
47.37 
27.68 
62.02 
54.85 
47.83 
53.19 
Hydrocellulose 
37.48 
22.47 
81.04 
68.95 
61.45 
62.39 
Viscose 
43.43 
19.98 
85.05 
67.36 
65.93 
63.07 
Ramie 
40.84 
13.98 
70.98 
55.34 
51.80 
52.50 
[Ce1V] = 0.006 M; Cellulose, 1 g; Monomer, 1 cm3 ; Material: Liquor ratio \:30; Reaction time, 
3 hours. 
implies that the effect of cellulose accessibility is not marked under the condi-
tions studied. However, it would be necessary to carry out initiation and 
grafting separately, in a manner similar to that used with AN, to establish this 
beyond doubt. Contrary to what would be expected from its higher crystallinity 
and, therefore, lower reactivity, hydrocellulose showed higher yields of grafting 
than swollen cottons. This would support the assumption that the process of 
grafting on different substrates is not necessarily comparable. It might be 
expected, and with reason, that grafting on substrates such as hydrocellulose, 
which has very high crystallinity, would be more of a surface phenomenon. 
This undoubtedly would be due to the fact that the monomer, in the aqueous 
solution used in this study, cannot penetrate beyond the surface of the 
fiber. 
Samples grafted with AN-MA.and AN-MMA mixtures at 40°C for different 
times were analyzed for nitrogen80,811. The results obtained are given in Table 40. 
The proportion of AN in the graft has been calculated from the nitrogen 
content and is shown in the last column. It is evident that the amount of AN 
grafted is not affected throughout the reaction period by the presence of MA. 
On the other hand, graft yields of AN from AN-MMA mixtures were signifi-
cantly lower in the initial stages of the reaction than those obtained with AN 
alone. Addition of MMA appears to slow down the rate of grafting of AN to 
cellulose. 
Schwab et a1.59) studied the graft polymerization of acrylamide, acrylonitrile, 
methyl methacrylate, ethyl acrylate, and styrene to paper using the CelV ion 
process. The reactivity of the monomer for graft polymerization was found to be 
as follows: 
ethyl acrylate > methyl methacrylate > acrylonitrile > acrylamide 
> styrene. 
These investigators also reported an optimum temperature (25-40 0c) for graft-
ing initiated by Ce1V ammonium nitrate, beyond which the amount of graft 
161 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
Table 40. Nitrogen content of AN-MA and AN-MMA grafted cellulose·. Adapted from Ref.sO), 
p. 173 
Reaction time 
Monomer 
Graftb 
Nitrogen content 
Grafte due to AN 
(min) 
% 
% 
% 
15 
AN 
10.4 
2.64 
10.1 
AN-MA 
32.6 
2.42 
9.1 
AN-MMA 
11.5 
1.02 
3.8 
30 
AN 
15.8 
3.97 
15.0 
AN-MA 
45.2 
3.87 
14.6 
AN-MMA 
24.0 
1.73 
6.5 
60 
AN 
17.1 
4.50 
17.0 
AN-MA 
51.3 
4.21 
15.9 
AN-MMA 
36.4 
3.40 
12.8 
80 
AN 
18.8 
4.77 
18.0 
AN-MA 
52.5 
4.72 
17.8 
AN-MMA 
41.6 
3.80 
14.3 
180 
AN 
19.3 
5.04 
19.0 
AN-MA 
53.1 
4.96 
18.7 
AN-MMA 
49.5 
4.48 
16.9 
• [CAN] = 0.006 M in 1% HN03 ; cellulose = I g; monomer mixture I: I (0.5 cm3 each); temp. 
40°C; liquor ratio I : 30). 
b Based on weight of cellulose. 
e Calculated from the nitrogen content. 
formed rapidly decreased. (Results for acrylonitrile and methyl acrylate are in 
agreement with this). The researchers attributed this partly to the instability of 
CeIV ammonium nitrate at elevated temperatures. Results for methyl metha-
crylate do not parallel this observation, perhaps due to its higher solubility at 
elevated temperatures. Increasing the solubility of the monomer would facilitate 
its diffusion in the substrate, thus favoring grafting. 
Negishi et a1. 76 ) have been able to effect graft copolymerization of acrylate 
monomers, such as methyl, ethyl, n-propyl, n- or isobutyl, onto cotton fabrics 
using an aqueous emulsion containing CeIV ions. They reported that the rate of 
graft copolymerization decreases with increasing length of the ester group of the 
monomer. 
Figure 37 shows the percent graft yields on cellulose fibers and the correspond-
ing polymerization yields in solution in the absence of cellulose56). Obviously, 
the grafting reaction proceeds much faster than polymerization without cellulose, 
showing the high grafting efficiency of the CeIV -cellulose system. The increased 
polymerization rates could be due either to the large area offered by cellulose or 
to the reducing action of the cellulose. The fact that the presence of a large 
surface area, in silica spheres with the same surface area of cellulose, has not 
increased the polymerization yields indicates that the high polymerization rates 
in the presence of cellulose must 'be due to the reducing action of cellulose. 
Here, too, the effect of adding traces of Cell sulfate to the grafting and 
polymerization mixture was studied. Unlike the persulfate-thiosulfatell ) system, 
in which addition of CUll ions significantly accelerated the grafting reaction by 
162 

3 0 f-------1-----71'------~'--
~ 25 
L 
"t:J 
OJ 
'§ 20 
A-H--+----+-J 20 ~ 
o c: 
o 
E 
0> 
~ 15f--+.hr~-----1--b~~--+-~~15o 
10 I--I;l;-+-~-+--->~+--+ 
o 
40 
50 
60 
Reaction time (min) 
4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
Fig. 37. Effect of surface area and addi-
tion of traces of copper sulfate, on acrylo-
nitrile polymerization in presence and 
absence of cellulose; 1 polymerization 
in presence of silica spheres; 2 polymeri-
zation in absence of cellulose; 3 poly-
merization with traces of copper sulfate 
(without cellulose); 4 grafting in pre-
sence of copper sulfate traces; 5 grafting 
without copper sulfate. [CelV], 0.006 M; 
liquor ratio, 30: I; acrylonitrile, 1 cm3 ; 
cellulose, 1 g; temperature of reaction, 
40 DC. Reprinted from Ref. 56), p. 1324, 
by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
reducing the induction period from 7 minutes to 3 minutes (see Fig. 33), 
the rate of grafting remains unaltered in the CelV -cellulose system. 
Kubota and Ogiwara82) have studied the effect of lignin, contained in cellulosic 
materials, on the vinyl graft copolymerization of lignin containing substrates, 
using the CelV ion technique. Samples containing the highest lignin content showed 
the lowest graft yield. This is so probably because the CelV ions reacted at a faster 
rate with lignin than with cellulose in wood pulp; but the active sites formed on 
lignin appeared to participate in the termination reactions, thus increasing the 
number of grafts but lowering their average molecular weight. 
The nature of the cerium1v ion initiation of cellulose grafting has been much 
studied by Iwakura et ai., who have shown that primary alcohols and glycols 
are more effective than secondary and tertiary alcohols in initiating the 
polymerization of styrene60). Mino et aLSO) have also shown that in the case of 
glycols, e.g., pinacols, the I: 2 glycol group is cleaved during the oxidation 
reaction with CelV ions. Thus, during grafting on cellulose, too, cleavage of the 
C2-C3 glycol bond is expected in this system of graft initiation. Terasaki and 
Matsuki841, considered the hemiacetal group at the end of the cellulose chain to 
be of primary importance in CelV attacks on cellulose, but postulated glycol 
cleavage as well. Cumberbirch and Holker62) and Arthur et a1.85) have also 
postulated glycol bond cleavage in cellulose during grafting initiated by CeIV • 
Cumberbirch and Holker62) have supported this postulate on the finding that 
adipaldehyde is obtained as a product of oxidation of cyclohexane-l ,2-diol by 
CeIV, while Arthur et a1.85) have supported it through e.s.r. studies on CelV ion-
oxidized cellulose. 
According to Arthur et al.8S), the CelV ion in acidic solution forms a chelate 
with the cellulose molecule, probably by reaction through the hydroxyl groups 
on carbon C2 and C3 (Eq. 146). There was a transfer of one electron from the 
163 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
cellulose molecule to the CeIV ions. The CeIV was reduced to CeIII ions, followed 
by release of CeIII ions and anhydroglucose ring cleavage at the C2-C3 bond 
(Eqs. 147 and 148). A short-lived free radical was then formed on either carbon 
C2 or C3. 
On initiation of graft polymerization at this site (Eq. 149), additional CeIV ions 
may chelate with the cellulose, forming additional radical sites. The decay of free 
radicals, formed on the cellulose molecule by CeIV ion interaction, is shown in 
Figure 38. Termination could result from the reaction of CeIV ions with the 
free radical to yield CeIII ions and an oxidized product of cellulose (Eq. 150). 
Reaction of solvent, usually water, with the free radical could also terminate the 
radical84l. 
H 
H 
/ ° + CeN --.".0 
(146) 
H 
H 
~~ 
° H 
/0 
0"" --
/0 H R H ifo/ 
(147) 
° 
° 
Cern 
H 
"'0 H 
~ 
eo H 
/0 
ito"" --
° 
H oft 0"" 
(148) 
.". 
5 
2 
4 
R6 
H 
H 
° 
° 
(a) Radical formation 
H 
~ 
+ /CHJ:) 
eo H 
/0 
H .tt'" 
-
4 R 5 
H 
H 
6 
° 
H 
eO H 
( 
CNL-
CN 
x-!t0"" 
X= CH2 - ~H n-l 
CH2~H 
(149) 
° 
(b) Graft polymerization 
164 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
H 
H 
"o~H: 
.ft:O 
~ 0" + CeN -
.ro~H ftH 0" + Cern 
4 R 
H 
R 
H 
H 
6 
H 
o 
0 
(c) Radical termination 
(150) 
Kulkarni and Mehta56) examined the question of C2-C3 bond cleavage during 
oxidation of cellulose with CeIV ions by following a reaction sequence similar to 
the oxidation of cellulose with sodium meta period ate and reduction with sodium 
borohydride. They have shown that in the initial stage of oxidation of cellulose 
with CeIV ions, the reaction proceeds very rapidly due to formation of a CeIV_ 
cellulose complex and oxidation of the hemiacetal group of cellulose. There-
after, oxidation of the secondary hydroxyl group at carbon C2 occurs without 
CZ-C3 bond cleavage. The glycol bond cleavage takes place at a high CeIV ion 
concentration and on prolonged oxidation of cellulose. There are, then, two 
postulated grafting sites in CeIV-initiated graft copolymerization onto cellu-
10se56,6z,65, 73, 75,84,86): the CZ-C3 glycol group of the anhydroglucose unit 
and the hemiacetal group of the end units of cellulose molecule. A number of 
authors have strongly supported these postulates on the basis of kinetic studies 
with modified celluloses66), as well as with model compounds88,89). 
More research90) indicates that the CeIV ion oxidizes glucose at the C1-CZ 
bond, forming a free radical on Cz' and that this is presumably the same 
reaction that occurs at the reducing end group of cellulose. A more startling 
proposal has been advanced by Gaylord911, who postulates that the growing poly-
mer chain is initiated on the monomer and terminated by the cellulose, rather 
than being initiated by a cellulose macroradical (see Chapter 2). 
3.5 rn--.,----,----,----,--,---,---,-----, 
2.B r----T+----j 
..c 
en 
c: 
~ 21 
If) 
• 
"0 
c: 
0) 
'Vi 
.~ 1.4 
o 
ru 
"" 
0.7 
o 
25 
50 
75 
100 
125 
175 
200 
Time (5) 
Fig. 38. Decay of free radicals formed on cellulose by CelV ion, time measured from saturation 
of cellulose with CelV ions at 25°C until freezing at -100°C before recording spectrum. Reprinted 
from Ref.BS), p. 1599, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
165 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
If a cellulose sample, in which free radicals have been initiated by oxidation 
with CeIV ions, is stored, one of two things may happen: the free radical may be 
terminated, owing to exposure to atmosphere, or there may be a charge 
transfer, resulting in termination of the radical with simultaneous creation 
of another active site (in other words, the free radical activity remains un-
changed). Thus, the decay of free radical activity of the CeIV -oxidized cellulose 
during storage would be a result of these two processes. Hebeish and Mehta57) 
have adopted the following experimental procedure for studying this pheno-
menon. The cellulosic material was oxidized with CeIV ammonium nitrate at 
20°C, 40 °C, and 60°C until maximum CeIV consumption was obtained. The 
reaction time needed for this was available from data on CeIV consumption 
during oxidation at various times of reaction (see Fig. 35). The excess CeIV 
solution was removed by suction filtration, and the sample (containing ap-
proximately 100 % its weight of CeIV solution) was stored for various intervals 
of time, ranging from 2 to 300 minutes, before acrylonitrile monomer was 
added. The percent graft yields shown in Figure 39 were obtained for a 3-hour 
reaction period after the addition of monomer. 
These data (Fig. 39) indicate that the rate of decay of free radical activity 
increases rapidly with increasing temperatures. The presence of air in the medium 
also accelerates this decay, since the percent graft yields are much lower in air 
than in nitrogen. Moreover, it is noticed that on increasing the accessibility of the 
substrate (e.g., viscose and ethylenediamine treated cotton), the free radical decay 
is greater. The difference in the percent graft yield in nitrogen and in air 
atmosphere is also greater in these cases than in that of native cotton. 
280,-----r----.----.----,----, 
--- ---
o 
60 
120 
180 
240 
300 
Storing time after oxidation with CelY (mini 
166 
Fig. 39. Rate of decay of free radical 
activity of CelV -oxidized cellulose. Per-
cent graft: (--) in nitrogen; (- - --) 
in air. Grafting at CC); (e) 20; (x) 40; 
(0) 60. Storing time after oxidation 
with CeIV, 2-300 min.; [CeIV] = 0.006 M 
in 1% HN03 ; cellulose, I g; acrylo-
nitrile, 15 cm3 • Reprinted from Ref.57), 
p. 1645, by courtesy of John Wiley & 
Sons, Inc. 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
Huang and Chandramouli have examined the structure and properties of 
cellulose -
styrene92) and cellulose -
methyl methacrylate93) graft copolymers 
synthesized, using the CeIV ion method. In the cellulose-styrene system, the graft-
ing reaction was found to reach a maximum value in a narrow range of 
concentrations of initiator, l.0 x 10-3 to l.8 X 10-3 mol/l at 58 ± 1 0c. The 
structure of the copolymers were assessed after hydrolyzing away the cellulose 
backbone to isolate the grafted polystyrene branches. Measurement of the mole-
cular masses and molecular mass distributions of the grafted branches was 
achieved through gel permeation chromatography. The number average mole-
cular mass, in the above initiator concentration range, varied from 2.3 x l(f 
to 4.5 X 105, while the polydispersity ratio (Mw/M.) varied from 2.5 to 8.0. Graft-
ing frequencies of the order of 0.05 to 0.4 polystyrene branches per cellulose 
chain were obtained. Huang and Chandramouli conclude that the success of 
initiation depends primarily on the diffusion rate of the monomer onto the 
cellulose. The initiation step is thought to be favored only when the diffusion 
rate is at least comparable to the rate of oxidative termination. 
For the cellulose-methyl methacrylate system93 ), the number average molecular 
mass of isolated branches ranged from 3.6 x l<r g/mol to 1.6 x 105 g/mol, and 
the polydispersity ratio (MwlM.) varied from 4.0 to 7.0. The grafting frequency 
ranged from 0.38 to 3.2. Thus, with methyl methacrylate grafting, greater internal 
control over the copolymerization reaction is obtained relative to the correspond-
ing cellulose-styrene system. As with the cellulose-styrene system, a critical con-
centration range for the initiator was observed in methyl methacrylate grafting. 
This range was from 3.0 to 6.0+ 10-3 mol/I. A decrease in the percent grafting 
beyond this range is attributed to the increasing oxidative termination rates. It 
has been shown that the number average molecular mass of the grafted branches 
generally decreases with increasing cellulose content in systems of this type. 
More recently, general studies of CeIV initiation include the grafting of acrylo-
nitrile onto sulfated pine and poplar wood pulps. It has been shown that the extent 
of grafting increases as the lignin content increases. The efficiency of the graft-
ing process using pine was greater than that observed with poplar pulp. How-
ever, an induction period is observed with both types of pulp, increasing in 
length as the concentration of lignin in the pulp increases. This inhibitory 
character has been confirmed via a kinetic analysis of the process94). 
Watamoto and Tonami95 ) have examined the graft copolymerization of 
p-benzoyloxystyrene onto cotton fibers by the pad-cure method using CeIV nitrate-
dimethylformamide. Samples treated in this way showed greater retention of 
tensile properties when exposed to ultraviolet radiation than did samples of 
copolymer obtained by non-pad-cure methods. It was found that in the grafting 
of fibers by the initiation/pad/cure route, the grafting ratio reached a maximum 
value with increasing temperatures in the range of 80° to 100°C. However, this 
limiting value increased as the concentration of p.benzoyloxystyrene in the 
system increased. 
Messiha et a1.96) have followed the graft copolymerization of a-bromoacrylic 
acid onto cellulose. Initiation was provided by CeIV ammonium sulfate and 
CeIV ammonium nitrate in aqueous media. HN03 was found to retard the 
grafting process, whereas H2S04 , HCl04 , and HCl provided an increase in 
167 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
grafting relative to the corresponding acid-free system. These effects were 
magnified with increasing temperatures in the range of 40 to 80°C. In each acid 
system the grafting degree increased rapidly in the initial phase of reaction, passed 
through a maximum, and then showed only a slow increase in grafting. In-
frared spectroscopic examination of the graft copolymers provides evidence of 
intramolecular lactone formation during the grafting reaction. 
The ability of CeIV to induce graft copolymerization onto chemically moditied 
celluloses has been investigated. Details of these studies will be discussed later 
(see Chapter 6). 
4.2.4. Initiation by Pentavalent Vanadium 
Waters97 ) has shown that oxidation of alcohols by transition metals, such as 
CoIII ions and pentavalent vanadium ions, takes place through complex formation. 
The formation of alcohol complexes with CoIII and vanadium v is easily noticed 
due to the immediate color change of the oxidizing solution. These complexes 
dissociate to yield free radical intermediates. That is, oxidation of the alcohol 
by such metals proceeds via a free radical mechanism. Thus, if cellulose reacts 
similarly, initiating free radicals on the cellulose backbone in the presence of a 
vinyl monomer, one may expect grafting. 
Indeed, synthesis of cellulose graft copolymers could be achieved using 
pentavalent vanadium as an initiator93). The reaction has been carried out as 
follows. Cellulose pulp (3 g) was swollen in distilled water (250 cm3). Methyl 
methacrylate (25 cm3) was added followed by addition of vanadium v nitrate 
(10 cm3). Vanadiumv nitrate was prepared by adding 3.48 g of ammonium 
vanadate in 12.5 cm3 of 69 % (w Iv) nitric acid and the whole diluted to 100 cm3 . 
The reaction mixture was stirred for 24 hr. at 30°C in nitrogen. The reaction 
product was filtered and washed until free from acid. After drying, the cellulose 
was extracted with benzene (300 cm3) for hours. The graft yield obtained amounted 
to 37.33%. 
4.2.5. Initiation by Manganeselilions 
Duke99) has studied the oxidation of the oxalate ion by manganese ions (MnIII). 
The oxidation proceeds by an electron transfer reaction via a free radical inter-
mediate. Oxidation of cellulose with MnIII might follow the same mechanism. 
Free radicals would be formed on the cellulose backbone upon treatment with 
solutions of manganese salts in high oxidation states. It is believed that the 
mechanism of the initiation reaction is similar to that of the CelV ion/glycol 
system and can be written as follows74): 
The free radicals produced can initiate graft copolymerization if a vinyl monomer 
is present. 
Using manganeseIII sulfate in the presence of sulfuric acid as initiator, Singh 
et a1. 1OO) have been able to graft a number of vinyl monomers onto different 
168 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
substrates containing hydroxyl groups. The grafting levels show a significant 
dependence on the substrate form. 
. 
Obviously, a considerable amount of. graft formation was obtained when 
methyl methacrylate, acrylonitrile, and methyl acrylate were used as monomers. 
The failure of this system to induce grafting of styrene and vinyl acetate has 
been, interpreted in terms of poor solubility of styrene in water and low 
reactivity in the case of vinyl acetate. With respect to the substrates, carboxy-
methyl cellulose showed low graft yields due to the reduction in the number of 
available hydroxyl groups on the cellulose chain, which act as sites for graft 
initiation. 
4.2.6. Initiation by Manganese lV 
Graft copolymerization of vinyl monomers onto textile fibers has been made 
possible by the use of potassium permanganate as initiator (101-104). Radical 
formation in this system seems likely to occur through reduction of MnlV to 
either Mnlll or Mnll. Thus, during vinyl copolymerization on cellulose (cell-OH) 
under the catalytic influence of potassium permanganate in the presence of an 
acid (HR), creation of free radicals in the system may be presented as 
follows104) : 
MnlV + HR- Mnlll + H+ + R', 
(152) 
(153) 
(154) 
The radical, R', or the hydroxyl radical, HO', attacks cellulose, forming a 
cellulose macro-radical. The latter may also be formed according to the follow-
ing reactions: 
Cell-OH + Mnlv _ Mnlll + H+ + Cell-O' , 
Cell-H + Mnlll_ MnIl + H+ + Cell-O' . 
(155) 
(156) 
A German patent by Teichman and Uhlig101 ) outlined the grafting of vinyl mono-
mers onto textile fibers with potassium permanganate as follows: Nylon (lg) 
was added to 200 cm3 of potassium permanganate (316 mg KMn04/200 cm3 
H20) at 60°C. To this was added 15.9 cm3 acrylonitrile, which resulted in the 
formation of active Mn02' The addition of 38 cm3 of concentrated HN03 started 
the grafting process after one hour. After washing and extracting with 
N,N'-dimethylformamide at 100 GC, followed by a second washing with water 
and drying, the polymer showed a 64.5 % weight increase due to grafting. In a 
similar manner, grafting of viscose with ethyl acrylate, and cotton with acrylo-
nitrile, could be achieved. The vapor phase technique was also used in effecting 
graft copolymerization by this initiator, i,e., potassium permanganate. 
Hebeish et a1.104) have extensively studied the copolymerization reactions 
169 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
initiated by manganese'v on a number of cellulosic substrates. Conclusions arrived 
at from this study may be summarized as follows: 
(I) The grafting reaction is characterized by an initial fast rate followed by a 
slower rate which levels off after a certain time. Leveling off of grafting with 
time was attributed to a decrease in concentration of both initiator and 
monomer, as well as to a reduction in the number of sites on the cellulose 
backbone accessible for grafting as the reaction proceeds. 
(2) The effect of raising the temperature of the polymerization system from 30° 
to 50°C is to bring about a significant enhancement in the rate of grafting. 
This is perhaps due to increases in the solubility of the monomer (acrylonitrile 
and methyl methacrylate), in diffusion of both monomer a'nd the initiator, 
or to changes in the rates of permanganate decomposition, initiation, and 
propagation of the graft. 
(3) Increasing the permanganate concentration from 0-20 milliequivalents per 
liter causes a significant increase to the graft yield. Further increases in the 
initiator concentration cause a decrease in the amount of graft formation, 
particularly when the polymerization is allowed to proceed for a prolonged 
time (4-6 hours). The reason for this is that at higher permanganate 
concentrations, extensive homo polymerization occurs at the expense of 
grafting. 
(4) Increasing the monomer (methyl methacrylate) concentration is accompanied 
by a significant increase in the graft yield. Moreover, the proportion of 
monomer converted to grafted polymer is substantially greater at higher 
monomer concentrations. This accelerated grafting is ascribed to the 
gel effect. 
(5) The graft yield increases with increasing concentration of the acid, attains 
a maximum, and then falls at a higher concentration. The fall at a higher 
concentration was attributed to a variety of conditions. First, coagulation of 
the colloidal homopolymer, in solution and within the fibers during the 
grafting reaction, increases at lower pH. This retards diffusion of both mono-
mer and initiator into the fiber. Secondly, side reactions, such as Mn02 
+ 2H+ --+ Mnll + H20 + 0, increase at higher acid concentrations. Thus, 
besides consuming some Mn02 (required for production of initiating species), 
this leads to constant production of inhibiting oxygen. Thirdly, the initiat-
ing species may be destroyed by side reactions such as, for instance, 
reaction of the acid radicals with Mnlll. 
(6) Within the range studied, the effectiveness of the acids follows the order: 
nitric acid > sulfuric acid > perchloric acid > hydrochloric acid. This has 
been interpreted in terms of the differences in the side reactions, in the 
affinity to cellulose of the acid species, and in the half-life of the free 
radicals formed when these acids were used. 
(7) Introduction of carboxymethyl groups into the cellulose molecule prior 
to grafting enhances the graft rate, as compared with sodium hydroxide-
treated cotton. This was anticipated in view of the greater swellability of such 
modified cotton. 
(8) The extent of grafting increases upon increasing the degree of substitution 
of cyanoethylated cotton. Besides opening up the cellulose structure, the 
170 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
cyanoethyl groups afford additional sites for grafting, thereby enhancing 
graft formation, in agreement with the results obtained when the CeIV ion 
method was used. 
(9) The effect of introducing acetyl groups into the cellulose molecule is to cause 
a significant decrease in the susceptibility of the cellulose toward grafting. 
This was ascribed to lack of swell ability and to blocking of some of the 
cellulose hydroxyls. 
4.2.7. Initiation by Ozone-Oxygen Mixtures 
Treatment of cellulose with an ozone-oxygen mixture105) introduces hydroper-
oxide groups. Thermal decomposition of these groups yields cellulose macro-
radicals capable of initiating grafting. Some crosslin king will result if the termina-
tion occurs mainly by coupling. On the other hand, there are many vinyl 
monomers, especially the acrylates and methacrylates, for which disproportiona-
tion is the main termination step and simple grafting will be favored over 
crosslinking. 
The e.s.r. method has been used to study the radical character of cellulose 
peroxide and hydroperoxide thermal decomposition106). It was concluded that 
the free radical formed arises from a cleavage of the form: 
H 
0/ ____ /0 
0/ + OH' 
R=CH 20H 
(157) 
Ozonizing was carried out experimentally, by placing the cellulose samples in 
glass cells through which ozone was passed. This hydroperoxidizing process 
depends on the moisture content of both the ozone and the cellulosic materials, 
the duration of the ozonizing, the storage time, and the working temperature. 
Grafting was achieved in hermetically closed isothermal glass tubes, in which 
monomers and peroxidized cellulose (rayon fiber) were introduced at temperatu-
res between 80--110 0c. The water-soluble monomers (acrylamide and methacrylic 
acid) were used in aqueous solution, while the water insoluble monomers (the 
esters of the acrylic and methacrylic acids) were applied as emulsions containing 
0.5 % sodium oleate in the former case and I % Dresinat 204 in the 
la tter1 06) • 
The quantity of synthetic polymers grafted onto the cellulose was found to 
depend on a number of factors. Among these are the time allocated to ozoniza-
tion and grafting, the monomer concentration, and the working temperature. The 
degree of grafting is favorably influenced by increasing the magnitude of these 
factors. The efficiency of grafting of the acrylic monomers follows the order 
acrylamide > methyl acrylate> ethyl acrylate> butyl acrylate. The metha-
crylate monomers, despite their longer processing time, have efficiencies in the 
171 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
order methyl methacrylate > methacrylic acid > ethyl methacrylate > butyl 
methacrylate106). 
4.2.8. Initiation by Periodate Ions 
It is well known that sodium periodate oxidizes cellulose specifically at carbon 
C2 and carbon e3 with cleavage of the glycol bond107,108). It has been 
postulated that this reaction proceeds via a free radical mechanism109,110). 
Hence, sodium period ate would be expected to make possible graft copolymeri-
zation to cellulose by utilization of such cellulose radicals. 
According to a Japanese patentll l), grafting to cellulosic paper was carried out 
as follows. A 20 x 5 cm filter paper was treated with 16 cm3 aqueous Nal04 
(0.01 mol/I) saturated with acrylonitrile at 25 °e for 5 hours. The paper 
increased in weight by 140 %. The tr .!ated sample was not soluble in an 
aqueous solution of the standard cupriethylenediamine complex after standing 
for 24 hours at room temperature. For grafting to viscose, the following proce-
dure was adopted. Viscose rayon (3 parts) was treated with 100 parts aqueous 
deoxygenated HI04 (0.01 mol/I) and 10 parts acrylonitrile at 50 °e, for 60 mi-
nutes. After decomposing HI04 with KI, a grafted rayon was obtained in 
an amount of 4.4 parts. 
A German patent112) describes the grafting of vinyl monomers onto polymers 
containing hydroxyl groups by employing HI04 as the initiator. For example, 
7 g scoured cotton cellulose was placed in a flask to which 10 cm3 aqueous 
HI04 (0.2 M) and 10 cm3 of acrylonitrile were added. The solution was made 
up to 250 cm3 and the reaction was conducted under nitrogen for 3 hours at 
23°C. The increase in weight of cotton due to grafting was 5.6 %. Satisfactory 
grafting onto cotton was also obtained with acrylic acid, methyl methacrylate, 
and tertiary butyroacrylamide. 
In an extensive study, Toda113) has shown that acrylic monomers, such as 
acrylonitrile and methyl methacrylate, were efficiently grafted to cellulose by 
sodium periodate. The grafting reaction was carried out in a glass ampoule and 
sealed under vacuum at 50 °e, with the use of a 7 % acrylonitrile solution and a 
1: 1 mixture of methyl methacrylate and water respectively, at a material to liquor 
ratio of 1: 50. The concentration of sodium period ate varied from 0.5 mmol/I to 
10 mmol/!. It was found that with both monomers, a maximum rate of grafting 
was attained at a sodium periodate concentration of approximately 2.5 mmo!. 
A graft yield of ca. 150 % and ca. 170 % could be obtained with acrylonitrile and 
methyl methacrylate respectively, after a reaction time of7 hours using 2.5 mmol/l 
sodium periodate. This is compared to yields of ca. 95 % and ca. 120 % with 
acrylonitrile and methyl methacrylate when using a concentration of 10 mmol/I 
sodium period ate under the conditions described above. At higher concentrations, 
the cellulose radicals formed by the attack of sodium periodate on cellulose are 
converted to aldehyde groups without contributing to the initiation of graft 
copolymerization. The grafted chains were also found to be much shorter in cases 
of higher periodate concentration than in those of lower concentrations, despite 
the fact that the apparent number of growing graft chains calculated from the 
percent grafting and the degree of polymerization of poly(methyl methacrylate) 
172 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
were observed to be almost constant. Further consideration of extensively 
periodate-treated cellulose (aldehyde cellulose) is given in Chapter 6. 
4.2.9. Initiation by Aryl Diazonium Groups 
Homolytic decomposition of aryl diazonium groups has been used to effect vinyl 
graft copolymerization onto cellulose. The method consists of introducing aroma-
tic amine groups onto the cellulose backbone114 - 118). This can be achieved by 
reacting an halogenated amine, such as p-aminophenacyl chloride, with either 
sodium cellulosate or with the sodium salt of carboxymethyl cellulose; thus, 
Cell-O-Na 
+ Cl-CH2-C~NH2 -
cell-O-CH2-C~NH2 
"~ 
"~ 
o 
0 
This compound is then reacted with nitrous acid to form a diazonium salt: 
o 
cell-o-cHJ--@-N=N-Cl 
When heated, the diazonium salt splits up to produce free radicals thus: 
o 
"~ 
cell-o-cH2-C---B' + N2 + Cl' 
However, in the presence of a vinyl monomer, both graft polymerization through 
the cellulose derivative radical, as well as homopolymerization through CI' 
radicals, occur. In order to suppress homopolymerization, a reducing agent such 
as a Fell salt is added which quickly destroys the cr free radicals. 
Introduction of aromatic amino groups into the cellulose may be accomplish-
ed with reactive dyes according to the following mechanism117): 
Remazol brilliant orange RR 
Na,S,O, 
---------., 
173 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
Cell- 0- CH2-CH2 -
502 ~ 
Fen J 
70'C 
N=NQl Cle 
Two classes of dyes have been used, chlorotriazine dyes (Procion, Cibacron) and 
vinyl sulfonyl dyes (Remazol). 
In grafting aromatic amino ethers or esters of cellulose with methacryljc, 
acrylic, and N-vinylpyrlidone monomers, the degree of grafting depends upon the 
nature of monomer solution, the pH, the reaction time and temperature, the 
degree of substitution of the aromatic amino derivative, and the concentration 
and type of the radical initiating grafting. Increasing the acidity and temperature 
of the reaction medium has been reported to cause a decrease in grafting. This 
could be traced back to the behavior of the diazonium salts during their thermal 
decomposition in media with different pH. In an acidic solution, water is the 
first to react while decomposition by the radical mechanism is much reduced117l. 
It has also been reported that methacrylic monomers and N-vinyl pyrrolidone 
show the highest activity in grafting using this method. With each series 
(methacrylic and acrylic monomers), the grafting degree decreases with the 
increase in the length of the ester chain1l7l. 
The nature of the initiating macroradical greatly influences the grafting degree. 
In a radical where a substituent in the para position has only (j links; its stability 
is relatively lower than one where the electronic cloud of the valency electron 
is not localized on a single carbon atom but on a higher number of atoms, so that 
the radical density is scattered. 
Increasing the degree of substitution of aromatic amino-cellulose ethers results 
in a higher percentage of grafted polymer being obtained. Aromatic amino esters 
behave differently, but they have a higher degree of substitution and reduced 
hygroscopicty, which may account for the differences. 
In addition, aromatic amino cellulose derivatives, obtained by the agency of 
the chlorotriazine type of reactive dyes, showed a lower degree of grafting 
than the aromatic amino cellulose derivatives prepared by the agency of the vinyl 
sulfone type of reactive dyes. This occurs as a consequence of macro radical 
stabilization by existing substituents from the aromatic nucleus. 
The main advantages of grafting by means of cellulose diazonium salts may be 
outlined as follows: 
(I) The number of free radicals produced on cellulose can be estimated by the 
nitrogen content of the sample. Furthermore, in the case of sodium carboxy-
174 

4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
methyl cellulose, the grafted polymer chains can be easily removed by 
hydrolysis, since grafting takes place through an ester linkage. Thus, the 
estimate of molecular masses of the grafted polymer segments is quite 
accurate in this case, since the conditions of hydrolysis are mild and no 
degradation of the polymer chains is expected to occur. 
(2) The cellulose macroradical is highly active and provides the opportunity of 
grafting different polymers, some of which cannot be joined to cellulose 
using other methods of initiation. 
(3) In the presence of a metal with variable valency, homopolymer formation can 
be eliminated and pure cellulose graft copolymers can be obtained. 
This method displays a number of serious disadvantages, including the follow-
ing: (I) the necessity of first introducing into the cellulose molecule an aromatic 
amino group; (2) the formation of colored compounds as a result of the 
interaction of the diazo group with those free aromatic amino groups which do 
not participate in the diazotization reaction. Commercial exploitation of this 
route to grafting seems very unlikely in view of the complex nature of the 
radical producing stages118). 
4.2.10. Initiation by Radical Attack on Unsaturated Groups 
Free radical transfer reactions with unsaturated polymers are most likely to 
occur through the abstraction of allylic hydrogen atoms. The formation of such 
resonance-stabilized macro radicals was studied by Schulz et aI.119,120). They 
used poly(methyl methacrylate) terminal double bonds which resulted from 
termination by disproportionation. The chain transfer constant for AIBN-
initiated polystyrene radicals with the allylic hydrogens at the chain ends is 
Cterm. = II x 10-2 ; and with hydrogen atoms along the backbone, Cinterm. 
~ 0.3 X 10-4 •119) Thus, if styrene is polymerized in the presence of such a polymer, 
the preferred reactivity at the chain ends leads to extensive block copolymer 
formation. 
Grafting of various vinyl monomers, such as methyl methacrylate, styrene, 
vinyl acetate, acrylonitrile, etc., onto natural and synthetic rubbers has been 
extensively studied12 1). Grafting depends on the nature of the initiator. Allen 
et a1. 121, 122) found that good yields of methyl methacrylate-rubber graft copoly-
mers are obtained by the use of benzoyl peroxide as initiator, while AIBN produces 
only a mixture of homopolymers. 
The mechanism of grafting in the methyl methacrylate-polyisoprene system 
was studied with the aid of C14-labelled initiators122). From the distribution of 
initiator fragments in the copolymer before and after ozonolysis of the poly-
isoprene backbone, it was concluded that free radical sites on the rubber 
molecule are produced by the addition and transfer of the primary radical: 
175 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
Graft formation has also been reported through addition copolymerization for 
several polymeric systems containing residual double bonds. By copolymerizing 
small amounts of ethylidene dimethacrylate with methyl methacrylate, a soluble 
polymer is obtained that has reactive double bonds132): 
Polymerization of styrene in the presence of this unsaturated polymer produces 
graft copolymer by addition copolymerization. 
Cellulose can be made amenable to grafting if it contains unsaturated groups 
along its molecule133 - 135). Cellulose containing unsaturated groups may be 
prepared by reacting it with compounds having two functional groups, one of 
which is a double bond, such as N-methylol acrylamide and methacryloyl 
chloride. For example, the partial esterification of cellulose with methacryloyl 
anhydride allows copolymerization, that is, grafting of cellulose with methyl 
methacry la te133) . 
4.2.11. Initiation by Dimethylaniline 
El-Rafie et al. 136) have examined the dimethylaniline (DMA) -
CUll ion system 
in the graft polymerization of methyl methacrylate onto viscose fiber. DMA 
has, in fact, been employed as a catalyst with other co-initiators, such as Cu" 
nitrate137), benzoyl peroxides138) or benzyl chloride139). The DMA-benzyl chloride 
system has been shown to be efficient in the grafting of methyl mathacrylate 
onto woollen substratesl40). In El-Rafie's study various factors were examined, 
including the influence of the concentration of DMA, Cu" ion, methyl metha-
crylate, the reaction time, and the temperature136). At 80°C, the grafting process 
generally displayed an initial rapid rate followed by a slower one. At 70°C, how-
ever, the graft yield increased directly with the reaction time. It was shown that 
increasing the monomer concentration did not significantly effect the graft yield 
during the first forty-five minutes of reaction. Beyond this time, the effect of 
monomer concentration increases was marked. Figure 40 shows the graft yield 
as a function of the copper sulfate concentration and indicates that grafting 
occurs even in the absence of catalyst, but to a considerably reduced extent. The 
critical nature of the copper sulfate concentration is seen in the maximum grafting 
which can be achieved at a specific copper sulfate concentration. The occurrence 
of grafting in the absence of copper may be explained by autoxidation of 
DMA via a free radical intermediate, which attacks the viscose rayon, producing 
macro-radicals in the system. Additional radicals, such as the methyl anilino-
methyl radical141 ) and the HO; radicaI142), may be created in such a system. 
176 

40 
32 
~ 24 
e 16 
'-" 
8 
o 
\ \ \ i'-o. --r---
10 
20 
30 
40 
CuS04 concentration (m molll) 
4.2. Free-Radical Initiation 
Fig. 40. Effect of the copper sulfate concen-
tration on the graft yield. Temperature 70°C; 
methyl methacrylate concentration 12%; 
DMA concentration 80 mmoll- 1• Polymeri-
zation time 4 hours; monomer/liquor ratio 
1: 50. Reprinted from Ref.136), p. 2904, cour-
tesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Figure 41 clearly shows the significance of the DMA concentration in the 
grafting process, with maximal grafting observed at a value of 80 mmolJI. 
Further increases in the DMA concentration only decrease the yield of grafting. 
It is supposed that the methyl anilinomethyl radical may take part in termina-
tion reactions involving the graft and also in coupling of the type 
Studies of the monomer dependence of grafting indicate that gel effects operate 
in this type of system as seen in Figure 42. The gel effect seems to have two 
functions: it hinders termination of the growing polymer chain radicals by 
coupling and also by enhancing the viscose rayon swellability; it thus assists 
diffusion of monomer to growing grafted chains and active sites on the viscose 
backbone, thereby accelerating grafting. The effect of temperature change on the 
grafting reaction is clearly shown in Fig. 43. An increase in temperature from 
70 to 80°C causes a significant enhancement in the rate of grafting. With a 
fourhour reaction time, the grafting reaction shows at 80°C an initial rapid 
rate followed by a slower one. At 70°C, on the other hand, the graft yield 
increased in proportion to the increase in reaction time within the same duration. 
EI-Rafie concludes that raising the reaction temperature seems to accentuate the 
177 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
40.-----,------,-----. 
32~-----r---+--~----~ 
~24~------~~----~----~ 
~ 
"0 
~ 16 ~------+__I~----+------__l 
8~----M_----_+----~ 
o 
40 
80 
120 
DMA concentration (mmol/I) 
40.------,-------,-------.-. 
Fig. 41. Effect of the dimethylaniline concentration 
on percent graft yield. Temperature 70°C, CuS04 
concentration I mmoll- I methyl methacrylate con-
centration, 12 %; time 4 hours ; monomer/liquor 
ratio, I :50. Reprinted from Ref. 136), p. 2906, cour-
tesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
32~-----+------~------~ 
-
24 ~-----_t­
~ 
"0 
~ 16~---~~--~~---~--l 
o 
1 
2 
3 
Reaction time (h) 
178 
Fig. 42. Influence of the methyl methacrylate 
concentration on the rate of grafting. (.), 4 % 
MMA, (x), 8% MMA; (0) 12 % MMA; 
Temperature 
80°C; 
CuS04 
concentration 
I mmoll- I DMA concentration 80 mmoll- I ; 
Monomer/liquor ratio 1: 50. Reprinted from 
Ref. '36), p. 2907, courtesy of John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc. 

4.3. Ionic Initiation 
creation of free radicals in the polymerization medium, assist the swellability 
of the cellulosic substrate, increase the solubility of the monomer in the reaction 
medium, and enhance the diffusion of the monomer into the fibers. Additional 
features include an apparent increase in efficiency of initiation and propagation 
of the grafting reaction when the temperature is raised to the 70 to 80°C range. 
The overall effect is one of increased grafting136). 
40,----,-----,-----,-----, 
32f---~ 
~ 24 f-----+-
~ 16 
2 
Reaction time (h) 
4.3. Ionic Initiation 
Fig. 43. Effect of temperature on grafting. (0) 
70°C; (x), 80°C. MMA concentration, 12 %; 
[CuS04], 1 mmol [D.M. A], 80 mmoll- 1 ; mono-
mer/liquor ratio 1: 50. Reprinted from Ref. 136), 
p. 2907, courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Although most of the grafting work on cellulose has been based on radical 
polymerization systems, ionic polymerization has also been employed143 -146). 
Ionic grafting may be divided into two types: 
A) Cationic grafting and 
B) Anionic grafting 
4.3.1. Cationic Grafting 
Metallic halides of the Friedel-Crafts type, e.g., BF3 , TiCI4 , and AlCI3, are well 
known to effect polymerization of a number of vinyl monomers. The polymeri-
zation reaction takes place rapidly at very low temperatures and proceeds through 
a mechanism involving ions. In almost all cases, the reaction requires the 
presence of traces of substances, such as water or hydrochloric acid, which 
act as co-catalysts. The monomers polymerized by these substances contain 
electron-releasing substituents, so that the doubly bonded carbon atoms tend to 
share a pair of electrons with these electron acceptors. This would imply that 
179 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
their mode of action involves carbonium ions147). One possible mechanism for 
their mode of action is: 
(158) 
eF3BCH2CllXY + CH2=CXY ---+ eF3BCH2CXYCH2CG:lXY, (159) 
eF3BCH2CXYCH2C G:lXY + nCH2 =CXY ---+ Polymer, 
(160) 
or, since a cocatalyst is required, another is possible involving proton trans-
fer148. 144). BF 3 will initiate polymerization of isobutylene in the presence of water. 
The first reaction is to form a hydrate BF3-OH2 which will transfer a proton 
BF30H2 + CH2=C(CH3)2---+(CH3)3CG:l + BF30H e , 
(161) 
(CH3)3C G:l + CH2 =C(CH3)2 ---+ (CH3)3C-CH2-C G:l(CH3)2 ' 
(162) 
(CH3)3C-CH2-C G:l(CH3)2 + nCH2 =C(CH3)2 ---+ Polymer. 
(163) 
Based on the principles discussed above, cationic grafting may be represented 
as follows: 
H 
I e 
Cell=CHOH + BF3 -
Cell=C$ HOBF3 
CH3 
H 
I 
CeU=C$ 
e 
HOBF3 + 
I 
e 
CH2=C(CH3l2 -
CeU=CH-CH2-C$- HOBF3 
4.3.2. Anionic Grafting 
Graft 
-
I 
CH3 
Copolymer 
(164) 
(165) 
(166) 
Many vinyl monomers undergo addition reactions with compound containing 
active hydrogen atoms. Additions of this general type, known as Michael reactions, 
require basic catalysts; one of the most powerful catalysts for such reaction is a 
sodium alkoxide150). Thus sodium cellulosate, as well as alkali cellulose, should 
readily react with certain vinyl compounds. The cyanoethylation of cellulose 
with acrylonitrile in the presence of dilute sodium hydroxide is a Michael 
reaction151). 
Thomas152) has reviewed the polymerization of acrylonitrile and discussed the 
mechanism of anionic polymerization in forming the homopolymer. The acrylo-
nitrile double bond is activated by the presence of the CN group, which 
withdraws electrons; in the case of vinyl monomersJ CH2 = CHX, the ease of 
180 

4.3. Ionic Initiation 
anionic polymerization can be expected to be a function of the electron-
withdrawing power of X. Comparatively recently, the methods of anionic 
polymerization of vinyl monomers have been adopted for graft polymerization 
to cellulose. Alkali metal cellulosates were used as initiators for the anionic 
graft polymerization of acrylonitrile, methacrylonitrile, methyl methacrylate, 
and other vinyl monomersl44.145). Grafting was carried out under conditions 
where rapid termination was not favored following the interaction of a single 
monomer molecule with the cellulose. 
Based on what is known of the literature on anionic polymerization, the anionic 
graft polymerization of a vinyl monomer, for example, acrylonitrile on sodium 
cellulosate in aprotic solvents, may be given as followSl44.145.153): 
(i) Initiation 
Cell-08 Na® + CHz = CHCN 
~ [Cell-O-CHz-CHC -N] Na® , 
(ii) Propagation 
(167) 
Na(!;)[Cell-O-CHzCH8CN] + n(CH2=CHCN)--+ 
~[ cen-O-fCH,CHCNJ;::-;CHJ:eJ Na". 
(iii) Termination 
(By chain transfer to monomer) 
Cell-O+CH2-CHCN+n~HzCH8CN Na(!;) + CH2 = CHCN 
~ Cell-O+CHz-CHCN+n=tCHz-CHz-CN + CHz 
(iv) Termination 
(By chain transfer to the free -OH of cellulose) 
Cell-O+CHz-CHCN~CHzC8HCN + Cell-OH, 
(168) 
(169) 
Cell-O+CHz-CHCN~CHz-CHz--CN + Cell-O-
(170) 
(v) Homopolymer Formation 
Initiated by the highly reactive species CHzC8 CN formed in step (iii) above 
CN 
CN 
e 
I 
I 
e 
CHz=C-CN + n(CHz=CHCNl --- CHz=C-(CHz-CHln:TCHzCHCN 
(171) 
CN 
CN 
I 
I 
e 
CHz=C-ICHz-CHln:1CHz-CH-CN + CHz=CH-CN ---
CN 
CN 
I 
I 
CHz=C-(CHZ-CHln-=1CHz- CHz-
CN + 
e 
CHz=C-CN 
(172) 
181 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
Schwenker and Pacsul44) have studied the reactions of acrylonitrile and other 
vinyl monomers with sodium cellulosate and alkali cellulose substrates. It is 
apparent that the reaction of selected monomers with either sodium cellulosate 
or alkali cellulose under controlled conditions leads to the formation of graft 
copolymers of cellulose and the vinyl polymers. According to these investigators 
the reaction of acrylonitrile with sodium cellulosate appears to result in a mixed 
product involving primarily (i) a graft copolymer and (ii) acrylonitrile homo-
polymer, although the possibility of a small amount of cyanoethylation cannot 
be completely excluded. However, the residue after extraction with dimethyl-
formamide (a solvent for polyacrylonitrile) is believed to be predominantly in 
the grafted form. Similar products appear to be formed when alkali cellulose 
is used as the substrate. 
It has been well established that low molecular mass polymers are obtained by 
anionic polymerization of vinyl monomers initiated with alkali metal alk-
oxides154,155). It has also been shown that the formation of sodium cellulosate 
with a relatively high alcoholate substitution can be accomplished by an 
exchange reaction with sodium methoxide, with no chemical degradation and no 
measurable alteration in the physical structure of the cellulose fiber161). Thus, 
this approach to grafting is particularly promising for the preparation of graft 
copolymers with low molecular mass side chains and high degrees of substitu-
tion157-161). 
Simionescu and Rusan have provided a related route to anionic grafting 
through their use of metallated cellulose monoethyl malonate as a macromole-
cular initiator for the grafting of certain vinyl monomers146). These researchers 
have successfully grafted acrylonitrile onto sodium cellulose monoethyl malonate. 
The copolymerization was carried out in dry N,N-dimethylformamide at -40°C 
for I hour in an argon atmosphere. After extraction to remove polyacrylonitrile 
homopolymer, the graft copolymers were obtained as white to yellow/brown 
products. 
Kido et al. have metallated samples of rayon with sodium methoxide162) and 
allowed the activated products to react with acrylamide and subsequently 
graft-copolymerized them with poly-fJ alanine. Here, the rayon samples were 
swollen with boiling water and dehydrated by repeated immersions in methanol. 
Reaction with sodium methoxide at 30° for 24 hours followed removal of the 
excess methanol. Extraction with dimethylsulfoxide allowed removal of excess 
methoxide solution. Grafting was achieved by reacting the metallated rayon with 
acrylamide solution at 100°C in a nitrogen atmosphere in a sealed glass tube for 
the required time. The graft copolymer was purified by repeated extraction in 
50 % aqueous phenol and washing with hot water. The reaction conditions, in-
cluding the reaction time, the amount of Na combined (mol. per glucose unit), 
inhibition of radical polymerization, the acrylamide concentration, and the di-
electric constant of the solvent were investigated and certain properties of the 
grafted fiber were measured. 
Marchessault et al. have reported developments in a technique of cellulose 
(paper) graft composite formation in which the monomer (ethylene) is 
directly grafted within the cellulosic substrate163). Marked improvements are 
thus obtained in most sheet properties. The technique involves absorbing a 
182 

References 
Ziegler-Natta catalyst at the external surface of the cellulose fibers and synthesis 
thereon of a layer of nascent polyethylene having controllable thickness. The 
catalyst system (TiCI4/AlEt3), when deposited on the cellulose surface, provides 
instantaneous grafting when brought into contact with ethylene. 
References 
I. Bains, M. S.: J. Polymer Sci. 37, 125 (1972) 
2. Kolthoff, 1. M., Miller, 1. K.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 73,3055 (1951) 
3. Smith, W. V., Cambell, H. N., J.: Chern. Phys. 15,388 (1947) 
4. Marie, c., Bunel, L. J.: Bull. Soc. Chim. Paris, Ser. 3, 29, 930 (1903) 
5. Bartlett, P. D., Cotman, J. D., Jr.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 71, 1419 (1949) 
6. Kolthoff, 1. M., Meeham, E. J., Carr, E. M.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 75, 1439 (1953) 
7. Haydel, C. H., Janssen, H. J., Seal, J. F., Vix, H. L. E., Gastrick, E. A.: Textile Res. J. 27, 975 
(1957) 
8. Hayes, R. A.: J. Polymer Sci. 13,585 (1954) 
9. Chaudhuri, D. K. R., Hermans, J. J.: J. Polymer Sci. 51, 373 (1961) 
10. Sankalia, S. H., Chaudhuri, D. K., Hermans, J. J.: Canad. J. Chern. 40, 2249 (1962) 
II. Kulkarni, A. Y., Chitale, A. G., Vaidya, B. K., Mehta, P. c.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 7, 
1581 (1963) 
12. Simionescu, c., Ungureanu, c.: Cell, Chern. Techno!. 1,33 (1967) 
13. Gaylord, N. G., Tomono, T.: J. Polymer Sci. B 13, 697 (1975) 
14. Gaylord, N. G., Takahashi, A., Anand, L. c.: J. Polymer Sci. 9,97 (1971) 
15. Gaylord, N. G., Anand, L. c.: J. Polymer Sci. B 10,305 (1972) 
16. Gaylord, N. G., Anand, L. C.: J. Polymer Sci. 9, 617 (1971) 
17. Gaylord, N. G., Tomono, T.: 1. Polymer Sci. B 13,689 (1975) 
18. Gaylord, N. G.: U.S. Patent 3,740,362 (1973) 
19. Gaylord, N. G.: U.S., Patent 3, 781, 232 (1973) 
20. Gaylord, N. G., Tomono, T., Mandai, B.: J. Polymer Sci. B 13,693 (1975) 
21. Gaylord, N. G.: J. Polymer Sci. B 13,693 (1975) 
22. Rowland, S. P., Blouin, F. A., Mason, J. S.: Textile Res. J. 48, 73 (1978) 
23. Bardhan, K., Mukhopadhyay, S., Chatterjee, S. R.: J. Polymer Sci. Chern. 15, 141 (1977) 
24. Mukhopadhyay, S., Prasad, J., Chatterjee, S. R.: Makro;no!. Chern. 1, 176 (1975) 
25. Uri, N.: Chern. Rev. 50, 375 (1952) 
26. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Hinojosa, 0., Bains, M. S.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 12,1411 (1968) 
27. Bains, M. S., Arthur, J. C. Jr., Hinojosa, 0.: J. Phys. Chern., 72,2250 (1968) 
28. Faber, F., Weiss, J.: Naturwissenschaften 20, 948 (1932) 
29. Faber, F., Weiss, J.: J. Proc. Roy. Soc. (London), A 147,332 (1934) 
30. Kolthoff, 1. M., Parry, E. P.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 73,3718 (1951) 
31. Merz, J. H., Waters, W. A.: J. Chern. Soc. 515 (1949) 
32. Landells, G., Whewell, C. S.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 67,338 (1951) 
33. Landells, G., Whewell, C. S.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists 71, 171 (1955) 
34. Kim, Bu. J., Dumitriu, S., Simoinescu, C. 1.: Cel!. Chern. Techno!. 11, 4555 (1977) 
35. Focher, B., D'Anguiro, L., Cremonesi, P.: Ann. Chim. (Rome) 66, 283 (1976) 
36. Hamada, R., Maeda, E.: Kinki Daigaku Nogakubu Kigo 10, 71 (1977) 
37. Mikolajczyk, T.: Polimery 22,11 (1977) 
38. Lawniczak, M.: Pr. Kom. Techno!. Drewna, Poznan, Tav. Przyj. Nauk. 6, 49 (1976); 
Through C.A. 85, 145003 (1976) 
39. Young, R. A.: J. Agric Food Chern. 25, 738 (1977) 
40. Baxendale, J. H., Evans, M. G., Park, G. S.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 42,155 (1946) 
41. Bridgeford, D. J.: Ind. Eng. Chern. Prod. Res. Develop. 1,45 (1962) 
42. Richards, G. N.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 5,539 (1961) 
43. Uno, K., Iwakura, Y., Makita, M., Ninomiya, T.: J. Polymer Sci., A-I 5, 2311 (1967) 
44. Ogiwara, Y., Kubota, H.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 12,2575 (1968) 
183 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
45. Ogiwara, Y., Kubota, H.: 1. App!. Polym. Sci. 13, 1613 (1969) 
46. Ibragimov, F., Mukhamadaliev, D., Gafurov, T. G.: Vysokomo!. Soed A 12, 1475 (1970), 
Ibragimov, F., Mukhamadaliev, D., Gafurov, T. G., Usmanov, Kh. U.: J. Polymer Sci. 
C 37, 239 (1972) 
47. Smith, G. F., Sullivan, V. R., Frank, G.: Ind. Eng. Chern. Anal. Ed. 8, 449 (1936) 
48. Mino, G., Kaizerman, S.: J. Polymer Sci. 31, 242 (1958) 
49. Mino,'G., Kaizerman, S., Rasmussen, E.: J. Polymer Sci., 38, 393 (1959) 
50. Mino, G., Kaizerman, S., Rasmussen, E.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc., 81,1494 (1959) 
51. Mino, G., Kaizerman, S., Rasmussen, E.: J. Polymer Sci., 39, 523 (1959) 
52. Hargreaves, G., Sutcliff, L. H.: Trans. Faraday Soc., 51, 1105 (1955) 
53. Ardon, M.: J. Chern. Soc. 1811 (1957) 
54. Katai, A. A., Kulshrestha, V. K., Marchessault: J. Polymer Sci. C 2, 403 (1963) 
55. Smith, G. F., Duke, F. R.: Ind. Eng. Chern. Anal. Ed. 15, 120 (1943) 
56. Kulkarni, A. Y., P. C. Mehta: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 12, 1321 (1968) 
57. Hebeish, A., Mehta, P. c.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 12, 1625 (1968) 
58. Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: Textile Res. J. 42, 10 (1972) 
59. Schwab, E., Stannett, V. T., Hermans, J. J.: Tappi 44,251 (1961) 
60. Iwakura, Y., Kurosaki, T., Uno, K., Imai, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. C4, 673 (1963) 
61. Kaizerman, S., Mino, G., Meinhold, L. F.: Textile Res. J. 32, 136 (1962) 
62. Cumberbirch, R. J. E., Holker, J. R.: J. Soc. Dyers Colourists. 82, 59 (1966) 
63. Schwab, E., Stannett, V. T., Rokowitz, D. H., Magrane, J. K.: Tappi 45, 390 (1962) 
64. Livshits, R. M., Rogovin, Z. A.: Vysokomol. Soed., Tsellyuloza i ee Proizvodnye, sb. Statein 
12-17 (1963); Through C.A. 60,13248 (1964) 
65. Iwai, S., Kukurai, T., Noguchi, T.: Seni-i Gakkaishi 19, 547 (1963); Through C.A. 62,13369 
(1965) 
66. Narita, H., Uchino, N., Machida, S.: Sen-i Gakkaishi 19, 225 (1963) C.A. 62, 13293 
(1965) 
67. Hebeish, A., Kantouch, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 15, 1921 (1971) 
68. Bergen, N., Ellefsen, fl., Kringstad, K., Kroden, P.: Norsk Skogind. 17,347 (1963) 
69. Movsumzade, A. A., Livshits, R. M., Rogovin, Z. A., Konkin, A. A.: Vysokomol, Soed, 
Tsellyuloza i ee Proizvodnye, Sb. Statein 186 (1963); Through C.A. 61, 5893 (1964) 
70. Ide, F., Handa, R., Makatsuka, K.: Kobunshi Kagaku 21, 57 (1964); Through C. A. 61, 
1997 (1964) 
71. Livshits, R. M., Alachev, V. P., Prokofeva, M. V., Rogovin, Z. A.: Vysokomol. Soed. 6, 655 
(1964); Through C.A. 61, 5893 (1964) 
72. Sun, T., Chou, H. H., Kuo, M. L., Chang, S. H.: Ko Fen Tzu rung Hsun 6, 130 (1964); 
Through C.A. 63,18441 (1965) 
73. Neime, L., Sihtola, H.: Paperi Puu., 47 369 (1965); 47, 374 (1965); Through C.A. 63, 
15086 (1965) 
74. Simionescu, Cr., Feldman, D., Hrihorov-Ciubotariu, M.: Iasi Hirtie, Bucharest, Romenia, 
14,358 (1965); Through C.A. 63, 15089 (1965) 
75. Iwakura, Y., Imai, Y., Yagi, K.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I 6, 801 (1968) 
76. Negishi, M., Nakamura, Y., Kakinuma, T., Iizuka, Y.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 9, 2227 (1965) 
77. Kamagawa, H., Sekiya, T.: Textile Res. J 31,585 (1961) 
78. Cornell, R. H.: Tappi 54, 145 A (1962) 
79. Ogiwara, Y., Kubota, H.: J. Polymer Sci., A-I 5, 2791 (1967) 
80. Hebeish, A., Ph. D. Thesis: Gujarat Univeristy India 1967 
81. Hebeish, A., Mehta, P. c.: Cell. Chern. Technol. 3, 469 (1969) 
82. Kubota, H., Ogiwara, Y.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 13, 1569 (1969) 
83. Immergut, E. H.: In Encyclopaedia of Polymer Science and Technology Vol. 3 (Mark, H. F., 
Gaylord, N. G., Bikales, N. M., eds.) New York: Interscience 1965, P. 242 
84. Teresaki, 1., Matsuki, M.: J. Soc. Text. Chern. Ind. Japan. 18, 147 (1962) 
85. Arthur, J. c., Jr., Baugh, P. J., Hinojosa, 0.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 10, 1591 (1966) 
86. Iwakura, Y., Kurosaki, T., lmai, Y.; J. Polymer Sci. A 3,1185 (1965) 
87. Hebeish, A., Kantouch, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 15. II (1971) 
88. Imai, Y., Masuhara, E., Iwakura, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. B 8, 75 (1970) 
89. Pottenger, C. R., Johnson, D. c.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I 8,301 (1970) 
184 

References 
90. Bhattacharyya, H., Johnson, D. c.: A.C.S. Abstracts 161 st National Heating Los Angeles, 
March 28, Carbohydrate Division, Paper 17 
91. Gaylord, N. G.: ibid, Cellulose Division, Paper 59 
92. Huang, R. Y-M., Chandramouli, P.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 12,2549 (1968) 
93. Huang, R. Y-M., Chandramouli, P.: J. App!. Polymer Sci. A-I 7, 1393 (1969) 
94. Erdelyi, D.: Cell. Chern. Techno!. 11,569 (1977) 
95. Watamoto, H., Tonami, T.: Nippon Kagaku Kaishi 6,876 (1977) 
96. Messiha, N., Shaaban, A. E., Nossier, M. H.: Faserforsch. Textiltech. 29, 290 (1978) 
97. Waters, W. A.: Mechanisms of Oxidation of Organic Compounds, London: Methuen 1964, 
P.403 
98. Singh, H., Thampy, R. T., Chipalkatti, V. B.: J. Polymer Sci. A 3,1247 (\965) 
99. Duke, F. R.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 69, 2885 (\947) 
100. Singh, H., Thampy, R T., Chipalkatti, V. B.: J. Polymer Sci. A 3,4289 (1965) 
101. Teichmann, R., Uhlig, E.: East German Patent 61,532 (1968) 
102. Uhlig, E., Teichmann, R.: Faserforsch. Textiltech. 20,451 (1969) 
103. Kantouch, A., Abdel-Fattah, S., Hebeish, A.: Polymer Journal 3, 675 (1972) 
104. Hebeish, A., Kantouch, A., Khalil, M. I., EI-Rafie, M. H.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 17, 2547 
(1973) 
105. Landler, Y., Lebel, P.: (to Polyplastic, Inc.) German Pat., 1, 100286 (1958) 
106. Simionescu, C. I., Oprea, S.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37,251 (1972) 
107. Jackson, E. L., Hudson, C. S.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 59, 2009 (1937) 
108. Davidson, G. F.: J. Text Inst. 29,195 (\938) 
109. Criege, R.: Angew. Chern. 50,153 (1937) 
110. Waters, W. A.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 42,184 (1946) 
Ill. Morimoto, S., Okada, K., Okada, T., Nakagawa, K.: (to Toyo Spinning Company Ltd.), 
Japan Pat. 2500 (1962) 
112. Chemische Werke Huels A-G (by F. Stuerzenhofecker), Ger. Pat. 1, 132, 724 (1962) 
113. Toda, T.: J. Polymer Sci. 58, 411 (\962) 
114. Rogovin, Z. A., Tun, S., Virnik, A. D., Khvostenko, N. M.: VysokomoL Soed. 4, 571 
(1962) 
115. Richards, G. N.:.I. App!. Polym. Sci. 5, 553 (1961) 
116. Simionescu, C. I., Dumitriu, S.: Cel!. Chern. Techno!. 3, 47 (1969) 
117. Simionescu, C. I., Dumitriu, S.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37, 187 (1972) 
118. Benson, R., Guthrie, J. T., Lartey, R. B.: Polymer 16,903 (1975) 
119. Schulz, G. V., Henrici, G., Olive, S.: J. Polymer Sci. 17, 45 (1955); Henrici-Olive, G., 
Olive, S., Schulz, G. V.: Makromo!. Chern. 23, 207 (1957) 
120. Schulz, G. V., Henrici, G., Olive, S.: Z. Electrochem. 60, 296 (1956) 
121. Allen, P. W., Merrett, F. M.: J. Polymer Sci. 22,193 (1956) 
122. Allen, P. W., Ayrey, G., Moore, C. G.; Scanlan, J.: J. Polymer Sci. 36, 55 (1959) 
123. Bloomfield, G. F., Swift, P. Mel.: J. App!. Chern. 5, 609 (\955) 
. 
124. Bloomfield, G. F., Merrett, F. M., Popham, F. G., Swift, P. McL.: Proc. Rubber Techno\. 
Conf. 3rd, London 1954, P. I. 
125. Merrett, F. M.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 50, 759 (1954) 
126. Koolhaas, D. R., Van der Bie, G. J., Van Essen, W. J.: Arch. Rubbercult, Ned-Ind. 
207, 197 (1950); Through Ceresa R.J. Block and Graft Copolymers, Washington: Butter-
worths 1962, P. 16 
127. Swift, P. M.: J. App!. Chern. 8, 803 (1958) 
128. Szwarc, M., Levy, M., Milkovich, R.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 78,2656 (1956)149) 
129. Berlin, A. A.: Russian Chern. Rev. (English Trans!.) 29, 541 (1960) 
130. Blanchette, J. A., Nielson, L. E.: J. Polymer Sci. 20, 317 (1956) 
131. Kobryner, W., Banderset, A.: J. Polymer Sci. 34, 881 (1959) 
132. Smets, C., Schmets, J.: Bull. Soc. Chim. Belges. 62, 358 (1953) 
133. Berlin', A. A., Makarova, T. A.: J. Gen. Chern. USSR. 21,1383 (\951); Through C.A. 46, 8017 
(1952) 
134. Faraone, G., Parasaceo, G., Cogrossi, C.: J. App\. Polym. Sci. 5,16 (1961) 
135. Rausing, G., Sunner, S.: Tappi 45 (1),203 A (1962) 
136. EI-Rafie, M. H., Waly, A. I., Hebeish, A.: J. Polym. Sci. 14,2903 (1976) 
185 

4. Grafting by Chemical Activation of Cellulose 
137. Sato, T., Takada, M., Otsu, T.: Makromol. Chern. 148,2903 (1971) 
138. Imoto, M., Otsu, T., Ota, T.: Makromol. Chern. /6, 10 (1955) 
139. Horner, L., Knapp, K. H.: MakromoL Chern. 93,69 (1966) 
140. Bendak, A., Khalil, M. I., EI-Rafie, M. H., Hebeish, A.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. /9, 335 (1975) 
141. EI-Rafie, M. H., Hebeish, A.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. /9, 1815 (1975) 
142. Nord, H.: Acta Chern. Scand. 9,442 (1955) 
143. Haas, H. c., Kamath, P. M., Schuler, N. W.: J. Polymer Sci. 24, 85 (1957) 
144. Schwenker, R. F. Jr., Pacsu, E.: Tappi 46, 665 (1963) 
145. Feit, B-A., Bar-Nun, A., Lahav, M., Zilkha, A.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 8, 1869 (1964) 
146. Simionescu, C. I., Rusan, V.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37, 173 (1972) 
147. Eley, D. D., Richards, A. W.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 45, 425, 436 (1949) 
148. Norrish, R. G. W., Russell, K. E.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 48, 91 (1952) 
149. Dainton, F. S., Sutherland, G. B. B. M.: J. Polymer Sci. 4, 37 (1949) 
150. Royals, E. E.: Advanced Organic Chemistry New York: Prentice-Hall 1954 
151. MacGregor, J. H.: J. Soc. Dyers Col. 67, 66 (1951) 
152. Thomas, W. M.: Fortschr. Hochpolymer-Forsch. 2, 401 (1961) 
153. Avny, Y., Yom-Toy, B., Zilkha, A.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 9, 3737 (1965) 
154. Zilkha, A., Feit, B. H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 5, 251 (1961) 
155. Feit, B. H., Zilkha, A.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 7,287 (1963) 
156. Avny, Y., Rebenfeld, L.: Textile Res. J. 38, 599 (1968) 
157. Avny, Y., Rebenfeld, L.: Textile Res. J. 38, 684 (1968) 
158. Feit, B. A., Bar-Nun, A., Lahav, M., Zilkha, A.: Himia i Technolog. Polimerov 93 (1966) 
159. Rusan, V., Asandei, N., Simoinescu, Cr.: Cell. Chern. Technol. 3, 151 (1969) 
160. Pearson, R. G.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 71,2212 (1949) 
161. Tahan, M., Yom-Toy, B., Zolkha, A.: Europ. Polym. J. 5, 499 (1969) 
162. Kido, I., Susuki, K., Ikeda, I., Yama, S., Shunichi, K.: J. Polymer Sci. B /3, 767 (1975) 
163. Marchessault, R. H., Fisa, B., Revol, J. F.: In Cellulose Technology Research (Turbak, A. F., 
ed.) A.C.S. Symp. Series No. 10. Washington: A.C.S. 1975, P. 147 
186 

5. Grafting of other Types of Monomers 
onto Cellulose 
5.1. Introduction 
The formation of copolymers of cellulose and various synthetic polymers via 
graft polymerization has been extensively studiedl - 7). The chemical modifi-
cation of different cellulosic materials by this means has been described in 
detail in Chapters 2, 3, and 4. It has been shown that nearly all the grafting 
methods have involved the free radical initiation of vinyl and acrylic copolymeri-
zation, using cellulose as a macromolecular initiator, to form grafted side chains 
on the cellulose backbone. Ionic initiation of vinyl graft copolymerization 
has also been employed. However, little consideration has been given yet to 
other possibilities of obtaining graft copolymers, such as using other mono-
mers rather than vinyl and acrylic monomers, or by directly linking preformed 
polymer chains to cellulose. The purpose of this chapter is tq summarize our 
present knowledge of grafting such types of monomers and/or polymers onto 
cellulose. 
5.2. Step-Growth Polymerization of Cyclic Compounds 
In these reactions, a cyclic, highly reactive molecule adds to the hydroxyl 
groups of cellulose, either without a catalyst or under the catalytic influence 
of hydrogen or hydroxyl ions. It is well known that the ring opening and poly-
merization of IX-epoxides, R-CH-CH2' may be accomplished with a variety 
'0"""'-
of substances: ammonia, organic acids, amines, alcohols, water, etc. Hence, 
the synthesis of graft copolymers involving epoxide groups is generally based 
on the reactions of macromolecules containing active sites, such as -NH2 ; 
-COOH, -OH, with the epoxide. 
A series of non-ionic detergents has been made by initiating the polyaddition 
of ethylene oxide to a poly(propylene oxide) having terminal hydroxyl groups8): 
187 

5. Grafting of other Types of Monomers onto Cellulose 
A variation of this technique utilizes a diamine to initiate propylene oxide 
polymerization, followed by polyaddition of ethylene oxide at the terminal 
-OH groups of the poly(propylene oxide)9). 
Epoxides are grafted onto polyamides via ring openings initiated by the 
N-hydrogen1o. 11) 
-C-N-
-C-N-
II 
I 
II 
I 
o H 
o CHz-CHz-O-CHz-CHz-O-
Macromolecules [other than poly(alkylene oxides)] containing pendant or 
terminal OH groups can also initiate epoxide polymerizations. For example, 
copolymers of styrene and dimethyl maleate, which have been converted to the 
polymeric N-ethanolamide, can initiate ethylene oxide polymerizationI2). The 
average number of ethylene oxide units added to each N-ethanol group varies 
from 0.8 to 6.8. Similarly, the acetate groups of styrene-allyl acetate copolymers 
have been saponified to yield polyol sites which can initiate ethylene oxide 
graftingl2 ) . 
Attempts to graft cellulosel3) and poly(vinyl alcohol)14) with ethylene oxide 
via the macromolecular -OH groups yield short polyethylene oxide chains 
due to the high reactivity of the secondary polymeric hydroxyl groups. The 
reaction of cellulose with ethylene oxide can be written as follows: 
CHZ--CHZ 
Celi-OH + n '\ / 
-
Cell-O-(CHz-CHZ-Oln-H 
o 
Although step-growth grafts of cellulose have not received much attentionI5 ), 
a commercial product, based on a cellulose-ethylene oxide graft copolymer, 
has been reportedI6). 
Grafts of similar cyclic compounds to cellulose have also been prepared1? -19). 
Examples of the grafting reactions between cellulose and some of these cyclic 
compounds are given below: 
a. Reaction with /3-propiolactone1?): 
o 
II 
Cell-GH 
+ 
-
Cell-O-C-CHz-CHz-OH 
and 
0 
II 
Cell-O-CHz-CHz-
C -OH 
o 
II 
Celi-O-C-CHz-CHz~OH + n CHz-C=O 
I 
I 
CHz-O 
-
Cell-O (~-CH -CH -~ -H 
"\ 
z 
Z 
0)n.1 
The carboxyethyl compound will also form polymer chains. 
b. Treatment of cellulose with ethylenimine18): 
188 
Cell-OH + n CHz-
CH z 
"N/ 
H 

5.2. Step-Growth Polymerization of Cyclic Compounds 
c. Polymerization of caprolactam onto the cellulosic backbone starting with 
carboxymethyl cellulose19): 
o 
0 
" 
II 
Cell-O-CHz-C-OH + SOClz --. Cell-O-CHz-C-Cl + HCl + SOz 
o 
II 
Cell-O-CHz-C-Cl + 
o 
0 
0 
II 
II 
II 
~HICHzls-Y -
Cell- 0 -
CHz -
C -
~ICHzls ~ 
NHICH,isC=O 
Cell-O-CHz-C-NICHzlsC=O 
L--...O..:..J 
~ 
II 
L-:..::...J 
o 
Cell- 0- CHz -
C1N'CHzlscj NICl12ls- C = 0 
II 
I 
II 
I 
I 
o 
H 
0 
Grafting has also been achieved by making use of the Schotten-Bauman 
reaction, which involves the step-growth reaction between a hydroxyl group 
and an acid chloride (-COCl). This reaction can be carried out interfacially, 
that is, the cellulose and the diamine are dissolved or dispersed in one phase 
and the acid chloride reagent in the other phase20). The following scheme shows 
the reaction mixture for grafting nylon-6,6 onto .cellulose21 ): 
Cell -
OH + HZNICHZl6 NHZ 
in Water 
o 
0 
" 
" 
Cl- C -,.ICHZI4 -
C -
Cl 
In this reaction, a mixture of graft copolymer and polyamide homopolymer 
will result because the diacid chloride can react with the diamine without 
necessarily reacting with a cellulose hydroxyl group. However, it is possible 
to favor the formation of graft copolymer by adding the diamine after some 
of the diacid chloride has reacted with the hydroxyl groups of cellulose. It is also 
possible to carry out this reaction in a single phase by employing an organic 
base, such as a trialkylamine, as a catalyst 
o 
0 
II 
II 
Cell-OH + n NHzICHzl6 NHz + n Cl-C-ICHzI4-C-Cl 
I
o 
0 H 
HI 
II 
II 
I 
I 
____ Cell-O 
C-ICHzI4-C-N-ICHzI6-N 
H 
n 
189 

5. Grafting of other Types of Monomers onto Cellulose 
5.3. Preformed Polymers 
Grafting of preformed polymers onto cellulose has been made possible. The 
following reaction22) was suggested for grafting polyester chains ont{) a cellulose 
backbone: 
Similarly, it is possible to graft polyamides onto a cellulose backbone23): 
-
II 
II 
t
o 
0 
i 
Celi-O 
C-(CH2)4-C-NH(CH2)6NH 
H 
I 
n 
OC-5 No 
II 
e <I! 
5 
Cellulose graft copolymers may also be based upon the use of epoxy resins, 
which are composed of macromolocules containing reactive terminal or branch 
epoxide groups. These resins may be obtained by condensing epichlorohydrin 
with a polyhydric phenol in the presence of an alkali. The phenol is often 
"Bisphenol A", [2,2-bis-(p-hydroxyphenyl)propane]. The reaction can be per-
formed in an excess of epichlorohydrin to ensure terminal epoxide groups. 
The chains are relatively short and may be represented as: 
Reaction of cellulose hydroxyls with exposy resins leads to block, graft, and 
crosslinked copolymers via epoxide group ring openini4•25). 
190 

5.3. Preformed Polymers 
Obviously, then, for grafting preformed polymers onto cellulose, short-chain 
synthetic polymers containing reactive terminal groups capable of reaction 
with the cellulose hydroxyl groups are required. It must also be realized 
that the heterogeneous reaction of even low molecular weight polymers poses 
accessibility problems due to steric factors, so that the extent of grafting is 
somewhat a function of the size of the synthetic polymer molecule. 
In an interesting study, Avny and Schwenker6) have shown that short-chain 
vinyl polymers can be synthesized, which contain reactive terminal groups 
of an acyl chloride type that permit a simple reaction with cellulose to form 
graft copolymers. Although these researchers grafted only polystyrene onto 
cellulose, they pointed out that other types of vinyl polymers made by 
anionic polymerization, such as poly(methyl methacrylate), could also be used: 
bifunctional carboxyl-terminated polystyrene was obtained in a typical prepa-
ration by polymerization conducted in dry tetrahydrofuran (THF) (200 cm3) 
using a sodium naphthalene initiator in 1.3 M solution (3 cm3) and styrene 
(10 cm3), introduced in that order. The reaction mixture was maintained at 
o °C for 30 minutes with vigorous stirring, followed by the addition of solid 
carbon dioxide. The polymer thus produced was isolated by precipitation 
in water, than filtered, washed, slurried, washed with ethanol, and finally dried 
in vacuo to yield 8.1 g of product. Monofunctional carboxyl-terminated poly-
styrene was similarly prepared, except that the initiator was butyl lithium 
in petroleum ether with the polymerization carried out at room temperature in 
benzene (200 cm3) containing THF (0.5 cm3).· 
It is clear that two different initiators were used in the preparation of the 
living polystyrene: butyl lithium in petroleum ether solution and sodium 
naphthalene in THF solution. Reaction between carbon dioxide and living 
polystyrene, initiated by butyl lithium, leads to the formation of mono-
functional carboxyl-terminated polystyrene, as described below26): 
Polymerization 
--
Reaction between carbon dioxide and living polystyrene, initiated by sodium 
naphthalene, leads to the formation of bifunctional carboxyl-terminated poly-
styrene in the following manner: 
191 

5. Grafting of other Types of Monomers onto Cellulose 
Polymerization 
Nael + n 
CH'~ -
The carboxylate terminal groups of the polystyrene were converted to the acid 
chloride form by reaction with thionyl chloride. In a typical example, 3.1 g 
of polystyrene with a carboxyl content of 7.38 x 10-4 mol/g were dissolved 
in 50 cm3 of benzene. Redistilled thionyl chloride (50 cm3) was added and the 
reaction mixture maintained at 55°C for 24 hours. Excess thionyl chloride was 
removed by concentrating the system in vacuo almost to dryness. Three 
portions (30 cm3) of dry benzene were then added, distilled, and the acyl 
chloride terminated polymer dissolved in 40 cm3 of benzene and used im-
mediately. 
A typical preparation involving grafting cotton yarn with polystyrene is 
as follows. Purified yarns (1.71 g) were swollen in 20% sodium hydroxide 
solution for 15 minutes at room temperature. The yarns were washed with 
distilled water, netltralized with 2 % acetic acid solution, and washed with water 
until neutral. Additional swelling of the yarns was accomplished in dimethyl-
formamide (DMF;) for 48 hours. The yarns were subsequently solvent-ex-
changed with dry THF, which had been distilled from sodium benzophenone 
solution, and then with dry benzene .. Fresh benzene (200 cm3) was distilled 
into the reaction flask and dry pyridine (10 cm3) was added. Acyl chloride-
terminated polystyrene (3.1 g, carboxyl content 7.38 x 10-4 mol/g) solution 
in benzene was then injected into the flask. The reaction mixture was refluxed 
for 24 hours while the yarns were mechanically stirred. After 24 hours, the 
reaction mixture was removed, the yarns were extracted with dry DMF for 
3 days, the DMF having been exchanged three times. The yarns were washed with 
benzene and dried in vacuo at 50°C. The modified yarns weighed 1.96 g, 
which corresponds to a 12.8 % polystyrene content. 
Table 41 contains the results obtained when cotton fabrics (0.6-1.3 g) were 
allowed to react with preformed polystyrene (2.0-5.5 g) containing terminal 
groups in the acid chloride form at 80°C. Table 42 contains the corresponding 
192 

5.3. Preformed Polymers 
Table 41. Grafting of preformed polystyrene on 80 x 80 cotton print cloth, Adapted from Ref.26l, 
p. 820, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Swelling agent 
Reaction 
Reaction 
Yield· 
Polystyrene + DP. of 
solvent 
time, hr 
content in 
% 
% 
20% NaOH 
and DMF 
Benzene 
24 
3.1 
15.4 
Water 
Dioxane 
67 
8.7 
14.0 
86% H3P04 
Dioxane 
48 
5.7 
14.8 
86% H3P04 
Dioxane 
48 
3.9 
14.5 
10% NaOH 
Dioxane 
48 
3.3 
10.8 
Water 
DMF 
68 
10.7 
17.3 
20% NaOH 
and DMF 
Benzene 
24 
1.2 
4.3 
* Percent by weight of the reacted preformed polymer. 
+ Determined from the weight increase. 
preformed 
polystyrene 
9.3 
10.3** 
50.8+ + + 
50.8+ + + 
53.6+ + + 
53.6+ + + 
107.3+ + + 
Grafting + + 
D.S. 
30.4 x 10-3 
24.6 x 10'3 
5.3x 10-3 
5.2 X 10-3 
3.5 X IO- J 
6.1 X 10-3 
0.7x 10-3 
+ + Calculated from DP. of the grafted preformed polymer and the polystyrene content of the graft. 
** Monofunctional polystyrene. 
+ + + Difunctional polystyrene. 
Table 42. Grafting of preformed polystyrene on cotton yarns. Adapted from Ref.26), p. 821, 
by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Swelling agent 
Reaction 
Reaction 
Yield· 
Polystyrene+ DP. of 
solvent 
time, hr 
content in 
% 
graft % 
20% NaOH 
and DMF 
benzene 
24 
8.0 
12.8 
86% H3P04 
dioxane 
48 
5.0 
5.4 
86% H3P04 
dioxane 
120 
22.0 
22.0 
10% NaOH 
dioxane 
120 
13.5 
19.5 
* Percent by weight of the reacted preformed polymer. 
+ Determined from the weight increase. 
preformed 
polystyrene 
13.0** 
119.3+++ 
119.3+++ 
119.3+ + + 
Grafting+ + 
D.S. 
17.5 x 10-3 
0.7 x 10-3 
3.2 x 10-3 
3.7 X 10- 3 
+ + Calculated from the DP. of the grafted preformed polymer and the polystyrene content of the 
graft. 
** Monofunctional polystyrene. 
+ + + Difunctional polystyrene. 
data when cotton yarns (1.70 g) were reacted with acid chloride terminated-
polystyrene (2.0-3.0 g) under similar conditions26). 
It is obvious that relatively high grafting D.S. values are obtained with low 
molecular mass polystyrene. The maximum D.S. of 30.4 x 10- 3 corresponds 
to 33 anhydroglucose units per grafted side chain, and the minimum D.S. of 
0.7 x 10- 3 corresponds to 1430 anhydroglucose units per grafted side chain. 
The extent of grafting is mainly determined by the DPn of the reacting 
preformed polymers, increased from a DPn of 9.3 to DPn of 107.3. The same 
relationship is observed in the modified yarns where a D.S. of 17.5x 10-3 was 
193 

5. Grafting of other Types of Monomers onto Cellulose 
30 
25 
OJ 
~ 10 
OJ 
Cl 
5 
• 
\ \ 
• Fabrics 
o Yarns I 
~ 
I 
I 
I 
-~t-
~ 
.-
1'---. • 
f-- .. -
;--I----r--
20 
40 
60 
80 
Oegree of polymerization 
.. _._-
I 
• 
100 
120 
Fig. 44. Relation between grafting degree 
of substitution and degree of polymeri-
zation of preformed polystyrene. Re-
printed from Ref. 26), p. 82f, by courtesy 
of Textile Research Institute. 
obtained with polystyrene of DPn = 13.0 after 24 hours of reaction, while a D.S. 
of 3.7 x 10-3 was reported for grafting with polystyrene of DPn = 119.3 after 
120 hours. 
Methods of swelling and the reaction solvent do not appear to influence 
the grafting D.S. The reaction time has some influence on the grafting D.S., 
with longer times leading to higher grafting D.S., but the changes observed 
over long periods of time are relatively small (see Tables 41, and 42). 
Figure 44 shows the dependence of the grafting D.s. on the DPn of the pre-
formed polymers using the data in Tables 1 and 2. Despite differences in 
the swelling method, the reaction solvent, and the reaction time, it is apparent 
that the grafting D.S. is mainly determind by the DP of the reacting pre-
formed polystyrene26). 
It has been claimed that this approach to grafting onto cellulose has many 
potential advantages over conventional monomer graft polymerization. First, 
the problem of homopolymer formation is avoided. Second, the grafting D.S. 
and graft side-chain molecular weight may readily be controlled. Third, though 
this approach produces relatively low graft yields, significant improvements in the 
fiber properties would be expected because of the higher grafting D.S. and the 
short side chains, when compared to those of other grafting methods. 
References 
1. Hebeish, A.: Koloriszt. Ert. 13 (1-2),12 (1971) 
2. Hermans, J. J.: Pure Appl. Chern. 5,147 (1962) 
3. Irnrnergut, E. H., Mark, H.: Makrornol. Chern. 18/19, 322 (1956); Proc. 1st Cellulose Conf. 
Syracuse, N.Y. (1958) 
4. Krassig, H. A., Stannett, v.: Adv. Polyrn. Sci. 4, III (1965) 
5. Schurz, J.: Papier 16, 525 (1962) 
194 

References 
6. Schwab, E., Stannett, V., Hermans, 1. 1.: Tappi 44,251 (1961) 
7. Arthur, 1. C. Jr.: Adv. Chern. Series 91, 547 (1962); also Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Adv. Chern. 
Series 99, 321 (1971); Arthur, 1. C. Jr.: Adv. Makromol. Chern. 2, 1(1970) 
8. Vaughn, T. H., Jackson, D. R., Lundsted, L. G.: 1. Amer. Oil Chemists Soc. 29, 240 (1952) 
9. Jackson, D. R., Lundsted, L. G.: U.S. Pat. 2, 677, 700 (1954) 
10. Haas, H. c., Cohen, S. G., Oglesby, A. c., Karlin, E. R.: J. Polymer Sci. 15,427 (1955) 
11: Rafikov, S. R., Che1nokova, G. N., Zhuravleva, I. V., Gribkova, P. N.: J. Polymer Sci. 53, 
75 (1961) 
12. Weiss, P., Gerecht, J. F., Krems, I. J.: J. Polymer Sci., 35,343 (1959) 
13. Cohen, S. G., Haas, H. c.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 72,3954 (1950) 
14. Cohen, S. G., Haas, H. c., Slotnick, H.: J. Polymer Sci. 11, 193 (1953) 
15. Stannett, V. T.: Tappi 47, 58A (1964) 
16. General Article in Chern. and Eng. News 16, 39 (1961) 
17. Daul, G. c., Reinhardt, R. M., Reid, D. J.: Textile Res. J. 24, 738 (1954) 
18. Cooper, W., Smith, R. K.: Makromol. Chern. 40, 148 (1960) 
19. Rogovin, Z. A., Zhui, U. Z.: Vysokomol Soed. 1, 1630 (1959) 
20. Morgan, P. W.: Condensation Polymers by Interfacial and Solution Methods, New York: Inter-
science Inc. 1965 
21. Tun, S., Vey-gan, J., Rogovin, Z. A.: Vysokomol. Soed. 3, 382 (1961) 
22. Rogovin, Z. A.: J. Polymer Sci. 48, 443 (1960) 
23. Rogovin, Z. A.: Unpublished data 
24. Bruneau, C.: Compte Rendu 252, 2413 (1961) 
25. Schroeder, C. W., Condo, F. E.: Textile Res. J. 27,135 (1957) 
26. Avny, Y., Schwenker, R. F. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 37, 817 (1967) 
195 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
6.1. Introduction 
Chemical modification of polymers with the aim of imparting specific, desirable 
properties is one of the main directions of development in modern macro-
molecular chemistry. Recently, this approach to tailor-made materials has 
been successfully applied to synthetic as well as natural polymers in many labo-
ratories in different countries. 
In the case of synthetic polymers, this can be achieved either by changing 
the composition and proportion of the monomeric raw materials used for the 
synthesis, or by chemical modification of the polymer manufactured in the 
normal way. With natural polymers and in particular, cellulose, which is one 
of the most important and widely available, the constitution and chemical 
composition, as determined by biosynthesis, cannot be modified. One way of 
solving this problem is by chemical modification. This is indeed a very 
fascinating field for research with unlimited future possibilities. 
The preparation of modified cellulosic materials has been, and still is, 
made possible by a thorough understanding of the chemistry of cellulose 
and the development and application of new methods of chemical modifi-
cation, along with detailed studies of the various properties of the products 
formed. Currently, much intensive research is being undertaken in different 
countries with the aim of making cellulosics that have properties superior to 
those provided by nature. 
There are many processes to which cellulose, in partic1.Jiar cotton cellulose, 
is suggested which modify it chemically. The advantage of treating the native 
cotton cellulose and maintaining its fibrous form, instead of using a solution of 
cellulose, is that the cotton fiber is wonderfully built up and has a fine internal 
structure which is itself fibrillar and helical. Thus, the success of a chemical 
modification lies essentially in introducing functional groups into the cellulose 
molecules which confer new properties on the cellulose without destroying 
its many desirable intrinsic properties. 
The cellulose molecule has mainly one type of functional group present, 
namely, the hydroxyl groups (primary as well as secondary). Hence, one might 
be tempted to expect that all reactions, normally found to be possible with 
hydroxyl groups in carbohydrate chemistry, would have potential application 
in cellulose modification. However, the following two fact()rs have to be con-
sidered before such methods can be successfully applied. 
1. Chemical reactions with the cellulose hydroxyls take place in hetero-
geneous media where diffusion of reagents into the fiber structure is involved. 
196 

6.1. Introduction 
This may lead to considerably slower rates of reaction and to non-uniform 
reactions in many cases. 
2. The I: 4 glucosidic linkages between the neighboring glucose units in the 
cellulose molecule have very limited stability under acid conditions. Hence, 
conditions for chemical modifications must be so selected as to prevent or at 
least to minimize the breakdown of these linkages, which may lead to a 
decrease in molecular mass and impairment of mechanical properties. 
Esterification and etherification reactions of the hydroxyl groups of cellulose 
have been employed for some time and have led to the development of a number 
of well-known commercial cellulose derivatives. Among these are cellulose 
xanthate used for viscose fibers and films; cellulose nitrate for coatings, 
cinefilms and plastics; cellulose acetate for fiber, cinefilms, fibers and plastics, 
ethyl cellulose for plastics, paints, inks and coating films; and carboxymethyl 
cellulose, which has wide application in the textile field as a gum and in drilling 
muds. The recent advances in transfer printing processes have led to interesting 
developments in ink technology, some of which utilize cellulose derivatives. 
Besides these simple derivatives, methods have been developed with the aim 
of converting the natural cellulose molecule, which has only one type of func-
tional group, into a modified cellulose with new and different reactive functional 
groups so that further reactions can be made possible. These investigations have 
theoretical as well as practical importance and involve solving a number of com-
plex problems, such as the understanding of the theories of the reactions in-
volved, the stability and toxicity of reagents used, prevention of cellulose 
degradation, and standardizing the optimum conditions for economical de-
velopment of a new process. A literature survey I -15) reveals that the following 
types of methods have been examined for chemical modifications from the above 
points of view. 
1. Substitution of the hydrogen atom in the hydroxyl groups of the cellulose 
molecule. 
(a) Esterification 
(b) Etherification 
2. Selective and controlled oxidation of the cellulose hydroxy Is. 
3. Substitution of the hydroxyl groups of the cellulose molecule. 
(a) Intramolecular reactions 
(b) Intermolecular reactions 
4. Reactions involving radical additions 
5. Reactions involving electrophilic substitution 
6. Interaction of cellulose with organometallic compounds 
7. Synthesis of block or graft copolymers of cellulose 
It is important to emphasize that the same functional groups may be introduced 
into the cellulose molecule via different reactions. Hence, it must be remembered 
that introduction of the same functional groups in the cellulose molecule by 
different methods may result in the production of chemically modified celluloses 
of diverse reactivities, depending on the position of the functional groups in the 
cellulose molecule, whether in the anhydroglucose unit of cellulose or in side 
chains. 
Recently, chemically modified celluloses have evoked considerable interest 
197 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
in the grafting area. It is hoped that the grafting of synthetic polymer chains 
onto modified celluloses will prove of value, both for the achievement of a 
good understanding of the kinetics and mechanisms of grafting and also for 
the provision of basic information needed for improvements to be made in the 
properties of the products. 
6.2. Grafting on Cellulose Xanthogenate 
The methods given for preparing "standard" cellulose sodium xanthate16 -18) 
follow the technical process for the production of viscose and yield a product 
whose average degree of substitution, D.S., is in the range of 0.4 to 0.7. One 
hundred times the D.S. is sometimes known as the "gamma number". After the 
cellulose has been steeped in strong sodium hydroxide solution, most of the 
excess alkali is removed by pressing until the weight of the residual alkali 
is 2.6 to 3 times the weight of the original air-dry cellulose. Variation in this 
"press ratio" effects the ease of comminuation (shredding) of the alkltli cellu-
lose, the xanthate D.S., and the rate at which the viscose "ripens". The pressed 
and shredded alkali cellulose is usually slightly depolymerized ("aged") by 
exposure to atmospheric oxygen before xanthation is brought about by reaction 
with carbon disulfide. 
5 
NoOH 
cs, 
II 
Celi-OH ----
-
Cell-O-No ~ 
Celi-O-C-S-No 
Cellulose sodium xanthate is fairly stable when stored under reduced pressure 
at room temperature in a pure-dry condition. However, in alkaline solution the 
equilibria noted in the xanthation reactions are driven slowly to the left as 
carbon disulfide is consumed in the formation of by-products, such as trithio-
carbonate, sulfide, thiosulfate, and carbonate. The decomposition of the cellulose 
xanthate occurs fairly rapidly near pH 7 and with extreme rapidity in the 
presence of excess mineral acid. 
Xanthate derivatives, such as cellulose xanthate N,N-diethylacetamide19), 
cellulose S-methyl xanthate17,20), and cellulose S-benzyl xanthate2l), are much 
more stable than the original xanthate salt. For example, the S-methyl esters have 
been completely benzoylated21 ) without a significant decrease in xanthate 
substitution. 
The voluminous literature concerning the preparation, properties, and ana-
lysis of cellulose xanthate has been reviewed in detail elsewhere18,22,23). 
Dimov and Pavlov24) have studied the possibility of obtaining modified 
cellulosic products by reacting cellulose xanthogenate in solutions containing 
oxidizers and acrylonitrile (AN). The cellulose xanthogenate was first prepared 
as follows. Cooked and bleached cotton printed calico was mercerized and then 
treated with carbon disulfide until the necessary degree of esterification of the 
cotton cellulose was obtained. The xanthogenate was then treated with a 
solution containing 300 gil ammonium chloride and finally washed with a tenfold 
diluted solution until the yellow color of the wash water disappeared. The 
xanthogenate retained the structure of the fabric. Next, the ability of the 
198 

6.2. Grafting on Cellulose Xanthogenate 
cellulose xanthogenate-hydrogen peroxide redox system to initiate graft copoly-
merization of acrylonitrile on the cellulose was investigated under a variety of 
conditions. Variables studied include: pH, temperature of the solution, concen-
tration of hydrogen peroxide, the degree of esterification, the gamma-number, 
y, of the cellulose xanthogenate, and duration of the treatment. 
The effect of the hydrogen peroxide concentration and the degree of esterifi-
cation of the cellulose xanthogenate may be observed in Table 43. With in-
creasing degrees of esterification of the initial cellulose xanthogenate, the 
quantity of AN grafted increases, as the number of centers which can initiate 
polymerization is increased. 
With respect to the H20 2 concentration, the quantity of AN grafted 
increases at first to a concentration of 30 or 50 gil and then decreases. The 
initial increase is explained on the basis of an increase in the speed of initiation 
of the polymerization with increasing concentration of the peroxide. In addition, 
while the concentration of peroxide is being increased, the number of the xantho-
genate groups which have reacted with the oxidant and initiated the polymeri-
zation before being hydrolyzed under the action of the strongly acidic medium, 
also increases24). 
The essential reactions, as postulated by Dimov and Pavlov24), probably 
proceed as follows: 
OH 
cell~ 
o-c II" 
S 
SH 
OH 
Cell/ 
" 
a 
o-c-s: 
II 
S 
1 
HO:OH 
OH 
OH 
/ 
/ 
Cell" 
+ 
cS2 .. 
Cell" 
+ OH' + OHa 
]
0' 
~o-~-s' 
.OH 
S 
CN 
0' 
CH2=~H 
ceu/ 
"0' 
OH 
/ 
Cell, 
CN 
..... 
I 
OCH2~H 
The disintegration of the initially formed radical on the xanthogenate group 
resembles the disintegration of the radical formed on the carboxyl group 
under similar circumstances25). 
o 
0 
o 
II 
II 
a 
R-C-OH ~ 
R-C-O 
e 
II 
-co 
-
.. 
R:C-O ~ 
R' 
199 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
Table 43. Variation of the amount of acrylonitrile (AN) grafted on cellulose xanthogenate with 
hydrogen peroxide concentration and degree of esterification (y) of cellulose xanthogenate*. 
Adapted from Ref.24), p. 2778, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
H20 2 
AN grafted % 
concentration 
gil 
y = 6 
y = II 
Y = 21 
Y = 24 
Y = 32 
y' = 36 
1 
7.4 
11.2 
25.6 
27.6 
28.8 
30.0 
10 
12.3 
18.2 
27.6 
30.9 
33.5 
35.6 
30 
20.0 
23.7 
28.6 
32.0 
37.6 
39.3 
50 
21.6 
24.4 
30.0 
32.5 
34.5 
35.4 
100 
31.7 
14.2 
14.8 
16.3 
18.8 
22.2 
* The experiments were carried out at a temperature of 20°C, with an aqueous solution of 7 % 
of AN at pH 1 for 1 hr using a material: liquor ratio 1: 50. 
Obviously, then, cellulose macroradicals are obtained as a result of both the 
oxidation of the xanthogenate group and as a consequence of radical or 
chain transfer. The 'OH radicals can either recombine among themselves or with 
other radicals; or they can split off hydrogen atoms from the hydroxyl groups 
of the cellulose, or from the -SH groups of the xanthogenate; they can cause 
homo polymerization or stop transfer or propagation of growing chains24). 
At higher peroxide concentrations, the 'OH radicals seem to participate in 
terminating the growing chain radicals, as well as in initiating homopolymeri-
zation, thereby lowering the amount of AN grafted. 
In order to study the effect of pH on the amount of AN grafted, experiments in 
which the pH of the solution varied from 0.3 to 4.0 were carried out. In each 
experiment the grafting reaction was performed at 20°C for 0.5 hr, using 7 % 
of AN and 30 g/I of hydrogen peroxide on cellulose xanthogenate of y = 55 
at a liquor ratio of 50.1. The results of these experiments revealed that the 
quantity of AN grafted increases parallel to the increase of pH from 0.3 to 1.5. 
For instance, graft yields of 3.7%, 25.1 %, and 30.7% were reached at pH's 
of 0.3,0.8, and 1.5, rt!spectively24). This is explained by the speedy disintegration 
of the xanthogenate groups in the strongly acidic medium before they have 
interacted with the hydrogen peroxide, and by the reduced degree of dissociation 
of the xanthogenic acid, due to which this reaction is further limited; more-
over, the growth of polyacrylonitrile chains is slower in a strongly acidic 
medium26). 
Under the same conditions, but with a reduction in the acidity of the 
medium from pH = 1.5 to pH = 4, the quantity of AN grafted decreases to 
give a graft yield of 15.5 %. This is because the polymerization initiated by the 
redox system, hydrogen peroxide-xanthogenate, begins later at an increased 
pH. Since the time allowed for the reaction to proceed was too short, i.e., 
one-half hour, the chains that formed later at the higher pH had less time 
for polymerization. This was substantiated by the observation that higher 
graft yields could be obtained at higher pH when the reaction time was 2.5 hours 
instead of one half hour. For example, a graft yield of 57 /~ was obtained at 
pH 4, as compared with a yield of 38.1 % at pH 1.1. This increment in the graft 
200 

6.2. Grafting on Cellulose Xanthogenate 
yield is associated with the slower saponification of the xanthogenate groups 
and the faster rate of AN polymerization at higher pH. 
The effect of increasing the temperature from 10 °c to 50°C was found to 
bring about a considerable enhancement in the quantity of AN grafted. This 
means that the positive effect which the increase of the temperature exerts on the 
initiation of polymerization and the polymerization itself is greater than the 
negative effect, i.e., increased rates of saponification of the xanthogenate groups 
in acidic media result. However, an increase in temperature to over 20°C is not 
recommended, because at the end of the process, especially at 40 DC and 
50 DC, the formation of homopolymer beginsZ4). 
Dimov and Pavlov24) have also studied the kinetics of depletion of hydrogen 
peroxide during grafting of acrylonitrile onto cellulose xanthogenate. As 
expected, the hydrogen peroxide is, in time, exhausted more slowly and to a 
smaller degree at the lower degrees of esterification of the xanthogenate. At a 
lower pH of the medium, the peroxide is exhausted faster, but to a lesser degree. 
This points out again that, in a less acidic medium, the reaction between the 
hydrogen peroxide and the xanthogenic groups goes on more slowly, and 
therefore the initiation of the polymerization is delayed. It can also be seen 
that in a more acidic medium a smaller quantity of the peroxide is consumed, 
and consequently, a smaller number of xanthate groups participate in the redox 
reaction because .they are saponified more rapidly. 
Grafting onto cellulose xanthogenate systems has recently been reviewed 
by Morin and RogovinZ7), who emphasied the HzOz/thiocarbonation redox 
system. The main approach involved an examination of factors known to be 
essential to the' efficient production of composite materials in the industrial 
sense. Kraessini8) has examined the HzOz/thiocarbonate system from the view-
point of changes in general crystal structure as grafting takes place. Pavlov 
et al.Z9) applied these principles in grafting various water insoluble monomers 
onto the cellulosic substrate. Thus, each research group was able to carry out 
grafting reactions onto freshly formed, highly swollen and reactive cellulose 
fibers. The logical conclusion of this type of work is the production of cellulosic 
fibers, films, and membranes having properties superior to those available 
with current regenerated celluloses. Morin et a1.30) have examined this point 
in detail using the Fell/Redox system in grafting styrene onto cellulose xanthate. 
The cellulose xanthate solution medium appears to offer an ideal opportunity 
for volumetric grafting onto cellulosic substances, though the limitations are 
appreciable. Grafting at the wood pulp stage, before xanthation, leads to 
problems in solution and filtration through gel formation31 ) and inactivation 
of the grafting process in the inherently alkaline medium leads to wastage, as 
does the physical incorporation of monomer into the solution of xanthate, 
which is ready for grafting upon reaching regeneration baths. Much of the fun-
damental work done on characterizing this system has now been carried out. 
What is needed is a careful screening of monomers aimed at providing im-
provements to physical properties, such as moisture regain, dimensional stability, 
resilience, and toughness. Brickmann3Z) has presented a ft'asoned discussion 
of the industrial development of thiocarbonation grafting and suggests that the 
commercial route most suitable follows seven process steps: preparation, thio-
201 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
carbonation, post-thiocarbonation wash, metathesis, post-metathesis wash, graft 
polymerization, and finishing. Using selected monomers, new functional groups 
can be attached in this way which give new properties to the existing materials, 
such as dyeability, chemical resistance, fire retardancy, soil and rot resistance, 
and others. However, since the grafts are not truly volumetric, there is usually 
little to be gained in properties associated with wear and toughness. 
6.3. Grafting on Acetylated Cellulose 
Acetylation of cellulose, one of the most important modifying processes, has 
found wide-spread industrial application. Acetylation involves treatment of the 
cellulose with a mixture of acetic anhydride, acetic acid, and a catalyst such 
as sulfuric/perchloric acid. The reaction of cellulose with acetic anhydride may 
be written as: 
Acetic acid in the acetylating mixture may be replaced by a nonopolar solvent such 
as benzene. Using such procedures33 ,34), it has been possible to produce a modified 
cellulose. Acetylated celluloses possess several useful properties33, 35, 36), such 
as heat resistance, mildew resistance, and rot resistance. 
Hebeish et a1.37 ) have investigated the grafting reaction of acrylonitrile (AN) 
and methyl methacrylate (MMA) with acetylated cellulose in order to elucidate 
(a) some of the important parameters which affect the grafting reaction, (b) the 
effect of the introduction of -eOCH3 groups into the cellulose molecule on the 
grafting efficiency, and (c) the mechanism of grafting. For this purpose, they 
have treated cellulose of different acetyl contents with either CelV ammonium 
sulfate (CAS) or CelV ammonium nitrate (CAN) and monomer, i.e., grafting, 
under various reaction conditions. Some of the important findings reported by 
them are given below. 
Figure 45 shows data for the graft yields obtained with acetylated cellulose 
having 395% combined acetic acid and for those obtained with cotton cellulose 
treated with glacial acetic acid (control). It is obvious that with acetylated 
cellulose, grafting proceeds very slowly in the early stages of the reaction, and that 
the graft formation is considerable only after 30 minutes' reaction time. There-
after, increasing the reaction time causes no substantial increment in the graft 
yield within the range studied. The introduction of -eOCH3 groups along the 
cellulosic chains greatly reduces its swellability in aqueous media. Diffusion of 
the monomer would, therefore, by very difficult, especially in the early stages 
of the reaction. As a result, only a small amount of graft copolymer is formed. 
On increasing the exposure time, swelling of the fiber and diffusion of both 
monomer and initiator all increase giving rise to a substantial amount of graft 
formation. The control also shows an initial fast rate followed by a slower rate. 
Besides substrate accessibility, other causes for this could be a fall in the 
concentration of the monomer and the initiator, as well as a decrease in the 
available sites for grafting on the cellulose molecule. 
202 

6.3. Grafting on Acetylated Cellulose 
70 
60 
OO~l 
• 
50 
40'C C 
.. 
30'C 
-40 
~ 
"E 
t3 30 
Fig. 45. Effect of temperature on 
rates of grafting of acetylated cot-
20 
ton having 39.5 % combined acetic 
~l 
acid A and cotton, treated with 
" 
40'C A 
acetic acid C; 1 g AN; O.oI M 
10 
O'C 
CAS. Reprinted from Ref. 37), p. 16, 
by courtesy of John Wiley & Soils, 
Inc. 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
Reaction time (min) 
The data (Fig. 45) also show that with both substrates, the rate of grafting in-
creases upon raising the temperature from 30° to 60°C. However, the maximum 
graft yields obtained with acetylated cotton at 40° to 60°C are comparable, des-
pite the significant difference in the yields during the early stages of the reaction. 
Grafting to acetylated cotton cellulose appears best at the point of maximum 
swelling in the CeIV-AN-water system. Beyond this, the grafted polyacrylonitrile 
probably forms a diffusion barrier and inhibits the diffusion of acrylonitrile 
monomer. It is well known that introduction of -COCH3 groups considerably 
reduces swelling of the cellulose in aqueous media. Thus, the lack of swelling and 
a rapid slowing down of diffusion of initiator and monomer as grafting 
proceeds would account for the comparable maximum yield obtained at 40° and 
60°C. 
The graft yield obtained with acetylated cotton cellulose is significantly 
lower than that obtained with the control (cf. Fig. 45). 1his was also observed 
when grafting was performed under other reaction conditions, including varia-
tions in the concentrations of monomer and initiator, the type of monomer and 
initiator, the reaction time, and the temperature. The presence of bulky groups, 
such as -COCH3 in the cellulose, results in two effects: (a) reduction of the swell-
ing capacity of cellulose, thereby decreasing diffusion and adsorption of both 
monomer and initiator; and (b) blocking of some of the cellulose hydroxyls. Both 
effects lead to lower graftin~7). Data presented in Figure 46 corroborate this 
conclusion; increasing the -COCH3 groups along the cellulosic chains causes a 
significant decrease in the graft yields. 
Like the graft yields, the consumption of CeIV ions during either grafting or oxi-
dation decreases as the -COCH3 content of acetylated cotton cellulose increases. 
The explanation given for the graft yield would also apply here. With all the 
acetylated cottons, the CeIV ion consumed during grafting is higher than that 
consumed during oxidation. Hebeish and Mehta38) noticed the same effect with 
203 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
50.---,-----.---~----.---,---~ 
50 -
::= 30 
e 
'-" 
20 1-----+-----'\'1.-'\01--""-: 
10 
20 
30 
1,0 
50 
Combined acetic acid (%) 
70,---,---,---,---~---,---, 
I 
I 
I 
! 
50 f----+ --+ ---+--+---
I 
I 
~~.--t--t 
i .Yi 
i 
0 
50~,r~- T--I 
~+---j 
~" ,{ 1--' -----:--1:---
" 30 1-11 
I -
j 
.. 
::~;-_' ;~ 1-] 
f··A ' 
·1 
! 
: 
I 
./', 
i 
I 
20 
1,0 
50 
80 
Reaction time (min) 
100 
120 
50 
Fig. 46. Acetyl content (expressed 
as % combined acetic acid) vs. % 
graft yield using acrylonitrile as a 
monomer; (e) 30°C, (.A.) 40 °C, 
(~) 60°C at 15 min., (0) 30 °C, 
(.6) 40°C, (\7) 60 °C at 60 min. 
I g AN; 0.01 M CAS. Reprinted from 
Ref. 37), p. 16, by courtesy of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Fig. 47. Rates of grafting of cotton treated 
with acetic acid and acetylated cottons having 
different acetyl content (expressed as % 
combined acetic acid); (e) 0%; (0) 6.48%; 
(.A.) 21.6%; (.6) 39.5%; (~) 49.65%; (\7) 
56.2%; I g AN; 0.01 M CAS; 60°C. Re-
printed from RefY), p. 21, by courtesy of 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
various cellulosic substrates and attributed this phenomenon to homopolymer 
formation. 
Figure 47 shows the rate of grafting for acetylated cotton celluloses having 
different acetyl contents; the latter is expressed as percent of combined acetic 
acid. The rate of grafting of cotton cellulose treated with glacial acetic acid, as a 
control, is also given in the same figure. Similar trends were also obtained for 
CelV consumption during oxidation. 
It is clear that the rate of grafting of acetylated cellulose having the lowest 
204 

6.3. Grafting on Acetylated Cellulose 
combined acetic acid, i.e., 6.4 %, is very rapid at first but subsequently 
decreases, and a maximum grafting level is reached. An identical rate is 
found for the control. This indicates that the presence of -COCH3 groups, in 
small amounts, does not alter the susceptibility of cellulose to CelV ion -
initiated 
grafting. Previous studies have shown such grafting to occur at the reducing end 
of the cellulose molecule and at the C2 and C3 glycols39 -46). 
Increasing the combined acetic acid to 21.6 % considerably lowers the maximum 
grafting level. However, the grafting shows an initial fast rate followed by a 
slower rate. This suggests that acetylation might have taken place exclusively at 
the primary hydroxyl group, i.e., at C6 of. the anhydroglucose unit in the 
cellulose, without attacking the secondary hydroxyls at C2 and C3. It is known, 
from esterification studies, that the C6 group is esterified ten times faster than the 
other groups47,48), and also that partially acetylated cotton is more resistant to 
oxidation by nitrogen dioxide, indicating that primary alcohol groups have been 
preferentially esterified49). Thus, the hydroxyls at C2 and C3 may be responsible 
for the initial fast rate, an assumption which is in agreement with previous 
postulations39 -44). Lowering of the maximum grafting level is presumably caused 
by a lack of swelling of the acetylated cotton cellulose. 
Allowing the acetylation reaction to proceed, in order to give acetylated 
cell uloses having more than 21 % combined acetic acid, would certainly involve 
the hydroxyls at either C2, C3, or both. If these two hydroxyls are the only 
groups which account for the rapid initial rate, as postulated above, one would 
expect that their partial or complete blocking would appreciably influence the 
rate of grafting. Indeed, increasing the combined acetic acid concentration to 
39.5 % slows down considerably the initial rate as well as the maximum grafting 
level. Further decreases in the initial rate of grafting and the maximum level are 
achieved with acetylated cotton having 49.65 % combined acetic acid, indicating 
that partial blocking of the glycol groups affects the rate of grafting. Acetylated 
cotton with 56.2 % combined acetic acid shows a rate of grafting identical to 
that obtained with acetylated cotton having 49.65 % combined acetic acid, 
despite the fact that nearly all the cellulose hydroxyls are blocked in the former 
case. This implies that introduction of -COCH3 groups up to a certain limit, 
i.e., approximately 50 % combined acetic acid, in the cellulose adversely affects 
the rate of grafting. Beyond this value, the influence of -eOCH3 groups on the 
rate of grafting is not marked. It appears that the free hydroxyl groups in highly 
acetylated cottons are not accessible for grafting, perhaps because of steric hinder-
ance and/or stabilization of the glycol bond with resulting resistance to CelV 
attack. 'However, a great lack of swellability in these cases, as compared with 
other acetylated cottons in the range studied, cannot be ruled out. 
In any event, an initial fast rate of grafting is observed even when nearly 
all the cellulose hydroxyls are blocked. This suggests that the hemiacetal groups 
(corresponding to the C1 linkage in the end unit of the cellulose molecule) contri-
bute to the initial fast rate of grafting, a conclusion which is in harmony with 
previous postulations39, 42 -46). Thus, CelV -induced polymerization of a vinyl 
or acrylic monomer in the presence of cellulose yields a mixture of graft 
copolymer (by CelV attack at C2 or C3) and block copolymer (by CelV attack at the 
hemiacetal group), as well as homopolymer (monomer attack by CeIV). That 
205 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
CeIV -induced copolymerization produces a mixture of block and graft copolymers 
has been also reported by Iwakura and co-researchers46). 
Hebeish et al.37) observed no change in the acetyl content (expressed as the per-
cent combined acetic acid yield) of the CeIV -oxidized samples. They concluded that 
the grafting reaction initiated by CeIV has practically no effect on the acetyl 
groups of the acetylated cotton cellulose. 
6.4. Grafting on Cyanoethylated Cellulose 
Modification of cellulose by cyanoethylation has attracted much attention and 
cyanoethylated cottons are now commercially available. In this procedure, the 
cellulose is first impregnated with dilute sodium hydroxide and then treated with 
acrylonitrile at ca. 55 DC, followed by rinsing with dilute acetic acid and washing 
with water. With care, high values of degree of substitution, D.S., may be achiev-
edSO). The reaction between the cellulose hydroxyls and acrylonitrile is: 
Cell-OH + CH2 =CHCN ~ Cell-OCH2---CH2---CN 
This treatment improved resistance to rot, heat, and damage by acids and 
abrasion,Sl-S6). Cyanoethylated cottons are more receptive than cotton to some 
dyes in all classes of dyestuffs and require more work than untreated cotton for 
rupture under tension. Furthermore, the dielectric constant of cyanoethylated 
cellulose is increased proportionally to the extent of reaction. The cyanoethylated 
cotton can be hydrolyzed to carboxyethyl cellulose. 
Hamaya and Yakada have examined the cyanoethylation of cellophane in 
considerable detaiIS7). Reactions were carried out in a heterogeneous system via 
a one-step process in an NaOH aqueous solution containing known amounts of 
acrylonitrile. The effects of varying the concentration of acrylonitrile, wetting 
agent (sodium lauryl sulfate), and alkali were measured, as was the temperature 
dependence. The aim was to provide uniformity of reaction with retention of 
film form for the cellophane film. 
The radiation-induced interaction of acrylonitrile with cyanoethylated cottons 
that have different cyanoethyl contents, i.e., different D.S., was studied by Demint 
et al.S8). The cotton yarn was cyanoethylated according to a method described 
by Daul et al.SO) by padding the yarn with 2 % sodium hydroxide to a wet pick-Up 
of ca. 85 % and then immersing the yarn in acrylonitrile (watersaturated), agitat-
ed at 55 DC. The cotton was removed at predetermined times of reaction to give 
the desired D.S., washed in dilute acetic acid, thoroughly rinsed in distilled 
water, and dried under ambient conditions. 
The grafting reaction was carried out as followsS8). The yarn was immersed 
overnight at room temperature in a solution containing 32 parts of acrylonitrile 
monomer in 68 parts of aqueous 80 % zinc chloride and then padded to give about 
a two-to-fourfold increase in weight of the original yarn. The treated cotton was 
irradiated in a cobalt-60 source, which had a dose rate of about 0.5 x 106 roentgens/ 
hr. (maximum). The unreacted monomer and homopolymer were removed by 
a thorough washing in distilled water and extraction with N ,N dimethyl-
formamide. 
206 

6.4. Grafting on Cyanoethylated Cellulose 
The effect of degree of substitution (D.S.) on the radiation-induced interaction 
of acrylonitrile with cyanoethylated cotton is considerable. It is clear that increas-
ing the D.S. from about 0 to 1.3 causes about a fourfold increment in the amount 
of monomer interacted. At 1.3 D.S., the composition of the fibrous product was 
about 36 % cellulose, 15 % cyanoethyl group, and 49 % interacted monomer58). 
Figure 48 shows the relationship between the interaction of monomer with 
cyanoethylated cotton and degree of substitution at a dosage of one mega roe nt-
gen58). Obviously, the amount of interacted monomer per 100 units of cellulose 
increased linearly over a range from 0.0 to about 1.0 D.S. and then increased 
more rapidly. The weight ratio of change in interacted monomer to change in 
cyanoethyl group, as compared with the data for purified cotton containing 
polymer, both calculated to 100 units of cellulose, was about 1.5. The interacted 
monomer is composed of the same type of group as that of the cyanoethyl 
groups. This would indicate that on an average, about 1.5 additional groups for 
each cyanoethyl group were added by the high-energy radiation-induced inter-
action. 
Here, too, the weight ratio of cyanoethyl groups to interacted monomer 
increased to about 0.34 at about 0.6 D.S. and then remained relatively constant 
over the range investigated. This would indicate that on an average about 3 addi-
tional groups were added for each cyanoethyl group by the radiation-induced 
interaction. In an estimate of the value of 1.5 added groups for each cyanoethyl 
group, it was assumed that the interaction of monomer with the purified cotton 
occurred in the same manner and to the same extent as with the cyanoethylated 
cotton. Consequently, the amount of monomer interacted with the cotton was 
subtracted from the amount interacted with the cyanoethylated cotton before 
0.4 
L 
~ OJ 
c o 
:::E 
:;;. 0.2 
--<= 
OJ 
o 
~0.1 
LJ 
o 
I 
l> 
IJ 
l> .....-
---t---
~~ 
./ 
V 
II 
fi 
/ 
--
/~ I 
I V-
V ---v I 
V 
Va 
i 
L 
/. 
,-/ 
• 
./ 
. 
, 
.......... 
~--+---
---
... 
• 
• 
I 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.2 
Degree of substitution, OS 
1 40 
1 
1 
20 
'" 
<f) 
00 ~ 
a; 
u = 
80 ~ 
'" 
E 
o 
60 ~ 
20 
o 
1.4 
Fig. 48. Relationships between interaction of monomer with cyanoethylated cotton and degree of 
substitution. Dosage: I megaroentgen. Reprinted from Ref. 58l, p. 824, by courtesy of Textile 
Research Institute. 
207 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
calculating the additional groups. Hence, it was concluded that the interaction of 
acrylonitrile with cyanoethylated cotton probably involves grafting of side chains 
of acrylonitrile at the site of cyanoethyl groups58). This conclusion was substantiat-
ed by infrared absorption studies which reveal that the hydroxyl bond intensities 
of cyanoethylated cotton were considerably less than the hydroxyl intensity of 
purified cotton; however, the hydroxyl intensity of cyanoethylated cotton and 
cyanoethylated-acrylonitrile graft copolymer were almost the same59). 
The interaction of acrylonitrile (AN) and methyl methacrylate (MMA) with 
cyanoethylated cotton in the presence of CeIV ions has been studied under a 
variety of conditions60). Variables studied include the D.S. of cyanoethylated 
cotton; the temperature; the type of initiator, i.e., CeIV ammonium nitrate (CAN) 
and CeIV ammonium sulfate (CAS); the reaction time; and the concentration 
of both monomer and initiator. 
Figure 49 shows the effect of the D.S. of cyanoethylated cotton on the rate of 
grafting at 40°C. It is apparent that increasing the D.S. causes an appreciable 
increment, in the graft yield. However, with all substrates, the grafting reaction 
is very fast, especially in the earlier stages of the reaction. This holds true for 
both monomers, i.e., AN and MMA. However, the rate of grafting of AN is 
much higher than that ofMMA. Low solubility in the reaction medium, as well as 
the effect of the two methyl groups in MMA, making growth of the polymer chain 
sterically more difficult as compared to AN, would account for this. 
Hebeish et a1.61 ) have examined the grafting of methyl methacrylate on cellulosic 
materials by chain transfer routes under the influence of azobisisobutyronitrile 
(AZBN). The study dealt partly with cyanoethylated cotton in a comparision with 
partly carboxymethylated cotton, cotton treated with 12 M sodium hydroxide, 
cotton treated with 0.5 M sodium hydroxide, and purified cotton. Proof of grafting 
was provided by fractional precipitaion. In this study cyanoethylation was achiev-
ed by impregnating the cotton with 0.5 M sodium hydroxide for one hour followed 
by padding. Samples were treated with acrylonitrile at 60°C for varying time 
50 
'0 
~ 30 -
c; 
G 20 
10 
208 
~----,-- -:- ---
-
..... 
. 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
Reaction time (min) 
Fig. 49. Effect of D.S. of cyanoethylated 
cotton (CEC) on rate of grafting: D.S. = 
(0) 0.0; (6) 0.2; (x) 0.337; (e) 0.515. 
CAS Concn. = 0.01 M; temp. = 40°C; 
MIL ratio = 1: 30; AN, MMA, 1 g. Re-
printed from Ref. 60), p. 1009, by courtesy 
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

6.4. Grafting on Cyanoethylated Cellulose 
intervals, before washing in dilute acetic acid and water and drying under 
ambient conditions. Grafting was carried out as follows: The conditioned samples 
were immersed in 100 cm3 of a mixture containing water/methanol/dimethylform-
amide (75:24:1) having a known concentration of the initator (0.01 M) at 
60°C. Reaction proceeded for known times and the products were repeatedly 
extracted with acetone to constant weight. With all the substrates, an induction 
period was observed. For cyanoethylated cotton this was 30 minutes. The 
grafting pattern followed the same trend for all substrates, but for a given reaction 
time the graft yield follows the order: partly carboxymethylated cotton > cotton 
treated with 12 M sodium hydroxide > cyanoethylated cotton (D.S. 0.126) 
> cotton treated with 0.5 M sodium hydroxide> purified cotton. This reflects the 
effect of the changes in physical and/or chemical structure caused by alkali in the 
presence and absence of the alkylating agent. Studies of the variation in grafting 
levels with a degree of cyanoethylation show that there is little to be gained from 
increased substitution in the D.S. range 0-0.15. This may be partly explained in 
terms of location of grafted sites, whether surface cyanoethylation or volumetric 
cyanoethylation. 
With the CelV initiation system, regardless of the conditions used, it was 
found that an increase in the D.S. from about 0.0 to 0.3 is accompanied by an 
increase in the graft yield. This increase becomes more significant when cyano-
ethylated cotton of higher D.S. i.e., about 0.5, is grafted60). This again suggests 
that the presence of cyanoethyl groups on the cellulose chain offers sites for 
increased interaction of monomer with the cellulose upon CelV treatment. This 
will be discussed later in a more detailed manner. 
Kantouch et a1.60 ) observed that increasing the reaction time, the monomer 
concentration, and the temperature favorably influences the degree of grafting 
on cyanoethylated cotton. 
An increase in the monomer concentration from 0.5 g to 2.0 g of monomer 
increased the maximum graft yield obtained with cyanoethylated cotton (D.S. 
= 0.515) by about three-fold. An increase in the initiator concentration (CAS) 
up to 0.05 M is accompanied by an increase in the graft yield, while a further 
increase brings about lower yields. This is probably because of the fast termination 
of the growing polymer chains owing to the presence of excess CeIV ions62). On the 
other hand, raising the temperature brings about a considerable increase in the 
graft yield. 
The rate of grafting of AN and MMA on cyanoethylated cotton (D.S. = 0.515) 
follows the order 60°C > 40 °C > 30°C. Increasing the temperature seems to 
cause (a) a higher rate of dissociation of initiator, (b) increased solubility of 
monomer, (c) increased diffusion of the monomer from the aqueous phase to the 
cellulosic phase, and (d) enhancement of the rate of initiation and propagation 
of the grafted chains. All these factors would be expected to improve the 
graft yield. 
The rates of the CelV ion consumption during grafting and oxidation of 
cyanoethylated cottons having different D.S. are given in Table 44. With all 
substrates studied, the CeIV consumption increases with increasing reaction time. 
However, the consumption during grafting is much greater than during oxidation. 
The same phenomenon was reported by Hebeish and Mehta38), who attributed 
209 

IV 
Table 44. CelV ion consumption during oxidation and grafting of cyanoethylated cotton having different D.S." Reprinted from Ref.60), p. 1014, by courtesy 
?' 
-
0 
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
a 
.., 
I» 
Reaction time, 
Oxidation 
Grafting (AN) 
Grafting (MMA) 
;:;> 
S· 
mins. 
(JQ 
0 
D.S.O.O 
0.2 
0.337 
0.515 
0.0 
0.2 
0.337 
0.515 
0.0 
0.2 
0.337 
0.515 
= 
(j 
:::r 
CelV Concumption, 30°C 
... 3 
10 
2.4 
0.9 
1.34 
1.5 
3.3 
2.7 
3.3 
3.8 
2.7 
2.4 
2.4 
2.4 
n' 
I» 
30 
4.2 
1.8 
2.7 
3.0 
4.8 
5.5 
5.7 
4.8 
4.2 
3.3 
3.3 
3.5 
~ 
60 
5.4 
2.7 
2.7 
3.3 
6.2 
5.7 
6.0 
6.0 
6.0 
4.5 
4.2 
4.8 
3: 
90 
6.3 
3.0 
3.0 
3.6 
7.5 
6.3 
8.7 
7.8 
6.6 
5.3 
5.4 
5.4 
0 c. 
120 
6.3 
3.0 
3.3 
3.8 
8.1 
7.8 
8.7 
7.8 
7.8 
6.3 
6.3 
6.6 
S ... c. 
CelV Consumption, 60°C 
(j 
!!.. 
10 
3.0 
1.8 
2.4 
2.4 
4.2 
3.6 
4.2 
3.6 
2.7 
2.7 
3.3 
3.0 
2" 
30 
5.7 
2.4 
2.7 
3.0 
6.9 
5.5 
5.4 
5.4 
6.0 
4.2 
4.9 
4.2 
0-'" ... 
60 
6.9 
3.0 
3.6 
3.9 
8.4 
7.8 
6.9 
6.9 
7.8 
6.0 
7.5 
7.2 
90 
9.0 
3.6 
3.6 
4.0 
11.4 
9.9 
10.2 
9.3 
9.6 
8.7 
8.4 
9.3 
120 
9.0 
3.6 
3.6 
4.8 
11.3 
10.8 
11.0 
10.2 
11.3 
10.2 
10.1 
10.7 
CelV Consumption, 60°C 
10 
6.6 
3.6 
3.6 
4.5 
8.7 
6.9 
7.8 
7.8 
7.2 
5.1 
5.4 
5.4 
30 
14.7 
6.0 
6.6 
8.4 
21.9 
14.9 
21.3 
19.2 
24.0 
19.8 
20.4 
19.2 
90 
18.0 
9.0 
9.0 
9.0 
28.8 
24.6 
25.2 
25.8 
28.8 
25.2 
25.2 
25.2 
120 
24.0 
20.1 
10.5 
10.0 
30.0 
28.8 
29.4 
29.4 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
30.0 
" CAS concentration 0.01 M; monomer, 1 g; Mil ratio, 1 :30; CelV consumption expressed in mmol/l00 g cellulose. 

6.4. Grafting on Cyanoethylated Cellulose 
it to initiation and termination of homopolymer by CeIV• The CeIV consumption 
during oxidation of cyanoethylated cotton, regardless of the D.S., is much lower 
than that of the unmodified cellulose (control). However, the difference in the 
consumption is marginally decreased at higher D.S. This makes it evident that 
changing the chemical structure of cellulose by cyanoethylation could certainly 
affect the susceptibility to graft copolymerization initiated by CeIV ions60). 
The presence of cyanoethyl groups on the cellulose seems to bring about an 
opening up of the cellulose structure, as well as the addition of new functional 
groups on the cellulose molecule, thereby promoting the CeIV attack. On the other 
hand, the cyanoethyl groups block some of the cellulose hydroxyls and determine 
the eventual location of the CeIV attack. Work on oxidation of cellulose with 
CeIV 37,39,41,42,44) showed that the total consumption of CeIV is due to (i) formation 
of a CeIV -cellulose complex at the glycol, (ii) termination of free radicals produced 
as a result of the partial dissociation of this complex, and (iii) initiation and 
termination of free radicals formed on the hemiacetal groups at the end unit of 
the cellulose molecule. Thus, the excess consumption of CeIV in the case of the 
control could be ascribed to the easier formation of the CeIV -cellulose complex, as 
compared to cyanoethylated cotton where this may be impeded due to blocking 
of some of the cellulose hydroxyls60). 
Another interesting feature is that, despite the fact that the CeIV consumption 
during oxidation of the control is higher than that of cyanoethylated cotton, 
cyanoethylated cotton showed higher grafting yields (cf. Fig. 63). The graft 
yields also increase upon increasing the D.S. of the cyanoethylated cotton60). 
This suggests that the free radicals formed at the cyanoethyl groups are more easily 
captured by the monomer during the grafting reaction than those brought about 
via dissociation of the CeIV -cellulose complex. It seems that in the case of the 
control, destruction of some of these free radicals by CeIV ions occurred even in 
the presence of the monomer. That is, oxidation of the control by CeIV ions during 
grafting is much higher than that of cyanoethylated cotton. This is substantiated 
by the fact that the CeIV consumptions during grafting of the control and of the 
cyanoethylated cotton are comparable (see Table 44). 
Direct study of the cyanoethylation of cotton indicates a possible preferential 
reaction at the C2 position, from which one can assume that most of the 
cyanoethyl groups are on that hydroxyl group63). The presence of such groups at 
this position would definitely inhibit the formation of the CeIV -cellulose 
complex60), which has been reported39,42-46) to involve the glycol groups. It is 
for this reason the rate of oxidation of the control is much greater than that of 
cyanoethylated cotton. However, the consumption increases with increased D.S. 
of cyanoethylated cotton. The graft yields obtained with the latter are also 
higher than those of the control, which are much greater at higher D.S. 
(Fig. 49). It is possible that the CeIV ion attacks the cyanoethylated cotton 
exclusively at the cyanoethyl group. This is reasonable, since the presence of the 
-C == N grouping with its negative inductive effect would facilitate hydrogen 
transfer. That is, the presence of -CN groups, due to resonance stabilization, 
favors the abstraction ofhydrogenJrom the carbon atom next to the -CN group. 
Consequently, the free radicals are very likely formed at the carbon atom of the 
cyanoethyl group. The following reaction scheme seems to be plausible for the 
211 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
interaction of a vinyl or acrylic monomer with cyanoethylated cotton in the 
presence of CelV 60) : 
RCHOH + CH2=CHCN ~ 
RCHOCH2 -
CH2-CN 
(Cyanoethylated cotton) 
H H 
I I) 
RCHOC-C~N 
I I 
H H 
H 
1 
• 
RCHO-C-C-C=N 
I 
I 
H H 
H 
CH2-CHX 
I 
I 
RCHOC-C -
C == N 
I 
I 
H H 
H 
+ 
1 
• 
Ce N _ 
RCHOC-C-C=N + Cern + H~ 
1 
I 
H H 
H 
CH 2-CHX 
1 
1 
+ CH2=CHX ----- RCHO-C-C-C=N 
I I 
H H 
IInitiation of grafting) 
H 
(CH 2CHXln-CH 2-CHX 
I I 
+ 
nICH2=CHX) -
RCHO-C-C 
I 
I 
H H 
(Propagation of graftingl 
H 
ICH 2CHX)n- CH2-CHX 
H 
(CH 2CHXln-
CH=CHX 
I 
I 
+ CeIY --
RCHOC -
C 
I 
I 
RCHOC-C 
I 
I 
I 
I 
H H 
H H 
(Termination of graftingl 
RCHOH is cellulose with the hydroxyl group at C2 of the anhydroglucose unit 
and CH2 =CHX is a vinyl or acryli.c monomer. It is interesting to note that this 
mechanism is in agreement with the postulation pointed out earlier concerning 
the interaction of a vinyl monomer with cyanoethylated cotton upon high-energy 
irradiation. 
6.5. Grafting on Partially Carboxymethylated Cellulose 
Carboxymethylation is among the more common methods of chemical modifi-
cation of cellulose. Partially carboxymethylated cotton may be simply prepared 
by padding the cellulose with monochloroacetic acid or its sodium salt, followed 
by padding it with sodium hydroxide61 • 63 -67). The overall reaction may be written 
as follows: 
Cell-OH + NaOH ---? Cell-O-Na + H20 
Cell-ONa + ClCH2COONa ---? Cell-OCH2COONa + NaCI 
212 

6.5. Grafting on Partially Carboxymethylated Cellulose 
This is an example of the classical Williamson synthesis for the preparation of 
ethers. However, mechanism studies on the reactions of a-halocarboxylic acids 
in aqueous alkaline solutions suggest that a nucleophilic attack may not occur 
in one step, but that highly reactive a-Iactones may be formed as transient 
intermediates68). 
.00 
CH2-
C = 0 + 
OH8 -----
HOCH2-
c:V 
~O/ 
'08 
Such transient intermediates may also be involved in the carboxymethylation of 
cellulose. 
Partially carboxymethylated cotton with a D.S. of about 0.05-0.15 retains the 
original fibrous nature and exhibits a number of potentially valuable properties, 
such as a crisp hand with a slightly starched feel, increased moisture regain, water 
absorbancy, water permeability, changed dyeing characteristics, increased resist-
ance to soiling from aqueous dispersions, greater ease of soil removal, cation 
exchange properties, high water swellability, etc.69 - i6 ). The presence of two 
functional groups, hydroxyl and carboxyl, in partially carboxymethylated cellulose 
affords attractive sites for further chemical modifications, such as hydrolysis 77 -78), 
oxidation 77 - 801, etherification 79), esterification 78 -79), enzyme binding80), and 
grafting81 ). 
Kantouch et a1.82 ) have reported a detailed study of grafting of various vinyl 
and acrylic monomers: acrylonitrile (AN), methyl methacrylate (MMA), and 
acrylamide (AA) onto partially carboxymethylated cotton (PCMC) using tetra-
valent cerium as initiator. For comparison, they have grafted the same monomers 
onto native cotton and alkali-treated cotton (NaOH-Cotton). It is clear that the 
grafting reaction is characterized by an initial fast rate followed by a slower rate 
which levels off after a certain time, depending on the nature of the substrate 
and the reactivity of the monomer. The leveling off of grafting with time could be 
attributed to a decrease in concentration for both initiator and monomer. The data 
also reveal that the graft yield obtained with PCMC is significantly higher than that 
obtained with native cotton. The presence of bulky groups, such as-CH2COOH 
in the cellulose, may open up the cellulose structure, thereby increasing the diffu-
sion of the initiator and the monomer into the cellulose. In other words, during 
swelling of PCMC in the reaction medium, there is breakdown of many of the 
hydrogen bonds in the amorphous regions of the cellulose, and the chain 
molecules are then able to move apart. Hence, there will be a tendency for the 
reaction molecules of monomer and initiator to approach the crystalline regions 
better than when the reaction is performed on unmodified cellulose. The cellulose 
is held in an open state to give a highly swollen product, in which the distribution 
of the graft may be quite different from that which occurs in unmodified 
cotton. The graft yield for NaOH-cotton is substantially higher than that for native 
cotton. This is expected since NaOH-cotton has greater accessibility than native 
cotton. However, the graft yield observed with PCMC is higher still than that 
for NaOH-cotton. 
213 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
The results also show that with all the substrates studies, the graft yield obtained 
using AN is much higher than that for MMA. However, AA produces the lowest 
graft yield. This discrepancy could be attributed to differences in monomer 
reactivities, solubility, polarity, molecular size, chemical nature, etc. As pointed 
out earlier, the lower reactivity of MMA, as compared with AN, could be 
attributed to its lower solubility in the reaction medium, as well as the 
effect of the two methyl groups in MMA, thereby making growth of the polymer 
chain sterically more difficult. The lower graft yield for AA could be attributed to 
inhibition by occluded oxygen; the polymerization of AA is known to be very 
sensitive to oxygen. 
The effect of the monomer concentration, the initiator concentration, the tem-
perature, and theD.S. ofPCMC on grafting of AN, MMA, andAA wasinvestigat-
ed82). I t was found that increasing the monomer concentration caused a substantial 
increase in the graft yield, particularly when AN or MMA was used. The same 
effect was found upon increasing the initiator up to a certain concentration, but 
beyond that, there was a reversal. The effect to temperature is shown in 
Table 45. It is apparent that grafting at 30°C gives lower yields than at 40° 
and 60 DC, particularly in the initial stages. At 30 0, no maximum graft yield was 
achieved, even after 2 hours' reaction time: at 40°C the reaction proceeds more 
quickly than that at 30 DC, though the yield is still rising at 2 hours. At 
60°C the grafting proceeds even more quickly. With CAN the yield continues to 
rise up to 1 hour, and with CAS the yield continues to rise up to 1.5 hours. The 
graft yields obtained after 2 hours' reaction at the three temperatures are 
comparable, in contrast with previous results38) on the grafting of vinyl 
monomers on cellulosic material using CAN as the initiator. Hebeish and Mehta38) 
have observed that the graft yields obtained at 20°C were higher than those of 
60 DC, following the order 40° > 20° > 60°C. Fast termination was thought to 
be responsible. In the case of PCMC, ionization of ---CH2COOH groups along 
the cellulose chain molecules introduces negative charges which attract CelV ions 
to the cellulose molecules. This leads to the formation on the cellulose backbone 
Table 45. Graft yield (%) of AN onto PCMC (D.S.: 0.124) using different CelY salts (0.01 g CelY 
salt, I g monomer/lOO g PCMC)*. Reprinted from Ref.82>, p. 1579, by courtesy of Microforms 
International Marketing Corporation 
Reaction time 
30°C 
40 °C 
60°C 
(mins) 
CAN 
CAS 
CAN 
CAS 
CAN 
CAS 
5 
30.28 
14.6 
45.06 
27.60 
60.0 
38.4 
10 
44.30 
23.4 
52.50 
40.50 
71.9 
54.6 
15 
51.40 
37.3 
60.50 
51.50 
76.0 
74.4 
30 
59.60 
56.8 
81.00 
73.00 
85.5 
82.7 
60 
73.00 
74.7 
82.00 
84.50 
87.7 
87.0 
90 
80.00 
79.0 
83.00 
86.00 
87.7 
90.3 
120 
84.80 
82.9 
86.00 
87.40 
87.7 
90.3 
* AN, acrylonitrile; PCMC, partially carboxymethylated cotton, CAN, CelY ammonium nitrate; 
CAS, CelY ammonium sulfate. 
214 

6.5. Grafting on Partially'carboxymethylated Cellulose 
of more active sites which are easily available to the monomer. Higher temperatu-
res increase both ionization of carboxyl groups and mobility of monomer. The 
effect is to produce a substantial formation of graft, outweighing the decrease in 
graft due to fast termination at high temperature. 
The effect of D.S. on the graft yield of PCMC is shown in Figure 50. It is 
obvious that increasing the D.S. up to 0.124 is accompanied by an increase in 
the maximum graft yield of AN, but that beyond this point, increasing the 
D.S. does not cause a significant increase in the maximum graft yields; the 
maximum graft yield obtained with D.S. 0.152is substantially lower than with D.S. 
0.0647 or 0.124. For MMA and AA, the maximum graft yields increase with 
increasing DS of PCMC over the range studied. It appears that introduction of 
-CH2-COOH groups into the cellulose molecules results in two opposing 
effects: (a) opening up the cellulose structure, thereby enhancing diffusion and 
adsorption of both the monomer and the initiator, and (b) blocking some of the 
hydroxyl groups along the cellulose chains. Effect (a) leads to an increase in the 
graft yields, whereas effect (b) gives rise to a decrease. Which of the two effects 
predominates would be the main controlling factor of the graft yields. The 
latter, in turn, would depend on the changes in the substrate composition and 
the reagent's participation in the process as the grafting reaction proceeds. It is 
likely that for AN, effect (a) predominates up to a D.S. of 0.124, after which 
effect (b) becomes much more prenounced. With MMA and AA, on the other 
hand, effect(a) still outweighs effect (b) up to the highest D.S. studied. 
The consumption of CeIV during grafting and oxidation of PCMC has been 
studied82l. These studies reveal that the consumption increases with increasing 
reaction time. In the case of AN, the CeIV consumed during grafting is lower 
than that consumed during PCMC oxidation. MMA and AA give the opposite 
80 
60 
40' 
o AN 
" MMA 
x AA 
-- 15min 
20 f----~--_+_----+ __ 60 min 
)(--:::::~ 
---,----
---
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
Degree of substitution,OS 
Fig. SO. Percent graft yield vs. degree of 
substitution (D.S.); cellulose = I g; mono-
mer = 
I g; liquor ratio 30. Reprinted 
from Ref. 82), p. 1580, by courtesy of Micro-
forms International Marketing Corpora-
tion. 
215 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
effect; CeIV consumption during grafting is higher than that consumed during 
oxidation. 
Taking into consideration the reaction scheme represented by EqsY3-138) (as 
laid out in section 4.2.3.), and assuming that A stands for cellulose, the following 
conclusions may be drawn: 
(i) Total consumption should be more or less equal for oxidation [reactions 
(134) and (138)] and grafting [reactions (133) and (137)], if all the monomer 
is effectively grafted onto cellulose. 
(ii) Total consumption during grafting will be more than during oxidation of 
cellulose if some homopolymer is formed [reactions (135) and (137)38l]. 
(iii) Total consumption during grafting will be less than during oxidation if the 
grafted polymer forms a barrier and inhibits diffusion of CeIV ions. 
The second conclusion may be correct in the case of MMA and AA, whereas 
the third accounts for the excess CeIV ions consumed during oxidation, as compar-
ed with those consumed during grafting of AN. This is substantiated by the fact 
that CeIV consumption during grafting of native or alkali-treated cotton is 
significantly higher than that consumed during oxidation up to 30 minutes. 
The effect of D.S. on CeIV consumption during grafting of various monomers 
and on that consumed during oxidation of PCMC has been examined. The 
data indicate that the CeIV consumed during grafting of the three monomers and 
that consumed during oxidation increases as the D.S. of PCMC is increased up 
to 0.124. A further increase in the D.S. lowers the CeIV consumption during both 
oxidation and grafting; particularly in the initial stages of the reaction. A similar 
trend has been observed with the graft yield (cf. Fig. 50). As previously 
mentioned, introduction of carboxymethyl groups into the cellulose molecule 
increases the susceptibility of cellulose to CeIV attack (by attracting CeIV ions 
from the reaction medium) and at the same time decreases the number of 
cellulose hydroxyls. It is likely that increasing the D.S. ofPCMC up to 0.124 favors 
the CeIV attraction, while further increases operate adversely because of the re-
duction in the number of free hydroxyl groups in cellulose. 
I t is not out of place to refer to the study reported by Kantouch et al. 82) on the 
grafting behaviour ofPCMC (D.S. 0.124)when CAS and CAN were used as ini-
tiators. Table 45 contains data for percentage graft yields at 30°C, 40°, and 
60 °C with CAN and CAS for PCMC of D.S. 0.124, while Table 46 shows the 
CeIV consumption during grafting and oxidation of the same substrate. Table 45 
shows that the graft yields obtained with CAN are much higher than those with 
CAS in the initial stages of the reaction, and at the three temveratures studied. 
The maximum graft yields obtained with CAN and CAS at 30°C and 40 °C are 
comparable, but at 60°C, the yield obtained with CAS is significantly higher than 
that with CAN. The fast dissociation of CAN may account for its higher grafting 
efficiency in the initial stages of the reaction, since less CeIV would be avail abe for 
initiation. This is substantiated by the data in Table 46, where consumption of 
CeIV by PCMC during its oxidation or grafting is much higher for CAN than for 
CAS, particularly in the initial stages of reaction. With CAN, the CeIV is 
completely consumed during grafting after 2 hours at the three temperatures 
studied. This is the case with CAS at 60°C only. Schwab et a1.83) have shown that 
CAN is more efficient at lower temperatures than CAS. It is inter~sting to note 
216 

6.5. Grafting on Partially Carboxymethylated Cellulose 
Table 46. CelV consumption (mmoljlOO g) during oxidation and grafting of PCMC (D.S.: 0.124) 
using I g AN at different temperatures. Reprinted from Ref.821, p. 1584, by courtesy of Microforms 
International Marketing Corporation 
Reaction time 
Temperature 
(mins) 
30 DC 
40 DC 
60 DC 
Oxid. 
Graft 
Oxid. 
Graft 
Oxid. 
Graft 
CAN 0.01 M 
5 
12.0 
17.4 
20.4 
17.5 
21.0 
24.0 
10 
16.0 
18.5 
23.5 
19.0 
24.5 
24.0 
IS 
19.6 
20.5 
24.5 
19.5 
30.0 
29.5 
30 
22.8 
21.2 
26.7 
28.0 
30.0 
29.6 
60 
25.5 
24.4 
29.7 
28.0 
30.0 
30.0 
90 
29.2 
26.6 
30.0 
28.0 
30.0 
30.0 
120 
30.0 
27.1 
30.0 
28.2 
30.0 
30.0 
CAS 0.0\ M 
5 
0.00 
1.62 
1.30 
2.16 
2.92 
7.14 
10 
0.54 
2.16 
\.95 
4.32 
3.90 
11.50 
IS 
0.54 
3.24 
2.60 
6.49 
4.54 
18.50 
30 
1.08 
4.86 
2.60 
11.25 
5.84 
27.00 
60 
1.62 
8.10 
3.90 
17.84 
7.78 
29.50 
90 
2.70 
11.35 
4.22 
20.00 
12.00 
30.00 
120 
2.70 
12.86 
4.54 
26.50 
16.22 
30.00 
AN, acrylonitrile; PCMC, partially carboxymethylated cotton; CAN, CelV ammonium nitrate; 
CAS, CelV ammonium sulfate. 
that with CAN and CAS, the maximum CeIV consumption during oxidation of 
PCMC follows the order 60° > 40° > 30°C. 
Table 46 also shows that the CeIVconsumed during grafting with CAS is 
greater than that consumed during oxidation at 30°, 40°, and 60 °C, which is in . 
full agreement with previous results38.61l. In the case of CAN, the CeIV ion 
consumption at 60°C during grafting is slightly higher than that during oxidation, 
while at 40 °C the CeIV consumed during oxidation is slightly higher than that 
during grafting. With CAN, it is apparent that more than 60 percent of the CeIV 
in the reaction was used in the first five minutes at 60°C, most of it for 
grafting, since homopolymer formation is negligible during this time. On the 
other hand, CAS is consumed from the reaction medium gradually and at a much 
slower rate than CAN. This means that appreciable amounts of CeIV would be 
available, in the case of CAS, throughout the reaction. Although diffusion 
might be impeded by the grafted branches on the substrate, it would still be 
possible due to greater availability, as compared with CAN. Here also, at the same 
graft yield the CeIV consumption during grafting differs considerably with CAN 
and CAS, especially in the case of CAN. This could be attributed to the 
difference in rates of initiation and termination with the two initiators. 
The effect of the grafting reaction, initiated by CeIV, on the carboxymethyl 
groups of the modified cotton was also studied82l. Results of this study indicate 
217 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
that grafting had practically no effect on the carboxymethyl groups (expressed 
as carboxyl groups) of the PCMC. 
As part of a comparative study on grafting by chain transfer mechanisms, 
Hebeish et a1.61 ) grafted methyl methacrylate onto partly carboxymethylated 
cotton cellulose using azobisisobutyronitrile as the initiator. The degree of 
substitution was carried out in water/solvent mixtures. The solvents used included 
methanol, ethanol, propanol, butanol, acetone, and carbon tetrachloride. The 
methyl methacrylate concentration was held at 6 %, and grafting was carried out 
in a monomer/liquor ratio of 1: 100 using a temperature of 60°C and a reaction 
time of four hours. Table 47 gives the influence of the reaction medium on 
grafting with this system. It is clear that regardless of the water/solvent system 
employed, a substantial amount of grafting is obtained. A regular decrease also 
occurs with increases in the solvent ratio in the water/solvent mixture. However, 
the magnitude of grafting differs significantly with the type and ratio of solvent 
used in the mixture. For the alcohols the graft yield follows the order: propanol 
> ethanol > methanol > butanol when the solvent constitutes 25 % of the 
water/solvent mixture. On the other hand, the graft yield follows the order: 
methanol > ethanol > propanol > butanol at 50 and 75 % solvent in the 
water/solvent mixture. 
Acetone is particularly attractive, possibly because of ketone-enol tauto-
merism, whereby it is somewhat similar in structure to the alcohols. Acetone 
shows graft yields which are comparable to those of propanol, particularly when 
used in a ratio of 25 and 50 % in solvent/water mixture, whereas the graft yields 
obtained with carbon tetrachloride are the lowest compared with those of other 
solvents in the range studied. 
Using a water/solvent mixture containing 25 % of either methanol, ethanol, 
propanol, or acetone seems to constitute a reaction medium where the monomer 
and initiator are completely miscible and the swelling of cellulose by water is not 
hindered by the presence of these solvents. This certainly simplifies access and 
diffusion of monomer and initiator, thereby promoting grafting. The greater yield 
obtained by using either propanol or acetone not only substantiates this, but also 
reflects the effect of the molecular size of the solvent on grafting. Propanol and 
Table 47. Influence of reaction medium on grafting of methyl 
methacrylate onto partially carboxymethylated cotton (PCMC). 
Reprinted from Ref.6 1), p. 155, by courtesy of Verlag Chern. 
GMBH. Berlin 
Solvent 
Methanol. 
Ethanol 
Propanol 
Butanol 
Acetone 
Carbon Tetrachloride 
218 
Graft Yield (%) 
Water/Solvent ratio 
75:25 
135 
150 
260 
124 
264 
73 
50:50 
98 
68 
64 
34 
60 
30 
25:75 
74 
34 
31 
18 
30 
15 

6.5. Grafting on Partially Carboxymethylated Cellulose 
acetone, both larger than methanol and ethanol, can disrupt the cellulose micro-
structure more extensively after having diffused into the lattice, thus rendering 
the cellulose more accessible to monomer and initiation. With butanol, however, 
the lower graft yields could be ascribed to its adverse effect on the swelling of 
cellulose by water. Associated with this factor is the hydrophobic character 
of the discussed alcohols, which decreases from butanol to methanol. In combi-
nation, these effects seriously hinder monomer access to reactive sites on cellulose. 
This is further supported by the significant fall in grafting when using carbon 
tetrachloride. 
The decrease in the graft yield, which results from an increase in the ratio 
of solvent in the water/solvent mixture, could be interpreted in terms of the 
adverse effect of the solvent on the swelling properties of cellulose in water. The 
data suggest that the relative sorptive and swelling properties follow the order: 
methanol > ethanol > propanol > acetone > butanol > carbon tetrachloride. 
However, the difference in capability of these solvents as terminators for the 
graft polymer radical and the cellulose macro radical via chain transfer cannot 
be ruled out as a possible reason for this decrease. 
Bhattacharjee and Perlin84) have examined the potential of crosslinked 
carboxymethyl cellulose (CLCMC) as a highly absorbent material after modifica-
tion through grafting with polystyrene. One treatment involves radiation-induced 
grafting of polystyrene onto CLCMC fibers. It has been shown that, at a critical 
level of grafting of approximately 25 %, the retentivity of the fibers is almost 
doubled, despite an initial decrease in retentivity on grafting. It is proposed that 
grafted polystyrene becomes associated preferentially with the residual ordered 
regions of the CLCMC through the localization of radicals in these regions85). 
Despite the hydrophobic character of polystyrene-grafted CLCMC, it is possible 
that this is more than compensated for by an overall disorganization of the fiber 
structure, which leads to a greater uptake of water by the hydroxyl groups in the 
matrix. This increase in hydrophilic character has been demonstrated by observed 
increases in enzymic activity86) exhibited by cellulose, which indicates87) that the 
newly accessible regions of the cellulose phase are neither highly substituted, nor 
extensively crosslinked. This interesting approach to the characterization of 
cellulosic graft copolymers highlights several difficulties associated with using 
partially substituted derivatives. The advantages of such partial substitution in 
terms of product application are obvious. However, mechanistic and kinetic 
interpretations are hindered by lack of knowledge of the true nature of the 
substrate, i.e. problems associated with the location of grafts, and difficulties in 
assigning likely active sites. This topic is covered further in Chapter 7, which 
deals with cellulosic copolymer characterization. Bhattacharjee and Perlin have 
shown that an increase in grafting of CLCMC with polystyrene beyond the 
30 % level leads to predominant water repellency and a marked fall of any 
water retention value (WRV)87). This supports the findings of Ogiwara et al. 
in studies on other cellulose grafted systems88). The level of water retention was 
measured using the method of Lepoutre et al.89), which involves soaking in 
excess water before centrifuging at 0.1 to 0.2 g. The retention values are based 
on the material which did not pass through the screen of the basket supported 
one-half inch above the bottom of the metal centrifuge tube. 
219 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
In an extension of their work on carboxymethylated cotton, Hebeish et al. have 
examined the dimethylaniline -
benzyl chloride (DMA-BC) route to induced 
grafting using methyl methacrylate90). This study is part of an extensive program 
involving grafting onto modified cottons91 -99). In studies of the influence of the 
initiator concentration (DMA-BC) on grafting, it has been shown that a concen-
tration of 0.08 to 0.087 molll yields the greatest level of grafting. Beyond this, a 
decrease in the level of grafting is observed. 
This decrease in grafting followed by an increase in the initiator concentration 
could possibly be associated with a faster rate of termination, probably owing 
to an abundance of free-radical speGies in the polymerization system. It is also 
possible that at higher initiator concentrations DMA reacts with BC to yield a 
quaternary ammonium salt which is not capable of initiating polymerization. 
A third possibility is that homopolymerization may prevail over grafting at higher 
initiator concentrations. There is, however, little reason to believe that anyone 
of the three possibilities is operating to the exclusion of the others. 
Upon increasing the monomer concentration in the bulk medium, there is an 
obvious increase in the grafting levels in the polymerization system. The 
same situation is also encountered with respect to the total conversion. At high 
concentrations of MMA, the gel effect brought about by the solubility of 
poly(methyl methacrylate) in its own monomer seems to be more pronounced. 
As a result, termination of the growing grafted chain radicals by coupling is 
hindered, while the swellability of PCMC is enhanced. The ultimate effect of this 
is increased grafting. 
Besides the gel effect, complex formation between PCMC and MMA is more 
favorable at higher concentrations ofMMA. Complexation ofPCMC with MMA 
activates the latter through formation of a donor-acceptor complex in which the 
uncomplexed MMA, though normally an electron acceptor, behaves as a donor 
relative to the complexed MMA, which has been converted to a stronger acceptor. 
Enhanced monomer reactivity is also apparently due to association of complexed 
monomer into organized arrays, since PCMC acts as a matrix for such alignment. 
Naturally, the effect of the enhanced monomer reactivity is increased grafting. 
Hebeish et al. have also studied the effect of temperature and reaction time on 
grafting using this system90). At 50°C, the grafting reaction is accompanied by a 
long induction period (150 min), whereas at a temperature of 60°C or higher, 
the reaction proceeds without any induction period. The rate of grafting also 
increases on increasing the temperature up to 70 0c. Above this temperature, the 
increment in the rate of grafting is not so striking. 
The enhancement in grafting suggests that raising the temperature performs 
the following functions: (a) increasing the concentration of active species, i.e., 
free radicals, in the polymerization system; (b) accentuating the swelling properties 
of PCMC; (c) improving the solubility of MMA; (d) accelerating diffusion of 
MMA from the polymerization medium to PCMC; and (e) enhancing the rate 
of initiation and propagation of the graft. There is no doubt that all these 
effects give rise to higher grafting levels. The effect of increasing the poly-
merization time is to bring about a significant enhancement in the graft yield. 
The same holds true for total conversion. However, the magnitude of this enhance-
ment is governed by the polymerization temperature and the monomer concentra-
220 

6.5. Grafting on Partially Carboxymethylated Cellulose 
tion, as well as the initiator concentration. Kubota et al. lOO ) have investigated the 
decomposition of the peroxide group on fibrous, peroxidized carboxymethyl cell-
Ulose101) and the ability of the decomposition products to initiate grafting. The 
peroxide groups on the carboxymethyl cellulose liberated hydrogen peroxide when 
the sample was heated in an aqueous medium. The decomposition of peroxide 
was found to increase markedly in the presence of an Fell salt and also on 
irradiation with light of A > 300 nm102). Ethyl methacrylate was grafted onto 
carboxymethyl cellulose peroxide after initiation by heat or irradiation with light. 
The rate of grafting and the reciprocal average molecular mass of the grafts were 
found to be proportional to the square root of the peroxide content of the 
sample, which was itself closely related to the number of grafts initiated. 
Figure 51 shows the thermal stability of the peroxide groups on carboxymethyl 
cellulose in an aqueous medium. In Figure 51, the terms a, b, and c represent 
the amounts of peroxide in the total system, the fibrous material, and the 
aqueous medium, respectively. The amount of peroxide on the fibrous material 
(b) shows a tendency to decrease with the passage of time, while an increase in the 
formation ofH20 2 was observed in the aqueous medium (c), thereby showing an 
extended tendency at higher temperatures. The total amount of peroxide, the sum 
of those on fibrous material and in the aqueous medium, is shown in curve A. 
The thermal decomposition of peroxide on CMC in a methanolic medium and 
the formation of H20 2in the medium are slower than in aqueous media. In the 
20 
~--t- 20°cj-
~ 
1'-.... 
I 
\ 
"r~ 
I 
I 
t-
I 
'. 
-.............. 
40- ----
\ 
I 
i~ r---
50 
40 
30 
~ 10 :i 
I 
L.) 
0> 
a 
~ 0 
~50~~~~=+====~==~===+====R 
~ 
20 
20~4-+--~--+~~--+--~ 
10 
o b 
20 
10 
c 
I 
I 
60 
40 _. 
---:::f-. 
:---. 
I~·j- ~--= 
20'e 
15 
30 
45 
60 
75 
90 
Time (min) 
Fig. 51 a~. The thermal decomposition 
of peroxide on CMC in an aqueous 
medium. a, b, and c represent the amounts 
of peroxide in the total system, in the 
fibrous material and in the aqueous me-
dium, respectively. Temperatures as in-
dicated. Reprinted from Ref. 100), p. 242, 
courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
221 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
10 
/ 
/ 
0 
~ 
~ 
e-
~ 
_e-:; 
e- V 
/ 
o 
2 
3 
4 
[Peroxide J 1/) (Meq.l100 9 CMC) 
v 
0 
e-
Fig. 52. The relationship between 
the rate of grafting and the peroxide 
content in the thermal grafting of 
MMA at 60°C A and photografting 
of MMA at 30°C B. Reprinted from 
Ref. 100), p. 244, courtesy of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
grafting of methyl methacrylate on carboxymethyl cellulose peroxide, when ini-
tiated thermally or by light, various interesting features were seen. Figure 52 shows 
the relationship between the rate of grafting and the peroxide content of the 
carboxymethyl cellulose. Carboxymethyl cellulose, though it does not contain a 
peroxide group, initiates grafting of methyl methacrylate by heat or light. 
A higher grafting rate in the same initiation systems was observed for the 
carboxymethyl cellulose peroxide, which shows a nearly linear relationship with 
the square root of the peroxide content of the sample. The graft efficiencies were 
of the order 80 %-90 %, and graftings were characterized by a relatively low 
formation of homopolymer. 
The average molecular mass of grafted poly(MAA) showed a temdency to 
decrease with increasing amounts of peroxide. A lower molecular mass for grafts 
Table 48. The photoinitiated grafting of various monomers on carboxymethyl cellulose peroxide. 
Reprinted from Ref.IOO), p. 246, by courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Monomer 
Peroxide 
Total 
Percent 
Graft 
meq/100 g CMC conversion 
grafting 
efficiency 
% 
% 
% 
Acrylamide 
0 
61.9 
214.3 
84.8 
34.9 
100 
365.3 
89.5 
Acrylic acid 
0 
88.0 
34.2 
205.1 
Methyl methacrylate 
0 
29.7 
102.4 
90.3 
34.6 
41.1 
152.2 
96.9 
Acrylonitrile 
0 
15.7 
42.9 
83.0 
31.5 
69.4 
191.6 
84.0 
Vinyl acetate 
0 
10.5 
32.0 
80.1 
35.0 
54.0 
178.8 
86.9 
Photoirradiation was carried out at 30°C for 14 min in a Pyrex glass tube. 
222 

6.6. Grafting on Acrylamidomethylated Cellulose 
was obtained for the photoinitiation system, as compared to the thermal system. 
A straight-line relationship was obtained between the reciprocal of the average 
molecular mass of the grafts and the square root of the peroxide content of the 
substrate. 
The number of grafts increased in proportion to the peroxide content. 
However, the number of grafts was higher for the copolymer obtained in the 
photo initiation system than in the thermal system. The number of grafts on the 
CMC substrate increased by introducing the peroxide group. Values of 17 and 
6 times were recorded for CMC peroxide with thermal initiation and photo-
initiation, respectively. 
The level of grafting with various monomers, through photoinitiation on car-
boxymethyl cellulose peroxide, is given in Table 48. The high grafting levels and 
grafting efficiencies are immediately apparent. 
6.6. Grafting on Acrylamidomethylated Cellulose 
Acrylamidomethylated cellulose can be prepared by reacting cellulose with 
N-methylolacrylamide under the catalytic influence of hydrogen ions91): 
Acrylamidomethylation may be carried out by impregnating cellulose in a 
solution containing a suitable concentration of N-methylolacrylamide (e.g., 
20 %) and an acid-liberating salt, such as ammonium chloride as a catalyst. 
After being squeezed to a wet pickup of 95-100 %, the cellulose is placed for a 
few minutes in an oven at 150°C. The cellulose is then treated with an aqueous 
solution of 2 % sodium nitrate at 80°C, followed by washing in soap solution 
and finally rinsed with cold water. Acrylamidomethylated cellulose has a 
pendant double bond which may react, under certain conditions, with various 
compounds having labile hydrogen atoms, or it may be homopolymerized in the 
presence of an initiator. Thus, acrylamidomethylated cellulose on subsequent 
chemical treatments gives a derivative with different reactivity than the un-
modified cellulose after subsequent chemical treatment. 
Hebeish et al.91 have studied the effect of the change in the physical and 
chemical structure of cellulose by acrylamidomethylation on the susceptibility 
of cellulose toward grafting. They followed the rate of grafting of acrylamido-
methylated cellulose and that of unmodified cellulose (control) using either CelV 
ammonium sulfate (CAS) or CelV ammonium nitrate (CAN) as initiators. It is 
clear that with both substrates the grafting reaction is characterized by an initial 
fast rate followed by a slower rate. However, the initial fast rate observed with 
the modified cellulose is significantly lower than that of the control. Also, the 
maximum graft yield obtained with the modified cotton is less than that of the 
control. The lower graft yields obtained with acrylamidomethylated cellulose, 
as compared with the control, could be interpreted in terms of the functions 
of the -CH2-O-CONH-CH=CH2 group; which causes (a) blocking of 
some of the cellulose hydroxyls; (b) decreasing of the swellability of cellulose 
223 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
due to its hydrophobic character; (c) termination of the growing chain of the 
graft, hence, decreasing its molecular mass; and (d) crosslinking of cellulose by 
homopolymerization of the double bonds or addition of a cellulose chain radical 
to the double bond present on an adjacent cellulose chain. Effects (a), (b), and (c) 
would bring about a decrease in the graft yield. The same holds true for 
effect (d), since crosslinked cellulose would be less amenable to grafting due to 
its lower swellability, as well as the decrease in the number of available 
cellulose hydroxyl groups (sites for grafting). 
A comparison between the efficiency of CAS and CAN in inducing grafting 
was made. In the case of acrylamidomethylated cellulose, there is no difference 
in the graft yields obtained with CAN and CAS. On the other hand, with the 
control, the yields obtained with the two initiators differ considerably; CAN 
is more efficient than CAS in the range studied. The identical graft yield obtained 
with both initiators in the case of the modified cellulose could be ascribed to 
crosslinking through homopolymerization of the double bond during the graft-
ing reaction. Graft yields of a crosslinked cellulose would be expected to be much 
lower than those of the acrylamidomethylated cellulose and the control, perhaps 
because of the relatively higher lack of swellability. This is substantiated by the 
fact that with both initiators, i.e., CAN and CAS, leveling off of grafting occurs 
after about 30 minutes in the case of the modified cellulose, whereas no maximum 
graft yield was observed with control even after 120 minutes using CAS91 ). 
Figure 53 shows the graft yield (percent) as a function of degree of substitution 
(D.S.) of acrylamidomethylated cellulose. These data make it evident that the 
graft yield decreases on increasing the D.S. This suggests that the pendant double 
bonds appear to be homopolymerized by the catalytic action ofCeIV. This conver-
sion increases with,the acrylamidomethyl content of cellulose because increasing 
the acrylamidomethyl content increases the probability that there will be another 
double bond close enough to any given double bond to permit reaction. 
80,-----~-----,------,------" 
CAS concentra tion 
Cellulose 19 
60 'h----'..----+------+ AN 1 g 
I 40'C 
MIL ratio 1: 30 
209.c-----·--j 
0.1 
0.2 
OJ 
Degree of substitution, OS 
224 
0.4 
Fig. 53. Graft yield % as a function 
of the degree of substitution of acryl. 
amidomethylated cellulose. 0, /::::., x 
for a reaction time of 10, 60, and 120 
minutes, respectively. Reprinted from 
Ref. 91), p. 1925, by courtesy of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 

6.7. Grafting on Cellulose Treated with N-Methylolacrylamide in an Alkaline Medium 
Using CAN and CAS, the CelV consumption during grafting and during 
oxidation of acrylamidomethylated cellulose and the control has been followed. 
Apparently, the consumption increases with increasing reaction time. It is 
more significant in the initial stages of the reaction, particularly in the case of 
CAN, than in the later stages, perhaps due to lowering of the CelV ion concen-
tration, as well as to the shortage of reactive sites on the substrate backbone as the 
reaction proceeds. This is observed with both substrates, i.e., acrylamidomethylat-
ed cellulose and the control. Nevertheless, the CelV consumption during oxidation 
of acrylamidomethylated cellulose is higher than the corresponding consumption 
in the case of the control when CAS was used. The opposite holds true for 
CAN. 
It follows from this that introducing acrylamidomethyl groups into the 
cellulose molecule significantly effects its behavior with regard to CelV attack. 
Besides the direct attack of CelV at the cellulose hydroxyl, attack at the pendant 
double bond seems to occur. As a result, homopolymerization of the double bonds 
takes place to produce a crosslinked cellulose. Formation of the latter would be 
expected to depend mainly on the number and distribution of the double bonds, 
as well as on the availability of CelV in the reaction medium. Since the rate of 
dissociation of CAN is much higher than that of CAS83 ), the availability of CelV 
for oxidation of acrylamidomethylated cellulose would be greater in the case of 
CAN than with CAS. As pointed out above, this would result in a crosslinked 
cellulose. The lower rate of oxidation of acrylamidomethylated cellulose at the 
later stages of the reaction in the case of CAN suggests that the crosslinked cellu-
lose is less susceptible to CelV attack than the control. On the other hand, formation 
of crosslinked cellulose seems to occur at a relatively lower rate in the case of CAS 
due to its slower rate of dissociation. Consequently, the change in the chemical 
structure of cellulose via crosslin king would not be so striking. This would account 
for the high CelV consumption by acrylamidomethylated cellulose in the case of 
CAS91), as compared to the control. 
6.7. Grafting on Cellulose Treated with N-Methylol-
acrylamide in an Alkaline Medium 
Like other etherification reactions of cellulose such as cyanoethylation, the 
reaction of cellulose with N-methylolacrylamide (MAM) in an alkaline medium 
will proceed via addition of the cellulose hydroxyl to the double bond of MAM 
as follows9 1): 
Cell-OH + CH2 =CHCONHCH20H ~ 
Cell--o---{::H2 CH2 CONHCH2 0 H 
This reaction may be carried out by impregnation of cellulose in a solution 
containing about 25 % N-methylolacrylamide and 2 % potassium hydroxide. 
After squeezing the sample to a wet pickUp of ca. 80 %, it is placed in an oven 
at 150 DC for a few minutes. The cellulose is then neutralized with dilute acetic 
acid, washed thoroughly with water, and air-dried. 
225 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
Introducing this type of bulky group, i.e., --CHzCHzCONHCHzOH, along 
the cellulose chains would be expected to improve the reactivity of cellulose to 
grafting with CeIV, perhaps by opening up the cellulose structure or by the 
presence of the methylol groups in the cellulose molecule. Hebeish et a1.9 1) have 
shown, however, that the graft yields obtained with cellulose treated with MAM 
in an alkaline medium are substantially lower than those of the control, 
thereby indicating that the above expectation is not valid. This would suggest 
that MAM reacts with cellulose in an alkaline medium as a bifunctional 
compound and yields a crosslinked cellulose. The reaction may be represented 
as follows: 
2 Cell-OH + CHz=CHCONHCHzOH----+ 
Cell-O--CHz-CHz--CONHCH2°-Cell 
It is worth pointing out that treating cotton fabric with MAM in an alkaline 
medium significantly improves its easy care properties, suggesting a cross-
linking reaction103). Besides its lower swellability, the crosslinked cellulose has 
less available 'hydroxyl groups. This adversely affects diffusion of the monomer 
and initiator and reduces the number of grafting sites on the cellulose back-
bone, thereby lowering the graft yield. 
Data for CeIV consumption show that the consumption of CeIV during 
grafting is generally higher than that consumed during oxidation, regardless 
of the substrate employed and the temperature used, in accordance with pre-
vious results38). The lower consumption of CeIV observed during oxidation 
of MAM-treated cellulose at 40°C, as compared with the corresponding 
consumption for the control, tallies with the trend of the grafting yield. The 
higher CeIV consumption observed with the MAM-treated cotton at 60 ac, 
in comparison with that of the control during oxidation, suggests that at higher 
temperatures, i.e. 60°C, and after prolonging the reaction time, breaking of the 
crosslinks seems to occur. 
Cell-OCHz-CH2-CONHCH20H + Cell-OH . 
It follows from this that, during oxidation with CeIV at 60°C, there is a 
significant change in the physical as well as the chemical structure of cellulose 
treated with MAM. In addition to the molecular rearrangements of the cellulose, 
--CH~CH2CONHCH20H groups are created as side groups along the cellulose 
molecules. As a result, susceptibility of cellulose toward CeIV attack increases. 
Since the graft yields obtained with cellulose treated with MAM are lower than 
the control even at 60°C, the excess CeIV consumed during oxidation of the 
modified cellulose, is presumably due to the fast initiation and termination rates 
of free radicals formed on the side group of the modified cellulose91 ). 
226 

6.8. Grafting on Carbamoylethylated Cellulose 
6.S. Grafting on Carbamoylethylated Cellulose 
Cellulose reacts with acrylamide in an alkaline medium to give carbamoylethylated 
celluloselOl.102). The reaction may be represented as follows: 
Cell-OH + CH2=CHCONH2 --+ Cell-O-CH2CH2CONH2 
In this process, cellulose is treated with a solution containing 12.6 % acrylamide 
and 3.8 % sodium hydroxide. After being squeezed to a wet pickup of 85 %, the 
cellulose is heated at 125°C for 6 minutes, followed by a thorough washing. 
The carbamoylethylated cellulose possesses good retention of strip breaking 
stren.gth, a slight degree of rot resistance, and substantial heat resistance104. 105). 
The vinyl graft copolymerization of carbamoylethylated cellulose has been 
studied91 ). Figure 54 shows the results of the grafting of acrylonitrile (AN) onto 
carbamoylethylated cellulose, as well as those obtained with cellulose treated with 
3.8 % NaOH (control) using CelV ammonium sulfate (CAS) as initiator. It is 
obvious that for a given reaction time and at a particular temperature, the graft 
yield obtained with the modified cellulose is substantially higher than that of the 
control. There seems to be an attack of CelV at the carbamoyl ethyl groups, as well 
as at the cellulose hydroxyl groups. The presence of the -CONH2 grouping with 
its negative inductive effect would facilitate hydrogen transfer. Thus, besides the 
free radical formation at the hydroxyl groups of cellulose, free radicals at the 
a-carbon atom of the carbamoylethyl group are very likely to occur. The 
following reaction scheme was suggested for initiation, propagation, and 
termination of the vinyl graft polymerization on the modified cellulose that 
takes place at the carbamoyl ethyl group91): 
H I) ,-., 
RCHO-CH 2C-CONH 2 +. CeN --. RCHO-CH2-CH-CONH 2 + CellI + 
HEll 
I 
H 
RCHO -CH2 -
C -
CONH2 
I 
H 
H 
/ 
H 
CH 2C\ 
I 
I 
X 
+ 
CH2=C -
RCHO-CH2-C-CONH2 
I 
I 
X 
H 
(Initiation of grafting) 
X 
H 
I 
/ 
RCHO-CH,-\-CONH, + O~H'~C<) 
H 
(CH 2CH)n- CH2C\ 
I 
X 
_ 
RCHOCH2 -
C -
CONH2 
I 
H 
X 
I 
. 
CH 2CHCH2CHX 
I 
RCHOCH 2-
C-CONH2 + 
I 
H 
x 
I 
(Propagation of grafting) 
(CH 2CH)n- CH =CHX 
I 
CeN ____ RCHOCH2-C-CONH2 
+ 
Cell + HEll 
I 
H 
(Termination' of grafting) 
227 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
-
'--,,~----
I----' . 
""" 
70 
,,/ 
_ ..... ..... -
/ 
0-
/ 
--
-""" 
" 
60 
I Y 
~/ 
I 
/ 
/ V 
/ 
---:; ;--
"/ 
0/ /' 
// 
1/ / 
M / L ratio : 1 : 30 
CAS concentration: 0.01 M 
/ 
Cellulose 
19 
_+ 
Y 
AN 
19 
---, 
-
Control 
i 
--- Carbamoylethyl - r----
50 
~ 
'0 
~ 30 
20 
cellulose 
10 
0 
40' C 
~-----1-
" 60' C 
I 
I 
I 
o 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
Reaction time (min) 
Fig. 54. Graft yield obtained with carba-
moylethylated cellulose (D.S. = 0.122) and 
those obtained with cellulose treated with 
3.8 % sodium hydroxide (control) when AN 
was used as a monomer and CAS as initiator. 
Reprinted from Ref. 91), p. 1935, by courtesy 
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
where RCHOCHzCHzCONHz is carbamoylethylated cellulose and CHz =CHX 
is a vinyl monomer. 
With respect to CeIV consumption, Hebeish et a1.90) have reported that despite 
the change in the chemical structure of cellulose by carbamoylethylation, the 
susceptibility toward CeIV oxidation remains practically unaltered. Probably the 
decreased attack due to blocking some of the cellulose hydroxyls in the modified 
cellulose is counterbalanced by CeIV attack at the carbamoyl ethyl groups. 
6.9. Grafting on Cellulose Bearing Carboxymethyl and 
Cyanoethyl Groups 
It has been pointed out that changing the chemical structure of cellulose by 
carboxymethylation up to a D.S. of 0.124 (PCMC) enhances the susceptibility of 
cellulose to grafting by means ofCe1v ions. The same holds true when the chemical 
modification is performed via cyanoethylation (CEC), but the graft yield in-
creases on increasing the D.S. In order to study the behavior of cellulose bearing 
both groups, i.e., carboxymethyl and cyanoethyl (PCMC-CEC) toward grafting, 
partially carboxymethylated cellulose of D.S. 0.0324 was cyanoethylated up to a 
D.S. of 1.425 and then grafted with acrylonitrile (AN) and methyl methacrylate 
(MMA), using CAS as the initiator91 ). Figure 55 shows that for given 
conditions, the graft yield of PCMC is significantly higher than that of cellulose 
bearing the same amount of carboxymethyl groups along with cyanoethyl groups. 
This implies that further modification of partially carboxymethylated cellulose 
by cyanoethylation greatly reduces its susceptibility to grafting. 
The consumption of CeIV during grafting and oxidation of PCMC-CEC and 
PCMC (as a control) had been studied in detail. Apparently, the CeIV consump-
228 

70 
60 
50 
'§ 30 
'-" 
20 
10 
o 
6.10. Grafting on Cellulose Bearing Cyanoethyl and Carboxyethyl Groups 
CAS concentr~tion = 0.01 M 
MIL ratio = 1: 30 
Cellulose 19 
r--
AN 
19 / 
40'C I 
AN-
-
/ 
--- MMA 
I I 
f-...D-----
--
.-
.... 
p .... 
--' 
6';' 
- ~ 
" 
" 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
Reaction time (min) 
Fig. 55. Grafting of acrylonitrile and methyl 
methacrylate on cellulose bearing cyanoethyl 
groups (D.S. = 1.425) along with carboxy-
methyl groups (D.S.: 0.0324) using CAS 
as initiator. (6), PCMC-CEC; (0), PCMC. 
Reprinted from Ref.91). p. 1929, by courtesy 
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
tion during oxidation ofPCMC is very close to that ofPCMC-CEC, which indi-
cates that introducing cyanoethyl groups along with carboxymethyl groups in 
the cellulose molecule has practically no effect on the susceptibility of cellulose 
to CelV attack. This is rather a surprise, since the graft yields obtained with 
PCMC-CEC are significantly lower than those of PCMC. There seems to be a 
considerable difference between the mode of CelV attack on both substrates, as 
well as in the rate of initiation and termination of the free radicals on the 
substrate backbone. 
An additional point of interest is that ~he consumption of CelV during grafting 
of PCMC is considerably higher than that consumed during grafting of PCMC-
CEC75 l. 
This is perhaps due to the difference in the rates of initiation, propagation, and 
termination of homopolymer formation. The magnitude of the latter was reported 
to depend on the nature of the substrate38l. 
6.10. Grafting on Cellulose Bearing Cyanoethyl and 
Carboxyethyl Groups 
It has been shown that while cellulose bearing either cyanoethyl or carboxy-
methyl groups shows higher graft yields than un substituted cellulose, cellulose 
bearing both groups shows lower yields. Cellulose bearing cyanoethyl groups 
along with carboxyethyl groups is discussed here with respect to its susceptibility 
towards grafting. Creation of carboxyethyl groups along the cellulose molecule 
is effected by partial hydrolysis of cyanoethylated cellulose with a D.S. of 0.515. 
In this range, the cyanoethyl groups are perhaps located at C2 of the anhydro-
glucose unit in the cellulose molecules91l. After being hydrolyzed with a 40% 
sodium hydroxide, the cellulose was shown to contain cyanoethyl groups (D.S. 
229 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
= 0.06) and carboxyethyl groups (D.S. = 0.038). The sum of both groups ex-
pressed as D.S. amounts to 0.098, a value which is much lower than that of the 
original cyanoethyl cellulose, i.e., D.S. 0.515. This suggests that ether bond 
cleavage occurs during alkaline hydrolysis91). 
It is established42l that CeIV consumption during oxidation of cellulose is due 
to (a) formation of a CeIV -cellulose complex, perhaps through chelation between 
the CeIV ions and the cellulose hydroxyl groups; (b) formation of free radicals 
at the hemiacetal group of the end anhydroglucose unit of the cellulose chain; 
and (c) termination of free radicals resulting from dissociation of acetal groups. 
The extent of CeIV -cellulose complex formation would be much greater for 
PCMC than for PCMC-CEC owing to the greater availability of cellulose 
hydroxyls in PCMC. Thus, the fact that the consumption of CeIV during oxida-
tion of PCMC and PCMC-CEC is very similar suggests that excess CeIV con-
sumption for complex formation during oxidation ofPCMC is outweighed by the 
direct attack ofCeIV on cyanoethyl groups91l ofPCMC-CEC. The following two 
possibilities may explain the lower graft yield obtained with PCMC-CEC, as 
compared with PCMC, 
(a) dissociation of the Ce1v-cellulose complex to produce free radicals capable 
of initiating grafting42l may be easier with PCMC than with PCMC-CEC. 
(b) termination of free radicals formed on cyanoethyl groups may be much 
faster than when brought about by dissociation of the Ce1v-cellulose 
complex. 
Hebeish et al.90l grafted acrylonitrile (AN) onto cellulose bearing cyanoethyl and 
carboxyethyl groups using CAS as initiator. Figure 56 shows these results; together 
with those obtained with cyanoethyl cellulose and cellulose treated with 2 % 
sodium hydroxide for comparison. Obviously, the graft yields obtained with 
cellulose bearing cyanoethyl along with carboxyethyl groups are much greater than 
70 
60 
50 
~ 40 
';;:' 
20 
10 
o 
230 
" 
f----------- ---
--
V' 
,/"" 
Zv 
~ 
~ 
! 
I 
;1 r 
1 
;------r--' 
I 
! 
x/ V'I 
MIL ratio = 1:30 
/ 
CAS concentration = 0.01 M 
/ 
Cellulose 19 
,( 
AN 
19 
40'C 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
Reaction time (min) 
Fig. 56. Graft yield percent vs. reaction time. 
(6.), cellulose bearing cyanoethyl groups 
(OS: 0.06) along with carboxyethyl groups 
(OS: 0.0376); (0), cyanoethylated cellulose 
(D.S. = 0.515); (x), cellulose treated with 
2 % sodium hydroxide (control for cyano-
ethylated cellulose). Reprinted from Ref.91), 
p. 1931, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. 

6.11. Grafting on Phosphorylated Cellulose 
those obtained with the cyano-ethylated cellulose and the alkali-treated 
cellulose. These investigators attributed this behaviour to the influence of the 
following factors taken together: ( a) cyanoethyl groups function as additional 
sites for grafting; (b) carboxyethyl groups increase the swell ability of cellulose; 
thereby facilitating diffusion of monomer and initiator; and (c) the physical 
and chemical changes in the cellulose structure brought about by the effect of the 
concentrated alkali used in hydrolyzing the cyanoethyl groups may cause, in 
particular, a crystal transformation from cellulose I to cellulose II, thus increasing 
the reactivity of cellulose. 
With reqard to the CeIV consumption, it has been reported91) that cellulose 
bearing cyanoethyl and carboxyethyl groups shows a lower consumption during 
oxidation when compared with cyanoethylated cellulose and alkali-treated 
cellulose (control). This has been ascribed to the disappearance of some of the 
cyanoethyl groups (sites for CeIV attack) through either hydrolysis to carboxy-
ethyl groups or cleavage of the ether bond. In addition, alkali treatment 
(used for hydrolysis) produces a substrate with higher grafting efficiency (cf. 
Figure 56), but lower susceptibility to CeIV oxidation; this finding is in agreement 
with previous results38), which revealed that cotton treated with concentrated 
sodium hydroxide showed a higher graft yield and lower CeIV consumption than 
did untreated cotton. 
6.11. Grafting on Phosphorylated Cellulose 
Cellulose phosphate and phosphorylating agents for cellulose have been review-
ed106). Reagents include ammonium phosphate, urea-phosphoric acid, phospho-
rus tri- and oxychloride, monophenyl phosphate, phosphorus pentoxide, and 
chlorides of partially substituted phosphoric acidsl06-108). The use of ortho- and 
condensed phosphate salts for the crosslinking and modification of cellulose has 
been described107). For example, when a cotton fabric is treated for 10-20 minutes 
with a phosphoric acid solution at pH 2, which contains 2 to 6 mol of urea per mol 
of phosphoric acid at a temperature between 140-160 °e, cellulose ammonium 
hydrogen phosphate is produced. 
(Cellulose ammonium hydrogen phosphate) 
Products with greater than 1.6 % phosphorus, obtained by reaction with neutral 
or slightly acidic alkali metal phosphate or condensed phosphate salts, are 
insoluble in cupriethylenediamine and are apparently crosslinked107). 
o 
0 
" 
" 
2CeU-OH + Na-O-P-OH -- NaO-P-O-CeU 
I 
I 
OH 
OCeU 
DiceUulose phosphate 
231 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
Phosphorylated cellulose esters in the form of ammonium salts resist fire. 
Phosphorylated cellulose also shows good non-soiling qualities and undergoes 
rapid cation exchange reactions. The latter property makes phosphorlated cellu-
lose suitable for grafting. This suitability may be due to the number and location 
of grafting sites in cotton or rayon fibers that can be controlled and directed by 
making use of the ion-binding capacity of cellulose109 -110). If at least one compo-
nent of the redox initiator is cationic, that component can be bound to anionic 
groups in cellulose, and these become loci at which polymerization takes place. 
Since homopolymer formation occurs mainly in the treating solution, while 
grafting can only occur on or within the solid cellulose, the probability of grafting 
is enhanced when initiator binding sites are present in high concentration in the 
fibers. 
Gallagherlll) has reported that the ion-binding capacity of cotton was readily 
increased by heating the fabric with alkali metal phosphates to effect phosphor-
ylation. Subsequent contact with a solution of redox polymerization initiators 
then binds the cationic component of the initiator to the cellulose. Graft poly-
merization of olefinic monomers in the phosphorylated, ion-exchanged fabric 
occurs with high speed and efficiency. Table 49 shows the polymerization data for 
individual vinyl and acrylic monomers. It is clear that with FeIl-H202 
initiation, the polymerizations were considerably accelerated in every instance 
when phosphorylated fabric was used as a substrate. However, vinyl monomers 
show greater acceleration than acrylic derivatives. Vinyl acetate produced 
900 times more polymer in phosphorylated cotton than in native cotton. After 
solvent extraction, the phosphorylated cotton retained at least 150 times as much 
polymer as did native cotton (runs 1,2). For styrene polymerization, the increase 
in total polymer deposition caused by phosphorylation was 4-12 times, depending 
on the level of phosphorus introduced. The increase in polymer remaining after 
Table 49. Comparison of phosphorylated and unphosphorylated cotton fabric as grafting hosts. 
(Redox initiator Fell-H20 2). Adapted from Ref.IUI, p. 624, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Run 
P, % 
Monomer 
Monomer Time, 
Temp., Weight gain, % 
No. 
concn. 
mins. 
°C 
before extrn. after extrn. 
I 
0.00 
Vinyl acetate 
3.3 
60 
50 
0.3 
2 
1.25 
Vinyl acetate 
3.3 
60 
50 
274 
45.7 
3 
0.00 
Methyl acrylate 
4.5 
15.5 
72 
32 
15.7 
4 
0.33 
Methyl acrylate 
4.5 
15.5 
72 
58.1 
35.0 
5 
0.00 
Ethyl acrylate 
4.0 
15.0 
75 
51.6 
29.0 
6 
0.33 
Ethyl acrylate 
4.0 
15 
75 
118 
94.0 
7 
0.00 
Styrene 
34" 
60 
50 
2.2 
0.8 
8 
0.33 
Styrene 
34" 
60 
50 
9.2 
7.9 
9 
1.25 
Styrene 
34" 
60 
50 
26.8 
18.7 
\0 
0.00 
N-Methylolacrylamide 
6.6 
18 
25 
3.3 
II 
0.33 
N-Methylolacrylamide 
6.6 
18 
25 
8.3 
12 
0.00 
Glycidyl acrylate 
5.0b 
5 
70 
18.5 
13 
0.33 
Glycidyl acrylate 
5.0b 
5 
70 
30.8 
a In aqueous emulsion 
b No Fell ions present. The aqueous emulsion contained 5% monomer, 0.018% KOH; 0.14% KCI; 
0.01 % tetraethylenepentamine; 0.5% TiCI3 ; 0.24% HP2 and 0.5% Triton X-IOO. 
232 

6.11. Grafting on Phosphorylated Cellulose 
extraction was 10-23 times (runs 7, 8, 9). The rates of reaction with the acrylic 
monomer showed accelerations in the neighborhood of 2-3 times on phos-
phorylated fabric. 
The effect of fabric phosphorylation on polymer formation for several dif-
ferent initiator systems is shown in Table 50. It is obvious that mixtures of 
monomers could readily be copolymerized on fabric, thus providing a wide 
range of fiber modifications. Mixtures of acrylic monomers produced 1.7-7.5 times 
as much polymer on phosphorylated fabric as on native cotton. A ten-fold 
increase in polymerization was produced in the case of ethyl acrylate mixed with 
a minor proportion of bis-2-(vinyloxy)ethyl ether; this is a further reflection of 
the sensitivity of the vinyl component to increased concentrations of initiator 
sites in the cellulose (runs 26, 27). For the polymerization of mixed monomers, 
initiation with hydrogen peroxide in combination with reducing ions, such as 
Table SO. Graft polymerization of single and mixed monomers on cotton fabric of varied phos-
phorus contents (Redox initiator M+-Hz02)' Reprinted from Ref.ll l), p. 625, by courtesy of the 
Textile Research Institute 
Run 
P, % Initiator Compd.' 
Concn., 
Mol 
Time, 
Temp., Weight gain 
No. 
ion, M+ 
% 
ratio 
min 
°C 
Before 
After 
extn. 
extn. 
1 
0 
N2H; 
AN 
5 
10 
79 
5.1 
3.6 
2 
3.1 
N2Hs+ 
AN 
5 
10 
79 
15.4 
10.0 
3 
3.1 
N2H; 
AN 
5 
35 
82 
53.0 
23.4 
4 
0.3 
N2Hs+ 
AN 
8.3 
6 
71 
13.2 
9.9 
5 
0 
N2H; 
AN/HPMA 
2.8/6.4 
1.2 
9 
66 
2.6 
6 
0.9 
N2Hs+ 
AN/HPMA 
2.8/6.4 
1.2 
9 
66 
12.6 
7 
0 
N2Hs+ 
AN/HPMA 
2.8/6.4 
1.2 
31 
71 
29.7 
8 
0.9 
N2H; 
AN/HPMA 
2.8/6.4 
1.2 
31 
71 
78.4 
57.1 
9 
0 
Fe+2 
AN 
8 
20 
25 
2.8 
10 
0.2 
Fe+2 
AN 
8 
20 
25 
5.6 
11 
0.2 
Fe+2 
AN 
8 
20 
66 
40.3 
37.5 
12 
0 
Fe+2 
AN/MAA 
7.1/2.7 
5.0 
30 
25 
1.2 
13 
0.3 
Fe+2 
AN/MAA 
7.1/2.7 
5.0 
30 
25 
9.1 
14 
0 
Fe+2 
AN/MAA 
5.9/1.1 
10 
30 
25 
3.5 
15 
0.3 
Fe+2 
AN/MAA 
5.9/1.1 
10 
30 
25 
10.5 
16 
0.3 
Fe+2 
AN/MAA 
6.6/2.0 
6.4 
30 
25 
4.7 
17 
0.3 
Ti+3 
AN/MAA 
6.6/2.0 
6.4 
30 
25 
6.0 
18 
0.3 
Fe+2 
AN/MAA 
6.6/2.0 
6.4 
60 
25 
20.0 
19 
0 
Fe+2 
AN/MAA 
6.6/2.0 
6.4 
30 
70 
42.0 
20 
0.3 
Fe+ 2 
AN/MAA 
6.6/2.0 
6.4 
30 
70 
70.0 
21 
0.3 
Fe+ z 
EA 
3.7 
30 
25 
25.3 
22 
0.3 
Fe+2 
MAA 
5.0 
27 
25 
9.6 
23 
0.5 
Fe+2 
MAA 
6.1 
18 
25 
22.4 
20.2 
24 
0 
Fe+2 
EA/MAA 
5.0/0.5 
10 
4 
75 
14.6 
13.0 
25 
0.3 
Fe+2 
EA/MAA 
5.0/0.5 
10 
4 
75 
30.3 
25.9 
26 
0 
Fe+ 2 
EA/DVG 
3.4/1.5 
3.6 
30 
25 
4.6 
27 
0.3 
Fe+ 2 
EA/DVG 
3.4/1.5 
3.6 
30 
25 
45 
28 
0.3 
Fe+2 
MA 
4.5 
2 
65 
29 
29 
0.3 
Fe+ 2 
MA 
4.5 
15 
65 
5\.7 
46.9 
30 
0 
Fe+ z 
MA/MAA 
4.3/1.0 
5.0 
1.25 
77 
2.8 
31 
0.3 
Fe+ 2 
MA/MAA 
4.3/1.0 
5.0 
1.25 
77 
5.9 
233 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
Table SO. (Continued) 
Run 
P, % Initiator Compd.' 
Concn., 
Mol 
Time, 
Temp., Weight gain 
No. 
ion, M+ 
% 
ratio 
min 
°C 
Before 
After 
extn. 
extn. 
32 
0 
Fe+2 
MA/MAA 
4.5/0.53 
10 
4 
73 
6.6 
33 
oj 
Fe+2 
MA/MAA 
4.5/0.53 
10 
4 
73 
12.9 
34 
0.3 
Fe+2 
S 
35 
60 
50 
13.1 
9.3 
35 
0.3 
Fe+2 
S 
35 
90 
50 
21.3 
16.2 
36 
0.3 
Fe+2 
S 
35 
22 
75 
28.5 
14.3 
37 
0.3 
Fe+ 2 
S 
35 
32 
75 
54.3 
24.8 
38 
0.3 
Fe+2 
VA 
3 
15 
62 
2.7 
39 
1.0 
Fe+2 
VA 
3 
15 
62 
15.9 
9.4 
40 
0.3 
Fe+2 
VA 
5 
10 
68 
18.3 
41 
0.3 
Fe+ 2 
VA 
5 
20 
69 
39.8 
42 
0 
Ce+ 4 
ANb 
5 
15 
25 
2.8 
43 
3.1 
Ce+1 
AN b 
5 
15 
25 
6.3 
44 
0.3 
Cr+2 
GA' 
10 
4 
70 
7.9 
45 
0.3 
N2H5+ 
GAd 
10 
24 
60 
10.1 
46 
0.3 
Sn+2 
HPMA/MAA 10/0.6 
12 
5 
75. 
4.1 
a AN = acrylonitrile; DVG = divinyl ether of diethylene glycol; EA = ethyl acrylate; GA 
glycidyl acrylate; HPMA = hydroxypropyl methacrylate; MA = methyl acrylate; MAA 
N-methylolacrylamide; S = styrene; VA = vinyl acetate. 
b No peroxide used in this run. Fabric was converted to Ce1v-ion form by treatment with 2.5 % 
Ce(HS04 )4' 
, Sodium form of phosphorylated fabric treated with emulsion of 10% GA, 0.02 % H20 2, 
0.018% KOH, 0.14% KCI, 0.02% tetraethylenepentamine, 0.4% CrCI3, 0.3% Triton X-100, 
and water. 
d Hydrazine form treated as in (c) except that CrCI3 was omitted. 
FeII, TilII, or hydrazinium ions could be used. CelV ion initiation appeared to be 
moderately effectivell1 . 
According to Gallaher, the proportion of monomer grafted to cellulose in these 
experiments can be estimated approximately from the fraction of polymer not 
removable by known polymer solvents. Consequently, for FeII-H202 initiation 
of such monomers as methyl acrylate, ethyl acrylate, and styrene (Table 50), the 
durably bound fraction comprised 60-86 % of the total polymer formed in the 
phosphorylated fabric. The relative percentages of bound and unbound polymer 
varied widely, however, with the monomer and initiator used as well as with 
polymerization temperature and monomer concentration. Polymerization of 
acrylonitrile (Table 66, runs 1-4 and 9-11) produced 44-93 % yields of bound 
polymer, showing that a large number of critical variables exist for a given 
monomer. 
It has also been reported that alkaline hydrolysis of phosphorylated cotton fail-
ed to remove phosphate groups, making this derivative one of the most alkali-
stable cellulose esters available. Bound polyacrylonitrile also resisted removal by 
alkaline hydrolysis, even though the nitrile groups were apparently converted to 
carboxyl groups. Hydrolysis in acid, under conditions known to cleave phosphate 
groups, also failed to remove the polymerll 1). 
234 

6.12. Grafting on Crosslinked Cellulose 
6.12. Grafting on Crosslinked Cellulose 
The interaction of cellulose and formaldehyde has received considerable 
attention over a period of many years. As a consequence, the conditions of 
reaction and the types of products obtained may be said generally to be 
understood112l. The acid-catalyzed reaction between formaldehyde and cellulose 
at high temperatures (ca. 150°C) has been studied extensively, both from theore-
tical and practical standpoints. In this reaction, the formation of methylene-
ether crosslinks takes place predominantly between the secondary hydroxyl groups 
of cellulose112-116l. The same reaction has been used in industry for improving 
the dimensional stability of viscose fabrics. However, attempts at applying this 
treatment to cotton fabrics on a commercial scale have not been successful 
since it causes large losses in strength117l. Interest has been revived in the 
reaction of formaldehyde with cotton in a swollen condition. This is due to the 
observations that (ii) the drip-dry characteristics of cotton fabric depend to a 
large extent on the crease recovery of wet fabrics, and that (ii) crosslinking treat-
ments of the swollen fiber produce large increases in wet crease recovery. It has 
been postulated that the crosslinking of cellulose in a swollen condition occurs 
largely in the regions having reasonable lateral order, while crosslinks introduced 
in the earlier treatments at high temperatures (when the fiber is in a collapsed 
state) are located in the noncrystalline regions118-120l. 
The effect of the change in the cellulose structure, brought about by cross-
linking cotton cellulose in the dry and wet states, on grafting of cellulose with 
acrylonitrile (AN) and methyl methacrylate (MMA), using the CeIV ion technique 
was examined121l. The graft copolymerization reaction was studied with respect 
to the graft yield and the CeIV consumption. Figure 57 shows the rate of grafting 
of cellulose, crosslinked in the dry state, and that of the control. It is clear that with 
both monomers, low grafting rates were obtained with crosslinked cellulose, as 
compared with the control. This is to be expected since the crosslin king reaction 
takes place in highly disordered regions. Besides blocking some of the cellulose 
hydroxyls, such a change results in a measurable decrease in swellability of the 
fiber, probably by restricting the freedom of movement of the cellulose 
molecules while in the aqueous grafting medium. The effect of low swellability 
of the crosslinked cellulose is to impede diffusion of both monomer and initiator, 
thereby adversely affecting the grafting yield. This is substantiated by the fact 
that lower grafting rates are obtained with cellulose having higher amounts of 
bound formaldehyde. It can also be seen (Fig. 57) that in the early stages of the 
reaction, crosslinked celluloses having lower amounts of bound formaldehyde 
show higher grafting levels than those with higher amounts; but this difference 
nearly disappears after one hour's reaction time. The prolonged reaction seems to 
have two effects: (1) enhancing fiber swellability, as well as diffusion of monomer 
and initiator; and (b) breaking down some of the crosslinks owing to the high 
acidity of the treating bath. Both effects lead to increased graft formation. Thus, 
within the range studied, the differences in the graft yields observed at short 
grafting times are reduced by increasing the swellability of the fiber and by break-
ing down some of the crosslinks at prolonged grafting times121). 
Contrary to cellulose crosslinked in the dry state, cellulose crosslinked in the 
235 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
40 
35 
Formaldehyde 
content 
__ f-------<'+----+oO.O 
(g/100g) 
" 1.82 
x 0.827 i 
30 f-----j--t---;f--j---j-. 2.07 --
'" 3.18 
~25~~--~~~==~~~ 
-0 
Qj 
~>. 
o 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
Reaction time (min) 
Fig. 57. Graft yield of cellulose containing 
various amounts of bound formaldehyde vs. 
reaction time. Reprinted from Ref. 121), p. II, 
by courtesy of Textile Research Institute. 
wet swollen state shows graft yields which are comparable to those of the 
control. 
In crosslinking cellulose while it is in the uncollapsed state, the crosslinkages 
appear to be located largely in regions of some lateral order due to the inclusion 
of the swelling agent (phosphoric acid) in the process. This stabilizes the swollen 
structure of the fiber, in the wet state, without reducing its swellability. The dis-
appearance of some of the cellulose hydroxyls (possible sites for grafting) as a 
consequence of crosslinking is compensated for by the possibility that some of the 
crosslinks introduced may occur in the crystalline, or at least in the near crystalline 
regions of the cellulose. Hence, there will be a greater tendency for the reacting 
molecules to approach these regions than would be the case with uncrosslinked 
cotton. The cellulose is held in a somewhat open state to give a swollen 
product in which the location of the graft sites may be quite different from 
those in the control, or even from that of cellulose crosslinked in the dry 
state121). 
With respect to CelV consumption, Kantouch and collaborators121 ) have 
reported changing the chemical structure of cellulose via interaction with form-
aldehyde in either the dry or wet states has very little effect on the susceptibility of 
cellulose toward CelV oxidation. Although this observation agrees with the graft 
yields in the case of cellulose crosslinked in the wet state, it does not concur 
with the graft yields obtained with cellulose crosslinked in the dry state. In the 
latter instance, the crosslinkages appear largely to be on the surface of the cellulose. 
These crosslinkages would be more sensitive to CelV attack, possibly through 
their cleavage under the hydrolytic influence of the acidic medium of the reaction, 
giving rise to CelV consumption without necessarily initiating grafting. It is also 
236 

6.13. Grafting on Aldehyde Cellulose 
possible that the discrepancy between the consumption of CelV during oxidation 
of cellulose crosslinked in the dry state and its graft yields could be due to a higher 
rate of CeIV diffusion than monomer diffusion. That is, the rate of CeIV diffusion 
into the modified and unmodified cellulose may be comparable, whereas the rate 
of monomer diffusion into both substrates may differ considerably because of its 
higher molecular size, as compared to CelV• 
It has been reported that treatment of cellulose, crosslinked in either dry or wet 
conditions with acidic CeIV solutions, results in a decrease in the amount of bound 
formaldehyde. This decrease was very significant with prolonged treatment 
times, indicating the occurrence of crosslink rupture during grafting initiated by 
CeIV•121) 
6.13. Grafting on Aldehyde Cellulose 
As stated in Chapter 4, the chemical reactivity of cellulose is known to be 
strongly influenced by its oxidized status. The enhanced thermal initiation of 
graft copolymerization on hydrogen peroxide or sodium hypochlorite-oxidized 
cellulose122l and poly (vinyl alcohol) fiber123l without the use of an initiator has 
been reported. Furthermore, periodic acid-oxidized cellulose124-125l or poly 
(vinyl alcohol) fiber126l has sufficient activity to initiate grafting via photo-
irradiation. 
Ogiwara et al.127l have used the periodic acid route to prepare so-called aldehyde 
cellulose. Substrate preparation involved treating commercial pulps from soft-
woods, with an aqueous periodic acid solution at 45°C for 60 minutes (ratio 
of material to liquid 1: 100). After this treatment, the samples were washed, 
dried under vacuum, and then used to establish both the relationship between 
the ability of the aldehyde cellulose to inititate grafting under photo-irradiation 
and the properties of the photoinduced radicals of the aldehyde cellulosel24l. 
Aldehyde cellulose was shown to have a high affinity for grafting, though the level 
of grafting is dependent on the carbonyl content of the aldehyde cellulose. A 
higher graft efficiency for each monomer is obtained with aldehyde cellulose of 
higher carbonyl content. The hydrophilic monomers used by Ogiwara et al.127l 
included acrylic acid, N-vinyl-2-pyrrolidone, and acrylamide and were reasonably 
representative of this class of monomer. 
The situation regarding the grafting of hydrophobic monomers was also follow-
ed by Ogiwara et al. The monomers used were vinyl acetate, methyl methacrylate, 
and acrylonitrile. It was found that the percent grafting of vinyl acetate 
increased with increasing carbonyl content of the cellulose sample, and that 
acrylonitrile grafting leveled off in the range beyond a critical carbonyl 
content, while methyl methacrylate grafting gave a maximum value. The hydro-
phobic monomers gave less grafting than the hydrophilic monomers. The dif-
ferences are due to water solubility, affinity for the cellulose substrate, and the 
monomer type. It was shown that the carbonyl group in aldehyde cellulose is 
very reactive toward light. A consequence of this activity is the production 
of radicals for grafting on the substrate. 
237 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
From e.s.r. studies of the photo-irradiated aldehyde cellulose and subsequent 
decay patterns, Ogiwara et al.127) concluded that the high activity needed to induce 
graft copolymerization of various monomers on aldehyde cellulose under 
photo-irradiation was derived from an acyl radical which originated in the 
aldehyde group of the sample. 
6.14. Grafting onto Methylol Cellulosics 
The methylol cellulose (cellulose/DMSO/formaldehyde) system, as a means of 
cellulose solution, is now reasonably well established 128 -130). This procedure 
has been used as a preliminary to cellulose regeneration and derivitivization. 
This type of system offers certain advantages, including relative ease of handling, 
considerable storage life, and the prospect of greater homogeneity of product 
modification, resulting from the fact that grafting can be completed in solution. 
The term methylol cellulose is used in its loosest sense, since product characteri-
zation is one of the areas which require thorough elucidation. Guthrie et al.131) 
have reported the sensitized photo initiated grafting of styrene onto methylol 
cellulose in DMSO. 
Typically, the methylolation procedure was a modification of that given by 
Johnson et aU 28) as reported by Guthrie and Hardcastle129). Cellulose (cotton 
wool or high-grade wood pulp), DMSO, and paraformaldehyde (l: 12:2 by 
weight) are heated under stirring at 120°C for five hours, though a clear 
solution is usually achieved within two hours. Dynamic viscometric measurements 
of filter-press treated solutions show them to be stable over long periods. 
Photosensitized grafting of styrene onto the methylol cellulose solution 
in DMSO was achieved using 2-chlorothioxanone as a sensitizer and dimethyl-
aminoethanol as a synergist131). Irradiation was carried out for various known 
times and monomer concentrations using a 125 W Primarc medium-pressure 
ultraviolet lamp. Homopolymer was removed from the bulk polymer (pre-
cipitated from chilled methanol) by Soxhlet extraction procedures. 
Figure 58 and 59 show the increase in grafting and homopolymerization, respec-
tively, with increasing irradiation time for the various initial monomer concen-
trations. While the homopolymerization process appears to be reasonably straight 
forward, the grafting reaction is complicated by the presence of maxima which 
maximize at an initial monomer concentration of 4.36 mol of styrene/l of bulk 
solution. These maxima are perhaps best shown by plotting the change in the 
overall rate of grafting against the original bulk monomer concentration 
(Fig. 60) for each of the irradiation periods covered. Figure 60 presents some 
interesting features. The occurrence of maxima in studies of grafting patterns 
have been observed previously. They are often associated with the Trommsdorff 
type phenomena or where precipitation of polymer follows as a consequence 
of the polymerization reaction. In the study by Guthrie et aI., the situation 
is somewhat more complex in that there is little change in the viscosity of the 
medium as a result of grafting, since the reaction is always carried out to 
low conversion levels13ll. Also, these deviations from expected behavior are not 
restricted to extended conversion but apply throughout each kinetic run. One 
238 

c a :; 
5i 4 I-----I--+---l-----+--_+_ 
-"" 
:5 
.0 
~~- 3 I---+---,d---~~*"""=------+_____=..._"'"t'_-__l 
o 
E 
0-
= 
o 
~ 2~~~~-=~~~--~-__l 
~ 
o 
E 
o 
M 
f+H'~--+--" 2.5 (mol 1.1) 
v 4.6 
• 5.2 
10 
20 
30 
• 6.1 
x 8.6 
o 1.7 (moll") 
40 
Irradiation time (min) 
50 
10.---,---~----~--~--~ 
8 -- ---j----+------b...c---
[M] 
x 8.6 (moI1 1) 
• 6.2 
• 5.2 
'7 4.4 
" 2.5 
o 1.7 (moll-I) 
20 
30 
40 
50 
Irradiation time (min) 
6.14. Grafting onto Methylol Cellulosics 
Fig. 58. Variation in extent of grafting with 
irradiation time for monomer concentrations 
in the bulk phase of (0), 1.7; (.t,.), 2.5; (\7), 
4.6; (e), 5.2; (T), 6.1 ; and (x), 8.6 mol/I of 
bulk phase respectively. 
Reprinted from 
Ref.131), courtesy of Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
Fig. 59. Variation in the extent of homopoly-
merization with irradiation time for monomer 
concentrations of (0), 1.7; (.t,.), 2.5; (\7), 4.6; 
(e), 5.2; (T), 6.2; (x), 8.6. Reprinted from 
Ref.l3l), courtesy of Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
possible explanation is that the addition of monomer to the bulk medium brings 
about changes in the morphological state of the methylol cellulose in the DMSO. 
Guthrie et al.l3l ) have proposed that an open gel-like phase is formed which con-
tains trapped monomer as well as the photoinitiator and synergist. Should 
initiation take place within these transparent 'gels', polymerization would proceed 
until monomer depletion occurs. An open 'gel phase' would be supported to an 
upper limit in the monOlller concentration (a non-solvent as far as the methylol 
cellulose/DMSO is concerned), during which the tendency toward reduced graft-
ing, arising from 'gel' compaction, is more than compensated for by the higher 
monomer concentration within the loosely structured 'gel'. At a critical monomer 
concentration, the methylol cellulose/DMSO/styrene medium acquires a more 
rigid form in which methylol cellulose/DMSO domains are produced owing to 
239 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
8 
+-----*---1 Irradiation ---1 
time (min) 
:1~j 
'" 15 
----1 
• 30 
' 
<5 
.5 4 1-----fHf----''''-:-t-----''~ 
• 
• 
4 
6 
Monomer (moll-I) 
• 
x 
10 
Fig. 60. Variation in the rate of 
grafting, Rg, with monomer concen-
tration. Irradiation times as stated . 
Reprinted from Ref. 131), courtesy of 
Springer-Verlag, Berlin. 
preferential adsorption of the DMSO as the styrene concentration is increased. 
The transport of styrene from the exterior to the interior of these domains then 
becomes diffusion controlled as a result of the increase in the heterogeneity of 
the system arising from increases in the bulk monomer (non-solvent) concen-
tration. 
Similar reasoning could be put forward for the role of the synergist and 
photoinitiator. Since the concentration of each of these was held constant 
throughout this study, Guthrie et al. state that their contribution to the abnormal 
behavior is relatively minor. However, an alternative cause for this type of 
behavior could arise from a decrease in the number of grafting sites as the 
monomer/solvent ratio is changed. There is a possbility that the addition of 
styrene to the methylol cellulose/OM SO causes partition of the initiator/ 
synergist system away from the vicinity of the methylol cellulose, leading to a 
decrease in the number of available grafting sites. 
In an interesting extension of the immobilized enzyme concept, Beddows 
et al. have reported the binding of various enzymes onto methylol cellulosic 
substrates, as well as p-amino carbanilated cellulose derivatives132). Here 
J3-galactosidase and other enzymes were bound using the diazo method132) 
and through glutaraldehyde133) to provide a modification of the grafting 
system. Coupling to methylol cellulose p-amino carbanilate (MCTAC) and 
p-amino carbanilated cellulose (CT AC) was carried out under heterogeneous 
conditions. In coupling J3 galactosidase using the diazo group, the optimum 
pH was 7 to 7.5, while the optimum concentration of Mgll ion was in the 
region of 2 x 10- 3 to 3 X 10- 3 mol/I. Figure 61 shows that most of the activity 
is observed after three hours. Although these levels of activity in the grafted im-
mobilized enzymes are not excessive, they are sufficient to indicate that this 
type of grafted cellulose deserves attention. The stability of the E. Coli -
c.T.c. system in a 0.1 M, pH = 7 buffer at 0-4 °C is given in Figure 62. 
The half-life is approximately fourteen days. Beddows et al. 132) have reported 
the successful binding of glucose oxidase, papain, trypsin, and pepsin. Such 
240 

/x 
II 
I 
I 
I 
I 
, 
I 
~r-
x_x
l
-
x ___ x; 
1 
j 
, 
I 
I 
345 
Time (h) 
I 
i 
References 
Fig. 61. The effect of time (hours) on the amount of active yeast Ii-galactosidase coupled to CTAC 
using the diazo method. (ONPG = o-nitrophenol-li-D-galactopyranoside). Reprinted from Ref. 132), 
courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
70 
60 
~50 
£! 
'c 
~ 40 
c... 
:z: 
C) 
:;30 
. s; 
:.i 20 
10 
o 
1'\ 
'x" 
i'-x 
""-
--
4 
x 
'x 
..... x 
8 
......... x, 
"x .............. 
12 
16 
Time (days) 
x .......... x 
20 
r"'-x, 
24 
28 
Fig. 62. The effect of time (days) 
on the activity of immobilized (E-
Coli) Ii-galactosidase coupled to 
CTAC, in pH = 7.0 buffer at 0-4 DC 
(ONPG = o-nitrophenol-li-D-galac-
topyranoside). 
Reprinted 
from 
Ref. 132), courtesy of John Wiley and 
Sons, Inc. 
work is of importance, since it permits recycling of used enzyme, a factor 
which is of significance when the purer or more expensive enzymes are 
involved. Cellulosic-bound enzyme systems of the type mentioned above seem 
to possess the right balance of hydrophobic-hydrophilic character to enable 
them to work efficiently and yet be easily and inexpensively recovered. 
References 
I. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage Jan. 29, 25 (1970) 
2. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage Aug. 12,28 (1971) 
3. Reinhardt, R. M.,.Reid, J. D., Daul, G. C.: Textile Res. J 26,1 (1956) 
4. Achwal, W. B., Deshpande, S. D.: Curr. Sci 38, 425 (1969) 
5. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage Sept. 23, 32 (1971) 
6. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage July 1, 34 (1971) 
7. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage June 3,35 (1971) 
8. Achwal, W. B.: Colorage, Dec 31, 22 (1970) 
241 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
9. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage, April 23, 37 (1970) 
10. Achwal, W .. B. : Colourage, Oct. 21, 34 (1971) 
II. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage, March 26, 31 (1970) 
12. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Adv. Chern. Ser. 91, 574 (1969) 
13. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Adv. Chern. Ser. 99, 321 (1971) 
14. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Adv. Macromo\. Chern. 2, I (1970) 
15. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage, Aug. 13,35 (1970) 
16. Chen, c.-Y., Montana, R. E., Grove, C. S. Jr.: Tappi 34, 420 (1951) 
17. Sanyal, A. K., Falconer, E. L., Vincent, D. L., Purves, C. B.: Can. J. Chern 35, 1164 (1957) 
18. Phillips, B.: Svensk. Papperstidn. 60, 88 (1957) 
19. Schurz, J., Zimmer!, W.: Papier, 12,468 (1958) 
20. Adamek, E. G., Purves, C. B.: Can. 1. Chern. 35, 960 (1957) 
21. Willard, J. J., Pacsu, E.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 82, 4347, 4350 (1960) 
22. Mathes, A.: Faserforsch. Textiltech. 3,127 (1952) 
23. Schurz, J.: Holzforschung 10, I (1956) 
24. Dimov, K., Pavlov, P.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I 7,2775 (1969) 
25. Smets, G., Poot, A., Mullier, M., Bex, J. P.: J. Polymer Sci. 34, 287 (1959) 
26. Iuguti, S., Watanabe, M.: Kobunshi Kagaku. 16, 467 (1959) 
27. Morin, B. P., Rogovin, Z. A.: Vysokomo\. Soedin. A 18,2451 (1976) 
28. Kraessig, H. A.: J. Macromo\. Sci. Chern. A 10, 759 (1976) 
29. Pavlov, P., Dimov, K., Simenov, N.: J. App\. Polym. Sci. 21, 291 (1977) 
30. Morin, B. P., Rogovin, Z. A., Samoilov, V. I.: Vysokomo\. Soedin. B 19, 1573 (1975) 
31. Harnof, V., Kokta, B. V., Valade, J. L.: J. App\. Polym. Sci. 18,772 (1976) 
32. Brickman, W. J.: Tappi 56, 97 (1973); also in Cellulose Chemistry and Technology Research 
(ed. Turbak, A. F.) A.C.S. Symp. Series No 10. A.C.S. Washington, D.C. 1975 P. 9 
33. Anderson, E. V., Cooper, A. S. Jr.: J. Ind Eng. Chern. 51, 608 (1959) 
34. McMillan, O. J. Jr., Decosas, K. M., Cooper, A. S. Jr., Hamalalinen, c., Murphy, A. L., 
Pollard, E. F.: Amer. Dyestuff Reptr. 49,839 (1960) 
35. Honold, E., Keating, E. J., Skau, E. L.: Text. Res. J. 27, 400 (1957) 
36. Tripp, V. W., Guiffria, R., de Gruy, I. V.: Text. Res. J. 27,14 (1957) 
37. Hebeish, A., Kantouch, A., EI Rafie, M. H.: J. App\. Polym. Sci. 15, II (1971) 
38. Hebeish, A., Mehta, P. c.: J. App\. Polym. Sci. 12, 1625 (1968) 
39. Terasaki, I., Matsuki, M.: J. Soc. Text. Cell. Ind. Japan 18,147 (1968) 
40. Iwai, S., Kakurai, T., Noguchi, T.: Sen-i-Gakkaishi 19, 547 (1963); Through CA 62, 
13369 (1965) 
41. Cumberbirch, R. J. E., Holker, J. R.: J. Soc. Dyers Co. 82,59 (1966) 
42. Kulkarni, A. Y., Mehta, P. c.: J. App\. Polym. Sci. 12, 1321 (1968) 
43. Imai, Y., Masuhara, E., Iwakura, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. B8, 75 (1970) 
44. Pottenger, C. R., Johnson, D. C.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I 8, 301 (1970) 
45. Iwakura, Y., Imai, Y., Yagi, K.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I 6,801 (1968) 
46. Iwakura, Y., Kurosaki, T., Imai, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. A 3, 1185 (1965) 
47. Maim, C. J., Tanghe, L. J., Laird, B. C., Smith, G. D.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 75,80 (1953) 
48. Fedorova, A. F., Rogovin, Z. A.: Vysokomo!. Soedin. 5,519 (1963) 
49. Schreiber, W. T., Bullock, A. L., Ward, W. L.: Textile Res. J. 24, 819 (1954) 
50. Daul, G. C., Reinhardt, R. M., Reid, J. D.: Textile Res. J. 25, 246 (1955) 
51. Reinhardt, R. M., Markezich, A. R., Moore, H.-B., Reid, J. D.: Textile Res. J. 26, 423 
(1956) 
52. Mazzeno, L. W. Jr., Reinhardt, R. M., Reid, J. D., Dickson, J. D.: Textile Res. J. 26, 597 
(1956) 
53. Bikales, N. M., Rapoport, L.: Textile Res. J. 28, 737 (1958) 
54. Conrad, C. M.: Textile Res. J. 29, 287 (1959) 
55. Compton, J., Martin, W. H., Gargarine, D. M.: Textile Res. J. 40, 813 (1970) 
56. Compton, J. : Amer. Dyestuff Reptr. 43, 103 (1954) 
57. Hamaya, T., Yamada, S.: 1. App!. Polym. Sci. 22, 875 (1978) 
58. Demint, R. J., Arthur, J. C. Jr., McSherry, W. F.: Textile Res. J. 31, 821 (1961) 
59. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J.: Textile Res. J. 31, 988 (1961) 
60. Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 15, 1007 (1971) 
242 

References 
61. Hebeish, A., Khalil, M. 1., EI-Rafie, M. H.: Angew. Makromo!. Chern. 37, 149 (1974) 
62. Mino, G., Kaizerman, S., Rasmusen, R.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 81, 1494 (1959) 
63. Carter, M. E.: J. Polymer Sci. 51,199 (1961) 
64. Kamel, M., Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A.: U.A.R. Pat. 6625 (1962) 
65. Kamel, M., Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A.: Texti!. Praxis 19, 1114 (1964) 
66. Kamel, M., Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A.: Texti!. Praxis 20,577 (1965) 
67. Reinhardt, R. M., Fenner, T. W.: Ind. Eng. Chern. Prod. Res. Dev. 4, 82 (1965) 
68. Cram, D. J., Hammond, G. S.: Organic Chemistry, 2nd ed., New York: McGraw-Hill 1964, 
P.232 
69. Conrad, C. M.: J. Textile Inst. 50, T133 (1959) 
70. Daul, D. c., Reid, J. D.: U.S. Pat. 2, 584,114 (1952) 
71. Daul, D. C., Reinhardt, R. M., Reid, J. D.: Textile Res. J. 22, 787 (1952) 
72. Daul, D. c., Reinhardt, R. M., Reid, J. D.: Textile Res. J. 23, 719 (1952) 
73. Grant, J. N.: Textile Res. J. 26, 74 (1956) 
74. Grant, J. N., McDonald, A. W., Humphreys, G. c.: Textile Res. J. 28, 60 (1958) 
75. Reinhardt, R. M., Fenner, T. W., Reid, J. D.: Textile Res. 1. 27, 873 (1957) 
76. Frieser, E.: Z. Ges. Text. Ind. 60, 977 (1959) 
77. Reinhardt, R. M., Fenner, T. W., Reid, J. D.: Amer. Dyestuff Reptr. 50, 67 (1961) 
78. Kamel, M., Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A.: Indian J. Techno!. 5, 58 (1967) 
79. Reinhardt, R. M., Reid, J. D., Fenner, T. W., Mayne, R. Y.: Textile Res. J. 29, 802 (1959) 
80. Manecke, G.: Pure App!. Chern. 4, 507 (1962) 
81. Reinhardt, R. M., Fenner, T. W., Reid, J. D.: Textile Res. J. 32, 735 (1962) 
82. Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: Europ. Polym. J. 6,1575 (1970) 
83. Schwab, E., Stannett, V. T., Rakowitz, D. H., Magrane, J. K.: Tappi 45, 390 (1962) 
84. Bhattacharjee, S. S., Perlin, A. S.: J. Polymer Sci. B 13,113 (1975) 
85. Ahmed, A. U., Rapson, W. H.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I, 9, 2129 (1971) 
86. Bhattacharjee, S. S., Perlin, A. S.: A.C.S. Meeting Los Angeles: April 1974 Abstracts 
87. Bhattacharjee, S. S., Perlin, A. S.: J. Polymer Sci. C 36,509 (1971) 
88. Ogiwara, Y., Kubota, H., Murayama, H., Sakamoto, A.: Tappi 53, 1685 (1970) 
89. LePoutre, P., Hui, S. H., Robertson, A. A.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 17, 3143 (1973) 
90. Hebeish, A., EI-Rafie, M. H., Khalil, M. 1., Bendak, A.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 21,1901 (1977) 
91. Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 15, 1921 (1971) 
92. Ogiwara, Y., Kubota, H.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 17,2427 (1973) 
93. Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: Textile Res. J. 42, 10 (1972) 
94. Bendak, A., Khalil, M. I., EI-Rafie, M. H., Hebeish, A.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 19,335 (1975) 
95. Bendak, A., Hebeish, A.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 17, 1953 (1973) 
96. Abdel-Fattah, S. H., Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A.: 1. Chern. (Egypt) 17, 311 (1974) 
97. EI-Rafie, M. H., Hebeish, A.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 19, 1815 (1975) 
98. Hebeish, A., Bendak, A.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 18, 1305 (1974) 
99. Hebeish, A., Abdel-Fattah, S. H., Bendak, A.: Angew. Makromo!' Chern. 37, 11 (1974) 
100. Kubota, H., Ogiwara, Y.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 23, 241 (1979) 
101. Kubota, H., Ogiwara, Y.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 22, 3363 (1978) 
102. Klinshpont, E. R., Milinchuk, V. K.: Vysokomol. Soedin. B 16, 35 (1974) 
103. Mock, U., Mock, W.: Melliand TextiIchemie 1, 82 (1965) 
104. Frick, J. W., Reeves, W. A., Guthrie, J. D.: Textile Res. J. 27, 294 (1957) 
105. Frick, J. W., Reeves, W. A., Guthrie, J. D.: Textile Res. J. 27, 92 (1957) 
106. Reid, J. D., Mazzeno, L. W. Jr.: Ind. Eng. Chern. 41, 2828 (1949) 
107. Gallagher, D. M.: Amer. Dyestuff Reptr. 53,361 (1964) 
108. Schiffner, R., Lange, R.: Faserforsch. Textiltech. 9,417 (1958) 
109. Bridgeford, D. J.: Ind. Eng. Chern. Prod. Res. Dev. 1,45 (1962) 
110. Bridgeford, D. J.: (to Tee-Pak Inc.) U.S. 3, 083,118 (1963) 
111. Gallagher, D. M.: Textile Res. J. 40, 621 (1970) 
112. Roff, W. J.: J. Textile Inst. 49, T646 (1958) 
113. Gruntfest, 1. J., Gagliardi, D. D.: Textile Res. J. 18,643 (1948) 
114. Stelle, R.: Textile Res. J. 25, 545 (1955) 
115. Goldthwait, C. F.: Textile Res. J. 21, 55 (1951) 
116. Wagner, R. E., Pacsu, E.: Textile Res. J. 22, 12 (1952) 
243 

6. Grafting on Chemically Modified Cellulose 
117. Marsh, J. T.: J. Textile Inst. 48, 374 (1957) 
118. Marsh, J. T.: J. Soc. Dyers Col. 75,244 (1959) 
119. Reeves, W. A., Perkins, R. M., Chance, L. H.: Textile Res. J. 3D, 179 (1960) 
120. Hebeish, A.: L'Industrie Textile 415, 991 (1970) 
121. Kantouch, A., Hebeish, A., EI-Rafie, M. H.: Textile Res. J. 42, 10 (1972) 
122. Ogiwara, Y., Igeta, K., Kubota, H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 15, 119 (1971) 
123. Ogiwara, Y., Igeta, K., Kubota, H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 10,845 (1972) 
124. Cremonesi, P., Focher, B., D'Anguiro, L.: Cell. Chern. Technol. 4, 496 (1970) 
125. Kubota, H., Ogiwara, Y., Yamato, H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 18,887 (1974) 
126. Ogiwara, Y., Yasunaga, T., Kubota, H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 20, 1413 (1976) 
127. Ogiwara, Y., Hayase, K., Kubota, H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 23, I (1979) 
128. Johnson, D. C., Nicholson, M. D., Haigh, F. C.: Appl. Polym. Sym. 28, 931 (1976) 
129. Guthrie, J. T., Hardcastle, S. v.: Polymer 18, 203, (1977) 
130. Portnoy, N. A., Anderson, D. P.: In Solvent Spun Rayon, Modified Cellulose Fibres and 
Derivatives (Turbak, A. F. ed.), A.C.S. Symp. Ser. 58, 52 (1977) 
131. Guthrie, J. T., Ryder, M., Abdel-Hay, F. I.: Polymer Bulletin, I, 509 (1979) 
132. Beddows, C. G., Guthrie, J. T., Mirauer, R. A.: Biotechnol. Bioeng., 22, 311 (1980) 
133. Regan, D. L., Dunhill, P., Lilly M. D.: Biotech. Bioeng. 16, 333 (1974) 
244 

7. Characterization and Properties 
of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
7.1. Introduction 
During grafting, a certain amount of monomer is not used in the reaction 
and the determination of "grafting yield"; i.e., percentage of monomer which 
is grafted to the polymer, is an important factor in the economics of the 
grafting process. However, in addition to this, the exact analysis of the 
grafted polymer is important and involves a determination of (i) the homo-
polymer content, (ii) the total grafted monomer, (iii) the fraction of cellulose 
or cellulose derivatives not taking part in grafting, (iv) the number of grafts 
per definite amount of cellulose, (v) the mean length of the grafted chain, 
and (vi) the polydispersity. Such studies are quite complex, but necessary if the 
optimum conditions of grafting for each system are to be realized. 
When the method of modifying polymers, by grafting side chains of a 
different type onto the given backbone macromolecules, emerged from the work 
of several investigators1" a great deal of enthusiasm was generated. However, 
in the early studies dealing with grafting onto cellulose, very few researchers 
characterized their so-called "grafted products" other than by measuring the 
"add-on" after some kind of extraction procedure. The products of each 
grafting reaction are usually extracted exhaustively with a solvent in order 
to remove the homopolymer. The material which cannot be extracted is usually 
considered as grafted, although whether the synthetic polymer is held in the 
system by chemical bonds or by physical entanglement, or by both in particular 
cases, is still uncertain. As a matter of fact, in the early days of cellulose grafting, 
there was considerable scepticism as to whether true grafting had taken place. 
There is no longer any doubt that grafting can occur, but the extent of actual 
grafting varies considerably with the method and conditions used. 
There have been comparatively few published studies of the properties 
of pure cellulose graft copolymers owing to difficulties associated with freeing 
the grafted material from ungrafted cellulosic and the attendant homopolymer. 
Attempts have been made to isolate the grafted branches and examine their 
properties in a systematic wai- IO). Most papers dealing with grafted cellulosics 
contain details of the attempted removal of homopolymer, where such details 
are relevant. From a practical or commercial standpoint, the heterogeneous 
mixture of graft and homopolymers might be deemed to satisfy particular 
requirements, and thus no further purification stages would be used. Since 
large-scale production probably often produces heterogeneous composites, 
a study of their bulk properties is a legitimate goal of applied research. Such 
studies have been reported on cotton, rayon, paper, board, wood, and various 
cellulose derivatives. 
245 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
In search of a deeper understanding of the nature of graft copolymerization 
processes and the 'true' graft copolymer, several groups require that the 
graft copolymer be in the 'purest possible form. Two distinct avenues to graft 
copolymer characterization have been developed, namely, evaluation through 
studies of physical properties and elucidation of the cellulosic copolymer mole-
cular structure. An analysis of selected studies11 - 15) on the structure of grafted 
cellulose prepared by free radical initiation methods has revealed that, grafting 
is generally, limited to a comparatively few high molecular weight branches 
involving about 0.2 to 2 side chains per cellulose chain, a degree of graft sub-
stitution (D.S.) of approximately 0.001. For example, the free radical graft 
polymerization of methyl methacrylate onto viscose rayon resulted in only 
1.4--1.7 PMMA side chains per cellulose chain with molecular masses of 
700,000 to 900,00015), and grafting of polystyrene onto cotton by radiation 
yielded, on the average, less than 1 side chain of molecular mass of 500,00011). 
The need for better control of the grafting process to yield shorter side chains 
and higher D.S. levels is apparent. Indeed, approaches to grafting via ionic-
initiation or grafting of preformed polymers having relatively low molecular 
masses show the importance of the D.S. of the graft in producing cellulosic 
graft copolymers with improved propertiesl6, 17). 
The usual dilemma which arises in preparing cellulose graft copolymers 
involves the choice between having several relatively low molecular mass 
grafts or a few high molecular mass grafts for a given add-on value. Careful 
selection of the copolymerization reaction may provide a measure of control, 
though normally no clear dividing line between the two options can be 
drawn. 
7.2. Proof of Grafting 
A number of quantitative tests can be applied to show that the product 
contains graft copolymer, although they do not give us quantitative infor-
mation about the ratio of graft to homopolymer. In these tests, the properties 
of the product believed to be a graft are compared with those of a physical 
mixture of the two types of macromolecule. This mixture should have the same 
overall composition as the graft. If possible, the average molecular mass of 
the polymer grafted onto cellulosic material should be the same as that of the 
homopolymer in the physical mixture. One way to meet this last requirement 
is to extract the homopolymer from the substrate on which grafting takes 
place. This may not always be a sufficient guarantee that the desired goal has 
been reached, because if the extraction of the homopolymer is incomplete, it is 
likely that molecules with relatively low molecular mass will be extracted in 
preference to those of high molecular mass. 
Easily measurable properties of the graft copolymer which may be compared 
with those of a physical mixture are the intrinsic viscosity and the concentration 
dependence of the viscosity18). A difference in these parameters for the 
'copolymer' relative to a mixture of homopolymers having the same composition 
could be indicative of the occurrence of grafting. 
246 

7.2. Proof of Grafting 
Another property is solubility. Separation of the graft copolymer from the 
homopolymers is based upon the different solubilities of chemically different 
polymeric species19 -2l). By way of example, mention is made of the following 
experiment21). Acrylamide was grafted onto cellophane. The product was 
dissolved in cuprammonium hydroxide and the solution acidifed. The amount 
of precipitate formed was always larger than the amount of cellulose present. 
When the same experiment was performed with a physical mixture of cellulose 
and polyacrylamide of the same composition, only the cellulose was precipitated. 
Further more, infrared spectroscopy showed the absence of polyacrylamide 
in the precipitate from the physical mixture. Hence, the extra weight of preci-
pitate from the graft must be presumed to originate from the acrylamide grafted. 
The fractional precipitation method, as described above, is also readily 
adapted to graft copolymers of cellulose derivatives, such as cellulose acetate, 
cellulose nitrate, etc.22). The reaction product is dissolved in a suitable solvent, 
and a precipitant is added slowly to the solution. At various stages the 
precipitated polymer is removed and the stepwise addition of precipitant to 
the supernatant liquid is continued. A plot of percent polymer precipitated 
versus the amount of precipitant added is then prepared in order to demon-
strate the presence of graft copolymer. If there is only a physical mixture, the 
curve shows a sharp difference in the solubility behavior of the two homo-
polymers. On the other hand, if graft copolymer has been formed, a more or 
less continuous precipitation curve is obtained. This method has been applied 
to demonstrate the grafting of polystyrene to cellulose acetate. 
Turbidimetric titration, a type of fractional precipitation, is a rapid ana-
lytical method for showing the presence of graft copolymer in a polymer 
mixture. With this technique, one measures the amount of turbidity resulting 
from the addition of a precipitant to a dilute polymer solution. The turbidity 
is expressed as the ratio of the amount of light absorption at partial precipitation 
to the absorption at complete precipitation23). The titration curve is obtained 
by plotting the turbidity against the amount of precipitant added. The curves 
obtained by recording the increase in solution turbidity upon addition of non-
solvent to a solution of the grafted product and to a physical mixture are 
analogous to those obtained when the fractional precipitation method is 
applied24). 
The density-gradient ultracentrifugation method, which is based on the 
difference in density between untreated cellulose, graft copolymers, and non-
grafted homopolymers, has been successfully applied to prove that grafting 
has occurred. This density difference is sufficient to cause the separation of the 
reaction product into distinct bands when the material is ultracentrifuged in a 
mixture of two solvents selected in such a way that a density gradient, covering 
the density range of the graft and homopolymers, is established. An example 
of such an examination is shown in Figure 63; the physical mixture shows clearly 
the two components. The original graft copolymer, which was believed to be 
pure, shows contamination with polystyrene, and the graft which has been 
re-extracted with benzene finally reveals only the peak of the graft itsel(25). 
Another physical method of establishing the formation of a cellulose graft 
copolymer is differential thermal analysis. By this method, any transition 
247 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
,/ Cellulose acetate-
polystyrene graft 
copolymer containing 
homopol ystyrene 
a 1-'------------1 
Physical mixture of 
,/ polystyrene and 
cellulose acetate 
b~.-____________ ~ 
C~J-_______ 
~ 
Top 
Bottom 
,/Graft copolymer as in 
fig.a without base line 
,.....Graft copolymer 
after removal of 
homopolystyrene 
Fig. 63a-c. Density gradient ultracentri-
fuge for a cellulose acetate-polystyrene 
graft copolymer; a physical mixture of 
cellulose acetate and polystyrene (upper) 
and the graft copolymer containing about 
10 % occluded polystyrene (lower). The 
plots are of the first derivative of refrac-
tive index with respect to distance (depth) 
in the cell vs. cell depth. Reprinted from 
Ref. 25), p. 4049, by courtesy of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Purified cotton 
~~_--_---:c_--
/"--7----
/ 
Control 
\100/ 
\( 
102 
"/ 
/ 
/ 
95'( 
103 
7;;..----
Temperature 1°C) 
362 
376 
Cyanoethylated 
cotton 
Fig. 64. DTA curves of cotton and AN-cotton products (nitrogen atmosphere). Reprinted from 
Ref.26), p. 666, by courtesy of Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. 
248 

7.2. Proof of Grafting 
or reaction accompanied by evolution or absorption of heat, as the sample 
and thermally stable reference substance are heated through a cetain tem-
perature interval, are detected in terms of temperature difference between the 
two substances. Endothermic changes give rise to negative peaks, exothermic 
to positive peaks. Figure 64 shows that the sharp exotherm at 278°C, which is 
characteristic for polyacrylonitrile homopolymer and which is observed with a 
physical mixture of cellulose and polyacrylonitrile, is practically absent in the 
grafted materials26). 
Infrared spectral analysis has been adopted to prove grafting by making 
use of the variation in the intensity of the hydroxyl infrared absorption bands 
that may occur because of grafting27 - 30). For example, a comparison was 
made of the infrared absorption of cellulose, cyanoethylated cellulose, acrylo-
nitrile-grafted cellulose, cyanoethyl cellulose, and a physical mixture of cellulose 
and polyacrylonitrile (PAN). It was found that the hydroxyl band intensities of 
the graft copolymers were considerably less than the hydroxyl intensity of the 
pure cellulose, but that the hydroxyl intensities of cyanoethylated cotton 
and the cyanoethylated-acrylonitrile graft copolymer were almost the same; 
therefore, it was concluded that grafting had probably occurred at the cyanoethyl 
groups28,29). The infrared spectrum of a PAN-cellulose graft copolymer, 
measured in the 4000-400 cm-t, region, was compared with the infrared 
spectrum of pure cotton, as shown in Figure 65, which covers only 2500 to 
400 cm -1. It can be seen that the absorption bands in most of the copolymer 
spectrum remain essentially unchanged; only in the bands corresponding to 
hydroxyl groups was a certain decrease in intensity observed30). Further in-
formation is supplied by the peak at 2249 cm -1 corresponding to the --C == N 
group of PAN. 
Chromatographic analysis has also been used in an extensive investigation 
of cellulose grafted with vinyl chloride by the CelV ion technique3l). Homo-
11 
~ 
t 
"2249 
2500 
em-) 
21001900 
1700 
1500 
1300 
1100 
900 
700 
600 
500 
400 
Fig. 65. Infrared spectra of 1 cotton and 2 cotton-PAN copolymer containing 42.9 % wt.- % of PAN. 
Reprinted from Ref.30), p. 903 by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
249 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
polymer was first removed from the reaction mixture by extraction with 
tetrahydrofuran, a solvent for poly(vinyl chloride). The residue was then 
hydrolyzed in 72 % H2S04 to remove the cellulose backbone from the poly-
(vinyl chloride) branches. The product remaining after hydrolysis was dis-
solved in tetrahydrofuran. Chromatographic analysis of this product showed 
no sugar content. However, when the material was hydrolyzed again, this time 
with 98 % formic acid, chromatographic examination of the aqueous solution 
showed the presence of glucose, which indicates that glucose residues must 
have been chemically attached to the poly(vinyl chloride) branches removed from 
the cellulose substrate by the first hydrolysis. 
Also, radioactive cellulose may be used to show that grafting has taken 
place. For example, cellulose labeled with C-14 was used as the starting material 
for grafting, and the resulting graft copolymer was hydrolyzed to remove the 
cellulose backbone. It was found that each of the remaining graft branches 
had acquired a radioactive glucose end group, indicating that grafting had 
occurred and that the grafted branches were attached to cellulose through a 
C-C bond31). 
Differential refractometry may be applied to soluble cellulose copolymer 
derivatives, after dialysis in mixed solvent systems, and may provide infor-
mation regarding the occurrence of preferential adsorption of one of the com-
ponents of the mixed solvents. This technique has been applied with some 
success to a series of cellulose tricarbanilate-polystyrene copolymers32- 34). 
Finally the grafting process itself sometimes shows features which are in-
compatible with the assumption that only homopolymer is formed. For 
example, the rate at which the weight of the substrate increases may become 
gradually slower with increasing time, while the homopolymerization outside the 
substrate shows no such tendency. This does not constitute a proof, but 
could be considered as an indication of grafting. In one caselS) the failure to 
observe a weight increase in the presence of acetone might be considered as evi-
dence for grafting in the absence of acetone, because the homopolymerization 
takes place in either case. 
7.3. Molecular Structure 
The first step in a complete characterization of the cellulose graft copolymer is a 
proof of grafting. This can be achieved by applying one or more of the methods 
already described above. Next, the molecular mass of the cellulose backbone 
and of the grafted branches, the frequency of branching, and the site of branch 
attachment should also be determined. Recent work has indicated that the 
molecular mass of the 'true' copolymers can be achieved directly32). 
7.3.1. Molecular Mass of Cellulose Backbone 
Under normal conditions it is extremely difficult to follow the changes in the 
cellulosic backbone during simultaneous graft copolymerization. The graft 
250 

7.3. Molecular Structure 
copolymer can be separated from the homopolymers and its composition and 
the molecular mass of the side chains determined. However, little knowledge 
can be gained from the cellulose backbone itself, since it is destroyed during 
isolation of the synthetic side chains, i.e., grafts, by either acid hydrolysis or 
acetolysis (see below). It has been reported that formation of free radicals by 
radiation and redox systems35) initiates oxidative degradation of the cellulose 
molecule in the absence of monomer, thereby decreasing its molecular mass. 
This degradation is unequivocally due to the formation of cellulose-free radical 
intermediates which subsequently lead to oxidatilll1 products of cellulose. In 
the presence of monomer, however, one would expect that cellulose degradation 
by any of the initiating methods would be eliminated or at least minimized, 
because it is very likely that monomer adds to the active centers before they 
can undergo the oxidation reaction. It is also possible that the oxidation reac-
tion is inhibited by the presence of the monomer or polymer during grafting. 
Therefore, the molecular mass of cellulose is determined before grafting, and the 
values obtained are considered to represent the molecular mass of the cellulose 
in the graft copolymer on the assumption that no degradation of cellulose 
occurred during the graft polymerization reaction. 
There are two approaches to the determination of the average molecular mass 
of cellulose: (i) direct molecular mass determination in a solvent for cellulose 
such as cuprammonium hydroxide, cupriethylene-diamine, Cadoxen, etc.36 - 41), 
and (ii) conversion of the cellulose to a derivative which is soluble in a standard 
organic solvent and therefore lends itself to routine molecular mass measure-
ments33.34.36.42-47). For graft copolymers, (ii) offers the only viable approach. 
Thus, the cellulose component of the graft copolymer would normally be con-
verted into a derivative which has similar solubility characteristics to the 
grafted backbone. Average molecular mass values are usually obtained from 
osmotic pressure (M,,), light scattering (M), or viscosity (M.) measurements. 
For copolymers, the values obtained must be handled with caution. This 
point will be dealt with later. 
7.3.2. Molecular Masses of Grafted Branches 
In order to characterize the grafted side chain of the copolymer, the grafted 
products must be separated. This can be achieved by first isolating the grafted 
branches from the cellulose backbone. There are three methods of removing the 
cellulosic component: hydrolysis, acetolysis, and enzymic attack. Stannett et al.13) 
have separated and characterized the cellulose acetate-styrene grafting system 
as follows: The grafted films were washed first in benzene, then in a 55: 45 
acetone-water mixture. The infrared spectra of both extracts were checked 
to determine if any graft copolymer had been removed. The extractions were then 
repeated and the residue considered as graft copolymer. Occasional samples 
were double-checked by dissolving them in dimethylformamide and precipitating 
in benzene, and then repeating the washing with the aqueous acetone mixture; 
virtually complete extraction was found to have taken place in every case 
examined. The increase in weight after the first benzene wash was recorded. and 
is equivalent to the percent grafting often reported in grafting studies. The 
251 

N 
Table 51. Heterogeneous grafting experiments with styrene. Adapted from Ref. 13 ), p. 552, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
:-' 
VI 
N 
Monomer-
Film 
Dose rate, 
Total dose 
Increase in weight 
Composition 
Efficiency 
M.W. of 
M.W.of 
n 
=r 
solvent mixture 
thickness, 
r/hr 
Mrad 
of graft 
of graft 
PS side 
PS produced 
'" 
.... 
'" 
mm 
Actual 
Due to 
chain 
in solution 
::l. 
(1) 
true graft CA: 
PS,b 
CA" 
PSb 
.... 
N' 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
~ 
o· 
;:l 
90 S-
0.025 
7,650 
0.45 
183.0 
93.6 
13 
87 
13.6 
51.8 
6.65 
4,200,000 
'" 
;:l 
10 DMF 
0.025 
21,000 
0.95 
147.0 
45.0 
27 
73 
16.7 
30.5 
5.80 
3,500,000 
Q. 
.." 
0.025 
340,000 
1.00 
13.9 
6.2 
70,000 
.... 
0 
0.025 
340,000 
10.00 
33.7 
70,000 
'0 
(1) 
.... 
0.0025 
340,000 
1.00 
60.8 
51.2 
22 
78 
11.1 
84.1 
3.81 
1,945,000 
70,000 
-n' 
0.0025 
340,000 
10.00 
169.5 
157.4 
20 
80 
34.2 
92.9 
2.90 
1.338,000 
70,000 
V> 
0 
80 S-
0.025 
340,000 
1.00 
22.9 
17.2 
30 
70 
4.0 
75.3 
2.42 
1,044,000 
61,000 
-, 
n 
20DMF 
0.025 
340,000 
10.10 
64.1 
37.8 
34 
66 
19.8 
59.1 
1.45 
518,000 
61,000 
~ 
0.0025 
340,000 
1.00 
11.1 
61,000 
2' 
0.0025 
340,000 
10.00 
67.2 
37.1 
41 
59 
21.5 
53.3 
0.68 
184,000 
61,000 
£" 
(1) 
95 S-
O 
5 pyridine 
0.0025 
340,000 
10.00 
79.9 
57.3 
12 
88 
7.9 
71.8 
0.78 
220,000 
74,000 
.... 
'" 
;::> 
90 S-
n 
10 pyridine 
0.025 
340,000 
10.00 
53.4 
34.0 
53 
57 
19.2 
63.7 
0.84 
245,000 
72,000 
0 
'0 
90 S-
o 
~ 
10 pyridine 
0.0025 
340,000 
10.00 
104.7 
103.2 
34 
66 
13.6 
98.5 
1.91 
755,000 
72,000 
;3 
(1) 
80 S-
.... 
'" 
20 pyridine 
0.025 
340,000 
10.00 
111.9 
92.7 
29 
71 
17.1 
90.9 
2.28 
962,000 
66,000 
80 S-
20 pyridine 
0.0025 
340,000 
10.00 
79.9 
73.7 
29 
71 
62.4 
92.2 
2.11 
865,000 
66,000 
80 S-
20 pyridine 
0.0025 
340,000 
10.00 
67.7 
65.2 
34 
66 
39.2 
96.3 
66,000 
70 S-
30 pyridine 
0.0025 
340,000 
10.00 
17.5 
17.0 
61 
39 
31.0 
97.1 
0.67 
181,000 
59,000 
70 S-
30 pyridine 
0.025 
340,000 
10.00 
23.1 
23.1 
55 
45 
28.3 
(100) 
0.91 
272,000 
59,000 
" CA, cellulose acetate. 
bpS, polystyrene. 

7.3. Molecular Structure 
difference between this value and the true grafting yield can be seen in Table 51. 
The grafts prepared in solution were isolated by pouring then into methanol, 
filtering, washing with methanol, and drying under vacuum. The dry polymer 
was then extracted with benzene to remove homopolystyrene and the residue 
further extracted with an acetone-water mixture. The two extractions were then 
recorded, the product dried under vacuum and weighed. The composition 
of the graft copolymer produced in solution is given in Table 52. 
The hydrolysis of the graft copolymers was achieved by first swelling about 
I g in a mixture consisting of 70 % acetone, 25 % of dimethylformamide, and 
5 % water. A 50 cm3 portion of 72 % sulfuric acid was then added and left for 2 hr 
at room temperature; 500 cm3 of water were then added and the mixture refluxed 
for 5 hr after first boiling off the acetone. The remaining polystyrene was then 
freeze-dried from a benzene solution13). 
An alternative procedure of hydrolysis was developed by Morris et al. to 
separate and characterize the vinyl side chains from grafted polyacrylonitrile-
cotton copolymers48). This was modified by Guthrie et al.2) in their study of the 
cellulose-polystyrene copolymer system. Here 2 g of copolymer were dispersed 
overnight (after removal of occluded homopolymer) in 200 cm3 of 75 % (wjw) 
aqueous zinc chloride with continuous shaking. An equal volume of 6 M hydro-
chloric acid was added and the mixture stirred for 2 hours, at which point disper-
sion of the sample was complete. After subsequent heating for 4 hours at 100°C, 
the product was poured into an excess of methanol and the precipitated 
polystyrene filtered. The product was reprecipitated from a suitable solvent and 
dried under vacuum at 60°C. 
Hebeish49) described another method for isolation and characterization of 
cellulose grafted with polyacrylonitrile (PAN). This method is based on re-
moving the cellulose backbone by acetolysis. 
The experimental procedure adopted was as follows. An accurately weighed 
quantity of the PAN grafted sample was transferred to a 100 cm3 stoppered 
conical flask and was treated with sufficient solution, consisting of 170 cm3 
glacial acetic acid plus 17 cm3 acetic anhydride plus 18 cm3 concentrated 
SUlphuric acid, to give a liquor ratio of 40.1. The acetolysis was carried out at 
30°C for 3 hours, after which the flask containing the reaction mixture was 
Table 52. Graft copolymers produced in solution at 25 DC a. Reprinted from RefP·, p. 560, 
by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Styrene -
Composition of graft 
M.W. 
M.W. 
Approx. No. 
pyridine ratio 
side chains 
homopoly-
of side chains 
CA,% 
S, % 
styrene 
CAb molecule 
30:70 
15,000 
40:60 
69 
31 
24,000 
19,000 
1.0 
50:50 
66 
34 
31,000 
25,000 
0.9 
60:40 
61 
39 
39,000 
35,000 
0.9 
a Dose rate 340,000 rads/hr., total dose 10 Mrads. 
b Calculated from the viscosity-average molecular masses. 
253 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
transferred to a thermostat bath at 90°C for 10-15 minutes. After cooling, the 
contents of the flask were filtered through a sintered glass crucible. The residue, 
after weighing, was dissolved in dimethylformamide, and the insoluble portion 
was removed by filtration. The filtrate was poured into distilled water, and the 
precipitated polymer was dissolved again in dimethylformamide and repreci-
pitated with distilled water. The polymer obtained was dried in vacuo and the 
molecular mass of the grafted polyacrylonitrile determined. The composition 
of the graft copolymer (E), as well as the molecular masses of the nongrafted 
homopolymer (PAN) and the grafted-PAN, are given in Table 53. 
This approach has also been used by Huang and ChandramouliS) with the 
polyacrylonitrile-cellulose copolymer system. The application of this acetolysis 
route has been shown to cause difficulties with cellulose-polystyrene graft 
copolymers2). Although the acetolysis process is efficient in cleaving the 
polystyrene grafts from the cellulose backbone, there is also appreciable 
involuntary sulfonation of the aromatic groups in the grafted chains arising 
from the reaction conditions. Viscometric studies of polystyrene grafts, isolated 
by the acetolysis procedureS), showed the presence of polyelectrolyte behavior, 
i.e., a marked increase in tlsp/C at low concentrations of grafted branches in 
solution. This behavior was supressed by the use of 10-3 M trichloroacetic 
acid in chloroform as the solvent in the viscometry. The concentration of sulfuric 
acid and the conditions recommended for acetolysis are similar to those used 
in standard methods of the sulfonation of aromatic hydrocarbons. The possibility 
arises of introducing sulfonic acid groups at the para-position of polysty-
rene. Elemental analysis gave sulfur concentrations which corresponded to I 
in every 27 styrene segments carrying a sulfonic acid group, which is in good 
agreement with a value of I in 29 obtained from titrimetric analysis. Using 
lower sulfuric acid concentrations, Schurz et al. SO) have successfully obtained 
toluene-soluble polystyrene by acetolysis of cellulose tricarbanilate grafted 
with polystyrene. These products did not exhibit polyelectrolyte behavior. 
Arai and OgiwaralO) have examined a rather novel method of separating 
branches from poly(vinyl acetate) grafted cellulose involving hydrolysis of 
Table 53. Composition of cellulose-acrylonitrile graft copolymer and molecular masses of grafted 
polyacrylnitrile and Homopolyacrylonitrile. Reprinted from Ref.49), p. 188 
Substrate 
Temp. 
Composition of Graft 
(a) 
Mn x 10- 5 (b) 
DC 
copolymer (E) 
Cellulose 
PAN 
Graft 
Homo-
Graft 
Homo-
wt. % 
wt. % 
polymer 
polymer 
Native cotton 
20 
4.77 
95.23 
2.40 
3.14 
1.7380 
2.5120 
NaOH-Cotton 
20 
3.96 
96.04 
1.88 
2.42 
1.2480 
1.7620 
Viscose 
20 
5.56 
94.44 
2.250 
2.72 
1.5890 
2.0650 
Ramine 
20 
4.51 
95.49 
1.165 
2.18 
0.6486 
1.5210 
Ramine 
40 
4.48 
95.52 
1.220 
3.43 
0.6918 
2.8310 
Ramine 
60 
8.45 
91.55 
0.835 
1.58 
0.4121 
0.9840 
(a) Determined in DMF at 20 DC. 
(b) Calculated from [IJ] = 3.46 x 10-4 ~.733. 
254 

7.3. Molecular Structure 
cellulose. Because of the time-course of deactivation of cellulose and competitive 
inhibition with the hydrolyzed products of cellulose, the grafted samples were 
subjected to twelve sequences of cellulose removal and acetone extractions, 
alternatively. Work of this type is usually carried out in a carefully buffered 
environment. The degree of polymerization (DP) obtained at each isolation 
stage showed a leveling-off tendency in the range above 60 % of recovered 
poly(vinyl acetate). The ease with which the poly(vinyl acetate) was recovered 
was influenced greatly by the extent of grafting in the sample. This method 
of hydrolysis by cellulase may have much wider application as a separation 
method of non-cellulosic material from cellulosic-non-cellulosic mixtures of 
composites, especially when the non-cellulosic is sensitive to extreme con-
ditions. 
The average molecular mass of the grafted branches may be determined by the 
usual methods. Such molecular mass measurements have shown that the 
grafted branches have a much higher average molecular mass than any homo-
polymer formed at the same timell ,13,22,50). Typical examples of this behavior 
are shown in Table 51. This has been attributed to a reduction in the rate of 
termination because of low mobility of the grafted chain radicals inside the 
fibers51 ). Stannett et al.13) have reported, however, that when grafting was 
carried out using a solution of styrene in dimethylformamide or pyridine, 
rather than a swollen but undissolved "included" cellulose sample, the mole-
cular mass of the grafted branches was much lower and almost comparable to 
that of the homopolymer formed at the same time. This is shown in Table 52. 
Other investigators, on the other hand, have reported higher molecular masses 
for the homo polymers than those for the grafted branches12,52,55), as can be seen 
in Table 53. Table 53 also shows that the molecular masses of the grafted 
branches, as well as those of the homopolymer, are greatly influenced by the 
nature of the substrate and reaction temperature. The relatively low molecular 
masses at higher temperature are perhaps due to a fast termination rate of the 
propagating polymer chains. 
Morris et al.48) have shown that the molecular mass relationship between 
cellulose and grafted copolymer depends on the method of initiation of the free 
radical sites on the cellulose molecule and the composition of the solution 
of monomer, particularly as this affects the propagation and termination 
reactions. The degree of grafting can be as much as I or 2 polymer grafts per 
cellulose molecule when the CelV ion and aqueous systems are used, or when 
high energy radiation combined with grafting from organic solvents is used: 
molecular masses of the grafted polymer range from 84,000 to 33,000 respectively. 
When high energy radiation is combined with grafting from aqueous salt so-
lutions, which cause large dimensional changes in the cellulosic fibers, the 
degree of grafting can be as low as 1 polymer graft per 100 cellulose molecules, 
with molecular masses of the grafted polymer as high as 1,000,000. 
Rogovin55) has reported that the molecular mass of the grafted synthetic 
polymer in the heterogeneous medium may be considerably decreased by the 
addition of a regulator (chain terminator). Indeed, this method is widely used 
for the regulation of the molecular mass of polymers by radical polymerization. 
In Table 54 are given some data relating to the molecular masses of the grafted 
255 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Table 54. The dependence of the quantity and type of regulator on the molecular mass of the 
grafted chains. Adapted from ReUS), p. 230, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Monomer 
Regulator 
Quantity of regulator Degree of poly-
(% on the monomer merization of the 
weight) 
grafted chain 
Acrylonitrile 
CCI4 
0 
1350 
II 
1180 
42.5 
870 
100 
560 
Acrylonitrile 
CCI4 
0 
3140 
0.02 
660 
0.10 
198 
0.20 
96 
0.30 
56 
0.50 
31 
1.0 
20 
Methylvinylpyridine 
Triethylamine 
0 
2240 
I 
1790 
2 
1630 
3 
1420 
5 
980 
Methylvinylpyridine 
Dodecylmercaptan 
0 
2240 
0.5 
1120 
1.0 
690 
5.0 
386 
Table 55. The influence of the number and molecular mass of grafted chains on the glass transition 
and temperature of cellulose graft copolymers and their esters. Adapted from ReUS), p. 231, by 
courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Grafted copolymer 
Composition of 
Molecular 
Glass transition 
reaction products 
mass of the 
temperature 
grafted chain 
Cellulose 
Grafted 
copolymer 
% 
% 
I) Cellulose-polystyrene 
60 
40 
158,000 
126 
60 
40 
74,150 
102 
74.8 
25.2 
7,800 
104 
72.9 
27.1 
4,150 
96 
2) Cellulose tri-acetate-
18.8 
81.2 
1,350,000 
142 
poly (methyl methacrylate) 
21.7 
78.3 
770,000 
130 
24.9 
75.1 
420,000 
125 
26.4 
73.6 
168,000 
116 
3) Secondary cellulose 
38 
62 
800,000 
141 
acetate-poly (methacrylic 
37 
63 
200,000 
132 
acid) 
37 
63 
10,000 
128 
256 

7.3. Molecular Structure 
chains and also to the type and amount of regulator used. Also relevant is the 
fact that a decrease in the average molecular mass of the grafted branches 
leads to superior mechanical properties of films prepared from graft copolymers 
of cellulose triacetate and cellulose nitrate. Analogous relationships also exist 
between the length of the grafted chain and the properties of fibers made 
up of cellulosic graft copolymers55). 
The question of the effect of the length of the grafted chain (on the basis of 
equal quantities of grafted polymer) on the properties of the modified cellulosic 
material is of considerable scientific and practical interest. 
One may well obtain different properties if one grafts 100 long chains or 1000 
considerably shorter chains. This important question has not been systematically 
investigated as yet. 
There are available only scattered data which indicate the considerable 
influence of this factor on the properties of the cellulose graft copolymer. Thus, 
for example, it has been shown that the length of the grafted chain greatly 
influences the viscosity of concentrated solutions of grafted cellulose ester 
copolymers. If the molecular mass of the poly(methyl methacrylate) chain 
grafted to a molecule of secondary cellulose acetate is increased from 100,000 
to 800,000, then the viscosity of solutions with the same concentration in-
creases by 20-25 times56), even though there is present in each case the same 
quantity of grafted polymer. Obviously, the spinning of fibers from such a 
viscous solution is considerably more difficult. 
Upon increasing the molecular mass of the grafted chain, the glass transition 
temperature of the polymer is increased. This may be realized from the data 
given in Table 55. 
7.3.3. Average Molecular Masses 
of 'True' Cellulosic Copolymers 
Attempts at copolymer characterization using the true copolymer, rather than 
isolation of backbone and grafts, have been made32 - 34,57-59). Some attention 
has been given to the cellulose-polystyrene graft (Cel-PS) copolymer system32 -34), 
produced by radiation-induced grafting. Purification of the copolymer involved 
efficient extraction of ungrafted cellulose with Cadoxen to constant weight. 
The resulting copolymer was then rigorously extracted with benzene for 16 
hours to remove any occluded homopolymeric polystyrene (P.S.), again to con-
stant weight. The copolymer product was then reacted with phenyl isocyanate 
in pyridine at 107°C for 24 hours to convert the cellulose into the carbanilate. 
This gives a cellulose tricarbanilate-polystyrene (CrC-PS) graft copolymer 
which is soluble in a variety of organic solvents. Light-scattering techniques 
were used in the molecular mass.measurements. For light scattering, refracto-
metry, and differential refractometry, a wavelength of 436 nm in vacuo was 
used. The apparent degree of grafting of the cellulose-polystyrene copolymer was 
0.108, calculated as (M ~ Mo)/Mo' where Mo and M are the weights of the 
ungrafted and grafted films respectively. The true degree of grafting was 
calculated as (M ~ Mo)/(Mg ~ M + Mo); where Mg is the constant residual 
weight of pure copolymer. After extraction of un grafted cellulose and polystyrene 
257 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
homopolymer, the true degree of grafting was 1.79. Thus, the fraction of 
weight, W g, of cellulose which actually participates in grafting is [Mg -
(M -
- Mo)]/Mo = 0.060. 
A consideration of the (CTC-PS) copolymer, obtained by carbanilation 
of the (Cel-PS) copolymer possessing a true degree of grafting of 1.79, provides 
an indication of the proportion of (CTC) in the (CTC-PS) copolymer. Using 
this true degree of grafting in conjunction with the factor 3.20 (= 519/162 = 
the ratio of the molecular weights of the segments in CTC and Cel), one 
obtains a value of 3.20 [Mg 
-
(M -
Mo)]/{3.20 [Mg 
-
(M -
Mo)] 
+ (M -
Mo)} = 0.64, for the weight fraction, Werc of the CTC in the 
CTC-PS copolymer. Alternative figures have been provided by elemental ana-
lysis of the CTC-PS copolymer (Werc = 0.71); by thermogravimetric ana-
lysis (W CTC = 0.73); and by measurement of the specific refractive index in-
crement of the copolymer in given solvents (W CTC = 0.73). Although the 
refractive index increments of CTC and PS in a given solvent are rather similar, 
the measured increment for the copolymer in the same solvent affords the 
quoted value of W CTC according to 
(173) 
Measurements were made in methyl ethyl ketone and dioxane to give the 
quoted value of W CTC of 0.71. There is some disparity in the composition of 
the copolymer as measured by the different techniques. Table 56 contains 
values of the specific refractive index increment v, for the CTC-PS copolymer 
is a series of single solvents. Values are also given for v /10' the specific refractive 
index increment acquired fer solutions of this copolymer in a series of mixed 
solvents, after attainment of dialysis equilibrium32). Such values are used in 
Table 56. The effect of solvent refractive index on the specific refractive index increment of a 
cellulose tricarbanilate-polystyrene (CTC-PS) copolymer. Single and mixed solvents. Reprinted from 
Ree2), pp. 198 and 200 
Solvent System 
Methyl Ethyl Ketone 
Dioxane 
Cydohexanone 
Pyridine 
Nitrobenzene 
Dioxane/bromonaphthalene (a) 
96.3: 3.7 
90 :10 
88.7: 11.3 
83 : 17 
'10 (30 DC) 
= 436 nm 
1.3836 
1.4269 
1.4567 
1.5294 
1.5806 
1.440 
1.458 
1.461 
1.478 
v copolymer at 30 DC (cm3 g-l) 
experimental 
calculated 
0.202 
0.206 
0.172 
0.172 
0.141 
0.090 
0.053 
vp values 
0.140 
0.142 
0.040 
0.023 
0 
-0.010 
-0.150 
-0.110 
(a) measurements taken after achievement of dialysis equilibrium32). 
258 

7.3. Molecular Structure 
Table 57. Values of 10-3 x M (kg mol-I) of cellulose tricarbanilate (CTC), polystyrene (PS), and a 
cellulose tricarbanilate-polystyrene copolymer (CTC-PS), obtained by light scattering studies. 
Reprinted from Ref.34), courtesy of IPC, Science and Technology Press, Ltd. 
L.S. measurement 
Homopolymer 
Graft-isolated 
Copolymer in single solvents 
Copolymer in selected mixed solvent 
Carbanilated form of initial irradiated cellulose (Cel) 
Carbanilated form of irradiated, 
ungrafted extracted cellulose (Cel) 
C.T.C. 
0.43 
0.63 
0.93 
0.61 
P.S. 
0.46 
3.07 
2.45 
2.91 
CTC-PS 
1.06 
1.21 
subsequent molecular mass determinations involving light-scattering meas-
urements. 
The molecular masses obtained by light scattering of the graft copolymer 
are listed in Table 5734); the procedures adopted for their determination are 
summarized as follows. For PS homopolymer the same value of M (the average 
molecular mass) was obtained with both toluene and dioxane as solvent. 
Dioxane was used as a solvent for measurement of M for the isolated PS grafts, 
irradiated CTC, and the unirradiated CTC. In general, compositional hetero-
geneity in a copolymer yields an apparent value for its average molecular mass 
M~, which is related to the true molecular mass of the copolymer (M) of 
its constitutent CTC (M A) portion and of the constituent PS (MB) branches57). 
A range of single and mixed solvents was used to determine the apparent 
average molecular mass of the CTC-PS copolymer, the values of which are 
shown-in Table 57321, using the two equivalent expressions: 
and 
M~ = (VAVB/~) Me + [VA(VA -
vB)/vcl WAM A 
-
[VB(VA -
VB)/V~] (1- W A) MB 
(174) 
(175) 
where P and Q are compositional heterogeneity parameters which are defined 
elsewhere57). If VA = VB (Le., the specific refractive index increment of cellulose 
tricarbanilate is equal to that of the polystyrene branches), then it can be seen 
that M~ = Me and that measurements always yield the true molecular mass 
of the copolymer directly. Figure 6634) gives the values of v A and VB as a function 
of the refractive indes of the pure solvent ('10) for solution of CTC and PS in 
several pure and mixed solvents32). This illustrates that the values of V A and VB are 
quite similar in most solvents. At the intersection of the two lines, VA = VB. 
Since there is no suitable solvent with a refractive index corresponding to the 
value when VA = VB' 1.543, recourse is made to using the more versatile mixed-
solvent system. The calculation procedure in obtaining Me from single solvents 
when VA =f. VB is somewhat tedious. 
With mixed solvents, it has been shown59) that the relevant expressions go-
verning M~ are identical in form to those given above in equations (174) and (175), 
259 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
OJ ,-----,..----.,.----..,----, 
0) 
-'" 
~ 0.1 
'" 
1.32 
1.42 
1.52 
iio-
1.62 
Fig. 66. Specific refractive index increment 
at constant composition as a function of the 
refractive index of the solvent for solutions 
of CT A, A and PS, B in several pure and 
mixed solvents CTC -
cellulose tricarbani-
late; PS -
polystyrene. Reprinted from 
Ref.34), by courtesy oflPC Science and Tech-
nology. 
except that the refractive index increments are replaced by the corresponding 
quantities at a constant chemical potential of solvents, defined as VilA' VIlB and 
V 1lC" This is achieved by dialysis procedures60). In Figure 61 34), the dependencies 
of VilA and of v/lB on no are shown for binary solvents comprising various 
volume fractions <PI' of l-bromonaphthalene in admixture with dioxane. The 
nature of the selected mixed solvents referred to in Table 57 was dictated by 
relevant features of Figure 6632). Thus, when v/lB = 0, the scattered light results 
solely from the CTC of a copolymer, and measurements yield the molecular 
mass of tfie cellulose tricarbanilate component of the copolymer, CTC-PS. 
From Figures 66 and 67, we can see that these conditions are given when 
VIlA = -l.60 dm3jkg, no = l.478, and <PI = 0.l7. Similarly, when VIlA = 0, 
the value of MB (the grafted polystyrene branches) is produced by the con-
o 
r/JI-
0.1 
0.2 
0.2 f----=-J..--t----+----t----t---I 
A 
-""" B 
_ 0.1 '------" ___ 
--1. ___ 
--'-___ 
-'---' 
ill 
ill 
U7 
ill 
no-
260 
Fig. 67. Specific refractive index incre-
ments at constant chemical potential as 
a function of the refractive index of the 
solvent for solutions of CTC, A and PS, 
B in binary mixtures of I-bromonaphtha-
lene (volume fraction 0J and dioxan. 
Reprinted. from Ref. 34), by courtesy of 
IPC Science and Technology Press, Ltd. 

7.3. Molecular Structure 
ditions V /lB = 0.075 dm3/kg, no = 1.458, and <PI = 0.037. Also, the value of 
Me (the true molecular mass of the copolymer) is obtained directly from one 
measurement in the mixed solvent defined by these conditions. Light-scattering 
studies of the cellulose tricarbanilate-polystyrene graft copolymer (CTC-PS) 
in several different single solvents yielded values for the apparent molecular 
mass of the copolymer, M~, which differ according to the refractive index of the 
solvent. Thus, in methyl ethyl ketone, dioxane, cyclohexanone, pyridine, and 
nitrobenzene, M~ ranged from 1.28 x 103 to 0.95 X 103 kg/mol. Using previously 
calculated values of vcro Vps and Vcopolymer' the data were used to supply the true 
molecular mass via several combinations of simultaneous equations, taking 
the weight fraction of the cellulose tricarbanilate in the copolymer to be 0.71. 
The mean values in Table 57 relate to this procedure. 
7.3.4. Preferential Adsorption 
by Cellulosic Copolymers in Mixed Solvents 
F or a polymer or copolymer in a binary solvent, the greater affinity of one of 
the solvents for the macromolecule produces a solvent sheath in the immediate 
vicinity of the polymer which is of a different composition from that of the 
bulk binary solvent. Differential refractometry provides a means of estimating 
this effect quantitatively58), as shown here: 
(176) 
where dno/d<P1 is the dependence of the refractive index of the binary solvent 
on the volume fraction of solvent 1; v /l and v are the specific refractive index 
increments, sometimes denoted dn/dc, of the copolymer at constant chemical 
potential and constant concentration respectively; and Yl denotes the coefficient 
of selective adsorption of solvent 1. Measurements of no for sixteen different 
values of <PI showed that dno/d<P1 is constant and has a value of +0.270. 
Values of Yl (where solvent 1 is I-bromonaphthalene) were calculated via 
equation (176) for systems encompassing only the rather restricted range of 4>1 
(0.03 to 0.185), which was required to obtain values of v/l for the light-scattering 
studies. The relevant data are shown on Figure 67. Within this range, 
Y 1 (dm3 /kg) varies from 0 to -1.1 for solutions of cellulose tricarbanilate and 
from -0.1 to -0.6 for solutions of polystyrene. Hence, for both polymers there 
is preferential desorption of I-bromonaphthalene, when the content of this 
solvent in the mixed solvent medium is low. From Figure 67 it can be seen 
that the cellulose tricarbanilate-polystyrene copolymer behaves in similar manner 
to the major component of the copolymer, namely, cellulose tricarbanilate 
(WCTC = 0.71). 
Observations obtained from light scattering, osmometry, and differential 
refractometry32) indicate that in the cellulose-polystyrene sample being in-
vestigated, grafting frequencies of a value less than unity are present. Such 
values are not without precedent in the literature61.62), though they preclude 
a simple backbone/graft model and are somewhat indicative of crosslin king, 
the presence of ungrafted substrate fragments, and possibly also of block 
261 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Gran Copolymers 
copolymer formation. Much of the evidence favors the last two as being the 
dominant factors. Approached with care, these techniques can supply valuable 
information. 
From Tables 57 we can see that the molecular mass of the bulk homo-
polymer is significantly less than that of the grafted branches (0.46 x 106 
and 2.45 x 106 respectively in this instance). Here we have further evidence 
for the presence of Trommsdorff effects in the grafting reactions. 
7.3.5. Molecular Mass Distribution of Grafted Branches 
Two cellulose graft copolymers with branches having the same average molecular 
mass may have different physical properties due to differences in the molecular 
mass distribution of their branches. It may therefore be of interest to fractionate 
the grafted branches and to plot their molecular mass distribution curve63l. 
Guthrie has shown32l that in the radiation-induced grafting of vinyl mono-
mers onto cellulosic substrates, the molecular mass distribution of grafted 
branches is significantly greater than that of homopolymeric species. This is 
especially so when the grafting is carried out in a heterogeneous medium64l. 
7.3.6. Frequency of Branching 
The same weight of polymer grafted onto a cellulose substrate may correspond 
to either a few long branches or many short ones. The physical properties of 
these two different types of grafted copolymer will evidently not be the same. 
It may therefore be important to calculate the number of grafted branches per 
cellulose backbone chainlll. 
7.3.7. Site of Branch Attachment 
With many of the methods used for the preparation of cellulose graft copolymers, 
the branches are attached to the oxygen atom of one of the three hydroxyl 
groups on the anhydroglucose unit. In other cases, such as where grafting 
occurs through hydrogen abstraction, the branches are attached to one of the 
three carbon atoms bearing hydroxyl groups. However, when grafting is 
initiated by irradiation, a number of different branching sites are created, and 
it may not be possible to determine unequivocally where the branches are 
attached to the cellulose molecule. Depending on whether a C-H bond, 
C--C bond, or C-O bond is ionized, different points of attachments will be 
formed resulting in different products. Breaking a C-H bond or C-C bond 
will give rise to grafting, whereas breaking an ether, C-O--C sequence will 
cause formation of block copolymers (see Chapter 3). 
7.4. Morphology 
Grafting may take place by interactions of monomers at the surface of the 
cellulosic substrate, with molecules on the surface of the supermolecular 
262 

7.4. Morphology 
structure of the cellulosic, or at random within the cellulose molecules in the 
substrate. With cellulosic fibers, grafting takes place both in the amorphous 
regions and on the surface of the oriented regions (crystallites) iIi the fibers. 
The distribution of grafted branches on the surface may lead to different 
effects on the properties from those produced by volumetric grafts located 
throughout the fibers. 
It must be emphasized that the optimum manner of distribution of grafts 
to get the best results also varies with the property desired. For instance, in 
order to improve the stability of cellulosic fibers to abrasion or to make them 
hydrophobic, surface grafting will be quite sufficient. However, if one wishes to 
impart a wool-like appearance and properties or to alter the dyeing properties 
of fibers, the grafting must be carried out not superficially, but internally 
(volumetric grafting). 
The morphology of cellulose graft copolymers has been shown to depend on 
the method of producing the graft, the experimental conditions during copoly-
merization, the nature of the substrate, and the type of monomer used65 ,66). 
Various cellulose graft copolymers have been examined by light microscopy 
in order to determine the location of the grafted polymer. Studies on cotton 
fibers grafted with !J-propiolactone67) showed that the fibers are swollen and 
round after a weight increase due to grafting of 35 %. With increased grafting, 
the fibers swell so much that they crack. This may be taken as evidence that 
grafting takes place inside the fiber rather than on its surface. 
Kaizerman et a1.68) dyed cotton and rayon fabrics, grafted with polyacrylo-
nitrile, with a basic dye (Calcozine Green) and examined the cross sections 
microscopically. Since the dye colors polyacrylonitrile to a fairly deep shade, 
yet barely stains cellulose, the location of the polymer could be readily 
observed. According to these researchers the fibers were almost completely 
penetrated by the polymer deposits, although the polymer concentration 
appeared to be greater near the surface. Similar observations have been 
reported by Hebeish49), who added that the process of grafting onto different 
cellulosic materials is not necessarily comparable, since grafting onto hydro-
cellulose was found to be much more in the nature of a surface phenomenon, 
whereas grafting onto swollen cottons and viscose took place inside the fibers. 
Iwakura et a1.69) eiamined the cross-section of cellulose grafted with glycidyl 
methacrylate (GMA) after dyeing-on an acid dye in the presence of pyridine. 
They disclosed that when copolymerization was initiated with CeIV ions, the 
grafting of the GMA on cellulose starts from the surface of the fiber and 
progresses towards the center when the grafting ratio is increased. On the other 
hand, grafting starts in the core of the fiber with the redox graft polymerization 
of the Fe"-H20z-cellulose type. This may be seen from Figure 68. 
It is also of interest to determine whether or not grafting occurs along the 
fiber axis, or whether there are centers where grafting has occurred followed 
by ungrafted sections. A longitudinal view of rayon fibers grafted with butadiene70) 
shows that the width of the filament is completely uniform and that grafting 
is therefore continuous along the entre fiber. Kaizerman et a1.68) have reported 
that a cellulose-polyacrylonitrile copolymer with a graft of about 30 ~~ and 
a cellulose-polyacrylamide copolymer with a graft of about 20 % showed 
263 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
00 
0 o· 
0 • 
.f) 
h 
Fig. 68a-d. Cross section of fiber II dyed with Acid Brilliant Scarlet 3 R in the presence of pyridine; 
a Bemberg rayon grafted with GMA in the presence of CelV salt, 11 % grafting; b Bemberg rayon 
grafted with GMA in the presence of a CelV salt, 25 % grafting; c Bemberg rayon grafted with GMA 
in the presence of a CelV salt, 128 % grafting; d Bemberg rayon grafted with GMA in the presence of 
H20 2-Mohr salt; ca. 5 % grafting. Reprinted from Ref. 69), p. 684, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. 
no detectable increase of fiber diameter, whereas grafting at the level of 
325 % of poly(methyl methacrylate) on viscose fiber had a pronounced swelling 
effect on the fiber. 
In grafting studies29.71-87), it is possible to detennine the morphology and 
distribution of grafted polymer in the macrostructure of the fiber in a much 
more detailed manner by means of electron microscopy. For instance, when 
cotton is pre-irradiated and then treated with acrylonitrile in dimethylformamide, 
the fibrous cross-section resembles that of a native fiber, and a unifonn distri-
bution of the polymer is obtained (Fig. 69 B). On the other hand, when the 
pre-irradiated cotton is treated with acrylonitrile in aqueous zinc chloride (80 %), 
the reaction starts at the outer edge of the fiber and proceeds towards the lumen 
area74), as shown in Figure 69A. If more dilute aqueous zinc chloride and a 
lower concentration of monomer are used, the cross section of the fiber 
Fig. 69a-c. Poly acrylonitrile ~ cellulose copolymer using ~ radiation (consecutive steps proce-
dure). a monomer solution : 32 % acrylonitrile in 80 % aqueous ZnCI2, b monomer solution: 32 % 
acrylonitrile in N,N-dimethyl formamide, c monomer solution: 15% acrylonitrile in 75% aqueous 
ZnCI2. Reprinted from ReC2\, p. 587, by courtesy of the American Chemical Society. 
264 

7.4. Morphology 
is rounded and the polymer is more concentrated in the outer layers of the 
fiber75 ,83), as shown in Figure 69C. 
The possible variations in the location and distribution of the grafted co-
polymer in the fiber when mutual irradiation grafting is employed may be realized 
from Figure 70a. It is apparent that the fiber cross-section is rounded and the 
polymer is concentrated about midway between the inner and outer layers 
of the fibers29, 83). When cellulose is cyanoethylated b~fore irradiation and 
aqueous zinc chloride is the solvent for the acrylonitrile monomer, the fibrous 
\ 
\ 
'f 
fl . 
Fig. 70a, b. Poly acrylonitrile-cellulose copolymer using y-radiation (simultaneous steps procedure). 
a monomer solution: 32 % acrylonitrile in 80 % aqueous ZnCI2 , b Cyanoethylated cellulose (D.S. 0.7); 
monomer solution same as a. Reprinted from Ref.72 ), p. 586, by courtesy of American Chemical 
Society. 
Fig. 71. Poly acrylonitrile-cellulose 
copolymer using CelV ion initiated 
copolymerization reaction. Reprinted 
from Ref. 72), p. 588, by courtesy of 
American Chemical Society. 
265 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
cross-section is rounded, and a uniform distribution of the polymer is obtained, 
as shown in Figure 70b. Redox systems give a uniform distribution of graft, 
as shown in Figure 71. 
An additional point of importance is that a layering or opening of the fibrous 
structure occurs when the ionizing radiation (mutual) procedure is used with 
styrene in methanol72 , 77), as shown in Figure 72a. 
By the same procedure, alkyl methacrylate in methanol also causes layering 
of the fibrous structure. The extent of the layering effect increases as the 
molecular mass of the alkyl methacrylate increases72 , 76). The effect of poly(hexyl 
methacrylate) on the fibrous structure is shown in Figure 72b. 
Goynes and Harris88) have investigated the structure of cotton fibers grafted 
by radiation-induced polymerization with butyl methacrylate and acrylonitrile 
by light and electron microscopy. They reported that the grafting reaction 
occurred throughout the fiber and increased in uniformity as the degree of 
grafting increased. During the reaction, the fibers were swollen into a layered 
configuration. The graft polymerization prevented the cellulose from dissolving 
in the cellulose solvent, cupriethylenediamine hydroxide. Scanning electron 
micrographs indicated that grafting so changed the fibrillar structure of the 
fibers that, on abrasion, the fibers with high graft content no longer separated 
into fibrils but into chunks of graft polymer. Surface views of the highly 
grafted fibers showed that coatings of polymer had built up on the surface. 
Their fused appearance on abrasion indicated that the samples were thermo-
plastic. 
Guthrie and Percival89) have presented information relating to the thermal 
properties of cellulose tricarbanilate-polystyrene (CTC-PS) graft copolymers. 
The original substrate was regenerated cellulose film. Techniques such as dif-
Fig. 72a, b. Layering or opening effects in cellulose copolymers using y radiation (simultaneous steps 
procedure). a monomer solution: 30 % styrene and 70 % methanol, b monomer solution: 30 % hexyl 
methacrylate and 70 % methanol. R °printed from Ref.72 ), p. 588, by courtesy of Americal Chemical 
Society. 
266 

7.4. Morphology 
ferential thermal analysis (DT A), thermogravimetric analysis (TOA), hot stage 
optical microscopy (HSOM), and electron microscopy (SEM) were used in 
the study. A corresponding study of the individual homopolymeric species 
(CTC and PS) was also undertaken89). Cellulose tricarbanilate has been studied 
extensively for its solution properties90), its chemical stability91), its ability 
to protect cellulosics from radiation induced damage92), and its value as an 
intermediate to self-colored polymers93). 
In an earlier related study, Benson et a1.93) examined the thermal properties 
of cellulose tricarbanilate (A), cellulose p-nitrocarbanilate (homogeneous nitra-
tion) (B), and cellulose p-nitrocarbanilate (indirect homogeneous nitration) (C), 
(Fig. 73). In this study the original source of cellulose was cotton linters. The 
melting process with cellulose tricarbanilate is seen to commence at 200°C. This 
broad endotherm points to the polydisperse nature of the sample. Nitrated 
products resulting from indirect homogeneous routes are clearly more stable than 
those produced by direct homogeneous nitration. The thermogram (A) in 
Figure 74, when compared with (A) in Figure 73, clearly shows the importance 
of the source and type of cellulose used in car bani lations when consideration 
·is given to the thermal properties. Regenerated cellulose film, converted to the 
carbanilate and subsequently examined by thermal analysis, gives a much 
sharper melting profile than does its counterpart derived from cotton linters. 
Table 58 contains information related to the thermal decomposition ofirradiat-
ed CTC, unirradiated CTC, and a CTC-PS copolymer89). Three methods of data 
analysis were used, the relevant merits of each having been fully considered94 - 96), 
and the procedure used given in Table 58. Figure 74 contains differential thermo-
grams from a DT A examination of the three species mentioned above. It 
should be noted that the symbols A, B, and C, used in Figure 74 have a different 
significance than when they are used in Figure 73. These thermograms (Fig. 74) 
u,------------------------------------, 
.§ 
Cl> 
-c 
(3 
X 
LLJ 
u ·E 
~ 
Cl> 
oS 
o 
Ll 
c: 
A 
LLJL-__ L-~~--~--~--~--~---L--~~~ 
100 
200 
300 
400 
Temperature (OC) 
Fig. 73. Differential thermograms from the thermogravimetric analysis of A cellulose tricarbanilate, 
B cellulose p-nitrocarbanilate (homogeneous nitration), and C, cellulose p-nitrocarbanilate (indirect 
homogeneous nitration). ~T = 0.2 DC/in. Reprinted from Ref. 93), p. 904, by courtesy ofIPC Science 
and Technology Press, Ltd. 
267 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Table 58. Thermogravimetric examination of the decomposition of a cellulose tricarbanilate-
polystyrene copolymer. Reprinted from Ref.89), p. 533 by courtesy of IPC, Science & Technology 
Press, Ltd. 
Sample and 
Method of Analysis 
Assumed 
Activation 
Correlation 
Temperature Range 
Reaction 
Energy of 
Coefficient 
Order 
decomposition 
kllmol 
Non-irradiated CTC 
Reich and Levi94) 
0 
59.2 ± 3.2 
160-270°C 
I 
64.8 ± 4.0 
Reich95.96) 
0 
57.2 
0.96 
I 
65.6 
0.96 
Irradiated CTC 
Reich and Levi94) 
0 
40.0 ± 1.6 
160-230°C 
I 
44.0 ± 1.2 
CTC-PS 
Reich and Levi94) 
0 
48.0 
Copolymer 
I 
49.2 
Section (a) 230-330 °c 
Reich and Levy95.96) 
0 
26.4 
0.86 
44.0 
0.95 
Section (b) 340-410 °c 
Reich and Levy95.96) 
0 
81.2 ± 1.2 
0.92 
I 
112.0 ± 1.6 
0.95 
Section (c) 410-480 °C 
Reich and Levy95.96) 
0 
no meaningful 
result 
166.0 ± 0.8 
1.0 
A 
100 
200 
T('C)-
Fig. 74. Differential thermograms from the differential thermal analysis of A (unirradiated CTC), 
B (irradiated CTC), ana C (the CTC-PS copolymer). Reprinted from Ref.89), p. 533, courtesy of 
IPC, Science and Technology Press, Ltd. 
were subsequently used in the provision of information required for the SEM 
examination of samples removed from the DT analyzer at temperatures associated 
with thermally induced changes in the sample. Again, the similarities between the 
irradiated CTC, (B), and the CTC-PS copolymer (C) are apparent, as is the 
added thermal stability of the copolymer. The primary endotherms shown In 
268 

7.4. Morphology 
Fig. 75a-c. Hot-stage optical microscopic examinations of unirradiated CTC: a unheated, bat 164°C, 
and c at 187°C. Prints 3X (X200). Reprinted from Ref. 89), p. 534, courtesy of IPC, Science and Tech-
nology Press, Ltd. 
269 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Figure 74 correspond to the initial weight losses observed in Figure 73. H.S.O.M. 
enables a visual appraisal of the complex decomposition processes to be made. 
Figure 75 portrays the change in physical characteristics in non-irradiated CTC 
under the conditions given in the Figure legend. On heating above 160°C, 
breakdown occurs to produce a vapor which immediately condenses on the cover-
slide of the microscope as very sharply defined needle-like crystals (Fig. 75 (b)). 
·On holding the temperature at 185°-187°C, these crystals are seen to grow at a 
relatively rapid rate, supplied by vapor from the decomposing CTC (Fig. 75 (c)). 
An increase in the temperature beyond 203°C leads to rapid melting of these 
crystals. At this point little of the original CTC remains, though what does 
appears to undergo a decomposition process normally associated with unsubstitut-
ed cellulose. There are indications that the continued growth of the large 
crystals occurs at the expense of the smaller ones. 
b 
~ 
33IJ.m 
Fig. 76a, b. Hot-stage optical microscopic examinations of irradiated eTC: a at 165 De and b at 
187°C. Prints 3X (X200). Reprinted from Ref. 89), p. 534, courtesy of IPC, Science and Technology 
Press, Ltd. 
270 

~ 
33J,1m 
7.4. Morphology 
Fig. 77. Hot-stage optical microscopic examination of a CTC-PS copolymer at 420C. Prints 3X 
(X200). Reprinted from Ref.89), p. 534, courtesy of IPC, Science and Technology Press, Ltd. 
Similar observations were made with the irradiated CTC, though here the ex-
tent of crystallization was reduced. The product, as seen after the initial 
decomposition (165°C), is shown in Figure 76 (a). Figure 76 (b) shows the sample 
at 187°C when crystal growth is taking place. The second and third endotherms 
shown in Figure 76 (b) must be associated with changes taking place in cellulosic 
residues. Examination of the CTC-PS copolymers showed no vaporization and 
crystallization in the temperature range studied (25-425 0C). A partial melt 
process was seen at 236°C, which produced a swollen ash that underwent little 
change until 415 °C when an ill-defined melting process occurred. This provides 
direct visual evidence (Fig. 77) of the effect of polystyrene grafts on the 
thermal stability ofCTC. The composite is stable through melting and beyond the 
temperature normally associated with the decomposition of styrene itself. 
Electron micrographs were taken of each of the three samples, the irradiated 
and non-irradiated CTC, and the CTC-PS copolymer, after heating to the given 
temperature. The micrographs relate to residues, unless otherwise specified. The 
details are given in the accompanying legends where the term exo or endo refers 
to the changes noted on the D.T.A. trace at the particular temperature. 
Figure 78 deals with non-irradiated CTC at various temperatures. Figure 78 (a) 
shows the sample before heating. Here we see the amorphous nature of the sample, 
each section having a semi-independent existence. After heating to 132°C, [Fig. 
78 (b)], there is evidence of phase change during which the fibers expand and 
lose their separate identity. Figures 78 (c) and 78 (d) show the. residue after 
the 250 °C endotherm. In these micrographs we see the smooth nature of the 
highly expanded sections, which appear as a continuous melt residue. 
Figure 79 displays the micrographs from the CTC-PS copolymer. The unheated 
sample [79 (a)] has a scaled-fiber appearance when seen on the TV monitor and 
shows evidence of film formation. Similar micrographs for cellulose copolymers 
have been recorded elsewhere65 ). Controlled heating to 200°C produced the 
271 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Fig. 78a-4. Electron micrographs. Non-irradiated CTC a x 103 unheated; b x 103, after 132 DC endo; 
c x 103 after 250 DC ends, and d x 3 X 103 after 250 DC endo. The endotherms referred to are those 
shown in Figure 74. Reprinted from Ref.89), p. 535, by courtesy of IPC, Science and Technology 
Press, Ltd. 
272 

7.4. Morphology 
Fig. 79a-d. Electron micrographs. The CTC-PS copolymer a x 5 x 1<P, unheated b x 102 at 200°C; 
c x 1Q2 after 325°C, and d x 3 X 103 after 325°C. Reprinted from Ref. 89 ), p. 538, by courtesy of 
IPC, Science and Technology Press, Ltd. 
residue whose micrograph is given in Figure 79 (b). Again, there is little 
evidence of any flow, though the fibrous nature of the granules is still evident. 
Heating to higher temperatures in excess of 325°C produces a melt and flow 
condition which leads to coverage of the inner pores. The initial conclusion 
is that we have reached the melting temperatures of the CTC-PS chains, and 
that the PS component serves as a surface coating for the enclosed amorphous 
273 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
network. These flow characteristics are in marked contrast to the irradiated 
CTC and the unirradiated CTC. Irradiated CTC shows no tendency for flow, 
and the unirradiated CTC, although flow occurs at relatively low tempera-
tures, maintains a degree of surface order. This order is lost in the CTC-PS 
copolymer. 
On heating to 185°C, unirradiated CTC undergoes decomposition, though the 
exact mechanism is as yet uncertain. This decomposition is accompanied by a 
simultaneous evaporation of the volatile decomposition products, which leads to 
an overall endotherm in the D.T.A. trace. Analysis of T.G.A. data shows the 
activation energy of this decomposition to be low (58.0 kJ /mol), so that the heat 
produced would be small relative to the heat required for the vaporization of 
volatile products. 
Pyrolysis of the irradiated CTC leads to an even lower value of Ea for the 160° 
to 230°C region of the thermogram (42.0 kJ/mol), which indicates the lesser 
stability of the irradiated CTC in this temperature range. Because of difficulties 
in analysis, values of Ea corresponding to the second stage of the decomposition 
are not available. However, this change is absent from the unirradiated CTC 
sample and possesses a higher, though unknown, activation energy. It is possible 
that this second endotherm arises from decomposition of the cellulose residues 
or more tightly bonded carbanilate groups. 
The CTC-PS possesses significantly greater overall thermal stability than either 
CTC variety. This is seen in the high temperature endotherm for the primary 
decomposition. Here we have no evidence for vaporization and subsequent 
crystallization. The endotherms are associated with melt or swelling processes 
and weight losses which are difficult to specify. The final melting process 
(410-480 0c) concerns polystyrene branches in the PS-CTC copolymer. The value 
of Ea for this process, at 166 kJ/mol, is in agreement with independently 
published data for polystyrene decompositions97), for which a radical chain 
reaction is assumed to be the mechanism of degradation. 
An explanation for the increase in thermal stability of the PS-CTC copolymer 
which does not involve interference with the mechanism of the subsequent 
decomposition is not easily found. The possibility of negative catalysis arises, 
though the pathway could be indirect. Evidence from the literature suggests 
that the breakdown of cellulose derivatives98) and polystyrene97 ) is free radical 
in character. Hence, the polystyrene must interfere with the pathway which is 
open to unmodified CTC. Such interference could originate in the radiation-
induced graft copolymerization reaction which preceded carbanilation. Evidence 
is available to indicate that Trommsdorff effects operate during the preparation 
of graft copolymers which have cellulose as the substrate99). This leads to the 
production of high molecular mass branches. Further work has revealed the 
occurrence of intramolecular crosslin king within the graft copolymer. Such 
crosslinks are maintained during carbanilation and would increase the thermal 
stability of the carbanilated celluloses relative to unmodified samples. These 
crosslinks could also explain the reluctance for release of volatile products 
during decomposition. Upon heating to the temperature at which polystyrene 
normally breaks down (300 0c), little change is observed in the PS-CTC co-
polymer. Subsequent heating produces the examples of overall flow shown in 
274 

7.4. Morphology 
the electron micrographs (Fig. 79 (c) and 79 (d)) which occur at a temperature 
in excess of 450°C. Again, we have evidence for the presence of crosslinking 
during the preparation of the cellulose-polystyrene graft copolymer. 
The electron micrographs shown in Figures 80 (a) to 80 (d) relate to the 
residues of irradiated CTC at various temperatures. The amorphous nature 
of the residues from the irradiated CTC suggests the potential adsorption systems 
or catalyst supports. However, any work along these lines will require a knowledge 
of the adsorption characteristics. 
Fig. BOa-d. Electron micrographs. Irradiated CTC a x 103 unheated; b x lIP after 200 °c endo; 
c x 3 x lIP 200°C endo; and d x 3 X 103 heated to 325°C endotherm (Fig. 74). Reprinted from 
Ref. 89), p. 537, by courtesy of IPC Science and Technology Press, Ltd. 
275 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
The CTC-PS copolymer micrographs, Figure (79 (c) and 79 (d», are inter-
esting. They show the surface to be completely covered in molten, frozen poly-
styrene when seen under high magnification. Two possibilities arise: first that 
the graft-substrate bond is cleaved with subsequent migration of molten poly-
styrene to the surface: The second possibility involves melting without decom-
position; hence, we may be seeing frozen, melted grafts on the cellulose substrate. 
It is clear that organized thermal analytical examination can provide a wealth 
of information concerning the structural characteristics of cellulosic copolymers. 
Harris et a1.102) have used electron microscopy to examine the distribution of 
poly(glycidyl methacrylate) within cotton fibrous structures. The polymerization 
was photoinduced in an unsensitized system involving aqueous media. When 
several layers of cotton fabrics were immersed in solutions of glycidyl metha-
crylate and only the surface layer was exposed to light, polymerization reactions 
were initiated in this layer and also in inner layers, probably by chain 
transfer reactions. In this instance, the chain transfer process is seen to be very 
efficient, in that with a six-layer sample the grafting levels are 29 %, 25 %, 22 %, 
20 %, 14 %, and 11 % respectively. Electron microscopic examination103) shows 
that the polymer is distributed throughout the cross-section of the fiber, though 
at the surface of the fibers the polymer trends to be more concentrated than 
within the cross section of the fibers and to encapsulate them. The photo-
initiated reactivities of several vinyl and acrylic monomers in solution with 
cotton fabrics are compared with those from glycidyl methacrylate 'as follows: 
methyl methacrylate > glycidyl methacrylate > diacetone acrylamide > 1,3-
butylene dimethacrylate > methacrylic acid> acrylonitrile> divinyl benzene. 
This information may be highly significant when considering the properties 
and application of this type of copolymer system, especially when comparisons' 
are made between genuine copolymers of cellulosics and blended compo-
sitesI04.105). 
7.5. Fine Structure 
Since many grafting reactions involving cellulose are performed in an aqueous' 
medium, and since the intercrystalline swelling of cellulose by water occurs 
predominantly in the accessible or amorphous regions of cellulose, the diffusion 
and, therefore, grafting of monomer is probably restricted to these regions. Saku-
rada et a1.8S) have shown that no change in the X-ray diffraction pattern was 
observed in poly(vinyl alcohol) grafted with large amounts of methyl methacrylate 
and reported that grafting probably occurred only in the amorphous regions. 
X-ray analysis of ramie grafted with polyacrylonitrile, as reported by Toda1S), 
showed no change in degree of crystallinity or orientation; however, the X-ray 
diffractogram showed a superimposed pattern of polyacrylonitrile. 
X-ray photographs of rayon grafted with glycidyl methacrylate, shown in 
Figure 81, reveals that the crystallinity and orientation of the fiber does not 
change after graft copolymerization69). Obviously then, although grafting onto 
cellulose causes a significant change in the fibrous structure, it leaves the fine 
structure of cellulose practically unaltered. 
276 

7.6. Properties 
Fig.8la-e. X-ray diagrams of Bemberg rayon grafted with GMA: a ungrafted; b 11.8 % grafting; 
c 44 % grafting; d 95 % grafting; e 155 % grafting. Reprinted from Ref. 69), p. 680, by courtesy of 
John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
7.6. Properties 
Although cellulosic materials may be superior to synthetic polymers in certain 
properties, such as moisture absorption and transmission, ability to withstand 
high temperatures, etc., they have some outstanding drawbacks. Cellulosic 
materials are susceptible to rot and mildew. They are not very extensible. They 
swell in water and are notoriously liable to shrinkage. Cellulosic fibers acquire 
wrinkles readily and recover with difficulty. By grafting branches of a synthetic 
polymer onto the cellulosic backbone, some of the drawbacks of the cellulosic 
materials can be eliminated or at least reduced. It is hoped, in the textile 
field at least, that fibrous cellulose graft copolymers may offer advantages 
which will be greater than those obtained by the physical blending of synthetic 
fibers with cotton or regenerated cellulosic fibers. 
Graft copolymerization is one of the more promising methods for the chemical 
modification of cellulose. Considerable changes in the properties of cellulosic 
materials (cloth, fibers, and films) can be achieved using this method. However, 
it must be pointed out that this method is not yet widely used, nor is it the 
only method available for the production of chemically modified celluloses with 
novel properties. At present the method of treating cellulosic materials by 
impregnating them with solutions of different reagents in order to obtain 
modified celluloses which are non-flammable, oil- and water-resistant, "easy-
care", etc., is widely used in a number of countries. 
In several procedures, in particular in preparing "easy-care" cellulosic mate-
rials, graft copolymerization cannot yet be used for mass production. The methods 
used at present will retain their importance for some time to come. However, 
in preparing most of the types of modified cellulosic materials which can be made 
by graft copolymerization, as well as by impregnation, the former method shows 
a number of significant engineering and economic advantages. The main 
277 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
advantages of the graft copolymerization over the impregnation method can 
be summarized as follows: 
(1) The achieved effect is stable to repeated water treatment and in particular 
to washing. The new properties are maintained after 20 or even 50 washings. 
Using the impregnation method, such stability cannot be achieved as a rule. 
(2) The grafting of synthetic polymers does not harm the hygienic properties of 
the product (in particular its permeability to air), in contrast to adsorbed 
reagents applied by impregnation as a covering film. 
(3) In many cases, the effect achieved by graft copolymerization cannot be 
attained by other methods of chemical modification. For example, the creation 
of different types of cellulosic materials which exhibit ion-exchange properties 
or the conferring of wool-like properties to viscose staple fiber with poly-
acrylonitrile grafting. This was undertaken in the USSR under the name 
Mtilon and can be achieved only by graft copolymerization. 
(4) The method is simple and more economical when inexpensive monomers are 
used, when produced on a large scale, and especially when the desired pro-
perties can be obtained by grafting comparatively small quantities of mono-
mers. This advantage becomes especially significant in the chemical modifi-
cation of viscose and cellulose acetate fibers, as there have been developed 
in the last few years methods of graft copolymerization which can be carried 
out directly, as one of the technological stages in the production process 
of these fibers. 
The properties of the cellulose graft copolymers would be expected to depend 
on the type of monomer, the total amount of polymer grafted, the molecular mass 
and the molecular mass distribution of the grafted polymer, the frequency of 
branching, and the location and distribution of the grafted polymer in the 
macrostructure of the fiber. At present, there are no apparent relationships 
between the sites of attachment on the cellulose, the molecular mass of the 
grafted polymer, the fraction of cellulose molecules grafted, and the properties 
of the cellulose graft copolymers, particularly those prepared by free-radical 
initiation processes. Little or no stress can be applied to the grafted polymer to 
enhance its properties, because if this is done the fibrous nature of the cellulose 
may be lost. Consequently, the effects of "amorphous" graft polymer on the 
properties of cellulose are being investigated. Some of the important changes 
in cellulose graft copolymers are summarized below. 
7.6.1. Textile Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Mechanical and Physical Properties 
The mechanical properties (tensile strength and tear strength, flat and flex 
abrasion resistance, etc.) of cotton fabrics grafted with polyacrylonitrile, poly-
acrylamide, and poly(methyl methacrylate) by the CeIV ion technique were inves-
tigated by Kaizerman et aI.68). Fabrics grafted with polyacrylonitrile show a signi-
ficant increase in tensile strength and a very considerable improvement in flat 
abrasion resistance for a grafting level of 27 %. The mechanical behaviour of 
grafted cotton has also been investigated by Blouin et aI.75 ). The results obtained 
278 

7.6. Properties 
are shown in Table 59. Cotton yarns and fabrics were pre-irradiated in nitrogen 
and then treated with monomer solution (vinyl acetate, acrylonitrile, and 
methyl methacrylate) in 75-80 % zinc chloride to ensure considerable swelling 
of cellulose during grafting. It appears likely that much of the grafted polymer is 
situated inside the cellulose fibers. An interesting feature was that fabrics 
grafted with po I y( vin yl acetate) and po I yacry lonitrile showed an exceptionall y high 
degree of abrasion resistance, while the improvement in tear and tensile strength 
is not so spectacular. Chitale and Kulkarni86) however did not observe any impro-
vement in the abrasion resistance of cotton fabrics grafted with polystyrene, 
poly(methyl methacrylate), and polyacrylonitrile when the grafting reaction was 
carried out in the absence of a swelling agent. Thus, it appears that swelling of 
cellulose fabric during grafting may be an important factor contributing to the 
improvement in the mechanical properties of the grafted cellulose. 
Prahl et al.87 ) have reported that the primary result of grafting vinyl monomers 
onto cotton fabric is a substantial increase in elongation and a moderate 
decrease in tensile strength, with the net result being, in many cases, an increase 
in toughness. This may be seen in Table 60 and 61. These authors pointed out 
that for the graft range studied, there appeared to be no dependence of the 
tensile properties on the graft level. 
Table 59. Mechanical properties of grafted cotton fabric*. Adapted from Ref.7S), p. 315, by courtesy 
of Textile Research Institute 
Untreat-Irradiat- 15 % vinyl acetate 
15 % acrylonitrile 
15% methyl 
ed 
ed 
in 70 % aq. ZnCI2 
in 75 % aq. ZnCI2 
methacrylate in 
control control 
80% aq. ZnCI2 
Treated Grafted 
Treated Grafted 
Treated Grafted 
Control Sample 
Control Sample 
Control Sample 
Grafted polymer % 
23 
25 
24 
Thread count (F) 
yarns/in 
81 
78 
83 
84 
81 
84 
81 
82 
Breaking strength 
(F), lb. 
44 
41 
42.7 
46.6 
42.5 
50.5 
42.2 
43.2 
Elongation at break 
(F), % 
24.5 
24.3 
31.8 
32.5 
22.9 
25.9 
23.9 
24.8 
Tear resistance 
(F), g 
540 
520 
540 
567 
553 
507 
553 
480 
Flex abrasion 
resistance (F) 
cycles to rupture 
228 
232 
291 
951 
347 
397 
274 
239 
Flat abrasion 
resistance, cycles 
91 
86 
233 
1521 
159 
551 
92 
133 
Conditioned wrinkle 
recovery (W + F), 
degrees 
174 
181 
95 
62 
188 
154 
193 
204 
* Purified cotton print cloth (86 x 80) irradiated dry and in nitrogen to a dos"ge of 106 R, and after 
irradiation treated with 15 % monomer in 70, 75, or 80 % aq. ZnCI2 at about 23°C for sufficient 
time to yield the grafted polymer indicated. 
279 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Table 60. Tensile properties of grafted 80 x 80 cloth (I replicate). Adapted from 
Ref.87 ), p. 247, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Graft 
Graft 
Warp tensile* 
Type 
% 
lb. 
None 
0.0 
16.0 
n-butyl acrylate 
8.0 
9.0 
n-Butyl acrylate 
13.5 
9.0 
Ethyl acrylate 
27.5 
17.0 
Methyl acrylate 
47.6 
10.0 
Methyl methacrylate 
23.7 
9.0 
Methyl methacrylete/styrene** 
7.5 
17.0 
Ethyl methacrylate 
22.7 
10.5 
n-Buthyl methacrylate 
17.0 
9.5 
Acrylonitrile 
11.8 
9.5 
Styrene 
5.1 
10.5 
* 
1/2 X 3 in sample; cross-head rate 0.05 in/min. 
** I: I in liquid phase; unknown proportion in graft polymer. 
Table 61. Tensile properties of ethyl acrylate grafted 80 x 80 
cloth. Reprinted from Ref.871, p. 247, by courtesy of Textile 
Research Institute 
% 
Warp tensile 
Filling tensile 
Graft 
lb. 
%Elong. 
lb. 
% Elong. 
0.0 
45.0 
7.2 
37.7 
13.4 
11.5 
48.2 
13.5 
32.6 
22.2 
18.3 
44.5 
14.4 
34.3 
21.1 
% Elongation 
4.9 
4.5 
5.5 
11.9 
7.6 
20.0 
20.0 
7.8 
7.4 
23.8 
13.2 
Iwakura et a1.69) have examined the strength, elongation, and elastic recovery 
of cellulose fibers grafted with glycidyl methacrylate. The results obtained are 
given in Table 62. It is apparent that denier and recovery increased with the 
increase of the grafting content, but that strength and elongation decreased. 
Demint et al. 78) have studied the physico-mechanical properties of cyanoethylat-
ed cotton grafted with polyacrylonitrile. Some of their results are shown in 
Table 63 and 64. It is obvious that with increasing interaction of acrylonitrile 
in the grafted polymer, the elongation at break and yarn number increases; 
the average stiffness, the breaking strength, and the toughness also increase 
slightly. The elastic recovery properties of a product having a graft yield of 
about 38 % are rather interesting (Table 64). At elongations of 25 % or less of 
their elongation at break, decreases in permanent set and increases in delayed 
recovery of the yarns were observed. There is apparently no effect on the 
immediate recovery of· the yarns. These changes indicate that a stabilizing of 
molecular bonds occurs (increased delayed recovery and decreased permanent 
set), but that the bonds involved are apparently low in energy (little or no 
change in immediate recovery). 
280 

7.6. Properties 
Table 62. Mechanical properties of GMA-grafted viscose rayon. Reprinted from Ref.69" p. 678, 
by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
No. 
Content of 
Denier Strength g/den. 
Elongation % 
Knot 
Knot 
grafting 
strength 
elongation 
(WI %) 
dry 
wet 
dry 
wet 
g./den. 
% 
0 
0.0 
2.00 
2.84 
1.80 
21.0 
23.2 
1.72 
12.8 
I 
16.2 
2.31 
2.23 
1.48 
19.2 
22.1 
1.16 
9.3 
2 
23.3 
2.40 
2.15 
1.50 
19.0 
22.6 
1.20 
10.2 
3 
44.4 
2.74 
2.01 
1.39 
18.8 
24.6 
1.23 
10.3 
4 
58.9 
3.10 
1.81 
1.25 
21.4 
25.1 
1.09 
10.5 
Table 63. Effect of radiation dosage on the interaction of acrylonitrile with cyanoethylated cotton 
and on its properties.* Reprinted from Ref.7s" p. 823, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Property of Yarn** 
Dosage, megaroentgen 
0.0*** 
0.0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.5 
Interacted monomer 
content, % 
0.0 
0.0 
4 
27 
38 
38 
36 
Parts monomer to 
100 parts cellulose 
0.0 
0.0 
I 
5 
45 
74 
74 
69 
Breaking strength, lb. 
10.1 
6.2 
7.1 
6.7 
6.3 
7.4 
8.2 
7.0 
Elongation at break, % 
13 
12 
15 
17 
24 
26 
28 
24 
Yarn number, tex 
241 
298 
312 
345 
513 
656 
649 
622 
Breaking toughness, g/tex 0.79 
0.40 
0.61 
0.53 
0.48 
0.55 
0.64 
0.49 
Average stiffness, g/tex 
141 
76 
67 
53 
24 
20 
21 
21 
* 
Treating solution: 32 parts of acrylonitrile in 60 ~';;rts of aqueous 80% ZnCI2 • Degree of substi-
tution of cotton, 0.7. 
• * Instron properties . 
*.* Purified, untreated, unirradiated yarn. 
Cellulose graft copolymers, in the form of yarns, have been found to be thermo-
plastic 77.104,105). This is probably due to lowered molecular cohesion. For 
instance, polystyrene-cellulose graft copolymers show a pronounced drop in 
resiliency index and stiffness when the temperature is increased to 100°C. 
Polyacrylonitrile-cellulose graft copolymers and polyacrylonitrile-cyanoethylated 
cellulose graft copolymers show drops in their resiliency index and stiffness at 
80°-100°C. The polystyrene-cellulose graft copolymers also show decreased rates 
of changes in the resiliency index from 40 °C to 60°C and from 100° to 150°C, 
indicating phase transition. Summations of the relative energies, expended 
over a temperature range from 21 ° to 200 °C to elongate the fibrous polymer 
to 1.5 %, are as follows: cyanoethylated cellulose (D.S.: 0.7) > acrylonitrile-
cellulose> cellulose> styrene-cellulose > acrylonitrile-cyanoethylated cellulose. 
Upon relaxation, the recovery of the energy expended is about 40 % in all 
cases, except for acrylonitrile-cyanoethylated cellulose, where about 66 % recovery 
is observed. 
281 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Table 64. Effect or radiation-induced interaction of acrylonitrile with 
cyanoethylated cotton on its elastic recovery properties. * Adapted from 
Ref. 78 ), p. 823, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Elongation of 
Recovery + , % of actual elongation 
cotton +, % of 
elongation 
Purified 
Purified 
Cyanoethylated 
at break 
cyanoethylated 
irradiated 
Immediate recovery 
5 
30 
34 
34 
10 
23 
29 
24 
25 
9 
10 
9 
50 
6 
8 
5 
75 
6 
7 
4 
Delayed recovery 
5 
49 
49 
63 
10 
58 
55 
71 
25 
66 
69 
74 
50 
46 
46 
48 
75 
29 
30 
29 
Permanent set 
5 
21 
17 
3 
10 
19 
16 
5 
25 
25 
21 
17 
50 
48 
46 
47 
75 
65 
63 
67 
* Degree of substitution, 0.7. Radiation dosage, 
megaroentgen. See 
Table 82 for other properties of cottons. 
+ Instron properties. 
Reports106, 107) on the properties of cotton cloth grafted with polystyrene using 
the post-irradiation technique reveal the following points. (1) When styrene is 
grafted by this technique with a dose of 2-3 x 106 r, the loss of strength of the 
cotton fabric is slight. (2) When the percent graft is higher than 40 %, the 
grafted cotton fabric shows excellent thermoplasticity. (3) The tearing strength 
of cotton fabric and the flex life of cotton fiber are somewhat lowered by 
grafting, but the flex-abrasion resistance is improved. 
Measurements of strength, elongation, and modulus of single cellulosic fibers 
of various apparent percent grafts have been carried out to elucidate the relation 
between percent graft and mechanical propertiesI06,108,109). In Table 65 are 
shown some of the results obtained when the grafting of styrene onto high-
tenacity rayon by mutual irradiation with y-rays was carried out in the absence of 
air. The term apparent percent graft means the weight increase of fiber after 
benzene extraction as a percentage of the initial weight of fiber. With increasing 
radiation doses, the apparent graft increases up to 189 %. 
The data in Table 65 make it evident that the conditioned strength of 
fibers remains almost unaltered despite the large weight increase due to grafting. 
The wet strength decreases very slightly below a dose of I Mrad, and there is a 
282 

7.6. Properties 
Table 65. Grafting of styrene onto high tenacity rayon by mutual irradiation with gamma rays. 
Adapted from Ref.IOS), p. 14, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Dose 
App. 
Titer 
Conditioned 
Wet 
106 Rad. 
graft 
(den.) 
% 
Strenght 
Tenacity 
Elong. 
Strength 
Tenacity 
Elong. 
(g) 
(g/den.) 
% 
(g) 
(g/den.) 
% 
0.0 
0.0 
1.54 
5.27 
3.42 
25.6 
3.70 
2.40 
35.3 
0.1 
1.6 
1.61 
5.31 
3.30 
25.5 
3.54 
2.20 
36.3 
0.2 
46.1 
2.35 
5.52 
2.35 
28.6 
3.30 
1.43 
54.3 
0.4 
77.4 
3.40 
5.84 
1.72 
44.0 
3.50 
1.03 
57.7 
0.8 
95.0 
3.57 
5.54 
1.55 
40.6 
3.30 
0.93 
62.7 
1.0 
153.0 
4.99 
5.20 
0.96 
53.0 
3.50 
0.72 
87.0 
1.6 
189.0 
6.15 
5.38 
0.88 
41.2 
2.77 
0.45 
72.6 
Monomer mixture: styrene: methanol: water = 20: 72: 8; Dose rate: 2.0 x 105 rad/hr; room tempera-
ture. 
sharp drop at 1.6 Mrad, possibly because of radiation damage. Both the condi-
tioned and wet elongation at break increase with increasing percent graft. 
Although the strength of a single fiber does not change much with grafting, the 
tenacity, i.e., the strength per unit thickness, decreases with increasing percent 
graft. The simplest explanation for this is that the grafted polystyrene is only a 
dead load as far as the tensile properties are concerned. However, the change 
of load at the yield point with percent graft is not in agreement with this ex-
planation. It is possible that though cellulosic fibers become hydrophobic through 
the grafting of styrene, the tendency to absorb water, calculated on the cellulose 
content basis, increases by increasing the percent graft. This may be the reason 
for the rather low wet tenacity of the styrene-grafted cellulosic fibers. 
Butadiene, butadiene-styrene, or butadiene-acrylonitrile was also grafted onto 
cotton and rayon109). It was found that elasticity, thermoplasticity, and adhesion 
to rubber markedly improved. 
Mares and Arthur have prepared cotton-cellulose graft copolymers and 
terpolymers by the irradiation techniques. Monomers copolymerized with irra-
diated cellulose from solutions of methanol-water were: methacrylic acid 
(MMA), methacrylonitrile (MAN), and hexaflu.oroisopropyl acrylate (6FIPA). 
Cotton cellulose, immersed in solutions of N-vinyl carbazole (NVC) in 1,2-di-
chloroethane, was irradiated to form a copolymer. Terpolymers prepared were: 
cellulose-poly(MAA)-poly(MAN), cellulose-poly(MAA)-poly(6FIPA), and cell-
ulose-poly(MAN)-poly(6FIPA). The strength and abrasion resistance of the 
cotton fabric copolymers and terpolymers are shown in Table 66 and 67. 
From Tables 66 and 67, it is clear that the breaking strengths of the copolymer 
fabrics are relatively unchanged when compared with those of untreated fabric. 
However, for cellulose-poly(MAN) and cellulose-p61~(MAA) copolymer fabrics, 
small increases in breaking strengths were recorded with increased polymer 
add-on. There were usually increases in the flat abrasibn resistance and decreases 
in the tearing strength of copolymer fabrics with increased polymer add-on. 
Cellulose-poly(6FIPA) copolymer fabrics exhibited an increase in flex abrasion, 
283 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Table 66. Preparation and properties of cotton cellulose graft copolymers as print cloth fabrics. 
Reprinted from Ref.HI), p. 351, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Solution composition 
Reaction Polymer 
Strength 
Abrasion resistance 
time 
add-on 
Monomer Solvent 
Water 
(hr) 
(%) 
Breaking Tearing Flex 
Flat 
(vol.-%) 
(vol.-%) 
(vol.-%) 
(lb) 
(g) 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
37 
770 
1.0 
1.0 
Cotton cellulose-poly(MAN) fabric 
\l 
71-
18 
0.58 
8 
34 
640 
0.76 
0.91 
20 
56-
24 
0.75 
18 
38 
630 
0.82 
1.10 
25 
60" 
15 
1.00 
19 
38 
580 
0.49 
1.10 
20 
55b 
25 
1.50 
23 
37 
550 
1.3 
20 
55b 
25 
3.00 
31 
40 
550 
1.9 
20 
55b 
25 
4.00 
35 
43 
520 
2.2 
Cotton cellulose-poly(MAA) fabric 
6 
75-
19 
0.50 
19 
35 
540 
0.45 
1.1 
5 
76-
19 
1.00 
23 
36 
560 
0.58 
1.2 
7 
74-
19 
1.00 
28 
38 
540 
0.44 
1.5 
\0 
72-
llS 
1.00 
38 
39 
520 
0.45 
1.7 
Cotton cellulose-poly(6FIPA) fabric 
7 
74-
19 
8.00 
58 
36 
560 
1.7 
- Methanol; 
b Dimethylsulfoxide. 
Table 67. Preparation and properties of cotton cel\ulose-poly(NVC) print cloth fabrics. Reprinted 
from RefYI), p. 351, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Solution composition 
Reaction time Polymer 
Breaking 
Abrasion resistance 
(hr.) 
add-on 
strength 
NVC 
Solvent-
(lb) 
Flex 
Flat 
(wt- %) 
(wt- %) 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
37.0 
1.0 
1.0 
10.0 
90.0 
1.0 
5.0 
35.0 
0.32 
1.5 
13.0 
87.0 
1.74 
\0.4 
37.0 
0.35 
1.8 
- 1,2-dichloroethane. 
as compared with that of untreated fabrics while all the other copolymer 
fabrics exhibited decreases in flex abrasion. 
The breaking strengths of the grafted block copolymer fabrics (Table 68) 
slightly increased, the tearing strengths decreased, and the resistance to flat 
abrasion increased after grafting. At low molar ratios of6FIPA/MAA in the block 
copolymer, the flex abrasion resistance of the fabrics was less than that of 
untreated fabrics. In fabrics containing block copolymers with molar ratios of 
6FIPA/MAA of about 1 or greater, the flex abrasion resistance of the fabrics 
was greater than that of untreated fabric. As the proportion of poly(6FIPA) 
284 

7.6. Properties 
Table 68. Preparation and properties of block copolymers of cotton cellulose and poly(6FIPA) 
(MAA) sateen fabrics'. Reprinted from Ref.III ), p. 354, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Solution composition (vol.- %) Reaction Terpolymer 
Strength 
Abrasion 
time 
Resistance 
FIPA MAA MeOH Water hr. 
Add-on 
6FIPA/ 
Breaking Tearing 
MAAb 
(lb) 
(g) 
Flex 
Flat 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
0.0 
99 
6300 
1.0 
1.0 
9 
8 
66 
17 
I 
39 
0.02 
104 
4450 
0.58 
2.3 
10 
7 
66 
17 
I 
34 
0.17 
103 
4750 
0.78 
1.8 
9 
2 
71 
18 
2 
31 
0.93 
94 
4700 
1.1 
1.6 
10 
2 
70 
18 
2 
36 
1.00 
97 
4900 
1.2 
1.9 
10 
I 
71 
18 
2 
40 
3.80 
101 
4350 
1.3 
2.3 
a Irradiated cellulose immersed in solutions containing mixture of monomers to form block copoly-
mers. 
b Molar ratio estimated from results of separate copolymerization reactions of each monomer with 
irradiated cellulose under the conditions indicated for the terpolymer. 
increased in the cellulose terpolymer, the effective glass transition temperature of 
the terpolymer probably decreased, resulting in increased flex abrasion resistance 
of the fabric. 
The presence of nitrile and/or methyl groups on a monomer is reported to 
increase the glass transition temperature of its homopolymer1ll ) relative to its 
unsubstituted analogue. Formation of block copolymers from two monomers, 
one with a high and one with a low glass transition temperature (with a molar 
ratio of about one or greater), gives a terpolymer with cellulose which has in-
creased flexibility (c.f. Table 68). However, formation of a terpolymer with 
cellulose by first graft copolymerizing one of the monomer with cellulose and 
then graft copolymerizing the second monomer gives products with increased 
Table 69. Preparation and properties of copolymers of cotton cellulose and poly(6FJPA) plus 
poly(MAN) sateen fabrics'. Reprinted from Ref. II I), p. 355, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Ins. 
Solution composition (vol.- %) Reaction Polymer 
Strength 
Abrasion 
time 
Resistance 
6FIPA MAN MeOH Water hr. 
Add-on 
6FIPAI 
Breaking Tearing 
MANb 
(lb) 
(g) 
Flex 
Flat 
0 
(0) 
0(0) 
0(0) 0 
0 
88 
6300 
1.0 
1.0 
9 
73 
18 
1.17 
12 
(21) 
(63) 
(16) 
(0.83) 
(9) 
0.38 
89 
5470 
1.5 
1.6 
9 
73 
18 
2.17 
23 
(13) 
(70) 
(17) 
(1.25) 
(7) 
1.00 
92 
5540 
2.0 
1.5 
9 
73 
18 
3.00 
17 
(13) 
(70) 
(17) 
( 1.25) 
(4) 
1.25 
85 
5400 
2.1 
1.6 
a MAN copolymerized with irradiated cellulose; then 6FIPA copolymerized with irradiated 
poly(MAN)-cellulose copolymer in first and second terpolymer; order of preparation reversed for 
third terpolymer. 
b Molar ratio calculated from polymer add-on. 
285 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Table 70. Abrasion resistance' of styrene-methyl methacrylate mixed monomer 
grafted cotton fabric. Reprinted from Ref. 113), p. 345, by courtesy of John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc. 
Percentage weight increase due to Tensile strength in lbs./in. 
total grafting 
Untreated control 
5.2 
10.6 
16.3 
25.8 
Before abrading 
Warp 
Filling 
58.0 
54.6 
55.4 
57.2 
65.0 
30.0 
43.2 
45.6 
49.5 
50.2 
After abrading 
Warp 
Filling 
8.0 
25.0 
51.5 
55.0 
62.0 
4.0 
27.0 
42.6 
48.0 
49.5 
, ASTM 0 1175-64T, oscillatory cylinder method, Load: 2 lbs., tension: 2 lbs., 
250 continuous cycles. 
flexibility at a lower molar ratio of monomer than in the previous case (cf. 
Table 69). Similarly, the large carbazole group in NYC probably accounts for 
the high glass transition temperature of its homopolymer and the low flexibility 
of its cellulose copolymerlll). 
The retention of and, in some cases, the increases in, the breaking strength of 
the cellulose copolymers and terpolymers containing MAA and MAN, with 
increasing polymer add-on, could, when compared with untreated cellulose, 
result from increased hydrogen bonding in the products. Methyl and carboxyl 
groups, if present in the grafted copolymers, would increase the number of 
hydrogen bonds in the productsllOl. This is substantiated by the fact that cellulose-
poly (MAA) copolymers exhibit increased aqueous soil-release properties, as 
compared with those of untreated cottonl12l. 
DasGupta113l has reported a substantial increase in tensile strength for cotton 
fabric grafted with styrene-methyl methacrylate and acrylonitrile-methyl metha-
crylate mixtures by radiation grafting. Values for resistance to abrasion are also 
shown in Table 70. From the results it is seen that there is very little change 
in tensile strength, even after subjecting the grafted samples to a load and 
tension of 2 pounds for 250 continuous cycles. The superiority over ungrafted 
controls is very significant. 
The same author also reported that radiation grafting of monomers, such as 
styrene and styrene-methacrylic acid mixtures on to cotton-polyester blends 
(35: 65), makes them superior to the ungrafted controls. An increase of 45 % in 
tensile strengths was observed with 15% grafting1l3l. 
Easy Care Properties 
Since grafting is a monofunctional reaction between cellulose and the monomer, 
no significant improvement in the easy care properties of the grafted fabrics 
would be expected. However, by using monomers such as methylolated 
acrylamide and divinyl benzene, it is possible to crosslink the grafted cotton 
fabrics either in a two-step or a one-step process. Kamogawa and Sekiya114l 
286 

7.6. Properties 
have grafted acrylamide to cotton fabrics by the CelV ion initiation method. The 
amido group was then methylolated by reacting the grafted cotton fabrics with 
formaldehyde at pH 11. This group was then reacted with adjacent cellulose mole-
cules through substances such as ethylene urea, melamine, etc. Kamogawa and 
Sekiya found that the fabrics grafted and crosslinked by this method showed 
better retention of tensile and tear strength than did ungrafted fabrics cross-
linked with similar crosslinking agents. 
This method of grafting and crosslin king was slightly modified by Gardon1l5), 
who used methylolated acrylamide as the starting monomer. The double bonds, 
of the vinyl group and the methylol group were reacted with cellulose in two 
different steps. The methylol was reacted through an acid catalyst step, while 
the vinyl double bond was reacted under alkaline conditions. This method makes 
it possible to follow the course of the grafting and crosslin king reactions 
independently by determining the vinyl double bond content and the methylene 
group content of the reacted sample. A quantitative measure of the number of 
crosslinks introduced in the sample is given by the simple derivation: 
[crosslinks = methylene content -
double bonds.] . 
Table 71. Two-stage cross-linking of phosphorylated cotton (redox polymerization followed by 
acid-catalyzed postcuring)a. Adapted from Ref.119), p. 626, by courtesy of Textile Research 
Institute. 
Run 
Monomers 
Mol Ratio Monomer Oven 
Add-on Wrinkle 
No. 
applied 
precure 
% 
recovery after 
Compounds 
Concen-
CCjmin) 
(oCjmin) 
post-cure 
tration 
I 
MA/MAA 
4.3/1.0 
5.0 
75/3 
none 
11.5 
266 
2 
EA/MAA 
9.6/2.0 
4.8 
70/1 
100/3.5 
4.4b 
286 
3 
EA/MAA 
9.6/2.0 
4.8 
70/6 
100/3.5 
45.7 
4 
EA/MAA 
3.4/0.4 
8.5 
70/1 
100/3 
7.6b 
279 
5 
AN/MAA 
7.1/2.7 
5.0 
25/30 
none 
9.1 
273 
6 
AN/MAN 
7.1/2.7 
5.0 
25/30 
none 
1.2 
231 
7 
EA/AN/MAA 
3.2/0.1/0.06 52/3.2/1 
70/4 
none 
19 
8 
S/MAAd 
25/9.5 
2.6 
70/10 
none 
39 
9 
S/MAAd 
17/1.1 
15 
70/4 
none 
6.2 
248 
10 
MA/GAf 
10/3.0 
5.0 
70/1 
70/4 
5.8b 
225" 
11 
GAf 
5.0 
25/1 
70/4 
10.0 
281 
12 
GAf 
10.0 
25/8 
none 
6.5 
239 
(untreated) 
179 
(phosphorylated) 
195 
a Glycidyl acrylate (GA) or N-methylolacrylamide (MAA) copolymerized in fabric (0.3 % P) with 
Fell-Hp2 initiation. Fell exchange was at 25°C in runs I, 5, 6, II and 12 but at 70°C in all others. 
MAA post cure was with 3 % catalyst H-7 at 170°/3 min. GA post cure was with 1.33 % Zn(BF 4)2 at 
145°/5 min. No catalyst was applied for precuring step. 
b Samples not washed prior to post cure. C On unphosphorylated fabric. d in water emulsion 
containing 14% sodium lauryl sulfate. • post cured with 0.5% Zn(BF4)2' f monomer solution 
contained 0.24 % H20 2, 0.018 % KOH, 0.14 KCI, 0.02 % tetraethylenepentamine, 0.3 % Triton X-IOO 
and water. 
287 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Similarly, Walsh et al.116) have shown that N-methylol acrylamide can be 
polymerized in cotton fabrics using either persulfate initiation of high energy 
radiation, and subsequently heat-cured with an acid catalyst to impart increased 
wrinkle recovery. Similar properties were obtained by Kamel et al. in their work 
on acrylamidomethylated cottons, as seen through reactions with selected sulfur 
compounds117• 118). 
Obviously, then, grafting of olefinic monomers containing epoxy, N-methylol, 
or other cellulose-reactive groups onto cotton fabrics is of particular interest, 
since the grafts are potentially capable of subsequent crosslinking reactions with 
cellulose. Starting with phosphorylated cotton, Gallagher119) has shown that 
redox polymerization of bifunctional monomers, either alone or in admixture 
with other vinyl or acrylic monomers, is very rapid, especially if monomer appli-
cation is followed by a precure at 70-100 °C, prior to introduction of the acid 
catalyst and final curing. As shown in Table 71, polymerization times of 3-10 
minutes produce a polymer add-on of 4-45 %. The number of epoxy or N-methylol 
groups in the grafted polymer and, therefore, the number of potential cross-
linking groups are controllable by adjusting the ratio of bifunctional monomer to 
monofunctional monomer in the copolymerization bath. Wrinkle recovery angles 
of 265-285° (W + F) are readily obtainable. 
Kulkarni et al.19) used a different method for grafting and crosslinking cotton 
fabrics. Fabrics grafted with acrylonitrile were treated with a mild NaOH solution 
(2.5 %) to convert some of the -CN groups of the polymer to the amide groups. 
These groups were then methylolated by reaction with formaldehyde at a pH of 
9-9.5. The methylolated groups were then reacted with cellulose by an acid curing 
step in the presence of a catalyst, e.g., MgCI2 . 6 H20, at a high temperature 
(150 0C); thus: 
Cell-0-CH2-CH- ~ 
Cell-0-CH2-CH-
I 
I 
Cellulose containing a unit of polyacrylonitrile graft. 
Cell- OCH2 -
CH-
I 
HCHO 
-
Cell-OCH2-CH-
pH 9 to 9.5 
I 
C 
09-
'NH2 
C 
0-7 'N-CH 20H 
I 
H 
Cell-0-CH2-CH-
I 
+ Cell-OH 
MgCl, ,150 'C 
---2...~_~ Cell-0-CH2-CH-
288 
I 
-7C, 
o 
N-CHz-O-Cell 
I 
H 

7.6. Properties 
There is also a possibility that the polymer can form crosslinks within itself, 
if two or more -CO-NH-CH20H groups of two modified polyacrylonitrile 
chains (PAN) interact, as shown below: 
-CHz 0 
H 
I 
II 
I 
CH-C-N-CHzOH + 
I 
--CHz 0 
H 
H 
0 
CHz--
I 
II 
I 
I 
II 
I 
-CH-C-N-CHz-N-C-CH-
MgCI, -
150'C 
Figure 82 schematically shows some possible formations of cellulose-PAN cross-
links after modification with formaldehyde and acid cure. Fabrics with appre-
ciable crease recovery can be obtained. 
Although grafting of monofunctional monomers on cotton fabrics generally 
produces no significant improvement in wrinkle recovery120), DasGupta121) did 
note an improvement after the radiation grafting of styrene. Negishi et aU22) 
have also shown that the dry and wet wrinkle recovery of cotton fabrics can be 
improved considerably by grafting certain acrylic polymers, such as methyl 
acrylate, n-propyl acrylate, etc. Prahl et al.B?) observed the same when n-butyl 
acrylate was grafted onto cotton fabrics by either the vapor phase or liquid 
phase technique (see Table 72). Furthermore, Avny and Schwenker1?) observed a 
substantial improvement in the wrinkle recovery of cotton fabrics grafted with 
preformed polystyrene (see Table 73). The wrinkle recovery of fabrics grafted 
with bifunctional polystyrene, i.e., a polymer with a reactive terminal group 
at each end of the chain, is shown to be significantly higher, both wet and dry, 
than for the control or for cotton grafted with monofunctional polystyrene, i.e., 
only one reactive terminal group. In addition, the wet wrinkle recovery value 
Fig. 82. Schematic representation of the possibilities of introducing crosslinks into fabrics containing 
PAN, after modification of the nitrile groups: (1) grafted PAN crosslinking with cellulose; (2) two 
grafted PAN chains interacting to produce a crosslink; (3) a PAN chain bridging adjoining cellulose 
chains. Reprinted from Ref. 19), p. 1593, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
289 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Table 72. Effect of vapor-phase n-butyl acrylate grafts on monsanto 
wrinkle recovery of print cloth. Adapted from Ref.s7), p. 250, 
by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
n-Butyl Acrylate Graft 
% 
o 
5-10 
15-20 
20-25 
25 
Monsanto Wrinkle Recovery 
(W + F) 
173 
192 
202 
212 
214 
Table 73. Wrinkle recovery of polystyrene grafted cotton fabrics adapted from Ref.1 7), p. 
by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Sample 
DPn 
Grafting 
Polystyrene 
Wrinkle Recovery 
preformed 
D.S. 
content 
(W + F) degrees 
polystyrene 
% 
Dry 
Wet 
Control 
104 
131 
Monofunctional Graft 
9.3 
30.4 x 10- 3 
15.4 
120 
150 
Bifunctional Graft 
107.3 
0.7 x 10- 3 
4.3 
146 
236 
821, 
of 236 (W + F) greatly exceeds the dry wrinkle recovery value, as would be the 
case for the conventional crosslinking of cotton in the wet, swollen state. 
It is believed that the increase in wet crease-recovery, in the case of grafting with 
bifunctional preformed polystyrene, is due to crosslin king in the cotton fabric. 
It is noteworthy, in this connection, that the improvement in wrinkle recovery of 
cellulosic fabrics grafted with monofunctional monomers, either alone or in 
admixture, has been attributed to the restriction of segmental movements of 
molecules containing both graft and cellulose chains, by entanglement between 
the graft polymer chains and between these and the cellulose chains. 
The relationship between the glass transition temperature of grafted polymers 
and the wrinkle recovery of cotton cellulose copolymer fabric has recently 
been examinedl11). Table 74 shows that the wrinkle recovery of the copolymer 
fabric decreases as the glass transition temperature of the grafted polymer 
increases. 
An additional point of interest is that the grafting of styrene, either alone 
or together with methacrylic acid, onto cotton-polyester blends (35: 65) yields a 
product with a wrinkle recovery angle (warp'+ weft) of about 300. This value re-
mains practically unaltered even after the fabric is subjected to 5 washings 
(each equivalent to 50 ordinary commercial ones)l13). 
As indicated earlier, graft copolymerization onto cellulose leads to an increase 
in the fabric toughness. This increase is reflected87 , 104, 105, 123) in the commonly 
occurring improved abrasion resistance of the grafted fabric, and also in the 
wrinkle-resistance of the fabrics derived therefrom by typical crosslinking treat-
290 

7.6. Properties 
Table 74. Effect of glass transition temperature of polymer on the wrinkle recovery angle of cotton 
cellulose graft copolymers as print cloth fabrics. Adapted from Ref.lI l), p. 356, by courtesy of John 
Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Grafted polymer 
Control 
Hexatluoroisopropyl 
acrylate (6FIPA) 
Methacrylic acid (MAA) 
N-vinyl carbazole (NVC) 
Homopolymer glass 
Polymer 
transition temperature add-on % 
(OK) 
288 
403 
481 
0.0 
6.0 
7.0 
5.0 
Wrinkle recovery angle 
(conditioned), degree 
(W + F) 
190 
220 
215 
160 
Dry fabric was first irradiated at about 25°C in nitrogen to a dosage of 5.2 x \019 eV/g, then 
immersed in solutions of monomer (about 250 cm3/40 g of fabric) at 25°C. In the case of NVC, 
to initiate graft polymerization, fabric was immersed in a 1,2-dichloroethane solution of NVC 
and irradiated. 
Table 75. Abrasion resistance of liquid-phase grafted, crosslinked twill (average of 6 replicates). 
Adapted from Ref.87), p. 249, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Graft type 
% 
% 
MWR+ 
Abrasion 
Graft 
resin 
cycles 
None 
0 
54 
307 
37 
methyl methacrylate 
5.0 
4.5 
307 
42 
methyl methacrylate 
4.1 
4.3 
309 
44 
methyl methacrylate 
2.8 
4.1 
3\0 
56 
methyl methacrylate/ethyl acrylate· 
1.2 
4.9 
308 
40 
methyl methacrylate/ethyl acrylate· 
2.2 
4.9 
311 
41 
methyl methacryla.te/ethyl acrylate· 
3.9 
5.2 
304 
58 
ethyl acrylate 
3.7 
4.2 
312 
44 
ethyl acrylate 
2.5 
4.0 
309 
50 
ethyl acrylate 
4.6 
4,3 
314 
60 
methyl acrylate/ethyl acrylate· 
2.0 
4.7 
317 
53 
methyl acrylate/ethyl acrylate· + 
3.6 
4.6 
316 
S4 
methyl acrylate/ethyl acrylate· 
4.8 
4.9 
306 
65 
n-butyl methacrylate 
7.5 
5.6 
308 
50 
n-butyl methacrylate 
1.6 
5.8 
311 
54 
n-butyl methacrylate 
0.7 
5.2 
306 
66 
dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate 
1.4 
5.1 
307 
53 
dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate 
2.4 
5.5 
299 
80 
dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate 
4.6 
6.7 
298 
82 
• I: I in liquid phase; unknown proportion in graft polymer. 
+ MWR, Monsanto Wrinkle Recovery. 
ments. The best grafted systems for this purpose, notably those based on diethyl-
aminoethyl acrylate or ethyl acrylate, do not exhibit the high loss in abrasion 
resistance incurred by conventional crosslinking treatments. Table 75 shows a 
marked tendency toward improvement in abrasion resistance by grafting one of 
a series of acrylate monomers, even at low grafting levels. This could mean that 
291 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
there is an optimum graft level for each monomer and that the graft levels 
of Table 75 tend to fall on either one or the other side of this optimum87). 
Dimensional Stability and Affinity for Water 
Kaizerman et a1.68) have shown that the dimensional stability of polyacrylonitrile-
grafted viscose rayon is considerably improved when the graft add-on is 
20-30%. These data are shown in Table 76. However, a considerable decrease 
in tear strength in the dry state accompanies the improvement in dimensional 
stability. Negishi et aU22) have reported that the water repellency of cotton 
fabrics can be considerably improved by grafting acrylate monomers such as 
n-butyl acrylate, iso-butylacrylate, etc. This may be seen in Table 77. The 
water repellency was measured by the sinking method with the use of specimens 
of 1 cm2 and water containing 1 % wetting agent at 60 DC. The water repellency 
of the cotton fabrics grafted with n-butyl acrylate seems to be better than that 
of the styrene-grafted fabric. 
Table 76. Properties of viscose rayon challis containing polyacrylonitrile*. Adapted from Ref.68), 
p. 140', by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Polymer content (based on untreated fabric) 
13.4% 
22.4% 
29.2% 
Tensile strength (W + F) lb. Dry 
91 
86 
82 
Wet 
48 
45 
41 
Tear strength (Elmendorf) Dry 
6.1 
4.6 
3.1 
Wet 
2.7 
2.5 
1.6 
Abrasion (Accelerator 2000 rpm.) 
% weight loss after 2 mins 
0.4 
2.5 
4.1 
4 mins 
2.6 
6.4 
8.0 
% Tensile strength retained after soil 
burial 2 weeks 
26 
66 
94 
6 weeks 
0 
12 
26 
% shrinkage on laundering 
(AATCC Test 40-52) 
5.0 
1.5 
0.0 
* Grafted by the vapor saturation technique using cerium1v ions as initiator. 
Table 77. Water repellency at about 30% graft-on of various acrylates or 
styrene. Adapted from Ref.122), p. 2248, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. 
Sample 
Extent of grafting, 
% 
Untreated cotton 
0 
Cotton grafted with 
n-butyl acrylate 
29.4 
isobutyl acrylate 
29.6 
methyl methacrylate 
28.9 
styrene 
30.7 
292 
Time required to sink, 
sec. 
720 
480 
120 
240 
Untreated 
90 
59 
10.2 
2.6 
0.4 
2.0 
0.0 
0.0 
7.5 

7.6. Properties 
Achwal124) has reviewed the various methods of introducing halogen, as well 
as silicon-contaning groups, into cellulose molecules. Emphasis has been placed 
upon the use of graft copolymerization for introducing such groups. It is claimed 
that water-repellent fabrics can be obtained by grafting cellulose with vinylidene 
chloride or fluorine-containing monomers. 
The water repellency of cotton cellulose-poly[hexafluoroisopropylacrylate, 
(6FIPA)] fabrics is shown in Table 78. Copolymerization followed by heat 
treatment gives copolymer fabrics with useful spray ratingsll1 ). The water spray 
resistance of cotton, grafted with a mixture of styrene and methyl methacrylate, 
is shown in Table 79. Samples with over 20% grafting showed 100% resistance; 
ungrafted controls did not show any resistance113). 
The effects of grafting and wetting agents on water imbibition, calculated 
on the basis of the cellulose component, is shown in Figure 83 and Tabele 80. 
Table 78. Water repellency of cotton cellulose-poly (6FIPA) fabrics. Adapted 
from RefYI), p. 353, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Fabric 
Polymer add-on 
Spray rating 
(%) 
Not cured 
Cured" 
Print cloth 
0 
0 
27 
80 
33 
90 
57 
70 
Sateen 
0 
0 
11 
50 
22 
50 
25 
90 
28 
50 
30 
80 
" Heated at 160°C for 5 mins. 
Table 79. Water spray resistance of cotton grafted with a mixture of 
styrene and methyl methacrylate. Reprinted from Ref. 1 13), p. 340, by 
courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Percentage 
Percentage 
weight increase 
polystyrene 
due to total graft grafted 
Ungrafted control -
10.6 
2.1 
16.3 
4.6 
25.8 
7.4 
26.9 
7.7 
29.9 
9.7 
46.6 
11.3 
Percentage 
poly(methyl-
methacrylate) 
grafted 
8.5 
11.7 
18.4 
18.7 
20.2 
35.3 
Resistance 
to water spray 
(%) 
o 
80 
80 
100 
100 
100 
100 
293 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
60,----,---,----,----,---, 
~ 40~e~--~~~~~~---e~----~ 
e 
e 
~ 
........ 
wit 
....... 
~ 30 I--__ ----l_x,-"'"'x..;;;.t-"x. __ --t-_ .---j------j 
..g 
x ...... __ ... 
:0 
:0 
.~ 20 
OJ a 
:;;= 
10 
Wetting agent 
n . BA -G _x_ containing 
n . BA - G -- x-- without 
EA -G ~} 
containing 
MA - G -e-
without 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
Extent of grafting ('!oJ 
Fig. 83. Effect of graft-on and wetting agent 
on water imbibition per cellulose compo-
nent for cotton grafted with methyl, ethyl, 
and n-butyl acrylates. Reprinted from 
Ref. 122), p. 2239, by courtesy of John Wiley 
& Sons, Inc. 
Table 80. Water imbibition at about 30 % graft-on of various acrylates or styrene. 
Adapted from Ref.122), p. 2240, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Sample 
Extent of 
Water imbibitionf 
grafting 
cellulose 
% 
Water 
0.5% of 
nonionic 
wetting 
agent 
Untreated cotton 
0 
37.5 
37.5 
Cotton grafted with 
Methyl acrylate 
36.0 
40.7 
42.8 
Ethyl acrylate 
34.0 
38.8 
41.5 
n-Propyl acrylate 
35.0 
30.4 
46.3 
n-Butyl acrylate 
34.0 
27.5 
54.3 
Untreated cotton 
0 
36.6 
Cotton grafted with 
n-Butyl acrylate 
29.4 
51.5 
Isobutyl acrylate 
29.6 
50.2 
Methyl methacrylate 
28.9 
50.6 
Styrene 
30.7 
42.5 
In the cotton grafted with n-propyl or n-butyl acrylate, the water imbibition is 
significantly increased by the presence of 0.5 % wetting agent, while the cotton 
grafted with methyl or ethyl acrylate is almost unaffected. A slight maximum of 
water imbibition appears in most cases, suggesting competition between the 
opening of the fiber structure and the imparting of a hydrophobic property by 
grafting (see Fig. 83). Furthermore, the water imbibition seems to increase with 
the increasing length of the acrylate ester group, indicating that the bulky groups 
294 

7.6. Properties 
of the ester play a role in opening the fiber structure. The opened structure 
of the cotton fiber is stabilized in the polymer, especially by bulky ester groups, 
and consequently the capacity for water imbibition increases. This also may 
perhaps permit the cellulose molecules to attain greater flexibility in the wet 
state than untreated cotton. Therefore when the entanglement-crosslinking of 
softer graft polymers is present to an appropriate extent, swelling elastomeric 
behavior would be expected, thereby improving the wet wrinkle recovery122l. 
Moisture Regain 
Vinyl graft copolymerization onto cellulose usually reduces the moisture regain 
due to the generally hydrophobic nature of the grafted branches. With cotton-
polystyrene graft copolymers, prepared by irradiation of cotton yarn in a solution 
of styrene and methanol77), the moisture regain ranges from 7.5 % for the 
untreated, unirradiated yarn to 2.7% for a sample with a graft of 165 %. 
However, if the moisture regains are calculated on the basis of the cellulose content 
only, rather than on the basis of the entire copolymer, the regain values vary from 
7.5 to 7.2 %. This indicates that the grafted polystyrene branches do not really 
affect the moisture regain of the cellulosic backbone, probably because the 
branches are very long but only few in number. Similar cotton-polystyrene 
graft copolymers were also examined by Kesting and Stannett125). They found that 
the moisture regain based only on the cellulose content actually increased with 
the extent of grafting. The moisture regain ranged from 10.7 for untreated cotton 
cellulose to 19.2% for a sample with a graft of 159%. In this case, therefore, the 
accessibility of the cellulose increases with grafting, presumably owing to the 
opening of the fiber structure by the polystyrene branches. 
Hebeish and Mehta49, 54) have examined the moisture regains of native cotton, 
hydrocellulose, viscose, ramie, and cottons swollen with sodium hydroxide 
(NaOH-Cotton), ethylenediamine (EDA-cotton), and zinc chloride (ZnCI2-
cotton) before and after grafting with acrylonitrile by the CelV ion method. The 
results are shown in Table 81. 
The data clearly indicate that the regains of the grafted materials progressively 
decrease as the extent of grafting increases. The theoretical moisture regain values 
for the treated fibers were also calculated on the assumption that the cellulose 
and polymer do not interact and that each contributes to the sorption in direct 
proportion to its concentration in the treated fibers. The theoretical values are 
shown in parentheses in Table 81. It is clear that the observed regain is less than the 
theoretical regain. This suggests that fewer sorbing sites are available on the grafted 
cell uloses, due to the production of a hydrophobic environment by graft polymeri-
zation which reduces the effectiveness of the cellulose hydroxyls as sorbing sites. 
It is interesting to note that on calculating the moisture regain on the cellulose 
content only, that is, after subtracting the regain due to polyacrylonitrile graft 
from that of the entire graft copolymer, it is found that the moisture regain is less 
than that of the original untreated cell uloses in all cases. 
Solubility 
The solubility in cupriethylenediamine of the cellulose in certain cotton-derived 
products, as reported by Demint et aI.78), is shown in Table 82. The solubilities of 
295 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Table 81. Moisture regain of cellulose-polyacrylonitrile grafts. Reprinted from Ref.49), p. 191 
Native 
NaOH-Cotton 
EDA-Cotton 
ZnCl2-Cotton 
Graft 
Mo 
Me 
Graft 
Mo 
Me 
Graft 
Mo 
Me 
Graft 
Mo 
Me 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
Un-
Un-
Un-
Un-
treated 
6.32 
6.32 
treated 9.05 
9.05 
treated 8.02 
8.02 
treated 6.90 
6.90 
12.63 
5.68 
6.11 
11.92 
8.06 
8.76 
16.40 
7.04 
7.83 
11.80 
6.21 
6.68 
(5.86) 
(8.32) 
(7.20) 
(6.40) 
14.85 
5.59 
6.\0 
19.72 
7.57 
8.63 
21.25 
6.75 
15.60 
6.01 
6.60 
(5.79) 
(7.92) 
(7.00) 
(6.27) 
21.14 
5.34 
6.01 
23.54 
7.24 
8.42 
26.95 
6.37 
7.49 
18.23 
5.83 
6.49 
(5.60) 
(7.74) 
(6.78) 
(6.18) 
34.12 
4.78 
6.67 
33.52 
6.73 
8.25 
29.46 
6.23 
7.42 
21.16 
5.58 
6.30 
(5.25) 
(7.33) 
(6.69) 
(6.08) 
38.52 
4.61 
5.54 
38.62 
6.33 
7.93 
32.15 
6.07 
7.32 
28.53 
5.39 
6.30 
(5.17) 
(7.14) 
(6.60) 
(5.86) 
40.00 
4.55 
5.49 
42.85 
6.05 
7.70 
36.85 
5.80 
7.13 
39.69 
4.87 
5.94 
(5.14) 
(6.99) 
(6.45) 
(5.56) 
43.64 
4.46 
5.44 
52.84 
5.40 
7.09 
48.38 
5.41 
6.96 
47.00 
4.57 
5.69 
(5.07) 
(6.68) 
(6.12) 
(5.40) 
Hydroce\lulose 
Viscose 
Ramie 
Graft 
Mo 
Me 
Graft 
Mo 
Me 
Graft 
Mo 
Me 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
% 
Un-
Un-
Un-
treated 
5.21 
5.21 
treated 
13.12 
13.12 
treated 
8.20 
8.20 
11.07 
4.75 
5.03 
13.6 
11.59 
12.87 
8.00 
7.61 
8.05 
(4.91) 
(11.51) 
(7.75) 
14.76 
4.64 
5.00 
17.27 
11.22 
12.78 
13.47 
7.28 
7.97 
(4.82) 
(\1.51) 
(7.49) 
17.56 
4.56 
4.96 
20.19 
10.92 
12.68 
23.05 
6.73 
7.78 
(4.76) 
( 11.29) 
(7.08) 
20.11 
4.52 
4.98 
29.78 
9.87 
12.16 
24.06 
6.72 
7.80 
(4.71) 
(\1.61) 
(7.04) 
28.21 
4.24 
4.82 
33.62 
9.53 
12.00 
30.12 
6.36 
7.61 
(4.55) 
(10.37) 
(6.81) 
32.50 
4.12 
4.74 
39.92 
8.89 
11.56 
35.51 
6.06 
7.42 
(4.47) 
(10.00) 
(6.63) 
37.61 
3.96 
4.62 
41.86 
8.69 
11.40 
40.80 
5.76 
7.21 
(4.39) 
(9.90) 
(6.46) 
Footnote: 
(I) Mo: Observed moisture regain based on weight of the entire copol§mer. 
(2) Me: Moisture regain calculated on the basis of cellulose content only. 
(3) Values in brackets present theoretical values of moisture regain (moisture regain of cellulose 
+ moisture regain of PAN). 
(4) Moisture regain of PAN =' 2.20%. 
296 

Table 82. Solubility of cellulose and some derivatives. * Adapted 
from ReCsl, p. 824, by courtesy of Textile Research Institute 
Cotton Product + Solubility 
of cellulose 
A 
B 
C 
D 
% 
99 
48 
97 
o 
Nitrogen % 
Total 
6.6 
4.8 
13.0 
* Solvent: 0.5, M cupriethylenediamine 
+ A: purified cotton, 
Insoluble 
fraction 
10.2 
11.5 
B: purified cotton, irradiated 0.8 megaroentgen, containing 
25 % polymer. 
C: cynaoethylated cotton, (DS 0.67). 
D: cyanoethylated cotton (DS 0.67), irradiated 0.8 mega roentgen, 
containing 38 % interacted monomer. 
7.6. Properties 
purified and cyanoethylated cottons, products A and C, were almost 100 %. The 
solubility of the cellulose in product B, which contained radiation-polymerized 
acrylonitrile, was about 50 %. From the magnitude of the increase in the 
nitrogen content of the insoluble fraction of product B over that of total 
product B, it could be concluded that only the cellulose dissolved. 
The solubility of cellulose in product C, which contained cyanoethylated cotton, 
radiation-grafted with acrylonitrile, was zero. The relatively constant nitrogen 
content indicates little or no change in the product. 
Resistance to Rot and Biological Degradation 
Under warm and humid conditions, cotton fabrics rot, become unsightly, and 
lose strength and, hence, their usefulness at a rapid rate. Remarkable resistance 
to micro-organisms can be achieved by various ways, such as: (1) impregnation 
of cellulosic materials by different compounds containing salts of different metals 
and copper in particular; (2) partial esterification or etherification of cellulose 
(acetylation as well as cyanoethylation has been employed for this purpose); and 
(3) synthesis of graft copolymers of cellulose using various copolymerants. 
Graft copolymerization of vinyl monomers onto cellulose may be regarded as 
one of the best methods of obtaining material whose resistance to rot and 
biological degradation is maintained even after prolonged exposure to a m~ist 
atmosphere, rain, or the usual washing treatments. In Table 83 are shown the 
tensile strengths of grafted samples and controls after being subjected to the 
action of microorganisms for periods up to 2 weeks. It is clear that the 
297 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Table 83. Loss in breaking strengths of grafted samples after exposure to fungus 
growths. Reprinted from Ref.m', p. 343, by courtesy of John Wiley ~ Sons, Inc. 
Percentage weight increase due to total grafting 
Ungrafted original cotton fabric 
Fabric coated with polystyrene-poly(methyl 
methacrylate) mixture 
19.2% styrene + methyl methacrylate 
(PS:PMM as 3.5: 1) 
20.2 % acrylonitrile + methyl methacrylate 
(PAN:PMM as 2: 1) 
19.5% Acrylic acid + styrene 
(PS:PAA as 2: 1) 
Percentage loss in tensile 
strength after exposure to 
micro-organisms 
100% 
(fabric rotted) 
100% 
(fabric rotted) 
1% 
4% 
3% 
Table 84. Effect of grafted polyacrylonitrile on rot resistance 
of cotton·. Adapted from Ref.681, p. 139, by courtesy of 
Textile Research Institute 
Polymer concentration 
% 
9.6 
14.2 
18.6 
21.7 
Percent Tensile Strength 
retained after·· 
2 weeks' 
6 weeks' 
burial 
burial 
86 
45 
100 
72 
99 
100 
100 
100 
• Grafted by the vapor saturation technique using the CeIV 
ion system in initiation . 
•• Based on untreated fabric. 
grafted samples remain practically unaltered, while untreated cotton becomes 
useless1l3). 
Various studies have reported on the improvement of rot resistance in cotton 
fabrics grafted with polyacrylonitrile68 , 70, 74, 75,82,126). The effect of grafting 
polyacrylonitrile onto cotton fabrics to test their susceptibility to rot resistance 
is shown in Table 84. Apparently, the grafting of polyacrylonitrile onto cotton 
imparts significant resistance to bacterial attack68). It has been claimed that good 
rotproofing can be obtained with as little as 3 % to 10 % polyacrylonitrile 
reacted126). 
Resistance to light 
Cellulosic materials with a high resistance to light are essential for application 
in regions where intense exposure to ultraviolet rays is unavoidable, particularly 
for covering of packages, outdoor wear, curtains, etc. Considerable improvement 
298 

7.6. Properties 
in resistance to light can be achieved by many techniques. One of the methods 
of chemical modification involves introduction of nitrile groups into the cellulose 
molecule by cyanoethylation or graft copolymerization. This method appears at 
present to be of considerable importance as the introduction of nitrile groups, 
as already pointed out, simultaneously improves the resistance of the cellulosic 
materials to the action of microorganisms. For example, on weathering cotton 
fabric in air for four months, the strength is reduced by 43 % and the 
elongation at break by 42 %. Similar fabrics having 16 % of polyacrylonitrile 
graft under the same conditions lose only 15 % in strength and their elongation 
at break decreases by only 30%127). 
The grafting of cellulose with methyl vinyl ketone (CH2 = CHCOCH3) 
introduces keto groups into the cellulose molecule. The presence of such groups 
increases the resistance of cellulose to ultraviolet radiation but simultaneously 
decreases the thermal stability128). 
Resistance to fire 
The demand for non-inflammable or heat-stable fibrous materials is increasing 
as new fields of use in coverings and furnishings of aeroplanes, submarines, 
ships, workers overalls, etc., are developed. The methods generally used to 
impart a non-flammable character involve impregnation with various chemicals. 
Most of these methods, however, have certain drawbacks, the most outstanding 
of which are: (1) considerable decrease in strength, (2) change in appearance of the 
fabric and in some cases decrease in permeability, and (3) low stability of 
finish to wet treatments or washing. 
Modified cellulosic materials, prepared by grafting, do not usually exhibit such 
drawbacks. A non-flammable character can be imparted to cellulosic materials 
by using halogen- and phosphorus-containing monomers129,130). Grafting poly-
vinylidene chloride to cellulose gives a non-burning product when the amount of 
chlorine introduced is 30-32 %, which corresponds to about 40-45 % polymer 
on the weight of the cellulose. Such a high polymer add-on, however, simultane-
ously decreases the tearing strength and increases the stiffness of the fabric. 
The amount of phosphorus required to impart fire resistance to cellulose is 
about 2-4 %. However, this amount depends on the nature of the phosphorus-
containing agent used for finishing. Thus, in the case of agents which form a 
c-p bond, 2-5 % phosphorus is quite adequate. In contrast, double this value 
is needed for compounds forming the C-O-P bond. It is also important to note 
that the amount of phosphorus necessary to impart fire resistance also increases 
with the size of the molecule or organoradical in the phospho-organic acid used 
for a given type of bond (C-P or C-O-P). The presence of a benzene ring lowers 
the effectiveness of the organo-phosphorus compounds. 
lon-Exchange Properties 
The preparation of modified cellulosic materials capable of forming stable 
complexes with metals, especially the heavy noble metals, considerably widens the 
field of application of cellulose derivatives having ion-exchange properties. These 
modified cellulose preparations were initially used for the manufacture of 
special quality papers for use in chromatography. Such materials, containing 
299 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
sulfografts or amino groups, are at present only being prepared on a small scale. 
In recent years, however, many new methods for obtaining ion-exchange materials 
have been devised and are being tested on a pilot plant scale. Results of these 
investigations indicate that graft polymerization methods seem to be potentially 
suitable for the industrial scale. Polymer reactions can also be carried out after 
the introduction of suitable functional groups to impart ion-exchange or com-
plex-forming properties. 
The different routes for imparting ion-exchange properties to cellulosic 
materials, which are of interest from the practical point of view, result in materials 
which can be classified into the following groups127): 
I. Materials with cation-exchange properties: 
(a) mild cation activity; derivatives containing carboxyl groups. 
(b) strong cation-exchange capacity; derivatives containing sulfo-groups or 
residues of phosphorus-containinr, acids. 
2. Materials with anion-exchange properties: 
(a) mild anion activity; derivatives containing methyl vinyl pyridine. 
(b) strong anion activity; derivatives containing quaternary ammonium 
groups. 
3. Materials with electron exchange properties. These contain sulfydryl or thio-
amide groups. 
4. Materials whose ion-exchange properties are acquired through complexing. 
These contain residues of hydroxamic acid or other complex-forming acids. 
Ion-exchange properties are shown by low molecular mass hydroxamic acids 
as well as poly(acryl-hydroxamic acids) formed by treatment of polyacrylates 
with hydroxylamine131). However, the use of modified celluloses in the form of 
fibers or fabrics having ion-exchange properties has advantages over the usual 
synthetic-polymer ion-exchange materials which are used as granules. This is 
because, due to the enormous surface area of fibers, the rate of ion-exchange 
reactions, of sorption or desorption, is considerably higher. The higher hydro-
philicity of modified cellulosic materials, as compared to synthetic polYQ1ers 
and their considerable swelling in aqueous media, tends to increase the rate 
of diffusion processes. Furthermore, the use of fabrics as ion-exchange materials 
lends itself to continuous processing. It must be noted that the hydrophilicity 
of a graft copolymer having ion-exchange properties usually decreases propor-
tionally upon increasing the ion-exchange capacity. Hence, for high rates of 
ion-exchange, an optimum degree of grafting must be reached to get a balance 
between hydrophilicity and ion-exchange capacity. 
The introduction of hydrophilic groups, (e.g., carboxyl groups) into the 
cellulose molecule influences the swelling capacity in water and may lead to a 
considerable decrease in wet strength and, in some cases, to the loss of physical 
form of the material. These factors also show the advisability of having the 
optimum, and not the maximum, quantity of synthetic polymer grafted to 
cellulose. 
Although cellulosic ion-exchange materials can be used under many conditions, 
their use is more limited than that of synthetic materials due to the sensitivity 
of the glucosidic bond to acidic media. The successful use of any ion-
exchange material requires that is should be useable over a large number of 
300 

7.6. Properties 
sorption-desorption cycles without loss of ion-exchange capacity or material 
properties. Hence, cell uloses of high tensile strength and high molecular mass 
must be used as starting materials. 
In some cases, in particular for modified cellulose having electron-exchange 
properties, the process of desorption presents severe difficulties. For example, 
in the case of sorption of heavy and noble metals, it is advisable and economic 
to use ion-exchange fibers for temporary use in one operation only. After 
reaching the limits of dynamic activity for adsorption of ions, the fiber is 
burned and the attached metal recovered. In such cases, cheap fibers, such as 
viscose, or pulp can be used as raw material. 
Ion-exchange, using fiber-based supports, can be carried out in a series of 
connected columns loose-packed with fibers, through which the liquid is passed. 
When dynamic equilibrium is reached, the column is disconnected and SUbjected 
to desorption. The main difficulties with fibers as ion-exchange materials arise 
from the gradual tight-packing of fibers in the columns causing increased. 
resistance to the flow of liquids. 
Synthesis of graft copolymers of cellulose with acrylic and methacrylic acids 
is an important method of obtaining modified celluloses having ion-exchange 
properties. The grafting reaction can be carried out without producing appreciable 
amounts of homopolymer by introducing diazo groups into cellulose derivatives 
or by using the FeII-H202 redox system. Products containing 15-20% carboxyl 
groups and having a high ion-exchange capacity can be obtained. However, such 
copolymers are soluble in dilute sodium hydroxide which limits their applica-
tion128). 
Ion-exchange properties can also be achieved by introducing hydroxamic 
acid residues into graft polymers obtained from cellulose and polyacrylonitrile 
or poly(methyl acrylate). Graft copolymers of cellulose with poly(methyl meta-
cry late ) can be treated with a 10-20 % alcoholic solution of hydroxylamine at 
20°-60°C for 4-10 hours to introduce the hydroxamic acid residues. Thus, 
The product will bind 8-10 % iron based on the weight of the graft copolymer132). 
A graft copolymer of cellulose of similar type can also be obtained by the 
analogous reaction of hydroxylamine, carried out at 100°C, with cellulose-
polyacrylonitrile graft copolymers. Under these conditions an almost quantitative 
conversion of nitrile groups into amidoxime then hydroxamic acid takes place as 
follows: 
Cell-CH2-CH-
-
I 
CN 
301 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Synthesis of graft polymers of cellulose with dimethyl vinylethynyl carbinol 
results in a modified cellulose containing triple bonds, since the monomer has a 
triple bond in addition to a double bond. The grafting reaction is carried out by 
using a 3-4 % aqueous solution of the monomer or 20 % aqueous emulsions. The 
reaction scheme may be represented as follows124): 
Cellulose + 
Cellulose-CH 2CH-
, 
C 
III 
C 
HO, I 
C 
/ 'CH 
CH3 
3 
In addition to polymerization by opening up of the double bond as shown above, 
polymerization also takes place to some extent by the opening up of the triple 
bond. On treatment of the cellulose graft copolymer with a 5 % aqueous solution 
of potassium hydroxide at 1200-\30°C, acetone is split off and a cellulose 
copolymer with vinyl acetylene is formed. 
Cellulose-CH2- CH- + KOH 
I 
C 
III 
C 
I 
HO-C- CH3 
, 
Cn3 
-
Cellulose-CH2-CH-
, 
C 
"' 
CH 
On treatment of the latter, copolymer with silver or copper salts, a modified 
cellulose contaning residues of silver or copper can be obtained, according to the 
following reaction scheme124): 
Cellulose-CH2- CH-
, 
+ AgN03 -
Cellulose-CH 2-CH-
I 
C 
C 
III 
III 
CH 
CAg 
Cellulose-CH 2-CH- + CuCI 2 -- Cellulose-CH2-CH-
I 
, 
C 
C 
III 
III 
CH 
CCu 
The introduction of nitrogenous heterocyclic compounds into the cellulose 
macromolecule gives materials having ion exchange properties which can be used 
for the preparation of chromatographic papers. Such modified celluloses can be 
prepared by grafting. For instance, graft polymerization of 2-methyl-5-vinyl 
pyridine with cellulose yields a poly(methyl vinyl pyridine)-cellulose graft 
302 

7.6. Properties 
copolymer. On treatment of the latter with an aqueous-alcoholic solution of 
dimethyl sulfate, the corresponding quaternary ammonium compounds are 
formed as follows124): 
NaOH -
Such graft copolymers are strong anion-active complexes. 
Anion-exchange fibers and cation-exchange fibers can be prepared by using 
the chemical reactivity of glycidyl methacrylate (GMA)-grafted cellulose 
(Fiber II). An anion-exchange fiber may be obtained by introducing a quaternary 
ammonium hydroxide and the cation-exchange fiber by introducing a sulfonic, 
a mercapto or a carbonyl group. Iwakura et a1.69) have examined the reaction of 
diethylamine with Fiber II (grafting content 100 wt. %) in anhydrous acetone, 
aqueous acetone, and water. The results are shown in Figure 84. Aqueous 
acetone gives the highest reaction ratio, but it decreases after 2 hours. The 
reason for this is that the rate of reaction was measured by the nitrogen 
content of the products, and hydrolysis of the ester is unavoidable. 
Water gave the highest reaction rate because cellulose has hydrophilic groups. 
Iwakura et al. further investigated the reaction of amines on rayon which had been 
graft-copolymerized with glycidyl methacrylate (GMA) and methyl methacrylate 
303 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
1--
t -
\ 
• 
3 
4 
5 
6 
8 
Reaction time (hl 
Fig. 84. Effect of reaction medium 
on amination of fiber II at 65°C; 
(0) acetone-diethylamine; (6) ace-
tone-water (20 wt.-% HzO); (\7) 
water; (e) water-diethanolamine; 
(x) water-diethylamine (cograft). 
Reprinted from Ref. 69), p. 685, by 
courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. 
(MMA) (grafting content GMA 57 wt. %, MMA 29 wt.- %), but the results were 
almost the same. On the other hand, an examination of the reaction velocity of 
(MMA-GMA)-cografted cellulose with amines in a homogeneous system showed 
that GMA-grafted cellulose had the higher reaction velocity. This was explained 
by the catalytic reaction of the group produced. No difference was observed in 
heterogeneous systems where the rate determining step is the diffusion of amines 
into the cellulose. 
The quaternary ammonium chloride was prepared using benzyl chloride, on 
GMA-grafted, diethylamine-treated cellulose (grafting content, 94 wt. %, N. 
content 3.36 %r). A range of reaction media, including dimethylformamide, 
acetone, and benzene, was assessed in this study. 
CH3 " 
( : )  
Cellulose 
CH2-~-
+ n CICH2~ --
I 
/2 HS 
~ 
C-O-CH -CH-CH -N 
~ 
2 
I 
2" 
o 
OH 
C2HS 
nlen 
304 

7.6. Properties 
It is well known that a sodium hydroxysulfonate is produced by the ring-
opening addition reaction of an epoxy group with N~S01: 
Table 85. The main types of cellulose graft copolymers, which have found practical application 
and their uses. Adapted from Ref.55), p. 235, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Polymer used for grafting 
cellulose 
(I) Polyacrylonitrile 
(2) Poly(methyl vinyl pyridine) 
(a) phosphate salt 
(b) quaternary salt (e.g., 
with dimethyl sulfate) 
(c) Bases 
(3) Poly(acrylic acid), 
poly(methycrylic acid) 
(a) in free state 
(b) in form of calcium salt 
(c) in the form of silver 
and copper salts 
(4) Phosphorus-containing 
vinyl polymers 
(5) Fluorine-containing 
polymers 
(6) Polyisoprene and other 
polyolefins. 
Preparations of the cellulose 
graft copolymer 
Wool-like appearance; im-
proved resistance to micro-
organisms, light and wear 
non-flammable 
Strong anion exchanger and 
complex compound former 
Weak anion exchanger 
weak cation exchanger 
Causes coagulation of pro-
teins, and blood clotting 
bactericidal property 
(destroys bacteria) 
Non-flammable chelating 
agent 
Waterproof and oil 
resistant properties 
Hydrophobic (waterproof), 
acid proof 
Field of Application 
Rugs (modified hydrated cellu-
lose fibers) 
Knitted goods, rain coats, tents. 
Decorating and facing materials, 
theatrical decorations 
Adsorption of ions, complex for-
mers, dyeing of food products, 
etc. 
Adsorption of metal ions, pro-
tein from food products etc. 
Blood-clotting cloth (hemostatic) 
Bed linen and underwear in cli-
nics; lab coats for doctors; work 
clothes in antibiotics factories 
and other special plants 
The same as 2 (a) 
The same as 2 (b) 
Work clothes for workers of 
different trades, tarpaulins, rain-
coats 
Industrial goods 
305 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
This reaction was applied to GMA-grafted cellulose (grafting content 101 wt.- %), 
and the polysulfonicacid was obtained69). For this addition reaction, Na2S03-H20 
and Na2S03/NaHS03-H20 were effective in modifying the rate of ring opening. 
GMA-grafted cellulose fiber can react with H2S to form the polythiol: 
CH3 
I 
Cellulose 
CH2 - C-
I 
C-O-CH2-CH-CH2 
O~ 
I 
I 
OH 
SH 
Two reaction products can be expected from the reaction of GMA-grafted 
cellulose and thioglycollic acid69): 
Cellulose 
and 
CH3 
I 
CH -C-
2 
I 
C-OCH2-
CH-CH2 
~ 
,,/ 
o 
0 
The main types of cellulose graft copolymers, which have found practical app-
lication, and their uses are summarized in Table 85. 
The introduction of reactive groups of these types provides possible routes 
to bound reagents (e.g., immobilized enzymes or drugs), thus expanding the 
areas of application of cellulosic graft copolymers. 
306 

7.6. Properties 
Dyeability 
Cotton grafted with /1-propiolactone36) can be dyed using dyes designed for 
acetate' fibers, whereas an untreated control is not receptive to these dyes. The 
basic dye Methylene Blue 2B also dyes this grafted cotton very readily, whereas 
the ungrafted cotton is resistant to dyeing. 
Grafting of acidic monomers such as acrylic and methacrylic acids to cellulose 
significantly improves its affinity to basic dyes. For example, the introduction 
of small amounts of carboxyl groups (1.8-2 % on the weight of material) by 
grafting cellulose with acrylic acid considerably improves the absorption of basic 
dyes128). 
Permanently dyed cellulose materials can be produced by first grafting rayon 
with glycidyl methacrylate and subsequently letting the epoxy group of the graft 
copolymer react with different dyes containing amino or phenolic hydroxyl 
groups69). Alternatively, glycidyl methacrylate and aromatic amines or phenol 
give addition compounds by the ring-opening reaction of the epoxy group. The 
compounds obtained can be coupled with diazonium salts to give azo dyes with a 
vinyl group. When the addition products are grafted to cellulose, the grafted 
fibers acquire color on treatment with diazonium salts133). 
The dye acceptability of cotton fabric grafted with a mixture of styrene and 
methyl methacrylate has been reported to be uniform and superior to that of 
un grafted cotton (cf. Table 86). Uniformity is of special importance in matching 
dyed batches. The dyed samples have remarkable wash and light fastnessll3). 
Kamel and Hebeish134) have reported on the behavior of cellulose, grafted with 
poly(methyl methacrylate) and polyacrylonitrile, toward some direct and reactive 
dyes. In this work, viscose rayon fibers were grafted and subsequently dyed in the 
usual manner. It was found that the exhaustion rate of dye onto the fibers was 
governed by the amount and nature of the polymer grafted. Figure 85 shows 
the effect of grafting of cellulose with polyacrylonitrile on dyeing with Solo phenyl 
Red 6BL at 70°C, in terms of the rates of dye exhaustion. 
Table 86. Dye" absorption of styrene-methyl methacrylate grafted cotton fabric and color-fastness 
of the dyed material (standard: undyed, ungrafted blank -
100% rellectance). Reprinted from 
ReU13), p. 345, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Percentage weight 
Ratio of grafted 
Amount of dye 
Percentage Rellectanceb 
increase due to 
polystyrene poly 
absorbed in 
total grafting 
(methyl methacrylate) mgm/g material 
Unexposed 
Exposed to 
on the fabric 
(%) 
fadeometer 
Dye, ungrafted 
18.6 
82,60 
Complete loss 
cotton 
Not uniform 
of color 
12.8 
I: 21/2 
38.1 
30 
56 
10J 
2: I 
42.3 
26 
55 
19.2 
31/2: I 
60.0 
20 
50 
24.7 
J:I 
60.0 
22 
49 
32.0 
I: 21/2 
55.1 
24 
49 
" Calcocid Fast red "A". 
b A higher value of rellectance denotes lower intensity in colour. 
307 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
90r---,----,----,----,---, 
20 
-- . 
40 
60 
Time (min) 
80 
100 
Fig. 85. Effect of grafting of cellulose with 
polyacrylonitrile on dyeing with Solophenyl 
Red 6 BL at 70°C; (e) untreated cellulose; 
(x) oxidized cellulose; (0) 13.5% PAN; 
(.6) 43.7% PAN; (0) 51.5% PAN; and (.) 
73.2 % PAN. Reprinted from Ref. 134), p. 2411, 
courtesy of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
It is clear that regardless of the substrate used, the exhaustion curve is 
characterized by an initially fast rate, followed by a slower rate, then a leveling 
off to give maximum exhaustion. In general, the maximum exhaustion level 
decreases with' increasing graft, though the picture regarding initial exhaustion 
rates is far from clear. A similar situation is found with methyl methacrylate 
grafted cotton, Figure 86. Dyeings with reactive dyes (Remazol Gold Yellow G 
90 
80 
70 
~ 60 
c 
.9 
Vi 
=> 
'" 
~ 50 
w 
40 
30 
20 0 
308 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Time (min) 
• 
100 
Fig. 86. Effect of grafting of cellulose with 
poly(methyl methacrylate) on dyeing with 
Solophenyl Red 6 BL at 70°C; (e) untreated 
cellulose; (x) oxidized cellulose; (0) 14 % 
PMMA; (.6) 43.5% PMMA; (\7) 66.8% 
PMMA, and (.) 93.2 % PMMA. Reprinted 
from Ref. 134), p. 2412, courtesy of John 
Wiley and Sons, Inc. 

7.6. Properties 
and Cibacron Blue 3 GA) show that both acrylonitrile and methyl methacrylate 
grafted cotton give increased exhaustion relative to ungrafted fabrics. 
Table 87 lists the affinity of three reactive dyes for different substrates. It is 
evident that the maximum exhaustion of Cibacron Brilliant Yellow 3G-E and 
Cibacron Orange T3G-E onto fibers is higher for polyacrylonitrile-cellulose 
grafted copolymers than for cellulose modified with poly(methyl methacrylate). 
Comparable dye exhau.stion was found when dyeing was performed with 
Cibacron Rubine R-E. This reflects the nature of the dye. It is probably 
correct to say that the affinity of the reactive dyes for cellulose graft 
copolymers depends mainly on the (i) nature of the dye; (ii) the extent of 
disruption of the microstructure of the cellulose by grafting, which is dependent 
on the nature and amount of grafted polymers; and (iii), the affinity of the dye 
Table 87. Effect of nature of substrate on dye affinity of some reactive dyes for cellulose. 
Reprinted from Ref.134), p. 2415, by kind permission of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Substrate 
Dye" 
Exhaustion after different time periods, % 
5 min 
15 min 
30 min 
40 min 
105 min 
Untreated cellulose 
Cibacron 
brilliant 
Yellow 
3 G-E 
52.38 
62.86 
69.52 
78.10 
78.10 
Ceric-oxidized cellulose 
17.40 
23.82 
23.81 
23.81 
23.81 
PAN-cellulose graft 
copolymer (13.5 % graft) 
22.52 
36.40 
42.70 
49.47 
49.76 
PAN-cellulose graft 
copolymer (73.2 % graft) 
15.24 
26.00 
37.48 
45.95 
45.95 
PAN-cellulose graft 
copolymer (66.8 % graft) 
25.08 
35.29 
40.59 
40.76 
40.76 
Untreated cellulose 
Cibacron 
Orange 
T3G-E 
88.79 
90.52 
90.52 
90.52 
90.52 
Ceric-oxidized cellulose 
73.28 
81.90 
81.90 
81.90 
81.90 
PAN-cellulose graft 
copolymer (13.5 % graft) 
79.24 
83.76 
90.70 
90.70 
90.70 
PAN-cellulose graft 
copolymer (73.2 % graft) 
77.54 
87.07 
87.07 
87.07 
87.07 
PAN-cellulose graft 
copolymer (66.8 % graft) 
75.59 
79.31 
79.31 
79.31 
79.31 
Untreated cellulose 
Cibacron 
Rubine 
R-E 
92.38 
96.19 
96.19 
96.19 
96.19 
Ceric-oxidized cellulose 
83.03 
88.39 
91.07 
91.07 
'11.07 
PAN-cellulose graft 
copolymer (13.5% graft) 
74.29 
79.05 
86.67 
89.95 
39.95 
PAN-cellulose graft 
copolymer (73.2 % graft) 
60.85 
75.07 
76.07 
77.78 
77.78 
PAN-cellulose graft 
copolymer (66.8 % graft) 
62.20 
74.50 
77.93 
77.93 
77.93 
" Dye concentration, I % (on weight of fibers); temperature of dyeing, 70°C. 
309 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
for the grafted polymer. For a given dye134), increasing the magnitude of (ii) and 
(iii) leads to increased dye exhaustion into the fibers. However, the general 
trend is that an increase in the level of grafting causes a substantial reduction in dye 
exhaustion onto fibers, particularly with dyes having low affinity for cellulose. 
The large disruption of microstructure of the cellulose at high polymer contents 
seems to be outweighed by the low affinity of the dye for the grafted polymer. 
The dye acquires little affinity for PMMA, in contrast to PAN, for which the dye 
has considerable affinity. This would also explain the higher exhaustion onto 
cellulose modified with PAN relative to cellulose modified with PMMA. In 
this regard, however, differences in molecular mass, molecular mass distribution, 
and grafting frequency between the two copolymers must also be taken into 
account. 
Dye fixation on untreated cellulos~, PAN-cellulose graft copolymers and 
PMMA-cellulose graft copolymers is shown in Table 88. It is obvious that the 
dye fixation obtained with PAN-cellulose graft copolymers having up to 51 % 
PAN was higher than that found with the untreated cellulose. The reverse is the 
case with a copolymer containing 73 % PAN. However, when the dye fixation 
was calculated on the weight of the cellulose. component only, the fixation 
increased significantly as the graft yield increased. The same situation was 
encountered when the dye fixation on PMMA-cellulose graft copolymers was 
determined. This leads to the conclusion that the grafted chains disrupt the 
Table 88. Fixation of reactive dyes on various grafted substrates. Reprinted from Ref.134), p. 2416, 
by kind permission of John Wiley and Sons, Inc. 
Cibacron Brilliant Yellow 3GE" Remazol Golden Yellowb 
Dye-Reacted with Cellulose 
Dye-Reacted with Cellulose 
% 
% 
Based on 
Based on weight Based on 
Based on 
weight of 
of cellulose only weight of 
weight of 
copolymer 
copolymer 
cellulose only 
Untreated 
0.86 
0.48 
Ce1vion-oxidized Cellulose 
0.78 
0.39 
PAN-Cellulose Graft 
(13.5 % graft) 
0.94 
1.04 
0.57 
0.63 
PAN-Cellulose Graft 
(43.7 % graft) 
1.04 
1.72 
0.52 
0.86 
PAN-Cellulose Graft 
(51.5 % graft) 
1.17 
2.34 
0.51 
1.02 
PAN-Cellulose Graft 
(73.2 % graft) 
0.76 
2.78 
0.31 
1.11 
PMMA-Cellulose Graft 
(14.0% graft) 
1.04 
1.16 
0.47 
0.52 
PMMA-Cellulose Graft 
(66.8 % graft) 
0.42 
1.47 
0.31 
0.88 
a Dye concentration. 1 % (on weight of fibers); temperature of dyeing, 70 OC; duration of dyeing, 
105 min. 
b Dye concentration, 2 % (on weight of fibers); temperature of dyeing, 60°C; duration of dyeing, 
60 min. 
310 

7.6. Properties 
microstructure of cellulose and increase the accessibility of the cellulose hydroxyls 
to reaction with the dye molecules. For a given dye, the magnitude of this effect 
seems to depend on the amount and nature of the polymer grafted. 
7.6.2. New Cellulosic Materials 
During the last few years much technological research has been performed with 
the aim of achieving controlled changes in the properties of cellulosic materials. 
In general, ceUulosic yarns or fabrics are treated with various reagents which 
often impart a new property of improve its performance in use. Another method 
followed to obtain cellulosic materials with novel properties is to synthesize 
new cellulose derivatives. For instance, reaction with ethylenimine gives improv-
ed affinity for reactive dyes as weU as crease-resistance to fabrics from cotton or 
viscose rayon. Improved water-repellency and fire-proofing can be achieved 
by such secondary treatment135). 
The recently developed methods of chemical modification have considerably 
widened the scope of possible improvements in properties as weU as fields of 
application. The new methods of chemical modification, and graft polymeri-
zation in particular, should be considered supplementary to the earlier methods 
of impregnation with specific reagents. In a few cases, such as the preparation 
of ion-exchange materials, fabrics with bactericidal action and substrates having 
medical uses, the chemical modification method alone is successful. However, 
for other uses, the method selected will depend on economic or technological 
factors, or on the type of equipment available. 
In general, chemical modification methods, give products with better fastness 
to washing and rubbing and are preferred for prolonged used. Water-proofing 
can be achieved by application of paraffin wax based emulsions, but it is 
effective against small amounts of water only. If such materials are used for gar-
ments and exposed to continuous prolonged rain, the water-proof effect is not 
adequate. However, the water-repellency imparted by the use of hydrophobic 
graft copolymers is quite durable. 
A surface application technique is, however, quite adequate in some cases, such 
as imparting antistatic properties, improving softness and handle, and reducing 
friction during fabrication of yarns and fabrics. 
As a result of considerable research, the Moscow Textile Institute has developed 
products with novel properties for three different types of application. 
I. Modified cellulosic materials for general use: 
(i) 
Fabrics from modified viscose staple (MTILON-B); 
(ii) Carpet materials from modified cuprammonium rayons (MTILON B 
&M); 
(iii) modified acetate silk (MTILON-A); 
(iv) materials of improved abrasion resistance. 
II. Modified cellulosic materials for specific uses with improved properties: 
(i) fire-resistance; 
(ii) resistance to microorganisms; 
(iii) resistance to molds; 
(iv) resistance to light degradation and heat; 
311 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
(v) water-repellency; 
(vi) ion-and electron-exchange properties. 
III. Cellulosic materials for medicinal use: 
(i) 
bactericides; 
(ii) blood-clotting materials; 
(iii) antifungal materials; 
(vi) materials for use in the radio tracer field. 
Perhaps one of the greatest achievements of grafting in the field of chemical 
modification of cellulose is the development of Mtilon fibers. Graft copolymeriza-
tion of the cellulose with 30--40 % acrylonitrile leads to these fibers. Different 
types of Mtilon fiber have been produced. 
A report by Achwal136) on Mtilon fibers reveals that Mtilon B is a modified 
viscose staple fiber which, due to the nitrile content, is characterized by a high 
resistance to weathering (photo-chemical degradation) as compared to normal 
viscose. Other advantages are increased resistance to abrasion and the possibility 
of dyeing with different classes of dyes used for dyeing cellulosic as well as 
wool fibers. Moreover, garments made of Mtilon B fibers acquire a wool-like 
appearance. 
The count of the various types of cellulosic fiber modified by graft copolymeri-
zation is found to decrease somewhat as a result of grafting. This lowering in 
count is proportional to the amount of graft polymer present. Some degradation 
of cellulose usually accompanies grafting, resulting in a decrease of strength of 
the order of 10-15 %. The index of the breaking load, the calculation of which 
involves the count of the fiber, naturally also decreases. The breaking load of 
Mtilon B obtained on a pilot plant is 10-20% lower than the value for the 
viscose staple fiber before grafting, though the breaking elongation is of the same 
order as for untreated rayon. 
Mtilon Band Mtilon M are useful for making carpets; the lowering in the count 
of fibers on grafting is important in this case. These fibers used for carpet-
making have a high resistance to the actions of light, high elasticity, high 
abrasion resistance, a wool-like appearance, and they can be dyed in bright 
shades. Apart from the improved properties of these modified rayons, their use 
is possible on a large scale since their cost compares favourably with that of 
ungrafted material, which is of importance to the consumer industry. 
During the synthesis of graft copolymers of cellulose-rayon fibers, homopoly-
mer formation can be almost completely prevented without other side reactions 
taking place. Hence, the specific cost of polyacrylonitrile, which forms the main 
part of the cost of grafting, consists of the amount of polymer grafted and small 
losses during the grafting or regeneration from used mixtures. In the USSR, the 
prices of viscose staple rayon and of acrylonitrile are of similar order, and the 
weight of the product increases on grafting. The commercial production price 
of Mtilon B, assuming almost complete regeneration from wash waters, is there-
fore not much higher than 10-15 % above the price of viscose rayon itself. 
The use of graft copolymerized acetate rayon material of improved properties 
is also of interest. Acetate fibers certainly have some advantages over the 
viscose fibers but possess the following drawbacks: (I) larger development of 
static charges, which creates difficulties in processing and wearing; (2) lower 
312 

7.6. Properties 
resistance to washing; and (3) dyeing is made possible only by the use of 
special classes of dyes. 
Modified acetate fibers prepared by graft copolymerization can be processed on 
the same machines as those used for acetate rayon and following the same se-
quence of operations. The modified acetate rayon has a number of advantages, 
such as three to four times higher fastness to abrasion than normal acetate 
and a lower tendency for development of static electricity. Bhattacharjee and 
Perlin have reported interesting properties for their radiation-induced styrene-
grafted, crosslinked carboxymethyl cellulose which apparently possesses signi-
ficantly enhanced water retention37l. 
7.6.3. Properties of Grafted Paper 
A number of studies have been reported on grafting paper with various vinyl 
monomers21, 138, 139l. It is claimed that the grafting reactions provide new ways 
of modifying paper. Such grafted papers may have quite different properties and 
different applications. They are often bulky and resilient, acid-resistant, and 
strong. It may also be possible, through the proper choice of monomers, to 
improve significantly the dimensional stability, particularly if crosslinking mono-
mers are selected so that a combination of grafting and crosslinking is 
achieved138l. 
The results of one study on the properties of omitted grafted paper may be 
summarized as follows: 
. 
1. Water absorption is reduced by grafting hydrophobic polymers. The reduction, 
however, is not spectacular and indicates that the cellulose hydroxyls remain 
substantially accessible to water. Nevertheless, the grafted papers are quite 
water-repellent in many cases. In Figure 87 the rate of water pickUp is 
1.0 
y 
~ 
I 
We alter 360 min __ 
I 
---
1-_--'-
---
/ 
1/ 
o Untreated 
I 
- % Acrylonitrile graft 
i 
--
~-~ 
.. _-----
0.8 
t 0.6 
0> 
3: 
~ 0.4 
0.2 
o 
5 
10 
15 
20 
25 
Time (min) 
Fig. 87. The rate of water sorption (30--70%). W = regain at time t; We = regain att = DC. Reprinted 
from Ref. 21), p. 254, by courtesy of the Technical Association of the Pulp and Paper Industry. 
313 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
recorded for one of the best grafts from the point of view of moisture 
regain. It can be seen that the rate of sorption is greatly reduced, showing the 
potentiality of grafting as a means of producing dimensional stability. 
2. The burst, tensile, and tear strengths can be increased by grafting in most 
cases. Figures 88 and 89 show thai all grafts have increased strengths at the 
~ 150 
..c: en 
c 
~ 
~100~-+--+---~~~ 
~ 
::::> 
.c 
.!: 
g, 50 r--t-----,r--+-----tT-------t- ------j---I 
c 
..c: 
w 
~ 
..c: en 
c: 
'" 
-500L-----L25---5'-0 __ 
..1-_----'-:----' 
Groft (%l 
250 r--------t':~----t_ -----t-----j--j 
200 r----j'--t_ 
~150~+----H~----r-----~~-----t 
.!!l 
·iii 
c: 
.!!l 
.!: 
~100~----Tr------r---r---t--------t 
c: 
c 
..c: 
w 
314 
o 
50 
100 
Groll (%l 
150 
200 
Fig. 88. Change in burst strength vs. graft 
percent. Reprinted from Ref. 21), p. 254, by 
courtesy of the Technical Association of the 
Pulp and Paper Industry. 
Fig. 89. Change in tensile strength vs. 
graft percent. AN: acrylonitrile; EA/ AN 
2: I = ethyl acrylate-acrylonitrile 2: I co-
polymer; AA = acrylamide. Reprinted 
from Ref. 21), p. 255, by courtesy of the 
Technical Association of the Pulp and Pa-
per Industry. 

7.6. Properties 
highest percentage grafting. Acrylamide appears to be particularly beneficial 
with respect tQ the dry properties. The wet properties are also substantially 
improved in the case of grafted hydrophobic polymers. Comparisons with 
latex-treated papers show that grafting results in less improvement in the dry 
strength than the same amount of polymer added by latex treatment, but 
that it gives far greater wet strength. 
3. The stiffness, particularly the wet stiffness, can be increased by the grafting of 
stiff polymers; fold endurance and softness can be improved by the grafting 
of soft rubbery polymers. 
4. The resistance of paper to acids, bases, and chemicals, and to heat, light, and 
microorganisms is, in general, greatly improved by grafting. 
5. Grafted paper can be rendered moldable to some extent through grafting with 
suitable monomers. 
6. The ionic character of paper can be changed to improve dyeability and 
receptivity to certain top coats and resins. 
Futhermore, it may be advantageous to use copolymerized papers in chromato-
graphy for the following reasonsl40): 
(i) 
Specialized papers can be prepared in a one-step synthesis. 
(ii) 
The grafted papers acquire improved wet strength. 
(iii) They are not affected by acids, bases, organic solvents, and phenolic 
developing solutions. 
(iv) The chromatogram development times are shorter. 
(v) 
The sheets can be used again after washing. 
(vi) 
Besides having unique ion-exchange properties, the grafted papers are 
useful for radioisotopes and labelled compounds. 
(vii) They are applicable to reverse-phase chromatography. 
(viii) Desired changes in the chroma~ography properties of the paper can be made 
by using monomers of different structures. 
(ix) 
Because of the clear separation, detection and measurement of ion species 
in complex mixtures and extracts are possible. 
(x) 
Since the grafted papers are stab!e to large doses of radiation, they are 
suitable for separation in radiation fields. 
The potential of radiation-copolymerized celluloses in chromatography, 
particularly in the reverse-phase technique, has recently been discussedl40). 
A range of styrenated celluloses has been prepared by copolymerizing styrene 
with Whatman 40, 41, and 42 papers. Significant differences in the chromato-
graphic behavior of certain dyes were observed between the grafted and non-
grafted papers. Similar changes in RJ-values between the two types of papers 
were also observed for the separation of a range of typical cations, such as 
Znll, Nill, and Cdll. In the separation of fatty acids, stearic, myristic, and 
lauric, the grafted celluloses were shown to possess advantages over the 
untreated Whatman equivalent. 
F or column chromatography, a methyl methacrylate-cellulose radiation copoly-
mer has been used quantitatively to separate a mixture of oil-soluble dyes. This 
same mixture could not be separated on a column of untreated cellulose 
powderl40). 
Bardan et a1.14l • 142) have shown interest in methyl cellulose-polyacrylamide 
315 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
graft copolymers and their formation. This type of system has great potential as 
a substrate for immobilized enzyme studies owing to its inherent affinity for water 
and ease of handlingI43). In the grafting stages, Bardin et ai. used potassium 
per sulfate as the initiator, and various factors affecting the copolymerization 
were studied. The efficiency of grafting was found to be maximum at an 
initiator concentration of 3.7 x 10-4 mol/I. Grafting was found to be enhanced 
by increasing the monomer concentration and the temperature up to 40 DC. The 
system is also of interest because of the different effects of temperature change 
on the component parts of the copolymer. Thus, the solubility of methyl 
cellulose in water increases with cooling, whereas the solubility of polyacrylamide 
increases with an increase in temperature. In fact, the precipitation temperature 
of the methyl cellulose, as well as the copolymers, was found to be an 
increasing function of dilution, but the copolymers always showed a higher 
precipitation temperature than did the methyl cellulose at the same concen-
tration. 
Dimov et ai. have studied the effects of reaction conditions on grafting 
itaconic acid and acrylamide onto cellulose fibersl44). The properties of the fibers 
as ion exchangers were studied, as were the exchange capacities of the fibers for 
heavy metal cations. In addition, the value of such materials for extracting 
cationic dyes and treating waste waters from dyeing processes was examined. 
Chebotareva et ai. have developed a method for determining the osmotic 
pressure of ion-exchangersI45 ). This eliminates the need for contact with 
aggressive solutions. Ion-exchange fibers were prepared from rayon grafted with 
vinyl sulfonic acid, methacrylic acid, and methyl vinyl pyridine followed by 
alkylation with epichlorohydrin. Other fibers were prepared by heating poly-
(vinyl alcohol) with sodium bisulphite and grafting with acrylic acid. The ion-
exchange fibers prepared from poly(vinyl alcohol) were found to possess greater 
osmotic stability. 
The ion-exchange properties of grafted copolymers where the monomer con-
tains a functional group, such as -NH2 ; -S03H, or even a heterocyclic 
nitrogen (the vinyl pyridines), have also been discussedl40 ). An interesting 
point is that the ion-exchange properties of papers grafted with vinylpyridine 
(VP) were connected with the behaviour of the copolymerized cellulose in the 
medium. Thus. in acid solutions, the nitrogen would be protonated while in alka-
line solutions it would remain free. In acid solutions it might therefore behave as 
an active zone for anionic particles [e.g., {ZnCI4)2-] or similar species. In alkaline 
solutions (NH3 , pyridine, etc.) it may act as a donor to species such as 
(Zn vpf + and thus be bound. The anions of strong acids may be held as 
PyH+X- in acid solutions, as might be the case with dyestuffs, while weak 
acids may have their anions held in alkaline solutions. 
7.6.4. Properties of Grafted Pulp and Timber 
Grafting reactions in wood have been reported by a number of investiga-
torsl46 -150). Most of these studies involved vinyl graft copolymerization induced 
by high energy radiation. Because of its heterogeneity, the effect of radiation 
upon the properties of wood is quite different from that on pure cellulose. This is 
316 

7.6. Properties 
probably due to the effect of the lignin, which is itself quite resistant to radiation 
damage and may reduce the scission of the cellulose chains150, 151). It is therefore 
possible to modify the cellulose in wood by radiation grafting, with a resulting 
enhancement of physical and mechanical properties. Alteration in the physical 
properties of wood by grafting of wood with polystyrene is shown in 
Table 89. 
In Figure 90 is shown a typical pair of load-deflection curves. In addition to a 
significantly higher bending strength (see Table 89), the mechanical nature of the 
material has been altered, and the load-deflection curves of this material are 
invariably linear right up to the point of failure. The alteration in the nature of 
Table 89. Changes in physical properties of treated wood". Reprinted from Ref.1 50), p. 160, 
by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
Sample 
Untreated 
Treated 
Bending strength 
Shrinkage based 
Swelling based on 
Vol. increase due 
increase 
on conditioned vol. swolJen sample 
to treatment 
% 
% 
% 
% 
45 
5.0 
0.9 
15.0 
1.1 
8-9 
" Treatment: impregnant 76 wt.-% styrene + 22.5 wt.-% methanol + 1.5 wt.-% Water: gamma 
dosage: 4.5 Mrad.; heating treatment; \05 °C for 24 hours. 
400 --
300 
g 
___ +-_--+6 Breaking 
J,/Jl 
POI int 
6 Wood with graft 
w 
copolymer - treated 
--+ 
with styrene-MeOH-HOH / 
_ 
__---I 
c "1'''1-""C"jl 
~ 200 
100 
- A typical stress - strain 
diagram for wood 
I 
I 
o 
0.1 
0.2 
03 
0.4 
0.5 
Deflection (in) 
Fig. 90. Load-deflection characteristics of wood samples. Reprinted from Ref. 150), p. 160, by courtesy 
of John Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
317 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
the load-deflection curves suggests that the chains of IX-cellulose have been 
modified by the grafting of polystyrene. In the unmodified wood, the force 
necessary to move the cellulose chains with respect to one another, as in 
bending, is that required to overcome relatively weak Van der Waal's forces 
between adjacent chains. However, in the modified wood, there are also 
primary valence forces introduced by the polystyrene side chains which increase 
the bending strength150). 
As can be seen from Figure 91, penetration by water vapour and liquid is 
drastically reduced. Dimensional changes associated with water adsorption 
are correspondingly reduced (see Table 109). The resistance of wood to micro-
biological attack is increased by grafting. 
The water sorption kinetics and equilibria in wood pulp cellulose grafted with 
styrene and other vinyl monomers, using the mutual radiation techniques have 
recently been studied152). With respect to cellulose grafted with polystyrene, the 
equilibrium water content dropped monotonically with increasing percent graft. 
160 
140 
120 
-100 
-g 
~ 
.t 80 
C\ 
o 
o 
:::::: 
£160 
c: 
.S! 
i5. 
~ 40 
..c 
c .... 
::> 
o g- 20 
> 
.... 
cu 
~ 0 
10 
5 
o 
~ 
-0 
V 
~ 
..d' 
~ 
V 
I 
Treated 
-" 
__ 
i---O---
~ 
.--0--
i 
Untreated 
~ 
~ 
~ 
,..-
~ 
Treated 
I 
4 
8 
12 
16 
20 
24 
28 
32 
Time (days) 
Fig. 91. Water absorption characteristics of wood. Samples immersed in distilled water at room 
temperature and under atmospheric pressure. Exposed to 75 % R.H. at 25°C. Reprinted from 
Ref. 150), p. 161, by courtesy of John-Wiley & Sons, Inc. 
318 

7.6. Properties 
This effect has been reported for similar systems153), although when the water 
sorbed is calculated as a percentage of the pure hydrophilic backbone (e.g., 
cellulose acetate), there is no apparent effect on the specific sorption. This has 
prompted the suggestion of a "domain model" of hydrophobic (essentially non-
sorbing) polymer domains dispersed in a seemingly unaltered matrix of hydro-
philic backbone polymer. 
It has been shown152), however, that the water sorbed at equilibrium and 
calculated on the basis of pure cellulose is actually less than the specific sorption 
in ungrafted cellulose. The magnitude of the decrease increases with percent 
graft and is more pronounced at the very low water activities. Here, it appears 
that the discrete domain model is not applicable and that pendant polystyrene 
chains are admixed molecularly throughout the cellulose matrix, hindering site 
sorption which occurs at low activities. 
The density of cellulose grafted with polystyrene by radiation-induced polymeri-
zation in the presence of dioxane has been measured and compared with the 
calculated density assuming physical mixing of the homopolymers, cellulose, and 
polystyrene, with no volume change on mixing. The results are presented in 
Table 90. In all cases, the measured values of density were significantly higher 
than the calculated values, assuming no volume change on mixing, which would 
be a reasonable assumption, if indeed there was no molecular intermingling of 
polystyrene and cellulose. These data support the arguments suggested by the 
sorption data that the grafted polystyrene is not solely deposited in isolated, 
discrete domains but is significantly intermingled with the cellulose matrix to 
affect not only the specific water sorption but the density as well. 
The effect of styrene grafting (induced by the mutual irradiation technique in 
the presence of dioxane) on the diffusion coefficient of water in cellulose-
polystyrene graft copolymers has been reported152). The results of this work 
reveal that grafting actually increases the magnitude of the diffusion coefficient, 
presumably as a consequence of subtle destructuring of the cellulose matrix by 
Table 90. The effect of graft copolymerization on the density of styrene-
cellulose grafts. Reprinted from Ref.1s2), p. 318, by courtesy of John Wiley 
and Sons, Inc. 
Cellulose sample 
Percent graft 
Specific gravity 
based on original 
cellulose 
Measured 
Calculated 
84 % Alpha wood pulp 
0.0 
1.527 
(1.527) 
21.0 
1.440 
1.415 
29.0 
1.430 
1.385 
45.0 
1.402 
1.339 
68.0 
1.361 
1.289 
Cotton 
0.0 
1.550 
(1.550) 
37.0 
1.415 
1.372 
Rayon 
0.0 
1.510 
(1.510) 
34.0 
1.368 
1.355 
319 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
the formation of graft copolymer. This means that, although styrene grafting 
decreases the amount of water sorbed, it increases the diffusion coefficient, 
characterizing the rate at which moisture is adsorbed. 
At approximately the same level of grafting, the diffusivities of water in grafts 
of polar monomers, such as acrylonitrile, ethyl acrylate, and acrylic acid, were 
compared with those in grafts of styrene. Although all three monomers are 
quite polar in comparison with styrene, acrylic acid is the only monomer which 
is sufficiently hydrophilic to be water soluble. Indeed, acrylic acid grafts have 
been shown to behave quite differently from the other polar monomers, which 
in turn behave much like non-polar styrene monomer152). This relative behaviour 
was also observed in the equilibrium sorption data presented in Table 91. 
Presumably, the extremely hydrophilic acrylic acid grafts swell significantly 
within the cellulose matrix, causing decreased mobility of the neighbouring 
cellulose chain segments. The other slightly less hydrophilic monomers (ethyl 
acrylate and acrylonitrile) behave much more like styrene and are presumably 
confined largely to domains and do not significantly alter the mobility of the 
cellulose moieties141}. In a similar vein, Toneho has examined the high-energy, 
radiation-induced curing of resin-impregnated composites using various mono-
mers, expecially styrene, as comonomers154). Significant improvements to general 
tensile properties are recorded. Although dealt with in Chapter 8, the industrial 
application of grafting to timber products is worthy of inclusion here because of 
marked changes in tensile and resilience properties which can be achieved. 
Thus, Gamova et a1.155) have reported the production of polymer grafted, wood-
like materials obtained by grafting styrene onto sawdust using radiation initiation. 
It is found that the mechanical properties are dependent on the copolymer 
composition but independent of the degree of grafting above a specific 
minimum grafting level. Cunanan et a1.156) report that significant improvements 
can be made to the physical properties of poorer quality timber by impregna-
tion with styrene/methyl methacrylate, irradiating, and subsequent drying to 
remove unreacted monomer. Grafting yields of 86 to 96 %, at an optimum 
1-2 Mrad total dose, were achieved. Indications are that a specific comonomer 
composition is needed for a particular timber species in order to optimize the 
process. 
It is sometimes expedient to sacrifice some of the mechanical/tensile character 
Table 91. Equilibrium water sorption in cellulose grafted with various vinyl 
monomers. Reprinted from RefYZ), p. 320, by courtesy of John Wiley & Sons, 
Inc. 
Sample description 
9 % ethyl acrylate graft 
7 % acrylonitrile graft 
II % acrylic acid graft 
8 % styrene graft 
Unmodified wood pulp 
320 
Equilibrium water 
content at 5 % 
relative humidity 
1.98 
2.00 
2.04 
1.95 
2.25 
Equilibrium water 
content at 75 % 
relative humidity 
11.6 
11.5 
14.4 
10.7 
11.5 

7.6. Properties 
of a material, especially when improvements to other properties can be obtained. 
Gorskii and Zhonina have produced an electrically insulating box board by the 
radiation-induced grafting of styrene, vinyl acetate, or methyl methacrylateI57). 
The products carry. superior insulating properties when compared with their 
ungrafted counterparts. Meleschevich et al. have prepared chromatography and 
filter papers which have better thermal stability, rot resistance, weatherability, 
and acid/alkali resistance than unmodified papersI58). Grafting is chemically or 
radiation-induced using a variety of monomer or como no mer systems. Vandana 
et al.159) have examined the effect of moisture on the grafting of styrene and 
acrylonitrile onto beechwood. It was observed that grafting at the cell wall 
exceeded grafting in the cell cavity by a wide margin. While dry conditions 
yielded grafting in aromatic zones, moist conditions resulted in grafting in the 
softwood sections of the timber. These observations are supported by Paeglitis 
in his work on the same materialsI60). The styrene/acrylonitrile combination has 
been successfully employed by Hills and McGahen in their work on ashwood161). 
Here the efficient production of graftwood composites was achieved using a 
combination of high pressures and high-energy radiation initiation. 
The chemical modification of timber through grafting has attracted recent 
attention. Lawniczakl62) used a mixed hydroperoxide/thermal induction process 
to achieve high levels of grafting to various wood pulps. A general observation is 
made that high initiator concentrations lead to excessive degradation. Hornoff 
et al. 163) have grafted styrene, acrylonitrile, methyl methacrylate, butyl acrylate, 
ethyl acrylate, vinyl acetate, methacrylic acid, and acrylamide onto spruce 
pulp in its xanthated form in the presence ofH20 2, while Tirzina and Zoldners1641 
have studied the effects of lignin on the grafting of styrene to birchwood and 
spruce. The effective chain transfer constants for the various timber types were 
measured and found to fall in the range of7 x 10-2 and 6 x 10-3. Youngl65) has 
monitored the grafting of styrene/acrylonitrile mixtures onto xanthated high-
yield wood pulps in the presence of Fell ions. It was seen that chemical pulps 
showed greater grafting levels than mechanical pulps. Horn166) has investigated 
the formation, character, and reactivity of those mechanically formed radicals 
in pulp cellulose fibers which are capable of initiating graft copolymerization, a 
theme studied by Young and Nguyen through the grafting of mechanical pulps 
and assessment of the properties of the resultant composite sheets167). Dolinin 
et al. prepared an ion-exchange material with an ion-exchange capacity of 
2.5-3.0 mequiv/g with respect to 0.1 M HCI by grafting spruce sawdust with 
2-methyl-5-vinyl pyridine. The sawdust was pretreated with 1-10% NaOH or 
1-3 % HN03. Grafting was followed by alkylation with epichlorohydrin168). 
Zoldners et al.169) have studied the effect of polar groups and polymer 
chemical bonding on the grafting of polystyrene onto birch wood sawdust. 
Grafting was radiation-induced with pure styrene, styrene-acrylonitrile, or styrene-
acrylic acid mixtures. Molding of the grafted sawdust at 145-160 DC, under a 
pressure of 17-21 MPa, gave constructionalloads having high flexural strength 
and water resistance. 
For general information regarding the characterization of graft copolymers, 
the reader is advised to consult the recent excellent review of the subject which 
has been provided by Ikada170). 
321 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
References 
I. Immergut, E. H., Mark, H.: Makromol Chern. 18/19,322 (1956) 
2. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 15: 1033 (1971) 
3. Usmanov, Kh. U., Aikhodzhaev, B. I., Azizov, U.: J. Polymer Sci. 53, 87 (1961) 
4. Kobayashi, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. 51, 539 (1961) 
5. Stannett, V. T., Wellons, J. D., Yasuda, H.: J. Polymer Sci. C 4, 551 (1963) 
6. Blouin, F. A., Morris, N. J., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 36, 309 (1966) 
7. Gugliemelli, L. A., Weaver, M. 0., Russell, C. R.: J. Polymer Sci. B6, 599 (1968) 
8. Huang, R. Y-M., Chandramouli, P.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 12,2549 (1968) 
9. Brockway, C. E.: J. Polymer Sci. 2, 3721 (1964) 
10. Arai, K., Ogiwara, Y.: Sen-i Gakkaishi, 26, II (1970) 
II. Huang, R. Y-M., Immergut, B., Immergut, E. H., Rapson, W. H.: J. Polymer Sci. A 1, 1257 
(1963) 
12. Iwakura, Y., Kurosaki, T., Imai, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. A 3, 1185 (1965) 
13. Stan nett, V. T., Wellons, J. D., Yasuda, H.: J. Polymer Sci. C 4,551 (1964) 
14. Guthrie, J. T.: Polymer 16,134 (1975) 
15. Toda, T.: J. Polymer Sci. 58, 411 (1962) 
16. Avny, Y., Rebenfeld, L.: Textile Res. J. 38, 684 (1968) 
17. Avny, Y., Schwenker, R. F. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 37, 817 (1967) 
18. Chaudhuri, D. K. R., Hermans, J. J.: J. Polymer Sci. 48,159 (1960); 51, 373 (1961) 
19. Kulkarni, A. Y., Chitale, A. G., Vaidya, B. K., Mehta, P. c.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 7, 1581 
(1963) 
20. Geacintov, N., Stannett, V. T., Abrahamson, E. W., Hermans, J. J.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 3,35 
(1960) 
21. Schwab, E., Stannett, V. T., Hermans, J. J.: Tappi 44, 251 (1961) 
22. Yasuda, H., Wray, J. A., Stan nett, V. T.: J. Polymer Sci. C 2,387 (1963) 
23. Melville, H. W., Stead, B. D.: J. Polymer Sci. 16,505 (1955) 
24. Horowitz, c., M. Sc. Thesis: Polytechnic Inst. of Brooklyn 1963 
25. Ende, H. A., Stannett, V. T.: J. Polymer Sci A 2, 4047 (1964) 
26. Schwenker, R. F. Jr., Pacsu, E.: Tappi 46, 665 (1963) 
27. Kulkarni, A. Y., Mehta, P. c.: J. Polymer Sci. B 1,509 (1963) 
28. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J.: Textile Res. J. 31, 988 (1961) 
29. Marupov, R., Zhbankov, R. G., Kryazhev, Yu. G., Rogovin, Z. A.: Vysokomol. Soedin, Tssellyul 
Proizvodnye 150 (1963) 
30. Imrisova, D., Maryska, S.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 11,901 (1967) 
31. Guthrie, F. K.: Tappi 46, 656 (1963) 
32. Guthrie, J. T., Thesis, Ph. D.: University of Salford, U.K. 1971 
33. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: IUPAC Int. Symp. Macromolecules, 
Helsinki (1972) Prepr. Vol. I. Paper II-26 
34. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: Polymer 18, 521 (1977) 
35. Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Macromol. Sci.-Chem. 4,1057 (1970) 
36. Immergut, E. R., Ranby, B. G., Mark, H. F.: Ind. Eng. Chern. 42, 2483 (1953) 
37. Vink, H.: Svensk Papperstidn. 63, 24 (1960) 
38. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 16, 1017 (1972) 
39. Henley, D.: Arkiv Kemi 18, 328 (1961) 
40. Riande, E., Perena, J. M.: J. Macromol. Sci. Chern. A 8,1413 (1974) 
41. Jayme, G.: Papier 32,145 (1978) 
42. Ohman, J.: Arkiv Kemi 31, 125 (1970) 
43. Shanbhag, V. P.: Arkiv Kemi 29,139 (1968) 
44. Burchard, W.: Z. Phys. Chern. 42, 293 (1964) 
45. Janeschitz-Kriegl, H., Burchard, W.: J. Polymer Sci. A-2, 6, 153 (1968) 
46. Wellons, J. D., Williams, 1. L., Stannett, V. T.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I, 5,1341 (1967) 
47. Wellons, J. D., Stan nett, V. T.: J. Polymer Sci. A 3, 847 (1965) 
48. Morris, N. J., Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 12, 373 (1968) 
49. Hebeish, A., Theses, Ph. D.: Gujarat University, India 1967 
50. Schurz, J., Rebek, M., Spork, H.: Angew. Chern. 1,42 (1967) 
322 

References 
51. Kobayashi, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. 51, 359 (1961) 
52. Kesting, R. E., Stannett, V. T.: Macromol. Chern. 55, I (1962) 
53. Neimo, L., Shitola, H.: Paperi Puu 47, 369, 374 (1965) 
54. Hebeish, A., Mehta, P. c.: Textile Res. J. 39, 99 (1969) 
55. Rogovin, Z. A.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37,221 (1972) 
56. Liushitz, R. M., Druzhinina, N. N., Penkova, M. P., Rogovin, Z. A.: Cell. Chern. Technol. 2, 
579 (1968) 
57. Benoit, H., Froelich, D.: In Light Scattering from Polymer Solutions (Huglin, M. B., ed.) 
London-New York: Academic Press 1972, Ch. II 
58. Strazielle, c.: In Light Scattering from Polymer Solutions Huglin, M. B., ed.) London-New York: 
Academic Press 1972, Ch. 15 
59. Tuzar, Z., Kratochvil, P., Strakova, P.: Europ. Polym. J. 6,1113 (1970) 
60. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: Makromol. Chern. 149,309 (1971) 
61. Taga, T., Inagaki, H.: Angew. Makromol. Chern. 33,129 (1973) 
62. Hamburger, C. J.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I, 7,1023 (1969) 
63. Moore, J. c.: J. Polymer Sci. A 2, 835 (1964) 
64. Guthrie, J. T., Haq, Z.: Polymer 15,133 (1974) 
65. Rollins, M. L., Cannizzaro, A. M., Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 12, 
71 (1968) 
66. Liggett, R. W., HotTman, H. L. Jr., Tanquary, A. c.: Amer. DyestutTReptr. 58, 25 (1969) 
67. Reinhardt, R. M., Reid, J. D., Daul, G. c.: Textile Res. J. 26, I (1956) 
68. Kaizerman, S., Mino, G., Meinhold, L. F.: Textile Res. J. 32, 136 (1962) 
69. Iwakura, Y., Kurosaki, T., Uno, K., Imai, Y.: J. Polymer Sci. C 4,673 (1964) 
70. Immergut, E. H.: In Encyclopedia of Polymer Science and Technology, (Mark, H. F., Gaylord, 
N. G., Bikales, N. M., eds.) Vol. 3., New York: Interscience 1965, P. 242 
71. Rollins, M. L., Moore, A. T., Goynes, W. R., Carra, J. H., de Gruy, I. V.: Amer. DyestutT 
Reptr. 54,512 (1965) 
72. Arthur, J. C. JT.: Advances in Chern. Ser. 91, 574 (1969) 
73. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Daigle, D. J.: Textile Tes. J. 34, 653 (1964) 
74. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 33, 727 (1963) 
75. Blouin, F. A., Morris, N. J., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 36, 309 (1966) 
76. Blouin, F. A., Cannizzaro, A. M., Arthur, J. C. Jr., Rollins, M. L.: Textile Res. J. 38, 811 
(1968) 
77. Demint, R. J., Arthur, J. C. Jr., Markezich, A. R., McSherry, W. F.: Textile Res. J. 32, 918 
(1962) 
78. Demint, R. J., Arthur, J. C. Jr., McSherry, W. F.: Textile Res. J. 31, 821 (1961) 
79. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Markezich, A. R., McSherry, W. F.: Textile Res. J. 33, 896 (1963) 
80. Blouin, F. A., Morris, N. J., Arthur, 1. C. lr.: Textile Res. 1. 38, 7\0 (1968) 
81. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Grant, N. J.: Textile Res. J. 36, 934 (1966) 
82. Blouin, F. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Polymer Preprints 6,359 (1965) 
83. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J.: Textile Res. J. 30, 505 (1960) 
84. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Demint, R. J., McSherry, W. F., Jurgens, J. F.: Textile Res. J. 29, 759 (1959) 
85. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Uchida, M., Kugo, E.: Doitati To Hoshasen 2, 316 (1959) 
86. Chitale, A. G., Kulkarni, A. Y.: J. Sci. Ind. Res. 20D, 223 (1961) 
87. Prahl, H. F., Tovey, H., Underwood, C. E.: Textile Res. 1. 36, 245 (1966) 
88. Goynes, W. R., Harris, 1. A.: J. Polymer Sci. C 36, 277 (1972) 
89. Guthrie, J. T., Percival, J. A.: Polymer 18, 531 (1977) 
90. Noordermeer, J.W. M., Daryanini, R., Janeschitz-Kriegl, H.: Polymer 16, 359 (1975) 
91. Hearon, W., Hiatt, D., Fordyce, C. R.: J. Amer. Chern. Soc. 65, 829 (1943) 
92. Guthrie, J. T., Huglin, M. B., Phillips, G. 0.: European Polym. J. 8, 747 (1972) 
93. Benson, R., Guthrie, J. T., Lartey, R. B.: Polymer 16,903 (1975) 
94. Reich, L., Levi, D. W.: Makromol. Chern. 66, 102 (1963) 
95. Reich, L. 1.: Polymer Sci. B 3, 231 (1965) 
96. Reich, L., Levi, D. W.: Makromol. Rev. 1, 173 (1967) 
97. Wegner, J., Patat, F.: J. Polymer Sci., Polym. Symp. 31,121 (1971) 
98. Patel, K. S., Patel, K. C., Patel, R. D.: Makromol. Chern. 132,7 (1970) 
99. Huang, R. Y-M., Chandramouli, P.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I, 7,663 (1969) 
323 

7. Characterization and Properties of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
100. Sharma, V. N., Daruwalla, E. H.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 21, 331 (1977) 
101. Brown, W. P., Tipper, C. F. H.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 22,1459 (1978) 
102. Harris, J. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr., Carra J. H.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 22, 905 (1978) 
103. Reinhardt, R. M., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Abstracts, A.C.S. I 76th National Meeting, Maimi Beach, 
Florida Sept. 1978 (Cel!. 94) 
104. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Blouin, F. A.: Amer. Dyestuff. Reptr. 51,1024 (1962) 
105. Arthur, J. C. Jr., Blouin, F. A.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 8, 2813 (1964) 
106. Sakurada, 1.: Nippon Mengyo Gijutsu Kenkyusho Kenkyu Hokuku (Res. Rept. Japan Cotton 
Techn. lnst.) 56, I (1962) 
107. Tsuji, W., lmai, M., Kadono, Y.: Bull. lnst. Chem. Kyoto. Univ. 42, 68 (1964) 
108. Sakurada, I., Okada, T., Kaji, K.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37,1 (1972) 
109. Sakurada, I.: Chem. Techno!. 2,376 (1972) 
110. Tsuji, W., lmai, M., Kadono, Y., Ichikawa, K.: Bull. lost. Chem. Res. Lyoto Univ. 43, 94 (1964) 
Ill. Mares, T., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37,349 (1972) 
112. Byrne, G. A., Arthur, J. C. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 41, 271 (1971) 
113. DasGupta, S.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37, 333 (1972) 
114. Kamogawa, H., Sekiya, T.: Textile Res. J. 31, 585 (1961) 
115. Gardon, J. L.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 5, 734 (1961) 
116. Walsh, W. K., Jin, C. R., Amstrong, A. A. Jr.: Textile Res. J. 35, 648 (1965) 
117. Kamel, M., Hebeish, A., AI-Aref, A.: j. App!. Polym. Sci. 18, 3463 (1974) 
118. Kamel, M., Hebeish, A., Allam, M., AI-Aref, A.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 17,2725 (1973) 
119. Gallagher, D. M.: Textile Res. J. 40, 621 (1970) 
120. Richards, G. N., White, E. F. T.: Textile Res. J. 34, 810 (1964) 
121. DasGupta: Can. Text. J. 18,57 (1964) 
122. Negishi, M., Nakamura, Y., Kakinuma, T., lizuka, Y.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 9, 2227 (1965) 
123. Hebeish, A.: L'lndustrie Textile No 991, 441 (1970) 
124. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage, Sept. 23, 32 (1971) 
125. Kesting, R. E., Stannett, V. T.: Mackromo!' Chern. 65, 248 (1963) 
126. Kulkarni, A. Y., Mehta, P. c.: Textile Res. J. 32, 701 (1962) 
127. Achwal, W. 8.: Colourage Dec. 16,34 (1971) 
128. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage Dec. 31, 22 (1970) 
129. Rogovin, Z. A.: Chemical Transformation and Modification of Cellulose, Khimiya 1967; 
Fasern 18, 138 (1968); Lenzinger Ber. 30, 20 (1970) 
130. Rogovin, Z. A., Tuganova, M. A., Krjazhev, J. G., Zharova, T. J.: (to Moscow Textiljny lnst.) 
U.S. Pat. 3, 391,096 (1968); British Pat. 1,022,083 (1966) 
131. Kern, W., Schulz, R. c.: Angew. Chern. 69,153 (1957) 
132. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage Oct. 21, 34 (1971) 
133. Uno, K., lwakura, Y., Makita, M., Ninomiya, T.: J. Polymer Sci. A-I, 5, 2311 (1967) 
134. Kamel, M., Hebeish, A.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 20, 2407 (1976) 
135. Einsele, U.: Melliand. Textilber. 45, 641 (1964) 
136. Achwal, W. B.: Colourage Nov. 18,36 (1971) 
137. Bhattacharjee, S. S., Perlin, A. S.: J. Polymer Sci. B 13, 113 (1975) 
138. Stan nett, V. T.: Tappi 47, 53A (1964) 
139. Putnam, E. S.: J. Polymer Sci. C 2,377 (1963) 
140. Dilli, S., Garnett, J. L., Martin, E. c.: J. Polymer Sci. C 37,291 (1972) 
141. Bardan, K., Mukhopadhyay, S., Chatterjee, S. R.: J. Polymer Sci. 15, 141 (1977) 
142. Mukhopadhyay, S., Prasad, J., Chatterjee, S. R.: Makromo!. Chem. 176, I (1975) 
143. Maeda, H., Suzuki, H., Yamauchi, A., Sakimae, A.: Biochem. Biotech. 17, 119 (1975) 
144. Dimov, K., Semkova, M., Dimitrov, D., Terlemezyan, E.: Lenzinger Ber. 45, 60 (1978) 
145. Chebotareva, R. D., Grebenyuk, V. D., Shamolina, I. I.: Zh. Prik!. Khim. (Leningrad) 51,2197 
(1978) 
146. Anon.: Nucleonics 20; 64 (1962) 
147. Karpov, V. L., Malinsky, Y. M., Serenkov, V. I., Klimanova, R. S., Freiden, A. S.: Nucleonics 
18, 88 (1960) 
148. Kenya, D. L., Fennessey, J. P., Stannett, V. T.: Forest Prod. J. 12,161 (1962) 
149. Kent, J. A., Winston, A. W., Boyle, W. R., Harrison, L. W.: AEC Publication TID 7643, 
P. 355 (\ 962) 
324 

References 
150. Ramalingam, K. V., Werezak, G. N., Hodgins, J. W.: J. Polymer Sci. C 2,153 (1963) 
151. Lawton, E. 1., Bellamy, W. D., Hungate, R. E., Bryant, M. P., Hall, E.: Science 113, 380 
(1951 ) 
152. LePoutre, P. F., Hopfenberg, H. B., Stan nett, V. T.: 1. Polymer Sci. C 37,309 (1972) 
153. Hopfenberg, H. B., Kimura, F., Rigney, P. T., Stannett, V. T.: J. Polymer Sci. C 28,243 
(1969) 
154. Yoneho, T.: Kasen Geppo 29,60 (1976) 
155., Gamova, I. A., Natkina, L. N., Shiryaeva, G. V., Prishchepa, N. D.: Isv. Uchebn. Zaved. Lesn. 
Zh. 19, 113 (1976) 
156. Cunanan, S. A., Bonoan, L. S., Verceluz, F. P., Azucena, E. A.: Phillipine A.E.e. Rept. 
(1976), PAEC(D)-76032 
157. Goskii, G. M., Zhonina, T. A.: Tsellyu!. Burn. Karton. 11,7 (1977) 
158. Meleschevich, A. P., Vishev, Yu. V., Gordienko, L. L., Richko, N. T., Yurganova, L. G., 
Voitsekhovskii, R. V.: Khim. Techno!. (Kiev) 4, 59 (1977) 
159. Vandana, I. Ya., Zolders, J., Surna, J.: Khim. Drev. 5, 115 (1976) 
160. Paeglitis, D.: Issled Ob!. Khim. Drev. Tezisy Dokl. Konf. Mollodykhz Uch. 1st 56 1975 
161. Hills, P. R., McGahen, D. J.: U.K.A.E.A., Brit. Pat. 1,449,814 (1976) 
162. Lawniczak, M.: Pr. Kom. Techno!. Drewna, Poznan, Tav. Przyj Nauk. 6, 49 (1976) 
163. Hornoff, V., Kokta, B. V., Valade, J. L.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 21, 477 (1977) 
164. Tirzina, J., Zoldners, J.: Tezisy Dokl-Vses Konf. Khim. Ispol'z Lignina, 6th (1975) (Sergeeva, 
V. N., ed.) Riga, U.S.S.R. 
165. Young, R. A.: 1. Agric. Food. Chern. 25, 738 (1977) 
166. Hon, D. N. S.: Abstracts, ACS., 176th National Meeting, Miami Beach, Florida, Sept. 1978 
(paper, Cel!. 56) 
167. Young, R. A., Naguyen, e.: Abstracts, A.e.S., I 76th National Meeting, Miami Beach, Florida, 
Sept. 1978 (paper, Cell. 56) 
168. Dolinin, V. R., Korovin, Yu. F., Tyuganov, M. A., Rogovin, Z. A.: Khim. Drev. 5,15 (1978) 
169. Zolders, J., Pauls, R., Berisova, T. G.: Khim. Drev. 5,19 (1978) 
170. Ikada, K.: In Advances in Polymer Science Vo!. 29. (Cantow H. J., ed.). Berlin: Springer-
Verlag 1978, P. 47 
325 

8. Industrial Application 
of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
8.1. Introduction 
Those industries based on cellulosic raw materials were quick to see potential 
advantages in the chemical combination of a polar cellulose with a non-polar 
vinyl polymer. Projects to form and evaluate graft copolymers were. therefore 
carried out with high hopes in research departments all over the world. There 
was a disappointing lack of success at first, frequently due to cost factors, and 
there are still only a few commercial products to be had, but the number seems to 
be increasing. Most of these products are based on either wood or textile 
fibers. 
8.2. Wood-Plastic Composites (WPC) 
The term "wood-plastic composites" or "WPC"l. 2) denotes the material formed 
when wood is impregnated with a monomer which is then polymerized. This 
process does not necessarily result in a graft copolymer, but some grafting 
may be expected from most methods of initiation. The polymerization may be 
initiated by treatment with high-energy radiation, either from a cobalt source or 
from an electron accelerator, or by the action of polymerization catalysts and 
heat. These treatments produce graft polymers of cellulose under the proper 
conditions, as has been discussed in earlier chapters. The conditions in forming 
wood-polymer combinations mayor may not be favourable for true grafting to 
occur. The monomer fills the wood pores, but penetrates the cell walls only under 
swelling conditions3), but there will probably be a certain amount of grafting 
wherever there is molecular contact between cellulose and monomer. This is less 
likely with simple peroxide initiation, because grafting would then occur by a 
chain-transfer mechanism, which does not operate too readily in the case of 
cellulose. 
The properties of a solid cellulose matrix with the pores filled by a solid polymer 
would not be expected to change much if the two phases were connected by random 
covalent link~ges, there is indeed little difference in the properties of radiation-
polymerized products and those initiated with benzoyl peroxide, although the 
former are likely to contain more true grafting4• 5). Still, since many investigators 
consider WPC's as examples of grafting, such composites should properly be 
mentioned here. 
WPC's are, of course, more complicated than the preceding brief summary 
indicates, due to the very complex physical nature of wood and to the presence 
326 

8.2. Wood-Plastic Composites (WPC) 
of other components. After all, cellulose IS only half of the wood substance, and 
the other components also take part in the reaction, either by forming grafts 
themselves, as the hemicelluloses may, or by inhibition, as in the case of 
lignin6). 
Fibrous materials other than wood may serve as substrates for boards or 
similar composites, but wood was the first to become an industrial material. 
In November, 1967, an international study group met at Bangkok, their report, 
"Impregnated Fibrous Materials", published by the International Atomic 
Energy Agency, gives a detailed resume of progress in the field at that time7). 
The initial paper gives a brief history of the impregnation of wood by phenolic 
or other resins81, but most of the others deal with wood or other fibrous 
materials which are subsequently subject to copolymerization. 
The number of substrates studied is vast, but the most promising woods seem 
to be oak, beech, poplar, birch, alder, maple, walnut, ash, and pine9 -12). Natur-
ally, the material of choice will depend upon the availability at the site of process-
ing, as well as upon the properties desired. 
An equally extensive study of monomers has been made. The choice here 
depends partly on availability, but still more so on economics, on the behavior 
of the process, and on the product's properties. Monomers of particular 
interest have been methyl methacrylate, styrene, and acrylonitrile2. 10 -IS). 
Mixtures of monomers have proved particularly interestingll • 14 -17). It is also 
customary to add solvents, plasticizers, resins, or other modifiers to the mono-
merI6). 
The properties of the product depend, of course, on the wood, the monomer, 
and the details of processing. However, one may make many generalizations. 
The improvements in hardness and dimensional stability are particularly 
striking and very important for many usesl •18 -21). Related properties are high 
compression resistance, abrasion resistance, and low water sorption. The attrac-
tive appearance is also an important attribute, especially since it lasts so well. 
WPC parquets in the Federal Pavilion at the New York World's Fair22) and, for 
the past several years in the Air Terminal at Helsinki; FinlandI9), have demon-
strated the superior wearing qualities of these materials, although not all reports 
have revealed the same superior performance23 ). 
Indicative of the wide spread interest in WPC systems is the level of patent 
activity and associated literature. One process using radiation grafting has been 
described by Mott and Stannett24). This consists essentially of degassing under 
vacuum to remove air, nitrogen purging, degassing, exposure to the monomer, 
impregnation of the timber by the monomer under pressure, and subsequent 
irradiation. Low dose rates and total doses ar~ favoured and a variety of monomers 
have been investigated. The results of grafting, depending on the monomer applied, 
can be related to those observed during textile modifications. Thus, improvements 
are observed in the moisture uptake, rot resistance, tensile strength, compressive 
strength, dimensional stability, elastic modulus, and overall wood hardness25 -27). 
Attempts to fabricate 'wood-plastics' have been successful in certain instances 
with a wide range of monomers28). Much of the research along these lines arises 
from the utilization of natural resources as fully as possible. The outcome is 
of great interest to the developing nations. In a thorough treatment of the 
327 

8. Industrial Application of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
radiation-induced grafting of styrene and methyl methacrylate-impregnated birch 
and aspen, Shirayaeva et al.29) noted improved compression strength, static 
bonding strength, shear strength, and static hardness. Grafting rates were 
accelerated by the presence of tributylphosphate and resulted in lesser doses 
being required. Alkenyl phosphates were observed to impart both fire and 
bio-organic decay resistance. 
Another treatment. involving impregnation followed by irradiation was used 
by Basson30) in a study of grafting to pine and eucalyptus timbers. The degree of 
monomer uptake by the eucalyptus was less than that of pine. The investigation 
included microscopic examination, dose rate effects, and mechanical and weather-
ing tests. Both types of treated timber were superior to their untreated 
counterparts in many respects. 
Stan nett and his group31-34) have shown a general interest in grafting to 
wood and wood pulps. Here, however, the aim has been toward a greater under: 
standing of the nature of the grafting process rather than toward improving the 
physical properties of the timber alone. This aspect was also studied by Sakata 
et al. using styrene in grafting to woody fibers35). In this instance, the study in-
volved the distribution of grafted polystyrene branches between the lignin and 
carbohydrate fractions of the parent substrate (1.2:4 for lignin:carbohydrate, 
respectively). The branches were removed from lignin sections by treatment 
with acetic acid and from cellulose by hydrolysis with 72 % sulphuric acid (see 
observations made earlier regarding the use of concentrated sulphuric acid in the 
acid hydrolysis of cellulose-polystyrene graft copolymers). 
Birchwood has attracted attention recently because of considerable improve-
ments which can be achieved in physical properties by low degrees of grafting. 
Irradiation of unitary and binary monomer-impregnated samples has been success-
fully carried out. Steiners et al. 36) have noted the absence of stress and deformation 
when birchwood is treated with styrene in carbon tetrachloride and then irradiated. 
Copolymerized samples have greater dynamic compliance and mechanical pro-
perties. Glukhov et al.37) used styrene-acrylonitrile mixtures and observed that 
grafting was much easier than polymerization with either monomer alone. Similar 
observations were made by Oraby et al. in their study of the grafting of 
these same monomers to wood pulp cellulose38). 
The modification of timber or wood pulps by radiation-induced grafting offers 
a simple method of protection against a wide variety of decay-initiating 
systems. Improvements to physical properties, structural properties, and appear-
ance may also be achieved. Once grafted, the timber or wood pulp composites are 
amenable to a much wider range of use than exists for ungrafted materials. Some 
of the major broad problems in graft polymerization on an industrial scale 
have been considered by Iwate in his review of this topic39). Mention should also 
be made of the use of grafting procedures to improve the flame retardency of timber 
through WPC formation as considered by Leipins et a1.40) and Needles41) in their 
comprehensive reviews of radiation processing for flammability resistance. Con-
sideration is given to the grafting of vinyl chloride monomer onto many types 
of wood using a Co-60 radiation facilitf2). Also noted is the non-flammability 
of woodplastic composites when grafted with Phosgard C-22-R (Monsanto 
flame resistant)/monomer mixtures43l. 
328 

8.2. Wood-Plastic Composites (WPC) 
8.2.1. The Geographical Distribution of WPC Development 
The status of industrial development may be conveniently discussed country by 
country. Freidin et al.44) published in 1959 what seems to bp. the first account 
of irradiation of monomer-impregnated wood to produce a WPC; the Russian 
patent application is dated 195845). In the United States, Kenaga's 1963 patents46) 
were also applied for in 1958. The U.S. Atomic Energy Commission initiated a 
very productive research program in 1961 at West Virginia University12). There 
has been a great deal of progress since these independant beginnings1.18,47). 
According to the Bangkok report, some eight or ten countries had reached various 
stages of industrial development asp evaluation by 1967, while laboratory studies 
of such wood-polymer composites"were being actively pursued in a dozen other 
coun tries 7). 
I. United States 
Rotariu and Mott12) described the activities of four companies with production 
capacity for wood-plastic composites in 1967. Four years later, the situation was 
about the same, although there have been changes in ownership and activity. 
The American Novawood Company, Lynchburg, Va., was founded and began 
small-scale production in 196412,22,48). By the fall of 1966, their facilities had been 
expanded and various products were being evaluated for consumer use. These 
products -
parquetry, stair treads and risers, handrails, thresholds, door sills, 
chair mats - are still being produced by the Applied Radiant Energy Corporation, 
which bought the original facilities and uses the same trade names49). Red oak 
is used for most of their products. The parquetry, "Gammapar", is also made 
from back ash or walnut. Methyl methacrylate, vinyl acetate, and styrene have 
been used as monomers. 
Another parquet flooring of this type, "Perm a Grain", is made by the ARCa 
Chemical Company, a division of the Atlantic Richfield Company12, 50). Red oak 
is evacuated and impregnated with methyl methacrylate under high pressure. 
After irradiation with a cobalt source, the parquets are sanded and buffed. 
Vinyl chloride, styrene, and mixtures of styrene and acrylonitrile were also 
tested as impregnants. 
Radiation Technology, Inc., of New Jersey and its Canadian subsidiary manu-
facture a composite called "Radwood" from red oak, birch, walnut, and wild 
cherry. When installed costs and maintenance costs are both considered, Rad-
wood is said to be cheaper than conventional parquet flooring for periods over 
5 years under heavy duty and over 10 years under medium duty51). 
The Bowling Division of the American Machine and Foundry Company12, 22, 52) 
at Lowville, N.Y., has used a chemically catalyzed polymerization to make a 
WPC, originally as shafts for billiard cues, although other products have also 
been evaluated. The process was developed by Professor J. A. MeyerS, 53, 54) at 
Syracuse University with benzoyl peroxide or azobisisobutyronitile as initiator. 
There may be little or no true grafting, but the properties are essentially the 
same as those of irradiated products. The catalytic process is advantageous for 
small units which can be built quickly and cheaply55). 
329 

8. Industrial Application of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
Lockwood is the registered trademark for the composite developed by the 
Lockheed-Georgia Nuclear Laboratories, Lockhead-Georgia Company, Mari-
etta, Georgia12). Over a hundred types of wood were processed, using a dozen 
different monomers. Methyl methacrylate seemed the most attractive; vinyl 
chloride was also promising. However, the company has discontinued its effort 
in the field and the Nuclear Laboratories are now closed5l). 
2. Canada 
The Canadian subsidiary of Radiation Technology, Inc., which was just mention-
ed51), also markets Radwood. 
There is also Barwood of Canada, Ltd., which, through an agreement with 
the Atomic Energy of Canada , fabricates and markets a red oak WPC impregnated 
with methyl methacrylate. The radiation source at the South March plant of the 
Atomic Energy of Canada has been in operation since early in 1970, and 10,000 
square feet of flooring have been produced. A high-capacity plant for 10 million 
square feet annually is now being designed53). 
3. United Kingdom 
The U. K. Atomic Energy Authority at Harwell, Berkshire, has developed a 
WPC called Curifax56). The wood is treated at Harwell and furnished on order. 
to a number of companies now using it or investigating its use. The largest 
impregnator is 15 feet long; smaller ones are available for shorter lengths or for 
preformed blanks. Curifax is readily machined, preferably with carbide-tipped 
tools, and may be bonded with screws or adhesives; it is too hard to 
nail. 
The most promising use is for flooring2•56) and one of the first large-scale 
installations for Curifax has been a walkway complex in a chlorine factory, which 
used approximately 30 tons ofWPC. Other applications have been cutlery handles, 
toilet brushes, and golf club heads. Textile machinery is being investigated experi-
mentally. Drumsticks and musical instruments are on the market and the new 
organ console recently installed at Blackburn cathedral has used Curifax 
extensively56). 
4. Russia 
The research initiated by Freidin and Karpov44• 57) has continued in the Soviet 
Union45 • 58). Although there has been no announcement oflarge-scale production, 
a pilot plant with a capacity of one-half ton per day has been developed at the 
Karpov Institute in Moscow to produce wood-plastic composites. Among the 
woods used are beech, pine, and spruce; the polymers include styrene, methyl 
methacrylate, vinyl acetate, and vinyl chloride. A parquet sample of this sort is 
exhibited at the permanent Exhibition of the Achievements of the National 
Economy in the Pavilion of Atomic Energy in Moscow. 
5. Finland 
Research on radiation initiation and on chemically catalyzed initiation has been 
pursued concurrently in Finland since the early 1960's. The former research was 
330 

8.2. Wood-Plastic Composites (WPC) 
carried out by the Department of Radiation Chemistry at the University of 
Helsinkill.14.19) and the latter by Neste Oyll.19). 
The best results with irradiation have been obtained with birch or alder 
impregnated with methyl. methacrylate, or with a mixture of styrene and 
unsaturated polyesters. A test floor of irradiated birch and oak WPC parquets 
has been laid in one of the Helsinki elementary schools, and similar material has 
been tested as window frames in saunas and as a thin veneer on ski runners19). 
In the Neste Oy processes, peroxides are used as initiators, and styrene or 
styrene-polyester mixtures are the monomers used in most of the examples in 
the patents59). The floor of the reception room at the Helsinki Air Terminal 
is made of 8000 square meters of the Neste Oy parquetry19). The product 
"Neswood" has been licensed to Riihimaki Saha Oy and Paloheimo-Yhtyma in 
Riihimaki, Finland, for use in parquetry60.61). This "Lamella-Neswood" is 
available either as parquet tiles or as strips of parquetry. It is recommended 
where heavy duty can be expected -
public buildings, lobbies, concert halls, 
gymnasiums, and the like60). Neswood is also suitable for furniture parts, wall 
panels, tool handles, and many kinds of sporting goods, particularly ski 
runners9). 
6. France 
Conservatoire Industrie in Courbevoie manufactures various articles from wood-
plastic combinations, especially tool handles10. 13). In Courbevoie, too, the organi-
zation Saint-Gobain Techniques Nouvelles is working with beech, poplar, and 
oak woods and with methyl methacrylate, acrylonitrile, and styrene mono-
merslO). 
The Centre Technique de Bois in Paris and the Centre d'Etudes Nucleaires in 
Saclay are cooperating in the study of a radiation-initiated combination of 
styrene with beechwood. France also collaborates with Japan in these studies and 
is particularly interested in density studies and fabrication procedures10). 
7. Japan 
In their collaboration with France, the Japanese have paid particular attention 
to the dimensional stability and flame resistance of the products. Trial 
production batches of both chemical and radiation polymerizations have been 
made, and studies of marketability are underwaylO. 62). 
8. Scandinavia 
There has been considerable research in Sweden on WPC, but no large-scale 
production and no plans for commercialization now exist. Samples have been 
evaluated for parquetry, tool handles, and plywoodlO ). 
The Danish Atomic Energy Commission and the wood-manufacturing 
industries have cooperated in research, with special interest in the impregnation 
of veneer. Investigations have also begun at the Central Institute for Industrial 
Research in Norway10). 
331 

8. Industrial Application of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
9. West Germany 
Some companies in the Federal Republic are interested in dimensionally stabilized 
wood and in surface-hardened wood. Heavily stressed products, like railway ties, 
have been suggested as the more economically feasible uses13,63). 
10. Other Countries 
Many other countries are investigating wood-plastic combinations in universities 
and research centers, but at the time of the Bangkok meeting, no industrial 
developments had been indicated. These countries include Austria, Belgium, 
Holland, Italy, Czechoslovakia, and Hungary in EuropelO, 25, 64, 65), and Austra-
lia66), India67l, the Philippines68l, and Taiwan69) in Asia and the Pacific regions. 
In Pakistan70), jute has been investigated. In the Philippines and in Taiwan, 
WPC's are of interest to the wood-carving industry7l). 
8.2.2. Uses and Properties 
The properties and uses have already been indicated, but more detail on some 
points may be useful. The major types of utilization are reviewed below. 
1. Construction Materials 
The major emphasis of present utilization of wood-plastic composites is 
in this area, especially for tile or strip parquetry, stair treads, and the 
likel, 2, 7, 9,19,22,50,56,65). They have improved hardness, dimensional stability, 
and resistance to abrasionl,9, 18,19,22,50,56,65). Thin sheets have been suggested 
as facings for outer walls, doors, and window frames68, 72). 
A significant difficulty, which must be recognized, is the need to educate 
construction workers in the uses and properties of plastic composite materials. 
Rotariu and Mott12) have concluded that there are no major differences 
between the products from radiation polymerization and those from chemical 
polymerization without acid catalysts, of monomer systems which do not swell 
wood. However, if swelling systems are used and monomer is deposited within 
the fiber walls, there should be an advantage with the radiation product due to 
the greater likelihood of true grafting. 
Capital costs would probably be higher for a radiation plant and operating 
costs lower. The heat-catalyst system would probably be more economical for 
low-volume production12, 22, 52). 
Several of the tables in Chapter 7 provide data which ar,e relevant to the use 
and properties of wood-plastic composites. Studies of the mechanical properties 
(Tables 59-63, 66-69, 75 and 76), water repellency, and moisture regain properties 
(Table 77-81), resistance to fungal growths (Tables 83 and 84), and general 
physical properties (Tables 89-91) are covered. Some general areas of application 
can be inferred from Table 85. Tlie information regarding relative ease of colora-
tion and color fastness of composites (Tables 86 and 87) has relevance when 
composite identification is a requisite or when there is need of proof regarding 
a particular type of treatment. 
The reader is also advised to consult those sections dealing with methods 
of developing cellulose composites such as those discussed in Chapters 3-6. 
332 

8.2. Wood-Plastic Composites (WPC) 
2. Furniture and Industrial Parts 
The wood-plastic composites can be machined by equipment with hard metal 
cutters and glued after surface roughening, but not all adhesives are satis-
factory19,56). Since nailing may cause splitting, pieces intended for nailing 
should be drilled beforehand, or they may be attached by screws. The uses 
most often mentioned are tool handles, furniture arms and legs, and other small 
articles9,13,14, 22, 56). 
Somewhat related to the use of WPC's in furniture and the like is the technique 
of high-energy irradiation to cure polymerizable lacquers or coatings on wood 
substrates. Hoffmann and Smith73), for instance, have studied the use of the 
electron accelerator to cure mixtures of unsaturated polyesters with a vinyl 
monomer (styrene, ethyl acrylate, methyl methacrylate) applied as a coating or 
imp regnant ; they conclude that a cellulose graft polymer has been formed in this 
process. Much of the Finnish work on WPC's has dealt with monomer-polyester 
mixtures as impregnants for WpC'Sl1,17,19,74). 
3. Sporting Goods 
The toughness of wood-plastic composites has made them particularly attractive 
for use in sports. They are said to be particularly adapted for floors and furnishings 
of such areas as gymnasiums, sports halls, and basketball courts66). One of the 
most promising commercial outlets is as a base for cross-country skis, taking 
advantage of the excellent abrasion resistance and the affinity for ski wax9, 11. 19). 
Wood-polymer composites are used in the United States to manufacture billiard 
cues12,52). Other possibilities being investigated include gun stocks, archery 
equipment, golf clubs, chess sets, and musical instruments9,56). 
4. Wood Carving 
Experience with the previously discussed products has led to the conclusion 
by many that it is not economically feasible at this stage to use the polymeri-
zation process to upgrade the properties of low-cost softwoods. On the other 
hand, there seems to be advantages in doing this in the specific field of wood 
carving7!). 
In Taiwan, the use of a softwood, schefflera, is being considered to replace 
the conventionally used teak and camphor. The carving process is greatly 
accelerated and the final product is quite comparable to that of other woods -
better, in fact, with regard to dimensional stability. Labor is 80 % of the cost of 
producing an 8-inch carving in this way, and the total monomer treatment 
(80 % vinyl chloride and 20 % vinyl acetate) is 17.5 %. Radiation polymerization 
is under consideration. 
There is also interest in wood carving in the Philippines, but the availability 
and the cost of monomers are restricting features. Only methacrylates have been 
tested as monomers so far. An additional problem is that the present situation 
calls for rough carving before impregnation and finishing afterwards, which will 
increase handling costs in such a widely dispersed industry. 
333 

8. Industrial Application of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
8.3. Grafted Textile Products 
Textile products from grafted cellulose, like the wood-plastic composites, have 
appeared on the market in several countries. They include the rayons developed 
by Rogovin and his associates in Russia, the permanent-press cotton of Deering 
Milliken in the United States, and the fibers of the American Enka Corporation 
in the United States and of Chemiefaser Lenzing in Austria. The last two have 
both been developed by the Scott Paper Company. All of these will be discussed 
below. A grafted rayon was also manufactured in Japan on a small scale, but 
production was abandoned after a few years75, 76). 
The two Russian materials most discussed in the literature are called 
Mtilon A and Mtilon B. Mtilon A has a cellulose acetate base copolymerized 
with poly(acrylic acid). Mtilon B is a viscose staple fiber with a polyacrylonitrile 
graft. Cotton may also be grafted in this way77). Graflon, the Japanese fiber 
formerly manufactured by Nisshin Spinning Company, was similar to Mtilon B 
with a higher polyacrylonitrile content. All of these were grafted by chemical 
initiation, probably using redox systems. The Japanese process used vapor-phase 
grafting of acrylonitrile75, 76). 
Graflon was recommended for blankets, but the improvement in properties 
apparently failed to justify the expense of manufacture. For the same reason 
Grimm78), in the Institute for Fiber-Technology in Dresden, decided that the 
superior stiffness and abrasion resistance did not justify further study of his pro-
cess of grafting rayon with acrylonitrile by means of Fenton's reagent (hydrogen 
peroxide in the presence of Fell-ions). Grimm has compared the properties of his 
products with Graflon and Mtilon. 
The Mtilons are still widely used in Russia79 - 82). Mtilon A, the modified 
acetate fiber, has three to four times the resistance to wear of the untreated 
acetate fiber and one tenth of the tendency to develop static during processing. 
It can be used to form a bactericidal fabric80 -83) and is being used as an 
ion-exchange material to recover precious metals, such as gold, from refining 
wastes82 ). Mtilon B, from viscose, has a wool-like appearance and is specially 
recommended especially for carpets77,81,83). It has improved resistance to micro-
organisms, light, and abrasion, in addition to lowered hygroscopicity and less 
tendency to crease, wrinkle, or shrink77,81,83). 
Rogovin80) has recently summarized the various uses in graft copolymers of 
cellulosic textiles in Russia. Earlier reviews in German and English also 
exist81,82). The Mtilon graft with acrylonitrile is produced (3 tons per day) for 
carpets and knitted wear82, 84, 85). Flame-proofed materials are produced by 
phosphorylation of a graft copolymer of poly(vinylpyrrolidone), or poly(methyl-
vinylpyridine), or by grafting with a phosphorus-col1taining monomer82, 84, 86). 
Ion-exchange fibers are being used, as mentioned above, for recovery of heavy 
metals from solution and also in the dye and food industries81, 82). They may be 
either cationic like Mtilon A or anionic (from nitrogeneous monomers, qua-
ternized if necessary)80,82,84,85). The ion-exchange fibers are used as substrates 
to bind enzymes or other proteins, and the salts have special uses83,84). The 
calcium salt is a coagulant for blood and proteins and is used for medical 
gauze as a hemostatic agent83,85,87,89), The silver or copper salts are bactericidal 
334 

8.3. Grafted Textile Products 
and are used in hospital linen, surgical coats, and special laboratory and 
working clothes81,83,85). Fluorine-containing grafts, which are water- and 
oil-repellent, are also used in special work clothes82). Special technical uses have 
been found for isoprene and styrene grafts. 
The durable-press cottons and polyester blends produced by Deering Milliken88) 
are based on processes described in a series of patents89). These fabrics have 
been grafted with methylolacrylamide by radiation. They have several ad-
vantages over conventional permanent-press fabrics: durability to commercial 
laundering, superior soil release, and no development of formaldehyde odour. 
It appears that grafting (through the vinyl function) and crosslinking (through 
the methylol group) have occurred in the process. 
Faessinger and Conte of the Scott Paper Company have developed very 
promising methods of grafting vinyl monomers to cellulose by initial xantha-
tion90- 92) or by reaction of the cellulose with thio-compounds like ethylene 
sulfide91,93). The process is being developed by Scott Paper Company jointly 
with American Enka Corporation in the United States and with Chemiefaser 
Lenzing in Austria. 
The Austrian group84,85 ,94) is also making extensive pilot-plant studies 
on a flameproof fiber using a monomer which contains phosphorus, and also 
on a fiber for use in wet-web nonwovens. This latter product will be a long, thin 
fiber which can be easily and uniformly dispersed. It is -formed by grafting the 
partly xanthated fiber with monomers which contain polar groups, such as 
the acrylates95). 
Considerable interest has been shown in the radiation-induced grafting of 
cellulosics with a view to enhancing their flammability resistance4O). Early 
reports on this subject include those of Morris and Charlesby96) and Miles and 
Delasanta97). Miles and Delasanta used triallyl phosphate and N-methylol-
acrylamide padded cotton, which was exposed to high-energy electrons at room 
temperature to produce a flame-retardant substrate. Cotton and various syn-
thetic fibers have been made flame retardant by reaction with the following: 
vinyl phosphonate monomers98); N ,N I ,Nil -triallyl phosphoric triamide and a 
crosslinking agent containing a vinyl group and a group reactive with cellulosic 
hydroxyl groupS99); phosphonate acrylamides of general structure100), 
o 
0 
II 
t 
CH2=C-C-N-CH2P (OR"12 
I 
I 
R 
R 
also cyclotri- and cyclotetraphosphazenes (for example, hexakis (methallyloxy) 
cyclo triphosphazine to retard cellophane film101» and organoboron com-
pounds102). 
In the application of the flame retardant Fyrol 76, it has been noticed that the 
addition of N-methylolacrylamide gives increased fixation and also greater 
stability to flaming40). In certain applications, for example cotton printing, 
N-vinyl pyrrolidone makes a good substitute for N-methylolacrylamide. N-vinyl 
pyrrolidone has the advantage of being still liquid when water is removed, whereas 
N-methylolacrylamide is not4O). With regard to flame retardancy, the greatest 
335 

8. Industrial Applica~on of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
activity has been concerned with grafting to cotton, polyester, and cotton/ 
polyester blends. 
8.4. Grafted Pulps and Papers 
There has been no evidence of the successful utilization of true grafting in the 
paper industry proper, although the Lenzing development of a fiber for non-
woven webs94,95) comes close to it. There is a grafted pulp on the market, however. 
This was a development of Adams and Hoftiezer of American Can Company90, 103) 
using the Bridgeford104, 105) method of grafting pulps with redox systems. Mono-
mers are used containing hydrophobic groups which, after grafting, can be con-
verted to hydrophilic groups. For instance, copolymers with poly(ethyl acrylate). 
or polyacrylonitrile can be readily changed to copolymers with poly(acrylic 
acid). These pulps are not at present used in paper, although their use as compo-
nents of papermaking stocks has been patentedI06), as have a number of other 
uses107). They are also being made and sold as a rooting medium for young 
plants104,108). 
Although it is not considered a true grafted product, the encapsulated fiber 
of the National Lead Company109-111) should also be mentioned here. The 
pulp fibers are treated with titanium chloride or the like and then with an 
organometallic alkylating agent, like triethyl aluminium or a Grignard reagent. 
Ethylene is then polymerized on the reactive sites. Very likely, the growing 
polymer is a graft polymer with the cellulose and polyethylene linked by 
catalyst, but when the reaction is terminated, as, for instance, by methanol, these 
linkages will be cleaved and the resulting fiber will be simply encapsulated110). 
These fibers can be formed into a paper web and bonded by heat sealing. With 
a polymer level as low as 20 %, the product has excellent wet strength, dimen-
sional stability, and chemical resistance112). For some years, it was used in 
separator plates for lead-acetate storage batteries and is recommended for 
certain industrial filters and packaging applications112, 113). 
Various approaches to paper boards have been made. A patent (to Kovrizh-
nykh and Flyate) has been granted which deals with a composite containing 
cellulose fiber (20-90 %), vinyl fibers, (5-10 %) and acrylonitrile grafted, rayon 
fibers (5-70%). This has been used to provide a filterboard having useful fil-
tration, physical, mechanical, and chemical properties114). Sakamoto et al. 
have examined vinyl acetate grafted pulps with particular attention focused 
on the effects of the manufacturing method on the properties of paper prepared 
from the grafted pulp. Improvements were observed in tensile strength, surface 
smoothness, water regain, and heat bonding characteristics115). A recent 
Japanese patent deals with the manufacture of heat formable panels using 
waste aqueous pulp slurries grafted with olefinic monomers116). A redox initiator 
system, operating at pH = 4, is recommended with styrene as comonomer. 
The example quoted deals with an 8 % aqueous waste, newspaper pulp slurry 
at 55 to 60°C. This is treated with styrene (pulp/styrene ratio of 80: 20) in the 
presence of I % hydrogen peroxide and 0.1 % Fell sulfate (based on weight of 
pulp in slurry) for I hour. Panels formed from the reSUlting copolymers, after 
336 

8.5. Miscellaneous Examples 
hot pressing, have a tensile strength of 39 N mm-2, bending modulus of 
6500 N mm - 2, bending strength of 80 N mm - 2, and a compression strength 
of 50Nmm-2• Grafting may be useful in specialty papers6,l17), but Jayme117) 
considers that impregnation or reaction with the preformed polymer is better. 
The paper industry is slow to adopt new processes and products requiring 
new equipment and conditions and raising unexpected questions of uniformity, 
speed, and cost. However, grafted textile and wood products are now in more 
than token use and cellulose grafting is no longer merely of academic interest. 
8.5. Miscellaneous Examples 
Taylor and Bagley have examined the hydrolyzed cellulose-polyacrylonitrile 
graft copolymer system as a polyelectrolyte gel forming highly viscous suspensions 
in water118). Such a material could compete with existing thickeners since the 
rheological properties of the swollen, packed gel suspension are very similar 
to standard thickeners. The copolymer formulation provides stiff pastes in 
water suspensions even at concentrations as low as 1 %119), and most of the 
material is easily centrifuged from suspension even at low speed. Patent 
coverage of this type of material has been taken by Adams and Tilloson120). 
Bagley et al. have prepared a series of extrudable composites from graft-
polymerized rigid fillers121 ). Here a vinyl monomer is copolymerized with 
starch or cellulose to give an extrudable, biodegradable polymer. In a typically 
quoted example, 40 g of cellulose, 40 g styrene, and 10 cm3 water were irradiated 
with Co 60, y rays for 62 minutes (1 Mrad) under nitrogen before being allowed 
to stand at room temperature for 2 hours. The corresponding graft copolymer 
was mixed with 30 g of glycerol and the whole mixture extruded at 190°C to 
give a product which, on repassage through the extruder at 190°C, gave a 
translucent ribbon with a smooth, glossy surface and no die swell. 
Absorbent materials (especially tampons) have been prepared from a 10-95 % 
cellulose grafted with acrylic acid, alkyd acrylates and acrylamide. The average 
particle size of these copolymers is 50-500 !l122). The remainder of the ab-
sorbent material consists of ungrafted wood pulp or regenerated cellulose. In 
a related field, Morin et aJ.123) have prepared graft copolymers of partly 
hydrolyzed cellulose triacetate and methacrylic acid (later converted to the 
sodium salt). Redox initiation at low temperatures was used in the grafting, 
which was achieved with high conversion C- 100 %) and efficiency (90-95 %). 
The appearance of a disperse phase during grafting is attributed to the for-
mation of spherical particles (0.5-1.0!lm in diameter) of insoluble graft 
copolymer on the surface of cellulose triacetate structures. 
Interest has been shown in ion-exchange fibers. Y oshiboshi et a1. 1Z4) have 
grafted substituted acrylic esters of type CH2=CRCOOCH2CH2NRz (where 
R=H, CH3, C2Hs' C3H7) to provide high strength, ion-exchange systems. Such 
fibers were found to have a rapid CrV) adsorption rate and to require a lower 
sodium hydroxide consumption for their regeneration than does Amberlite 
IR 45. Oishi et a1.12S) have looked at similar series of compounds together with 
337 

8. Industrial Application of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
the corresponding phosphoric acid derivates. Here, electron beam initiation 
was used in grafting. The products were shown to have a high ion-exchange 
capacity and to exhibit little swelling in water or dioxan/water (90: 100). Grafting 
levels of 740 % were achieved. The preparation of mercaptoethylated graft 
fibers for the adsorption of heavy metal cations has been reported by Hayakawa 
and YamakitaI26). 
In many ways, the industrial development of cellulosic graft copolymers is 
related to developments in associated technologies. An example of particular 
importance is provided by the advances made in electron beam acceleratorsl27) 
as considered by Abramyan. Electron beam facilities have found application 
in an ever-increasing number of polymerization processes and polymer degra-
dation reactions. Equipment capable of generating energy in the range 0.3 to 
. 5.0 MeV to a total dose of between I and 40 Mrad is readily available. Such 
sources, it may be recalled, have the advantages of high power, the possibility 
of inclusion in the production line (as seen in fabric, fiber, surface coating, or 
film modification), no radiation hazard when switched ofT, and high efficiency 
of utilization of the available radiation. The total power of industrial electron 
beam facilities produced every year is increasing rapidlyI28-130). The expansion 
of electron beam curing in industry owes much to the fact that significant modi-
fications of properties can be made at a relatively low energy expenditure. Thus, 
a typical dose in grafting is 2.5 Mrad (i.e. 24 J g-I), which corresponds to 
heating water by 6 dc. 
Processes involving electron beam curing technologies, which either involve 
cellulosics directly or provide a guide to possible means of alteration, include 
the surface activation of polyethylene131, 132); curing processes on various 
substrates including timber, cotton, paper and other substrates131, 133); graft 
polymerization131, 134); textile modificationl35 -136); crosslinking reactions132, 137); 
sterilization of medical products and associated packagingl38) foodstuffpreser-
vation139, 140); and leather goods processingl41). 
References 
I. Anonymous: Nucleonics 20 (3), 94 (1962) 
2. Hills, P. R.: United Kingdom Atomic Energy Authority, AER~-M 2269 Wantage, U.K. (1969) 
3. Timmons, T. K., Meyer, 1. A., Cote, W. A. lr.: Wood Science 4,13 (1971) 
4. luneja, S. C., Hodgins, 1. W.: Forest Prod. 1. 20 (12),24 (1970) 
5. Meyer, 1. A.: Forest Prod. 1.15,362 (1965); Siau, 1. F., Meyer, 1. A.: Forest Prod. 1.16,47 
(1966) 
6. Phillips, R. B., Quere, 1., Guiroy, G., Stan nett, V. T.: Tappi 55, 858 (1972) 
7. International Atomic Energy Agency, Impregnated Fibrous Materials Vienna 1968 
8. Takow, H.: Impregnated Fibrous Materials Vienna 1968 
9. Neswood Neste Oy, Helsinki, undated, P. 3 
10. Kinell, p.-b., Aagaard, P.: Impregnated Fibrous Materials I.A.E.A., Vienna 1968, P. 129 
II. Miettinen, 1. K.: Impregnated Fibrous Materials I.A.E.A., Vienna 152 1968 
12. Rotariu, G. 1., Mott, W. E.: Impregnated Fibrous Materials I.A.E.A., Vienna 1968, P. 190 
13. Burmester, A.: Impregnated Fibrous Materials, I.A.E.A., Vienna, 1968, P. 209 
14. Miettinen, 1. K.: Paperi Puv 49,51 (1967); 49, 63 (1967) 
15. Mott, W. E., Rotariu, G. 1.: Impregnated Fibrous Materials I.A.E.A., Vienna 83 1968; 
Stannett, V. T., ibid., P. 45 
338 

References 
16. I.A.E.A. Report: Impregnated Fibrous Materials Vienna: 1968, P. 121 
17. Stromberg, 1., Miettintn, 1. K.: Paperi Puu 51, 785 (1969) 
18. Anonymous: Nucleonics 23,17 (1965) 
19. Autio, T., Miettinen, J. K.: Forest Prod. J. 20, 36 (1970) 
20. Gibson, E. J., Laidlow, R. A., Smith, G. A.: 1. Appl. Chern. 16, 58 (1966) 
21. Aaagaard, P.: Svensk Kern. Tidskr. 79, 501 (1967) 
22. Anonymous: Modern Pla)ltics 44,96 (1967) 
23. Garratt, P. G., Hoigrie, J., Heetman, J. G., Hess, W.: Holzforsch 26,96 (1972); Hills, P. R., 
U.K.A.E.A., A.E.R.E.-M. 2401 Harwell 1971 
24. Mott, W. E., Stannett, V. T.: Isotopes Radiat. Tech. 6, 323 (1969) 
25. Czikovsky, T.: Atomic Energy Review 6, 3 (1968) 
26. Stamm, A. J.: Wood and Celluloe Science New York: Ronald Press 1964 
27. Kenaga, D. L., Fennessey, J. P., Stannett, V. T.: Forest Prod. J. (1962), P. 161 
28. ~andeel, S. A. E., Etman, M. H.: Alexandria J. Agric. Res. 19,365 (1973) 
29. Shirayeva, G. V., Prishchepa, N. D., Glutiov, V. I., Lebedev, V. T., Karpov, V. L.: 
Proc. 3rd Tihany Symp. Rad. Chern. (1971), (ed., Dobo, J., Hedwig, P.); Akademiai Kaido 
Budapest, 1, 783 (1972) 
30. Basson, R. A.: Atom. Energy Board, Pretoria Rep. A/Conf. 49/P-668 (1971) 
31. Radi, F. S., Hopfenberg, H. B., Stannett, V. T.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 16,2685 (1972) 
32. Phillips, R. B., Brown, W., Stannett, V. T.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 15,2929 (1971) 
33. Phillips, R. B., Brown, W., Stannett, V. T.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 16, I (1972) 
34. Phillips, R. B., Brown, W., Stannett, V. T.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 17,443 (1973) 
35. Sakata, I., Miyata, N., Senjui, R.: Mokuzai Gakkaishi, 18, 593 (1972) 
36. Steiners, K., Goldsteins, A., Rocens, K., Dolacis, J., Rajavaa, E.: Latv. P.SR Zinat Akad. 
Vestis 11, 35 (\ 972) 
37. Glukov, V. I., Shirayaeva, G. V., Karpov, V. L.: Plass. Massy 11, 28 (1972) 
38. Oraby, W:, Hopfenberg, H. B., Stannett, V. T.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 15,2987 (1971) 
39. Iwate, F.: Kobunshi Kato 27, 89 (1978) 
40. Liepins, R., Stannett, V., Walsh, W. K.: Prog. Polym. Sci., 6, I (1978) 
"41. Needles, H. L.: J. Consumer Prod. Flammability 4,156 (1977) 
42. Freibush, A. M., Kieltyka, H. P.: U.S. patent '3,407,088 (1978) 
43. Proksch, E.: Wood-plastic Work in Austria, presented at the Conference on Large Radiation 
Sources for Industrial Processes, Munich Germany 1969 
44. Freidin, A. S., Malinskii, Yu, M., Karpov, V. L.: Gidroliz. i. Lesokhin. Prom. 12,4(1959); 
Through Abstr. Bull. Inst. Paper Chern. 31 2485 (1960) 
45. Czvikovsky, T., Dobo, J.: Impregnated Fibrous Materials, Vienna: International Atomic 
Energy Agency 1968, P. 169 
46. Kenaga, D. L.: (to Dow Chemical Company) U.S. Patents 3,077,417; 3 077,418; 3, 077,419 
(1963); Kenaga, D. L., Fennessey, J. P., Stannett, V. T.: Forest Prod. J. 12, 161 (1962) 
47. Kent, J. A.: Proc. Nuclear Applns. Wood, Paper, Pulp Inds. Conf. 1964, P. 49; Kent, J. A.: 
U.S.A.E.C. Doc. ORNL IIC 7, 6 (1965); Kent, J. A., Loos, W. E., Walters, W. R., Boyle, W. R., 
Taylor, G. W., Winston, A. W.: U.S.A.E.C. Accession No. 33335 Rept. ORD-2954-4 1966; 
Kent, J. A., Winston, A. W., Boyle, W. R., Harmison, L. W.: U.S.A.E.C., TID-7643 1962; 
Kent, J. A., Winston, A., Boyle, W. R., Loos, W., Ayres, J. E.: Interim Report ORO-625 
1965 Eng. Expt. Station, W. Va. Univ. Morgantown, W. Va: Klein, R. M.: U.S.A.E.C. Doc. 
ORNL IIC 7, 15 (1965) 
48. Anonymous: Chern. Eng. 72,64(1965) 
49. Gammapar: American Novawood Corp. 1971, R.D. Gillespie, personal communication 
50. Witt, A. E., Morissey, J. E.: Modern Plastics 49,78 (1972) 
51. Welt, M. A.: In U.K.A.E.A., AERE-M 2401, Harwell 1971, P. 4 
52. Hebble, K., Golas, C., Schneider, D., Meyer, J. A., Moore, R.: Forest Prod. J. 17, 19 
(1967) 
53. Langwig, J. E., Meyer, J. A., Davidson, R. W.: Forest Prod. J. 18, 33 (1968), 1957 (1969); 
Meyer, J. A.: Forest Product J. 18,89 (1968); Meyer, J. A., Loos, W. E.: Forest Prod. J. 
19, 32 (1969) 
54. McClary, L. R.: personal communication 
55. Green, W. R.: U.K.A.E.A., AERE-M, 2401 Harwell: 1971, P. I 
339 

8. Industrial Application of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
56. Hills, P. R.: Composites 211 (1972) 
57. Karpov, V. L., Malinsky, Y. M., Serenkov, V. 1., Klimanova, R. S., Freidin, A. S.: 
Nucleonics 18, 88 (1960) 
58. Kashkina, N. A., Pormale, M. Ya., Surna, Va. A.: In Modifikatsiya Drevesiny Akad. Nauk. 
Latv. SSR, Inst. Khim. Drevesiny, Riga (1967) P. 221; Kreitsberg, Z. N., Sergeeva, V. N., 
Grabovskii, Va. K., Ore, V. N., ibid.: P. 209; Pormale, N. Ya., Kashkina, N. A., Surna, Ya. A. : 
Khim. Drevesiny S, 109 (1970); Through Abstr. Bull. Inst. Paper Chern. 41, 7507 (1971) 
59. Tammela, V.: Kern. Teolisuus, 26, 9 (1969); Through CA 71, 39880 C (1969); Tammela, V. 
(to Neste Oy), German Pat. 1, 642,190 (1970); Tammela, V., Harra, T. (to Neste Oy), 
German Pat. 2, 013,186 (1970) 
60. Lamel1a-Neswood, Paloheimo-Yhtymii, Riihimiiki, Finland, undated. 
61. Tanner, M., Valtari, H. A.: personal communication 
62. Hirayama, T.: In Impregnated Fibrous Materials, Vienna: LA.E.A. 1968, P. 250 
63. Burmester, A.: Holz Roh-Werkstoff 25, 11 (1967) 
64. Kolosvany, G., Czvikovsky, T.: Holztechnol. 10,44(1969) 
65. Kolosvany, G., Czvikovsky, T.: Holztechnol. 10, 104 (1969) 
66. Clouston, J. C.: In Impregnated Fibrous Materials, Vienna: LA.E.A. 1968, P. 217 
67. Iya, V. K.: In Impregnated Fibrous Materials Vienna: LA.EA 1968, P. 231 
68. Bonoan, L. S.: In Impregnated Fibrous Materials, Vienna: LA.E.A. 1968, P. 286 
69. Wang, V.-P.: In Impregnated Fibrous Materials Vienna: LA.E.A. 1968, P. 293 
70. Awan, M.-H., Husain, A.: In Impregnated Fibrous Materials Vienna: LA.E.A. 1968, P. 267; 
Awan, M.-H., Mohammed, D., Qadir, Q. A.: ibid. P. 278 
71. Impregnated Fibrous Materials Vienna: LA.E.A. 1968, P. 367 
72. Arledter, H. F., Holweg, M.: Mitt. Deut. Ges. Holzforsch 57, 105 (1971) 
73. Hoffman, A. S., Smith, D. E.: Modern Plastics 43, Ill, 1966 
74. Miettinen, J. K., Autio, T., Stromberg, J.: Britisch Pat. 1, 178,215 (1970) 
75. Matsuzaki, K. (1972), Ohno, Y. (1972); both personal communications 
76. Puig, J.-R., Gaussens, G.: Bul1. I.T.F. 21,133 (1967) 
77. Khubitiya, M. M., Monastyrskiu, A. G.: Tekstil. Prom 26,10 (1966); Through CA 66,387,467 
(1967) 
78. Grimm, H.: Faserforsch, Textiltech. 19,20 (1968) 
79. Phillip, B., Kukanoff, T.: Zel1stoffPapier 9, 292 (1970) 
80. Rogovin, Z. A.: Cell. Chern. Technol. 6,17, 1972 
81. Rogovin, Z. A.: Chemiefasern 18, 738; 742, 746 (1968) 
82. Rogovin, Z. A.: Svensk. Papperstidn. 70, 799 (1967) 
83. Rogovin, Z. A., Virnik, A. D.: Faserforsch. Textiltech. 22, 145 (1971) 
84. Kriissig, H.: Papier, 24, 926 (1970) 
85. Kriissig, H.: Svensk. Papperstidn. 74,417 (1971) 
86. Makhamov, K., Penenzhik, M. A., Virnik, A. D., Rogovin, Z. A.: Texstil. Prom. 24, 62 
(1964); Through Abstr. Bul1. Inst. Paper Chern. 36, 2390 (1965) 
87. Virnik, A. D., Penenzhik, M. A., Rogovin, Z. A., Daurova, T. T., Khodakov, 1. G.: 
Textil. Prom. 29, 67 (1969); Through Abstr. Bul1. Inst. Paper Chern. 41, 2008 (1970) 
88. Chern. Eng. News 44,19 (1966), 44, 42 (1966); Autio, T.: In Radioisotopes in the Pulp and 
Paper Industry, Vienna: LA.E.A. 1968, P. 103, P. 107 
89. Deering Milliken Res. Corp.: British Pat. 1, 160,446 (1969); Gale, D. J. (to Deering Milliken 
Res. Corp) U.S. Pat. 3, 617,196 (1971); U.S. Pat. 3, 658,458 (1972); Lynch, J. A., Machel1, G. 
(to Deering Mil1iken Res. Corp.) Canadian Pat. 797,724 (1968) 
90. Conte, J. S., Faessinger, R. W.: (to Scott Paper Company), U.S. Pat. 3, 505,257 (1970); 
Faessinger, R. W., Conte, J. S. (to Scott Paper Company), Canadian Pat. 823, 261 and 
823, 262 (1969); (to Scott Paper Company), U.S. Pat. 3, 359,224 (1967), British Pat. 
1,255,184 (1971) 
91. Ranby, B.: Pulp Paper Internatl. 11,52 (1969) 
92. Scott Paper Company: British Pat. 1, 137,624 (1968); Netherlands Pat. Appl. 6, 514,877 (1966); 
Faessinger, R. W., Conte, J. S. (to Scott Paper Company), Belgian Pat., 646, 284 (1964) 
93. Conte, J. S., Faessinger, R. W.: (to Scott Paper Company), Canadian Pat. 824, 725 (1964); 
Faessinger, R. W., Conte, 1. S.: (to Scott Paper Company), U.S. Pat. 3, 330,787 (1967), 
Belgian Pat. 646, 285 (1964) 
340 

References 
94. Schurz, 1.: Papier 25, 635 (1971) 
95. Gotschy, F., Krassig, H.: Papier 26, 813 (1972) 
96. Morris, 1., Charlesby, A.: Recent Developments in the Irradiation Treatment of Polymers in 
Applications of Radioactive Isotopes in Textile Research and Technology Lindau, W. Germany: 
Symposium 1964 (eds. Schmidt-Kuester, W. J., Weisner, L.), Munich Verlag Karl Thiemig KG: 
1964 
97. Miles, T. D., Delasanta, A. c.: Textile Res. J. 39, 357 (1969) 
98. Weil, E. D., Ger. Offen.: 2, 115,050 October (1971) 
99. Cahill, 1. A., Myers, J. A.: U.S. Patent, 3, 666,401, May (1972) 
100. Duffy, J. J., Golbcrn, P.: (to Hooker Chemical Corp.) Ger. Offen. 2, 215,434. Oct. (1972) 
101. Hook, E. 0., Nichols, L. D.: U.S. Patent, 3, 711,389 Jan. (1973) 
102. Liepins, R., Gilbert, S., Tibbetts, F., Kearney, J.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 17,2523 (1973) 
103. Adams, J. W., Hoftiezer, H. W.: (to Tee-Pak), U.S. Pat. 3, 194,727 (1965); Ranby, B., 
Svensk. Papperstidn 72, 546 (1969) 
104. Anonymous: Chern. Eng. News 46,58 (1968) 
105. Bridgeford, D. J.: Ind. Eng. Chern. Prod. Res. Deve!. 1,45 (1962); Tappi, 46, 673 (1963); 
Bridgeford, D. 1. (to Tee-Pak) U.S. Pat. 3, 083,118 (1963) 
106. Adams, J. W., Hoftiezer, H. W.: (to Tee-Pak), Canadian Pat. 824, 419 (1969); U.S. Pat. 3, 
395,070 (1969) 
107. Adams, J. W., Hoftiezer, H. W.: (to American Can Company), U.S. Pat. 3, 256,372 (1966); 
U.S. Pat. 3, 366,582 (1968); Adams, J. W., Tilloson, A. H. (to American Can Company), 
U.S. Pat. 3, 553,306 (1971) 
108. Adams, J. W., Hoftiezer, H. W.: (to American Can Company) Canadian Pat. 838, 039 
(1970) 
109. Carious Articles; Chern. Eng. News 41, 42 (1963); Chern. Process, 26, 34 (1963); Ind. Eng. 
Chern. 55, 11 (1963); Modern Plastics 40, 97 (1963); Modern Textiles Mag. 44, 37 (1963) 
110. Herman, D. F., Dunlap I. R.: Tappi 48, 418 (1965) 
Ill. Herman, D. F., Kruse, U.: (to National Lead Company), U.S. Pat. 3, 297,466 (1967) 
112. Herman, D. F., Kruse, U., Brancato, J. J.: J. Polymer' Sci. C 11,75 (1965) 
113. Yanulis, M. 1.: Tappi, 48 61A (1965) 
114. Kovrizhnijkh, L. P., Flyate, D. M.: U.S.S.R. Pat. 599, 001 (1977) 
115. Sakamoto, I., Sumi, M., Iwasaki, T., Tani, S., Inagaki, H.: Kamipa Gikyoshi 32, 249 
(1978) 
116. P.R.B. SA: Japan Kokai 78,60,958 (1978) 
117. Jayme, G., Hebble, G. W.: Papier 25,113 (1971) 
118. Taylor, N. W., Bagley, E. B.: J. App!. Polym. Sci. 21,1607 (1977) 
119. Le Poutre, P., Robertson, A. A.: Tappi 57, 87 (1974) 
120. Adams, J. W., Tillotson, A. H.: U.S. Pat. 3, 682,856 (1972) 
121. Bagley, E. B., Fanata, G. F., Doanne, W. M., Gugliemelli, L. A., Russell, C. R.: U.S. Pat. 
4, 026,849 (1977) 
122. Personal Products Ltd. Bol. Inst. Prod. Florestais. Madeiras Deriv 3,31 (1977) 
123. Morin, B. P., Smo\'yakov, O. I., Tsarevskaya, I. Y., Rogina, M. V., Rogovin, Z. A.: Cel!. Chern. 
Technol. 12, 263 (1978) 
124. Yoshiboshi, 0., Takaharu, I. G., Serjii, G., Tomihiko, K.: Japan, Kokai, 77, 144,389 (1977) 
125. Oishi, Y., Hagaki, T., Goto, S., Kitada, T.: Japan, Kokai, 77, 138,490, (1976) 
126. Hayakawa, K., Yamakita, H.: J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 21,665 (1977) 
127. Abramyan, E. A.: Atomic Energy Review (1978),16 (3), 427 (1978) 
128. Morganstern, K. H.: Radiation Processing with Electron Beam Accelerators -
Present and 
Future Applications, presented at the World Electrotechnical Congress, Moscow June 1977 
129. Morgenstern, K. H.: Appraisal of the Advantages and Disadvantages of Gamma, Electron 
Beam and X-ray Radiation Sterilization. at the Conference on the Radiosterilization of 
Medical Products, 1974: (Proc. Symp. Bombay 1974, IAEA, Vienna 269 (1975) 
130. Glukhikh, V. A., Svin'in, M. P.: In Present Status and Future Development of High Voltage 
Accelerators, Proc. 2nd All-Union Meeting of Uses of Charged Particle Accelerators in 
National Economy, (Leningrad, 1975) I, NIIEL FA 76 (1976) 
131. CharJesby, A.: Atomic Radiation and Polymers, Oxford Pergamon Press: 1960 
341 

8. Industrial Application of Cellulose Graft Copolymers 
132. Finkel, E. L., Braginskij, R. P.: (Heat-resistant Wires and Cables with Radiation -
Modified 
Insulation) Ehnergiya, Moscow 1975 
133. Nablo, S. V.: Electron Beam Curing -
a Cool Solution to the Energy Problem, Rep. 19th 
Annual Techn. Forum Flexographic Technical Association, Montreal April 1977 
134. Hummel, D. 0.: Some Aspects of Radiation -
Initiated Copolymerization Large Radiation 
Sources for Industrial Processes (Proc. Sump. Munich, 1969) IAEA, Vienna 117 1969 
135. Hoffman, A. S.: Radiation Modification of Textiles", Large Radiation Sources for Industrial 
Processes (Proc. Symp. Munich, 1969) IAEA, Vienna 301 1969 
136. Chepel, L. V.: Use of Electron Accelerators in Radiation Chemistry Atomizdat, Moscow f975 
137. Kozlov, V. T., Evseev, A. G., Ponomarev, A. N. Os'kin, V. S., Ta\'roze, V. L., Kozovrov, V. M., 
Smagin, E. N., Pashinin, V. l.: Proc. 2nd All-Union Meeting Use of Charged-Particle Accele-
rators in the National Economy (Leningrad, 1975) 1, NIIEhFA, 320 (1976) 
138. Sterilization by Ionizing Radiation (Proc. Conf. Vienna, 1968) Multiscience Publication, Mon-
treal 
139. Metlitskij, L. V., Rogachev, V. I., Khrushchev, V. G.: Radiation Processing of Foodstuffs 
Ehkonomiya Moscow (1967) 
140. Diehl, 1. F.: Preservation of Food Radiation Physics and Chemistry, (Trans. 1st Int. 
Meeting Radiation Processing, Puerto Rico, 1976) NNl~3, (1977), 9,193 
141. Strakhov, I. P., Shefrin, I. G.: (Ionizing Radiation Treatment in the Leather Industry) 
Legkaya Industriya, Moscow 1972 
342 

Subject Index 
Abrasion resistance of cellulose copolymers 
278,284-286,291 
Absolute dosimetry 66, 67 
Accessibility, guide to graft location 88 
Acetolysis in branch isolation 251 
Acetone, grafting in, on carboxymethylcellulose 
218 
Acid catalysis, effect on radiation induced graft-
ing 
106-107 
, of grafting with CelV ions 
167 
, of manganese salt initiated grafting 
168, 
170 
, of redox initiated grafting 
153 
Acid group content, irradiated cell uloses 87 
Acid hydrolysis of irradiated cellulose 85 
Acrylamide grafting, anionic grafting 
182 
, by CelV ion 
156, 160 
, efficiency 
161, 171 
, in ozone-oxygen mixtures 
171 
, on carboxymethyl cellulose 222 
, photo initiated 
132 
Acrylamidomethylated cellulose, preparation 
223 
, grafting onto 223-225, 233 
Acrylates, photochemical grafting 
135 
, uncatalyzed grafting 51 
Acrylic acid grafting, by CelV initiation 
160 
, by periodate initiation 
172 
, effect on dyeing properties 307 
, ion exchange properties 30 I 
, on aldehyde cellulose 237 
, on carboxymethyl cellulose 214,222 
, ozone-oxygen mixtures 
171 
, photochemical 
135 
Acrylonitrile grafting, by anionic means 
181 
, by CelV initiation 
157, 160 
, by Mn'v initiation 
169 
, by periodate ions 
172 
, by persulfate initiation 147-151 
, by redox initiation 
154 
, on acrylamidomethylated cellulose 224 
, on carbamoylethylated cellulose 227 
, on carboxymethyl cellulose 213,222 
, on carboxymethyl/cyanoethyl cellulose 228 
, on cellulose acetate 202 
, on cellulose xanthogenate 201 
, on cyanoethylated cellulose 206-211 
, post irradiation grafting 
116 
, radiochemical yields 98 
, relative efficiency 
161 
, the physical characteristics 36-41 
, uncatalyzed 
51 
Activation energy in polymerization 21, 113 
Addition polymerisation, characteristics 
I I 
Additives, in mechanochemical activation 50 
, effect on radiation induced grafting 
105 
After-effect degradation of cellulose 70 
Alcohols, effect on CelV ion grafting 
156, 163 
, effect on grafting to carboxymethyl cellulose 
218 
, effect on photochemical grafting 134 
Aldehyde cellulose, grafting to 237 
, periodate formation with 237 
, preparation 237 
Alkyl halides as promoters of uncatalyzed graft-
ing 
51 
Alternating copolymers 24 
Anionic grafting 
180--183 
Anthraquinone dyestuffs, in phototendering 
128,130 
, in photoinitiation 
135, 136 
Apparent molecular mass, copolymers 259-262 
Aromatic groups, in cellulose protection 73 
Aryl diazonium ions as initiators of grafting 
173 
Asymmetry and polymer structure 30 
Azobisisobutyronitrile, chain transfer grafti~g 48 
, grafting to cyanoethyl cellulose 208 
, grafting to carboxymethyl cellulose 218 
, initiator in grafting 49 
Basswood, radiation effects 83 
Bast fibres, composition 42 
Benzene, radical scavenger 
126 
Benzoin ethyl ether, photoinitiated grafting 
135, 136 
Benzophenone, photoinitiated grafting 
135 
Benzoquinone, radical inhibitor 23 
Benzoyl groups, cellulose protection 73, 85 
Benzoyloxystyrene, CelV ion initiation of 167 
343 

Subject Index 
Benzoyl peroxide in chain transfer grafting with 
DMA-catalyst 176 
Benzydryl groups, cellulose protection 73 
Benzyl chloride -
DMA, catalyst system 
176 
Benzyl groups, cellulose protection 73 
Biacetal, photoinitiated grafting 
136 
Binary monomer mixtures in grafting 
107 
Biological degradation, resistance to 297 
Branching, attachment sites 262 
, frequency 262 
, in grafting characterization 246-276 
, polyacrylonitrile 254, 256, 263 
, poly(methacrylic acid) 256 
, poly(methyl methacrylate) 246, 256 
, poly(methyl vinyl pyridine) 256 
, polystyrene 254, 267-276 
, poly(vinyl acetate) 254 
cx-Bromoacrylic acid, CelV grafting of 167 
Bromoethyl groups, in chain transfer grafting 49 
Bromonaphthalene in light scattering studies 
257 
m-Bromostyrene, grafting of 124 
p-Bromostyrene, grafting of 124 
Bulk grafting, chain transfer mechanisms 
123 
Butadiene, characterization of grafts of 263 
Butyl acrylate, ozone-oxygen grafting 
171 
, uncatalyzed grafting 51 
, water repellency by 294 
, wrinkle recovery by 292 
Butyl methacrylate, ozone-oxygen grafting 
171 
, water repellency by 294 
, wrinkle recovery by 292 
Butyl styrene, grafting of 124 
Cad oxen, solvent for cellulose 68,251 
Caesium-I 37, initiator system 65 
Carbamoylethylated cellulose, preparation 227 
, CelV grafting 227, 228 
Carbohydrates, intramolecular energy transfer 
72 
Carbon tetrachloride, as grafting promoter 51 
, as grafting regulator 256 
Carboxymethyl cellulose, grafting to 212-223 
, CelV initiation 214-216 
, -co-acrylic acid 214 
, -co-acrylonitrile 213 
, -co-methyl methacrylate 213 
, photochemical initiation 221 
, preparation 212 
, step-growth grafting 
189 
Carboxymethyl/cyanoethyl cellulose, grafting 
228 
, preparation 228' 
Cationic grafting 179 
Ceiling temperatures in copolymerization 28 
Cellulose octa-acetate 
3 
, methylation 4 
Cellohexaose 4 
344 
Cellopentaose 4 
Cellophane, grafting to 36, 10 I, 132 
, persulfate initiation 148 
, solvent exchange with 49 
Cellulose acetate 202-206 
, cleavage, during grafting 205 
, -co-acrylonitrile 202 
, -co-methyl methacrylate 202 
, grafting by CelV initiation 202 
, grafting by Mnlv initiation 
171 
, grafting onto 202-206 
, hydrolysis 3 
, photo initiated grafting 132 
, preparation 202 
Cellulose, advantages 32 
, accessibility 90 
. activation 45 
, chain cleavage 43 
, chemical modification 32 
, crystalline/amorphous character 8 
, definition 2 
, derivatives and grafting 7,41 
, heterogeneity 9 
, hydrolysis 3, 8 
, improvements to 32 
, oxidation of 8 
, problems with 32 
, radical formation in 42 
, reactivity 7, 9 
, structural features 3,9, 42 
,swelling 32 
Cellulose carbanilates, copolymer characteriza-
tion 257 
, effect on grafting 75 
, hot-stage microscopy 270 
, in copolymer characterization 257 
, kinetics of grafting 60 
, protection of cellulose 72-75,85 
, thermal analysis of 82, 267 
Cellulose copolymers, characterization and pro-
perties 245-321 
, preparation by radical procedures 64-145 
, preparation by chemical procedures 
146 
to 186 
, preparation by step-growth methods 
187 
to 195 
Cellulose grafting, chemical activation 
146-186 
, kinetics of, radiation induced, 56 
, mechanism of, radiation induced, 91 
, mechanochemical initiation 50 
, protection of cellulose during, 72 
, radiation induced degradation during, 
78 
, radiation induced, 96-127 
, radical location during, 
91 
Cellulose p-nitrocarbanilate, thermal properties 
267 
Cellulose-eo-styrene, thermal analysis 82 
, composition 82 

Cellulose xanthogenates, grafting to 
198-202 
, preparation 
198 
Cerium IV salts, change transfer grafting 46 
, chelate formation 
163 
, copolymerization with, 
155-168 
, efficiency in grafting 
161 
, in grafting to cyanoethylated cellulose 
211 
, inhibitors of grafting 38 
Chain transfer agents 55 
Chain transfer reactions 20 
, in grafting to cellulose 43,47-49 
, in persulfate initiation 
147 
Characterization of cellulosic copolymers 
245-276 
, average molecular mass values 257 
, branch attachment 262 
, branching frequency 262 
, copolymer morphology 262 
, fine structure 276 
, molecular structure 250, 251 
, preferential adsorption 
261 
, proof of grafting 246 
Charge transfer complexes in cellulose grafting 
46, 122-124 
Chelate formation, CelV ions during initiation 
163 
Chemical activation, grafting by 
146-183 
, of cellulose 44-46 
Chemical dosimeters 67 
Chemical grafting 34, 146-183 
Chemical properties of irradiated cellulose 82 
Chlorostyrene(s), grafting of 124 
2-Chlorothioxanthone, photochemical grafting 
with 
238 
Chromatography, in proof of grafting 249 
Cinnamoyl groups in cellulose protection 73 
Cobalt (60) as initiator 39, 65 
Complex formation in copolymerization 28 
Composite 'G' value, in grafting kinetics 58 
Conductivity as guide to grafting 37,87,89 
Configuration of cellulose 6 
Conformations 5 
Copolymer classification 24, 32 
Copolymerization features 23-28 
Copper salts, cocatalysts in grafting 
176 
, in uncatalysed grafting 53 
, persulfate decomposition, effect on 
151 
Corona discharge, route to grafting 65 
Cotton, effects of radiation on 83, 86 
, hydrolysis 3 
, grafting 36,40, 109, 160 
, Mnlv initiation 
169 
, periodate initiation 
172 
, photochemical grafting 
132 
, post-irradiation grafting 
118 
Crosslinked carboxymethyl cellulose, grafting to 
219 
Subject Index 
Crosslinked cellulose, grafting 235-237 
, preparation 235 
Cumene hydroperoxide, redox initiation 
153 
Cuprammonium hydroxide, solvent for cellulose 
247 
Cupriethylenediamine, solvent for cellulose 251, 
266,295 
, solvent for cyanoethyl cellulose 296 
Curie, definition 66 
Cyanoethyl/carboxyethyl cellulose, grafting to 
229-231 
, preparation 229 
Cyanoethyl cellulose, CelV consumption 209-211 
, chain cleavage 211 
, dyeing of 206 
, grafting 206-212 
, mechanism of grafting 212 
, preparation 206 
, radiochemical yields 99 
Cyclohexadienyl radicals, in protected, irradiated 
cell uloses 
73 
, lifetimes 74 
Cyclohexanone, solvent in light scattering 258 
Damage, radiation induced 80 
Degradation, radiation induced 68, 77-82 
Degree of polymerization, of cell uloses 5, 12 
, kinetics 
18-21 
Dehydrogenation of irradiated cell uloses 93 
Diazonium ions, graft initiation with 44 
Dielectric measurements, irradiated celluloses 
37,87,90 
Diethyleneglycol divinyl ether, grafting 233 
Differential refractometry, copolymer character-
ization 257-261 
, copolymer composition 82 
, preferential adsorption 261 
, proof of grafting 250 
Diffusion effects, in polymerization 
17, 56 
, Trommsdorff effect in grafting 59-61, 105 
Dimethylaminoethyl methacrylate, wrinkle re-
covery with 291 
Dimethyl aniline, as grafting initiator 
176 
, in grafting to carboxymethyl cellulose 220 
Dimethyl styrene, grafting of 124 
Dimethylvinylethynyl carbinol, ion exchange 
ceIl ulQses 302 
Dioxan, solvent in grafting 39, 57 
, solvent in light scattering 259 
Diphenylpicrylhydrazyl radical, as inhibitor 23 
Dodecylmercaptan, grafting regulator 256 
Dose and dosimetry 66, 67 
Easy care properties of copolymers 286-292 
Efficiency factors in grafting 
13 
Elastic recovery, graft copolymers 280 
Electrografting, presence of persulfate ions 
151 
Electron beam curing 65 
345 

Subject Index 
Electron irradiation, cellulose properties 88 
Electron microscopy, irradiated celluloses 80 
, of copolymer celluloses 264-273 
Electron scavenging in grafting 
127 
Electron spin resonance spectroscopy, asymmetry 
of spectra 85 
, guide to grafting 119 
, irradiated carbanilated cellulose 74 
, irradiated cellulose (air) 92,94 
, irradiated cellulose (vacuum) 94 
, in hydroxyl radical initiation 152 
, photoinitiated grafting 
132 
, and post-irradiation grafting 
119 
, protected celluloses 74 
, radical concentrations 89 
, radical location 87 
, and scission events 70 
, and polymer structure 29 
Electron transfer, in CelV initiation reactions 
156 
Elemental analysis, copolymer composition 82 
Energy transfer, for irradiated celluloses 71 
, in grafting 75, 127 
, in photochemical grafting 137 
Environment, influence on cellulose irradiation 
92 
Enzyme attack, in branch isolation 251 
, in hydrolysis 255 
Enzyme immobilization, through grafting 154 
, on methylol cellulose copolymers 240 
Epoxy groups in cellulose crosslinking 288 
Ethyl acrylate grafting, by CelV initiation 
161 
, by Mnlv initiation 
169 
, grafting efficiency 
161 
, on carboxymethyl cellulose 221 
, on phosphorylated cellulose 232 
, post-irradiation grafting 
119 
, wrinkle recovery by 291 
Ethyl cellulose, photoinitiated grafting on 
132 
Ethylene, anionic grafting on paper 
182 
Ethylenediamine, effect on swelling 
161 
Ethylene glycol, CelV salt decomposition 
157 
Ethyleneimine, in step-growth grafting 
188 
Ethylene oxide, in step-growth grafting 
188 
Ethylene sulfide, addition with cellulose acetate 
49 
, crosslin king with 335 
Ethyl methacrylate, grafting In ozone-oxygen 
mixtures 
172 
Ethyl styrene, grafting of 124 
Extinction coefficients 
14 
Fabrics, modification through grafting 36, 
279-325 
Fibers, grafting on 36 
Flame retardancy, of copolymers 299,334 
, phosphorous monomers 335 
, phosphorylated cotton 232 
346 
Flax 42 
m-Fluorostyrene, grafting 124 
p-Fluorostyrene, grafting 124 
Fractionation, mechanically activated celluloses 
50 
Free radical location in irradiated cellulose 87 
G-value, composite 58 
, definition 56, 67 
, calculated 59 
, dioxan (radicals) 58 
, of cellulose (accessible radicals) 95 
, of cellulose (inaccessible radicals) 95 
, of cellulose (total radicals) 58,95,97, 113 
, protected celluloses 73 
, scission for cellulose 69 
, significance to grafting 58 
, styrene (radicals) 58 
, water (radicals) 58 
Gel effects 
16 
Glass transition temperatures of graft copolymers 
256 
Glucose, as basic unit 3 
, polymerization with 
148 
, radiation effects on 71 
CI: Glucosides from hydrolysis 3 
fJ Glucosides from cellulose acetate hydrolysis 3 
Glycidyl acrylate, -co-phosphorylated cotton 
234 
, in crosslin king 287 
Glycidyl methacrylate, characterisation of grafts 
of 263,281 
, -co-phosphorylated cotton 232 
, effect on dyeing properties 307 
, ion-exchange properties 303 
Grafted paper, property modification 313-316 
Grafted pulp, properties 316-321 
Grafting, definition 33 
Grafting, chain transfer mechanism 47 
, charge transfer mechanism 46 
, conditions affecting 34-41 
, definition 
33 
, distribution 44 
, efficiency 
33 
, techniques of 34-36, 50 
Grafting on chemically modified cell uloses, 
196-241 
, acrylamidomethylated cellulose 223-225 
, aldehyde cellulose 237 
, carbamoylethylated cellulose 227,228 
, carboxymethylated cellulose 212-223 
, carboxymethyl/cyanoethyl cellulose 228 
, cellulose xanthogenate 198-202 
, crosslinked celluloses 235-237 
, cyanoethylated cell uloses 206-212 
, cyanoethyl/carboxyethyl cellulose 229-231 
, methylol acrylamide treated cellulose 
225-227 

, methylol cellulose 238-241 
, phosphorylated cellulose 231-235 
Heterogeneity of cellulose 9 
Heterogeneity parameters, copolymer character-
ization' 259 
Heterogeneous grafting 252 
Hexafluoroisopropyl acrylate, in water repell-
ancy 293 
, in wrinkle recovery 291 
Hexakis(metallyloxy)cyclotriphosphazine, in 
flame retardency 335 
Hot-stage optical microscopy of cellulosic co-
polymers 269,270 
Hydrocellulose, grafting to 36,40, 160 
Hydrogen abstraction, in grafting 97, 102 
, in photografting 130, 137 
, in photo tendering 
131 
Hydrogen bonding 6 
Hydrogen peroxide and hydroxyl radical initia-
tion 
152 
Hydrogen sulfide, chain transfer grafting 48 
Hydrolysis, branch isolation 251 
, acid hydrolysis 85 
, enzyme induced 251 
Hydroquinone as radical inhibitor 52, 126 
Hydroxyethyl cellulose, grafting on 59,60 
Hydroxypropyl methacrylate -co-phosphorylated 
cellulose 233 
Hydroxyl radical initiation 152 
Inclusion techniques, in grafting 4, 109 
Inductive effects, in grafting 
126 
Industrial application of cellulosic copolymers 
326-338 
, pulps and papers 336 
, textile products 334 
, wood-plastic composites 326-333 
Infra-red spectroscopy, analysis of irradiated 
celluloses 84 
, cellulose characterization 37 
, in post-irradiation grafting 
119 
, proof of grafting 247 
Inhibitors, effects on initiation 12, 23, 52 
Initiation, kinetics of, 
13, 23 
, of radiation induced grafting 64, 145 
, by chemical means 146-186 
Initiation of grafting, by aryl diazonium ions 
11,173 
, by CelV ion initiation II, 155-168 
, by dimethylaniline-Cull 
176 
, by hydroxyl radicals 152-155 
, by Mnlll ions 168 
, by Mnlv ions 169-171 
, by ozone-oxygen mixtures 
171 
, by periodate ions 
172 
, by persulfate ions 
11, 146-152 
, by photochemical means 
II, 127-138 
Subject Index 
, by radiation induction 64--127 
, by radical attack on unsaturated groups 
175 
, by thermal means II 
Initiator effect 48 
Immobilized enzymes 
154 
Intercrystalline swelling 37 
Intrinsic viscosity, guide to phototendering 
132 
, irradiated cellulose, solutions of 68, 70, 85 
, proof of grafting 246 
Ion exchange properties, classification 300 
, grafted celluloses 299-311 
Ionic grafting 179-1 X3 
, cationic routes 
179 
, anionic routes 
180 
Iron salts, as initiators (photochemical), 
132, 
134,152 
Irradiated cell uloses, chemical properties 82 
, grafting in 96 
, mechanisms of reactions in 91 
, radical location in 87 
, structural properties of 77 
, storage of 85 
, radiochemical yields 97-100 
Isobutyl acrylate, CelV initiated grafting of 162 
Isoprene, hydroxyl ion grafting of 153 
Jute, composition 42 
, grafting to 102-104 
Kinetic chain length 
19 
Kinetics of copolymerization 23-28 
, of cellophane 58 
, of cellulose 54-60 
Kinetics of copolymerization, of cellulose 
xanthogenate 201 
, of hydroxyethyl cellulose 59 
, of cellulose tricarbanilate 60 
Kinetics of polymerization 13-23 
,steady state 17-18 
, transfer reactions ,0 
Kinetics of radical build-up 96 
Kinetics of radical decay 74-96 
Light scattering, copolymer characterization 
257-261 
, in mixed solvents 258 
, in single solvents 258 
Light stability, of grafted celluloses 298 
Lignin, effect on eelV initiated grafting 163 
Linear accelerators, radiation processing by 65 
Maltose, structure 3 
Manganese carbonyl, photo initiated grafting via 
135, 136 
Manganese salts, initiators 168-171 
Mark-Houwink parameters, cellulose in Cado-
xen 69 
347 

Subject Index 
Mass spectrometry, of cellulose residues 83 
Mastication, radical formation during, 50 
Mechanical properties of cellulose copolymers 
278-286 
Mechanism of, CelV ion initiation 
157-159, 
164-167 
, persulfate ion decomposition 
147 
, phototendering 128 
, post-irradiation grafting 119,120 
, radiation induced reactions in cellulose 
91,121 
, radical formation in cellulose 42 
, uncatalyzed grafting 52 
Mechanochemical activation of cellulose 50 
Mercaptoethyl cellulose -co-methyl methacrylate 
49 
Mercerized cotton, grafting to 
I, 36, 40, 160 
Methacrylamide, persulfate initiated grafting 
152 
, photochemical grafting 
132 
Methacrylic acid, effect on dyeing properties 
307 
, grafting by CelV initiation 
160 
, grafting by ozone-oxygen 
171 
, grafting by post-irradiation 
121 
, grafting on phosphorylated cellulose 233 
, ion exchange celluloses via 301 
Methacrylonitrile, anionic grafting 
181 
Methanol, effect on radiation grafting 99 
Methoxy radicals, role in grafting 
137 
Methoxystyrene co-cellulose grafting, 
124 
Methyl acrylate grafting, by CelV initiation 
160, 
162 
, by ozone-oxygen mixtures 
171 
, ion exchange properties via 301 
, on phosphorylated cellulose 232, 233 
, water repellancy with 294 
Methyl cellulose, polarography 4 
Methyl ethyl ketone, in light scattering studies 
258 
Methyl methacrylate grafting, by anionic routes 
181 
, by CelV initiation 
160 
, by dimethylaniline-Cull 
178 
, by manganese salts 169-170 
, by periodate ion 
172 
, by redox routes 
154 
, by vanadium v initiation 
168 
, by uncatalyzed grafting 53 
, effect on dyeing properties 307 
, inhibition of 52 
, ion exchange cell uloses with 304 
, on carboxymethyl cellulose 213,222 
, on cellulose 37 
, on cellulose acetate 202 
, on cross-linked cellulose 235 
, on phosphorylated cellulose 233 
348 
, photoinitiated grafting 132 
, post-irradiation induced 
118 
, relative efficiency of 161 
, water repellancy by 293 
, wrinkle recovery by 291 
Methylolacrylamide-co-phosphorylated cotton 
232 
Methylolacrylamido cotton, CelV initiated graft-
ing 226 
, cellulose cross-linking 287 
, crease resistance 335 
, grafting to 225-227 
, preparation 225 
Methylol cellulose, grafting to 238-241 
, persulfate initiation 152 
, photochemical grafting 238 
, preparation 238 
Methylol radicals 
137 
p-Methyl styrene 124 
u-Methyl styrene 124 
Methylvinyl ketone, light stabilization of cellu-
lose 299 
Methylvinyl pyridine, ion exchangeable celluloses 
302 
Microscopic studies, cellulosic copolymers 
263-273 
, of grafted acrylonitrile 264 
, of grafted glycidyl methacrylate 263 
Mineral acids, effect on grafting 
106, 153, 
167-170 
Mixed solvents, in differential refractometry 
257-262 
, in light scattering studies 257-261 
Moisture regain, cellulosic copolymers 295, 296 
Molecular mass, cellulose backbones 250 
, grafted branches 251, 255 
Molecular mass distribution, in graft copolymers 
250 
, in radical polymerization 29 
Molecular properties of irradiated cell uloses 77 
Morphology of cellulosic copolymers 262-276 
Mutual grafting technique 101-109 
Naphthalene, electron scavenger 
127 
Naphthyl groups, cellulose protection 73 
New cellulosic materials, by grafting 311 
Nitrobenzene, solvent in light scattering 258 
Non-solvents, effect on grafting 38 
Non-steady state grafting, kinetics 54 
Normalization, in copolymerization 27 
Nuclear magnetic resonance, polymer structure 
29 
Number average molecular mass 69 
Nylon, as model for grafting 54 
Orientation of cellulose 
37 
Oxidation of cellulose, during grafting 
159, 166 

Oxygen consumption, during grafting 83, 92, 
121 
Ozone-oxygen initiation 171-172 
Oxycellulose grafting, CelV ion initiation of 160 
Papers and pulps, by CelV ion grafting 
167 
, by photochemical grafting 
133 
, by redox grafting 154 
, from anionic initiation 
182 
, from grafted cell uloses 336 
, properties of grafted 313-316 
Pentaerythritol dibromide 49 
Pentavalent vanadium, initiation of grafting 
168 
Penultimate unit effects 28 
Periodate initiated grafting 
172 
Persulfate initiation, grafting 146-151 
, effect of pinacol on 148 
, application of 148 
Phenylcarbamoyl groups, cellulose protection 
73 
Phosphorus monomers, flame retardancy by 
299 
, ion exchange cell uloses from 305 
Phosphorylated cellulose, grafting 232-235 
,preparation 231 
, -co-diethylene glycol divinyl ether 233 
Photochemical grafting 127-134 
,initiation 14 
, of aldehyde cellulose 238 
Phototendering of cellulosics 
128 
,mechanism 129 
Physical activation, cellulose 43 
Physical grafting, diffusion and swelling 35 
Physical properties, cellulose copolymers 277 
to 325 
Pinacol, effect on initiation 
148, 156 
Plasma sources, grafting via 65 
Polarography, methyl cellulose 4 
Polyamide grafting, to cellulose 190 
Polyacrylamide copolymers, characterization 
263 
, proof of grafting 247 
Polyacrylonitrile copolymers, characterization 
256, 263 
, fine structure 276 
, light stability 299 
, proof of grafting 249 
, rot resistance 298 
Polydispersity, in CelV initiated grafting, 67 
Polyelectrolyte behaviour, poly(styrene sulfonic 
acid) branches 254 
Polyester grafting, on cellulose 
190 
Polyethylene, model for kinetic studies 54 
, post-irradiation grafting on 
115 
Poly(glycidyl methacrylate)-co-cellulose, fine 
structure 276 
Subject Index 
Poly(isobutylene oxide), in non-steady state 
grafting 54 
Polyisoprene, homopolymer 25 
, in ion exchange cell uloses 
305 
Poly(methacrylic acid), characterization in graft-
ing 256 
, propagating radical 
121 
Poly(methyl methacrylate) grafting, characteriza-
tion 37,257 
, rot resistance 298 
Poly(methyl vinyl pyridine), flame retardancy 
334 
Polymer structure, radical polymerization 29 
Polystyrene, moisture regain character 295 
, prepolymer grafting 192-194 
Poly(vinyl acetate) 29 
, copolymer characterization 254 
Poly(vinyl alcohol) 29, 37 
, grafting onto 100, 114, 116, 148 
, grafts, fine structure of 276 
, step-growth grafting 
188 
Poly(vinyl chloride), proof of grafting 249 
Poly(vinylfluoride) 29 
Poly(vinylidine fluoride) 29 
Poly(vinyl pyridine), characterization in graft-
ing 256 
Poly(N-vinyl pyrrolidone), flame retardancy by 
334 
Poly(vinyl trichloroacetate), abstraction reac-
tions 25 
Post-irradiation grafting 100,113-121 
, to substrates 113-117 
Preformed polymers, grafting to cellulose 
190 
to 194 
Pressley index, irradiated celluloses 86 
Proof of grafting 246, 247 
Propagation 
12, 15,28 
p-Propiolactone, in dyeing modification 307 
, in step-growth grafting 
188 
Properties of cellulosic copolymers, dimensional 
stability 292 
, easy care 286 
, fire retardancy 232, 299, 334, 335 
, ion exchange 299 
, mechanical 278 
, moisture regain 295 
, resistance to light 298 
, solubility 295 
, water repellancy 294 
, water retention 219 
, wrinkle recovery 298 
Propiolactone, graft characterization 263 
Propyl acrylate, grafting of 162 
, water repellancy by 294 
Protection, radiation damage 72-76 
Pyridine, solvent in light scattering 258 
Quartz, use in photochemical grafting 136 
349 

Subject Index 
Rad, definition 66 
Radiation chemistry of cellulose 76, 91 
Radiation degradation, cellulose 68, 78 
, mechanical properties 78 
, structural properties 79 
Radiation grafting to cellulosics 25, 64--138 
, initiation of 43 
Radiation protection, cellulosics 72-76 
Radiation sources 65 
Radiation units 66 
Radical formation on cellulose 11-15,42, 112 
, chemical means 
146--186 
, photochemical means 
133 
, physical means 43 
, radiation induced 64--138 
Radical propagation 
12 
Radical scavenging, in copolymerization 
126 
, styrene in 
126 
Radical stability, effect on grafting 35 
Radical termination 
12 
Radiochemical yields, acrylonitrile grafting 98 
, irradiated cellulose 97 
, irradiation grafting 98, 107 
, polymerizing medium 98, 99 
Ramie, composition 42 
, grafting by CelV ions 
161 
Random copolymers 24 
Random structures 29 
Rate constant 13-22 
Rayon depolymerization 86 
Rayon grafting, anionic 
182 
, hydroxyl radical 
153 
, ozone-oxygen mixtures 
171 
, post-irradiation 
114 
Reactions in grafting 41 
Reactive dyes, on grafted celluloses 309, 310 
Reactivity of cellulose 7 
Redox initiated grafting 152-155 
, to cellulose xanthogenate 20 I 
Regenerated cellulose, e.s.r. spectra 95 
, grafting 
10 1 
Remazol Brilliant Orange R.R. 
173 
Rep, definition 66 
Riboflavin, photosensitizer of grafting 
132 
Ring opening, in grafting 187-194 
Roentgen, definition 66 
Rot resistance of cellulosic copolymers 297 
Schardinger dextrins, irradiation of 71 
Sensitized grafting. 127-138 
Sensitized phototendering 
128 
Serine methyl ester, persulfate polymerization 
148 
Singlet oxygen, phototendering 
131 
Sodium cellulose monoethyl malonate, anionic 
grafting 182 
Sodium-naphthalene, initiator 
191 
350 
Solubility, cellulosic copolymer 295 
, proof of grafting 247 
Solvents, chain transfer to 20 
, effects on light scattering 257-261 
, mutual grafting in 
100--109 
, photoinitiated grafting in 
133 
, radiochemical yields 
109 
Specific refractive index increment, cellulose tri-
carbanilate 258 
, dialysis equilibrium 260 
, cellulose tricarbanilatejpolystyrene 258 
, polystyrene 259 
, preferential adsorption 261, 262 
Spectroscopy, hydrogen bonding in cellulose 6 
, infra-red, characterization 249,250 
Stability of irradiated cell uloses 86 
Starch 3 
Steady state, radical polymerization 
17 
, deviation from 
28 
Step-growth grafting 187-195 
Storage, irradiated cellulose 85 
Structural features, cellulose 3 
, effect on grafting 37 
, irradiated cell uloses 77 
, radical polymerization 29 
Styrene(s), effect on dyeing properties 307 
, G-value 67, 97 
, radical scavenger 
126 
, water repellency with 293 
Styrene grafting, -co-carboxymethyl cellulose 
219 
, -co-cellophane 56--61 
, -co-cellulose 38, 106 
, -co-cellulose carbanilate 74--76 
, -co-cotton 80--82, 86--88 
, -co-hydroxyethyl cellulose 59, 60 
, -co-methylol cellulose 238 
, -co-phosphorylatt:d cellulose 232 
, -co-rayon 102, 103 
, effect of temperature on 
III 
, inclusion technique 
109 
, mutual technique 
101 
, non-steady state of 55 
, photoinitiated 132 
, physical conditions 38 
, radiochemical yields 98, 107 
, redox initiation 154 
, relative efficiency 
161 
, uncatalysed 
51 
Substituted styrenes, grafting 124 
Substitution effects, grafting 75 
Substrate structure, effect on grafting 37 
Sugars, radiation chemistry, as models 91 
Sulfonation, in acetolysis 254 
Surface grafting 25, 122 
Suspension grafting 51 
Swelling effects, cellulose structure 
10 
, by ethylenediamine 37 

, by sodium hydroxide 37 
, by zinc chloride 37 
, by water 36 
, effect on grafting 36, 10 1-109 
Tacticity 30 
Tautomerism in grafting 126 
Techniques of grafting, inclusion 
109 
,mutual 100, 101 
, post-irradiation 113, 114 
Temperature effects, on chain transfer grafting 
48 
,grafting by CelV ion 
161, 168 
,grafting by dimethylaniline-Cull 177 
, grafting by MnlV ion 170 
, grafting by mutual method 
110 
, grafting by post-irradiation 
120 
, grafting on carboxymethyl cellulose 214 
, grafting on cellulose xanthogenate 201 
Termination, kinetics 12-16 
Tertiary butyroacrylamide, periodate ion grafting 
172 
Textile products 278-325, 334-336 
Thermal analysis, cellulose copolymers 267 
, composition determination 82 
, irradiated celluloses 80 
, proof of grafting 248 
Thermoplasticity, cellulosic copolymers 281 
Threshold dose, degradation 68 
Timber, grafting via CelV ion 
167 
, properties of grafted 316-321 
Thioglycollic acid, chain transfer grafting 48 
Thiourea, radical quencher 126 
, crosslinking of cellulose 306 
Titanium dioxide, sensitizer for grafting 
128 
Tracer techniques, cellulose degradation 84 
, proof of grafting 250 
Transfer reactions 20,21,47 
Triallyl phosphoric triamide/cellulose, flame 
retardancy 335 
Trichlorobromomethane, block copolymer for-
mation via 25 
Triethylamine, grafting regulator 256 
, terminal group formation 25 
Trimethylstyrene(s), grafting 124 
Trityl groups, cellulose protection 73 
Trommsdorff effect, in grafting 60, 105, 106, 
119,137 
, proof of grafting 262 
'True' graft copolymers 257-261 
Turbidimetric titration, proof of grafting 247 
Subject Index 
Ultracentrifugation, proof of grafting 247 
Ultrasonic vibration, route to grafting 51 
Ultra-violet light induced grafting 43, 65, 127 
, vessel composition 
136 
Uncatalyzed grafting 45, 51 
, of acrylates to celluloses 51-54 
Units of dose 66 
Unsaturated groups, in grafting 175 
Uranyl nitrate, photoinitiator 134-137 
Vanadium salts, initiators 168 
Vapor phase grafting 
121 
Vapor phase swelling 26 
Vat dyes, in phototendering 128, 130 
Vinyl acetate, -co-carboxymethyl cellulose 222 
, -co-phosphorylated cellulose 232 
, photochemical grafting 135 
, post-irradiation grafting 118, 119 
N-Vinyl caprolactam, redox grafting 
155 
Vinyl carbazole, effect on wrinkle recovery 291 
Vinyl co-polymerization, characteristics 23-29, 
32,41 
Vinyl pyridine(s), grafting 124 
, photochemical grafting 135 
N-Vinyl pyrrolidone grafting, azo initiation 
174 
, on aldehyde cellulose 237 
, redox initiation 
155 
Viscose grafting 36, 38, 40 
, CelV ion initiation 
160 
, MnlV ion initiation 
169 
Viscosity average molecular mass, cellulosics 69 
Viscosity, guide to degradation 70,85 
Water, adsorption by irradiated cellulose 88 
, swelling and grafting in 36, 102 
, retention 219 
Wood grafting, effect of solvents on 
101 
, redox initiation of 154 
, via xanthation 201 
Wood-plastic composites (WPC) 326-333 
Wrinkle recovery 289 
Xanthated cellulose, redox grafting 154 
X-ray analysis, fine structure analysis by 276 
, irradiated celluloses 77 
, structure determination 37 
Zinc chloride, radiochemical yields, effect on 
99 
, swelling agent 151, 161 
Zinc oxide, photosensitizer in grafting 128 
351 

