Python Data Products
Course 1: Basics
Lecture: Our Case Study (Recommender Systems)

Python Data Products Specialization: Course 1:  Basic  Data Processing…
Learning objectives
In this lecture we will...
• Introduce the concept of Recommender Systems, which 
we'll use as an ongoing case-study throughout the 
Specialization
• Describe some of the main datasets we will use to study 
recommender systems and their main characteristics
• Motivate the use of these datasets for various problems 
throughout the Specialization

Python Data Products Specialization: Course 1:  Basic  Data Processing…
Recommender Systems
As a running example throughout this 
course, we will build recommender 
systems that model interactions between 
users and items
• In particular, we will focus on two publicly-available 
datasets from Amazon and Yelp:
• https://s3.amazonaws.com/amazon-reviews-
pds/tsv/index.txt
• https://www.yelp.com/dataset/download

Python Data Products Specialization: Course 1:  Basic  Data Processing…
Recommender Systems
We are particularly interested in tasks 
including:
• How can we read and process these large datasets, 
containing complex, structured fields (Course 1)?
• How can we make simple predictions from these 
datasets, such as the sentiment of a review or the 
category of a business (Course 2)?
• How can we validate these predictions, and compare 
different modeling approaches (Course 3)?
• How can we build and deploy a working system using 
these predictive models (Course 4)?

Python Data Products Specialization: Course 1:  Basic  Data Processing…
What do recommender systems do?
$
(preference modeling)
(pricing)
(retrieval)

Python Data Products Specialization: Course 1:  Basic  Data Processing…
What do recommender systems do?
In essence, Recommender Systems work by trying to model the 
relationships between people and the items they’re evaluating:
my (user’s)
“preferences”
HP’s (item) 
“properties”
preference
Toward
“action”
preference toward
“special effects”
is the movie 
action-
heavy?
are the special effects good?
Compatibility

Python Data Products Specialization: Course 1:  Basic  Data Processing…
Recommender Systems
• In Course 4 we'll look at some of the state-of-the-art (but reasonably common) 
approaches that are used to implement recommender systems on the web, e.g. rating 
prediction:
• And "people who bought X also bought Y" etc.:

Python Data Products Specialization: Course 1:  Basic  Data Processing…
Recommender Systems
Other than building such systems in Course 4, 
in the meantime we're also interested in 
"standard" tasks that can approached using the 
same type of data, e.g.
• Regression and classification tasks
• Time series modeling
• Text analysis
• Visualization
• (Etc.)

Python Data Products Specialization: Course 1:  Basic  Data Processing…
Summary of concepts
• Introduced the concept of Recommender Systems, 
which we'll use as an ongoing case-study throughout 
the Specialization

