THE ARABIC ALPHABET 
www.uz-translations.net

Nicholas Awde and Putros Samano 
THE ARABIC ALPHABET 
How to Read and Write it 
SAQI 
www.uz-translations.net

British Library u u loguing-in-Publ ication Data 
A cUl.logue record for this book is aVllilable from the British Ubrary 
ISBN 0-86356-954-4 
fAN 9-780863-569548 
First published 1986 by Saqi Books 
This edilion published 2006 by Saqi Books 
oopyriglu 0 Nicholas Awde and Puu"Os Samano, 1986 
All rights mmJotd N() pan of this book mlly '" 1tproJUffd or tmnsmitud in 
any form or by Ilny m~"nJ. tkaro"ir u, m«hanicll~ including photocopying. 
moming or by any information Ilomgt and rrtrinuzi sysum, without f'"1'IissiOll 
in writingfrom tIN pub/is,,". 
This booft is wid luhjm to tIN CDndition lhat it shall not, by way ofmuu 
or othtrwist, '" Iml, rr-sold. hirtd out, or othtrwist cirrnloud without fht 
pub/isMrs pri(1r «m""r ill ally form of bill ding (1r CI1wr orkr rhan rhar in which 
it is pub/isl"d and withour a simil4r condition including rhis condition bdng 
impoHd on thf substqufnr purchaJtT. 
SAQI 
26 We1;tbournc: Grove: 
london W2 5RH 
www,saqibooks,oom 
CONTENTS 
A Word to the Reader 
9 
1. Introduction to Arabic 
13 
2. 
The Alphabet and Writing System 
21 
3. The Letters 
37 
4. 
Rererence Material 
83 
Ha .... 
85 
A Verse From the Koran 
88 
A Note (;0 Handwriting 
91 
The Alpbabd 
93 
Map orthe Anb World 
95 
www.uz-translations.net

A WORD TO THE READER 
One of the first obstacles facing anyone trying to learn Arabic is 
the seemingly complicated and convoluted alphabet, usually 
treated sketchily in the opening pages of daunting grammatical 
tomes. 
Many students beginning to learn Arabic ace plunged directly 
into grammar lessons without having first mastered the alphabet. 
They then try to pick the alphabet up as they go, finding out, only 
too late. that the attempt to assimilate both grammar and the 
alphabet simultaneously is simply too taxing. Genuine mastery 
of the alphabet ought to be a prerequisite to learning Arabic, yet 
there is scarcely any material devoted exclusively to it. 
But committed students of the language are not the only 
people interested in the Arabic alphabet. Many others who come 
into contact with the Arab world would like to be able at least to 
read a menu or a street sign, to understand labels in a 
supermarket, or to pay their Arab hosts the simple courtesy of 
being able to read and write the names of their countries. 
This book is meant to suit both the serious student of Arabic 
and more casual readers: businessmen or tourists visiting the 
Middle East, employees oJf British or American companies 
working for a time in an Arab country, or any of the growing 
number of people fascinated by the language and culture of a 
great and increasingly prominent civilization. 
The style of the book is light and non~technical: no previous 
knowledge of grammar or linguistics is assumed. At the same 
time, we have tried to be meticulous in detail and comprehensive 
in scope. We have not concealed anything to 'simplify' matters: 
everything you need to know is here. But neither have we added 
any unnecessary complications. 
The book teaches the alphabet: the letters, sounds, and 
9 
www.uz-translations.net

A Word to the Reatkr 
writing system of the Arabic language. If you put your mind to it 
you will soon find yourself able to recognize and reproduce aU 
the I~tters, to pronounce them more or less correctly. and to 
combme them into words. At this point some of you will have 
reached your goal; others will have taken the first essential step 
toward mastering Arabic. 
How to U .. Thla Book 
~e first chapt~r is a brief introduction to the Arabic language. It 
IS Intended to gIVe readers the minimum of information required 
to set a proper context for the presentation of the alphabet. But 
-
and this may seem paradoxica1 -
it actually says more about 
the basic structure of Arabic than is found in the opening lessons 
of most university courses. 
. There are two.rea~ns for this. To start with, learning Arabic is 
10 many ways qUite different from learning a European language. 
If you embark on a study of French, Italian, Gennan -
or even 
one of the more difficult European languages, like Russian or 
Greek -
you soon find that however different from English it 
might be, there is a basic correspondence in the way the language 
works overall. In fact, this underlying similarity is so obvious that 
it is rarely remarked upon, and the beginner feels no sense of 
disorientation. 
In Arabic this is not the case. It is not just that the alphabet and 
words are unusual. More profoundly. the whole structure of the 
language- its logical basis so to speak -
is alien to the structure 
of any European language. Even the simplest things -like the 
distinction between nouns and adjectives -
cannot be taken for 
granted. It is therefore much better (and in the end it makes 
!hings easier) if the person embarking on learning Arabic is 
mformed of these structural differences right from the start. A 
relatively small amount of information can help to reduce that 
sense of strangeness which all too often overwhelms the 
European who wants to learn Arabic. 
The .second reason is simpler: even if all you want to do is learn 
the alphabet, your task will be facilitated by knowing something 
about the language that this alphabet expresses. Why. for 
10 
A Word to the Reader 
example, is Arabic usually written without vowels? The answer 
has to do with the underlying logic of the language. 
The chapter introducing the Arabic language is followed by a 
brief but fairly complete presentation of the whole alphabet and 
writing system. A table of the main shapes of all the letters is 
given and their pronunciation discussed. All the various 
diacritical marks are explained. It is a good idea to read through 
this brief chapter in one sitting. Don't worry if you don't retain all 
the information right away. Everything in it is repeated later on, 
in the main part of the book, which presents all the letters one at 
a time. After you have worked through these descriptions, you 
will find that points that may have seemed complicated when you 
first read chapter 2 now seem easy. 
So read through the first two chapters relatively quickly. Try to 
get the general idea of what is being presented in the second 
chapter (and concentrate on the information about pronuncia-
tion); then keep referring back to chapter 2 as you go through the 
rest of the book. 
When you finish the section explaining each letter, you will be 
able to move on to reading some simple phrases and sentences. 
We will then take you, line by line, through the opening sura (or 
chapter) of the Koran, as a famous sample of Arabic prose. The 
map at the back of the book gives the names of all the countries 
and capital cities of the Middle East and North Africa in Arabic, 
A last word of advice. Although the Arabic script looks 
complicated and forbidding at first glance, it is actually quite 
logical and well-adapted to the Arabic language. It is based on 
the same principles as the Roman alphabet and is therefore 
within the reach of anyone who wants to make the effort to 
.master it. Most of all it takes practice. Don't be put off by fear of 
the unknown. It is not as hard as it looks. 
11 
www.uz-translations.net

1 INTRODUCTION TO ARABIC 
Arabic is one of the world's major languages. It is widely spoken 
on two continents, across the entire breadth of North Africa to 
the Arabian peninsula and the entire Middle East. It is the 
official language of eighteen countries with a total population of 
about 120 million,- placing it among the top ten tongues of the 
planet in number of speakers. 
Its unbroken literary tradition goes back about thirteen 
centuries, it is the language of one of the world's major religions 
-
Islam -
and it is the written and spoken means of 
communication in a region of steadily rising importance in 
international affairs: the Middle East. The numerical, geo-
graJlhical, political, and cultural status of the language was 
fonnally recognized by the United Nations in 1973, when Arabic 
was made the sixth official language of that body (the others are 
English, French, Spanish, Russian, and Chinese). 
Arabic belongs to the Semitic family of languages, which also 
includes Hebrew (both classical and modem), Aramaic, Syriac, 
and several of the languages of Ethiopia (Amharic, Tigrinya, 
Tigre, and others). Its alphabet, with the occasional modifica-
tion, is used to write other, non-Semitic languages as well, such 
as Persian, Urdu, and Kurdish. Until about sixty years ago, 
Turkish was also written with a modified Arabic alphabet, as 
were several leading African languages, notably Hausa and 
Swahili. 
"These countries are: Morocco, Algeria, Tunisia, libya, Egypt, Sudan, 
Lebanon, Syria, Jordan, Iraq, Kuwait, Saudi Arabia, Yemen, South Yemen, 
Oman, United Arab Emirates, Bahrain, and Qatar. In addilion, of course, 
Arabic is spoken by tbe Arab population of Israel and the ocrupied territories, 
and there are large numbers of Arabi<: speakers in southern Iran. 
13 
www.uz-translations.net

Introduction 10 Arabic 
Arabic is considered a difficult language to learn. One of the 
problems is that the tenn 'Arabic' is used to describe three 
different fonns of the same language: classical Arabic, which is 
the language of the Koran, the holy book of Islam; colloquial, or 
spoken, Arabic, as used in the daily lives of the people of the 
Arab countries; and modem standard Arabic, sometimes also 
called modem literary Arabic. 
Colloquial Arabic shows great diversity from region to region 
and among different layers of the population. Moreover, the 
various dialects 'differ quite considerably from the written 
language in vocabulary and grammar, as well as in syntax. 
There is a direct link between c1assica1 Arabic and modem 
standard Arabic, which is the written language of the entire Arab 
world today. Any newspaper published anywhere in the Arab 
world, for instance, can be read without the slightest problem 
anywhere else in the Arab world. Newspapers, magazines, 
official documents, poetry, all works of non-fiction, and the vast 
majority of prose literature are all written in modem standard 
Arabic, which shows virtually no regional variation. Most radio 
and television broadcasts (especially news programmes and 
political speeches) are given in a spoken version of the written 
language. In other words, every Arab who is literate reads 
modem standard Arabic (the colloquial languages are not 
written, except occasionally as dialogue in plays and novels), and 
because of the widening influence of radio and television 
throughout the Arab world, nearly every Arab, even if illiterate, 
will understand the spoken version of modem standard Arabic to 
some extent. 
In many ways, modem standard Arabic is quite close to 
classical Arabic. The Koran, which was first written down about 
twelve centuries ago, has always been a major grammatical and 
linguistic authority. The existence of a commonly accepted 
literary standard has been a powerful unifying force in the 
written language. One of the results has been that today's Arabic 
as written in, say, a newspaper or a popular novel is mlilch closer 
to the language of the Koran than modem Greek, for example, is 
to classical Greek, not to mention modem and medieval English, 
French, or Gennan. As compared to classical Arabic, modem 
standard Arabic is simpler in grammar and syntax, but the 
14 
Introduction to Arabic 
areater difference, as you would expect, is in vocabulary. 
The alphabet taught in this book is the one used in both 
classical and modem standard: in Arabic, unlike in English, 
Gennan, French, or other European languages, there has been 
no change at all in the alphabet or in spelling in hundreds of 
years. So learning the alphabet presented in this book is a 
necessity for leaming any kind of written Arabic. Whether you 
want to read the Koran in its original language, follow the output 
of modem Arabic literature, or simply read a menu in an Arab 
restaurant, the first step has to be the same: to learn to read, 
write, and pronounce the alphabet. 
It is not as complicated as it looks. But when first starting out it 
does help to know something about the overall structure and 
shape of the Arabic language, because the alphabet. more than 
most other alphabets in the world, is closely modelled to the 
language it was devised to represent. 
The most important thing to know right from the start is this: 
like other Semitic languages, Arabic is based on what is nonnally 
called a 'consonantal root system'. What this means is that 
almost every word in the language is ultimately derived from one 
or another 'root' (usually a verb) that represents a general, and 
often quite neutral, concept of an action or state of being. 
Usually this root consists of three letters. By making changes to 
these letters, the original root concept is refined and altered. 
There are many ways to make these changes: letters are added to 
the beginning of the root or tacked on at the end; the vowels 
between the consonants of the root are changed; extra 
consonants are inserted into the middle of the root; syllables are 
appended to the end. Each of these changes produces a new 
word -
and a new meaning: meanings seem literally to grow out 
of the root like branches of a tree. But the original, basic idea of 
the root persists, in one way or another. 
It is easier to see this by taking an example. The three 
consonants, k, t, and b -
combined in that order: k-t-b -
connote the idea of writing. The simplest word based on those 
letters is kataba, which means 'to write'. That is the root. If you 
go to an Arabic dictionary and look up the root kataba, you will 
find, among maoy other entries, the following (the three letters 
15 
www.uz-translations.net

Introduction to Arabic 
of the root are printed in bold type so that they stand out). 
kataba 
to write 
kattaba 
takaataba 
istaktaba 
kitaab 
maktab 
mo.taba 
kaatib 
miktaab 
mukaataba 
mukaatib 
muktatib 
kutubU 
kutayyib 
maktuub 
to make someone write 
to write to each other, correspond 
to dictate 
book 
office 
library (also bookstore) 
clerk 
typewriter 
correspondence 
correspondent, reporter 
subscriber 
bookseller 
booklet 
written (or letter) 
Th.e. co~nection of all these words ",\pith the underlying idea of 
wntlOg IS pretty clear. But often it is a lot less obvious more akin 
to an etymolog~ in an English ~ictjonary: once you ;ead it, you 
see the con~ectJOn, but you ought not have noticed it on your 
own. For ~nsta~ce: katiiba means 'squadron' or 'military 
detachment, whIch seems to have been derived from the 
time·honoured practice of drawing armies up into battalions on 
paper before they were actually put into the field. 
Now take another look at the list of k+b words. Apart from 
the fact .that the .seq~ence k·t·b appears in every word, you can 
also notice certalO kmds of changes that might easily be seen as 
patterns that could be repeated with other roots. For example, 
how do we get rnaklab out of kataba? Well, first we prefix rna· to 
the ,root, and then we delete the first vowel (the a after the k). 
Let s take a completely different root and make the same 
c~ang~. Say we have the root d-r·s. Its simplest fonn is darasa 
(just like kataba). So let's put in rna· as a prefix, take away the a 
after the d (and in this case tack on an -a at the end which 
~appens to be just the feminine ending). We get madras~. Now, 
if we. tell you that darasa means 'to study', you might not be 
surpnsed to find out that madrasa means 'school'. A rnadrasa is a 
16 
Introduction to Arabic 
p&.ce where d·r·s takes place (at least in principle), and a maktab 
•• place where k+b takes place. 
Another example. We !;an get ktullib (clerk) from kataba (to 
.fite) by doubling the fifst vowel (lengthening it, actually), 
d •• nging the second vowel from a to i, and eliminating the final 
""weI. Now let's take another root, a little more grisly this time: 
.·.·1. or qatala, which means 'to kill' or ' to murder'. If we 
Ionltthen the first vowel, change the second vowel to i, and 
.liminate the last vowel, we get qaatil, which means 'killer' or 
'murderer'. Generalizing from these two instances, we might be 
tempted to say something like this: if we have a three-oonsonant 
root and we lengthen the first vowel, change the second vowel to 
I, and eliminate the final vowel, we get a noun that means a 
person who does the thing that the root word means. A clerk 
writes and a killer kills. From kataba to kaatib and from qatala to 
qDDtii. 
Unfortunately. things are not always that simple. In fact, they 
.Imost never are. One of the things you can do to a 
three-consonant root is double the middle consonant (starting 
with kataba, for instance, we get kattaba, two I's instead of one). 
This gives us a new verb. Sometimes that new verb has the 
connotation of 'making someone do whatever the root word 
means', as is the case with k·l·b. where kalaba means 'to write' 
and kattaba means 'to make someone write'. But sometimes it 
can be just an intensified version of the root word. For example, 
kasara (k·s·r) means 'to break'. while kassara means 'to smash'. 
Moreover, not every three-consonant root uses all its possibili-
ties. There are plenty of sets of three consonants that just never 
double the middle consonant. For instance, taraka ('·r·k) means 
'to leave', but there is no such word as ta"aka. It's just a kind of 
empty form lying there waiting for a meaning to come along and 
fill it. Sometimes, on the other hand, things can be the other way 
around: dallasa (d·l-s) means 'to swindle', also 'to forge' or 'to 
counterfeit', but there is no such word as do/asa. Here the root 
itself has disappeared, if indeed it ever existed. 
The ramifications of a meaning-system like this are virtually 
endless, and its subtleties are such that you can often quite 
legitimately end up with words that have a common root but are 
opposite in meaning. On the other hand, the possibilities of 
17 
www.uz-translations.net

Inlroduction to Arabic 
coining new words, of finding an appropriate root and an 
appropriate 'unfilled fonn' to correspond to a new idea, are 
immense. (One example: the modem Arabic word for 'social· 
ism' is ishtirakiya, which comes from the root sharaka, the sh 
being a single letter, which means 'to share'. Ironically enough, 
the word for 'corporation', in the sense of 'limited company', is 
shirka, which comes from exactly the same root.) 
It should also be remembered that most native speakers of the 
language do not think about the system in this kind of clinical 
way, any more than speakers of Romance languages think about 
how their tongues are related to Latin or any more than English 
speakers think about the difference between 'strong' and 'weak' 
verbs. It is an instinctive process in Arabic, as in any language. 
But for foreigners learning the language it is important to know, 
right from the beginning, that when they embark on learning 
Arabic, they are studying a language the key to which lies in its 
underlying structure of three.consonant roots. Even at the stage 
of simply learning the alphabet, it helps matters to be aware that 
the Acabic language is ultimately based on patterns. There are 
many different kinds of patterns, and each may have a variety of 
possible connotations, but the existence of these patterns is the 
heart of the language. Even something so elementary as the 
alphabet is tailored to reflect these patterns. 
Because of the emphasis on consonants, it is not surprising that 
the Arabic alphabet consists almost purely of consonants. In 
fact, of the twenty·nine letters of the alphabet, twenty-six are 
consonants, and of the other three, two sometimes stand for 
consonants as well. 
But in certain patterns, those three letters can stand for long 
vowels. Nonnally, short vowels are not wrinen. (The ee in the 
English word reed is a long vowel; the corresponding short vowel 
is the i in the word bit, for example.) Short vowels are not part of 
the alphabet; when it is considered necessary to write them, they 
are represented as little hooks and dashes above and below the 
letters. This means that written Arabic nonnally looks like a kind 
of speed writing: it is as if the words 'modern standard Arabic' 
were written 'mdrn stndrd rbe'. Now, this is definitely a problem 
for people learning the language. But the system of patterns 
18 
Introduction to Arabic 
makes it less of a problem than it would be in a European 
language, which would often be completely unintelligible if 
written without any vowels. Although the lack of vowels may be 
an obstacle to the learner in the early days, it will rarely cause an 
Arab to stumble when reading a written unvowelled text; this is 
because of the patterns. 
Once you get used to the various patterns, the lack of short 
vowels becomes less of a problem. On the other hand, an 
advantage of Arabic is that the alphabet and writing system is 
closely tailored to fit Arabic phonetics: if all the short vowels and 
other diacritical marks are written (as they are, for instance, in all 
editions of the Koran), then every word is pronounced exactly as 
it is written and written exactly as it is pronounced. 
Another important thing about the writing system: the script is 
cursive. That is, almost all letters are joined up to the letters 
preceding and following them, as in English longhand. Ther~ is 
no distinction between printing and writing of the sort that eXIsts 
in European languages: one system in which the leiters are 
joined up and one in which they are kept separate. Also, there 
are no capital and small letters: the very concept is completely 
foreign to Arabic. A word that starts a sentence is written just 
exactly as it would be if it was in the middle of a sentence, and the 
letter that begins a proper name like Muhammad is exactly the 
same as that letter when it begins a common word like maktab. 
But since the letters are almost all joined together (there are 
just a few that aren't), they take different forms depending on 
where they appear in a word. For example, when an m starts a 
word, it has to have a little tail connecting it to the next leiter of 
the word. When it comes in the middle of a word it needs two 
tails, one connecting it to the letter that comes after it and one 
connecting it to the letter that comes before it. When it is the last 
letter of a word it needs a tail connecting it to the letter that came 
before it, but no tail connecting it to the next letter ,since the~ is 
no next letter; instead it has a special little ending flounsh. 
Finally, when a letter is written by itself, not co~nected !o 
anything, it usually has a slightly different shape than It would ID 
a word. 
At first dance this can seem incredibly complicated: most of 
19 
www.uz-translations.net

Introduction to Arabic 
the letters have four forms each! And most Arabic grammar 
books start out with a table showing all the various fonns laid out 
in a chart that looks like it was designed to scare off aU but the 
most detennined. (We have a table like that too, but at the back 
of the book, where it belongs -
for reference only.) Actually, 
however, things are not so bad. In general, the basic shape of 
each letter is given by the way that letter looks when it is standing 
atone in splendid isolation. All the other forms are really only 
ways to make that basic shape fit into the various combinations 
with other letters, and once you learn to look at it that way. it 
soon becomes second nature to you. The best way to learn the 
alphabet is not to try to memorize a complicated table, but to 
take each letter one by one, to learn the basic sbape first -
how 
to recognize it and how to write it -
and then to see how to 
connect it to other letters. That is what we will do in the pages 
that follow. 
First there will be a list of aU the twenty-rune letters of tbe 
alphabet. They will be given in their 'isolated' fonn. Alongside 
each letter you will find the Arabic name of the letter, the 
English letters we are using in this book to transliterate the 
Arabic letters, and a 'guide to pronunciation', which is a rough 
indication of the sound of each letter. After the table there are a 
series of notes and explanations about pronunciation and other 
things you have to know about the writing system. At this stage, 
just read through them. Then use the table for reference. Later 
on we will go through each letter one by one, giving atl its various 
fonns and showing bow all the letters are combined into words. 
One last -
but very important -
point: Arabic is written from 
right tQ left. 
20 
2 THE ALPHABET AND 
WRITING SYSTEM 
The following chart lists the names of all the letters of the ~r~bic 
alphabet. The transliteration gives ~ hint a?<>ut pronu~Clahon . 
All letters for which there is no English equivalent are discussed 
below. 
Nome 01' 
Arabk 
TnsJslJteratJon 
Guide to 
IA_ 
Form 
PronUlldation 
'alif 
aa 
fair 
baa' 
.... 
b 
big 
I .. ' 
Y 
1 
tell 
thaa' 
o!. 
Ih 
think 
jiim 
r. 
) 
measure 
Haa' 
~ 
H 
no equivalent 
kbaa' 
t 
kh 
Scottish loch 
daal 
• 
d 
dead 
dbaal 
• 
db 
then 
raa' 
J 
r 
rolled r 
zaay 
J 
z 
zoo 
siin 
"" 
s 
sew 
shiin 
• 
sh 
shall 
"" 
Saad 
"'" 
S 
no equivalent 
21 
www.uz-translations.net

The Alphabet and Writing System 
Oaad 
..,.0 
0 
no equivalent 
Taa' 
Jo 
T 
no equivalent 
DHaa' 
J; 
OH 
no equivalent 
cayn 
t 
, 
no equivalent 
&hayo 
t 
&h 
no equivalent 
faa' 
..J 
f 
fool 
qaaf 
.j 
q 
no equivalent 
kaaf 
.:I 
k 
kitten 
laam 
J 
love 
miim 
~ 
m 
mask 
nuun 
Ii 
n 
never 
haa' 
• 
h 
happy 
waaw 
J 
w, uu 
weld, food 
yaa' 
IF 
Y,il 
yell, breeze 
harnza 
• 
no equivalent 
If the names of the first two letters -'aliI and baa' -
sound like 
alpha-bet it is not just coincidence. The Arabic and Roman (and 
Greek and Russian) alphabets, no matter how different they may 
look, all have a common distant ancestor. You can also see a hint 
of this common descent in the sequence k, I, m, n, wbich occun 
in both the Arabic and English alphabets. 
22 
The Alph4bet and Writing System 
Notice also that various groups of letters have similar shapes. 
IJM', taa', and thac', for instance, are exactly the same except 
that boo' has one dot under the letter, too' has two dots above, 
and ,haa' has three dots above. These dots are crucial: they are 
not extra diacritical marks but are part of the letters themselves. 
..... on PronuncJ8t1on 
In Arabic, as in any language, proper pronunciation is best 
learned by imitating a native speaker. What follows here is 
meant to give only a general idea of how the letters sound. By 
carefully following the instructions here, you can arrive at a good 
enough first approximation to serve until you are able to listen to 
Arabs. We'll take the consonants first and then say something 
about vowels and combinations of vowels. 
Consonants 
Except for the ones discussed below, the consonants are 
pronounced pretty much as they are in English. When you see an 
Arabic letter in the table transcribed by a normal, lower-case 
English letter (or a combination of two normal, lower-case 
letters), you can assume that the Arabic letter is pronounced like 
its English equivalent (like b, t, d, sh, and so on). The ones that 
need some explanation are as follows . 
.. h4mza. Phonetically. the hamza is a 'glottal stop'. It sounds 
like a little catch in the voice. Although there is no letter 
representing this sound in English (which is why we represent it 
in the transliteration by an apostrophe), the sound actually does 
exist. Say the word 'Noel', not as if it were written 'Nowel', but 
clearly separating the two syllables: 'No-el'. If you did it properly 
and forcefully, that little catch in your voice between the two 
syllables was a perfect hamzo. The traditional Cockney way of 
saying 'bottle' (as bo"/e) also has a hamza in it. Another way to 
try it is to say the syllables 'uh-oh' (as though you're in trouble). 
You should notice that same little catch in the voice at the 
beginning of each syllable. In Arabic the glottal stop is a 
full-fledged consonant and can appear in the strangest places: at 
23 
www.uz-translations.net

The Alphabet and Writing System 
the end of a word for example. The main thing is: be careful not 
to ignore it. 
Four Arabic letters -
rjA , ~, .» I .l,; -
are known as 
'emphatic consonants'. They are represented in the translitera-
tion as capital letters. Although there is no exact equivalent of 
them in English, they are not all that difficult to pronounce: it 
just takes a bit of practice. The best way to do it is to start with 
their 'unemphatic' equivalents. For example, pronounce as s, as 
in English. This is the Arabic letter sUn ((,)"") . Now try to make 
the same sound, but as if your mouth was full of cotton wool, so 
that you have to say s with your tongue drawn back. Make the 
sound more forcefully and shorter in duration than a normal s. 
The back of your tongue should be raised up toward the soft 
palate, and the sound produced should have a sort of 'dark' 
quality. This is the letter Saad (rjA). There is a similar 
relationship between the following pairs: oJ and ~ (daal and 
Dam!), -::. and.» (taa' and Taa'); .j and.» (dhaal and DHaa'). 
If you listen to native speakers of Arabic, one thing you will 
notice is that these 'emphatic consonants' give a very distinctive 
sound to the language. To sum up: the four emphatic 
consonants, with their 'unemphatic' equivalents, are: 
U'" , d 
.::. I 
.j dh 
~s 
~D 
... T 
,i; DH 
While we're on the subject, notice that Arabic has two different 
letters to represent the two sounds of th (as in think and as in 
then). The second one (th as in then) is represented in the 
transliteration as dh. 
The letter khaa' (t) , represented in transliteration by kh , is like 
the ch in the Scottish loch, or like the ch in the German 
pronunciation of the composer Bach. But it is slightly more 
guttural than its Scottish or German cousin. Whatever you do, 
don't pronounce it as an h or a k. It is beUer to exaggerate rather 
than underemphasize the guttural aspect. 
24 
The Alphabet and Writing System 
The letter ghayn (t) is another one that gives English-speaking 
people trouble. More or less, it is the sound you make when 
prgling. Everyone can do it. but it's not always easy to get used 
10 it when it appears in words. Another way to approximate it 
pretty well: it is almost exactly the sound of the very strongly 
rolled Parisian r in French. 
Now we come to the three letters that always give European 
apeakers the most trouble. 
Qaaf(J) ,represented by q in the transliteration, sounds a bit 
like k, but is pronounced very far back in the throat. When you 
tay the letter k, you touch the roof of your mouth with more or 
less the middle of your tongue. When you say a qaaf. you touch 
the very back of your tongue to the soft palate in the back of your 
mouth. Most Europeans trying to learn Arabic have a lot of 
trouble doing this, and pronounce qaal as if it were kaaf. Arabs 
tend to be fairly tolerant of this mistake, and there are not very 
many words in which the difference between qaal and kaa! 
determines a different meaning. Still, it's worth making the 
effort. 
You probably noticed that one of the letters of the Arabic 
alphabet - e - is transliterated by a raised letter '. The reason 
for this peculiarity is that this letter is completely foreign not only 
to English but also to any other European language, and in fact 
to just about all the world's languages. It is a peculiarity of the 
Semitic languages, and one of the most difficult sounds of the 
Arabic language to make. Unfortunately, it is also one of the 
most common letters. The only real way to learn it is to listen to 
Arabs and to practice incessantly. In scientific phonological 
terms, this letter is a pharyngal voiced fricative. That means that 
the sound is made by constricting the muscles of the larynx so 
that the flow of air through the throat is partially choked off. One 
eminent Arabist once suggested that the best way to pronounce 
this letter is to gag. Do it, and you'll feel the muscles of your 
throat constrict the passage of air in just the right way. The sound 
is voiced, which means that your vocal cords vibrate when 
25 
www.uz-translations.net

The Alphabet and Writing System 
making it. It sounds rather like the bleating of a lamb, but 
smoother. 
Finally, we have Hoo' (el, transliterated by a capital H. Hoo' 
sounds much like a very emphatic h. Imagine that you've just 
swallowed a spoonful of the hottest chili imaginable: the 'haaa' 
sound that results should be a pretty good approximation of 
Hoo'. Strictly speaking, Hoo' is an unvoiced version of <ayn. In 
other words, it is made just like the <ayn, except that when you 
say <ayn your vocal cords vibrate, but when you say Hoo' they 
don't. (In English, for instance, rand d are exactly the same, 
except that I is unvoiced and d is voiced: your vocal cords vibrate 
when you say d, but not when you say t.) 
Don't worry too much if you can't get qaaf, <ayn, and Hoo' right 
away. Quite a few learned people have struggled for decades 
with them. As a first approximation, you can pronounce qooflike 
kaaf, 'ayn like hamza, and Haa' like haa' (like an English h). But 
this should be only a temporary measure, more or less equivalent 
to the Arab who says 'blease' instead of 'please' (as you wiU have 
noticed, there is no letter p in Arabic). 
One last point: the letter raa'(J)is always roUed: exaggerate it 
rather than lose it. 
Vowels 
Written Arabic has c;nly three vowels -
a, u, and i. But they 
come in pairs: each vowel can be either long or short. The 
difference between long and short vowels is important in both 
speech and writing, and the distinction actually affects meaning 
in many words (faaris, for example, means 'Persia', whereas 
faras, with a short a, means 'horse'). 
The short vowels a, u, and i are not part of the main alphabet. 
Instead they are written as small 'blips' or strokes above or below 
the consonants that come before them in pronunciation. The 
short a is pronounced like the a in the English word pal, the short 
U is like the u in put, and the short i is like the i in pin. The a is 
represented as a slanted slash above the consonant; the U is 
represented by a sort of miniature woow above the consonant; 
26 
The Alphabet and Writing System 
&1M ; is represented by a slash just like the a but below the 
CIOOlOnant. For example, let's take the letter daal (which, 
..member, has the sound c/)j with the three short vowels it would 
be written 
.:a da 
, 
• du 
.t di 
The long vowels aa, UU, and ii are represented in writing by the 
lhree letters 'aJif(I),woow(J) , and yaa'(I/) respectively. As we 
mentioned before, these vowels are actually pronounced longer 
th.n their short counterparts: it really does take longer to say 
them, in fact about twice as longas it does to say the short vowels. 
The aa comes out sounding more or less like the ai in the English 
word fair, the uu like the 00 in food, and the ii like the ee in 
brteze. It is important to remember, however, that Arabic 
vowels are all pure: in other words, the position of tongue and 
lips must remain stationary while the vowels are pronounced. 
This is rarely true in English, where, for example, the word food 
• often pronounced as if it had a half-silent w in it. Finally, you 
win notice in the alphabet table that besides representing the 
long vowels, the letters waaw and yoo' also stand for the 
consonants w and y. How can you tell when a waaw stands for w 
and when it stands for a longuu, and when ayaa' stands for y and 
when it stands for a long ii? The answer is that when one of these 
letters stands for a consonant it will itself be marked with a short 
vowel; when it stands for a long vowel, it win have no vowel sign 
.1 allan it. 
To clarify this, let's take the consonant daaJ again. If daal is 
fonawed by the three long vowels, it is written 
, 
j.J duu 
\f~ 
dii 
Notice that in each case the daal is marked with a short vowel as 
weD as the corresponding long vowel after it. On the other hand, 
27 
www.uz-translations.net

The Alphabet and Writing System 
if waaw and yaa' stood for consonants and not long vowels, we 
would have 
jJ dawa 
-,j~ dayi 
Here waaw and yaa' are themselves marked with short vowels, 
and therefore must be consonants. 
When no vowel follows a consonant, a sign called sukuun is 
written over that consonant. The sukuun looks like a small zero 
(e), which is a convenient way of thinking about it: it means zero 
vowel. 
Arabic also has two diphthongs. A diphthong is a combination 
of two vowels written and spoken together. The first diphthong 
has more or less the soundofthe owin the English word how. It is 
composed of a short a followed by waaw and is thus transliterated 
aw. The second sounds like the j in bite. It is composed of a short 
a foUowed by yaa' and is thus transliterated ay. A sukuun written 
over a waawor ayaa' is the main indication of a diphthong. Using 
the letter daaJ again: 
j~ dow (sounds like English dow) 
~~ day (sounds like EngJish die). 
S~marizing aU this, we can draw the follOwing chart, which 
gtves the combinations of all six Arabic vowels (three short and 
three long) and two diphthongs with the letter daal. 
0Ih0r SIgno 
Doubled LBIters 
~ 
da 
I~ dQIJ 
~ du 
• 
di 
jJ dow 
, 
jJ duu 
t.J ~ dii 
If' doy 
Arabic, unlike most European languages, does not bother to 
write a letter twice in words like bitler or twaddle. Instead there is 
28 
The Alphabet and Writing System 
Ilpecial sign, written above a letter, that means that this letter 
**ld be read as if it appeared twice. This sign is .I and is called 
ItIMJda or tashdiid. This is important in pronunciation, because 
01 the patterns that we talked about before. Remember, for 
"'Iance, that if you double the middle consonant of a 
Ihree-consonant root, you get a new verb that may mean 'to 
.. te someone do' whatever the root word means. The word 
_asa means 'to study', but the word darrasa means 'to make 
lOmeone study', or more precisely, 'to teach'. Now, darasa 
would be written 
J..j~ 
but da"asa would be written 
". 
.... J. 
The shadda makes all the difference. Make sure to pronounce 
tlGn'asa with the two r's clearly distinct: dar·rasa. The same with 
any other doubled consonant. 
I/omz. 
We have already talked a bit about hamza(~), the consonant that 
.. pronounced like a catch in the voice. Although the hamza is a 
full consonant in Arabic just like any other, it is written in a 
IpCcial way. Only very rarely can ahamza stand on its own. Most 
ohen the hamza is written 'riding' on another letter. That letter 
can be either aUt(d, WQIJw(j), or yaa'(rj) , There is a set of very 
complicated rules that determine which letter the hamza must 
'ride on' in any given word -
so complicated, in fact , that most 
Arabs never learn them all. Later on, we wiU give a simplified 
form of those rules and we will see how the hivnza is written in 
almost every context. For tbe moment, note just this one point: 
wbenever a hamza comes at tbe beginning of a word, that homza 
'rides' on an 'alit. If the foUowing short vowel is a or u, the hivnza 
will sit on top of the 'alit; if the foUowing sbort vowel is i, it will sit 
underneatb the 'a1if. Thus: 
1 'u 
I " 
'i 
29 
www.uz-translations.net

The Alphabet and Writing Syslem 
When you see one of these combinations at the beginning of a 
word, remember not to pronounce the 'alif. In this context, the 
'alifhas no value of its own: its only role is to 'carry' the hamza. 
taa'marbuuTa 
Arabic has two genders, masculine and feminine. Many nouns 
and adjectives are made feminine by adding an ending to the 
masculine form. The most common feminine ending is the 
so-called loa' marbuuTa, which means 'tied t'. The loa' 
marbuuTa is simply the letter haa' (~) with two dots over it: O. In 
other words, it is a kind of combination of h and I (having the 
shape of hoa' with the two dots of toa'). If a toa' marbuuTa is 
followed by a vowel, it is pronounced as a I; otherwise it is 
pronounced simply as short a or as ah. For example, tbe word for 
'administration' -
'idaara -
is written tbus 
oJI.l! 
and, as indicated in the transliteration, the taa' marbuuTa at the 
end would be pronounced as short a. But if the word 
'administration' were followed by another word with an inter-
vening vowel, it would be pronounced 'idaaral, with the loa' 
marbuuTa pronounced as a t. 
madda 
The madda is a special symbol to represent a particular sound. 
Suppose a word started with hamza followed by the long vowel 
QQ. Since hamza at the beginning of a word always 'rides' on an 
'alif and since 'alif also represents the long vowel aIJ, we would 
have 
11 
This is considered ugly and unwieldy, so a special symbol, the 
maddJJ, has been invented to stand for the sound 'oa. It looks like 
this: 
i 
Case Endings 
Oassica1 Arabic had three cases: nominative, accusative, and 
genitive. This meant that the ending of a word would change 
The Alphabet and Writing Syslem 
depending on its role in the sentence. (Remnants of cases exist in 
English too. That's why you say 'she did it' and 'he gave it to her' 
but not 'her did it' or 'him gave it to she' ,) In Arabic these cases 
were indicated by modified versions of the short vowels added to 
the end of the words. In addition, each case had two sets of 
endings, one used for words that were 'defined' (like 'the book'), 
another for words that were 'undefined' (like 'book' or 'a book'). 
That made a total of six possible endings, two each, defined and 
undefined, for nominative, accusative, and genitive. 
Now, in modem Arabic, both spoken and written, these 
endings have in practice almost disappeared, just as they have in 
English. Unfortunately, their disappearance is not total. Theore-
tically, they still exist. Most Arabic courses spend a lot of time on 
the: case endings. The rules for using them are quite complicated, 
10 much so that even among native speakers of Arabic only a 
lmaU minority have really mastered them. In fact , unless it· is 
your ambition to become a lawyer pleading cases in an Arab 
court or a Koranic scholar, you are better off spending as little 
time as possible bothering about Arabic case endings. They are 
hardly ever written, since with just one exception they are 
represented by short vowels, and short vowels are hardly ever 
written. More to the point, they are hardly ever pronounced 
either. 
Then why bother with them at all? Two reasons. Firlt, in a few 
Instances they persist in both the written and spoken languages. 
Second, if you pick up a fully vowelled text, an edition of the 
Koran for instance, you win see them written there. So the best 
procedure is to learn to recognize the case endings, so that you 
are not thrown off when you come across them. Later on, you 
will gradually come to learn how to use the ones that are still 
needed. The sounds of these case endings are: 
nominative 
accusative 
genitive 
indefinite 
definite 
-un 
-u 
-an 
-a 
-in 
-; 
Take an example. The word for house is daar. If the word is 
indefinite ('a house' or just 'house'). then the three cases would 
give us: doarun (nominative), doran (accusative), daarin 
31 
www.uz-translations.net

The Alphabet and Writing System 
(genitive). If the word were defined (for instance, 'Muhammad's 
house', which in Arabic has to be 'the house of Muhammad'), it 
would be, in the three cases: claaru (nominative), eJaara 
(accusative), daari (genitive). Now let's see how these endings 
are written in Arabic. 
The word by itself is 
,Jlj 
And with the endings 
jlj daarun 
jlJ 
daaru 
Ijlj claaran 
jlJ 
daara 
,Jlj 
daarin 
Jlj 
daari 
• 
Notice th-at all the indefinite endings involve a doubling up of the 
short vowels associated with the ending; this doubling of the 
vowels is read as if it were short vowel plus n. For the definite 
endings we have simply the appropriate short vowel. But notice 
something else as well: in the accusative indefinite ending (-an), 
there is not only the doubled-up short vowel, but also an extra 
'alif. This 'ali/is written but not pronounced. Now, since none of 
the <;hort vowels are normally written, the accusative indefinite 
ending -an is generally speaking the only one you will see written, 
since the 'alif associated with it is always written (but not 
pronounced). 
Accent end streu 
Accent is just as important in Arabic as in English. In English, it 
is usually impossible to tell which syllable of a word should be 
stressed, and English is especially complicated in this, since the 
stress can fallon virtually any syllable, whereas in most 
languages there are restrictions on where accents are allowed to 
fall. The best way of getting a sense of the stress patterns of any 
language, of course, is to listen to native speakers and to build up 
an intuitive sense of rhythm for the language. This is just as true 
for Arabic as for any other language. But there are some clear 
guidelines about Arabic stress. 
32 
The Alphabet and Writing System 
The first thing to note is that Arabic syllables are divided into 
two kinds: long and short. A short syllable is simply a single 
fOftIOnant followed by a single short vowel. The word kalllba for 
_tance, is composed of three short syllables: ka-ta-ba. Any 
.,.U.ble that is not short is considered long. There are various 
w.ys a syllable can be long: a consonant plus a long vowel; a 
ODnlOnant plus a diphthong; a consonant followed by a short 
¥OWel followed by another consonant. For instance, kitaab 
('book') has two syllables, one short (ki-) and one loog (-taab). 
Another example: maktaba ('bookstore' or 'library') has three 
.yllables. The first one is long (mak-), the second short (-ta-), the 
third short (-ba). Finally, take maktuub ('letter'). It has two long 
I)'lIables (mak-) and (-tuub). 
Now, the basic rule of Arabi:: stress is this: the accent falls on 
lhe long syllable nearest to the end of the word. If the last syllable 
"long, then that syllable is stressed: kitaab, accent on the last 
I)'lIable. If the second-to-last syllable of a word is long and the 
lut is short, then the second-to-Iast syllable is stressed: 'abuuhu 
('his father') , accent on the second-to-last syllable. If there is no 
kmg syllable in the word (like kataba), then the accent is on the 
lhird-to-Iast syllable. This will be the case with the great majority 
of root words, since these usually take the form of three 
consonants separated by short vowels (kataba, clarasa, taraka, 
and so on -
all accented on the first syllable). Last point: the 
Keent is not allowed to fall any further back than the third 
Iyllable from the end. So if you have a word of four (or more) 
1II0rt syllables, the stress has to fallon the third syllable from the 
end. For example: kat!lbahu ('he wrote it') has four short 
syllables; the stress will therefore fallon the third syllable back: 
/caJ/Jbahu. 
While we're on the subject of accent, we should oote one other 
thing: in Arabic every syllable, long or short, should be clearly 
and distinctly pronounced, given its due weight. In this Arabic is 
like Italian, Spanish, or German, and not like English or French. 
Syllables do not disappear or get slurred just because they are 
unstressed. 
33 
www.uz-translations.net

The Alphabet and Writing System 
This is a grey area in Arabic. Here are some of the more 
commonly used items: 
Humbert: 
comma 
semicolon 
colon 
full-stop 
quotation marks 
« 
)I 
question mark 
'l 
exclamation point 
dash _ 
The numerals in Arabic are written like this 
'Y'f'tO"\VA\ 
o 
123 4 567 8 
9 
Be careful not to confuse zero and five. The Arabic five looks a 
lot like our zero, except it is slightly flattened. The dot in the 
middle of a line is the Arabic zero. Also be careful of two and 
three, which are very similar in Arabic. And of course, seven and 
eight. A memory trick to help you remember which is seven and 
which is eight: 'seven is open to heaven'. 
One peculiar thing about Arabic numerals is that even though 
th~ language is written from right to left, the numerals are 
wntten from left to right. in the same order as European 
numerals. For instance: 
Y'f' 
1'"0 
23 
35 
'1"V 
137 
Y1"' 
239 
Finally, the numbers given bere are the ones used in tbe eastern 
part of the Arab world. In North Africa (particularly the three' 
former French colonies Morocco, Algeria, and Tunisia). 
European numerals are generally used. 
LIgotu ... 
Arabi.c v.:as developed as a handwriuen script. As a result, 
combmattons of leiters were invented to facilitate the flow of 
34 
The Alphabet and Writing System 
writing. In addition, partly because Islam forbids the representa-
don of the human form. calligraphy has come to play a large part 
lithe Arab visual arts. a process no doubt aided by the intrinsic 
pKC of the alpbabet, which lends itself to considerable artistic 
elaboration. 
The special combinations of letters -
called ligatures -
have 
.vcn Arab printers headacbes for ages. Modem Ara~ic 
typewriters (as well as many printing styles) bave done away WIth 
.. 
rly all of them. But since you will still encounter them, bere 
_ just for reference -
is a table of the most common ones. We 
will come to some of tbem later on. It isn't necessary for you to 
..e them -
merely to recognize them when you come across 
diem. After you have gone through tbe whole book, it might be 
_lpfut to come back to this page to compare the various 
..... tures with the way the same letters would normally be 
.nlten. 
[+L,-J;::; * !. ==('tJ 
l+C"'3i~=(+J 
[t c= ~ ~=c:+u 
~+~ -t L=~ ~ ""L:t (tJ 
L + ()-"== ~ ~=ur 
[+ if:: 11£ ~ =(+9 
35 
www.uz-translations.net

The Alphabet and Writing System 
Well, so much for our introductory survey of the Arabic 
l:lnguage and its alphabet. Don't worry if you did not retain all 
the infonnation given. The next step is to go through the letters 
one by one. Each letter will be explained in detail, and its various 
fonns demonstrated. Along the way, you will learn how to 
combine the letters into words, and how to string the words 
togethet into sentences. 
Here are some hints about how to proceed from here on. 
I. Pay attention to which letters and which parts of letters go 
below the line and which go above the line. 
1. Try not to take your pen off the page -
make your writing 
look as fluid as possible. Look upon the writing of a word as the 
writing of a single, extended letter. 
3. Put in all the dots and any other accessory part of the word 
after you have finished writing the whole basic shape of the word. 
A1so, put the dots in from right to left. 
4. Remember that all the examples showing you how to write 
words and letters flow from right 10 left. 
5. After reading any Arabic in this book, copy it out for 
yourself. 
6. Practise the isolated forms of the letters in particular. As we 
said before, it is the isolated fonn that determines the b4sicsbape 
of the letter. 
7. It might help to take some tracing paper and la)' it over the 
Arabic words in this book and then trace the words out several 
times, trying to go faster each time until you get the feel of the 
flow of each word. Then try to do the word by yourself on a 
separate piece of paper. 
Finally, once you have completed the section on making all the 
letters, it would probably be helpful to refer to the chart on pages 
93-94, which lists all the various forms of each letter. It is a kind 
of check-list of the entire alphabet. 
36 
3 THE LETTERS 
www.uz-translations.net

The Leners 
'r' (baa') belongs to a group of three letters thatbave exactly the 
time shape. The other two are taa' (.:.) and loa' (.!I) . These 
Ihree letters are distinguished only by their dots. These dots are 
pGrt of the letters, and not extra diacritical marks. 
'r' has one dot below it. 
In isolation, it is written like this 
f 
, 
f 
, 
f 
, 
• 
• 
• 
Notice that the basic shape is wide and shallow, about three times 
.. long as it is wide. It sits right on the line, and the dot goes just 
under the line, in the centre of the letter. 
w is one of the letters whose shape changes depending on 
whether it falls at the beginning, in the middle, or at the end. 
The initial form looks like this 
... ...1 
.J 
• 
• 
The medial form looks like this 
... + ",00 
• 
The final form looks like this 
, 
f 
••• 
• 
• 
••• ....J 
1 
... -. 
• 
.. 
f 
f 
... 
, 
Notice that the final form is basically the same as the isolated 
39 
www.uz-translations.net

The Ltners 
form , except for the little link joining it to the preceding letter. 
The initial and medial forms too are basically the same thing: a 
blip in the line with a dot under it. In effect, the isolated and final 
forms are just the blip of the initial and medial forms with an 
extra flourish. 
A string of forms of the leiter baa' would look like this 
( , 
• 
, 
f 
-: 
-. 
• 
, 
Now, remember that the short vowels (a, i, and u) are written as 
small diacritical marks above and below the letters. (Take 
another look at chapter 2, pp. 26-28, where the short vowels are 
explained.) We can add these vowels to the letter baa' to produce 
three different syllables, like this 
ba . 
u 
bi 
u 
bu 
• 
u 
The Arabic names of the short vowels are: talHa (a), kasra (I), 
and damma (u) . 
:. 
U 
W (loa') is exactly the same as boa' except that it has two dots 
above the letter instead of one dot below. The two dots are 
placed close to each other just above the top of the scoop, so that 
the letter loa', written in isolation, looks like this 
, 
H 
, 
40 
The uners 
A kia' coming at the end of a word would look like this 
••• 
ff' 
,HI 
In the initial or medial position, taa' is, again, just like baa', 
I.cept for the dots. Notice that the two dots are placed close 
toaether, centred over the blip . 
:. (thaa') is just like baa' and tua', except this time we have three 
dots placed over the letter. These dots form a kind of equilateral 
triangle: the two dots of tao', plus one added on top. The forms 
therefore look like this 
Isolated 
Final 
Initial 
Medial 
~ 
• • 
I, 
f 
• 
•• 
If 
.. 
10 I 
•• 
, 
~ . ,t4 • 
(.\ . 
, , ..... 
•• 
•• 
i 
t - .. 
" 
•• 
Reminder about proftUIICiation 
The letters boa' and toa' are pronounced almost exactly like the 
English letters band t. The letter thaa' is pronounced just like the 
th in the word think. 
41 
www.uz-translations.net

The Leners 
Remember that on pp. 28-29 we explained the sign called 
shadda, which is how Arabic indicates that a letter is to be 
pronounced twice. For instance. suppose we wanted to write the 
sound tabba. Instead of writing the letter baa twice, we simply 
write it once and place a shadda{'; ) above it, like this 
.. 
ul 
With this in mind, and with our three letters baa', laa', and thaa', 
we are now in a position to write some Arabic words. We have 
picked these words not because of what they mean or because of 
their frequency, but just to show how these first three letters can 
be combined to make actual words. 
- • 
, " 
, 
.. ,. .. ... 
' '1" 
u.a 
.::... 
• • h 
• 
ba1ba~4 
tabba 
baua 
to spread, 
to perish, 
to achieve, 
scatter 
be destroyed 
settle 
, 
- -
-, 
~
-
-. 
,-,; "', 
u.a 
.::..... 
. 
balhtl!tl 
thabata 
batrata 
to broadcast 
to be fixed 
to cut up 
42 
The Leners 
• 
U 
~ nuun is very similar to baa', tao' , and thaa' in fWO of its forms: 
the initial and the medial. In fact, the only difference between 
""un and baa' in these two cases is that the single dot goes above 
the blip instead of below it. So we have 
Initial 
• 
• 
• 
.. ..J 
• • J 
.. ... 
Medial 
• 
• 
• 
•• 
I .. ., 
I .. 
•• 
I 
, . 
In the isolated and final forms, however, there is a difference in 
the shape of tbe scoop. The same dot is still there, but the scoop 
of the letter is fuller and more rounded. Also, the scoop of the 
letter nuun drops below tm line, whereas the scoop of baa' , taa', 
and thaa' sits on the line. 
So for nuun we have 
Isolated 
Final 
0-" 
43 
www.uz-translations.net

The Leiters 
A string of the letter nuun would look like this 
Reminder about pronuncioticn 
• • 
• , 
The letter nuun is pronounced just like the English letter n. 
In !he beginni,ng, you. may find yourself confusing nuun , baa', 
(QQ , and thao , eSpeCJally when they occur in their initial and 
medial forms, when they are distinguished only by the placement 
and number of dots. But this is only a matter of practice. In time 
you will automatically come to as!"ociate the sound b with a dot 
below, the sound n with a dot above, the sound t with two dots 
above, and the sound th with three dots above. As an aid to 
memory, try this device: b below, ttwo, III three; n you just have 
to remember. 
Here are a few more words combining lhese letters. Remember 
from chapter 2 that a little circle over a letter is called sukuun aud 
means that the letter in question is followed by no vowel ('zero 
vower). 
0'. 
, 
- -
_ 0 
~ 
~ 
--. 
~ 
0 -
libn 
binI 
nobaID 
straw 
girl 
to grow, sprout 
44 
The Leners 
II (yao') is another letter that has some features in common with 
the other letters we have considered so far. Its initial and medial 
rorms are the same as all the others, except this time the letter has 
two dots below. The two dots are written close together, and are 
centred under the blip of the letter. Like this 
Initial 
•• , .. .J.J 
•• 
J 
.. 
.. 
Medial 
If , •• 
,,, , .. .. _b. 
.. 
.. 
.. 
The shape of yao' in its final and isolated fonns, however, is quite 
different from anything that we have had so far. In fact. since 
your pen has to cbange direction several times, this is not an easy 
shape to make. and it requires quite a lot of practice. FoUow the 
direction of the arrows carefully. 
Isolated 
.. 
: 
Final 
.. 
Reminder about pronunciation 
The letter yao' is one of the two letters of the Arabic alphabet 
45 
www.uz-translations.net

The Letters 
that can stand for a consonant or for a long vowel. It also appears 
in one of the two diphthongs (vowel combinations). 
As a consonant, yaa' is pronounced just like the y in the 
English word yes. 
As a long vowel, yaa' represents the sound of ee in the word 
feet. 
As a diphthong, yaa' has the sound of ei in the word neighbour. 
How can you tell, in any given word, whether the yaa' is meant 
to be a consonant (Y), a long vowel (ee) , or part of a diphthong 
(ei)? The rule is actually simpler than it may sound. If yaa' is itself 
marked with a vowel, then it is a consonant. If yaa' is not marked 
with a vowel but comes after a consonant that is marked with a 
short vowel i, then it is a long vowel. If yaa' is marked with a 
sukuun (,zero vowel') and the letter that comes before it is 
marked with a short vowel a, then it is a diphthong. Look at the 
following list of five words, and pay careful attention to the 
transliteration, 
'" , 
t-I~~ "a 
~ 
~ 
• -
bayna 
tUn 
yanbut 
between 
figs 
it grows 
, 
0 , 
• . 
~ 
.::a.a.a _. 
nabiiy 
bayt 
prophet 
house 
In the first word (reading from right to left, of course), the yOlJ', 
which begins the word, is marked with a short vowel a. It is 
therefore a consonant, with the sound y. ln the second word, the 
yaa' in the middle of the word has no vowel, but the Ula' that 
comes before it has a short vowel i. The role of the yOlJ' in this 
word is therefore to lengthen the vowel, and it has the sound ee. 
In the third and fourth words, the yaa'. again coming in the 
middle of the word, is marked withsukuun, the 'zero vowel'. But 
46 
The Letters 
the first letter of the words (baa') has the short vowel a. In these 
words, then, the yaa' is part of a diphthong and has the sound of 
,i in neighbour, Finally, look at the fifth word. Here we have a 
)'QO' at the end of a word, marked with a shadd~,. which me~ n s 
that the letter is doubled. In effect, the first yaa IS lengthenmg 
the vowel under the baa' and the second yaa', which has no 
vowel, is a consonant. So the word is pronounced with a long ee 
and a y at the end. 
All this may seem very complex. at first, but in time, with 
practice, it becomes second nature. 
Finally, there is one more point we have to make about yoa'. A 
)'110' written without any daIS is sometimes used to repre~nt the 
lOund of the long vowel 00. This job is usually done by a different 
tetter 'alif which is the next letter we will deal with. But in some 
cases '- a~d this happens only at the end of a word -
a yaa' 
without dots is used instead of 'alif. In Arabic grammar the yaa' 
without dots at the end of a word is called 'alif maqsuura. 
literally, this means 'shortened 'alif ', and is so called because 
the sound aa, normally a long vowel, is then pronounced short. 
Here are a few examples 
, , 
" 
, 
•• 
" 
" -
~ 
~ 
~ 
tabanna 
thana 
bona 
to adopt 
to fold, fold up 
to build 
47 
www.uz-translations.net

The Letters 
, and ~ 
I ('alifJ i~ one of the ~imple st ietters of the alphabet. Its isolated 
form IS simply a vertical stroke, writlen from top to bottom. 
1 
11 
1 
~n. its final position it is written as the same vertical stroke, but 
Jomed at the base to the preceding letler. Because of this 
connecting line - and this is very important _ it is written from 
bottom to top instead of top 10 bottom. 
, 
IL •• 
•• 
I 
.. 
Practise these to get the feel of the direction of the stroke. 
~e letter 'alif is one of a number of non..connecting letters. 
!hIS means that it is never connected to the letter that comes after 
It. Non-connecting letters therefore have no initial or medial 
forms: They can appear in only two ways: isolated or final, 
meamng connected to the preceding letter. 
Reminder about pronunciation 
The lette.r 'ali/represents the long vowel aa. Usually, this vowel 
sou~~s like a lengthened version of the a in pal. In some 
~sltlOns , ~owever (we will explain Ihis later), it sounds more 
like the a m father. 
~ne of the most important functions of 'alif is not as an 
mdependent sound but as the carrier, or 'bearer', of another 
letter: hamza "" . Tum back to p. 29 and re-read what we said 
about hamza there. Later on we will discuss hamza in more 
detail . Here we will go through one of the mNt common uses of 
48 
• 
• , 
The Letters 
Mmza: its combination with 'alif at the beginning of a word. 
One of the rules of the Arabic language is that no word can 
btg;n with a vowel. Many Arabic words may sound to the 
beginner as though they start with a vowel, but in fact they begin 
with a glottal stop: that little catch in the voice that is represented 
by hmnza. When hamza appears at the start of a word, it .is 
.Jways written on 'alif. The 'alifin these cases has no sound of Its 
OWn : it is simply acting as the carrier of hamza. If the vowel that 
rollows the hamza is a short a or u, then the hamza and the vowel 
are written on top of the 'aliI; if the vowel is a short i, then both 
the hamza and the voweLare written below the hamza. 
We therefore nave 
i 
, 
1 
'a 
'u 
'j 
Finally, there is a special symbol, called madtia, which is used to 
represent the sound of a hmnza followed by a long vowel aa (in 
other words, hamztJ followed by 'alin. The purpose of the madda 
is to avoid the ugly juxtaposition of two 'alifs. This bas already 
been explained in chapter 2, but here it is again: 
1 represents the sound 'QQ. 
Here are some practice words that illustrate the use of 'alif and 
hmnza. 
-
-.-
--
... 1 
... 1 
':':'1 
l:al 
• 
• 
'anta 
'anaa 
'aab 
'ab 
you (masculine) 
I 
August 
father 
49 
www.uz-translations.net

Tht Ltntrs 
,-
.-
.::al:;I 
'::':'1 
'ayyoot 
'anti 
verses of 
you (feminine) 
the Koran 
uU 
6L:a 
• 
. 
toaba 
baata 
to repent 
to spend 
the night 
f ',", 
.::a . 
bantUll 
gids 
.... l:; 
• • 
baab 
door 
'ayna 
where 
l:;l:; . . 
booboo 
Pope 
J (woow) is another non-connecting letter. Remember that this 
means that it can be written only standing alone or connected to 
the preceding letter. It is never connected to the following letter, 
so there are no initial or medial forms. 
Isolated, the loop sits on the line, and the tail extends below the 
line. 
In the final position, it is written the same way, except for the 
little connecting line. 
*' 
:J " .. 
Rtmitu:hr aboUl pronunciation 
The letter woow, lik.e yoo', can represent ei.ther a consonant or a 
50 
The untrs 
kmg vowel or a diphthong. As a consonant, it has the sou~d of w 
in the word wood. As a long vowel, it has the sound of ~ 
l~fOQI . 
As a diphthong, it has the sound of ow in h~w. The.pnnaple b.Y 
which you can tell what sound waaw has ID any gl~en word IS 
euctly the same as for yaa', so it might be a good Idea to read 
that explanation again now. 
Examples of the use of waaw: 
uUjl 
-
-
-
Jl 
-.-
J 
':-""J 
'awrhoon 
'aw 
watlulba 
wa 
idols 
or 
to jump 
and 
, 
, 
• -. 
I;Jl 
(SJl 
.::aJl 
r.j~~ 
nawawiiy 
'uubraa 
'aawa 
tuUl 
nuclear 
opera 
to harbour, 
mulberry 
shelter 
Recap of what we have learned so far 
We have now covered all the vowels of written Arabi.c, three 
short 
, 
--
-
-
u 
a 
and three long 
to.? 
:J 
I 
51 
www.uz-translations.net

AU the rest of the letters of the alphabet are consonants. 
52 
Th~ Leiters 
• J 
" (daaI) and l (dhaal) have exactly the same shape, except that 
dhaalhas a dot over the letter. where doal has none. These le~ters 
are both non-connecting, so they have no initial or medial forms. 
Isolated 
• \ 
~ 
\ 
Final , .. 
..1\'- _ 
\ .. 
Notice that the isolated and final forms have slightly different 
shapes. In the isolated form, the downstroke is a bit longer than 
the base stroke. Both forms sit squarely on the line: try not to let 
them sink below the line. The dot over the dJuJaJ sits just above 
the letter. 
Isolated 
• 
\ 
\ 
\ 
-
Fmal 
\ 
\ 
• 
.. 
\ •• 
-
,. -
Reminder about pronuncituion 
The dtlal is pronounced almost exactly as the English letter d. 
The dhaal is like the Ih in then. Notice that Arabic has two 
53 
www.uz-translations.net

The Leaf!TS 
different letters to rep 
h 
. . 
think (Ihoo') 
d 
. resent t e two dlstlOct sound of th: as in 
an as 10 then (dhaal). 
Examples: 
• 
, 
. -
~ 
.... l:ij 
-
w.i 
J~ 
band 
dhubaab 
baduu 
point of law 
flies (insect) 
bedouins 
dunyaa 
world 
. ~ 
" .. 
"::'I~ 
~ -
":-'~~ 
.... .:il 
• 
dUn 
dhunuub 
• 
dhaaba 
'adab 
religion 
sins 
to melt 
literature 
- -
lI.:a 
U10lj 
• 
nabadha 
'aadhaan 
to banish 
ears 
• J 
Isolated 
54 
Final 
Isolated 
Fmal 
• ~-
The Ltners 
Notice that the basic sbape begins just above the line and extends 
below the line. Also, be careful of the proportions: the top stroke 
is much sborter than the bottom one. The differences in these 
proportions and in the positioning on the line belp to distinguish 
I'Q.(J' and zaay on the one band from doaJ and dhaal on the other. 
'\ 
\ 
:J :J 
Remitukr about pronunciation 
The letter raa' is similar to the English r, but is made by a flap of 
the tongue behind the teeth. The sound of zaay is almost exactly 
like the English z. 
Examples: 
, 
.-
. -
~J~ 
~~ 
":-'J 
duwl 
bard 
rabb 
worms 
cold 
lord 
55 
www.uz-translations.net

The Letters 
'. -
. ' : 
~,)J 
UJ-!,) 
. : ... 
U.)J 
waziir 
zabuun 
waZIl 
minister 
client 
weight 
... to ... 
• 
":-',)..l 
--
• 
":-'-',) 
..lj 
darraba 
rattaba 
radda 
to train 
to arrange 
to give back 
• !.o: 
.-
U~,) 
~J:iJ 
.. ill : 
..lJ,) 
-
zaytuun 
tazwiir 
zawwada 
olives 
forgery 
to supply 
provide 
rave(s:~7!r ~~~ 
e~;~':n!~~aeteCOdn~e~inrg lett~rs. They therefore 
I 
. 
. 
• IDllIa • medial and final Th 
h
etters are Identical except that shiin has three dots whee·e .. e 
as none. 
' 
sun 
Initial 
••• _ _ 'O .. LU4f. 
-
~ 
-eo 
·.·d" 
Medial 
••• 'lh.. tL.&!:-
-
0-
••• d' ..... 
56 
The Letters 
The initial and medial versions of sUn are very similar, the only 
difference being the littJe connector at the front of the medial 
fonn. Be careful not to make the peaks too high, and notice that 
the letters sit right on the line. 
The final version has a tail that descends below the line and rises 
up above the line level with the peaks: 
In isolation it looks the same, but without the connector: 
U" 
The three dots of shUn are arranged in a triangle just like the 
three dots of thoo'. They are written above the little peaks, not 
above the tail. 
Initial 
·1, 
.-
•• 
•• _LV 
• 
.. 
.. 
UI 
Medial 
,t, 
,. 
•• 
If F' (fk 
.. 
,. Uk .. 
Final 
cJ ..... of' 
.. 
- uu .... 
Isolated 
tfo 
ub 
ub 
57 
www.uz-translations.net

The Lenen 
Ronintkr about prOnunciotiofl 
Thesiin stands for the ~e 
sound ass in the word sleep. It never 
has a z sound as the English s sometimes does. The shlin has the 
same sound as the sh in sheep. Be careful not to confuse them. 
Examples: 
t.:. 
·'1.c·,~ 
~J. 
U 
. 
, 
btUlriis 
bUSltUlfl 
Paris 
orchard 
, .' 
, '. 
~ 
":'.J'"" 
, 
bashar 
shariba 
human being 
to drink 
ul:i~ 
, 
• 
&." 
&." 
U"'.jIJJ" 
suudoan 
washwasha 
Sudan 
to whisper 
1...Zt.:. 
v!' .. ~~ 
• 
• • 
baas""" 
s""boob 
pasha 
youth (as noun) 
s"""y 
. tea 
58 
'uslDOdh 
professor 
~ , 
.'.).jIJJ 
suuriiya 
Syria 
. 
' 
U"'JJ 
dars 
lesson 
, " 
••• 
...,....., 
nalas"" 
to unplug 
! 0 
~ 
J~J 
duslUur 
constitution 
I 
The Leners 
• 
t t 
These two letters are fairly difficult, in both pronunciation and 
writing. They are both connectors, having four forms each, and 
differ only in one respect: ghayn has a dot over it, cayn has none. 
Isolated 
Notice that the first part of cayn looks very much like a hamza, 
only larger. It sits more or less on the line, while the bottom part 
of the letter sweeps below the line. The letter has to be made in 
two separate strokes, and be careful about the proportions. 
The initial version of Cay" consists basically of the top part of the 
letter, the broad tail replaced by a connecting line to the 
following letter: 
The medial version is a kind of altered form of the initial version . 
It is a flattened loop, resting just on the line. It has to be made in 
three strokes, with two changes of direction of the pen: 
t. $ ' .• 'c:: 
•• sr •. 
The final version begins just like the medial version, but then bas 
a sweeping tail very much like the isolated version: 
t ... 11-" 0 __ ... e ... 
59 
www.uz-translations.net

The Leuers 
Making this letter in its various fOnDS takes practice. It is the 
change of direction of the pen that makes it difficult, and it is 
essential to maintain the graceful proportions of the shape. Here 
are the various versions of ghayn: 
Isolated 
t 
• 
• 
t 
t 
Initial 
• 
... ..k 
'" 
W 
• 
.".* 
Medial 
• 
ci.. 
i 
•• 2ft II 
... -
Final 
t 
• 
t 
... t ••• 
M' 
Look carefully at the foUowing two sets as a further guide 
• 
-.k 
tIL 
Reminder about pronunciJJlion 
Look back at the section of chapter 2 explaining the pronuncia· 
tion of these letters. Unfortunately, there is no way to make 
them any easier. It is simply a matter of practice and more 
practice. 
Examples: 
60 
The Letters 
. , 
, 
,. , 
:r:ji 
e-" 
~..) 
~ 
. • 
, 
naw~ 
robit" 
yocbud 
Carabiiy 
kind, type 
spring 
to worship 
Arab 
JI~ 
, 
, ". 
, 
• o~ 
:r:~ 
t~j 
~ 
zaghzagha 
tabgh 
baghdaad 
ghorbiiy 
to tickle 
tobacco 
Baghdad 
western 
(miim) is another connector, with four ~onns: Basically, it 
~onsists of a flattened circle, with a descendmg tall that appea~ 
only in the final position. In some handwriting sty~es , and even tn 
some typefaces, the circle is filled in, and looks hke a large dot . 
The forms are: 
Initial 
...... .. ~ 
Medial 
.. 4 
• 
Final 
r 
cpc 
.. 
• 
w 
61 
www.uz-translations.net

The Leners 
Isolated 
r 
~:~~ :the variation in forms, look at the following string of miim 
• r ,. 
~!~~~!.~~~S:~~~;~:~I:h;tnl:~;;~;i~gO~~:~ii~~~~~ ~~t~~:~ 
e aSlc s ape IS really quite flexible. 
Reminder about pronunciation 
The letter mUm has the same sound as the English letter m . 
Examples: 
. 
' • 
, . 
Uol 
()" At 'J 
~ 
• 
~ 
shams 
nat"am 
thamtJn 
min 
sun 
yes 
price 
from 
',' 
. 
: 
, 
-' 
~jA 
('~ 
('~ 
-. 
,... 
murabbac 
nawm 
lhuum 
thumma 
square 
sleep (noun) 
garlic 
then 
62 
J 
J (loom) is another connecting letter, with four fonns. 
Isolated 
J 
J 
Notice that the stroke begins well above the line, descends below 
it, and then curls back up to meet the line. Be careful of the 
proportions: this letter is much taller than it is wide. 
The final fonn is like the isolated fonn, but with a connector 
attaching it to the previous letter: 
Be careful not to make too thick a line as you double it by going 
first up and then down. 
In an initial position, Jaam simply loses its tail 
In the medial position, it is the same as the initial version, but 
with two connectors 
Be careful not to confuse the initial or media1 loom with 'aliI-
Remember that laam is connected to the following letter. 
63 
www.uz-translations.net

The Letters 
whereas 'aillis not. Here is a string showing all the forms of loam 
connected to one another 
dd-.J. J 
Reminder about pronunciation 
The letter loam is pronounced like the English I, except that it is 
a1most always a very pure, liquid sound, not muffled as the 
English I sometimes is. It sounds like the I in light, not like the I in 
fool or feel. 
One special symbol that it is important to recognize is the 
combination of loam and' alif. When the sound lao occurs - an I 
followed by the long vowel 00 - the loom and 'aliI are written 
together. 
Isolated 
y 
\\ ~I{ Y 
Final 
\\l -
,. 
JIl lb .lI .. 
In the isolated form, laam·'alif gives the sound /aa, which in 
Arabic is the word for 'no'. 
Examples: 
nabiil 
noble 
, " 
~ 
bulbul 
nightingale 
64 
'I..:.J 
U 
_ 
lisaan 
tongue 
The Letters 
,-
.' 
J~j 
u. 
~ 
lommaa 
thulth 
rasuul 
when 
tw<rthirds 
messenger 
-. -
'JjJ 
~~ 
~~'J 
lawlaa 
salaam 
laazim 
were it not 
peace (used 
necessary 
for 
as greeting) 
Definite article 
The definite article in Arabic-in other words, the word 'the' -
;s 
... .l or 
... .JI 
It is written attached to the word following it, which is why. in 
most transliterations, it is represented as 01 •.. Here. are some 
examples of words with and without the defimte article: 
.-
UU 
~1 
. -
ul:.!1 
~ -
~~ 
. . 
. . 
al·yawm 
yawm 
al·boab 
boob 
the day 
day 
the door 
door 
.-
",:,:j. 
0-
~J 
",:,jAJl 
~jJl 
al-wa/ad 
walad 
a/·carab 
'arab 
the boy 
boy 
the Arabs 
Arabs 
65 
www.uz-translations.net

The utters 
When attaching the definite article to the word that follows it, we 
have to take account of the fact that the letters of the Arabic 
alphabet are divided into two categories, 'sun letters' and 'moon 
letters'. There are fourteen sun letters (named after the word 
shams, 'suo'). They are: 
As you will notice, most of them are either 'dentals' (made by 
touchiog the tongue to the teeth) or 'sibilants' (hissing sounds), 
which in Arabic are considered not to combine well with the 
sound I. The moon letters (named afterthe word qamar, 'moon') 
are all the other letters of the alphabet. 
Now, when the definite article is connected to a word that begins 
with a sun letter, two things happen: the sukuun ('zero vowel') 
on the letter loam disappears, and ashadda (the doubling sign) is 
written above the sun letter. In pronunciation, the laam 
disappears and the sun letter is pronounced doubled. In effect, 
the laam is assimilated to the first letter of the word. Here are 
some examples: 
ar-rasuul 
the messenger . 
, 
~I 
an-nabiiy 
the prophet 
rasuul 
messenger 
-
• • 
~ 
nabiiy 
prophet 
ad-diin 
the religion 
ash-shams 
the sun 
~~ 
diin 
religion 
, -. 
W""" 
shams 
sun 
The hamza in the definite article is a hamza of a special type, 
called luzmzatu-l-waSI. which means 'oonnectinghamza'. Strictly 
speaking, at the beginning of a sentence it should be written 
above the 'ali/like a normal hamza. In practice, however, it is 
usually not written, though it is pronounced in the normal way 
(as a glottal stop). 
66 
The Letters 
But if it comes in the middle of a phrase, the hamzat,ui~~w~SI ~s 
written above' alif as a kind of small loop above the a I) , ut ~s 
not pronounced at all. It is elided, which simply means that It 
drops out. For example 
, '1 ' , 
.-,,"" ULa 
-.. . .' 
baabu-I-bayt 
the door of 
the house 
... .... 
., 
':' .).iJ I J ,:,.)AJ I 
'al-(arab wa-l-gharb 
the Arabs and 
the West 
'al-walad wa-r-rajul 
the boy and 
the man 
.:J (kao/) is a connecting letter, with four forms . 
Isolated 
Notice that the letter rests on the line, and be careful not to ~a~ 
the curl at the end too big. The wiggle in the.lapofthe letter ;::, 
very much like a Mmza, but is si~ply an IDtegral part of 
'J, 
like the dot over an i or j in English. 
67 
www.uz-translations.net

The Lellers 
Final 
The final form is essentially the same as the iSOlated, but with a 
connecting line. 
Initial 
.. f 
.. f.Jj .. ( 
Always do the top stroke after the first stroke of the body of the 
leUer. 
Medial 
" C. ,A ... \.. .. C. 
This form is like the initial form, but with a connector. Also, 
notice that the isolated and final forms are upright, while the 
initial and medial forms slope to the left. 
Examples 
.:1l4 
. , 
i'~ 
~ 
f1Ullik 
sukkar 
kaloom 
king 
sugar 
speech, talk 
• 
.:I~ 
.:Ii;, 
~ eI, °,1 
.. #! ! 
'injiliiz 
suJuuk 
mallaak 
English people 
behaviour 
landowner 
68 
The Letters 
• 
h 
hape except that jiim 
These three letters h~ve exactly t e l 
sal medskh 
: has adot above. 
has a dot below, Haa hasnodotata ,an 
00 
They are connectors, with four forms. 
Isolated 
The top section of the letter stands above the line, while the tail 
extends well below. 
Final 
~ 
.. 
b 
. h connecto" from the 
This is basically the same shape, ut WIt a 
. 
preceding letter. 
The initial and medial forms essentially consist of the top of the 
letter, with the tail eliminated. 
Initial 
2 
~ 
';;;; 
"... 
• 
• 
Medial 
::&.. "'l. C-
11 
$' 
• 
69 
www.uz-translations.net

The utters 
Note the position of the dot. 
Haa' is elt8ctly the same as jiim, but with no dot. 
Fmally, kJuuz' is the same, but with the dot above the letter. Note 
the position of the dot in the various forms. 
t 
Reminder about pronunciation 
Of these three letters, jiim is the easiest to pronounce. It is like 
the s in pleasure (the same as j in French). The letter Haa' is, 
strictly speaking, an unvoiced version ofCayn (see pp. 25-26 again 
for an explanation of this), and sounds like a very emphatic h. 
Finally, khaa' is the ch in the Scottish loch. Try to be careful Qot 
to make it too guttural, though it does come from the back ofthe 
mouth. 
Examples 
~ 
• , 
..-
• 
masiiH 
fUlHI 
Hubb 
messiah, Christ 
bee 
love 
~ ... 
-
C~ 
UJ'?4 
.).I~ 
. -. 
majnuun 
jadiid 
silaaH 
mad 
new 
weapon 
. , 
~~j 
-
~ 
~ 
kiwm' 
'aCwaj 
thalij 
wine 
crooked 
ice, snow 
70 
The Letters 
, '. 
-
~ 
• • • 
. 
~ 
C~ 
. -. 
shuyuukh 
shaykh 
bakhiil 
greedy 
sheikhs 
sbeikh 
~. ~ 
~ 
, -, 
Jon.,... 
~ 
khubz 
muslim 
muHammad 
bread 
Muslim 
Muhammad 
o (haa') is unusual in that there is hardly any resemblance 
between the various forms. 
Isolated 
" 
Notice that the shape is not quite round ~ 
it is more like an egg 
with a flattened bottom and slightly polDted top. 
Initial 
••• 
... "., 
Although it looks very different, this fonn is actually similar ~o 
the isolated fonn. the middle stroke being a connector to t e 
foUowing letter. 
71 
www.uz-translations.net

The Letters 
Medial -
here there are two types 
"I" ~ @: •• , ,. 
or 
77 "r·· 
Both of these forms may be used in printed text in a book or 
newspaper. In handwriting, the second one is far more common. 
Be able to recognize both, but practice making the second one. 
Final 
4... .. 
Notice that the rounded part of this form stands slightly above 
the line, unlike the iso.lated form , which sits on the line. 
Reminder about pronunciation 
The letter haa' represents the same sound as the English letter h . 
There is therefore no difficulty pronouncing it, but notice that, 
unlike the English h. it can (and does) appear at the end of 
words. Make sure to pronounce it when this happens. 
This is a good place to recall the letter (00' marbuuTa, which we 
mentioned earlier (see chapter 2). The (iUJ' marbuuTa is basically 
just a letter haa' with two dots added over it (just like the two 
dots of the letter taa'). In general, thetaa' marbuuTa isa sign that 
a word is grammatically feminine. It can occur only at the end of 
a word. When a word with taa' marbuuTa is pronounced in 
isolation, there is no tsound, and it is as if the word ended with a 
simple haa'. But when a word with taa' marbuuTa is immediately 
followed by another word (as in the last example below). it is 
pronounced as if it were a simple taa'. (Note carefully the 
transliteration below.) In other words,Jaa' marbuuTa is a kind of 
72 
The Letters 
combination of raa' and haa', and has the sound of the one or the 
other depending on the context. 
Examples 
-... 
'*' 
nah' 
river 
~ - . 
j~ 
mirwaHa 
f.n 
• 
~ 
.. ~I 
~ 
. '" 
~ 
hiya 
huwa 
'intibaah 
attention 
sbe 
he 
;~~ 
, -
01.1.11 
allah 
mustUladah 
God 
help. aid 
" 
'.. 
°1 
''''''' 0 ",0 ", 
~~~;,~ .. tT 4!;J.iU 4<IoLI 
'al_mamlakalU-
l_CarabiiyalU-
s-sa€ uudjiyah 
the Kingdom of 
Saudi Arabia 
73 
www.uz-translations.net

The Letters 
~ (Saad) and u-O (Daad) are identical in shape, except that 
the first has no dot, while the second has one dot above it. 
Isolated 
Initial 
•• _.0 •• ..,('" ... ,....() 
Medial 
,4 r .. 
-
Final 
u 
Notice that in the isolated fonn, the first part of the letter sits on 
the line, while the tail drops below the line. The initial fonn is 
simply the isolated form with the tail missed out. The medial 
fonn is just the initial fonn with a connector added, and the final 
fonn is like the isolated fonn with an extra connector. One very 
important point: in all forms, do not miss out the little blip at the 
end of the letter, before the tail. 
Notice that DQIld is just the same as SlUld, but with a dot. Also 
notice the position of the dot. Try not to make it too high above 
the letter. 
74 
The Letters 
Isolated 
.17 
.11 
.11 
(J 
U 
0 
Initial 
• 
• 
Jt 
,Q 
,t) 
•• 
•• 
. 
, 
Medial 
,4' 
,4 
., ,jt " 
., 
•• -
Final 
• 
• 
~ .. uA .. U
I1
••• 
0" 
Reminder about pronunciation 
.. 
111 
The letter Saad is the emphatic version of the letter sun. 
~ 
letter Daad is the emphatic version of the I~tt.er daal. Look ba.c 
at p 24 for an explanation of the pronunClatton. Another pamt 
to n~te : when 'alif comes after a Saad or Daad, or after ~heoth~r 
em hatic consonants (Tao' and DHaa': see pp. 76::8), It has t e 
so!d of a as in father. Try to remember the pamngs: 
Examples 
I ' -' 1 
, ~ 
,010 
....,--
,,~ 
'imtiSaS 
suction 
maghS 
colic 
75 
~ uli.." 
baSal 
Sinaacah 
onion 
industry 
www.uz-translations.net

-
• '" °1 
~ 
'abyaD 
white 
nahaDa 
to rise 
The Letters 
HaDoorah 
civilization, 
culture 
• 
Sayyaad 
hunter 
. -
• 
• 
f"'O 
Dakhm 
huge 
u-Ojl 
'arD 
land, earth 
~ (Taa') and Ji (DHaa') are relatively easy letters to write 
. cause they . have the same form in all positions, the onl ' 
d;ffere~ bemg. the connecting strokes in the approPriat~ 
rh:~H ~ ~nly ~iffere~ce between the two letters themselves is 
aa IS wntten With a dot above, where Taa' has none. 
Isolated 
.b 
f, ffi J, 
Initial 
. 
., h ••• h 
• •• b 
Medial 
•• Iz •• •• Iz ., .. b •• 
76 
The uners 
Final 
••• 
fz ••• 
It ... 
Notice that in all cases the loop is made first, then the 
downstroke is put on last. In writing words, it is usually easier to 
put on the downstroke after you have finished the entire word. 
Notice that the dot on DHaa' seems to nestle in the nook formed 
by the downstroke. 
Isolated 
Initial 
... 
.. , 
... 
Medial 
•• Ii ., 
Ii 
t., Ii ... 
Final 
Ii .. , 
I; ••• 
I; • •• 
Reminder about pronunciaticn 
The letter Taa' is the emphatic version of the letter taa' (see p. 24 
again). Strictly speaking, the letter DHtllJ' is the emphatic 
version of the letter dhaal. Many Arabs, h>Jwever, pronounce 
DHaa' as an emphatic version of zaay, in which case it would be 
Zoo' instead of DHaa'. Either pronunciation is legitimate, so you 
can use whichever you find easier. Remember 'the pairings: 
77 
www.uz-translations.net

The Leiters 
Examples . 
, 
• 
.bi:a 
~ 
nofT 
maTbakh 
oil 
kitchen 
• 
, . 
~ 
~ I 
.~ 
maDHhar 
'ab"u DHabi 
appearance 
Abu Dhabi 
~ 
, 
~ 1;." 
J ". 
Tabaca 
maHDHuuDH 
10 print 
lucky 
, 
~ 
, 
~ 
• 
DBuhr 
haral 
noon 
hero 
78 
. , 
Tibb 
medicine 
i.~ 
DaraTa 
to fart 
-, 
ghaliiDH 
boorish 
DllIlbiT 
officer 
The Leuers 
• 
U 
..J (faa') and J (qaal) have shapes that are similar in certain 
respects. Both are basically loops with tails, but the contours of 
the loops and their positioning are different. In addition,faa' has 
one dot, whereas qaaf has two. Let's take faa' first. 
Isolated 
, • , 
• ... 
Notice that the loop sits on the line and that the tail is long and 
flat: it, too, sits on the line. The tipofthe tail does not rise higher 
than the body of the letter. 
Final 
, • 
« .- tt:....-@ ••. 
• 
't -
, 
This is the same as the isolated form, but with a connector from 
the preceding letter. 
The initial and medial foms simply drop the tail. 
Initial 
... J 
• 
.. t~ 
Medial 
• 
... ., ... ~ 
79 
• 
•.. J 
• 
... 
, 
ttt 
www.uz-translations.net

The unen 
In the letter qaafthe loop is wider and, in the initial and isolated 
form , sits slightly above the line, while the tail in the isolated and 
final forms drops below the line (unlike faa'). 
Initial 
••• ; .., lf 
.,. i 
Medial - -
-
... " ." .. ... .. , " ... 
Final 
l3 ••• ,. .. d ." 
Isolated 
.. 
(j 
t§ 
U 
The tail of qaaf is shorter and rounder than the tail of faa'. and 
remember that faa' never &aes below the line. 
Reminder about pronunciation 
1.b~ letter faa' is pr?nounced just like the English f The qaaf is 
slmtiar to the EngilSh q. but is made much further back in the 
throat (see chapter 2). 
Examples 
khariif 
autumn 
,uffaH 
apples 
8(} 
filasTiinii 
Palestinian 
The Letters 
~~i 
.-
-
u.li 
. , . 
U~ 
• 
faqiir 
qalb 
kharuuf 
poor 
heart 
sheep 
~ 
.. ,~ ~ 
,,~ 
~~ 
lam 
fwtduq 
Sadiiq 
mouth 
hotel 
friend 
.-
, 
• 
lW 
cjl,ji 
Gi.a .\ 
.. ~ .. tt ~ 
/aIDH 
qur'aan 
'ifriiqiyaa 
pronunciation 
Koran 
Africa 
That completes our survey of the letters of the Arabic al~habel. 
We have now covered all the letters and symbols: everythmg you 
need to know to be able to read anything in Arabic. In the next 
section, we will give some examples of actual sentences from the 
Koran . Try to read them directly, using the transliteration only 
as a guide if you are stuck. All the required i~formation h.as now 
been given. From here on , it is just a question of practice. 
81 
www.uz-translations.net

4 REFERENCE MATERIAL 
83 
www.uz-translations.net

HAMZA 
In chapters 2 and 3 we explained that when the letter hamza 
occurs at the beginning of a word, it always 'rides' on an 'alif. But 
we also mentioned that the glottal stop in Arabic, represented by 
hamza, is a full·fledged CODsonant that can occur anywhere in a 
word. When it appears in the middle or at the end of a word, 
hamza can 'ride' on any one ofthree letters: 'alif{I), waaw(J) ,or 
ytUl', which is written without the two dots when it 'carries' 
hamza (IS) . Or, it can sit on the line independently. 
Here are some examples of bow hamza looks in the middle of a 
word. 
JI~ 
Here are some examples of bow it looks at the end of a word 
.. .... 
i) 
.~ 
Now, how can you determine which of the three letters - 'aliI. 
waaw. YQQ' -
will act as the 'carrier' of hamza in any given 
instance? As we mentioned before, the rules determining this are 
pretty complicated, and if the truth be told most foreigners 
learning Arabic (and indeed not a few Arabs) never really master 
them. The most important thing is to recognize luunzll when you 
see it, and to build up an intuitive sense of which letter should 
'carry' it. 
85 
www.uz-translations.net

Reference Material 
. For referena:. however, here is a list of regulations that cover 
vutually every mstance of the occurrence of L __ 
,",,"zo. 
Initial position 
~hife~;amza appears at t~e start of a word, it is always written on 
a I . 
the v?wel followmg hamza is fatHa (0) or damma ( ) 
th~nhamza Sits above 'ali/. If the vowel is kasra (J) thenh 
u.' 
wntten below 'a/i!- For example: 
,amzalS 
Medial PosJtion 
~I 
f 
• 
When it appears in the middle of a word, hamza is written over: 
A. 'ali! 
a.) when the vowel of hamza isfatHa (a): 
ji.;. 
b. ~ w~e~ the vowel of hamza is sukuun and the vowel 
precedmg It IS fatHa (a): 
).l 
B. waaw 
a.) when the vowel of hamzll is damma (u) : 
U"1 
b.) whe~ th~ v?wel of hamzo issukuun or !olHa (a) and th 
vowel precedmg It IS damma (u) : 
e 
.:.i~ 
f}l 
C. yoa' (without the two dots) 
a.) when the vowel of hamza is kasro (I): 
.. 
~." .. '. 
~ 
~ 
Reference Material 
b.) when the vowel preceding hamza is kasra (l): 
• 
.>'t 
c.) when hamza is preceded by the long vowel ii (yaa'), oris 
followed by the diphthong ay as in 
.~.. 
~ -
& 
~~ 
~~J 
_ 
D. without a carrier, sitting on the line 
when the vowel of hamza is fatHa (a) and the preceding 
vowel is a long aa ('alif) or a long uu (waaw), as in 
Final position 
In the final position of word, hamza is written over 
A. 'alif 
when the vowel preceding hamza is fatHa (a): 
i) 
B. waaw 
when the vowel preceding hamza is damma (u): 
~;, 
C. yaa' (without the two dots) 
when the vowel preceding hamza is kasra (i): 
D. without a carrier. sitting on the line 
a.) when hamza is preceded by sukuun: .. 
.... 
b.) when hamza is preceded by a long vowel aa ('alif). uu 
(waaw) . or jj (yaa'): 
87 
www.uz-translations.net

A VERSE FROM THE KORAN 
Finally, here is a sort attest. or more accurately, a challenge: a 
sample of classical Arabic prose. In fact , it is one of the most 
famous of all passages of classical Arabic: the Fatiha, or 
'opening' (sometimes called the Exordium) of the Koran, the 
holy book of Islam. The Fatiha is one of the most commonly 
recited prayers of Islam, and may be regarded as a Muslim 
equivalent to the Lord's Prayer in Christianity. First we will give 
it to you in Arabic, fully vowelled. See if you can decipher it. 
After that, there is a line-by-line transliteration, followed by a 
line-by-line translation. It is worth going over it many times, as 
nearly all the letters orlhe alphabet appear in it. If you practise it 
enough, and find yourself able to read it, then you can be 
confident that you have truly mastered the Arabic alphabet. 
_., , 
J.).:Wloj".... 
~1 ·14i.~l .ill ~ 
~ <.J 
••• 
U'-iLa,jl ..:.. dI ~j 
H
. 
.. J . . 
~~y~jri 
·:.11 
•. .:UU 
~ . . ~~ .. 
'I 
:·
: ~I
· i'!;~!~1 
~ 
_, J. 
_, 
.. '. " 
. 
r ·'-·,,·'1 JoI·.'-" u"';l 
- . 
~'
. 
l 
~ 
·'·;;~i : :.il.i.l· 
.-
~ . 
~ 
.;,JW.jJ y. !.,j, u_:'l·(j . , 
-. 
"r,.-
, ~ 
~ 
88 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
8 
Reference Material 
Transliteration 
suuratu·l·faatiHah 
1. bismi·I·laahi·r·raHmaani·r-raHiim. 
2. al·Hamdu-lillahi rabbi·I·"aa/amiin. 
3. 
ar·raHmaanj·r-raHiim. 
4. maaliki yawmi·d·diin. 
5. 'iyyaaka na"budu wa 'iyyaakl.l nastaCiinu. 
6. 'ihdinaa-S-SiraaTa-l-mustaqiima. 
7. SiraaTa·/Iadhiina 'anCamta c%yhim. 
8. ghayri-l-maghDuubi c% yhim walao·D-Daalliin. 
89 
www.uz-translations.net

Reference MaleriaJ 
Translation 
The Exordium 
1. In the name of God (Allah),lhe compassionate, the merciful. 
2. Praise be to God. Lord of the Worlds. 
3. The compassionate., the merciful. 
4. Master of Judgement Day. 
5. You alone we worship, and to You alone we pray for help. 
6. Guide us to the straight path. 
7. The path of those whom You have favoured. 
8. Not of those who have incurred Your wrath, nor of those who 
have gone astray. 
(Adapted from the translation by N.J. Dawood: The Koran, 
Penguin Books, first published 1956, founh revised edition 
1976.) 
90 
A NOTE ON HANDWRITING 
Although Arabic does not have the vast differences between 
printing and handwriting that English does, there. are some 
variations in some of the letters when they are handWritten. Here 
are the most important ones. 
The two dots of the letters too', qoo/. and yaa' are usually written 
as a dash. 
-
-I.. 
~y-
The three dots of the letters thoo' and shiin are usually written as 
a sort of inverted v, resembling a circumflex accent in French. 
6J~ ..!.J~ 
~ 
<.!-.t:. 
. " 
" • 
, 
• 
.,-.-- ~ v-r-
u-.'" 
The blips of the letters sUn and shUn are usually written as a flat 
line. 
v-~ U"~ yL.- yt..-. 
jL.- .f'-
• • 
• • 
u--r-
V--
9/ 
www.uz-translations.net

R~f~r~nc~ MaJ~riaJ 
When the letter yao' is connected to a final nuun, it is usually 
written like this 
~I 
The letter kaaf in the mitial position may be written like this 
In the final and isolated positions, the letters nuun, shUn, Daod, 
and qaof sometimes take on variant foons, as follows 
-, 
, 
, , 
v'" J U""./ 
, 
1J:'J 
92 
I 
I 
Name 
of Letter 
'aliI 
baa' 
,..' 
t!uw' 
jiim 
Haa' 
kJuJa' 
d44I 
dioDaJ 
,..' 
. aa, 
siin 
shiin 
Saad 
Daad 
Taa' 
, 
I 
THE ALPHABET 
Table Showing All Forms 
Standing 
alone 
FInal Medial 
InItial 
L. 
u 
.... 
~ 
-' 
.:. 
.::.. 
.... 
...l 
.!o 
.:.. 
.... 
...l 
to: 
eo --
~ 
e 
eo --
~ 
t 
~ ~ 
.... 
• 
.... 
• 
:.. 
J 
J'" 
J 
J'" 
..,. 
V- -
-
• 
• 
• 
• 
..,. 
V- -
-
.,.. 
IJ"- -
... 
"" 
...... ...... 
...... 
Jo 
... ... 
Jo 
93 
www.uz-translations.net

Refuence Material 
D/wa' 
J; 
J;.. 
J;.. 
J; 
1 ·1 
Cayn 
t 
~ ---
~ 
ghoyn 
t 
~ 
..A. 
~ 
faa' 
... 
..... 
-&.. 
-J 
qaaf 
..; 
~ 
..I.. 
...I 
'=1 
.:I 
.:I. 
...... 
.... 
/aam 
J 
V. 
..J.. 
...J 
mUm 
~ 
f-
.... 
-
nuun 
" 
u-
.... 
.... 
. 
'l 
~1. 
/wa' 
• 
... 
-+-
~ 
,~ 
'i, -
·1 
"'aa,., 
J 
~ 
:-~ 
yaa' 
Ii 
.,. 
.... 
.... 
\.'_ ..... ~\... --
. 
-~-:= <:) 
'\ 
;.l, ~ i 
:;r 
'1; • (j oJ:, 
:; 
\ 
.-
I 
'1' 
• I 
:'l. 
'OJ 
) 
'); 
~ 
.-, 
I 
.. 
.~c>~v 
, 
' 1.; 
:~ :1 
'1 
-
1 · 
.~ 'lJ' 
>3" 
. , 
. 
" 
b' 
0 ' 
94 
95 
www.uz-translations.net

