


Cover images 0 
Murray Robertson/visual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-647-X 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001 
All rights reserved 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or 
review as permitted under the terms of the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, this publication may not be reproduced, stored or trunsmitted, in any form or by 
any means, without the prior permission in writing of The Royal Society of Chemistry, 
or in the case of reprographic reproduction only in accordance with the terms of the 
licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the 
terms of the licences issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights Organization out- 
side the UK. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the terms stated here should be 
sent to The Royal Society of Chemistry at the addressprinted on this page. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 2 1, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

Preface 
This book on the structure of molecules and their bonding is intended for 
the introductory courses given in the first two years of chemistry courses 
in UK universities. The subject is a complex one, and as Robert S. 
Mulliken, winner of the 1966 Nobel prize for his contribution to chemical 
bonding known as molecular orbital theory, said: “the chemical bond is 
not a simple as some people seem to think it is”. In this book it is 
recognized that the solutions to quantum mechanical problems are the 
foundation of the subject. It is the author’s opinion that undergraduates 
should be exposed to as much of atomic and molecular theory as is 
compatible with their incoming qualifications and the requirements for 
the other parts of their chemistry courses. The more understanding 
of the basic theory they acquire, the more will their appreciation be of 
chemistry in general. 
The identification of a chemical bond with a pair of electrons came 
from G. N. Lewis in 1916, and the term covalent bond was coined by 
Irving Langmuir. The Lewis structures for covalent bonds are still in use 
in the UK A-level syllabus, and it is the main purpose of this book to per- 
suade new students that the time has come to make further progress with 
their understanding of bonding. 
This book has evolved from the author’s previous attempts to give a 
general description of the ideas which are used to describe atomic and 
molecular structure, and fulsome thanks go to Ellis Horwood, the pub- 
lisher of some of my books, for his generous permission to use some of 
the material in the present volume. 
Martyn Berry took on the onerous task of reading every word of the 
manuscript, and thanks go to him for the many suggestions that produced 
an improved final text. 
Jack Barrett 
London 

E D I T O R - I  N - C H  I E F  
E X E C U T I V E  E D I T O R S  
E D U C A T l  O N  A L C O N S  U LTA N T 
Professor E W Abel 
Professor A G Davies 
Professor D Phillips 
Professor J D Woollins 
Mr M Berry 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  I N  T H E  S E R I E S  
F O R T H C O M  I N G  T I T L E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry WHenderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Barrett 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hanson 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
S E Dann 
D 0 Hayward 
J D Gale and J M Seddon 
R A Jackson 
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
Elect rochemist ry 
X-ray Crystallography 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Spectroscopy: Physical 
Spectroscopy: Organic 
Biology for Chemists 
Further information about this series is available at www.chemsoc.orgltct 
Orders and enquiries should be sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 423429; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
1.1 The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 
1.2 Atomic Orbitals 
1.3 Quantum Mechanics 
1.4 
1.5 
1.6 
Spatial Orientations of Atomic Orbitals 
The Electronic Configurations of Atoms; the Periodic 
Classification of the Elements 
Periodicities of Some Atomic Properties 
2.1 
Molecular Symmetry 
2.2 Point Groups and Character Tables 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 Valence Bond Theory 
3.4 
3.5 Some Experimental Observations; Photoelectron 
Ionic, Covalent and Coordinate (or Dative) Bonding 
Covalent Bonding in H2+ and H, 
Energetics of the Bonding in H,+ and H, 
Spectroscopy 
5 
9 
16 
22 
35 
35 
47 
49 
52 
V 

vi 
Contents 
4.1 
4.2 
Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules of the Second Short 
Electronic Configurations of Homonuclear Diatomic 
Molecules 
67 
4.3 Some Heteronuclear Diatomic Molecules 
74 
Period Elements, E, 
59 
5.1 Triatomic Molecules 
83 
5.2 Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion Theory 
84 
5.4 Hydrogen Bonding and the Hydrogen Difluoride Ion, 
HF2- 
114 
5.3 Molecular Orbital Theory 
94 
6.1 Ammonia, NH, 
6.2 Methane, CH, 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 An Overview of Covalency 
Boron, Nitrogen and Chlorine Trifluorides 
Ethane, C,H,, and Diborane, B,H, 
7.1 Metal Structures 
7.2 Metal or Non-metal? 
7.3 Metallic Bonding; Band Theory 
7.4 Ionic Bonding 
7.5 Ionic-Covalent Transition 
119 
123 
126 
136 
139 
146 
147 
152 
155 
163 

A Brief Summary of Atomic 
Theory, the Basis of the 
Periodic Table and Some 
Trends in Atomic Properties 
As a preliminary to the main topics of this book - molecular structure 
and chemical bonding - this chapter is included to remind the reader of 
the foundations of atomic theory, an understanding of which is neces- 
sary for the assimilation of the main subject matter. 
1 

2 
Structure and Bonding 
I .I The Heisenberg Uncertainty Principle 
The uncertainty principle rationalizes our inability to observe the 
momentum and position of an atomic particle simultaneously. The act 
of observation interferes with atomic particles so that their momenta and 
positions are altered. 
may be stated in the form: It is impossible to determine simultaneously 
the position and momentum of an atomic particle. It can also be stated by 
the simple mathematical relationship: 
The Heisenberg 
or 
in which Ap represents the uncertainty in momentum of the electron and 
Aq its uncertainty in position. The main consequence of the uncertainty 
principle is that because electronic energy levels are known with consid- 
erable accuracy, the positions of electrons within atoms are not known 
at all accurately. This realization forces theoretical chemistry to develop 
methods of calculation of electronic positions in terms of probabilities 
rather than assigning to them, for example, fixed radii around the nucle- 
us. The varied methods of these calculations are known collectively as 
1.2 
Atomic Orbitals 
Atomic orbitals represent the locations of electrons in atoms, and are 
derived from quantum mechanical calculations. The consequence of 
being in considerable ignorance about the position of an electron in an 
atom is that calculations of the 
in a 
given position must be made. 
1.3 
Quantum Mechanics 
The solution of the 
gives mathematical form to the 
which describe the locations of electrons in atoms. The 
wave function is represented by w, which is such that its square, v2, is 
the 
of finding an electron. 

A Brief Summary of Atomic Theory, the Basis of the Periodic Table 
3 
The value of y2dz represents the probability of finding the electron in 
the volume element, dz (which may be visualized as the product of three 
elements of the Cartesian axes: dx.dy.dz). Each solution of the 
Schrodinger wave equation is known as an 
. Although the 
solution of the Schrodinger equation for any system containing more 
than one electron requires the iterative techniques available to comput- 
ers, it may be solved for the hydrogen atom (and for hydrogen-like atoms 
such as He+, Li2+, etc.) by analytical means, the energy solutions being 
represented by the equation: 
where 2 is the atomic number, p is the reduced mass of the system, e is 
the electronic charge, and E, is the 
of a vacuum; n is the 
. Equation 1.2 indicates that the energies of 
atomic orbitals increase as the value of n2 increases, i.e. the electrons 
become less stable as the value of the principal quantum number 
increases. 
The 
describe atomic orbitals. The permitted values of 
the 
, n, are: n = 1, 2, 3, 4, ... ; those of the 
, I ,  are: I =  0, 1, 2, 3, ... 
(n - 1); and those of the 
, m,, are: m, = +I, +I 
- 1 ,  ... 0, ... -(I - l), -1. Code letters for atomic orbitals, s, p, d and f, 
are used to represent those orbitals for which the value of 1 is 0, 1, 2 and 
3, respectively. 
The mathematical functions representing atomic orbitals are usually 
, i.e. the wave function is arranged so that the integral of its 

4 
Structure and Bonding 
square over all space has the value +I, as expressed by the general 
equation: 
m 
jv2dT = 1 
0 
The solutions of the Schrodinger equation show how y is distributed in 
the space around the nucleus of the hydrogen atom. The solutions for 
y are characterized by the values of three quantum numbers and every 
allowed set of values for the quantum numbers, together with the 
associated wave function, strictly defines that space which is termed an 
atomic orbital. Other representations are used for atomic orbitals, such 
as the 
and 
described later in the 
chapter. 
I .4 
Spatial Orientations of Atomic Orbitals 
The 
of the atomic orbitals of the hydrogen atom are 
very important in the consideration of the interaction of orbitals of dif- 
ferent atoms in the production of 
Although the formal method of describing orbitals is to use mathe- 
matical expressions, much understanding of orbital properties may be 
gained by the use of pictorial representations. The most useful pictorial 
representations of atomic orbitals are similar to boundary surfaces 
(which are based on y2), but are based upon the distribution of v, Val- 
ues, with the sign of v, being indicated in the various parts of the diagram. 
The shapes of these distributions are based upon the contours of y within 
Figure 1.1 The envelope 
diagrams of the Is, 2p ad 3d 
atomic orbitals of the H atom 

A Brief Summary of Atomic Theory, the Basis of the Periodic Table 
5 
which the values of w2 represent 0.95, and may be called 
. The orbital envelopes for the Is, three 2p and five 3d hydro- 
gen orbitals are shown in Figure 1.1. 
Two methods are used to represent the positive and negative values 
of the wave functions in 
. Both are 
shown in Figure 1.2 for the 2p- orbital. The two lobes of the orbital may 
be indicated by open areas containing the signs of the wave function in 
the two areas, or they may be represented by filled and open areas which 
represent the positive and negative values of the wave function, respec- 
tively. In the remainder of the book, the filled and open parts of atom- 
ic orbital diagrams are used to denote positive and negative signs of wave 
functions. 
Figure 
' m 2  
representing the 2p orbitals 
methods Of 
1.5 
The Electronic Configurations of Atoms; the 
Periodic Classification of the Elements 
The chemistry of an element is determined by the manner in which its 
electrons are arranged in the atom. Such arrangements are the basis of 
the modern periodic classification of the elements: the 
The treatment of atoms with more than one electron 
towards the nucleus, 
) requires consideration of the effects of 
7 
, and an extra 
quantum number (the 
sic energy of the electron in any orbital. The restriction on numbers of 
atomic orbitals and the number of electrons that they can contain leads 
to a discussion of the 
and the 
. All these considerations are necessary to allow the 
construction of the modern form of the periodic classification of the 
elements. 
) which specifies the 
1.5.1 The Spin Quantum Number 
When dealing with atoms possessing more than one electron it is neces- 
sary to introduce a fourth quantum number: s, the 
. However, to take into account the intrinsic energy of an electron, 
the value of s is taken to be 'A. Essentially the intrinsic energy of the 
electron may interact in a quantized manner with that associated with 
the angular momentum represented by 1, such that the only permitted 
interactions are 1 + s and I - s. For atoms possessing more than one elec- 
tron it is necessary to specify the values of s with respect to an applied 
magnetic field; these are expressed as values of msof +'A or -'A, 

6 
Structure and Bonding 
I .5.2 The Pauli Exclusion Principle 
The Pauli exclusion principle is the cornerstone in understanding the 
chemistry of the elements. It may be stated as: “No two electrons in an 
atom may possess identical sets of values of the four quantum numbers, n, 
I, m, and ms”. The consequences are: 
1. To restrict the number of electrons per orbital to a maximum of two. 
2. To restrict any one atom to only one particular orbital, defined by 
its set of n, 1 and m, values. 
1 5.3 The Electronic Configurations and Periodic 
Classification of the Elements 
The modern form of the Periodic Table is shown in Figure 1.3. The atom- 
ic number, 2, of each element is shown together with its electronic con- 
figuration. There are 18 
, according to modern convention. The 
quantum rules define the different types of atomic orbitals which may 
be used for electron occupation in atoms. The Pauli exclusion principle 
defines the number of each type of orbital and limits each orbital to a 
maximum electron occupancy of two. Experimental observation, 
together with some sophisticated calculations, indicates the energies of 
the available orbitals for any particular atom. The 
(the orbitals which are used to accommodate the appropriate num- 
ber of electrons) may be decided by the application of what is known as 
the 
(German: building-up) 
, which is that electrons in 

1 
2 
3 
4 
6 
6 
7 
8 
9 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 
17 
Ga 
Ge 
1 
H 
1s' 
3 
Li 
2s' 
Na 
3s' 
19 
K 
4s' 
37 
Rb 
5s' 
55 
cs 
6s' 
11 
81 
Fr 
7s' 
I 
4 
Be 
2s2 
12 
M 
3 3  
20 
21 
n 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
Ca 
sc 
Ti 
Cr 
Mn 
Fe 
Ni 
cu 
Zn 
4s2 
4s23d' 
4s23d2 
4 s L 3  
4s'3d5 
4s23d5 
4s23& 
4 g 7  
4s23$ 
4s13d'O 
4s23d'' 
38 
39 
40 
41 
42 
43 
U 
45 
46 
47 
48 
5s2 
5s24d' 
5 . ~ ~ 4 6 ~  5s'4$ 
5s'4d5 
5s'4ds 
5~'4d' 
5s'4d8 
4'' 
55'"'' 
5s24d'0 
56 
71 
72 
73 
74 
75 
16 
Sr 
Lu 
Hf 
Ta 
W 
Re 
0 s  
6s2 
4f'%S25d' 
4f'%S25d2 
4f'46s25d3 4f'%s25d4 
4f''6s25dS 
4f'%s25ds 
Sr 
Y 
ZI 
Nb 
Mo 
Tc 
Ru 
Rh 
Pd 
As 
Cd 
88 
103 
104 
105 
106 
107 
108 
109 
110 
Re 
Lr 
Rf 
Db 
Bh 
HS 
Mt 
7s2 
5f'47s%d' 
5f"7s%d2 
5f"7s%d3 
5f'?% 
5f'47s?6ds 
5f"7~26$ 
5f147s26d7 
n 
Pb 
Lanthanide 
elements 
Actinide elements 
I 
Ii4 
51 
58 
59 
60 
61 
62 
63 
64 
65 
€6 
67 
68 
69 
70 
Yb 
6s25d1 
4f26s2 
4r'6s2 
4f46s2 
4&s2 
4*s2 
4f'66s2 
4f'5d'6s2 
4&s2 
4f'%s2 
4f1'6s2 
4f126s2 
4f'%S2 
4f'%s2 
La 
Ce 
Pr 
Nd 
Pm 
Sm 
Eu 
Gd 
Tb 
OY 
Ho 
Er 
Tm 
89 
90 
91 
92 
93 
94 
95 
96 
91 
98 
99 
loo 
101 
102 
Ac 
Pa 
U 
Pu 
Am 
Cm 
Bk 
Cf 
ES 
Fm 
Md 
No 
7sW' 
7:k2 
5f27s26d' 
5t%&d1 
5f47Npsd' 
5 e s 2  
5fr7s2 
5f77s%d' 
5$Is2 
5f'9s2 
5f1'7s' 
5f"7s2 
5f'?S2 
5f''7SZ 
I 
5s24d"5p3 f i q ;  
5s24d''5p4 
5s24d"5p5 
Bi 
Po 
At 
4f'%s25d1' 1 4f1%$5d'' 
1 4f1%s25d" 
6P3 
6P5 
18 
2 
He 
1 s2 
10 
Ne 
2s22pe 
18 
3& 
36 
Kr 
4s23d104pl 
54 
5s24d"5pf 
Xe 
Figure 1.3 The Periodic Table showing the atomic numbers and outer electronic configurations of the elements; the core configurations are those of the 
preceding Group 18 element; those that are numbered, but unnamed, have been synthesized in small quantities 

a 
Structure and Bonding 
the ground state of an atom occupy the orbitals of lowest energy such 
that the total electronic energy is minimized. 
The various considerations that allow the aufbau order of filling of 
atomic orbitals as the nuclear charge increases steadily along the order 
of the elements can be written down in a manner similar to the Periodic 
Table as shown in Table 1.1, starting on the top left-hand side with the 
1s orbital and then filling each successive row, ending with the incom- 
pletely filled 7p orbitals. There are some irregularities in the filling, but 
the order of filling is generally in line with the value of the sum n + I, 
and if there is more than one set of orbitals with the same sum, the set 
with the larger or largest I value is filled preferentially. For example, the 
3d and 4p sets of orbitals have a sum of n + I = 5, but the 3d orbitals 
are filled before the 4p. 
Table 1 .I An arrangement showing the relationship between the atomic orbitals filled 
and the number of elements in the various groups and periods of the Periodic Table. 
Both the major blocks mimic the arrangement of the elements in the 18-group Periodic 
Table 
Orbitals filled 
Is 
2s 
3s 
4s 
3d 
5s 
4d 
6s 
4f 
5d 
7s 
5f 
6d 
2P 
3P 
4P 
5P 
6P 
7pa 
Numbers of elements 
associated with the 
maximum filing of the 
orbitals 
2 
2 
6 
2 
6 
2 
10 
6 
2 
10 
6 
2 
14 
10 
6 
2 
14 
10 
6 
ahcomplete at this time 
Notice the similarities between the two parts of Table 1.1 and the form 
of the Periodic Table given in Figure 1.3. The quantum rules, the Pauli 
exclusion principle and the auJbau principle combine to explain the gen- 
eral structure of the Periodic Table. 
Hund’s rules are used to determine the ground state of atoms which 
have electrons in degenerate orbitals, i. e. those with identical energy, such 
as the three 2p orbitals. These may be stated in the following way: in 
filling a set of degenerate orbitals the number of unpaired electrons is 
maximized, and such unpaired electrons will possess parallel spins. 

A Brief Summary of Atomic Theory, the Basis of the Periodic Table 
9 
I .6 
Periodicities of Some Atomic Properties 
This section summarizes the variation, across the periods and down the 
groups of the Periodic Table, of (i) the ionization energies, (ii) the elec- 
tron attachment energies (electron affinities), (iii) the atomic sizes and 
(iv) the electronegativity coefficients of the elements. 
1.6.1 Periodicity of First Ionization Energies 
The 
of an atom is the minimum energy required 
to convert one mole of the gaseous atom (in its ground - lowest energy 
- electronic state) into one mole of its gaseous unipositive ion: 
The first ionization energies of the elements are plotted in Figure 1.4. 
There is a characteristic pattern of the values for the elements Li to Ne 
which is repeated for the elements Na to Ar, and which is repeated yet 
again for the elements K, Ca and A1 to Kr (the s- and p-block elements 
of the fourth period). In the latter case, the pattern is interrupted by the 
values for the 10 transition elements of the d-block. The fourth period 
pattern is repeated by the fifth period elements, and there is an additional 

10 
Structure and Bonding 
section in the sixth period where the 14 lanthanide elements occur. In 
addition to this periodicity there is a general downward trend, and the 
ionization energy decreases down any of the groups. Both observations 
are broadly explicable in terms of the electronic configurations of the 
elements. 
Figure 1.4 The first ionization 
energies of the elements 
I .6.2 Variations in Electron Attachment Energies 
(Electron Affinities) 
The 
or 
is defined as the 
change in internal energy (i.e. AU) that occurs when one mole of gaseous 
atoms of an element are converted by electron attachment to give one 
mole of gaseous negative ions: 
Conversion to an electron attachment enthalpy requires the subtraction 
of 5/,RT, i.e. 6.2 kJ mol-' at 298 K. Most elements are sufficiently elec- 
tronegative to make their first electron attachment energies negative 
according to the thermodynamic convention that exothermic reactions 
are associated with negative energy changes. All second and subsequent 
electron attachment energies are highly endothermic. 
The first electron attachment energies of the first 36 elements are plot- 
ted in Figure 1.5 and show the values for H and He followed by a char- 
acteristic pattern, the second repetition of which is split by the values for 
the 10 transition elements. The value for hydrogen is -72.8 kJ mol-', 
which is very different from the 1s orbital energy of -1312 kJ mol-' 
because of the interelectronic repulsion term amounting to -72.8 - 

A Brief Summary of Atomic Theory, the Basis of the Periodic Table 
11 
(-1312) = 1239.2 kJ mol-I. The value for the helium atom is positive 
(21 kJ mol-I), indicating an overall repulsion of the incoming electron 
from the ls2 configuration which is not offset by the nuclear charge. 
Figure 1.5 The electron 
attachment energies of the first 
36 elements 
1.6.3 Variations in Atomic Size 
The size of an atom is not a simple concept. An inspection of the wave 
function for any atom shows that it is asymptotic to infinity, so some 
practical definition of size is required. There are two ways of assigning 
sizes to atoms: atomic radius and covalent radius. 
Atomic Radius 
The atomic radius of an element is considered to be half the interatomic 
distance between identical (singly bonded) atoms. This may apply to iron, 
say, in its metallic state, in which case the quantity may be regarded as 
the metallic radius of the iron atom, or to a molecule such as Cl,. The 
difference between the two examples is sufficient to demonstrate that 
some degree of caution is necessary when comparing the atomic radii of 
different elements. It is best to limit such comparisons to elements with 
similar types of bonding, metals for example. Even that restriction is 
subject to the drawback that the metallic elements have at least three 
different crystalline arrangements with possibly different 
(the number of nearest neighbours for any one atom). 

12 
Structure and Bonding 
Covalent Radius 
The covalent radius of an element is considered to be one half of the 
covalent bond distance of a molecule such as C1, (equal to its atomic 
radius in this case), where the atoms concerned are participating in sin- 
gle bonding. Covalent radii for participation in multiple bonding are also 
quoted in data books, In the case of a single bond between two differ- 
ent atoms, the bond distance is divided up between the participants by 
subtracting the covalent radius of one of the atoms, whose radius is 
known, from it. A set of mutually consistent values is now generally 
accepted and, since the vast majority of the elements take part in some 
form of covalent bonding, the covalent radius is the best quantity to 
consider for the study of general trends. Only atoms of the Group 18 
elements (except Kr and Xe) do not have covalent radii assigned to them 
because of their general inertness with respect to the formation of 
molecules. The use of covalent radius for comparing the sizes of atoms 
is subject to the reservation that its magnitude, for any given atom, is 
dependent upon the oxidation state of that element. 
Figure 1.6 shows how covalent radii vary across periods and down 
the main groups of the Periodic Table. Across periods there is a general 
reduction in atomic size, while down any group the atoms become larg- 
er. These trends are consistent with the understanding gained from the 
study of the variations of the first ionization energies of the elements. As 
the ionization energy is a measure of the effectiveness of the nuclear 
charge in attracting electrons, it might be expected that an increase in 
nuclear effectiveness would lead to a reduction in atomic size. The trends 
in atomic size in the periodic system are, in general, almost the exact 
opposite to those in the first ionization energy. 
Figure 1.6 The covalent radii of 
the main group elements of the 
2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th periods 

A Brief Summary of Atomic Theory, the Basis of the Periodic Table 
13 
The details of size variations within the transition series and the lan- 
thanide and actinide series are not included here, but are discussed in 
more specialist books. 
1.6.4 Electronegativity 
The concept of 
is derived from experimental observa- 
tions, such as that the elements fluorine and chlorine are highly elec- 
tronegative in their strong tendencies to become negative ions. The 
metallic elements of Group 1, on the other hand, are not electronegative 
and are better described as being electropositive: they have a strong ten- 
dency to form positive ions. A scale of 
is 
useful in allowing a number to represent the tendency of an element in 
a molecule of attracting electrons to itself. The establishment of such a 
scale has involved the powers of two Nobel prize winners: Pauling (chem- 
istry prize for valence bond theory, 1954) and Mulliken (chemistry prize 
for molecular orbital theory, 1966). Both the Pauling and Mulliken scales 
suffered from lack of accurate data and have been largely replaced by 
the Allred-Rochow scale. 
The Allred-Rochow Scale of Electronegativity Coefficients 
The now generally accepted scale of electronegativity was derived by 
Allred and Rochow and is known by their names. It is based on the con- 
cept that the electronegativity of an element is related to the force of 
attraction experienced by an electron at a distance from the nucleus equal 
to the covalent radius of the particular atom. 
Figure 1.7 The Allred-Rochow 
electronegativity coefficients of 
the main group elements of the 
2nd, 3rd, 4th and 5th periods 

14 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 1.7 shows the variation of Allred-Rochow electronegativity 
coefficients for singly bonded elements along periods and down groups 
of the Periodic Table. In general the value of the electronegativity coef- 
ficient increases across the periods and decreases down the groups. That 
is precisely the opposite of the trends in covalent radii, but similar to the 
trends in first ionization energy (Figure 1.4). This latter conclusion is no 
surprise, as it is to be expected that elements with a high tendency to 
attract electrons possess high first ionization energies. 

A Brief Summary of Atomic Theory, the Basis of the Periodic Table 
15 

Molecular Symmetry and 
Group Theory 
The contents of this chapter are fundamental in the applications of 
molecular orbital theory to bond lengths, bond angles and molecular 
shapes, which are discussed in Chapters 3-6. This chapter introduces the 
principles of group theory and its application to problems of molecular 
symmetry. The application of molecular orbital theory to a molecule is 
simplified enormously by the knowledge of the symmetry of the mole- 
cule and the group theoretical rules that apply. 
2.1 
Molecular Symmetry 
A mathematical 
which are related to 
each other according to certain rules, outlined later in the chapter. The 
particular kind of elements which are relevant to the symmetries of mol- 
ecules are 
. With each symmetry element there is an 
associated 
. The necessary rules are referred to where 
appropriate. 
consists of a set of 
16 

Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory 
17 
2.1 .I Elements of Symmetry and Symmetry Operations 
There are seven 
which are commonly possessed 
by molecular systems. These elements of symmetry, their notations and 
their related symmetry operations are given in Table 2.1. 
Table 2.1 Elements of symmetry and their associated operations 
Symmetry element 
Symbol 
Symmetry operation 
Identity 
Proper axis 
Horizontal plane 
Vertical plane 
Dihedral plane 
Improper axis 
Inversion centre or 
centre of symmetry 
Leave the molecule alone 
Rotate the molecule by 360h degrees 
around the axis 
Reflect the molecule through the plane 
which is perpendicular to the major axis 
Reflect the molecule through a plane which 
contains the major axis 
Reflect the molecule through a plane which 
bisects two C, axes 
Rotate the molecule by 360h degrees 
around the improper axis and then reflect 
the molecule through the plane perpendicu- 
lar to the improper axis 
Invert the molecule through the inversion 
centre 
An element of symmetry is possessed by a molecule if, after the asso- 
ciated symmetry operation is carried out, the atoms of that molecule are 
not perceived to have moved. The molecule is then in an 
. The individual atoms may have moved but only to positions 
previously occupied by identical atoms. 
The Identity, E 
The symmetry element known as the 
, and symbolized by E (or 
in some texts by I), is possessed by all molecules independently of their 
shape. The related symmetry operation of leaving the molecule alone 
seems too trivial a matter to have any importance. The importance of E 
is that it is essential, for group theoretical purposes, for a group to con- 
tain it. For example, it expresses the result of performing some opera- 
tions twice, e.g. the double reflexion of a molecule in any particular plane 
of symmetry. Such action restores every atom of the molecule to its orig- 
inal position so that it is equal to the performance of the operation of 
leaving the molecule alone, expressed by E. 

18 
Structure and Bonding 
Proper Axes of Symmetry, C, 
A 
, denoted by C,, is an axis around which a 
molecule is rotated by 36O"ln to produce an equivalent configuration. 
The trigonally planar molecule BF, may be set up so that the molecular 
plane is contained by the xy Cartesian plane (that containing the x and 
y axes) and so that the z Cartesian axis passes through the centre of the 
boron nucleus, as is shown in Figure 2.1. 
If the molecule is rotated around the z axis by 120" (360"/3), an equiv- 
alent configuration of the molecule is produced. The boron atom does 
not change its position, and the fluorine atoms exchange places depend- 
ing upon the direction of the rotation. The rotation described is the sym- 
metry operation associated with the C, axis of symmetry, and the 
demonstration of its production of an equivalent configuration of the 
BF, molecule is what is required to indicate that the C, proper axis of 
symmetry is possessed by that molecule. 
There are other proper axes of symmetry possessed by the BF, 
molecule. The three lines joining the boron and fluorine nuclei are all 
contained by C2 axes (from hereon the term "proper" is dropped, unless 
it is absolutely .necessary to remove possible confusion) as may be seen 
from Figure 2.2. The associated symmetry operation of rotating the 
molecule around one of the C2 axes by 360"/2 = 180" produces an 
equivalent configuration of the molecule. The boron atom and one of 
the fluorine atoms do not move whilst the other two fluorine atoms 
exchange places. There are, then, three C2 axes of symmetry possessed 
by the BF, molecule. 
The value of the subscript n in the symbol C, for a proper axis of 
symmetry is known as the 
of that axis. The axis (and there may 
be more than one) of highest order possessed by a molecule is termed 
the 
. The concept of the major axis is important in distin- 
guishing between horizontal and vertical axes of symmetry. It is also 
important in the diagnosis of whether a molecule belongs to a C group 
or a D group (terms which are defined later in the chapter). As is the 
case with the Cn axis of BF,, the axis of symmetry coincides with one of 
the Cartesian axes (z), but that is because of the manner in which the 
diagram in Figure 2.1 is drawn. It is a convention that the major axis of 
symmetry should be coincident with the z axis. It is unnecessary for there 
to be any coincidences between the axes of symmetry of a molecule and 
the Cartesian axes, but it is of considerable convenience if there is at 
least one coincidence. 
Figure 2.1 An example of a 
proper axis of symmetry, in this 
case of order 3, C, 
Figure 2.2 An example of a C, 
axis of symmetry 
Planes of Symmetry, o 
There are three twes of 
, all denoted by the Greek 

Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory 
19 
lower case sigma, o, and all of them are such that reflexions of the mol- 
ecule through them produce equivalent configurations of that molecule. 
The symmetry operation associated with a plane of symmetry is reflex- 
ion through the plane, 
( a )  Horizontal Planes, oh. A 
(denoted by 
oh) is one that is perpendicular to the major axis of symmetry of a 
molecule. The molecular plane of the BF, molecule is an example of a 
horizontal plane: it is perpendicular to the C, axis. Reflexion in the 
horizontal plane of the BF, molecule has no effect upon any of the four 
atoms. A better example is the PCl, molecule (shown in Figure 2.3) 
which, since it is trigonally bipyramidal, possesses a C, axis (again 
arranged to coincide with the z axis) and a horizontal plane (the xy plane 
as it is set up) which contains the phosphorus atom and the three chlo- 
rine atoms of the trigonal plane. Reflexion through the horizontal plane 
causes the apical (i.e. out-of-plane) chlorine atoms to exchange places in 
producing an equivalent configuration of the molecule. 
Figure 2.3 An example of a 
horizontal plane of symmetry, oh 
(b) Vertical Planes, o),. 
A 
(denoted by 0”) is 
one which contains the major axis. The BF, and PC1, molecules both 
possess three vertical planes of symmetry. These contain the C, axis and, 
in the BF, case, the boron atom and one each of the fluorine atoms, 
respectively. In the PC1, case the three vertical planes, ov, contain the C, 
axis, the phosphorus atom, the two apical chlorine atoms and one each 
of the chlorine atoms of the trigonal plane, repectively. 

20 
Structure and Bonding 
(c) Dihedral Planes, od. 
(denoted by od) 
is one which bisects two C2 axes of symmetry. In addition, it contains 
the major axis and so is a special type of vertical plane. An example is 
shown in Figure 2.4, which contains a diagram of the square planar 
IC14-- ion. 
As may be seen from Figure 2.4, the ICl; ion has a major axis which 
is a C4 axis. The C4 axis is also a C2 axis in that rotations around it of 
90" and 180" both produce equivalent configurations of the molecule. A 
rotation through 270" also produces an equivalent Configuration, but 
Figure 2.4 An example of a 
dihedral plane of 
oA 
.
"
 that is equivalent to a rotation through 90" in the opposite direction and 
so does not indicate an extra type of axis of symmetry. The molecular 
plane contains two C,' axes (the superscript prime is to distinguish them 
from the C, axis which is coincident with the C4 axis), both of which 
contain the iodine atom and two diametrically opposed chlorine atoms. 
The two C,' axes are contained respectively by the two vertical planes 
which also contain the major axis. There are, in addition, two C," axes 
(coincident with the x and y axes) which are contained by the horizon- 
tal plane, are perpendicular to the major axis, and also bisect the respec- 
tive Cl-I-Cl angles. The double-prime superscript serves to distinguish 
these axes from the C2 and C,' axes. The C2" axes are contained by two 
extra planes of symmetry (they are the xz and yz planes), which are 
termed dihedral planes since they bisect the two C,' axes. The dihedral 
planes contain the major axis, C4. 
Improper Axes of Symmetry, S, 
If rotation about an axis by 360"ln followed by reflexion through a plane 
perpendicular to the axis produces an equivalent configuration of a mol- 
ecule, then the molecule contains an 
. Such 
an axis is denoted by Sn, the associated symmetry operation having been 
described in the previous sentence. The C3 axis of the PC1, molecule is 
also an S, axis. The operation of S, on PC1, causes the apical (i.e. out- 
of-plane) chlorine atoms to exchange places. 
The operation of reflexion through a horizontal plane may be regard- 
ed as a special case of an improper axis of symmetry of order one: s,. 
The rotation of a molecule around an axis by 360" produces an identi- 
cal configuration (C, = E), and the reflexion in the horizontal plane is 
the only non-trivial part of the operations associated with the S, 
improper axis. This may be symbolized as: 
If a molecule does not possess an improper axis of symmetry it is termed 
and cannot have a mirror image that is superposable on 

Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory 
21 
itself. Molecules in this class are termed 
passing through their solutions in opposite directions. 
, i.e. they can show 
such that optical isomers deflect the plane of polarized light 
The Inversion Centre or Centre of Symmetry, i 
An 
or 
(denoted by i) is possessed 
by a molecule which has pairs of identical atoms that are diametrically 
opposed to each other about the centre. Any particular atom with the 
coordinates x, y, z must be partnered by an identical atom with the coor- 
dinates -x, -y, -2, if the molecule is to possess an inversion centre. That 
condition must apply to all atoms in the molecule which are off-centre. 
The IC1,- ion possesses an inversion centre, as does the dihydrogen 
molecule, H,. The BF, molecule (trigonally planar) does not possess an 
inversion centre. The symmetry operation associated with an inversion 
centre is the inversion of the molecule, in which the diametrically opposed 
atoms in each such pair exchange places. The inversion centre is another 
special case of an improper axis in that the operations associated with 
the S, element are exactly those which produce the inversion of the atoms 
of a molecule containing i. Reference to Figure 2.5 shows the effects of 
carrying out the operation C2 followed by oh, and that the fluorine atoms 
in each of the three diametrically opposed pairs in the octahedral SF, 
molecule have been exchanged with each other, all of which is what is 
understood to be the inversion of the molecule. This is symbolized as: 
The superscript numbering of the fluorine atoms in Figure 2.5 is done 
to make clear the atomic movements which take place as a result of the 
application of the symmetry operations. 
Figure 2.5 An illustration of the 
inversion of the SF, molecule by 
two paths 

22 
Structure and Bonding 
2.2 
Point Groups and Character Tables 
The symmetry elements which may be possessed by a molecule are 
defined above and exemplified. The next stage is to decide which, and 
how many, of these elements are possessed by particular molecules so 
that the molecules can be assigned to 
. A point group con- 
sists of all the elements of symmetry possessed by a molecule and which 
intersect at a point. Such elements represent a group according to the 
rules to be outlined. The interactions of the properties of the elements 
of symmetry of a point group are summarized in a 
. The 
description of point groups and character tables is best carried out by 
means of examples. A simple example is the water molecule, which is a 
bent triatomic system. 
2.2.1 Point Groups 
The symmetry elements of the water molecule are easily detected. There 
is only one proper axis of symmetry, which is the one that bisects 
the bond angle and contains the oxygen atom. It is a C2 axis and the 
associated operation of rotating the molecule about the axis by 180” 
results in the hydrogen atoms exchanging places with each other. The 
demonstration of the effectiveness of the operation is sufficient for 
the diagnosis of the presence of the element. 
Figure 2.6 shows the molecule of water set up so that the C2 axis is 
coincident with the z axis according to convention. The molecular plane 
is set up to be in the yz plane so that the x axis is perpendicular to the 
paper, as is the xz plane. There are two vertical planes of symmetry: the 
xz and the yz planes, and these are designated as 0” 
and o”‘, 
respective- 
ly, the prime serving to distinguish between the two. The only other sym- 
metry element possessed by the water molecule is the identity, E. 
The four symmetry elements form a group, which may be demon- 
strated by introducing the appropriate rules. The rules are exemplified 
by considering the orbitals of the atoms present in the molecule. Such a 
consideration also develops the relevance of 
, in that it leads 
Figure 2.6 The water molecule 
set up in the YZ plane with the z 
axis containing the C, axis 

Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory 
23 
to an understanding of which of the atomic orbitals are permitted to 
combine to form molecular orbitals. 
The electrons which are important for the bonding in the water mol- 
ecule are those in the 
of the oxygen atom: 2s22p4. It is essen- 
tial to explore the character of the 2s and 2p orbitals, and this is done 
by deciding how each orbital 
with respect to the operations 
associated with each of the symmetry elements possessed by the water 
molecule. 
The Characters 
Oxygen Atom 
The 
of 
the result of any 
of the 2s orbital 
of the Representation of the 2s Orbital of the 
an orbital is symbolized by a number which expresses 
particular operation on its wave function. In the case 
of the oxygen atom which is spherically symmetrical, 
there is no change of sign of w with any of the four operations: E, C2 
(z), o,, 
(xz) and q,’ 
0.)~). These results may be written down in the 
form: 
the ‘1’s indicating that the 2s orbital is 
individual operations. Such a collection of characters is termed a 
with respect to the 
, this particular example being the 
(ie. all the characters are ‘1’s). 
The Characters of the Representation of the Zp, Orbital of the 
Oxygen Atom 
The 2p, orbital of the oxygen atom is symmetric with respect to the iden- 
tity, but is 
with respect to the C2 operation. This is 
because of the spatial distribution of w values in the 2p orbitals with one 
positive lobe and one negative lobe. The operation, C2, causes the pos- 
itive and negative regions of the 2p, orbital to exchange places with each 
other. This sign reversal is indicated as a character of -1 in the repre- 
sentation of the 2px orbital as far as the C2 operation is concerned. The 
2p, orbital is unchanged by reflexion in the x z  plane but suffers a sign 
reversal when reflected through the y z  plane. The collection of the char- 
acters of the 2p-x orbital with respect to the four symmetry operations 
associated with the four elements of symmetry forms another represen- 
tation of the group currently being constructed: 

24 
Structure and Bonding 
The Characters of the Representation of the 2py Orbital of the 
Oxygen Atom 
The 2py orbital of the oxygen atom changes sign when the C2 operation 
is applied to it, and when it is reflected through the xz plane, but is sym- 
metric with respect to the molecular plane, yz. The representation 
expressing the character of the 2py orbital is another member of the 
group: 
The Characters of the Representation of the 2p, Orbital of the 
Oxygen Atom 
The 2p, orbital of the oxygen atom has exactly the same set of charac- 
ters as the 2s orbital: it is another example of a totally symmetric rep- 
resentation. 
The Multiplication of Representations 
At this stage it is important to use one of the rules of group theory, 
which states that the product of any two representations of a group must 
also be a member of that group. This rule may be used on the examples 
of the representations for the 2p, and 2py orbitals as deduced above. The 
product of two representations is obtained by multiplying together the 
individual characters for each symmetry element of the group. The nor- 
mal rules of arithmetic apply, so that the representation of the product 
of those of the two 2p orbitals under discussion is given by: 

Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory 
25 
The new representation is, by the rules, a member of the group, and is 
also the only possible addition to the set of representations so far deduced 
for the molecular shape under consideration. There are no other com- 
binations of 1 and -1 that would form a different representation. 
The four representations may be collected together and be given sym- 
bols, the collection of characters forming what is known as a 
E 
c2 
ov 
q’ 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
A, 
A2 
B, 
B2 
The symbols used for the representations are those proposed by 
Mulliken. The A representations are those which are symmetric with 
respect to the C2 operation, and the Bs are antisymmetric to that 
operation. The subscript 1 indicates that a representation is symmetric 
with respect to the oV operation, the subscript 2 indicating antisymme- 
try to it. No other indications are required, since the characters in the 
ou’ 
column are decided by another rule of group theory. This rule is: the 
product of any two columns of a character table must also be a column in 
that table. It may be seen that the product of the C2 characters and those 
of o,, 
give the contents of the G,,’. 
The representations deduced above 
must be described as 
This is because they 

26 
Structure and Bonding 
cannot be simpler, but there are other representations (examples follow) 
which are 
in that they are sums of irreducible ones. Character 
tables, in general, are a list of the irreducible representations of the par- 
ticular group, and as in the ones shown in Appendix 1 they have an extra 
column which indicates the representations by which various orbitals 
transform. 
In the example under discussion the 2s and 2p, orbitals transform as 
a,, the 2p, orbital transforms as b, and the 2py o;bital transforms as b,. 
In this context ‘transform’ refers to the behaviour of the orbitals with 
respect to the symmetry operations associated with the symmetry ele- 
ments of the particular group. 
Symmetry Properties of the Hydrogen Is Orbitals in the Water 
Molecule; Group Orbitals 
Neither of the 1s orbitals of the hydrogen atoms of the water molecule, 
taken separately, transform within the group of irreducible representa- 
tions deduced for that molecule. The two 1s orbitals must be taken 
together as one or the other of two 
. A more formal treat- 
ment of the group orbitals which two 1s orbitals may form is dealt with 
in Chapter 3. 
Whenever there are two or more identical atoms linked to a central 
atom, their wave functions must be combined in such a way as to demon- 
strate their indistinguishability. This is achieved by making 
of the wave functions of the ligand atoms. For the two 1s 
orbitals of the hydrogen atoms in the water molecule their wave func- 
tions may be combined to give: 
12, = Is, + Is, 
h, = IS, - IS, 
where h, and 12, are the wave functions of the two group orbitals, and 
Is, and Is, represent the 1s wave functions of the two hydrogen atoms, 
A and B. The two group orbitals are shown diagrammatically in Figure 
2.7. By inspection, they may be shown to transform as a, and b, repre- 
sentations, respectively. The 12, orbital behaves exactly like the 2s and 
2pz orbitals of the oxygen atom, and the h, orbital behaves exactly like 
the 2py orbital of the oxygen atom, with respect to the four symmetry 
operations of the point group. 

Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory 
27 
2.2.2 Character Tables 
Figure 2.7 The (top) a, and 
(bottom) b, group 
formed 
from the I S  atomic orbitals of the 
It is necessary to label the various point groups to which molecules may 
belong. The labelling system adopted is to use a letter which is related 
to the major axis, and to use the value of n (the order of the major axis) 
together with a letter indicating the plane of symmetry (h, v or d,) 
of high- 
est importance for descriptive purposes, as subscripts. The system was 
suggested by Schonflies and the labels are known as 
The method of deciding the point group of a molecule is that described 
below. 
two hydrogen atoms of the water 
molecule 
Assignment of Molecules to Point Groups 
There are three shapes which are particularly important in chemistry and 
are easily recognized by the number of their faces, all of which consist 
of equilateral triangles. They are the 
(four faces), the 
(20 faces). Figure 2.8 con- 
tains diagrams of these shapes and examples from chemistry. 
The first two of the shapes are extremely common in chemistry, while 
the third shape is important in boron chemistry and many other 
molecules (a cluster is defined as a molecule in which three or more iden- 
tical atoms are bonded to each other) and ions. The three special shapes 
are associated with point groups and their character tables and are 
labelled, Td, 0, and I,, respectively. The point group to which a mole- 
cule belongs may be decided by the answers to four main questions: 
(eight faces) and the 
1. Does the molecule belong to one of the special point groups, Td, 0, 
or I,? If it does, the point group has been identified. 
2. If the molecule does not belong to one of the special groups, it is 
necessary to identify the major axis (or axes). The major axis is the 
one with the highest order (the highest value of n) and is designat- 
ed Cn. In a case where there is more than one axis which could be 
classified as major (of equal values of n), it is conventional to regard 
the axis placed along the z axis as being the major one. 
Figure 2.8 The 'special' 
shapes, the tetrahedron, the 
octahedron and the icosahedron 
with chemical examples of each: 
SiF,, SF,, R2h2I2- 

28 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 2.9 The structure of the 
ethene molecule showing its 
three C, axes 
H 
I 
C1 
I 
cs 
,C<l,C, 
Br 
F 
H 
,CKIH 
c1 
Br, 
C1 
C1' 
Br 
Ci 
Figure 2.10 Examples of C,, 
C, and Ci molecules: CHBrCIF, 
CH,CIF and staggered C,(HBrCI), 
looking along the C-C axis 
Figure 2.1 1 The benzene mol- 
ecule showing the C, axis and 
the six C, axes at 90" to it 
3. 
In the trivial cases where there is only a C, axis, the point group of 
the molecule is C,, unless there is either a plane of symmetry or an 
inversion centre present, indicating the point groups C, or Cj, respec- 
tively. Examples of C,, C, and Ci 
molecules are shown in Figure 2.10. 
The main question is: are there n C, axes perpendicular to the 
major axis, C,? If there are, the molecule belongs to a D, group, oth- 
erwise the molecule belongs to a C, group. Figure 2.1 1 shows the 
benzene molecule, which belongs to a D,, 
group. In the benzene mol- 
ecule the major axis is C6, perpendicular to the molecular plane, and 
there are six C, axes perpendicular to the major axis. Benzene belongs 
to a D, group, therefore. Although the ethene molecule, shown in 
Figure 2.9, does not possess a major axis, it does have three C2 axes 
which are mutually perpendicular, and so belongs to a D,, 
group in 
which the z axis may be regarded as major, with the C, axes coinci- 
dent with the x and y axes satisfying the qualification. 
The third question applies only to D, groups: is there a horizontal 
plane of symmetry present? If oh is present, the molecule belongs to 
the point group D,,. As shown in Figure 2.1 1, the benzene molecule 
does possess a horizontal plane and belongs to the point group D6h. 
If there is no oh but there are n ov present, the molecule belongs to 
the point group D,,. The example shown in Figure 2.12 is the allene 
molecule, which has a C2 axis (major) coincident with the CCC axis 
with two dihedral planes which contain that axis and both contain 
and bisect respectively the two CH, groups. If no q, 
is present, then 
the point group of the molecule is D,. As shown in Figure 2.13, the 
staggered form of the ethane molecule has a C3 major axis with three 
C2 axes which are mutually perpendicular to it, but there are no 
planes of symmetry so the molecule belongs to the D, point group. 

Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory 
29 
4. The fourth question applies only to Cn groups: is there a CT, 
present? 
If there is, the molecule belongs to the point group Cnh. There are 
very few examples of such molecules, and Figure 2.14 shows the pla- 
nar form of B(OH), which has a C, major axis perpendicular to the 
molecular plane, but there are no other planes of symmetry. It 
belongs, therefore, to the point group C3h. 
If there is no CT, 
but there are n CT,, present, the molecule belongs to the 
point group C,,. Examples of these molecules are common in chemistry; 
two are shown in Figure 2.15. 
The trigonally pyramidal ammonia molecule has a C3 axis with three 
vertical planes passing through it and belongs to the point group C,,. If 
no C T ~  is present but there is an S2, improper axis present, the molecule 
belongs to the S2n point group. Very few examples of SZn molecules exist. 
One is tetraphenylmethane, shown in Figure 2.16. 
An S4 operation causes pairs of phenyl groups to interchange with 
one another to produce an equivalent structure of the molecule, so the 
molecule belongs to the point group S4. If no S,, is present, the point 
group of the molecule is Cn. At this point, molecules are severely lack- 
ing in symmetry elements. There are molecules such as CFClBrI, which 
belongs to C, (this is equivalent to the identity, E), and H,O, with its 
non-planar arrangement of OH groups, as shown in Figure 2.17, which 
belongs to C2. In Figure 2.17, one of the oxygen atoms is placed on top 
of the other one, so the view of the molecule is down the 0-0 axis, which 
is itself not an axis of symmetry. 
The procedure described will identify the point groups of the majority 
Figure 2.12 (Left) The allene 
molecule which has a C, axis 
(major) coincident with the CCC 
axis with two dihedral planes 
which contain that axis and both 
contain and bisect respectively 
the two CH, groups 
Figure 2.13 The staggered 
form of the ethane molecule, 
looking down the C, major axis, 
and showing the three C, axes 
perpendicular to it 
Figure 2.14 The planar B(OH), 
molecule; its C, axis passes 
through the boron nucleus and is 
at right angles to the molecular 
plane 
Figure 2.15 Examples of mole- 
cules belonging to C,, groups: 
staggered CI,CCH, 
and XeOF, 
Figure 2.i6 The structure of 
tetraphenylmethane; the view 
down any phenyl-central carbon 
direction is that of a propeller 

30 
Structure and Bonding 
of molecules. It may be written in the form of a flow sheet, which is 
shown in Figure 2.18 and allows the assignment of molecules to 
point groups. The most frequently used character tables are placed in 
Appendix 1. 
Figure 2.17 The structure of 
hydrogen peroxide, which 
belongs to the C, point group 
Figure 2.18 A flow chart for 
the assignment of molecules, 
groups of ligands or orbitals to 
point groups 
Figure 2.19 The structure of 
Cr(C,Hd, 

Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory 
31 

32 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 2.20 A diagram of a 
tennis ball showing the seam and 
the positions of the three C, 
axes. The C, operation perpendi- 
cular to the paper causes the 
interchanges of the two halves of 
the red curve (representing the 
seam on the underside of the 
ball) and of the two halves of the 
black curve (representing the 
seam on the topside of the ball). 
The other two C, operations 
cause the interchanges of black 
and red sections of the seam. 

Molecular Symmetry and Group Theory 
33 

Covalent Bonding I: the 
Dihydrogen Molecule-ion, H,+, 
and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
This chapter consists of the application of the symmetry concepts of 
Chapter 2 to the construction of molecular orbitals for a range of dia- 
tomic molecules. The principles of molecular orbital theory are devel- 
oped in the discussion of the bonding of the simplest molecular species, 
the one-electron dihydrogen molecule-ion, H,+, and the simplest mole- 
cule, the two-electron dihydrogen molecule. Valence bond theory is 
introduced and compared with molecular orbital theory. The photo- 
electron spectrum of the dihydrogen molecule is described and 
interpreted. 
34 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
35 
3.1 
Ionic, Covalent and Coordinate (or Dative) 
Bonding 
There are two extreme cases of chemical bonding: ionic and covalent. 
occurs when there is a complete transfer of one electron 
from one atom to another to form 
as in the equation: 
Na( 1 s22s22p63s1) + F( 1 s22s22p5) + Na'( 1 s22s22p6) + F-( 1 s22s22p6) (3.1) 
In this case the electropositive sodium atom loses its 3s electron, which 
is then transferred to the 2p orbital of the electronegative fluorine atom 
to produce the Na'F- ion-pair. Ionic bonding is the subject of Chapter 
7. When there is little or no difference in the electronegativity coefficients 
of the combining atoms, 
are possible in which two or 
more electrons are shared between the two atoms. 
is the main 
subject of this chapter. 
The 
, also known as the 
, is an electron- 
pair bond between two atoms or groups of atoms in which both elec- 
trons are supplied by one atom. The atom supplying the electron pair is 
called the 
. Although the 
coordinate bond is extremely important in the description of compounds 
of the transition elements, it is given minimal treatment here. The clas- 
sic example of coordinate bond formation in main group chemistry is 
the formation of an 
) from boron tri- 
fluoride and ammonia. The ammonia molecule possesses a non-bonding 
(lone) pair of electrons, which is used to form a coordinate bond with 
the boron trifluoride, which has a vacant p-type orbital: 
, the receiving atom being the 
(' z.e. an 
H,N: + BF, -+ H,N:+BF, 
(3.2) 
The resulting adduct has the same number of valence electrons as the 
ethane molecule, C,H,, and has the same structure with the two parts of 
the molecule having rotational freedom around the N+B coordinate 
bond, or covalent C-C bond in ethane. Coordinate or dative bonds are 
usually drawn in molecular structures as arrows to represent the direc- 
tion of the donation process as in: 
3.2 
Covalent Bonding in H,' 
and H, 
A covalent bond occurs when two atoms share two or more electrons. 
More specifically, in the context of molecular orbital theory, a single 
covalent bond between two atoms occurs when two electrons (one from 
each of the atoms) occupies a bonding molecular orbital. Other terms 

36 
Structure and Bonding 
used in molecular orbital theory are non-bonding and anti-bonding 
orbitals. 
, which consists of two protons and one elec- 
tron, represents an even simpler case of a covalent bond, in which only 
one electron is shared between the two nuclei. Even so, it represents a 
quantum mechanical 
, which means that solutions of 
the wave equation must be obtained by 
. The molecu- 
lar orbitals derived from the combination of two 1s atomic orbitals serve 
to describe the electronic configurations of the four species H2+, H,, He2+ 
and He,. 
The H2+ 
3.2.1 The Construction of Molecular Orbitals 
The basic concept of 
is that molecular orbitals 
may be constructed from a set of contributing atomic orbitals such that 
the molecular wave functions consist of 
. In the case of the combination of two 1s hydrogen 
atomic orbitals to give two molecular orbitals, the two linear combina- 
tions are written below so that atomic wave functions are represented 
by y~ and 
by 0: 
$2 = v* - vg 
(3.4) 
where vA and vB are the two hydrogen atomic 1s wave functions of 
atoms A and B, respectively. The two linear combinations may be rep- 
resented by diagrams in which the envelopes of the two orbitals are used 
as shown in Figure 3.1. The two 1s orbitals as they are represented in 
equations 3.3 and 3.4 are shown overlapping in two ways. 
Where the two atomic orbitals have the same signs for y~ there is an 
increase in probability of finding an electron in the internuclear region 
because the two atomic orbitals both contribute to a build-up of y~ value. 
The orbital so produced is called a 
. If the two 
1s orbitals have different signs for v, the internuclear region has a vir- 
tually zero probability for finding the electron because the two wave func- 
tions cancel out, and the molecular orbital produced is described as 
. This is shown in a more mathematical way later in this 
section. The formal way in which the forms of the two molecular orbitals 
are decided is by using group theory. 
Figure 3.1 The two ways in 
which 1s orbitals from two hydro- 
gen atoms are permitted to over- 
lap. In the top diagram, one 1s 
wave function is positive and the 
other negative: in the lower dia- 
gram, both ls wave functions are 
positive 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
37 
Group Theory Applied to the Molecular Orbital Formation in H,+ 
and H, 
The H,+ and H2 molecules belong to the D, point group. The two 1s 
atomic orbitals, individually, do not transform within the Dm, point 
group, but together their symmetry representation, i. e. the characters 
with respect to the various symmetry operations of the Dm, 
point group, 
may be elucidated. This is done by considering each of the symmetry ele- 
ments of the Dm, 
group in turn, and writing down under each element 
the number of orbitals unaffected by the associated symmetry operation: 

38 
Structure and Bonding 
The two 1s orbitals are unaffected by the E (identity) operation, and 
hence the number 2 is written down in the representation. Rotation by 
any angle, @, around the C ,  axis does not affect the orbitals; hence the 
second 2 appears as the character of the two 1s orbitals. The third 2 
appears because the two orbitals are unaffected by reflexion in any of 
the infinite number of vertical planes which contain the molecular axis. 
The operation of inversion affects both orbitals in that they exchange 
places with each other, and so a zero is written down in the i column. 
Likewise an S, operation causes the orbitals to exchange places and a 
zero is written in that column. There are an infinite number of C2 axes 
passing through the inversion centre and these are perpendicular to the 
molecular axis. The associated operation of rotation through 180" 
around any C2 axis causes the 1s orbitals to exchange places with each 
other, so there is a final zero to be placed in the representation. 
The sequence of numbers arrived at constitutes the representation of 
the two 1s orbitals with respect to Dm, 
symmetry. Such a combination 
of numbers is not to be found in the D,, character table: it is an exam- 
ple of a 
is, in this instance, a matter of realizing that the sum of 
the og+ 
and oU+ 
characters is the representation of the two 1s orbitals: 
. Its reduction to a sum of 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
39 
og+ + old+ 
2 
2 
2 
0 
0 
0 
Lower case letters are used for the symbols representing the symmetry 
properties of orbitals. Greek letters are used to symbolize the irreducible 
representations of the D_, point group, and have either g or u subscripts 
and either + or - signs as superscripts. The g and u subscripts refer to 
the character in the i column: g (coming from the German word 
9 
meaning even) indicating symmetrical behaviour and u ( 
, mean- 
ing odd) indicating antisymmetrical behaviour with respect to inversion. 
The + and - signs refer respectively to symmetry and antisymmetry with 
respect to reflexion in one of the vertical planes. The ‘2’s in the E and 
some of the other columns are indications of 
repre- 
sentations (some representations in other point groups are triply degen- 
erate, and this is indicated by a ‘3’ in the E column). 
By referring to the diagrams in Figure 3.1 it may be seen that the 
orbital $, transforms as og+, 
and that the orbital $2 transforms as ou+. 
That two molecular orbitals are produced from the two atomic orbitals 
is an important part of molecular orbital theory: a 
. The two molecular orbitals differ in energy, both 
from each other and from the energy of the atomic level. To understand 
how this arises it is essential to consider the 
of the orbitals. 
Normalization is the procedure of arranging for the integral over all 
space of the square of the orbital wave function to be unity, as described 
in Section 1.3. For molecular orbitals this is expressed by the equation: 
m 
I@’dT = 1 
0 
(3.9) 
where dz is a volume element (equal to dx.dy.dz). The probability of 
unity expresses the certainty of finding an electron in the orbital. It must 
be that, by transforming atomic orbitals into molecular ones, no loss, or 
gain, in electron probability should occur. For equation 3.9 to be valid, 
, N, must be introduced into equations 3.3 and 3.4, 
which then become: 
(3.10) 
(3.11) 
where N ,  and N2 are the appropriate normalization factors for the two 
molecular orbitals. 

40 
Structure and Bonding 
To determine the value of N ,  in equation 3.10 the expression for $, 
must be placed into equation 3.9, giving: 
and expanding the square-term in the integral gives: 
(3.12) 
(3.13) 
which may be written as three separate integrals: 
The assumption that the atomic orbital wave functions are separately 
normalized leads to the conclusion that the first and third integrals in 
equation 3.14 are both equal to 1. The second integral is known as the 
, symbolized by S. This allows equation 3.14 to be sim- 
plified to: 
NI2(1 + 2 s  + 1) = 1 
(3.15) 
which gives a value for N, of: 
N ,  = 142 + 2s)‘” 
(3.16) 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
41 
To reinforce the meanings of diagrams such as those shown in Figure 
3.1, it is helpful to plot the atomic and molecular wave functions along 
an axis which coincides with the molecular axis of H,. For this exercise 
the wave function for the 1s orbital of the hydrogen atom may be written 
as: 
w = Ne-"ao 
(3.22) 
where N is the normalizing factor for the atomic orbital. This wave func- 
tion may be plotted for the two hydrogen atoms, A and B, with their 
respective origins separated by the known bond length of the dihydro- 
gen molecule, 74 pm. So that the plots will represent a 'slice' through 
the wave functions along the molecular axis and to take into account the 
negative values of the distance from the nucleus at the origin, equation 
3.22 may be modified to read: 
which now contains the absolute value of the z coordinate (i.e. lzl, the 
value independent of sign), as a representation of the distance from the 
nucleus at the origin, that of atom A. Placing the second nucleus B at a 
distance R, equal to the bond length, further along the z axis in a posi- 
tive direction is accomplished by modifying equation 3.23 to read: 

42 
Structure and Bonding 
(3.24) 
Plots of both equations 3.23 and 3.24 are shown in Figure 3.2, the value 
of N being taken to be 1 rather than the term 7c1’2a;3/2. The normaliza- 
tion factor can be ignored, for the purposes of Figure 3.2, since it is a 
scalar multiplier for all the orbital wave functions under consideration. 
Figure 3.2 also shows equation 3.24 plotted with negative values of the 
wave function (i.e -vB), as is consistent with those it has in the forma- 
tion of the anti-bonding wave function. 
Figure 3.2 Plots of equations 
3.23 and 3.24; equation 3.24 is 
also plotted with negative values 
The equations for the bonding and anti-bonding wave functions used 
in Figure 3.3 are: 
(3.25) 
(3.26) 
The plots of equations 3.25 and 3.26 are shown in Figure 3.3, again con- 
sidering the normalization factors to be 1.0. In the two plots shown in 
Figure 3.3 there is an enhancement of the t) values in the internuclear 
region of the bonding combination, but an enfeeblement in that region 
for the anti-bonding combination. 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
43 
Figure 3.3 Plots of equations 
3.25 and 3.26 for the bonding 
and anti-bonding wave functions 
of the dihydrogen molecule 
Figure 3.4 Plots of equations 
3.27 and 3.28 for the bonding 
and anti-bonding wave functions 
of the dihydrogen molecule 

44 
Structure and Bonding 
The equations for the bonding and anti-bonding molecular orbital wave 
functions for the linear combinations of the two Is atomic orbitals of 
the two hydrogen atoms may now be written in the forms: 
@ = @  
. = 
1 
bonding 
and 
1 
(2 + 2s); 
r 
(w, + W B )  
(3.29) 
(3.30) 
3.2.2 The Energies of Electrons in Molecular Orbitals 
The next stage in the full description of the molecular orbitals is to cal- 
culate their energies, and to show that electrons in bonding molecular 
orbitals have a lower energy than when they occupy one or other of the 
constituent atomic orbitals and that electrons in anti-bonding orbitals 
are at a higher energy. This is done by considering the Schrodinger equa- 
tion for molecular wave functions: 
H@ = EQ 
(3.31) 
If both sides are pre-multiplied by @ (this is essential for equations con- 
taining operators such as H) this gives: 
$H$ = $E@ = EQ2 
(3.32) 
there being no difference between E@2 and @EQ since E is not an operator. 
Equation 3.32 may be integrated over all space to give: 
(3.33) 
since the integral on the right-hand side is equal to unity for normalized 
orbitals. Equation 3.33 may be used to calculate the energy of an elec- 
tron in the molecular orbital @,, by substituting its value from equation 
3.10: 
m 
E($)= N : f ( u / A  -tvB)H(vA +V/B)dT 
0 
m 
m 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
45 
= N: (a + a + 2p) = 2N; (a + p) 
(3.34) 
The first two integrals are entirely concerned with atomic orbitals, wA 
and \vB, respectively, and have identical values (since they refer to iden- 
tical orbitals) which are put equal to a, which is a quantity known as 
the 
. In essence it is the energy of an electron in the 1s 
orbital of the hydrogen atom and equal to the ionization energy of that 
atom. The third integral is the sum of two identical integrals (again 
because wA and wB are identical) and is put equal to 2p, where p is called 
the 
. p represents the extra energy gained by an elec- 
tron, over that which it possesses in any case by being in the 1s atomic 
orbital of the hydrogen atom, when it occupies the molecular orbital 
Because the electron is more stable in 
than it is in wA or vB, 
Q1 is 
called a 
. Occupancy of 
by one or two elec- 
trons leads to the stabilization of the system. 
If the value of N ,  from equation 3.16 is substituted into equation 3.34 
the expression for the energy of the bonding orbital becomes: 
(3.35) 

46 
Structure and Bonding 
Equation 3.37 shows that an electron in $, has a higher energy than in 
q1. The electron energy in the anti-bonding orbital is also higher t'han if 
it were to occupy vA (or v,). The orbital $2 is therefore called an anti- 
molecular orbital. Electrons in anti-bonding orbitals are less 
stable than in the atomic orbitals from which the molecular orbital was 
constructed. Such anti-bonding electrons contribute towards a weaken- 
ing of the bonding of the molecule, or sometimes cause the complete dis- 
sociation of the molecule. 
Using orbital envelope diagrams, the formation of bonding and anti- 
bonding orbitals from two 1s atomic orbitals is shown in Figure 3.5. In 
the bonding orbital the electron probability is concentrated in the inter- 
nuclear region and is understandably an electrostatically attractive 
arrangement of the atomic particles. In the anti-bonding orbital the main 
electron probability is concentrated in regions other than the internu- 
clear one and is understandably an electrostatically repulsive arrange- 
ment. The two nuclei are face-to-face with no negative electrons between 
them to provide electrostatic stability and cohesion. 
Figure 3.6 shows the relative energies of the atomic orbitals, vA and 
v,, 
and the molecular orbitals, 
and $2, which are involved in the 
production of H,+ and H,. Both a and p are negative quantities on an 
energy scale with the ionization limit as the reference zero. The electronic 
configuration of the H2+ molecule-ion may be written as Qll, 
or in sym- 
metry symbols as (og+)'. 
That of the dihydrogen molecule is Q12, or ( G ~ ' ) ~ ,  
provided that the stabilization of $, with respect to the atomic state is 
sufficiently large to force the electrons to pair up in the bonding orbital. 
The configuration, 
lQ2I, produced by the absorption of a suitable quan- 
tum of energy, would lead to dissociation into separate hydrogen atoms. 
The occupation of the bonding orbital by a pair of electrons is the sim- 
plest example of a 
Figure 3.5 Orbital envelope 
diagrams showing the formation 
of the bonding and anti-bonding 
atomic orbitals overlap 
orbitals when two 
Figure 3.6 The molecular 
orbital diagram for the combina- 
tion of two identical Is atomic 
orbitals 
The single covalent bond, consisting of two electrons used in the bond- 
, the nomenclature being of more general use when 
The molecular orbitals $I and Q2 may be used to describe the electronic 
ing between two atoms, is sometimes referred to as a 
considering larger systems. 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
47 
configurations of the helium molecule-ion, He2+, and the dihelium 
molecule, He,. The former contains three electrons, so that two electrons 
pair up in the bonding orbital, leaving one unpaired electron to occupy 
the anti-bonding orbital. The electronic configuration of He2+ is ql2Q2I. 
The single anti-bonding electron offsets some of the bonding effect of 
the pair of electrons in the bonding orbital to give a bond with a strength 
about equal to that of the bond in H,+. The extent of bonding in any 
system can be formalized in terms of the 
. The bond order is 
given by the number of bonding electron pairs in excess of any anti- 
bonding electron pairs, or in terms of numbers of electrons as: 
No. of bonding electrons - No. of anti - bonding electrons 
2 
(3.38) 
The electronic configuration of dihelium would be 
which would 
result in zero bonding. Table 3.1 summarizes the electronic configura- 
tions, bond energies and bond lengths of the species H,+, H,, He2+ and 
He,. 
Bond order = 
i 
Table 3.1 The electronic configurations and bond data for diatomic species 
Molecule 
Electronic 
Bond 
Bond 
Equilibrium bond 
configuration 
order 
dissociation 
lengthlpm 
energylkJ mol-1 
H2’ 
$1’ 
!4 
264 
106 
He2+ 
@,202’ 
!4 
297 
108 
He* 
$,2@; 
0 
Molecule not formed 
H2 
@12 
1 
436 
74 
The variations in the bond dissociation energies of H2+, H, and He2+ 
and their equilibrium bond lengths are consistent with the expectations 
from molecular orbital theory. As the bond order increases it would be 
expected that the bonds formed would be stronger and shorter. 
3.3 
Valence Bond Theory 
Valence bond theory, largely developed by Pauling, is not used to a large 
extent in this book because the alternative molecular orbital theory, 
largely developed by Mulliken, gives more satisfying explanations of the 
bonding of molecules and in addition rationalizes their electronically 
excited states in a way that valence bond theory cannot easily do. 
Nevertheless, valence bond theory is still used in a general way to describe 
the bonding in many molecules, and some indication here is necessary 

48 
Structure and Bonding 
of why it is used and its relevance to the description of the bonding in 
any system. Both methods aim to describe the ways in which electrons 
are distributed in molecules. 
The molecular orbital theory of the dihydrogen molecule is dealt with 
in detail above, and describes how the two electrons occupy a bonding 
molecular orbital so that they are equally shared between the two nuclei. 
This state of affairs can be written symbolically in the form: 
meaning that both electrons, 1 and 2, occupy the bonding molecular 
orbital constructed from the 1s atomic orbitals of the two hydrogen 
atoms, a and b. Multiplying out the two terms of the equation together 
produces the four-term equation: 
The first two terms indicate that the two electrons occupy the 1s orbital 
of one or the other hydrogen atoms, i.e. they are the ionic structures, 
H-H' and H+H-. The third and fourth terms indicate that each hydro- 
gen atom is associated with one of the electrons, and are consistent with 
the definition of covalency. All four terms together indicate the equal 
sharing of the two electrons between the two nuclei, but very much 
overemphasize the ionic aspect of the bonding. In practice this over- 
emphasis is dealt with by assigning coefficients to the four terms and 
evaluating them by the process of minimizing the total energy of the 
system. When minimum energy is achieved, the values of the coefficients 
are such that the ionic terms contribute only about 1% to the overall 
bonding. 
Valence bond theory begins by assigning wave functions to the vari- 
ous permutations of electrons and nuclei to give what are known as the 
of the molecule, i.e. for the hydrogen molecule these 
would be Ha( 1)Hb(2), Ha(2)Hb( I), Ha( 1)(2) and Hb( 1)(2), terms similar to 
those derived from molecular orbital theory. The first two terms repre- 
sent canonical forms in which each hydrogen atom has an associated 
electron, 1 or 2. The latter two terms are ionic in which both electrons 
are associated with either atom A or atom B. These canonical forms 
engage in 
(Pauling's terminology), i. e. they con- 
tribute to the total description of the molecular bonding such that the 
stabilizes the system with the formation of a 
. In practice, the ionic terms are given a lesser participation to 
arrive at a reasonable description of the bonding. 
The conclusion from this short discussion is that both valence bond 
and molecular orbital theories can describe the bonding of a system and 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
49 
in the limit they both arrive at the same answer. In practice, molecular 
orbital theory is more often used and is much more amenable to giving 
solutions to more complex systems than does valence bond theory. 
3.4 
Energetics of the Bonding in H,+ and H, 
It is helpful in the understanding of covalent bond formation to consider 
the energies due to the operation of attractive and repulsive forces in H,+ 
and H,, and to estimate the magnitude of the interelectronic repulsion 
energy in the dihydrogen molecule. Figure 3.7 shows plots of potential 
energy against internuclear distance for H,' and H,. The curves shown 
are 
which, for diatomic species, have the form: 
v =  De{l - exp[-(p/2De) l120(r - 
(3.41) 
where V represents potential energy, De 
the electronic dissociation ener- 
gy, p is the reduced mass of the system, o is the fundamental vibration 
frequency of the molecule, r is the internuclear distance, and req is the 
equilibrium internuclear distance otherwise known as the bond length. 
The quantity De 
is related to the dissociation energy, D, 
of the molecule 
by the relation: 
D = De -Xhm 
(3.42) 
the %ho term representing the 
molecule. 
of the 
Figure 3.7 Morse curves for 
H,+ (black line) and H, (red line) 

50 
Structure and Bonding 
Under standard conditions, both molecules exist in their lowest vibra- 
tional energy levels. These are known as their 
, in which the value of the vibrational quantum number is zero. 
The fact that molecules in their zero-point vibrational states possess 
vibrational energy is a consequence of the Uncertainty Principle; this 
would be violated if the internuclear distance was unchanging. The dis- 
sociation limits for both species are identical: the complete separation of 
the two atoms, which is taken as an arbitrary zero of energy. The dif- 
ference between the zero of energy and the zero-point vibrational energy 
in both cases represents the bond dissociation energies, respectively, of 
H,+ and H,. 
To obtain an accurate assessment of the interelectronic repulsion 
energy of the H, molecule it is essential to carry out calculations in which 
the hydrogen nuclei are a constant distance apart. The following calcu- 
lations are for an internuclear distance of 74 prn for both molecules, 
which is the equilibrium internuclear distance in the dihydrogen 
molecule. 
3.4.1 The H,+ Molecule-ion 
There are only two forces operating in H2+: the 
between 
the nuclei and the single electron, and the 
between the 
two nuclei. The interproton repulsion energy may be calculated from 
Coulomb’s law: 
(3.43) 
where e is the charge on the proton, Y is the interproton distance, E, is 
the permittivity of a vacuum, and NA the Avogadro constant. For two 
protons separated by 74 pm the force of repulsion between them causes 
an increase in energy of 1878 kJ mol-’ compared to the infinite separa- 
tion of H+ and H (the arbitrary zero of energy). From the Morse curve 
for H,+ in Figure 3.7, it may be estimated that if H+ and H are brought 
from infinite separation to an interproton distance of 74 pm there is a 
stabilization of 180 kJ mol-’. This represents the resultant energy of the 
system with both forces operating. It means that the attractive force oper- 
ating between the electron and the two protons produces a stabilization 
which is in excess of 1878 kJ mol-l by 180 kJ mol-I, so that the quantity 
known as 
is calculated to be 1878 + 180 = 
2058 kJ mol-I. The interrelationship of these energies is shown in the dia- 
gram of Figure 3.8. Notice that the actual dissociation energy is a rela- 
tively small quantity compared to the energies representing the effects of 
the attractive and repulsive forces operating in the H,+ system. 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
51 
Figure 3.8 IEnergetics of forma- 
tion of the H$ molecule-ion 
3.4.2 The Dihydrogen Molecule, H, 
In the dihydrogen molecule there are three forces operating: (1) inter- 
proton repulsion, (2) proton-electron attraction and (3) interelectronic 
repulsion. The force of interproton repulsion produces a destabilization 
of the dihydrogen system equal to that of the H,+ molecule-ion, since 
the interproton distance is again taken to be 74 pm. The resultant sta- 
bilization of all three forces is equal to the bond dissociation energy of 
H,, which is 436 kJ mol-l. For a comparison with H,+ the electronic 
binding energy may be calculated as: 1878 + 436 = 2314 kJ mol-I. It is 
12% greater than that in H,+, indicating that two bonding electrons are 
only marginally better than one at binding the two nuclei together. The 
reason for this is that, with two electrons present, there is a substantial 
destabilization of the system as a result of the interelectronic repulsion. 
The magnitude of this may be calculated, as shown in Figure 3.9, by 
assuming that the electronic binding energy per electron is as calculated 
for the H,' system (2058 kJ mol-I). For two electrons the stabilization 
from the electronic binding energy is 2 x 2058 = 41 16 kJ mol-', and that 
amount is offset by the interelectronic repulsion energy. If the two- 
electron binding energy is subtracted from the sum of the two one- 
electron binding energies, a value of 4 1 16 - 23 14 = 1802 kJ mol-' is given 
for the interelectronic repulsion energy in H,. Notice that all three energy 
quantities in H, are large by comparison with the resultant bond disso- 
ciation energy. 

52 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 3.9 Energetics of forma- 
tion of the H, molecule 
It is of interest to calculate the magnitude of the interelectronic repul- 
sion energy in the hydride ion, H-, which possesses an ionic radius of 
208 pm. The electron attachment energy of the proton is -1312 kJ mol-I 
(numerically equal to the ionization energy of the hydrogen atom, but 
of opposite sign) and represents the energy released when an electron 
enters the 1s orbital of the hydrogen atom. The electron attachment ener- 
gy of the hydrogen atom is considerably smaller than that of the proton 
and is -7 1 kJ mol-I. Since the electron enters the same 1 s orbital, the dif- 
ference between the two electron attachment energies gives an estimate 
of the interelectronic repulsion energy of -71 + 1312 = 1241 kJ mol-I. 
This is appreciably smaller than the value calculated for the two elec- 
trons occupying the bonding orbital of the dihydrogen molecule. The 
increased size of the hydride ion is one reason for this, the other being 
that in H, there are two attracting protons which draw the electrons 
closer to each other in spite of their like charges. 
3.5 
Some Experimental Observations; 
Photoelectron Spectroscopy 
In the proper development of a scientific theory it is to be expected that 
theory and experimental observations should be consistent with one 
another, preferably the theory being refined by further observations. It 
is essential to obtain experimental observations by which ideas such as 
molecular orbital theory may be tested and possibly refined. This sec- 
tion describes a method of studying molecules using electromagnetic 
radiation. 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
53 
3.5.1 Frequency, Wavelength and Energy of 
Electromagnetic Radiation 
All electromagnetic radiation is a form of energy which is particulate in 
nature. The terms wavelength and frequency do not imply that radiation 
is to be regarded as a wave motion in a real physical sense. They refer 
to the form of the mathematical functions which are used to describe the 
behaviour of radiation. The fundamental nature of electromagnetic radi- 
ation is embodied in quantum theory, which explains all the properties 
of radiation in terms of 
: packets of energy. A cavity, 
e.g. an oven, emits a broad spectrum of radiation which is independent 
of the material from which the cavity is constructed, but is entirely 
dependent upon the temperature of the cavity. Planck (1918 Nobel prize 
for physics) was able to explain the frequency distribution of broad-spec- 
trum cavity radiation only by postulating that the radiation consisted of 
quanta with energies given by the equation: 
or 
E = hv 
(3.44) 
where h is Planck's constant (3.6260755 x 
known as the Planck equation. 
equation: 
J s), the equation being 
The relationship between frequency and wavelength is given by the 
v = cth 
(3.45) 
where cand h represent the speed of light (c = 299792458 m s-') and its 
wavelength, respectively, in a vacuum. Quoted frequencies are sometimes 
either numbers which are too small or too large when expressed in hertz, 
and it is common for them to be expressed as 
, which are 
the frequencies divided by the speed of light. This is expressed by the 
equation: 
(3.46) 
Wavenumbers, represented by the symbol P (nu-bar), have the units of 
reciprocal length and are usually quoted in cm-', although the strictly 
S.I. unit is reciprocal metres, m-I. For example, 3650 cm-l = 365000 m-l. 
A wavenumber represents the number of full waves that occur in the unit 
of length. For example, the wavenumber for the stretching vibration of 
a C-H bond in a hydrocarbon is around 3650 cm-' and means that there 
are 3650 wavelengths in one centimetre. 
When dealing practically with equation 3.44 it is usual to work in 
molar quantities so that the energy has units of J mol-I, and to achieve 
this it is necessary to use the equation: 

54 
Structure and Bonding 
E = NAhv 
(3.47) 
where NA is the Avogadro constant (3.0221367 x 
mol-I). 
3.5.2 Photoelectron Spectroscopy 
A direct method of obtaining experimental measurement of the energies 
of electrons in molecules is known as 
The basis of the method is to bombard an atomic or molecular species 
with radiation of sufficient energy to cause its ionization. If the quan- 
tum energy of the radiation is high enough, ionizations may be caused 
from one or other of the permitted levels within the bombarded atom or 
molecule. In addition to causing ionization of the target species, the radi- 
ation (in the case of molecules) may cause changes in the vibrational, 
AEvib, and rotational, AErot, energies of the resulting positive ion. This 
may be written as: 
M(g) + hv -+ M+ + e- (photoelectron) 
(3.49) 
the energy balance being: 
hv = ZM + AEvib + AErot + kinetic energy of the electron (3.50) 
The kinetic energies (KEs) of the photoelectrons are measured by the 
use of a modification of a conventional P-ray spectrometer as used in 
the study of P-particle (electron) emissions from radioactive nuclei. The 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
55 
photoelectron spectrum of a molecule is presented as a plot of the count 
rate (the intensity of the photoelectrons detected) against the electron 
energy. The PES of the dihydrogen molecule is shown in Figure 3.10. 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Electron energy/eV - 
The energy of the quantum used to cause the ionization is 21.22 eV 
or 2047 kJ mol-I, so the ionization energy of the dihydrogen molecule is 
21.22 eV minus the energy of the photoelectron with the energy of 
5.8 eV, corresponding to the peak on the far right-hand side of the spec- 
trum, which gives 15.42 eV as the first ionization energy of H2. The addi- 
tional peaks in the photoelectron spectrum represent ionizations of the 
molecule, with additional energy being used to excite the product H,+ 
molecule-ion vibrationally and rotationally. The rotational ‘fine struc- 
ture’, which arises from variations in the rotational energy of the ion and 
its neutral molecule (AErot), is not observed at the resolution at which 
the spectrum was measured, but contributes to the width of the vibra- 
tional bands which are observed. Vibrational excitations up to the 
eleventh level can be discerned from the spectrum shown. 
The second peak from the right in the dihydrogen PES corresponds 
to the energy required for its ionization plus that required to give H,+ 
one quantum of vibrational excitation. The difference in energy between 
the first two peaks is a measure of the magnitude of one quantum of 
vibrational excitation energy of H,+. The difference amounts to 0.3 eV 
or 29 kJ mol-’. It is useful to compare such a value with the energy of 
one quantum of vibrational excitation of the dihydrogen molecule, which 
is 49.8 kJ mol-I. The frequency (and in consequence the energy) of the 
vibration of two atoms bonded together is related to the bond strength, 
so it may be concluded that the removal of an electron from a dihydro- 
gen molecule causes the remaining bond (in H2+) to be considerably 
weaker than that in the parent molecule. This is a confirmation of the 
Figure 3.10 The photoelectron 
spectrum of the H, molecule 

56 
Structure and Bonding 
bonding nature of the electron removed in the ionization process. 
Diagnosis of the bonding, non-bonding or anti-bonding nature of elec- 
trons in molecules may in some cases be made from a study of the effects 
of their ionization upon the vibrational frequency of the resulting posi- 
tive ion. The removal of a non-bonding electron would have very little 
effect upon the bond strength and the vibrational frequencies of the neu- 
tral molecule, and its unipositive ion would be expected to be similar in 
bond strength and vibrational frequency. The vibrational frequency of 
the ion would be greater than that of the neutral molecule if the elec- 
tron removed originally occupied an anti-bonding orbital. 
3.5.3 Photodissociation of the Dihydrogen Molecule 
Experimental confirmation of the energy of the anti-bonding level in the 
dihydrogen molecule comes from the observation of its absorption spec- 
trum in the far-ultraviolet region. Dihydrogen absorbs radiation of a 
wavelength of 109 nm, which is equivalent to a molar quantum energy 
of 1097 kJ mol-I. 
In terms of an 
the process of absorbing the quan- 
tum is: 
@12 (ground state configuration) hv 
Q1 'Q2'(excited state configuration) 
(3.51) 
which would lead to the dissociation of the molecule into two hydrogen 
atoms. The effect of the bonding electron in 
is out-balanced by the 
anti-bonding electron in Q2 and the molecule undergoes photodissocia- 
tion to give two hydrogen atoms. 

Covalent Bonding I: the Dihydrogen Molecule-ion and the Dihydrogen Molecule 
57 

58 
Structure and Bonding 

Covalent Bonding 11: Diatomic 
Molecules; Bond Lengths and 
Strengths 
This chapter consists of the application of the symmetry concepts of 
Chapter 2 and those of molecular orbital theory to the construction 
of molecular orbitals for a range of diatomic molecules, building upon 
the principles outlined in Chapter 3. These are: (1) the homonuclear 
diatomic molecules, E,, where E is an element of the second period of 
the periodic classification (Li-Ne), and (2) some heteronuclear diatomic 
molecules, in which differences in electronegativity coefficients between 
the combining atoms are important: nitrogen monoxide, carbon monox- 
ide and hydrogen fluoride. Emphasis is placed on the length and strength 
of bonds in relation to the electronic configurations of the molecules. 
4.1 
Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules of the 
Second Short Period Elements, E, 
This section consists of the formal molecular orbital treatment of 
homonuclear diatomic molecules of the second short period. The molec- 
59 

00 
Structure and Bonding 
ular axis of an A, molecule is arranged to be coincident with the z axis 
by convention. It is necessary to look at the 2s and 2p orbitals separately 
and classify them with respect to the D,, point group to which the 
molecules belong. 
4.1.1 Classification of the Orbitals of E, Molecules 
Classification of the 2s Orbitals of E, Molecules 
The classification of the two 2s orbitals of an E, molecule is very simi- 
lar to that of the two 1s orbitals of dihydrogen and is not repeated here. 
The two combinations of the 2s orbitals are: 
the A and B subscripts referring to the two atoms contributing to the 
molecule. To simplify the equations it is assumed that all the wave func- 
tions are normalized, although the normalization factors are omitted. 
The equations are used to indicate the atomic orbitals which contribute 
to the molecular orbitals. 
There is a bonding combination (equation 4.1) which transforms with- 
in the D,, point group as a og+ irreducible representation, the prefix 2 
being assigned because of the bonding combination of the 1s orbitals 
having the same symmetry (and termed log+). Likewise the anti-bond- 
ing combination (equation 4.2) is termed 2ou+ because there is an anti- 
bonding combination of the 1s orbitals at lower energy, lou+. 
Classification of the 2p Orbitals of E, Molecules 
The character of the reducible representation of the 2p orbitals of E, 
molecules may be obtained by writing down, under each symmetry ele- 
ment of the D,, group, the number of such orbitals which are unchanged 
by each symmetry operation. This produces the representation: 
E 
em@ 
0" 
1 
SW@ c, 
6 x 2 ~  
6 
2 + 4cos@ 
2 
0 
0 
0 
This result requires some explanation, particularly concerning the char- 
acter of the 2p orbitals with respect to the C, operation. The two 2pz 
orbitals, lying along the C, axis with their positive lobes overlapping, 
are unaffected by the associated operation and account for the 2 in the 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
61 
character column. The term 4cos@ arises because of the two 2p, and two 
2py orbitals which are perpendicular to the C, axis. Although a rotation 
through @ degrees around that axis does not move any of the orbitals to 
another centre, it does alter their disposition with regard to the xz and 
yz planes. 
If the angle @ was chosen to be 180", for instance, it would have the 
effect of inverting the 2p, and 2py orbitals, and it would be necessary to 
place -1 in the above representation for each orbital as their characters 
(note that cosl80" = -1). To take into account all possible values of @ it 
is essential to express the character of each orbital as the cosine of the 
angle of rotation, +. Effectively this implies that the character of each 
orbital is represented by the resolution of the orbital on to the plane it 
occupied before the symmetry operation was carried out. This ensures 
that for a rotation through 180" the character of a 2p, or 2py orbital 
will be -1; in effect such an orbital, whilst not moving from its original 
position, changes the signs of its w values. 
The character with respect to reflexion in one of the infinite number 
of vertical planes requires some explanation. It is best to choose a 
particular vertical plane such as that represented by the xz plane. 
Reflexion in any of the vertical planes has no effect upon the two 2p, 
orbitals, which gives 2 as their character. Reflexion of the two 2p, orbitals 
in the xz plane does not change them in any way: their character is 2. 
The reflexion of the two 2py orbitals in the xz plane causes their w Val- 
ues to change sign, and because they are otherwise unaffected, their char- 
acter is -2. The resultant character of the six 2p orbitals, with respect to 
the operation, ov, is given by 2 + 2 - 2 = 2. 
The reducible representation of the six 2p orbitals may be seen, by 
inspection of the D_, 
character table and carrying out the following exer- 
cise, to be equivalent to the sum of the irreducible representations: 

62 
Structure and Bonding 
It is important to realize which orbital combinations are represented by 
the above irreducible representations. This is best achieved by looking 
at the diagrams in Figure 4.1 for the overlaps represented by the equa- 
tions: 
The molecular orbital @(30gf) is bonding and is the third highest energy 
og’ orbital; hence the prefix 3. The @(30u+) orbital is the anti-bonding 
combination of the two 2p, orbitals, and the third highest energy oU+ 
orbital. The 7cu and xg orbi;als are both doubly degenerate, the 
com- 
bination being bonding, the ng combination being anti-bonding. They 
both are prefixed by the figure ‘1’ since they are the lowest energy orbitals 
of their type. 
In the discussion of the bonding of the E, molecules in the next sec- 
tion, the orbitals are referred to by their symmetry symbols with the 
appropriate numerical prefixes. 
4.1.2 The Molecular Orbital Diagram for E, Molecules 
Figure 4.2 is a diagram of the relative energies of the molecular orbitals 
of the E, molecules, together with those of the atomic orbitals from 
which they were constructed. The ‘sideways’ overlap involved in the pro- 
duction of 7c orbitals is not as effective as the ‘end-on’ overlap which 
characterizes the production of CJ orbitals. For a given interatomic dis- 
Figure 4g1 The (3 and 
Orbital 
overlaps between 2p atomic 
orbitals in the formation of Some 
diatomic molecules 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
63 
tance the overlap integral for o-type overlap is generally higher than that 
for n-type overlap between two orbitals. The consequence of this is that 
the bonding stabilization and the anti-bonding destabilization associat- 
ed with n orbitals are significantly less than those associated with CJ 
orbitals, This accounts for the differences in energy, shown in Figure 
4,2(a), between the o and n orbitals which originate from the 2p atom- 
ic orbitals of the E atoms. The order of energies of the orbitals of E, 
molecules according to Figure 4.2(a) is dependent upon the assumption 
that the energy difference between the 2p and 2s atomic orbitals is suf- 
ficient to prevent significant interaction between the molecular orbitals. 
In Figure 4.2(b), interactions are allowed between molecular orbitals of 
the same symmetry, which produces a different auflau filling order. This 
effect is more important when the 2p-2s energy gap is relatively small. 
Figure 4.2 The molecular 
orbital diagrams for homonuclear 
diatomic moleciiles of the second 
short period, Li;. to Ne,. Diagram 
(a) is appropriat'3 for 0,, F, and 
Ne,, diagram (b) for the mole- 
cules Li, to N, 

64 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 4.3 Plots of the overlap 
integrals against the parameter p 
for the o and x overlaps between 
pairs of 2p atomic orbitals 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
65 

66 
Structure and Bonding 
If two molecular orbitals have identical symmetry, such as the 2og+ and 
3og+ orbitals, they may interact by the formation of linear combinations. 
The resulting combinations still have the same symmetry (and retain the 
nomenclature), but the lower orbital is stabilized at the expense of the 
upper one. Such interaction is also possible for the 2oU+ and 3oU+ 
orbitals. 
The extent of such interaction is determined by the energy gap between 
the two contributors. If the energy gap between the 2p and 2s atomic 
orbitals is small enough, the interaction between the 2og+ and 3og+ molec- 
ular orbitals may be so extensive as to cause the upper orbital 3$' 
to 
have an energy which is greater than that of the lnu set. Such an effect 
is shown in Figure 4.2(b). 
The magnitude of the 2p-2s energy gap varies along the elements of 
the second period (Li-Ne), as is shown in Figure 4.4. The energy gaps 
in the elements lithium to nitrogen are sufficiently small to make signif- 
icant 2og+ and 3og+ interaction possible, such that Figure 4.2(b) is rele- 
vant in determining the electronic configurations of the molecules Li,, 
Be,, B,, C, and N,. Figure 4.2(a) is used to determine the electronic con- 
figurations of the molecules 0,, F, and Ne,, since the 2p-2s energy gaps 
in 0, F and Ne are sufficiently large to prevent significant molecular 
orbital interaction. The aufbau principle is followed in building up the 
electronic configurations of the diatomic molecules, with the relevant 
order of filling given by the appropriate part of Figure 4.2. 
Figure 4.4 Variation of the 
2p-2s energy gap along the sec- 
ond short period 
The interaction of molecular orbitals of the same symmetry has impor- 
tant consequences for all systems where it occurs, and more examples 
will be referred to in later chapters. It is possible to carry out the mix- 
ing of the original atomic orbitals (known as 
) before the 
molecular orbitals are formed. Some examples of this approach are 
included in later chapters. Both approaches give the same eventual result 
for the contributions of atomic orbitals to the molecular ones. 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
67 
4.2 
Electronic Configurations of Homonuclear 
Diatomic Molecules 
The electronic configurations of the homonuclear diatomic molecules of 
the elements of the second period, and some of their ions, are given in 
Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1 The electronic configurations of some homonuclear diatomic molecules 
and ions 
Mo/ecu/e/ion 
2og+ 
2o,+ 
3og+ 
IK, 
17cg 
3ou+ 
Li2 
2 
Be2 
2 
2 
B2 
2 
2 
2 
c2 
2 
2 
4 
N2 
2 
2 
2 
4 
N2+ 
2 
2 
1 
4 
N2- 
2 
2 
2 
4 
1 
0 2  
2 
2 
2 
4 
2 
0 2 +  
2 
2 
2 
4 
1 
02- 
2 
2 
2 
4 
3 
0;- 
2 
2 
2 
4 
4 
F2 
2 
2 
2 
4 
4 
Ne2 
2 
2 
2 
4 
4 
2 
The four electrons occupying the log+ and ~ c T ~ +  
orbitals are not indi- 
cated. The interactions of the 1s orbitals of the atoms under discussion 
are minimal and, although they may be regarded as occupying the molec- 
ular orbitals previously indicated, they are virtually non-bonding. In any 
case, the slight bonding character of the two electrons occupying log+ is 
cancelled by the slight anti-bonding nature of the two electrons in lou+. 
In some texts the four electrons are indicated symbolically by KK (a ref- 
erence to the 'K shells' of the two atoms), now recognized as their 1s 
atomic orbitals. 
4.2. I Dilithium, Li, 
This molecule exists in the gas phase and has a bond dissociation energy 
of 107 kJ mol-' and a bond length of 267 pm. The weak, and very long, 
bond is understandable in terms of the two electrons in 2og+ being the 
only ones having bonding character. The bond order is one, The four 1s 
electrons have no resultant bonding effect and yet contribute consider- 
ably to the interelectronic repulsion energy. The electron attachment 

68 
Structure and Bonding 
energy of the lithium atom is -59.8 kJ mol-’, which indicates that the 
nuclear charge of +3e is not very effective in attracting more electrons. 
The atom also has a very low first ionization energy (513 kJ mol-I), which 
is another indication of the low effectiveness of the nuclear charge. 
Another approach is to use the concept of the nuclear charge being 
shielded by the various occupied atomic orbitals so as to reduce its effec- 
tiveness in attracting extra electrons, For bonding to be achieved, the 
attraction between the two shielded nuclei and the two bonding electrons 
must outweigh the two repulsive interactions: internuclear and interelec- 
tronic. The efficient shielding of the lithium nuclei by their ls2 ‘core’ con- 
figurations contributes to the weakness of the bond in the Li, molecule. 
The standard state, i. e. the more thermodynamically stable form, of lithi- 
um is the metallic state, which does not contain discrete molecules and 
has a metallic lattice. The bonding in metals is discussed in Chapter 7. 
4.2.2 Diberyllium, Be, 
The electronic configuration of the diberyllium molecule, Be,, would be 
(20,’)2(2a,’)2, with two bonding electrons being counterbalanced by two 
anti-bonding electrons, leading to a bond order of zero. The molecule 
does not exist with such a configuration. Elementary beryllium exists in 
the solid state with a metallic lattice. 
4.2.3 Diboron, B, 
The diboron molecule, B,, has a transient existence in the vapour of the 
element, and has a bond dissociation energy of 291 kJ mol *, the bond 
length being 159 pm. The bond is stronger and shorter than that in Li,. 
The first ionization energy of the boron atom (800 kJ mol-l) indicates 
that the nuclear charge is considerably more effective than that of the 
lithium atom and a somewhat stronger (and shorter) bond is to be expect- 
ed for B, as compared to that in Li,. The two pairs of (r electrons have 
a zero resultant bonding effect, leaving the stability of the bond to the 
two electrons which occupy the In, orbitals. It is of interest that, since 
the Inu level is doubly degenerate (i.e. Hund’s rules apply to their fill- 
ing), the two orbitals are singly occupied and the two nu electrons have 
parallel spins. The bonding in B, consists of two ‘half-IT’ bonds, if the 
term ‘bond’ is understood to indicate a pair of bonding electrons. The 
bond order is 1.0. 
Evidence which is consistent with the above description of the bond- 
ing in B, is the observation that the molecule is 
, the prop- 
erty associated with an unpaired electron (or with more than one 
unpaired electrons with parallel spins). In the B, case the evidence for 
the presence of unpaired electrons comes from the observation of its 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
69 
(ESR) spectrum. The detailed theory of electron spin 
resonance spectra is not dealt with in this book. The essentials of the 
method depend upon there being a difference in the energy of an unpaired 
electron when subjected to a magnetic field. The electron spin is aligned 
either in the same direction as the applied field or against it. The differ- 
ence in energy between the two quantized alignments corresponds to the 
energies of radiofrequency photons. No ESR signal is obtained from 
paired-up electrons, since neither of the electrons may change its spin 
without violating the Pauli exclusion principle. 
Elementary boron exists in the solid state in several allotropic forms. 
Those which have been properly characterized by X-ray diffraction con- 
tain icosahedral B,, units, which are also the basis of many boron clus- 
ter compounds. 
4.2.4 Dicarbon, C, 
This molecule exists transiently in hydrocarbonldioxygen flames and has 
a bond dissociation energy of 590 kJ mol-' and a bond length of 
124 pm. The bond order is 2, since both the orbitals of the bonding 1nu 
set are filled. The atoms are held together by two n; bonds with no over- 
all o-bonding: a very unusual example. The carbon nucleus is more effec- 
tive than that of the boron atom and, combined with there being twice 
as many resultant bonding electrons, serves to produce a much more 
stable molecule (with respect to the constituent atoms) than in the case 
of B,. The average bond energy for C-C o bonds is generally accepted 
to be 348 kJ mol-l, and that for C=C double (o + n;) bonds is 612 kJ 
mol-'. These energies are consistent with the view expressed above that 
n; bonding is weaker than 0. The extra n;-bond energy of the C=C dou- 
ble bond is given by 612 - 348 = 264 kJ mol-', and is about 25% small- 
er than that representing the strength of the C-C single o bond. 
Elementary carbon exists as the allotropes diamond, graphite and the 
recently characterized series of cluster molecules known as fullerenes, e. g. 
C60. 
4.2.5 Dinitrogen, N,, and the Ions N,+ and N; 
In the dinitrogen molecule, N,, two electrons occupy the 3ogC orbital, 
and the bond order is 3.0: one 0 pair plus the two n; pairs. The electronic 
configuration is consistent with the very high bond dissociation energy 
of 942 kJ mol-l and the short bond length of 109.7 pm. In the sequence 
of diatomic molecules, dinitrogen is the first that represents the standard 
state of the element. The molecule is chemically inert to oxidation and 
reduction, although it does easily form some complexes when it acts as 
a ligand as, for example, in [Ru(NH,),N,I2+. The great strength of the 

70 
Structure and Bonding 
bond in dinitrogen is associated with the presence of an excess of six 
bonding electrons together with the greater effectiveness of the nuclear 
charge compared to that of carbon. 
The ionization of the molecule to give the N,+ ion causes the bond 
order to be reduced to 2.5, with consequent weakening (bond dissocia- 
tion energy = 841 kJ mol-I) and lengthening (bond length = 11 1.6 pm) 
of the bond as compared to that in N,. The electron removed in the ion- 
ization comes from the 30~' orbital, which, because of the interaction 
with the 2og' orbital, is only moderately bonding. The effects upon the 
bond strength and length are, therefore, relatively small. 
The N,- ion is produced by adding an electron to the anti-bonding 
lng level and, as does the N,+ ion, it has a bond order of 2.5. Since the 
lng level is anti-bonding, with no off-setting effects, the addition of an 
electron causes the bond in N,- to be significantly weaker (bond disso- 
ciation energy = 765 kJ mol-I) and longer (bond length = 119 pm) than 
the one in N,. 
4.2.6 Dioxygen, O,, and the Ions 02+, 
0; and O,,- 
The standard state of oxygen is the dioxygen molecule, O,, which has 
the dinitrogen configuration (except that the 17cu level is higher in energy 
than the 3og+ orbital) with an extra two electrons which occupy the lng 
level. Since Ing is doubly degenerate, the orbitals are singly occupied by 
electrons with parallel spins (in accordance with Hund's rules). The 
molecule is paramagnetic as would be expected, and since the additional 
electrons occupy anti-bonding orbitals, the bond order decreases to 2.0 
compared with the N, molecule. In consequence, the bond dissociation 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
71 
energy (494 kJ mol--l) is considerably lower, and the bond length 
(121 pm) is considerably larger, than in the N2 case. 
The ionization of an electron from the highest energy level (17~~) 
of 
the 0, molecule produces the positive ion, O,+, which has a bond order 
of 2.5 (as does Ni-). The bond dissociation energy of O,+ is 644 kJ mol-I 
and its bond length is 112 pm. The nuclear charge of the oxygen is not 
as effective as that of nitrogen, and the anti-bonding electron in 02+ 
has 
a very significant weakening effect. 
In the superoxide ion, O,, 
there are three electrons occupying the 1 7 ~ ~  
orbitals. The bond order is 1.5, which is consistent with its observed bond 
dissociation energy of 360 kJ mol-' and bond length of 132 pm. 
The peroxide ion, 022-, 
has a filled set of lng orbitals and the bond is 
weaker (bond dissociation energy = 149 kJ mol-I) and longer (bond 
length = 149 pm) than that of 0;. The order of the bond in the 0;- ion 
is 1.0. 

7 2  
Structure and Bonding 
4.2.7 Difluorine, F, 
The standard state of fluorine is the difluorine molecule, F,, which has 
an electronic configuration identical with that of the peroxide ion. The 
two species are isoelectronic. The bond order is 1, and the bond disso- 
ciation energy of 155 kJ mol-' and bond length of 144 pm are very sim- 
ilar to the values for 0,2-. 
The species with any electrons occupying the 1zg (anti-bonding) level 
(O,+, 0,, OF, 0,2- and F2) possess considerable chemical reactivity. The 
bonds are relatively weak and, therefore, easily cleaved, and the species 
with unpaired electrons can easily form linkages to other atoms. 
4.2.8 Dineon, Ne, 
The standard state of neon is the gaseous atom. The dineon molecule, 
Ne2, with all its molecular orbitals filled, has an equal number of bond- 
ing and anti-bonding orbitals doubly occupied, resulting in a bond order 
of zero, and would not be expected to exist. 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
73 
4.2.9 Bond Order, Bond Length and Bond Strength 
Relationships 
The bond orders, bond lengths and bond dissociation energies for the 
diatomic species discussed in the previous section are summarized in 
Table 4.2. 
Table 4.2 Bond orders, bond lengths and bond dissociation energies for some 
diatomic species 
Diatomic 
Bond 
Bond 
Bond 
species 
order 
dissociation 
lengthlpm 
energylkJ mol-1 
1 
0 
1 
2 
3 
2.5 
2.5 
2 
2.5 
1.5 
1 
1 
0 
267 
291 
590 
942 
84 1 
765 
494 
644 
360 
149 
159 
- 
- 
107 
159 
124 
109.7 
111.6 
119 
121 
112 
132 
149 
144 
- 
- 
There is only a very general relationship between bond order and bond 
length and between bond order and bond strength as measured by the 
dissociation energy of a molecule. A plot of the bond lengths and bond 
strengths of the dioxygen species (given in Table 4.2) against bond order 
is shown in Figure 4.5. This shows that the relationship is almost linear, 
but it would seem that the 0-0 single bond is slightly longer than would 
be expected from the other values. The single bond in F, is also partic- 
ularly long, and this is usually rationalized in terms of a large contribu- 
tion from the repulsions between the three non-bonding pairs of electrons 
on each fluorine atom. This is similar to the explanation of the magni- 

74 
Structure and Bonding 
tude of the electron attachment energy of the fluorine atom. It may be 
argued that the reason for the electron attachment energy of fluorine 
being less negative than that for chlorine is because of the more tightly 
bound 2p electrons, leading to more interelectronic repulsion than in the 
chlorine atom, the repulsions not being restricted to those between elec- 
tron pairs. This effect also applies to the F-F and 0-0 single bond 
lengths. 
Figure 4.5 A plot of bond 
length against bond order for 
some dioxygen species 
4.3 
Some Heteronuclear Diatomic Molecules 
The 
diatomic molecules nitrogen monoxide, NO, carbon 
monoxide, CO, and hydrogen fluoride, HF, are dealt with in this sec- 
tion. They belong to the point group Cwy and possess a Cm axis of sym- 
metry and an infinite number of vertical planes, all containing that axis. 
The orbitals of the molecules NO and CO are similar to those of the E, 
molecules of the previous section, but have different labels because of 
their different point group. In addition to the different symmetry there 
are effects due to the participating atoms having different electronega- 
tivity coefficients, the energies of the combining atomic levels not being 
identical in such cases. 
4.3.1 Nitrogen Monoxide (Nitric Oxide), NO 
The molecular orbital diagram for the nitrogen monoxide molecule is 
shown in Figure 4.6. The orbitals are produced from the same pairs of 
atomic orbitals as in the cases of the homonuclear diatomic molecules 
of Section 4.2. 
To take into account the energy inequalities between the participat- 
ing atomic orbitals the wave functions have extra c terms, as in the 
example: 
(4.10) 
This is appropriate for the combination of the 2p7 orbitals of two dif- 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
75 
Figure 4.6 Molecular orbital 
diagram for nitrogen monoxide, 
NO 
ferent atoms with different energies. The value of (cJ2 represents the con- 
tribution of the y(2p,) wave function of atom A to the molecular orbital 
@(3o'); likewise, the value of (c,)~ represents the contribution of the 
yl(2pz) wave function of atom B. 
The first ionization energies of nitrogen (1400 kJ mol-') and oxygen 
(1314 kJ mol-I) are quite similar and the 2p2s energy gap is smaller in 
N than in 0, so the atomic orbitals match up reasonably well. The sym- 
metry terminology is different, and because of the absence of an inver- 
sion centre there are no g or u subscripts and this alters the numbering 
of the o and .n orbitals. The two pairs of 1s electrons (or KK) form the 
lo+ and 2o+ orbitals; the other o+ orbitals follow in order of increasing 
energy. The two sets of .n orbitals become 1.n (bonding) and 2.n (anti- 
bonding), respectively. The electronic configuration of the nitrogen 
monoxide molecule is thus: KK(30+)~(4o+)~( 
l.n)4(50+)2(2.n)1. 
The bond 
order is 2.5, consistent with the bond dissociation energy (626 kJ mol-I) 
and bond length (1 14 pm). The molecule is chemically very reactive and 
is paramagnetic because of the single unpaired anti-bonding electron. If 
this electron is removed to give the positively charged NO+ ion the bond 
order increases to 3.0. The bond length in the NO+ ion is 106 pm. The 
first ionization energy of NO, from its photoelectron spectrum, is 897 kJ 
mol-'. The vibrational spacing in the NO+ ion is 27 kJ mol-I, compared 
with that of 22.6 kJ mol-' in the NO molecule, evidence that the first 
ionization is from an anti-bonding orbital. 
In the NO case (ignoring the ls2 pairs) there are four orbitals pos- 
sessing the same symmetry, d, 
which can therefore mix to an extent 
which depends upon energy differences. It would be expected that all 
four orbitals would possess 2s and 2p contributions, although it is not 
possible to quantify those in qualitative molecular orbital theory. The 
2 p 2 s  gaps in nitrogen and oxygen are relatively large, so that the 2p-2s 
mixtures in the o+ molecular orbitals would not be expected to approach 
equivalence. 

76 
Structure and Bonding 
4.3.2 Carbon Monoxide 
As the first ionization energies imply, the energies of the atomic orbitals 
of carbon (first ionization energy = 1086 kJ mol-I) and oxygen (first ion- 
ization energy = 1314 kJ mol-]) do not match up very well. When the 
2p-2s energy gaps are compared (C, 386, and 0, 1544 kJ mol-I) it is 
obvious that there is a great mismatch between the respective 2s levels. 
That of the oxygen atom is too low to interact with the 2s atomic orbital 
of the carbon atom in any significant manner. The 2s atomic orbital of 
the oxygen atom may be regarded as a virtually non-bonding orbital 
( 3 d ) .  The small 2p-2s energy gap in the carbon atom facilitates the mix- 
ing, or 
, of its 2s and 2pz orbitals, assuming that the molec- 
ular axis is coincident with the z axis. The two orbitals participate in CJ+ 
orbitals of the molecule and can mix. Because of the relatively small 
2p-2s energy gap they do mix, the new orbitals being written as: 
and 
The hybrid orbitals, h, and h,, are shown diagrammatically in Figure 
4.7, together with the atomic orbitals from which they are formed. They 
have two unequal lobes of oppositely signed w values, the large positive 
lobe of h, being directed at the oxygen atom, with that of h, pointing in 
the opposite direction. It would be difficult for h, to play any significant 
part in the bonding to the oxygen atom, and it should be regarded as 
non-bonding (it is labelled 50’ in Figure 4.8). 
The interaction of h,(C) and the 2p, orbital of the oxygen atom gives 
a bonding combination: 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
77 
Figure 4.7 The formation of the 
two sp hybrid orbitals of the car- 
bon atom used in the production 
of molecular orbitals in the CO 
molecule. h, is directed towards 
the oxygen atom, h, is directed 
diametrically opposite to the CO 
bonding region 
and an anti-bonding combination: 
(4.14) 
The molecular orbitals are completed by the interaction of the two sets 
of 2px and 2py orbitals to give doubly degenerate In; (bonding) and 2n; 
(anti- bonding) levels: 
(4.15) 
(4.16) 
Figure 4.8 A molecular orbital 
diagram for the CO molecule 
The molecular orbital diagram is given in Figure 4.8. The electronic con- 
figuration of the CO molecule is thus KK(30')2(4~')2(3n;)4(5a+)2 
and the 
bond order is 3, consistent with the high bond dissociation energy of 
1090 kJ mol-' and the short bond length of 113 pm. Carbon monoxide 
is a relatively inert chemical substance, but it does have an extensive 
involvement with the lower oxidation states of the transition elements 
with which it forms a great many carbonyl complexes, in which it acts 
as a ligand. The bonding of CO to a transition metal involves the use of 
the otherwise non-bonding electron pair in the 50' orbital. The vacant 
2n orbital is also important in the bonding of CO to transition metals, 
a subject not treated in this book. 

78 
Structure and Bonding 
The cyanide ion, CN-, is isoelectronic with carbon monoxide and has an 
extensive chemistry of reaction with transition metals (e.g. the formation 
of the hexacyanoferrate(II1) ion, [Fe(CN),3-] by reaction with iron(II1) 
in solution) but, unlike CO, it shows a preference for the positive oxi- 
dation states of the elements. This is mainly because of its negative 
charge. 
4.3.3 The Photoelectron Spectra of N, and CO 
The photoelectron spectra of the isoelectronic molecules N, and CO have 
peaks corresponding to the ionization energies, I, given in Table 4.3. The 
peaks corresponding to the ionized molecules have vibrational structure, 
with vibrational separations in wavenumbers given in Table 4.3. The fun- 
damental vibration frequencies of the neutral molecules N, and CO are 
2345 and 2143 cm-', respectively. 
Table 4.3 Photoelectron spectra data for N, and CO 
N2 
co 
IlkJ mol-I 
vlcm-l 
IlkJ mol-1 
vlcm-' 
1503 
1639 
1812 
21 50 
1352 
21 84 
1810 
1632 
1535 
2390 
1903 
1678 
The data in Table 4.3 allow a discussion of the bondinglanti-bonding 
characteristics of the three orbitals from which electrons are removed in 
the three ionization processes for both molecules, and the relationship 
of these characteristics to the formal bond order in the neutral mole- 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
79 
cules. A comparison of the vibrational separation in the neutral mole- 
cule with that in an ion produced by photoionization should indicate 
whether the electron removed originated in a bonding, non-bonding or 
anti-bonding orbital. In practice the decision is not straightforward, 
because of the interactions that may occur between orbitals of the same 
symmetry. In the N, case [electronic configuration KK(20J2(20J2 
(1n,)4(30g+)2] the first ionization is from the 3og+ orbital, which is for- 
mally a bonding orbital. The vibrational separation of the N,+ ion 
[(20~+)~(20~+)~( 
1n:3(30g+)'] is smaller than that of the neutral molecule, 
but not by the amount possibly expected for the removal of a bonding 
electron. From the evidence, the 3og+ orbital can be described as weak- 
ly bonding. Its relative instability arises because of the interaction with 
the low-energy 2og+ orbital, which gains stability thereby. The second 
ionization is from the highly bonding In, level, the vibrational separa- 
tion in the N,+ ion [(20g+)2(20u')2( 1n,3)(30g+)2] showing a significant fall 
compared to the neutral molecule. The third ionization is from the osten- 
sibly anti-bonding 2ou+ orbital, but the evidence from the vibrational 
separations of N,' [(20g')2(20,')1( 1n:,)4(30g')2] is that it is practically non- 
bonding. This is because of the interaction with the higher energy vacant 
anti-bonding 3ou+ orbital, the 2ou+ orbital gaining some stabilization at 
the expense of the vacant orbital. So, in the N, molecule with its formal 
bond order of 3, it may be concluded that this value is due to two pairs 
of bonding n: electrons plus a combination from a not-very-bonding 3og' 
pair of electrons and a pair of 2ou+ electrons which, rather than being 
anti-bonding, are virtually non-bonding. Considerations such as these 
put into perspective the somewhat over-simplified conclusions that may 
be made from an overall bond order about the state of bonding in a mol- 
ecule. 
The first ionization of the CO molecule is from a virtually non-bond- 
ing orbital to give the CO' ion [(40+)2(1n)4(50')1]; the second and third 
ionizations are from strongly bonding molecular orbitals to give the 
[(4o'),( ln)3(50+)2] and [(4o+)'( 1n)4(50+)2] CO+ ions. Thus, in the CO case 
the connection between bond order and the energies of the contributing 
orbitals is much clearer than in the N, case. The non-bonding 5o+ orbital 
of CO is at a higher energy than the corresponding orbital in N, (30~') 
and is localized on the carbon atom, so that it is more easily donated to 
a metal atom or ion than the N, orbital. CO forms more stable and more 
numerous complexes than does N,. 
4.3.4 Hydrogen Fluoride, HF 
The molecule of hydrogen fluoride, HF, belongs to the CmV point group. 
The hydrogen atom uses its 1s atomic orbital to make bonding and anti- 
bonding combinations with the 2p, orbital of the fluorine atom, the z 

80 
Structure and Bonding 
axis coinciding with the molecular axis. Because of the different values 
of the first ionization energies of the two elements (hydrogen, 1312, and 
fluorine, 1681 kJ mol-’), the molecular orbital diagram, shown in Figure 
4.9, is considerably skewed, with the lower energy bonding orbital (3d) 
having a major contribution from the fluorine 2pz orbital. The higher 
energy anti-bonding orbital (4o+) has a major contribution from the 
hydrogen 1 s orbital. Such inequality in contributing to molecular orbitals 
may be expressed by considering the coefficients of the atomic orbital 
contributions to the molecular wave functions that are constructed from 
linear combinations of the ls(H) and 2pz(F) wave functions: 
and 
(4.17) 
(4.18) 
Because the squares of wave functions are proportional to electron prob- 
abilities, the ‘share’ of the two bonding electrons experienced by the 
fluorine atom is given by the factor (c,)~/[(c,>~ + (c,),]. The ‘share’ expe- 
rienced by the hydrogen atom is (c,)~/[(c,)~ 
+ (c,)~]. The HF molecule 
possesses a 
of 6.33 x 
C m, which is experimental 
evidence for such a charge separation. The dipole moment (h) in units 
of C m is given by the product of the charge (Q in coulombs) at the POS- 
Figure 4.9 The molecular 
orbital diagram for the HF mole- 
- 
cule 
itive end of the molecule and the distance (in metres) between the two 
ends of the molecule (the bond length in the case of a diatomic mole- 
cule): p = Qr. The charge separation in HF is thus given by: 
Q = p/r = (6.33 x 
+- (0.092 x lop9) = 6.88 x 
C 
which is equal to an electronic charge of (6.88 x 
-F (1,6 x 10-19) = 
0.43e. The hydrogen end of the molecule is, in effect, positive to the 
extent of 0.43e, whilst the fluorine end is negative to the extent of -0.43e. 
Valence bond theory would describe the bonding as 57% covalent and 
43% ionic. 
The other orbitals in Figure 4.9 are the non-bonding 2 d  (the 2s atom- 
ic orbital of the fluorine atom) and the non-bonding 1.n (the 2p, and 2py 
atomic orbitals of the fluorine atom). The ls2 pair of fluorine electrons 
(lo+) is omitted from the diagram. 
The discrepancy in the matching up of the ls(H) and 2p,(F) orbitals 
is 1681 - 1312 = 369 kJ mol-l, and leads to a bond with considerable 
ionic character. The difference in energy between the orbitals of the sodi- 
um atom (the 3s ionization energy = 496 kJ mol-I) and the fluorine atom 
(the 2pz ionization energy = 1681 kJ mol-’) amounts to 1185 kJ mol-’, 

Covalent Bonding II: Diatomic Molecules; Bond Lengths and Strengths 
81 
and leads to the conclusion that covalent bond formation is impossible 
between Na and F. If the elements are to combine at all, it has to be by 
an alternative method (ionic bonding), which is described in Chapter 7. 

82 
Structure and Bonding 

Covalent Bonding 111: 
Triatomic Molecules; 
Bond Angles 
This chapter consists of the application of molecular orbital theory to 
the bonding in triatomic molecules, with its extension to the factors 
responsible for the determination of bond angles and molecular shapes. 
Additionally, a straightforward method of predicting molecular shape, 
the valence shell electron pair repulsion theory (VSEPR), is introduced. 
This is based on a valence bond approach, and is of general application. 
In this chapter, the discussions are restricted to: (1) the linear and bent 
forms of the water molecule, (2) two linear molecules, CO, and XeF,, 
and the linear ion I,-, (3) the linear nitronium ion, NO,+, and the bent 
nitrogen dioxide molecule and the nitrite [or nitrate(III)] ion, NO,-, and 
(4) the linear HF,- ion, which is an example of strong hydrogen 
bonding. 
5. I Triatomic Molecules 
Triatomic molecules may be linear or bent (i.e. V-shaped or angular). 
The shape adopted by any particular molecule is that which is consis- 
tent with the minimization of its total energy. 
a3 

84 
Structure and Bonding 
The 
1
,
 
is based 
upon the original ideas of Sigwick and Powell, and was extended by 
Gillespie and Nyholm. The basis of the method is that the shape of a 
molecule results from the minimization of the repulsions between the 
pairs of electrons in the valence shell. The term ‘ 
’ refers to 
the orbitals of the central atom of the molecule which could possibly be 
involved in bonding. The theory is operated by counting the number of 
electrons in the valence shell of the central atom, together with suitable 
contributions from the ligand atoms: one electron per bond formed or 
two if coordinate bonds are used. This sum is then divided by two to 
give the number of pairs of electrons. These electron pairs are then con- 
sidered to repel each other (ignoring the interelectronic repulsion between 
the electrons in each pair) to give a spatial distribution which is that cor- 
responding to the minimization of the repulsive forces. This method of 
predicting molecular shape affords a very rapid and easy-to-use set of 
arguments which almost always produces an answer which is consistent 
with observation. 
The extension of molecular orbital theory to triatomic molecules is a 
major part of this chapter. It gives a very satisfactory description of the 
shapes and the bonding of molecules in general, and is consistent with 
observations of photoelectron and electronic absorption spectra. It is not 
possible for the VSEPR theory to explain these latter observations. 
5.2 
Valence Shell Electron Pair Repulsion Theory 
The basis of the VSEPR theory is that the shape of a molecule (or the 
geometry around any particular atom connected to at least two other 
atoms) is assumed to be dependent upon the minimization of the repul- 
sive forces operating between the pairs of ‘sigma’ (0) 
valence electrons. 
This is an important restriction. Any ‘pi’ (IT) 
or ‘delta’ (6) pairs are dis- 
counted in arriving at a decision about the molecular shape. The terms 
‘sigma’, ‘pi’ and ‘delta’ refer to the type of overlap undertaken by the 
contributory atomic orbitals in producing the molecular orbitals, and are 
referred to by their Greek-letter symbols in the remainder of the book. 
Examples of the types of overlap which give rise to 0 orbitals are 
shown in Figure 5.1. The sideways overlap of two p orbitals that gives 
rise to n; orbitals is shown in Figure 4.1. 
Figure 5.2 demonstrates the different types of overlap for dx-dxz (in 
the xz plane) and duxy-dxy 
(along the z axis). The ‘sideways’ (two lobes) 
overlap by the dxZ orbitals is n;-type, the four-lobe overlap by the two dxy 
orbitals being termed &type. The Greek letters are used loosely for such 
orbitals: strictly they should be used for molecules possessing either Dmh 
or CmY symmetry, but they are used generally to describe the type of over- 
lap. Only CJ pairs are counted up in the VSEPR approach. This often 
Figure 5.1 Examples of orbital 
overlaps which give rise to (T 
orbitals 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
85 
means that some assumptions about the bonding have to be made before 
the theory may be applied. 
Table 5.1 contains the basic shapes adopted by the indicated numbers 
of 0 electron pairs, and Figure 5.3 shows representations of the basic 
shapes assumed by the various electron pair distributions. The 
(the angles formed by ligand+entral atom-ligand triplets) are 
included in Table 5.1. 
Table 5.1 The basic shapes, bond angles and hybridizations adopted by various 
numbers of o pairs of electrons 
Number of 
Distribution of 
Bond 
Type of 
CT electron 
electron pairs 
angles 
hybridization 
pairs 
Linear 
180" 
SP 
Trigonally planar 
120" 
SP2 
Tetrahedral 
109'28' 
SP3 
Trigonally bipyramidal 
1 80', 1 20', 90' dsp3 
Octahedral 
180', 90" 
d2sp3 
Pentagonally bipyramidal 1 80", go', 72" 
d3sp3 
Figure 5.2 Overlap diagrams 
for d,-d, 
(in the xz plane) and 
dxy-dxy (along the z axis) 
Figure 5.3 The basic shapes 
for the spatial distribution of three 
(trigonally planar), four (tetrahe- 
dral), five (trigonally bipyramidal), 
six (octahedral) and seven (pen- 
tagonally bipyramidal) pairs of 
electrons around a central atom 
Table 5.1 also includes the types of 
for each of the basic 
shapes which are used in VSEPR and valence bond theories. 
Hybridization, or mixing of the indicated atomic orbitals, in each case 
produces hybrid orbitals that radiate from the central atom to where the 
ligand atoms are situated. This is done to ensure that there are localized 

86 
Structure and Bonding 
electron-pair bonds between the central atom and the ligand atoms which 
constitute the molecule. Although hybridization is used in molecular 
orbital theory, it is only used when allowed by the symmetry rules, i.e. 
only those orbitals of identical symmetry may mix. 
The application of VSEPR theory to triatomic molecules is exempli- 
fied by considering water, carbon dioxide, xenon difluoride and a trio of 
connected species: the nitronium ion, NO,+, nitrogen dioxide and the 
nitrite [or nitrate(III)] ion, NO;. 
5.2.1 Water, H,O 
The isolated water molecule has a bond angle of 104.5'. The central oxy- 
gen atom has the valence shell electron configuration 2s22p4, with two 
of the 2p orbitals singly occupied. The hydrogen atoms supply one elec- 
tron each to the valence shell of the central atom, which makes a total 
of eight o electrons (since the 1s-2p overlaps are o-type). The four elec- 
tron pairs are most stable when their distribution is tetrahedral. Two of 
the pairs are bonding pairs, the other two being non-bonding or lone 
pairs. The production of the four pairs of electrons in the valence shell 
of the oxygen atom is shown in Figure 5.4. The box notation is useful 
for VSEPR theory, and Figure 5.4 shows the valence state of the oxygen 
atom with its two vacancies in the 2p set of atomic orbitals ready to 
accept the two electrons from the hydrogen atoms when the water 
molecule is formed. The in-coming electrons are shown in red; this is 
done to help with the electron counting rather than to suggest that elec- 
trons can be distinguished from each other. 
Figure 5.4 A diagram showing 
the two-valent state of the oxy- 
gen atom and the use of the 
oxygen valence shell to accom- 
modate the electrons from the 
hydrogen atoms in the formation 
of a water molecule; the elec- 
trons shown in red are those 
from the ligand hydrogen atoms 
This VSEPR picture of the water molecule implies that the bond angle 
should be that of the regular tetrahedron, 109'28'. The theory predicts 
that the water molecule should be bent, which it is. To refine the pre- 
diction of the bond angle it is possible to argue that the non-bonding 
pairs of electrons, which are more localized on the central oxygen atom 
than the bonding pairs, have a greater repulsive effect upon the bond- 
ing pairs than that exerted by the bonding pairs upon each other. The 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
87 
result would be a reduction of the angle between the two bonding pairs, 
making the bond angle smaller than the regular tetrahedral value. It is 
not possible to quantify this aspect of the theory. 
5.2.2 Carbon Dioxide, CO, 
The carbon dioxide molecule is linear and belongs to the Dm, point 
group. The carbon atom has the valence shell configuration of 2s22p2. 
In that state the carbon atom is 
: there are two unpaired elec- 
trons which occupy two of the three 2p atomic orbitals. The two singly 
occupied orbitals may each accept an electron from a ligand atom. In 
order for carbon to be 
it is necessary to arrange for there to 
be four unpaired electrons in its valence shell. This may be achieved (as 
a thought experiment) by transferring one of the 2s electrons to the pre- 
viously unoccupied 2p orbital. It is then possible to feed two CT electrons 
into the 2s and one of the 2p orbitals, leaving the other two 2p orbitals 
to accept the two n: electrons. These hypothetical electronic changes are 
shown in Figure 5.5. 
Prior knowledge is used of the normal divalency of the oxygen atom 
Figure 5.5 A diagram showing 
and the impossibility of there being more than one CT bond between any 
pair of atoms (the spatial distribution of atomic orbitals decides that). 
the 
changes made in 
the formation of CO,; the elec- 
trons shown in red are those 
The count of CT electron pairs comes to two and quite correctly the the- 
ory predicts the shape of the CO, molecule to be linear, the two 0 pairs 
repelling each other to a position of minimum repulsion. The two n: pairs 
are used to complete the bonding picture. In valence bond theory the 
description is taken further by having the s and one of the p orbitals 
undertake hybridization to give two sp hybrid orbitals diametrically 
opposed to each other to give the molecule its linearity, with the two 
pure p orbitals reserved for the two n: pairs. 
from the ligand oxygen atoms 

88 
Structure and Bonding 
5.2.3 Xenon Difluoride, XeF,, and the Octet Rule 
The XeF, molecule is linear. According to the 
, which is 
assumed to apply to the central atoms of most main group compounds 
and which states that such central atoms combine with other atoms until 
they have a share in eight electrons, i.e. an s2p6 configuration is pro- 
duced, the xenon atom should be zerovalent. 
VSEPR theory acknowledges that the valence shell of the xenon atom 
has the configuration 5s25p6, and as such the atom should be zerovalent. 
There is the possibility of causing a 5p to 5d excitation to make the atom 
divalent. Addition of the two valence electrons from the fluorine atoms 
would make two bonding pairs and these, together with the remaining 
three pairs of non-bonding electrons, would contribute to the total of 
five electron pairs. These electronic changes are shown in Figure 5.6. 
The 5d orbital used would be the d,, which would participate in 
hybridization with the 5s and three 5p orbitals to give five dsp3 hybrid 
orbitals disposed towards the vertices of a trigonal bipyramid. The five 
pairs would assume a trigonally bipyramidal distribution, and it is log- 
ical for the fluorine atoms to be as far away from each other as possi- 
ble to give a linear molecule. The alternative approach would divide the 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
89 
molecule up into Xe2+ and two ligand fluoride ions. The Xe2+ (5s25p4) Figure 5.6 A diagram showing 
would then accept two electron pairs from the fluorine atoms, one of 
the electronic 
changes made in 
the formation of XeF,; the elec- 
which would fill the third 5p orbital and the second would enter the next 
trons shown in red are those 
available level, 5d. The same (correct) conclusion would follow. 
from the ligand fluorine atoms 
5.2.4 The Tri-iodide ion, I,- 
The tri-iodide ion, 13-, is linear. VSEPR theory may be applied by assum- 
ing the 
structure I-+I+tI-, in which the central atom 
has an 
from the two ligand iodide ions. The electronic configuration of iodine 
in its valence shell is 5s25p5, and ionization to I+ removes one of the 5p 
electrons to give the configuration 5s25p4. If the 5p electrons are arranged 
to be paired up, there is a vacant 5p orbital which can accept one of the 
incoming electron pairs from the ligand iodide ions. 
of + I  and acts as the acceptor of 

90 
Structure and Bonding 
The second donated electron pair must then occupy one of the 5d orbitals 
(this would be the 5dV2 orbital, assuming that the tri-iodide ion is coin- 
cident with the Cartesian z axis), giving five CT electron pairs which would 
be directed towards the vertices of a trigonal bipyramid. The three non- 
bonding pairs occupy the trigonal plane, so that the ligand iodine atoms 
are placed in the two axial (or apical) positions, making the tri-iodide 
ion linear. 
The alternative approach is to place the negative charge on the cen- 
tral iodine atom so that it has the xenon configuration, 5s25p6. The diva- 
lent state of I- is produced by promoting one of the 5p electrons to a 5d 
orbital and this results in the same conclusion from the two bonding 
pairs and three non-bonding pairs as the previous treatment. 
Valence bond theory resorts to using the two forms of the tri-iodide 
ion as canonical forms contributing to the resonance hybrid: 
I-+I+tI- # I-I--I 
5.2.5 Hypervalence 
The exceptions to the octet rule described in the previous section, the 
xenon compounds and the tri-iodide ion, are dealt with by the VSEPR 
and valence bond theories by assuming that the lowest energy available 
d orbitals participate in the bonding. This occurs for all main group com- 
pounds in which the central atom forms more than four forrrial covalent 
bonds, and is collectively known as 
, resulting from the 
expansion of the valence shell. This is referred to in later sections of the 
book, and the molecular orbital approach is compared with the valence 
bond theory to show that d orbital participation is unnecessary in some 
cases. It is essential to note that d orbital participation in bonding of the 
central atom is dependent upon the symmetry properties of individual 
compounds and the d orbitals. 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
91 
In accord with the octet rule, the valencies or oxidation states of the 
main group elements depend upon their s1 Or 2p’ to electronic configura- 
tions. Elements of Groups 1, 2, 13 and 14 usually have one valency or 
oxidation state, which corresponds to the use of all the s and p valence 
electrons that they possess. For example, in the third period there are 
the species Na+, Mg2’, A13’ and SiIVO2 in the main groups. In the case 
of the heavier members of Group 14, the ‘ 
operates to 
produce compounds with valencies or oxidation states which are two 
units fewer than the maximum expected, e.g. Sn2+ and PbO. The heav- 
ier elements of Groups 15 and 16 are also subject to the inert pair effect 
and have compounds based upon the retention of the s2 pairs. The ‘nor- 
mal’ valencies/oxidation states of the elements of Groups 15 to 18 are 
based upon the number of vacancies in the p orbitals of their atoms, 
resulting in the values 3, 2, 1 and 0, respectively. The range of valen- 
ciedoxidation states exhibited by compounds of Groups 1 5-1 8 is given 
in Table 5.2 
~ 
~~ 
~ 
Table 5.2 Oxidation states for elements in Groups 15-1 8 
~~ 
Group 
‘Normal’ oxidation state 
Other oxidation states 
15 
3 
16 
2 
17 
1 
18 
Q 
5 
4, 6 (except 0) 
3, 5, 7 (except F) 
2, 4, 6, 8 (xenon only)a 
aKrypton is known to form compounds in its +2 state, and radon probably has a chem- 
istry similar to that of xenon 
Compounds in which the valencies/oxidation states of the central ele- 
ment are greater than the ‘normal’ ones, based upon the octet rule, are 
examples of hypervalency, and vary in steps of two because they are 
related to the unpairing and use of two extra electrons at each stage. 

92 
Structure and Bonding 
5.2.6 The Nitronium Ion, NO,+, Nitrogen Dioxide and the 
Nitrite [or Nitrate(lll)] Ion, NO2- 
The Nitronium Ion, NO,+ 
The best approach to the VSEPR treatment of positive ions is to remove 
an electron from the central atom as a first step. With the nitronium ion 
this results in a central N+ ion which has the same electronic configura- 
tion as the carbon atom, 2s22p2, and is divalent. A notional promotion 
of one of the 2s electrons into the otherwise vacant 2p orbital produces 
the tetravalent state 2s12p3; this can accept the four electrons from the 
two ligand oxygen atoms, which ensures that oxygen is exerting its usual 
divalency. With the assumption that the N-0 bonds will be a double C J , ~  
combination, two of the four bonding pairs of the 2s22p6 system are 
reserved for the n bonds, leaving only two bonding pairs to undergo the 
VSEPR bond pair-bond pair repulsion. This results in the prediction 
that the nitronium ion should be linear, which is found to be the case. 
This is not surprising, since the ion is isoelectronic with CO,, i.e. they 
possess the same number of electrons, and isoelectronic species normally 
have the same shape. 
Nitrogen Dioxide 
In the NO, molecule the central nitrogen (2s22p3) is trivalent, and to cope 
with the normal valencies of the oxygen atoms it is best to regard the 
central atom as Nf which can then bond to 0- (isoelectronic with F) by 
a (T bond and to an oxygen atom by the usual double o,n combination. 
By this rather artificial procedure the valence shell of the central N+ ion 
is 2s12p3 in a four-valent state. If two CJ bonds and one n bond are made 
by adding three electrons, one from 0- and two from 0, the valence shell 
is then 2s22p5, which has the odd electron in one of the 2p orbitals. In 
VSEPR terms there are two and a half CJ electron pairs, which will result 
in a planar distribution with the angles between the bonding pairs and 
the bonding half-pair being smaller than the angle between the two bond- 
ing pairs, resulting in a molecule with a bond angle somewhat greater 
than the 120" that would arise from a regular trigonally planar mole- 
cule. The observed bond angle in NO, is 134". 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
93 
The Nitrite Ion, NO; 
The treatment of the nitrite ion is similar to that of NO,, except that the 
artifice of having a charge separation is not necessary. The central nitro- 
gen atom has the trivalent 2s22p3 configuration, and can accept one elec- 
tron from an 0- and two electrons from an oxygen atom to give the 
filled 2s22p6 configuration. With one pair of electrons reserved for the 7t 
bond there are then three pairs of 0 electrons which determine the shape 
of the ion. The trigonally planar distribution of the 0 electron pairs pro- 
duces a bent nitrite ion with the bond angle based on 120", but with the 
lone pair exerting slightly more repulsion to force the bond angle to 
somewhat less than the regular angle. The observed angle is 115". 
The valence bond treatment of the nitrite ion includes the two canon- 
ical forms shown in Figure 5.7, which contribute to the resonance hybrid 
that represents the bonding. It is a method of indicating that the two 
bonds are equivalent in length and strength and that the bond order is 
1.5 per bond, and that the negative charge is spread evenly between the 
two oxygen atoms. 
Figure 5.7 Two canonical 
forms of the nitrite ion 

94 
Structure and Bonding 
5.3 
Molecular Orbital Theory 
The application of molecular orbital (MO) theory, even on a qualitative 
basis as is described in this book, is a more lengthy procedure than that 
using VSEPR theory. It begins with the atomic orbitals which are avail- 
able for bonding and the number of electrons which have to be accom- 
modated. The understanding of the bonding of a molecule arises from 
the proper application of symmetry theory as is demonstrated in the fol- 
lowing sections, using the same examples that are subjected to the 
VSEPR and valence bond theories in previous sections. 
5.3. I Water 
The groundwork for the application of MO theory to the water mole- 
cule has been carried out to a large extent in Section 2.2.1. The proce- 
dure is to identify the point group to which the molecule belongs. To 
demonstrate the power of MO theory, both of the extreme geometries 
of the molecule, the bent (bond angle, 90") and linear (bond angle, 180') 
forms, are treated. 
90" Water Molecule 
The general protocol for the derivation of the MO energy diagram for 
any molecule is outlined in this section. It is applied to the 90" water 
molecule as follows. 
1. Identifv the point group to which the nzolecule belongs. 
The 90" form of the water molecule belongs to the C2,, point group. There 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
95 
is only one axis of symmetry, C,, and this is arranged to coincide with 
the z axis. The position of the molecule with respect to the coordinate 
axes is as shown in Figure 5.8. 
2. Classifv the atomic orbitals in the valency shell of the central atom with 
respect to the point group of the molecule. 
The classification of the orbitals of the oxygen atom is a matter of look- 
ing them up in the C2, character table, a full version of which is includ- 
ed in Appendix 1. The 2s(O) orbital transforms as an a, representation, 
the 2p,(O) orbital transforms as a b, representation, the 2py(0) orbital 
transforms as a b, representation and the 2pz(0) orbital transforms as 
another a , representation. 
Figure 5.8 The position of the 
water 
with respect to 
the coordinate axes; the molecule 
is in the xz plane 
3. Classify the valency orbitals of the ligand atoms with respect to the point 
group of the molecule and identifv their group orbitals. 
The two hydrogen 1s orbitals have the characters shown in the follow- 
ing representation; the individual characters are the number of orbitals 
unaffected by the particular symmetry operation carried out upon the 
two orbitals. 
This representation may be seen, by inspection of the C2” character table, 
to be equivalent to the sum of the characters for the a, and b, irreducible 
representations. Those particular hydrogen group orbitals are very sim- 
ilar to the ones used to describe the bonding of the H, molecule (equa- 
tions 3.3 and 3.4, respectively, and shown in Figure 3.1), but the nuclei 
are further apart in water. The a, hydrogen group orbital (labelled as h,) 
is H-H bonding, whereas the b, group orbital (labelled as h2) is H-H 
anti-bonding. Because of the greater distance between the hydrogen 
atoms in the water molecule, the bonding and anti-bonding interactions 
are not as great as those in the H2 molecule. 
4. Correlate the orbitals of the central atom with the group orbitals of the 
ligand atoms and draw the MO diagram for the molecule. 
Two considerations are of importance in drawing the molecular orbital 
diagram for a molecule. First, the relative energies of the orbitals must 
be considered. The first ionization energies of the atoms involved in mol- 
ecule formation give a good indication of how to position the atomic 
levels, and information about the magnitude of p-s energy gaps is useful. 
Second, and highly important, is the guiding principle that only atomic 
orbitals (single or group) belonging to the same irreducible representation 
may combine to give bonding and anti-bonding MOs. It is also helpful to 

96 
Structure and Bonding 
have knowledge of the photoelectron and absorption spectra to assist 
with the exact placement of the molecular levels, although such infor- 
mation is unnecessary for the production of a qualitative molecular 
orbital diagram. 
When considering the formation of the water molecule, an important 
observation is that the first ionization energies of the hydrogen and oxy- 
gen atoms are almost identical (H, 1312; 0, 1314 kJ mol-I), and there is 
a large energy difference between the 2p and 2s levels of the oxygen atom 
(1544 kJ mol-I). The latter piece of information indicates that the 2s(O) 
orbital does not participate in the bonding to a major extent. The 2s(O) 
and 2pz orbitals do have identical symmetry properties and so have the 
possibility of mixing to give two 
, but the large energy gap 
between them prevents very much interaction. This means that the main 
a, combination is between the 2pz and h, orbitals. Combination occurs 
between the b, [2p,(O)] and h, orbitals, with the b, [2px(0)] orbital 
remaining as a nonlbonding MO. The a, interaction produces a bond- 
ing orbital which is 0-H bonding and which is also H-H bonding. The 
bonding orbital from the b, combination is 0-H bonding but is H-H 
anti-bonding. 
Figure 5.9 Overlap diagrams 
for the a, (top) and b, (bottom) 
bonding orbitals of the C,, water 
molecule 
The above interactions are made obvious in the pictorial representation 
of the a, and b, orbital combination diagrams shown in Figure 5.9, and 
the MO' energy diagram for the 90" water molecule is shown in Figure 
5.10. 
The 2a, orbital gains some stability from a small interaction with the 
bonding 3a, orbital, which becomes destabilized to a similar extent. This 
causes the 3a, orbital to have a higher energy than that of the lb, orbital. 
One very important difference between VSEPR theory and MO the- 
ory should be noted. The MOs of the water molecule which participate 
in the bonding are three-centre orbitals. They are associated with all three 
atoms of the molecule. There are no localized electron pair bonds between 
pairs of atoms as used in the application of VSEPR theory. The exis- 
tence of three-centre orbitals (and multi-centre orbitals in more compli- 
cated molecules) is not only more consistent with symmetry theory, it 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
97 
Figure 5.10 MO diagram for 
the 90" water rnolecule 
also allows for the reduction of interelectronic repulsion effects when 
more extensive, non-localized ( 
), orbitals are doubly occupied. 
180" Water Molecule 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
The linear water molecule belongs to the D,, point group. The clas- 
sifications of atomic and group orbitals must be carried out using 
the D_, 
character table, The molecular axis, C,, is arranged to coin- 
cide with the z axis. 
The classification of the 2s and 2p atomic orbitals of the central oxy- 
gen atom. The 2s(O) orbital transforms as og+, 
the 2p, and 2py 
orbitals transform as the doubly 
a degenerate nu representation, and 
the 2pz orbital transforms as ou+. In some texts the '+' and '-' super- 
scripts are omitted, but throughout this one there is strict adherence 
to the use of the full symbols for all orbital symmetry representa- 
tions. Unlike the 90" case, the 2s and 2p, orbitals have different sym- 
metry properties so there is no question of their mixing. 
Classification of the hydrogen group orbitals. The H-H bonding 
group orbital, h,, transforms as og+, 
and the H-H anti-bonding group 
orbital, h,, transforms as ouf . The detailed conclusions are dealt with 
in Section 3.2.1. 
The MOs may now be constructed by allowing the orbitals of the 
oxygen and hydrogen atoms, belonging to the same representations, 
to combine. Thus the interaction between og' and h, is possible, by 
symmetry, but is very restricted in extent by the large difference in 
energy between the two orbitals. The major interaction is between 
ou+(0) 
and h, which possess very similar energies. The 2p, and 2py 
orbitals of the oxygen atom remain as a doubly degenerate pair of 
nu orbitals. The MO diagram for the linear water molecule is shown 
in Figure 5.1 1. 

98 
Structure and Bonding 
5.11 MO diagram for the linear 
water molecule 
Comparison and Correlation of the Energies of 90" and 180" 
Water Molecules 
In the water molecule there are eight valency electrons to be distributed 
in the lowest four MOs. In the 90" case this produces an electronic con- 
figuration which may be written as 2a,21b,23a,21b,2 (the ls2 pair of the 
oxygen atom forms the configuration la12 or K). The 2a, orbital is slight- 
ly bonding because of the interaction with the 3a, orbital. The latter 
orbital has considerable bonding character, as has the lb,, so that there 
are two bonding pairs of electrons responsible for the cohesion of the 
three atoms. The lb, orbital is non-bonding, there being no hydrogen 
orbitals of that symmetry. The 90" molecule would have two similar, 
strongly bonding, electron pairs (in the 3a, and lb, three-centre MOs) 
and two virtually non-bonding electron pairs (in the lb, and 2a, orbitals) 
of very different energies. 
The electronic configuration of the linear water molecule is 
(20g+),( lo,+)2( ln;u)4 [the ls2(0) pair of electrons occupy the: log+ molec- 
ular orbital]. The 2og+ pair of electrons is only weakly bonding, and the 
lou+ pair supplies practically the only cohesion for the three atoms, the 
other four electrons being non-bonding. 
A comparison of the MO diagrams for the two forms of the water 
molecule is given in the 
of Figure 5.12, which cor- 
relates the MOs of the two extreme geometries of the molecule. It shows 
that the 90" angle confers the extra stability of two bonding pairs of elec- 
trons as opposed to the single pair of bonding electrons in the linear 
molecule. 
The diagrams of Figures 5.10 and 5.11 have been constructed accord- 
ing to the convention of making the major axis coincident with the z 
axis. In considering the correlation of the two diagrams, it is useful to 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
99 
Figure 5.12 A MO correlation 
diagram for the bent and linear 
forms of the water molecule 
retain the convention for the linear molecule, but to have the linear mol- 
ecule bend in the yz plane so that the C, axis of the bent molecule is 
coincident with the y axis. In this case, the l.nu orbitals of the linear mol- 
ecule (oxygen atom contributions from 2p, and 2py atomic orbitals) cor- 
relate with the lb, and 3a,, respectively, of the bent molecule. The 2py 
and 2p, orbitals in the bent molecule are labelled a, and b,, rather than 
the other way round which is conventional. The 2pz orbital correlates 
with the lb, orbital of the bent molecule; it takes the place of the 2py 
orbital in the conventional treatment. These non-conventional changes 
may be visualized by swapping the y and z axes in Figures 5.8 and 5.9. 
The correlations are: 2ou+ -+ 2b,, 3og+ -+ 4a,, 17cu + lb, and 3a,, lou+ 
+ lb,, and 2og+-+ 2a,. 
Neither interelectronic repulsions nor internuclear repulsions have 
been considered. To ignore interelectronic repulsions is not serious since 
the orbitals used in the two forms of the molecule are extremely similar. 
The internuclear repulsion in the 90" form would be larger than in the 
linear case, and contributes to the bond angle in the actual water mole- 
cule being greater than 90". The actual state of the molecule, as it nor- 
mally exists, is that with the lowest total energy and only detailed 
calculations can reveal the various contributions. At a qualitative level, 
as carried out so far in this section, the decision from MO theory is that 
the water molecule should be bent, in preference to being linear. 
The Inu orbitals in the linear case (these are the non-bonding 2p, and 
2pv orbitals of the oxygen atom) lose their degeneracy when the molecule 
bends. The 2px orbital retains its non-bonding character, but the 2py 
orbital makes a very important contribution to the 3a, bonding MO of 
the bent molecule. It is this factor which is critical in determining 
the shape of the water molecule. The distortion of the linear molecule 

I00 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 5.1 3 The photoelectron 
spectrum of water vapour; ioniza- 
tions from the 1 b,, 3a, and 1 b, 
orbitals are indicated. Ionizations 
from the more stable 2a, orbital 
are not produced by the helium 
radiation used 
produces two orbitals, labelled 4a1 and 3a1 in Figure 5.12, which are 
derived from the 3og' orbital and a component of the 17cu orbital. The 
two orbitals in the bent molecule, having the same symmetry, can mix 
efficiently as they were quite close in energy in the linear molecule, and 
produce a stabilization of the lower orbital, 3a,, which then becomes a 
bonding orbital. 
Experimental confirmation of the order of MO energies for the water 
molecule is given by its photoelectron spectrum. Figure 5.13 shows the 
helium-line photoelectron spectrum of the water molecule. There are 
three ionizations at 1216, 1322 and 1660 kJ mol-I. A fourth ionization 
at 3107 kJ molt' has been measured by using suitable X-ray photons 
instead of the helium emission, That there are the four ionization ener- 
gies is consistent with expectations from the MO levels for a bent C2" 
molecule (see Figure 5.1 2). 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
2000 
1800 
1600 
1400 
1200 
Ionization energy/kJ mol-I 
A study of the magnitudes of the various vibrational excitations asso- 
ciated with the second and third ionizations confirm that the second ion- 
ization is from the 3a1 orbital (this is both 0-H and H-H bonding) and 
that the third ionization is from the lb, orbital (this is 0-H bonding but 
H-H anti-bonding). 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
101 
Conclusion 
The discussion of the distortion of the water molecule from a linear to 
a bent shape allows a tentative general conclusion to be reached. This is 
that if a distortion of a molecule from a particular symmetry allows two 
MOs to mix, so that the lower occupied orbital is stabilized at the expense 
of the higher vacant orbital, such a distortion will occur and will confer 
stability on the distorted molecule. A gain of stability will only occur if 
the two orbitals concerned in the stabilization process are the 
and the 
. If both orbitals are doubly occupied, interaction 
between them does not lead to any change in stability. The generality of 
this conclusion is explored further in the next sections of this chapter 
and in Chapter 6. 
5.3.2 Molecular Orbital Theory of CO, and XeF, 
The linear CO, and XeF, molecules belong to the D_, 
point group and, 
for purposes of classifying their atomic orbitals, the principal quantum 
numbers (2 for C, 5 for Xe) of their valence electrons are omitted in the 
following discussion. 
The s orbitals of C and Xe transform as og+, the p, and p, transform 
as nu, and the p, as ou+. The p s  energy gaps in oxygen and fluorine 
atoms are very large and their 2s orbitals (as formal bonding and anti- 
bonding combination group orbitals) may be regarded as being virtual- 
ly non-bonding. Using the Mulliken numbering system for the CO, case, 
the Is orbitals of the ligand atoms form the log+ and lou+ 
combinations. 
The 1s orbital of the central carbon atom is next highest in energy and 
is labelled as 2og+. The 2s orbitals of the ligand atoms give rise to the 
combinations labelled as 3og+ and 2ou+. 
The 2p orbitals of the ligand atoms, labelled as either A or B to dis- 
tinguish between the two atoms, may be dealt with in two sets of group 
orbitals: the o orbitals being the 2pz lying along the molecular axis, and 

102 
Structure and Bonding 
the n: orbitals being made up from the 2p, and 2py orbitals perpendicu- 
lar to the molecular axis. The 2p orbital group combinations may be 
written as: 
the plus sign being used to indicate a bonding interaction (i. e. a plus 
plus 
overlap), and 
to 
the minus sign indicating an anti-bonding interaction (i. e. a plus 
w overlap). 
to minus 
The 7c group orbital combinations are: 
and 
@(n:g> = W(2Pry), - V(2PY,,), 
(5.4) 
with the signs having the same significance as those in equations 5.1 and 
5.2. A summary of the above classifications is given in Table 5.3. 
Table 5.3 The orbitals of C and Xe and the group orbitals of 0 and F which can 
combine to give the molecular orbitals of CO, and XeF,. 
The references to bonding 
characteristics in the table are with respect to interactions between the two ligand 
atoms 
C or Xe atomic orbital 
0, 
or F2 group orbitals 
ogL (2s -non-bonding) 
ouT (2s -non-bonding) 
og+ (s) 
og+ (2pz bonding) 
0; 
(P,) 
ou+ (2p, anti-bonding) 
ng 
anti-bonding) 
XlJ (Px,,, 
Ku (2PX,$ bonding) 
It is possible to use one qualitative MO energy diagram for CO, and 
XeF, molecules. The diagram is shown in Figure 5.14 and for CO, omits 
the lCTg+, lou+, 2og+, 3og+ and 2ou+ orbitals (i.e. the two ligand 1s orbitals, 
the 1s orbital of the central carbon atom and the two ligand 2s orbitals). 
The orbital numbering by the Mulliken system takes all the orbitals into 
account; hence the numbering on the diagram of Figure 5.14 has the 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
103 
bonding combination of the carbon 2s [cg+(s)] orbital with the 0-0 
bonding 2p, oxygen group orbital [og+(2pZ bonding)] as the 4og+ MO. 
The n: MOs are assumed to be between the bonding and anti-bonding CT 
orbitals, as the n: overlap is normally not as efficient as that of the CT 
atomic orbitals. 
Figure 5.14 A MO diagram for 
the CO, and XeF, molecules 
The 16 valence electrons of the CO, molecule (i.e. 2s22p2 from C 
and 2s22p4 from both 0s) occupy the lowest energy orbitals, in accord 
with the aufbau principle, to give the electronic configuration as 
( 3 ~ ~ ~ + ) ~ ( 2 ~ ~ , + ) ~ ( 4 ~ ~ ~ + ) ~ ( 3 o u ‘ > ~ (  
1 
1 n:R)”. The first two pairs of electrons are 
non-bonding (they are the 2s2 pairs of the oxygen atoms), but the next 
four pairs (two CT and two n:) occupy three-centre (i.e. all three atoms 
participating) bonding MOs and are responsible for the high bond 
strength of the so-called ‘double bonds’ of the molecule (743 kJ mol-’ 
for each nominal C=O bond). The remainder of the electrons occupy the 
three-centre non-bonding ng orbitals. The photoelectron spectrum of the 
CO, molecule indicates ionization energies of 1330, 1671, 1744 and 1872 
kJ mol-I, for the removal of electrons from the hg, h U ,  3 q +  and 4~5’ 
MOs, respectively. 
Some comment is necessary here to emphasize the three-centre nature 
of the bonding in CO,, particularly with respect to the 7c orbitals. The 
three p orbitals in the xz plane and the three in the yz plane (remember 
that the molecular axis is conventionally taken to coincide with the 
z axis) form the three-centre set of three n: MOs, lnU (bonding), lng 
(non-bonding) and 2xU (anti-bonding), the first two orbitals being fully 

I04 
Structure and Bonding 
occupied and leading to the idea that the three atoms are bonded by two 
three-centre n; bonds. The valence bond theory, which depends upon two- 
electron two-centre bonding, provides the CO, molecule with two C=O 
double bonds (with the two n: C-0 bonds at right angles to each other 
with reference to the molecular axis) and can cope with the delocaliza- 
tion of the n system only by postulating the participation of ionic struc- 
tures, -0-CEO+ and +O=C-0-, in the resonance hybrid. This ensures, in 
a clumsier manner than does MO theory, that the doubly degenerate n: 
bonding is delocalized over the three atom centres. The delocalization 
allows the electrons of the n; system to occupy larger orbitals than they 
would occupy in a two-electron, two-centre conventional bond. This 
allows a reduction in the interelectronic repulsion and leads to stronger 
bonding and stabilizes the molecule as a whole. This point can be demon- 
strated by a simple calculation. The standard enthalpy of formation of 
the CO, molecule is -394 kJ mol-'. An estimate of what this would be 
if the molecule were to be constructed from two-electron, two-centre 
bonds (two G and two n; bonds) is calculated by adding the enthalpy 
changes for (i) the sublimation of carbon (715 kJ mol-l), (ii) the disso- 
ciation of dioxygen (496 kJ mol-') and (iii) the production of two C=O 
bonds from one carbon atom and two oxygen atoms (2 x -743 kJ mol-I). 
The calculated enthalpy of formation of the CO, molecule is thus -275 
kJ mol-', which indicates that the localized two double bonded molecule 
would be 119 kJ mol-' less stable than the real delocalized arrangement. 
The energy changes described are shown in Figure 5.15. 
Figure 5.15 The energy 
changes in the formation of car- 
bon dioxide from its elements 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
105 
The electronic configuration of the 22-electron XeF, molecule may be 
deduced from the diagram of Figure 5.14 and may be written (using the 
same prefixes as those for CO,) as (40,')'(30,')~( 
1 .nu)4( 1 ~ ~ ) ~ ( 2 ~ , ) ~ ( 5 0 ~ + ) ~  
for the 18 valency electrons (i.e. ignoring the two 2s pairs of electrons 
of the fluorine atoms). It follows the same pattern as that of the CO, 
molecule with the additional occupancy of the 3og' and the doubly 
degenerate 2.nu orbitals, all three orbitals being anti-bonding. Their occu- 
pancy reduces the resultant bonding in the XeF, molecule to the single 
electron pair in the 3ou+ bonding orbital. The bonding of the molecule 
is equivalent to each Xe-F 'bond' possessing a bond order of 0.5. The 
molecule is only marginally stable with respect to its formation, 
AfH(XeF,,g) = -82 kJ mol I, compared with CO,, AfHe(CO,,g) = -394 
kJ mol-'. A fairer comparison would be to use the standard heat of for- 
mation of CO, from carbon in its gaseous state which is -1 109 kJ mol-'. 
The XeF, molecule would be difficult to describe in terms of valence 
bond theory since conventional electron pair bonds are impossible with 
the filled shell Xe atom, and in MO theory the effects of .n-electron delo- 
calization are not present because of the filled ~ T C ,  anti-bonding orbitals. 
The He-line photoelectron spectrum of XeF, shows five ionization 
energies at 1206, 1322, 1389, 1515 and 1679 kJ mol-I, which have been 
assigned (by a study of the vibrational intervals) to the removal of elec- 
trons from the 2 5 ,  5og', Ing, ln, and 3ou+ orbitals, respectively. The 
reversal of the energies of the 27cu and jog' orbitals, compared to those 
indicated in Figure 5.14, is possibly because of d-orbital participation in 
XeF,, which is not possible in CO,. The MO treatment of XeF, does not 
depend upon (and so does not overemphasize) the inclusion of d-orbital 
contributions from the Xe atom. Reference to the Dmh character table 
shows that the dz2 orbital of xenon transforms as og' and that the dx2 
and dyz orbitals transform as .ng. Those orbitals have suitable symmetries 
to interact with the appropriate orbitals of the fluorine atoms, so that 
the orbitals labelled 5og+ and 1ng could derive some stabilization by 5d 

106 
Structure and Bonding 
participation. The other two d orbitals (xy and x2-y2) transform as the 
representation, $, and cannot participate in the bonding of XeF,. 
An alternative and simpler view of the bonding in XeF, is that using 
three-centre, four-electron bonds (3c4e) consisting of orbitals construct- 
ed from the three p- atomic orbitals of the three atoms. A diagram of 
their overlap is shown in Figure 5.16. The 5p, orbital of the xenon atom 
transforms as og+, 
as does the anti-bonding combination of the two 2pz 
orbitals of the ligand fluorine atoms. The interaction of these two orbitals 
gives rise to the bonding and anti-bonding combinations shown in Figure 
5.17. The non-bonding MO is that produced by the bonding combina- 
tion of the two fluorine orbitals with oU+ 
symmetry. The xenon 5pz orbital 
contains two electrons and the fluorine 2pz orbitals are singly occupied. 
The bonding is produced by the four electrons occupying the og+ 
bond- 
ing MO and the non-bonding oU+ 
MO, leading again to a Xe-F bond 
order of 0.5. This o-only treatment of the bonding in XeF, leads to the 
same conclusions as the more complex MO treatment, and underlines 
the point that it is unnecessary to have any participation from the 5d 
Figure 5.1 6 Overlap diagrams 
for the 
orbitals along the 
-is 
of the XeF, molecule 
level. 
Figure 5.17 The three-centre 
orbitals of the XeF, molecule 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
107 
5.3.3 Molecular Orbital Theory of NO,+, NO, and NO; 
The nitronium cation, NO,+, is linear, but the +4 oxide of nitrogen, NO,, 
and the nitrite [nitrate(III)] ion, NO;, 
are both bent structures and 
belong to the CZv point group. The bond angles and bond lengths for 
NO,', NO, and NO; are given in Table'5.4. The three species form an 
important application of MO theory as it deals with bond angles in cases 
where there is n; bonding. 
Table 5.4 Data for NO,+, NO, and NO,- 
Species 
N-0 
lengthlpm 
G N - 0  angle 
NO,+ 
NO,- 
NO* 
115 
119 
124 
180" 
134" 
115" 
Unlike the molecules in the previous section, the 2p-2s energy gap in 
the central atom is relatively large, and this has an effect on the partic- 
ipation of the 2s orbitals of the nitrogen and oxygen atoms in MO for- 
mation. The MO diagram for NO,+, shown in Figure 5.18, differs 
somewhat from that of Figure 5.14 for CO, because the 2p-2s energy 
gap is much larger in the nitrogen atom. The MOs may be visualized by 
taking the orbital diagrams of Figure 4.1 for E, molecules, stretching 
Figure 5.18 The MO diagram 
for NO,+ 

108 
Structure and Bonding 
them to allow for an atom to be placed into their centres, and then slot- 
ting in the 2s or 2p orbitals of the central atom, as appropriate. 
Because the first ionization energy of the oxygen atom (1310 kJ mol-I) 
is slightly lower than that of the nitrogen atom (1400 kJ mol-l), and 
because the 2p-2s energy gap in 0 (1500 kJ mol-l) is somewhat larger 
than that in N (1050 kJ mol-I), the energies of the 2s atomic orbitals of 
the nitrogen and two oxygen atoms are not very different and MO inter- 
action is possible. The MO diagram may be described in two parts, the 
first assuming no MO mixing (of those orbitals with identical symme- 
try), and then in the second part such orbital mixing is incorporated. 
Working up the diagram in Figure 5.18(a) from the most stable MO, 
the nitrogen 2s orbital interacts with the og+ group combination of the 
oxygen 2s orbitals to give the bonding and anti-bonding MOs labelled 
3og+ and 4og+, respectively. The anti-bonding combination of the oxy- 
gen 2s orbitals is N-0 non-bonding and is labelled 2ou+. The o interac- 
tions between the 2p- orbital of the nitrogen atom and the ouf 
combination of the oxygen 2pz orbitals give the bonding and anti-bond- 
ing MOs labelled 3ou+ and 4ou+ in Figure 5.18. The remaining o MO is 
that which is labelled 5og+ and consists of the bonding combination of 
the oxygen 2pz atomic orbitals, which does not interact with any orbitals 
of the nitrogen atom at this first stage. Next come the doubly degener- 
ate interactions of the 2p, and 2py orbitals of the nitrogen atom with the 
nu combinations of the corresponding orbitals of the oxygen atoms to 
give the bonding and anti-bonding MOs labelled Inu and 2nU. The 
remaining 'x; orbitals are the doubly degenerate 7cg combinations of the 
2p, and 2py orbitals of the oxygen atoms, which are non-bonding and 
have no interaction with nitrogen atomic orbitals and are labelled 17cg in 
Figure 5.18. 
When orbital mixing is considered, it affects the energies of the orbitals 
with identical symmetry and produces the changes shown in Figure 
5.18(b). The 4og+ and 5og+ orbitals mix to stabilize the lower energy 
orbital at the expense of the higher one. This causes the 5og+ orbital to 
be higher in energy than the 27cg set. The anti-bonding 4og+ orbital is 
correspondingly stabilized and becomes less anti-bonding. In a similar 
manner, the interaction between the 2ou+ and 3ou+ orbitals causes the 
bonding 3ou+ orbital to become destabilized as the lower energy 2ou+ 
orbital gains stability. The 3ou+ loses some of its bonding character and 
rises above the Inu level. The crucially important interaction is that 
between the 4og+ and 5og+ orbitals, which prevents the latter orbital being 
occupied in the nitronium ion. Hybridization allows the stabilization of 
the species in this case. That between the 2ou+ and 3ou+ orbitals is rela- 
tively unimportant because both orbitals are occupied and no change of 
energy results from their mixing. The mixing of the 4og+ and 5og+ orbitals 
is shown pictorially in Figure 5.19. 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
109 
Figure 5.1 9 The interactions 
between the 4ug+ and 5og+ 
orbitals of NO,'. The interactions 
between the oxygen orbital con- 
tributions are minimal, and are 
not shown 
In NO,+ there are 16 valency electrons which occupy the lower six levels 
in Figure 5.18(b) to give the electronic configuration (30g')2(20,+)2(40,')2 
(1~,)~(30,+)~( 
l q 4 ,  equivalent to a formal bond order of 3.0 arising from 
the three pairs of bonding electrons in the 3ou+ and Ix, orbitals. Because 
of the stabilization of the 4og+ orbital it may be regarded as almost non- 
bonding, so that the bonding effect of the electron pair in the 3og+ orbital 
gives a boost to the bond order by another unit. This means that the 
two bonds in the nitronium ion may be considered to be double bonds, 
but it is important to realize that the four pairs of bonding electrons are 
over the three atom centres to give an extra stability to the 
ion. 

110 
Structure and Bonding 
NO, and NO; 
If NO, and NO,- were linear, their valency electrons in excess of 16 would 
occupy the anti-bonding 2.nu anti-bonding level, (27~~)' 
for NO, and (2nJ2 
for NO,-. By having bent structures they avoid the occupancy of anti- 
bonding orbitals, and thereby achieve a greater stability than they would 
have if they were linear. In constructing the MO diagram shown in Figure 
5.20 it is important to note how the MOs of the linear molecules shown 
in Figure 5.18(b) transform with respect to the new symmetry of the C," 
point group to which the bent molecules belong. 
Starting with the lowest energy orbitals and working upwards, in 
Figure 5.20 the 3og' orbital becomes the 3a, orbital. Bending brings the 
ligand atoms together, and in this case the resulting orbital becomes more 
stable since the contributions from the oxygen 2s orbitals are in a bond- 
ing mode. The 2ou+ orbital becomes the 2b, of the bent molecules and 
is slightly higher in energy because of the anti-bonding mode of the 
oxygen 2s orbitals from which this orbital is constructed. The 4og+ orbital 
becomes the 4a, orbital of the bent molecules, deriving a little stability 
because the oxygen 2s contributions are in a bonding mode. The dou- 
bly degenerate 17cLl MOs of the linear molecules lose their degeneracy in 
the bent cases, with transformation into the orbitals labelled lb, and 5a,, 
the former orbital remaining as a .n-type orbital. The 5a, orbital is at a 
higher level then the Inu, as it has lost some of its bonding character. 
Figure 5.20 A MO diagram for 
bent NO, species 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
I 1  1 
The 3ou+ orbital becomes the 3b, of the bent molecules and increases in 
energy slightly because it becomes less N-0 bonding, and the anti-bond- 
ing mode of the oxygen 2p orbitals from which this orbital is constructed 
approach more closely and are more anti-bonding. The non-bonding lng 
set of degenerate orbitals splits upon bending into the 4b, and la, pair 
of orbitals, the former having a slightly higher energy because the oxy- 
gen 2p contributions are in an anti-bonding mode. The la, orbital is also 
destabilized since it is more 0-0 anti-bonding in the bent cases. 
So far, the changes described apply to orbitals which are all occupied 
in the molecules under discussion, and therefore do not alter the over- 
all stability of the molecules substantially. This is not the case for the 
anti-bonding 27cU orbitals, which in NO, and NO,- represent the HOMOS. 
They lose their degeneracy by bending, to give the orbitals labelled as 
2b, and 6a,. The former remains as an anti-bonding n;-type orbital, and 
the latter is approximately non-bonding and initially derives some 
stabilization as a result. The 50~' orbital is the LUMO for NO, and 
NO;, 
and which in the linear molecule is a bonding combination of the 
two oxygen 2p orbitals, is initially regarded to be unchanged in energy 
in the bent examples where it becomes labelled as 7a,. The highest ener- 
gy orbital in the linear case is 4oU+ and becomes the 5b, orbital of the 
bent molecules. The oxygen 2p contributions are in an anti-bonding 
mode, but there is a loss of some N-0 anti-bonding character so the 
orbital is slightly destabilized in the bent molecules. 
Having dealt with the transformation of all the MOs of the linear 
molecules to those of the bent variety, there is a very important extra 
effect which is incorporated into Figure 5.20 as the result of the inter- 
action of the orbitals 6a, and 7a,. Because these orbitals have the same 
symmetry and are fairly close to each other in energy, they may and do 
interact so that the 6a, orbital is stabilized at the expense of the 7a, 
orbital. The atomic orbital contributions to the MOs are shown in Figure 
5.2 1 for the 2nU-6a, and 5og+-7a, transformations. 
The interaction between the 3b, and 4b, orbitals stabilizes the former 
at the expense of the latter, but since the two orbitals are both occupied 
in the molecules being discussed there is no change in their total ener- 
gies and the interaction is not important. The 6a,-7aI interaction has 
consequences for the electronic configurations of NO, and NO,- and 
their bond angles. The highest energy electrons in NO, and NO,- have 
the configurations (6a,)I and (6a,):, respectively, and since this orbital is 
strongly stabilized upon bending, the bond angles are consistent with the 
transition from the linear NO,+ to the bent NO, and NO;, 
the latter 
having a smaller bond angle than the former since it has two electrons 
in the 6a, orbital. 
As in the case of the distortion of the linear water molecule (Section 
5.2. l), this more complicated treatment of NO, species arrives at the con- 

I I 2  
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 5.21 The 2nu-6a, and 
5og+-7a, orbital transformations 
which occur when NO,' 
bends 
clusion that the distortion (i.e. bending) of the NO, and NO,- species 
occurs because of the stabilization of their HOMOS. The stabilization is 
possible because the distortion allows the HOMO and LUMO of the 
bent molecules to have the same symmetry, and therefore they mix, giv- 
ing stability to the lower of the two orbitals and to the molecule, since 
the higher orbital is vacant. 
5.3.4 XeF, again 
In Section 5.2.2 the electronic configuration of the XeF, molecule is 
treated as being very similar to that of the linear molecule CO,. That is 
because they are both linear molecules. It is clear that CO, should be 
linear from the electronic configuration derived in Section 5.2.2, in which 
the C-0 bond orders are shown to be 2 and the inter-ligand repulsion 
is minimized. In XeF,, however, the bond orders are a mere 0.5, and 
some reason should be furnished for its linearity. Electrons occupy anti- 
bonding orbitals, (2q4( 5crg+)*, and surely some distortion should occur 
which gives rise to some stabilization, as it does in the cases of NO, and 
NO,-. There is no alleviation of instability for XeF, even if it is distort- 
ed to a bent state, because the HOMO would then be the doubly occu- 
pied 7a, orbital, which would cancel out the stabilization of having the 
6a, orbital occupied. The molecule is linear because of the minimization 
of inter-ligand repulsion, rather than any electronic cause. 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
113 
5.3.5 Conclusions 
Predictions of the shapes of triatomic molecules, based on the above 
ideas, indicate that 16-electron molecules should be linear (no anti- 
bonding orbitals occupied), but molecules with 17-20 electrons will be 
bent because of electronic stabilization. Molecules with 2 1 electrons 
should have the larger angle associated with the 17-electron molecules, 
the latter having the configuration (6aJ' and the former having 
(6a,)2(2b,)2(7al)1. Molecules with 22 electrons will be linear because of 
the absence of electronic stabilization and the minimization of inter- 
ligand repulsion. Table 5.5 gives examples of molecules having numbers 
of valence electrons from 16 to 22 and their electronic configurations and 
bond angles. 
Table 5.5 Bond angles and electronic configurations for molecules with 16-22 elec- 
trons 
Example 
Number of valence electrons 
6a, 
2b, 
7a, 
Bond 
angle 
co2 
16 
NO2 
17 
ONCl 
18 
CIO, 
19 
OCI, 
20 
XeF,+ 
21 
XeF, 
22 
~~ 
~~~ 
0 
0 
0 
180" 
1 
0 
0 
134" 
2 
0 
0 
116" 
2 
1 
0 
117" 
2 
2 
0 
111" 
2 
2 
1 
134" 
2 
2 
2 
180" 
The examples given in Table 5.5 are molecules whose electronic con- 
figurations are reasonably deduced from Figures 5.14, 5.18 and 5.20. 
Table 5.6 gives bond length and bond angle data for some compounds 
with the formula EL,, where E can be 0, S or Se and L can be H, F or 
c1. 
Because the relevant s and p orbitals of sulfur and selenium are clos- 
er together and at higher general energies than the 2s and 2p orbitals of 
oxygen, it is not possible to use any of the diagrams of this chapter 
to discuss their electronic configurations. Some general comments may 
be made about the trends in bond angles. In the series of OL, compounds 
there is very little correlation of bond angle with the size of the ligand 
atoms, although there is some correlation in the quantities for the SL, 
compounds. Across the series of EH,, EF, and ECl, compounds there 
is a reduction in the bond angle as the size of the central atom increas- 
es. The limit of the size reduction seems to be 90°, corresponding to 
the full participation of the two p orbitals in the bonding and to the 

114 
Structure and Bonding 
Table 5.6 Bond length and bond angle data for some compounds with the formu- 
la E L .  The differences between the electronegativity coefficients (Allred-Rochow) of 
the elements are also given 
~~~ 
Property 
OH, 
SH, 
SeH, 
Angle 
104.5' 
92" 
91" 
r(F-H)/pm 
96 
133 
146 
r(H-H)/pm 
152 
192 
208 
6x 
1.3 
0.2 
0.3 
OF, 
SF, 
Angle 
103.8" 
98' 
r( E-F)/pm 
141 
159 
r( F-F)/pm 
222 
240 
Sx 
0.6 
1.7 
OCI, 
SCI, 
~~~~ 
~ 
Angle 
110.8" 
103' 
r(CI-Cl)/pm 
282 
31 3 
6x 
0.7 
0.4 
r( E-Cl)/pm 
170 
200 
maximization of electronic stabilization. This latter factor overrides the 
effects of inter-ligand repulsion. There is no noticeable correlation 
between the physical data and the differences in the electronegativity 
coefficients of the participating elements in the compounds considered. 
From a VSEPR viewpoint it might be expected that the non-bonding 
pairs would have less effect on reducing the bond angles from the 
expected regular tetrahedral angle as the size of the central atom 
increased. It might also be expected that as the ligand atoms become 
more electronegative they would have a greater share of the bonding 
electrons and would repel each other more strongly, leading to a larger 
bond angle. Both predictions from VSEPR theory seem not to hold. 
5.4 
Hydrogen Bonding and the Hydrogen 
Difluoride ion, HF; 
The hydrogen difluoride ion has a central hydrogen atom and belongs 
to the Dm, 
point group. It is important in explaining the weakness of 
hydrogen fluoride as an acid in aqueous solution, and as an example of 
. Hydrogen bonding occurs usually between molecules 
which contain a suitable hydrogen atom and one or more of the very 
electronegative atoms N, 0 or F. It is to be considered, in general, as a 
particularly strong intermolecular force. 
In the case of HF,- it may be considered that the ion is a combina- 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
115 
tion of an HF molecule and a fluoride ion, F . Both of those chemical 
entities have considerable thermodynamic stability independently of each 
other. Their combination in HF,- indicates the operation of a force of 
attraction which is significantly greater than the normal intermolecular 
forces which operate in all systems of molecules. The latter forces are 
responsible for the stability of the liquid and solid phases of chemical 
substances. They counteract the tendency towards chaos. The majority 
of hydrogen bonding occurs in systems where the hydrogen atom, 
responsible for the bonding, is asymmetrically placed between the two 
electronegative atoms (one from each molecule). In those cases the bond- 
ing may be regarded as an extraordinary interaction between two dipolar 
molecules. The extraordinary nature of the effect originates in the high 
effectiveness of the almost unshielded hydrogen nucleus in attracting 
electrons from where they are concentrated: around the very electro- 
negative atoms of neighbouring molecules. The hydrogen bond in the 
HF; ion is capable of treatment by bonding theories. 
The VSEPR treatment is best approached by considering the ion as 
made up from three ions: F- + H+ + F-. The central proton possesses 
no electrons until the ligand fluoride ions supply two each. The two pairs 
of electrons repel each other to give the observed linear configuration of 
the three atoms. The two pairs of electrons would occupy the 1s and 2s 
orbitals of the hydrogen atom and, what with a considerable amount of 
interelectronic repulsion, would not lead to stability. 
The MO theory is straightforward. The hydrogen 1s orbital trans- 
forms as og' within the D_,, 
point group. The 2p- orbitals of the fluorine 
atoms (since the ion is set-up with the molecularaxis coincident with the 
Cartesian z axis) may be arranged in the linear combinations: 
the As and Bs indicating that the 2p contributions are from the two flu- 
orine atoms. 
MOs may be constructed from the two orbitals of $+ symmetry to 
give bonding and anti-bonding combinations. The orbital, localized on 
the fluorine atoms, of oZ4+ 
symmetry remains as a non-bonding orbital. 
The MO diagram is shown in Figure 5.22. The four electrons, which may 
be regarded to have been supplied by two fluoride ions, occupy the bond- 
ing and non-bonding orbitals and the F-H bond order is 0.5. This is con- 
sistent with the observed weakness of the hydrogen bond of 126 kJ mol-' 
(the AHe of the reaction of HF; to give H' + HF), although that is very 
large relative to 'normal' hydrogen bond strengths of 10-30 kJ molk'. 

116 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 5.22 A MO diagram for 
the HF,- ion 

Covalent Bonding 111: Triatomic Molecules; Bond Angles 
1 17 
Over and above the normal van der Waals forces which are responsible 
for the cohesion of molecular compounds in the solid and liquid states, 
hydrogen bonding occurs between molecules containing electronegative 
atoms (ie. mainly 0 and N) and hydrogen atoms. It may be regarded 
as an enhanced form of dipole-dipole interaction, as shown in Figure 
H 
H 
I
'
 
5.23 for the water molecule, and in water is responsible for the arrange- 
ment of the molecules in the various forms of ice. When ice melts the 
Figure 5.23 Dipoledipole inter- 
action between two water mole- 
liquid water retains some local order, which is finally broken down com- 
pletely when the liquid boils. 
The HF,- ion is isoelectronic with the unknown compound helium 
difluoride, HeF,. The latter compound would have a very similar elec- 
tronic configuration to that of HF,-. The reason for its non-existence is 
indicated by the values of the first ionization energies of H- and He 
(which are isoelectronic) of 73 and 2372 kJ mol-', respectively. The attrac- 
tion for electrons represented by the large ionization energy of the helium 
atom is greater than that exerted by the two fluorine atoms, making the 
formation of a stable compound impossible. The molecule XeF, exists 
(even though the first ionization energy of Xe is 1170 kJ mol-I), although 
it is very weakly bonded. 
cules as an example of hydrogen 
bonding 

118 
Structure and Bonding 

Covalent Bonding IV: 
Poly atomic Molecules 
Polyatomic molecules, in this book, are those with more than three 
atoms. The discussions in this chapter are restricted to a selection of 
small polyatomic molecules. Treatments of the shapes and bonding by 
VSEPRhalence bond theory and MO theories are included and com- 
pared. MO theory is presented in a less detailed fashion, and its main 
conclusions described rather than constructing the orbital diagrams, as 
is done in Chapter 3 for triatomic molecules. The molecules whose bond- 
ing schemes are described are (1) the two hydrides NH, and CH,; (2) a 
series of tetra-atomic fluorides, BF,, NF, and CIF, with varying num- 
bers of valence electrons, treated in a less rigorous fashion and (3) some 
‘two-centre’ molecules are described: B,H, and ethane are compared. 
Finally, the predictions of molecular shapes by the VSEPR and MO 
theories are summarized. 
6.1 
Ammonia, NH, 
6.1.1 VSEPR Theory 
The VSEPR theory of the ammonia molecule starts with the nitrogen 
atom (2s22p3), to which is added the 1s electrons from the three hydro- 
I19 

120 
Structure and Bonding 
gen atoms, so producing the 2s22p6 configuration in the valence shell of 
the nitrogen atom. The four pairs of CJ electrons adopt a tetrahedral dis- 
tribution to minimize electron pair repulsions. One of the four tetrahe- 
dral positions is occupied by a lone pair, the other three being those of 
the three bonding pairs. The molecular shape should be trigonally pyram- 
idal, with bond angles somewhat smaller than those of a regular tetra- 
hedron, because of the extra repulsion between the lone pair and the 
bonding pairs (see Section 5.2.1). The molecule is a trigonal pyramid 
with HNH bond angles of 107". 
6.1.2 Molecular Orbital Theory 
The ammonia molecule is a trigonal pyramid, belonging to the C," point 
group. The 2s and 2p orbitals of the nitrogen atom and the 1s orbital 
group combinations of the three hydrogen atoms transform, with respect 
to the C3" point group, as indicated in Table 6.1. 
Table 6.1 Orbitals of the nitrogen and hydrogen atoms of the ammonia molecule 
Orbital 

Covalent Bonding I V  Polyatomic Molecules 
121 
The 2s and 2p- orbitals of the nitrogen atom have the same symmetry, 
a,, and therefdre can mix or hybridize. The description of the bonding 
in ammonia is aided by allowing the two orbitals to mix before con- 
structing the MOs. The process occurs along the z axis, which coincides 
with the C, axis of the molecule. The two linear combinations may be 
written as in equations 6.1 and 6.2, neither of which contains a normal- 
ization factor, nor do they indicate the exact 2s:2p mixtures; the c fac- 
tors allow for unequal mixing, which is necessary because of the large 
energy gap between the two atomic orbitals. 
The two hybrid orbitals are shown pictorially in Figure 6.1. Figure 6.1 
also shows the positions of the a, group orbital of the three hydrogen 
atoms. The minus sign in equation 6.1 indicates that the 2p- contribu- 
tion to 2a, is that which is directed towards the three hydrogen atoms 
in the ammonia molecule, the 3a, hybrid orbital pointing along the pos- 
itive direction of the z axis, also shown in Figure 6.1. The 2a, nitrogen 
orbital may interact with the a, group orbital of the three hydrogen atoms 
to give bonding and anti-bonding combinations, labelled as 2a, and 4a, 
in the MO diagram shown in Figure 6.2. The 3a, orbital has-some 2s 
Figure 6., 
The mixing of the 2s 
content which reduces its energy, but it is essentially non-bonding and 
and 2a- atomic orbitals of the 
- L  
the two electrons which it contains are localized along the z axis point- 
nitrogen atom in the pyramidal 
ing away from the direction where the hydrogen atoms are located. 
ammonia molecule, and the rela- 
tionship of the hybrid orbitals with 
the a, grOUD orbital of the three 
There is a doubly degenerate interaction between the e-type orbitals 
I
-
 
. 
of the nitrogen atom and those of the ligand hydrogen atoms to give the 
hydrogen atoms 

122 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 6.2 The MO diagram of 
the trigonally pyramidal (C,J 
ammonia molecule 
molecular orbitals labelled as le (bonding) and 2e (anti-bonding). The 
pyramidal ammonia molecule has the valence electronic configuration 
(2a,)2(le)4(3a,)2, in which the electrons occupying the 2a, and le orbitals 
are bonding, which makes the total bond order 3, shared out between 
the three supposed bonds between the nitrogen atom and the three lig- 
and hydrogen atoms and gives such bonds single bond status. 
The photoelectron spectrum of the ammonia molecule is consistent with 
the molecular orbital conclusions: there are three ionization energies at 

Covalent Bonding IV: Polyatomic Molecules 
123 
1050, 1445 and 2605 kJ mol-I, corresponding to the removal of electrons 
from the 3a,, le and 2a, molecular orbitals, respectively. 
6.2 
Methane, CH, 
6.2.1 VSEPR Theory 
The methane molecule is a very important molecule in organic chemistry, 
the geometry around the tetravalent carbon atom being basic to the 
understanding of the structure, isomerism and optical activity of a very 
large number of compounds. It is a tetrahedral molecule belonging to 
the tetrahedral point group, T(,. 
The VSEPR theory assumes that the four electrons from the valence 
shell of the carbon atom plus the valency electrons from the four hydro- 
gen atoms form four identical electron pairs which, at minimum repul- 
sion, give the observed tetrahedral shape. To rationalize the tetrahedral 
disposition of four bond-pair orbitals with those of the 2s and three 2p 
atomic orbitals of the carbon atom, sp3 hybridization is invoked. 

124 
Structure and Bonding 
6.2.2 Molecular Orbital Theory 
The transformation properties of the orbitals of the carbon atom and 
the group orbitals of the four hydrogen atoms, with respect to the Td 
point group, are given in Table 6.2. 
Table 6.2 Symmetries of the valence orbitals of the carbon atom and the group 
orbitals of the hydrogen atoms of the methane molecule 
Orbital 
Td 
The MO diagram for the methane molecule is shown in Figure 6.3. 
Atomic overlap diagrams for the two sets of bonding MOs are incor- 
porated into Figure 6.3, and emphasize their five-centre nature. In Td 
symmetry there is a total match between the two a, and two t, sets of 
orbitals (C and H). The electronic configuration of the methane mole- 
cule is (2a,)2( 1 tJ6. All eight electrons occupy bonding orbitals, and give 
all four bonds single bond status. 
Figure 6.3 The MO diagram of 
tetrahedral (T,) methane, and 
overlap diagrams for the la, and 
It, orbitals. The Is orbital of the 
carbon atom is not shown, but 
would be labelled la, 

Covalent Bonding IV: Polyatomic Molecules 
125 
The VSEPR assumption that there are four identical localized electron 
pair bonds in the four C-H regions, made up from sp3 hybrid carbon 
orbitals and the hydrogen 1s orbitals, is not consistent with the experi- 
mentally observed photoelectron spectrum. The MO theory is consistent 
with the two ionizations shown in the photoelectron spectrum of CH, 
and implies that the bonding consists of four electron pairs which occupy 
the la, and It, five-centre MOs. 
The photoelectron spectrum is shown in Figure 6.4 and shows that 
A 
2200 
2000 
1800 
1600 
1400 
1200 
- 
Ionization energykJ mol-1 
Figure 6.4 A photoelectron 
spectrum of the methane mole- 
cule 

126 
Structure and Bonding 
F 
I 
F / ~ B ’ F  
F 
B 
F’ 
\ F  i 
F 
I 
F/B*F 
Figure 6.5 The three canonical 
forms of the BF, molecule 
there are two ionization energies at 1230 and 2160 kJ mol-’, correspon- 
ding to the removal of electrons from the It2 and la, MOs: respective- 
ly. The valence electrons in CH, are accommodated in two levels of 
energy rather than the single level implied by the hybridization approach. 
6.3 Boron, Nitrogen and Chlorine Trifluorides 
Most of the principles by which AB, molecules, such as BET,, NF, and 
ClF,, are treated have been dealt with in previous sections. For this rea- 
son, their treatments are presented in a relatively concise fashion with 
only additional points being stressed. 
6.3.1 Boron Trifluoride 
The VSEPR treatment of the shape of the BF, molecule depends upon 
the three 0 electron pairs repelling each other to a position of minimum 
repulsion, giving the molecule its trigonally planar configuration. The 
molecule belongs to the D,, point group, but experimental observation 
of the B-F internuclear distance (130 pm) shows it to be smaller than 
that in the BF,- ion (153 pm). Between the same two atoms a shorter 
distance implies a higher bond order. The VSEPR treatment ignores any 
possible contribution to the bonding which may be made by the other 
electrons of the ligand fluorine atoms. It assumes that the fluorine con- 
tributions are just the three <T electrons (one electron per fluorine atom). 
Although the boron atom only provides three valence electrons, the 
four valence shell orbitals are occupied additionally by three 0 electrons 
and a pair of n electrons from the fluorine atoms to make up the nor- 
mal octet of electrons surrounding central atoms of the main group ele- 
ments. The three canonical forms of the BF, molecule are shown in 
Figure 6.5. 
In valence bond terms the bonding consists of three 0 bonds and one 
n: bond. The latter are electron pair bonds between 
two atoms in which both electrons originate from one of the participat- 
ing atoms. 
In the MO treatment of the D,, BF, molecule the 2p- orbital of the 
boron atom transforms as an a2” representation, as does one of the lin- 
ear combinations of fluorine 2p, group orbitals (all F-F n bonding). The 
MO diagram is shown in Figuie 6.6. 
or 

Covalent Bonding IV: Polyatomic Molecules 
127 
Figure 6.6 A MO diagram for 
BF, with the five non-bonding 
MOs placed on one level 

128 
Structure and 6onding 

Covalent Bonding I V  Polyatomic Molecules 
129 

130 
Structure and Bonding 
The NF, molecule has two extra electrons, compared to BF,, which 
would occupy an anti-bonding n-type 2a,” orbital if it had a trigonally 
planar shape. The ClF, molecule with another two electrons would make 
use of the anti-bonding 0-type 4a,’ orbital if the molecule were to be 
trigonally planar. It is to avoid use of anti-bonding orbitals that they 
adopt different symmetries. 
6.3.2 Nitrogen Trifluoride, NF, 
In VSEPR theory the valence shell configuration of the nitrogen atom 
in NF, is 2s22p3, and the addition of the three o-type electrons from the 
fluorine atoms gives the octet 2s22p6: four pairs of 0 electrons which dis- 
tribute themselves tetrahedrally around the nitrogen atom. The three 
identical bonding pairs are squeezed together somewhat by the extra 
repulsion of the lone pair to give a trigonally pyramidal molecule with 
bond angles slightly less than the regular tetrahedral angle. The observed 
angle is 104”. 
If the NF, molecule possessed a trigonally planar structure, its 
electronic configuration would be that of the BF, molecule with the extra 
pair of electrons occupying the anti-bonding 2a2” (n) orbital. That would 
cancel out any bonding effect of the two electrons in the bonding la,” 
(n) orbital, and it would not have the extra stability of the n; bonding 
possessed by the BF, molecule. For trigonally planar NF, the highest 
energy occupied molecular orbital (HOMO) would be the anti-bonding 
2a,” orbital and the LUMO would be the anti-bonding o-type 4a,’ 
orbital. If a distortion from D,, symmetry to C,y occurs, both orbitals 
have a, symmetry. In that case, they can mix, which leads to the stabi- 

Covalent Bonding I V  Polyatomic Molecules 
131 
lization of the lower energy orbital at the expense of the higher one. In 
the trigonally pyramidal molecule, the HOMO is non-bonding. The MO 
diagram shown in Figure 6.7 is constructed by allowing the 2s and 2p- 
orbitals of the nitrogen atom to hybridize so that one hybrid is directed 
symmetrically towards the three ligand fluorine atoms and the other 
hybrid is 180" from that orbital directed away from the bonding region. 
Figure 6.7 A MO diagram for 
NF3 
The hybrid pointing towards the ligand fluorine atoms and the other 
two 2p orbitals of the nitrogen atom form the three bonding orbitals 
(4a1, 3e) and the corresponding three anti-bonding orbitals (7a,, 6e). The 
other six orbitals (derived from the 2p orbitals of the three fluorine 
atoms), and which are localized on the fluorine atoms, form non-bond- 
ing group orbitals with the symmetries and numbering 5a,, 4e, 5e and 
la,. They are filled in the NF, molecule, as is the hybrid orbital direct- 
ed away from the bonding region, and which has the label 6a1, and forms 
the HOMO. Thus the molecule achieves an N-F bond order of one per 
bond, and avoids the use of an anti-bonding orbital. The major effect 
on the energies of the MOs as the symmetry changes from trigonal plane 
to trigonal pyramid are shown in Figure 6.8. The 2a," and 4a,' orbitals 
both adopt a, symmetry, and allow the stabilization of the two electrons 
in the 6a, orbital of the trigonally pyramidal molecule. The ClF, mole- 
cule with a trigonally pyramidal symmetry would have to use the anti- 
bonding Sa,orbital and avoids this by adopting a lower symmetry. 

132 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 6.8 A diagram showing 
the interaction of the 4a,' and 
2a," MOs of trigonally planar NF, 
permitted by a distortion of the 
molecule, giving a shape of lower 
symmetry, i.e. trigonally pyramidal 
6.3.3 Chlorine Trifluoride, CIF, 
The VSEPR treatment of the ClF, molecule employs a chlorine 3d orbital 
to contain one of the electron pairs. The chlorine atom is normally 3s23p5, 
and as such is expected to be univalent. To arrange for it to be trivalent 
one of the paired-up 3p electrons is excited to a 3d level. Then, the three 
electrons from the ligand fluorine atoms may be added to give the con- 
figuration 3s23p63d2, making five G electron pairs, three of which are 
bonding and two are non-bonding. The basic electron pair distribution 
is expected to be trigonally bipyramidal, as in dsp3 hybridization. There 
are three possible shapes for ClF, which result from placing the three 
fluorine atoms in the two different positions in the trigonal bipyramid, 
either in the trigonal plane or in a position along the C3 axis of the trig- 
onal bipyramid. The three possible shapes are (1) trigonally planar, with 
the two lone pairs in apical positions, (2) trigonally pyramidal, with one 
lone pair in an apical position and the other in the trigonal plane and 
(3) T-shaped, with both lone pairs in the trigonal plane. There is a general 
rule which is based upon a detailed consideration of the repulsions 
between bonding-bonding and bonding-non-bonding and between two 
non-bonding pairs of electrons. This is that (for the case of five electron 
pairs) non-bonding pairs are more stable in the trigonal plane. Applied to 
ClF,, this rule implies that the molecule should be T-shaped. The rela- 
tively greater repelling effects of the two in-plane non-bonding pairs 
cause the angle F-Cl-F to be slightly less than 90". The observed angle 

Covalent Bonding IV: Polyatomic Molecules 
133 
170 pm I 870 21 
is 87", as is shown in the diagram of Figure 6.9. The VSEPR treatment, 
incorporating a d orbital, gives the impression that there are three 0 
bonds of equal strength, but this is not consistent with the different bond 
The molecule belongs to the C2v point group. It may be set up with 
respect to the z axis as shown in Figure 6.10. A MO diagram is shown 
in Figure 6.11. 
CIF, molecule 
lengths of the ClF, molecule. 
160 pm 
Figure 6m9 The structure of the 
Figure 6.10 The CIF, molecule 
set up in the yz plane 
Figure 6.11 A MO diagram for 
CIF, 
The 3s and 3p, orbitals of the chlorine atom may be hybridized to 
give one hybrid directed towards the fluorine atom positioned on the z 
axis, the other pointing in the opposite direction. The hybrid directed 
towards the fluorine atom can undertake MO formation via the 2pz 
orbital of the fluorine atom. The only other bonding combination is 
between the 3py orbital of the chlorine atom (b,) and a group orbital of 
that symmetry constructed from the 2py orbitals of the fluorine atoms 
positioned along the y axis. That leaves seven non-bonding orbitals orig- 
inating on the fluorine atoms and the hybrid orbital pointing away from 
the bonding region (6a,) along the z axis. That and the 3p, orbital of 
the chlorine atom (3b,) are also non-bonding. The latter orbital is the 
HOMO for the molecule. Thus, some bonding is achieved and the use 
of anti-bonding orbitals avoided, but the overall bonding consists of only 
two bonding pairs, one localized in the bond between chlorine and the 
fluorine atom along the z axis and the other forming a 3c2e bond along 
the y axis. 
The symmetries of the d orbitals of the chlorine atom allow some sta- 
bilization of the two bonding orbitals, which is consistent with the 
assumptions made by the VSEPR approach. Both theoretical approach- 
es offer a reason for the deviation from T-shape to an arrow shape for 

134 
Structure and Bonding 
the ClF, molecule. VSEPR theory postulates that there are two lone pairs 
in the trigonal plane containing the unique C1-F bond, which repel the 
two bonding pairs along the y axis. MO theory has the sp hybrid orbital 
diametrically opposed to the unique C1-F bond, which can cause the 
same type of distortion. 

Covalent Bonding I V  Polyatomic Molecules 
135 
6.3.4 Bond Angle Comparisons in Some Group 15 
Hydrides and Halides 
Table 6.4 contains some bond length and bond angle data for the 
hydrides, fluorides and chlorides of nitrogen, phosphorus and arsenic. 
The differences in the electronegativity coefficients (Allred-Rochow) in 
the compounds are also given. 
Table 6.4 Bond length, bond angle and electronegativity coefficient (Ax) data for 
some EL, compounds, where E = N, P or As, and L = H, F or CI 
~~~ 
~ 
~~ 
~ 
Molecule 
Property 
NL, 
PL, 
AsL, 
Bond angle 
106.6" 
93.5" 
91.8" 
r( E-H)/pm 
101.5 
142 
152 
r( E-E)/pm 
163 
207 
218 
Ax 
0.9 
0.1 
0 
Bond angle 
102.1" 
100" 
102" 
r(E-H)/pm 
137 
154 
171 
r( E-E)/pm 
21 3 
236 
266 
Ax 
1 .o 
2.0 
1.9 
ECI, 
Bond angle 
107.1' 
100.1" 
98.4" 
(E-H)/p m 
176 
204 
216 
r( E-E)/pm 
283 
313 
327 
Ax 
0.3 
0.7 
0.6 
Because the relevant s and p orbitals of phosphorus and arsenic are 
closer together and at higher general energies than the 2s and 2p orbitals 
of oxygen, it is not possible to use any of the diagrams of this chapter 
to discuss their electronic configurations. Some general comments may 
be made about the trends in bond angles. In the three series of com- 
pounds there is very little correlation of bond angle with the size of 
the ligand atoms. Across the series of EH,, EF, and EC1, compounds 
there is a reduction in the bond angle as the size of the central atom 
increases. The limit of the size reduction seems to be 90°, corresponding 
to the full participation of the two p orbitals in the bonding and to the 
maximization of electronic stabilization. This latter factor overrides the 
effects of inter-ligand repulsion. There is no noticeable correlation 
between the physical data and the differences in the electronegativity 
coefficients of the participating elements in the compounds considered. 
From a VSEPR viewpoint it might be expected that the non-bonding 
pairs would have less effect on reducing the bond angles from the expect- 
ed regular tetrahedral angle as the size of the central atom increased. It 
might also be expected that as the ligand atoms become more elec- 

I36 
Structure and Bonding 
tronegative they would have a greater share of the bonding electrons and 
would repel each other more strongly, leading to a larger bond angle. 
Both predictions from VSEPR theory seem not to hold. 
6.4 
Ethane, C,H,, 
and Diborane, B2H6 
The ethane molecule, C,H,, can be regarded as the dimer of the free rad- 
ical CH,, which has an odd electron. The two odd electrons from two 
methyl radicals can pair up to make the conventional C-C <T bond to 
give the covalently saturated ethane molecule. The two methyl groups 
have rotational freedom with respect to rotation around the C-C axis, 
although it has been estimated that the difference in energy between the 
eclipsed and staggered forms of the molecule is 12.6 kJ mol-', an amount 
not sufficiently large to offer the possibility of their independent sepa- 
rate existence. The geometry around each carbon atom is expected to be 
tetrahedral, as indicated from the VSEPR theory applied to four valence 
shell electron pairs. 
The diborane molecule, B,H,, is the simplest of the boron hydrides and 
can be considered as the dimer of the BH, molecule, which has only a 
transient existence. There are important differences between the dibo- 
rane molecule and that of ethane. In addition to being a molecule with 
two 'central' atoms in the VSEPR sense, diborane poses an unusual prob- 
lem in chemistry. The molecule is described as 'electron deficient' in the 
sense that there are only 12 valency electrons (three from each B plus 
one from each H) available for the bonding of the eight atoms. The struc- 
ture of the molecule is shown in Figure 6.12. The boron atoms are sur- 
rounded by four hydrogen atoms, two of which (the bridging atoms) are 
shared between them. The coordination of the boron atoms is irregu- 
larly tetrahedral with HBH angles of 97' for the bridging hydrogen atoms 
and 121.5' for the terminal angles. The molecule belongs to the D,, point 
group. The terminal B-H distances are 119 pm and the bridge bonds are 
all 133 pm long. 
Figure em12 The structure of 
the diborane molecule 

Covalent Bonding IV: Polyatomic Molecules 
137 
The VSEPR theory can be applied to the geometry around both of 
the boron atoms. The boron atom has the configuration 2s22p1 and could 
be made ‘trivalent’ by the excitation of one of the 2s electrons to an oth- 
erwise vacant 2p orbital: 2s12p2. Bearing in mind that the boron is 
involved in some form of bonding to four hydrogen atoms, the only sen- 
sible distribution is that in which the three electrons from the hydrogen 
atoms [being half the number of ls(H) electrons available] are placed in 
the valence shell of the boron atom to give the configuration 
2s22p22p12p1, with two singly occupied 2p orbitals. 
The normal practice of making electron pairs has to be abandoned. 
The VSEPR argument continues by considering the minimization of the 
repulsions between the two pairs of electrons and the two unpaired elec- 
trons. This gives a distorted tetrahedral distribution with the electron 
pairs (those involved with the terminal B-H bonding) being further apart 
than the ‘bonds’ associated with the single electrons (which participate 
in the bridging B-H bonding). The two irregular tetrahedra, so formed, 
join up by sharing the bridging hydrogen atoms to give the observed D,, 
symmetry of the molecule. Localized bonding could be inferred from this 
treatment and this leads to the idea of there being four localized 
one-electron bonds in the bridging between the two boron atoms. The 
one-electron bond in the H2+ molecule-ion is reasonably strong (see 
Section 3.4). It is a general rule that whenever delocalization can occur, 
it does. This is because the larger orbitals involved allow for a mini- 
mization of interelectronic repulsion. The MO theory as applied so far 
would classify the orbitals of the boron atoms, and then those of the 
hydrogen atoms, with respect to their transformation properties in the 
D,, point group. This may be done but is a very lengthy and complex 
procedure. With a relatively complex molecule, such as B,H,, there is a 
simpler way of dealing with the bonding which is known as the 
The ‘molecules’ within the B,H, molecule, rather than two BH, 
groups, are chosen to be the two BH, (terminal) groups and a stretched 
version of the H, molecule. As a separate exercise the bonding in a BH, 
group may be dealt with in exactly the same way as was the H,O mol- 
ecule (see Figure 5.12). It belongs to the C,, point group and as such 
would have the electronic configuration (1 b,)2(2a,)2(3a,)2, with the non- 
bonding 3a1 orbital [it is the 2p,(B) orbital] being singly occupied. There 
are two important differences from the H,O case. The 2p-2s energy gap 
in the boron atom is relatively small (350 kJ mol-l) and this allows the 
2s(B) and 2pJB) orbitals (both belonging to a,) to mix. This has the con- 
sequence of making the higher energy 3a, orbital non-bonding. The 
bonding 2a, is of higher energy than the bonding lb, orbital because of 
the very large HBH bond angle which favours the latter orbital. 
The two BH, groups may be set up so that their z axes are collinear 

138 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 6.13 Two BH, ,groups 
set up in the yz plane with their 
C, axes collinear with the z axis 
and with two hydrogen atoms 
symmetrically placed along the x 
axis 
Figure 6.14 The orbitals of two 
BH, groups and of two hydrogen 
atoms used in the formation of 
the MOs of the bridge bonding in 
di borane 
and coincident with the z axis as in Figure 6.13. Their molecular planes 
are contained within the yz plane. This ensures that the lb1(2p,(B)) 
orbitals of the two BH, groups are aligned in the x direction and in the 
xz plane. The two hydrogen atoms responsible for the bridging are sit- 
uated along the x axis. The two hydrogen group orbitals are used in the 
construction of those MOs responsible for the cohesion of the three mol- 
ecules in their formation of diborane. This arrangement of orbitals is 
shown in Figure 6.14. 
In order to construct the MO diagram for the bridging between the 
two BH, groups it is essential to re-name the participating orbitals with- 
in the framework of the D,, point group to which diborane belongs. This 
may be done by inspecting the D,, character table and gives the follow- 
ing results: 
The orbitals of BH,, 3a, and lb,, form the following linear combina- 
tions: 
with their new D,, names indicated. 
The hydrogen 1s orbitals may be regarded in their usual group forms: 
also with their new D,,7 names indicated. 
The MO diagram for the bridging in diborane may be constructed by 
the formation of bonding and anti-bonding combinations of the con- 
tributing orbitals of the same symmetries. The MO diagram is shown in 
Figure 6.15. There are two bonding orbitals, of ag and b,u symmetries, 
respectively, which contain the four available electrons. The two orbitals 
are four-centre MOs which allow the minimization of interelectronic 
repulsion and give the molecule some stabilization compared to the for- 
mulation with four localized one-electron bonds. 

Covalent Bonding I V  Polyatomic Molecules 
139 
Figure 6.15 The MO diagram 
for the bridge bonding in the dib- 
orane molecule 
6.5 
An Overview of Covalency 
Two major theories of the covalent bond are described in this book: the 
main features of valence bond theory are treated in terms of the VSEPR 
theory of molecular shapes, and MO theory which is based on the sym- 
metry properties of the contributing atomic orbitals. The latter theory is 
applied qualitatively with MO diagrams being constructed and used to 
interpret bond orders and bond angles. The problems associated with 
bond angles are best treated by using the highest symmetry possible for 
a molecule of a particular stoichiometry. 
If the valence electrons can be accommodated in the available bond- 
ing and non-bonding orbitals, the high symmetry will be adopted by the 
molecule. If, however, one or more electrons occupy anti-bonding 
orbitals in the high-symmetry shape, a distortion occurs to a shape of 
lower symmetry in which the HOMO (i. e. the occupied anti-bonding 
orbital in high symmetry) is stabilized by interaction with the LUMO so 
that the electron or electrons in the original HOMO become non-bonding 
or bonding. The HOMO and LUMO in high symmetry belong to dif- 
ferent irreducible representations, but the distortion to lower symmetry 
allows them to belong to the same irreducible representation (note: this 
is always the completely symmetric representation of the ‘distorted’ mol- 
ecule), so that interaction between them is permitted and leads to the 
stabilization of the molecule. This mechanism is shown in Figure 6.16. 
The predictions of molecular shape by VSEPR theory are summarized 
in Figure 6.17 for those molecules which have no n: bonding. To the left 
side of Figure 6.17 are the basic shapes adopted by molecules which are 
, i.e. all the valence electrons are used in bond for- 

140 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 6.16 A diagram show- 
ing the interaction between the 
HOMO and LUMO orbitals when 
a distortion from high symmetry 
allows them to have the same 
(a,) symmetry representation 
Figure 6.17 A summary of the 
predictions of molecular shape by 
the VSEPR theory 

Covalent Bonding I V  Polyatomic Molecules 
141 
mation. Going down the basic shapes, successive E atoms are one group 
to the right in the Periodic Table. The shapes may be considered as result- 
ing from electron pair repulsion, the basis of VSEPR theory, although 
the same conclusions arise from considerations of ligand-ligand repul- 
sions. Such ligand-ligand repulsions vary from those between the posi- 
tive protons in hydride molecules to those between the resultant negative 
fluorine atoms in fluorides. From left to right across Figure 6.17 are the 
changes expected when a lone pair of electrons is added to the valence 
shell, the valency of the atom E remaining constant. Each of the changes 
represents a shift of two groups to the right in the Periodic Table, e.g. 
Be, C, 0 and Xe for the top row. 
The influence of n: bonding on the VSEPR predictions are best sum- 
marized by the diagrams of Figure 6.18, which show the changes occur- 
ring in a series of intramolecular dehydration reactions. Figures 6.19 and 
6.20 show similar dehydration processes occurring when the molecule 
possesses one and two lone pairs, respectively. Figure 6.21 shows the 
dehydration reactions of the unusual eight-coordinate E(OH), molecule 
which adopts a square anti-prismatic shape, and eventually reaches 
the EO, oxide. Examples of such molecules are only found in xenon 
chemistry. 
OH 
I 
0 
II 
OH 
0 
OH 
0 
0 
0 
Figure 6.18 Examples of 
VSEPR theory predictions of 
molecular shapes in a series of 
hypothetical dehydration reac- 
tions. The elernent E is covalently 
saturated 

142 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 6.19 Examples of 
VSEPR theory predictions of 
molecular shapes in a series of 
hypothetical dehydration reactions 
in which element E has one lone 
pair of electrons 
Figure 6.20 Examples of 
VSEPR theory predictions of 
molecular shapes in a series of 
hypothetical dehydration reactions 
in which element E has two lone 
pairs of electrons 
Figure 6.21 The VSEPR theory 
predictions of molecular shapes 
in a series of hypothetical 
dehydration reactions in which 
element E is eight-coordinate 
0 

Covalent Bonding I V  Polyatomic Molecules 
143 

144 
Structure and Bonding 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
About 80% of the elements are solid metals in their standard states at 
298 K. Of the metallic elements, only mercury is a liquid at 298 K and 
at 1 atmosphere pressure (caesium melts at 302 K, gallium at 302.9 K). 
The non-metallic elements exist as either discrete small molecules, in the 
solid (SJ, liquid (Br,) or gaseous (H,) states, or as extended atomic arrays 
in the solid state (C as graphite or diamond). The elements of Group 18 
are monatomic gases at 298 K. 
This chapter consists of two sections, one being a general discussion 
of the stable forms of the elements, whether they are metals or non-met- 
als, and the reasons for the differences. The theory of the metallic bond 
is introduced, and related to the electrical conduction properties of the 
elements. The second section is devoted to a detailed description of the 
energetics of ionic bond formation. A discussion of the transition from 
ionic to covalent bonding in solids is also included. 
145 

146 
Structure and Bonding 
7.1 
Metal Structures 
Metallic character decreases across any period from left to right, and 
increases down any group, the non-metals being situated towards the top 
right-hand region of the Periodic Table. The trends in first ionization 
energies and electronegativity coefficients are opposite to that of metal- 
lic character. A large first ionization energy is associated with a large 
effective nuclear charge, and the atoms in this class are those which can 
participate in the formation of strong covalent bonds. They have the 
attracting power to interact with the electrons of another atom in cova- 
lent bond formation. Metal atoms, on the contrary, can only form weak 
covalent bonds with each other, and preferentially exist in the 
with 
in which the 
(the number of nearest 
neighbours) of each atom is relatively high (between eight and 14). 
Collaboration between many atoms is required for metal stability. 
Diagrams of the three most common metallic lattices are shown in Figure 
7.1. 
tion number of each atom is eight. There 
in the centres of the adjacent cubes only 
coordination number may be considered 
Figure 7.l(a) is the 
in which the coordina- 
are six next nearest neighbours 
15% further away, so that the 
to be 14. 
Figure 7.1 Three common 
crystal lattices adopted by ele- 
ments: (a) body-centred cubic 
packing, (b) cubic closest packed 
(or face-centred cubic) and (c) 
hexagonal closest packed 
The cubic 
is shown in Figure 7.l(b), and can also 
be described as a 
arrangement in which there is an 
atom at the centre of each of the six faces of the basic cubic of eight 
atoms. The coordination number of any particular atom in a cubic clos- 
est packed lattice is 12. Considering an atom in one of the face centres 
of the diagram in Figure 7.l(b), there are four atoms at the corners of 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
147 
the face. Each face of the structure is shared between two such cells, and 
in the adjacent planes parallel to any shared face there are four atoms. 
These three sets of four atoms constitute the coordination number of 12. 
arrangement, shown in Figure 
7.l(c), the coordination consists of six atoms in the same plane as the 
atom under consideration plus three atoms from both of the adjacent 
planes, making a total of 12. 
With such high coordination numbers it is quite clear that there can 
be no possibility of covalency, because there are insufficient numbers of 
electrons, The difficulty is shown in the case of metallic lithium, with its 
body-centred cubic structure and coordination number of 14. Each lithi- 
um atom has one valency electron and for each atom to participate in 
14 covalent bonds is quite impossible. 
In the 
7.2 
Metal or Non-metal? 
A discussion of the elementary forms of hydrogen and lithium serves to 
illustrate the factors which determine their metallic or non-metallic 
nature. These factors are extendible to elements in general. In a formal 
sense, the two elements belong to Group 1 of the Periodic Table and are 
expected to be univalent, as they are. They both have outer electronic 
configurations which are ns’, and differ in nuclear charge by two units 
with lithium having the ls2 ‘inner core’. Yet, hydrogen is quite definite- 
ly a non-metal and lithium has all the properties of a metal: 
(with lithium this is so for the clean metal surface in the absence of 
any reactive atmosphere), good 
and 
in the 
solid and liquid states, low values of the 
and 
relatively small values of the 
. Their electroneg- 
ativity coefficients, H, 2.2, Li, 0.97, are quite different, the value for lithi- 
um placing it beyond doubt in the metallic, electropositive category, and 
that for hydrogen reflecting the element’s three tendencies of either 
becoming positively or negatively charged (i.e. forming H+ or H-), or 
participating in covalent bond formation. 

148 
Structure and Bonding 
7.2.1 Elementary Hydrogen 
The simplest element exists normally as the dihydrogen molecule, H,, a 
strongly covalent diatomic molecule with a bond dissociation energy of 
436 kJ mol-I. The high value of the ionization energy of the hydrogen 
atom is indicative of the electron-attracting power of the bare proton 
which contributes to the large single bond energy in the dihydrogen 
molecule. 
It is instructive to consider the energetics of formation of larger mol- 
ecules such as H,. The hypothetical H, molecule could have three pos- 
sible symmetric structures: tetrahedral, square planar or linear. The 
results of MO calculations on these molecules are shown in Table 7.1. 
The nearest H-H distance is assumed to be 100 pm, chosen because it 
minimized the total energy of the linear form of H,. 
1 
Table 7.1 The calculated energies of some H, molecules 
Point group 
EnergylkJ mol-' 
Electronic 
Nuclear 
-1 21 38 
8344 
-1 2333 
751 8 
-1 1524 
601 7 
Total 
-3794 
-481 5 
-5507 
The most stable H, molecule is the linear Dm, form, the main factor 
being the low value of the internuclear repulsion energy. The calculated 
values for the internuclear repulsion, electronic and total energies for the 
H, molecule (req = 74 pm) are 1876, -4807 and -2930 kJ mol-', respec- 
tively. These calculations show that any form of hydrogen which is more 
than diatomic is less stable than H,, and that the main reason for this is 
the nuclear repulsion term. For hydrogen to exist in the metallic form 
would require tremendous pressure to overcome the internuclear repul- 
sion. It is supposed that such conditions exist in the core of the planet 
Jupiter, and the presence of metallic hydrogen could explain the mag- 
netic properties of that planet. 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
149 
7.2.2 Elementary Lithium 
The atom of lithium has the outer electronic configuration 2.4, and might 
be expected to form a diatomic molecule, Li,. The molecule Li, does exist 
in lithium vapour and has a dissociation energy of only 108 kJ mol--'. 
The enthalpy of atomization of the element is 161 kJ mol-', which is a 
measurement of the strength of the bonding in the solid state. To pro- 
duce two moles of lithium atoms (as would be produced by the dissoci- 
ation of one mole of dilithium molecules) would require 2 x 161 = 
322 kJ of energy. From such values it can be seen that solid metallic 
lithium is more stable than the dilithium molecular form by (322 - 108)/2 
= 107 kJ mol-I. The energy changes described are shown in the diagram 
of Figure 7.2, which compares the enthalpies of the metallic element and 
the diatomic molecule. 
Figure 7.2 A diagram compar- 
ing the enthalpies (kJ mol-') of 
metallic and gaseous lithium and 
the Li, molecule 
The weakness of the covalent bond in dilithium is understandable in 
terms of the low effective nuclear charge, which allows the 2s orbital to 
be very diffuse. The addition of an electron to the lithium atom is 
exothermic only to the extent of 59.8 kJ mol-', which indicates the weak- 
ness of the attraction for the extra electron. By comparison, the exother- 
micity of electron attachment to the fluorine atom is 333 kJ mol-'. The 
diffuseness of the 2s orbital of lithium is indicated by the large bond 
length (267 pm) in the dilithium molecule. The metal exists in the form 
of a body-centred cubic lattice in which the radius of the lithium atoms 
is 152 pm: again a very high value, indicative of the low cohesiveness of 
the metallic structure. The metallic lattice is preferred to the diatomic 
molecule as the more stable state of lithium. 
The high electrical conductivity of lithium (and metals in general) indi- 
cates considerable 
. This is consistent with the MO treat- 
ment of an infinite three-dimensional array of atoms, in which the 2s 
orbitals are completely 
over the system with the formation 
of a 
of n/2 bonding orbitals and n/2 anti-bonding orbitals for the 
n atoms concerned. Figure 7.3 shows a simple representation of the 

150 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 7.3 The 2s band of lithi- 
um metal; the red colouring 
implies that the lower half is 
occupied by electrons, the upper 
shaded half is vacant 
2s band of lithium metal. The successive levels (MOs) are so close 
together that they almost form a continuum of energy. The formation 
of a band of delocalized MOs allows for the minimization of interelec- 
tronic repulsion. The small gaps in energy between adjacent levels in a 
band of MOs allow a considerable number of the higher ones to be singly 
occupied. Such single occupation is important in explaining the electri- 
cal conduction typical of the metallic state. An electron may join the 
conduction band at any point of the solid and leave at any other point 
without having to surmount any significant energy barriers. 
The existence of an incompletely filled infinite band of MOs leads to 
one general definition of the metallic state. The highest filled level in a 
band is known as the 
(equivalent to the HOMO level in small 
molecules), and when the Fermi level is not at the top of a filled band 
(as it would be in an insulator or some semiconductors) it leads to the 
concept of a 
for the infinite array of metal atoms. A metal, 
then, is that state which has a Fermi surface, one where electron pro- 
motion to the nearest higher level is very facile. Apart from electronic 
transitions within the highest energy band of a metal, there are transi- 
tions possible to the next highest otherwise vacant band. In the majori- 
ty of cases the energy required to cause these inter-band transitions is in 
the UV region, so that visible light is generally completely reflected from 
metallic surfaces, giving them their characteristic 
. The apparent colours of some metals, e.g. the bluish colour of some 
steels, are caused by surface layers of oxides which allow interference 
fringes to be produced. Two metals which have a distinctive ‘colour’ are 
copper and gold. In the case of copper the inter-band energy is small 
enough to allow the absorption of light with frequencies in and around 
the bluelgreen part of the visible region to occur, giving the characteris- 
tic ‘copper’ colour. Because of 
, gold has a slightly larg- 
er inter-band gap than does copper (although that in silver is larger than 
both copper and gold), and absorption of the bluehiolet part of the vis- 
ible spectrum gives the metal its golden yellow colour. The colour of gold 
is discussed in more detail later in this chapter. 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
151 
7.2.3 Generalizations 
For an element to have stable covalent molecules or extended arrays it 
is essential that it has sufficient valence electrons and that these should 
experience a high effective nuclear charge, thus making the electron 
attachment energy sufficiently negative. Elements with electronegativity 
coefficients greater than about 1.8 fall into this class. Elements with elec- 
tronegativity coefficients less than 1.8 do not have effective nuclear 
charges that are sufficiently high to attract electrons from other atoms 
in order to form covalent bonds, and can achieve thermodynamic sta- 
bility only by forming delocalized band structures characteristic of metal- 
lic bonding. As with any generalization based on an estimate of a 
property which is difficult to define, such as electronegativity, there are 
glaring exceptions. For example, silicon (x = 1.7) and boron (x = 2.0) 
are astride the 1.8 suggested borderline between metallic and non-metal- 
lic properties, but both are strictly non-metallic from the viewpoint of 
their not showing metallic conduction of electricity, i.e. where the con- 
ductivity is high and decreases with increasing temperature. Copper (x 
= 1 .S) and nickel (x = 1 .S) are on the borderline, but are certainly met- 
als, copper having the next highest electrical conductivity to that of sil- 
ver, the best conductor. Boron, silicon, germanium, arsenic, antimony, 
selenium and tellurium are sometimes described as metalloid elements or 
semi-metals. They show semiconductor properties and have low electri- 
cal conductivities which increase as the temperature increases. 
The non-metallic elements whose cohesiveness depends upon partici- 
pation in strong covalent bond formation exist in the following forms: 
1. 
which may be singly bonded, e.g. H, and F,, 
doubly bonded, e.g. 0,, or triply bonded, e.g. N,. 
2. 
involving single covalent bonds between 
adjacent atoms, e.g. P, and S,. 
3. 
which are polymers of small molecules, e.g. ‘plastic’ sul- 
fur composed of polymers of S, units with variable chain lengths, 
and red phosphorus which is a P, polymer. 
, e.g. graphite, diamond, boron and silicon. 
A capacity to be at least three-valent is necessary for a three-dimen- 
sional array to be formed. 
The individual molecules form crystals in which the cohesive forces are 
intermolecular, the form of a particular crystal being determined usually 
by the economy of packing the units together. 
(chain formation) in 
their elementary states, only carbon retains the property in its com- 
pounds to any great extent. The relatively high strength of the single 
covalent bond between two carbon atoms gives rise to such a large 
4. 
Of the elements which participate in 

152 
Structure and Bonding 
number, and wide variety, of compounds that it is dealt with in a sub- 
section of the subject called organic chemistry. Boron and silicon chem- 
istry contains some examples of compounds in which catenation is 
present. 
7.3 
Metallic Bonding; Band Theory 
The band of molecular orbitals formed by the 2s orbitals of the lithium 
atoms, described above, is half filled by the available electrons. Metallic 
beryllium, with twice the number of electrons, might be expected to have 
a full ‘2s band’. If that were so the material would not exist, since the 
‘anti-bonding’ half of the band would be fully occupied. Metallic beryl- 
lium exists because the band of MOs produced from the 2p atomic 
orbitals overlaps (in terms of energy) the 2s band. This makes possible 
the 
of both the 2s and the 2p bands, giving metallic beryl- 
lium a greater cohesiveness and a higher electrical conductivity than 
lithium. 
The overlapping of the 2s and 2p bands of beryllium, and their partial 
occupancies, are shown diagrammatically in Figure 7.4. The gap between 
the 2p and 2s bands of lithium is smaller than that in beryllium, so it is 
to be expected that some population of the 2p band in lithium occurs 
and contributes to the high conductivity of the metal. This would also 
explain why the work function of lithium (280 kJ mol-I) is considerably 
smaller than the first ionization energy of the isolated atom (513 kJ 
mol-’). The corresponding data for beryllium are 480 and 900 kJ mol-l, 
consistent with the partial filling of the 2p band. 
The participation of the 2p band in the bonding of metallic beryllium 
explains the greater cohesiveness (bond strength) of the metal when com- 
pared to that of lithium, and also why the enthalpies of atomization and 
the melting temperatures of the two metals are different, as shown by 
the data in Table 7.2. 
If overlap between bands does not occur, the size of the band gap 
(between the lowest level of the vacant band and the highest level of the 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
153 
Figure 7.4 The 2s and 2p 
bands of beryllium metal before 
(left-hand side) and after (right- 
hand side) overlap is allowed to 
occur; the red colouring indicates 
filled levels, the shading indicates 
vacant levels 
Table 7.2 Physical properties of lithium and beryllium metals 
Property 
lithium 
Beryllium 
Standard enthapy of atomization/kJ mol-' 
161 
32 1 
Melting temperature/K 
453 
1550 
Conductivity/S m-' 
1.08 x 107 
2.5 x 107 
filled band) determines whether the element exhibits 
or is a 
. If the band gap is small the material may be a semiconductor. The 
band gaps in the diamond form of carbon and in silicon (which has the 
diamond, four-coordinate, structure) are 521 and 106 kJ mol-', respec- 
tively. Diamond is an insulator but silicon is a semiconductor. 
. If the band gap is large the material is an 
7.3.1 Yellow Gold and Liquid Mercury 
The colour of gold adds to the attractiveness of the metal, and the liq- 
uid state of mercury allows the metal to be used over a wide range of 
temperatures in thermometers and electrical contact switches. These 
unusual properties are explicable in terms of relativistic effects. The rel- 
on the 6s orbital are at a maximum in gold and are con- 
siderable in mercury. 

154 
Structure and Bonding 
Relativistic Effects 
The general trends across periods and down groups of the Periodic Table 
are influenced by relativistic effects, which become more serious in the 
heavier elements (2 > 55). This can only be dealt with here in a brief 
manner. 
The theory of relativity indicates that the mass of a particle is depend- 
ent upon its velocity. The effect is only noticeable when the particle veloc- 
ity approaches that of light itself. The average velocity of a 1s electron 
is proportional to the atomic number (Z) of the element. The relativis- 
tic effect exhibits a maximum in gold and mercury, in which atoms the 
6s orbital is being filled. The mass of a 1s electron in a gold atom is some 
23% greater than the rest mass. Since the radius of the 1s orbital is 
inversely proportional to the mass of the electron, the radius of the 
orbital is reduced by 23%) compared to that of the non-relativistic radius. 
This 
affects the radii of all the other orbitals in the 
atom up to, and including, the outermost orbitals. The s orbitals con- 
tract, the p orbitals also contract, but the more diffuse d and f orbitals 
can become more diffuse as electrons in the contracted s and p orbitals 
offer a greater degree of shielding to any electrons in the d and f orbitals. 
The effects are observable by a comparison of the metallic radii, the 
first three ionization energies and the first electron attachment energy of 
the Group 11 elements as shown in Table 7.3, and the metallic radii and 
the first two ionization energies of the elements of Group 12 (Zn, Cd 
and Hg) as given in Table 7.4. 
Table 7.3 The metallic radii, first three ionization energies and first electron attach- 
ment energies of the Group 11 elements (energies in kJ mol-’) 
~~ 
~ 
Atom 
rlpm 
I’ 
12 
13 
E 
c u  
128 
745 
1960 
3550 
-1 19 
Ag 
144 
732 
2070 
3360 
-1 26 
Au 
144 
891 
1980 
2940 
-223 
Table 7.4 The metallic radii and first two ionization energies of the Group 12 ele- 
ments 
Atom 
rlpm 
1,lkJ mol-’ 
1,lkJ mol-’ 
Zn 
133 
908 
1730 
Cd 
149 
866 
630 
Hg 
152 
1010 
1810 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
155 
In gold the 6s band is stabilized, making the Fermi level lower than 
expected, and the 5d level is destabilized. This makes electronic transi- 
tions to the d band from the ‘Fermi band’ have energies that correspond 
to the blue/violet region of the visible spectrum, so that the metal reflects 
the red/yellow frequencies (their photon energies are not sufficiently high 
to cause transitions to the 5d band). The majority of metals have tran- 
sitions into their ‘Fermi bands’ which lie in the ultraviolet region of the 
spectrum, and consequently they reflect white light with very little selec- 
tive absorption so that sensations of colour are not produced. The 
stabilization of the 6s orbital in gold is responsible for the very large 
negative value of the electron attachment energy; only the halogens and 
platinum have even more negative values. 
The mercury atom is smaller than expected from the zinc-cadmium 
trend and is more difficult to ionize than the lighter atoms. In conse- 
quence the metal-metal bonding in mercury is relatively poor, resulting 
in the element being a liquid in its standard state. This almost Group 
18 behaviour of mercury may be compared to that of a real Group 18 
element, xenon, which has first and second ionization energies of 1170 
and 2050 kJ mol I .  
7.4 
Ionic Bonding 
The interaction between any two atomic orbitals is at a maximum if the 
energy difference between them is zero and they have mutually compat- 
ible symmetry properties. A difference in energy between the two par- 
ticipating orbitals causes the bonding orbital to have a majority 
contribution from the lower of the two atomic orbitals. Likewise, the 
anti-bonding orbital contains a majority contribution from the higher of 
the two atomic orbitals. In a molecule such as HF the bonding orbital 
has a major contribution from the fluorine 2p orbital and in consequence 
the two bonding electrons are unequally shared between the two nuclei, 
which results in the molecule being 
The difference in energies between the 3s valence electron of the sodi- 
um atom and that of the 2p level in the fluorine atom is so great that 
the bonding orbital is virtually identical to the 2p(F) orbital, and the 
anti-bonding orbital is identical to the 3s orbital of the sodium atom. If 
a bond were formed it would be equivalent to the transfer of an electron 
from the sodium atom to the fluorine atom, causing the production of 
the two ions, Na+ and F-. A detailed consideration of this specific case 
is used to explain the nature of 
The 
for the reaction: 
Na(sj + ‘/2F,(gj -+ Na+(g) + F-(gj 

156 
Structure and Bonding 
may be estimated as the sum of the standard enthalpy changes of the 
following four component reactions: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
Na(s) + Na+(g), the atomization of sodium, AatomH*(Na) = 109 kJ 
mol-' . 
XF2(g) + F(g), the atomization of fluorine, XD(F,,g) = 79 kJ mol-l, 
where D(F,,g) is the 
of the fluorine 
molecule. 
Na(g) -+ Na+(g), the ionization of sodium, Il(Na) = 500 kJ mol-', 
where Il is the first ionization enthalpy of the sodium atom (i.e. the 
first ionization energy plus MU', 494 + 6 = 500 kJ mol--l). 
F(g) -+ F-(g), the attachment of an electron to the fluorine atom, 
Ee,(F) = -339 kJ mol-', where Ee,(F) is the electron attachment 
enthalpy of the fluorine atom (i.e. the first electron attachment ener- 
gy minus XRT, -333 - 6 = -339 kJ mol-'). 
The standard enthalpy change for equation (7.1) is given by: 
AH* = AatomHe(Na) + %D(F,,g) + Il(Na) + E,,(F) 
= 109 + 79 + 500 - 339 = 349 kJ mol-I 
The reaction is considerably endothermic and would not be feasible 
(changes of 
are excluded from the calculation, but would not 
alter the conclusion). 
The above calculation applies to independent sodium and fluoride 
ions, and does not take into account the electrostatic attraction between 
the oppositely charged ions, nor the repulsive force which operates at 
small interionic distances. In the crystal of NaF the distance of nearest 
approach of the sodium and fluoride ions is 231 pm, and Coulomb's law 
may be used to calculate the energy of stabilization due to electrostatic 
attraction between individual ion pairs: 
N,e2 
E(Na'F-) = -- 4n;&,,r 
where NA is the Avogadro constant, e the electronic charge, E~ the vac- 
uum permittivity and r the interionic distance. Equation 7.2 gives a value 
of E(Na+F--) of -601 kJ mol-'. As a 
this result has 
to have 6 kJ mol-' subtracted from it to give -607 kJ mol-'. 
The standard enthalpy of formation of the substance Na+F- with 
, but with no interaction between pairs, is then calculated 
to be: 
AfHe(Na+F-,g) = 349 - 607 = -258 kJ mol-' 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
157 
This calculation is still hypothetical, in that the actual substance formed 
when sodium metal reacts with difluorine is solid sodium fluoride, and 
the standard enthalpy of its formation is -569 kJ mol-'. The actual sub- 
stance is 31 1 kJ mol-' more stable than the hypothetical substance con- 
sisting of ion pairs, Na+F-(g), described above. The added stability of 
the observed solid compound arises from the long-range interactions of 
all the positive Na+ ions and negative F- ions in the solid 
which 
forms the structure of 
sodium fluoride. The ionic arrangement 
is shown in Figure 7.5. Each Na+ ion is octahedrally surrounded (i.e. 
) by six fluoride ions, and the fluoride ions are similarly coor- 
dinated by six sodium ions. The 
of both kinds of 
ion are six. 
The overall stability of the NaF lattice is represented by the resultant 
of the many stabilizing attractions (Na+-F-) and destabilizing repulsions 
(Na+-Na+ and F--F-), which amount to a stabilization which is 1.74756 
times that of the interaction between the individual Na+-F- ion pairs. 
Figure 7.5 The structure of the 
sodium fluoride crystal 
The factor, 1.74756, is the 
, M, for the particular lat- 
tice arrangement and arises from the forces experienced by each ion. 
These are composed of six attractions at a distance r, 12 repulsions at a 
distance 2'12r, eight attractions at a distance 3112r, six repulsions at a dis- 
tance of 4112r, 24 attractions at a distance 5112r, and so on. 
The series 6 - 12/2lI2 + 8/3II2 - 6/4112 + 24/5'12 - ... eventually becomes 
convergent and gives the value for the Madelung constant for the sodi- 
um chloride lattice (the standard description of lattices which have the 
same form as that adopted by sodium fluoride). The values of Madelung 
constants for some common crystal lattices are given in Table 7.5. 
Table 7.5 Values of the Madelung constants for some common lattices 
Lattice type 
Madelung constant 
NaCl 
1.74756 
CSCl 
1.76267 
CaF, (fluorite) 
2.51 939 
TiO, (rutile) 
2.408 
ZnS. (blende, sphalerite) 
1.63806 
ZnS (wurtzite) 
1.641 32 
AI,O, 
(corundum) 
4.1 71 86 
The 
to the 
, L, for the sodium 
fluoride arrangement (the energy required to form gas phase ions from 
the solid crystalline lattice) is the value of the change in internal energy 
(i.e. AU) for the reaction: 

158 
Structure and Bonding 
Na+F-(s) + Na+(g) + F-(g) 
(7.3) 
Lattice energies (sometimes defined as the energy released when the lat- 
tice is formed from its constituent gaseous ions) are usually tabulated in 
data books as positive quantities and are internal energy changes 
at 0 K. The internal energy change corresponding to the formation of a 
lattice when the gaseous ions condense to produce the crystalline lattice 
(the reverse of equation 7.3) is given by the equation: 
where M is the Madelung constant and the other quantities are the same 
as given in equation 7.2. 
In addition to the Coulombic forces, there is a repulsive force which 
operates at short distances between ions as a result of the overlapping 
of filled orbitals, potentially a violation of the Pauli exclusion principle. 
This repulsive force may be represented by the equation: 
where B is a proportionality factor. The full expression for the change 
in internal energy becomes: 
When r is the equilibrium interionic distance req, the differential of equa- 
tion 7.6 is equal to zero, corresponding to an energy minimum: 
which gives an expression for B: 
MN Ae 'r:-' 
4n;~,n 
B =  
Substitution of this value into equation 7.6 with r = req gives: 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
159 
which is known as the 
. The positive value of the 
product of the ionic charges, Iz+z-I, is included in the equation to take 
into account any charges which differ from +1, so that the equation may 
be applied to any lattice provided that the appropriate value of the 
Madelung constant is used. The lattice energy, as defined above, has the 
value -AU. The 
(for two gaseous 
ions forming a lattice) is given by: 
AlattHO 
= AU - 6 kJ mol-' 
(7.10) 
The values of the 
, n, for various crystal structures are 
estimated from compressibility data. The values recommended for use 
with various ion configurations are shown in Table 7.6, 
Table 7.6 Some values of the Born exponent, n 
Ion configuration 
Value of n 
He 
Ne 
Ar, Cu, 
Kr, Ag+ 
Xe, Au+ 
5 
7 
9 
10 
12 
For a crystal with mixed ion types the average value of n should be 
used in the calculation of lattice energy. Using the value n = 7 for sodi- 
um fluoride with req equal to 231 pm gives a value for L of 901 kJ mol-I. 
The condensation of gaseous sodium and fluoride ions to give a mole 
of sodium fluoride would have an enthalpy change of -901 - 6 = 
-907 kJ mol- I .  
It is now possible to produce a theoretical value for the standard 
enthalpy of formation of sodium fluoride based upon the ionic model 
described above. The necessary equation is produced by adding together 
equations 7.1 and 7.3 to give: 
Na(s) + %F2 + Na+F-(s) 
(7.11) 
and the calculated value for AfHe(Na+F-) is 349 - 907 = -558 kJ mol-', 
which is fairly close (-98%) to the observed value of -569 kJ mol-' and 
gives considerable respectability to the theory. Figure 7.6 contains all the 
energy factors that contribute to the overall production of the exother- 
micity and consequent stability of the sodium fluoride lattice. 
In general terms, the feasibility of ionic bond production depends 
upon the AfH* value for the compound MXn, the entropy of formation 

160 
Structure and Bonding 
Figure 7.6 An enthalpy (kJ 
mol-I) diagram for the formation 
of the sodium fluoride lattice 
being of minor importance. The value of A,H" may be estimated from 
known thermodynamic quantities and the calculated value for the lat- 
tice energy: 
the 
of the metal, AatomHO(M), 
sometimes known 
as the 
, and that of the non-metal, AatomHO(X), 
the 
enthalpy change required to produce the gas phase atom from the ele- 
ment in its standard state, incorporating the change of enthalpy required 
to produce the element in the gas phase and the enthalpy of dissociation 
of the molecule. The ionization energy term is the appropriate sum of 
the first n ionization energies to produce the required n-positive ion. The 
n electrons are used to produce either n singly negative ions or n/2 dou- 
bly negative ions and the Eea(X) term has to be modified accordingly. 
The AlattHe(MXfl) value is calculated, using the Born-Lande equation 
(7.9) for the appropriate ionic arrangement (if known, otherwise appro- 
priate guesses have to be made) and corrected for the transformation of 
an internal energy change to a change of enthalpy. 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
161 
The first three terms of equation 7.12 are positive and can only con- 
tribute to the feasibility of ionic bond production by being minimized. 
The last two terms are negative for uni-negative ions (Eea represents ener- 
gy released), and for ionic bond feasibility should be maximized. From 
such considerations it is clear that ionic bond formation will be satis- 
factory for very electropositive and easily atomized metals with very elec- 
tronegative and easily atomized non-metals. 
The lattice energy term may be increased, for ions with charges, z+ 
and z-, by the positive value of the product of the charges, Iz+z-l. To 
increase the cation charge involves the expense of an increase in CI(M) 
and, although there is some pay-back in the production of more anions 
(a larger Eea), there are severe limits to such activity. This is because the 
successive ionization energies of an atom increase more rapidly than does 
the lattice energy with increasing cation charge. The stoichiometry of the 
ionic compound produced from two elements is determined by the Val- 
ues of the five terms of equation 7.12, which minimize the value of the 
enthalpy of formation of the compound. 
Calculations may be made for hypothetical compounds such as NaF,. 
Assuming that the compound contains Na2+ ions, the standard enthalpy 
of formation is given by the equation: 

162 
Structure and Bonding 
The numerical values of the terms in equation 7.15 are, respectively, 108, 
158,496,4562,2 x -339 and (assuming the hypothetical Na2+ ion to have 
a radius of 65 pm, as does the real Mg2+ ion, and using a Madelung con- 
stant of 2.381, appropriate for the MgF2 lattice) 2821 kJ mol-], which 
gives a value of +1825 kJ mol-' for the standard enthalpy of formation 
of ionic NaF,, a compound which would, therefore, not be expected to 
exist. The reason for that is the very large value of the second ioniza- 
tion energy of the sodium atom, the electron being removed from one 
of the very stable 2p orbitals. 

Metallic and tonic Bonding 
I63 
7.5 
Ionic-Covalent Transition 
Both ionic bonding and covalent bonding are extreme descriptions of 
the real state of affairs in elements and their compounds, and although 
there are many examples of almost pure, i.e. 99%, covalent bonding, 
there are very few so-called ionic compounds in which there is complete 
transfer of one or more electrons from the cationic element to the anionic 
one. This ionicxovalent transition in which an initially purely ionic com- 
pound acquires some covalent character is reasonably easy to deal with 
qualitatively, but is very difficult to quantify. Fajans stated four rules 
which are helpful in deciding which of two compounds has the most 
covalency, In this respect the starting point is complete electron trans- 
fer in the compounds considered. The positively charged cations are then 
considered to exert a polarizing effect on the negatively charged anions 
such that any polarization represents a clawing-back of the transferred 
electron(s), so that there is some electron sharing between the atoms 
concerned which may be interpreted as partial covalency. Figure 7.7 
shows diagrammatically what is meant by polarization of an anion; the 
Figure 7.7 
~~ 
diagram i,,ustrat- 
distortion from the spherical distribution of the anionic electrons is a 
ing the polariz3tion of an ion 
representation of the covalency. 
Fajans' rules state that the extent of polarization of an anion or the 
partial covalent character of an otherwise 100% ionic compound is 
increased by: 
1. A high charge of the cation and/or anion 
2. A small cation 
3. A large anion 
4. A cation with a Group 18 gas electronic configuration 
The reasoning underlying these rules is dependent upon the 
of the cation, the charge density being the ratio of charge:surface 
area. The first three rules are straightforward electrostatics. Comparing 
the anhydrous chlorides of sodium, magnesium and aluminium it is 
expected that the last compound would have the greatest partial cova- 
lency, be the least ionic, and that the sodium compound would be the 
most ionic. 

164 
Structure and Bonding 
The fourth rule is an indication that a sub-shell of d electrons is a 
poorer shield of the nuclear charge than an octet of s2p6 electrons, and 
that a cation with a d shield will exert a greater polarizing effect than 
one with an s-p shield, Comparing copper(1) chloride with sodium chlo- 
ride is the classical example of this rule. Cu' has the electronic configu- 
ration 3dI0, whereas Na+ has the [Ne] core configuration. The ions are 
similar in size, their ionic radii being 96 pm for Cu+ and 102 pm for Na+, 
but the melting temperatures of their chlorides are 430 "C for CuCl and 
801 "C for NaCl, giving some indication that the copper compound is 
more covalent. 

Metallic and Ionic Bonding 
165 

166 
Structure and Bonding 

Appendix 
I 
Selected Character Tables 
The character tables for the point groups which are relevant to most of 
the problems and discussions in this book are listed here. The transfor- 
mation properties of the s, p and d orbitals are indicated by their usual 
algebraic descriptions appearing in the appropriate row of each table. 
1
1
 1 
z, 2, 
y’, z2 
1 
-1 
-1 
xy 
-1 
1 
-1 
x, xz 
-1 
-1 
1 
Y ,  Y Z  
A, 
A2 
B, 
B2 
C3, 
E 2 
C3 
3ov 
D,, E 
2C3 3C2 oh 
2S3 
30,, 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
A,’ 
1 
1
1
 1
1
 1 
x2 + y2, z2 
A,’ 
1 
1 
-1 
1 
1 
-1 
E’ 
2 
-1 
0 
2 
-1 
0 
(x, Y>(X2 - Y2, X Y >  
A,” 
1 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
A[ 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
z 
E” 
2 
-1 
0 
-2 
1 
0 
(xz, Y 4  
167 

168 
Structure and Bonding 
AIg 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
x 2 + y 2 , z 2  
AZg 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
Blh' 1 
-1 
1 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
1 
-1 
x 2 - y 2  
Eg 
2 
0 
-2 
0 
0 
2 
0 
-2 
0 
0 
(xz, y z )  
BZg 1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
1 -1 
1 
-1 
1 
~y 
Ah 
1 
1 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
A 2 u  
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
1 
1 
z 
BIu 1 
-1 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
B2u 1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
E u '  2 
0 
-2 
0 
0 
-2 
0 
2 
0 
0 
( x , y )  
Td 
E 
SC, 
3C2 
6S, 
60, 
1 
1 
1 
1 
.x2 + y2 + z2 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
0 
0 
-1 
1 
-1 
A, 
A2 
T, 
T2 
3 
0 
(222 - x2 - y2 , x2 - y2;l 
E
2
-
1
2
 
0 
-1 
-1 
1 
(x, y ,  z)(xy, xz, y.1 
~- 
c+ 
1 
1 
1 
... 
1 
2 
x2 + y2, z2 
n 
2 
2 
2cos@ ... 
0 
(x, y )  (xz, y.) 
A
2
 2 
2COS2@ ... 
0 
(x2 - y2 9 X Y )  
c- 
1 
1 
1 
... -1 
@ 
2 
2 
2 ~ 0 ~ 3 0  
... 
0 
~~ 
Dw,, 
E 
2Cw@ ... mo,, 
i 
2sm+ 
... ..c2 
cg+ 1 
cg- 
1 
nK 
Ag 
xu+ 1 
xu- 
1 
" u  
A u  
... 
... 
1 
... 
1 
1 
1 
... -1 
1 
2cosq 
... 
0 
2 
2COS2@ ... 
0 
2 
... 
... 
... 
... 
1 
... 
1 
-1 
1 
... -1 
-1 
2cos4) 
... 
0 
--2 
2cos20 ... 
0 
-2 
1 
... 
1 
x2 + y*, z2 
2cos20 ... 
0 
(x* -yz 9 xv) 
1 
... -1 
--2cos@ ... 
0 
(xz, yz) 
... 
... ... 
-. 1 
... -1 
2 
-- 1 
... 
1 
2cosq ... 
0 
(x, y )  
--2cos2@ ... 
0 
... 
. . . 
. . . 
. . . 
... 
... ... 

Appendix 
I69 
0, 
E 
SC, 6C2 6C4 3C2 i 
6S4 SS, 30, 60, 
(= C:) 
Alg 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
x 2 + y 2 + z 2  
Eg 
2 
-1 
0 
0 
2 
2 
0 
-1 
2 
0 
(2z2-x2-y2, 
A, 
1 
1 -1 
-1 
1 
1 
-1 
1 
1 
-1 
x2 - y 2 )  
Tlg 3 
0 
-1 
1 
-1 
3 
1 
0 
-1 
-1 
T, 
3 
0 
1 
-1 
-1 
3 
-1 
0 
-1 
1 
(XY, XZ, Y Z )  
Alu 1 
1 
1 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
A2u 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
E u 2  -1 
0 
0 
2 - 2  
0 
1 - 2  
0 
TIu 3 
0 
-1 
1 
-1 
-3 
-1 
0 
1 
1 
(x,Y, 
Z) 
TZu 3 
0 
1 
-1 
-1 
-3 
1 
0 
1 
-1 
2 
The Reduction of a Representation to a Sum 
of Irreducible Representations 
In the text, when the character of a set of orbitals is deduced to give a 
reducible representation, the reduction to a sum of irreducible represen- 
tations has been carried out by inspection of the appropriate character 
table. In some instances this procedure can be lengthy and unreliable. 
The formal method can also be lengthy, but it is highly reliable, although 
not to be recommended for simple cases where inspection of the char- 
acter table is usually sufficient. The formal method will be explained by 
doing an example. 
The three 1s atomic orbitals of the trigonally pyramidal C," NH, mol- 
ecule have the character given below: 
C," 
E 
2c3 
30" 
3 x N(1s) 
3 
0 
1 
The coefficients of the symmetry elements along the top of the above 
classification (the same as those across the top of the C3" character table), 
i.e. 1, 2 and 3, give a total of six which is the order of the point group, 
denoted by h. The relationship used to test the hypothesis that the 
reducible representation contains a particular irreducible representation 
is: 
@-reducible) = l/h E[g x x(R) x x(4] 
where g is the number of elements in the class (i.e. the coefficients of the 
symmetry operations across the top line of the character table), x(R) is 

170 
Structure and Bonding 
the character of reducible representation and x(I) is the character of the 
irreducible represent at ion. 
In the present case the test for the presence of an A, representation 
depends upon the sum: 
a(A,) = 1/6[1 x 3 x 1 + 2 x 0 x 1 + 3 x 1 x I] = 6/6 = 1 
implying 
that 
the 
reducible 
representation 
contains 
one 
A, 
representation. 
The test for an A, representation is: 
a(A,) = 1/6[1 x 3 x 1 + 2 x 0 x 1 + 3 x 1 x -I] = 0/6 = 0 
so confirming that the irreducible representation does not contain an A, 
representation. 
This leaves the possibility that it would contain an E representation, 
for which the equation is: 
a(E) = 1/6[1 x 3 x 2 + 2 x 0 x -1 + 3 x 1 x 01 = 6/6 = 1 
confirming that the reducible representation does contain an E repre- 
sentation. There being no further sums to do in this case, it can now be 
concluded that the representation of the three 1s orbitals of the hydro- 
gen atoms of the ammonia molecule transform as the sum A, + E. 

Answers to Problems 
171 

172 
Structure and Bonding 

Answers to Problems 
I73 

174 
Structure and Bonding 

Answers to Problems 
I75 

176 
Structure and Bonding 

Answers to Problems 
I77 

178 
Structure and Bonding 

Subject Index 
Atomic number, effective 
Atomic orbitals 2 
64 
boundary surfaces 4 
linear combinations 
36 
orbital envelope 
diagrams 
5 
spatial orientations 4 
Atomic properties, trends 
Atomic radius 
11 
Atomic size 
11 
Atomic theory 
1 
Aufbau principle 6 
9 
Body centred cubic 
lattice 
146 
Bond angles 83 
Bond enthalpy 
129 
Bond lengths 59 
Bond order 47, 73 
Bond strengths 59 
Born-Lande equation 
Boundary surfaces 4 
159 
Canonical forms 48 
Character tables 22, 27, 
Coordinate bonding 
35 
Correlation diagram, 
water 98 
Coulomb integral 45 
Covalency, overview 
167 
139 
Covalent bond, single 
Covalent bonding 
35 
Covalent radius 
12 
Cubic closest packed 
46 
lattice 
146 
Dative bonding 
35 
Delocalization 
105 
Diatomic molecules 59 
heteronuclear 
59, 74 
homonuclear 
59 
Dihydrogen molecule 34 
Di hydrogen molecule-i on 
Dipole moment 
80 
Dixenon cation 
73 
34 
Effective atomic number 
Electromagnetic 
Electron affinity 10 
Electron attachment 
energy 
10 
Electron spin resonance 
spectroscopy 69 
Electronegativity 
13 
Electronegativity 
coefficients 13 
Allred-Rochow scale 
13 
Electronic binding energy 
50 
Electronic transition 
56 
Elements of symmetry 
64 
radiation 53 
17 
21 
centre of symmetry 
identity 
17 
improper axes 20 
inversion centre 21 
planes 
18 
dihedral 20 
horizontal 
19 
vertical 
19 
proper axes 
18 
Fajan’s rules 
163 
Fermi level 150 
Fermi surface 150 
Gold, yellow colour 
Group orbitals 26 
character 37 
Group theory 
16 
dihydrogen molecule 
dihydrogen molecule- 
153 
37 
ion 37 
Heisenberg uncertainty 
principle 2 
Heteronuclear diatomics 
59, 74 
Hexagonally closest 
packed lattice 
147 
Homonuclear diatomics 
59 
electronic 
configurations 67 
179 

180 
Index 
Hund's rules 8 
Hybridization 
85 
Hydrogen, elementary 
Hydrogen bonding 
114 
normal 
116 
Hypervalence 90 
148 
Inert pair effect 91 
Interelectronic repulsion 
energy 49 
Ionic bonding 35, 155 
Ionization energy 9 
Lattice energy 158 
Lithium, elementary 
149 
Madelung constant 
157 
Mercury, liquid state 
Metal lattices 146 
Metals, band theory 152 
beryllium 152 
Molecular orbital 
diagram 
ammonia 
121 
boron trifluoride 
126 
carbon dioxide 102 
carbon monoxide 77 
chlorine trifluoride 
diborane bridging 
dihydrogen 46 
homonuclear 
diatomics 62 
hydrogen difluoride 
115 
hydrogen fluoride 80 
lithium metal 
150 
methane 
124 
nitrite ion 
110 
nitrogen dioxide 110 
nitrogen monoxide 
nitrogen trifluoride 
nitronium ion 
107 
water 90" 96 
xenon difluoride 102 
153 
133 
138 
74 
31 
linear 97 
Molecular orbital theory 
34, 83 
Molecular orbitals 
anti-bonding 36 
bonding 35 
construction 36 
energies 44 
non-bonding 36 
normalization 
39 
Molecular symmetry 16 
Morse functions 49 
Mulliken symbols 26 
Normalization factors 
39 
Octet rule 88 
Orbital character 23 
Orbital overlap 
6 84 
n 84 
(3 84 
Mulliken equations 63 
Overlap integral 40 
Paramagnetism 
68 
Pauli exclusion principle 
Periodic Table 6 
Photodissociation, 
dihydrogen 56 
Photoelectric work 
function 
147 
Photoelectron 
spectroscopy 52, 
54 
Photoelectron spectrum 
ammonia 
122 
carbon dioxide 103 
carbon monoxide 78 
dihydrogen 55 
dinitrogen 78 
methane 125 
Photoelectrons 
54 
Point groups 22 
assignments of 
Polyatomic molecules 
6 
molecules 27 
119 
Quantum mechanics 2 
Quantum number 
magnetic 3 
orbital angular 
principal 
3 
spin 5 
vibrational 50 
Quantum rules 3 
momentum 3 
Relativistic effects 150, 
Representation 
153, 154 
irreducible 38 
mu1tiplicat.ion 24 
orbital characters 23 
reducible 38 
reduction 
169 
Repulsion energy, 
interelectronic 49 
Resonance integral 45 
Resonance interaction 
48 
Schonflies symbols 27 
Schrodinger wave 
Slater's rules 64 
Sodium fluoride, 
crystalline state 
156 
Symbols 
equation 3, 44 
Mulliken 26 
Schonflies 27 
Symmetry operations 
17 
Triatomic molecules 83 
Valence bond theory 
Van der Waals forces 
VSEPR theory 
83, 84 
34, 47 
116 
ammonia 
119 
boron trifluoride 
126 
carbon dioxide 87 
chlorine trifluoride 
diborane 
136 
ethane 
136 
hydrogen difluoride 
ion 
115 
methane 
123 
132 

Index 
181 
nitrite ion 93 
water 86 
bonding 42 
nitrogen dioxide 92 
xenon difluoride 88 
nitrogen trifluoride 
Xenon compounds 88 
130 
Water molecule 26 
nitronium ion 92 
Wave functions 
Zero-point vibrational 
tri-iodide ion 89 
anti-bonding 42 
energy 49 




