
Cover images 0 
Murray Robertson/visual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-627-5 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001 
All rights reserved 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research orprivate study, or criticism or 
review as permitted under the terms of the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, tlzispuhlication may not be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, without the prior permission in writing of The Royal Society of Chemistry, 
OY in the case of reprographic reproduction only in accordance with the terms of the 
licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the 
terms of the licences issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights Organization out- 
side the UK Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the terms stated here should be 
sent to The Royal Society of Chemistry at the address printed on this page. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 21, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

Preface 
The aim of this book is to provide an introduction to the characteristic 
properties of functional groups. It is written for first-year undergraduates. 
The book is in four chapters. The first is devoted to a general considera- 
tion of the bonding in functional groups, the classes of reagent and the 
types of reaction. Functional groups may be divided into several broad 
classes. The first of these are those functional groups in which the reac- 
tions, mainly substitution and elimination, are those of the o-bond. The 
chemistry of these functional groups forms the second chapter. A second 
class of functional groups is those in which a x-bond is a characteristic 
feature. The initial step in many of their reactions is an addition. These 
functional groups are described in the third chapter. The electrons within a 
n-bond may be symmetrically distributed as in an alkene, or unsymmetri- 
cally distributed as in the carbonyl group. The aromatic ring plays a major 
part in functional group chemistry. The final chapter is devoted to a 
description of the interaction between functional groups and the aromatic 
ring. Heteroaromatic compounds are considered in terms of the perturba- 
tion of the x-system brought about by the insertion of the heteroatom. 
A balance has to be drawn in the use of systematic and trivial names. 
The IUPAC rules recognize that the use of trivial names for many simple 
compounds is often preferred. Students will meet these names in reading 
the current literature and on the bottles in the laboratory. However, 
because the systematic nomenclature forms the basis of documenting 
more complex structures, students need to be familiar with the use of sys- 
tematic nomenclature by applying it to simple molecules. Both names will 
be given for compounds at appropriate stages in the text. An Appendix of 
Common and Systematic Names can be found on the RSC website 
(h t tp://www.chemsoc, org/pdf/tct/functionalappendix. pdf), as well as a 
Further Reading list (http://www.chemsoc.org/pdf/tct/functionalreading. 
I am indebted to Martyn Berry and Professor Sir John Cornforth AC 
FRS for their many valuable comments on the draft manuscript and par- 
ticularly to Professor Alwyn Davies FRS for his substantial help and 
encouragement throughout the preparation of the manuscript and dia- 
grams. 
J. R. Hanson 
Sussex 
PdQ. 

E D 1 TO R - I N - C €1 I E r 
E X E C U T I V E  E D I T O R S  
E D U C A T I O N A L  C O N S U L T A N T  
Professor E W Abel 
Professor A G Davies 
Professor D Phillips 
Profissor J D Woollins 
Mr M Berry 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  I N  T H E  S E R I E S  
F O R T H C O M I N G  T I T L E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Barrett 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hunson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry A4 Sainsbury 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Barrett 
S E Dann 
D 0 Hayward 
J D Gale and J M Seddon 
R A Jackson 
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
Basic Spectroscopy 
X-ray Crystallography 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Chemistry of Solid Surfaces 
Biology for Chemists 
Multi-element NMR 
Further information about this series is available at www. chemsoc. orgltct 
Orders and enquiries should be sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 423429; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
1.1 The Structure of Functional Groups 
1.2 Reagents and Reactions 
1.3 Learning Organic Functional Group Chemistry 
2.1 Alkanes 
2.2 Alkyl Halides 
2.3 Alcohols 
2.4 Epoxides and Ethers 
2.5 Organosulfur Compounds 
2.6 Aliphatic Amines 
3.1 Alkenes 
3.2 Alkynes 
3.3 Carbonyl Compounds 
3.4 Carboxylic Acids and their Relatives 
3.5 Enolate and Related Carbanion Chemistry 
3.6 Nitriles, Imines and Nitro Compounds 
4.1 Aromatic Substitution 
1 
12 
18 
24 
27 
33 
43 
48 
51 
64 
76 
79 
92 
100 
105 
115 
V 

vi 
Contents 
4.2 Aromatic Functional Groups 
4.3 Heteroaromatic Compounds 
123 
133 



General Principles 
1.1 
The Structure of Functional Groups 
A 
is a chemically reactive group of atoms within a 
molecule. Each functional group has its characteristic reactivity, which 
may be modified by its position within the molecule or by the presence 
of other neighbouring functional groups. 
I =l 
=I 
Hybridization and Bonding 
An isolated carbon atom possesses two electrons in its 1s orbital, two 
electrons in its 2s orbital and two electrons in its 2p orbitals. The types 
of bonding found in carbon compounds arise from various hybrids 
of the 2s and 2p orbitals. Combination of one 2s and three 2p orbitals 
1 

2 
Functional Group Chemistry 
leads to four equivalent 
orbitals directed towards the 
apices of a tetrahedron (see 1.1). Each of these orbitals can be occupied 
by one of the four available electrons from the carbon atom. These 
can each pair with one electron from another atom to produce, for 
example, methane (1.2). The energy required for the reorganization 
of the orbitals is gained from the formation of the four covalent 
bonds. 
Alternatively, the 2s and two 2p orbitals may be hybridized to give a 
planar 
system accommodating three electrons from the carbon, one 
in each hybrid orbital. Three bonds may then be formed with other atoms 
(see 1.3). The remaining electron, which is in a p orbital at 90" to the 
plane of the sp2 system, may overlap with a comparable p orbital from 
a second atom to form a 
, leading to a double bond between the 
carbon and this atom as in ethene (1.4). 
A further way of making four bonds from the carbon is to hybridize 
the 2s and one 2p orbital to give two 
hybrids in which the orbitals 
are at 180" to each other. The remaining two 2p orbitals are used to 
form two n;-bonds at 90" each other (see 1.5). In this case there is a triple 
bond between the carbon and another atom as, for example, in ethyne 
(acetylene, 1.6). 
These hybridizations have several consequences. Since an s orbital is 
closer to the nucleus than the corresponding p orbital, the increasing 
s character in the orbitals in changing from sp3 to sp2 and then sp leads 
to a decrease in bond length: sp3 C-C, 0.154 nm; sp2 C=C, 0.134 nm; sp 
CeC, 0.120 nm. Secondly, the increasing s character means that the bond- 
ing electrons in the sp and sp2 orbitals are held more tightly to the car- 
bon than in an sp3 bond. This is reflected in the increase in the polarity 
and acidity of a C--H+ bond and in the ease of formation of 
organometallic compounds containing the C--M' 
bond. These follow 
the order sp3 < sp2 < sp. On the other hand, there is an increase in the 
difficulty of breaking a carbon-halogen bond in the ionic sense C+-X-, 
in changing from an alkyl to an alkenyl (vinyl) halide. Thirdly, whereas 
the maximum electron density of a 0-bond lies between the atoms form- 
ing the bond, that of a n;-bond lies above and below the plane of the 
bonding atoms, i.e. a n-bond is more exposed for reaction. 
A further consequence lies in the opportunity for one n;-bond to inter- 
act with another suitably oriented n-bond to give a 
system. 
When a carbon-carbon double bond is separated from another carbon 
multiple bond by one carbon-carbon single bond so that overlap is 
possible between the n;-bonds, they are said to be conjugated. Thus in 
butadiene (1.7) molecular orbitals may be written embracing all four 
atoms. These conjugated double bonds often behave as one Functional 
group rather than as two isolated double bonds. Electronic effects are 
relayed through the conjugated system. 
H 
I 
,,\$ \ 
H
H
 
1.2 
,'I 
'\ ,A 
4+ 
- 
=: = ' 
1.1 
H-CCC-H 
1.6 

General Principles 
3 
1.7 
1.8 
1.9 
1.10 
1.11 
1.12 
1.13 
A cyclic conjugated system containing (4n + 2)n electrons has an extra 
stability over that of a comparable number of isolated double bonds. 
This extra stabilization, known as 
, leads to a characteristic 
pattern of reactivity which distinguishes the reactions of benzene (1.8) 
from, for example, the linear hexatriene (1.9) or cyclooctatetraene (1.10) 
(4n electrons, n = 2). The aromatic sextet may arise not just from the 
overlap of three double bonds as in benzene (1.8) or pyridine (1.11) but 
also from the participation of the lone pair of electrons on a heteroatom. 
Thus pyrrole (1.12), with effectively six n-electrons, shows some aromatic 
character. In allene (1.13) the double bonds are at 90" to each other and 
conjugation does not occur. 
I. 
1.2 Bonding and Structure 
The tetrahedral arrangement of the bonds of an sp3 hybridized carbon 
atom, the planar trigonal sp2 arrangement and the linear sp system 
each have structural and geometrical consequences. The existence of free 
rotation about a single bond means that in a molecule such as ethane 
the methyl groups are free to take up a range of different 
relative to each other. There are two extreme conformations, one in 
which the hydrogen atoms are staggered (see 1.14) and the other in which 
they are eclipsed (see 1.15). In the former the interactions between the 
hydrogen atoms of the methyl group are minimized, and the structure is 
of a lower energy than that in which the hydrogen atoms are eclipsed. 

4 
Functional Group Chemistry 
When these ideas are extended to butane, there are three 
about 
the central C-C bond which need to be considered. Not only are there 
the extremes of the staggered (1.16) and eclipsed conformations (1.17), 
in which the methyl group interactions are at a minimum and a maxi- 
mum respectively, but there is also a gauche conformation (1.18) which 
is intermediate between these. 
1.16 
1.17 
1.18 
When the carbon chain is constrained in a cyclohexane ring, there are 
forms. The former is destabilized by eclipsed interactions whilst in the 
latter the interactions are gauche. This conformation is more stable. 
The C-H bonds on the chair cyclohexane ring are of two types. One 
set of six C-H bonds are parallel to the axis of the ring and are known 
as 
bonds (see 1.21). The other set of six bonds point out of the 
horizontal plane of the ring and are known as the 
bonds 
(see 1.22). When these C-H bonds are replaced by substituents, the sub- 
stituents experience different interactions depending on their conforma- 
tion. These steric relationships play an important role in the influence of 
the carbon skeleton of a particular compound on the reactivity of its 
functional groups. 
In an alkene such as ethene, the presence of the .n-bond prevents rota- 
tion about the C=C bond. The hydrogen atoms on the separate carbons 
are either cis or trans to each other. When the alkene bears substituents 
on the separate carbon atoms, these are cis or trans to each other. Distinct 
are possible. These compounds have different prop- 
erties. Thus cis-ethenedicarboxylic acid is maleic acid (1.23). The car- 
boxyl groups are close together in space and react together to form a 
cyclic anhydride (1.24). On the other hand, trans-ethenedicarboxylic acid 
is fumaric acid (1.25) and no such interaction is possible. 
# two extreme conformations known as the 
(1.19) and 
(1.20) 
1.19 boat 
1.20 chair 
0 
II 
H\C/C, 
OH 
0 
1.23 
1.24 
0 
II 
I 1  0 
1.25 

General Principles 
5 
1 .I .3 The Inter-relationship of Functional Groups 
Functional groups may be regarded in a systematic, formal sense to be 
related by a series of redox and substitutive transformations. 
Replacement of a hydrogen atom on the carbon atom at the end of the 
four-carbon chain of butane (1.26) by a 
(OH) group gives the 
butan-1-01 (1.27), and when one of the methylene (CH,) 
hydrogen atoms of butane (1.26) is replaced we obtain the 
butan-2-01 (1.28). Replacement of the central hydrogen of the C, 
isomer 2-methylpropane (1.29) by an OH group gives 2-methylpropan- 
2-01 (1.30), a 
. In each of these isomeric alcohols there is 
a hydroxyl (OH) group conferring similar properties. However, the alco- 
hols differ in the number of hydrogen atoms attached to the carbon atom 
and hence in the properties associated with these atoms. Insertion of the 
oxygen between the two central carbon atoms gives a further C,H,,O 
isomer, ethoxyethane (diethyl ether, 1.31), lacking the characteristic OH 
of the alcohol and thus containing a different functional group, the ether 
group. 
CH3CH2CHCH3 
CH3CH2CH2CH3 
CH3CH2CH2CH20H 
I 
OH 
1.26 
1.27 
1.28 
CH3 
CH? 
\ 
CH3, 
,CH3 
,CH-CH3 
C 
CH~CHZOCH~CH~ 
CH3’ 
‘OH 
1.29 
1.30 
1.31 
Oxidation of butan- 1-01 gives butanal (1.32) which is characterized by 
a C=O, a 
group. Oxidation of 
the secondary alcohol butan-2-01 (1.28) gives butan-2-one (1.33), a 
. There are many common properties of aldehydes and ketones, 
and others that differ because of the aldehydic C-H. 
, butanoic acid (1.34). 
The distinctive properties of a carboxylic acid [C(=O)OH] can be con- 
sidered as combining those of a carbonyl group modified by an attached 
hydroxyl group and those of a hydroxyl group modified by an attached 
carbonyl group. Replacement of the hydrogen atom of a carboxylic acid 
by an alkyl group gives an ester, for example ethyl acetate (ethyl 
ethanoate, 1.35). 
The functional group which contains two alkoxy groups attached to 
the same carbon atom occurs, for example, in dimethoxymethane (1.36), 
and is known as an 
. A compound containing three alkoxy groups 
(see 1.37) is an 
If another atom such as a halogen, a sulfur or a nitrogen is substi- 
group, in this case an 
Oxidation of butanal leads to a 
0 
I/ 
CH~CHZCH~C 
\ 
H 
1.32 
0 
// 
\ 
CH3 
CH:;CH2C 
1.33 
0 
// 
\ OH 
CH3CH2CH2C 
1.34 
OCH2CH3 
CH3 -- d \\ 0 
1.35 

6 
Functional Group Chemistry 
OCH3 
OCH3 
1 
OCH3 
O CH ~  
tuted in place of the hydroxyl group, further functional groups are gen- 
/ 
HC-OCH3 
erated (see Box 1.1). 
H2C, 
I 
1.36 
1.37 
The 
(halogenoalkanes), 
and 
are at the same 
are similarly related to the carboxylic acids. Like oxygen, sulfur can be 
inserted into a chain to generate the equivalent of an ether such as the 
oxidation level as the alcohols, while 
7 
and 
The tervalency of nitrogen does not permit simple insertion; another 
group such as hydrogen or an alkyl group must be added to nitrogen, 
producing for example (CH,),NH (dimethylamine, a 
or (CH,),N (trimethylamine, a 
). Note that the terms pri- 
mary, secondary and tertiary are used in different ways when referring 
to alcohols and amines. 
(R,N+X-), while thioethers form 
Tertiary amines can form stable 
(R3SfX-), but stable 
(R,O+X-) are less common. 
CH3CH3 - 
CH2=CH2 - 
CH3CH2OH 
1.38 
1.39 
1.40 
Dehydrogenation of alkanes such as ethane (1.38) relates them to 
such as ethene (ethylene, 1.39). The same functional group may 
be obtained by dehydration of ethanol (1.40). Further dehydrogenation 
of ethene would generate an 
, ethyne (acetylene, 1.41). In terms 
of oxidation level, the alkene is related to the alcohol and the alkyne is 
related to the ketone. 
H-CzC-H 
1.41 
I .I 
D
4
 Electronegativity 
Having considered the oxidative and substitutive relationships 'between 
functional groups, we now consider the factors that contribute to their 

General Principles 
7 
reactivity. The 
of an element is a measure of the power 
of an element to attract electrons to itself in a chemical bond. It increas- 
es across a period in the Periodic Table from lithium to fluorine and 
decreases down a group. Electronegativity differences between atoms 
lead to an unequal sharing of the bonding electrons between the atoms 
concerned and consequently to regions of electron deficiency and elec- 
tron excess in a molecule. Some electronegativities on the Pauling scale 
(lithium = 1 and fluorine = 4) are given in Table 1.1. 
Table 1 .l Some Pauling electronegativity values 
H 2.1 
Li 1.0 
Mg 1.2 
B 2.0 
C 2.5 
N 3.0 
0 3.5 
F 4.0 
Si 1.8 
P 2.1 
S 2.5 
CI 3.0 
Ge 1.8 
As 2.0 
Se 2.4 
Br 2.8 
I 2.5 
The halogens, oxygen and nitrogen are more electronegative than car- 
bon and hence the alkyl halides, carbonyl and imine groups may be rep- 
resented as in 1.42-1.44, where the full-headed arrows represent the shift 
of an electron pair. 
However, this is not a complete picture of the factors that contribute 
I 
--C--Cl 
1.42 
I 
to the reactivity of functional groups. For example, the electronegativi- 
ty difference between carbon and iodine is relatively small. In the much 
\
P
 
\ P /  
/C=O 
/C=N 
larger iodine atom the bonding orbitals are further from the nucleus than 
in chlorine and are more polarizable during the course of a reaction. 
These differences affect both the 0- 
and n-bonds. Thus many of the reac- 
tions of the alkyl halides and of carbonyl compounds may be rational- 
ized in terms of the 
of 
the component atoms. 
1.43 
1.44 
of the bonds and the 
1.1.5 The Role of Lone Pairs 
The non-bonding 
of electrons, particularly on oxygen and 
I .9,+ 
I x 
nitrogen, are f a  from inert and play an important role in directing the 
outcome of many reactions. They may accept a proton or a Lewis acid 
--c-0 
and thus increase the electron deficiency of the carbon atom to which 
they are attached. Secondly, they are available for donation to an 
attached electron-deficient carbon, and thus they may reduce the sensi- 
tivity of this carbon to nucleophilic attack. Thirdly, they are available 
1.45 
\ r* 
\ 
q - R  
r,C=O 
R 
1.46 
for conjugation with the n-electrons of an alkene or arene, thus increas- 
ing its electron-rich character. These effects may be summarized in 
-0, 
?TC\ 
E+ 
1.45-1.47. When two oxygen atoms, each possessing lone pairs, are 
1.47 

8 
Functional Group Chemistry 
1.48 
8 
1.49 
\
/
 
\
I
 
c-c - 
c=c 
/-d 
/ 
\o- 
1.50 
1.51 
attached to the same carbon atom, the interactions between the lone 
pairs become important in determining the stereochemistry of reactions. 
1.1.6 Resonance 
The structures of a number of compounds that contain a conjugated n- 
system can be written as the combination of a number of contributory 
valence bond structures. Thus benzene can be written as a combination 
of the two valence bond structures 1.48 and 1.49. These contributory but 
non-isolable structures are known as 
, The delocal- 
ization of the n;-electrons, arising from the combination of these valence 
bond structures, leads to enhanced stability. 
Examination of the contributory resonance structures can shed a use- 
ful light on the regions of electron deficiency and electron excess in a 
molecule and hence on its reactivity. The delocalization of charge 
through a conjugated system can give significant stabilization to reac- 
tion intermediates. An example is the delocalization of the negative 
charge of a carbanion adjacent to a carbonyl group (see 1.50 and 1.51). 
There are a number of rules that distinguish meaningful contributory 
resonance structures. Firstly, the atoms involved must not mo\7e between 
resonance structures; secondly, the same number of paired electrons 
should exist in each structure contributing to the resonance hybrid; and 
thirdly, structures that have adjacent like charges will not make a major 
contribution to the overall resonance hybrid, neither will those involv- 
ing multiple isolated charges. Finally, it is important that the 0-bond 
framework, and in particular steric factors, permit a planar relationship 
between the contributory resonance structures. 
I .I 
.7 Tautomerism 
Compounds whose structures differ in the arrangement of hydrogen 
atoms and which are in rapid equilibrium are called 
. It is 
important to draw a distinction between resonance forms and tautomers. 
Whereas it is possible to obtain spectroscopic information on the exis- 
tence of the individual tautomeric forms, resonance forms are not dis- 
tinguishable. The difference can be illustrated by considering an amide 
(1.52). The resonance form (1.53) shows a difference in the position of 
charge, while the tautomer (1.54) shows a difference in the position of a 
hydrogen atom. 
1.52 
resonance 
1.53 
tautomerism 
1.54 

General Principles 
9 
A number of common tautomeric relationships are shown in Box 1.2. 
1.1.8 Naming of Compounds 
Many simple common compounds are known by both a trivial and a 
systematic name. The systematic names are helpful in learning the struc- 
tures of organic compounds, but the trivial names are often simpler and 
can reflect the source or dominant reactivity of the compound concerned. 
The systematic name for a compound has a stem that describes the car- 
bon skeleton, prefixes and suffixes that indicate the functional groups, 
and numbers (locants) that define their position. Prefixes may also be 
added to indicate modifications to the carbon skeleton and to define the 
stereochemistry. A list of the more common prefixes, suffixes and stems 
is given in Table 1.2. 
Thus the various C4H,,0 alcohols are named as butan-1-01 
[CH,CH,CH,CH,OH], 
butan-2-01 [CH,CH,CH(OH)CH,], 2-methyl- 
propan- f-01 [(CH,),CHCH,OH] and 2-methylpropan-2-01 [(CH,),COH]. 
In selecting a stem, note that this includes the carbon atom of the sub- 
stituent described by the suffix. For example, ethanoic acid (acetic acid) 
is CH,CO,H, not CH,CH,CO,H (propanoic acid). Where there is chain 
branching, the longest chain is selected as the stem. For example, 
CH,CH,CH(CH,)CH,OH is named as 2-methylbutan- 1-01 and not as 2- 
ethylpropan- 1-01. 
The relative positions of substituents on an aromatic ring (e.g. ben- 
zene) are indicated by numbers (see 1.55). When only two substituents 
X 
4 
P 
1.55 

10 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Table 1.2 Common stems, suffixes and prefixes 
~ 
~~ 
~~~ 
Examples of stems for carbon chain length 
C, meth- 
C, 
but(a)- 
C, 
hept(a)- 
C,, 
dec(a)- 
C, 
eth- 
C, 
pent(a)- 
C, 
oct(a)- 
c, 
ProP(a)- 
C, 
hex(a)- 
C, 
non(a)- 
Examples of suffixes 
-ane alkane 
-oic acid 
carboxylic acid 
-ene alkene 
-oate 
ester or salt 
-yne alkyne 
-0yl 
acyl derivative 
-01 
alcohol 
-Y I 
alkyl derivative 
-al 
aldehyde 
-amine 
amine 
-one ketone 
-di-. -tri- 
two or three of 
Examples of prefixes 
cyclo- 
amino- 
cisltrans- 
bromo- 
(*I- 
chloro- 
fluoro- 
h yd roxy- 
iodo- 
methyl- 
nitro- 
Br 3”” 
CH3 
1.56 
C02H 
/ 
CH3CH 
\ 
NH2 
1.57 
0 
// 
CH2=CHC \ 
CH3 
1.58 
are present, o- (ortho), m- (meta) and p- (para) are sometimes used in 
place of 1,2-, 1,3- and 1,4-, respectively. These may also be used to relate 
two particular substituents in a polyfunctional molecule. The lowest 
numbers possible are given to the substituents (e.g. 1 -bromo-4-methyl- 
2-nitrobenzene, 1.56) and the substituents are listed in alphabetical order. 
The reactivity of the positions adjacent to a functional group is often 
modified by the functional group. Specific names are given to these posi- 
tions. The position adjacent to an alkene is known as the 
posi- 
tion, whilst that adjacent to a benzene ring is known as the 
position. In more general cases the Greek letters a, p and y are used to 
designate positions adjacent to and progressively further from a func- 
tional group. The o-position is that at the end of a chain. Thus the com- 
mon amino acids such as alanine (1.57) are a-amino acids and 
but-3-en-2-one (1.58) is an a$-unsaturated ketone. The Greek letters a 
and p may also have a different stereochemical meaning, but the con- 
text usually makes this clear. 
When two groups, for example two hydroxyl groups, are adjacent to 
each other, they are known as 
groups, whilst two groups attached 
to the same atom are referred to as 
An asymmetric centre may be described systematically using the 
. The atoms attached to the asymmetric centre are ranked 
according to their atomic number. The highest number is given the pri- 
ority ‘a’ and the lowest ‘d’. If, on viewing the carbon-d bond from the 
side remote from d, the sequence of the three higher atoms around the 
groups. 

General Principles 
11 
asymmetric carbon, a -+ b -+ c, is clockwise, the centre is described as 
R (right handed or rectus). If the order a + b + c is anticlockwise, the 
centre is described as S (left handed or sinister). The full implementation 
of these rules for the designation of stereochemistry, including that of 
alkenes, is described in books on stereochemistry. 
In a number of cases, particularly with simple molecules, the com- 
monly accepted trivial name is more clearly indicative of their proper- 
ties, source and reactivity. The IUPAC rules indicate that some of these 
trivial names are preferred and they are in current common usage in the 
scientific literature and on the bottles found in the laboratory. However, 
systematic nomenclature is used for more complex structures, for index- 
ing and for abstracting. Consequently, both have to be known. In this 
book we will use the common trivial names, giving where appropriate 
the systematic name as well. 
Abbreviations are often used for parts of structures, particularly when 
these do not participate in a reaction. Thus the symbol R may be used 
for the remainder of a molecule. The abbreviation Ar may be used for 
an aromatic ring while Ph is used for phenyl (C,H,). Some common 
abbreviations for alkyl groups are given in Table 1.3. 
Table 1.3 Common abbreviations for alkyl groups 
Me 
methyl 
Bu 
butyl 
Et 
ethyl 
But or t-Bu 
tertiary butyl (tert-butyl) 
Pr 
ProPYl 
AC 
acetyl 
Pr‘ or iPr 
isopropyl 
82 
benzoyl 
Another abbreviation used in drawing structures is to draw only the 
bonds of the carbon framework, leaving out the atoms. Bonds between 
carbon and hydrogen atoms are also left out. Thus, butane is drawn as 
a ‘zigzag’ and cyclohexane as a hexagon. Double and triple bonds are 
included as = or =. In this book, benzene rings will be drawn as cyclo- 
hexatrienes rather than with a circle, because this valence bond repre- 
sentation makes it much easier for the student to understand the 
mechanism of aromatic substitution. Furthermore, in polycyclic aro- 
matic compounds the use of circles can be misleading. 
Electron movement is symbolized by a double-headed ‘curly arrow’ 
used for an 
for the movement of an electron pair, and a single-headed arrow or ‘fish- electron pair 
hook’ for the movement of a single electron. In representing electron 
movement, the arrow must start from the bond or atom that provides 
the electron(s) and the arrow should end where the electron movement 
terminates, either to form a bond or on the particular atom or group 
that receives the charge. Thus if the electron movement creates a bond, 
7. 
-3 
used for a 
single electron 

12 
Functional Group Chemistry 
the arrow should terminate where the centre of the new bond will be; if 
a leaving group departs with the bonding electrons, the arrow should 
terminate on the atom receiving the charge. 
L 2  Reagents and Reactions 
1.2.1 Making and Breaking Bonds 
The reactions of functional groups involve the making and breaking of 
bonds. In homolytic reactions the bonding pair of electrons is separat- 
ed to generate two free radicals, whereas in heterolytic reactions the 
bonding pair stays with one partner. The reagents that bring about these 
reactions are thus involved in one- or two-electron processes. 
In the laboratory, most reactions take place in solution. What may be 
considered to be a high-energy process of placing two bonding electrons 
on to one atom is influenced by the solvent. The solvent can play a major 
role in the stabilization of the reacting species by associating with the ions 
which are formed. Thus heterolytic reactions, which produce ionic species, 
are favoured in dipolar solvents with a high dielectric constant such as 
water, dimethylformamide (DMF, HCONMe,) or dimethyl sulfoxide 
(DMSO, Me2SO), whereas homolytic reactions are favoured by non-polar 
solvents such as petroleum ether or carbon tetrachloride. 
I .2.2 Nucleophiles and Electrophiles 
The reagents that bring about heterolytic reactions may be classified as 
. Nucleophiles are electron-rich, sometimes 
anionic, reagents which participate in reactions at centres of electron defi- 
ciency in a molecule. A nucleophile forms a bond to the electron-defi- 
cient centre by donating both bonding electrons. On the other hand, 
electrophiles are electron-deficient, sometimes cationic, reagents that 
react with regions of higher electron density within a molecule. The elec- 
trophile forms a bond by accepting both bonding electrons from the 
other component of the reaction. In Table 1.4, nucleophiles and elec- 
trophiles are listed in terms of their position in the Periodic Table. 
There are some gaps in terms of common reactive species. For exam- 
ple, although such species or their equivalents can be generated, simple 
electrophiles based on oxygen (OH') and amide nitrogen (NHJ are not 
commonly used. 
and 
1.2.3 Radical Reagents 
are atomic or molecular entities possessing an unpaired 
electron. They are formed by homolytic, or one-electron transfer, reac- 

General Principles 
13 
Table 1.4 Nucleophiles and electrophiles 
Nucleophiles 
Elec trophiles 
H- 
H' (H,O+) 
Halogens 
F-, CI-, Br, I- 
(F+), CI+, Br+, I' 
Sulfur 
H,S, SH-, SR- 
SO,H+ 
Nitrogen 
NH,, 
NH,-, HNR, 
NO,', 
NO+ 
Carbon 
R,C-, 
CN-, R C d -  
R,C+, RCO+ 
Oxygen 
H,O, 
OH-, OMe-, OAc- 
(OH+) 
tions. The tendency for an unpaired electron to seek a partner means 
that, in the absence of special stabilizing features, free radicals are high- 
ly reactive species. Nevertheless, it is possible to design situations in 
which this reactivity can be turned to useful advantage. 
Radicals may be generated by thermal means using, as initiators, com- 
pounds which possess either a weak 0-0 bond such as a peroxide, or 
which, on fragmentation, generate a stabilized radical and a strongly 
bonded product such as nitrogen gas. Azobisisobutyronitrile (1.59) falls 
into this class. After the loss of the nitrogen, the nitrile stabilizes the 
adjacent carbon radical by delocalization. 
1.59 
When a molecule is irradiated, particularly with ultraviolet light, some 
bonds within the molecule can absorb this energy and undergo homolyt- 
ic cleavage to generate free radicals. These reactions include the forma- 
tion of alkoxyl (RO*) radicals from alkyl hypoiodites (RO) or nitrites 
(RONO) or the generation of bromine atoms from bromine or N-bro- 
mosuccinimide. 
A number of radicals may be formed by one-electron transfer redox 
reactions using a metal ion. These may be either oxidations in which a 
transition metal ion such as iron(II1) accepts a single electron from the 
organic substrate to become iron(II), or the reaction may be a reduction 
in which a strongly electropositive metal such as sodium donates an elec- 
tron to the substrate. 
Many radical reactions differ from ionic processes in that they involve 
a chain of reactions. Once initiated, one radical reacts with another mol- 
ecule to generate a further radical by breaking another electron pair. This 
in turn generates a third radical and so on, thus propagating the chain 
until ultimately it is terminated by the combination of two radicals. 

14 
Functional Group Chemistry 
1.2.4 Pericyclic Reactions 
AlC13 + C1- 
AlC14- 
1.60 
BF3 + OEt2 
BF3:OEtZ 
1.61 
There are a number of concerted reactions involving cyclic transition 
states which are characterized by the maintenance throughout of an over- 
lap between orbitals of the correct symmetry. These reactions are known 
as pericyclic reactions and the rules that govern them are known as the 
. A typical example of a reaction of this type 
is the 
of a diene and a dienophile. 
1.2.5 Acids and Bases 
The Bronsted theory of acids and bases defines an acid as a proton donor 
and a base as a proton acceptor, i.e. a protic acid such as hydrochloric 
acid is a source of protons. Although the idea of an acidic hydrogen in 
organic compounds may initially be understood in terms of a carboxyl 
hydroxyl group, a hydrogen atom may become weakly acidic in a num- 
ber of other circumstances, e.g. when it is attached to a carbon atom 
that is adjacent to a carbonyl group. On the other hand, a base such as 
an amine, or a carboxylate anion, is capable of accepting a proton. 
The idea of the proton as the acidic entity was extended by G. N. 
Lewis. Protons can accept electron pairs from bases; 
are gen- 
eralized electron-pair acceptors. For example, aluminium trichloride 
(1.60) behaves as a Lewis acid and reacts with the chloride ion (a Lewis 
base). Boron trifluoride may react with the lone pair of the oxygen of 
diethyl ether to form boron trifluoride etherate (1.61). A Lewis base is 
an electron pair donor, in this case the ether oxygen. 
is useful in classifying 
reagents. The nature of the outer electron shell of an atom determines 
its reactivity. If the electron shell is firmly bound and the orbitals are 
rigidly directed and of low 
, then the atom is said to be 
hard. If the orbitals are less rigidly held and are more polarizable, the 
atom is said to be softer. Hard acids tend to react with hard bases, and 
soft acids react with soft bases. Some typical hard and soft acids and 
bases are given in Table 1.5. 
The concept of 
I 
Table 1.5 Hard and soft acids and bases 
Hard 
Borderline 
soft 
Acids 
H+, Li+, Na+, Mg2+, Ce4+, Ti4+, CP+, Fe2+, Cu2+ 
Cu+, Ag+, Cd2+, 
Fe3+, BF,, 
AICI,, 
Me,Si+ 
Hg2+ 
Bases 
NH,, 
RNH,, H,O, OH-, F- 
C,H,N 
(pyridine), 
H-, CN-, R,S, 
B r  
RS-, 
1 -  

General Principles 
15 
Acid-Base Catalysis 
Many organic reactions are subject to acid or base catalysis. For exam- 
ple, protonation of the oxygen atom of a carbonyl group may enhance 
the electron deficiency of the carbonyl carbon atom and increase its 
sensitivity to nucleophilic attack. 
The catalyst may serve to generate the reactive species. For example, 
many electrophiles are generated by mineral acid or Lewis acid catalysts. 
Bromine reacts with iron(II1) bromide to give the bromonium ion (1.62), 
whilst acetyl chloride in the presence of aluminium trichloride reacts as 
an acylium ion (1.63). 
0 
// 
+ 
\ 
31-2 + FeBq - 
Br+ + FeBr4- 
CH3C 
+ A1Cl-j + 
CH3CrO + AIC14- 
1.63 
1.62 
c1 
Base catalysis operates in a similar manner. An acidic proton of a 
methylene adjacent to a carbonyl group may be removed by a base to 
generate the reactive nucleophilic carbanion (1.64). 
- 
I 113 
0 
1.2.6 Reaction Types 
Having considered the types of bonding, the different functional groups 
and the types of reagent, it is helpful to divide organic reactions into 
several large groups. The first group are 
in which 
one group directly displaces another (Scheme 1. la). These reactions are 
typical of o-bonded C-X systems. 
(Scheme 1.1 b) 
Scheme 1.1 

16 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 1.2 
form a second group. Elimination reactions lead to the formation of an 
unsaturated n-bonded system. The converse of these are 
, in which sp or sp2 centres are converted to sp2 or sp3 centres, respec- 
tively (Scheme 1. lc). These reactions are typical of n-bonds. 
A number of reactions which at first sight appear to be substitution 
reactions, particularly at sp2 centres, in fact proceed via an addition- 
elimination mechanism (e.g. Scheme 1.2). Oxidation and reduction reac- 
tions may often be regarded as subsets of elimination and addition reac- 
tions, respectively. Other oxidation reactions may involve the 
substitution of a hydrogen atom by an oxygen atom, while some reduc- 
tions involve the displacement of a substituent by hydrogen (hydrogenol- 
ysis). Rearrangement reactions (Scheme 1.3) may be considered as 
internal substitution reactions. 
I 
Addition-elimination 
Scheme 1.3 
Finally, there is the large family of industrially important polymer- 
ization reactions. 
I 
.2.7 The Reaction Coordinate 
As a reaction proceeds from starting materials to products, it is possi- 
ble to show the change of the free energy against the progress of the 
reaction (the reaction coordinate) and thus identify various stages in the 
reaction (see Figure 1.1). The activation energy needed to reach the tran- 
sition state determines the rate of the reaction. In a multi-step process, 
we can often identify the rate-limiting step. 

General Principles 
17 
Figure 1.1 The reaction 
coordinate 
9.2.8 Inductive and Mesomeric Effects 
The electronic factors which affect the ground state of a molecule by 
operating through the 0-bond system, such as the electron-withdrawing 
effect of a halogen, are known as 
. Electronic factors, 
which operate by the overlap of the p- or norbitals of a substituent with 
the n;-orbitals of the rest of the molecule, are known as 
The mesomeric effect may modify the reactivity of the ground state of 
a molecule. Once the reaction is in progress, these effects may stabilize 
an intermediate by enhancing charge delocalization, leading to the 
of an intermediate. The resonance stabilization of a 
carbanion by an adjacent carbonyl group (1.65) is an important exam- 
ple of this. A double-ended arrow (++) is used to indicate the existence 
of these resonance structures. 
1.65 
I 
I .2.9 Kinetic versus Thermodynamic Control 
The features that control the eventual outcome of a reaction may also 
be illustrated by the reaction coordinate diagram. If there are two pos- 
sible reaction products with no opportunity to equilibrate between them, 
the product that has the lowest activation energy (and hence is formed 
the fastest) will be formed preferentially. The reaction is under 
. On the other hand, if the products can equilibrate so that the 
most stable product is formed (i.e. AG predominates), the reaction is said 
to be subject to 

18 
Functional Group Chemistry 
I .2.10 Steric Factors 
Hitherto we have considered electronic features which affect the reac- 
tivity of a functional group. However, there are a number of general 
steric factors which need to be considered in terms of the reaction co- 
ordinate. Although the topic will be dealt with in detail in a companion 
volume on stereochemistry, some general points need to be made. 
The pathway of the incoming reagent approaching an sp3 centre may 
strongly influence the chance of a reaction. Obstruction of this pathway 
by other parts of the molecule will reduce the rate of reaction by 
. Such steric factors can affect the face of a double bond to 
which groups become attached when a reagent attacks an sp’ centre. 
Reagents will attack an alkene or a carbonyl group from the less-hin- 
dered face. Hydrogen bonding interactions with a reagent may also 
favour attack on a particular face. Since an addition leads to the con- 
version of an sp2 to a more bulky sp3 centre, the steric consequences of 
this have also to be considered. 
Many reactions have stereochemically demanding intermediates. The 
requirements for the optimum overlap of the participating orbitals in 
many reactions may lead to specific stereochemical relationships between 
groups in the products of a reaction. Neighbouring functional groups 
may participate in many reactions, affecting not only the rate but also 
the products of a reaction. Each of these general stereochemical points 
needs to be considered for a specific reaction. Functional groups do not 
exist in isolation, but in real molecules in which the general pattern of 
reactivity may be modified by their particular environment. 
1.3 
Learning Organic Functional Group Chemistry 
Learning organic chemistry involves rationalizing the reactivity of 
functional groups in a systematic way so that reactions can be seen to 
follow a pattern. Recognition of this pattern not only aids the under- 
standing of organic reaction mechanisms, but also reveals those reac- 
tions which do not follow the predicted pattern and for which a special 
explanation must be sought. 
A useful method for learning functional group chemistry is to prepare 
a template, such as the one illustrated in Scheme 1.4. The formula of a 
typical example of a compound bearing a functional group, for example 
a ketone such as propanone (acetone), is placed in the centre of a sheet 
of paper. The template containing three groups of questions is then 
superimposed on this. The first questions lead to the identification of the 
sites of electron excess and deficiency in the compound. In the case of 
propanone, these are the oxygen atom and the carbon atom of the car- 
bony1 group, respectively. Secondly, the types of reaction that the com- 

General Principles 
19 
pound undergoes are identified. In the example of propanone, these 
would be addition reactions. Thirdly, the results of using various reagents 
for reactions are drawn on to the sheet of paper. For propanone, these 
would be the products of the addition of various nucleophiles to the car- 
bony1 group. Once a series of reactions have been outlined, it is impor- 
tant to rationalize them in mechanistic terms. 
Scheme 1.4 Reaction template 
A second strategy is to replace one atom by another close to it in the 
Periodic Table to reveal analogies and patterns of reactivity. For exam- 
ple, replacing a nitrogen atom by an oxygen atom may reveal analogies 
between the reactivity of nitriles and carbonyl compounds and between 
enamines and enols. It may also provide some useful ideas for synthet- 
ic methods. 
A number of summary charts showing the inter-relationship of func- 
tional groups are placed at the end of the sections in Chapters 2, 3 and 
4. Students should copy these and place the formulae of appropriate 
reagents and conditions above the arrows linking the functional groups. 
The creation of ‘spider’s webs’ linking specific compounds provides a 
useful method of learning functional group chemistry. 

20 
Functional Group Chemistry 

General Principles 
21 

22 
Functional Group Chemistry 

General Principles 
23 

The Chemistry of the 0-Bond 
2.1 
Alkanes 
2A 
Preparation of Alkanes 
Methods for the preparation of alkanes may be divided into a number 
of 
functional groups; secondly, there are methods that involve the 
of groups. Firstly, there are methods that involve the 
24 

The Chemistry of the o-Bond 
25 
of unsaturated systems; and thirdly, there are methods that involve 
the formation of the C-C bonds of the alkane. 
Hydrogenolysis of the toluene-4-sulfonate of an alcohol may be 
carried out with a nucleophilic hydride such as lithium aluminium 
hydride. There are also a series of radical methods based on the reduction 
of alkyl halides with tri-n-butyltin hydride (Bu,SnH). Finally, the source 
of the hydrogen may be the electrophilic proton, exemplified by the 
decomposition of organometallic reagents such as the Grignard reagent 
with water. 
The reduction of carbonyl compounds to hydrocarbons may be 
achieved under acidic conditions (e.g. the 
with 
zinc and concentrated hydrochloric acid), basic conditions (e.g. the 
of a hydrazone with alkali) or neutral condi- 
tions (e.g. the catalytic reduction of thioketals with Raney nickel). The 
carbonyl group may represent the residue from an earlier step in the syn- 
thesis of a compound. 
The catalytic reduction of alkenes and alkynes are important methods 
for the synthesis of alkanes. The hydroboration and hydrosilylation of 
alkenes are alternatives to catalytic methods. Again, both the alkene and 
alkyne may have played an important role in the construction of the 
hydrocarbon chain. 
The formation of C-C bonds in hydrocarbon synthesis by various 
coupling reactions has a long history. While the Wurtz coupling (Scheme 
2. la) is of historical interest, modern coupling methods using 
organometallic reagents are more specific. Electrolytic methods (Scheme 
2. lb) may lead to the generation of the free radicals involved in the cou- 
pling process. 
(a) 2 mBr 
+ 2Na - 
+ 2NaBr 
Scheme 2.1 
2.1.2 Reactions of Hydrocarbons 
Although the older name for the alkanes, the paraffins, arises from the 
Latin parurn afjnis, meaning ‘little reactivity’, nevertheless under the 
appropriate conditions the aliphatic C-H bond can be quite reactive. 
Hydrogen is more electropositive than carbon and hence there is a 
tendency for the C-H bond to react in the sense C--H+. However, very 
few of the reactions of alkanes are of an ionic character. The normal 
or straight-chain hydrocarbons are unattacked by treatment with con- 

26 
Functional Group Chemistry 
centrated sulfuric acid or molten sodium hydroxide. Indeed, refluxing 
n-hexane with concentrated sulfuric acid is part of the method for its 
purification. 
The chemistry of the alkanes is dominated by the abstraction of a 
hydrogen atom by various 
. The bond dissociation energies 
of C-H bonds decrease in the order primary > secondary > tertiary > 
benzylic and allylic, and thus free radical reactions tend to occur at ter- 
tiary, benzylic or allylic centres. 
The sequence of a radical chain reaction is exemplified by the photo- 
chemical 
of methane (Box 2.1). 
In the case of the fluorination and chlorination of methane, both the 
hydrogen abstraction and propagation steps are exothermic, leading to 
a vigorous reaction. Although the abstraction of a hydrogen atom from 
methane by a bromine atom is endothermic, the generation of the halo- 
gen atom in the propagation step is sufficiently exothermic to allow a 
slower overall reaction with bromine. In the case of iodination the hydro- 
gen atom abstraction step is sufficiently endothermic to inhibit reaction. 
The photochemical or radical-induced chlorination of other hydrocar- 
bons can be quite vigorous and mixtures of mono- and polychlorinated 
products are obtained. 
Branched chain hydrocarbons have a greater reactivity, with the rel- 
ative reactivity order being tertiary C-H > secondary C-H > primary 
C-H. Thus, 
of 2-methylpropane with nitric acid in a sealed tube 
can lead to 2-nitro-2-methylpropane. 
The same reactivity order is found with 
. A number of these 
reactions may have radical character. Oxidation with chromium(V1) 
oxide (CrO,) may lead to a tertiary alcohol. 
When a free radical is formed and held tightly within a molecule, reac- 
tions of quite high site specificity (regioselectivity) may be observed. The 
free radical may be generated from another functional group in the mol- 
ecule, but the result is the substitution at a centre that in a formal sense 
has the characteristics of a hydrocarbon. Such reactions are observed 
in the photolysis of nitrite esters (RONO) (the Barton reaction), the 

The Chemistry of the o-Bond 
27 
photolysis of hypochlorites (ROCl) and the oxidation of alcohols with 
iodine and lead(1V) acetate. These reactions generate oxygen radicals 
that are capable of abstracting a hydrogen atom. The radical substitu- 
tion reactions then introduce a functional group at a position which is 
remote from conventional ionic activating groups. 
2.2 
Alkyl Halides 
(halogenoalkanes; R-X where X = F, C1, Br or I) play an 
important role in many synthetic sequences. Their chemistry is domi- 
nated by the electronegativity differences between the halogen and car- 
bon. However, this must be tempered by the ease of breaking the C-X 
bonds. This is reflected in the 
and in the 
(see 
Table 2.1). Hence, if the rate-determining step in a reaction involves the 
fission of the C-X bond, fluorine will be the least reactive despite its high 
electronegativity . 
Table 2.1 Bond dissociation energies (kJ mol-l) and bond lengths (nm) 
CH,-H 
426 
0.109 
CH,-F 
447 
0.138 
CH,-CI 
339 
0.178 
CH,-Br 
280 
0.194 
CH,-I 
226 
0.21 3 
The solvation of ionic species involved in a reaction has to be con- 
sidered. Furthermore, many reactions involve metal-ion catalysis in 
which the principles of hard and soft acids and bases come into play. 
Thus a large ‘soft’ metal may facilitate the reaction of the softer iodides, 
allowing a ‘harder’ base to react at the carbon centre. Finally, there are 
radical reactions based on the alkyl halides, particularly bromides and 
iodides, involving homolytic fission of the C-X bond. 
The combination of these factors leads to the alkyl bromides and 
iodides being the most important alkyl halides in a synthetic context. 
The strength of the C-F bond and the relatively small size of the fluo- 
rine atom give rise to useful biological and industrial properties. The 
slow metabolic cleavage of a C-F bond can be both an advantage and 
a disadvantage. Alkyl fluorides have a chemistry which is somewhat dif- 
ferent from the other alkyl halides. Highly fluorinated compounds are 
more stable than their highly chlorinated analogues. This is of use in the 
polymer industry, but it produces environmental problems in the dis- 
posal of Freons that have been used as refrigerants. 

28 
Functional Group Chemistry 
2.2.1 Methods of Preparation 
Many of the convenient methods of preparing alkyl halides are based 
on the reactions of alcohols with reagents such as thionyl chloride and 
phosphorus pentachloride. These are dealt with in more detail in Section 
2.3 on alcohols. The 
of an alkyl methanesul- 
fonate or toluene-4-sulfonate with a sodium or potassium halide is a use- 
ful method. 
Another widely used series of reactions involves the addition of the 
hydrogen halides to alkenes. These are discussed in more detail later in 
the section on alkenes. Other methods that find some use include the 
of the dry silver salts of carboxylic acids by the halo- 
gens (the Hunsdiecker reaction). 
A number of radical reactions involving substitution at an allylic posi- 
tion, for example with N-bromosuccinimide (NBS), are useful synthetic 
methods. NBS, in the presence of dibenzoyl peroxide as an initiator, 
reacts more rapidly at a secondary rather than a primary allylic position. 
2.2.2 Reactions of Alkyl Halides 
The reactions of alkyl halides are summarized in Box 2.2. 
Reactions with Oxygen Nucleophiles 
Many of the reactions of alkyl halides with oxygen nucleophiles repre- 
sent a balance between nucleophilic substitution and elimination. These 
reactions may occur together, giving mixtures of products. 
Two mechanistic extremes for nucleophilic substitution have been 
established involving unimolecular 
and bimolecular 
path- 
ways. In the S,l pathway the rate-determining step is the fission of the 
C-X bond. This precedes attack by the nucleophile. In the S,2 pathway, 
collision between the nucleophile and the alkyl halide brings about reac- 
tion and is the rate-determining step. Tertiary alkyl halides follow an 
S,1 pathway while primary halides follow an S,2 pathway. Secondary 
alkyl halides may follow either pathway, with the balance depending on 

The Chemistry of the O-Bond 
29 
the specific conditions. These are dealt with in more detail in books on 
organic reaction mechanisms, but are summarized in Scheme 2.2. 
Me 
Me 
Me 
Me 
S N ~  
Me-C-Cl 
+ 
,C: - 
Me-C-OH 
+ HO-C’-Me 
+C1- 
\ 
slow 
I 
H20 
\ 
/ 
/ 
\ 
Me 
Me Me 
Me 
Me 
I 
I 
I 
HO-? 
CH2C1 
[HO - - - CH2 - - - Cl] 
HO-CH2 
Nucleophilic substitution 
W 
Elimination reactions 
Whereas nucleophilic substitution occurs on heating with water, aque- 
ous potassium carbonate, silver oxide or sodium acetate, elimination 
reactions occur on heating an alkyl halide with ethanolic potassium 
hydroxide. Both unimolecular 
and bimolecular 
pathways 
occur, the former with tertiary and the latter with primary and second- 
ary halides. The reactions of alkyl halides with oxygen nucleophiles are 
summarized in Scheme 2.3. 
\+’? 
/ 
/=OX?\ 
Me 
Me 
H 
+
/
 
MezS + O=C \ 
0 
II 
/ 
I \  
R- C-0-C 
H 
/ 
HO-C. 
,?-Hal 
H 
(Cs’ or Ag+ salt) 
/ 
RO-C‘ 
H 
I \  
Scheme 2.2 Substitution 
and elimination reactions of 
alkyl halides 
Scheme 2.3 Reactions of alQl 
halides with oxygen nucleophiles 
An important consequence of the bimolecular S,2 reaction is the 
of a chiral centre bearing the alkyl halide. As 

30 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 2.4 Reactions of alkyl 
halides with nitrogen nucleophiles 
the halide departs on one face, the nucleophile approaches the other face 
of the carbon atom. In contrast, in the S,1 pathway dissociation of the 
C-X bond takes place before the nucleophile attacks. The nucleophile 
may then attack from either face of the carbon atom and the stereo- 
chemical result may be 
rather than inversion of configura- 
tion. The displacement of an alkyl halide may be accompanied by the 
participation of a neighbouring group. This effect can modify the stereo- 
chemistry of the reaction. A number of these reactions are facilitated by 
using silver salts. The silver forms an insoluble silver halide, thus driv- 
ing a reaction to completion. 
The reaction with dimethyl sulfoxide provides a useful method of oxi- 
dizing an alkyl halide to a ketone. Thiols are powerful nucleophiles and 
displace alkyl halides. 
Reactions with N it rog en N ucleo p h i les 
The substitution reaction by ammonia and other amines can give rise to 
complex mixtures of primary, secondary and tertiary amines, together 
with quaternary ammonium salts (see Scheme 2.4). The separation of 
these by chemical means, as opposed to distillation or chromatography, 
is discussed in the section on amines. 
0 
0 
I /  
H2N-C 
I /  
+ H2N-C 
I 
H 
I 
H 
C-Hal 
I 
/ 
H 
0 
RCONH2 
R--N-C 
0 
I
1
 
II 
I /  
H
H
 
R-C-N-C 
I
I
 
H
H
 
0 
II 
I / 
I
I
 
H
H
 
RCONH2 
R--N-C 
I
1
 
H
H
 
Reactions with Carbon Nucleophiles 
The substitution reactions of alkyl halides by 
derived from alkynes and enolate anions provide major methods for the 

The Chemistry of the cs-Bond 
31 
~~ 
formation of C-C bonds (Scheme 2.5). When alkyl halides are heated 
with aqueous ethanolic potassium cyanide, alkyl nitriles (cyanides) are 
obtained, but when silver cyanide is used both cyanides (RCN) and iso- 
cyanides (RNC) are formed. A similar situation occurs with silver nitrite, 
which gives both a nitrite ester and a C-nitro compound. The synthetic 
value of these reactions lies in the further transformation of the prod- 
ucts. The alkynes can be hydrated to form methylene ketones and the 
nitriles may be hydrolysed to form carboxylic acids. 
I /  
RCzC-C 
H 
\
/
 
I 
-c-c- ’ 
‘H 
Scheme 2.5 Reactions of alkyl 
1 
halides with carbon nucleophiles 
Reactions involving Metal Insertion 
These reactions lead to the formation of 
. Since 
metals are more electropositive than carbon, the C-M bond is polarized 
in the sense C--M+. Their importance in the general chemistry of the 
alkyl halides lies in the reversal of the reactive character of the carbon 
atom. It changes from being susceptible to nucleophilic attack to behav- 
ing as a nucleophile. Methyl iodide undergoes nucleophilic substitution 
by the hydroxide ion to form methanol in which the nucleophile has 
become attached to the carbon. On the other hand, treatment of methyl- 
magnesium iodide with acid gives methane in which the electrophile is 
now attached to the methyl group. The best-known organometallic 
reagents are the 
or organomagnesium reagents. Other useful 
reagents are the organolithium reagents, the organozinc reagents and the 
organocuprates. 
The Grignard reagents are prepared by treating the alkyl halide with 
magnesium in diethyl ether (ethoxyethane) or tetrahydrofuran. The 
reagent is stabilized as its diethyl ether complex. Many of the important 
Grignard reactions lead to the formation of a new C-C bond. These 
involve the 
of the reagent to a carbonyl group and 

32 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 2.6 Reactions of 
Grignard reagents 
~~ 
are shown in Scheme 2.6. Grignard reagents also react with epoxides 
(oxiranes) with the formation of alcohols in which the new C-C bond is 
in the P-position to the hydroxyl group. The application of these reagents 
is described in books on synthesis. 
R'CO~H 
R ~ H  
R' CH2OH 
\ 
/ 
R'-C-OH 
R2 
R' \ 
R'MgX 
= CH(0H) 
/ 
R' 
R' 
\ 
R~-C-OH 
/ 
R3 
Radical Reactions of Alkyl Halides 
The 
of an alkyl halide, typically a bromide or an iodide by tri- 
n-butylstannane, is a well-established radical reaction leading to the for- 
mation of a C-H bond (Scheme 2.7a). If the carbon radical is formed in 
the proximity of a double bond, then a new C-C bond may be created. 
These reactions are useful in the formation of ring systems (Scheme 2.7b). 
(4 \ 
Bu3SnH 
\ 
C-Br - 
'C-H 
I 
AIBN 
I 
1 
H 
H 
AIBN = azobisisobutyronitrile 
halides 

The Chemistry of the 45-Bond 
33 
2.3 
Alcohols 
An alcohol (R-OH) contains a hydroxyl group in place of the hydrogen 
atom of an alkane. Alcohols may be primary, secondary or tertiary, 
depending on the number of alkyl substituents attached to the carbon 
atom bearing the hydroxyl group (Box 2.3). 
The relationship between the hydroxyl groups of a polyhydroxylic alco- 
hol can confer special properties on these compounds. In particular, there 

34 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 2.8 
Scheme 2.9 
are a number of specific reactions associated with the presence of a 
1,2-diol. 
2.3.1 Preparation of Alcohols 
Alcohols may be prepared by the hydrolysis of alkyl halides and esters, 
the reduction of carbonyl compounds, the addition of carbanions to car- 
bony1 groups and the hydration of alkenes. Although these reactions are 
discussed in detail in the separate sections concerning these functional 
groups, they are brought together here to show the inter-relationship of 
these functional groups with alcohols. 
Alcohols may be prepared by the nucleophilic substitution of an alkyl 
halide with aqueous alkali or moist silver oxide (Scheme 2.8a). A second fam- 
ily of methods is based on the hydrolysis of esters with alkali (Scheme 2.8b). 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
~ 
The formation of alcohols by the reduction of aldehydes and ketones, 
carboxylic acids, esters and epoxides is summarized in Scheme 2.9. The 
change in the strength of the reducing agents, from the relatively mild 
sodium borohydride to the vigorous lithium aluminium hydride, reflects 
the difference in the electron deficiency of the carbonyl group which is 
being reduced. 
NaBH4 
H \ C=O - 
R-CH2-OH 
/ 
R 
R 
NaBH4 
\ 
R \ C=O - 
CH-OH 
/ 
/ 
R' 
R' 
0 
LiA1H4 
R-CH-CH2 
R-CH-CH3 
\ /  
I 
0 
OH 

The Chemistry of the a-Bond 
35 
The 
(Scheme 2.10a) is a useful way of generating 
alcohols. In the acid-catalysed hydration of an alkene, the initial elec- 
trophilic attack by a proton affords the more stable carbenium ion (car- 
bocation), which is then neutralized by the attack of a water molecule. 
In the case of an unsymmetrical alkene this hydration follows the 
This rule states that the electrophilic part of the 
addendum becomes attached to the carbon atom that bears the greater 
number of hydrogen atoms. This generates the more stable, more highly 
substituted carbenium ion. 
Me\ 
(a) 
+ H30' 
Me-C-OH 
/ 
Me 
Me 
Me 
HgOAc 
Me 
Me 
NaOH 
Me 
OAc 
OH 
Me 
I 
BH3-THF 
Scheme 2.10 
An indirect hydration reaction may be performed using mercury(I1) 
acetate (Scheme 2. lob). The mercury salt behaves as the electrophile, 
forming an organomercury intermediate. The C-Hg bond is subsequently 
cleaved by reduction with sodium borohydride and the alcohol is gen- 
erated by hydrolysis of the acetate. 
of an alkene 
(Scheme 2.10~). This reaction has the overall effect of producing the 
hydration of the double bond. A further characteristic of 
this pathway is that there is a cis relationship between the added hydro- 
gen derived from the borane and the hydroxyl group. 
An alternative sequence involves the 
2.3.2 Reactions of Alcohols 
The reactions of alcohols are summarized in Box 2.4. 

36 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Reactions of the Hydroxyl Hydrogen Atom 
The hydrogen atom of the hydroxyl group of an alcohol is weakly acidic. 
The hydrogen atom of the alcohol is sufficiently mobile to be exchanged 
rapidly with deuterium from deuterium oxide (Scheme 2.1 la). 
I 
I 
I 
I 
--C-O- 
Na' + IH'I 
-C-O-CH3 
Scheme 2.11 
Alcohols will form metal salts. Thus treatment with sodium, potassi- 
um or magnesium leads to the evolution of hydrogen and the formation 
of the 
(Scheme 2.1 lb). The liberation of hydrogen in this reac- 
tion is used in the Bouveault-Blanc reduction of ketones, esters and nitro 
compounds. 
Alkoxides are strong bases and find widespread use in the generation 
of carbanions by abstracting weakly acidic hydrogen atoms from, for 
example, the position a to a carbonyl group. The electron-donating prop- 
erty of the alkyl group increases the basicity of RO- over that of the 
hydroxide anion (OH-). Potassium tert-butoxide is a strong base but 
because of its steric bulk the tert-butoxide anion is a poor nucleophile. 
Alkoxides are nucleophiles and may be used to react with alkyl halides 
or alkyl toluene-4-sulfonates to form ethers (Scheme 2.1 lc). 
Reactions of Alcohols as Nucleophiles 
Many of the reactions of alcohols are dominated by the availability of 
the lone pairs on the oxygen atom, firstly to act as a base by accepting 

The Chemistry of the o-Bond 
37 
~~ 
~ 
~ 
a proton or Lewis acid and secondly to behave as a nucleophile. 
Protonation to form ROH,+ or the addition of a Lewis acid can lead to 
the fission of the C-0 bond and the formation of a carbenium ion (car- 
bocation). The tendency for this to occur increases as the structure of 
the alcohol changes from primary to secondary to tertiary. The result- 
ant carbocation may trap a nucleophile, as in the reaction with concen- 
trated hydrochloric acid and zinc chloride to give an alkyl halide (Scheme 
2.12a). The carbocation may also react with an electron-rich system, as 
in the Friedel-Crafts alkylation of aromatic rings (Scheme 2.12b). 
Alternatively, the carbocation may lose a proton from an adjacent car- 
bon atom to form an alkene, typified by the dehydration of alcohols with 
sulfuric acid or phosphoric acid (Scheme 2.12~). Finally, the carbocation 
may undergo rearrangements such as are found in the reactions of 2,2- 
dimethylpropan- 1-01 (neopentyl alcohol) (Scheme 2.12d). 
CH3 
CH3 
H 
t 
Scheme 2.12 
The lone pairs may act as nucleophiles in substitution reactions of 
alkyl halides and sulfonates, in the solvolysis of epoxides, and in addi- 
tion reactions to carbonyl groups. These reactions often proceed with 
acid or base catalysis. 
The stereochemistry of the bimolecular reactions involves an inver- 
sion of configuration at the centre bearing the leaving group (see Scheme 
2.13). When the addition takes place to an epoxide, there is a trans co- 
planar arrangement between the reacting centres: the nucleophilic oxy- 
gen of the alcohol, the carbon atom of the epoxide and the protonated 
oxygen of the epoxide. 
The addition of an alcohol under acid-catalysed conditions to the elec- 
tron-deficient carbon of a carbonyl group leads firstly to a 
(Scheme 2.14a) and then to an 
(Scheme 2.14b). The lone pairs of 

38 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 2.13 
Scheme 2.14 
I 
Ts = toluene-4-sulfonyl 
EtBr 
but note: 
___) 
Ag20 
the oxygen atom play an important role in stabilizing the intermediates 
in this sequence. Although the reaction proceeds smoothly with aldehy- 
des, in the case of ketones the water which is formed has to be removed 
using a dehydrating agent to drive the reaction to completion. 
Me 
OH 
Me 
hemi-acetal 
-/ 
H 
H \ 
H+ 
Me 
OMe 
Me 
-+=x 
Me 
OMe 
acetal 
The addition of an alcohol to the carbonyl group of a carboxylic acid 
in the presence of an acid catalyst leads to 
formation (Scheme 
2.15a). The acid catalyst increases the electron deficiency of the carbonyl 
carbon, thus overcoming the electron-donating effect of the hydroxyl 
group of the acid. This enhancement of the electron deficiency of the 
carbonyl group of the carboxylic acid may be brought about by con- 
verting the acid to a derivative such as the anhydride or the acyl chlo- 
ride. The reaction of these with alcohols leads to esters (Scheme 2.15b). 
Another method is to carry out the reaction of the alcohol with an acyl 
chloride or anhydride in the presence of a base such as pyridine, which 
may facilitate the removal of a proton from the alcohol. 
Whereas primary and secondary alcohols form esters, these reactions 

The Chemistry of the o-Bond 
39 
+O’H 
l i O H  
Me t 
0’ 
I 
< 
H 
Et 
o, Et 
0 
Me 
EtO, 
H 
Me l o , ,  
Scheme 2.15 
take place far less readily with tertiary alcohols, when they may be 
accompanied by elimination. In such circumstances the addition of the 
alcohol to the highly reactive, less sterically demanding 
(CH,=C=O) may be useful. 
Ethers, such as the benzyl, triphenylmethyl, tetrahydropyranyl and 
silyl ethers, acetals and esters may be used to protect the hydroxyl group 
against further reaction. 
The electron-deficient atom with which the alcohol reacts may not be 
a carbon atom. It may be sulfur as in thionyl chloride (SOCl,) or toluene- 
4-sulfonyl chloride (MeC,H,SO,Cl), nitrogen as in nitrosyl chloride 
(NOCl), phosphorus as in phosphorus oxychloride (POC1,) or phos- 
phorus pentachloride (PCl,) or chromium(V1) as in chromium trioxide 
(CrO,). In each case, esters of the corresponding inorganic acids are 
formed. Many of these esters are very reactive and form intermediates 
in reaction sequences. 
Conversion of Alcohols to Alkyl Halides 
The reaction with thionyl chloride affords a chlorosulfite, the decompo- 
sition of which may generate an alkyl chloride by the 
(substitution, 
nucleophilic, internal) mechanism (Scheme 2.16). This reaction, which 
may proceed by an ion pair, can lead to the retention of configuration 
of an asymmetric secondary alcohol in the conversion to the alkyl chlo- 
ride. This is in contrast to the inversion of configuration found with the 
reaction with phosphorus pentachloride and with the nucleophilic dis- 
placement of a leaving group. 

40 
Functional Group Chemistry 
I 
'cage' 
Scheme 2.16 
Sulfur tetrafluoride (SF,) or diethylaminosulfur trifluoride (Et,NSF,) 
are useful reagents for converting alcohols to fluorides. Diethylamino- 
sulfur trifluoride will also react with aldehydes and ketones to form 
difluorides. 
(ArSO,OR), which is a better leaving group than the hydroxyl group. 
This allows a range of nucleophilic substitutions to be carried out, many 
of which parallel those found with alkyl halides. Alkyl halides such as 
iodides are formed by the nucleophilic substitution of the sulfonate by 
an iodide ion. The reaction in this case proceeds with inversion of con- 
figuration. Treatment of the sulfonate esters with bases such as sodium 
methoxide or collidine (2,4,6-trimethylpyridine), or even just heating 
them, can lead to the elimination of toluene-4-sulfonic acid and the for- 
mation of an alkene. 
The reaction with phosphorus pentachloride, unlike thionyl chloride, 
proceeds more commonly with inversion of configuration. 
The sulfonyl halides (ArS0,Cl) convert the alcohol into a 
Phosphorus Activation of Alcohols 
The 
leads to substitution with inver- 
sion of configuration. The reactions are based on the high heat of for- 
mation of the P-0 bond and the tendency for phosphorus to form 
multiple bonds with oxygen. For example, treatment of an alcohol with 
triphenyl phosphite and methyl iodide leads to the corresponding iodo 
compound (Scheme 2.17). 
Scheme 2.17 
One of the best known of these phosphorus activation reactions is the 
(Scheme 2.18). The phosphorus is itself first activated 

The Chemistry of the a-Bond 
41 
by reaction with diethyl azodicarboxylate (DEAD). Reaction with the 
alcohol then gives a phosphorus derivative which can be displaced by a 
variety of nucleophiles with inversion of configuration of the alcohol. If 
the acetate, benzoate or chloroacetate anion is used as the nucleophile, 
the ester of the epimeric alcohol is obtained. 
HX 
EtOzCN=NC02Et + Ph3P - 
Et02CNNHC02Et 
I 
(DEAD) 
Ph,P+ 
Ph,$O 
MeC02- 
I 
.aH x- 
OCOMe 
I ..+ 
RIHC‘R2 - 
R’ ,C, 
R2 + Et02CNHNHC02Et 
Oxidation Reactions of Alcohols 
Chromium(V1) oxide in various solvent systems provides an excellent 
oxidizing agent for alcohols, since it rapidly forms chromate esters which 
are intermediates in the oxidation of alcohols to aldehydes and ketones. 
The oxidation of [2-3H]propan-2-ol showed a significant isotope effect 
when compared to propan-2-01. Hence the abstraction of a proton by a 
base in the fragmentation of these esters is the rate-determining step in 
the reaction (Scheme 2.19). 
0 
II 
0- 
2H 
2H 
0 
Me 
Me 
I 
Cr03 
Me, 
I 
II 
0 
‘C 
H - 
C> 
?Cr-OH 
___t 
‘C=O 
+ Cr-OH 
Me’ 
‘0’ 
Me’ 
‘O’II$ 
-B2H 
Me / 
I 
The products of the oxidation reactions can be used to distinguish 
between primary, secondary and tertiary alcohols. A primary alcohol 
undergoes a two-stage oxidation via an aldehyde to a carboxylic acid, 
whilst a secondary alcohol gives a ketone. Tertiary alcohols do not react 
under mild conditions. Potassium permanganate can also be used to oxi- 
dize alcohols. 1,2-Diols are oxidized specifically by sodium periodate. 
Remote Oxidation Reactions 
Scheme 2.18 
Scheme 2.19 
A number of esters of alcohols easily undergo homolytic fission, either 
on heating or on irradiation with light. These reactions can lead to the 

42 
Functional Group Chemistry 
generation of reactive 
that may be close to other parts 
of a molecule. Thus in the Barton reaction, photolysis of a nitrite ester 
(RONO) can lead to an oxygen radical and a nitrosyl radical. The oxy- 
gen radical may remove a hydrogen atom from an appropriately placed 
C-H bond to form a carbon radical and an alcohol. The carbon radical 
may then trap the nitrosyl radical, leading to the formation of a C-nitroso 
compound and thence its tautomeric oxime. 
Elimination Reactions of Alcohols 
It has already been noted that a number of derivatives of alcohols, such 
as the sulfonate esters, when heated in the presence of a base, such as 
pyridine, collidine or even alumina, undergo elimination rather than sub- 
stitution, so forming an alkene. 
of alcohols to alkenes may also occur under acid- 
catalysed conditions. Tertiary alcohols undergo elimination more readi- 
ly than secondary alcohols, which are in turn dehydrated more easily 
than primary alcohols. Furthermore, where several elimination products 
are possible, the hydrogen atom that is lost tends to come from the car- 
bon atom bearing the smaller number of hydrogen atoms. However, in 
more complex molecules this type of reaction may be accompanied by 
rearrangements. 
The 

The Chemistry of the o-Bond 
43 
2.4 
Epoxides and Ethers 
Ethers (ROR’) may be considered to be the anhydrides of alcohols which 
are formed by the elimination of water from two alcohols (ROH and 
R’OH). Epoxides (oxiranes) are a sub-set of ethers and share many of 
their characteristics which are derived from the presence of the oxygen 
lone pairs. However, their much greater reactivity arising from the 
strained nature of the three membered ring and their wider use in syn- 
thesis means that they are best considered separately. 
2.4.1 Preparation of Epoxides 
Epoxides may be prepared from alkenes by the action of a peroxy acid 
such as m-chloroperbenzoic acid (Scheme 2.20a) or via the formation of 
a bromohydrin or iodohydrin and the treatment of this with base 
(Scheme 2.20b). Since the initial electrophile, the bromine or the iodine, 
is displaced in the second step when the epoxide is formed, the stereo- 
chemistry of this epoxidation is likely to differ from that of the reaction 
with peroxy acid. 
0 ’\ / 
>c-c \ 
Scheme 2.201 
Hydrogen peroxide or t-butyl hydroperoxide may be used in the pres- 
ence of a catalyst such as sodium tungstate(V1) or vanadyl acetylaceto- 
nate [ { MeCOCH=C(O-)Me),VO] for the epoxidation of allylic alcohols. 
The stereochemistry of the hydroxyl group has a profound effect on the 
stereochemistry of epoxidation. A system which has been applied to 
allylic alcohols, to make optically active epoxides, utilizes titanium(1V) 
isopropoxide, t-butyl hydroperoxide and either of the enantiomeric forms 
of diethyl tartrate. This system forms chiral epoxides of predictable 
stereochemistry. When the reactivity of epoxides is combined with the 

44 
Functional Group Chemistry 
synthesis of double bonds of defined geometry, this chiral step can con- 
stitute a key stage in the synthesis of optically active natural products. 
The double bond of an unsaturated ketone is deactivated towards elec- 
trophilic attack by the electron-withdrawing carbonyl group but is sus- 
ceptible to nucleophilic addition. 
with 
alkaline hydrogen peroxide provides a useful method for the synthesis 
of @-epoxy ketones. 
The reaction of 
(e.g. Me,S+-CH,-) with carbonyl corn- 
pounds is a useful route to epoxides. 
2.4.2 Chemistry of Epoxides 
The chemistry of epoxides is dominated by the basicity of the oxygen 
lone pairs and the release of ring strain as the three-membered ring opens. 
Many of the reactions of epoxides are acid or Lewis acid catalysed. The 
catalyst may coordinate with the oxygen, increasing the polarity of the 
C-0 bond and the sensitivity of the carbon atom to reaction with a 
nucleophile. The reactivity of epoxides are summarized in Box 2.5. 
Cleavage Reactions of Epoxides 
Ring opening can occur in neutral, basic or acidic media. In acidic media 
such as hydrochloric acid, 
of the epoxide precedes nucle- 
ophilic attack by the halide ion or water. In general, the nucleophile then 
attacks from the rear of the epoxide carbon, resulting in an inversion of 
configuration at this centre. 
With unsymmetrical epoxides, the site of the nucleophilic attack is 
governed by both the structure of the epoxide and the reaction condi- 
tions. In neutral or basic conditions, attack by the nucleophile at the 

The Chemistry of the tr-Bond 
45 
sterically less-hindered site may predominate, but under acidic conditions 
there is a greater tendency for nucleophilic attack to take place at the 
carbon atom which can more easily accommodate a developing positive 
charge in the transition state. 
The requirement that the reacting centres must lie in the same plane 
for the most efficient orbital overlap leads to a trans relationship between 
the groups (see 2.1). In a rigid cyclohexane epoxide, ring opening usu- 
ally occurs to give trans diaxial products, although this may be influ- 
enced by neighbouring group participation from an adjacent hydroxyl 
group. Some examples are set out in Scheme 2.21. 
I 
I 
The ring opening of epoxides with carbon nucleophiles represents a 
useful way of making C-C bonds. Grignard, organolithium and 
organocopper reagents and alkali metal acetylides have all been used for 
this purpose. This type of reaction has been used to form carbocyclic 
systems. 
Epoxides may undergo rearrangement in the presence of protic or 
Lewis acids to give carbonyl compounds. However, the nature of the 
products may depend quite subtly on the reaction conditions. For exam- 
ple, 1-methylcyclohexene oxide has been reported to give the ring- 
contracted aldehyde as the major product with lithium bromide, but with 
lithium perchlorate, 2-methylcyclohexanone is the major product 
(Scheme 2.22a). In the presence of a strong base such as lithium diethyl- 
amide, an allylic alcohol may be formed from an epoxide (Scheme 2.22b). 
Scheme 2.21 
95% 
0 
5% 
20% 
80% 
3 
OH 
Scheme 2.22 

46 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Reduction and Oxidation of Epoxides 
Scheme 2.23 
The reduction of epoxides to alcohols has been accomplished by a vari- 
ety of reducing agents. The reduction of unsymmetrical epoxides with 
lithium aluminium hydride in general occurs by attack of the hydride at 
the least-hindered side of the epoxide to form the more highly substi- 
tuted alcohol. 
Organophosphorus reagents based on triphenylphosphine, or 
trimethylsilyl iodide, may be used to 
epoxides to re-form 
the parent alkene. Reactions based on this, or on a related scheme using 
the reduction of an iodohydrin, have been used in the synthesis and pro- 
tection of alkenes as their epoxides (Scheme 2.23). 
I 
I 
Me 
/ I 
Zn 
Me 
NaI 
Me 
0 
‘C5CHMe - 
)C\CHMe 
‘C=CHMe 
/ 
/ 
AcOH 
AcOH 
Me(CH213 
Me(CH2)3 OH 
Me(CH213 
The oxidation of epoxides by chromium(V1) oxide can be used to pre- 
pare 
from trisubstituted epoxides. 
Epoxides will fragment if carbanions are formed adjacent to the epox- 
ide ring. Decomposition of the hydrazone of an epoxy ketone in the pres- 
ence of base may lead to an allylic alcohol (Scheme 2.24). Since the epoxy 
ketone may be prepared from an unsaturated ketone, this can form part 
of a sequence for the 1 + 3 transposition of an oxygen function. 
Scheme 2.24 
2.4.3 Preparation of Ethers 
Ethers are formed by elimination of one molecule of water from two 
alcohol molecules. A wide variety of dehydrating agents have been used, 
including sulfuric acid, phosphoric acid, potassium hydrogen sulfate and 
alumina. 
The conversion of an alcohol to a methanesulfonate or an alkyl halide 
followed by nucleophilic displacement with an alkoxide is a milder 

The Chemistry of the cr-Bond 
47 
procedure. Many methyl ethers have been prepared from the corre- 
sponding alcohol and methyl iodide in the presence of silver oxide (see 
Section 2.3.2). 
2.4.4 Chemistry of Ethers 
Ethers are relatively unreactive substances, which is why diethyl ether 
and tetrahydrofuran are widely used as solvents for organic reactions. 
However, the Zone pairs on the oxygen atom are a source of reactivity. 
The oxygen atom may be protonated, and it reacts with Lewis acids. The 
increased polarity of the C-0 bond then makes the neighbouring car- 
bon atoms sensitive to nucleophilic attack. 
Ethers may be cleaved with hydrogen iodide or boron tribromide to 
form an alcohol and an alkyl halide. 
The a-position of an ether is susceptible to attack by free radicals and, 
in certain circumstances, by halogens. Ethers are slowly oxidized by the 
oxygen from air to form 
. This can be a hazard in stored bot- 
tles of ethers, particularly with the higher ethers such as di-isopropyl 
ether. These peroxides may be destroyed by treatment with iron(I1) sul- 
fate. Chlorine reacts with ethers, particularly in sunlight. These a-halo 
ethers then decompose to the aldehyde and an alcohol. 
The lone pairs on the oxygen atom are effective in stabilizing an adja- 
cent carbocation. This property accounts for the reactivity of acetals in 
the presence of acid. Thus chloromethyl methyl ether (ClCH,OMe), 
obtained from formaldehyde, methanol and hydrogen chloride (Scheme 
2.25a), is a powerful alkylating agent (Scheme 2.25b) and indeed it owes 
its high toxicity to that property. Similarly, dimethoxymethane 
[(MeO),CH,] in the presence of a Lewis acid catalyst is a methylenating 
agent. 
(a) CH30H + HCHO + HCl ---+ 
CICH20CH3 
R' 
R' 
R2 
R2 
\ 
\ 
(b) 
/NH + ClCH20CH3 - 
NCH20CH3 
/ 
Scheme 2.25 

48 
Functional Group Chemistry 
2.5 
Organosulfur Compounds 
Although sulfur is in the same group of the Periodic Table as oxygen, 
there are a number of differences between the organic chemistry of sul- 
fur and that of oxygen. Firstly, the S-H bond is much weaker than the 
0-H bond. Thiols are more acidic than alcohols and the homolytic fis- 
sion of the S-H bond occurs more readily. Secondly, sulfur is a larger 
third-row element and consequently the valence shell electrons are fur- 
ther from the nucleus, leading to a lower ionization potential and greater 
polarizability of divalent sulfur. Thus sulfur compounds are better 
nucleophiles than their oxygen counterparts. In hard and soft acid and 
base terms, sulfur is softer than oxygen. Thirdly, metal salts which readily 
react with sulfur compounds (e.g. salts of mercury and nickel) are gen- 
erally different from those which react with oxygen compounds. 
Fourthly, sulfur has the ability to expand its valency shell and to form 
stable sulfonium salts. Furthermore, the availability of relatively low- 
lying unoccupied orbitals in divalent sulfur compounds means that sul- 
fur can stabilize a-carbanions in a way that is not open to oxygen. 
Finally, the strength of the S-0 bond is greater than that of an 0-0 
bond, leading to a range of S-0 derivatives. However, double bonds to 
carbon are more stable with oxygen (2p-2p n;-bonding) than with sulfur 
(3p2p nbonding). Although sulfur-containing compounds have many 
applications in synthesis, their use is often restricted by the unpleasant 
smell associated with the more volatile compounds. 
2.5.1 Preparation of Thiols 
Although thiols may be prepared by the nucleophilic displacement of an 
alkyl halide, the resultant thiol may react further to give a thioether. 
Consequently, methods have been introduced which reduce the nucle- 
ophilicity of the sulfur and thus the tendency for this second step to 

The Chemistry of the cr-Bond 
49 
occur. For example, reaction of an alkyl halide with thiourea gives a 
thiouronium salt in which the positive charge of the salt adjacent to the 
sulfur reduces its nucleophilicity. The thiol is then released from the 
thiouronium salt by treatment with base (Scheme 2.26). Aromatic thiols 
can also be prepared by the reduction of sulfonates or arenesulfonyl 
chlorides. 
S 
2.5.2 Reactions of Thiols 
Scheme 2.26 
Thiols are more acidic than the corresponding alcohols and are converted 
into their salts using alkali metal hydroxides or alkoxides. The thiolate 
salts are powerful nucleophiles, a property which has been used in the 
cleavage of methyl esters and methyl ethers. The combination of a hard 
acid and a soft base such as lithium propanethiolate (Li+-SPr) may favour 
attack on the methyl group of an ester and lead to alkyl-oxygen fission 
of the ester, rather than the more common addition of a nucleophile to 
the carbonyl group and consequently acyl-oxygen fission. This is par- 
ticularly useful in the hydrolysis of hindered esters. 
The ease of fission of the S-H bond under 
conditions means 
that thiols are often used as hydrogen donors in free radical reactions. 
The acid-catalysed addition of thiols to the carbonyl group of alde- 
hydes and ketones to form 
provides not only a useful way of 
protecting the carbonyl group but also of modifying the reactivity of the 
carbonyl carbon. The equilibrium is much more in favour of the thioac- 
etal than the corresponding oxygen-containing acetal. 
and hence may 
be used to form new C-C bonds in reactions in which the formerly elec- 
tron-deficient character of the aldehydic carbon has been reversed. The 
1,3-dithianes derived from formaldehyde or a higher aldehyde may be 
metallated and then alkylated (Scheme 2.27). Hydrolysis of the dithioac- 
etal is usually carried out in the presence of a thiophilic (sulfur seeking) 
metal salt such as a mercury salt. The insoluble sulfides cause the equi- 
librium to move in favour of the parent carbonyl compound. 
of aldehydes are sources of 
L 
I 
Scheme 2.27 

50 
Functional Group Chemistry 
of the C-S bond can be achieved both by dissolving 
metal systems (sodium in liquid ammonia) or by catalytic methods, par- 
ticularly with a finely divided reactive form of nickel known as Raney 
nickel. When the latter is combined with dithioacetal formation, using 
either ethanedithiol or propane-l,3-dithiol, the result is a mild method 
for reducing a carbonyl group to a methylene group. 
The oxidation of thiols in general follows a different route to that of 
alcohols. Thiols are easily oxidized, even by aerial oxygen, to form 
. This relationship links the amino acid cysteine (2.2) with its 
HSCH2CH(NH2)C02H 
2.2 Cysteine 
SCH2CH(NH2)C02H 
I 
SCH2CH(NH2)C02H 
2.3 Cystine 
disulfide, cystine (2.3). These disulfide bridges are often important in 
holding two peptide chains together in an enzyme system. The oxidation 
of thioethers to form sulfoxides (R,SO) and sulfones (R2S02) may be 
brought about by reagents such as hydrogen peroxide, potassium per- 
manganate or potassium persulfate. On the other hand, the oxidation of 
thiols to thiones (C=S) is much less common than the comparable oxi- 
dation of alcohols to ketones. 
The formation of salts from sulfides is a common process. Thus reac- 
tion of dimethyl sulfide with methyl iodide gives trimethylsulfonium 
iodide (Me,S+I-). 
2.5.3 Sulfonium Salts 
Sulfonium salts react in several ways. They may behave as a leaving 
group, undergoing substitution by a nucleophile or fragmenting with the 
formation of an alkene. However, the most important reaction of sulfo- 
nium salts involves the formation of an ylide in the presence of a base. 
The carbanion of this sulfur ylide is stabilized by the adjacent positive- 
ly charged sulfonium ion. The reaction of the carbanion with a carbonyl 
group parallels that of a phosphonium ylide in the Wittig reaction. 
However, the decomposition of the intermediate dipolar species is dif- 
ferent and leads to the formation of an epoxide (oxirane) rather than an 
alkene. 
2.5.4 Sulfoxides and Sulfones 
(Me,SO), apart from being a useful dipolar aprotic 
solvent, has a number of reactions which reveal its behaviour as a mol- 
ecule containing an S O -  dipole. 
Alkylation may take place either on sulfur or on oxygen to form either 
oxosulfonium or alkoxysulfonium salts. Whereas the former are useful 
in carbanion chemistry, the latter can be used in oxidizing reactions. If 
trimethylsulfoxonium iodide is heated with a mild base i:n deuterium 
oxide, the hydrogen atoms in the salt are replaced by deuterium. 

The Chemistry of the o-Bond 
51 
, 
Decomposition of the deuteriated trimethylsulfoxonium iodide gives deu- 
teriated dimethyl sulfoxide and deuteriated methyl iodide. 
In its simplest application as an oxidizing agent, dimethyl sulfoxide 
displaces a reactive alkyl halide or sulfonate to give an alkoxysulfonium 
salt (Scheme 2.28a). This collapses in the presence of a mild base with 
the elimination of dimethyl sulfide and the formation of a new ketone 
or aldehyde. 
B: 
0 
\EI 
II 
Me2SO 
I?, 
+ 
(a) RCH2-0-S-Ph 
RCH-O--SMe2 
RCHO 
NaHC03 
-MeZS 
PhS03- 
II 0 
0
0
 
COCl 
II 
II 
(b) Me2SO + I 
----t Me2~-O-C-C-Cl 
---+ Me&-Cl 
Cl- 
-coz 
-co 
COCl 
c1- 
B:, 
L 
I 
Scheme 2.28 
Another method of activation is known as the 
. Under 
these conditions a reactive dimethylchlorosulfonium chloride is formed 
from the reaction of dimethyl sulfoxide and oxalyl chloride (Scheme 
2.28b). This then reacts with an alcohol to give an alkoxysulfonium salt. 
In the presence of a base (triethylamine) this salt fragments with the for- 
mation of a carbonyl compound (Scheme 2.28~). 
(R,SO,) lies in the stabilization that they 
provide to adjacent carbanions. The carbanions are produced by treat- 
ment of the sulfone with a strong base such as butyl-lithium or lithium 
diethylamide. The sulfone a-carbanions may be alkylated and a variety 
of products may be formed. Once the sulfone has fulfilled its role in a 
synthetic sequence, it may be removed either by elimination as sulfur 
dioxide or by reductive cleavage using sodium amalgam. 
The importance of 
2.6 
Aliphatic Amines 
Amines are derivatives of ammonia in which one or more of the hydro- 
gen atoms has been replaced by an alkyl group. They are divided into 
primary (RNH,), secondary (R,NH) or tertiary amines (R,N) according 
to the number of hydrogen atoms that have been replaced. The intro- 
duction of a fourth alkyl group leads to the tetra-alkyl or quaternary 
ammonium salts (R,N+X-). 

52 
Functional Group Chemistry 
2.6.1 Preparation of Amines 
The reaction of a primary alkyl halide with ethanolic ammonia in a sealed 
tube at 100 "C, or with liquid ammonia, gives a mixture of all three class- 
es of amine together with a quaternary ammonium salt. Although mix- 
tures of this kind may be separated by fractional distillation, this can be 
achieved by the 
. This method reveals some aspects 
of the chemistry of amines and amides. The procedure involves con- 
verting the amine mixture to alkyl sulfonamides with benzene- or toluene- 
4-sulfonyl chloride. The sulfonamide of a primary amine, such as that 
of the ethylamine, retains an N-H group which is rendered acidic by the 
adjacent sulfonyl group. This sulfonamide may be extracted as a sodi- 
um salt with sodium hydroxide. The sulfonamide of a secondary amine 
has no acidic N-H and the lone pair of the nitrogen is conjugated to the 
sulfonyl group. It is no longer basic and remains in a neutral fraction. 
A tertiary amine such as triethylamine does not form a sulfonamide yet 
retains its basic character. It is therefore soluble in hydrochloric acid as 
a salt (Scheme 2.29). 
I 
H 
I 
tertiary amine 
Scheme 2.29 
The reduction of a number of nitrogen derivatives such as amides, 
oximes, alkyl cyanides or nitro compounds, particularly with lithium alu- 
minium hydride, provides useful ways of making amines. The value of 
these methods lies in the fact that these derivatives allow the nitrogen to 
be introduced into a compound at different oxidation levels (Scheme 
2.3 Oa) . 
The 
of ketones by the Leuckart method utilizes 
ammonium formate both as the source of the nitrogen to form an imine 
while the formate acts as the reductant (Scheme 2.30b). 
A number of methods involve the rearrangement of carboxylic acid 
derivatives via nitrenes. The best known of these is the 
of amides. This involves treating an amide with bromine and alka- 
li. The N-bromo compound undergoes an a-elimination in the presence 

The Chemistry of the a-Bond 
53 
Scheme 2.30 
of alkali to form a nitrene, which immediately rearranges to an iso- 
cyanate. Hydrolysis of this gives an amine (Scheme 2.31). 
0 
0 
0 
MeANH2 
% 
Me 
% IMeAN/ 
---+ 
Me,N=C=O - 
OH- 
MeNH2 
The 
of oximes affords amides which may 
Scheme 2.3,l Hofmann 
be hydrolysed or reduced to form amines. The geometry of the oxime is 
important in directing the course of the rearrangement and hence in 
defining which amide might be obtained (Scheme 2.32). 
rearrangemen1 
H+ 
G 
Scheme 2.32 Beckmann 
rearrangemenl. 
The 
of making primary amines (Scheme 2.33) rests 
on the fact that the imide hydrogen of phthalimide is rendered acidic by 
the two carbonyl groups. It therefore forms a potassium salt, which is a 
powerful nucleophile and may be alkylated. Hydrolysis of the amide gen- 
erates the primary amine. The cleavage of the phthalimide may be car- 
ried out with hydrazine (H2NNH,). 
Scheme 2m3:3 Gabriel amine 
synthesis 
@ 
NK 
@ 
N\/ - 
N2H4 
@yH 
NH 
+ H 2 N C n  NH2 
0 
0 
0 

54 
Functional Group Chemistry 
2.6.2 Reactions of Amines 
/- 
2.4 
2.5 
The chemistry of the amines is dominated by the nucleophilicity of the 
lone pair on the nitrogen atom. The nitrogen can participate in both 
nucleophilic substitution and addition reactions. The nitrogen atom of 
an amine uses sp3 hybridized orbitals in bonding. As with carbon, these 
are directed to the corners of a tetrahedron. Three of these orbitals, each 
containing one electron from the nitrogen, overlap with orbitals of a sub- 
stituent whilst the fourth orbital contains the unshared lone pair of elec- 
trons from the nitrogen. Consequently, amines have a pyramidal shape 
with the nitrogen at one of the vertices. Under normal conditions this 
pyramidal shape is rapidly inverting. 
Reactions with Acids 
Amines are bases and form salts with acids, including carboxylic acids. 
They also form complexes with metal salts. As the size and number of 
the alkyl groups around the nitrogen increase, there is a competition 
between the inductive effect of the alkyl group and the steric hindrance 
of the group. The balance between steric and electronic factors is revealed 
by comparing the variation in base strength, which increases in the order 
ammonia (pKb 4.7) < methylamine (p& 3.36) < dimethylamine (p& 
3.29). Introduction of the third alkyl group then reduces the base strength 
and trimethylamine has pKb = 4.28. The heat of dissociation of the 
amine-trimethylborane complexes (R,N:BMe,) rises from ammonia 
through methylamine to dimethylamine, whilst the trimethylamine- 
trimethylborane complex is about as stable as the methylamine complex. 
On the other hand, the triethylamine complex is quite unstable. Models 
show that it is possible to rotate only two of the three ethyl groups of 
triethylamine (2.4) out of the way of the trimethylborane molecule. 
However, quinuclidine (2.5) effectively possesses three ethyl groups held 
back in a cage and this forms an exceedingly stable addition compound 
with trimet hylborane. 
Amines in Nucleophilic Substitution Reactions 
Amines can displace a halide or a derivative of an alcohol, such as the 
methanesulfonate or toluene-4-sulfonate, with the eventual formation of 
a quaternary ammonium salt. Reaction with ammonia may lead to mix- 
tures, since the initial alkylation increases the basicity of the nitrogen, 
and hence the primary amine reacts more rapidly than ammonia. Further 
reaction, although enhanced by the increase in basicity, may be imped- 
ed by steric hindrance arising from the additional alkyl groups. 

The Chemistry of the o-Bond 
55 
Reaction with Bases 
The hydrogen of a primary or secondary amine is sufficiently acidic to 
form sodium or lithium 
. Thus treatment of diethylamine with 
butyl-lithium affords the strong base lithium diethylamide (Et,N-Li+). 
Amines in Nucleophilic Addition Reactions 
The addition of a primary or secondary amine to a carbonyl group to 
form a tetrahedral intermediate is the first step in a number of reactions. 
Dehydration of the intermediate can give an 
. If, however, the car- 
bony1 group is part of an acyl halide, ester or anhydride, the collapse of 
the tetrahedral intermediate may lead to an amide. These reactions are 
exemplified in Scheme 2.34. 
,x 
1 
Y 
I 
Y 
X \ C=% 
Hf ---+ 
RNH-C-OH 
X 
RNH-C' 
+o 
Scheme 2.34 
Whereas the imines formed with aromatic aldehydes are relatively sta- 
ble, those formed from aliphatic aldehydes are often unstable and under- 
go further reaction. If the reaction with formaldehyde is carried out with 
the salt of a primary or secondary amine and a ketone containing an 
acidic hydrogen, a new C-C bond is formed. This reaction, known as 
the 
(Scheme 2.35), has played a useful role in many 
syntheses. 
Scheme 2.3!5 Mannich reaction 
The acetyl, benzoyl and toluene-4-sulfonyl derivatives of amines are 
often crystalline, and have been used to characterize the amine. The addi- 
tion of an amine to an isocyanate may lead to a substituted 
and 
these have also been used to characterize the amines. 
The electron-deficient atom to which the nitrogen adds may be anoth- 
er heteroatom, as in toluene-4-sulfonyl chloride. The product is then a 
. Some sulfonamides have useful biological activity as anti- 
bacterial agents. 

56 
Functional Group Chemistry 
When the electron-deficient atom is the nitrogen atom of nitrous acid 
or nitrosyl chloride, the products will depend on whether the amine is a 
primary or secondary amine. Primary aliphatic amines give rise to 
(RN,+X-) which readily decompose, sometimes with 
rearrangement. Aromatic diazonium salts (ArN2+X-) are very important 
in aromatic transformations, and are discussed later. Secondary amines, 
on the other hand, give rise to 
Oxidation Reactions of Amines 
There are oxidation reactions in which oxygen is donated to the system 
(Scheme 2.36a) and there are those reactions which are dehydrogena- 
tions. The hydrogen atoms of primary and secondary amines are readi- 
ly replaced by halogens, particularly in the presence of alkali. Some of 
the resultant 
are quite unstable, decomposing, for 
example, to give nitriles (Scheme 2.36b). 
(a) Me3N + HzO2 + 
Me3N+O + H20 
(b) RCH2NH2 - 
RCH2NC12 * 
RC=N + 2NaC1 
c12 
NaOH 
Scheme 2.36 
Cleavage of the C-N Bond in Amines 
Apart from the reactions of diazonium salts, a number of other reac- 
tions are known in which the C-N bond is broken. The best known of 
these is the 
of quaternary ammonium hydroxides 
(Scheme 2.37). An amine is converted by methylation with methyl iodide 
to the quaternary ammonium salt (‘exhaustive methylation’). The iodide, 
on treatment with moist silver oxide, forms the quaternary ammonium 
hydroxide which undergoes a 
to form an alkene. 
The bimolecular elimination of ‘onium’ salts yields the least alkylated 
alkene. This substitution pattern is determined by the ease with which a 
hydrogen atom can be attacked by the base. 
I 
Scheme 2.37 Hofmann 
elimination 

The Chemistry of the a-Bond 
57 

58 
Functional Group Chemistry 

The Chemistry of the o-Bond 
59 

60 
Functional Group Chemistry 

The Chemistry of the o-Bond 
61 

62 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
The overlap between the trigonal sp’ hybridized orbitals of the two car- 
bon atoms of an 
leads to the planar n-bonded system of the alkene 
and leaves an electron in a p orbital on each of the carbons. Overlap 
between these p orbitals leads to the n-system of the alkene. There is a 
region of increased electron density above and below the plane of the 
63 

64 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 3.1 
alkene. Hence the reactions of the alkene are typically those of elec- 
trophilic and radical addition. 
Perturbation of the n;-system by replacement of one carbon atom by 
the electronegative oxygen leads to an unsymmetrical distribution of the 
electrons between the atoms, and to electron deficiency on the remain- 
ing carbon atom. The 
( G O )  is thus sensitive to attack 
by nucleophiles on the carbon and to electrophilic attack on the lone 
pairs of the more electron-rich oxygen atom. If, however, an oxygen 
atom is attached to the alkene to give an 
(C=C-OH), the lone pairs 
on the oxygen atom may interact with the n-system of the alkene, thus 
increasing the electron-rich character of the double bond. The reactivi- 
ty of the alkene towards electrophiles is enhanced on the carbon atom 
that is further from the oxygen atom. Similar effects are observed when 
nitrogen is introduced into the system. 
which exist between a ketone and an enol 
and between an imine and an enamine (see Chapter 1) are reflected in 
the susceptibility of the position a to a ketone to electrophilic attack. 
These effects are discussed in this chapter of the book. 
The 
3.1 
Alkenes 
3.1 .I Preparation of Alkenes 
Alkenes may be obtained by elimination reactions from alkyl halides, 
alcohols, sulfonates or amines. The substitution pattern of the alkene 
and the stereospecificity of these methods depend quite subtly on the 
structure of the individual substrate. If the leaving group occupies an 
unsymmetrical position in a compound, one of two isomeric alkenes can 
be formed (Scheme 3.1). Elimination to give an alkene bearing the great- 
est number of alkyl groups is known as the 
, and is 
commonly found with alkyl halides. When the elimination gives prefer- 
entially the less-substituted alkene, it is known as the 
. This substitution pattern is commonly found with the elimination 
of alkylammonium salts. In practice, mixtures of alkenes are often 
obtained. 
Me&=CHCH3 
Saytzeff elimination 
(X = halogen, except F) 
f 
Me2CHCHCH3 
Me&HCH= CH2 
Hofmann elimination 
A
h
 
(X = 'NMe3, F) 

Chemistry of the x-Bond 
65 
A second general family of methods is based on the addition of car- 
banions to carbonyl groups. The particular alkene which is formed 
depends on the mechanism of the reaction. The 
leads to 
the direct replacement of the carbonyl group by an alkene. The synthetic 
value of the reaction lies in the regiospecific formation of the alkene. 
Thus cyclohexanone gives only methylenecyclohexene on treatment with 
met hylenet rip hen ylp ho spho rane . The a1 ternat ive sequence, involving the 
addition of methylmagnesium iodide and dehydration of the resultant 
tertiary alcohol, gives a mixture of double bond isomers (Scheme 3.2). 
However, although the Wittig reaction is regiospecific, i. e. the alkene 
is formed in a particular position in the molecule, it is stereoselective 
rather than stereospecific. Both cis and trans geometrical isomers can be 
formed. The ratio of geometrical isomers may be varied. The phospho- 
nate variant of the process (the Wadsworth-Emmons reaction) leads to 
trans alkenes. 
The partial reduction of alkynes provides methods that are both regio- 
and stereospecific. Dissolving metal reductions tend to give trans alkenes, 
whereas catalytic methods of reduction generate the cis alkenes (Scheme 
3.3). A Lindlar catalyst (PdlCaCO, + PbO, partially poisoned with 
quinoline) has been recommended for use in this context. 
H 
H 
\
I
 
f = C  \ 
7 
Me(CH2)2 
(CH2)zMe 
\ 
Me(CH& 
H 
Na, liq. NH3 
\
I
 
c=c 
/
\
 
H 
(CH2)2Me 
Scheme 3.2 
Scheme 3.3 

66 
Functional Group Chemistry 
3.1.2 Reactions of Alkenes 
The reactions of alkenes are determined by the 
of 
the alkene. Mechanistically, these reactions may be divided into a num- 
ber of groups. The .n-system may react with electrophiles, with radicals 
and as a component in pericyclic reactions, including acting as a 
dienophile in Diels-Alder reactions. The alkene may also stabilize an 
adjacent electron-deficient carbon either as a radical or as a carbocation. 
This pattern of reactivity is summarized in Box 3.1. 
Electrophilic Addition 
The reactions which involve 
, followed by reaction 
with the associated nucleophile, commonly result in trans addition aris- 
ing from a requirement for the reacting orbitals to lie in a plane. A sec- 
ond electronic feature determines the regiochemistry of electrophilic 
additions. The electron-releasing effect of an alkyl group stabilizes an 
adjacent carbocation. Hence, in those electrophilic additions in which 
there is some intermediate carbocationic character, the addition of the 
electrophile takes place to generate the more highly substituted carbo- 
cationic intermediate. This provides a mechanistic interpretation of the 
, which states that “in the addition of HX to an alkene, 
the hydrogen atom (the electrophile) becomes attached to the less-sub- 
stituted carbon atom”. 
The addition of radicals follows a different pattern which is deter- 
mined by access to the alkene. The addition of hydrogen bromide under 
photochemical conditions, or in the presence of peroxides, involves 
the initial attack of a bromine radical on the alkene. The consequences 
are illustrated by the reaction of hydrogen bromide with ally1 bromide 
(Scheme 3.4). 
Another family of addition reactions to alkenes involves a cyclic 
intermediate or a cyclic transition state. These commonly lead to cis 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
67 
Br 
H+ Br- 
H' Br' 
CH3CHCH2Br a 
CHZ=CHCHzBr - 
BrCH2CH2CHzBr 
ionic 
radical 
Scheme 3.4 
addition. This series also includes the cycloaddition of dienes and 1,3- 
dipolar compounds. 
of the addition to an alkene may be determined 
by a number of factors. The face of the alkene which is attacked by an 
electrophile may be determined by the steric bulk of neighbouring 
groups. A group such as an alkyl group may protect one face, so direct- 
ing the incoming reagent to the opposite face. Secondly, if a bulky cyclic 
intermediate is formed during the reaction, the face on which this occurs 
may be determined by steric interactions. On the other hand, hydrogen 
bonding between a neighbouring hydroxyl group in the substrate and 
the reagent may lead to the initial addition taking place on the same face 
as the directing group, in this case the hydroxyl group. 
The electron density on the two faces of the alkene may be selective- 
ly modified by adjacent substitution. For example, the repulsion between 
the lone pairs of an adjacent ether and the n-system may increase the 
electron density on the face opposite to the ether. Hyperconjugative assis- 
tance from adjacent axial C-H bonds may favour attack from a partic- 
ular face of an alkene. 
The classical examples of electrophilic addition are those of the addi- 
tion of the hydrogen halides and are exemplified by the addition of 
hydrogen chloride under ionic conditions, when the products are those 
of Markownikoff addition (Scheme 3.5). 
The 
hAP 
h A P  
hAP 
Scheme 3.5 
The initial addition of the electrophilic proton is not always followed 
by the addition of a nucleophile. The carbocationic intermediate may be 
discharged by the loss of a proton from another position, leading to 
(Scheme 3.6). 
Secondly, the carbocation may act as an electrophile and react with 
H+ 
-H+ 
c/t 
MeCH2CH=CH2 
MeCH2&HMe 
MeCH=CHMe 
I 
Scheme 3.6 

68 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 3.7 
Scheme 3.8 
Scheme 3.9 
another electron-rich centre within the molecule, for example another 
double bond or an aromatic ring. This can lead to the formation of new 
C-C bonds and, in appropriate circumstances, to 
(Scheme 3.7). 
Thirdly, the carbocation may initiate a series of 
with either the eventual loss of a proton or attack by a nucleophile 
elsewhere in the molecule (Scheme 3.8). The classical examples of the 
Wagner-Meerwein rearrangements of terpenoids follow this pattern. 
Me' 
Halogen Electrophiles 
The additions of halogens such as bromine to alkenes represent a good 
test for unsaturation in a molecule. The addition of bromine takes place 
via the formation of a 
. Proof of this was obtained by 
carrying out the reaction of ethene with bromine in the presence of sodi- 
um chloride, when the product was the bromo-chloride (BrCH,CH,Cl). 
The addition of bromine takes place in a trans manner. In a cyclic 
system this may lead to 
The incoming nucleophile may not necessarily be a second halogen 
atom. Hypobromous acid (HOBr), generated from N-bromosuccinimide 
(Scheme 3.9). 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
69 
and perchloric acid (HCIO,), behaves as a source of a bromonium ion, 
with the hydroxide ion reacting in the subsequent step (Scheme 3.10). 
OH 
I 
Scheme 3.10 
Nitrogen Electrophiles 
The 
(NO?+) is a powerful electrophile and can nitrate 
alkenes. Although the reaction may be followed by the attack of a nucleo- 
philic component, it is often completed by the loss of a proton and the 
formation of a 
(Scheme 3.11). 
M
e
~
M
e
 
HN03 
~ 
M
e
~
M
e
 
The 
(NO+) is another electrophile which is generat- 
ed either from the oxides of nitrogen or from nitrosyl chloride. The 
nitrosochloride may 
to chloro-oxime adducts. 
Carbon Electrophiles 
The reactions of alkenes with carbon electrophiles have already been 
mentioned in the cyclization of 1,5-dienes. However, carbon electrophiles 
may be generated in other ways. Protonation of formaldehyde (methanal) 
leads to a carbocation that may be stabilized by the oxygen lone pair 
(Scheme 3.12a). This may react with alkenes with the formation of 1,3- 
glycols or unsaturated alcohols, depending upon the way in which the 
intermediate carbocation is discharged (the 
, Scheme 
3.12b). 
H’ 
H 
H 
Scheme 3.1 1 
Scheme 3.12! 

70 
Functional Group Chemistry 
The 
of an alkene is a useful reaction which 
can lead to the formation of an unsaturated ketone (Scheme 3.13). 
Scheme 3.13 
Oxymercuration 
A number of metals salts can be used as the source of electrophiles in 
reactions with alkenes. One of the most interesting of these involves the 
attack of mercury(I1) acetate in acetic acid. Reductive cleavage of the 
organomercury compound with sodium borohydride leads to the over- 
all 
of the alkene in a Markownikoff sense. There are a num- 
ber of preparative advantages, such as a reduced tendency to rearrange, 
associated with this and similar relatively mild procedures when com- 
pared to the direct protonation of a double bond (Scheme 3.14) 
Scheme 3.14 
Reactions involving syn Addition 
The 
of a double bond involves the adsorption 
of the alkene on a metal surface and the transfer of hydrogen from the 
surface to the double bond. Typical catalysts are finely divided forms of 
nickel, platinum or palladium, the latter often supported on an inert car- 
rier such as charcoal or barium sulfate. Hydrogenations are carried out 
in solution, with the hydrogen at atmospheric or higher pressure. The 
addition of hydrogen is typically cis and from the less-hindered face of 
the molecule (e.g. the hydrogenation of a-pinene, 3.1). 
The ability of alkenes such as ethene to form stable metal complexes 
such as 
(K[PtCl,(C,H,)]) has been exploited in the develop- 
ment of soluble metal catalysts for reduction. The catalyst is a soluble 
metal complex in which the central metal atom has the ability to bind 
both hydrogen and an alkene. The best known of these catalysts is 
The cis addition of borane to an alkene and the subsequent transfor- 
are reactions of major synthetic importance. 
[RhCl(PPh,),]. 
mations of the 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
71 
Although the reagent is often the borane-tetrahydrofuran complex 
(BH3:THF), other more highly substituted, more sterically demanding, 
alkylboranes (RBH, and R,BH) are also used to enhance the stereo- 
selectivity of the reaction. 
The electrophile is the electron-deficient boron. The reaction takes 
place in several stages. The first stage involves the formation of a n-com- 
plex between the alkene and the borane. The stereochemical directing 
effects of neighbouring alkyl groups and lone pairs on adjacent oxygen 
atoms determine the facial selectivity at this stage. The second stage 
involves the rearrangement of the n-complex to form an alkylborane. 
The regiochemistry of this is determined by the stabilization of carbo- 
cations at the respective carbon atoms. The electron-deficient boron atom 
behaves in the same way as a proton, resulting in Markownikoff addition 
of borane across the double bond. 
The synthetic value of the reaction lies in the modification of these 
organoboranes. The commonest reaction involves the decomposition of 
the borane by alkaline hydrogen peroxide. The highly nucleophilic 
hydroperoxide anion attacks the electron-deficient boron with the for- 
mation of an 'ate' complex. Rearrangement of this leads to the forma- 
tion of a borate ester which then undergoes hydrolysis to an alcohol in 
which an oxygen atom has replaced the boron (Scheme 3.15). The over- 
all outcome of this reaction is the 
of the 
double bond. The regiochemistry is the reverse of the acid-catalysed 
hydration of an alkene. The overall addition of water takes place in a 
cis manner on the less-hindered face of the double bond. 
\
/
 
COH 
I 
J 
\ 
I 
Scheme 3.15; 
Other useful reactions of the boranes include 
of the 
borane with a carboxylic acid, which leads to hydrogenation of the 
alkene. 
The reaction of alkenes with peroxy acids involves an initial complex 
being formed between the alkene and the oxygen of the peroxy 
acid. Further collapse of the intermediate leads to the formation of an 

72 
Functional Group Chemistry 
0 
II 
epoxide (oxirane) (Scheme 3.16). The peroxy acid that is used may be 
m-chloroperbenzoic acid (3.2) or peracetic acid. Alternatively, the per- 
oxy acid may be generated in situ from hydrogen peroxide and an acid 
anhydride. 
Q'- 
O-OH 
c1 
3.2 
Scheme 3.16 
Scheme 3.17 
-0 -C 
The facial selectivity of epoxidation is dominated by steric factors. 
by neighbouring alkyl groups may direct attack to the 
opposite face, while hydrogen bonding between the reagent and an adja- 
cent hydroxyl group may bring about the addition of the oxygen to same 
face of the alkene as the neighbouring hydroxyl group. 
Epoxides may also be formed from alkenes by the treatment of halo- 
hydrins with base. 
Whereas hydrolysis of epoxides leads to the trans diaxial addition of 
water and the formation of trans glycols (1,2-diols), cis glycol formation 
involves the addition of osmium(VII1) oxide (osmium tetroxide, OsO,) 
or cold dilute aqueous potassium manganate(VI1) (potassium perman- 
ganate) to an alkene. 
involv- 
ing the formation of the 
. Subsequent hydrolysis of the ester 
gives the cis glycol (Scheme 3.17). The process can be converted into a 
catalytic sequence by the re-oxidation of the osmium using a variety of 
reagents such as hydrogen peroxide, t-butyl hydroperoxide, morpholine 
N-oxide or potassium hexacyanoferrate(II1) (potassium ferricyanide). 
Although alkaline potassium permanganate can be used as a much 
cheaper alternative, the reaction is often more complex. These cis gly- 
cols are readily cleaved by sodium iodate(VI1) (sodium periodate). 
A number of mechanisms have been proposed for 
Pericyclic Reactions 
There are a number of compounds whose structures can be represented 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
73 
by a combination of resonance forms to which a 
(a+-b-c-) 
makes a significant contribution. These dipolar compounds participate 
in 
with alkenes. A common 1,3-dipolar cycload- 
dition is the reaction with 
(OJ, which rapidly adds to an alkene 
to form a molozonide. However, the initial adduct is unstable because 
of the repulsion between the oxygen lone pairs and the resultant weak- 
ness of the 0-0 bond. Rearrangement takes place with the formation 
of the 
. Cleavage of the ozonide by various reagents such as zinc 
dust or triphenylphosphine may lead, depending on the vigour of the 
reductant, either to dicarbonyl compounds or to alcohols (Scheme 3.18). 
Many other 1,3-dipolar cycloadditions are known, amongst which is 
the addition of 
(CH,N,). Expulsion of nitrogen from the 
adduct leads to the formation of a cyclopropane ring. Another way of 
achieving the same result involves the addition of a carbene such as the 
Simmons-Smith reagent. This is generated from methylene iodide 
(CH,I,) and a zinckopper couple. 
Scheme 3.18 
Dieis-Alder and Related Reactions 
The 
between a 
and a 
is one of the 
major synthetic reactions that are used for the formation of C-C bonds. 
Its usefulness lies in the mild conditions and the predictable regio- and 
stereospecificity of the process. For most purposes the thermal reaction 
requires the presence of an electron-withdrawing substituent on the 
alkene. The reaction is exemplified by the addition of the alkene of male- 
ic anhydride as the dienophile to the diene of cyclopentadiene (Scheme 
3.19). 
A consequence of a Diels-Alder reaction is the formation of a cyclo- 
hexene. The reverse of this reaction, involving the fragmentation of a 
Scheme 3.19 

74 
Functional Group Chemistry 
cyclohexene under thermal conditions, may sometimes be observed. 
Cyclopentadiene is obtained by the thermal decomposition of its dimer 
in a retro-Diels-Alder reaction. 
is another pericyclic reaction which involves the 
combination of an alkene with an allylic system and a hydrogen atom 
transfer (Scheme 3.20). 
The 
Scheme 3.20 
Polymerization Reactions 
CH2=CH2 
ethene 
- 
(CH2 - 
CH2)n- 
polyethene 
3.3 
MeCH=CHZ 
propene 
Me 
I 
- 
(CH- CH&- 
polypropene 
3.4 
Scheme 3.21 
The 
of alkenes is of major economic importance. It may 
take place with either 
or 
. Three stages may 
be distinguished in the polymerization process: initiation, propagation 
and termination. The free radical polymerization of ethene under pres- 
sure and at temperatures of 50-150 "C leads to low-density polyethene 
(3.3). The polymer is of relatively low density due to chain branching 
and the consequent poor packing of the chains. Typical initiators are 
peroxides such as dibenzoyl peroxide, t-butyl hydroperoxide, oxygen or 
azobisisobutyronitrile. A more regular polymer known as high-density 
polyethene is formed when catalysts based on titanium(1V) chloride and 
triethylaluminium (the Ziegler catalysts) are used. These catalysts may 
be used with propene to give polypropene (3.4). 
Alkene Metathesis 
is a reaction catalysed by transition metals in which 
the carbon atoms that constitute the double bond of the alkene are 
exchanged with those of another alkene via a metal-carbene complex 
(Scheme 3.21). 
cat. 
2RCH=CHR' --+ RCH=CHR + R'CH=CHR' 
The combination of short- and long-chain alkenes to make alkenes of 
medium chain length (C, l-C14) has been important in the petrochemical 
industry. Typical catalysts are based on complexes of molybdenum, 

Chemistry of the Tc-Bond 
75 
in ring-closing alkene metathesis. 
(Tr = triphenylmethyl protecting group) 
Reactivity at the Allylic Position 
An alkene may enhance the reactivity of an adjacent allylic position by 
making a hydrogen atom, or a substituent, labile and by stabilizing an 
adjacent radical or carbocation (Scheme 3.23). 
+ 
+ 
RCH=CH-CHz 
f---)- RCH-CH=CH;! 
Scheme 3.23 
0 
I I  
Bromination with a free-radical brominating agent such as N-bromo- 
succinimide (3.6) takes place at the allylic position. The radical that is 
product may be a mixture (Scheme 3.24). 
formed in the first step of the reaction is delocalized, and hence the final 
0 
3.6 
~
_
_
_
_
_
 
- 
NBS 
NBS 
Me(CH&-CH--CH=CH2 - 
M~(CHZ)~-CH~-CH=CH~ - 
Me(CH2)4-CH=CH-CH2 
I 
I 
Br 
Br 
Oxidation with chromium(V1) oxide, t-butyl chromate or chromyl 
chloride may also take place at the allylic position with the formation 
of 
. The alkene may enhance the rate of displace- 
ment of an 
, and the reaction may even take place with the 
participation of the double bond, so leading to an allylic rearrangement 
(Scheme 3.25). 
Scheme 3.24 
OH 
aq. NaOH 
-Cl - 
-OH 
3 
2 
Scheme 3.25 

76 
Functional Group Chemistry 
3.2 
Alkynes 
3.2.1 Preparation of Alkynes 
Alkynes (acetylenes, RCrCR) may be prepared by the elimination of a 
hydrogen halide from alkenyl halides under vigorous conditions. This is 
exemplified by the preparation of phenylacetylene from cinnamic acid 
via the dibromide and o-bromostyrene (Scheme 3.26). The contrast 
between the conditions required for the bromodecarboxylation and for 
the second elimination to form the alkyne reveals the difference in reac- 
tivity between an alkyl and an alkenyl halide. Alternative modes of elim- 
ination, such as allene formation or rearrangement reactions, restrict the 
use of this procedure. 
Scheme 3.26 
A common method for the preparation of alkynes is to insert acetyl- 
ene (ethyne) itself into a molecule viu the acetylide (Scheme 3.27a) or 
Grignard reagent (Scheme 3.27b). 

Chemistry of the 7c-Bond 
77 
-- 
1 
Scheme 3.27 
3.2.2 Addition Reactions of Alkynes 
Alkynes are highly unsaturated and are reactive towards electrophiles 
and nucleophiles. They are less reactive than alkenes towards elec- 
trophiles and more reactive than alkenes towards nucleophiles. 
The reduction of alkynes may be carried out with sodium dissolving 
in liquid ammonia. Subsequent protonation of the dianion gives the 
trans-alkene. On the other hand, catalytic reduction gives the cis-alkene. 
An illustration of alkyne chemistry involves the preparation of interme- 
diates for the synthesis of vitamin A shown in Scheme 3.28. Complete 
hydrogenation to an alkane takes place over a platinum catalyst. 
HIlPd, 
CaCO3 . 
HCGCNat do" 
C=CH 
HO 
C=CH 
In the absence of a catalyst, alkynes react very slowly with bromine, 
particularly when compared to alkenes. When a choice exists, bromine 
reacts preferentially with an alkene rather than an alkyne. It is possible 
that radical reactions play a more important role in the addition to 
alkynes. When the reaction of acetylene with chlorine is catalysed by 
iron(II1) chloride, the reaction is Fast and 1,1,2,2-tetrachloroethane is 
formed. The uncatalysed addition of a hydrogen halide gives a trans 
alkenyl halide. Further addition is restricted but can give rise to dihalides. 
The mercury-catalysed hydration of alkynes is a useful reaction which 
leads, via protonolysis of the organomercury compound and the enol, to 
a methylene ketone (Scheme 3.29). 
Scheme 3.28 
I
-
 
-1 
Scheme 3.29 
Some alkynes undergo 
. Thus acetylene adds 
methanol under pressure in the presence of sodium methoxide to form 
methyl vinyl ether (methoxyethene). 

78 
Functional Group Chemistry 
c=o 
/ 
Me 
Me 
Me 
+ 
---+HO-C-CECH 
* HC--C=C-C=C-CH 
H 
I 
0 2 ,  CuCl, NH4CI 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
H 
OH 
OH 
HCECNa 
3.2.3 Formation of Acetylides 
Scheme 3.30 
Scheme 3.31 
The increase in ‘s’ character of the C-H bond (sp), compared to that of 
an alkene (sp’) or an alkane (sp3), means that the electrons of the C-H 
bond are held more tightly by the carbon, thus making the hydrogen 
atom more acidic. In the presence of a strong base, typically sodamide I 
in liquid ammonia, acetylene may form an acetylide. The acetylide is a 
powerful nucleophile and will add to carbonyl groups. These reactions 
are useful C-C bond-forming processes (see Scheme 3.28). 
Some of the organometallic acetylides, particularly the copper deriv- 
atives, can be linked together by oxidation to form diacetylenes in the 
Cadiot-Chodkiewick oxidative coupling reaction (Scheme 3.30). 
3.2.4 Metal Complexes of Alkynes 
A number of metal carbonyls and cyanides, particularly those of nickel 
and iron, form 
with alkynes. These systems behave cat- 
alytically in the carbonylation of acetylene and in the formation of 
trimers (benzene) and tetramers (cyclooctatetraene). 
3.2.5 Rearrangements of Alkynes 
Alkynes may participate in a number of rearrangement reactions, 
exemplified by the Rupe rearrangement of ethynylcyclohexanol to an 
unsaturated ketone (Scheme 3.31). 
0 
OH 
and displacement reactions yield 
Allenes are also formed in basic media (Scheme 3.32). The reaction is 
particularly easy if the migrating hydrogen is adjacent to a second mul- 
tiply bonded carbon. 

Chemistry of the n;-Bond 
79 
A1203, KOH 
PhCECCH2Ph 
PhCH=C=CHPh 
20 "C, 20 min 
I 
Scheme 3.32 
3.3 
Carbonyl Compounds 
Dipole moment measurements of carbonyl compounds have shown that 
there is an uneven distribution of charge within the carbonyl group, with 
the electronegative oxygen bearing more negative charge and the carbon 
atom being electron deficient. Electron donation to the 
may be provided by an external nucleophile (Scheme 3.33a), 
by an adjacent lone pair (Scheme 3.33b) or by an adjacent anion (Scheme 
3.3 3c). 
Scheme 3.33 

80 
Functional Group Chemistry 
~ 
~ 
~~ 
The oxygen atom is basic and reacts with electrophiles, such as the 
proton and Lewis acids. Protonation of the oxygen increases the elec- 
tron deficiency of the carbon atom of the carbonyl group. Hence many 
addition reactions of the carbonyl group are acid catalysed (Scheme 
3.34). 
\ .q 
\
+
 
\+ 
C=O 
H+- 
C=O-H - 
C-0-H 
/ 
/ 
/ 
Scheme 3.34 
The carbonyl group has an influence on the chemistry of substituents. 
The electron donation from the lone pairs on oxygen and nitrogen in 
esters and amides not only diminishes the reactivity of the carbonyl group 
towards nucleophiles, but also reduces the basicity of the oxygen and 
nitrogen atoms. 
The electron-withdrawing effect of the carbonyl group makes hydro- 
gen atoms attached to neighbouring atoms acidic (Box 3.2). Once the 
anion is formed, it may achieve stability by delocalization of the nega- 
tive charge over the carbonyl group. 
There is a 
between the carbonyl compound and 
the corresponding enol. The latter possesses an electron-rich alkene. The 
hydrogen atom of the enolic hydroxyl group is acidic and in the presence 
of base forms an anion (Scheme 3.35a). Protonation of the enolate anion 
may take place on oxygen or carbon to regenerate either the enol or the 
corresponding carbonyl compound. The existence of the electron-rich 
enolic form of carbonyl compounds leads to the position adjacent to a 
carbonyl group being sensitive to electrophilic attack (Scheme 3.35b). 
The electron-withdrawing effect of the carbonyl group may be relayed 
through a conjugated system. Hence the P-carbon of an 
is susceptible to nucleophilic attack (Scheme 3.36). A hydroxyl 
group attached to this P-carbon is acidic and the anion is stabilized by 
delocalization (Scheme 3.37). 

Chemistry of the :rc-Bond 
81 
Scheme 3.35 
Scheme 3.36 
0 
0- 
y2 
;J 
I1 
I 
0 
OH 
0 
m 
I 
I I 
base 
\ 
\ 
I 
,c-c-c, 
* 
,c=c-c - 
,c=c-c\ - 
,c-c=c 
I I  
I ; 
I 
I 
H 
The enolate of a P-dicarbonyl compound is acidic. The resultant anion 
may be neutralized by reaction with an electrophile either on the central 
carbon (Scheme 3.38a) or on an oxygen atom (Scheme 3.38b). This 
reactivity of P-dicarbonyl compounds makes them extremely useful in 
synthesis. 
Scheme 3.37 
Scheme 3.38 
The addition of a nucleophile to the carbonyl group involves the con- 
version of a planar sp' centre to a tetrahedral sp' centre with an increase 
in the steric bulk of the intermediate. The preferred direction of approach 
of the nucleophile to the carbonyl carbon is along an axis through the 
carbon and oxygen atoms and at an angle of 108" to the plane of the 
carbonyl group (see 3.7). 
The face of the carbonyl group which is attacked by a nucleophile 
may be influenced by the size of the adjacent substituents. Several models 

82 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Nu -I 
.sp". 
L 
3.8 
have been proposed to account for the stereochemical outcome of these 
reactions. The validity of these models depends upon whether the 
reaction is a pure nucleophilic attack or is a reaction which is proceed- 
ing through catalysis by a Lewis acid and in which coordination to the 
oxygen precedes attack by the nucleophile. If the groups attached to 
the adjacent carbon atom are designated S (small), M (medium) and L 
(large), the optimum arrangement of these places the C-L bond per- 
pendicular to the R-C=O fragment and the S group opposite the R alkyl 
residue (see 3.8). A nucleophile is likely to approach the carbonyl group 
at an obtuse angle between the small and medium groups and in such a 
way as to minimize the interactions in the tetrahedral intermediate. 
Overall, this 
accounts for the majority of the 
results. In cyclic systems, more distant factors, such as the interactions 
with a methyl group, may affect the incoming nucleophile. 
Carbonyl-like reactivity is found with a number of other functional 
groups. Replacement of the oxygen of the carbonyl (C=O) group with 
nitrogen leads to 
(C=N-R) and to 
(C=N). These possess 
both an electron-deficient carbon and adjacent substituents which are 
activated by the imine (see 3.9) or nitrile (see 3.10). 
Replacement of the carbon of the carbonyl group by nitrogen, phos- 
phorus or sulfur reveals an analogy with nitroso and nitro compounds, 
phosphono derivatives, sulfoxides and sulfones (Box 3.3). Therefore it is 
not surprising to find parallels in the chemistry of these substances with 
those of the carbonyl group. 
The reactions of the carbonyl group will be discussed under the head- 
ings of the general reactions of aldehydes and ketones and then the 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
83 
special reactions of aldehydes. Acyl chlorides, carboxylic acids, esters 
and amides will be discussed in the next section. The general reactions 
of the carbonyl group are shown in Box 3.4. 
3.3.1 Reduction of Aldehydes and Ketones 
Aldehydes and ketones may be reduced to the corresponding primary 
and secondary alcohols by reagents such as lithium aluminium hydride, 
sodium borohydride, sodium and ethanol or hydrogen over a platinum 
catalyst. A ketone is reduced to a methylene group under more vigor- 
ous conditions with zinc amalgam and concentrated hydrochloric acid 
(the 
) or treatment of the hydrazone with alkali 
(the 
) (Scheme 3.39). 
R '  
R' 
c-c 
,c=c / 
,'I 
I'R2 
R7 
R' 
R-OH OH 
Scheme 3.39 
Reagents such as magnesium, or low-valency states of titanium dis- 
solving in acid, function by donating an electron to the carbonyl group 
to form a radical anion. The reductive process may be completed by the 
dimerization of these radicals to form 1,2-diols (pinacols) in the case of 
magnesium or alkenes in the case of titanium. 
of ketones involves the transfer of 
The 

84 
Functional Group Chemistry 
~ _ _ _ _ _  
hydrogen from an alcohol such as propan-2-01 (isopropanol) mediated 
by aluminium tri-isopropoxide. The isopropanol is oxidized to 
propanone (acetone). The reaction involves the intervention of a cyclic 
transition state (see Scheme 3.40) directed by the favourable formation 
of an 0-A1 bond. The reaction is driven to completion by the removal 
of the more volatile acetone by distillation. 
Scheme 3.40 
The 
of non-enolizable aldehydes is another exam- 
ple of a hydride transfer reaction. It is carried out under alkaline con- 
ditions and involves not only the addition of a hydroxide ion to one 
aldehyde but the stabilization of the resultant acid as the anion (Scheme 
3.4 I ). Methanal (formaldehyde), which gives methanoic acid (formic 
acid), a relatively strong carboxylic acid, makes a good hydrogen donor 
in a cross-Cannizzaro reaction. 
Scheme 3.41 
3.3.2 Addition Reactions 
Addition of Oxygen Nucleophiles 
The addition of oxygen nucleophiles to the carbonyl group can take place 
quite easily, particularly under acid-catalysed conditions. A number of 
simple aldehydes such as formaldehyde and trichloroethanal (chloral) are 
extensively hydrated in aqueous solution. The addition of methanol to 
the carbonyl group under acid catalysis reveals a number of aspects of 
this chemistry (Scheme 3.42). The oxygen atom of the carbonyl group is 
protonated to produce an electron-deficient carbon atom. The initial 
addition takes place to form a 
. In the presence of acid, water 
is lost from this with the formation of a carbocation that is stabilized by 
the lone pairs on the oxygen. Further addition of methanol then takes 
place with the formation of' a 
. The formation of this 
tetrahedral centre leads to steric congestion in the molecule. Hcnce, 
although dimethyl acetals are formed quite easily from aldehydes, they 

Chemistry of the Tc-Bond 
85 
are less readily formed by ketones, particularly sterically hindered 
ketones. 
H 
H\ f\O-Me 
H\ /OMe 
d 'H' 
R 
OMe 
R/ a+ 
OMe 
R/ 
\OMe 
-
c
 
+
c
 
H \ 
H, CH' 
/OH 
C=O + HOMe ---+ 
/C\c 
Ethane- 1,2-diol (ethylene glycol) reacts with aldehydes and ketones 
under these conditions to form ethylene acetals (3.1 1). These compounds 
no longer possess the electron-deficient carbon of the carbonyl group, 
and therefore these acetals function as 
for the carbonyl 
group, allowing reactions to take place at other centres in the molecule 
without interference from the carbonyl group. 
The oxygen nucleophile may be that of a peroxy acid such as 
perbenzoic acid. In this case a rearrangement may occur under acidic 
conditions. This takes place with the expulsion of benzoate and the inser- 
tion of an oxygen adjacent to the carbonyl group. The reaction, known 
as the 
, leads to the conversion of a ketone 
to an ester (Scheme 3.43) or a cyclic ketone to a 
(cyclic ester). 
R, F- 
C 
/ \  n 
R L O - 0 -  
c=o 
I 
R, 
R/O 
+ 0, 
/ 
C 
I 0- 
Ph 
Add it ion of Su If u r N ucleop h i les 
The addition of sulfur nucleophiles to aldehydes and ketones may be 
exemplified by the formation of hydrogensulfite ( 
) adducts (3.12). 
These are sulfonates that are water soluble. However, their steric bulk 
means that whereas they are formed from aldehydes and methyl ketones, 
more highly substituted ketones are reluctant to form these derivatives. 
from aldehydes and ketones involves the 
reaction with a thiol such as ethane-l,2-dithiol in the presence of a Lewis 
acid catalyst such as boron trifluoride etherate. These derivatives have 
been described earlier. 
The formation of 
Addition of Nitrogen Nucleophiles 
Scheme 3.42 
3.11 
Scheme 3.43 
R 
,OH 
I \  
'C 
H 
S03- NaS 
3.12 
Amines behave as powerful nucleophiles and readily add to the carbonyl 
group. The initial addition product of the amine and the carbonyl 

86 
Functional Group Chemistry 
compound may undergo dehydration and the resultant imine may then 
be the substrate for a further addition. 
Ammonia reacts with formaldehyde to give hexamethylenetetramine 
(3.13) and with acetaldehyde to give a trimer (3.14). Other more steric- 
ally hindered imines remain as the monoadduct and do not add a sec- 
ond molecule of amine. These imines are readily reduced by, for example, 
sodium cyanoborohydride to form amines or they may be hydrolysed to 
regenerate the carbonyl compound. 
These salts, such as that formed from formaldehyde and dimethylamine, 
have a very reactive electron-deficient carbon. They are useful in C-C 
bond formation in the 
The addition reactions of amines to polycarbonyl compounds 
are important ways of making heterocyclic compounds. An example 
is the condensation of ammonia with hexane-2,Sdione to give 2,5- 
dimethylpyrrole. 
(Scheme 3.44a). 
The oximes of simple aldehydes and ketones are crystalline derivatives, 
the melting points of which play a useful role in characterizing these 
compounds. Oximes are planar, and show geometrical isomerism about 
the C=N bond. A useful feature of their chemistry is the 
. If the oximino hydroxyl group is converted into a leav- 
ing group by protonation or treatment with phosphorus pentachloride, 
a 1,2-shift of an alkyl or aryl group from carbon to nitrogen may occur 
with the ultimate conversion of a ketone to an amide. The stereochem- 
istry of this reaction reflects the geometry of the oxime, with a trans rela- 
tionship between the leaving hydroxyl group and the migrating C-C 
bond (Scheme 3.44b). 
TN7 
fNTN 
3.13 
HN-CHMe 
HN-CHMe 
I
\
 
MeCH, 
, 
NH 
Secondary amines such as dimethylamine give rise to 
3.14 
The reaction with hydroxylamine gives rise to 
Scheme 3.44 
The addition reactions of 
provide a number of useful solid 
derivatives of well-defined melting point, such as the phenylhydrazones, 
the 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazones (Scheme 3.45a) and the semicarbazones 
(Scheme 3.45b). These are used to characterize aldehydes and ketones. 
In each case the reaction takes place at the most nucleophilic nitrogen. 

Chemistry of the Tc-Bond 
87 
NO;? 
NO;? 
0 
(b) 
II 
0 
Me 
NHCNH;? 
I I  
Me \ 
C=O +H;?NNHCNH;? - 
/ 
/C=N 
Me 
Me 
A useful reduction reaction takes place with hydrazine in the presence 
of a strong base. In the Wolff-Kishner reduction a carbonyl group is 
reduced to a methylene. If the hydrazone is formed from an epoxy 
ketone, the decomposition takes place easily with the formation of an 
allylic alcohol. 
Addition of Carbon Nucleophiles 
The reaction of carbon nucleophiles with the electron-deficient carbon 
of a carbonyl group represents one of the major ways of making C-C 
bonds. The addition of hydrogen cyanide to acetone to form the 
(e.g. 3.15) was one of the first reactions to be studied mech- 
anistically. The reversible reaction leads to the cyanohydrin in which the 
cyano group may be further modified by hydrolysis to a carboxylic acid 
or by reduction to an amine. 
An amino nitrile may be formed instead of a cyanohydrin if the car- 
bony1 compound is treated with aqueous ammonium chloride and sodi- 
um cyanide. Hydrolysis of the amino nitrile gives an a-amino acid as in 
the 
of DL-alanine (Scheme 3.46). 
NH 
MeAk02H 
A 
NH&I, NaCN, 
E
H
 
Me 
Me 
C=N 
conc. HCI - 
The nucleophilic addition of an acetylide to form an 
and the addition of organometallic reagents such as 
to carbonyl compounds are important methods for C-C bond formation. 
Useful carbon nucleophiles are derived from the phosphorus, sulfur 
and silicon 
. The elimination of a hydrogen halide from a phos- 
phonium salt by a strong base, such as sodium hydride, leads to the for- 
mation of a carbanion (see Scheme 3.47). The carbanion of this ylide is 
Scheme 3.45 
Me 
OH 
'\ 1 
C 
/' \ 
Me 
C=N 
3.15 
Scheme 3.46 

88 
Functional Group Chemistry 
stabilized by the adjacent positively charged phosphorus in these 
. The addition of these carbanions to a carbonyl group gener- 
ates a dipolar intermediate, a betaine. Decomposition of this adduct, 
with the formation of triphenylphosphine oxide, brings about the 
regiospecific formation of an alkene from a carbonyl group. 
Scheme 3.47 
Scheme 3.48 
Scheme 3.49 
The phosphorus ylide may be obtained from a wide range of 
different halides, and thus ketones may be converted into a range of 
unsaturated compounds. A useful reaction with the methoxymethylene 
Wittig reagent leads, via the acid-labile enol ether, to an aldehyde 
(Scheme 3.48). 
CHOMe 
The use of sulfur in place of the phosphorus brings about a different 
mode of decomposition of the intermediate betaine. Two sulfur ylides, 
dimethylsulfonium methylide (Scheme 3.49a) and dimethylsulfoxonium 
methylide (Scheme 3.49b), have been used. Both ylides react with ketones 
to give epoxides, but the stereochemistry may differ. 
0 
The use of silicon is illustrated by Scheme 3.50 involving a Grignard 
reagent containing a trimethylsilyl group in which the silicon stabilizes 
the carbanion. Elimination of the silyl group from the P-hydroxysilane 
leads to the formation of the alkene. 

Chemistry of the 7c-Bond 
89 
Mg 
Me3SiCH2Cl __f Me3SiCH2MgCI \ 
Me 
I 
0 
Me?C=CHCH2CH2COH 
II 
I 
CHZSiMe3 
Me2C =CHCH*CHZCMe 
1 
/Me 
HOSiMe3 + Me?C=CHCH?CH?C \\ CH? 
The carbonyl group acts as the recipient carbon for a large family of 
carbanions derived from carbonyl activation. These are dealt with in 
more detail in the section on enolate anions. 
3.3.3 Special Properties of Aldehydes 
Aldehydes show a number of special properties which distinguish them 
from ketones. Firstly, they are easily oxidized to the corresponding 
carboxylic acid. If alkaline silver oxide is used for this purpose, a silver 
mirror is formed, and this can be used as a test for an aldehyde. 
The oxidation of aldehydes by reagents such as chromium(V1) oxide 
involves the hydration of the aldehyde and hence sterically hindered 
aldehydes are sometimes relatively slow to be oxidized. Many aldehydes 
are autoxidized vici the hydroperoxide to give the acid or other decom- 
position products. 
Non-enolizable aromatic aldehydes take part in the Cannizzaro 
reaction. 
The cyanohydrins of aromatic aldehydes participate in the 
. The carbon-bound hydrogen (formerly the aldehydic 
hydrogen) of the cyanohydrin is made weakly acidic by the adjacent 
nitrile. The related carbanion may condense with a second molecule of 
the aldehyde. The resultant cyanohydrin is that of a ketone which is less 
stable and collapses to give benzoin (Scheme 3.51). 
Scheme 3.50 
Scheme 3.511 

90 
Functional Group Chemistry 
3.3.4 Quinones 
are cyclic unsaturated diketones in which the carbon atoms are 
derived from the oxidation of an aromatic system. Although the under- 
lying reactivity of quinones is that of unsaturated ketones (cyclohexadi- 
enediones), it is tempered by this relationship to aromatic compounds 
and in particular by their reduction to dihydroxyphenols (quinols). 
The relationship of quinones to aromatic compounds is revealed by 
their preparation by the oxidation of aromatic hydrocarbons, phenols or 
amines (Scheme 3.52). 
Scheme 3.52 
3.16 4 
0 
3.17 
Scheme 3.53 
Two major types of quinone exist, 1,2- and 1,4-quinones, exemplified 
by ortho- (3.16) and para-benzoquinone (3.17). Quinones are electron- 
deficient conjugated systems which can accept electrons in two single- 
electron steps to give, firstly, a semiquinone radical anion and then a 
hydroquinone (Scheme 3.53). The electrode potential required to bring 
about the change varies with the structure. Electron-withdrawing 
substituents increase the electron deficiency and make the quinone a 
more powerful electron acceptor and consequently oxidizing agent. 
Tetrachloro-p-benzoquinone 
(chloranil) and 2,3-dichloro-4,5-dicyano-p- 
benzoquinone are useful dehydrogenating agents for converting ketones 
to unsaturated ketones. 
0 
0- 
0- 
0- 
Quinones are reduced to quinols by sulfur dioxide or by zinc dust in 
acetic acid. The ability of a quinone to act as an electron-acceptor and 
their reduction products (quinols) to act as electron-donors is reflected 
in the formation of 
which are highly coloured 1: 1 charge- 
transfer molecular complexes. 

Chemistry of the rc-Bond 
91 
Quinones behave as typical unsaturated ketones and undergo 1,4-addi- 
tion reactions with acid catalysis. Thus treatment of p-benzoquinone with 
hydrogen chloride gives a chlorohydroquinone (3.1 8). The addition of 
aniline and methanol takes place to give initially the corresponding 
quinols. However, the electron-donating character of these substituents 
makes the quinols more easily oxidized by excess p-benzoquinone. The 
anilino- (3.19) and methoxyquinones (3.20) are therefore the final 
products. 
Quinones, typical of unsaturated ketones, undergo 
. The epoxy ketone may then rearrange with the formation 
of a hydroxy quinone. Quinones may also act as 
in the 
Diels-Alder reaction. This can be a useful way of constructing polycyclic 
ring systems (Scheme 3.54). 
OH 
0 
3.18 
3.19 
,YOMe 
0 
3.2!0 
I 
I 
Scheme 3.54, 

92 
Functional Group Chemistry 
3.4 
Carboxylic Acids and their Relatives 
The carbonyl group has a major effect on the reactivity of a number of 
substituents such as the halogen of an acyl halide, the hydroxyl group 
of a carboxylic acid and the amino group of an amide. Although it is 
possible to regard each of these as separate functional groups, in each 
case the carbonyl group modifies the properties of the substituent, while 
the substituent also modifies the properties of the carbonyl group. There 
are some similarities in these interactions which are usefully considered 
together. 
3.4.1 Carboxylic Acids 
The electron-withdrawing properties of the carbonyl group renders acidic 
the hydrogen of the attached hydroxyl group. The 
is 
then stabilized by resonance (Scheme 3.55). The strength of the individ- 
ual carboxylic acids is a reflection of the other substituents attached to 
the carbonyl group. A powerful electron-withdrawing group, such as the 
trifluoromethyl group, increases the strength of the acid, while an elec- 
tron-donating substituent weakens the acid. 
Scheme 3.55 
Reduction of Carboxylic Acids 
The use of 
for the reduction of carboxylic acids requires 
vigorous conditions because the carboxylate anion, once formed, is 
resistant to further nucleophilic attack. An interesting exception to this 
is reduction with borane. A triacyloxyborane may be formed. Resonance 
involving the vacant orbitals of the boron and the lone pairs on the oxy- 
gen has the effect of making the attack of a nucleophilic hydride on the 
carbonyl carbon of the acid easier (see 3.21). 
0 
// 
\
/
 
'tr \ 
R-C 
0-B 
3.2 1 
3.4.2 Formation of Acyl Derivatives 
The key to the formation of acyl derivatives involves removing the influ- 
ence of the oxygen lone pairs on the electron-deficient carbon atom of 
the carbonyl group. This may be achieved either by protonation or by 
the formation of a mixed anhydride. Thus 
occurs with an 
alcohol and an acid catalyst (Scheme 3.56). Protonation of the carbonyl 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
93 
group by the acid catalyst facilitates the addition of the alcohol to,the 
carbonyl carbon atom, and leads to the formation of a tetrahedral inter- 
mediate, The loss of water from this intermediate gives the ester. 
H 
y5 
6"+ 
// 
H 
6"+ 
)'O-H 
0 
+ 
Me-C-OH 
---+ 
// 
Me-C 
t 
L H +  
Me 
Et' 
Et - 0, 
H 
0 
II 
Reaction of the acid with 
(CH,N,) gives methyl esters. 
Diazomethane is a 1,3-dipolar molecule, the structure of which can be 
written in a number of resonance forms (Scheme 3.57a). The reaction 
with a carboxylic acid is accompanied by the loss of nitrogen gas (Scheme 
3.57b). 
A carboxylic acid may be converted to an 
by heating 
the acyl chloride with a salt of the same acid (Scheme 3.58). Acid anhy- 
drides may also be prepared by heating the acid with acetic anhydride. 
I
-
 
- 
l 
0 
0 
-NaCI 
Me 
Me 
Scheme 3.5ti 
Scheme 3.57 
Scheme 3.58 
Acid anhydrides react more easily than the corresponding carboxylic 
acid with nucleophiles because the electron-withdrawing effect of the sec- 
ond carbony! group reduces the effect of the lone pairs on the oxygen 
on the first carbonyl group (see 3.22). 
Once the tetrahedral intermediate has been formed by addition of the 
nucleophile to a carbony!, the second carboxyl group acts as a good leav- 
ing group, favouring the collapse of the intermediate and the formation 
of the product. Acid anhydrides are therefore widely used in making the 
esters of alcohols. 
O 
II 
:3 
J -9 
Me-C--0-C-Me 
3.22 
Nu- 

94 
Functional Group Chemistry 
The formation of 
by thedission of the hydroxyl group 
in strong acid provides a useful source of electrophilic carbon and this 
leads to an important series of methods for making C-C bo'nds (Scheme 
3.59), similar to the Friedel-Crafts acylations based on acyl chlorides. 
The acylium ion obtains some stabilization from the lone pairs on the 
oxygen atom of the carbonyl group (see 3.23). 
R-CCO 
+ J?. - 
R-CrO 
+ 
3.23 
Scheme 3.59 
The carboxylate anion is a useful oxygen nucleophile for the dis- 
placement of a variety of leaving groups. A halophilic silver salt may be 
used for the displacement of a halogen such as an alkyl halide. 
The carboxylate anion may neutralize a carbocation formed by the 
attack of an electrophilic metal on an alkene, as in the 
of alkenes. 
The 
of acids may take place by both radical and ionic 
processes. Radical processes involving the electrolytic discharge of a car- 
boxylate anion (the 
in the 
presence of bromine (the 
) may give rise to dimeric products. 
Silver salts of carboxylic acids undergo a 
, Scheme 3.60). 
Scheme 3.60 
Decarboxylation of the aliphatic esters of N-hydroxypyridine-2-thione 
by tributyltin hydride leads to reduction of the radical and the forma- 
tion of the alkane lacking the carboxyl carbon, as in the 
(Scheme 3.61). 
A number of reactions of metal salts can be rationalized in terms of 
the formation of a carbanion adjacent to the carboxylate. Dibasic met- 
als such as calcium bring two carboxylate units close to each other so 
that the carbanion formed adjacent to one carboxylate may attack the 
carbonyl of the other. Thus 
of calcium acetate affords 
propanone (acetone) (Scheme 3.62). A similar reaction is found in the 
pyrolytic cyclization of some dicarboxylic acid anhydrides. Heating C, 
and C, dicarboxylic acids gives cyclopentanones and cyclohexanones 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
95 
OH 
+ 
RC02H 
0 
/ 
R-C 
“0 
R-C 
“0 
Bu3SnH 
-SnBu3 
R-H - 
R’ + COz f-- 
0 
II 
Me \ 
Me-C-0 
\ Ca - 
/ 
-CaC03 
/C=O 
Me-C-0 
Me 
II 0 
respectively, but smaller rings such as cyclobutanones cannot be formed 
this way. 
3.4.3 Acyl Halides 
Acyl halides may be prepared from carboxylic acids by treatment with 
phosphorus pentachloride or, better, thionyl chloride (Scheme 3.63); the 
latter gives gaseous by-products. Oxalyl chloride may be used in the same 
way and again it gives volatile by-products. 
Jo,H 
+ SOCI2 - 
JCI 
Scheme 3Al 
Scheme 3.612 
Scheme 3.63 
The electron-withdrawing effect of the halogen, coupled with that of 
the carbonyl oxygen, leads to a very electron-deficient carbon, and this 
is not effectively counteracted by the lone pairs on halogens such as chlo- 
rine. Consequently, the carbonyl carbon atom is very sensitive to nucleo- 
philic addition to form a tetrahedral intermediate. The collapse of the 
tetrahedral intermediate with the expulsion of the halide ion, which is a 
good leaving group, enhances the reactivity of the acyl halides (Scheme 
3.64a). The direct fission of the acyl halide C-X bond leads to the for- 
mation of an electrophilic 
(Scheme 3.64b). 

96 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 3.64 
Scheme 3.65 
Scheme 3.66 
0 
(a) (7 
y2 
II 
R-C-Cl - 
R-C-CI - 
R-C-NU 
1 L -c1- 
Nu 
7 
Nu- 
FeC13 
+ -  
+ 
R-C-CI - 
FeCL- + R-C=O - 
R-C=O 
Acyl halides are sensitive to the same groups of reducing agents that 
are used with aldehydes and ketones. However, it is possible, by using a 
catalyst poison such as barium sulfate, to stop the reduction at the stage 
at which only the halogen atom has been replaced by hydrogen, as in 
the 
(Scheme 3.65). 
Acyl halides such as acetyl chloride react with water to regenerate the 
starting acid and they react with alcohols to yield 
. The reaction is 
often facilitated by the presence of a tertiary amine catalyst. Although 
this may function purely as a base to neutralize the hydrochloric acid 
which is formed in the reaction, bases such as 
can also activate the carboxyl group via the formation of the interme- 
diate shown in Scheme 3.66. 
Me, 
,Me 
Me, + ,Me 
N 
N 
The 
procedure is used with benzoyl 
chloride and other aroyl chlorides that are relatively stable to water. In 
this procedure the alcohol is shaken with the acyl chloride in the pres- 
ence of aqueous sodium hydroxide. This method is particularly useful 
with phenols (Scheme 3.67). 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
97 
0 
I I  
0-C-Ph 
OoH+ 
,Ac, = 0 
I-- 
Scheme 3.6'7 
Nitrogen nucleophiles such as ammonia and amines react rapidly with 
acyl chlorides to form amides. 
Acyl chlorides react with 
. Ketones may be 
formed when reagents such as organocadmium compounds are used 
(Scheme 3.68). 
0 
+ PhZCd - aph 
CI 
Scheme 3.6;B 
A useful reaction of acyl chlorides is with diazomethane. The initial 
product, a diazo ketone, undergoes a rearrangement with the expulsion 
of nitrogen and the insertion of a methylene group. This 
is a useful chain-extension procedure (Scheme 3.69). 
AgzO 
Ph dc, 
+ CHqNq 
Ph-OH 
I 
V 
1 Scheme 3.69 
3.4.4 Reactions of Esters 
Esters are more readily reduced than carboxylic acids because there are 
not the problems associated with carboxylate formation. Thus reduction 
with lithium aluminium hydride gives a primary alcohol from the car- 
boxylic acid component (Scheme 3.70). 
The hydrolysis of esters may take place by two general pathways 
involving either 
(Scheme 3.71a) or 
0 
II 
Scheme 3.70 

98 
Functional Group Chemistry 
(Scheme 3.7 1 b). Under normal basic conditions a tetrahedral inter- 
mediate is formed by the addition of a nucleophile to the carbonyl group. 
This collapses with the expulsion of an alkoxide. Under acid-catalysed 
conditions the initial protonation of the carbonyl group renders the car- 
bonyl carbon more sensitive to attack by a nucleophile. When the car- 
bonyl group is particularly hindered, attack on the alkyl ester carbon may 
take place. This may be facilitated by a hard acid-soft base pair such as 
trimethylsilyl iodide (from trimethylsilyl chloride and sodium iodide). The 
hard silicon bonds to the carbonyl oxygen, increasing the electron defi- 
ciency of the carbonyl carbon, whilst the soft iodide attacks the ester car- 
bon. Very dry lithium iodide can be used for the same purpose. 
Scheme 3.71 
Because the hydroxyl hydrogen is replaced by an alkyl group, the acid- 
ifying effect of the carbonyl group on an adjacent C-H bond can be 
expressed. A carbanion may be formed in the presence of a base such as 
sodium ethoxide or a bulkier group such as potassium t-butoxide that 
does not form a tetrahedral intermediate by addition to the carbonyl 
group. These carbanions may then react as nucleophiles by addition to 
other carbonyl groups in condensation reactions or to displace the halo- 
gen in alkyl halides in alkylation reactions. 
3.4.5 Reactions of Amides 
The chemistry of amides is characterized by diminished carbonyl reac- 
tivity and a diminished basicity and nucleophilicity of the nitrogen, aris- 
ing from the interaction between the carbonyl group and the nitrogen 
lone pairs (Scheme 3.72a). An understanding of the chemistry of amides 
is important because of the role that the amide group plays in the pep- 
tide bond. On the other hand, the carbonyl group renders the amide 
hydrogen atoms weakly acidic and, in the presence of strong bases, 
anions may be formed (Scheme 3.72b). 
The reduction of amides to amines may be achieved with lithium alu- 
minium hydride and with borane (Scheme 3.73). 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
99 
LiAlHj 
MeCNH 
MeCHzNH 
' a 
Scheme 3.72 
Scheme 3.73 
The hydrolysis of amides is normally carried out under acidic cataly- 
sis. Protonation makes the carbonyl group more sensitive to nucleophilic 
attack (see 3.24). 
The weakly acidic N-H may be 
in the presence of a base. 
This can provide a useful method for making amines. 
The amide N-H may also be halogenated, oxidized and nitrosated. 
N-Bromosuccinimide (NBS), like a number of other N-halo compounds, 
readily undergoes a radical fission to give a bromine radical. This pro- 
vides a useful reagent for radical bromination at, for example, allylic or 
benzylic positions. In the presence of acid, NBS is also a mild source of 
the halonium ion, which is used for the addition of hypobromous acid 
(Scheme 3.74) to alkenes or for the bromination of reactive aromatic 
rings. 
R-C-NHR' 
7 
3.24 
-OH 
Scheme 3.74 
N-Haloamides also undergo the 
This reac- 
tion provides a useful method of making amines from amides with the 
loss of the carboxyl carbon atom. 

I00 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 3.75 
3.5 
Enolate and Related Carbanion Chemistry 
3.5.1 Enolate Anion Formation and Stabilization 
The electron-withdrawing effect of a carbonyl group makes the hydro- 
gen atom of an adjacent C--H weakly acidic. Once the anion is formed, 
it is stabilized by resonance. The negative charge is delocalized over both 
the carbonyl oxygen and this carbon. The enolate anion can react as a 
nucleophile at either the carbon or the oxygen (Scheme 3.75). 
The acidity of the C-H varies according to the type of carbonyl com- 
pound. Thus, because of the electron donation from the ester oxygen 
lone pair to the carbonyl group, the C-H adjacent to an ester is less 
acidic than that of a ketone. On the other hand, the C-H lying between 
two carbonyl groups is considerably more acidic than a C-H adjacent 
to just one carbonyl group (Scheme 3.76). 
A number of other groups such as the nitrile, imine, nitro, sulfoxide, 
sulfonyl and phosphono, can act as 
. These groups may 

Chemistry of the n;-Bond 
101 
H 
be used either on their own or in combination with other carbonyl groups 
to generate a range of synthetically useful 
In each of the cases where there are two activating groups, the anions 
are stabilized by delocalization over both activating groups. Different 
bases are required to generate the anions from these acidic hydrogens. 
An unsymmetrical ketone can form two different enolates. In some 
situations it is possible to distinguish between them by trapping the sep- 
arate enolates as their silyl enol ethers. The anions may then be regen- 
erated from the silyl enol ether in an aprotic solvent under 
non-equilibrating conditions using fluoride ion. The rapidly formed 
kinetic enol of 2-methylcyclohexanone may be trapped using lithium di- 
isopropylamide as the base (Scheme 3.77a). On the other hand, the ther- 
modynamically more stable enol is trapped with a milder base such as 
triethylamine (Scheme 3.77b). 
I 
Scheme 3.7(5 
Scheme 3.77 
Protonation of an enolate anion may take place on the oxygen or on 
the carbon. This may lead to the exchange of a proton by deuterium. 
The formation of an enolate and the subsequent regeneration of a 
ketone may lead to 
and, in the case of a chiral centre, to 
3.5.2 Reactions of Enolate Anions 
adjacent to a ketone is a useful synthetic reaction (Scheme 
3.78). The reaction involves the nucleophilic substitution of the alkyl 
halide by the carbanion. 
A Scheme 3.78 

102 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 3.79 
Scheme 3.80 
Scheme 3.81 
One of the most important methods of C-C bond formation involves 
the 
in which the carbanion derived from an aldehyde 
or ketone reacts with a second carbonyl component to give a P-hydroxy- 
carbonyl derivative (Scheme 3.79). 
I 
OH 
I 
t 
H 
0- 
0 
I 
// 
0 
Me-C-H 
- 
- 
Me-C-CH2-C, - 
Me-C-CH2-CHO 
II 
I 
H 
c -CH2-C, I? 
H 
I 
H 
Ketones are less reactive than aldehydes because the 
and 
of the second alkyl group make the carbonyl group less sus- 
ceptible to nucleophilic attack. Nevertheless, acetone can be induced to 
react and an equilibrium (see Scheme 3.80) can be established. Depending 
on the base, elimination of water may take place to give an unsaturat- 
ed ketone. A second condensation may also take place to form phorone 
(2,6-dimethyl-4-oxohepta-2,5-diene). 
0 
OH 
0 
II 
WOW2 
I 
II 
2Me-C-Me 
- Me-? - 
CH2 - 
C-Me 
0 
I I  
Me + 
0 
Me 
Me 
II 
\ 
/ 
Me 
\C=CH-C-CH=( - 
C=CH-C-Me 
Me 
Me 
/ 
Me 
I 
The electron deficiency of the carbonyl group may be relayed through 
a double bond of an a,P-unsaturated ketone to the P-position. The addi- 
tion of a carbon nucleophile to the P-position of an a$-unsaturated 
ketone is known as a 
. Since both the electron-with- 
drawing effect and the activating effect of the carbonyl group of phorone 
may be relayed through the separate double bonds, a further base- 
catalysed reaction can occur. This involves a Michael addition and leads 
to cyclization and the formation of isophorone (Scheme 3.8 1). 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
103 
If the carbonyl components are esters rather than ketones, somewhat 
stronger bases (for example, sodium ethoxide) are required to generate 
the carbanions. The product of the 
between two 
molecules of an ester is a P-keto ester (Scheme 3.82). 
0 
0 
0 
NaOEt 
9 II 
II 
II 
Me- C- OEt 
Me-C-CH2 
-C- 
OEt + 
Me-C-CH2-C-OEt 
I 
t 
(OEt 
-CHZCOEt 
I I  0 
The reaction can be used to form rings in the 
of a diester (Scheme 3.83). 
There are a large number of variations on this general theme, in which 
both the source of the carbanion and the carbonyl recipient have been 
varied. The preparation of cinnamic acid and its ester from benzalde- 
hyde exemplify some of these reactions (Scheme 3.84). 
Scheme 3.82 
Scheme 3.83 
Scheme 3.84 
The halogenation of positions adjacent to a carbonyl group takes place 
via the electrophilic attack of a halonium ion on the enol. Thus the 
bromination of ketones may be carried out with bromine in acetic acid. 

104 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Alternatively, the ketone may be converted to the enol acetate and this 
may be brominated (Scheme 3.85). Elimination of hydrogen bromide 
from a-bromo ketones leads to a,P-unsaturated ketones. 
Scheme 3.85 
A trihalo compound may be formed from the halogenation of a methyl 
ketone. The electron-withdrawing effect of the trihalomethyl group 
makes the carbonyl group very sensitive to nucleophilic addition. 
Consequently, in the presence of a mild base the trihalomethyl compound 
easily decomposes with the formation of chloroform, bromoform or iodo- 
form, depending on the halogen. The other product of the haloform 
reaction is a carboxylic acid (Scheme 3.86). 
Scheme 3.86 
The carbonyl group is not the only electron-deficient centre at which 
using nitrous acid provides a 
an enolate carbon may react. 
useful method of making C-N bonds. 
The methylene group adjacent to a ketone may be oxidized by 
to give 1,2-dicarbonyl compounds. It is important to carry 
out base-catalysed condensations of ketones wherever possible under an 
atmosphere of nitrogen. The reason is that enolate anions are readily 
. These may then 
undergo further reaction including decomposition to form diketones. 
by the oxygen in air to form 

Chemistry of the n-Bond 
105 
3.6 
Nitriles, lmines and Nitro Compounds 
In a nitrile (cyanide, RCrN) or an imine (R,C=N-) the nitrogen atom 
may be regarded as replacing the oxygen of a carbonyl group, whereas 
in a nitroso (RNO) or nitro (RNO,) group the nitrogen may be regard- 
ed as replacing the carbon. Since nitrogen has an electronegativity 
between that of carbon and oxygen, it is not suprising to find similari- 
ties to carbonyl chemistry in both sets of compounds. 
3.6. I Nitriles 
Alkyl nitriles show a large 
consistent with polarization 
in the sense RC6'=N6. Hence many of the properties of the nitrile show 
a parallel to those of the carbonyl group. Nitriles are at the same oxi- 
dation level as a carboxylic acid, whereas an imine corresponds to an 
aldehyde or a ketone. 
Nitriles may be prepared from amides by dehydration with phosphor- 
us pentoxide, phosphorus oxychloride or thionyl chloride (Scheme 3.87). 
1 
Scheme 3.87 
An alternative route involves the nucleophilic substitution of an alkyl 
or benzyl halide with a cyanide ion. Two reactions are possible, leading 
to an isocyanide (R-N=C) or a cyanide (R-C=N). 
Many aryl nitriles are obtained from diazonium salts by treatment 
with copper(1) cyanide. Hydroxy and amino nitriles are obtained from 
addition reactions to carbonyl compounds. 
Nitriles are reduced by sodium and alcohol or by the nucleophilic 

106 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 3.88 
Scheme 3.89 
Scheme 3.90 
addition of a hydride from lithium aluminium hydride to give a primary 
amine (Scheme 3.88a). A partial reduction may be achieved by the use 
of tin(I1) chloride and anhydrous hydrogen chloride. Hydrolysis at the 
end of the reaction releases the aldehyde. Free imines (R,C=NH) are 
very rapidly hydrolysed to carbonyl compounds (Scheme 3.88b). 
LiAIH4 
(a) PhCH2C=N - 
PhCH2CH2NH2 
HCI 
\ 
(b) R-CEN - 
C=NH 
Nitriles undergo hydrolysis under both acidic and alkaline conditions. 
Whereas alkaline hydrolysis normally gives the salt of the corresponding 
acid (Scheme 3.89a), acidic hydrolysis may be halted at the amide stage 
(Scheme 3.89b). The reaction may be combined with an esterification 
step if it is carried out with, for example, ethanolic sulfuric acid. 
I 
---+ 
reflux 
P
h
T
o
H
 
phTNH2
H2S04 
0 
H2S04 
(b) Ph-CZN 
------+ 
room temp. 
0 
If the nucleophile is the hydroperoxide anion derived from hydrogen 
peroxide, an imino hydroperoxide is formed. These are useful mild 
epoxidizing agents and decompose to give amides. Alkaline hydrogen 
peroxide can be used to hydrolyse nitriles. 
The addition of carbon nucleophiles such as Grignard reagents gives, 
in the first instance, an iminomagnesium halide. This does not add a sec- 
ond alkyl residue because of the negative charge on the nitrogen. 
Hydrolysis of the imine at the end of the reaction releases the carbonyl 
group (Scheme 3.90). This provides a method of making ketones using 
a Grignard reagent. 
PhMgBr + O
C
r
N
 4 php 
% php
N 
n 

Chemistry of the rc-Bond 
107 
Like the carbonyl group, the nitrile makes a hydrogen atom on an a- 
methylene weakly acidic. Treatment with a strong base (NaNH,, LiNEt,, 
NaH) generates a carbanion which can undergo alkylation and partici- 
pate in various condensation reactions. The 
based on the cyclization of dinitriles provides a useful route for making 
cyclic ketones (Scheme 3.91). 
C=N 
C=N 
1. PhNEt Li+ 
C s N  - 
2. H20 
The nitrogen atom of the nitrile possesses some nucleophilic charac- 
teristics. When a carbocation is generated by protonation of an alkene, 
it may be discharged by a nitrile. This reaction, known as the 
, leads to the formation of amides (Scheme 3.92). 
0 
3.6.2 lmines 
Whereas isolated imines are relatively unstable and readily undergo 
hydrolysis to form carbonyl compounds, alkylated imines and imino 
derivatives are found as stable compounds in a variety of situations. Thus 
a number of nitrogen derivatives of aldehydes and ketones, such as the 
oxime, semicarbazone and hydrazone, contain an imino fragment. 
Imines may be converted to their enamine tautomers, which contain 
an electron-rich alkene (Scheme 3.93). 
Oximes are tautomers of C-nitroso compounds. In a number of 
instances the nitroso compound may be isolated as a dimer. Since nitroso 
Scheme 3.91 
Scheme 3.92 
I 
Scheme 3.98 

108 
Functional Group Chemistry 
compounds may be obtained from alkenes by the addition of nitrosyl 
chloride (NOCl), this tautomeric relationship allows a ketone to be intro- 
duced into a molecule. 
3.6.3 Aliphatic Nitro Compounds 
Aliphatic nitro compounds show a number of reactions which parallel 
those of carbonyl chemistry. Primary and secondary nitro compounds 
exhibit tautomerism paralleling keto-enol tautomerism (Scheme 3.94a). 
Aliphatic nitro compounds dissolve in aqueous sodium hydroxide with 
the formation of sodium salts. The resultant anions behave as carban- 
ions and will condense with aldehydes. An example involves the forma- 
tion of o-nitrostyrene from nitromethane and benzaldehyde (Scheme 
3.94b). 
OH 
//o 
/ 
'0- 
'0- 
(a) RCH2-N+ 
RCH=N+ 
Scheme 3.94 
Primary nitro compounds are hydrolysed by boiling hydrochloric acid 
to a carboxylic acid (Scheme 3.95a), but, under milder conditions, neu- 
tralization of a sodium salt with sulfuric acid leads to an aldehyde or 
ketone (Scheme 3.95b). 
Scheme 3.95 
HCl 
(a) RCH2N02 
RC02H + NH2OH 
R 
H2S04 
\ 
(b) R2C=N02- 
Na' * 
,C=O 
R 

Chemistry of the n:-Bond 
I09 

1 10 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Chemistry of the  bond 
Ill 

1 12 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Chemistry of the x-Bond 
I13 

1 14 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Chemistry of Aromatic 
Compounds 
4.1 
Aromatic Substitution 
The chemistry of aromatic systems is dominated by the enhanced stability 
associated with the presence of a cyclic conjugated system containing (4n 
115 

1 16 
Functional Group Chemistry 
4.1 
+ 2)n electrons. In the case of benzenoid aromatics where n = 1, this is 
a 6n; system. For naphthalene (Box 4.1), n = 2 (10n electrons), and for 
anthracene and phenanthrene, n = 3 (14n electrons). A number of het- 
eroaromatic rings (see Section 4.3) exist, such as pyridine, pyrrole, thio- 
phene and furan, in which a carbon atom or atoms has been replaced 
by nitrogen, sulfur or oxygen. In the five-membered series the heteroatom 
contributes two electrons from its lone pair to the sextet. 
The enhanced stability arising from the property of 
as the 
is known 
and for benzene this is 150.6 kJ mol-'. 
4=1 =I 
Electrophilic Aromatic Substitution 
The reactions of the electron-rich n-sy stem with electrophiles involve an 
addition followed by an elimination and reversion to an aromatic system. 
The picture of aromatic substitution which has emerged, and which is 
dealt with in more detail in books on reaction mechanisms, is shown in 
the reaction coordinate diagram (Figure 4.1) in which the 
, formed by the addition of the electrophile, represents a key step. 
In considering the aromatic ring as a functional group, we have to 
b2 
examine the influence of substituents on the overall electron density of 
the aromatic ring, and their effect at specific sites (see 4.1 and 4.2). 
Secondly, we have to consider the influence of these substituents on the 
There are other reactions of aromatic compounds, such as metalla- 
5 \ 3 
4 
4.2 
Wheland intermediate. 
tion reactions, which involve the C-H o-system. 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
11 7 
Figure 4.1 
Substituent Effects in Electrophilic Substitution 
Substituents fall into a number of groups. There are those which 
the ring by electron donation and can also stabilize the Wheland 
intermediate. Secondly, there are those which 
the ring by elec- 
tron withdrawal, but their lone pairs can stabilize a Wheland interme- 
diate. Finally, there are substituents which both deactivate the ring and 
destabilize the Wheland intermediate. 
The activating influence of an electron-donating substituent is great- 
est at the 2- (ortho) and 4- (para) positions, whilst the deactivating effect 
of an electron-withdrawing substituent is least at the meta position. The 
orienting effects of substituents are summarized in Table 4.1. 
Table 4.1 Directing effects in aromatic substitution 
Ortho/para directing; activating 
R,N, NH, (but salt formation can lead 
to deactivating NH,+), NHCOMe, OR, 
OH, alkenyl, aryl, alkyl, halides 
Meta directing; deactivating 
CX, (X = halogen), CO,H, C(O)R, 
SO,H, 
NO,, NR,+ 
I 
The consequences of the nitration of a series of monosubstituted aro- 
matic compounds using a nitric acid-sulfuric acid nitrating mixture are 
given in Table 4.2 
In some cases the electrophile attacks the site bearing the substituent 
and the latter is then displaced. This is known as @so substitution (Latin 
ipse = self). An example involves the nitration of isopropylbenzene in 
which propene is lost and nitrobenzene is formed. 

1 18 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Table 4.2 Nitration of monosubstituted aromatic compounds 
Original 
substituent 
Orientation of nitro group (%) 
ortho 
meta 
para 
Me 
OH 
CI 
MeCONH 
CO,H 
SO,H 
NO* 
58.5 
4.4 
36.8 
59.2 
2.7 
38.1 
17.5 
1.2 
81.3 
19.4 
2.1 
78.5 
22.3 
76.5 
1.2 
8.1 
90.9 
1 .o 
19.9 
68.3 
6.2 
The effect of a substituent on the reactivity of a particular centre may 
be quantified in terms of the 
. The partial rate factor 
is defined as the rate of substitution at a given position relative to that 
in any one position in benzene itself. Partial rate factors may be calcu- 
lated by treating an equimolar mixture of benzene and the substituted 
benzene with insufficient reagent to complete the reaction. Analysis of 
the products will then show which substrate has reacted with more of 
the reagent and at which centre. 
Although a detailed discussion of the influence of aromatic sub- 
stituents on the rates of aromatic substitution is outside the scope of this 
book, it is nevertheless helpful to note that quantitative correlations of 
directing effects have been made using various forms of the 
log(klkn) = p+o+ 
where k and kn are the rate constants for the substituted and unsubsti- 
tuted compounds, respectively, whilst p' and o+ are the reaction and 
substituent constants. In the Hammett equation, which is used for meta 
and para substitution, the rate of reaction of a substituted benzene is 
compared to the rate for the unsubstituted benzene, and shown to be the 
product of a 
(p') and a 
(of). The 
reaction constant reflects the susceptibility of the particular aromatic 
reaction to changes in the nature of the substituent, and the substituent 
constant measures the sum of the polar and resonance effects of a sub- 
stituent on aromatic substitution. These are discussed in more detail in 
the book on reaction mechanisms in this series. 
Reagents for Aromatic Electrophilic Substitution 
The generation of an electrophilic 
or 
ion from 
chlorine or bromine, by heterolytic fission in an ionizing solvent such as 

Chemistry of Aromatic Connpounds 
119 
glacial acetic acid, leads to a reagent that can be used for aromatic sub- 
stitution (Scheme 4. la), particularly of the more reactive ring systems. 
Indeed, under some circumstances, for example with phenol or aniline, 
polysubstitution may occur (Scheme 4.1b). A protic or a Lewis acid 
(H2S04, AlCl,, FeBr,) catalyst may be used with less reactive species. 
c1 
OH 
OH 
Cl 
For most iodinations the reactive species is not the iodonium ion. 
Iodinations require iodine and an oxidant. The actual reactant may be 
an iodosulfuric acid or iodonitric acid species. 
ion (NO,+) can be generated from 
concentrated nitric acid by the action of concentrated sulfuric acid (the 
classical ‘mixed acid’; Scheme 4.2) or with acetic acid and/or acetic anhy- 
dride. The latter may involve the formation of acetyl nitrate. Some metal 
nitrates, such as copper(I1) nitrate or vanadium(V) oxytrinitrate, have 
been employed in nitrations, whilst the combination of ozone and nitro- 
gen dioxide has provided a relatively non-acidic methodology, based on 
the formation of N20, and its fission to give N0,+N03-. 
The electrophilic 
NHCOMe 
NHCOMe 
NHCOMe 
Scheme 4:l 
Scheme 4,,2 
A number of nitrations, particularly of phenols, may in practice be 
followed by oxidation of the nitroso compound to form the 
nitro compound by nitric acid. Although the underlying pattern of 
the nitration (ortholpara or meta) is determined by the substituent(s) on 
the aromatic ring, the ratio of the different isomeric nitro compounds 

120 
Functional Group Chemistry 
that are formed may vary with the reagent and the temperature at which 
the reaction is carried out. 
is another useful electrophilic nitrogen species, 
particularly with reactive aromatic rings such as phenols (Scheme 4.3). 
Further modification of the resultant coupled product may leads to 
amines or to hydrazines. 
The 
Scheme 4.3 
or 
using fuming sulfuric acid or chloro- 
sulfonic acid are useful reactions. Sulfonations are often reversible and 
hence the sulfonate group may be used to protect a particular site on an 
aromatic ring. It can then be removed later in a synthetic sequence. 
The reaction with chlorosulfonic acid affords the sulfonyl chloride 
rather than the sulfonic acid (Scheme 4.4). 
NHCOMe 
NHCOMe 
Scheme 4.4 
Carbonium ions can be generated at a variety of oxidation levels. The 
can be generated from alkyl halides by reaction with 
a Lewis acid (RC1 + AlCl,) or by protonation of alcohols or alkenes. 
The reaction of an alkyl halide and aluminium trichloride with an aro- 
matic ring is known as the 
. The order of sta- 
bility of a carbocation is tertiary > secondary > primary. Since many 
alkylation processes are slower than rearrangements, a secondary or ter- 
tiary carbocation may be formed before aromatic substitution occurs. 
Alkylation of benzene with 1 -chloropropane in the presence of alumini- 
um trichloride at 35 "C for 5 hours gave a 2:3 mixture of YI- and iso- 
propylbenzene (Scheme 4.5). Since the alkylbenzenes such as toluene and 
the xylenes (dimethylbenzenes) are more electron rich than benzene itself, 
it is difficult to prevent polysubstitution and consequently mixtures of 
polyalkylated benzenes may be obtained. On the other hand, nitro com- 
pounds are sufficiently deactivated for the reaction to be unsuccessful. 
The lone pairs on an adjacent oxygen atom may stabilize a carbo- 
cation, affording a useful reactive species (Scheme 4.6a). The combina- 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
121 
Me \CH/ Me 
CH2CH2Me 
I 
I 
0 
+ 0 
\ 
\ 
1 
Scheme 4.5 
tion of formaldehyde with zinc chloride and hydrochloric acid gives a 
reagent that may be used in the 
of aromatic hydro- 
carbons. Thus benzene affords chloromethylbenzene (Scheme 4.6b). 
CH2Cl 
(b) fJ - 
[0cH20H] 
- f7J 
The 
(RCO'), which may be generated from an acyl halide 
and a Lewis acid catalyst, also achieves some stabilization from oxygen 
lone pairs, and the carbocation remains localized on the carbonyl group. 
Consequently, Friedel-Crafts acylation is not accompanied by the 
rearrangements that affect alkylations (Scheme 4.7). 
Scheme 4.6; 
I 
Scheme 4.7 
Aromatic Substitution of Naphthalene 
Naphthalene undergoes electrophilic aromatic substitution at C- 1 more 
easily than at C-2. There is a smaller loss of resonance energy in form- 
ing the intermediate for reaction at C-1 and reaction takes place more 
rapidly at this centre. However, the products of aromatic substitution at 
C-1 suffer interactions with C-8 (peri interactions) and are less stable 
than the corresponding products of substitution at C-2. Hence those aro- 
matic substitution reactions that are carried out under conditions that 
allow equilibration between isomers (thermodynamic control) lead to 
substitution at C-2, but reactions that are carried out under conditions 

122 
Functional Group Chemistry 
that are essentially irreversible (kinetic control) lead to substitution at 
C- 1. Sulfonation at 40 "C under kinetic control yields naphthalene- 1 - 
sulfonic acid, whilst at 160 "C equilibration takes place and the more 
stable naphthalene-2-sulfonic acid is formed. 
The directing effects of substituents can be summarized as follows. 
Activating groups such as hydroxyl, methoxyl, amino and amide, alkyl and 
halogen in the 1 -position direct the electrophilic substitution to the 4-posi- 
tion, with some 2-substitution. If these groups are at the 2-position, then 
attack is directed to the 1-position. Deactivating groups such as nitro or 
carboxyl direct the substitution to the other ring and to positions 5 and 8. 
Nitration using nitric acid gives 1-nitronaphthalene and then 1,5- and 
1,8-dinitronaphthaIenes. Bromination with bromine in carbon tetra- 
chloride gives 1 -bromonaphthalene followed by 1,4-dibromonaphtha- 
lene, whilst chlorination with sulfuryl chloride (S02Cl,) affords 
1 -chloronaphthalene. Friedel-Crafts reactions can proceed with ther- 
modynamic control and give mixtures of 1- and 2-acetyl and 1- and 2- 
methyl derivatives. The higher homologues [ethyl bromide with iron(II1) 
chloride] give 2-substitution. Naphthalene is readily oxidized to 1,4- 
naphthaquinone by chromium(V1) oxide, whilst catalytic hydrogenation 
takes place in a stepwise manner to give tetralin and then decalin. 
4.1.2 Aromatic Nucleophilic Substitution 
Hitherto we have concentrated on electrophilic aromatic substitution. 
However, certain n-deficient aromatic rings are deactivated towards 
electrophilic attack but are susceptible to nucleophilic addition and a 
subsequent elimination. A particular example is 2,4-dinitrochloroben- 
zene. The electron-withdrawing nitro groups facilitate a Michael-type 
addition of a nucleophile to give a so-called 
(Scheme 4.8). Collapse of the Meisenheimer intermediate and reversion 
to the aromatic system may lead to expulsion of the halide ion, as 
exemplified by the preparation of 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine. 2,4- 
Dinitrofluorobenzene is known as Sanger's reagent and is used for the 
detection of the N-terminal amino acids in peptides. 
Scheme 4.8 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
123 
4.1.3 Benzyne Intermediates 
When chlorobenzene is heated with sodamide, aniline is formed. 
However, a direct replacement of the halogen does not occur. The reac- 
tion proceeds through a highly reactive 
formed by elimination 
in which the cleavage of the C-H bond is the rate-determining step. The 
amide anion may then attack the symmetrical benzyne at either end of 
the benzyne triple bond (Scheme 4.9). 
Benzyne is a good 
. For example, reaction of 2- 
bromofluorobenzene with lithium metal or decomposition of benzenedi- 
azonium-2-carboxylate both generate benzyne, which can be trapped 
with furan to give a naphthalene endoxide (Scheme 4.10). 
\ 
J4 8 
f 
0 
4.2 
Aromatic Functional Groups 
4.2.1 Aromatic Halides 
Scheme 4.9 
Scheme 4.10 
Aromatic halides, in which the halogen is attached to the ring, may be 
prepared by direct electrophilic aromatic substitution or from arylamines 
via diazonium compounds (see below). 

124 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Benzyl halides may be prepared by the 
of 
the corresponding hydrocarbon using reagents such as N-chloro- or N- 
bromosuccinimide in the presence of light or a radical initiator. Other 
methods involve the substitution of benzyl alcohols. Benzyl chlorides 
may also be prepared by the 
of aromatic compounds. 
An aromatic ring has a significant effect on the reactivity of the car- 
bon-halogen bond. There are two very different systems: aryl halides, 
exemplified by chlorobenzene, and benzyl halides, exemplified by benzyl 
chloride. These illustrate the different effects that the presence of an aro- 
matic ring can have on the reactivity of a functional group. 
An aryl halide such as chlorobenzene is relatively unreactive towards 
nucleophilic substitution. The S, 1 and S,2 pathways involve mechanisms 
that are not open to aryl halides. The greater 's' character of the sp2 
bond makes it more difficult to cleave the bond to generate a carbo- 
cation. However, these restrictions do not apply to radical or carbanion 
chemistry. Hence, aryl halides undergo radical coupling reactions and 
metal insertion reactions, leading to organometallic compounds. 
These differences in reactivity are illustrated by the following. 
Chlorobenzene is unreactive on prolonged boiling with aqueous alkali, 
aqueous ammonia or aqueous potassium cyanide, conditions which 
would bring about replacement of the halogen in an alkyl halide. Heating 
with aqueous sodium hydroxide at 300-370 "C under pressure or pass- 
ing chlorobenzene and steam over a silica catalyst at 400 "C are the type 
of conditions that are required to form phenol. When chlorobenzene is 
heated with aqueous ammonia and a small amount of a copper(I1) sul- 
fate catalyst at 200 OC, aniline is formed, together with small amounts 
of diphenylamine and phenol. These reactions probably occur via a ben- 
zyne intermediate. This lack of reactivity contrasts with the ease of 
nucleophilic substitution of benzyl halides by alkali and by amines 
Although chlorobenzene does not easily give a Grignard derivative, 
bromobenzene reacts normally in diethyl ether with magnesium to give 
phenylmagnesium bromide. This undergoes typical 
3 
for example with carbon dioxide to give benzoic acid (Scheme 4.1 1). 
Scheme 4.11 
Aryl bromides and iodides undergo a series of aryl coupling reactions 
mediated by organometallic derivatives. An example is the 
9 
in which an organopalladium iodide complex is formed and coupled with 
an alkene (Scheme 4.12). 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
125 
\- 
II 
1 
Scheme 4.12 
The 
of aryl halides takes place less 
readily than with benzene (electron-withdrawing effect), but occurs at 
the ortho and para positions (the lone pairs on the halogen assist in delo- 
calizing the positive charge in the intermediate). Further chlorination of 
chlorobenzene, in the presence of aluminium or iron trichlorides, gives 
1,4-dichIorobenzene and some 1,2-dichlorobenzene. Nitration normally 
occurs to give the 2- and 4-nitro- and 2,4-dinitrochlorobenzenes (Scheme 
4.13). 
0 - 
HN03, H2S04 bNo2 
+ 0 
+ Q””’ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
\ 
NO2 
NO2 
Scheme 4.13 
Chloromethylation and the Friedel-Crafts alkylation and acylation 
take place normally at the ortho and para positions. The insecticide DDT 
(4.3, dichlorodiphenyltrichloroethane) is prepared from chlorobenzene clQHJJcl 
and chloral (trichloroethanal). 
C 
I cc13 
The presence of additional substituents on the aromatic ring may mod- 
ify the reactivity of the halogen by opening up alternative reaction path- 
ways. Thus an ortho or para nitro group makes an aryl halogen more 
susceptible to nucleophilic aromatic substitution. 
4.3 
4.2.2 Phenols 
Phenols may be obtained by fusing the corresponding sulfonic acid with 
sodium or potassium hydroxide or by the hydrolysis of diazonium salts 
(see below). Both 1- and 2-naphthol may be obtained from the corre- 
sponding sulfonic acids. 
On an industrial scale, phenol is obtained by the oxidation of 
isopropylbenzene (cumene). Initially a hydroperoxide is formed, which 
then undergoes a fragmentation and rearrangement. The initial oxida- 
tion illustrates the susceptibility of benzylic positions to oxidative, par- 
ticularly radical, attack (Scheme 4.14). 

126 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 4.14 
Scheme 4.15 
The 
of various acylbenzenes with alkaline 
hydrogen peroxide (the Dakin reaction) can provide a mild method for 
the synthesis of phenols (Scheme 4.15). 
0 
II 
C 
O/ 
'Me 
OH 
OH 
OH 
OH 
The hydroxyl group of a phenol activates the aromatic ring towards 
electrophilic attack, whilst the aromatic ring increases the acidity of the 
hydroxyl group compared to an aliphatic alcohol. Thus many phenols 
are soluble in sodium hydroxide solution to form the phenoxide anion. 
Electron-withdrawing nitro groups in the ortho and para positions pro- 
vide additional resonance stabilization for the phenoxide anion. 2,4,6- 
Trinitrophenol (picric acid) is quite a strong acid. 
Like alcohols, phenols form ethers such as anisole (PhOMe) and esters 
such as phenyl acetate and phenyl benzoate (PhC0,Ph). 
A number of the reactions of phenols are typical of 
. Thus they 
are readily halogenated in the ortho and para positions, with a marked 
tendency for polyhalogenation. Bromination of phenol with bromine in 
carbon tetrachloride gives 4-bromophenol, but 2,4,6-tribromophenol is 
formed with bromine water. 
Nitration takes place easily and again there is a tendency for poly- 
substitution, Phenols are readily 
by nitrous acid. The result- 
ant nitrosophenols are tautomeric with the corresponding quinone 
monoximes (Scheme 4.1 6). 
Phenols readily form new C-C bonds under a variety of conditions, 
again paralleling the reactions of enols and enolate anions. For example, 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
127 
6 
NaNOz,H2S04+ 4 
- I  - 6 
I 
“OH 
N 
\‘O 
- 
Scheme 4.16 
phenols readily undergo 
catalysis. 
Lewis acid (the 
4.17). 
in the presence of quite mild acid 
may undergo rearrangement in the presence of a 
), leading to C-acylation (Scheme 
I 
COMe 
Scheme 4.17 
Ally1 phenyl ethers undergo an intramolecular [3,3]-sigmatropic 
rearrangement (the 
) to form the C-alkyl deriva- 
tive (Scheme 4.18). A consequence of the electrocyclic mechanisms is that 
the y-carbon atom of the ally1 ether becomes attached to the aromatic 
ring. 
Scheme 4.18 
The formation of the phenoxide anion enhances the reactivity of the 
ortho and para positions of the aromatic ring towards electrophilic 
reagents. The reaction of the phenoxide anion with carbon dioxide at 
130 “C leads to ortho carboxylation (the 
). Thus phenol 
gives salicylic acid (4.4), the acetate of which is aspirin. The reaction is 
Phenols react easily with chloroform in the presence of base in the 
. The reaction of chloroform with sodium 
reversible and ortho phenolic acids undergo decarboxylation on heating. 
4.4 

128 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 4.19 
hydroxide leads to the formation of dichlorocarbene (:CClJ, and it is 
this which reacts with phenol to give the aldehyde (Scheme 4.19). 
H 
Phenols can condense with aqueous formaldehyde in mildly alkaline 
solution with the introduction of a hydroxymethyl group in the ortho or 
para position to the phenolic hydroxyl group. In the presence of acid, 
phenols react with formaldehyde to give the phenol-formaldehyde resins 
such as Bakelite. 
The coupling reactions of phenols with diazonium salts take place 
most readily using the phenoxide anions. Many of the products are 
dyestuffs (see below). 
Phenols are quite sensitive to oxidation. On the one hand, they are 
easily oxidized to quinols and on further oxidation with, for example, 
iron(II1) chloride, chromic acid or silver(1) oxide give p-quinones. 
However, under one-electron transfer conditions the phenoxide anion is 
oxidized to the phenoxyl radical. This shows free radical reactivity on 
the oxygen atom and at the ortho and para positions (Scheme 4.20a). 
The phenoxyl radical may readily dimerize. This is exemplified by the 
formation of 
from p-cresol (Scheme 4.20b). 
(a> yJMe2 2gJMe-oB
-0 
Scheme 4.20 
The loss of resonance energy involved in the reduction of an aromat- 
ic ring makes this a difficult process. If the reaction is carried out using 
hydrogen and a catalyst, high pressure and temperature are required. 
However, reduction can be achieved by the stepwise addition of elec- 
trons using sodium or lithium in liquid ammonia, followed by protona- 
tion from an alcohol. This reaction, which has had wide application in 
the laboratory, is known as the 
. It is commonly used 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
129 
with phenol ethers and leads to the formation of 1,4-dihydroarenes. The 
resultant enol ethers may be hydrolysed by acid to give the correspon- 
ding unsaturated ketones (Scheme 4.21). 
OMe 
OMe 
0 
Scheme 4.21 
4.2.3 Aromatic Amines 
Aromatic amines are prepared by the reduction of nitro compounds 
under acidic conditions; this leads to the protection of the resultant amine 
as the salt. The selective reduction of one nitro group in 1,3-dinitroben- 
zene can be achieved with sodium polysulfide. 
Aromatic amines are less basic than their aliphatic counterparts. The 
lone pair on the nitrogen atom is delocalized over the n-system of the 
aromatic ring. Furthermore, the basicity is influenced by substituents on 
the aromatic ring. Thus 4-nitroaniline (4.5) is less basic than aniline. 
However, the aromatic amines behave as typical nucleophiles. Alkylation 
of the nitrogen by alkyl halides leads to the mono- and dialkylanilines. 
Reaction with acetic anhydride or acetyl chloride affords acetanilides. 
Aromatic amines, such as aniline, are easily chlorinated with chlorine 
water to give, for example, 2,4,6-trichloroaniline. 
The reactivity of the aniline may be modified by acetylation. 
Bromination of acetanilide with bromine in acetic acid gives 4-bro- 
moacetanilide (4.6). Under some conditions, bromination can take place 
first on the amide to give the N-bromo compound. This then undergoes 
a rearrangement known as the 
to give thepara sub- 
stituted product. 
, which 
is a deactivating substituent, nitration of aniline in nitric acid-sulfuric 
acid yields 60% para and 34% meta substitution, whilst nitration of 
acetanilide gives 79% para and 19% ortho nitroacetanilides. 
Although carbon electrophiles can be used to substitute the aromat- 
ic ring, these reactions are difficult to achieve because of the tendency 
of the reagents to react on the nucleophilic nitrogen. 
Oxidation of the aromatic amines occurs readily to give the aniline 
blacks. These reactions are of historic interest. The oxidation may take 
place via the quinone (4.7) or quinone imine, which subsequently react 
with unchanged amine. 
Aromatic amines react with various carbonyl compounds in a useful 
series of condensation reactions. Dehydration of the carbinolamines to 
Although protonation of the amine leads to the 
PhNH 
0 
4.7 
(-NjH2 
q,"4 
0 
4.5 
PJHCOMe Q 
I3 r 
4.16 

130 
Functional Group Chemistry 
form imines takes place readily. Reactions of this type are used in hete- 
rocyclic synthesis. 
4.2.4 Aromatic Diazonium Compounds 
N=N 
fJ+cl- 
4.8 
4.9 oNHNH2*Hc
4.10 
Aromatic amines react with nitrous acid (sodium nitrite and hydrochlo- 
ric acid) to form diazonium compounds. In the diazotization reaction 
the amine behaves as a nucleophile, adding to the nitroso group of the 
nitrous acid. Loss of water then yields the diazonium compound (4.8). 
The reactions of diazonium compounds can be divided into two 
groups: those involving the retention of nitrogen and those involving 
the loss of nitrogen. The reactions involving the retention of nitrogen 
are those of an 
species. As already mentioned, the 
diazonium salts will react with an electron-rich aromatic ring such as a 
phenol by a coupling reaction to give dyestuffs (e.g. 4.9). Reduction of 
diazonium compounds with tin(I1) chloride gives rise to phenylhy- 
drazines (e.g. 4.10). 
The reactions involving the displacement of nitrogen, as a molecule 
of nitrogen gas, are interesting because they lead to a reversal of the reac- 
tive character of a specific site on the aromatic ring. Although many of 
the reactions have a radical character, they involve creating electron defi- 
ciency in a o-bond, allowing attack on the aromatic ring in the o-bond 
system by a nucleophilic species. Many of the reactions are catalysed by 
copper(1) salts and are known as 
. There are reac- 
tions with halogen, oxygen, nitrogen and carbon nucleophiles (Scheme 
4.22). These reactions are of considerable importance in the transfor- 
mation of aromatic functional groups. 
Scheme 4.22 
, h* Cl- 
cu. 
Reduction with phosphinic acid (hypophosphorous acid, H,PO,) leads 
to the replacement of the diazonium group with hydrogen. Thus an 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
131 
amino group can be used in an aromatic sequence to direct a particular 
aromatic substitution and then it can be removed via the diazonium salt. 
4.2.5 Aromatic Nitro Compounds 
The aromatic nitro group is a deactivating substituent as far as elec- 
trophilic aromatic substitution is concerned. Further electrophilic sub- 
stitution requires vigorous conditions and takes place at the least 
deactivated position. Thus the preparation of 2,4,6-trinitrotoluene (TNT) 
from 4-nitrotoluene requires fuming nitric acid and fuming sulfuric acids. 
Nitrobenzene is sufficiently unreactive towards electrophilic substitution 
to be used as a solvent for the Friedel-Crafts alkylation of more reac- 
tive aromatic systems. 
On the other hand, the aromatic nitro group activates the ring towards 
nucleophilic addition. The addition may be followed by an elimination. 
This is exemplified by the preparation of 2,4-dinitrophenylhydrazine 
from 2,4-dini t rochloro benzene. 
The effect of the nitro group in decreasing the basicity of aromatic 
amines in the ortho and para positions, and in increasing the acidity of 
phenolic hydroxyl groups, has already been mentioned. The nitro group 
also activates aromatic methyl groups both towards oxidation and 
towards base-catalysed condensation reactions, as exemplified by the for- 
mation of 2,4-dinitrobenzoic acid and the formation of 2,4-dinitrostilbene 
from 2,4-dinitrotoluene (Scheme 4.23). The carbanion that is formed on 
the methyl group is stabilized by delocalization onto the nitro group. 
‘NO2 
02” 
F/ ‘N 
Scheme 4.23 
4.2.6 Aromatic Carboxylic Acids 
Aromatic carboxylic acids can be prepared by oxidation of the corre- 
sponding benzyl alcohols and benzaldehydes. An aromatic methyl group 
is also sufficiently activated by the aromatic ring for it to be oxidized to 
the acid under vigorous conditions, such as heating with chromium(V1) 
oxide. Other conventional methods include the hydrolysis of aromatic 
nitriles and the carboxylation of aromatic Grignard reagents with car- 
bon dioxide. 

132 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Aromatic carboxylic acids show many properties that parallel those 
of aliphatic carboxylic acids. Thus acyl chlorides are formed on treat- 
ment with thionyl chloride and esters are obtained on treatment with the 
alcohol and an acid catalyst. Benzoate and 3,5-dinitrobenzoate esters are 
used in the characterization of alcohols and are prepared using the reac- 
tion of the acyl halide with the alcohol. 
There are a number of reactions which reveal the interaction between 
the aromatic ring and the carboxyl group. The carboxyl group and the 
corresponding esters are deactivating groups, and hence nitration and 
bromination require relatively vigorous conditions and the substituents 
enter the tnetu position. The strength of the benzoic acids reflect the elec- 
tron-withdrawing or -donating character of additional substituents on 
the aromatic ring. Thus an electron-withdrawing p-nitro group increas- 
es the strength of the acid, whereas an electron-donating p-methoxy 
group weakens the acid (pKa for benzoic acid, 4.17; for 4-nitrobenzoic 
acid, 3.43; for 4-methoxybenzoic acid, 4.47). Other properties, such as 
the rate of hydrolysis of the methyl esters, can be similarly correlated 
with the nature of the substituents. 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
133 
4.3 
Heteroaromatic Compounds 
are cyclic structures which contain an atom 
other than carbon as part of a ring system. 
are a group of these which possess a cyclic conjugated system that can 
satisfy the (4n + 2)n: electron rule and thus have some aromatic stabi- 
lization. 
The insertion of a heteroatom such as nitrogen into a benzenoid aro- 
matic ring can be considered to take place in two ways. In 
(C,H,N; see Box 4.2) a nitrogen atom replaces a C-H. The aromatic sex- 
tet is then made up of five electrons from the five carbon atoms and one 
from the sp2 hybridized nitrogen atom. The lone pair on the nitrogen 
remains localized on the nitrogen atom and lies in the plane of the ring 
and it does not participate in the sextet. On the other hand, in the five- 
membered ring of 
(C,H,N) a nitrogen atom replaces two carbon 
atoms, and the aromatic sextet is made up of four electrons from the 
remaining four carbon atoms and two electrons from the lone pair on 
the nitrogen. 
The heteroatom may be oxygen or sulfur as in the 
or 
The extent to which these compounds possess an 
enhanced stability arising from their aromatic resonance energy varies. 
There are more complex ring systems containing several heteroatoms 
Heteroaromatic rings may be fused to a second aromatic ring as in 
such as the 
9 
and 
ring systems. 
and 

134 
Functional Group Chemistry 
When the heteroaromatic ring is derived by replacing a -CH=CH- by 
a -CH=N- as in pyridine, the more electronegative nitrogen has an over- 
all electron-attracting effect, as in an imine. It distorts the n-electron 
cloud of the aromatic ring system, so making the carbon atoms 
. Hence, although the nitrogen atom itself reacts readily with elec- 
trophiles, the remainder of the ring system is resistant to electrophilic 
attack. On the other hand, the nitrogen of pyrrole contributes its lone 
pair to the aromatic sextet. The nitrogen is no longer basic, but the 7c- 
system is 
and there is a parallel to the reactivity of enam- 
ines. This division of heteroaromatic compounds into n-deficient and 
n-excessive compounds provides a useful basis for understanding their 
chemistry. 
4.3.1 Reactions of .n-Deficient Heteroaromatic 
Compounds 
The pyridine ring system is the archetypical n-deficient heteroaromatic 
ring with a resonance energy of 125.5 kJ mol-I. The ring is deactivated 
towards towards electrophilic attack, but may be attacked by nucleo- 
philes. 

Chemistry of Aromatic Connpounds 
135 
~~ 
~ 
Pyridine is only brominated, nitrated or sulfonated under vigorous 
conditions (Scheme 4.24) with reaction occurring at the least deactivat- 
ed 3-position. Pyridine does not undergo Friedel-Crafts alkylation or 
acylation. In many cases the electrophile attacks the nitrogen first to form 
a pyridinium salt, which is even less reactive towards electrophiles. 
fuming H2S04 
fuming H2S04 
N 
N 
Scheme 4.24 
An indication of the deactivating effect of replacing a CH=CH by an 
imine (CH=N-) is that the electrophilic substitution of quinoline and 
isoquinoline, in which a benzenoid ring is fused to a pyridine ring, takes 
place in the benzenoid ring at C-5 and to a lesser extent at C-8 (Scheme 
4.25). 
Scheme 4.25 
Pyridine reacts with nucleophiles under vigorous conditions at C-2 or 
C-4 by an addition-elimination mechanism. Thus pyridine reacts with 
sodamide (the 
; Scheme 4.26a). Pyridine will also 
react with lithium aluminium hydride to give predominantly a 1,2-dihy- 
dropyridine (Scheme 4.26b), whereas sodium in ethanol gives mainly the 
1,4-isomer (Scheme 4.26~). 
Unlike their benzenoid counterparts, halogen substituents at C-2 and 
C-4 are sensitive to nucleophilic displacement by an addition-elimina- 
tion mechanism. There is a parallel to the reaction of imino halides and 
acyl halides (see Scheme 4.27aI. There are a number of other parallels 
to carbonyl chemistry. Thus a methyl group at C-2 or C-4 undergoes 
condensation reactions (Scheme 4.27b) and an acetic acid residue at C- 
2 undergoes decarboxylation (Scheme 4.27~). 
Spectroscopic evidence shows that the 2- and 4-hydroxypyridines are 

136 
Functional Group Chemistry 
Scheme 4.26 
Scheme 4.27 
Scheme 4.28 
0 
N 
0 
N 
H 
H 
0, 
N 
NH2 
/I\ 
N 
C€,=CF Ph 
H 
tautomeric with the corresponding 
, with the latter predomi- 
nating (Scheme 4.28). These compounds may be alkylated on either the 
nitrogen or the oxygen, depending on the reaction conditions. 
OH 
0 
H 
H 
Pyridine is weakly basic. It is less basic than aliphatic amines because 
the lone pair is in an sp2 rather than an sp3 orbital which, with higher 
‘s’ character, is held more closely to the nucleus. Nevertheless, alkyl and 
reactive aryl halides react with pyridines to form quaternary N-alkyl (or 
N-aryl) salts. 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
137 
Pyridine forms a number of complexes and salts which are useful syn- 
thetic reagents. These include pyridiniuni hydrobromide perbromide 
(C,H,NH+Br, ), which is a convenient crystalline, easily handled, bromi- 
nating agent, the pyridine-sulfur trioxide complex (C,H,N:SO,) for sul- 
fonations, pyridine-borane (C,H,N:BH,) for hydroborations and the 
pyridine-chromium(V1) oxide complex (C,H,N:CrO,) for oxidations. 
The oxidation of pyridinium salts with alkaline potassium ferricyanide 
provides a fdcile route to N-substituted pyridones (Scheme 4.29a), 
although the sensitivity of pyridinium salts to nucleophilic attack may 
lead to ring fission reactions (Scheme 4.29b). 
I' 
R 
(b) 
OH 
R 
R - pCHo 
- fi + RNH2 
CHO CHO 
NH 
R 
I 
Scheme 4.29 
Oxidation of pyridine with a peroxy acid gives 
[5 
The N-oxides may be reduced to regenerate the parent pyridine with a 
variety of reagents, including phosphorus(II1) compounds. Their value 
as synthetic intermediates is that there is a back-donation from the 
oxygen to activate the 2- and 4-positions towards electrophilic attack. 
Thus nitration of pyridine N-oxide, although still requiring vigorous 
?+ N 
I 0- 
4.11 
conditions (conc. HNO,/conc. H,SO,), gives 4-nitropyridine N-oxide 
(4.11). 
4.3.2 Reactions of n;-Excessive Heteroaromatic 
Compounds 
Pyrrole is a typical n;-excessive heteroaromatic compound, with a reso- 
nance energy of 103 kJ mol I .  While thiophene possesses rather more 
aromatic character, there is less stabilization associated with furan. 
The involvement of the nitrogen lone pair in the aromatic sextet means 
that the nitrogen of pyrrole is non-basic. When the pyrrole ring system 
is protonated, addition takes place at C-2 (Scheme 4.30a). Electrophilic 
attack on pyrrole is rapid and also takes place at C-2. Reaction at (2-3 
is less favoured (Scheme 4.30b). 

138 
Functional Group Chemistry 
H 
I 
N 
I 
H 
H 
H 
H 
l 
E 
E 
Scheme 4.30 
I 
H 
H 
H 
Pyrrole and its simple alkyl derivatives are 
by many of 
the typical acidic electrophiles. Nitration with acetyl nitrate (Scheme 
4.3 1) under mild conditions gives the 2-nitro compound, together with 
small amounts of 3-nitropyrrole. Halogenation is rapid but it gives a 
complex mixture of polyhalogeno compounds. 
H 
H 
Scheme 4.31 
Pyrrole can be easily acylated and alkylated, reacting as an enamine. 
Formylation takes place at the C-2 position with ethyl orthoformate and 
boron trifluoride etherate as a catalyst, with hydrogen cyanide and 
hydrogen chloride ( 
) or with dimethylformamide and 
phosphorus oxychloride ( 
). The products of these reac- 
tions are useful for coupling pyrroles to give dipyrrolylmethanes and 
thence the tetrapyrroles of the porphyrin and corrin ring systems. The 
acid-catalysed condensation of pyrrole with 4-dimethylaminobenzalde- 
hyde (the 
for pyrroles) is a colour test for the ring system 
which follows this pattern (Scheme 4.32). 
Although the nitrogen is non-basic, the N-H hydrogen is acidic and, 
in the presence of a strong base, pyrrole forms a powerful nucleophile. 
Pyrrole reacts with Grignard reagents to give a pyrrolylmagnesium halide 
(Scheme 4.33a), releasing a hydrocarbon. The pyrrole anion is resonance 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
139 
NMe2 - Q$nNMe
I H I  
H 
OH 
H 
, NMe2 
stabilized (Scheme 4.33b) and will react either on nitrogen or carbon 
(Scheme 4.33~). 
Scheme 4.m 
I 
Scheme 4.33 
Thiophene is closer to benzene in its resonance energy (1 16 kJ mol-') 
and aromatic character. It is somewhat more stable to acidic conditions 
and undergoes, for example, Friedel-Crafts acylation. 
On the other hand, furan has less resonance stabilization (91 kJ molt') 
and undergoes a number of reactions in which the aromatic character is 
lost. For example, typical of a diene, it undergoes a Diels-Alder reac- 
tion with maleic anhydride (Scheme 4.34). 
0 
1 
Scheme 4.34 

140 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
141 

142 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
143 

144 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Chemistry of Aromatic Compounds 
145 

146 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
147 

148 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
149 

150 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
151 

152 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
153 

154 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
155 

156 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
I57 

158 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
159 

160 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
161 

162 
Functional Group Chemistry 

Answers to Problems 
163 

Subject Index 
Acetals 39, 85 
Acetanilide 129 
Acetylides 45, 76, 78 
Acid-base catalysis 15 
Acyl halides 95 
Addition reactions 16, 
66-74 
Aldol reaction 102 
Alkene metathesis 74 
Alkynes 76-79 
Amides 98, 129 
Anthracene 
1 16 
Arndt Eistert reaction 
Aromaticity 3, 116 
Aryl halides 123 
Azobisisobutyronitrile 
97 
13 
Baeyer-Villiger oxidation 
Barton reaction 26,42 
Beckmann rearrangement 
53 
Benzene 116 
Benzene, chloro- 124 
Benzoin condensation 
89 
Benzyne 123 
Birch reduction 128 
Bisulfite compounds 
Boranes 70,92, 137 
Bromination 1 18, 122, 
126, 132, 135, 137 
Bromonium ion 68, 118 
85 
85 
N- B r om osucci n i mid e 
28, 75, 99, 124 
Cannizzaro reaction 84, 
Carbocations 35, 37, 66 
Carboxylic acids 92-95, 
Chlorination 26, 129 
In-Chloroperbenzoic acid 
43,72 
Chromium trioxide 39, 
41,46, 122, 131 
Claisen condensation 
103 
Claisen rearrangement 
127 
Clemmensen reduction 
25,83 
Conformation 3 
Conjugation 2, 80 
89 
131 
Dakin reaction 126 
DDT 125 
Decarboxylation 94 
Diazomethane 73,93, 
97 
Diazonium compounds 
56, 128, 130 
Dieckmann cyclization 
103 
Diels-Alder reaction 73, 
91. 139 
Dimethylaminopyridine 
96 
Dimethyl sulfoxide 50 
Ehrlich reaction 138 
Electronegativity 6, 27 
Electrophile 12 
Electrophilic addition 
35,44,66-70,77 
Electrophilic aromatic 
substitution 116 
Elimination reactions 
15, 28, 56, 64 
Enols 80, 100-104 
Epoxides 43, 72 
Esters 38, 92, 97, 132 
Ethers 39,46 
FriedelLCrafts reaction 
37, 70, 120, 122, 
131, 139 
Furan 133, 139 
Gabriel method 53 
Geometrical isomerism 
Grignard reagents 3 1, 
4, 65 
45,87, 106, 124, 138 
Hammett equation 1 18 
Hardlsoft acidslbases 
14, 27,48,98 
Heck reaction 124 
Heteroaromatic com- 
Heterolytic reactions 
Hexamethylenetetramine 
Hinsberg procedure 52 
pounds 133 
12 
86 
164 

Index 165 
Hofmann degradation 
Hofmann elimination 64 
Homolytic reactions 12 
Hybridization 1 
Hydrazones 86 
Hydroboration 35,70 
Hydrogen peroxide 43. 
50, 106, 126 
Hydrogenation 25,70 
Hydrogenolysis 16, 24, 
Hypophosphorus acid 
52,99 
25 
130 
Imidazole 133 
Imines 86, 105 
Inductive effect 17 
Iodination 119 
Ips0 substitution 117 
Isocyanides 105 
Isomerism, geometrical 
4, 65 
Isoquinoline 133, 135 
Kine tichhermod yn amic 
control 17, 121, 
122 
Kolbe carboxylation 127 
Lewis acids 14, 37, 82, 
119, 121 
Lithium aluminium 
hydride 46, 52, 83, 
92, 106 
Lone pairs 7,44,47, 54 
Magnesium 31 
Markownikoff rule 35, 
Meisenheimer 
Mesomeric effect 17 
Michael addition 102 
Mitsunobu reaction 40 
66,67 
intermediate 122 
Naphthalene 1 16, 12 1 
Nitration 117, 125, 126, 
129, 132, 135, 137 
Nitriles 105, 106 
Nitro compounds 108, 
131 
Nitronium ion 69, 119 
Nitrosation 69, 119, 126 
Nucleophile 12 
Nucleophilic addition 
Nucleophilic aromatic 
substitution 122 
Nucleophilic substitution 
44,55,79-89 
28-31,34,44,46,54 
Organometallic reagents 
31 
Orientation, substituents 
117 
Orton rearrangement 
129 
Osmium tetroxide 72 
Oximes 53, 86 
Oxymercuration 70 
Partial rate fxtor 118 
Perbenzoic acid, 
m-chloro- 43, 72 
Pericyclic reactions 14, 
66, 72. 73 
Peroxides 47 
Phenanthrene 1 16 
Phenol coupling 128 
Phenols 125, 126 
Phosphorus oxychloride 
Phosphorus 
39 
pentachloride 28, 
39 
Pi-deficient compounds 
134 
Pi-excessive compounds 
134, 137 
Polymerization 74 
Potassium permanganate 
41,72 
Prins reaction 69 
Pummerer’s ketone 128 
Pyridine 116, 133, 134 
Pyridine, dimethylamino- 
Pyrimidine 133 
Pyrrole 116, 133, 137 
96 
Quinhydrones 90 
Quinoline 133, 135 
Quinones 90, 128, 129 
Radical reactions 12, 25, 
26, 32,49, 66 
Reaction coordinate 16, 
17 
Rearrangement reactions 
45,78, 129 
Resonance 8, 92,93, 100 
Riemer-Tiemann 
reaction 127 
Rosenmund reaction 96 
Sandmeyer reaction 
Saytzeff elimination 64 
Steric hindrance 18 
Substituent effects 1 17 
Substitution reactions 
15,28-31, 34 
Succinimide, N-bromo- 
28, 75, 99, 124 
Sulfonation 120 
Sulfones 50 
Sulfonium salts 50 
Sulfoxides 50 
Swern oxidation 51 
130 
Tautomerism 8, 80, 107, 
136 
Tetrahedral intermediate 
82, 84,93,98 
Thiazole 133 
Thioacetals 49, 85 
Thioethers 48 
Thiols 48,49 
Thionyl chloride 28, 39, 
40, 132 
Toluene-4-sulfonates 28, 
36, 39,40, 52, 54 
Tri-n-butyltin hydride 
25,32 
Tschitschibabin reaction 
135 
Vilsmeier reaction 138 
Wheland intermediate 
117 
Wittig reaction 50, 65, 
88 
Wolff-Kishner reduction 
25, 82, 87 
Wurtz coupling 25 




