


Cover images 0 
Murray Robertsonlvisual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-622-4 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
8 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2002 
All rights reserved 
Apurtjiotn uny juir deuling,filr thc)purposcs of research or privute study, or criticisin or 
review us permitted undor the ternis of the UK Copyright, Designs und Putents Act, 
1988, this puhhlicution niuy not he rtywduced, stored or trunsniitted, in m y  jilrni or hy 
uny means, without tlie prior permission in ivriting of' The Royul Society oj' Clieniistrj: 
or in the C N S ~  
(?f' reprogruphic rtpwluction only in uccordunce cvith the terms (f 
the 
licences issued by thci Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accor~luncc with the 
tcrnis qf the licencc~s issued by the uppropriute Reproduction Rights Orgunizution out- 
side the UK. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the terms stuteri here should he 
sent to The Royul Society of' Chemistry ut the uddress printed on this puge. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWE U K  
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 21, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

Preface 
Take the crowning achievements of the various sub-disciplines of chem- 
istry, combine them and you have organotransition metal chemistry. 
First, the organic chemist’s shrewd manipulation of functional groups, 
allowing strategic multi-step synthesis. Add to this the main-group 
chemist’s understanding of reactivity within a framework of periodicity. 
Apply this to the colourful playground of the transition elements with 
their enormous variations in oxidation states, ligands, coordination num- 
bers and associated stereochemistries. The scope for intellectual pursuit is 
staggering, but organometallic chemistry is not simply an academic exer- 
cise. It underpins industrial chemical processes on a megatonne scale, pro- 
viding commodity chemicals from the simplest petrochemicals to the 
most exotic pharmaceuticals. 
This text covers the material I consider appropriate for a core introduc- 
tory course in organotransition metal chemistry. For all students, such a 
course will be their first encounter; for some it will be their last, depending 
on their degree specialization in later years. The material covered here 
should be seen as the basic tools which any graduate might be expected to 
call upon. It cannot do justice to the enormous breadth of the subject and 
the exciting tangential fields (e.g., polymers, metals in catalytic and stoi- 
c hiometric organic synthesis, industrial chemistry). Tutorial examples, 
problems and answers are available on the RSC’s Tutorial Chemistry 
Texts website at http://www.chemsoc.org/pdf/tct/organoexamples.pdf, 
http://www.chemsoc.org/pdf/tct/organoproblems.pdf and http://www. 
chemsoc. org/pdf/tct/organoanswers. pdf. 
I would like to acknowledge the support during the preparation of this 
text of my partner Mark, to whom it is dedicated. 
Anthony F. Hill 
Canberra, Australia 

E D I T O R - I N - C H I E F  
Profissor E W Abel 
E X  E C U T I V E E I> IT O R S 
Professor A G Davies 
Professor D Phillips 
Professor J D Woollins 
E D U C A T I O N A L  C O N S U L T A N T  
Mr M Berry 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  IN T H E  S E R I E S  
F O R T H C O M I N G  T I T L E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Barretr 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hanson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M Sainsbury 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Barrett 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
S E Dann 
J D Gale and J M Seddon 
D 0 Huyward 
R A Juckson 
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
Basic Spectroscopy 
X-ray Crystallography 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Chemistry of Solid Surfaces 
Biology for Chemists 
Multi-element NMR 
Further information about this series is uvailable at w w v .  chemsoc. orgltct 
Orders and enquiries should be sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 426017; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
1.1 What is Organometallic Chemistry? 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 Accessing the Organometallic Literature 
Bonding in Organotransition Metal Compounds 
The Bonding of Unsaturated Organic Ligands to a 
Metal Centre 
Thermodynamics of the Metal-Carbon Bond 
2.1 
2.2 
3.1 
3.2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.7 
4.1 
4.2 
4.3 
‘Innocent’ Co-ligands 
Hydride Complexes 
Introduction 
Coordination Modes for Carbon Monoxide 
Characterization of Metal Carbonyls 
Important Classes of Metal Carbonyls 
Synthesis of Metal Carbonyls 
Reactions of Metal Carbonyls 
Ligands Related to Carbon Monoxide 
Introduction 
Selected Classes of o-Organyls 
Reactions of o-Organyls 
1 
3 
9 
17 
20 
22 
30 
42 
43 
44 
46 
53 
58 
67 
69 
70 
79 
V 

vi 
Contents 
5. I 
Introduction 
5.2 Carbenes (Alkylidenes) 
5.3 Carbynes (Alkylidynes) 
5.4 Vinylidenes (Alkenylidenes) 
5.5 Cumulenylidenes 
6.1 Introduction 
6.2 Alkenes 
6.3 Di- and Polyenes 
6.4 Allenes 
6.5 Alkynes 
7.1 Introduction 
7.2 Allyls, q3-C3R, 
7.3 Pentadienyls, qS-CsR7 
7.4 
7.5 Cyclobutadienes, q4-C,R4 
7.6 Cyclopentadienyls, q s-C5R5 
7.7 Arenes, q6-C,R, 
7.8 Cycloheptatrienyls, q7-C7R, 
7.9 C yclooct ate traenes, q 8 -C8& 
7.10 Heteroarenes (‘Inorganometallic’ Chemistry) 
C yclopropenyls, q 3-C3R3 (Metallatetrahedranes) 
89 
90 
109 
118 
120 
122 
123 
139 
143 
144 
149 
152 
156 
158 
160 
161 
169 
176 
178 
179 

Introduction, Scope and 
Bonding 
1 .l What is Organometallic Chemistry? 
The subdivision of chemistry into inorganic and organic domains reflects 
history not nature. Organometallic chemistry, the subject of this text, is 
one unifying point of contact between these two disciplines; it embraces 
and enriches both. Organometallic chemistry is concerned with the 
in all its many and remarkably various forms. 
Organotransition metal chemistry (compounds featuring bonds between 
carbon and a transition metal) has matured in the last five decades, in 
parallel with our general understanding of the bonding of more classi- 
cal ligands to transition metals. The laboratory curiosities and exotic 
compounds of yesteryear are today routinely the synthetic organic 
chemist’s reagents, the polymer chemist’s catalysts, the industrial 
chemist’s meal-ticket. The eventual exploitation of today’s organo- 
metallic curiosities provides the challenge and opportunities for this 
generation of readers. 
We shall consider organometallic compounds as those in which the 
‘metal’ has a comparable or lower 
(PE) than 
that of carbon (2.5). For transition metals, these span the range 1.3 
Figure 1.1 Main group M-C 
bonding 
1 

2 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 1.2 Origins of n-bonding 
(hafnium) to 2.5 (gold). These generally increase across a transition peri- 
od, and less generally down a group. Thus the first transition (3d) ele- 
ments are more electropositive than the heavier 4d and 5d transition 
metals. The very electropositive lanthanide and actinide elements (PE 
1.1-1.3) also have a rich organometallic chemistry, which will not be 
dealt with specifically here, however, except where it provides useful 
illustrative examples. 
Main group elements have their own diverse organometallic 
chemistry, often overlapping with that of the transition metals. Primarily, 
this is concerned with simple element-carbon o-bonds (Figure 1. la). 
More complex structures arise for 
organometallic com- 
pounds, typically those of Groups 1, 2 and 13 (Figure 1.lb). Multiple 
bonding between carbon and the heavier p-block elements (pn-pn;, 
Figure 1.2a) is less (though increasingly more!) common. For transition 
metals, multiple bonding (dn-pn, Figure 1.2b) is readily achieved and 
quite commonplace. The nature of a p-block organometallic follows 
primarily from the characteristics of the central metal: a typical p-block 
element has a predominant oxidation state [e.g. In(III), Sn(IV), Sb(III)], 
a less common though occasionally accessible oxidation state which 
differs by two units [e.g. In(I), Sn(II), Sb(V)] and a comparatively 
narrow range of coordination numbers and geometries rationalized by 
the 
and 
. Although energetically accessible for hybridization and use in cova- 
lent bonding, the d-orbitals of these elements are unoccupied and mul- 
tiple bonding to carbon, when it does arise, generally involves pn-pn; 
orbital combinations. For heavier elements where this is less effective, 
via the use of sterically protective substituents is 
generally required (Figure 1.1 c). 
The defiance of these generalizations underpins the intrigue of transi- 
tion elements. Some transition elements can offer as many as 11 differ- 
ent accessible formal oxidation states { e.g. [Ru(CO)J2- [Ru(-II)] and 
RuO, [Ru(VIII)]; [Cr(CO),]" [Cr(-IV)] and CrF, [Cr(VI)]} ; 
of 1 to 8 are observed, although 4, 5 and 6 remain the most 
commonly encountered. This breadth arises from the most significant 
feature of transition elements: the presence of 
which may be of suitable 
to enter into very effective multiple bonding (dn-pn;). Indeed, even bonds 
of 
become possible for transition metals. In contrast to 
p-block elements, the efficiency of this multiple bonding actually 
increases down a triad. This is due in part to 
which 
destabilize d-orbitals for heavy metals, increasing their 
when 
occupied, a key factor in the bonding of such metals to unsaturated 
organic molecules which will be discussed later in this chapter. The 
enormous variation in these characteristic properties would at first glance 
and 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
3 
make the diversity of organotransition metal chemistry appear over- 
whelming and even intimidating. Fortunately, various guiding principles 
have emerged help to conceptualize this complexity within generally well- 
behaved models. The most useful is the 
or 
, discussed below. 
Two compounds serve to illustrate extremes of complexity in organ- 
otransition metal chemistry: 
(Figure 1.3a; see also 
Chapter 3) and 
(Figure 1.3b; see also Chapter 4). These exem- 
plary compounds share two features: firstly, both are beautiful, the for- 
mer for its simplicity, the latter for its complexity. Secondly, both are 
also useful, the former as an intermediate in the industrial purification 
of nickel, the latter as a key catalyst 
in human bio- 
chemistry. Figure 1 . 3 ~  
shows a simple organocobalt compound which 
can serve as a model of the 
of vitamin B,2. Chemical models 
are valuable conceptual tools in understanding the chemistry of more 
complex chemical systems, which are themselves less amenable to direct 
study, when appropriate care is taken in making inferences. Many further 
examples of organometallic model compounds will be met in subsequent 
chapters. 
I .2 
Bonding in Organotransition Metal Compounds 
It is generally accepted that d-orbitals do not play a major role in the 
bonding of p-block elements to carbon. The diverse chemistry of the 
transition metals, however, centres on the involvement of partially filled 
d-orbitals in the bonding to ligands. The basics of simple metal-ligand 
bonding are dealt with in other texts. The majority of transition metal 
phenomena can be accommodated by a molecular orbital or ' 
treatment. In addition to providing insights into the symmetry, degen- 
eracy and energy of d-orbitals, such a treatment also concludes that 
is important in explaining the metal-ligand bond, even for very 
simple ligands such as halides, water and ammonia. For these classical 
ligands, however, the large electronegativity difference between the donor 
atom and the metal would be expected to favour largely 
character 
(as is also the case for bonds between carbon and the lanthanides or 
actinides). For the bonding of carbon to transition metals the electro- 
negativity difference is modest or negligible. Hence the concepts of 
covalency and 
become all-important, whilst the concept 
of oxidation state rapidly loses its usefulness. An organic chemist seldom 
explicitly considers the oxidation state of carbon. Similarly, as 
organometallic chemists we will only consider this (artificial) concept in 
the most clear-cut situations where the basic rules can be applied with- 
out ambiguity. 
The important descriptors in oranotransition metal chemistry are the 
7 
Figure ' 
m3 
complexity 
to 

4 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
coordination number and the total number of 
WE), 
independent of where they are ‘located’ within the metal-ligand bond- 
ing framework (the description of which typically requires more sophis- 
ticated molecular orbital treatments). The number of valence electrons 
(nVE) in an organotransition metal complex is crucial to understanding 
the reactivity of a complex. This is described by the 18-electron rule, 
which is by no means absolute but provides an effective framework for 
interpretation. 
The octet rule underpins much of the chemistry of the p-block ele- 
ments, and the origins of deviations when they occur are generally well 
understood. An analogous generalization also arises for organometallic 
compounds of the d-block. The octet rule arises from the use of four 
valence orbitals (s + 3 p) by p-block elements in the majority of their 
compounds, thereby requiring eight valence electrons (8VE) to attain the 
effective atomic number of the next heaviest noble gas. Within the tran- 
sition series it follows that nine valence orbitals are available (s + 3 p + 
5 d) and that full use of these will require 18 valence electrons (18VE). 
Thus the 18-electron (EAN) rule emerges in its simplest form, although 
later we will look more deeply into the nature of this relationship. The 
octet rule is not absolute in p-block chemistry and the 18-electron rule 
has its limitations as well. Fortunately, deviations generally fall within 
readily understandable situations involving 
or more subtle 
considerations. Note that the 18-electron rule has no useful 
application or predictive value in the organometallic chemistry of the 
f-block elements (in principle, 16 valence orbitals!). In this area, steric 
and 
generally hold sway. 
We shall first revisit some p-block ‘octet’ examples as a point of ref- 
erence. The total number of valence electrons for the atom of interest in 
a molecule is the sum of the electrons provided by the central element 
in its 
(oxidation state = 0) form and the ligands or sub- 
stituents, with the charge of the molecule finally subtracted. Table 1.1 
collates some of the ligands to be encountered later in this book, accord- 
ing to the number of electrons they provide. An important class of ligands 
which are ubiquitous in transition metal chemistry are 
hydro- 
carbons and their derivatives. These are organic ligands capable of bind- 
ing through two (Chapter 6) or more (Chapter 7) unsaturated carbon 
atoms. Each carbon through which the ligand binds provides one valence 
orbital and accordingly one electron to the valence count. The number 
of carbon (or other) atoms through which it binds (n) is referred to as 
the 
(monohapto, dihupto, trihupto ... octuhupto) and this is given 
the symbol ‘qf7’. By convention, if all carbons of the unsaturated system 
are bound to the metal, the superscript is omitted. 
A selection of compounds of the simplest p-block element, boron 
(Figure 1.4), illustrates a number of points. The salt (1.4a) involves two 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
5 
Table 1.1 Electron counting for commonly encountered ligands 
nVE 
Ligands 
l a  
2a 
3 
4 
5 
6 
7 
a 
n 
H, F, CI, Br, I, OH, OR, NH,, NR,, 
SR, PR,, CN, N,, 
NCS, bent NO, 
bent NNR 
Monodentate carboxylates O,CR, dithiocarbamates S,CNR,, 
amidates 
RC(NR),, alkyl, aryl, vinyl (alkenyl), acetylide (alkynyl), formyl, acyl, aroyl, 
etc . 
OH,, NH,, ethers, amines, thioethers, phosphines 
NR, 0, S, PR 
'C,': CO, CNR, CS, CR,, C=CR,, C=C=CR,, etc. 
72,': alkenes, alkynes; molecules which bind side-on through a multiple 
bond: 0,, SO,, CS,, 
CSe,, RP=PR, R,Si=CR, 
Linear NO, nitride (N), linear NNR, NS, NSe, P 
e.g. q3-allyl, q3-cyclopropenyl, bidentate alkenyls, acyls, carboxylates, 
dithiocarbamates, amidates, P-diketonates, salicylates, glyoximates 
Dienes, including cyclobutadiene and heteroatom-substituted dienes, 
e.g. vinyl ketones 
Cyclopentadienyl, pentadienyl, tris(pyrazoly1)borate 
Arenes, trienes (e.9. cycloheptatriene), thiophene, pyrrole 
q7-Cyclohexatrienyl ('tropylium') 
q8-Cyclooctatetraene 
~"-C,R, 
aMany ligands may also carry a further pair(s) of electrons on the donor atom which 
may be available (if required) for n-donation, thereby alleviating an otherwise coordi- 
natively unsaturated metal centre. 1 VE ligands capable of providing a further electron 
pair include alkoxides, amides, nitrosyls and diazonium ions. 2VE ligands capable of 
providing a further two electrons include 0x0, imidd and alkynes 
electron-precise (WE) boron centres that satisfy the octet rule, and the 
compound is stable. The molecule BH, (1.4b), however, has only 6VE 
and is therefore electron deficient. In organometallic terms, we describe 
this as being 
with one (or more) vacant co- 
ordination site(s). The molecule cannot be isolated, but rather finds some 
way of relieving this unsaturation, either by dimerizing to diborane B,H, 
or by forming adducts with 
H,B-L (1.4~; L = diethyl ether), 
thereby acquiring the 2VE needed to complete the octet. The compound 
B(NMe,), (1.4d) appears to have the same electron count as BH, and 
yet is stable as a monomer. This introduces the ability of some ligands 
Figure 1.4 Some boron 
compounds 

6 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
(notably those with lone pairs, e.g. amides NR,, alkoxides OR, halides) 
to provide further electrons via 
This phenomenon will also 
be encountered for such ligands in organotransition metal chemistry, in 
particular that of the earlier transition metals which typically have suit- 
able vacant orbitals to accommodate n-donation from the ligands. 
The examples shown in Figure 1.5 illustrate the extension of these 
ideas to transition metals. The first two examples each obey the 
1 8-electron rule and are stable complexes. The manganese example (1.5~) 
is, however, coordinatively unsaturated (has a vacant coordination site) 
and cannot be isolated, but rather dimerizes via halide bridges in the 
same way that AICl, dimerizes to Al2(p-C1),Cl4, with each bridging halide 
providing three electrons to the overall count. In valence bond terms 
(1.5d), we can describe this situation as each halide providing a single 
electron to one metal 
to the other metal. The final example (1.5e) is monomeric, although it 
appears to have less than 18VE. This complex provides an analogy with 
B(NMe,),, in that the presence of strong n-donor 0x0 ligands helps to 
stabilize the coordinative unsaturation. Note that in both B(NMe,), and 
Re(Me)(=O), the ligands have more electron pairs available for donation 
than required for 8VE or 1 WE, respectively. 
and an electron pair 
Figure 1.5 Some transition 
metal compounds 
The examples illustrated above involve simple ligands; however, many 
more complicated ligands will be encountered. In most cases we can 
usually subdivide complicated ligands into smaller components so long 
as we employ reasonable 
(resonance) forms which each con- 
tribute the same overall number of electrons. Thus in Figure 1.6 are 
shown three-electron ligands, independent of the valence bond descrip- 
tions used. Figure 1.7 shows how valence electrons are counted for a 
range of illustrative examples, including some with metal-metal bonds. 
Metal-metal bonds also follow the same approach as for multiply 
bonded p-block compounds, i.e. a bond of multiplicity n (single, double, 
triple, quadruple) provides nVE to each metal. 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
7 
Figure 1.6 Deconstructing 
complicated ligands 
Figure 1.7 The 18-electron 
rule: illustrative examples 

8 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
I 
Figure 1.8 sp3d2 hybridization 
1.2.1 Limitations of the 18-Electron Rule 
The 18-electron rule follows in its simplest form from the requirement 
to fully populate nine metal valence orbitals with 18VE. This is a con- 
venient working simplification which is generally borne out by more 
sophisticated treatments. We can delve more deeply into the nature of 
the bonding, however, through a simplified molecular orbital treatment, 
taking for illustrative purposes an octahedral sp3d2 hybridized (Figure 
1 .S) metal centre. This perspective provides six empty sp3d2 orbitals, each 
of which is directed along one metal-ligand vector. This may interact 
with the lone pair of a ligand (a,) in a bonding (Figure 1.9a; M-L a) 
and antibonding (Figure 1.9b; M-L a*) combination. The remaining 
three orbitals (t2g = d-xy, d-yz, dyz) protrude between the metal-ligand vec- 
tors and may only interact with ligand orbitals which have .n-symmetry 
with respect to these vectors (Figure 1.9~). In the absence of ligand 
.n-orbitals, these t2g orbitals remain non-bonding in nature. Combining 
these interactions leads to the orbital scheme shown in Figure 1.10a. For 
an octahedron, therefore, the most stable configuration will require a 
d6 metal configuration (6VE), in addition to the six lone pairs (12VE) 
(reassuringly) providing a total of 1 WE. 
Figure 1.9 Metal-ligand orbital 
interactions 
Figure 1 .10 Molecular orbitals 
for octahedral and square-based 
pyramidal complexes 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
9 
It is often useful to consider how this scheme would change if one 
ligand was then removed to provide a hypothetical 16VE complex, since 
this allows us to consider how one individual ligand might interact with 
a typical metal centre (a 
approach). The departing 
ligand takes its lone pair of electrons with it, leaving a vacant (Lewis 
acidic) sp3d2 orbital directed towards a vacant coordination site, flanked 
in the d6 case by two occupied tZg orbitals of nsymmetry with respect to 
the M-L vector. We will return to this hypothetical situation later when 
considering how the molecules CO, CH, and C,H, might bond to such 
a dh ML, metal centre. Similar schemes may also be constructed for other 
geometries and coordination numbers; however, the d6 octahedral case 
is the simplest to visualize. 
The 18-electron rule loses dominance at the extremes of the transition 
series. At the left-hand side (Groups 3 and 4) the metal centre contributes 
fewer electrons to the valence count, and thus more electrons are required 
from ligands. This may not always be easily possible simply due to the 
steric pressures of accommodating more ligands, e.g. the metallocenes 
MC12Cp, (M = Ti, Zr, Hf, Nb, Ta; Cp = q-C5H,; see Chapter 7) are 
stable with <18 VE (chloride is a 7c-donor). This also accounts for the 
prevalence of n;-donor ligands in isolable organometallic compounds of 
these metals, i.e. ligands capable of providing extra electrons to the over- 
all count from ‘lone’ pairs. Steric factors in general provide a useful 
method of kinetically stabilizing coordinative unsaturation (preventing 
bimolecular decomposition routes, which generally require vacant 
coordination sites), and this approach will be encountered often. 
Towards the right-hand side of the transition series, electronic factors 
are usually associated with coordinative unsaturation. We assumed 
above that it will be energetically advantageous to employ all nine metal 
valence orbitals. For this to be true, it is necessary that these are all of 
comparable energy. However, on moving from Ca to Zn there is a 
progressive relative increase in the energy gap between the (n - 1)d and 
the ns and np orbital energies. This separation is further increased by 
increasing positive charge (or oxidation state) at the metal centre. For 
late transition metals, the np orbitals are generally less likely to partici- 
pate significantly in bonding. Furthermore, as in classical coordination 
chemistry, the characteristic stability associated with the 
geometry for ds metal centres (high energy but vacant dX2-,., orbital) 
extends to organometallic examples of Groups 9 and 10. 
1.3 
The Bonding of Unsaturated Organic Ligands 
to a Metal Centre 
For simple 0-ligands, e.g. alkyls (sp3 hybridized carbon), there are no 
orbitals of appropriate n;-symmetry with respect to the metal-ligand 

10 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 1.1 1 Representative 
x-ligands 
Figure 1 .12 Synergic bonding 
of CO to a transition metal; 
implications for nucleophilic (Nu-) 
attack 
vector and so the metal t,,, orbitals remain non-bonding in character. 
There are, however, many unsaturated organic ligands which do have 
orbitals of appropriate n-symmetry, be they associated with one carbon 
atom ['C,': carbenes, carbynes, vinylidenes (Chapter 5), acyls (Chapter 
4)] or two or more carbon atoms ['C,': alkenes, alkynes (Chapter 6), 
q"-hydrocarbons (Chapter 7)]. We will deal with three illustrative cases 
here: carbon monoxide (CO), methylene (CH,) and ethene (H,C=CH,) 
(Figure 1.1 1). These basic principles can then be modified and refined in 
later chapters for more complex ligands. 
1.3.1 Carbon Monoxide 
Carbon monoxide shows very little basicity or nucleophilicity within 
p-block chemistry, although some Lewis acid adducts are known, e.g. 
H,B-CO. In contrast, there are many thousands of known complexes of 
CO with transition metals (metal carbonyls; Chapter 3). The simple 
classical two-electron dative interaction from the lone pair on carbon, 
although important, is seldom sufficiently strong to bind CO firmly to a 
transition metal. Accordingly, comparatively few do or dIo metal carbonyl 
complexes are known. The key lies in the presence of electrons housed 
in d-orbitals of n-symmetry with respect to the metalkarbon vector (t,J. 
We begin by considering the frontier orbitals of CO (Figure 1.12). 
The 
( 3 0 )  is primarily based on carbon, and the 
set 
of antibonding n* orbitals (2n 
also have their greatest contri- 
bution from carbon p-orbitals. The most important component of the 
bonding involves the combination of occupied metal t2g orbitals with the 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
I I 
empty .n* 
(2.n) orbitals of CO. The interaction of the 30 and 
2n: orbitals of CO with those of a transition metal is illustrated in Figure 
1.12. Salient features may be summarized as follows: 
(i) 
The conventional two-electron dative metal-ligand o-bond 
(30 + sp3d2 hybrid, or dV2). 
(ii) Two orthogonal-bonds of .n-symmetry (e.g. dsZ + 2.nx, dyz + 2nY; 
only one is shown). The electrons in these bonds originated from pure 
metal tZg orbitals but now reside in molecular orbitals with considerable 
ligand character. Thus a drift of electron density has occurred from the 
metal to the antibonding 2.n orbitals of CO. The more effective is this 
drift of electron density from the metal to CO, the more the CO bond 
will be weakened, as the metalkarbon bonding increases. 
This phenomenon has a number of names including 
or 
and is in essence similar to the C-N 
multiple bonding found in organic amides, in which the lone pair of an 
sp2 hybridized nitrogen mixes with the empty .n* orbital of the CO bond. 
Ligands capable of such interactions (and there are many) are thus 
referred to as 
(in the Lewis acidity sense) or 
The 
operation of these two mutually supportive interactions in opposite direc- 
tions is referred to as 
Figure 1.13 shows how we might 
represent this in 
terms. 
Effective retrodonation is most readily apparent as a decrease in the 
stretching frequency (vco) of the CO ligand observed using vibrational 
(infrared, IR) spectroscopy. Free CO absorbs at 2143 cm-I, but in tran- 
sition metal compkxes the V,, 
frequency is typically in the range 
1840-2120 cm-'. Table 1.2 illustrates the effect of the 
of the 
metal centre on vco for various metal carbonyls. Increasing the negative 
charge on the metal centre raises the energy of the metal t2g orbitals, 
Figure 1.13 Valence bond 
description of CO coordination 
Table 1.2 IR data (cm-l). for [M(CO),I" 
V 
V 
Cr 
Mo 
w 
Mn 
Fe 
Ir 
1- 
0 
0 
0 
0 
1+ 
2+ 
3+ 
1859 
1973 
2000 
2004 
1998 
2096 
2203 
2254 
Cr 
4- 
1460 
Mn 
3- 
1670 
Fe 
2- 
1761 
0 s  
2- 
1787 
c o  
1- 
1883 
Ni 
0 
2058 
~ -~ 
.For CO(g), v(C0) = 2143 cm-l; for [CO]+(g), v(C0) = 2214 cm-l 

12 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 1.14 n-Acids 
isoelectronic with CO 
Figure 1.15 Bonding of 
methylene to a transition metal; 
implications for electrophilic (E’) 
and nucleophilic (Nu-) attack 
making the transfer of electron density to the 2n orbitals of CO more 
effective and resulting in a decrease in the CO bond strength accompa- 
nied by an increase in the strength of the metalkarbon bond. Conversely, 
metal centres with low n-basicity (low-energy tZg orbitals, positive 
charge, other strong and therefore competitive n-acidic co-ligands) will 
have 
The value of vco may therefore be used as an 
indicator of the lability of CO coordination (and susceptibility towards 
nucleophilic attack): the higher the vco frequency, the more labile the 
carbonyl ligand. The frontier orbitals of CO are analogous to those of 
a range of other isoelectronic ligands (e.g. cyanide, nitrosyls), for which 
the same bonding model can be applied, although the relative impor- 
tance of o-donation and n-acceptance (and hence the net acceptor ability) 
may vary, depending on the actual energy of the orbitals involved (Figure 
1.14). 
1.3.2 Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding: Methylene 
Complexes involving a formal metalkarbon double bond are referred 
to as either 
or 
complexes. For simplicity we shall 
consider the orbitals of singlet methylene, which consist of a filled sp2 
orbital (‘lone pair’) and an empty and highly electrophilic p- orbital 
(Figure 1.15). 
Combining these with suitable valence orbitals of a transiton metal, 
we form a o-bond between the sp2 orbital on carbon and one sp3d2 hybrid 
of o-symmetry (or d-?) on the metal centre (the classical 2VE dative o- 
bond). We are now left with the vacant p- orbital, which has correct sym- 
metry to interact with one metal tZCq 
orbital (in contrast to CO, which 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
13 
interacts with two). This has the effect of forming a M-C n-bond, result- 
ing in retrodonation to the carbene carbon. In general, carbenes are 
weaker net n-acids than CO since there is only one acceptor orbital, 
although this is often of lower energy than the 2n of CO. Many carbene 
complexes involve heteroatom carbene substituents also capable of n- 
donation into the empty p- orbital, and this occurs at the expense (length- 
ening) of the M-C n-bond (Figure 1.16). 
This general description can be applied to other C, ligands capable of 
Figure 1-16 Carbene 
heteroatom substituents 
forming multiple bonds to transition metals, e.g. carbynes (alkylidynes), 
LnM-CR, and vinylidenes, LnM=C=CR2 (Chapter 5). Furthermore, a 
number of one-electron o-organyl ligands, e.g. acyl, vinyl (alkenyl) and 
even aryl, have suitably vacant orbitals for such retrodative processes 
(Figure 1.17). It is noteworthy that the presence of a metalkarbon 
n-bond introduces an electronic barrier to rotation of the carbene (or 
other sp2-hybridized C ,  ligand) about the metal-carbon axis (in addition 
to steric factors). Rotation would require that the n-component is lost 
at some point during rotation (Table 1.3) 
This general picture of a C, ligand multiply bound to a metal centre 
allows us to predict some aspects of the reactivity of such ligands towards 
The LUMO of the complex corresponds 
to the antibonding combination of p- and a metal t2g orbital. This is 
primarily localized on the carbene carbon and it is therefore this centre 
that is generally attacked by nucleophiles (Chapter 5). This assumes 
that the metal centre is coordinatively saturated (1 WE); otherwise, the 
Figure 1-17 C, ligands with a 
7c-component 
and 

14 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
metal centre itself presents a potential site for attack by nucleophiles. 
Similarly, it is the carbon atom of coordinated CO that is attacked by 
nucleophiles (Chapter 3), a process which is favoured by metal centres 
of low 7c-basicity (low-energy t 
orbitals arising from positive charge 
and/or oxidation state or n-acidic co-ligands). The site of attack by 
electrophiles is likely to be the metal centre since the HOMO has the 
greatest contribution from the metal t,g orbital(s). In the case of carbonyl 
complexes, this is almost exclusively the case. The only departures from 
this involve the use of very hard [in the 
(HSAB) sense] and sterically congested electrophiles, both of which will 
favour attack at the (hard) oxygen atom of the CO ligand (Chapter 3). 
It is one of the exciting aspects of organotransition metal chemistry that 
we can ‘tune’ in a controlled manner the n-basicity of the metal centre 
(charge, oxidation state, nature of co-ligands), and thereby control the 
efficacy of attack at unsaturated ligands by nucleophiles or electrophiles. 
?g 
1.3.3 C,-C, Ligands: Ethene 
The description of the bonding of ethene to transition metals is known 
as the 
model. This builds on the previous 
descriptions for CO and CH, with the exception that we must now 
consider the frontier orbitals of the ligand to be molecular orbitals 
delocalized over the two (or more) donor atoms. The basic features are 
presented for ethene; however, the bonding scheme applies in principle 
to the 
of any multiple bond to a transition metal. 
Transition metals bind to the face of an alkene. Therefore the orbitals 
of interest are the filled In: (bonding) orbital and the empty 27c (anti- 
bonding) orbital of the C=C double bond (Figure 1.18). The actual ener- 
gies of these orbitals will depend on the nature of the alkene substituents, 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
15 
a point we will return to in Chapter 6. The n-bonding orbital (ln) has 
o symmetry with respect to the metal-ligand vector and provides the 
electron pair for the classical dative bond. This leaves the vacant 2n (C=C 
antibonding) orbital available and correctly positioned for interaction 
with one filled t2g orbital. Once again we see that o-donation is accom- 
panied by n-retrodonation in a synergic manner. In contrast to CO, the 
o interaction may be sufficient to bind an alkene to a metal centre in 
the absence of retrodonation. 
Figure 1.18 Bonding of ethene 
to a transition metal centre; impli- 
cations for electrophilic (E+) and 
nucleophilic (Nu-) attack 
The relative importance of the o-donation and n-acceptance process- 
es will be determined by the electronic nature of the metal centre and 
alkene substituents. This affects the reactivity of the coordinated alkene, 
which may be quite different from that of the free alkene. Thus, co- 
ordination of alkenes to n-basic metal centres (effective retrodonation) 
activates them towards electrophilic attack, while coordination to poorly 
n-basic metal centres activates the alkene towards nucleophilic attack. 
As in the case of CO coordination, n;-retrodonation from the metal centre 
occurs into an antibonding orbital, and the effect of this is to weaken 
the C=C double bond. This is illustrated by structural data for the alkene 
complexes shown in Table 1.4. The C-C bond length in 
K[Pt"Cl,(q-H,C=CH,)], is shorter than that in the zerovalent (more elec- 
tron rich or n-basic) platinum complex PtO(q-H,C=CH,)(PPh,),. 
Similarly, strongly electron-withdrawing alkene substituents lower the 
energy of the alkene 2n orbital, favouring retrodonation, as illustrated 
in the complexes Fe(q-X,C=CX,)(CO), (X = H, F) for which the 
F,C=CF, ligand is more strongly bound than is H,C=CH,, at the expense 

16 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
of the C=C multiple bonding in the former. As in the case of carbenes 
(alkylidenes) above, the presence of a n-component in the bonding 
introduces a barrier to rotation since the n;-bond must normally be 
broken at some point during rotation (Table 1.4). This is reflected in the 
measured for the rhodium complex Rh(q-CH,=CH,)- 
(q-CF,=CF,)Cp using variable-temperature NMR spectroscopy. The 
weakening of the C=C bond which results from retrodonation may also 
be inferred from IR spectroscopy, since coordination of the metal to the 
alkene face lowers the symmetry of the alkene, allowing the otherwise 
IR-inactive vcXc vibration to be observed. 
We have discussed alkene coordination from a molecular orbital point 
of view. However, many of the conclusions also follow from a valence 
bond description comprising the two canonical forms shown in Figure 
1.19. The nature of the metal and alkene substituents will dictate the 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
17 
relative contributions of the dative (1.19b) and metallacyclopropane 
(1.19~) canonical forms. Both molecular orbital and valence bond 
treatments require a pyramidalization of the trigonal carbon centres, 
equivalent to the hybridization at carbon assuming more sp3 character. 
The bending back of alkene substituents therefore also provides an 
indication of the strength of the alkene coordination. 
The Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson 
model is equally appropriate for 
describing the coordination of bidentate non-conjugated dienes, which 
may simply be viewed as two separate metal-alkene interactions, assisted 
kinetically by the 
The situation with conjugated dienes 
(trienes, etc.) is essentially similar with the exception that the delocalized 
nature of the polyene orbitals may introduce subtleties obscured by a 
simple valence bond description. Thus, for example, it is generally found 
that conjugated dienes bind more effectively than non-conjugated dienes. 
Indeed, there are examples of transition metal complexes that are 
capable of isomerizing non-conjugated dienes to their conjugated isomers 
(Chapter 6). 
I .4 
Thermodynamics of the Metal-Carbon Bond 
The apparent instability of transition metal o-organyls is now recognized 
to be almost invariably of kinetic origin. Indeed, the various routes by 
which these compounds may decompose under mild conditions actually 
contribute to both their intrigue and their involvement in technological- 
ly useful stoichiometric or catalytic applications. The delicate nature of 
some transition metal alkyls (and aryls) arises from the availability 
of low-energy decomposition routes that are generally less favourable for 
o-organyls of the p-block elements (Chapter 4). Many of these decom- 
position routes may be excluded by incorporation of suitable co-ligands, 
which either sterically block metal coordination sites and/or confer 
There is a general lack of directly comparable thermochemical data 
for main group and transition metal alkyls and aryls because of the very 
nature of the two classes of compounds. 
alkyls (i.e. all 
ligands identical) of the p-block with the exception of Group 13 show 
little if any Lewis acidity, and hence tend not to coordinate further 
ligands. The majority of isolable transition metal alkyls, on the other 
hand, are typically stabilized by the incorporation of kinetically or 
thermodynamically stabilizing co-ligands, thereby clouding direct 
thermochemical comparisons. The most common comparisons of ther- 
modynamic data have involved Group 4 alkyls, which is perhaps unfor- 
tunate in that these typically have do metal centres. Nevertheless, these 
data do confirm that transition metal-carbon o-bonds can be quite 
strong. 
on the metal centre. 
Figure 1 .I 
9 Canonical 
(resonance) forms for ethene 
coordination 

18 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
(BDEs; see Box 1.1) for transition metal 
o-organyls appear at present to fall within the quite wide range of 70-330 
kJ mol-I, i.e. a range comparable to those of main group alkyls. It should 
be noted, however, that transition metals also have the possibility of 
including a n-component when the carbon is sp’ (alkylidenes, alkenyls, 
acyls) or sp hybridized (alkylidynes, vinylidenes, alkynyls), thereby 
leading to larger BDEs. 
may 
enhance both o-donation and nacceptance for the 4d and especially the 
5d transition elements. Loosely speaking, the high nuclear charge asso- 
ciated with heavier elements requires that the associated electrons have 
increasingly higher angular momentum to avoid crashing into the 
nucleus. This requires electronic velocities that begin to approach 
the speed of light, and hence the attendant increase in electronic mass 
leads to a decrease in the size of the corresponding Bohr radius. This is 
In recent times it has been established that 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
19 
Table 1.5 M-C bond dissociation enthalpies (kJ mol-l)a 
CMe, 
SiMe, 
GeMe, 
SnMe, 
PbMe, 
Ti(CH2But), 
Zr(CH,But), 
Hf(CH2But), 
Zr(CH,Ph), 
Zr(CH,SiMe,), 
Cp*HfMe, 
CpPtMe, 
Vitamin B,,-adenosyl 
(RC,H,N)(dmg),CoCHMePh 
(R,P)(dmg),CoCHMePh 
(R,P)(dmg),CoCH,Ph 
(R,P)(oep)CoCH,Ph 
Vitamin B,,-R 
(CO),MnR 
(R = Pr', CHMeEt, CH,But, CH,Ph) 
R =  H 
Me 
Ph 
CH,Ph 
CH,F 
CHF, 
C(0)Me 
C(0)Ph 
CF3 
(CO),ReMe 
Cp*(PMe,)H I rR 
R = 
Ph 
cyclo-C,H, 
358 
31 1 
249 
21 7 
152 
198 
249 
266 
263 
31 0 
294 
163 
112-131 
89-96 
73-1 00 
96-1 28 
100-1 24 
79-1 04 
245 
187 
207 
129 
139 
144 
182 
185 
127 
220 
32 1 
21 5 
244 
R =  
Cp,TiR, 
Cp*,TiR, 
Cp*,ZrR, 
Cp*,HfR, 
C P p ,  
CP,MOR, 
CP,WR, 
Cp*ThR, 
Cp*UR, 
TaMe, 
WMe, 
R =  
cis-(Et,P),PtR, 
cis-(Et,P),CIPtR 
t/-XE-(Et,P),PtPh, 
t/-anS-(Et,P),CIPtEt 
Cp(CO),MoR 
R =  
M =  
(CO),W=C(OMe)Ph 
Cp*(PMe,)lrR, 
R =  
Cp*(PMe,)Brlr-CH=CH, 
Ph 
332 
280 
300 
166 
22 1 
Me 
269 
251 
Me 
Et 
Me 
298 
281 
285 
284 
306 
339 
300 
261 
160 
0-tolyl 
298 
300 
159 
206 
203 
185 
CyClO-C3H,147 
CH,Ph 
154 
Cr 
258 
Mo 
273 
W 
339 
359 
H 
31 0 
Me 
243 
326 
aoep = octaethylporphyrin, dmg = dimethylglyoximate. For further reading, see J. A. M. Simoes and J. L. Beachamp, 
Chern. Rev., 1990, 90, 629. 
particularly true for electrons in s-orbitals, which have finite nuclear 
penetration (p- and d-orbitals have nodal planes passing through the 
nucleus). This results in a stabilization of the s-orbitals, which in turn 
more effectively shield the nuclear charge for p- and d-orbitals; these are 
accordingly destabilized. In our model of synergic bonding above, the 
ramifications are that the metal centre becomes a stronger 0-acceptor 

20 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
(lowering of the energy of the sp'd' acceptor orbital which has some 
s character) and a stronger n-retrodonor [raising of the occupied 
nretrodonor orbital( s)]. Thus retrodonation increases in efficiency, most 
significantly for the 5d metals 
1.5 
Accessing the Organometallic Literature 
The field of organotransition metal chemistry has grown enormously in 
the last four decades. This reflects the natural transition from laborato- 
ry curiosities of primarily aesthetic and fundamental interest, to the 
routine application of organometallic reagents (stoichiometric or 
catalytic) in fine and bulk chemical synthesis, and their use as precur- 
sors for both trivial and sophisticated materials with wide-reaching 
technological applications. Just as the field has expanded and diversified, 
so have the media in which the science is published. The primary 
literature includes general chemical journals and also specialist journals 
dealing with organometallic chemistry [Organometullics, J. Organornet. 
Chew.]. Increasingly, organometallic chemistry is to be found in the jour- 
nals of other disciplines, including those dealing with organic synthesis, 
polymers and the chemistry of materials. Fortunately, the secondary lit- 
erature (reviews, monographs) regularly collates organometallic chem- 
istry from these disparate sources. The most useful access points in this 
respect are: 
Dictionury of Orgunometallic Compounds (Chapman and Hall). 
Although not comprehensive, this regularly supplemented series now 
available in electronic form arranges compounds firstly according to 
central metal and secondly according to molecular formula, providing 
the quickest access to the literature of a single known compound. 
Comprehensive Organometallic Chemistry (Pergamon Press). The first 
edition covers the literature up to 1982. The second edition is supple- 
mental and covers the literature from 1982 to 1994. The majority of mate- 
rial is arranged in chapters, firstly according to element and secondly 
according to the nature of the ligand (generally the hapticity). In 
addition to the element-based volumes, a number of special topics are 
included which span the transition series, e.g. transition metals in organ- 
ic synthesis. The final volumes include useful cumulative indexes accord- 
ing to chemical formula, subject and crystallographic studies (also in 
searchable databases, e. g. www.ccdc.cam .ac.uk). 
(Academic Press). Reviews 
specific aspects of organometallic chemistry and is published approxi- 
mately annually [Cumulative index Volume 451. 
Convenient and efficient electronic retrieval of information from 
chemical databases via the world wide web is rapidly evolving. Various 
services are available for retrieving information from the organometallic 
Advances in Organornetullic Chemistry 

Introduction, Scope and Bonding 
21 
literature according to title, keyword, compound, author or journal. The 
entire literature is covered by Chemical Abstracts (info.cas.org); the 
literature from 1981 is also accessible via the Web of Science (currently 
available free in all British Universities: wos@mimas.ac.uk). 
Finally, in addition to the many monographs on various aspects of 
organotransition metal chemistry, there are a number of excellent alter- 
native textbooks, indicated in the further reading section below. 

Co-ligands in Organotransition 
Metal Chemistry 
2.1 
Llnnocent9 
Co-ligands 
Throughout the text, when the co-ligands are of only secondary inter- 
est, or when the generality of a reaction is to be emphasized, the abbre- 
viation LnM will be used to indicate a general metal ‘M’ with a set of 
‘n’ ligands. Ligands which adopt a purely spectator role are often referred 
to as ‘innocent’. 
2.1 .l Phosphines: Electronic, Steric and Chirality Control 
Aliphatic (i.e. sp3 N) amines have a rich coordination chemistry dating 
back to the seminal studies of Alfred Werner, which raised the curtain 
on coordination chemistry. 
They are strong 
but have no 
molec- 
ular orbitals available of the correct 
for 
combi- 
22 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
23 
nation with occupied t2g type metal orbitals (although aromatic imines, 
e.g. 2,2'-bipyridyl, may do so). 
PR,, their heavier analogues 
(and, to a lesser extent, arsines and stibines) present a quite different sit- 
uation. These molecules have empty orbitals of .n-symmetry with respect 
to the metal-ligand bond. In principle, vacant pure phosphorus d- 
orbitals have suitable symmetry for constructive overlap with occupied 
metal t2g orbitals (Figure 2. la). Alternatively, the o-bonds, which bind 
the substituents to phosphorus, have vacant 
(o*) partners 
which also have local n-symmetry with respect to the M-P vector 
(Figures 1 . 2 ~  
and 2.1b). As the 
of the phosphorus sub- 
stituents increases (alkyl < aryl < alkoxide < halide), the energy of the 
phosphorus d-orbitals and the o* orbitals will decrease, thereby increas- 
ing the facility of any 
@-accept or) interaction from the metal. 
Thus the first important feature of phosphines emerges: the o-dativeh- 
retrodative capacity of phosphine ligands may be fine-tuned to allow 
control over the 
of the metal centre. A quantitative 
indication may be derived from the complexes Ni(CO),(PR,). This range 
of (C3" symmetric) complexes gives rise to a single intense IR absorption 
(a, vco) in the region 2050-2110 cm-', dependent upon the substituents 
'R' (Table 2.1). At one extreme is the highly basic and bulky phosphine 
PBu',, for which retrodonation is negligible. The net effect of the vari- 
ous substituents 'R' is approximately additive, leading to the empirical 
expression given in Table 2.2 based on the substituent contributions Xi. 
An 
Figure 2.2). This angle is derived by considering the cone which would 
be defined by the 
generated by a phosphine bound 
Figure 2.1 Retrodonation to 
phosphines 
The second variable feature of phosphines is the 
approximate measure of this is given by the 
(9, 
Table 2.1 Steric (0) and electronic (v) properties for phosphines 
PR3 
W" 
v/cm-' 
PR3 
W" 
v/cm-l 
182 
170 
194 
160 
132 
132 
157 
118 
122 
165 
136 
145 
2056 
2056 
2058 
2059 
2060 
2062 
2062 
2064 
2065 
2066 
2067 
2069 
P(OMe)Ph, 
132 
PHPh, 
128 
P (0 P rl), 
130 
P ( W ,  
109 
PH,Ph 
101 
P(0 M e) 3 
107 
PH3 
87 
P(C,F,), 
184 
PCI, 
124 
PF3 
104 
P(OPh), 
128 
2072 
2073 
2076 
2076 
2077 
2080 
2083 
2085 
2090 
2097 
2111 
Figure 2.2 Steric properties of 
phosphines (cone angle) 

24 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Table 2.2 Phosphine substituent contributions for Ni(CO),(PR,): 
vc0 = 2056.1 + C)(, 
R 
XI 
R 
Y 
R 
Y 
But 
0.0 
CY 
0.1 
Pr' 
1 .o 
Bu 
1.4 
Et 
1.8 
NMe, 
1.9 
Me 
2.6 
Ph 
4.3 
OPr' 
6.3 
OEt 
6.8 
OMe 
7.7 
H 
8.3 
OPh 
9.7 
C,F, 
11.2 
CI 
14.8 
F 
18.2 
to nickel which freely rotates about the Ni-P bond (assuming rNi-P = 
0.228 nm). Table 2.1 collates the Tollman cone angle for a range of 
phosphines, revealing the impressive control over steric and electronic 
properties offered. The choice of nickel(0) is not entirely arbitrary. The 
hydrocyanation of butadiene is catalysed by nickel phosphine complex- 
es, providing adiponitrile [N-C( CHJ4C=N], which is a key intermediate 
in the preparation of 6,6-Nylon (Chapter 6). An understanding of the 
electronic and steric properties of the nickel catalysts guided the process 
and catalyst optimization. 
Unlike amines, which readily invert their configuration at nitrogen, 
phosphines have substantially larger barriers to inversion (NH,, 25 kJ 
mol-'; PH,, 155 kJ mol-I). Resolved chiral phosphines therefore retain 
their configuration at phosphorus and this chirality may influence the 
enantioselectivity of reactions involving their complexes. 
are often capable of mediating 
transfor- 
mations of substrates, most usefully in a catalytic manner (Chapter 6). In 
recent times, effort has focused more on the use of phosphines bearing 
chiral substituents. Some examples of technologically useful chiral phos- 
phines are shown in Figure 2.3 and are revisited in Chapter 6. 
Finally, just as polydentate amines find wide application in biological 
Figure 2.3 Selected chiral 
and synthetic coordination chemistry, so too do bi- and to a lesser extent 
phosphines 
tridentate phosphines. In addition to simple 
through 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
25 
the 
the ring size of chelates formed between transition 
metals and bidentate phosphines is becoming recognized as a key factor 
in catalyst design. The 
of bidentate phosphines (a, 
Figure 2.4) 
can have an impact on the hybridization at the metal centre and the 
resulting energies of valence orbitals. Furthermore, steric factors associ- 
ated with increased chelate size may contribute pressures on ligands 
undergoing conversions, e.g. reductive elimination and migratory 
angle (a) 
Figure 2.4 Chelate bite 
insertion (see Chapter 3). Bis(phosphino)methanes, H,C(PR,),, present 
a special case where coordination across a metal-metal bond can favour 
the formation of binuclear complexes, sometimes in preference to 
mononuclear structures which require the formation of more strained 
four-membered metallacycles (Figure 2.5). 
Phosphines find wide application as co-ligands in industrial catalysis. 
In addition to their use in conventional organic solvents, variants exist 
to make such complexes amenable to more exotic (and environmentally 
friendly) chemical environments, e.g. aqueous-organic two-phase sys- 
tems (Figure 2.6a), fluorophasic solvents (Figure. 2.6b) or immobilized 
on polymer supports (Figure 2.6~). Each of these variants attempts to 
overcome the problem of ultimate catalyst separation (and re-use) from 
products, the advantages being both economic and environmental. 
Arsines (AsR,) and stibines (SbR,) are generally found to be more 
labile (sometimes an advantage) than phosphines, in part due to their 
reduced o-donor properties. Furthermore, arsenic and antimony lack 
conveniently measurable spin-active nuclei for NMR studies, in contrast 
to phosphines (31P: I = %, 100% abundance), for which an enormous 
amount of informative data is available. Because of the direct bond 
between phosphorus and the metal centre, information is available about 
the electronic nature and stereochemistry of the metal centre, in addi- 
tion to information about dynamic processes. This is further enhanced 
in the case of complexes involving metals with NMR-active nuclei, e.g. 
Figure 2.5 
Bis(phosphino)methanes 
Figure 2.6 (a) Hydrophilic, 
Ibl fluoroPhasic and 
>
,
 
W, Rh, V, Pt, Hg and Ag, where ]J(M-,'P) couplings may be observed. 
(c) polymer-supported phosphines 

26 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
2.1.2 Aryloxides, Siloxides and Calixarenes 
In contrast to phosphines which are ‘soft’ by nature, alkoxides and ary- 
loxides are particularly ‘hard’ in the hard and soft acid and base 
sense. In addition, they carry two ‘lone pairs’ of electrons which may (if 
required) become involved in .n-donation to an electron-deficient metal 
centre, thereby relieving coordinative unsaturation. If both pairs of elec- 
trons can be ‘accepted’ by the metal, then the alkoxide could be consid- 
ered to serve as a net 5VE donor. Accordingly, some parallels have 
emerged between, for example, the organometallic chemistry of the 
‘TiCp,’ (Chapter 7) and ‘Ti(OAr),’ (Ar = aryl) fragments (Figure 2.7). 
This analogy is most useful when the alkoxide (OR) or aryloxide (OAr) 
has bulky substituents which disfavour dimerization, e.g. OCH(CF,), 
and OC,H,Ph,-2,6 
via alkoxide bridge formation. Similar arguments 
hold for amides (LnM-NR,), which can in principle act as 3VE donors 
when suitably vacant metal orbitals are present. Once again, large 
substituents may be employed to prevent dimerization, e.g. in the three- 
coordinate complexes M(N(SiMe,),}, (M = Y, Ti, Cr, Mn, Fe, Co). 
Imides (LnM=NR) and oxides (LnM=O) can provide between 2VE and 
4VE to the valence count and hence parallels between the chemistries of 
the ‘TiCp,’, ‘VCp( =NR)’ ‘VCp( =O)’and ‘Cr( =NR)2’ fragments can be 
considered (Figure 2.7). 
Figure 2.7 Parallels in the 
The study of organometallic alkoxides has a further impetus: many 
chemistry of cyclopentadienyl, 
industrial heterogeneous transition metal catalysts result from the 
adsorption of metal salts onto the surface of various of inorganic oxides 
aryloxide, amido and imido 
ligands 
(alumina, silica, titania, etc.). In general, heterogeneous catalysts offer 
the practical advantages of product separation, long catalyst lifetime and 
re-use. The downside is that the truly active species in such systems 
(and there may be more than one, leading to a loss of selectivity) are 
very difficult to observe directly using conventional spectroscopic tech- 
niques. Such a catalyst is exemplified by the Phillips alkene polymeriza- 
tion catalyst obtained from the absorption and reduction of CrO, onto 
silica gel. The coordination number and geometry of the active species 
are by no means certain and even the oxidation state of the active chromi- 
um centre attracts debate (Cr”’ or Cr”?). It is possible, however, to gain 
insight into possible pathways by emulating the active site with soluble 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
27 
model complexes (cJ: Figure 1.2), which are more amenable to spectro- 
scopic and kinetic study. Two ligands which offer promise in modelling 
the behaviour of a metal centre bound to an oxide surface are provided 
by calixarenes (Figure 2.8a) and silsesquioxanes (Figure 2.8b). Both 
of these have an arrangement of four or three oxygen donor sites, 
respectively, ideally disposed to coordinate metal centres and provide 
soluble organometallics which may be studied in more detail than the 
heterogeneous systems. 
Figure 2.8 Soluble model 
compounds for heterogeneous 
oxide-bound organometallics 
2.1.3 Porphyrins, Corrins and Related Macrocycles 
In nature, 
has evolved as a highly effective organometal- 
lic metalloenzyme. It is therefore not surprising that synthetic chemists 
have attempted to understand and harness the properties of such 
organometallic compounds. The vitamin B,, nucleus involves a 
corrin ring; in which the circumannular 
is inter- 
rupted (Figure 1.3b). Complex derivatives of the more symmetric dian- 
ionic and aromatic (4n + 2 = 20) 
are found in 
many non-organometallic metalloproteins (haemoglobin) and enzymes 
(cytochrome P-450). Because of the comparative ease of preparation and 
symmetry, simpler models of these complex biological macrocycles, e. g. 
(H,TPP, Figure 2.9a), have been studied in much 
more detail than the corrins. An even simpler macrocycle (H,tmtaa, 
Figure 2.9b) is obtained by the (nickel-templated) condensation of pen- 
tane-2,4-dione (Hacac) and o-phenylenediamine. The tmtaa ligand is in 

28 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
some ways reminiscent of a porphyrin with three distinctions. The dian- 
ion ligand is 
(161~)~ 
the pocket for metal coordination is 
smaller and the ring more flexible. These factors tend to favour a cis 
geometry for octahedral complexes ML,(tmtaa), although some smaller 
metal ions, e.g. low-spin d6 and d8 centres, can fit into the plane of the 
macrocycle. Finally, 
(Pc) complexes (Figure 2.9~) are 
known for most metals, although it is their chemical inertness rather than 
reactivity that underpins the majority of their technological applications, 
and accounts for their somewhat limited use in organometallic chemistry. 
Figure 2.9 Tetra-aza 
macrocycles: (a) H,TPP, 
(b) HJmtaa and (c) H,Pc 
2.1.4 qn-C,Hn Carbocyclic Polyenes and Related 
Ligands 
The ligand-based chemistry and metal-ligand bonding of this class of 
ligand will be detailed in Chapter 7, However, by far the majority of 
compounds involving such ligands employ them as 
rat her than 
direct participants. A cyclic unsaturated ligand bound in an n-hupto 
manner, qn-C,R,, provides nVE to the electron count (Table 1.1). The 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
29 
coordination involves adjacent sites and therefore the ligands bind in a 
manner, ensuring that the remaining ligands have mutually 
cis arrangements. 
The most widely employed ligands in this class are q6-arenes and q5- 
cyclopentadienyls, providing 6VE and 5VE respectively to the EAN 
count. Figure 2.10 shows some of the numerous ways in which the arene 
or cyclopentadienyl ligands might be functionalized to introduce control 
over the electronic, steric and chiral properties of the metal complex. 
Many of these functionalizations may be carried out even after the lig- 
and has been coordinated (Chapter 7). Note that introducing two dif- 
ferent substituents into the cyclopentadienyl (any relative positions) or 
arene ligand (1,2- or 1,3-positions) renders the complex chiral (no ele- 
ments of symmetry) because of the metal centre coordinating to one or 
other of the 
faces of the planar ring. 
2. I 
.5 Poly(pyrazoly1)borates 
The reactions of tetrahydridoborate [BHJ salts with variously substi- 
tuted pyrazoles provide access to a wide range of poly(pyrazoly1)borate 
chelates (Figure 2.11). The most widely studied are the 
which typically coordinate to threefacial sites of a complex, pro- 
viding a total of 5VE to the electron count (if the ligand is considered 
neutral). An analogy with the coordination properties of the cyclopen- 
tadienyl ligand therefore emerges, and many analogous pairs of com- 
plexes have been prepared. One of the most useful features of this class 
of ligand arises from the orientation of substituetnts in the 5-position 
which are directed towards the metal coordination sphere. This affords 
control over the steric profile of the metal centre. Chiral examples have 
also been prepared. The bis(pyrazoly1)borates have been less studied; 
however, these offer the added feature of possible 
coordination 
(see Figure 2.25) of a B-H bond to a vacant metal coordination site. 
Figure 2.10 Functionalization of 
q”-C,H, 
facial ligands 

30 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 2.11 Synthesis and 
2.1 .6 Carbaboranes 
coordination of 
poly(pyrazoly1)borates 
The fields of main group cluster chemistry and organotransition metal 
chemistry converge with complexes of the carbaborane ligands 
[RCB,,H,,I3- (carbollide) and [R2C2B,H,I2- (dicarbollide). Although 
these complexes themselves feature direct metal-carbon bonds, it is their 
analogy with cyclopentadienyl ligands that provides the key focus for 
their study in an organometallic context. The 
of each of 
these anions extend from the open five-membered face and have the same 
symmetry and occupancy as those of the Cp anion (Figure 2.12). 
Coordination of a metal centre to this face completes the beautiful 
motif. The introduction of a variety of functional groups at car- 
bon is fairly straightforward, further increasing the possible coordination 
properties. 
Figure 2.1 2 Carbaboranes: 
cyclopentadienyl mimics 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
31 
2.2 
Hydride Complexes 
The field of metal hydride chemistry has developed contemporaneously 
with that of organometallic chemistry. The first example, cis-FeH,(CO),, 
arose in the laboratory of Walter Hieber (Munich, 193 l), from the study 
of reactions of 
(Chapter 3) with bases, including hydrox- 
ide (Figure 2.13). 
Figure 2.13 Synthesis of iron 
carbonyl hydride complexes 
2.2.1 Characterization of Metal Hydrides 
Many industrial organometallic catalytic processes involve organometal- 
lic hydride complexes as intermediates (Chapter 6). An understanding of 
the chemistry of these ligands is of fundamental as well as economic 
importance to organometallic chemists. For some time following their 
initial discovery there was debate as to their actual nature: were they true 
conventional ligands or, as initially suggested, buried protons within the 
valence shell of the metal centre? This debate was finally put to rest with 
the application of 
and 
crystallographic tech- 
niques to the characterization of the complexes PtHBr(PEt,), and 
MnH(CO),, respectively. The scattering of X-rays by crystals is prima- 
rily by electrons. Hydrogen (one associated electron) is therefore the most 
difficult atom to locate accurately, especially if it is bound directly to a 
heavy metal. In the case of PtHBr(PEt,), the hydride ligand was not 
actually ‘located’; instead, a 
geometry was observed suggest- 
ing that a 
was occupied by the inconspicuous hydride 
ligand. Factors other than electron density contribute to neutron scat- 
tering, thereby allowing positions of hydrogen atoms to be identified, 
e.g. in MnH(CO), (Figure 2.14), by this less readily and expensive 
technique. 
The salient structural features of this molecule include (i) approximate 
exerted by the hydride ligand 
Figure 2.14 Molecular 
structures of metal hydrides 
(ii) a strong 

32 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
[the ability of a ligand to weaken (lengthen) the bond of the ligand to 
which it is trans coordinated]; (iii) bending of the cis ligands towards the 
smaller hydride ligand. Similar features are observed for the five-coor- 
dinate trigonal bipyramidal complex CoH( CO),, wherein the hydride 
adopts an axial coordination site. The 
of these molecules 
([Mn(CO)J and [Co(CO),]-) have trigonal bipyramidal and tetrahedral 
geometries, respectively, i. e. protonation results in a change in geometry 
and increase in coordination number. 
in the 
region 1800-2 100 cm-' . However, the 
of the metal-hydrogen 
bond is highly variable, as are the intensities of resulting IR absorptions, 
e.g. IrH,(PMe,), (intense) and CoH {P(OPh),}, (very weak), although the 
assignments may be verified by deuterium replacement. Bridging 
hydrides absorb to lower frequency (1000-1 550 cm-'). 
is by far the most reliable and convenient spec- 
troscopic technique. The majority of metal hydrides resonate to high field 
of SiMe,, between 6 -3 and -25 ppm. Hydrides of the more electropos- 
itive metals (Groups 46), however, have resonances to lower field (Table 
2.3). Bridging hydrides typically resonate to even higher field, whilst 
(see later) show somewhat unpredictable behaviour, 
e.g. [Ru,(p,-H)(CO),,]- (6 + 16.4). In general, however, the 
of metal hydride resonances is complex and not easily pre- 
dictable. The utility of NMR spectroscopy is further enhanced when 
either the metal itself has a spin-active nucleus or when co-ligands, espe- 
cially phosphines, for example, have 'NMR friendly' nuclei. Two exam- 
ples are illustrated in Figure 2.15, where it is shown that stereochemical 
information follows from the magnitude of couplings between the pro- 
ton and the phosphorus nuclei. 
Terminal metal hydrides typically give rise to 
Figure 2.15 IJ(PH) and ,J(PH) 
couplings 
Table 2.3 6('H) for metal hydrides 
7.46 
12.6, 13.5 
-1.65, -3.02 
-8.76 
-1 2.28 
-6.08, -6.44 
-1 4.6 
-7.8 
-1 2.8 
-2.1 
-7.2 
-7.5 
-5.66 
-1 1 .I 
-7.62 
-8.84 
aCp = q-C5H5; Cp* = q-C,Me, 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
33 
Paramagnetic metal hydrides are comparatively rare; however, when 
they arise, 
may be useful, e.g. the anionic 
complex [TiH,Cp,]- gives rise to a resonance (dl, g = 1.992) showing 
coupling to the two hydride ligand nuclei (a = 7-8 G). The majority of 
metal hydrides (and all examples met in this text) are, however, dia- 
magnetic (‘EPR silent’). 
is very useful for establish- 
ing the gross molecular composition, so long as it is used with caution 
owing to the often facile loss of hydrogen atoms or molecules from ions. 
In calling such complexes ‘metal hydrides’, an historical analogy with 
main group metal hydrides is implied. In terms of the chemical nature 
of the transition metalk‘hydride’ bond, however, a spectrum of behav- 
iour is observed from 
(&M-H6+). Figure 2.16 illustrates two reactions for the complex 
ZrH,Cp*,, which are reminiscent of the behaviour of Group 13 metal 
hydrides (PE: Zr = 1.3; A1 = 1.6), suggesting a hydridic bond polariza- 
tion. In contrast, Table 2.4 compiles pKa, values for selected later tran- 
sition metal (PE 1.9-2.3) hydrides, which clearly illustrate 
acidic 
behaviour (see also Figure 2.13). This series parallels to an extent the 
nucleophilicity of the conjugate bases obtained on deprotonation 
(Chapter 3). 
(&+M-H6) through to strongly 
2.2.2 Bridging Hydrides 
In this text we will be primarily concerned with the reactivity of 
ligands. There are, however, other types of metal hydride 
which deserve mention, not in the least because of their possible signif- 
icance in heterogeneous industrial processes. One of the most important 
classes of metal hydrides is the 
i.e. complexes with two or 
more hydride ligands. Until the discovery of 
(see 
below) these were considered to contain only discrete terminal metal 
hydride ligands. Many have now been reformulated as involving coor- 
dinated dihydrogen, e.g. RuH,(PPh,), 
is in fact RuH,(q-H,)(PPh,), 
(Figure 2.17). 
Just as bridging hydrides play a central role in the chemistry of Group 
13 hydrides, three centre-two electron (3c-2e) bonding is a recurrent fea- 
Table 2.4 pK,, 
for metal 
hydrides in acetonitrile 
(water) 
Complex 
PKa 1 
HCr(CO),Cp 
13.3 
HMo(CO),Cp 
13.9 
HW(CO),Cp 
16.1 
HMn(CO), 
15.1 (7.1) 
HRe(CO), 
21 .O 
H,Fe(CO), 
11.4 (4.0) 
H,Ru(CO), 
18.7 
H,Os(CO), 
20.8 
HCo(CO), 
8.4 (strong) 
HCo(CO),(PPh,) 15.4 (6.96) 
Figure 2.1 6 Borane-like reac- 
tivity of metal hydrides 
Figure 2.1 7 Polyhydride vs. 
ture of 
(and 
of the transition metals 
dihydrogen coordination 

34 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
(Figure 2.1 8), with the added dimension that the metal-metal bonds may 
be formally multiple, e.g. Os3(p-H),(CO),, (Os=Os), [Ir,(y-H),Cp*,]+ 
(Ir=Ir) and Re,(p-H),H,(PEt,Ph), 
(ReERe) or involve different metals. 
Figure 2.18 Bridging hydride 
complexes 
The energy involved in movement between terminal and bridging posi- 
tions may be modest, illustrated by the complexes Os,(p-H)H(CO), , 
(Figure 2.14b) and Re,@-H),H,(PEt,Ph), 
(Figure 2.18); each of these 
molecules have both terminal and bridging hydride ligands. This is fur- 
ther illustrated by the complex W2(p-H)2H6Cp*2, 
the high-field 'H NMR 
spectrum of which comprises a single resonance (8 -0.34) with 'satellites' 
due to coupling to two 183W nuclei [J(Is3W-'H) = 48 Hz], indicating that 
all eight protons see an averaged chemical environment (on the 'H NMR 
timescale). Hydrides may also triply bridge the face of a tri- or poly- 
metallic cluster. 
2.2.3 The Cluster-Surface Analogy 
It has been argued that the behaviour of ligands on the edges and faces 
of metal clusters (molecular compounds based on three or more con- 
nected metals) might model the behaviour of such ligands respectively 
on a step or surface of a bulk metal 
Figure 
2.19). 
Figure 2.19 The cluster- 
surface analogy 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
35 
Such entities are difficult to directly observe spectroscopically on a 
metal surface; however, molecular clusters (and their chemical transfor- 
mations) are usually amenable to spectroscopic studies, which can shed 
light on the more obscure realm of surface chemistry. In this way, doubly 
(p,) and triply (p,) bridging hydrides can serve as conceptual models for 
hydrogen 
on the surface of metals. Similar arguments apply to 
other ligands, e.g. carbonyls (Chapter 3), alkyls and acyls (Chapter 4), 
alkenes (Chapter 6) and carbenes (Chapter 5). Hydride ligands may also 
reside within the 
of molecular clusters, thereby providing a 
conceptual link with the nature of hydrogen adsorbed within a bulk 
metal. 
2.2.4 Dihydrogen Complexes 
There are many examples of complexes with more than one hydride lig- 
and. Until the mid-1980s these were all assumed to contain discrete 
hydride ligands. It was suspected that in situations where dihydrido com- 
plexes arose from the 
of dihydrogen, an intermediate 
coordination of the H-H bond must occur en route to cleavage, account- 
ing for the commonly observed cis stereochemistry. Thus, for example, 
IrCl(CO)(PPh,), reacts with I-CH, by a two-step oxida- 
tive addition process, resulting in trans addition of the methyl and iodide 
components (Figure 2.20). In contrast, the reaction with hydrogen leads 
to a cis-dihydride, IrH,Cl(CO)(PPh,),. 
Figure 2.20 Synthesis and 
oxidative addition reactions of 
Vaska’s complex 
In 1984, however, Kubas succeeded in isolating the first example ot a 
dihydrogen complex from the (reversible) reaction of W(CO),(PCy,), 
(16VE!) with hydrogen (Figure 2.21). This complex retains a bond 
between the two hydrogen atoms [rHpH = 0.084 nm (0.074 nm in H,); 
rWPH = 0.175 nm], i. e. oxidative addition has been arrested. In the interim, 

36 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 2.21 A complex of 
di hydrogen 
numerous examples of such complexes have since been identified, includ- 
ing both new complexes and reformulations of older ‘polyhydride’ com- 
plexes, some of which include both hydride and dihydrogen ligands 
(Figure 2.18). 
Various spectroscopic techniques have been developed and refined to 
identify such situations, amongst which ‘H NMR spectroscopy remains 
the most informative. By preparing complexes of HD rather than HZ, 
H-D coupling constants [‘J(IH-’H)] may be measured. In situations 
where there is direct bond between the H and D atoms, then the cou- 
pling will be larger (typically ca. 20-30 Hz) than for a dihydride (0-3 
Hz), e.g. 33 Hz for W(qz-HD)(CO),(PCy3)2 and 43 Hz for free HD. More 
conveniently, use can be made of the phenomenon that one proton mod- 
erates the rate at which a nearby proton relaxes in the NMR experiment 
(TI, spin relaxation time). This effect diminishes very quickly (r6) 
with 
internuclear separation ‘T’. 
(a routinely measured 
parameter with modern spectrometers) of TI < 150 ms are generally taken 
as suggestive of dihydrogen coordination. 
For the dihydrogen molecule the frontier orbitals are simply the occu- 
pied bonding l o  orbital and an empty antibonding 20* orbital. If these 
approach a metal side-on (perpendicular to the H-H bond axis, Figure 
2.22), a 
situation arises with donation (combination of lo + 
sp3d2) and retrodonation (tZ9 + 2o*). Both of these processes should be 
mutually supportive (synergic). However, as the efficiency of each of 
these increases, the depletion of the lo and population of the 20” orbitals 
will lead ultimately to rupture of the H-H bond, i.e. oxidative addition. 
Therefore, the situations where dihydrogen complexes arise and persist 
involve a balance between these processes ensuing sufficiently to bind the 
dihydrogen molecule as a ligand, but not to the extent that oxidative 
addition occurs. There are various ways of discouraging the ultimate 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
37 
oxidative addition (lowering the energy of the n-retrodative metal 
orbital), e.g. loading the metal coordination sphere with strong n-acid 
co-ligands or making the complex cationic. One or both of these features 
typify the majority of isolated dihydrogen complexes, with the proviso 
that, in the case of cationic complexes, these are protected from poten- 
tial bases; dihydrogen ligands can act as strong Brransted acids to gen- 
erate monohydride complexes (Figure 2.23). 
The basic molecular orbital scheme shown in Figure 2.22 for the coor- 
dination of a H-H o-bond to a transition metal is in principle applica- 
ble to the coordination of any H-element o-bond. In particular, there 
are many examples of 3c-2e bonding involving coordination of C-H 0- I 
bonds (Figure 2.24) and other heteroatoms, e.g. B-H, Si-H, Ge-H, N-H 
bonds (Figure 2.25). The term 
has been used to denote such 
Figure 2.23 Bransted acidity 
of dihydrogen ligands; 
interactions, in particular for situations involving C-H-M 
interactions, 
and these will be met subsequently. 
L,Re = Re(CO),(PCy,) 
2.2.5 Synthesis and Reactivity of Hydride Complexes 
Figure 2.24 C-H-M agostic 
interactions 
The majority of synthetic approaches involve sources of H,, H+ or H-. 
However, of particular interest will be the various ways in which 
organometallic ligands may decompose to provide hydride ligands, dis- 
cussed in subsequent Chapters (e.g. 
see 
Chapters 4-6). 

38 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 2.25 Heteroatom-H-M 
agostic interactions 
coc12 
1 Mg 
Figure 2.26 Hydride synthesis 
via Rieke-activated metals 
Very few metals react directly with CO (Chapter 3); however, some 
will react with mixtures of CO and H,, especially if the metal can be pre- 
pared in highly activated form, e.g. by reduction of metal halides in situ. 
More commonly, a metal halide or other salt is reduced in the presence 
of H,/CO mixtures. In a similar manner, mixtures of H, and PF, can 
provide related PF, complexes (Figure 2.26). 
The simplest method for the introduction of a hydride ligand involves 
the protonation of a metal centre (Figure 2.13). This is a conventional 
(see Table 2.4), dependent on the 
of the metal centre. This is, in turn, a function of 
and 
Protonation does not alter the number of valence 
electrons, but leads to a formal increase in the 
by two 
units and of the 
by one unit. Note also that proto- 
nation may be 
if alternative sites are available on the metal 
centre. This is illustrated in Figure 2.27a, which also demonstrates the use 
of an acid with a 
(perchlorate). A range 
of other commonly employed ‘non-coordinating’ anions are shown in 
Figure 2.27b. However, it should be appreciated that some of these can 
in some cases coordinate, albeit weakly. In the cases of C104-, CF,SO,-, 
BF, and PF, this is most easily established by IR spectroscopy, since 
coordination to a metal lowers the symmetry of the anion, leading to 
changes in the number and positions of (typically intense) C1-0 (see also 
Figure 3.18), S-0, B-F and P-F bands. When acids with potentially 
are employed, the possibility of coordina- 
tion arises, thereby constituting oxidative addition. This is illustrated by 
the reactions of Vaska’s complex IrC1(CO)(PPh3), with a range of ‘prot- 
id substrates (HX), some of which are normally considered to be quite 
weak acids (Figure 2.20). A special case of oxidative addition involves the 
reactions of metal complexes with hydrogen, in which the stereochem- 
istry of the products is consistent with the intermediacy of dihydrogen 
complexes (see above). Similar observations for the additions of the Si-H 
bond of silanes suggest that prior coordination of the Si-H bond also 
occurs. Indeed, stable silane complexes have been isolated (Figure 2.25). 
A special case of H-X oxidative addition, which we will return to, involves 
the addition of C-H bonds 
In the case of terminal 
alkynes and cyclopentadienes, these C-H bonds are sufficiently acidic for 
simple oxidative addition to occur. The osmium examples (Figure 2.28a) 
illustrate the effect of 
on the facility of oxidative addition. 
Increasing the basicity of the phosphine co-ligands from PPh, to PPr’, 
(see Table 2.1) favours the oxidative addition of the alkyne C-H. In 
Chapter 4 we will see that for some metal complexes even unfunctional- 
ized alkanes may oxidatively add (‘C-H activation’, e.g. Figure 2.28c,d). 
This reaction is often reversible, with alkane 
being 
a facile decompostion route for cis metal alkyl hydrides. 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
39 
Figure 2.27 (a) Regioselective 
metal protonation (R = C,H,Me; 
L = PPh,); (b) non- or weakly 
coordinating anions 
Figure 2.28 C-H oxidative 
additions involving (a) alkynyl, 
(b) cyclopentadienyl, (c) aryl and 
(d) aliphatic C-H bonds; 
L,Fe 
= Fe(dmpe),; L,lr = 
Ir(CO)Cp*, Ir(PMe,)Cp* 
The hydride ligand may also be introduced in a nucleophilic form 
through the reactions of metal halides or other salts with ‘hydride’ donors 
(Figure 2.29a). This may be thought of as a simple nucleophilic substi- 
tution of halo or solvent0 ligands by hydride. However, the nucleophi,le 
is not hydride itself but in most cases a hydride donor based on a Group 
13 metal, among which Na[BH,] and Li[AlH,] and their derivatives (e.g. 
Li[HBEt,], Li[HAl(OBu‘),]) are the most commonly employed. When 
alcohols are used as the solvent in these reactions, dihydrogen is also 

40 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
generated, leading in many cases to polyhydrides (e.g. Figure 2.17). In 
some cases, intermediate 
may be isolated 
(Figure 2.29b). In the case of metal carbonyl substrates which are typi- 
cally 
(1 8VE and therefore not electrophilic at 
the metal centre), 
intermediates may be involved which thermal- 
ly extrude a CO co-ligand, allowing the hydrogen to transfer from the 
formyl ligand to the metal centre (Figure 2.29~; Chapter 4). 
Figure 2.29 Metal hydride 
borohydride reagents, (b) via 
synthesis (a) employing 
2.2.6 Reactivity of Metal Hydrides 
tetrahydroborate ligands and 
(c) via formyl intermediates 
Transition metal hydrides may show hydridic (H&, Figure 2.16) or protic 
reactivity (H", 
Table 2.4). In addition, there are some characteristic 
reactions that fall outside this categorization, which involve coordina- 
tion of the substrate to the metal centre, prior to combination with the 
hydride ligand (Figure 2.30). 
of the hydride 
on to an organometallic cis co-ligand is particularly relevant and will be 
met often throughout this text (Figure 2.31). In many cases, these reac- 
tions are reversible; however, it should be noted that the forward reac- 
tion results in a depletion of 2VE. The resulting vacant coordination site 
may be filled by an incoming ligand, or alternatively the new ligand might 
also contain a donor group, thereby favouring the formation of the inser- 
tion product. We have already seen that H-H and Si-H o-bonds may 
act as ligands. In a similar manner, migration of a hydride to an organ- 
ic ligand may result in new ligands that have C-H o-bonds which can 
weakly coordinate to the resulting vacant site in an agostic manner. This 
In an organometallic context, however, the 

Co-Ligands in Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
41 
Figure 2.30 Selected reactions 
of metal hydride complexes 
Figure 2.31 Intramolecular 
hydrogen transfers 
is most obvious in crystallographically determined structures. However, 
when it persists in solution, it may be inferred on occasion from 'H NMR 
data, owing to the characteristic upfield shift of agostically coordinated 
protons, and also in a decrease in the value of 'J(CH). In the case of 
simple H-C(sp3) bonds, this is typically ca. 125 Hz, but commonly falls 
below 100 Hz when agostic interactions occur with metals. 

Carbon Monoxide 
3.1 
Introduction 
In 1888, Ludwig Mond reported that crude nickel powder reacted with 
CO under ambient conditions (the only metal to do so) to give a colour- 
less volatile compound of composition CqNi04. This observation was 
contemporary with Alfred Werner’s fledgling ideas of 
in coordination compounds. Carbon monoxide was not, 
however, considered to show any basic or nucleophilic properties. 
Accordingly, the nature of this strange compound remained obscure, but 
this did not prevent an immediate application being devised: ‘CqNi04’ 
could be thermally decomposed back into its constituents Ni and CO, 
providing a means of purifying crude nickel via a volatile and distillable 
and 
42 

Carbon Monoxide 
43 
intermediate. This also suggested that the CO somehow retained its 
integrity in the curious compound. 
In fact, metal carbonyl complexes occur in nature, detrimentally in 
the case of the strong adduct formed between 
and CO. Very 
recently, however, it has been found that the active site of 
isolated from Desulfovibrio desulfuricans and Clostridium pasteurianum 
feature 
ligated with both CO and cyanide ligands (Figure 
3.la). Precise information about the structural features of the active sites 
of 
is often difficult to obtain crystallographically. 
However, as is often the case for chemical regimes not amenable to sim- 
ple study, small molecule model compounds may yield to more complete 
chemical and spectroscopic characterization, (e. g. Figure 3.1 b). 
For a molecule with such a low basicity (only protonated in super- 
binary) carbonyls (i.e. in which CO is the only ligand) already span 
oxidation states from -1V to +III, and higher oxidation states are known 
for 
complexes (mixed ligand sets) which have good ndonor 
co-ligands, e.g. RurV(CO)(SR),. 
acidic media), CO is a surprisingly versatile ligand. The 
(or 
Figure 3.1 (a) A carbonyl 
complex from nature and 
3.2 
Coordination Modes for Carbon Monoxide 
(b) a synthetic model compound 
By far the most common mode of CO coordination is 
through 
carbon. The bonding for this mode of coordination has already been dis- 
ever, there exist further coordination possibilities in which the CO ligand 
a metal-metal bond (Figure 3.2). Simple symmetric bridging 
(Figure 3.2a) is reminiscent of ketones (vco IR absorptions are shifted 
to lower frequency, cJ: organic carbonyls). The ligand is considered to 
provide 1VE to each metal, with M-C bond lengths typically longer than 
for terminal carbonyls. The CO ligand thereby exerts less steric pressure 
on the metal and bridging carbonyls are more frequently encountered 
for the smaller first-row 3d transition metals, e.g. Fe,(p-CO),(CO),, 
cussed (Figure l. 12). For bi- and polynuclear complexes 
how- 
Figure 3.2 Bridging carbonyl 
ligands 

44 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
compared with M,(CO),, (M = Ru, Os), which have only terminal 
ligands. 
carbonyls arise wherein the interaction with one metal 
(typically the more electron rich) is weaker (Figure 3.2b), although these 
probably represent the early stages of a continuum along the reaction 
coordinate depicted in Figure 3.2~. Very little energy is required for 
carbonyl ligands to move between terminal and bridging positions, 
especially if two carbonyl ligands can move synchronously [Figure 3.2c, 
see also Co,(CO), below]. For each of these bonding modes the CO 
provides only 2VE to the overall count. For more electron-deficient 
bimetallic complexes, a third possibility arises: the CO acts as a 
conventional teminal ligand (2VE) to one metal, but bends towards the 
second metal to allow the n-system to bind side on (q2) and thereby con- 
tribute a further 2VE (Figure 3.2d). Figure 1.12 might suggest that the 
oxygen of coordinated CO has very little nucleophilic character. 
Situations do arise, however, where this may coordinate to very hard 
(early, electropositive) metal centres 
, Figure 3.2e). Doubly 
or triply bridging CO ligands have more nucleophilic oxygen atoms such 
that coordination of a hard metal centre (or other electrophile) becomes 
more favourable (Figure 3.20. 
3.3 
Characterization of Metal Carbonyls 
For carbonyl complexes, a combination of IR (p. 11) and 13C NMR spec- 
troscopy will often reveal the molecular symmetry and also provide fur- 
ther information about the nature of the metal centre to which the CO 
ligand(s) is bound. However, the spectroscopic events involved occur 
within completely different time frames. Molecular vibrations (IR and 
Raman spectroscopy) are rapid relative to molecular 
NMR transitions, however, are slow, often comparable in rate to 
processes. This can lead to ‘time-averaged’ chemical environments being 
observed ‘on the NMR timescale’. So long as this is borne in mind, I3C 
NMR spectroscopy is a very valuable technique and can provide ther- 
modynamic and kinetic data about such processes over a temperature 
range [variable temperature (VT) NMR]. 
This point is illustrated by the binary or homoleptic carbonyl com- 
plex Co,(CO), (Figure 3.3). In the solid state a structure with two bridg- 
ing and six terminal carbonyl ligands is adopted. In hexane solution, 
however, a total of 13 vco bands are observed, a number far in excess 
of that expected for a single compound with only eight carbonyl ligands. 
This is due to three isomers being present in solution. One of these cor- 
responds to the solid state isomer with bridging carbonyls [vpco = 1866, 
1857 cm-’1, but the remaining two have only terminal carbonyl ligands. 
and even intermolecular 

Carbon Monoxide 
45 
The 13C NMR spectrum, however, comprises a single resonance (204 
ppm), indicating that the three isomers interconvert very rapidly (k >> 
lo3 s-l). This is a very common phenomenon in bi- and polynuclear (clus- 
ter) carbonyl complexes. 
IR spectroscopy provides information about both the number and 
local symmetry of carbonyl ligands in a complex (Table 3.1). Note that 
the generalizations in this table assume that the remaining ligands are 
identical. If this is not the case, then the lower symmetry may lead to 
more absorptions. The medium for the measurement of IR spectra of 
metal carbonyls is important and typically spectra should be measured 
both in the solid state and in solution [e.g. Co,(CO),]. Different struc- 
tures may be adopted in the solid state and solution, a complex may 
crystallize in different crystal forms, or even have more than one crys- 
tallographic environment or molecule in the unit cell. The carbonyl lig- 
ands may therefore experience different environments and give rise to 
different v,, 
values 
In solution (solvated), how- 
ever, the orientations will be random. One important class of carbonyl 
complexes is the 
(see p. 48). For such salts the nature 
of the counter cation may be important in dictating both the frequency 
of the vco absorptions and the nucleophilicity of the metal, owing to the 
relative extent of ion pairing in different solvents, e.g. for Na,[Fe(CO)J, 
v(C0) = 1786 (H,O), 1730 (DMF) and 1761 (Nujol, i.e. solid state) cm-'. 
Terminal carbonyl ligands generally give rise to I3C NMR resonances 
in the region 160-230 ppm, the chemical shift (6) being most significantly 
dkpendent on the metal centre. In general, heavier metals cause shifts to 
higher field. Bridging carbonyls typically resonate to lower field. 

46 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
3.4 
Important Classes of Metal Carbonyls 
3.4.1 Binary (Homoleptic) Carbonyls 
The family of complexes that contain only CO are referred to as 
homoleptic or binary carbonyls and may be cationic, anionic or neutral. 
The more common neutral examples are illustrated in Figure 3.3, since 
these serve as key precursors for much metal carbonyl chemistry. Since 
CO is a strong 
these involve metals in low (even formally nega- 
tive) oxidation states, with 
electronic configurations (high A). 
With the exception of V(CO), (t,:), 
these are 
and generally 
i.e. they obey the 18VE rule. Elements from 
odd groups (with the exception of vanadium) can only satisfy the 18- 
electron rule by forming either neutral bi- or polynuclear species or singly 
Figure 3.3 Selected binary 
metal carbonyls 

Carbon Monoxide 
47 
charged mononuclear ions, In general, metal-metal bonding becomes 
increasingly favourable on descending a triad, such that polynuclear 
metal carbonyls are particularly common for the heavier (4d and 5d) 
elements. 
Carbonyl metallates (anionic metal carbonyls) are an extremely impor- 
tant class of reagent in metal carbonyl chemistry, because they offer the 
synthetic advantage of a nucleophilic metal centre (see Figure 1.12, 
HOMO). Towards the far right-hand side of the transition series the 
metal 
generally decreases as the p and d orbitals decrease in 
energy. Thus binary carbonyl complexes become more sparse and have 
increasingly 
carbonyl ligands. These may often be easily displaced 
by even comparatively non-nucleophilic ligands, including weakly nucle- 
ophilic solvents and traditionally ‘non-coordinating’ counter anions 
(Figure 2.27b). Synthetic routes typically involve the generation of 
ligand-free metal cations in highly Lewis acidic solvents with only non- 
coordinating anions being present. Thus CO is the only available poten- 
tial ligand. In this respect SbF, (or ‘super-acidic’ SbF,/HOSO,F) is a 
particularly effective solvent for the isolation of [SbFJ or [Sb,F,,]- salts 
of metal carbonyl complexes. Even under these conditions, the carbonyl 
ligands tend to be labile (very high vco) and many of the salts decom- 
pose readily. In such syntheses (Figure 3.4), either the elemental metal 
is oxidized in situ, or salts of an appropriate anion (e.g. S0,F-) may be 
employed. Under such conditions, CO may be readily oxidized, e.g. in 
the reductive carbonylation of Pt(O,SF),. Table 3.2 summarizes the 
important isolable mononuclear homoleptic carbonyl complexes. 
In contrast to the highly reduced early transition metallates (Table 
3.2)’ the CO binding in the cationic complexes shown in Figure 3.4 
Table 3.2 Homoleptic mononuclear carbonyl complexesa [M(CO)J’ 
X 
Y 
M 
X 
Y 
M 
1 
2 
2 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
+1 
+1 
+2 
-3 
-4 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
+2 
cu 
Cu, Ag, Au 
Hs 
Co, Rh, Ir 
Cr, Mo, W 
Mn, Re 
Ti, Zr, Hf 
Fe, Ru, 0 s  
Co, Rh, Ir 
Ni 
Pd, Pt 
5 
5 
5 
5 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
-2 
-1 
0 
+1 
+2 
+3 
V, Nb, Ta 
Cr, Mo, W 
Mn, Tc, Rh 
Fe, Ru, 0 s  
Ti, Zr, Hf 
V, Nb, Ta 
V, Cr, Mo, W 
Mn, Tc, Re 
Fe, Ru, 0 s  
Ir 
aComplexes in italics have 4 8 V E  

48 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
I 
Figure 3.4 Homoleptic 
carbonyl cations of the late 
transition metals 
primarily involves a-donation, with 
being negligible. 
Accordingly, the values for v,, 
are actually higher than those for free 
or protonated CO. 13C NMR chemical shifts for the carbonyl ligands of 
these late transition metal complexes occur to much higher field, e.g. in 
the isoelectronic d6 complexes [M(CO),]": M" = HF- 244, Ta- 210, 
Wo 192, Re+ 171, Os2+ 147, Ir3+ 121 ppm. A similar situation arises for 
do metal carbonyls (e.g. [Ti(C0)2Cp2]2+, v,, 
= 2119 and 2099 cm-'; 
[Zr(CO)(q'-OCMe)Cp*,]', 
vco = 21 76 cm-I ) , where retrodonation is not 
possible. Cationic homoleptic isocyanide complexes of the late transition 
metals are more common, e.g. [Rh(CNBu')J 
and [Pt(CNMe),]?+. 
Although isocyanides are 
with CO, they are stronger 0- 
donors and weaker 7c-acceptors (Figure 1.14). Cyanide is also isoelec- 
tronic with CO, but a much stronger o-donor. Hence homoleptic 
cyanides of the later transition metals are commonplace and some were 
known in the 18th century, e.g. K,[Fe(CN),]. 
3.4.2 Carbonyl Metallates 
The ability of carbon monoxide to stabilize low oxidation states is 
most impressively demonstrated by the synthesis and isolation of com- 
plexes wherein the metal adopts formally negative oxidation states, of 
which the dlo complexes [M(CO),]& (M-'" = Cr, Mo, W) represent the 
(current) extreme. 
By far the most common method for the synthesis of carbonyl 
metallates is via the reduction of binary carbonyls (or carbonyl halides). 
A variety of reducing agents has been employed including alkali metal 
amalgams, sodium in liquid ammonia, borohydride derivatives, e. g. 
Li[Et,BH], and alkali metals in combination with (often catalytic) poly- 
aromatic organic molecules capable of serving as 
(e.g. benzophenone, anthracene, naphthalene). In the case of 
mononuclear precursors, two-electron reduction (+2VE) is accompanied 

Carbon Monoxide 
49 
by loss of one carbonyl ligand (-2VE) to satisfy the Welectron rule 
(Figure 3.5a). Occasionally, it is advantageous to begin with a derivative 
which contains a labile purely o-bonding ligand which will more easily 
dissociate from the reduced metal centre [e.g. W(NMe,)(CO),, Figure 
3.5a1, thereby avoiding side reactions, e.g. 
(see 
below). For bi- and polynuclear precursors, reduction is accompanied 
by metal-metal bond cleavage (Figure 3.5b). Stronger reductants 
(Na[C,,H,] or Na[Ph,CO]) may be employed to provide more highly 
reduced species ([M(CO),]"-, Mfl- = Mn3 , Cr'-). Group 13 hydride 
reagents may also be employed to cleave metal-metal bonds, in 
which case metal hydride complexes are implicated (or isolated) as 
Figure 3.5 Synthesis of 
carbonyl metallates 

50 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
, 
aFor reactions with Me1 
intermediates (Figure 3.5~). A further route to metal carbonylates 
involves the 
of metal carbonyls, which may be 
induced by strong nucleophiles (Figure 3.5e). Although this is a key reac- 
tion of metal carbonyls, it is synthetically unattractive so far as 
is concerned. Sources of hydroxide can also bring about 
reduction of metal carbonyls; however, this is mechanistically more com- 
plex since coordinated CO is oxidized to CO, (or carbonate) during the 
process (Figures 2.13, 3.50. 
Carbonyl metallates find their widest application as reagents for intro- 
ducing electrophilic functionality to the metal centre, which is highly 
nucleophilic. Table 3.3 indicates nucleophilicities for a range of common 
carbonyl metallates estimated from conventional S,2 reaction rates with 
iodomethane. This illustrates their versatility in metal-carbon bond 
forming reactions; however, as shown in Figure 3.6, this reactivity is not 
limited to carbon electrophiles but allows a wide range of metal-element 
bonds to be easily formed (see also reactions of metal carbonyls below). 
Figure 3.6 Reactions of 
carbonyl manganates with 
electrophiles 
Table 3.3 Relative 
nucleophilicities of carbonyl 
metallates 
Anion 
Relative 
ratesa 
7.0 x 107 
7.5 x 106 
5.5 x 106 
5 x 102 
77 
67 
4 
1 
2.5 x 104 
Two potential problems (opportunities?) which may be encountered 
are (i) 
whereby carbonylates of higher nuclearity 
may be formed (Figure 3.5a,d,e); effectively, the reduced carbonylate 
replaces a carbonyl ligand on combination with a second equivalent of 
the original neutral carbonyl; (ii) 
whereby more than two 
electrons may be added, e.g. in the formation of Na,[Cr(CO),] or 
Na,[Mn(CO),] (Figure 3,5b). These problems are controlled by judicious 
(or empirical) choice of solvent and reductant. 
3.4.3 Cyclopentadienyl Metal Carbonyls 
Chemistry involving transformations of the cyclopentadienyl (Cp) ligand 
itself will be discussed in Chapter 7; however, much of the chemistry of 
cyclopentadienyl complexes involves the ligand acting purely as a 
Thus there arises a broad area of chemistry involving complexes 
with both carbonyl and cyclopentadienyl ligands. The most common 
classes of such compounds (Table 3.4) are the mononuclear complexes 

Carbon Monoxide 
51 
M(CO)y(q-C,R,)z and the binuclear species M,(CO)y(q-C,R,)z, the Val- 
ues of y and z being largely dictated by adherence to the 18VE rule. 
Figure 3.7 illustrates structural motifs for the more commonly encoun- 
tered neutral examples, whilst Figure 3.8 illustrates the most common 
synthetic routes. Noteworthy amongst these is the reaction of mononu- 
clear metal carbonyls with cyclopentadiene (C,H,) to provide binuclear 
derivatives. Hydrogen is eliminated, and the most likely intermediates 
involve cyclopentadienyl metal hydrides that thermally eliminate dihy- 
drogen in a 
process (Figure 2.28). The binuclear derivatives 
are key starting materials for much chemistry, owing to the often facile 
reduction of the metal-metal bond to provide mononuclear nucleophilic 
carbonyl metallates, e.g. [Cr(CO),Cp]-, [Fe(CO),Cp]- and [Ni(CO)Cp]-. 
In some cases, complexes arise which may appear to have more than 
the requisite 18VE and, in such situations, one of the cyclopentadienyl 
rings may assume 
(q3 or even ql, Figure 3.9). This is 
more pronounced in complexes of the 
may be compensated for by the increase in aromatic character 
within the benzene ring. Indeed, indenyl complexes are generally found 
to be more reactive towards ligand substitution processes than simple 
cyclopentadienyl analogues. These reactions appear to proceed via 
suggesting that a vacant coordination site may be tran- 
siently achieved by ring slippage (known as the 
In other 
cases, the metal centres in bi- or polynuclear complexes may appear to 
have <18VE, in which case the coordinative unsaturation is accommo- 
dated through metal-metal multiple bonding, or the adoption of 
(Figure 3.2d) by one or more carbonyl ligands which there- 
by each contribute 4VE in total. Thus the simple stoichiometries 
ligand (C,H,) where 
Figure 3.7 Representative 
cyclopentadienyl metal carbonyls 
(CP’ = TC5R5) 
Table 3.4 
Cyclopentadienyl metal 
carbonyls 
Cp’M(CO), 
Co, Rh, Ir 
Cp’M(CO), 
Mn, Tc, Re 
Cp’M(CO), 
V, Nb, Ta 
Cp’,M(CO) 
Mo, W, V 
Cp’,M(CO), 
Ti, Zr, Hf 
Cp’,M,(CO), 
Ni, Pt 
Cp’,M,(CO), 
Co, Rh, Ir, Re 
CP’~M,(CO), 
Fe, Ru, 0 s  
Cr, Mo, W 
Cp’,M,(CO), 
V, Re 
CP’~M,(CO)~ Cr, Mo, W 
Cp’,M,(CO), 
Ni 
Cp’,M,(CO), 
Co, Rh 
Co, Rh, Ir 
CP’,M,(CO), 
Nb 
CP’,M4(CO), 
Fe 

52 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 3.8 Synthesis of 
cyclopentadienyl metal carbonyls 
Figure 3.9 Cyclopentadienyl 
hapticity (q5, q3 and ql) 
indicated in Table 3.4 obscure more subtle bonding situations (or flux- 
ional processes). As for simple binary carbonyls, thermolysis or photol- 
ysis generally leads to loss of CO and formation of higher nuclearity 
clusters. 
3.4.4 Nitrosyl Metal Carbonyls 
The nitrosonium cation [NO]' is isoelectronic with CO and accordingly 
many mixed 
complexes are known. For electron count- 
ing purposes, the neutral molecule is considered to act as a 3 (or occa- 
sionally 1) VE donor. Thus various series of isoelectronic complexes can 
be envisaged (Table 3.5). The majority of synthetic routes to nitrosyl- 
carbonyl complexes involve (i) photochemical CO substitution or 
metal-metal bond cleavage by NO; (ii) electrophilic attack by nitroso- 
nium salts, e.g. [NOIBF, or nitrosyl halides (e.g. ClNO) upon electron- 

Carbon Monoxide 
53 
rich metal complexes; (iii) oxidation of coordinated CO by nitrite accom- 
panied by reduction of the metal centre; or (iv) reactions of metal 
hydrides with nitrosamines or nitrite esters (Figure 3.10). In this context 
we consider the nitrosyl ligand to serve as a 3VE ligand; however, note 
that it may also act as a 1VE ligand by bending (reversibly) at nitrogen. 
Thus it is commonly observed that nitrosyl complexes can undergo lig- 
and substitution processes via associative activation, i. e. an increase in 
coordination number, without contravention of the 18-electron rule. For 
example, whilst Fe(CO), undergoes CO substitution via a dissociative 
process, the reactions of Mn(NO)(CO), with phosphines show a depend- 
ence on the nucleophilicity of the incoming ligand (e.g. PBu, reacts 40 
times faster than PPh,). This suggests a bimolecular rate-determining step 
involving an increase in coordination number which may be accommo- 
dated by nitrosyl bending. 
Table 3.5 lsoelectronic 
carbonyl nitrosyl 
complexesa 
Figure 3.10 Synthesis of 
nitrosyl metal carbonyls 
3.5 
Synthesis of Metal Carbonyls 
The majority of synthetic approaches to binary carbonyls involve 
of solutions of metal salts in the presence of a suitable reduc- 
tant (Figure 3.1 1). Nickel and iron are the only metals that will react 
readily with CO, and even iron requires the use of high temperatures 
(420 K) and pressures (100 atm). Some other metals (Mo, W, Co, Ru) 
in highly activated form 
will also react with CO under 
higher temperatures and pressures. 
Both its solubility and any potential side reaction with reductant dic- 
tate the choice of precursor metal salt or complex. In many cases the 
reductant is an aluminium alkyl or electropositive metal (Goups 1, 2, 12 
or 13, possibly amalgamated with mercury), requiring the use of anhy- 
drous metal salts or complexes. Carbonyls of higher nuclearity are 

54 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 3.1 1 (a) Generalized 
and (b)-(f) illustrative syntheses 
of binary carbonyls 
generally prepared by either photolysis or thermolysis of mono- or 
binuclear precursors, although these may not necessarily be observed 
(Figure 3.12). The reverse of this process may be used to degrade higher 
nuclearity clusters by heating under high pressures of CO (' 
reactions; Figure 3.12). Finally, the combination of CO and 
hydroxide offers a reducing medium via a process to be discussed below 
(Figures 2.13, 3.1 1). 
Heteroleptic (mixed ligand) carbonyl complexes are intriguing in their 
enormous variability. Many of these derivatives originate via ligand sub- 
stitution reactions starting from the homoleptic carbonyls (Figure 3.13). 
The replacement of strongly macidic CO by more basic ligands will elec- 
tronically enrich the metal centre, strengthening retrodative bonding to 
any remaining CO ligands. However, if the new ligand (e.g. PF,) is also 

Carbon Monoxide 
55 
a strong n-acid, the remaining CO ligands may still be labile (Figure 
3.13a). Since binary carbonyls are coordinatively saturated, a vacant site 
must first be generated (dissociative activation, reduced coordination 
number). This may be achieved thermally, photochemically or by chem- 
ical modification of a carbonyl ligand. Given a choice between which 
CO ligands are substituted, it is usually one of a pair that is mutually 
trans coordinated (minimize competition for metal retrodonation). For 
example, heating Mo(CO), with piperidine (pip) or acetonitrile provides 
cis-Mo(CO),(pip), and fuc-Mo(CO),(NCMe),, respectively, rather than 
the corresponding trans and mer isomers. These complexes are useful 
precursors for other derivatives of the ‘Mo(CO),’ and ‘Mo(CO),’ frag- 
ments owing to the facile substitution of the amine or nitrile ligands 
under much milder conditions (typically ambient) than those required 
for the initial thermal CO substitution. 
Thermal reactions can be somewhat indiscriminate, and lead to mix- 
tures of substitution products, e.g. Figure 3.13c,d. Photochemical sub- 
stitution is often more selective, but less conveniently applicable to 
large-scale syntheses. For example, photolysis of the (t,,)6(e,*)0 complex 
Cr(CO), will promote electrons into the previously empty eK* orbitals, 
which are antibonding with respect to the Cr-CO bonds. Thus the photo- 
excited molecule can relax by ejection of one CO ligand. Typically this 
is carried out in a weakly coordinating solvent, e.g. tetrahydrofuran (con- 
tinuously purged with nitrogen to remove liberated CO) to provide a 
labile deep red 
complex Cr(CO),(THF). Once photolysis is 
Figure 3-12 Metal carbony1 
interconversions involving 
changes in nuclearity 
Figure 3.13 Thermal and photo- 
chemical carbonyl substitution 

56 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
complete (typically monitored by solution IR spectroscopy), this may 
then be used in situ for subsequent facile substitution of the THF ligand 
by more strongly coordinating ligands, including those which might be 
too photo or themally sensitive to survive direct thermolysis or photol- 
ysis (Figure 3.14). Occasionally, alkenes (Chapter 6) may be used as a 
compromise between the inert CO coordination and the extremely labile 
solvent coordination, e.g. the photochemically generated complexes 
Mn(~*-C,H,,)(CO),Cp and Cr(q2-C,H,,)(CO), (C,H,, = cyclooctene) 
serve as isolable (by chromatography) alternatives to the highly reactive 
complexes Mn( THF)( CO),Cp and Cr(TH F)( CO), (unstable in the 
absence of THF) as sources of the 16VE fragments ‘Mn(CO),Cp’ and 
‘Cr( CO),’ . 
Carbonyl ligands may also be removed by treatment with an 
this oxidizes coordinated CO to CO,, which does not coordinate 
strongly and is displaced by the (labile) amine (Figures 3.15 and 3.5a). 
Since this involves nucleophilic attack at coordinated CO, it is most effec- 
tive for carbonyl ligands bound to less n;-basic metal centres (higher vco). 
An alternative means of activating coordinatively saturated metal car- 
bonyls involves 
A strong 
(e.g. Na[C,,H,] or Na[Ph,C=O]) adds an electron to the complex, 
converting it to a labile 19VE species. Replacement of CO by a stronger 
net donor makes the product a stronger reductant than the precursor 
and accordingly it is able to transfer an electron to a further molecule 
of substrate; hence catalysis can ensue (Figure 3.16). 
Figure 3.1 4 Photochemical 
generation of solvent0 
intermediates 
Figure 3.15 Amine oxide- 
mediated carbonyl substitution 

Carbon Monoxide 
57 
The alternative approach to heteroleptic carbonyl complexes involves 
the addition of CO to a preformed complex which either has a vacant 
coordination site to begin with, or is capable in solution of eliminating 
one or two ligands, e.g. via simple 
processes (Figure 3.17). In the case of 
halide complexes, salts of non-coordinating anions (Figure 2.27b) may 
be used to extract the halide, leaving a vacant coordination site (Figure 
3.18). Such reactions are equilibria, often driven by the precipitation of 
the halide salt. This is particularly favourable for thallium(1) or silver(1) 
salts, where the resulting halide is essentially insoluble. Silver salts can, 
however, also act as 
(formation of Ago), in which 
case the highly toxic though non-oxidizing thallium(1) salts may be used 
instead. Various Lewis acids are also capable of abstracting halide to 
generate a non-coordinating anion, e.g. Al,Cl, (see also Figure 3.4) 
Figure 3.1 6 Electron transfer- 
catalysed carbony1 substitution 
or 
Figure 3.17 Methods for 
the generation of a vacant 
coordination site (acac = 
propane-2,4-dionate, 
acetylacetonate) 

58 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 3.18 Halide 
3.6 Reactions of Metal Carbonyls 
abstraction/CO coordination 
It is useful to consider the reactions of carbonyl metallates separately, 
since their reactivity is generally concerned with the nucleophilic metal 
centre and will be discussed below. Simple ligand substitution reactions 
have already been discussed above, as have redox processes that provide 
access to carbonyl metallates through reduction of the metal centre. 
These redox or ligand addition/elimination processes are in principle no 
different from those encountered for classical ligands. We will now con- 
sider reactions in which the carbonyl ligand itself enters directly into the 
reaction and emerges transformed. 
3.6.1 Electrophilic Attack 
Figure 1.12 suggests that for carbonyl complexes the HOMO is local- 
ized primarily on the metal centre, with only a modest contribution from 
oxygen orbitals. Thus by far the majority of reactions of metal carbonyls 
with electrophiles involve direct attack at the metal, with the carbonyl 
serving as a spectator ligand. If, however, the metal centre is (i) partic- 
ularly electron rich and (ii) sterically shielded and the electrophile is 
‘hard’ (in the HSAB sense) and also sterically encumbered, then attack 
may occur at the oxygen. 
(LnM-CS) are stronger z-acids 
than CO and the sulfur is both softer and more nucleophilic. Thus elec- 
trophilic attack at the sulfur of thiocarbonyls is more common if the 
metal centre is electron rich (vcs < 1200 cm-l). Similarly, coordinated 
isocyanides (CNR) are more prone to attack by electrophiles at nitro- 
gen. This is noteworthy in the sense that free isocyanides are attacked 
by electrophiles at carbon (Figure 3.19). The resulting 
ligands 
will be discussed in Chapter 5. 
3.6.2 Nucleophilic Attack 
Although free CO is attacked by very strong nucleophiles (e.g. Bu‘Li), 
the resulting acyl anions are generally unstable. In contrast, coordinat- 

Carbon Monoxide 
59 
ed CO is highly prone to attack by nucleophiles, especially when the 
metal centre is not particularly n;-basic (high vco) (Figure 3.20). 
Nucleophiles are potential ligands (and vice versa); if the metal centre is 
coordinatively unsaturated, attack may occur at the metal (although this 
may be followed by migration to CO; see below). For coordinatively sat- 
Figure 3.19 Electrophilic attack 
at coordinated co and related 
ligands 
urated metal carbonyls, however, nucleophilic attack generally occurs at 
the carbonyl carbon, consistent with the high contribution of c orbitals 
Figure 3.20 Nucleophilic attack 
at coordinated co and related 
to the LUMO (Figure 1.12). 
ligands 

60 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
The resulting 
may be described by the two canonical 
forms shown, with a negative charge on either the metal or the oxygen. 
The relative contributions of these two forms will depend on the nature 
of the metal centre (d configuration, charge, co-ligands, coordination 
number; see also Figure 1.17). Therefore although they may be prone to 
subsequent attack by electrophiles, the 
of attack (metal 
vs. oxygen) may differ between complexes; thus the six-coordinate d6 
tungsten acylate is attacked by [Me,O]BF, ( 
; syn- 
thetically equivalent to ‘Me+’ and Me,O) at the acyl oxygen to provide 
a 
complex (Chapter 5). The five-coordinate d8 iron example, 
however, undergoes attack at the metal centre followed by reductive elim- 
ination of a ketone (see 
Figures 3.5 and 3.29). Three 
special cases should be considered (Figure 3.21): hydride (Figure 2.29c), 
hydroxide (Figure 2.13) and nitrite (Figure 3.10). 
Figure 3.21 Nucleophilic attack 
at coordinated CO: special cases 
In general, the initially formed 
or 
complexes rapidly convert to hydrido or nitrosyl complexes with 
elimination of CO or CO,; however, occasionally intermediates have been 
isolated. The oxidation-of coordinated CO to CO, by amine oxides 
(Figure 3.15) may be considered a further example. The hydroxycarbonyl 
example underpins a technologically important process, the 
equilibrium, involving the catalytic conversion of CO and water 
into CO, and hydrogen (Figures 3.22, 3.1 1 and 2.13). 
Figure 3.22 The water-gas 
shift equilibrium 

Carbon Monoxide 
01 
3.6.3 Ligand-CO Coupling Processes: Migratory 
If the IT* orbital of coordinated CO is sufficiently electrophilic to interact 
with external nucleophiles, the question arises as to whether the electron 
pair binding an adjacent ligand to the metal might not also act as an 
internal electrophile. This is indeed what often happens, especially if the 
adjacent ligand is a 
. Three cases deserve attention (the first 
being by far the most important): when the organic ligand is singly, dou- 
bly or triply bound to the metal (Figure 3.23). The situations involving 
multiply bound ligands (carbenes and carbynes) will be discussed in 
Chapter 5. 
Insertion 
Figure 3.23 Carbonyl co-ligand 
coupling reactions 
The case of simple o-organyl ligands (alkyls, aryls, etc.) coupling with 
carbon monoxide is known as 
(Figure 3.24). The for- 
ward process should be viewed as the migration of the R group onto the 
carbonyl, thereby leaving its original coordination site vacant, and 
depleting the electron count by 2VE. This loss of coordinative satura- 
tion may appear to be an unfavourable development. Indeed, it is seldom 
directly observed and coordinatively unsaturated acyl complexes are rare 
for metals where the 18-electron rule holds sway. Three situations do, 
however, arise where the process may be inferred: (i) when a new 
ligand may be added to block the vacated coordination site; (ii) when 
the metal is sufficiently 
for the oxygen of the resulting acyl to 
serve as an electron pair donor to the metal; and (iii) when subsequent 
reductive elimination of the acyl ligand may displace the natural 
position of the equilibrium. It is this latter situation that underpins 
the majority of technological applications of the process (e.g. see the 
, below). Illustrative examples are provided in Figure 
3.25. 
Figure 3.24 Equilibria manifold 
for migratory insertion 

62 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 3.25 Examples of 
migratory insertion reactions 
(Ar = 4-MeC6H,) 
The mechanism of migratory insertion has been studied in consider- 
able detail and some conclusions are summarized in Box 3.1. Much infor- 
mation has been extracted from studies on the system RMn(CO),/ 
RCOMn(CO),, because of the inherent simplicity which allows careful 
Figure 3.26 Migratory 
insertion reactions of Mn(Me)(CO), 
( 
= '3C) 
control of the different variables (Figure 3.26). 

Carbon Monoxide 
63 
Any complex containing cis organyl and carbonyl ligands should 
therefore be considered to be potentially in 
with 
the corresponding acyl complex. Any acyl complex should be considered 
to be in equilibrium with the corresponding cis organyl/carbonyl com- 
plex, but only ifa situation arises where the metal centre may become 
coordinatively unsaturated, e.g. thermal or photochemical dissociation 
of a ligand which is cis to the acyl ligand. 
Applications of the migratory insertion process are numerous and 
many will be met in subsequent sections. One example, however, which 
has been particularly successful is the Monsanto process for the 
to provide ethanoic (acetic) acid (Figure 3.27). 
The catalysts for the Monsanto process are hydrogen iodide and the 
complex [RhI,(CO),]-. 
Hydrogen iodide converts methanol into 
iodomethane, which (unlike methanol) is highly prone to oxidative addi- 
tion reactions with electron-rich metal centres (see also Figure 2.20). The 
rhodium complex has features typical of many catalysts: two easily acces- 
sible and favourable oxidation states with their associated geometries 
square planar (d8 ML,) and octahedral (d6 ML,). These are readily inter- 
convertible via the processes of oxidative addition and reductive elimi- 
nation. Oxidative addition of iodomethane provides a cis methyl/ 
carbonyl complex (18VE) in equilibrium with a 16VE acyl complex. The 
subsequent coordination of CO blocks the reverse de-insertion and 
this is followed by reductive elimination of ethanoyl (acetyl) iodide. 
This might re-add to the metal were it not rapidly hydrolysed to ethanoic 

64 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 3.27 Catalytic 
carbonylation of methanol 
(r.d.s. = rate-determining step) 
Figure 3.28 Empirical aptitude 
for migratory insertion 
acid and hydrogen iodide by the water present (from iodomethane 
formation). 
The process works exceedingly well for the rhodium, iodide and 
methanol combination, although it has been extended to iridium, other 
halides and longer chain alcohols with some success. The success with 
methanol and iodide as the halide lies in the particularly rapid rates of 
oxidative addition of iodomethane compared with other alkyl halides 
(weak C-I bond strength, fast S,2 substitution). This is the rate-limiting 
step (rate-determining step, r.d.s.) in the case of rhodium. The iridium 
complex [IrI,(CO),]- will also mediate the process; however, it is note- 
worthy that in this case the rate-limiting step is the migratory insertion. 
Metal-carbon bond strengths generally increase down a triad (Table 1 S); 
thus for iridium the oxidative addition reaction is more facile (Ir-C bond 
formation as the transition state is approached). The migratory insertion 
reaction, however, is less favoured (Ir-C bond disruption on approach 
to the transition state). 
Table 1.5 also holds one key for interpreting the empirical order of 
migratory aptitudes for various organyl groups when the BDEs for var- 
ious RMn(CO), complexes are considered. Since it is the Mn-R bond 
which is broken in the migratory insertion reaction, the greater the BDE, 
the less favourable the migratory insertion reaction. Figure 3.28 shows 
an empirical ordering of o-organyl groups. 
Generally, any factor that enhances the metal-carbon bond strength 
may discourage migratory insertion. This includes sp2 or sp hybridiza- 
tion at carbon, which adds a (variable) z-component to the metal-car- 
bon bond. However, it must be stressed that these are thermodynamic 
arguments. In terms of kinetic activation, the approach to the three- 
membered transition state may be assisted by further orbital interactions 
available to unsaturated o-organyl ligands. The hydride ligand presents 

Carbon Monoxide 
65 
a special case in that it is very rarely directly observed to undergo 
migratory insertion reactions with carbonyl ligands. There is, however, 
considerable indirect evidence that such processes operate (Figure 3.29). 
Indeed, such a process is considered crucial to the catalytic (heteroge- 
neous) 
whereby CO is reduced by hydrogen 
to provide a range of organic molecules of the form CIHyO-. The prob- 
lem in observing the reaction lies in appreciating the interplay of ther- 
modynamic and kinetic factors; in general, the BDEs for M-H bonds 
exceed those of other o-organyls (Table 1.5). Thus although hydrido- 
carbonyl complexes may well be in rapid equilibrium with formyl tau- 
tomers, the position of this equilibrium (and hence the amount of any 
spectroscopically observable species) will lie strongly towards the hydride 
isomer. 
A variety of ligand substitution reactions of hydrido-carbonyl com- 
plexes appear to proceed via associative activation (rate dependant on 
the nucleophilicity and concentration of the incoming ligand), pointing 
towards the intermediacy of coordinatively unsaturated formyl species 
(e.g. Figure 3.29a). Thus, for example, [FeH(CO),]- undergoes ligand 
substitution reactions far more rapidly than Fe(CO),, [Fe { C( =O)Me) - 
(CO),]- or [Fe(C0),I2-. The hydride migratory insertion route appears 
most important for complexes that have weak metal-hydride bonds 
[e.g. MnH(CO),, FeH,(CO),, CoH(CO),]. Complexes with stronger 
Figure 3.29 Supporting 
evidence for migratory insertion 
reactions of hydride ligands 

66 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
metal-hydride bonds appear less reactive, e.g. ReH(CO), undergoes sub- 
stitution via radical intermediates, and no deuterium isotope effect is 
encountered in the substitution reactions of Mo(HID)(CO),Cp, consis- 
tent with negligible Mo-H bond disruption in the rate-limiting step. One 
situation where the equilibrium may be shifted towards observation of 
the formyl tautomer is provided by the carbonylation of the complex 
ThH(OR)Cp*2 (Figure 3.29b). In this case the highly oxophilic thorium 
centre ‘traps’ the oxygen of the formyl complex in a bidentate (3VE) 
coordination. 
3.6.4 Carbonyl Metallates 
It was noted above that situations could be contrived in which the oxygen 
atoms(s) of carbonyl metallates may be attacked by hard and sterically 
encumbered electrophiles (Figure 3.19). These are illustrative exceptions 
to the far more general observation that the metal centres of carbonyl 
metallates typically act as potent nucleophiles. This reverses the classical 
view of metals centres as Lewis acids. Carbonyl ligands can make metals 
into strong bases and nucleophiles by stabilizing unusually low oxidation 
states and the associated high electron density. It is this feature that under- 
lies their enormous synthetic utility. Because they are highly reduced and 
ligated by 7c-acids, the EAN rule is strictly obeyed almost exclusively 
for metal carbonylates. The nucleophilicity of carbonyl metallates is 
illustrated 
for 
three 
typical 
examples: 
Na[Mn(CO),] 
and 
[Na(HMPA)x],[Mn(CO)4] (Figure 
3.6) 
and 
Collman’s 
reagent 
Na,[Fe(CO),].l . Sdioxane (Figure 3.30). The manganese examples 
illustrate the formation of bonds between manganese and a variety of 
main group elements (Groups 13-17) and transition metals. Figure 3.30 
illustrates the use of carbonyl metallates in stoichiometric organic syn- 
thesis. The acyl ferrate originates from (i) the reaction of Collman’s 
reagent with acyl halides; (ii) attack upon Fe(CO), by a suitable carban- 
ionic nucleophile (Figure 3.20); or (iii) from the migratory insertion of 
the simple alkyl derivative (prepared from the corresponding alkyl halide) 
upon carbonylation. Electrophilic cleavage of either the alkyl or acyl 
species provides access to aldehydes, ketones, carboxylic acids, acid 
halides, esters and amides. Certainly these are all functional groups for 
which copious alternative synthetic procedures exist in classical organic 
chemistry. The strength of the Collman protocol lies in the fact that much 
classical organic carbonyl chemistry involves the groups R and R* being 
introduced in nucleophilic form; the present approach allows these groups 
to be introduced in nucleophilic (Figure 3.20) or electrophilic form. The 
use of very hard alkylating agents and polar solvents (e.g. HMPA) may 
result in alkylation at oxygen (rather than iron) to provide alkoxycar- 
benes which themselves have a rich organic chemistry (Chapter 5). 

Carbon Monoxide 
67 
3.7 
Ligands Related to Carbon Monoxide 
There exists a series of ligands which are isoelectronic with CO (Figure 
1.14) and which might be expected to show some parallels in bonding 
and reactivity. Many such parallels do indeed arise; however, it is the 
divergences which intrigue. Whilst the frontier orbitals of these various 
ligands might be similar in shape, number and occupancy, the various 
electronegativities of the elements concerned lead to significant differ- 
ences in reactivity. Thus, for example, whilst electrophilic attack at the 
oxygen atom of coordinated CO is rare, cyanides (CN), isocyanides 
(CNR) and chalcocarbonyls (CA: A = S, Se, Te) appear more prone to 
attack at the P-atom (Figure 3.19). Chalcocarbonyls, in particular CS, 
have a rich coordination chemistry, despite the limitation that CS itself 
is not isolable. Ingenious methods have been developed for the con- 
struction of this ligand within the protective environment offered by 
coordination to a metal (Figure 3.31). Many more examples will be met 
in later sections. The chalcocarbonyl ligands are stronger n-acids than 
CO owing to the n* orbitals of the CA decreasing in energy on descend- 
ing Group 16. This is reflected in a greater propensity for CS to enter 
into migratory insertion processes (Figure 3.29) and reactions with nucle- 
ophiles. 
Isocyanides, in contrast, are much poorer n-acids and stronger 
o-donors than CO. Accordingly, they appear less able to stabilize 
Figure 3.30 Applications of 
Collman’s reagent (X = halogen) 

68 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 3.31 Selected 
syntheses of chalcocarbonyl 
complexes 
negative or low oxidation states. The field of isocyanide metallates is, 
however, beginning to grow slowly. Analogues of some of the more 
familiar carbonyl metallates have now been prepared, e.g. [Co(CNR)J 
and [Ru(CNR),I2-, as well as zerovalent binary isocyanide complexes, 
e.g. Fe(CNR),, Fe,(CNR), and Co,(CNR),. The comparative influence 
on metal basicity of CO and isocyanide ligands is indicated by the obser- 
vation that Fe(CO), is only protonated by concentrated H2S0, (Figure 
2.13), whilst Fe(CNBu'), will deprotonate WH(CO),Cp (pKa = 16.1). 

0-Organyls 
4.1 
Introduction 
Curiously, the simple metal-carbon single bond was amongst the last to 
be embraced by organometallic chemists. This situation arose from pre- 
mature ideas about the presumed instability of transition metal alkyls, 
based on the very few examples known by the middle of the 20th cen- 
tury. There is nothing inherently unstable about metal-carbon o-bonds 
from a thermodynamic perspective; some transition metal alkyls and 
aryls have BDEs in excess of those for main group elements (Table 1.5). 
The key lies in appreciating the 
(lability) of many tran- 
sition metal-carbon G-bonds, i.e. the many ways in which they may 
decompose, through low-energy routes less accessible to main group 
(closed d-shell) elements. Once understood, practical use can be creatively 
organic synthesis. Alternatively, situations may be engineered to allow 
encountered o-organyls 
69 

70 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 4.2 Structural data (nm) 
for o-organyls 
Figure 4.3 Pope's complex 
the isolation of kinetically (or thermodynamically) stabilized o-organyl 
complexes. The various classes of 0-organyls to be discussed are depict- 
ed in Figure 4.1. We will be concerned primarily with mononuclear exam- 
ples; however, many of these organyls can bridge two or more metal 
centres. Also noteworthy are the ways in which some organyl ligands 
can provide more than lVE, if required by the coordinative unsatura- 
tion of a metal centre (e.g. alkenyls, acyls and allyls). 
Of particular interest are n-organyls having empty orbitals of 
(with respect to the M-C vector) available for overlap with occu- 
pied metal orbitals of n; symmetry (t2n). Such ligands, e.g. 
(vinyls), 
and 
(acetylides), can in principle supplement their 
0-bonding with a 
component. This may be reflected in an 
increased M-C bond strength (Table 1.5), a decrease in the M-C bond 
length (Figure 4.2) or in restricted rotation about the M-C bond, as 
sometimes observed in VT NMR experiments. 
More importantly, much chemical reactivity points towards these 
interactions being important, e.g. alkenyl and acyl complexes tend to dis- 
play enhanced nucleophilicity at the c, or 0 atoms, respectively, sug- 
gesting transfer of electron density from the metal (see later). 
4.2 
Selected Classes of o-Organyls 
4.2.1 Alkyls 
Pope's landmark complex {PtMe,I}, (1907, Figure 4.3) predated a four- 
decade hiatus in the chemistry of metal alkyls, but with hindsight holds 
the key to the stability of metal alkyls. Each platinum centre has an octa- 
hedral d6 coordinatively saturated geometry. By far the majority of tran- 
sition-metal 0-organyl decomposition routes require the availability of a 
adjacent (cis) to the organyl and an electron 
count of <18VE. In the interiiii. 'iiowever, 
(neutral and 
ionic) have been prepared (Figure 4.4). 
These are generally limited to what are termed 
i.e. those devoid of protons p to the metal (Figure 4.5). These 
also include 
and 
examples since decomposition via 
p-metal hydride elimination (see below) would require the installation of 
an alkenic bond between the a and p carbons of the precursor alkyl. 
This is precluded for these two alkyls because of the prohibitive strain 
associated with forming a double bond to a bridgehead atom within a 
small cage structure 
. The tetrakis(norborny1) complexes 
are also remarkable because some uncharacteristic oxidations states can 
be attained, e.g. Cr(IV), Co(IV) (low-spin e4t;). The second factor which 
may confer stability is 
; bimolecular decomposition routes are 
thereby discouraged. 

o-Organyls 
7 1 
There are various ways in which the coordinative unsaturation of 
Figure 4.4 Selected homoleptic 
homoleptic alkyls may be accommodated. Coordinatively unsaturated 
alkyls may show M-C,-C, 
angles greater than the value expected (C sp3: 
109O), and when the protons can be located crystallographically, one 
shows an 
interaction with the metal centre (Figure 2.24). 
Similarly, protons P to the metal may agostically stabilize the alkyl; how- 
ever, this is less commonly encountered in favour of complete P-M-H 
elimination. In solution, such agostic interactions muy be inferred from 
a shift to higher field of the 'H NMR resonance for the CH, (or CH,) 
proton and/or a decrease in the value of 'J(13C-1Ha), 
In the case of benzyl complexes, an interaction with the @so carbon 
may occur, or even with both the ispo and one ortho carbon, effectively 
an q3-allyl coordination (Figure 4.1, Table 1.1). Some stable alkyls may 
contain chelating donor groups which confer stability through the 
alkyls 
Mixed ligand alkyl complexes, with kinetically or thermodynamically 
stabilizing co-ligands, are far more numerous and examples have already 
been met. The more general synthetic routes to alkyl complexes are sum- 
marized in Figure 4.6, many of which apply to o-organyls in general. 
metals) from often commercially available organometallic reagents of 
Groups 1, 2, 12, 13 and the heavier elements of 14 are the most com- 
monly employed. Such reagents effectively deliver the organyl ligand in 
a nucleophilic (carbanionic) form in substitution reactions with complex 
halides, alkoxides or amides ( 
These equilibria are usually dictated by the thermodynamics of the alkyl 
transfer; transfer from a more electropositive metal to a more 
electronegative one generally results. However, the heat of formation 
of the resulting halide must be considered; for ionic halide formation 
(e.g. Groups 1 and 2) this may provide a substantial component of 
the driving force. The more 'carbanionic' and highly nucleophilic 
Amongst these, the 
(transfer of the o-organyl between 
Figure 4.5 Kinetically stabilized 
alkyls 
or 

72 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 4.6 o-Organyl transfer 
organometallics of the very electropositive elements of Groups 1 and 2 
occasionally lead to complex multiple metatheses, or 
(SET) reactions (reduction). In such cases, control may be 
achieved by use of the milder reagents of Groups 12 and 13. In the case 
of coordinatively saturated carbonyl halide complexes, nucleophilic 
attack may occur first at a carbonyl ligand followed by loss of halide 
and migration of the organyl to the metal centre (see Chapter 3). 
of alkyl halides 
offers a means of delivering the alkyl in electrophilic form, although it 
ultimately adopts a &+M-C& bond polarity as a result of the relative elec- 
tronegativities of carbon and the metal centre. For this purpose, the util- 
ity of the halide increases for X = F < Cl < Br < I (decreasing C-X bond 
strength). Although these reactions are most commonly simple S,2 in 
nature, radical routes may also be travelled. The routes shown in Figure 
4.7 involve modification of pre-coordinated ligands and these are revist- 
ed in more detail in sections dealing with the precursor ligand. 
For electron-rich metal substrates, 
4.2.2 Aryls 
Aryls are amongst the oldest examples of o-organyls to be investigated. 
Although there may be a modest mcomponent contributing to the ther- 
modynamic bond strength, these 7c-interactions may also facilitate 
approaches to the various transition states for decomposition. Over 80 
years ago, Hein investigated the synthesis of 
of triva- 
lent chromium. The ultimate products (Figure 4.8) contained hexahupto 
arene coordination, although at the time this was not recognized as such 
(Chapter 7). The related complex CrPh,(THF), can be isolated; howev- 
er, the corresponding complex formed in diethyl ether (a more common 
solvent in Hein’s day), CrPh,(OEt,),, is far less stable. Figure 4.8 also 

o-Organyls 
73 
Figure 4.7 o-Alkyl ligands via 
modification of other ligands 
Figure 4.8 Selected homoleptic 
o-aryls; Mes = 2,4,6-Me3C,H,; 
THT = tetrahydrothiophene, a 
labile thioether 

74 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
depicts further isolable examples of homoleptic aryls, amongst which the 
C,X, (X = F, Cl) group appears to provide particularly robust deriva- 
tives, through a combination of steric (kinetic) and electronic (thermo- 
dynamic) stabilization. 
of biaryls is a common decomposition route 
(Figure 4.9a), as illustrated by the osmium example (Figure 4.9b) in which 
the biaryl remains hexuhupto coordinated. Alternatively, 
com- 
plexes may result from P-C-H or P-C-Br abstraction processes (see below). 
Figure 4.9 Decomposition of 
complexes via (a) biavl Or 
(b) aryne formation 
The facility of arene reductive elimination underpins numerous C-C, 
C-0 and C-N bond-forming reactions, which may be catalysed by late 
transition metals, in particular palladium (Figure 4. lo). Although there 
are many variants, the general reaction scheme involves introduction of 
the aryl in electrophilic form via oxidative addition of an aryl halide (or 
sulfonate), substitution of the palladium halide by a nucleophile (which 
may also be carbon based) followed by reductive elimination. It is note- 
worthy that nucleophilic aromatic substitution in the absence of such 
catalysts can be difficult. 

a-Organyls 
75 
Figure 4.1 0 Generalized cat- 
alytic scheme for palladium-catal- 
ysed aryl halide (Ar-X) 
functionalization 
4.2.3 Alkenyls (Vinyls) 
As with aryls, the sp2 hybridization of o-alkenyls may contribute to both 
an increased BDE and also access to decomposition routes; homoleptic 
examples, e.g. Zr(CPh=CMe,),, are particularly rare. Decomposition of 
cis-bis(alkeny1) complexes via reductive elimination of buta- 1,3-dienes is 
occasionally observed; however, the butadiene may remain coordinated 
(Figure 4.11). 
Figure 4.1 1 Butadiene 
Other than simple transmetallation approaches, the majority of syn- 
thetic routes to o-alkenyls involve the functionalization of alkynes, via 
reactions of the coordinated alkyne with suitable nucleophiles or elec- 
trophiles or alternatively by the insertion of the alkyne into an adjacent 
M-H or M-C bond. These reactions (Figure 4.12) will be revisited in 
Chapter 6. 
One significant feature of alkenyl ligands is that in addition to simple 
reductive ‘elimination’ 
Figure 4.12 Synthesis of 
o-alkenyl ligands via alkyne 
modification 

76 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
o-coordination (1VE donation), they offer the possibility of o-n: or q2 
coordination (3VE; Figure 1.6) to metal centres that would otherwise be 
coordinatively unsaturated. In some instances, such ligands may 
rearrange to alkylidyne ligands (also 3VE, Figure 4.13; see also Chapter 
5). The ability to contribute 3VE also allows alkenyl ligand to bridge 
two metal centres (Figure 4.14). 
Figure 4.13 0-n Vinyl-alkyli- 
dyne interconversion (see Figure 
2.1 1); L5W = W(CO){HB(pzMe,),) 
Figure 4.14 Bridging alkenyl 
(vinyl) ligands 
Schwartz’s reagent, (ZrHC1Cp2}n (Figure 2.29b), readily (and often 
regioselectively) hydrozirconates alkynes to provide o-vinyl complexes from 
which the vinyl ligand may be cleaved by a wide range of electrophiles, in 
a manner reminiscent of hydroboration chemistry (Figure 4.15). 
4.2.4 Acyls 
These ligand have already been met (Chapter 3), including the three key 
synthetic routes: 
of o-organylkarbonyl complexes, 
at electron rich metals by acyl halides or anhydrides 
and 
is also 
fundamental to the reactivity of acyls. Further synthetic approaches are 
summarized in Figure 4.16 (see also Figure 3.30). 
at coordinated CO (Figure 4.12). 
The reverse of migratory insertion, 
Figure 4.15 Hydrozirconation 
with Schwartz’s reagent 
(see Figure 2.2913) 
v 
v 

a-Organyls 
77 
A further feature of acyl ligands is the enhanced acidity of protons 
on the carbon adjacent to the carbonyl (cf: enolate chemistry), a prop- 
erty shared with alkyl-substituted 
(Chapter 5). 
Figure 4.17 illustrates this point, including an application employing the 
chiral auxiliary ‘Fe(CO)(PPh,)Cp’. 
Figure 4.16 General routes to 
acyl ligands 
Figure 4.17 Acyl function- 
alization by (a) 0-alkylation and 
(b) P-C-H deprotonation 
including 
[LnM-C(=O)OR] and 
[LnM-C(=O)NR,], fall within this category with the exception 
that the carbon-heteroatom bond may occasionally be cleaved by Lewis 
(or Brarnsted) acids 
1 to generate a carbonyl ligand, a reac- 
tion which is atypical of hydrocarbon-substituted acyl ligands. The oxy- 
gen atom of acyls, in particular anionic acylates, may display nucleophilic 
character, especially towards hard electrophiles, a feature that led to the 
first examples of transition metal carbenes by alkylation (Figure 4.17a; 
see also Figure 5.4). 

78 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
4.2.5 Alkynyls (acetylides) 
For a long time, 
(Figure 1.14), were viewed from a classical coordination chemist’s per- 
spective, rather than as synthetically versatile organometallic functional 
groups. This by no means remains the case owing primarily to two prin- 
ciples. Firstly, many catalytic approaches to alkynes now proceed via 
alkynyl complexes of palladium and/or copper. Secondly, the facile con- 
version of alkynyls to 
(Chapter 5 )  presents a versatile and 
reactive M=C=C system which provides access to alkenyl, alkylidene, 
acyl, alkylidyne, carbonyl and alkyl species via the complex reaction man- 
ifold shown in Figure 4.18. This is an attempt to generalize a vast amount 
of chemistry in a unified scheme; the ultimate products of these reactions 
tend to be very metal-specific but clearly have enormous synthetic poten- 
tial. The crucial alkyne-vinylidene interconversion will be discussed in 
detail in Chapter 5. 
by analogy with 
Figure 4.18 Organometallic 
ligands arising from the 
Alkynyl ligands are only modest n-acids; however, this can allow 
between metal centres bound to bis(alkyny1)diyl 
bridging ligands, e. g. the diruthenium butadiyne- 1,4-diyl complex shown 
(Figure 4.19) undergoes four single 1VE oxidations. If the metals were 
not in electronic communication, oxidation of one iron centre would not 
significantly affect the redox potential of the second, i.e. both would oxi- 
dize at the same potential. 
modification of o-alkynyls 

o-Organyls 
79 
The ability of alkynyl groups to bridge two metals may be employed 
in the construction of 
complexes in a controlled manner 
(Figure 4.20; Chapter 6). Many metals will react directly with terminal 
alkynes or acetylide salts under basic conditions; however, use is often 
made of copper alkynyls as 
reagents [usually gener- 
ated in situ with catalytic amounts of Cu(1) salts]. 
4.3 
Reactions of o-Organyls 
As noted above, many transition metal o-organyl complexes are kineti- 
cally unstable owing to low-energy decomposition routes, which become 
available if the metal centre is coordinatively unsaturated. The various 
decomposition routes will be discussed in turn within the wider context 
of their reactivity. 
4.3.1 Homolytic Cleavage 
The homolytic cleavage (formation of organyl radicals) of transition 
metal o-organyls is not generally a favourable decomposition route under 
mild conditions. However, it does arise in some situations, the most 
celebrated being in the biochemistry of vitamin B,, where a number of 
reactions are mediated by its ability to generate adenonsyl radicals. More 
generally, however, the majority of transition metal o-organyl complex- 
es have metals in low oxidation states, and quite often also have n-accep- 
tor co-ligands. These factors favour the adoption of low-spin diamagnetic 
complexes, such that loss of an organic radical and formation of a para- 
magnetic metal radical is less favoured than other lower energy (dia- 
magnetic) processes. The use of cobalt o-organyl porphyrin complexes 
Figure 4.19 Yne-diyl and 
diyne-diyl ligands 
Figure 4.20 Alkynyl-bridged bi- 
and trimetallic complexes 

80 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
(models for vitamin B,J as catalysts for the 
of 
methyl methacrylate similarly relies on the ability of these complexes to 
generate radicals by facile Co-C homolysis. 
4.3.2 Reductive Elimination 
Complexes with two adjacent (cis) o-organyl ligands, or (more readily) 
a o-organyl and a hydride ligand, may decompose to provide hydro- 
carbon with concomitant (formal) reduction of the metal centre by two 
units. Either mononuclear (Figure 4.21a) or bimolecular (Figure 4.21b) 
decomposition routes may operate, depending on the steric and elec- 
tronic properties of the particular metal complex. This has been most 
Figure 4.21 Alkane reductive 
elimination 

a-Organyls 
81 
intensely studied for ds square planar diorganyls of Group 10, where the 
actual mechanism may involve (i) prior dissociation of a co-ligand to 
generate a more reactive three-coordinate species (dissociative activa- 
tion), or (ii) addition of a ligand to provide a more sterically encumbered 
five-coordinate intermediate (associative activation). This is especially 
true if the initial complex has the two eliminating groups in mutually 
trans positions, and therefore unable to commence elimination from a 
four-coordinate geometry. This is illustrated by the relative rates of 
ethane elimination from the three dimethyl complexes shown (Figure 
4.21c), the third of which has a bidentate diphosphine which enforces a 
trans geometry. 
In general, reductive elimination involving an organyl and a hydride 
is more facile than that between two organyls; indeed, 
of 
metal alkyls represents one of the most important cleavage reactions, 
which is often incorporated within catalytic cycles (Figures 4.22, 6.14). 
For metals in less than their highest oxidation state, this may proceed 
via oxidative addition of dihydrogen followed by reductive elimination 
Figure 4.22 Hydrogenolysis of 
o-alkyl ligands 

82 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
of a hydrocarbon. For metals in higher oxidation states, the cleavage 
may alternatively proceed via a (highly ordered, AS: < 0) four-membered 
transition state. Combining the BDE data given in Table 
1.5 with those in Table 4.1 suggests that a thermodynamic impetus for 
alkyl hydrogenolysis lies in the greater value for M-H vs. M-C bonds. 
is known as 
and is potentially of enormous technological significance, 
especially in the case of non-functionalized alkane C-H bonds. The acti- 
vation of non-functionalized alkanes occurs in nature, e.g. the iron-based 
metalloenzyme methane mono-oxygenase, which selectively converts 
methane to methanol, albeit via non-organometallic routes. Early indi- 
cations that C-H activation was feasible were provided by coordinatively 
unsaturated species, which entered into oxidative addition reactions with 
aryl C-H bonds (Figures 2,28c, 4.23a). The C-H activation of simple 
alkanes, however, was first achieved with the transient complexes 
‘Ir(L)Cp*’ (L = CO, PMe,), generated by photolysis of appropriate pre- 
cursors in alkane solvents (Figure 2.28d). The alkyl hydride complexes 
that resulted were somewhat unstable with respect to alkane reductive 
elimination; however, they could be trapped by conversion to the corre- 
sponding alkyl-halo complexes on treatment with a halocarbon (a char- 
acteristic reaction of metal hydrides; Figure 2.30). An intriguing and 
highly promising variant on this process involved the C-H activation of 
tert-butyl alcohol and tert-butylamine (Figure 2.28d). Following these 
seminal results, numerous examples of these processes have now been 
recognized. Furthermore, alkane complexes have now been spectro- 
scopically observed as intermediates, although these are exceedingly 
labile species. In the case of unsaturated hydrocarbons (alkenes, arenes), 
The (microscopic) reverse of 
I 
1 

a-Organyls 
83 
prior coordination of the hydrocarbon through a x-system may occur 
(see Chapters 5 and 6). 
4.3.3 Electrophilic Cleavage 
Transition metal alkyls generally retain nucleophilic character at C, and 
are thus prone to reactions with electrophiles, usually leading to cleav- 
age from the metal. Mechanistically, two paths may operate, depending 
on the particular metal centre concerned (Figure 4.24): either direct elec- 
or alternatively attack at the metal centre (oxidation) followed by reduc- 
tive elimination, proceeding with 
at C,. These 
alternatives are depicted in Figure 4.24 in addition to a special case, the 
insertion of sulfur dioxide. This process is in contrast to conventional 
migratory insertion (Chapter 3), which involves migration of the organyl 
to an adjacent ligand and is characterized by retention of configuration 
at C,. In the case of SO, insertion, however, initial electrophilic cleav- 
age (inversion) results in ion pair formation followed by re-coordination 
of the sulfinate anion through either sulfur or oxygen. The reverse of this 
reaction, the de-insertion of so, from Sulfinate COITlplexeS, also provides 
a synthetic route to o-organyls (see also Figure 4.6). 
trophilic attack at C,, which leads to 
at c,, 
Figure 4.24 E,ectrophilic 
cleavage of alkyl ligands; 
Fel, = Fe(CO),Cp 

84 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
4.3.4 Insertion Reactions 
These have already been met in the case of carbonyl-alkyl coupling 
through migratory insertion (Figures 3.23-3.30). In Chapter 6 the case 
of alkenes inserting into metal-carbon o-bonds will be discussed in detail, 
since it is of crucial importance in catalytic alkene polymerization 
processes. Figure 4.25 illustrates the general cases of migration to a C, 
and a C, ligand and situations where these migrations have been impli- 
cated. Parallels with insertion reactions of hydride ligands (Figures 2.30, 
2.31) should become apparent, bearing in mind that M-C bonds are typ- 
ically 60-120 kJ mol-' weaker than M-H bonds (Table 1.5). 
Figure 4.25 Migrations of alkyl 
4.3.5 B-Metal Hydrogen (P-M-H) Elimination 
ligands to C, and C, co-ligands 
This reaction is by far the most common decomposition route for alkyl 
ligands which possess hydrogen substituents on the carbon p to the metal. 
The process requires a vacant coordination site (i.e. <18VE) cis to the 
alkyl (Figure 2.31). The P-C-H bond may weakly coordinate in an agos- 
tic manner (sometimes isolable; Figure 2.24) en route to a four-membered 
transition state involving C-H bond rupture (transfer of the hydrogen 
to the metal). The resulting alkene may remain coordinated or alterna- 
tively dissociate and be substituted by other available ligands. As such, 
this reaction presents an important synthetic route to hydride complex- 
es (Chapter 2, Figure 2.31). If more than one alkyl ligand is present, the 

o-Organyls 
85 
resulting hydride may reductively eliminate alkane with a second alkyl, 
leading to a reduction of the metal centre. Thus the role of alkylating 
agents as reductants (e.g. Al,Et,) in the synthesis binary carbonyls 
(Figure 3.1 1) becomes clear. The geometrical requirement that the vacant 
site is cis to the ethyl ligand is illustrated by the thermal decomposition 
of trans-RuEt,(TPP), which proceeds via a radical pathway since the 
porphyrin (TPP) blocks sites adjacent to the ethyl ligands. Figure 4.26 
shows selected examples, including non-organometallic ligands (amides, 
alkoxides) which are also vulnerable to this decomposition route. 
4.3.6 a-Abstraction or a-Elimination 
Figure 4.26 Synthetic 
The kinetically stabilized alkyls shown in Figure 4.5 do not have the 
P-M-H elimination route available to them owing to the absence of 
P-protons. An alternative decomposition route, however, arises when 
these are bound to highly unsaturated metal centres, involving loss of 
an a-C-H which may be either transferred (Figure 4.27) to (a) the metal 
centre itself (a-elimination), (b) a co-ligand or (c) an external basic or 
electrophilic reagent (a-abstraction). 
The complex Ta(CH,But), has yet to be isolated; initial attempts at 
its preparation led Schrock instead to a remarkable 
(carbene) 
complex (Figure 4.28). Neopentane was amongst the side products of 
the reaction and this most likely arises from a concerted a-C-H abstrac- 
tion by an adjacent neopentyl ligand. In other systems, there is evidence 
for transfer of the hydrogen to the metal centre and agostic alkyls (Figure 
2.24) can be seen as a step en route to the a-M-H elimination transition 
applications of P-metal-hydride 
eliminations 

86 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 4.27 (a) a-Hydrogen 
elimination, (b) intra- and 
(c) intermolecular hydrogen 
abstraction 
Figure 4.28 Alkyl decomposi- 
tion via intramolecular a-M-H 
elimination/abstraction 
state. These reactions are particularly prevalent for the 4d and 5d ele- 
ments of Groups 5-7 with low VE counts. The 3d elements, in contrast, 
are more prone to homolytic cleavage. The a-M-H elimination process 
requires a somewhat strained three-membered transition state, whilst the 
0-M-H elimination involves a more relaxed four-membered transition 
state. In general, P-M-H elimination tends to prevail over a-M-H elim- 
ination, although there are (rare) examples where the two processes may 
compete, e.g. the ethene-neopentyl tantalum complex shown in Figure 
4.28. 
When the a-hydrogen is transferred to an external reagent, it may do 
so in protic (Figure 4.29) or hydridic form (Figure 4.30a), depending on 
the nature of the metal centre and the external reagent. Thus the first 
methylene (CH2) complex arose from the deprotonation of a cationic 
methyl complex, which was in turn obtained via electrophilic cleavage 
(Ph,C+) of one methyl ligand from TaMe3Cp2 (Figure 4.29). 
suggests that since the methylene ligand was produced by 
removal of an electrofuge (H+), it will be prone to both the reverse 
-Chle4 
H 
+ (THF)*Cl,Ta=C: 
THF 
But 
Zn(CH2But)2 
TaC13(CH2But)2 
* TaC12(CH2But)3 
LiCH2But -CMe4 
(ButH2C)3Ta=C: 
I
H
 
ZnEt2 
I 
But 
TaC12Et(CH2But)2 
Figure 4.29 Intermolecular 
a-H abstraction (electrofugic) 

o-Organyls 
87 
reaction (protonation) and reaction with other electrophiles (Me3SiBr, 
A12Me,). 
In contrast, the late transition metal alkyls Re(CH,R)(NO)(PPh,)Cp 
(R = H, Ph) react with trityl (Ph,C+) salts via intermolecular hydride 
abstraction to provide alkylidene complexes which by microscopic 
reversibility are prone to reactions with nucleophiles (Figure 4.30a). The 
reactivity of alkylidene (carbene) complexes will be discussed in the next 
chapter. Intermolecular a-abstraction is also widely applied to a- 
alkoxyalkyl and a-haloalkyl ligands, with a range of Lewis acids being 
suitable (Figure 4.30b). 
L3Re - 
CH2PR3 
f 
+ 
L3Re - CH3 + L3Re=CHOMe 
L3Re = Re(NO)(PPh3)(q-CsHs) 
H 
H+ 
+ 
/H 
Fp-C)OMe - 
Fp=C, 
Ph 
ph 
-MeOH 
F 
I 
,CF3 
Me3SiC1 
~ C - F  
L ~ R u  
= RuCl(CO)(PPh3)2 
c1 
L4Ru, N C M ~  -Me3SiF * 
4 ' \  
-MeCN 
Figure 4.30 Intermolecular a- 
M-H abstraction (nucleofugic) 
(see also Figure 5.17) 
4.3.7 Remote C-H Functionalization 
In addition to a- and P-C-H activation, the possibility occasionally aris- 
es for y- or even 6-functionalization. This is particularly common for aryl 
phosphine and phosphite ligands that may undergo metallation of the 
ortho-C-H bond of an aryl substituent. This process may be reversible; 
however, if a suitable co-ligand is present which can undergo subsequent 
reductive elimination of the hydride, stable 
are 
obtained (Figure 4.3 1). The formation of metallacyclic alkyls may con- 
fer some stability, as does the possibility of increased hapticity, e.g. in 
the case of xylyene ligands (see also Chapter 6). 

88 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
- 
oc’pe, 
-CH4 oC”yJ 
oc 
oc 
CH3 
,c1 
RuC12L4 
H3C 
tmen.Li 
Figure 4.31 Remote (cu) C-H 
activation/metallation of organyls 

Met al-Carbon Multiple 
Bonding 
5.1 
Introduction 
Metal-carbon multiple bonding takes many forms; indeed, carbonyl lig- 
ands (Chapter 3) are arguably the simplest. ‘Formal’ metalkarbon mul- 
tiple bonds (Figure 5. l) will be considered here; however, some o-organyl 
ligands may also feature a degree of metakarbon multiple bonding 
(Figure 4.2). The synthesis of such ligands will be discussed, followed by 
a survey of the various typical reactions that the metakarbon bond may 
undergo. 
The oxygen atom of 
may present nucleophilic 
character (Figures 3.25, 4.16). In 1964, E. 0. Fischer showed that pro- 
tonation of the benzoyl tungstate complex obtained from W(CO), and 
phenyllithium (Figure 3.20) provided the first characterized example 
of a metalkarbon double bond, viz. the 
complex 
(CO),W=C(OH)Ph. This labile species decomposed to provide ben- 
zaldehyde; however, it could be ‘esterified’ with diazomethane to provide 
Figure 5.1 M-C multiple 
bonding 
89 

90 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Figure 5.2 Fischer’s carbene 
and carbyne syntheses 
the more stable 
derivative (Figure 5.2). Almost a decade 
later, Fischer showed that the reaction of this complex with boron halides 
did not proceed as expected to provide a halocarbene complex (by anal- 
ogy with vinyl ethers), but rather the first example of a metal-carbon 
triple bond, the 
complex trans-Cl(CO),W=CPh. 
At the time, such carbene and carbyne complexes must have appeared 
as exotic curiosities. In the interim, they have become firmly entrenched 
in the modern synthetic chemist’s armoury of 
are used interchangeably in the literature; the for- 
mer is more commonly used for heteroatom functionalized examples 
whilst the latter typically refers to purely hydrocarbon ligands. In a sim- 
ilar manner, the terms carbyne and 
both enjoy wide useage. 
Historically, the terms carbene and carbyne call to mind an analogy with 
the free species CR, and CR; however, in very few cases does the chem- 
istry or character of these ligands overlap with that of the free (transient) 
species. This may be understood when one bears in mind two key 
points. Firstly, the BDE for the metalkarbon double bond of 
W(=C(OMe)Ph}(CO), (ca. 359 kJ mol-I; Table 1.5) would appear to 
preclude simple dissociation [CJ: 178 kJ mol-’ for W-CO in W(CO),, 
Table 3.31. Secondly, the half-lives of simple hydrocarbon carbenes are 
far shorter than those typical of ligand substitution reactions at transi- 
tion metal centres. Thus, with a few notable exceptions (see later), free 
carbenes are neither isolable nor suitable precursors to carbene com- 
plexes. One must therefore, in the steps of Fischer, resort to ingenuity 
to prepare the carbene (or carbyne) ligand within the protective envi- 
ronment of a transition metal coordination sphere. 
The terms 
and 
5.2 
Carbenes (Alkylidenes) 
A bonding scheme has already been provided for methylene (‘CHJ coor- 
dinated to a transition metal centre (Figure 1.15). The energies of the 
frontier orbitals of free CO are fixed; however, the reactivity of coordi- 
nated CO may be tuned by variations in the energy of the metal-ligand 
orbitals. Thereby, the CO may be coordinatively activated towards either 
nucleophilic or (less readily) electrophilic attack, in addition to ligand 
coupling reactions. This principle applies equally to carbene (and car- 
byne) complexes, with the added dimension that now it is also possible 
to moderate the energies of the carbene frontier orbitals [o (sp2) and p-] 
by varying the carbene substituents. This enormous variability accounis 
for the wide spectrum of reactivity observed for carbene complexes. 
The generalizations in Box 5.1 represent two extreme situations and 
are referred to in the older literature as 
carbenes, in deference to the research groups from which the apparent- 
ly distinct classes of carbene complex originally arose. This dichotomy 
and 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
91 
reflected the historical development of two extreme ends of a spectrum, 
which has in the interim been interspersed with sufficient counter or inter- 
mediate examples to justify a more unified view. With regard to carbene 
substituents, heteroatom groups capable of 
into the empty 
carbene p, orbital compromise the metalkarbon bond, leading to length- 
ening (Figures 1.16, 5.3). 
present a special case in that the 
substituents are electronegative and very poor .n-donors; unless bound 
to particularly electron-rich metal centres, halocarbenes are especially 
electrophilic. 
5.2.1 Characterization of Carbene Complexes 
A formal metalkarbon double bond should in principle be reflected in 
the metalkarbon bond length. This is generally the case, although it 
must be noted that metalkarbene bond lengths may span a wide range 
due in part to the effects indicated in Figure 1.16. Figures 1.16, 4.2, 4.29 
and 5.3 show structural data for selected carbene complexes, amongst 
which, those for the complex W(CH,R)( =CHR)(=CR)(dmpe) (R = But) 
provide the most convincing (and elegant) illustration. NMR spec- 
troscopy is very useful for characterizing carbene complexes in that the 
13C resonance occurs to low field (200-350 ppm). The resonance is moved 
to higher field by heteroatom carbene substitutents. For 
(LnM=CHR), 'H NMR spectroscopy typically reveals a 
resonance between 10 and 22 ppm, and 'J(13C-'H) couplings evident in 
should be noted that some coordinatively unsaturated alkylidenes may 
alkylidene complexes 

92 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
enter into agostic interactions with the metal, leading to an opening of 
the M=C-R angle, accompanied by a decrease in the lJ(13C-'H) values 
(70-100 Hz) and the frequency of the vCH IR absorption ( v ~ = ~  
is seldom 
unambiguously identified). This agostic coordination is particularly com- 
mon for coordinatively unsaturated alkylidene complexes of the earlier 
transition metals. Finally, variable temperature NMR (VT NMR) meas- 
urements may reveal barriers to alkylidene rotation (Table 1.3). 
5.2.2 Synthesis of Carbene Complexes 
Fischer's acylate 
remains a widely employed method of car- 
bene synthesis, the generality of which is indicated in Figure 5.4. There 
are, however, many alternative approaches. The case of 
or 
(Figures 4.27,4.28, 5.5) is particularly important for unsat- 
urated alkyls of Group 4-7 metals, but less relevant for later transition 
metals which typically have higher d occupancies. 
Figure 5.4 Carbonyl-derived 
carbenes and carbynes 
The vast majority of carbene syntheses involve the modification of an 
existing ligand and some of the more general routes are shown in Figure 
5.6, in addition to some less general though intriguing approaches which 
may subsequently find more generality. 
Bertrand was quickly followed by the isolation of stable 
by Arduengo (Figure 5.7). Imidazolylidene complexes of most 
of the transition metals have since been prepared directly from free 
carbenes. 
The use of stable free carbenes now allows their coordination to be 
The discovery of stable and isolable free 
by 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
93 
achieved under milder conditions, thereby greatly increasing their syn- 
Figure 5.5 Alkylidene synthesis 
thetic versatility. These diaminocarbenes have a very modest (if any) 
retrodative component to the M-C bond and in this respect emulate 
a-M-H elimination/abstraction 
(see a'So Figures 3*28-3.30) 
phosphines both in terms of the net (and tunable) dative capacity and 
in the potential control of steric factors offered by the variety of possi- 
ble nitrogen substituents. The reduction in metal-carbon bond order gen- 
erally results in a loss of M=C based reactivity, to the point that these 
ligands may be used in place of phosphines as innocent (spectator) co- 
ligands in catalytic processes. 
As in organic chemistry, 
have found wide application as 
ultimate carbene sources. In contrast to the organic chemistry of dia- 
zoalkanes, however, the reactions do not proceed via free carbenes but 
rather via 
transformations of coordinated diazoalkanes. 
In some cases, diazoalkane complexes may be isolated (Figure 5.8). The 
parent diazoalkane, H,C=N,, has found somewhat less success in the 
synthesis of terminal 
complexes LnM=CH,; however, this is 
primarily due to the lack of any kinetic (steric) or thermodynamic 
(n-dative) stabilization by carbene substituents. Thus methylene ligands 

94 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 5.6 Selected synthetic 
routes to carbene complexes 
Figure 5.7 lsolable (a) 
Bertrand- and (b) Arduengo-type 
free carbenes predated by (c) 
transition metal complexes 
are generally more prone to subsequent reaction with co-ligands or exter- 
nal reagents. This may include other metal centres, leading to bridging 
carbene complexes (see later), but may be retarded by inclusion of bulky 
co-ligands. 
The complications that occasionally arise in the use of diazoalkanes 
reflect the possible further reactions of carbene ligands, which will be 
dealt with subsequently, e.g. insertion into adjacent M-H or M-halide 
bonds and the formation of 
In some cases, transition metals may catalyse reactions 
of diazoalkanes, leading to products which are suggestive of the reac- 
tions of free carbenes, i.e. dimerization, addition to alkenes (cyclo- 
propanation) and insertion into C-H bonds (Figure 5.9). In such cases, 
however, the actual mechanism does not involve free carbenes but rather 
transient 
This is supported by the obser- 
supported by 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
95 
Figure 5.8 Reactions of metal 
complexes with diazoalkanes; 
[Mn] = Mn(CO),Cp; L = PPh, 
vation that chiral metal catalysts can lead to enantioselective processes, 
Figure 5.9 Transition metal 
implicating the direct participation of the optically active metal centre in 
the bond-forming step(s). The special case of cyclopropanation will be 
catalysed (a) dimerizationy 
(b) C-H 
insertion and (c) cyclopropanation 
reactions of diazoalkanes 
-. 
_
_
 - 
discussed below. 
The search for halocarbenes led to Fischer’s carbyne synthesis (see 
below); however, such halocarbene complexes are now widely available for 
elements of Group 6-9, albeit via alternative synthetic strategies. The first 
stable example arose from a study of the biochemically relevant reactions 

96 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 5.1 1 Intermetallic car- 
bene transfer 
of halocarbons with porphyrin complexes under reducing conditions. Thus 
reaction of Fe(TPP)Cl with CCl, in the presence of iron powder (reduc- 
tant) provided the diamagnetic dichlorocarbene complex Fe(TPP)(=CCl,). 
Various other routes to halocarbene complexes are presented in Figure 5.10 
(see also Figures 4.30b, 5.6). The key synthetic utility of these complexes 
lies in the ability of one or both halides to be replaced by a range of nucle- 
ophiles (cf acyl halides and phosgene, O=CCl,). 
Figure 5.10 Synthetic routes to 
halocarbene complexes (see also 
Figure 4.30) 
Coordinatively unsaturated alkyl complexes devoid of P-protons are 
prone to a-elimination or abstraction reactions, especially for higher 
valent metals of Groups 5-7. Intramolecular a-elimination (H trans- 
ferred to the metal) or a-abstraction (H transferred to a co-ligand) reac- 
tions (Figures 4.274.29) are complemented by reactions which result in 
removal of an a-C-H by an external reagent. Depending on the nature 
of the alkyl precursor, this hydrogen may be removed as either H-, H' 
or H+ (Figures 4.27). Many other alkyl a-substituents (halide, alkoxide, 
thiolate) are also capable of 
Alkylidene ligands may in some cases be transferred between metal 
centres; however, it should be stressed that these reactions do not involve 
the generation of free carbenes but rather 
intermediates. So 
far, these reactions have involved transfer of a carbene ligand from an 
earlv transition metal to a later transition metal (Figure 5.11). 
(Figure 4.30). 
4 
\
u
 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
97 
New carbene complexes may arise from the modification of a pre- 
formed carbene ligand. Examples have already been met in the case of 
halocarbenes (Figure 5.10); however, further examples will be discussed 
under the topic of carbene reactivity. 
5.2.3 Reactions of Carbene Complexes 
Both the 
and the 
of carbene complexes comprise contri- 
butions from both metal and carbon atomic orbitals. The relative con- 
tributions of these orbitals will be dependent upon the nature of the metal 
[charge, oxidation state, co-ligands, coordinative (un)saturation] and the 
carbene substituents (electronegativity, .n-dative capacity). The effect of 
charge is illustrated by the two 
complexes RM( =CH,)Cp, 
(RM = MeTa, HW+). The methylene ligand in the tantalum complex 
(Figure 4.29) displays nucleophilic character, whilst the tungsten meth- 
ylene is a strong electrophile (Figure 5.12). 
Thermo I ysi s 
Many carbene complexes, especially those bearing one or two hydrogen 
substituents, are thermally unstable with respect to the formation of 
alkenes or their complexes (Figure 5.13), usually via 
inter- 
mediates. For this reason the thermal stability of carbene complexes can 
normally be enhanced by- inclusion of sterically demanding co-ligands. 
Often within a triad the stability of carbene complexes increases in the 
order 4d < 3d < 5d when analogous compounds can be obtained and 
compared. 
Figure 5.12 Metal-dependent 
methylene reactivity; top: L,M 
= 
I r(PMe,)Cp*, Ta(CH,)Cp,, 
OsCI( NO)( PPh,), , I rl(CO)(PPh,),; 
Fe(CO),Cp+, Mo(CO),Cp+, 
Os(dppm)Cp*+, Re(NO)(PPh,)Cp+ 
bottom: L,M 
= WHCp,', 
Ligand Substitution 
Coordinatively unsaturated carbene complexes will normally bind 
further ligands to attain coordinative saturation (steric factors allowing). 
Figure 5.13 Thermolysis of car- 
bene complexes 

98 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
For 18VE carbene complexes, however, direct attack by ligands at the 
metal centre is disfavoured. This leaves two mechanistic possibilities: (i) 
(A or hv), which may be enhanced by the charac- 
teristically high trans influence of carbene ligands; or (ii) 
via attack by the ligand (nucleophile) at the carbene carbon. 
Occasionally (e.g. Figure 5.14), both mechanisms may operate, the latter 
showing, as expected, a rate dependence on the nature of the incoming 
ligand (nucleophilicity, steric properties). Thus for phosphines of low 
rate limiting dissociation of a carbonyl co-ligand pre- 
cedes rapid coordination of the phosphine. For smaller and highly basic 
phosphines, e.g. PMe, (Table 2.1), this route operates in addition to a 
second process involving nucleophilic attack at the carbene carbon (ylide 
formation, see below). This may be followed by either loss of a carbonyl 
ligand and migration of the phosphine to the metal (a-elimination), 
or alternatively competitive displacement of the ylide by a second 
phosphine. 
Figure 5.14 Dissociatively (k,) 
In addition to carbenes exerting a strong 
(thermody- 
and associatively (k,) activated 
routes for ligand substitution; CR, 
= Cf0Me)Me 
namic), which may be manifest as a 
(kinetic) in ligand sub- 
stitution reactions, heteroatom-functionalized carbene ligands (with their 
- \ -  
- I  
- 
associated dipolar resonance contributor, Figure 1.16) may assist in 
the stabilization of transition states of reduced coordination number by 
electron donation to the metal. 
N ucleo phi1 ic Attack 
For coordinatively unsaturated carbene complexes, nucleophilic attack 
may occur at the Lewis-acidic metal centre. For 18VE carbene com- 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
99 
plexes, however, nucleophiles generally attack at the carbene carbon. 
This process (Figures 5.12, 5.14) may be encouraged, as in the case of 
carbonyl ligands (Figure 3.20), by any factor which raises the energy of 
the carbon or metal orbitals contributing to the LUMO of the complex 
(positive charge, .n-acidic co-ligands, electronegative carbene sub- 
stituents). For simple Fischer-type carbenes, although the carbonyls 
carry a greater positive charge than the carbene carbon, nucleophiles 
generally attack at the carbene because of the high contribution that this 
atom makes to the LUMO 
. Figure 5.15 collects 
a range of reactions of Fischer-type carbenes with nucleophiles. For 
many 
(H-Nu), the ultimate product arises from 
substitution of alkoxide by Nu-. A zwitterionic intermediate (Figure 5.16) 
is assumed to occur and in some cases this intermediate may be isolated 
if the nucleophile is a tertiary amine (e.g. DABCO) or phosphine. 
Figure 5.15 Nucleophilic attack 
at Fischer carbenes (not all 
combinations of M and Nu); 
M = Cr(CO),, Mo(CO),, W(CO), 
Nucleophilic attack by hydride or organolithium reagents calls for 
special comment as it provides access to non-heteroatom-functionalized 
carbenes (alkylidenes). In both of these cases (Figure 5.17), an anionic 
complex is formed and in some cases this may be isolated. 
However, more commonly, this intermediate is treated with a Bronsted 
of the alkylidene complex. The examples shown are somewhat thermally 
unstable, especially the benzylidene complex. These may, however, be 
generated in situ and trapped with a variety of reagents, e.g. the addi- 
tion of chalcogens which provide complexes of 
(E=CHR) and 
(E=CR,). In some cases it is more con- 
venient to prepare an a-alkoxyalkyl complex directly (Figure 4.30), prior 
to alkoxide abstraction. 
acid at low temperature, resulting in 
and formation 
Figure 5.16 Elimination vs. 
rearrangement Of a-alkoxya'ky' 
intermediates 

100 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 5.1 7 Benzylidene, 
diphenylcarbene and chalcoalde- 
hyde complexes; [wl = W(CO), 
Eiectrophilic Attack 
Figure 5.1 8 Electrophilic attack 
at carbenes 
Figure 5.1 9 Electrophilic 
attack at an electron-rich car- 
bene; [Ir] = Ir(PMe,)Cp*; X = 
CI (as [PhNH,]CI), H, OC,H,CF,, 
SBu', N(CO),C,H, 
Figure 5.20 Amphiphilic 
carbenes; [Ru] = Ru(CO),(PPh,),; 
[Re] = Re(CO),Cp; R = 
CH,CH,But 
An electrophile may ultimately bind to either the metal centre (nVE) or 
the carbene carbon (n - 2VE), bearing in mind that the two potential 
outcomes (Figure 5.18) are related by the 
(see also Figures 4.29, 5.12). More commonly, however, 
the conjugate nucleophile of the electrophilic reagent coordinates to 
the metal, blocking a-elimination, as illustrated for the electron-rich 
methylene complex Ir(=CH,)(PMe,)Cp* (Figure 5.19). 
Intermediate situations may arise where the M=C bond may act as 
either an electrophile or a nucleophile (i.e. an 
This is illus- 
trated by the complexes Ru(=CF,)(CO),(PPh,), 
[Ru(O), d8] and 
Re(=CHR)(CO),Cp [Re(I), d6] (Figure 5.20). The Ru(0) example is par- 
ticularly illustrative in that the related Ru(I1) complex, RuCl,(CO)- 
(=CF,)(PPh,), (d6), reacts solely with nucleophiles. The intermediate 
character of these and other amphiphilic carbenes serve to devalue the 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
101 
Fischer/Schrock dichotomy in favour of a more inclusive and tunable 
reactivity continuum. 
Cyclopropanation and Related Reactions 
Free carbenes readily add to C-C multiple bonds with the formation of 
cyclopropanes. Cyclopropanes may also be obtained via the reaction 
of carbene complexes with alkenes; however, since free carbenes are not 
involved, the course of the reaction may be influenced by the nature 
of the metal complex. Generally (though not exclusively), the reaction is 
considered to proceed via coordination of the alkene cis to the carbene 
ligand, followed by a [2 + 21 cycloaddition of the C=C and M=C double 
bonds. The resulting 
may then undergo reductive 
elimination of the cyclopropane (Figure 5.2 la). For particularly elec- 
trophilic (1 8VE) carbene complexes, however, an alternative mechanism 
may operate, in which the carbene carbon attacks the alkene directly to 
generate y-carbocationic alkyl ligand which collapses with ring closure 
and electrophilic alkyl cleavage (Figure 4.24). Support for this comes 
from unequivocal synthesis of a putative intermediate via reaction of 
y-haloalkyl complexes with halide abstractors (Figure 5.2 1 b). 
This stoichiometric process may be made catalytic if a means of 
Figure 5.21 Alkene cyclopropa- 
reintroducing a carbene ligand can be incorporated into a cycle. This has 
been achieved now for a number of metal catalysts, with diazoalkanes 
nation 
(a) cycloaddition Or 
(b) electrophilic attack processes 
typically serving as the carbene source (Figure 5.9~). The key inter- 
mediate in the above process is a metallacyclobutane, to which we will 
return (see Alkene metathesis below). First, however, we will consider 
the reactions of metal carbenes with other Gelement double bonds, i.e. 

102 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
C=O and C=N. In the reactions of aldehydes with phosphorus ylides 
(‘phosphorus alkylidenes’), there is a strong impetus for the formation 
of phosphine oxide and alkene via a four-membered intermediate: the 
For transition metal alkylidenes, a similar situation aris- 
es: those of the earlier electropositive (i.e. hard, oxophilic) elements react 
with organic carbonyl complexes via reactions analogous to the Wittig 
reaction, resulting in the formation of the corresponding metal 0x0 com- 
plex and liberation of an alkene (Figure 5.22). 
Figure 5.22 Alkylidene cyclo- 
additions with heteroalkenes 
Many examples of this class of reaction have been demonstrated for 
isolable alkylidene complexes, in addition to similar results obtained for 
complexes which appear to react as alkylidenes, e.g. the Petasis reagent 
TiMe,Cp, and Tebbe’s reagent, TiCl(CH,AlMe,Cl)Cp, (Figure 4.14), 
both of which alkenate esters presumably via a reactive methylene com- 
plex, Ti(=CH,)Cp,. Imines also react with some early transition metal 
alkylidene complexes to provide the corresponding alkene and imido 
complex. 
Al kene Met at hesi s (Dism u t at ion) 
Returning to the key metallacyclobutane intermediate above, we must 
now consider an alternative decomposition mechanism which may 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
103 
operate. The reverse of the [2 + 21 cycloaddition would regenerate the 
original alkylidene-alkene complex, if 
the complex had a ‘memory’. 
However, once formed, the metallacyclobutane may break down in two 
ways: from whence it came or alternatively to generate new alkylidene 
and (labile) alkene ligands. Many factors, both thermodynamic and 
kinetic, may determine which of these is favoured. Since the new alkene 
can dissociate from the metal centre and be replaced by a further mole- 
cule of the original alkene substrate, a process arises by which the halves 
of an alkene may be exchanged or ‘metathesized’. This 
process in its various forms underpins a range of technologically 
useful alkene transformations. The accepted 
mech- 
anism (Figure 5.23) is supported by the observation that the process may 
be initiated by either preformed alkylidene or metallacyclobutane pre- 
catalysts. Variants will be considered in turn, although the same mech- 
anism accounts for each, the distinctions arising from the nature of the 
substrates and products. As is often the case, applications of the process 
predated its understanding. Various effective 
have long been known and generally arise from a high-valent transition 
metal compound (Re,O,, WC16, MoC1,) in combination with a nucleo- 
philic alkylating agent (SnR,, AlR,, ZnR,). Such systems are believed 
to generate polyalkyls which convert by a-H abstraction/elimination 
reactions to alkylidene species, The true nature of the active site(s), how- 
ever, often remains obscure, the inevitable downside of heterogeneous 
cat a1 y sis. 
In contrast to ill-defined heterogeneous systems, well-defined catalyt- 
ically active molecular complexes of the metallacyclobutane or alkyli- 
dene variety have each been employed as initiators. The requirement for 
initial alkene coordination is reflected in the observation that the most 
effective catalysts tend to be four-coordinate alkylidene complexes. Less 
active catalysts may be activated by co-ligand removal, which may be 
effected by Lewis acids (A12C16, Ga2C16, CuCl) capable of abstracting 
halide or phosphine ligands. Thus W(=O)(=CHBut)C12(PEt,), is activat- 
ed by Al,Cl, (halide abstraction) whilst CuCl abstracts phosphine from 
Grubbs’ catalyst, RuCl,( =CHPh)(PCy,),. The tendency of early transi- 
tion metal alkylidenes to form either 0x0 or imido complexes on reac- 
tion with carbonyl or imine functional groups complicates the design of 
alkene metathesis catalysts based on these metals, since they are some- 
what intolerant of many polar functional groups (requiring protection/ 
deprotection protocols). Alkylidene complexes of the later transition 
metals, in particular Grubbs’ catalyst (Figure 5.8), are less oxophilic and 
can tolerate alkenes bearing a range of oxygen- and nitrogen-based polar 
functional groups. In general, however, the heteroatom must be remote 
from the double bond to be metathesized since the inclusion of 
heteroatoms directly on the double bond would result in the formation 
Figure 5.23 (a) Chauvin- 
Herisson mechanism for alkene 
metathesis with well-defined 
(b) alkylidene and (c) metallacy- 
clobutane initiators 

104 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
of heteroatom-functionalized carbene complexes. These usually only 
show limited activity relative to non-heteroatom carbene (alkylidene) 
complexes. 
Acyclic Diene Metathesis (ADMET) 
Figure 5.24 ADMET 
polymerization 
Figure 5.25 ROMP: 
mechanism and application 
is applied to the synthesis of polymers from dienes, wherein a 
(most commonly ethene) is lost as the polymerization 
proceeds. The strength of this process (and ROMP, below) is that poly- 
mers with regularly repeating alkene groups 
are obtained 
with a regularity, and proximity to other repeating functional groups, 
strictly defined by the nature of the diene monomer. The process is, how- 
ever, in principle an equilibrium, and accordingly by varying the condi- 
tions such polymers may be depolymerized in the presence of a catalyst 
and excess ethene (Figure 5.24). 
Ring-opening Metathesis Polymerization (ROMP) 
For cyclic alkenes which involve a degree of 
this may be elim- 
inated by metathesizing the halves of the strained alkene, resulting in lin- 
ear polyalkenes (polyenamers) (Figure 5.25). This is illustrated by the 
of norbornene to provide poly(norbornene). The Diels-Alder 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
105 
dimer dicyclopentadiene (a substituted norbornene) comprises two 
cyclopentene rings, either of which might in principle be opened. 
However, the more strained of these which is involved in the bicyclic 
ring system is preferentially opened, although highly active catalysts may 
in the later stages of catalysis also open the second ring, leading to 
also involve considerable ring strain and 
the ROMP of one example provides access to the conducting polymer 
precursor 
(CH=CH)n. 
Ring Closure Metathesis 
The difference in 
(e.g. ring strain) of substrate and product 
provides a driving force for the ROMP process. 
considerations 
of 
a,o-dienes (Figure 5.26). With the ultimate generation of two product 
molecules from one substrate molecule, and so long as the resulting 
cycloalkene does not possess prohibitive ring strain, the gain in entropy 
(AS > 0) drives the reaction to completion. If the liberated sacrificial 
alkene is volatile (ethene, butene), removal may further displace the 
may also play a part, as in the case of ring closure metathesis 
Figure 5.26 Ring 
metathesis including 
enantioselective applications 

106 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
equilibrium in favour of cycloalkene isolation. Entropic factors may, 
however, count against the formation of larger rings. Furthermore, as 
these have less ring strain, the double bond that results may have E or 
z 
(Figure 5.26). Catalytic 
) has also been developed in various enantioselective 
forms. Kinetic 
may be achieved such that one 
enantiomer of a racemate may be selectively closed, ideally leaving the 
other untouched. Alternatively, a prochiral substrate with three alkene 
groups, two of which are 
, may undergo ARCM 
with a kinetic preference for one. In these processes, the 
is critically dependent on the nature of the catalyst and chiral co- 
ligands (Figure 5.26) 
Ligand Coupling Reactions 
Figure 5.27 Carbene coupling 
with 2VE ligands 
Figure 5.28 Carbene coupling 
with 2VE ligands: examples 
The coupling of carbene ligands with alkenes was discussed above; 
however, many other ligands may also enter into coupling reactions with 
carbenes. Simple 1VE ligands (hydrides, alkyls) may migrate onto a 
carbene ligand to generate an alkyl, the former being the microscopic 
reverse of a-M-H elimination (Figures 4.25, 4.27). These reactions 
deplete the valence electron count by 2VE and accordingly may be most 
readily observed when a new ligand is added to saturate the VE count 
for the resulting alkyl complex. By geometric necessity, the migrating lig- 
and must first occupy a coordination site cis to the carbene. Various 2VE 
ligands (including alkenes discussed above) have also been shown to cou- 
ple with carbenes (Figures 3.23, 5.27, 5.28), in processes that in the 
absence of added ligands also lead to a loss of 2VE. The special case of 
alkynes is discussed next. 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
107 
The Dotz and Related Reactions 
Alkynes as well as alkenes can enter into cycloaddition reactions with 
carbene ligands. The initially formed metallacycle is a metallacyclobu- 
tene, e.g. in the reaction of Tebbe’s reagent with diphenylacetylene 
(Figure 5.29). One of the most versatile stoichiometric applications of 
carbene complexes, the 
(Figure 5.30), is based on this 
process applied (primarily) to chromium carbenes. Generally the inter- 
mediate metallacyclobutene (or its 
isomer) is not usually 
isolated. Rather, subsequent combination of this ligand with a carbonyl 
co-ligand ultimately leads to the formation of 
species, appar- 
ently via formation of an electrophilic 
complex (Figures 3.23, 
5.28). 
Figure 5.29 Alkyne-carbene 
coupling 
Figure 5.30 The Dotz 
benzannulation: mechanism; 
Cr = Cr(CO), 

108 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
P- De p rot on at io n 
Just as the P-protons of acyl ligands are acidic, allowing the synthesis of 
(Figure 4.17), the P-protons of many car- 
bene ligands may be removed by non-nucleophilic bases. Nucleophilic 
bases are generally avoided since these may directly attack the carbene 
carbon. The resulting anionic carbene complexes may then be function- 
alized with a variety of electrophiles (Figure 5.31). 
Figure 5.31 Carbene P-H 
acidity: synthetic applications; 
Cr = Cr(CO), 
5.2.4 Bridging Carbenes 
I 
Figure 5.32 Valence 
(resonance) contributors for 
1-carbenes and p-carbynes 
The loose analogy between M=C and C=C bonds has been drawn above, 
whilst the ability of alkenes to coordinate to a metal centre has also been 
met in passing, prior to a fuller treatment in Chapter 6. It is therefore 
reasonable to now consider the possibility that M=C double bonds might 
coordinate to a metal centre. In fact this possibility has already been 
seen, implicitly in the formation of Mn,(p-CH,)(CO),Cp, 
from dia- 
zomethane and Mn(THF)(CO),Cp, via the putative intermediate com- 
plex Mn(=CH,)(CO),Cp which ‘coordinates’ its Mn=C double bond to 
a further Mn(CO),Cp fragment. This represents the history of the 
process; however, once formed, we might view the product as a 
or a metal complex of 
Mn( =CH,)(CO),Cp (Figure 5.32). 
This last view leads to the principles developed by Stone, which allow 
the planned synthesis of a wide range of complexes involving two (or 
more) different metal centres ( 
) bridged by carbene lig- 
complex, a 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
109 
ands (Figure 5.33). Many other bi- and trimetallic carbene complexes 
may, however, also be prepared by beginning with the preformed bi- or 
trimetal core. The chemistry of bridging carbenes will not be dealt with 
specifically in this text other than to point out that carbenes are believed 
to occur on the surface of metals and metal oxides in some of the 
heterogeneously catalysed transformations of organic substrates (e.g. the 
These molecular bimetallic carbene complex- 
es serve as models for such species (the cluster-surface analogy, Figure 
2.19). Given that the ‘carbene’ carbon is effectively sp3 hybridized in such 
species, the description as dimetallacyclopropanes has some merit. 
5.3 
Carbynes (Alkylidynes) 
Alkylidyne or carbyne complexes involve formal metal-carbon triple 
bonds. The bonding in these complexes is most simply envisaged by con- 
sidering the frontier orbitals of a cationic carbyne fragment [CR]+, in 
combination with a metal centre with occupied orbitals of n;-symmetry 
Figure 5.33 Carbene bridge- 
assisted 
tion; OsL, = OsCI(NO)(PPhJ, 
bond forma- 
with respect to the M-C vector (Figure 5.34). The interactions can then 
be seen as analogous to those of a carbonyl ligand (or [NO]+), i.e. com- 
bination of a dative interaction of o-symmetry coupled synergically with 
two (orthogonal) retrodative (x-acid) interactions. 
Given the topological parallels between Figures 1.12 and 5.34, it can 
be expected that the arguments presented for the reactivity of carbene 
complexes towards nucleophiles and electrophiles could be equally 
applicable to carbyne complexes, which in general they are. Indeed, this 
included premature attempts to dichotomize carbyne complexes within 
‘Fischer-type’ and ‘Schrock-type’ regimes of reactivity. Just as hetero- 
atom substitutents compromise the M=C bond of carbenes, carbyne 
ligands which bear heteroatom substituents (e.g. Figure 3.19) tend to 
show longer and less reactive M=C bonds (Figure 5.35). 
Figure 5.34 Carbyne [CR]+ 
frontier orbitals for synergic 
bonding with transition metals 
I 
5.3.1 Characterization of Carbyne Complexes 
As in the case of carbene complexes, I3C NMR spectroscopy is particu- k 
larly useful in that the carbyne carbon typically resonates to ]OW field 
Figure 5.35 Heteroatom- 
(240 and 360 ppm), with heteroatom substituents shifting this to higher 
substituted carbynes; X = NR,, 
field. As noted above for carbene complexes, X-ray crystallography 
OR, SRq SeRi TeR 
reveals that carbyne complexes have very short metal-carbon bonds, typ- 
ically the shortest of any metal-carbon multiple bond, but lengthened if 
heteroatom substituents are present. 
5.3.2 Synthesis of Carbyne Complexes 
Free carbynes, ‘CR’, are exceedingly reactive short-lived species and 

I 
I 0  
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
therefore entirely inappropriate precursors for carbyne complexes. 
Furthermore, their limited chemistry finds no analogy in the organometal- 
lic chemistry of carbyne complexes. As with carbene chemistry, the gene- 
sis of carbyne complexes occurred in the laboratory of E. 0. Fischer. 
Fischer’s alkoxide abstraction route (Figure 5.2) has been extended to all 
the metals of Groups 6 and 7 as well as iron. Furthermore, refinements 
have made it unnecessary in many cases to isolate the intermediate carbene 
or acylate complexes. Rather, the acyl metallate intermediates may be often 
converted directly to carbynes by treatment with oxide (02-) 
abstracting 
reagents (oxalyl halides, phosphine halides, thionyl chloride, phosgene, tri- 
flic or trifluoroacetic anhydrides) (Figure 5.36). This approach relies on con- 
verting the oxide into a better leaving group than an alkoxide. This is 
illustrated by the reaction of acyl metallates with acetic or trifluoroacetic 
anhydride. With the former, a stable (though synthetically versatile) ace- 
toxycarbene is formed. However, with the latter, rearrangement to the tri- 
fluoroacetatocarbyne complex occurs spontaneously. 
Fischer’s carbyne complexes are thermally labile (facile loss of CO) 
and decompose bimolecularly with formation of alkynes. This carbonyl 
lability may be traced to the strong 
of the carbyne ligand, which 
compromises retrodonation to the carbonyl ligands. On treatment with 
donor ligands, however, thermally stable substituted derivatives may be 
Figure 5-36 Carbyne synthesis 
via oxide abstraction; A-X = 
cIcoco-cI, CICO-CI, 
CF,CO-0,CC 
F,, 
B r P h,P-B r , 
CIOS-CI, F,CSO,-O,SCF,) 
obtained (Figure 5.36). 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
I 1  I 
Just as alkyl ligands may undergo a-hydrogen abstraction or elimi- 
nation to provide alkylidene ligands, these in turn may be prone to 
to generate alkylidyne ligands. These 
reactions are most prevalent for metals of Groups 5-7 but have occa- 
sionally been observed within Group 8, a trend already noted for alkyll 
alkylidene chemistry. Schrock's archetypal tantalum neopentylidene 
complex (Figure 4.28) may be deprotonated by strong bases to provide 
an anionic carbyne' complex (Figure 5.37). Alternatively, reduction of 
related complexes may be accompanied by a-hydrogen elimination. 
Further examples of alkylidyne syntheses via this approach are shown 
in Figure 5.37. Amongst these, the complexes W(=CR)(CH,R), and 
Os(=CHR),(CH,R), present an interesting pair in that the presence of 
an extra 2VE for osmium appears to favour the bis(carbene) tautomer 
(in the ground state). Since this compound also results from the addition 
of LiCD,R to OS(=CR)(CH,R>,(OT~)(~~)~, 
with deuterium scrambled 
between alkyl and alkylidene sites, it may be surmised that this species 
may well be in equilibrium with an undetected alkylidyne tautomer, 
Os(=CR)(CH,R),. 
Figure 5.37 Carbyne syntheses 
via a-H elimination/abstraction 
Electrophilic attack at the p-atom of CO, isocyanides and chalco- 
carbonyls has already been met as a route to carbyne complexes (Figure 
3.19). This reaction may be extended to the P-carbon of vinylidenes, 
which are discussed below. The remaining routes to carbyne complexes 
at present lack generality; however, selected examples are included in 

1 12 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 5.38. In recent times these have included the rearrangement of 
terminal alkynes in combination with late transition metal hydrido 
complexes, presumably via vinylidene intermediates (see below). 
Figure 5.38 Selected (non- 
general) carbyne syntheses 
5.3.3 Reactions of Carbyne Complexes 
The reactions of carbyne complexes will be discussed, albeit more briefly, 
along the lines developed for alkylidene complexes, to emphasize the par- 
allels. Once again, as with alkylidenes, early generalizations suggested 
two classes of complexes, Fischer-type and Schrock-type, which have 
subsequently been recognized as extremes in a tunable reactivity con- 
tinuum. Furthermore, within the chemistry of tungsten, Fischer-type 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
113 
carbynes may be converted to Schrock-type by simple oxidation, or vice 
versa by reduction. As with carbenes, the reactivity of the metalkarbon 
triple bond is crucially dependent upon the nature of the metal centre 
[charge, oxidation state, co-ligands, coordinative (un)saturation] and the 
carbyne substituent (e.g. n-dative capacity). 
E I ect ro p h i I i c Attack 
Electrophilic attack at carbyne complexes may ultimately place the elec- 
trophile on either the metal or the (former) carbyne carbon, the two pos- 
sibilities being related in principle by a-eliminationlmigratory insertion 
processes (Figure 5.39). The reactions of the osmium carbyne complex 
are suggestive of an analogy with alkynes. Each of these reactions (hydro- 
halogenation, chlorination, chalcogen addition, metal complexation; see 
below) have parallels in the chemistry of alkynes. 
Figure 5.39 Electrophilic attack 
at carbyne ligands; OsL, = 
OsCI(CO)(PPh,),; 
Wl, = W(C0)Cp 
Nucleophilic Attack 
An example of this class of reactivity has already been met in the 
formation of halocarbenes via the reaction of cationic carbyne complexes 

1 14 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 5.40 Nucleophilic attacb 
at carbyne ligands 
Figure 5.41 Migratory insertion 
of carbyne and hydride ligands; 
with halides (Figure 5.10), and alluded to as a synthetic route to carbene 
complexes in general (Figure 5.6). This type of reaction will be particu- 
lar favoured for cationic 18VE complexes and/or those with strongly 
n-acidic co-ligands. Further examples are shown in Figure 5.40, includ- 
ing one in which the nucleophile is a carbonyl metallate, leading to a 
binuclear bridging carbyne complex. Note that for coordinatively 
unsaturated complexes the metal centre presents an alternative site for 
nucleophilic attack. In the case of monobasic nucleophiles, this may be 
followed by transfer of a hydrogen atom to the alkylidyne carbon and 
formation of a carbene ligand. 
Since carbynes may arise from a-elimination reactions, it follows that 
the reverse, migratory insertion, is also possible. This is illustrated for 
the case of hydrido-carbyne complexes (Figure 5.41) 
Ketenyl Formation 
Figure 3.23 introduced the possibility of carbonyl ligands coupling with 
either alkylidene or alkylidyne ligands. The process depletes the VE count 
by two units and accordingly is most readily observed when an external 
ligand is added to trap, in the case of alkylidynes, the resulting 3VE 
The ketenyl ligand may, however, in the presence of 
excess and strongly nucleophilic ligands assume a monohapto (IVE) coor- 
dination. This type of reactivity is characteristic of alkylidynes of Groups 
6 and 7 and may also be induced photochemically. Isocyanide ligands 
may also couple with carbynes to provide iminoketenyls. The reverse 
reaction has also been observed. Of the various canonical forms which 
may describe ketenyl ligands, dipolar contributions 
suggest 
a nucleophilic character for the ketenyl oxygen which is indeed reflect- 
ed in reactions with various electrophiles (Figure 5.42). 
W& = W(CO){P(OMe),},; R = 2,4, 
6-Me3C,H,; 
OsL, = OsCI,(PPr',), 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
1 15 
Figure 5.42 Ketenyl formation 
via carbyne-carbonyl coupling; 
wl, = W(C0)Cp 
C ycloadd it i on React ions 
Alkynes enter into many cycloaddition reactions and by analogy so do 
some alkylidyne complexes. Selected examples are shown in Figure 5.43; 
however, those involving alkynes are reserved for discussion in the 
following section (alkyne metathesis). 
Figure 5.43 Selected 
cycloaddition reactions of 
carbynes 
Al kyne Metathesis 
By analogy with alkene metathesis, carbyne complexes might be expect- 
ed to mediate the metathesis of alkynes, which indeed they do, but with 
some specific limitations. The basic mechanism parallels that for alkene 
metathesis, with the key intermediate being a 
which may break down in one of two possible directions (Figure 5.44). 
Two complications however arise: (i) the metallacyclobutadiene may 
convert to a 
complex (see Figures 7.18, 7.19); (ii) for 

I 16 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 5.44 
Metallacyclobutadienes and 
de h yd rometallac yclo but ad ienes : 
relevance to alkyne metathesis 
(see also Figure 7.1 8) 
metallacyclobutadienes derived from terminal alkynes, deprotonation 
may occur to provide catalytically inactive 
Active alkyne metathesis catalysts (both obscure and well-defined 
examples) are generally limited to early transition metals, with the atten- 
dant intolerance of polar functional groups already encountered for 
alkene metathesis processes. However, this reflects the comparative imma- 
turity of the field with respect to the technologically more useful and pur- 
sued area of alkene metathesis. It may be anticipated that more 
sophisticated and versatile alkyne metathesis catalysts will arise. The reac- 
tion of W,(OR), with alkynes or nitriles provides alkylidyne complexes 
which may used in situ for alkyne metathesis, or the synthesis of new car- 
byne complexes which are not easily available via the conventional routes 
(Figure 5.45). In these preparations, substituted propynes are employed 
so that the equilibrium may be driven in the direction of the desired car- 
byne complex by the loss of volatile but-2-yne from the reaction mixture. 
This is illustrated for the synthesis of a polymeric carbyne complex 
from 4-propynylpyridine, the metathesis polymerization of 1,4-bis(propy- 
ny1)benzene to provide but-2-yne and a conjugated poly-ynamer, and an 
example of ring-closure alkyne metathesis (Figure 5.45). 
5.3.4 Bridging Carbyne Complexes 
Carbyne ligands may bridge two (p) or three (p,) metal centres, provid- 
ing a total of 3VE to the overall electron count. Earlier synthetic routes 
to such complexes involved the reactions of carbonyl metallates with 
1 , 1 ,l -trihaloalkanes, or the cleavage of alkyne ligands coordinated to 
clusters (Figure 5.46). 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
11 7 
Figure 5.45 Alkyne metathesis: applications 
Figure 5.46 Bridging carbyne 
complexes; 
= Co(CO),; 
= Ru(CO), 

I 18 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
An alternative strategy considers the isoelectronic analogy between 
M=C and C=C triple bonds. If an alkyne can coordinate to a metal cen- 
tre (Chapter 6), then in principle so can a M=C bond (Figure 5.32). This 
approach, pioneered again by Stone, has proven particularly versatile for 
the designed synthesis of bi- and polymetallic complexes bridged by one 
or more alkylidyne units. The application of this approach is illustrated 
for the alkylidyne complex W(=CR)(C0)2Cp in Figure 5.47. The descrip- 
tion of such complexes as 
suggests that one M=C 
double bond remains, and accordingly a second metal may be added to 
this. Alternatively, bimetallic complexes may add directly to the M-C 
bond to give triply bridging trimetallatetrahedranes. Finally, two alkyli- 
dyne complexes may be coupled by a further metal centre, in a manner 
reminiscent of alkyne coupling (Chapter 6), further strengthening the 
analogy. 
Figure 5.47 Stone alkylidene 
condensations 
5.4 
Vinylidenes (Alkenylidenes) 
If there is an analogy between alkenedalkynes and alkylidenes/alkyli- 
dynes, then the metal-based analogue of an allene would be a 
(alkenylidene), LnM=C=CR,, with cumulenated M=C and C=C double 
bonds. Such complexes are well established and generally arise directly 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
1 19 
or indirectly from transformations of coordinated alkynes (Figures 4.12, 
4.18). Complexes of alkynes bearing H, SIR,, SnR,, SR and SeR groups 
are prone to 1,2-shifts of these substituents to generate vinylidene lig- 
ands (Figure 5.48). 
An alternative and widely employed approach involves the initial 
synthesis of a 
complex, followed by treatment with a variety 
of electrophiles. As with the heterocarbonyls shown in Figure 3.19, the 
atom p to the metal is activated towards electrophilic attack (Figure 
5.49). This strategy is most effective for alkynyls bound to highly n-basic 
(commonly d6) metal centres for two reasons. Firstly, the more electron 
rich the metal centre, the more the P-carbon will be activated (via 
retrodonation) to electrophilic attack. Secondly, the vinylidene ligand is 
a potent n-acid, and will accordingly be most stabilized by coordination 
to a n-basic metal centre. 
The n-acidity of vinylidene ligands also points towards reactions with 
nucleophiles at Ca. This will be particularly true if the metal centre is 
positively charged or co-ligated by other strong n-acids, which compet- 
itively compromise M+Ca retrodonation. In the case of monobasic 
Figure 5.49 Vinylidene synthesis: (a) electrophilic attack at alkynyl ligands, (b) alkenyl 
a-M-H elimination and (c) acyl dehydroxylation (see also Figure 4.18); [Ru] = Ru(PPh,),Cp; 
[Fe] = Fe(CO)(PPh,)Cp; Tf = SO,CF, 
Figure 5.48 Alkyne-vinylidene 
rearrangements; E = H, SIR,, 
SnR,, 
SR, SeR 

120 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 5.50 Bridging 
vinylidenes; 
= Mn(CO),Cp 
nucleophiles (H-Nu), the resulting vinyl ligands may be prone to pro- 
tonation at C,, resulting in the formation of a carbene ligand (Figures 
4.18, 5.49). Two special cases of this reaction manifold deserve comment. 
(i) The reaction of 4-hydroxyalk- 1 -ynes with various transition metal cen- 
tres may lead directly to cyclic carbene ligands via internal nucleophilic 
attack by the alcohol at the C, of a vinylidene intermediate (Figure 5.6). 
(ii) By using water as the nucleophile, a 
may be formed 
which rearranges to an acyl ligand. If a-elimination (the reverse of migra- 
tory insertion) of the acyl substituent occurs, a complex results, where- 
in a carbonyl and an alkyl ligand arise from cleavage of the C=C triple 
bond (!). 
Just as alkylidenes and alkylidynes may bridge M-M bonds, vinyli- 
denes may also be employed to support metal-metal bonds. This 
approach has included the addition of preformed terminal vinylidene 
complexes to unsaturated metal complexes or, occasionally, the direct 
assembly from terminal alkynes with unsaturated metal complex pre- 
cursors (Figure 5.50). 
5.5 
Cumulenylidenes 
Extending the carbon chain of vinylidenes by one or three carbons 
provides linear cumulenated ligands, LnM=(C=C)n=CR, (n = 1,2). These 
compounds have been studied in considerable detail, especially 
(n = 1) and arise in most cases from the rearrangement and dehy- 
dration (often spontaneous) of hydroxyalkyl alkynes or diynes (Figure 
5.51). Various intermediates (Figure 4.18) may be envisaged (and 
occasionally isolated) which are related by eliminatiodaddition of H+ or 
hydroxide, e.g. 
complexes have been isolated and sub- 
sequently dehydroxylated with Lewis or Brransted acids. 
Figure 5.51 Allenylidene 
synthesis: propynol dehydration; 
= RuCl(dppm),, 
RU(PM~,),CP, Ru(PPh3)2{HB(pz)3}! 
RuCI(PCy3)(q 
-MeC,H,Pr') 
This approach is inappropriate for the even-carbon ligands LnM=(C= 

Metal-Carbon Multiple Bonding 
121 
C),=C=CR, and complexes of these ligands have yet to be isolated. 
However, this represents a synthetic hurdle rather than an indication that 
these complexes might not be stable. Indeed, 
L,M= 
C=C=C=CR,, have been implicated in reactions of butadiyne (HC=C- 
C=CH) with transition metal complexes (Figure 5.52) and stable exam- 
ples may be anticipated. 
a picture has begun to emerge 
wherein nucleophiles attack at C,, C ,  C,, etc., whilst electrophilic attack 
occurs at cp, c,, etc. (Figure 5.53). Thus, the reactions of vinylidenes 
with nucleophiles at Ca and electrophiles at C, fits within this scheme. 
For the reactions of 
Figure 5m52 
Higher 
mulenes (cumulenylidenes); 
= Ru(Pph,),cp; 
RuCl(dppm), 
= 
Figure 5.53 Regioselectivity of 
electrophilic and nucleophilic 
attack on metallacumulenes (n = 

I 
Figure 6.1 Alkene complexes 
in organic (retro)synthesis (‘n’ 
isomers shown; is0 or branched 
alternatives are also accessible) 
n-Coordination of C-C 
Multiple Bonds 
6.1 
Introduction 
Previous chapters concerned ligands which bind to a metal through one 
carbon atom (‘Cl’ ligands). Unsaturated organic substrates may also bind 
through two or more carbon atoms of a En-system. We will begin with 
simple ‘C2’ examples, alkenes and alkynes, and then extend the princi- 
ples to acyclic systems where the unsaturation extends through more car- 
bon atoms. Carbocyclic polyenes will then be developed in Chapter 7. 
As with the ligands met previously, the coordination of C-C multiple 
bonds to a transition metal may greatly alter the reactivity of the mole- 
cule; however, this may often be harnessed by judicious choice of metal 
centres. Once appreciated, these principles may be exploited for the 
of alkenes and alkynes. Figure 
6.1 presents an impressive but by no means comprehensive array of 
selected alkene functionalizations that emerge in a 
sense 
122 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
123 
from alkene complexes, placing such complexes firmly within the organ- 
ic chemist’s synthetic armoury. 
6.2 
Alkenes 
Only two years after Magnus reported the first coordination complex of 
a neutral molecule (NH,), organotransition metal chemistry was born 
with the isolation by Zeise of sal kalico-platinicus inflammabilis, 
K[PtCl,(H,C=CH,)].H,O 
(Figure 6.2). In the interim, all manner of 
unsaturated organic molecules have been shown to coordinate to tran- 
sition metals through their unsaturated n;-systems. 
6.2.1 Bonding 
Figure 6.2 The births of 
metal chemistry 
The frontier orbitals of ethene are of suitable symmetry, energy and occu- 
pancy to interact 
with the valence orbitals of a transition 
and organotransition 
metal complex (Figure 1.18) as described by the 
model. This considers the simple 2VE dative interaction 
(from a MO rather than a single donor atom), counter-balanced (to vary- 
ing degrees) in pursuit of 
by retrodonation into the 
alkene n* antibonding orbital. The relative extents of these two process- 
es will depend on the energies of both the metal and (in contrast to CO) 
the alkene molecular orbitals. This, in part, determines the relative 
of the alkene coordination, although steric factors also play a 
part; increased alkene substitution typically leads to increased alkene 
lability. Alkene complexes are known for all of the transition metals in 
a wide range of oxidation states. By analogy with the n;-acidity of CO, 
alkenes may even stabilize negative oxidation states, e.g. [Fe(q- 
CH2CH2)J2-, in which case 
from the metal assumes para- 
mount importance. 
6.2.2 Synthesis of Alkene Complexes 
Generally, alkene complexes are prepared by simple ligand substitution 
processes beginning with the free alkene (Figure 6.3). Being 
lower oxidation states are preferred and in some cases reactions with 
alkenes may result in reduction of the metal centre (sacrificial oxidation 
of excess alkene or solvent). A vacant coordination site is required, and 
the various means by which this coordinative unsaturation may be 
achieved have been met (Chapter 3). Notably, one class of labile pre- 
cursors is alkene complexes themselves, when the electronic and steric 
properties of the introduced alkene relative to that displaced are taken 
into consideration. Loosely speaking, and with all else being equal, a 
more electronegative alkene will displace a more basic one, and a smaller 

124 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
alkene will displace a larger or more heavily substituted one. Since equi- 
libria may be involved, if the departing alkene is volatile, its removal 
from the system may direct the position of equilibrium in favour of the 
desired complex. This is illustrated by the wide use of the 2-methyl- 
propene (isoprene) complex [Fe(q-CH2=CMe,)(COI),Cp]+ { ‘Fp(q- 
H,C=CMe2)”) for the preparation of numerous alkene complexes of the 
~ p +  
fragment. 
Figure 6.3 Selected 
syntheses of ethene complexes; 
acac = propane-2,4-dionate 
(acetylacetonate) 
Alternatively, alkenes may also originate within a coordination sphere 
via modifications of existing ligands (e.g. 
Figures 2.31, 4.11, 4.25, 4.26, 4.28). Although already 
met, the most important of these are collected in Figure 6.4, because 
through 
an appreciation of these processes pro- 
vides retrosynthetic insights into the types of reaction that we might 
expect coordinated alkenes to undergo. 
Indeed, it is this loss of symmetry that allows the vc=c IR absorption of 
alkene complexes to be observed (IR inactive for the free molecule). 
Consistent with the synergic bonding description, coordination leads to 
a decrease in the C=C bond strength and accordingly a decrease in the 
value of v,=,. 
The case of 
is of particular importance, 
A key feature of alkene coordination is the 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
125 
since either prochiral face of the alkene may coordinate to the metal cen- 
tre (Figure 6.5). This is equivalent to the inclusion of a chiral centre with- 
in a cyclopropane ring. If the metal centre is itself chiral, then the energies 
(and kinetic implications) of the two possible facial coordinations will 
differ 
Figure 6.5). This principle 
underpins the observed and technologically exploitable 
of any organometallic process involving prochiral alkenes in combi- 
nation with chiral transition metal centres (see below). 
Figure 6.4 Alkene formation 
from pre-coordinated bands 
Figure 6.5 Diastereomeric 
reaction coordinates for the inter- 
action of a prochiral alkene with a 
chiral metal centre 
The 
applies equally to alkenes as it does to classical lig- 
ands; dienes typically bind more effectively than monoalkenes. Perhaps 
the most widely employed of these are 
(nbd) (Figure 6.6). Conjugated 1,3-dienes tend to bind more 
efficiently than non-conjugated a,o-dienes (see below). Transition metal 
centres are capable of isomerizing alkenes (see below, Figure 6.7), and 
accordingly non-conjugated dienes may be isomerized to their conjugated 
1,3-isomers for more favourable coordination. Conjuated di- and 
polyenes will be returned to later in the chapter. 
(cod) and 

126 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 6.6 Complexes of 
cyclic dienes; cod = cycloocta- 
1,5-diene; nbd = norbornadiene 
(bicyclo[2.2.1 ]hepta-2,5-diene) 
Figure 6.7 (Below) Metal- 
mediated alkene isomerization 
via (a) ally1 or (b) hydride 
intermediates 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
127 
6.2.3 Reactions of Coordinated Alkenes 
Al kene Rearrangements 
The metal-mediated rearrangement of alkenes is an immensely broad 
topic in its own right; only the more general principles will be discussed. 
The various alkene rearrangement possibilities all rely on 
processes, which in turn necessitate that the C-H bond approaches 
the metal centre. The most important processes therefore involve hydro- 
gen atoms bound either directly (‘vinylic’) or adjacent (‘allylic’) to the 
alkene. For coordinatively saturated alkene complexes, formation of the 
simple n;-complex ensures that the alkene is within the coordination 
sphere; however, rearrangement to an intermediate in which the vinylic 
C-H o-bond coordinates prior to oxidative addition allows the metal 
centre not to exceed 18VE (Figure 6.7). For 
C-H activation, a 
vacant coordination site cis to the alkene will facilitate a 
and evidence in support of this comes from the isolation of alkene 
complexes wherein the allylic C-H bond coordinates 
(Figure 
2.24). Once an allyl ligand (Chapter 7) is generated, reductive elimina- 
tion of the hydride ligand may occur at either end of the allyl ligand to 
generate the original alkene or, alternatively, a new isomer. Amongst the 
most effective metal complexes for the isomerization of alkenes are metal 
hydrides, which, in addition to the previous mechanism, may insert the 
alkene to provide o-alkyl ligands. These may then isomerize via a series 
of P-M-H elimination/reinsertion steps. The equilibria in such sequences 
are generally dictated by steric factors; alkene coordination is less 
favoured for polysubstituted alkenes; metal bond strengths decrease with 
a-branching (Table 1.5, Figure 6.7). 
In the previous chapter it was noted that alkene metathesis may be 
catalysed by some pre-catalysts which have neither alkylidene nor met- 
allacyclobutane ligands. In such systems, the alkene itself serves as the 
alkylidene source, presumably through rearrangement to a carbene via 
a sequence of hydrogen shifts. Although this is unlikely to be directly 
observed in the most active catalysts, examples of this rearrangement 
have been observed in stoichiometric reactions. Generally, however, the 
reverse alkylidene + alkene rearrangement is more common. 
Nucleophilic and Electrophilic Attack 
It has already been seen that the reactivity of 
complexes may be dictated by the nature of both the metal and the car- 
bon substitutents. These principles apply equally to alkene coordination 
(Figure 6.8). Two metal-ligand fragments serve to illustrate these prin- 
ciples in the activation of alkenes to electrophilic and nucleophilic 
and 

128 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
reagents: ‘Ru(dmpe),’ (Figure 6.9; electron-rich, neutral, zerovalent, 0- 
donor co-ligands) and ‘Fe(CO),Cp+’(Figure 6.10; electron-poor, cationic, 
divalent, competitive n-acid co-ligands). 
Figure 6.8 (a) Electrophilic 
and (b) nucleophilic 
at alkene complexes 
Figure 6.9 Electrophilic attack 
at coordinated ethene 
Nucleophilic attack at coordinated alkenes might be viewed as anal- 
Figure 6.10 (Right) Nucleophilic 
attack at coordinated ethene; 
Fp = Fe(CO),Cp 
ogous to the organic chemistry of 
(‘alkene complexes’ 
of Br+), and is favoured by positively charged metals and/or those bear- 
ing strongly n-acidic co-ligands. The range of nucleophiles is enormous 
(Figure 6.10), with the caveat that many nucleophiles can also serve as 
potential ligands. This may be a problem if the alkene coordination is 
labile. 
The product of nucleophilic attack at a coordinated alkene is gener- 
ally an alkyl ligand that bears the nucleophile P (and anti) to the metal 
centre. Since alkyls with protons P to the metal centre are prone to 
P-M-H elimination (releasing an alkene), this may be built into a 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
129 
catalytic cycle for the nucleophilic functionalization of alkenes. One 
application of this is the catalytic oxidation of ethene to ethanal 
(acetaldehyde) by [PdC1,I2- 
Figure 6.11 for the reac- 
tion in D20). In this process, divalent palladium is reduced and must be 
re-oxidized by a combination of air (sacrificial oxidant, i. e. consumed) 
and copper(I1) chloride (catalytic, i. e. regenerated oxidant). If methanol 
is used in place of water as the nucleophile, methyl vinyl ether is obtained 
stoichiometrically (Figure 6.12). 
Figure 6.1 
The Wacker 
process for ethene oxidation 
In some instances (<18VE) it is not always certain that nucleophilic 
attack occurs directly at the coordinated alkene, since attack at the metal 
centre followed by 
of the nucleophile to the alkene (alkene 
insertion, see below) may result in the same overall reaction product 
(Figure 6.8). 
will be favoured by metals in low oxidation states, 
with few or no competitive nacceptor ligands. In such situations, 
retrodonation from the metal loads the alkene with excessive electron 
density which is attractive to an external electrophile. As in the case of 
nucleophilic attack, it may not always be clear, however, whether 
electrophilic attack has occurred directly at the alkene, or alternatively 
at the metal centre followed by insertion of the alkene into the metal- 
electrophile bond (Figure 6.8). This is a real possibility, since the factors 
that activate the alkene to electrophilic attack are also factors that render 
the metal centre potentially nucleophilic. Furthermore, the electrophilic 
conversion of an alkene to a P-functionalized alkyl deprives the metal 
centre of 2VE; this may make it prone to P-M-E(H) elimination (unless 
blocked by coordination of the conjugate nucleophile), obscuring the 
mechanistic detail (Figure 2.25). 
The microscopic reverse of the p-metal hydride (P-M-H) elimination 
Figure 6-12 Stoichiometric 
reactions of Pd,Cl,(tl-C,H,), 

130 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 6.13 Radical route for 
alkene hydrometallation 
reaction is 
a special case of the more general insertion 
of unsaturated ligands into metal-hydride bonds (see Chapter 2, Figures 
2.30,2.3 1). By far the majority of metal-hydride alkene insertion process- 
es occur via concerted four-membered transition states (Figure 2.3 1); 
however, it should be noted that alternative mechanisms exist which may 
lead to the same overall stoichiometric result. Of these, radical insertion 
processes are of note (e.g. Figure 6.13). 
The insertion of alkenes into metal-hydride bonds is of central impor- 
tance to many alkene functionalization processes, many of which are cat- 
alytic in nature. Depending on the co-ligands present (or subsequently 
introduced), reductive elimination of the resulting o-organyl ligand may 
be possible. This will be illustrated for the case of 
and then developed to include many of the variants illustrated in Figure 
6.1. The hydrogenation of alkenes catalysed by 
RhCl(PPh,),, is depicted in Figure 6.14. This is a mechanistic simplifi- 
cation; many subtle equilibria exist involving chloride and phosphine dis- 
sociation. Furthermore, an alternative sequence involving alkene 
coordination prior to hydrogen oxidative addition would also lead to the 
same crucial intermediate with hydride cis to the alkene. The relative 
rates of these two routes will depend on the particular (and numerous!) 
variants of Wilkinson’s original rhodium(1) catalyst. 
Figure 6.14 Alkene 
hydrogenation by RhCI(PPh,), 
(Wilkinson’s catalyst) 
Important features of RhCl(PPh,), include (i) sterically induced 
lability of one phosphine; (ii) solvent-dependent lability of the chloride 
ligand; (iii) facile interconversion between two electronically advanta- 
geous oxidation states and geometries (d8 ML, square planar and d6 ML, 
octahedral). The lability of chloride or phosphine ligands allows for the 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
131 
generation of vacant coordination sites for alkene coordination and 
oxidative addition processes. The initial step involves loss of phosphine 
and dihydrogen oxidative addition to form the 
This coordinates the alkene followed by a rate- 
determining insertion of the alkene into one Rh-H bond followed by an 
irreversible reductive elimination of an alkane to regenerate the catalyst. 
Wilkinson's catalyst was remarkable at the time of its discovery (1965); 
perhaps more remarkable is that, despite the intervening 35 years of 
intense research into alternatives, it still enjoys wide use. The key fea- 
tures that make it attractive are therefore noteworthy. Firstly, the syn- 
thesis from commercial RhC1,.3H20 and PPh, (methanol reflux) is high 
yielding and simple. Low concentrations (<1 mmol dm-3) of the com- 
plex will effectively hydrogenate alkenes at ambient temperatures under 
low pressures (1 bar, lo5 Pa) of hydrogen. Given the importance of steric 
factors in the organometallic chemistry of both alkenes and a-alkyls, it 
is not surprising that Wilkinson's catalyst shows the indicated rate 
dependence on the degree of alkene substitution (these observations gen- 
erally apply to many other hydrogenation catalysts). It is also tolerant 
of a wide range of functional groups (esters, ketones, nitro compounds 
and carboxylic acids). Aldehydes are, however, 
to the 
corresponding hydrocarbon in a stoichiometric (and therefore prohibi- 
tively expensive) process under mild conditions. At higher temperatures 
(>200 "C) the reaction does become catalytic; however, by employing 
cationic complexes, the lability of the resulting coordinated CO may be 
increased, favouring dissociation and regeneration of the catalyst. Thus 
the complex [Rh(triphos)(CO)]+ effects catalytic decarbonylation at 
100 "C (Figure 6.15). 
Figure 6.16 shows some of the commonly encountered (pre)catalyst 
Figure 6.15 Catalytic aldehyde 
decarbonylation 

132 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
variants which employ the basic rhodium or iridium (I/III) reaction man- 
ifold. The cationic complexes (a) or (b) react with hydrogen in donor 
solvents (THF, acetone, ethanol, acetonitrile) via hydrogenation of the 
cod or nbd ligand to generate [MH2(solvent)2(PR,)2]f (M = Rh, Ir) as 
the active catalyst. A wide variety of derivatives are available by varia- 
tion of the phosphine (PR,) and solvent. These (halide-free) catalysts 
offer the advantage that, being cationic, any potential donor group which 
the alkene may possess (amides, alcohols, esters, etc.) may also bind to 
the metal. This becomes particularly important for 
(see below). 
Two important alternatives to dihydrogen oxidative addition also exist 
and may operate in some systems. Firstly, 
of a dihy- 
drogen ligand (H+, H-) by base is implicated in the formation of the 
Figure 6.16 MI (M = Rh, Ir) 
hydrogenation catalyst RuHCl(PPh,), from RuCl,(PPh,),, hydrogen and 
alkene hydrogenation pre- 
Et,N. Alternatively, some complexes, e.g. [CO(CN)~]~- 
and [Rh(TPP)],, 
catalysts 
may 
cleave dihydrogen (H, H) to provide [CoH(CN),IS- 
(Figure 6.17) and RhH(TPP) (Figure 6.13), respectively. 
A 
PhCH=CHR 
[CoH(CN)5] 3- 
(b ) 
H 
[CO(CN)S]~- - 
‘12 H2 
[CoH(CN)5I3- 
+* 
PhCH2CH2R 
Figure 6.17 (a) Heterolytic 
and (b) homolflic activation Of 
hydrogen 
Hydrogenation is of enormous synthetic potential, but represents only 
one dimension of Figure 6.1. Many other functional groups may be intro- 
duced by essentially the same process. Each of these requires the for- 
mation of the key alkyl intermediate, but varies in the ways in which this 
is ultimately cleaved from the metal. Alkene 
represent key routes to important classes of 
organic commodity chemicals, which may be effectively catalysed by 
transition metal complexes. These processes differ essentially only in the 
nature of the group that is ultimately eliminated with the alkyl formed 
by alkene insertion. In place of hydrogen, HCN, a silane or a borane is 
used for the oxidative addition step. Figure 6.18 provides a generalized 
mechanistic model for these three processes (only the route to the n 
isomer is shown). The danger of generalization, however, is that the 
actual sequence and rate-determining steps may differ, depending on the 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
133 
particular catalyst and substrate, and whether insertion of the alkene 
occurs into the M-H or M-X bond. Whatever their actual order, the 
basic steps remain fundamental. 
Alkene hydrogenation may be diverted, if the reaction is carried out 
in the presence of carbon monoxide, leading to the 
process (Figure 6.19). The intermediate alkyl complex, being coordina- 
tively unsaturated, may add CO to form a cis alkyl-carbonyl complex in 
equilibrium (Figure 3.24) with the corresponding acyl complex. 
Reductive elimination of aldehyde finally regenerates the catalyst. 
Numerous metal hydride complexes (or suitable precursors) have been 
shown to mediate this reaction. Two examples serve to illustrate key 
points, viz. RhH(CO)(PPh,), and Co,(CO),/H, [in equilibrium with 
CoH(CO),; Figure 3.1 11. Firstly, in contrast to alkene hydrogenation 
(H, H), for hydroformylation the addenda (H, CHO) are different and 
accordingly isomeric products (n- vs. iso) may arise. At present, com- 
mercial interests generally favour the formation of the n-isomer, i. e. 
where the formyl group adds to the terminal carbon (Cl) of the alkene, 
rather than the is0 isomer (formyl resides on C2). The more sterically 
congested coordination sphere of the rhodium catalyst favours forma- 
tion of the n-alkyl isomer, whilst the less sterically cumbersome cobalt 
complex can accommodate both n- and branched (iso) alkyl ligands, lead- 
ing to a loss of selectivity. Furthermore, high pressures of CO (and asso- 
ciated plant costs) are required to prolong the life of the cobalt catalyst. 
Thus for rhodium, catalyst cost is offset by selectivity. It should be noted 
that alkene hydrogenation is thermodynamically more favourable than 
hydroformylation (e.g. by 34 kJ mol-I for ethene) and so a requirement 
of the catalyst is that it kinetically diverts the reaction away from simple 
hydrogenation. 
The nliso ratio for the cobalt system can be significantly increased by 
Figure 6.18 Generalized 
catalytic addition of ‘H-X’ to 
alkenes 

134 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 6.19 Alkene 
hydroformylation 
inclusion of bulky ligands, e.g. 9:l for the complex HCo(CO),(PBu,). 
Since the simple HCo(CO), catalyst degrades via CO loss (depositing Co 
metal), introduction of stabilizing ligands may help to increase catalyst 
lifetime but compromise the catalyst activity. Further current variants 
include polymer-bound or water-soluble versions of the rhodium system 
(see Figure 2.6). 
Enantioselective Alkene Reduction 
So far, we have only considered ‘generalized’ alkenes and not addressed 
the questions of stereochemistry that arise when prochiral alkenes are 
functionalized with loss of planar symmetry. Hydrogenation (and hydro- 
cyanation, hydroformylation, hydrosilylation and hydroboration) of a 
prochiral alkene must lead to a 
mixture of products if the metal 
catalyst and reaction medium are achiral. Coordination of a prochiral 
alkene to a chiral metal centre, however, leads to 
com- 
plexes (different energies). Accordingly, the rates of both the formation 
and any subsequent reactions will be different (Figure 6.5). Ideally, it 
would be useful if the rates for the two diastereomeric reaction co- 
ordinates were sufficiently different that productive enantioselectivity 
was observed; indeed, this is often the case. Enantioselectivity may arise 
from the initial (ideally reversible) coordination stage, or during any of 
the subsequent reactions prior to or including the rate-determining step. 
For this reason, the entire reaction sequence must be considered, and the 
accumulation of one particular diastereomeric intermediate in sufficient 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
135 
quantities for spectroscopic observation is not necessarily indicative of 
the predominant reaction. Indeed, the absence (or minority) of the alter- 
native diastereomer may simply reflect its greater rate in a subsequent 
(selectivity determining) step, which drains the equilibrium manifold in 
the direction of the final predominant enantiomer. It is a guiding prin- 
ciple for the study of catalysis that however much we might hope to 
observe (characterize and understand) catalytic intermediates, the more 
effective the catalysis, the less likely that the key intermediates will per- 
sist long enough to be observed. 
Perhaps the greatest effort has been directed towards the design of 
prochiral alkenes. Fortunately, knowledge gained in such studies (and 
the resulting catalysts) may often be applied to the broader scheme of 
enantioselective alkene functionalization in general, given the generality 
suggested by Figure 6.18. Figure 2.3 presented one approach to enantio- 
selective catalysis involving the use of 
co-ligands (see 
also Figure 2.10). The Monsanto company applied this to the develop- 
ment of a chiral catalyst for the enantioselective hydrogenation of the 
prochiral dehydroalanine precursor to 
used in the treatment of 
Parkinson’s disease (Figure 6.20). The active catalyst is generated from 
the cod complex (pre-catalyst) by in situ hydrogenation of the diene to 
(non-coordinating) cyclooctane in a pre-activation step (see Figure 6.16). 
This liberates two potential coordination sites which are occupied by 
labile solvent in the resting state of the catalyst. This particular case is 
slightly more complex than simple alkenes in that further coordination 
of the amide group to the cationic centre enhances the enantioselectivity. 
Enantioselective catalysis is routine in biological systems; a feature of 
this synthetic approach is that by inverting the chirality of the phosphine, 
the alternative enantiomer of the product may be selectively prepared, if 
Figure 6-20 Monsanto L-dopa 
required. 
synthesis: Co-ligand dependence 
chiral metal catalysts capable of 
of 

136 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 6.21 Transfer 
hydrogenation of alkenes and 
aldehydes 
The principles of asymmetric alkene hydrogenation may also be 
extended to other C=X double bonds, the greatest success being achieved 
to date with aldehyde, and to a lesser extent imine, hydrogenation. The 
steps in such a reductive sequence parallel those for alkenes with the 
exception that an alkoxide, rather than an alkyl, complex results from 
insertion of the aldehyde. This is the reverse of the P-M-H elimination 
reaction observed for alkoxides (Figure 4.26), and which underpins the 
numerous syntheses of metal hydride complexes in basic alcoholic sol- 
vents. A clever variant of this equilibrium process, known as 
makes use of the different volatilities of propan-2-01 and 
propanone (acetone) and the equilibrium nature of the reaction mani- 
fold. Thus dehydrogenation of propan-2-01 provides both volatile 
propanone and an intermediate dihydride (or dihydrogen) complex for 
use in productive hydrogenation of the desired aldehyde. Aldehydes and 
alkenes are generally more prone to hydrogenation than ketones; hence 
the reduction of these substrates may be carried out without the need to 
use gaseous hydrogen as a substrate (Figure 6.21). 
Alkene Dimerization and Oligomerization 
If metal complexes (in particular hydrido or alkyl complexes) are able 
to coordinate more than one alkene, the possibility of alkene coupling 
arises. Amongst the various mechanisms that can account for this 
coupling, the two shown in Figure 6.22 each involve P-M-H elimination 
as the key step, which ultimately leads to (possibly catalytic) alkene 
dimerization. This elimination naturally requires a vacant coordination 
site, and if this is available to further alkene coordination, oligomeriza- 
tion or polymerization may occur. This is highlighted by the phosphine 
co-ligand dependence of the nickel example in Figure 6.22, where the use 
of PBu', leads exclusively to oligomerization. The intermediacy of 
is suggested by the reaction of Fe(CO), with 
tetrafluoroethene (Figure 6.22), which provides a 
which is 
stable, primarily due to a combination of the Fe-C bond strength 
enhancement offered by a-fluoro substituents (Table 1.5) and the relative 
lability of Feo-F (HSAB) vs. C-F bonds which will discourage P-M-F 
elimination. Indeed, perfluoroalkenes are particularly prone to insertion 
reactions with metal-ligand bonds. 
Aluminium alkyls will polymerize ethene to polyethene, albeit 
inefficiently. During studies of this process, Ziegler found that a nickel 
contaminant resulted in the exclusive formation of butene, i. e. dimer- 
ization (see above). This prompted a study of the reactions of various 
transition metal complexes in combination with aluminium alkyls. Recall 
(Figure 4.6) that aluminium alkyls readily transfer their 0-organyl groups 
to the more electronegative transition metals. Amongst these, titanium 

7c-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
137 
and zirconium halides provided crystalline, 
under mild conditions (50 "C, 10 bar). These desirable properties result 
from the low degree of 
along the polymer chain, which 
is otherwise commonly encountered in non-transition metal polymeriza- 
tion processes (thermal, radical, anionic, cationic). Natta extended this 
process to propene with either TiCl,/Et,Al or VCl,/Et,AlCl and found 
that different types of 
result, differing in the relative orien- 
tation of the polymer spine methyl substituents (Figure 6.23). For free 
radical polymerization the relative orientations of substitutents are ran- 
dom 
For the titanium system, all substituents lie on the same 
side 
of the hydrocarbon chain (Fischer projection sense). For 
the vanadium system, however, the substituents lie on alternating sides 
Since the different forms atactic, isotactic and syndiotactic 
have different mechanical and physical properties, the control of 
is crucial for subsequent applications (Figure 6.23). 
For syndiotactic polypropene, one currently employed variant on the 
Figure 6.22 Catalytic alkene 
dimerization and models for inter- 
mediates 

138 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 6.23 Control of 
polypropene tacticity 
involves a combination of a-TiCI,, TiC1, and ethyl 
benzoate doped (cu. 1%) in bulk MgCl,, which is then activated with 
Et,Al. The activity of this somewhat ill-defined mixture is sufficiently 
high that it is unnecessary to remove the traces of catalyst from the bulk 
commodity polymer. Alternatives include the 
and 
catalysts, which are based on the incorporation of low- 
valent chromium species into silica gel, wherein the alkene itself some- 
how is converted into the propagating alkyl, without requiring 
organoaluminium additives. Whilst these mixtures are justified on the 
grounds of activity and economy, they are frustrating on an academic 
level. Ignorance of the true nature of the active site(s) requires that any 
further refinement be based on empirical (‘trial and error’) iteration. 
Molecular alkene polymerization catalysts have been developed, how- 
ever, and are finding increasing industrial application, whilst providing 
insight into the mechanism of polymerization. These all have in common 
a situation where a coordinatively unsaturated alkyl complex is gener- 
ated, the most effective involving 14VE (and therefore electrophilic) 
metal centres. Many transition metal halides react with 
to provide active Ziegler-Natta-like catalysts. M A 0  is 
a poorly defined partial hydrolysis product of Al,Me,, which neverthe- 
less effectively serves two purposes: (i) as an alkyl transfer reagent to the 
transition metal; and (ii) as a Lewis acid which abstracts one alkyl to 
generate a vacant coordination site. Alternatively, dialkyls may be iso- 
lated using more conventional alkylating agents and then treated with 
an alkyl abstracting agent [electrophilic cleavage, e.g. B(C6F5),, Ph,C+, 
or a weak proton donor such as PhNMe,H+, Figure 4.281. When the 
resulting alkyl complex is cationic, it is essential for high activity that 
the counter anion does not compete effectively with the alkene for the 
requisite coordination site (see Figure 2.27b), whilst the inclusion of 
sterically demanding co-ligands ensures that the catalyst does not de- 
activate via 
(not a problem for het- 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
139 
erogeneous catalysts). Since the relative stereochemistries of the carbon 
centres of the polymer spine dictate the tacticity, the inclusion of chirality 
at the metal centre may assist in controlling the enantioselectivity of C-C 
bond formation (Figure 6.5). Figure 6.24 illustrates (a) some represen- 
tative molecular Ziegler-Natta-type catalysts and (b) metal halide 
complexes which serve the same purpose in combination with MAO. 
~ _ _ _ _ _ _ _  
Although others have been proposed, the most widely accepted 
mechanism for Ziegler-Natta polymerization was proposed by Cossee 
(Figure 6.25) and might be viewed as tangental to Figure 6.22. If the 
initially formed and coordinatively unsaturated alkyl complex may CO- 
ordinate a further alkene rather than undergoing p-metal hydride 
ordination is faster than p-elimination, 
occurs. 
If, however, P-M-H elimination competes, then 
occurs to 
generate a metal hydride. This does not necessarily destroy the catalyst(s), 
since it may (depending on the particular catalyst) in principle insert a 
further equivalent of the monomer to regenerate a new alkyl complex, 
and the polymerization may reinitiate to form a new propagating chain. 
Figure 6.24 (a) Well-defined 
molecular alkene polymerization 
initiators; (b) MAO-act ivated 
initiation [E = CPh3, H, HNR3; 
x = weakly coordinating anion 
(see Figure *.*7b); R’ = Ph, 
elimination, then this will lead to 
Thus if alkene co- 
c6Fsy C6H3(CF3)A 
6.3 
Di- and Polyenes 
It was noted above that 
generally coordinate more 
effectively to transition metals than do a,o-dienes. This may be traced 

140 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 6.25 Cossee 
mechanism for alkene 
polymerization 
I 
Figure 6.26 Butadiene frontier 
molecular orbitals 
to a better energetic balance of frontier orbitals for the conjugated system 
with those of a transition metal. Figure 6.26 illustrates the molecular 
n-orbitals of 
in addition to the symmetries (0, n, 6) these pres- 
ent to a metal as it approaches one face (Figure 6.26). By far the most 
common coordination mode for butadienes involves the q4-coordination 
of the 
form. Notably, free butadienes typically adopt the energeti- 
cally more favourable (12 kJ mol 
for butadiene) 
form. For 
earlier transition metals, however, coordination in the s-trans form is 
prevalent (Figure 6.27). This is especially true in the case of bent 
(Figure 6.28, see Chapter 7), where the frontier orbitals of the 
metallocene are essentially restricted within one plane (between the two 
Cp rings) and are therefore better oriented for overlap with the s-trans 
form. An alternative coordination of the s-cis form involves the forma- 
tion of two a-M-C bonds to the termini of the butadiene and the local- 
ization of a C-C double bond between the two internal carbon atoms. 
This double bond may coordinate to the metal centre (o,o’,n), it may 
remain remote (a,~’) or, as is occasionally observed, there may be a weak 
interaction, Thus a continuum of coordination modes is possible, 
depending on the requirements of the metal centre. This even extends to 
ortho-xylylene ligands, where the 
of the C,H4 unit might be 
expected to be compromised by coordination. In solution there is often 
evidence to suggest that a metal may migrate between the faces of q4- 
coordinated butadienes via the intermediacy of such o,o’-isomers (Figure 
6.27). 
Some metals show such a pronounced tendency to adopt q4-butadi- 
ene coordination that this may override the driving force to aromatici- 
ty. Selected complexes of ds M(CO), (M = Fe, Ru) fragments illustrating 
this point are included in Figure 6.29. Phenol is far more stable than its 
(cyclohexadienone), which may be stabilized, however, by 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
141 
I 
coordination to iron(0). In a similar manner, divinylbenzene coordinates 
two 'Fe(CO),' fragments, disrupting the aromaticity. The complex [Fe(q- 
C6MeJ2I2+ (see Chapter 7) on reduction to iron(0) results in loss of the 
aromaticity of one arene to provide a tetrahapto butadiene coordination. 
This type of q4-coordination is often encountered for complexes of 
(4n + 2 = Ion), where some aromaticity (4n + 2 = 67c) is retained 
in the second ring of the fused arene. The drive towards buta-1,3-diene 
coordination may be sufficient to favour rearrangement of non-conju- 
gated dienes, or the 
of cyclopropylalkenes (Figures 6.2, 6.6, 
6.29). 
We have previously emphasized the activation of organic molecule via 
coordination. The converse may also be true, such that transition metals 
may be used as 
for reactive unsaturated functional 
groups. Thus q4-metal coordination of a butadiene system deactivates it 
towards 
of free polyenes 
Figure 6.27 Butadiene 
coordination modes 
is a somewhat indiscriminate process; however, this proceeds cleanly 
when the diene is coordinated to the Fe(CO), unit. Iron tricarbonyl 
adducts of butadienes are comparatively stable towards aerial oxidation, 
allowing ease of handling; decomplexation may be achieved, however, 
by stronger oxidants (e.g. Ce'") or reagents which abstract CO, leading 
to decomposition of the complex, e.g. Me,N-0, PhI-0, RCrN-0 (see 
Figure 3.15). The special case of 
in the 
free state) will be discussed in the next chapter. 
may also coordinate to a metal centre, providing a total 
of 6VE to the electron count; however, this is only favourable when the 
Figure 6.28 Synthesis of 
butadiene complexes 

142 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
I 
Figure 6.29 Butadiene 
coordination chemistry 
Figure 6.30 q6- 
Cycloheptatriene coordination 
spatial arrangement of the three double bonds allows all three to assume 
facial stereochemistry, i.e. if the triene has the cis-cis arrangement, e.g. 
in the case of 
are an intriguing class of organometallic ligand 
that could equally well be discussed in this or the following chapter. Free 
cyclooctatetraene is a non-planar (tub-shaped) cyclic polyene; a planar 
structure would constitute an anti-aromatic (8n; # 4n + 2) system. The 
molecule may be reduced (2VE), however, by Group 1 metals to provide 
the aromatic (107~) dianion. For metals of Groups 6-10, the polyene 
behaves as a non-planar ligand, coordinating through one, two or three 
of the double bonds (Figure 6.3 l), depending on the electronic require- 
ments of the metal centre(s). Since this leaves one or more double bonds 
pendant, the possibility of bridging two metals arises. Earlier transition 
(Figure 6.30). 

n-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
143 
metals with lower d occupancies (or actinides which fall outside the 18VE 
regime) offer the possibility of coordinating C,H, in a planar manner 
since the metal is able to accept the full 8VE potentially on offer from 
a C,H, ligand (Chapter 7). 
6.4 
Allenes 
The n-system of 
(H,C=C=CHJ is not conjugated at the central 
carbon owing to the 
of the two central carbon p-orbitals. 
Thus it is not favourable for the allene to provide 4VE to one metal with- 
out severe distortion. Many complexes of allenes occur, however, in 
which one double bond coordinates to a metal centre. In principle, the 
exocyclic double bond remains available for coordination to a second 
metal centre, resulting in a 
structure (Figure 6.32). 
If we consider the 
resonance form, then it appears 
that there are two types of metal-carbon o-bond: an alkyl and a vinyl. 
These may therefore be expected to show different 
reactivities. Thus, as with simple alkenes, coordination to a metal centre 
may result in activation to either nucleophilic or electrophilic attack and 
in both cases the external reagent ultimately resides on the terminal 
carbon to provide an alkenyl ligand rather than attack at the central 
carbon to give an allyl ligand (see Chapter 7). Insertion of allenes into 
metal-hydride bonds, however, typically results in the formation of allyl 
complexes, although it should be noted that the allyl and alkenyl isomers 
may be related by P-M-H elimination-alkene re-insertion processes 
(Figure 6.32). 
chemistry 
Figure 6.31 Non-planar 
cyclooctatetraene coordination 
Figure 6.32 Allene coordination 

144 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
6.5 
Alkynes 
Figure 6.33 Metal-alkyne 
orbital interactions 
Much of the coordination chemistry of alkynes may be viewed as anal- 
ogous to that of alkenes within the context of the Dewar-Chatt- 
Duncanson model (Figure 6.33). Similar arguments apply to the factors 
which dictate the relative importance of 
and the effect of these on the reactivity of the coordinated alkyne. A fur- 
ther dimension is included, however, by the presence of the second set 
of n-orbitals which are orthogonal to those used in synergic bonding to 
the metal. Two important situations arise where these orbitals may 
become involved. Firstly, a second metal centre may coordinate to the 
alkyne by making use of these, in which case a 
structure is adopted. This may be supported by a direct metal-metal 
bond (Figure 6.34); however, this is not always essential. In this co- 
ordination mode the alkyne provides a total of 4VE to the overall 
electron count, with the C-C bond perpendicular (transverse) to the 
M-M bond. If, however, the alkyne coordinates parallel to the M-M 
bond, then it only provides 2VE and might be viewed as a 
Interconversion between these two bonding modes is occasion- 
ally observed. A third possibility arises if the alkyne is bound to a 
trinuclear cluster that might be considered as a hybrid of these two, in 
which the available 4VE are shared between three metals. Remarkably, 
this may lead to eventual cleavage of the remaining C-C bond and 
formation of a cluster with two bridging 
ligands, which 
together provide a total of 6VE to the overall count. 
and 
Figure 6.34 Binuclear alkyne 
coordination 
If simple mononuclear alkyne coordination does not complete an 
18VE count for the metal, then the possibility arises for further donation 
of the 2VE housed in the orthogonal n-bond (Figure 6.33). If the metal 
centre possesses empty orbitals of appropriate n-symmetry, then the 

x-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
145 
alkyne effectively serves as a n-donor through this interaction. In valence 
bond terms (Figure 6.35) we may depict this in two ways: either as a K -  
donor or alternatively as a 
. Both depictions have merit 
and the latter is supported by the observation that the adoption of 4VE 
donation is accompanied by a decrease in metakarbon bond lengths 
and an increase in the C-C bond length. Furthermore, 4VE 
also results in a shift to low field of the alkyne 13C NMR res- 
onance, towards the region associated with metal-carbon multiple 
bonding. In general, 4VE alkyne coordination is more prevalent for met- 
als of the earlier transition triads with <6 d-electrons, in particular d4 
octahedral complexes (i.e. tz,”) are very common. From Figure 6.36 it 
becomes apparent that in some instances it is not clear just how many 
electrons are provided by an individual alkyne, in which case a more 
detailed molecular orbital treatment is required. 
Figure 6.35 ~ V E  
alkyne 
coordination 
As with alkenes, coordination of an alkyne may activate it towards 
electrophilic attack, nucleophilic attack, insertion or ligand coupling 
reactions. Alkynes may also be metathesized by alkylidyne complexes 
(Chapter 5), and metallacyclobutadienes may occasionally be encoun- 
tered in such processes. The arguments for choosing a particular metal 
centre to favour either nucleophilic attack or electrophilic attack for 
alkenes, alkylidenes and CO apply equally to alkyne complexes. A 
generalized scheme is depicted in Figure 4.12, whilst Figure 6.37 
illustrates the specific case of nucleophilic attack at alkynes coordinated 
to the electrophilic ‘Fe(CO)(PR,)Cp’ (R = Ph, OPh) cationic complex, 
for comparison with Figure 6.10. The products are generally 
complexes; however, some distinctions do arise. In contrast to alkene- 
derived alkyls, alkenyls which are obtained by nucleophilic attack at 
alkynes offer the possibility of interaction of the C=C double bond with 
the metal to provide 
(3VE); this possibility may arise 
when 4VE alkyne coordination is involved, or for 2VE alkyne complexes 
in which one co-ligand is potentially labile. 
Figure 6.36 2VE vs. 4VE 
alkyne coordination 

146 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 6.37 Nucleophilic attack at 
coordinated alkynes; Fel, = 
Fe(CO)(PRJCp; R = Ph, OPh; Nu = 
Me, Ph, CN, CH(CO,R),, 
OR, SR 
Figure 6.38 Metal-mediated 
oligomerization of alkynes 
By far the most overwhelming class of reaction for alkynes with 
transition metals is their 
reactions, including self- 
coupling processes (dimerization, oligomerization). This field requires a 
tome in its own right and so only some illustrative examples will be 
provided. Simple oxidative dimerization of terminal alkynes to provide 
symmetrical 1,3-diynes has long been routinely achieved using copper 
salts, and more recently by a variety of transition metal complexes. For 
internal alkynes, however, which lack mobile protons, other structures 
may be obtained. The conceptually simplest outcome would be cyclo- 
butadiene formation; however, since these molecules are anti-aromatic 
(47c), they are not generally liberated from the metal centre. Instead, 
stable complexes often arise (Figure 6.38). One generally accepted 
mechanism (cf Figure 6.22) involves the intermediacy of 
(which may sometimes be isolated). Reductive elimina- 
tion of the two M-C bonds generates the cyclobutadiene ligand, which 
remains coordinated. However, this intermediate may also react with a 
further equivalent of alkyne (via one of two possible mechanisms; inser- 

7c-Coordination of C-C Multiple Bonds 
147 
tion or [2 + 41 
to provide an arene. If this is 
eliminated from the metal centre (as is usually the case), the unsaturat- 
ed complex may react with further alkyne in a catalytic synthesis of 
arenes. This principle has been extended to the 
of alkynes 
and nitriles, leading to pyridine formation. If the metal centre involved 
also has carbonyl co-ligands, then the reaction may be diverted towards 
the formation of 
and q4, q6 
and q2 complexes of these ligands have all been isolated. 
A number of complexes react with internal alkynes to provide stable 
metallacyclopentadienes. These occasionally appear to have a 16VE 
metal centre; however, it should be noted that an alternative valence 
bond representation involving metalkarbon multiple bonding may be 
envisaged, in which case an analogy with pyrroles and thiophenes 
emerges (see Figure 7.19). These metallacycles, in particular those based 
on Group 4 metallocenes, can serve as precursors for a wide range of 
five-membered unsaturated heterocycles by treatment with suitable main- 
group element dihalides via electrophilic cleavage, whilst hydrolysis pro- 
vides the corresponding butadiene (Figure 6.39). 
R 
R 
Cp2Zr, 
C1 - 
-2LiCl 
CP2Zr\ ,Bu BU 2RCCR 
4 4 H 8  * Cp*zr$; 
*'I* 
* A$R 
,C1 
2BuLi 
t 
R 
A = S, Se, PPh, SiMe2, etc. 
R 
R 
-C4H I 0 
,C1 
2BuLi 
,Bu 
2RCCR 
Cp2Zr, - 
CP2Zr\ 
* Cp2Zr , 
C1 
-2LiCl 
BU 4 4 H 8  
t 
-C4H I 0 
R 
I 
I A = S, Se, PPh, SiMe2, etc. 
We have already mentioned cyclooctatetraene and will meet more 
Figure 6.39 
examples of its complexes. This aspect of organometallic chemistry might 
never have evolved to its present state if chemists needed to rely on the 
Metallacyclopentadienes; 
en = 
1,2-diaminoethane (ethylene-l,2- 
diarnine) 
laborious multi-step synthesis. Reppe (1948), however, found that a 
variety of nickel complexes [e.g. Ni(CN),, Ni(acac),, Ni(H,C=CHCN),] 
could 
ethyne (acetylene) to provide this hydrocarbon in 
good yield (70%, 80-120 "C, 10-25 bar). Depending on the conditions, 

148 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 6.40 Propargylic 
substitution 
ligands and choice of solvent, the reaction may be diverted to provide 
either simple dimerization (butenyne), trimerization (benzene) or poly- 
merization (polyacetylene). Small amounts of styrene, phenylbutadiene 
and vinylcyclooctatetraene and traces of azulene and naphthalene (via 
cyclodecapentaene) are also observed. Numerous other metal catalysts 
have since been shown to access this type of chemistry. 
The coupling of alkynes, alkenes and CO to provide 
via the intermediacy of 
(Figure 6.34) is known as 
the 
The reaction of cobalt carbonyl with 
alkynes to provide these intermediates is virtually quantitative and, once 
formed, the initial alkyne may be substituted by more electronegative 
alkynes. The alkynes may themselves be modified whilst coordinated, in 
which case the dicobalt moiety might be viewed as a protecting group 
for the alkyne. Some of the most useful protocols include the conven- 
ient modification of coordinated 
(Figure 6.40). 
Abstraction of the hydroxide (Brarnsted or Lewis acids) adjacent to the 
alkyne leads to a carbonium ion (comparable stability to Ph,C+), which 
may then be functionalized with a variety of nucleophiles. The reactions 
of these tetrahedranes with alkenes and CO provides cyclopentadienones, 
with good regioselectivity (CO adjacent to the bulkier alkyne substituent) 
in the C-C bond-forming stages. Chiral centres are generated if the 
alkene is prochiral, and the introduction of chiral co-ligands may lead 
to enantioselectivity. In some cases the reaction may be carried out using 
catalytic amounts of Co,(CO),; however, it is more usual to isolate the 
alkyne complex intermediate (Figure 6.41). 
Figure 6.41 Pauson-Khand 
synthesis 

qn-C n
n
 
R Carbocyclic Polyene 
Ligands (n = 3-8) 
7.1 
Introduction 
This chapter is concerned with planar 
ligands of the form cyclo-CnRn (n = 3-8) in addition to the related odd- 
electron acyclic ligands V " - C ~ R ~ + ~  
(n = 3, 5). The material is arranged 
according to hapticity. However, before embarking on a systematic 
Fern- 
C,H,),, arguably the most important synthetic compound of the 20th 
century. This remarkable organometallic compound was discovered at a 
time when the field of simple transition metalkarbon single bonds 
appeared to be a non-starter. At this time, new spectroscopic techniques 
that we now consider routine were slowly becoming available, and could 
be used in combination with (at the time painfully arduous) X-ray 
crystallography to test the emerging theories on metal-ligand bonding. 
For such a completely novel class of molecule, and an archetype of such 
elegant simplicity, to appear at such a scientifically voracious time 
explains why it captured the imagination of such a diverse group of 
and 
march from q3 to q8, centre stage must be given to 
chemists. In the intervening 50 years, only 
(C60) has 
149 

150 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
[C,H,IX 
x (n-~)n 
1+ 
271: 
2+ 
2.n 
2- 
6.n 
1- 
6.n 
0 
6.n 
1+ 
671: 
3- 
Ion 
2- 
lox 
Figure 7.1 Aromatic 
carbocycles 
been so eagerly and widely embraced (including organometallic chem- 
istry), for many of the same reasons. 
For electron counting purposes and in deference to the principle of 
electroneutrality, we consider planar qH-CnR, to serve as neutral ligands 
(Table 1.1). It is instructive, however, to consider the charges that the 
free molecules would require were they to satisfy the Huckel '(4n + 2 ) ~ '  
concept of 
(Figure 7.1). Amongst these, only arenes (n = 6) 
would be expected to be equilateral, planar, neutral aromatic molecules. 
This perspective serves two purposes. Firstly, if (artificial) oxidation 
states need to be assigned, this may assist. Secondly, the relationship 
of charged species to related neutral molecules may provide retro- 
synthetic insight, e.g. the 6n; 
([C,H,] ) is easily 
generated by deprotonation (-H+) of cyclopentadiene (CjH6), whilst 
hydride abstraction (-H-) from cycloheptatriene (C,H,) provides the 671 
In addition to the carbocyclic ligands, we will also consider here the 
chemistry of 
(C,R,) and 
(C5R7) ligands. These acyclic 
ligands might be considered as relatives of q3-C R and qS-C,R, ligands, 
although there is no circumannular delocalization, and the reactivity 
tends to be associated with the peripheral methylenic carbon atoms. 
Before we consider each of these ligands in turn, it is useful to iden- 
tify parallels, which run through the chapter and characterize all the q"- 
C,R, ligands. These may be generalized as in Box 7.1. 
([C&]+). 
3 . 3  
Figure 7.2 Geometrical 
implications for qn-CnRn 
coordination 

q"-C,R, 
Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n = 3-8) 
151 
We will not consider here specific MO schemes for the various car- 
bocyclic ligands since these are available in advanced texts. It is suffi- 
of 
q"-C,R, ligands. An q"-C,R, ligand provides nVE to the metal centre 
and presents n 
(combinations of n p- orbitals) for mix- 
ing with the nine valence orbitals of the metal centre. These may be of 
0, 
n: or (for n > 3) 6 symmetry with respect to the vector joining the 
metal and ring centroid, allowing overlap with metal orbitals of 0 (s, p-, 
cy of each of the resulting molecular orbitals (and their impact on reac- 
tivity/ stability) will depend on the number of valence electrons. This 
symmetry matching is illustrated for cyclobutadiene (Figure 7.3; cJ: buta- 
diene, Figure 6.26; see also Figure 7.23). The actual energetic ordering 
of the molecular orbitals which results from these combinations will 
cient here to appreciate some general features of the 
d,d, n: (dx,, dy" p,x, PJ or 6 (dTY, d,2,2) 
symmetry. The actual occupan- 

152 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
depend on (i) the value of n, (ii) the nature of the metal centre, and (iii) 
the nature of the co-ligands which influence the relative energies of the 
metal valence orbitals. 
Figure 7.3 Symmetry consider- 
ations for metal valence orbitals 
and a representative qn-C,R, 
car- 
bocyclic ligand, C4H4 
7.2 
Allyls, q3-C3R, 
Figure 7.4 Allyl (C,H,) 
'TC 
molecular orbitals 
Allyl ligands (Figure 4.1) have already been encountered in one of their 
possible coordination modes: simple q' (IVE) coordination may be 
viewed as a sub-class of o-alkyl ligands. The divergence arises, however, 
when the metal centre is able to accommodate a further pair of electrons 
(i. e. < 18VE) from the double bond, thereby adopting a trihapto coordi- 
nation. In valence bond terms (Figure 1.6), a contribution to stability 
can be envisaged from three canonical forms (both C-C bonds of simi- 
lar length). In molecular orbital terms (Figure 7.4) the hydrocarbyl pres- 
ents orbitals of both o and n; symmetry. The importance of the central 
molecular orbital (localized on the terminal carbon atoms) is manifest 
in these carbons having shorter metal-carbon bond lengths such that the 
C, plane is tilted, e.g. by 20" in the homoleptic complex Ni(q-C3HJ2, 
accompanied by displacement of the allyl substituents from the C, plane. 
Cyclopropenyl ligands present a special case (Section 7.4). 
The q' and q3 coordination modes are often interconvertable via the 
addition or dissociation of co-ligands, which modifies the EAN require- 
ments of the metal. Many allyl compounds have complex NMR spectra 
due to the various 
that may operate. For ql-ally1 
ligands the possibility of transfer of the metal between the ends of the 
allyl group may occur, chemically equilibrating the two ends of the 
hydrocarbyl on the NMR timescale. For trihapto allyl coordination, 
rotation about the axis perpendicular to the C, plane may occur, in addi- 
tion to reversible q'-q3 tautomerism. The intermediacy of q1 coordina- 
tion allows the possibility of rotation about the C(sp3)-C(sp2) bond such 
that the syn and anti substituents may exchange sites (Figure 7.5). So 
long as these possibilities are appreciated, the chemical shifts for protons 
of q3-allyl ligands fall into reasonably distinct ranges (6m,so > 6,,,i > S,,), 
whilst the relative magnitudes of 2J(H,yJ,n-HU,ri) < 3J(HsJ,llH,71eSI)) 
< 3J(H,nti-Hmc.so) assist in making assignments. In the case of ql-ally1 

qn-C,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n 
3-8) 
153 
ligands, the resonances fall into distinct aliphatic (M-CH,) and vinylic 
(CH=CH,) regions. 
Figure 7.5 Fluxional processes 
for q3-allyl ligands 
Allyl complexes may be accessed via comparatively general synthetic 
routes typical of simple o-alkyl ligands, i. e. 
of allyl halides by 
carbonyl metallates (Figure 4.6) and the 
of allenes or 
1,3-butadienes (Figure 6.32). Furthermore, the rearrangement of alkenes 
bearing allylic hydrogen substituents has been noted (Figure 6.7). Allyl 
Grignard reagents (commercially available) are the most widely 
employed nucleophilic transfer reagents, especially for the preparation 
of homoleptic complexes (Figure 7.6). 
of allyl halides or 
Figure 7.6 Synthesis of allyl 
complexes via transmetallation 
Allyl halides (electrophilic allyl delivery) are effective both for oxida- 
tive addition and for reactions with nucleophilic carbonyl metallates ~~~~~)'ic Organyl 
(Figures 7.7, 7.8). In some cases, e.g. with Na[M(CO),] (M = Mn, Re), 
monohapto allyl intermediates may be isolated and then photochemically 
or thermally decarbonylated. 
Whilst homoleptic alkyls are generally highly reactive and kinetically 
unstable, the possibility of q3-coordination has made the isolation of 

154 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 7.7 Electrophilic allyl 
introduction; M(CO), = V(CO),, 
WCO),, Re(CO),, Co(CO), 
Figure 7.8 Oxidative addition of 
allyl halides 
many 
allyl complexes comparatively routine (Figure 7.6). 
Poly(ally1) complexes are useful starting materials owing to their solu- 
bility in many solvents, comparative stability and high reactivity, e.g. 
towards 
or 
, providing 
a route to unsaturated metal species. 
The reactivity of allyl ligands recalls aspects of both o-organyl 
(Chapter 4) and also .n-alkene (Chapter 6) chemistry. In a o-organyl con- 
text, the case of electrophilic cleavage deserves special comment. In addi- 
tion to the metal centre and the M-C bond, the pendant C=C double 
bond may also be attacked by electrophiles. However, the initial site of 
attack may not always be unequivocally evident from the nature of the 
alkene product (Figure 7.9a). The chemistry of q3-allyl complexes is 
strongly dependent on the nature of the metal centre. Thus the reactions 
of nickel(I1) complexes are dominated by the organyl ligand displaying 
nucleophilic character (Ni PE = 1.9)? which may be exploited in cou- 
pling reactions with alkyl, aryl, vinyl or allyl halides (many of which fail 
in the case of allyl Grignard reagents) (Figure 7.9b). Intramolecular vari- 
ants may be devised if both the allylic halide and the subsequent elec- 
trophile are contained within the same substrate (Figure 7.9~). 
Whilst electrophilic attack is commonly observed for q '-ally1 ligands, 
the reactivity of $-ally1 ligands towards nucleophiles has been intense- 
ly studied because the enormous synthetic utility this offers for allylic 
functionalizat ion 
. The metal of choice for such appli- 
cations is generally palladium (PE = 2.2), which may be employed in 
numerous catalytic processes. The versatility of palladium arises from 
the general tolerance of late transition metal centres to polar functional 

qn-C,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n = 3-8) 
155 
Figure 7.9 Electrophilic attack 
at 0'- and q3-allyl ligands 
groups, minimizing the requirement for protection/deprotection proto- 
cols. The key step is the facile oxidative addition of the allyl-X bond (X 
= halide, OAc, OPh, OH, NR,+, S0,Ph) to a palladium(0) precursor to 
provide (depending on the ligands present and choice of solvent) q3-allyl 
complexes of the forms shown in Figure 7.10. 
It is not always clear which one (or more) of these forms operates, 
although the cationic species might appear to be most prone to nucle- 
ophilic attack. We have already seen that coordination of alkenes to diva- 
lent palladium activates them towards nucleophilic attack. In a similar 
manner, a wide range of nucleophiles may be introduced in a step which, 
in generating a new alkene, also reduces the palladium (I1 -+ 0) for intro- 
duction into the next cycle (Figure 7.1 1). 
A wide range of nucleophilic functional groups may be introduced; 
however, of particular use are C-C bond-forming reactions employing 
(malonates, dithianyls, etc. ). Intramolecular appli- 
cations of this reaction are particularly efficient, allowing the construc- 
tion of 3- to 11-membered rings. For most nucleophiles (including 
stabilized carbanions), direct attack occurs at the ally1 ligand on the face 
opposite to the metal. Since both the oxidative addition and the subse- 
quent exo nucleophilic attack involve 
at car- 
bon, the net result (double inversion) is overall 
at 
the carbon. Alternatively, the nucleophile may attack the metal centre 
directly, followed by reductive elimination (proceeds with retention), 
such that the overall process results in 
at 
carbon. In the case of carbon nucleophiles, this is favoured by the use 
of organometallics of the main group elements (transmetallation), e.g. 
stannanes or (less commonly) Grignard reagents. This process finds 
Figure 7.10 Ally1 palladium 
complexes 

156 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 7.1 1 Generalized 
scheme for palladium-catalysed 
allylic functionalization 
parallels with the palladium-catalysed nucleophilic substitution of aryl 
halides (Figure 4.10). If an alkene is introduced in place of the 
nucleophile, then coordination to the metal centre may be followed by 
insertion of the alkene into the metal-ally1 bond (possibly via an ql- 
tautomer). The resulting alkyl may undergo P-M-H elimination to 
provide a 1,4-diene. The amazing utility of this technology is beyond this 
discussion; however, an illustrative selection of organic syntheses 
employing this technology is presented in Figure 7.12. 
7.3 
Pentadienyls, q5-C5R7 
Pentadienyls may be considered as vinylogues of ally1 complexes and 
accordingly parallels exist, both in their synthesis and reactivity. These 
are most widely prepared by transmetallation from lithium or Grignard 
reagents, nucleophilic attack at pentadienyl halides or via hydride 
abstraction from q4-pentadiene complexes (Figure 7.13). 
A special case involves complexes of cyclohexadienyl ligands, which 
may result from the addition of nucleophiles to q6-arene complexes 
(Section 7.7) or hydride abstraction from complexes of readily available 
cyclohexadienes (Birch reduction of arenes) (Figure 7.14). In the latter 
case, it is within the chemistry of iron that such complexes find the widest 

qn-C,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n 
3-8) 
157 
Figure 7.1 2 (Above) Illustrative examples of palladium-catalysed 
allylic functionalization 
Figure 7.13 Synthesis of 
pentadienyl complexes 

158 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
application in organic synthesis. By 
, the abstraction of 
hydride from a pentadiene ligand suggests that the point of abstraction 
(the pentadienyl terminus carbon) will be prone to nucleophilic attack 
(Figure 7.14). Bis(pentadieny1) complexes have been prepared (typically 
by transmetallation) and their reactivity compared to those of metal- 
locenes (Section 7.6). From this it may be concluded that the pentadi- 
enyl ligand is typically more likely to take part in ligand-based reactions 
than are cyclopentadienyl ligands, and also that it is more prone to reduc- 
tion in hapticity (Figure 7.14). 
Figure 7.14 Synthetic 
applications of cyclohexadienyl 
iron complexes; HNu,, Nu; 
= 
H-, OH-, OR-, NH,, NH,R, NHR,, 
R- (R-M or stabilized carbanion) 
7.4 
Cyclopropenyls, q3-C3R3 (Metal latetra hed ranes) 
The 
cation [C,H,]+ is the simplest aromatic (27~) carbo- 
cyclic system. However, having only three p-orbitals with which to con- 
struct (n) frontier orbitals (Figure 7.15), there is no orbital of 6 symmetry. 
The chemistry of 
is far less studied than that of the 
acyclic ally1 ligands discussed previously. Cyclopropenyl halides readily 
ionize to provide aromatic (2.n) cyclopropenium salts (isolated with non- 
coordinating anions). Alternatively, a hydride may be abstracted from 
the sp3 carbon of cyclopropenes (e.g. with [Ph,C]BF,) to provide isolable 
cyclopropenium salts, amongst which the triphenyl derivative has 
been the most widely studied in an organometallic context. These and 
the halides serve as the most common means for introducing the 
cyclopropenyl ligand, via oxidative addition or nucleophilic attack by 
carbonyl metallates (Figure 7.16). 
complexes may be isolated as inter- 
mediates, whilst in others, migration to a carbonyl ligand may be 
Figure 7.15 Frontier molecular 
orbitals for [C,H,]+ 
'* Some cases, 

qn-C,Rn Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n = 3-8) 
159 
Figure 7.1 6 Synthesis of cyclopropenium complexes 
followed by 
of the CO group into the (strained) carbocycle, 
resulting in the formation of 
ligands. Two special cases 
in which cyclopropenes do not lead to cyclopropyl complexes are wor- 
thy of note: 3,3-dihalocyclopropenes have been used for the synthesis of 
cyclopropenylidenes, whilst some cyclopropenes may be ring opened to 
provide alkenyl carbenes (Figure 7.17). 
Although many conventional and symmetric q3-cyclopropenyl com- 
plexes are known, in many cases quite dramatic distortion from ideal 
local C3” MC, geometry may occur. The reactions of [C3Ph3]BF, with 
Pt(q-C,H,)(PPh,), and IrCl(CO)(PMe,), are of interest in that the prod- 
ucts do not contain symmetrical q3-C,Ph3 ligands. Instead, a distorted 
) in the latter, wherein the iridium is inserted into one C-C bond 
(Figure 7.18). This product recalls the formation of such metallacycles 
via the cycloaddition of alkynes to high oxidation state Group 6 alkyli- 
dynes (Figure 5.44), and even these metallacycles are occasionally found 
to be non-planar. 
arises in the former and a metallacycle 
Figure 7.1 7 Cyclopropene-derived carbenes; L = PPh, 

160 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 7.1 8 Cyclopropenyl 
vs. metallacyclobutadiene 
coordination; R = But; 
Ac = COMe 
It is perhaps premature to attempt to delineate the factors that 
determine whether symmetrical or distorted metallacyclobutadiene or q3- 
cycopropenyl coordination is observed, given the comparitive sparsity of 
directly comparable examples, and the observation that 
appears to operate between coordination modes in some cases. A similar 
situation arises for 
coordination vs. 
formation (Figures 6.38, 6.39, 7.19). In both cases the metallacycles 
are important intermediates in catalytic manifolds 
and 
respectively) and in both cases the polyhapto variant 
represents a tangent to the productive catalytic cycle, formation of which 
may be reversible or in some cases may lead to termination. 
7.5 
Cyclobutadienes, q4-C,R, 
As early as 1956 it was suggested that the 
(4n: # 4n + 2) 
molecule cyclobutadiene (Figure 7.3) might be stabilized by coordina- 
tion to a transition metal. This, coupled with the known ability of the 
Fe(CO), unit to stabilize butadiene coordination, and the previous iso- 
lation of complexed substituted cyclobutadienes (Figure 7.20), led Pettit 
to design and isolate Fe(CO),(q-C,H,) from the reaction of dichloro- 
cyclobutene with Fe,(CO),. In this reaction the iron carbonyl acts as both 
a reductant and a trap. More generally, the majority of cyclobutadiene 
complexes arise from 
, prior to or as a result of coordi- 
nation (Figure 7.20). Many examples of both metallacyclopentadienes 
and cyclobutadiene complexes (Figure 7.19) are known. In some cases 
the former lies synthetically en route to the latter via reductive elimina- 
tion. In other cases this final step is not easily induced. One case where 
ring closure (reductive elimination) does occur is in the formation of 
Ni(q-C,Ph,), (Figure 7.20). 
Figure 7.19 Metallacyclic vs. 
polyhapfo coordination 

qn-C,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n 
3-8) 
161 
On reaching q4 in our march, aromatic character begins to become 
manifest in the reactivity of the coordinated carbocycle. Figure 7.2 1 illus- 
trates a range of reactions of Pettit's complex, including those involving 
and the reactions of free cyclobutadiene which may be liberated by oxi- 
dation (CeIV) in the presence of suitable trapping agents. 
Figure 7.20 Synthesis of 
cyclobutadiene complexes 
functionalization of the coordinated ring (e. g. 
) 
7.6 
Cyclopentadienyls, q5-C5R, 
Complexes of the cyclopentadienyl ligand fall loosely into three classes: 
and 
(Figure 
7.22). For metallocenes, interest focuses on the chemistry of the cyclopen- 
tadienyl rings, whilst for bent metallocenes and half-sandwich complex- 
es the cyclopentadienyl ligands usually serve as innocent spectator 
ligands. A special case of bent metallocenes involves those wherein the 
two rings are joined by a bridge 
7 
which may impart steric (and resulting electronic) constraints upon the 
complex geometry. 
A detailed discussion of the molecular orbital scheme for linear sand- 

162 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 7.21 Syntheses and 
selected reactions of Pettit's 
complex, Fe(CO),(q-C,H,) 
wich complexes will be deferred until we consider Cr(q-C6H6)2. This is 
justified on three grounds. Firstly, the molecular orbitals of benzene (0-3 
nodal planes bisecting a six-membered ring) are more familiar and eas- 
ily visualized than those of the cyclopentadienyl anion (0-2 nodal planes 
superimposed on a five-membered ring). Secondly, the orbital symme- 
tries and principles illustrated apply to both Fe(q-C,H,), and Cr(q- 
C6H6),. Finally, so long as we appreciate the limitations of a crystal field 
approximation, i. e. neglect of covalency, the actual ordering of the result- 
ant frontier orbitals is similar to that arising from a molecular orbital 
approach. This is not an acceptable approximation, but will suffice in 
the interim. The immediate conclusion from Figure 7.23 is that the fron- 
tier orbitals comprise a (closely spaced) set of alg (d-2) and degenerate 
e2g (dx2:1;2, dxy) orbitals which lie below two degeneiate elg* (d,xz, dyz) 
orbitals which are destabilized as a result of pointing towards the C,H, 
orbital torroids. The most stable situation would therefore appear to be 
for an 18VE complex with vacant elK* orbitals. This is indeed the case, 
with the d6 metallocenes MCp2 (M = Fe, Ru, Os, Co'; Cp = q-C,H,) 

q"-C,,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n = 3-8) 
163 
being the most stable and inert. However, the close spacing of the alg 
and e2g orbitals means that 3d metallocenes which have these only par- 
tially filled are also comparatively stable (e.g. M = Cr, V, Mn), although, 
being electron deficient, they show a tendency to coordinate ligands [e.g. 
M(CO)Cp, (M = V, Cr)]. Similarly (paramagnetic) MCp, (M = Co, Ni) 
are also thermally stable despite population of the elg* orbitals. 
For an 18VE metallocene the three e and alg* orbitals are primarily 
metal based and weakly M-C antibonding. If we imagine bending the 
metallocene, the effect is to 'squeeze' these orbitals out between the rings, 
making them available for interaction with further ligands in the plane 
between the two Cp rings (Figure 7.22). The occupancy of these orbitals 
will depend on the overall valence electron count. Thus a do bent 
metallocene is Lewis acidic; for TiCl,Cp,, two orbitals become involved 
in bonding to chloride ligands whilst the third acts as a Lewis acid. For 
a d2 or d4 bent metallocene, however, one of these orbitals will be 
occupied and may be attacked by electrophiles, e.g. WH2Cp2 (d2) and 
ReHCp, (d4) which are protonated to form [WH,Cp,lf and [ReH,Cp,]+, 
whilst TaH,Cp, (do) is not. The implications of this rehybridization are 
that with only three coplanar orbitals available, a maximum of three 
24 
Figure 7.22 Cyclopentadienyl 
complexes 
Figure 7.23 Crystal field 
approximation for d-orbital 
splitting in ferrocene 
covalent coplanar metal-ligand bonds may be formed. Effective 
metal-ligand n;-interactions are limited to these three orbitals, which lie 
in the plane between the two rings, e.g. the loss of this interaction 
contributes to orientation and the high rotation barrier for the carbene 
ligand in Ta(=CHPh)(CH,Ph)Cp, (Table 1.3). 
7.6.1 Ferrocene 
The chemistry in this chapter originates from Pauson's discovery of 
bis(cyclopentadienyl)iron(II). Pauson had attempted the synthesis of the 
1 On: aromatic hydrocarbon fulvalene via an oxidative coupling/dehydro- 
genation of the cyclopentadienyl anion (Figure 7.24). However, Pauson 

164 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
chose ferric [iron( III)] chloride (commonly employed for oxidative biaryl 
coupling) and obtained a highly stable, sublimable, diamagnetic 
orange compound of composition C,,H,oFe which he formulated as 
Fe(o-C,H,)z. 
Figure 7.24 Synthesis of fer- 
locene and fulvalene complexes; 
M(CO), = Ru(CO),, Cr(CO),, 
WW,, W W ) ,  
The apparent instability of metal-carbon single bonds, which was 
prematurely presumed at the time, led Wilkinson and Fischer to question 
this formulation. They proposed and confirmed the now-familiar 
sandwich structure wherein the metal resides between parallel planar 
C,H, rings. 
This revolutionary formulation was supported by both the physical 
properties (zero dipole moment, diamagnetism, IR and X-ray crystal- 
lography) and also the chemical reactivity. Amongst the first of these to 
be investigated were electrophilic aromatic substitution reactions (e.g. 
FriedelLCrafts acylation). Not only did ferrocene undergo electrophilic 
aromatic substitution, it did so with far greater activity than simple 
arenes (ca. 3 x 106 as fast as C,H,). This pseudo-aromatic behaviour led 
to the trivial name ‘ferrocene’ and later to the more general term 
‘metallocene’ as it became clear that ferrocene was by no means unique 
in forming bis(cyclopentadieny1) complexes. Figure 7.25 presents a range 
of key ferrocenyl derivatives which arise from electrophilic attack at one 
of the C,H, rings; however, it is an illustrative over-simplification. In 
many cases, attack at both rings may occur, requiring careful control of 
conditions. In general, introduction of an electron-withdrawing sub- 
stituent will deactivate a cyclopentadienyl ring to further electrophilic 
attack, thereby directing attack to the second ring. This is illustrated by 
the acid-catalysed H/D exchange of variously substituted ferrocenes 
Fe(q-C,H,)(q-C,H,R), the rate of which is found to decrease in the order 
R = OMe > alkyl > H > Cl, C02Me. Thus acetylation of acetylferrocene 
is approximately lo4 times slower than for ferrocene, and produces a 
1O:l mixture of the 1,l’- and 1,2-isomers (Figure 7.26). Conversely, 
Friedel-Crafts alkylution results in a more electron-rich alkyl-substituted 

qn-CnR, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n = 3-8) 
165 
ring, which is therefore more prone to attack, and hence polyalkylation 
often occurs with little selectivity. 
There is continuing debate about the role of the metal centre in the 
very facile electrophilic substitution reactions of ferrocene and related 
metallocenes. The Group 8 metallocenes are reversibly protonated at the 
metal by strong acids (Table 2.3), indicating that the metal centre has 
some nucleophilicity. The metallocene equivalent of the 
in conventional electrophilic substitution would be a cationic 
(16VE) cyclopentadiene complex that could in principle have the intro- 
duced electrophile exo or endo with respect to the iron. If this inter- 
mediate arose from initial attack at the metal centre followed by 
migration to the ring, the endo intermediate would result (although this 
could in principle also arise from direct endo ring attack). Figure 7.27 
illustrates both mechanistic pathways in addition to results which point 
towards preferential direct exo attack. The two metallocene carboxylic 
acids shown were designed to only allow either endo or exo intra- 
molecular attack (activated by 0-trifluoroacylation). The metallocene 
capable of exo attack reacts faster than that for which only direct endo 
attack or attack at the metal centre is possible, i.e. denied access to the 
metal centre does not retard the rate. This argument assumes that 
electrophilic attack is the rate-limiting step and does not consider the 
possible participation of the metal centre in the subsequent deprotona- 
tion, e.g. via initial transfer to the metal centre. 
Figure 7.27 is mechanistically most relevant to the functionalization 
of d6 diamagnetic Group 8 metallocenes. A more general picture of the 
reactivity of metal-bound cyclopentadienyl ligands towards nucleophiles 
and radicals is presented in Figure 7.28, which takes into account 
Figure 7.25 Aromatic character 
of ferrocene expressed in 
electrophilic ring functionalization. 
(i) Hg(O,CMe),, 
LiCI; (ii) N-bromo- 
succinimide; (iii) CIC(=O)Me 
(Friedel-Crafts); (iv) AI,CI,; 
(v) 
NaBH,; (vi) H+; (vii) BuLi; (viii) 
PhNMeCHO, POCI, (Vilsmeier); 
(ix) O=C(CF,),; (XI 
H,C(NMe,),, 
MeCO,H, H,PO, 
(Mannich); (xi) 
Mel; (xii) PPh,; (xiii) Wittig; (xiv) Meli 
Figure 7.26 Selectivity in 
Friedel-Crafts acylation of 
ferrocene 

166 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 7.27 The role of iron in 
electrophilic substitution 
Figure 7.28 General reactivity 
of MCp, complexes 
the effect of varying the nature (charge, nVE) of the metal centre, and 
the drive towards adherence to the EAN rule. In complexes where the 
dative capacity of the ligand exceeds the metal’s requirements (n > IS), 
may occur transiently, allowing the resulting pendant dou- 
ble bond to enter into cycloaddition chemistry, a characteristic reaction 
of 20VE nickelocene. 
A complication in the reaction of ferrocene with electrophiles arises 

q"-C,R, 
Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n = 3-8) 
167 
from the ease of one-electron oxidation of the metal centre by strong 
oxidants (Cl,, NO+, NO,+, etc.), to generate greedblue ferrocenium salts. 
The majority of reactions of ferrocene involve electrophilic attack, to 
which the d5 ferrocenium cation is deactivated. This lack of reactivity, 
coupled with the solubility of ferrocene and ferrocenium salts, makes the 
[FeCp,]"+ (n = 0, 1) redox couple an ideal, chemically inert, 
for electrochemical experiments, and also as an electron carri- 
er. This has been exploited in the use of the ferrocene/ferrocenium redox 
couple in redox 'biosensors' used for monitoring blood glucose levels in 
diabetics and in industrial fermentation monitoring. The metallocene acts 
as an electron carrier between the glucose oxidase enzyme (which specif- 
ically recognizes glucose) and a suitable electrode (Figure 7.29). 
Given the remarkable stability of ferrocene, its chemistry might have 
been a cul-de-sac were it not for the high reactivity associated with the 
C,H, rings, which allow very easy functionalization, using modifications 
of well-established protocols for simple aromatic compounds. Figure 
7.25 showed reactions with electrophiles whilst Figure 7.30 illustrates a 
range of compounds which arise from o-organometallic derivatives. 
These are far too numerous to cover here and for illustrative purposes 
a selection has been made which lead to ferrocenyl-based ligands. The 
key starting point in these syntheses involves ferrocene lithiation. 
Unfortunately, ferrocene reacts with BuLi to provide a mixture of mono- 
Figure 7.29 Ferrocene/glucose 
oxidase (GOD) based glucose 
sensor 
red arrows) 
Figure 7.30 Ferrocenophanes and ferrocenyl ligands derived from dilithioferrocene. (i) Fe(CO),; (ii) MO(CO),, (cF3co),0; 
(iii) CI,BNR,; 
(iv) LiAIH,; (v) MCI,Cp,; 
(vi) S,; (vii) Pd(PPh,),; 
(viii) EC14; (ix) CI,PPh; (x) CIPPh,; (xi) PdCI,(NCPh),; 
(Xi11 W(CO),rHF); 
(xiii) PhLi; (xiv) CIAsPh,; (xv) FeCI(CO),Cp 

168 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
and 1,l’-dilithioferrocene, which is of limited use as a reagent (mixture). 
1 ,l’-Dilithioferrocene, however, is formed in high yield from the combi- 
nation of BuLi and TMEDA. Pure monolithioferrocene is obtained via 
the initial mercuration of ferrocene (Figure 7.25; a common reaction of 
arenes) by Hg(O,CMe),/LiCl which, as in the case of acylation, provides 
a mixture of mono- and dimercurated compounds. These are air stable 
and easily separated. Amongst the derivatives shown in the figure are 
examples from a class of compounds known as metallocenophanes (ansa- 
metallocenes), i.e. compounds where the two rings are joined by a bridg- 
ing unit (SiMe,, PPh, BNMe,). The rings in these molecules are not 
parallel, reflecting a degree of-introduced strain which may be alleviat- 
ed by thermolytic (or metal-catalysed) 
Figure 7.31 Ring-opening poly- 
merization of metallocenoDhanes: 
provide ferrocene-diyl polymers (Figure 7.3 1). 
to 
X = PR, SIR,, BR 
In addition to the many functionalized cyclopentadienyl ligands 
shown in Figures 7.23 and 7.30, a vast array of possible variants are 
accessible via modification of free cyclopentadienes. This is fortunate, in 
that ferrocene is unique in its versatility towards functionalization. The 
majority of other metallocenes, once constructed, are not as tolerant of 
such subsequent transformations. 
7.6.2 Other Metallocenes 
Ferrocene is somewhat special because of the position of iron(I1) in the 
Periodic Table. Although the metals V, Cr, Mn, Fe (Ru, Os), Co and 
Ni all form thermally stable bis(cyclopentadienyl)s, it is only those of 
Group 8 which are diamagnetic. In solution, all of these others are air 
sensitive and mononuclear; however, in the solid state, manganocene 
adopts a chain structure with bridging C,H, groups. Much of the 
chemistry of ferrocene is reflected in those of 
and 
, 
which, however, are less mature for reasons of cost and non-trivial or 
low-yielding synthetic routes. On moving away from iron, significant dif- 
ferences arise: to the right, the neutral metallocenes exceed 18VE and 
are easily oxidized, such that the 
(1 8VE) is less reac- 
tive than 
(1 9VE). Whilst ferrocene is stable towards proto- 
nation, the protonation of 
(20VE) results in loss of one C,H, 
and formation of a 
in which two nickels are sand- 
wiched between three C,H, rings (Figure 7.32). Although this was the 
first triple-decker complex, a number of others have now been prepared. 
Although most of the 3d metals form stable metallocenes which 
contravene the 18-electron rule, titanium and many of the 4d and 5d 
metals do not tolerate this discomfort, but rather enter into reactions of 
the C,H, rings which allow the metal to reach an 18VE count (Figure 
7.33). 
The chemistry of metallocenes may be divided into that associated 
Figure 7.32 A triple decker 

q"-C,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n 
3-8) 
169 
with the hydrocarbon rings and that associated with the metal centre, 
wherein the C,R, ring serves as a spectator ligand. Ring chemistry is best 
illustrated by the reactions of ferrocene itself (see above), and many of 
these extend to other metallocene or monocyclopentadienyl complexes 
so long as the co-ligands remain innocent. The basis for the immense 
number of such compounds is that when an qn-CnRn ligand coordinates 
to a metal centre, up to three mutually cis coordination sites are blocked, 
leaving the remaining sites for co-ligands which are mutually adjacent 
and well disposed for studying their interactions and modifications. One 
of the most important classes of such complexes is the cyclopentadienyl 
metal carbonyls (Figures 3.7-3.9, Table 3.4). Since the chemistry of these 
complexes focuses primarily on the other ligands, no more will be said 
here. 
Figure 7.33 Elusive 
7.7 
Arenes, qs-C6R, 
The correct identification of the sandwich structure of ferrocene led 
Fischer to consider the possibility of arenes acting as hexahapto 6VE 
ligands. By simple arithmetic, a neutral bis(arene) sandwich complex of 
a zerovalent Group 6 element, e.g. chromium (Figure 6.71), was antici- 
pated, a line of reasoning which led Fischer to develop the synthesis 
of 
His approach resulted in the comparatively 
general 'Fischer-Hafner' synthesis ( 1955), which is applicable to many 
metals and arenes (devoid of Lewis-basic substituents, Figure 7.34). 
The approach involves the reaction of a mid-valent metal halide with 
a mixture of arene, aluminium chloride (Lewis acidic halide abstractor) 
and aluminium powder (mild reductant). The charge on the resulting 
bis(arene) sandwich (n+) is generally dictated by the nature of the metal 
and EAN requirements, although once isolated, further reduction may 
Figure 7.34 Fischer-Hafner 
synthesis; M = V, Cr, M ~ ,  
W, T ~ ,  
be possible with stronger reductants. The approach can also be applied 
de, Fe, Ru, Os, Co, Rh, Ir, 

170 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
to the preparation of half-sandwich arene complexes and metallocenes 
may sometimes be used in place of metal halides (C,H, abstraction) to 
provide mixed arene<yclopentadienyl sandwiches. In the interim, many 
more synthetic routes have emerged for the preparation of arene com- 
plexes of transition metals (and some main group elements). Amongst 
these, 
(Figure 7.3 5) deserves 
special comment because it is in arene chemistry that it finds its widest 
application. 
Figure 7.35 Metal atom-ligand 
co-condensation 
The metal and ligand are both vaporized and then co-condensed 
together, usually at liquid nitrogen temperature (77 K). In addition to 
finely divided (and pyrophoric) bulk metal, organometallic complexes 
may generally be extracted from the resulting condensate. Although this 
non-routine method requires sophisticated equipment, the strength lies 
in accessing compounds not available by conventional 'wet' routes, 
including those shown in Figure 7.35. The high energy required to vapor- 
ize some metals presently excludes them from this approach. 
Cyclohexadienes are readily available via Birch reduction of arenes, 
and may also serve as precursors via metal-mediated dehydrogenation, 
e.g. the majority of half-sandwich arene chemistry based on ruthenium 
arises from the binuclear complexes Ru,(p-C1),Cl,(q6-arene), (arene = 
MeC,H,Pr', C,H,) which result from the reaction of RuCl,.xH,O with 
a-phellandrene or cyclohexadiene (Figure 7.36). The cymene or benzene 
ligands may be replaced by more substituted arenes (e.g. C6HnMeCn, n 
= 3, 6) under thermally forcing conditions. These are also photolabile, 
whilst the chloride bridges are easily cleaved by nucleophilic ligands to 
provide mononuclear half-sandwich derivatives. 
The bonding in bis(arene) complexes in terms of orbital symmetry is 
essentially analogous to that of metallocenes: the frontier orbitals of 
benzene, familiar from any organic textbook, are of correct symmetry 
(0, 
n; and 6) for interaction with all the s, p and d orbitals of a metal 
centre, In energetic terms, however, there is a somewhat closer match in 
energy between the Cro/C,H, combination than Fe2+/C,H,-, leading to 

qn-C,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n 
3-8) 
171 
stronger &bonding (e2g+ dxy, d x 2 4 .  Figure 7.37 shows the molecular 
Figure 7.36 Synthesis and 
orbital scheme for dibenzenechromium, from which the clear 
reactions Of a ruthenium ha’f- 
sandwich arene complex 
HOMO-LUMO gap for the d6 18VE species helps to rationalize the 
observed stability of M(C,R,), (M = Cr, Mo, W, Fe2+, Ru2+, Os2+). Note 
the topological similarity of the central part of this scheme to Figure 
7.23, although it must be emphasized that the exact energetics and orbital 
contributions will vary with the nature of the metal and the carbocyclic 
ring. 
Whilst metallocenes have an enormously rich chemistry, in the case 
of arene coordination it is the half-sandwich (‘piano-stool’) class of 
complex which finds the widest utility in organic synthesis, in particular 
within the chemistry of Cr(CO),(@arene) complexes. These are generally 
prepared directly from the thermal reaction of Cr(CO), and arene in a 
high-boiling solvent (e.g. Bu,O, 2-picoline). For less robust arenes, the 
labile complexes Cr(L),(CO), (L = NH,, THF, MeCN, py) may be 
employed under milder conditions (Figure 7.38). 
As with cyclopentadienyl metal carbonyls, the coordination of the net 
donor arene ligand trans to three n-acidic CO ligands confers consider- 
able thermodynamic stability. Relative to the free arene, the coordina- 
tion of a ‘Cr(CO),’ unit to an arene face removes electron density, to an 
extent comparable to the inclusion of a nitro ring substituent. The chem- 
ical implications of this electron drift from the arene to chromium, and 
the basis for much chemistry, are an increase in the acidity of protons 
bound to the arene ring or to the a- and P-carbons of substituents, and 

172 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 7.37 (right) Molecular 
orbital description of diben- 
zenechromium, Cr(q-C,H& 
Figure 7.38 Synthesis of 
Cr(CO),(q6-arene); L = NH,, 
MeCN, py or & = q6-C,,H, 
Figure 7.39 Chemical 
implications of q6-arene 
coordination 
an activation towards attack by nucleophiles exo to the metal (Figure 
7.39). 
The nucleofugacity of leaving groups bound to either the a- or p- 
carbons is enhanced by the metal centre being able to stabilize the result- 
ing carbocation. However, it is the increase in reactivity towards 
nucleophilic substitution at the ring itself which finds widest application 
since S,Ar reactions for free arenes are typically difficult (however, see 
Figure 4.10). These various activations are useful in their own right, but 
a further dimension is added if the free arene has no element of sym- 
metry other than the C, plane. In such arenes (e.g. 1,2- or 1,3-XYC6H,), 
the faces are diastereotopic, i.e. association of a reagent (in this case the 
metal) to one or other face will result in enantiomers. If either the metal 
centre or an arene substitutent is chiral, then (possibly separable) 
diastereomers will result (see coordination of prochiral alkenes, Figure 
5.6). Similar arguments apply to the benzylic protons adjacent to coor- 
dinated prochiral arenes, which may show diastereoselective reactivity. 
Figure 7.40 illustrates transformations which may be mediated by 
coordination of an arene to chromium. As with cyclopentadienyl ligands, 
it is possible to metallate the ring with BuLi (often regioselectively) to 
provide q6-aryllithium reagents which may be treated with a range 

qR-C,Rn Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n = 3-8) 
173 
of electrophiles (cf: Figure 7.30), e.g. with CIPPhz a hexahapto complex 
of PPh, (E = PPh,) is obtained. Chromium-complexed aryl halides may 
also be employed in the palladium-catalysed coupling with arylboronic 
acids (Figure 4.10). The most extensively studied class of reactions 
involves direct attack by nucleophiles at the exo face of the arene, which 
results in the formation of an anionic cyclohexadienyl complex (cf. 
[Cr(CO),Cp]-). In general, this addition is reversible and, in the case of 
monosubstituted arenes, attack is possible at all four sites (@so, ortho, 
rneta, para); however, for haloarenes, ispo attack is usually followed irre- 
versibly by loss of halide to effect S,Ar. More generally, however, the 
product of nucleophilic attack may be trapped either by protonation to 
provide the substituted cyclohexadiene, or hydride abstraction (Ph,C+) 
to provide a new disubstituted arene complex. Because the nucleophilic 
attack is reversible, the majority of other electrophiles simply attack the 
uncoordinated nucleophile to regenerate the starting complex. A special 
case involves sulfur-stabilized anions, in which the addition is irreversible 
and subsequent quenching by electrophiles proceeds via attack at the 
metal followed by migration to the ring (reductive elimination). In 
the case of alkyl halides, initial migration to a carbonyl first followed by 
reductive elimination provides acyl cyclohexadienes (Figure 7.41). 
Figure 7.40 Metal-mediated 
arene 
hexahapto coordination 
via 

174 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 7.41 Alkylation of 
cyclohexadienyl chromium 
complexes; R’ = CHJSR),, 
In addition to the ‘Cr(CO),’ group, a range of other (primarily d6 
ML,) fragments have been employed for the coordinative activation of 
arenes (Figure 7.42). En retarde of alkene chemistry, catalytic protocols 
for the modification of arenes via hexahupto coordination are at present 
less well evolved; however, this will no doubt follow. Primarily this may 
be traced to the energetics of introducing and liberating the arene from 
the metal centre. 
7.7.1 Reduced Hapticity 
Arenes have a total of 6VE with which to provide a metal centre; how- 
ever, if this were to contravene the 18-electron rule, then the possibility 
of reduced hapticity arises. Thus two-electron reduction of the 18VE 
cation [Ru(q-C6Me6),l2+ provides the neutral ruthenium(0) complex 
Ru(q4-C6Me,)(q-C,Me6) wherein one arene coordinates as a buta- 1,3- 
diene. The loss of aromatic stabilization is less drastic for naphthalenes 
(lOz), which on ‘ring slippage’ retain the 6.n system of the uncomplexed 
ring (cf. 
). Thus [Ru(~-C~H~)(C,,M~,)]~+ 
upon reduction 
gives a complex where it is the naphthalene ligand which exclusively 
adopts the tetrahapto coordination, such that the intact uncoordinated 
benzo group may then be coordinated to chromium (Figure 7.42). 
Because of this ring slippage lability of naphthalenes (and anthracenes), 
@-naphthalene complexes are widely used as isolable precursors for sub- 
sequent arene exchange reactions, e.g. Cr(CO),(q6-C,,H,) (Figure 7.38). 
The previous discussion focused on coordination of arenes to metal 
centres ligated by n-acids, the net result being that the role of the arene 
was primarily as a donor and thereby activated towards nucleophilic 
attack. A complementary situation arises when the metal centre has only 
pure o-donor co-ligands. The resulting retrodative capacity of the metal 

qfl-C,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n 
3-8) 
175 
centre is then best alleviated by interaction with a x-acceptor ligand. In 
the case of arenes, this is achieved, quite remarkably, by coordination 
of only one C=C double bond, at the expense of aromaticity. The ability 
to (temporarily) induce alkenic reactivity in an aromatic compound is 
synthetically valuable, and this is most mature in the case of the 
‘OS(NH~)~~+’ 
fragment (Figure 7.43), which binds strongly to .n-acceptor 
ligands (relativistic enhancement, Chapter 1) but essentially ignores func- 
tional groups which can only serve as o-donors (avoiding the need for 
protection/deprotection protocols for esters, amides, ethers, alcohols, 
water and amines). Thus reduction of the trivalent precursor (for 
[OS(NH,),]~+’~+, 
E” = -0.78 V vs. NHE) in propanone (acetone) provides 
a propanone complex, n;-bound through the C=O bond rather than 
conventional 0-coordination (o-donor). In this case, the dihupto co- 
ordinated arene is activated towards electrophilic substrates (attack anti 
to the metal), including even weak electrophiles such as 
(H,C=CHR; R = CN, C02Me, COMe). Alternatively, the pertur- 
bation of the .n-system induces 1,3-diene character on the four unbound 
carbons, e.g. deuteration (D2, Pd/C) of the benzene complex provides the 
d4 cyclohexene complex (all D anti to 0s). The modified arene is then 
liberated by oxidation to OsIII, which does not bind .n-acids as strongly 
(e. g. the q2-Me2NPh and 2,6-dimethylpyridine complexes rearrange, on 
to o-amine complexes). Conventional alkenes, 
however, e.g. styrene, will bind in preference to the C=C bond. With six 
C-C bonds to choose from, coordination normally occurs so as to min- 
imize steric pressures and the disruption of the x-system, although migra- 
tion around the ring may occur (typically AGI = 50-75 kJ mol-’). 
Figure 7.42 Tetrahapto arene 
coordination 

176 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Figure 7.43 Dihapto arene 
coordination: synthetic implica- 
tions; L = NH,; Tf = SO,CF, 
The cluster-surface analogy (Figure 2.19) also extends in principle to 
arenes (and other qt2-CnRn 
ligands), including the osmium and ruthenium 
clusters depicted in Figure 7.44. The hexaruthenium example contains 
one hexahapto benzene ligated to one ruthenium, whilst the second 
bridges a triruthenium face (p3:q2,q2,q2). 
Facile rotation of the arene 
(NMR), however, argues against a localized cyclohexatriene bonding 
description. 
7.8 
Cycloheptatrienyls, q7=C7R7 
Figure 7.44 Cluster face- 
capping (p3:q2,q*,q2) 
arenes 
The 
is a stable 67c aromatic system, allowing salts to be 
prepared with non-coordinating anions. For Groups 4-6, heptahapto pla- 
nar coordination is commonly encountered including examples with 
< 1 WE. However, for later transition metals (greater d occupancies), 
binding modes of reduced hapticity are common (as with cyclooctate- 
traene, Figure 6.31). By far the majority of q7-C,H7 complexes originate 
from readily available cycloheptatriene, via hexahapto complexes of this 
neutral ligand from which hydrogen (generally as H-, but occasionally 
as He or H+) is abstracted. This is illustrated by the synthesis of 
[Mo(CO),(q-C,H,)]+ (Figure 7.45). 
By microscopic reversibility, the possibility of nucleophilic attack at 
the ring arises, in particular for cationic complexes, and this generally 
occurs at an exo site, allowing the synthesis of functionalized cyclohex- 
triene complexes. When it arises, the reduced hapticity of the C,H, ring 
to one metal may allow the introduction of a second metal such that the 
C,H, ring serves as a bridging ligand (Figures 7.45, 7.46). Furthermore, 

qn-C,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n = 3-8) 177 
Figure 7.45 Synthesis and 
reactivity of [Mo(CO),(q -C7H7)]+ 
even for heptahapto coordination, there are indications that co-ligand 
substitution processes may proceed via pentahapto coordinated inter- 
mediates, allowing an associative mechanism to operate (cf indenyl 
Figure 7.46 Various 
coordination modes for C,H, 
effect). 
and C,H, 
ligands 

178 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
Whilst the chemistry of q5-C5Me5 and q6-C6Me6 ligands is enormously 
rich, a problem arises with the C,Me, ligand: as n increases for q"-C,R, 
ligands, so does the steric repulsion between the adjacent R groups. 
Furthermore, the increase in ring size requires that these substituents 
bend towards the metal, increasing intersubstituent repulsion. Thus, to 
date, no q7-C,Me, complexes have been isolated, there being a tendency 
towards reduced hapticity 
(i. e. q5-C,Me,) whereby the pseudo- 
aromaticity is sacrificed in favour of reducing steric repulsions (Figure 
7.47). Indeed, even the free cation [C,Me,]+ adopts a non-planar (boat) 
structure. 
(Figure 7.48) is an intriguing variant wherein the cyclohep- 
tatrienyl unit is fused with a five-membered ring. The organometallic 
chemistry of this hydrocarbon and related derivatives is less intensely 
studied but includes the 18VE derivatives shown, obtained from reac- 
tions with simple binary carbonyls. 
Figure 7.47 Steric effects in 
tropylium coordination 
Figure 7.48 Reactions of 
7.9 
Cyclooctatetraenes, q8-C,R8 
azulene with binary carbonyls 
Cyclooctatetraene (cot) behaves something like an octopus when inter- 
acting with transition metals in that a wide range of hapticities (q2, q4, 
q6 and q8, Figure 7.49) are commonly observed or (cautiously!) inferred 
from spectroscopic data. On moving from Group 4 to Group 10 there 
is a progressive trend from octahapticity to dihapticity, as the central 

q”-C,R, Carbocyclic Polyene Ligands (n 
3-8) 
179 
metal itself provides increasingly more valence electrons and therefore 
requires less from the C,R, ligand. Since the 18-electron rule is redundant 
for lanthanides and actinides, octahupto coordination is most common 
for these elements, including the first C,H, sandwich ‘uranocene’, 
The first complex of cyclooctatetraene prepared by Stone in fact 
involved static tetruhapto (buta-l,3-diene-like) C,H, coordination in the 
solid state, but dynamic migration of the iron centre around the ring in 
solution (a single ‘H NMR resonance). This dichotomy presaged the 
encountered in many subsequent complexes of cyclooctate- 
traenes, wherein the hapticity does not follow unambiguously from solu- 
tion spectroscopic data, e.g. M(cot), (M = Fe, Ru; Figure 7.50) also have 
single ‘H NMR resonances at room temperature, despite two distinct 
coordination modes ($, q4) for the rings in the solid state. 
The cyclooctatetraene ligand is generally introduced in one of two 
ways: either as the neutral hydrocarbon or alternatively via initial reduc- 
tion to the aromatic (lox) dianion by treatment with a Group 1 metal 
(Figure 7.5 1). 
Wl-C,H,)2* 
Figure 7.49 Variable hapticity in 
c~clooctatetraene coordination 
7.1 0 Heteroarenes (‘lnorganometallic’ Chemistry) 
We have only considered polyhupto carbocyclic ligands; however, the 
field of aromatic heterocycles is immense and conceptually simplified by 
Figure 7,50 M(q4-c8H8)(q6- 
c,H,) 
(M = Fe, R ~ )  
I
,
 
0 0’ ‘ 
recognizing simple isoelectronic relationships between ‘CH’ and various 
(possibly substituent bearing or charged) heteroatoms. Many such 
Figure 7.51 (Below) Synthesis 
of cyclooctatetraene complexes 

180 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry 
heteroaromatics can indeed mimic the type of polyhapto coordination 
displayed by the qn-CnRn ligands. Such molecules fall outside the scope 
of this introductory text; however, some of the elegant examples illus- 
trated in Figure 7.52 should whet the appetite for further reading. Taking 
the analogy to the extreme, we have the entirely 'inorganic' examples of 
borazine (B,N,R,), which is isolable as a free molecule, and cyclo-P,, 
which is only stable when coordinated to a metal centre. 
Figure 7.52 lnorganometallic 
analogues of qn-C,H, 
ligands 

Abbreviations 
acac 
BDE 
cod 
CP 
CP" 
DMF 
dmpe 
dPPe 
EAN 
en 
HMPA 
HOMO 
HSAB 
IR 
LUMO 
nbd 
NMR 
nVE 
PE 
R 
MLn 
Tf 
THF 
tmeda 
TPP 
propane-2,4-dionate, acetylacetonate 
bond dissociation enthalpy 
cyclooctadiene 
q-C5H5, pentuhupto cyclopentadienyl 
q -C,Me,, pen tuhupto pent ame th ylcyclopen tadien yl 
N,N-dimethylformamide 
1,2-bk(dimethylphosphino)ethane 
1,2-bis(diphenylphosphino)ethane 
effective atomic number 
1,2-diaminoethane, ethylenediamine 
hexamet hylp hosp horic triamide, 0 = P( NMe,), 
highest occupied molecular orbital 
hard and soft acid and base 
infrared 
lowest unoccupied molecular orbital 
a general metal 'M' ligated by n ligands 
norbornadiene 
nuclear magnetic resonance 
n valence electrons 
Pauling electronegativity 
a general organic group (Me = methyl; Et = ethyl; Pr = propyl; 
Bu = butyl; Cy = cyclohexyl; Ar = aryl; Ph = phenyl; Bz = benzyl; 
pz = pyrazol-1-yl; Ad = adenosyl) 
trifluoromethanesulfonyl (OTf = trifluoromethanesulfonate) 
tetrahydro furan 
N,N,N',N'-tetramethyl- 1,2-diarninoethane, 
N,N,N',N'-tetramethylethylenediamine 
tetraphenylporphyrinate 
crystal field splitting parameter for octahedralketrahedral field 
n-hapto ligand 
a ligand bridging n metals 
181 

Subject Index 
a-Abstraction 77, 85, 
92,96, 111 
n-Acceptor 11 
Acetylides, see Alkynyls 
n-Acid 1 1  
Acyclic diene metathesis 
Acylates 60 
104 
Acyls 76-77 
alkylation 77, 89 
synthesis 76 
Agostic interactions 27, 
41, 71, 84, 85, 92, 
114, 127 
Aldehydes 
decarbonylation 130 
hydrogenation 136 
Alkane complexes 38, 82 
Alkene complexes 
bonding 14,123 
electrophilic attack 
127, 129 
IR 124 
nucleophilic attack 128 
reactivity 127 
structures 16 
substitution 123 
synthesis 123 
dimerization 136 
hydroboration 132 
hydrocyanation 132 
hydroformylation 133 
hydrogenation 130 
enantioselective 125, 
Alkenes 
132,134 
hydrosilylation 132 
insertion 130 
metathesis 102 
oligomerization 136 
polymerization 104, 
rearrangements 127 
Alkenyl complexes 14 1 
Alkenylidenes 13 
bridging 120 
complexes 102 
reactivity 11 1, 119 
synthesis 78, 119 
bridging 76 
0-n coordination 7, 
reductive coupling 75, 
synthesis 75, 141, 145 
136 
Alkenyls 
69,75, 145 
141 
Alkoxyalkyl complexes 
87,99 
Alkoxycarbonyl 
complexes 77 
Alkylation, allylic 154 
Alkylidenes 90-1 09 
amphiphilic 100 
binuclear 95, 96, 97, 
coupling reactions 106 
cyclopropanation 95, 
101 
electrophilic attack 
100 
“Fischer-type” 90 
halo 87, 95 
NMR 91 
nucleophilic attack 98 
108 
reactivity 86, 97-108 
rotation 14, 92 
“Schrock-type” 90 
substitution 97 
synthesis 77, 85, 86, 92 
thermolysis 97 
transfer 96 
bonding 109 
bridging 108, 116 
characterization 109 
coupling 115 
cycloadditions 1 15 
electrophilic attack 
nucleophilic attack 1 13 
reactivity 1 12 
synthesis 109 
electron-deficient 2 
electrophilic cleavage 
83,86, 101, 138 
homoleptic 17, 70 
kinetically stabilized 
metallacyclic 87 
migration 84 
norbornyls 70 
A1 kyne complexes 
144-148 
Alkylidynes 13, 109-1 18 
113 
Alkyls 69-72 
70 
binuclear 144, 148 
4VE coordination 144 
coupling 146 
metathesis 115, 145 
oligomerization 146 
Alkynes 
Alkynyls 78-79 
182 

Index 183 
bridging 78 
reactivity 78 
synthesis 78 
binuclear 143 
Allene complexes 143 
Allenylidenes 89, 120 
Allyls 143, 150, 152-156 
fluxional processes 152 
homoleptic 153 
molecular orbitals 152 
nickel 154 
palladium 154 
synthesis 152 
Allylic functionalization, 
Anions, non-coordinating 
Ansa-metallocenes 16 1, 
Arduengo carbenes, see 
Arene complexes 
Aromaticity 
156 
38,47 
168 
Imidazolin ylidenes 
169-1 76 
disruption 175 
Huckel 150, 160 
Arsines 25 
Aryloxides 26 
Aryls 72-75 
Atactic polyalkenes 137 
Azulene complexes 178 
homoleptic 72 
n-Basicity 11 
Benzyne complexes 74 
Biaryls, reductive 
Bond dissociation 
Bonding 
elimination 74 
enthalpies 18 
carbon monoxide 10 
ethene 14 
methylene 12 
multiple 2, 16 
n-Bonding 2, 10-17 
Buckminsterfullerene 
Butadiene 
149 
complexes 75, 140 
molecular orbitals 139 
C-H activation 38, 82 
Calixarenes 26 
Carbaboranes 30 
Carbamoyls 77 
Carbenes, see Alkylidenes 
Carbon monoxide, 
coordination 
4344 
(carbonylates) 48 
Carbonyl metallates 
Carbonyls 
bridging 43 
fluxionality 44 
infrared 11,43,45,46 
lability 11 
NMR 45,46 
reduction 48 
synthesis 53 
Carbynes, see Alkylidynes 
Chalcoaldehydes 99 
Chalcoketones 99 
Chauvin-Herisson 
mechanism 103 
Chelate effect 17, 125 
Cluster-surface analogy 
Collman’s reagent 49, 60 
Cone angle, Tollman 23 
Corrins 27 
Cossee mechanism 139 
Cumulenylidenes 
reactivity 12 1 
synthesis 120 
Cyclo bu tadienes 
complexes 141, 
160-161 
molecular orbitals 152 
Cyclobutenonyl 
complexes 159 
C yclo hepta triene 
complexes 141, 176 
Cycloheptatrienyl 
complexes 176 
Cyclohexadienes 156, 
170, 173 
C yclohexadienone, 
complexes I40 
Cyclometallation 87 
Cyclooctadiene 
complexes 125 
Cyclooctatetraene 
complexes 142, 178 
Cyclopentadieneone 
comr>!exes 147 
34, 109 
1 20- 1 2 1 
C yclopentadien yls 
Cyclopropenium cation 
161-169 
I58 
molecular orbitals 159 
C yclopropen ylidene 
complex 159 
Cyclopropenyls 1 15, 158 
Dehydrometallacyclo- 
butadienes 1 15 
Dewar-Chatt-Duncanson 
model 14, 123 
Diazoalkanes 93 
Dibenzenechromium 
169 
molecular orbitals 170 
coordination 125 
bonding 36 
complexes 35 
heterolytic activation 
homolytic activation 
Dimetallacyclopropanes 
Dimetallacyclopropenes 
Dimetallatetrahedranes 
Diyne-diyls 79 
n-Donors 5 
L-Dopa 135 
Dotz reaction 107 
Dienes 139 
Dihydrogen 
132 
132 
108 
118 
144, 148 
Effective atomic number 
rule 3 
18-Electron rule 3 
limitations 8 
Electron transfer catalysis 
Electronegativity, 
Electroneutrality 3, 123 
a-Elimination 77, 85, 92, 
Ethene oxidation 129 
56 
Pauling 1 
111 
Ferrocene 149, 163-1 68 
crystal field model 162 
derived hands 167 

184 Index 
Ferrocene continued 
glucose sensor 167 
reactivity 165 
Ferrocenium, 
electrochemical 
standard 167 
Fischer-Hafner synthesis 
169 
Fischer-Tropsch process 
65,109 
Formyls 40, 60 
Friedel-Crafts acylation 
Fulvalene, complexes 
141,161, 164-165 
164 
Gillespie-N yholm rules 
Grubbs’ catalyst 95, 103 
2 
Haemoglobin 42 
Half-sandwich complexes 
161,163, 169 
Hapticity 4 
Heteroacyls 77 
Hydride abstraction 84, 
87, 157, 158, 173, 
177 
Hydride complexes 
crystallography 3 1 
IR 32 
NMR 32 
reactivity 40 
synthesis 37 
trans influence 31 
Imidazolinylidenes 13, 
92 
Imine hydrogenation 
136 
Iminoketenyls 114 
lndenyl effect 5 1 , 174, 
177 
Insertion 
alkenes 57, 84, 86, 130, 
137 
alkynes 76 
carbon monoxide 61, 
76 
sulfur dioxide 83 
Isocarbonyls 44 
Isocyanides (isonitriles) 
48,67 
Isotactic polyalkenes 137 
Ketenyls 114 
Kubas’ complex 35 
Metal atom vapour 
synthesis 170 
P-Metal hydride 
elimination 84, 
127, 128, 136, 143, 
156 
Metallacycles 
115, 159 
101 
107 
146 
136 
me tallacyclo butadienes 
metallacyclobutanes 
metallacyclobutenes 
metallacyclopentadienes 
metallacyclopentanes 
Metallocenes 161-169 
Metallocenophanes 161, 
Metalloenzymes 3,43 
Methanol carbonylation 
Methylaluminoxane 138 
Methylene complexes 
86,93, 97, 102 
Milking stool complexes 
163, 169 
Molecular orbitals 
octahedral 8 
square pyramidal 8 
Mond, Ludwig 42 
Monsanto process 64 
168 
64 
Naphthalene complexes 
Nickelocene 166 
Nitrosyls 52 
Norbornadiene 
141 
complexes 125 
Octet rule 2, 4 
c3-Organyls 
cleavage 79 
electrophilic cleavage 
83,86 
hydrogenolysis 8 1 
Orthometallation 87 
Oxidative addition, 
dihydrogen 82, 131 
Pauson-Khand reaction 
Pentadienyls 150, 156 
Petasis reagent 102 
Pettit’s complex 162 
Phosphines 22 
bite angle 25 
7c-bonding 23 
chirality 24, 135 
electronic properties 23 
inversion 24 
steric properties 23 
Phosphinocarbenes 92 
Pogo-stick complex 163, 
Polyacetylene 105 
Polyenamers 104 
Polyenes 139 
carbocyclic 28, 
148 
169 
149-180 
Poly(pyrazoly1)borates 
29 
Pope’s complex 70 
Porphyrins 27 
Prochiral alkenes 124 
Propenylidenes 106, 107, 
Propynols, dehydration 
116 
120 
Redox condensation 49 
Redox disproportionation 
Reduced Phillips catalyst 
Reductive elimination 
Relativisitic effects 2, 19 
Reppe process 147 
Rieke metals 53 
Ring closure metathesis 
105, 116 
Ring opening metathesis 
polymerization 104 
Ring slippage 5 1, 166, 
174 
Ring whizzing 151 
Rotation barrier 
alkenes 16, 123 
alkylidenes 14 
50 
138 
57,80 

Index 185 
Sandwich complexes 
Schwartz’s reagent 76 
Silane complexes 28 
Siloxides 26 
Single electron transfer 
72 
Solvento complex 55 
Syndiotactic polyalkenes 
161, 163,169 
137 
Tacticity 137 
Tebbe’s reagent 76, 102, 
107 
Tetrahydroborato 
complexes 40 
Thiocarbonyls 58, 67 
Trans effect and influence 
31,98 
Transfer hydrogenation 
Transmetallation 7 1 
Triene complexes 14 1 
Trimetallatetrahedranes 
Triple-decker complexes 
Tropylium 150, 176 
136 
118 
168 
Union Carbide catalyst 
138 
Uranocene 179 
Valence shell electron pair 
Vaska’s complex 35 
Vinyl carbenes 106, 107, 
repulsion rule 2 
116 
Vinylidenes, see 
Vinylketene complexes 
Alkenylidenes 
107 
Vinyls, see Alkenyls 
Vitamin B,, 2, 79 
Wacker process 129 
Water gas shift 60 
Wilkinson’s catalyst 
Xylylene complexes 
Ylide complexes 98, 
Yne-diyls 79 
Zeise’s salt 15, 123 
Ziegler-Natta 
130 
140 
100 
polymerization 136 




