Polymers 
Properties and Applications 
Editorial Board: 
Prof Hans-Joachim Cantow 
Institut fUr Makromolekulare Chemie der Universitiit 
Stefan-Meier-Stral3e 31, 
7800 Freiburg/Federal Republic of Germany 
Prof H. James Harwood 
Institute of Polymer Science, University of Akron 
Akron, OH 44325/USA 
Prof Joseph P. Kennedy 
Institute of Polymer Science, University of Akron 
Akron, OH 44325/USA 
Prof Anthony Ledwith 
Dept. of Inorganic, Physical and Industrial Chemistry 
University of Liverpool 
P.O. Box 147, Liverpool L 693 BX/UK 
Prof Joachim Meij3ner 
Techn.-Chem. Lab., Eidgenossische Techn. Hochschule 
Sonneggstral3e 3, CH-8092 Zurich, Switzerland 
Prof Seizo Okamura 
No. 24 Minami-Goshomachi 
Okazaki 
Sakyo-ku, 606 Kyoto, Japan 
Dr. G. Henrici-Olive/Prof S. Olive 
Chemical Department, University of California 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037/USA 
7 

Walter Klopifer 
Introduction to 
Polymer Spectroscopy 
With 80 Figures 
Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg New York Tokyo 1984 

Prof Dr. Walter KlOpffer 
Leiter der Zentralstelle Qualitiit und Abt. Umwelttechnik 
Battelle-Institut e. V. 
Am Romerhof 35 
D-6000 Frankfurt/M. 90 
This volume continues the series Chemie, Physik und Technologie der Kunst-
stofJe in Einzeldarstellungen, which is now entitled Polymers/Properties and 
Applications. 
ISBN-13: 978-3-642-69375-5 
DOl: 10.1007/978-3-642-69373-1 
e-ISBN-13: 978-3-642-69373-1 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data: 
Kliipffer, Walter. 1938- Introduction to polymer spectroscopy. (Polymers: properties and 
applications; 7) Includes index. 1. Polymers and polymerization-Spectra. I. Title. II. Series: 
Polymers; 7. 
QC463.P5K55 1984 
547.7'028 83-16700 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or piut of the 
material is concerned, specifically those of translation, reprinting, re-use of illustrations, 
broadcasting, reproduction by photocopying machine or similar means, and storage in data 
banks. Under § 54 of the German Copyright Law where copies are made for other than private 
use a fee is payable to "Verwertungsgesellschaft Wort", Munich. 
© by Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1984 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1984 
The use of registered names, trademarks, etc. in this publication does not imply, even in the 
absence of a specific statement, that such names are exempt from the relevant protective laws and 
regulations and therefore free for general use 
2154/3020-543210 

This book is dedicated to 
ERWIN SCHAUENSTEIN 
Professor of Biochemistry 
at the University of Graz 
on the occasion of his 65th birthday. 

Preface 
This book has grown out of several courses oflectures held at the University of Mainz in 
the years 1978 to 1981, at the Ecole Poly technique Federal, Lausanne, and at the 
University of Fribourg, Switzerland. The last two courses were held in the framework of 
the "3e Cycle" lectures in June 1981. 
According to this genesis, the emphasis of the book lies on a unified and concise 
approach to introducing polymer spectroscopy rather than on completeness which, by 
the way, could hardly be achieved in a single volume. In contrast to other books on this 
subject, equal weight is given to electronic spectroscopy, vibrational spectroscopy and 
spin resonance techniques. The electronic properties of polymers have been increasingly 
investigated in the last ten years; until recently, however, these studies and the 
spectroscopic methods applied have not generally been considered as part of polymer 
spectroscopy. 
The increasing use of electronic spectroscopy by polymer researchers, on the other 
hand, shows that this type of spectroscopy provides efficient tools for gaining insight 
into the properties of polymers which cannot be obtained by any other means. 
Although the main aim of the book is a didactic one, it should also be useful as a first 
survey to polymer researchers not specialised in spectroscopy or even to specialists in 
one or the other spectroscopic technique wishing to orient themselves outside their own 
field of research. Much emphasis is therefore given to the understanding of the basic 
processes and mechanisms involved in each method, which are dealt with in an 
elementary fashion. Both differences and similarities between low and high molar mass 
compounds with regard to their spectra have been elaborated. The peculiar status of 
macromolecules, somewhere between molecule and one-dimensional crystal, is demon-
strated in many instances. At the end of each chapter, the strength as well as the 
limitations of the method are delineated, showing that only the combination of several 
methods can yield an adequate picture of a given polymer. 
This book would never have come to live without the initiative and constant interest 
shown by Dr. F. L. Boschke, Springer-Verlag. It was originally planned as a multi-
authored volume; the help and encouragement I got in this early phase by H. J. Cantow 
(Freiburg), J. J. Verbist and J.-N. Andre (Namur), H. Kashiwabara (Nagoya) and R. 
Kosfeld (Dusseldorf) is gratefully acknowledged. 
The English manuscript has been corrected and improved by Mrs. E. Zimmer, 
Battelle-Institut Frankfurt, in addition to her official duties. My sincere thanks are also 
due to U. Wegstein, M. llgenstein and G. Teichmann for typing the consecutive stages 
of the manuscript. Most figures have been drawn by Mr. O. Ruppel. 
Most of my own research, which is quoted in Chapters 3 and 4, has been performed 
within the "Battelle Institute Programme in Physical Sciences". 
VII 

Preface 
Finally, I would like to extend my thanks to all colleagues who sent me reprints and 
manuscripts before publication, to A. Braun, Lausanne, for organising the guest 
lectures in Switzerland and, last but not least, to my students for their endurance and for 
their comments. 
Frankfurt am Main, June 1983 
Walter Kl6pffer 
VIII 

Table of Contents 
Part A. General Introduction . . . . . . . 
1 
1.1 
1.2 
1.3 
1.4 
1.5 
Introduction. . . . . . . . . . . 
Definition of Polymer Spectroscopy. 
Information Obtained by Polymer Spectroscopy 
Spectral Range. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Remarks on the Choice of Examples for Applications 
Bibliographic Notes. 
References. . . . . . 
Part B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
2 
ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
2.1 
Principle of the Method. . . . 
2.2 
The ESCA Spectrometer 
. . . 
2.3 
Main Features of ESCA Spectra 
2.4 
Applications of Core-Electron Spectra. 
2.4.1 
The Chemical Shift. . . . 
2.4.2 
Bulk and Surface Analysis. . 
2.4.3 
Examples of Bulk Analysis 
2.4.4 
Examples of Surface Analysis 
2.5 
ESCA Spectrum of Valence Electrons. 
2.5.1 
Energy Bands . . . . . . . . . . . 
2.5.2 
Energy Bands in Polymers. . . . . . 
2.5.3 
The Zero-Level Problem in ESCA Studies of Valence Bands 
2.5.4 
Examples of Valence Band Studies Using ESCA 
2.6 
Resume of ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
. . . . . . . 
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
1 
1 
1 
3 
4 
4 
5 
7 
7 
7 
8 
9 
11 
11 
13 
14 
14 
15 
15 
17 
18 
18 
21 
22 
3 
Absorption Spectroscopy in the Ultraviolet and Visible Regions 
23 
3.1 
The far Ultraviolet (fUV) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
23 
3.2 
Absorption Spectroscopy in the Near Ultraviolet and Visible Regions. 
25 
3.2.1 
Spectral Region and Characteristic Transitions . . . . 
25 
3.2.2 
Basic Principles of nUV/VIS Absorption Spectroscopy 
26 
3.2.2.1 Electronic Vibronic Spectra . 
26 
3.2.2.2 Energy Level Diagrams . . . 
27 
3.2.2.3 Intensity of Absorption Bands 
27 
3.2.2.4 The Franck-Condon Principle 
28 
3.2.3 
Application of Lambert-Beer's Law to Polymers 
28 
IX 

Table of Contents 
3.2.4 
3.2.5 
3.2.6 
3.3 
4 
UV-Absorbing Polymers ........... . 
Hypochromy in Polymers . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Absorption by Molecules dissolved in Solid Polymers 
Resume of nUV/VIS-Absorption Spectroscopy 
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Fluorescence- and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Radiative and Radiationless Transitions . 
The Jablonski Diagram . . . . . . . . . . . 
Fluorescence. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Internal Conversion and Inter-System Crossing . 
Phosphorescence . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Experimental 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Quantum efficiency, decay time and rate constants 
Fluorescence in Polymers . . . . . . . . 
Isolated and Crowded Fluorescent Groups. . . . 
Fluorescence from Isolated Chromophores. . . . 
4.1 
4.1.1 
4.1.2 
4.1.3 
4.1.4 
4.2 
4.3 
4.4 
4Al 
4.4.2 
4.4.3 
4.4.4 
4.4.5 
4.5 
4.5.1 
4.5.2 
4.5.3 
4.6 
Energy Transfer between Isolates Groups or Dissolved Molecules . 
Singlet Excitons . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Excimer Fluorescence as a Probe in Polymer Studies 
Phosphorescence in Polymers 
The Phosphorescent Triplet State . 
Isolated Phosphorescent Groups . 
Triplet Excitons in Polymers. . . 
Resume of Fluorescence and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy 
References. . . . . . . 
Part C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
5 
Vibrations....... 
5.1 
Introduction...... 
5.2 
The Harmonic Oscillator 
5.3 
Molecular Vibrations as Quantum Phenomena 
5.4 
General Remarks on the Interpretation of Vibrational Spectra 
5.5 
Symmetry and Fundamental Vibrations of One-dimensional Chain 
Molecules. 
5.6 
6 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
6.5 
6.6 
6.7 
x 
Phonons 
References. 
Raman Spectroscopy 
Introduction. . . . 
The Smekal-Raman Effect. 
Experimental 
. . . . . . 
Examples of Laser-Raman Spectra of Synthetic Polymers 
The Accordion Vibration . . . . . . . . . 
Resonance Raman Scattering 
. . . . . . . 
Resume of Raman Spectroscopy of Polymers. 
References. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
" 
30 
32 
33 
34 
34 
36 
36 
36 
37 
37 
37 
37 
40 
41 
41 
42 
43 
44 
46 
47 
47 
48 
49 
50 
51 
53 
53 
53 
53 
54 
55 
56 
59 
61 
62 
62 
62 
65 
66 
70 
72 
74 
75 

Table of Contents 
7 
Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
75 
7.1 
Introduction.......... 
75 
7.2 
Absorption of Infrared Radiation. 
76 
7.3 
Experimental...... 
78 
7.3.1 
IR-Absorption......... 
78 
7.3.2 
IR Reflection and Emission . . . 
80 
7.4 
Interpretation of Polymer mIR Spectra 
81 
7.4.1 
Empirical IR Spectroscopy 
. . . . . 
81 
7.4.2 
Examples of mIR Spectra of Linear Polymers 
82 
7.4.2.1 Poly(methylmethacrylate) . . . . . . . . . 
82 
7.4.2.2 Poly(isobutene) and amorphous polypropylene 
85 
7.4.2.3. Poly(vinylalcohol) 
86 
7.4.2.4 Poly(acrylonitrile) 
. . . . . . . . . . . 
87 
7.4.2.5 Poly(caprolactam) . . . . . . . . . . . 
88 
7.4.3 
Tacticity and Conformation in mIR Spectra 
89 
7.5 
Applications of mIR Spectroscopy 
94 
7.5.1 
General... 
94 
7.5.2 
Copolymers 
94 
7.5.3 
Molar Mass. 
95 
7.5.4 
Branching.. 
95 
7.5.5 
Carbon Double Bonds 
96 
7.5.6 
Oxidation Processes. . 
96 
7.5.7 
Corona and Plasma Treatment of Polymer Surfaces. 
98 
7.5.8 
Dissociation of Polymeric Acids and Other polymer-IR Studies. 
99 
7.6 
Resume of mIR . . . . . . . . . . 
99 
7.7 
Far-Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
100 
7.7.1 
Introduction........... 
100 
7.7.2 
Chemical Applications . . . . . . 
100 
7.7.3 
Phonons in fiR Spectra of Polymers 
101 
7.7.4 
Inelastic Neutron Scattering (INS) 
102 
7.7.5 
Resume offIR+INS 
105 
References. . . . . . . . . 
105 
Part D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
109 
8 
Principles of Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy. 
109 
8.1 
Introduction.......... 
109 
8.2 
The Spin of Elementary Particles. 
109 
8.3 
Resonance Absorption . . . 
110 
8.4 
Spin-Resonance in Polymers . 
III 
9 
9.1 
9.2 
9.3 
9.4 
9.5 
References. . . . . . . . . 
113 
Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers. 
General Characteristics of ESR Spectra . . . . . . . . . 
Experimental 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Survey of Polymer-Specific Applications of ESR Spectroscopy 
Polymerisation Studies by Means of ESR 
Mechanically Formed Polymer Radicals. . . . . . . . . . 
113 
113 
120 
123 
123 
126 
XI 

Table of Contents 
9.6 
9.7 
9.8 
9.9 
10 
10.1 
10.2 
10.3 
10.3.1 
10.3.2 
10.4 
10.5 
10.6 
10.7 
10.8 
10.8.1 
10.8.2 
10.8.3 
10.8.4 
10.9 
ESR of Radicals Formed by Radiation 
Triplet States 
Spin-Labels 
Resume 
References. 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
The Origine of NMR Spectra . . . . 
Experimental 
. . . . . . . . . . . 
High-Resolution IH-NMR of Polymers 
Applications. . . 
Tacticity Analysis 
. . 
Broad-line NMR. . . 
Spin-Relaxation Times 
Chemically Induced Dynamic Nuclear Spin Polarisation (CIDNP) 
Resume of IH-NMR Spectroscopy ........ . 
Polymer NMR Spectroscopy of 13C and Other Nuclei. 
Experimental 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
Solid Polymer 13C-NMR Spectroscopy ...... . 
High Resolution 13C-NMR Spectroscopy of Polymer Solution 
Other Nuclei. 
Resume .. 
References. . 
Part E. Conclusion and Appendices . 
Conclusion. . . . . . . . . . . 
Appendix 1: Table of Polymers . . 
Appendix 2: List of Abbreviations . 
Appendix 3: List of Elementary Constants Used in This Book. 
Subject Index. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
XII 
129 
130 
133 
135 
136 
137 
137 
143 
144 
144 
145 
157 
159 
160 
160 
161 
161 
162 
165 
168 
169 
169 
171 
171 
173 
174 
179 
181 

Part A. Generallntroduction 
1 Introduction 
1.1 Defi n ition of Polymer Spectroscopy 
Polymer spectroscopy deals with the application of a wide range of spectroscopic 
methods to the study of polymers, i.e. substances of high molar mass which are formed 
by linking of suitable low molar mass compounds - the monomers. With regard to their 
origin, we can distinguish synthetic polymers and biopolymers, with regard to chemical 
composition between homopolymers and copolymers and between linear, branched 
and cross-linked polymers. 
Because of the elevated molar mass some physical properties of polymers are dras-
tically different from those of monomeric (or oligomeric) substances, so that not all 
methods available for the latter are applicable to the former; e.g., it is not possible to 
evaporate polymers without decomposition and therefore gas phase methods can only 
be applied in order to study small fragments formed in the pyrolysis of polymers. This 
will be outside the scope of this book whose focus is on methods giving information 
on integral macromolecules and their aggregates rather than to monomeric degrada-
tion products. 
Spectroscopy is usually defined as the science of the interactions between radiation 
and matter and deals with both the experimental and the theoretical aspects of these 
interactions. 
This definition is too broad to be applicable to our purpose without reservation. 
First of all, we shall restrict our interest primarily to electromagnetic radiation and its 
interaction with polymers. With regard to the nature of interaction we shall further re-
strict ourself to quantum resonance phenomena; accordingly, pure relaxation effects 
such as microwave absorption of polymers, will be outside the scope of this book. The 
same is true of "elastic" diffraction and scattering of radiation not connected with up-
take or release of energy. Inelastic scattering, on the other hand, is part of spectroscopy 
within the scope of this definition, e.g. Raman spectroscopy. 
Summing up, we define polymer spectroscopy as the science of quantum resonance 
interactions of electromagnetic radiation with polymers. This does not exclude the oc-
casional discussion of effects due to particle radiation such as neutron radiation, if com-
plementary, or otherwise inaccessible information can be obtained. 
1.2 Information Obtained by Polymer Spectroscopy 
The primary information of spectroscopy always consists in energy differences, supple-
mented by additional pieces of evidence such as line and band shapes, intensities, and 
in some experiments by the time dependence or polarisation of signals. 

A. General Introduction 
Table 1.1. Infonnations obtained by spectroscopy relating to 
structure and dynamics of polymeric systems 
Structure 
Chemical structure 
Tacticity 
Confonnation 
Crystallinity 
Electronic structure 
Dynamics 
Movements of the chain, 
segments and side groups 
Phonons 
Excitons 
Complex formation and related 
phenomena 
From this primary information, polymer spectroscopy provides two types of infor-
mation, related to the structure and dynamics of polymers (Table 1.l). Information on 
chemical- or primary structure is the main aim of analytical applications of polymer 
spectroscopy. This type of information is especially important if complex copolymers, 
resins, etc. have to be characterised or identified. 
Tacticity or configuration of the macromolecules often determines the degree of 
crystallinity which can develop along the chain (I D crystallinity or - regular - chain 
conformation) or in three dimensions. Equally important as the arrangement of the 
atoms in space is the average distribution of electrons or electronic structure which can 
be explored by several spectroscopic methods. 
The dynamic phenomena to be studied by spectroscopy encompass movements of 
atoms and larger parts of the macromolecules, e.g. side groups. If the movements are 
collective oscillations of the lattice - in crystalline regions - they are called phonons. 
Excited states may also move, in general without a corresponding molecular diffu-
sion, in the form of excitons. Finally, there is a wide range of more or less specific mo-
lecular interactions which can best be described as complex formation and can be stud-
ied by suitable spectroscopic methods. 
Of course, not all spectroscopic techniques give information on all the items listed 
in Table 1.1 and some of these can be more conveniently studied by non-spectroscopic 
methods; as an example, (3D-)crystallinity can be determined much more directly using 
diffraction techniques. This inferiority of spectroscopy applies in general to the study 
oflong-range phenomena, since spectroscopy, as a rule, is somewhat "short-sighted". 
This disadvantage is, on the other hand, an asset insofar as spectroscopy yields precise 
information at the molecular level. Influences due to surrounding groups aCre evidenced 
by - mostly weak disturbances. Depending on the magnitude of the disturbances and 
the interactions causing them, we may distinguish two complementary aspects of poly-
mer spectroscopy: 
- the polymer aspect: 
here, the absorbing or emitting group is either the entire macromolecule (or crystal 
lattice) or part of it which measurably and specifically interacts with other parts 
- and the monomer aspect: 
2 
in this limiting case the absorbing or emitting group is part of the macromolecule 
without measurable interaction with neighbouring groups. The spectra are identical 
with those of suitable monomeric model compounds. 

I Introduction 
ME (FeS7) 
I 
f 
inlvl n! m 
ESCA(AIK~ UV "' 
IR 
ESR(X) 
NMR 
5 
-10 
-9 
-8 
-7 
-6 
-5 
-4 
-3 
-2 
-1 
0 
11 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1nm 
1IJm 
1cm 
1m 
logA. (m) 
Fig. 1.1. Spectral range of spectroscopic methods used in polymer spectroscopy in a logarithmic 
wavelength scale. For converting photon energy (E), wave number (v') and wavelength (l) of 
electromagnetic radiation it is advisable to remember the following approximate correlation: 
Energy 
wavenumber 
wavelength 
1 eV/photon 
= 8065cm- 1 
= l240nm 
(= 96.5 kl/mol) 
(based on E = hv = he / l = hev') 
Polymer physicists are in general more interested in the polymer aspect, whereas 
chemists and especially analytical chemists often use the addidivity of spectral bands 
inherent in the monomer aspect. Even here, it will often not be possible to avoid inter-
actions completely, since polymers never form true dilute solutions with respect to the 
parts of the macromolecules, e.g. side groups in vinyl polymers. 
As a practical consequence of this distinction it becomes necessary to study polymers 
and suitable monomers - which as a rule are not the chemical monomers - in compar-
ison, the chemical nature of the model monomers depending on the spectroscopic 
method applied. Polymer spectroscopy therefore is not only the spectroscopy of poly-
mers. It involves the investigation of monomers and oligomers, mostly in solution but 
occasionally also in the form of single crystals, polycrystalline or amorphous layers, 
thus offering many connections between polymer spectroscopy on the one hand and 
molecular and solid state physics on the other. In order to get a maximum of useful 
information, polymer chemistry and non-spectroscopic methods of polymer science 
have to be combined with polymer spectroscopy in order to pro,duce pure and well 
characterised polymer samples. 
1.3 Spectral Range 
The spectral range covered by the different methods to be discussed is shown in Fig. 1.1. 
It extends at the wavelength scale used from about 0.1 nm (I A) to 10 m. Below this 
range, in the region of soft y-rays, there are nuclear transitions showing the Mossbauer 
effect, a nuclear resonance absorption. Mossbauer spectroscopy which is based on this 
effect is unfortunately strongly restricted in its application to polymers due to the rare 
occurrence of heavy nuclei in polymers. Although y-rays belong to the electromagnetic 
spectrum, Mossbauer spectroscopy will not be treated in this book due to the scarcity 
of examples. 
The X-rays used for excitation in ESCA experiments have wavelengths near 1 nm. 
The experimentally difficult far UV (fUV) or vacuum-UV is found between 10 and 200 
nm, followed by the important near UV (nUV) which forms a unit with the visible re-
3 

A. General Introduction 
gion (VIS) both with regard to the mechanism of electronic excitation and from the ex-
perimental point of view. It is the spectral sensitivity of the human eye which draws a 
borderline between nUV and VIS at about 400 nm. In this range, nUV- (and VIS-) ab-
sorption and luminescence (fluorescence and phosphorescence) of polymers have to be 
considered. 
Next to the long-wavelength side we see the near infrared (nIR) from 0.8 to 2.5 /lm, 
a much neglected part of the spectrum in polymer research, and further to long wave-
lengths, the most popular part (mIR) up to about 50 /lm. This is followed by the far 
IR (fiR) comprising wavelengths up to about 1 mm. For theoretical reasons, Raman 
spectroscopy belongs to the IR range, although the excitation wavelengths used are 
mostly in the visible part of the spectrum, since the vibrational transitions observed in 
this inelastic scattering are similar to those observed in the IR spectra. 
Further to higher wavelengths we find the relaxation spectra which do however not 
belong to the topic of this book, followed by ESR (A. = 1 to 3 cm) and NMR (A. = 1 to 
5 m) spectroscopy. 
The whole range can conveniently be divided into three parts: 
- Electronic spectroscopy (ESCA and UV /VIS) in Part B 
- Vibrational spectroscopy (IR and Raman spectroscopy) in Part C 
- Spin resonance spectroscopy (ESR and NMR) in Part D 
1.4 Remarks on the Choice of Examples for Applications 
Polymer spectroscopy is an equally important tool for investigations of synthetic and 
biological polymers, both being highmolar mass substances and obeying the same 
chemical and physical laws. Although there is no theoretical reason for treating the two 
groups separately, there are limitations of space and editorial points of view that re-
strict the examples to the field of synthetic polymers. We nevertheless hope that the 
book can give some useful information for researchers in the field of biopolymers, the 
introductory and general sections being, of course, independent ofthe specific polymers 
to be studied. 
1.5 Bibliographic Notes 
The scientific literature on polymer spectroscopy has rapidly grown within the last few 
years so that complete coverage could only be tried in a several volume handbook and 
is outside the scope of this introduction. The books covering parts of the whole field 
are listed at the end of this chapter. The most comprehensive book on polymer spec-
troscopy is the one edited by D. O. Hummel. This excellent book can only be blamed 
for having been written at a time when the progress of electronic spectroscopy of poly-
mers was not yet so clearly visible as it is today. We hope to fill this gap and to give 
a useful overview of the whole field of polymer spectroscopy within the framework of 
the definition given in Sect. 1.1. The quotations refer preferentially to books, reviews 
and important original papers. Since we shall also touch some very recent fields of re-
search, in these cases also preliminary work will be quoted. 
4 

References 
References 
1. Hummel, D.O. (ed.): Polymer Spectroscopy, Weinheim: Verlag Chemie 1974 
2. Iving, K.J. (ed.): Structural Studies of Macromolecules by Spectroscopic Methods, London: 
Wiley 1976 
3. Jones, D.W. (ed.): Introduction to the Spectroscopy of Biological Polymers, London: Aca-
demic Press (1976) 
4. Hoffmann, M., Kramer, H., Kuhn, R.: Polymeranalytik I and II, Thieme Taschenlehrbuch 
der organischen Chemie B4, Stuttgart: Thieme 1977; English translation: Polymer analytics, 
Polymer Monographs 3, Chur: MMI Press 1981 
5. Brame, E.G. (ed.): Applications of Polymer Spectroscopy, New York: Academic Press 1978 
6. Fava, R.A.: Polymers, Part A: Molecular Structure and Dynamics, Vol. 16 of Methods of Ex-
peri mental Physics (L. Marton and C. Marton eds.), New York: Academic Press 1980 
7. Andre, J.-M., Ladik, J., Delhalle, J. (eds.): Electronic Structure of Polymers and Molecular 
Crystals, New York: Plenum 1975 
8. Natta, G., Zerbi, G. (eds.): Vibrational Spectra of High Polymers, J. Pol. Sci. Part C, No.7, 
New York: Interscience Publ. 1964 
9. Zbinden, R.: Infrared Spectroscopy of High Polymers, New York: Academic Press 1964 
10. Siesler, H.W., Holland-Moritz, K.: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy of Polymers, New 
York: Dekker 1980 
11. Kine\l, P.-O., Ranby, B., Runnstrom-Reio, V. (eds.): ESR Applications to Polymer Re-
search, Stockholm: Almquist, New York: Wiley 1973 
12. Ranby, B., Rabek, J.F.: ESR Spectroscopy in Polymer Research, Polymers - Properties and 
Applications, Vol. 1, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1977 
13. Woodward, A.E., Bovey, F.A. (eds.): Polymer Characterization by ESR and NMR, ACS 
Symp. Ser. No. 142, Am. Chem. Soc., Washington 1980 
14. Boyer, R.F., Keinath, S.E. (eds.): Molecular Motion in Polymers by ESR, New York: Har-
wood Academic Publ. 1980 
15. Bovey, F .A.: High Resolution NMR of Macromolecules, New York: Academic Press 1972 
16. Randall, J.e.: Polymer Sequence Determination (Carbon-13 NMR Method), New York: 
Academic Press 1977 
17. Pasika, W.M. (ed.): Carbon-13 NMR in Polymer Science, ACS Symp. Ser. No. 103, Am. 
Chem. Soc., Washington 1974 
18. Morawetz, H., Steinberg, LZ. (eds.): Luminescence from Biological and Synthetic Macro-
molecules - Eighth Katzir (Katchalsky) Conference, Annals of the New York Academy of 
Sciences, Vol. 366 1981 
19. Hummel, D.O. (ed.): Proceedings of the 5th European Symposium on Polymer Spectroscopy, 
Weinheim: Verlag Chemie 1979 
20. Cantow, H.-J. et al. (eds.): Luminescence, Adv. Pol. Sci. Vo1.40, Berlin, Heidelberg, New 
York: Springer 1981 
21. Phillips, D., Roberts, A.J. (eds.): Photo physics of Synthetic Polymers, Science Reviews, 
Northwood, England 1982 
22. Painter, P.C., Coleman, M.M., Koenig, J.L.: The Theory of Vibrational Spectroscopy and 
its Application to Polymeric Materials, New York: Wiley 1982 
23. Mort, J., Pfister, G. (eds.): Electronic Properties of Polymers, New York: Wiley 1982 
5 

Part B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
2 ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
2.1 Principle of the Method 
Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis (or Applications) - ESCA - is based on 
the following principle I, 2): 
monochromatic short-wavelength radiation is used in order to detach electrons from 
the sample, the kinetic energy of the electrons being measured by means of an electron 
analyser. The difference in energy between the exciting photons offrequency v and the 
electrons detached (Ekin) is equal to the binding energy of the electron. 
EB=hv-Ekin • 
(2.1) 
The ESCA spectrum therefore informs us about the binding energies or ionisation en-
ergies of the electrons in the sample investigated. According to the Koopmans Theo-
rem, the ionisation energies describe the sequence of atomic or molecular orbitals quan- . 
titatively. This is shown schematically in Fig. 2.1 for two orbitals 1 and 2 of different 
energy, separated by II and 12 from the zero level of energy, attributed arbitrarely to 
the detached electron without surplus kinetic energy and outside the attractive poten-
tial of the positive ion left during ionisation. The ionisation energies measured by ES-
CA are one-electron ionisation energies, not to be confused with the 2nd, 3rd ... ionisa-
tion energy of atoms, related to the formation of multiply charged ions. 
-- - --
E 
Ekin 
hv 
o 
I, 
<D 
- -
Ekin 
12 
en 
-
hv 
Fig.2.1. Schematic energy level diagram 
for an ESCA experiment at constant ex-
citing photon energy hv. Two orbitals 1 
and 2 of different ionisation energy I indi-
cated 
7 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
Polymer 
--9 
Surface 
l 
hv(x) 
Fig.2.2. Behavior of detached elec-
trons in the bulk and at the surface 
of the polymer 
Depending on the magnitude of hv, two experimental variants of electron spectros-
copy can be distinguished: 
1. excitation in the fUV (hv ~ 20 e V): this method is often called Photo Electron Spec-
troscopy (PES or UVPS) and so far has been applied only in few cases for the study 
of polymers 24). 
2. X-ray excitation (hv~ 1,500 eV): ESCA or XPS. Using this high energy excitation, 
even the firmly bound core electrons can be detached. 
Applying ESCA to polymers, on,ly solid state spectra can be obtained (in solutions 
the solvent molecules would mask the effect of the solute). In solids, the detached elec-
trons are rapidly thermalised, at least in the bulk (Fig. 2.2) of the sample. Within a very 
thin surface layer, however, of the order of b~2 nm, the electrons are allowed to leave 
the surface without loss in kinetic energy, so that Eq. (2.1) can be applied. Hence, ESCA 
is uniquely suited for studying the surface of solid polymers. 
A serious experimental difficulty is posed by the extremely low electrical conductiv-
ity of most polymers «(J < 10 -15 Q - 1 cm -1). Each emitted electron leaves behind a 
positive hole which cannot flow to the back electrode (shown in Fig. 2.2) fast enough 
in order to prevent static charging. The electrons emitted have to surpass this attractive 
potential and consequently lose part of their kinetic energy. This effect has to be com-
pensated by suitable calibration (evaporation of gold dots) and/or discharging by ther-
mal electrons. 
ESCA has found two essential applications in the polymer field, which will be dis-
cussed in Sects. 2.4 and 2.5: 
- analytical studies, especially of polymer surfaces 3.18.19) 
- studies on the electronic structure of polymers 4.5) 
2.2 The ESCA Spectrometer 
The block diagram in Fig. 2.3 shows the most important parts of an ESCA spec-
trometer. 
The X-ray sources most commonly used are Mg KI1. (1,253.7 eV, 0.99 nm) and Al KI1. 
(1,486.6 eV, 0.83 nm). It has recently been suggested 20) to use harder excitation such 
as Ti K,. (4,510 eV) in order to achieve a greater escape depth b of the electrons de-
tached. 
The sample (film or powder) is kept under vacuum of about 10- 5 Pa on a sample 
holder which preferably allows for heating and cooling. The kinetic energy of the elec-
8 

X-ray 
Source (Al;Mg) 
E 
Counting 
Electronics 
0--------4---------,-------, 
Empty Orbitals 
shake off 
Occupied 
Valence-orbitals 
e 
• 
\ 
shake'-
\UP 
: 
, 
i 
'r 
+ 
2 • 
3 • 
Occupied 
\_.-
Core-orbitals 
n~---:~~---
2 ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
Fig.2.3. Block diagram of a typical 
ESCA spectrometer; explanation 
see text 
Fig. 2.4. The origin of shake-up and shake-
off satellite peaks in core level spectra. The 
dotted arrows indicate examples of pro-
cesses coupled with the main ionisation 
process involving a core orbital (n) 
trons detached is determined in most commercial instruments using a double-focussing 
electrostatic analyser. The number of electrons of a given energy is counted and re-
corded as a function of their kinetic energy. 
2.3 Main Features of ESCA Spectra 
As pointed out in Sect. 2.1, the ESCA spectrum consists of a plot of the (relative) num-
ber of electrons as a function of their kinetic energy or, transformed using Eq. (2.1), 
of a related plot as a function of binding (= ionisation) energies. The electrons detached 
and analysed either originate from loosely bound outer ("valence") electrons or from 
tightly bound inner ("core") electrons. IfaX-ray photon removes an electron from the 
n-th (core) orbital, the energy In is consumed and the corresponding peak in the spec-
trum is in general strong. With a certain probability, simultaneous energy-consuming 
processes may occur, as indicated in Fig. 2.4, which decrease the kinetic energy of the 
detached core electron and cause satellite peaks at lower Ekio . The energy differences 
to the corresponding main peak are similar to those observed in ionisation (shake-off) 
or optical excitation (shake-up) of valence electrons, although the selection rules are 
different in the latter case. 
9 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
Shake-up and shake-off occur simultaneously with the ejection of a core electron. 
Other processes follow after these processes, since the electron system is left in a highly 
excited and short-lived state which is deactivated by 
- X-ray fluorescence (emission of photons) 
- electron emission (Auger effect). 
The Auger electrons are also recorded and can be distinguished from true "ESCA 
electrons" using different excitation wavelengths the kinetic energy of Auger electrons 
being independent of the exciting photon energy. 
The information gained from the spectral position of ESCA peaks relates to the 
binding energies of core and valence electrons and to energy differences between the 
different orbitals. The line-width gives further information, provided the influence of 
instrumental broadening can be minimised. The total line-width (LI) of core-electron 
peaks is composed of three additive terms, Eq. (2.2)3). Related to the half-width of X-
ray excitation Llx, the half-width due to the spectrometer (electron analyser), LIS' and 
the natural line-width Llr. 
(2.2) 
For non-monochromatised Mg or AI(K .. ) radiation, Llx amounts to 0.7 and 0.9 eV, re-
spectively, for monochromatic Al radiation Llx = 0.55 eV has been reported 4). In mod-
ern spectrometers, Lis can be neglected. The natural-line width is related to the uncer-
tainty principle, Eq. (2.3). 
LJE· LJtG,h/2n 
(2.3) 
and thus determined by the lifetime of the excited positive hole left by electron detach-
ment, which is in the range between 1:= 10- 17 to 10- 13 s. According to Eq. (2.3), with 
1:=Llt for Llr (=LlE) we obtain a range of 10- 2 to 100 eV. Atoms with medium atomic 
masses have natural line-widths of the order of Llr=O.l to 1 eV and thus lie in the region 
of Llx' The very broad lines of the core electrons of higher elements (LI, ~ Z2) are oflittle 
analytical use and not very interesting if polymers are considered. 
Core electron peaks are prominent in ESCA spectra since their binding energy is 
nearer to the photon energy of exciting X-rays than that of weakly bound valence elec-
trons thus facilitating the energy uptake. Core electrons are less directly involved in 
binding the atoms to monomers and polymers, compared to the valence electrons 
which belong to molecular rather than to atomic orbitals or to energy bands (Sect. 2.5). 
Core electrons are, however, influenced by the mode of binding, as evidenced by shifts 
in ionisation energies relative to the free atom values. The free atom values are char-
acteristic of the element and the orbital considered. 
The shifts are called, by analogy to NMR, "Chemical Shifts", and depend on the 
electron densities near the nuclei on account of the shielding of the positive charge of 
the nuclei. 
The core electron peaks in the ESCA spectra therefore can be used in order to iden-
tify the atoms present in the polymer - and more specifically near the surface -, their 
mode of binding and their relative abundance. 
10 

2 ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
300 
Fig.2.5. ESCA spectrum of ben-
zotrifluoride; after Clark 3) 
2.4 Applications of Core-Electron Spectra 
2.4.1 The Chemical Shift 
The spectrum of the core electrons is most frequently used for analytical applications, 
although the valence electrons also contain analytically important information. The 
reason for this preference is the high intensity of the core peaks which is due to the high 
ionisation cross section of core electrons for X-rays. As a rule, ionisation is the more 
efficient the better the excitation energy matches the ionisation energy, i.e. if nearly the 
total X-ray photon energy is used for detaching the electron and the kinetic energy of 
the electron left over according to Eq. (2.1) is small. Valence electrons, on the other 
hand, use only a small portion of the exciting photon energy and therefore are ionised 
only with smaller probabilities. 
The core electrons (e.g. Cis, N Is etc.) are primarily localised at the individual 
atoms that form the polymer and therefore are not considered to contribute to chemical 
binding. They are, however, influenced by the "chemical environment" within the mol-
ecule so that their ionisation energies somewhat vary, depending on the nature and 
number of neighbouring atoms. The most marked effect is exerted by electro-negative 
partners which decrease the shielding of the positive nuclear charges by .outer electrons, 
thus increasing the effective attractive force of the nucleus with regard to the core elec-
trons. The ESCA signals of core electrons give the following analytically important in-
formation: 
a) identification of the elements contained in the polymer 
b) mode of binding (in favourable cases) 
c) relative number of differently bound atoms (if chemical shift> Ll). 
A pronounced example of chemical shifting of the C Is signal is given in Fig. 2.5. 
(C6H sCF 3, benzotrifluoride), showing that the binding energy of C Is electrons in the 
CF3 group is 8 eV higher than in the phenyl groups. The relative number of the two 
species of C atoms is reflected in the peak area ratio. The magnitude of the shift depends 
II 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
Table 2.1. ESCA chemical shifts of several vinyl polymers, relative to PE 
Polymer 
R 
Chern. shift of IX Cis' 
(Abbreviation) 
eV 
Poly( ethylene) 
-H 
0.0 
(PE) 
Poly(vinylfluoride) 
-F 
3.1 
(PVF) 
Poly(viny1chloride) 
-CI 
1.8 
(PVC) 
Poly(vinyla1cohol) 
-OH 
1.9 
(PVOH) 
Poly(propylene) 
- CH3 
- 0.1 
(PP) 
Poly(l-butene) 
-CzHs 
-0.2 
(PB) 
Poly(styrene) 
-C6H S 
-0.6 
(PS) 
• Positive sign means increase a binding (ionisation) energy 
on the nature and number of substituents. Table 2.1 gives some examples of ex C Is in 
different vinyl-type polymers. 
Since the natural ESCA line-width of the light atoms considered and the exciting X-ray 
line-width are each about 0.5 eV, only the larger, positive chemical shifts, which are due 
to electro negative substituents can be used for analytical purposes. Comparing PVF 
(Table 2.1) with benzotrifluoride (Fig. 2.5) we see that each fluorine atom contributes 
an increment of a bout 3 e V to the total chemical shift and even the pC 1 s peak in PVF 
is still shifted by + 0.8 e V IF 3). The high increment of the fluorine atom makes ESCA 
uniquely suited for studying fluorinated polymers, e.g. Teflon (PTFE), where many 
other methods fail; but also oxygen- and chlorine containing polymers can be analysed 
due to the high electro-negativity of the substituents (Table 2.1). As an example of oxy-
gen-containing polymers, the ESCA spectrum of polyethylene terephthalate (PET) is 
shown in Fig. 2.6. 
tCH,_oJ-<Q>-L~l 
PET 
This polymer has three differently bound groups ofC-atoms (aliphatic, ester, aromatic) 
in a ratio 2: 2: 6 and two differently bound groups of (ester) 0 atoms in the ratio 1: 1. 
12 

2 ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
o 1s 
C 1s 
-O-CHi"" 
-0-(-0 I 
280 
Es 
eV 
Fig. 2.6. ESCA spectrum of PET; after Clark 3) 
The spectrum shows in the C Is region the aromatic signal near 285 eV (cf. Fig. 2.5) and 
two peaks shifted to higher binding energies due to electro-negative substitution with 
one (287 eV) and two oxygens (289 eV). The oxygen increment therefore amounts to 
about 2 e V /0 in PET, the same value as was found for PVOH (Table 2.1). The 0 Is-
electron is bound more tightly, due to the higher effective nuclear charge of oxygen 
compared to carbon. The two differently bound 0 atoms again show distinct signals. 
The magnitude of the chemical shifts can be well correlated with empirical electro-
negativities 4) of the substituents. 
2.4.2 Bulk and Surface Analysis 
The molecules and atoms detected by ESCA always belong to the surface of the poly-
mer, b = 1 to 2 nm being a good approximation of the 1/ e escape depth of fast and slow 
electrons. The escape depth of medium energy electrons (Ekin ~50 to 100 eV) is smaller, 
b~0.5 nm 3). Depending on the sample preparation, the information gained by 
ESCA of polymers may be characteristic of the bulk of the solid polymer as well. In 
this case, each contamination of the surface, e.g. oxidation, must be scrupulously 
avoided. The purity of the surface can be tested by comparing peaks originating from 
different depths due to the different kinetic energy of the electrons released. 
In surface studies, on the other hand, the specific treatment to be investigated - e.g. 
Corona discharge, chemical modification, photo-oxidation - is applied to the polymer 
prior to the spectroscopic investigation. As an example of surface modification, the 
pressing of PTFE powder between Al foils should be mentioned 3). At the lowest press-
ing temperature possible (200°C), only typical Cis, F Is, and F 2s peaks occur together 
with Auger electrons which can be distinguished by changing the excitation source. At 
a pressing temperature of 300°C, additional peaks occur which are typical of 0 Is, Al 
2s, Al 2s, and Al 2p point to a very thin « 1 nm) layer of Al 20 3 formed at the 
surface of the PTFE. This very thin layer cannot be identified by any other spectro-
scopic method. 
13 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
Fl. 
CI. 
A 
90 
Es 
eV 
2.4.3 Examples of Bulk Analysis 
Fig.2.7. ESCA spectra of PTFEjE co-
polymers: 63 mol% C2F 4 (curve 1),44 
mol% C2F4 (curve 2) and 32 mol% 
C2F 4 (curve 3) after Clark 3). Composi-
tion calculated from (A + B)jC. Predict-
ed composition from monomer reactiv-
ity ratio: 63 mol% (1), 50 mol% (2) and 
36 mol%3) 
Under clean surface conditions, the ESCA spectrum is representative of the bulk of a 
polymer sample, e.g. Fig. 2.6. The data presented in Table 2.1 can be used to identify 
these simple vinyl polymers. Structural details, as head-to-head links, branching, resid-
ual double bonds and conformation, are in general not indicated in the ESCA spectra. 
The analysis of copolymers is an important application of ESCA, provided the core 
levels of the monomers are well separated. Systems which have already been investi-
gated mostly comprise fluoro polymers 3), e.g. the copolymers of tetrafluoroethylene 
and ethylene 6) shown in Fig. 2.7. The evaluation can be based upon the ratio AlB, using 
C Is peaks only (no calibration needed), or on the ratio (A+B)/C. In the latter case, 
due to the much different energy of the F Is(C) electrons, a calibration using pure homo 
polymers has to be performed. 
Recently, the in situ synthesis of polymers using plasma techniques has become an 
accepted method. These polymers are highly cross-linked and insoluble so that ESCA 
turns out to be a very useful tool for characterisation 19.20) of these polymers. 
2.4.4 Examples of Surface Analysis 
Surface reactions are conveniently studied by ESCA, as already demonstrated by the 
example of PTFE heated between Al foils 3, 19,20). Another example regarding this 
polymer, which has a low adhesive strength due to its low surface energy, is given by 
the action of sodium metal, dissolved in liquid ammonia, in order to chemically modify 
the polymer surface. The ESCA spectrum of PTFE etched with sodium solution does 
not contain any fluorine signal; this indicates complete chemical reaction in a layer 
exceeding 2 nm in depth. A polymer sample treated in this way rapidly takes up oxygen 
from the air, which is bound in groups like CO, COOH, etc. 
14 

2 ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
Fig. 2.8. Schematic view of energy band and en-
ergy gap formation in a crystal consisting of 
many atoms. The lower atomic level is filled with 
electrons, the upper one is empty 
Other treatments of the surface of different polymers to be studied by ESCA include: 
- corona discharge (formation of highly reactive radicals, atoms, excited molecules, 
etc. under the action of electrons emitted from a wire kept under high electrical ten-
sion), see also Chap. 7, 
- ozone treatment and photo-oxidation, 
- CASING (Cross-linking by Activated Species of Inert Gases) 3). In this method, 
accelerated ions (e.g. Ar) are ejected to the surface under exclusion of oxygen. The 
primary radicals recombine under cross-linking and thus improve the mechanical 
properties of the surface. In PTFE/E, the CF 2/CF ratio decreases after very short 
treatment; this indicates the removal of F atoms from the surface, 
- plasma treatment 7): a microwave discharge at low pressure creates fast electrons, ions 
and excited particles; UV/VIS radiation originates from the deactivation of the latter. 
As shown by ESCA, the effect of this treatment on PTFE/E is similar to that of CAS-
ING. 
2.5 ESCA Spectrum of Valence Electrons 
2.5.1 Energy Bands 
The term "Energy Band", as developed in solid state physics 8), visualises the fact that 
in most solids (metals, semiconductors, insulators) the outer electrons of the lattice con-
stituents do not occupy well-defined narrow energy levels, as in free atoms, but rather 
a dense band of closely spaced levels. The energy bands are separated from each other 
by forbidden zones which are called energy gaps. In free atoms we can distinguish (fully 
or partly) occupied and empty levels or orbitals. The same is true of energy bands in 
solids; the occupied bands are called valence bands (VB), the empty ones conduction 
bands (CB). 
The theoretical models describing the formation of energy bands are connected with 
the names of Bloch and Brillouin 9). According to Bloch, first an atom is brought into 
contact with a second one; this results in a splitting of each energy level into a bonding 
and an anti-bonding one, the magnitude of splitting (in energy units) being twice the 
exchange interaction energy (JA ). This simple case describes the formation of a mole-
cule consisting of two atoms. The splitting of core electron levels is insignificant. 
The formation of a crystal leeds to 
1. interaction of many atoms instead of two 
2. ordering of the atoms according to crystal symmetry and lattice constants. 
The first effect induces further splitting of individual levels until energy bands are 
formed, as indicated schematically in Fig. 2.8. Using another picture, the valence elec-
15 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
0-------- -------- ---------
CB e 
~E 
hv- --
Semiconductor 
or insulator 
lop! 
-----~---
Metal 
Fig. 2.9. Simple band model of a pure semiconductor or insulator (e.g. a polymer) in equilibrium 
with a metal of equal work function. As usual, the bands are sketched using a non-specified space 
coordinate 
trons are tunnelling through the potential barriers which separate the atoms of the lat-
tice. The width of the VB then gives the probability of this electron exchange. 
Often only the highest valence band and the lowest conduction band are considered, 
since these are responsible for most electric properties of a crystal. These two bands are 
separated by the energy gap ,1E whose magnitude distinguishes semiconductors 
(,1E<:: 3) from insulators (,1E::S 3 eV). 
The second effect (lattice ordering and symmetry) implies that the interaction lead-
ing to energy bands is periodic and anisotropic, as required by the lattice. This is im-
mediately evident for every chemist, especially if the highly directional covalent bonds 
are considered. In solid state physics, this fact is expressed by the "reciprocal lattice", a 
useful concept for interpreting diffraction phenomena 1 which replaces lattive vectors 8) 
by their reciprocals and allows the energy of electrons in the bands to be calculated 
as a function of their "wave number" (k) in the reciprocal lattice. The close analogy 
between diffraction and energy band formation is stressed in Brillouin's approach, 
starting from free electrons in a lattice of positive atomic truncs, and allowing for in-
terference of the electron waves according to de Broglie. This aspect of the band model 
will not be discussed in detail, since the E (k) presentation of energy bands in polymers 
has only been used in theoretical calculations and was replaced by the density of states 
D (E) presentation in recent papers. The density of states is defined as the number of 
energy levels per energy interval and is proportional to the ESCA signal, provided the 
ionisation cross section (efficiency) is constant over the energy region considered. 
Before discussing the application of the band model to polymers, some basic notions 
have to be explained, using a simple model consisting of highest (filled) valence band 
and lowest (empty) conduction band (Fig. 2.9). Irradition of a semiconductor or insu-
lator with light of photon energy hv ~ ,1 E creates charge carriers - electrons in CB, posi-
The diffraction pattern, e.g. of X-rays, caused by a lattice provides a picture of the reciprocal 
lattice, the real lattice has to be calculated using Bragg's formula 
16 

2 ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
~::_A-....I9 ---t---~=~-}-F _-_-_-__ ------------
"CB"-----
Ig (=1 ) 
Is 
filled--"'----
Gas 
Solid 
llE 
Crystal 
"VB" -_-_-
Amorphous 
Polymer 
Fig. 2.10. Schematic view of energy levels in the free molecule and in crystalline and amorphous 
solids. This case is relevant to polymers showing side groups with lower ionisation energies and/or 
higher electron affinities compared to those of the back bone 
tive holes in VB - moving in opposite directions if an electric field is applied or vanishing 
by recombination. By increasing the frequency of the exciting radiation we reach Is> the 
ionisation energy of the solid, as alre·ady discussed in Sect. 2.1. In the case of metals, 
which are characterised by a partly filled valence band, the corresponding energy is 
called work function (cP) and is, here, identical with the Fermi level (EF) or chemical 
potential of the electrons. In ideal (pure) semiconductors and insulators this level is lo-
cated at !JE12 between VB and CB and does not correspond to any real, i.e. allowed 
electronic energy level. This term is important when fixing the zero-level in polymer ES-
CA experiments (Sect. 2.5.3). 
2.5.2 Energy Bands in Polymers 
The width of energy bands reflects the strength of interaction between the lattice con-
stituents. Two extreme cases can be distinguished: 
a) covalent crystals, e.g. diamond (insulator) or silicon (semiconductor) showing 
strong interaction and correspondingly broad bands 
b) molecular crystals, which are typically held together by weak van der Waals forces 
and thus display only very narrow bands. 
Case b) is characterised by the fact that the lattice units are modified by their sur-
roundings, but have not lost their molecular identity or "individuality" in contrast to 
the atoms forming a covalent crystal (a). The modification of energy levels in b) is small 
with regard to optical transitions (Chap. 3), but significant with regard to the energy 
levels leading to VB and CB, as shown in Fig. 2.10. Starting with the free molecule or 
polymer side group, we see that the first ionisation energy is decreased and the electron 
17 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
affinity increased by polarisation of the solid environment 10,22,23): 
As=Ag+P-
Is =Ig -p+ 
(2.4) 1 
Considering the molecules or polymer side groups as belonging to a crystal lattice, we 
assume splitting to narrow energy bands which are lost again if the crystal lattice dis-
appears during melting or formation of an amorphous solid: in this case, each molecule 
or side group "feels" a somewhat different microscopic environment with regard to dis-
tance and - more importantly 11) - with regard to the relative orientation of the indi-
vidual molecules. The breakdown of the band model in weakly interacting amorphous 
solids leads to isolated, albeit closely spaced ( < 0.1 e V) energy levels, At this point we 
surpass the limits of ESCA, since this method is presently not yet able to detect these 
subtle energy differences. However, ESCA is highly relevant with regard to the energy 
bands of the polymer backbone, showing strong interaction along the covalent bonds 
(broad intramolecular energy bands), but only weak van der Waals interactions perpen-
dicular to the chain direction. 
Polymer chains therefore can be treated as pseudo- (one-dimensional) crystals; mod-
el calculations based on this assumption reproduce the sequence of ESCA valence 
peaks satisfactorily 12,4,5). 
2.5.3 The Zero-level Problem in ESCA Studies of Valence Bands 
Although the valence signals in ESCA experiments are in general weak, they can be im-
proved by cumulation of spectra and averaging in order to improve the SIN ratio. The 
main experimental problem consists in determining the zero energy level of the elec-
trons detached, which is altered by not entirely avoidable static charging effects. 
Usually, a very thin layer of gold is evaporated onto the polymer film and thermal equi-
librium between the metal and the polymer is assumed, i.e. 
EF (polymer) = EF (Au). 
In these experiments, the ESCA spectrum consists of peaks characteristic of the poly-
mer and the metal, the Fermi level being taken as the common zero level. If it is true 
that the Fermi level of the polymer is situated exactly in between VB and CB, LJE can 
be calculated from the ESCA spectrum. In order to calculation the absolute energy of 
the levels, either As or Is has to be known from independent measurements. For polyo1e-
fins the solid state electron affinity is supposed to be As::::: O. Even without exact calibra-
tion, the ESCA spectrum yields the relative energies and the width of the valence bands 
which is useful for comparison with theory. 
2.5.4 Examples of Valence Band Studies Using ESCA 
Many linear polymers consist only of a backbone (HDPE, POM) or have side groups 
which are characterised by tightly bound valence electrons (PP, PB, LDPE). These 
18 
Ag is negative if the electron is not bound to the molecule in an exothermic reaction; Ag::::: 2 to 
3 eV in typical electron acceptors, I g ::::: 8 to 12 eV in the average case, 6.5 to 8 eV in pronounced 
electron donors. P::::: I to 2 eV in most cases (molecular crystals) studied 

o 
10 
20 
30 
6 
e:: 
UJ 
z 
UJ 
2 ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
-------------------
5 
,C-H BANDS 
~---------------~a 
\ Ib 
\ 
Ie ---====::--
'-------Id--===---I 
BANDS 
15 
25 
----=====:-1 
\ 
\------------11£>---=::'---1 
~ 
~ 
e:: 
UJ z 
UJ 
z 
0 
~ 
N 
Z 
9 
35 
Fig. 2.11. Band structure ofPE, calculated and measured by ESCA; after Andre et aL 13) 
polymers can be treated theoretically using the "Extended Huckel" method or by "ab 
initio" calculations in order to calculate the valence bands 4). In these calculations, the 
polymer chain is usually treated as an infinitely long, extended chain, neglecting more 
complicated conformations and intermolecular interactions, The energy bands calcu-
lated in this way are one-dimensional or intra- (macro-) molecular bands. 
Exact coincidence of calculated and experimental band energies therefore cannot be 
expected and has not been observed. However, the relative position and internal struc-
ture of the bands D(E) is well reproduced by more recent calculations 4.13), as can be 
seen in Fig. 2.11. The structure in the bands results from the non-uniform distribution 
(density) of energy levels within the bands whose width typically amounts to several eV. 
As an example, linear polyethylene (HOPE) will be discussed first 12). It should be 
noted that the linear paraffin C36H 74, which can be considered as an oligomer of 
HOPE (N = 18) behaves quite similar to the high-polymer with respect to its band struc-
ture. The ESCA valence region of HOPE consists of three regions 13), see Fig. 2.11: 
1. a weakly structured band 4 e V below EF , corresponding to the highest valence band, 
originates from C-H bonds, 
19 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
o .-------C--S--..-----..--r-r- Vacuum level 
of electrons 
liE 
Is 
Fig. 2.12. Schematic energy band dia-
gram of PE, based on ESCA and 
photoionisation experiments (see text); 
<!> can be estimated from electrostatic 
charging experiments 15) 
2. the C-C (C 2s) valence band shows higher binding energies and is divided into two 
sub-bands due to "bonding" (18.8 eV) and "antibonding" (13.2 eV) levels, both 
fully occupied by electrons. The splitting of this band is well predicted by theory, 
3. the third region is due to inelastically scattered electrons detached from both bands. 
The analysis of the spectrum reveals the following, still preliminary band structure 
ofHDPE (Fig. 2.12): about 4 eV below EF, the reference level of the experiment, there 
is the first (C-H) valence band whose four maxima of D(E) can be recognised in the 
spectrum as a weak structure. If the assumption of EF being situated exactly at !JE12 
is correct, we obtain 
!JE(HDPE)=7.7 ±0.5 eV. 
The second VB, which is about 8 eV broad, is separated by a narrow forbidden zone 
(1.6 eV) from the first one. 
20 

2 ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
The absolute energies of the bands are still controversial 14). Photoemission of elec-
trons starts at Is= 8.5 eV in good agreement with EF=4.5 to 5 eV, (estimated by other 
methods), since EF=Is-LlE/2~4.65. 
The lower edge of CB (As) which is not measurable by ESCA seems therefore to be 
situated near the vacuum zero level of the electrons (As= +0.5 to -1 eV). A negative 
value As would mean that there are no states available for excess electrons in pure PE. 
The ionisation energy oflong paraffin chains can be extrapolated to Ig = 9.0 e V, giving 
P = Ig - Is = 0.5 e V. This low value of P seems reasonable, considering charge spreading 
in large molecules. 
The ESCA valence spectrum of PVC, taken as a second example, can be explained 
as a superposition of the PE spectrum and structures due to chlorine (CI 3p - "lone 
pairs" - at 5.7 eV; Cl3s at 17.5 eV, relative to EF)' The chlorine levels are more atomic 
and less band-like in character compared to the C-C band which can clearly be iden-
tified on both sides of CI 3s. Making the same assumptions as above, we obtain LIE = 
9.8 eVandAs~O. 
Data on valence bands have been obtained for about ten polymers, ESCA being the 
only method available for these studies. The absolute values are still uncertain by about 
I eV, even though the most elaborate technique known at present has been used. The 
calculations are uncertain in this respect by about 10 eV but nevertheless offer invalu-
able help in identifying the bands and their sub-levels. 
Beyond the purely scientific interest, these studies contribute very significantly to 
our understanding of the electronic structure of polymers and thus of15• 16) 
- photo conductivity 
- electrostatic charging and 
- adhesion 
of polymers, the latter two items being typical surface phenomena and thus particularly 
suited for ESCA studies. Localised levels often will have to be considered in addition 
to band levels, especially in polymers with large LIE. 
2.6 Resume of ESCA in Polymer Spectroscopy 
The application of ESCA to polymers is a recent development. It is the only method 
which allows both valence- and core electrons to be measured. The results are the en-
ergies of the orbitals or bands provided, as tacitly assumed in the discussions above, 
that Koopmans theorem is valid. This condition is fulfilled except that very fast relax-
ation processes occur during ionisation, i.e. if the electrons ejected to not change ,their 
orbits during the elementary processes. This assumption seems to be valid within about 
10 percent. Thus, ESCA measures approximately the energy of the electrons in their 
unperturbed orbits, the actually measured value being the difference between the initial 
and the final state of the polymer in this experiment. 
Table 2.2 shows the matrix presented in Sect. 1.2, as applied to ESCA. As can be 
seen, the application of ESCA has so far been restricted to analytical work and elec-
tronic structures. Conformation should have an influence on ID valence bands. Com-
plex formation could influence the valence electron spectra or possibly appear in the 
shake-up structure of the core electron spectra. 
The greatest potential for applications of ESCA in polymer research seems to be the 
investigation of 
21 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
Table 2.2. Information obtained by ESCA relating to structure and dynamics of 
polymeric systems 
Structure 
Chemical structure 
Tacticity 
Conformation 
Crystallinity 
Electronic structure 
+ 
+ 
Dynamics 
Movements of the chain, 
segments and side groups 
Phonons 
Excitons 
Complex formation and re-
lated phenomena 
- insoluble polymers containing heteroatoms 
- fluoro-polymers 
- "plasma polymers" 
- surface modification of polymers and 
- valence bands and detailed electronic structure, including 
- surface states of pure and contaminated polymers. 
References 
I. Siegbahn, K. et a!.: Nova Scota R. Soc. Sci., Uppsala, Ser. IV, 20 (1967) 
2. Siegbahn, K., in: Electron Spectroscopy. Progress in Research and Applications, Caudano, 
R., VerbistJ. (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier 1974, p. 3; see alsol7) 
3. Clark, D.T., in: Jvin, K.1. (ed.): Structural Studies of Macromolecules by Spectroscopic 
Methods, London: Wiley 1976, p. III 
4. Pireaux, 1.1., Riga, J., Verbist, J.J., Delhalle, J., Delhalle, S., Andre, J.M., Gobillon, Y.: Phys. 
Scripta 16, 329 (1977) 
5. Andre, 1.-M., Ladik, 1., Delhalle, J. (eds): Electronic Structure of Polymers and Molecular 
Crystals, New York: Plenum 1975 
6. Clark, D.T., Kilcast, D., Feast, W.J., Musgrave, W.K.R.: J. Po!. Sci. Po!. Chem. Ed. 11, 389 
(1973) 
7. Lee, L.-H. (ed.): Characterization of Metal and Polymer Surfaces, Vo!' 2, Polymer Surfaces, 
New York: Academic Press 1977, Part I (ESCA) 
8. Kittel, C.: Introduction to Solid State Physics, New York: Wiley 1971, German Trans!. 
Miinchen: Oldenburg, Frankfurt am Main: Wiley, 3rd ed. 1973 
9. Spenke, E.: Elektronische Halbleiter, 2nd ed., Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1965 
10. Gutmann, F., Lyons, L.E.: Organic Semiconductors, New York: Wiley 1967 
II. Bassler, H.: Phys. Stat. So!. (b), 107, 9 (1981) 
12. Delhalle, J., Andre, J.-M., Delhalle, S., Pireaux, J.J., Caudano, R., Verbist, J.J.: 1. Chem. 
Phys., 60, 595 (1974) 
13. Andre, J.-M., Delhalle, 1., Delhalle, S., Caudano, R., Pireaux, 1.J., Verbist, J.1.: Chem. Phys. 
Lett. 23, 206 (1973) 
14. Bloor, D.: Chem. Phys. Lett., 40,323 (1976) 
15. Bauser, H., Klopffer, W., Rabenhorst, H. in: Advances in Static Electricity, Vo!.l, p.2 
(1970), Proceedings of the 1st Int. Conf. on Static Electricity, Vienna (Austria), May 4-6, 
1970 
16. Mort, J., Pfister, G.: Electronic Properties of Polymers, New York: Wiley 1982 
17. Brundle, C.R., Baker, A.D. (eds.): Electron Spectroscopy, Theory, Techniques and Appli-
cations, Vo!' 1-3, London: Academic Press 1977, 1978, 1979 
18. Clark, D.T. in: Cantow, H.1. et a!. (eds.): Molecular Properties, Adv. Po!. Sci., Vo!.24, 125, 
Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1977 
19. Clark, D.T.: Pure App!. Chem. 54, 415 (1982) 
22 

3 Absorption Spectroscopy in the Ultraviolet and Visible Regions 
20. Clark, D.T.: ACS Meeting Monograph (1982/1983), The Modification, Degradation, and 
Synthesis of Polymer Surfaces Studied by Means of ESC A 
21. Peeling, J., Clark, D.T.: Pol. Degrad. Stab. 3, 971980 
22. Silinsh, E.A.: Organic Molecular Crystals, Their Electronic States, Berlin, Heidelberg, New 
York: Springer 1980 
23. Pope, M., Swenberg, C.E.: Electronic Processes in Organic Crystals, Oxford University Press 
1982 
24. Seki, K., Hashimoto, S., Sato, N., Harada, Y., Ishii, K., Inokuchi, H., Kaube, J.: J. Chern. 
Phys. 66, 3644 (1977) 
3 Absorption Spectroscopy in the Ultraviolet 
and Visible Regions 
3.1 The far Ultraviolet (fUV) 
Experimentally, the fUV (II.< 200 nm) is more demanding than the nUV jVIS-region to 
be discussed in the next sections, since the beam has to be conducted in vacuum and 
since the laboratory radiation sources are weak. Only very few solvents are transparent 
in the fUV. Polymers therefore have to be measured in the form of thin films and mostly 
show intense, structureless absorption bands (1-4) which become narrower and partly 
structured at low temperature. Qualitatively, these spectra resemble in the long-wave-
length region of the fUV (about 100 to 200 nm) to absorption edges in insulators which 
are due to transitions from the energetically highest VB to the lowest CB. Unfortunate-
ly, the interpretation of the spectra is not always straightforward because of the pseudo-
10-band nature of polymers, i.e. their intermediate position with regard to electronic 
structure between true (30) solids and molecules (see also Figs. 2.9., 2.10, and 2.12). 
An experimental set-up for measuring fUV absorption spectra of thin polymer films 
has been described by George et al. 4. 5). The radiation source is a micro-wave-(2.45 
GHz)-excited H2-discharge lamp yielding a weak fUV continuum at a pressure of 
about 1 mbar. In order to prevent intensity losses due to window absorption, the lamp 
is connected by a special slit with the grating monochromator, pumped to about 10- 4 
Pa. The resolution obtained with the 1 m grating monochromator fitted with 50 Ilm 
slits amounts to 0.15 nm. The polymer forms a thin (about 50 nm) film produced by 
tip-coating from dilute solution on to LiF discs 4) and is mounted in a cryostat if low 
temperature spectra are to be measured. There is again no window between the 
monochromator and the sample. The detection is effected by a photomultiplier behind 
sodium salicylate transforming the fUV into blue radiation. The apparatus described 
is a single beam spectrometer so that a second spectrum without sample has to be mea-
sured separately in the same arrangement. The signal of the detector has to be corrected 
for sample fluorescence if the polymer emits radiation. As an example of the few fUV-
polymer spectra reported, the spectrum of PE will be discussed according to the results 
obtained by Partridge 1) and George et al. 4). It should be noted that hardly any differ-
ences exist between the spectra of LOPE, HOPE and long-chain paraffins (C2sH5s and 
C42H s6), i.e. branching and chain length seem not to be important in polyolefins if 
n~14. 
Figure 3.1 shows the "absorption edge" of PE at room temperature and at 4K. The 
absorption starts at about 8 e V (155 nm), the apparent absorption at longer wavelength 
23 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
r-----------------------,1.O 
00 
4 
Photon Energy 
00 
Fig. 3.1. fUV Absorption spectrum of HDPE at room temperature (curves I and 3) and at 4K 
(curve 2); film thickness roughly 50 nm (curves I and 2) and 40 !lm (curve 3); after George 4) 
being due to scattering. There is a broad maximum near 9 eV at room temperature and 
a second increase at about 11 eV. In the 4K spectrum, a sharper peak is observed at 
8.35 eV (149 nm), and the absorption edge is somewhat sharper compared to that at 
room temperature. The asorption coefficient in the absorption maximum (ex ~ 5 x 105 
cm - 1) indicates very strong absorption, comparable to allowed band-to-band tran-
sitions of inorganic solids. Using thick films ofPE (d~ 50 Jlm), a weak absorption band 
is detected at 6.90 e V (180 nm), which is absent in the spectra of oligomeric model com-
pounds. This band is due to approximately one double bond per macromolecule, most 
probably to vinylidene end groups, as shown by independent IR evidence. 
There are no n-electrons in pure PE; the strong absorption observed below 155 nm, 
therefore, can only be attributed to (J electrons. As shown in Sect. 2.5.4, photoionisation 
starts at 8.5 eV (146 nm) and may be responsible, together with photodissociations for 
the strong increase in absorption near II eV. The origin of the absorption edge is still 
controversial: is it due to absorption into an exciton state? Or do we observe a genuine 
VB ..... CB transition? 
The difference between the two possible explanations is basically the attraction be-
tween electron and hole; if the Coulomb energy is higher than kT, electron and hole 
are coupled and form a shortlived neutral pseudo particle, the exciton; if it is smaller 
than kT, the particles move independently and carry the (intrinsic) photocurrent, pro-
vided an electric field is applied. Only in this latter case, therefore, 
L1 E = E opt = Ephoto 
(3.1) 
do band gap, absorption edge and threshold energy of intrinsic photo current coincide 
(3.1). In PE, Ephoto= 8.81 ±0.05 eV 6) and is 0.46 eV higher than the 4K absorption peak 
ofPE (Fig. 3.1). This indication contradicting the VB ..... CB assignment is, however, not 
absolutely convincing, since photoconductivity being a macroscopic phenomenon, the 
charge carriers have to move between the polymer molecules so that the simple model 
of ID energy bands may be insufficient to describe this process in polymers. A more 
serious argument against independent holes and electrons in PE, they may move in 1 D 
or 3D bands, involves the low dielectric constant (8 = 2.3) causing mutual attraction of 
24 

3 Absorption Spectroscopy in the Ultraviolet and Visible Regions 
Table 3.1. ~xamples of technical polymers containing nUV-chromophores 
Polymer 
Chromophore 
Longest wavelength absorption 
nm 
Poly( styrene) 
Poly( ethylene therephthalate) 
Poly(methyl methacrylate) 
Poly(vinylacetate) 
Phenyl-group 
Terephthalate-group 
Aliphatic Ester 
Aliphatic Ester 
Carbazole-group 
270 3 • 16\ 280 (absorption edge) 35) 
290 (tail of absorption) 18.46) 30049) 
250-260 (absorption edge) 35) 
210 (maximum) 9) 
Poly(vinyl carbazole) 
345 19) 
holes and electrons over distances up to 10 nm. The most likely explanation of the 4K 
absorption peak consequently involves a bound state (exciton) which may dissociate 
into a free charge carrier after additional supply of energy. The ESCA results (Sect. 
2.5.4) are compatible with both interpretations. 
The fUV -asorption spectra of very thin, oriented LDPE films, using the polarised 
radiation of a hydrogen lamp have been reported recently 32). According to this work, 
the absorption edge near 8 e V is observed if the polarisation of the electric field vector 
is perpendicular to the drawing direction and, hence, perpendicular to the main chain 
ofPE. Synchrotron radiation reveals a first, "parallel" absorption edge near 11.5 e V 32). 
The dichroism observed agrees well with ab initio calculations 33) although the calcu-
lated energy gap is much too high. 
The measurements do not, however, resolve the problem of exciton vs band absorp-
tion. 
Polystyrene 2. 3) shows predominantly n-electron excitations, so that the absorption 
edge of the back-bone cannot be assigned accurately. 
Solutions ofPoly(oxyethylene) in water and Poly(vinyl acetate) in acetonitrile have 
recently been investigated 9) down to 170 nm. In this region, commercial spectrometers 
can still be used. 
At energies above 10 eV, photo-ionisation and numerous photo-dissociation pro-
cesses occur which have not yet been investigated in polymers. 
Due to the experimental difficulties, the fUV -spectroscopy of polymers is still in its 
infancy. The use of Synchrotron radiation 7.~) as a powerful source offUV may remove 
some of the difficulties, so that at least the basic research in this field, complementary 
to ESCA and photoconductivity, may increase in importance in future. 
The main fields of application (according to Table 1.1) are clearly "Electronic struc-
ture" and "Excitons". Formally, UVPES (Sect. 2.l) belongs to the fUV -region. This 
variant of ESCA seems appropriate to study valence electron spectra, since the excita-
tion energy is nearer to the binding energies of these loosely bound electrons. 
3.2 Absorption Spectroscopy in the Near Ultraviolet 
and Visible Regions 
3.2.1 Spectral Region and Characteristic Transitions 
The nUV and the VIS regions of the electromagnetic spectrum spectroscopically form 
one entity, since with a few exceptions we observe the absorption and emission (lumi-
nescence) of n- and n-electron systems in this region, often exemplified by intense tran-
25 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
sitions and characteristic vibrational structures. The nUV is that part of the UV which 
can be observed in air (},;;;. 200 nm) and is next to the shortest visible wavelengths (), ~ 
400 nm). Next are the regions of the visible spectrum, giving rise to the visual sensations 
known as spectral colours. Polymers generally absorb in the VIS region only if pur-
posely modified or degraded, the exceptions being highly conjugated polymers used in 
studies of electrical conductivity or catalytic activity. Biopolymers are often coloured 
by specific chromophoric groups, e.g. hemins or carotenoids. Only few dyes and com-
plexes absorb electronically above a wavelength of about 750 nm, the red edge of the 
VIS region. 
3.2.2 Basic Principles of nUVjVIS Absorption Spectroscopy 10. 11) 
3.2.2.1 Electronic Vibronic Spectra 
The absorption of photons in the nUV /VIS region by organic molecules is caused by 
excitation of n;- and n-valence electrons including the additional excitation of molecular 
vibrations. Only the 0-0 transition (Fig. 3.2) occur between the vibrational ground 
states of the electronic ground state (mostly So) and electronically excited states (Sn). 
Potential curves can be depicted only for diatomic molecules 12), as shown in Fig. 3.2. 
The solid curved denote the return points in the classical (mechanical) picture of two 
vibrating atoms. The highest probability according to quantum mechanics, in the 
zero vibration mode is at Ro, the coordinate of the minimum of the classical 
curve; the first excited vibration has two maxima, etc. If the equilibrium bond 
length is equal in So and S 1, the 0-0 absorption is the strongest one. The elec-
tronic states considered in absorption spectroscopy of polymers are mostly singlet 
states So, S 1, S2 - Sn), all electron spins being compensated (symbolic: tt ). 
The graphic presentation using potential curves and discrete vibrational levels cor-
responds to the Born-Oppenheimer approximation in molecular quantum theory, 
Fig. 3.2. Schematic presentation of a 0-1 absorption with equal and unequal atomic coordinates 
in ground and excited state 
26 

3 Absorption Spectroscopy in the Ultraviolet and Visible Regions 
based on the separation of the wave function [Eq. (3.2)] into electron and nuclear wave 
functions which only depend on the 
per, R)=1p(r) x <peR) 
(3.2) 
electronic (r) and nuclear coordinates (R), respectively. The physical basis of this model 
rests on the vastly different velocities of electronic and nuclear movements so that the 
former can be calculated assuming that the latter is constant during the electron move-
ment. 
3.2.2.2 Energy Level Diagrams 
UV-spectroscopic results are graphically presented using diagrams like the one shown 
in Fig. 3.2 or, more frequently, a Jablonski-Diagram (Fig. 4.1). The energy levels indi-
cated always correspond to measured or calculated energy differences. Spectra there-
fore are best plotted to show absorption intensity (optical density or absorption coef-
ficient) vs. wave number (v'), since this magnitude is proportional to energy (Fig. 1.1); 
in this way the spectrum itself is kind of an energy level diagram. Molecular orbital dia-
grams, as derived from simple MO models or using measured ionisation energies 
(Chapt. 2) and electron affinities, are of little value for quantitative comparison with 
UV spectra. The reason for the large discrepancies (lg - Ag ~ Eop,) lies in the fact that 
the orbitals have no fixed energy, irrespective of the number of electrons occupying 
them. The electron lifted by absorption of a photon into a higher orbital strongly in-
teracts with all other electrons and especially with the positive hole remaining in the 
originally filled MO. Thus, the energy differences measured in absorption spectra do 
not simply correspond to the differences in unperturbed orbital energies. Electronic 
spectra can be calculated using elaborate theoretical models involving electron/electron 
interactions and mixing ofMOs 11). 
3.2.2.3 Intensity of Absorption Bands 
Complex chromophores in Polymers or their monomeric models always contain more 
quantum mechanically allowed electronic states than can be observed in optical ab-
sorption spectra due to the selection rules. The two most important selection rules are 
connected with the electron spin and with the symmetry of the MO's involved. The spin 
selection rule, according to Kasha 13) the strictest one, forbids the electron spin (Chap. 
9) to be changed during absorption or emission of a photon. 
Absorptions between states of different multiplicity, e.g. So~ T 1, cannot be ob-
served without tricks (oxygen pressure technique, heavy atom effect). 
The symmetry selection rule strongly reduces the intensity of absorption if the posi-
tive nuclei and negative electrons have the same centre of gravity in the ground and ex-
cited state, i.e. if excitation does not lead to a transfer of charge. In this case, the tran-
sition dipole moment (Mk•n) which measures the strength of an absorption band [Eq. 
(3.4)] equals zero. The transition dipole moments is an integral of the form (3.3) 
Mk.n=e(Pk I L ZiriIPn), 
, 
(3.3) 
where e is the elementary charge, P k' P n are the wave functions of the initial state (k) 
and the final state (n), Zi is the charge of the ith particle (electron or nucleus) and fi is 
27 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
the space vector of the ith particle 
(3.4) 
The oscillator strength/k•n of the transition (a relict of older mechanical theories oflight 
absorption) is proportional to the integral absorption band and to the square of the 
transition dipol moment (3.4). Very strong, i.e. fully allowed electronic bands are char-
acterised by: 
Ik.n';::;; 1, 
Bmax';::;; 105 1 mol- 1 cm -1 (CTmax ,;::;;4 x 10- 16 cm 2 =4A 2), 
This transition dipole moment roughly corresponds to a shift of one elementary charge 
over 2A. 
3.2.2.4 The Franck-Condon Principle 
Vibrationally structured electronic absorption bands show one of two principal band 
shapes: either the 0-0 peak is the strongest one, or one of the following (0-1, 0-2 
etc.) transitions has the highest probability and thus the most intense peak [Eq. (3.4)]. 
The reason for this behaviour is readily apparent from Fig. 3.2 and depends on the nu-
clear coordinates in the ground and excited states. The Franck-Condon principle im-
plies that the most probable transition is the one showing best overlap of wave func-
tions in the ground and the excited state without change in nuclear coordinates. The 
physical basis is again the high velocity of electronic compard to nuclear movements. 
The weak intensity of the 0-0 peak may, however, also be due to symmetry (e.g. 
in the lowest UV band of benzene). 
3.2.3 Application of Lambert-Beer's Lawto Polymers 
Lambert-Beer's Law is fundamental for quantitative absorption spectroscopy in the 
UV /VIS and constitutes a special case of the general law of absorption of radiation [Eq. 
(3.5)] in homogeneous matter. 
(3.5) 
Equation (3.5) implies that the decrease in light intensity only depends upon the inten-
sity at depth d and on a constant (IX) characteristic of the substance. In the case of poly-
mer films, especially if the absorbing units are not known, the'absorption coefficient 
IX according to (3.5) can be used in order to characterise the absorption behaviour of 
the polymer. In solutions and polymer films with known absorbing units, IX can be writ-
ten as the product of concentration x specific absorption coefficient, provided that the 
particles absorb independently of one another. This condition, which is the essence of 
Lambert-Beer's law, is fulfilled especially at low concentration and therefore proble-
matic for polymers. However, if there is a constant, i.e. concentration-independent in-
teraction between the chromophores, Lambert-Beer's law can be used in the concentra-
tion range of constant interaction. 
28 

3 Absorption Spectroscopy in the Ultraviolet and Visible Regions 
Depending on the concentration units employed, a variety of specific absorption 
coefficients can be used, e.g. the absorption cross section (J [Eq. (3.6)] or the molar 
decadic absorption coefficient s [Eq. (3.7)] most frequently used in chemical absorption 
spectroscopy if the molar mass of the absorbing species is known so that c is known 
as well. 
rx=Nx(J 
N: number of absorbing particles (cm - 3) 
(J: absorption cross section (cm2). 
rx=2.303 c x s 
identical with 
s: molar, decadic absorption coefficient (1 mol- 1cm -1) 
c: concentration of absorbing units (mol 1- 1) 
OD: optical density or absorbance (log lo/f). 
(3.6) 
(3.7) 
(3.8) 
lfthe molar mass of the absorbing species is not known, the specific absorption coef-
ficient (s') can be based on c' (g I-I) as defined in Eq. (3.9) 
rx=2.303 c'xc'. 
(3.9) 
Since the intensities of absorption bands may vary over several orders of magnitude, 
it is common practice to plot the logarithm of the absorption coefficient, preferentially 
log s, vs. v' or A.. The applicability of Lambert-Beer's law can in principle be checked 
by measuring different concentrations of the polymer to be studied. However, unlike 
monomers, polymers never form really dilute solutions with regard to the absorbing 
groups, which may be present as side groups (A) or as integral parts of the backbone 
(B). 
I 
A 
I 
A 
I 
A 
~~-B----B----B--~ 
Polymers in which the chromophore extents over the whole molecule, e.g. polyconju-
gated molecules, are in most cases insoluble and should be treated by energy band 
models (Sect. 3.1) rather than as molecules. 1 Using Eq. (3.8), the molar mass of the 
basic unit (e.g. styrene for PS) has to be taken in order to calculate c and s. The spectra 
obtained in this way can be compared directly with those of monomeric models 
(cumene or toluene in the example given) in order to detect deviations from purely 
additive behaviour (polymer vs monomer aspect, Sect. 1.2). 
Insoluble polymers can be measured by reflection spectroscopy, the absorption spectrum being 
calculated 14); results obtained in this way should be regarded with caution, especially if weak 
transitions are involved 
29 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
The problem of chromophore interactions in polymer coils or networks is certainly 
smallest in the case of copolymers, especially if the UV -absorbing component is present 
only in low concentration; UV -absorption can therefore be used to determine copoly-
mer composition. 
In polymer films, the concentration of the chromophores is given by the chemical 
composition and the density of the solid polymer. In copolymers it may be varied by 
changing the monomer ratio. It is advisable also in this case to compare the copolymers 
with monomeric models the greatest experimental difficulties being the homogeneity of 
the films which usually have to be very thin. 
Another experimental difficulty in evaluating UV /VIS-absorption spectra - particu-
larly of partly crystalline films - consists in light scattering, adding to the true optical 
density (OD) an apparent absorbance [Eq. (3.10)] which is due to scattering 34). 
(3.10) 
(3.11) 
The additivity postulated by Eq. (3.10) is valid as long as the ratio of absorbing to non-
absorbing groups does not exceed an upper limit which has to be determined ex-
perimentally ('" 1 :15) in several detergents and proteins 15). 
If (3.10) is valid, the Rayleigh Eq. (3.11) offers a simple possibility of correcting the 
spectra disturbed by scattering effects: outside the region of true absorption the spec-
trum has to be measured up to long wavelengths. Plotting log ODobs> i.e. the measured 
absorbance, vs log v' should give a streight line with slope n at long wavelengths. Ex-
trapolating this line into the region of true absorbance and subtracting the OD's (rather 
than their logs!) yields OD (v'), the true absorption spectrum. Care must be taken with 
impure polymers (e.g. technical PS grades) 16,17), since small concentrations of im-
purities asorbing at long wavelengths may severely alter the spectral region useful for 
the scattering correction. On the other hand, such weak absorptions can be recognised 
if the spectrum has been recorded far into the non-absorbing range and the scattering 
correction has been applied. 
3.2.4 UV-Absorbing Polymers 
Well developed nUV absorption spectra can be obtained from polymers containing 
aromatic or heteroaromatic groups. Polymers showing nn* chromophores (C = 0), are 
expected to give weak UV -absorption. Conjugated double or triple bonds give strong 
absorptions often detected in partly degraded polymers, e.g. PV~ 18). Some technically 
important polymers showing nUV -absorbing chromophores are summarised in 
Table 3.1. Collections ofUV /VIS-spectra and reference books are quoted in the biblio-
graphy 36 - 43). 
Among the biopolymers, proteins (due to tyrosine and tryptophane) and DNA/ 
RNA (due to the purine and pyrimidine bases) strongly absorb in the nUV. With the 
exception of a generally weak hypochromy (Sect. 3.2.6) and some broadening of the 
spectra, the absorption spectra of pure polymers and their monomeric models are very 
similar, indicating the absence of any strong ground-state interaction between the 
chromophores. As examples for nUV-absorption spectra, PS and PVCA are shown in 
Fig. 3.3 in the log B VS. v' presentation. 
30 

3 Absorption Spectroscopy in the Ultraviolet and Visible Regions 
Wavenumber 
Fig. 3.3. nUV Absorption spectra of solutions ofPS (curve 1) and PVCA (curve 2) 
Table 3.2. nUV -Absorption of PVC A and NIPCA 19) oscillator strengths ifo .• ) 
n 
Absorption 
NIPCAin 
NIPCAin 
PVCAin 
PVCAin 
band 
cyc10hexane 
methylene 
methylene 
solid state 
(cm-l) 
chloride 
chloride 
29,000 
0.012 
0.010 
0.012 
0.Q15 
(0-0 peak) 
2 
34,000 
0.050 
0.045 
0.049 
0.058 
(0-0 peak) 
3 
38,000 
0.17 
0.16 
0.17 
0.18 
(total) 
Table 3.2 gives the wavelengths and molar decadic absorption coefficients of the 
0-0 peaks of PVC A and, for comparison, N-Isopropyl carbazole (NIPCA). The con-
siderable differences in Smax between polymer and monomeric model are mostly com-
pensated by band broadening in the polymer so that the oscillator strengths of the tran-
sitions fon are roughly the same in the polymer and the monomer. Deviations will be 
discussed in Sect. 3.2.5. 
The long wavelength band of PVCA (SO--->SI) corresponds to the 1 Lb (Platt) or (X 
(Clar) transition of monomeric carbazoles. This transition involves strong charge 
transfer from N to C 3 and C 6 and therefore is polarised in the short axis. The bands 
at 295 (SO--->S2) and 261 nm (SO--->S3) are polarised in the long molecular axis, the for-
31 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
mer corresponds to 1 La (Platt) or p (Clar) of carbazole and is due, simply speaking to 
the strong transition of an electron from the highest filled to the lowest empty MO. 
The two band shown in the PS spectrum (SO-+Sl' SO-+S2) are due to the weak, sym-
metry-forbidden 1 Lb transition shown by benzene itself and its simple alkyl derivatives 
and to the medium intensity 1 La. 
The strong electronic absorption of crystalline polydiines 44,45), e.g. TSHD (PTS) 
will be shown in connection with resonance Raman scattering (Sect. 6.6) and ESR of 
the growing chain (Sect. 9.7). 
3.2.5 Hypochromy in Polymers 
Deviations from the additive behaviour (monomer aspect) in UV-absorption of poly-
mers can be caused by 
a) shifting and splitting of bands 
b) lowering of absorption intensity without spectral changes. 
Changes according to (a) may occur in crystalline polymers (Davydov splitting47» 
not yet been definitely identified in polymers). 
Hypochromy (b) has occasionally been observed in solutions of stereo-regular aro-
matic polymers 26); the strongest effect, however, is displayed by DNA 20, 21). UV -ab-
sorption of DNA is due to the four bases adenine, thymine, guanidine and cytosine, 
all strongly absorbing in the 200 to 280 nm region and yielding an absorption maxi-
mum near 260 nm (fO,l ~0.27 in average base composition 21». The total absorbance 
does not only depend on the base composition, but also on the degree of ordering. 
Homogeneous neutral solutions of denaturated (random-coil) DNA in water show an 
absorption spectrum which can hardly be distinguished from that of a mixture of the 
bases and changes little upon hydrolysis to nucleotides. Native (helix form) DNA 
shows an absorption spectrum of the same form, but of30 percent lower optical density 
over the whole absorption band. In order to understand this effect we have to remem-
ber than one turn of the double helix of DNA has a height of 3.4 nm and contains 10 
base pairs, resulting in a vertical distance of 0.34 nm, the thickness of aromatic mole-
cules. This close packing causes, among other effects, exciplex fluorescence 23) and hy-
pochromy. 
A semi-classical interpretation of hypochromy is based on the screening of neigh-
bouring chromophores by dispersion interaction 23-26). The UV-radiation induces di-
poles in the chromophores which are felt by neighbouring chromophores as weakening 
of the oscillating electromagnetic field. This interaction leading to decreased absorp-
tion increases with the 
- overlap of absorption spectra 
- strength of absorption (fk,n) 
- decreasing distance of chromophores 
- parallel or almost parallel arrangement of chromophores and thus their Mk,n' 
The spectral and structural data of DNA show that the first three conditions are 
nearly perfectly fulfilled, the fourth one is satisfied approximately. From the example 
of this biopolymer we may expect that strong transitions in synthetic polymers should 
give the same effect which thus could be used for identifying ordered structures when 
other methods fail, e.g. in dilute solution. It should be noted that the analysis of copoly-
mers can be complicated by this and similar effects, especially if random and block co-
polymers are to be compared 28). In order to avoid analytical errors it is imperative to 
32 

3 Absorption Spectroscopy in the Ultraviolet and Visible Regions 
carefully measure the spectra of the corresponding homopolymer(s) and a suitable 
monomeric model in addition to the spectra of the copolymers to be analysed. It should 
furthermore be remembered that the integrated absorption curve [Eq. (3.4)] rather than 
the maximum absorption coefficient is the true measure of absorption strength. 
The importance of a careful error analysis in the UV -spectroscopy determination of 
copolymer composition has recently been emphasized by Garcia 47) in a critical evalu-
ation of all data available on styrene polymers. He concludes that Lambert-Beers law 
is fulfilled within the limits of experimental error in all cases reported so far. 
3.2.6 Absorption by Molecules dissolved in Solid Polymers 
Commercial polymers (plastics, fibres, etc.) frequently contain monomeric substances 
(additives and impurities): plasticisers, antioxidants, UV -stabilisers, dyes, optical 
brighteners, lubricants, antistatics (additives), residual monomer, traces of catalyst, 
degradation products and dissolved atmospheric pollutants (impurities). 
Many of these compounds absorb strongly nUV /VIS-radiation and thus disturb the 
investigation of the polymer, even if present only in traces. For the same reason, UV-
absorption is a suitable method for analysing these substances, preferentially after ex-
traction with a solvent which does not dissolve the polymer or by repeated solution/ 
precipitation yielding pure solid polymer and additives dissolved in the solvent/non-
solvent mixture. 
Some additives have been designed to give optimum absorption in the nUV, e.g. the 
2-hydroxybenzophenones and 2-(2-hydroxyphenyl) benzotriazoles used as screening 
type UV-stabilisers 18). Polymer spectroscopy in its strict sence requires pure polymer 
samples so that carefully prepared and purified laboratory products will in general be 
preferred. Several polymers, however, (e.g. PP) can be prepared in the laboratory only 
with difficulties if special requirements concerning tacticities, molar mass, etc. have to 
be met. In such cases, purification of commercial polymers is a feasible way of obtain-
ing suitable samples. Impurities which are chemically linked to the polymer cannot be 
removed by the usual solvent techniques, but in special cases chemical purification (e.g. 
hydrogenation ofC= C and C =0 groups) may be successful. 
If the polymer contains electron-donating (D) or -accepting (A) groups, monomeric 
compounds with the opposite property will give rise to formation ofDA complexes 29). 
The corresponding charge transfer absorption bands are due to a partial shift of elec-
trons from the donor to the acceptor, in most cases according to Eq. (3.12). 
(3.12) 
The resulting bands are often in the VIS and thus cause a specific colouring of the poly-
mer solution or film. It should be noted that the optical density of the CT band in DA 
solutions does not obey the simple Lambert Beer's law, since formation and dissoci-
ation of the complexes depend on the concentrations and, more exactly, on the ac-
tivities of 0 and A and on the equilibrium constant of complex formation 30). 
The ionisation energy and electron affinity in polymers have already been discussed 
in Sect. 2.5.2, see also Fig. 2.10. Strong electron donors and acceptors, either polymers 
or monomers, combine to give radical-ion complexes in which the charge transfer oc-
curs in the electronic ground state [Eq. (3.13)]. The radical ions formed and/or their 
33 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
Table 3.3. Information obtained by UV /VIS absorption relating to structure and 
dynamics of polymeric systems 
Structure 
Chemical structure 
Tacticity 
Conformation 
Crystallinity 
Electronic structure 
+ 
+ 
(+ ) 
+ 
Dynamics 
Movements of the chain, seg-
ments and sidegroups 
Phonons 
Excitons 
Complex formation and related 
phenomena 
+ 
+ 
degradation products often show characteristic absorption bands in the VIS range, 
sometimes extending to the nIR. 
Both phenomena - charge transfer in the ground and the excited state - play an im-
portant role in the electrical conductivity of polymers 31). If the absorption coefficients 
of the DA complex or of the radical ions 
(3.13) 
are known, nUV/VIS/nIR-absorption spectroscopy can be used in order to analyse the 
amount and nature of the polymeric complex(es) formed. 
3.3 Resume of nUV jVIS-Absorption Spectroscopy 
The following discussion includes certain aspects of the rov (n electron absorption) 
and the nIR (electronic bands extending into this range. Table 3.3 shows the essential 
fields of application. Analytical applications are the identification of aromatic poly-
mers, copolymers and additives. A strong conformational effect has been shown to oc-
cur in DNA hypochromy, and weaker effects of this kind may be used to explore the 
conformation of aromatic synthetic polymers in solution. Polymer crystallinity is an-
other field not yet studied by UV /VIS-absorption, although specific splitting at low 
temperature is in principle to be expected in crystalline polymers. The electronic struc-
ture is studied by UV/VIS [and by ESCA (Chap. 2) and luminescence spectroscopy 
(Chap. 4)]. If the absorbing groups are closely spaced, the excited states may migrate 
as excitons, as will be shown in Chap.4. Finally, the formation ofDA complexes is an 
important application ofnUV and especially VIS (+nIR) absorption spectroscopy. 
The nUV/VIS-absorption spectroscopy seems to be a very iII:1portant tool for study-
ing 
- aromatic and heteroaromatic polymers 
- photochemistry of polymers 
- degradation of polymers 
- polymeric DA complexes and radical ion complexes. 
References 
1. Partrigde, R.H.: J. Chern. Phys. 45,1685 (1961) 
2. Buck, W.C., Thomas, B.R., Weinreb, A.: J. Chern. Phys. 48, 549 (1968) 
34 

References 
3. Partrigde, R.H.: J. Chern. Phys. 47,4223 (1967) 
4. George, R.A., Martin, D.H., Wilson, E.G.: J. Phys. C: Solid State Phys. 5,871 (1972) 
5. George, R.A., Roberts, I., Wilson, E.G.: J. Phys. E: Sci.lnstrum. 4, 384 (1971) 
6. Bloor, D.: Chern. Phys. Lett. 40, 323 (1976) 
7. Koch, E.E., Sonntag, B.F.: Molecular Spectroscopy with Synchrotron Radiation in Synchro-
tron Radiation, C. Kunz (ed.), Topics in Current Physics, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: 
1979,p.269 
8. Jortner, J, Leach, S. (eds.): Perspectives of Synchrotron Radiation. Application to Molecular 
Dynamics and Photochemistry. J. Chim. Phys 77, No.1 (1980) pp.I-57 
9. Lee, C.H., Waddell, W.H., Casassa, E.F.: Macromolecules 14,1021 (1981) 
10. Kortum, G.: Kolorimetrie, Photometrie und Spektrometrie, 4th Ed., Berlin, Giittingen, 
Heidelberg: Springer 1962 
11. Murrell, J.N.: The Theory of Electronic Spectra of Organic Molecules, London: Methuen 
1963; German Trans!.: B.1. Hochschultaschenbucher, No. 250/250 a, Mannheim: Bibliogr. 
lnst. 1967 
12. Herzberg, G.: Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure I. Spectra of Diatomic Molecules, 
2nd Ed., New York: Van N ostrand-Reinhold 1950 
13. Kasha, M.: Discuss. Faraday Soc. 9,14 (1950) 
14. Buck, W.L., Thomas, B.R., Weinreb, A.: J. Chern. Phys. 48, 549 (1968) 
15. Schauenstein, E., Kliipffer, W.: Acta histochim. Suppl. VI, 227 (1965) 
16. Kliipffer, W.: Europ. Pol. J. 11,203 (1975) 
17. Kubica-Kowal, J.: Makromol. Chern. 178,3017 (1977) 
18a. Geuskens, G. (ed.): Degradation and Stabilisation of Polymers, London: Applied Science 
Publ1975 
18b. Riinby, B, Rabek, J.F.: Photodegradation, Photo oxidation and Photostabilisation of Poly-
mers, London: Wiley 1975 
18c. Hawkins, W.L. (ed.): Polymer Stabilization, New York: Wiley 1972 
19. Kliipffer, W.: J. Chern. Phys. 50, 2337 (1969) 
20. Magazanik, B., Chargaff, E.: Biochem. Biophys. Acta 7, 396 (1951) 
21. Thomas, R.: Biochem. Biophys. Acta 14, 231 (1954) 
22. Tinoco, I., Jr.: J. Am. Chern. Soc. 82, 4785 (1960) 
23. Eisinger, J.: Photochem. Photo bioI. 7,597 (1968) 
24. Bolton, H.C., Weiss, J.J.: Nature 195, 666 (1962) 
25. Nesbet, R.K.: Mol. Phys. 7,211 (1964) 
26. Fowler, G.N.: Mol. Phys. 8, 383 (1964) 
27. Val a, M.T., Rice, S.A.: J. Chern. Phys. 39, 2348 (1963) 
28. Brussau, R.J., Stein, D.J.: Ang. Makromol. Chern. 12, 59 (1970) 
29. Pearson, J.M., Turner, S.R., Ledwith, A., in: Molecular Association, R. Foster (ed.), Lon-
don: Academic Press 1979, p. 79 
30. Briegleb, G.: Elektronen-Donator-Acceptor-Komplexe, Berlin, Giittingen, Heidelberg: 
Springer 1961 
31. Mort, J., Pfister, G. (eds.): Electronic Properties of Polymers, New York: Wiley 1982 
32. Hashimoto, S., Seki, K., Sato, N., lnokuchi, H.: J. Chern. Phys. 76, 163 (1982) 
33. Armstrong, D.R., Jamieson, J., Perkins, P.G.: Theor. Chim. Acta 50,193 (1978) 
34. Schauenstein, E., Bayzer, H.: J. Pol. Sci. 16,45 (1955) 
35. Beavan, S.W., Hargreaves, J.S., Phillips, D.: Advances in Photochemistry Vol. 11,207, New 
York: Wiley 1979 
36. Rao, C.N.R.: Ultraviolet and Visible Spectroscopy, London: Butterworth 1961 
37. DMS UV Atlas of Organic Compounds, London: Butterworth, Weinheim: Verlag Chemie 
1966-1971 
38. Friedel, R.A., Orchin, M.: Ultraviolet Spectra of Aromatic Compounds, New York: Wiley, 
London: Chapman & Hall 1951 
39. Pestemer, M., Scheibe, G., Schiintag, A., Bruck, D., in: Landolt-Biirnstein, 6. Auflage, I. 
Band, 3. Teil (Molekeln II), 78, Berlin, Giittingen, Heidelberg: Springer 1951 
40. Pestemer, M.: Correlation tables for the structural determination of compounds by ultravio-
let light absorptiometry, Weinheim: Verlag Chemie: 1974 
41. Calvert, J.G., Pitts, J.N.P., Jr.: Photochemistry, New York: Wiley 1966 
35 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
42. Phillips, J.P., et al. (eds.): Organic Electronic Spectra Data, Vol.I-VIII, New York: Wiley 
1973 
43. Sadtler Standard Ultraviolet Reference Spectra, London: Heyden 
44. Bloor, D., Williams, R.L., Ando, D.J.: Chern. Phys. Lett. 78,67 (1981) 
45. Six!, H.: Spectroscopy of the Intermediate States of the Solid State Polymerization Reaction 
in Diacetylene Crystals, in Advances in Polym. Sci. (1983) 
46. Takai, Y., Ozawa T., Mizutani, M. Ieda, M.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. Ed. 15,945 (1977) 
47. Davydov, A.S.: Theory of Molecular Excitons, translated by M. Kasha and M. Oppenheimer 
Jr., New York: McGraw-Hill, 1st Ed. 1962, 2nd Ed. 1971 
48. Garcia-Rubio, L.H.: J. Appl. Pol. Sci. 27, 2043 (1982) 
49. Ouchi, I.: Polymer (Japan) 15, 225 (1983) 
4 Fluorescence-and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy 
of Polymers 
4.1 Radiative and Radiationless Transitions 
4.1.1 The Jablonski Diagram 
This section is complementary to the foregoing one, since the luminescence of organic 
molecules is due to radiative transitions between the same electronic levels, but in the 
reverse sense, compared to absorption. Furthermore, (delayed) emission can be ob-
served by forbidden transitions which are not observable in absorption. 
Luminescence is not observed, however, if there are efficient radiationless processes 
competing with the emission of photons. 
The important energy levels of poly-atomic molecules - in our case of the emitting 
polymer chromophores - are usually presented in the form of a Jablonski-Diagram, 
choosing the singlet ground state So as the common baseline (Fig. 4.1). The transitions 
SO-+S1, S2'" S. symbolise the UVjVIS-absorption processes discussed in Chap. 3 (see 
also the discussion of energy level diagrams, Sect. 3.2.2.2). 
ic 
-+--HH~HHrT-----+--IHrr----
-f---l-HI--H--H"-------+--lf-+-l-----
Fig. 4.1. Jablonski-Diagram of Energy Levels of Poly atomic Molecules in Condensed Phase 
36 

4 Fluorescence - and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy of Polymers 
4.1.2 Fluorescence 
Fluorescence occurs with only few exceptions from S 1, even if in absorption primarely 
a higher excited state Sn has been created (Fig. 4.1). This behaviour is also observed in 
the case of phosphorescence (Tl ->So) and is known as Kasha's rule 1). The reason for 
the absence (or extreme faintness) of emissions from higher excited states to lower ex-
cited ones or to the electronic ground state consists in the rapid internal conversion 
(Sect. 4.1.3) competing with luminescence 2). In the singlet system, S 1 in its vibrational 
ground state offers a metastable intermediate in the deactivation cascade starting at Sn 
or at vibrationally excited S l' The fluorescent transition S 1 -> So is a dipole transition 
which is subject to the selection rules discussed in Chapt. 3. With the exception oflasing 
systems, not yet described for polymers, fluorescence occurs spontaneously, the rate of 
emission (ke= lIre) being a measure of the allowedness of the transition and thus pro-
portional to fo.l (fO.l = 1 roughly corresponds to ke = 109 S -1). 
The vibrational structure of fluorescence depends on the vibrations (vo) in So cou-
pling with the emission and is often similar to that oflong wavelength absorption (VI:::::: 
Vo, "mirror image" of fluorescence and absorption). 
4.1.3 Internal C;:0nversion and Inter-System Crossing 
Internal conversion (ic) denotes a radiationless transition between two electronic states 
of the same mUltiplicity, intersystem crossing (isc) a similar radiationless transition con-
nected with a change in multiplicity (mostly Sl-> Tn or T1->So, see Fig. 4.1). Radiation-
less transitions are isoenergetic transitions to a vibrationally excited lower electronic 
state. In condensed phases (the only ones that are of interest to the spectroscopy of 
polymers) these transitions are followed by very rapid vibrational relaxation, i.e. trans-
fer of vibrational energy to the surrounding medium. The rate of radiationless tran-
sitions decreases (roughly) exponentially with increasing energy difference between the 
electronic states involved 3) and thus explains Kasha's rule. The rate is furthermore de-
creased by the spin selection rule, which also applies to radiationless transitions so that 
isc, all other conditions being equal, is slower than ie. 
4.1.4 Phosphorescence 
The metastable state responsible for phosphorescence (T1) is long-lived since the highly 
forbidden spin reversal is needed for both the radiative (phosphorescence) and the 
ratiationless (isc) deactivation to So 4). Whereas fluorescence decays with r:::::: 1 to 100 
ns, phosphorescence is much slower: r:::::: 1 ms to lOs (see also Sect. 4.3). Furthermore, 
phosphorescence is always observed at longer wavelengths compared to fluorescence; 
this is due to energy lowering by electron exchange E (T1)<E (Sl): The vibrational 
quanta Vo coupling with T1->So may be different from those observed in the fluores-
cence spectrum. Due to the extremely long lifetime of T 1, this excited state is highly 
susceptible to quenching processes (e.g. by 02) so that phosphorescence can in general 
only be observed at low temperature and in rigid matrices when diffusion is suppressed. 
4.2 Experimental 
Fluorescence and phosphorescence spectra are recorded by spectrofluorimeters 5.40), as 
shown in Fig.4.2. The radiation source emitting a continuum in the nUV/VIS-range 
37 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
Et,lISSION 
WAVELENGTH 
CAM 
EXCITATION MARKER SWITCH 
EXCITATION 
WAVELENGTH CAM 
EMISSION MONOCH ROMATOR 
EXCITATION MONOCH ROMATOR 
AMPLIFIER 
SAMPLE 
REF. 
XENON LAMP 
POWER 
SUPPLY 
SAMPLE 
CIRCUIT 
CIRCUIT 
REFERENCE 
( INCLUDING 
STARTER) 
SIGNAL 
SIGNAL 
EMISSION MARKER SIGNAL 
EXCITATION MARKER SIGNAL 
RECORDER 
Fig. 4.2. Schematic presentation of a Spectrofluorometer (HitachijPerkin-Elmer MPF A4) 
38 

4 Fluorescence- and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Table 4.1. Fluorescence quantum efficiencies of reference com-
pounds· 
Substance 
T 
I1F 
Ref. 
(K) 
Quinine sulphate 
298 
0.55 
8) 
(1.0 N H 2SO4) 
9,1O-Diphenyl anthracene 
298 
1.00 
8.9) 
(cyclohexane) 
9,10-Diphenyl anthracene 
298 
0.94 
8) 
(ethanol) 
77 
1.00 
Anthracene 
298 
0.9 
11) 
(crystalline) 
• Performance of relative measurements of quantum efficiencies 
see Parker 6) 
is a stabilised Xenon arc. The first monochromator is used to select a fixed wavelength 
for recording emission spectra. Ifluminescence excitation spectra are recorded, the ex-
citation wavelength is varied at fixed emission wavelength. The first monochromator 
can be replaced by a suitable filter if only emission spectra are to be recorded. 
The sample is contained in quartz tubes or cuvettes if in the form of solution, pow-
ders or granular materials. 
Polymer films produced by slow evaporation of solutions onto a quartz support are 
mounted on a solid sample holder. 
The solvent used to produce the films has to be of high purity. Low-temperature flu-
orescence and phosphorescence spectra are recorded using samples in quartz tubes or 
on a rod immersed in liquid nitrogen in a quartz Dewar vessel. Measurements per-
formed below 77 K or requiring temperature variation require special cryostats. 
The phosphorescence is recorded using rotating mechanical devices (sector discs or 
cans) separating the fast decaying fluorescence from the slow phosphorescence. 
The second monochromator spectrally resolves the luminescence originating from 
the sample and can be replaced by suitable filters for recording only excitation spectra. 
The detector nearly always is a photomultiplier whose sensitivity maximum should 
coincide with the emission of the sample in measurements requiring high sensitivity. In 
modern spectrometers the output of the detector is corrected for equal photon intensity 
in order to obtain "true" emission spectra; otherwise, correction curves can be obtained 
by standard lamps or using reference compounds of known spectral properties. 
The most important sources of errors are: 
- Scattered light from the source, especially in fluorescence measurements (the phos-
phoroscope acts as a trap of scattered light), iflight sources with strong spectral lines 
and if strongly scattering samples are used, e.g. crystalline polymers. 
- Smekal Raman effect (see Sect. 6.2), can be detected and eliminated by changing the 
excitation frequency. 
- Chemical sources of error: impurities in solvent and sample; reabsorption and 
quenching in concentrated solutions. 
39 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
Quantum efficiencies (see Sect.4.3) (Table 4.1) are determined relative to known 
ones of reference substances using identical conditions of excitation and detection for 
sample and reference. This apparently simple comparative method has several sources 
of error 6 -10), especially in the case of films (reabsorption of fluorescence, different 
scattering in sample and reference, etc.). 
In addition to spectral distribution and quantum efficiency of luminescences, their 
decay behaviour - in the simplest case an exponential decay according to Eq. (4.1)-
is of paramount importance in order to interpret and understand polymer emissions. 
(4.1) 
Decay times can be estimated from quenching experiments or, better, measured directly 
using short pulses of exciting radiation and following up the decay of the luminescence 
to be studied. The slowly decaying phosphorescence can be interrupted using a mechan-
ical shutter (T > 1 ms) and recorded by means of an oscillograph or recorder (T > 1 s). 
The fluorescence decay in the range T ~ 1 ns to I JlS can be studied using flashlamps 
and a sampling oscillograph, much more reliably, however, by means of the single 
photon counting technique 12.56) and multichannel analysers. This technique has been 
extended to give time resolved emission spectra 13) and recently has been used to study 
polymer solutions. 
Ultrashort fluorescences have been measured by means of a laser pulse technique 
known as "picosecond spectroscopy" 14), the most advanced tool for measuring the de-
cay of emissions in the ps to ns range being the streak camera 15). 
4.3 Quantum efficiency, decay time and rate constants 
In polymers, the emitting chromophore is often not identical with the absorbing one, 
as implied in the discussion of the Jablonski Diagram in Sect. 4.1. The absorbing group 
may be reversibly converted into another with different properties, or the electronic ex-
citation energy may be transferred to other groups which eventually are radiatively 
deactivated. The quantum efficiency as experimentally observed by comparison with 
a standard (I]) may therefore be quite different from the "true" quantum efficiency (c/J) 
which is a characteristic feature of the emitting group, irrespective of the mode of ex-
citation. 
For the simplest case, we consider an absorbing-emitting group and neglect exter-
nal quenching, the notation of the rate constants is explained in the simplified Jablonski 
Diagram (Fig. 4.3). Under these simple conditions, the true quantum efficiencies of flu-
r-..-rv-..... ..,....-- Tl 
40 
Fig. 4.3. Simplified J ablonski-Diagram. Vibrational 
relaxation (vertical wave lines) is assumed to be much 
faster than the other processes (condensed phase) 

4 Fluorescence- and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy of Polymers 
orescence (¢F) and phosphorescence (¢p) are given by the ratios of the radiative rate 
constants to the sum of all competing rate constants [Eqs. (4.2) and (4.3)] 14) 
¢-
~ 
~~ 
F- ke+kic+kiSC' 
(4.3) 
The true quantum efficiency may generally be defined according to Eq. (4.4) and 
(4.4) 
indicates the fraction of emitting states radiatively deactivated. The experimental quan-
tum efficiencies are related to the number of photons absorbed and are identical with 
the true quantum efficiencies if each photon absorbed creates one emitting state. For 
example, ¢F = I1F if the absorption creates S 1, or, if higher excited singlets Sn are created 
in a first step and there are no side reactions, as ic to So, isc to Tn and photochemical 
reactions from Sn states. This condition is often fulfilled, but cannot be expected from 
the start. The true quantum efficiency of phosphorescence is identical with the ex-
perimental one (using, as usual, excitation via the singlet system) only if kisc~ke+kic, 
i.e. ¢isc>::! 1. This behaviour is often observed in carbonyl containing chromophores. In 
general Eq. (4.5) applies, provided there are no 
(4.5) 
side reactions before T1 reached. 
As can be seen from Eqs. (4.2)-(4.4), the quantum efficiencies give only ratios of rate 
constants. In order to determine the rate constants, we need additionally the decay 
times. In Eq. (4.1) (exponential decay), the decay time 'I: is the reciprocal of the sum of 
all rate constants determining the decay of the excited states S or T[Eqs. (4.6) and (4.7)]. 
1 
-=ke+kic+kisc, 
'l:s 
~ =k~+'<sc' 
'l:T 
(4.6) 
(4.7) 
In calculating rate constants from measured 'I: and 11 data, it is often assumed that 
kic ~ ke + kisc so that ¢isc>::! l-¢F' This assumption facilitates the evaluation but several 
cases are known (e.g. the constituent bases of DNA and biphenylene) where ic is the 
fastest deactivation process of S1' 
4.4 Fluorescence in Polymers 15) 
4.4.1 Isolated and Crowded Fluorescent Groups 
In studying the fluorescence of polymers it is useful to distinguish between isolated 
fluorescent groups, e.g. in statistical copolymers and fluorescent groups in homopoly-
mers or blockcopolymers. In the first case, only weak interactions between the excited 
41 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
group and its surrounding are in general to be expected, whereas in the second case 
strong interactions may occur, especially if the groups are favourable spaced and 
oriented relative to each other. 
Molecules in excited states have drastically different properties compared to the 
same molecules in their electronic ground state 18):their ionisation energy is lower (1;= 
Ig - Es 1 or - ET 1)' their electron affinity is higher (A; = Ag + Es 1 or + ET 1)' their acid/ 
base properties are different due to different electron distribution, the dipole moment 
is different and so is the general chemical reactivity (photochemistry!). It can therefore 
easily be understood that interactions of excited groups playa greater role than in the 
ground state. The most conspicuous interaction observed in polymers leads to the for-
mation of excimers 16, 17), complexes existing in the excited state only; these can be re-
cognised by a strong red shift of fluorescence, compared to monomer emission. Energy 
transfer by exciton hopping - a random electronic diffusion of 81 or Tl - is another 
important process in aromatic polymers to be studied by luminescence spectroscopy. 
The joint occurrence of exciton hopping and excimer formation is the typical combina-
tion of processes competing with simple deactivation in these polymers 17). This is espe-
cially true for solid aromatic polymers and liquid solutions. Rigid dilute solutions, on 
the other hand, behave apparently more like monomers, although weak interactions 
between the chromophores can be identified even in this case 19). 
4.4.2 Fluorescence from Isolated Chromophores 
Statistical copolymers containing a lower energy (81) component (underlined) in small 
concentation can be prepared from couples of suitable monomers, styrene/methyl 
methacrylate, vinylnaphthalene/styrene, vinyl carbazole/styrene, etc. The chemical 
bonding in the macromolecules induces some broadening of the fluorescence spectra 
which otherwise are very similar to those of suitable monomeric models. The fluores-
cent chromophor can be excited either directly, since the host polymer (majority com-
ponent of the copolymer) is transparent in the region of 80 -,,81 absorption of the 
minority component, or by energy transfer via the majority component (Fig. 4.4). In 
the latter case, the mole ratio should exceed, say, 1/100. 
Similar cases are trace impurities, e.g. residual chemical monomer and degradation 
products formed during extrusion, storage, use or weathering of polymers. Chemically 
linked fluorescent groups can easily be distinguished from dissolved ones by repeated 
dissolution/precipitation or by GPc. 
Isolated fluorescent groups represent the monomer aspect of polymer spectroscopy 
and may be used for analytical purposes. 
42 
Collections of reference sprectra are given in the bibliography 7, 44,45). 
Fig.4.4. Fluorescence Excitation of the 
minority component in a copolymer. 
The dashed arrow indicates rapid 
quenching if S 1 of the minority compo-
nent is higher than S, of the majority 
component 

4 Fluorescence- and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Fig. 4.5. Schematic view of different positions of fluo-
rescence labels in a polymer chain 
Fluorescence labels constitute a special case of isolated fluorescent groups in poly-
mers 20-22,41-43). These groups, e,g, reactive dyes or aromatic molecules, are intro-
duced into polymers in order to study the dynamics or orientation of the macromole-
cules. 
Depending on the type of movement to be studied, the label may be fixed in mainly 
three different positions of the main chain (Fig. 4.5): at the end groups, firmly locked 
into the backbone or flexibly connected with it. 
In order to investigate the dynamics of polymer chains, the labels are excited using 
polarised light, the fluorescence emitted by the label being observed through a second 
polariser. In a sample containing randomly distributed labels, the polarised light excites 
selectively those labels whose transition dipole moment is parallel to the electric vector 
of the excitation beam (photo selection). If the emitting state is identical with the ab-
sorbing one - or at least has the same transition vector - the degree of polarisation can 
only change if the label moves during 1:. The time scale of this experiment is thus de-
termined by the fluorescence decay time of the label. In more sophisticated experiments 
the depolarisation is not measured in a stationary manner but rather in a time-resolved 
way 15.22). It is a prerequisite of all these studies that competing depolarising processes, 
as energy transfer, are absent; consequently, the concentration of the labels has to be 
low (see Sect. 4.4.3). 
In the absence of molecular movements, the polarisation of fluorescence can be used 
for studying the degree of orientation in solid polymers, e.g. drawn fibers and films. 
In this case 20), physically dissolved fluorescent molecules can be used as probes, intro-
duced into the sample before stretching by diffusion or mixing before extrusion. 
4.4.3 EnergyTransfer between Isolated Groups 
or Dissolved Molecules 
If the fluorescence spectrum of a polymer molecule or isolated chromophore of a poly-
mer (D = energy donor) 1 overlaps with the absorption spectrum of another molecule 
or chromophore (A = energy acceptor), energy transfer may occur from excited D* to 
A, Eq. (4.8). This energy transfer, which does not involve emission and re-absorption 
of photons, is a non-radiative process first observed by Perrin 23) and theoretically ex-
plained by Forster 14,24,6) using dipole resonance as the main mechanism. 
(4.8) 
The rate constant of energy transfer decays with the 6th power of the distance R be-
tween D and A. 
Note that D and A have a different meaning than in Sect. 3.2.6 where electron donor-acceptor 
(CT) complexes have been discussed 
43 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
By definition, the "critical radius", Ro is the distance between D and A at which the 
probability of energy transfer es equal to the probability of all other deactivating pro-
cesses ofD*. 
According to Forster's theory, Ro can be calculated from spectroscopic data, Eq. 
(4.9) 
(4.9) 
x2 
(orientational factor) ~ 0.6 in solids 
N L 
Loschmidt's number 
n 
Refractive index of the polymer or solvent in the spectral region of fluorescence 
(D)/absorption (A) overlap 
Q 
Overlap integral according to Eq. (4.10) 
(4.10) 
where the donor's fluorescence spectrumjD is normalised such that 
00 J fD(V')dv' = 1. 
o 
The integral in Eq. (4.10) can be approximated by a summation over the range of 
measurable overlap (V'l to v' 2) using appropriate steps Llv' which depend on the vibra-
tional structure displayed by D and A. 
The measurement of Ro for suitable D/A pairs offers a spectroscopic method of 
measuring distances in the range of 0.5 up to 10 nm in the case of extremely strong over-
lap, high ¢F and small ii'. Using suitably D and A labelled end groups, this method 
could be used for measuring the end-to-end distance in polymer coils. 
Calculations of energy transfer are frequently necessary in order to make compar-
isons with experimental measurements or as an alternative to the experiment if, e.g., 
selective excitation of D is not possible. Transparent polymers have frequently been 
used as rigid solvents for energy transfer studies of dissolved monomeric compounds. 
4.4.4 Singlet Excitons 
In homopolymers or copolymers with a high content of fluorescent groups the first ex-
cited singlet state is not fixed to the group where it has originally been created by ab-
sorption of photon or some other excitation process (X-rays etc.) but rather moves 26) 
around in a random hopping process until deactivation occurs by emission of fluores-
cence, radiationless deactivation or trapping and quenching. The reason for this singlet 
exciton hopping process is a step-by-step Forster mechanism (4.4.3) although at the 
close distance between nearest neighbours higher multipole and electron exchange 
terms beside dipole-dipole may contribute to the rate of the elementary transfer step 25), 
Essentially, the transition dipole moment (M) induces the same moment at a neigh-
bouring group so that the energy is transferred without emission and absorption of a 
44 

E 
4 Fluorescence- and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy of Polymers 
F A 
(or energy 
transfer) 
R 
cm-l 
Wavenumber 
Fig.4.6. Excimer fluorescence of PS (l) and PV CA (2) to be compared with absorption spectra 
in Fig. 3.3. Insert: simplified excimer potential scheme 
photon within a time of about 1 ps, depending on 1M I, distance and relative orientation 
of the groups. It should be remembered that wavelike (coherent) excitons have not yet 
been detected in polymers (Sect. 3.2.5). 
In the absence of traps monomer - like fluorescence would be expected in aromatic 
homopolymers. This, however, has been observed only in rigid solutions, although a 
small red shift is detected in most cases 19). In liquid solutions and in solid films of ar-
omatic polymers the monomer fluorescence is in general replaced by a broad, strongly 
red-shifted and structureless excimer fluorescence 15-17,26), Fig.4.6. For sterical rea-
sons, excimer formation can take place only at a few sites of higher than average energy, 
since these complexes, which can exist only in the excited state 27), require nearly 
complete overlap of the molecular planes in a sandwich-like arrangement. Excimer 
fluorescence and the absence of monomer fluorescence in pure solid aromatic polymers 
proves energy transfer since absorption of photons occurs randomly, whereas 
fluorescence is emitted, only from specific centres, called excimer-forming sites 46). Since 
furthermore excimers do not have a bonding ground state, they cannot act as acceptors 
in a long-range Forster-transfer so that energy transfer must be due to excitons. 
In solid films energy transfer can quantitatively be studied using quenching or 
sensitised fluorescence of guest substances dissolved in the polymer to be studied. 
Equations (4.11) and (4.12) are modified Stern-Volmer equations 26, 46), 
Q= 10-1 = CG 
1 
CE 
(4.11) 
45 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
Q 
Quenching factor 
10,1 
Fluorescence intensity without and with guest molecule of 
CG 
mol guest/mol basic unit of polymer 
CE 
mol excimer-forming sites/mol basic unit of polymer. 
Equation (4.11) is valid if monomer fluorescence is completely quenched by energy 
transfer to excimer-forming sites: in typical aromatic polymers, CE~ 10- 3 to 10- 2 moll 
mol basic unit 26). The reciprocal of C E gives the average number of exciton jumps in 
the polymer which is necessarily lower than in molecular crystals where Eq. (4.12) ap-
plies. 
(4.12) 
n = number of exciton jumps ~ 104 to 105 in typical molecular crystals 26). 
In a polymer free of excimer-forming sites Eq. (4.12) would be suitable for 
describing energy transfer by excitons. 
The excimer lifetime is independent of CG as long the excimer is not an intermediate 
step in energy transfer, but rather a passive trap. However, if a guest shows strong 
absorption in the region of excimer fluorescence and is present in high concentration, 
the excimer is bound to act as energy-donor in Forster transfer. This should'be indicated 
in a steep decrease of the excimer decay curve near t = 0 27). Thus, kinetic measurements 
are needed in order to elucidate the details of energy transfer in aromatic polymer films. 
This is even more important in fluid solutions where the kinetics are complicated by the 
superposition of exciton and molecular dynamics, since in flexible chain molecules 
excimers can be formed during the lifetime of the excited state. Recently, evidence has 
beeen produced which contradicts simple Birks kinetics 2, 17) in polymer solutions 28). 
Identifying the excimer fluorescence of a specific polymer chromophore often in-
volves dimeric or trimeric model compounds which in studies aimed at clarifying the 
influence oftacticity on energy transfer, chain conformation, etc. should reflect the dif-
ferent configurations possible 16,29). Generally, isotactic configuration seems to favour 
excimer formation in polymers and oligomeric models 47). 
4.4.5 Excimer Fluorescence as a Probe in Polymer Studies 
Excimer fluorescence is a useful probe in polymer studies owing to the structural 
requirements of excimer formation, implying close contact of two groups, either frozen 
in, as in solids, or dynamically formed as possible only in liquids. Since in liquids energy 
transfer to preformed sites and dynamic excimer formation are possible, the kinetic in-
terpretation of fluorescence experiments may be difficult. In order to use excimer flu-
orescence as a probe in liquids, the excimer-forming groups have to be present in dilute 
form, as recently reported by Morawetz 30), using a copolymer ofPA 66): 
46 

4 Fluorescence- and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy of Polymers 
As a dimeric model, the N,N' diacetyl derivative of the phenyltype excimer probe has 
been measured as a function of temperature. Excimer formation has been found to in-
crease with increasing temperature, in accordance with expectations, if internal hin-
drance was responsible for low excimer yield at low temperature. The copolymer show-
ing exactly the same temperature dependence of excimer relative to monomer fluores-
cence intensity (IE/1M ) indicates the absence of "crankshaft-like" motions in this - and 
probably other - polymer chains, involving the concerted rotation of two bonds. 
Important information on chain dynamics can be obtained from endgroup labeled 
macromolecules using excimer-forming pyrene groups as labels, as shown in the 
pioneering work by Carla Cuniberti 48) and subsequent time-resolved measurements of 
very narrow fractions of Pyr-Ps-Pyr, performed by Winnik and coworkers 49 • 50). 
Measurements of this type can be used in order to test advanced theories of intramole-
cular dynamics and end-group cyclization 51- 53). 
A second example in which excimer fluorescence is applied as a probe is the study 
of compatibility in polyblends of poly (2-vinyl naphthalene) in a series of solid 
polyalkylmethacrylates 31). C. W. Frank prepared dilute solid solutions of P2VN in a 
series ofpolyalkylmethacrylates showing different alkyl substituents and correlated the 
calculated solubility parameters of host and guest polymer with measured fluorescence 
intensity ratios IE/1M of P2VN. This ratio was found to be minimal- indicating good 
compatibility - if the solubility parameters of P2VN and host polymer are identical. 
Pure excimer fluorescence would be expected for complete seggregation, i.e. formation 
of little particles of P2VN (Sect. 4.4.4) in the host matrix. The merit of this method, 
however, lies in the detection of the early stages of seggregation, not possible by other 
methods. Recently, this work has been extended, e.g. to the phase separation of PSI 
Poly(vinylmethyl ether) blends 54). 
4.5 Phosphorescence in Polymers 
4.5.1 The Phosphorescent Triplet State 
The phosphorescent state, TI (Sect. 4.1.4) is distinct from its corresponding singlet state 
(mostly SI or S2) with respect to energy, lifetime and spin state. Due to its paramag-
netism it can also be studied by ESR (Sect. 9.7) and, as a result of its slow decay, the 
absorption spectrum (TI --> Tn) can be measured using intense pulse excitation. Since di-
rect absorption 4) (SO--> T 1, ..• Tn) is very weak, TI is generally populated by isc via the 
singlet system. Alternatively, it may be formed by energy transfer (Sects.4.5.2 and 
4.5.3) or chemical sensitisation 32. 33), Eq. (4.13). The excited triplet aceton transfers its 
0-0 
CH3 ........ 1 
I/CH3 
C-C 
CH{/ 
"'CH3 
Tetramethyl~ 
dioxetane 
( 4.13) 
energy to polymer chromophores of lower (PVCA) or slightly higher (PS) triplet 
energy. 
47 

2l 
~ 
B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
4.5.2 Isolated Phosphorescent Groups 
A phosphorescent group of a polymer without appropriate neighbours with which it 
may interact behaves essentially like a physically dissolved molecule. The phos-
phorescence of the statistical copolymer PSjVCA, e.g. shows a 0-0 peak which is red-
shifted by 70 cm -1 only with regard to N-isopropyl carbazole as monomeric model. 
The vibrational resolution, however, is poorer in the polymer spectrum. Other exam-
ples of isolated phosphorescent groups are oxidatively formed chromophores in com-
mercial polymers. The phosphorescence spectrum of PS shown in Fig. 4.7 is undoubtly 
due to acetophenone type end groups -CO-C6HS' as indicated by the characteristic vi-
brational structures in the excitation and the emission spectra. The latter is dominated 
by C = 0 valence vibrations (Fig. 4.8) which in severely degraded PS samples can also 
be detected in the mIR spectrum. It can be seen from Fig.4.7 how small the SI-T1 gap 
is in this group from the close position of the 0-0 peaks of phosphorescence excita-
tion (SO~SI) and emission (Tl ~So); this is one reason for the efficient isc preventing 
fluorescence in this group. The analytical usefulness of the spectrum shown is due to 
the high quantum yield (cpp) and, above all, to the clearly resolved vibrational structure. 
~ 50~~~--~-~~-
Fig. 4.7. Phosphorescence excitation (1) 
and emission (2) spectrum (not cor-
rected) of a thick film of commercial 
polystyrene at 77 K. Excitation of (2) at 
315-355 nm. The sample has not been 
artificially degraded. The structure in 
(1) near 290 nm is due to residual 
monomeric styrene 
2 
a... 
&1 
T1 
p 
k 
48 
Wavelength 
'I125000cm1 
, 
i i 
..........-IR Abs. 
\ 
-1 
'" 1610cm 
Fig. 4.8. Phosphorescence and IR absorption 
in acetophenone type end groups (see Fig. 
4.7) 

4 Fluorescence- and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy of Polymers 
There are many polymer phosphorescences without vibrational structure which con-
tain little analytical information. Careful comparison with possibly monomeric models 
and additional comparative measurements of the decay of polymer and monomer 
phosphorescence is clearly necessary in these cases if any conclusions on the chemical 
nature of the groups are to be drawn. 
Energy transfer from isolated groups may occur over small distances only, since 
electron exchange 25) as the dominant transfer mechanism requires some overlap of 
electronic wave functions of D and A.Perrin's model 34) is used to describe triplet energy 
transfer 26• 35) quantitatively. Energy transfer to molecular (triplet) oxygen, the most 
common quenching mechanism, leads to electronically excited singlet oxygen which 
may react with double bonds of the macromolecules to yield hydroperoxides. 
4.5.3 Triplet Excitons in Polymers 
Evidence for mobile triplet states in polymers is derived from two sources; sensitised 
guest phosphorescence and T-T annihilation 19.26.32). The smaller hopping rate com-
pared to singlet excitons is compensated by the fact that the triplet exciton has much 
more time due to its slow decay. If the electronic excitation is strongly localised within 
the chromophore (small overlap) and the triplet lifetime is short, then the triplet exci-
tons have only a short range or are even immobile. This seems to be the case in aliphatic 
polyketones 36). 
T-T annihilation is elegantly detected by delayed fluorescence without the need of 
adding guest molecules. 
D F is caused by the singlet channel of T-T annihilation: 
(4.14) 
The delayed fluorescence is in general spectrally identical with prompt fluorescence (for 
deviations in polymers see 26. 3 7.38) but kinetically related to the slowly decaying triplets 
so that experimentally DF is observed together with the phosphorescence spectrum. 
Delayed fluorescence, in addition to phosphorescence, has been observed in several 
aromatic polymers, both in glassy solution and in the form of solid films at low tem-
perature 26). Triplet excimers have been identified as exciton traps, characterised by 
redshifted structureless emission in analogy to singlet excimers, but apparantly of dif-
ferent conformation. Triplet exciton hopping seems to be much slower in amorphous 
polymers compared to molecular crystals, probably due to shallow T-exciton traps 55). 
In dilute glassy solutions of aromatic homopolymers, triplet excimers have not been 
detected, but rather red-shifts of the order ofseverallOO cm -1 19) indicating some trap-
ping of energy even in this cace. Mobile triplet states are indicated by delayed fluores-
cence whose intensity strongly increases with the molar mass of the polymer or polymer 
fraction used. This effect is due to the confinement of the excitons in the pseudo-lD 
polymer chains from which the coils are formed. At low molar mass or irradiation 
intensity, statistically uneven distribution of the triplet excitons over the different mac-
romolecules of the sample may occur, so that some coils at a given time have no exciton, 
others one, two, etc. Studies of this kind represent a good example of the polymer as-
pect and at the same time demonstrate the polymers as real, although not well ordered, 
lD-systems. 
49 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
4.6 Resume of Fluorescence 
and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy 
As can be seen from Table 4.2 the luminescence of polymers gives relevant information 
on several items. 
The analytical application depends critically on elevated quantum efficiences (1) ~ 
0.1 or higher) and well developed vibrational structure. The method is very sensitive 
but difficult (scattering effects, re-absorption) if quantitative measurements have to be 
made especially in solid polymers. 
Tacticity has an indirect influence on the emission spectra of polymers since it fa-
ours certain conformations leading to excimer formation. The crystallinity has so far 
not been studied in detail. The relationship of luminescences with electronic structure 
in ground and excited states (Sl and T 1) is evident. 
Molecular movements can be studied by fluorescence depolarisation techniques of-
ten requiring labelled polymers. Alternatively, the dynamics of excimer formation can 
be used to study chain movement 39,48,49). Phonons should be observable inlow-tem-
perature luminescence spectra of highly crystalline polymers but little is known about 
this at present. 
Luminescence methods are indispensable for the study of excitons. Complex forma-
tion, at least in the excited state (excimers and exciplexes) is also studied by fluorescence 
and phosphorescence methods. 
Despite this wealth of possible applications, it should be noted that luminescence 
spectroscopy is no routine method and probably never will be. This is mainly to be at-
tributed to the following facts: 
- In many pure polymers there are no suitable groups (luminophores) 
- There are many disturbances such as reabsorption, luminescent impurities, quench-
ing by oxygen and other impurities. 
In other words: the high degree of sensitivity and specificity of this method, making 
it a unique tool of polymer research, seems to prevent its broader use as a routine 
methods for analytical purposes. 
Fluorescence and phosphorescence spectroscopy is especially useful in studies con-
cerning 
- aromatic, heteroaromatic and carbonyl-containing polymers 
- photochemistry of polymers 
Table 4.2. Information obtained by fluorescence and phosphorescence on structure 
and dynamics of polymeric systems 
Structure 
Chemical structure 
Tacticity 
Conformation 
Crystallinity 
Electronic structure 
50 
+ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Dynamics 
Movements of the chain, 
segments and side groups 
Phonons 
Excitons 
Complex formation and re-
lated phenomena 
+ 
+ 
+ 

References 
- photophysics of polymers, including photoconductivity and scintillation counting 
- dynamics of macromolecules in solution 
- compatibility and phase separation of polymer blends. 
References 
1. Kasha, M.: Disc. Faraday Soc. 9,14 (1950) 
2. Birks, J.B.: Photo physics of Aromatic Molecules, London: Wiley 1970 
3. Henry, B.R., Siebrand, W., in: Organic Molecular Photo physics, Vol. 1, J.B. Birks (ed.), Lon-
don: Wiley 1973 p.153 and Vol. 2, p. 303 (1975) 
4. McGlynn, S.P., Azumi, T., Kinoshita, M.: Molecular Spectroscopy of the Triplet State, En-
glewood Cliff: Prentice Ha111969 
5. Shulman, S.S.: Fluorescence and Phosphorescence Spectroscopy: Physico-chemical Princi-
ples and Practice, Oxford: Pergamon Press 1977 
6. Parker, C.A.: Photoluminescence of Solutions, Amsterdam: Elsevier 1968 
7. Berlman, I.B.: Fluorescence Spectra of Aromatic Molecules, 2nd Edition, New York: Aca-
demic Press 1971 
8. Heinrich, G., Schoof, S., Gusten, H.: J. Photochem. 3, 315 (1974/75) 
9. Ware, W.R., Rothman, W.: Chern. Phys. Lett. 39, 449 (1976) 
10. Huber, J.R., Mahaney, M.A., Mantulin, W.W.: J. Photochem. 2, 67 (1973/74) 
11. Wright, G.T.: Proc. Phys. Soc. (London) B 68,241 (1955) 
12. Ghiggino, K.P., Robert, A.l., Phillips, D.: Time-Resolved Fluorescence Techniques in Poly-
mer and Biopolymer Studies in Advances in Pol. Sci. Vol. 40 (Luminescence) Berlin, Heidel-
berg, New York: Springer 1981 
13. Beavan, S.W., Hargreaves, J.S., Phillips, D., in: Adv. Photochem. Vol. 11,207, New York: 
Wiley 1979 
14. Forster, Th.: Fluoreszenz organischer Verbindungen, Gottingen: Vandenhoeck und Rup-
recht 1951; Reprint 1982 
15. Morawetz, H., Steinberg, I.Z. (Eds.): Luminescence from Biological and Synthetic Macro-
molecules, Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences, Vol. 366 (1981) 
16. Hirayama, F.: 1. Chern. Phys. 42, 3163 (1965) 
17. Klopffer, W.: Intramolecular Excimers in Organic Molecular Photophysics, J .B. Birks (ed.), 
London: Wiley 1973, Vol. 1, p. 357 
18. Turro, N.J.: Modern Molecular Photochemistry, Menlo Park/California: Benjamin/ 
Cummings Publ. 1978 
19. Klopffer, W.: Spectros. Letters 11, 863 (1978) 
20. Nishijima, Y., Teramoto, A., Hiratsuka, S.: J. Pol. Sci. A-2 5,23 (1967) 
21. North, A.M., Soutar, J.: J. Chern. Soc. Faraday Trans. I 68,1101 (1972) 
22. Valeur, B., Monnerie, L.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. Ed. 14, 11 (1976) 
23. Perrin, J.: Compt. rend. 177, 469 (1923) 
24. Forster, Th.: Disc. Faraday Soc. 27, 7 (1959) 
25. Dexter, D.L.: J. Chern. Phys. 21, 836 (1953) 
26. Klopffer, W.: Energy Transfer, in: Electronic Properties of Polymers, J. Mort and G. Pfister 
(eds.), New York: Wiley 1982 
27. Forster, Th.: Ang. Chern. 81,364 (1969) 
28. Phillips, D., Roberts, A.J., Soutar, J.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. Ed. 18, 2401 (1980) 
29. Bokobza, L., Jasse, B., Monnerie, L.: Eur. Pol. J.13, 921 (1977) 
30. Morawetz, H.: Science 203, 405 (1979) 
31. Frank, C.W., Gashgari, M.A.: Macromolecules 12, 163 (1979) 
32. Turro, N.J., Kochevar, I.E., Noguchi, Y., Chow, M.-F.: J. Am. Chern. Soc. JOO, 3170 (1978) 
33. Klopffer, W., Turro, N.J., Chow, M.-F., Noguchi, Y.: Chern. Phys. Lett. 54,457 (1978) 
34. Perrin, F.: Compt. rend. 178, 1978 (1924) 
35. Ermolaev, V.L.: Sov. Phys. Uspekhi 80,333 (1963) (Engl. Transl.) 
36. David, C., Putman, N., Lempereur, M., Geuskens, G.: Eur. Pol. J. 8, 409 (1972) 
37. Rippen, G., Kaufmann, G., Klopffer, W.: Chern. Phys. 52,165 (1980) 
38. Kim, N., Webber, S.E.: Macromolecules 13,1233 (1980) 
51 

B. Electronic Spectroscopy 
39. Cuniberti, C., Perico, A.: Eur. Pol. J. 16,887 (1980) 
40. Zander, M.: Fluorometry, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1981 
41. Chapoy, L.L., Du Pre, D.B.: Fluorescence Probe Methods, in: 'Methods in Experimental 
Physics, Vol. 16, Polymers, Part A, R.A. Fava (ed.) New York: Academic Press 1980 
42. Anufrieva, E.V., Gotlib, Y.Ya.: Investigation of Polymers in Solution by Polarized Lumines-
cence, in: Adv. Pol. Sci., Vol. 40, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1981 
43. Anufrieva, E.V.: Pure & Appl. Chern. 54, 533 (1982) 
44. Schmillen, A., Legler, R.: Lumineszenz Organischer Substanzen, in: Landolt-Bornstein, 
Neue Serie Bd. 3, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1967 
45. Standard Fluorescence Spectra, Vol. 1-5, Sadtler Res. Laboratories, Philadelphia (1974(75) 
46. Klopffer, W.: J. Chern. Phys. 50, 2337 (1969) 
47. De Schryver, F.C., Moens, L., Van der Auweraer, N., Boens, N., Monnerie, L., Bokobza, 
L.: Macromolecules 15, 64 (1982) 
48. Cuniberti, c., Perico, A.: Eur. Pol. J. 13, 369 (1977) 
49. Winnik, M.A., Redpath, T., Richards, D.H.: Macromolecules 13, 328 (1980) 
50. Redpath, A.E.C., Winnik, M.A.: J. Am. Chern. Soc. 104, 5604 (1982) 
51. Wilemski, G., Fixman, M.: J. Chern. Phys. 60, 866, 878 (1974) 
52. Doi, M.: Chern. Phys. 9, 455 (1975) 
53. Perico, A., Cuniberti, C.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. Ed. 15, 1435 (1977) 
54. Gelles, R., Frank, C.W.: Macromolecules 15,1486 (1982) 
55. Klopffer, W.: Chern. Phys. 57, 75 (1981) 
56. Demas, J.N.: Excited State Lifetime Measurements, New York: Academic Press 1983 
52 

Part C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
5 Vibrations of Polymers 
5.1 Introduction 
Vibrational transitions of macromolecules have been demonstrated to influence the 
UV jVIS-absorption and emission spectra where these transitions cause the vibrational 
structure of electronic bands (Chap. 4). In the case of fluorescence and phos-
phorescence spectra this vibrational structure corresponds to ground state vibrations 
coupling with the electronic transition. Only a small fraction of all possible vibrations, 
however, can be identified in electronic spectra due to restrictions in coupling efficiency 
and spectral resolution. The methods of vibrational spectroscopy to be discussed in the 
following chapters allow a much broader range of polymer vibrations to be studied and 
additionally do not depend on the presence of chromophores with the exception of Res-
onance Raman Spectroscopy. 
Infrared absorption and Raman spectroscopies do not, however, indicate all vi-
brations theoretically possible in polymers 1) since each molecule has 3n-6 fundamental 
vibrations, where n = number of atoms forming the molecule. Thus, polymers should 
have a nearly infinite number of vibrational bands and no useful information could be 
obtained from the spectra. Actually, polymer spectra are only moderately more com-
plicated than monomer spectra. This is especially true for amorphous polymers whose 
vibrational spectra often can hardly be distinguished from corresponding spectra of 
monomeric model compounds. The reasons are: 
1. Coincidence of transition energies (degeneration), especially in symmetric mole-
cules. 
2. Inefficient coupling between distant parts of the molecule. This can be understood 
immediately in polymers, where often the vibrating groups are separated by 
thousands of bonds. 
3. Selection rules to be met regarding the change in dipole moments (lR) or polarisa-
bilities (Raman) during vibration. 
5.2 The Harmonic Oscillator 
Molecular vibrations are due to the elastic rather than rigid nature of chemical bonds 
which can be elongated or twisted; furthermore, the angles between the bonds can be 
changed periodically 2). 
Since the potential energy of the non-vibrating molecule is at its minimum, any dis-
turbance requires the uptake of energy. Using a mechanical analogue taken from the 
53 

c. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
macroscopic world, e.g. spheres interconnected with springs, it can easily be demon-
strated that the characteristic vibrational frequency (vv) has to be high if the strength 
of the spring (chemical bond) is high and/or if the mass of the spheres (atoms, parts 
of molecules) is small. The classical mechanical relationship between these magnitudes 
is gi~en by Eq. (5.1) 2) for the harmonic oscillator. 
(5.1) 
where k=force constant and 11= reduced mass, in the case of two vibrating masses mi , 
m2 : l1=m i . m2/(m i +m2). Equation (5.1) implies that the restoring force is proportion-
al to elongation and consequently that the potential energy is a function of elongation. 
In the case of a stretching vibration the function EpotCx) is parabolic, Eq. (5.2). 
(5.2) 
This potential can be valid only near the equilibrium position, since the binding force 
diminishes during elongation (x). In the classical picture which can easily be visualised 
for a two-particle system (Fig. 3.2), the molecule rests in equilibrium with a minimum 
energy EpotCO). Disturbing the system would induce a vibration whose amplitude would 
be proportional to the strength of the disturbance. 
This simple picture contradicts the laws of quantum mechanics in two points: first, 
a rest position at x = 0 is impossible, since in this case the position and the energy of 
the system would be known exactly and secondly, proportionality of amplitude and 
strength of disturbance implies continuous rather than discrete absorption. The model 
has to be modified by solving the Schrodinger equation for the harmonic oscillator [Eq. 
(5.3)]. 
Mechanical considerations are nevertheless useful, especially for the determination 
and visualisation of fundamental vibrations. In electronic spectroscopy, on the other 
hand, these models are useless; the reason for this difference is the relatively large mass 
of the nuclei involved in molecular vibrations compared to the electrons: dealing with 
molecular and especially with polymer vibrations we are a large step nearer to the ma-
croscopic world. 
5.3 Molecular Vibrations as Quantum Phenomena 
Solving the Schrodinger equation for the harmonic oscillator 3) yields the following set 
of energy eigenvalues [Eq. (5.3)]. 
E=hv(v+ 1/2); 
v=O, 1,2 ... 
(5.3) 
The energy of the vibrational ground state (v = 0) is thus given by Eo = hv/2. 
The rest position at x=O in the mechanical model now changed into a maximum 
probability (1p2) at the same coordinate (see also Fig. 3.2). In the lower vibrationally 
excited states, 1p2 (max) is not situated at the classical potential curve, only in the higher 
vibrational states the classical limit is approached in accordance with the "correspon-
dence principle". Owing to the finite magnitude of the bond dissociation energy, Eq. 
54 

5 Vibrations of Polymers 
(5.3) is fulfilled only approximately and for small values of v, the region of vibrational 
spectroscopy; even here, v(O--+2) is in general somewhat smaller than 2v(O--+ 1), whereas 
according to Eq. (5.3) the first "overtone" should have exactly twice the frequency of 
the fundamental. In higher excited states, the vibrational energy differences gradually 
diminish. 
5.4 General Remarks on the Interpretation 
of Vibrational Spectra 
Depending on the complexity of the systems studied and the level of accuracy attempt-
ed, two complementary approaches of interpretation have been developed 4.7), one 
based on symmetry, force constants, selection rules etc. (molecular physics approach), 
the other one using rules derived from extensive comparative studies (empirical vibr-
ational spectroscopy). This is shown schematically in Fig. 5.1. 
In polymer spectroscopy, the molecular physics approach is largely restricted to 
crystalline polymers since in amorphous polymers and solutions the symmetry of the 
vibrating systems, the most important input parameter, is ill defined. The empirical vi-
brational spectroscopy is a good example of the "monomer aspect" of polymer spec-
troscopy discussed in Chap. 1. It is based on the fact that many vibrating subunits of 
Molecular 
Physics 
Approach 
In put: 
-
---
Empirical 
Spectroscopy 
In put: 
-
Symmetry 
-
Masses (m\, m, ",) 
-
Force constants (k\, k, .. ,) 
-
Mathematical models 
l 
Calculation of Fundamental Vibrations 
l 
Application of Selection Rules· 
~ 
I nterpretation of Vibrational Spectra 
I 
Identification of Group frequencies 
i 
-
Molecular formula and structures 
-
Reference spectra 
-
Empirical rules 
* specific for method 
used for obtaining the spectrum 
---
-
Fig.5.1. Interpretation of vibrational 
spectra 
55 

c. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
the polymer molecule are only weakly coupled with the rest of the molecule or with its 
surroundings so that the corresponding spectral signal always appears at about the 
same frequency. Small deviations from this frequency can be used to explain details of 
the mode of bonding of this group. 
5.5 Symmetry and Fundamental Vibrations 
of One-dimensional Chain Molecules 
Most of the characteristic features of ordered, linear polymers can be explained con-
sidering single chains. Additionally, splitting of peaks due to the (3D) crystal structure 
may occur provided that the unit cell contains more than one chain and the interaction 
between the non-equivalent chains is sufficiently large to be detected (factor group or 
Davydov splitting). The ideal polymer chain - in the simplest case the extended "zig-zag 
chain" - can be considered to be a I D crystal. The prominent symmetry element of a 
lD crystal is its translation (1) along the chain axis (see Fig. 5.2). 
Tn(n= -00, ... -1,0, + 1, ... + oo"lattice constants" a) 
lattice 
constant 
a 
Infinite ID "crystal lattice" 
Further symmetry elements of the 1 D crystal lattice are 5. 6): 
Cn 
IT( == St) 
i 
Sn 
I(==Ct == To) 
Axis of symmetry 
Plane of symmetry 
Centre of symmetry 
Rotation reflection axis of symmetry 
Identity. 
In the following, the use of the symmetry elements will be discussed for extended chain 
polyethylene. It should be noted that the assumption of infinite chains seems to be jus-
tified even in case of folded chain crystals, due to the general "short sightedness" of 
spectroscopic methods (Chap. 1). An exception to this rule is the accordion vibration 
O(xy) 
y cz(y) 
c~(xl-il----0-------iS-----''k---;lJ-------i9--
z 
Fig. 5.2. Symmetry elements of the infinite extended chain conformation of PE. There is an infi-
nite number ofC2(y) and (C 2(z) axes, inversion centres i and symmetry planes O"(yz) 
56 

5 Vibrations of Polymers 
detected in the Raman spectra of crystalline chain polymers, which is useful for deter-
mining the thickness of crystalline regions (Sect. 6.5) and thus depends on the finite 
length of the extended chain regions of the PE molecules. 
The symmetry elements of the infinitely extended PE chain are indicated in Fig. 5.2, 
the plane of symmetry a(x,y) being the paper plane. The z-axis, therefore, is perpendic-
ular to this plane, whereas x is the chain axis. All C-atoms are situated in the xy plane. 
Those symmetry operations which leave the system unchanged are called symmetry ele-
ments. The extended PE chain shown in Fig. 5.2 contains the following symmetry ele-
ments: 
a) An infinite number of translations Tn" 
b) Symmetry axes C 2(y), C 2(z); the x-axis is a screw axis (q(x)), i.e. rotation about 
2n/n (n = 2) followed by T (l/2Iattice constant) leaves the molecule unchanged. 
c) Symmetry planes a(xy), a(yz). The (xz) plane perpendicular to (xy) is a glide plane, 
since reflection about this plane has to be followed by Tin order to leave the system 
unchanged. 
d) Centre of symmetry: if the point i in Fig. 5.2 is taken as the origin of a Cartesian 
coordinate system, inversion (i.e. change of all signs) does not change the system. 
e) Identity,!, visualised e.g. by rotation about 360°C (2n/l) = C1 . 
These symmetry elements a) to e) form a space group 6) and can be used for assign-
ment of the (1 D) crystal structure and for exactly describing the vibrations of the sys-
tem. As already discussed, a vibration always constitutes a disturbance of the equilib-
rium. Consequently, the vibrating system can at most have equilibrium symmetry 
(totally symmetric vibrations). There is only a limited set of possible disturbances with 
regard to the individual symmetry elements which are codified for each (point) group 
in the form of character tables. The symbols of the "irreducible representations" i.e. 
allowed combinations of changes in the individual symmetry elements of a point group, 
are frequently used to classify the vibrations. 
Space groups, which are used to describe the symmetry of crystals, can be written 
as a product of two subgroups Tx G, where Tcontains all translations and G, the factor 
group, contains all remaining symmetry elements and therefore describes the elemen-
tary cell of the crystal. If this contains only one molecule, G is identical with the point 
group of the molecule, otherwise G contains additionally the symmetry operations nec-
essary for changing the molecules of the elementary cell which are not identical. 
Since regular polymers have features both of molecules and crystals, it is possible 
to use space groups as well as point groups in order to describe their symmetry. Extract-
ing the translational symmetry elements Tn in the case of the extended PE molecule, 
we obtain the elements of the factor group G: 
I, 
C2(y); Cz(z); C~(x), 
i, 
a(xy); a(yz); aixz). 
The factor group G differs from the isomorphous point group D2h related by calcula-
tion rules only by two translations of 1/2 lattice constant contained in C~(x) and aixz) 
which do not affect the irreducible representations ofD2h shown in Table 5.1. 
57 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
Table 5.1. Character Table ofthe PE factor group, isomorphous with point groups D2h 
D2h 
I 
C2(y) 
C2(z) 
C~(x) 
Ag 
I 
I 
I 
1 
BIg 
1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
B29 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
B3g 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
Au 
1 
1 
1 
1 
Blu 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
B2u 
1 
1 
-1 
-1 
B3. 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
A: symmetric with regard to the main axis 
g (gerade): symmetric with regard to inversion 
u (ungerade): antisymmetric with regard to inversion 
B: antisymmetric with regard to at least one C 2 axis 
CT(Xy) 
I 
1 
1 
1 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
Assignment of axes see Fig. 5.2; notation of symmetry elements see text 
CT(yZ) 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
1 
-1 
CTg(XZ) 
1 
-1 
1 
-1 
-1 
1 
-1 
1 
The highest symmetry possible for the vibrating molecule (Ag) is the symmetry of 
the equilibrium. The corresponding wave function (tpo) retains its sign with regard to 
all symmetry operations. If the symmetry of the vibrating molecule is lower than equi-
librium, .one or several connected operations change the sign of the wave function, as 
shown in Eq. (5.4) for a reflection. 
(5.4) 
The characters + 1 and - I in Table 5.2 indicate symmetric or antisymmetric behav-
iour of the wave function that describes the vibration with regard to the specific sym-
metry operation. 
As can be seen from Table 5.2, the point group of the extended PE chain, D 2h, has 
eight symmetry elements and seven irreducible representations (A g'" B3u)' These can be 
used to deduce the allowed vibrations, as described in detail by Tadokoro and Ko-
bayashi 5) using matrix calculations. The coordinates describing the vibration are writ-
ten as vectors (columns) and multiplied by quadratic matrices which describe the sym-
metry operations to be performed. In this way the new coordinates of the system can 
be found. For a complete theory of polymer vibrations, see Painter et al. 7). Here, only 
a few of the fundamental vibrations obtained for PE will be shown. 
One or more "symmetry coordinates" (SI' S2"') can be ascribed to ea,ch irreducible 
representation. These contain the allowed changes of coordin~tes for all atoms of the 
unit cell. The totally symmetric representation Ag has the following symmetry coordi-
nates (omitting normalisation factors of the order of I): 
SI =Lly(C1)-Lly(Cn), 
S2 = LIz(HI) - Llz(Hn)+ LIz(Hm) - Llz(HlV)' 
S 3 = LI y(H1) - LI y(Hu) - LI y(Hm) - LI y(HlV) . 
(5.5) 
CI and Cn are neighbouring carbon atoms of PE (Fig. 5.2), HI and HIlI are situated be-
low the paper plane, Hn and HIV above; the six atoms together form the unit cell of the 
58 

5 Vibrations of Polymers 
lD chain (rather than of 3D real PE crystals). Sl describes the vibration CI t and Cut, 
or vice versa. In S2 the H atoms situated in the yz planes approach each other simul-
taneously. S 3 describes the concerted movement of (HI + HuH and (HIlI + HIV H, or vice 
versa. It can easily be seen that all these vibrations are symmetric with regard to all sym-
metry operations of D 2h. 
The irreducible representation Au has only one symmetry coordinate (S10) in accor-
dance with symmetric behaviour with regard to the three C2 axes and antisymmetry 
with regard to inversion and reflection at the three mirror planes (5.6). 
(5.6) 
During this vibration, HI and HIlI approach each other in the chain direction (x), 
whereas Hu and H 1V move apart in this axis. 
All in all, there are 14 fundamental vibrations of the (lD) unit cell 5). Since the real 
orthorombic unit cell of PE crystals has a lower symmetry (C 2h), some symmetry re-
strictions may be eased in crystalline PE. 
The calculation of the actual frequencies (vv) is based on the masses, which are pre-
cisely known and on the valence forces and fields which are approximately known 7). 
Together with isotopic substitution and measurements of band polarisations these cal-
culations are useful in the identification of the spectral bands. Recently, a complete nor-
mal vibrational analysis of crystalline PVC12 has been reported 11) predicting Raman-
as well as infrared absorption bands accurately. For sterical reasons many polymers are 
not able to crystallise in stretched form. These polymers often crystallise as helices 
which can also be treated as lD systems 5). In this case, the (lD) unit cell is given by 
one turn of the helix. 
5.6 Phonons 
In crystal lattices formed by atoms the only possible vibrations are those of the lattice 
"points". The number and frequencies of these collective vibrations depend on the 
strength of binding, the mass of the atoms and on the symmetry of the lattice. The lat-
tice vibrations can be described by a wave and by a quantum (or particle) model, the 
quanta being called phonons 8). A disturbance of the lattice, e.g. by sound or heat, 
propagates through the lattice in the form of these characteristic vibrations. 
If the lattice points are occupied by molecules, complex ions, etc., intramolecular vi-
brations may occur in addition to the intermolecular or lattice vibrations. Since poly-
mers can be regarded as molecules and 1 D crystals, the term phonon can also be applied 
to the (mostly low-frequency) intermolecular vibrations and to intramolecular vi-
brations of the type discussed in Sect. 5.5. 
A characteristic feature of the lattice waves or phonons is the dependence of their 
frequency on the phase difference (phase angle) of the vibration between neighbouring 
unit cells. This is shown schematically in Fig. 5.3 for a ID lattice containing two atoms 
per unit cell. There are similar curves for longitudinal and transversal vibrations; for 
the purpose of illustration, however, the transversal picture has been preferred in Fig. 
5.3. Since the dipole moment of the lattice can only change if the unequal (and different-
ly charged) atoms move in the opposite direction during the vibration, only these vi-
brations are IR active and the corresponding (upper) branch of the dispersion relation 
59 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
VI 
I 
I 
I 
I I R -Absorption 
i 
<P = 0 
I selection rule 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Optical branch t 
Tt 
phase difference <P 
Fig. 5.3. Dispersion curve for longitudinal phonons in a ID system. The illustrations on top (op-
tical) and at the bottom (acoustical) are drawn for transversal vibrations for better demonstration 
ofthe basic difference of the two modes 
is therefore called "optical branch". The lower branch is called "acoustical branch" ow-
ing to the low frequency propagation of acoustic waves which belong to this type of 
(synchronous periodic) movement of lattice points without change in dipole moments. 
It should be noted that the periodic change in density, corresponding to a similar 
change in polarisability, is favourable to the Smekal-Raman Effect (Chap. 6) of inelas-
tic light scattering. 
The absorption ofIR photons is forbidden unless cjJ ~ 0 since the phonon formed has 
to correspond not only to the IR energy (quantum resonance) but also to the wave-
length of the exciting wave. The maximum phase difference therefore is given by Eq. 
(5.7). 
2na 
cjJ= -..1.-;::::0 
(5.7) 
a: lattice constant, k wavelength ofIR radiation in the polymer. 
60 

5 Vibrations of Polymers 
In the case 4> ~ 0 indicated (A ~ a) the corresponding particles in neighbouring unit 
cells are nearly all moving in the same direction. On the other hand, if A = 2a; 4> = 11:, 
the corresponding particles in neighbouring cells move in opposite direction. The full 
exploration of the phonon dispersion, therefore, needs radiation of quantum energy 
corresponding to (far) IR photons, but wavelengths corresponding to X-rays, i.e. of the 
order of lattice constants; in other words, energy resonance and Bragg's diffraction of 
exciting radiation have to be fulfilled at the same time. 
A radiation meeting these requirements is neutron radiation 10) of suitable particle 
velocity v. The relationship between kinetic energy (rnv 2/2) and wavelength follows 
from Broglie's formula (5.8) 
A=~. 
(5.8) 
mv 
The maximum energy which can be exchanged during collision of a particle wave in 
inelastic scattering therefore amounts to 
h2 
E= 2m},2. 
For comparison, the analogous equation for electromagnetic radiations reads 
he 
E=hv=-. 
}, 
(5.9) 
(5.10) 
The mechanism of inelastic neutron spectroscopy (Sect. 7.7.4) is momentum transfer 
between the particle wave (usually about v= 800 m s- \ E= 323 J mol- 1, A=0.5 nm) 
and the polymer which is favoured if the masses of scattered particle and momentum-
accepting atoms are of the same order of magnitude. The energy and momentum trans-
fer occurs in an Anti-Stokes process from the polymer to the neutrons, thus increasing 
the velocity and decreasing the Broglie wavelength [Eq. (5.8)] of the neutrons. Both ef-
fects can be used for measuring INS. In order to get the full information needed for 
measuring the phonon dispersion curves, oriented polymers or crystals have to be used 
and the wavelength or velocity of the scattered neutrons has to be measured as a func-
tion of the scattering angle. 
References 
I. Zbinden, R.: Infrared Spectroscopy of High Polymers, New York: Academic Press 1964 
2. Briigel, W.: Einfiihrung in die Ultrarotspektroskopie, 4th ed., Darmstadt: Steinkopff 1969 
3. Funck, E., Stuart, H.A.: Mo1ekiilstruktur, 3rd ed., Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 
1967 
4. Hummel, D.O. (ed.): Polymer Spectroscopy, Weinheim: Verlag Chemie 1974 
5. Tadokoro, H., Kobayashi, M.: Vibrational Spectroscopy, in 4), p. 3 
6. Hollas, J .M.: Symmetry in Molecules, London: Chapman and Hall 1972 
7. Painter, P.C., Coleman, M.M., Koenig, J.L.: The Theory of Vibrational Spectroscopy and 
its Application to Polymeric Materials, New York: Wiley 1982 
8. Kittel, C.: Introduction to Solid State Physics, 4th ed., New York: Wiley 1971. German trans-
lation, 3rd ed., Miinchen: Oldenbourg 1973 
9. Allen, G., in: Ivin, J.J. (ed.): Structural Studies of Macromolecules by Spectroscopic 
Methods, London: Wiley 1976, p. 1 
10. Allen, G.; Macromol. Chemie, Suppl. 3,335 (1978) 
II. Wu, M.S., Painter,P.C., Coleman, M.M.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. ed.IS, 111 (1980) 
61 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
6 Raman Spectroscopy 
6.1 Introduction 
The vibrational spectroscopy of polymers comprises two important experimental 
methods: 
- Infrared spectroscopy 
- Raman spectroscopy. 
The Raman spectroscopy of polymers, to be discussed in this Chapter uses visible laser 
radiation in the spectral region between 400 and 600 nm in order to excite polymer vi-
brations. The vibrational quanta v; ~ 10 to 4,000 cm -1 are subtracted (in the more 
commonly studied case of Stokes lines) from the energy of the exciting photons and cor-
respond to IR absorption between A= 1 mm (fiR) to 2.5 ~m (mIR/nIR). Iflight of A= 
500 nm (v' = 20,000 cm -1) is used to excite the Raman spectrum, the above wave num-
ber range corresponds to the wavelength region from 500.25 to 625.00 nm in which the 
Raman spectrum is observed. Thus, Raman spectroscopy is experimentally a spectro-
scopic method operating in the VIS region (but not confined to it) and mechanistically 
belongs clearly to IR or vibrational spectroscopy (Chap. 5). 
Raman spectroscopy is based on inelastic light scattering predicted theoretically by 
Smekal in 1923 1, 2) and detected experimentally five years later by Raman 3,4). The in-
elastic light scattering is therefore called "Smekal-Raman Effect"2}, the spectroscopy 
based on this effect is generally called Raman spectroscopy. 
In the field of Polymer spectroscopy, Raman spectroscopy has been applied af-
ter introducing laser excitation which removes some of the difficulties connected with 
strong (elastic) light scattering of polymers using the intense and highly monochromat-
ic radiation which is typical of lasers 5, 19, 20}. In some early work, however, Raman 
spectra obtained using classical excitation sources were used in order to verify 
Staudingers theory of linear macromolecules 21, 22). 
6.2 The Smekal-Raman Effect 
If a clear non-luminescent liquid is illuminated laterally, a weak radiation of scattered 
light can be observed against a dark background. This Tyndall (or Rayleigh) scattering 
has the same frequency as the exciting radiation and its intensity (I.,) increases with in-
creasing frequency or wave number according to Eq. (6.1). 
(6.1 ) 
1 .::: n'::: 4. 
The Tyndall effect is due to density variations in the scattering medium and can be ob-
served in gases (blue sky) and solids as well as in liquids. It should be minimal in an 
ideal crystal near 0 K. The origin of this scattering is visualised by assuming the elec-
trons to perform vibrations in phase with the exciting radiation (but without "true" ab-
sorption). The vibrating electrons are thought to be the origin of new waves which in 
the case of ideal order all vanish by interference, except those which are in phase with 
the original wave (i.e. no scattering in this case). If this order is disturbed, however, 
quenching by interference is incomplete thus giving rise to scattering. In polymer re-
search, this type of (elastic) scattering is used for measuring the size (Mw) and shape 
of macromolecules. 
62 

6 Raman Spectroscopy 
Sample 
1\ 
~~ 
-~;---
hVo 
'-
L 
A 
S 
E 
R 
Monochromator 
L-____________ 
~ 
Detector I 
Amplifier 
Anti -Stokes 
Stokes 
~ 
'iii 
c 
cu 
C 
, 
AJv,Uv,-" 
Vo __ Wave number 
Fig. 6.1. Schematic view of a laser Raman spectrometer and resulting spectrum 
If monochromatic light is used for excitation (see Fig. 6.1) and the radiation scat-
tered by the sample is analysed by means of a monochromator, in addition to the rel-
atively strong Tyndall component (vb) additional weak peaks appear both at lower 
(Stokes, 1,2 .. . n) and higher (anti-Stokes, -1,-2 ... -n) wave numbers compared to 
vb. These components indicating the Smekal-Raman effect are characterised by the fol-
lowing features 2,4): 
a) The difference in wave numbers Llv' =v~ - Vn andLlv' = v~n- v~ is independent of the 
frequency of excitation (vb) and independent of the direction of observation. 
b) The intensity of the anti-Stokes lines decreases in a Boltzmann relationship with in-
creasing v'_ n - Yo' 
c) The inelastically scattered radiation is characteristic of the scattering substance with 
regard to Llv' and relative intensity of the lines. 
d) The individual peaks partly correspond to infrared lines (Llv' = v~), but not so in 
highly symmetric molecules. 
e) The intensity is roughly proportional to the density of the medium, in contrast to 
Tyndall scattering which is strong in gases due to the pronounced density fluc-
tuations in this state of aggregation. 
±) If linearly polarised light is used for exciting, the Smekal-Raman lines are likewise 
polarised, but different lines to a different extent. 
g) Intensity increases strongly with increasing frequency, similar to Tyndall scattering 
[Eq. (6.1)]. 
All effects observed can be explained by two assumptions: 
- The spectrally shifted lines are due to the transfer of vibrational quanta to the scat-
tering medium (v~) or by the acceptance of vibrational quanta from the medium (v'-n)' 
- The selection rule is the change in polaris ability during the vibration, favouring the 
IR-inactive totally symmetric vibrations. (Rotations will not be regarded here, since 
they are not relevant to polymers.) 
63 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
a 
R 
Fig. 6.2. Change in polarisability as a function of 
vibration coordinate (schematic) for a totally sym-
metric vibration 
Examples of totally symmetric vibrations in small molecules are 
* 
Cl t 
1\ 
......... Cl 
Cl 
Cl 
the "breathing" vibrations (C6H 6 ; CCI4 ) and symmetric stretching vibrations (C02) 
in which the dipole moment remains zero :~ = 0 during vibrations, hence IR 
inactive (R=coordinate of vibration). 
The polarisability (a), however, changes in this type of vibration (Fig. 6.2) 
!!!:...=/= 0 
dR 
near the equilibrium position. 
This can be understood considering the strong change in electron density during 
these vibrations. The polarisability of a molecule is a measure of the ease of electron 
displacement under the influence of an electric field (8) inducing a dipole moment ,uind, 
Eq. (6.2) 
(6.2) 
Except for molecules with spherical symmetry, the induced dipole moment depends on 
the orientation of the molecule relative to the electric field. The polarisability, therefore, 
is a tensor which has a maximum of six distinct, real components (axx, ayy, aw axy, ax", 
ayz), if a suitable Cartesian coordinate system is chosen for each lJlolecule. 
In symmetric molecules, some of the components of the polarisability tensor coin-
cide. The basic difference between direct absorption of electromagnetic radiation [Eq. 
(3.3)] and the Smekal-Raman-Effect consists in the replacement of the dipole moment 
operator by the polarisability operator leading to an induced rather than a "real" tran-
sition dipole moment 6). 
(6.3) 
Due to the large wavelength of the exciting light, compared to the size of the absorbing 
groups, the electric field vector can be considered constant and thus written outside the 
64 

6 Raman Spectroscopy 
integral (6.3). The polarisability tensor acts as operator on the (vibrational) wave func-
tions of the initial (k) and final (n) state of the system and hence Raman absorption 
can only be observed if there is a significant change in polarisability in moving from 
({Jk to ({In· 
Quanta may be transferred between the radiation field and the vibrating system in 
both directions leading with the same probability to Stokes lines and anti-Stokes lines. 
However, the density of vibrating molecules that are able to cause anti-Stokes lines de-
pend on the vibration energy hLiv and the temperature according to Boltzmann (6.4). 
N' 
_hLlv 
-~e kT 
N 
. 
(6.4) 
The anti-Stokes lines of high energy vibrations, therefore, are much weaker than the 
corresponding Stokes lines. The intensity ratio furthermore depends on the frequency 
Vo, since the intensity of Raman scattering increases with frequency in the same way 
as does Tyndall scattering (6.5). 
I (anti-Stokes) 
v::'n 
_:;:v 
-·e 
I (Stokes) 
v~ 
(6.5) 
Polarisation of Raman lines is strong if the vibration and the molecule are symmetric 
and thus can be used to identify specific vibrations of a molecule. Due to strong (elastic) 
light scattering, however, polarisation measurements hav:e rarely been performed on 
polymer samples. 
Summing up we can state that the Smekal-Raman-Effect is a light scattering effect 
rather than an absorption process. Although vibrational quanta are taken up or re-
leased by the molecules, the role of the exciting light is to create induced dipoles not 
corresponding to any real energy levels of the molecule. The selection rules are charac-
teristic of scattering and not of the absorption and emission of photons. 
6.3 Experimental 
The possibility of applying Raman spectroscopy to polymer problems is largely due to 
the development of laser excitation. A schematic view of a Raman spectrometer has al-
ready been given in Fig. 6.1. 
Polymers tend to strong Tyndall scattering, especially in the partly crystalline state 
(spherulites) and dissolved in solvents (polymer coils). The exciting light, therefore, has 
to be highly monochromatic, so that v~ can be separated from Vn and v':'n. Even iflasers 
are used (LI ~ 1/3 cm -1), double or triple monochromators have to be employed. The co-
herent radiation of lasers offers the additional advantage of easy focusing so that very 
small samples can be investigated. On the other hand, large samples are not advan-
tageous so that the analytical value of Raman spectroscopy with regard to the detection 
of impurities, small concentrations of additives, etc. is rather low. 
The intensity of the Raman spectrum is of the order of 10- 9 of the exciting light. 
Thus, a high performance monochromator is required. "Holographic" gratings 7), as 
produced by Jobin-Yvon in France, seem to allow the use of a single monochromator, 
if highest resolution is not necessary. According to Bulkin 7), the combined effect of in-
65 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
tense laser radiation + holographic gratings + red sensitive photomultipliers has in-
creased the sensitivity of Raman spectroscopy 100 times within ten years. 
Choosing the optimum excitation frequency involves a compromise between several 
conflicting requirements: 
Intensity of Smekal-Raman 
, 
. 
scattenng 
Sensitivity of 
, 
photomultiplier 
Intensity 
Decreasing disturbance 
, 
) . 
of Excitation 
by fluorescence 
UV---------------------------------R-e~d IR. 
Blue 
Since the fluorescence of the sample excited by Vo seems to constitute the greatest ex-
perimental problem in polymers, UV excitation is generally avoided, although all other 
factors call for short wavelength excitation. 
Fluorescent groups, if caused by impurities (Sect. 4.4.2), are often removed by 
"burning out", i.e. by photochemical degradation. Red-sensitive, cooled photomulti-
pliers and photon-counting devices are also useful in preventing any excessive distur-
bance by fluorescence. 
As a compromise, excitation by Ar+ lasers (0.2 to I W) near 500 nm (488.0 and 
514.5 nm) is often used. In the red, He/Ne lasers (632.8 nm) and Kr+ lasers (647.1 nm) 
can be used. 
The wave number difference Ltv' = Vo 
v~ is recorded in the Stokes region of the spec-
trum so that spectra recorded with different Vo can be compared with each other and 
with IR absorption spectra in wave number presentation. 
The disturbance caused by fluorescence of the sample can be reduced by many or-
ders of magnitudes in CARS (coherent anti-Stokes Raman scattering) spectroscopy. In 
this technique two laser beams are crossed at the sample with a small angle, one of the 
laser beams being tunable in frequency. Strongly enhanced scattering is observed if the 
difference of the two laser frequencies corresponds to a polymer vibration 7, 20). 
The coherently scattered radiation is to the short-wavelength side of fluorescence 
and spatially directed; it can therefore be separated from fluorescence. 
6.4 Examples of Laser-Raman Spectra 
of Synthetic Polymers 
Raman spectroscopy has been used mainly to answer questions relating to the physical 
structure rather than to analytical-chemical aplications. Therefore, chemically simple 
polymers, such as PE, PTFE, PP 8 -10) and linear paraffins as oligomeric models 9,14) 
have been studied preferentially. In these linear polymers, differences between crystal-
line and amorphous and solid/molten state can be observed most easily. The wave num-
bers of Raman active ID chain vibrations ofPE are summarised in Table 6.1. 
66 

Table 6.1. Raman-active vibrations in PE 
2,850 
2,884 
2,920 
1,060 
1,130 
1,170 
1,300 
1,420 
1,440 
Interpretation 5) 
C-H Stretching vibration 
c 
C-H Stretching vibration 
C-C (Skeleton) stretching vibration 
Skeleton 
CHzRocking 
CHz Twisting 
Overtone 
CHz Deformation 
a Data (rounded) according to Schaufele 9) and Strobel!!) 
b See Sect. 5.5 
6 Raman Spectroscopy 
(lD) 
Symmetryb 
C Very intense band 5); there are several more Raman lines in this frequency region 
---
D.y' 
HOPE 
PE-Melt 
LOPE 
Fig. 6.3. Comparison of structure-sensitive 
Raman bands in PE, after Strobel!!) 
A good example of sensitivity of structural order is given by the 1,130/1,060 lattice 
vibration ofPE 11), see Fig. 6.3. 
Other crystallinity/conformation peaks show an analogous behaviour. Certain 
bands are associated with a special type of crystal lattice and therefore have to be as-
cribed to an 3D rather than aID structure. In the amorphous and molten state, the 
intensity of interactions between molecules fluctuates randomly thus causing broaden-
ing of the spectra. In the crystalline phase, on the other hand, each molecule "feels" 
the same local environment so that the peaks are narrower because they are more ho-
mogenous. A similar effect is exerted by low temperatures where additionally bands 
originating from vibrationally excited groups ("hot bands") are suppressed. 
Splitting of bands occurs in crystallites if more than one chain is found per unit cell, 
provided the interaction (coupling) is strong enough so that splitting can be measured. 
67 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
----
av' 
HOPE 
PE - Melt 
LOPE 
Fig. 6.4. Fermi splitting in the defor-
mation region of PE 
In the simplest case, the non-equivalent chains can vibrate in phase with each other 
or in the opposite sense, e.g. in orthorhombic PE containing two chains per unit cell. 
In order to observe splitting caused by the two different vibrations experimentally, the 
strength of the interaction, as given by the splitting of Raman frequencies (bLlv'), has 
to be stronger than the spectral resolution. At 17K, the Raman spectrum of crystalline 
PE indeed shows two splittings which can be attributed to 3D crystal structure; 
c-C 
Stretching 
Twisting 
1,063 
Llv' (cm-I) 
---> 1,062 
1,064 
bLlv'=2cm- 1 • 
1)93 
I 
1,295.5 ---> 1,295.5 
bLl v' = 2.5 cm -
. 
As can be seen, the interaction energy between the two non-equivalent chains is quite 
small; comparable Davydov-splittings of allowed electronic transitions are in the range 
of 100 to 1,000 cm -I. Linear paraffins which can be considered as oligomeric models 
of linear PE crystallise in an orthorhombic crystal lattice comparable to PE and addi-
tionally in a tric1inic modification which contains only one ch~in per unit cell. In con-
trast to the orthorhombic structure which behaves analogous to PE, the latter does not 
show splitting. 
A further effect which may increase or superpose the above splitting is due to Fermi 
resonance. An example of this splitting is given in Fig. 6.4. Fermi resonance is due to 
the coincidence of a weak overtone or combination vibration with a strong Raman-al-
lowed band of the same symmetry. The strong transition transfers part of its strength 
to the weak one and instead of one strong peak (hiding the weak overtone) we observe 
a strong couple of bands. 
The few experimental examples given show that the spectrum of the partly crystal-
lised polymers is roughly a superposition of a true crystal spectrum and a melt spec-
68 

3500 
3000 
Fig. 6.5. Raman spectrum ofPP; after 13) 
Table 6.2. Raman-active vibrations in PTFE 5) 
1,381 
732 
383 
290 
a Only strong lines indicated 
Interpretation 
Symmetric stretching (CF 2) 
vC-C skeleton vibration 
CF 2 deformation 
CF 2 twisting 
6 Raman Spectroscopy 
o 
trum. In principle, this offers the possibility of measuring the degree of crystallinity (in 
addition to X-ray and density measurements). However, comparing different methods 
of measuring the degree of crystallinity in polymers, the physical effect used has to be 
checked with regard to the minimum crystallite size which can be detected. X-ray dif-
fraction, e.g., requires perfect order over a distance of at least 5 nm to ensure sharp re-
flexes; this corresponds to a minimum crystallite volume of about 100 nm3 . Raman-
spectroscopically, according to Hendra 5), the minimum length of a I D chain contains 
5 to 6 monomer units and 8 to 10 chains laterally are required if 3D crystal effects are 
to be observed. As an order of magnitude, therefore, the minimum crystallite volume 
amounts to only I to 10 nm3 . Frequently, characteristic ID (conformation) bands are 
used to estimate the degree of crystallinity, but this does not necessarily indicate the 
true 3D crystal content. 
Isotactic poly(propene) (Fig. 6.5) crystallises in the conformation of a 3/1 helix 
(3 monomers per turn). The 3D crystal unit cell contains four chains whose 
interaction seems to be too weak in order to show any detectable Davydov split-
ting (as discussed for PE, see above). It is interesting to note that the helix bands do 
not vanish during melting when the 3D order is lost. It is only 10 K above the melting 
point that the melt shows the spectrum characteristic of the amorphous polymer, also 
shown by solid, atactic PP. Melting, therefore, leads to the loss of long-range order, 
whereas the ID order persists, provided the polymer still forms helices (the PE crystal 
spectrum conversely collapses at the melting point). 
Polytetrafluoroethene (PTFE) at room temperature shows one chain per unit cell 
(no Davydov splitting to be expected), wound up in the form of an elongated (15/1) 
69 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
Fig. 6.6. Fundamental vibration of the longitudinal accoustic vibration of a linear zig-zag chain 
(accordion vibration) 
helix. The prominent Raman peaks are compiled in Table 6.2. Owing to the higher 
mass of F atoms, the CF z stretching vibration is at much lower frequency compared 
to CHz; the symmetric component is preferred in the Raman spectrum, whereas the op-
posite is the case in IR absorption. Doubling of several peaks at low temperature in-
dicates a second crystal structure with two chains per unit cell. The Raman spectra of 
several polymers have been discussed and compared with normal coordinate analysis 
by Painter et al. in Chap. 16 of their book 15). 
6.5 The Accordion Vibration 
Among all Raman-active polymer vibrations, the accordion vibration has found the 
widest application. In the fundamental vibration, all C-C-C angles change simulta-
neously so that a motion described graphically by the name of this vibration results. 
The vibration is totally symmetric (Ag) and thus Raman-active. The same applies to all 
uneven overtones. 
This family of vibrations is also named longitudinal accoustic vibrations owing to 
the similarity with accoustic waves (see discussion of phonons, Sect. 5.6). In order to 
describe the accordion vibration quantitatively, an equation similar to that for a vibrat-
ing spring can be used 5) in a first approximation: 
m~c 
v=-2 -
(m=1,2,3 ... ). 
L 
Q 
v 
= Frequency = LI v in Raman spectroscopy 
L = Length of the vibrating molecule or part of molecule 
2L = Wavelength of (acoustic) vibration (m= 1 :A= 2L) 
m 
Ec = Elastic constant (Young's Modulus) 
Q = Density 
(6.6) 
If this equation is to be applied to polymers, e.g. crystallising itt the form of extended 
or folded chains, the elastic constant and density of these regions has to be used instead 
of the (averaged) macroscopic properties. 
Crystallised paraffins have been used in order to calibrate the Raman bands, up to 
n= 100 9), see Table 6.3. From these data and the experimental lamella thickness, Ec= 
3.6 x 1011 Pa has been found for these model compounds. 
Several simple polymers crystallise in the form of lamellae as well; this is shown 
schematically in Fig. 6.7. 
The lamellae consist of a highly ordered crystalline core of thickness Lc and a less 
ordered folding layer, often considered to be amorphous. Since Lc;:::' 10 nm, the ac-
70 

6 Raman Spectroscopy 
Table 6.3. Accordion vibrations in paraffins as oligomeric mod-
els oflinear PE a 
Paraffin 
Order of vibration 
m 
C 2oH 42 
1 
3 
5 
C32H 66 
I 
3 
5 
C94H190 
I 
3 
5 
25 
31 
a Data according to 9) 
--~-+--~;--+--~--,-
X-ray 
Small angle 
Scattering 
Crystal-
Lc 
layer 
} 
Folding-
layer 
Llv' 
(cm-I) 
114 
324 
475 
76 
211 
337 
26 
71 
121 
491 
556 
Crystal-
Lc 
layer 
Fig. 6.7. 
Lamellar structure 
of 
folded chain polymer crystals (sche-
matic) 
cordion fundamental vibration is expected to be at low frequency [experimentally ob-
served atlO to 30 cm -l(m= 1)] and the m= 3 overtone at about 3 times this frequency. 
For simple estimates of lamella thickness in polymers, the paraffin results can be used 
as a preliminary calibration. A more detailed analysis by Strobl 11), however, shows 
that coupling between the lamellae has to be introduced into the calculation; this results 
in an increase in frequency compared to Eq. (6.6). A refined value of Ec=2.9 x 1011 Pa 
has been determined for PE (HDPE), yielding Eq. (6.7). 
(6.7) 
71 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
Comparing L (Raman) obtained according to Eq. (6.7) with Leo as obtained by chemi-
cal edging and Lx (X-ray small-angle scattering) we find: 
e.g. for solvent-crystallised linear PE (M ~ 2 x 104): 
Raman: L = 11.7 nm 
Lx=12.0nm 
Lc=9.6 nm. 
These data indicate that the folding layer is more anisotropic (less amorphous) than 
believed so far. 
Other polymers investigated include 5): 
- (cis)poly(1,4-butadiene) 
- Poly(tetrahydrofuran) and other poly-ethers 
- Oligo-TFE 
- Oligo-ethylene oxide 
Raman studies using the accordion vibration as a probe involve studies on the 
growth of lamellae, crystallisation, melting, etc. Since the laser beam can easily be col-
limated (diameter~ 100 Ilm), even local changes of lamellar structure can be resolved 
and measured. 
6.6 Resonance Raman Scattering 
If the frequency of the exciting radiation corresponds, or almost corresponds, to an 
electronic absorption band the Raman lines due to vibrations coupling with the elec-
tronic transition are much stronger than ordinary lines. This effect is called "resonance 
Raman scattering" and can not in general be observed if the sample shows strong flu-
orescence (Fig. 6.8). The influence of fluorescence which, in contrast to Raman scatter-
ing, is a delayed emission (Chap. 4), can be minimised by fluorescence quenching or 
choosing Vo just below the 0-0 level of the transition to be studied. The main differ-
ences between resonance Raman scattering and ordinary Raman scattering are: 
- The effect is observed only near electronic absorption bands. 
- It is much stronger and thus more easily detected. 
Vo 
T yndall-' 
So 
72 
! : 
I 
I 
I.. 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
~Raman 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
'-i 
I 
I 
I 
I I 
I 
I 
I 
t 
• t 
Fig. 6.8. Resonance Raman scattering and fluores-
cence (schematic) 

A 
5000 
laser Ii nes at 
647, 
568, 
530, 
520 nm 
Al 
15000 cm-1 
V· 
"C-R 
R-c! 
"C 
~ 
~hain. 
'C-R 
aXIs 
R_C9' 
" 
b 
4000 
3000 
L1 '\) J 
2000 
cm- 1 
6 Raman Spectroscopy 
1000 
o 
Fig.6.9 and 6.10. Absorption (6.9) and resonance Raman scattering (6.10) of single crystals of 
PTS, redrawn after Blooret al. 12). Excitation in Fig. 6.10 at Aexc= 568.2 nm (a) and 647.1 nm (b) 
- Only such vibrations show increased intensity which are coupled with the electronic 
transition and therefore can be distinguished from other vibrations not belonging to 
the chromophore. 
An experimental example of an application of resonance Raman scattering to poly-
mer problems consists in the study of conjugated poly-diine single crystals 12, 16, 17). As 
73 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
can be seen from Fig.6.9, the strong electronic absorption near 15,000 cm -1 is po-
larised along the polyconjugated "backbone" of the polymer. In the resonance Raman 
spectrum, therefore, characteristic vibrations of the backbone are to be expected, 
whereas the aromatic side groups should not contribute to the spectrum (Fig. 6.1 0 b). 
Strong lines at 1,485 em -1 (st C=C), 2,086 cm- 1 (st C==C), 1,203 cm- 1 (b C=C) and 
953 cm - 1 (b C == C) prove the existence of double and triple carbon bonds in this poly-
mer and at the same time their vibrational coupling with the electronic transition. 
The strong resonance Raman lines associated with the conjugated backbone has 
been used in order to study the solid-state polymerisation of single crystals of the 
monomers 1,6-di-p-Toluene sulfonyloxy-2,4-hexadiine (TSHD) 16) and the corre-
sponding p-methoxybenzene analogue 17). The interest in this work, as well as in ESR 
studies to be discussed in Sect. 9. 7 lies in a detailed understanding of the polymerisation 
leading to polyconjugated single crystals, as first described by Wegner 18). The Raman 
spectra of PTS are shown to be sensitive to the mechanical strain exerted on the poly-
mer chain during polymerisation 15) due to the change in lattice dimensions. 
6.7 Resume of Raman Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Table 6.4 shows an impressive multitude of phenomena which can be studied by Ra-
man spectroscopy. In contrast ot IR spectroscopy, it can be applied to aqueous solu-
tions. This point is attractive for studies ofbiopolymers whose vibrational spectra con-
sequently can be studied in their natural environment. Conformation and crystallinity 
directly influence the Raman spectra of polymers, whereas tacticity has an indirect in-
fluence by favouring certain conformations and crystal structures. The electronic struc-
ture influences the binding strength of the vibrating groups and thus the spectral po-
sition of the corresponding bands; in resonance Raman scattering, the electronic struc-
ture contributes directly to Raman scattering due to selective coupling of the chromo-
phore with its characteristic vibrations and corresponding selectivity of the enhanced 
scattering. Movements of the chains and crystal lattice (phonons), filtered by the selec-
tion rule of polarisability change are the very reason of Raman scattering. Complex for-
mation, finally, can likewise be detected in the Raman spectra, e.g. H-bonds. 
For experimental purposes the small sample volume turns out to be advantageous. 
Furthermore, the whole frequency range can be recorded using one spectrometer. In 
the development of Laser Raman spectrometers progress has been made by combining 
intense laser sources (variable Yo), monochromators involving only minimal losses of 
Table 6.4. Informations obtained by Raman spectroscopy relating to structure and 
dynamics of polymeric systems 
Structure 
Chemical structure 
Tacticity 
Conformation 
Crystallinity 
Electronic structure 
74 
+ 
(+) 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Dynamics 
Movements of the chain, 
segments and side groups 
Phonons 
Excitons 
Complex formation and re-
lated phenomena 
+ 
+ 
+ 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
light due to scattering, red sensitive photomultipliers, photon counting and use of com-
puters. An increased use of polarised Raman spectra, resonance Raman scattering and 
CARS is expected to further extend the scope of Raman spectroscopy of polymers 
which so far has turned out to be of prime importance to: 
- analysis of polymer vibrations (complementary to IR absorption) 
- conformation studies 
- polymer lamellae (micromorphology) 
- vibrational spectra of water-soluble polymers, especially biopolymers 
- polyconjugated single crystals. 
References 
1. Smekal, A.: Naturwissenschaften 11, 873 (1923) 
2. Kohlrausch, K.W.F.: Der Smekal-Raman-Effekt, Berlin: Springer 1931 
3. Raman, C.V., Krishnan, K.S.: Nature 121, 501 (1928) 
4. Long, D.A.: Raman Spectroscopy, New York: McGraw-Hill 1977 
5. Hendra, D. in: Hummel, D.O. (ed.): Polymer Spectroscopy, Weinheim: Verlag Chemie 1974, 
p.151 
6. Herzberg, G.: Molecular Spectra and Molecular Structure. I. Spectra of Diatomic Molecules, 
2nded. New York: Van Nostrand 1950 
7. Bulkin, B.J. in: Brame, E.G., Jr. (ed.): Applications of Polymer Spectroscopy, New York: 
Academic Press 1978, p. 121 
8. Hendra, P.J. in: Adv. Pol. Sci. 6,151 (1969) 
9. Schaufele, R.F.: Macromol. Rev. 4, 67 (1970) 
10. Andrews, R.D., Hart, T.R. in: L.H. Lee (ed.): Characterization of Metal and Polymer Sur-
faces, Vol. 2, New York: Academic Press 1977, p. 207 
11. Strobel, G.R.: Colloid Polym. Sci. 257,584 (1979) 
12. Bloor, D., Preston, F.H., Ando, D.J., Batchelder, D.N., in: K.J. Ivin (ed.): Structural Studies 
of Macromolecules by Spectroscopic Methods, London: Wiley 1976, p. 91 
13. Schrader, B., Meier, W. (eds.): DMS (Raman/IR) Atlas, Weinheim: Verlag Chemie 1974/75, 
Vol. 1 + 2; Polymers: Sect. N, Vol. 2 
14. Zerbi, G., Magni, R., Gussoni, M., Holland Moritz, K., Bigotto, A., Dirlikov, S.: J. Chern. 
Phys. 75, 3175 (1981) 
15. Painter, P.C., Coleman, M.M., Koenig, J.L.: The Theory of Vibrational Spectroscopy and 
its Application to Polymeric Materials, New York: Wiley 1982, p. 377 
16. Bloor, D., Kennedy, R.J., Batchelder, D.N.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. Ed. 17, 1355 (1979) 
17. Bloor, D., Ando, D.J., Hubble, C.L., Williams, R.L.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. Ed. 18,779 (1980) 
18. Wegner, G.: Z. Naturforsch. 24b, 824 (1969) 
19. Cutler, D.J., Hendra, P.J., Fraser, G., in: Dowkins, P.V. (ed.): Developments in Polymer 
Characterisation, Vol. 2, Applied Science Publ. (1980), Chap. 3 
20. Lascombe, J., Huong, P.V. (eds.): Raman Spectroscopy, Linear and Nonlinear, Proceedings 
of the Eighth International Conference on Raman Spectroscopy, Bordeaux, France; Wiley 
Heyden, Chichester (London) 1982 
21. Signer, R., Weiler, J.: Helv. Chim. Acta 15, 649 (1932) 
22. Mitushima, S.-I., Morino, Y., Inoue, Y.: Bull. Chern. Soc. Japan 12, 136 (1937) 
7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
7.1 Introduction 
Historically, studies of the selective absorption of infrared (IR) radiation preceeded vi-
brational spectroscopy using the Smekal-Raman effect, although in the early times re-
cording of IR-spectra was difficult and time-consuming 1-4). The development of 
75 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
-V' 
104 cm-I 
103 
102 
10 
VIS I. + 
.1· 
mIt 
1 
10 
.1-
I flR3 MW 
102 
11m 
103 
A. ---
Fig. 7.1. The IR region of the spectrum of electromagnetic radiation 
routine double beam spectrophotometers operating in the analytically most important 
medium IR (mIR) made this type of spectroscopy the most important one in identifying 
known compounds and elucidating the chemical structure of unknown ones. 
Since the techniques of IR-absorption spectroscopy are well suited for polymers, a 
large number of polymer spectra has been collected and published 5). Spectra of poly-
mer films are even used to calibrate the IR-spectrophotometer. It is usual to divide the 
IR -region into three parts (Fig. 7.1): 
nIR: 0.75-2.5 !lm(13,300-4,000 cm- 1) 
mIR: 2.5-50!lm (4,000-200 em - 1) 
fIR: 50-1,000 !lm(200-1O cm- 1). 
In the nlR 6) we find the weak overtone (v = 2, 3, ... ) and combination bands whose 
fundamentals, mostly stretching vibrations, are in the mIR. The nIR requires either 
concentrated solutions or a film thickness of at least 0.1 mm. Experimentally, the nIR 
is covered by many UV /VIS-spectrophotometers ("nIR-bonus") using the tungsten 
lamp as radiation source, quarz optics and a PbS detector. The resolution is good and 
several peaks which can be distinguished in the Av = 1 transition only with difficulty are 
separated at Av=2, roughly at 2 x Vo of the ground vibration. There are only few papers 
on polymer spectroscopy in the nIR 8), but a closer look at this neglected field would 
be worthwhile. The nIR identification table by Goddo and Delker9) is also reproduced 
in 3). 
The nIR spectra have been used in order to evaluate the structural order (crystallin-
ity) and quantitative composition of polymers (additivity Of C-H increments of opti-
cal density) 8). 
In addition to these higher excited vibrational states, there are few long-wavelength 
electronic bands extending into the nIR, e.g. those of some dyes, strong CT complexes, 
radical ions and extensively conjugated double bonds. These absorptions are in general 
very strong and may be observed, e.g. in coloured, degraded and electrically.conducting 
polymers. 
. 
7.2 Absorption of Infrared Radiation 
The IR-spectroscopy of polymers is based on excitation of polymer vibrations (Chap. 
5) by absorption of photons in the spectral regions indicated in Sect. 7.1. The most im-
portant selection rule is the change in the dipole moment during excitation dpJdt, the 
same as in electronic excitation (UV /VIS). This selection rule is to be attributed to in-
teraction of the polymer with the electric field component of the electromagnetic radi-
ation. Totally symmetric vibrations - highly active in Raman spectroscopy - are forbid-
76 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
den in IR absorption, since by definition the dipole moment cannot change during such 
a transition (examples see Sect.6.2). Strong IR-absorptions are displayed by polar 
groups which already in the ground state have a strong dipole moment (flo), perhaps 
the best known example being the carbonyl group that is present in many polymers as 
part of the basic unit (polyesters, polyamides) or as artefact: 
(+) (-) 
>C=O 
flo=2to 3 Debye. 
Vibrations of this kind are strongly localised in the "chromophore" and therefore in-
variably are found in a rather narrow spectral region. Small, but analytically significant 
shifts are due to neighbouring groups, in the example of C = 0 groups, e.g., conjugation 
with C = C double bonds which alters the binding strength and thus the resonance 
frequency according to Eq. (5.1). The intensity of the carbonyl band amounts to 
emax~ 100 to 500 I mol- i cm- i . 
The quantitative description of an IR peak requires at least the spectral position (il or, 
better, v') and a measure of intensity, e.g. the molar decadic absorption coefficient (e) 
of the absorption maximum. 
OD 
e=- (lmol-icm- i) 
c·d 
OD = optical density (absorbance) at a specific wavelength 
c = molar concentration given in mol 1- 1 
d 
= thickness of film (solid state spectrum) or cuvette (solution) given in cm. 
(7.1) 
Equation (7.1) is another form of Lambert-Beer's law [Sect. 3.2.3, Eq. (3.8)] whose va-
lidity in IR-absorption has been questioned. Especially OR and NR peaks show 
deviations from simple behaviour. It has been suggested 7) to use the area of the 
absorption band (JOD(vl)dv/) rather than OD itself in (7.1) in order to compensate for 
line broading effects which may be due to association etc. In practice, unfortunately, 
only qualitative statements such as VW, w, m, s, vs. are made in most papers reporting 
mIR spectra of polymers as well as monomers which are mostly plotted in "percent 
transmission" (1001) as a function of il or v'. It is usually not possible to calculate 
absorption coefficients from published spectra because data on d and/or c as needed for 
Eq. (7.1) are missing. These data are indeed difficult to obtain in case' of meltpressed 
films or KBr pills, but should always be reported if homogeneous films or solutions are 
investigated. For the sake of comparison with electronic absorption bands, it should be 
noted that the range of useful mIR absorption intensity is roughly given by 
emax ~ 10 to 500 I mol- 1 cm - 1 ; 
this corresponds to the intensity of symmetry-forbidden UV-absorption bands. Ab-
sorptions in the fiR are often found to be weaker than mIR bands. They frequently 
are due to excitation ofphonons, i.e. lattice vibrations (Sect. 5.6). 
77 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
For analytical purposes, relative intensities of different peaks of the spectrum may 
be used after calibration with suitable reference compounds, e.g. a series of homolo-
gous molecules. 
7.3 Experimental 
7.3.1 IR-Absorption 
Two types of IR spectrometers are at present available and suited for recording poly-
mer spectra; 
- dispersive double beam spectrometers 
- computerised Fourier Transform Interferometers (FTIR) 10,11). 
In their measuring principle double beam spectrometers 3) using a dispersive element 
(prism or grating) are similar to UV jVIS-spectrometers. Continuous IR radiation pro-
duced by a heated (rare earth oxide) rod is divided into two parallel beams which pass 
sample and reference, the monochromator and are finally detected by a suitable IR de-
tector and recorded as the intensity ratio of the two beams Ij1o( = 1). The optical com-
ponents are reflecting mirrors and gratings or prisms made from non-absorbing 
material, e . .g. NaCl for the range 2 to 15 11m. 
Film-forming polymers can be conveniently measured in form of thin films. Strong 
disturbances of the spectra may result from periodic interference patterns which are 
superposed for the true absorption or transmission spectrum. This disturbing effect can 
be prevented by casting the polymer solution on to a rough surface 8), followed by slow 
evaporation of the solvent. The optimal thickness amounts to d = 10 (polar polymers) 
to 30 11m (non polar polymers). 
Dispersive IR spectrometers are less suited for the fiR range owing to the extremely 
weak intensity of thermal radiation sources, strong absorption of water traces, etc. In 
this region, interferometric analysis of the IR radiation by means of the FTIR tech-
niques should be preferred. 
Additionally, kinetic studies in the time regime of seconds becomes possible due to 
fast recording and three-dimensional (perspective) display of consecutively recorded 
spectra 21) and weak or disturbed spectra may be enhanced and corrected. Therefore, 
FTIR also gains importance in the mIR. Fourier Transform IR Spectrometers which 
became available several years ago brought real advantages due to the non-dispersive 
mode of recording the spectra. Since monochromators, slits, etc. are superfluous, the 
intensity of the exciting radiation can be used in an economical way. Historically, this 
interferometric method was at the beginning offiR research 12), but only'the recent de-
velopment of efficient small computers made its broader use possible. In addition to 
small intensity losses, the rapid recording of FTIR is advantageous for multiple record-
ing and signal-to-noise improvement by averaging. 
The core of each (commercial) FTIR spectrometer is a Michelson Interferometer. 
An interferometer is an apparatus used for splitting and re-unifying light beams so that 
one of the partial beams can be influenced, e.g. delayed and brought to interference 
with the second beam. In Michelson's interferometer, the beam is split into two partial 
beams using a semitransparent mirror (Fig. 7.2). Each of the two beams is reflected at 
a mirror (one is movable) back to the beam splitter where they are re-unified. The mov-
able mirror creates, either point by point or continuously, all possible phase differences 
78 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
S 
MICHELSON 
INTERFEROMETER 
o 
, ", 
/ 
movable mirror 
Fig. 7.2. Scheme of a Michelson Interferometer, as used in FTIR spectrometers. 
S: Source ofIR radiation, D: Detector 
between the two partial beams. If monochromatic radiation is used, the intensity mea-
sured at the detector (I(9)rea is a simple cosine function: 
I( 9)rel = B( v') cos(2nv' 9) . 
(7.2) 
This is due to the fact that the intensities of the two partial beams amplify by interfer-
enceif 
9=0,A,2A... 
and vanish if 9=A/2, 3A/2 .... 
Using polychromatic radiation, interference occurs between light of different 
frequencies so that only at 9=0 we have optimum amplification, whereas at all other 
differences in path length we observe increasing quenching by interference. 
Hence, the resulting interferogram has the form of a damped oscillation. Mathe-
matically, this corresponds to a summation ofEq. (7.2) over all wave numbers: 
00 
J(9)rel= S B(v') cos (2nv'9)dv'. 
o 
(7.3) 
B(v'), the spectral intensity distribution is the information in which the spectroscopist 
is interested. It is clearly contained in the interferogram, but in a coded form. Decoding 
79 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
is done mathematically by means of the Fourier transformation, hence the name of the 
method. 
If the Michelson interferometer is the heart of the FTIR spectrometer, the computer 
is its brain which calculates the spectrum and also performs control functions. The 
spectra are single-beam spectra, the blank is measured separately and subtracted auto-
matically by the computer. Finally, several runs are averaged and presented as OD(v') 
or in another familiar format. 
7.3.2 IR Reflection and Emission 
As a rule, the IR transitions of transparent or soluble polymers are measured using 
transmission (absorption) techniques, the samples being thin films or solutions in CCI4 , 
CS2 or other solvents for limited spectral ranges 13). In these experiments, reflection is 
eliminated by conducting the reference beam through a twin cuvette that is filled with 
the solvent used to dissolve the polymer. 
Recording film spectra, reflection cannot be excluded completely, since the reference 
(if there is any) often has not exactly the same reflection behaviour as the sample. 
Ideally, a very thin film of the sample polymer should serve as reference, the effective 
sample thickness being the difference between sample and reference film. Two kinds of 
polymer samples require special reflection techniques in order to yield useful vibration-
al spectra: 
- Polymer layers on opaque substrates, highly IR scattering samples, certain resins and 
rubbers not measurable in transmission. 
- Oxidised or otherwise surface-modified films, if the surface of the polymer is to be 
studied in order to elucidate the nature and extent of modification. 
Reflection of electromagnetic radiation at smooth surfaces shows maxima in the re-
gion of strong absorption bands due to the increase in the refractive index. Diffuse re-
flection at scattering surfaces, at the other hand, yields maxima in regions of minimal 
absorption of the sample, since in these spectral regions the losses due to absorption 
of radiation are very low. The same is true for attenuated total reflection (A TR) of IR 
radiation, a technique combining total reflection in a crystal, covered by the sample 
(e.g. a polymer film) and absorption in the thin surface layer which is penetrated by 
the IR beam (Fig. 7.3). The penetration depth into the medium with lower refractive 
index (polymer) depends in a complex manner on the wavelength, the refractive indices 
n1 and n2 and on the angle of reflection 15); as an order of magnitude, the penetration 
depth can be estimated at ,1/10, i.e. roughly 100 to 1,000 times the value estimated for 
the surface layer involved in ESCA (Sect. 2.4.2). In practice, multiple reflection is used 
in order to increase the effective path length (FMIR), Fig. 7.3 b. This method is useful 
for studying surface modifications of polymer films, e.g. by corona treatment 14) or 
photochemical oxidation 45). Experimentally, the greatest difficulty consists in pressing 
the films (or other samples) homogeneously to the surface of the crystal. Since the op-
tical constants of polymer and crystal vary as a function of the wavelength so that the 
penetration depth varies, too, the FMIR spectrum is not identical with the absorption 
spectrum, although the spectral position of the bands is the same. 
Finally, IR emission spectroscopy 16) should be mentioned which is based on quan-
tum emission from vibrationally excited states. This emission occurs in competition 
with non-radiative energy transfer to the surrounding medium and within the sample 
into other modes of vibration. 
80 

Sample 
7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
al 
bl 
to monochromator 
and detector 
Fig. 7.3 a, b. Principle of A TR 
(single pass) (a) and FMIR (b) 
applied to polymer films 
The average thermal energy at "room-temperature" corresponds to the borderline 
between mIR and fiR (kT ~ 1/40 e V ~ 200 cm - 1). Higher energy vibrations, which are 
able to exit mIR radiation are excited according to the Boltzmann equation and there-
fore strongly depend on the average temperature of the sample. Of course, a meaningful 
analysis of this heat radiation is only possible if the sample does not behave as an ideal 
black body, a condition which is fulfilled in the case of polymers. This technique could 
turn out useful for samples whose transmission (absorption) or ATR cannot be mea-
sured. The spectral composition of emitted IR radiation is most conveniently measured 
by FTIR analysis 16). 
7.4 Interpretation of Polymer mlR Spectra 
7.4.1 EmpiricallR Spectroscopy 
Empirical IR spectroscopy is based on the existence of "group vibrations" as indicated 
by narrow frequency ranges of characteristic absorptions. The physical reason for this 
behaviour is inefficient coupling of the IR absorbing group with the rest of the molecule 
(Sect. 5.1). This effect is observed in ordinary size molecules as well as "in polymers, the 
former providing an enormous amount of reference spectra 19). There are, on the other 
hand, borderline cases to the sphere of "true" polymer spectra caused by vibrations of 
the whole macromolecule or larger parts of it. In these cases, the vibrating group is in-
fluenced by its neighbours so that conformations or crystal structures influence the po-
sition, strength or shape of the corresponding absorptions band. These "regularity 
bands" 22) are usually not observed in amorphous polymers and in solution, except that 
some ordering exists even in this state, e.g. in helical regions. Accordingly we may dis-
tinguish three levels of interpretation, depending on the complexity by the chemical and 
physical structure of the polymer to be studied (Table 7.1). 
81 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
Table 7.1. Evaluation ofIR spectra 
Type of Polymer 
A 
B 
C 
Complex, irregular chemical and physical 
structure (e.g. resins, thermosetting resins, 
random copolymers) 
Intermediate cases (e.g. vinyl polymers with 
large side groups, homopolymers) 
Simple chemical structure and thus higher 
degrees of physical order possible, e.g. 
helices, extended chains and crystallini ty 
(e.g. PE, POM) 
Evaluation 
Empirical IR spectroscopy only 
Group frequencies, independent of 
state of physical ordering 
"Regularity Bands" indicating regular 
conformations or even crystallinity 
Theoretical band assignments (at least 
partly) possible 
For chemical-analytical purposes, the empirical approach (see also Fig. 5.1) is the 
most important one 4) and also in polymer physics there is a trend to investigating more 
complex structures 17) which in part require empirical methods of vibrational analysis. 
The assignment of group frequencies is based on reference spectra mostly of 
monomeric and oligomeric compounds 18, 19). These can directly be used for interpret-
ing the spectra od amorphous polymers. A comprehensive collection of polymer spectra, 
including monomers, additives, resins, etc. has been edited by Hummel and SchollS). 
Several polymer IR and Raman spectra are included in the DMS Atlas 23). Industrial 
polymers are delt with by Henniker 57). These spectra can be used to identify known 
polymers and plastics by comparison. 
The usual nomenclature of vibrations used in empirical IR spectroscopy is explained 
in Table 7.2. The notation is not always used consistently in the literature. In the fol-
lowing, a few examples of polymer IR spectra will be discussed, knowing that any sys-
tematic coverage of the polymers or only groups of polymers studied would surpass the 
scope of this book. 
The field of polymer IR spectroscopy, including applications, has been reviewed sev-
eral times 4,5,17,21). 
7.4.2 Examples of mlR Spectra of Linear Polymers 
7.4.2.1 Poly(methylmethacrylate) 
PMMA is a glass-forming polymer and the main component of well-known plastics 
("PLEXIGLAS") with excellent optical properties. The commercial polymer, which is 
produced by radicalic polymerisation, was formerly regarded as "atactic" (see Sect. 
82 

Table 7.2. Notation of group vibrations 
Symbols 
A Valence vibrations 
Stretching st 
Breathing br 
v 
B Deformation (Bending) vibrations a) 
Scissor s 
Vibration 
Wagging w 
Rocking r 
Twisting t 
Torsion 
Out-of plane 
in-plane-bending 
y 
f3 
a Deformation abbr. d, bending abbr. b 
Example v 
(sym.; vs) v 
(asym.; va) 
* 
v 
(in plane) 
V 
(out-of-plane) 
V 
(in plane) 
0+ -0 
Y" 
(out-of-plane) 
"'-
o 
-7-fO t 
o #' 
b Often used as general symbol for deformation vibrations 
83 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
50 
VC-H 
Fig. 7.4. mIR Spectrum ofPMMA (radicalic) film after 5) 
Table 7.3. Assignment ofmIR bands ofPMMA (see Fig. 7.4) 
Range 
(see text) 
2 
3 
4 
5 
v' (cm-I) 
(Splitting cm - 1) 
3,000 
2,960 
(Maximum) 
2,850 
1,735 
1,490 
1,450 
1,440 
1,390 
(1,365 
1,275", 30 
1,245/ 
1,195"'45 
1,150/ 
1,060 
A. (!lm) 
3.33 
3.38 
3.51 
5.76 
6.71 
6.90 
6.94 
dC-H 
7.19 
7.33) 
7.84 
8.03 
8.37 
8.70 
9.43 
Assignment 
stCH3 
stCH 3 
+ sym. st. CH 2 
Antisym. 
stCH 2 
st0=O 
Sym. (?) 
stc-o--c 
Antisym. (?) 
Regularity band 
10.3). Pure syndiotactic and pure isotactic PMMA can be prepared using ionic initia-
tors. 
The mIR spectrum of commercial PMMA is shown in Fig. 7.4 and interpreted in 
Table 7.3. It consists offour groups of bands: 
1) The range of C-H-stretching vibrations is dominated by the Me group I(CH 3)/ 
I(CH 2) ~3, see formula of basic unit. The central peak (2,960 cm -1) could possibly 
be resolved using higher dispersion. 
2) The C = 0 stretching range shows a strong homogeneous ester carbonyl band at 
1,735cm- 1 . 
3) CH deformation range showing 4 peaks in the region 6.7 to 7.4 !lm. 
4) The ester stretching band is a typical "Regularity Band" as can be seen from the be-
haviour of band splitting 22). 
84 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Splitting vanishes in copolymers with low MMA-content and decreases with in-
creasing bulkiness of the alkyl group. 
Although PMMA is X-ray amorphous, some short-range order seems to be pre-
served in the amorphous solid, most probably helices. The 1,060 cm -1 peak is only 
found in syndiotactic PMMA indicating a largely syndiotactic configuration of com-
mercial PMMA (see Chap. 10). Configurational regularity (tacticity) facilitates confor-
mational order; the latter can induce crystallinity, but is not bound to do so (as in this 
case). 
7.4.2.2 Poly(isobutene) and amorphous polypropylene 
At room temperature PIB is rubber-like, glass-clear and amorphous. It is distinguished 
from PP by replacing the tertiary R ofPP by a methyl group: 
t
CH,_~~l 
CH31 
PP 
PIB 
The pseudo-asymmetric C* atom of PP is missing in PIB so that no differences due to 
tacticity are possible in this polymer. The preferred conformation of PIB seems to be 
a narrow (8/5) helix. 
Atactic PP is amorphous and non-oriented, as PIB. It is chemically less stable due 
to the tertiary CR. Comparing the mIR spectra of the two polymers shows the follow-
ing (see Fig. 7.5): 
/ OH/C=O, 
Ox? 
/ 
' 
/ 
\ 
/ 
, 
I 
, 
I 
' 
I 
; 
t 
a) 
c 
0 ·iii 
III 
E 
III 
C ,g 
b) 
I 
I 
4 
3 
2 
-. 
V 
1.S: 
: 
, 
i-r CH 3 
Iv skeleton 
-..j: 
I 
I r--
I~I 
, 
' 
~ . 
Wavenumber 
Fig. 7.5 a, b. mIR Spectra of atactic 
PP (a) and amorphous PIB (b) films 
85 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
- Insignificant differences in the C-H valence range (3,000 cm -1) 
- Weak bands in the OH and C=O valence range for PPat pointing to partial oxida-
tion; 
PIB, on the other hand, is completely free from peaks indicating oxidation products 
- In PP the C-H deformation vibration of CH3 causes a strong single band at 1,378 
cm -1 (7.26 !lm). This peak is split into a doublet in PIB since 2 CH 3 groups are 
linked to the same C-atom. This effect is called "mechanical coupling" - in contrast 
to "electrical coupling" which is due to effects of electron distribution (mesomeric 
effects, etc.). Splitting is quite strong (LI v' ::::; 25 cm - 1) despite 2 C-C bonds separate 
the vibrating C-H groups 
- The valence skeleton vibration at 1,153 cm -1 (PPat) is shifted to higher frequencies 
in PIB (1,227 cm -1), whereas 
- the r CH 3 (969 cm -1 in PPat) is red-shifted in PIB and again split into a doublet. 
This rocking vibration contains contributions of other modes 24). 
7.4.2.3 Poly(vinyl alcohol) 
tCH'-t:t 
PVOH 
PVOH is produced by hydrolysis ofpoly(vinyl acetate) (PVAC) yielding either a com-
pletely hydrolysed product (PVOH) or polymers containing residual acetate groups 
which can be considered as copolymers of vinyl alcohol and vinyl acetate. The mIR 
spectrum of PVOH is similar to that of its monomeric model substance 2-propanoI 24). 
Starting from syndiotactic PV AC, partially crystallising stereoregular PVOH can be 
produced (Fig. 7.6). The broad intense band with maximum of absorption at v' = 3,370 
cm -1 is due to st OH shifted from its position at 3,600 cm - 1 (2.78 !lm, narrow peak) 
to longer wavelengths and broadened by hydrogen bonding. The formation of hydro-
gen bonds (O-H ... 0) evidently weakens the O-H bond; within a series of similar 
compounds the spectral shift Llv' is roughly proportional to the strength of the hydro-
gen bond 25). 
1001 ------:::::======----------1 
%T 
so 
OL---~~~--~--~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~ 
2000 
t 
Wavenumber 
Change of scale 
Fig. 7.6. mIR Spectrum of partly crystalline, syndiotactic PVOH, after 5) 
86 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
The complete absence of any peak at 3,600 cm -1 indicates the absence of any appre-
ciable fraction offree OH groups in solid PVOH. This spectral range can only be evalu-
ated for carefully dried polymer samples (no KBr discs), since water absorbs strongly 
in the same region and may act both as hydrogen donor and hydrogen acceptor in poly-
mers showing no hydrogen bonds in pure state. 
The st CH vibrations in PVOH (Fig 7.6) are found at 2,920 cm -1 (3.42 11m) and 
2,950 cm- 1 (3.39 11m). The absence of any st c=o absorption near 1,740 cm- 1 (5.75 
11m) - as found in PV AC 5) - indicates complete hydrolysis of the starting material. 
Vibrations of groups containing hydrogen atoms can be by identified replacing H 
by D. This is especially simple in the case of weakly acidic groups by exchanging their 
protons by dissolution in DzO. The frequency of st O-D is reduced with regard to st 
O-H by V2 [Eq. (5.1)]; in our example, this band is expected near 2,400 cm -1 (4.2 
11m). 
A second hydroxyl band in PVOH is the st C-O of secondary OH groups at 1,090 
cm -1 (9.15 11m) near a "crystallinity band" at 1,150 cm -1 (8.7 11m), possibly the st C-
O in the crystal phase of the partly crystalline PVOH used for recording Fig. 7.6. 
This peak increases by annealing and extensive dehydration over P 205; IR measure-
ments using polarised radiation and oriented samples also indicate the crystalline origin 
of this band. 
An extensive discussion of the PVOH spectrum has been published by Krimm 26) 
and Tadokoro 27). According to these authors, the 922 cm -1 (10.85 11m) band is char-
acteristic of syndiotactic sequences. 
As in the previous examples, the 1,400 cm -1 range is due to C-H deformation vi-
brations. 
7.4.2.4 Poly( acrylonitrile) 
1
CH2-~Ht 
III 
N 
n 
PAN 
The most prominent feature of the PAN spectrum (Fig. 7.7) is the st C=N peak at 
2,230 cm -1 (4.48 11m) which in most nitriles appears unvariably at this wave number, 
0/0 T 
VC-H 
VC=N 
Wavenumber 
Fig. 7.7. mIR Spectrum of PAN (film) 
87 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
indicating that this vibration is strongly decoupled from the rest of the molecule. There 
is furthermore a strong d CH2 vibration at 1,447 cm -1 (6.91 J.Lm) 28). The nitrile band 
is very useful in analysing copolymers (Sect. 7.5.2). 
7.4.2.5 Poly(caprolactam) 
/H2"-
/CH2,,-
-CH2 
CH2 
CH2 
o 
II C-N 
'-...H 
PA-6 
planar, trans 
The spectrum ofPA-6 serves as an example of the mIR spectra of aliphatic polyamides, 
which are chemically related to the polypeptides and proteins as far as the amide bond 
is concerned which links the monomer units. Simple alipathic polyamides are highly 
crystalline polymers of low molar mass (M~ 1 to 3 X 104); owing to their microcrystal-
linity they are opaque, tough, and have well defined melting points. As expected from 
the structural formula, the mIR spectra are composed of bands due to the short (CH2)n 
segments and those which are characteristic of the amide group. This is always planar, 
since the C(O)N bond is not a pure single bond so that no free rotation is possible. The 
NH groups from hydrogen bonds with C = 0 groups of other P A chains. Different crys-
tal structures ("sheet", "pleated sheet", etc.) influence the IR spectrum often to a higher 
extent than minor differences in chemical structure. The spectrum of the {3-form ofPA-
6 (Fig. 7.8) shows the following features: 
The double peak at 
2,940 cm -1 
3.40 J.Lm 
st CH2 antisym. 
2,860 cm -1 
3.50 J.Lm 
st CH2 sym. 
is typical of all substances whose CH bonds occur predominantly in CH2 groups. 
The st N-H at 3,300 cm -1 (3.03 J.Lm) is narrow despite its hydrogen bonding (to 
be compared with PVOH, Fig. 7.6) due to the highly crystalline structure which reduces 
the fluctuations oflength and strength ofN-H bonds. 
1 
c o 
·iii 
Ul ·e 
Ul 
c 
2 
N-H ... O=C. 
VN-H 
........ VCH 
I 
I 
4 
3 
2 
-V' 
C=O 
1'-... 
PA-6 (~Forml 
\111 
\IV C-N+.rNH 
I 
I 
1.5 
1 
Fig. 7.8. mIR Spectrum ofPA-6 (fJ form) 
88 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Table 7.4. Characteristic amide bands 
No. 
I 
II 
III 
IV 
V 
VI 
VII 
Assignment 29) 
.stC=O 
stC-N+NH 
stC-N+NH 
dC=O 
yNH 
yC=O 
Lattice vibration 
1,640 
1,550 
1,280 ... 50 
Not yet detected in P A 
700 
600 
280 
Ilm 
6.10 
6.45 
7.8 to 8.0 
14.3 
15.6 
36 
The amide group causes 7 characteristic vibrations in the range between 1,650 and 
250 cm - 1 summarised in Table 7.4. Six of these have so far been identified in aliphatic 
PAs. They also appear in the IR and Raman spectra of proteins 29). 
Amide (I) is shifted to longer wavelengths, since the strength of the C = 0 bond is 
weaker than that of a pure double bond. 
7.4.3 Tacticity and Conformation in mlR Spectra 
As shown in Sect. 7.3, the IR Spectra of complicated polymers are mostly due to group 
absorption. The interpretation of these spectra is similar to that of low-molar mass 
compounds. Chemically simple polymers, e.g. PE, PP, POM, show additional bands 
("Regularity Bands") which depend on the arrangement of the atoms or groups of 
atoms in space. The reasons are: 
- Formation of well-ordered conformations, including true crystalline order (3D order 
in regions of at least 5 nm diameter) 
- These generally weak "Regularity-Bands" can be observed experimentally since the 
background of strong, mostly polar group absorptions is weak in simple polymers. 
Great influence on the mIR spectra is exerted by conformation, i.e. the ID order of 
(linear) polymer chains. High ID order can, but does not necessarily, lead to true (3D) 
crystallinity which may influence the IR spectra by factor group splitting. In the ex-
ample given below (PP), 3D crystallinity seems to have no influence on the spectra 
which can be explained by "1 D" helices and extended chains. In polymers showing 
pseudo-asymmetric C atoms there is a possible link between configuration (tacticity) 
and IR spectrum since regular configuration favours or makes possible a conformative 
order which influences IR absorption. 
As an example the IR absorption of PP which can be prepared in isotactic (PP it) 
and syndiotactic (PP st) form 30 - 32) will be discussed in the following. 
CH3 
CH3 
CH3 
I 
I 
I 
-C-CHz-C-CHz-C-CHz-
I 
I 
I 
H 
H 
H 
PPit 
In PP it all pseudo-asymmetric C atoms of a chain are either in d or I configuration. 
In the solid state (m.p. 170°C, density 0.92 g cm - 3) the polymer is nearly completely 
crystalline with a monoclinic elementary cell containing 4 chains or 12 monomeric units 
89 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
(l08 atoms). In organic crystals with large elementary cells, the optical effects depend-
ing on unit cell symmetry (Davydov splitting) are weak owing to the large distances of 
the interacting atoms or groups. More important is the interaction of immediately 
neighbouring groups, as shown in PP which does not exhibit any Davydov splitting but 
rather conformational effects due to the 3/1 helix. 
In PP st d and [configurations alternate in regular fashion: 
CH3 
H 
CH3 
I 
I 
I 
-C-CH2-C-CH2-C-CH2-
I 
I 
I 
H 
CH3 
H 
PP st 
This polymer crystallises in two polymorphous forms of slightly different stability. The 
more stable modification is a double helix where each fourth monomeric unit lies above 
or below the first. The less stable conformation is the extended chain. 
Atactic PP is characterised by an almost statistical pattern of d and [links. It forms 
a by-product in the industrial production ofPP it and, on account its of irregular struc-
ture, can neither build helices nor does it crystallise. At room temperature, PP at is 
sticky and gum-like, it represents a good example of the fact that amorphous solids may 
form in the absence of stereoregular order. On the other hand, amorphous polymers 
are not generally and necessarily atactic, as evidenced by PMMA. The spectrum of PP 
at (Fig. 7.9) is much simpler than those of the more ordered isomers. The differences 
shown in Fig. 7.9 qualitatively indicate the great influence exerted by coupling between 
the atoms along the chain. As in the melt, this coupling is only weak in PP at the re-
sulting spectrum consists of typical group absorptions which are identical for the three 
polymers of equal chemical composition. The IR spectra of PP of different tacticities 
have been investigated and reviewed by several authors 5, 32 - 38). Essential con-
tributions have been made using polarised IR radiation in studying uniaxially drawn 
PP foils with preferential orientation of the chain axes along the direction of the elonga-
tion. Some absorption peaks can only be observed in one direction (parallel or vertical 
to the chain axis), others show some shifts of the absorption maxima due to orientation-
dependent coupling. 
The wave numbers of the mIR absorption maxima for PP it and PP st are summar-
ised in Table 7.5. The assignments have been obtained by calculation and comparison 
with the spectra of partially or fully deuterated PP samples. The following is a brief dis-
cussion of the results. For theoretical and experimental details the original papers and 
extensive reviews should be consulted 33 - 38). 
The C-H valence region (2,800 to 3,000 cm- 1) hardly depends on conformation; 
this indicates that the vibrations are coupled only to a minimum degree (group vi-
brations). 
The 1,430 to 1,460 cm- 1 region contains one of the strongest bands of the PP spec-
trum which is caused by the asymmetric deformation vibration of the methyl groups. 
For the band at 1,460 cm -1 (PP it), Gmax ~ 30 1 mol- 1 cm - 1 can be calculated from T 
and film thickness 5. The theoretical analysis shows that neither the asymmetric defor-
mation vibration of the CH 3 nor that of the CH2 group couples with the lattice (back-
bone) vibrations, thus explaining the similar position and intensity of these bands in 
PP it, PP st, and PP at. It should be noted that the indices a and b in Table 7.5 refer 
90 

t 
c: 
a 
'iii 
Ul 
'E 
Ul 
c: ,g 
2000 
7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
PP at. 
PP st. 
PP it. 
Wavenumber 
Fig. 7.9. Comparison of mIR Spectra of atactic, syndiotactic and isotactic PP after 5) 
to local symmetry coordinates of the helix, which indicates asymmetric vibrations 
(v and 9). The symmetric deformation of the methyl groups - the one causing the 
strong splitting in PIB (7.4.2.2) - does not couple with the chain and thus agam proves 
to be independent of conformation. The deformation of the tert. H, on the other hand, 
couples with CH2 wagging and a lattice vibration; it is pronounced only in the PP it 
helix (1,350 to 1,380 cm -1). 
The next region (1,200 to 1,330 cm - 1) contains several weak peaks (hardly observed 
in thin film spectra) which are distinctly dependent on conformation and thus indirectly 
on tacticity. The data of this region are those reported by Grant and Ward, quoted af-
ter 5). The 1,150 to 1,170 cm - 1 region shows the complicated vibrations combining C-
C (chain-) valence with different C-H deformation vibrations. Conformational in-
fluences, therefore, are not unexpected. The 1,167 cm -1 band in PP it is highly charac-
91 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
Table7.5. IR Absorption maxima and assignment of poly (propene) 
v;"'x(cm- 1) 
PPit 
b 
PPst 
2,958 
(s) 
2,955 
(s) 
2,956 
(s) II.L 
Vas CH3 
(100%) 
2,951 
(s).L 
Vas CH3 
2,923 
(s) 
2,923 
(s) 
2,925 
(sh) .L 
Vas CH2 
(94%) 
2,907 
(sh) .L 
vCH 
(94%) 
2,881 
(s) 
2,880 
(s) .L 
VS CH3 
(98%) 
2,881 
(sh) 
2,869 
(s) 
2,869 
(sh) 
2,868 
(s) .L 
VS CH2 
(99%) 
2,839 
(s) 
2,841 
(s) 
2,843 
(s) II 
VS CH2 
(99%) 
2,810 
(w) 
2,809 
(w) 
1,458 
(s) 
1,461 
(s) 
1,456 
(s) II 
Sb CH3 (65%) +Sa (CH3) (22%) 
1,450 
(s) II 
Sa CH3 (64%) -Sb (CH3) (22%) 
1,450 
.L 
Sa CH3 (87%) 
1,440 
(sh) 
, 1,437 
(sh) 
1,434 
(m) II.L 
CH2 
(91%) 
1,377 . 
(s) 
1,376 
(s) 
1,376 
(s) II.L 
Ss CH3 
(77-79%) 
1,360 
(m) 
1,369 
(sh) 
1,357 
(w) II 
S CH (50%) 
-w CH2 (18%) 
1,357 
(m).L 
S CH (61%), 
Va CC (10%) 
1,329 
(w) 
1,332 
(w) 
1,326 
(vw) II 
wCH (60%) 
-Vb CC (21%) 
1,326 
(vw) .L 
w CH (38%), 
w CH2 (26%) 
Vb CC (13%) 
1,303 
(w) 
1,311 
(w) 
1,305 
(w) II 
w CH2 (57%) +S CH (29%) 
1,297 
(w) 
1,290 
(w) 
1,296 
(vw).L 
w CH2 (52%), 
w CH (26%) 
1,255 
(w) 
1,262 
(w) 
1,255 
(w) II 
t CH2 (80%) 
1,219 
(w) 
1,242 
(w) 
1,218 
(vw).L 
t CH2 (75%), 
W CH (12%) 
1,200 
(w) 
1,168 
(s) 
1,162 
(m) 
1,166 
(m) II 
Vb CC (26%)-raCH3 
(18%)+w CH (18%) 
1,153 
(sh) 
1,154 
(m) 
1,153 
(sh) .L 
V CC (17%), Vb CC 
(13%), S CH (8%) 
1,103 
(w) 
1,128 
1,083 
(w) to 
92 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Table 7.5 (continued) 
V~ax(cm -1) 
PPit 
b 
1,101 
(VW)~ 
Vb CC (25%), ra CH3 16%) 
rb CH3 (11%) 
1,045 
(w) 
1,043 
(vw) II 
Va CC (53%) 
997 
(s) 
998 
(m) II 
rb CH3 (41 %) 
972 
(s) 
974 
(m) II 
ra CH 3 (55%) 
+Vb CC (26%) 
a PPit intensity and polarisation relative to drawing axis; 
b % calculated contribution in coupled vibration 
C PPst, intensity (helix) 
PPst 
1,061 
1,002 
976 
963 
(vw) 
(w) to 
(vw) 
(s) 
(m) 
teristic of the 3/1 helix; it is absent in the spectra of the melt and of PP st and thus re-
presents a typical and specific chain (lattice) vibration. 
There are weak lattice vibrations which are drastically different in PP it and PP st, 
in the region from 1,000 to 1,130 cm -1. Again, from 950 to 1,000 cm - 1, a characteristic 
coupling between CH 3 rocking and C-C valence vibrations depends on conformation 
and yields strong differences between PP it and PP st. The strong PP it peak at 997 cm -1 
(3/1 helix) is missing in the spectrum of PP st. The CH3-rocking band at 973 cm -1, 
on the other hand, occurs in both isomers and can conveniently be used as internal stan-
dard in studying the degree of crystallinity 5). The last lowest wave number absorption 
peaks which are reasonably strong are in the range between 800 and 950 cm - 1. Impor-
tant features are the medium intensity band at 868 cm - 1 in PP st, characteristic of the 
double helix in this isomer and the nearly pure CH rocking at 841 cm -1 , characteristic 
of the 3/1 helix of PP it. Below this range there are several very weak conformation-
dependent peaks down to 200 cm -1 5). 
Finally, it should be pointed out that a (nearly) complete assignment of conforma-
tion-dependent IR spectra requires carefully prepared and purified polymer samples of 
well-defined tacticity, helical order and - for the sake of comparison - deuterated poly-
mers. Since, as we have seen, the conformation-dependent absorption peaks are often 
quite weak, impurities may be especially misleading in these studies. 
Calculations of IR spectra of crystalline, linear polymers have shortly been discussed 
in Chap. 5. The basis of these calculation is the normal coordinate analysis 56). If a fam-
ily of polymers shows similar conformation in the crystalline phase, a common valence 
force field may be used, introducing a few additional parameters for each specific mem-
ber of the family. 
This has been demonstrated for (trans) 1 ,4-poly(butadiene) 58), (trans) I ,4-poly(2,3-
dimethylbutadiene), and (trans) 1 ,4-poly(isoprene) 59). The combined information of 
IR, Raman and theory has been used in order to elucidate the preferred conformation 
of crystalline PVCl2 60). 
93 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
7.5 Applications of mlR Spectroscopy 
7.5.1 General 
The possibilities for applying mIR spectroscopy in polymer research are so numerous 
that a systematic treatment is not feasible here. In the following, only a few important 
applications will be mentioned. More extensive discussions of practical applications are 
given in the often quoted books by HummeI 4), Hummel-Scholl (first edition) 5), the 
chapters devoted to analytical applications in Zbinden 39) and in the most recent book 
by Siesler and Holland-Moritz 21 ); see also the comprehensive recent review by 
Snyder I7). Special attention to FTIR in polymer research is paid in 21) and 40). it is a 
distinct advantage of this technique over conventional dispersive IR spectroscopy that 
moderately rapid reactions can be followed by recording a spectrum every few seconds 
if highest resolution is not required. The presentation can be made very pictorial by 
"3D" (perspectivic) plotting, showing immediately the growing in or vanishing of 
certain groups as a function of time 21,40). 
7.5.2 Copolymers 
The composition of copolymers using mIR spectra can be determined if at least 
one partner (two in the case of terpolymers) shows a characteristic and reasonably 
$trong absorption band in an otherwise free spectral region. If the molar ratio AlB of 
the monomers A and B is small, A has to be the IR-detectable component. A real "text-
0.0 
~0.2 
'iii c 
'" 
o 
8 
E-o 
94 
o. 4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1. 5 
00 
Wavenumber 
3000 
2500 
2000 
cm-1 
NIl :\ 
r 
h 
3 
4 
5 
Wavelength 
/ 
I 
6 IJm 
Fig. 7.10. Infrared spectrum of poly 
(acry lonitrile-co-methylmethacrylate) 
(94/6) after 39) 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
book example" is offered by the copolymer derived from methyl methacrylate (v ) C = 
o band) and acrylonitrile (v -C=N band), see Fig. 7.l0. Please note the strongly dif-
ferent molar absorption coefficients of the two key peaks, the nitrile triplebond absorp-
tion being roughly 10 times weaker than the corresponding carbonyl double bond ab-
sorption. The range of A/B which can be studied by IR spectroscopy amounts to about 
0.01 to 100 in favourable cases, in others roughly 0.1 to 10. Knowing the film thickness 
(or polymer concentration in case of solutions) the evaluation can be performed using 
Lambert-Beer's law. Alternatively, relative optical densities can be used by selecting a 
strong band of A or B as internal standard. 
If sequences of the AAA ... or BBB ... type cause modifications of the spectrum, 
e.g. by conformational order, block-copolymers can in principle be distinguished from 
random ones. 
7.5.3 Molar Mass 
If one or both end groups of a linear polymer are known, e.g. if the initiator and the 
polymerisation mechanism are known, the number average Mn of the relative molar 
mass can in principle be measured by IR. The number of end groups (NE) corresponds 
to the number of macromolecules N p, since N p = N E or N p = N E/2, thus yielding the in-
formation necessary for calculating Mn. The method of determining NE and thus Mn 
by IR absorption requires a distinct absorption band of the end group(s) and is limited 
to oligomers up to about Mn= 104 . 
7.5.4 Branching 
Polymers showing irregular side chains (e.g. LDPE) are not suitable for determining 
Mn by IR absorption. The degree of branching, however, can be measured if the end 
groups of the side chains (E3) differ significantly from those of the main chain (E1' E2) 
either with regard to their chemical composition or due to much higher concentration 
[E31 ~[Etl = [E21; see Fig.7.l1. Alternatively, changes in the main chain (branching 
points as indicated schematically in Fig. 7.l1) can be used in order to estimate the de-
gree of branching. Branching requires, e.g., the replacement of a CH2 group by a CH 
group. Of course, any other sensitive method which distinguishes the branching point 
from the unsubstituted chain segment can be used as well, e.g. 13C_ NMR. 
As in the above methods, the concentration (end groups or branching points) can 
be determined by using Lambert Beer's Law or an internal reference peak. 
Fig. 7.11. Scheme of a branched 
linear polymer 
95 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
Table 7.6. Wave number and intensity of absorption bands characteristics of various kinds of 
double bonds after Zbinden 39) 
R~CH=CH2' two C~H 
bands 
1,2-polyisoprene 
1,2-polybutadiene 
R-CH 
CH~R' (trans) 
trans-I,4-polybutadiene 
R~CH=CH~R'(cis) 
cis-I,4-polybutadiene 
RR'C=CH2 
3,4-polyisoprene 
RR'C=CHR" 
cis-I,4-polyisoprene 
trans-I,4-polyisoprene 
a I mol(double bond)-I em-I 
C = C (Stretching) 
(em-I) 
1,642± 3 
28-44 
1,667 
Very weak 
1,646± 10 
7-18 
J,650± 11 
20-42 
1,680± 10 
4-7 
7.5.5 Carbon Double Bonds 
C~H (Out-of-Plane bending) 
990-1,003 
908- 916 
909 
911 
964- 977 
967 
675- 729 
680 
883- 895 
888 
788-
840 
835 
842 
E 
a 
33- 57 
110-150 
149 
145 
85-120 
109 
13-106 
23 
103-200 
145-159 
11- 35 
19 
II 
Unsaturated groups belong to those impurities or end groups which are most frequent-
ly encountered in formally saturated polymers. In polymers derived from monomers 
having conjugated double bonds, C = C groups may occur in the repetitive units of the 
polymer, either in the main chain (1,4 addition) or in the side groups (1,2 addition). 
Characteristic absorption peaks can be found near 1,640 to 1,680 cm -1 (vC = C) and 
680 to 1,000 cm -1 (yC-H), as measured in isomeric poly(butadienes) and poly(iso-
prenes) 39). Natural caoutchouc consists mainly of cis-poly(isoprene). 
yC-H: 835 cm -1; e: 19 1 mol (double bond)-1 cm -1. 
Further data are compiled in Table 7.6. Double bonds in pVC, together with syn-
diotacticsequences can be measured in agreement with other methods 61). 
7.5.6 Oxidation Processes 
Chemical modifications of polymers are very frequently studied by means of mIR ab-
sorption and ATR (FMIR) spectroscopy. These modifications can be applied pur-
posely in order to ameliorate a polymer or they may occur during production and use 
under the influence of UV-radiation, elevated temperature, etc. The most important 
degradation pathways are oxidative processes caused by 
96 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
- UV -radiation + oxygen eOz) 
- Heat+oxygeneOz) 
- Ozone(03) 
- Molecular singlet oxygen e02) 
In most cases, strongly polar groups are formed which can easily be detected by mIR 
spectroscopy. 
Hydroperoxy groups (R-OOH) are the most important primary products ofther-
mooxidative and often also of photo-oxidative degradation processes 41). These groups 
are unstable, both thermally and photochemically and are converted to alkoxy radicals 
which react further to give hydroxyl and carbonyl groups, both absorbing strongly in 
themIR. 
~ 
O-OH 
~ ---
hv 
~RH 
0- + -OH --- H20 
+R-
ketone or aldehyde 
I 
acid 
Unfortunately, vOO-H can hardly be distinguished from vO-H in the mIR. Marked 
differences can be observed between free and associated (H-bonded) OOH groups. At 
this point it is interesting to note that PP invariably shows associated OOH groups even 
at very low levels of oxidation 4Z). In contrast to this strange behaviour, PE shows free 
-OOH groups at low concentration in the 2.5 to 3.0 11m region. Chien et a1.4Z) con-
cluded that -OOH groups in PP are present in 1,3- or 1,3,5- etc. sequences forming 
intramolecular hydrogen bonds, as postulated earlier from kinetic measurements in so-
lution 43). There is no direct evidence of structures of this type in solid PP, although the 
mIR spectra strongly suggest a similar behaviour in both phases. 
Provided there are no carbonyl or hydroxyl groups in the basic unit of the polymer, 
oxidation can be detected by monitoring the changes in the O-H and C = 0 regions 
(Fig. 7.12). 
In many cases, oxidative degradation starts at the surface 44.45), e.g. during extru-
sion of films at high temperature and in contact with air. In this case, ketones are 
formed at the surface which photochemically react by Norrish I and Norrish II split-
ting, thus decreasing M and consequently the mechanical strength. Finally, also the op-
tical properties of the product are affected. Studying these processes, the mIR-ATR 
(-FMIR) spectra should be recorded in addition to mIR transmission spectra 45) in or-
97 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
Wavenumber 
2000 
1800 
1600 1500 
1400 cm-1 
0.0 
~0.2 
'iii 
c:: 
~ 
o 
u 
'K 
o 0.4 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
1.5 
CD 
~ ~ 
I ' .... 
~ : ~ 
5 
, 
I 
, ' 
\ : 
~"""'J 
\ 
, , 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I, 
I, 
\I , 
6 
Wavelength 
~ 
, , 
I r \lj 
" 
~ 
V 
7 iJm 
Fig.7.12. Infrared spectra of films of PE; ex-
posed to UV radiation in the presence of oxy-
gen and water vapour (---); unexposed film 
(--) after 39) 
der to investigate specifically the surface layer (see 7.3.2); e.g., the surface layers of PET 
have been studied during photochemical degradation 62). In this case, fluorescent 
groups are formed at the surface which may also detected by luminescence spectrosco-
py. 
7.5.7 Corona and Plasma Treatment of Polymer Surfaces 
A method of improving certain properties such as adhesion, printability, wettability, 
etc. is the deliberate, controlled degradation and cross-linking of polymer surfaces. This 
can be done by purely chemical methods (e.g. ozone, sodium/NH 3 depending on the 
chemical nature of the polymer) or by corona discharge, a special type of plasma which 
is generated by accelerated electrons leaving a wire or an edge under high tension. The 
active particles formed - atoms, ions, radicals, 0 3 and NOx - modify the surface chemi-
cally. Again, ATR is an adequate method for studying the changes 45) in surface layers 
of about I !lm (much thinner layers of the order of I nm can be studied by ESCA, see 
Sect. 2.4.4). 
U sing the ATR technique, carbon double bonds have been identified at 1,640 cm- 1 
under nitrogen gas 14). In an oxygen atmosphere carbonyl compounds are formed in 
addition, probably by ozone formed in a secondary reaction. Unfortunately, the ATR 
technique is not sensitive enough in order to detect submonolayer modifications known 
to modify the adhesive properties of the polymer surfaces. In these cases, either ESCA 
98 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
or specific colour-forming reactions can be used, e.g. 2,4-dinitrophenyl-hydrazine for 
ketones and aldehydes 63), and measured by UV -absorption (Chap. 3). Chemical treat-
ment by halogens etc. has also been studied by means of IR/ A TR 64). 
7.5.8 Dissociation of Polymeric Acids 
and Other Polymer-IR Studies 
Polystyrene sulphonic acid, a strong acid acting as cation exchanger, can be investi-
gated in the mIR in the form of thin films. Dissociation starts if two mol H 20 have 
been taken up per mol S03H46). In the IR spectrum the absorption of the H50; 
(H30+ +H20) unit formed can be detected as an extremely broad band which is ex-
plained by rapid tunneling of the proton in the highly polarisable H bond connecting 
the two subunits. This behaviour is to be distinguished from simple association by H 
bonds which leads to red-shifted absorption, e.g. in PVOH (Sect. 7.4.2.3). Other recent 
studies, mostly using FTIR include time-dependent orientation processes 65, 66), poly-
mer blends 67,68) and the formation of carbon fibers by thermal degradation of linear 
polymers, e.g. PAN 69). 
7.6 Resume of mlR 
The main application ofmIR polymer spectroscopy is doubtless the analysis and iden-
tification of chemical structures and their changes (Table 7.7). This application is fol-
lowed, at a higher level of sophistication, by studies of conformation which also provide 
information about tacticity and crystallinity. True crystal effects caused by 3D ordering 
are occasionally also observed, although the effects are small. The electronic structure 
influences the strength of many bonds and thus causes shifts of maxima which may help 
to elucidate the nature of bonding. 
Many mIR bands are due to movements in the chain and can thus be interpreted 
as phonons (see Sect. 5.6). 
As a prominent example for interactions and complex formation studied by mIR 
spectroscopy, the H bond has been discussed on several occasions. Summing up, mIR 
spectroscopy is the most commonly used method in polymer spectroscopy. This is why 
only a very limited number of examples out of thousands has been discussed in this 
chapter. This extensive use as a routine method overshadows the scientific merits of the 
method which are often underestimated 56). The range of applications has recently been 
increased by FTIR. 
Table 7.7. Information obtained by mIR absorption relating to structure anddy-
namics of polymeric systems 
Structure 
Dynamics 
Chemical structure 
+ 
Movements ofthe chain, 
+ 
Tacticity 
(+) 
segments and side groups 
Conformation 
+ 
Phonons 
+ 
Crystallinity 
+ 
Excitons 
Electronic structure 
+ 
Complex formation and re-
+ 
lated phenomena 
99 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
7.7 Far-Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
7.7.1 Introduction 
The far infrared extends from v' = 200 to 10 cm - 1 (IUP AC) or A = 50 to 1,000 Ilm. Since 
there is no unambiguous physically meaningful borderline between medium and far 
IR 1, in older papers the fiR is said to extend up to 300 or even 500 cm -1 . 
Absorption by polymers in the fiR 47) is due to low-frequency vibrations (rotations 
cannot be observed in polymers) of heavy groups andjorweak bonds [Eq. (5.1)]: 
- An important vibration in the fiR consists of the valence vibration of H-bonds X-
H ... Y, not to be confused with vX-H and .9X-H, modified by H-bonds and ob-
served in the mIR 
- Intermolecular vibrations in DA complexes 
- Torsional vibrations 
- C-Halogen vibrations 
- Phonons (quanta of collective lattice vibrations). 
The recording of fiR spectra has greatly been facilitated by the FTIR technique 
(Sect.7.3.1), using evacuated interferometer and sample housing in order to avoid 
strong absorption caused by water vapour. 
The absorption coefficients of fiR transitions in polymers are often very weak (ac-
tually LDPE is a popular material for windows and cuvettes, PET films are used as 
beam splitter in FTIR spectrometers). 
Competing with fiR-absorption spectroscopy is Raman spectroscopy (region near 
vo) and inelastic neutron scattering. The latter method, using particle radiation rather 
than electromagnetic waves, has other selection rules, since momentum transfer fa-
vours collision partners of roughly the same mass. 
7.7.2 Chemical Applications 
The low-frequency absorption of the H bond in the fiR is due to vibrations of the mole-
cules or connected by the H bond. The frequency of this band is therefore only weakly 
influenced by deuteration in contrast to mIR bands caused by X-HjX-D vibrations. 
(-D) 
X -
H ----V) 
.. 
.. 
An example of fiR absorption due to an H bond is shown in Fig. 7.13. Actually, the 
polymer (PE) serves as a solvent in this experiment which demonstrates (a) the revers-
ible association of 2,5-dimethylphenol and (b) the unambiguous identification of the 
170 cm - 1 band to belong to the intermolecular H bond 48). 
1 Incidentally, the borderline defined by IUPAC corresponds, in energy units, to the average 
thermal energy at room temperature, 
50 J.lm== 200 cm -1 == 1/40 eV ~kT. 
In the fiR, and even more so in spin resonance spectroscopy (Part D), the excited states are 
highly populated at ordinary temperature 
100 

, 
T 
\\ 
\. 
,~ " /' 
\ i i: 
Ii if 
'v, 
I 
f 
, , 
, , 
, , 
, , 
, , 
\J 
7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
--
Fig. 7.13. fiR Spectra of 2,6-dimethyl phenol dissolved in PE at room temperature (--), after 
heating to 100 OC and rapid cooling (---) and after some time at room temperature (_._._) after 
48) 
One of the more complex polymers investigated by fiR, PET 49), shows four to six 
peaks in the region 40 to 200 cm - 1 if unaxially stretched (100 Ilm film) and measured 
using polarised IR. 
There are considerable differences between amorphous and crystalline samples, in-
dicating strong intermolecular interactions. 
Biaxially stretched crystalline PET films show three peaks at 68, 78, and 176 cm - 1 
which are absent in amorphous samples. They have been interpreted as being due to 
phonons. 
Poly(vinylidene fluoride) (PVF2) forms three different solid phases, depending on 
the mode of preparation, one of the phases (I or f3) being piezoelectric. The polarised 
fiR spectra of the three phases have been measured and compared with mIR andX-ray 
results 50). The spectra are very sensitive to the arrangement of the polymer chains and 
to deviations from the ideal crystalline order. They can be used to identify the different 
phases and distinguish between samples of high and low degree of purity. Furthermore, 
it is hoped to understand the transition between the phases by extended studies of fiR 
spectra. The energy of fiR vibrations being small, weak interactions typical of inter-
molecular forces can easily be recognised. 
7.7.3 Phonons in fiR Spectra of Polymers 
Phonons have been discussed in Sect. 5.6. In the spectral region of fiR, the low-energy 
intermolecular vibrations of crystalline regions can be described as (optical) phonon 
101 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
1.5 
a 
1.0 
B 
0.5 
25 
50 
150 cm-1 
Fig. 7.14A,B. fiR Spectrum of HDPE (90% crystalline) at 25 DC (A) and -150°C (B), after 52) 
transitions. Thus, part of the absorption peaks mentioned in Sect. 7.7.2 (PET, PVF2 ) 
are due to phonons. The selection rule for optical absorption (<p;;:;;; 0) means that the 
wavelength of the phonons - in the wave picture phonons are considered as collective 
lattice vibrations - is much larger than the lattice constant. 
An example of polymer phonon absorption in the fiR is illustrated in Fig. 7.14 
(HDPE) 51. 52). The absorption is shown at two temperatures. There is a sharp peak at 
72 cm -1 at 123 K. The lowest frequency internal (intramolecular) vibration of PE is 
calculated to have ten times the observed frequency. Hence, the absorption observed 
has to be due to an intermolecular vibration. Its intensity is furthermore decreased con-
siderably in LDPE of medium crystallinity, indicating the origin of the 72 cm -1 peak 
in the crystal regions of PE. Cooling of the sample increases the density of the polymer 
and causes the intermolecular (repulsive) potentials to become steeper; this explains the 
increased wave number at low temperature at which there are fewer vibration ally ex-
cited molecules so that transitions from vibrating polymers to higher vibrational states 
do not occur. Thus, the spectrum becomes sharper. 
Poly(tetrafluoroethylene) (PTFE) is another example of phonon absorption 51. 53). 
This polymer shows only diffuse absorption at room temperature. At low temperature, 
however, crystalline PTFE shows a well-resolved spectrum consisting of at least four 
peaks. There is a phase transition in PTFE near room temperature so that the low tem-
perature spectrum not only shows the usual band sharpening due to the loss of excited 
state absorptions and steepening of potentials, but also reflects a different crystal struc-
ture. There is an indication of splitting of the 55 cm - 1 peak, which is said to be due 
to the presence of two PTFE chains per unit cell 51). Other modes in the fiR spectrum 
correspond to calculated internal modes. 
7.7.4 Inelastic Neutron Scattering (INS) 
"Inelastic neutron scattering is used to obtain molecular spectra of polymers free from 
the restrictions of optical selection rule" 54). The usefulness of INS justifies the dis-
cussion of this particle radiation which is partly out of the scope of this book devoted 
to the interaction of electromagnetic radiation with polymers (Chap. 1). 
102 

The neutron has the following properties: 
- as particle 
- Mass: 1 atomic unit = 1.675 x 10- 27 kg 
- Electric charge: 0 
- Spin: 1/2 (h/2n) 
- as wave (at a velocity of v;:;:; 800 ms - 1) 
- de Broglie wavelength: 0.5 nm. 
7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Fig.7.15. Scheme of a neutron scatter-
ing experiment: n: neutron beam, s: 
sample, ex: scattering angle 
At the given velocity, neutrons have a kinetic energy of 300 J mol- 1 (corresponding 
to a 23 cm- 1 photon) and a momentum of 1.3 x 10- 24 Ns (an energy equivalent 
photon has a momentum of only 1.5 x 10- 30 Ns). Neutrons have a much higher 
momentum and a much shorter wavelength compared to photons of the same energy 
per particle. 
These differences lead to the following characteristics ofINS: 
- Scattering involves the nuclei rather than the electron 
- The cross-section strongly depends on the isotopes (drastic differences between H 
and D) 
- Scattering can occur in a spin-coherent and a spin-incoherent manner depending on 
the spin properties of the nuclei. 
The unique position of INS in phonon research is due to the fact that energy, 
momentum and wavelength are in a suitable range for measuring phonons. 
Information on structure and dynamics can therefore be obtained at one and the 
same radiation. The transfer of energy and momentum occurs in an "anti-Stokes" man-
ner from polymer (i.e. from the phonon) to the neutron whose kinetic energy increases 
and whose de Broglie wavelength consequently decreases. Both effects can be used to 
measure the amount of quantum energy transferred. The scattered radiation is mea-
sured as a function of the angle relative to the direction of the exciting beam (Fig. 7.15). 
If the velocity of the neutrons is measured (Ekin = mv2/2), a time-of-flight spec-
trometer is used as detector. Changes in wavelength are measured by crystal diffraction, 
using Bragg's law (A. = 2a sin¢ where a=lattice constant, ¢=angle of maximum reflec-
tion). In the extreme case of coherent INS, one experiment combines inelastic scattering 
and diffraction (interference) so that a high density of information is obtained. For this 
experiment, perdeuterated polymers are required, whereas for incoherent INS proton-
ated polymers are more suitable. This is due to the different cross-sections of scattering 
(Table 7.8). 
103 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
Table 7.S. Cross-sections for neutron scattering (low energy neu-
trons) 54) 
Nucleus 
Spin 
Coherent 
Incoher-
(h/2 n) 
(bam)" 
ent 
(bam)" 
1/2 
l.8 
80 
I 
5.6 
2 
0 
5.6 
0 
I 
1l.6 
0.3 
0 
4.2 
0 
0 
2.0 
0 
" 1 bam = 10- 24 cm2/nucleus 
Coherent INS requires large single crystals of deuterated polymers which are avail-
able only for a few polymers (e.g. POM 55»). The information to be gained, especially 
for transversal phonons, cannot be obtained by other methods, i.e. the intermolecular 
part of the crystal potential. This is needed for calculations of polymer conformations 
and elastic behaviour of crystalline polymers. 
The experiments are simpler if oriented partly crystalline polymers (e.g. fibres) are 
used instead of single crystals, PTFE being a good example for this type of experi-
ment 55). PTFE crystallines in a hexagonal lattice, the macromolecules forming nearly 
ideal cylinders (15/7 helix at room temperature), see Fig. 7.16. The helices are arranged 
in the direction of the fibres. 
The time-of-flight spectra show three maxima; two maxima at 1/v=400 and l/v= 
1,200 Ils m - 1 are independent of the scattering angle, the latter corresponding to elas-
tically scattered neutrons (v= 800 ms- 1, 2=0.5 nm). The third peak (about 800 IlS m- I 
at 27°) approaches the elastic peak near Bragg's angle, i.e. The energy transfer from 
the phonons of PTFE ceases if the diffraction relation is fulfilled. This experiment 
shows that phonon dispersion (see Fig. 5.3 in Sect. 5.6) is actually measured which is 
not possible in optical experiments. 
The reason for the dependence of scattering intensity on the angle of scattering is 
the angle dependence of momentum (mv) transfer which is related with the Broglie's 
wavelength (2) 
mv=h/Jc. 
(7.4) 
Since energy transfer from the phonons of the polymer in this special case (Fig. 7.16) 
discontinues at Bragg's angle (c/>=O), the phonons have zero frequency. This indicates 
n 
104 
Fig. 7.16. Coherent INS by hexago-
nal PTFE fibers: a: lateral distance 
of PTFE helices, 8: Bragg's angle 
(56.5°), n: neutron beam 

7 Infrared Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Table 7.9. Information obtained by fIR and INS relating to structure and dynamics 
of polymeric systems 
Structure 
Chemical structure 
Tacticity 
Conformation 
Crystallinity 
Electronic structure 
(+ ) 
(+ ) 
+ 
+ 
Dynamics 
Movements ofthe chain, 
segments and side groups 
Phonons 
Excitons 
Complex formation and re-
lated phenomena 
+ 
+ 
+ 
acoustic phonons running vertical to the helix axis of the oriented PTFE molecules. In 
contrast, the fIR experiment (7.3.3) populated the optical branch (at iJ</J = 0) of the dis-
persion curve. 
7.7.5 Resume offIR+INS 
The most interesting results with fIR and INS spectroscopy can be obtained on pho-
nons, chain movements and intermolecular interactions (Table 7.9). These processes 
critically depend on crystallinity and conformation. Chemical-analytical applications 
are much less important compared to mIR. It should be noted, however, that modern 
FTIR spectrometers have become available only recently and that the expansive instru-
mentation of INS, requiring a nuclear reactor as radiation source, forbid any routine 
application. 
References 
I. Coblentz, W.W.: Investigations ofInfrared Spectra, Publications Nos. 35, 65, 97, Washing-
ton: Carnegie Institution 1905-1908 
2. Lecomte, J.: Spectroscopie dans 1 'infrarouge, in: Handbuch der Physik XXVI, Berlin, Giit-
tingen, Heidelberg: Springer 1958, p. 244 
3. BriigeJ, W.: Einfiihrung in die Ultrarotspektroskopie, 4.Ed. Darmstadt: Steinkopff 1969; 
Polymers: p. 356 
4. Hummel, D.O., in: Hummel, D.O. (ed.): Polymer Spectroscopy, Weinheim, Verlag Chemie 
1974,p.1l2 
5. Hummel, DO., Scholl, F.: Atlas der Polymer- und Kunststoffanalyse, 2nd ed. Miinchen: 
Hanser, Weinheim: Verlag Chemie (since 1978); 1st ed. (1968--1973) 
6. Wheeler, O.W.: Chern. Rev. 59, 635 (1959) 
7. Brown, T.L.: Chern. Rev. 58, 581 (1958); J. Am. Chern. Soc. 80, 3513 (1958) 
8. Ref. 5), Isted., Vol. I, Part l,p.48(1968) 
9. Goddu, R.F., Delker, D.A.: Anal. Chern. 32,140 (1960) 
10. Ferraro, J.R., Basile, L.J. (eds.): Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy, Vol. 1, New 
York: Academic Press (1978), Vol. 2 (1979), Vol. 3 (1982) 
II. Barnes, AJ., in: Vibrational Spectroscopy, Modern Trends, Barnes, A.J., Orville-Thomas, 
WJ. (eds.), Amsterdam: Elsevier 1977, p. 53 
12. Durig, J.R., Cox, A.W., Jr., in (10), Vol. 1, p. 215 
13. White, R.G.: Handbook ofIndustrial Infrared Analysis, Plenum, New York (1964); Tables 
of useful solvents for IR spectroscopy, p. 102 
14. Carlsson, DJ., Wiles, D.M.: Can. J. Chern. 48, 2397 (1979) 
15. Harrick, N.J., du Pre, F.K.: Appl. Optics 5,1739 (1966) 
105 

C. Vibrational Spectroscopy 
16. Bates, J.B.: Infrared Emission Spectroscopy, in: Fourier Transform Infrared Spectroscopy, 
Vol. I, p. 99 ff., Ferraro, J.R., Basile, LJ. (eds.), New York: Academic Press 1978 
17. Snyder, R.-G., in: Fava, R.A. (ed.): Methods of Experimental Physics, Vol. 16, Polymers, 
Part A, Molecular Structure and Dynamics, New York: Academic Press 1980 
18. Bellamy, L.J.: Ultrarotspektrum und chemische Konstitution, 2nd ed., Darmstadt: Stein-
kopff 1974, Engl. Original ed.: The Infra-red Spectra of Complex Molecules, 2nd ed., Lon-
don: Methuen 
19. Sadtler: Standard Infrared Spectra, Philadelphia 
20. CRC Handbook of Chemistry and Physics, 58th ed. 1977-1978, Section F, Collection of 
Identification Tables 
21. Siesler, H.W., Holland-Moritz, K.: Infrared and Raman Spectroscopy of Polymers, New 
Y or k: Marcel Dekker 1980 
22. Zerbi, G., Ciampelli, F., Zamboni, V.: J. Pol. Sci. C-7, 141 (1964) 
23. Schrader, B., Meier, W. (eds.):DMS RamanjIR Atlas of Organic Compounds, Weinheim: 
Verlag Chemie, Vol. 2, Section N 1974--1975 
24. Ref. 5), Isted., VoLIjI (1968) 
25. Hadzi, D. (ed.): Hydrogen Bonding, New York: Pergamon 1959 
26. Krimm, S., Liang, C.Y., Sutherland, G.B.B.M.: J. Pol. Sci. 22, 227 (1956) 
27. Tadokoro, H., et al.: J. Chern. Phys. 23,1351 (1955) and J. Pol. Sci. 26, 379 (1957) 
28. Yamahashi, R., Tadokoro, H., Marahashi, S.: J. Chern. Phys. 41,1233 (1964) 
29. Keighley, J.H., in: Jones, D.W. (ed.): Introduction to the Spectroscopy of Biological Poly-
mers, London: Academic Press 1976, p. 17 
30. Natta, G.: Makromol-Chem. 35, 44 (1960) 
31. Natta, G., Peraldo, M., Allagra, G.: Makromol. Chern. 75,215 (1964) 
32. Miyazawa, T., in: The Stereochemistry of Macromolecules, Vol. 3, Kethley, A.D. (ed.), New 
York: Dekker 1968, p. 147 
33. Tadokoro, H., Kobayashi, M., in: Hummel, D.O. (ed.): Polymer Spectroscopy, Weinheim: 
Verlag Chemie 1974, p. 3 
34. Natta, G., Valvassori, A., Ciampelli, F., Mazzanti, G.: J. Pol. Sci. A3, 1 (1965) 
35. Schachtschneider, J.H., Snyder, R.G.: Spectrochim. Acta 21,1527 (1965) 
36. Tadokoro, H., Kobayashi, M., Uhita, M., Yasufuku, K., Murahashi, S.: J. Chern. Phys. 42, 
1422 (1965) 
37. Peraldo, M., Cambini, M.: Spectrochim. Acta 21, 1509 (1965) 
38. Grant, LJ., Ward, LM.: Polymer 6, 223 (1965) 
39. Zbinden, R.: Infrared Spectroscopy of High Polymers, New York: Academic Press 1964 
40. Siesler, H.W.: J. Mol. Structure 59,15 (1980) 
41. Geuskens, G. (ed.): Degradation and Stabilisation of Polymers, London: Applied Science 
Publ. 1975 
42. Chien, J.C.W., Vandenberg, E.J., Jabloner, H.: J. Pol. Sci. A-I 6, 381 (1968) 
43. Dulog, L., Radlmann; E., Kern, W.: Makromol. Chern 60,1 (1963) 
44. Carlsson, D.J., Wiles, D.M.: Macromolecules 4,174 (1971) 
45. Blais, P., Carlsson, P.J., Wiles, D.M.: J. Pol. Sci. A-1, 1077 (1972) 
46. Zundel, G.: Hydration and Intermolecular Interaction, Infrared Investigations with Polyelec-
trolyte Membranes, New York: Academic Press 1969 
47. Brasch, J.W., Mikawa, Y., Jakobsen, R.J.: Appl. Spectrosc. Rev. 1, 187 (1968) 
48. Jakobsen, R.J., Brasch, J.W.: Spectrochim. Acta 21,1753 (1965) 
49. Maubey, T.R., Williams, D.A.: J. Pol. Sci. e22, 1009 (1969) 
50. Latour, M., Montaner, A., Galtier, M., Geneves, G.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. Ed. 19, 1121 
(1981 ) 
51. Willis, H.A., Andby, M.E.A., in: Ivin, K.J. (ed.): Structural Studies of Macromolecules by 
Spectroscopic Methods, London: Wiley 1976, p. 81 
52. Fleming, J.W., Chantry, G.W., Turner, P.A., Nicol, E.A., Willis, H.A., Cudby, M.E.A.: 
Chern. Phys. Lett. 17, 84 (1972) 
53. Chantry, G.W., Fleming, J.W., Nicol, E.A., Willis, H.A., Cudby, M.E.A., Boerio, F.J.: Poly-
mer 15,69(1974) 
54. Allen, G., in: Ivin, K.J. (ed.): Structural Studies of Macromolecules by Spectroscopy 
Methods, London: Wiley 1976, p.l 
106 

References 
55. White, J.W.: in ref. 54), p,41 
56. Painter, G.C., Coleman, M.M., Koenig, J.L.: The Theory of Vibrational Spectroscopy and 
its Application to Polymeric Materials, New York: Wiley 1982 
57. Henniker, J. c.: Infrared Spectroscopy of Industrial Polymers, London: Academic Press 1967 
58. Neto, N., DiLauro, C.: Eur. Pol. J. 3, 645 (1967) 
59. Petcavich, R.J., Coleman, M.M.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. ed. 18,2097 (1980) 
60. Wu, M.S., Painter, P.C., Coleman, M.M.: J. Pol. Sci. Pol. Phys. ed. 18,95 (1980) 
61. Simak, P.: J. Macromol. Sci. Chern. A 17,923 (1982) 
62. Blais, P., Day, M., Wiles, P.M.: J. Appl. Pol. Sci. 17, 1895 (1973) 
63. Kato, K.: J. Appl. Pol. Sci. 19,951 (1975) 
64. Sage, D., Berticat, P., Vallet, G.: Ang. Makrom. Chern. 54,151 (1976) 
65. Holland-Moritz, K., Holland-Moritz, I., van Werden, K.: Coll. Pol. Sci. 259,156 (1981) 
66. Holland-Moritz, K., Siesler, H.W.: Pol. Bull. 4,165 (1981) 
67. Varnell, D.F., Runt, J.P., Coleman, M.M.: Macromolecules 14, 1350 (1981) 
68. Varnell, D.F., Coleman, M.M.: Polymer 22,1324 (1981) 
69. Coleman, M.M., Sivy, G.T.: Carbon 19,123 (1981) 
107 

Part D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
8 Principles of Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
8.1 Introduction 
The group of spectroscopic methods that are based on the spin-resonance effect has in 
common with those discussed in the previous chapters that it is due to true resonance 
absorption or emission of electromagnetic radiation, albeit under the additional action 
of external (laboratory) or internal (molecular) magnetic fields. Continrting the non-
magnetic absorption spectroscopy beyond the fiR into the microwave region would 
lead to the relaxation spectra of polymers (the rotations typical of this spectral regions 
are irrelevant to macromolecules) which are due to slow movements of the polymer 
chains or parts of it. These non-resonance spectra, however, have been excluded from 
the scope of this book (see Part A). 
The energy levels between which spin resonance absorption and emission takes place 
are in general created by external magnetic fields. Exceptions are the zero-field tran-
sitions of triplet states in ESR and the nuclear quadrupole magnetic resonance in NMR 
spectroscopy. 
In Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy the interaction responsible for absorption of the 
low energy (microwave and radio frequency) is a magnetic one, whereas the inter-
actions considered in the preceding chapters were nearly exclusively electric inter-
actions. The field of Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy of polymers will be conveniently 
classified into Electron Spin-Resonance (ESR, Chap. 9) and Nuclear Magnetic Res-
onance (NMR, Chap. 10). Before discussing these methods in further detail, a few ques-
tions concerning the common basic principle of the two will be treated in this introduc-
tory chapter: 
- What is an electron or a nuclear spin? 
- How does resonance absorption come about in systems containing spin? 
- Which polymers can be investigated by Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy? 
8.2 The Spin of Elementary Particles 
Spin is a movement which in the macroscopic world is known as rotation about an axis 
of a body (e.g. of a top). This movement is characterised by an angular momentum 
(8.1). 
Angular momentum = Moment of inertia (EJ)xAngular velocity (co). 
(8.1) 
109 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
The dimension of angular momentum is identical with that of the Planck constant, h 
(energy x time), the SI unit being Js=:kg m2 S-1. 
The elementary particles forming the atoms (e-, p+, n) are known to show an 
angular momentum of ~. ;n =: h/2. This elementary angular momentum, which in 
nuclei and atoms may add vectorially to give 0, 1/2, 1,3/2 ... XJiis briefly called spin and 
characterised by the numbers 0, 1/2, 1,3/2 ... X omittingJf. The angular momentum is 
the physical reality which has been postulated from quantum mechanics (Pauli-Dirac 1») 
and experimentally verified. A spin-like movement of the particles corresponding to this 
angular momentum can be imagined, taking into account the tentative nature of all 
macroscopic pictures of atomic events. 
The electrons in atoms and molecules may in addition to the above spin angular 
momentum show an orbital angular momentum which combines with the former to 
yield a total angular momentum. Ordinary ("closed shell") molecules mostly have a 
total electron spin of zero (singlets). Radicals have a total electron spin of 1/2 corre-
sponding to one unpaired electron (doublets), triplet states with two unpaired electrons 
have an electron spin of 1 (see Sect. 4.5.1). 
In elementary particles, the angular momentum is furthermore connected with a 
magnetic (dipole) momentum, the vector p. This can easily be understood in the case 
of charged particles, but much less so in the case of the neutron. 
The magnetic moment of the free electron amounts to 
(8.2) 
and numerically nearly equals Bohr's magneton J1-B which is defined according to (8.3) 
by universal constants only: 
eh 
J1-B= 4--= 9.274 x 10- 24 IT- 1 . 
nm. 
(8.3) 
Defining an analogous nuclear magneton J1-N [using the mass of the proton, mp, instead 
of me in Eq. (8.3)] we see that his quantity has to be smaller by the factor mp/me= 
1836.15 than the corresponding electronic (Bohr's) moment. 
(8.4) 
The experimental magnetic moment of the proton amounts to 2 .. 79 J1-N' 
Summing up we note that the mechanic angular momentum - the spin - is connected 
with a magnetic moment. This magnetic moment is smaller roughly by a factor of 1,000 
for the proton compared to the electron. 
8.3 Resonance Absorption 
In order to observe resonance absorption (or emission) of electromagnetic radiation, 
a magnetic field which acts on the elementary magnetic moments of the electrons or 
nuclei is necessary 3, 8-11). The force of this interaction is proportional to the magnetic 
110 

8 Principles of Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
Tabelle 8.1. Resonance Frequencies and gN Factors of Several 
Nuclei, Relevant to Polymer NMR 
Nucleus 
IH 
2H(D) 
13C 
14N 
19F 
33S 
31p 
Natural 
abundance 
percent 
99.98 
1.6 x 10- 2 
1.1 
99.64 
100 
0.74 
100 
voat 
gN 
2.114 T 
MHz 
90.00 
5.5854 
13.82 
0.8574 
22.63 
1.4044 
6.50 
0.4036 
84.67 
5.2546 
6.90 
0.4284 
36.43 
2.26\0 
flux density B of the field 1 and to the magnetic moment of the particle. The resonance 
condition in its general form is given in Eq. (8.5). 
hv=gllB 
(8.5) 
g=proportionality factor (ge=2.0 in case offree electrons, gN=O.1 to 6 for many nu-
clei, see Table 8.1); 11 = flB for electrons, flN for nuclei; B= IB I, magnetic flux density. 
Figure 8.1 shows that part of the electron-magnetic spectrum which is used in Spin-
Resonance (ESR and NMR) Spectroscopy. 
According to this scheme, ESR spectroscopy is performed in the microwave region, 
around 10 GHz, whereas NMR requires short wavelength radiowaves in the 1 to 1O-m 
band. the magnetic strength required is of the order of 1 Tesla (104 GauB). Usually, 
the sample is placed into a strong, homogeneous magnetic field and exposed to 
microwaves of RF radiation. In order to obtain a spectrum, the frequency could in 
principle be scanned under fixed B [Eq. (8.5)] over the absorption region. This pro-
cedure would correspond to the use of monochromators in optical spectroscopy. Ex-
perimentally, however, it is easier to scan the magnetic flux density B, while keeping 
the frequency constant. Furthermore, in ESR spectroscopy, the first derivative of the 
absorption dA/ dB is recorded as a function of B rather than the absorption A itself. 
The first ESR spectra have been obtained by Savoisky in 1945 4 ). The NMR tech-
nique was introduced in the same year by Purcell and Bloch 5) and has been applied to 
the study of polymers soon after its discovery 6). 
8.4 Spin-Resonance in Polymers 
Most polymers are diamagnetic, thus containing only spin-compensated electrons. 
Such polymers can only be investigated by ESR if excited to paramagnetic triplet states 
(see Sect. 4.5.1), or if unpaired electrons are introduced such as in 
- polymers containing "broken bonds", e.g. by mechanical stress 12) or UV radiation 
- polymers produced as polyradicals 7) 
The magnetic flux density is proportional to the magnetic field strengh H according to B = 
lloH2) where /10 =4n 10- 7 Vs/Am is the permeability of vacuum (SI units) 
111 

-
N 
e-
e-(0.3T) 
IH(7.0T) 
13C 
IH 
Resonance - A-
t 
+ 
• 
• 
I 
I 
I 
I 
fiR 
MW 
I 
RF 
(ESR) 
: 
(NMR) 
I 
I 
I 
-
I 
I 
I 
-I 
10-2 
10-1 
10 
102 
dm 
A-
-
Fig. S.l. Wavelength Region of Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy. The resonance wavelengths are given for B= 2.114 Tunless indicated otherwise 
~ 
-s. 
:;' 
i 
=:I 
~ 
en I 
8 
~ 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
- polymers caused to react with "spin labels" 
- polymers containing transition metal ions, e.g. biopolymers. 
NMR can be applied to several nuclei usually present in polymers e H, 13C), al-
though in many cases gN is small, resulting in low intrinsic sensitivity and the natural 
abundance of the active nucleus may be small (see Table 8.1). In these cases, special 
techniques (pulse-FT NMR) have to be applied. Only 19F equals IH with regard to gN 
and natural abundance of the magnetically active isotope. The increase in sensitivity 
at high gN is due to the proportionally higher energy difference [see Eq. (8.5)] between 
ground and excited states at fixed B and temperature, thus yielding a favourable Boltz-
mann distribution between ground and excited states. The natural abundance does, of 
course, influence the concentration of the particles available for detection at a given 
concentration of the polymer to be studied. In contrast to the more specific ESR tech-
nique, NMR spectroscopy can be applied nearly universally in polymer research. In this 
regard it may be compared with mIR absorption spectroscopy. 
References 
1. Schpolski, E.W.: Atomphysik, I and II. VEB Berlin (1973/1974) 
2. Pohi, R.W.: Elektrizitiitslehre, 20. Auflage. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1967 
3. Ingram, D.J.E.: Spectroscopy at Radio and Microwave Frequencies, 2nd Ed. London: But-
terworth 1967 
. 
4. Zavoisky, E.: J. Phys. USSR 9, 211 (1945); see also: B. Ranby in: ESR Applications to 
Polymer Research, Nobel Symposium 22. Stockholm: Almquist & Wiksell 1973 
5. Bovey, F.A.: High Resolution NMR of Macromolecules. New York: Academic Press 1972 
6. Slichter, W.P.: Fortschr. Hochpolymer Forsch. 1,35 (1958) 
7. Braun, D.: J. Pol. Sci. Part C 24, 7 (1968) 
8. Mc Lauchlan, K.A.: Magnetic Resonance. Oxford: University Press 1975 
9. Coogan, C.K., Ham, N.S., Stuart, S.N., Pilbrow, J.R., Wilson, G.: Magnetic Resonance. 
New York: Plenum 1970 
10. Erbeia, A.: Resonance Magm!tique. Paris: Masson 1969 
II. Poole, C.P., Farah, H.A., Jr.: The Theory of Magnetic Resonance. New York: Wiley-Inter-
science 1972 
12. Kausch, H.H.: Polymer Fracture. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1978 
9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) 
Spectroscopy of Polymers 
9.1 General Characteristics of ES R Spectra 
The basis of ESR spectroscopy is absorption of electromagnetic radiation by unpaired 
electrons in a magnetic field 1.5 - 9). Unpaired electrons are characterised by an angular 
momentum, the "spin", which is connected with a magnetic moment (Chap. 8). This 
magneticmoment is influenced by external magnetic fields in such a way that two orien-
tations of different energy are formed [Eq. (9.1) and Fig. 9.1]. 
Without external field, all unpaired electrons are degenerate, i.e. they have equal en-
ergies. It is therefore permissible to say that the external magnetic field removes this 
degeneracy. Since the degenerate energy levels of a single unpaired electron split into 
two, the corresponding state is called a doublet in analogy to optical spectroscopy of 
113 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
E 
o~------~------------------~-
B 
Fig. 9.1. Schematic presentation of the splitting of energy levels in a magnetic field (doublet). B: 
magnetic flux density; see Eq. (9.1) 
atoms and small molecules in the gas phase where similar splittings are observed (cou-
pling of spin transitions with electronic transitions). 
Let us consider a polymeric radical, e.g. a broken C-C chain: 
IH 
I 
I 
'V\I\I\JVC--12Ce 
I 
lk 
In a first approximation, we expect a resonance absorption close to that observed for 
free electrons; since the magnetic interaction of un unpaired electron with its surround-
ings is in general weak: 
(9.1) 
ge = 2.0023 (free electron "g-factor"), J1.B = Bohr's magneton (see Chap. 8). 
In contrast to most other spectroscopic techniques the resonance frequency of ESR 
depends not only on molecular properties, but primarily on the external magnetic field, 
as measured by the magnetic flux density B [Eq.(9.l)]. For experimental reasons, in 
ESR spectroscopy two microwave frequencies, called X band and Q band (Table 9.1), 
are preferentially used (as indicated by the term "band", X and Q indicate a range of 
frequencies available). 
Since JE=hv is very small (1.6 x 10- 3 kT at room temperature in the case of X-
band), the upper and the lower energy levels are nearly identically populated so that 
"upward" and "downward" transitions are almost equally likely to occur if microwaves 
interact with the sample, which is located between the poles of a strong magnet of vari-
able field strength. The net absorption observed is due to the slightly superior popula-
tion of the lower "ground state" [see Eq. (9.5)]. During the experiment, v is kept con-
114 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Arnax 
\ -2 
\ \, 
"-' .... ' ............ 
Or---~~-------''----'----;-----------~~--~ 
(pIp) 
I 
I 
-I 
8 
Tesla 
Fig. 9.2. Schematic ESR absorption spectrum of an unpaired electron without hyperfine splitting; 
absorption (A) in relative units and first derivative dA/dB. The position of maximum absorption 
is given for X-band 
stant. Scanning B through the resonance region according to (9.1), we expect a roughly 
GauBian absorption surve, A (B), as shown in Fig. 9.2. 
Again for experimental reasons, the 1 st derivative of the absorption curve, dA/ dB (B) 
is recorded instead of A (B). A low frequency alternating field is superposed on the -
slowly scanned - external magnetic field and the resonance absorptiop. thus obtained 
is amplified and recorded to yield directly the derivative absorption dA/dB. As a 
measure of line-width, the easily derived L1 peak-to-peak width (see Fig. 9.1) is used in-
stead of L1 at Amax/2 ("half-width") which is somewhat larger. The minimum line-width 
is given by the uncertainty principle (9.2). 
(9.2) 
(9.3) 
If L1 t is extremely small, i.e. if the relaxation is very fast, L1 may become large relative 
to ordinary ESR band widths and the ESR absorption may actually vanish. 
115 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
dA 
dB 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
a 
I 
a 
.. I 
1-
-I-
B 
Fig. 9.3. ESR spectrum of an unpaired electron coupled with two equivalent protons; a = coupling 
constant 
According to Eqs. (9.2) and (9.3), a natural line-width of 
corresponds to a relaxation time of about 30 ns. Compared to other spectroscopic 
methods, we observe in ESR (and even more so in NMR) extremely narrow lines and 
as a consequence the natural line-width may influence the observed line shape in many 
cases. The relaxation processes deactivating the energetically higher ("excited") state 
created by absorption of a microwave photon are 
Spin-lattice relaxation: Ll t = Tl 
and 
Spin-spin relaxation: Llt= T2 • 
The relaxations are relatively slow processes in C-radicals and similar unpaired elec-
trons in organic molecules, e.g. in polymer radicals and thus in general do not strongly 
increase Ll in ESR spectra. 
In transition metal ions the relaxation may be very fast due to spin-orbit coupling, 
so that ESR may often be observed only at very low temperatures. This point is crucial 
when recording ESR spectra of some biopolymers 2). 
A typical ESR spectrum is shown in Fig. 9.3. This spectrum could be due to the 
above ~CH2 . radical, taking now into account the hyperfine coupling between the 
116 

E 
H 
I 
-C· 
I 
9 Electron.Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
A 
B 
H 
I 
-C· 
I H 
hVo 
B 
Fig. 9.4. Pictorial explanation of hyperfine splitting (after Ranby and Rabek I); hvo indicates the 
microwave energy used 
' 
unpaired electron and the two equivalent protons (the actual recording of this 
particular spectrum depends, of course, on the strict exclusion of oxygen). Figure 9.3 
shows three peaks, the central peak being twice as strong as the outer peaks, which 
have the same distance (a) from the central peak. The true absorption curve A (B) 
(Fig. 9.4) would give the same information. The reason for this splitting is the 
"isotropic" (i.e. independent of the direction of the magnetic field) interaction of the 
magnetic moments of the protons of the radical end group. 
Owing to this coupling, the electron and nuclear spins orient one other inducing 
small energy differences and thus slightly different resonance frequencies. In a pictorial 
117 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
E 
hVo 
A 
B 
B 
Fig. 9.5. Hyperfine splitting between an unpaired electron and a nucleus with spin I (e.g. a spin 
label of the type indicated). As in Fig. 9.4, splitting is strongly exaggerated for the sake of clarity 1) 
way, this splitting, first by one proton, then by a second one, is shown in Fig. 9.4. Using 
a fixed microwave frequency VQ , the experimental absorption spectrum can easily be de-
duced from this diagram (insert in Fig. 9.4). Interaction of the unpaired electron with 
only one proton would result in a doublet of equally intense ESR absorption lines (inner 
part of Fig. 9.4). The (isotropic) coupling constant a depends on the unpaired electron 
density at the protons or, generally, at the interacting paramagnetic nuclei. 
In organic molecules, 14N is a further important nucleus I), because of its high nat-
ural abundance and its nuclear spin 1 corresponding to two parallel elementary spins, 
("nuclear triplet state"). In polymer spectroscopy, 14N splitting is observed, e.g. in spin 
labels. As can be seen in Fig. 9.5, splitting leads to three equally intense hyperfine struc-
ture lines. 
The simultaneous interaction of an unpaired electron with more than one or two 
paramagnetic nuclei leads to intricate spectra with many lines except for highly sym-
metrical molecules. The coupling constants (a) can be deduced from measured peak dis-
tances and thus a picture of the electron density distribution within the molecule or 
"chromophore" - e.g. a side group of an aromatic polymer can be obtained. In this 
118 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
case, the spectral resolution has to be high, a requirement which is achieved only with 
difficulty in polymers. 
The density of the unpaired electron (Q) at the interacting nucleus or at a neighbour-
ing nucleus (e.g. H splitting in aromatic radical-ions) is porportional to the experimen-
tal hyperfine splitting constant, a, Eq. (9.4). 
(9.4) 
QH= 22.5 G in C6H~ -; similar values have been found for other aromatic radical 
ions 3); in this case is the density of the unpaired electron obtained, e.g. from HMO cal-
culation at the C-atom to which the interacting H-atom is connected. 
In polymers, radical anions (e.g. ofPIVN) tend to degrade so that ESR spectra have 
to be interpreted with care 4). 
As indicated above, line broadening, especially of polymers, is a major problem in 
ESR spectroscopy. This may be due to 
- extremely fast relaxation (Tl and/or Tz very short) 
- saturation of signals due to high microwave power 
- anisotropic hyperfine interaction or other anisotropic line broadening effects. 
Fast relaxation leads to homogeneous line broadening, i.e. the line is broadened as 
a whole. From this point of view, slow relaxation seems to be desirable, although this 
leads to another broadening mechanism - signal saturation - which is due to equal dis-
tribution of lower (No) and higher (N,) energy radicals. Without perturbation by a 
microwave field the Ns/ N 0 ratio is determined by the Boltzmann distribution (9.5), 
Ns 
_,1£ 
_~ 
No = e 
kT = e 
kT. 
(9.5) 
For Xband frequencies and T=295 K, we obtain Ns/No=O.985. 
Since resonance interaction with the microwave field leads to absorption and in-
duced emission of photons with equal probability, net absorption is not observed if Ns/ 
No = 1. The intensity of the ESR signal increases with microwave power; in slowly 
relaxing systems, however, this effect cannot be fully used to increase the sensitivity be-
cause higher power levels saturate (Ns/ N 0 ~ 1) the ESR signal. 
For polymers, as for all amorphous solids and highly viscous solutions, anisotropic 
or "classical" interaction of the unpaired electron with surrounding paramagnetic nu-
clei or other unpaired electrons is an important line-broadening mechanism. This 
broadening is due to the small additional magnetic fields provided by the paramagnetic 
particles (nuclei or unpaired electrons) which increase or decrease the external magnetic 
field by small amounts and thus are shifting the resonance flux density Bo over a certain 
region, the width of which determines the anisotropic broadening (Fig. 9.6). 
Whereas in fluid solutions the magnetic dipolar interactions are averaged to zero, 
in amorphous and polycrystalline solids and in viscous solutions, each unpaired elec-
tron "feels" a somewhat different magnetic field. The broadening due to this effect is 
furthermore inhomogeneous, since the signal observed is composed of many different 
lines, each corresponding to a different resonance frequency of Bo. This can be shown 
directly by partial saturation of one of the lines, which causes a dip in the absorption 
signal ("hole burning"). Rigid polymer molecules can show anisotropic interaction 
119 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
-
~ 
S 
N 
N, 
==:J 
S 
N 
S 
==:J 
S 
N 
(b) 
(Q) 
-
-
Fig. 9.6. Visualisation of anisotropic line broadening of an ESR active spin, depicted as small 
magnet (black bar) by other nearby elementary magnets (white bars); (a) increase of external field; 
(b) decrease of external field 
even in fluid solution unless the frequency of molecular movements> hyperfine split-
ting (a splitting of 10 G corresponds to 28 MHz). 
A last type of band broadening is due to the small, but measurable anisotropy of 
ge [Eq. (9.1)]. The average CfJe' as measured in liquid solutions is mostly found near the 
value of the free electron (2.0023). Small deviations from this value can be used analyti-
cally in order to identify radicals. In single crystals of known orientation relative to the 
magnetic field, the anisotropy of ge can be measured; in amorphous and polycrystalline 
media where the individual spins do not have a common orientation, this anisotropy 
causes line broadening and distortions. 
9.2 Experimental 
An ESR spectrometer consists of the following essential parts 1. 2, 5 - 9), see Fig. 9.7. The 
radiation source is a klystron in which a reflected electron beam is modulated by means 
of electric fields thereby producing monochromatic microwaves of a relatively small 
power of about I to 100 mW. The frequency chosen can be precisely kept constant by 
modifying the tension of the reflector (AFC). The modulation range of a klystron is 
about Vo ± 25 MHz at Vo ~ 10 GHz (X band). A monochromator is not necessary owing 
to the purity of the frequency generated. 
The microwaves are conducted in a suitably formed metallic hollow waveguide to 
the cacity to which they are coupled by means of a hole (iris). The cavity is designed 
in the form of a resonator, in which standing microwaves are formed by reflection and 
interference (Fig. 9.8). The sample has to be introduced into the cavity in the region of 
the highest magnetic field strength (interaction with the magnetic moments) which cor-
responds to the minimum electric field strength so that dielectric losses in the sample 
are minimised. This is especially important when water is used as solvent; in that case, 
flat absorption cells, parallel to the xy plane (Fig. 9.8) have to be used. The resonator 
has to be tuned exactly to the frequency used. The condition of interference requires 
the dimensions of the cavity to be of the order ofthe wavelength (Table 9. I). 
Part of the difficulties in working with Q-band frequencies is due to the smaller 
sample - and cavity dimensions required compared to those for X-band frequencies. 
The magnet has to produce a maximum magnetic flux density of the order of Bmax = 1 
Tesla and has to be variable over the whole region from B=O up to B. The field has to 
120 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
._00_ .. -, 
i°.cil~ 
: 
:-.. _00_00_00_00_00_00--1 Tmni""th .. r---J ~ 
II: 
I 
Source system 
• Io.-d 
I: 
. 
i 
'=~n::'oo--oo --"1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
,,,,,,,dor 
: 
.. ~00_00_.1 
system 
100 kHz: 
po-
otmplifiet 1------.,---1 
00, 
I, 
i 
L .. _. 
._oo __ .. _ .. _··_··~ 
Fig. 9.7. Block diagram of an X-band ESR spectrometer equipped with 100 kHz phase - sensitive 
detection (after 2)) 
be homogeneous and constant within ± 1 ppm. Most modern ESR spectrometers use 
100 kHz modulation of the magnetic field produced by small, additional coils located 
at the cavity walls. Thus, periodical changes in ESR absorption (A) are created, which 
are used for the phase-sensitive amplification of the signal (Fig. 9.9). 
Recording very narrow peaks, it has to be taken into account that 
v (modulation) < LI 
(9.6) 
is required; in X band, 100 kHz corresponds to about 3 J.l.T (30-mG); polymer peaks, 
however. are mostly much broader. 
The detector (Si crystal), which is located outside the cavity in a branch of the wa-
veguide, is sensitive to the weakening of the microwave field by the sample. The 100 
kHz component is amplified selectively and either recorded directly or stored to im-
prove the S/ N ratio using signal averaging. Strong signals can immediately be observed 
by an oscilloscope. 
Under favourable conditions meaning small line-width LI = 1 G and insignificant 
saturation tendency so that high MW power can be used, the sensitivity is reported to 
121 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
a) 
Iris 
'~, 
y 
b) 
sample 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
-----~ 
" " 
I 
electric 
tsA/2 
~
I 
l~ 
y ~ 
field strength 
c) 
x 
z 
z 
magnetic 
field strength 
Fig. 9.8 a-c. Scheme of a TE10Z-resonator cavity (a), electric (b), and magnetic (c) field distribu-
tion showingmaximum magnetic field strength at the sample position 
Table 9.1 
X-Band 
v =9.5 GHz 
A =3.16cm 
Bx=O.339 T 
Q-Band 
v =35 GHz 
A = 8.57mm 
BQ = 1.25 T 
be near 1010 "spins" 1 28) per sample. 
1010 "spins" correspond roughly to 
10- 2 pmol (absolute) or 10- 10 moll-I. 
The concentration can be determined, albeit not very exactly, by comparison with stan-
dard samples. In modern ESR spectrometers, on line-computers are used for data treat-
ment and simulation of spectra 28). 
1 In laboratory jargon, "spin" is used synonymously for "unpaired electron" 
122 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
'--r 
---n-n-~ Modulated 
_M_V_U~ ob ..... 'oo "g .. ' 
.. 
B 
=' 30 mG (Modulation amplitude) 
Fig. 9.9. Modulation ofESR absorption. The intensity ofthe modulated signal depends on dA/dB 
9.3 Survey of Polymer-Specific Applications 
of ESR Spectroscopy 
According to R{mby 28), the first applications of ESR spectroscopy to polymers have 
been reported by Bresler 29), Bamford 30), and Ingram 31) in the years 1958 to 1960. 
Since that time, a large number of papers have been appearing. 
The most comprehensive monography on this topic is the book by Ranby and Ra-
bek 1). Special fields have been treated, e.g. by Fischer 10), Kausch 11), Tormala and 
Lindberg 12) and many others. Biopolymers have been treated by Keighley 13). 
According to these sources, the main fields of polymer-related applications for ESR 
are: 
- Radicalic polymerisation 
- Mechanical degradation and fracture of polymers 
- Radiation- and light-induced radical formation 
- Spin label and spin probe techniques 
- "True" electron-spin polymers 
- Conductive polymers 
- Triplet states and biradicals. 
In the following sections, a few examples will be given for the mos't important ap-
plications. Since ordinary polymers are mostly diamagnetic, ESR is used for studying 
growing polymer chains, degradation processes and optically excited or chemically 
modified polymers. 
9.4 Pdlymerisation Studies by Means of ESR 
For a large number of polymerisation processes the following mechanism had been 
postulated, long before ESR was used for the direct observation of radicalic intermedi-
123 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
Solution 
of 
Redox system 
---
Solution 
of 
Monomer 
---
-Pump 
ESR Cavity 
Mixingchamber 
Fig. 9.10. Scheme of a flow system for ESR studies of radicalic polymerisation 
ates: 
Initiator 
--:.:.,/lhc:.:.~r--» Starting radical 
+ Monomer -----» Monomeric radical 
+ Monomer 
) Dimeric radical 
+ Monomer 
) Polyradical 
(M') 
(D') 
(P') 
Termination (recombination, chain transfer, etc.) 
-----» Saturated macromolecule 
(polymer or oligomer). 
The experimental problem involved in the direct detection of the intermediate radicals 
is their high reactivity and, hence, low stationary concentration. Figure 9.10 shows a 
flow system which can be used to generate a high concentration of radicals in the cavity 
of the ESR spectrometer, using Fenton's reagent (9.7) or the corresponding Ti3 + sys-
tem (9.8) as initiator ( OH as starting radical ifHzO is used as solvent) 10.14) 
Fe2+ +Hz02->Fe3+ +OH- + OH, 
Ti3 + +HzOz->Ti4 + +OH- +OH. 
According to the general scheme, the reaction proceeds as follows (9.9): 
Starting radical 
Monomer Monomeric radical (M') 
(9.9) 
124 
(9.7) 
(9.8) 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Table 9,2, Hyperfine splitting parameters for polymerizing 
acrylic acid 
Radical 
H 
p 
I 
HO-CH~-
2 I 
COOH 
H 
H 
a(H.) 
G 
20.23 
22.81 
I 
p 
I 
D-
HO---CH2---C---CH2~-
22.62 
21.34 
(>::ope) 
I 
I 
COOH 
COOH 
Other starting radicals are 'CH20H (using methanol as solvent), CH3 (tert. butylhy-
droperoxide instead ofH20 2) or 'NH2 (from NH20H). 
Direct evidence of the radicalic mechanism of polymerisation is obtained by detect-
ing radicalic intermediates, which is possible by ESR. The intermediates are identified 
using the hyperfine parameters, or differences in ge values of M', D' and P". The radi-
cals expected according (9.9) can indeed be identified by ESR. Using vinyl monomers 
(Rl = H), it was shown that the growing end of (P") is the "head" [as shown in (9.9)] 
rather than the "tail". This behaviour had earlier been postulated on the basis of in-
direct evidence. 
The radicals (P");:::;(D') and (M') are chemically very similar so that high resolution 
is needed in order to resolve the spectra as shown in Table 9.2 for acrylic acid. The simi-
larity of the hyperfine coupling constants a (Hrx) and (HfJ) indicates a similar spin den-
sity at the two proton positions. IfNH2 was the starting radical, even a weak 14N triplet 
can be observed in M' (a(N) = 3.4 G), but not in D' and r, thus labelling the monomer 
radical. 
Kinetic experiments can be performed using different concentrations of[M] and fol-
lowing up the radicals quantitatively in order to elucidate the elementary steps of poly-
merisation. 
Other applications ofESR to polymerisation processes include: 
- Copolymerisation: 
the ESR spectrum shows which monomer is added preferentially to the growing 
chain end, e.g. in the copolymerisation of crotonic compounds with acrylonitrile 32). 
- Anionic polymerisation: 
the growing end of a "living polymer" in a purely anionic polymerisation is diamag-
netic, e.g. 
Rl 1 
"",,CH2-i19 Me+ 
R2 
125 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
and thus not detected by ESR; precursors and intermediates of the actual initiator, 
such as naphthalene' - can easily be studied by ESR. 
- Cationic polymerisation: 
for this type of polymer is at ion, if pure, the same is true as for the anionic polymerisa-
tion. Again, precursors can be identified, e.g. CT complexes forming the initiator by 
light-induced electron transfer. 
- Solid-state polymerisation: 
in favourable cases, allowing a fixed orientation of the growing radical with regard 
to the external magnetic field, this type of polymer is at ion may be carried out in single 
crystals. Often, however, the crystal lattice will be destroyed during polymerisation, 
introducing incertainties in the interpretation of spectra. The initiation by means of 
ionising radiation may furthermore create radicals not involved in starting and 
propagating the chain growth! See also Section 9.7. 
- Radiation - induced ionic polymerisation 15): 
in the solid state or in solid matrix. The intermediates (solvent" +, M'- and/or M'+) 
can be detected using ESR. The primary products in rigid solution are the radical 
cation of the solvent molecules and free electrons. 
9,5 Mechanically Formed Polymer Radicals 
Methods for producing "mechanoradicals" include 11): 
a) Milling, cracking, sawing to give powders oflarge surface area and high radical con-
centration. 
b) Stretching of fibres in the cavity; this method produces fewer radicals than (a) but 
oriented ones, and their formation can be recorded during stress. 
The ESR spectra observed originate from three types of radicals: 
(I) Primary radicals - "broken chains" - such as ~H2; these radicals are extremely 
reactive and are converted into 
(2) Secondary radicals. In polyamides (P A), the secondary radical which is relatively 
stable in the absence of O2 is invariably 'CH next to the amide nitrogen (9.10). 
Primary radical 
~ 
CHz 
I 
-
.C-H 
I 
NH 
I 
C=O 
I 
PA 
Secondary radical (1) 
(9.10) 
This radical (1) is formed by hydrogen transfer. The localisation of the unpaired 
electron in the CCH)-N results in the absence of accidental degeneracies in 3 
(N) x 2 (H) ESR absorption lines (Fig. 9.11). 
(3) Follow-up radicals which are due to chemical reactions ofthe primary or secondary 
radicals with impurities. The most important radical of this kind - under practical 
126 

dA 
dB 
9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
g .. 2 
PA6 
room temp. 
B 
Fig. 9.11. ESR spectrum of the metastable secondary radical ofPA6, see Eq.(9.1O) at room tern-
perature;ge~2 
conditions of incomplete exclusion of oxygen - is the peroxy radical: 
~ 
~ 
H-C. + O2 ~ 
H-C-O-O. 
~ 
~ 
The unpaired electron in the peroxy radical does not have an appreciable density 
at any paramagnetic nucleus and therefore forms a single ESR line which may be 
distorted by an anisotropy of the ge-factor. During fracture under "ordinary" en-
viron~ental conditions (e.g. [02] ~ 10- 3 mol 1-1, room temperature), the three 
types of radicals appear at the same time. In ESR experiments aimed at elucidating 
the mechanism of fracture and radical formation, an attempt is made to separate 
the stages, measuring gradually, first at low temperature (77 K), warming up, add-
ing oxygen etc. The spectra are poorly resolved in most cases so that additional in-
formation (irradiation experiments, etc.) are often needed in order to definitely as-
sign the splittings observed. 
In PA_6 11), the primary radicals at 77 K are distributed as follows (9.11): 
50% -CH2--cH; (A) 
(9.11) 
25% -C--cH; 
I 
(B) 
0 
25% -N--cH; 
I 
(C). 
H 
This distribution shows clearly that primary breaking occurs with equal probability at 
the oc-jJ-bond at both sides of the amide groups. 
127 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
Fracture 
z 
(a) 
0 
I-
oCt 
LltL 
(!) 
z 
0 
....I 
W 
--- <rrTf 
S4b-
IDlcro-
crack 
... 
(b) 
Fig. 9.12 a, b. Primary processes of fracture; Peterlin-Sohma (a) and Zhurkov-Kausch (b) 
models 11) 
Warming up under strict exclusion of O2 gives rise to the following secondary reactions 
[(9.12); I see Eq. (9.10)] without loss of total ESR-intensity, 
120 K: A-+I 
120-240 K: B+C-+I 
> 240 K: I is the predominant radical. 
(9.12) 
Stretching experiments using ESR during stress up to the beginning of fracture 1.11.16) 
are aimed at the pinpointing of the primary processes of fracture in an early stage where 
macroscopic damage canot yet be discerned. According to these studies fracture starts 
at single broken bonds and first leads to "submicro cracks" 16) which can also be iden-
tified using X-ray small angle scattering. For partly crystalline polymers the Peterlin-
Sohma model is suitable which assumes strained macromolecules belonging to more 
than one microcrystal as the initial point of attack (Fig. 9.12a). The Zhurkov-Kausch 
model (Fig. 9 .12 b), on the other hand, assumes the formation of more than one broken 
chain for each initially split macromolecule 11). The primary splitting is followed by sec-
ondary reactions of the type Eq. (9.10) leading to saturated chain ends and macro radi-
cals [e.g. lin (9.10)] which are more likely to break near the unpaired electron (weaker, 
electron deficient bonds) than elsewhere in the macromolecule. 
128 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
It can be concluded from ESR studies of polymer fracture under elongation that 
most polymers do break radically and that the primary event is invariably a main chain 
splitting (rather than "stripping off' of side groups). 
9.6 ESR of Radicals Formed by Radiation 
In principle, any radiation whose energy per photon or particle is higher than the bind-
ing energy of the chemical bonds to be broken is capable of forming radicals (100 to 500 
kJ mol- 1 for most single bonds), provided that the radiation is absorbed by the poly-
mer. In practice, "I, f3 and X-rays are used predominantly. For studies of the photolytic 
break-down and the photo-oxidation of polymers, nUV radiation is also used, ESR 
studies of polymer radicals formed by radiation are important with regard to the deg-
radation of plastics and their stabilisation against radiation. 
As discussed for the mechanoradicals, radiation - induced radicals are rapidly con-
verted in the presence of oxygen to form peroxy radicals, hydroperoxides, ketones, etc. 
In the absence of oxygen, the primary reactions can be studied by ESR. 
Polyolefines (RH) react with radiation predominantly according to Eq. (9.13) 1). 
Recombination 
-------...... (RH)* _ 
R- + H-
(9.13) 
\~------,~y------~I 
Using n-alkane single crystal as oligometic models for PE it has been established by 
ESR that all C-H bonds are attacked with equal probability by the high energy 
photons; in a secondary reaction, the terminal-CHz groups are converted into -CH-
radicals. A radical which has been frequently observed in polyolefines is the metastable 
allyl radical. 
H 
""'-CHz-CH = CH~-CHz~ . 
The absorption offree electrons (e-), to be expected according to Eq. (9.13), has indeed 
been identified as a sharp single peak atge = 2.002. 
The literature on radiation-induced radicals in polymers is abundant 1, 18). The case 
of PIB is chosen as an example to explain differences caused by different modes of radi-
ation 1, 17). 
The ESR spectrum of PIB which has been treated with ionising radiation at 77 K 
shows a doublet (two equally intense peaks, separated by aH =20 G) which is due to 
the radical (9.14). 
CH3 
H 
CH3 
I 
I 
I 
~C----C----C~ 
I 
• 
I 
(9.14) 
CH3 
CH3 
PIB 
UV irradiation at 77 K, on the other hand, gives first rise to a complicated ESR spec-
trum consisting of the superposed components A and B, as shown in Fig. 9.13. The 
component B, which is due to the 'CH 3 radical vanishes after a few hours even at 77 K. 
129 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
~~------+-------,.- + 
8 
Fig. 9.13. ESR components of UV irradiated PIB, which, if superposed, forms the original spec-
trum at 77 K 1, 17) 
The broad band A is still a superposition of the signals originating from three radicals 
which are stable at 77 K, 
• 
(a) --c-
(the counterpart of 'CH3) 
I 
CH3 
(b) The radical (9.14) 
CH3 
I 
(c) 'VVVCH2-C-CH2'VVV 
I 
CH2 
• 
Many plastics contain stabilisers against UV radiation (out-door use) and elevated tem-
perature (during processing), one of the main stabilising mechanisms being the conver-
sion of reactive radicals into more stable ones, e.g. hindered phenoxy radicals: 
oo-P-R 
These reactions are conveniently studied using ESR spectroscopy 1). 
9.7 Triplet States 
Triplets are electronic states of two parallel spins (tt) which have been identified as 
electronically excited phosphorescent states in Sect. 4.5.1. Disregarding for the time be-
ing the magnetic interaction of the two spins, the energy of the triplet splits into three 
sublevels (hence the name "triplet") if a magnetic field is applied to the sample (Fig. 
9.14). In this approximation, the triplet energy is given by Eq.(9.15) where the spin 
quantum number ms= + 1,0, -1 (in contrast to ms= ± 1/2 for unpaired electrons, re-
sulting in doublet states). 
(9.15) 
130 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy ofPolyrners 
ET 
Bmin=Bo/2 
BO 
B 
Fig. 9.14. Idealised (no zero field splitting) energy level diagram of a triplet system as a function 
of magnetic flux density B. The length of the arrows indicates the microwave photon energy 
which is kept constant in typical ESR experiments 
Applying the selection rule Llms = 1, one ESR absorption is expected at Bo, roughly cor-
responding to the resonance absorption of free electron and a weak "half-field peak" 
which is due to the forbidden Llms=2 transition (Fig. 9.14). 
This oversimplified picture has to be modified for real systems taking into account 
the magnetic spin-spin interaction which causes zero field splittings (Fig. 9.15): the trip-
let states of molecules consist of three closely spaced energy levels even in the absence 
of an external field, except in highly symmetric molecules 19) (in spherical and cubical 
symmetry all spin-spin interactions cancel so that D=E=O). Zero field splitting is 
quantified by the first order zero field splitting constant D (about 0.1 cm -1) and the 
second order constant E (about 0.01 cm -1). These constants are indicated in Fig.9.15 
for one particular orientation of the spin system vs. the external magnetic field. The 
single resonance at Bo (Fig. 9.14) is replaced by two Llms= 1 resonances Ba and Bb,which 
strongly depend on the orientation of the molecular axes relative to tbe external field. 
A full analysis of zero field parameters can hence only be made in samples of known 
molecular orientation. The half-field resonance is less orientation-dependent and can 
easily be recognised even in amorphous, rigid solutions. From the exact position of this 
resonance (BmiJ a mean splitting parameter D* can be deduced [Eq. (9.16)] which gives 
an approximate measure of the strength of interaction and thus of the mean distance 
of the two electron spins forming the triplet system (D* is roughly inversely proportion-
al to the mean distance of the two unpaired electrons forming the triplet state). 
_ ! 
3 (hV)2 
2 
D*=VD2+3E2= -4--3(getlBBmin). 
(9.16) 
131 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
axislls 
Fig.9.15. Zero field splitting of a triplet of relatively low summy try (one particular orientation 
relative to the external field). The length of the arrows corresponds to MW photon energy used; 
dashed lines correspond to Ms ± 1 in Fig. 9.14 
The total zero field splitting is approximately given by D (or D*). Strong magnetic 
fields decouple the triplet state so that the two spins are quantised separately, as shown 
in Fig. 9.14 (ms is a good quantum number in this high field case, but notso in the zero 
field region). 
In symmetrical molecules, the magnetic moment of each of the three (or two if E = 0) 
zero field levels of the triplet corresponds to one main axis of the molecule or part of 
macromolecule. In molecules of medium symmetry (E> 0) up to six ms = I peaks can 
be observed in the ESR spectrum. If the triplets are oriented in a single crystal, they 
can collectively be rotated with regard to the external magnetic field so that the res-
onances are observed one after the other. 
This experiment has been performed e.g. using partly polymerised TSHD single 
crystals (see also Sect. 6.6)20.21). The triplet, in this exceptional case, is an electronic 
ground state related to the growing chain ends ofthe TSHD macromolecules: 
132 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
TSHD (Carbene-type chain end) 
R 
I. 
R 
/C. 
I 
~C 
/C~T/~ 
= -CH2-0-S0 2-Q-CH3 
R 
Structures of this type are called carbenes which in principle can also form singlets (i t). 
The triplet nature (it) of the growing chains has been evidenced by ESR absorption, 
since the singlet carbene does not give any ESR signal. The large zero field splitting con-
stant of polymerising TSHD 
D=O.27 cm- 1 
points to close neighbourhood of the spins in the reactive center, causing strong mag-
netic interaction. 
In the low temperature photopolymerisation of TSHD crystals other ground state 
triplets ("diradicals") have been detected in addition to the triplet carbenes and even 
dicarbenes forming quintet states were identified by ESR spectroscopy 33 - 35). These 
studies which have been reviewed recently by Six1 36) give a very detailed picture on the 
primary processes of the solid state polymerisation in diacetylene single crystals. 
Most triplets observed by ESR are excited electronic states (Sect. 4.5.1). The study 
of polymer triplets, e.g. in aromatic and ketonic polymers should be much more used 
as a method complimentary to phosphorescence spectroscopy 22). The most promising 
field of polymer applications for ESR spectroscopy of these "optical" triplets seems to 
be the elucidation of trapping centres which have been identified by emission spectros-
copy. Triplet excitons may also be investigated by ESR although their concentration 
is in general smaller so that sensitivity problems are likely to occur. 
It should be added that zero field splitting can be investigated at low temperature 
without external fields and that transitions between the sublevels can be induced by 
microwaves and observed using phosphorescence as a probe (double resonance tech-
niques) 23). 
9.8 Spin-Labels 
Diamagnetic polymers can be converted into ESR-active derivatives using stable radi-
cals, e.g. nitroxides: 
R 
These radicals can either be attached by covalent bonds to the polymer (spin labels) us-
ing reactive substituents (R) or dissolved physically (spin probes) 12.24). 
133 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
dA 
dB 
B 
Fig. 9.16. ESR of a typical nitroxide spin label in fluid (--) and viscous (---) solution; the split-
ting is due to 14N (aN"" 15 G) 
Nitroxides show a well resolved 14N-split (Fig. 9.16) hyperfine spectrum in solvents 
oflow viscosity. In viscous solution, anisotropic broadening first decreases the intensity 
of the high-field peak (Fig. 9.16). 
Broadening is observed when the spin label needs more than about 10 ps for one ro-
tation. Hindered rotation may be due to firm linking with a macromolecule. The spec-
trum therefore indicates the frequency of polymer movements. The total time regime 
available for the measurement amounts to 
'c (spin-label) "" 10 ps to I IlS 
and overlaps with the time range of fluorescence polarisation (fluorescence label) tech-
nique. Average rotation times (,J are calculated from peak broadening 12, 24). In order 
to exclude electron spin-spin interaction, a dilution of I : 200 to I : 600 (mollabeljmol 
basic unit) is generally attempted. It is often possible to label the end group(s) of mac-
romolecules specifically (PEO, polyester, polyamides, biopolymers). Alternatively, 
substitution is performed along the chain. 
134 
Examples (tert. butyl = + ): 
PS 
H 
~f 
N!.O 
+ 
tert. butyl 
mole ratio label to basic unit: I j 160 
CH3 
I 
;>( 
'\J\.f'vCHz--C--N "-
I 
·"0 
COOCH3 

9 Electron-Spin-Resonance (ESR) Spectroscopy 6fPolymers 
Typically, the average time needed for rotations Tc, as a measure of inverse chain or end 
group flexibility, increases with Mm as in the case oflabelled PS in toluene. 
A limiting value Tc = 400 ps is reached at about Mn = 105 . This effect is due to the 
superposition of movements of the polymer coil as a whole (Ttot) and "local modes" 
(Tim) which are due to movements of side groups and segments [Eq. (9.17)] 
1 
1 
1 
-=-+-, 
L, 
1'tot 
TIm 
(9.17) 
where Ttot can be estimated from viscosity data 24. 25) according to Eq. (9.18) 
(9.18) 
A (free draining coil)=0.6l, A (non draining coil) =0.42, [17] = limiting viscosity num-
ber, 17Solv = viscosity of solvent. 
The temperature dependence of Ttot reflects the activation of 17Solv (9 kJ mol- 1 in 
toluene); Tim' on the other hand, is found to have an activation energy of 18 kJ mol- 1 
(PS), similar to local mode activation in (pCLPS) - and pFPS measured using dielectric 
relaxation techniques. 
The spin label technique has recently been reviewed by Tormiilii et al. 37) and by 
Cameron 38). 
9.9 Resume 
ESR, except for specially prepared polymers, gives no direct information about the 
chemical nature of the intact polymers (Table 9.3), since these in general are diamag-
netic; it does, however, give precise information about the radicals formed by radiation, 
mechanical stress, etc. The spin density is closely related to the electronic structure of 
doublet and triplet states which can be studied by ESR. High resolution allows the spin 
density to be measured using Mc Connell's equations analogous to Eq. (9.4). 
The chain movements are studied using the spin label technique which in this appli-
cation is complementary to several other relaxation methods giving similar informa-
tion. In exciton studies, triplet excitons and their traps in aromatic polymers are likely 
objects of further research. Polymeric CT complexes 26) showing at least partial e1ec-
Table 9.3. Informations obtained by ESR relating to 
Structure 
of polymeric systems 
Chemical structure 
Tacticity 
Conformation 
Crystallinity 
Electronic structure 
+ 
+ 
Dynamics 
Movements of the chain, 
segments and side groups 
Phonons 
Excitons 
Complex formation 
and related phenomena 
+ 
(+) 
+ 
135 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
tron transfer from donor (e.g. PVCA) to acceptor molecules can be studied using ESR. 
The paramagnetic species formed can be regarded as radical cations and anions which 
are closely related to charge carries in polymers (hopping model) 26). Highly conjugated 
polymers mostly contain appreciable concentrations of unpaired electrons and have 
been studied by ESR in order to explain the catalytic and conductive properties of these 
polymers. 
Electron Spin Research is unique for studying the primary processes of mechanical 
degradation and similar degradation processes following a radicalic pathway (e.g. 
photolysis). If highly reactive primary products are to be studied, low temperature 
or high pressure 27) is needed in order to moderate possible secondary reactions. 
ESR spectroscopy is a highly specific and if relaxation is neither too slow nor too 
fast, also an extremely sensitive method. It is not, however, an analytical routine 
method in polymer research. 
References 
1. Ranby, B., Rabek, J.F.: ESR Spectroscopy in Polymer Research. Berlin, Heidelberg, New 
York: Springer 1977; this book contains 2,519 references, up to 1975 
2. Swarz, H.M., Bolton, J .R., Borg, D.C.: Biological Applications of Electron Spin Resonance. 
New York: Wiley 1972 
3. McConnell, H.M., Chesnut, D.B.: J. chern. Phys. 28,107 (1958) 
4. Rembaum, A., Moacanin, J., Haak, R.: J. Macromol. Chern. 1, 657 (1966) 
5. Ayscough, P.B.: Electron Spin Resonance in Chemistry. London: Methuen 1967 
6. Atherton, N.M.: Electron Spin Resonance, Theory, and Application. New York: Halsted 
1973 
7. Geschwind, S.: Electron Paramagnetic Resonance. New York: Plenum 1971 
8. McMillan,J.A.: Electron Paramagnetism. New York: Reinhold 1968 
9. Schemer, L., Stegmann, H.B.: Electron Spin Resonance. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: 
Springer 1970 
10. Fischer, H.: In: Hummel, D.O. (Ed.): Polymer Spectroscopy. Weinheim: Verlag Chemie 
1974,p.289 
11. Kausch, H.H.: Polymer Fracture. Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1978 
12. Tormiilii, P., Lindberg, J.J.: In: Iving, K.J. (Ed.): Structural Studies of Macromolecules by 
Spectroscopic Methods. London: Wiley 1976, p. 255 
. 
13. Keighley, J.H.: In: Jones, D.W. (Ed.): Introduction to the Spectroscopy of Biological Poly-
mers. New York: Academic Press 1976, p. 221 
14. Fischer, H.: Advances Pol. Sci. Vol. 5, 463 (1967) 
15. Yoshida, H., Hayashi, K.: Adv. Pol. Sci. Vol. 6, 401 (1969) 
16. Kausch, H.H., Becht, J.: Kolloid-Z. u. Z., Polymere 250,1048 (1972) 
17. Carstensen, P., Ranby, P.: In: Radiation Research. Amsterdam: North Holland Publ. 1967, 
p.297 
18. Sohma,J., Sakagudri, M.: Adv. Pol. Sci. Vol. 20,1 (1976) 
19. McGlynn, S.D., Azumi, T., Kinoshita, M.: Molecular Spectroscopy of the Triplet State. En-
glewoods Cliff: Prentice Hall 1969 
20. Stevens, G.C., Bloor, D.: Chern. Phys. Lett. 40, 37 (1976) 
21. Eichele;H., Schwoerer, M., Huber, R., Bloor, D.: Chern. Phys. Lett. 42, 342 (1976) 
22. Rippen, G.: Optische und ESR-spektroskopische Untersuchungen von molekularen Kom-
plexen im Triplettzustand. Gottingen: Thesis 1976 
23. EI-Sayed, M.A.: In: Adv. Photochem. Vol. 9, 311 (1974), New York: Wiley, and in: Lim, E.C. 
(Ed.): Excited States, Vol. 1, 35 (1974), New York: Academic Press 
24. Bullock, T.A., Cameron, G.G.: In: Ivin, K.J. (Ed.): Structural Studies of Macromolecules by 
Spectroscopic Methods. London: Wiley 1976, p. 273 
136 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
25. Zimm, B.H.: J. Chern. Phys. 24, 269 (1956) 
26. Mort, J., Pfister, G. (Eds.): Electronic Properties of Polymers. New York: Wiley 1982 
27. Sz6cz, F.: J. App!. Po!. Sci. 27,1865 (1982) 
28. Ri'mby, B.: In: Bayer, F., Keinath, S.E. (Eds.): Molecular Motion in Polymers by ESR. New 
York: Harwood acado pub!. 1980 
29. Bresler, S.E., Kazbekov, E.N., Saninskii, E.M.: Vysokomo!. Soedin.l, 132 (1959) 
30. Bamford, C.H., Jenkins, A.D., Symons, M.C.R., Townsend, M.G.: J. Po!. Sci. 34,181 (1959) 
31. Ingram, D.J.E., Symons, M.C.R., Townsend, M.G.: Trans. Faraday Soc. 54, 409 (1958) 
32. Can back, G., Ri'mby, B.: Macromolecules 10, 797 (1977) 
33. Huber, R., Schwoerer, M.: Chern. Phys. Lett. 72, 10 (1980) 
34. Bubeck, C., Sixl, H., Neumann, W.: Chern. Phys. 48, 269 (1980) 
35. Neumann, W., Sixl, H.: Chern. Phys. 58, 303 (1981) 
36. Sixl, H.: Spectroscopy of the Intermediate States of Solid State Poiymerisation in Diacety-
lene Crystals, submitted to Advances in Polymer Science 
37. T6rmala, P., Weber, G., Lindberg, J.J.: In: Boyer, R.F., Keinath, S.E. (Eds.): Molecular Mo-
tion in Polymers by ESR. New York: Harwood acado pub!. 1980 
38. Cameron, G.G.: Pure App!. Chern. 54, 483 (1982) 
10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy 
of Polymers 
10.1 TheOrigineofNMRSpectra 
Compared to ESR Spectroscopy, the interaction between the magnetic particles and 
the external magnetic field is much weaker in NMR. The resonance frequency is there-
fore much smaller and can be found in the range of radio frequencies (corresponding 
to wavelengths of I to 10 m) 1,2). As discussed in Chap. 8, the main reason for this be-
haviour is the weakness of nuclear magnetic moments. Table 10.1 shows a list of nuclei 
frequently encountered in polymers together with their natural abundance and relative 
sensitivity of detection. The nuclear spin moment is given in Table 10.1 in units of h/2n. 
The spin of protons and neutrons (1/2) adds up to the total nuclear spin (0, 1/2, 3/ 
2 ... ) which, if non-zero, causes the magnetic moment of the isotope considered. The 
usefulness of NMR as a tool in organic polymer research rests in the magnetic moment 
of several important nuclei CH, 13C, 14N, 19F ... ) and in the absence of such a moment 
in the main isotope of carbon, 12C (if 12C was a magnetic isotope, the NMR spectra 
of most organic compounds were excessively complicated). In the following sections we 
shall first consider IH-NMR spectra which until recently dominated polymer spectros-
copy due to the relatively high sensitivity of 1 H 3). Only 19F shows a comparable sen-
sitivity and therefore can be studied using the classic (continuous mode) instrumenta-
tion discussed in Sect. 10.2. 
. 
The proton spin moment of 1/2 (ms = ± 1/2) causes a splitting into two energy levels, 
in analogy to unpaired electrons in ESR (10.1): 
gN: nuclear g-factor (gp = 5.5857 in case of proton) 
f1N: nuclear magneton (see Chap. 8). 
(10.1) 
In Table 10.2, experimental resonance frequencies, the corresponding wavelengths 
and magnetic flux densities are given for the free proton, neglecting any screening ef-
fects. 
137 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
Table 10.1. Nuclear spin of important isotopes 
Element 
Main isotope 
Isotopes nuclear spin> 0 
Approximative 
nuclear spin = 0 
(natural abundance percent) 
sensitivity 
relative to 1 H 
H 
1 H: 1/2 (99.98) 
I 
2H=D: I (1.5 x 10-2) 
10-2 
C 
l2C 
l3C: 1/2 (1.11) 
1.6 x 10-2 
N 
14N: I (99.64) 
10-3 
15N: 1/2 (0.36) 
10-3 
0 
160 
170: 5/2(3.7 x 10-2) 
3 x 10-2 
F 
19F: 1/2 (100) 
0.83 
Si 
28Si 
29Si: 1/2 (4.7) 
8 x 10- 3 
P 
31 P: 1/2 (100) 
0.07 
S 
32S 
33S: 3/2 (0.74) 
2xlO- 3 
CI 
35CI: 3/2 (75.4) 
5 x 10- 3 
37CI: 3/2 (24.6) 
3 x 10- 3 
Table 10.2. NMR resonance conditions for protons 
Resonance frequency 
Vo 
Wavelength 
Magnetic flux density 
(IT=104 G) 
60 MHz=6 X 107 S-l 
100 MHz= 108 S-l 
300 MHz=3 X 108 S-l 
5m 
3m 
1m 
1.4 T 
2.3 T 
7.0T 
This (free) proton resonance frequency Vo is most easily calculated according to 
(10.2). 
Vo (MHz) = 42.577 x B(T). 
(10.2) 
Using strong magnetic fields turns out to be advantageous for two reasons: 
- Increasing .dE improves the Boltzmann distribution Ns/No between upper and lower 
state [Eq. (9.5)] . .dE at 100 MHz (0.4 mJ mol-l) corresponds to only 1.6 x 10- 5 kT 
at room temperature so that Ns/No is very near to I anyway. The increased Ns/No 
enhances the sensitivity ofNMR measurements. 
- The resolution of spectra is improved by high fields, too, since the chemical shift is 
proportional to the strength of the applied field, but nuclear spin-spin coupling is 
not. 
For chemical applications ofNMR, the following effects are of prime importance: 
(1) Magnetic Dipole-Interaction (anisotropic shielding) 
(2) Chemical Shift 
(3) Nuclear Spin-Spin Coupling 
Magnetic Dipole-Interaction. Each magnetic nucleus belonging to solvent molecules or 
to dissolved macromelecules, is a micro magnet which slightly modifies the magnetic 
field experienced by neighbouring protons so that the resonance field is somewhat dif-
ferent for each proton even if they are chemically equivalent. It follows a peak broaden-
138 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
ing which in the solid state prevents high resolution spectra of polymers, unless a special 
geometrical arrangement (magic angle) is combined with NMR pulse techniques (see 
Sect. 10.8.2). 
Classical solid polymer spectra are "broad-line" spectra giving information about 
movements, but virtually zero information on chemical structure (Sect. 10.4). 
Due to the rapid rotation of flexible macromolecules and their segments in solution, 
the above interactions are averaged to zero, so that in low viscosity solutions high res-
olution spectra can be observed. However, in rigid polymers and viscous solvents, re-
strictions of molecular mobility are frequently observed so that the spectral resolution 
is poor in these cases. 
In practice, proton-free solvents oflow viscosity are used (CCI4 , CDCI3) whenever 
possible. In the case of rigid polymers, the temperature is increased in order to facilitate 
rapid molecular movements. 
Chemical Shift. The interaction of a magnetic field with matter is not restricted to mag-
netic moments already present in the sample, but also induces magnetic moments. This 
diamagnetism causes the magnetic shielding of protons and other nuclei to be studied 4). 
If Bo is the resonance magnetic flux density of the free proton according to Eq. (10.1) 
and (10.2), it is modified by diamagnetic shielding according to (10.3) 
(10.3) 
where ai' the shielding constant is composed of a diamagnetic positive term ad and a 
paramagnetic, negative term a p: 
(10.4) 
In the case of H, the diamagnetic term dominates, so that a H is positive and, hence, 
Bi < Bo, i.e. the magnetic flux density is smaller for protons in molecules compared to 
"nacked" protons. A given proton, corresponding to resonance condition in Eq. (10.1), 
is now off-resonance due to the lower effective magnetic flux density Bi• The external 
field has to be increased in order to achieve resonance. It is chemically of outmost im-
portance that ai strongly differs for differently bound protons; it is lowest for "acid" 
H-atoms. 
This is shown by the well-known text book example of (medium resolution) ethanol 
lH-NMR absorption; three peaks whose relative areas are 1:2:3, in the order ofincreas-
ing B. Obviously, the three peaks correspond to O-H, CH2 , and CH 3 protons, the 
methyl group experiencing the strongest shielding, the "acid" hydroxyl proton the 
smallest one. In NMR-spectroscopical practice, chemical shifts UJ.;) are given relative 
to an internal standard substance 
(10.5) 
The sign in Eq. (10.5) has been recommended by IUPAC; 9i is accordingly positive for 
all protons which are less shielded than the standard. This is true for nearly all types 
of H if the strongly shielded TMS is used as standard [.9p (free proton) = 31 ppm]. 
139 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
Splitting 
J 
J 
b) 
NMR 
J 
J 
I- ·1- -I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
1 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
J' 
J' 
J' 
I ... 1_ 
.. I_ -I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Fig. 10.1 a, b. Spin-spin coupling of the protons of C2Hs-OH (schematic drawing); a CH3 group, 
coupling constant J; b CH2 group, coupling constant J' (no O-H splitting; rapid proton exchange 
limit) 
The internal standard compensates shielding effects of the solvent and the sample 
tube wall. Experimentally, 9i is determined according to Eq. (10.6) S). 
(10.6) 
A large chemical shift, e.g. for R-COOH, is in the order of 10 to 15 ppm, relative to 
TMS; a shift ofl ppm (at V= 100 MHz) corresponds to Llv= 100' Hz or LlB=23 mG. 
Nuclear Spin-Spin Coupling. Spin-spin coupling allows the relative position of protons 
to be determined and can be understood only on the basis of quantum mechanics [mag-
netic dipole interaction (1) and diamagnetic shielding (2) can be understood using clas-
sical models]. In order to illustrate the influence of spin-spin coupling on NMR spectra, 
the well-known high resolution spectrum of C2HsOH should be considered: the central 
CH2 band splits into four peaks (1:3:3:1) and the high field CH3 band splits into three 
peaks (1 :2: 1) if the resolution is high enough. According to the rules presented in Chap. 
9 and taking into account that the spin quantum number of the proton is ms = ± 1/2, 
the experimentally observed splittings can easily be explained, provided there is a cou-
140 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
, J' I J" 
J' I 
, ! IIII i 
J 
I 
J 
1 
B---
a) 
b) 
I 
I 
J 
J 
1 J'I J'I J'I 
B 
Fig. 10.2. Improvement of spectral resolution from low (a) to high (b) magnetic flux density (B). 
The spin coupling constants J and J' are not influenced by B, the evident simplification results 
from changing chemical shifts which are proportional to B 
pIing mechanism which connects the neighbouring non equivalent protons (Fig. 10.1). 
The highest sensitivity may also reveal spin-spin coupling between more distant pro-
tons. 
Figure 10.1 shows that 
- The magnetic moments of the CH 3 group couple with those of the two methylene 
protons 
- The protons of the methylene groups couple with all three protons of the methyl 
group 
- No splitting occurs between the equivalent protons of the same group 
- The interaction occurs through the distance of three bonds. 
The question therefore arises how the magnetic moments "feel" each other over the 
distance. Evidently, the electronic system of the molecule acts as a mediator. The mag-
nitude of the splitting (1) is decisively influenced by the distance and relative orientation 
of the protons, but is independent of the strength of the external magnetic field. This 
behaviour is analogous to, e.g., zero field splitting in triplet states and ~lectron-nuclear 
spin coupling observed in ESR. 
This independence of magnetic field strength (or flux density B) is the main reason 
of the spectral simplification achieved by increasing B, as shown schematically in Fig. 
10.2. 
The art of interpreting NMR spectra consists in detecting related peaks, finding the 
type of bonding (from chemical shift) and identifying the proton positions relative to 
neighbouring protons (from spin-spin coupling). In technical polymers, resins, etc. 
which often contain plastisisers and other additives, the 1 H -NMR spectra are in general 
quite complicated. The analytical-chemical usefulness of these spectra, at least in 
routine work is therefore limited. 
141 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
The order of magnitude of the spin-spin coupling constant ist 
J~1mG~10Hz. 
The homogeneity of the magnetic field, therefore, has to be of the order of 1:107 to 
1:108 to allow the resolution (1). 
We now return to the C2H sOH spectrum in which splitting of the hydroxyl proton 
is not observed, at least not in only moderately pure samples. The behaviour is to be 
attributed to proton exchange processes, which are due to traces of acids or bases, e.g. 
(10.7): 
C2HsOH+H+ ..... C2H50H~ 
C2H50H~"",C2H50H+H+ . 
(10.7) 
These processes,which are closely connected with Grotthus-(proton hopping) conduc-
tivity of protonic substances, decrease the average time spent by a proton at the OH 
group to such an extent that spin-spin coupling cannot occur. Any rapid exchange pro-
cess has the same consequence if 
1 
,~--­
- Llv( =J) 
,: average resdence time of H at the group causing the signal (s) 
J: spin-spin coupling constant (Hz). 
(10.8) 
If J= 10 Hz, the proton has to spent at least ,=0.1 s at a particular group (e.g. OH) 
in order to produce a measurable peak splitting. If the exchange is faster, i.e. , smaller, 
this splitting vanishes. In high-purity ethanol, the OH signal splits into a 1:2:1 "triplet" 
as expected for coupling with the central CH 2 groups, 160 being magnetically inert 
(Table 10.1). In this case, also the peaks of the CH2 group double by interaction with 
the single proton at OH. Addition of a few percent of very pure water does not alter 
this well resolved spectrum, addition of more than 25 percent H 20, however, causes 
the appearance of a peak averaged between OH (C2HsOH) and OH (H20) indicating 
an averaged chemical shift. This averaging can be used in order to study slow proton 
exchange processes, rotations etc. 6). Spin-spin coupling and chemical shift averaging, 
therefore, are useful kinetic probes for slow processes. 
Often, however, it is desirable to make spectra simpler by removing spin-spin cou-
pling. This can be achieved experimentally by irradiating the sample using the charac-
teristic frequency of the proton to be decoupled, thus destroying the interaction with 
its neighbours. 
A further requirement of high resolution is narrow line width. Saturation, therefore, 
has to be avoided; the Boltzmann distribution between lower and upper states is very 
unfavourable anyway; equal distribution removes any measurable NMR absorption, 
since the RF field induces exactly as many "down" as "up" -transitions in this case. The 
long spin-lattice relaxation time of protons 
Tl~1 s 
favours saturation effects; Tl can be decreased by paramagnetic impurities such as mo-
lecular oxygen. 
142 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Chemical reactions may disturb the Boltzmann distribution in such a way that the 
emission ofRF quanta (CIDNP) can be observed30J. 
10.2 Experimental 
The essential parts of a high resolution NMR spectrometer are shown in Fig. 10.3: 
The radiation source is an emitter coil envelopping the sample tube. The emitter coil 
is connected with the RF generator and can be simultaneously used as detector if a 
bridge circuit is used, as indicated in Fig. 10.3. The magnetic field produced by the coil 
is perpendicular to the external one. 
The magnet has to produce magnetic flux densities of the order of 
B:::::;1 t07 T. 
Permanent magnets are relatively simple, but very high flux densities cannot be 
achieved in this way and the temperature has to be accurately controlled. Homogenous 
standard electromagnets can be used up to about 2.5 T, whereas supraconducting coils 
are suitable as magnets for very high magnetic fields (11.7 T for 
1 H-NMR at 
500 MHz)46) . These coils have to be cooled by means of liquid He. 
Modulation. The NMR spectrum can be produced by varying the magnetic field 
strength using an additional coild (field sweep) or by varying the frequency of the emit-
ter using a.f. modulation (frequency sweep). 
The sample is contained in a tube spinning around the long axis in order to improve 
the effective homogeneity of the magnetic field. 
RF 
I Bridge 
I 
Amplifier 
Generator 
I 
I 
AF 
J 
lModulator 
~~ ~~[ 
f-----, 
I 
N 
S 
I 
CAT 
I 
"-II 
I 
I 
\ 
I 
1 
I 
I 
Sample 
t 
Field Scan 
Recorder 
Fig. 10.3. Block diagram of a (continuous mode) NMR spectrometer, as used for 'H_ and 
19F-NMR spectroscopy 
143 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
If the detector is not identical with the emitter coil, a detector coil can be inserted 
perpendicular to the external and the emitter fields. This coil measures the magnetisa-
tion of the sample by detecting the induced a.f. tension. 
The NMR signal can be recorded after amplification provided the Sf N ratio is suf-
ficient. Otherwise, signal averaging has to be applied. This procedure requires extreme 
constancy of the experimental conditions (feed back techniques) ensuring that the sig-
nal appears at exactly the same resonance position in repetitive scans. This improve-
ment is especially important in polymer spectroscopy, since concentration should be 
small in order to keep the viscosity low. High viscosity broadens the absorptions peaks 
and thus diminishes the spectral resolution. For the same reason, temperature has to 
be increased in many cases. 
Fourier-Transform NMR-spectroscopy will be discussed together with 13C-NMR 
in Sect. 10.8. 
10.3 High-Resolution 1H-NMR of Polymers 
10.3.1 Applications 
High-resolution lH-NMR spectra of polymers 3,47) have to be recorded in solutions 
oflow viscosity. In Fig. lOA, the order of magnitude of the different line-broadening 
and shifting mechanisms is indicated. Ifit is possible to achieve the necessary small line 
width, the following informations can be gained from the 1 H -NMR spectrum: 
- Identification of the polymer by comparison with reference spectra recorded under 
the same experimental conditions - above all, the same solvent and the same res-
onance frequency has to be used. Collections of reference spectra are available for 
Vo = 60 and 100 MHz 9). The approach discussed here is similar to the one used in em-
I o 
I 
1 
'----y--I 
Spin-
Spin 
Coupling 
(1 p~m) 
i 
i 
2 
3 
~ 
Chem.Shift 
i 
i 
4 
5 
Dip.-Dip.* 
I 
6 
log flv (Hz) 
I 
8 
Vo 
• 
Hl Resonance 
(100 MHz) 
broad-line NMR in solid polymers 
high resolution 
NMR (attempted 
line width) 
* broadening mechanism 
Fig.10.4. Schematic view of peak broadening and shifting due to different mechanisms at a 
frequency scale 
144 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
pirical mIR spectroscopy and may be successful in identification of well-defined pure 
polymers. 
- Chemical shift, spin-spin coupling and number of protons. This evaluation corre-
sponds exactly to the one applied to unknown low molar mass compounds. The spec-
tra may be much more complicated due to higher order spin-spin coupling especially 
if J is nearly equal to the difference of the chemical shifts of the coupling protons 2). 
- Configuration (tacticity-) analysis; this application of polymer NMR spectroscopy 
gives results not available by any other method 2,3, 10, 11) except by other, more ad-
vanced NMR techniques (Sect. 10.8). Examples for this most important application 
are given in the following section. 
- Dynamical data are obtained using line broadening, chemical shift averaging etc. 
10,3.2 Tacticity Analysis 
Tacticity analysis by 1 H-NMR is discussed in the following, starting with the now clas-
sical example of PMMA, the first polymer which was successfully examined by means 
of this method for its tacticity in 1960 12 - 14). This polymer seems to be extremely suit-
able for this work since measurable 1 H spin-spin coupling may be ruled out because 
of the chemical structure of the basic unit; 
H 
H"-.I/H 
C 
H I 
H 
I 
I 
~C--C--C--C--c~ 
I 
I 
I 
H 
H 
c=o 
I 
o 
I 
C 
H/I"""H 
H 
PMMA 
All non-equivalent protons are separated from each other by more than three bonds. 
Hence, any lH-NMR splittings which may be observed in PMMA can only be due to 
the inequivalency of protons induced by the steric arrangement (conformation) of the 
macromolecule which is controlled by its configuration or tacticity. 
Actually, some PMMA samples - later on to be identified as highly syndiotactic 
ones - show a very simple 1 H-NMR spectrum 13) (Fig. 10.5). In some PMMA samples 
(e.g. those polymerised with a Grignard's reagent) two essential differences can be ob-
served: the C-CH3 peak is shifted from 9 = 0.91 to 1.20 ppm and the CH2 signal at 1.82 
ppm is split into a quartet. The O-CH3 group, which is situated at the periphery of the 
macromolecule is unaffected (9 = 3.59 ppm). The splitting of the CH2 signal in the poly-
145 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
A 
3.59 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
A 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I c=o 
I o 
I 
CH3 
I C=O 
I 
0 
I 
CH3 
Syndiotactic 
1.82 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
Isotactic 
I 
I 
-
CH2-
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(TMS) 
0.91 
- CH3 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
(TMS) 
I 
I 
I 
1.20 
Fig. 10.5. 1 H-NMR absorption ofPMMA, schematic after U. Johnsen 10.13) 
B 
B 
mer labelled "isotactic" in Fig. 10.5 can only be due to some inequivalence of the two 
protons induced by the stereochemistry of the polymer leading to geminal coupling. 
Methyl groups, on the other hand, rotate very fast so that an inhomogenous "micro 
environment" - as indicated by CHz splitting, cannot induce any measurable C-CH3 
splitting. 
In order to explain this important experiment, we first have to recall the meaning 
of the term "tacticity" which has been introduced by Natta in 1955 15) (see also Sect. 
7.4.3). 
146 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Natta called those molecules of vinyl polymers isotactic, which show the same con-
figuration at all pseudo-asymmetric C*-atoms (ddd ... or III ... ): 
H 
H 
H 
,* 
,* 
,* 
~C-CH2-C--CH2--C--CH2~ 
I 
I 
, 
R 
R 
R 
Extended chain projection of an isotactic vinyl polymer. 
Molecules with alternating d and I configuration (dldl ... ) have been called syn-
diotactic. 
H 
R 
H 
,* 
,* 
,* 
~C-CH2-C-CH2-C-CH2-~ 
I 
, 
I 
R 
H 
R 
Extended chain projection of a syndiotactic vinyl polymer. 
Any less regular structure originally was termed atactic, whereas more recently the 
term atactic is more frequently used for polymers showing random sequences. A better 
characterisation is obtained if the relative number of d and I links is measured and if 
additionally longer blocks of isotactic or syndiotactic configuration, if present, are 
identified. Studies of this type, made possibly by NMR, reveal the "micro-tacticity" lO} 
of polymers. Due to their regular micro structure polymers of well-defined tacticity can 
form macroscopic crystal lattices so that they may also be studied by means of diffrac-
tion methods. Configurationally less ordered polymers, on the other hand, do not crys-
tallise so that diffraction methods cannot be applied; high resolution NMR is the most 
direct approach in structural studies of this type. 
In order to understand the different spectral features of PMMA samples supposed 
to show different tacticity, we first consider the extended zig-zag chain of isotactic 
PMMA: 
Isotactic PMMA, extended chain 
It is easily noted that in this particular conformation of isotactic PMMA the two 
protons of CHz are not equivalent with regard to their environment; the protons la-
belled "a" are nearer to the ester groups, those labeled "b" nearer to C-CH3 • This inequi-
147 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
valence of the methylene protons persists on the average also in all other conformations 
of the isotactic configuration, which can be formed by rotations about the C-C bonds 
of the main chain. 
A different situation is encountered in the syndiotactic polymer, as can be seen from 
the extended zig-zag conformation: 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
H 
"" / 
"" / 
"" / 
"" / 
~C~ /C~ 
/C~ 
/C~ 
C 
C 
C 
C( ~C=O ~ ~ 0( ~C=O 
I 
I 
I 
OCH3 
CH3 
OCH3 
Syndiotactic PMMA 
Here, the "right-hand" - and "left hand" neighbours of each CHz proton are differ-
ent - either C-CH3 or COOCH3; therefore, they "feel" on the average the same en-
vironment. Splitting of the CHz NMR peak which is due to spin-spin coupling between 
inequivalent protons is excluded in this case and hence the interpretation given in Fig. 
10.5 is correct and unambiguous. Furthermore, the difference in the chemical shift of 
C-CH3 observed in PMMA samples of different tacticity can be used in order to quan-
tify the relative abundance of the three possible "triades". This can be explained on the 
basis of the above zig-zag conformations, focussing our attention on the central CH3 
groups (encircled): in the isotactic triade, two other C-CH3 groups are the nearest 
neighbours, whereas in the syndiotactic triade the neighbours are ester groups. The 
third possible arrangement is that where two different configurations join (heterotactic 
triade). In this case, the central C-CH3 group is next to one C-CH3 and one ester group. 
Whatever the reason for the different diamagnetic shielding (.9syndio=0.91 ppm; .9iso = 
1.20 ppm) may be, the chemical shift of the C-CH3 of heterotactic triades is expected 
to lie between the two extreme values quoted. 
Actually, in configurationally inhomogenous ("atactic") PMMA, a third C-CH3 
peak is found at .9hetero = 1.04 ppm. 
The relative proportion of the three triades, which is calculated from the areas under 
the CH 3-iso, syndio and hetero peaks, can be used as measure of "micro tacticity" for 
those polymers which cannot be classified as 100 percent isotatic or 100 percent syn-
diotactic, i.e. for the vast majority of polymer samples, showing pseudo-asymmetric 
centres. 
In order to quantify the microtacticity of linear macromolecules, two quantities have 
to be known 3): 
- The relative amount of meso (m) and racemic (r) placements between neighbouring 
basic units of the polymer. These formations are called "dyads". Correspondingly, 
three consequentive basic units may form either an isotatic (i=mm), heterotactic 
(h = mr, rm) or syndiotactic (s = rr) "triad". 
148 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
- The average lengths of isotactic and syndiotactic sequences [/(i), /(s)] and their dis-
tribution functions. 
The symbols used for dyads are q 
and ~ 
Dyads have either meso (dd, 11) or racemic (dl, ld) configuration. Triads can be sym-
bolised as follows: 
I. 1 I 
l=mm 
~ 
s=rr 
-~ 
II 
~ ~ I 
mr 
(h or mr) 
rm 
Experimentally, only i, s, and h can be distinguished, whereas mr is equivalent to rm. 
In the example of PMMA, the intensity of the C-CH3 signal at 9 = 1.04 ppm is propor-
tional to the concentration of the heterotactic triads: 
10.91 - P(rr) 
11.04 - P(mr) + P(rm) 
=P(~) 
11.20 -P(mm). 
(10.9) 
If the intensity of the individual peaks is normalised to the total intensity of the C-CH3 
signal, the relative concentrations or probabilities (P) of the different triads are ob-
tained: 
(10.10) 
Applying Eq. (10.10) requires that the molar mass (Mn) of the polymer is relatively large 
so that end group effects can be neglected. The concentration of the triads can be de-
duced from the NMR spectrum directly according to Eq. (10.10), provided its resolu-
tion is sufficient. The relative concentration of dyads, P (m) and P (r) can be derived 
according to the following considerations 10): 
Since a meso placement can only follow up on a meso or racemic placement, 
P(mm)+P(rm)=P(m) . 
(10.11) 
I t is equally true that a meso placement can only precede a meso or racemic placement: 
P(mm)+P(mr)=P(m) . 
Hence, we find from Eqs. (10.11) and (10.12) that 
P(rm) = P(mr) = 1/2(P(rm)+P(mr» , 
P(m) = P(mm) + 1/2(P(rm) + P(mr» . 
The relative concentration of racemic dyads is given by P(r) = 1-P(m). 
(10.12) 
(10.13) 
(10.14) 
Including Eq. (10.10), we now have derived the relative concentrations of meso and 
racemic placements or dyads from experimental information. These dyads, however, 
149 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
Table 10.3. Intensities of C-CH3 peaks ofPMMA, 220 MHz in Chlorobenzene 16) 
i 
h 
s 
Sum 
(rr) 
(mr)+(rm) 
(mm) 
Peak (cm) 
5.3 
3.2 
0.5 
9.0 
Relative intensity ( = P) 
0.59 
0.36 
0.05 
can form many short sequences or a few long ones. It can immediately be seen that in 
this latter case the concentrations of heterotactic triads has to be small whereas in the 
former case of short sequences P (h) has to be large. Since each isotactic sequence, 
formed by meso dyads is terminated by a racemic dyad 
-------, 
m 
m 
m 
m 
isotactic ~ 
sequence I 
r 
is the relative concentration of mr triads equal to the relative concentration of isotactic 
sequences. The average length lei) is given by 
and 
I(i) = P(m) 
P(mr) 
Per) 
I(s)= P(mr)' 
(10.15) 
(10.16) 
As an example, a commercial PMMA sample will be analysed in the following 
(Table 10.3). According to Eq. (10.14) we obtain 
P(m)=0.05+0.18 =0.23 
Per) =0.59+0.18=0.77 
1.00. 
This PMMA sample is predominantly, though not purely syndiotactic. According to 
Eqs. (10.15) and (10.16) the average sequence length is 
. 
0.23 
1(1) = 0.18 = 1.28 , 
0.77 
I(s)= 0.18 =4.28. 
Hence, the sample shows short sequences of syndiotactic PMMA which are interrupted 
as ifby error by one or two meso placements. 
Furthermore, it is possible to check whether the type of polymerisation used to pro-
duce the PMMA sample obey the simple kinetic law which presumes that each chain 
150 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Fig. 10.6. Bernoulli statistics of polymerisation; Pm indicates the relative concentration of isotactic 
triads, p, that of syndiotactic triads and 2 P mP, that of heterotactic triads [see Eq. (10.17)] 
growing step is independent on the configuration of the last segment of the growing 
chain. In this case, the followings (Bernoullian) statistics are valid 10). 
P(mm)=p! 
P(ffff) = 2 PmPr 
P(rr) =p;. 
(10.17) 
In Eq. (10.17) and Fig. 10.6 Pm andpr are the probabilities for meso- and racemic place-
ment to occur during chain growth. In the experimental example - PMMA _16) we ob-
tain 
Pm= VO.05 = 0.224 , 
Pr =VO.59=0.768, 
2 PmPr = 
0.36 (experimental) , 
0.34 [acc. to Eq. (10.17)]. 
The simple kinetic law is perfectly verified in this case, as is generally true for radicalic 
polymerisation ofPMMA 3). 
PolY-(J(-methyl styrene (PMS) 
CH3 
al 
~a;;*c 
C:2~ 
H 
H 
H 
151 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
is another "simple" example that does not show any measurable 1 H spin-spin coupling 
in the absence of polymer-specific effects. A predominantly syndiotactic polymer (PMS 
st) shows peaks near 9 = 0.23 ppm (C-CH3)' 1.55 ppm (CH 2) and 6.85 ppm (C6HS) rel-
ative to TMS 10). Introducing meso dyads increases the heterotactic peak at 0.47 ppm 
and causes a signal characteristic of the (mm) triad at 0.92 ppm. Since the phenyl 
groups of PMS are closer to the backbone of the polymer, compared to -O-CH3 in 
PMMA, the chemical shift of the phenyl group is affected by tacticity (6.64 ppm in 
PMSit). 
Ordinary vinyl polymers (IXH unsubstituted) do show spin coupling even in the ab-
sence of polymer specific effects: 
H 
H 
~ ..JI\. ..)1 
.~~CH2-C-CH2-C~ 
1 
1 
R 
R 
Each IXH couples with four ([3) methylene protons, each methylene proton interacts with 
two IXH. These intrinsically complicated spectra can be simplified using double res-
onance techniques: 
- Saturation of CHz decouples the IXH which consequently assumes the role of the C-
CH3 group in PMMA or PMS in probing for triads. 
- Saturation of IXH decouples the CHz group and makes the two protons inequivalent 
if present in an isotactic triad. 
Similar simplifications may be achieved using isotopic substitution replacing either 
the IXH or the CHz by deuterium. The spin resonance of zH is observed at a much lower 
magnetic field than that of 1 H, and coupling of zH with 1 H is weak. 
An example of this type of linear polymers is PVC Z) which is obtained in "atactic" 
form in most polymerisation processes; the determination of the microtacticity of PVC, 
therefore, is of paramount importance in revealing subtle differences between samples 
of different origin and connections between microtacticity and properties of this poly-
mer. The number of peaks to be expected depends on spin-spin coupling (CHz and 
IXCH), configurational inequivalence of the two protons of CHz in isotactic PVC and 
the existence of three types of triads caused by IXCH. Further complications may arise 
owing to higher order splittings if the difference in chemical shifts, Ll9 equals J. In the 
case of vic in ale protons (as in CHz), simple 1st order spectra are expected if 
(10.17) 
The 100 MHz 1H-NMR spectrum ofradicalic PVC is shown in Fig. 10.7. 
The assignment of the CHz and IXH regions is unambiguous on account of the 2: I 
ratio of the areas and the magnitude of the chemical shifts. Unfortunately, the spectrum 
is unsuitable for a detailed analysis because there are many unresolved peaks. 
As discussed earlier, NMR spectra can be simplified by increasing the magnetic field 
strength and thus the chemical shift at the Hz scale; according Eq. (10.17), higher order 
coupling may thus be reduced to first order. Furthermore, spindecoupling and partial 
deuteration are suitable methods. The residual, weak ZHj1 H coupling may be eliminat-
152 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
ed by deuterium decoupling. Monomeric model compounds of known configuration 
have to be used for comparison (Chap. 1); in the case of PVC, the dyad models are: 
CH3 
J 
H-C-CI 
I 
CH2 
*' 
H-C-CI 
I 
CH3 
meso-2, 4-dichloropentane 
(model of m-dyad of PVC) 
CH3 
J 
H-C-CI 
I 
CH2 
J 
CI-C-H 
I 
CH3 
racernic-2, 4-dichloro-
pentane (model of 
r-dyad of PVC) 
By analogy, the steroisomers of 2,4,6-trichloroheptane are models of the isotactic (i = 
mm), syndiotactic (s=rr) or heterotactic (h=mr+rm=ffi'r) triads. The NMR spectra 
of these dimeric and trimeric models of PVC are used as a source of chemical shifts data 
and coupling constants for polymer analysis, in addition to the conformational analysis 
of the oligomers made possible by exhaustive interpretation of the spectra. The model 
data can be used for a tentative synthesis of the polymer NMR spectrum. 
Spin decoupling (CH 2) as well as deuteration of methylene protons (f3f3d 2 PVC) re-
place the complex o:H band in Fig. 10.7 ("atactic" PVC) by a "triplet" indicating the 
triads (mm), (fir), and (rr) (from higher to lower field), the heterotactic central peak 
being by far the most intense. Of course, the 1 H -NMR spectrum of PVC of pure tac-
ticity should show only one peak (mm) or (rr). The splitting observed closely resembles 
that of C-CH3 in PMMA, i.e. the o:H serves as a "triad probe" as C-CH3 does in 
o:Me vinyl polymers. The CH2 decoupled methin triple peak indicates strong con-
figurational disorder; this particular PVC sample seems to be really atactic. The partly 
deuterated polymer (f3f3d 2 PVC) shows a somewhat better resolution than the spin-
decoupled ordinary PVC 1 7); this may also be due to its low molar mass. 
The triads are assigned on the basis of model spectra (trichloroheptanes). Here, the 
syndiotactic (rr) model is the least shielded (9 higher) and the isotactic (mm) model has 
the most shielded o:H (closer to TMS). The relative ordering is, therefore, reversed in 
comparison to PMMA. 
The areas under the peaks yield the following relative concentrations for a fadicalic 
(radiation-induced) PVC: 
P(rr) =0.328, 
p(lill) = 0.494, 
0.178 
P(mm)= 1.000' 
The micro tacticity of this PVC sample is characterised by strong disorder, and predom-
inance by very short syndiotactic sequences. According to Eqs. (10.11) to (10.14)the 
153 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
;::CHCI 
a) 
4 
5.ppm 
3 
2 
b) 
2 
154 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
dyad distribution is given by 
P(m) = 0.425 , 
P(r) = 1-P(m) = 0.575 
and, using (10.15) and (10.16): 
I(i) =0.86 , 
I(s) = 1,16. 
The statistical treatment (10.17) again shows the simple Bernoulli statistics to be fulfil-
led. 
The analyses of triads cannot go beyond the comparison with Bernoulli statistics. 
A more in-depth analysis has to go further, i.e. the influence of the next-nearest neigh-
bours hat to be probed by even better spectral resolution in proceeding from triad to 
pentad analysis: 
triad ~ 
pentad 
(2 dyads) 
(4 dyads) . 
In order to perform such an analysis, the central proton (0) has to become mor "far-
sighted", compared to that in simple triad analyses. 
I o 
r m m r 
Example of a pentad (rmmr) 
In the NMR spectrum, the pentad is recognised by further splitting of the central (triad) 
peak - in the above example the (mm) 1 H or C-CH3 peak. Since the influence of the 
configuration of neighbouring units declines as a functionof the distance, the differ-
ences in chemical shift decrease, as well. There are three distinguishable pentads with 
a central (mm) or (rr) triad and four different pentads with a heterotactic central triad. 
In oligomeric fJfJ-d 2-PVC, Cavalli et al. l7) observed splittings caused by pentad inter-
actions and showing differences which can be attributed to the polymerisation temper-
ature. 
The next step in analysing the CH2 region, probing the dyad distribution at medium 
resolution, involves tetrads; six distinguishable tetrads can be observed in PVC-type 
... Fig.l0.7a, b. NMR spectra of PVC, 100 MHz, recorded in 1,2-dichlorobenzeneat 120 °C(afterG. 
Sielaff and L. Cavalli et aI., redrawn from Ref. 2). a total spectrum, b (CH region): normal spec-
trum (I), CH2 decoupling (2), and /3,/3-d2-PVC (3) 
155 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
polymers. In this case, a specially deuterated polymer, starting from a,{3-cis-dideutero 
vinyl chloride may provide additional information; 
D 
D 
I 
I 
-
~D-CHD-C-CHD~ 
I 
I 
Cl 
Cl 
In this polymer, geminal 1 H coupling is not possible, but rather different chemical shifts 
are observed for (m) and (r) placements, resulting in no more then three peaks. The ex-
perimental observation of eight peaks, which can be assigned to tetrads, confirms both 
the assignment of triads according to the aH analysis and the validity of simple Ber-
noulli statistics: P(m) = 0.44 ± 0.02 [compared with P(m) = 0.425 in triad analysis]. The 
small preponderance of syndiotactic configuration has been explained by electric repul-
sion by the Cl atoms making r-placements slightly more likely than m-placements. 
By comparative studies of oligomeric model compounds, a conformational analysis 
can be made, indicating 90 percent trans conformation in the (r) dyads. 
The NMR spectra of linear polymers burdened with bulky side groups, e.g. PVCA, 
may be difficult to interpret due to band broadening and shielding effects 18, 19). The 
splitting of the broad CH 2 and CH peaks of PVC A, which significantly depends on the 
mode of polymerisation, has tentatively been assigned to isotactic (in cationic PVCA) 
and syndiotactic (in radicalic PVCA) sequences by Okamoto et al. I8). This interpreta-
tion rests on a reasoning that differs from dyad and triad analysis. Here it is assumed 
that particular protons are more shielded in one conformation due to steric hindrance 
which again depends on the microtacticity of the chain. Model building is required in 
order to identify possible, sterically favourable conformations, e.g. approximately heli-
cal parts of the macromolecules. 
In PVCA, the following relationships seems to be valid 18): 
- effective shielding - tightly packed conformation - isotactic helical (3/1) regions -
cationic polymerisation 
-
less effective shielding - more open conformation - syndiotactic helical (2/1) regions 
radicalic polymerisation. 
This hypotheses correlates well with fluorescence spectroscopic results 20, 21). How-
ever, NMR measurements, including 13C-NMR 22) do not yet permit a final decision 
on the tacticity of PVC A. The poor resolution of the NMR spectra of solutions of rigid 
macromolecules is due to their high "internal viscosity". This problem is related to 
those encountered in solid polymers, as discussed in Sect. 10.4. 
10.4 Broad-line NMR 
In the solid state, band broadening occurs due to magnetic dipole-dipole interaction. 
This interaction (in the order of 10 - 3 T) decreases with the third power of the distance 
(10.18) 
156 
1 
L1B~ 3' 
R 
(10.18) 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
The broad-line signal narrows if segmental motions become effective, comparable to 
dielectric and mechanical relaxations. Depending on the line broadening observed, the 
time scale of this experiment is of the order> 104 Hz. 
Calculations of line shapes are only possible in simple cases involving two or three 
interacting protons 23). 
The limiting case of many interacting proton is conveniently described by a Gaus-
sian line shape. Since Van Vleck 24), the "second moment" of the absorption curve has 
often been used as a measure of the line broadness, despite the fact that much informa-
tion contained in the whole spectrum is lost 2 5). 
The 2nd moment «L1B)2) is defined according to Eq. (10.19)23) where A is the 
NMR absorption observed: 
00 J A(B - Bres)2 dB 
«(,1B)2)= --:-~-oo.,.--­
J AdB 
o 
B2 I A(B - Bres)2 ,1B 
(10.19 ) 
The summations are shown schematically in Fig. 10.8. The absorption (A) is weighted 
with respect to the distance of B from Bres by the integral in the numerator of Eq. (19.19). 
This global characterisation of band shape may in the case of multiple bands be inde-
pendent of temperature, whereas the actual shape of the curve shows characteristic dif-
ferences which can be interpreted in terms of molecular mobility. Figure 10.9, e.g., 
shows for PE that the less shielded, quasi-liquid component dramatically increases dur-
ing the glass transition of the amorphous phase. A detailed analysis of this spectrum 25) 
shows the correspondance of the three parts of the curve to dielectric and mechanical 
measurements. 
Molecular movement 
Type of relaxation 
CH2, crystalline 
CH2, hindered rotation 
}' 
CH2, microbrownian motion 
(J3, observable only in NMR). 
When comparing apparent activation energies, which can be deduced from the tem-
perature dependence of broad-line NMR as well as from relaxation measurements, the 
extremely broad range of relaxation times has to be taken into account. This range of 
relaxation times extends over roughly 10 orders of magnitude (log r~O to -10 in sec-
onds). The NMR line width method only covers the high frequency part, Ifr> 105 Hz. 
Although the chemical-analytical value of broad-line NMR is small, the method is 
important for studying the mobility ofprotonated groups in solid polymers. One result 
of this type ofNMR experiments is, e.g. that CH3 groups in several polymers start ro-
tating about the C-C bond at temperatures as low as -180 DC. 
157 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
A 
B 
Fig. 10.8. Schematic explanation of the "2nd moment" of a NMR absorption A as a function of 
magnetic flux density B 
A 
CH2(micro brownian motion) 
.. --.. ..-CH 2,(hindered rotation) 
" 
\ 
/ 
, 
/ 
, 
" 
" 
,~ 
, 
-
... , 
10 
Fig. 10.9. Influence of temperature on the broad-line NMR spectra oflinear PE after Bergmann25) 
In Sect. 10.8.2, a method is described which allows the measurement of 13C_NMR 
high resolution spectra of solid polymers (Pulse-FT-NMR, combined with Magic 
Angle Spinning and Crosspolarisation). This method has recently been applied to lH_ 
NMR of PET 26). 
158 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
10.5 Spin-Relaxation Times 
Spin resonance signals tend to saturate if no effective mechanisms exist which restore 
the equilibrium disturbed by absorption of electromagnetic radiation. This is a problem 
especially in NMR spectroscopy where the nuclear moments are weak and, hence, the 
possible magnetic interactions are not very pronounced as well. Spin relaxation pro-
cesses depend on molecular movement, albeit in an indirect manner 27): the relaxation 
(or saturation) measured is a property of the magnetic spin system which in only in-
directly coupled with the molecular motions of the polymer. 
Spin relaxation is described by two relaxation times which can be measured using 
NMR-Pulse methods, roughly analogous to the measurement of luminescence decay 
times: 
T 1 : Spin-lattice relaxation time or longitudinal relaxation time. 
T2 : Spin-spin relaxation time or transversal relaxation time. (T is defined as the time 
needed for an excited system to reach lie of the original concentration and is called 
Tin all- non magnetic - spectroscopies.) 
5 
+2 
o 
-2 
-4 
-6~-7~--~~----~----~----~------~----~~ 
5 
Fig. 10.10. Dependence of spin relaxation times T1 and T2 on polymer movements (schematic) 
Tl is due to the coupling of the nuclear spins with the "lattice" - more generally with 
the surrounding matrix -, coupling being caused by fluctuating magnetic fields. The 
fluctuations result from molecular movements; this explains qualitatively the coinci-
dence of strong interaction and molecular movements which are of the order of the res-
onance frequency (about 108 Hz). Since the polymer movements are strongly temper-
ature dependent, a Tl (T) minimum indicating strong interaction can be predicted (Fig. 
10.10). At very low temperature coupling with the lattice becomes very ineffective so 
159 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
that T1 is very long, and in practice relaxation by traces of paramagnetic impurities, 
e.g. O2, is a more effective relaxation mechanism. 
T2 is due to spin coupling with neighbouring atoms. This type of coupling is 
strongest at low temperature (rigid lattice) and decreases if the part of molecule which 
carries the absorbing group becomes mobile. In the case of very rapid movements, both 
T1 and T2 are long, i.e. coupling is ineffective. 
1 
12~ -. 
LIB 
(10.20) 
According to Eq. (10.20), T2 is inversely proportional to the line width (LIB); the infor-
mation contained in T2 is therefore essentially the same as that deduced from line-width 
measurement 23). The great importance of relaxation times in pulsed Fourier-transform 
NMR spectroscopy will be discussed in Sect. 10.8.2. 
10.6 Chemically Induced Dynamic Nuclear 
Spin Polarisation (CIDNP) 
The effect has been detected in 1967 by Bargon 28) and Ward 29). It consists in NMR-
emission or increased NMR-absorption of reaction products during radical reactions. 
A classical example28) is the decomposition of benzoyl peroxide in cyclohexane at 
110 °C: 
- The characteristic peaks of benzoyl peroxide vanish after about 40 min 
- After four minutes a C6H6 NMR peak appears in the emission 
- This emission declines and is replaced by increased absorption after eight minutes. 
The decisive step of this reaction seems to be (10.21): 
(10.21) 
(SH: solvent) 
(polarised) 
In this case "polarised" means that a spin distribution is created which deviates from 
thermal equilibrium in the magnetic field ofthe spectrometer. 
CIDNP is an important tool in studying radical reactions 30), including reactions 
with polymers 31). 
10.7 Resumeof 1 H-NMRSpectroscopy 
The greatest importance of IH-NMR in the polymer field (Table lOA) lies.in the deter-
mination of tacticity or rather, microtacticity of soluble polymers with pseudo-
asymmetric C-atoms, the most important group belonging to vinyl polymers. 
The determination of the chemical structure is a difficult task in complex polymers or 
mixtures; in this application, 13C-NMR has gained much importance due to simple 
spectra and the great range of chemical available. In favourable cases the preferred 
conformation of polymers can be calculated from experimental chemical shifts. The 
measurement of crystallinity and chain movements using the broad-line technique 
supplements other methods. The same is true for measurements of relaxation times. In 
the field of exciton studies, triplet excitons can in principle be studied using nuclear spin 
depolarisation, a method which is well known in molecular crystal studies. In complex 
formation, H-bonds can conveniently be studied using 1H-NMR. 
160 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Table 10.4. Informations obtained by 1 H-NMR of polymers relating to structure 
and dynamics of polymeric systems 
Structure 
Chemical structure 
Tacticity 
Conformation 
Crystallini ty 
Electronic structure 
+ 
++ 
+ 
+ 
+ 
Dynamics 
Movements of the chain, 
segments and sidegroups 
Phonons 
Excitons 
Complex formation and 
related phenomena 
+ 
(+) 
(+ ) 
10.8 Polymer NMR Spectroscopy of 13C and Other Nuclei 
10.8.1 Experimental 
Nearly each element has one or more magnetic isotopes (see Table 1O.l); only those 
isotopes which are formally build up by He nuclei have no magnetic moment: 4He, sBe, 
12C, 160, 2°Ne, 24Mg, 28Si etc. In principle, therefore, it should be possible to use near-
ly all elements in NMR spectroscopy, although for reasons of sensitivity only 19F can 
be measured on conventional continuous mode spectrometers (see Table 1O.l). The 
main causes for low NMR sensitivity of an isotope are low natural abundance and 
small magnetic moment. Furthermore, the nuclear quadrupole moment of certain nu-
clei (e.g. 14N, 170, 33S) broadens the spectra so that the effective sensitivity of mea sur-
ing these isotopes is decreased. The disadvantage of low sensitivity may well be over-
compensated by very weak spin-spin coupling due to low abundance (only very few 
pairs of the same isotope such as 13C_13C) once a method for recording spectra with 
a high degree of sensitivity is found. Such a method has become available (PFT-NMR) 
which combines excitation by short (I1S) rf pulses with Fourier-transformation of the 
signals obtained. On the other hand, the sensitivity of conventional continuous mode 
Table 10.5. Comparison between CW-NMR and PFT-NMR Spectroscopy 
CW-NMR 
PFT-NMR 
rf-Radiation 
Continuous 
Pulsed 
Intensity (power) 
Small 
High 
Spectral purity ofradi-
Monochromatic 
Polychromatic 
ation 
Magnetic field 
Variable (in field 
Constant 
sweep operation) 
Signal 
lev) or 1(B) 
I (t) 
FTl 
lev) or I(B) 
Signal averaging 
Time consuming 
Rapid 
Computer 
Peripheral 
Integral part 
Nuclei 
lH, 19F 
All nuclei if natural 
abundance is suffi-
cient 
Solid state 
Broad-line NMR 
High resolution pos-
sible (MAS-CP) 
161 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
recording cannot be substantially increased due to saturation if the excitation power is 
increased (in addition to limitations in time and field stability during SN improvement 
by averaging). 
U sing the pulse method, one spectrum per pulse is stored, the minimal repetition 
time being five spin-lattice relaxation time (5 Td. If nOn equivalent nuclei are present, 
the longest Tl has to be used to calculate the repitition rate. If Tl is small, a large num-
ber of spectra can be stored and used for computational SN averaging. 
The rf excitation pulses in PFT-NMR cover a frequency range which is at least as 
broad as the spectrum expected. They, therefore, contain all frequencies needed fo a 
full NMR spectrum to be recorded if the magnetic field is kept constant during the ex-
periment. Owing to the shortness of the pulses, the power level of the exciting radiation 
can be much higher than in conventional CW-NMR spectroscopy. The magnetic nuclei 
of the sample to which the apparatus has been tuned, e.g. 13C, 15N, etc., absorb their 
characteristic frequencies from the radiation offered to them whereby the magnetic 
moments are aligned with respect to the external magnetic field. The signal I (t) result-
ing after the pulse from reorientation of the excited spins corresponds to the interfero-
gram in FT-IR spectroscopy, i.e. it contains the full spectral information in a coded 
form. Using the Fourier transformation technique, the signal I (t) is computationally 
transformed into the NMR spectrum I (v) or I (B). The signal I (t) is called FID (free 
induced decay). 
Modern PFT-NMR spectrometers allow nearly all magnetic nuclei to be measured, 
each nucleus being characterised by a resonance (at a given field), which is slightly 
modified by the chemical shift. The frequency range of rf excitation has to be chosen 
for each magnetic nucleus to be measured in such a way that the reSOnance frequency 
plus the chemical shift range is contained in the spectral width. Strong magnets of the 
superconducting coil type furnish a magnetic flux density of B ~ 7 Tesla or even higher; 
the resonance frequency of most nuclei at 7 T lies between Vo ~ 10 to 100 MHz (com-
pared to about 300 MHz for lH and 19F). It is necessary that the pulses can be chosen 
in defined sequencies or programmes and that other nuclei, especially 1 H can be decou-
pled. Table 10.5 shows a comparison of the most important differences between CW-
and PFT -NMR spectroscopy. The PFT -spectrometer can be used not only for record-
ing NMR spectra but also for performing relaxation measurements, e.g. by saturation 
experiments using rapid pulse sequencies. In this respect, the PFT technique is also ad-
vantageous for measuring NMR spectra of lH and 19F. Furthermore, dilute solutions 
can be measured (important for polymers) and kinetic measurements can be performed 
in the time region:> 10 - 6 s. 
10.8.2 Solid Polymer 1 3 C-NMR Spectroscopy 
The most important nucleus in polymer spectroscopy is 13C since 32, 33): 
- Nearly all polymers show C-atoms in the main chain, or at least in side-groups. 
- The range of chemical shifts is very large (200 ppm), 
- Spin-spin coupling between neighbouring atoms (13C_13C) - not to be eliminated by 
spin decoupling - is very weak owing to the low natural abundance (Table 10.1); the 
probability of such contacts is about 10 - 4. 
The informations obtained by 13C-NMR is equally important in organic chemistry 
and in polymer research. 
162 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
a) 
b) 
-
o 
c: 
.2 -
u 
~ 
i5 
e 
..... 
--!~IH 
~ 
r 
/ 
/u 
/ 
///1 
// 
rotation axis 
(of sample) 
dipole in the sample 
Fig.10.1l. Magic angle spinning (MAS), a Definition of the angle (J, b Schematic view of the MAS 
experiment; r represents a dipole of a random sample. All possible r vectors by rapid rotation 
about the axis indicated on the average include the "magic angle" with the magnetic field 
The technique leading to well resolved solid state spectra (MAS) has first been 
explored by polymer spectroscopists 34-36). In general, solid state NMR spectra are 
broad, as discussed in Sect. 10.4 for lH-NMR. The main reasons for low intensity, 
broad 13C-NMR spectra in solids are 37): 
a) Anisotropic magnetic dipole-dipole interaction, mostly 13C_1 H, 
b) Anisotropy of chemical shift, 
c) Long relaxation time Tl (several minutes for 13C in solids) -limiting the repetition 
frequency. 
Restriction (c) is "merely" a problem of sensitivity, whereas (a) and (b) are funda-
mental restrictions. The experimental solution of high resolution in solid state 13C_ 
NMR requires the following combination of techniques 48): 
I) High power 1 H -decoupling, 
2) Rotation of the sample about the "magic angle" = magic angle spinning (MAS), 
3) Cross polarisation (CP). 
163 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
Fig.lO.12. Effect of Cross Polarisation (hydrostatic analogue) 
High power lH-decoupling (1) solves the problem of dipolar broadening (a). This 
could, in principle, be solved by (2) at very high rotation speed. MAS (2) is based on 
the fact that both intrinsic broadening mechanisms (a) and (b) contain the term (3 cos 2 
e-l). This is visualised in Fig. 10.11 for 13C_1H interaction. The above term is zero 
at e = 54°44' relative to the external magnetic field. If the sample is rapidly rotated at 
this angle, as indicated in Fig. 10.11, the average e for all vectors (dipoles) in the sample 
is the magic angle and all dipole interactions as well as chemical shift anisotropies can-
cel. The rotation has to be faster than the frequency of the broadening mechanism to 
be eliminated; the resonance condition for 13C is (10.22) 
Jo(MHz)~Bo(kG) . 
(10.22) 
A 10 ppm broadening (at Bo~7 T=70 kG) would correspond to 700 Hz; a spinning 
frequency of several kHz, therefore, eliminates this broadening. 
Cross polarisation (3) overcomes the long Tl of 13C by a sequence of suitable pulses 
which transfer the polarisation from slowly decaying 13C to the much faster relaxing 
lH system. This principle of CP is shown in Fig. 10.12 by means of a hydrostatic 
analogue. The transfer of polarisation from the 13C to 1 H system is induced by satis-
fying the condition (10.23) 
(10.23) 
essentially by simultaneous irradiation with both 13C and 1 H resonance frequencies. 
Using the CP-MAS method, even insoluble, e.g. cross linked polymers can be stud-
ied with a resolution high enough for chemical analysis. The .only prerequisite is the 
presence of a magnetic nucleus in the sample, usually 13C, in small concentration. 
CP-MAS is especially important for many commercial plastics which often are in-
soluble. As an example 36), epoxides have been investigated, consisting ofbis-phenol A-
diglycidylether as a bifunctional monomer (DGEBA): 
o 
CH3 
0 
LLCH2-0--O-{~O-CH2~ 
CH3 
DGEBA 
164 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
a) 
b) 
c) 
TMS 
Fig. lO.13a--c. Solid state NMR of DGEBA converted by 5% piperidine into an insoluble resin; 
a 13C-broad line spectrum, b 60 kHz 1 H decoupling, c 2.2 kHz MAS 
This monomer is converted by amines into insoluble resins. The increasing resolution 
from the 13C broad line to the well resolved MAS spectrum can be seen in Fig. lO.13. 
The application ofNMR to solid polymers has recently been reviewed by McBrierty 
and Douglas 49). The use of 13C_MSA for conformational studies of solid polymers has 
been demonstrated by Cant ow and coworkers 50. 51). 
10.8.3 High Resolution 1 3 C-NMR Spectroscopy of Polymer Solution 
The usefulness of 13C_ NMR and the advantages compared to 1 H-NMR are due to 
large range of chemical shifts enabling the resolution of chemically very similar struc-
tural units nearly complete absence of 13C_13C coupling broad band decoupling of 
13C_1 H coupling avoidance of saturation using the pulse technique. 
Polymer solutions, showing a high degree of segment mobility (in order to prevent 
dipolar broadening) are highly suitable for recording 13C-NMR spectra. The main in-
formation which can be obtained from these spectra includes 
identification of specific polymers 38), identification of groups in a polymer, branch-
ing of macromolecules, analysis of sequences 33. 52) in copolymers, distinction be-
tween block- and random-copolymers, analysis of (micro-)tacticity 33). 
Polymers and groups in the polymer chain are identified by comparison with stan-
dard spectra, now available for 13C-NMR 38), tables of chemical shift data 39), and 
comparison with spectra of monomeric model compounds recorded under exactly the 
same conditions with regard to solvent, temperature, Bo, etc. as the polymer samples. 
Branching of carbon chains is a most important subject of 13C_ NMR studies 40). The 
diamagnetic shielding by nearest «()(), next to nearest (fJ) and even y C-atoms of the bran-
165 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
I \ 
(CH2)n 
CH3 
a 
y 
(Bu or longer) 
Fig. 10.14. Typical 13C-NMR spectrum ofLDPE in solution (simplified) 
ching point C (0) results in a broad range of chemical shift. 
a 
f3 
y 
_
13CO_C-C-C-
I 
C-atoms in rJ. and f3 position cause strong deshie1ding (increase of 8) of about 9 ppm/ 
C-atom. C-atoms in y position, on the other hand, have a shielding effect and thus de-
crease the chemical shift observed (exception: quarternary y C-atoms) . 
.. 
• 
o 
These empirical rules which have been obtained from a great number of monomeric 
models allow us to construct theoretical spectra for different types of branching, includ-
ing the endgroups which can be observed in low molar mass polymers. 
LDPE is one of the commercially most important branched polymers, produced by 
radicalic initiation of ethene at high pressure. The ideal structure of PE, a chain con-
sisting of CH2 groups, which is approximately realised in HDPE, gives a 13C-NMR 
signal after 1 H -decoupling at 8 ~ 30 ppm relative to TMS. 
This peak is also the strongest one in solution spectra of LDPE and indicates the 
unperturbed regions of the main chain and oflong-chain branches which might be pres-
ent. 
CH3 ' 
1 
I 
CH2 ' 
2 
n-butyl branch 
I 
CH2 ' 
3 
I 
30 ppm 
CH2 ' 
4 
(a) 
(J3) 
(y) 
y 
p 
a 
I 
a 
p 
y 
CH3 - CH2 - CH2 - CH2 - (CH2)n - CH2 - CH2 - CH2 - CO - CH2 - CH2 - CH2 
Main chain (LDPE) 
166 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
The best shielded C-atom as a rule is located in CH3-end groups (Fig. 10.14). The bran-
ching point (CO) "feels" the slightest shielding due to the combined deshielding effects 
of main chain plus branch IX + f3 C-atoms. The spectrum shown in Fig. 10.14 essentially 
corresponds to the one calculated for n-butyl branches 41. 42) and confirms the "back-
biting" hypothesis of branching (10.24), postulated before 13C-NMR spectroscopy was 
introduced: 
• 
-
H 
I 
• 
-CH2 -C-CH2 -CH2 
I 
CHz 
etc . 
I 
CH2 
I 
CH2-CH3 
(10.24) 
Formation of n-butyl branches in LDPE by "back-biting" 
of the growing chain end 
Polyethene and other polymers without pseudo-asymmetric C-atoms are especially 
suited for NMR branching studies since splittings due to differences in tacticity cannot 
occur. The spectrum of native PVC is too complicated for studying the branching pat-
tern; a total reduction of PVC using LiAlH4 yields, without chain splitting, PE of the 
same branching as the original PVC 40). In this case the 13C-NMR spectrum shows 
mostly CH3 bands ([) ~ 20 ppm relative to TMS). A quantiative evaluation yields about 
3 CH3 groups per 1,000 C-atoms. This short chain branching may occur at head-to-
head placements by shift of a Cl-atom (20.25): 
H 
-CH2-CH-CH-CH: -
I 
I 
4 
I 
-CH2-CH-C. 
I 
I 
Cl Cl./ 
Cl 
CH2Cl 
head -to-head 
H 
+C2H30 
I 
------~.~ -CH2-CH-CH-CH2-C. 
I 
I 
I 
etc. 
Cl 
CH20 
Cl 
(10.25) 
The CH2Cl groups, after reduction, are identified as CH3 groups 40). 
Another important application of 13C_ NMR is the study of copolymers 33. 52): 
- (A)n-{B)m - block-copolymers 
167 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
- ABABAB - alternating copolymers 
- AABABBA- statistical copolymer (irregular) 
Basically, the analytical problems are similar to those encountered when analysing 
the microtacticity of polymers 33), see Sect. 10.3.1. In order to perform a quantitative 
determination, the chemical shifts of 13C-atoms within sequences of one comonomer 
and at the links have to be different (l0.26). 
(10.26) 
Since the influence of neighbouring atoms extends over three atoms "to the right" and 
"to the left" of 13CO, each C-atom in vinyl polymers can "feel" both adjoining 
monomers (A or B). 
The statistical evaluation according to dyads, triads etc. is similar to tacticity anal-
ysis. This evaluation is treated in extenso in Randall's monograph 33). 
As an examle, polybutadiene, formally a homopolymer, is in fact a copolymer due 
to 1,3 and 1,2 addition: 
CH2 = CH - CH = CH2 
1,3-butadiene 
-CH2-CH=CH-CH2-CH2-CH=CH2-CH2-
1,4 addition 
- CH2 - CH - CH2 - CH -
1,2 addition 
I 
I 
CH=CH2 CH=CH2 
Hydrogenation of polybutadiene transforms this polymer to PE with ethyl branches. 
The 13C-NMR spectrum shows 19 peaks, 9= 10 to 40 ppm. The statistical analyses 
yields the relative number of branches and the distribution of segment lengths. 
In partially hydrogenated samples, the degree of reduction can be measured. This 
can be taken as a typical example of an application of 13C_ NMR in industrial practice 
43). Here, as in the case of sequence analysis, the correct assignment of all peaks is de-
cisive. A rough assignment is possible using tables; small splittings have to be explained 
using model spectra, different polymers, etc. However, absolute certainty can not be 
achieved due to conformational effects on the chemical shifts. Deviations between 
model and polymer and between different polymers are possible. Therefore, different 
peaks of a spectrum have to be evaluated and the consistency of the results has to be 
checked. 
10.8.4 Other Nuclei 
Because of the versatility of modem PFT -NMR spectrometers, other nuclei present in 
polymers will be increasingly studied. As an example, Kricheldorf44) applied 15N_ 
NMR to polymer problems. According to this work, homo- and copoly urethanes can 
be studied using 15N-NMR, since N is part of the main chain and structural differences 
in neighbouring basis units shift the resonance signal of 15N. 
In linear PU of the type 44) 
t 
NH-{CH'l"-NH_[t 
n 
the shielding of 15N decreases with increasing n, i.e. 9 15N increases. 
168 

10 Nuclear Magnetic Resonance (NMR) Spectroscopy of Polymers 
Table 10.6. Informations obtained by 13C_ NMR of Polymers relating to structure 
and dynamics of polymeric systems 
Structure 
Chemical structure 
Tacticity 
Conformation 
Crystallinity 
Electronic structure 
++ 
+ 
+ 
(-) 
Dynamics 
Movements ofthe chain, seg-
ments and sidegroups 
Phonons 
Excitons 
Complex formation and related 
phenomena 
+ 
2H-NMR is used extensively for studying relaxation processes in deuterated poly-
mers by Sillescu and coworkers 45.53.54). The advantage of using 2H_ instead of 1 H-
NMR is a different relaxation (coupling) mechanism 45) which facilitates the interpreta-
tion of the experiments. 
10.9 Resume 
The focus of 13C-NMR in the polymer field (Table 10.6) is on chemical analysis, where 
the greater simplicity of the spectra and the larger chemical shift range, compared to 
IH-NMR, makes this technique unique. Copolymers and polymers of different tactic-
ity can also be analysed. For the first time, high resolution NMR spectra of solids have 
been obtained using the CP-MAS technique allowing structural identification as well 
as conformational analysis of macromolecules in the solid state. This is especially true 
for PFT -NMR; spin relaxation, however, is only indirectly coupled with molecular mo-
tion. This must be kept in mind when evaluating NMR relaxation experiments of poly-
mers. 
References 
1. Ingram, J.E.: Spectroscopy at Radio and Microwave Frequencies, 2nd Ed., London: Butter-
worth 1967 
2. Klesper, E., Sielaff, G. in Hummel, D.O. (ed.): Polymer Spectroscopy, Weinheim: Verlag 
Chemie 1974, p. 189 
3. Bovey, F.A.: High Resolution NMR of Macromolecules, New York: Academic Press 1972 
4. Levins,J.N.: Molecular Spectroscopy, New York: Wiley 1975, p.331 
5. Tables of chemical shifts are reproduced in recent editions of the Handbook of Chemistry 
and Physics, CRC Press 
6. Phillips, W.D.: J. Chem. Phys. 23,1363 (1955) 
7. Bargon, J., Fischer, H., Johnsen, D.: Z. Naturforsch. 22 a, 1551 (1967) 
8. Richard, c., Granger, P.: NMR Vol. 8, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1974 
9. Sadtler Commercial Spectra, Proton NMR-Polymers 60 MHz (2 Vol.); Polymers 100 MHz 
(1 Vol.); 300 spectra per vol., London: Heyden 1980 
10. Johnsen, D.: Kolloid Z.v.Z. Polymer 210,1 (1966) 
11. Woodbrey, J.C., in: Ketley, A.D. (ed.): The Stereo-chemistry of Macromolecules, Vol.3, 
New York: Dekker 1968 
12. Bovey, F.A., Tiers, G.V.D.: J. Pol. Sci. 44,173 (1960) 
13. Johnsen, D., Tessmar, K.: Kolloid Z.v.Z. Polymere 168,160 (1960) 
14. Nishioka, A., Watanabe, H., Yamaguchi, I., Shimizu, H.: J. Pol. Sci. 45, 232 (1960) 
169 

D. Spin-Resonance Spectroscopy 
15. Natta, G.: J. Pol. Sci. 16, 143 (1955) 
16. Spectrum by Dr. Wendisch, in: Hoffmann, M., Kramer, H., Kuhn, R.: Polymeranalytik I, 
Thieme Taschenlehrbuch B 4 1977 
17. Cavalli, L., Borsini, G.S., Carraro, G., Confalonieri, G.: J. Pol. Sci. AI, 8, 801 (1970) 
18. Okamoto, K.-l., Yamada, M., Itaya, A., Kimura, T., Kusabayashi, S.: Macromolecules 9, 
645 (1976) 
19. Williams, D.J.: Macromolecules 3, 602(1970) 
20. Rippen, G., Kaufmann, G., Klopffer, W.: Chern. Phys. 52,165 (1980) 
21. Itaya, A., Okamoto, K.-l., Kusabayashi, S.: Bull. Chern. Soc. Japan 49, 2037 (1976) 
22. Kawamura, T., Matsuzaki, K.: Makromol. Chern. 179, 1003 (1978) 
23. Kosfeld, R., v. Mylius, U., in: Diehl, P., Fluck, E., Kosfeld, R. (eds.): NMR, Vol.4, Berlin, 
Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1971, p. 181 
24. van Vleck, J.H.: Phys. Rev. 74, 1168 (1948) 
25. Bergmann, K.: see Ref. 23), p. 233 
26. Cheuny, T.T.P., Gerstein, B.C., Ryan, C.M., Taylor, R.E.: J. Chern. Phys. 73,6059 (1980) 
27. Broecker, H.Ch.: Third Int. Seminar on Polymer Physics, High Tatra, April 25 to May 
1, 1982 
28. Bargon, J., Fischer, H., Johnson, U.: Z. Naturforsch. 22a, 1551 (1967) 
29. Ward, H.R.: J. Am Chern. Soc. 89, 5517 (1967) 
30. Richard, C., Granger, P.: NMR, Vol. 8. Chemically Induced Dynamic Nuclear and Electron 
Polarizations - CIDNP and CIDEP, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York: Springer 1974 
31. Bargon, J.: CIDNP During the Photolysis of Poly (Methyl Isopropenyl Ketone) and its 
Model Compounds in Solution. Int. Symposium on Degradation and Stabilization of 
Polymers, Brussels 11-1, September 1984 
32. Pasika, W.M. (ed.): Carbon-13 NMR in Polymer Science, ACS Symposium Series, Vol. 103, 
Washington 1979 
33. Randall, J.C.: Polymer Sequence Determination Carbon-13 Method, New York: Academic 
Press 1977 
34. Schaefer,J., Stejskal, E.O.: J. Am. Chern. Soc. 98,1031 (1976) 
35. Schaefer, J., Stejskal, E.O., Buchdall, R.: Macromolecules 10, 384 (1977) 
36. Garroway, A.N., Moritz, W.B., Resing, H.A., in Ref. 32), p. 67 
37. Lyerla, J.R., in: Fava, R.A. (ed.): Method of Experimental Physics, Vol. 16 Polymers, Part A, 
New York: Academic Press 1980, p. 241 
38. Carbon 13 NMR of Monomers & Polymers, Sadtler Research Lab. (1979) 
39. See Ref. 5) 
40. Bovey, F.A.: High-Resolution Carbon 13 Studies of Polymer Structure, in: Ivin, K.J. (ed.): 
Structural Studies of Macromolecules by Spectroscopic Methods, London: Wiley 1976, p. 
181 
41. Dorman, D.E., Otaka, E.P., Bovey, F.A.: Macromolecules 25,574 (1972) 
42. Randall, J.C.: J. Pol. Sci., Pol. Phys. Ed. 11,275 (1973) 
43. Arendt, G.: Personal communication 
44. Kricheldorf, H.R.: J. Macromol. Sci. Chern. A14, 959 (1980) 
45. Collignon, J.L., Sillescu, H., Spiess, H.W.: Colloid Pol. Sci. 259, 220 (1981) 
46. Harris, R.K., Packer, K.J., Say, B.J.: Makromol. Chern. Suppl. 4,117 (1981) 
> 
47. Becker, E.D.: High Resolution NMR-Theory and Chemical Applications, 2nd. Ed., New 
York: Academic Press 1980 
. 
48. Mehring, M.: Principles of High Resolution NMR in Solids, Berlin, Heidelberg, New York, 
Tokyo: Springer 1983 
49. MCBrierty, V.J., Douglas, D.C.: J. Pol. Sci. Macromol. Rev. 16, 295 (1981) 
50. Moller, M., Cantow, H.-J.: Pol. Bull. 5,119 (1981) 
51. Gronski, W., Hasenschindl, A., Limbach, H.H., Moller, M., Cantor, H.-J.: Pol. Bull. 6, 93 
(1981) 
52. Hsieh, E.T., Randall, J.C.: Macromolecules 15, 353 (1982) 
53. Lindner, P., Rossler, E., Sillescu, H.: Macromol. Chern. 182, 3653 (1981) 
54. Sillescu, H.: Pure Appl. Chern. 54, 619 (1982) 
170 

Part E. Conclusion and Appendices 
Conclusion 
Several of the most important methods of polymer characterisation and identification 
are spectroscopic methods; among them, mIR and NMR are useful for all polymers, 
other methods, such as nUV, for certain types of polymers only. Spectroscopy comple-
ments the "classical" methods of polymer research, such as X-ray and light scattering, 
osmometry, rheology, dielectric and mechanical relaxation, X-ray diffraction, etc. 
The most fascinating aspect of polymer spectroscopy, as defined in Chap. 1, is that 
of a "dialogue" at the molecular level, where molecular in most cases means that one 
or a few monomer units are involved, rather than the macromolecule as a whole. Neigh-
bouring groups - in extreme cases the whole polymer molecule - may influence the sig-
nals obtained (polymer aspect). However, the distances involved in these interaction 
rarely surpass I to 10 nm, a fact which has been called the "short-sightedness" of most 
spectroscopic methods at several occasions in this book. 
The dialogue, if we stick to this metaphor for a moment longer, is, of course, a coded 
one. Decoding in most cases is performed empirically by comparison with the spectra 
of monomers, oligomers, related polymers etc. There are other spectra, however, which 
can only be understood on the basis of calculations. 
The most extensive application of polymer spectroscopy, especially in practical and 
routine work, seems to be the chemical analysis of polymers including subtle structural 
differences such as the microtacticity. In addition, spectroscopy provided plenty of 
chemical and physical information about polymers which so far has been derived only 
for relatively simple and commercially important polymers. It was perhaps the most 
important aim of this book to point out these exciting yet not fully exploited possi-
bilities of polymer spectroscopy. 
Recent experimental developments are connected with Fouriertransform techniques 
in the long wavelength region (PFT -NMR and FTIR), whereas in the short wavelength 
region ESCA has been the main new development in the last decade. In the fUV, togeth-
er with nIR, the most neglected field of polymer spectroscopy, a change seems possible 
owing to Synchroton radiation which has become available in some laboratories con-
nected to electron accelerators. In nDV jVIS spectroscopy it is especially the investiga-
tion of dissolved macromolecules which has recently found much attention in polymer 
research. In this area, nano- to picosecond spectroscopy has been opening the door to 
studies of extremely fast kinetics. 
171 

E. Conclusion and Appendices 
Finally, it should be pointed out that a close cooperation between polymer spectro-
scopists and their colleagues working on the preparation of polymers is needed and in 
many cases has to be improved. The purity and homogeneity of the samples investigated 
is an important criterion in many experiments in this field, especially at the level of basic 
research. However, even in polymer identification or functional group analysis, high-
purity and well defined reference samples are desirable. 
172 

Appendix 1 
Table of Polymers 
Chemical name 
Deoxyribonucleic acid 
High density-poly (ethene) (pre-
dominantly linear) 
Low density-poly (ethene) 
(branched) 
Poly (acrylic acid) 
Poly (acrylonitrile) 
Poly (acrylonitrile-co-methyl-
methacrylate) 
Polyamide (s) 
Polyamide (66) 
Poly-(butadiene) 
Poly (I-butene) 
Poly (caprolactam) 
Poly (p-chlorostyrene) 
Poly epoxides based on the di-
glycidylether ofbisphenol A 
Poly (ethene) 
Poly (ethene oxide) 
Poly (ethene terephthalate) 
Poly (p-fluorostyrene) 
Poly (isobutene) 
Poly (isoprene) 
Poly (IX-methylstyrene) 
Poly (methyl methacrylate) 
Poly (methyl methacrylate-co-
styrene) 
Poly (oxymethylene) 
Poly (propene) 
Poly (styrene) 
Poly (styrene-co-vinyl carbazole) 
Poly (styrene-co-vinyl naph-
thalene) 
Poly (styrene sulphonic acid) 
Poly (tetrafluoro ethene-co-
ethene) 
Poly (tetrafluoro ethene) 
Polyurethane(s) 
Poly(vinylacetate) 
Poly(vinylalcohol) 
Poly(N-vinyl carbazole) 
Poly(vinylchloride) 
Poly(vinylfluoride) 
Poly(vinylidene fluorid) 
Poly(vinylidene chloride) 
Poly (I-vinyl naphthalene) 
Poly (2-vinyl naphthalene) 
Polymer of bis(p-toluene-sulpho-
nate) of 2,4-hexadiine-l ,6-diol 
Abbreviation 
DNA 
HDPE 
LDPE 
PAN 
PANjMMA 
PA 
PA-66 
PB 
PA-6 
pCiPS 
DGEBA 
PE 
PEO(POE) 
PET 
pFPS 
PIB 
PMS 
PMMA 
PMMAjS 
POM 
PP 
PS 
PSjVCA 
PSjVN 
PTFEjE 
PTFE 
PU 
PVAC 
PVOH 
PVCA 
PVC 
PVF 
PVF 2 
PVClz 
PlVN 
P2VN 
TSHD (PTS) 
Appendix 1 
Section 
3.2.5 
2.5.4; 3.1; 6.4; 6.5; 7.7.3; 10.4 
2.5.4; 3.1; 6.4; 7.5.4; 10.8.3 
9.4 
7.4.2.4; 7.58 
7.5.2 
3.2.4; 7.4.2.5; 9.8 
4.4.5 
7.4.3; 7.5.5; 10.8.3 
2.4.1; 2.5.4 
7.4.2.5; 9.5 
9.8 
10.8.2 
2.4.1; 3.1; 5.5; 6.4; 6.5; 7.5.6; 9.6; 10.8.3 
3.1; 9.8 
2.4.1; 3.2.4; 7.5.6; 7.7.2 
9.8 
7.4.2.2; 9.6 
7.5.5 
10.3.2 
3; 7.4.2.1; 9.8; 10.3.2 
4.4.2 
2.5.4; 7.4.3; 7.7.4 
2.4.1; 2.5.4; 6.4; 7.4.2.2; 7.4.3; 7.5 
2.4.1; 3.1; 3.2; 4.4.4; 4.5; 9.8 
4.4.2; 4.5.2 
4.4.2 
7.5.8 
2.4.3; 2.4.4 
2.4.1; 2.4.2; 2.4.4; 6.4; 7.7.3; 7.7.4 
3.2.4; 10.8.4 
3.1; 7.4.2.3 
2.4.1; 7.4.2.3 
3.2.4; 4.4.4; 4.5.1; 9.9; 10.3.2 
2.4.1; 2.5.4; 10.3.2; 10.8.3 
2.4.1 
7.7.2 
5.5; 7.4.2 
9.1 
4.4.5 
6.6; 9.7 
173 

E. Conclusion and Appendices 
Appendix 2 
List of Abbreviations 
Roman and Italics Letters 
a 
a 
a.f. 
AFC 
Ag 
As 
at 
ATR 
B 
b 
B(v') 
br 
c 
c 
c' 
CIDNP 
Cn 
CT 
CW 
Lattice constant 
Electron-nuclear hyperfine coupling constant 
(ESR) 
Alternating frequency 
Automatic Frequency Control 
Electron affinity of free molecule or basic 
unit of polymer 
Electron affinity of free molecule in an excited 
electronic state 
Electron affinity of solids 
Atactic 
Attenuated Total Reflection 
Magnetic flux density or induction 
Bending vibration 
Spectral intensity distribution of IR radiation 
(FTIR) 
Breathing vibration 
Velocity of light 
Molar concentration 
Concentration (mass/volume) 
Coherent Antistokes Raman Spectroscopy 
Conduction band 
Concentration (mol ratio) of guest molecules 
or excimer-forming sites 
Chemically Induced Dynamic Nuclear Spin 
Polarisation 
n fold axis of symmetry 
Charge Transfer (inter- or intramolecular 
CT band, CT (donor acceptor) complex) 
Continuous Wave 
Unitl 
nm 
G, T, Hz 
eV 
eV 
eV 
ms- l 
mol basic unit 1- 1 
(11= 1 dm 3) 
g 1- 1 (kgm - 3) 
mol· (mol basic unit)-l 
D,D* 
lD,2D,3D 
First order zero field splitting parameter 
(triplets) and mean zero field splitting parameter 
One, two, three dimensional (lattice) 
1 SI basic unit in bold letters 
174 

Appendix 2 
d 
d 
EF 
Ekin 
E opt 
Ephoto 
Epot 
ESCA 
ESR 
fD(v') 
FlO 
fiR 
fk,n 
FMIR 
fUV 
G 
g 
GPC 
H 
h 
,Ii 
hv 
1,10 
Thickness of polymer film or solution in optical 
absorption measurements 
Deformation vibration 
Fermi energy 
Kinetic energy 
Spectroscopically measured absorption edge 
Threshold of intrinsic photo-current in 
photo-action spectra 
Potential energy 
Electron Spectroscopy for Chemical Analysis 
(or Applications) 
Electron Spin Resonance 
Fluorescence function (reI. spectral distribution) 
of the energy donor 
Free Induced Decay (in FT-NMR) 
far infrared 
Oscillator strength of a transition 
(between states k and n, k<n) 
Frustrated Multiple Internal Reflection 
farUV 
GauJ3, 10- 4 Tesla 
g-factor (ge of electrons, gN of nuclei, 
gp of proton) 
Gel Permeation Chromatography 
Magnetic field strength 
Planck's constant 
h/2n 
Photon energy; in chemical equations: 
photochemical reaction 
Intensity of radiation, 
intensity of reference beam 
Centre of symmetry 
iso 
(as subscript) non-radiative 
IC 
Internal conversion 
eV 
J, eV 
eV, cm- I 
eV, cm- 1 
J, eV 
A m- 1 
Js 
Js 
eV photon- 1 
J Einstein - 1 2 
W m- 2 
photons cm - 2 
Einstein ,cm - 2 
II' I2".In 
Ionisation energy of the highest, second 
eV 
. highest". molecular orbital 
Iq 
( = II) Ionisation energy of free molecule 
e V 
or basic unit of polymer 
2 1 Einstein = 1 mol photons 
175 

E. Conclusion and Appendices 
1* 
9 
INS 
ISC 
Is 
it 
IE 
1M 
J, J' 
JA 
k 
k 
k 
Ionisation energy of free molecule in excited 
electronic state (SI or T 1) 
Inelastic Neutron Scattering 
inter-system crossing 
Intensity of scattered light (radiation) 
Isotactic 
Intensity ratio of excimer to monomer 
fluorescence 
Spin-spin coupling constant 
Exchange interaction energy 
Boltzmann's constant 
Force constant 
"Wave number" of electrons and holes in the 
reciprocal lattice, lattice constant a 
eV 
S-I (Hz) 
eV 
J K- 1 molecule-I 
kgs- 2 
1 
a 
Rate constants of radiative deactivation 
S-I 
(of fluorescence or phosphorescence) 
Rate constant of internal conversion 
S-I 
(mostly SI ~ So) 
Rate constants of intersystem crossing 
S-I 
(S~ Tor T~S) 
Average thermal energy at temperature T (K) 
e V molecule-I 
L 
Length (of vibrating polymer section) 
m, nm 
M 
Molar mass (formerly: molecular ",eight) 
g mol-I 
M(Mn; Mw) Average molar mass; with index n: number 
average; with index w: weight average 
m 
Meso (configuration of dyad) 
m 
Medium (IR absorption intensity) 
MAS 
Magic Angle Spinning (in solid state NMR) 
M, D, P 
Monomer, Dimer, Polymer and corresponding 
radicals and radical-ions 
mm 
MO 
MW 
n 
n 
176 
Mass of the electron 
medium infrared 
Transition dipole moment (between 
states k and n) 
Configuration of isotactic triad (i) 
Molecular orbital 
Mass of the proton 
Configuration ofheterotactic triad (h = mr + rm) 
Microwaves 
Refractive index 
Number of monomer units in a polymer 
molecule 
kg 
D (Debey,1O-18 esu) 
Chm 
kg 

Appendix 2 
nIR 
near infrared 
NL 
Loschmidt's number 
mol- l 
(or Avogadro's constant NA ) 
NMR 
Nuclear Magnetic Resonance 
nUV 
Near UV 
OD 
Optical density or absorbance (= log(lol J)) 
P 
Polarisation energy 
eV 
PFT 
Pulse Fourier-Transform (NMR) 
Q 
Quenching factor 
R 
Nuclear coordinates and distances 
nm 
r 
Electronic coordinates and distances 
nm 
r 
rocking vibration 
r 
racemic (configuration of dyad) 
rf 
radio frequencies 
rr 
Configuration of syndiotactic triad (s) 
S 
Symmetry coordinate 
s 
strong (IR absorption) 
s 
syndio 
So 
Singlet ground state 
SI, SZoo.Sn Excited singlet states (relative to So) 
cm- l , eV 
Sn 
n-Fold rotation - reflection axis of symmetry 
SIN 
Signal to Noise (ratio) 
st 
Stretching vibration 
st 
Syndiotactic 
T 
( I) 
. . 
= 10 
TransmIssIOn 
T 
Absolute temperature 
K 
Time 
ps, ns, )lS, ms, S 
Twisting vibration 
T 1 , Tzoo.Tn Triplet states 
cm- l 
(relative to So ground state) 
eV 
Tl 
Spin-lattice relaxation time 
S 
Tz 
Spin-spin relaxation time 
S 
Tn 
Translation (symmetry element) 
TMS 
Tetra Methyl Silane (as chemical shift 
standard in NMR) 
UV/VIS 
Mostly used for nUV + VIS 
177 

E. Conclusion and Appendices 
VB 
VIS 
vs 
vw 
w 
w 
z 
Velocity 
Quantum number of vibration 
Vibrational quanta in the ground state 
and in excited electronic states 
Valence band 
Visible range of the electromagnetic 
spectrum. light 
Very strong (IR absorption intensity) 
Very weak (lR absorption intensity) 
Wagging vibration 
Weak (IR absorption and intensity) 
Nuclear charge 
Greak Letters 
(J. 
Absorption coefficient, base e; 
mostly used in solid state physics 
(J. 
Polarisability 
y 
Out-of-plane bending vibration 
LI 
Peak- or band width 
LI 
Thermal energy (in chemical equations) 
~ 
Escape depth (lIe) of electron (ESCA) 
~ 
Pathlength difference (in Michelson's 
interferometer) 
«LlB)2) 
Second moment of absorption curve 
LIE 
Energy gap (solid state physics) 
~i 
Chemical shift, relative to internal standard, 
mostly TMS 
e 
Molar absorption coefficient, base 10; 
mostly used in chemical spectroscopy 
(concentration in moll- 1) 
e' 
Specific absorption coefficient, base 10 
(concentration in gl-l) 
e 
Dielectric constant 
['1] 
Intrinsic viscosity 
'1F' '1p 
Experimental quantum efficiency of 
fluorescence or phosphorescence 
e 
Moment of inertia 
,,2 
Orientational factor in Forster's equation 
A 
Wave length 
p. 
Dipole moment (electric) 
Jl. 
Reduced mass (of molecular vibrations) 
178 
nucleus- 1 
cm- 1 
cm3, m3 
eV, em- 1, Hz 
nm 
cm 
eV 
ppm 
1 mol- 1 cm- 1 
1 g-l cm- 1 
dlg- 1 (1 dl=O.l dm3) 
kgm2 
nm, 11m, em, m 
D (Debey, 10- 18 esu) 
Cbm 

Appendix 3 
/lB, /IN 
V 
v 
v' 
(! 
(! 
(J 
(J 
T 
T 
qJ(R) 
tp 
1p(r) 
w 
Bohr's magneton, nuclear magneton 
Frequency 
Stretching vibration 
Wave number 
Density 
Spin density (ESR) 
Absorption cross section, base e 
(concentration in molecules cm - 3) 
Specific electric conductivity 
Shielding constant, consisting of a diamagnetic 
part (Jf and a paramagnetic part (Jf 
Decay time (lIe) or "life-time" of excited states 
Torsional vibration 
Rotation correlation time (spin labels) 
Radiative (fluorescence) lifetime 
Rotation correlation time of segments and 
side groups (1m = local mode) 
Rotation correlation time of macromolecule 
(coil) 
Phase difference (phase angle) 
Work function = ionisation energy of metals 
or location of EF below the vacuum level in 
pure polymers (insulators) 
True quantum efficiency of fluorescence or 
phosphorescence 
Nuclear wave function depending on the space 
coordinates of the nuclei 
Wave function 
Electronic wave function, depending on the 
space coordinates of the electrons 
Angular velocity 
Appendix 3 
List of Elementary Constants Used in This Book 1 
JT- 1 (Am2) 
Hz (S-I), kHz, 
MHz, GHz 
cm- t , m- 1 
gcm- 3 , kgm- 3 
ps, ns, JlS, ms, S 
S 
ms, s 
S 
S 
rad 
eV 
Quantity 
Symbol 
Value 
Units 
Uncertainty, 
parts 106 
Speed of light in vacuum 
c 
Permeability of vacuum 
flo 
Planck constant 
h 
2.997924580 (12) 
108 ms - 1 
4n exactly 
6.626176 (36) 
4.13570 I (11) 
10- 7 Hm- 1 
1O- 34 JHz- 1 
10- 15 eV Hz- 1 
Data according to National Physical Laboratory, Teddington, U.K. 
0.004 
5.4 
2.6 
179 

E. Conclusion and Appendices 
List of elementary constants used in this book (continued) 
Quantity 
Symbol 
Value 
Units 
Uncertainty, 
parts 106 
h/2n 
h 
1.0545887 (57) 
1O- 37 Js 
5.4 
6.582173 (17) 
1O- 16 eVs 
2.6 
Elementary charge 
e 
1.6021892 (46) 
1O- 19 C 
2.9 
4.803242 (14) 
1O- 1O esu 
2.9 
Avogadro constant (or 
NA 
6.022045 (31) 
1023 mol- l 
5.1 
Loschmidt's Number NL ) 
Bohr magneton 
J1B 
9.274078 (36) 
10- 24 J T- l 
3.9 
5.7883785 (95) 
10- 5 eVT- l 
1.6 
Nuclear magneton 
J1N 
5.050824 (20) 
10- 27 JT- l 
3.9 
3.1524515 (53) 
1O- 8 eVT- l 
1.7 
Magnetic moment of 
J1e 
9.284832 (36) 
1O- 24 JT- l 
3.9 
the electron 
Magnetic moment in Bohr J1e/J1B 
1.0011596567 (35) 
0.0035 
magneton (g-factor, ge) 
=ge/2 
Ratio of electron 
J1e/ J1p 
658.2106880 (66) 
0.010 
and proton magnetic 
moments 
Mass of the electron 
Ine 
9.109534 (47) 
10- 31 kg 
5.1 
at rest 
I Electron volt 
eV 
1.6021892 (46) 
10- 19 J 
2.9 
in frequency units 
2.4179696 (63) 
1014 Hz 
2.6 
in wave number units 
8.065479 (21) 
105 m- l 
2.6 
in temperature units 
1.160450 (36) 
104 K 
31 
Magnetic moment of 
J1p 
1.4106171 (55) 
10- 26 JT- l 
3.9 
free proton 
in Bohr magnetons 
J1p / J1B 
1.521032209 (16) 
10- 3 
0.011 
in nuclear magnetons 
J1p/ J1N 
2.7928456 (11) 
0.38 
Mass of proton at rest 
Inp 
1.6726485 (86) 
10- 27 kg 
5.1 
Ratio of proton mass to 
Inp/lne 
1836.15152 (70) 
0.38 
electron mass 
Mass of neutron at rest 
Inn 
1.6749543 (86) 
10- 27 kg 
5.1 
Energy x wavelength 
1.2398520 (32) 
1O- 6 eVm 
,2.6 
(or energy-o-
wavenumber) 
Boltzmann constant R/ N A k 
1.380662 (44) 
10- 23 J K- l 
32 
0.861735 (28) 
1O- 4 eVK- l 
32 
Molar gas constant 
R 
8.31441 (26) 
Jmol- l K- l 
31 
"Bases of Measurement" is obtainable from the Publications Officers, National Physical 
Laboratory, Teddington, Middlesex, TW 11 OLW 
180 

Author Index and Subject Index 
Absorbance 29 
Absorption band(s) 23 
, cell (ESR) 
120 
, electronic 28 
, integral 28, 77 
, intensity of 27 
Absorption coefficient 27, 28 
, molar decadic 29, 31, 77 
, specific 28, 29 
Absorption cross section 29 
Absorption edges 23, 24 
Absorption of radiation 
, general law of in homogeneous matter 
28 
Absorption spectroscopy 
, ultraviolet and visible 
23 
, near ultraviolet and visible 25, 26 
Abbreviations, table of 174 
Accordion vibration 56, 70 
, in paraffins 
71 
Acetophenone type end groups in PS 
48 
, c=o valence vibration 48 
, IR absorption of 48 
, phosphorescence of 48 
Acoustical branch (of phonons) 60 
Acrylic acid 
125 
Acrylonitrile 
125 
Additives 
33 
Adenine 32 
Adhesion 21 
AFC 
120 
Amide bands (IR) 89 
Auger effect 
10 
Angular momentum 109, 110, 113 
, velocity 
109 
Anionic polymerisation 
125 
Anisotropic broadening 119, 120 
Anthracene 39 
Anti oxidants 33 
Antistatics 33 
Anti-Stokes process in INS 
61, 103 
, in Raman spectroscopy 63, 65 
Ar+ laser 66 
Aromatic polymers 34 
Atmospheric pollutants 33 
ATR 80,81,96,97 
Avogadro constant (Loschmidt's number) 
180 
Backbone (of polymer) 29 
, poly conjugated 74 
Bamford 
123 
Band 
, pseudo ID 23 
, gap 24 
Band model 
16 
, of polymer backbone 
18 
Bargon 
160 
Bending (vibration) 83 
Benzotrifluoride 
11 
Benzoyl peroxide (CIDNP) 
160 
Bergmann 
158 
Bernoulli statistics 
151, 155 
Binding energy, of electrons 
7 
Biological polymers 4 
Biopolymers 4, 30, 32, 74, 75 
, ESR 
116 
Biphenylene 41 
Biradicals 
123 
F. Bloch 
15, 111 
Block copolymers 41 
Bloor 73 
Bohr's magnet on 110, 114, 180 
Boltzmann constant 
180 
Boltzmann distribution (equation) 
81 
, in Raman spectra 63, 65 
,inESR 119 
, in NMR 138, 142, 143 
Born-Oppenheimer approximation 26 
Bragg's diffraction (law) 
16,61, 103 
Branching (of polymers) 95,165 
, back-biting mechanism 
167 
Breathing vibration 64, 83 
Bresler 123 
Brillouin 
15, 16 
Broad-line spectra (NMR) 139,144,157,158 
de Broglie 
16 
Broglie wavelength 61, 103, 104 
Broglie's formula 
61 
181 

Author Index and Subject Index 
Bulk analysis 
13 
,ESCA 14 
Bulkin 65 
Cameron 
135 
Cantow 
165 
Caoutchouc 96 
Carbene-type chain end (TSHD) 
133 
Carbon double bonds 
, in IR bands 96 
Carbonyl group IR absorption 77,84,88,95 
, in degraded films of PE 98 
CARS 66,75 
Catalyst 33 
Cationic polymerisation 
126 
Cavalli 
156 
Cavity (ESR) 120, 121, 124 
,scheme 122 
CB 
15 
Centre of symmetry 56 
, of 1D chain 57 
Chain dynamics 47 
Chain segment, movements of 2 
Character table 
58 
Charge transfer absorption bands 33 
Chemical shift, ESCA 
10, 11 
Chemical shift 
138, 139, 144 
, anisotropy 
163 
,data 165 
Chemical structure 2 
Chromophores 27, 77 
CIDNP 143, 160 
(cis )poly( 1 A-butadiene) 
72, 96 
cis-1 A-poly isoprene 96 
CIar 
31 
Clark 
13 
C=N band 95 
13C-NMR 161,165 
, of solid polymers 
162 
, of solutions 
165 
,resume 
169 
Coherent INS 
104 
Compatibility (of polymers) 47, 51 
,excimer fluorescence as a probe 47 
Commercial polymers 
33 
Complex formation 2 
Conduction band 16, 19 
Configuration(s) 2 
,in PP 90 
Conformation 2 
, in mIR spectra 89 
Copolymerisation (ESR) 
125 
Copolymers 2, 30 
, alternating 
168 
, analysis of 32 
,mIR 94 
, 13C-NMR 167 
182 
, singlet excitons 44 
,statistical (random) 41, 82 
Core electrons 8-11, 21 
Corona discharge 
13, 15 
Corona treatment (polymer films) 
80, 98 
Correspondence principle 54 
Coupling "electrical" 86 
, constant (hyperfine splitting) 
118 
, "mechanical" 86 
Covalent bands 
16 
CP-MAS 
164, 169 
"Crankshaft-like" motion 47 
Critical radius, Ro 
44 
Cross linking 98 
Cross polarisation 159, 163, 164 
Cross-section for neutron scattering 104 
, UV jVIS absorption 29 
Crystal lattice 
18 
, infinite 1D 
56, 59 
Crystal symmetry 
15 
Crystals, molecular 
17 
Crystallinity 2 
,1D 2, 18 
, 3D in mIR 89, 99 
, degree of (Raman) 69 
,band 87 
CT complexes 
76, 126, 135 
Cuniberti, Carla 47 
CW-NMR, Comparison with PFT-NMR 161 
Cytosine 32 
DA complexes 
33, 100 
Davydov splitting 32, 68, 90 
Debye (unit) 28, 77 
Decay behaviour of luminescence 40 
Decay time(s) 40, 41 
, of fluorescence labels 43 
Deformation (vibration) 
83 
DGEBA 164 
,solid state 13C-NMR 165 
Degradation of polymers 34 
Delayed emission 36 
Delker 76 
Density of states 
16 
Density of unpaired electrons ("spin density") 
119, 125 
. 
Diamagnetic shielding 
139 
Diamagnetism 
139 
Dicarbenes 
133 
2,4-Dichloropentane, meso 
153 
,racemic 153 
Diffuse reflection 80 
Dimeric radical 
124, 125 
2,6-Dimethyl phenol in PE 
, flR and mIR, H-bond 
101 
2,4-Dinitrophenylhydrazine for detection of 
ketones and aldehydes 99 

9,10-Diphenyl anthracene 39 
Dipole moment 64, 77 
, induced 64 
Dipole resonance 43 
Dirac 110 
Dispersion interaction 32 
DNA 30,41 
,hypochromy 32, 34 
, random coil 32 
ID system (chain), dispersion curve for 
longitudinal phonons 60 
, crystallinity in Raman spectrum 69 
Dyad(s) 
148, 149 
Dyes 
33 
Dynamics of macromolecules 
51 
Doublet (states) 
130 
,spin 
110 
, splitting of energy levels in magnetic field 
114 
Douglas 
165 
Eigenvalues (of harmonic oscillator) 
54 
Electric field distribution in ESR cavity 
122 
Electromagnetic radiation, spectrum of 3 
Electron affinity 
17, 27, 33, 42 
Electron analyser 7, 9 
Electron-nuclear spin coupling 
141 
Electron spectroscopy for chemical analysis 
(ESCA) 7 
Electron-spin polymers 
123 
Electron spine s) 
26, 27 
Electron volt 
180 
Electronic absorption bands in Resonance 
Raman Spectroscopy 
72 
Electronic ground state 26, 42 
Electron spectroscopy 4, 7, 8 
Electronic structure 2 
Electronic vibronic spectra 26 
Electronically excited state(s) 26 
Electrostatic charging 
21 
Elementary charge 
180 
Elementary constants, list of 179 
Emission spectra 
, time resolved 40 
, "true" 
39 
Emitting chromosphore 40 
End-group cyclization 47 
Energy band model '29 
Energy bands 15, 16 
, in polymers 
17 
Energy donor 43 
Energy gap 
IS 
,ofHDPE 
19 
Energy level diagram(s) 
27 
Energy transfer 42, 43 
, between isolated groups 43 
Author Index and Subject Index 
Energy acceptor 43 
Escape depth of electrons 
13 
ESR spectra of mechanically formed 
polymer radicals 
126 
ESCA 3, 7, 25, 80, 98, 171 
,resume 21 
, spectra 9, 10, 12 
,spectrometer 8, 9 
ESR 4,47, 109, Ill, 135, 136 
, absorption 
121 
, general characteristics of spectra 
113 
, spectral range 
111, 112 
,spectrometer 
120, 121, 122 
, spectroscopy of polymers 
113, 123 
Ethanol 
139 
,(NMR) 140, 142 
Excimer(s) 42 
, fluorescence 
45, 46 
, potential scheme 45 
, formation 45, 47 
, as a probe in polymer studies 46, 47 
Excimer-forming sites 
45 
, in aromatic polymers 46 
Exciplex fluorescence 
32 
Excitation spectra 
39 
Excited states 42 
, vibrational, emission from 80 
Exciton(s) 2, 25, 45, 50, 135 
, hopping 42 
, in molecular crystals 46 
, wavelike (coherent) 45 
Factor group 57 
Fenton's reagent 
124 
Fermi level 
18, 19 
Fermi resonance (splitting) 
68 
Fibres 
33 
Field scan 
143 
fiR 77,78 
, resume 
105 
,spectroscopy of polymers 
100 
,chemical applications 
100 
Fischer, H. 
123 
Flow system for radicalic polymerisation 
(ESR) 
124 
Fluorescence 4. 37 
, comparison with Resonance Raman 
Scattering 
72 
, disturbance of Raman spectra 
, excitation 42 
, from isolated chromophores 42 
, in polymers 
41 
, labels 43, 134 
, mirror image 37 
, spectroscopy of polymers 
36 
vibrational structure 
183 

Author Index and Subject Index 
Fluorescence and phosphorescence spectra in 
comparison to vibrational spectra 53 
, low temperature 39 
Fluorescent groups 41 
, burning out 66 
, crowded 41 
, isolated 41--43 
Fluorescent transitions 37 
Fluoro polymers 
14, 22 
FMIR 80, 81, 96 
Forbidden trasitions 36 
Force constant 54, 55 
Forster 43 
, theory, mechanism 44 
Fourier transform(ation) interferometers 78 
,in NMR 161 
Fracture of polymers 
123 
, PA-6 
127 
, primary processes 
128 
Franck-Condon principle 28 
Frank, C.W. 47 
Free electron ESR 
129, 131 
Free induced decay 162 
FTIR spectrometer 79,81 
Fundamental vibrations 53, 54 
, of 1 D chain molecules 56 
fUV 3,8,34 
, absorption 25 
, experimental set-up 23 
Garcia 33 
GauBian absorption curve (ESR) 
115 
George 24 
g-factor ( = ge) of free electron 114, 180 
, anisotropy 127 
gN-factors of nuclei III 
Goddu 76 
Grant 91 
Grotthus conductivity 142 
Group vibrations (frequencies) 81, 82 
, notation 83 
Guanidine 32 
Half-field resonance (ESR) 
131 
Half width of ESCA peaks 10, 12 
Harmonic oscillator 53, 54 
H-(hydrogen-)bonds 74, 86,99, 100 
HDPE 18-20, 23, 24, 166 
, Raman bands 67, 71 
, Fermisplitting 68 
, fiR spectrum 
102 
Helix 7, 32, 71, 91, 93, 104 
Hendra 69 
Henniker 82 
Heteroaromatic polymers 34 
HeiNe Laser 66 
184 
High-resolution lH-NMR (of Polymers) 
144 
Hindered rotation (of spin label) 
134 
2H-NMR 169 
lH-NMR, resume 
160 
Hole burning 119 
Hole, positive ( = defect electron) 8, 24, 27 
Holland-Moritz 94 
Holographic gratings 65 
Homogeneous line broadening 119 
Homopolymers 41 
, aromatic 45 
, singlet excitons 44 
Hopping process (model) 44, 136 
, singlet exciton 44 
Hot bands 67 
Hiickel (method) 
19 
Hummel, D.O. 4, 82, 94 
Hummel and Scholl 82, 94 
Hydroperoxides 49, 129 
, mIR absorption 97 
2-Hydroxy benzophenones 33 
2-(2-Hydroxyphenyl)benzotriazoles 33 
Hyperfine (splitting) coupling 117-120 
, acrylic acid 
125 
Hypochromy 30 
, in polymers 32 
Identity (symmetry element) 56, 57 
Inelastic neutron scattering (INS) 61, 100, 
102 
, resume 
105 
Infrared lines (in comparison to Raman lines) 
63 
Infrared spectroscopy of polymers 75 
, empirical 82 
Ingram 123 
Initiators 124 
Insulator 16, 17 
Internal conversion 37 
Internal standard 140 
Interference pattern 78 
Interferogram 79 
Inter-system crossing 37 
. 
Ionisation energy 7,9, 10, 11, 17, 19,27, 33 
IR-absorption 78 • 
, dispersion curve 60 
,spectroscopy 76 
IR emission 80 
IR radiation, polarised 90 
IR reflection 80 
IR region of electromagnetic radiation 76 
IR-spectrometer(s) 78 
Irreducible representations 57, 59 
Isotactic configuration 
, excimer formation 46 
, definition 
147 

Isotactic sequence 
150 
Isotactic vinyl polymer 
, extended chain projection 
147 
Isotopic substitution 
152 
Isotropic splitting 
117 
Jablonski-diagram 27,36 
, simplified 40 
Johnsen, U. 
146 
Kasha 27 
, rule 
37 
Kausch 
123, 128 
Keighley 
123 
Kinetic law of polymerisation (NMR) 120 
Klystron 
120 
Kobayashi 58 
Koopmans theorem 7,21 
Kricheldorf 168 
Krimm 87 
Kr+ laser 66 
LDPE 18,23, 100 
, branching, lack-biting 
167 
, branching, mIR 95 
, branching, NMR 166 
, Raman bands 67 
, Fermi splitting 68 
Lambert-Beer's law 29, 33, 95 
, application to polymers 28 
, in IR spectroscopy 77 
Lamellae (of crystalline PE) 
70, 71 
Laser radiation 62, 63 
Laser-Raman spectra 66 
, spectrometer 63, 74 
Lattice reciprocal 
16 
, symmetry 
16 
, vibrations (see also phonons) 93 
, wave number 
16 
, constant 56 
Light scattering 30 
Lindberg 
123 
Linear PE 158, 166 
Linear polymers, mIR spectra 82 
Linear PU 
168 
Line broadening (ESR) 
119 
Line width, natural 
10 
Living polymer 125 
Local modes 
135 
Longitudinal acoustic vibration 70 
Loschmidt's number (Avogadro constant) 
180 
Lubricants 33 
Luminescence 4, 25, 36 
, excitation spectra 39 
Author Index and Subject Index 
Macromolecules, orientation of 43 
Macro radicals (s.a. polyradicals) 
128 
Magic angle 
139 
, spinning (MAS) 
158, 161-163 
Magnetic dipole interaction 
138, 157, 163 
Magnetic field distribution in ESR cavity 
122 
Magnetic moment 113 
, free electron 
110, 180 
, proton 110, 180 
Magnetic spin-spin interaction 
131 
Mass of the electron 
180 
, of neutron 
180 
, of proton 180 
Mc Brierty 165 
Mc Connell's equations 
135 
Mechanical degradation 136 
Mechano radicals 
126, 129 
meso placement 148 
Methyl group rotation (NMR) 
158 
Michelson Interferometer 78-80 
Microtacticity 
147, 148, 160, 165, 168, 171 
Microwave absorption of polymers 
1 
mIR 4 
, spectra of polymers 
77, 81 
, applications 94 
Mixing chamber (ESR flow system) 
124 
Model compounds, monomeric 2, 30, 33, 49 
, dimeric or trimeric 46 
Modulation amplitude (ESR) 
123 
M6ssbauer spectroscopy 3 
Molar gas constant 180 
Molar mass 
I 
, delayed fluorescence dependent on 49 
, determination by mIR spectroscopy 95 
Molecular dynamics 46 
, orbital 27 
Molecules, dissolved in solid polymers 
, absorptioon (UV) 
33 
Moment of inertia 
109 
Momentum transfer (INS) 
61 
Monomer, residual 
33 
Monomer radical 
124, 125 
Monomer aspect 3,29, 55 
, definition of 2 
Morawetz 46 
Multiplicity (spin) 
37 
Natta 146, 147 
Naturallinewidth 116 
Neutron properties 
103 
, radiation I 
, scattering experiment (scheme) 
103 
14N-hyperfine splitting (triplet) 
118, 125 
, in spin label 
134 
NIPCA (N-isopropyl carbazole) 
31 
185 

Author Index and Subject Index 
nIR 4,34,76 
Nitroxide(s) 
133 
, spin label 
134 
NMR 4, 109, 137 
, pulse technique 
139 
, sensitivity 
138 
, spectral range III 
NMR spectrometer, block diagram 
143 
15N_NMR 168 
Norrish I and II splitting 97 
Nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy 
(of polymers) 
137 
, magneton 
137 
, quadrupole magnetic resonance 
109 
, spin 137 
, of isotopes 
138 
, spin coupling 138, 140 
, triplet state 118 
nUV 3,26 
, chromophores 24 
OH (starting radical) 
124 
Okamoto 156 
Oligo-ethylene oxide 
72 
Oligo-TFE 72 
Optical branch (of phonons) 60 
Optical brighteners 33 
Optical density 27, 29, 77 
Orbital angular momentum 110 
Orbitals 9 
, atomic 7 
, molecular 7 
, valence 9 
, core 9 
Oscillator strength 28, 31 
Overlap integral (Forster) 
44 
Oxidation 96 
, degradation 97 
, photochemical, polymer films 80 
Ozone 97 
PIVN 119 
P2VN 47 
PA6 46,77,88, 127, 134 
, mIR spectrum 88 
, mechanically degraded (ESR) 
126 
Painter 58 
PAN 99 
, mIR spectrum 87 
Paraffins Raman bands 70· 
Paramagnetism 47 
Parker 39 
Partridge 23 
Pauli 
110 
PB 
11, 18 
186 
PE 11, 25, 56, 82, 129 
, absorption edge 23 
, as matrix in fiR 
100 
, broad-line NMR 157 
, 13C_NMR 167 
, extended chain 58 
, fundamental vibrations 59 
, lamellae thickness 
72 
, OOH groups 97 
, Raman spectrum 66-68 
Peak-to-peak width (ESR) 
115 
- Pentad 155 
Permeability of vacuum 179 
Peroxy radical(s) 
127, 129 
Perrin (Francis), Perrin's model 49 
Perrin (Jean) 43 
PES 8 
PET 12, 13, 25, 98, 101, 102 
Peterlin 128 
PFT-NMR 169, 191 
, comparison with CW-NMR 161 
Phase angle of vibrations (phonons) 
59 
Phase separation of polymer blends 51 
Phenoxy radicals (ESR) 
130 
Phonons 2, 59, 60, 70, 74, 77, 99, 100 
, in fiR spectra of polymers 
101 
Phosphorescence excitation spectrum of 
commercial PS 
48 
Phosphorescence 4, 37 
, spectroscopy of polymers 36, 133 
, in polymers 47 
, sensitized of guest molecules 49 
Phosphorescent groups isolated 48 
Photochemistry 42 
, of polymers 34, 50 
Photoconductivity 21, 50 
Photo current 24 
, intrinsic, threshold energy of 24 
Photo-dissociation 25 
Photo electron spectroscopy 8 
Photo emission, of electrons 21 
Photo-ionisation 25 
Photo polymerisation (TSHD crystals) 
133 
Photo selection 43 
Photo oxidation 
13 . 
PIB, mIR spectrum 85,86,91 
, ESR 129, 130 
Picosecond spectroscopy 40 
Plane of symmetry 56 
Planck constant 179 
Plasma polymers 21 
Plasticisers 33 
Plastics 33 
Platt 31,32 
Plexiglas 82 
PMMA 25, 82, 84 
, isotactic 146, 147 

, mIR bandS and spectrum 84 
• NMR data 150 
, syndiotactic 85, 145 
PMS 
151 
, st 152 
, it 
152 
POE 25,134 
Point group 57, 58 
Polarisability (Smekal-Raman effect) 64 
, tensor 64 
Polarisation, electronic 
18 
Poly(acrylonitrile) 87 
Poly( acrylonitrile-co-methylmethacrylate) 
-mIR Spectrum 94 
Polyalkylmethacrylates 47 
1,2-Polybutadiene 96 
Polybutadiene 168 
Poly(caprolactam) 88 
Polydiines 32 
, single crystals, Resonance Raman spectra 
73 
Polyester(s) 77, 134 
Poly(isobutene) 85 
1,2-Polyisoprene 96 
3,4-Polyisoprene 96 
Polymer aspect, definition of 2,3,29, 171 
Polymer chains, dynamics of 43, 133 
Polymer chromophores 36 
Polymer coils 30, 65, 135 
, free draining 135 
, non draining 135 
Polymer crystals (folded chains lamellar 
structure) 71, 75 
Polymer films, tip-coating 23 
Polymeric acids 99 
Polymeric DA complexes 34 
Polymerisation studies (ESR) 
123 
, radicalic 125 
Polymer spectroscopy 3 
, definition of I 
, information obtained by 2 
, spectral range 3 
Polymer surfaces, Corona and plasma treat-
ment 98 
Poly(tetrahydrofuran) 72 
Polyolefines 
129 
Polypeptides 88 
Polypropylene, amorphous 85 
Polyradicals 
111, 124, 125 
Poly(vinyl alcohol) 86 
POM 18, 82, 104 
Potential curves 26 
Polymers, degree of orientation in solid 43 
, table of 173 
PP 11,18,33 
, mIR spectrum of atactic 85, 86, 91 
, isotactic 89, 91 
Author Index and Subject Index 
, syndiotactic 90-93 
, OOR groups 97 
, Raman spectrum 66, 69 
Primary processes (ESR) 
136 
Primary radical (ESR) 
127 
Prompt fluorescence, relation to delayed 
fluorescence 49 
Proteins 30 
, IRjRaman 89 
Proton exchange (hopping) processes 
142 
Proton spin moment 
137 
PS 
11, 25, 30-32 
, escimer fluorescence 45 
, monomeric models 29 
, spin label study 134, 135 
, technical grades 30 
, phosphorescence spectrum of 
, triplet energy 47 
PSjPoly(vinylmethyl ether) blends 47 
PSjVCA (copolymer) 48 
PTFE 13,14 
, Raman spectrum 66, 69 
, fiR 
102 
, INS 
104 
PTS 32 
Purcell 
111 
PVCI2 
59,93 
PVAC 25 
, syndiotactic 86, 87 
PVC 11,30 
, branching 167 
, double bonds 96 
, ESCA valence spectrum 21 
, NMR spectrum 
154 
, radicalic, NMR 153, 155 
, tacticity 
152, 153 
, tactici ty analysis 
155 
PVCA 25,30,31, 136 
, excimer fluorescence 45 
, NMR 156 
, triplet energy 47 
PVF 
11 
PVF2, fiR 101, 102 
PVOR 11, 13, 99 
, mIR spectrum 86, 87 
Q band 114, 120 
. , resonance conditions 122 
Quantum efficiency 40, 50 
, experimentally observed 40 
, "true" 40,41 
, fluorescence 
39 
Quenching 39,50 
, experiments 40 
, factor 45, 46 
187 

Author Index and Subject Index 
Quinine sulphate 39 
Quintet states (ESR) 
133 
Rabek 
117, 123 
Racemic placement 
148 
Radiation, electromagnetic 
1, 112 
, induced ionic polymerisation 
126 
, less transition 36 
,particle 1 
Radiative transition 36 
Radical, anions 
119 
, cations 
136 
Radical-ion complexes 
33, 76 
Radicalic polymerisation (PMMA) 
151 
Radical, formed by radiation (ESA) 
129 
,CIDNP 160 
Raman spectra 57, 62 
,intensity 65 
Raman spectrometer 63, 65 
Raman spectroscopy 
1, 53, 62 
,resonance 53 
, of crystalline PE 68 
Raman spectroscopy (of polymers) 
62 
,resume 74 
Ranby 
117,123 
Randall 
168 
Rate constants 40, 41 
, of emission 
37 
Rayleigh equation 30 
,scattering 62 
Reabsorption 
39 
, of fluorescence 
40, 50 
Reduced mass (of oscillator) 
54 
Reference spectra (IR) 
81 
,substances (compounds) 
40, 78 
Regularity bands (IR) 81,82,89 
, ester stretching in PMMA 84 
Resins 
2, 82, 141 
Resonance A (ESR, NMR) 
112 
Resonance absorption 
110 
, condition 
111 
,frequency 
137 
,of proton 
138 
,NMR 138, 144 
, of unpaired electron 
114 
Resonance Raman scattering 32, 72 
, of PTS single crystals 
73 
RNA 30 
Rocking (vibration) 
83 
Rotation-reflection axis of symmetry 
56 
Sample, position in cavity (ESR) 
122 
Saturation of signals (ESR) 
119 
,at high MW power 
121 
,in NMR 142 
188 
Savoisky 
111 
Scattering (of radiation) 40 
Schaufele 67 
Schrodinger equation 54 
Scintillation counting 51 
Scissor (vibration) 
83 
Secondary radical (in polymer fracture) 
126 
Second moment (of absorption curve) 
157, 
158 
Selection rules 
27 
, in vibrational spectroscopy 
53, 55 
, of IR-absorption 60 
,of Smekal-Raman 63 
Semiconductor 
16, 17 
Sensitivity (ESR) 
121 
Sequence length (tacticity) 
150 
Shake-off 9, 10 
,up 9, 10 
Shielding (NMR) 
156, 166 
Side groups, movements of 2 
Siesler 94 
Sillescu 
169 
Singlet oxygen 
49, 97 
Singlet state( s) 
26 
,spin 110 
Sixl 
133 
Smekal-Raman disturbance by fluorescence 
66 
, effect 39, 62-65, 75 
,explanation 63 
, increase of intensity with frequency 
63, 
66 
, lines, polarisation 
63 
S(MMA (copolymer) 
42 
Snyder 94 
Sodium salicilate 23 
Sohma 
128 
Solid-state polymerisation 
126 
Space group 57 
Spectrofluorimeters 37, 38 
Spectroscopy, definition of 
, information obtained by 2 
Speed of light 
179 
Spherulites 65 
Spin decoupling 
153 
,density (density Of unpaired electrons) 
135 
Spin of elementary particles 
109, 113, 122 
,labels 
113, 118, 123, 133 
, orbit coupling 
116 
,probes 133 
,quantum number 
130 
Spin-lattice relaxation time (T 1) 
116, 159, 
162 
, of 13C atoms 
163 
, of protons 
142 
, traces of paramagnetic impulses 
160 

Spinning frequency (MAS) 
164 
Spin relaxation times 
159 
Spin resonance spectroscopy 4, 109 
, in polymers III 
, spectral range 112 
Spin selection rule 37 
Spin-spin coupling constant 142, 144 
Spin-sp~n relaxation time (T 2) 
116, 159 
Stabilisers (UV) 
130 
Starting radical 124 
Steric hindrance (in NMR) 156 
Stem-Volmer equations 45 
Stokes (lines in Raman spectrum) 63, 65, 66 
Stretching experiments (ESR) 
128 
"Stripping off' (side groups) 
129 
Strobl 67, 71 
Submicro cracks 
128 
Supraconducting coils 
143 
Surface analysis 
13 
,ESCA 14 
,layer 8 
, modification 80 
Symmetry axes (of ID chain) 57 
, plane (of ID chain) 57 
Synchrotron radiation 25, 171 
Syndiotactic vinyl polymer, extended chain 
projection 
147 
Tacticity 2, 50, 99, 146, 160 
, analysis (NMR) 
145 
, in mIR spectra 89 
Tadokoro 58, 87 
Teflon 
12 
Termination 124 
Tetrafluoroethylene, copolymer with ethylene 
14 
Tetramethyl dioxetane 47 
Time-of-flight spectra (neutron scattering) 
104 
TMS 
139 
TormiiUi 
123, 135 
Torsion (vibration) 83, 100 
Transition dipole moment 27,28,43,47 
Transition metal ions 
113 
Translation (symmetry element) 
57 
Triad(es) 
148 
, probabilities 149 
Triplet excimers 49 
, as exciton traps 49 
, in aromatic homopolymers 49 
Triplet excitons, in polymers 49 
, hopping rate 49 
, ESR 
135 
Triplet state(s) 47, 123 
, spin 
110 
, ESR absorption 
130 
, decoupling 
132 
Author Index and Subject Index 
Tryptophane 30 
TSHD 74 
, ESR of growing chain ends 132, 133 
Twisting (vibration) 83 
Tyndall scattering (effect) 62, 65 
, comparison with Smekal-Raman effect 
63,72 
Tyrosine 30 
Uncertainty principle 
115 
, (Heisenberg) 
10 
UV absorbing polymers 30 
, absorption 30 
, excitation of Raman spectra 66 
, radiation 97, 129 
, stabilisers 33 
, screening type 33 
UVPS 8 
UVfVIS 34 
, absorption spectra 30 
, resume 34 
, absorption processes 36 
Valence band 16, 18, 19 
, lD 21 
, electrons 9, 10, 11 
, vibrations 83 
VB 
15, 16, 20, 23 
, CB transition 24 
VCA/S (copolymer) 42 
Van Vleck 
157 
Vibrational spectra interpretation 55 
, spectroscopy 4, 53 
, structure of electronic bands 53 
Vibrations of polymers 53 
, totally symmetric 57, 64, 76 
, in Smekal-Raman effect 63 
Vinylidene end groups 24 
VIS 4 
VN/S (copolymer) 42 
vanderWaals (forces) 
17, 18 
Wagging (vibration) 83 
Ward 91,160 
Water-soluble polymers 75 
Wave function symmetry or anti symmetric 
behaviour 58 
Wave guide 
120 
Wegner 74 
Winnik 47 
Work function 
16, 17 
189 

Author Index and Subject Index 
X band 114,119,120 
, ESR spectrometer (scheme) 
121 
, resonance conditions 
122 
X-ray fluorescence 
10 
XPS 
8 
X-ray small-angle scattering 72, 128 
X-rays (radical formation) 
129 
Young's modulus (elastic constant) 
70 
190 
Zbinden 96 
Zero field levels in symmetrical molecules 
132 
Zero field splitting 131, 133, 141 
, of triplet states 
132 
, parameters D and E 
131 
Zhurkov 
128 
Zig-zag chain (extended) 56 
, accordion vibration of 70 
,isotactic PMMA 
147 
,syndiotactic PMMA 148 

Spectroscopy: 
NMR, Fluorescence, 
FR-IR 
1983. 40 figures, 5 tables. Approx. 170 pages 
(Advances in Polymer Science 
Fortschritte der Hochpolymeren-Forschung, 
Volume 54) 
ISBN 3-540-12591-4 
Contents: 
E.D. v.Meerwall: Self-Diffusion in Polymer 
Systems, Measured with Field-Gradient Spin-
Echo NMR Methods. This article reviews practice 
and theory of self-diffusion in polymer systems as 
measured with the field-gradient NMR methods. 
Polymer diffusion in dilute and concentrated 
solutions and melts, and penetrant and diluent 
diffusion in polymers, are covered together with 
theoretical interpretation of experiments. The 
aim ofthis review is to familiarize workers in the 
polymer field with these techniques for measur-
ing self-diffusion, and with their applications and 
benefits. (74 ref.) 
c. W. Frank, S.N. Semerak: Photo physics of Exci-
mer Formation in Aryl Vinyl Polymers. Fluores-
cence techniques are powerful methods for obtai-
ning detailed information on the molecular struc-
ture of biopolymers and synthetic polymers. Exci-
mer fluorescence is a significant feature of the 
luminescence behavior of virtually all aryl vinyl 
polymers. The objective of this review is to con-
centrate on two aspects of the photophysics of 
these synthetic polymers and copolymer variants: 
excimer formation and singlet exciton migration. 
The article clarifies both the power and limita-
tions of the excimer as a molecular probe of poly-
mer structure and dynamics. (220 ref.) 
J. L. Koenig: Fourier Transform Infrared Spectros-
copy of Polymers. This review covers the theory 
and application of Fourier transform infrared 
spectroscopy to the characterization of polymers. 
The basic theory, the sampling techniques and 
the spectral operations are described. The appli-
cations discussed include the study of polymer 
reactions, polymer structure and dynamic effects. 
(344 ref.) 
Light Scattering 
from Polymers 
1983.74 figures. V, 167 pages 
(Advances in Polymer Science 
Fortschritte der Hochpolymeren-Forschung, 
Volume 48) 
ISBN 3-540-12030-0 
Contents/Information: 
W.Burchard: Static and Dynamic Light Scattering 
from Branched Polymers and Biopolymers. The 
properties of synthetic polymers and biological 
macromolecules are largely determined by their 
shape and the internal mobility, which can 
directly be investigated by Static and Dynamic 
Light Scattering. The author analyses branched 
molecules in dilute solution, starting with regu-
larly branched structures and ascending to the 
randomly branched ones. For the first time he 
combines the static and the more recent dynamic 
light scattering methods, thus obtaining new 
structure-sensitive parameters. As he also com-
bines the different concepts of the traditional 
polymer scientist and the theoretical physicist, 
both groups can utilize his results. He investi-
gates the applicability ofthe Flory-Stockmayer 
Theory and the further developed Cascade 
Branching Theory, compares in detail theory and 
experiment and illustrates his statements with 
graphs and schemes. 
G. D. Patterson: Photon Correlation Spectroscopy 
of Bulk Polvrners. The use of Photon Correlation 
Spectroscopy to study the dynamics of concentra-
tion fluctuations in polymer solutions and gels is 
now well established. The article reviews the 
development of this field and focuses on the 
dynamics of fluctuations near the glass transition 
in bulk polymers. The theory of dynamic light 
scattering from pure liquids is presented and 
applied to polymers. The experimental considera-
tions involved in this application of Photon Cor-
relation Spectroscopy are discussed. 
Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg New York Tokyo 

Springer-Verlag 
Berlin 
Heidelberg 
New York 
Tokyo 
H.Janeschitz-Kriegl 
Polymer Melt Rheology 
and Flow Birefringence 
1983. 144 figures. XV, 524 pages 
(Polymers Properties and Applications, Volume 6) 
ISBN 3-540-11928-0 
Contents: Survey of Experimental Results. - Quasi-Molecular 
Phenomenological Theories. - Prospects for Predictions on a 
Molecular Basis. - Industrial Applications. - Appendix A: Linear 
Visco-Elasticity. - Appendix B: The Time-Temperature Superpo-
sition Principle. - Appendix C: The Measurement of Birefrin-
gence Effects. - SUbject Index. 
This work presents a comprehensive review of the empirical 
behavior of polymer melts, demonstrating for the first time the 
most recent molecular theories for describing this behavior. The 
technique of the measurement of flow birefringence is shown to 
be a useful tool for the investigation of rheological properties of 
polymer melts. The monograph is intended as an introduction 
into this new area of polymer science for industrial and university 
polymer scientists in general and rheologists and process engi-
neers in particular. Graduate students are also addressed. The 
review is a fortunate combination of experimental and theoretical 
aspects, clearly arranged and didactically well presented. 
J.Stepek, H.Daoust 
Additives for Plastics 
1983.54 figures. XI, 243 pages 
(Polymers Properties and Applications, Volume 5) 
ISBN 3-540-90753-X 
Contents: Introduction. - Additives Which Modify Physical Pro-
perties: Plasticizers. Lubricants and Mold-Release Agents. Mac-
romolecular Modifiers. Reinforcing Fillers, Reinforcing Agents, 
and Coupling Agents. Colorants and Brightening Agents. Chemi-
cal and Physical Blowing Agents. Antistatic Agents. - Antiaging 
Additives (Antidegradents): Difficulty Stabilizable and Nonstabi-
lizable Factors Provoking Plastic Degradation. Heat Stabiliziers. 
Antioxidants and Metal Ion Deactivating Agents. Ultraviolet Pro-
tecting Agents. Flame Retardants. Biocides Against Biological 
Degradation of Plastics. Brief Survey of Methods Used to Incor-
porate Additives into Polymer Matrices. - Appendix: Abbrevia-
tions and Symbols. - Subject Index .. 
Here is a practical, contemporary discussion of the most impor-
tant substances used to modify and improve the physical proper-
ties and anti-ageing characteristics of polymer-based materials. 
Each chapter explores a particular type of additive based on its 
definition, structure, and classification according to main effects 
on polymeric materials. These chapters take the reader from the 
fundamental theory through practical commercial applications for 
the wide range of additive types. The numerous references (650) 
included provide a valuable source for expanded study. 
More than an essential reference, this volume belongs on the 
shelves of all students, technologists, and researchers of plastics 
technology. 

