

TUTORIAL CHEMISTRY TEXTS 
Heterocyclic 
Chemis trv 
M. SAINSBURY 
University of Bath 
R S C  
~~ 
ROYAL S O C l f i  OF CHEMISTRY 

Cover images 0 
Murray Robertson/visual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-652-6 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2001 
All rights reserved 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or 
review as permitted under the terms of the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, this publication may not be reproduced, storedor transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, without the prior permission in writing of The Royal Society of Chemistry, 
or in the case of reprographic reproduction only in accordance with the terms of the 
licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the 
terms of the licences issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights Organization out- 
side the UK. Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the terms stated here should be 
sent to The Royal Society of Chemistry at the address printed on this page. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 2 1, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

Preface 
This book provides a concise, yet thorough, introduction to the vast sub- 
ject of heterocyclic chemistry by dealing only with those compounds con- 
taining a single heteroatom. By restricting the discussion to these, the 
most important classes of heterocycles, a balanced treatment is possible, 
allowing the student to rapidly understand the importance of heterocyclic 
compounds in general to mankind and at the same time stimulating an 
interest in the challenges this chemistry presents. 
The contents of the book are carefully designed to meet the needs of 
undergraduate students in the 2nd year of a degree course in Chemistry 
or Biochemistry and are based upon the author’s own lectures given to 
students at Bath. Although primarily an undergraduate text, the main 
principles that govern heterocyclic chemistry as a whole are addressed in 
this book, providing a sure foundation for those wishing to widen their 
interest in heterocyclic chemistry in later years. 
Malcolm Sainsbury 
Bath 

TUTORIAL CHEMISTRY TEXTS 
E D I T O R - I N - C H  t E F  
E X E C U T I V E  E D I T O R S  
E D U C A T  I 0  N A L C O N  S U LTAN T 
Professor E W Abel 
Professor A G Davies 
Professor D Phillips 
Professor J D Woollins 
Mr M Berry 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
T I T L E S  1N T H E  S E R I E S  
F O R T H C O M I N G  T I T L E S  
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Barrett 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hanson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M Sainsbury 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Barrett 
S E Dann 
D 0 Hayward 
J D Gale and J M Seddon 
R A Jackson 
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
Basic Spectroscopy 
X-ray Crystallography 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Chemistry of Solid Surfaces 
Biology for Chemists 
Multi-element NMR 
Further information about this series is available at www. chemsoc. orgltct 
Orders and enquiries should be sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 426017; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
I 
Introduction to Heterocyclic Chemistry 
1.1 Coverage 
1.2 Nomenclature 
1.3 Importance to Life and Industry 
1.4 General Principles 
2 
Pyridine 
2.1 
2.2 
2.3 
2.4 
2.5 
2.6 
2.7 
2.8 
Resonance Description 
Electrophilic Substitution 
Pyridine N-Oxides 
Nucleophilic Substitution 
Lit hiat ion 
Methods of Synthesis 
Commonly Encountered Pyridine Derivatives 
Reduced Pyridines 
3 
Benropyridines 
3.1 Introduction 
3.2 Quinoline 
3.3 Isoquinoline 
4 
Pyrylium Salts, Pyrans and Pyrones 
4.1 Introduction 
4.2 Pyrylium Salts 
i 
18 
18 
19 
22 
23 
28 
28 
29 
36 
42 
42 
43 
50 
58 
58 
59 
V 

vi 
Contents 
4.3 Pyran-2-ones (a-Pyrones) 
4.4 Pyran-4-ones (y-Pyrones) 
4.5 Reduced Pyrans 
4.6 Saccharides and Carbohydrates 
61 
63 
65 
65 
5 
Benropyrylium Salts, Coumarins, 
Chromones, Flavonoids and Related 
Compounds 
68 
5.1 Structural Types and Nomenclature 
5.2 Coumarins 
5.3 Chromones (Benzopyran-4-ones) 
68 
70 
72 
6 
Five-membered Heterocycles containing 
One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and 
Thiophene 
77 
6.1 Pyrrole 
6.2 Furan 
6.3 Thiophene 
77 
85 
91 
7 
Benzo[b]pyrrole, Benzo[b]furan and 
Benzo[&]thiophene 
97 
7.1 Indole (Benzo[b]pyrrole) 
7.2 Benzo[b]furan and Benzo[b]thiophene 
97 
110 
8 
Four-membered Heterocycles containing a 
Single Nitrogen, Oxygen or Sulfur Atom 
115 
8.1 Azete, Azetine and Azetidine 
8.2 Oxetene and Oxetane 
8.3 Thietene and Thietane 
115 
121 
122 
Answers to Problems 
125 
Subject Index 
141 

I 
Introduction to Heterocyclic 
Chemistry 
1.1 
Coverage 
The subject of heterocyclic chemistry is vast, so in this book the focus 
is on the more common four-, five- and six-membered systems contain- 
ing one heteroatom. Little attempt is made to extend the coverage to 
more complex heterocycles, so that students interested in extending their 
knowledge will need to consult more advanced works. Fortunately, there 
is a very wide choice; excellent texts include Heterocyclic Chemistry by 
Gilchrist' and Heterocyclic Chemistry by Joule and Mills.2 In addition, 
there are many authoritative compilations that deal with heterocyclic 
chemistry in much more depth? 
I .2 
Nomenclature 
~~ 
~~ 
Students will be familiar with carbocyclic compounds, such as cyclo- 
hexane and benzene, that are built from rings of carbon atoms. If one 
or more of the carbon atoms is replaced by another element, the prod- 
uct is a heterocycle. Multiple replacements are commonplace, and the 
elements involved need not be the same. The most common are oxygen, 
I 

2 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
sulfur or nitrogen, but many other elements can function in this way, 
including boron, silicon and phosphorus. Chemists have been working 
with heterocycles for more than two centuries, and trivial names were 
often applied long before the structures of the compounds were known. 
As a result, many heterocycles retain these names; a selection of com- 
mon five- and six-membered heterocycles that contain one oxygen, nitro- 
gen or sulfur atom are included in Box 1.1. The ring atoms are normally 
numbered such that the heteroatom carries the lowest number. 
Some authors use Greek letters, 
a, p and y, etc., in place of 
numbers, to indicate the position 
of substitution in much the same 
way that the terms ortho, meta 
and para are used for benzenes. 
A problem arises with trivial names when a sp3 hybridized atom is present 
in an otherwise unsaturated ring. A good example is pyran, a hetero- 
cycle that is formally the product of the addition of a single hydride ion 
to the pyrylium cation. However, as this addition could occur either at 
C-2 or C-4, two isomers of pyran are possible; so the question is, how 
can you distinguish between them? The solution is to call one compound 
2H-pyran and the other 4H-pyran, using the number of the ring atom 
and the letter H, in italics, to show the position of the hydrogen (see 
Box 1.2). This system of nomenclature works tolerably well in many 
related cases and is widely used; other examples will be found in this 
book. 
It is also customary to use the prefixes di-, tetra-, hexahydro- . . . (rather 
than tri-, penta- or heptahydro- ...) when referring to compounds that 
are partly or fully reduced. This terminology reflects the fact that hydro- 
gen atoms are added two at a time during the hydrogenation of multi- 
ple bonds, and it is used even when the compound contains an odd 
number of hydrogen atoms relative to its fully unsaturated parent. As 
before, the position of the ‘extra hydrogen’ atom is located by means of 
the ring atom number, followed by the letter H. It is important to note 

Introduction to Heterocyclic Chemistry 
3 
that the lowest possible number is always selected for the locant; so, for 
example, the fully reduced pyrylium cation is referred to as 3,4,5,6- 
tetrahydro-2H-pyran (see Box 1.2). 
Since trivial names are so well established, it is now very difficult to 
abandon them in favour of a logical nomenclature system that provides 
structural information. Nevertheless, a predictive method of this type is 
very desirable, especially for molecules where there may be two or more 
heteroatoms present in the ring. One approach is to use a prefix, which 
is indicative of the heteroatom [aza (N), oxa (0), thia (S), bora (B), phos- 
pha (P), sila (Si), etc.], to the name of the corresponding carbocycle. 
Thus, pyridine becomes azabenzene and piperidine is azacyclohexane. 
This method is useful when dealing with simple heterocycles, but it 
can become clumsy with more complex ones. An alternative is the 
Hantzsch-Widman system, which uses the same prefixes, but adds a stem 
name designed to indicate not only the ring size but also the state of 
unsaturation or saturation (note: when the stem name begins with a 
vowel the last letter, a, of the prefix is dropped). The stem names for 
rings containing up to 10 atoms are shown in Table 1.1. 
Using this terminology, furan becomes oxole and tetrahydrofuran is 
named oxolane; pyridine is azine and piperidine is azinane. As with trivial 
names, the potential difficulty over partly reduced heterocycles is resolved 
- 
Table 1.1 Hantzsch-Widman stem names for heterocycles with 3-10 ring atoms 
Ring size 
Unsaturated 
Saturated 
3 
irene 
irane 
4 
ete 
etane 
5 
ole 
olane 
6 
ine 
inane 
7 
epine 
epane 
8 
ocine 
ocane 
9 
onine 
onane 
10 
ecine 
ecane 

4 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
by using the usual numbered H prefix; thus, the four possible isomers of 
azepine are termed as in Box 1 .3.7 
For a full discussion of how to 
name heterocycles by this and 
other methods, see Panico et a/.7 
Many heterocycles are fused to other ring systems, notably benzene, giv- 
ing in this case benzo derivatives; some of these compounds are also 
extremely well known and have trivial names of their own, such as indole 
and isoquinoline. Here, however, it is possible to relate these compounds 
back to the parent monocycles by indicating to which face the ring fusion 
applies. To do this, each face of the ring is given a letter (lower case ital- 
ic), beginning with the face that bears the heteroatom (see Box 1.4). 
1.3 
Importance to Life and Industry 
Many heterocyclic compounds are biosynthesized by plants and animals 
and are biologically active. Over millions of years these organisms have 
been under intense evolutionary pressure, and their metabolites may be 
used to advantage; for example, as toxins to ward off predators, or as 
colouring agents to attract mates or pollinating insects. Some heterocy- 
cles are fundamental to life, such as haem derivatives in blood and the 

Introduction to Heterocyclic Chemistry 
5 
chlorophylls essential for photosynthesis (Box 1.5). Similarly, the paired 
bases found in RNA and DNA are heterocycles, as are the sugars that 
in combination with phosphates provide the backbones and determine 
the topology of these nucleic acids. 
Dyestuffs of plant origin include indigo blue, used to dye jeans. A poi- 
son of detective novel fame is strychnine, obtained from the plant resin 
curare (Box 1.6). 
The biological properties of heterocycles in general make them one 
of the prime interests of the pharmaceutical and biotechnology indus- 
tries. A selection of just six biologically active pyridine or piperidine 

6 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
derivatives is shown in Box 1.7. It includes four natural products (nico- 
tine, pyridoxine, cocaine and morphine) and two synthetic compounds 
(nifedipine and paraquat). 
There are many thousands of other heterocyclic compounds, both nat- 
ural and synthetic, of major importance, not only in medicine but also 
in most other activities known to man. Small wonder then that their 
chemistry forms a major part of both undergraduate and postgraduate 
curricula. 
1.4 
General Principles 
I 
=4=1 Aromaticity 
Many fully unsaturated heterocyclic compounds are described as aro- 
matic, and some have a close similarity to benzene and its derivatives. 
For example, pyridine (azabenzene) is formally derived from benzene 
through the replacement of one CH unit by N. As a result, the consti- 

Introduction to Heterocyclic Chemistry 
7 
tutions of the two molecules are closely related: in each molecule all the 
ring atoms are sp2 hybridized, and the remaining singly occupied p- 
orbital is orientated at right angles to the plane of the ring (orthogonal). 
All six p-orbitals overlap to form a delocalized n-system, which extends 
as a closed loop above and below the ring. 
Pyridine and benzene conform to Hiickel's rule, which predicts that 
planar cyclic polyenes containing (4n + 2) n-electrons (n = 0, or an inte- 
ger) should show added stability over that anticipated for theoretical 
polyenes composed of formal alternate single and double bonds. This 
difference is sometimes called the empirical resonance energy. For exam- 
ple, benzene, where n = 1, is estimated to be 150 kJ mol-' more stable 
than the, hypothetical molecule cyclohexatriene (Box 1.8); for pyridine, 
Values for 
be obtained in several ways, and 
when comparisons are being 
made between one molecule and 
another the data must be 
obtained by the same method of 
calculation. 
energy can 
the empirical resonance energy is 107 kJ mol-'. 
Alternate double and single bonds are often used in drawing aromatic 
structures, although it is fully understood these form a closed loop (n- 
system) of electrons. The reason is that these classical structures are used 
in the valence bond approach to molecular structure (as canonical 
forms), and they also permit the use of curly arrows to illustrate the 
course of reactions. 
The increased stability of 4n + 2 cyclic planar polyenes, relative to 
their imaginary classical counterparts, comes about because all the bond- 
ing energy levels within the n-system are completely filled. For benzene 
and pyridine there are three such levels, each containing two spin-paired 
electrons. There is then an analogy between the electronic constitutions 
of these molecules and atoms that achieve noble gas structure. 
A further result of the delocalization of the p-electrons is the merg- 
ing of single and double bonds; benzene is a perfect hexagon with all 
C-C bond lengths the same (0.140 nm). 
Like benzene, pyridine is hexagonal in shape, but in this case the per- 
fect symmetry of the former molecule is distorted because the C-N bonds 

a 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
If cyclohexatriene were to exist in 
a localized form and was a planar 
molecule it would contain three 
long single bonds and three short 
double bonds (in buta-l,3-diene 
the C,-C,, bond length is 0.134 
nm and the C,-C, 
bond length is 
0.148 nm). The result would be 
an irregular hexagon and there 
would be two isomers for, say, a 
hypothetical 1,2-dichlorocyclo- 
hexatriene: one with a single C-C 
bond separating the two chlorine 
atoms, and the other with a 
double C=C bond. 
are slightly shorter than the C-C bonds (0.134 nm versus 0.139-0.140 
nm). This is because nitrogen is more electronegative than carbon, and 
this fact also affects the nature of the n-system. In pyridine the electron 
density is no longer uniformly distributed around the ring and is con- 
centrated at the N atom. 
Another difference between the molecules is that whereas in benzene 
each carbon is bonded to a hydrogen atom, in pyridine the nitrogen pos- 
sesses a lone (unshared) pair of electrons. This lone pair occupies an sp2 
orbital and is orientated in the same plane as the ring; moreover, it is 
available to capture.a proton so that pyridine is a base. 
In five-membered heterocycles, formally derived from benzene by the 
replacement of a CH=CH unit by a heteroatom, aromaticity is achieved 
by sharing four p-electrons, one from each ring carbon, with two elec- 
trons from the heteroatom. Thus in pyrrole, where the heteroatom is N, 
all the ring atoms are sp2 hybridized, and one sp2 orbital on each is 
bonded to hydrogen. To complete the six n-electron system the non- 
hybridized p-orbital of N contributes two electrons (Box 1.9). It follows 
that the nitrogen atom of pyrrole no longer possesses a lone pair of elec- 
trons, and the compound cannot function as a base without losing its 
aromatic character. 
I .4.2 Non-aromaticity and Anti-aromaticity 
Cyclic polyenes and their heterocyclic counterparts which contain 4n 
p-electrons do not show aromaticity, since should these molecules be 
forced to form a planar array the orbitals used to accommodate the 
electrons within the closed loop are no longer just bonding in nature, 
but a mixture of both bonding and non-bonding types. For a fully unsat- 
urated planar polyene containing four ring atoms, the number of bond- 
ing energy levels is one and there are two degenerate non-bonding levels 
(Box 1.10); in the case of an eight-membered ring, there are three bond- 
ing sub-levels and two degenerate non-bonding levels. 
Consider a fully delocalized symmetrical ‘cyclobutadiene’; here 
each carbon atom is equivalent and sp2 hybridized; this leaves four 
p-electrons to overlap and to form a n-system. Two electrons would then 

Introduction to Heterocyclic Chemistry 
9 
enter the bonding orbital with their spins paired; however, following 
Hund’s rule the other two have to occupy the two degenerate non- 
bonding orbitals singly with their spins parallel. In essence the result is 
a triplet diradical, which is anti-aromatic, i. e. the result of delocalization 
actually leads to a destabilization of the molecule relative to an alterna- 
tive model with double and single bonds. 
It turns out that cyclobutadiene is not a perfect square (two bonds 
are longer than the others), but it is essentially planar. Not surprising- 
ly, it is very unstable and dimerizes extremely readily. It only exists at 
very low temperatures either in a matrix with an inert ‘solvent’ (where 
the molecules are kept apart), or at room temperature as an inclusion 
compound in a suitable host molecule. Azacyclobutadiene (azete) is also 
extremely unstable, for similar reasons. 
Although a major divergence from planarity is not possible for small 
cyclic delocalized polyenes containing 4n electrons, their larger equiva- 
lents adopt non-planar conformations. Here destabilizing orbital over- 
lap between adjacent double bonds is minimized; the compounds are thus 
non-aromatic, and their chemistry often resembles that of a cycloalkene. 
A good example is cyclooctatetraene (Box 1.1 1); formally the higher 
homologue of benzene, it is a 4n type containing eight p-electrons. This 
Hund’s rule states: electrons 
enter degenerate orbitals singly 
with their spins parallel, before 
pairing takes place. The term 
degenerate here means having 
the same energy but not the 
same symmetry or spatial 
orientation. 
The term triplet derives from the 
three spin states used by a 
molecule having two unpaired 
electrons. A singlet state is one in 
which all the electrons are spin- 
paired, and in principle for every 
triplet state there is a 
corresponding singlet state. In 
most cases the triplet state is 
more stable than the singlet (also 
a consequence of Hund’s rule). 

10 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
The dianion of cyclooctatetraene 
is planar and aromatic in nature. 
It has two more electrons than its 
parent and consequently has 10 
x-electrons; it now becomes a 
member of the aromatic 4n + 2 
series. 
The absolute frequency of an 'H 
NMR signal is not normally 
measured; instead, 
tetramethylsilane [(CH,),Si, 
TMS] 
is added to the sample as an 
internal standard. The difference 
between the proton resonance of 
TMS and that of the sample, 
both measured in hertz, divided 
by the spectrometer frequency in 
megahertz, is called the 
chemical shift (given the symbol 
8). This is quoted in ppm (parts 
per million). To simplify matters 
the chemical shift of TMS is 
defined as zero. Note: the vast 
majority of proton resonances 
occur downfield from that of 
TMS, with values greater than 0 
PPm. 
compound is not planar, it has no special stability and it exists as equil- 
ibrating tub-shaped forms with single and double bond lengths of 0.146 
nm and 0.133 nm, respectively. 
The circulating electrons in the n-system of aromatic hydrocarbons 
and heterocycles generate a ring current and this in turn affects the chem- 
ical shifts of protons bonded to the periphery of the ring. This shift is 
usually greater (downfield from TMS) than that expected for the proton 
resonances of alkenes; thus 'H NMR spectroscopy can be used as a 'test 
for aromaticity'. The chemical shift for the proton resonance of benzene 
is 7.2 ppm, whereas that of the C-1 proton of cyclohexene is 5.7 ppm, 
and the resonances of the protons of pyridine and pyrrole exhibit the 
chemical shifts shown in Box 1.12. 
I .4.3 Ring Strain in Cycloalkanes and their Heterocyclic 
Counterparts 
Conformation 
Although cyclopropane is necessarily planar, this is not the case for other 
cycloalkanes. Cycloalkanes utilize sp3 hybridized carbon atoms, and the 
preferred shape of the molecule is partly determined by the tetrahedral 
configuration of the bonds. Indeed, any deviation from this ideal induces 
angle strain. However, other factors must also be considered; for exam- 
ple, although both the chair and boat forms of cyclohexane minimize 
angle strain, the chair form is more stable than the boat by approxi- 
mately 30 kJ mol-I. This comes about because in the boat representa- 
tion there are serious non-bonded interactions, particularly C-H bond 
eclipsing (Box 1.13), that adds to the torsional strain of the ring. As a 
result, only the chair form is populated at normal temperatures. Fully 
reduced pyridine (piperidine) follows the same pattern and also exists as 
a chair. However, in this case ring inversion and pyramidal inversion of 
the nitrogen substituents is possible (Scheme 1.1). 
Formerly, there was much discussion over how much space a lone 
pair of electrons occupies relative to a hydrogen atom. It now seems clear 

Introduction to Heterocyclic Chemistry 
1 1 
0 
N 
I H 
Piperidine 
Ring 
H 
I 
.d 
- 
m
N
.
H
 
inversion 
Pyramidal 
inversion 
/I 
pramipal 
inversion 
II - 
Ring 
v 
inversion 
H 
I 
Scheme 1.1 
that there is a preference for an equatorial N-H (i.e. H is larger than the 
The energy difference between 
lone pair), and this preference is ,consolidated as the size of the N sub- 
stituent increases. 
equatorial N-H and axial N-H in 
piperidine is estimated to be 
1.5-3.1 kJ mol-1 in favour of the 
Components of Ring Strain 
Angle and torsional strain are major components of the total ring strain 
in fully reduced cyclic compounds. For cycloalkanes (see Table 1.2), the 
smaller the ring, the larger the overall strain becomes. What may appear 
at first to be surprising is that medium-sized rings containing 8-1 1 atoms 
Table 1.2 Ring strain in cycloalkanese 
Number of atoms 
Total strain 
Number of atoms 
Total strain 
in the ring 
(kJ mol-l) 
in the ring 
(kJ mol-l) 
115 
110 
26 
0.5 
26 
41 
53 
10 
11 
12 
13 
14 
15 
52 
47 
17 
21.5 
8 
8 
equatorial form. In piperidine the 
energy for N inversion is ca. 25.5 
kJ mol-I. 

12 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
are considerably more strained than cyclohexane. One might think that 
increased flexibility would be beneficial, but in these cases, although 
puckering reduces angle strain, many pairs of eclipsed H atoms are also 
created in adjacent CH, groups. These may further interact across the 
ring, causing compression if they encroach within the normal van der 
Waals’ radii of the atoms involved (this additional strain is called 
‘transannular strain’). However, as more atoms are introduced and the 
ring size expands, these problems are reduced, and the molecules even- 
tually become essentially strain free. 
These considerations may also apply to fully reduced heterocycles, 
where one or more N or 0 atoms replace ring carbons, but it must be 
noted that a change in element also means a change in electronegativi- 
ty and a change of bond length. Thus in hetero analogues of cyclohexa- 
ne, for example, as C-N and C-0 bonds are shorter than C-C bonds, 
there are increased 1,3- (flagpole) interactions in the chair forms, ren- 
dering axial substitution even less favourable. 
Furthermore, for multiple replacements, lone pair electrons on the 
heteroatoms may interact unfavourably and limit certain conformations. 
In fact, interactions between lone pairs are the main reason for increased 
barriers to rotation, particularly in N-N bonds compared to C-C single 
bonds. 
Anomeric Effect 
When a ring system contains an O-CH-Y unit, where Y is an elec- 
tronegative group (halogen, OH, OR’, OCOR’, SR’, OR’ or NR’R’’), 
one of the oxygen lone pairs may adopt a trans antiperiplanar relation- 
ship with respect to the C-Y bond (Box 1.14). In this orientation the 
orbital containing the lone pair overlaps with the antibonding o orbital 
(o*) of the C-Y bond and ‘mixes in’ to form a pseudo n-bond. This is 
called the anomeric effect. When Y is F or Cl (strongly electronegative) 

Introduction to Heterocyclic Chemistry 
13 
the net result is that the 0-C bond is strengthened and shortened, where- 
as the C-Y bond is weakened and lengthened. However, for other Y 
atoms (e.g. oxygen or nitrogen) the anomeric effect can operate in both 
directions, i.e. Y can be a donor as well as an acceptor. 
Anomeric effects are cumulative, and can cause a potentially flexible 
ring to adjust to a more rigid conformation in order to maximize the 
overlap of suitable lone pair and o* orbitals. It has been particularly 
instructive in explaining ‘anomalous’ preferences for substituent mien- 
The 
simply restricted to ring 
effect is not 
tations in tetrahydropyrans and related compounds, In the case of 2- 
compounds and a full discussion 
methoxytetrahydropyran, for example, the axial conformer is three times 
~
e
~
~
~
o
~
( ? ~ ~ ~ ~ ‘ ; e ~ n c e  
for 
more populated than the equatorial form (Scheme 1.2). 
?Me 
OMe 
axial (75%) 
equatorial (25%) 
2-Methoxytetrahydropyran (Y = OMe) 
Heteroatom Replacement 
Nitrogen and oxygen are found in level 2 of the Periodic Table, and a 
further alteration in ring topology may arise when the heteroatom is 
replaced by an element from a lower level. Here, apart from an increase 
in atomic diameter, the replacement element may use a hybridization 
state different than that of the earlier elements. Not only can this affect 
the shape of the molecule, it can also modify the chemical properties. 
conformations where the best 
donor lone pair, or bond, is 
orientated antiperiplanar to the 
best acceptor bond’.g 
Scheme 1.2 

14 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 

Introduction to Heterocyclic Chemistry 
15 

16 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
1. T. L Gilchrist, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 2nd edn., LongmanNiley, 
Harlow/Chichester, 1992. 
2. J. A. Joule and K. Mills, Heterocyclic Chemistry, 4th edn., Blackwell 
Science, Oxford, 2000. 
3. A. R. Katritzky, Handbook of Heterocyclic Chemistry, Pergamon 
Press, Oxford, 1985. 
4. A. R. Katritzky and C. W. Rees (eds.), Comprehensive Heterocyclic 
Chemistry, vols. 1-8, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1984. 
5. A. R. Katritzky, C. W. Rees and E. F. V. Scriven (eds.), 
Comprehensive Heterocyclic Chemistry 11, A Review of the Literature 
1982-1995, vols. 1-1 1, Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1996. 
Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1973-1986 (supplements 1990-2000). 
Nomenclature of Organic Compounds (Recommendations 1993), 
Blackwell Science, Oxford, 1993. 
6. Rodds Chemistry of Carbon Compounds, 2nd edn., vols. IVA-K, 
7. R. Panico, W. H. Powell and J.-C. Richer (eds.), A Guide to IUPAC 

Introduction to Heterocyclic Chemistry 
17 
8. J. S. Chickos et al., J. Org. Chem., 1992, 57, 1897. 
1 
9. A. J. Kirby, The Anomeric Effect and Related Stereoelectronic Effects 
I 
ut Oxygen, Springer, New York, 1983. 
I 
J. Rigaudy and S. P. Klesney (eds.), IUPAC Nomenclature of Organic 
Chemistry (Sections A to H), Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1979. 
L. A. Paquette, Principles of Modern Heterocyclic Chemistry, Benjamin, 
New York, 1966. 
A. R. Katritzky, Physical Methods in Heterocyclic Chemistry, Academic 
Press, New York, 1960-1 972. 
M. J. Cook, A. R. Katritzky and P. Linda, Aromaticity of Heterocycles, 
in Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1974, 17, 257. 
D. H. R. Barton and W. D. Ollis (eds.), Comprehensive Organic 
Chemistry, vol. 4, Heterocyclic Chemistry, ed. P. G. Sammes, 
Pergamon Press, Oxford, 1979. 
A. R. Katritzky, M. Karelson and N. Malhotra, Heterocyclic 
Aromaticity, in Heterocycles, 199 1, 32, 127. 
B. Ya. Simkin and V. I. Minkin, The Concept of Aromaticity in 
Heterocyclic Chemistry, in Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1993, 56, 303. 
E. L. Eliel and S. H. Wilen, Stereochemistry of Organic Compounds, 
Wiley, Chichester, 1994. 
E. Juaristi and G. Cuevas, The Anomeric Effect, CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, Florida, 1995. 

Pyridine 
A dipole moment results when a 
molecule has a permanent 
uneven electron density. Individual 
charge separations in bonds 
cannot be measured, only the 
vectorial sum of all individual 
bond moments. A dipole moment 
is expressed in debye units (D). 
Only completely symmetrical 
molecules fail to have a dipole 
moment, but few have dipole 
moments greater than 7 D. 
2.1 
Resonance Description 
As our first more detailed foray into heterocyclic chemistry we will con- 
sider pyridine (azabenzene). It is an aromatic compound (see previous 
chapter), but the replacement of CH by more electronegative N induces 
a dipole moment of 2.2 D, denoting a shift of electron density from the 
ring towards the nitrogen atom (benzene, which is symmetrical, has no 
dipole moment). The valence bond (resonance) description indicates that 
the nitrogen atom of pyridine carries a partial negative charge and the 
carbons 2(6) and 4 bear partial positive charges. The canonical forms 
shown in Scheme 2.1 may then effectively represent the molecule. 
4 
Scheme 2.1 
18 

Pyridine 
I 9  
2.2 
Electrophilic Substitution 
2.2.1 Attack at Nitrogen and at Carbon 
From the resonance description you might conclude that although the 
primary site for electrophilic attack is at N-1, reactions at carbon C-3(5) 
might be possible, even if not as likely. However, an important point to 
remember is that the N atom of pyridine carries a lone pair of electrons; 
these electrons are NOT part of the n;-system. As a result, pyridine is a 
base (pKa 5.2), reacting with acids, Lewis acids and other electrophiles 
(E') to form stable pyridinium salts (Scheme 2.2), in which the hetero- 
cycle retains aromatic character. 
0 0 
-,o - 0 
- o+ 
N 
N 
N 
Y+ 
I 
I 
I 
N 
E 
E 
E 
E 
Direct attack at a ring carbon, even C-3, is normally slow (a) because 
the concentration of free pyridine in equilibrium with the pyridinium salt 
is extremely low, and (b) attack upon the salt would also require the pos- 
itive pyridinium cation to bond to a positively charged reactant. 
Indeed, where reactions at a ring carbon take place under relatively 
mild conditions, special circumstances are at work. For example, 2,6-tert- 
butylpyridine combines with sulfur trioxide in liquid sulfur dioxide at 
-10 "C to give the corresponding 3-sulfonic acid (Scheme 2.3). An expla- 
nation is that the bulky tert-butyl groups prevent access of the 'large' 
electrophile to N- 1. Steric hindrance is much less at C-3 and sulfonation 
is diverted to this site using the 'free' pyridine as the substrate. 
Scheme 2.2 
Pyridinesulfonic acids are strongly 
acidic, so that the 3-sulfonic acid 
that forms then protonates a 
second molecule of 2,6-tert- 
butylpyridine (N-protonation is 
permitted because of the small 
size of the proton). Once 
protonated, however, further 
electrophilic attack is strongly 
disfavoured, and so the overall 
conversion is limited to 50%. 
Scheme 2.3 

20 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
2.2.2 Addition-Elimination 
Another feature that is clear from the resonance description of the pyri- 
dinium cation is that attack by nucleophiles is favoured at C-2(6) and 
C-4. This has importance in some reactions where at first sight it may 
appear that electrophilic reagents combine quite easily with pyridine. 
These reactions are more subtle in nature! 
For example, 3-bromopyridine is formed when pyridine is reacted with 
bromine in the presence of oleum (sulfur trioxide in conc. sulfuric acid) 
at 130 "C (Scheme 2.4). Direct electrophilic substitution is not involved, 
however, aszwitterionic (dipolar) pyridinium-N-sulfonate is the substrate 
for an addition of bromide ion. Subsequently, the dihydropyridine that 
is formed reacts, possibly as a dienamine, with bromine to generate a 
dibromide, which then eliminates bromide ion from C-2. It is notable 
that no bromination occurs under similar conditions when oleum is 
replaced by conc. sulfuric acid alone; instead, pyridinium hydrogensul- 
fate is produced. 
0 
N 
0 -  
+yJ 0 - B r  
so,- 
n 
c&rBr 
H 
I S0,- 
Br 
soy- 
I -H+ 
I s0,- 
Scheme 2.4 
Similarly, pyridine can be 3-sulfonated with hot sulfuric acid, or oleum, 
if mercuric [mercury(II)] sulfate is present as a catalyst (Scheme 2.5). The 
process is not straightforward and may involve a C-mecuriated pyridine 
intermediate [it is known, for example, that pyridine reacts with mer- 
curic acetate at room temperature to form a pyridinium salt that decom- 
poses at 180 "C into 3-(acetoxymercuri)pyridine (X = OAc)]. Without 
the catalyst, long reaction times and a temperature of 350 "C are neces- 
sary; even then, the yield of pyridine-3-sulfonic acid is poor. 
2.2.3 Acylation and Alkylation 
Pyridine reacts with acyl chlorides, or acid anhydrides, to form N- 
acylpyridinium salts, which are readily hydrolysed (Scheme 2.6a). 

Pyridine 
21 
HgX 
Scheme 2.5 
However, the salts can be used as valuable transacylating agents, par- 
ticularly for alcohols, and in this application the salt is not isolated but 
reacted in situ with the alcohol. An excess of pyridine is needed and such 
reactions were carried out in pyridine both as reagent and as solvent. 
Unfortunately, pyridine is difficult to remove from the products, and its 
use has been superseded by DMAP [4-(N, N-dimethy1amino)pyridinel. 
Now, after N-acylation the 4-N, N-dimethylamino group reinforces the 
nucleophilicity of the corresponding acylpyridinium salt (Scheme 2.6b), 
and this promotes the transfer of the acyl group from the salt to the alco- 
hol in the next step. Only a catalytic amount of DMAP is used. 
R = alkyl or aryl 
+ 
R,oYMe 
0 
Scheme 2.6 
Alkyl halides and related alkylating agents react with pyridines to form 
N-alkylpyridinium salts (Scheme 2.7). These compounds are much more 
stable than their N-acylpyridinium equivalents and can often be isolat- 
ed as crystalline solids, particularly if the halide ion is exchanged for per- 
chlorate, tetrafluoroborate or another less polarizable counter anion. 

22 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 2.7 
Pyridine N-oxide exhibits a dipole 
moment of 4.25 D (cf. pyridine, 
2.2 D) and it is important to note, 
however, that because of the 
formal positive charge upon the 
nitrogen atom, pyridine N-oxides 
are also susceptible to 
nucleophilic reactions at C-2(6) 
and C-4. 
$- 
0- 
OLIrJ 
0 
- PhCH2C1 
N 
N+ 
1 
N+ 
Me I- 
Ph I 
c1- 
N-Benzylpyridinium chloride 
N-Methylpyridinium iodide 
2.3 
Pyridine NlOxides 
Pyridine N-oxides are frequently used in place of pyridines to facilitate 
electrophilic substitution. In such reactions there is a balance between 
electron withdrawal, caused by the inductive effect of the oxygen atom, 
and electron release through resonance from the same atom in the oppo- 
site direction. Here, the resonance effect is more important, and elec- 
trophiles react at C-2(6) and C-4 (the antithesis of the effect of resonance 
in pyridine itself). 
The N-oxide is prepared from pyridine by the action of a peracid (e.g. 
hydrogen peroxide in acetic acid, forming peracetic acid in situ, or 
rn-chloroperbenzoic acid, MCPBA); pyridine is regenerated by de- 
oxygenation by heating with triphenylphosphine (Ph,P + Ph,PO) 
(Scheme 2.8). 
There is thus a subtlety in the 
reactions of pyridine N-oxides 
with both electrophiles and 
nucleophiles that is not easily 
explained. 
Scheme 2.8 
As long as the conditions are selected so that the N-oxygen atom is not 
irreversibly protonated, reactions with electrophiles give 2- and 
4-substituted products. Thionyl chloride, for example, gives a mixture of 
2- and 4-chloropyridine N-oxides in which the 4-isomer is predominant. 
However, pyridine N-oxide reacts with acetic anhydride first to give 
1-acetoxypyridinium acetate and then, on heating, to yield 2- 
acetoxypyridine through an addition-elimination process (Scheme 2.9a). 
When a similar reaction is carried out upon the 2,3-dimethyl analogue, 
the acetoxy group rearranges from N-1 to the C-2 methyl group, at 
180 "C, to form 2-acetoxymethyl-3-methylpyridine (possibly as shown in 
Scheme 2.9b). 
Nitration at C-4 occurs with conc. sulfuric acid and fuming nitric acid 
(Scheme 2.1Oa); very little 2-nitropyridine N-oxide is formed, but in cases 
where the electrophile binds strongly to the oxygen atom of the N-oxide, 

Pyridine 
23 
further attack occurs at C-3. Thus, pyridine N-oxide is brominated at 
70 "C by bromine and oleum to form 3-bromopyridine N-oxide, and 
sulfonated by oleum and mercuric sulfate at 240 "C to give pyridine-3- 
sulfonic acid N-oxide (Scheme 2. lob). 
Scheme 2.9 
(a) 
H NO2 
Possibly the substrate for the last 
two reactions is the N- 
sulfonyloxypyridinium cation: 
0- 
03 
0- 
oleum, 
240°C 
HgS04 0 
Br;lp Brm 
____c 
OS03H 
N+ 
I 
N+ 
I 
0- 
0- 
0- 
Scheme 2.10 
2.4 
Nucleophilic Substitution 
2.4.1 The Effects of the Pyridine Resonance and 
Leaving Groups 
An intermediate formed through 
attack at c-3(5) 
the negative charge to be 
When pyridine is reacted with nucleophiles the attack occurs pre- 
ferentially at C-2(6) and/or at c-4, as predicted by the resonance descrip- 
not permit 
tion of possible reaction intermediates (Scheme 2.1 1). The problem, 
sharedwith the Natom. 

24 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
0 
N 
Nu 
Nu 
H 
Nu H 
N 
N 
N 
N 
Scheme 2.11 
Scheme 2.12 
however, is that for unsubstituted pyridines the leaving group is the high- 
ly reactive hydride ion. So, although the first step in the reaction is 
favoured, the second step is not. Oxygen in the air, or an added oxidant, 
may ease the situation and serve to oxidize the intermediate to an aro- 
matic pyridine. 
2.4.2 Chichibabin Reaction 
A classic reaction of this type is Chichibabin amination, leading mainly 
to 2-aminopyridine (Scheme 2.12a). This takes place when a pyridine is 
heated at 140 "C with sodamide (NH, is a very strong nucleophile). 
Although hydrogen gas is certainly evolved during the reaction, the ini- 
tial proton donor is not known. However, once some 2-aminopyridine 
is formed this product could function as the donor (Scheme 2.12b), and 
the process may then become a form of chain reaction. 
0 
N 

Pyridine 
25 
2.4.3 Nucleophilic Reactions of Halopyridines 
Halide Ion versus Hydride Ion 
Normally, nucleophilic attack occurs preferentially at C-2(6); this selec- 
tivity is the result of the enhancedinductive effect experienced by the 
carbon atoms immediately adjacent to the more electronegative nitrogen 
(Scheme 2.13). If both C-2 and C-6 are occupied, then attack at C-4 
takes place. However, it is possible to influence the site and rate of the 
reaction if a potential leaving group replaces hydrogen. After addition, 
the loss of the leaving group from the o-intermediate will be easier than 
if it were the very reactive hydride ion. Halopyridines are often used, 
although not exclusively, and this normally ensures preferential nucle- 
ophilic substitution at the site of the halogen atom. 
c1 
very strongly favoured 
c1 
I 
Scheme 2.13 
‘Addition-substitution’ easily occurs with a variety of nucleophilic 
reagents, including NaOMe, PhSH, PhNHMe and NH,. Thus, with 2- 
chloropyridine a range of 2-substituted pyridines is formed (Scheme 
2.14). 

26 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 2.14 
phNHMY 
heat 
I 
I Me 

Pyridine 
27 
Scheme 2.15 
2.4.4 Pyridynes 
There is a complication if the nucleophile used in reactions with 
halopyridines is also a strong base; for now the formation of a pyridyne 
is possible, and with sodamide in liquid ammonia (providing the NHz 
ion?, B), for example, both 3-aminopyridine and 4-aminopyridine are 
formed from 4-bromopyridine (Scheme 2.16). 
Scheme 2.16 
NH2 
cBr 
Br 
'B-qHh 
- 
B- yb - 0 - 
NH3 
+H2N
-BH 
-B r- 
N 
N 
N 
N 
N 
3-Pyridyne 
This occurs because 3-pyridyne (3,4-didehydropyridine) is formed by an 
ElcB process [elimination (first order) from the conjugate base]. 
An alternative 
addition of NH; to 3-pyridyne, 
bv Drotonation as the 
is the 
. ,  
3-Pyridyne then adds ammonia; the addition is not regiospecific and two 
amino derivatives are formed. 
second step. 

28 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
285 
Lithiation 
Scheme 2.1 7 
Normally, compounds containing 
a methine group situated next to 
a carbonyl group (CH-CO) are in 
equilibrium with an enol tautomer 
which contains the C=C(OH) 
group. The term enolate anion 
refers to the resonance-stabilized 
anion, formed by deprotonating 
the enol tautomer with a 
sufficiently strong base: 
Y Y  
‘keto’ form 
0 
acid 11 
enolate anion 
I +- 
base 11 
~~~ 
~ 
Halogenopyridines can undergo metal-halogen exchange when treated 
with butyllithium. The lithium derivatives then behave in a similar man- 
ner to arylithiums and Grignard reagents and react with electrophiles 
such as aldehydes, ketones and nitriles (Scheme 2.17). Thus, aldehydes 
and ketones form alcohols, and nitriles yield N-lithioimines, which on 
hydrolysis are converted into pyridyl ketones. 
R 
OH 
RCN I 
R 
R 
2.6 
Methods of Synthesis 
2.6.1 Hantzsch Synthesis 
The most used route to pyridines is called the Hantzsch synthesis. This 
uses a 1,3-dicarbonyl compound, frequently a 1,3-keto ester [ethyl ace- 
toacetate (ethyl 3-oxobutanoate)], and an aldehyde, which are heated 
together with ammonia (Scheme 2.18). At the end of the reaction the 
dihydropyridine is oxidized to the corresponding pyridine with nitric acid 
(or another oxidant such as MnO,). The normal Hantzsch procedure 
leads to symmetrical dihydropyridines. Two different 1,3-dicarbonyl 
compounds may not be used as two enolate anions might form, giving 
mixed products when reacted with the aldehyde. The aldehyde itself 
should preferably be non-enolizable, otherwise the chance of aldoliza- 
tion exists, but with care this can be avoided. 
2.6.2 Guareschi Synthesis 
This is a similar synthesis in which the ring atoms are assembled by react- 
ing a 1,3-dicarbonyl compound with cyanoacetamide (cyanoethanamide) 

Pyridine 
29 
Eto2c\I "KR 
0 
Me A0- 
HN03 aq. 
Me 
Me 
H 
under mildly basic conditions (Scheme 2.19). The product, a 3-cyano-2- 
pyridone, may then be hydrolysed and decarboxylated, before the oxy- 
gen atom of the carbonyl group is removed in two steps: by chlorination 
and hydrogenolysis. 
Scheme 2.19 
Scheme 2.18 
C02Me 
C02Me 
C02Me 
Me J$ +H2NJr-M
H 
H2S04aq*- Le&j 
H 
Me fj -Me5(cl= 
Me ho 
H 
1 4 0 2  
C02Me 
C02Me 
C02Me 
2.7 
Commonly Encountered Pyridine Derivatives 
The chemical behaviour of many substituents attached to the pyridine 
ring is similar to that of the corresponding groups in benzene, with the 
proviso that resonance with, and the inductive influence of, the ring nitro- 
gen atom may significantly modify some reactions. 
2.7.1 Methylpyridines (Picolines) 
These have the trivial generic name picolines; on oxidation they give the 
appropriate acids; pyridine-2- and -4-carboxylic acids are called 2- and 

30 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
4-picolinic acids, respectively (see Box 2.1). Pyridine-3-carboxylic acid is 
better known as nicotinic acid (reflecting its relationship to the alkaloid 
nicotine, see Section 1.3). 
2-Picoline and 4-picoline are easily deprotonated as the conjugate car- 
banions are resonance stabilized. These anions can be used in alkylations 
and other reactions with electrophiles (Scheme 2.20). 
RCHO 
H02C 
R ro 
Scheme 2.20 
Deprotonation of 3-picoline is more difficult (the anion cannot achieve 
stability through resonance, as happens with the others) and a much 
stronger base, LDA [lithium diisopropylamide (lithium propan-2- 
ylamide)], is needed. Once achieved, however, the conjugate anion 
behaves as a nucleophile and undergoes typical carbanion reactions 
(indeed, it is more reactive than its counterparts, since reactivity is most 
often the opposite of stability!). 

Pyridine 
31 
Scheme 2.21 

32 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
The tautomeric preferences 
observed for hydroxy and amino 
heterocycles is a complex subject 
and not always easily 
explained .1#2 
2.7.2 Pyridones (Hydroxypyridines) 
Tautomerism 
2-Hydroxy- and 4-hydroxypyridines are in tautomeric equilibrium with 
isomers bearing a carbonyl group (Scheme 2.22). These are called 2- and 
4-pyridones, respectively. The pyridone forms are favoured in ionic sol- 
vents and also in the solid state. 
H 
2-Pyridone 
H 
4-Pyridone 
Scheme 2.22 
3-Hydroxypyridine adopts a dipolar (zwitterionic) constitution in polar 
solvents (Scheme 2.23). 
Scheme 2.23 
4-Pyridones can be considered to 
react with electrophiles at C-3 
either as enamines or as enols. 
Etb 
L N  
H 
E~ 
N 
H 
Note that 0-Si bonds are 
stronger than N-C bonds 
3-H ydroxypyridine 
H 
React i o n s 
These compounds undergo electrophilic substitution readily, but their 
chemistry is quite complex; for example, 2-and 4-pyridones, although 
weak bases (amide-like), protonate at oxygen. Some other electrophiles, 
particularly those which bond strongly to oxygen, also react at this site. 
Others react at nitrogen, and acetyl chloride, for example, gives a 1:l 
mixture of 0- and N-acetyl-4-pyridones, whereas phosphorus oxychlo- 
ride, together with phosphorus pentachloride, reacts at oxygen and forms 
a good leaving group (possibly C1,OPO-), which is then displaced by 
chloride ion to afford a chloropyridine (Scheme 2.24). 
Deprotonation of 2- and 4-pyridones is easily achieved, and the anions 
react with carbon electrophiles, such as carbon dioxide and trimethyl- 
silylmethyl chloride, at nitrogen, but with trimethylsilyl chloride at 
oxygen (Scheme 2.25). 

Pyridine 
33 
OSiMe3 
-(Me3Si)*NH 6 02Nd 
N 
H 
H 
N 
A+(', 
N 
N 
I 
Ac 
- 
OPOcl; h 
+N 
I 
c1 
-HOPOC12 
N 
CO2Li 
CH2SiMe3 
Scheme 2.24 
Scheme 2.25 

34 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 2.26 
2.7.3 Aminopyridines 
All three aminopyridines are known, but although the 2-and 4- 
aminopyridines are potentially tautomeric with imino forms, they seem 
to exist as the amino tautomers (Scheme 2.27). 
Scheme 2.27 
2-Aminop y ridine 
I 
4-Aminopyridine 
I 
H 
2.7.4 Pyridinium Salts 
N ucleop h i I ic Add it ion 
Nucleophilic addition readily takes place with pyridinium salts; attack is 
normally easier at the C-2(6) position, since the inductive effect of the 
positively charged. nitrogen atom is greatest here (Scheme 2.28). When 
the sites adjacent to the nitrogen are blocked, however, attack occurs at 
C-4. The products are dihydropyridines. 
2 \  315 -+nJ - 0 
- 0 
N
+
 
N 
N 
l y +  
I 
I 
I 
R 
R 
R 
R 
Scheme 2.28 

Pyridine 
35 
It is not always easy to remove the N-substituent after the initial nucle- 
ophilic addition, although demethylation of N-methylpyridinium salts 
can be achieved by heating in N, N-dimethylformamide, and N-benzyl 
groups are cleaved by hydrogenolysis (heating over Pd/C in the presence 
of hydrogen). 
Other groups can be bonded to the nitrogen atom and, if these 
are electron withdrawing, nucleophilic attack at a ring carbon atom 
is further enhanced. This is particularly useful if the activating group is 
carbonyl containing, for it can easily be removed at the end of the reac- 
tion by hydrolysis. Oxidation then leads to a substituted pyridine. 
However, note that, with electron-withdrawing N-substituents, ring 
opening by certain nucleophiles (e.g. cyanide ion) is also facilitated. Such 
reactions often take place by concerted mechanisms. 
Some examples of nucleophilic additions are shown in Scheme 2.29. 
M e  
Me 
major 
minor 
c1- 
H * 
-HC1 
'
N
 
H 
COPh 
55% 
C02Et 
C02Et 
C02Et 
As for pyridine, the presence of a 
potential leaving group already in 
the ring of the salt at C-2 or C-4 
favours preferential attack at this 
site and facilitates re-aromatiz- 
ation to a substituted pyridinium 
salt by loss of the original 
substituent from the reaction 
intermediate. 
Although 2-cyanodihydropyridines 
are favoured by the addition of 
potassium cyanide in water to 
pyridinium salts, an increase in 
the 4-isomer may occur when a 
salt like ammonium chloride is 
added to the reaction mixture. 
Scheme 2.29 
In Scheme 2.29b the nucleophile is indole (see Chapter 7), acting as an 
enamine. It seems likely that the size of the attacking reagent in this case 
is influential in directing addition solely to C-4. The reaction in Scheme 
2.29~ exemplifies nucleophilic addition followed by a concerted retro- 
cvclization process. 

36 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
2.8 
Reduced Pyridines 
Scheme 2.30 
If R = benzyl, this substituent can 
be hydrogenolysed after, or as a 
part of, the hydrogenation 
procedure (i.e. without the 
isolation of the intermediate N- 
alkylpiperidine). 
2.8.1 Reduction of Pyridines 
Pyridine is difficult to reduce (as is benzene!), but pyridinium salts, e.g. 
alkylpyridinium halides, are partly reduced by hydride transfer reagents 
such as lithium aluminium hydride (LiAlH,) and sodium borohydride 
(NaBH,). LiAlH,, which must be used in anhydrous conditions, only 
gives the 1,2-dihydro derivative, but the less vigorous reductant NaBH, 
in aqueous ethanol yields the 1,2,5,6-tetrahydro derivative (Scheme 2.30)! 
'7 
HO-H 
4 
I R 
1 --OH 
I x- 
I 
R 
anhydrous 
R 
conditions 
0 
NaBH4 ~ 0 
H2,Pd/C, 0 
N 
N 
I 
I 
+N 
I 
R 
R 
R 
In this case the aqueous conditions permit protonation at C-5 after the 
first hydride addition, thereby setting up the next hydride transfer. The 
reduction stops before the ring is fully saturated, however, as the lone 
pair electrons on the N atom of the 1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridine are not 
conjugated with the C=C double bond (i.e. further activation by proto- 
nation is not possible). 
Reduction 
of 
1,2,5,6-tetrahydropyridines to N-alkylpiperidines 
requires catalytic hydrogenation. 
2.8.2 NAD+ and NADH 
NAD+ is one of Nature's most important oxidizing agents; it can be con- 
sidered as a biological equivalent of the chromium(V1) ion. NAD+ is 
shorthand for nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide; it is a co-enzyme, 
which together with an enzyme is essential for several life-sustaining 
processes (Box 2.2). On reduction it forms the corresponding 1,4- 
dihydropyridine, NADH. The oxidation of ethanol to acetaldehyde 
(ethanal) is effected by the enzyme alcohol dehydrogenase and mediat- 
ed by NAD+ (Scheme 2.31). 

Pyridine 
37 
I 
I 
alcohol 
HWH 
Ad 
Ad 
NAD+ 
NADH 
Scheme 2.31 
Conversely, NADH is one of the important natural reductants, and in 
yeast cells, for example, it reduces acetaldehyde to ethanol! 
2.8.3 Piperidine (Azacyclohexane or Hexahydropyridine) 
Synthesis and Reactions 
Piperidine is obtained commercially by the catalytic hydrogenation of 
pyridine over a nickel catalyst at about 200 "C. N-Substituted deriva- 
tives are formed by reduction of the corresponding pyridinium salts. 
Piperidine is a secondary amine (pK, 11.3; cf. diethylamine, pK, 1 1  .O); 
it is more basic than pyridine (pKa 5.2). It is also a good nucleophile, 
and it is N-alkylated by alkyl halides in the presence of potassium car- 
bonate to form first N-alkylpiperidines and then quaternary salts. 

38 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Hofmann Exhaustive Methylation 
Originally, moist silver oxide 
(expensive!) was used as the 
base, although an alkali or an 
alkali-bound ion exchange resin 
are alternatives. 
In practice, the formation of 
trimethylamine is obvious from its 
smell, or by red litmus paper 
turning blue when applied to the 
top of the condenser. 
The Hofmann exhaustive N-methylation procedure, often used in classi- 
cal structure determinations of alkaloids containing the piperidine nucle- 
us, depends upon the formation of quaternary methyl salts. 
Although of much less importance today, because of the availability 
of NMR spectroscopy and mass spectrometry for structural analysis, the 
method still has its uses. For example, consider the exhaustive methyla- 
tion of an ‘unknown’ piperidine where there are three different groups 
X, Y and Z located somewhere in the heterocycle (Scheme 2.32). First, 
treatment of the unknown with an excess of methyl iodide gives a qua- 
ternary iodide; then this is reacted with a base. Heating in the presence 
of the base promotes elimination of a proton, through a concerted E2- 
type mechanism involving H-3, causing the ring to fragment. Then, the 
whole process is repeated until trimethylamine is detected. 
Y Z  
(i) Me1 
H 
Me’ ‘
M
~
~
~
 
Me‘ 
Me 
Me/ AiMe 
Y Z  
-B H, -Me3N 
1 
X ;”; 
Scheme 2.32 
For our ‘unknown’ piperidine the other product is a penta-l,4-diene, the 
constitution of which can now identified by ozonolysis (in the presence 
of a reducing agent such as Zn dust, or triphenylphosphine, to prevent 
the oxidation of the ozonolysis fragments). Here ozonolysis will yield 
formaldehyde (methanal) (an indication that C-6 is unsubstituted) 
plus another aldehyde, XCHO (showing that C-2 bears the group X). 
The other product is a propanedial in which the groups Y and Z must 
occupy the central carbon. Clearly then, C-4 is substituted by both Y 
and Z. 
The above example was selected because the penta- 1 ,rl-diene cannot 
isomerize to a more conjugated isomer; however, in many other examples 
this is not the case and, for example, a Hofmann exhaustive methylation 
reaction upon piperidine itself eventually leads to penta-2,4-diene 
(Scheme 2.33). 

Pyridine 
39 
(i) excess Me1 
(ii) base 
(two cycles) [ n] 
__t Me- 
N 
I 
H 
Scheme 2.33 
Furthermore, when a group bearing an a-hydrogen atom is present 
at C-2, proton loss from this substituent may occur, rather than loss of 
the C-3 ring proton. This gives rise to a double bond exocyclic to the 
original heterocycle (Scheme 2.34). 
R 
Me 
R Me 
Me 
Scheme 2.34 

40 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
1. J. Elguero, C. Marzin, A. R. Katritzky and P. Linda, The 
Tautomerism of Heterocycles, in Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., Suppl. 1, 
1976. 
Tautomerism of Heterocyclic Compounds, in Heterocycles, 199 1, 32, 
329. 
2. A. R. Katritzky, M. Karelson and P. A. Harris, Prototropic 

Pyridine 
41 
E. Klinsberg (ed.), Pyridine and its Derivatives, in Chemistry of 
Heterocyclic Compounds, suppl. 1 4 ,  ed. A. Weissberger and E. C. 
Taylor, Wiley-Interscience, New York, 1960-1964. 
V. Eisner and J. Kutham, The Chemistry of Dihydropyridines, in Chem. 
Rev., 1972, 72, 1. 
C .K. McGill and A. Rappa, Advances in the Chichibabin Reaction, in 
Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1988, 44, 2. 
A. R. Katritzky and J. M. Lagowski, Heterocyclic N-Oxides, Methuen 
Press, London, 1967. 
H. Vorbriiggen, Advances in the Amination of Nitrogen Heterocycles, in 
Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1990, 49, 117. 
A. Albini and S .  Pietra, Heterocyclic N-Oxides, CRC Press, Boca 
Raton, Florida, 199 1. 

Benzopyridines 
3.1 
Introduction 
~~ 
___ 
The naming of benzo-fused 
heterocycle is discussed in 
Section 1.2. 
There are two neutral benzopyridines, quinoline (benzo[b]pyridine) and 
isoquinoline (benzo[c]pyridine), together with the quinolizinium cation 
(benzo[a]pyridinium) (Box 3. l), formed by a ring fusion that utilizes the 
nitrogen atom. 
Quinolines and isoquinolines are very important because their deriva- 
tives, a large proportion of which are alkaloids, show useful biological 
effects. Indeed, the medicinal properties of the plants that biosynthesize 
42 

Benzopyridines 
43 
these alkaloids have been recognized for centuries, long before the 
nature of the compounds responsible was known. Two such natural 
products are the anti-malarial agent quinine, from the bark of Cinchona 
trees, and morphine, a tetrahydroisoquinoline derivative, found in the 
latex from poppy seed capsules. Morphine and its di-0-acetyl derivative, 
heroin, are still used to control severe pain, despite being addictive 
drugs. 
3.2 
Quinoline 
3.2.1 Molecular Structure and General Properties 
Quinoline is a base since, as for pyridine, the lone pair of electrons on 
the nitrogen atom is not utilized in its internal resonance. Although it is 
an aromatic compound, the valence bond description of quinoline shows 
two of the neutral contributors, A and C (see Scheme 3.1), to the reso- 
nance hybrid as quinonoid in character, whereas in B either the carbo- 
cycle or the heterocycle must exist in the form of a 1,3-diene. The 
presence of the pyridine nucleus is reflected by the inclusion of doubly 
charged canonical forms. 
However, the representations F to H involve disruption of both 
Scheme 3.1 
monocyclic ‘JC systems simultaneously. It follows that these are of higher 
energy, and they contribute very much less to the overall description of 
the molecule than do the alternatives D and E that affect only the 
pyridine system. 
The bond lengths of quinoline, which are irregular, support the 
resonance description; thus, the 1,2-, 5,6- and 7,8-linkages are shorter 
than that of the carbon+arbon bond in benzene (more double bond 
character!). There is also a dipole of 2.19 D directed towards the nitrogen 
atom. 

44 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
3.2.2 Electrophilic Substitution 
Acids and Lewis acids react with quinoline at the basic nitrogen atom 
to form quinolinium salts, and there is a question over the nature of the 
substrate for electrophilic attack, i.e. is it quinoline or the quinolinium 
cation? The answer is not a simple one and appears to depend upon the 
reagents and reaction conditions. Thus, whereas acetyl nitrate at 20 "C 
gives mainly 3-nitroquinoline (Scheme 3.2), fuming nitric acid in con- 
centrated sulfuric acid containing sulfur trioxide at 15-20 "C yields a 
mixture of 5-nitroquinoline (35%) and 8-nitroquinoline (43%) (Scheme 
3.3). In the case of acetyl nitrate, the reaction may proceed by the 1,4- 
addition of the reagent to quinoline, followed by electrophilic attack 
upon the 1,4-dihydro derivative. 
Scheme 3.2 
Scheme 3.3 
Although not shown, the nitrogen 
atom of the sulfonic acid is 
probably protonated, or even 
sulfonated, under the reaction 
conditions, exaggerating the 
steric problems experienced by 
the substituent at C-8. The 
mechanism of the desulfonation 
of aromatic sulfonic acids occurs 
via the reverse of the sulfonation 
process. 
Q 
so3 
YC 
O=S=cJ 
I 
OH 
1 > 250°C 
Ho3sw 
NO2 
I 
f. HNO3 
c. H2S04 
w 
+ p 
No, 
However, the rate of nitration of quinoline in 80-99% sulfuric acid is of 
the same order as that of N-methylquinolinium salts, suggesting that here 
the quinolinium cation may be the target for attack. 
Sulfonation with oleum at 90 "C affords mainly the 8-sulfonic acid, 
but as this product is sterically hindered, at higher temperatures it 
rearranges into the 6-sulfonic acid (Scheme 3.3). This rearrangement is 
similar to that shown by naphthalene- 1 -sulfonic acid, the kinetic sul- 
fonation product of naphthalene, which isomerizes on heating into the 
thermodynamically favoured (less hindered) 2-isomer. 

Benropyridines 
45 
Alkyl and acyl halides react directly with quinoline to give N-alkyl- 
or N-acylquinolinium salts (Scheme 3.4). Whereas the N-alkyl salts are 
stable and can often be isolated as crystalline solids, the N-acyl analogues 
are unstable and undergo rapid hydrolysis in moist air or in aqueous 
solution. 
The origin of the instability of N- 
acylpyridinium salts and their 
quinolinium counterparts is the 
proximity of the positive charge 
on nitrogen to the positive end of 
the dipole of the carbonyl group. 
3 . 
2 . 3 N uc I eo p h i I i c Add it i o n/Su bs t i t u t ion 
N-Acyl- or N-sulfonylquinolinium salts can be trapped by cyanide ion 
to form what are known generally as Reissert adducts. The easy removal 
of the N-substituent in a subsequent reaction with a base provides access 
to 2-cyanoquinoline (Scheme 3.5). 
I R 
c1- 
There is a strong similarity between the reactions of pyridines and quino- 
lines towards nucleophiles. Addition occurs mainly at C-2, giving 
1,2-dihydroquinolines, but the locus of the reaction can be diverted to 
C-4, particularly if there is a good leaving group located at this position. 
In a Chichibabin-type reaction (see Section 2.4.2), quinoline reacts 
with potassamide (KNH,) in liquid ammonia at -70 "C to give 
2-amino- 1,2-dihydroquinoline and this is oxidized by potassium 
permanganate [manganate(VII)] at the same temperature to yield 
2-aminoquinoline (Scheme 3.6). If the temperature is allowed to increase 
to -45 "C the adduct rearranges into 4-amino- 1,4-dihydroquinoline, and 
upon oxidation this product gives 4-aminoquinoline. 
Scheme 3.5 
3.2.4 Synthesis 
S krau p Synthesis 
The commonest approach is the Skraup synthesis. Here a mixture of 
glycerol (propane- 1,2,3-triol), aniline (phenylamine), sulfuric acid, 
nitrobenzene and ferrous [iron(II)] sulfate are heated together (Scheme 

46 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 3.6 
Scheme 3.7 
3.7). The last reagent is added as a moderator to prevent a 'runaway 
reaction'; nitrobenzene, or an alternative oxidant (iodine or chloroanil 
are often recommended), is required to .convert the product, 1,2- 
dihydroquinoline, into quinoline. 
OH 
Glycerol 
Acrolein (propenal) 
H 
H 
H+ 
UJ 
CN 
H 
The Skraup procedure is applicable to quinoline derivatives substituted 
in the benzene ring, providing these substituents are not strongly elec- 
tron withdrawing. 

Benzopyridines 
47 
Friedlander Synthesis 
Another approach, the Friedlander synthesis, is to condense a 2- 
aminophenyl ketone with an aldehyde or ketone that contains a meth- 
ylene unit (to permit enolization and subsequent aromatization), in 
contact with either an acid or a base as the catalyst (Scheme 3.8). 
NH2 
R' 
Scheme 3.8 
3.2.5 Important Derivatives 
Methylquinolines 
Like the corresponding methylpyridines, 2- and 4-methylquinolines can 
be deprotonated by a base, such as sodium methoxide, forming 
resonance-stabilized anions (Scheme 3.9). The latter are' useful in 
synthesis, providing nucleophilic reagents that allow extension of 
quinoline side chains through reactions with appropriate electrophiles. 
Activation of the 2-methyl group can also be achieved by the use of acetic 
anhydride (the same type of process occurs with 2-methylpyridine, 
Section 2.7.1, Worked Problem 2.3). 
Scheme 3.9 
Me 
CH2- 
CH2 
CH2R 
d++d-d+d
- 
RX = alkyl halides, acyl halides, etc. 
Ac 
Ac 
-HOAc 
H+ 

48 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Suitable imines are commonly in 
equilibrium with enamine 
tautomers: 
C'N/ 
11 
imime 
H 
@ N /  
1 
enamine 
H 
Scheme 3.10 
Aminoquinolines 
These compounds exist as the amino tautomers and normally the imino 
forms are not observed. All react with acids at the heterocyclic nitrogen 
atom, giving salts. The protonated forms of both 2- and 4-aminoquino- 
lines are resonance hybrids (Scheme 3. lo), but 4-aminoquinoline is more 
basic than 2-aminoquinoline, possibly because the nitrogen atoms that 
carry the charge between them in the corresponding cation are more 
widely separated. 
H 
H 
2-Aminoquinoline 
2-Aminoquinolinium cation 
I 
NH2 
I 
H 
H 
4-Aminoquinoline 
4-Aminoquinolinium cation 
Quinolones (Quinolinones) 
Although hydroxyquinolines in which the hydroxy substituent is present 
in the benzene ring are known and show phenolic activity, 2- and 4- 
hydroxyquinoline exist solely as the quinolone tautomers (Box 3.2). 

Benzopyridines 
49 
Conrad-Limpach-Knorr Synthesis 
Quinolones are obtained in the Conrad-Limpach-Knorr synthesis, which 
is subject to either kinetic or thermodynamic control, when aniline is 
reacted with a 3-keto ester (Scheme 3.1 la). At room temperature the 
more reactive keto group combines with the aniline nitrogen atom, lead- 
ing to an enamino ester: the kinetic product. Cyclization of this product 
to a 4-quinolone requires heating at 250 "C. 
- 
+ 
-H20 
OR2 05Rl 
- 
+ 
-H20 
R' 
H 
_I 
R' 
I 
H 
H 
H 
R' 
-a.X;:::-a% 
- R ~ O H  
I 
I 
H 
H 
Alternatively, when the reaction is carried out at 140 "C, the thermody- 
namically preferred amido ketone is formed (Scheme 3.1 lb), even though 
the less reactive ester group of the keto ester is the locus of the initial 
nucleophilic attack. Ring closure of the amino ketone then affords the 
4-quinolone. 
Scheme 3.11 

50 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 3.12 
3.3 
lsoquinoline 
3.3.1 Resonance Structure 
The valence bond description of isoquinoline is similar to that of quino- 
line (Scheme 3.13). Only A, B, C and D are of major importance in 
describing the molecule, as the contributors E, F, G and H involve a dis- 
Scheme 3.13 
ruption of the n;-systems of both rings. 
5 
4 

Benzopyridines 
51 
383.2 Reactions with Electrophiles 
Isoquinoline, like quinoline, is protonated and alkylated at the nitrogen 
atom, but electrophilic substitution in the benzene ring is also easily 
achieved (Scheme 3.14). Sulfonation with oleum gives mainly the 
5-sulfonic acid, but fuming nitric acid and concentrated sulfuric acid 
at 0 "C produce a 1 : 1 mixture of 5- and 8-nitroisoquinolines. Bromination 
in the presence of aluminium trichloride at 75 "C gives a 78% yield of 
5-bromoisoquinoline. 
so3 
C. H2S04 
\90 
"C 
(R = H or alkyl 
X = halide, etc.) 
Br 
Scheme 3.14 
383.3 Reduction and Reactions with Nucleophiles 
Nucleophilic addition takes place at C- 1, and this is considerably 
enhanced if the reaction is carried out upon an isoquinolinium salt. 
Reduction with lithium aluminium hydride [tetrahydroaluminate(III)] in 
THF (tetrahydro furan), for example, gives a 1,2-dihydroisoquinoline 
(Scheme 3.15). These products behave as cyclic enamines and if 
isoquinolinium salts are reacted with sodium borohydride [tetrahy- 
droboronate(III)] in aqueous ethanol, further reduction to 1,2,3,4- 
tetrahydroisoquinolines is effected through protonation at C-4 and then 
hydride transfer from the reagent to C-3. 
The cyanide anion adds to C-1 in 2-benzoylisoquinolinium salts in 
water/DCM (dichloromethane), forming Reissert compounds; then, just 
like their quinoline counterparts (see Section 3.2.3), the adducts can be 
deprotonated by a base with the loss of the N-substituent and the for- 
mation of a 1 -cyanoisoquinoline (Scheme 3.16). 

52 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 3.15 
X- 
Isoquinolinium salt 
1,2-Dihydroisoquinoline 
NaBH4 
EtOH aq. 
I 
1,2,3,4-Tetrahydroisoquinoline 
D( 
c1- 
I 
CN 
CN 
Scheme 3.16 
3.3.4 Synthesis 
The biological properties of many derivatives have ensured the develop- 
ment of a number of syntheses providing access to all types of 
isoquinolines, both natural and man made. Three important routes 
are the Bischler-Napieralski, Pictet-Spengler and Pomeranz-Fritsch 
procedures. 
Bisc hler-Napierals ki Synthesis 
This method is very useful for the construction of 1-substituted 3,4- 
dihydroisoquinolines, which if necessary can be oxidized to isoquinolines. 
A P-phenylethylamine (1 -amino-2-phenylethane) is the starting material, 
and this is usually preformed by reacting an aromatic aldehyde with 
nitromethane in the presence of sodium methoxide, and allowing the adduct 
to eliminate methanol and give a P-nitrostyrene (1 -nitro-2-phenylethene) 
(Scheme 3.17). This product is then reduced to the P-phenylethylamine, 
commonly by the action of lithium aluminium hydride. Once prepared, the 
P-phenylethylamine is reacted with an acyl chloride and a base to give the 
corresponding amide (RI = H) and then this is cyclized to a 3,4-dihydro- 
isoquinoline by treatment with either phosphorus pentoxide or phospho- 
rus oxychloride (Scheme 3.18). Finally, aromatization is accomplished by 
heating the 3,4-dihydroisoquinoline over palladium on charcoal. 

Benzopyridines 
53 
I 
OMe 
I 
Hz, PdC 
1 
LiAIH4 
I 
R '  
&NH2 
R' GN 
R2 
R2COCl 
base - 
PdC - 
R' 
R' 
I 
R' 
R' 
I 
R 2  
'p, 
Scheme 3.17 
Scheme 3.18 
Alternatively, a P-methoxy-P-phenylethylamine can be used to cir- 
cumvent the oxidation step after the conventional Bischler-NaDerialski 
There are numerous other 
reagents that can be used in the 
cyclization step of the 
Bischler-Naperialski synthesis, 
but P,O, 
or POCI, are probably 
cyclization. Here, when treated with the phosphorus reagent the amide 
(R' = OMe) undergoes both cyclization and the elimination of methanol 
to give the isoquinoline (R = H) directly. This is known as the 
Pictet-Gams modification of the Bischler-Napieralski synthesis. 
the m;G 
common'. 
Pictet-Spengler Synthesis 
The mechanistically similar Pictet-Spengler synthesis is also much used 
for the preparation of 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinolines, starting from a 

54 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
P-phenylethylamine and an aldehyde (Scheme 3.19). The reaction inter- 
mediate is an imine which, provided the benzene ring contains electron- 
donating groups, often ring closes under very mild conditions. Indeed, 
cyclization can occur under physiological conditions, and in Nature this 
is an important step in the biosynthesis of many tetrahydroisoquinoline 
Scheme 3.19 
a1 kaloids. 
n 
R 
R 
4cetals are formed by reacting an 
aldehyde or a ketone with an 
alcohol (2 equivalents) in the 
presence of a catalytic amount of 
acid. Water is released and this is 
trapped out to facilitate the 
forward reaction. Acetals are 
stable to base but decompose 
into their starting materials when 
treated with aqueous acid: 
R' 
)-o 
+ ~ R ~ O H  
II 
R2 
R'x0R3 
+ H20 
R2 
 OR^ 
acetal 
Scheme 3.20 
Pomeranz-Fritsc h Synthesis 
Whereas both the previous two routes depend upon a cyclization of the 
benzene ring to what becomes C-1 of the heterocycle, the key step in 
the Pomeranz-Fritch synthesis is the formation of a bond to C-4. A 
benzaldehyde is the starting material, and it is reacted with an amino- 
acetaldehyde dialkyl acetal to form an imine, which is then cyclized 
directly under relatively severe acidic conditions (e.g. conc. H,SO, at 
100 "C) to give the isoquinoline (Scheme 3.20). Although the Pomeranz- 
Fritsch ring-closure conditions permit the cyclization of unsubstituted 
imines, the reaction is accelerated greatly if electron-donating groups are 
present in the benzene ring. 
Through a slight modification the Pomeranz-Fritsch synthesis can be 
made particularly useful for the preparation of 1,2-dihydroisoquinolines. 
The imine is first reduced with sodium borohydride in 98% ethanol to 
the corresponding benzylamine, prior to cyclization, by treatment with 
6 M hydrochloric acid. When electron-donating groups (such as a 
methoxyl) are present in the aromatic unit of the benzylamine, the ring- 
NH2CH2CH(OR)2 MeocT 
70% 
-2ROH 
H2S04 
Meon 
CHO 
-HzO 
Me0 
6M HCl aq. 

Benzopyridines 
55 
closure step occurs at room temperature to give a 1,2-dihydroisoquino- 
line. As 1,2-dihydroisoquinolines are unstable in air it is customary to 
carry out the reaction under an atmosphere of oxygen-free nitrogen. 
An advantage of the modified Pomeranz-Fritsch synthesis is that the 
1,2-dihydroisoquinolines can be reacted in situ with electrophiles, yield- 
ing 1,4-dihydroisoquinolinium salts that react with nucleophiles at C-3 
(see Section 3.3.3). Such a ‘single pot’ procedure can be used to form 
complex 1,2,3,4-tetrahydroisoquinolines. 
For convenience the imine is 
drawn here with a Z 
configuration, but in reality the 
favoured stereochemistry is E; 
thus, inversion of double bond 
geometry is necessary prior to 
ring closure. This requirement 
contributes to the relative severity 
of the conditions needed for 
cyclization compared to those 
needed for the ring closure of the 
corresponding benzylamines, 
where there is free rotation about 
the C-N bond. 

56 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 3.21 

Benzopyridines 
57 
G. Jones (ed.), Quinolines, Wiley-Interscience, Chichester, 1982. 
V. T. Andriole (ed.), The Quinolones, Academic Press, London, 1988. 
C. D. Johnson, Bicyclic Compounds containing a Pyridine Ring; 
Quinoline and its Derivatives, in Rodd’s Chemistry of Carbon 
Compounds, 2nd edn., 2nd suppl., vol. F/G, chap. 26, ed. M. 
Sainsbury, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1998. 
Parts 1-3, in Chemistry of Heterocyclic Compounds, vol. 31, ed. A. 
Weissberger and E. C. Taylor, Wiley, New York, 1990. 
L. Hazai, 3(2H) -Isoquinolones and their Saturated Derivatives, in Adv. 
Heterocycl, Chem., 1991, 52, 155. 
M. Balasubramanian and E. F. V. Scriven, Isoquinoline and its 
Derivatives, in Rodd’s Chemistry of Curhon Compounds, 2nd edn., 
2nd suppl., vol. F/G, chap. 27, ed. M. Sainsbury, Elsevier, 
Amsterdam, 1998. 
F. G. Kathawala, G. M, Coppola and H. F. Schuster, Isoquinolines, 

Pyrylium Salts, Pyrans and 
Pyrones 
4.1 
Introduction 
~~ 
~ 
As oxygen is divalent, no strict equivalent of benzene exists, although the 
pyrylium cation does achieve aromaticity (see Chapter 1). Both 
2H-pyrans and 4H-pyrans are known, but are encountered more fre- 
quently as their carbonyl analogues pyran-2-one and pyran-4-one (see Box 
4.1). In addition, reduced forms such as 3,4-dihydro-2H-pyran and 3,4,5,6- 
58 

Pyrylium Salts, Pyrans and Pyrones 
59 
2H-tetrahydropyran, the latter better known simply as tetrahydropyran 
(THP), are valuable laboratory chemicals: 3,4-dihydro-2H-pyran is used 
as a reagent to protect alcohols and THP is a non-protic solvent. 
4.2 
Pyrylium Salts 
4.2.1 Structure and Reactions 
Although pyrylium cations in combination with an anion of a strong 
acid are stable, the presence of a formally charged oxygen atom renders 
them susceptible to reactions with nucleophiles and the valence bond 
description indicates that C-2( 6) and C-4 are the potential targets for 
attack (Scheme 4.1). 
X- 
Scheme 4.1 
The products of nucleophilic addition are pyrans that frequently ring 
open and then recyclize to other heterocycles (Scheme 4.2). For this rea- 
Scheme 4.2 Some 
son, pyrylium salts can be valuable starting materials for a variety of 
nucleophilic reactions of ,3,5- 
other compounds. 
trimethylpyrylium salts 
Me 
(a) 
Me 
Me 
Me 
Me A
M
e
 
NHPh eMefiM
Me 
H
O
A
 
N 
Me 
I 
Ph 
Ph 
+ x- 
HN, 
Me 
Ph 
X- 

60 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 4.3 
4.2.2 Synthesis 
A general method for the synthesis of pyrylium salts is the cyclodehy- 
dration of 1,5-dicarbonylalkanes (Scheme 4.4). Acetic anhydride is com- 
monly used as both solvent and reagent, but since the initial product is 
a 4H-pyran, an oxidant such as the triphenylmethyl (trityl) cation in the 
form of triphenylmethyl hexachloroantimonate is added (Ph,C+ + [H-] 
+ Ph,CH). In certain cases, however, it is advantageous to isolate the 
pyran and to oxidize it in a separate step. 

Pyrylium Salts, Pyrans and Pyrones 
61 
I 
D2 
4.3 
Pyran-2-ones (a=Pyrones) 
Scheme 4.4 
4.3.1 Molecular Structure and Electrophilic Reactions 
Although the valence bond description of pyran-2-one could include a 
zwitterionic contribution involving the carbonyl group, thus making the 
ring aromatic, there is little evidence to support this. For example, the 
IR carbonyl frequency (1 740 cm-I) is typical of an unsaturated lactone, 
and the chemical shifts of the ring protons in the 'H NMR spectrum 
indicate that there is no ring current. 
Although some electrophilic reagents cause substitution in the ring at 
C-3 and C-5, very reactive compounds, such as trimethyloxonium tetra- 
fluoroborate (Me,O+BF;, 
Meerwein's reagent) and nitronium tetrafluo- 
roborate (NO,+BF,-), attack the carbonyl oxygen atom first and give 
pyrylium salts (Scheme 4.5). In the case of nitronium tetrafluoroborate 
the product rearranges into 5-nitropyran-2-one. 
0 0 
1 
I 
Scheme 4.5 
4.3.2 Nucleophilic Attack 
The lactonic property of pyran-2-ones is apparent in their reactions 
with nucleophiles, which normally lead to ring opening. However, this 
may not be simply direct attack of the reagent at the carbonyl carbon, 

62 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
The concept of ‘hardness and 
softness’ was first used to 
as conjugate addition at C-6 is often observed. When it is warmed with 
aqueous ammonia, pyran-2-one, for example, affords pyridin-2-one, 
through nucleophilic attack at C-6 followed by recyclization of the initial 
acyclic intermediate (Scheme 4.6). With the ‘harder’ reagent methyl- 
provide a non-quantitative 
assessment of acid and base 
strengths. It can be extended to 
characterize nucleophiles and 
magnesium iodide, the reaction seems to proceed by addition to the 
carbonyl group as the first step. Thereafter the ring opens, and a second 
equivalent of the Grignard reagent reacts at either Of the two potential 
electrophiles. The term ‘soft’ 
implies low electronegativity and 
hiah Dolarizabilitv (holds on to 
u 
I- 
~ 
,
\
 
electrons loosely), and ‘hard’ 
indicates high electronegativity 
and low polarizablity (holds on to 
electrons tightly). 
carbonyl groups in the intermediate. Protonation and dehydration at the 
end of the process then leads to a ketone and an aldehyde. 
Me 
0 0 
Me O
M
e
 
+ 
45% 
M
e
0
 
Me 
25% 
H 
Scheme 4.6 
The non-aromatic nature of the pyran-2-one ring is evident in its 
behaviour as the diene component in Diels-Alder cycloadditions. With 
dimethyl acetylenedicarboxylate (DMAD, dimethyl but-2-ynedicarboxy- 
late), for example, it gives an adduct that spontaneously eliminates 
carbon dioxide to yield dimethyl phthalate (dimethyl benzene- 1,2- 
dicarboxylate) (Scheme 4.7) 
Scheme 4.7 
C02Me 

Pyrylium Salts, Pyrans and Pyrones 
63 
4.3.3 Synthesis 
In the von Pechmann synthesis, originally used to prepare pyran-2-one- 
5-carboxylic acid (coumalic acid), 2-hydroxybutane- 1,4-dioic acid is con- 
verted into 3-oxopropanoic acid by treatment with oleum (sulfur trioxide 
and conc. sulfuric acid), and this product then self-condenses in the acidic 
medium to give pyran-2-one-5-carboxylic acid (Scheme 4.8a). Pyran-2- 
one is obtained by decarboxylating coumalic acid by heating it over cop- 
per at 650 "C. 
Coumalic acid 
The von Pechmann procedure also works with keto esters. Ethyl ace- 
toacetate (ethyl 3-oxobutanoate), for example, self-condenses readily in 
the presence of acid to form ethyl 4,6-dimethylpyran-2-one-5-carboxylate 
(Scheme 4.8b). 
4.4 
Pyran-4-ones (y-Pyrones) 
Scheme 4.8 
0 
4.1 Kojic acid 
4.4.1 Occurrence and Reactions 
Some representatives of this group occur as natural products, including 
kojic acid (4.1), which can be isolated from the Aspergillus mould 
used in the manufacture of sake from rice. Like pyran-2-ones, these 
compounds show little aromatic character and are best considered 
as vinylogous lactones (Scheme 4.9), rather than as unsaturated 
ketones. 
Reactions with electrophiles occur more readily at the carbonyl oxygen 
atom than is the case for pyran-2-ones. Hydrogen chloride, for example, 
yields aromatic 4-hydroxypyrylium chlorides (4.2) when reacted with 
2,6-disubsti t uted pyran-4-ones. 
Nucleophilic attack follows a similar pattern to that encountered with 
pyran-2-ones; thus hydroxyl ion attacks in conjugate fashion at C-2. In 
The word vinylogous refers to 
the presence of a CH=CH ('vinyl') 
unit between two atoms or 
groups, an 0 and C=O in this 
case, relaying the properties of 
one to the other. 
Lactone 
Vinylogous 
lactone 

64 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
OH 
R AR 
+ c1- 
the case of 2,6-dimethylpyran-4-one, this causes ring opening and 
recyclization to 1,3-dihydroxy-5-methylbenzene 
(Scheme 4.1Oa). 
Grignard reagents add directly at C-4; here subsequent ring opening 
is not an option, but when treated with strong acid the adducts are 
converted into pyrylium salts (Scheme 4. lob). 
4.2 
I 4.4.2 Synthesis 
0 
0- 
+ 
Pyran-4-one 
Scheme 4.9 
The acid cyclization of 1,3,5-tricarbonyl compounds (the reverse of 
alkaline hydrolysis) is a common route to pyran-4-ones (Scheme 4.1 1 a). 
An alternative procedure is the cyclization of alkynyl diketones in the 
presence of aqueous sulfuric acid (Scheme 4.11b). In this case the 
substituents R' and R2 can be alkyl or aryl groups. 
Scheme 4.10 
Me 
OH 
0 
0 
Me OMgI 
Me 
Me 
+ c104- 
1 4 2 0  
OH 
Me 
OH 
Scheme 4.11 
- 
+ 
,C02Et 
Et02C, 
Et02C 
C02Et 
Et02C 
C02Et 
0 
- 
C02Et 
H+ 
-H20 
Et02C 

Pyrylium Salts, Pyrans and Pyrones 
05 
4.5 
Reduced Pyrans 
Tetrahydropyran can be prepared by heating 1,5-dihydroxypentane at 
190-21 0 "C in the presence of butyltin trichloride (Scheme 4.12a). When 
the reaction is carried out using a cobalt catalyst [prepared by heating 
cobalt(I1) oxalate (ethanedioate) under hydrogen at 600 "C] instead of 
the tin halide, the product is 3,4-dihydro-2H-pyran (Scheme 4.12b). 
(a) 
(b) 
Co catalyst 
Scheme 4.12 
OH 
When reacted with an alcohol in the presence of a catalytic amount of 
a strong acid, 3,4-dihydro-2H-pyran yields a base-stable 2-alkoxytetra- 
hydropyran (a cyclic acetal) (Scheme 4.13). The reaction is reversed if 
the acetal is treated with aqueous acid (see Section 3.3.4, page 54), so 
that this provides a simple way of protecting alcohols in syntheses where 
a strong base might otherwise deprotonate them. The conformational 
preferences of 2-alkoxytetrahydopyrans, mediated by the anomeric 
effect, were commented upon earlier (Section 1.5.3). 
a 
P 
Scheme 4.13 
4.6 
Saccharides and Carbohydrates 
A major group of tetrahydropyrans is represented by the pyranose mono- 
saccarides. These polyhydroxylated compounds, together with isomers 
based upon tetrahydrofuran (furanoses), are a very important class of 
natural products and also form the building blocks from which poly- 
saccharides are constructed. The 2-position or the anomeric position in 
the monosaccharides is the usual linkage site. Sugars in the a-series have 
an oxygen substituent at the anomeric position below the plane of the 
ring, whereas those with an oxygen substituent above the ring plane at 
this site are members of the P-series. 
Sucrose (4.5, common sugar) is an acetal formed from glucose (4.3) 
and fructose (4.4); ignoring terms which indicate the absolute stereo- 
chemistry, a more complete name for sucrose is 2a-glucopyranose-2P- 
fructofuranose. 
OH 
Ho% 
HO 
OH 
4.3 a-Glucose 
(glucop yranose) 
OH 
HOH2C 
4.4 P-Fructose 
(fructofuranose) 

66 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
The chemistry of sugars 
(carbohydrates) is a major 
subject area, covered by many 
specialist texts. Note: 
monosaccharides can exist as 
open-chain or as cyclic forms, 
where the oxygen atom forms 
part of the ring. Those with six- 
atom rings are called pyranoses, 
and those with five-atom rings 
are described as furanoses. 
eH 
4.5 Sucrose 

Pyrylium Salts, Pyrans and Pyrones 
67 
K. Dimroth and K. H. Wolf, Aromatic Compoundsfrom Pyrylium Salts, 
in Newer Methods of Preparative Organic Chemistry, vol. 3, 
Academic Press, New York, 1964. 
A. T. Balaban, W. Schroth and G. W. Fischer, Pyrylium Salts. Part I ,  
Syntheses, in Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1969, 10, 241. 
A. T. Balaban, A. Dinculescu, G. N. Dorofeeko, G. W. Fischer, A. V. 
Koblik, V. V. Metzheritskii and W. Schroth, Pyrylium Salts. 
Synthesis, Reactions and Physical Properties, in Adv. Heterocycl. 
Chem., Suppl. 2, 1982. 

The general term glycoside is 
applied to natural products 
bonded to one or more sugars 
through ether groups. The 
corresponding term aglycone is 
used for the hydroxylated 
derivatives, where the sugar 
residues are no longer present. 
Anthocyanins are thus glycosides, 
whereas anthocyanidins are 
ag I ycones. 
Benzopyrylium Salts, 
Coumarins, Chromones, 
Flavonoids and Related 
Compounds 
5.1 
Structural Types and Nomenclature 
There are numerous examples of benzopyrylium salts, benzopyrans and 
benzopyranones, and frequently they have trivial names that reflect their 
long history (see Box 5.1). Many are natural products, and frequently 
these compounds contain hydroxy or alkoxy groups (sometimes in the 
form of a sugar residue). Polyhydroxylated natural products based upon 
2-phenylbenzopyrylium (flavylium) salts and with ether linkages to sug- 
ars are called anthocyanins, whereas without their sugars they are known 
as ant hocyanidins. 
Anthocyanins, in association with other compounds, such as flavones, 
are responsible for the colour of certain flowers. An anthocyanin found 
in rose petals is cyanin; it can be isolated as its chloride. The corre- 
sponding anthocyanidin, cyanidin, exists as the pentahydroxy salt in 
acidic media, but as the pH increases it gives first a quinone and then 
an anion. Each of these forms has a different colour (see Scheme 5.1). 
Other natural products in the group are built up by ring fusions of 
several types of ring systems. They include the garden insecticide 
rotenone (sometimes sold in the crude form as derris powder, the pul- 
verized bark of the plant Derris elliptica). 
68 

Benzopyrylium Salts, Coumarins, Chromones, Flavonoids and Related Compounds 
69 
OGlu 
HO I
O
H
 
’ 
OH 
Cyanin (Glu = glucose residue) 
OH 
OH 
HO IOH
’ 
OH 
Cyanidin (red) 
HO 
violet 
HO 
blue 
Scheme 5.1 

70 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
OMe 
5.1 Rotenone 
\ 
5.2 
Coumarins 
5.2.1 Introduction 
Hydroxylated coumarins are present in grass and contribute to the smell 
of newly cut hay; others have pharmaceutical and rodenticidal activities. 
The compound warfarin (5.2) was developed to kill rats, but is now often 
used as a blood anti-coagulant in human patients. 
5.2 Warfarin 
5.2.2 Reactions 
Resonance within the unsaturated lactone unit of coumarin gives a strong 
hint as to its likely reactivity. Thus, the oxygen atom of the carbonyl 
group receives electron density both via the enone chromophore and from 
the internal resonance of the lactone group (Scheme 5.2). 
5 
7 6m-a 
8 
0
2
 
I 
0 
0- -m-m 
0 
0- 
+ 
0- 
Scheme 5.2 
Nucleophilic addition occurs mainly at the carbon atom of the carbonyl 
group, causing ring opening. Similarly, electrophilic reagents containing 
an element capable of forming a strong bond to oxygen (oxophiles) bind 
to the oxygen atom of the carbonyl group; thus silanes, for example, give 
2-( 0-si1yl)benzopyrylium salts. 
Other less oxophilic electrophiles give C-6 substituted coumarins, but 
it is unclear whether the substrate for such reactions is the free coumarin 
or a cation formed by protonation or bonded by a Lewis acid at the 
carbonyl oxygen. Some typical reactions are shown in Scheme 5.3. 

Benzopyrylium Salts, Coumarins, Chromones, Flavonoids and Related Compounds 
7 1 
Scheme 5.3 
Assuming that the 
dehydrobromination step follows 
an El mechanism, then the 
chemoselectivity is accounted for 
by the participation of the better 
carbocation (i.e. a benzylic cation 
where the + charge is conjugated 
with the benzene nucleus). The 
alternative cation places the 
positive charge next to the 
carbonyl group: 
benzylic cation 
versus 
Br 
5.2.3 Synthesis 
I 
One approach is to use a 2-hydroxybenzaldehyde to form all but two 
atoms of the molecule. The remaining atoms are supplied by malonic 
acid (propane-1,3-dioic acid), which combines with the aldehyde in a 
Knoevenagel condensation step, before cyclization (lactonization) and 
decarboxylation occur (Scheme 5.5). 
4-Methylcoumarins bearing hydroxy and other electron-donating 
groups can be synthesized from the corresponding phenols by reaction 
with ethyl acetoacetate in the presence of sulfuric acid. Hydrolysis of the 
ester group in the product then allows the lactone ring of the coumarin 
to form (Scheme 5.6). 

72 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
1 
CHO 
piiridine, 
~ 
C02H 
OH 
Scheme 5.5 
H2S04 
___) 
Me 
Me 
___) 
-H+ 
Me 
H', H20 
I 
OHMe OH 
OH 
Me 
Me fioz 
M
e
m
C
0
2
H
 
Scheme 5.6 
5.3 
Chromones (Benzopyran-4-ones) 
5.3.1 Structure and Reactions 
Chromones differ marginally in their chemistry from coumarins (ben- 
zopyran-2-ones) because the carbonyl group is now conjugated with the 
oxygen atom via the double bond of the heterocycle (see Box 5.2). This 
conjugation does not involve the benzene ring. 
As a result, chromones are rather more basic, and strong acids read- 
ily protonate the carbonyl oxygen atom, forming crystalline benzopy- 

Benzopyrylium Salts, Coumarins, Chromones, Flavonoids and Related Compounds 
73 
rylium salts. Once protonated, the molecule should be resistant to fur- 
ther electrophilic attack, but with fuming nitric and concentrated sulfu- 
ric acid at between 0 "C and room temperature, chromone gives the 
6-nitro derivative (Scheme 5.7). Chromone also undergoes a Mannich- 
type reaction (see Section 7.1.2) with dimethylamine and formaldehyde 
(methanal) in hydrogen chloride and ethanol; here the product is 3-(N, N- 
dimethy laminomet hy1)chromone. 
Relatively hard nucleophiles, such as Grignard reagents, may attack at 
the carbonyl carbon, whereas softer nucleophiles, e. g. hydroxide ion, 
combine at C-2 by conjugative addition, and this may then cause ring 
opening (Scheme 5.8). 
Scheme 5.7 
cxk Et 
+ c1- 
Scheme 5.8 

74 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 5.9 
5.3.2 Synthesis 
Syntheses of 2- and 3-substituted chromones normally start from 2- 
hydroxyphenyl ketones. In the first of two examples, a route to flavone 
is shown in Scheme 5.10 using 2-hydroxyacetophenone (2-hydrox- 
yphenylethanone) and benzoyl chloride as starting materials. Initially, 
the phenolic group of the acetophenone is 0-acylated by benzoyl 
chloride, using pyridine as a base (a Schotten-Baumann-type reaction). 

Benzopyrylium Salts, Coumarins, Chromones, Flavonoids and Related Compounds 
75 
Under these conditions, the 0-benzoyl derivative immediately enolizes 
and is 0-acylated again to yield a dibenzoate. Without isolation, this 
product is cyclized by treatment with aqueous potassium hydroxide to 
yield 2-hydroxy-2,3-dihydroflavone. Dehydration to flavone is then 
effected by the action of glacial acetic acid containing sulfuric acid. 
PhCOCl 
Me pyridine (B) 
+ 
OH 
0 
I-c/ -OH 
KOH * 
-PhCOzH 
I i 
H20 
0 
0 
A similar route to 3-substituted chromones and isoflavone (R = Ph) 
relies upon a Claisen-like condensation between the enolate of a 2- 
Scheme 5.10 
hydroxyphenyl ketone and ethyl formate (methanoate) (Scheme 5.1 1). 
This affords a 2-hydroxydihydrochromone that, as in the first example, 
Dihydrochromones are Often 
called chromanones, and 
dihvdroflavones and dihvdro- 
is subjected to an acid-promoted dehydration in the final step. 
isoflavones are known as 
flavanones and isoflavanones, 
respectively. 
Scheme 5.11 
O/Na 
eR 
- 
2Na &GH o&eEI - 
-NaOEt 
&R 
H 
’ 
ONa 
/’ ONa ‘0 
HC02Et 
/’ OH 
0 
1 H+ 
0 

76 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
J. B. Harborne, T. J. Mabry and H. Mabry (eds.), The Flavonoids, 
C. 0. Chichester (ed.), The Chemistry of Plant Pigments, Academic 
F. M. Dean (ed.), The Natural Coumarins: Occurrence, Chemistry and 
Chapman Hall, London, 1975. 
Press, New York, 1972. 
Biochemistry, Wiley, Chichester, 1982. 

6 
Five-membered Heterocycles 
containing One Heteroatom: 
Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
6=1 Pyrrole 
6=1 =l 
Introduction 
Formally, pyrrole can be described as azacyclopentadiene, i. e. cyclopen- 
tadiene in which a CH, unit has been replaced by a NH group. However, 
this translates into a classical structure that does not adequately describe 
the compound, for pyrrole has aromatic character, even though there 
are only five atoms in the ring! The aromaticity arises because the 
nitrogen atom contributes two electrons and the four carbons one 
electron each to form a delocalized sextet of n-electrons. In valence bond 
terms the structure of pyrrole can be represented as a resonance hybrid 
(Scheme 6.1) 
Although resonance causes a partial negative charge to reside on the 
carbon atoms and a partial positive charge on the nitrogen atom, this 
polarization is offset by an inductive effect in the opposite direction 
(nitrogen is more electronegative than carbon!). Overall, the balance is 
77 

78 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
I 
H 
H 
Scheme 6.1 
I 
I 
See Section 2.1 for a brief 
description Of dipole moment. 
in favour of the resonance effect and pyrrole has a dipole moment 
(1.55-3.0 D) directed away from the nitrogen atom (the value of the 
dipole moment depends on the solvent). Pyrrole has about half the res- 
onance energy of benzene, and it is only a very weak base (pKa -3.6). 
6.1.2 Electrophilic Substitution 
Pyrrole generally reacts with electrophiles (E’) (including the proton) at 
C-2 in preference to C-3. This selectivity can be explained by more exten- 
sive delocalization of the positive charge in the 0 intermediate for C-2 
substitution than is the case in the equivalent intermediate for attack at 
C-3 (Scheme 6.2). 
Scheme 6.2 
Although these explanations 
represent good ‘rules of thumb’, 
the reactions of some 
electrophiles, including the 
proton, can be complex: for a full 
interpretation, thermodynamic and 
kinetic factors also need to be 
considered. 
Intermediate for C-2 attack (more delocalized) 
E 
E 
H 
H 
H 
Intermediate for C-3 attack (less delocalized) 
Attack at nitrogen is inhibited because no delocalization of charge is 
possible in the intermediate (Scheme 6.3). N-Alkylation and -acylation 
of pyrrole are best carried out indirectly using the anion of pyrrole (see 
Section 6.1.3). 
Pyrrole is very reactive towards electrophiles. With bromine in ethanol 
at 0 O C ,  for example, it gives 2,3,4,5-tetrabromopyrrole, whereas sulfuryl 
chloride (SO,Cl,) in diethyl ether at 0 “C yields 2-chloropyrrole. 
Typical electrophilic reactions, such as nitration, halogenation with a 
Lewis acid (as a ‘carrier’), Friedel-Crafts C-alkylation and -acylation, 
that work well with benzene, cannot be applied to pyrrole, because heat- 
ing with strong acids, or a Lewis acid, destroys the heterocycle. However, 

Five-membered Heterocycles containing One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
79 
milder conditions can sometimes be used. With pyridinium-N-sulfonate, 
for example, a 90% yield of the corresponding pyrrole-2-sulfonic acid is 
obtained, after acidification (Scheme 6.4). 
H
E
 
I 
I 
I
L
 
I 
I 
Scheme 6.4 
Similarly, the Vilsmeier reaction (reagents: POCl, and N, N-dimethyl- 
formamide) gives 2-formylpyrrole (Scheme 6.5). 
r 
Me 
Me 
c- 
Me '
H
 
POzC12- 
H 
I 
Me 
Me/'+& 
N 
c1- 
I 
H 
H' 
H 
Scheme 6.5 

80 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 6.6 
Pyrrole reacts with aldehydes and ketones and an acid catalyst to form 
resins, probably linear polymers; however, surprisingly, from an entrop- 
ic point of view, with acetone (propanone) and hydrochloric acid the 
product is a cyclic tetramer. Possibly the two methyl groups in the devel- 
oping side chains force it to bend and thus ‘bite its own tail’ (Scheme 
6.7). 
Me 
HCI 
Me 
-HO- 
OH 
N H 
Me 
Me 
Scheme 6.7 

Five-membered Heterocycles containing One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
81 
6 m I  m 3  Pyrrole Anion 
Although pyrrole is a very weak acid (pKa 17.7), it can be deprotonat- 
ed by a strong base, such as butyllithium. Its 'acidity' is much greater 
than a typical aliphatic secondary amine, say pyrrolidine [tetrahydropy- 
rrole, (pKa ca. 27)]. Unlike pyrrole itself, resonance within the pyrrole 
anion does not involve charge separation (Scheme 6.8). 
I 
Pyrrole anion 
H 
Scheme 6.8 
Although pyrrole is much less acidic than phenol (pKa ca. lo), many 
reactions of the pyrrole anion are reminiscent of those of the phenolate 
anion. Examples include N-alkylation, -acylation and -sulfonylation 
(Scheme 6.9). For the phenolate anion these reactions occur at oxygen. 
0 
N 
I 
H 
I 
ArS02CI 
0 
N 
I 
S02Ar 
0 
N 
I 
R 0 
N 
0 A 
Scheme 6.9 
The pyrrole anion also undergoes the Kolbe carboxylation reaction 
The Kolbe reaction is best 
_ _  
with carbon dioxide under pressure in a heated autoclave and gives pyr- 
role-N-carboxylic acid, on acidic work-up (Scheme 6.10). 
known for the 
Of 
sodium phenolate into salicylic 
acid (2-hydroxybenzoic acid). 
Na' 
Pyrrole-N-carboxylic acid 
I 
I 
Scheme 6.10 

82 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Singlet dichlorocarbene (generated from chloroform by the action of 
a strong base, such as potassium tert-butoxide, KOCMe,), reacts with 
the anion of pyrrole to give an adduct, which then ring expands to give 
3-chloropyridine (Scheme 6.1 1). 
K+ 
K+ 
3-Chloropyridine 
Scheme 6.11 
6.1.4 Cycloaddition Reactions 
Pyrrole and its simple derivatives do not react easily as dienes. Pyrrole 
itself only combines with dimethyl acetylenedicarboxylate (DMAD, 
dimethyl but-2-ynedicarboxylate) under high pressure and then it is by 
C-2 substitution. However, N-acylpyrroles, such as N-acetyl- and N-( tert- 
butoxycarbonyl)pyrrole, do undergo Diels-Alder addition reactions. 
Here, internal resonance within the acyl group reduces the availability 
of the lone-pair electrons, formally on nitrogen, to delocalize into the 
ring, thus making the carbon unit more ‘diene-like’ (Scheme 6.12). 
COR 
N 
Scheme 6.12 
6.1 15 Synthesis 
There are two principal routes to pyrroles. One is called the Paal-Knorr 
synthesis, in which pyrroles are formed by the interaction of 1,4-dicar- 
bony1 compounds and ammonia. No intermediates have ever been iso- 
lated, so the mechanism shown in Scheme 6.13 is speculative. 
A recent adaptation of this type of approach involves the spontaneous 
intramolecular cyclization of imino ketones, formed by the reduction of 
nitro ketones through the action of tributylphosphine/diphenyl sulfide 
(Scheme 6.14). When the corresponding esters (R4 = OR) are used, 
pyrrolin-2-ones are formed (Scheme 6.15). 

Five-membered Heterocycles containing One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
83 
R' 
NO2 0 
OR - 
[HI [,HOR] 
NH 
0 
-H20 Rlw 
H 
OR - 
H2O Rlv
H 
0 
Another preparation involves the reaction of a 2-amino ketone with 
an activated ester, such as ethyl acetoacetate. The problem here is stop- 
ping the amino ketones reacting with themselves to give 1,4-diaza-l,4- 
dihydrobenzenes (piperazines) (Scheme 6.16). 
Scheme 6.15 
R' 
R' 
H 
A piperazine 
Scheme 6.16 

84 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 6.17 
Scheme 6.18 
6.1.6 Pyrrolines (Dihydropyrroles) and Pyrrolidine 
(2,3,4,5-Tetra hyd ropyrrole) 
Di hydropyrroles 
There are three dihydro forms of pyrrole: 2,3-dihydro-lH-pyrrole (1- 
pyrroline) exists in equilibrium with its imine tautomer (Scheme 6.17). 
These isomers are more stable than 2,Sdihydro- 1 H-pyrrole (3-pyrroline), 
where no conjugation is possible between the N lone pair electrons and 
the C=C double bond. 
N 
N 
H 
N 
H 
2,3-Dihydro- 1 H-pyrrole 
3,4-Dihydro-2H-pyrrole 
2,5-Dihydro- 1 H-pyrrole 
(enamine tautomer) 
(imine tautomer) 
Although hydrogenation of pyrrole over a rhodium/alumina catalyst 
gives some 1-pyrroline (Scheme 6.18a), a better method is to dehydro- 
halogenate N-chloropyrrolidine by heating it with alcoholic potassium 
hydroxide (Scheme 6.18b). 2,SDihydro- 1H-pyrrole, containing 15% 
pyrrolidine, is obtained by the zinc/hydrochloric acid reduction of 
pyrrole. 
-0 
+ 0 
H2 
(a) 0 
Rhhlumina 
N 
N 
N 
H 
H 
H 
Pyrrolidine 
(2,3,4,5 - tetrahydropyrrole) 
t 0 
- 
(b) 0 
KOH,EtOH 
/qH 
N 
N 
N 
Pyrrol id i n e 
Pyrrolidines can be prepared from 1,4-diaminobutanes by the action of 
acids (Scheme 6.19). 
Pyrrolidine acts as a strong base and it is often used as such in homog- 
enous non-aqueous reactions. Pyrrolidine, like piperidine and other sec- 

Five-membered Heterocycles containing One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
85 
r--- 
I 
H+, 
heat 
R 0
;
H
z
 7 
R
o
R
 
I 
H 
Scheme 6.19 
ondary amines, is also used to prepare enamines by reactions with 
ketones. These enamines are extremely valuable in synthesis, as they 
allow electrophilic substitution at the a-position of the original ketone, 
so avoiding potential problems through aldolization reactions and 
polymerization. 
The reaction from an enamine is initiated by the addition of a trace 
of a strong acid, cg. p-toluenesulfonic acid (TsOH, 4-methylbenzene- 
sulfonic acid), to the ketone and pyrrolidine in a solvent such as toluene. 
When the mixture is at reflux in a Dean-Stark apparatus, water is lib- 
erated and is removed through azeotropic distillation, leaving the enam- 
ine in the reaction vessel. After a follow-up reaction between the enamine 
and a suitable electrophile, an iminium salt is produced that liberates 
The mechanism for the release of 
the substituted ketone is 
essentially the reverse of enamine 
both the a-substituted ketone and pyrrolidine when it is treated with 
aqueous acid (Scheme 6.20). 
formation. 
RX 0 
I 
toluene 
H 
HzO, H+ 
An enamine 
Scheme 6.20 
6.2 
Furan 
6.2.1 Introduction 
Furan (oxacyclopentadiene) is also an aromatic compound, although not 
as aromatic as pyrrole (the oxygen atom is more electron withdrawing). 

86 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Like pyrrole, its resonance description requires the delocalization of one 
of the lone pair electrons of the oxygen atom with the cyclopentadiene 
unit (Scheme 6.21). 
Scheme 6.21 
6.2.2 Electrophilic Substitution 
For the same reasons as outlined for pyrrole (Section 6.1.2), there is 
preference for 2- rather than 3-substitution. However, conventional 
electrophilic reactions, such as nitration, sulfonation, etc., carried out 
under acidic conditions, are very difficult to control. 
In order to achieve 2-nitration, acetyl nitrate may be used as the 
reagent, but unlike pyrrole a semi-stable adduct, 5-acetoxy-2,5-dihydro- 
2-nitrofuran, is formed as an intermediate product (Scheme 6.22). This 
eliminates acetic acid when treated with pyridine. Furan also undergoes 
initial bromination or chlorination (X = Br or C1) in ethanol at -40 "C, 
but then addition of two ethoxyl units occurs with the expulsion of halide 
These reactions emphasize the 
electrophilic character of the CJ 
intermediates formed between 
furan and positively charged 
reactants. 
Scheme 6.22 
ion (Scheme 6.23). 
AcON02 
pyridine 
oze:Ac 
OPJ 
0 
-5 to-30°C 
0 
0 - 
z°C rn] 
- 
EtOH 
H
f
i
H
 - 
O
H
 
EtOH+ H
a
o
H
t
 
-"+ 
EtO 
-X- 
X 
OEt 
+ 
OEt 
-H+ 
x
9
 
0 
Scheme 6.23 
2,5-Disulfonation can be achieved by treating furan with pyridinium- 
N-sulfonate in dichloromethane over several days (Scheme 6.24). 
6.2.3 Reactions with Nucleophiles 
Furan is resistant to nucleophilic attack, but certain derivatives such 
as 2-chloromethylfuran undergo side-chain substitution. However, the 

Five-membered Heterocycles containing One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
87 
L 
Scheme 6.24 
reaction is not a simple one, and treatment with aqueous potassium 
cyanide gives a mixture of 2-cyanomethylfuran and 2-cyano-5- 
methylfuran (Scheme 6.25). The first compound might form as the result 
of a conventional nucleophilic substitution, but equally it could arise 
(as shown) from the same intermediate as that which gives rise to the 
second, i.e. one formed through elimination of chloride ion and then 
addition of cyanide ion. 
Scheme 6.25 
6.2.4 Metallation 
Furan reacts with butyllithium in boiling diethyl ether to yield 2- 
lithiofuran, and further lithiation at C-5 occurs when this product is 
treated with a second equivalent of the reagent in hexane containing 
N, N, N',N'-tetramethylethane- 1,2-diamine (TMEDA) (Scheme 6.26a). 
TMEDA is added as a co-solvent 
to promote the rate of 
deprotonation of 2-lithiofuran by 
BuLi, 
BuLi 
BuLi 
THFiTMEDA 
heat 
(a) 
Li 
* Li 
4 0 ° C  
Scheme 6.26 

88 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
The terms ex0 and endo are 
often used to indicate the relative 
positions of the bridging unit (in 
this case an oxygen atom) and 
the residue of the dienophile. 
When these are on the same 
face the adduct is referred to as 
the ex0 form, and when the 
bridge and the residue are on 
opposite faces it called the endo 
form. For many pairs of adducts, 
formed between dienophites and 
cyclic dienes, the ex0 product 
has fewer steric interactions and 
is the more stable. In some 
cases, however, secondary 
electronic effects may overcome 
steric preferences so that the 
endo (kinetic product) is favoured. 
3-Bromofuran undergoes metal-halogen exchange at -78 "C in THF 
(tetrahydrofuran) to yield 3-lithiofuran, but when this product is warmed 
to about -40 "C it rearranges to 2-lithiofuran (Scheme 6.26b). 
6.2.5 Cycloaddition Reactions 
As a result of its reduced aromaticity, relative to pyrrole, furan under- 
goes [4 + 21 cycloaddition reactions much more readily. It combines as 
a diene with electron-poor dienophiles to yield Diels-Alder-type adducts. 
Maleic [(Z)-butenedioic acid] anhydride, for example, reacts at room 
temperature, and the only isolated adduct is the exo isomer (the more 
thermodynamically favoured adduct) (Scheme 6.27a). 
COZEt 
C02Et 
B 
OH 
Scheme 6.27 
With diethyl acetylenedicarboxylate the adduct formed can be ring 
opened by base treatment to afford diethyl 3-hydroxyphthalate (3- 
hydroxybenzene- 1,2-dicarboxyIate) (Scheme 6.27b). 
Carbenes, such as that formed by the photolysis of methyl diazoac- 
etate, may add to one of the carbon-carbon bonds (Scheme 6.28). 
Scheme 6.28 
hv 
N2CHC02Me - 
:CHC02Me 
-Nz 
MeOX. 
0 
:CHCOZMe 
~ 
H 
0 

Five-membered Heterocycles containing One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
89 
Scheme 6.29 
6.2.6 Synthesis 
On a commercial scale, furan is obtained from 2-formylfuran (furfural, 
furan-2-carbaldehyde) (see Section 6.2.7) by gas-phase decarbonylation, 
but in the laboratory, furans can be formed by the cyclodehydration of 
1,4-dicarbonyl compounds. Heating in boiling benzene with a trace of 
p-toluenesulfonic acid as a catalyst in a Dean-Stark apparatus is often 
effective (Scheme 6.30a). 
Scheme 6.30 
TsOH cat. 
PhH, heat 
* R  
R- (‘b 6’ 
Hf 
H 
I 
IJ 
-- 
H 

90 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 6.31 
Similarly, 1,4-dihydroxybut-2-enes can oxidized and dehydrated by 
the action of chromic acid [chromium(IV) oxide in conc. sulfuric acid] 
(Scheme 6.30b). 
6.2.7 Important Derivatives 
2-Formylf uran (Furfural, Furfuraldehyde) 
This compound is one of the more important furan derivatives, and is 
commercially available from pentosans (polysaccharides) which are pres- 
ent in rice husks, oats and corn residues (furfur is the Latin name for 
bran!). When treated with sulfuric acid, pentosans decompose into pen- 
toses, which then undergo dehydration to the aldehyde (Scheme 6.3 1). 
'
X
O
H
 
H2S04, heat 
OH' 
OH 
2-Formylfuran behaves in a very similar manner to benzaldehyde and 
undergoes the usual reactions of an aromatic aldehyde, e.g. (i) the 
Cannizzaro reaction with conc. sodium hydroxide to give furan-2- 
ylmethanol and the sodium salt of furoic acid, (ii) the Perkin reaction with 
acetic anhydride and sodium acetate to yield an aldol product that dehy- 
drates to 3-(furan-2-yl)propenoic acid, and (iii) a condensation with potas- 
sium cyanide in alcoholic solution to form furoin (under these conditions, 
benzaldehyde undergoes the benzoin condensation) (Scheme 6.32). 
Scheme 6.32 
HO 
HOH2C 
-H?O \ 
NaOAc 
Furan-2-ylmethanol 
J 
0 
o+Q 
OH 
3-(Furan-2-yl)propenoic acid 
Furoic acid 
Furoin 

Five-membered Heterocycles containing One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
91 
Furoic Acid 
2-Formylfuran on oxidation gives furoic acid (Scheme 6.32), which shows 
reactions resembling those of benzoic acid. 
6.3 
Thiophene 
6.3.1 Introduction 
Thiophene is present in the benzene fraction from the distillation of coal 
tar. As with pyrrole and furan, the same type of resonance forms 
contribute to its overall molecular constitution, and the compound is 
aromatic in character. There is a difference between thiophene and furan, 
however, because sulfur is less electronegative than oxygen. Thus, the 
chemistry of thiophene tends to be closer to that of pyrrole than to that 
of furan. For example, thiophene does not enter easily into [4 + 21 
~ ~ ~ ~ ~ e ' z , " n " e 4  
cycloaddition reactions and quite severe conditions, high pressure (1 5 
bar) and a temperature of 100 "C, are necessary in order to force a 
cycloaddition between it and maleic anhydride. 
Thiophene w,lI form adducts with 
very strongly electron-depleted 
dienophiles, such as 1 2 -  
6.3.2 Electrophilic Substitution 
Electrophiles attack thiophene at C-2 and, as for pyrrole, there is a 
tendency for over-reaction with some traditional electrophilic reagents. 
In a commercially useful reaction, sulfuric acid can be used to 
sulfonate thiophene at room temperature! Benzene is not attacked under 
these conditions, and needs a reaction with oleum at 60 "C before it is 
sulfonated. Thiophene-2-sulfonic acid, formed in this way, dissolves in 
dilute alkali, allowing thiophene in coal tar distillate to be easily removed 
from benzene. Thiophene can be generated from its sulfonic acid by heat- 
ing the latter in steam. 
Nitration with concentrated nitric acid in acetic anhydride and glacial 
acetic acid affords a mixture of 2- and 3-nitrothiophenes (in the ratio 
6: 1) (Scheme 6.33). However, bromination with bromine in diethyl ether 
and 48% hydrobromic acid, starting at -25 "C and allowing the reaction 
temperature to rise to -5 
O C ,  gives 2-bromothiophene. If the experiment 
is initiated at -10 "C and the temperature is then allowed to rise to + 
10 "C, 2,5dibromothiophene is formed. 2,3,5-Tribromination occurs in 
48% hydrobromic acid, starting the experiment at room temperature and 
allowing the temperature to rise to 75 "C. Acetylation with acetyl chloride 
in the presence of the Lewis acid tin( IV) chloride gives 2-acetylthiophene, 
and efficient 2-formylation takes place under Vilsmeier conditions (see 
Section 6.1.2). 

92 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
I 
02N 
C. HN03, 
( 6 :  1 )  
HOAc, 
MeCOCI, SnCl 
PhH,O"C 7 
I 
0 
A c ~ O  
, 0 "C 
Br2, Et20 
48% HBr 
-25 to -5 "C 
PhN(Me)CHO 
OHC 
Scheme 6.33 
6.3.3 Oxidation 
Oxidation of thiophene with m-chloroperbenzoic acid (MCPBA, 
3-chloroperoxobenzoic acid) probably gives first unstable thiophene 
1-oxide, and then thiophene 1,l-dioxide (Scheme 6.34a). 2,5-Diarylthio- 
phenes can be oxidized to the corresponding 1-oxides with 30% aqueous 
hydrogen peroxide in trifluoroacetic acid and dichloromethane. 
Scheme 6.34 
Thiophene 1,l -dioxides, unlike most other thiophene derivatives, are 
dienes and combine with dieneophiles to form adducts that are prone to 
retro-cycloaddition, extruding sulfur dioxide in the process (Scheme 
6.34b). 

Five-membered Heterocycles containing One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
93 
Scheme 6.35 
6.3.4 Metallation 
Both 2-bromo- and 3- 
bromothiophenes and their 
derivatives undergo 
Butyllithium effects C-2 lithiation, and the lithium derivative can then 
~
u
~
~
~
~
be reacted with electrophiles (this is a good way to synthesize a wide 
variety of 2-substituted thiophenes) (Scheme 6.36). 
reagents when reacted with 
magnesium turnings suspended 
in diethyl ether or THF. 

94 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 6.36 
~~ 
6.3.5 Synthesis 
This is often achieved from 1,4-dicarbonyl compounds in a procedure 
similar to that used to form furans but using phosphorus pentasulfide, 
or Lawesson’s reagent (see below), to cause a transposition from car- 
bony1 to thiocarbonyl groups, prior to cyclization and loss of hydrogen 
sulfide (Scheme 6.37). 
H A 
reagent 
Lawesson’s reagent =Me0 
Scheme 6.37 

Five-membered Heterocycles containing One Heteroatom: Pyrrole, Furan and Thiophene 
95 
1. S. Gronowitz, Phosphorus, Sulfur, Silicon, 1993, 74, 113. 
P yrroles 
R. A. Jones and G. P. Bean, The C/zeniistry of Pj~rrole, Academic Press, 
London, 1977. 

96 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
M. P. Sammes and A. R. Katritzky, The 2H- and 3H-Pyrroles, in Adv. 
R. A. Jones (ed.), Pyrroles, in The Chemistry of Heterocyclic 
Heterocycl. Chem., 1982, 32, 233. 
Compounds, ed. A. Weissberger and E. C. Taylor, vol. 48, parts 1 
and 2, Wiley, New York, 1990-1992. 
A. V. Pate1 and T. A. Crabb, Pyrroles, Pyrrolines and Pyrrolidines, in 
Rodd’s Chemistry of Carbon Compounds, 2nd. edn., 2nd suppl., vol. 
IVA, chap. 4, ed. M. Sainsbury, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1997. 
D. StC. Black, IH-Pyrroles, in Science of Synthesis, vol. 9, ed. G. Maas, 
Thieme, Stuttgart, 2001, chap. 9.13. 
Furans 
A. P. Dunlop and F. N. Peters, The Furans, Reinhold, New York, 1952. 
P. Bosshar and E. H. Eugster, The Development of the Chemistry of 
Furans, 1952-1963, in Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1966, 7, 377. 
F. M. Dean, Recent Advances in Furan Chemistry, Parts 1 and 2, in 
Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1982, 30, 167; 1983, 31, 237. 
D. T. Hurst, Furans, Benzofurans, Isofurans and their Reduced Forms, in 
Rodd’s Chemistry of Carbon Compounds, 2nd. edn., 2nd suppl., vol. 
IVA, chap. 2, ed. M. Sainsbury, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1997. 
B. Konig, Furans, in Science of Synthesis, vol, 9, ed. G. Maas, Thieme, 
Stuttgart, 2001, chap. 9.9. 
Thiophenes 
D. E. Wolf and K. Folkers, The Preparation of Thiophenes and 
Tetrahydrothiophenes, in Org. React., 195 1, 6, 4 10. 
S. Gronowitz (ed.), Thiophene and its Derivutives, in The Chemistry of 
Heterocyclic Compounds, ed. A. Weissberger and E. C. Taylor, vol. 
44, Wiley, New York, 1985. 
Thiophenes, in Heterocycles, 1983, 20, 1127. 
Benzothiophenes, and Related Compounds, in Rodd’s Chemistry of 
Carbon Compounds, 2nd edn., 2nd suppl., vol. IVA, chap. 3, ed. M. 
Sainsbury, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1997. 
J. Schatz, Thiophenes, Thiophene I ,  I -Dioxides, and Thiophene 1 -Oxides, 
in Science of Synthesis, vol, 9, ed. G. Maas, Thieme, Stuttgart, 2001, 
chap. 9.10. 
B. Iddon, Cycloaddition, Ring Opening and Other Novel Reactions of 
K. Hale and S. Manaviazar, Thiophenes, Hydrothiophenes, 

Benzo [ b] pyrrole, Benzo [ b] furan 
and Benzo[b]thiophene 
7.1 
lndole (Benzo[b]pyrrole) 
7A A Introduction 
Indole is the parent of a very large number of alkaloids and medicinally 
important compounds. Its reactions, and particularly the synthesis of 
complex derivatives, occupy central stage in heterocyclic chemistry. 
The definition of aromaticity conceived by Huckel strictly applies 
to monocyclic ring systems, but indole, constructed from the fusion of 
benzene and pyrrole, behaves as an aromatic compound, like quinoline 
and isoquinoline. The ring fusion, however, affects the properties of both 
components. This is reflected in the valence bond description of indole, 
shown in Scheme 7.1, where one canonical representation shows electron 
density shared between N-1 and C-3 in the pyrrole unit (implying enamine 
character). Note that although other canonical forms can be drawn, where 
the lone-pair electrons are delocalized into the benzenoid ring, their energy 
content is relatively high and they are of limited importance. 
97 

98 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
I 
I 
H 
H 
H
I
 
Scheme 7.1 
7.1.2 Electrophilic Substitution 
C-3 versus C-2 
Electrophiles attack indole at C-3, rather than at C-2 (Scheme 7.2). This 
is the opposite result to that observed for pyrroles, but can be explained 
if the intermediates for each type of reaction are considered. For a 
reaction at C-3, the energy of activation of the intermediate is lowered 
because it is possible to delocalize the positive charge through resonance 
involving the nitrogen lone pair of electrons. This favourable situation 
is not possible in the corresponding intermediate for attack at C-2. 
Any attempt to delocalize the positive charge would now disrupt the 
6~-electron system of the benzene ring. 
a 
H 
r 
E 
E 
L 
H 
E 
-03 
-H+ 
H 
Scheme 7.2 
2,3-Disubstituted lndoles 
In times past it was thought that indoles already bearing an alkyl 
substituent at C-3 were further alkylated by direct attack at C-2. However, 
although 2,3-dialkylindoles are readily formed the reaction still involves 
attack at C-3. This can be demonstrated by the example in Scheme 7.3, 
where 3-(4’-hydroxybutyl)indole, containing an isotopic label located at 
C-1’, is treated with boron trifluoride in diethyl ether. Two 1,2,3,4-tetrahy- 
drocarbazoles ( 1,2,3,4-tetrahydrodibenzo[b, 
d]pyrroles) are formed in a 
ratio of 1: 1. These differ only in the position of the label. This result indi- 
cates that a 3,3-~piroindoleninium intermediate is formed first, and this 
then undergoes rearrangement of either bond a or bond b to C-2. As the 
two bonds a and b are identical, equal amounts of the tetrahydrocarbazoles 

Benzo[b]pyrrole, Benzo[b]furan and Benzo[b]thiophene 
99 
are formed. This is a general type of reaction for indoles, but when two 
different groups are present at C-3 in the intermediate their ability to 
migrate may not be the same. Hence, after rearrangement the proportions 
A spiro compound contains a 
carbon atom that is 
to 
of products may no longer be 1: 1. 
two ring systems. 
H 
# indicates position 
of isotopic label 
BF3 P 
-HOB F3- 
H 
Protonation of indole has been shown to give the indoleninium (3H- 
indolium) cation, and this is presumably formed under the conditions 
commonly used for electrophilic substitution reactions in the benzene 
series. For indole these conditions are often unsatisfactory and, for exam- 
ple, nitration of indole with nitric acid gives polymers. On the other hand, 
N-alkylindoles can be nitrated with concentrated nitric acid and acetic 
anhydride at -70 "C to afford 1 -alkyl-3-nitroindoles. 
3-Su bstituted I ndoles 
Sulfonation of indole with pyridinium-N-sulfonate yields indolyl-3- 
sulfonic acid, and bromine in pyridine at 0 "C affords 3-bromoindole 
(Scheme 7.4). Acetylation with a heated mixture of acetic anhydride and 
acetic acid gives 1,3-diacetylindole. Methylation requires heating with 
methyl iodide in DMF (N,N-dimethylformamide) at 80-90 "C and yields 
3-methylindole. This compound reacts further, giving 2,3-dimethylindole 
and finally 1,2,3,3-tetramethy1-3H-indoleninium 
iodide. 
Vilsmeier Formylation 
When DMF and phosphorus oxychloride are reacted together in the 
Vilsmeier reaction, the N,N-dimethylamino(chloro)methyleniminium 
cation is generated, and this reacts with indole at 5 "C to give 
3-(N,N-dimethylaminomethylene)indolenine (see Section 6.1.2). When 
hydrolysed by treatment with dilute sodium hydroxide, this gives an 
excellent yield of 3-formylindole (Scheme 7.5). 
Scheme 7.3 
The term indolenine (or 3H- 
indole) is in common use; the 
corresponding cation is named 
indoleninium (or 3H-indolium). 
Note: 2,3-dihydroindole is called 
indoline: 
Indolenine (3H-indole) 
Y 
Indoleninium (3H-indolium) 
Br? 
H 
Indoline (2,3-dihydroindole) 

i 
00 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 7.4 
H 
Indoleninium (3H-indolium) 
cation 
Br, 0 "C 
pyridine 
MeI, DMF 1 heat 
N 
/
N
 
\ Ac 
\ 
H 
Me1,DMF 
H 
Me 1- 
H 
Me 
\ 
H 
3-(N,N-Dimethylamino- 
methy1ene)indolenine 
H 
H 
- 
\ 
\ 
H 
H 
3-Formylindole 
Scheme 7.5 

Benzo[b]pyrrole, Benzo[b]furan and Benzo[bJthiophene 
101 
Reaction with Triethyl Orthoformate (Triethoxymethane) 
Triethyl orthoformate is often used in reactions with enolates and 
carbanions to form diethyl acetals that on treatment with dilute acid give 
the corresponding formyl derivatives. However, when indole is heated at 
160 "C with triethyl orthoformate the locus of reaction is at N-1 rather 
than at C-3, and 1 -(diethoxymethyl)indole is formed (Scheme 7.6). The 
N-substituent is easily removed by acidic hydrolysis to reform indole. 
\ 
H 
\ 
\ CH( OEt)2 
Y - H  
H 
OG 
H' 
'H 
Mannich Reaction 
Scheme 7.6 
The mechanism of the Mannich reaction is similar to that of the Vilsmeier 
reaction as the electrophile is also a methyleniminium cation, formed this 
time from a condensation of dimethylamine and formaldehyde in 
acetic acid solution (Scheme 7.7a). This reacts with indole to yield 
3-(N, N-dimethylaminomethy1)indole (although not shown, it is possible 
that initial attack occurs at N-1 and rearrangement of the side chain to 
C-3 takes place in a follow-up step) (Scheme 7.7b). 
Scheme 7.7 
Me 
H 
Me 
, 
I, 
\ H 
CH2CN 
I 
KCN 
m -  
\ H 
H 
J 
H 
I Me1 
Me 
H 

102 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
To make use of the Mannich reaction it is possible to methylate the 
N-atom of the new side chain and eliminate trimethylamine. The prod- 
uct, a 3-methyleneindoleninium salt, can then be trapped with suitable 
nucleophiles. In the example shown in Scheme 7.7b, cyanide ion is used, 
and reduction of the resultant nitrile yields the important amine trypta- 
mine. Indol-3-ylacetonitrile is also the source of indol-3-ylacetic acid and 
other biologically useful compounds (see Section 7.1.7). 
Scheme 7.8 

Benzo[b]pyrrole, Benzo[b]furan and Benzo[b]thiophene 
103 
7.1.3 Formation of the lndolyl Anion; N-I versus C-3 
Substitution 
The indole anion is easily formed by reactions with bases such as sodium 
hydride, sodamide, Grignard reagents or alkyllithiums. Although the 
indolyl anion is resonance stabilized, the nature of the cation has an 
influence upon future reactions (as does the solvent used). Thus, if the 
conjugate cation is not easily polarized, e.g. a sodium ion (or potassium 
ion), the indolyl anion is attacked at the site of highest electron density, 
i.e. at N-1. However, if the metal in the cation is magnesium, then it is 
assumed that partial covalent bonding to nitrogen prevents attack there. 
Now the electrophilic attack is diverted to C-3. 
N-Alkylation, -acylation and -sulfonation are also promoted by a 
polar solvent, such as HMPA (hexamethylphosphoric triamide). This acts 
to solvate the ions (promoting dissociation), but in a non-polar solvent 
like diethyl ether or tetrahydrofuran (THF), attack by most carbon 
electrophiles upon indolylmagnesium bromide proceeds at C-3 (Scheme 
7.9). 
E = alkyl, acyl 
X = halide 
E = alkyl, acyl, PhS02 
X = halide 
C-2 Lithiation 
In order to access the C-2 position, indirect methods of reaction are used, 
and a common procedure is to N-sulfonate indole with sodium hydride 
and benzenesulfonyl chloride and then to treat the derived sulfonate with 
butvllithium. C-2 deprotonation and lithiation occur (facilitated by 
Scheme 7.9 
The word chelation derives from 
the Greek word chela, meaning 
claw-like, Here, 
is held 
between c-2 and the so,~ph 
chelation to the sulfonyl group) and the intermediate, without isolation, 
can then be reacted with a wide range of electrophiles at this site. Finally, 
the sulfonyl group can be hydrolysed off in a separate step to form the 
desired product (Scheme 7.10). 
group by partial ionic bonds. 

104 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
I 
I 
\ 
Ph 
Scheme 7.10 
Scheme 7.11 
7.1.4 Ring Expansion with Dichlorocarbene 
Indole can be reacted with dichlorocarbene to yield 3-chloroquinoline 
(Scheme 7.12). Initially, the carbene adds across the C-2-C-3 double 
bond to form a cyclopropanoindole; this product then ring expands with 
elimination of hydrogen chloride (cf. pyrrole, Section 6.1.3). 
7.1.5 Reduction 
Indole can be reduced under Birch conditions (lithium in liquid ammo- 
nia containing a hydrogen donor, e.g. methanol) to give a 4:l mixture 

Benzo[b]pyrrole, Benzo[b]furan and Benzo[b]thiophene 
105 
of 4,7-di- and 4,5,6,7-tetrahydroindoles (Scheme 7.13a). Sodium 
cyanoborohydride (NaBH,CN) in acetic acid, however, forms indoline 
(2,3-dihydroindole). In this reduction, 3-protonation gives the indolen- 
inium salt, which is then ‘set up’ to undergo hydride transfer at C-2 from 
the boron reagent (Scheme 7.13b). 
H 
H 
H 
H 
Indoline 
7.1.6 Synthesis 
Fischer lndolization Reaction 
Most indoles are synthesized by the Fischer indolization reaction. Here 
a phenylhydrazine is first reacted with an aldehyde, or ketone, carrying 
an a-methylene group (not acetaldehyde). The corresponding hydrazone 
is then treated with an acid, often hydrochloric acid. Ring closure occurs, 
through a [3,3]-sigmatropic change, and ammonia (as the ammonium 
cation) is lost (Scheme 7.14). 
A variant on the traditional method is to use a phenylhydroxylamine 
instead of a phenylhydrazine. For example, N-(benzyloxycarbony1)- 
phenylhydroxylamine can be reacted with methyl propynoate to give an 
adduct that spontaneously undergoes a [3,3]-sigmatropic shift and even- 
tually yields 1 -( benzyloxycarbonyl)-3-(methoxycarbonyl)indole (Scheme 
7.15). 
Scheme 7.12 
Scheme 7.13 
The mechanism of the reaction 
has been much studied, but even 
now the precise details are 
uncertain and the extent of 
protonation of the reactant and 
intermediates depends upon the 
conditions used (in some cases, 
aprotic conditions have been 
used). Labelling studies (with ’“N) 
show that the NH, unit of the 
phenylhydrazine is eventually lost 
as ammonia. Note: the term 
sigmatropic indicates that a 
single (0) 
bond is moving to a 
new location. In this case, both 
termini of the new bond are three 
atoms away from their original 
positions: a [3,3]-shift. 

106 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
H 
R2 
H 
R2 
NH 
I 
H 
H+ 
H 
N 
H 
I 
Scheme 7.14 
C02Bn 
COZMe 
C02Me 
I 
H
I
 
I 
L I  
C02Bn 
H+ C02Bn 
C02Me 
\ 
C02Bn 
Wender Synthesis 
Scheme 7.15 
There are numerous other syntheses of indoles, and a modern example 
is the Wender synthesis. Here a 2-bromo-N-(trifluoroacetyl)aniline in 
THF is deprotonated by butyllithium and then, in the same pot, react- 
ed with tert-butyllithium to effect halogen-metal exchange to give the 
dilithiated derivative. To this intermediate is added an a-bromo ketone. 
A carbon-carbon bond is established first between the reactants, and 
then cyclization occurs to form a hydroxyindoline. Finally, dehydration 
generates the indole (Scheme 7.16). 
Leimgruber-Batcho Synthesis 
When indoles unsubstituted in the heterocyclic ring are required, the 
Leimgruber-Batcho synthesis can be used. In its original form the 

Benzo[b]pyrrole, Benzo[b]furan and Benzo[b]thiophene 
107 
(a) pyrrolidine (-H+) 
R2 
(b) Meo>M;+~+) 
H fJNMe2 
J H*O 
Li 
method utilizes a 2-nitrotoluene, which when heated in a mixture con- 
taining the base pyrrolidine and N,N-dimethylformamide dimethyl acetal 
(DMFDMA) 
gives 
the 
corresponding 
p-(N, N-dimethylamino)- 
phenylethene. Reduction of this product with zinc and acetic acid forms 
the appropriate indole via the intermediary aniline, or its equivalent 
(Scheme 7.17). Cheaper reagents than DMFDMA have been recom- 
mended, including tris(piperidin- 1 -yl)methane, for the first step of the 
synthesis. 
Scheme 7.16 
Scheme 7.17 

108 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 7.18 

Benzo[b]pyrrole, Benzo[b]furan and Benzo[b]thiophene 
109 
7.1.7 Important Derivatives 
Some prominent 3-substituted derivatives include skatole (3-methylin- 
dole), which has a faecal odour, and indolyl-3-acetic acid (sold as a plant 
rooting powder). Many indoles are biologically important; for example, 
tryptamine is the precursor of two hormones: serotonin, a vasocon- 
strictor, and melatonin, which is involved in the control of circadian 
rhythm. In addition, the amino acid tryptophan is an essential compo- 
nent of proteins (see Box 7.1). 
Indigo Blue 
Indigo (or, more strictly, indigotin, the main component) is the blue 
dyestuff traditionally used to colour jeans; it and its analogues have been 
used by man for centuries. Indigotin occurs in plants as its precursor 

1 10 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
N‘ 
V
I
 
H 
Indican 
H 
H 
lndoxyl 
I 
HO 
Leucoindigo 
(indigo white) 
Scheme 7.19 
indican (3-glucosylindole), which on hydrolysis gives indoxyl (Scheme 
7.19). Indoxyl undergoes oxidative dimerization in the presence of air 
and aqueous alkali to leucoindigo (indigo white), and this is further oxi- 
dized to indigotin (7.6). Tyrian purple (7.7), which was used to dye the 
robes of Roman emperors, is 6,6’-dibromoindigo. It comes from the 
Mediterranean mollusc Murex branduris; piles of the shells of this ani- 
mal still remain outside the walls of the ancient city of Tyre. 
7.6 Indigotin (indigo) 
7.7 Tyrian purple 
Oxindole 
Other important compounds include oxindole, which is the’ lactam of 2- 
aminophenylacetic acid. This compound has an ‘active’ methylene group, 
which can be deprotonated with a base such as sodium ethoxide, and 
the anion that is formed can be alkylated with% variety of electrophiles 
(Scheme 7.20). In the case of benzaldehydes, the initially formed aldols 
are unstable and these dehydrate readily to the corresponding (a- 
and 
(2)-( 
benzy1idene)oxindoles. 

Benzo[b]pyrrole, Benzo[b]furan and Benzo[b]thiophene 
1 1 1 
H 
H 
Oxindole 
Ar \ 
. 
Ar 
H 
H 
ArCHO 
J (yJ: 
/ 
H
-
 
7.2 
Benzo[&]furan and Benzo[b]thiophene 
7.2.1 Introduction and Reactions 
These compounds are less common than indole (benzo[b]pyrrole). In the 
case of benzo[b]furan the aromaticity of the heterocycle is weaker than 
in indole, and this ring is easily cleaved by reduction or oxidation. 
Electrophilic reagents tend to react with benzo[b]furan at C-2 in 
preference to C-3 (Scheme 7.21), reflecting the reduced ability of the het- 
eroatom to stabilize the intermediate for 3-substitution. Attack in the 
heterocycle is often accompanied by substitution in the benzenoid ring. 
Nitration with nitric acid in acetic acid gives mainly 2-nitrobenzo[b]furan, 
plus the 4-, 6- and 7-isomers. When the reagent is N,O, in benzene main- 
tained at 10 "C, both 3- and 2-nitro[b]furans are formed in the ratio 4: 1. 
Under Vilsmeier reaction conditions (see Section 6.1.2), benzo[b]furan 
gives 2-formylbenzo[b]furan in cu. 40'% yield. 
Chlorine or bromine add across the C=C bond of the furan ring, 
giving 2,3-dihalo-2,3-dihydrobenzo[b]furans. 
Base-promoted dehydro- 
~~ 
N204. PhH 
+ 3-nitrobenzo[b]furan 
D
C
H
O
 
Y3 
Scheme 7.20 
Scheme 7.21 

1 12 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
halogenation of the dihalides affords mixtures of the corresponding 2- 
and 3-halobenzo[b]furans. 
For benzo[b]thiophene the heterocycle is rather more resistant to ring 
opening and oxidation with hydrogen peroxide in acetic acid at 95 O C ,  
for example, gives the 1,l -dioxide (Scheme 7.22); reduction with either 
sodium and ethanol or triethylsilane in trifluoroacetic acid affords 2,3- 
di hydro benzo[b] t hiophene. Electrophiles give mainly 3 -substituted 
benzo[b]thiophenes, although these products are often accompanied by 
smaller amounts of the 2-isomers. 
Scheme 7.22 
Scheme 7.23 
7.2.2 Synthesis 
A general route to both benzo[b]furans and benzo[b]thiophenes depends 
upon the cyclodehydration of either 2-hydroxy- or 2-sulfanylbenzyl 
ketones or aldehydes (Scheme 7.23a). 2-Acetylbenzo[b]furan can be 
obtained by reacting the sodium salt of 2-formylphenol with chloroace- 
tone (chloropropanone) (Scheme 7.23b). A similar reaction using sodium 
2-formyl benzenet hiola te yields 2-acetylbenzo[b] t hiophene. 
3-Methylbenzo[b]thiophene is available through the interaction of sodi- 
um benzenethiolate and chloroacetone, followed by the cyclization of the 
initial product by the action of a Lewis acid, zinc chloride (Scheme 7.23~). 
Y = O o r S  
Y = O o r S  
0 
Me 


1 14 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Indoles 
R. J. Sunberg, The Chemistry of Indoles, Academic Press, New York, 
B. Robinson, Fischer Indole Synthesis, Wiley, Chichester, 1982. 
U. Pindur and R. Adam, Synthetic Attractive Indolization Procedures 
and Newer Methods for the Preparation of Selectivily Substuted 
Indoles, in J. Heterocycl. Chem., 1988, 25, 1. 
1970. 
R. J. Sunberg, Indoles, Academic Press, London, 1996. 
D. L. Hughes, Progress in the Fischer Indole Reaction, in Org. Prep. 
Proc. Int., 1993, 25, 607. 
Benzo[ blfurans 
P. Cagniant and D. Cagniant, Recent Advances in the Chemistry of 
Benzo[b Jfurans, Part 1, Occurrence and Synthesis, in Adv. Heterocycl. 
Chem., 1975, 18, 337. 
Benzo(b]thiophenes 
B. Iddon and R. M. Scrowston, Recent Advances in the Chemistry of 
Benzo[b]thiophenes, in Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1970, 11, 177. 
R. M. Scrowston, Recent Advances in the Chemistry of Benzo[b]thio- 
phenes, in Adv. Heterocycl. Chem., 1981, 29, 171. 

Four-membered Heterocycles 
containing a Single Nitrogen, 
Oxygen or Sulfur Atom 
8.1 
Azete, Azetine and Azetidine 
8.1 .I Introduction 
Azete, azetine and azetidine are the aza analogues of cyclobutadiene, 
cyclobutene and cyclobutane, respectively (Box 8.1). 
The terms azetidine and azetine 
have been used for many years 
and chemists are reluctant to 
change them. However, the 
systematic name for azetidine is 
azetane and that for azetine is 
2,3-dihydroazete. 
115 

1 16 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 8.1 
The loss of nitrogen from an 
aide to form a nitrene can be 
visualized as shown, although 
whether the fragmentation 
involves two electrons (double- 
headed arrows) or a single 
electron (fish-hooks) is not 
important to this discussion: 
+ c- 
R-N-N=N 
kJ 
R- N +  N=N 
(R-N could be a singlet or triplet, 
depending upon R and other 
factors) 
Ph 
Ph 
8.1.2 Azetes 
Like cyclobutadiene, azete is very unstable, but it is known in the form of 
certain derivatives, such as 2-phenylbenzo[b]azete. This compound can be 
synthesized in 64% yield by passing a stream of 4-phenyl- 1,2,3-benzotria- 
zoline vapour at low pressure through a tube heated to 420450 "C. 
Nitrogen is lost from the starting material, possibly generating a diradical 
that spontaneously cyclizes to form 2-phenylbenzo[b]azete (Scheme 8.1). 
Ph 
Ph 
4-Phenyl- 1,2,3-benzotriazoIine 
As the gases emerge from the heated area of the reactor, 2-phenyl- 
benzo[b]azete can be trapped out on a cold finger maintained at -78 "C. 
However, if the temperature is allowed to rise to about -40 "C, the com- 
pound forms a dimer. 
8.1 .3 Azetines 
Several simple derivatives of azetine are known, although most of these 
bear substituents that help stabilize the compound by extending the con- 
jugation of the endocyclic double bond. For example, 2-phenylazetine is 
obtained by the thermolysis of 1 -azido- 1 -phenylcyclopropane; nitrogen 
is lost from the azide group and a nitrene may be formed, prior to ring 
expansion (Scheme 8.2). 
Reduction of 2-phenylazetine with lithium aluminium hydride gives 
2-phenylazetidine (Scheme 8.3); this compound and its analogues are sta- 
ble compounds. Indeed, the parent heterocycle azetidine is largely 
unchanged when it is passed over alumina at 360 "C 
Scheme 8.2 
Scheme 8.3 

Four-membered Heterocycles containing a Single Nitrogen, Oxygen or Sulfur Atom 
I 17 
8.1.4 Azetidines 
Azetidine, a liquid, has been known since 1899; it smells of ammonia 
and is a strong base. For azetidine and its derivatives the ring is puck- 
ered to reduce eclipsing interactions, the extent depending upon the sub- 
stituents. The barrier to inversion is low, which helps equilibration 
between the two conformers (Scheme 8.4). 
(for convenience, methylene protons are not shown) 
Synthesis 
Azetidines are often synthesized by reacting 1,3-dihalogenopropanes with 
an amine (ammonia gives poor yields), or from propane- I ,3-diamines 
where one N-substituent can function as a leaving group. A reaction of 
the latter type is used to synthesize azetidine from N,N-bis(toluenesu1- 
fony1)- 1,3-diaminopropane in two steps, the last being a reductive 
N-de-toluenesulfonation, caused by adding sodium to naphthalene in an 
inert solvent (Scheme 8.5). 
Azetidin-2-ones (P-Lactams) 
The main interest in azacyclobutanes is reserved for azetidin-2-ones (p- 
lactams), as this ring system is found in penicillin and cephalosporin 
antibiotics (Box 8.2). These compounds are effective because the P-lac- 
tam ring is strained and readily reacts with the enzyme transpepidase, 
responsible for the development of the bacterial cell wall. The ring of the 
lactam is cleaved by this enzyme, which becomes 0-acylated in the 
process (Scheme 8.6). Once this occurs the enzyme’s normal cross-link- 
ing function is lost and the cell wall is ruptured. 
Scheme 8.4 
Like carbenes, nitrenes are 
electron-deficient species that 
contain a nitrogen atom 
surrounded by only six valence 
electrons (two are used in the 
R-N bond). Two types, singlets 
or triplets, are recognized, 
depending upon the electronic 
configuration: 
** 
R
E
0
 
Singlet ni trene 
** 
R-?* 
Triplet nitrene 
Nitrenes react readily with 
electron-rich systems in order to 
acquire an outer electron shell on 
N containing eight electrons. 
Scheme 8.5 

1 18 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 8.6 
RCONH 
RCONH 
Transpepidase 
EnzOH + 
0 pyi- Enz-0 o
g
x
e
 
Me 
k02H 
k02H 
Inactivated transpepidase 
Unfortunately, many resistant bacteria have evolved which biosyn- 
thesize a lactamase enzyme (penicillinase) capable of cleaving the lactam 
ring before it can interact with transpepidase at the cell wall. Although 
cephalosporins are not inactivated by penicillinase, bacteria resistant to 
them are now also widespread. Indeed, the indiscriminate use of the 
p-lactam antibiotics in general throughout the world has severely cur- 
tailed the effective working life of these precious drugs. 
Because of their immense importance to mankind, the discovery and 
the mode of action of the p-lactams has been surveyed in detail, and sim- 
ilarly there are numerous methods for their synthesis.' 
Azetidin-2-one can be synthesized by treating 1 -ethoxy- 1 -hydroxycy- 
clopropane with aqueous sodium azide at pH 5.5 (Scheme 8.7a). This 
type of construction has wider applications and N-substituted derivatives 
are formed from 1 -amino- 1 -hydroxycyclopropanes in two steps: first 
N-chlorination with tert-butyl hypochlorite [2-methylpropan-2-y1 chlo- 
rate(I)], and then treatment with silver ion in acetonitrile (ethanenitrile) 
to release chloride ion and trigger ring expansion of the tricycle (Scheme 
8.7b). 
A general approach to azetidine-2-ones utilizes a cycloaddition 

Four-membered Heterocycles containing a Single Nitrogen, Oxygen or Sulfur Atom 
I 19 
(a) 
[ 
+ Eto3 
- ~ 2 -  PN] 
5 
E t O P N H  
EtO 
HO 
N = N  
N 
J 
H-0 
F r- 7 
-A&] I 
c -  
H-0 
H-0 
L 
J 
reaction between a ketene and an imine. The ketene can be generated in 
situ by treating an acid chloride with a base, such as triethylamine [note: 
although these reactions are of the [2 + 21 type, should they be concert- 
ed they must proceed by an antarafacial, rather than a ‘forbidden’ 
suprafacial, mechanism (Scheme 8.8)]. 
Scheme 8.7 
A strict interpretation of the 
of orbital symmetry determines 
that two 
A=B 
and X=Y, each containing two n: 
electrons, cannot combine 
D A O  - - - - O X 0  
O B Q - - - - D Y O  
A-X 
II 
1 1  + ;-; 
‘Forbidden’ suprafacial [2+2] cycloaddition 
between two simple 2-electron n-systems 
Antarafacial alignment for an ‘allowed’ concerted 
reaction between an imine and a ketene 
An important point, however, is that although the configurations of 
the reactants are preserved in the products (i.e. the additions are stereo- 
selective), some cycloadditions, including those of ketenes to imines, 
occur more rapidly in polar rather than in non-polar solvents (Scheme 
8.9). For such examples it may well be that the addition proceeds in a 
stepwise manner (non-concerted), and the collapse of a dipolar inter- 
mediate is so quick that the stereochemistry of the reacting species is not 
compromised. 
together in a concerted reaction 
to form a four-membered 
saturated ring by approaching 
one another in the same plane 
(suprafacial). Ketenes 
(RCH=C=O) are linear in overall 
shape, but have two rc-systems 
at a right angle to one another. 
This enables them to approach 
an imine in a ‘diagonal’ fashion 
(antarafacial) and react with it 
so that two new bonds may form 
simultaneously. 
Scheme 8.8 

120 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
Scheme 8.9 
c=c=o 
a ketene 
~ 
H, 
-Et3NHCI 
R l /  
R’ 
R’ 
H 
II 
C 
II 0 
‘C’ 
‘R4 
an imine 
Scheme 8.10 

Four-membered Heterocycles containing a Single Nitrogen, Oxygen or Sulfur Atom 
121 
8.2 
Oxetene and Oxetane 
8.2.1 Synthesis and Properties 
The first reliable synthesis of an oxetene was that of the 2-ethoxy-4,4- 
di( trifluoromethyl) derivative in 1965, by reacting di(trifluoromethy1) 
ketone with ethoxyethyne at -78 "C (Scheme 8.1 1). At room tempera- 
ture the product undergoes ring fission to ethyl 3,3-bis(trifluo- 
romet hy1)propenoat e. 
Oxetane is a colourless liquid, formed by the cyclization of 3-acetoxy- 
1 -chloropropane with potassium hydroxide, or from 1,3-dihydroxy- 
propane on treatment first with sulfuric acid and then with sodium 
hydroxide (Scheme 8.12). 
(i) H~SOJ 
H
O
~
O
H
 
(ii) NaOH 
AcO-CI 
KOH_ @! 
Scheme 8.11 
Scheme 8.12 
Interestingly, the oxetane ring is essentially planar, presumably 
because the lone pairs on oxygen causefewer eclipsing problems than a 
lone pair and an N-H bond do in the non-planar aza equivalent azeti- 
dine (Box 8.3). 

122 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
(b) CH2 CH2 
II 
II 
~ 
c 
II 
+ c  
II - gCH2 
I 
0
0
 
0 
8.2.2 Oxetanones 
Oxetan-2-one (P-propanolactone) and also oxetan-3-one are known, 
although most interest lies in the former compound. It is a carcinogen, 
possibly because it can alkylate guanidine, one of the constituent bases 
of nucleic acids. On standing, oxetan-2-one slowly polymerizes, and on 
pyrolysis it forms propenoic acid (Scheme 8.13). Alkaline hydrolysis gives 
a salt of 3-hydroxypropanoic acid. 
0 b 
Oxetan-2-one 
Oxetan-3-one 
OH 
Scheme 8.13 
Oxetan-2-one can be formed by treating 3-iodopropanoic acid with 
moist silver oxide (Scheme 8.14a), and commercially it is obtained by the 
cycloaddition of formaldehyde (methanal) and ketene (ethenone). At 
0-20 "C, ketene undergoes self-dimerization to give 4-methyleneoxetan- 
2-one (Scheme 8.14b). 
Scheme 8.14 
4-Methyleneoxetan-2-one 
(dike tene) 
8.3 
Thietene and Thietane 
Thietene is also called thiete. It can be synthesized by treating methane- 
sulfonyl chloride (mesyl chloride) with trimethylamine and trapping the 

Four-membered Heterocycles containing a Single Nitrogen, Oxygen or Sulfur Atom 
123 
product with N,N-dimethylaminoethene (Scheme 8.15). This gives 3- 
(N, N-dimethy1amino)thietane 1,l -dioxide, which can be reduced by lithi- 
um aluminium hydride to 3-(N, N-dimethylamino)thietane, prior to 
N-alkylation with methyl iodide and base-promoted Hofmann-type elim- 
ination of trimethylamine. Reduction of thietene with sodium borohy- 
dride affords thietane. 
MezN 
Me*N 
Me3N+ 
'cl, 
I 
Me3N 
1 Me2Nbso2 
- 
LiAlH4 
MeSOzCI - 
II - 
- H a  
so* 
AgzO, Hz0 -MeRN 
Q 
NaBH4 
Thietene 
E -  
Thietane 
There is theoretical interest in thietene because if it were to lose hydride 
ion a potentially aromatic cation having 4n + 2 electrons, where n = 0, 
might form (Scheme 8.16). Intriguingly, the mass spectrum of thietene, 
molecular mass 72, shows a fragment ion peak at rnlz 71! 
Thietene is a liquid that polymerizes within an hour at room temper- 
ature. However, thietane, also a liquid, is more stable; it exists as a 
puckered structure, similar to that of azetidine (note: the sulfur atom 
and hence its lone-pair electrons occupy more space than those of 
oxygen). 
Scheme 8.15 r 
Scheme 8.16 

124 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
1. For an introduction to this vast topic, see A. F. Pozharskii, A. T. 
Solatenkov and A. R. Katritzky, Heterocycles in Life and Society, 
Wiley, Chichester, 1997. 
S. Patai (ed.), The Chemistry of Ketenes, Allenes and Related 
Compounds, Wiley-Interscience, Chichester, 1980. 
Recent Advances in the Chemistry of Lactam Antibiotics, Royal Society 
of Chemistry, London, 198 1. 
E. H. Flynn (ed.), Cephalosporins and Penicillins: Chemistry and Biology, 
Academic Press, New York, 1983. 
A. Hassner (ed.), Small Ring Compounds, Part 2, Wiley-Interscience, 
New York, 1983. 
M. Regitz and U. Bergstrasse, Four-Membered Rings with One or More 
Heteroatoms, in Science of Synthesis, vol. 9, ed. G. Maas, Thieme 
Stuttgart, 2001, chap. 9.8. 
E. Block and R. J. Lindermanin, in Four Membered Rings with One 
Oxygen, Sulfur or Selenium Atom, in Rodd’s Chemistry of Carbon 
Compounds, 2nd edn., 2nd suppl., vol. IVa, chap. Id, ed. M. 
Sainsbury, Elsevier, Amsterdam, 1997. 

Answers to Problems 
1 .I. 
(a) 2,3-Dihydro- 1 H-pyrrole; (b) 2,5-dihydro-1 H-pyrrole; (c) 
2H-pyran; (d) 4H-pyran; (e) benzo[b]thiophene; (0 benzo[c]thio- 
phene. 
1.2. (a) Antiaromatic and unstable 4n type; (b) aromatic, planar 
(4n + 2) type; lone pair formally on N delocalized into ring; (c) aro- 
matic, planar and ‘benzene-like constitution’; (d) Non-aromatic, 
non-planar aminotriene; (e) Non-aromatic, non-planar. 
1.3. Normally an N-substituent of a piperidine larger than a pro- 
ton assumes an equatorial orientation. Thus, in the isomers A and 
B the trunsoid conformation A is more stable, and hence more high- 
ly populated, than B. 
2.1. The loss of chloride ion from the adduct formed between 2- 
chloropyridine and a nucleophile is fast and irreversible, whereas a 
similar attack upon pyridine itself would require the loss of hydride 
ion. 
2.2. Both reactions are directed to C-2(6) and C-4 (attack at C-2 
is shown below). Electrophilic reactions require the loss of a pro- 
ton, whereas those for nucleophiles require the loss of hydride ion. 
2(4)-Halogenopyridine N-oxides are good substrates for nucleo- 
philic substitution, and the thus site of attack is strongly influenced 
by the position of the halogen atom. 
125 

126 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
0- 
0- 
0 
1 -H- 
0- 
0- 
2.3. The reaction of sodamide in liquid ammonia (a strong base) 
causes the formation of 3-pyridyne. The subsequent addition of 
ammonia (or the equivalent two-step addition of amide ion and 
then a proton) to this compound is unspecific and leads to a mix- 
ture of 3- and 4-aminopyridines. 
1 
2.4. 
CH2Ph 
CH2Ph 
CH2Ph 
2.5. The reaction is a modified Hantzsch procedure in which ethyl 
acetoacetate (3-oxobutanoate) is pre-treated with benzaldehyde, 
before methyl acetoacetate and ammonia are added: 
Ph 
Me/' 
N " 
Me 
H 
0 

Answers to Problems 
127 
. - - 
- -.- _______ 
2.6. Assuming isomerism occurs to give the most stable (most con- 
jugated and most highly substituted) dienes during the reactions, 
the two piperidines would undergo Hofmann exhaustive methyl- 
ation and subsequent ozonolysis as shown below. The different ori- 
entation patterns are then reflected in the constitutions of the 
aldehydes and ketones that are formed. 
(a) 
C02Me 
Mel, B, heat 
Ph 
H 
w
-
 
0 
two cycles 
N 
H 
C02Me 
I 
- /yPh 
Ph 
/ 
C02Me 
I 
0 
C02Me 
__c phAph 
Me 
CH2 
C02Me 
phYo 
+ O  +CPh+ 1 
Me 
0 
H
H
 
~ 
3.1. The large sulfonic acid group at C-8 in quinoline-8-sulfonic 
acid causes an adverse steric interaction with the lone pair on the 
nitrogen atom. The fact that sulfonic acids of the pyridine and ben- 
zopyridine series are strong acids and self-protonate at nitrogen 
does nothing to solve this; however, when protonation occurs at 
C-8 the tetrahedral intermediate is less crowded. The formation of 
this intermediate and subsequent heating aids desulfonation by 
reversing the usual sulfonation mechanism. At this elevated tem- 
perature, sulfonation then takes place at C-6, giving the thermo- 
dynamically more stable (less crowded) quinoline-6-sulfonic acid: 

128 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
thermodynamic product 
3.2. By reacting quinoline first with benzoyl chloride and then with 
aqueous potassium cyanide, the corresponding Reissert compound 
is obtained. The reaction is normally carried out in one operation 
using a two-phase system plus a phase transfer catalyst. The N- 
benzoyl group can then be removed by heating with sodium 
hydroxide solution, and the reaction is continued to hydrolyse the 
nitrile function to the acid: 
L 
COPh 1 
KCN aq. 
I 
(i) NaOH aq. 
(ii) H'aq. a 
H 
CN 
COPh 
3.3. (a) Hantzsch synthesis: 
OH 
OH 
OH 
H
~
&
'
C
H
O
 

Answers to Problems 
129 
(b) Friedlander synthesis: 
C02Et 
C02Et 
d 
+ IxMe 
HlS04catalyst 
HOAc, heat 
NH2 
Me 
Me 
(c) Konrad-Limpach-Knorr 
synthesis (first step under thermody- 
namic control): 
+ 
Me 
I 
H 
H 
OAOEt 
3.4. Bischler-Naperialski synthesis (used in penultimate step): 
MeCOCl 
1 NaOH 
4.1. 
HClOd 

130 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
I I  
4.2. 
0 
Simple ketone: cyclohexanone 
G H+ 
O OJ 
I yLn 
H 
HC104 1 
H + I  
H OH 
OH 
-2H20 
1 
4.3. 
Me 
+c104- 1 
Me' 
kOMe 
4.4. 
T 
Lulv'e 
COMe 
+ 
-I- 
- 
I 
I 
0 
4 h C O 2 E t  
0 
Et02C 
0 0 
1 HCl aq. heat 
Et02C 

Answers to Problems 
131 
5.1. (a) acHo 
NaOAc 
Ac20 
OH 
heat - 
+ 
f Me 
C02Me 
H 
OAc 
OH 
(b) In the first step of this synthesis, trdhyl orthoformate (tri- 
ethoxymethane) + HCl is the formylating agent; alternatively, ethyl 
formate (methanoate) and sodium could be used. 
5.2. 
1 HOAc 
(acid-catalysed isomerism) 

132 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
6.1 Although 2-substitution leads to a better delocalization of 
charge in the intermediate than reaction at C-3, here the size of the 
N-substituent dictates a reversal of the normal process (there is also 
the possibility that silicon may help stabilize a positive charge at a 
position p to it): 
m
B
r
 
N 
Me 
H 
Me 
6.2. Although 2-protonation of pyrrole is favoured, there is suffi- 
cient of the 3-protonated form to initiate the addition of hydroxyl- 
amine. Once this occurs, ring opening may follow, as shown below. 
Subsequent addition of a second equivalent of hydroxylamine and 
elimination of ammonia (as ammonium chloride) then gives the 
dioxime. 

Answers to Problems 
133 
I 
'aH 
'
Q
G
O
H
-
 NH20H HON 
"
G
H
 
I 
H2NJ 
H 
H 
HON 
NOH 
-NH3 
HON 
H+ 
6.3. (a) This is a classical Knorr synthesis; in fact this particular 
product is called Knorr's pyrrole. 
HN02 
Me 
(NaN02. HOAc) 
Zn, HOAc 
M e  
Et02C 
I 
H 
(b) The starting compound is cyclohexanone, here shown as its 
enamine with pyrrolidine. After alkylation with chloroacetone 
(chloropropanone) and hydrolysis, the product diketone is cyclode- 
hydrated by treatment with P,O,: 
(i) MeCOCHZCI 
(ii) H20/H2S04 - 4 9  
Me 
0
0
 
(c) 2-Bromothiophene is subjected to lithium-halogen exchange 
and acylated with benzoyl chloride: 

134 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
0 
6.4. The final product is furoin and it is generated by the inter- 
action of the rearranged anion of the cyanohydrin of furfuralde- 
hyde and furfuraldehyde 
itself. In aqueous medium the 
cyanohydrin anion would simply 0-protonate to give the cyanohy- 
drin, but here it does not have this option and it undergoes a pro- 
tropic shift to a resonance-stabilized isomer (see below). Once this 
has reacted with more aldehyde, the intermediate formed also 
undergoes proton migration, and so permits irreversible elimina- 
tion of cyanide ion, giving furoin. 
QYH% 
0 
N 
0. 
0 
‘H’ 
Furoin 
c-- 
-CN- 
lo, ,o 
’H 
Converting furfuraldehyde into its 1,3-dithian-2-y1 derivative by 
reacting it with propane-1,3-dithiol could also be the basis of a 
route to furoin. Once deprotonated, this forms an ‘acyl anion equiv- 
alent’ that could be reacted with a second equivalent of the alde- 
hyde and then protonated and deprotected to yield furoin: 

Answers to Problems 
135 
7.1. Indole reacts preferentially with electrophiles at C-3, as does 
its sodium salt; in this case, although an ethyl group already occu- 
pies the 3-position of the starting compound, the incoming methyl 
group is also bonded at this site in the initial reaction intermedi- 
ate. Thereafter, as ethyl and methyl groups have similar abilities to 
migrate, both can move to C-2 and a mixture of products forms: 
Me 
H 
' 1  
1 
H 
\ 
H 
---- 
-H+ &Me 
H 

136 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
(i) NaH, DMF 
(ii)PhS02CI t 
(ii)PhCOCl t mph
(i) BuLi, THF 
/
N
 
0 
\ 
/
N
 
\ 
’
N
 
\ 
I 
H 
S02Ph 
S02Ph 
NaOH aq. heat 
I 
H 
(b) Fischer indole synthesis, followed by reduction: 
Me0 
NHNH2 
Me 
I 
‘ H I  
H 
Note: attack on opposite 
face to C-3 methyl group 
i 
‘H-7 Me 
Meow 
Me 
H 

Answers to Problems 
137 
. . - .. . 
~ 
(c): 
I 
H 
H 
reductive 
(ii) NaBH4, EtOH 
methylation 
(i) HCHO 
I 
7.3. (a) Oxindole is a cyclic amide (lactam), but its ring size tends 
to give it rather more ketone character than is the case for acyclic 
amides, and on treatment with a base an anion is formed by depro- 
tonation at C-3. This is stabilized not only by the carbonyl group 
(as an enolate) but also by the adjacent benzene nucleus. (b) When 
reacted with a carbon electrophile the benzylic position is the locus 
of attack, and with p-nitrobenzaldehyde the initial aldol-like prod- 
uct is easily dehydrated to a mixture of (a- 
and (2)-benzylidene 
derivatives (a, below). Both are highly conjugated and hence are 
coloured. (c) Although indoxyl also contains an ‘active methylene’ 
group and once deprotonated by base will react with benzaldehy- 
des at C-2 in much the same way, the anion is very reactive and 
air must be excluded from the reaction vessel. The reason is that 
the indoxyl anion readily oxidizes to a resonance-stabilized radical 
(b, below), which couples with itself and undergoes further oxida- 
tion to give indigotin. A convenient method of ‘handling’ indoxyl 
is to use it in the form of its 1,3-diacetyl compound (c, below), a 
stable crystalline solid. 

138 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
(a) Wo 
H 
05 
H 
Oxindole 
Indoxyl 
NaOEt 
H 
* 
+ 
4-NO2CbH4CHO 
H 
H 
OCOMe 
?- 
\ 
COMe 
1,3-Diacetylindoxyl 
H 
4-NO2CbH4CHO 
0 
7.4. Several disconnections are possible for this compound, of 
which (a) and (b) are fairly obvious. However, although the start- 
ing material for (a) could be obtained from sodium benzenethio- 
late and 3-chlorobutan-2-one, that for (b) is more difficult as ortho 
alkylation of benzenethiol would be necessary: 

Answers to Problems 
139 
t 
H 
An alternative would be to establish the aryl side chain selectively 
by a rearrangement process: 
I’ 
H 
8.1. (a) The synthesis begins with a conjugative addition of 3- 
aminopropanol to ethyl acrylate, forming an adduct that can be 
cyclized by treatment with thionyl chloride and then with a base, 
sodium carbonate: 

140 
Heterocyclic Chemistry 
(i) SOC12, CH2C12 
(ii) NaZC03 aq. 
I n 
(b) The cis disposition of the two methyl groups suggests a cyclo- 
addition approach involving (Q-but-2-ene as one reaction compo- 
nent. The other is chlorosulfonyl isocyanate (used because it is very 
reactive and because the chlorosulfonyl group can be easily 
removed at the end of the reaction). Whether the first stereoselective 
reaction is an antarafacial [2 + 21 concerted reaction or a stepwise 
process with a very fast collapse of the dipolar intermediate is 
arguable. Certainly the rate of the addition is greater in polar 
solvents than in non-polar ones. 
Me 
Me 
L/ 
PhSH MewM
H 
p\ 
s02c1 
0 
0 =C =NS02CI 
k N \  
0 
(c) If the epoxide is treated with hydrogen sulfide, 3-chloro-2- 
hydroxypropanethiol is obtained. This compound is cyclized to 3- 
hydroxythietane by exposure to aqueous base (barium hydroxide 
solution was used): 
HO 
O w C ' " " -  

Subject Index 
Aminopyridines 34 
Aminoquinolines 48 
Anomeric effect 12 
Anthocyanidins 68 
Anthocyanins 68 
Anti-aromaticity 8 
Aromaticity 6 
Azepines 4 
Azete (azacyclobuta- 
Azetidine 
1 15 
Azetidin-2-ones 
1 17 
Azetine 115 
diene) 9, 115 
Benzo[h]furan 11 1 
Benzopyridines 42 
Benzopyrylium salts 68 
Benzo[b]thiophene 11 1 
Bischler-Napieralski 
reaction 52. 129 
Carbazoles, tetrahydro- 
Carbohydrates 65 
Cephalosporins 
1 I7 
Chelidonic acid 67 
Chichibabin reaction 24 
Chlorophyll a 5 
Chromones 68,72 
Cocaine 6 
Conformation 10 
Conrad-Limpach-Knorr 
synthesis 49 
Coumalic acid 63 
Coumarins 68,70 
Cyanidin 69 
98 
Cyanin 68 
Cyclooctatetraene 9 
Dihydropyrans 58 
Fischer indole synthesis 
105, 138 
Flavones 68 
Flavylium salts 68 
Friedlinder synthesis 
Furan 85 
cycloadd i tion reactions 
88 
electrophilic substitu- 
tion 86 
metallation 87 
synthesis 89 
47, 129 
Furfural(2-form ylfuran) 
90 
Guareschi synthesis 28 
Haem 4 
Halopyridines 20, 25 
Hantzsch synthesis 28, 
Hantzsch-Widman sys- 
Hardhoft notation 62 
Heroin 6 
Hofmann exhaustive 
Hiickel’s rule 7, 97 
Hund’s rule 8 
Hvdroxvtlvridines 32 
126, 128 
tem 3 
methylation 38, 127 
Indican 109 
Indigotin (indigo blue) 
5, 109 
Indigo white 110 
Indole 97 
anion 103 
reactions 98, 135 
reduction 104 
ring expansion 104 
Indole-3-acetic acid 109 
Isoflavones 69 
reactions 51 
reduction 51 
structure 51 
synthesis 52 
Isoquinoline 4 
Knorr synthesis 83, 133 
Kojic acid 63 
Kolbe reaction 8 1 
p-Lactams 117 
Leimgruber-Batcho 
reaction 106 
Mannich reaction 74, 
Melatonin 109 
Methylpyridines 29 
Methylquinolines 47 
Morphine 6 
101 
Nicotinamide adenine 
dinucleotide (NAD+) 
36 
Nicotine 6 
141 

142 
Subject Index 
Nicotinic acid 30 
Nifedipine 6 
Nomenclature 1 
Non-aromaticity 8 
Oxetane 121 
Oxetanones 122 
Oxetene 121 
Oxindole 1 10, 137 
Paal-Knorr synthesis 82 
Paraquat 6 
Penicillins 1 17 
Picolines 29 
Picolinic acids 30 
Pictet-Spengler synthesis 
Piperidine 11, 36,60 
Pomeranz-Fri t sch 
synthesis 54 
Pyranones 64 
Pyrans 58 
Pyrans, dihydro- 58 
Pyrans, tetrahydro- 3, 
13, 58, 65 
Pyridine 18 
acylation 20 
addition elimination 
20 
electrophilic subs ti tu- 
tion 19 
lithiation 28 
nucleophilic substi tu- 
tion 23 
53 
reduction 36 
structure 7 
Pyridine N-oxides 22 
Pyridines, amino- 34 
Pyridines, hydroxy- 32 
Pyridines, methyl- 29 
Pyridinium salts 34 
Pyridones 32, 51, 58,63 
Pyridoxine 6 
Pyridynes 27, 126 
Pyrrole 77 
anion 81 
cycloaddition reactions 
reduction 84 
structure 8 
synthesis 82 
Pyrrolidine 8 I ,  84 
Pyrroline 84 
Pyrylium salts 58 
82 
Quinoline 42 
electrophilic substitu- 
tion 44 
structure 43 
synthesis 54 
Quinolines, amino- 48 
Quinolines, methyl- 47 
Quinolizinium cation 42 
Quinolones 48 
Reissert compounds 45, 
Ring current 10 
128 
Ring strain 11 
Rotenone 68 
Saccharides 65 
Seratoin 109 
Skatole 109 
Stilbazole 3 1 
Strychnine 5 
Tetrahydrocarbazoles 98 
Tetrahydropyrans 3, 13, 
58,65 
Thietane 122 
Thiophene 91 
electrophilic substitu- 
tion 91 
metallation 93 
oxidation 92 
synthesis 93 
Tryptamine 109 
Tryptophan 109 
Tyrian purple 110 
Vilsmeier reaction 74, 99 
Wafarin 68 
Wender indole synthesis 
106 



