
 Understanding 
Business  


 Understanding  
Business 
 ELEVENTH EDITION 
 William G.   Nickels   
 University of Maryland  
 James M.   McHugh  
 St. Louis Community College at Forest Park  
 Susan M.   McHugh  
 Applied Learning Systems  

 UNDERSTANDING BUSINESS, ELEVENTH EDITION 
 Published by McGraw-Hill Education, 2 Penn Plaza, New York, NY 10121. Copyright © 2016 by McGraw-Hill Education. All rights 
reserved. Printed in the United States of America. Previous edition © 2013, 2010, and 2008. No part of this publication may be 
reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior written con-
sent of McGraw-Hill Education, including, but not limited to, in any network or other electronic storage or transmission, or broad-
cast for distance learning. 
 Some ancillaries, including electronic and print components, may not be available to customers outside the United States. 
 This book is printed on acid-free paper. 
 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 0 DOW/DOW 1 0 9 8 7 6 5 
 ISBN 978-0-07-802316-3 
 MHID 0-07-802316-5 
 Senior Vice President, Products & Markets:   Kurt L.  Strand 
 Vice President, General Manager, Products & Markets:   Michael  Ryan 
 Vice President, Content Design & Delivery:   Kimberly Meriwether  David 
 Managing Director:   Susan  Gouijnstook 
 Brand Manager:   Anke  Weekes 
 Director, Product Development:   Meghan  Campbell 
Marketing Manager: Michael Gedatus
Marketing Specialist: Liz Steiner
Associate Market Development Manager: Andrea Scheive
 Product Developer:   Kelly  Delso 
 Digital Product Analyst: Kerry Shanahan 
 Director, Content Design & Delivery:   Terri  Schiesl 
 Program Manager:   Mary  Conzachi 
 Content Project Managers:   Christine Vaughan , Danielle Clement, and Judi David 
 Buyer:   Carol A.  Bielski 
 Design:   Srdjan  Savanovic 
 Content Licensing Specialist:   Carrie  Burger 
 Cover Image:  © Maureen McCutcheon 
 Compositor:  Laserwords Private Limited 
 Typeface:  10/12 New Aster 
 Printer:  R. R.  Donnelley 
 All credits appearing on page or at the end of the book are considered to be an extension of the copyright page. 
 Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data 
Nickels, William G.
  Understanding business / William G. Nickels, James M. McHugh, Susan M. 
 McHugh. —Eleventh edition.
   pages cm
  ISBN 978-0-07-802316-3 (alk. paper)
  1. Industrial management. 2. Business. 3. Business—Vocational guidance.
 I. McHugh, James M. II. McHugh, Susan M. III. Title. 
 HD31.N4897 2016
 658—dc23
 
2014030245
 The Internet addresses listed in the text were accurate at the time of publication. The inclusion of a website does not indicate 
an endorsement by the authors or McGraw-Hill Education, and McGraw-Hill Education does not guarantee the accuracy of the 
 information presented at these sites. 
 www.mhhe.com 

v
 To our families—Marsha, Joel, Carrie, Claire, Casey, 
Dan, Molly, Michael, Patrick, and Quinn. Thank you 
for making everything worth doing and giving us the 
support to do it well!  
 and 
 To the team that made this edition possible, especially 
the instructors and students who gave us such valuable 
guidance as we developed the text and package.  
 dedication 

vi
 Bill Nickels is emeritus professor of business at the University of  Maryland, College 
Park. He has over 30 years’ experience teaching  graduate and undergraduate business 
courses, including introduction to business, marketing, and promotion. He has won the 
Outstanding Teacher on  Campus Award four times and was nominated for the award many 
other times. He received his M.B.A. degree from Western Reserve University and his Ph.D. 
from The Ohio State University. He has written a marketing communications text and 
two  marketing  principles texts in addition to many articles in business publications. He 
has taught many seminars to businesspeople on subjects such as power communications, 
marketing, non-business marketing, and stress and life management. His son, Joel, is a 
 professor of English at the University of Miami (Florida). 
 Jim McHugh holds an M.B.A. degree from Lindenwood University and has had broad 
experience in education, business, and government. As chairman of the  Business and 
Economics Department of St. Louis Community College–Forest Park, Jim  coordinated 
and directed the development of the business curriculum. In addition to  teaching sev-
eral sections of Introduction to Business each semester for nearly 30 years, Jim taught in 
the marketing and management areas at both the undergraduate and graduate levels. Jim 
enjoys conducting business seminars and consulting with small and large businesses. He 
is actively involved in the public service sector and served as chief of staff to the St. Louis 
County Executive. 
 Susan McHugh is a learning specialist with extensive training and experience in 
adult learning and curriculum development. She holds an M.Ed. degree from the Uni-
versity of Missouri and completed her course work for a Ph.D. in education administra-
tion with a specialty in adult learning theory. As a professional curriculum developer, 
she has directed numerous curriculum projects and educator training programs. She 
has worked in the public and private sectors as a consultant in training and employee 
development. While Jim and Susan treasure their participation in writing projects, 
their greatest accomplishment is their collaboration on their three children. Casey is 
carrying on the family’s teaching tradition as an adjunct professor at Washington Uni-
versity. Molly and Michael are carrying on the family writing tradition by contributing 
to the development of several supplementary materials for this text.  
 A B O U T  T H E  A U T H O R S 

vii
 The Platinum Experience 
 W A L K T H R O U G H 
 Understanding Business  has long been the MARKET LEADER. We’ve listened to 
you and your students and that’s helped us offer you: 
Resources that were developed based directly on  your feedback—all geared to 
make the most of your time and to help students succeed in this course. All the 
supplemental resources for  Understanding Business  are carefully reviewed by Bill, 
Jim, and Susan to ensure cohesion with the text. 
Technology that leads the way and   is consistently being updated to keep up with 
you and your students.  Connect   Business offers students a truly interactive and 
adaptive study arena.  Interactive Presentations, Interactive Applications,  SmartBook, 
and  LearnSmart are designed to engage students and have been proven to increase 
grades by a full letter. 
Support that is always available to help you in planning your course, working with 
technology, and meeting the needs of you and your students.  
 KEEPING UP WITH WHAT’S NEW 
 Users of  Understanding Business have always appreciated the currency of the material 
and the large number of examples from companies of all sizes and industries (e.g., service, 
manufacturing, nonprofit, and profit) in the United States and around the world. A glance 
at the Chapter Notes will show you that almost all of them are from 2013 or 2014. Accord-
ingly, this edition features the latest business practices and other developments affecting 
business including:
 
• 
U.S. economic status post-financial crisis and recession 
 
• 
Growing income inequality  
 
• 
Gross output (GO) 
 
• 
Core inflation 
 
• 
 Trans-Pacific Partnership 
 
• 
Types of social commerce 
 
• 
JOBS Act of 2012 
 
• 
Crowdinvesting vs. crowdfunding 
 
• 
 Big data 
 
• 
Nanomanufacturing 
 
• 
Generation Z 
 
• 
Alpha Generation 
 
• 
Affordable Care Act (Obamacare) 
 
• 
Ethnographic segmentation  
 
• 
 Mobile/social/on-demand marketing 
 
• 
Bitcoin and other cryptocurrencies 
 
• 
Net neutrality 
 
• 
Internet of Things (IoT) 
 
• 
And much, much more 

viii
 RESULTS-DRIVEN TECHNOLOGY FOR STUDENTS 
 Across the country, instructors and students continue to raise an important question: How can introduction to business 
courses further support students throughout the learning process to shape future business leaders? While there is no 
one solution, we see the impact of new learning technologies and innovative study tools that not only fully engage 
students in course material but also inform instructors of the students’ skill and comprehension levels. 
 Interactive learning tools, including those offered through McGraw-Hill  Connect, are being implemented to increase 
teaching effectiveness and learning efficiency in thousands of colleges and universities. By facilitating a stronger connec-
tion with the course and incorporating the latest technologies—such as McGraw-Hill LearnSmart, an adaptive learning 
program—these tools enable students to succeed in their college careers, which will ultimately increase the percentage of 
students completing their postsecondary degrees and create the business leaders of the future. 
 Connect 
 McGraw-Hill  Con-
nect is the leading 
online assignment 
and assessment solution that connects students 
with the tools and resources they need to achieve 
success while providing instructors with tools to 
quickly pick content and assignments according 
to the learning objectives they want to emphasize. 
 Connect improves student learning and 
retention by adapting to the individual student, 
reinforcing concepts with engaging presenta-
tions and activities that prepare students for 
class, help them master concepts, and review 
for exams. You can learn more about what is in 
Connect on the next page.  
Grade Distribution
Without 
LearnSmart
A
30.5%
B
33.5%
C
22.6%
A
19.3%
B
38.6%
C
28.0%
With
LearnSmart
58% more As
with LearnSmart
With 
LearnSmart
Without 
LearnSmart
Student Pass Rate
25% more students
passed with LearnSmart
 SmartBook  Achieve
 A revolution in reading  
 Fueled by 
LearnSmart, SmartBook Achieve is the 
first and only adaptive reading experi-
ence available today. SmartBook per-
sonalizes content for each student in a 
continuously adapting reading experi-
ence. Reading is no longer a passive 
and linear experience, but an engaging 
and dynamic one where students are 
more likely to master and retain impor-
tant concepts, coming to class better 
prepared.  

ix
Leveraging a continuously adaptive learning path, the program adjusts to each stu-
dent individually as he or she progresses through the program, creating just-in-time learn-
ing experiences by presenting interactive content that is tailored to each student’s needs. 
This model is proven to accelerate learning and strengthen memory recall. A convenient 
time-management feature and turnkey reports for instructors also ensure student’s stay 
on track.
 Interactive Presentations 
Aid for Visual Learners 
These visual pre-
sentations within Connect are designed to rein-
force learning by offering a visual presentation 
of the learning objectives highlighted in every 
chapter of the text. Interactive presentations are 
engaging, online, professional presentations (fully 
Section 508 compliant) covering the same core 
concepts directly from the chapter, while offer-
ing additional examples and graphics.  Interactive 
Presentations teach students learning objectives in 
a multimedia format, bringing the course and the 
book to life.  Interactive Presentations are a great 
prep tool for  students—when the students are bet-
ter prepared, they are more engaged and better 
able to participate in class.  
 Click and Drag 
exercises allow students to 
reinforce key models/processes by requiring stu-
dents to label key illustrations and models from 
the text or build a process, and then demonstrate 
application-level knowledge. 
 Interactive Applications 
 A higher level of learning 
 These exercises 
require students to APPLY what they have learned 
in a real-world scenario. These online exercises 
will help students assess their understanding of the 
concepts. 

x
 Decision generators 
 require students to make 
real business decisions based on specific real-
world scenarios and cases.  
 Comprehensive Cases 
encourage students 
to read a case and answer open-ended discussion 
questions to demonstrate writing and critical-
thinking skills. 
 Manager’s 
Hotseat 
 ( Connect 
Library)—
short video cases that show 15 real managers 
applying their years of experience in confronting 
certain management and organizational behavior 
issues. Students assume the role of the manager as 
they watch the video and answer multiple-choice 
questions that pop up during the segment, forc-
ing them to make decisions on the spot. Students 
learn from the managers’ unscripted mistakes 
and successes, and then do a report critiquing the managers’ approach by defending their 
reasoning. 
 Video Cases 
 Real-world assignments 
 Industry-leading video support helps students understand 
concepts and see how real companies and professionals implement business principles 
in the workplace. The video cases highlight companies from a broad range of industries, 
sizes, and geographic locations, giving students a perspective from a variety of businesses. 
 Video cases 
 give students the opportunity to 
watch case videos and apply chapter concepts 
to a real-world business scenario as the scenario 
unfolds. 

xi
 PLATINUM EXPERIENCE STUDENT-FRIENDLY 
FEATURES 
 Learning Objectives 
 Everything in the text and supplements package ties back to 
the chapter learning objectives. The learning objectives listed throughout the chapter help 
students preview what they should know after reading the chapter. Chapter summaries 
test students’ knowledge by asking ques-
tions related to the learning objectives. The 
Test Bank, Instructor’s Manual, PowerPoints, 
Online Course, and  Connect  are all organized 
according to the learning objectives. 
 Getting to Know Business Professionals 
 Every chapter in the text opens with the pro-
file of a business professional whose career 
relates closely to the material in the chapter. 
These business professionals work for a vari-
ety of businesses from small businesses and 
nonprofit organizations to large corporations. 
These career profiles are an engaging way to 
open the chapter and to introduce students to a 
variety of business career paths. 
 name that company 
 This Swiss-based company has many foreign subsidiaries including Jenny 
Craig (weight management), Ralston Purina, Chef America (maker of Hot 
Pockets), and Dreyer’s Ice Cream in the United States, as well as Perrier in 
France. The company employs over 328,000 people and has operations in 
almost every country in the world. Name that company. (Find the answer in 
the chapter.)  
 Name That Company 
 Every text chapter opens with a Name That 
Company challenge. The answer for the challenge can be found somewhere 
in the chapter.  
 Test Prep Questions 
 help students understand and 
retain the material in the chapters. These questions stop 
them at important points in the chapter to assess what 
they’ve learned before they continue reading and help them 
prep for exams.  
 • What are the advantages to a firm of using licensing as a method of 
entry in global markets? What are the disadvantages?  
 • What services are usually provided by an export-trading company?  
 • What is the key difference between a joint venture and a strategic 
alliance?  
 • What makes a company a multinational corporation?  
•
What are the advanta
test prep
ges to a firm of
ges
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 Seeking Sustainability 
 boxes highlight corporate 
responsibility and help students understand the various 
ways business activities affect the environment. 
 seeking sustainability 
 When it comes to sustainable 
products, making sure an item is 
environmentally sound is just 
the first step. After all, the word 
“sustainability” implies that 
something will last for a long 
time. A shoddy product that 
needs to be replaced often 
takes a hefty toll on resources, 
which can cancel out the envi-
ronmental benefits of even the 
greenest production methods. 
 That’s why Rickshaw 
Bagworks in San Francisco 
makes sustainable accessories 
designed to last for the long 
term. For instance, at first the com-
pany began producing bags using 
expensive Italian wool herring-
bone tweed. Although the fabric 
was beautiful and environmentally 
friendly, the prototypes wore out 
in a manner of weeks. So 
Rickshaw teamed up with an 
upholstery mill to create its own 
fabric, Rickshaw Performance 
Tweed. Made from recycled plas-
tic bottles, this synthetic fabric 
ended up being stronger and 
more eco-friendly while still look-
ing gorgeous as a handbag. 
 Rickshaw employees and 
executives abide by the compa-
ny’s “three Fs” of sustainable 
design: form, function and foot-
print. Not only must a product 
make as small a carbon footprint 
as possible, it must also serve a 
long-term practical function and 
look great doing it. That’s why 
Rickshaw’s messenger bags are 
designed in a way that ensures 
every piece of fabric cut by the 
company makes it into the bag. 
The company’s dedication to 
sustainability is even incorpo-
rated in its name, which means 
“human powered vehicle” in 
Japanese. Do you think more com-
panies should be as dedicated to 
sustainability as Rickshaw? 
 Sources: Mark Dwight, “How to Build a 
Sustainable Business,”  Inc., November 2013; and 
 http://blog.rickshawbags.com/the-rickshaw-story/ , 
accessed February 2014.    
www.rickshawbags.com
 Sustainability’s in the Bag 
y
ex
ny
de
pr
m
as
lo
lo
Ri
de
ev
 Media-Rich E-Book 
 Connect provides students with a cost-saving alternative to the traditional textbook. 
A seamless integration of a media-rich e-book features the following:
 
• 
 A web-optimized e-book, allowing for anytime, anywhere online access to the 
textbook. 
 
• 
Our iSee It! animated video explanations of the most often confused topics can be 
accessed within this e-book.  
 
• 
Highlighting and note-taking capabilities.
298
 Human Resource 
Management: 
Finding and Keeping the 
Best Employees 
 11 
Learning Objectives  
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 11-1 
Explain the importance of human resource management, and 
describe current issues in managing human resources. 
 LO 11-2 Illustrate the effects of legislation on human resource 
management. 
 LO 11-3 Summarize the five steps in human resource planning. 
 LO 11-4 Describe methods that companies use to recruit new employees, 
and explain some of the issues that make recruitment challenging. 
 LO 11-5 Outline the six steps in selecting employees. 
 LO 11-6 Illustrate employee training and development methods. 
 LO 11-7 Trace the six steps in appraising employee performance. 
 LO 11-8 Summarize the objectives of employee compensation programs, 
and evaluate pay systems and fringe benefits. 
 LO 11-9 Demonstrate how managers use scheduling plans to adapt to 
workers’ needs. 
 LO 11-10 Describe how employees can move through a company: 
promotion, reassignment, termination, and retirement.  
299
Tony Hsieh
 • CEO of Zappos
 • Created an offbeat but efficient 
workplace
 • Empowers staffers to wow 
customers
www.zappos.com
@zappos
A
 lthough online shopping 
sites are becoming the 
dominant force in the 
retail world, they often 
fall short of their brick-
and-mortar rivals in terms of customer 
service. At the online shoe vendor Zap-
pos, however, a unique company culture 
ensures customers don’t have to sacri-
fice quality service for convenience. 
 When Tony Hsieh joined Zappos as 
CEO, he wanted to change the corporate 
work environment for the better. After sell-
ing his first company to Microsoft for a 
whopping $265 million, Hsieh didn’t want 
a job in a gray, cubicle-filled office. “For 
me, I didn’t want to be part of a company 
where I dreaded going into the office,” 
said Hsieh. To set Zappos apart from 
other online retailers, he wanted his ser-
vice representatives to wow customers 
with their energy and expertise. To do that 
Hsieh needed upbeat employees who 
were motivated by the love of their work. 
He gave his call center staffers remark-
able freedom, allowing them to talk to 
customers for hours at a time or send 
flowers and thank-you notes on the com-
pany’s dime. 
 Not only does this strategy do won-
ders for customer satisfaction, it also 
keeps employee morale sky high. In 
order to succeed at this job, Zappos’s 
service reps must be creative, energetic, 
generous, and understanding. But this 
commitment to excellence doesn’t end 
with the company’s spirited call center 
employees. When candidates for depart-
ments like marketing or management 
reach the interview stage, Hsieh starts 
testing them before they even set foot in 
the company’s Las Vegas headquarters. 
“A lot of our job candidates are from out 
of town, and we’ll pick them up from the 
airport in a Zappos shuttle, give them a 
tour, and then they’ll spend the rest of 
the day interviewing,” said Hsieh. “At the 
end of the day of interviews, the 
recruiter will circle back to the shuttle 
driver and ask how he or she was 
treated. It doesn’t matter how well the 
day of interviews went, if our shuttle 
driver wasn’t treated well, then we won’t 
hire that person.” The examination 
doesn’t end once the person lands the 
job. Regardless of their position, new 
hires must spend their first month help-
ing customers in the call center. If they 
can’t thrive, they’re gone. 
A long with creating open and acces-
sible work environments, Hsieh also tries 
to break down as many barriers between 
employees and management as possi-
ble. Zappos executives are affectionately 
referred to as “monkeys,” and the best 
view from the company’s 10-story Vegas 
high-rise is reserved for the call center 
workers. In fact, Hsieh puts so much faith 
in his staff that in 2014 he announced 
Zappos would be eliminating most of its 
traditional managers, corporate titles, 
and hierarchy entirely. Instead, the com-
pany will be replacing its standard 
chain of command with a “hol-
acracy.” This new company 
structure splits employees into 
overlapping but mostly self-
ruling “circles” that allow 
them to have a greater 
voice in how the 
company is run. 
Although time will tell 
whether or not this 
radical system works, Tony 
Hsieh’s commitment to an 
offbeat but efficient workplace 
has already grown Zappos into 
a $2 billion company. If anybody 
can pull off such an unorthodox 
office  structure, it’s Hsieh. 
 In this chapter, you’ll learn 
how businesses that succeed like 
Zappos recruit, manage, and make 
the most of their employees. 
 Sources: Jena McGregor, “Zappos Says Goodbye to 
Bosses,”  The Washington Post, January 3, 2014; Edward 
Lewine, “Tony Hsieh’s Office: Welcome to the Rain 
Forest,”  The New York Times, December 28, 2013; Max 
Nisen, “Tony Hsieh’s Brilliant Strategy for Hiring Kind 
People,”  Business Insider, November 22, 2013; Kim Bhasin, 
“Tony Hsieh: Here’s Why I Don’t Want My Employees to 
Work From Home,”  Business Insider, March 6, 2013; and 
Adam Bryant, “On a Scale of 1 to 10, How Weird Are You?” 
 The New York Times, January 9, 2010.  
 Getting to know  Tony Hsieh

xii
 reaching beyond our borders 
 For decades McDonald’s 
has been the undisputed 
king of global food fran-
chising. With more than 
34,000 restaurants in over 
118 countries, Mickey D’s 
serves more than 69 mil-
lion customers every day. 
 So how did McDonald’s 
become such a global 
powerhouse? It certainly 
didn’t get there through 
hamburgers alone. Since 
it first began expanding 
overseas, McDonald’s has 
been careful to include 
regional tastes on its menus along 
with the usual Big Mac and 
French fries. For instance, in 
Thailand patrons can order the 
Samurai Burger, a pork-patty 
sandwich marinated in teriyaki 
sauce and topped with mayon-
naise and a pickle. If fish is more 
your taste, try the Ebi Filet-o 
shrimp sandwich from Japan. 
 McDonald’s is also careful to 
adapt its menus to local customs 
and culture. In Israel, all meat 
served in the chain’s restaurants is 
100 percent kosher beef. The com-
pany also closes many of its restau-
rants on the Sabbath and religious 
holidays. McDonald’s pays respect 
to religious sentiments in India as 
well by not including any beef or 
pork on its menu. For more exam-
ples, go to  www.mcdonalds.com  
and explore the various 
McDonald’s international franchises 
websites. Notice how the company 
blends the culture of each country 
into the restaurant’s image. 
 McDonald’s main global market 
concern as of late has been Asia. 
So far McDonald’s strategy seems 
to be working. In Shanghai the 
company’s Hamburger University 
attracts top-level college graduates 
to be trained for management posi-
tions. Only about eight out of every 
1,000 applicants makes it into the 
program, an acceptance 
rate even lower than 
Harvard’s! McDonald’s is 
reaching out further in Asia 
and in 2014 opened its first 
store in Vietnam. The 
Vietnamese location in Ho 
Chi Minh City is the coun-
try’s very first drive-thru 
restaurant. Bringing 
McDonald’s to Vietnam is a 
dream come true for Henry 
Nguyen, founder of Good 
Day Hospitality, who has 
been wanting to introduce 
the brand to Vietnam for 
over a decade. Nguyen brought in 
20 top McDonald’s employees 
from Australia to help aid in the 
opening while also sending pro-
spective Vietnamese employees to 
Queensland to learn the ropes in a 
real-life restaurant setting. In the 
end, one can only hope that 
McDonald’s remains dedicated to 
quality as it continues adapting and 
expanding into the global market. 
 Sources: Erin Smith, “Some McSkills to Share,” 
The Warwick Daily News, February 4, 2014; Kate 
Taylor, “New Year, New Expansion: McDonald’s to 
Open First Restaurant in Vietnam,”  Entrepreneur, 
December 23, 2013; Vivian Giang, “McDonald’s 
Hamburger University: Step inside the Most 
Exclusive School in the World,”  Business Insider, 
April 7, 2012; and McDonald’s,  www.mcdonalds
.com , accessed February 2014.    
 www.mcdonalds.com 
 McDonald’s: Over 100 Cultures Served 
r
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders 
 boxes focus on 
global issues surrounding business.  
 Making Ethical Decisions 
 boxes offer students eth-
ical dilemmas to consider. 
 making ethical decisions 
 The Affordable Care Act (ACA) 
may bring some relief to astro-
nomical insurance costs. But as 
premiums continue to rise at 
home, overseas in countries like 
Thailand, Colombia, and India, 
health care is not only affordable, 
it’s also high quality. For instance, 
in the United States it would cost 
Patrick Follett, an avid skier, at 
least $65,000 for his hip replace-
ment surgery. Unlike some 
Americans, Follett had medical 
insurance and would have part of 
the procedure covered. However, 
it would have still cost him at least 
$10,000 out-of-pocket. Follett, like 
1.6 million other Americans, 
started looking for treatment else-
where. In March of 2012, he 
underwent surgery in Mexico and 
was back on the California ski 
slopes in March of 2013. His total 
bill: $10,000, all of which was cov-
ered by his company. 
 Right now, few American com-
panies include medical tourism in 
their health care plans, but some 
of the larger companies like 
Aetna and WellPoint are working 
with companies to include inter-
national coverage. It’s even 
expected to become a booming 
industry with worldwide annual 
growth estimated between 20 
and 30 percent. Would it be ethi-
cal to force patients to travel 
thousands of miles and be sepa-
rated from friends and family in a 
time of crisis in order to save 
money? 
 Sources: Medical Tourism Association, “Medical 
Tourism Sample Surgery Cost Chart,”  www
.medicaltourismassociation.com/en/for-patients.
html , accessed March 2014; Kevin Gray, “Medical 
Tourism: Overseas and Under the Knife,”  Men’s 
Journal, November 2013; and Elisabeth Rosenthal 
“The Growing Popularity of Having Surgery 
Overseas,”  The New York Times, August 6, 2013. 
www.medicaltourism.com
 Making Your Operation Your Vacation 
s
PLATINUM EXPERIENCE INSTRUCTOR RESOURCES
 Connect offers instructors autogradable material in an effort to facilitate learning and to 
save time. 
 Student Progress Tracking 
 spotlight on small business 
 Although Americans love to watch 
sports, professional athletes often 
receive criticism for collecting 
enormous paychecks. After all, 
some sports stars make more 
money in a single season than 
many educators or nurses would 
see in a lifetime. But matters can 
change drastically for athletes 
once their playing days end. 
Suddenly skills that you’ve spent 
your entire life honing are obso-
lete, often leading to confusion 
over what to do next. 
 When faced with this problem, 
the groundbreaking former NBA 
center Yao Ming opted to use his 
resources to start a business. 
Although this is a common post-
retirement tactic for many ath-
letes, Yao didn’t unveil a line of 
athletic wear or open a chain of 
sports bars. Instead, he estab-
lished a high-end winery in 
California’s famous Napa Valley. 
Although many wealthy Chinese 
celebrities have bought vine-
yards, Yao has set himself apart 
by building a brand from scratch 
rather than investing in an exist-
ing operation. A national hero in 
China, Yao Family Wines uses the 
name recognition of its seven-
and-half-foot founder to appeal to 
the nation’s growing consumer 
class. Yao’s wines are intention-
ally expensive: the cheapest vin-
tage goes for about $87 while the 
priciest bottle, Yao Ming Family 
Reserve, lists for more than 
$1,000. With premium brands still 
a rarity in China, Yao could end 
up being just as influential in the 
Chinese business world as he 
was on the basketball court. 
 Sources: Jason Chow, “Yao Ming’s Napa Winery 
Stoops to Conquer China’s Middle Class,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, September 5, 2013; and 
Michelle FlorCruz, “Yao Ming’s Wine Company 
Sets Sights on China’s Growing Middle Class,” 
International Business Times, September 6, 2013.    
www.yaofamilywines.com
 From Setting Picks to Picking Grapes 
s
 Spotlight on Small Business 
 boxes feature how the 
concepts in the chapter relate to small businesses.  
Connect Insight is a powerful data 
analytics tool that allows instructors 
to leverage aggregated information 
about their courses and students to 
provide a more personalized teach-
ing and learning experience.

xiii
 Connect’s Instructor Library 
 Connect’s Instructor Library serves as a one-stop, secure site for essential course materi-
als, allowing you to save prep time before class. The instructor site resources found in the 
library include:
 
• 
 Instructor’s Manual 
 
• 
PowerPoint Presentations 
 
• 
Test Bank/EZ Test 
 
• 
 Monthly Bonus Activities 
 
• 
 Videos 
 
• 
Video Guide 
 
• 
Connect Instructor’s Manual
 Instructor’s Manual: 
 The authors have carefully reviewed all resources provided in 
the Instructor’s Manual to ensure cohesion with the text. It includes everything an instruc-
tor needs to prepare a lecture, including lecture outlines, discussion questions, and teaching 
notes. More than 900 PowerPoint slides offer material from the text, as well as expanded 
coverage to supplement discussion.
 PowerPoint Presentations: 
 More than 900 PowerPoint slides offer material from the 
text, as well as expanded coverage to supplement discussion. 
Test Bank and EZ Test Online: 
The Test Bank and Computerized Test Bank offer 
over 8,000 multiple-choice, true/false, short answer, essay, and application questions.
 ISBN: 0077474376 
Monthly Bonus Activities: 
Monthly Bonus Activities contain a variety of tools to 
help freshen your classes: (1) links to interesting new videos; (2) abstracts of recent articles 
with accompanying critical-thinking questions to spark class discussion (sample answers 
included); and (3) a PowerPoint file that integrates these elements in an easy-to-use pack-
age. If you’re a current adopter of the text, then we are already sending you the Monthly 
Bonus Activities. If you are not receiving them and would like to, please contact your 
McGraw-Hill Sales Representative.
 Videos: 
 Chapter-specific videos are provided to complement each chapter of the text. 
Eleven of the 20 videos have been updated to include interesting companies that students 
will identify with such as SXSW, Sonic, and Whole Foods. 
 Video Guide: 
 The Video Guide offers additional detailed teaching notes to accompany 
the chapter videos, and provides essay-style and multiple-choice questions.  
 Connect Instructor’s Manual: 
 This Instructor’s Manual offers instructors what 
they need to set up  Connect for their courses. It explains everything from how to get 
started to suggestions of what to assign and ideas about assigning credit. This tool was 
developed by instructors who have used and continue to use  Connect successfully in 
their course.  

xiv
 PLATINUM EXPERIENCE TEACHING OPTIONS 
AND SOLUTIONS 
Blackboard Partnership
McGraw-Hill Education and Blackboard have teamed up to simplify your life. Now 
you and your students can access Connect and Create right from within your Black-
board course—all with one single sign-on. The grade books are seamless, so when a 
student completes an integrated Connect assignment, the grade for that assignment 
automatically (and instantly) feeds your Blackboard grade center. Learn more at 
www.domorenow.com.
 Create 
 Instructors can now tailor their teaching resources to match the way they teach! With 
McGraw-Hill Create,  www.mcgrawhillcreate.com , instructors can easily rearrange 
 chapters, combine material from other content sources, and quickly 
upload and integrate their own content, like course syllabi or teaching 
notes. Find the right content in Create by searching through thousands of 
leading McGraw-Hill textbooks. Arrange the material to fit your teach-
ing style. Order a Create book and receive a complimentary print review copy in three to 
five business days or a complimentary electronic review copy via e-mail within one hour. 
Go to  www.mcgrawhillcreate.com today and register. 
 Tegrity Campus 
 Tegrity makes class time available 24/7 by automatically capturing every lecture in a 
searchable format for students to review when they study and complete assignments. 
With a simple one-click start-and-stop process, you capture all computer screens and 
corresponding audio. Students can replay any part of any class with easy-to-use 
browser-based viewing on a PC or Mac. Educators know that the more students 
can see, hear, and experience class resources, the better they learn. In fact, studies 
prove it. With patented Tegrity “search anything” technology, students instantly 
recall key class moments for replay online or on iPods and mobile devices. Instructors 
can help turn all their students’ study time into learning moments immediately supported 
by their lecture. To learn more about Tegrity, watch a two-minute Flash demo at   http://
tegritycampus.mhhe.com   .   
 McGraw-Hill Campus 
 McGraw-Hill Campus is a new one-stop teaching and learning experience available to 
users of any learning management system. This institutional service allows faculty and 
students to enjoy single sign-on (SSO) access to all McGraw-Hill Higher Education 
materials, including the award-winning McGraw-Hill  Connect platform, from 
directly within the institution’s website. With McGraw-Hill Campus, faculty 
receive instant access to teaching materials (e.g., eTextbooks, test banks, Power
Point slides, animations, learning objects, etc.), allowing them to browse, 
search, and use any instructor ancillary content in our vast library at no additional cost to 
instructor or students.
®

xv
 COURSE DESIGN AND DELIVERY 
In addition, students enjoy SSO access to a variety of free content (e.g., quizzes, flash 
cards, narrated presentations, etc.) and subscription-based products (e.g., McGraw-Hill 
Connect). With McGraw-Hill Campus enabled, faculty and students will never need 
to create another account to access McGraw-Hill products and services. Learn more at 
www.mhcampus.com.
 Assurance of Learning Ready 
 Many educational institutions today focus on the notion of  assurance of learning, an 
important element of some accreditation standards.  Understanding Business  is designed 
specifically to support instructors’ assurance of learning initiatives with a simple yet pow-
erful solution. Each test bank question for  Understanding Business  maps to a specific 
chapter learning objective listed in the text. Instructors can use our test bank software, EZ 
Test and EZ Test Online, to easily query for learning objectives that directly relate to the 
learning outcomes for their course. Instructors can then use the reporting features of EZ 
Test to aggregate student results in similar fashion, making the collection and presenta-
tion of assurance of learning data simple and easy.  
 AACSB Tagging 
   McGraw-Hill Education is a proud corporate member of AACSB International. Under-
standing the importance and value of AACSB accreditation,  Understanding Business 
recognizes the curricula guidelines detailed in the AACSB standards for business accred-
itation by connecting selected questions in the text and the test bank to the six general 
knowledge and skill guidelines in the AACSB standards. The statements contained in 
 Understanding Business  are provided only as a guide for the users of this textbook. The 
AACSB leaves content coverage and assessment within the purview of individual schools, 
the mission of the school, and the faculty. While the  Understanding Business teaching 
package makes no claim of any specific AACSB qualification or evaluation, we have 
within  Understanding Business  labeled selected questions according to the six general 
knowledge and skills areas. 
 McGraw-Hill Customer Experience Group Contact Information 
 At McGraw-Hill Education, we understand that getting the most from new technology can 
be challenging. That’s why our services don’t stop after you purchase our products. You 
can e-mail our Product Specialists 24 hours a day to get product training online. Or you 
can search our knowledge bank of Frequently Asked Questions on our support website. 
For Customer Support, call  800-331-5094 or visit  www.mhhe.com/support . One of our 
Technical Support Analysts will be able to assist you in a timely fashion. 


xvii
 Ashraf Almurdaah,  Los Angeles 
City College 
 Lydia Anderson,  Fresno City 
College 
 Chi Anyasi-Archibong,  North 
Carolina A&T 
 Maria Aria,  Camden County 
College 
 Michael Aubry,  Cuyamaca College 
 Frank Barber,  Cuyahoga Commu-
nity College 
 Richard Bartlett,  Columbus State 
Community College 
 Lorraine P. Bassette,  Prince 
George’s Community College 
 Jim Beard,  University of 
Arkansas–Fort Smith  
 Amy Beattie,  Champlain College 
 Charles Beem,  Bucks County 
Community College 
 Robert Bennett,  Delaware County 
Community College 
 Michael Bento,  Owens Community 
College 
 George H. Bernard,  Seminole 
State College of Florida 
 Marilyn Besich,  Montana State 
University–Great Falls 
 Dennis Brode,  Sinclair Community 
College 
 Kathy Broneck,  Pima Community 
College 
 Harvey Bronstein,  Oakland Com-
munity College 
 Jerri Buiting,  Baker College–Flint  
 Bonnie Chavez,  Santa Barbara 
City College 
 Savannah Clay,  Central Piedmont 
Community College 
 Paul Coakley,  Community College 
of Baltimore County 
 Patrick Conroy,  Delgado 
 Community College 
 James Darling,  Central New 
 Mexico Community College 
 Joseph Dutka,  Ivy Tech 
 Community College of Indiana 
 MaryBeth Furst,  Howard 
 Community College 
 Wayne Gawlik,  Joliet Junior 
College 
 A C K N O W L E D G M E N T S 
 O ur Senior Brand Manager, Anke Weekes, led the talented team at McGraw-Hill Educa-
tion. We appreciate her dedication to the success of the project and her responsiveness to 
the demands of the market. Kelly Delso served as our product developer and kept everyone 
on task and on schedule. Molly and Michael McHugh contributed the new boxes and pro-
files. Srdjan Savanovic created the new fresh, open interior design and extraordinary cover. 
Carrie Burger and Jen Blankenship carried out the extensive research for photos that was 
necessary to effectively reflect the concepts presented in the text. Lead project manager, 
Christine Vaughan, did a splendid job of keeping the production of the text on schedule. 
Danielle Clement expertly supervised Connect production. 
 Many dedicated educators made extraordinary contributions to the quality and utility 
of this text and package. For this edition, Molly McHugh did an exceptional job in prepar-
ing the Test Bank and creating the quizzes for  Connect.  Molly also did a superb job of 
creating the PowerPoint slides and a useful and current Instructor’s Resource Manual. We 
also recognize the efforts of those who contributed to the creation of  Connect  materials, 
and to our LearnSmart “team” at Monroe Community College; Judy Bulin, John Striebich, 
and Donna Haeger who tirelessly worked to review and perfect LearnSmart content. Thank 
you to Chris Cole, Dayna Brown, Dan Mack, and the crew of Cole Creative Productions 
for the fabulous new videos they produced. Thank you to the Digital Faculty Consultants 
who have helped train and support so many instructors in the Introduction to Business 
course, as well as assist them in successfully implementing  Connect  into their courses: 
Chris Finnin, Drexel University; Todd Korol, Monroe Community College; John Striebich, 
Monroe Community College; and Marie Lapidus, Oakton Community College. 
 Our outstanding marketing manager, Michael Gedatus, was up to the challenge of 
once again guiding the text to market leadership. With the assistance of the market’s fin-
est sales professionals, he led the text to record highs. We appreciate his commitment and 
the renowned product knowledge, service, and dedication of the McGraw-Hill Education 
sales reps. We want to thank the many instructors who contributed to the development of 
 Understanding Business. 
 REVIEWERS 
 We would like to thank the following instructors for sharing their opinions with us in an 
effort to improve this and previous editions:

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xviii
 Ross Gittell,  University of New 
Hampshire 
 Constance Golden,  Lakeland 
Community College 
 Doug Greiner,  University of 
Toledo–Scott Park 
 John Guess,  Delgado Community 
College 
 Lisa E. Hadley,  Southwest 
 Tennessee Community College 
 Nancy Hernandez,  Howard 
College 
 Maryanne Holcomb,  Oakland 
Community College 
 Russell E. Holmes,  Des Moines 
Area Community College 
 Janice Karlen,  La Guardia 
 Community College 
 James W. Marco,  Wake Technical 
Community College 
 Theresa Mastrianni,  Kingsborough 
Community College 
 Michelle Meyer,  Joliet Junior 
College 
 Catherine Milburn,  University of 
Colorado–Denver 
 Mihai Nica,  University of Central 
Oklahoma 
 David Oliver,  Edison Community 
College 
 Dyan Pease,  Sacramento City 
College 
 Vincent Quan,  Fashion Institute of 
Technology 
 David Robinson,  University of 
California–Berkeley 
 Rieann Spence-Gale,  Nova 
 Community College 
 Kurt Stanberry,  University of 
Houston 
 Marguerite Teubner,  Nassau 
 Community College 
 Rod Thirion,  Pikes Peak 
 Community College 
 William J. Wardrope,  University of 
Central Oklahoma 
 David Washington,  North Carolina 
State University 
 Ruby Barker,  Tarleton State 
University 
 Rosalia (Lia) Barone,  Norwalk 
Community College 
 Barbara Barrett,  St. Louis Commu-
nity College–Meramec 
 Barry Barrett,  University of 
Wisconsin–Milwaukee 
 Lorraine Bassette,  Prince George’s 
Community College 
 Robb Bay,  College of Southern 
Nevada–West Charle 
 Charles Beavin,  Miami Dade 
 College North 
 Charles Beem,  Bucks County 
Community College 
 Cathleen Behan,  Northern Virginia 
Community College 
 Lori Bennett,  Moorpark College 
 Ellen Benowitz,  Mercer Commu-
nity College 
 Patricia Bernson,  County College 
of Morris 
 William Bettencourt,  Edmonds 
Community College 
 Robert Blanchard,  Salem State 
College 
 Nikolas Adamou,  Borough of 
 Manhattan Community College 
 Cathy Adamson,  Southern Union 
State Community College 
 Gary Amundson,  Montana State 
University–Billings 
 Kenneth Anderson,  Borough of 
Manhattan Community College 
 Kenneth Anderson,  Mott 
 Community College 
 Lydia Anderson,  Fresno City 
College 
 Narita Anderson,  University of 
Central Oklahoma 
 Roanne Angiello,  Bergen 
 Community College 
 Chi Anyansi-Archibong,  North 
Carolina A&T University 
 Michael Atchison,  University of 
Virginia–Charlottesville 
 Andrea Bailey,  Moraine Valley 
Community College 
 Sandra Bailey,  Ivy Tech Commu-
nity College of Indiana 
 Scott Bailey,  Troy University 
 Wayne Ballantine,  Prairie View 
A&M University 
 Mary Jo Boehms,  Jackson State 
Community College 
 James Borden,  Villanova 
University 
 Michael Bravo,  Bentley College 
 Dennis Brode,  Sinclair Community 
College 
 Harvey Bronstein,  Oakland Com-
munity College–Farmington 
Hills 
 Deborah Brown,  North Carolina 
State University–Raleigh 
 Aaron A. Buchko,  Bradley 
University 
 Laura Bulas,  Central Community 
College–Hastings 
 Judy Bulin,  Monroe Community 
College 
 Barry Bunn,  Valencia Community 
College–West Campus 
 Bill Burton,  Indiana Wesleyan 
University 
 Paul Callahan,  Cincinnati State 
Technical and Community 
College 
 William Candley,  Lemoyne Owen 
College 
 We would like to thank the following instructors and students who generously provided the input and advice that contrib-
uted to the  development of this text.

xix
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 Nancy Carr,  Community College of 
Philadelphia 
 Ron Cereola,  James Madison 
University 
 Bonnie Chavez,  Santa Barbara 
City College 
 Susan Cisco,  Oakton Community 
College 
 Margaret (Meg) Clark,  Cincinnati 
State Technical and Community 
College 
 David Clifton,  Ivy Tech Community 
College of Indiana 
 C. Cloud,  Phoenix College 
 Doug Cobbs,  JS Reynolds Com-
munity College 
 Brooks Colin,  University of New 
Orleans 
 Debbie Collins,  Anne Arundel 
Community College 
 Andrew Cook,  Limestone College 
 Bob Cox,  Salt Lake Community 
College 
 Susan Cremins,  Westchester Com-
munity College 
 Julie Cross,  Chippewa Valley Tech 
College 
 Geoffrey Crosslin,  Kalamazoo 
 Valley Community College 
 Douglas Crowe,  Bradley University 
 John David,  Stark State College of 
Technology 
 Peter Dawson,  Collin County 
 Community College 
 Joseph Defilippe,  Suffolk County 
Community College–Brentwood 
 Tim DeGroot,  Midwestern State 
University 
 Len Denault,  Bentley College 
 Frances Depaul,  Westmoreland 
County Community College 
 Donna Devault,  Fayetteville Tech 
Community College 
 Sharon Dexter,  Southeast 
 Community College–Beatrice 
 John Dilyard,  St. Francis College 
 Barbara Dinardo,  Owens 
 Community College 
 George Dollar,  St. Petersburg 
College 
 Glenn Doolittle,  Santa Ana 
College 
 Ron Dougherty,  Ivy Tech 
 Community College of Indiana 
 Michael Drafke,  College of 
DuPage 
 Karen Eboch,  Bowling Green State 
University 
 Brenda Eichelberger,  Portland 
State University 
 Kelvin Elston,  Nashville State Tech 
Community College 
 Robert Ettl,  Stony Brook University 
 Nancy Evans,  Heartland 
 Community College 
 Michael Ewens,  Ventura College 
 Hyacinth Ezeka,  Coppin State 
University 
 Bob Farris,  Mt. San Antonio 
College 
 Karen Faulkner,  Long Beach City 
College 
 Gil Feiertag,  Columbus State 
 Community College 
 Joseph Flack,  Washtenaw 
 Community College 
 Lucinda Fleming,  Orange County 
Community College 
 Jackie Flom,  University of Toledo 
 Andrea Foster,  John Tyler 
 Community College 
 Michael Foster,  Bentley College 
 Leatrice Freer,  Pitt Community 
College 
 Alan Friedenthal,  Kingsborough 
Community College 
 Charles Gaiser,  Brunswick 
 Community College 
 Ashley Geisewite,  Southwest 
 Tennessee Community College 
 Katie Ghahramani,  Johnson 
County Community College 
 Debora Gilliard,  Metropolitan State 
College–Denver 
 James Glover,  Community College 
of Baltimore County–Essex 
 Constance Golden,  Lakeland 
Community College 
 Toby Grodner,  Union County 
College 
 Clark Hallpike,  Elgin Community 
College 
 Geri Harper,  Western Illinois 
University 
 Frank Hatstat,  Bellevue 
 Community College 
 Spedden Hause,  University of 
Maryland–University College 
 Karen Hawkins,  Miami-Dade 
College–Kendall 
 Travis Hayes,  Chattanooga State 
Technical Community College 
 Jack Heinsius,  Modesto Junior 
College 
 Charlane Held,  Onondaga 
 Community College 
 James Hess,  Ivy Tech Community 
College of Indiana 
 Steve Hester,  Southwest 
 Tennessee Community 
 College–Macon Campus 
 William Hill,  Mississippi State 
University 
 Nathan Himelstein,  Essex County 
College 
 Paula Hladik,  Waubonsee 
 Community College 
 David Ho,  Metropolitan 
 Community College 
 Douglas Hobbs,  Sussex County 
Community College 
 Maryanne Holcomb,  Antelope 
 Valley College 
 Mary Carole Hollingsworth, 
 Georgia Perimeter College 
 Russell Holmes,  Des Moines Area 
Community College 
 Scott Homan,  Purdue 
University–West Lafayette 
 Stacy Horner,  Southwestern 
 Michigan College 
 Dennis Hudson,  University of 
Tulsa 

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
xx
 Jo Ann Hunter,  Community 
 College Allegheny County in 
Pittsburgh 
 Kimberly Hurns,  Washtenaw 
 Community College 
 Victor Isbell,  University of 
Nevada–Las Vegas 
 Deloris James,  University of 
 Maryland–University College 
 Pam Janson,  Stark State College 
of Technology 
 William Jedlicka,  Harper College 
 Carol Johnson,  University of Denver 
 Gwendolyn Jones,  University of 
Akron 
 Kenneth Jones,  Ivy Tech Commu-
nity College of Indiana 
 Marilyn Jones,  Friends University 
 Michael Jones,  Delgado Commu-
nity College 
 Dmitriy Kalyagin,  Chabot College 
 Jack Kant,  San Juan College 
 Jimmy Kelsey,  Seattle Central 
Community College 
 Robert Kemp,  University of 
Virginia–Charlottesville 
 David Kendall,  Fashion Institute of 
Technology 
 Kristine Kinard,  Shelton State 
Community College 
 Sandra King,  Minnesota State 
University–Mankato 
 John Kurnik,  Saint Petersburg 
College 
 Jeff LaVake,  University of 
Wisconsin–Oshkosh 
 Robert Lewis,  Davenport University 
 Byron Lilly,  DeAnza College 
 Beverly Loach,  Central Piedmont 
Community College 
 Boone Londrigan,  Mott Commu-
nity College 
 Ladonna Love,  Fashion Institute of 
Technology 
 Ivan Lowe,  York Technical College 
 Yvonne Lucas,  Southwestern 
College 
 Robert Lupton,  Central 
 Washington University 
 Megan Luttenton,  Grand Valley 
State University 
 Elaine Madden,  Anne Arundel 
Community College 
 Lawrence Maes,  Davenport 
University 
 Niki Maglaris,  Northwestern 
College 
 James Maniki,  Northwestern College 
 Martin Markowitz,  College of 
Charleston 
 Fred Mayerson,  Kingsborough 
Community College 
 Stacy McCaskill,  Rock Valley 
College 
 Vershun L. McClain,  Jackson State 
University 
 Gina McConoughey,  Illinois 
 Central College 
 Patricia McDaniel,  Central 
 Piedmont Community College 
 Pam McElligott,  St. Louis Commu-
nity College–Meramec 
 Tom McFarland,  Mt. San Antonio 
College 
 Bill McPherson,  Indiana University 
of Pennsylvania 
 Ginger Moore,  York Technical 
College 
 Sandy Moore,  Ivy Tech Community 
College of Indiana 
 Jennifer Morton,  Ivy Tech 
 Community College of Indiana 
 Peter Moutsatson,  Central 
 Michigan University 
 Rachna Nagi-Condos,  American 
River College 
 Darrell Neron,  Pierce College 
 Mihia Nica,  University of Central 
Oklahoma 
 Charles Nichols,  Sullivan 
University 
 Frank Novakowski,  Davenport 
University 
 Mark Nygren,  Brigham Young 
University–Idaho 
 Paul Okello,  Tarrant County 
College 
 Faviana Olivier,  Bentley College 
 John Olivo,  Bloomsburg University 
of Pennsylvania 
 Teresa O’Neill,  International 
 Institute of the Americas 
 Cathy Onion,  Western Illinois 
University 
 Susan Ontko,  Schoolcraft College 
 Glenda Orosco,  Oklahoma 
State University Institute of 
Technology 
 Christopher O’Suanah,  J. S. 
 Reynolds Community College 
 Daniel Pacheco,  Kansas City 
 Kansas Community College 
 Esther Page-Wood,  Western 
 Michigan University 
 Lauren Paisley,  Genesee 
 Community College 
 John Pappalardo,  Keene State 
College 
 Ron Pardee,  Riverside Community 
College 
 Jack Partlow,  Northern Virginia 
Community College 
 Jeff Pepper,  Chippewa Valley Tech 
College 
 Sheila Petcavage,  Cuyahoga 
 Community College 
Western–Parma 
 Roy Pipitone,  Erie Community 
College 
 Lana Powell,  Valencia Community 
College–West Campus 
 Dan Powroznik,  Chesapeake 
College 
 Litsa Press,  College of Lake 
County 
 Sally Proffitt,  Tarrant County 
College–Northeast 
 Michael Quinn,  James Madison 
University 
 Anthony Racka,  Oakland Commu-
nity College 
 Larry Ramos,  Miami-Dade Commu-
nity College 

xxi
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
 Greg Rapp,  Portland Community 
College–Sylvania 
 Robert Reese,  Illinois Valley Com-
munity College 
 David Reiman,  Monroe County 
Community College 
 Gloria Rembert,  Mitchell Commu-
nity College 
 Levi Richard,  Citrus College 
 Clinton Richards,  University of 
Nevada–Las Vegas 
 Patricia Richards,  Westchester 
Community College 
 Susan Roach,  Georgia Southern 
University 
 Sandra Robertson,  Thomas 
 Nelson Community College 
 Catherine Roche,  Rockland 
 Community College 
 Tim Rogers,  Ozark Technical 
College 
 Sam Rohr,  University of 
 Northwestern Ohio 
 Pamela Rouse,  Butler University 
 Carol Rowey,  Community College 
of Rhode Island 
 Jeri Rubin,  University of 
Alaska–Anchorage 
 Storm Russo,  Valencia Community 
College 
 Mark Ryan,  Hawkeye Community 
College 
 Richard Sarkisian,  Camden County 
College 
 Andy Saucedo,  Dona Ana 
 Community College–Las Cruces 
 James Scott,  Central Michigan 
University 
 Janet Seggern,  Lehigh Carbon 
Community College 
 Sashi Sekhar,  Purdue 
University–Calumet-Hammond 
 Pat Setlik,  Harper College 
 Swannee Sexton,  University of 
Tennessee–Knoxville 
 Phyllis Shafer,  Brookdale Commu-
nity College 
 Richard Shortridge,  Glendale 
Community College 
 Louise Stephens,  Volunteer State 
Community College 
 Desiree Stephens,  Norwalk Com-
munity College 
 Clifford Stalter,  Chattanooga State 
Technical Community College 
 Kurt Stanberry,  University of 
Houston–Downtown 
 Martin St. John,  Westmoreland 
County Community College 
 John Striebich,  Monroe Commu-
nity College 
 David Stringer,  DeAnza College 
 Ron Surmacz,  Duquesne 
University 
 William Syvertsen,  Fresno City 
College 
 Scott Taylor,  Moberly Area Com-
munity College 
 Jim Thomas,  Indiana University 
Northwest 
 Deborah Thompson,  Bentley 
College 
 Evelyn Thrasher,  University of 
Massachusetts–Dartmouth 
 Jon Tomlinson,  University of 
Northwestern Ohio 
 Bob Trewartha,  Minnesota School 
of Business 
 Bob Urell,  Irvine Valley College 
 Dan Vetter,  Central Michigan 
University 
 Andrea Vidrine,  Baton Rouge 
Community College 
 Daniel Viveiros,  Johnson & Wales 
University 
 Joann Warren,  Community College 
of Rhode Island–Warwick 
 R. Patrick Wehner,  Everest 
University 
 Sally Wells,  Columbia College 
 Mildred Wilson,  Georgia Southern 
University 
 Karen Wisniewski,  County College 
of Morris 
 Greg Witkowski,  Northwestern 
College 
 Colette Wolfson,  Ivy Tech 
 Community College of Indiana 
 Deborah Yancey,  Virginia Western 
Community College 
 Mark Zarycki,  Hillsborough 
 Community College 
 Lisa Zingaro,  Oakton Community 
College 
 Mark Zorn,  Butler County 
 Community College 
 This edition continues to be the market’s gold standard due to the involvement of these committed instructors and stu-
dents. We thank them all for their help, support, and friendship. 
 Bill  Nickels                              Jim  McHugh                              Susan   McHugh 

PART 3
PART 1
PART 4
PART 5
PART 6
PART 2
xxii
Prologue  P-1 
 Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global 
Environments  2
 1 
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment  2 
 2 
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business  28 
 3 
Doing Business in Global Markets  60 
 4 
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior  92 
 Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business  118
 5 
How to Form a Business  118 
 6 
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business  150 
 Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy 
Customers  184 
 7 
Management and Leadership  184 
 8 
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges  210 
 9 
Production and Operations Management  240 
 Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce 
Quality Goods and Services  268 
 10 Motivating Employees  268 
 11 Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees  298 
 12 Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues  332  
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented 
Marketing Plans   360 
 13 Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy  360 
 14 Developing and Pricing Goods and Services  388 
 15 Distributing Products  416 
 16 Using Effective Promotions  446 
 Managing Financial Resources  472
 17 Understanding Accounting and Financial Information  472 
 18 Financial Management  502  
 19 Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities  530 
 20 Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve  564 
Bonus Chapters
 Bonus Chapter A: Working within the Legal Environment  A 
 Bonus Chapter B: Using Technology to Manage Information  B 
 Bonus Chapter C: Managing Risk  C 
 Bonus Chapter D: Managing Personal Finances  D 
 Epilogue  E  
 B R I E F  C O N T E N T S 

xxiii
 Prologue: Getting Ready for This Course and Your 
Career P-1 
 Top 10 Reasons to Read This Introduction P-1 
 Learning the Skills You Need to Succeed Today 
and Tomorrow P-2 
 Using This Course to Prepare for Your Career P-3 
 Assessing Your Skills and Personality P-4  
 Using Professional Business Strategies Right Now P-4 
 Learning to Behave Like a Professional P-5 
 Doing Your Best in College P-7  
 Study Hints P-7 
 Test-Taking Hints P-9 
 Time Management Hints P-10 
 Making the Most of the Resources for This 
Course P-1 1 
 Getting the Most from This Text P-1 2 
PART 1
 Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in 
Diverse, Global Environments  2 
 CHAPTER 1  
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the 
Dynamic Business Environment 2  
 Getting to Know: Sammy Hagar, Entrepreneur and 
Rock Star 3 
 Entrepreneurship and Wealth Building 4  
 Revenues, Profits, and Losses 4  
 Matching Risk with Profit 5  
 Standard of Living and Quality of Life 5  
 Responding to the Various Business Stakeholders 6  
 Using Business Principles in Nonprofit 
Organizations 7  
 Entrepreneurship versus Working for Others 8 
 Opportunities for Entrepreneurs 8  
 Spotlight on Small Business: How a Food Truck 
Helped Rebuild a Storm-Struck Community 9 
 The Importance of Entrepreneurs to the Creation of 
Wealth 9  
 The Business Environment 11 
 The Economic and Legal Environment 11  
 Making Ethical Decisions: Ethics Begins with You 14  
 The Technological Environment 14  
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Connecting 
Companies with Global Freelancers 15 
 The Competitive Environment 16  
 The Social Environment 17  
 The Global Environment 18  
 Adapting to Change: Gourmet Airport Eateries 
Take Flight 19 
 The Evolution of U.S. Business 20 
 Progress in the Agricultural and Manufacturing 
Industries 20  
 Progress in Service Industries 20  
 Your Future in Business 22  
 Summary  22 
 Key Terms  24 
 Critical Thinking  24  
 Developing Workplace Skills  25 
 Taking It to the Net  25  
 Video Case: Thomas Lennon  26 
 Notes  27 
 Photo Credits  27 
 CHAPTER 2  
Understanding Economics and How It Affects 
Business 28 
 Getting to Know: Matt Flannery, Co-Founder and 
CEO of   Kiva.org 29 
 How Economic Conditions Affect Businesses 30 
 What Is Economics? 30  
 The Secret to Creating a Wealthy Economy 32  
 Adam Smith and the Creation of Wealth 32  
 How Businesses Benefit the Community 33  
 Making Ethical Decisions: How Corruption Harms 
the Economy 34 
 Understanding Free-Market Capitalism 34 
 The Foundations of Capitalism 35  
 How Free Markets Work 36  
 How Prices Are Determined 37  
 The Economic Concept of Supply 37  
 The Economic Concept of Demand 37  
 The Equilibrium Point, or Market Price 37  
 Competition within Free Markets 38  
 Spotlight on Small Business: Bugs Bug Orange 
Farmers and Drive Prices Up 39  
 Benefits and Limitations of Free Markets 40  
 Understanding Socialism 41 
 The Benefits of Socialism 41  
 The Negative Consequences of Socialism 41  
 Understanding Communism 42 
 The Trend Toward Mixed Economies 42 
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Economic 
Expansion in Africa 44  
 Understanding the U.S. Economic System 44  
 Key Economic Indicators 44  
 Productivity in the United States 48  
 Productivity in the Service Sector 48  
 The Business Cycle 49  
 Stabilizing the Economy through Fiscal Policy 49  
 Fiscal Policy in Action during an Economic Crisis 51  
 Using Monetary Policy to Keep the Economy 
Growing 51  
 Summary  52 
 Key Terms  54 
 Critical Thinking  54  
 C O N T E N T S 

CONTENTS
xxiv
 Developing Workplace Skills  55 
 Taking It to the Net  56 
 Video Case: Opportunities International  56  
 Notes 57 
 Photo Credits  58 
 CHAPTER 3  
Doing Business in Global Markets 60  
 Getting to Know: Leila Janah, Founder and CEO 
of Samasource 61  
 The Dynamic Global Market 62  
 Why Trade with Other Nations? 63  
 The Theories of Comparative and Absolute 
Advantage 64  
 Getting Involved in Global Trade 64 
 Importing Goods and Services 65  
 Exporting Goods and Services 65  
 Measuring Global Trade 66  
 Strategies for Reaching Global Markets 67 
 Licensing 68  
 Exporting 68  
 Franchising 69  
 Contract Manufacturing 69  
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: McDonald’s: Over 
100 Cultures Served 70  
 International Joint Ventures and Strategic 
Alliances 70  
 Foreign Direct Investment 71  
 Forces Affecting Trading in Global Markets 73 
 Sociocultural Forces 73  
 Spotlight on Small Business: From Setting Picks to 
Picking Grapes 74 
 Economic and Financial Forces 74  
 Legal and Regulatory Forces 76  
 Physical and Environmental Forces 77  
 Trade Protectionism 77 
 The World Trade Organization 79  
 Common Markets 79  
 The North American and Central American Free 
Trade Agreements 80  
 The Future of Global Trade 81  
 The Challenge of Offshore Outsourcing 83  
 Globalization and Your Future 84  
 Making Ethical Decisions: Making Your Operation 
Your Vacation 85 
 Summary 85 
 Key Terms  87 
 Critical Thinking  87  
 Developing Workplace Skills  87 
 Taking It to the Net  88 
 Video Case: Electra Bicycle Company 88  
 Notes  89 
 Photo Credits  91 
 CHAPTER 4  
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible 
Behavior 92  
 Getting to Know: Patty Stonesifer, CEO of 
Martha’s Table 93  
 Ethics Is More Than Legality 94 
 Making Ethical Decisions: Bernie Madoff’s Ponzi 
Scheme 95  
 Ethical Standards Are Fundamental 96  
 Ethics Begins with Each of Us 96  
 Spotlight on Small Business: Turning Ex-Convicts 
into Entrepreneurs 97  
 Managing Businesses Ethically and 
Responsibly 98 
 Setting Corporate Ethical Standards 100  
 Corporate Social Responsibility 102 
 Responsibility to Customers 104  
 Responsibility to Investors 105  
 Responsibility to Employees 106  
 Responsibility to Society and the Environment 107  
 Social Auditing 108  
 Seeking Sustainability: Sustainability’s in the Bag 109  
 International Ethics and Social Responsibility 110 
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Going by a 
Different Standard 112  
 Summary  113 
 Key Terms  114 
 Critical Thinking  115 
 Developing Workplace Skills  115  
 Taking It to the Net  115  
 Video Case: Warby Parker/VisionSpring  116  
 Notes  117 
 Photo Credits  117  
PART 2
 Business Ownership: Starting a Small 
Business  118  
 CHAPTER 5  
How to Form a Business 118 
 Getting to Know: Anne Beiler, Founder of Auntie 
Anne’s 119  
 Basic Forms of Business Ownership 120  
 Sole Proprietorships 121  
 Advantages of Sole Proprietorships 121  
 Disadvantages of Sole Proprietorships 121  

xxv
CONTENTS
 Partnerships 123  
 Advantages of Partnerships 124  
 Disadvantages of Partnerships 125  
 Making Ethical Decisions: Good Business, Bad 
Karma? 127  
 Corporations 127 
 Advantages of Corporations 127  
 Disadvantages of Corporations 129  
 Seeking Sustainability: B Corporations Let 
Sustainability Set Sail 130  
 Individuals Can Incorporate 131  
 S Corporations 132  
 Limited Liability Companies 132  
 Corporate Expansion: Mergers and 
Acquisitions 135 
 Franchises 136  
 Advantages of Franchises 137  
 Spotlight on Small Business: The Building Blocks 
of Franchising 139  
 Disadvantages of Franchises 139  
 Diversity in Franchising 140  
 Home-Based Franchises 141  
 E-Commerce in Franchising 141  
 Using Technology in Franchising 141  
 Adapting to Change: Giving Entrepreneurs Options 
with Digital Franchising 142 
 Franchising in Global Markets 142  
 Cooperatives 143  
 Which Form of Ownership Is for You? 144 
 Summary  144 
 Key Terms  146 
 Critical Thinking  147 
 Developing Workplace Skills  147 
 Taking It to the Net  148 
 Video Case: Sonic  148 
 Notes  149  
 Photo Credits  149 
 CHAPTER 6  
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small 
Business 150 
 Getting to Know: Prudencio Unanue, Founder of 
Goya Foods 151 
 The Age of the Entrepreneur 152  
 The Job-Creating Power of Entrepreneurs in the 
United States 152 
 Spotlight on Small Business: Earning while 
Learning 153 
 Why People Take the Entrepreneurial 
Challenge 153 
 What Does It Take to Be an Entrepreneur? 154  
 Turning Your Passions and Problems into 
Opportunities 155  
 Entrepreneurial Teams 157  
 Micropreneurs and Home-Based Businesses 157  
 Web-Based Businesses 159  
 Entrepreneurship within Firms 160  
 Encouraging Entrepreneurship: What Government 
Can Do 161  
 Getting Started in Small Business 162 
 Small versus Big Business 162  
 Importance of Small Businesses 163  
 Small-Business Success and Failure 163  
 Learning about Small-Business Operations 165 
 Learn from Others 165  
 Get Some Experience 165  
 Making Ethical Decisions: Should You Stay or 
Should You Go? 166  
 Take Over a Successful Firm 166  
 Managing a Small Business 167 
 Begin with Planning 167  
 Getting Money to Fund a Small Business 168  
 Adapting to Change: States Test New 
Crowdinvesting Rules 171 
 The Small Business Administration (SBA) 171  
 Knowing Your Customers 172  
 Managing Employees 173  
 Keeping Records 173  
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Beyond Knowing 
What Your Customers Need 174 
 Looking for Help 174  
 Going Global: Small-Business Prospects 176 
 Summary  177 
 Key Terms  179 
 Critical Thinking  179  
 Developing Workplace Skills  179 
 Taking It to the Net  180 
 Video Case: Launching a Business: Pillow 
Pets  180 
 Notes  181  
 Photo Credits  182 
PART 3
 Business Management: Empowering 
Employees to Satisfy Customers  184  
 CHAPTER 7  
Management and Leadership 184  
 Getting to Know: Sheryl Sandberg, COO of 
Facebook 185  

CONTENTS
xxvi
 Managers’ Roles Are Evolving 186  
 The Four Functions of Management 187  
 Planning and Decision Making 189 
 Decision Making: Finding the Best Alternative 192  
 Organizing: Creating a Unified System 193 
 Tasks and Skills at Different Levels of 
Management 194  
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Back to School for 
Top Managers 195 
 Staffing: Getting and Keeping the Right People 195  
 Leading: Providing Continuous Vision and 
Values 196 
 Making Ethical Decisions: What Do You Tell the 
Team? 197 
 Leadership Styles 197  
 Empowering Workers 198  
 Managing Knowledge 199  
 Adapting to Change: Using Social Media during 
the Worst of Times 200 
 Controlling: Making Sure It Works 201 
 A Key Criterion for Measurement: Customer 
Satisfaction 202  
 Summary 203 
 Key Terms  205 
 Critical Thinking  205  
 Developing Workplace Skills  205 
 Taking It to the Net  206 
 Video Case: Zappos’s Team Approach  207  
 Notes 207 
 Photo Credits  208  
 CHAPTER 8  
Structuring Organizations for Today’s 
Challenges 210 
 Getting to Know: Jenna Lyons, President and 
Creative Director of J. Crew 211  
 Everyone’s Reorganizing 212 
 Building an Organization from the Bottom Up 212  
 Making Ethical Decisions: Would You Sacrifice 
Safety for Profits? 213  
 The Changing Organization 214 
 The Development of Organization Design 214  
 Turning Principles into Organization Design 216  
 Decisions to Make in Structuring 
Organizations 218  
 Choosing Centralized or Decentralized 
Authority 218  
 Choosing the Appropriate Span of Control 219  
 Choosing between Tall and Flat Organization 
Structures 219  
 Weighing the Advantages and Disadvantages of 
Departmentalization 220  
 Organizational Models 222 
 Line Organizations 223  
 Line-and-Staff Organizations 223  
 Matrix-Style Organizations 223  
 Cross-Functional Self-Managed Teams 225  
 Going Beyond Organizational Boundaries 226  
 Managing the Interactions among Firms 226  
 Transparency and Virtual Organizations 227  
 Spotlight on Small Business: Cutting Back while 
Cutting Costs 228  
 Benchmarking and Core Competencies 228  
 Adapting to Change 229  
 Adapting to Change: When Open Communication 
Should Not Be So Open 230 
 Restructuring for Empowerment 230  
 Creating a Change-Oriented Organizational 
Culture 231 
 Managing the Informal Organization 232  
 Summary  233  
 Key Terms  235  
 Critical Thinking  235  
 Developing Workplace Skills  236  
 Taking It to the Net  237  
 Video Case: Whole Foods  237  
 Notes  238  
 Photo Credits  238 
 CHAPTER 9  
Production and Operations 
Management 240 
 Getting to Know: Shahid Khan, CEO of 
Flex-N-Gate 241  
 Manufacturing and Services in Perspective 242 
 Seeking Sustainability: Your Own Farm in a Box 243 
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Nobody Does It 
Better 244  
 Manufacturers and Service Organizations Become 
More Competitive 244  
 From Production to Operations Management 245  
 Operations Management in the Service Sector 246  
 Production Processes 247  
 The Need to Improve Production Techniques and Cut 
Costs 248  
 Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing 248  
 Flexible Manufacturing 249  
 Lean Manufacturing 249  
 Mass Customization 250  
 Robotics 250  
 Spotlight on Small Business: Make Your Own Kind 
of Music 251 
 Using Sensing, Measurement, and Process Control 251  

xxvii
CONTENTS
 Operations Management Planning 252  
 Facility Location 252  
 Facility Location for Manufacturers 253  
 Making Ethical Decisions: Do We Stay or Do We 
Go? 254 
 Taking Operations Management to the Internet 254  
 Facility Location in the Future 254  
 Facility Layout 254  
 Materials Requirement Planning 255  
 Purchasing 257  
 Just-in-Time Inventory Control 257  
 Quality Control 257  
 The Baldrige Awards 258  
 ISO 9000 and ISO 14000 Standards 258  
 Control Procedures: Pert and Gantt Charts 259 
 Preparing for the Future 261  
 Summary  262  
 Key Terms  264 
 Critical Thinking  264  
 Developing Workplace Skills  265  
 Taking It to the Net  265 
 Video Case: Keeping Your Eye on the Ball  266 
 Notes  267 
 Photo Credits  267  
PART 4
 Management of Human Resources: 
Motivating Employees to Produce Quality 
Goods and Services  268 
 CHAPTER 10  
Motivating Employees 268  
 Getting to Know: David Novak, CEO of Yum! 
Brands 269  
 The Value of Motivation 270 
 Frederick Taylor: The Father of Scientific 
Management 271  
 Elton Mayo and the Hawthorne Studies 272  
 Motivation and Maslow’s Hierarchy 
of Needs 273  
 Herzberg’s Motivating Factors 274  
 McGregor’s Theory X and Theory Y 276 
 Theory X 276  
 Theory Y 277  
 Ouchi’s Theory Z 278 
 Goal-Setting Theory and Management by 
Objectives 280  
 Meeting Employee Expectations: Expectancy 
Theory 280 
 Reinforcing Employee Performance: Reinforcement 
Theory 281  
 Treating Employees Fairly: Equity Theory 282 
 Putting Theory into Action 282 
 Motivation through Job Enrichment 283  
 Motivating through Open Communication 283  
 Applying Open Communication in Self-Managed 
Teams 284 
 Adapting to Change: When Is Social Media Too 
Social? 285  
 Recognizing a Job Well Done 285  
 Personalizing Motivation 286 
 Spotlight on Small Business: Going Up against the 
Heavyweights 287 
 Motivating Employees across the Globe 287  
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Beyond Just 
Knowing Cross-Cultural Differences 288  
 Motivating Employees across Generations 288  
 Summary  291  
 Key Terms  293 
 Critical Thinking  294 
 Developing Workplace Skills  294 
 Taking It to the Net  294  
 Video Case: Appletree Answers  295 
 Notes  296  
 Photo Credits  296  
 CHAPTER 11  
Human Resource Management: Finding and 
Keeping the Best Employees 298  
 Getting to Know: Tony Hsieh, CEO of 
Zappos 299 
 Working with People Is Just the Beginning 300 
 Developing the Ultimate Resource 300  
 The Human Resource Challenge 301  
 Laws Affecting Human Resource 
Management 302 
 Laws Protecting Employees with Disabilities and 
Older Employees 304  
 Effects of Legislation 305  
 Determining a Firm’s Human Resource 
Needs 305  
 Recruiting Employees from a Diverse 
Population 307 
 Spotlight on Small Business: Competing for the 
Cream of the Crop 309  
 Selecting Employees Who Will Be Productive 309 
 Adapting to Change: Keeping the Right Face on 
Facebook 311  
 Hiring Contingent Workers 311  
 Training and Developing Employees for Optimum 
Performance 312  

CONTENTS
xxviii
 Making Ethical Decisions: Intern or Indentured 
Servant? 313  
 Management Development 314  
 Networking 315  
 Diversity in Management Development 316  
 Appraising Employee Performance to Get 
Optimum Results 316  
 Compensating Employees: Attracting and Keeping 
the Best 318  
 Pay Systems 318  
 Compensating Teams 319  
 Fringe Benefits 320  
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Cultural Challenges 
without Conflict 321  
 Scheduling Employees to Meet Organizational and 
Employee Needs 322  
 Flextime Plans 322  
 Home-Based Work 323  
 Job-Sharing Plans 323  
 Moving Employees Up, Over, and Out 324 
 Promoting and Reassigning Employees 325  
 Terminating Employees 325  
 Retiring Employees 326  
 Losing Valued Employees 326  
 Summary 326 
 Key Terms  328 
 Critical Thinking  329 
 Developing Workplace Skills  329 
 Taking It to the Net  329 
 Video Case: Teach for America  330  
 Notes 331  
 Photo Credits  331  
 CHAPTER 12  
Dealing with Union and Employee—
Management Issues 332  
 Getting to Know: DeMaurice Smith, Executive 
Director of the NFL Players Association 333  
 Employee–Management Issues 334  
 Labor Unions Yesterday and Today 335 
 The History of Organized Labor 335  
 Public Sector Union Membership 336  
 Spotlight on Small Business: The Factory Blaze 
That Fired Up a Movement 337  
 Labor Legislation and Collective Bargaining 337  
 Union Organizing Campaigns 338  
 Objectives of Organized Labor over Time 340  
 Resolving Labor–Management Disagreements 342  
 Mediation and Arbitration 343  
 Tactics Used in Labor–Management 
Conflicts 343  
 Union Tactics 343  
 Management Tactics 344  
 Making Ethical Decisions: To Cross or Not to 
Cross 345  
 The Future of Unions and Labor–Management 
Relations 345  
 Controversial Employee–Management Issues 347  
 Executive Compensation 347  
 Adapting to Change: College Athletes: What Are 
They Worth? 348 
 Pay Equity 349  
 Sexual Harassment 350  
 Child Care 351  
 Elder Care 352  
 Drug Testing 353  
 Violence in the Workplace 353  
 Summary  354  
 Key Terms  356 
 Critical Thinking  356  
 Developing Workplace Skills  356  
 Taking It to the Net  357  
 Video Case: United We Stand  357  
 Notes  358  
 Photo Credits  359  
PART 5
 
Marketing: Developing and Implementing 
Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans  360  
 CHAPTER 13  
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy 360  
 Getting to Know: Daymond John, Founder of 
FUBU 361  
 What Is Marketing? 362  
 The Evolution of Marketing 363  
 Seeking Sustainability: Making Sustainability Just 
Peachy 365 
 Nonprofit Organizations and Marketing 366  
 The Marketing Mix 366  
 Applying the Marketing Process 367  
 Designing a Product to Meet Consumer Needs 368  
 Setting an Appropriate Price 369  
 Getting the Product to the Right Place 369  
 Developing an Effective Promotional Strategy 369  
 Providing Marketers with Information 370  
 The Marketing Research Process 370  
 The Marketing Environment 372  
 Global Factors 373  
 Technological Factors 373  
 Sociocultural Factors 373  

xxix
CONTENTS
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Two Is Better than 
One 374 
 Competitive Factors 374  
 Economic Factors 374  
 Two Different Markets: Consumer and Business-to-
Business (B2B) 375 
 The Consumer Market 375 
 Segmenting the Consumer Market 376  
 Reaching Smaller Market Segments 377  
 Building Marketing Relationships 378  
 The Consumer Decision-Making 
Process 378 
 Adapting to Change: Turning Negatives to 
Positive 379 
 The Business-to-Business Market 380 
 Your Prospects in Marketing 380  
 Summary  381 
 Key Terms  383 
 Critical Thinking  383 
 Developing Workplace Skills  384 
 Taking It to the Net  384 
 Video Case: Using the 4 Ps at Energizer  385 
 Notes  385 
 Photo Credits  386 
 CHAPTER 14  
Developing and Pricing Goods and 
Services 388 
 Getting to Know: Kathy Ireland, CEO of Kathy 
Ireland Worldwide 389  
 Product Development and the Total Product 
Offer 390  
 Adapting to Change: Bellying Up to 
Social Media 391 
 Distributed Product Development 392  
 Product Lines and the Product Mix 393  
 Spotlight on Small Business: Sealing the 
Deal 394  
 Product Differentiation 394  
 Marketing Different Classes of Consumer Goods and 
Services 395 
 Marketing Industrial Goods and Services 396  
 Packaging Changes the Product 397 
 The Growing Importance of Packaging 398  
 Branding and Brand Equity 398  
 Brand Categories 399  
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Playing the Name 
Game 400  
 Generating Brand Equity and Loyalty 400  
 Creating Brand Associations 401  
 Brand Management 401  
 The New-Product Development Process 402 
 Generating New-Product Ideas 402  
 Product Screening 402  
 Product Analysis 402  
 Product Development and Testing 402  
 Commercialization 403  
 Adapting to Change: Making the 
Right Cut 404  
 The Product Life Cycle 404  
 Example of the Product Life Cycle 405  
 Using the Product Life Cycle 405  
 Competitive Pricing 407 
 Pricing Objectives 407  
 Cost-Based Pricing 408  
 Demand-Based Pricing 408  
 Competition-Based Pricing 408  
 Break-Even Analysis 408  
 Other Pricing Strategies 409  
 How Market Forces Affect Pricing 409  
 Nonprice Competition 410 
 Summary  410  
 Key Terms  412 
 Critical Thinking  413  
 Developing Workplace Skills  413  
 Taking It to the Net  414  
 Video Case: Dream Dinners Food-to-Go  414  
 Notes  415 
 Photo Credits  415  
 CHAPTER 15  
Distributing Products 416 
 Getting to Know: Reed Hastings, CEO of 
Netflix 417 
 The Emergence of Marketing Intermediaries 418  
 Seeking Sustainability: Answer May Be Blowing in 
the Wind 419  
 Why Marketing Needs Intermediaries 419  
 How Intermediaries Create Exchange 
Efficiency 420  
 The Value versus the Cost of Intermediaries 421  
 The Utilities Created by Intermediaries 423 
 Form Utility 423  
 Time Utility 423  
 Place Utility 423  
 Possession Utility 424  
 Information Utility 424  
 Service Utility 424  
 Wholesale Intermediaries 425  
 Merchant Wholesalers 425  
 Agents and Brokers 426  

CONTENTS
xxx
 Retail Intermediaries 426 
 Retail Distribution Strategy 427 
 Adapting to Change: Truckin’ On with Social 
Media 428 
 Nonstore Retailing 428 
 Electronic Retailing 428 
 Telemarketing 430  
 Vending Machines, Kiosks, and Carts 430 
 Direct Selling 430 
 Multilevel Marketing 430  
 Direct Marketing 431  
 Building Cooperation in Channel Systems 431 
 Corporate Distribution Systems 432 
 Contractual Distribution Systems 432 
 Administered Distribution Systems 432 
 Supply Chains 432 
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Weak Links Can 
Break a Chain 434 
 Logistics: Getting Goods to Consumers 
Efficiently 434 
 Trains Are Great for Large Shipments 436 
 Trucks Are Good for Small Shipments to Remote 
Locations 437  
 Water Transportation Is Inexpensive but Slow 437 
 Pipelines Are Fast and Efficient 437 
 Air Transportation Is Fast but Expensive 437 
 Intermodal Shipping 438 
 The Storage Function 438 
 Tracking Goods 439 
 What All This Means to You 439 
 Summary 440 
 Key Terms  442 
 Critical Thinking  442 
 Developing Workplace Skills  443   
 Taking It to the Net  443  
 Video Case: FedEx  444 
 Notes  445 
 Photo Credits  445 
 CHAPTER 16  
Using Effective Promotions 446 
 Getting to Know: Chris Hardwick, Co-Founder 
of Nerdist Industries 447 
 Promotion and the Promotion Mix 448 
 Advertising: Informing, Persuading, and 
Reminding 449 
 Television Advertising 452 
 Product Placement 453 
 Infomercials 453  
 Online Advertising 453 
 Making Ethical Decisions: Pay-per-Tweet 454 
 Using Social Media to Monitor Ad Effectiveness 455  
 Global Advertising 455 
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: What’s in Your 
Oreo? 456 
 Personal Selling: Providing Personal 
Attention 456 
 Steps in the Selling Process 457 
 The Business-to-Consumer Sales Process 458 
 Public Relations: Building Relationships 460 
 Publicity: The Talking Arm of PR 460 
 Sales Promotion: Giving Buyers Incentives 461 
 Word of Mouth and Other Promotional Tools 463 
 Adapting to Change: What Are Companies Yelping 
About? 464 
 Blogging 464  
 Podcasting 465  
 E-Mail Promotions 465 
 Mobile Marketing 465  
 Managing the Promotion Mix: Putting It All 
Together 465 
 Promotional Strategies 466 
 Summary 467  
 Key Terms  468 
 Critical Thinking  469  
 Developing Workplace Skills 469  
 Taking It to the Net  470  
 Video Case: SXSW  470  
 Notes  471 
 Photo Credits  471 
PART 6
 Managing Financial Resources  472  
 CHAPTER 17  
Understanding Accounting and Financial 
Information 472  
 Getting to Know: John Raftery, Founder of Patriot 
Contractors 473 
 The Role of Accounting Information 474 
 What Is Accounting? 474 
 Accounting Disciplines 475 
 Managerial Accounting 475 
 Financial Accounting 476 
 Auditing 477  
 Adapting to Change: Elementary, Mr. Auditor, 
Elementary 478 
 Tax Accounting 478 
 Government and Not-for-Profit Accounting 478 
 The Accounting Cycle 479 
 Using Technology in Accounting 480 

xxxi
CONTENTS
 Understanding Key Financial Statements 481 
 The Fundamental Accounting Equation 482 
 The Balance Sheet 482 
 Classifying Assets 483 
 Liabilities and Owners’ Equity Accounts 484 
 The Income Statement 485 
 Revenue 487  
 Cost of Goods Sold 487 
 Operating Expenses 487 
 Spotlight on Small Business: The Ins and Outs of 
Valuing Inventory 488 
 Net Profit or Loss 488 
 The Statement of Cash Flows 489 
 Making Ethical Decisions: Would You Cook the 
Books? 490 
 The Need for Cash Flow Analysis 490 
 Analyzing Financial Performance Using 
Ratios 491 
 Liquidity Ratios 491 
 Leverage (Debt) Ratios 492 
 Profitability (Performance) Ratios 493 
 Activity Ratios 494 
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Speaking a 
Universal Accounting Language 495 
 Summary 496 
 Key Terms  497 
 Critical Thinking  498 
 Developing Workplace Skills  498 
 Taking It to the Net  499 
  Video Case: The Accounting Function at Goodwill 
Industries 499 
 Notes  500 
  Photo Credits  500 
 CHAPTER 18  
Financial Management 502  
 Getting to Know: Sabrina Simmons, CFO of 
Gap 503 
 The Role of Finance and Financial Managers 504 
 The Value of Understanding Finance 505 
 What Is Financial Management? 506 
 Financial Planning 507 
 Forecasting Financial Needs 507 
 Working with the Budget Process 508 
 Establishing Financial Controls 508 
 The Need for Operating Funds 510 
 Managing Day-by-Day Needs of the Business 511 
 Controlling Credit Operations 511 
 Making Ethical Decisions: Good Finance or Bad 
Medicine? 512 
 Acquiring Needed Inventory 512 
 Making Capital Expenditures 512 
 Alternative Sources of Funds 513 
 Obtaining Short-Term Financing 514 
 Trade Credit 514 
 Family and Friends 514 
 Commercial Banks 515 
 Adapting to Change: Threading the Financial 
Needle 516 
 Different Forms of Short-Term Loans 516 
 Factoring Accounts Receivable 517 
 Commercial Paper 518 
 Credit Cards 518 
 Obtaining Long-Term Financing 519 
 Debt Financing 519 
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Are They Heroes or 
Hustlers? 520 
 Equity Financing 521 
 Comparing Debt and Equity Financing 523 
 Lessons Learned from the Recent Financial Crisis 524 
 Summary 525 
 Key Terms  526 
 Critical Thinking  527 
 Developing Workplace Skills 527  
 Taking It to the Net  527 
 Video Case: Starting Up: Tom and Eddie’s  528 
 Notes  529 
 Photo Credits  529  
 CHAPTER 19  
Using Securities Markets for Financing and 
Investing Opportunities 530 
 Getting to Know: Mellody Hobson, President of 
Ariel Investments 531 
 The Function of Securities Markets 532 
 The Role of Investment Bankers 533  
 Stock Exchanges 533 
 Securities Regulations and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission 534 
 Spotlight on Small Business: Giving Small Business 
a Jump on Funding 535 
 Foreign Stock Exchanges 536 
 How Businesses Raise Capital by Selling 
Stock 537 
 Advantages and Disadvantages of Issuing 
Stock 537  
 Issuing Shares of Common Stock 537 
 Issuing Shares of Preferred Stock 538 
 How Businesses Raise Capital by Issuing 
Bonds 539 
 Learning the Language of Bonds 539 
 Advantages and Disadvantages of Issuing Bonds 540  

CONTENTS
xxxii
 Different Classes of Bonds 540  
 Special Bond Features 541  
 How Investors Buy Securities 542 
 Making Ethical Decisions: Money Going Up in 
Smoke 543 
 Investing through Online Brokers 543  
 Choosing the Right Investment Strategy 543  
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: Global Stocks: Love 
Them or Leave Them 544 
 Reducing Risk by Diversifying Investments 544  
 Investing in Stocks 545  
 Stock Splits 546  
 Buying Stock on Margin 546  
 Understanding Stock Quotations 547  
 Investing in Bonds 548 
 Investing in High-Risk (Junk) Bonds 548  
 Understanding Bond Quotations 548  
 Investing in Mutual Funds and Exchange-Traded 
Funds 549 
 Understanding Mutual Fund Quotations 550  
 Understanding Stock Market Indicators 551 
 Riding the Market’s Roller Coaster 553  
 Investing Challenges in the 21st-Century 
Market 555  
 Summary 555 
 Key Terms  558 
 Critical Thinking  558  
 Developing Workplace Skills  559 
 Taking It to the Net  560 
 Video Case: Where Did All My Money Go?  560 
 Notes 561  
 Photo Credits  562 
 CHAPTER 20
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal 
Reserve  564  
 Getting to Know: Janet Yellen, First Female Chair 
of the Federal Reserve 565  
 Why Money Is Important 566 
 What Is Money? 566  
 Adapting to Change: The Bitcoin Is in 
the Mail 568  
 What Is the Money Supply? 569  
 Managing Inflation and the Money Supply 569  
 The Global Exchange of Money 570  
 Control of the Money Supply 570  
 Basics about the Federal Reserve 570  
 The Reserve Requirement 572  
 Open-Market Operations 572  
 The Discount Rate 572  
 The Federal Reserve’s Check-Clearing Role 572  
 The History of Banking and the Need for the 
Fed 574  
 Banking and the Great Depression 575  
 The U.S. Banking System 575  
 Commercial Banks 576  
 Services Provided by Commercial Banks 576  
 Services to Borrowers 576  
 Making Ethical Decisions: Would You Tell the 
Teller? 577  
 Savings and Loan Associations (S&Ls) 577  
 Credit Unions 577  
 Other Financial Institutions (Nonbanks) 578  
 Spotlight on Small Business: Taking a Bite Out 
of the Sharks 579 
 The Banking Crisis and How the Government 
Protects Your Money 580 
 Protecting Your Funds 581  
 The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 581  
 The Savings Association Insurance Fund (SAIF) 581  
 The National Credit Union Administration 
(NCUA) 581  
 Using Technology to Make Banking More 
Efficient 581 
 Online Banking 583  
 International Banking and Banking Services 583 
 Leaders in International Banking 583  
 The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund 
(IMF) 584  
 Reaching Beyond Our Borders: New Day, New 
Issues across the Globe 585  
 Summary  585  
 Key Terms  588  
 Critical Thinking  588 
 Developing Workplace Skills  588 
 Taking It to the Net  589  
 Video Case: The Financial Crisis  589  
 Notes  590  
 Photo Credits  591 
Bonus Chapters
 BONUS CHAPTER A 
Working within the Legal Environment  A 
 Getting to Know: Eve Wright Taylor, Vice 
President & Associate General Counsel for the 
Miami Heat A-1   
 The Case for Laws A-2 
 Statutory and Common Law A-2  
 Administrative Agencies A-3  
 Tort Law A-4  
 Product Liability A-5  
 Legally Protecting Ideas: Patents, Copyrights, and 
Trademarks A-6 

xxxiii
CONTENTS
 Sales Law: The Uniform Commercial Code A-8 
 Warranties A-8 
 Negotiable Instruments A-8 
 Contract Law A-9 
 Breach of Contract A-10 
 Promoting Fair and Competitive Business 
Practices A-10 
 The History of Antitrust Legislation A-11 
 Laws to Protect Consumers A-12 
 Tax Laws A-14 
 Bankruptcy Laws A-15 
 Deregulation versus Regulation A-17 
 Summary A-19  
  Key Terms  A-21 
 Critical Thinking  A-21 
  Developing Workplace Skills  A-22 
 Taking It to the Net  A-22  
  Notes  A-22  
 Photo Credits  A-23 
 BONUS CHAPTER B 
Using Technology to Manage Information  B 
 Getting to Know: Jack Dorsey, Co-Founder of 
Twitter B-1 
 The Role of Information Technology B-2 
 Evolution from Data Processing to Business 
Intelligence B-2  
 How Information Technology Changes Business B-3  
 Types of Information B-5 
 Managing Information B-6 
 Organizing E-Mail and Electronic Files B-7 
 Big Data and Data Analytics B-8 
 The Heart of Knowledge Management: The 
Internet B-9 
 Broadband Technology B-10 
 Social Media and Web 2.0 B-12 
 Web 3.0 B-13 
 Who’s the “Boss” of the Internet? B-15 
 Virtual Networking and Cloud Computing B-15 
 Effects of Information Technology on 
Management B-17 
 Human Resource Issues B-17 
 Security Issues B-18 
 Privacy Issues B-20 
 Stability Issues B-21 
 Technology and You B-21 
 Summary B-22  
  Key Terms  B-24  
  Critical Thinking  B-24  
  Developing Workplace Skills  B-24 
 Taking It to the Net  B-25  
 Notes  B-25  
 Photo Credits  B-26 
 BONUS CHAPTER C 
Managing Risk  C 
 Getting to Know: Dan Amos, CEO of Aflac C-1 
 Understanding Business Risks C-2 
 How Rapid Change Affects Risk Management  C-3 
 Managing Risk  C-3 
 Reducing Risk C-4 
 Avoiding Risk C-4 
 Self-Insurance C-4 
 Buying Insurance to Cover Risk C-5 
 What Risks Are Uninsurable? C-5 
 What Risks Are Insurable? C-6 
 Understanding Insurance Policies  C-6 
 Rule of Indemnity C-7 
 Types of Insurance Companies C-7 
 Insurance Coverage for Various Kinds 
of Risk  C-7 
 Health Insurance C-9 
 Health Savings Accounts C-9 
 Disability Insurance C-9 
 Workers’ Compensation C-10  
 Liability Insurance C-10 
 Life Insurance for Businesses C-10 
 Insurance Coverage for Home-Based 
Businesses C-10  
 The Risk of Damaging the Environment  C-10 
 Protection from Cyber Attacks  C-11 
 Summary C-11  
 Key Terms  C-12  
 Critical Thinking  C-12  
 Developing Workplace Skills C-13  
 Taking It to the Net  C-13  
 Notes  C-14  
 Photo Credits  C-14  
 BONUS CHAPTER D 
Managing Personal Finances  D 
 Getting to Know: Alexa von Tobel, Founder and 
CEO of LearnVest D-1 
 The Need for Personal Financial Planning D-2 
 Financial Planning Begins with Making Money D-2 
 Six Steps to Controlling Your Assets D-3 
 Building Your Financial Base D-6 
 Real Estate: Historically, a Relatively Secure 
Investment D-7  
 Tax Deductions and Home Ownership D-8 

CONTENTS
xxxiv
 Where to Put Your Savings D-8 
 Learning to Manage Credit D-9 
 Protecting Your Financial Base: Buying 
Insurance D-11 
 Health Insurance D-12 
 Disability Insurance D-12 
 Homeowner’s or Renter’s Insurance D-12 
 Other Insurance D-13 
 Planning Your Retirement D-13 
 Social Security D-14 
 Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) D-14 
 Simple IRAs D-15 
 MyIRAs D-15  
 401(k) Plans D-16 
 Keogh Plans D-17 
 Financial Planners D-17 
 Estate Planning D-17 
 Summary D-18 
 Key Terms  D-20 
 Critical Thinking  D-20 
 Developing Workplace Skills D-20  
 Taking It to the Net  D-21  
 Notes  D-21  
 Photo Credits  D-22 
 EPILOGUE 
Getting the Job You Want  E 
 Job Search Strategy E-1 
 Searching for Jobs Online E-3 
 Job Search Resources E-4 
 Writing Your Résumé E-5 
 Putting Your Résumé Online E-6 
 Writing a Cover Letter E-9 
 Preparing for Job Interviews E-11 
 Be Prepared to Change Careers E-14 
 Photo Credits E-14 
 Glossary G 
 Name Index  I-1  
 Organization Index  I-7  
 Subject Index  I-11  

P-1
 P R O L O G U E 
 Getting Ready 
for This Course 
and Your Career 
 Top 10 Reasons to Read This Introduction 
 (EVEN IF IT ISN’T ASSIGNED) 
  10 What the heck—you already bought the book, so you might as well get your 
money’s worth. 
  9 You don’t want the only reason you get a raise to be that the government has 
increased the minimum wage. 
  8 Getting off to a good start in the course can improve your chances of getting a 
higher grade, and your Uncle Ernie will send you a dollar for every A you get. 
  7 Your friends say that you’ve got the manners of a troll and you want to find out 
what the heck they’re talking about. 
  6 How else would you find out a spork isn’t usually one of the utensils used at a 
business dinner? 
  5 You don’t want to experience the irony of frantically reading the “time 
management” section at 3:00 a.m. 
  4 Like the Boy Scouts, you want to be prepared. 
  3 It must be important because the authors spent so much time writing it. 
  2 You want to run with the big dogs someday.  
 AND THE NUMBER ONE REASON FOR READING THIS INTRODUCTORY 
SECTION IS . . .  
  1 It could be on a test.  

PROLOGUE
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
P-2
 LEARNING THE SKILLS YOU NEED TO SUCCEED 
TODAY AND TOMORROW 
 Your life is full. You’re starting a new semester, perhaps even beginning your college 
career, and you’re feeling pulled in many directions. Why take time to read this introduc-
tion? We have lightheartedly offered our top 10 reasons on the previous page, but the real 
importance of this section is no joking matter. 
 Its purpose, and that of the entire text, is to help you learn principles, strategies, and 
skills for success that will serve you not only in this course but also in your career and your 
life. Whether you learn them is up to you. Learning them won’t guarantee success, but not 
learning them—well, you get the picture. 
 This is an exciting and challenging time. Success in any venture comes from under-
standing basic principles and knowing how to apply them effectively. What you learn now 
could help you be a success—for the rest of your life. Begin applying these skills now to 
gain an edge on the competition. READ THIS SECTION BEFORE YOUR FIRST CLASS 
and make a great first impression! Good luck. We wish you the best. 
 Bill  Nickels                                      Jim   McHugh                                      Susan  McHugh 

P-3
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
PROLOGUE
 USING THIS COURSE TO PREPARE 
FOR YOUR CAREER 
  Since you’ve signed up for this course, we’re guessing you already know 
the value of a college education. The holders of bachelor’s degrees make an 
average of about $46,000 per year compared to less than $30,000 for high 
school graduates. 1 That’s greater than 50 percent more for college graduates 
than those with just a high school diploma. Compounded over the course of a 
30-year career, the average college grad will make nearly a half-million dol-
lars more than the high school grad! Thus, what you invest in a college educa-
tion is likely to pay you back many times. See  Figure P.1 for more of an idea 
of how much salary difference a college degree makes by the end of a 30-year 
career. That doesn’t mean there aren’t good careers available to non–college 
graduates. It just means those with an education are more likely to have higher 
earnings over their lifetime.  
 The value of a college education is more than just a larger paycheck. Other bene-
fits include increasing your ability to think critically and communicate your ideas to 
others, improving your ability to use technology, and preparing yourself to live in a 
diverse and competitive world. Knowing you’ve met your goals and earned a college 
degree also gives you the self-confidence to work toward future goals. 
 Experts say today’s college graduates will likely hold seven or eight different jobs 
(often in several different careers) in their lifetime. Many returning students are chang-
ing their careers and their plans for life. In fact, in recent years the percentage increase 
of students age 25 or older enrolling in college has been larger than the percentage of 
younger students. 2 In addition, over 50 percent of all part-time college students are 25 
or older. 3  
 You too may want to change careers someday. It can be the path to long-term hap-
piness and success. That means you’ll have to be flexible and adjust your strengths and 
talents to new opportunities. Learning has become a lifelong job. You’ll need to constantly 
update your skills to achieve high competence and remain competitive. 
 If you’re typical of many college students, you may not have any idea what career 
you’d like to pursue. That isn’t necessarily a big disadvantage in today’s fast-changing job 
market. After all, many of the best jobs of the future don’t even exist today.  Figure P.2 lists 
10 careers that didn’t exist 10 years ago. There are no perfect or certain ways to prepare for 
the most interesting and challenging jobs of tomorrow. Rather, you should continue your 
college education, develop strong technology and Internet skills, improve your verbal and 
written communication skills, and remain flexible and forward thinking while you explore 
the job market. 
 FIGURE P.1 SALARY 
COMPARISON OF HIGH 
SCHOOL VERSUS 
COLLEGE GRADUATES  
$1,400,000.00
$1,200,000.00
$1,000,000.00
$800,000.00
$600,000.00
$400,000.00
$200,000.00
$-
College Graduate
High School Graduate
High School Graduate
College Graduate
$46,000.00
$30,000.00
1 Year
$230,000.00
$150,000.00
5 Years
$460,000.00
$300,000.00
10 Years
$920,000.00
$600,000.00
20 Years
$1,380,000.00
  $   900,000.00
30 Years
0 Y
Y
Y
The rewards of college 
are well worth the effort 
for graduates, who can 
expect to earn over 
60 percent more than 
high school graduates 
over the course of their 
careers. Businesses like 
graduates too, because 
the growing needs of 
a global workplace 
require knowledgeable 
workers to fill the jobs of 
the future. What other 
benefits do you see 
from earning a college 
degree?

PROLOGUE
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
P-4
 One of the objectives of this class, and this book, is to help you choose an area in 
which you might enjoy working and have a good chance to succeed. You’ll learn about 
economics, global business, ethics, entrepreneurship, management, marketing, accounting, 
finance, and more. At the end of the course, you should have a much better idea which 
careers would be best for you and which you would not enjoy. 
 But you don’t have to be in business to use business principles. You can use market-
ing principles to get a job and to sell your ideas to others. You can use your knowledge 
of investments to make money in the stock market. You’ll use your management skills 
and general business knowledge wherever you go and in whatever career you pursue—
including government agencies, charities, and social causes.  
 ASSESSING YOUR SKILLS AND PERSONALITY 
 The earlier you can do a personal assessment of your interests, skills, and values, the better 
it can help you find career direction. Hundreds of schools use software exercises like the 
System for Interactive Guidance and Information (SIGI) and DISCOVER to offer self-
assessment exercises, personalized lists of occupations based on your interests and skills, 
and information about different careers and the preparation each requires. Visit your col-
lege’s placement center, career lab, or library soon and learn what programs are available 
for you. Even if you’re a returning student with work experience, an assessment of your 
skills will help you choose the right courses and career path to follow next. 
 Self-assessment will help you determine the kind of work environment you’d prefer 
(technical, social service, or business); what values you seek to fulfill in a career (security, 
variety, or independence); what abilities you have (creative/artistic, numerical, or sales); 
and what job characteristics matter to you (income, travel, or amount of job pressure 
versus free time).  
 USING PROFESSIONAL BUSINESS STRATEGIES 
RIGHT NOW 
 Here are two secrets to success you can start practicing now:  networking and  keeping files 
on subjects important to you. 
 Networking is building a personal array of people you’ve met, spoken to, or corre-
sponded with who can offer you advice about and even help with your career options. 4 Start 
with the names of your professors, both as employment references and as resources about 
fields of interest to you. Add additional contacts, mentors, and resource people, and keep 
the notes you make when talking with them about careers including salary information and 
courses you need to take. 
FIGURE P.2 NEW 
CAREERS
 These careers didn’t exist 10 years ago:  
 • 
IOS Developer
 • 
Android Developer
 • 
Zumba Instructor
 • 
Social Media Intern
 • 
Data Scientist
 • 
UI/UX Designer
 • 
Big Data Architect
 • 
Beachbody Coach
 • 
Cloud Services Specialist
 • 
Digital Marketing Specialist
Source: LinkedIn,  www.linkedin.com , accessed May 2014.

P-5
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
PROLOGUE
Networking provides 
you with an array of 
personal contacts on 
whom you can call 
for career advice and 
help. Have you begun 
creating your network 
yet? Are you 
part of someone else’s?
 All students need a way to retain what they learn. An 
effective way to become an expert on almost any business 
subject is to set up your own information system. You can 
store data on your computer, tablet, and cell phone (back 
up these files!), or you can establish a comprehensive fil-
ing system on paper, or you can use a combination of the 
two. Few college students take the time to make this effort; 
those who don’t lose much of the information they read in 
college or thereafter. 
 Keep as many of your textbooks and other assigned 
readings as you can, as well as your course notes. Read a 
national newspaper such as  The Wall Street Journal, The 
New York Times,  or  USA Today. Read your local newspaper. 
Each time you read a story that interests you, save a paper 
copy or add a link to the story online in your electronic file, 
under a topic heading like  careers, small business, market-
ing, economics, or  management. You’ll easily find the lat-
est data on almost any subject on the Internet. Don’t rely on just one site for information 
(and be wary of Wikipedia)! Get familiar with a variety of sources and use them. 
 Start a file for your résumé. In it, keep a copy of your current résumé along with reference 
letters and other information about jobs you may have held, including projects accomplished 
and additions to your responsibilities over time, plus any awards or special recognition 
you may have received. Soon you’ll have a tremendous amount of information to help 
you prepare a polished résumé and answer challenging job interview questions with ease. 
 Watching television shows about business, such as  Nightly Business Report and Jim 
Cramer’s  Mad Money, helps you learn the language of business and become more informed 
about current happenings in business and the economy. Try viewing some of these shows 
or listening to similar ones on the radio, and see which ones you like best. Take notes and 
put them in your files. Keep up with business news in your area so that you know what 
jobs are available and where. You may also want to join a local business group to begin 
networking with people and learning the secrets of the local business scene. Many business 
groups and professional business societies accept student members.  
 LEARNING TO BEHAVE LIKE A PROFESSIONAL 
 There’s a reason good manners never go out of style. As the world becomes increasingly 
competitive, the gold goes to teams and individuals with that extra bit of polish. The person 
who makes a good impression will be the one who gets the job, wins the promotion, or 
clinches the deal. Good manners and professionalism are not difficult to acquire; they’re 
second nature to those who achieve and maintain a competitive edge. 
 Not even a great résumé or designer suit can substitute for poor behavior, including verbal 
behavior, in an interview. Say “please” and “thank you” when you ask for something. Certainly 
make it a point to arrive on time, open doors for others, stand when an older person enters the 
room, and use a polite tone of voice. You may want to take a class in etiquette or read a book 
on etiquette to learn the proper way to eat in a nice restaurant, what to do at a formal party, and 
so on. 5 Of course, it’s also critical to be honest, reliable, dependable, and ethical at all times.  
 Some rules are not formally written anywhere; instead, every successful businessperson 
learns them through experience. If you follow these rules in college, you’ll have the skills 
for success when you start your career. Here are the basics:
 
1.  Making a good first impression. An old saying goes, “You never get a second 
chance to make a good first impression.” You have just a few seconds to make 
an impression. Therefore, how you dress and how you look are important. 
Take your cue as to what is appropriate at any specific company by studying the 
people there who are most successful. What do they wear? How do they act? 

PROLOGUE
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
P-6
Many businesses have 
adopted business casual 
as the proper work attire, 
but others still require 
traditional clothing 
styles. How does your 
appearance at work 
affect both you and your 
company?
 
2.  Focusing on good grooming. Be aware of your appearance and its impact. Wear 
appropriate, clean clothing and a few simple accessories. Revealing shirts, nose 
rings, and tattoos may not be appropriate in a work setting. Be consistent, too; 
you can’t project a good image by dressing well a few times a week and then 
showing up looking like you’re getting ready to mow a lawn. 
 
 
  Many organizations have adopted “business casual” guidelines, but others still 
require traditional attire, so ask what the organization’s policies are and choose 
your wardrobe accordingly. Casual doesn’t mean sloppy or shabby. Wrinkled 
clothing, shirttails hanging out, and hats worn indoors are not usually appropriate. 
For women, business casual attire includes simple skirts and slacks (no jeans), 
cotton shirts, sweaters (not too tight), blazers, and low-heeled shoes or boots. Men 
may wear khaki trousers, sport shirts with collars, sweaters or sport jackets, and 
casual loafers or lace-up shoes.  
 
3.  Being on time. When you don’t come to class or work on time, you’re sending 
this message to your teacher or boss: “My time is more important than your time. 
I have more important things to do than be here.” In addition to showing a lack of 
respect to your teacher or boss, lateness rudely disrupts the work of your 
colleagues. 
 
 
  Pay attention to the corporate culture. Sometimes you have to come in earlier 
than others and leave later to get that promotion you desire. To develop good 
work habits and get good grades, arrive in class on time and avoid leaving 
(or packing up to leave) early. 
 
4.  Practicing considerate behavior. Listen when others are talking—for example, 
don’t check your cell phone for messages, read the newspaper, or eat in class. 
Don’t interrupt others when they are speaking; wait your turn. Eliminate profanity 
from your vocabulary. Use appropriate body language by sitting up attentively 
and not slouching. Sitting up has the added bonus of helping you stay awake! 
Professors and managers alike get a favorable impression from those who look 
and act alert. 
 
5.  Practicing good e-mail etiquette. The basic rules of courtesy in face-to-face 
communication also apply to e-mail exchanges. Introduce yourself at the 
beginning of your first e-mail message. Next, let your recipients know how you 
got their names and e-mail addresses. Then proceed with your clear but succinct 
message, and always be sure to type full words ( ur is not the same thing as  your ). 
Finally, close the e-mail with a signature. Do not send an attachment unless your 
correspondent has indicated he or she will accept it. Ask first! You can find much 
more information about proper Internet etiquette, or netiquette, online—for 
example, at  NetManners.com . 
 
6.  Practicing good cell phone manners. Your Introduction to Business class is not 
the place to be arranging a date for tonight. Turn off the phone during class or in 
a business meeting unless you are expecting a critical call. If you are expecting 
such a call, let your professor know before class. Turn off your ringer and put the 
phone on vibrate. Sit by the aisle and near the door. If you do receive a critical 
call, leave the room before answering it. Apologize to the professor after class and 
explain the situation. 
 
7.  Practicing safe posting on social media. Be careful what you post on your 
Facebook page or any other social media. While it may be fun to share your latest 
adventures with your friends, your boss or future boss may not appreciate your 
latest party pictures. Be aware that those pictures may not go away even if you 
delete them from your page. If anyone else downloaded them, they are still out 
there waiting for a recruiter to discover. Make sure to update your privacy settings 
frequently. It’s a good idea to separate your list of work friends and limit what 
that group can view. Also be aware that some work colleagues aren’t interested in 
becoming your Facebook friends. To avoid awkwardness, wait for work associates 

P-7
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
PROLOGUE
to reach out to you first. Make sure you know 
your employer’s policy on using social media on 
company time. 6 Obviously, they will probably 
frown on using it for personal use on company 
time, but there may be rules about sharing 
technical matter, company information, etc. Be 
mindful that social media accounts time-stamp 
your comments.  
 
8.  Being prepared. A businessperson would never 
show up for a meeting without having read the 
appropriate materials and being prepared to 
discuss the topics on the agenda. For students, 
acting like a professional means reading assigned 
materials before class, having written assignments 
ready to be turned in, asking and responding to 
questions in class, and discussing the material 
with fellow students. 
 Just as traffic laws enable people to drive more safely, business etiquette allows people 
to conduct business with the appropriate amount of consideration. Sharpen your competi-
tive edge by becoming familiar with its rules. If your job or career requires you to travel 
internationally, learn the proper business etiquette for each country you visit. 7 Customs 
differ widely for such everyday activities as greeting people, eating, giving gifts, present-
ing and receiving business cards, and conducting business in general. In Japan, business-
people typically bow instead of shaking hands, and in some Arab countries it is insulting 
to sit so as to show the soles of your shoes. Honesty, high ethical standards, and reliability 
and trustworthiness are important for success in any country. 
 Having a reputation for integrity will enable you to be proud of who you are and con-
tribute a great deal to your business success. Unethical behavior can ruin your reputation; 
so think carefully before you act. When in doubt, don’t! Ethics is so important to success 
that we include discussions about it throughout the text. 
 DOING YOUR BEST IN COLLEGE 
 The skills you need to succeed in life after college are the same ones that will serve you 
well in your studies. Career, family, and hobbies all benefit from organizational and time 
management skills you can apply right now. Here are some tips for improving your study 
habits, taking tests, and managing your time.  
 Study Hints 
 For the remainder of your college career, consider studying to be your business. Though 
you may hold another job while enrolled in this class, you’re in school because you want 
to advance yourself. So until you get out of school and into your desired occupation, study-
ing is your business. And like any good businessperson, you aim for success. Follow these 
strategies:
 
1.  Go to class. It’s tempting to cut a class on a nice day or when there are other 
things to do. But nothing is more important to doing well in school than going to 
class every time. If possible, sit in the front near the instructor. This will help you 
focus better and avoid distractions in the room. 
 
2.  Listen well. It’s not enough to show up for class if you use the time for a nap. 
Make eye contact with the instructor. In your mind, form a picture of what he or 
she is discussing. Include your existing knowledge and past experiences in your 
picture. This ties new knowledge to what you already know. 
Behavior that’s taken 
for granted in other 
countries might be 
unusual in the United 
States. In some cultures 
bowing is a form of 
greeting to show 
respect. How can you 
learn the appropriate 
business etiquette for 
the countries in which 
you do business?

PROLOGUE
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
P-8
 
3.  Take careful notes. Make two columns in your notebook, laptop, or tablet. On 
one side write down important concepts, and on the other examples or more 
detailed explanations. Use abbreviations and symbols whenever possible and 
wide spacing to make the notes easier to read. Edit your notes after class to 
make sure you fully understand what was discussed in class. Rereading and 
rewriting help store the information in your long-term memory. Learn the 
concepts in your courses the same way you learn the words to your favorite song: 
through repetition and review. 
 
4.  Find a good place to study. Find a place with good lighting and a quiet 
atmosphere. Some students do well with classical music or other music without 
lyrics playing in the background. Keep your study place equipped with extra 
supplies such as pens, pencils, calculator, folders, and paper so you don’t have to 
interrupt studying to hunt for them. 
 
5.  Read the text using a strategy such as “survey, question, read, recite, 
review” (SQ3R). 
 
a.  Survey or scan the chapter first to see what it is all about. This means looking 
over the table of contents, learning objectives, headings, photo essays, and charts 
so you get a broad idea of the content. The summaries at the end of each chapter 
in this text provide a great overview of the concepts in the chapter. Scanning will 
provide an introduction and help get your mind in a learning mode.  
 
 b. Write  questions, first by changing the headings into questions. For example, 
you could change the heading of this section to “What hints can I use to study 
better?” Read the questions that appear throughout each chapter in the Test 
Prep sections to give yourself a chance to recall what you’ve read. 
 
 c.  Read the chapter to find the answers to your questions. Be sure to read the 
boxes in the chapter as well. They offer extended examples or discussions of 
the concepts in the text. You’ve probably asked, “Will the material in the boxes 
be on the tests?” Even if your instructor chooses not to test over them directly, 
they are often the most interesting parts of the chapter and will help you retain 
the chapter concepts better. 
 
 d.  Recite your answers to yourself or to others in a study group. Make sure you 
say the answers in your own words so that you clearly understand the concepts. 
Research has shown that saying things is a more effective way to learn them 
than seeing, hearing, or reading about them. While often used in study groups, 
recitation is also good practice for working in teams in the work world. 
 
 e.  Review by rereading and recapping the information. The chapter summaries 
are written in a question-and-answer form, much like a classroom dialogue. 
They’re also tied directly to the learning objectives so that you can see whether 
you’ve accomplished the chapter’s objectives. Cover the written answers and 
see whether you can answer the questions yourself first. 
   6.  Use flash cards. You’ll master the course more easily if you know the 
language of business. To review the key terms in the book, write any terms 
you don’t know on index cards and go through your cards between classes and 
when you have other free time. 
   7.  Use  Connect  Introduction to Business (if your 
professor has recommended it for your course). 
Connect’s 
online 
features 
include 
interactive 
presentations, LearnSmart (adaptive learning technology 
that identifies what you know and don’t know, and 
personalizes your learning experience, ensuring that every 
minute spent studying with LearnSmart is the most efficient and 
productive study time possible), SmartBook (creates a personalized reading 
The SQ3R study system 
recommends that you 
“survey, question, read, 
recite, and review” to 
stay up-to-date with 
assignments and shine in 
class every day. Have you 
adopted this system?

P-9
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
PROLOGUE
experience by highlighting the most impactful concepts you need to learn at that 
moment in time), and interactive applications.  
 
8.  Go over old exams, if possible.  If old exams are not available from your professor, 
ask how many multiple-choice, true/false, and essay questions will be on your test. 
It’s acceptable to ask your professor’s former students what kind of questions are 
given and what material is usually emphasized. It is unethical, though, to go over 
exams you obtain illegally.  
 
9.  Use as many of your senses in learning as possible. If you’re an auditory 
learner—that is, if you learn best by hearing—record yourself reading your 
notes and answering the questions you’ve written. Listen to the tape while you’re 
dressing in the morning. You can also benefit from reading or studying aloud. If 
you’re a visual learner, use pictures, charts, colors, and graphs. Your professor has 
a set of videos that illustrate the concepts in this text. If you’re a kinesthetic learner, 
you remember best by doing, touching, and experiencing. Doing the Developing 
Workplace Skills exercises at the end of each chapter will be a big help.  
 Test-Taking Hints 
 Often students will say, “I know this stuff, but I’m just not good at taking multiple-choice 
(or essay) tests.” Other students find test taking relatively easy. Here are a few test-taking 
hints:
 
1.  Get plenty of sleep and have a good meal. It’s better to be alert and awake 
during an exam than to study all night and be groggy. If you keep up with your 
reading and your reviews on a regular basis, you won’t need to pull an all-nighter. 
Proper nutrition also plays an important part in your brain’s ability to function.  
 
2.  Bring all you need for the exam. Sometimes you’ll need No. 2 pencils, erasers, 
and a calculator. Ask beforehand. 
 
3.  Relax. At home before the test, take deep, slow breaths. Picture yourself in the testing 
session, relaxed and confident. Reread the chapter summaries. Get to class early to 
settle down. If you start to get nervous during the test, stop and take a few deep 
breaths. Turn the test over and write down information you remember. Sometimes 
this helps you connect the information you know to the questions on the test.  
 
4.  Read the directions on the exam carefully. You don’t want to miss anything or 
do something you’re not supposed to do. 
 
5.  Read all the answers in multiple-choice questions. Even if there is more than 
one correct-sounding answer to a multiple-choice question, one is clearly better. 
Read them all to be sure you pick the best. Try covering up the choices while 
reading the question. If the answer you think of is one of the choices, it is probably 
correct. If you are still unsure of the answer, start eliminating options you know 
are wrong. Narrowing the choices to two or three improves your odds. 
 
6.  Answer all the questions. Unless your instructor takes off more for an incorrect 
answer than for no answer, you have nothing to lose by guessing. Also, skipping 
a question can lead to inadvertently misaligning your answers on a scan sheet. 
You could end up with all your subsequent answers scored wrong! 
 
7.  Read true/false questions carefully. All parts of the statement must be true or 
else the entire statement is false. Watch out for absolutes such as  never, always, 
and  none. These often make a statement false. 
 
8.  Organize your thoughts before answering essay questions. Think about the 
sequence in which to present what you want to say. Use complete sentences with 
correct grammar and punctuation. Explain or defend your answers.  
 
9.  Go over the test at the end. Make sure you’ve answered all the questions, put 
your name on the exam, and followed all directions. 

PROLOGUE
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
P-10
 Time Management Hints 
 The most important management skill you can learn is how to manage your time. Now is as 
good an opportunity to practice as any. Here are some hints other students have learned—
often the hard way:
 
1.  Write weekly goals for yourself. Make certain your goals are realistic and 
attainable. Write the steps you’ll use to achieve each goal. Reward yourself when 
you reach a goal. 
 
2.  Keep a “to do” list. It’s easy to forget things unless you write them down. Jot 
tasks down as soon as you know of them. That gives you one less thing to do: 
remembering what you have to do. 
 
3.  Prepare a daily schedule. Use a commercial printed or electronic daily planner 
or create your own. Write the days of the week across the top of the page. Write 
the hours of the day from the time you get up until the time you go to bed down 
the left side. Draw lines to form columns and rows and fill in all the activities you 
have planned in each hour. Hopefully, you will be surprised to see how many slots 
of time you have available for studying. 
 
4.  Prepare for the next day the night before. Having everything ready to go will 
help you make a quick, stress-free start in the morning.  
 
5.  Prepare weekly and monthly schedules. Use a calendar to fill in activities and 
upcoming assignments. Include both academic and social activities so that you 
can balance your work and fun.  
 
6.  Space out your work.  Don’t wait until the last week of the course to write all 
your papers and study for your exams. If you do a few pages a day, you can write 
a 20-page paper in a couple of weeks with little effort. It is really difficult to push 
out 20 pages in a day or two. 
 
7.  Defend your study time. Study every day. Use the time between classes to go 
over your flash cards and read the next day’s assignments. Make it a habit to 
defend your study time so you don’t slip. 
 
8.  Take time for fun. If you have some fun every day, life will be full. Schedule 
your fun times along with your studying so that you have balance. 
Keeping a daily schedule 
is only one of the many 
strategies that will help 
you manage your time. 
You should also keep a 
running list of goals and 
things you need to do 
each week. In what other 
ways can you defend 
your study time?

P-11
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
PROLOGUE
 “Time is money,” the saying goes. Some, however, would argue that time is more 
valuable than money. If your bank account balance falls, you might be able to build it back 
up by finding a better-paying job, taking a second job, or even selling something you own. 
But you have only a limited amount of time and there is no way to make more. Learn to 
manage your time well, because you can never get it back.  
 MAKING THE MOST OF THE RESOURCES 
FOR THIS COURSE 
 College courses and textbooks are best at teaching you concepts and ways of thinking 
about business. However, to learn firsthand how to apply those ideas to real business situa-
tions, you need to explore and interact with other resources. Here are seven basic resources 
for the class in addition to the text:
 
1.  The professor. One of the most valuable facets of college is the chance to study 
with experienced professors. Your instructor is a resource who’s there to answer 
some questions and guide you to answers for others. Many professors get job 
leads they can pass on to you and can provide letters of recommendation too. 
Thus it’s important to develop a friendly relationship with your professors. 
 
2.  The supplements that come with this text.  Connect Introduction to Business 
online course material (if your professor has recommended it for your course) 
will help you review and interpret key material and give you practice answering 
test questions. Even if your professor does not assign these materials, you may 
want to use them anyhow. Doing so will improve your test scores and help you 
compete successfully with the other students.  
 
3.  Outside readings. One secret to success in business is staying current. Review 
and become familiar with the following magazines and newspapers during 
the course and throughout your career:  The Wall Street Journal, Forbes, 
Barron’s, Bloomberg Businessweek, Fortune, Money, The 
Economist, Hispanic Business, Harvard Business Review, 
Black Enterprise, Fast Company, Inc., and  Entrepreneur. 
You may also want to read your local newspaper’s business 
section and national news magazines such as  Time and 
 Newsweek. You can find them in your school’s learning 
resource center or the local public library. Some are also 
available online free.  
 
4.  Your own experience and that of your classmates. Many 
college students have had experience working in business or 
nonprofit organizations. Hearing and talking about those 
experiences exposes you to many real-life examples that are 
invaluable for understanding business. Don’t rely exclusively 
on the professor for all the answers and other exercises in 
this book. Often there is no single “right” answer, and your 
classmates may open up new ways of looking at things 
for you. 
 
 
  Part of being a successful businessperson is learning how 
to work with others. Some professors encourage their 
students to work together and build teamwork as well as 
presentation and analytical skills. Students from other 
countries can help you learn about different cultures and 
different approaches to handling business problems. There 
is strength in diversity, so seek out people different from you 
to work with on teams. 
 Your college professors 
are among the most 
valuable resources 
and contacts you’ll 
encounter as you 
develop your career 
path. How many of your 
professors have you 
gotten to know so far?  

PROLOGUE
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
P-12
 
5.  Outside contacts.  Who can tell you more about what it’s like to start a career in 
accounting than someone who’s doing it now? One of the best ways to learn about 
different businesses is to visit them in person. The world can be your classroom. 
 
 
  When you go shopping, think about whether you would enjoy working in and 
managing a store. Think about owning or managing a restaurant, an auto body shop, 
a health club, or any other establishment you visit. If something looks interesting, 
talk to the employees and learn more about their jobs and the industry. Be constantly 
on the alert to find career possibilities, and don’t hesitate to talk with people about 
their careers. Many will be pleased to give you their time and honest opinions.  
 
6.  The Internet. The Internet offers more material than you could use in a lifetime. 
Throughout this text we present information and exercises that require you to use 
the Internet. Information changes rapidly, and it is up to you to stay current.  
 
7.  The library or learning resource center. The library is a great complement to 
the Internet and a valuable resource. Work with your librarian to learn how to best 
access the information you need. 
 Getting the Most from This Text 
 Many learning aids appear throughout this text to help you understand the concepts:
 
1.  List of Learning Objectives at the beginning of each chapter. Reading through 
these objectives will help you set the framework and focus for the chapter 
material. Since every student at one time or other has found it difficult to get into 
studying, the Learning Objectives are there to provide an introduction and to get 
your mind into a learning mode.  
 
2.  Getting to Know and Name That Company features.  The opening stories will 
help you  get to know professionals who successfully use the concepts presented 
in the chapters. The Name That Company feature at the beginning of each chapter 
challenges you to identify a company discussed in the chapter. 
 
3.  Photo essays. The photos offer examples of the concepts in the chapter. Looking 
at the photos and reading the photo essays (captions) before you read the chapter 
will give you a good idea of what the chapter is all about. 
 
4.  Self-test questions. Periodically, within each chapter, you’ll encounter set-off 
lists of questions called Test Prep. These questions give you a chance to pause, 
think carefully about, and recall what you’ve just read. 
 
5.  Key terms. Developing a strong business vocabulary is one of the most important 
and useful aspects of this course. To assist you, all key terms in the book are 
highlighted in boldface type. Key terms are also defined in the margins, and page 
references to these terms are given at the end of each chapter. A full glossary is 
located in the back of the book. You should rely heavily on these learning aids in 
adding new terms to your vocabulary. 
 
6.  Boxes. Each chapter contains a number of boxed extended examples or discussions 
that cover major themes of the book: (a) ethics (Making Ethical Decisions); 
(b) small business (Spotlight on Small Business); (c) global business (Reaching 
Beyond Our Borders); (d) environmental issues (Seeking Sustainability); and 
(e) contemporary business issues (Adapting to Change). They’re interesting to 
read and provide key insights into important business issues; we hope you enjoy 
and learn from them. 
 
7.  End-of-chapter summaries. The chapter summaries are directly tied to the 
chapter Learning Objectives so that you can see whether you’ve accomplished the 
chapter’s objectives. 
 
8.  Critical Thinking questions. The end-of-chapter questions help you relate the 
material to your own experiences. 

P-13
Getting Ready for This Course and Your Career
PROLOGUE
 
9.  Developing Workplace Skills exercises. To really remember something, it’s best 
to do it. That’s why Developing Workplace Skills sections at the end of each 
chapter suggest small projects that help you use resources, develop interpersonal 
skills, manage information, understand systems, and sharpen technology skills.  
 
10.  Taking It to the Net exercises. These exercises direct you to dynamic outside 
resources that reinforce the concepts introduced in the text. You might want to 
bookmark some of the websites you’ll discover. 
 
11.  Video Cases. These cases feature companies, processes, practices, and managers 
that bring to life the key concepts in the chapter and give you real-world 
information to think over and discuss. 
 If you use the suggestions we’ve presented here, you’ll actively participate in a learn-
ing experience that will help you greatly in this course and your chosen career. The most 
important secret to success may be to enjoy what you’re doing and do your best in every-
thing. To do your best, take advantage of all the learning aids available to you. 
  1 . 
Danielle Kurtzleben, “Study: Income Gap Between Young 
College and High School Grads Widens,”  U.S. New & World 
Report, February 11, 2014. 
  2. 
National Center for Education Studies,   www.nces.ed.gov  , 
accessed May 2014. 
  3. 
U.S. Census Bureau,   www.census.gov  , accessed May 2014. 
  4. 
David Lavenda and Susan Fisher, “15 Tips to Master the 
Awkward Networking Waltz,”  Fast Company,  October 31, 
2013; and Elaine Wherry, “Networking Tips for Wallflowers,” 
 The Wall Street Journal,  March 13, 2014. 
  5. 
Barbara Pachter,  The Essentials of Business Etiquette—How 
to Greet, Eat, and Tweet Your Way to Success (New York, 
McGraw-Hill, 2013); and Susan Adams, “A Guide to Business 
Etiquette: What’s New?”  Forbes, May 14, 2014. 
  6. 
Jeanne Meister, “To Do: Update Company’s Social Media 
Policy ASAP,”  Forbes, February 7, 2013; and Erik Sherman, 
“You Tweeted What about My Company?”  Inc., January 31, 
2014. 
   7.  
Andy Molinsky, “When Crossing Cultures, Use Global 
Dexterity,”  Harvard Business Review, March 12, 2013; and 
Christina Larson, “Office Cultures: A Global Guide,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, June 13, 2013.  
Susan Adams, “A Guide to Business
 notes 
Page P-3: © Fancy Photographer/Veer/RF; p. P-5: 
© John Lund/Blend Images/Alamy; p. P-6: 
© iStock/360/Getty Images RF; p. P-7: © Digital 
Vision/Getty Images RF; p. P-8: © Greg Vote/Cor-
bis RF; p. P-10: © Nigel Russel/Corbis; 
p. P-11: © Randy Faris/Corbis RF. 
F; p P-8: © Greg Vote/Cor-
 photo credits 

2
 Taking Risks and 
Making Profits within 
the Dynamic Business 
Environment 
BUSINESS TRENDS: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
 1 
 PART 1 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 1-1 
Describe the relationship between profit and risk, and show how 
businesses and nonprofit organizations can raise the standard of 
living for all. 
 LO 1-2 
Compare and contrast being an entrepreneur and working for others. 
 LO 1-3 
Analyze the effects of the economic environment and taxes on 
businesses. 
 LO 1-4 
Describe the effects of technology on businesses. 
 LO 1-5 
Demonstrate how businesses can meet and beat competition. 
 LO 1-6 
Analyze the social changes affecting businesses. 
 LO 1-7 
Identify what businesses must do to meet global challenges, 
including war and terrorism. 
 LO 1-8 
Review how past trends are being repeated in the present and 
what those trends mean for tomorrow’s college graduates.  

3
Sammy Hagar
 • Entrepreneur and Rock Star
 • Van Halen frontman
 • Entrepreneur
 • Philanthropist
www.redrocker.com
@sammyhagar
M
   ost 1980s hard rockers 
are known for their big 
hair and wild lifestyles 
rather than their business 
expertise. But unlike 
many of his colleagues, Sammy Hagar has 
juggled a decades-long music career with 
a lucrative business portfolio that has 
earned him tens of millions of dollars over 
the years. From humble beginnings to the 
heights of international stardom, the Red 
Rocker’s careful money management skills 
and immense entrepreneurial enthusiasm 
have helped him become one of the rich-
est musicians in the world. 
 Born to a poor family in Fontana, Cali-
fornia, Hagar credits his mother as his 
first business advisor. “She convinced 
me, ‘If you’re going to be in the music 
business, then you have to save your 
money and invest it properly, because all 
those guys end up alcoholic, drug 
addicts, and broke,’” says Hagar. After 
first finding success with the band Mon-
trose, Hagar partnered with his brother-
in-law and invested his earnings in some 
apartment complexes. Then as the band 
began to tour more, he started his own 
travel agency so they wouldn’t have to 
pay anyone to book travel arrangements. 
 When his stint with Montrose ended, 
Hagar focused on his solo career. The 
early 1980s found him packing stadiums 
across the country and earning $3 mil-
lion annually. However, Hagar was 
always careful not to depend solely on 
his music to earn money. In 1987 he 
bought and expanded a specialty moun-
tain bike store called Sausalito Cyclery 
that soon grew into one of the highest-
rated bike shops in California. 
 But just as Hagar’s business interests 
were progressing steadily, his music 
career took a sudden shot upward. After 
the band Van Halen fired its fitful front-
man David Lee Roth, lead guitarist 
Eddie Van Halen hired Hagar for the job. 
Although Hagar was certainly well known 
before, Van Halen’s position as one of 
the biggest bands in the world launched 
Hagar’s fame to enormous heights. The 
band’s relentless touring and recording 
schedule took a toll on the hardworking 
rocker. Whenever Hagar got a free 
moment in his hectic schedule, he would 
unwind at his condo in Cabo San Lucas, 
Mexico. The small resort hideaway ended 
up giving Hagar his biggest business 
idea yet. “[The town had] three hotels, 
and none of the restaurants had air con-
ditioning, telephones, or TV,” says Hagar. 
“But I fell in love with the place. I wanted 
a place to hang out down there, so I 
said, ‘I’m going to build a tequila bar.’” 
 With his bandmates as partners, 
Hagar opened the Cabo Wabo Cantina 
in 1990. However, his responsibilities 
with Van Halen prevented him from tak-
ing an active role in the business. The 
failing restaurant added to the tension 
within the band, and by 1996 Hagar and 
Van Halen parted ways. Hagar bought 
out his bandmates and hired new man-
agement at Cabo Wabo. As the 
revamped restaurant became a hot des-
tination both for locals and tourists, 
Hagar looked to expand his brand. Along 
with opening Sammy’s Beach Bar restau-
rants in cities and airports across the 
country, in the late 1990s he launched 
Cabo Wabo Tequila as a national brand. 
By 2010 the liquor had become so popu-
lar that Hagar sold it for $91 million. All 
told, Hagar’s holdings have grown the 
Red Rocker’s net worth to $120 million. 
 Although Hagar has come a long way 
from his youthful days on welfare and 
food stamps, he hasn’t forgotten those 
who continue to struggle to put food on 
the table. In addition to contributing all of 
the profits from his airport restaurants to 
charity, Hagar contributes $2,500 to 
food banks in each of the cities he visits 
and brings awareness to food banks by 
featuring information about them on 
video screens during his live 
performances .
The business environment is 
constantly changing, and 
along with those changes 
come opportunities. The 
purpose of this chapter, 
and this text, is to intro-
duce you to the 
dynamic world of busi-
ness and to some of the 
people who thrive in it. Entrepreneurs 
like Sammy Hagar contribute much to 
the communities they serve, and they 
also make a good living doing so. 
That’s what business is all about.
Sources: Liz Welsh, “How I Did It: Sammy 
Hagar,” Inc., November 2013; Mike Burr, “Paul 
McCartney Heads List of World’s Richest 
Singers,” Prefix, September 13, 2012; and 
Mitchell Peters, “Banking on Sammy 
Hagar: Red Rocker Is Serious about 
Helping Local Food Banks”, 
Billboard, August 13, 2013.  
 Getting to know  Sammy    Hagar  

4
 name that company 
 Just before Christmas 2013, hackers stole more than 110 million credit card 
numbers from this retailer’s computer system requiring all customers to monitor 
activity on these accounts and/or get new credit cards. The company’s profits 
fell nearly 50 percent for the quarter. Name that company. (You will find the 
answer in this chapter.)  
 Describe the relationship between profit and risk, and show how businesses 
and nonprofit organizations can raise the standard of living for all. 
 ENTREPRENEURSHIP AND WEALTH BUILDING  
 One thing you can learn from the chapter-opening Getting to Know feature is 
that success in business is based on constantly adapting to the market. A 
  business   is any activity that seeks to provide goods and services to others 
while operating at a profit. To earn that profit, you provide desired goods, 
jobs, and services to people in the area.   Goods  are  tangible products such as 
computers, food, clothing, cars, and appliances.   Services   are  intangible prod-
ucts (i.e., products that can’t be held in your hand) such as education, health 
care, insurance, recreation, and travel and tourism.  1 Once you have devel-
oped the right goods and services, based on consumer wants and needs, you 
need to reach those consumers using whatever media they prefer, including 
blogs, tweets, Facebook, TV advertising, and more.  2  
 Although you don’t need to have wealth as a primary goal, one result of 
successfully filling a market need is that you can make money for yourself, 
sometimes a great deal, by giving customers what they want. Sam Walton of 
Walmart began by opening one store in Arkansas and, over time, became one 
of the richest people in the United States. Now his heirs are some of the rich-
est people in the United States.  3 
 There are about 9 million millionaires in the United States.  4 Maybe you 
will be one of them someday if you start your own business. An   entrepreneur  
is a person who risks time and money to start and manage a business.  
 Revenues, Profits, and Losses 
 Revenue  is the total amount of money a business takes in during a given 
period by selling goods and services.   Profit  is the amount of money a business 
earns above and beyond what it spends for salaries and other expenses needed 
to run the operation. A   loss   occurs when a business’s expenses are more than 
its revenues. If a business loses money over time, it will likely have to close, 
putting its employees out of work. About 80,000 businesses in the United 
States close each year. Even more close during a recession like the recession of 
2007–2009. 5 
 As noted above, the business environment is constantly changing. What 
seems like a great opportunity one day may become a huge failure when the 
economy changes. Starting a business may thus come with huge risks.  6 But 
huge risks often result in huge profits. We’ll explore that concept next.  
LO 1–1
 business  
 Any activity that seeks to 
provide goods and services to 
others while operating at a 
profit.  
 goods  
 Tangible products such as 
computers, food, clothing, cars, 
and appliances.  
 services  
 Intangible products (i.e., 
products that can’t be held in 
your hand) such as education, 
health care, insurance, 
recreation, and travel and 
tourism.  
 entrepreneur  
 A person who risks time and 
money to start and manage a 
business.  
 profit  
 The amount of money a 
business earns above and 
beyond what it spends for 
salaries and other expenses.  
 loss  
 When a business’s expenses 
are more than its revenues.  
 revenue  
 The total amount of money a 
business takes in during a 
given period by selling goods 
and services.  

5
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment
CHAPTER 1
 Matching Risk with Profit 
  Risk  is the chance an entrepreneur takes of losing time and money on a busi-
ness that may not prove profitable. Profit, remember, is the amount of money 
a business earns  above and beyond what it pays out for salaries and other 
expenses. For example, if you were to start a business selling hot dogs from a 
cart in the summer, you would have to pay for the cart rental. You would also 
have to pay for the hot dogs and other materials, and for someone to run the 
cart while you were away. After you paid your employee and yourself, paid for 
the food and materials you used, paid the rent on the cart, and paid your taxes, 
any money left over would be profit. 
 Keep in mind that profit is over and above the money you pay yourself in 
salary. You could use any profit to rent or buy a second cart and hire other 
employees. After a few summers, you might have a dozen carts employing 
dozens of workers. 
 Not all enterprises make the same amount of profit. Those that take the 
most risk may make the most profit. There is high risk, for example, in making 
a new kind of automobile.  7 It’s also risky to open a business in an inner city, 
because insurance and rent are usually higher than in suburban areas, but 
reduced competition makes substantial profit possible. Irish entrepreneur Denis 
O’Brien, of Digicel, made billions of dollars selling cell phones in the poorest, 
most violent countries in the world. Big risk can mean big profits.  
 Standard of Living and Quality of Life 
 Entrepreneurs such as Sam Walton (Walmart) and Bill Gates (Microsoft) not 
only became wealthy themselves; they also provided employment for many 
other people. Walmart is currently the nation’s largest private employer. 
 Businesses and their employees pay taxes that the federal government 
and local communities use to build hospitals, schools, libraries, playgrounds, 
roads, and other public facilities. Taxes also help to keep the environment 
clean, support people in need, and provide police and fire protection. Thus, 
the wealth businesses generate, and the taxes they pay, help everyone in their 
communities. A nation’s businesses are part of an economic system that con-
tributes to the standard of living and quality of life for everyone in the country 
(and, potentially, the world). How has the recent economic slowdown affected 
the standard of living and quality of life in your part of the world? 
 The term   standard of living   refers to the amount of goods and services peo-
ple can buy with the money they have. For example, the United States has one of 
the highest standards of living in the world, even though workers in some other 
countries, such as Germany and Japan, may on average make more money per 
hour. How can that be? Prices for goods and services 
in Germany and Japan are higher than in the United 
States, so a person in those countries can buy less 
than what a person in the United States can buy with 
the same amount of money. For example, a bottle of 
beer may cost $7 in Japan and $3 in the United States.  
 Often, goods cost more in one country than in 
another because of higher taxes and stricter gov-
ernment regulations. Finding the right level of 
taxes and regulation is important in making a 
country or city prosperous.  8 We’ll explore those 
issues in more depth in Chapter 2. At this point, it 
is enough to understand that the United States 
enjoys a high standard of living largely because of 
the wealth created by its businesses. 
 risk  
 The chance an entrepreneur 
takes of losing time and money 
on a business that may not 
prove profitable.  
 standard of living  
 The amount of goods and 
services people can buy with 
the money they have.  
 When Nick Woodman 
wanted to show off 
videos of his stunts to 
other surfers, he used 
rubber bands and a 
surfboard leash to 
attach cameras to his 
wrist. His early attempts 
didn’t work, but after a 
lot of work and a 
$235,000 investment, 
his GoPro cameras are 
now the gold standard 
for self-documenting 
extreme sports. Today 
Woodman’s company 
brings in $526 million in 
annual revenue. What 
risks and rewards did 
Woodman face when 
starting his business?  
iSee It! Need help 
understanding standard 
of living vs. quality of 
life? Visit your Connect 
e-book video tab 
for a brief animated 
explanation.

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
6
 The term   quality of life   refers to the general well-being of a society in 
terms of its political freedom, natural environment, education, health care, 
safety, amount of leisure, and rewards that add to the satisfaction and joy that 
other goods and services provide. Maintaining a high quality of life requires 
the combined efforts of businesses, nonprofit organizations, and government 
agencies. Remember, there is more to quality of life than simply making 
money. 
 Responding to the Various Business Stakeholders 
  Stakeholders   are all the people who stand to gain or lose by the policies and 
activities of a business and whose concerns the business needs to address. 
They include customers, employees, stockholders, suppliers, dealers (retail-
ers), bankers, people in the surrounding community, the media, environmen-
talists, competitors, unions, critics, and elected government leaders (see 
 Figure 1.1 ).  9  
 A primary challenge for organizations of the 21st century will be to recog-
nize and respond to the needs of their stakeholders. For example, the need for 
the business to make profits may be balanced against the needs of employees 
to earn sufficient income or the need to protect the environment.  10 Ignore the 
media, and they might attack your business with articles that hurt sales. 
Oppose the local community, and it may stop you from expanding. 
 Staying competitive may call for outsourcing.   Outsourcing   means 
contracting with other companies (often in other countries) to do some or 
all of the functions of a firm, like its production or accounting tasks. Out-
sourcing has had serious consequences in some states where jobs have been 
lost to overseas competitors. We discuss outsourcing in more detail in 
Chapter 3. 
quality of life
The general well-being of a 
society in terms of its political 
freedom, natural environment, 
education, health care, safety, 
amount of leisure, and rewards 
that add to the satisfaction and 
joy that other goods and 
services provide.
 stakeholders  
 All the people who stand to 
gain or lose by the policies and 
activities of a business and 
whose concerns the business 
needs to address.  
 outsourcing  
 Contracting with other 
companies (often in other 
countries) to do some or all of 
the functions of a firm, like its 
production or accounting tasks.  
 FIGURE 1.1 A BUSINESS 
AND ITS STAKEHOLDERS  
Often the needs of a firm’s 
various stakeholders will 
conflict. For example, paying 
employees more may cut into 
stockholders’ profits. Balancing 
such demands is a major role 
of business managers. 
STAKEHOLDERS
Stockholders
Customers
Surrounding
community
Environmentalists
Dealers
(retailers)
Employees
Government
leaders
Suppliers
Media
TYPICAL U.S.
BUSINESS
Bankers

7
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment
CHAPTER 1
 The other side of the outsourcing coin is  insourcing. 11 Many foreign com-
panies are setting up design and production facilities here in the United States. 
For example, Korea-based Hyundai operates design and engineering head-
quarters in Detroit, Michigan, and produces cars in Montgomery, Alabama. 
Japanese automakers Honda and Toyota have been producing cars in the 
United States for years. Hon Hai Precision Industry Company assembles gad-
gets for Apple and other global technology companies. It is evaluating a plan 
to build an advanced display-manufacturing plant in the United States.  12 
Insourcing creates many new U.S. jobs and helps offset those jobs being 
outsourced. 
 It may be legal and profitable to outsource, but is it best for all the stake-
holders? Business leaders must make outsourcing decisions based on all fac-
tors. Pleasing stakeholders is not easy and often calls for trade-offs.  
 Using Business Principles in Nonprofit Organizations 
 Despite their efforts to satisfy their stakeholders, businesses cannot do every-
thing needed to make a community all it can be. Nonprofit organizations—
such as public schools, civic associations, charities like the United Way and 
the Salvation Army, and groups devoted to social causes—also make a major 
contribution to the welfare of society. A   nonprofit organization   is an organi-
zation whose goals do not include making a personal profit for its owners or 
organizers. Nonprofit organizations often do strive for financial gains, but 
they use them to meet their social or educational goals rather than for per-
sonal profit.  
 Your interests may lead you to work for a nonprofit organization. That 
doesn’t mean, however, that you shouldn’t study business in college. You’ll still 
need to learn business skills such as information management, leadership, 
marketing, and financial management. The knowledge and skills you acquire 
in this and other business courses are useful for careers in any organization, 
including nonprofits. We’ll explore entrepreneurship in more detail right after 
the Test Prep.  
 nonprofit organization  
 An organization whose goals 
do not include making a 
personal profit for its owners or 
organizers.  
 The goals of nonprofit 
organizations are social 
and educational, not 
profit-oriented. The Red 
Cross, for example, 
provides assistance to 
around 30 million 
people annually, from 
refugees to victims of 
natural disasters. Why 
do good management 
principles apply equally 
to businesses and 
nonprofit organizations?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
8
 Compare and contrast being an entrepreneur and working for others. 
 ENTREPRENEURSHIP VERSUS 
WORKING FOR OTHERS
 There are two ways to succeed in business. One is to rise through the ranks of 
a large company. The advantage of working for others is that somebody else 
assumes the company’s entrepreneurial risk and provides you with benefits 
like paid vacation time and health insurance. It’s a good option, and many 
people choose it. 
 The other, riskier, but often more exciting, path is to become an entrepre-
neur. 13 The national anthem, “The Star Spangled Banner,” says that the 
United States is the “land of the free and the home of the brave.” Part of being 
free is being able to own your own business and reap the profits from it. That 
includes older people who have some experience and are looking for new 
opportunities.  14 In 2013, for example, over 23 percent of companies were 
started by people aged 55 to 64.  15 But freedom to succeed also means free-
dom to fail, and many small businesses fail each year. It takes a brave person 
to start one. As an entrepreneur, you don’t receive any benefits such as paid 
vacation time, day care, a company car, or health insurance. You have to pro-
vide them for yourself! But what you gain—freedom to make your own deci-
sions, opportunity, and possible wealth—is often worth the effort. Before you 
take on the challenge, you should study successful entrepreneurs to learn the 
process.  16 You can talk to them personally and read about them in Chapter 6, 
as well as in other books and magazines. Read the nearby Spotlight on Small 
Business box to learn about an example of entrepreneurship helping those in 
a devastated community and how a natural disaster was turned into an 
opportunity.  
 Opportunities for Entrepreneurs 
 Millions of people from all over the world have taken the entre-
preneurial challenge and succeeded.  17 For example, the number 
of Hispanic-owned businesses in the United States has grown 
dramatically (Hispanics are now the largest ethnic group in the 
United States). Both Hispanic men and women are doing par-
ticularly well. Similar successes are true of businesses owned 
by Asians, Pacific Islanders, Native Americans, and Alaska 
Natives. Young people today have many choices—including 
working for others for a while and then entrepreneurship—to 
find the right fit.  18  
LO 1–2
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.   
 To create wealth for its 
citizens, a country 
requires more than 
natural resources. It 
needs the efforts of 
entrepreneurs and the 
skill and knowledge to 
produce goods and 
services. How can 
government support 
entrepreneurship and 
the spread of 
knowledge?  
 • What is the difference between  revenue and  profit? 
 • What is the difference between  standard of living and  quality of life? 
 • What is  risk, and how is it related to  profit? 
 • What do the terms  stakeholders, outsourcing, and  insourcing mean? 
• What is the difference
 test prep  
e between reve
e be

9
 Women now own over a third of all businesses. Businesses owned by 
minority women are growing faster than those owned by men or nonminority 
women. Women of color are establishing businesses at twice the rate of their 
male counterparts and more than four times that of nonminority entrepreneurs. 
As one woman put it in a recent article, “Today, women have choices that their 
grandmothers could not have imagined. The challenge lies in recognizing that 
having choices carries the responsibility to make them wisely.”  19 For many, that 
choice is entrepreneurship.  
 The Importance of Entrepreneurs to the Creation of Wealth 
 Have you ever wondered why some countries are relatively wealthy and others 
poor? Economists have been studying the issue of wealth creation for many 
 spotlight on small business 
 Although 
Hurricane 
Sandy devas-
tated hundreds 
of communities 
along the East 
Coast in 2012, 
few places 
experienced a 
worse “super-
storm” than 
Rockaway 
Beach in the 
New York City 
borough of Queens. An especially 
powerful storm surge flooded the 
whole neighborhood, while fires 
simultaneously consumed resi-
dential as well as commercial dis-
tricts. By the time the winds had 
settled, thousands of Rockaway 
residents found themselves with-
out access to electricity, food, or 
clean water. 
 After witnessing the destruc-
tion firsthand, Mike Diamond of 
the hip-hop group the Beastie 
Boys knew he had to do some-
thing. A native New Yorker and 
dedicated activist, Diamond 
teamed up with some friends in 
the restaurant industry and 
started the Rockaway Plate Lunch 
Truck. Just days after the storm 
cleared, Diamond’s food truck 
began serving more than 500 
free lunches of chicken, rice, and 
beans every day to residents. The 
venture continued even after 
Rockaway Beach began to 
rebuild, but Diamond noticed 
major changes within the commu-
nity during its recovery. “One of 
the main things that has not 
returned is prosperity,” says 
Diamond. “[Rockaway Beach] 
wasn’t a thriving economy before 
Sandy, and it was really set back 
post-Sandy. You have all these 
businesses that won’t reopen.” 
 In an effort to 
provide entre-
preneurial 
experience to 
the residents of 
Rockaway, 
Diamond and 
his partners 
decided to shift 
the food truck 
from a charity to 
a business. But 
instead of hiring 
professionals to 
do the cooking, the team 
brought in local high school stu-
dents to staff the truck. The idea 
was to bring valuable work expe-
rience to young adults in the 
community that will lead to 
careers in food service and per-
haps beyond. “It’s really about 
opportunity and access,” says 
Diamond. “We can find the peo-
ple who are leaders and give 
them a chance at learning from 
our restaurant partners.” 
 Sources: Melinda Newman, “How a Beastie Boy’s 
Food Truck Helped the Rockaways Rebuild after 
Hurricane Sandy,”  Entrepreneur, September 19, 
2013; and Stacey Anderson, “Beastie Boys’ Mike 
D Feeds Hurricane Sandy Victims with Free Food 
Truck,”  Rolling Stone, April 2, 2013. 
 www.rockawayplatelunch.org   
 How a Food Truck Helped Rebuild 
a Storm-Struck Community 
 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
10
years. They began by identifying five   factors of production   that seemed to 
contribute to wealth (see  Figure 1.2 ):
 
1.  Land (or natural resources). Land and other natural resources are 
used to make homes, cars, and other products.  
 
2.  Labor (workers). People have always been an important resource in 
producing goods and services, but many people are now being replaced 
by technology.  
 
3.  Capital. (This includes machines, tools, buildings, or whatever else is 
used in the production of goods. It may not include money; money is 
used to buy factors of production but is not always considered a factor 
by itself.)  
 
4.  Entrepreneurship. All the resources in the world have little value unless 
entrepreneurs are willing to take the risk of starting businesses to use 
those resources.  
 
5.  Knowledge. Information technology has revolutionized business, 
making it possible to quickly determine wants and needs and to 
respond with desired goods and services.  
 Traditionally, business and economics textbooks emphasized only four fac-
tors of production: land, labor, capital, and entrepreneurship. But the late man-
agement expert and business consultant Peter Drucker said the most important 
factor of production in our economy is and always will be  knowledge.  
 What do we find when we compare the factors of production in rich and 
poor countries? Some poor countries have plenty of land and natural resources. 
Russia, for example, has vast areas of land with many resources such as tim-
ber and oil, but it is not considered a rich country (yet). Therefore, land isn’t 
the critical element for wealth creation. 
 Most poor countries, such as Mexico, have many laborers, so it’s not labor 
that’s the primary source of wealth today. Laborers need to find work to make 
a contribution; that is, they need entrepreneurs to create jobs for them. Fur-
thermore, capital—machinery and tools—is now fairly easy for firms to find in 
factors of production
The resources used to create 
wealth: land, labor, capital, 
entrepreneurship, and 
knowledge.
 FIGURE 1.2 THE FIVE FACTORS OF PRODUCTION  
Labor
Land
Capital
Entrepreneurship
Knowledge

11
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment
CHAPTER 1
world markets, so capital isn’t the missing ingredient either. Capital is not pro-
ductive without entrepreneurs to put it to use. 
 What makes rich countries rich today is a combination of  entrepreneur-
ship and the effective use of  knowledge. 20 Entrepreneurs use what they’ve 
learned (knowledge) to grow their businesses and increase wealth. Economic 
and political freedom also matter. 
 The business environment either encourages or discourages entrepre-
neurship. That helps explain why some states and cities in the United States 
grow rich while others remain relatively poor. In the following section, we’ll 
explore what makes up the business environment and how to build an envi-
ronment that encourages growth and job creation.  
 THE BUSINESS ENVIRONMENT  
 The   business environment   consists of the surrounding factors that either 
help or hinder the development of businesses.  Figure 1.3  shows the five ele-
ments in the business environment:
 
1. The economic and legal environment.  
 
2. The technological environment.  
 
3. The competitive environment.  
 
4. The social environment.  
 
5. The global business environment.  
 Businesses that create wealth and jobs grow and prosper in a healthy 
environment. Thus, creating the right business environment is the foundation 
for social benefits of all kinds, including good schools, clean air and water, 
good health care, and low rates of crime. Businesses normally can’t control 
their environment, but they need to monitor it carefully and do what they can 
to adapt as it changes. 
Analyze the effects of the economic environment and taxes on businesses.
 The Economic and Legal Environment 
 People are willing to start new businesses if they believe the risk of losing their 
money isn’t too great. The economic system and the way government works 
with or against businesses can have a strong impact on that level of risk. For 
example, a government can minimize spending and keep taxes and regula-
tions to a minimum—policies that tend to favor business . Much of the debate 
business environment
The surrounding factors that 
either help or hinder the 
development of businesses.
LO 1–3
 Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 • What are some of the advantages of working for others?  
 • What benefits do you lose by being an entrepreneur, and what do you 
gain?  
 • What are the five factors of production? Which ones seem to be the 
most important for creating wealth?  
•
What are some of the
 test prep  
advantaages of
ad

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
12
in recent elections has focused on whether or not to raise taxes and how to 
lower government spending. President Obama increased government spend-
ing with the idea of getting the economy moving faster. Some economists 
agreed with such a stimulus, but some did not.  21 
 One way for government to actively promote entrepreneurship is to allow 
private ownership of businesses. In some countries, the government owns 
most businesses, and there’s little incentive for people to work hard or create 
profit. Around the world today, however, some governments are selling those 
businesses to private individuals to create more wealth. One of the best things 
the governments of developing countries can do is to minimize interference 
with the free exchange of goods and services. 
 The government can further lessen the risks of entrepreneurship by pass-
ing laws that enable businesspeople to write enforceable contracts. In the 
United States, the Uniform Commercial Code, for example, regulates business 
agreements such as contracts and warranties so that firms know they can rely 
on one another. In countries that don’t yet have such laws, the risks of starting 
a business are that much greater. 
 The government can also establish a currency that’s tradable in world 
markets. That is, the currency lets you buy and sell goods and services 
 FIGURE 1.3 TODAY’S 
DYNAMIC BUSINESS 
ENVIRONMENT  
 G
L
O
B
A
L 
B
U
SI
N
E
S
S 
E
N
VI
R
O
N
M
E
N
T 

13
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment
CHAPTER 1
anywhere in the world when it is easily exchanged for that of the other coun-
tries where you do business. If the Chinese did not want to trade their yuan for 
the U.S. dollar, for instance, it’s hard to imagine how Coca-Cola or Disney 
would have been able to sell their products and services there.  
 Finally, the government can help minimize corruption in business and 
in its own ranks.  22 Where governments are corrupt, it’s difficult to build a 
factory or open a store without a government permit, which is obtained 
largely through bribery of public officials. Among businesses themselves, 
unscrupulous leaders can threaten their competitors and unlawfully mini-
mize competition.  23  
 Many laws in the United States attempt to minimize corruption. Nonethe-
less, corrupt and illegal activities at some companies do negatively affect the 
business community and the economy as a whole. The news media widely 
report these scandals. Ethics is so important to the success of businesses and 
the economy as a whole that we feature stories about ethics in most chapters 
and devote Chapter 4 to the subject. 
 The capitalist system relies heavily on honesty, integrity, and high ethical 
standards. Failure of those fundamentals can weaken the whole system. The 
faltering economy that began in 2008 was caused in large part to such failure. 
Some mortgage lenders, for instance, failed to do the research necessary to 
ensure their borrowers’ creditworthiness. Many subprime borrowers (people 
with low credit ratings) forfeited their loans. The ripple effects of these unpaid 
debts not only cost many people their homes but also reduced the value of 
housing across the world and made it difficult even for business borrowers to 
get new loans. Part of the blame for this economic disaster can be placed on 
the borrowers who didn’t tell the truth about their income or who otherwise 
deceived the lenders. 
 It is easy to see the damage caused by the poor moral and ethical behavior 
of some businesspeople. What is not so obvious is the damage caused by the 
moral and ethical lapses of the everyday consumer—that is, you and me. The 
Making Ethical Decisions box discusses that issue in more depth.  
 Starting a business is 
more difficult in some 
countries than in others. 
In India, for example, it 
takes a time-consuming 
and bureaucratic 
process to obtain 
government permission. 
Nonetheless, new 
businesses can become 
a major source of 
wealth and employment. 
This sari shop is one 
small example. What do 
you think would be the 
effect of a little more 
freedom to create 
business opportunities 
in this country of over a 
billion people?  

14
Describe the effects of technology on businesses. 
 The Technological Environment  
 Since prehistoric times, humans have felt the need to create tools that make 
work easier. Few technological changes have had a more comprehensive and 
lasting impact on businesses, however, than the emergence of information 
technology (IT): computers, networks, smartphones, and the Internet. Read the 
nearby Reaching Beyond Our Borders box to learn more about how technology 
makes it possible for freelance employees to find good, lucrative work even 
though they don’t even need to live in the same country as their employers. 
 Smartphones and other mobile devices, as well as social media like Face-
book and Twitter, have completely changed the way people communicate with 
one another. Advertisers and other businesspeople have created ways of using 
these tools to reach their suppliers and customers. Even politicians have har-
nessed the power of the Internet to advance their causes. IT is such a major 
force in business today that we discuss its impact on businesses throughout the 
entire text.  
 How Technology Benefits Workers and You  One of the advantages of work-
ing for others is that the company often provides the tools and technology to 
make your job more productive.   Technology   means everything from phones and 
copiers to computers, mobile devices, medical imaging machines, and the vari-
ous software programs and apps that make business processes more effective, 
efficient, and productive.  Effectiveness means producing the desired result.  Effi-
ciency means producing goods and services using the least amount of resources 
  Productivity   is the amount of output you generate given the amount of 
input, such as the number of hours you work. The more you can produce in 
any given period, the more money you are worth to companies. The problem 
with productivity today is that workers are so productive that fewer are 
needed, and that is contributing to the high unemployment rate we are now 
experiencing.  24 
LO 1–4
technology
Everything from phones and 
copiers to computers, mobile 
devices, medical imaging 
machines, and the various 
software programs and apps 
that make business processes 
more effective, efficient, and 
productive.
productivity
The amount of output you 
generate given the amount of 
input (e.g., hours worked).
 making ethical decisions 
 It is easy to criticize the ethics of 
people whose names appear in 
the headlines. It is more difficult to 
see the moral and ethical misbe-
havior of your own social group. 
Do you find some of the behav-
iors of your friends morally or ethi-
cally questionable? 
 A survey found that the num-
ber of employees calling in sick 
had reached a five-year high, and 
three-fifths were not sick at all. 
Other employees have been 
caught conducting personal busi-
ness at work, such as doing their 
taxes. And others play video 
games on their work computers. 
We’re sure you can add many 
more examples. 
 Many companies today are cre-
ating ethics codes to guide their 
employees’ behavior. We believe 
the trend toward improving ethi-
cal behavior is so important that 
we’ve made it a major theme of 
this book. Throughout the text 
you’ll see boxes like this one, 
called Making Ethical Decisions, 
that pose ethical dilemmas and 
ask what you would do to resolve 
them. The idea is for you to think 
about the moral and ethical 
dimensions of every decision you 
make. 
 Here is your first one: You 
have become addicted to your 
electronic gadgets. Some days 
at work you spend most of the 
time playing games, watching 
TV, texting, sending e-mails to 
friends, or reading a book or 
magazine on your devices. What 
is the problem in this situation? 
What are your alternatives? What 
are the consequences of each 
alternative? Which alternative will 
you choose? Is your choice 
ethical? 
 Ethics Begins with You 

15
 Technology affects people in all industries. For example, Don Glenn, a 
farmer in Decatur, Alabama, uses his computer to compare data from the 
previous year’s harvest with infrared satellite photos of his farm that show 
which crops are flourishing. He can check the latest grain prices and use 
website AgTalk to converse with other farmers from all over the world. He 
also bids for bulk fertilizer on XSAg.com, an online agricultural exchange. 
High-tech equipment tells Glenn how and where to spread fertilizer and seed, 
tracks yields yard by yard, and allows him to maintain high profit margins. 
More tech often means fewer workers. Is that a good or bad thing for 
farmers?  
 The Growth of E-Commerce  
 E-commerce  is the buying and selling of 
goods online. There are two major types of e-commerce transactions: 
business-to-consumer (B2C) and business-to-business (B2B). As important as 
the Internet has been to retailers like Amazon in the consumer market, it has 
become even more important in the B2B market, where businesses sell goods 
and services to one another, such as IBM selling consulting services to a local 
bank. Websites have become the new stores. 
 Traditional businesses must deal with the competition from B2B and 
B2C firms, and vice versa. Many new parents would just as soon buy used 
items posted on Craigslist than shop in a baby-goods store. Starting a busi-
ness on eBay has never been easier. E-commerce has become so important 
that we will discuss it throughout the text.  
 Using Technology to Be Responsive to Customers  
A major theme of 
this text is that those businesses most responsive to customer wants and 
needs will succeed. That realization points to one way in which brick-and-
mortar (traditional) retailers also use technology. For example, businesses 
use bar codes to identify products you buy and their size, quantity, and 
color. The scanner at the checkout counter identifies the price but can also 
put all your purchase information into a   database,  an electronic storage file 
for information. 
e-commerce
The buying and selling of 
goods over the Internet.
database
An electronic storage file for 
information.
 reaching beyond our borders 
 In the years since the recession of 
2007–2009, freelancers have 
become more important to the 
business world than ever before. 
Rather than spend money on 
recruiting and retaining full-time 
employees, many companies pre-
fer to hire temporary workers in 
order to cut costs. In fact, thanks 
to the Internet, freelance employ-
ees don’t even need to live in the 
same country as their employers 
to do good, lucrative work. 
 The company Elance acts as an 
online marketplace that connects 
freelancers with companies looking 
for contractors. For instance, if a 
Silicon Valley startup is looking for 
an affordable engineer, Elance can 
introduce the company to a quali-
fied candidate from Eastern Europe 
or India. Elance then collects an 
8.75 percent transaction fee from 
the company. With more than 
8 million registered individuals, in 
2013 Elance saw its revenues grow 
to $300 million. Following a merger 
with its former rival ODesk, Elance 
expects billings to increase by 
more than $1 billion annually as 
businesses become more depen-
dent on freelance labor, and 
workers adapt to its flexible struc-
ture. “Millennials want to work 
independently and control their 
careers,” says Elance founder 
Fabio Rosati. “If I had to give advice 
to anybody about their careers, I 
would say your number one priority 
should be to remain employable 
as opposed to remaining 
employed.” 
 Sources: Laura Weber, “Elance Taps Growing 
Demand for Freelancers,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, February 4, 2014; Ari Levy, “Elance 
Merges with ODesk to Enlarge Service for 
Freelancers,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
December 18, 2013; and Patrick Clark, “What 
Elance-ODesk Merger Means for Freelancers,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, December 19, 2013. 
 www.elance.com   
 Connecting Companies with Global Freelancers 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
16
 Databases enable stores to carry only the merchandise their local 
population wants. But because companies routinely trade database infor-
mation, many retailers know what you buy and from whom you buy it. Thus 
they can send you catalogs and other direct mail advertising offering the kind 
of products you might want, as indicated by your past purchases.  25 We discuss 
other ways businesses use technology to be responsive to consumers through-
out the text. 
 Unfortunately, the legitimate collection of personal customer information 
also opens the door to identity theft.   Identity theft   is the obtaining of individu-
als’ personal information, such as Social Security and credit card numbers, for 
illegal purposes. Just before Christmas 2013, hackers stole more than 110 mil-
lion credit card numbers from Target’s computer system, requiring all custom-
ers to monitor activity on these accounts and/or get new credit cards. The 
company’s profits fell nearly 50 percent for the quarter.  26  
 The Federal Trade Commission says millions of U.S. consumers are vic-
tims of identity theft each year. What you should learn from these examples is 
to limit those to whom you give personal information.  27 You also need antivi-
rus software on your computer as well as a firewall and antispyware software. 
You may also want to monitor your credit report. It is important for you to 
understand identity theft, security, privacy, stability, and other important IT 
issues. Many people today are concerned about the government listening in on 
their phone conversations and e-mails. 28 
 Demonstrate how businesses can meet and beat competition. 
 The Competitive Environment 
 Competition among businesses has never been greater. Some have found a 
competitive edge by focusing on  quality. The goal for many companies is zero 
defects—no mistakes in making the product. However, even achieving a rate 
of zero defects isn’t enough to stay competitive in world markets. Companies 
now have to offer both high-quality products and good value—that is, out-
standing service at competitive prices. 
 Competing by Exceeding Customer Expectations  
Today’s customers want 
not only good quality at low prices but great service as well. Every manufactur-
ing and service organization in the world should have a sign over its door telling 
its workers that the customer is king. Business is becoming customer-driven, 
not management-driven as often occurred in the past. Successful organizations 
must now listen more closely to customers to determine their wants and needs, 
and then adjust the firm’s products, policies, and practices accordingly. We will 
explore these ideas in more depth in Chapter 13.  
 Competing by Restructuring and Empowerment  
To meet the needs of 
customers, firms must give their frontline workers—for example, office 
clerks, front-desk people at hotels, and salespeople—the responsibility, 
authority, freedom, training, and equipment they need to respond quickly to 
customer requests. They also must allow workers to make other decisions 
essential to producing high-quality goods and services. The process is called 
  empowerment,  and we’ll be talking about it throughout this book. 
 As many companies have discovered, it sometimes takes years to restruc-
ture an organization so that managers can and will give up some of their 
authority and employees will assume more responsibility. We’ll discuss such 
organizational changes in Chapter 8. 
LO 1–5
empowerment
Giving frontline workers the 
responsibility, authority, freedom, 
training, and equipment they 
need to respond quickly to 
customer requests.
identity theft
The obtaining of individuals’ 
personal information, such as 
Social Security and credit card 
numbers, for illegal purposes.
Walt Disney World 
introduced MyMagic+, a 
convenient way for 
guests to create their 
ideal vacation 
experience. The key 
element is the 
MagicBand, providing 
an all-in-one way to 
effortlessly connect all 
the vacation choices 
guests make online with 
MyDisneyExperience.
com. The MagicBand 
uses RF technology and  
serves as park ticket, 
hotel room key, access 
to FastPass+ advance 
reservation of attraction 
times, and Disney’s 
PhotoPass. Disneyhotel 
guests may use the 
Bands to charge meals 
and merchandise to 
their hotel account.
po
matio
they can
of produ
other w
out the 
 Un
also ope
als’ pers
illegal p
lion cre
ers to m
compan
 The
tims of 
to limit
rus soft
You ma
underst
issues. M

17
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment
CHAPTER 1
 Analyze the social changes affecting businesses. 
 The Social Environment  
 Demography   is the statistical study of the human population with regard to 
its size, density, and other characteristics such as age, race, gender, and 
income. In this text, we’re particularly interested in the demographic trends 
that most affect businesses and career choices. The U.S. population is going 
through major changes that are dramatically affecting how people live, where 
they live, what they buy, and how they spend their time. Furthermore, tremen-
dous population shifts are leading to new opportunities for some firms and to 
declining opportunities for others. For example, there are many more retired 
workers than in the past, creating new markets for all kinds of goods and 
services. 
 Managing Diversity  
 Diversity has come to mean much more than recruit-
ing and keeping minority and female employees. Diversity efforts now include 
seniors, people with disabilities, people with different sexual orientations, 
atheists, extroverts, introverts, married people, singles, and the devout. It 
also means dealing sensitively with workers and cultures around the world. 
 Legal and illegal immigrants have had a dramatic effect on many cities. 
Schools and hospitals have been especially affected. Some local governments 
are making every effort to adapt, including changing signs, brochures, web-
sites, and forms to include other languages. Has your city experienced such 
changes? What are some of the impacts you’ve noticed?  
 The Increase in the Number of Older Citizens  
People ages 65 to 74 are cur-
rently the richest demographic group in the United States. They thus represent 
a lucrative market for companies involved with food service, transportation, 
entertainment, education, lodging, and so on. By 2020, the percentage of the 
population over 60 will be 22.8 percent (versus 16 percent in 2000). What do 
these changes mean for you and for businesses in the future? Think of the prod-
ucts and services that middle-aged and elderly people will need—medicine, 
nursing homes, assisted-living facilities, adult day care, home health care, rec-
reation, and the like—and you’ll see opportunities for successful businesses of 
the 21st century. Don’t rule out computer games and online services, even Wii. 
Businesses that cater to older consumers will have the opportunity for excep-
tional growth in the near future. The market is huge.  
 On the other hand, retired people will be drain-
ing the economy of wealth. Social Security has 
become a major issue. The pay-as-you-go system (in 
which workers today pay the retirement benefits for 
today’s retirees) operated just fine in 1940, when 42 
workers supported each retiree; but by 1960, there 
were only 5 workers per retiree, and today, as the 
baby-boom generation (born between 1946 and 
1964) begins to retire, that number is under 3 and 
dropping. In addition, the government has been 
spending the accumulated Social Security money 
instead of leaving it in a Social Security account. 
 Soon, less money will be coming into Social 
Security than will be going out. The government 
will have to do something to make up for the short-
fall: raise taxes, reduce Social Security benefits 
(e.g., raise the retirement age at which people 
qualify for payments), reduce spending elsewhere 
LO 1–6
demography
The statistical study of the 
human population with regard 
to its size, density, and other 
characteristics such as age, 
race, gender, and income.
 The United States 
boasts enormous ethnic 
and racial diversity. Its 
workforce is also widely 
diverse in terms of age, 
which means that 
managers must adapt 
to the generational 
demographics of the 
workplace. What are 
some challenges of 
working with someone 
much younger or much 
older than you?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
18
(e.g., in other social programs like Medicare or Medicaid), or borrow on 
the world market. 
 In short, paying Social Security to senior citizens in the future will 
draw huge amounts of money from the working population. That is why 
there is so much discussion in the media today about what to do with 
Social Security.  
 The Increase in the Number of Single-Parent Families  
It is a 
tremendous task to work full-time and raise a family. Thus, the 
rapid growth of single-parent households has also had a major 
effect on businesses. Single parents, including those forced by wel-
fare rules to return to work after a certain benefit period, have 
encouraged businesses to implement programs such as family 
leave (giving workers time off to attend to a sick child or elder 
relative) and flextime (allowing workers to arrive or leave at 
selected times). You will read about such programs in more detail 
in Chapter 11.  
 Identify what businesses must do to meet global challenges, including 
war and terrorism. 
 The Global Environment  
 The global environment of business is so important that we show it as sur-
rounding all other environmental influences (see again  Figure  1.3 ). Two 
important changes here are the growth of global competition and the increase 
of free trade among nations.  29 
 World trade, or  globalization, has grown thanks to the development of 
efficient distribution systems (we’ll talk about these in Chapter 15) and com-
munication advances such as the Internet. Globalization has greatly improved 
living standards around the world. China and India have become major U.S. 
competitors. Shop at Walmart and most other U.S. retail stores, and you 
can’t help but notice the number of “Made in China” stickers you see. Call for 
computer help, and you are as likely to be talking with someone in India as 
someone in the United States. 
 World trade has its benefits and costs. You’ll read much more about its 
importance in Chapter 3 and in the Reaching Beyond Our Borders boxes 
throughout the text. 
 War and Terrorism  
War and terrorism have drained billions of dollars from 
the U.S. economy. Some companies—like those that make bullets, tanks, and 
uniforms—have benefited greatly. Others, however, lost workers to the armed 
forces, and still others (e.g., tourism) have grown more slowly as money was 
diverted to the war effort. The threat of more wars and terrorism leads the 
government to spend even more money on spying and the military. Such 
expenditures are subject to much debate, especially as the United States 
strives for economic recovery. Note the increased unrest in the world as peo-
ple in other nations are demanding more freedom, which adds uncertainty. 
 The threat of terrorism also adds greatly to organizational costs, including the 
cost of insurance. In fact, some firms are finding it difficult to get insurance against 
terrorist attacks. Security, too, is costly. Airlines, for example, have had to install 
stronger cockpit doors and add more passenger screening devices. Read the nearby 
Adapting to Change box to learn more about how the threat of terrorism affects 
even airport restaurants, which must adapt to increasing security regulations. 
 Like all citizens, businesspeople benefit from a peaceful and prosperous 
world. One way to lessen international tensions is to foster global economic 
growth among both profit-making and nonprofit organizations.  
LO 1–7
 More and more working 
families consist of single 
parents who must juggle 
the demands of a job 
and the responsibilities 
of raising children. What 
can managers do to try 
to retain valued 
employees who face 
such challenges?  

19
 How Global Changes Affect You  
As businesses expand to serve global mar-
kets, new jobs will be created in both manufacturing and service industries. 
Global trade also means global competition. The students who will prosper 
will be those prepared for the markets of tomorrow. Rapid changes create a 
need for continuous learning, so be prepared to continue your education 
throughout your career. You’ll have every reason to be optimistic about job 
opportunities in the future if you prepare yourself well.  
 The Ecological Environment  
Few issues have captured the attention of the 
international business community more than climate change.  Climate change  
is the movement of the temperature of the planet up or down over time. Some of 
the world’s largest firms—including General Electric, Coca-Cola, Shell, Nestlé, 
DuPont, Johnson & Johnson, British Airways, and Shanghai Electric—say the 
evidence for climate change is overwhelming. Saving energy and producing 
products that cause less harm to the environment is a trend called  greening. We 
shall discuss these issues in the Seeking Sustainability boxes throughout the text.  
climate change
The movement of the 
temperature of the planet up or 
down over time.
greening
The trend toward saving 
energy and producing products 
that cause less harm to the 
environment.
 Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 • What are four ways the government can foster entrepreneurship?  
 • What’s the difference between effectiveness, efficiency, and productivity?  
 • What is  empowerment? 
 • What are some of the major issues affecting the economy today?  
•
What are four ways th
 test prep  
he goverrnment
he g
 adapting to change 
 Although the poor quality of air-
line food has been an easy punch 
line for decades, often the food 
served inside the airport itself isn’t 
much better. That’s because air-
port restaurants are especially dif-
ficult to operate on account of a 
number of security regulations. 
For example, open-flame grills 
aren’t allowed, and kitchen knives 
must be tethered to a counter. On 
top of that, cooking spaces are 
typically tiny and the time-
crunched clientele demands 
speedy service. 
 But airport diners 
are more than just 
cranky people in a hurry: 
they also tend to be more afflu-
ent than average consumers. As 
a result, more gourmet restau-
rants are setting up shop in air-
ports in order to cash in on 
vacationing diners. For instance, 
chief executive of Boston Legal 
Sea Foods Roger Berkowitz 
opened a location at Logan 
International Airport once he 
learned people were willing to 
spend more while traveling. 
After stocking the bar with pricey 
wines, he edited the menu down 
to a few simple favorites like 
crab cakes and tuna burgers. He 
also tweaked his recipes so that 
all fish fillets would be griddled 
rather than grilled. Not only 
does the restaurant earn a lot 
of money for Berkowitz, but 
the airport also gets to show 
off a bit of local flavor to pass-
ing travelers. However, 
Berkowitz has one piece of 
advice about operating an 
airport eatery that many air 
carriers won’t appreciate: 
“You want to be near air-
lines with more delays and 
cancellations.” 
 Sources: Scott McCartney, “The Best Airport Food 
in the U.S. and Beyond,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 15, 2014; and Will Yakowicz, “Comfort 
Food: The Best U.S. Airport Restaurants,”  Inc., 
January 16, 2014. 
 Gourmet Airport Eateries Take Flight 
e 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
20
 Review how past trends are being repeated in the present and what those 
trends mean for tomorrow’s college graduates. 
 THE EVOLUTION OF U.S. BUSINESS  
 Businesses in the United States have become so productive that they need 
fewer workers than ever before to produce goods.  30 If global competition and 
improved technology are putting skilled people out of work, should we be con-
cerned about the prospect of high unemployment rates and low incomes? 
Where will the jobs be when you graduate? These important questions force 
us all to look briefly at the U.S. economy and its future.  
 Progress in the Agricultural and Manufacturing Industries 
 The United States has experienced strong economic development since the 
1800s. The agricultural industry led the way, providing food for the United 
States and much of the world. Cyrus McCormick’s invention of the harvester 
in 1834, other inventions such as Eli Whitney’s cotton gin, and modern 
improvements on such equipment did much to make large-scale farming suc-
cessful. Technology has made modern farming so efficient that the number of 
farmers has dropped from about 33 percent of the population to about 1 per-
cent today. However, average farm size is now about 450 acres versus 160 
acres in the past. 
 Agriculture is still a major industry in the United States. What has 
changed is that the millions of small farms that existed previously have been 
replaced by some huge farms, some merely large farms, and some small but 
highly specialized farms. The loss of farm workers over the past century is not 
a negative sign. It is instead an indication that U.S. agricultural workers are 
the most productive in the world. 
 Most farmers who lost their jobs during the 19th and 20th centuries 
went to work in factories springing up around the country. Manufacturers, 
like farms, began using new technology, new tools and machines, to become 
more productive. Eventually the consequence in manufacturing, as in farm-
ing, was the elimination of many jobs. 
 Again, the loss to society is minimized if the wealth created by increased 
productivity and efficiency creates new jobs elsewhere—and that’s exactly what 
has happened over the past 50 years. Many workers in the industrial sector 
found jobs in the growing service sector. Most of those who can’t find work today 
are people 
who need retraining and education to become qualified for 
jobs that now exist or will exist in the near future, such as 
building wind farms or making electric automobiles. We’ll 
discuss the manufacturing sector and production in 
more detail in Chapter 9.  
 Progress in Service Industries 
 In the past, the fastest-growing industries in the 
United States produced goods like steel, automobiles, 
and machine tools. Today, the fastest-growing firms 
provide services in areas such as law, health, tele-
communications, entertainment, and finance. 
 Together, services make up over 70 percent of 
the value of the U.S. economy. Since the mid-1980s, 
LO 1–8
 Agriculture is one of the 
largest and most 
important industries in 
the United States. 
Technology has 
increased productivity 
and made farmers more 
efficient, allowing for 
larger farms. This trend 
has helped to reduce the 
increase in price of some 
foods for consumers, but 
has also reduced the 
number of small, family-
run farms. Does the new 
technology also help 
smaller farms compete? 
How?  

21
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment
CHAPTER 1
the service industry has generated almost all the increases in employment. 
Although service-sector growth has slowed, it remains the largest area of 
growth. Chances are very high that you’ll work in a service job at some point 
in your career.  Figure 1.4  lists many service-sector jobs; look it over to see 
where the careers of the future are likely to be. Retailers like American Eagle 
are part of the service sector. Each new retail store can create managerial jobs 
for college graduates. 
 Lodging Services  
 Hotels, rooming houses, and other lodging places 
 Sporting and recreation camps 
 Trailer parks and campsites for transients  
 Personal Services  
 Laundries 
 Child care 
 Linen supply 
 Shoe repair 
 Diaper service 
 Funeral homes 
 Carpet cleaning 
 Tax preparation 
 Photographic studios 
 Beauty shops 
 Health clubs 
  
 Business Services  
 Accounting 
 Exterminating 
 Ad agencies 
 Employment agencies 
 Collection agencies 
 Computer programming 
 Commercial photography 
 Research & development labs 
 Commercial art 
 Management services 
 Stenographic services 
 Public relations 
 Window cleaning 
 Detective agencies 
 Consulting 
 Interior design 
 Equipment rental 
 Web design 
 Tax preparation 
 Trash collection 
 Automotive Repair Services and Garages  
 Auto rental 
 Tire retreading 
 Truck rental 
 Exhaust system shops 
 Parking lots 
 Car washes 
 Paint shops 
 Transmission repair 
 Miscellaneous Repair Services  
 Radio and television 
 Welding 
 Watch 
 Sharpening 
 Reupholstery 
 Septic tank cleaning 
 Motion Picture Industry  
 Production 
 Theaters 
 Distribution 
 Drive-ins 
FIGURE 1.4  WHAT IS THE SERVICE SECTOR?
There’s much talk about the service sector, but few discussions actually list what it includes. Here’s a 
representative list of services as classified by the government:
 Amusement and Recreation Services  
 Restaurants 
 Racetracks 
 Symphony orchestras 
 Golf courses 
 Pool halls 
 Amusement parks 
 Bowling alleys 
 Carnivals 
 Fairs 
 Ice skating rinks 
 Botanical gardens 
 Circuses 
 Video rentals 
 Infotainment 
 Health Services  
 Physicians 
 Nursery care 
 Dentists 
 Medical labs 
 Chiropractors 
 Dental labs 
 Legal Services  
 Educational Services  
 Libraries 
 Computer schools 
 Schools 
 Online schools 
 Social Services  
 Child care 
 Family services 
 Job training 
 Elder care 
 Noncommercial Museums, Art Galleries, 
and Botanical and Zoological 
Gardens  
 Selected Membership Organizations  
 Business associations 
 Civic associations 
 Financial Services  
 Banking 
 Real estate agencies 
 Insurance 
 Investment firms (brokers) 
 Miscellaneous Services  
 Architectural 
 Surveying 
 Engineering 
 Utilities 
 Telecommunications 
 Lawn care 
 Vending 
 Delivery 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
22
 Another bit of good news is that there are  more high-paying jobs in the 
service sector than in the goods-producing sector. High-paying service-sector 
jobs abound in health care, accounting, finance, entertainment, telecommu-
nications, architecture, law, software engineering, and more. Projections are 
that some areas of the service sector will grow rapidly, while others may have 
much slower growth. The strategy for college graduates is to remain flexible, 
find out where jobs are being created, and move when appropriate.  31  
 Your Future in Business 
 Despite the growth in the service sector we’ve described above, the service era 
now seems to be coming to a close as a new era is beginning. We’re in the 
midst of an information-based global and technical revolution that will alter 
all sectors of the economy: agricultural, industrial, and service. It’s exciting to 
think about the role you’ll play in that revolution. You may be a leader who 
will implement the changes and accept the challenges of world competition 
based on world quality standards. This book will introduce you to some of the 
concepts that make such leadership possible, not just in business but also in 
government agencies and nonprofit organizations. Business can’t prosper in 
the future without the cooperation of government and social leaders through-
out the world.  
 Describe the relationship between profit and risk, and show how businesses 
and nonprofit organizations can raise the standard of living for all.
 • 
 What is the relationship of businesses’ profit to risk assumption?  
Profit is money a business earns above and beyond the money that it 
spends for salaries and other expenses. Businesspeople make profits by 
taking risks.  Risk is the chance an entrepreneur takes of losing time and 
money on a business that may not prove profitable. A loss occurs when a 
business’s costs and expenses are higher than its revenues.  
 • 
 Who are stakeholders, and which stakeholders are most important to a 
business?  
 Stakeholders include customers, employees, stockholders, suppliers, deal-
ers, bankers, the media, people in the local community, environmentalists, 
and elected government leaders. The goal of business leaders is to try to rec-
ognize and respond to the needs of these stakeholders and still make a profit.  
LO 1–1
Summary 
 Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
•
 •
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  
 • What major factor caused people to move from farming to manufacturing 
and from manufacturing to the service sector?  
 • What does the future look like for tomorrow’s college graduates?  
• What major factor cau
 test prep  
sed peoople to m
sed

23
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment
CHAPTER 1
Compare and contrast being an entrepreneur and working for others.
 • 
 What are the advantages and disadvantages of entrepreneurship?  
 Working for others means getting benefits like paid vacations and health 
insurance. Entrepreneurs take more risks and lose those benefits. They 
gain the freedom to make their own decisions, more opportunity, and pos-
sible wealth.  
 • 
 What are the five factors of production?  
 The five factors of production are land, labor, capital, entrepreneurship, 
and knowledge. Of these, the most important are entrepreneurship and 
knowledge. Entrepreneurs are people who risk time and money to start 
and manage a business. What makes rich countries rich today is a combi-
nation of  entrepreneurship and the effective use of  knowledge. 
Analyze the effects of the economic environment and taxes on businesses.
 • 
 What can governments in developing countries do to reduce the risk of start-
ing businesses and thus help entrepreneurs?  
 The government may allow private ownership of businesses, pass laws 
that enable businesspeople to write contracts that are enforceable in court, 
establish a currency that’s tradable in world markets, help to lessen cor-
ruption in business and government, and keep taxes and regulations to a 
minimum. From a business perspective, lower taxes mean lower risks, 
more growth, and thus more money for workers and the government.  
Describe the effects of technology on businesses.
 • 
 How has technology benefited workers, businesses, and consumers? 
 Technology enables workers to be more effective, efficient, and produc-
tive.  Effectiveness means doing the right thing in the right way.  Efficiency
means producing items using the least amount of resources.  Productivity
is the amount of output you generate given the amount of input (e.g., 
hours worked).  
Demonstrate how businesses can meet and beat competition.
 • 
 What are some ways in which businesses meet and beat competition?  
 Some companies have found a competitive edge by focusing on making 
high-quality products, all the way to zero defects. Companies also aim to 
exceed customer expectations. Often that means  empowering frontline 
workers by giving them more training and more responsibility and 
authority.  
Analyze the social changes affecting businesses.
 • 
 How have social changes affected businesses?  
 Diversity has come to mean much more than recruiting and keeping 
minority and female employees. Diversity efforts now include seniors, 
people with disabilities, people with different sexual orientations, athe-
ists, extroverts, introverts, married people, singles, and the devout. Man-
aging diversity means dealing sensitively with workers and cultures 
around the world. Providing Social Security benefits to senior citizens 
in the future will draw huge amounts of money from the working popu-
lation. That is why there is so much discussion about Social Security in 
the media today.  
•
What are
LO 1–2
•
What can
LO 1–3
•
How has
LO 1–4
•
What are
LO 1–5
•
How hav
LO 1–6

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
24
Identify what businesses must do to meet global challenges, including war 
and terrorism.
 • 
 Which countries are creating the greatest challenges?  
 China and India are two major competitors.  
 • 
 What will be the impacts of future wars and terrorism?  
 Some businesses, such as those in the defense industry, may prosper. Oth-
ers, such as tourism, may suffer. One way to minimize world tensions is to 
help less developed countries to become more prosperous.  
Review how past trends are being repeated in the present and what those 
trends mean for tomorrow’s college graduates.
 • 
 What is the history of our economic development in the United States, 
and what does it tell us about the future?  
 Agricultural workers displaced by improved farm technology went to work 
in factories. Improved manufacturing productivity and increased competi-
tion from foreign firms contributed to the development of a service economy 
in the United States. The service era is now giving way to an information-
based global revolution that will affect all sectors of the economy. The secret 
to long-term success in such an economy is flexibility and continuing educa-
tion to be prepared for the opportunities that are sure to arise.  
 • 
 What job opportunities for college graduates exist in the service sector?  
 Check over  Figure 1.4 , which outlines the service sector. That is where you 
are most likely to find the fast-growing firms of the future.  
LO 1–7
LO 1–8
 business  4
 business environment  11
 climate change  19
 database  15
 demography  17
 e-commerce  15
 empowerment  16
 entrepreneur  4
 factors of production  10
 goods  4
 greening  19
 identity theft  16
 loss  4
 nonprofit organization 7  
 outsourcing  6
 productivity  14
 profit  4
 quality of life 6  
 revenue  4
 risk 5
 services  4
 stakeholders  6
 standard of living  5
 technology  14
 Imagine you are thinking of starting a restaurant in your community. Answer 
the following questions:
 1. Who will be the various stakeholders of your business?  
 2. What are some of the things you can do to benefit your community other 
than providing jobs and tax revenue?  
 3. How will you establish good relationships with your suppliers? With your 
employees?  
 4. Do you see any conflict between your desire to be as profitable as possible 
and your desire to pay employees a living wage?  
 5. Which of the environmental factors outlined in this chapter might have 
the biggest impact on your business? How?  
bus
key terms 
Im
critical thinking 

25
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment
CHAPTER 1
developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1. Poll the class and determine which students believe that climate change is 
primarily caused by humans and which believe that other factors, such as 
climate cycles or sun spots, are the primary cause. Discuss what students 
can do to minimize human effects on the environment regardless of the 
primary causes of climate change. Are there any negative consequences to 
trying to minimize humans’ impact on the environment?  
 2. Imagine you are a local businessperson who has to deal with the issue of 
outsourcing. You want to begin with the facts. How many, if any, jobs have 
been lost to outsourcing in your area? Are there any foreign firms in your 
area that are creating jobs (insourcing)? You will need to go online to find 
the data you need.  
 3. What indicates that you and other people in the United States have a high 
standard of living? What are some signs that maintaining such a high 
standard of living may have a negative impact on quality of life? Does 
everyone in the United States enjoy a high standard of living? If not, how 
does this impact their quality of life?  
 4. Use Yelp to find five businesses that provide services in your area. List 
those businesses and, for each, describe how social trends might affect 
them in both positive and negative ways. Be prepared to explain your 
descriptions to your team or the whole class, as your instructor directs.  
 5. Form into teams of four or five and discuss the technological and 
e-commerce revolutions. How many students now shop for goods and 
services online? What have been their experiences? What other high-tech 
equipment do they use (smartphones, tablets, laptops, etc.)?  
 
 
 
 
 
taking it to the net
 PURPOSE 
 To learn what changes are occurring in the business environment today and 
how those changes are affecting businesses.  
 EXERCISE 
 1. Go to the National Taxpayers Union website (www.ntu.org). Search for 
“Who Pays Income Taxes? See Who Pays What.” Study the tables showing 
what percentage of taxes the various income groups pay. Do you think that 
businesspeople pay their fair share? What percentage of taxes does the top 
1 percent of earners pay? What about the top 5 percent? The lowest 
50 percent? How do such tax rates affect incentives to become a successful 
entrepreneur?  
 2. Go to the Census Bureau’s website (www.census.gov) and learn what the 
population of the United States is at this moment. While at the site, you 
may want to look up the population in your town or city. Explore what 
other data are available at this site. What trends seem most important to 
you and to businesspeople in general?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
26
 3. Do a Google search for “business blogs” and check out some of the avail-
able results. Go to one of the blogs that seems interesting to you and write 
a brief paragraph about it—including such things as who sponsors it, who 
contributes the posts, and what other features it has—and how it may help 
a student in an introductory business course.
 video case  
 Although comedy may look like all fun and games, 
making movies in Hollywood is serious business. 
Few people understand this as well as Thomas 
Lennon. Although best known for his starring role 
in the Comedy Central series  Reno 911, Lennon 
does his most lucrative work off-screen. He and 
his writing partner, Robert Ben Garant, have 
penned the screenplays to a number of block-
buster movies, including the  Night at the Museum
series. 
 Staying successful in the writing business is a 
tough task. There’s lots of competition, and few 
writers ever sell enough work to make a living. 
Some movie and TV writers work on teams for big 
studios. For instance, late night talk show hosts 
like Jimmy Fallon have writing staffs to pen jokes 
and sketches for each episode. While these writers 
receive a steady paycheck, there are also limita-
tions to their work. After all, if one writer comes 
up with something especially brilliant, she doesn’t 
receive anything more than her standard salary. 
 The most successful players in entertainment 
take control of their work so that they can reap 
the most benefit from their efforts. Lennon set off 
on this particular path at a young age. While a stu-
dent at New York University, he joined a comedy 
troupe that quickly gathered a dedicated follow-
ing. Within a few years the team had struck a deal 
with MTV to create their own show. Called  The 
State, this short-lived but critically acclaimed 
series taught Lennon the value of creating his own 
projects. 
 This entrepreneurial outlook allows Lennon 
almost total freedom in his work, but it presents a 
number of risks as well. He launched a few failed 
TV projects before he managed to find the right 
formula with  Reno 911. Moviemaking presents 
even more challenges than TV. In fact, Lennon 
had to shut down production on a film for nearly 
two years due to the writers’ union strike of 
2007–2008. As a result, that movie has never been 
released. Being an entrepreneur means not only 
taking risks, but enduring setbacks as well. 
 For those who work in Hollywood, creators 
must also be able to respond to changing tastes, 
technological advances, and drastic budget cuts. 
They must also know how to appeal to global 
audiences. Writers like Lennon have to be mindful 
not to focus jokes or characters on very limited 
cultural ideas. Instead, making characters broad 
and themes universal makes their film accessible 
to a wider audience. And that makes it more prof-
itable to a studio. Lennon proved he could do that. 
In fact, the original Night at the Museum played in 
over 70 countries, earning huge box office num-
bers from the Americas to Australia, from Europe 
to Southeast Asia. 
 The film was so successful that it spawned a 
sequel,  Night at the Museum: Battle of the Smithso-
nian, which did even more business. The two films 
combined brought in nearly $1 billion at the box 
office, to say nothing of DVD sales and merchan-
dising revenue. In fact, a third film is likely to 
push Tom’s career box office haul to more than 
$2 billion, making him only the sixth writer to 
achieve that feat. With his relentlessly creative 
mind and entrepreneurial drive, Lennon stands to 
be a major force in the entertainment industry for 
some time to come. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. What are the risks and benefits of becoming 
an entrepreneur as opposed to working for 
others?  
 2. Why is the writing profession especially risky 
for entrepreneurs like Tom Lennon?  
 3. Does the entertainment industry seem like a 
stable option for aspiring entrepreneurs to 
pursue?  
 THOMAS LENNON, ACTOR AND ENTREPRENEUR 

27
Taking Risks and Making Profits within the Dynamic Business Environment
CHAPTER 1
 1. 
Abram Brown, “Fred Smith Flies High,”  Forbes, February 10, 
2014. 
 2. 
Farhad Manjoo, “Deal with It: Mobile Ads Are Here to Stay,” 
The Wall Street Journal, December 19, 2013. 
 3. 
“The Definitive Ranking of the Richest People in the United 
States,”  Forbes, October 7, 2013. 
 4. 
“The Numbers,”  Barron’s, March 25, 2013. 
 5. 
Richard Vedder, “The Wages of Unemployment,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, January 16, 2013. 
 6. 
Jeffrey McKinney, “Before Disaster Strikes,”  Black Enterprise, 
April/May 2013. 
 7. 
Craig Giammona, “Smooth Handling,”  Fortune, December 
23, 2013. 
 8. 
Nina Easton, “Time to Get Creative about Helping the 
Unemployed Back into the Job Market,”  Fortune, February 3, 
2014. 
 9. 
John Mackey and Raj Sisodia,  Conscious Capitalism (Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2013). 
 10. 
Michael R. Strain, “Back to Work,”  The Weekly Standard, 
December 16, 2013. 
 11. 
James R. Hagerty, “Flextronics Warms to U.S.,”  The Wall 
Street Journa l, January 5–6, 2013. 
 12. 
Lorraine Luk, “Hon Hai Weighs Plant in U.S.,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, January 27, 2014. 
 13. 
Elaine Glusac, “No Permanent Address,”  Entrepreneur, 
February 2014. 
 14. 
James R. Hagerty, “Entrepreneur Let No Impediment Stop 
Him,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2014. 
 15. 
Steve Matthews, “For Many, the Age of Entrepreneurship 
Starts at 55,”  The Washington Post, January 12, 2014. 
 16. 
Ed Feulner, “Entrepreneurs: Spark Plugs in a Free-Market 
Economy,”  The Washington Times,  September 3, 2013. 
 17. 
John Dearie and Courtney Geduldig, “More Immigration 
Means More Jobs for Americans,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
December 30, 2013. 
 18. 
Sue Shellenbarger, “Love and Work on a Strict Timetable,” 
The Wall Street Journal, January 22, 2014. 
 19. 
Debora Spar, “American Women Have It Wrong,”  Newsweek,  
October 8, 2012. 
 20. Janel Martinez, “Atlanta’s Tech Stars,”  Black Enterprise, 
November 2013. 
 21. 
Christopher S. Rugaber and Ken Sweet, “Explaining the 
Disconnect in the U.S. Economy,”  St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 
November 8, 2013. 
 22. Andrew Feinberg, “Swimming in a Cesspool,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance, March 2014. 
 23. Paul M. Healy and Karthik Ramanna, “When the Crowd 
Fights Corruption,”  Harvard Business Review, January–
February 2013. 
 24. Richard Stengel, “Made in America, Again,”  Time, April 22, 
2013. 
 25. Jack Neff, “Marketers Become Big Data Hoarders,” 
 Advertising Age, March 18, 2013. 
 26. Maggie McGrath, “Target Profit Falls 46% on Credit Card 
Breach and the Hits Could Keep On Coming,”  Forbes, 
February 26, 2014. 
 27. Lisa Gerstner, “What You Need to Know about Identity Theft,” 
Kiplinger’s Personal Finance, June 2013. 
 28. “Snowden’s Damage,” editorial,  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 11–12, 2014. 
 29. David Malpass, “Five Big Steps toward Faster Global 
Growth,”  Forbes, February 10, 2014. 
 30. David Von Drehle, “The Robot Economy,”  Time, September 
9, 2013. 
 31. 
Parmy Olson, “Crowdsourcing Capitalists,”  Forbes,  February 
10, 2014. 
Page 3: © Larry Marano/Getty Images; p. 5: 
© Skip Brown/National Geographic/Getty Images; 
p. 7: © Tom Gilbert/Tulsa World/AP Images; p. 8: 
© Rosemarie Gearhart/E+/Getty Images RF; p. 9: 
© James Katsipis; p. 13: © Partha Pal/The Image 
Bank/Getty Images; p. 16: © McGraw-Hill 
Education, photo by Mark Dierker; p. 17: 
© Monkey Business Images Ltd./photolibrary 
RF; p. 18: © Julie Toy/Photographer’s Choice/
Getty Images; p. 19: © Steve Parsons/AP 
Images; p. 20: © Monty Rakusen/Cultura/
Newscom.
Mark Dierker; p 17:
photo credits
e and Work on a Strict Timetable,”
notes 

28
 Understanding 
Economics and How 
It Affects Business 
 2 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
  LO 2-1 
Explain basic economics. 
  LO 2-2 
Explain what capitalism is and how free markets work. 
 LO 2-3 
Compare socialism and communism. 
  LO 2-4 
Analyze the trend toward mixed economies. 
  LO 2-5 
Describe the economic system of the United States, including the 
significance of key economic indicators (especially GDP), 
productivity, and the business cycle. 
  LO 2-6 
Contrast fiscal policy and monetary policy, and explain how each 
affects the economy.  

29
Matt Flannery
Co-Founder and CEO of Kiva.org
 • From software developer to 
microlender
 • Provides small loans to build 
businesses
www.kiva.org
twitter.com/kiva
P
 eople talk about the state of 
“ the economy” so much that 
it can seem as if economics 
deals only with big, world-
shaking financial issues. In 
reality, though, economics 
can be found all around us in daily life. 
From a family saving money for the future 
to a major corporation measuring its reve-
nue, the world is full of economies both 
large and small. 
 It’s these small economies that are the 
major concern of Matt Flannery, co-
founder and CEO of the microlending 
company  Kiva.org . His company offers 
small loans to entrepreneurs working in 
developing countries in Africa, Asia and 
South America. Unlike businesspeople 
operating in the U.S., these entrepreneurs 
don’t need thousands upon thousands of 
dollars to see their dreams become reality. 
Instead, many loans issued by Kiva are lit-
tle more than a few hundred dollars. 
 But it’s not the size of the loans that 
makes Flannery’s work notable. In fact, 
microlending has been a common source 
of financing for the developing world since 
the early 1980s. What sets Kiva apart from 
the rest is the company’s approach. Kiva 
operates in a similar way to crowdfunding 
sites like Kickstarter or Indiegogo. These 
companies rely on small donations from 
many people in order to fund a larger goal. 
At Kiva, users first go to the site to select 
the person or family they’d like to fund. 
Next, they lend $25 to the entrepreneur of 
their choice. If the borrowers reach their 
funding goal, then Kiva grants the loans. 
The borrowers gradually make repay-
ments that are sent back to Kiva, which 
then distributes the money back to the 
lenders. Although lenders don’t earn any 
interest, the satisfaction of helping another 
human being thousands of miles away is 
enough to ensure that 70 percent of all 
lenders make another loan. 
 Flannery took a winding road to reach 
this point in his career. Interestingly 
enough, other than Kiva, he doesn’t have 
any previous background in either 
financing or the nonprofit sector. After 
getting a degree from Stanford Univer-
sity, Flannery got a job developing soft-
ware at Tivo, but he really wanted a 
business of his own. “I tried to start 
maybe ten companies,” says Flannery. “It 
was like I had a midlife crisis at 22.” For 
example, Flannery attempted to start a 
DVD-rental machine business years 
before Redbox existed. He also tried his 
hand at starting an online luxury clothes 
rental company. “A lot of those other 
ideas for me were a little empty . . . they 
weren’t proactive movements towards 
something I loved. This idea is different. 
The actual content of the idea I enjoy 
every day . . . this is my dream job.” 
 The inspiration for Kiva didn’t hit him 
until he spent a few months working in 
rural communities throughout Africa. The 
impact of small businesses on the 
communities Flannery visited made a pro-
found impression on him. Kiva launched in 
2005, after he spent a year researching 
the aid industry and talking with experts. 
Today Kiva has distributed more than $500 
million in loans to entrepreneurs through-
out the world. “Small loans used for busi-
ness growth encourage self-respect, 
accountability, and hope among loan recip-
ients,” says Flannery. “Primarily, the chal-
lenges they [entrepreneurs in Africa] face 
are very similar to the challenges we face 
. . . a story about a woman selling fish on 
the side of the street in Uganda, you can 
get into profit margins, inventory manage-
ment, the same things that businesses 
here think about. There’s a commonality 
that can unify people. Which is exciting.” 
 Many people don’t realize the impor-
tance of the economic environment to 
the success of business. That is what this 
chapter is all about. You will learn to com-
pare different economic systems to see 
the benefits and the drawbacks of each. 
You will learn how the free-market 
system of the United States 
works. And you will learn 
more about what makes 
some countries rich and 
other countries poor. By 
the end of the chapter, 
you should understand 
the direct effect economic 
systems have on the 
wealth and happiness of 
communities throughout 
the world. 
 Sources: Mohana Ravindranath, 
“Microfinance Nonprofit Kiva 
Launches in D.C.,”  The 
Washington Post, January 8, 
2013; Interview, “Why Purpose 
Matters For Matt Flannery of 
 Kiva.org ,”  Yscouts,  
September 11, 2013; Charles 
Blass, “Matt Flannery: 
Co-Founder and CEO, Kiva 
Microfunds,” 
 Thefuturemakers. net, May 2, 
2013; and  www.kiva.org , 
accessed January 2014.   
 Getting to Know  Matt Flannery

30
 name that company 
 This privately funded organization provides funds to support world health and 
education. This organization was founded and is managed by one of the most 
famous U.S. entrepreneurs and his wife. What is the name of this organization? 
(Find the answer in the chapter.)  
 Explain basic economics. 
 HOW ECONOMIC CONDITIONS 
AFFECT BUSINESSES  
 Compared to, say, Mexico, the United States is a relatively wealthy country. 
Why? Why is South Korea comparatively wealthy and North Korea suffering 
economically, with many of its people starving? Such questions are part of the 
subject of economics. In this chapter, we explore the various economic sys-
tems of the world and how they either promote or hinder business growth, the 
creation of wealth, and a higher quality of life for all. 
 A major part of the United States’ business success in the past was due to 
an economic and social climate that allowed most businesses to operate freely. 
People were free to start a business anywhere, and just as free to fail and start 
again. That freedom motivated people to try until they succeeded because the 
rewards were often so great.  1 
 Any change in the U.S. economic or political system has a major influ-
ence on the success of the business system.  2 For example, the recent increase 
in government involvement in business will have an economic effect. What 
that effect will be in the long run, however, remains to be seen. 
 Global economics and global politics also have a major influence on busi-
nesses in the United States. For example, there is even some talk today about 
having a one-time global wealth tax.  3 This is a tax that was proposed by the 
International Monetary Fund (IMF). The idea is to tax the wealth of individu-
als around the world by 10 percent to bring the debt of nations closer to the 
pre-recession levels. Think of how such a tax would affect businesses and 
workers in the United States. Clearly, to understand business, you must also 
understand basic economics and politics. This is especially true of new college 
graduates looking for jobs.  
 What Is Economics? 
 Economics   is the study of how society chooses to employ resources to pro-
duce goods and services and distribute them for consumption among various 
competing groups and individuals. There are two major branches of econom-
ics:   macroeconomics   looks at the operation of a nation’s economy as a whole 
(the whole United States), and   microeconomics   looks at the behavior of peo-
ple and organizations in markets for particular products or services.  4 A ques-
tion in macroeconomics might be: What should the United States do to lower 
its national debt?  5 Macroeconomic topics in this chapter include gross domes-
tic product (GDP), the unemployment rate, and price indexes. Recently, there 
has been some question about macroeconomic policies and how effective they 
really are. 6 A question in microeconomics might be: Why do people buy 
smaller cars when gas prices go up? Such questions seem easier to answer. 
LO 2–1
economics
The study of how society 
chooses to employ resources 
to produce goods and services 
and distribute them for 
consumption among various 
competing groups and 
individuals.
macroeconomics
The part of economics study 
that looks at the operation of a 
nation’s economy as a whole.
microeconomics
The part of economics study 
that looks at the behavior of 
people and organizations in 
particular markets.

31
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
The economic contrast 
is remarkable. Business 
is booming in Seoul, 
South Korea (as shown 
in the top photo). But 
North Korea, a 
communist country, is 
not doing well, as the 
picture on the bottom 
shows. What do you 
think accounts for the 
dramatic differences in 
the economies of these 
two neighboring 
countries?
 Some economists define economics as the study of the allocation of  scarce 
resources. They believe resources need to be carefully divided among people, 
usually by the government. However, there’s no way to maintain peace and 
prosperity in the world by merely dividing the resources we have today among 
the existing nations. There aren’t enough known resources to do that.   Resource 
development  is the study of how to increase resources (say, by getting oil and 
gas from shale and tar sands) and create conditions that will make better use 
of them (like recycling and conservation).  7 
 Businesses can contribute to an economic system by inventing products 
that greatly increase available resources. For example, they can discover new 
energy sources (natural gas for autos), new ways of growing food (hydroponics), 
and new ways of creating needed goods and services such as nanotechnology 
 resource development  
 The study of how to increase 
resources and to create the 
conditions that will make better 
use of those resources.  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
32
and 4D technology (moving 3D, with time as the fourth dimension). Maricul-
ture, or raising fish in pens out in the ocean, could lead to more food for every-
one and more employment. It is believed that the United States could monopolize 
the shrimp industry using aquaculture. Now we import about a billion pounds 
of shrimp a year.  
 The Secret to Creating a Wealthy Economy 
 Imagine the world when kings and other rich landowners had most of the 
wealth, and the majority of the people were peasants. The peasants had many 
children, and it may have seemed a natural conclusion that if things went on 
as usual there would soon be too many people and not enough food and other 
resources. Economist Thomas Malthus made this 
argument in the late 1700s and early 1800s, lead-
ing the writer Thomas Carlyle to call economics 
“the dismal science.”  
 Followers of Malthus today (who are called 
neo-Malthusians) still believe there are too many 
people in the world and that the solution to pov-
erty is radical birth control, including forced abor-
tions and sterilization.  8 The latest world statistics, 
however, show population growing more slowly 
than expected. In some industrial countries—such 
as Japan, Germany, Italy, Russia, and the United 
States—population growth may be so slow that 
eventually there will be too many old people and 
too few young people to care for them.  9 In the 
developing world, on the other hand, population 
will climb relatively quickly and may lead to greater poverty and more unrest. 
Studies about the effects of population growth on the economy are part of 
macroeconomics. 
 Some macroeconomists believe that a large population, especially an edu-
cated one, can be a valuable resource. You’ve probably heard the saying “Give a 
man a fish and you feed him for a day, but teach a man to fish and you feed him 
for a lifetime.” You can add to that: “Teach a person to start a fish farm, and he 
or she will be able to feed a village for a lifetime.”  The secret to economic develop-
ment is contained in this last statement. Business owners provide jobs and eco-
nomic growth for their employees and communities as well as for themselves.  10 
 The challenge for macroeconomists is to determine what makes some 
countries relatively wealthy and other countries relatively poor, and then to 
implement policies and programs that lead to increased prosperity for every-
one in all countries. One way to begin understanding this challenge is to con-
sider the theories of Adam Smith.  
 Adam Smith and the Creation of Wealth 
 Rather than believing fixed resources had to be divided among competing 
groups and individuals, Scottish economist Adam Smith envisioned creating 
more resources so that everyone could become wealthier. Smith’s book  An 
Inquiry into the Nature and Causes of the Wealth of Nations (often called simply 
 The Wealth of Nations ) was published in 1776. 
 Smith believed  freedom was vital to the survival of any economy, especially 
the freedom to own land or property and to keep the profits from working the 
land or running a business.  11 He believed people will work long and hard if 
they have incentives for doing so—that is, if they know they’ll be rewarded. As 
a result of those efforts, the economy will prosper, with plenty of food and all 
 New ways of producing 
goods and services add 
resources to the 
economy and create 
more employment. Fish 
farms, for instance, 
create both food and 
jobs. Can you think of 
other innovations that 
can help increase 
economic development?  

33
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
kinds of products available to everyone. Smith’s ideas were later challenged by 
Malthus and others who believed economic conditions would only get worse, 
but Smith, not Malthus, is considered the father of modern economics .  
 How Businesses Benefit the Community 
 In Adam Smith’s view, businesspeople don’t necessarily deliberately set out to 
help others. They work primarily for their own prosperity and growth. Yet as 
people try to improve their own situation in life, Smith said, their efforts serve 
as an “invisible hand” that helps the economy grow and prosper through the 
production of needed goods, services, and ideas. Thus, the phrase   invisible 
hand   is used to describe the process that turns self-directed gain into social 
and economic benefits for  all. 
 How do people working in their own self-interest produce goods, services, 
and wealth for others? The only way farmers can become wealthy is to sell 
some of their crops to others. To become even wealthier, they have to hire 
workers to produce more food. So the farmers’ self-centered efforts to become 
wealthy lead to jobs for some and food for almost all. Think about that process 
for a minute, because it is critical to understanding economic growth in the 
United States and other free countries. The same principles apply to every-
thing from clothing to houses to iPhones. 
 Smith assumed that as people became wealthier, they would naturally 
reach out to help the less fortunate in the community. That has not always 
happened. In fact, today the poverty rate in the United States is quite high and 
there is a great disparity between the amount of money the wealthy have and 
the amount of money poor people have.  12 This is called “inequality” and is the 
central concern of many political, religious, and social leaders today.  13 Many 
businesspeople are becoming more concerned about social issues and their 
obligation to return to society some of what they’ve earned.  14 The economic 
question is: What can and should we do about poverty and unemployment in 
the United States and around the world? 
 As we mentioned in Chapter 1, it is important for businesses to be ethical 
as well as generous. Unethical practices undermine the whole economic sys-
tem. The Making Ethical Decisions box explores the effects of corruption.  
 invisible hand  
 A phrase coined by Adam 
Smith to describe the process 
that turns self-directed gain into 
social and economic benefits 
for all.  
 According to Adam 
Smith’s theory, business 
owners are motivated to 
work hard because they 
know they will earn, and 
keep, the rewards of 
their labor. When they 
prosper, as the owner of 
this restaurant has, they 
are able to add 
employees and grow, 
indirectly helping the 
community and the 
larger economy grow in 
the process. What might 
motivate you to start 
your own business?  

34
 Explain what capitalism is and how free markets work. 
UNDERSTANDING FREE-MARKET CAPITALISM
 Basing their ideas on free-market principles such as those of Adam Smith, 
businesspeople in the United States, Europe, Japan, Canada, and other coun-
tries began to create more wealth than ever before. They hired others to work 
on their farms and in their factories, and their nations began to prosper as a 
result. Businesspeople soon became the wealthiest people in society. 
 However, great disparities in wealth remained or even increased. Many 
businesspeople owned large homes and fancy carriages while most workers 
lived in humble surroundings. Nonetheless, there was always the promise of 
better times. One way to be really wealthy was to start a successful business 
of your own. Of course, it wasn’t that easy—it never has been. Then and now, 
you have to accumulate some money to buy or start a business, and you have 
to work long hours to make it grow. But the opportunities are there.  15  
 The economic system that has led to wealth creation in much of the world 
is known as capitalism. Under   capitalism   all or most of the factors of produc-
tion and distribution—such as land, factories, railroads, and stores—are 
owned by individuals. They are operated for profit, and businesspeople, not 
government officials, decide what to produce and how much, what to charge, 
and how much to pay workers. They also decide whether to produce goods in 
their own countries or have them made in other countries. No country is 
purely capitalist, however. Often the government gets involved in issues such 
as determining minimum wages, setting farm prices, and lending money to 
some failing businesses—as it does in the United States. But capitalism is the 
 foundation of the U.S. economic system, and of the economies of England, 
Australia, Canada, and most other industrialized nations. 
 Capitalism, liked all economic systems has its faults. For example, income 
inequality is a major issue that concerns many today. However, John Mackey, 
LO 2–2
 capitalism  
 An economic system in which 
all or most of the factors of 
production and distribution are 
privately owned and operated 
for profit.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 making ethical decisions 
 There are numerous forces in 
poor countries that hinder eco-
nomic growth and development. 
One of those forces is corrup-
tion. In many countries, a busi-
nessperson must bribe 
government officials to get per-
mission to own land, build on it, 
and conduct normal business 
operations. The United States 
has seen much corruption 
among businesspeople, such as 
use of prostitutes, illegal drug 
use, alcohol addiction, and gam-
bling. Imagine you need a permit 
to add liquor to your restaurant 
menu to increase your profit. You 
have tried for years to get one, 
with no results. You have a friend 
in the government who offers to 
help you if you make a large 
contribution to his or her reelec-
tion campaign. Would you be 
tempted to make a campaign 
contribution? What are your 
alternatives? What are the 
consequences of each? 
 How Corruption Harms the Economy 
 • What is the difference between macroeconomics and microeconomics?  
 • What is better for an economy than teaching a man to fish?  
 • What does Adam Smith’s term  invisible hand mean? How does the 
invisible hand create wealth for a country?  
• What is the difference
 test prep 
e between mac
e be

35
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
CEO of Whole Foods, believes that “conscious capitalism,” that is, capitalism 
based on businesses that serve all major stakeholders, is the best system in the 
world. 16 Here is what he says about capitalism: “In the long arc of history, no 
human creation has had a greater positive impact on more people more rap-
idly than free-enterprise capitalism. . . . This system has afforded billions of us 
the opportunity to join in the great enterprise of earning our sustenance and 
finding meaning by creating value for each other.”  17 
 Some countries have noticed the advantages of capitalism and have 
instituted what has become known as state capitalism.  18   State capitalism   is 
a combination of freer markets and some government control. China, for 
example, has had rapid growth over the last few years as a result of state 
capitalism—that is, freer markets and less government control.  19 We shall 
discuss the Chinese system in more detail when we look at communism.  
 The Foundations of Capitalism 
 Under free-market capitalism people have four basic rights:
 
1.  The right to own private property. This is the most fundamental of all 
rights under capitalism. Private ownership means that individuals can 
buy, sell, and use land, buildings, machinery, inventions, and other 
forms of property. They can also pass property on to their children. 
Would farmers work as hard if they didn’t own the land and couldn’t 
keep the profits from what they earned?  
 
2.  The right to own a business and keep all that business’s profits. Recall 
from Chapter 1 that profits equal revenues minus expenses (salaries, 
materials, taxes). Profits act as important incentives for business owners.  
 
3.  The right to freedom of competition. Within certain guidelines established 
by the government, individuals are free to compete with other 
individuals or businesses in selling and promoting goods and services.  
 
4.  The right to freedom of choice. People are free to choose where they 
want to work and what career they want to follow. Other choices 
people are free to make include where to live and what to buy or sell.  
 state capitalism  
 A combination of freer markets 
and some government control.  
 The right to own private 
property and the right to 
own a business and 
keep its profits are two 
of the fundamental 
rights that exist in the 
economic system called 
free-market capitalism. 
Would either of these 
rights be viable without 
the other?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
36
 One benefit of the four basic rights of capitalism is that people are willing to 
take more risks than they might otherwise. President Franklin Roosevelt believed 
four additional freedoms were essential to economic success: freedom of speech 
and expression, freedom to worship in your own way, freedom from want, and 
freedom from fear. Do you see the benefits of these additional freedoms? 
 Now let’s explore how the free market works. What role do consumers 
play in the process? How do businesses learn what consumers need and want? 
These questions and more are answered next.  
 How Free Markets Work 
 A free market is one in which decisions about what and how much to produce 
are made by the market—by buyers and sellers negotiating prices for goods 
and services. You and I and other consumers send signals to tell producers 
what to make, how many, in what color, and so on. We do that by choosing to 
buy (or not to buy) certain products and services. 
 For example, if all of us decided we wanted T-shirts supporting our 
favorite baseball team, the clothing industry would respond in certain ways. 
Manufacturers and retailers would increase the price of those T-shirts, 
because they know people are willing to pay more for the shirts they want. 
They would also realize they could make more money by making more of 
those T-shirts. Thus, they have an incentive to pay workers to start earlier 
and end later. Further, the number of companies making T-shirts would 
increase. How many T-shirts they make depends on how many we request or 
buy in the stores. Prices and quantities will continue to change as the num-
ber of T-shirts we buy changes. 
 The same process occurs with most other products. The  price tells pro-
ducers how much to produce. If something is wanted but isn’t available, the 
price tends to go up until someone begins making more of that product, sells 
the ones already on hand, or makes a substitute. As a consequence, there’s 
rarely a long-term shortage of goods in the United States.  
 The economic concept of 
demand measures the 
quantities of goods and 
services that people are 
willing to buy at a given 
price. All else equal, the 
lower the price, the 
higher the demand will 
be. Do you think there 
would be this many 
customers rushing to 
shop on Black Friday if it 
wasn’t for those low-
price/low-quantity deals? 

37
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
 How Prices Are Determined 
 In a free market,  prices are not determined by sellers; they are determined by 
buyers and sellers negotiating in the marketplace. A seller may want to receive 
$50 for a T-shirt, but the quantity buyers demand at that high price may be 
quite low. If the seller lowers the price, the quantity demanded is likely to 
increase. How is a price determined that is acceptable to both buyers and sell-
ers? The answer is found in the microeconomic concepts of supply and 
demand. We shall explore both next.  
 The Economic Concept of Supply 
  Supply   refers to the quantities of products manufacturers or owners are will-
ing to sell at different prices at a specific time. Generally speaking, the amount 
supplied will increase as the price increases, because sellers can make more 
money with a higher price. 
 Economists show this relationship between quantity supplied and price 
on a graph.  Figure 2.1  shows a simple supply curve for T-shirts. The price of 
the shirts in dollars is shown vertically on the left of the graph. The quantity of 
shirts sellers are willing to supply is shown horizontally at the bottom of the 
graph. The various points on the curve indicate how many T-shirts sellers 
would provide at different prices. For example, at a price of $5 a shirt, a T-shirt 
vendor would provide only 5 shirts, but at $50 a shirt the vendor would supply 
50 shirts. The supply curve indicates the relationship between the price and 
the quantity supplied. All things being equal, the higher the price, the more the 
vendor will be willing to supply.  
 The Economic Concept of Demand 
  Demand  refers to the quantity of products that people are willing to buy at 
different prices at a specific time. Generally speaking, the quantity 
demanded will increase as the price decreases. Again, we can show the rela-
tionship between price and quantity demanded in a graph.  Figure 2.2  shows 
a simple demand curve for T-shirts. The various points on the graph indi-
cate the quantity demanded at various prices. For example, at $45, buyers 
demand just 5 shirts, but at $5, the quantity demanded would increase to 35 
shirts. All things being equal, the lower the price, the more buyers are will-
ing to buy.  
 The Equilibrium Point, or Market Price 
 You might realize from  Figures 2.1 and  2.2 that the key factor in determining 
the quantities supplied and demanded is  price. If you were to lay the two 
graphs one on top of the other, the supply curve and the demand curve would 
cross where quantity demanded and quantity supplied are equal.  Figure 2.3  
illustrates that point. At a price of $15, the quantity of T-shirts demanded and 
the quantity supplied are equal (25 shirts). That crossing point is known as the 
 equilibrium point or  equilibrium price. In the long run, that price will become 
the market price.   Market price,  then, is determined by supply and demand. It 
is the price toward which the market will trend.  
 Proponents of a free market argue that, because supply and demand 
interactions determine prices, there is no need for the government to set 
prices. If quantity supplied exceeds quantity demanded, the resulting surplus 
 supply  
 The quantity of products that 
manufacturers or owners are 
willing to sell at different prices 
at a specific time.  
demand
The quantity of products that 
people are willing to buy at 
different prices at a specific 
time.
 market price  
 The price determined by 
supply and demand.  
iSee It! Need help 
understanding supply 
and demand? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
38
signals sellers to lower the price. If shortages develop 
because the quantity supplied is less than quantity 
demanded, it signals sellers to increase the price. Eventu-
ally, supply will again equal demand if nothing interferes 
with market forces. The Spotlight on Small Business box 
shows how environmental forces can influence supply and 
demand. 
 In countries without a free market, there is no mecha-
nism to reveal to businesses (via price) what to produce 
and in what amounts, so there are often shortages (not 
enough products) or surpluses (too many products). In 
such countries, the government decides what to produce 
and in what quantity, but without price signals it has no 
way of knowing what the proper quantities are. Further-
more, when the government interferes in otherwise free 
markets, such as when it subsidizes farm goods, surpluses 
and shortages may develop. Competition differs in free 
markets, too. We shall explore that concept next.  
 Competition within Free Markets 
 Economists generally agree there are four different degrees 
of competition: (1) perfect competition, (2) monopolistic 
competition, (3) oligopoly, and (4) monopoly. 
  Perfect competition   exists when there are many sell-
ers in a market and none is large enough to dictate the price of a product. Sell-
ers’ products appear to be identical, such as agricultural products like apples, 
corn, and potatoes. There are no true examples of perfect competition. Today, 
government price supports and drastic reductions in the number of farms 
make it hard to argue that even farming represents perfect competition. 
 perfect competition  
 The degree of competition in 
which there are many sellers in 
a market and none is large 
enough to dictate the price 
of a product.  
 FIGURE 2.2 THE DEMAND CURVE AT 
VARIOUS PRICES  
This is a simple demand curve showing the quantity of 
T-shirts demanded at different prices. The demand curve 
falls from left to right. It is easy to understand why. The lower 
the price of T-shirts, the higher the quantity demanded. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Price ($)
5
10 15 20 25 30
Quantity of T-Shirts
Demand curve
35 40 45 50
 FIGURE 2.1 THE SUPPLY CURVE AT VARIOUS 
PRICES  
The supply curve rises from left to right. Think it through. 
The higher the price of T-shirts goes (the vertical axis), 
the more sellers will be willing to supply. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Price ($)
5
10 15 20 25 30
Quantity of T-Shirts
35 40 45 50
Supply curve
 FIGURE 2.3 THE EQUILIBRIUM POINT  
The place where quantity demanded and quantity 
supplied meet is called the equilibrium point. When we 
put both the supply and demand curves on the same 
graph, we find that they intersect at a price where the 
quantity supplied and the quantity demanded are equal. 
In the long run, the market price will tend toward the 
equilibrium point. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
50
Price ($)
5 10 15 20 25 30
Quantity of T-Shirts
Demand curve
Equilibrium
point
35 40 45 50
Supply curve

39
 Under   monopolistic competition   a  l arge number of sellers produce very 
similar products that buyers nevertheless perceive as different, such as hot 
dogs, sodas, personal computers, and T-shirts. Product differentiation—the 
attempt to make buyers think similar products are different in some way—is a 
key to success. Think about what that means. Through advertising, branding, 
and packaging, sellers try to convince buyers that their products are different 
from competitors’, though they may be very similar or even interchangeable. 
The fast-food industry, with its pricing battles among hamburger offerings 
and the like, offers a good example of monopolistic competition. 
 An   oligopoly    i s a degree of competition in which just a few sellers domi-
nate a market, as we see in tobacco, gasoline, automobiles, aluminum, and 
aircraft. One reason some industries remain in the hands of a few sellers is 
that the initial investment required to enter the business often is tremendous. 
Think, for example, of how much it would cost to start a new airplane manu-
facturing facility. 
 In an oligopoly, products from different companies tend to be priced about 
the same. The reason is simple: Intense price competition would lower profits 
for everyone, since a price cut by one producer would most likely be matched 
by the others. As in monopolistic competition, product differentiation, rather 
than price, is usually the major factor in market success in an oligopoly. Note, 
for example, that most cereals are priced about the same, as are soft drinks. 
Thus, advertising is a major factor determining which of the few available 
brands consumers buy, because often it is advertising that creates the perceived 
differences. 
 A   monopoly   occurs when one seller controls the total supply of a product 
or service, and sets the price. In the United States, laws prohibit the creation 
of monopolies. Nonetheless, the U.S. legal system has permitted monopolies 
 oligopoly  
 A degree of competition in 
which just a few sellers 
dominate the market.  
 monopoly  
 A degree of competition in 
which only one seller controls 
the total supply of a product or 
service, and sets the price.  
 spotlight on small business 
 Normally, it takes a large force to 
significantly affect a product’s 
supply and demand. However, in 
the case of 2013’s Florida orange 
crop, the supply of this commodity 
experienced a major disruption 
due to tiny invaders. The state 
experienced its worst crop since 
1990, thanks to an orange-killing 
disease brought on by gnat-sized 
insects called Asian citrus psyllids. 
As a result, orange prices rose by 
as much as 16 percent throughout 
2014. 
 An unusually dry spell brought 
the wrath of the gnats swarming 
on Florida’s orange groves. For 
small farmers throughout the 
state, the next step to take is 
unclear. “We’re in uncharted ter-
ritory,” says John Ortelle, an 
expert who’s been following the 
citrus industry for more than 30 
years. “Whatever producers have 
tried to tackle the disease has 
had a minimal effect so far. 
Growers took out trees and 
added extra nutrients. You just 
don’t know when and if the 
effects will be positive.” With 
immediate solutions to the 
problem still out of reach, 
Florida’s farmers can only hope 
that no other circumstances 
beyond their control harm crops 
and drive prices up further. In 
fact, the state’s orange growers 
dodged a bullet during the harsh 
2013/2014 winter season as tem-
peratures often hovered around 
freezing. Thankfully for Florida’s 
citrus farmers (as well as the 
nation’s frugal OJ drinkers), 
oranges aren’t damaged by cold 
unless the temperature drops 
below 28 degrees Fahrenheit. 
 Sources: Marvin G. Perez, “Bug Bites Cut Florida 
Orange Crop to Lowest in 2 Decades,” 
 Bloomberg, December 26, 2013; and Claudia 
Carpenter, Luzi Ann Javier, and Jeff Wilson, 
“Florida Oranges to U.S. Wheat Seen Escaping 
Freeze Damage,”  Bloomberg, January 7, 2014. 
 www.gulfcitrus.org   
 Bugs Bug Orange Farmers and Drive Prices Up 
 
 monopolistic competition  
 The degree of competition in 
which a large number of sellers 
produce very similar products 
that buyers nevertheless 
perceive as different.  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
40
in the markets for public utilities that sell natural gas, water, and electric 
power. These companies’ prices and profits are usually controlled by public 
service commissions to protect the interest of buyers. For example, the Florida 
Public Service Commission is the administering agency over the Florida Power 
and Light utility company. Legislation ended the monopoly status of utilities 
in some areas, letting consumers choose among providers. The intention of 
such  deregulation is to increase competition among utility companies and, 
ultimately, lower prices for consumers.  
 Benefits and Limitations of Free Markets 
 One benefit of the free market is that it allows open competition among com-
panies. Businesses must provide customers with high-quality products at fair 
prices with good service. If they don’t, they lose customers to businesses that 
do. Do government services have the same incentives? 
 The free market—with its competition and incentives—was a major fac-
tor in creating the wealth that industrialized countries now enjoy. Some peo-
ple even talk of the free market as an economic miracle. Free-market 
capitalism, more than any other economic system, provides opportunities for 
poor people to work their way out of poverty. Capitalism also encourages busi-
nesses to be more efficient so they can successfully compete on price and qual-
ity. Would you say that the United States is increasing or decreasing the 
emphasis on capitalism? Why? 
 Yet, even as free-market capitalism has brought prosperity to the United 
States and to much of the rest of the world, it has brought inequality as well. 
Business owners and managers usually make more money and have more 
wealth than lower-level workers. Yet people who are old, disabled, or sick may 
not be able to start and manage a business, and others may not have the talent 
or the drive. What should society do about such inequality?  20 
 One of the dangers of free markets is that some people let greed dictate 
how they act. Criminal charges brought against some big businesses in bank-
ing, oil, accounting, telecommunications, insurance, and pharmaceuticals indi-
cate the scope of the potential problem. Some businesspeople have deceived 
the public about their products; others have deceived stockholders about the 
value of their stock, all in order to increase executives’ personal assets. 
 Clearly, some government laws and regulations are necessary to protect 
businesses’ stakeholders and make sure people who cannot work get the 
basic care they need. To overcome some of capitalism’s limitations, some 
countries have adopted an economic system called socialism. It, too, has its 
good and bad points. We explore these after you review the following Test 
Prep questions.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 •  What are the four basic rights that people have under free-market 
capitalism?  
 • How do businesspeople know what to produce and in what quantity?  
 • How are prices determined?  
 • What are the four degrees of competition, and what are some examples 
of each? 
• What are the four bas
 test prep 
ic rights that p
ic r

41
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
 Compare socialism and communism. 
 UNDERSTANDING SOCIALISM  
 Socialism   is an economic system based on the premise that some, if not most, 
basic businesses (e.g., steel mills, coal mines, and utilities) should be owned 
by the government so that profits can be more evenly distributed among the 
people. Entrepreneurs often own and run smaller businesses, and individuals 
are often taxed relatively steeply to pay for social programs. The top federal 
personal income tax rate in the United States, for example, was 39.6 percent 
recently, but in some socialist countries the top proposed rate can be as much 
as 75 percent.  21 While U.S. shoppers pay sales taxes ranging from over 10 per-
cent in Chicago to zero in Delaware, some socialist countries charge a similar 
value-added tax of 15 to 20 percent or more. Socialists acknowledge the major 
benefit of capitalism—wealth creation—but believe that wealth should be 
more evenly distributed than occurs in free-market capitalism. They believe 
the government should carry out the distribution and be much more involved 
in protecting the environment and providing for the poor. Do you see evidence 
of that happening in the United States today?  
 The Benefits of Socialism 
 The major benefit of socialism is supposed to be social equality. Ideally it 
comes about because the government takes income from wealthier people, in 
the form of taxes, and redistributes it to poorer people through various gov-
ernment programs. Free education through college, free health care, and free 
child care are some of the benefits socialist governments, using the money 
from taxes, may provide to their people. Workers in socialist countries usually 
get longer vacations, work fewer hours per week, and have more employee 
benefits (e.g., generous sick leave) than those in countries where free-market 
capitalism prevails.  
 The Negative Consequences of Socialism 
 Socialism may create more equality than capital-
ism, but it takes away some of businesspeople’s 
incentives. For example, tax rates in some socialist 
nations once reached 83 percent. Today, doctors, 
lawyers, business owners, and others who earn a 
lot of money pay very high tax rates. As a conse-
quence, many of them leave socialist countries for 
capitalistic countries with lower taxes, such as the 
United States. This loss of the best and brightest 
people to other countries is called a   brain drain.   
 Imagine an experiment in socialism in your 
own class. Imagine that after the first exam, those 
with grades of 90 and above have to give some of 
their points to those who make 70 and below so 
that everyone ends up with grades in the 80s. 
Would those who got 90s study as hard for the sec-
ond exam? What about those who got 70s? Can 
you see why workers may not work as hard or as 
well if they all get the same benefits regardless of 
how hard they work? 
LO 2–3
 socialism  
 An economic system based on 
the premise that some, if not 
most, basic businesses should 
be owned by the government 
so that profits can be more 
evenly distributed among the 
people.  
 brain drain  
 The loss of the best and 
brightest people to other 
countries.  
 Socialism has been 
more successful in some 
countries than in others. 
This photo shows 
Denmark’s clean and 
modern public 
transportation system. 
In Greece, overspending 
caused a debt crisis that 
forced the government 
to impose austerity 
measures that many 
Greeks oppose. What 
other factors might lead 
to slower growth in 
socialist countries?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
42
 Socialism also tends to result in fewer inventions and less innovation, 
because those who come up with new ideas usually don’t receive as much 
reward as they would in a capitalist system. Communism may be considered a 
more intensive version of socialism. We shall explore that system next.  
 UNDERSTANDING COMMUNISM 
 Communism   is an economic and political system in which the government 
makes almost all economic decisions and owns almost all the major factors of 
production. It intrudes further into the lives of people than socialism does. For 
example, some communist countries have not allowed their citizens to prac-
tice certain religions, change jobs, or move to the town of their choice. 
 One problem with communism is that the government has no way of 
knowing what to produce, because prices don’t reflect supply and demand as 
they do in free markets. The government must guess what the people need. As 
a result, shortages of many items, including food and clothing, may develop. 
Another problem is that communism doesn’t inspire businesspeople to work 
hard because the incentives are not there. Therefore, communism is slowly 
disappearing as an economic form. 
 Most communist countries today are suffering severe economic depres-
sion. In North Korea, many people are starving. In Cuba, people suffer a lack 
of goods and services readily available in most other countries, and some fear 
the government. 
 While some parts of the former Soviet Union remain influenced by com-
munist ideals, Russia itself now has a flat tax of only 13 percent. Yet this low 
rate increased the government’s tax revenues by nearly 30 percent, because 
more people were willing to pay.  
Analyze the trend toward mixed economies.
 THE TREND TOWARD MIXED ECONOMIES  
 The nations of the world have largely been divided between those that fol-
lowed the concepts of capitalism and those that adopted the concepts of com-
munism or socialism. We can now contrast the two major economic systems 
as follows:
 
1.  Free-market economies   exist when the market largely determines what 
goods and services get produced, who gets them, and how the economy 
grows.  Capitalism is the popular term for this economic system.  
 
2.   Command economies   exist when the government largely decides 
what goods and services will be produced, who gets them, and how the 
economy will grow.  Socialism and  communism are variations on this 
economic system.  
 Although all countries actually have some mix of the two systems, neither 
free-market nor command economies have resulted in optimal economic con-
ditions. Free-market mechanisms don’t seem to respond enough to the needs 
of those who are poor, elderly, or disabled. Some people also believe that busi-
nesses in free-market economies have not done enough to protect the environ-
ment. Over time, voters in mostly free-market countries, such as the United 
States, have elected officials who have adopted many social and environmen-
tal programs such as Social Security, welfare, unemployment compensation, 
and various clean air and water acts. What new or enhanced social policies do 
you know of that have been enacted or are being considered today? 
 communism  
 An economic and political 
system in which the government 
makes almost all economic 
decisions and owns almost all 
the major factors of production.  
LO 2–4
 free-market economies  
 Economic systems in which the 
market largely determines what 
goods and services get 
produced, who gets them, and 
how the economy grows.  
 command economies  
 Economic systems in which the 
government largely decides 
what goods and services will be 
produced, who will get them, 
and how the economy will grow. 

43
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
 Socialism and communism haven’t always created enough jobs or wealth 
to keep economies growing fast enough. Thus, communist governments are 
disappearing, and some socialist governments have been cutting back on 
social programs and lowering taxes on businesses and workers to generate 
more business growth and more revenue. 
 The trend, then, has been for mostly capitalist countries (like the United 
States) to move toward socialism (e.g., more government involvement in 
health care), and for some socialist countries to move toward capitalism 
(more private businesses, lower taxes). All countries have some mix of the 
two systems. Thus, the long-term global trend is toward a blend of capital-
ism and socialism. This trend likely will increase with the opening of global 
markets made easier by the Internet. The net effect is the emergence 
throughout the world of mixed economies (see the Reaching Beyond Our 
Borders box).  
  Mixed economies   exist where some allocation of resources is made by 
the market and some by the government. Most countries don’t have a name 
for such a system. If free-market mechanisms allocate most resources, the 
leaders call their system capitalism. If the government allocates most 
resources, the leaders call it socialism.  Figure 2.4  compares the various eco-
nomic systems.  
 Like most other nations of the world, the United States has a mixed econ-
omy. The U.S. government has now become the largest employer in the coun-
try, which means there are more workers in the public sector (government) 
than in any of the major businesses in the United States. Do you see the gov-
ernment growing or declining in the coming years?  
 mixed economies  
 Economic systems in which 
some allocation of resources is 
made by the market and some 
by the government.  
Russia has been moving 
away from communism 
toward a viable market 
economy. As poverty 
begins to decline, a 
middle class is 
emerging, but many of 
the country’s vast 
natural resources are 
difficult to tap. Laws that 
help promote business 
are few, and there is an 
active black market for 
many goods. Many 
observers are optimistic 
that Russia can prosper. 
What do you think?

44
 reaching beyond our borders 
 For much of the 20th century, sto-
ries about Africa’s economy inevi-
tably focused on the continent’s 
rampant poverty. The end of colo-
nial rule in Africa brought military 
dictatorships and other oppres-
sive forces to power in many 
countries. Coupled with disease 
and an almost nonexistent infra-
structure, Africa’s economy and its 
people suffered horribly. 
 Thankfully, so far the 21st cen-
tury has been brighter for many 
Africans. A booming commodities 
market along with expanding 
manufacturing and service econo-
mies are leading to unprece-
dented growth. Over the last 
decade, six of the world’s 10 
fastest-growing countries have 
been African. In eight of those 
years, Africa has even outpaced 
the growth of East Asia, including 
Japan. Looking to the future, 
experts expect the continent’s 
GDP to grow 6 percent annually 
over the next 10 years. 
 Many Africans have seen their 
lives change radically as econo-
mies on the continent have 
expanded. Income per person 
has shot up 30 percent over the 
last decade, while life expectancy 
has increased by 10 percent. 
Even small, formerly war-torn 
nations are seeing improve-
ments. For instance, in the 1990s 
Rwanda suffered a horrific civil 
war and genocide that claimed 
the lives of hundreds of thou-
sands of citizens. Subsequent 
years of peace and a relatively 
stable government have since 
turned the country around signifi-
cantly. Although many on the 
continent still experience major 
hardships, improving economic 
conditions are allowing more and 
more people to enter the middle 
class. Goods and services that 
used to be scarce are now 
becoming commonplace. There 
are now three mobile phones for 
every four people in Africa, and 
by 2017 nearly 30 percent of 
households are expected to own 
a television. School enrollment 
has also skyrocketed in the last 
few years. Experts hope that this 
younger generation will take 
advantage of improving educa-
tional opportunities and ensure 
Africa’s place on the global eco-
nomic stage. 
 Sources: “A Hopeful Continent,”  The Economist, 
March 2, 2013; “Business in Rwanda: Africa’s 
Singapore?”  The Economist, February 25, 2012; 
and John O’Sullivan, “Middle East and Africa: 
Digging Deeper,”  The Economist, November 18, 
2013. 
 www.imf.org  
 Economic Expansion in Africa 
r
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 • What led to the emergence of socialism?  
 • What are the benefits and drawbacks of socialism?  
 • What countries still practice communism?  
 • What are the characteristics of a mixed economy?  
• What led to the emerg
 Test prep 
gence of social
gen
 Describe the economic system of the United States, including the 
significance of key economic indicators (especially GDP), productivity, and 
the business cycle. 
UNDERSTANDING THE U.S. ECONOMIC SYSTEM
 The following sections will introduce the terms and concepts that you, as an 
informed citizen, will need to understand in order to grasp the issues facing 
government and business leaders in the United States. 
 Key Economic Indicators 
 Three major indicators of economic conditions are (1) the gross domestic 
product (GDP), (2) the unemployment rate, and (3) price indexes. Another 
important statistic is the increase or decrease in productivity. When you read 
LO 2–5
iSee It! Need help 
understanding basic 
economic systems? Visit 
your Connect e-book 
video tab for a brief 
animated explanation.

45
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
 FIGURE 2.4 COMPARISONS OF KEY ECONOMIC SYSTEMS 
CAPITALISM*
(United States)
SOCIALISM
(Sweden)
COMMUNISM
(North Korea)
MIXED ECONOMY
(Germany)
Social and 
Economic 
Goals
Private ownership of 
land and business. 
Liberty and the 
pursuit of happiness. 
Free trade. Emphasis 
on freedom and the 
proﬁt motive for 
economic growth.
Public ownership of 
major businesses. 
Some private 
ownership of 
smaller businesses 
and shops. 
Government control 
of education, 
health care, utilities, 
mining, transporta-
tion, and media. 
Very high taxation. 
Emphasis on 
equality.
Public ownership 
of all businesses. 
Government-
run education 
and health care. 
Emphasis on 
equality. Many 
limitations on 
freedom, including 
freedom to own 
businesses and to 
assemble to protest 
government actions.
Private ownership of 
land and business 
with government 
regulation. 
Government control 
of some institutions 
(e.g., mail). High 
taxation for defense 
and the common 
welfare. Emphasis 
on a balance 
between freedom 
and equality.
Motivation 
of Workers
Much incentive to 
work efﬁciently and 
hard because proﬁts 
are retained by 
owners. Workers are 
rewarded for high 
productivity.
Capitalist incentives 
exist in private 
businesses. 
Government control 
of wages in public 
institutions limits 
incentives.
Very little incentive 
to work hard or 
to produce quality 
goods or services.
Incentives are similar 
to capitalism except 
in government-
owned enterprises, 
which may have 
fewer incentives.
Control 
over 
Markets
Complete freedom 
of trade within and 
among nations. 
Some government 
control of markets.
Some markets are 
controlled by the 
government and 
some are free. Trade 
restrictions among 
nations vary and 
include some free-
trade agreements.
Total government 
control over markets 
except for illegal 
transactions.
Some government 
control of trade 
within and among 
nations (trade 
protectionism).
Choices in 
the Market
A wide variety of 
goods and services 
is available. Almost 
no scarcity or over-
supply exists for 
long because supply 
and demand control 
the market.
Variety in the 
marketplace varies 
considerably 
from country to 
country. Choice 
is directly related 
to government 
involvement in 
markets.
Very little choice 
among competing 
goods.
Similar to capitalism, 
but scarcity and 
oversupply may 
be caused by 
government 
involvement in 
the market (e.g., 
subsidies for farms).
Social 
Freedoms
Freedom of speech, 
press, assembly, 
religion, job choice, 
movement, and 
elections.
Similar to mixed 
economy. 
Governments may 
restrict job choice, 
movement among 
countries, and who 
may attend  upper-
level schools 
(i.e., college).
Very limited 
freedom to protest 
the government, 
practice religion, or 
change houses or 
jobs.
Some restrictions 
on freedoms of 
assembly and 
speech. Separation 
of church and state 
may limit religious 
practices in schools.
*The United States is a mixed economy based on a foundation of capitalism.

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
46
business literature, you’ll see these terms used again and again. Let’s explore 
what they mean. 
 Gross Domestic Product  
  Gross domestic product (GDP), which we men-
tioned briefly in Chapter 1, is the total value of final goods and services pro-
duced in a country in a given year. Both domestic and foreign-owned companies 
can produce the goods and services included in GDP, as long as the companies 
are located within the country’s boundaries. For example, production values 
from Japanese automaker Honda’s factory in Ohio are included in U.S. GDP. 
Revenue generated by Ford’s factory in Mexico is included in Mexico’s GDP, 
even though Ford is a U.S. company. Although the country relies on such data, 
the accuracy of the data (at least in the short run) is questionable.  22  
 Starting in the spring of 2014, the United States Bureau of Economic 
Analysis at the Commerce Department will report a statistic called gross out-
put (GO).   Gross output (GO)   is a measure of total sales volume at all stages of 
production. GO is almost twice the size of GDP and is considered a better indi-
cator of the business cycle and more consistent with economic growth theory. 
It shows that consumer spending is the effect, not the cause, of prosperity.  23  
 Almost every discussion about a nation’s economy is based on GDP. If 
growth in GDP slows or declines, businesses may feel many negative effects. A 
major influence on the growth of GDP is the productivity of the workforce—
that is, how much output workers create with a given amount of input. The 
level of U.S. economic activity is actually larger than the GDP figures show, 
because those figures don’t take into account illicit activities such as sales of 
illegal drugs. The high GDP in the United States is what enables its citizens to 
enjoy a high standard of living.  
 The Unemployment Rate  
The   unemployment rate   refers to the percent-
age of civilians at least 16 years old who are unemployed  and tried to find a job 
within the prior four weeks. The unemployment rate was over 7 percent in 
2013 and went down below 6.5 percent in 2014 (see  Figure  2.5 ). However, 
many people had given up looking for jobs (people who are not actively look-
ing for work are not included in the unemployment figures).  24 Some people 
feel that the unemployment statistics don’t accurately measure the pain being 
felt by those who have been unemployed for a long time or those who have 
 gross domestic product 
(GDP)  
 The total value of final goods 
and services produced in a 
country in a given year.  
 gross output (GO)  
 A measure of total sales 
volume at all stages of 
production.  
unemployment rate
The number of civilians at least 
16 years old who are 
unemployed and tried to find a 
job within the prior four weeks.
The overall 
unemployment rate in 
the United States 
fluctuates. Over the last 
decade, it has been as 
low as less than 5 
percent and as high as 
more than 10 percent. 
Unemployment 
insurance goes only so 
far to relieve the loss of 
income caused by 
losing your job. How 
high is the 
unemployment rate in 
your area today?

47
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
simply given up looking for a job.  25 Some believe that government benefits 
may lead to more unemployment.  26 Do you agree?  
 Figure 2.6  describes the four types of unemployment: frictional, structural, 
cyclical, and seasonal. The United States tries to protect those who are unem-
ployed because of recessions (defined later in the chapter), industry shifts, and 
other cyclical factors. Nonetheless, the  underemployment figure in 2014 was 
about 13.1 percent (this includes those who are working part time and want to 
work full time and those who have stopped looking for work).  27 Such high 
numbers raise the question of what the U.S. can do to increase employment.  28  
 Inflation and Price Indexes  
Price indexes help gauge the health of the econ-
omy by measuring the levels of inflation, disinflation, deflation, and stagfla-
tion.   Inflation   is a general rise in the prices of goods and services over time. 
 inflation  
 A general rise in the prices of 
goods and services over time.  
 FIGURE 2.5 U.S. UNEMPLOYMENT RATE 1989–2014  
0
4.0
4.5
5.0
5.5
6.0
6.5
7.5
8.0
9.0
7.0
Percent
1989 1990 1991 1992 1993 1994 1995 1996 1997 1998 1999
2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 2008 2009 2010 2011 2012 2013 2014
2000
10.0
Frictional unemployment refers to those people who have quit work because they didn’t like
the job, the boss, or the working conditions and who haven’t yet found a new job. It also refers
to those people who are entering the labor force for the ﬁrst time (e.g., new graduates) or are
returning to the labor force after signiﬁcant time away (e.g., parents who reared children).
There will always be some frictional unemployment because it takes some time to ﬁnd a ﬁrst
job or a new job.
Frictional unemployment
Structural unemployment refers to unemployment caused by the restructuring of ﬁrms or by 
a mismatch between the skills (or location) of job seekers and the requirements (or location) 
of available jobs (e.g., coal miners in an area where mines have been closed).
Structural unemployment
Cyclical unemployment occurs because of a recession or a similar downturn in the business 
cycle (the ups and downs of business growth and decline over time). This type of unemploy-
ment is the most serious.
Cyclical unemployment
Seasonal unemployment occurs where demand for labor varies over the year, as with the 
harvesting of crops.
Seasonal unemployment
FIGURE 2.6 FOUR TYPES 
OF UNEMPLOYMENT

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
48
The official definition is “a persistent increase in the level of consumer prices 
or a persistent decline in the purchasing power of money, caused by an 
increase in available currency and credit beyond the proportion of goods and 
services.”29 Thus, it is also described as “too many dollars chasing too few 
goods.” Go back and review the laws of supply and demand to see how that 
works. Rapid inflation is scary. If the prices of goods and services go up by just 
7 percent a year, they will double in about 10 years. 
  Disinflation   occurs when price increases are slowing (the inflation rate is 
declining). That was the situation in the United States throughout the 1990s.  30 
  Deflation   means that prices are declining.  31 It occurs when countries produce 
so many goods that people cannot afford to buy them all (too few dollars are 
chasing too many goods).   Stagflation   occurs when the economy is slowing 
but prices are going up anyhow. Some economists fear the United States may 
face stagflation in the near future. 
 The   consumer price index (CPI)   consists of monthly statistics that mea-
sure the pace of inflation or deflation. The government can compute the cost of 
goods and services, including housing, food, apparel, and medical care, to see 
whether or not they are going up or down. Today, however, the government is 
relying more on the measure of   core inflation.  That means the CPI minus food 
and energy costs. Since the costs of food and energy have been going up rapidly, 
the inflation measures reported (core inflation) are actually lower than real costs. 
This is important to you because some wages and salaries, rents and leases, tax 
brackets, government benefits, and interest rates are based on these data. 
 The   producer price index (PPI)  measures prices at the wholesale level. 
Other indicators of the economy’s condition include housing starts, retail 
sales, and changes in personal income. You can learn more about such indica-
tors by reading business periodicals, listening to business broadcasts on radio 
and television, and exploring business sites on the Internet.  
 Productivity in the United States 
 An increase in productivity means a worker can produce more goods and ser-
vices than before in the same time period, usually thanks to machinery or 
other equipment. Productivity in the United States has risen because comput-
ers and other technology have made production faster and easier. The higher 
productivity is, the lower the costs are of producing goods and services, and 
the lower prices can be. Therefore, businesspeople are eager to increase pro-
ductivity. Remember, however, that high productivity can lead to high unem-
ployment. Certainly, that is what the United States in now experiencing.  32  
 Now that the U.S. economy is a service economy, productivity is an issue 
because service firms are so labor-intensive. Spurred by foreign competition, 
productivity in the manufacturing sector is rising rapidly. In the service sector, 
productivity is growing more slowly because service workers—like teachers, 
clerks, lawyers, and barbers—have fewer new technologies available than 
there are for factory workers.  
 Productivity in the Service Sector 
 One problem with the service industry is that an influx of machinery may add 
to the quality of the service provided but not to the output per worker . For 
example, you’ve probably noticed how many computers there are on college 
campuses. They add to the quality of education but don’t necessarily boost 
professors’ productivity. The same is true of some equipment in hospitals, 
such as CAT scanners, PET scanners, and MRI scanners. They improve patient 
care but don’t necessarily increase the number of patients doctors can see. In 
 disinflation  
 A situation in which price 
increases are slowing (the 
inflation rate is declining).   
 deflation  
 A situation in which prices are 
declining.  
 stagflation  
 A situation when the economy 
is slowing but prices are going 
up anyhow.  
 consumer price index (CPI)  
 Monthly statistics that measure 
the pace of inflation or 
deflation.  
 core inflation  
 CPI minus food and energy 
costs.  
 producer price index (PPI)  
 An index that measures prices 
at the wholesale level.  

49
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
other words, today’s productivity measures 
in the service industry fail to capture the 
increase 
in 
quality 
caused 
by 
new 
technology. 
 Clearly, the United States and other 
countries need to develop new measures of 
productivity for the service economy that 
include quality as well as quantity of out-
put. Despite productivity improvement, the 
economy is likely to go through a series of 
ups and downs, much as it has over the past 
few years. We’ll explore that process next.  
 The Business Cycle 
 Business cycles   are the periodic rises and 
falls that occur in economies over time. 
Economists look at a number of business cycles, from seasonal cycles that 
occur within a year to cycles that occur every 48–60 years. 
 Economist Joseph Schumpeter identified the four phases of long-term 
business cycles as boom–recession–depression–recovery:
 
1. An  economic boom is just what it sounds like—business is booming.  
 
2.  Recession   is two or more consecutive quarters of decline in the GDP. 
In a recession prices fall, people purchase fewer products, and 
businesses fail. A recession brings high unemployment, increased 
business failures, and an overall drop in living standards.  
 
3. A   depression   is a severe recession, usually accompanied by deflation. 
Business cycles rarely go through a depression phase. In fact, while 
there were many business cycles during the 20th century, there was 
only one severe depression (1930s).  
 
4. A  recovery occurs when the economy stabilizes and starts to grow. 
This eventually leads to an economic boom, starting the cycle all over 
again.  
 One goal of some economists is to predict such ups and downs. That is 
very difficult to do. Business cycles are identified according to facts, but we 
can explain those facts only by using theories. Therefore, we cannot predict 
with certainty. But one thing is certain: over time, the economy will rise and 
fall as it has done lately. 
 Since dramatic swings up and down in the economy cause all kinds of 
disruptions to businesses, the government tries to minimize such changes. It 
uses fiscal policy and monetary policy to try to keep the economy from slow-
ing too much or growing too rapidly.  
 Contrast fiscal policy and monetary policy, and explain how each affects the 
economy. 
 Stabilizing the Economy through Fiscal Policy  
 Fiscal policy   refers to the federal government’s efforts to keep the economy 
stable by increasing or decreasing taxes or government spending. The first fis-
cal policy tool is taxation. Theoretically, high tax rates tend to slow the econ-
omy because they draw money away from the private sector and put it into the 
government. High tax rates may discourage small-business ownership because 
 business cycles  
 The periodic rises and falls that 
occur in economies over time.  
 recession  
 Two or more consecutive 
quarters of decline in the GDP.  
 depression  
 A severe recession, usually 
accompanied by deflation.  
LO 2–6
 fiscal policy  
 The federal government’s 
efforts to keep the economy 
stable by increasing or 
decreasing taxes or 
government spending.  
It can be difficult to 
measure productivity in 
the service sector. New 
technology can improve 
the quality of services 
without necessarily 
increasing the number 
of people served. A 
doctor can make more-
accurate diagnoses with 
scans, for instance, but 
still can see only so 
many patients in a day. 
How can productivity 
measures capture 
improvements in the 
quality of service?

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
50
they decrease the profits businesses can earn and make the effort less reward-
ing. It follows, then, that low tax rates will theoretically give the economy a 
boost. When you count all fees, sales taxes, and more, taxes on the highest-
earning U.S. citizens could exceed 50 percent. Is that figure too high or not 
high enough in your opinion? Why? 
 The second fiscal policy tool is government spending on highways, social 
programs, education, infrastructure (e.g., roads and utilities), defense, and so 
on. The national deficit is the amount of money the federal government 
spends beyond what it gathers in taxes for a given fiscal year. The deficit is 
expected to be over $1 trillion for the next several years. Such deficits increase 
the national debt. The   national debt   is the sum of government deficits over 
time. Recently, the national debt was over $17 trillion (see  Figure 2.7 ). That is 
a rather misleading number, however, since the unfunded obligation for 
Medicare has been estimated to be over $70 trillion (Various sources cite dif-
ferent numbers for the unfunded obligations for both Medicare and Social 
Security, but the number is high enough to be of concern, no matter how 
high it is.) If the government takes in more revenue than it spends (i.e., tax 
revenues exceed expenditures), there is a national  surplus. That is not likely 
to happen soon.  
 One way to lessen deficits is to cut government spending. Many presi-
dents and those in Congress have promised to make the government 
“smaller,” that is, to reduce government spending—but that doesn’t hap-
pen very often. There always seems to be a need for more social programs 
each year, and thus the deficits continue and add to the national debt. 
Some people believe that government spending helps the economy grow. 
 national debt  
 The sum of government deficits 
over time.  
 FIGURE 2.7 THE NATIONAL DEBT  
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
$18
Trillions of dollars
$1.8 trillion 
$2.9 trillion 
$3.6 trillion 
$4.6 trillion 
$4.96 trillion 
$5.2 trillion $5.4 trillion 
$5.6 trillion 
$5.5 trillion 
$5.7 trillion 
1980 ’81 ’82 ’83 ’84 ’85 ’86 ’87 ’88 ’89 ’90 ’91 ’92 ’93 ’94 
’96 ’97 ’98 ’99 ’00 ’01 ’02 ’03 ’04 ’05 ’06 ’07 ’08 ’09 ’10
’12 ’13 ’14
’11
’95
$6.4 trillion 
$8.4 trillion 
$9.6 trillion 
$14.4 trillion 
$161 trillion 
$2.3 trillion 
$1.4 trillion 
$15 trillion
$994 billion
$171 trillion 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
11
12
13
14
15
16
$1.8 trillioon
$2.9 trillion
$3.6 trillion
$3.6 tril ioon
$3.6 tril ioon
$4.6 trillion
$4 6 trillion 
$4 6 trillion 
$4.96 trillion
$5.2 trillion 
$5.2 trillion
$5.2 trillion $5.4 trillion
$5.4 tril ion
$5.4 trillio
$5.6 trillion 
$5.
$5 5 t trilrillio
lion
$5.7 trillion 
$
1980 ’81 ’82 ’83 ’84 ’85 ’86 ’87 ’88 ’89 ’90 ’91 ’92 ’93 ’94
’96 ’97 ’98 ’99 ’00 ’01 ’02 ’03 ’04 ’05 ’06 ’07 ’08 ’09 ’10
’12 ’13 ’14
’11
’95
$6.4 trillion 
$6 4
illi
$8
$8.4 trillion 
$9.
$9 6 t
6 tririllion
$
$14.4 trillion
$161 trillion 
$2.3 trillion
$2 3 trillion
$2 3 trillion
$1.4 trillioon 
$14 trillion
$15 trillion
$994 billillion
ion
$171 trillion 
17

51
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
Others believe that the money the government spends comes 
out of the pockets of consumers and businesspeople, and 
thus slows growth. What do you think?  
 Fiscal Policy in Action during an Economic Crisis 
 During much of the early 2000s, the U.S. federal government 
followed the basic economic principles of free markets. By 
2008, however, the economy was facing a dire economic crisis 
and the government spent more than $1 trillion of taxpayer 
money in an effort to revive the failing economy (including 
helping out banks, the auto industry, and others). ($1 trillion is 
about $3,272 per person in the United States.) The government 
was then following the basic economic theory of John Maynard 
Keynes.   Keynesian economic theory   is the theory that a gov-
ernment policy of increasing spending could stimulate the 
economy in a recession. The Federal Reserve has continued to 
pump trillions of dollars into the economy over the last few 
years. Recently, the Fed cut back on dollar generation from 
$85 billion to $65 billion per month. What do you expect the 
result of that cut will be?  
 Using Monetary Policy to Keep the Economy Growing 
 Have you ever wondered what organization adds money to or subtracts money 
from the economy? As noted above, the answer is the Federal Reserve Bank 
(the Fed). The Fed is a semiprivate organization that is not under the direct 
control of the government but does have members appointed by the presi-
dent. We will discuss the Fed in detail when we look at banking in Chapter 20. 
Now we simply introduce monetary policy and the role of the Fed in control-
ling the economy.   Monetary policy   is the management of the money supply 
and interest rates by the Federal Reserve Bank. The Fed’s most visible role is 
the raising and lowering of interest rates. When the economy is booming, the 
Fed tends to raise interest rates. This makes money more expensive to borrow. 
Businesses thus borrow less, and the economy slows as businesspeople spend 
less money on everything they need to grow, including labor and machinery. 
The opposite is true when the Fed lowers interest rates. Businesses tend to 
borrow more, and the economy is expected to grow. Raising and lowering 
interest rates should help control the rapid ups and downs of the economy. In 
2010–2014, the Fed kept interest rates near zero, but the economy remained 
sluggish. You can imagine the pressure that puts on Janet Yellen, the new 
head of the Federal Reserve. Again, we shall discuss her later in the text. 
 The Fed also controls the money supply. A simple explanation of this 
function is that the more money the Fed makes available to businesspeople 
and others, the faster the economy is supposed to grow. To slow the econ-
omy (and prevent inflation), the Fed lowers the money supply. The Fed 
poured money into the economy in 2008–2014. What would you expect the 
result to be? 
 To sum up, there are two major tools for managing the economy of the 
United States: fiscal policy (government taxes and spending) and monetary 
policy (the Fed’s control over interest rates and the money supply). The goal is 
to keep the economy growing so that more people can rise up the economic 
ladder and enjoy a higher standard of living and quality of life.  
Keynesian economic theory
The theory that a government 
policy of increasing spending 
could stimulate the economy in 
a recession.
monetary policy
The management of the money 
supply and interest rates by the 
Federal Reserve.
The financial crisis 
beginning in 2008 
caused much anguish 
among Wall Street 
workers and people in 
general. How effective 
was the government’s 
response?

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
52
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 Explain basic economics.
 • 
 What is economics?  
 Economics is the study of how society chooses to employ resources to pro-
duce goods and services and distribute them for consumption among vari-
ous competing groups and individuals.  
 • 
 What are the two branches of economics?  
 There are two major branches of economics: macroeconomics studies the 
operation of a nation’s economy as a whole, and microeconomics studies 
the behavior of people and organizations in particular markets (e.g., why 
people buy smaller cars when gas prices go up).  
 • 
 How can we be assured of having enough resources?  
 Resource development is the study of how to increase resources and cre-
ate the conditions that will make better use of them.  
 • 
 How does capitalism create a climate for economic growth?  
 Under capitalism, businesspeople don’t often deliberately set out to help 
others; they work mostly for their own prosperity and growth. Yet people’s 
efforts to improve their own situation in life act like an  invisible hand to 
help the economy grow and prosper through the production of needed 
goods, services, and ideas.  
 Explain what capitalism is and how free markets work.
 • 
 What is capitalism?  
 Capitalism is an economic system in which all or most of the means of 
production and distribution are privately owned and operated for profit.  
 • 
 Who decides what to produce under capitalism?  
 In capitalist countries, businesspeople decide what to produce, how much 
to pay workers, and how much to charge for goods and services. They also 
decide whether to produce certain goods in their own countries, import 
those goods, or have them made in other countries.  
 • 
 What is state capitalism?  
 State capitalism is a combination of freer markets and some government 
control.  
 • 
 What are the basic rights people have under capitalism?  
 The four basic rights under capitalism are (1) the right to own private 
property, (2) the right to own a business and to keep all of that business’s 
Wh t i
LO 1–1
Wh t i
LO 1–2
Summary 
 • Name the three economic indicators and describe how well the United 
States is doing based on each indicator.  
 • What’s the difference between a recession and a depression?  
 • How does the government manage the economy using fiscal policy?  
 • What does the term  monetary policy mean? What organization is 
responsible for monetary policy?  
•
Name the three econo
 test prep 
omic indicators
om

53
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
profits after taxes, (3) the right to freedom of competition, and (4) the 
right to freedom of choice. President Franklin D. Roosevelt felt that 
other freedoms were also important: the right to freedom of speech and 
expression, the right to worship in your own way, and freedom from 
want and fear.  
 • 
 How does the free market work?  
 The free market is one in which buyers and sellers negotiating prices for 
goods and services influence the decisions about what gets produced and 
in what quantities. Buyers’ decisions in the marketplace tell sellers what to 
produce and in what quantity. When buyers demand more goods, the price 
goes up, signaling suppliers to produce more. The higher the price, the 
more goods and services suppliers are willing to produce. Price is the 
mechanism that allows free markets to work.  
Compare socialism and communism.
 • 
 What is socialism?  
 Socialism is an economic system based on the premise that some busi-
nesses should be owned by the government.  
 • 
 What are the advantages and disadvantages of socialism?  
 Socialism intends to create more social equity. Workers in socialist coun-
tries usually receive more education, health care, and other benefits and 
also work fewer hours, with longer vacations. The major disadvantage of 
socialism is that it lowers the incentive to start a business or to work hard. 
Socialist economies tend to have a higher unemployment rate and a slower 
growth rate than capitalist economies.  
 • 
 How does socialism differ from communism?  
 Under communism, the government owns almost all major production 
facilities and dictates what gets produced and by whom. Communism is 
also more restrictive when it comes to personal freedoms, such as reli-
gious freedom.  
 Analyze the trend toward mixed economies.
 • 
 What is a mixed economy?  
 A mixed economy is part capitalist and part socialist. Some businesses are 
privately owned, but taxes tend to be high to distribute income more 
evenly among the population.  
 • 
 What countries have mixed economies?  
 The United States has a mixed economy, as do most other industrialized 
countries.  
 • 
 What are the benefits of mixed economies?  
 A mixed economy has most of the benefits of wealth creation that free 
markets bring plus the benefits of greater social equality and concern for 
the environment that socialism promises.  
 Describe the economic system of the United States, including the 
significance of key economic indicators (especially GDP), productivity, and 
the business cycle.
 • 
 What are the key economic indicators in the United States?  
Gross domestic product (GDP) is the total value of final goods and services 
produced in a country in a given year. The  unemployment rate refers to the 
percentage of civilians at least 16 years old who are unemployed and tried 
What is s
LO 1–3
What is a
LO 1–4
LO 1–5

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
54
to find a job within the most recent four weeks. The  consumer price index 
(CPI) measures changes in the prices of about 400 goods and services that 
consumers buy.  
 • 
 What is gross output?  
 Gross output (GO) is a measure of total sales volume at all stages of 
production.  
 • 
 What are the four phases of business cycles?  
 In an  economic boom, businesses do well. A  recession occurs when two or 
more quarters show declines in the GDP, prices fall, people purchase fewer 
products, and businesses fail. A  depression is a severe recession.  Recovery
occurs when the economy stabilizes and starts to grow.  
Contrast fiscal policy and monetary policy, and explain how each affects the 
economy.
 • 
 What is fiscal policy?  
 Fiscal policy consists of government efforts to keep the economy stable by 
increasing or decreasing taxes or government spending.  
 • 
 What is the importance of monetary policy to the economy?  
 Monetary policy is the management of the money supply and interest 
rates. When unemployment gets too high, the Federal Reserve Bank (the 
Fed) may put more money into the economy and lower interest rates. That 
is supposed to provide a boost to the economy as businesses borrow and 
spend more money and hire more people.    
LO 1–6
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  
key terms 
 brain drain  41
 business cycles  49
 capitalism  34
 command 
economies 42
 communism  42
 consumer price index 
(CPI)  48
 core inflation  48
 deflation 48
 demand 37
 depression  49
 disinflation  48
 economics  30
 fiscal policy  49
 free-market 
economies  42
 gross domestic 
product (GDP)  46
 gross output 
(GO) 46
 inflation  47
 invisible hand  33
 Keynesian economic 
theory  51
 macroeconomics  30
 market price  37
 microeconomics  30
mixed economies  43
monetary policy  51
monopolistic 
competition  39
monopoly  39
national debt  50
oligopoly  39
perfect competition  38
producer price 
index (PPI)  48
recession  49
resource development  31
 socialism  41
 stagflation  48
 state capitalism  35
 supply  37
 unemployment rate  46
 The U.S. Supreme Court ruled that cities could have school voucher programs 
that give money directly to parents, who could then choose among competing 
schools, public or private. The idea was to create competition among schools. 
Like businesses, schools were expected to improve their services (how effec-
tively they teach) to win students from competitors. The result would be 
improvement in all schools, private and public, to benefit many students.
Th
 critical thinking 

55
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1. In teams, develop a list of the advantages of living in a capitalist society. 
Then develop lists headed “What are the disadvantages?” and “How could 
such disadvantages be minimized?” Describe why a poor person in a 
socialist country might reject capitalism and prefer a socialist state.  
 2. Show your understanding of the principles of supply and demand by look-
ing at the oil market today. Go online and search for a chart of oil prices 
for the last few years. Why does the price of oil fluctuate so greatly? What 
will happen as more and more people in China and India decide to buy 
automobiles? What would happen if most U.S consumers decided to drive 
electric cars?  
 3. This exercise will help you understand socialism from different perspec-
tives. Form three groups. Each group should adopt a different role in a 
socialist economy: one group will be the business owners, another group 
will be workers, and another will be government leaders. Within your 
group discuss and list the advantages and disadvantages to you of lower-
ing taxes on businesses. Then have each group choose a representative to 
go to the front of the class and debate the tax issue with the representa-
tives from the other groups.  
 4. Draw a line and mark one end “Free-Market Capitalism” and the other end 
“Central Planning.” Mark where on the line the United States is now. 
Explain why you marked the spot you chose. Students from other coun-
tries may want to do this exercise for their own countries and explain the 
differences to the class.  
 5. Break into small groups. In your group discuss how the following changes 
have affected people’s purchasing behavior and attitudes toward the 
United States and its economy: the wars in Iraq and Afghanistan, the 
increased amount spent on homeland security, the government involve-
ment in banking and other industries, and the growth of the Internet. 
Have a group member prepare a short summary for the class.
 
 
 
 
 
 1. Do you believe economic principles, like competition, apply in both pri-
vate and public organizations? Be prepared to defend your answer.  
 2. Are there other public functions that might benefit from more competi-
tion, including competition from private firms?  
 3. Many people say that businesspeople do not do enough for society. Some 
students choose to go into the public sector instead of business because 
they want to help others. However, businesspeople say that they do more 
to help others than nonprofit groups do because they provide jobs for peo-
ple rather than giving them charity. Furthermore, they believe businesses 
create all the wealth that nonprofit groups distribute.
 
a. How can you find some middle ground in this debate to show that both 
businesspeople and those who work for nonprofit organizations contrib-
ute to society and need to work together more closely to help people?  
 
b. How could you use the concepts of Adam Smith to help illustrate 
your position?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
56
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To familiarize you with the sources of economic information that are impor-
tant to business decision makers.  
 EXERCISE 
 Imagine that your boss asked you to help her to prepare the company’s sales 
forecast for the coming two years. In the past, she felt that trends in the 
nation’s GDP, U.S. manufacturing, and manufacturing in Illinois were espe-
cially helpful in forecasting sales. She would like you to do the following:
 1. Go to the Bureau of Economic Analysis’s website ( www.bea.gov ) and 
locate the gross domestic product data. Compare the annual figure for the 
last four years. What do the figures indicate for the next couple of years?  
 2. At the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ website ( www.bls.gov ) under Industries, 
click on Industries at a Glance to find the information about the manufac-
turing industry. What is the employment trend in manufacturing over the 
last four years (percentage change from preceding period)?  
 3. Return to the Bureau of Labor Statistics’ home page and use the Search 
feature to find trends in employment for the state of Illinois. Look around 
the website to see what other information is available. Plot the trend in 
manufacturing employment in Illinois over the last four years. On your 
own, discuss what economic changes may have influenced that trend.  
 4. Based on the information you have gathered, write a brief summary of 
what may happen to company sales over the next couple of years.  
video case   
Billions of people in the world make $2 a day or 
less. In fact, a billion people make less than $1 a 
day. In such places, a loan of $100 or $200 makes 
a huge difference. That’s where microloans from 
organizations such as Opportunity International 
come in.
Opportunity International is an organization 
that grants microloans to people, mostly women, in 
developing countries so they can invest in a busi-
ness. Those investments often lead to community 
growth and employment, and help the owners 
themselves to prosper on a moderate scale. The bor-
rowers must pay back the money with interest—
when they do, they can borrow more and keep 
growing. Opportunity International, unlike some 
other microlending organizations, also provides a 
banking function where entrepreneurs can safely 
put their money. They can also buy some insurance 
to protect themselves against loss.
Opportunity International helps over a mil-
lion people in over 28 countries, giving them the 
opportunity to change their lives for the better. 
This video introduces you to some of those peo-
ple, but primarily explains how freedom and a lit-
tle money can combine to create huge differences 
in people’s lives.
Adam Smith was one of the first people to 
point out that wealth comes from freedom, the 
ability to own land, and the ability to keep the prof-
its from what you do on that land. When people try 
to maximize profits, they have to hire other people 
to help them do the work. This provides jobs for 
others and wealth for the entrepreneur. And, like 
an invisible hand, the whole community benefits 
 OPPORTUNITY INTERNATIONAL: GIVING THE POOR 
A WORKING CHANCE

57
Understanding Economics and How It Affects Business
CHAPTER 2
from the entrepreneurs’ desire to earn a profit. In 
the video, you can see a woman in Uganda who has 
applied those principles to benefit her family, pro-
vide employment, and help her community.
Free-market capitalism is the system where 
people can own their own land and businesses and 
keep the profits they earn. Such a system demands 
that people can (1) own their own property (not a 
reality in many developing nations); (2) keep the 
profits from any  business they start; (3) compete 
with other businesses (it is difficult to compete 
with the government); and (4) work wherever and 
whenever they want. The key word in capitalism is 
freedom—freedom of religion, freedom to own 
land, and freedom to prosper and grow. Opportu-
nity International is making an attempt to show 
people how freedom plus a few dollars can make a 
huge difference in an economy.
In a free-market economy, price is determined 
by buyers and sellers negotiating over the price of a 
good or service. The equilibrium point is the place 
where buyers and sellers agree to an exchange; it is 
also called the market price. Without free markets, 
there is no way of knowing what buyers need and 
what sellers need to produce. Thus, in command 
economies, where there is no supply-and-demand 
mechanism in operation, there can be shortages or 
surpluses in food, clothing, and other necessities.
Socialism and communism are alternatives to 
a free-market economy. Under such systems, peo-
ple are more likely to have a bit of equality, but 
there are fewer incentives to work hard, and entre-
preneurs are often lured to countries where they 
can make more money by working harder. The 
result is called a brain drain, where the best and 
the brightest often move to free-market countries. 
There are advantages to socialism and commu-
nism, such as free schools, free health care, free 
day care, etc. But the taxes are higher, and there is 
usually less innovation and higher unemployment.
The trend in the world is toward mixed econo-
mies, where most of the economy is based on free-
market principles, but the government gets 
involved in things such as education, health care, 
and welfare. The United States has been basically 
a free-market economy, but it is clear that there is 
a movement toward more government involve-
ment. On the other hand, some countries are 
reducing the role of government in society and 
moving toward freer markets. Thus the world is 
moving toward mixed economies.
The United States government tries to control 
the money supply through the Federal Reserve 
and fiscal policy. Fiscal policy has to do with taxes 
and spending. The less the government spends, 
the more that is available for businesses to invest. 
And the lower the tax rates on entrepreneurs, the 
more they will invest in businesses and the faster 
the economy will grow.
Opportunity International shows the poorest 
of the poor how important entrepreneurs, free-
dom, opportunity, and a little bit of money are to 
economic growth and prosperity. You are encour-
aged in this video to participate in helping poor 
people around the world. You can do this by con-
tributing time and money to organizations like 
Opportunity International. You can join the Peace 
Corps or other groups designed to assist less-
developed countries.
THINKING IT OVER
 1. Why is there a need for organizations like 
Opportunity International? Can’t poor people 
get loans from banks and other sources?
 2. Identify the four major requirements neces-
sary for a free-market system to operate.
 3. What is the main difference between capital-
ism and a mixed economy? Which model is 
used in the United States?
  1. 
Terry Miller, “America’s Dwindling Economic Freedom,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, January 14, 2014. 
  2. 
Randall Stephenson, “A Business Short List for Growth,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, January 15, 2014. 
  3. 
Romain Hatchuel, “The Coming Global Wealth Tax,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, December 4, 2013. 
  4. 
Roger Lowenstein, “Macro Master,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 18–19, 2014. 
  5. 
Janet Hook and Kristina Peterson, “Congress Passes a Debt 
Bill,”  The Wall Street Journal, October 13, 2013. 
  6. 
Robert J. Samuelson, “Macroeconomics Loses Its Magic,” 
The Washington Post, April 22, 2013. 
  7. 
Nidaa Bakhsh, “Shale Goes Global,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, November 18, 2013–January 2, 2014. 
  8. 
Nicholas Eberstadt, “China’s Coming One-Child Crisis,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, November 27, 2013. 
  9. 
Charles Kenny, “The Reproductive Recession,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, February 11–February 17, 2013. 
 10. 
Stephenson, “A Business Short List for Growth.” 
  11. 
Ed Feulner, “The Slow Fade of Economic Freedom,”  The 
Washington Times, January 14, 2014. 
 12. 
Donald Lambro, “Dickensian Poverty in 2013,”  The 
Washington Times, December 25, 2013. 
 13. 
Charles Lane, “The Politics of Inequality,”  The Washington 
Post, December 10, 2013. 
oes Global,” Bloomberg
notes 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
58
  14.  
“The Philanthropic,” special feature,  Forbes, December 2, 2013. 
 15. 
Steve Matthews, “For Many, the Age of Entrepreneurship 
Starts at 55,”  The Washington Post, January 12, 2014. 
 16.  
John Mackey and Raj Sisodia,  Conscious Capitalism (Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2013). 
  17. 
Ibid., p. 11. 
 18. 
“What Kind of Capitalism?” editorial,  The Economist, October 
12, 2013. 
 19. 
Charles Wolf Jr., “A Truly Great Leap Forward: How China 
Became Capitalist,”  The Wall Street Journal, May 1, 2013. 
 20. Peter Coy, “The Sting of Long-Term Unemployment,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, February 11–February 17, 2013. 
 21. 
Romain Hatchuel, “What’s French for Economic Nonsense?” 
The Wall Street Journal, March 29, 2013. 
 22. Samuel Rines, “Monthly Economic Data Aren’t Reliable,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, June 28, 2013. 
 23. Mark Skousen, “A New Way to Measure the Economy,” 
Forbes, December 16, 2013. 
 24. John Cassidy, “Meet the ‘Missing Millions’ Who’ve Vanished 
from the Economy,”  Fortune, April 8, 2013. 
 25. Peter Coy, “The Sting of Long-Term Unemployment,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, February 11–February 17, 2013. 
 26. Richard Vedder, “The Wages of Unemployment,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, January 16, 2013; Brenda Cronin, “Jobless 
Benefits Set to Expire,”  The Wall Street Journal, December 
28–29, 2013; and Arthur Laffer, “Work Disincentives, Still 
Crazy after All These Years,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
February 9–10, 2013. 
 27. “The Latest Jobs Miss,” editorial,  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 11–12, 2014. 
 28. Brenda Cronin and Jonathan House, “Hiring Slowdown 
Blurs Growth View,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 11–12, 
2014. 
 29. www.thefreedictionary.com, accessed September 2014.
 30. Gene Epstein, “More Disinflation Lies Ahead,”  Barron’s, 
January 20, 2014.
 31. 
Paul Hannon, “Economist Warns Europe on Deflation,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, January 18–19, 2014. 
 32. “Does More Work Lead to a Healthier Economy?” HBR 
Reprint,  Harvard Business Review, December 2013. 
 Page 29: Photos by @jibees for LeWeb11 Confer-
ence @ Les Docks—Paris, /https://www.flickr.com/
photos/leweb3/6491865213; p. 31 (top): © Lucas 
Vallecillos/age fotostock; p. 31 (bottom): © Ng 
Han Guan/AP Images; p. 32: © Stephen Shaver/
UPI/Landov; p. 33: © Kim Karpeles/Alamy; p. 35: 
© Luc Beziat/Cultura RM/Alamy; p. 36: © John 
Minchillo/AP Images; p. 39: © Stockbyte/Getty 
Images RF; p. 41: © Kathy deWitt/Alamy; p. 43: 
© Dmitry Rogulin/ITAR-TASS/Newscom; p. 46: 
© Paul Sakuma/ AP Images; p. 49: © Hero Images/
Corbis RF; p. 51: © M. Spencer Green/AP Images.
Page 29: Photos by @jibees fo
photo credits 


60
 Doing Business in 
Global Markets 
 3 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
  LO 3-1 
Discuss the importance of the global market and the roles of 
comparative advantage and absolute advantage in global trade. 
  LO 3-2 
Explain the importance of importing and exporting, and 
understand key terms used in global business. 
  LO 3-3 
Illustrate the strategies used in reaching global markets and 
explain the role of multinational corporations. 
  LO 3-4 
Evaluate the forces that affect trading in global markets. 
  LO 3-5 
Debate the advantages and disadvantages of trade protectionism. 
  LO 3-6 
Discuss the changing landscape of the global market and the issue 
of offshore outsourcing.  

61
Leila Janah
 • Founder and CEO of Samasource
 • Fights world poverty and trains 
unskilled workers
 • Finds jobs for newly trained workers
www.samasource.org
@samasource
F
or decades U.S. companies 
have outsourced work over-
seas to countries known for 
providing cheap labor. The 
practice is controversial. 
While it saves businesses money, that’s 
often the only benefit. Not only may it 
hurt job creation domestically, outsourc-
ing can also overload foreign job mar-
kets with underpaid work that often 
offers little chance for advancement.
 Leila Janah saw this problem firsthand 
when she befriended a call center 
employee working in India. The young 
man took a long commute to his job from 
one of Mumbai’s worst slums, which was 
the only place he could afford. “I knew 
there were more people like him capable 
of doing quality work,” says Janah. She 
then came up with the idea for 
Samasource, a nonprofit “microwork” 
company that helps young men and 
women in developing countries earn extra 
income in order to rise out of poverty. 
 The bulk of the work provided by 
Samasource involves simple, computer-
related tasks—such as tagging images, 
moderating comments on websites, and 
transcribing interviews. These jobs nor-
mally end up in countries like India and 
the Philippines through large outsourc-
ing corporations. Unlike these compa-
nies, however, Samasource carefully 
selects potential employees based on 
the skills they lack, not the ones they 
have already. “The criteria for selecting 
agents is that they must be between the 
ages of 18 and 30, have no formal work 
experience, and are currently earning 
less than a living wage,” says Janah. 
“Agents are then provided free, special-
ized technology training, soft skills train-
ing, and project-specific training before 
beginning work.” Samasource’s contracts 
with companies like Google, Microsoft 
and eBay have helped more than 4,000 
people and their families rise above the 
poverty line. In fact, a recent study pro-
jected that by 2020 more than 2.9 mil-
lion people will be employed through 
“impact sourcing” companies like 
Samasource. 
 Janah’s commitment to combating 
world poverty has been her driving force 
since her teenage years. She earned a 
$10,000 scholarship, which funded a trip 
to Ghana to teach English. Janah 
continued to travel the world while 
also studying at Harvard University. 
After graduating with a degree in 
economic development, she took a job 
with the World Bank that made her 
question traditional methods of 
providing aid. “The more time I spent in 
developing countries, and the more 
time I spent talking to poor people, I real-
ized what they want more than anything 
is a good job,” says Janah. “We spend bil-
lions on international aid annually, but we 
don’t find ways to connect people to dig-
nified work.” 
 Janah hopes that Samasource will 
change that. The nonprofit currently 
operates 16 centers in nine countries and 
is always expanding. One of 
Samasource’s most ambitious projects is 
SamaUSA, a pilot program the company 
recently launched in San Francisco. This 
80-hour training program teaches mar-
ketable computer skills to community-
college students from low-income 
neighborhoods and helps them find 
online work. In the end, though, much of 
the nonprofit’s future success depends 
on outside companies choosing to work 
with Samasource instead of other out-
sourcing services. “We tell [clients], 
‘You’re going to spend this money on an 
outsourcing company anyway—why not 
end poverty and save the world without 
spending more money than you already 
spend?’” says Janah. 
 Leila Janah is an example of an 
emerging global businessperson. She 
has learned to speak other languages, 
understands cultural and economic dif-
ferences, and knows how to adapt to 
changes successfully. This chapter 
explains the opportunities and chal-
lenges businesspeople like Janah face 
every day in dealing with the dynamic 
environment of global business. 
 Sources: Jason Ankeny, “The 7 Most Powerful 
Women to Watch in 2014: The Humanitarian,” 
Entrepreneur, January 3, 2014; Catherine Dunn, “40 
Under 40: Leila Janah,” Forbes, September 19, 2013; 
Visi R. Talik, “‘Rising Star’ Leila Janah on Fighting 
Poverty,” The Wall Street Journal, November 29, 
2012; and “A Letter from Leila Janah, Founder 
and CEO,”   www.samasource.org  ,  accessed 
February 2014.   
 Getting to Know  Leila Janah

62
 name that company 
 This Swiss-based company has many foreign subsidiaries including Jenny 
Craig (weight management), Ralston Purina, Chef America (maker of Hot 
Pockets), and Dreyer’s Ice Cream in the United States, as well as Perrier in 
France. The company employs over 328,000 people and has operations in 
almost every country in the world. Name that company. (Find the answer in 
the chapter.)  
Discuss the importance of the global market and the roles of comparative 
advantage and absolute advantage in global trade.
 THE DYNAMIC GLOBAL MARKET     
Have you dreamed of traveling to cities like Paris, London, Rio de Janeiro, or 
Moscow? Today, over 90 percent of the companies doing business globally 
believe it’s important for their employees to have experience working in other 
countries.  1 The reason is not surprising—although the United States is a mar-
ket of over 317  million people, there are over 7.1  billion potential customers in 
the 194 countries that make up the global market.  2 That’s too many people to 
ignore! (See  Figure 3.1  for a map of the world and important statistics about 
world population.)  
 Today U.S. consumers buy billions of dollars’ worth of goods from China.  3
United Parcel Service (UPS) has experienced double-digit market growth in 
its global operations and Walmart operates more than 350 stores in Africa.  4
The National Basketball Association (NBA) played eight preseason games in 
Europe, Asia, and South America in 2013 and the National Football League 
(NFL) plans to play three games in London’s Wembley Stadium in 2014. 
LO 3–1
 FIGURE 3.1 WORLD 
POPULATION BY 
CONTINENT  
Australia
0.5%
North
North
America
America
7.9%
7.9%
North
America
7.4%
South
South
America
America
5.6%
5.6%
South
America
6.3%
Europe
Europe
12.5%
12.5%
Europe
10.7%
Africa
Africa
12.7%
12.7%
Africa
14.9%
Asia
60.2%

63
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
NBC paid $250 million to telecast three full seasons of England’s Barclays 
Premier Soccer League in the United States.  5 U.S. film stars Matt Damon, 
Tom Cruise, and Meryl Streep draw crowds to movie theaters around the 
globe.  6  
 Because the global market is so large, it is important to understand the 
language used in global trade. For example,   importing   is buying products 
from another country.   Exporting  is selling products to another country. As 
you might suspect, competition among exporting nations is intense. The 
United States is the largest importing nation in the world and is the second-
largest exporting nation, behind China.  7 
 This chapter will familiarize you with global business and its many chal-
lenges. As competition in global markets intensifies, the demand for students 
with training in global business is almost certain to grow.  
 WHY TRADE WITH OTHER NATIONS? 
 No nation, not even a technologically advanced one, can produce all the 
products its people want and need. Even if a country did become 
self-sufficient, other nations would seek to trade with it to meet the needs of 
their own people. Some nations, like Venezuela and Russia, have an abun-
dance of natural resources but limited technological know-how. Other 
countries, such as Japan and Switzerland, have sophisticated technology 
but few natural resources. Global trade enables a nation to produce what it 
is most capable of producing and buy what it needs from others in a mutu-
ally beneficial exchange relationship. This happens through the process 
called free trade.  8  
  Free trade  is the movement of goods and services among nations with-
out political or economic barriers. It has become a hotly debated concept.  9 In 
fact, many in the United States take the position “fair trade, not free trade.”  10 
 Figure 3.2  offers some of the pros and cons of free trade.  
 importing  
 Buying products from another 
country.  
 exporting  
 Selling products to another 
country.  
 free trade  
 The movement of goods and 
services among nations without 
political or economic barriers.  
 It may not be what the 
rest of the world calls 
“football,” but American 
football is attracting an 
audience outside the 
United States. London’s 
Wembley Stadium has 
been home to the NFL’s 
International Series 
since 2007. What 
cultural factors must 
U.S. sports franchises 
overcome in order to 
increase popularity 
abroad?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
64
The Theories of Comparative and Absolute Advantage 
 Countries exchange more than goods and services, however. They also 
exchange art, sports, cultural events, medical advances, space exploration, 
and labor. Comparative advantage theory, suggested in the early 19th century 
by English economist David Ricardo, was the guiding principle that supported 
the idea of free economic exchange.  11   Comparative advantage theory   states 
that a country should sell to other countries those products it produces most 
effectively and efficiently, and buy from other countries those products it can-
not produce as effectively or efficiently. The United States has a comparative 
advantage in producing goods and services, such as software and engineering 
services.  12 In contrast, it lacks a comparative advantage in growing coffee or 
making shoes; thus, we import most of the shoes and coffee we consume. By 
specializing and trading, the United States and its trading partners can realize 
mutually beneficial exchanges. 
 A country has an   absolute advantage   if it can produce a specific product 
more efficiently than all other countries. Absolute advantage does not last for-
ever; global competition causes absolute advantages to fade. Today there are 
very few instances of absolute advantage in global markets.  
 Explain the importance of importing and exporting, and understand key terms 
used in global business. 
 GETTING INVOLVED IN GLOBAL TRADE  
 People interested in a job in global business often think they are limited to 
firms like Boeing, Caterpillar, or IBM, which have large multinational 
accounts. However, real global job potential may be with small businesses. 
In the United States, only 1 percent of the 30 million small businesses export 
yet they account for about 30 percent of the total U.S. exports.  13 In 2010, 
 comparative advantage 
theory  
 Theory that states that a 
country should sell to other 
countries those products that it 
produces most effectively and 
efficiently, and buy from other 
countries those products that it 
cannot produce as effectively 
or efficiently.  
 absolute advantage  
 The advantage that exists 
when a country produces a 
specific product more 
efficiently than all other 
countries.  
LO 3–2
 FIGURE 3.2 THE PROS AND CONS OF FREE TRADE  
•  The global market contains over 7 billion  
 potential customers for goods and services.
•  Productivity grows when countries produce  
 goods and services in which they have a  
 comparative advantage.
•  Global competition and less-costly imports  
 keep prices down, so inﬂation does not  
 curtail economic growth.
•  Free trade inspires innovation for new   
 products and keeps ﬁrms competitively  
 challenged.
•  Uninterrupted ﬂow of capital gives countries
 access to foreign investments, which help  
 keep interest rates low.
PROS
CONS
• Domestic workers (particularly in manufac- 
 turing-based jobs) can lose their jobs due 
 to increased imports or production shifts  
 to low-wage global markets.
• Workers may be forced to accept pay cuts  
 from employers, who can threaten to move  
 their jobs to lower-cost global markets.
• Moving operations overseas because of  
 intense competitive pressure often means  
 the loss of service jobs and growing   
 numbers of white-collar jobs.
• Domestic companies can lose their  
 
 comparative advantage when competitors  
 build advanced production operations in  
 low-wage countries.

65
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
President Obama challenged small businesses to think big and help double 
exports by 2015. With the support of the U.S. Department of Commerce, 
U.S. exports increased significantly but not quite at the level the president 
requested.  14  
 Getting started globally is often a matter of observing, being determined, 
and taking risks. In a classic story, several years ago a U.S. traveler in an 
African country noticed there was no ice available for drinks or for keeping 
foods fresh. Research showed there was no ice factory for hundreds of miles, 
yet the market seemed huge. The man returned to the United States, found 
some investors, and returned to Africa to build an ice-making plant. The job 
was tough; much negotiation was necessary with local authorities (much of 
which was done by local citizens and businesspeople who knew the system). 
But the plant was built, and this forward-thinking entrepreneur gained a 
considerable return on his idea, while the people gained a needed product.  
 Importing Goods and Services 
 Students attending colleges and universities abroad often notice that some 
products widely available in their countries are unavailable or more expensive 
elsewhere. By working with producers in their native country, finding some 
start-up financing, and putting in long hours of hard work, many have become 
major importers while still in school. 
 Howard Schultz, CEO of Starbucks, found his opportunity while travel-
ing in Milan, Italy. Schultz was enthralled with the ambience, the aroma, and 
especially the sense of community in the Italian neighborhood coffee and 
espresso bars that stretched across the country. He felt such gathering places 
would be great in the United States. Schultz bought the original Starbucks 
coffee shop in Seattle and transformed it according to his vision.  15 Because 
the Italian coffee bars caught his attention, U.S. coffee lovers now know what 
a grande latte is.  
 Exporting Goods and Services 
 Who would think U.S. firms could sell beer in Germany, home of so many good 
beers? Well, some of Munich’s most famous beer halls now have American out-
posts where you can buy U.S. beers like Samuel Adams Boston Lager.  16 If this 
surprises you, imagine selling sand in the Middle East. Meridan Group exports 
a special kind of sand used in swimming pool filters that sells well there. 
 The fact is, you can sell just about any good or service used in the United 
States to other countries—and sometimes the competition is not nearly so 
intense as it is at home. For example, you can sell snowplows to Saudi Arabi-
ans, who use them to clear sand off their driveways. As Chinese women 
develop more sophisticated beauty routines, companies like Mary Kay are 
increasing their presence in China.  17 Exporting also pro-
vides a terrific boost to the U.S. economy. C. Fred 
Bergsten, founding director of the Peterson Insti-
tute for International Economics, states that U.S. 
exports of $1.5 trillion goods and services create 
approximately 10 million well-paid jobs in our 
economy. He also estimates that every $1 billion in 
additional U.S. exports generates over 7,000 jobs at 
home. 18 But selling in global markets and adapting 
products to global customers are by no means easy 
tasks. We discuss key forces that affect global trad-
ing later in this chapter. 
 Things may not have 
started off “pretty” for 
Ugly Dolls, a venture 
founded almost by 
accident, but the two-
person company has 
grown into a global 
business selling its 
products in over 1,000 
stores around the world. 
The original dolls have 
been joined by 
accessories, books, 
calendars, action 
figures, and T-shirts. 
Does a career in 
exporting or importing 
sound appealing to you?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
66
 If you are interested in exporting, send for “The Basic Guide to Exporting,” 
a brochure from the U.S. Government Printing Office, Superintendent of Docu-
ments, Washington, DC 20402. More advice is available at websites such as those 
sponsored by the U.S. Department of Commerce ( www.doc.gov ), the Bureau of 
Export Administration ( www.bea.gov ), the Small Business Administration 
( www.sba.gov ), and the Small Business Exporters Association ( www.sbea.org ).  
 Measuring Global Trade 
 In measuring global trade, nations rely on two key indicators: balance of trade 
and balance of payments. The   balance of trade   is the total value of a nation’s 
exports compared to its imports measured over a particular period. A  favor-
able balance of trade, or   trade surplus   , occurs when the value of a country’s 
exports exceeds that of its imports. An  unfavorable balance of trade, or   trade 
deficit   , occurs when the value of a country’s exports is less than its imports. 
It’s easy to understand why countries prefer to export more than they import. 
If I sell you $200 worth of goods and buy only $100 worth, I have an extra $100 
available to buy other things. However, I’m in an unfavorable position if I buy 
$200 worth of goods from you and sell you only $100. 
 The   balance of payments   is the difference between money coming into a 
country (from exports) and money leaving the country (for imports) plus 
money flows coming into or leaving a country from other factors such as tour-
ism, foreign aid, military expenditures, and foreign investment. The goal is to 
have more money flowing into the country than out—a  favorable balance of 
payments. Conversely, an  unfavorable balance of payments exists when more 
money is flowing out of a country than coming in. 
 In the past, the United States exported more goods and services than it 
imported. However, since 1975 it has bought more goods from other nations 
than it has sold and thus has a trade deficit. Today, the United States runs its 
highest trade deficit with China.  19 Nonetheless the United States remains one 
of the world’s largest  exporting nations even though the U.S. exports a much 
lower  percentage of its products than other countries, such as China, Germany, 
and Japan. ( Figure 3.3  lists the major trading countries in the world and the 
leading U.S. trading partners.)  
 balance of trade  
 The total value of a nation’s 
exports compared to its 
imports measured over a 
particular period.  
 trade surplus  
 A favorable balance of trade; 
occurs when the value of a 
country’s exports exceeds that 
of its imports.  
 trade deficit  
 An unfavorable balance of 
trade; occurs when the value of 
a country’s imports exceeds 
that of its exports.  
 balance of payments  
 The difference between money 
coming into a country (from 
exports) and money leaving the 
country (for imports) plus 
money flows from other factors 
such as tourism, foreign aid, 
military expenditures, and 
foreign investment.  
 FIGURE 3.3 THE 
LARGEST EXPORTING 
NATIONS IN THE WORLD 
AND THE LARGEST U.S. 
TRADE PARTNERS  
World’s Largest Exporting Nations
Top U.S. Trading Partners
Both
ATLANTIC OCEAN
PACIFIC OCEAN
PACIFIC OCEAN
INDIAN OCEAN
ARCTIC OCEAN
ARCTIC OCEAN
United States
United Kingdom
Saudi Arabia
Russia
Netherlands
Mexico
South Korea
Japan
Italy
Germany
France
China
Canada
Brazil
iSee It! Need help 
understanding balance 
of trade? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.

67
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
 Illustrate the strategies used in reaching global markets and explain the role 
of multinational corporations. 
 STRATEGIES FOR REACHING GLOBAL MARKETS  
 Businesses use different strategies to compete in global markets. The key strat-
egies include licensing, exporting, franchising, contract manufacturing, inter-
national joint ventures and strategic alliances, foreign subsidiaries, and 
foreign direct investment. Each provides different economic opportunities, 
along with specific commitments and risks.  Figure 3.4  places the strategies on 
LO 3–3
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 • What are two of the main arguments favoring the expansion of U.S. 
businesses into global markets?  
 • What is comparative advantage, and what are some examples of this 
concept at work in the United States?  
 • How are a nation’s balance of trade and balance of payments determined?  
 • What is meant by the term  dumping in global trade?  
•
What are two of the m
test prep
main arguments
main
In supporting free trade, the United States, like other nations, wants to 
make certain global trade is conducted fairly. To ensure a level playing field, 
countries prohibit unfair trade practices such as dumping.   Dumping  is selling 
products in a foreign country at lower prices than those charged in the pro-
ducing country. This predatory pricing tactic is sometimes used to reduce sur-
plus products in foreign markets or to gain a foothold in a new market. Some 
governments may even offer financial incentives to certain industries to sell 
goods in global markets for less than they sell them at home. China, Brazil, 
and Russia, for example, have been penalized for dumping steel in the United 
States. U.S. laws against dumping are specific and require foreign firms to 
price their products to include 10 percent overhead costs plus an 8 percent 
profit margin. Now that you understand some of the basic terms used in global 
business, we can look at different strategies for entering global markets. First, 
let’s assess your progress so far.  
dumping
Selling products in a foreign 
country at lower prices than 
those charged in the producing 
country.
 FIGURE 3.4 STRATEGIES FOR REACHING GLOBAL MARKETS  
Amount of commitment, control, risk, and profit potential
LEAST
MOST
Licensing
Exporting
Franchising
Contract
manufacturing
Foreign
direct
investment
International
joint ventures
and
strategic
alliances

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
68
a continuum showing the amount of commitment, control, risk, and profit 
potential associated with each strategy. Take some time to look over the infor-
mation in  Figure 3.4  before you continue.  
Licensing 
 A firm (the licensor) may decide to compete in a global market by   licensing  
the right to manufacture its product or use its trademark to a foreign company 
(the licensee) for a fee (a royalty). A company with an interest in licensing gen-
erally sends company representatives to the foreign company to help set up 
operations. The licensor may also assist or work with a licensee in such areas 
as distribution, promotion, and consulting. 
 A licensing agreement can benefit a firm in several ways. First, the firm 
can gain revenues it would not otherwise have generated in its home market. 
Also, foreign licensees often must purchase start-up supplies, materials, and 
consulting services from the licensing firm. Coca-Cola has entered into global 
licensing agreements with over 300 licensees that have extended into long-
term service contracts that sell over $1 billion of the company’s products each 
year.  20 Service-based companies are also active in licensing. For example, 
retailer Frederick’s of Hollywood recently entered into a licensing agreement 
with Emirates Associated Business Group to build and operate Frederick’s of 
Hollywood stores in the Middle East. 
 A final advantage of licensing is that licensors spend little or no money 
to produce and market their products. These costs come from the licensee’s 
pocket. Therefore, licensees generally work hard to succeed. However, licen-
sors may also experience problems. Often a firm must grant licensing rights 
to its product for an extended period, 20 years or longer. If a product experi-
ences remarkable growth in the foreign market, the bulk of the revenues 
belong to the licensee. Perhaps even more threatening is that the licensing 
firm is actually selling its expertise. If a foreign licensee learns the compa-
ny’s technology or product secrets, it may break the agreement and begin to 
produce a similar product on its own. If legal remedies are not available, 
the licensing firm may lose its trade secrets, not to mention promised 
royalties.  
 Exporting 
 To meet increasing global competition, the U.S. Department of Commerce 
created Export Assistance Centers (EACs). EACs provide hands-on export-
ing assistance and trade-finance support for small and medium-sized busi-
nesses that wish to directly export goods and services. An EAC network 
exists in more than 100 U.S. cities and 80 countries, with further expansion 
planned.  21  
 U.S. firms that are still hesitant 
can engage in  indirect exporting 
through specialists called export-
trading companies (or export-
management companies) that 
assist in negotiating and estab-
lishing trading relationships. 
An export-trading company 
not only matches buyers and 
sellers from different countries 
but also deals with foreign cus-
toms offices, documentation, 
licensing
A global strategy in which a 
firm (the licensor) allows a 
foreign company (the licensee) 
to produce its product in 
exchange for a fee (a royalty).
Warner Bros. has 
licensed many 
companies to make 
products related to 
successful film 
franchises like The 
Hobbit. Do you think 
Hobbit-licensed 
products will maintain 
their global popularity 
with new generations of 
viewers?
p a
ed.
 U
can
th
tr
m
s
b
t

69
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
and even weights and measures conversions to ease the process of 
entering global markets. It also can assist exporters with 
warehousing, billing, and insuring. If you are considering 
a career in global business, export-trading companies 
often provide internships or part-time opportunities 
for students.  
 Franchising 
 Franchising is a contractual agreement whereby 
someone with a good idea for a business sells others 
the rights to use the business name and sell a product 
or service in a given territory in a specified manner. Fran-
chising is popular domestically and globally. (We discuss it in 
depth in Chapter 5.) Major U.S. franchisors such as Subway, Holi-
day Inn, and Dunkin’ Donuts have many global units operated by foreign 
franchisees, but global franchising isn’t limited to large franchisors. For 
example, Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory, a Colorado-based producer of 
premium chocolates, has agreements with the Al Muhairy Group of the 
United Arab Emirates and plans to open two stores in Saudi Arabia in 2015. 
In the Middle East, chocolate is considered a gourmet luxury much like cav-
iar in the United States.  22 Foreign franchisors also may look to expand to the 
U.S. market. Guatemala-based Pollo Campara opened its first restaurant 
franchise in the U.S. in 2002, and Vietnamese entrepreneur Ly Qui Trung 
introduced his Pho24 franchises to the United States in 2012. 
 Franchisors have to be careful to adapt their product or service to the 
countries they serve. Yum! Brands has 40,000 of its KFC, Taco Bell, and Pizza 
Hut restaurants in 130 countries around the world.  23 It learned quickly that 
preferences in pizza toppings differ globally. Japanese customers, for example, 
enjoy squid and sweet mayonnaise pizza. In the company’s KFC restaurants in 
China, the menu is chicken with Sichuan spicy sauce and rice, egg soup, and a 
“dragon twister” (KFC’s version of a traditional Beijing duck wrap).  24 Read the 
nearby Reaching Beyond Our Borders box that highlights another global fran-
chise champion, McDonald’s.
 Contract Manufacturing 
 In   contract manufacturing   a foreign company produces private-label goods 
to which a domestic company then attaches its own brand name or trade-
mark. For example, contract manufacturers make circuit boards and com-
ponents used in computers, printers, smartphones, medical products, 
airplanes, and consumer electronics for companies such as Dell, Xerox, and 
IBM. Nike has more than 800 contract factories around the world that man-
ufacture all its footwear and apparel. The worldwide contract manufactur-
ing business is estimated to be a $250 billion industry that’s expected to grow 
to $325 billion soon.  25  
 Contract manufacturing enables a company to experiment in a new mar-
ket without incurring heavy start-up costs such as building a manufacturing 
plant. If the brand name becomes a success, the company has penetrated a 
new market with relatively low risk. A firm can also use contract manufactur-
ing temporarily to meet an unexpected increase in orders, and, of course, 
labor costs are often very low. Contract manufacturing falls under the broad 
category of  outsourcing, which we defined in Chapter 1 and will discuss in 
more depth later in this chapter.  
contract manufacturing
A foreign company’s 
production of private-label 
goods to which a domestic 
company then attaches its 
brand name or trademark; part 
of the broad category of 
outsourcing.
ess of
with
g
n-
in
Tired of studying and 
want a quick snack? 
How about a piping hot 
Domino’s pizza with 
potatoes and corn 
topped with mayo? 
Domino’s serves pizzas 
around the globe that 
appeal to different 
tastes (the mayo pizza 
is a hit in Japan). How 
can franchises ensure 
their products are 
appropriate for global 
markets?

70
 International Joint Ventures and Strategic Alliances 
 A  joint venture   is a partnership in which two or more companies (often from 
different countries) join to undertake a major project. Joint ventures are often 
mandated by governments such as China as a condition of doing business in 
their country. For example, Disney and state-owned Shanghai Shendi Group 
entered a joint venture to create a Disneyland theme park in Shanghai that is 
expected to open in 2015.  26
 Joint ventures are developed for many different reasons. Marriott Interna-
tional and AC Hotels in Spain entered a joint venture to create AC Hotels by 
Marriott to increase their global footprint and future growth.  27 PepsiCo, as part 
of its Performance with Purpose global vision, agreed to joint ventures with 
Tata Global Beverages of India to develop packaged health and wellness 
joint venture
A partnership in which two or 
more companies (often from 
different countries) join to 
undertake a major project.
 reaching beyond our borders 
 For decades McDonald’s 
has been the undisputed 
king of global food fran-
chising. With more than 
34,000 restaurants in over 
118 countries, Mickey D’s 
serves more than 69 mil-
lion customers every day. 
 So how did McDonald’s 
become such a global 
powerhouse? It certainly 
didn’t get there through 
hamburgers alone. Since 
it first began expanding 
overseas, McDonald’s has 
been careful to include 
regional tastes on its menus along 
with the usual Big Mac and 
French fries. For instance, in 
Thailand patrons can order the 
Samurai Burger, a pork-patty 
sandwich marinated in teriyaki 
sauce and topped with mayon-
naise and a pickle. If fish is more 
your taste, try the Ebi Filet-o 
shrimp sandwich from Japan. 
 McDonald’s is also careful to 
adapt its menus to local customs 
and culture. In Israel, all meat 
served in the chain’s restaurants is 
100 percent kosher beef. The com-
pany also closes many of its restau-
rants on the Sabbath and religious 
holidays. McDonald’s pays respect 
to religious sentiments in India as 
well by not including any beef or 
pork on its menu. For more exam-
ples, go to  www.mcdonalds.com  
and explore the various 
McDonald’s international franchises 
websites. Notice how the company 
blends the culture of each country 
into the restaurant’s image. 
 McDonald’s main global market 
concern as of late has been Asia. 
So far McDonald’s strategy seems 
to be working. In Shanghai the 
company’s Hamburger University 
attracts top-level college graduates 
to be trained for management posi-
tions. Only about eight out of every 
1,000 applicants makes it into the 
program, an acceptance 
rate even lower than 
Harvard’s! McDonald’s is 
reaching out further in Asia 
and in 2014 opened its first 
store in Vietnam. The 
Vietnamese location in Ho 
Chi Minh City is the coun-
try’s very first drive-thru 
restaurant. Bringing 
McDonald’s to Vietnam is a 
dream come true for Henry 
Nguyen, founder of Good 
Day Hospitality, who has 
been wanting to introduce 
the brand to Vietnam for 
over a decade. Nguyen brought in 
20 top McDonald’s employees 
from Australia to help aid in the 
opening while also sending pro-
spective Vietnamese employees to 
Queensland to learn the ropes in a 
real-life restaurant setting. In the 
end, one can only hope that 
McDonald’s remains dedicated to 
quality as it continues adapting and 
expanding into the global market. 
 Sources: Erin Smith, “Some McSkills to Share,” 
The Warwick Daily News, February 4, 2014; Kate 
Taylor, “New Year, New Expansion: McDonald’s to 
Open First Restaurant in Vietnam,”  Entrepreneur, 
December 23, 2013; Vivian Giang, “McDonald’s 
Hamburger University: Step inside the Most 
Exclusive School in the World,”  Business Insider, 
April 7, 2012; and McDonald’s,  www.mcdonalds
.com , accessed February 2014.    
 www.mcdonalds.com 
 McDonald’s: Over 100 Cultures Served 
r

71
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
beverages for the mass consumer market in India and the Strauss Group in 
Mexico to provide fresh dips and spreads.  28 Joint ventures can also be truly 
unique, such as the University of Pittsburgh’s Medical Center and the Italian 
government’s joint venture that brought a new medical transplant center to Sic-
ily. The transplant center in Palermo called ISMETT recently celebrated its fif-
teenth year of operation.  29 The benefits of international joint ventures are clear:
 
1. Shared technology and risk.  
 
2. Shared marketing and management expertise.  
 
3. Entry into markets where foreign companies are often not allowed 
unless goods are produced locally.  
 The drawbacks of joint ventures are not so obvious but are important. One 
partner can learn the other’s technology and business practices and then use 
what it has learned to its own advantage. Also, a shared technology may become 
obsolete, or the joint venture may become too large to be as flexible as needed. 
 The global market has also fueled the growth of strategic alliances. A 
  strategic alliance   is a long-term partnership between two or more companies 
established to help each company build competitive market advantages. Unlike 
joint ventures, strategic alliances don’t share costs, risks, management, or even 
profits. Such alliances provide broad access to markets, capital, and technical 
expertise. Thanks to their flexibility, strategic alliances can effectively link firms 
from different countries and firms of vastly different sizes. Hewlett-Packard has 
strategic alliances with Hitachi and Samsung, and Coca-Cola and Nestlé have 
had an alliance since early 1990 to distribute ready-to-drink tea and coffee.  
 Foreign Direct Investment 
  Foreign direct investment (FDI)   is the buying of permanent property and 
businesses in foreign nations. The most common form of FDI is a   foreign 
subsidiary   , a company owned in a foreign country by another company, called 
the  parent company. The subsidiary operates like a domestic firm, with pro-
duction, distribution, promotion, pricing, and other business functions under 
the control of the subsidiary’s management. The subsidiary also must observe 
the legal requirements of both the country where the parent firm is located 
(called the  home country ) and the foreign country where the subsidiary is 
located (called the  host country ). 
 The primary advantage of a subsidiary is that the company maintains com-
plete control over any technology or expertise it may possess. The major short-
coming is the need to commit funds and technology within foreign boundaries. 
Should relationships with a host country falter, the 
firm’s assets could be  expropriated (taken over by the 
foreign government). Swiss-based Nestlé has many 
foreign subsidiaries. The consumer-products giant 
spent billions of dollars acquiring foreign subsidiar-
ies such as Jenny Craig (weight management), 
Ralston Purina, Chef America (maker of Hot Pock-
ets), and Dreyer’s Ice Cream in the United States as 
well as Perrier in France. Nestlé employs over 
328,000 people and has operations in almost every 
country in the world.  30  
 Nestlé is a   multinational corporation   , one 
that manufactures and markets products in many 
different countries and has multinational stock 
The United States has 
been and remains a 
popular global spot for 
foreign direct 
investment. Global 
automobile 
manufacturers like 
Toyota, Honda, and 
Mercedes have spent 
millions of dollars 
building facilities in the 
United States, like the 
Mercedes plant in 
Tuscaloosa, Alabama, 
pictured here. Do you 
consider a Mercedes 
made in Alabama to be 
an American car or a 
German car?
strategic alliance
A long-term partnership 
between two or more 
companies established to help 
each company build 
competitive market 
advantages.
foreign direct investment 
(FDI)
The buying of permanent 
property and businesses in 
foreign nations.
foreign subsidiary
A company owned in a foreign 
country by another company, 
called the parent company.
multinational corporation
An organization that 
manufactures and markets 
products in many different 
countries and has multinational 
stock ownership and 
multinational management.

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
72
ownership and management. Multinational corporations are typically 
extremely large corporations like Nestlé, but not all large global businesses are 
multinationals. For example, a corporation could export everything it pro-
duces, deriving 100 percent of its sales and profits globally, and still not be a 
multinational corporation. Only firms that have  manufacturing capacity or 
some other physical presence in different nations can truly be called multina-
tional.  Figure 3.5 lists the 10 largest multinational corporations in the world. 
 A growing form of foreign direct investment is the use of   sovereign wealth 
funds (SWFs)   , investment funds controlled by governments holding invest-
ment stakes in foreign companies. SWFs from the United Arab Emirates, Sin-
gapore, and China have purchased interests in many U.S. companies. Norway, 
with a population of 5 million people, is the world’s richest SWF with assets of 
approximately $830 billion.  31 The size of SWFs ($6 trillion globally) and gov-
ernment ownership make some fear they might be used for achieving geopoliti-
cal objectives, gaining control of strategic natural resources, or obtaining 
sensitive technologies. Thus far this has not been a problem. In fact during the 
Great Recession, SWFs injected billions of dollars into struggling U.S. compa-
nies. 32 Many economists argue that foreign investment through SWFs is a vote 
of confidence in the U.S. economy and a way to create thousands of U.S. jobs. 
 Entering global business requires selecting an entry strategy that best fits 
your business goals. The different strategies we’ve discussed reflect different 
levels of ownership, financial commitment, and risk. However, this is just the 
beginning. You should also be aware of market forces that affect a business’s 
ability to thrive in global markets. After the Test Prep, we’ll discuss them.  
COMPANY
COUNTRY
WEBSITE
 1. Royal Dutch Shell
 2. Wal-Mart Stores
 3. ExxonMobil
 4. Sinopec Group
 5. China National Petroleum
 6. BP
 7. State Grid
 8. Toyota Motor
 9. Japan Post Holdings
 10. Chevron
Netherlands
United States
United States
China
China
Britain
China
Japan
Japan
United States
shell.com
walmart.com
exxonmobil.com
Sinopecgroup.com
cnpc.com.cn
bp.com
sgcc.com.cn
toyota.co.jp
japanpost.jp
chevron.com
Source: Fortune, July 25, 2013.
FIGURE 3.5 THE 
LARGEST 
MULTINATIONAL 
CORPORATIONS IN THE 
WORLD
sovereign wealth funds 
(SWFs)
Investment funds controlled by 
governments holding 
investment stakes in foreign 
companies.
 • What are the advantages to a firm of using licensing as a method of 
entry in global markets? What are the disadvantages?  
 • What services are usually provided by an export-trading company?  
 • What is the key difference between a joint venture and a strategic 
alliance? 
 • What makes a company a multinational corporation?  
•
What are the advanta
test prep
ges to a firm of
ges
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

73
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
 Evaluate the forces that affect trading in global markets. 
 FORCES AFFECTING TRADING 
IN GLOBAL MARKETS  
 The hurdles to success are higher and more complex in global markets than in 
domestic markets. Such hurdles include dealing with differences in sociocultural 
forces, economic and financial forces, legal and regulatory forces, and physical 
and environmental forces. Let’s analyze each of these market forces to see how 
they challenge even the most established and experienced global businesses.  
 Sociocultural Forces 
 The word  culture refers to the set of values, beliefs, rules, and institutions held 
by a specific group of people. Culture can include social structures, religion, 
manners and customs, values and attitudes, language, and personal communi-
cation. (See the Spotlight on Small Business box for a story about how one 
entrepreneur is attempting to appeal to the changing values in China as newly 
affluent consumers desire luxury U.S. products.) If you hope to get involved in 
global trade, it’s critical to be aware of the cultural differences among nations. 
Unfortunately, while the United States is a multicultural nation, U.S. business-
people are often accused of  ethnocentricity, an attitude that your own culture 
is superior to other cultures. 
 In contrast, many foreign companies are very good at adapting to U.S. cul-
ture. Think how effectively German, Japanese, and Korean carmakers adapted to 
U.S. drivers’ wants and needs in the auto industry. In contrast, for many years 
U.S. auto producers didn’t adapt automobiles to drive on the left side of the road 
and printed owner’s manuals only in English. Liberia, Myanmar, and 
the United States are the only nations in the world that have not conformed to the 
metric system of measurement. Let’s look at other hurdles U.S. businesses face in 
adapting to social and cultural differences in global markets. 
 Religion is an important part of any society’s culture and can have a sig-
nificant impact on business operations. Consider the violent clashes between 
religious communities in India, Pakistan, and the Middle East—clashes that 
have wounded these areas’ economies. Even successful global companies can 
be affected by ignoring religious implications in making business decisions. 
For example, in honor of nations competing in the World Cup in 1994, both 
McDonald’s and Coca-Cola reprinted the flags of the participating countries 
on their packaging. Muslims were offended when the Saudi Arabian flag was 
put on their packaging because the flag’s design contained the Muslim Sha-
hada (the Muslim declaration of faith), and Muslims believe their holy writ 
should never be wadded up and thrown away. Both companies learned from 
this experience that understanding religious implications in the global market 
is important. 
 In a similar classic story, a U.S. manager in Islamic Pakistan toured a new 
plant under his control. While the plant was in full operation, he went to his 
office to make some preliminary production forecasts. Suddenly all the 
machinery in the plant stopped. The manager rushed out, suspecting a power 
failure, only to find his production workers on their prayer rugs. Upon learn-
ing that Muslims are required to pray five times a day, he returned to his office 
and lowered his production estimates. 
 Understanding sociocultural differences is also important in managing 
employees. In some Latin American countries, workers believe managers are 
in positions of authority to make decisions concerning the well-being of the 
LO 3–4

74
workers under their control. Consider the U.S. manager in Peru who was 
unaware of this cultural characteristic and believed workers should partici-
pate in managerial functions. He was convinced he could motivate his work-
ers to higher levels of productivity by instituting a more democratic 
decision-making style. Workers instead began quitting in droves. When asked 
why, they said the new manager did not know his job and was asking the 
workers what to do. All stated they wanted to find new jobs, since this com-
pany was doomed due to its incompetent management. 
 Even today, many U.S. companies still fail to think globally, not under-
standing that something like the color of flowers can have different meanings in 
different cultures. A sound philosophy is:  Never assume what works in one coun-
try will work in another. Intel, Nike, IBM, Apple, KFC, and Walmart have devel-
oped brand names with widespread global appeal and recognition, but even 
they often face difficulties.  33 To get an idea of the problems companies have 
faced with translations of advertising globally, take a look at  Figure 3.6 .  
Economic and Financial Forces 
 Economic differences can muddy the water in global markets. In Qatar, annual 
per capita income is over $100,000, the highest in the world. In economically 
strapped Ethiopia and Haiti, per capita income is barely over $1,200. It’s diffi-
cult for us to imagine buying chewing gum by the stick. Yet this behavior is 
commonplace in economically depressed nations like Haiti, where customers 
can afford only small quantities. You might suspect with over 1.2 billion poten-
tial customers, India would be a dream market for a company like Coca-Cola. 
Unfortunately, Indians consume only 12 eight-ounce bottles of Coke per person 
a year due to low per-capita income.  34 Financially, Mexicans shop with pesos, 
Chinese with yuan (also known as renminbi), South Koreans with won, 
 spotlight on small business 
 Although Americans love to watch 
sports, professional athletes often 
receive criticism for collecting 
enormous paychecks. After all, 
some sports stars make more 
money in a single season than 
many educators or nurses would 
see in a lifetime. But matters can 
change drastically for athletes 
once their playing days end. 
Suddenly skills that you’ve spent 
your entire life honing are obso-
lete, often leading to confusion 
over what to do next. 
 When faced with this problem, 
the groundbreaking former NBA 
center Yao Ming opted to use his 
resources to start a business. 
Although this is a common post-
retirement tactic for many ath-
letes, Yao didn’t unveil a line of 
athletic wear or open a chain of 
sports bars. Instead, he estab-
lished a high-end winery in 
California’s famous Napa Valley. 
Although many wealthy Chinese 
celebrities have bought vine-
yards, Yao has set himself apart 
by building a brand from scratch 
rather than investing in an exist-
ing operation. A national hero in 
China, Yao Family Wines uses the 
name recognition of its seven-
and-half-foot founder to appeal to 
the nation’s growing consumer 
class. Yao’s wines are intention-
ally expensive: the cheapest vin-
tage goes for about $87 while the 
priciest bottle, Yao Ming Family 
Reserve, lists for more than 
$1,000. With premium brands still 
a rarity in China, Yao could end 
up being just as influential in the 
Chinese business world as he 
was on the basketball court. 
 Sources: Jason Chow, “Yao Ming’s Napa Winery 
Stoops to Conquer China’s Middle Class,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, September 5, 2013; and 
Michelle FlorCruz, “Yao Ming’s Wine Company 
Sets Sights on China’s Growing Middle Class,” 
International Business Times, September 6, 2013.    
www.yaofamilywines.com
 From Setting Picks to Picking Grapes 
s

75
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
Japanese with yen, and U.S. consumers with dollars. Among currencies, glob-
ally, the U.S. dollar is considered a dominant and stable currency.  35 However, it 
doesn’t always retain the same market value. In a global transaction today, a 
dollar may be exchanged for eight pesos; tomorrow you may get seven. The 
  exchange rate   is the value of one nation’s currency relative to the currencies of 
other countries. 
 Changes in a nation’s exchange rates have effects in global markets. A 
 high value of the dollar means a dollar is trading for more foreign currency 
than previously. Therefore, foreign products become cheaper because it takes 
fewer dollars to buy them. However, U.S.-produced goods become more 
expensive because of the dollar’s high value. Conversely, a  low value of the dol-
lar means a dollar is traded for less foreign currency—foreign goods become 
more expensive because it takes more dollars to buy them, but U.S. goods 
become cheaper to foreign buyers because it takes less foreign currency to 
buy them. 
 Global financial markets operate under a system called  floating exchange 
rates, which means that currencies “float” in value according to the supply 
and demand for them in the global market for currency. This supply and 
demand is created by global currency traders who develop a market for a 
nation’s currency based on the country’s perceived trade and investment 
potential. 
 Changes in currency values can cause many problems globally.  36 For 
instance, labor costs for multinational corporations like Nestlé, General Elec-
tric, and Sony can vary considerably as currency values shift, causing them to 
juggle production from one country to another. The same is true for 
 FIGURE 3.6 OOPS, DID 
WE SAY THAT?
 A global marketing strategy 
can be very difficult to 
implement. Look at the 
problems these well-known 
companies encountered in 
global markets. 
PepsiCo attempted a Chinese
translation of “Come Alive, You’re in the
Pepsi Generation” that read to Chinese
customers as “Pepsi Brings Your
Ancestors Back from the Dead.”
Coors Brewing Company
put its slogan “Turn It Loose” into
Spanish and found it translated
as “Suffer from Diarrhea.”
KFC’s patented slogan
“Finger-Lickin’ Good” was
understood in Japanese as
“Bite Your Fingers Off.”
Perdue Chicken used the slogan
“It Takes a Strong Man to Make a
Chicken Tender,” which was interpreted
in Spanish as “It Takes an Aroused Man
to Make a Chicken Affectionate.”
On the other side of the translation
glitch, Electrolux, a Scandinavian
vacuum manufacturer, tried to
sell its products in the U.S. market
with the slogan
“Nothing Sucks Like an Electrolux.”
exchange rate
The value of one nation’s 
currency relative to the 
currencies of other countries.

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
76
medium-sized companies like H.B. Fuller, a global industrial adhesives pro-
vider from St. Paul, Minnesota, which has 4,000 employees in 43 countries. 
Like its larger counterparts, H.B. Fuller uses currency fluctuations to its 
advantage in dealing with its global markets.  37 
 Currency valuation problems can be especially harsh on developing econ-
omies. At times a nation’s government will intervene and readjust the value of 
its currency, often to increase the export potential of its products.   
Devaluation   lowers the value of a nation’s currency relative to others. Argen-
tina and Venezuela both devalued their currencies in 2014 to try to alleviate 
severe economic problems in both countries.  38 Sometimes, due to a nation’s 
weak currency, the only way to trade is  bartering, the exchange of merchan-
dise for merchandise or service for service with no money traded.  39  
  Countertrading   is a complex form of bartering in which several coun-
tries each trade goods or services for other goods or services. Let’s say a devel-
oping country such as Jamaica wants to buy vehicles from Ford Motor 
Company in exchange for bauxite, a mineral compound that is a source of 
aluminum ore. Ford does not need Jamaican bauxite, but it does need com-
pressors. In a countertrade, Ford may trade vehicles to Jamaica, which trades 
bauxite to another country, say India, which exchanges compressors with 
Ford. All three parties benefit and avoid some of the financial problems and 
currency constraints in global markets. Estimates are that countertrading 
accounts for over 20 percent of all global exchanges, especially with develop-
ing countries.  40 
 Legal and Regulatory Forces 
 In any economy, the conduct and the direction of business are firmly tied to the 
legal and regulatory environment. In global markets, no central system of law 
exists, so different systems of laws and regulations may apply in different places. 
This makes conducting global business difficult as businesspeople navigate a 
devaluation
Lowering the value of a nation’s 
currency relative to other 
currencies.
countertrading
A complex form of bartering in 
which several countries may be 
involved, each trading goods 
for goods or services for 
services.
When the dollar is “up,” 
foreign goods and travel 
are a bargain for U.S. 
consumers. When the 
dollar trades for less 
foreign currency, 
however, foreign tourists 
like these often flock to 
U.S. cities to enjoy 
relatively cheaper 
vacations and shopping 
trips. Do U.S. exporters 
profit more when the 
dollar is up or when it is 
down?

77
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
sea of laws and regulations that are often inconsistent. Antitrust rules, labor 
relations, patents, copyrights, trade practices, taxes, product liability, child 
labor, prison labor, and other issues are governed differently country by 
country. 
 U.S. businesses must follow U.S. laws and regulations in conducting busi-
ness globally, although legislation such as the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 
1978 can create competitive disadvantages. This law prohibits “questionable” 
or “dubious” payments to foreign officials to secure business contracts.  41 That 
runs contrary to practices in some countries, where corporate or government 
bribery is not merely acceptable but perhaps the only way to secure a lucrative 
contract. The Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development 
(OECD) and Transparency International have led a global effort to fight cor-
ruption and bribery in global business, with limited success.  42  Figure  3.7  
shows a partial list of countries where bribery or other unethical business 
practices are most common.  
 The cooperation and sponsorship of local businesspeople can help a com-
pany penetrate the market and deal with laws, regulations, and bureaucratic 
barriers in their country.  
 Physical and Environmental Forces 
 Physical and environmental forces certainly affect a company’s ability to con-
duct global business. Some developing countries have such primitive trans-
portation and storage systems that international distribution is ineffective, if 
not impossible, especially for perishable food. Add unclean water and lack of 
effective sewer systems, and you can see the intensity of the problem. 
 Technological differences also influence the features of exportable prod-
ucts. For example, residential electrical systems in most developing countries 
do not match those of U.S. homes, in kind or capacity. Computer and Internet 
use in many developing countries is thin or nonexistent. These facts make for 
a tough environment for business in general and for e-commerce in particular. 
After the Test Prep, we’ll explore how another force, trade protectionism, 
affects global business.  
 FIGURE 3.7 COUNTRIES 
RATED HIGHEST ON 
CORRUPT BUSINESS  
 
 1. Somalia  
 2. North Korea  
 3. Afghanistan  
 4. Sudan  
 5. South Sudan  
 6. Libya  
 7. Iraq 
 8. Uzbekistan  
 9. Turkmenistan  
 10. Syria  
 Source: Transparency 
International, 2014. 
 Debate the advantages and disadvantages of trade protectionism. 
 TRADE PROTECTIONISM  
 As we discussed in the previous section, sociocultural, economic and finan-
cial, legal and regulatory, and physical and environmental forces are all chal-
lenges to global trade. What is often a much greater barrier to global trade, 
however, is trade protectionism.   Trade protectionism   is the use of 
LO 3–5
trade protectionism
The use of government 
regulations to limit the import of 
goods and services.
 • What are four major hurdles to successful global trade?  
 • What does  ethnocentricity mean, and how can it affect global success?  
 • How would a low value of the dollar affect U.S. exports?  
 • What does the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act prohibit?  
•
What are four major h
test prep
hurdles to succe
hurd
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
78
government regulations to limit the import of 
goods and services. Advocates of protectionism 
believe it allows domestic producers to survive and 
grow, producing more jobs. Other countries use 
protectionist measures because they are wary of 
foreign competition in general. To understand how 
protectionism affects global business, let’s briefly 
review a bit of global economic history.  
 Business, economics, and politics have always 
been closely linked. Economics was once referred 
to as  political economy, indicating the close ties 
between politics (government) and economics. In 
the 17th and 18th centuries, businesspeople and 
government leaders endorsed an economic policy 
called  mercantilism. 43 The idea was for a nation to 
sell more goods to other nations than it bought from them, that is, to have a 
favorable balance of trade. According to mercantilists, this resulted in a flow 
of money to the country that sold the most globally. The philosophy led gov-
ernments to implement   tariffs   , taxes on imports, making imported goods 
more expensive to buy.  
 There are two kinds of tariffs: protective and revenue.  Protective tariffs 
(import taxes) raise the retail price of imported products so that domestic 
goods are more competitively priced. These tariffs are meant to save jobs for 
domestic workers and keep industries—especially infant industries that have 
companies in the early stages of growth—from closing down because of for-
eign competition.  Revenue tariffs are designed to raise money for the 
government. 
 An   import quota   limits the number of products in certain categories a 
nation can import. The United States has import quotas on a number of prod-
ucts, including sugar and shrimp, to protect U.S. companies and preserve 
jobs. Nations also prohibit the export of specific products. Antiterrorism laws 
and the U.S. Export Administration Act of 1979 prohibit exporting goods such 
as high-tech weapons that could endanger national security. An   embargo  is a 
complete ban on the import or export of a certain product, or the stopping of 
all trade with a particular country. Political disagreements have caused many 
countries to establish embargoes, such as the U.S. embargo against Cuba, in 
effect since 1962. 
 Nontariff barriers are not as specific or formal as tariffs, import quotas, 
and embargoes but can be as detrimental to free trade.  44 For example, India 
imposes a number of restrictive standards like import licensing, burdensome 
product testing requirements, and lengthy customs procedures that inhibit the 
sale of imported products. China omits many American-made products from 
its government catalogs that specify what products may be purchased by its 
huge government sector. Other trade barriers detail exactly how a product 
must be sold in a country or may insist on local content requirements that 
require that some part of a product be produced domestically. For example, 
even though we have a free-trade agreement with South Korea, nontariff bar-
riers still restrict the import of U.S. cars there. Barriers such as the size of the 
engine and strict emission standards limit the number of U.S. cars that can be 
sold in the country. South Korea on the other hand sells almost 1.3 million 
cars to the United States. 
 Would-be exporters might view such trade barriers as good reasons to 
avoid global trade, but overcoming constraints creates business opportunities. 
Next, we’ll look at organizations and agreements that attempt to eliminate 
trade barriers.  
 Some workers believe 
that too many U.S. jobs 
have been lost due to 
the growing number of 
imported products. 
Should governments 
protect their industries 
by placing tariffs on 
imported products? Why 
or why not?  
 tariff  
 A tax imposed on imports.  
import quota
A limit on the number of 
products in certain categories 
that a nation can import.
embargo
A complete ban on the import 
or export of a certain product, 
or the stopping of all trade with 
a particular country.

79
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
 The World Trade Organization 
 In 1948, government leaders from 23 nations 
formed the   General Agreement on Tariffs and 
Trade (GATT)   ,  a global forum for reducing trade 
restrictions on goods, services, ideas, and cultural 
programs. In 1986, the Uruguay Round of the 
GATT convened to renegotiate trade agreements. 
After eight years of meetings, 124 nations voted to 
lower tariffs an average of 38 percent worldwide 
and to expand new trade rules to areas such as 
agriculture, services, and the protection of patents. 
 The Uruguay Round also established the 
  World Trade Organization (WTO)   to mediate 
trade disputes among nations. The WTO, head-
quartered in Geneva, is an independent entity of 159 member nations whose 
purpose is to oversee cross-border trade issues and global business practices.  45 
Trade disputes are presented by member nations with decisions made within a 
year, rather than languishing for years as in the past; member nations can 
appeal a decision. 
 The WTO has not solved all global trade problems. Legal and regulatory 
differences (discussed above) often impede trade expansion. Also a wide gap 
persists between developing nations (80 percent of the WTO membership) and 
industrialized nations like the United States. The WTO meetings in Doha, 
Qatar, begun in 2001 to address dismantling protection of manufactured 
goods, eliminating subsidies on agricultural products, and overturning tempo-
rary protectionist measures, have still not resulted in any significant 
agreements.  46 
 Common Markets 
 An issue not resolved by the GATT or the WTO is whether common markets 
create regional alliances at the expense of global expansion. A   common 
market  (also called a  trading bloc ) is a regional group of countries with a 
common external tariff, no internal tariffs, and coordinated laws to facilitate 
exchange among members. The European Union (EU), Mercosur, the Asso-
ciation of Southeast Asian Nations (ASEAN) Economic Community, and the 
Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa (COMESA) are common 
markets. 
 The EU began in the late 1950s as an alliance of six trading partners (then 
known as the Common Market and later the European Economic Community). 
Today it is a group of 28 nations (see  Figure 3.8 ) with a population of over 500 
million and a GDP of $17.2 trillion. Though the EU is represented as a unified 
body in the WTO, the economies of six members (Germany, France, United 
Kingdom, Italy, Spain, and the Netherlands) account for over three-fourths of 
the EU’s GDP.  
 European unification was not easy, but in 1999 the EU took a significant 
step by adopting the euro as a common currency. The euro has helped EU 
businesses save billions by eliminating currency conversions and has chal-
lenged the U.S. dollar’s dominance in global markets. Eighteen member 
nations now use the euro as their common currency. In 2013, the EU faced 
debt, deficit, and growth problems due to financial difficulties in member 
nations Greece, Italy, Portugal, and Spain that required bailout assistance.  47 
EU officials moved forward with broad economic policies to ensure the finan-
cial stability of the union. Even though the EU faces challenges going 
 General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade (GATT)  
 A 1948 agreement that 
established an international 
forum for negotiating mutual 
reductions in trade restrictions.  
 World Trade Organization 
(WTO)  
 The international organization 
that replaced the General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
and was assigned the duty to 
mediate trade disputes among 
nations.  
 common market  
 A regional group of countries 
that have a common external 
tariff, no internal tariffs, and a 
coordination of laws to facilitate 
exchange; also called a  trading 
bloc. An example is the 
European Union.  
 This Indian family used 
to use bullocks to pull 
their plow, but had to 
sell them because the 
cost to maintain the 
animals is now too high. 
Do you think a Doha 
resolution regarding 
tariff protection would 
help families like these?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
80
forward, it still considers economic integration among member nations as 
the way to compete globally against major competitors like the United States 
and China. 
 Mercosur unites Brazil, Argentina, Paraguay, Uruguay, Venezuela and 
associate members Bolivia, Chile, Colombia, Ecuador, and Peru in a trading 
bloc that encompasses more than 275 million people. The EU and Mercosur 
have hopes of finalizing a trade agreement in 2014 that would expand the 
movement of goods and services between the two trading blocs.  48 
 The ASEAN Economic Community was established in 1967 in Thailand 
to create economic cooperation among its five original members (Indonesia, 
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand). ASEAN has expanded to 
include Brunei, Cambodia, the Lao People’s Democratic Republic, Myanmar, 
and Vietnam, creating a trade association with a population of approximately 
620 million and a GDP of $2.2 trillion.  49 COMESA is a 19-member African 
trading bloc. In 2008, COMESA joined with the Southern African Develop-
ment Community (SADC) and the East Africa Community (EAC) to form an 
expanded free-trade zone that has a GDP of $624 billion and a population of 
527 million.  50 
 The North American and Central American Free 
Trade Agreements 
 A widely debated issue of the early 1990s was the   North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA)   , which created a free-trade area among the United 
States, Canada, and Mexico. Opponents warned of the loss of U.S. jobs and 
capital. Supporters predicted NAFTA would open a vast new market for U.S. 
exports and create jobs and market opportunities in the long term. In reality, 
North American Free Trade 
Agreement (NAFTA)
Agreement that created a free-
trade area among the United 
States, Canada, and Mexico.
 FIGURE 3.8 MEMBERS 
OF THE EUROPEAN 
UNION 
Current EU members 
are highlighted in yellow. 
Countries that have applied 
for membership are in orange. 
Iceland (not shown) is also an 
EU candidate. 
Russia
Finland
Austria
Italy
Spain
Sweden
Norway
Germany
France
Portugal
Hungary
Romania
Bulgaria
Turkey
Denmark
Poland
Belarus
Ukraine
Czech
Slovakia
Greece
Cyprus
Andorra
Netherlands
Belgium
Ireland
Serbia
Albania
Moldova
Lithuania
Latvia
Estonia
Lux.
Montenegro
Bosnia
Croatia
Slovenia
Switzerland
Macedonia
Great
Britain
Malta

81
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
NAFTA did not cause the huge job losses feared by many nor did it achieve the 
large economic gains predicted.  51 
 NAFTA’s objectives were to (1) eliminate trade barriers and facilitate 
cross-border movement of goods and services, (2) promote conditions of fair 
competition, (3) increase investment opportunities, (4) provide effective pro-
tection and enforcement of intellectual property rights (patents and copy-
rights), (5) establish a framework for further regional trade cooperation, and 
(6) improve working conditions in North America. Today, the three NAFTA 
countries have a combined population of over 460 million and a gross domes-
tic product (GDP) of over $18 trillion. 
 After 20 years in existence, NAFTA remains a debated issue.  52 On the posi-
tive side, trade volume in goods and services among the three partners 
expanded from $289 billion in 1994 to over $1.2 trillion today. However, the 
major gains in trade were in the early years of the agreement.  53 On the nega-
tive side, in the United States, of the 680,000 manufacturing jobs that have 
been lost since enacting NAFTA in 1994, many were lost to Mexico. In Mexico, 
promises to close the wage gap with the U.S., boost job growth, fight poverty, 
and improve environmental controls have largely failed.  54 Illegal immigration 
remains a major problem between the two nations. Still, NAFTA controversies 
have not changed the U.S. commitment to free-trade agreements. 
 In 2005 the Central American Free Trade Agreement (CAFTA) was signed 
into law, creating a free-trade zone with Costa Rica, the Dominican Republic, 
El Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua. The United States is also 
considering an agreement with eleven Pacific-Rim nations called the Trans-
Pacific Partnership and a massive free-trade deal with the EU called the Trans-
atlantic Trade and Investment Partnership.  55 
 Common markets and free-trade areas will be debated far into the future. 
While some economists resoundingly praise such efforts, others are concerned 
the world is dividing into major trading blocs (EU, NAFTA, etc.) that will 
exclude poor and developing nations. After the Test Prep, we’ll look at the 
future of global trade and address the issue of outsourcing.  
Discuss the changing landscape of the global market and the issue of 
offshore outsourcing.
 THE FUTURE OF GLOBAL TRADE  
 Global trade opportunities grow more interesting and more challenging each 
day. After all, over 7 billion potential customers are attractive. However, ter-
rorism, nuclear proliferation, rogue states, income inequality, and other issues 
cast a dark shadow on global markets. Let’s conclude this chapter by looking 
at issues certain to influence global markets, and perhaps your business career. 
LO 3–6
 • What are the advantages and disadvantages of trade protectionism and 
of tariffs?  
 • What is the primary purpose of the WTO?  
 • What is the key objective of a common market like the EU?  
 • What three nations comprise NAFTA?  
•
What are the advanta
test prep
ges and disadv
ges
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
82
 With more than 1.3 billion people and incredible exporting prowess, China 
has transformed the world economic map. China is the world’s largest exporter 
and the second largest economy. Its rise has happened over a relatively short 
period of time, with the value of Chinese trade roughly doubling every four years 
over the last three decades.  56 Not long ago, foreign direct investment in China 
was considered risky and not worth the risk. In 2013, China attracted $117 bil-
lion in foreign direct investment.  57 Today, over 400 of the Fortune 500 companies 
(the world’s largest companies) have invested in China. According to Goldman 
Sachs Group and the London Center for Economic and Business Research, 
China could overtake the United States as the world’s largest economy by 2028.  58 
 Since 2009 China has been the largest motor vehicle market in the world 
with sales and production topping nearly 22 million vehicles in 2013.  59 It’s 
estimated that by 2030, there could be more cars on the road in China than all 
the cars in the world today. Walmart began operations in China in 1996 and 
now has over 390 stores with plans to open more. Even newcomers like IMAX 
Corporation are expanding in this fast-growing market. IMAX currently has 
150 movie theaters with plans to grow to 400 by 2018.  
 Many view China as a free trader’s dream, where global investment and 
entrepreneurship will lead to wealth. However, concerns remain about China’s 
one-party political system, human rights abuses, currency issues, and increas-
ing urban population growth. China’s underground economy also generates 
significant product piracy and counterfeiting, although the country has been 
more responsive to these problems since its admission to the WTO. With the 
global economy continuing to grow, China will be a key driver of the world 
economy along with the United States, the EU, and Japan. 
 While China attracts most of the attention in Asia, India’s population of 
1.2 billion presents a tremendous opportunity. With nearly 575 million of its 
population under 25, India’s working-age population will continue to grow 
while the United States, China, and the EU expect a decline in the 2020s. 
Already India has seen huge growth in information technology and biotech-
nology, and its pharmaceutical business is expected to grow to $30 billion, a 
jump of over 150 percent by 2020. Still, it remains a nation with difficult trade 
laws and an inflexible bureaucracy.  60 
 China’s economy is 
booming, and a highly 
educated middle class 
with money to spend is 
emerging, especially in 
the cities. Many 
observers believe China 
will continue its growth 
and play a major role in 
the global economy. Are 
U.S. firms prepared to 
compete? 

83
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
 Russia is an industrialized nation with large reserves of oil, gas, and gold 
that became a member of the WTO in 2012. Multinationals like Chevron, 
ExxonMobil, and BP have invested heavily in developing Russia’s oil reserves. 
However, Russia’s economy slowed when world oil prices declined and the 
government admitted that growth prospects for the economy were not strong 
for the next two decades.  61 Unfortunately, Russia is plagued by political, cur-
rency, and social problems and is considered by Transparency International 
as the world’s most corrupt major economy. 
 Brazil is an emerging nation that along with China, India, and Russia was 
projected to be one of the wealthier global economies by 2030. In fact, the 
term  BRIC has been used as an acronym for the economies of Brazil, Russia, 
India, and China. Today, Brazil is the largest economy in South America and 
the seventh-largest economy in the world with well-developed agriculture, 
mining, manufacturing, and service sectors. Along with Russia, Brazil was 
expected to dominate the global market as a supplier of raw materials. China 
and India were predicted to be leading global suppliers of manufactured goods 
and services. Unfortunately, the past few years have been tough times for Bra-
zil’s economy with growing inflation and slow growth. Still, its growing con-
sumer market of over 200 million people is a target for major exporters like 
the United States and China. 
 The  BRIC economies are certainly not the only areas of opportunity in the 
global market. The developing nations of Asia, including Indonesia, Thailand, 
Singapore, the Philippines, Korea, Malaysia, and Vietnam, also offer great 
potential for U.S. businesses. Africa, especially South Africa, has only begun 
to emerge as a center for global economic growth. Business today is truly 
global and your role in it is up to you.  
 The Challenge of Offshore Outsourcing 
 Outsourcing, as noted in Chapter 1, is the process whereby one firm contracts 
with other companies, often in other countries, to do some or all of its func-
tions. In the United States, companies have outsourced payroll functions, 
accounting, and some manufacturing operations for many years. However, the 
shift to primarily low-wage global markets, called  offshore outsourcing, 
remains a major issue in the United States. This is especially true as the growth 
in U.S. jobs has lagged since the financial crisis began in 2008. Take a look at 
the pros and cons of offshore outsourcing in  Figure 3.9 . 
As lower-level manufacturing became more simplified, U.S. companies 
such as Levi Strauss and Nike outsourced manufacturing offshore. Today, econ-
omists suggest, we have moved into the “second wave” of offshore outsourcing, 
shifting from product assembly to design and architecture. This process has 
proved more disruptive to the U.S. job market than the first, which primarily 
affected manufacturing jobs. Today, increasing numbers of skilled, educated, 
middle-income workers in service-sector jobs such as accounting, law, finance, 
risk management, health care, and information technology have seen their jobs 
outsourced offshore. While loss of jobs is a major concern, it’s not the only 
worry. Nations such as China have a spotty safety record in manufacturing toys, 
food, and drugs. Today, concerns are mounting about companies like Medtronic 
and Siemens shifting production of sensitive medical devices such as MRI and 
CT machines to China. IBM is setting up research facilities in offshore loca-
tions. U.S. airlines have even outsourced airline maintenance to countries such 
as El Salvador. India at one time was the center for telemarketing, data entry, 
call centers, billing, and low-end software development. Today—with its well-
educated, deep pool of scientists, software engineers, chemists, accountants, 
lawyers, and physicians—India is providing more sophisticated services. For 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
84
example, radiologists from Wipro Health Science read CAT scans and MRIs for 
many U.S. hospitals. Some medical providers are shifting surgical procedures 
to India and other nations. The nearby Making Ethical Decisions box offers an 
interesting ethical question about this process. 
 As technical talent grows around the globe, offshore outsourcing will 
increase. To stay competitive, education and training will be critical for U.S. 
workers to preserve the skill premium they possess today and to stay ahead in 
the future.  
 Globalization and Your Future 
 Whether you aspire to be an entrepreneur, a manager, or some other type of 
business leader, think globally in planning your career. By studying foreign 
languages, learning about foreign cultures, and taking business courses 
(including a global business course), you can develop a global perspective on 
your future. As you progress through this text, keep two things in mind: glo-
balization is real, and economic competition promises to intensify. 
 Also keep in mind that global market potential does not belong only to 
large, multinational corporations. Small and medium-sized businesses have a 
world of opportunity in front of them. In fact, these firms are often better pre-
pared to leap into global markets and react quickly to opportunities than are 
large businesses. Finally, don’t forget the potential of franchising, which we 
examine in more detail in Chapter 5.  
 FIGURE 3.9 THE PROS AND CONS OF OFFSHORE OUTSOURCING  
PROS
CONS
•  Less-strategic tasks can be outsourced 
 globally so that companies can focus on
 areas in which they can excel and grow.
•  Outsourced work allows companies to 
 create efﬁciencies that in fact let them 
 hire more workers.
•  Consumers beneﬁt from lower prices 
 generated by effective use of global 
 resources and developing nations grow, 
 thus fueling global economic growth.
• Jobs may be lost permanently and wages
  fall due to low-cost competition offshore.
• Offshore outsourcing may reduce product 
 quality and can therefore cause permanent 
 damage to a company’s reputation.
• Communication among company members, 
 with suppliers, and with customers 
 becomes much more difﬁcult.
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.
 • What are the major threats to doing business in global markets?  
 • What key challenges must India and Russia face before becoming 
global economic leaders?  
 • What does the acronym  BRIC stand for?  
 • What are the two primary concerns associated with offshore 
outsourcing?  
•
What are the major th
test prep
reats to doing
rea

85
Discuss the importance of the global market and the roles of comparative 
advantage and absolute advantage in global trade.
 • 
 Why should nations trade with other nations?  
 (1) No country is self-sufficient, (2) other countries need products that 
prosperous countries produce, and (3) natural resources and technologi-
cal skills are not distributed evenly around the world.  
 • 
 What is the theory of comparative advantage?  
 The theory of comparative advantage contends that a country should make 
and then sell those products it produces most efficiently but buy those it 
cannot produce as efficiently.  
 • 
 What is absolute advantage?  
 Absolute advantage exists if a country produces a specific product more 
efficiently than any other country. There are few examples of absolute 
advantage in the global market today.  
 Explain the importance of importing and exporting, and understand key terms 
used in global business.
 • 
 What kinds of products can be imported and exported?  
 Though it is not necessarily easy, just about any product can be imported 
or exported.  
 • 
 What terms are important in understanding world trade?  
Exporting is selling products to other countries.  Importing is buying prod-
ucts from other countries. The  balance of trade is the relationship of 
exports to imports. The  balance of payments is the balance of trade plus 
LO 3–1
LO 3–2
summary 
 making ethical decisions 
 The Affordable Care Act (ACA) 
may bring some relief to astro-
nomical insurance costs. But as 
premiums continue to rise at 
home, overseas in countries like 
Thailand, Colombia, and India, 
health care is not only affordable, 
it’s also high quality. For instance, 
in the United States it would cost 
Patrick Follett, an avid skier, at 
least $65,000 for his hip replace-
ment surgery. Unlike some 
Americans, Follett had medical 
insurance and would have part of 
the procedure covered. However, 
it would have still cost him at least 
$10,000 out-of-pocket. Follett, like 
1.6 million other Americans, 
started looking for treatment else-
where. In March of 2012, he 
underwent surgery in Mexico and 
was back on the California ski 
slopes in March of 2013. His total 
bill: $10,000, all of which was cov-
ered by his company. 
 Right now, few American com-
panies include medical tourism in 
their health care plans, but some 
of the larger companies like 
Aetna and WellPoint are working 
with companies to include inter-
national coverage. It’s even 
expected to become a booming 
industry with worldwide annual 
growth estimated between 20 
and 30 percent. Would it be ethi-
cal to force patients to travel 
thousands of miles and be sepa-
rated from friends and family in a 
time of crisis in order to save 
money? 
 Sources: Medical Tourism Association, “Medical 
Tourism Sample Surgery Cost Chart,”  www
.medicaltourismassociation.com/en/for-patients.
html , accessed March 2014; Kevin Gray, “Medical 
Tourism: Overseas and Under the Knife,”  Men’s 
Journal, November 2013; and Elisabeth Rosenthal 
“The Growing Popularity of Having Surgery 
Overseas,”  The New York Times, August 6, 2013. 
www.medicaltourism.com
 Making Your Operation Your Vacation 
s

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
86
other money flows such as tourism and foreign aid.  Dumping is selling 
products for less in a foreign country than in your own country. See the 
Key Terms list after this Summary to be sure you know the other impor-
tant terms.  
Illustrate the strategies used in reaching global markets and explain the role 
of multinational corporations.
 • 
 What are some ways in which a company can engage in global business?  
 Ways of entering world trade include licensing, exporting, franchising, 
contract manufacturing, joint ventures and strategic alliances, and direct 
foreign investment.  
 • 
 How do multinational corporations differ from other companies that partici-
pate in global business?  
 Unlike companies that only export or import, multinational corporations 
also have manufacturing facilities or other physical presence abroad.  
 Evaluate the forces that affect trading in global markets.
 • 
 What are some of the forces that can discourage participation in global 
business?  
 Potential stumbling blocks to global trade include sociocultural forces, 
economic and financial forces, legal and regulatory forces, and physical 
and environmental forces.  
 Debate the advantages and disadvantages of trade protectionism.
 • 
 What is trade protectionism?  
 Trade protectionism is the use of government regulations to limit the 
import of goods and services. Advocates believe it allows domestic produc-
ers to grow, producing more jobs. The key tools of protectionism are tar-
iffs, import quotas, and embargoes.  
 • 
 What are tariffs?  
 Tariffs are taxes on foreign products. Protective tariffs raise the price of 
foreign products and protect domestic industries; revenue tariffs raise 
money for the government.  
 • 
 What is an embargo?  
 An embargo prohibits the importing or exporting of certain products.  
 • 
 Is trade protectionism good for domestic producers?  
 That is debatable. Trade protectionism offers pluses and minuses.  
 • 
 Why do governments continue such practices?  
 The theory of mercantilism started the practice of trade protectionism and 
it has persisted, though in a weaker form, ever since.  
 Discuss the changing landscape of the global market and the issue of 
offshore outsourcing.
 • 
 What is offshore outsourcing? Why is it a major concern for the future?  
 Outsourcing is the purchase of goods and services from outside a firm 
rather than providing them inside the company. Today, more businesses 
are outsourcing manufacturing and services offshore. Many fear that 
growing numbers of jobs in the United States will be lost due to offshore 
outsourcing and that the quality of products produced could be 
inferior.  
LO 3–3
What are
LO 3–4
Wh t i t
LO 3–5
LO 3–6
•
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  

87
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
  key terms 
 absolute advantage 64
balance of payments 66
balance of trade 66
common market 79
comparative advantage 
theory 64
contract manufacturing 69
 countertrading 76
 devaluation 76
 dumping 67
 embargo 78
 exchange rate 75
 exporting 63
foreign direct investment 
(FDI) 71
foreign subsidiary 71
 free trade 63
 General Agreement on 
Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT) 79
 importing 63
 import quota 78
 joint venture 70
 licensing 67
 multinational 
corporation 71
North American Free 
Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA) 80
sovereign wealth funds 
(SWFs) 72
strategic alliance 71
tariff 78
trade deficit 66
trade protectionism 77
trade surplus 66
 World Trade Organization 
(WTO)  79
 1. About 95 percent of the world’s population lives outside the United States, 
but many U.S. companies, especially small businesses, still do not engage 
in global trade. Why not? Do you think more small businesses will partici-
pate in global trade in the future? Why or why not?  
 2. Countries like the United States that have a high standard of living are 
referred to as  industrialized nations. Countries with a lower standard of 
living and quality of life are called  developing countries (or  underdeveloped 
or  less developed countries ). What factors prevent developing nations from 
becoming industrialized nations?  
 3. What can businesses do to prevent unexpected problems in dealing with 
sociocultural, economic and financial, legal and regulatory, and physical 
and environmental forces in global markets?  
 4. How would you justify the use of revenue or protective tariffs in today’s 
global market?  
s
critical thinking 
developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  Find out firsthand the global impact on your life. How many different 
countries’ names appear on the labels in your clothes? How many lan-
guages do your classmates speak? List the ethnic restaurants in your com-
munity. Are they family-owned or corporate chains?  
 2.  Call, e-mail, or visit a local business that imports foreign goods (perhaps a 
wine or specialty foods importer). Ask the owner or manager about the 
business’s participation in global trade, and compile a list of the advan-
tages and disadvantages he or she cites. Compare notes with your class-
mates about their research.  
3.  Visit four or five public locations in your community such as schools, hos-
pitals, city/county buildings, or airports. See how many signs are posted in 
different languages (don’t forget the restrooms) and look for other multi-
lingual information, such as brochures or handouts. Do any of the loca-
tions fly flags from different nations? In what other ways do they recognize 
 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
88
the diversity of employees or students? What does your search tell you 
about your community?  
4.  Suppose Representative I. M. Wright delivers a passionate speech at your 
college on tariffs. He argues tariffs are needed to
 
a. Protect our young industries.  
 
b. Encourage consumers to buy U.S.-made products because it’s 
patriotic.  
 
c. Protect U.S. jobs and wages.  
 
d. Achieve a favorable balance of trade and balance of payments.  
 
 Do you agree with Representative Wright? Evaluate each of his major points 
and decide whether you consider it valid. Be sure to justify your position.  
 5.  Form an imaginary joint venture with three classmates and select a prod-
uct, service, or idea to market to a specific country. Have each team mem-
ber select a key global market force in that country (sociocultural, economic 
and financial, legal and regulatory, or physical and environmental) to 
research. Have each report his or her findings. Then, as a group, prepare a 
short explanation of whether the market is worth pursuing.  
 
taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To compare the shifting exchange rates of various countries and to predict the 
effects of such exchange shifts on global trade.  
 EXERCISE 
 One of the difficulties of engaging in global trade is the constant shift in 
exchange rates. How much do exchange rates change over a 30-day period? 
Research this by choosing five currencies (say, the euro, the British pound, the 
Japanese yen, the Mexican peso, the Saudi Arabian riyal) and recording their 
exchange rates relative to the U.S. dollar for 30 days. The rates are available on 
the Internet at Yahoo Finance’s Currency Center ( http://finance.yahoo.com/
currency ). At the end of the tracking period, choose a company and describe 
what effects the currency shifts you noted might have on this company’s trade 
with each of the countries or areas whose currency you chose.  
video case  
 Doing business in global markets can be tricky, 
but the benefits that come from overseas success 
justify much of the risk. That’s what Electra Bicy-
cle Company’s founders discovered after their 
business’s growth suddenly halted. Throughout 
the early 2000s, many bicycle manufacturers con-
centrated on producing mountain and speed bikes 
while discontinuing casual models. Benno Baziger 
and Jeano Erforth of Electra didn’t follow the fad, 
though, choosing instead to stick with cool, 
upright bikes perfect for cruising city streets. 
 The company thrived for years thanks to their 
unique “comfort bikes.” However, major competi-
tors like Schwinn eventually took notice and 
began making their own sleek street bikes. Elec-
tra’s explosive growth halted, and the company’s 
two founders searched for a solution. To grow fur-
ther, the pair knew they would have to enter the 
global marketplace. They went on a search for 
places where their vintage sense of style and up-
to-date technology would give them a compara-
tive advantage against their bigger competitors. 
 ELECTRA BICYCLE COMPANY 
 

89
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
 Electra eventually settled on Taiwan as the site 
for its overseas manufacturing site. From Taiwan, 
the California-based company can simply export 
bikes to neighboring Asian countries like China 
where bikes are most popular. They can in turn 
feed their domestic demand by importing bikes 
into the U.S., a practice that is actually cheaper for 
Electra than producing bikes on their home soil. 
This outsourcing of production to a foreign manu-
facturing plant helps Electra keep its costs down. 
If labor costs increase or instability flares up 
between Taiwan and China, Electra could move its 
production to a less turbulent location. 
 Such unexpected problems represent just a 
few of the hurdles companies can face when they 
go global. For example, laws against motorized 
bikes forced Electra to tweak the design for its 
Townie Go model in order to make the bike accept-
able in some foreign markets. Despite these issues, 
global commerce puts companies on the radar of 
millions of new customers. This immense access 
can make all the additional effort needed for going 
global worth it. In fact, Electra now sells more 
than 100,000 bikes each year. 
 Electra’s success eventually brought it to the 
attention of Trek, a multinational corporation 
with offices in Wisconsin, the UK, and Germany. 
The conglomerate bought Electra, which can 
now use Trek’s established distribution network 
to reach new markets more quickly and effec-
tively. Letting their parent company worry about 
matters like capitalization and manufacturing 
infrastructure allows Electra to focus on other 
things, such as designing stylish bikes that are 
easy to ride and fun to own by people all over 
the world.  
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. What major advantages did Electra gain by 
using a contract manufacturer in Taiwan to 
produce its bikes?  
 2. When Electra produced its bikes in Taiwan, 
did the company have to follow the laws of 
Taiwan or the laws of the United States?  
 3. What major forces impact Electra (or any 
global producer) in trading in global markets?  
 1. 
Robert J. Thomas, Joshua Bellin, Claudy Jules, and Nandani 
Lynton, “Developing Tomorrow’s Global Leaders,”  Sloan 
Management Review, Fall 2013; and Gregory C. Unruh and 
Angel Cabera, “Join the Global Elite,”  Harvard Business 
Review, May 2013. 
 2. 
“World Population Clock,” U.S. Census Bureau,   www.census.
gov/ipc/www/popclockworld.html  , accessed April 2014; and 
 WorldAtlas.com  , accessed April 2014. 
 3. 
Russell Flannery, “What Can be Done about the Big U.S. 
Trade Deficit with China?”  Forbes, August 3, 2013; and Paul 
Davidson, “U.S. Trade Deficit Drops to 4-Year Low,”  USA 
Today, January 7, 2014. 
 4. 
  UPS.com, accessed April 23, 2014;    Walmart.com , accessed 
April 23, 2014; and Janice Kew, “Walmart Brand Favored in 
Massmarts Africa Growth,”  Bloomberg Personal Finance, 
April 16, 2013. 
 5. 
Ira Boudway, “Soccer Will Not Stop Arriving,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, January 2, 2014. 
 6. 
Pamela McClintock and Stuart Kemp, “The 21 Surprising 
Hollywood Actors Whose Names Sell Movies Overseas,”  The 
Hollywood Reporter, September 12, 2013. 
 7. 
World Bank,   www.worldbank.org  , accessed April 2014; World 
Trade Organization,   www.wto.org  , accessed April 2014; and 
Gordon Chang, “Is China Really the World’s No. 1 Trader?” 
Forbes, January 12, 2014. 
 8. 
Matthew J. Slaughter, “Exports Sagging? Try Some Free 
Trade,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 23, 2013. 
 9. 
“Free Trade and Secrecy Don’t Mix,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, December 1, 2013. 
 10. 
Joshua Kurlantzick, “Farewell to the Age of Free Trade,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, December 22, 2013. 
 11. 
Robert Skidelsky, “In a World Based on Free Trade, Love Will 
Cost You,”  Global Times, January 23, 2014. 
 12. Donald Lessard, Rafael Lucea, and Luis Vives, “Building Your 
Company’s Capabilities Through Global Expansion,”  MIT 
Sloan Management Review, Winter 2013. 
 13. International Trade Administration,   www.trade.gov  , accessed 
April 2014. 
 14. Bryan Lowry, Tanvi Misra, and Katie Peralta, “U.S. Exports 
Rise but Are Likely to Fall Short of Obama’s Goal,”  McClatchy 
DC, December 30, 2013. 
 15. Alexandra Wolfe, “Howard Schultz: What Next Starbucks?” 
The Wall Street Journal, September 27, 2013. 
 16. Greg Kitsock, “Beer: Brewers Find It Can Be Bright in Helles,” 
The Washington Post, January 7, 2014. 
 17. Carolyn Berg, “Holding a Mirror to China’s Economy Through 
Cosmetics,”  China Daily USA, October 15, 2013. 
 18. C. Fred Bergston, “How Best to Boost U.S. Exports,”  The 
Washington Post, February 3, 2010; and Barry Wood, “An 
Interview with C. Fred Bergsten, Evangelist for the Open 
Economy,”  The Washington Post, April 19, 2013. 
 19. Paul Davidson, “U.S. Trade Deficit Drops to 4-Year Low,”  USA 
Today, January 7, 2014; and Rob Hotakainen, “U.S. Exports 
on Record Pace but So Is Trade Deficit with China,”  Miami 
Herald, January 7, 2014. 
 20.  www.goldmarks.com  , accessed April 2014. 
 21.   www.Export.gov  , accessed April 2014; and   www.sba.gov  , 
accessed April 2014. 
 22. “Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory, Inc. Reports Improved 
Third Quarter Operating Results,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 21, 2014. 
 23. “Yum Brands’ World Hunger Relief Efforts Result in Record-
Breaking $37 Million in Cash and Food Donations,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, January 9, 2014. 
 24. AnnaLisa Kraft, “Crazy Food You Can’t Get Here,”  The Motley 
Fool, January 4, 2014. 
ucea, and Luis Vives, “Building Your
notes 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
90
 25. Flextronics,   www.flextronics.com  , accessed May 2012. 
 26. Zhou Wenting, “Full Steam Ahead for Shanghai Disney in 
2015,”  China Daily USA, January 24, 2014. 
 27. Alby Gallum, “European Hotel Chain Coming to River North,” 
 Crain Chicago Business, January 24, 2014. 
 28. “Pepsi Announces Plans for $5 Billion Investment in Mexico,” 
 The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2014. 
 29. Sean D. Hamill, “How UPMC’s Overseas Operation 
Blossomed in 14 Years,”  Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, May 30, 
2010; and University of Pittsburgh Medical Center,   www
.upmc.com  , accessed April 2014. 
 30.  CNNMoney,  www.cnnmoney.com  , accessed April 2014; and 
Nestlé,   www.nestle.com  , accessed 2014. 
 3 1. Vivienne Walt, “Norway’s Trillion Dollar Oil Problem,”  Fortune 
Magazine, January 16, 2014. 
 32. Ashley Stahl, “The Promise and Perils of Sovereign Wealth 
Funds,”  Forbes, December 19, 2013; and “More Money than 
Thor,”  The Economist, September 14, 2013. 
 33. Susan Bergfield, “4 Countries Walmart Can’t Conquer,”  MSN 
Money, October 15, 2013; Walter Loeb, “Walmart: What 
Happened in India?”  Forbes, October 16, 2013; and 
Agustino Fontevecchia, “IBM Falls Off Cliff as Q3 Sales Fall 
on Services and Hardware Weakness,”  Forbes, 
October 16, 2013. 
 34. Nikhul Gulati and Rumman Ahmed, “India Has 1.2 Billion 
People but Not Enough Drink Coke,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
July 13, 2012; and Coca-Cola,   www.cocacola.com  , accessed 
April 2014 . 
 35. “In Dollars They Trust,”  The Economist, April 27, 2013. 
 36. Simon Kennedy, “Developed Economies Seen Fighting Off 
Emerging Market Contagion,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
January 27, 2014. 
 37. H.B. Fuller,   www.hbfuller.com  , accessed April 2014. 
 38. Taos Turner, Ken Parks, and Juan Foreno, “Crisis Squeeze 
Two Latin Leaders,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 26, 2014; 
and Jonathan Gilbert, Simon Romero, and William Neuman, 
“Erosian of Argentine Peso Sends a Shudder Through Latin 
America,”  The New York Times, January 24, 2014. 
 39. Christina LeBeau, “Rules of the Trade,”  Entrepreneur, 
February 2014. 
  40.  www.wto.com  , accessed April 2014. 
 4 1. Crayton Harrison, “Hewlett-Packard in Advanced Talks to 
Resolve U.S. Bribery Probes,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
December 30, 2013; and Chris Isidore, “SEC Expands Probe 
into Overseas Hiring by U.S. Banks,”  CNN Money, 
November 27, 2013. 
 42. Alexandra Wrage, “What Companies Can’t Do about 
Corruption,”  Forbes, January 24, 2014. 
 43. “What Was Mercantilism?”  The Economist, August 23, 2013; 
and Nathan Lewis, “Keynes and Rottbard Agreed: Today’s 
Economics Is Mercantilism,”  Forbes, January 23, 2014. 
 44. “The Hidden Persuaders: Protectionism Can Take Many Forms, 
Not All of Them Obvious,”  The Economist, October 12, 2013. 
 45.   www.wto.org  , accessed April 2014; and “Unaccustomed 
Victory,”  The Economist, December 14, 2013. 
 46. David Nicklaus, “WTO Talks Could Boost Trade by $1 Trillion,” 
 St. Louis Post Dispatch, December 8, 2013; and “Life After 
Doha,”  The Economist, December 14, 2013. 
 47. Emma Ross Thomas,”EU Says Spain Should Improve Bank 
Monitoring as Bailout Ends,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
January 29, 2014; and Juergen Baetz, “EU Seeks to Make 
Mega-Banks Less Risky,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
January 29, 2014. 
 48. “EU-Mercosur Trade Talks: Strategic Patience Runs Out,”  
The Economist, December 14, 2013; and Uruguay: CFK Must 
Improve EU Trade Offer,”  Buenos Aires Herald, 
January 22, 2014. 
 49. Association of Southeast Asian Nations,   www.aseansec.org  , 
accessed April 2014. 
 50. Common Market for Eastern and Southern Africa,   www
.comesa.int  , accessed April 2014. 
 5 1. “Briefing NAFTA at 20: Ready to Take Off Again?”  The 
Economist, January 4, 2014; and Mark Glassman, “NAFTA 20 
Years After: Neither Miracle nor Disaster,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, December 30, 2013. 
 52. “Deeper, Better, NAFTA,”  The Economist, January 4, 2014. 
 53.   www.uschamber.com  , accessed April 2014; and “Deeper, 
Better, NAFTA.” 
 54. Mark Stevenson, “20 Years after NAFTA, a Changed Mexico,” 
 The Boston Globe, January 3, 2014; and Alfredo Conchado, 
“20 Years after NAFTA, Mexico Has Transformed,”  The 
Dallas Morning News, January 1, 2014. 
 55. “Free Trade Deals such as the Trans-Pacific Partnership Help 
the United States,”  The Washington Post, January 16, 2014; 
and Christian Oliver and Shawn Donnan, “Brussels Wants 
Finance Rules Back in the U.S. Trade Pact,”  Financial Times, 
January 27, 2014. 
 56. Jamil Anderlini and Lucy Hornby, “China Overtakes U.S. 
as World’s Largest Goods Trader,”  Financial Times, 
January 10, 2014. 
 57. Liyan Qi and Grace Zhu, “China’s Capital Inflows, Foreign 
Direct Investment Rose in 2013,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 16, 2014. 
 58.  www.goldmansachs.com  , accessed April 2014; and Morris 
Beschloss, “Will China Overtake U.S. GDP World Leadership 
by 2028?”  The Desert Sun (Gannett), January 23, 2014. 
 59. Samuel Shen and Norihiko Shirozu, “China Auto Market 
Seen Cruising to Another Strong Year,”  Reuters, 
January 12, 2014. 
 60. “Can India Become a Great Power?”  The Economist, March 
30, 2013; and Philip Stephens, “India Still a Contender in the 
Asian Race,”  Financial Times, January 30, 2014. 
 61. 
Paul Hannon, “EBRD Reduces Investment in Russia,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, January 15, 2014; and Mark Adomanis, 
“Russia’s Economic Performance Is Actually Very Similar to 
Other East European Countries,”  Forbes, January 20, 2014.  

91
Doing Business in Global Markets
CHAPTER 3
 Page 61: Postcode Lottery Green Challenge/Creative 
Commons, https://www.flickr.com/photos/post-
codelotterygreenchallenge/8202992042; 
p. 63: © Sang Tan/AP Images; p. 65: Peter Rivera/
Creative Commons, https://www.flickr.com/photos/
riverap1/3258668503; p. 68: © Rex Features/AP 
Images; p.69: Courtesy of Domino’s Pizza; 
p. 70: © Andrey Rudakov/Bloomberg/Getty 
Images; p. 71: © imago stock&people/Newscom; 
p. 74: Courtesy of Yao Family Winery, © George 
Rose Photography; p. 76: © Eyecandy Images/age 
fotostock RF; p. 78: © Tom Williams/Roll Call/
Getty Images; p. 79: © Sam Panthaky/AFP/Getty 
Images; p. 82: © Imaginechina/Corbis.
kov/Bloomberg/Getty
photo credits 

92
 Demanding Ethical 
and Socially 
Responsible Behavior 
 4 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 4-1 
Explain why obeying the law is only the first step in behaving 
ethically. 
 LO 4-2 
Ask the three questions you need to answer when faced with a 
potentially unethical action. 
 LO 4-3 
Describe management’s role in setting ethical standards. 
 LO 4-4 
Distinguish between compliance-based and integrity-based ethics 
codes, and list the six steps in setting up a corporate ethics code. 
 LO 4-5 
Define  corporate social responsibility and compare corporations’ 
responsibilities to various stakeholders. 
 LO 4-6 
Analyze the role of U.S. businesses in influencing ethical behavior 
and social responsibility in global markets.  

93
Patty Stonesifer
 • CEO of Martha's Table 
 • Washington, DC, nonprofit
 • Provides food, clothes, and 
education to those in need
www.marthastable.org
@MarthasTableorg
F
 iguring out the next step to 
take after leaving a long-held 
job can be difficult for anyone. 
But what if your previous posi-
tion had been leading the 
largest charitable organization in human 
history? That’s the situation Patty Stone-
sifer found herself in after stepping down 
as CEO of the Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation. 
 For more than 10 years Stonesifer 
stood at the head of 500 employees and 
a $39 billion endowment. She used 
those resources to tackle some of the 
world’s biggest problems, such as elimi-
nating diseases like malaria and polio as 
well as reducing the U.S. high school 
dropout rate. Stonesifer played a major 
part in establishing the foundation’s lofty 
goals. “When we were starting up the 
Gates Foundation, it meant envisioning 
the world as we thought it should be and 
setting our own vision accordingly: 
Everyone should have the opportunity 
for a healthy and productive life,” says 
Stonesifer. “Big moves ahead start with 
big visions.” Before taking charge of the 
foundation, Stonesifer spent more than 
20 years at Gates’s company Microsoft, 
rising to the position of vice president in 
charge of consumer products. 
 But two decades working for the same 
company followed by 10 years of trying to 
solve the most complicated issues on the 
planet eventually wore Stonesifer down. 
She left the Gates Foundation in 2008 to 
become an independent consultant for 
businesses and nonprofits interested in 
strategies for reducing inequality. In 2010 
President Obama appointed her as the 
chair of the White House Council for Com-
munity Solutions. In fact, at the time there 
was even talk that she would be 
appointed as the president’s domestic 
policy advisor. After years of high-level 
dealing, however, Stonesifer was looking 
for more hands-on work. “I would love to 
call my mother and tell her, ‘Mom, I’m 
president of such-and-such,’ a university 
or a great NGO [nongovernmental organi-
zation] or a corporation,” says Stonesifer. 
“But when I sat and really thought about 
what I wanted to do, I realized that the 
only job I was interested in would be one 
that would put me very close to the front 
lines, to go beyond white papers and 
PowerPoint presentations and get my 
boots dirty.” 
 In 2013 Stonesifer shocked the busi-
ness world by accepting the CEO posi-
tion at Martha’s Table, a Washington, 
DC–based nonprofit. The organization 
focuses on empowering local residents 
by providing healthy food, affordable 
clothing, and quality education. In the 
eyes of many businesspeople, for a per-
son with Stonesifer’s experience to join a 
small nonprofit would be as if Lebron 
James quit the NBA to coach basketball 
at his old high school. “If you just look at 
my résumé, I find that I have to explain 
this,” says Stonesifer. “But if you know 
me, I don’t have to explain it at all.” As 
the sixth of nine children in a religious 
family, Stonesifer understands the impor-
tance of placing the needs of others 
before her own. “Our family didn’t talk 
about volunteerism. It was just baked in,” 
says Stonesifer. “We went down and put 
the new missals in the church pews, and 
we volunteered at the Sunday soup 
kitchen, and we went with my dad to 
pick up the deaf children for church.” 
Stonesifer’s good works have won her 
many awards, including two honorary 
doctorates to go with her bachelor’s 
degree from Indiana University. 
Although they may not receive as 
much media attention as fraudulent 
businesspeople, ethical entrepre-
neurs like Patty Stonesifer are the 
backbone of the business world. In 
this chapter, we explore the respon-
sibility of businesses to their stake-
holders, including customers, 
investors, employees, and society.   
We look at the responsibilities of 
individuals as well. After all, respon-
sible business behavior depends on 
the integrity of each person in the 
business.
Sources: Steve Hendrix, “Patty Stonesifer, Former CEO 
of Gates Foundation, to Lead D.C. Food Pantry,” The 
Washington Post, January 29, 2013; Maureen Dowd, 
“She’s Getting Her Boots Dirty,” The New York Times, 
June 1, 2013; and “A Q&A with Patty Stonesifer, 
President and CEO, Martha’s Table,” Washington 
Business Journal, June 6, 2013.
 Getting to Know  Patty Stonesifer

94
name that company 
 The wage and benefit packages offered by this company are among the best in 
hourly retail. Even part-time workers are covered by its health plan. Increased 
benefits reduce employee turnover to less than a third of the industry average. 
Name that company. (Find the answer in the chapter.)  
 Explain why obeying the law is only the first step in behaving ethically. 
 ETHICS IS MORE THAN LEGALITY  
 In the early 2000s, the U.S. public was shocked to learn that Enron, the giant 
energy trading company, had created off-the-books partnerships to unlawfully 
hide its debts and losses. The Enron disgrace was soon followed by more scan-
dals at major companies such as WorldCom, Tyco International, ImClone, 
HealthSouth, and Boeing. (See the nearby Making Ethical Decisions box for a 
brief summary of one of the more notorious corruption cases.) In recent years, 
greedy borrowers and lenders alike were among those who brought the real 
estate, mortgage, and banking industries to the edge of a financial crisis that 
threatened the entire U.S. and world economies.  1 
Given the ethical lapses prevalent today, how can we restore trust in the 
free-market system and in leaders in general? First, those who have broken 
the law should be punished accordingly. New laws making accounting records 
more transparent (easy to read and understand) and businesspeople and oth-
ers more accountable for their actions may also help. But laws alone don’t 
make people honest, reliable, or truthful. If they did, crime would disappear. 
LO 4–1
 Mortgage giant Fannie 
Mae paid the SEC $400 
million to settle charges 
of misstating financial 
statements. The SEC 
filed a civil suit in 2011 
charging three former 
top executives with 
securities fraud for 
misleading investors 
about the volume of 
higher-risk mortgage 
loans it held during the 
financial crisis.  

95
While the number of accounting fraud cases pursued by the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) fell from its typical level of more than 25 percent 
of the SEC’s enforcement efforts before the Great Recession to just 11 percent 
in 2013, experts predict this number will rise in the near future. Why? One 
reason is that new data mining technology will allow the SEC to more easily 
identify companies that may be making earnings misstatements.  2
 One danger in writing new laws to correct behavior is that people may 
begin to think that any behavior that is within the law is also acceptable. The 
measure of behavior then becomes “Is it legal?” A society gets into trouble 
when people consider only what is illegal and not also what is unethical. Eth-
ics and legality are two very different things. Although following the law is an 
important first step, behaving ethically requires more than that. Ethics reflects 
people’s proper relationships with one another: How should we treat others? 
What responsibility should we feel for others? Legality is narrower. It refers to 
laws we have written to protect ourselves from fraud, theft, and violence. 
Many immoral and unethical acts fall well within our laws. For example, gos-
siping about your neighbor or sharing something told to you in confidence is 
unethical, but not illegal. 
 making ethical decisions 
 News stories of corporate fraud 
and corruption are all too com-
mon. White-collar criminals often 
assume the complexity of the 
financial system will hide their 
crimes, leaving them free to 
embezzle to their heart’s con-
tent. But people tend to 
notice when a few bil-
lion dollars suddenly go 
missing. Eventually, 
even the most careful 
corporate criminals get 
caught. 
 When the credit cri-
sis hit in 2008, it unex-
pectedly exposed 
one of history’s most 
shameful financial felons. 
For many years, Bernie Madoff 
ran his exclusive wealth manage-
ment firm as a gigantic Ponzi 
scheme. Legitimate money man-
agers invest their clients’ money 
in various ventures and pay them 
back on their returns, minus a 
commission. With a Ponzi 
scheme, however, the fraudsters 
don’t invest the money. They 
simply pass money contributed 
by new investors on to early 
investors (minus a healthy sum 
held back for their own personal 
use, of course), claiming the 
money as profits from the exist-
ing clients’ “investments.” The 
steady income fools the inves-
tors into thinking their wealth is 
growing when in reality it is 
being siphoned off from other 
people. Obviously the scheme 
depends upon being able to con-
tinuously attract new 
“investors.” 
 Once the bubble burst on 
Wall Street, everything fell 
apart for Madoff. He con-
fessed his crimes to his 
sons, who then contacted 
the police. Though exact 
estimates are still 
 uncertain, Madoff swin-
dled approximately $65 
billion from his investors, 
 including $20 billion in 
cash losses that can 
never be recovered. A 
judge sentenced Madoff 
to 150 years behind bars 
with no chance of parole. Do you 
think the  punishment fit the crime 
in this case? 
 Sources: James Sterngold, “Unraveling the Lies 
Madoff Told,”  The Wall Street Journal, December 10, 
2013; Diana B. Henriques, “Madoff Victims, 
Five Years the Wiser,”  The New York Times, 
December 7, 2013; and Erik Larson, “Madoff 
Ex-Aide Knew of Scheme to Pay His Son, Jury 
Told,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, January 22, 
2014. 
 Bernie Madoff’s Ponzi Scheme 
s
aud 
om-
often 
e 
eiriri
n-
peop
opl
de
d pen
titinuuo
“i“in
Wa
Wa
ap
ap

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
96
 Ethical Standards Are Fundamental 
 We define   ethics   as society’s accepted standards of moral behavior, that is, 
behaviors accepted by society as right rather than wrong. Many Americans 
today have few moral absolutes. Many decide situationally whether it’s OK to 
steal, lie, or text and drive. They seem to think that what is right is whatever 
works best for the individual—that each person has to work out for himself 
or herself the difference between right and wrong. Such thinking may be part 
of the behavior that has led to scandals in government and business. 
 This isn’t the way it always was. When Thomas Jefferson wrote that all 
men have the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, he declared 
it to be a self-evident truth. Going back even further in time, the Ten Com-
mandments were not called the “Ten Highly Tentative Suggestions.” 
 In the United States, with so many diverse cultures, you might think it is 
impossible to identify common standards of ethical behavior. However, among 
sources from many different times and places—such as the Bible, Aristotle’s 
Ethics, the Koran, and the  Analects of Confucius—you’ll find the following 
common statements of basic moral values: Integrity, respect for human life, 
self-control, honesty, courage, and self-sacrifice are right. Cheating, coward-
ice, and cruelty are wrong. Furthermore, all the world’s major religions sup-
port a version of what some call the Golden Rule: Do unto others as you would 
have them do unto you.  3 
 Ask the three questions you need to answer when faced with a potentially 
unethical action. 
 Ethics Begins with Each of Us  
 It is easy to criticize business and political leaders for moral and ethical 
shortcomings. Both managers and workers often cite low managerial ethics 
as a major cause of U.S. businesses’ competitive woes. But employees also 
frequently violate safety standards and goof off during the work week. U.S. 
adults in general are not always as honest or honorable as they should be. 
Even though volunteerism is at an all-time high 
according to the U.S. Census Bureau, three of 
every four citizens do not give any time to the 
community in which they live because they think 
it will take too much time or they don’t think 
they are qualified.  4  
 Plagiarizing material from the Internet, 
including cutting and pasting information from 
websites without giving credit, is the most com-
mon form of cheating in schools today. To fight 
this problem, many instructors now use services 
like TurnItIn.com, which scans students’ papers 
against more than 40 billion online sources to pro-
vide evidence of copying in seconds.  5 
 In a recent study, most teens said they were 
prepared to make ethical decisions in the work-
force, but an alarming 51 percent of high school 
students admit that they have cheated on tests in 
the last year. Studies have found a strong rela-
tionship between academic dishonesty among 
undergraduates and dishonesty at work.  6 In 
response, many schools are establishing heavier 
 ethics  
 Standards of moral behavior, 
that is, behavior accepted by 
society as right versus wrong.  
LO 4–2
 Plagiarizing from the 
Internet is one of the 
most common forms of 
cheating in colleges 
today. Have you ever 
been tempted to 
plagiarize a paper or 
project? What are the 
possible consequences 
of copying someone 
else’s material? 

97
consequences for cheating and requiring students to perform a certain 
number of hours of community service to graduate. Do you think such poli-
cies make a difference in student behavior? 
 Choices are not always easy, and the obvious ethical solution may have 
personal or professional drawbacks. Imagine that your supervisor has asked 
you to do something you feel is unethical. You’ve just taken out a mortgage on 
a new house to make room for your first baby, due in two months. Not carry-
ing out your supervisor’s request may get you fired. What should you do? 
Sometimes there is no easy alternative in such  ethical dilemmas because you 
must choose between equally unsatisfactory alternatives. 
 It can be difficult to balance ethics and other goals, such as pleasing 
stakeholders or advancing in your career. According to management writer 
Ken Blanchard and religious leader Norman Vincent Peale, it helps to ask 
yourself the following questions when facing an ethical dilemma.  7 
 
1.  Is my proposed action legal? Am I violating any law or company policy? 
Whether you’re thinking about having a drink and driving home, 
gathering marketing intelligence, designing a product, hiring or firing 
employees, getting rid of industrial waste, or using a questionable 
 spotlight on small business
 While starting a business 
from scratch is difficult for 
anybody, it can be an 
almost impossible task for 
someone with a criminal 
record. Most former 
 convicts come from poor 
backgrounds with limited 
opportunities and only 
see their opportunities 
dwindle further once 
they’ve done time. With 
few options available, 
many return to their lives 
of crime and  eventually 
end up back in jail. 
 That’s why entrepre-
neur and activist 
Catherine Rohr began 
Defy Ventures, a New 
York–based nonprofit that 
helps newly released pris-
oners launch their own busi-
nesses. Rohr came up with the idea 
after a tour through a Texas prison 
shattered her previous thoughts on 
incarcerated people. “Most prison 
rehabilitation advocates talk about 
‘second chances,’ but I  recognized 
that those I met behind bars were 
never given a legitimate first 
chance,” says Rohr. She also 
noticed that many inmates shared 
the same characteristics as most 
successful businesspeople: 
“Relentless drive, charisma that 
turns a ‘no’ into a ‘yes,’ and creative 
problem solving.” 
 In 2004 Rohr founded the 
Prison Entrepreneurship Program 
(PEP) in Texas after investing her 
entire savings and 401(k). The 
nonprofit soon grew into a 
$2.5 million organization 
that had helped launch 
60 startups. Of the 600 
 students Rohr graduated 
through the program, 
98 percent found employ-
ment and less than 5 per-
cent returned to prison. In 
2010 Rohr established 
Defy in New York City 
where she continues to 
fight for the advance-
ment of ex-convicts. “We 
break generational lega-
cies of violence, poverty, 
and incarceration by 
coaching students to 
become successful entre-
preneurs, employers,  parents, 
and community leaders,” says 
Rohr. 
 Sources: Riane Menardi, “Catherine Rohr Helps 
Former Felons Defy Odds, Start Businesses,” 
Silicon Prairie News, May 9, 2013; and Ashoka, 
“Legalize IT: Met New Ashoka Fellow Catherine 
Rohr,”  Forbes, March 28, 2013.    
 www.devyventures.org   
 Turning Ex-Convicts into Entrepreneurs 
 In 2
Pr
P ison
(P
(PEP
E ) i
en
entitir
no
$
t
6
 s
t
9
m

 • What are ethics?  
 • How do ethics differ from legality?  
 • When faced with ethical dilemmas, what questions can you ask yourself 
that might help you make ethical decisions?  
•
What are ethics?
test prep
PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
98
nickname for an employee, think about the legal implications. This is 
the most basic question in business ethics, but it is only the first.  
 
2.  Is it balanced? Am I acting fairly? Would I want to be treated this way? 
Will I win everything at the expense of another? Win–lose situations 
often become lose–lose situations and generate retaliation from the 
loser. Not every situation can be completely balanced, but the health of 
our relationships requires us to avoid major imbalances over time. An 
ethical businessperson has a win–win attitude and tries to make 
decisions that benefit all.  
 
3.  How will it make me feel about myself? Would I feel proud if my family 
learned of my decision? My friends? Could I discuss the proposed 
situation or action with my supervisor? The company’s clients? Will I 
have to hide my actions? Has someone warned me not to disclose them? 
What if my decision were announced on the evening news? Am I feeling 
unusually nervous? Decisions that go against our sense of right and 
wrong make us feel bad—they erode our self-esteem. That is why an 
ethical businessperson does what is proper as well as what is profitable.  
Individuals and companies that develop a strong ethics code and use the 
three questions above have a better chance than most of behaving ethically. 
The Spotlight on Small Business box features a story about how one woman 
chose to help others. If you would like to know which style of recognizing and 
resolving ethical dilemmas you favor, fill out the ethical orientation question-
naire in  Figure 4.1 . 
Describe management’s role in setting ethical standards. 
MANAGING BUSINESSES ETHICALLY 
AND RESPONSIBLY  
 Ethics is caught more than it is taught. That is, people learn their standards 
and values from observing what others do, not from hearing what they say. 
This is as true in business as it is at home. Organizational ethics begins at the 
top, and the leadership and example of strong managers can help instill corpo-
rate values in employees. 
 Trust and cooperation between workers and managers must be based 
on fairness, honesty, openness, and moral integrity. The same applies to rela-
tionships among businesses and between nations. A business should be 
managed ethically for many reasons: to maintain a good reputation; to keep 
existing customers and attract new ones; to avoid lawsuits; to reduce 
employee turnover; to avoid government intervention in the form of new 
laws and regulations controlling business activities; to please customers, 
employees, and society; and simply to do the right thing. 
LO 4–3
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

99
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior
CHAPTER 4
 FIGURE 4.1 ETHICAL ORIENTATION QUESTIONNAIRE  
 Please answer the following questions.
 1. Which is worse?
 
A. Hurting someone’s feelings by telling the truth.  
 
B. Telling a lie and protecting someone’s feelings.  
 2. Which is the worse mistake?
 
A. To make exceptions too freely.  
 
B. To apply rules too rigidly.  
 3. Which is it worse to be?
 
A. Unmerciful.  
 
B. Unfair. 
 4. Which is worse?
 
A. Stealing something valuable from someone for 
no good reason.  
 
B. Breaking a promise to a friend for no good reason.  
 5. Which is it better to be?
 
A. Just and fair.  
 
B. Sympathetic and feeling.  
 6. Which is worse?
 
A. Not helping someone in trouble.  
 
B. Being unfair to someone by playing favorites.  
 7. In making a decision you rely more on
 
A. Hard facts. 
 
B. Personal feelings and intuition.  
 8. Your boss orders you to do something that will hurt 
someone. If you carry out the order, have you actu-
ally done anything wrong?
 
A. Yes. 
 
B. No.  
 9. Which is more important in determining whether an 
action is right or wrong?
 
A. Whether anyone actually gets hurt.  
 
B. Whether a rule, law, commandment, or moral 
principle is broken.  
Source: Thomas I. White, Discovering Philosophy—Brief Edition, 1e, © Copyright 1996. Adapted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle 
River, NJ.
To score: The answers fall in one of two categories, J or C. Count your number of J and C answers using this key: 1. 
A  5  C; B  5  J; 2. A  5  J; B  5  C; 3. A  5  C; B  5  J; 4. A  5  J; B  5  C; 5. A  5  J; B  5  C; 6. A  5  C; B  5  J; 7. A  5  J; B  5  C; 8. 
A  5  C; B  5  J; 9. A  5  C; B  5  J
What your score means: The higher your J score, 
the more you rely on an ethic of justice. The higher your 
C score, the more you prefer an ethic of care. Neither 
style is better than the other, but they are different. 
Because they appear so different, they may seem 
opposed to one another, but they’re actually comple-
mentary. In fact, your score probably shows you rely on 
each style to a greater or lesser degree. (Few people 
end up with a score of 9 to 0.) The more you can appre-
ciate both approaches, the better you’ll be able to 
resolve ethical dilemmas and to understand and com-
municate with people who prefer the other style.
An ethic of justice is based on principles like justice, 
fairness, equality, or authority. People who prefer this 
style see ethical dilemmas as conflicts of rights that can 
be solved by the impartial application of some general 
principle. The advantage of this approach is that it looks 
at a problem logically and impartially. People with this 
style try to be objective and fair, hoping to make a deci-
sion according to some standard that’s higher than any 
specific individual’s interests. The disadvantage of this 
approach is that people who rely on it might lose sight 
of the immediate interests of particular individuals. They 
may unintentionally ride roughshod over the people 
around them in favor of some abstract ideal or policy. 
This style is more common for men than women.
An ethic of care is based on a sense of responsibil-
ity to reduce actual harm or suffering. People who prefer 
this style see moral dilemmas as conflicts of duties or 
responsibilities. They believe that solutions must be tai-
lored to the special details of individual circumstances. 
They tend to feel constrained by policies that are sup-
posed to be enforced without exception. The advantage 
of this approach is that it is responsive to immediate suf-
fering and harm. The disadvantage is that, when carried 
to an extreme, this style can produce decisions that 
seem not simply subjective, but arbitrary. This style is 
more common for women than men.
To learn more about these styles and how they 
might relate to gender, go to www.ethicsandbusiness
.org/kgl.htm.
 Some managers think ethics is a personal matter—either individuals have 
ethical principles or they don’t. These managers believe that they are not respon-
sible for an individual’s misdeeds and that ethics has nothing to do with man-
agement. But a growing number of people think ethics has everything to do with 
management. Individuals do not usually act alone; they need the implied, if not 
the direct, cooperation of others to behave unethically in a corporation. 
 For example, there have been reports of cell phone service sales represen-
tatives who actually lie to get customers to extend their contracts—or even 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
100
extend their contracts without the customers’ knowledge. Some phone reps 
intentionally hang up on callers to prevent them from canceling their con-
tracts. Why do these sales reps sometimes resort to overly aggressive tactics? 
Because poorly designed incentive programs reward them for meeting certain 
goals, sometimes doubling or tripling their salaries with incentives. Do their 
managers say directly, “Deceive the customers”? No, but the message is clear. 
Overly ambitious goals and incentives can create an environment in which 
unethical actions like this can occur. 
Distinguish between compliance-based and integrity-based ethics codes, and 
list the six steps in setting up a corporate ethics code.
 Setting Corporate Ethical Standards 
 More and more companies have adopted written codes of ethics.  Figure 4.2  
offers Johnson & Johnson’s as a sample. Although these codes vary greatly, they 
can be placed into two categories: compliance-based and integrity-based (see 
 Figure 4.3 ).   Compliance-based ethics codes   emphasize preventing unlawful 
behavior by increasing control and penalizing wrongdoers.   Integrity-based 
ethics codes   define the organization’s guiding values, create an environment 
that supports ethically sound behavior, and stress shared accountability.  
LO 4–4
 compliance-based ethics 
codes  
 Ethical standards that 
emphasize preventing unlawful 
behavior by increasing control 
and by penalizing wrongdoers.  
 integrity-based ethics codes  
 Ethical standards that define 
the organization’s guiding 
values, create an environment 
that supports ethically sound 
behavior, and stress a shared 
accountability among 
employees.  
 FIGURE 4.2 OVERVIEW OF 
JOHNSON & JOHNSON’S 
CODE OF ETHICS 
Note: This is an overview of Johnson 
& Johnson’s code of ethics, which it 
calls its Credo. To see the company’s 
complete Credo, go to www.jnj.com, 
then under the “Our Company” tab 
click on “Our Credo Values.”
Written in 1943 by long-time Chairman General Robert Wood Johnson, the Johnson
& Johnson Credo serves as a conscious plan that represents and encourages a unique
set of values. Our Credo sums up the responsibilities we have to the four important
groups we serve:
•  Our customers—We have a responsibility to provide high-quality products they
 can trust, offered at a fair price.
•  Our employees—We have a responsibility to treat them with respect and dignity,
 pay them fairly and help them develop and thrive personally and professionally.
•  Our communities—We have a responsibility to be good corporate citizens,
 support good works, encourage better health and protect the environment.
•  Our stockholders—We have a responsibility to provide a fair return on their
 investment.
The deliberate ordering of these groups—customers ﬁrst, stockholders last—
proclaims a bold business philosophy: If we meet our ﬁrst three responsibilities,
the fourth will take care of itself. . . . To ensure our adherence to Credo values, we
periodically ask every employee to evaluate the company’s performance in living up
to them. We believe that by monitoring our actions against the ethical framework of
Our Credo, we will best ensure that we make responsible decisions as a company.

101
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior
CHAPTER 4
 Here are six steps many believe can improve U.S. business ethics:  8 
 
1. Top management must adopt and unconditionally support an explicit 
corporate code of conduct.  
 
2. Employees must understand that expectations for ethical behavior 
begin at the top and that senior management expects all employees to 
act accordingly.  
 
3. Managers and others must be trained to consider the ethical 
implications of all business decisions.  
 
4. An ethics office must be set up with which employees can communicate 
anonymously.   Whistleblowers   (insiders who report illegal or unethical 
behavior) must feel protected from retaliation. The Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act protects whistleblowers by requiring all public corporations to 
allow employee concerns about accounting and auditing to be 
submitted confidentially and anonymously. The act also requires 
 FIGURE 4.3 STRATEGIES 
FOR ETHICS 
MANAGEMENT  
Integrity-based ethics codes 
move beyond legal compliance 
to create a “do-it-right” climate 
that emphasizes core values 
such as honesty, fair play, 
good service to customers, a 
commitment to diversity, and 
involvement in the community. 
These values are ethically 
desirable, but not necessarily 
legally mandatory.
FEATURES OF COMPLIANCE-BASED 
ETHICS CODES
FEATURES OF INTEGRITY-BASED 
ETHICS CODES
Ideal:
Conform to outside 
standards (laws and 
regulations)
Ideal:
Conform to outside 
standards (laws and 
regulations) and cho-
sen internal standards
Objective:
Avoid criminal 
misconduct
Objective:
Enable responsible 
employee conduct
Leaders:
Lawyers
Leaders:
Managers with aid of 
lawyers and others
Methods:
Education, reduced 
employee discretion, 
controls, penalties
Methods:
Education, leadership, 
accountability, decision 
processes, controls, 
and penalties
 The Internal Revenue 
Service awarded 
$104 million to Bradley 
Birkenfeld, a banker-
turned-whistleblower 
who gave the agency 
the information it 
needed to uncover a 
massive tax evasion 
scheme pulled off by 
Swiss bank UBS. 
Switzerland’s largest 
bank helped thousands 
of its American clients 
dodge taxes. Birkenfeld 
also received 31 months 
in prison for his role in 
the scheme. What 
motivates 
whistleblowers?  
whistleblowers
Insiders who report illegal or 
unethical behavior.

 • What are compliance-based and integrity-based ethics codes?  
 • What are the six steps to follow in establishing an effective ethics pro-
gram in a business?  
•
What are compliance-
 test prep  
based and inte
-ba
PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
102
reinstatement and back pay to people who were punished by their 
employers for passing information about fraud on to authorities. 
(We cover Sarbanes-Oxley in more detail in Chapter 17.) In 2010 the 
Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act was signed 
into law. The law includes a “bounty” provision that allows corporate 
whistleblowers who provide information that leads to a successful 
enforcement action to collect 10–30 percent of the total penalty for 
violations that exceed $1 million. A whistleblower in the Enron case 
received a $1 million reward from the IRS (and, yes, it is taxable).  
 
5. Outsiders such as suppliers, subcontractors, distributors, and customers 
must be told about the ethics program. Pressure to put aside ethical 
considerations often comes from the outside, and it helps employees 
resist such pressure when everyone knows what the ethical standards are.  
 
6. The ethics code must be enforced with timely action if any rules are 
broken. That is the most forceful way to communicate to all employees 
that the code is serious.  
 This last step is perhaps the most critical. No matter how well intended a 
company’s ethics code, it is worthless if not enforced. Enron had a written 
code of ethics. By ignoring it, Enron’s board and management sent employees 
the message that rules could be shelved when inconvenient. In contrast, John-
son & Johnson’s response to a cyanide poisoning crisis in the 1980s shows that 
enforcing ethics codes can enhance profit. Although not legally required to do 
so, the company recalled its Tylenol products and won great praise and a repu-
tation for corporate integrity. 
 An important factor in enforcing an ethics code is selecting an ethics officer. 
The most effective ethics officers set a positive tone, communicate effectively, 
and relate well to employees at every level. They are equally comfortable as 
counselors and investigators and can be trusted to maintain confidentiality, con-
duct objective investigations, and ensure fairness. They can demonstrate to 
stakeholders that ethics are important in everything the company does.  9  
Define corporate social responsibility and compare corporations’ 
responsibilities to various stakeholders.
 CORPORATE SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY  
 Just as you and I need to be good citizens, contributing what we can to society, 
corporations need to be good citizens as well.   Corporate social responsibility 
(CSR)   is the concern businesses have for the welfare of society, not just for 
their owners. CSR goes well beyond being ethical. It is based on a commit-
ment to integrity, fairness, and respect. 
 You may be surprised to know that not everyone thinks that CSR is a good 
thing. Some critics of CSR believe that a manager’s sole role is to compete and 
LO 4–5
 corporate social 
responsibility (CSR)  
 A business’s concern for the 
welfare of society.  
s
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

103
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior
CHAPTER 4
win in the marketplace. The late U.S. economist Milton Friedman made the 
famous statement that the only social responsibility of business is to make 
money for stockholders. He thought doing anything else was moving danger-
ously toward socialism. Other CSR critics believe that managers who pursue 
CSR are doing so with other people’s money—which they invested to make 
more money, not to improve society. In this view spending money on CSR 
activities is stealing from investors.  10 
 CSR defenders, in contrast, believe that businesses owe their existence to 
the societies they serve and cannot succeed in societies that fail.  11 Firms have 
access to society’s labor pool and its natural resources, in which every member 
of society has a stake. Even Adam Smith, the father of capitalism, believed 
that self-interested pursuit of profit was wrong and that benevolence was the 
highest virtue. CSR defenders acknowledge that businesses have deep obliga-
tions to investors and should not attempt government-type social responsibil-
ity projects. However, they also argue that CSR makes more money for 
investors in the long run. Studies show that companies with good ethical repu-
tations attract and retain better employees, draw more customers, and enjoy 
greater employee loyalty.  12 
 The social performance of a company has several dimensions:
 
• 
  Corporate philanthropy   includes charitable donations to nonprofit 
groups of all kinds. Eighty percent of the business leaders surveyed in 
a recent study said that their companies participate in philanthropic 
activities. Some make long-term commitments to one cause, such as 
McDonald’s Ronald McDonald Houses for families whose critically ill 
 corporate philanthropy  
 The dimension of social 
responsibility that includes 
charitable donations.  
More than 1,300 Florida 
Light & Power Company 
employees volunteer in 
their communities 
during the company’s 
Power to Care Week. 
Here FLP volunteers 
work to beautify a 
school in Rivera Beach 
through painting, clean- 
ups, landscaping, and 
rebuilding a volleyball 
court. Do companies 
have responsibilities to 
the communities in 
which they operate 
beyond obeying the 
laws?

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
104
children require treatment away from home. The Bill & Melinda Gates 
Foundation is by far the nation’s largest philanthropic foundation, 
with assets of approximately $40 billion.  13 
 
• 
  Corporate social initiatives   include enhanced forms of corporate 
philanthropy. Corporate social initiatives differ from traditional 
philanthropy in that they are more directly related to the company’s 
competencies.  14 For example, logistics giant TNT keeps a 50-person 
emergency response team on standby to go anywhere in the world at 48 
hours’ notice to provide support in aviation, warehousing, transportation, 
reporting, and communications. Over the years, 225 TNT employees 
have been involved in 30 emergency response activities.  15  
 
• 
  Corporate responsibility   includes everything from hiring minority 
workers to making safe products, minimizing pollution, using energy 
wisely, and providing a safe work environment—essentially everything 
that has to do with acting responsibly within society.  
 
• 
  Corporate policy   refers to the position a firm takes on social and 
political issues. For example, Patagonia’s corporate policy includes this 
statement: “A love of wild and beautiful places demands participation 
in the fight to save them, and to help reverse the steep decline in the 
overall environmental health of our planet. We donate our time, services 
and at least 1% of our sales to hundreds of grassroots environmental 
groups all over the world who work to help reverse the tide.”  16  
The problems corporations cause get so much news coverage that people 
tend to get a negative view of their impact on society. But businesses make 
positive contributions too. Few people know, for example, that a Xerox pro-
gram called Social Service Leave allows employees to take up to a year to work 
for a nonprofit organization while earning their full Xerox salary and benefits, 
including job security.  17 IBM and Wells Fargo Bank have similar programs. 
 In fact, many companies allow employees to give part-time help to social 
agencies of all kinds. The recent recession has changed the way that many 
corporations approach corporate philanthropy.  18 Now they are often likely to 
give time and goods rather than money. Many companies are now encourag-
ing employees to volunteer more—on company time.  19 For example, Mars 
Incorporated encourages community involvement by offering paid time off to 
clean parks, aid medical clinic, and plant gardens. Nearly 10,000 Mars employ-
ees volunteer 37,000 hours a year.  20  NetworkforGood.org , 1-800-Volunteer.org, 
and VolunteerMatch.org are web-based services that link volunteers with non-
profit and public sector organizations around the country. Volunteers enter a 
zip code or indicate the geographic area in which they’d like to work, and the 
programs list organizations that could use their help. 
 The majority of the MBA students surveyed by a group called Students for 
Responsible Business said they would take a reduced salary to work for a 
socially responsible company.  21 But when the same students were asked to 
define  socially responsible, things got complicated. Even those who support 
the idea of social responsibility can’t agree on what it is. Let’s look at the con-
cept through the eyes of the stakeholders to whom businesses are responsible: 
customers, investors, employees, and society in general.  
 Responsibility to Customers 
 President John F. Kennedy proposed four basic rights of consumers: (1) the 
right to safety, (2) the right to be informed, (3) the right to choose, and (4) the 
right to be heard. These rights will be achieved only if businesses and consum-
ers recognize them and take action in the marketplace. 
 corporate social initiatives  
 Enhanced forms of corporate 
philanthropy directly related to 
the company’s competencies.  
 corporate responsibility  
 The dimension of social 
responsibility that includes 
everything from hiring minority 
workers to making safe 
products.  
 corporate policy  
 The dimension of social 
responsibility that refers to the 
position a firm takes on social 
and political issues.  

105
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior
CHAPTER 4
 A recurring theme of this book is the importance of pleasing customers by 
offering them real value. Since three of five new businesses fail, we know this 
responsibility is not as easy to meet as it seems. One sure way of failing to 
please customers is to be less than honest with them. The payoff for socially 
conscious behavior, however, can be new customers who admire the compa-
ny’s social efforts—a powerful competitive edge. Consumer behavior studies 
show that, all else being equal, a socially conscious company is likely to be 
viewed more favorably than others. In fact, a recent Nielsen survey showed 
that 50 percent of the consumers surveyed were willing to pay more for goods 
from socially responsible companies.  22 
 Given the value customers place on social efforts, how do companies 
make customers aware of such efforts? One tool many companies use to raise 
awareness of their social responsibility efforts is social media. The primary 
value of using social media to communicate CSR efforts is that it allows com-
panies to reach broad and diverse groups, allows them to connect directly 
with customers in a low-cost, efficient way, and enables them to interact with 
specific groups more easily than through more traditional efforts. 
 It’s not enough for companies to brag about their social responsibility 
efforts; they must live up to the expectations they raise or face the conse-
quences. When herbal tea maker Celestial Seasonings ignored its advertised 
image of environmental stewardship by poisoning prairie dogs on its property, 
it incurred customers’ wrath. Customers prefer to do business with companies 
they trust and, even more important, don’t want to do business with those they 
don’t trust. Companies earn customers’ trust by demonstrating credibility over 
time; they can lose it at any point.  
 Responsibility to Investors 
 Ethical behavior doesn’t subtract from the bottom line; it adds to it. In con-
trast, unethical behavior, even if it seems to work in the short term, does finan-
cial damage. Those cheated are the shareholders themselves. For example, in 
just 11 business days in June 2002, 44 CEOs left U.S. corporations amid accu-
sations of wrongdoing, and the stock prices of their companies plummeted. 
 Many investors believe that it makes financial as well as moral sense to 
invest in companies that plan ahead to create a better environment. By choos-
ing to put their money into companies whose goods and services benefit the 
community and the environment, investors can improve their own financial 
health while improving society’s.  23 
 A few investors, however, have chosen unethical means to improve their 
financial health. For example,   insider trading   uses private company 
information to further insiders’ own fortunes or those of their family and 
friends. In 2011, one of the biggest insider trading cases in history went 
to trial in New York. Billionaire Raj Rajaratnam was convicted of mas-
terminding an insider trading ring that made his Galleon Group hedge 
fund $64 million richer. Of course, he didn’t do this all by himself. 
More than three dozen former traders, executives, and law-
yers have pled guilty or faced charges that they helped 
Rajaratnam trade illegally on more than 35 stocks, 
including Intel, Hilton, IBM, and eBay. Rajaratnam 
was sentenced to 11 years in prison and lost an appeal 
in 2013.  24  
 Insider trading isn’t limited to company execu-
tives and their friends. Before it was publicly known 
that IBM was going to take over Lotus Develop-
ment, an IBM secretary told her husband, who told 
 insider trading  
 An unethical activity in which 
insiders use private company 
information to further their own 
fortunes or those of their family 
and friends.  
ses private company
se of their family and
ases in history went
s convicted of mas-
lleon Group hedge
his all by himself.
and law-
elped
cks,
am
al
 Billionaire hedge-fund 
manager Steven Cohen, 
head of SAC Capital 
Advisors, agreed to 
settle an insider-trading 
investigation against 
the firm by paying a 
record $1.8 billion fine. 
Six former SAC 
employees pled guilty to 
securities fraud. A 
seventh was found 
guilty in December 2013 
of five counts of 
securities fraud and 
conspiracy. The trial of 
an eighth is ongoing. So 
far Cohen has somehow 
managed to avoid jail 
himself.  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
106
two co-workers, who told friends, relatives, business associates, and even a 
pizza delivery man. A total of 25 people traded illegally on the insider tip within 
a six-hour period. When the deal was announced publicly, Lotus stock soared 
89 percent. One of the inside traders, a stockbroker who passed the informa-
tion to a few customers, made $468,000 in profits. The U.S. Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) filed charges against the secretary, her husband, 
and 23 others. Four defendants settled out of court by paying penalties of twice 
their profits. Prosecutors are increasingly pursuing insider trading cases to 
ensure that the securities market remains fair and equally accessible to all.  25  
 After the deluge of insider trader cases was made public in the early 2000s, 
the SEC adopted a new rule called Regulation FD (for “fair disclosure”). The rule 
doesn’t specify what information can and cannot be disclosed. It simply requires 
companies that release any information to share it with everybody, not just a few 
select people. In other words, if companies tell anyone, they must tell everyone—
at the same time. 
 Some companies have misused information for their own benefit at inves-
tors’ expense. When WorldCom admitted to accounting irregularities misrep-
resenting its profitability, investors who had purchased its stock on the basis 
of the false financial reports saw share prices free-fall from the mid-teens in 
January 2002 to less than a dime the following July. The pain was even greater 
for long-term investors, who had bought the stock at around $60 in 1999.  
 Responsibility to Employees 
 It’s been said that the best social program in the world is a job. Businesses 
have a responsibility to create jobs if they want to grow. Once they’ve done so, 
they must see to it that hard work and talent are fairly rewarded. Employees 
need realistic hope of a better future, which comes only through a chance for 
upward mobility. One of the most powerful influences on a company’s effec-
tiveness and financial performance is responsible human resource manage-
ment. We’ll discuss this in Chapter 11. 
 If a company treats employees with respect, those employees usually 
will respect the company as well. Mutual respect can make a huge difference 
to a company’s profit. In their book  Contented Cows Still Give Better Milk, Bill 
Catlette and Richard Hadden compared “contented cow” companies with 
“common cow” companies. The companies with contented employees out-
grew their counterparts by four to one for more than 10 years. They also out-
earned the “common cow” companies by nearly $40 billion and generated 
800,000 more jobs. Catlette and Hadden attribute this difference in perfor-
mance to the commitment and caring the outstanding companies demon-
strated for their employees.  26  
 One way a company can demonstrate commit-
ment and caring is to give employees salaries and 
benefits that help them reach their personal goals. 
The wage and benefit packages offered by ware-
house retailer Costco are among the best in hourly 
retail. Even part-time workers are covered by Cost-
co’s health plan, and the workers pay less for their 
coverage than at other retailers such as Walmart. 
Increased benefits reduce employee turnover, 
which at Costco is less than a third of the industry 
average.  27 The U.S. Department of Labor estimates 
that replacing employees costs between 150 and 
250 percent of their annual salaries, so retaining 
workers is good for business as well as morale.  28  
 The wage and benefit 
packages offered by 
warehouse retailer 
Costco are among the 
best in hourly retail. 
Even part-time workers 
are covered by Costco’s 
health plan. Increased 
benefits reduce Costco 
employee turnover to 
less than a third of the 
industry average. Why 
do you think Costco is 
so successful at keeping 
its employees?  

107
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior
CHAPTER 4
 Getting even is one of the most powerful incentives for good people to do 
bad things. Few disgruntled workers are desperate enough to commit violence 
in the workplace, but a great number relieve their frustrations in subtle ways: 
blaming mistakes on others, not accepting responsibility, manipulating bud-
gets and expenses, making commitments they intend to ignore, hoarding 
resources, doing the minimum needed to get by, and making results look bet-
ter than they are. 
 The loss of employee commitment, confidence, and trust in the company 
and its management can be costly indeed. Employee fraud costs U.S. busi-
nesses approximately 5 percent of annual revenue and causes 30 percent of all 
business failures, according to the Association of Certified Fraud Examiners.  29
You’ll read more about employee–management issues like pay equity, sexual 
harassment, child and elder care, drug testing, and violence in the workplace 
in Chapter 12.  
 Responsibility to Society and the Environment 
 More than a third of U.S. workers receive salaries from nonprofit organiza-
tions that receive funding from others, that in turn receive their money from 
businesses. Foundations, universities, and other nonprofit organizations own 
billions of shares in publicly held companies. As stock prices of those firms 
increase, businesses create more wealth to benefit society. 
 Businesses are also partly responsible for promoting social justice. Many 
companies believe they have a role in building communities that goes well 
beyond simply “giving back.” To them, charity is not enough. Their social con-
tributions include cleaning up the environment, building community toilets, 
providing computer lessons, caring for elderly people, and supporting chil-
dren from low-income families. 
 As concern about climate change increased, the green movement emerged 
in nearly every aspect of daily life. What makes a product green? Some believe 
that a product’s carbon footprint (the amount of carbon released during produc-
tion, distribution, consumption, and disposal) defines how green it is. Many 
variables contribute to a product’s carbon footprint. The carbon footprint of a 
package of, say, frozen corn includes not only the carbon released by the fertil-
izer to grow the corn but also the carbon in the fertilizer itself, the gas used to 
run the farm equipment and transport the corn to market, the electricity to make 
 Driving a Prius with a 
big banana on the roof 
is an eye-catching way 
for Mason Arnold of 
Greenling to attract the 
attention of potential 
customers while 
delivering fresh, 
nutritious food to local 
customers. Greenling 
believes that supporting 
local organic growers is 
a good way of 
supporting sustainable, 
healthy environments. 
What do you think?  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
108
the plastic packages and power the freezers, and so on. (See the Seeking Sustain-
ability box for a story of how one company strives to reduce its carbon footprint 
by using recycled plastic bottles to make the fabric for its messenger bags.)  
 No specific guidelines define the carbon footprints of products, busi-
nesses, or individuals or outline how to communicate them to consumers. 
PepsiCo presents carbon information with a label on bags of cheese-and-onion 
potato chips, for example, that says “75 grams of CO 2 .” Simple enough, but 
what does it mean? (We don’t know either.) 
 The green movement has provided consumers with lots of product choices. 
However, making those choices means sorting through the many and confus-
ing claims made by manufacturers. The noise in the marketplace challenges 
even the most dedicated green activists, but taking the easy route of buying 
what’s most readily available violates the principles of the green movement.  
Environmental efforts may increase a company’s costs, but they also allow 
the company to charge higher prices, increase market share, or both. Ciba Spe-
cialty Chemicals, a Swiss textile-dye manufacturer, developed dyes that require 
less salt than traditional dyes. Since used dye solutions must be treated before 
being released into rivers or streams, less salt means lower water treatment 
costs. Patents protect Ciba’s low-salt dyes, so the company can charge more for 
its dyes than other companies can charge for theirs. Ciba’s experience illustrates 
that, just as a new machine enhances labor productivity, lowering environmen-
tal costs can add value to a business. 
 Not all environmental strategies are as financially beneficial as Ciba’s, how-
ever. In the early 1990s, tuna producer StarKist responded to consumer con-
cerns about dolphins in the eastern Pacific dying in nets set out for yellow fin 
tuna. The company announced it would sell only skipjack tuna from the west-
ern Pacific, which do not swim near dolphins. Unfortunately, customers were 
unwilling to pay a premium for dolphin-safe tuna and considered the taste of 
skipjack inferior. Nor was there a clear environmental gain: for every dolphin 
saved in the eastern Pacific, thousands of immature tuna and dozens of sharks, 
turtles, and other marine animals died in the western Pacific fishing process. 
 The green movement can have a positive impact on the U.S. labor force. 
Emerging renewable-energy and energy-efficiency industries currently account 
for 9 million jobs and by 2030 may create as many as 40 million more in engi-
neering, manufacturing, construction, accounting, and management, accord-
ing to a green-collar job report by the American Solar Energy Society.  30  
 Environmental quality is a public good; that is, everyone gets to enjoy it 
regardless of who pays for it. The challenge for companies is to find the public 
goods that will appeal to their customers. Many corporations are publishing 
reports that document their net social contribution. To do that, a company 
must measure its positive social contributions and subtract its negative social 
impacts. We discuss that process next. 
 Social Auditing 
 Can we measure whether organizations are making social responsibility an 
integral part of top management’s decision making? The answer is yes, and the 
term that represents that measurement is  social auditing. 
 A   social audit   is a systematic evaluation of an organization’s progress 
toward implementing socially responsible and responsive programs. One of 
the major problems of conducting a social audit is establishing procedures for 
measuring a firm’s activities and their effects on society. What should a social 
audit measure? Many consider workplace issues, the environment, product 
safety, community relations, military weapons contracting, international oper-
ations and human rights, and respect for the rights of local people. 
social audit
A systematic evaluation of an 
organization’s progress toward 
implementing socially 
responsible and responsive 
programs.

109
 It remains a question whether organizations should add up positive 
actions like charitable donations and pollution control efforts, and then sub-
tract negative effects like layoffs and overall pollution created, to get a net 
social contribution. Or should they just record positive actions? What do you 
think? However they are conducted, social audits force organizations to con-
sider their social responsibility beyond the level of just feeling good or manag-
ing public relations. 
 In addition to social audits conducted by companies themselves, five 
types of groups serve as watchdogs to monitor how well companies enforce 
their ethical and social responsibility policies:
 
1.  Socially conscious investors insist that a company extend its own high 
standards to its suppliers. Social responsibility investing (SRI) is on 
the rise, with nearly $3.7 trillion invested in SRI funds in the United 
States already.  31 
 
2.  Socially conscious research organizations, such as Ethisphere, analyze 
and report on corporate social responsibility efforts.  32 
 
3.  Environmentalists apply pressure by naming companies that don’t 
abide by environmentalists’ standards. After months of protests 
coordinated by the San Francisco–based Rainforest Action Network 
(RAN), JPMorgan Chase & Co. adopted guidelines that restrict its 
lending and underwriting practices for industrial projects likely to 
have a negative impact on the environment. RAN activists first go after 
an industry leader, like JPMorgan, then tackle smaller companies. “We 
call it, ‘Rank’em and spank’em,’” says RAN's executive director.  33 
 seeking sustainability 
 When it comes to sustainable 
products, making sure an item is 
environmentally sound is just 
the first step. After all, the word 
“sustainability” implies that 
something will last for a long 
time. A shoddy product that 
needs to be replaced often 
takes a hefty toll on resources, 
which can cancel out the envi-
ronmental benefits of even the 
greenest production methods. 
 That’s why Rickshaw 
Bagworks in San Francisco 
makes sustainable accessories 
designed to last for the long 
term. For instance, at first the com-
pany began producing bags using 
expensive Italian wool herring-
bone tweed. Although the fabric 
was beautiful and environmentally 
friendly, the prototypes wore out 
in a manner of weeks. So 
Rickshaw teamed up with an 
upholstery mill to create its own 
fabric, Rickshaw Performance 
Tweed. Made from recycled plas-
tic bottles, this synthetic fabric 
ended up being stronger and 
more eco-friendly while still look-
ing gorgeous as a handbag. 
 Rickshaw employees and 
executives abide by the compa-
ny’s “three Fs” of sustainable 
design: form, function and foot-
print. Not only must a product 
make as small a carbon footprint 
as possible, it must also serve a 
long-term practical function and 
look great doing it. That’s why 
Rickshaw’s messenger bags are 
designed in a way that ensures 
every piece of fabric cut by the 
company makes it into the bag. 
The company’s dedication to 
sustainability is even incorpo-
rated in its name, which means 
“human powered vehicle” in 
Japanese. Do you think more com-
panies should be as dedicated to 
sustainability as Rickshaw? 
 Sources: Mark Dwight, “How to Build a 
Sustainable Business,”  Inc., November 2013; and 
 http://blog.rickshawbags.com/the-rickshaw-story/ , 
accessed February 2014.    
www.rickshawbags.com
 Sustainability’s in the Bag 
y
ex
ny
de
pr
m
as
lo
lo
Ri
de
ev

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
110
  4.  Union officials hunt down violations and force companies to 
comply to avoid negative publicity.  
 5.  Customers make buying decisions based on their social 
conscience. Many companies surveyed are adjusting their 
environmental and social responsibility strategies because of the 
number of customers that factor these into their buying 
decisions.  
 As you can see, it isn’t enough for a company to 
be right when it comes to ethics and social 
responsibility—it also has to convince its cus-
tomers and society that it’s right.  
 The goal of the 
Rainforest Action 
Network, an 
environmental activist 
group, is to show 
companies that it is 
possible to do well by 
doing good. It conducts 
public campaigns 
designed to put 
consumer pressure on 
companies that refuse 
to adopt responsible 
environmental policies. 
RAN has helped 
convince dozens of 
corporations including 
Home Depot, Citigroup, 
Boise Cascade, and 
Goldman Sachs to 
change their practices. 
Analyze the role of U.S. businesses in influencing ethical behavior and social 
responsibility in global markets.
 INTERNATIONAL ETHICS 
AND SOCIAL RESPONSIBILITY  
 Ethical problems and issues of social responsibility are not unique to the 
United States. Influence-peddling or bribery charges have been brought 
against top officials in Japan, South Korea, China, Italy, Brazil, Pakistan, and 
Zaire. What is new about the moral and ethical standards by which govern-
ment leaders are being judged? They are much stricter than in the past. Top 
leaders are now being held to higher standards. 
 Many U.S. businesses also demand socially responsible behavior from their 
international suppliers, making sure they don’t violate U.S. human rights and 
environmental standards. Sears will not import products made by Chinese prison 
labor. Clothing manufacturer PVH (makers of such brands as Calvin Klein and 
Tommy Hilfiger) will cancel orders from suppliers that violate its ethical, envi-
ronmental, and human rights code. Dow Chemical expects suppliers to conform 
to tough U.S. pollution and safety laws rather than just to local laws of their 
respective countries. McDonald’s denied rumors that one of its suppliers grazes 
cattle on cleared rain-forest land but wrote a ban on the practice anyway. 
 In contrast are companies criticized for exploiting workers in less devel-
oped countries. Nike, the world’s largest athletic shoe company, has been 
accused by human rights and labor groups of treating its workers poorly while 
lavishing millions of dollars on star athletes to endorse its products. Cartoon-
ist Garry Trudeau featured an anti-Nike campaign in his popular syndicated 
series  Doonesbury. 
LO 4–6
 • What is corporate social responsibility, and how does it relate to each of 
a business’s major stakeholders?  
 • What is a social audit, and what kinds of activities does it monitor?  
•
What is corporate soc
test prep
cial respoonsibili
cial
Z
m
l
i
e
l
T
r
t
r
c
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

111
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior
CHAPTER 4
 Nike worked hard to improve its reputation. Nike monitors efforts to 
improve labor conditions in its 700 contract factories that are subject to local 
culture and economic conditions. The company released the names and loca-
tions of its factories, both as a show of transparency and to encourage its 
competitors to work on improving conditions as well. The company shared 
its audit data with a professor at MIT’s Sloan School of Management. He con-
cluded that despite “significant efforts and investments by Nike . . . work-
place conditions in almost 80% of its suppliers have either remained the same 
or worsened over time.” In 2014, a Nike supplier shut down a factory after 
four people were shot during a strike over higher wages.  34 This followed the 
2013 collapse of a factory in Bangladesh that killed more than 1,000 
workers.  35  
 Why has Nike’s monitoring program not been as successful as the com-
pany hoped? One reason is that in emerging economies, government regula-
tions tend to be weak, which leaves companies to police their suppliers. That’s 
a major task for a company like Nike, which produces 98 percent of its shoes 
in hundreds of factories in many different countries. Another reason is that as 
a buyer, Nike has different degrees of leverage. This leverage is based on how 
long Nike has worked with a supplier or how much of the factory’s revenue 
depends on Nike alone.  
 The fairness of requiring international suppliers to adhere to U.S. ethical 
standards is not as clear-cut as you might think. For example, a gift in one 
culture can be a bribe in another. Is it always ethical for companies to demand 
compliance with the standards of their own countries? What about countries 
where child labor is accepted and families depend on children’s salaries for 
survival? Should foreign companies doing business in the United States expect 
U.S. companies to comply with their ethical standards? Since multinational 
corporations span different societies, should they conform to any society’s 
standards? Why is Sears applauded for not importing goods made in Chinese 
 Nike has outsourced the 
manufacture of its 
products to plants in 
other countries and has 
weathered much 
criticism for operating in 
low-wage countries 
where child labor is 
common. The company 
has taken many 
corrective measures, 
including working with 
other companies and 
advocacy groups on a 
set of common labor 
standards and factory 
guidelines. Can a 
successful firm 
overcome past ethical 
errors? 

112
prisons when there are many prison-based enterprises in the United States? 
None of these questions are easy to answer, but they suggest the complexity of 
social responsibility in international markets. (See the nearby Reaching 
Beyond Our Borders box for an example of an ethical culture clash.)  
In the 1970s, the Foreign Corrupt Practices Act (discussed in Chapter 3) 
sent a chill throughout the U.S. business community by criminalizing the act 
of paying foreign business or government leaders to get business. Many U.S. 
executives complained that this law put their businesses at a competitive 
 reaching beyond our borders 
 The extension of corporations’ 
reach into communities across 
the globe has led to many ques-
tions: For which communities 
are the companies responsible? 
Are domestic operations more 
important than foreign ones? 
Should the interests of employ-
ees be put first, or is the compa-
ny’s image the main priority? 
 Here’s an example of how 
corporate ethics can clash with 
cultural ethics. Joe, the oldest 
son of a poor South American 
cloth peddler, managed to 
move to the United States, 
earn an engineering degree, 
and get a job with a large tele-
communications company. 
After five years, Joe seemed to 
have bought into the company 
culture and was happy to be 
granted a transfer back to his 
home country. He was told that 
the company expected him to 
live there in a safe and present-
able home of his choice. To help 
him afford such a residence, his 
employer agreed to reimburse 
him a maximum of $2,000 a 
month for the cost of his rent and 
servants. Each month Joe submit-
ted rental receipts for exactly 
$2,000. The company later found 
out that Joe was living in what 
was, by Western standards, a 
shack in a dangerous area of 
town. Such a humble home could 
not have cost more than $200 a 
month. The company was con-
cerned for Joe’s safety as well as 
for the effect his residence would 
have on its image. The human 
resource manager was also wor-
ried about Joe’s lack of integrity, 
given he had submitted false 
receipts for reimbursement. 
 Joe was upset with what he 
considered the company’s inva-
sion of his privacy. He argued he 
should receive the full $2,000 
monthly reimbursement all 
employees received. He explained 
his choice of housing by saying he 
was making sacrifices so he could 
send the extra money to his family 
and put his younger siblings 
through school. This was espe-
cially important since his father 
had died and his family had no 
one else to depend on. “Look, 
my family is poor,” Joe said. “So 
poor that most Westerners 
wouldn’t believe our poverty 
even if they saw it. This money 
means the difference between 
hope and despair for all of us. 
For me to do anything less for 
my family would be to defile the 
honor of my late father. Can’t 
you understand?” 
 Often it is difficult to under-
stand what others perceive as 
ethical. Different situations often 
turn the clear waters of “right-
ness” downright muddy. Joe 
was trying to do the honorable 
thing for his family. Yet the com-
pany’s wish to have its higher-
level people live in safe housing 
is not unreasonable, given the 
dangerous conditions of the city 
in which Joe lived. The policy of 
housing reimbursement supports 
the company’s intent to make its 
employees’ stay in the country 
reasonably comfortable and safe, 
not to increase their salaries. If 
Joe worked in the United States, 
where he would not receive a 
housing supplement, it would be 
unethical for him to falsify 
expense reports in order to 
receive more money to send to 
his family. In South America, 
though, the issue is not so clear. 
 Sources: Shirley Engelmeir, “Engage a Diverse 
Work Force to Capture Foreign Markets,” 
American Banker, November 13, 2012; and 
Meghan M. Biro, “Happy Employees  5 Hefty 
Profits,”  Forbes, January 19, 2014. 
 Going by a Different Standard 

113
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior
CHAPTER 4
disadvantage when bidding against non-U.S. companies, since foreign compa-
nies don’t have to abide by it.  
To identify some form of common global ethics and fight corruption in 
global markets, partners in the Organization of American States signed the 
Inter-American Convention Against Corruption.  36 The United Nations adopted 
a formal condemnation of corporate bribery, as did the European Union and 
the Organization for Economic Cooperation and Development. The Interna-
tional Organization for Standardization (ISO) published a standard on social 
responsibility called ISO 26000, with guidelines on product manufacturing, 
fair pay rates, appropriate employee treatment, and hiring practices. These 
standards are advisory only and will not be used for certification purposes. The 
formation of a single set of international rules governing multinational corpo-
rations is unlikely in the near future. In many places “Fight corruption” 
remains just a slogan, but even a slogan is a start.  
 Explain why obeying the law is only the first step in behaving ethically.
 • 
 How is legality different from ethics?  
 Ethics goes beyond obeying laws to include abiding by the moral stan-
dards accepted by society. Ethics reflects people’s proper relationships 
with one another. Legality is more limiting; it refers only to laws written to 
protect people from fraud, theft, and violence.  
 Ask the three questions you need to answer when faced with a potentially 
unethical action.
 • 
 How can we tell if our business decisions are ethical?  
 We can put our business decisions through an ethics check by asking 
three questions: (1) Is it legal? (2) Is it balanced? and (3) How will it make 
me feel?  
 Describe management’s role in setting ethical standards.
 • 
 What is management’s role in setting ethical standards?  
 Managers often set formal ethical standards, but more important are the 
messages they send through their actions. Management’s tolerance or 
intolerance of ethical misconduct influences employees more than any 
written ethics codes.  
H
i l
LO 4–1
LO 4–2
Wh t i
LO 4–3
summary 
 • How are U.S. businesses demanding socially responsible behavior from 
their international suppliers?  
 • Why is it unlikely that there will be a single set of international rules 
governing multinational companies soon?  
•
How are U.S. business
test prep
ses demanding
ses
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
114
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  
key terms 
compliance-based ethics 
codes 100
corporate philanthropy 103  
 corporate policy 104
 corporate responsibility 104  
corporate social 
initiatives 104
corporate social 
responsibility (CSR) 102
ethics 96
insider trading 105
integrity-based ethics 
codes 100
social audit 108
 whistleblowers  101
 Distinguish between compliance-based and integrity-based ethics codes, and 
list the six steps in setting up a corporate ethics code.
 • 
 What’s the difference between compliance-based and integrity-based ethics 
codes? 
 Whereas compliance-based ethics codes are concerned with avoiding legal 
punishment, integrity-based ethics codes define the organization’s guiding 
values, create an environment that supports ethically sound behavior, and 
stress a shared accountability among employees.  
 Define  corporate social responsibility and compare corporations’ 
responsibilities to various stakeholders
 • 
 What is corporate social responsibility?  
 Corporate social responsibility is the concern businesses have for society.  
 • 
 How do businesses demonstrate corporate responsibility toward 
stakeholders?  
 Businesses demonstrate responsibility to stakeholders by (1) satisfying 
 customers with goods and services of real value; (2) making money for 
 investors; (3) creating jobs for  employees, maintaining job security, and 
seeing that hard work and talent are fairly rewarded; and (4) creating new 
wealth for  society, promoting social justice, and contributing to making 
the businesses’ own environment a better place.  
 • 
 How are a company’s social responsibility efforts measured?  
 A corporate social audit measures an organization’s progress toward social 
responsibility. Some people believe the audit should add together the orga-
nization’s positive actions and then subtract the negative effects to get a 
net social benefit.  
 Analyze the role of U.S. businesses in influencing ethical behavior and social 
responsibility in global markets.
 • 
 How can U.S. companies influence ethical behavior and social responsibility 
in global markets?  
 Many U.S. businesses are demanding socially responsible behavior from 
their international suppliers by making sure their suppliers do not violate 
U.S. human rights and environmental standards. Companies such as 
Sears, PVH, and Dow Chemical will not import products from companies 
that do not meet their ethical and social responsibility standards.  
LO 4–4
LO 4–5
LO 4–6

115
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior
CHAPTER 4
 Think of a situation that tested your ethical behavior. For example, maybe 
your best friend forgot about a term paper due the next day and asked if he 
could copy a paper you wrote for another instructor last semester. 
 1. What are your alternatives, and what are the consequences of each?  
 2. Would it have been easier to resolve the dilemma if you had asked yourself 
the three questions listed in the chapter? Try answering them now and see 
whether you would have made a different choice.  
be
critical thinking 
developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology 
 1.  What sources have helped shape your personal code of ethics and moral-
ity? What influences, if any, have ever pressured you to compromise those 
standards? Think of an experience you had at work or school that tested 
your ethical standards. How did you resolve your dilemma? Now that time 
has passed, are you comfortable with the decision you made? If not, 
explain what you would do differently.  
 2.  Do a little investigative reporting of your own. Go online and search for a 
public interest group in your community. Identify its officers, objectives, 
sources and amount of financial support, and size and characteristics of 
membership. List some examples of its recent actions and/or accomplish-
ments. You should be able to choose from environmental groups, animal 
protection groups, political action committees, and so on. Visit the web-
site of the local chamber of commerce, the Better Business Bureau, or 
local government agencies for help.  
 3.  You’re the manager of a coffeehouse called the Morning Cup. One of your 
best employees desires to be promoted to a managerial position; however, 
the owner is grooming his slow-thinking son for the job. The owner’s nep-
otism may hurt a valuable employee’s chances for advancement, but com-
plaining may hurt your own chances for promotion. What do you do?  
 4.  Go to the website of a local corporation and search for its written ethics 
code. Would you classify its code as compliance-based or integrity-based? 
Explain.  
 5.  What effects have the new laws protecting whistleblowers had on the busi-
ness environment? Go online or to the library to research individuals who 
reported their employers’ illegal and/or unethical behavior. Did the com-
panies change their policies? If so, what effect have these policies had on 
the companies’ stakeholders? What effect did reporting the problems have 
on the whistleblowers themselves?  
 
 
 
 
taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To demonstrate the level of commitment one business has to social 
responsibility.  

PART 1
Business Trends: Cultivating a Business in Diverse, Global Environments
116
 EXERCISE 
 According to household products and personal-care company Seventh Genera-
tion, corporate responsibility is in its DNA as it considers the effects of its actions 
on the next seven generations. It strives to limit the effect of all aspects of its 
products on the environment from development to their production, purchase, 
use, and disposal. Visit the company’s website at www.seventhgeneration.com. 
Then answer the following questions:
 1. What is the social mission of Seventh Generation? 
 2. What are Seventh Generation’s four sustainability goals? 
 3. How is Seventh Generation involved in improving the Vermont community?  
 4. How does Seventh Generation communicate the company’s social mission 
to its customers? 
video case  
 Warby Parker is a relatively new player in the eye-
wear industry, but it’s managed to make a big 
impact in a short amount of time. Neil Blumen-
thal and his three partners founded the company 
in 2010 in order to sell sophisticated and afford-
able glasses frames. But the team also wants the 
brand to stand for more than just profits, as evi-
denced by its commitment to keeping prices low 
and its relationship with its charitable partner, 
VisionSpring. 
 Unlike other start-ups that face competition 
from many established companies, Warby Parker 
only has one major competitor. However, it just so 
happens that this rival owns almost all of the best-
selling eyewear and eyecare brands in the world. 
Since this large conglomerate doesn’t create any 
barriers to upstarts like Warby Parker from enter-
ing the market, it is technically not a monopoly 
and can operate legally. Still, Warby’s founders see 
this business model as unethical since it allows 
one huge company to set prices over an entire 
industry for maximum profit. 
 Blumenthal and his partners didn’t want to 
contribute to the imbalance of power between 
consumers and manufacturers, so they set out to 
form a different kind of company. From the out-
set, Warby Parker developed an ethical standard 
that focused on its most important stakeholder—
its customers. Since the company saves money 
by selling exclusively online and designing and 
manufacturing its own frames, it is able to fix the 
price of every pair at a modest $95. Considering 
that its competitor’s frames can be as costly as a 
new iPhone, Warby immediately caught the 
interest of many stylish but budget-minded 
consumers. 
 An organization operates in a larger world, 
and there are more stakeholders than just custom-
ers. Warby Parker felt it had a mission to bring 
affordable eyewear to the masses, and nobody 
needed that tool more than impoverished people 
in developing nations. It was a natural thing, then, 
for the company to join forces with VisionSpring, 
a charity that gives quality eyeglasses to people 
struggling with vision problems in some of the 
poorest countries in the world. Warby donates a 
pair of glasses to the nonprofit for every pair that 
its customers buy. Together, they have put over a 
half-million pairs of glasses into the hands of peo-
ple whose livelihoods depend on them. 
 VisionSpring hopes this model will inspire 
other American companies to get more involved 
in impacting global markets at the local level. For 
all its efforts, VisionSpring estimates that there 
are still over 700 million people worldwide who 
struggle to earn a living on account of lacking 
quality glasses. The folks at Warby Parker and 
VisionSpring believe that once you see that figure 
clearly, it’s hard to look the other way. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. Is Warby Parker is a good example of corpo-
rate social responsibility. What dimensions 
stand out in measuring the company’s social 
performance?
 2. What is a social audit and why do companies 
perform them? What factors would you con-
sider in your social audit of Warby Parker? 
 3. Do you believe most businesses in the United 
States follow strict ethical standards? Make sure 
to offer some defense in support of your answer.
 WARBY PARKER/VISIONSPRING 

117
Demanding Ethical and Socially Responsible Behavior
CHAPTER 4
 1. 
Justin Baer and Julie Steinberg, “Volcker Rule Challenges 
Wall Street,”  The Wall Street Journal, December 10, 2013. 
 2. 
Christopher M. Matthews, “Law 2014: In White Collar Crime, 
It’s Deja Vu All Over Again,”  The Wall Street Journal,” 
December 31, 2013. 
 3. 
Jahnabi Barooah, “The Golden Rule in World Religions 
(Quotes),”  Huffington Post,  www.huffingtonpost.com , 
accessed April 2014. 
 4. 
Kari Henley, “Why Don’t We Volunteer,”  Huffington Post, 
  www.huffingtonpost.com , accessed April 2014. 
 5. 
 Turnitin,  www.turnitin.com , accessed April 2014; and “Turnitin 
for iPad Surpasses 100,000 Downloads,”  The Sacramento 
Bee, January 14, 2014. 
 6. 
Thomas Ehrlich and Ernestine Fu, “Cheating in Schools and 
Colleges,”  Forbes, August 22, 2013. 
 7. 
Kenneth Blanchard and Norman Vincent Peale,  The Power of 
Ethical Management (New York: William Morrow, 1996). 
 8. 
Will Yakowicz, “A New Website That Helps CEOs Lead More 
Ethically,”  Inc., January 22, 2014; “Integrity in the 
Boardroom,”  www.wsj.com , accessed April 2014; Donna 
Boehme, “5 New Year’s Compliance Resolutions for Boards 
in 2014,”  Connecticut Law Tribune, January 2, 2014; Victor 
Lipman, “New Study Shows Transparency Isn’t Just Good 
Ethics—It’s Good Business,”  Forbes, December 11, 2013; 
Rachel Louis Ensign, “Whistleblowers Coming from 
Compliance Departments,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
November 6, 2013; Venessa Wong, “So You Want to Be a 
Whistle-Blower . . . ,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, June 11, 
2013; and Paul J. H. Schoemaker, “How to Defuse an Ethical 
Time-Bomb in Your Company,”  Inc., June 10, 2014. 
 9. 
Gregory J. Millman and Ben Dipietro, “More Compliance 
Chiefs Get a Direct Line to the Boss,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, January 15, 2014; and Gregory J. Millman and 
Samuel Rubenfeld, “Compliance Officer: Dream Career?” 
The Wall Street Journal, January 15, 2014. 
 10. 
Doug Guthrie, “A Conversation on Corporate Social 
Responsibility,”  Forbes, January 9, 2014. 
 11. 
Aoltan J. Acs, “A Buffett Rule Worth Following,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, March 28, 2013. 
 12. 
Michael Cohn, “Investors Swayed by Corporate Social 
Responsibility Reputation,”  Accounting Today, January 10, 2014. 
 13. 
Gates Foundation,  www.gatesfoundation.org , accessed April 
2014; and Howard Husock, “Lessons from Zuckerberg and 
Bloomberg: As Giving Goes Up, Philanthropy under Fire,” 
Forbes, January 11, 2014. 
 14. 
Annie Gasparro, “A New Test for Panera’s Pay-What-You-
Can,”  The Wall Street Journal, June 5, 2013. 
 15. 
TNT,  www.tnt.com , accessed April 2014. 
 16. 
Patagonia,   www.patagonia.com , accessed April 2014. 
 17. 
Xerox,  www.xerox.com , accessed April 2014. 
 18. 
Ann Eigeman, “Giving in the Midst of a Polarized Economy,” 
  www.nonprofitquarterly.org , accessed April 2014; “The 
Philanthropic,”  Forbes, December 2, 2013; “Giving USA 2013: 
Giving Coming Back Slowly and Different After Recession,” 
Nonprofit Quarterly,  www.nonprofitquarterly.org , accessed 
April 2014. 
 19. Sarah Halzack, “Paid Time Off for Volunteering Gains 
Traction as Way to Retain Employees,”  The Washington Post, 
August 11, 2013. 
 20. David A. Kaplan, “Inside Mars,”  Fortune, February 4, 2013. 
 21. Debbie Haski-Leventhal,  MBA Students Around the World 
and Their Attitudes Towards Responsible Management, 
Second Annual Study (Macquarie Graduate School of 
Management, 2013). 
 22. “50 Percent of Global Consumers Surveyed Willing to Pay 
More for Goods, Services from Socially Responsible 
Companies, Up From 2011,” Nielsen,  www.nielsen.com , 
accessed March 2014. 
 23. Eric Gneckow, “’Socially Responsible Investing Steps Toward 
Mainstream,”  North Bay Business Journal, January 6, 2014. 
 24. Chad Bray, “Court Upholds Conviction of Ex-Fund Manager 
Raj Rajaratnam,”  The Wall Street Journal, June 24, 2013. 
 25. Seth Stern, “FBI Fraud Probes Increase as ‘Insider Trading’ 
Widespread,”  Bloomberg,  www.bloomberg.com , accessed 
March 2014. 
 26. Bill Catlette and Richard Hadden,  Contented Cows Still Give 
Better Milk (Contented Cow Partners, 2012); and Contented 
Cow Partners,  www.contentedcows.com , accessed 
March 2014. 
 27. Costco,   www.costco .com, accessed March 2014. 
 28. Heather Boushey and Sarah Jane Glenn, “There Are 
Significant Business Costs to Replacing Employees,” Center 
for American Progress,  www.centerforamericanprogress.org , 
accessed March 2014; and Suzanne Lucas, “How Much 
Employee Turnover Really Costs You,”  Inc., August 13, 2013. 
 29. Douglas M. Boyle, Brian W. Carpenter, and Dana R. 
Hermanson, “CEOs, CFOs, and Accounting Fraud,”  The CPA 
Journal, January 1, 2012; and Association of Certified Fraud 
Examiners,  www.acfe.com , accessed March 2014. 
 30. American Solar Energy Society,  www.ases.org , accessed 
March 2014. 
 31. USSIF, The Forum for Sustainable and Responsible 
Investment,  www.ussif.org , accessed April 2014. 
 32. Ethisphere,   www.ethisphere.com , accessed March 2014. 
 33. Rainforest Action Network,  www.ran.org , accessed 
March 2014. 
 34. Russell Flannery, “Cambodia Factory Shootings Underscore 
Shifts, Openings in the Global Apparel Business,”  Forbes, 
January 16, 2014. 
 35. Jim Yardley, “Report on Deadly Factory Collapse in 
Bangladesh Finds Widespread Blame,”  The New York Times, 
May 22, 2013. 
 36. Organization of American States,  www.oas.org , accessed 
March 2014. 
ecember 2, 2013; “Giving USA 2013:
  notes 
Page 93: Courtesy of Bill & Melinda Gates Foun-
dation;  p. 94: © Manuel Balce Ceneta/AP Images; 
p. 95: © Timothy A. Clary/AFP/Getty Images; 
p. 96: © Marty Bucella, www.cartoon
stock.com; p. 97: © Ann Hermes/The Christian 
Science Monitor/Getty Images; p. 101: 
© Gianluca Colla/Bloomberg/Getty Images; 
p. 103: © Lannis Waters/Zuma Press/Newscom; 
p. 105: © Steve Marcus/Reuters/Corbis; p. 106: 
© Wilfredo Lee/AP Images; p. 107: © Jody Hor-
ton; p.109: Courtesy of Rickshaw Bagworks, Inc; 
p. 110: Courtesy of Rainforest Action Network; 
p. 111: © Richard Vogel/AP Images; p. 112: 
© David R. Frazier/Alamy.
rs/Zuma Press/Newscom;
photo credits  

118
 How to Form a 
Business 
 BUSINESS OWNERSHIP:   Starting a Small Business 
 5 
PART 2
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
  LO 5-1 
Compare the advantages and disadvantages of sole 
proprietorships. 
  LO 5-2 
Describe the differences between general and limited partners, 
and compare the advantages and disadvantages of partnerships. 
  LO 5-3 
Compare the advantages and disadvantages of corporations, and 
summarize the differences between C corporations, S 
corporations, and limited liability companies. 
  LO 5-4 
Define and give examples of three types of corporate mergers, and 
explain the role of leveraged buyouts and taking a firm private. 
  LO 5-5 
Outline the advantages and disadvantages of franchises, and 
discuss the opportunities for diversity in franchising and the 
challenges of global franchising. 
  LO 5-6 
Explain the role of cooperatives.  

119
Anne Beiler
 • Founder of Auntie Anne's
 • Twisted a small pretzel stand 
into a successful snack franchise
www.auntieannes.com
@AuntieAnnes
S
ome people start busi-
nesses in order to fulfill a 
lifelong dream or to capital-
ize on a unique idea. But 
many other entrepreneurs 
simply need to earn money. That’s the 
reason why Anne Beiler began rolling 
pretzels at a local farmer’s market in the 
early 1980s. At the time her family was liv-
ing paycheck to paycheck as her husband 
tried to get a nonprofit crisis counseling 
service off the ground. After earning $875 
their first weekend, the Beilers were 
thrilled at their new venture’s potential. 
However, neither could have imagined 
that their little pretzel stand would grow 
into Auntie Anne’s, a mall-based chain 
with more than 1,200 locations worldwide 
and $410 million in annual sales.
 As a child Beiler made her first entre-
preneurial effort baking cakes and pies 
for her Amish-Mennonite family to sell. 
She married young and planned to live a 
quiet life on the farm raising her children. 
But Beiler’s plans turned upside down in 
1975 when her daughter Angela lost her 
life in a tractor accident. Although it took 
years for the family to recover, Beiler’s 
husband came out of the tragedy wanting 
to start his own free counseling service 
for people in their Pennsylvania town. 
Beiler supported her husband’s decision 
but realized that she would need to figure 
out a way to fund this nonprofit without 
the aid of his mechanic’s salary. 
 Beiler soon discovered that a pretzel 
and pizza store was up for sale in an 
Amish farmer’s market. After borrowing 
$6,000 to purchase the space, Beiler 
began to tweak the previous owner’s pret-
zel recipe to fit her own tastes. Customers 
immediately responded to the changes. 
“The morning we launched the new rec-
ipe, the first customer to take a bite 
looked at us and said, ‘This is amazing,’” 
says Beiler. “From that point on, we had to 
bring in more help and buy more ovens. 
We got rid of the pizza and sold only the 
pretzels.” She renamed the store Auntie 
Anne’s Soft Pretzels, a nod to her 30 
nieces and nephews. Within a few months 
she launched a second location in Harris-
burg, Pennsylvania. Operating a booming 
business in the state capital put her in 
contact with many people who wanted to 
help expand her brand. Although she 
refused at first, eventually Beiler decided 
to let family and friends open 10 stores 
under a licensing agreement. 
 For the next year Auntie Anne’s con-
tinued to grow by licensing its name for 
a $2,500 upfront fee and 4 percent of 
gross sales. However, a licensee 
pointed out that the company was actu-
ally franchising, not licensing. “It was an 
honest mistake,” says Beiler. “By then, 
we had 75 locations in several states. If 
you franchise without the proper docu-
mentation, you could be fined thousands 
of dollars a day per store.” Luckily, Beiler 
managed to avoid any fines by immedi-
ately contacting her partners as well as 
state legislators about the issue. Auntie 
Anne’s ran into more problems as its 
national expansion required more and 
more money. Although Beiler had incor-
porated the company by that point, she 
didn’t want to risk putting financial 
benchmarks ahead of the needs of 
employees or franchisees by going pub-
lic. Instead, good fortune found her 
again in the form of a Mennonite pig 
farmer who provided a $1.5 million loan 
on a handshake. 
 By 2005, though, the company had 
grown to such an enormous size that 
Beiler felt it was time to move on. She 
sold Auntie Anne’s to her second cousin 
in order to focus more on the company’s 
charitable organizations, such as the 
Angela Foundation, named in honor of 
her daughter. Beiler attributes her suc-
cess to what she calls “the three small 
P’s”: purpose, product, and people. “We 
started with a  purpose —counseling and 
helping people,” says Beiler. “We had a 
product that supported our purpose. 
Then we got the  people to do it. The 
three small P’s, in that order, result in the 
big P— profit. ” 
 Just like Anne Beiler, all business 
owners must decide for themselves 
which form of business is best for them. 
Whether you dream of starting a busi-
ness for yourself, going into 
business with a partner, forming 
a corporation, or someday being 
a leading franchisor, it’s important 
to know that each form of 
ownership has its advantages 
and disadvantages. You will learn 
about them all in this chapter. 
 Sources: “Franchise Players: An Auntie 
Anne’s Franchisee on the Importance of 
Seeking Advice,”  Entrepreneur, January 28, 
2014; Dinah Eng, “Soft Pretzels Out of Hard 
Times,”  Fortune, July 10, 2013; and  www.
auntieannebeiler.com , accessed June 2014.  
 Getting to Know  Anne Beiler

120
 name that company 
 In 2013, this company became the largest firm in terms of revenue to be taken 
private through a leveraged buyout. After closing the $25 billion deal, the 
founder now controls a 75 percent stake in the company he started in his dorm 
room. Name that company. (Find the answer in the chapter.)  
 BASIC FORMS OF BUSINESS OWNERSHIP  
 Hundreds of thousands of people have started new businesses in the United 
States. In fact, more than 600,000 are started each year.  1 Chances are, you’ve 
thought of owning your own business or know someone who has. 
 How you form your business can make a tremendous difference in your 
long-term success. The three major forms of business ownership are (1) sole 
proprietorships, (2) partnerships, and (3) corporations. Each has advantages 
and disadvantages that we’ll discuss. 
 It can be easy to get started in your own business. You can begin a lawn 
mowing service, develop a website, or go about meeting other wants and needs 
of your community. A business owned, and usually managed, by one person is 
called a   sole proprietorship.  That is the most common form of business 
ownership. 
 Many people do not have the money, time, or desire to run a business on 
their own. When two or more people legally agree to become co-owners of a 
business, the organization is called a   partnership.  
 Sole proprietorships and partnerships are relatively easy to form, but 
there are advantages to creating a business that is separate and distinct from 
the owners. This is a   corporation,  a legal entity with authority to act and have 
liability apart from its owners. The almost 5 million corporations in the United 
States make up only 20 percent of all businesses, but they earn 81 percent of 
total U.S. business receipts (see  Figure 5.1 ). 2 
 Keep in mind that just because a business starts in one form of owner-
ship, it doesn’t have to stay in that form. Many companies start out in one 
 sole proprietorship  
 A business that is owned, and 
usually managed, by one 
person.  
 partnership  
 A legal form of business with 
two or more owners.  
 corporation  
 A legal entity with authority to 
act and have liability apart from 
its owners.  
iSee It! Need help 
understanding forms of 
business ownership? 
Visit your Connect 
e-book video tab 
for a brief animated 
explanation.
 FIGURE 5.1 FORMS OF 
BUSINESS OWNERSHIP  
Although corporations make 
up only 20 percent of the total 
number of businesses, they 
make 81 percent of the total 
receipts. Sole proprietorships 
are the most common form 
(72 percent), but they earn only 
6 percent of the receipts. 
 Source: U.S. Census Bureau. 
Sole proprietorships
72%
Partnerships
8%
Corporations
20%
Sole proprietorships
6%
Percentage of
Total Receipts
Percentage of Businesses
Partnerships
13%
Corporations
81%

121
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
form, then add (or drop) a partner or two, and eventually become corpora-
tions, limited liability companies, or franchisors.  3 Let’s begin our discussion 
by looking at the most basic form of ownership—the sole proprietorship.  
 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of sole proprietorships. 
 SOLE PROPRIETORSHIPS  
 Advantages of Sole Proprietorships 
 Sole proprietorships are the easiest kind of businesses to explore in your quest 
for an interesting career. Every town has sole proprietors you can visit and talk 
with about the joys and frustrations of being in business on their own. Most 
will mention the benefits of being their own boss and setting their own hours. 
Other advantages include:
 
1.  Ease of starting and ending the business. All you have to do to start a 
sole proprietorship is buy or lease the needed equipment (a saw, a 
laptop, a tractor, a lawn mower) and put up some announcements 
saying you are in business. You may have to get a permit or license 
from the local government, but often that is no problem. It is just as 
easy to get out of business; you simply stop. There is no one to consult 
or disagree with about such decisions.  
 
2.  Being your own boss. Working for others simply does not have the 
same excitement as working for yourself—at least, that’s the way sole 
proprietors feel. You may make mistakes, but they are your mistakes—
and so are the many small victories each day.  
 
3.  Pride of ownership. People who own and manage their own businesses 
are rightfully proud of their work. They deserve all the credit for taking 
the risks and providing needed goods or services.  
 
4.  Leaving a legacy. Owners can leave an ongoing business for future 
generations.  
 
5.  Retention of company profits. Owners not only keep the profits earned 
but also benefit from the increasing value as the business grows.  
 
6.  No special taxes. All the profits of a sole proprietorship are taxed as the 
personal income of the owner, and the owner pays the normal income 
tax on that money. However, owners do have to pay the self-employment 
tax (for Social Security and Medicare). They also have to estimate 
their taxes and make quarterly payments to the government or 
suffer penalties for nonpayment.  
 Disadvantages of Sole Proprietorships 
 Not everyone is equipped to own and manage a business. 
Often it is difficult to save enough money to start a 
business and keep it going. The costs of inventory, 
supplies, insurance, advertising, rent, computers, 
utilities, and so on may be too much to cover alone. 
There are other disadvantages:
 
1.  Unlimited liability—the risk of personal losses. When you 
work for others, it is their problem if the business is not 
profitable. When you own your own business, you and the 
business are considered one. You have   unlimited liability;  
LO 5–1
 In college, Jerry Swain 
earned a reputation for 
making delicious 
chocolate candies. Even 
after graduation and 
landing a job at IBM, he 
still loved to make 
chocolate and decided 
to take the risk of 
starting his own 
confection company. 
Swain now offers his 
awarding-winning 
candies in his Solana 
Beach store as well as 
supplying Barney’s in 
New York and Costco 
around the country. Do 
you have a passion you 
would like to pursue as 
a business?  
unlimited liability
The responsibility of business 
owners for all of the debts of 
the business.

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
122
that is, any debts or damages incurred by the business are your debts 
and you must pay them, even if it means selling your home, your car, 
or whatever else you own. This is a serious risk, and undertaking it 
requires not only thought but also discussion with a lawyer, an 
insurance agent, an accountant, and others.  
 
2.  Limited financial resources. Funds available to the business are limited 
to what the one owner can gather. Since there are serious limits to 
how much money one person can raise, partnerships and corporations 
have a greater probability of obtaining the financial backing needed to 
start and equip a business and keep it going.  
 
3.  Management difficulties. All businesses need management; someone 
must keep inventory, accounting, and tax records. Many people skilled 
at selling things or providing a service are not so skilled at keeping 
records. Sole proprietors often find it difficult to attract qualified 
employees to help run the business because often they cannot compete 
with the salary and benefits offered by larger companies.  
 
4.  Overwhelming time commitment. Though sole proprietors say they set 
their own hours, it’s hard to own a business, manage it, train people, and 
have time for anything else in life when there is no one with whom to 
share the burden. The owner of a store, for example, may put in 12 hours 
a day at least six days a week—almost twice the hours worked by a 
nonsupervisory employee in a large company. Imagine how this time 
commitment affects the sole proprietor’s family life. Many sole 
proprietors will tell you, “It’s not a job, it’s not a career, it’s a way of life.”  4
 
5.  Few fringe benefits. If you are your own boss, you lose the fringe 
benefits that often come with working for others. You have no paid 
health insurance, no paid disability insurance, no pension plan, no 
sick leave, and no vacation pay. These and other benefits may add up 
to 30 percent or more of a worker’s compensation.  
 
6.  Limited growth. Expansion is often slow since a sole proprietorship 
relies on its owner for most of its creativity, business know-how, and 
funding.  
 
7.  Limited life span. If the sole proprietor dies, is incapacitated, or retires, 
the business no longer exists (unless it is sold or taken over by the sole 
proprietor’s heirs).  
 Being the sole 
proprietor of a company, 
like a dog-walking 
service, means making 
a major time 
commitment to run the 
business, including 
constantly seeking out 
new customers and 
looking for reliable 
employees when the 
time comes to grow. If 
you were a sole 
proprietor, what would 
you need to do if you 
wanted to take a week’s 
vacation?  

123
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
 Talk with a few local sole proprietors about the problems they’ve faced in 
being on their own. They are likely to have many interesting stories about 
problems getting loans from the bank, problems with theft, and problems sim-
ply keeping up with the business. These are reasons why many sole propri-
etors choose to find partners to share the load.  
 • Most people who start businesses in the United States are sole propri-
etors. What are the advantages and disadvantages of sole 
proprietorships?  
 • Why would unlimited liability be considered a major drawback to sole 
proprietorships?  
•
Most people who start b
 test  prep  
ses in the Unite
Describe the differences between general and limited partners, and compare 
the advantages and disadvantages of partnerships.
 PARTNERSHIPS  
 A partnership is a legal form of business with two or more owners. There are 
several types: (1) general partnerships, (2) limited partnerships, and (3) mas-
ter limited partnerships. In a   general partnership   all owners share in operat-
ing the business and in assuming liability for the business’s debts. A   limited 
partnership   has one or more general partners and one or more limited part-
ners. A   general partner   is an owner (partner) who has unlimited liability and 
is active in managing the firm. Every partnership must have at least one gen-
eral partner. A   limited partner   is an owner who invests money in the business 
but does not have any management responsibility or liability for losses beyond 
his or her investment.   Limited liability   means that the limited partners’ lia-
bility for the debts of the business is  limited to the amount they put into the 
company; their personal assets are not at risk. 
 One form of partnership, the   master limited partnership (MLP), looks 
much like a corporation (which we discuss next) in that it acts like a corpora-
tion and is traded on the stock exchanges like a corporation, but is taxed like a 
partnership and thus avoids the corporate income tax.  5 Master limited part-
nerships are normally found in the oil and gas industry. For example, Sunoco 
Inc. formed the MLP Sunoco Logistics Partners (SXL) to acquire, own, and 
operate a group of crude oil and refined-product pipelines and storage facili-
ties. Income received by SXL is not taxed before it is passed on to investors as 
dividends as it would be if SXL were a corporation.  6 
 Another type of partnership was created to limit the disadvantage of 
unlimited liability. A   limited liability partnership (LLP)   limits partners’ risk 
of losing their personal assets to the outcomes of only their own acts and omis-
sions and those of people under their supervision. If you are a limited partner 
in an LLP, you can operate without the fear that one of your partners might 
commit an act of malpractice resulting in a judgment that takes away your 
house, car, retirement plan, even your collection of vintage Star Wars action 
figures, as would be the case in a general partnership. However, in many states 
this personal protection does not extend to contract liabilities such as bank 
loans, leases, and business debt the partnership takes on; loss of personal 
LO 5–2
 general partnership  
 A partnership in which all 
owners share in operating the 
business and in assuming 
liability for the business’s debts.  
 limited partnership  
 A partnership with one or more 
general partners and one or 
more limited partners.  
 general partner  
 An owner (partner) who has 
unlimited liability and is active 
in managing the firm.  
 limited partner  
 An owner who invests money 
in the business but does not 
have any management 
responsibility or liability for 
losses beyond the investment.  
 limited liability  
 The responsibility of a 
business’s owners for losses 
only up to the amount they 
invest; limited partners and 
shareholders (stockholders) 
have limited liability.  
 master limited partnership 
(MLP)  
 A partnership that looks much 
like a corporation (in that it acts 
like a corporation and is traded 
on a stock exchange) but is 
taxed like a partnership and 
thus avoids the corporate 
income tax.  
limited liability partnership 
(LLP)
A partnership that limits 
partners’ risk of losing their 
personal assets to only their 
own acts and omissions and to 
the acts and omissions of 
people under their supervision.
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
124
assets is still a risk if these are not paid. In states without additional contract 
liability protections for LLPs, the LLP is in many ways similar to an LLC (dis-
cussed later in the chapter). 
 All states except Louisiana have adopted the Uniform Partnership Act 
(UPA) to replace earlier laws governing partnerships. The UPA defines the 
three key elements of any general partnership as (1) common ownership, (2) 
shared profits and losses, and (3) the right to participate in managing the 
operations of the business. 
 Advantages of Partnerships 
 Often, it is much easier to own and manage a business with one or more part-
ners. Your partner may be skilled at inventory control and accounting, while 
you do the selling or servicing. A partner can also provide additional money, 
support, and expertise as well as cover for you when you are sick or on vacation. 
 Figure 5.2  suggests several questions to ask yourself when choosing a partner.  
 Partnerships usually have the following advantages:
 
1.  More financial resources. When two or more people pool their money and 
credit, it is easier to pay the rent, utilities, and other bills incurred by a 
business. A limited partnership is specially designed to help raise money. 
As mentioned earlier, a limited partner invests money in the business but 
cannot legally have management responsibility and has limited liability.  
 
2.  Shared management and pooled/complementary skills and knowledge. It 
is simply much easier to manage the day-to-day activities of a business 
with carefully chosen partners. Partners give each other free time from 
the business and provide different skills and perspectives. Some people 
 Eventbrite, an online 
ticketing service, 
boasts having 
processed more than 
$1.5 billion in ticket 
sales. Married 
partners Julia and 
Kevin Hartz say their 
secret to success is 
to “‘Divide and 
conquer’ . . . while 
we both operate 
the business on a 
day-to-day basis, 
we are diligent 
about not treading 
on each other’s turf.” 
What problems 
might partners who 
share both business 
and home encounter 
that other partners 
might not?  

125
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
find that the best partner is a spouse. Many husband-and-wife teams 
manage restaurants, service shops, and other businesses.  7 
 
3.  Longer survival. Partnerships are more likely to succeed than sole 
proprietorships because being watched by a partner can help a 
businessperson become more disciplined.  8 
 
4.  No special taxes. As with sole proprietorships, all profits of partnerships 
are taxed as the personal income of the owners, who pay the normal 
income tax on that money. Similarly, partners must estimate their 
taxes and make quarterly payments or suffer penalties for nonpayment.  
 Disadvantages of Partnerships 
 Anytime two people must agree, conflict and tension are possible. Partner-
ships have caused splits between relatives, friends, and spouses. Let’s explore 
the disadvantages of partnerships:
 
1.  Unlimited liability. Each  general partner is liable for the debts of the 
firm, no matter who was responsible for causing them. You are liable 
for your partners’ mistakes as well as your own. Like sole proprietors, 
general partners can lose their homes, cars, and everything else they 
own if the business loses a lawsuit or goes bankrupt.  
 
2.  Division of profits. Sharing risk means sharing profits, and that can 
cause conflicts. There is no set system for dividing profits in a 
partnership, and they are not always divided evenly. For example, if 
one partner puts in more money and the other puts in more hours, 
each may feel justified in asking for a bigger share of the profits.  
 
3.  Disagreements among partners. Disagreements over money are just one 
example of potential conflict in a partnership. Who has final authority 
over employees? Who hires and fires employees? Who works what 
hours? What if one partner wants to buy expensive equipment for the 
firm and the other partner disagrees? All terms of the partnership 
should be spelled out in writing to protect all parties and minimize 
misunderstandings.  9 The Making Ethical Decisions box offers an 
example of a difference of opinions between partners.  
 There’s no such thing as a perfect partner, but you should share some common 
thoughts on the business. Ask yourself: 
 Do you share the same goals? 
 Do you share the same vision for the company’s future? 
 What skills does the person have? 
 Are those skills the same as yours, or do they complement your skills? 
 What contacts, resources, or special attributes will the person bring to the business? 
 What type of decision maker is the person? 
 Is this someone with whom you could happily share authority for all major business 
decisions? 
 Do you trust each other? 
 How does the person respond to adversity? 
 Does he or she try to solve the problem or try to defend his or her ego? 
 Can the person accept constructive criticism without getting defensive? 
 To what extent can you build fun and excitement into the partnership? 
 FIGURE 5.2 QUESTIONS 
TO ASK WHEN CHOOSING 
A BUSINESS PARTNER  

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
126
 
4.  Difficulty of termination. Once you have committed yourself to a 
partnership, it is not easy to get out of it. Sure, you can just quit. However, 
questions about who gets what and what happens next are often difficult 
to resolve when the partnership ends. Surprisingly, law firms often have 
faulty partnership agreements and find that breaking up is hard to do. 
How do you get rid of a partner you don’t like? It is best to decide such 
questions up front in the partnership agreement.  Figure 5.3 gives you 
ideas about what to include in partnership agreements.  
 The best way to learn about the advantages and disadvantages of partner-
ships is to interview several people who have experience with them. They will 
give you insights and hints on how to avoid problems. 
 One fear of owning your own business or having a partner is the fear of 
losing everything you own if someone sues the business or it loses a lot of 
money. Many businesspeople try to avoid this and the other disadvantages of 
sole proprietorships and partnerships by forming corporations. We discuss 
this basic form of business ownership in the following section.  
 FIGURE 5.3 HOW TO 
FORM A PARTNERSHIP  
 It’s not hard to form a partnership, but it’s wise for each prospective partner to get the 
counsel of a lawyer experienced with such agreements. Lawyers’ services are usually 
expensive, so would-be partners should read all about partnerships and reach some 
basic agreements before calling a lawyer. 
 For your protection, be sure to put your partnership agreement in writing. The 
Model Business Corporation Act recommends including the following in a written part-
nership agreement: 
 1. The name of the business. Many states require the firm’s name to be registered 
with state and/or county officials if the firm’s name is different from the name of any 
of the partners.  
 2. The names and addresses of all partners.  
 3. The purpose and nature of the business, the location of the principal offices, and 
any other locations where business will be conducted.  
 4. The date the partnership will start and how long it will last. Will it exist for a specific 
length of time, or will it stop when one of the partners dies or when the partners 
agree to discontinue?  
 5. The contributions made by each partner. Will some partners contribute money, 
while others provide real estate, personal property, expertise, or labor? When are 
the contributions due?  
 6. The management responsibilities. Will all partners have equal voices in manage-
ment, or will there be senior and junior partners?  
 7. The duties of each partner.  
 8. The salaries and drawing accounts of each partner.  
 9. Provision for sharing of profits or losses.  
 10. Provision for accounting procedures. Who’ll keep the accounts? What bookkeep-
ing and accounting methods will be used? Where will the books be kept?  
 11. The requirements for taking in new partners.  
 12. Any special restrictions, rights, or duties of any partner.  
 13. Provision for a retiring partner.  
 14. Provision for the purchase of a deceased or retiring partner’s share of the 
business.  
 15. Provision for how grievances will be handled.  
 16. Provision for how to dissolve the partnership and distribute the assets to the partners  .

127
Compare the advantages and disadvantages of corporations, and summarize 
the differences between C corporations, S corporations, and limited liability 
companies.  
CORPORATIONS  
 Many corporations—like General Electric, Microsoft, and Walmart—are big 
and contribute substantially to the U.S. economy. However, it’s not necessary 
to be big to incorporate. Incorporating may be beneficial for small businesses 
as well. 
 A   conventional (C) corporation   is a state-chartered legal entity with 
authority to act and have liability separate from its owners—its  stockholders.
Stockholders are not liable for the debts or other problems of the corpora-
tion beyond the money they invest in it by buying ownership shares, or stock, 
in the company. They don’t have to worry about losing their house, car, or 
other property because of some business problem—a significant benefit. A 
corporation not only limits the liability of owners but often enables many 
people to share in the ownership (and profits) of a business without working 
there or having other commitments to it. Corporations may choose whether 
to offer ownership to outside investors or remain privately held. (We discuss 
stock ownership in Chapter 19.)  Figure 5.4 describes various types of 
corporations.  
 Advantages of Corporations 
 Most people are not willing to risk everything to go into business. Yet for a 
business to grow, prosper, and create economic opportunity, many people have 
to be willing to invest money in it. One way to solve this problem is to create 
an artificial being, an entity that exists only in the eyes of the law—a corpora-
tion. Let’s explore some of the advantages of corporations:
 
1.  Limited liability. A major advantage of corporations is the limited 
liability of their owners. Remember, limited liability means that the 
owners of a business are responsible for its losses only up to the 
amount they invest in it.  
LO 5–3
 conventional (C) corporation  
 A state-chartered legal entity 
with authority to act and have 
liability separate from its 
owners.  
 making ethical decisions 
 Imagine that you and your partner 
own a construction company. You 
receive a bid from a subcontrac-
tor that you know is 20 percent 
too low. Such a loss to the sub-
contractor could put him out of 
business. Accepting the bid will 
certainly improve your chances of 
winning the contract for a big 
shopping center project. Your 
partner wants to take the bid and 
let the subcontractor suffer the 
consequences of his bad esti-
mate. What do you think you 
should do? What will be the con-
sequences of your decision? 
 Good Business, Bad Karma? 
s
 • What is the difference between a limited partner and a general partner?  
 • What are some of the advantages and disadvantages of partnerships?  
•
What is the difference be
 test  prep  
a limited partn
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
128
 
2.  Ability to raise more money for investment. To raise money, a corporation 
can sell shares of its stock to anyone who is interested. This means 
that millions of people can own part of major companies like IBM, 
Apple, and Coca-Cola, and smaller corporations as well. If a 
company sells 10 million shares of stock for $50 a share, it will 
have $500 million available to build plants, buy materials, hire 
people, manufacture products, and so on. Such a large amount of 
money would be difficult to raise any other way. 
 Corporations can also borrow money by obtaining loans from 
financial institutions like banks. They can also borrow from individual 
investors by issuing bonds, which involve paying investors interest 
until the bonds are repaid sometime in the future.  10 You can read 
about how corporations raise funds through the sale of stocks and 
bonds in Chapter 19.  
 
3.  Size. “Size” summarizes many of the advantages of some corporations. 
Because they can raise large amounts of money to work with, big 
corporations can build modern factories or software development 
facilities with the latest equipment. They can hire experts or specialists 
in all areas of operation. They can buy other corporations in different 
fields to diversify their business risks. In short, a large corporation 
with numerous resources can take advantage of opportunities 
anywhere in the world. 
 
 
 But corporations do not have to be large to enjoy the benefits of 
incorporating. Many doctors, lawyers, and individuals, as well as 
partners in a variety of businesses, have incorporated. The vast 
majority of corporations in the United States are small businesses.
Burton Baskin 
and Irvine Robbins ran 
their ice cream 
businesses separately 
for two years. Once they 
had succeeded apart, 
Baskin and Robbins 
became partners and 
were able to avoid 
many of the pitfalls of 
starting a new business 
from scratch. They 
flipped a coin to see 
whose name would 
come first. What factors 
besides the partners’ 
individual success do 
you think contributed to 
their long-lasting 
partnership?
You may find some confusing types of corporations when reading about them. Here 
are a few of the more widely used terms:
 An  alien corporation does business in the United States but is chartered (incorporated) 
in another country.  
 A  domestic corporation does business in the state in which it’s chartered 
(incorporated).  
 A  foreign corporation does business in one state but is chartered in another. About 
one-third of all corporations are chartered in Delaware because of its relatively 
attractive rules for incorporation. A foreign corporation must register in states where 
it operates.  
 A  closed (private) corporation is one whose stock is held by a few people and isn’t 
available to the general public.  
 An  open (public) corporation sells stock to the general public. General Motors and 
ExxonMobil are examples of public corporations.  
 A  quasi-public corporation is a corporation chartered by the government as an 
approved monopoly to perform services to the general public. Public utilities are 
examples of quasi-public corporations.  
 A  professional corporation is one whose owners offer professional services (doctors, 
lawyers, etc.). Shares in professional corporations aren’t publicly traded.  
 A  nonprofit (or not-for-profit) corporation is one that doesn’t seek personal profit for its 
owners.  
 A  multinational corporation is a firm that operates in several countries.  
 FIGURE 5.4 CORPORATE TYPES  
 Corporations can fit in more than one category.  

129
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
 
4.  Perpetual life. Because corporations are separate from those who own 
them, the death of one or more owners does not terminate the 
corporation.  
 
5.  Ease of ownership change. It is easy to change the owners of a 
corporation. All that is necessary is to sell the stock to someone else.  
 
6.  Ease of attracting talented employees. Corporations can attract skilled 
employees by offering such benefits as stock options (the right to 
purchase shares of the corporation for a fixed price).  
 
7.  Separation of ownership from management. Corporations are able to 
raise money from many different owners/stockholders without getting 
them involved in management. The corporate hierarchy in  Figure 5.5  
shows how the owners/stockholders are separate from the managers 
and employees. The owners/stockholders elect a board of directors, 
who hire the officers of the corporation and oversee major policy 
issues. The owners/stockholders thus have some say in who runs the 
corporation but have no real control over the daily operations.  11 
 Disadvantages of Corporations 
 There are so many sole proprietorships and partnerships in the United States 
that there must be some disadvantages to incorporating. Otherwise, everyone 
would do it. The following are a few of the disadvantages:
 
1.  Initial cost. Incorporation may cost thousands of dollars and require 
expensive lawyers and accountants. There are less expensive ways of 
incorporating in certain states (see the following subsection), but 
 FIGURE 5.5 HOW 
OWNERS AFFECT 
MANAGEMENT  
Owners have an influence on 
how a business is managed 
by electing a board of 
directors. The board hires the 
top officers (and fires them if 
necessary). It also sets the pay 
for those officers. The officers 
then select managers and 
employees with the help of the 
human resources department. 
Board of directors
(hire officers)
Owners/stockholders
(elect board of directors)
Employees
Managers
(supervise employees)
Officers
(set corporate
objectives and
select managers)

130
 seeking sustainability 
 While vacationing on the 
small island of Tobago, 
Michael Dimin and his sons 
saw a nasty sight as their 
boat headed to dock after a 
day of fishing. Tons of rot-
ting fish littered the water, 
left there by fishermen who 
caught too much to sell 
locally. That gave Dimin an 
idea: what if they sold the 
surplus fish directly to New 
York restaurants? After all, 
demand for fresh seafood 
would always be high at the 
city’s many upscale eateries. Plus, 
with an outside market to sell to, 
fishermen in Tobago wouldn’t 
need to waste so much of their 
catch. 
 Dimin knew this venture was 
likely to be profitable, but more 
than that he wanted ocean con-
servation and sustainability to be 
the driving force of the business. 
That’s why he registered his com-
pany Sea2Table as a benefit cor-
poration, or B corporation. With 
this new sort of business struc-
ture, companies are judged by 
how well they meet their own set 
of socially or environmentally 
beneficial goals. For Sea2Table, 
that means developing 
relationships with local fish-
ermen rather than costly 
and wasteful middlemen. 
This allows the company to 
keep their  supply lines 
transparent while still ship-
ping the freshest fish possi-
ble to their clients in New 
York. Not only do business 
 models like this help soci-
ety, their compassionate 
goals tend to lure in some 
of the most talented peo-
ple in the job market. It just 
goes to show that profits aren’t 
the only way to  measure success 
in the business world. 
 Sources: “Our Story,”  www.sea2table.com , 
accessed February 2014; “Sean and Michael 
Dimin,”  www.futureoffish.org , accessed February 
2014; and Lindsay Gellman and Rachel Feintzeig, 
“Social Seal of Approval Lures Talent,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, November 12, 2013. 
 www.sea2table.com  
 B Corporations Let Sustainability Set Sail 
many people do not have the time or confidence to go through this 
procedure without the help of a potentially expensive lawyer.  
 
2.  Extensive paperwork. The paperwork needed to start a corporation is 
just the beginning. A sole proprietor or partnership may keep rather 
broad accounting records. A corporation, in contrast, must keep 
detailed financial records, the minutes of meetings, and more. As 
noted in  Figure 5.4 , many firms incorporate in Delaware or Nevada 
because these states’ business-oriented laws make the process easier 
than it is in other states.  
 
3.  Double taxation. Corporate income is taxed twice. First the corporation 
pays tax on its income before it can distribute any, as  dividends, to 
stockholders. Then the stockholders pay income tax on the dividends 
they receive. States often tax corporations more heavily than other 
enterprises, and some special taxes apply only to corporations.  12
 
4.  Two tax returns. An individual who incorporates must file both a 
corporate tax return and an individual tax return. Depending on the 
size of the corporation, a corporate return can be quite complex and 
require the assistance of a certified public accountant (CPA).  
 
5.  Size. Size may be one advantage of corporations, but it can be a 
disadvantage as well. Large corporations sometimes become too 
inflexible and tied down in red tape to respond quickly to market 
changes, and their profitability can suffer.  
 
6.  Difficulty of termination. Once a corporation has started, it’s relatively 
hard to end.  

131
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
 The process of forming a corporation 
varies somewhat from state to state. 
The articles of incorporation are usually 
filed with the secretary of state’s office 
in the state in which the company 
incorporates. The articles contain:
 • 
The corporation’s name.  
 • 
The names of the people who 
incorporated it.  
 • 
Its purposes.  
 • 
Its duration (usually perpetual).  
 • 
The number of shares that can be 
issued, their voting rights, and any 
other rights the shareholders have.  
 • 
The corporation’s minimum capital.  
 • 
The address of the corporation’s office.  
 • 
The name and address of the per-
son responsible for the corpora-
tion’s legal service.  
 • 
The names and addresses of the 
first directors.  
 • 
Any other public information the 
incorporators wish to include.  
 Before a business can so much as 
open a bank account or hire employ-
ees, it needs a federal tax identification 
number. To apply for one, get an SS-4 
form from the IRS. 
 In addition to the articles of incorpo-
ration listed, a corporation has bylaws. 
These describe how the firm is to be 
operated from both legal and manage-
rial points of view. The bylaws include:  
 • 
How, when, and where sharehold-
ers’ and directors’ meetings are held, 
and how long directors are to serve.  
 • 
Directors’ authority.  
 • 
Duties and responsibilities of offi-
cers, and the length of their 
service.  
 • 
How stock is issued.  
 • 
Other matters, including employ-
ment contracts.  
 FIGURE 5.6 HOW TO 
INCORPORATE  
 
7.  Possible conflict with stockholders and board of directors. Conflict may 
brew if the stockholders elect a board of directors who disagree with 
management.  13 Since the board of directors chooses the company’s 
officers, entrepreneurs serving as managers can find themselves forced 
out of the very company they founded. This happened to Tom Freston, 
one of the founders of MTV, and Steve Jobs, a founder of Apple 
Computer (Jobs of course returned to the company later).  
 Many businesspeople are discouraged by the costs, paperwork, and spe-
cial taxes corporations must pay. However, many others believe the advantages 
of incorporation outweigh the hassles. See the Seeking Sustainability box for 
an example of a benefit corporation, a new type of nonprofit corporation.  
Individuals Can Incorporate 
 Not all corporations are large organizations with hundreds of employees and 
thousands of stockholders. Truckers, doctors, lawyers, plumbers, athletes, and 
small-business owners of all kinds can also incorporate. Normally, individuals 
who incorporate do not issue stock to outsiders; therefore, they do not share all 
the advantages and disadvantages of large corporations (such as size and more 
money for investment). Their major advantages are limited liability and possi-
ble tax benefits. Although you are not required to file for incorporation through 
a lawyer, it is usually wise to consult one. In addition to lawyers’ fees, the sec-
retary of state’s office charges a fee for incorporating a business, varying by 
state from a low of $50 (in Colorado, Iowa, Kentucky, Mississippi, and Okla-
homa) to a high of $300 (in Texas).  14 Like the fee, the length of time it will take 
to actually have your business incorporated will vary by state. The average time 
is approximately 30 days from the date of application.  Figure 5.6  outlines how 
to incorporate.  

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
132
 S Corporations 
 An   S corporation   is a unique government creation that looks like a corpora-
tion but is taxed like sole proprietorships and partnerships. (The name comes 
from the fact that the rules governing them are in Subchapter S of Chapter 1 
of the Internal Revenue Code.) The paperwork and details of S corporations 
are similar to those of conventional (C) corporations. S corporations have 
shareholders, directors, and employees, and the benefit of limited liability, but 
their profits are taxed only as the personal income of the shareholders—thus 
avoiding the double taxation of C corporations. 
 Avoiding double taxation is reason enough for approximately 3 million 
U.S. companies to operate as S corporations. Yet not all businesses can become 
S corporations. In order to qualify, a company must:  15 
 
1. Have no more than 100 shareholders. (All members of a family count 
as one shareholder.)  
 
2. Have shareholders that are individuals or estates, and who (as 
individuals) are citizens or permanent residents of the United States.  
 
3. Have only one class of stock. (You can read more about the various 
classes of stock in Chapter 19.)  
 
4. Derive no more than 25 percent of income from passive sources (rents, 
royalties, interest).  
 An S corporation that loses its S status may not operate under it again for 
at least five years. The tax structure of S corporations isn’t attractive to all 
businesses.  16 For one thing, the benefits change every time the tax rules 
change. The best way to learn all the benefits or shortcomings for a specific 
business is to go over the tax advantages and liability differences with a law-
yer, an accountant, or both.  
 Limited Liability Companies 
 A   limited liability company (LLC)   is similar to an S corporation, but without 
the special eligibility requirements. LLCs were introduced in Wyoming in 
1977, and were recognized by the Internal Revenue Service as a partnership 
for federal income tax purposes in 1988. By 1996, all 50 states and the District 
of Columbia recognized LLCs. 
 The number of LLCs has risen dramatically since 1988, when there were 
fewer than 100 filings to operate them. Today more than half of new business 
registrations in some states are LLCs. 
 Why the drive toward forming LLCs? Advantages 
include:
 1.  Limited liability. Personal assets are protected. 
Limited liability was previously available 
only to limited partners and shareholders of 
corporations.  
 2.  Choice of taxation. LLCs can choose to be 
taxed as partnerships or as corporations. 
Partnership-level taxation was previously a 
benefit normally reserved for partners or S 
corporation owners.  
 S corporation  
 A unique government creation 
that looks like a corporation but 
is taxed like sole proprietorships 
and partnerships.  
 limited liability company 
(LLC)  
 A company similar to an 
S corporation but without the 
special eligibility requirements.  
 PetZen Products LLC 
offers doggie treadmills 
to help the nation’s 
overweight pets get 
back their puppy 
figures. What are the 
advantages and 
disadvantages of LLCs?  

133
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
 
3.  Flexible ownership rules. LLCs do not have to comply with ownership 
restrictions as S corporations do. Owners can be a person, partnership, 
or corporation.  
 
4.  Flexible distribution of profits and losses. Profits and losses don’t have 
to be distributed in proportion to the money each person invests, as in 
corporations. LLC members agree on the percentage to be distributed 
to each member.  
 
5.  Operating flexibility. LLCs do have to submit articles of organization, 
which are similar to articles of incorporation, but they are not required 
to keep minutes, file written resolutions, or hold annual meetings. An 
LLC also submits a written operating agreement, similar to a 
partnership agreement, describing how the company is to be operated.  
 Of course, LLCs have their disadvantages as well. These include:
 
1.  No stock. LLC ownership is nontransferable. LLC members need the 
approval of the other members in order to sell their interests in the 
company. In contrast, regular and S corporation stockholders can sell 
their shares as they wish.  
 
2.  Limited life span. LLCs are required to identify dissolution dates in the 
articles of organization (no more than 30 years in some states). The 
death of a member can cause LLCs to dissolve automatically. Members 
may choose to reconstitute the LLC after it dissolves.  
 
3.  Fewer incentives. Unlike corporations, LLCs can’t deduct the cost of 
fringe benefits for members owning 2 percent or more of the company. 
And since there’s no stock, they can’t use stock options as incentives to 
employees.  
 
4.  Taxes. LLC members must pay self-employment taxes—the Medicare/
Social Security taxes paid by sole proprietors and partnerships—on 
their profits. In contrast, S corporations pay self-employment tax on 
owners’ salaries but not on the entire profits.  
 
5.  Paperwork. While the paperwork required of LLCs is not as great as 
that required of corporations, it is more than required of sole 
proprietors.  
 The start-up cost for an LLC varies. Online legal services such as Legal 
Zoom ( www.legalzoom.com ) can file the necessary paperwork for as little as 
$99 plus the state filing fee.  17  Figure 5.7  summarizes the advantages and dis-
advantages of the major forms of business ownership.  
 • What are the major advantages and disadvantages of incorporating a 
business?  
 • What is the role of owners (stockholders) in the corporate hierarchy?  
 • If you buy stock in a corporation and someone gets injured by one of 
the corporation’s products, can you be sued? Why or why not?  
 • Why are so many new businesses choosing a limited liability company 
(LLC) form of ownership?  
•
What are the major adva
 test  prep  
and disadvant
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
134
PARTNERSHIPS
CORPORATIONS
SOLE 
PROPRIETOR-
SHIP
GENERAL 
PARTNERSHIP
LIMITED 
PARTNERSHIP
CON VENTIONAL 
CORPORATION
S 
CORPORATION
LIMITED 
LIABILITY 
COMPANY
Documents 
Needed to 
Start Business
None; may need 
permit or license
Partnership 
agreement (oral 
or written)
Written 
agreement; 
must file 
certificate of 
limited 
partnership
Articles of 
incorporation, 
bylaws
Articles of 
incorporation, 
bylaws, must 
meet criteria
Articles of 
organization 
and 
 operating 
 agreement; 
no eligibility 
require-
ments
Ease of 
Termination
Easy to terminate: 
just pay debts and 
quit
May be hard to 
terminate, 
depending on 
the partnership 
agreement
Same as 
general 
partnership
Hard and 
expensive to 
terminate
Same as 
conventional 
corporation
May be 
difficult, 
depending 
upon 
operating 
agreement
Length of Life
Terminates on the 
death of owner
Terminates on 
the death or 
withdrawal of 
partner
Same as 
general 
partnership
Perpetual life
Same as 
conventional 
corporation
Varies 
according to 
dissolution 
dates in arti-
cles of 
organization
Transfer of 
Ownership
Business can be 
sold to qualified 
buyer
Must have other 
partner(s)’ 
agreement
Same as 
general 
partnership
Easy to change 
owners; just sell 
stock
Can sell stock, 
but with 
restrictions
Can’t sell 
stock
Financial 
Resources
Limited to owner’s 
capital and loans
Limited to 
partners’ capital 
and loans
Same as 
general 
partnership
More money to 
start and operate; 
may sell stocks 
and bonds
Same as 
conventional 
corporation
Same as 
partnership
Risk of Losses
Unlimited liability
Unlimited 
liability
Limited liability
Limited liability
Limited liability
Limited 
liability
Taxes
Taxed as personal 
income
Taxed as per-
sonal income
Same as 
general 
partnership
Corporate, 
double 
taxation
Taxed as 
personal 
income
Varies
Management 
Responsibilities
Owner manages 
all areas of the 
business
Partners share 
management
Can’t 
participate in 
management
Separate 
management 
from ownership
Same as 
conventional 
corporation
Varies
Employee 
Benefits
Usually fewer 
benefits and lower 
wages
Often fewer 
benefits and 
lower wages; 
promising 
employee 
could become 
a partner
Same as 
general 
partnership
Usually 
better benefits 
and wages, 
advancement 
opportunities
Same as 
conventional 
corporation
Varies, but 
are not tax 
deductible
 FIGURE 5.7 COMPARISON OF FORMS OF BUSINESS OWNERSHIP 

135
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
Define and give examples of three types of corporate mergers, and explain 
the role of leveraged buyouts and taking a firm private.
 CORPORATE EXPANSION: MERGERS 
AND ACQUISITIONS  
 What’s the difference between mergers and acquisitions? A   merger   is the result 
of two firms joining to form one company. It is similar to a marriage, joining 
two individuals as one family. An   acquisition   is one company’s purchase of 
the property and obligations of another company. It is more like buying a 
house than entering a marriage. 
 There are three major types of corporate mergers: vertical, horizontal, 
and conglomerate. A   vertical merger   joins two firms operating in different 
stages of related businesses.  18 A merger between a soft drink company and an 
artificial sweetener maker would ensure the merged firm a constant supply of 
an ingredient the soft drink manufacturer needs. It could also help ensure 
quality control of the soft drink company’s products. 
 A   horizontal merger   joins two firms in the same industry and allows 
them to diversify or expand their products. A soft drink company and a mineral 
water company that merge can now supply a variety of beverage products.  
A   conglomerate merger   unites firms in completely unrelated indus-
tries in order to diversify business operations and investments. A soft drink 
company and a snack food company would form a conglomerate merger. 
 Figure 5.8  illustrates the differences among the three types of mergers.  
LO 5–4
 merger  
 The result of two firms forming 
one company.  
 acquisition  
 One company’s purchase of 
the property and obligations of 
another company.  
 vertical merger  
 The joining of two companies 
involved in different stages of 
related businesses.  
 horizontal merger  
 The joining of two firms in the 
same industry.  
 conglomerate merger  
 The joining of firms in 
completely unrelated 
industries.  
 FIGURE 5.8 TYPES OF 
MERGERS  
Soft drink company
Buys
Mineral water company
Horizontal
merger
(companies in
same industry)
Soft drink company
Buys
Snack food company
Conglomerate merger
(companies in unrelated industries)
Soft drink company
Buys
Artiﬁcial sweetener company
Vertical merger
(companies in different stages
in related industries)

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
136
Rather than merge or sell to another company, 
some corporations decide to maintain, or in some cases 
regain, control of a firm internally. By  taking a firm pri-
vate, management or a group of stockholders obtain all 
the firm’s stock for themselves by buying it back from 
the other stockholders. Burger King and Gymboree are 
firms that have been taken private. 
 Suppose employees believe they may lose their 
jobs, or managers believe they could improve corporate 
performance if they owned the company. Does either 
group have an opportunity of taking ownership of the 
company? Yes—they might attempt a leveraged buy-
out. A   leveraged buyout (LBO)   is an attempt by 
employees, management, or a group of private investors to buy out the stock-
holders in a company, primarily by borrowing the necessary funds. The 
employees, managers, or investors now become the owners of the firm. LBOs 
have ranged in size from $50 million to $34 billion and have involved every-
thing from small family businesses to giant corporations like Hertz Corpora-
tion, Toys “R” Us, Chrysler, and the former RJR Nabisco. In 2013, Dell became 
the largest company in terms of revenue to be taken private through a lever-
aged buyout. After closing the $25 billion deal (with $19.4 billion of the total 
coming from a group of lenders), Michael Dell now controls a 75 percent stake 
in the company he founded in his dorm room.  19 
 Today, business acquisitions are not limited to U.S. buyers. Foreign com-
panies have found the fastest way to grow is often to buy an established opera-
tion that can enhance their technology or expand the number of brands they 
offer. Swiss drugmaker Roche paid $43 billion to take control of biotechnology 
giant Genentech. Belgium’s InBev purchased the largest U.S. brewer, Anheuser-
Busch and its Budweiser and Bud Light brands, for $52 billion. Number two 
brewer Miller Brewing Company was acquired by London-based SAB. In 2012, 
foreign investors poured over $166 billion into U.S. companies.  20  
 However, such deals are not always welcomed. U.S. lawmakers feared the 
proposed purchase of U.S. oil company Unocal by a Chinese oil company 
might threaten American economic and national security interests. CNOOC, 
the Chinese company, eventually withdrew its bid.  
Outline the advantages and disadvantages of franchises, and discuss the 
opportunities for diversity in franchising and the challenges of global franchising.
 FRANCHISES 
 In addition to the three basic forms of business ownership, there are two special 
forms: franchises and cooperatives. Let’s look at franchises first. A   franchise 
agreement   is an arrangement whereby someone with a good idea for a busi-
ness (the   franchisor   ) sells the rights to use the business name and sell a prod-
uct or service (the   franchise   ) to others (the   franchisees   ) in a given territory. 
 Some people, uncomfortable with the idea of starting their own business 
from scratch, would rather join a business with a proven track record through a 
franchise agreement. A franchise can be formed as a sole proprietorship, a part-
nership, or a corporation. The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that one out of every 
10 businesses in the United States is a franchise.  21 Some of the best-known fran-
chises are McDonald’s, Jiffy Lube, 7-Eleven, Weight Watchers, and Holiday Inn.  
 According to the International Franchise Association, the more than 770,000 
franchised businesses operating in the United States create approximately 
 leveraged buyout (LBO)  
 An attempt by employees, 
management, or a group of 
investors to purchase an 
organization primarily through 
borrowing.  
LO 5–5
 franchise agreement  
 An arrangement whereby 
someone with a good idea for 
a business sells the rights to 
use the business name and sell 
a product or service to others 
in a given territory.  
 franchisor  
 A company that develops a 
product concept and sells 
others the rights to make and 
sell the products.  
 franchise  
 The right to use a specific 
business’s name and sell its 
products or services in a given 
territory.  
 franchisee  
 A person who buys a franchise.  
 Mars, the maker of 
M&M’s, acquired the 
Wm. Wrigley Jr. 
Company for $23 
billion. What type of 
merger is this (vertical, 
horizontal, or 
conglomerate)?  

137
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
8.5 million jobs that produce a direct and indirect economic impact of $839 bil-
lion in the U.S. economy.  22 The most popular businesses for franchising are res-
taurants (fast food and full service) and gas stations with convenience stores. 
McDonald’s, the largest restaurant chain in the United States in terms of sales, is 
often considered the gold standard of franchising. Retail stores, financial ser-
vices, health clubs, hotels and motels, and automotive parts and service centers 
are also popular franchised businesses. Today a fast-growing franchise sector is 
senior care. In fact,  Entrepreneur magazine’s 2013 list of 100 fastest-growing 
franchises included nine senior care concepts.  23 With roughly 40 million seniors 
in the United States today and projections the number will double in the next 
20 years, it’s a market that is not going to disappear.  24 See  Figure 5.9  for some 
tips on evaluating franchises.  
 Advantages of Franchises 
 Franchising has penetrated every aspect of U.S. and global business life by offer-
ing products and services that are reliable, convenient, and competitively priced. 
Franchising clearly has some advantages:
 
1.  Management and marketing assistance. Compared with someone who 
starts a business from scratch, a franchisee usually has a much greater 
chance of succeeding because he or she has an established product to sell, 
help choosing a location, and assistance in all phases of promotion and 
operation. It’s like having your own store but with full-time consultants 
when you need them. Franchisors usually provide intensive training. For 
example, McDonald’s sends all new franchisees 
and managers to Hamburger University in 
Oak Brook, Illinois.  25  
 
 
  Some franchisors help their franchisees 
with local marketing efforts rather than 
having them depend solely on national 
advertising. Franchisees also have a network 
of fellow franchisees facing similar problems 
who can share their experiences. The UPS 
Store provides its more than 4,700 franchisees 
with a software program that helps them 
build customer databases along with quick 
and personal one-on-one phone and e-mail 
support.  26  
 
2.  Personal ownership. A franchise operation is 
still your business, and you enjoy as much of 
the incentives and profit as any sole proprietor 
would. You are still your own boss, although 
you must follow more rules, regulations, and 
procedures than with your own privately 
owned business. The Spotlight on Small 
Business box features an example of a growing 
franchise that is attracting new franchisees.  
 
3.  Nationally recognized name. It is one thing to 
open a gift shop or an ice cream store. It is 
quite another to open a new Hallmark store 
or a Baskin-Robbins. With an established 
franchise, you get instant recognition and 
support 
from 
a 
product 
group 
with 
established customers around the world.  
 Door-to-Door Dry 
Cleaning franchises are 
the brainchild of John 
Dame and his wife Joey. 
All franchisees need to 
get started is a truck to 
make pickups and 
deliveries, and a 
contract with a local dry 
cleaner. Start-up costs 
can be as low as 
$40,000 and profits as 
high as 26 percent. The 
Dames provide two 
weeks of training and 
plenty of online support. 
What type of service 
franchise might appeal 
to you as a business 
owner? 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
138
Since buying a franchise is a major investment, be sure 
to check out a company’s financial strength before you 
get involved. Watch out for scams too. Scams called 
bust-outs usually involve people coming to town, renting 
nice offices, taking out ads, and persuading people to 
invest. Then they disappear with the investors’ money. 
For example, in San Francisco a company called T.B.S. 
Inc. sold distributorships for in-home AIDS tests. It prom-
ised an enormous market and potential profits of $3,000 
for an investment of less than $200. The “test” turned 
out to be nothing more than a mail-order questionnaire 
about lifestyle.
A good source of information about evaluating a fran-
chise deal is the handbook Investigate before Investing, 
available from International Franchise Association 
Publications.
Checklist for Evaluating a Franchise
The Franchise
Did your lawyer approve the franchise contract you’re 
considering after he or she studied it paragraph by 
paragraph?
Does the franchise give you an exclusive territory for the 
length of the franchise?
Under what circumstances can you terminate the fran-
chise contract and at what cost to you?
If you sell your franchise, will you be compensated for 
your goodwill (the value of your business’s reputation 
and other intangibles)?
If the franchisor sells the company, will your investment 
be protected?
The Franchisor
How many years has the firm offering you a franchise 
been in operation?
Does it have a reputation for honesty and fair dealing 
among the local firms holding its franchise?
Has the franchisor shown you any certified figures indi-
cating exact net profits of one or more going firms 
that you personally checked yourself with the franchi-
see? Ask for the company’s disclosure statement.
Will the firm assist you with
 A management training program?
 An employee training program?
 A public relations program?
 Capital?
 Credit?
 Merchandising ideas?
Will the firm help you find a good location for your new 
business?
Has the franchisor investigated you carefully enough to 
assure itself that you can successfully operate one of 
its franchises at a profit both to itself and to you?
You, the Franchisee
How much equity capital will you need to purchase the 
franchise and operate it until your income equals 
your expenses?
Does the franchisor offer financing for a portion of the 
franchising fees? On what terms?
Are you prepared to give up some independence of 
action to secure the advantages offered by the fran-
chise? Do you have your family’s support?
Does the industry appeal to you? Are you ready to 
spend much or all of the remainder of your business 
life with this franchisor, offering its product or service 
to the public?
Your Market
Have you made any study to determine whether the 
product or service that you propose to sell under the 
franchise has a market in your territory at the prices 
you’ll have to charge?
Will the population in the territory given to you increase, 
remain static, or decrease over the next five years?
Will demand for the product or service you’re consider-
ing be greater, about the same, or less five years 
from now than it is today?
What competition already exists in your territory for the 
product or service you contemplate selling?
Sources: U.S. Department of Commerce, Franchise Opportunities Handbook; and Steve Adams, “Buying a Brand,” Patriot Ledger (Quincy, MA), 
March 1, 2008.
 FIGURE 5.9 BUYING A FRANCHISE 
 
4.  Financial advice and assistance. Two major problems for small-business 
owners are arranging financing and learning to keep good records. 
Franchisees often get valuable assistance and periodic advice from 
people with expertise in these areas. In fact, some franchisors, including 
Meinike, Gold’s Gym, and UPS Stores, provide financing to potential 
franchisees they feel will be valuable parts of the franchise system.  27  
 
5.  Lower failure rate. Historically, the failure rate for franchises has been 
lower than that of other business ventures. However, franchising has 
grown so rapidly that many weak franchises have entered the field, so 
you need to be careful and invest wisely.  28 

139
Disadvantages of Franchises 
 There are, however, some potential pitfalls to franchising. Check out any fran-
chise arrangement with present franchisees and discuss the idea with an attor-
ney and an accountant. Disadvantages of franchises include the following:
 
1.  Large start-up costs. Most franchises demand a fee for the rights to the 
franchise. Start-up costs for a Jazzercise franchise range from $4,200, 
but if it’s Dunkin’ Donuts you’re after, you’d better have a lot more 
dough—-approximately $1.5 million.  29 
 
2.  Shared profit. The franchisor often demands either a large share of the 
profits in addition to the start-up fees or a percentage commission 
based on sales, not profit. This share is called a  royalty. For example, if 
a franchisor demands a 10 percent royalty on a franchise’s net sales, 10 
cents of every dollar the franchisee collects (before taxes and other 
expenses) must be paid to the franchisor.  30 
 
3.  Management regulation. Management “assistance” has a way of becoming 
managerial orders, directives, and limitations. Franchisees feeling 
burdened by the company’s rules and regulations may lose the drive to 
run their own business. Often franchisees will band together to resolve 
their grievances with franchisors rather than fighting their battles alone.  31
For example, the KFC National Council & Advertising Cooperative, 
which represents all U.S. franchisees, sued KFC to gain control of 
advertising strategies. The franchisees were angry over Yum! Brands’ 
(owners of KFC) decision to implement an ad strategy that emphasized a 
shift to grilled chicken rather than fried chicken. The campaign centered 
around the slogan “Unthink KFC,” which was exactly what customers 
did. Sales plummeted 7 percent that quarter and franchisees had to 
throw away up to 50 percent of their grilled chicken supplies.  
 spotlight on small business 
 After work at Michelle Cote’s archi-
tectural firm stopped due to the 
Great Recession, she found inspi-
ration for her next venture in an 
unlikely place: her children’s Lego 
toys. In 2008 she took a stash of 
the building blocks to an elemen-
tary school where she used them 
to teach kids about engineering 
and construction. Of course, the 
children didn’t realize that they 
were learning. They thought the 
amusement parks and inventions 
they created were just another part 
of playtime. The class was a hit 
with both kids and parents, leading 
Cote to organize more events 
under the name Bricks 4 Kidz at 
other schools as well as summer 
camps and birthday parties. 
 However, Cote’s company 
didn’t hit its stride until she met 
Brian Pappas, a franchise devel-
oper with more than 30 years of 
experience in the industry. 
Pappas knew that such a 
low-cost business plan would be 
appealing to many potential 
 franchisees. After all, a few boxes 
of Legos costs a lot less than 
opening a chain restaurant or 
retail store. Within five years, 
Bricks 4 Kidz expanded into 
more than 200 franchises in the 
U.S. and 11 other countries. 
The company’s cheap and 
 easily reproducible model 
could make it an even 
greater success in the years 
to come. 
 Sources: “Franchise Spotlight: Bricks 4 Kidz,” 
Entrepreneur, March 2013; Jacklyn Corley, 
“Sickles Students Get a Hands-on Lesson in 
Engineering, Architecture,”  Rumson-FairHaven 
Patch, February 4, 2014; and  http://www.
bricks4kidz.com/ , accessed February 2014. 
 www.bricks4kidz.com  
 The Building Blocks of Franchising 
 
l
a
 f
o
o
r
B
c
g

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
140
 
4.  Coattail effects. What happens to your franchise if fellow franchisees 
fail? The actions of other franchises have an impact on your future 
growth and profitability. Due to this  coattail effect, you could be forced 
out of business even if your particular franchise has been profitable. 
For example, the customer passion for high-flying franchisor Krispy 
Kreme sank as the market became flooded with new stores and the 
availability of the product at retail locations caused overexposure. 
McDonald’s and Subway franchisees complain that due to the 
company’s relentless growth, some new stores have taken business 
away from existing locations, squeezing franchisees’ profits per outlet.  
 
5.  Restrictions on selling. Unlike owners of private businesses, who can 
sell their companies to whomever they choose on their own terms, 
many franchisees face restrictions on the resale of their franchises. To 
control quality, franchisors often insist on approving the new owner, 
who must meet their standards.  
 
6.  Fraudulent franchisors. Most franchisors are not large systems like 
McDonald’s and Subway. Many are small, rather obscure companies 
that prospective franchisees may know little about. Most are honest, 
but complaints to the Federal Trade Commission have increased about 
franchisors that delivered little or nothing of what they promised. 
Before you buy a franchise, make certain you check out the facts fully 
and remember the old adage “You get what you pay for.”  
 Diversity in Franchising 
 A lingering issue in franchising is the number of women who own franchises. 
While women own about half of all U.S. companies and are opening busi-
nesses at double the rate of men, their ownership of franchises is only about 
21 percent. However, that statistic doesn’t tell the whole story; 45 percent of 
franchises are co-owned by male and female partners. “Because women in 
general are collaborative and want to create win-win relationships, we make 
wonderful franchisors,” says Stephanie Allen, co-founder of Dream Dinners, a 
meal-preparation service.  32 
 Women aren’t just franchisees anymore; they’re becoming franchisors as 
well. Women are finding if they face difficulty getting financing for growing 
their business, turning to franchisees to help carry expansion costs can help. 
For example, top-rated franchise companies Auntie Anne’s, Decorating Den, 
and Jazzercise were started by women. 
 Minority-owned businesses are growing at more than six times the 
national rate. Franchisors are becoming more focused on recruiting minority 
franchisees. DiversityFran is an initiative by the International Franchise Asso-
ciation to build awareness of franchising opportunities within minority com-
munities. The U.S. Commerce Department’s Federal Minority Business 
Development Agency provides aspiring minority business owners with training 
in how to run franchises. Domino’s Pizza launched a minority franchisee 
recruitment program called Delivering the Dream. The company provides 
financial support and a financing partner to help budding franchisees “realize 
their dream.” 
 Today over 20 percent of franchises are owned by African Americans, 
Latinos, Asians, and Native Americans. Franchising opportunities seem per-
fectly attuned to the needs of aspiring minority businesspeople. For example, 
Junior Bridgeman was a basketball star in college and enjoyed a stellar career 
with the Milwaukee Bucks and Los Angeles Clippers in the NBA. He trans-
ferred his dedication on the court to dedication to building Bridgeman Foods. 

141
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
His company now owns 125 Chili’s and 155 
Wendy’s restaurants and plans to open 30 Blaze 
Pizza stores. Bridgeman is the fifth largest fran-
chise owner in the country.  33  
 Home-Based Franchises 
 Home-based businesses offer many obvious 
advantages, including relief from the stress of 
commuting, extra time for family activities, and 
low overhead expenses. One disadvantage is the 
feeling of isolation. Compared to home-based 
entrepreneurs, home-based franchisees feel less 
isolated. Experienced franchisors often share 
their knowledge of building a profitable enter-
prise with other franchisees. 
 Home-based franchises can be started for as little as $5,000. Today you 
can be a franchisee in areas ranging from cleaning services to tax preparation, 
child care, pet care, cruise planning, or direct mail services.  34 Before investing 
in a home-based franchise it is helpful to ask yourself the following questions: 
Are you willing to put in long hours? Can you work in a solitary environment? 
Are you motivated and well organized? Does your home have the space you 
need for the business? Can your home also be the place you work? It’s also 
important to check out the franchisor carefully.  
 E-Commerce in Franchising 
 The Internet has changed franchising in many ways. Most brick-and-mortar 
franchises have expanded their businesses online and created virtual store-
fronts to deliver increased value to customers. Franchisees like Carole Shutts, 
a Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory franchisee in Galena, Illinois, increased 
her sales by setting up her own website. Many franchisors, however, prohibit 
franchisee-sponsored websites because conflicts can erupt if the franchisor 
creates its own website. Sometimes franchisors send “reverse royalties” to 
franchisees who believe their sales were hurt by the franchisor’s online sales, 
but that doesn’t always bring about peace. Before buying a franchise, read the 
small print regarding online sales. 
 Today potential franchisees can make a choice between starting an online 
business or a business requiring an office or storefront outside the home. 
Quite often the decision comes down to financing. Traditional brick-and-
mortar franchises require finding real estate and often require a high fran-
chise fee. Online franchises like Printinginabox.com charge no up-front 
franchise fee and require little training to start a business. Franchisees pay 
only a set monthly fee. Online franchises also do not set exclusive territories 
limiting where the franchisee can compete. An online franchisee can literally 
compete against the world. See the Adapting to Change box for an example of 
a company using the power of the Internet to start a new digital franchise.  
 Using Technology in Franchising 
 Franchisors often use technology, including social media, to extend their 
brands, to meet the needs of both their customers and their franchisees, and 
even to expand their businesses. For example, Candy Bouquet International, 
Inc., of Little Rock, Arkansas, offers franchises that sell candies in flowerlike 
arrangements. Franchisees have brick-and-mortar locations to serve walk-in 
 Judi Sheppard Missett 
started a dance-fitness 
program called 
Jazzercise in 1969. The 
worldwide franchise 
company now takes 
fitness-minded adults 
and kids in 32 countries 
through weekly classes 
blending jazz dance, 
resistance training, 
Pilates, yoga, and 
kickboxing moves 
choreographed to the 
latest popular music. 
Jazzercise is 
consistently listed 
among Entrepreneur 
magazine’s top 20 
franchises. What 
accounts for its appeal? 

142
customers, but they also are provided leads from the company’s main website. 
All franchisees are kept up-to-date daily on company news via e-mail, and they 
use a chat room to discuss issues and product ideas with each other. The com-
pany has found the Internet a great way of disseminating information that is 
revolutionizing franchisor support and franchisee communications. Candy 
Bouquet International now has 300 locations around the globe.  35   
Franchising in Global Markets 
 Franchising today is truly a global effort. U.S. franchisors are counting their 
profits in euros, yuan, pesos, won, krona, baht, yen, and many other curren-
cies. McDonald’s has more than 34,000 restaurants in 118 countries serving 
over 69 million customers each day.  36 
 Because of its proximity and shared language, Canada is the most popu-
lar target for U.S.-based franchises. Franchisors are finding it surprisingly 
easier now to move into China, South Africa, the Philippines, and the Middle 
East. Plus it’s not just the large franchises like Subway and Marriott Hotels 
making the move. Newer, smaller franchises are going global as well. Auntie 
Anne’s sells hand-rolled pretzels in 25 different countries including Indonesia, 
Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Venezuela, and Thailand.  37 Build-A-Bear 
Workshops has 79 franchisees in 12 countries including South Africa and the 
United Arab Emirates. 38 In 2005, 29-year-old Matthew Corrin launched 
Freshii, a sandwich, salad, and soup restaurant with fresh affordable food in 
trendy locations. He already has 45 locations in eight countries.  39 
 What makes franchising successful in global markets is what makes it 
successful in the United States: convenience and a predictable level of service 
 adapting to change 
 Chris Jeffrey noticed something 
strange about the restaurants in 
his college town: few of them 
posted their menus online. And 
when an eatery did have a web-
site, ordering food through it 
was usually out of the question. 
Sensing an opportunity, Jeffrey 
developed his own online res-
taurant ordering service after 
graduation. Called OrderUp, the 
site lets users scroll through vari-
ous restaurants located in their 
area. Once they’ve decided what 
they’d like to eat, customers can 
place their order and either pick it 
up or have it delivered. OrderUp 
then sends the payment to the res-
taurant, minus a small commission. 
 Jeffrey’s early success with the 
concept made him eager to 
expand. But potential investors 
wanted too large a stake in the 
business, leaving Jeffrey afraid 
that he could be forced out of his 
own company. So instead, he 
offered to franchise OrderUp digi-
tally, something that had never 
been done before in the business 
world. Although investors weren’t 
interested in such a risky venture, 
Jeffrey carried on and developed 
a tempting offer for potential fran-
chisees. For a start-up fee of 
$42,000, franchisees receive soft-
ware and training to launch an 
OrderUp operation in their area. 
The franchisee maintains exclu-
sive rights to sell the service 
within their territory while the 
company itself handles order 
processing and customer ser-
vice. This digital franchising 
model keeps costs low while 
giving franchisees the time to 
focus on convincing restaurants 
to join OrderUp. So far Jeffrey’s 
20 digital franchisees have gener-
ated more than $30 million in food 
orders annually. Expect to see 
them in your town soon, or if 
you’re prepared to take the risk, 
bring them there yourself by 
becoming an OrderUp franchisee! 
 Sources: Minda Zetlin, “Digital Franchises: New 
Spin on an Old Business Model,”  Inc., March 7, 
2013; “Business Opportunities: OrderUp,”  www.
entrepreneur.com , accessed February 2014; and 
 www.franchise.orderup.com , accessed February 
2014. 
 Giving Entrepreneurs Options with Digital Franchising 
 

143
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
and quality. Franchisors, though, must 
be careful and do their homework before 
entering into global franchise agree-
ments. Three questions to ask before 
forming a global franchise are: Will your 
intellectual property be protected? Can 
you give proper support to global part-
ners? Are you able to adapt to franchise 
regulations in other countries? If the 
answer is yes to all three questions, 
global franchising creates great oppor-
tunities. It’s also important to remember 
that adapting products and brand names 
to different countries creates challenges. 
In France, people thought a furniture-
stripping franchise called Dip ‘N’ Strip 
was a bar that featured strippers. 
 Just as McDonald’s and Subway have exported golden arches and sub 
sandwiches worldwide, foreign franchises see the United States as a popular 
target. Japanese franchises like Kumon Learning Centers and Canadian fran-
chises like tax preparer H&R Block are very active in the United States. 
Kumon was ranked as the number one tutoring franchise by  Entrepreneur
magazine 13 years in a row, and H&R Block even has its headquarters in 
Kansas City, Missouri.  40 Other franchises are hoping to change our tastes 
here. Ly Qui Trung would like to see his Pho24 noodle bars become a part of 
the American landscape, and Canada’s Yogen Früz frozen yogurt wants us to 
eat healthier desserts.  
Explain the role of cooperatives.
 COOPERATIVES  
 Some people dislike the notion of owners, managers, workers, and buyers being 
separate individuals with separate goals, so they have formed cooperatives, a 
different kind of organization to meet their needs for electricity, child care, 
housing, health care, food, and financial services. A   cooperative,  or co-op, is 
owned and controlled by the people who use it—producers, consumers, or 
workers with similar needs who pool their resources for mutual gain. In many 
rural parts of the country, for example, the government sells wholesale power to 
electric cooperatives at rates 40 to 50 percent below the rates nonfederal utili-
ties charge. Electric cooperatives serve 42 million U.S. consumer-members in 
47 states—or 12 percent of the population.  41  
 Worldwide, more than 1 billion people are members of cooperatives.  42
Members democratically control these businesses by electing a board of direc-
tors that hires professional management. Some co-ops ask members/customers 
to work for a number of hours a month as part of their membership duties. You 
may have one of the country’s 4,000 food co-ops near you. If so, stop by and 
chat to learn more about this growing aspect of the U.S. economy. If you 
are interested in knowing more about cooperatives, contact the National Coop-
erative Business Association at 202-638-6222 or visit its website at  www
.ncba.coop . 
 Another kind of cooperative in the United States is formed to give members 
more economic power as a group than they have as individuals. The best exam-
ple is a farm cooperative. The goal at first was for farmers to join together to get 
LO 5–6
 cooperative  
 A business owned and 
controlled by the people who 
use it—producers, consumers, 
or workers with similar needs 
who pool their resources for 
mutual gain.  
 Holiday Inn’s 
InterContinental Amstel 
hotel in Amsterdam has 
been celebrated as the 
Netherlands’ most 
beautiful and luxurious 
hotel. Holiday Inn 
franchises try to 
complement the 
environment of the area 
they serve. This hotel is 
on the crossroads of 
Amsterdam’s financial 
and exclusive shopping 
districts. What do you 
think would have been 
the reaction if Holiday 
Inn had built the typical 
U.S.-style Holiday Inn in 
this area?  

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
144
better prices for their food products. Eventually the idea expanded, and farm 
cooperatives now buy and sell fertilizer, farm equipment, seed, and other prod-
ucts in a multibillion-dollar industry. Cooperatives have an advantage in the 
marketplace because they don’t pay the same kind of taxes corporations pay. 
 Cooperatives are still a major force in agriculture and other industries today. 
Some top co-ops have familiar names such as Land O’ Lakes, Sunkist, Ocean 
Spray, Blue Diamond, Associated Press, Ace Hardware, True Value Hardware, 
Riceland Foods, and Welch’s.  
 WHICH FORM OF OWNERSHIP IS FOR YOU? 
 You can build your own business in a variety of ways. You can start your own 
sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, LLC, or cooperative—or you 
can buy a franchise and be part of a larger corporation. There are advantages 
and disadvantages to each. Before you decide which form is for you, evaluate 
all the alternatives carefully. 
 The miracle of free enterprise is that the freedom and incentives of capi-
talism make risks acceptable to many people who go on to create the great 
corporations of America. You know many of their names and companies: 
James Cash Penney (JCPenney), Steve Jobs (Apple Computer), Sam Walton 
(Walmart), Levi Strauss (Levi Strauss), Henry Ford (Ford Motor Company), 
Thomas Edison (General Electric), Bill Gates (Microsoft), and so on. They 
started small, accumulated capital, grew, and became industrial leaders. Could 
you do the same?
 • What are some of the factors to consider before buying a franchise?  
 • What opportunities are available for starting a global franchise?  
 • What is a cooperative?  
•
What are some of the fa
 test  prep  
o consider befo
 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of sole proprietorships.
 • 
 What are the advantages and disadvantages of sole proprietorships?  
 The advantages of sole proprietorships include ease of starting and end-
ing, ability to be your own boss, pride of ownership, retention of profit, 
and no special taxes. The disadvantages include unlimited liability, limited 
financial resources, difficulty in management, overwhelming time com-
mitment, few fringe benefits, limited growth, and limited life span.  
 Describe the differences between general and limited partners, and compare 
the advantages and disadvantages of partnerships.
 • 
 What are the three key elements of a general partnership?  
 The three key elements of a general partnership are common ownership, 
shared profits and losses, and the right to participate in managing the 
operations of the business.  
Wh t
LO 5–1
LO 5–2
 summary 
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

145
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
 • 
 What are the main differences between general and limited partners?  
 General partners are owners (partners) who have unlimited liability and 
are active in managing the company. Limited partners are owners (part-
ners) who have limited liability and are not active in the company.  
 • 
 What does   unlimited liability  mean? 
Unlimited liability means that sole proprietors and general partners must 
pay all debts and damages caused by their business. They may have to sell 
their houses, cars, or other personal possessions to pay business debts.  
 • 
 What does   limited liability  mean?  
Limited liability means that corporate owners (stockholders) and limited 
partners are responsible for losses only up to the amount they invest. Their 
other personal property is not at risk.  
 • 
 What is a master limited partnership?  
 A master limited partnership is a partnership that acts like a corporation 
but is taxed like a partnership.  
 • 
 What are the advantages and disadvantages of partnerships?  
 The advantages include more financial resources, shared management 
and pooled knowledge, and longer survival. The disadvantages include 
unlimited liability, division of profits, disagreements among partners, and 
difficulty of termination.  
 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of corporations, and summarize 
the differences between C corporations, S corporations, and limited liability 
companies.
 • 
 What is the definition of a corporation?  
 A corporation is a state-chartered legal entity with authority to act and 
have liability separate from its owners.  
 • 
 What are the advantages and disadvantages of corporations?  
 The advantages include more money for investment, limited liability, size, 
perpetual life, ease of ownership change, ease of drawing talented employ-
ees, and separation of ownership from management. The disadvantages 
include initial cost, paperwork, size, difficulty in termination, double taxa-
tion, and possible conflict with a board of directors.  
 • 
 Why do people incorporate?  
 Two important reasons for incorporating are special tax advantages and 
limited liability.  
 • 
 What are the advantages of S corporations?  
 S corporations have the advantages of limited liability (like a corporation) 
and simpler taxes (like a partnership). To qualify for S corporation status, 
a company must have fewer than 100 stockholders (members of a family 
count as one shareholder), its stockholders must be individuals or estates 
and U.S. citizens or permanent residents, and the company cannot derive 
more than 25 percent of its income from passive sources.  
 • 
 What are the advantages of limited liability companies?  
 Limited liability companies have the advantage of limited liability with-
out the hassles of forming a corporation or the limitations imposed by 
S corporations. LLCs may choose whether to be taxed as partnerships 
or corporations.  
LO 5–3

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
146
 Define and give examples of three types of corporate mergers, and explain 
the role of leveraged buyouts and taking a firm private.
 • 
 What is a merger?  
 A merger is the result of two firms forming one company. The three major 
types are vertical mergers, horizontal mergers, and conglomerate mergers.  
 • 
 What are leveraged buyouts, and what does it mean to take a company 
private? 
 Leveraged buyouts are attempts by managers and employees to borrow 
money and purchase the company. Individuals who, together or alone, buy 
all the stock for themselves are said to take the company private.  
 Outline the advantages and disadvantages of franchises, and discuss the 
opportunities for diversity in franchising and the challenges of global 
franchising.
 • 
 What is a franchise?  
 An arrangement to buy the rights to use the business name and sell its 
products or services in a given territory is called a franchise.  
 • 
 What is a franchisee?  
 A franchisee is a person who buys a franchise.  
 • 
 What are the benefits and drawbacks of being a franchisee?  
 The benefits include getting a nationally recognized name and reputation, 
a proven management system, promotional assistance, and pride of own-
ership. Drawbacks include high franchise fees, managerial regulation, 
shared profits, and transfer of adverse effects if other franchisees fail.  
 • 
 What is the major challenge to global franchises?  
 It is often difficult to transfer an idea or product that worked well in the 
United States to another culture. It is essential to adapt to the region.  
 Explain the role of cooperatives.
 • 
 What is the role of a cooperative?  
 Cooperatives are organizations owned by members/customers. Some peo-
ple form cooperatives to acquire more economic power than they would 
have as individuals. Small businesses often form cooperatives to gain more 
purchasing, marketing, or product development strength.  
LO 5–4
LO 5–5
What is t
LO 5–6
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.
 key terms 
acquisition 135
conglomerate merger  135
conventional (C) 
corporation 127
cooperative 143
corporation 120
franchise 136
franchise agreement  136
franchisee 136
franchisor 136
general partner  123
general partnership  123
horizontal merger 135
leveraged buyout 
(LBO)  136
limited liability 123
limited liability company 
(LLC) 132
limited liability 
partnership (LLP)  123
limited partner 123
limited partnership  123
master limited 
partnership (MLP) 123
merger 135
partnership  120
S corporation 132
sole proprietorship  120
 unlimited liability 121
 vertical merger  135

147
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
 Imagine you are considering starting your own business. 
 1. What kinds of products or services will you offer?  
 2. What talents or skills do you need to run the business?  
 3. Do you have all the skills and resources to start the business, or will you 
need to find one or more partners? If so, what skills would your partners 
need to have?  
 4. What form of business ownership would you choose—sole proprietorship, 
partnership, C corporation, S corporation, or LLC? Why?  
critical thinking 
developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1. Research businesses in your area and identify sole proprietorships, part-
nerships, corporations, and franchises. Arrange interviews with managers 
using each form of ownership and get their impressions, hints, and warn-
ings. (If you are able to work with a team of fellow students, divide the 
interviews among team members.) How much does it cost to start? How 
many hours do they work? What are the specific benefits? Share the results 
with your class.
 2. Have you thought about starting your own business? What opportunities 
seem attractive? Choose someone in the class whom you might want for a 
partner or partners in the business. List all the financial resources and 
personal skills you will need to launch the business. Then make separate 
lists of the personal skills and the financial resources that you and your 
partner(s) might bring to your new venture. How much capital and what 
personal skills will be needed beyond those you already have? Develop an 
action plan for needed capital.
 3. Let’s assume you want to open one of the following new businesses. What 
form of business ownership would you choose for each? Why? Explain 
your choices to the rest of the class.
 
a. Video game rental store.  
 
b. Wedding planning service.  
 
c. Software development firm.  
 
d. Online bookstore.  
 4. Successful businesses continually change hands. Methods of change dis-
cussed in this chapter include mergers, acquisitions, taking a firm private, 
and using leveraged buyouts. Search for an article online that illustrates 
how one of these methods changed an organization. What led to the 
change? How did this change affect the company’s stakeholders? What 
benefits did the change provide? What new challenges were created?
 5. Find information online about a business cooperative (e.g., Welch’s, Land 
O’ Lakes, Sunkist). Research how it was formed, who can belong to it, and 
how it operates.
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
148
taking it to the net
 PURPOSE 
 To explore franchising opportunities and to evaluate the strengths and weak-
nesses of a selected franchise.  
 EXERCISE 
 Go to Franchise Expo  ( www.franchiseexpo.com ). 
 1. Use the search tool to find a franchise that has the potential of fulfilling 
your entrepreneurial dreams. Navigate to the profile of the franchise you 
selected. Explore the franchise’s website if a link is available. Refer to the 
questions listed in  Figure 5.9  in this chapter and assess the strengths and 
weaknesses of your selected franchise.  
 2. Did your search give you enough information to answer most of the ques-
tions in  Figure 5.9 ? If not, what other information do you need, and where 
can you obtain it?  
video case  
 With more than 3,500 locations in 44 states, Sonic 
is the largest chain of drive-in fast-food restau-
rants in the United States. Unlike other chains, 
many of Sonic’s locations are individually owned 
and operated. That’s because Sonic knows the 
value of motivated entrepreneurs who are willing 
to put everything they’ve got into their businesses. 
 Sonic has stuck to this go-getter attitude 
thanks to the leadership of founder Troy Smith. 
After coming back from World War II, Smith took 
a job as a milkman until he realized that he wanted 
to run a business of his own. Over the next few 
years he opened several restaurants in his home-
town of Shawnee, Oklahoma, ranging from a diner 
to his own fried chicken chain to see what worked 
best for him. Since he ran these businesses by 
himself as sole proprietorships, that meant he 
could make all the major decisions himself, but he 
had no one to help him make the restaurants great. 
As a result, most of Smith’s early ventures failed. 
 He didn’t let those initial disappointments set 
him back, however. Eventually Smith bought a five-
acre gravel lot that contained a little root beer stand 
and a big log cabin. While he planned to turn the 
latter into a steakhouse, Smith nearly tore down 
the root beer stand to make room for more parking. 
As time went by, though, he realized that the soda 
stand was actually doing better business than the 
steakhouse. After visiting a drive-in burger place in 
Louisiana, Smith thought that was just the thing 
his small soda shop needed to become a big suc-
cess. He commissioned a speaker system, added a 
canopy to the parking lot, and hired servers to bring 
food directly to customers’ cars. Soon enough, rev-
enue at the Top Hat Drive-In had tripled. 
 As Smith’s burger-and-soda stand continued 
to grow, a local grocer named Charles Pappe 
approached him about investing in the business. 
The two ended up forming a partnership where 
Pappe would concentrate on sales while Smith 
improved the business. Things continued to run 
smoothly until the pair found out that the Top Hat 
name had already been trademarked by another 
company. Although Smith and Pappe’s personal 
assets were protected by their limited partnership 
agreement, they stood to lose their entire business 
if they were successfully sued over the Top Hat 
name. So, deciding that it was better to be safe 
than sorry, they agreed to change the name of the 
business to Sonic Drive-In. 
 Business continued to boom as the years went 
by, leading Smith and Pappe to think bigger. More 
people expressed interest in becoming involved in 
the business, but Smith didn’t want to take on any 
more partners. Instead, they decided to expand the 
Sonic brand by franchising. This allowed other 
entrepreneurs to open up their own locations 
throughout the country with the help of the Sonic 
home office. Today, Sonic has thousands of franchi-
sees from all walks of life operating in every corner 
of America. The flexibility of their ownership system 
allows franchisees to focus on building their busi-
ness, rather than on the brand itself. Maybe that’s 
why Sonic continues growing at the speed of sound.  
 SONIC 

149
How to Form a Business
CHAPTER 5
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. Like many entrepreneurs, Troy Smith started 
Sonic as a sole proprietorship, then took on a 
partner, and eventually offered franchises. What 
advantages did he enjoy at each stage of Sonic’s 
development? What disadvantages did he face?
 2. How is a franchise different from a partnership?
 3. What important questions should you ask 
before becoming a franchisee in a company 
like Sonic?
  1 . Small Business Administration,  www.sba.gov , accessed 
March 2014; and SCORE,  www.score.org , accessed 
March 2014. 
  2. U.S. Census Bureau,  www.census.gov , accessed March 2014. 
  3 .  My Own Business,  www.myownbusiness.org , accessed 
March 2014. 
  4 . Elaine Pofeldt, “Going It Alone,”  Inc., February 2014. 
  5 . “Subterranean Capitalist Blues,”  The Economist, October 26, 
2013; and “Rise of the Distorporation,”  The Economist, 
October 26, 2014. 
   6. Sunoco,   www.sunoco.com , accessed March 2014. 
  7. Molly Wright, “Married to the Job,”  Columbia Business Times, 
January 30, 2014. 
  8 . Bureau of Labor Statistics,   www.bis.gov  , accessed March 2014. 
  9 . Paula Andruss, “Divide & Conquer,”  Entrepreneur, April 2013. 
  10 . Nellie Akalp, “Top Reasons to Incorporate Your Business,” 
Small Business Trends, February 3, 2014. 
  11 . Carol Hymowitz, “Not Going Anywhere,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, May 27–June 2, 2013. 
  12 . Nellie Akalp, “Is the Wrong Company Structure Hurting You 
at Tax Time?”  Forbes, February 3, 2014. 
  13 . Geoff Colvin, “Inside the Boardroom,”  Fortune, May 29, 2013. 
  14. Incorporate 101,  www.incorporate101.com , accessed March 
2014. 
  15 . United States Internal Revenue Service,  www.irs.gov , 
accessed March 2014. 
  16 . Tony Nitti, “Tax Geek Tuesday: Reasonable Compensation in 
the S Corporation Arena,”  Forbes, February 4, 2014. 
  17 . LegalZoom,   www.legalzoom.com , accessed March 2014. 
   18 . Gabrielle Karol, “V-Commerce Could Be the Next Big Trend 
for Startups,”  Entrepreneur, January 30, 2014. 
  19 . Connie Guglielmo, “You Won’t Have Michael Dell to Kick 
Around Anymore,”  Forbes, November 18, 2013. 
 20  . The Whitehouse,   www.whitehouse.gov  , accessed March 2014. 
  21 . U.S. Census Bureau,  www.census.gov , accessed March 2014. 
 22 . International Franchise Association,  www.franchise.org , 
accessed March 2014. 
 23 .  Entrepreneur,  www.entrepreneur.com , accessed March 2014. 
 24 . U.S. Census Bureau,  www.census.gov , accessed March 2014. 
 25 .  McDonald’s,  www.aboutmcdonald’s.com , accessed 
March 2014. 
 26. United Parcel Service,  www.ups.com , accessed March 2014. 
   27. Michelle Goodman, “Franchisors Offer Their Own Financing 
Programs,”  Entrepreneur, January 14, 2014. 
 28. Jason Daly, “What Is the Real Survival Rate of a Franchised 
Business?”  Entrepreneur, September 13, 2013. 
 29.   Entrepreneur,  www.entrepreneur.com , accessed March 2014. 
 30. Leslie Patton, McDonald’s Aiming for Better Bottom Line, 
Shifts More of the Burden to Its Franchisees,”  St. Louis Post-
Dispatch, August 11, 2013. 
   31 . Carol Coultas, “Jim Cohen Launches Franchise Owners 
Lobbying Efforts,”  MaineBiz, January 27, 2014; and J. Craig 
Anderson, “Maine Bill Aims to Protect Franchise Owners,” 
Press Herald, January 28, 2014. 
 32. Kate Taylor, “Women in Franchising,”  Entrepreneur, October 
31, 2013. 
 33. Caitlin Bowling, “Junior Bridgeman, Jim Patterson Backing 
New Franchise,”  Business First, January 31 2014. 
 34.  Arlene Satchell, “Cruise Planners Expect Growth in 2014,” 
Sun Sentinel, January 23, 2014. 
 35 . CandyBouqet,   www.candybouqet.com , accessed March 
2014. 
 36 . McDonald’s,   www.mcdonalds.com , accessed March 2014. 
  37 . Auntie Annes,  www.auntieannes.com , accessed March 2014; 
and Matthew D’Ippolito, “Auntie Anne Beiler Attributes 
Success to Giving, Finding Purpose at Ursinus Talk,”  The 
Mercury Business, January 30, 2014. 
 38 . Build-a-Bear,   www.buildabear.com , accessed March 2014; 
and Kavita Kumar, “New Build-a-Bear CEO Upbeat about 
Turnaround, Future,”  St. Louis Post-Dispatch, January 19, 
2014. 
 39 . Freshii,   www.freshii.com , accessed March 2014; and Patti 
Woods, “An Appetite for Health Eating in the New Year,” 
Fairfield Citizen, January 21, 2014. 
 40.  Entrepreneur,  www.entrepreneur.com , accessed March 2014; 
and “Entrepreneur Magazine Ranks Kumon No. 1 Education 
Franchise for 13th Consecutive Year,”  BusinessWire, January 
7, 2014. 
   41 . Nation Rural Electric Cooperative Association,  www.nreca
.coop , accessed March 2014. 
 42 . National Cooperative Business Association,  www.ncba.coop , 
accessed March 2014. 
ww.ups.com, accessed March 2014.
notes
Page 119: © Mark Peterson/Redux; p. 121: Cour-
tesy of Jer’s Chocolates; p. 122: © Peter Horree/
Alamy; p. 124: © Lance Iversen/Corbis; p. 128: 
© Newscom; p. 130: Courtesy of Sea To Table; 
p. 132: © Splash/PetZen/GoPet/Newscom; 
p. 136: © Daniel Acker/Bloomberg/Getty 
Images; p. 137: Courtesy of MyDoor Dry Clean-
ing; p. 139: © Cr-Management GmbH & Co. 
KG/iStock/360/Getty Images RF; p. 141: Courtesy 
of Jazzercise; p. 142: Courtesy of OrderUp; 
p. 143: © Stephen Gabriel/imagebroker/age 
fotostock.
sy of MyDoor Dry Clean-
photo credits

150
 Entrepreneurship 
and Starting a Small 
Business 
 6 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 6-1 
Explain why people take the risks of entrepreneurship; list the 
attributes of successful entrepreneurs; and describe 
entrepreneurial teams, intrapreneurs, and home- and web-based 
businesses. 
 LO 6-2 
Discuss the importance of small business to the American 
economy and summarize the major causes of small-business 
failure. 
 LO 6-3 
Summarize ways to learn about how small businesses operate. 
 LO 6-4 
Analyze what it takes to start and run a small business. 
 LO 6-5 
Outline the advantages and disadvantages small businesses have 
in entering global markets.  

Prudencio Unanue
 • Founder of Goya Foods
 • Grew a $1 billion business from 
a small New York City grocery 
store
www.goya.com
@GoyaFoods
F
 or more than 75 years, Goya 
Foods has provided a little 
taste of home for millions of 
Hispanic immigrants. That 
commitment goes all the 
way back to the company’s founder Pru-
dencio Unanue, who moved from his 
native Spain to Puerto Rico before ulti-
mately heading for New York. But as the 
years passed and tastes changed, 
Goya’s business changed as well. Under 
the leadership of Unanue’s sons and 
grandsons, Goya’s products grew popu-
lar with non-Latinos as well, leading to 
current sales revenues of more than 
$1 billion. 
 After settling in Lower Manhattan in 
1936, Unanue opened a small grocery 
store in his neighborhood. He catered to 
the area’s large Spanish community by 
selling items like olives, olive oil, and sar-
dines. Soon after Unanue set up shop, he 
purchased the Goya name for a dollar 
from one of his sardine importers. Not 
only was “Goya” easier to pronounce 
than “Unanue,” but he also liked the 
association with the famous Spanish 
painter Francisco Goya. The store contin-
ued to grow even as the population of 
the neighborhood changed. After the 
end of World War II brought a wave of 
Puerto Rican immigrants, Unanue 
stocked up on local staples like yucca, 
plantains, and pigeon peas. Black beans, 
guava paste, and coconut were the next 
products to be added, after many Cubans 
and Dominicans moved to the city in the 
1950s. Around that same time, Unanue 
moved the company headquarters to 
New Jersey and started distributing his 
products along the East Coast. By 1973 
the company was harvesting and export-
ing its own olives from Spain. Prudencio 
Unanue died a few years later, leaving his 
son Joseph Unanue in charge. 
 Despite the loss to the family as well 
as the change in leadership, Goya grew 
steadily over the next few decades by 
sticking to its slogan, “If it’s Goya, it has 
to be good.” By the 1980s this motto 
rang true for millions of second- 
generation Hispanics who had grown up 
eating Goya products. While this core 
market continued to fuel sales, more 
non-Hispanic Americans were expanding 
their diets to include foods from other 
cultures. 
 Goya took advantage of this change 
in taste, and began appealing more to 
consumers outside of its traditional 
 markets. After Joseph Unanue stepped 
down as president in 2004, his succes-
sor and nephew, Bob Unanue, went one 
step further and hired a marketing firm to 
help the company specifically target non-
Hispanics. Still, the company strives to 
serve all customers regardless of their 
demographic. “We like to say we don’t 
market  to Latinos, we market  as Latinos,” 
says Bob Unanue. “We sell to the 
masses, food that is good for you and 
not expensive. We pretty much stick to 
that.” This simple philosophy has grown 
Goya from a small neighborhood grocery 
store, with one man selling olives and 
sardines, into a large company with more 
than 3,500 employees selling more than 
1,500 products across the U.S. and 
Caribbean. In fact, today Goya enjoys a 
25 percent market share among authentic 
Hispanic food brands. And none of it 
would have been possible without the 
entrepreneurial spirit of the company’s 
immigrant founder, Prudencio Unanue. 
 Stories about people who take risks, 
like Unanue, are commonplace in this 
age of the entrepreneur. As you read 
about such risk takers in this chapter, 
maybe you’ll be inspired to become an 
entrepreneur yourself. 
 Sources: Bernadette R. Giacomazzo, “The Story of 
Goya Foods: How a Latino-Owned Specialty Company 
Became a Mainstream Monolith,”  Latin Post, February 7, 
2014; Lisa Fickenscher, “Goya Grows Beyond 
Hispanics,”  Crain’s New York Business, June 9, 2013; 
Erin Carlyle, “How Goya Became One of America’s 
Fastest-Growing Food Companies,”  Forbes, 
May 8, 2013; and Kristina Puga, “Former President of 
Goya Foods Dead at 88, Remembered for His 
Philanthropy,”  NBC Latino, June 14, 2013. 
an 75
7
yea
earsrs Goya
non Hispanic Americans were expanding
 Getting to Know  Prudencio Unanue
151

152
 name that company 
 While I was an employee at a big company, I developed a product that has 
become a staple on most office supply lists. I needed something to mark the 
pages of a hymnal without falling out or damaging the book. What started as a 
simple, yellow piece of paper with a new adhesive evolved into many different 
versions—now there are Super Sticky, recycled, Pop-Up and electronic versions 
of my invention. Who am I, whom did I work for, and what did I invent? (Find the 
answer in the chapter.)  
 THE AGE OF THE ENTREPRENEUR 
 Today most young people know it’s unlikely they will get a job in a large cor-
poration and stay 30 years. For those who want more control over their des-
tiny, working in or starting a small business makes sense.   Entrepreneurship   
is accepting the risk of starting and running a business. Explore this chapter 
and think about the possibility of entrepreneurship in your future.  
 THE JOB-CREATING POWER OF 
ENTREPRENEURS IN THE UNITED STATES 
 Well before the recent economic turmoil, one of the major issues in the United 
States was the need to create more jobs. With the current high unemployment 
rate, job creation is even more critical. You can begin to understand the job-
creating power of entrepreneurs when you look at some of the great U.S. 
entrepreneurs from the past and the present. The history of the United States 
is the history of its entrepreneurs. Consider just a few of the many who have 
helped shape the U.S. economy:  1 
 
• 
DuPont, which manufactures thousands of products under such brand 
names as Teflon and Lycra, was started in 1802 by French immigrant 
Éleuthère Irénée du Pont de Nemours. Some 18 
shareholders provided $36,000 in start-up money.  
 •  Avon, the familiar beauty products retailer, 
started in 1886 with $500 David McConnell 
borrowed from a friend.  
 •  George Eastman launched photographic giant 
Kodak in 1880 with a $3,000 investment.  
 •  Procter & Gamble, now a multinational 
marketer of household products, was formed in 
1837 by William Procter, James Gamble, and a 
total of $7,000 in capital.  
 •  Ford Motor Company began with an investment 
of $28,000 by Henry Ford and 11 associates.  
 •  Amazon.com  
began 
with 
investments 
by 
founder Jeff Bezos’s family and friends. Bezos’s 
parents invested $300,000, a huge portion of 
their retirement account. Today they are 
billionaires.  
 entrepreneurship  
 Accepting the risk of starting 
and running a business.  
 Wacky grocer Jim 
Bonaminio may put on his 
wizard suit and roller-
skate through his Jungle 
Jim’s International Market, 
but he’s serious when it 
comes to his business. 
Instead of competing on 
price against Walmart, 
Jungle Jim’s competes on 
product variety. A case 
holding 1,200 kinds of hot 
sauce rests beneath an 
antique fire engine. Why 
do you think customers 
might remain loyal to 
Jungle Jim’s?  

153
 These stories have much in common. One or a couple of entrepreneurs had a 
good idea, borrowed some money from friends and family, and started a business. 
That business now employs thousands of people and helps the country prosper. 
 The United States has plenty of entrepreneurial talent. Names such as 
Mark Zuckerberg (Facebook), Michael Dell (Dell Inc.), Bill Gates (Microsoft), 
Howard Schultz (Starbucks), Jack Dorsey (Twitter), and Chad Hurley and 
Steve Chen (YouTube) have become as familiar as those of the great entrepre-
neurs of the past. The Spotlight on Small Business box highlights several 
young entrepreneurs who started businesses while still in school.  
Explain why people take the risks of entrepreneurship; list the attributes of 
successful entrepreneurs; and describe entrepreneurial teams, intrapreneurs, 
and home- and web-based businesses.
 WHY PEOPLE TAKE THE 
ENTREPRENEURIAL CHALLENGE  
 Taking the risks of starting a business can be scary and thrilling at the same 
time. One entrepreneur described it as almost like bungee jumping. You might 
be scared, but if you watch six other people do it and they survive, then you’re 
LO 6–1
 spotlight on small business 
 Although most entrepreneurs wait 
until they finish their education to 
make the jump into their own busi-
nesses, some aspiring entrepre-
neurs choose to buck the trend. 
Here are just a few examples of 
young entrepreneurs who found 
success in their college years:
Jeremy Young enrolled in col-
lege to major in art history. 
During his sophomore year 
he attended a meeting of the 
entrepreneurship club on 
campus and shortly afterward 
pitched an idea he had for a 
prepaid laundry service for 
students. After developing a 
business plan and getting 
permission from the college, 
he negotiated an agreement 
with a local Laundromat that 
provided wash/dry/fold ser-
vices and became a “laundry 
broker” for students.  
Jessica Mah sold her first com-
pany (that rented server 
space to small businesses) at 
the ripe old age of 14. As a 
student at the University of 
California at Berkeley she 
came up with an idea for a 
new venture, InternshipIN, 
which helps students identify 
high-quality internships. Her 
service has built up increas-
ing traffic through a partner-
ship with SimplyHired, a job 
search engine. She plans to 
charge employers a fee to 
post listings on her site.  
Zach Workman searched for an 
energy drink that did not con-
tain heavy doses of sugar or 
caffeine. When he was unable 
to find an energy drink with 
only natural ingredients, he 
decided to develop his own 
from a family recipe for fruit-
punch. With start-up capital 
from his parents he launched 
Punch, an all-natural energy 
drink that tasted good and 
had all the necessary dietary 
requirements. After a short 
while, three major distributor-
ships decided to carry the 
product. While still a student 
at the University of Indiana, 
his business had hopes of 
reaching sales of $1 million.  
Whitney Williams displayed a 
fine sense for design and 
business at an early age. 
During her first year at Texas 
Christian University, she 
started her own company 
named Tramonti (the Italian 
word for sunset), where she 
produced one-of-a-kind 
handcrafted jewelry. After 
two years of primarily selling 
her products through trunk 
shows, she set up an e-com-
merce site to expand distri-
bution. You can view her 
products today at  www.
tramontibywhitney.com . 
 Sources: Dave Lerner, “4 Reasons Why Student 
Entrepreneurs Are Poised for Success,”  Inc., 
February 24, 2014; Jason Ma, “Student 
Entrepreneurship Is Humming at Elite 
Universities,”  Forbes, May 14, 2014; and Nathan 
Resnick, “Student Raises $15 on Kickstarter 
Without Spending a Dime,”  Entrepreneur, 
February 12, 2014. 
 Earning while Learning 
 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
154
more likely to do it yourself. Here are some reasons people are willing to take 
the entrepreneurial risk:  2 
 
• 
 Opportunity. The opportunity to share in the American dream is a 
tremendous lure. Many people, including those new to this country, 
may not have the skills for today’s complex organizations, but they do 
have the initiative and drive to work the long hours demanded by 
entrepreneurship. The same is true of many corporate managers who 
leave corporate life (by choice or after downsizing) to run businesses 
of their own. Others, including an increasing number of women, 
minorities, older people, and people with disabilities, find that starting 
their own businesses offers them more opportunities than working for 
others.  
 
• 
 Profit. Profit is another important reason to become an entrepreneur. 
Bill Gates, who co-founded Microsoft, is the richest man in the United 
States and one of the richest people in the world.  
 
• 
 Independence. Many entrepreneurs simply do not enjoy working for 
someone else. Melissa Harvey, whose company Will n’ Rose’s LLC, 
produces all-natural nut and whole-grain Kizo bars, says one of the 
best things about being an entrepreneur is the freedom to pursue your 
passion: “It’s about independence. You can take something that 
motivates you, that inspires you and act on it without roadblocks.”  3 
 
• 
 Challenge. Some people believe that entrepreneurs are excitement 
junkies who thrive on risk. Entrepreneurs take moderate, calculated 
risks; they don’t just gamble. In general, though, entrepreneurs seek 
achievement more than power.  
 What Does It Take to Be an Entrepreneur? 
 Would you succeed as an entrepreneur? You can learn about the managerial 
and leadership skills needed to run a firm. However, you may not have the 
personality to assume the risks, take the initiative, create the vision, and rally 
others to follow your lead. Such personality traits are harder to learn or 
acquire than academic skills are. A list of entrepreneurial attributes to look for 
in yourself includes:  4 
 
• 
 Self-directed. You should be self-disciplined and thoroughly comfortable 
being your own boss. You alone will be responsible for your success or 
failure.  
 
• 
 Self-nurturing. You must believe in your idea even when no one else 
does, and be able to replenish your own enthusiasm. When Walt 
Disney suggested the possibility of a full-length animated feature film, 
 Snow White, the industry laughed. His personal commitment and 
enthusiasm caused the Bank of America to back his venture. The rest 
is history.  
 
• 
 Action-oriented. Great business ideas are not enough. Most important 
is a burning desire to realize, actualize, and build your dream into 
reality. 
 
• 
 Highly energetic. It’s your business, and you must be emotionally, 
mentally, and physically able to work long and hard. Employees have 
weekends and vacations; entrepreneurs often work seven days a week 
and don’t take vacations for years. Working 18-hour days in your own 
business can be exhausting, but most entrepreneurs think it is better 
than working long hours for someone else.  

155
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
 
• 
 Tolerant 
of 
uncertainty. 
Successful 
entrepreneurs take only calculated risks 
(if they can help it). Still, they must be 
able to take  some risks. Remember, 
entrepreneurship is not for the squea-
mish or those bent on security. You 
can’t be afraid to fail. Many well-known 
entrepreneurs 
failed 
several 
times 
before achieving success. The late foot-
ball coach Vince Lombardi summa-
rized the entrepreneurial philosophy 
when he said, “We didn’t lose any games 
this season, we just ran out of time 
twice.” New entrepreneurs must be pre-
pared to run out of time a few times 
before they succeed.  
 Turning Your Passions and Problems into Opportunities 
 As a young man in Queens, a borough of New York City, Russell Simmons chan-
neled his passion for hip-hop culture into Def Jam Records. Today, his multimil-
lion-dollar empire also includes Phat Farm clothing and Rush Management. 
Simmons used his time, money, and energy to turn his passion into a sustainable 
business.  5  
 While many entrepreneurs’ business ideas are inspired by their passions, 
many see business opportunities where others only see problems. For example, 
while Celtel’s founder Mo Ibrahim saw the opportunity to bring mobile phones 
to the over 1 billion people in Africa who had never even used a phone much 
less owned one, large telecommunication companies saw only poor peasants 
and logistical hurdles. Celtel is now Africa’s largest cell phone provider.  6  
 Most entrepreneurs don’t get ideas for products and services from some 
flash of inspiration. The source of innovation is more like a  flashlight. Imagine 
a search party walking in the dark, shining lights, looking around, asking 
questions, and looking some more. “That’s how most creativity happens,” says 
business author Dale Dauten. “Calling around, asking questions, saying ‘What 
if?’ till you get blisters on your tongue.” 
 To look at problems and/or passions and see opportunities in them, ask 
yourself these questions: What do I want, but can never find? What product or 
service would improve my life? What really irritates me, and what product or 
service would help? 
 Keep in mind, however, that not all ideas are opportunities. If your idea 
doesn’t meet anyone else’s needs, the business won’t succeed. You may have a 
business idea that is a good opportunity if:  7 
 
• 
It fills customers’ needs.  
 
• 
You have the skills and resources to start a business.  
 
• 
You can sell the product or service at a price customers are willing and 
able to pay—and still make a profit.  
 
• 
You can get your product or service to customers before your window 
of opportunity closes (before competitors with similar solutions beat 
you to the marketplace).  
 
• 
You can keep the business going.  
 If you think you may have the entrepreneurial spirit in your blood, com-
plete the Entrepreneurial Readiness Questionnaire on the next page.  
 Their love of bacon 
inspired Dave Lefkow 
and Justin Esch to 
create J&D Bacon Salt, a 
seasoning that adds the 
flavor of bacon to 
anything. With a start-up 
budget of just $5,000, 
they promoted their 
product with strategies 
like crazy antics, a 
Facebook page, blog, 
and free samples. 
Without food-industry 
connections, Lefkow and 
Esch created their own 
network of support the 
hard way—by picking up 
the phone and asking for 
it. Check out their story 
at  www.baconsalt.com . 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
156
 ENTREPRENEUR READINESS QUESTIONNAIRE  
 Each of the following items describes something that you may or may not feel represents your personality or other 
characteristics about you. Read each item and then circle the response (1, 2, 3, 4, or 5) that most nearly reflects the 
extent to which you agree or disagree that the item seems to fit you. 
 
  RESPONSE 
 Looking at My Overall Philosophy of Life and 
Typical Behavior, I Would Say That . . .  
 AGREE 
COMPLETELY 
(1)  
 MOSTLY 
AGREE 
(2) 
 PARTIALLY 
AGREE 
(3) 
 MOSTLY 
DISAGREE 
(4) 
 DISAGREE 
COMPLETELY 
(5)  
 1. I am generally optimistic. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 2. I enjoy competing and doing things better 
than someone else. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 3. When solving a problem, I try to arrive at the 
best solution first without worrying about 
other possibilities. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
4. I enjoy associating with co-workers after 
working hours. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 5. If betting on a horse race, I would prefer to 
take a chance on a high-payoff “long shot.” 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 6. I like setting my own goals and working hard 
to achieve them. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 7. I am generally casual and easygoing with others. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 8. I like to know what is going on and take 
action to find out. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 9. I work best when someone else is guiding me 
along the way. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 10. When I am right I can convince others. 
 
 
  
 
 
 11. I find that other people frequently waste my 
valuable time. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 12. I enjoy watching football, baseball, and similar 
sports events. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 13. I tend to communicate about myself very 
openly with other people. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 14. I don’t mind following orders from superiors 
who have legitimate authority. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 15. I enjoy planning things more than actually car-
rying out the plans. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
16. I don’t think it’s much fun to bet on a “sure thing.” 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 17. If faced with failure, I would shift quickly to 
something else rather than sticking to my guns. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 18. Part of being successful in business is reserv-
ing adequate time for family. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 19. Once I have earned something, I feel that 
keeping it secure is important. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 20. Making a lot of money is largely a matter of 
getting the right breaks. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 21. Problem solving is usually more effective 
when a number of alternatives are considered. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 22. I enjoy impressing others with the things I can do. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 23. I enjoy playing games like tennis and handball 
with someone who is slightly better than I am. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
 24. Sometimes moral ethics must be bent a little 
in business dealings. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
25. I think that good friends would make the best 
subordinates in an organization. 
 1 
 2 
 3 
 4 
 5 
(continued)

157
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
 Entrepreneurial Teams 
 An   entrepreneurial team   is a group of experienced people from different 
areas of business who join to form a managerial team with the skills to develop, 
make, and market a new product. A team may be better than an individual 
entrepreneur because team members can combine creative skills with produc-
tion and marketing skills right from the start. Having a team also can ensure 
more cooperation and coordination later among functions in the business. 
 While Steve Jobs was the charismatic folk hero and visionary of Apple Com-
puters, it was Steve Wozniak who invented the first personal computer model 
and Mike Markkula who offered business expertise and access to venture capital. 
The key to Apple’s early success was that it was built around this “smart team” of 
entrepreneurs. The team wanted to combine the discipline of a big company with 
an environment in which people could feel they were participating in a successful 
venture. The trio of entrepreneurs recruited seasoned managers with similar 
desires. Everyone worked together to conceive, develop, and market products.  8  
 Micropreneurs and Home-Based Businesses 
 Not everyone who starts a business wants to grow a mammoth corporation. 
Some are interested in maintaining a balanced lifestyle while doing the kind 
of work they want to do. Such business owners are called   micropreneurs  . 
While other entrepreneurs are committed to the quest for growth, micropre-
neurs know they can be happy even if their companies never appear on a list 
of top-ranked businesses. 
 Many micropreneurs are home-based business owners. More than half of 
all small businesses are run from owners’ homes.  9 Micropreneurs include con-
sultants, video producers, architects, and bookkeepers. Many with profes-
sional skills such as graphic design, writing, and translating have found that 
one way of starting a freelance business is through websites such as Elance 
( www.elance.com ) and oDesk ( www.odesk.com ) that link clients and freelanc-
ers. The sites post job openings and client feedback and serve as secure inter-
mediaries for clients’ payments. 
 Many home-based businesses are owned by people combining career and 
family. Don’t picture just moms with young children; nearly 60 percent are 
men. 10 Here are more reasons for the growth of home-based businesses:  11 
 
• 
Computer technology has leveled the competitive playing field, 
allowing home-based businesses to look and act as big as their 
corporate competitors. Broadband Internet connections, smartphones, 
 entrepreneurial team  
 A group of experienced people 
from different areas of business 
who join together to form a 
managerial team with the skills 
needed to develop, make, and 
market a new product.  
 micropreneurs  
 Entrepreneurs willing to accept 
the risk of starting and 
managing the type of business 
that remains small, lets them do 
the kind of work they want to 
do, and offers them a balanced 
lifestyle.  
 Scoring: 
  
 
 
 Give yourself one point for each 1 or 2 response you circled for questions 1, 2, 6, 8, 10, 11, 16, 17, 21, 22, 23. 
 Give yourself one point for each 4 or 5 response you circled for questions 3, 4, 5, 7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 15, 18, 19, 20, 24, 25. 
 Add your points and see how you rate in the following categories: 
 21–25  Your entrepreneurial potential looks great if you have a suitable opportunity to use it. What are you waiting for? 
 16–20  This is close to the high entrepreneurial range. You could be quite successful if your other talents and 
resources are right. 
 11–15 
 Your score is in the transitional range. With some serious work you can probably develop the outlook you 
need for running your own business. 
 6–10  Things look pretty doubtful for you as an entrepreneur. It would take considerable rearranging of your life 
philosophy and behavior to make it. 
 0–5 
 Let’s face it. Entrepreneurship isn’t really for you. Still, learning what it’s all about won’t hurt anything. 
 Source: Kenneth R. Van Voorhis,  Entrepreneurship and Small Business Management (New York: Allyn & Bacon, 1980). 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
158
and other technologies are so affordable that setting up a business 
takes a much smaller initial investment than it once did.  
 
• 
Corporate downsizing has led many to venture out on their own. 
Meanwhile, the work of the downsized employees still needs to be 
done, and corporations are outsourcing much of it to smaller 
companies.  
 
• 
Social attitudes have changed. Whereas home-based entrepreneurs 
used to be asked when they were going to get a “real” job, they are now 
likely to be asked for how-to-do-it advice.  
 
• 
New tax laws have loosened restrictions on deducting expenses for 
home offices.  
 Working at home has its challenges, of course. Here are a few:  12 
 
• 
Getting new customers. Getting the word out can be difficult because 
you don’t have a retail storefront.  
 
• 
 Managing time. You save time by not commuting, but it takes self-
discipline to use that time wisely.  
 
• 
Keeping work and family tasks separate. It’s great to be able to throw a 
load of laundry in the washer in the middle of the workday if you need 
to, but you have to keep such distractions to a minimum. It also takes 
self-discipline to leave your work at the office if the office is at home.  
 
• 
 Abiding by city ordinances. Government ordinances restrict the types 
of businesses allowed in certain parts of the community and how 
much traffic a home-based business can attract to the neighborhood.  
 
• 
Managing risk. Home-based entrepreneurs should review their 
homeowner’s insurance policy, since not all policies cover business-
related claims. Some even void the coverage if there is a business in 
the home. 
Home-based entrepreneurs should focus on finding opportunity instead 
of accepting security, getting results instead of following routines, earning a 
profit instead of earning a paycheck, trying new ideas instead of avoiding mis-
takes, and creating a long-term vision instead of seeking a short-term payoff. 
 Figure 6.1  lists 10 ideas for potentially successful home-based businesses, and 
 Figure 6.2  highlights clues for avoiding home-based business scams. You can 
find a wealth of online information about starting a home-based business at 
Entrepreneur magazine’s website ( www.entrepreneur.com ).
 Many businesses can be started at home. Listed below are 10 businesses that have 
low start-up costs, don’t require an abundance of administrative tasks, and are in rel-
atively high demand: 
 1. Cleaning service.  
 2. Gift-basket business.  
 3. Web merchant.  
 4. Mailing list service.  
 5. Microfarming (small plots of land for such 
high-value crops as mushrooms, edible 
flowers, or sprouts).  
 6. Tutoring.  
 7. Résumé service.  
 8. Web design.  
 9. Medical claims assistance.  
 10. Personal coaching.  
 Look for a business that meets these important criteria: (1) The job is something you 
truly enjoy doing; (2) you know enough to do the job well or you are willing to spend 
time learning it while you have another job; and (3) you can identify a market for your 
product or service. 
 FIGURE 6.1 POTENTIAL 
HOME-BASED 
BUSINESSES 

159
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
Web-Based Businesses
 The Internet has sprouted a world of small web-
based businesses selling everything from staplers 
to refrigerator magnets to wedding dresses. In 
2013, online retail sales reached $262 billion, or 
approximately 8 percent of all retail sales. Online 
retail sales were up 13 percent in 2013, compared 
to just 2.5 percent for all retail sales. Forrester 
Research predicts that online retail sales will reach 
$370 billion by 2017.  13 
 Web-based businesses have to offer more than 
the same merchandise customers can buy at 
stores—they must offer unique products or ser-
vices. For example, Marc Resnik started his web-
based distribution company after waking up one 
morning laughing about his business idea. Now Throw Things.com makes 
money for him—he’s shipped products to more than 44 countries. Although the 
company’s offerings seem like a random collection of unrelated items, every-
thing it sells can be thrown. You can buy promotional products in the “Throw 
Your Name Around!” section, ventriloquist dummies in the “Throw Your Voice!” 
section, and sporting equipment in the “Things to Throw!” section. Stranger 
products include fake vomit (“Throw Up!”) and a $3.50 certificate that says you 
wasted your money (“Throw Your Money Away!”). Resnik doesn’t sell very many 
of those certificates, but he does sell more dummies than anyone else in the 
United States. About two-thirds of the company’s revenue comes from the pro-
motional products section, which allows customers to add a logo to thousands 
of products. Why is Resnik’s business so successful? As one frequent customer 
said, it’s because of Resnik’s exceptional service and quick turnaround time.  14  
 One of the easiest ways to start a web-based business is through affiliate 
marketing.   Affiliate marketing   is an online marketing strategy in which a 
business rewards individuals or other businesses (affiliates) for each visitor or 
affiliate marketing
An online marketing strategy in 
which a business rewards 
individuals or other businesses 
(affiliates) for each visitor or 
customer the affiliate sends to 
its website.
 You’ve probably read many newspaper and magazine ads selling home-based busi-
nesses. You may have even received unsolicited e-mail messages touting the glory of 
particular work-at-home opportunities. Beware of work-at-home scams! Here are a few 
clues that tell you a home business opportunity is a scam:
 1. The ad promises that you can earn hundreds or even thousands of dollars a week 
working at home.  
 2. No experience is needed.  
 3. You need to work only a few hours a week.  
 4. There are loads of CAPITAL LETTERS and exclamation points!!!!!  
 5. You need to call a 900 number for more information.  
 6. You’re asked to send in some money to receive a list of home-based business 
opportunities.  
 7. You’re pressured to make a decision NOW!!!!  
 Do your homework before investing in a business opportunity. Call and ask for refer-
ences. Contact the Better Business Bureau ( www.bbb.org ), county and state depart-
ments of consumer affairs, and the state attorney general’s office. Conduct an Internet 
search and ask people in forums or on social networking sites if they’ve dealt with the 
company. Visit websites such as Friends In Business ( www.friendsinbusiness.com ) to 
find advice on specific online scams. Most important, don’t pay a great deal of money 
for a business opportunity until you’ve talked to an attorney. 
 FIGURE 6.2 WATCH OUT 
FOR SCAMS 
Jennifer Burnham 
operates her business, 
Pure and Simple 
Organizing, from her 
apartment. Burnham 
helps people organize 
their lives, homes, 
businesses, and more. 
Can you see why 
Burnham is considered 
a micropreneur?

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
160
customer the affiliate sends to its website. For 
example, imagine you discovered a backpack 
online made of an extremely lightweight, amaz-
ingly strong fabric that holds everything you need 
for the day, is easy to carry, and looks great. You 
want to tell all your friends about it, so you register 
as an affiliate on the seller’s website and post an 
affiliate link to the product on your Facebook page. 
Whenever anyone clicks on the link and buys a 
backpack, the seller pays you a commission.  15 
 If you can make a little money in commissions 
from sales of a single backpack, imagine if you 
want to recommend products from many different 
e-tailers. Building such relationships has become 
easier with the advent of social commerce services 
such as SkimLinks ( www.skimlinks.com ). Once 
registered with SkimLinks, any links to participat-
ing e-tailers that you’ve posted to your website, 
Facebook page, or blog are automatically converted 
to affiliate links with those e-tailers. You then get 
commissions on sales generated through your visi-
tors clicking on the links. While you do have to 
share a portion of your commissions with Skim-
Links, the social commerce service saves you from 
the time-consuming task of researching and regis-
tering as an affiliate with multiple sellers. Such ser-
vices are allowing users to become what amounts to peer-to-peer affiliates for 
e-retailers where the users can make money.  16 
 A web-based business isn’t always a fast road to success. It can sometimes 
be a shortcut to failure. Hundreds of high-flying dot-coms crashed after prom-
ising to revolutionize the way we shop. That’s the bad news. The good news is 
that you can learn from someone else’s failure and spare yourself some pain. 
 Entrepreneurship within Firms 
 Entrepreneurship in a large organization is often reflected in the efforts and 
achievements of   intrapreneurs  , creative people who work as entrepreneurs 
within corporations. The idea is to use a company’s existing resources—
human, financial, and physical—to launch new products and generate new 
profits. At 3M, which produces a wide array of products from adhesives like 
Scotch tape to nonwoven materials for industrial use, managers are expected 
to devote 15 percent of their work time to thinking up new products or ser-
vices.  17 You know those bright-colored Post-it Notes people use to write 
messages on just about everything? That product was developed by Art Fry, 
a 3M employee. He needed to mark the pages of his hymnal with something 
that wouldn’t damage the book or fall out. He came up with the idea of the 
self-stick, repositionable paper slips. The labs at 3M produced a sample, but 
distributors were unimpressed, and market surveys were inconclusive. 
Nonetheless, 3M kept sending samples to secretaries of top executives. Even-
tually, after a major sales and marketing program, the orders began pouring 
in, and Post-it Notes became a big winner. The company continues to update 
the product; making it from recycled paper is one of many innovations. 
Post-it Notes have gone international as well—the notepads sent to Japan 
are long and narrow to accommodate vertical writing. You can even use 
Post-it Notes electronically—the Post-it Software Notes program allows you 
intrapreneurs
Creative people who work as 
entrepreneurs within 
corporations.
 There are more than 
70,000 diamonds for 
sale on BlueNile.com, a 
Seattle-based company 
that took in $10.9 million 
in net income in 2013. 
Customers buy directly 
from the website or 
through a toll-free 
number staffed by 
helpful reps (who don’t 
work on commission). 
What does Blue Nile 
offer that other jewelry 
retailers don’t?  

161
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
to type messages onto brightly colored notes and store them on memo 
boards, embed them in documents, or send them through e-mail. 
 A classic intrapreneurial venture is Lockheed Martin Corporation’s 
Skunkworks, a research and development center that turned out such monu-
mental products as the United States’ first fighter jet in 1943 and the Stealth 
fighter in 1991.  18 
 Encouraging Entrepreneurship: What 
Government Can Do 
 Part of the Immigration Act passed by Congress in 1990 was intended to 
encourage more entrepreneurs to come to the United States. The act created a 
category of “investor visas” that allows 10,000 people to come to the United 
States each year if they invest $1 million in an enterprise that creates or pre-
serves 10 jobs. Some people are promoting the idea of increasing the allowed 
number of such immigrants. They believe the more entrepreneurs that can be 
drawn to the United States, the more jobs will be created and the more the 
economy will grow.  19 
 Another way to encourage entrepreneurship is   enterprise zones , specific 
geographic areas to which governments attract private business investment by 
offering lower taxes and other government support. These are also sometimes 
called  empowerment zones or  enterprise communities. In 2014, President 
Obama announced the creation of the first 5 of 20 “promise zones.” The prom-
ise zone plan calls on federal agencies to help business owners cut through 
bureaucracy to win federal grants and bring schools, companies, and nonprof-
its together to support literacy programs and job training.  20 
 The government could have a significant effect on entrepreneurship by 
offering tax breaks to businesses that make investments to create jobs. The 
Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) Act of 2012 was enacted in an 
effort to make it easier for small business to raise funds and hopefully create 
new jobs.  21 We talk more about the JOBS Act later in this chapter and in 
Chapter 19. 
 States are becoming stronger supporters of entrepreneurs, and are creat-
ing programs that invest directly in new businesses. Often, state commerce 
departments serve as clearinghouses for such programs. States are 
also creating incubators and technology centers to reduce start-up 
capital needs.   Incubators   offer new businesses in the critical stage 
of early development low-cost offices with basic services such as 
accounting, legal advice, and secretarial help. According to a 
recent study conducted by the National Business Incubator Asso-
ciation (NBIA), 87 percent of incubator graduates remain in busi-
ness.  22 Approximately 32 percent of all business incubators have 
ties to a university.  23 To learn more about what incubators offer 
and to find links to incubators in your area, visit the NBIA’s web-
site ( www.nbia.org ). 
 There are a few states that offer assistance to qualified candi-
dates under the Self-Employment Assistance (SEA) program. The 
program allows participants to collect unemployment checks while 
they build their businesses. Participants often get training and 
counseling as well. Unemployment checks may not seem like 
much, but many business owners say they are enough to help them 
launch their companies without depleting savings to pay for living 
expenses until their businesses are strong enough to support 
them.  24  
 enterprise zones  
 Specific geographic areas to 
which governments try to 
attract private business 
investment by offering lower 
taxes and other government 
support.  
 incubators  
 Centers that offer new 
businesses low-cost offices 
with basic business services.  
 When you come up with 
a winning idea, stick 
with it. That’s certainly 
been the motto of 3M, 
the maker of Post-it 
Notes. The company 
encourages 
intrapreneurship among 
its employees by 
requiring them to 
devote at least 15 
percent of their time to 
think about new 
products. How has this 
commitment to 
innovation paid off for 
3M and its employees?  

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
162
 The government can also join with private 
entities to promote entrepreneurship. For exam-
ple, Startup America is a White House initiative to 
“celebrate, inspire, and accelerate high-growth 
entrepreneurship throughout the nation.”  25 It is a 
public and private effort to bring together the 
country’s most innovative entrepreneurs, corpora-
tions, universities, foundations, and other leaders, 
to work with federal agencies to increase the num-
ber and success of U.S. entrepreneurs. One of the 
core goals is to empower more Americans not just 
to get a job, but also to create jobs. Learn more 
about the resources offered by Startup America at 
 www.startupamericapartnership.org . 
 • Why are people willing to take the risks of entrepreneurship?  
 • What are the advantages of entrepreneurial teams?  
 • How do micropreneurs differ from other entrepreneurs?  
 • What does the government do to promote entrepreneurship?  
•
Why are people willing
 test prep 
g to take the ri
g to
 Incubators, such as this 
one in Washington DC, 
offer new businesses 
low-cost offices with 
basic business services 
such as accounting, 
legal advice, and 
secretarial help. Do you 
have such incubators in 
your area?  
Discuss the importance of small business to the American economy and 
summarize the major causes of small-business failure.
 GETTING STARTED IN SMALL BUSINESS  
 Let’s suppose you have a great idea for a new business, you have the attributes 
of an entrepreneur, and you’re ready to take the leap into business for yourself. 
How do you start? That’s what the rest of this chapter is about. 
 It may be easier to identify with a small neighborhood business than with 
a giant global firm, yet the principles of management are similar for each. The 
management of charities, government agencies, churches, schools, and unions 
is much the same as the management of small and large businesses. So, as you 
learn about small-business management, you will take a giant step toward 
understanding management in general. All organizations demand capital, 
good ideas, planning, information management, budgets (and financial man-
agement in general), accounting, marketing, good employee relations, and 
good overall managerial know-how. We shall explore these areas as they relate 
to small businesses and then, later in the book, apply the concepts to large 
firms and even global organizations.  
 Small versus Big Business 
 The Small Business Administration (SBA) defines a   small business   as one 
that is independently owned and operated, is not dominant in its field of oper-
ation, and meets certain standards of size in terms of employees or annual 
receipts (such as under $2.5 million a year for service businesses). A small 
business is considered “small” only in relationship to other businesses in its 
industry. A wholesaler may sell up to $22 million and still be considered a 
LO 6–2
 small business  
 A business that is 
independently owned and 
operated, is not dominant in its 
field of operation, and meets 
certain standards of size (set by 
the Small Business 
Administration) in terms of 
employees or annual receipts.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

163
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
small business by the SBA. In manufacturing, a plant can have 1,500 employ-
ees and still be considered small. Let’s look at some interesting statistics about 
small businesses:  26 
 
• 
There are 28 million small businesses in the United States.  
 
• 
Of all nonfarm businesses in the United States, almost 97 percent are 
considered small by SBA standards.  
 
• 
Small businesses account for more than 50 percent of the gross 
domestic product (GDP).  
 
• 
Nearly 600,000 tax-paying, employee-hiring businesses are started 
every year.  
 
• 
Small businesses have generated 65 percent of the new jobs since 1995.  
 
• 
Small businesses employ about half of all private-sector employees.  
 
• 
About 80 percent of U.S. workers find their first jobs in small 
businesses.  
 As you can see, small business is really a big part of the U.S. economy. 
How big? Let’s find out.  
 Importance of Small Businesses 
 Since 60–80 percent of the nation’s new jobs are in small businesses, there’s a 
very good chance you’ll either work in a small business someday or start one. 
In addition to providing employment opportunities, small firms believe they 
offer other advantages over larger companies—more personal customer ser-
vice and the ability to respond quickly to opportunities. 
 Bigger is not always better. Picture a hole in the ground. If you fill it with 
boulders, there are many empty spaces between them. If you fill it with 
sand, there is no space between the grains. That’s 
how it is in business. Big businesses don’t serve all 
the needs of the market. There is plenty of room 
for small companies to make a profit filling those 
niches. 
 Small-Business Success and Failure 
 You can’t be naïve about business practices, or 
you’ll go broke. According to the SBA half of new 
businesses don’t last five years.  27 Some people 
argue that the failure rate is actually much lower 
than that statistic suggests. When small-business 
owners closed down one business to start another, 
for instance, they were included in the “failure” 
category—even though they hadn’t failed at all. 
Similarly, when a business changed its form of 
ownership or a sole proprietor retired, it was 
counted as a failure. The good news for entrepre-
neurs is that business failures are much lower than 
traditionally reported. 
 Figure 6.3  lists reasons for small-business fail-
ures, among them managerial incompetence and 
inadequate financial planning. Keep in mind that 
when a business fails, it is important that the own-
ers learn from their mistakes. Some entrepreneurs 
 When Roni Di Lulla’s 
dog Midnight had 
trouble squinting at a 
flying Frisbee, Roni 
retrofitted sports 
goggles to fit him. 
Midnight became the hit 
of the dog park and 
owners asked if she 
could make the eyewear 
for their dogs too. They 
became so popular, Di 
Lulla contracted with a 
Taiwanese company to 
make goggles with wide 
nose bridges and deep 
lens cups. Today 
Doggles brings in 
$3 million a year and 
are used by doggie 
fashionistas, veterinary 
ophthalmologists, and 
even military canines.  

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
164
 FIGURE 6.3 CAUSES 
OF SMALL-BUSINESS 
FAILURE 
The following are some of the causes of small-business failure:
•  Not allowing for setbacks and unexpected
 expenses.
•  Buying too much on credit.
•  Extending credit too freely.
•  Expanding credit too rapidly.
•  Failing to keep complete, accurate records, 
 so that the owners drift into trouble without
 realizing it.
•  Carrying habits of personal extravagance 
 into the business.
•  Not understanding business cycles.
•  Forgetting about taxes, insurance, and other
 costs of doing business.
•  Mistaking the freedom of being in business 
 for oneself for the liberty to work or not, 
 according to whim.
•  Plunging in without ﬁrst testing the waters 
 on a small scale.
•  Underpricing or overpricing goods or
 services.
•  Underestimating how much time it will take
 to build a market.
•  Starting with too little capital.
•  Starting with too much capital and being 
 careless in its use.
•  Going into business with little or no
 experience and without ﬁrst learning 
 something about the industry or market.
•  Borrowing money without planning just how
 and when to pay it back.
•  Attempting to do too much business with too
 little capital.
tle o
earn
n
nin
d b
o
g g
•
so
rea
  
s
Faili
o tha
lizi
t
ng
at
ing
ding
to k
he o
g cre
eep
ow
d
p
m
d
apital a
•  E
endin
Exp
d
o muc
ng credit t
to
m
ith
ﬁr
ustry or ma
plann
r
rk
rs d
t.
s d
g it
Carrying 
int
rr
s
who have suffered flops are more realistic than novice entrepreneurs. Because 
of the lessons they’ve learned, they may be more successful in their future 
ventures.  28 Milton Hershey, for example, tried starting candy businesses in 
Chicago and New York and failed both times. He could have followed in the 
footsteps of his father, a dreamer who lacked the perseverance and work ethic 
to stick to an idea long enough to make it work. Instead Hershey kept trying 
and eventually built not only the world’s largest candy company, but also 
schools, churches, and housing for his employees.
Arianna Huffington, cofounder of the Huffington Post, put learning from 
failure this way: “I failed, many times in my life…but my mother used to tell 
me, ‘failure is not the opposite of success, it’s a stepping stone to success.’ So 
at some point, I learned not to dread failure. I strongly believe that we are not 
put on this Earth just to accumulate victories and trophies and avoid failures; 
but rather to be whittled and sandpapered down until what’s left is who we 
truly are.”29
Choosing the right type of business is critical. Many businesses with low 
failure rates require advanced training to start—veterinary services, dental 
practices, medical practices, and so on. While training and degrees may buy 
security, they do not tend to produce much growth—one dentist can fill only 
so many cavities. If you want to be both independent and rich, you need to go 
after growth. Often high-growth businesses, such as technology firms, are not 
easy to start and are even more difficult to keep going. 
 The easiest businesses to start have the least growth and greatest failure 
rate (like restaurants). The easiest to keep alive are difficult to get started (like 
manufacturing). And the ones that can make you rich are both hard to start 
and hard to keep going (like automobile assembly). See  Figure 6.4 to get an 
idea of the business situations most likely to lead to success. 
 When you decide to start your own business, think carefully. You’re 
unlikely to find everything you want—easy entry, security, and reward—in one 
business. Choose those characteristics that matter most to you; accept the 
absence of the others; plan, plan, plan; and then go for it!  

165
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
Summarize ways to learn about how small businesses operate.
LEARNING ABOUT SMALL-BUSINESS 
OPERATIONS 
 Hundreds of would-be entrepreneurs ask the same question: “How can I learn 
to run my own business?” Here are some hints.  
 Learn from Others 
 Investigate your local community college for classes on small business and 
entrepreneurship; there are thousands of such programs throughout the 
United States.  Many bring together entrepreneurs from diverse backgrounds 
who form helpful support networks. Talk to others who have already done it. 
They’ll tell you that location is critical and caution you not to be undercapital-
ized, that is, not to start without enough money. They’ll warn you about the 
problems of finding and retaining good workers. And, most of all, they’ll tell 
you to keep good records and hire a good accountant and lawyer before you 
start. Free advice like this is invaluable.  
 Get Some Experience 
 There is no better way to learn small-business man-
agement than by becoming an apprentice or working 
for a successful entrepreneur. Many small-business 
owners got the idea for their businesses from their 
prior jobs. The rule of thumb is: Have three years’ 
experience in a comparable business first. 
 Back in 1818, Cornelius Vanderbilt sold his 
own sailing vessels and went to work for a steam-
boat company so that he could learn the rules of 
the new game of steam. After learning what he 
needed to know, he quit, started his own steamship 
company, and became the first U.S. business owner 
to accumulate $100 million. 
LO 6–3
 FIGURE 6.4 SITUATIONS 
FOR SMALL-BUSINESS 
SUCCESS  
 When Luke Holden and 
Ben Conniff opened 
their first lobster shack 
in 2009, they depended 
on Holden’s experience 
as a lobster fisherman 
and financial experience 
as an investment 
banker, and Conniff’s 
background in food 
media and culinary 
experience. With the 
help of Holden’s father, 
who spent 25 years 
fishing, cooking, 
packing, and shipping 
lobster, Luke’s Lobster is 
now an $8.5 million 
business with 
11 locations. How do you 
think this team’s 
experience helped the 
business succeed?  
The following factors increase the chances of small-business success:
•  The customer requires a lot of personal 
 attention, as in a salon.
•  The product is not easily made by
 mass-production techniques (e.g.,
 custom-tailored clothes or custom
 auto-body work).
•  Sales are not large enough to appeal to a
 large ﬁrm (e.g., a novelty shop).
• The neighborhood is not attractive because of
 crime or poverty. This provides a unique
 opportunity for small grocery stores and
 laundries.
•  A large business sells a franchise operation 
 to local buyers. (Don’t forget franchising 
 as an excellent way to enter the world of 
 small business.)
•  The owner pays attention to new 
 competitors.
•  The business is in a growth industry (e.g.,
 computer services or web design).
eal tto
m
aas 
to
•  A
lo
an
A large 
cal b
rie
e b
e.g.,
lau
 (e
cu
o a
p).
i e
a
s.s
portunity
unity
ne
s
cellent 
small busi
• T
ntn

166
 Running a small business part-time, during your off hours or on week-
ends, can bring the rewards of working for yourself while still enjoying a 
regular paycheck at another job. It may save you money too, because you’re 
then less likely to make “rookie mistakes” when you start your own busi-
ness. The Making Ethical Decisions box presents ethical questions about 
using the knowledge you’ve gained as an employee to start your own 
business.  
 Take Over a Successful Firm 
 Small-business owners work long hours and rarely take vacations. After many 
years, they may feel stuck and think they can’t get out because they have too 
much time and effort invested. Thus millions of small-business owners are 
eager to get away, at least for a long vacation. 
 This is where you come in. Find a successful businessperson who owns a 
small business. Tell him or her you are eager to learn the business and would 
like to serve an apprenticeship, that is, a training period. Say that at the end of 
the training period (one year or so), you would like to help the owner or man-
ager by becoming assistant manager. Thus you can free the owner to take off 
weekends and holidays and have a long vacation—a good deal for him or her. 
For another year or so, work very hard to learn all about the business—suppliers, 
inventory, bookkeeping, customers, promotion. At the end of two years, make 
this offer: The owner can retire or work only part-time, and you will take over 
management of the business. You can establish a profit-sharing plan with the 
owner plus pay yourself a salary. Be generous with yourself; you’ll earn it if 
you manage the business. You can even ask for 40 percent or more of the 
profits. 
 The owner benefits by keeping ownership in the business and making 
60 percent of what he or she earned before—without having to work. You ben-
efit by making 40 percent of the profits of a successful firm. This is an excel-
lent deal for an owner about to retire—he or she is able to keep the firm and a 
healthy profit flow. It is also a clever and successful way to share in the profits 
of a successful small business without making any personal monetary 
investment. 
 If profit sharing doesn’t appeal to the owner, you may want to buy the 
business outright. How do you determine a fair price for a business? Value is 
based on (1) what the business owns, (2) what it earns, and (3) what makes it 
unique. Naturally, an accountant will need to help you determine the busi-
ness’s value.  30
 If you fail at your efforts to take over the business through either profit 
sharing or buying, you can quit and start your own business fully trained.  
 making ethical decisions 
 Suppose you’ve worked for two 
years in a company and you see 
signs that it is beginning to falter. 
You and a co-worker have ideas 
about how to make a company 
like your boss’s succeed. Rather 
than share your ideas with your 
boss, you and your friend are con-
sidering quitting your jobs and 
starting your own company 
together. Should you approach 
other co-workers about working 
for your new venture? Will you try 
to lure your old boss’s customers 
to your own business? What are 
your alternatives? What are the 
consequences of each alternative? 
What’s the most ethical choice? 
 Should You Stay or Should You Go? 

167
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
Analyze what it takes to start and run a small business.
 MANAGING A SMALL BUSINESS  
 According to the Small Business Administration, one of the major causes of 
small business failures is poor management. Keep in mind, though, that  poor 
management covers a number of faults. It could mean poor planning, record-
keeping, inventory control, promotion, or employee relations. Most likely it 
includes poor capitalization. To help you succeed as a business owner, in the fol-
lowing sections we explore the functions of business in a small-business setting:
 
• 
Planning your business.  
 
• 
Financing your business.  
 
• 
Knowing your customers (marketing).  
 
• 
Managing your employees (human resource development).  
 
• 
Keeping records (accounting).  
 Although all the functions are important in both the start-up and manage-
ment phases of the business, the first two—planning and financing—are the 
primary concerns when you start your business. The others are the heart of 
your operations once the business is under way.  
 Begin with Planning 
 Many people eager to start a small business come up with an idea and begin 
discussing it with professors, friends, and other 
businesspeople. At this stage the entrepreneur 
needs a business plan. A   business plan   is a detailed 
written statement that describes the nature of the 
business, the target market, the advantages the 
business will have over competition, and the 
resources and qualifications of the owner(s). A 
business plan forces potential small-business own-
ers to be quite specific about the products or ser-
vices they intend to offer. They must analyze the 
competition, calculate how much money they need 
to start, and cover other details of operation. A 
business plan is also mandatory for talking with 
bankers or other investors. 
 Lenders want to know everything about an 
aspiring business. First, pick a bank that serves 
businesses the size of yours. Have a good accoun-
tant prepare a complete set of financial statements 
and a personal balance sheet. Make an appointment 
before going to the bank, and go to the bank with an 
accountant and all the necessary financial informa-
tion. Demonstrate to the banker that you’re a per-
son of good character, civic-minded and respected 
in business and community circles. Finally, ask for 
all the money you need, be specific, and be prepared 
to personally guarantee the loan.  
 Writing a Business Plan  
A good business plan 
takes a long time to write, but you’ve got only five 
minutes, in the  executive summary, to convince 
LO 6–4
 business plan  
 A detailed written statement 
that describes the nature of the 
business, the target market, the 
advantages the business will 
have in relation to competition, 
and the resources and 
qualifications of the owner(s).  
 ModCloth co-founders 
Susan and Eric Koger 
started selling vintage 
clothes when they were 
in college. They entered a 
hastily written business 
plan in a school 
competition—and lost. 
While discouraging at 
first, the loss taught them 
that they needed to 
refocus and create a solid 
business plan if they were 
going to attract investors. 
Today their company has 
more than 400 
employees and revenue 
over $100 million.  

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
168
readers not to throw it away. Since bankers receive many business plans every 
day, the summary has to catch their interest quickly. An outline of a compre-
hensive business plan is shown on the next page. There’s no such thing as a 
perfect business plan; even the most comprehensive business plan changes as 
the new business evolves. 31 
 Many software programs can help you get organized. One highly rated 
business-plan program is Business Plan Pro by Palo Alto Software. For a sim-
plified business plan, you may want to check out Fortune 500 executive Jim 
Horan’s book  The One Page Business Plan.  The book includes a CD with inter-
active exercises, forms and templates.  32 To see samples of successful business 
plans for a variety of businesses go to  www.bplans.com/sample_business_
plans . You can also learn more about writing business plans on the Small 
Business Administration website at  www.sba.gov/starting . 
 Getting the completed business plan into the right hands is almost as impor-
tant as getting the right information into the plan. Finding funding requires 
research. Next we discuss sources of money available to new business ventures. 
All require a comprehensive business plan. The time and effort you invest before 
starting a business will pay off many times later. The big payoff is survival.  
 Getting Money to Fund a Small Business 
 An entrepreneur has several potential sources of capital: personal savings; fam-
ily and business associates; banks and finance institutions; angels and venture 
capitalists; and government agencies such as the Small 
Business Administration (SBA), the Farmers Home 
Administration, the Economic Development Author-
ity, and the Minority Business Development Agency. 
 Family and business associates  
The most common 
source of funding after personal savings is friends and 
family.  33 You may even want to consider borrowing from a 
potential supplier to your future business. Helping you get 
started may be in the supplier’s interest if there is a chance you will 
be a big customer later. This is what Ray Kroc did in the early years 
of McDonald’s. When Kroc didn’t have the funds available to keep the 
company going, he asked his suppliers to help him with the necessary 
funds. These suppliers grew along with McDonald’s. It’s usually not a 
good idea to ask such an investor for money at the outset. Begin by 
asking for advice; if the supplier likes your plan, he or she may be 
willing to help you with funding too. 
 Banks and finance institutions  
The credit crunch spurred 
by the recent financial crisis made it necessary for small-
business owners to do a little extra shopping to find a 
friendly lender. Many found that smaller community banks 
were more likely to grant loans than larger regional banks. 
Since small banks do business in a single town or cluster of 
towns, they know their customers better. They have more flex-
ibility to make lending decisions based on everything they 
know about their customers, rather than on a more automated 
basis as larger banks must. 
 Community development financial institutions (CDFIs) may be a 
source of funding for businesses in lower-income communities. 
Today CDFIs are playing a big role in the economic recovery. 
iSee It! Need help 
understanding how 
an entrepreneur can 
secure financing for a 
small business? Visit 
your Connect e-book 
video tab for a brief 
animated explanation.
 Wouldn’t it be great if 
money grew on trees? 
Unfortunately it doesn’t, 
so prospective 
entrepreneurs must find 
other sources of capital 
such as personal 
savings, relatives, 
former employers, 
banks, finance 
companies, venture 
capitalists, and 
government agencies. 
What is the most 
common source of 
funding after personal 
savings? 

169
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
OUTLINE OF A COMPREHENSIVE BUSINESS PLAN 
 A good business plan is between 25 and 50 pages long and takes at least six months to write. 
 Cover Letter  
 Only one thing is certain when you go hunting for money to start a business: You won’t be the only hunter out there. You 
need to make potential funders want to read  your business plan instead of the hundreds of others on their desks. Your cover 
letter should summarize the most attractive points of your project in as few words as possible. Be sure to address the letter 
to the potential investor by name. “To whom it may concern” or “Dear Sir” is not the best way to win an investor’s support. 
 Section 1—Executive Summary  
 Begin with a two-page or three-page management summary of the proposed venture. Include a short description of 
the business, and discuss major goals and objectives. 
 Section 2—Company Background  
 Describe company operations to date (if any), potential legal considerations, and areas of risk and opportunity. Sum-
marize the firm’s financial condition, and include past and current balance sheets, income and cash flow statements, 
and other relevant financial records (you will read about these financial statements in Chapter 17). It is also wise to 
include a description of insurance coverage. Investors want to be assured that death or other mishaps do not pose 
major threats to the company. 
 Section 3—Management Team  
 Include an organization chart, job descriptions of listed positions, and detailed résumés of the current and proposed 
executives. A mediocre idea with a proven management team is funded more often than a great idea with an inexpe-
rienced team. Managers should have expertise in all disciplines necessary to start and run a business. If not, mention 
outside consultants who will serve in these roles and describe their qualifications. 
 Section 4—Financial Plan  
 Provide five-year projections for income, expenses, and funding sources. Don’t assume the business will grow in a 
straight line. Adjust your planning to allow for funding at various stages of the company’s growth. Explain the rationale 
and assumptions used to determine the estimates. Assumptions should be reasonable and based on industry/ 
historical trends. Make sure all totals add up and are consistent throughout the plan. If necessary, hire a professional 
accountant or financial analyst to prepare these statements. 
 Stay clear of excessively ambitious sales projections; rather, offer best-case, expected, and worst-case scenarios. 
These not only reveal how sensitive the bottom line is to sales fluctuations but also serve as good management guides. 
 Section 5—Capital Required  
 Indicate the amount of capital needed to commence or continue operations, and describe how these funds are to be 
used. Make sure the totals are the same as the ones on the cash-flow statement. This area will receive a great deal of 
review from potential investors, so it must be clear and concise. 
 Section 6—Marketing Plan  
 Don’t underestimate the competition. Review industry size, trends, and the target market segment. Sources like the 
 Rand McNally Commercial Atlas and Marketing Guide can help you put a plan together. Discuss strengths and weak-
nesses of the product or service. The most important things investors want to know are what makes the product more 
desirable than what’s already available and whether the product can be patented. Compare pricing to the competi-
tion’s. Forecast sales in dollars and units. Outline sales, advertising, promotion, and public relations programs. Make 
sure the costs agree with those projected in the financial statements. 
 Section 7—Location Analysis  
 In retailing and certain other industries, the location of the business is one of the most important factors. Provide a 
comprehensive demographic analysis of consumers in the area of the proposed business as well as a traffic-pattern 
analysis and vehicular and pedestrian counts. 
 Section 8—Manufacturing Plan  
 Describe minimum plant size, machinery required, production capacity, inventory and inventory-control methods, qual-
ity control, plant personnel requirements, and so on. Estimates of product costs should be based on primary research. 
 Section 9—Appendix  
 Include all marketing research on the product or service (off-the-shelf reports, article reprints, etc.) and other informa-
tion about the product concept or market size. Provide a bibliography of all the reference materials you consulted. This 
section should demonstrate that the proposed company won’t be entering a declining industry or market segment. 
 If you would like to see sample business plans that successfully secured funding, go to Bplans.com ( www.bplans.com ). 
You can also learn more about writing business plans on the Small Business Administration website at  www.sba.gov/starting . 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
170
CDFIs succeeded even after the credit bubble because they maintained 
the financial discipline other lenders lacked. They have the incentive 
to make sure their clients succeed because, if borrowers don’t repay 
their loans, the CDFIs take the hit, not investors. Only 1 percent of 
their loans were not paid back in the last three decades.  34 CDFIs don’t 
just loan money. More importantly, they provide business counseling 
such as helping owners learn how to develop marketing strategies, 
manage inventory, and improve cash flow. 
 Angels and venture capitalists  
Individual investors are also a frequent 
source of capital for most entrepreneurs.  Angel investors  are private individu-
als who invest their own money in potentially hot new companies before they 
go public. A number of websites match people who want money with those 
willing to lend it. They include donation-based services like Kickstarter, equity-
investment sites like Early Shares, and debt-investment sites like Prosper Mar-
ketplace. Other sites, such as GreenNote and People Capital, specialize in 
lending to students. This form of individual investing is called peer-to-peer 
(P2P) lending or crowdfunding.  35 A creditworthy borrower often gets such 
money faster and more easily than going to the bank. And the cost is often less 
than a bank loan. With so many crowdfunding sites (there more than 1,000 so 
far), it can be confusing to know which one is the best fit for you and your 
prospective business. Reviewing services like CrowdsUnite and Crowdfunding 
Websites Reviews offer feedback from users of lending sites to help you better 
understand your options.  36  
 The JOBS Act of 2012 allows businesses to raise up to $1 million a year 
from private investors without making an initial public offering 
(discussed in Chapter 19). Unlike many crowdfunding options that 
accept small donations in exchange for perks like T-shirts and other 
memorabilia, the JOBS Act allows businesses to solicit larger 
investments in exchange for either ownership shares in the business 
or a commitment to repay the loan.  37 Many prefer the terms 
 crowdinvesting or  equity crowdfunding  for this form of fund raising. 
The Adapting to Change box offers a couple of examples of 
companies seeking crowdinvested funds. You can read more about 
how the JOBS Act is changing how businesses can attract investors 
in Chapter 19.   
Venture capitalists  may finance your project—for a price. Venture 
capitalists may ask for a hefty stake in your company (as much as 60 
percent) in exchange for the cash to start your business. If the venture 
capitalist takes too large a stake, you could lose control of the business. 
Since the widespread failure of early web start-ups, venture capitalists 
have been willing to invest less and expect more return on their 
investment if the new company is sold.  38 Therefore, if you’re a very 
small company, you don’t have a very good chance of getting venture 
capital. You’d have a better chance finding an angel investor.  
 If your proposed venture does require millions of dollars to start, experts 
recommend that you talk with at least five investment firms and their 
clients in order to find the right venture capitalist.  39 You may be able 
to connect with potential investors through AngelList, an online 
nonprofit service that helps entrepreneurs and venture capitalists get 
to know each other.  40 To learn more about how to find venture 
capitalists, visit the National Venture Capital Association’s website 
( www.nvca.org ). 
 venture capitalists  
 Individuals or companies that 
invest in new businesses in 
exchange for partial ownership 
of those businesses.  

171
 The Small Business Administration (SBA) 
 The   Small Business Administration (SBA)   is a U.S. government agency that 
advises and assists small businesses by providing management training and 
financial advice and loans (see  Figure 6.5 ). The SBA started a microloan dem-
onstration program in 1991. The program provides very small loans (up to 
$50,000) and technical assistance to small-business owners. It is administered 
through a nationwide network of nonprofit organizations chosen by the SBA. 
Rather than award loans based on collateral, credit history, or previous busi-
ness success, the program judges worthiness on belief in the borrowers’ integ-
rity and the soundness of their business ideas.  41 
 The SBA reduced the size of its application from 150 pages to 1 page for 
loans under $50,000. Since government regulations are constantly changing, 
you may want to go to the SBA’s website ( www.sba.gov ) for the latest informa-
tion about SBA programs and other business services. 
 Small Business 
Administration (SBA)  
 A U.S. government agency that 
advises and assists small 
businesses by providing 
management training and 
financial advice and loans.  
 adapting to change 
 Crowdfunding websites like 
Kickstarter and Indiegogo have 
allowed thousands to receive 
the capital they need to realize 
their entrepreneurial dreams. 
However, these sites tend to 
work out best for people whose 
ideas play to an Internet audi-
ence, such as artists or video 
game designers who reward 
contributors with T-shirts or prod-
ucts. That’s why U.S. lawmakers 
passed the Jumpstart Our 
Business Startups (JOBS) Act in 
2012. The legislation is meant to 
make crowdfunding more acces-
sible to small businesses that 
hope to attract investors. 
 However, the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC) 
has yet to enact all the crowdin-
vesting (also known as  equity  
crowdfunding) clauses laid out 
in the JOBS Act. Instead, portions 
of it are being given a test run in 
states like Georgia, Kansas, and 
Wisconsin, as legislators continue 
to modify the law. For instance, 
after failing to secure a bank 
loan, two brothers from Georgia 
used crowdinvesting to raise 
$126,000 for their oilcan guitar 
business. Not only did the 
brothers spend six weeks 
explaining their business model 
to potential investors, but they 
also had to educate people in 
depth about the new law. “It’s not 
just throwing up a profile on a 
website and investors swarm at 
you. It’s a lot of effort,” says one 
of the brothers. 
 Even with all that effort, though, 
there’s no guarantee that a crowd-
investing campaign will work. For 
Daniel Popovic, another Georgia 
entrepreneur, three months of 
searching wasn’t enough time to 
secure the $400,000 he needed 
to launch his fitness website. He 
says that scrounging for capital 
became a full-time job, something 
that didn’t fit in with his skill set as 
a web designer. What’s more, 
even if a company raises enough 
crowdinvested cash to meet its 
current goals, there’s a good 
chance that other investors down 
the line wouldn’t want to fund a 
company with 40 or more stock-
holders. As a result, crowdinvest-
ing is recommended primarily for 
small, local shops and restaurants 
that won’t need venture capital 
investment going forward. Still, 
 circumstances could change once 
the revised federal bill finally gets 
enacted into law. Stay tuned. 
 Sources: Ruth Simon and Angus Loten, 
“Crowdfunding Gets State-Level Test Run,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, December 4, 2013; J. Craig 
Andersen, “Maine ‘Crowd Investing’ Bill Becomes 
Law,”  Portland Press Herald, March 6, 2014; and 
Nicole Fallon, “Equity Crowdfunding: 3 Facts 
Entrepreneurs Should Know,”  Business News 
Daily, March 21, 2014.    
 States Test New Crowdinvesting Rules 
e

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
172
 You may also want to consider requesting funds from the   Small Business 
Investment Company (SBIC) Program   . SBICs are private investment com-
panies licensed by the SBA to lend money to small businesses. An SBIC must 
have a minimum of $5 million in capital and can borrow up to $2 from the 
SBA for each $1 of capital it has. It lends to or invests in small businesses that 
meet its criteria. Often SBICs are able to keep defaults to a minimum by iden-
tifying a business’s trouble spots early, giving entrepreneurs advice, and in 
some cases rescheduling loan payments. 
 Perhaps the best place for young entrepreneurs to start shopping for an 
SBA loan is a Small Business Development Center (SBDC). SBDCs are funded 
jointly by the federal government and individual states, and are usually associ-
ated with state and community colleges and universities. SBDCs can help you 
evaluate the feasibility of your idea, develop your business plan, and complete 
your funding application—all for no charge. 
 Obtaining money from banks, venture capitalists, and government 
sources is very difficult for most small businesses. (You will learn more about 
financing in Chapter 18.) Those who do survive the planning and financing of 
their new ventures are eager to get their businesses up and running. Your suc-
cess in running a business depends on many factors, especially knowing your 
customers, managing your employees, and keeping good records.  
 Knowing Your Customers 
 One of the most important elements of small-business success is knowing the 
  market   , which consists of consumers with unsatisfied wants and needs who 
have both resources and willingness to buy. Most of our students have the will-
ingness to own a brand-new Maserati sports car. However, few have the 
resources necessary to satisfy this want. Would they be a good market for a 
luxury car dealer? 
 Small Business Investment 
Company (SBIC) Program  
 A program through which 
private investment companies 
licensed by the Small Business 
Administration lend money to 
small businesses.  
 market  
 People with unsatisfied wants 
and needs who have both the 
resources and the willingness 
to buy.  
 The SBA may provide the following types of financial assistance:
 • 
 Guaranteed loans —loans made by a financial institution that the government will 
repay if the borrower stops making payments. The maximum individual loan guar-
antee is capped at $5 million.  
 • 
 Microloans —amounts ranging from $100 to $50,000 to people such as single 
mothers and public housing tenants.  
 • 
 Export Express —loans made to small businesses wishing to export. The maximum 
guaranteed loan amount is $500,000.  
 • 
 Community Adjustment and Investment Program (CAIP) —loans to businesses to 
create new, sustainable jobs or to preserve existing jobs in eligible communities 
that have lost jobs due to changing trade patterns with Mexico and Canada fol-
lowing the adoption of NAFTA.  
 • 
 Pollution control loans —loans to eligible small businesses for the financing of the 
planning, design, or installation of a pollution control facility. This facility must pre-
vent, reduce, abate, or control any form of pollution, including recycling.  
 • 
 504 certified development company (CDC) loans —loans for purchasing major 
fixed assets, such as land and buildings for businesses in eligible communities, 
typically rural communities or urban areas needing revitalization. The maximum 
guaranteed loan amount is $5 million for meeting the job creation criteria or a 
community development goal. The business must create or retain one job for 
every $65,000 ($100,000 for small manufacturers) provided by the SBA.  
 • 
 CAPLine loans —loans to help small businesses meet their short-term and cyclical 
working capital needs. The maximum CAPLine loan is $5 million.  
 FIGURE 6.5 TYPES 
OF SBA FINANCIAL 
ASSISTANCE  

173
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
 Once you have identified your market and its needs, you must set out to 
fill those needs. How? Offer top quality at a fair price with great service. 
Remember, it isn’t enough to get customers—you have to  keep them. As Victo-
ria Jackson, founder of the $50 million company Victoria Jackson Cosmetics, 
says of the stars who push her products on television infomercials, “All the 
glamorous faces in the world wouldn’t mean a thing if my customers weren’t 
happy with the product and didn’t come back for more.” Everything must be 
geared to bring customers the satisfaction they deserve.  42 
 One of the greatest advantages small businesses have is the ability to 
know their customers better and adapt quickly to their ever-changing needs. 
The only way to know what your customers’ needs are is to listen, listen, listen. 
Don’t let your passion and ego get in the way of changing your products or 
services to fit what customers really want. The Reaching Beyond Our Borders 
box discusses how you can use crowdsourcing to let customers and others 
from around the world help you design your products. You will gain more 
insights about markets in Chapters 13–16. Now let’s consider effectively man-
aging the employees who help you serve your market.  
Managing Employees 
 As a business grows, it becomes impossible for an entrepreneur to oversee 
every detail, even by putting in 60 hours per week. This means that hiring, 
training, and motivating employees are critical.  43 
 It is not easy to find good help when you offer less money, skimpier benefits, 
and less room for advancement than larger firms do. That’s one reason employee 
relations is important for small-business management. Employees of small 
companies are often more satisfied with their jobs than are their counterparts 
in big business. Why? Quite often they find their jobs more challenging, their 
ideas more accepted, and their bosses more respectful. 
 Often entrepreneurs are reluctant to recognize that to keep 
growing, they must delegate authority to others. Who should 
have this delegated authority, and how much? This can be a 
particularly touchy issue in small businesses with long-term 
employees and in family businesses. As you might expect, 
entrepreneurs who have built their companies from scratch 
often feel compelled to promote employees who have been with 
them from the start—even when they aren’t qualified to serve as 
managers. Common sense tells you this could hurt the business. 
The idea that you must promote or can’t fire people because “they’re 
family” can also hinder growth. Entrepreneurs best serve themselves 
and the business if they gradually recruit and groom employees for 
management positions, enhancing trust and support between them. 
You’ll learn more about managing employees in Chapters 7–12.  
 Keeping Records 
 Small-business owners often say the most important assistance 
they received in starting and managing their business was in 
accounting. A businessperson who sets up an effective account-
ing system early will save much grief later. Accurate recordkeep-
ing enables a small-business owner to follow daily sales, 
expenses, and profits, as well as help owners with inventory 
control, customer records, and payroll. 
 Many business failures are caused by poor accounting 
practices that lead to costly mistakes. A good accountant can 
 Not all small businesses 
stay small; some 
become business 
superstars. Take Mattel, 
for example. Mattel 
founders Ruth and Elliot 
Handler started their 
business in their 
garage—making picture 
frames. When they 
found that the dollhouse 
furniture they made with 
the wood scraps sold 
better than the frames, 
they changed their 
business. Today toys 
like Barbie helped 
Mattel grow into a 
$14.4 billion business.  

174
help you decide whether to buy or lease equipment and whether to own or 
rent a building. He or she may also help you with tax planning, financial fore-
casting, choosing sources of financing, and writing requests for funds. 
 Other small-business owners may tell you where to find an accountant 
experienced in small business. It pays to shop around for advice. You’ll learn 
more about accounting in Chapter 17.  
 Looking for Help 
 Small-business owners have learned, sometimes the hard way, that they need 
outside consulting advice early in the process. This is especially true of legal, 
tax, and accounting advice but also of marketing, finance, and other areas. 
Most small and medium-sized firms cannot afford to hire such experts as 
employees, so they must turn to outside assistance. 
 A necessary and invaluable aide is a competent, experienced lawyer who 
knows and understands small businesses. Lawyers can help with leases, con-
tracts, partnership agreements, and protection against liabilities. They don’t 
have to be expensive. In fact, several prepaid legal plans offer services such as 
drafting legal documents for a low annual rate. Of course, you can find plenty 
of legal services online. The SBA offers plain-English guides and mini-tutorials 
that will help you gain a basic understanding of the laws that affect each phase 
of the life of a small business. FindForms.com offers a search tool that
 reaching beyond our borders 
 What’s better than knowing what 
your customers need and then 
designing products to meet 
those needs? Getting your 
customers to design the 
products themselves. That’s 
what Quirky has done. You 
probably are familiar with 
Quirky’s most successful 
product, Pivot Power, the pivot-
ing power strip that allows you to 
bend the strip in order to fit large 
adapters in every outlet. 
 Pivot Power’s creator, Jake 
Zien, will be the first Quirky inven-
tor to earn $1 million in royalty a 
year. When Zien was a college 
junior, he joined the Quirky com-
munity and submitted his idea as a 
simple, basic drawing. A week 
later, it was selected for develop-
ment. A year after that, it was on 
sale at Bed Bath & Beyond. Zien 
just submitted an idea; everything 
else was done by the Quirky com-
munity (i.e., all inventors, influenc-
ers, staff, and customers from 
around the globe). Anyone in the 
community who contributes their 
ideas regarding design, style, 
enhancing, packaging, naming, 
taglines, or pricing are called influ-
encers. The influencers don’t just 
get a pat on the back for helping 
out; if their ideas are used, they 
are paid a portion of the royalty as 
well. Once a product is ready for 
production, Quirky decides which 
of its 21 suppliers and factories 
(mostly in Asia) will make the 
product. 
 Quirky founder and CEO 
Ben Kaufman knew Quirky 
would work two years ago 
when he saw a tweet of a Target 
advertisement for Quirky prod-
ucts. The tweeter wrote, “I made 
that.” Actually, the person hadn’t 
made that. But he was part of the 
community that helped create it, 
an experience that gave him a 
sense of ownership. Can’t build a 
customer relationship stronger 
than that! 
 Sources: Josh Dean, “Is This the World’s Most 
Creative Manufacturer?”  Inc., October 2013; 
Stephanie Mlot, “Quirky, GE Unveil Aros Smart 
Air Conditioner,”  PC Magazine, March 19, 2014; 
and “Quirky’s Ben Kaufman Gets GE to Share 
Its Patents,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
March 20, 2014. 
www.quirky.com
 Beyond Knowing What Your Customers Need 
r
t 
o 
well
prod
of its
(mos
whe
adve
ucts
th t

175
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
helps you find free legal forms from all over the 
web as well as advice, links, books, and more. 
Remember, “free” isn’t a bargain if the information 
isn’t correct, so check the sources carefully and 
double-check any legal actions with an attorney.  
 Make your marketing decisions long before you 
introduce a product or open a store. An inexpensive 
marketing research study may help you determine 
where to locate, whom to select as your target mar-
ket, and what is an effective strategy for reaching it. 
Thus a marketing consultant with small-business 
experience can be of great help to you, especially 
one who has had experience with building websites 
and using social media. 
 Two other invaluable experts are a commercial loan officer and an insur-
ance agent. The commercial loan officer can help you design an acceptable 
business plan and give you valuable financial advice as well as lend you money 
when you need it. An insurance agent will explain all the risks associated with 
a small business and how to cover them most efficiently with insurance and 
other means like safety devices and sprinkler systems. 
 An important source of information for small businesses is the   Service 
Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE)  . This SBA office has more than 11,000 
volunteers from industry, trade associations, and education who counsel small 
businesses at no cost (except for expenses).  44 You can find a SCORE counselor 
by logging on to  www.score.org . The SBA also offers a free, comprehensive 
online entrepreneurship course for aspiring entrepreneurs. 
 Often business professors from local colleges will advise small-business 
owners free or for a small fee. Some universities have clubs or programs that 
provide consulting services by master of business administration (MBA) can-
didates for a nominal fee. The University of Maryland and Virginia Tech have 
internship programs that pair MBA students with budding companies in local 
incubator programs. The incubator companies pay half the intern’s salary, 
which is around $20 an hour. 
 It is also wise to seek the counsel of other small-business owners. The 
website YoungEntrepreneur.com offers experienced entrepreneurs and young 
start-ups an open forum to exchange advice and ideas. Visitors have access to 
articles on marketing, business planning, incorporation, and financial man-
agement. Peer groups within specific industries can give you better insights 
into the challenges and solutions encountered by other business owners in 
your field. Peer advisory organizations that could help you connect with a 
peer group in your industry include the American Small Business Coalition 
and Entrepreneurs Organization.  45 
 Other sources of counsel include local chambers of commerce, the Better 
Business Bureau, national and local trade associations, the business reference 
section of your library, and many small-business-related websites.  
 Service Corps of Retired 
Executives (SCORE)  
 An SBA office with volunteers 
from industry, trade 
associations, and education 
who counsel small businesses 
at no cost (except for 
expenses).  
 Dianne Harrison and 
Cynthia Clarke, 
founders and owners of 
Copioisty, worked with a 
SCORE mentor to 
develop the business 
side of their greeting 
cards and paper 
products company. The 
mentor advised them 
about financing, 
investor relations, sales 
and marketing, human 
resources, operations, 
and organizational 
planning. What was the 
price tag for all of this 
valuable advice? $0!  
 • A business plan is probably the most important document a small-
business owner will ever create. There are nine sections in the business 
plan outline shown in the chapter. Can you describe at least five of 
those sections now?  
•
A business plan is pro
 test prep 
obably thhe mos
oba
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
176
Outline the advantages and disadvantages small businesses have in entering 
global markets.
 GOING GLOBAL: SMALL-BUSINESS PROSPECTS  
 As we noted in Chapter 3, there are over 317 million people in the United 
States but more than 7.1 billion people in the world.  46 Obviously, the world 
market is a much larger, more lucrative market for small businesses than the 
United States alone. Small and medium-sized business accounted for 99 per-
cent of the growth in exporting firms in recent years. All this exporting is pay-
ing off. According to the International Trade Commission small exporting 
firms averaged 37 percent revenue growth during a recent five-year period 
compared to the decline of 7 percent for nonexporting firms.  47 
 Technological advances have helped increase small business exporting. 
PayPal makes it possible for small businesses to get paid automatically 
when they conduct global business online. The Internet also helps small 
businesses find customers without the expense of international travel. As 
people acquire more wealth, they often demand specialized products that 
are not mass-produced and are willing to pay more for niche goods that 
small businesses offer. Dave Hammond, inventor and founder of Wizard 
Vending, began to push his gumball machines into the global market via a 
website. In the site’s first year, he sold machines in Austria, Belgium, and 
Germany. 
 Still, many small businesses have difficulty getting started in global busi-
ness. Why are so many missing the boat to the huge global markets? Primarily 
because the voyage includes a few major hurdles: (1) financing is often diffi-
cult to find, (2) would-be exporters don’t know how to get started and do not 
understand the cultural differences between markets, and (3) the bureaucratic 
paperwork can threaten to bury a small business. 
 Beside the fact that most of the world’s market lies outside the United 
States, there are other good reasons for going global. Exporting can absorb 
excess inventory, soften downturns in the domestic market, and extend prod-
uct lives. It can also spice up dull routines. 
 Small businesses have several advantages over large businesses in inter-
national trade:
 
• 
Overseas buyers often enjoy dealing with individuals rather than with 
large corporate bureaucracies.  
 
• 
Small companies can usually begin shipping much faster.  
 
• 
Small companies can provide a wide variety of suppliers.  
 
• 
Small companies can give customers personal service and undivided 
attention, because each overseas account is a major source of business 
to them. 
A good place to start finding information about exporting is the Depart-
ment of Commerce’s Bureau of Industry and Security ( www.bis.doc.gov ). 
Other sources include the SBA’s Office of International Trade. The SBA’s 
Export Express loan program provides export financing opportunities for 
small businesses. The program is designed to finance a variety of needs of 
small-business exporters, including participation in foreign trade shows, cat-
alog translations for use in foreign markets, lines of credit for export pur-
poses, and real estate and equipment for the production of goods or services 
to be exported.  
LO 6–5

177
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
 • Why do many small businesses avoid doing business globally?  
 • What are some of the advantages small businesses have over large 
businesses in selling in global markets?  
•
Why do many small bu
 test prep 
usinesses avoi
usi
 Explain why people take the risks of entrepreneurship; list the attributes of 
successful entrepreneurs; and describe entrepreneurial teams, intrapreneurs, 
and home- and web-based businesses.
 • 
 What are a few of the reasons people start their own businesses?  
 Reasons include profit, independence, opportunity, and challenge.  
 • 
 What are the attributes of successful entrepreneurs?  
 Successful entrepreneurs are self-directed, self-nurturing, action-oriented, 
highly energetic, and tolerant of uncertainty.  
 • 
 What have modern entrepreneurs done to ensure longer terms of 
management?  
 They have formed entrepreneurial teams with expertise in the many skills 
needed to start and manage a business.  
 • 
 What is a micropreneur?  
 Micropreneurs are people willing to accept the risk of starting and manag-
ing the type of business that remains small, lets them do the kind of work 
they want to do, and offers them a balanced lifestyle.  
 • 
 What is intrapreneuring?  
 Intrapreneuring is the establishment of entrepreneurial centers within a 
larger firm where people can innovate and develop new product ideas 
internally.  
 • 
 Why has there been such an increase in the number of home-based and 
web-based businesses in the last few years?  
 The increase in power and decrease in price of computer technology have 
leveled the field and made it possible for small businesses to compete 
against larger companies—regardless of location.  
 Discuss the importance of small business to the American economy and 
summarize the major causes of small-business failure.
 • 
 Why are small businesses important to the U.S. economy?  
 Small business accounts for almost 50 percent of gross domestic product 
(GDP). Perhaps more important to tomorrow’s graduates, 80 percent of 
U.S. workers’ first jobs are in small businesses.  
 • 
 What does the   small  in small business mean?  
 The Small Business Administration defines a small business as one that is 
independently owned and operated and not dominant in its field of 
LO 6–1
LO 6–2
 summary 
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
178
operation, and that meets certain standards of size in terms of employees 
or sales (depending on the size of others in the industry).  
 • 
 Why do many small businesses fail?  
 Many small businesses fail because of managerial incompetence and 
 inadequate financial planning. See  Figure 6.3  for a list of causes of small- 
business failure.  
 Summarize ways to learn about how small businesses operate.
 • 
 What hints would you give someone who wants to learn about starting a 
small business?  
 First, learn from others. Take courses and talk with some small-business 
owners. Second, get some experience working for others. Third, take over 
a successful firm. Finally, study the latest in small-business management 
techniques.  
 Analyze what it takes to start and run a small business.
 • 
 What goes into a business plan?  
 See the outline of a business plan in the chapter.  
 • 
 What sources of funds should someone wanting to start a new business con-
sider investigating?  
 A new entrepreneur has several potential sources of capital: personal sav-
ings; family and business associates; banks and finance institutions; angels 
and venture capitalists; and government agencies and more.  
 • 
 What are some of the special problems that small-business owners have in 
dealing with employees?  
 Small-business owners often have difficulty finding competent employees 
and grooming employees for management responsibilities.  
 • 
 Where can budding entrepreneurs find help in starting their businesses?  
 Help can come from many sources: accountants, lawyers, marketing 
researchers, loan officers, insurance agents, the SBA, SBDCs, SBICs, peer 
groups, and even college professors.  
 Outline the advantages and disadvantages small businesses have in entering 
global markets.
 • 
 What are some advantages small businesses have over large businesses in 
global markets?  
 Foreign buyers enjoy dealing with individuals rather than large corpora-
tions because (1) small companies provide a wider variety of suppliers and 
can ship products more quickly and (2) small companies give more per-
sonal service.  
 • 
 Why don’t more small businesses start trading globally?  
 There are several reasons: (1) financing is often difficult to find, (2) many 
people don’t know how to get started and do not understand the cultural 
differences in foreign markets, and (3) the bureaucratic red tape is often 
overwhelming.  
 
Wh t hi
LO 6–3
LO 6–5
Wh t
LO 6–4
 •
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.

179
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
 key terms 
 affiliate marketing  159
 business plan  167
 enterprise zones  161
 entrepreneurial team  157
 entrepreneurship  152
 incubators  161
 intrapreneurs  160
 market  172
 micropreneurs  157
 Service Corps of Retired 
Executives (SCORE)  175
 small business  162
 Small Business 
Administration (SBA)  171
 Small Business 
Investment Company 
(SBIC) Program  172
 venture capitalists  170
 1. Do you have the entrepreneurial spirit? What makes you think that?  
 2. Are there any similarities between the characteristics demanded of an 
entrepreneur and those of a professional athlete? Would an athlete be a 
good prospect for entrepreneurship? Why or why not? Could teamwork be 
important in an entrepreneurial effort? Why or why not?  
 3. Imagine yourself starting a small business. What kind of business would it 
be? How much competition is there? What could you do to make your 
business more attractive than those of competitors? Would you be willing 
to work 60 to 70 hours a week to make the business successful?  
 critical thinking 
 developing workplace skills 
 1.  Find issues of  Entrepreneur, Black Enterprise, and  Inc. magazines online. 
Read about the entrepreneurs who are heading today’s dynamic new busi-
nesses. Write a profile about one.  
 2.  Select a small business that looks attractive as a career possibility for you. 
Talk to at least one person who manages such a business. Ask how he or 
she started it. Ask about financing; human resource management (hiring, 
firing, training, scheduling); accounting issues; and other managerial mat-
ters. Prepare a summary of your findings, including whether the person’s 
job was rewarding, interesting, and challenging—and why or why not.  
 3.  Contact the Small Business Administration by visiting a local office or the 
organization’s website at  www.sba.gov . Write a brief summary of the ser-
vices the SBA offers.  
 4.  Select a small business in your area or a surrounding area that has failed. 
List the factors you think led to its failure. Compile a list of actions the 
business owners might have taken to keep the company in business.  
 5.  Choose a partner from among your classmates and put together a list of 
factors that might mean the difference between success and failure of a 
new company entering the business technology industry. Can small start-
ups realistically hope to compete with companies such as Microsoft and 
Intel? Discuss the list and your conclusions in class.  
 
 
 
 
 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
180
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To assess your potential to succeed as an entrepreneur and to evaluate a sam-
ple business plan.  
 EXERCISE 
 1. Go to  www.bizmove.com/other/quiz.htm  and take the interactive entrepre-
neurial quiz to find out whether you have the qualities to be a successful 
entrepreneur.  
 2. If you have entrepreneurial traits and decide you would like to start your 
own business, you’ll need to develop a business plan. Go to  www.bplans.
com/sample_business_plans.cfm  and click on Coffee Shops. Review the 
sample business plan for Internet Café. Although the plan may not follow 
the same format as the business plan outline in the chapter, does it contain 
all the necessary information listed in the outline? If not, what is 
missing?  
 video case   
 “If you like what you do, then life is a whole lot eas-
ier for you and for those around you.” According to 
Jennifer and Clint Telfer, this is the key to success 
as an entrepreneur. Beginning with an idea and 
using $50,000 from credit cards, the Telfers 
launched the company CJ Products with the fea-
tured line of Pillow Pets. The idea began as Jennifer 
watched her son patting down his stuffed animal to 
use it as a pillow. Since that humble beginning, the 
company has grown tremendously; that growth 
includes a successful website and licensing agree-
ments with Major League Baseball, the National 
College Athletic Association, and Disney. 
 Jennifer cites two mistakes they made early 
on as entrepreneurs: (1) they tried to grow the 
business too quickly; and (2) they used a less than 
quality manufacturer. These two errors were 
costly, and it took the Telfers a year and a half to 
recover their losses. Since those early setbacks, 
the Telfers and Pillow Pets have never looked 
back. Today, the company sells over 15 million 
units a year. 
 Part of the Telfers’ success stems from their 
many years as salespeople in retail markets. Suc-
cess as an entrepreneur requires a passion for 
what you do, action orientation, self-discipline, 
and high energy levels. 
 Small businesses are the backbone of the U.S. 
economy, with more than 2 million currently 
operating and over 750,000 new businesses start-
ing up each year. Small businesses are responsi-
ble for over 75 percent of all jobs in the United 
States. In fact, small businesses generate over 
50 percent of the U.S. GDP annually. And over 
80 percent of all Americans began their first job 
with a small business. Many of today’s large busi-
nesses, such as Avon, Ford, DuPont, Walmart, 
and Amazon.com, all started as small entrepre-
neurial ventures. 
 Do you have what it takes to be a successful 
entrepreneur? While self-discipline and high 
energy are essential, you must have a passion for 
what you want to do.  
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1.  How does the notion of taking an existing idea 
and making it better relate to the successful 
launch of Pillow Pets?  
 2.  What personal characteristics helped Jennifer 
and Clint Telfer succeed as entrepreneurs and 
build C.J. Products into the multimillion-
dollar business it is today?  
 3.  How did the Telfers finance their start-up? 
Why is it difficult for budding entrepreneurs 
to 
secure 
bank 
financing 
or 
venture 
capital?  
 LAUNCHING A BUSINESS: PILLOW PETS 

181
Entrepreneurship and Starting a Small Business
CHAPTER 6
 1. 
Philipp Harper, “History’s 10 Greatest Entrepreneurs,”  NBC 
News,  www.nbcnews.com  , accessed March 2014; and Lisa 
Ocker “The 50 Greatest Entrepreneurs of All Time,” 
 www.success.com  , accessed March 2014. 
 2. 
Jane Bryant Quinn, “Start Your Own Business,”  AARP 
Bulletin, January–February 2013; Kerry Hannon, “Psst . . . 
Want to Start a Side-Gig? Here’s What You Need to Know 
Now,”  Forbes, January 22, 2014; Julia Chang, “6 Successful 
Leaders On What It Takes to be Fearless,”  Fast Company, 
 www.fastcompany.com  , accessed March 2014; “The Forbes 
400,”  Forbes,  www.forbes.com  , accessed March 2014; and 
Martin Zwilling, “How to Balance Business Risk versus 
Opportunity,”  Forbes, January 16, 2014. 
 3. 
Will n’ Rose’s,   www.willnroses.com  , accessed March 2014. 
 4. 
Jason Daley, “Born or Made,”  Entrepreneur, October 2013; 
James Stephenson, “25 Common Characteristics of Successful 
Entrepreneurs,”  Entrepreneur,  www.entrepreneur.com  , 
accessed March 2014; Ed Feulner, “Entrepreneurs: Spark 
Plugs in a Free-Market Economy,”  The Washington Times, 
September 3, 2013; Hanny Lerner, “Do You Have What It 
Takes to Be an Entrepreneur?”  Forbes, March 18, 2013; and 
Joe Robinson, “The 7 Traits of Successful Entrepreneurs,” 
Entrepreneur, January 10, 2014. 
 5. 
Rush Communications,   www.rushcommunications.com  , 
accessed March 2014. 
 6. 
“Crazy Diamonds,”  The Economist, July 20, 2014. 
 7. 
Chuck Green, “When Entrepreneurs Don’t Take No for an 
Answer,”  The Wall Street Journal, April 29, 2013; Lizette 
Chapman “Extreme Sports Get a Camera,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, Jane 20, 2013; Lisa Quast, “Turning Your Passion 
into Business,”  Forbes, September 2, 2013; and Gautam 
Gupta, “How to Transform Your Passion into a Successful 
Business,”  Entrepreneur, November 20, 2013. 
 8. 
Cadie Thompson, “Is Apple Still the King of Consumer 
Design?”  Entrepreneur, July 17, 2013. 
 9. 
U.S. Census Bureau,   www.census.gov  , accessed March 2014. 
 10. 
Ibid. 
 11. 
Lauren Folino, “Recession Feeds Increase of Home-based 
Businesses,”  Inc.,  www.inc.com  , accessed March 2014; and 
Rebecca Reeve, “Snapchat, Rdio, And Other Unlikely 
Workplace Engagement-Boosting Tools,”  Fast Company, 
October 28, 2013. 
 12. 
Paul Tassi, “11 Ways to Stay Motivated While Working from 
Home,”  Forbes, January 22, 2014; Jacquelyn Smith, 
“How to Succeed at Working from Home,”  Forbes, 
August 12, 2013; and Ruth Blatt, “What Musicians Teach Us 
about the Challenges of Being Your Own Boss,”  Forbes, 
January 17, 2014. 
 13. 
Forrester Research, “US Online Retail Sales to Reach $370B 
by 2017,”  Forbes, March 14, 2013; and Forrester Research, 
 www.forrester.com  , accessed March 2014. 
 14. 
Throw Things,   www.throwthings.com  , accessed March 2014. 
 15. 
Mark Cohen, “Surviving the Dark Side of Affiliate Marketing,” 
The New York Times, December 4, 2014; Francine Hardaway, 
“10 Tips for Small Business Marketing From Infusioncon,” 
Fast Company, March 29, 2013; and HBS Working 
Knowledge, “The Tricky Business of Managing Web 
Advertising Affiliates,”  Forbes, February 3, 2014. 
 16. 
Anthony Ho, “Skimlinks Says Its Affiliate Linking Technology 
Drove $500M 1 in E-Commerce Sales Last Year,” 
TechCrunch,   www.techcrunch.com  , accessed March 2014. 
 17. 
 www.3m.com  , accessed March 2014. 
 18.  www.lockheedmartin.com  , accessed March 2014. 
 19. Catherine Rampell, “Immigration and Entrepreneurship,”  The 
New York Times, January 29, 2014. 
 20. Tom Moroney, “Putting a New Name on an Old Idea 
to Fix Inner Cities,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
January 27–February 2, 2014. 
 21. Kate Harrison, “What You Really Need to Know about 
the Jobs Act General Solicitation Rule,”  Forbes, 
October 21, 2013. 
 22. National Business Incubator Association,   www.nbia.org  , 
accessed March 2014. 
 23. “Give It the Old College Try,”  Inc., June 2013. 
 24. “Laid Off and Want to Start a Business? Self-Employment 
Assistance Programs May Help,” Small Business 
Administration,   www.sba.gov , accessed March 2014. 
 25. Startup America,   www.whitehouse.gov/issues/startup-
america , accessed March 2014. 
 26. Small Business Administration,   www.sba.gov , accessed 
March 2014; U.S. Census Bureau,   www.census.gov  , accessed 
March 2014; and Jason Nazar, “16 Surprising Statistics about 
Small Businesses,”  Forbes, September 9, 2013. 
 27. Small Business Administration,   www.sba.gov , accessed 
March 2014; and Brian Headd, Alfred Nucci and Richard 
Boden, “What Matters More: Business Exit Rates or Business 
Survival Rates?” U.S. Census Bureau,   www.census.gov  , 
accessed March 2014. 
 28. Kathy Caprino, “The 7 Worst Marketing Blunders Small 
Businesses Make,”  Forbes, January 24, 2014; Eric T. Wagner, 
“Five Reasons 8 out of 10 Businesses Fail,”  Forbes, 
September 12, 2013; Steve Tobak, “It’s a Marathon, Not a 
Sprint: The Real Reason Start-ups Fail,”  Inc., March 6, 2013; 
and Norm Brodsky, “Everyone Fails. What’s Key Is to Learn 
the Right Lessons,”  Inc., July/August 2013. 
 29. Vivian Giang, “11 Famous Entrepreneurs Share How They 
Overcame Their Biggest Failures,” Fast Company, May 1, 
2014. 
 30. George Anders, “Takeover University,”  Forbes, October 28, 
2013. 
  31. Steve Blank, “Why the Lean Start-Up Changes Everything,” 
Harvard Business Review, May 2013. 
 32. Mindy Charski, “Front-Page Success,”  The Costco 
Connection, June 2013. 
 33. Karen E. Klein, “Funding a New Small Business? Don’t Bother 
with Banks,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, February 13, 2014. 
 34. Michael Swack, Jack Northrup, and Eric Hangen, “CDFI 
Industry Analysis,”  Community Investments, Summer 2012; 
and “A Guide to Community Development Financial 
Institutions,”  Entrepreneur,  www.entrepreneur.com  , accessed 
March 2014. 
 35. Micahel Lev-Ram, “Crowdfunding Tries to Grow Up,”  Fortune, 
May 20, 2013; Vanessa Richardson,” Funds and Feedback,” 
Entrepreneur, August 2013; Ellen Gamerman, “The Trouble 
with Kickstarter,”  The Wall Street Journal, June 21, 2013; 
Michelle Goodman, “Seed Money,”  Entrepreneur, 
March 2013; Mat Honan, “Beyond Kickstarter,”  Wired, March 
2013; Todd Woody, “Own a Piece of the Sun,”  Forbes, 
February 11, 2013; and Sheila Bair, “P2P Lending,”  CNN 
Money, December 2013. 
 36. Michelle Goodman, “Rating the Platforms,”  Entrepreneur, 
January 2014. 
 37. Chris Brummer and Daniel Gorfine, “The JOBS Act Isn’t All 
‘Crowdfunding,’”  Forbes, October 8, 2013; and Darren Dahl, 
m, accessed March 2014.
 notes 

PART 2
Business Ownership: Starting a Small Business
182
“Want Funding from the Crowd? Get Ready to Bare Your 
Soul,”  Inc., February 2014. 
 38. Mahendra Ramsinghani, “Venture Capital 2013 Recap—Oh 
What a Year It Was,”  Forbes, December 26, 2013. 
 39. Deepak Malhotra, “How to Negotiate with VCs,”  Harvard 
Business Review, May 2013. 
 40. AngelList,   www.angel.co , accessed March 2014. 
 41. 
“A Simple Guide to Microloans,”  Entreprenuer,  www.
entrepreneur.com , accessed March 2014. 
 42. “Testing, Testing,”  The Economist, January 18, 2014; Matt 
Villano, “That’s My Motto,”  Entrepreneur,  May 2013; Joann 
Muller, “Tough Clothes, Tough Company,”  Forbes, November 
18, 2013; Kevin J. Boudreau and Karim R. Lakhani, “Using the 
Crowd as an Innovation Partner,”  Harvard Business Review, 
April 2013; Vincent Onyemah, Martha Rivera, and Abdul Ali , ” 
Harvard Business Review, May 2013; and Gladys Edmunds, 
“Refocus on Customers for Small Business Success,”  USA 
Today, January 1, 2014. 
 43. “Not Open for Business,”  The Economist, October 12, 2013; 
and Eric Paley, “Go Beyond Visionary; Be a Leader,”  Inc., 
February 2014. 
 44.   www.score.org , accessed May 2012; and Small Business 
Administration,  www.sba.gov , accessed March 2014. 
 45. Susan Hirshorn, “Sharing Secrets,”  The Costco Connection, 
March 2013. 
 46. “World Population Clock,” U.S. Census Bureau,
  www.census.gov/ipc/www/popclockworld.html , accessed 
March 2014; and  WorldAtlas.com , accessed March 2014. 
 47. National Small Business Association, “2013 Small Business 
Exporting Survey,”  www.nsba.biz , accessed March 2014. 
 Page 151: © Tony Freeman, PhotoEdit; p. 152: 
© Dan Callister/Alamy; p. 155: © Brian Smale 
Photography; p. 159: © Abbi O’Leary/MCT/News-
com; p. 160: © Brian Smale Photography; p. 161: 
© Lucidio Studio, Inc./Moment/Getty Images RF; 
p. 162: © Michel du Cille/The Washington Post/
Getty Images; p. 163: © Rick Madonik/Toronto 
Star/Getty Images; p. 165: Courtesy of Luke’s 
Lobster; p. 167: © Annie Tritt/The New York 
Times/Redux; p. 168: © John Lund/Blend 
Images/Getty Images RF; p. 171: © Peter Tit-
muss/Alamy; p. 173: © Zuma Press, Inc./Alamy; 
p. 174: Courtesy of Quirky; p. 175: © Lonnie 
C. Major. 
Page 151: © Tony Freeman P
 photo credits 


184
 Management and 
Leadership 
 BUSINESS MANAGEMENT: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers 
 7 
PART 3
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
  LO 7-1 
Describe the changes occurring today in the management function. 
  LO 7-2  
Describe the four functions of management. 
  LO 7-3  
Relate the planning process and decision making to the 
accomplishment of company goals. 
  LO 7-4  
Describe the organizing function of management. 
  LO 7-5 
Explain the differences between leaders and managers, and 
describe the various leadership styles. 
  LO 7-6 
Summarize the five steps of the control function of management.  

 Sheryl  Sandberg  
 • COO of Facebook 
 • Wants to change women's roles 
in business 
 • Led Facebook to profitability
 www.facebook.com 
 @facebook 
     lthough women have 
made great strides in the 
workplace over the last few 
decades, in many ways 
business remains a man’s 
world at the top of the career chain. Women 
lead only 21 of the Fortune 500 companies. 
 As chief operating officer of Facebook, 
Sheryl Sandberg knows more than most 
about the struggles faced by high-powered 
women. But her fame isn’t just because of 
her reputation as an all-star corporate man-
ager. Sandberg is also the author of  Lean 
In: Women, Work and the Will to Lead, the 
2013 best seller about the ways she thinks 
women’s roles in the workplace should 
change. While the book’s runaway success 
turned her into a celebrity, people in the 
business world have known about Sand-
berg’s seemingly superhuman ability to 
succeed for a long time. 
 The daughter of an eye doctor dad 
and PhD-holding mom, Sandberg’s first 
management gig involved looking after 
her two younger siblings. Even in those 
early days she displayed an ability to be 
an assertive leader. In  Lean In she writes 
that she taught her brother and sister to 
“follow me around, listen to my mono-
logues, and scream the word ‘Right!’ 
when I concluded.” Sandberg’s confident 
attitude and intelligence set her apart 
even among the bright minds of her Har-
vard undergraduate class. Her talents 
caught the eye of the prominent econo-
mist and professor Larry Summers, who 
became Sandberg’s mentor. When she 
moved on to Harvard Business School to 
earn an MBA, Summers volunteered to 
be her thesis advisor. His loyalty didn’t 
stop there. When he received an 
appointment at the Treasury Department 
from President Clinton, Summers 
brought on his protégé as chief of staff. 
Still only in her 20s, Sandberg began to 
build a reputation in Washington as a 
tough go-getter who still made time for 
the people who operated below her. 
 Once the Clinton presidency ended, 
though, Sandberg left the capital to try 
her hand in Silicon Valley. She joined 
Google in 2001, years before the search 
engine became the worldwide force it is 
today. As an executive in charge of 
global sales and advertising, Sandberg 
struck a deal with AOL that set Google 
on the path to profitability. After playing a 
key role in the search engine’s rise to 
dominance, Sandberg moved to Face-
book in 2008. At the time the social net-
work shared the same problem that 
Sandberg had faced at Google: the ser-
vice was popular with millions but profits 
were hard to come by. To push Face-
book into the black, CEO and founder 
Mark Zuckerberg granted Sandberg total 
freedom to revitalize the company’s 
earnings structure. Along with her easy-
going but dedicated management style, 
Sandberg also employed her army of 
high-level business contacts to ink 
important deals for Facebook. By 2010 
the company was profitable. Two years 
later she helped launch the company’s 
initial public offering, which, after a rocky 
start, grew into a well-performing stock. 
 But for all her accomplishments in the 
business world, Sandberg is still most 
famous for writing  Lean In. In it, she argues 
that women should not have to choose 
between holding a career and having a fam-
ily. According to Sandberg, this decision to 
“pull back” leaves too many women unful-
filled professionally as well as personally. But 
by “leaning in” to your career with passion 
and intensity, she claims that women can 
make the workplace more accessible. Sand-
berg’s message inspired thousands to form 
their own “ Lean In circles” to discuss the 
book as well as ways to advocate for 
change. However, others criticized 
Sandberg for offering advice that was 
aimed mainly at rich women. But 
despite how well her strategy works 
for others, there’s certainly no denying 
that “leaning in” has paid off hand-
somely for Sheryl Sandberg. 
 This chapter is all about leadership 
and management. You will learn that 
shared leadership is more widespread 
than you might have imagined. You will 
also learn about the functions of 
management and how manage-
ment differs from leadership. All 
in all, you should get a better 
idea of what leaders and man-
agers do and how they do it. 
 Sources: David de Jong, “Sheryl 
Sandberg Becomes One of Youngest U.S. 
Billionaires,”  Bloomberg, January 21, 2014; 
Miguel Helft, “Sheryl Sandberg: The Real 
Story,”  Fortune, October 10, 2013; Paul 
Harris, “Sheryl Sandberg: The Facebook 
Boss on a Self-Help Mission,”  The 
Guardian, February 23, 2013; and 
Nina Bahaudur, “Lean In Quotes: 11 
of the Best Quotations from Sheryl 
Sandberg’s New Book,”  
The Huffington Post, March 6, 2013.  
 Getting to Know  Sheryl Sandberg
A
185

186
 name that company 
 This company knows that finding the right people and keeping them happy is 
the key to long-term business success. So it has its own gourmet chefs prepare 
delicious lunches, dinners, and snacks for its employees. What is the name of 
this company? (The answer can be found in this chapter.)  
 MANAGERS’ ROLES ARE EVOLVING 
 Managers must practice the art of getting things done through organizational 
resources, which include workers, financial resources, information, and equip-
ment. At one time, managers were called “bosses” and their job consisted of 
telling people what to do, watching over them to be sure they did it, and repri-
manding those who didn’t. Many managers still behave that way. Perhaps 
you’ve witnessed such behavior; some coaches use this style.  
 Today, however, most managers tend to be more progressive. For example, 
they emphasize teams and team building; they create drop-in centers, team 
spaces, and open work areas. They may change the definition of  work from a 
task you do for a specified period in a specific place to something you do any-
where, anytime. They tend to guide, train, support, motivate, and coach employ-
ees rather than tell them what to do.  1 Thus most modern managers emphasize 
teamwork and cooperation rather than discipline and order giving.  2 They may 
also open their books to employees to share the company’s financials. 
 Managers of high-tech firms, like Google and Apple, realize that many work-
ers often know more about technology than they do. At first, Google tried to get by 
with no managers. Soon, however, it found that managers were necessary for com-
municating strategy, helping employees prioritize projects, facilitating coopera-
tion, and ensuring that processes and systems aligned with company goals.  3  
LO 7–1
Describe the changes occurring today in the management function.
 Rather than telling 
employees exactly what 
to do, managers today 
tend to give their 
employees enough 
independence to make 
their own informed 
decisions about how best 
to please customers. 
How do you think most 
employees respond to 
this empowerment on 
the job?  

187
Management and Leadership
CHAPTER 7
 The recent financial crisis forced many leading firms to fire managers 
and lower-level workers. Managers tended to be cautious in starting new ven-
tures as they waited to see what the economy would do. That hesitancy con-
tributed to high unemployment in the United States.  4 
 The people entering management today are different from those who entered 
in the past. Leaders of Fortune 100 companies tend to be younger, more of them 
are female, and fewer of them were educated at elite universities.  5 Managers in 
the future are more likely to be working in teams and assuming completely new 
roles in the firm. For one thing, they’ll be doing more expansion overseas.  6 Fur-
ther, they may be taking a leadership role in adapting to climate change.  7  
 What these changes mean for you is that management will demand a new 
kind of person: a skilled communicator and team player as well as a planner, 
organizer, motivator, and leader.  8 Future managers will need to be more glob-
ally prepared; that is, they need skills such as adaptability, foreign language 
skills, and ease in other cultures.  9 We’ll address these trends in the next few 
chapters to help you decide whether management is the kind of career you 
would like. In the following sections, we shall discuss management in general 
and the functions managers perform.  
Describe the four functions of management.
 THE FOUR FUNCTIONS OF MANAGEMENT 
 The following definition of management provides the outline of this chapter: 
 Management   is the process used to accomplish organizational goals through 
planning, organizing, leading, and controlling people and other organizational 
resources (see  Figure 7.1 ). 
LO 7–2
 management  
 The process used to 
accomplish organizational 
goals through planning, 
organizing, leading, and 
controlling people and other 
organizational resources.  
 FIGURE 7.1 WHAT 
MANAGERS DO  
Some modern managers 
perform all of these tasks 
with the full cooperation 
and participation of workers. 
Empowering employees 
means allowing them to 
participate more fully in 
decision making. 
Planning
Leading
•  Allocating resources, assigning tasks, and establishing procedures for accomplishing goals.
•  Preparing a structure (organization chart) showing lines of authority and responsibility.
•  Recruiting, selecting, training, and developing employees.
•  Placing employees where they’ll be most effective.
Organizing
•  Measuring results against corporate objectives.
•  Monitoring performance relative to standards.
•  Rewarding outstanding performance.
•  Taking corrective action when necessary.
Controlling
•  Setting organizational goals.
•  Developing strategies to reach those goals.
•  Determining resources needed.
•  Setting precise standards.
•  Guiding and motivating employees to work effectively to accomplish organizational goals
   and objectives.
•  Giving assignments.
•  Explaining routines.
•  Clarifying policies.
•  Providing feedback on performance.

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
188
 Planning   includes anticipating trends and 
determining the best strategies and tactics to achieve 
organizational goals and objectives. One of the 
major objectives of organizations is to please cus-
tomers. The trend today is to have  planning teams to 
help monitor the environment, find business oppor-
tunities, and watch for challenges.  Planning is a 
key management function because accomplishing 
the other functions depends heavily on having a 
good plan. 
 Organizing   includes designing the structure 
of the organization and creating conditions and 
systems in which everyone and everything work 
together to achieve the organization’s goals and 
objectives. Many of today’s organizations are 
being designed around pleasing the customer at a profit. Thus they must 
remain flexible and adaptable, because when customer needs change, 
firms must change with them.  10 Whole Foods Market, for example, is 
known for its high-quality, high-priced food items. But it has introduced 
many lower-cost items to adjust to the financial losses of its customer base. 
General Motors lost much of its customer base to manufacturers of more 
fuel-efficient cars. It hopes to win back market share by offering hydrogen-
powered or electric vehicles that cost less to run. GM has had some success 
in doing that.  11  
  Leading   means creating a vision for the organization and communi-
cating, guiding, training, coaching, and motivating others to achieve goals 
and objectives in a timely manner. The trend is to empower employees, 
giving them as much freedom as possible to become self-directed and 
self-motivated. This function was once known as  directing; that is, telling 
employees exactly what to do. In many smaller firms, that is still the man-
ager’s role. In most large firms, however, managers no longer tell people 
exactly what to do because knowledge workers and others often know 
how to do their jobs better than the manager does.  12 Nonetheless, leader-
ship is still necessary to keep employees focused on the right tasks at the 
right time.  13  
 Controlling   establishes clear standards to determine whether an organi-
zation is progressing toward its goals and objectives, rewarding people for 
doing a good job, and taking corrective action if they are not. Basically, it 
means measuring whether what actually occurs meets the organization’s 
goals. 
 Planning, organizing, leading, and controlling are the heart of manage-
ment, so let’s explore them in more detail. The process begins with planning; 
we’ll look at that right after the Test Prep questions.  
 planning  
 A management function that 
includes anticipating trends 
and determining the best 
strategies and tactics to 
achieve organizational goals 
and objectives.  
 organizing  
 A management function that 
includes designing the 
structure of the organization 
and creating conditions and 
systems in which everyone and 
everything work together to 
achieve the organization’s 
goals and objectives.  
 leading  
 Creating a vision for the 
organization and guiding, 
training, coaching, and motivating 
others to work effectively to 
achieve the organization’s goals 
and objectives.  
 Planning is what helps 
managers understand 
the environment in 
which their businesses 
must operate. When 
people’s tastes and 
preferences for 
restaurant meals 
change, food service 
managers need to be 
ready to respond with 
menu alternatives. What 
changes have occurred 
in your own preferences?  
 • What are some of the changes happening in management today?  
 • What’s the definition of  management used in this chapter?  
 • What are the four functions of management?  
•
What are some of the
 test prep 
changes happ
ch
j
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

189
Management and Leadership
CHAPTER 7
Relate the planning process and decision making to the accomplishment of 
company goals.  
PLANNING AND DECISION MAKING 
 Planning, the first managerial function, is setting the organization’s vision, goals, 
and objectives. Executives find planning to be their most valuable tool. A   vision   
is more than a goal; it’s a broad explanation of why the organization exists and 
where it’s trying to go.  14 It gives the organization a sense of purpose and a set of 
values that unite workers in a common destiny.  15 Managing an organization 
without first establishing a vision is like getting everyone in a rowboat excited 
about going somewhere, but not telling them exactly where. The boat will just 
keep changing directions rather than speeding toward an agreed-on goal. 
 Top management usually sets the vision for the organization and then often 
works with others in the firm to establish a mission statement. A   mission statement   
outlines the organization’s fundamental purposes. It should address:
 
• 
The organization’s self-concept.  
 
• 
Its philosophy.  
 
• 
Long-term survival needs.  
 
• 
Customer needs.  
 
• 
Social responsibility.  
 
• 
Nature of the product or service.  
 The mission statement becomes the foundation for setting specific goals 
and objectives.   Goals   are the broad, long-term accomplishments an organiza-
tion wishes to attain. Because workers and management need to agree on 
them, setting goals is often a team process.   Objectives   are specific, short-term 
statements detailing  how to achieve the organization’s goals. One of your goals 
for reading this chapter, for example, may be to learn basic concepts of man-
agement. An objective you could use to achieve this goal is to answer the chap-
ter’s Test Prep questions. 
 Planning is a continuous process. A plan that worked yesterday may not 
be successful in today’s market. Most planning also follows a pattern. The pro-
cedure you’ll follow in planning your life and career is basically the same as 
the one businesses use. It answers several fundamental questions:
 
1.  What is the situation now? What are the success factors affecting the 
industry participants and how do we compare? What is the state of the 
economy and other environments? What opportunities exist for meeting 
people’s needs? What products and customers are most profitable? Who 
are our major competitors? What threats are there to our business? 
These questions are part of   SWOT analysis,  which analyzes the 
organization’s  s trengths and  w eaknesses, and the  o pportunities and 
t hreats it faces, usually in that order.  16 Opportunities and threats are 
often  external to the firm and cannot always be anticipated. 
 
 
Weaknesses and strengths are more often  internal and therefore more 
within reach of being measured and fixed.  Figure 7.2  lists some of the 
general issues companies consider when conducting a SWOT analysis: 
What external success factors affect the industry? How does our firm 
measure up to other firms? What are our social objectives? What are 
our personal development objectives? What can we do to survive and 
prosper during a recession? For more on SWOT analysis, see the 
Taking It to the Net exercise at the end of this chapter.  
LO 7–3
 vision  
 An encompassing explanation 
of why the organization exists 
and where it’s trying to head.  
 mission statement  
 An outline of the fundamental 
purposes of an organization.  
 goals  
 The broad, long-term 
accomplishments an 
organization wishes to attain.  
 objectives  
 Specific, short-term statements 
detailing how to achieve the 
organization’s goals.  
 SWOT analysis  
 A planning tool used to analyze 
an organization’s strengths, 
weaknesses, opportunities, and 
threats.  
controlling
A management function that 
involves establishing clear 
standards to determine 
whether or not an organization 
is progressing toward its goals 
and objectives, rewarding 
people for doing a good job, 
and taking corrective action if 
they are not.

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
190
 
2.  How can we get to our goal from here?  Answering this question is often 
the most important part of planning. It takes four forms: strategic, 
tactical, operational, and contingency (see  Figure 7.3 ). 
  Strategic planning   is done by top management and determines the major 
goals of the organization and the policies, procedures, strategies, and resources 
it will need to achieve them.  17  Policies are broad guidelines for action, and 
 strategies determine the best way to use resources. At the strategic planning 
stage, top managers of the company decide which customers to serve, when to 
serve them, what products or services to sell, and the geographic areas in 
which to compete. Take Taco Bell, for example. Recognizing the economic 
slump, the company introduced a “value menu” of items like cheese roll-ups 
and bean burritos with low prices. It also went after the “fourth-meal” (late-
night) crowd and introduced several low-calorie, low-fat Fresco items. Block-
buster was not as successful in fighting off the introduction of new technology 
offered by Netflix and Hulu, making its brick-and-mortar stores obsolete. 
 In today’s rapidly changing environment, strategic planning is becoming 
more difficult because changes are occurring so fast that plans—even those 
set for just months into the future—may soon be obsolete. Think of how the 
amusement park company Six Flags had to change its plans when the price of 
gas went from a couple of dollars per gallon to over four dollars and then 
dropped back to the three-dollar range again. 
 Clearly, some companies are making shorter-term plans that allow for 
quick responses to customer needs and requests. The goal is to be flexible and 
responsive to the market. 18 
  Tactical planning   is the process of developing detailed, short-term state-
ments about what is to be done, who is to do it, and how. Managers or teams 
of managers at lower levels of the organization normally make tactical plans. 
Such plans can include setting annual budgets and deciding on other activities 
necessary to meet strategic objectives. If the strategic plan of a truck manufac-
turer, for example, is to sell more trucks in the South, the tactical plan might 
be to fund more research of southern truck drivers’ wants and needs, and to 
plan advertising to reach them. 
  Operational planning   is the process of setting work standards and sched-
ules necessary to implement the company’s tactical objectives. Whereas strategic 
planning looks at the organization as a whole, operational planning focuses on 
 strategic planning  
 The process of determining the 
major goals of the organization 
and the policies and strategies 
for obtaining and using 
resources to achieve those 
goals.  
 tactical planning  
 The process of developing 
detailed, short-term statements 
about what is to be done, who 
is to do it, and how it is to be 
done.  
 operational planning  
 The process of setting work 
standards and schedules 
necessary to implement the 
company’s tactical objectives.  
 FIGURE 7.2 SWOT 
MATRIX
 This matrix identifies potential 
strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats 
organizations may consider in 
a SWOT analysis. 
Potential Internal STRENGTHS
• Core competencies in key areas
• An acknowledged market leader
• Well-conceived functional area strategies
• Proven management
• Cost advantages
• Better advertising campaigns
Potential Internal WEAKNESSES
• No clear strategic direction
• Obsolete facilities
• Subpar profitability
• Lack of managerial depth and talent
• Weak market image
• Too narrow a product line
Potential External OPPORTUNITIES
• Ability to serve additional customer
   groups
• Expand product lines
• Ability to transfer skills/technology to
   new products
• Falling trade barriers in attractive foreign
   markets
• Complacency among rival firms
• Ability to grow due to increases in market
   demand
Potential External THREATS
• Entry of lower-cost foreign competitors
• Rising sales of substitute products
• Slower market growth
• Costly regulatory requirements
• Vulnerability to recession and business
   cycles
• Changing buyer needs and tastes

191
Management and Leadership
CHAPTER 7
specific supervisors, department managers, and individual employees. The oper-
ational plan is the department manager’s tool for daily and weekly operations. 
An operational plan may include, for example, the specific dates for certain 
truck parts to be completed and the quality specifications they must meet. 
  Contingency planning   is the process of preparing alternative courses of 
action the firm can use if its primary plans don’t work out. The economic and 
competitive environments change so rapidly that it’s wise to have alternative 
plans of action ready in anticipation of such changes. For example, if an orga-
nization doesn’t meet its sales goals by a certain date, the contingency plan 
may call for more advertising or a cut in prices at that time.  Crisis planning is 
a part of contingency planning that anticipates sudden changes in the environ-
ment. 19 For example, many cities and businesses have developed plans to 
respond to terrorist attacks. You can imagine how important such plans would 
be to hospitals, airlines, the police, and public transportation authorities.  
 Instead of creating detailed strategic plans, the leaders of market-based 
companies (companies that respond quickly to changes in competition or to 
other environmental changes) often simply set direction. They want to stay 
 contingency planning  
 The process of preparing 
alternative courses of action 
that may be used if the primary 
plans don’t achieve the 
organization’s objectives.  
 Organizations of all 
kinds need contingency 
plans for unexpected 
events. Here first 
responders at 
Washington’s Reagan 
National Airport 
participate in a drill with 
volunteers who are 
pretending to be victims 
in a simulated airplane 
crash. What 
contingency plans are 
you aware of on your 
campus or at work?  
 FIGURE 7.3 PLANNING 
FUNCTIONS  
Very few firms bother to 
make contingency plans. 
If something changes the 
market, such companies may 
be slow to respond. Most 
organizations do strategic, 
tactical, and operational 
planning. 
STRATEGIC PLANNING
The setting of broad,
long-range goals
by top managers
OPERATIONAL
PLANNING
 The setting of work
standards and schedules
TACTICAL PLANNING
The identification of
specific, short-range
objectives by lower-level
managers
CONTINGENCY
PLANNING
 Backup plans in case
primary plans fail
FORMS OF PLANNING

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
192
flexible, listen to customers, and seize opportunities—expected or not. Think 
of how stores selling to teenagers must adapt to style changes.  20 
 The opportunities, however, must fit into the company’s overall goals and 
objectives; if not, the company could lose its focus. Clearly, then, much of man-
agement and planning requires decision making.  
 Decision Making: Finding the Best Alternative 
 Planning and all the other management functions require decision making.   Decision
making  is choosing among two or more alternatives, which sounds easier than it 
is. In fact, decision making is the heart of all the management functions. 
 The  rational decision-making model is a series of steps managers often fol-
low to make logical, intelligent, and well-founded decisions. Think of the steps 
as the six Ds of decision making:
 
1. Define the situation.  
 
2. Describe and collect needed information.  
 
3. Develop alternatives.  
 
4. Decide which alternative is best.  
 
5. Do what is indicated (begin implementation).  
 
6. Determine whether the decision was a good one, and follow up.  
 Managers don’t always go through this six-step process. Sometimes they 
have to make decisions  on the spot —with little information available. They still 
must make good decisions in all such circumstances.   Problem solving   is less for-
mal than decision making and usually calls for quicker action to resolve everyday 
issues. Both decision making and problem solving call for a lot of judgment. 
 Problem-solving teams are two or more workers assigned to solve a spe-
cific problem (e.g., Why aren’t customers buying our service contracts?). 
 Problem-solving techniques include   brainstorming, that is, coming up with 
as many solutions as possible in a short period of time with no censoring of 
ideas. Another technique is called   PMI,  or listing all the  p luses for a solution 
in one column, all the  m inuses in another, and the  i mplications in a third. The 
idea is to make sure the pluses exceed the minuses. 
 You can try using the PMI system on some of your personal decisions to 
get some practice. For example, should you stay home and study tonight? List 
all the pluses in one column: better grades, more self-esteem, more responsi-
ble behavior, and so on. In the other column, put the minuses: boredom, less 
fun, and so on. We hope the pluses outweigh the minuses most of the time and 
that you study often. But sometimes it’s best to go out and have some fun, as 
long as doing so won’t hurt your grades or job prospects.  
 decision making  
 Choosing among two or more 
alternatives.  
 problem solving  
 The process of solving the 
everyday problems that occur. 
Problem solving is less formal 
than decision making and 
usually calls for quicker action.  
 brainstorming  
 Coming up with as many 
solutions to a problem as 
possible in a short period of 
time with no censoring of ideas.  
 PMI  
 Listing all the pluses for a 
solution in one column, all the 
minuses in another, and the 
implications in a third column.  
 • What’s the difference between goals and objectives?  
 • What does a company analyze when it does a SWOT analysis?  
 • What are the differences among strategic, tactical, and operational 
planning?  
 • What are the six Ds of decision making?  
•
What’s the difference
 test prep 
betweeen goals
be
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

193
Management and Leadership
CHAPTER 7
Describe the organizing function of management.
ORGANIZING: CREATING A UNIFIED SYSTEM 
 After managers have planned a course of action, they must organize the firm 
to accomplish their goals. That means allocating resources (such as funds for 
various departments), assigning tasks, and establishing procedures. A mana-
gerial pyramid shows the levels of management (see  Figure 7.4 ).   Top manage-
ment, the highest level, consists of the president and other key company 
executives who develop strategic plans. Job titles and abbreviations you’re 
likely to see often are chief executive officer (CEO), chief operating officer 
(COO), chief financial officer (CFO), and chief information officer (CIO) or in 
some companies chief knowledge officer (CKO). The CEO is often also the 
president of the firm and is responsible for all top-level decisions. The CEO 
and president are the same person in over half of the S&P 500 companies, 
including big companies such as United Parcel Service, John Deere, and Gen-
eral Electric.  
 CEOs are responsible for introducing change into an organization. The 
COO is responsible for putting those changes into effect. His or her tasks 
include structuring work, controlling operations, and rewarding people to 
ensure that everyone strives to carry out the leader’s vision. Many companies 
today are eliminating the COO function as a cost-cutting measure and assign-
ing that role to the CEO. Often, the CFO participates in the decision to cut the 
COO position. The CFO is responsible for obtaining funds, planning budgets, 
collecting funds, and so on. The CIO or CKO is responsible for getting the 
right information to other managers so they can make correct decisions. CIOs 
are more important than ever to the success of their companies given the 
LO 7–4
 top management  
 The highest level of 
management, consisting of the 
president and other key 
company executives who 
develop strategic plans.  
 FIGURE 7.4 LEVELS OF 
MANAGEMENT  
This figure shows the three 
levels of management. In 
many firms, there are several 
levels of middle management. 
However, firms have eliminated 
many middle-level managers 
because fewer are needed to 
oversee self-managed teams 
and higher-skilled employees. 
TOP 
MANAGEMENT
President
Vice presidents
MIDDLE MANAGEMENT
Plant managers
Division heads
Branch managers
SUPERVISORY (FIRST-LINE)
MANAGEMENT
Supervisors, Foremen
Department heads
Section leaders
NONSUPERVISORY
Employees

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
194
crucial role that information technology has come to play in every aspect of 
business. 
  Middle management   includes general managers, division managers, and 
branch and plant managers (in colleges, deans and department heads) who 
are responsible for tactical planning and controlling. Many firms have elimi-
nated some middle managers through downsizing and have given their 
remaining managers more employees to supervise. Nonetheless, middle man-
agers are still considered very important to most firms. 
  Supervisory management   includes those directly responsible for supervis-
ing workers and evaluating their daily performance; they’re often known as first-
line managers (or supervisors) because they’re the first level above workers. This 
is the first management position you are most likely to acquire after college.  
 Tasks and Skills at Different Levels of Management 
 Few people are trained to be good managers. Usually a person learns how to 
be a skilled accountant or sales representative or production-line worker, and 
then—because of her or his skill—is selected to be a manager. Such managers 
tend to become deeply involved in showing others how to do things, helping 
them, supervising them, and generally being active in the operating task. 
 The further up the managerial ladder a person moves, the less important 
his or her original job skills become. At the top of the ladder, the need is for 
people who are visionaries, planners, organizers, coordinators, communica-
tors, morale builders, and motivators.  Figure 7.5  shows that a manager must 
have three categories of skills:
 
1.   Technical skills   are the ability to perform tasks in a specific discipline 
(such as selling a product or developing software) or department (such 
as marketing or information systems).  
 
2.   Human relations skills   include communication and motivation; they 
enable managers to work through and with people. Communication can 
be especially difficult when managers and employees speak different 
languages. Skills associated with leadership—coaching, morale building, 
delegating, training and development, and supportiveness—are also 
human relations skills.  
 
3.   Conceptual skills   let the manager picture the organization as a whole 
and see the relationships among its various parts. They are needed in 
planning, organizing, controlling, systems development, problem 
 middle management  
 The level of management that 
includes general managers, 
division managers, and branch 
and plant managers who are 
responsible for tactical planning 
and controlling.  
 supervisory management  
 Managers who are directly 
responsible for supervising 
workers and evaluating their 
daily performance.  
 technical skills  
 Skills that involve the ability to 
perform tasks in a specific 
discipline or department.  
conceptual skills
Skills that involve the ability to 
picture the organization as a 
whole and the relationships 
among its various parts.
 human relations skills  
 Skills that involve 
communication and motivation; 
they enable managers to work 
through and with people.  
 FIGURE 7.5 SKILLS 
NEEDED AT 
VARIOUS LEVELS OF 
MANAGEMENT  
All managers need human 
relations skills. At the top, 
managers need strong 
conceptual skills and rely 
less on technical skills. First-
line managers need strong 
technical skills and rely less 
on conceptual skills. Middle 
managers need to have a 
balance between technical and 
conceptual skills. 
Middle
Managers
Technical
skills
Human relations
skills
Conceptual
skills
Top
Managers
Technical
skills
Human relations
skills
Conceptual
skills
First-Line
Managers
Technical
skills
Human relations
skills
Conceptual
skills

195
analysis, decision making, coordinating, and delegating (see the 
Reaching Beyond Our Borders box).  
 Looking at  Figure 7.5 , you’ll notice that first-line managers need to be 
skilled in all three areas. However, they spend most of their time on technical 
and human relations tasks, like assisting operating personnel and giving direc-
tions, and less time on conceptual tasks. Top managers, in contrast, need to 
use few technical skills. Instead, they spend almost all their time on human 
relations and conceptual tasks. A person who is competent at a low level of 
management may not be competent at higher levels, and vice versa. Different 
skills are needed at different levels.  
 Staffing: Getting and Keeping the Right People 
 To get the right kind of people to staff an organization, the firm has to offer the 
right kind of incentives. For example, Google’s gourmet chefs cook up free 
lunches, dinners, and snacks for employees. Would such an incentive appeal 
to you? How important to you is pay relative to other incentives? 
 Staffing   is recruiting, hiring, motivating, and retaining the best people 
available to accomplish the company’s objectives. Today, staffing is critical, 
especially in the Internet and high-tech areas. At most high-tech companies, 
like Google, Sony, and Microsoft, the primary capital equipment is brain-
power. A firm with innovative and creative workers can go from start-up to 
major competitor in just a few years. 
 Many people are not willing to work at companies unless they are treated 
well and get fair pay. They may leave to find a better balance between work 
and home.  21 Staffing is becoming a greater part of each manager’s assignment, 
and all managers need to cooperate with human resource management to win 
and keep good workers. Chapter 11 is devoted to human resource issues, 
including staffing.  
 staffing  
 A management function that 
includes hiring, motivating, and 
retaining the best people 
available to accomplish the 
company’s objectives.  
 reaching beyond our borders 
 As the overseer of an organiza-
tion’s “big picture,” CEOs need to 
have strong conceptual skills. In 
today’s global market, the scope 
of those skills is expanding rapidly 
as businesses increasingly focus 
on globalization in their long-term 
planning. 
 The shift from being a country-
focused company to a global-
focused company increases the 
CEO “to-do” list. Business leaders 
need to study a country’s political, 
legal, and regulatory systems and 
the impact they have on important 
business functions such as supply 
chains, capital markets, and the 
productivity of human resources. 
It’s also critical to thoroughly under-
stand a nation’s culture and respect 
its strengths and challenges. 
 There isn’t a single global mar-
ket, but rather a complex network 
of globally connected “local mar-
kets.” Such “local markets” require 
their own set of global standards 
that require local training, devel-
opment, and assessment. Aligning 
a company’s business applica-
tions across such diverse net-
works is no simple task. However, 
leaders at companies such as 
Coca-Cola, Nestlé, and IBM have 
done a noteworthy job. 
 Samuel Palmisano, former CEO 
of IBM, perhaps summed up the 
global management challenge 
best in his book  Adapting from 
Re-Think: A Path to the Future. In 
it he states, “The fundamental 
question for companies is not 
whether to compete globally, but 
how to compete globally.” That’s 
the challenge CEOs will have to 
answer company-by-company as 
they refine their conceptual skills. 
 Sources: Josh Bersin, “The World Is Not Global, 
It’s Local,”  Forbes, April 23, 2013; Samuel J. 
Palmisano, “The New Era for Global Enterprise,” 
 Bloomberg Businessweek, March 28, 2014; and 
Rana Foroohar, “Globalization in Reverse,”  Time, 
April 7, 2014. 
 Back to School for Top Managers 
www.ibm.com

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
196
 Explain the differences between leaders and managers, and describe the 
various leadership styles.
LEADING: PROVIDING CONTINUOUS 
VISION AND VALUES 
 One person might be a good manager but not a good leader. Another might be 
a good leader without being a good manager. Managers strive to produce order 
and stability, whereas leaders embrace and manage change. Leadership is cre-
ating a vision for others to follow, establishing corporate values and ethics, 
and transforming the way the organization does business in order to improve 
its effectiveness and efficiency. Good leaders motivate workers and create the 
environment for them to motivate themselves. Management is carrying out 
the leader’s vision. 22 
 Leaders must therefore:
 
• 
Communicate a vision and rally others around that vision. The leader 
should be openly sensitive to the concerns of followers, give them 
responsibility, and win their trust. A successful leader must influence 
the actions of others. Ellen Kullman took the reins at DuPont in the 
middle of a crisis. Nonetheless, she set the tone for growth and 
prosperity in the future. 
 
• 
Establish corporate values.  These include concern for employees, for 
customers, for the environment, and for the quality of the company’s 
products. When companies set their business goals, they’re defining 
the company’s values as well. The number one trait that others look for 
in a leader is honesty. The second requirement is that the leader be 
forward looking. 
 
• 
Promote corporate ethics.  Ethical behavior includes an unfailing 
demand for honesty and an insistence that everyone in the company 
gets treated fairly (see the Making Ethical Decisions box). That’s why 
we stress ethical decision making throughout this text. Many 
businesspeople have made the news by giving away huge amounts to 
charity, thus setting a model of social concern for their employees and 
others. 23 
 
• 
 Embrace change.  A leader’s most important job may be to transform 
the way the company does business so that it’s more effective (does 
things better) and more efficient (uses fewer resources to accomplish 
the same objectives). 24 
 
• 
 Stress accountability and responsibility.  If there is anything we have 
learned from the failures of banking managers and other industry and 
government managers, it is that leaders need to be held accountable 
and need to feel responsible for their actions. A key word that has 
emerged from the recent financial crisis is transparency. 
 
 
  Transparency  is the presentation of a company’s facts and figures in a 
way that is clear and apparent to all stakeholders. Clearly it is time to 
make businesses and the government more transparent so that 
everyone is more aware of what is happening to the economy and to 
specific businesses and government agencies. 25 
 All organizations need leaders, and all employees can help lead. You don’t 
have to be a manager to perform a leadership function. That is, any employee 
can motivate others to work well, add to a company’s ethical environment, and 
report ethical lapses when they occur. 
LO 7–5
 transparency  
 The presentation of a 
company’s facts and figures in 
a way that is clear and 
apparent to all stakeholders.  
 Jim Koch, founder and 
Chairman of Boston 
Beer Company, believes 
that culture and values 
can often substitute for 
money and resources. 
When he started his 
company, he had a very 
tight budget and his 
staff needed to be 
creative in figuring out 
how to use the limited 
resources wisely. Koch 
found that workers are 
motivated to do their 
best in a corporate 
culture of innovation 
and creativity. 

197
 Leadership Styles 
 Nothing has challenged management researchers more than the search for the 
best leadership traits, behaviors, or styles. Thousands of studies have tried to 
identify characteristics that make leaders different from other people. Intui-
tively, you might conclude the same thing they did: leadership traits are hard 
to pin down. Some leaders are well groomed and tactful, while others are 
unkempt and abrasive—yet both may be just as effective. 
 Just as no one set of traits describes a leader, no one style of leadership 
works best in all situations. Even so, we can look at a few of the most com-
monly recognized leadership styles and see how they may be effective (see 
 Figure 7.6 ):
 
1.   Autocratic leadership   means making managerial decisions without 
consulting others. This style is effective in emergencies and when 
absolute followership is needed—for example, when fighting fires. 
Autocratic leadership is also effective sometimes with new, relatively 
unskilled workers who need clear direction and guidance. Former Los 
Angeles Lakers Coach Phil Jackson used an autocratic leadership style 
iSee It! Need help 
understanding leaders 
vs. managers? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation. 
autocratic leadership
Leadership style that involves 
making managerial decisions 
without consulting others.
 making ethical decisions 
 First-line managers assist in the 
decisions made by their depart-
ment heads. The department 
heads retain full responsibility for 
the decisions—if a plan succeeds, 
it’s their success; if a plan fails, it’s 
their failure. Now imagine this: As 
a first-line manager, you have new 
information that your department 
head hasn’t seen yet. The findings 
in this report indicate that your 
manager’s recent plans are sure 
to fail. If the plans do fail, the man-
ager will probably be demoted 
and you’re the most likely candi-
date to fill the vacancy. Will you 
give your department head the 
report? What is the ethical thing to 
do? What might be the conse-
quences of your decision? 
 What Do You Tell the Team? 
s
 FIGURE 7.6 VARIOUS 
LEADERSHIP STYLES  
Source: Reprinted by permission 
of the  Harvard Business Review. 
An exhibit from “How to Choose 
a Leadership Pattern” by Robert 
Tannenbaum and Warren Schmidt 
(May/June 1973). Copyright © 1973 
by the Harvard Business School 
Publishing Corporation. All rights 
reserved. 
Use of authority by manager
Boss-centered
leadership
Subordinate-centered
leadership
Area of freedom for 
employee
Manager 
makes 
decision and 
announces it 
it
Manager 
“sells” 
decision 
Manager 
presents 
ideas and 
invites 
questions
Manager 
presents 
tentative 
decision 
subject to 
change
Manager 
presents 
problem, 
gets 
suggestions, 
makes 
decision
Manager 
defines 
limits, 
asks group 
to make 
decision
Manager 
permits 
employee to 
function 
within limits 
defined by 
superior
Autocratic
Participative/democratic
Free rein

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
198
to take the team to three consecutive National Basketball Association 
championships in his first three seasons. By following his leadership, a 
group of highly skilled individuals became a winning team. Today 
Jackson is president of the New York Knicks. Do you think he is using 
the same leadership style as president as he did as coach? What kind of 
leadership do you see being used most successfully in baseball, football, 
and other areas?  
 
2.   Participative (democratic) leadership   involves managers and 
employees working together to make decisions. Research has found 
that employee participation in decisions may not always increase 
effectiveness, but it usually does increase job satisfaction.  26 Many 
large organizations like Google, Apple, IBM, Cisco, and AT&T, and 
most smaller firms have been highly successful using a democratic 
style of leadership that values traits such as flexibility, good listening 
skills, and empathy. Employees meet to discuss and resolve 
management issues by giving everyone some opportunity to contribute 
to decisions.  
 
3. In   free-rein leadership   managers set objectives and employees are 
free to do whatever is appropriate to accomplish those objectives. 
Free-rein leadership is often the most successful leadership style in 
certain organizations, such as those in which managers supervise doctors, 
professors, engineers, or other professionals. The traits managers need in 
such organizations include warmth, friendliness, and understanding. 
More and more firms are adopting this style of leadership with at least 
some of their employees.  
 Individual leaders rarely fit neatly into just one of these categories. We can 
think of leadership as a continuum along which employee participation varies, 
from purely boss-centered leadership to subordinate-centered leadership. 
 Which leadership style is best? Research tells us that it depends largely on 
what the goals and values of the firm are, who’s being led, and in what situa-
tions. A manager may be autocratic but friendly with a new trainee, demo-
cratic with an experienced employee, and free-rein with a trusted 
long-term supervisor.  
 There’s no such thing as a leadership trait that is effective in 
all situations, or a leadership style that always works best. A suc-
cessful leader in one organization may not be successful in another 
organization. A truly successful leader has the ability to adopt the 
leadership style most appropriate to the situation and the 
employees.  
 Empowering Workers 
 Many leaders in the past gave explicit instructions to 
workers, telling them what to do to meet the goals and 
objectives of the organization. The term for this pro-
cess is  directing. In traditional organizations, directing 
includes giving assignments, explaining routines, 
clarifying policies, and providing feedback on perfor-
mance. Many organizations still follow this model, 
especially fast-food restaurants and small retail estab-
lishments where the employees don’t have the skill 
and experience needed to work on their own, at 
least at first. 
 participative (democratic) 
leadership  
 Leadership style that consists 
of managers and employees 
working together to make 
decisions.  
 free-rein leadership  
 Leadership style that involves 
managers setting objectives 
and employees being relatively 
free to do whatever it takes to 
accomplish those objectives.  
long-term supe
There’s n
all situations
cessful leader
organization.
leadership st
employees.
Empow
Man
wo
ob
c
i
c
m
e
 Alan Mulally, former 
CEO of Ford Motor 
Company, managed to 
lead the U.S. auto giant 
back into the black after 
the recession—without a 
government bailout. The 
reason for this success 
was the leadership style 
of the most authoritarian 
CEO that Ford has seen 
since Henry Ford. When 
an organization is under 
extreme pressure, why 
might autocratic 
leadership be 
necessary?  

199
Management and Leadership
CHAPTER 7
 Progressive leaders, such as those in some high-tech firms and Internet 
companies, empower employees to make decisions on their own.  Empower-
ment means giving employees the authority to make a decision without con-
sulting the manager and the responsibility to respond quickly to customer 
requests. Managers are often reluctant to give up their decision-making power 
and often resist empowerment. In firms that implement the concept, however, 
the manager’s role is less that of a boss and director and more that of a coach, 
assistant, counselor, or team member. 
  Enabling   means giving workers the education and tools they need to 
make decisions. Clearly, it’s the key to the success of empowerment. Without 
the right education, training, coaching, and tools, workers cannot assume 
the responsibilities and decision-making roles that make empowerment 
work.  27  
 Managing Knowledge 
 “Knowledge is power.” Empowering employees means giving them  knowledge—
that is, the information they need to do the best job they can. Finding the right 
information, keeping it in a readily accessible place, and making it 
known to everyone in the firm together constitute the tasks of   knowledge 
management.   
 Today there is no shortage of information to manage. In fact, the amount 
of data gathered has grown so much that the term  big data has become a pop-
ular term to describe the vast collection of available information. These data 
are collected from both traditional sources like sales transactions and digital 
sources like social media from both inside and outside the company.  28 
 The first step to developing a knowledge management system is determin-
ing what knowledge is most important. Do you want to know more about your 
customers? Do you want to know more about competitors? What kind of 
information would make your company more effective or more efficient or 
more responsive to the marketplace? Once you’ve decided what you need to 
know, you set out to find answers to those questions. 
 enabling  
 Giving workers the education 
and tools they need to make 
decisions.  
 knowledge management  
 Finding the right information, 
keeping the information in a 
readily accessible place, and 
making the information known 
to everyone in the firm.  
 Fast-food restaurant 
employees often don’t 
have the skill and 
experience to make 
empowerment work 
very well. Instead their 
managers generally 
have to supervise and 
direct them fairly 
closely. What do you 
think are some of the 
consequences for 
managers of not being 
able to empower their 
staff with decision-
making authority?  

200
 Knowledge management tries to keep people from reinventing the 
wheel—that is, duplicating the work of gathering information—every time a 
decision must be made. A company really progresses when each person con-
tinually asks, “What do I still not know?” and “Whom should I be asking?” It’s 
as important to know what’s  not working as it is to know what  is working. 
Employees and managers now have texting, tweeting, and other means of 
keeping in touch with one another, with customers, and with other stake-
holders. The key to success is learning how to process information effectively 
and turn it into knowledge that everyone can use to improve processes and 
procedures. The benefits are obvious. See Bonus Chapter B for a more 
detailed discussion about using technology to manage information. See the 
Adapting to Change box for an example of how GM used social media to 
manage information customers needed during a time of crisis for the 
company.  
 adapting to change 
 When a company struggles with a 
recall of 1.6 million of its products 
that are linked to 13 deaths, manag-
ers naturally expect a harsh back-
lash from consumers. This was the 
situation Mary Barra faced, just a 
few short weeks after being named 
CEO of General Motors (GM). GM 
was forced to recall 2006 Saturn 
Ions and five other models 
because of a defective ignition 
switch that, if bumped or weighed 
down by a heavy key ring, could 
turn off, shutting down the engine 
and disabling the car’s air bags. 
 To make matters worse for the 
company, investigations indicated 
that there were employees within 
the company who knew about the 
defective switch years ago; yet 
the problem was not corrected. 
At the time of this writing, the 
 matter is still under investigation. 
 Barra knew it was impossible to 
undo the damage already done. 
She decided the best path was to 
try to redefine GM as an open, 
transparent, listening organization 
customers could trust. One of her 
first moves was appointing a vehicle-
safety czar whose job is to quickly 
identify and resolve any safety 
issues facing the company. She 
also wanted worried owners of 
recalled vehicles to know that GM 
was listening and ready to address 
their concerns. To achieve this, 
GM’s social media group was 
deployed to reach out to impacted 
customers and explain their cars 
were drivable while they waited 
for repairs so long as extra items 
are not attached on their key 
rings. Despite such assurances, 
GM provided more than 6,000 
loaner cars to customers who 
were skeptical about their car’s 
safety. The company’s social 
media staffers also set up dealer-
ship appointments with frustrated 
owners to have the problem fixed. 
 CEO Barra’s overriding concern 
was that the recall not permanently 
tarnish GM’s image going forward. 
The company had made strong 
financial progress since emerging 
from bankruptcy and the govern-
ment bailout. She knew on social 
media like Facebook and Twitter, a 
customer’s perception of a brand is 
influenced by what a firm does and 
other people’s opinion of it. 
Therefore, GM’s social media com-
mitment was to search for com-
plaints, respond quickly, and solve 
the problems. Professor Roland 
Rust, an expert in managing brand 
crises from the University of 
Maryland, believed GM’s respon-
siveness online was “absolutely the 
right thing to do.” According to Rust, 
“If they didn’t respond to customers, 
then those customers are going to 
continue to flame them.” Mary Barra 
certainly hopes he is right and GM’s 
response was right on. For right 
now, it remains to be seen whether 
GM can repair its internal quality 
control issues and whether con-
sumers will trust its products again. 
 Sources: Vince Bond Jr., “GM Uses Social Media to 
Respond to Customer Gripes,”  Automotive News,  
March 8, 2014; Lindsay Gellman, “Companies Turn 
to Social-Media Coaches,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
March 26, 2014; and Vindu Goel, “G.M. Uses Social 
Media to Manage Customers and Its Reputation,” 
 The New York Times, March 23, 2014. 
 Using Social Media during the Worst of Times 
 
www.gm.com

201
Management and Leadership
CHAPTER 7
 Summarize the five steps of the control function of management.
CONTROLLING: MAKING SURE IT WORKS 
 The control function measures performance relative to the planned objectives 
and standards, rewards people for work well done, and takes corrective action 
when necessary. Thus the control process (see  Figure 7.7 ) provides the feed-
back that lets managers and workers adjust to deviations from plans and to 
changes in the environment that have affected performance.  
 Controlling consists of five steps:
 
1. Establishing clear performance standards. This ties the planning 
function to the control function. Without clear standards, control is 
impossible.  
 
2. Monitoring and recording actual performance or results.  
 
3. Comparing results against plans and standards.  
 
4. Communicating results and deviations to the appropriate employees.  
 
5. Taking corrective action when needed and providing positive feedback 
for work well done.  
 For managers to measure results, the standards must be specific, attain-
able, and measurable. Setting such clear standards is part of the planning 
function. Vague goals and standards such as “better quality,” “more efficiency,” 
and “improved performance” aren’t sufficient because they don’t describe in 
enough detail what you’re trying to achieve. For example, let’s say you’re a 
runner and you have made the following statement: “My goal is to improve my 
distance.” When you started your improvement plan last year, you ran 2.0 
miles a day; now you run 2.1 miles a day. Did you meet your goal? Well, you 
did increase your distance, but certainly not by very much. 
 A more appropriate statement would be “My goal is to increase my running 
distance from two miles a day to four miles a day by January 1.” It’s important 
LO 7–6
 FIGURE 7.7 THE 
CONTROL PROCESS  
The whole control process 
is based on clear standards. 
Without such standards, the 
other steps are difficult, if 
not impossible. With clear 
standards, performance 
measurement is relatively easy 
and the proper action can be 
taken. 
Establish clear
standards
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Monitor
and record
performance
Compare
results
against
standards
Are standards
realistic?
FEEDBACK
Communicate
results
If needed,
take
corrective
action

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
202
to establish a time period for reaching goals. 
The following examples of goals and stan-
dards meet these criteria:
 •  Cutting the number of finished product 
rejects from 10 per 1,000 to 5 per 1,000 by 
March 31.  
 •  Increasing the number of times managers 
praise employees from 3 per week to 12 
per week by the end of the quarter.  
 •  Increasing sales of product X from 10,000 
per month to 12,000 per month by July.  
 One way to make control systems work is 
to establish clear procedures for monitoring 
performance. Accounting and finance are 
often the foundations for control systems because they provide the numbers 
management needs to evaluate progress.  
 A Key Criterion for Measurement: Customer Satisfaction 
 Traditional measures of success are usually financial; that is, they define suc-
cess in terms of profits or return on investment. Certainly these measures are 
still important, but they’re not the whole purpose of the firm. Other purposes 
may include pleasing employees, stakeholders, and customers—including 
both external and internal customers. 
 External customers   include dealers, who buy products to sell to others, 
and ultimate customers (also known as end users) such as you and me, who 
buy products for their own personal use.   Internal customers   are individuals 
and units within the firm that receive services from other individuals or units. 
For example, the field salespeople are the internal customers of the marketing 
research people who prepare market reports for them. 
 One goal today is to go beyond simply satisfying customers to “delight-
ing” them with unexpectedly good products and services. We’ll discuss man-
agement in more detail in the next few chapters. Let’s pause now, review, and 
do some exercises. Management is doing, not just reading.  
 external customers  
 Dealers, who buy products to 
sell to others, and ultimate 
customers (or end users), who 
buy products for their own 
personal use.  
 internal customers  
 Individuals and units within the 
firm that receive services from 
other individuals or units.  
 • How does enabling help achieve empowerment?  
 • What are the five steps in the control process?  
 • What’s the difference between internal and external customers?  
•
How does enabling he
 test prep 
elp achieve em
elp
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 One way colleges and 
universities measure 
their performance is to 
track the number of 
students who complete 
their degrees or who 
graduate within a 
certain number of years. 
What are some of the 
factors that could affect 
the achievement of this 
performance standard, 
and how do college 
administrators take 
corrective action when 
necessary?  

203
Management and Leadership
CHAPTER 7
 Describe the changes occurring today in the management function.
 • 
 What does management look like today? 
At one time, managers were called bosses, and their job consisted of tell-
ing people what to do, watching over them to be sure they did it, and rep-
rimanding those who didn’t. Many, if not most, managers still behave that 
way. Today, however, some managers tend to be more progressive. For 
example, they emphasize teams and team building; they create drop-in 
centers, team spaces, and open work areas. They tend to guide, train, sup-
port, motivate, and coach employees rather than tell them what to do.  
 • 
 What reasons can you give to account for changes in management?
 Leaders of Fortune 100 companies today tend to be younger, more of them 
are female, and fewer of them were educated at elite universities. They 
know that many of their employees know more about technology and 
other practices than they do. Therefore, they tend to put more emphasis 
on motivation, teamwork, and cooperation. Managers in the future are 
likely to be assuming completely new roles in the firm. For one thing, they 
will be taking a leadership role in adapting to climate change. Further, 
they’ll be doing more expansion overseas.  
 Describe the four functions of management.
 • 
 What are the primary functions of management? 
The four primary functions are (1) planning, (2) organizing, (3) leading, 
and (4) controlling.  
 • 
 How do you define each of these functions? 
Planning includes anticipating trends and determining the best strategies 
and tactics to achieve organizational goals and objectives. Organizing includes 
designing the structure of the organization and creating conditions and 
systems in which everyone and everything works together to achieve the 
organization’s goals and objectives. Leading means creating a vision for the 
organization, and communicating, guiding, training, coaching, and moti-
vating others to achieve goals and objectives. Controlling means measuring 
whether what actually occurs meets the organization’s goals.  
 Relate the planning process and decision making to the accomplishment of 
company goals.
 • 
 What’s the difference between goals and objectives? 
Goals are broad, long-term achievements that organizations aim to accom-
plish, whereas objectives are specific, short-term plans made to help reach 
the goals.  
 • 
 What is a SWOT analysis? 
Managers look at the  s trengths and  w eaknesses of the firm and the  o ppor-
tunities and  t hreats facing it.  
 • 
 What are the four types of planning, and how are they related to the organi-
zation’s goals and objectives? 
Strategic planning  is broad, long-range planning that outlines the goals of 
the organization.  Tactical planning  is specific, short-term planning that lists 
organizational objectives.  Operational planning  is part of tactical planning 
and sets specific timetables and standards.  Contingency planning is developing 
an alternative set of plans in case the first set doesn’t work out.  
Wh t d
LO 7–1
Wh t
LO 7–2
LO 7–3
 summary 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
204
 • 
 What are the steps involved in decision making? 
The six Ds of decision making are (1) define the situation; (2) describe 
and collect needed information; (3) develop alternatives; (4) decide 
which alternative is best; (5) do what is indicated (begin implementa-
tion); and (6) determine whether the decision was a good one, and fol-
low up.  
 Describe the organizing function of management.
 • 
 What are the three levels of management in the corporate hierarchy? 
The three levels of management are (1) top management (highest level 
consisting of the president and other key company executives who develop 
strategic plans); (2) middle management (general managers, division man-
agers, and plant managers who are responsible for tactical planning and 
controlling); and (3) supervisory management (first-line managers/ 
supervisors who evaluate workers’ daily performance).  
 • 
 What skills do managers need? 
Managers must have three categories of skills: (1) technical skills (ability 
to perform specific tasks such as selling products or developing software), 
(2) human relations skills (ability to communicate and motivate), and (3) 
conceptual skills (ability to see organizations as a whole and how all the 
parts fit together).  
 • 
 Are these skills equally important at all management levels? 
Managers at different levels need different skills. Top managers rely heav-
ily on human relations and conceptual skills and rarely use technical skills, 
while first-line supervisors need strong technical and human relations 
skills but use conceptual skills less often. Middle managers need to have a 
balance of all three skills (see  Figure 7.5 ).  
 Explain the differences between leaders and managers, and describe the 
various leadership styles.
 • 
 What’s the difference between a manager and a leader? 
A manager plans, organizes, and controls functions within an organiza-
tion. A leader has vision and inspires others to grasp that vision, estab-
lishes corporate values, emphasizes corporate ethics, and doesn’t fear 
change. 
 • 
 Describe the various leadership styles. 
 Figure  7.6  shows a continuum of leadership styles ranging from boss- 
centered to subordinate-centered leadership.  
 • 
 Which leadership style is best? 
The most effective leadership style depends on the people being led and the 
situation. The challenge of the future will be to empower self-managed teams.  
 • 
 What does empowerment mean? 
Empowerment means giving employees the authority and responsibility 
to respond quickly to customer requests. Enabling is giving workers the 
education and tools they need to assume their new decision-making 
powers.  
 • 
 What is knowledge management? 
Knowledge management is finding the right information, keeping the 
information in a readily accessible place, and making the information 
known to everyone in the firm.  
Wh
LO 7–4
LO 7–5

205
Management and Leadership
CHAPTER 7
 Summarize the five steps of the control function of management.
 • 
 What are the five steps of the control function? 
Controlling incorporates (1) setting clear standards, (2) monitoring and 
recording performance, (3) comparing performance with plans and stan-
dards, (4) communicating results and deviations to employees, and (5) 
providing positive feedback for a job well done and taking corrective 
action if necessary.  
 • 
 What qualities must standards possess to measure performance results? 
Standards must be specific, attainable, and measurable.  
What are
LO 7–6
d
n-
) 
e
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  
 key terms 
 autocratic leadership 197  
 brainstorming 192  
 conceptual skills 194  
 contingency 
planning 191 
 controlling 188  
 decision making 192  
 enabling 199 
 external customers 202  
 free-rein leadership 198  
 goals 189  
 human relations 
skills 194  
 internal customers 202  
 knowledge 
management 199  
 leading 188  
 management 187 
 middle management 194 
 mission statement 189  
 objectives 189  
 operational planning 190 
 organizing 188 
 participative (democratic) 
leadership 198  
 planning 188 
 PMI 192 
 problem solving 192 
  staffing 195 
 strategic planning 190 
 supervisory 
management 194 
 SWOT 
analysis 189  
 tactical planning 190 
 technical skills 194 
 top management 193 
 transparency 196 
 vision 189  
 Many students say they would like to be a manager someday. Here are some 
questions to get you started thinking like a manager:
 1. Would you like to work for a large firm or a small business? Private or 
public? In an office or out in the field? Give your reasons for each answer.  
 2. What kind of leader would you be? Do you have evidence to show that?  
 3. Do you see any problems with a participative (democratic) leadership style? 
Can you see a manager getting frustrated when he or she can’t control others?  
 4. Can someone who’s trained to give orders (like a military sergeant) be 
retrained to be a participative leader? How? What problems may emerge?  
me
 critical thinking 
 developing workplace skills 
 Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1. Allocate time to do some career planning with a SWOT analysis of your 
present situation. Choose one career you are interested in and answer the 
following questions: What does the marketplace for your chosen career 
 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
206
look like today? What skills do you have that will make you a winner in 
that type of career? What weaknesses might you target to correct? What 
are the threats to your career choice? What are the opportunities? Prepare 
a two-minute presentation to the class. 
 2. Bring several decks of cards to class and have the class break up into teams 
of four or so members. Each team should then elect a leader. Each leader 
should be assigned a leadership style and learn how to perform that style: 
autocratic, participative (democratic), or free rein. Have each team try to 
build a house of cards by stacking them on top of each other. The team 
with the tallest house wins. Each team member should report his or her 
experience under the selected style of leadership. 
 3. In class, discuss the advantages and disadvantages of becoming a man-
ager. Does the size of the business make a difference? What are the advan-
tages of a career in a profit-seeking business versus a career in a nonprofit 
organization? 
 4. Review  Figure 7.6  and discuss managers you have known, worked for, or 
read about who have practiced each management style. Students from 
other countries may have interesting experiences to add. Which manage-
rial style did you like best? Why? Which was or were most effective? Why?  
 5. Because of the illegal and unethical behavior of a few managers, managers 
in general are under suspicion for being greedy and dishonest. Discuss the 
fairness of such charges, and suggest what could be done to improve the 
opinion of managers among the students in your class. 
 
 
 
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To perform a simple SWOT analysis. 
 EXERCISE 
 Go to  www.marketingteacher.com , locate the list of SWOT analyses, and click 
the link to go to the SWOT for Toys “R” Us.
 1. What are Toys “R” Us’s strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats?  
 2. Analyze Toys “R” Us’s weaknesses. How do you think the company’s 
strengths might be used to overcome some of its weaknesses? 
 3. Analyze Toys “R” Us’s opportunities and threats. What additional opportu-
nities can you suggest? What additional threats can you identify?  

207
Management and Leadership
CHAPTER 7
 video case   
 Located in Las Vegas, Nevada, with its fulfillment 
center situated next to the UPS hub,  Zappos.com  
has $1 billion in annual revenue. In 2010,  Zappos.
com was ranked #6 by  Fortune magazine as one of 
the best places to work in America. The origin of 
Zappos was an entrepreneurial effort by Nick 
Swinmurn 
called 
 ShoeSite.com . 
Swinmurn 
launched this company during the dot-com boom. 
The concept emerged as a result of Swinmurn’s 
inability to locate shoes that he was looking for in 
malls. Swinmurn took photos of the shoes from 
various shoe stores and uploaded them onto his 
website. He would take orders, go to the shoe 
store and purchase the shoes for the customer, 
and ship the shoes the next day. At the time, there 
was no single place online to purchase shoes in 
that way. 
 Today, Zappos is owned by  Amazon.com , which 
purchased the company for $1.2 billion in 2010. 
Zappos CEO Tony Hsieh remains at the helm of 
the company, and the culture of the firm remains 
intact. In short,  Amazon.com  has allowed Zappos 
to continue to operate as it had in the past. 
 The emphasis on customer satisfaction and 
employee happiness permeates the culture of 
Zappos. The name “Zappos” is a derivative of the 
Spanish word for shoes, “zapatos.” Its culture is 
driven by 10 core values, the first being to “wow” 
the customer. Two important core values influ-
ence the planning, organizing, leading, and con-
trolling functions at the firm. They are (1) to 
pursue growth and learning; and (2) to have pas-
sion and determination. These and the other 
core values emphasize teams and employee 
empowerment, so much so that team leaders 
(management) are required to spend at least 20 
percent of their time off the job with their team 
members. 
 Relationship building helps drive a manage-
ment approach that focuses on the primary goal 
of the company—to provide the best possible 
experience for the customer. The four functions of 
management are discussed in the video, and mem-
bers of the Zappos team indicate how these func-
tions are practiced at Zappos.  
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. What does the vision statement for a company 
like  Zappos include?  
 2. How does the  employee satisfaction and 
empowerment at Zappos help support the pri-
mary goals of the company?  
 3. Why do you think team leaders at  Zappos are 
required to spend 20 percent of their time with 
their teams outside the work environment?  
 ZAPPOS’S TEAM APPROACH 
 1. 
Katherine Duncan, “Command Performance,”  Entrepreneur, 
March 2013. 
 2. 
Christian Stadler and Davis Dyer, “Why Good Leaders Don’t 
Need Charisma,”  Sloan Management Review, Spring 2013. 
 3. 
David A. Garvin, “How Google Sold Its Engineers on 
Management,”  Harvard Business Review, December 2013. 
 4. 
“The Latest Job Miss,” editorial,  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 11–12, 2014. 
 5. 
“The 23 Female CEOs Running Fortune 500 Companies,” 
San Jose Mercury News, December 10, 2013. 
 6. 
David Malpass, “Five Big Steps Toward Global Growth,” 
Forbes, February 10, 2014. 
 7. 
Steven Overly, “Going Green, Bit by Bit,”  The Washington 
Post, April 22, 2013. 
 8. 
Alan Bird and James Root, “Making Star Teams Out of Star 
Players,”  Harvard Business Review, January–February, 2013. 
 9. 
Daniel Goleman, “The Focused Leader,”  Harvard Business 
Review, December 2013. 
 10. 
Leigh Buchanan, “The Essential Management Book You’re 
Not Reading,”  Inc., December 2013–January 2014. 
 11. 
Jeff Bennett and John Kell, "GM Restores Annual 
Dividend as Sales Shine,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 15, 2014. 
 12. 
Roger L. Martin, “Rethinking the Decision Factory,”  Harvard 
Business Review, October 2013. 
 13. 
“What Is the Difference Between Management and 
Leadership?”  The Wall Street Journal, accessed March 2014.  
 14. 
Interesting contrasts among purpose, mission, and vision can 
be found in John Mackey and Raj Sisodia,  Conscious 
Capitalism (Boston, MA: Harvard Business Review 
Press, 2013). 
 15. 
Eric Paley, “Go Beyond Visionary; Be a Leader,”  Inc., 
February 2014. 
 16. 
“SWOT Analysis,”   www.MindTools.com  , accessed 
January 2014. 
 17. 
Roger L. Martin, “The Big Lie of Strategic Planning,”  Harvard 
Business Review, February 2014. 
 18. 
Greg Bensinger, “Amazon Plans to Compete with PayPal and 
Square in Retail Stores,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 30, 
2014. 
ell, "GM Restores Annual
 notes 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
208
 Page 185: © Rick Friedman/Corbis; p. 186: 
© Jason Plotkin/York Daily Record/AP Images; 
p. 188: © Creatas/photolibrary RF; p. 191: 
© Jonathan Ernst/Reuters/Corbis; p. 196: 
© Dina Rudick/The Boston Globe/Getty 
Images; p. 198: © Jeff Kowalsky/Bloomberg/
Getty Images; p. 199: © Richard Graulich/ZUMA 
Press/Corbis; p. 200: © Michael Spooneybarger/
Reuters/Corbis; p. 202: © Andrew Burton/Getty 
Images. 
Page 185: © Rick Friedman/C
 photo credits 
 19. Gregory J. Millman and Samuel Rubenfeld, “For Corporate 
America, Risk Is Big Business,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 16, 2014. 
 20. Miriam Gottfried, “This Eagle Must Hunt Elsewhere,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, January 24, 2014. 
 21. “The 10 Best Companies to Work For in 2014,”  www.forbes.
com , accessed March 2014. 
 22. Amy C. Cooper, “Unite and Conquer,”  Entrepreneur, March 2013. 
 23. Kerry Dolan, “Billionaires, Led by Zuckerberg, Dig a 
Bit Deeper with 10 Biggest Charitable Gifts of 2013,”
  www.forbes.com , January 1, 2014. 
 24. Dorrie Clark, “How the Best Leaders Embrace Change,” 
 www.forbes , November 5, 2013. 
 25. Barry Glassman, “In Business, Transparency Wins,”  Forbes, 
January 15, 2014. 
 26. Jim Pawlak, “Treating Employees as Assets, Not Expenses 
Boosts Profits,”  Hartford Business Journal, February 24, 2014. 
 27. Dino Signore. “Why Kicking It Old-School Could Kill Your 
Business,”  www.inc.com , accessed March 2014. 
 28. Lisa Arthur, “What Is Big Data?”  Forbes, August 15, 2013. 


210
 Structuring 
Organizations for 
Today’s Challenges 
 8 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
  LO 8-1 
Outline the basic principles of organization management. 
  LO 8-2 
Compare the organizational theories of Fayol and Weber. 
  LO 8-3 
Evaluate the choices managers make in structuring organizations. 
  LO 8-4  
Contrast the various organizational models. 
  LO 8-5 
Identify the benefits of interfirm cooperation and coordination. 
  LO 8-6 
Explain how organizational culture can help businesses adapt to 
change.  

211
 Jenna  Lyons  
• President and Creative Director 
for J. Crew
 • Used teams to unify the 
company's brand
 • Tripled sales
www.jcrew.com
@jcrewProfile
I
 n today’s fast-paced business envi-
ronment, companies need to keep 
current with trends if they want to 
succeed. But in the fashion indus-
try, it’s not enough for brands to 
simply know what customers want now. 
Garment designers and manufacturers 
must also define the trends that consum-
ers will be following in the years to come. 
That’s what Jenna Lyons does at J. Crew. 
As president and creative director of the 
respected fashion label, she must man-
age the design of clothes that are 
fashion-forward, but are also likely to 
sell well. 
 Striking this balance has been Lyons’s 
top priority since she took over as presi-
dent in 2010. Her history with J. Crew 
goes back much further than that. In 1990 
she joined the company as a junior 
designer after graduating with a degree 
from the Parsons School of Design. In 
those days, J. Crew was a successful 
brand with a reputation for making 
“preppy” clothes that would look appropri-
ate at a country club or yacht party. While 
catering to this upscale market proved 
lucrative at first, both sales and ideas 
started to decline as the 1990s drew to a 
close. Despite the drop in sales, execu-
tives ordered employees to continue mak-
ing garments in step with J. Crew’s stale 
branding. According to Lyons, this led to 
an uninspired atmosphere that stifled cre-
ativity. “We were lost soldiers, working 
away, following orders,” said Lyons. “I was 
shell-shocked . . . fried.” 
 All that changed in 2003 with the 
arrival of chair and CEO Mickey Drexler. 
As the architect of Gap’s rise to retail 
dominance, Drexler was known through-
out the industry as a tough boss who 
could get the most out of an ailing opera-
tion. He lived up to this reputation on his 
first day at J. Crew. “He sat down, pushed 
his chair back, put his foot up on the 
table, and he looked around, and he’s 
like, ‘You’re all interviewing for your jobs,’” 
said Lyons. At a meeting with staff the 
next day, he asked Lyons to give her opin-
ion on three different pairs of women’s 
stretch pants that the company sold. “At 
that point I was like, I have to be honest,” 
said Lyons. “I can’t lie to him because this 
is sort of a do-or-die situation.” She told 
him that only one pair fit the brand. After 
Drexler threw the other two on the floor, 
he and Lyons began sorting through the 
entire women’s collection, tossing the 
items that Lyons deemed unfashionable. 
He then ordered Lyons to board a plane 
to Hong Kong and start designing clothes 
for all the new holes in J. Crew’s 
collection. 
 Lyons soon proved that she was just 
as committed to quality as Drexler. While 
many of her colleagues lost their jobs, 
she implemented a new company struc-
ture that made J. Crew fashionable 
again. Before Drexler cleaned house, 
management consultants nitpicked 
designers’ work so that no item strayed 
too far from the company’s established 
branding. Lyons, on the other hand, 
employed a compassionate and under-
standing management style that guided 
designers to make clothes that were styl-
ish, but still appealing on a wide scale. 
 Designing fashionable clothing was 
only the first step in turning J. Crew 
around. Lyons believed that in order for 
the company to create a coherent brand 
that would drive the business forward, 
every part of the organization had to be 
unified. She was frustrated that the aes-
thetics of the products were not reflected 
in either the stores or catalog, both run 
by merchandising. “There were a lot of 
really talented people, but they were all 
doing their own thing, and it looked like 
it.” She told her teams that from that point 
on they should always consider how the 
brand appears to everyone who comes 
into contact with it. Lyons started by 
rehabbing the stores. She then moved on 
to completely overhauling the catalog 
and website, which now look more like 
fashion magazines than boring catalogs. 
 When asked how going private in 2011 
helped the company, Lyons cited the free-
dom to invest more in information technol-
ogy. “It’s hard to make those kinds of capital 
expenditures when you’re public,” she says. 
 With sales of J. Crew clothes tripling 
since 2003, Lyons has shown that she 
understands all the organization’s mov-
ing parts and how they connect. This 
chapter is about changing and adapting 
organizations to today’s markets, as 
Jenna Lyons did at J. Crew. There are 
plenty of opportunities in every firm to 
use the principles of organizing to 
 manage—and benefit from—change. 
 Sources: David Colman, “Jenna Lyons, The Woman 
Who Dresses America,”  The New York Times, January 
18, 2013; Danielle Sacks, “How Jenna Lyons Turned J. 
Crew into a Cult Brand,”  Fast Company, May 2013; and 
Barbara McMahon, “Jenna Lyons: Fashion Queen of 
America,”  The Guardian, May 25, 2013.     
 Getting to know  Jenna Lyons

212
 name that company 
 This company maintains strict written rules and decision guidelines. Those rules 
enable the firm to deliver packages quickly because employees don’t have to 
pause to make decisions—procedures are clearly spelled out for them. What is 
the name of this company? (The answer can be found in this chapter.)  
 Outline the basic principles of organization management.
EVERYONE’S REORGANIZING 
 You don’t have to look far to find examples of companies reorganizing.  1 A. G. 
Lafley, CEO of legendary Procter & Gamble, transformed the company into 
one of the most innovative firms in the United States. Some entrepreneurial 
companies are organizing globally from the start, and succeeding. Other orga-
nizations have been declining, including some homebuilders, and banks.  2
Clearly the challenge to reorganize is strong. 3 
 Few firms have established as strong an image in the United States as 
Starbucks, but even that company had to restructure to keep its customer 
base. As the company expanded its menu to include more sandwiches, one of 
the unexpected results was a change in the smell of the stores (the odor of 
burning cheese was overwhelming the smell of coffee). The company restored 
the stores’ aroma by cutting back on sandwiches for a while. Many stores had 
to be closed and other stores were remodeled to recapture the feel of a Milan 
coffee bar. In the end, Starbucks regained its market image and is prospering 
again. 
 You may be wondering what has happened to U.S. producers—so many 
seem to be failing. But adjusting to changing markets is a normal function in 
a capitalist economy. There will be big winners, like Amazon, Google and 
Facebook, and big losers as well.  4 The key to success is remaining flexible 
enough to adapt to the changing times.  5 Often that means going back to basic 
organizational principles and rebuilding the firm on a sound foundation.  6
This chapter will begin by discussing such basic principles.  
 Building an Organization from the Bottom Up 
 No matter the size of the business, the principles 
of organization are much the same. Let’s say you 
and two friends plan to start a lawn-mowing busi-
ness. One of the first steps is to organize your busi-
ness.  Organizing, or structuring, begins with 
determining what work needs to be done (mowing, 
edging, trimming) and then dividing up the tasks 
among the three of you; this is called a  division of 
labor. One of you might have a special talent for 
trimming bushes, while another is better at mow-
ing. The success of a firm often depends on man-
agement’s ability to identify each worker’s strengths 
and assign the right tasks to the right person. Many 
jobs can be done quickly and well when each 
LO 8–1
 The principles of 
organization apply to 
businesses of all sizes. 
Structuring the business, 
making an appropriate 
division of labor using 
job specialization and 
departmentalization, 
establishing procedures, 
and assigning authority 
are tasks found in most 
firms. How do these 
principles operate at 
your current or most 
recent job? 

213
person specializes. Dividing tasks into smaller jobs is called  job specialization.
For example, you might divide the mowing task into mowing, trimming, and 
raking. 
 If your business is successful, you’ll probably hire more workers to help. 
You might organize them into teams or departments to do the various tasks. 
One team might mow while another uses blowers to clean up leaves and 
debris. If you’re really successful over time, you might hire an accountant to 
keep records, various people to handle advertising, and a crew to maintain the 
equipment. 
 You can see how your business might evolve into a company with several 
departments: production (mowing and everything related to that), marketing, 
accounting, and maintenance. The process of setting up individual depart-
ments to do specialized tasks is called  departmentalization. Finally, you’ll 
assign authority and responsibility to people so that you can control the whole 
process. If something went wrong in the accounting department, for example, 
you would know who was responsible. 
 Structuring an organization, then, consists of devising a division of 
labor (sometimes resulting in specialization); setting up teams or depart-
ments to do specific tasks (like production and accounting); and assigning 
responsibility and authority to people. It also includes allocating resources 
(such as funds for various departments), assigning specific tasks, and estab-
lishing procedures for accomplishing the organizational objectives. From 
the start, you have to make ethical decisions about how you’ll treat your 
workers and how you will benefit the community (see the Making Ethical 
Decisions box).  
 You may develop an  organization chart (discussed later in this chapter) 
that shows relationships among people: who is accountable for the comple-
tion of specific work, and who reports to whom. Finally, you’ll monitor the 
environment to see what competitors are doing and what customers are 
demanding. Then you must adjust to the new realities. For example, a major 
lawn care company may begin promoting itself in your area. You might have 
to make some organizational changes to offer even better service at competi-
tive prices. What would you do first if you began losing business to 
competitors?  
 making ethical decisions 
 Imagine you have begun a suc-
cessful lawn-mowing service in 
your neighborhood. Other lawn-
mowing services in the area seem 
to hire untrained workers, many 
from other countries. They pay 
only the minimum wage or slightly 
more. Most obviously, however, 
they often provide no safety 
equipment. Workers don’t have 
ear protection against the loud 
mowers and blowers. Most don’t 
wear goggles when operating the 
shredder. Very few wear masks 
when spraying potentially harmful 
fertilizers. 
 You are aware there are many 
hazards connected with yard 
work, but safety gear can be 
expensive and workers often pre-
fer to work without it. You are 
interested in making as much 
money as possible, but you also 
are concerned about the safety 
and welfare of your workers. You 
know yard maintenance equip-
ment creates noise pollution, but 
quiet equipment is expensive. 
 The corporate culture you 
create as you begin your service 
will last a long time. If you empha-
size safety and environmental 
concern from the start, your 
workers will adopt your values. 
On the other hand, you can see 
the potential for making faster 
profits by ignoring safety rules 
and paying little attention to the 
environment as your competitors 
seem to do. What are the 
consequences? 
 Would You Sacrifice Safety for Profits? 
s 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
214
Compare the organizational theories of Fayol and Weber.
 THE CHANGING ORGANIZATION 
 Never before in the history of business has so much change been introduced so 
quickly—sometimes too quickly, as we saw with the 2011 earthquake and tsu-
nami in Japan. Think of the effects these disasters have had on the nuclear power 
industry. As we noted in earlier chapters, much change is due to the evolving 
business environment—more global competition, a declining economy, faster 
technological change, and pressure to preserve the natural environment.  7  
 Equally important to many businesses is the change in customer expec-
tations. Consumers today expect high-quality products and fast, friendly 
service—at a reasonable cost. Doug Rauch, former President of Trader Joe’s, 
views employees and customers as two wings of a bird: you need both of 
them to fly. They go together—if you take care of your employees, they’ll 
take care of your customers. When your customers are happier and they 
enjoy shopping, it also makes your employees’ lives happier, so it’s a virtu-
ous cycle.  8  
 Managing change, then, has become a critical managerial function. That 
sometimes includes changing the whole organization structure. Such change 
may occur in nonprofit and government organizations as well as businesses. 
Many organizations in the past were designed more to facilitate management 
than to please the customer. Companies designed many rules and regulations 
to give managers control over employees. As you’ll learn later in this chapter, 
this reliance on rules is called  bureaucracy. The government has to wrestle 
with bureaucracy just as businesses do.  9 
 To understand where we are in organization design, it helps to know 
where we’ve been. We’ll look at that subject next.  
 The Development of Organization Design 
 Until the 20th century, most businesses were rather small, the processes for 
producing goods were relatively simple, and organizing workers was fairly 
easy. Organizing workers is still not too hard in most small firms, such as a 
lawn-mowing service or a small shop that produces custom-made boats. Not 
until the 1900s and the introduction of  mass production (methods for effi-
ciently producing large quantities of goods) did production processes and 
business organization become so complex. Usually, the bigger the plant, the 
more efficient production became. 
 Business growth led to   economies of scale   . This term refers to the fact 
that companies can reduce their production costs by purchasing raw mate-
rials in bulk. Thus, the average cost of goods decreases as production levels 
rise. The cost of building a car, for example, declined sharply when automo-
bile companies adopted mass production, and GM, Ford, and others intro-
duced their huge factories.  10 Over time, such innovations became less 
meaningful as other companies copied the processes. You may have noticed 
the benefits of mass production in housing and computers.  11 
 During the era of mass production, organization theorists 
emerged. Two influential thinkers were Henri Fayol and Max Weber. 
Many of their principles are still being used in businesses throughout 
the world. Let’s explore these principles.  
 Fayol’s Principles of Organization  
In France, economic theoretician 
Henri Fayol published his book  Administration industrielle et générale in 
LO 8–2
 economies of scale  
 The situation in which 
companies can reduce their 
production costs if they can 
purchase raw materials in bulk; 
the average cost of goods 
goes down as production 
levels increase.  
 Henri Fayol introduced 
several management 
principles still followed 
today, including the idea 
that each worker should 
report to only one man-
ager and that manag-
ers, in turn, should have 
the right to give orders 
for others to follow and 
the power to enforce 
them. Which of Fayol’s 
principles have you 
observed?  

215
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
1919. It was popularized in the United States in 1949 under the title  General 
and Industrial Management. Fayol introduced such principles as the 
following:
 
• 
 Unity of command. Each worker is to report to one, and only one, boss. 
The benefits of this principle are obvious. What happens if two 
different bosses give you two different assignments? Which one should 
you follow? To prevent such confusion, each person should report to 
only one manager. (Later we’ll discuss an organizational plan that 
seems to violate this principle.)  
 
• 
 Hierarchy of authority. All workers should know to whom they report. 
Managers should have the right to give orders and expect others to 
follow. (As we discussed in Chapter 7, this concept has changed over 
time, and empowerment is often more important now.)  
 
• 
 Division of labor. Functions are to be divided into areas of specialization 
such as production, marketing, and finance. (This principle too is 
being modified, as you’ll read later, and cross-functional teamwork is 
getting more emphasis.)  
 
• 
 Subordination of individual interests to the general interest. Workers are 
to think of themselves as a coordinated team. The goals of the team 
are more important than the goals of individual workers. (This concept 
is still very much in use.) Have you heard this concept being applied to 
football and basketball teams? Did you see this principle at work in 
the latest Super Bowl?  
 
• 
 Authority. Managers have the right to give orders and the power to 
enforce obedience. Authority and responsibility are related: whenever 
authority is exercised, responsibility arises. (This principle is also 
being modified as managers are beginning to empower employees.)  
 
• 
 Degree of centralization. The amount of decision-making power vested 
in top management should vary by circumstances. In a small 
organization, it’s possible to centralize all decision-making power in 
the top manager. In a larger organization, however, some decision-
making power, for both major and minor issues, should be delegated 
to lower-level managers and employees.  
 
• 
 Clear communication channels. All workers should be able to reach 
others in the firm quickly and easily.  
 
• 
 Order. Materials and people should be placed and maintained in the 
proper location.  
 
• 
 Equity. A manager should treat employees and peers with respect and 
justice.  
 
• 
 Esprit de corps. A spirit of pride and loyalty should be created among 
people in the firm.  
 Management courses in colleges throughout the world taught Fayol’s 
principles for years, and they became synonymous with the concept of man-
agement. Organizations were designed so that no person had more than one 
boss, lines of authority were clear, and everyone knew to whom to report. Nat-
urally, these principles tended to be written down as rules, policies, and regu-
lations as organizations grew larger. 
 That process of rule making has often led to rather rigid organizations 
that haven’t always responded quickly to consumer requests. For example, in 
various cities, the Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) and auto repair facili-
ties have been slow to adapt to the needs of their customers. So where did the 
idea o f bureaucracy come from? We talk about that next.  

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
216
 Max Weber and Organizational Theory  
Max Weber’s book  The Theory of 
Social and Economic Organizations, like Fayol’s, appeared in the United 
States in the late 1940s. Weber (pronounced Vay-ber), a German sociolo-
gist and economist, promoted the pyramid-shaped organization struc-
ture that became popular in large firms. Weber put great trust in 
managers and felt the firm would do well if employees simply did what 
they were told. The less decision making they had to do, the better. 
Clearly, this is a reasonable way to operate if you’re dealing with rela-
tively uneducated and untrained workers. Such was generally the case 
at the time Weber was writing. Most employees today, however, have con-
siderably more education and technical skills. 
 Weber’s principles of organization resembled Fayol’s. In addi-
tion, Weber emphasized:
 • 
Job descriptions.  
 • 
Written rules, decision guidelines, and detailed records.  
 • 
Consistent procedures, regulations, and policies.  
 • 
Staffing and promotion based on qualifications.  
 Weber believed that large organizations demanded clearly estab-
lished rules and guidelines to be followed precisely. In other words, he was in 
favor of  bureaucracy. Although his principles made sense at the time, rules and 
procedures became so rigid in some companies that they grew counterproduc-
tive. Some organizations today still thrive on Weber’s theories.  12 United Parcel 
Service (UPS), for example, maintains strict written rules and decision guide-
lines. Those rules enable the firm to deliver packages quickly because employees 
don’t have to pause to make decisions—procedures are clearly spelled out for 
them. 
 Some organizations that follow Weber’s principles are less effective than 
UPS because they don’t allow employees to respond quickly to new challenges. 
That has clearly been the case with disaster relief agencies in many areas. 
Later, we explore how to make organizations more responsive. First, let’s look 
at some basic terms and concepts.  
 Turning Principles into Organization Design 
 Following theories like Fayol’s and Weber’s, managers in the latter 1900s began 
designing organizations so that managers could  control workers. Many compa-
nies are still organized that way, with everything set up in a hierarchy. 
A   hierarchy   is a system in which one person is at the top of the organization and 
there is a ranked or sequential ordering from the top down of managers and oth-
ers who are responsible to that person. Since one person can’t keep track of 
thousands of workers, the top manager needs many lower-level managers to 
help. The   chain of command   is the line of authority that moves from the top of 
the hierarchy to the lowest level.  Figure 8.1 shows a typical hierarchy on an 
organization chart. An   organization chart   is a visual device that shows rela-
tionships among people and divides the organization’s work; it shows who 
reports to whom.  
 Some organizations have a dozen or more layers of management between 
the chief executive officer (CEO) and the lowest-level employees. If employees 
want to introduce work changes, they ask a supervisor (the first level of manage-
ment), who asks his or her manager, who asks a manager at the next level up, 
and so on. It can take weeks or months for a decision to be made and passed 
from manager to manager until it reaches employees. At pharmaceutical 
 hierarchy  
 A system in which one person 
is at the top of the organization 
and there is a ranked or 
sequential ordering from the 
top down of managers who are 
responsible to that person.  
 chain of command  
 The line of authority that moves 
from the top of a hierarchy to 
the lowest level.  
 organization chart  
 A visual device that shows 
relationships among people 
and divides the organization’s 
work; it shows who reports to 
whom.  
  Max Weber promoted 
an organizational struc-
ture composed of mid-
dle managers who 
implement the orders of 
top managers. He 
believed less-educated 
workers were best man-
aged if managers or 
supervisors gave them 
strict rules and regula-
tions to follow and mon-
itored their 
performance. What 
industries or businesses 
today would benefit by 
using such controls?  

217
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
company Pfizer, for example, there were once 17 layers between the chief 
executive and the lowest employee. 
 Max Weber used the word  bureaucrat to describe a middle manager whose 
function was to implement top management’s orders. Thus,   bureaucracy  
came to be the term for an organization with many layers of managers. 
 When employees in a bureaucracy of any size have to ask managers for 
permission to make a change, the process may take so long that customers 
become annoyed. Has this happened to you in a department store or other 
organization? Since customers want efficient service—and they want it  now —
slow service is simply not acceptable in today’s competitive firms. 
 Some companies are therefore reorganizing to let employees make deci-
sions in order to please customers no matter what. Home Depot has adopted 
this approach to win more customers from competitors. Nordstrom employ-
ees can accept a return from a customer without managerial approval, even if 
the item was not originally sold at that store. As you read earlier in this book, 
giving employees such authority is called  empowerment. Remember that 
empowerment works only when employees are given the proper training and 
resources to respond. Can you see how such training would help first respond-
ers in crisis conditions?  
 bureaucracy  
 An organization with many 
layers of managers who set 
rules and regulations and 
oversee all decisions.  
 FIGURE 8.1 TYPICAL ORGANIZATION CHART  
 This is a rather standard chart with managers for major functions and supervisors reporting to the managers. Each supervisor manages 
three employees. 
Manager A
(production)
Manager B
(marketing)
Manager C
(finance)
President
First-line
supervisor
First-line
supervisor
First-line
supervisor
First-line
supervisor
First-line
supervisor
First-line
supervisor
First-line
supervisor
First-line
supervisor
First-line
supervisor
 • What do the terms  division of labor and  job specialization mean?  
 • What are the principles of management outlined by Fayol?  
 • What did Weber add to the principles of Fayol?  
•
What do the terms div
 test prep  
vision of labor a
r
visi
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
218
Evaluate the choices managers make in structuring organizations.
 DECISIONS TO MAKE IN STRUCTURING 
ORGANIZATIONS 
 When designing responsive organizations, firms have to make decisions 
about several organizational issues: (1) centralization versus decentraliza-
tion, (2) span of control, (3) tall versus flat organization structures, and 
(4) departmentalization.  
 Choosing Centralized or Decentralized Authority 
 Centralized authority   occurs when decision making is concentrated at the 
top level of management. The retailing giant Target, for example, has a very 
centralized form of management.  Fortune magazine commented that Target is 
so top-down that the CEO personally interviews candidates for the top 600 
positions. That doesn’t mean Target hasn’t adapted to different circumstances, 
however, as you’ll see later in this chapter. 
 McDonald’s believes that purchasing, promotion, and other such deci-
sions are best handled centrally. There’s usually little need for each McDon-
ald’s restaurant in the United States to carry different items, although, as 
you have read, the restaurants’ menus are often quite different in other 
countries. In the United States, McDonald’s leans toward centralized author-
ity. However, today’s rapidly changing markets, added to global differences 
in consumer tastes, tend to favor some decentralization and thus more del-
egation of authority, even at McDonald’s. Its restaurants in England offer 
tea, those in France offer a Croque McDo (a hot ham-and-cheese sandwich), 
those in Japan sell rice, and Chinese McDonald’s offer taro and red bean 
desserts.  
  Decentralized authority   occurs when decision making is delegated to 
lower-level managers and employees more familiar with local conditions than 
headquarters management could be. Macy’s customers in California, for 
example, demand clothing styles different from what customers in Minnesota 
or Maine like. It makes sense to delegate to store managers in various cities 
the authority to buy, price, and promote merchandise appropriate for each 
area. Both Home Depot and Lowe’s are doing more to cater to local markets. 
 Figure 8.2  lists some advantages and disadvantages of centralized and decen-
tralized authority.  
LO 8–3
centralized authority
An organization structure in 
which decision-making 
authority is maintained at the 
top level of management.
decentralized authority
An organization structure in 
which decision-making 
authority is delegated to lower-
level managers more familiar 
with local conditions than 
headquarters management 
could be.
 FIGURE 8.2  
ADVANTAGES AND 
DISADVANTAGES OF 
CENTRALIZED VERSUS 
DECENTRALIZED 
AUTHORITY  
Advantages
Disadvantages
•  Less responsiveness to customers
•  Less empowerment
•  Interorganizational conﬂict
•  Lower morale away from
 headquarters
•  Less efﬁciency
•  Complex distribution system
•  Less top-management control
•  Weakened corporate image
•  Better adaptation to customer wants
•  More empowerment of workers
•  Faster decision making
•  Higher morale 
•  Greater top-management control
•  More efﬁciency 
•  Simpler distribution system
•  Stronger brand/corporate image
Centralized
Decentralized

219
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
 Choosing the Appropriate Span 
of Control 
  Span of control   describes the optimal number of 
subordinates a manager supervises or should 
supervise. What is the “right” span of control? At 
lower levels, where work is standardized, it’s pos-
sible to implement a broad span of control (15 to 
40 workers). For example, one supervisor can be 
responsible for 20 or more workers assembling 
computers or cleaning movie theaters. The appro-
priate span gradually narrows at higher levels of 
the organization, because work becomes less stan-
dardized and managers need more face-to-face 
communication. 
 The trend today is to expand the span of con-
trol as organizations adopt empowerment, reduce 
the number of middle managers, and hire more talented and better educated 
lower-level employees. Information technology also allows managers to handle 
more information, so the span can be broader still.  13  
 Choosing between Tall and Flat Organization Structures 
 In the early 20th century, organizations grew even bigger, adding layer after 
layer of management to create   tall organization structures   . As noted earlier, 
some had as many as 17 levels, and the span of control was small (few people 
reported to each manager). 
 Imagine how a message might be distorted as it moved up the organiza-
tion and back down through managers, management assistants, secretaries, 
assistant secretaries, supervisors, trainers, and so on. The cost of all these 
managers and support people was high, the paperwork they generated was 
enormous, and the inefficiencies in communication and decision making were 
often intolerable. 
 More recently, organizations have adopted   flat organization structures   
with fewer layers of management (see  Figure 8.3 ) and a broad span of control 
(many people report to each manager). Flat structures can respond readily to 
customer demands because lower-level employees have authority and responsi-
bility for making decisions, and managers can be spared some day-to-day tasks. 
In a bookstore with a flat organization structure, employees may have authority 
to arrange shelves by category, process special orders for customers, and so on.  
 Large organizations use flat structures to try to match the friendliness of 
small firms, whose workers often know customers by name. The flatter orga-
nizations become, the broader their spans of control, which means some man-
agers lose their jobs.  Figure 8.4  lists advantages and disadvantages of narrow 
and broad spans of control.  
 span of control  
 The optimal number of 
subordinates a manager 
supervises or should supervise.  
 tall organization structure  
 An organizational structure in 
which the pyramidal 
organization chart would be 
quite tall because of the 
various levels of management.  
flat organization structure
An organization structure that 
has few layers of management 
and a broad span of control.
 FIGURE 8.3 A FLAT 
ORGANIZATION 
STRUCTURE  
Owner/
Manager
  A broad span of control 
allows one supervisor 
to be responsible for 
many workers whose 
work tasks are predict-
able and standardized. 
In addition to assembly 
lines, can you think of 
other management situ-
ations that might benefit 
from a broad span of 
control? What about 
in a service industry?  

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
220
 Weighing the Advantages and 
Disadvantages of Departmentalization 
  Departmentalization   divides organizations into separate units. The traditional 
way to departmentalize is by  function —such as design, production, market-
ing, and accounting. Departmentalization groups workers according to their 
skills, expertise, or resource use so that they can specialize and work together 
more effectively. It may also save costs and thus improve efficiency. Other 
advantages include the following:
 
1. Employees can develop skills in depth and progress within a department 
as they master more skills.  
 
2. The company can achieve economies of scale by centralizing all the 
resources it needs and locate various experts in that area.  
 
3. Employees can coordinate work within the function, and top management 
can easily direct and control various departments’ activities.  
 Disadvantages of departmentalization by function include the following:
 
1. Departments may not communicate well. For example, production 
may be so isolated from marketing that it does not get needed feedback 
from customers.  
 
2. Employees may identify with their department’s goals rather than the 
organization’s. The purchasing department may find a good value 
somewhere and buy a huge volume of goods. That makes purchasing 
look good, but the high cost of storing the goods hurts overall profitability.  
 
3. The company’s response to external changes may be slow.  
 
4. People may not be trained to take different managerial responsibilities; 
rather, they tend to become narrow specialists.  
 
5. Department members may engage in groupthink (they think alike) 
and may need input from outside to become more creative.  
 Looking at Alternative Ways to Departmentalize  
Functional separation isn’t 
always the most responsive form of organization. So what are the alternatives? 
 Figure 8.5 shows five ways a firm can departmentalize. One way is by product. A 
book publisher might have a trade book department (for books sold to the gen-
eral public), a textbook department, and a technical book department, each with 
separate development and marketing processes. Such product-focused depart-
mentalization usually results in good customer relations.  
 Some organizations departmentalize by customer group. A pharmaceuti-
cal company might have one department for the consumer market, another 
departmentalization
The dividing of organizational 
functions into separate units.
 FIGURE 8.4  
ADVANTAGES AND 
DISADVANTAGES OF 
A NARROW VERSUS 
A BROAD SPAN OF 
CONTROL 
 The flatter the organization, the 
broader the span of control. 
Advantages
Disadvantages
•  Reduced costs 
•  More responsiveness to customers
•  Faster decision making 
•  More empowerment 
•  Fewer chances for advancement
•  Overworked managers
•  Loss of control
•  Less management expertise
•  Less empowerment
•  Higher costs
•  Delayed decision making
•  Less responsiveness to customers
•  More control by top management 
•  More chances for advancement 
•  Greater specialization 
•  Closer supervision 
Narrow
Broad

221
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
 FIGURE 8.5 WAYS TO 
DEPARTMENTALIZE  
 A computer company may 
want to departmentalize by 
geographic location (countries), 
a manufacturer by function, 
a pharmaceutical company 
by customer group, a leather 
manufacturer by process, and 
a publisher by product. In each 
case the structure must fit the 
firm’s goals. 
Japanese
division
Canadian
division
European
division
Korean
division
By geographic location
Vice president
(international operations)
By function
President
Marketing
Production
Finance
Human
resources
Accounting
Consumers
Commercial
users
Manufacturers
Institutions
By customer group
President
Dyers
Cutters
Stitchers
By process
Production
manager
College texts
Trade books
Technical
books
By product
Marketing
manager
that calls on hospitals (the institutional market), and another that targets doc-
tors. You can see how customer groups can benefit from having specialists 
satisfying their needs. 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
222
 Some firms group their units by geographic location because customers 
vary so greatly by region. Japan, Europe, and South America may deserve sep-
arate departments, with obvious benefits.  
 The decision about how to departmentalize depends on the nature of the 
product and the customers. A few firms find that it’s most efficient to separate 
activities by process. For example, a firm that makes leather coats may have 
one department cut the leather, another dye it, and a third sew the coat 
together. Such specialization enables employees to do a better job because 
they can focus on learning a few critical skills. 
 Some firms use a combination of departmentalization techniques to cre-
ate  hybrid forms. For example, a company could departmentalize by function, 
geographic location,  and customer groups.  
 After the material for 
footballs has been cut 
and sewn in the Wilson 
Sporting Goods factory, 
it moves on to the lacing 
department where work-
ers like this one open up 
the deflated balls and 
prepare them for lacing. 
What are the advantages 
and disadvantages of 
departmentalizing by 
processes like this?  
 • Why are organizations becoming flatter?  
 • What are some reasons for having a narrow span of control in an 
organization?  
 • What are the advantages and disadvantages of departmentalization?  
 • What are the various ways a firm can departmentalize?  
•
Why are organizations
 test prep  
s becoming fla
s b
Contrast the various organizational models.
 ORGANIZATIONAL MODELS 
 Now that we’ve explored the basic choices in organization design, let’s look in 
depth at four ways to structure an organization: (1) line organizations, (2) line-
and-staff organizations, (3) matrix-style organizations, and (4) cross-functional 
LO 8–4
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

223
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
self-managed teams. You’ll see that some of these models violate traditional 
management principles. The business community is in a period of transition, 
with some traditional organizational models giving way to new structures. 
Such transitions can be not only unsettling to employees and managers but 
also fraught with problems and errors.  
 Line Organizations 
 A   line organization   has direct two-way lines of responsibility, authority, 
and communication running from the top to the bottom of the organiza-
tion, with everyone reporting to only one supervisor. Many small businesses 
are organized this way. For example, a locally owned pizza parlor might 
have a general manager and a shift manager. All the general employees 
report to the shift manager, and he or she reports to the general manager or 
owner. 
 A line organization does not have any specialists who provide managerial 
support. There is no legal department, accounting department, human 
resources department, or information technology (IT) department. Line orga-
nizations follow all of Fayol’s traditional management rules. Line managers 
can issue orders, enforce discipline, and adjust the organization as conditions 
change. 
 In large businesses, a line organization may have the disadvantages of 
being too inflexible, of having few specialists or experts to advise people along 
the line, and of having lengthy lines of communication. Thus a line organiza-
tion may be unable to handle complex decisions relating to thousands of prod-
ucts and tons of paperwork. Such organizations usually turn to a line-and-staff 
form of organization.  
 Line-and-Staff Organizations 
 To minimize the disadvantages of simple line organizations, many organiza-
tions today have both line and staff personnel.   Line personnel  are responsible 
for directly achieving organizational goals, and include production workers, 
distribution people, and marketing personnel.   Staff personnel   advise and assist 
line personnel in meeting their goals, and include those in marketing research, 
legal advising, information technology, and human resource management. 
 See  Figure 8.6  for a diagram of a line-and-staff organization. One impor-
tant difference between line and staff personnel is authority. Line personnel 
have formal authority to make policy decisions. Staff personnel have authority 
to advise line personnel and influence their decisions, but they can’t make 
policy changes themselves. The line manager may seek or ignore the advice 
from staff personnel.  
 Many organizations benefit from expert staff advice on safety, legal issues, 
quality control, database management, motivation, and investing. Staff per-
sonnel strengthen the line positions and are like well-paid consultants on the 
organization’s payroll. 
 Matrix-Style Organizations 
 Both line and line-and-staff organization structures may suffer from inflexibil-
ity. Both allow for established lines of authority and communication and work 
well in organizations with stable environments and slow product development 
(such as firms selling household appliances). In such firms, clear lines of 
authority and relatively fixed organization structures are assets that ensure 
efficient operations. 
line organization
An organization that has direct 
two-way lines of responsibility, 
authority, and communication 
running from the top to the 
bottom of the organization, with 
all people reporting to only one 
supervisor.
 line personnel  
 Employees who are part of the 
chain of command that is 
responsible for achieving 
organizational goals.  
 staff personnel  
 Employees who advise and 
assist line personnel in meeting 
their goals.  
iSee It! Need help 
understanding line vs. 
staff employees? Visit 
your Connect e-book 
video tab for a brief 
animated explanation.

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
224
 Today’s economy, however, is dominated by high-growth industries like tele-
communications, nanotechnology, robotics, biotechnology, and aerospace, where 
competition is stiff and the life cycle of new ideas is short. Emphasis is on prod-
uct development, creativity, special projects, rapid communication, and interde-
partmental teamwork. From those changes grew the popularity of the   matrix 
organization   , in which specialists from different parts of the organization work 
together temporarily on specific projects, but still remain part of a line-and-staff 
structure (see  Figure 8.7 ). In other words, a project manager can borrow people 
from different departments to help design and market new product ideas.  14  
 The matrix structure was developed in the aerospace industry and is now 
familiar in areas such as banking, management consulting firms, accounting 
firms, ad agencies, and school systems. Among its advantages:
 
• 
It gives managers flexibility in assigning people to projects.  
 
• 
It encourages interorganizational cooperation and teamwork.  
 
• 
It can produce creative solutions to product development problems.  
 
• 
It makes efficient use of organizational resources.  
 As for disadvantages:
 
• 
It’s costly and complex.  
 
• 
It can confuse employees about where their loyalty belongs—with the 
project manager or with their functional unit.  
 
• 
It requires good interpersonal skills as well as cooperative employees 
and managers to avoid communication problems.  
 
• 
It may be only a temporary solution to a long-term problem.  
 matrix organization  
 An organization in which 
specialists from different parts 
of the organization are brought 
together to work on specific 
projects but still remain part of 
a line-and-staff structure.  
 FIGURE 8.6 A SAMPLE 
LINE-AND-STAFF 
ORGANIZATION  
= line
= staff
Chief executive
officer
Plant manager
Supervisor
Supervisor
Supervisor
Assembly-line
workers
Assembly-line
workers
Assembly-line
workers
Human resource
department
Legal
department
Marketing
research
department

225
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
 If you’re thinking that matrix organizations violate some traditional 
managerial principles, you’re right. Normally a person can’t work effectively 
for two bosses. Who has the real authority? Whose directive has first 
priority? 
 In reality, however, the system functions more effectively than you might 
imagine. To develop a new product, a project manager may be given temporary 
authority to “borrow” line personnel from production, marketing, and other 
line functions. The employees work together to complete the project and then 
return to their regular positions. Thus, no one actually reports to more than 
one manager at a time.  
 A potential real problem with matrix management, however, is that the 
project teams are not permanent. They form to solve a problem and then break 
up. There is little chance for cross-functional learning, because teams work 
together so briefly. 
 Decision making in the future will be distributed throughout the organi-
zation so that people can respond rapidly to change, says the  Harvard Business 
Review. Global teams will collaborate on the Internet for a single project and 
then disband. Young people who play online games will feel quite comfortable 
working in such groups.  
 Cross-Functional Self-Managed Teams 
 One solution to the temporary nature of matrix teams is to establish  long-lived 
teams and empower them to work closely with suppliers, customers, and oth-
ers to quickly and efficiently bring out new, high-quality products while giving 
great service. 
 FIGURE 8.7 A MATRIX ORGANIZATION  
 In a matrix organization, project managers are in charge of teams made up of members of several departments. In this case, project manager 
2 supervises employees A, B, C, and D. These employees are accountable not only to project manager 2 but also to the head of their 
individual departments. For example, employee B, a market researcher, reports to project manager 2  and to the vice president of marketing. 
President
Vice president 
(manufacturing)
Vice president 
(marketing)
Vice president 
(finance)
Vice president 
(engineering)
Vice president 
(project 
management)
Project 
manager 2
Employee A 
(buyer)
Employee B 
(market 
research)
Employee C 
(budget analyst)
Employee D 
(product 
designer)
Project 
manager 1
Project 
manager 3

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
226
 Cross-functional self-managed teams   are 
groups of employees from different departments 
who work together on a long-term basis (as 
opposed to the temporary teams established in 
matrix-style organizations).  Self-managed means 
that they are empowered to make decisions without 
management approval. The barriers among design, 
engineering, marketing, distribution, and other 
functions fall when interdepartmental teams are 
created. Sometimes the teams are interfirm; that 
is, the members come from two or more 
companies.  
 John Mackey of Whole Foods says that self-
managed teams are important, and they should be 
empowered and collaborative.  15 Cross-functional 
teams work best when leadership is shared. An engineer may lead the design 
of a new product, but a marketing expert may take the leadership position 
once it’s ready for distribution.  
 Going Beyond Organizational Boundaries 
 Cross-functional teams work best when the voice of the customer is brought 
in, especially in product development tasks.  16 Suppliers and distributors 
should be on the team as well. A cross-functional team that includes custom-
ers, suppliers, and distributors goes beyond organizational boundaries. When 
suppliers and distributors are in other countries, cross-functional teams may 
share market information across national boundaries. Government coordina-
tors may assist such projects, letting cross-functional teams break the barriers 
between government and business. 
 Cross-functional teams are only one way businesses can interact with 
other companies. Next we look at others.  
 You can think of a team 
of medical specialists in 
an operating room as a 
cross-functional, self-
managed team. Doctors, 
nurses, technicians, and 
anesthesiologists from 
different departments 
and areas in the hospital 
work together to com-
plete successful opera-
tions. What kinds of 
tasks do cross-functional, 
self-managed teams 
complete in an office or 
retail environment?  
 • What is the difference between line and staff personnel?  
 • What management principle does a matrix-style organization challenge?  
 • What is the main difference between a matrix-style organization’s struc-
ture and the use of cross-functional teams?  
•
What is the difference
 test prep  
e between line
e be
Identify the benefits of interfirm cooperation and coordination.
 MANAGING THE INTERACTIONS AMONG FIRMS 
 Whether it involves customers, suppliers, distributors, or the government, 
 networking   uses communications technology and other means to link organi-
zations and allow them to work together on common objectives. Let’s explore 
this concept further.  
LO 8–5
 networking  
 Using communications 
technology and other means to 
link organizations and allow 
them to work together on 
common objectives.  
cross-functional self-
managed teams
Groups of employees from 
different departments who work 
together on a long-term basis.
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

227
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
 Transparency and Virtual Organizations 
 Networked organizations are so closely linked by the Internet that each can 
find out what the others are doing in real time.   Real time   simply means the 
present moment or the actual time in which an event takes place. The Internet 
has allowed companies to send real-time data to organizational partners as 
they are developed or collected. 17 The result is transparency (see Chapter 7), 
which occurs when a company is so open to other companies that electronic 
information is shared as if the companies were one. With this integration, two 
companies can work as closely as two departments in traditional firms. 
 Can you see the implications for organizational design? Most organiza-
tions are no longer self-sufficient or self-contained. Rather, they are part of a 
vast network of global businesses that work closely together. An organization 
chart showing what people do within any one organization is simply not com-
plete, because the organization is part of a much larger system of firms. 
A modern chart would show people in different organizations and indicate 
how they are networked. This is a relatively new concept, however, so few 
such charts are yet available. The Spotlight on Small Business box offers an 
example of how small businesses outsource work rather than hire full-time 
workers. 
 Networked organization structures tend to be flexible. A company may 
work with a design expert from another company in Italy for a year and then 
not need that person anymore. It may hire an expert from a company in 
another country for the next project. Such a temporary network, made of 
replaceable firms that join and leave as needed, is a   virtual corporation   
(see  Figure 8.8 ). This is quite different from a traditional organization struc-
ture; in fact, traditional managers sometimes have trouble adapting to the 
speed of change and the impermanence of relationships in networking.  18 We 
discuss adaptation to change below; first, we describe how organizations use 
benchmarking and outsourcing to manage their interactions with other firms.  
 real time  
 The present moment or the 
actual time in which something 
takes place.  
 virtual corporation  
 A temporary networked 
organization made up of 
replaceable firms that join and 
leave as needed.  
 FIGURE 8.8 A VIRTUAL 
CORPORATION  
 A virtual corporation has no 
permanent ties to the firms that 
do its production, distribution, 
legal, and other work. Such 
firms are flexible enough to 
adapt to changes in the market 
quickly. 
Production
Firm
Accounting
Firm
Legal
Firm
Advertising
Agency
Distribution
Firm
CORE
Firm
Design
Firm

228
 Benchmarking and Core Competencies 
 Organizations historically tried to do all functions themselves. Each had its 
own department for accounting, finance, marketing, production, and so on. 
As we’ve noted, today’s organizations look to other organizations for help in 
areas where they do not generate world-class quality. 
 Benchmarking   compares an organization’s practices, processes, and 
products against the world’s best. As one example, K2 Skis is a company 
that makes skis, snowboards, in-line skates, and related products. It studied 
the compact-disc industry and learned to use ultraviolet inks to print graph-
ics on skis. It went to the aerospace industry to get piezoelectric technology 
to reduce vibration in its snowboards (the aerospace industry uses the tech-
nology for wings on planes). It learned from the cable television industry 
how to braid layers of fiberglass and carbon, and adapted that knowledge to 
make skis. As another example, Wyeth, a pharmaceutical company, bench-
marked the aerospace industry for project management, the shipping indus-
try for standardization of processes, and computer makers to learn the most 
efficient way to make prescription drugs. 
 Benchmarking also has a more directly competitive purpose. In retailing, 
Target may compare itself to Walmart to see what, if anything, Walmart does 
better. Target will then try to improve its practices or processes to become 
even better than Walmart.  
 If an organization can’t do as well as the best in, say, shipping, it will try to 
outsource the function to an organization like UPS or FedEx that specializes in 
shipping. Outsourcing, remember, means assigning one or more functions—such 
as accounting, production, security, maintenance, and legal work—to outside 
organizations. Even small firms are getting involved in outsourcing. We’ve 
already discussed some problems with outsourcing, especially when companies 
outsource to other countries. Some functions, such as information management 
benchmarking
Comparing an organization’s 
practices, processes, and 
products against the world’s 
best.
 spotlight on small business 
 When you look for your next job, 
it’s likely you’ll find it in a small 
business. In fact, over the past 
20 years, almost two-thirds of the 
net new jobs have been created 
by small businesses. Unfortunately, 
keeping costs low is the name of 
the game for small businesses and 
hiring workers is a major expense. 
That’s why many small businesses 
are asking: “Why hire here in the 
U.S. if someone in another country 
can do the job for less?” For exam-
ple, when Mike Scanlin, CEO of 
Born to Sell, an online investment 
service, was looking for program-
ming help for his company, he 
found that programmers from 
nearby Silicon Valley said it would 
cost $600,000. So he hired pro-
grammers from eastern Europe for 
only $37,000. While language 
problems were an issue at times, 
quality was not sacrificed. The pro-
grammers from Romania and 
Russia were seasoned software 
developers with Master’s degrees 
in computer science. 
 Today, outsourcing jobs is not 
just for big businesses anymore. 
Small businesses can grow with-
out hiring additional full-time 
workers. They also do not need to 
pay high-priced local companies 
to handle projects such as web-
site design, software develop-
ment, and customer service since 
there are so many lower-cost 
global options available. This 
increase in small business out-
sourcing can be partly attributed 
to the presence of online job 
marketplaces such as ODesk. At 
ODesk, workers’ skills and portfo-
lios, along with reviews of their 
work, are posted for businesses 
to review. ODesk handles pay-
ment to the contractors; it does 
require a fee for its services. 
 With growing numbers of reli-
able contractors available glob-
ally, the trend is not good for U.S. 
job seekers and freelancers, 
especially in basic tech positions. 
It’s difficult for a U.S. worker to 
compete with a contractor in the 
Philippines who bids $5 per hour 
for a tech-related job. 
 Sources: Jose Pagliery, “Even Small Companies 
Are Outsourcing,”  CNNMoney, March 28, 2013; 
Adam Callinan, “To Outsource or Not? That Is the 
Question,”  Entrepreneur, February 7, 2014; and 
Phyllis Korkki, “Small Business, Joining a Parade of 
Outsourcing,”  The New York Times, February 15, 
2014. 
 Cutting Back While Cutting Costs 
s

229
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
and marketing, may be too impor-
tant to assign to outside firms. In 
that case, the organization should 
benchmark the best firms and 
restructure its departments to try to 
be equally good. It is important to 
remember that companies in other 
countries often outsource their func-
tions to companies in the United 
States. We call that  insourcing and it 
is the source of many jobs.  19  
 When a firm has completed its 
outsourcing process, the remaining 
functions are its   core competencies ,  
those functions it can do as well as 
or better than any other organiza-
tion in the world. For example, Nike 
is great at designing and marketing athletic shoes. Those are its core competen-
cies. It outsources manufacturing, however, to other companies that assemble 
shoes better and less expensively than Nike can. Similarly, Dell is best at market-
ing computers and may outsource most other functions, including manufactur-
ing and distribution. 
 After you have structured an organization, you must keep monitoring the 
environment (including customers) to learn what changes are needed. Dell, for 
example, reversed its practice of outsourcing customer support and now offers 
a premium service that allows U.S. customers to reach tech support in North 
America. The following section discusses organizational change in more detail.  
 ADAPTING TO CHANGE 
 Once you have formed an organization, you must be prepared to adapt the 
structure to changes in the market. That’s not always easy to do.  20 Over time, 
an organization can get stuck in its ways. Employees have a tendency to say, 
“That’s the way we’ve always done things. If it isn’t broken, don’t fix it.” Man-
agers also get complacent. They may say they have 20 years’ experience when 
in fact they’ve had one year’s experience 20 times. Do you think that slow 
adaptation to change was a factor in the decline of the manufacturing sector 
in the United States? 
 Introducing change is thus one of the hardest challenges facing any man-
ager. Nonetheless, change is what’s happening at General Motors (GM), Ford, 
Facebook, and other companies eager to become more competitive. If you 
have old facilities that are no longer efficient, you have to get rid of them. 
That’s exactly what GM and other companies did. In fact, they asked the gov-
ernment to lend them billions of dollars to help. You may have to cut your 
labor force to lower costs. 
 The Internet has created whole new opportunities, not only to sell to cus-
tomers directly but also to ask them questions and provide them with any 
information they want. To win market share, companies must coordinate the 
efforts of their traditional departments and their information technology staff 
to create friendly, easy-to-manage interactions. Young people today are called 
  digital natives   because they grew up with the Internet and cell phones; using 
high-tech devices is second nature to them. On the other hand, companies 
often need to retrain older employees to be more tech-savvy. While the ease 
and immediacy of communication created by technology may be powerful, 
being constantly connected to work does have its downsides (see Adapting to 
Change box). 
 core competencies  
 Those functions that the 
organization can do as well as 
or better than any other 
organization in the world.  
digital natives
Young people who have grown 
up using the Internet and social 
networking.
  Nike’s core competen-
cies are designing and 
marketing athletic 
shoes. The company 
outsources other func-
tions (i.e., manufactur-
ing) to other companies 
that assemble shoes 
better and cheaper than 
Nike could do on its 
own. What are the 
advantages of focusing 
on the company’s core 
competencies? What 
are the disadvantages?  

230
 We’ve seen that Target is highly centralized. Nonetheless, the company 
reacts effectively to changes in consumer preferences throughout the country, 
in part by keeping in touch with an enormous web of people of all ages, inter-
ests, and nationalities—its “creative cabinet”—via the Internet. The members 
of the “cabinet,” who never meet so they cannot influence each other, evaluate 
various new initiatives and recommend new programs to help Target figure 
out what belongs on store shelves. 
 Restructuring for Empowerment 
 To empower employees, firms often must reorganize dramatically to make 
frontline workers their most important people.   Restructuring  is redesigning 
an organization so it can more effectively and efficiently serve its customers. 
 Until recently, department store clerks, and front-desk staff in hotels 
weren’t considered key employees. Instead, managers were considered more 
important, and they were responsible for directing the work of the frontline 
people. The organization chart in a typical firm looked much like a pyramid. 
 A few service-oriented organizations have turned the traditional organi-
zation structure upside down. An   inverted organization   has contact people 
(like nurses) at the top and the chief executive officer at the bottom. 
 restructuring  
 Redesigning an organization so 
that it can more effectively and 
efficiently serve its customers.  
inverted organization
An organization that has 
contact people at the top and 
the chief executive officer at 
the bottom of the organization 
chart.
 adapting to change 
 People today use technology to 
text, tweet, surf the web, and run 
apps as they go about their per-
sonal lives and, in many cases, their 
business lives. Many companies, in 
fact, provide work-issued smart-
phones, tablets, and other mobile 
technology to their employees. This 
blending of mobile technology and 
work has been a boon to employ-
ees and businesses in many ways, 
particularly in terms of speed, 
reach, and efficiency. Unfortunately, 
it has also encroached on the tradi-
tional boundaries between work 
and home. 
 According to a recent survey 
conducted by Right Management, 
a career and outplacement ser-
vice, more than one-third of 
employees receive work-related 
e-mails after work hours. 
According to Monika Morrow, 
senior vice president at Right 
Management, “The boundaries of 
the workplace are expanding and 
now reach deeper into employ-
ees’ lives. Workers can no longer 
leave the office at the office.” 
While no one disputes the value of 
technology, many believe its use 
has gone overboard and is affect-
ing employees’ quality of life. 
Companies such as Volkswagen, 
PricewaterhouseCoopers, and 
shipping company PBD have 
heard the complaints and created 
both formal and informal rules 
regarding e-mail. 
 The e-mail encroachment prob-
lem is not just in the United 
States. France is considering leg-
islation that would block work 
e-mails and phone calls, and 
legally give employees at least 11 
hours of daily rest free from 
mobile technology. 
 Sources: Cecilia Kang, “Firms Tell Employees: 
Avoid After-Hours E-Mail,”  The Washington Post, 
September 21, 2012; Chris Baysden, “Why You’re 
Never Safe from More Work—Even After Hours,” 
CGMA Magazine, July 4, 2013; and Scott Sayare, 
“In France, a Move to Limit Off-the-Clock Work 
Emails,”  The New York Times, April 11, 2014. 
 When Open Communication Should Not Be So Open 

231
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
Management layers are few, and the manager’s job is to  assist and support
frontline people, not boss them around.  Figure 8.9  illustrates the difference 
between an inverted and a traditional organizational structure.  
 Companies based on this organization structure support frontline person-
nel with internal and external databases, advanced communication systems, 
and professional assistance. Naturally, this means frontline people have to be 
better educated, better trained, and better paid than in the past. It takes a lot 
of trust for top managers to implement such a system—but when they do, the 
payoff in customer satisfaction and profits is often well worth the effort.  21 
 In the past, managers controlled information—and that gave them power. 
In more progressive organizations today, everyone shares information, often 
through an elaborate database system, and  among firms as well as  within 
them. No matter what organizational model you choose or how much you 
empower your employees, the secret to successful organization change is to 
focus on customers and give them what they want.  
Explain how organizational culture can help businesses adapt to change.
 Creating a Change-Oriented Organizational Culture 
 Any organizational change is bound to cause some stress and resistance among 
members. Firms adapt best when their culture is already change-oriented.   Orga-
nizational (or corporate) culture   is the widely shared values within an organi-
zation that foster unity and cooperation to achieve common goals. Usually the 
culture of an organization is reflected in its stories, traditions, and myths. 
 Each McDonald’s restaurant has the same feel, look, and atmosphere; in 
short, each has a similar organizational culture. It’s obvious from visiting 
many McDonald’s restaurants that the culture emphasizes quality, service, 
cleanliness, and value. 
 An organizational culture can also be negative. Have you ever been in an 
organization where you feel no one cares about service or quality? The clerks 
may seem uniformly glum, indifferent, and testy. Their mood pervades the 
atmosphere, and patrons become unhappy or upset. It may be hard to believe 
an organization, especially a profit-making one, can be run so badly and still 
LO 8–6
 organizational (or corporate) 
culture  
 Widely shared values within an 
organization that provide unity 
and cooperation to achieve 
common goals.  
 FIGURE 8.8 COMPARISON OF AN INVERTED ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE AND A TRADITIONAL 
ORGANIZATIONAL STRUCTURE  
Top
management
Middle management
Frontline workers
Supervisory management
Top
management
Empowered frontline 
workers (often in teams)
Support personnel 
Traditional Organization
Inverted Organization

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
232
survive. Clearly then, when you search for a job, 
study the organizational culture to see whether you 
will thrive in it.  
 Some of the best organizations have cultures 
that emphasize service to others, especially custom-
ers. The atmosphere reflects friendly, caring people 
who enjoy working together to provide a good prod-
uct at a reasonable price. Companies that have such 
cultures have less need for close supervision of 
employees. That usually means fewer policy manu-
als; organization charts; and formal rules, proce-
dures, and controls. The key to a productive culture 
is mutual trust. You get such trust by giving it. The 
very best companies stress high moral and ethical 
values such as honesty, reliability, fairness, environ-
mental protection, and social involvement. 
 We’ve been talking as if organizational mat-
ters were mostly controllable by management. In 
fact, the formal structure is just one element of the 
total organizational system, including its culture. 
The informal organization is of equal or even 
greater importance. Let’s explore this notion next.  
 Managing the Informal Organization 
 All organizations have two organizational systems. 
The   formal organization   details lines of responsi-
bility, authority, and position. It’s the structure 
shown on organization charts. The other system is the   informal organization   , 
the system that develops spontaneously as employees meet and form cliques, 
relationships, and lines of authority outside the formal organization. It’s the 
human side of the organization that doesn’t show on any organization chart. 
 No organization can operate effectively without both types of organiza-
tion. The formal system is often too slow and bureaucratic to let the organiza-
tion adapt quickly, although it does provide helpful guides and lines of authority 
for routine situations. 
 The informal organization is often too unstructured and emotional to 
allow careful, reasoned decision making on critical matters. It’s extremely 
effective, however, in generating creative solutions to short-term problems and 
creating camaraderie and teamwork among employees.  22 
 In any organization, it’s wise to learn quickly who is important in the 
informal organization. Following formal rules and procedures can take days. 
Who in the organization knows how to obtain supplies immediately without 
the normal procedures? Which administrative assistants should you see if you 
want your work given first priority? Answers to these questions help people 
work effectively in many organizations.  
 The informal organization’s nerve center is the  grapevine, the system 
through which unofficial information flows between and among managers and 
employees. Key people in the grapevine usually have considerable influence. 
 In the old “us-versus-them” system of organizations, where managers and 
employees were often at odds, the informal system hindered effective manage-
ment. In more open organizations, managers and employees work together to 
set objectives and design procedures. The informal organization is an invalu-
able managerial asset that can promote harmony among workers and estab-
lish the corporate culture.  23 
formal organization
The structure that details lines 
of responsibility, authority, and 
position; that is, the structure 
shown on organization charts.
informal organization
The system that develops 
spontaneously as employees 
meet and form cliques, 
relationships, and lines of 
authority outside the formal 
organization.
 Empowering employees 
who deal directly with 
customers to solve 
problems without 
needing a manager’s 
approval makes a 
higher level of customer 
service possible and 
helps employees grow 
as well. What kind of 
guest issues do you 
think a frontline hotel 
employee should be 
allowed to solve on his 
or her own?  

233
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
 • What is an inverted organization?  
 • Why do organizations outsource functions?  
 • What is organizational culture?  
•
What is an inverted or
 test prep  
rganization?
rga
 summary 
.  Outline the basic principles of organization management. 
 • 
 What is happening today to American businesses?  
 They are adjusting to changing markets. That is a normal function in a 
capitalist economy. There will be big winners, like Google and Facebook, 
and big losers as well. The key to success is remaining flexible and adapt-
ing to the changing times.  
 • 
 What are the principles of organization management?  
 Structuring an organization means devising a division of labor (some-
times resulting in specialization), setting up teams or departments, and 
assigning responsibility and authority. It includes allocating resources 
(such as funds), assigning specific tasks, and establishing procedures for 
accomplishing the organizational objectives. Managers also have to make 
ethical decisions about how to treat workers.  
Wh
i h
LO 8–1
 The informal 
organization is the 
system that develops as 
employees meet and 
form relationships. The 
grapevine, the unofficial 
flow of information 
among employees, is 
the nerve center of the 
informal organization. 
How does the informal 
organization affect the 
work environment?  
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  
 As effective as the informal organization may be in creating group coop-
eration, it can still be equally powerful in resisting management directives. 
Employees may form unions, go on strike together, and generally disrupt 
operations. Learning to create the right corporate culture and work within the 
informal organization is thus a key to managerial success.  24 
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
234
  Compare the organizational theories of Fayol and Weber. 
 • 
 What were Fayol’s basic principles?  
 Fayol introduced principles such as unity of command, hierarchy of 
authority, division of labor, subordination of individual interests to the gen-
eral interest, authority, clear communication channels, order, and equity.  
 • 
What principles did Weber add?  
 Weber added principles of bureaucracy such as job descriptions, written 
rules and decision guidelines, consistent procedures, and staffing and pro-
motions based on qualifications.  
  Evaluate the choices managers make in structuring organizations. 
 • 
 What are the four major choices in structuring organizations?  
 Choices to make in structuring and restructuring organizations cover (1) 
centralization versus decentralization, (2) breadth of span of control, (3) tall 
versus flat organization structures, and (4) type of departmentalization.  
 • 
 What are the latest trends in structuring?  
 Departments are often replaced or supplemented by matrix organizations 
and cross-functional teams that decentralize authority. The span of con-
trol becomes larger as employees become self-directed. Another trend is to 
eliminate managers and flatten organizations.  
  Contrast the various organizational models. 
 • 
 What are the two major organizational models?  
 Two traditional forms of organization are (1) line organizations and 
(2) line-and-staff organizations. A line organization has clearly defined 
responsibility and authority, is easy to understand, and provides each 
worker with only one supervisor. The expert advice of staff assistants in a 
line-and-staff organization helps in areas such as safety, quality control, 
computer technology, human resource management, and investing.  
 • 
 What are the key alternatives to the major organizational models? 
 Matrix organizations assign people to projects temporarily and encour-
age interorganizational cooperation and teamwork. Cross-functional 
self-managed teams have all the benefits of the matrix style and are long 
term.  
  Identify the benefits of interfirm cooperation and coordination. 
 • 
 What are the major concepts involved in interfirm communications?  
 Networking uses communications technology and other means to link 
organizations and allow them to work together on common objectives. 
A virtual corporation is a networked organization of replaceable firms that 
join and leave as needed. Benchmarking tells firms how their performance 
measures up to that of their competitors in specific functions. The com-
pany may then  outsource to companies that perform its weaker functions 
more effectively and efficiently. The functions that are left are the firm’s 
core competencies. 
 • 
 What is an inverted organization?  
 An inverted organization places employees at the top of the hierarchy; 
managers are at the bottom to train and assist employees.  
Wh t
LO 8–2
Wh
LO 8–3
Wh t
LO 8–4
Wh t
LO 8–5

235
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
  Explain how organizational culture can help businesses adapt to change. 
 • 
 What is organizational culture?  
 Organizational (or corporate) culture consists of the widely shared values 
within an organization that foster unity and cooperation to achieve com-
mon goals.  
 • 
 What is the difference between the formal and informal organization of a firm?  
 The formal organization details lines of responsibility, authority, and posi-
tion. It’s the structure shown on organization charts. The informal organi-
zation is the system that develops spontaneously as employees meet and 
form cliques, relationships, and lines of authority outside the formal orga-
nization. It’s the human side of the organization. The informal organiza-
tion is an invaluable managerial asset that often promotes harmony among 
workers and establishes the corporate culture. As effective as the informal 
organization may be in creating group cooperation, it can still be equally 
powerful in resisting management directives.   
Wh
i
LO 8–6
 key terms 
 benchmarking 228  
 bureaucracy 217 
 centralized authority 218  
 chain of command 216 
 core competencies 229  
 cross-functional self-
managed teams 226  
 decentralized 
authority 218  
 departmentalization 220  
 digital natives 229  
 economies of scale 214  
 flat organization 
structure 219 
 formal organization 232  
 hierarchy 216  
 informal organization 232  
 inverted 
organization 230 
 line organization 223 
 line personnel 223  
 matrix organization 224  
 networking 226  
 organization (or 
corporate) culture 231  
 organizational 
chart 216  
 real time 227  
 restructuring 230 
 span of control 219   
 staff personnel 223  
 tall organization 
structure 219 
 virtual corporation 227  
 Now that you have learned some of the basic principles of organization, pause 
and think about where you have already applied such concepts yourself or 
when you have been part of an organization that did. 
 1. Did you find a division of labor necessary and helpful?  
 2. Were you assigned specific tasks or left on your own to decide what to do?  
 3. Were promotions based strictly on qualifications, as Weber suggested? 
What other factors may have been considered?  
 4. What problems seem to emerge when an organization gets larger?  
 5. What organizational changes might you recommend to the auto compa-
nies? The airline industry?  
se
 critical thinking 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
236
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology 
 1. There is no better way to understand the effects of having many layers of 
management on communication accuracy than the game of Message 
Relay. Choose seven or more members of the class and have them leave the 
classroom. Then choose one person to read the following paragraph and 
another student to listen. Call in one of the students from outside and have 
the “listener” tell him or her what information was in the paragraph. Then 
bring in another student and have the new listener repeat the information 
to him or her. Continue the process with all those who left the room. Do 
not allow anyone in the class to offer corrections as each listener becomes 
the storyteller in turn. In this way, all the students can hear how the facts 
become distorted over time. The distortions and mistakes are often quite 
humorous, but they are not so funny in organizations such as Ford, which 
once had 22 layers of management. 
 
 Here’s the paragraph:
 Dealers in the midwest region have received over 130 complaints 
about steering on the new Commander and Roadhandler models of 
our minivans. Apparently, the front suspension system is weak and the 
ball joints are wearing too fast. This causes slippage in the linkage and 
results in oversteering. Mr. Berenstein has been notified, but so far 
only 213 of 4,300 dealers have received repair kits.  
 2.  Describe some informal groups within an organization with which you are 
familiar at school or work. What have you noticed about how those groups 
help or hinder progress in the organization?  
 3.  Imagine you are working for Kitchen Magic, an appliance manufacturer 
that produces dishwashers. A competitor introduces a new dishwasher 
that uses sound waves not only to clean even the worst burned-on food 
but also to sterilize dishes and silverware. You need to develop a similar 
offering fast, or your company will lose market share. Write an e-mail to 
management outlining the problem and explaining your rationale for rec-
ommending use of a cross-functional team to respond quickly.  
 4.  Divide the class into teams of five. Each team should imagine your firm, a 
producer of athletic shoes, has been asked to join a virtual network. How 
might you minimize the potential problems of joining? Begin by defining 
a virtual corporation and listing its advantages and disadvantages. Each 
team should report its solutions to the class.  
 5.  A growing number of work groups, including management, are cross-
functional and self-managed. To practice working in such an organization, 
break into groups of five or so students, preferably with different back-
grounds and interests. Each group must work together to prepare a report 
on the advantages and disadvantages of working in teams. Many of the 
problems and advantages of cross-functional, self-managed teams should 
emerge in your group as you try to complete this assignment. Each group 
should report to the class how it handled the problems and benefited from 
the advantages.  
 
 
 
 
 

237
Structuring Organizations for Today’s Challenges
CHAPTER 8
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To learn more about the process of organizational change.  
 EXERCISE 
 Xerox is a very familiar corporate name in the United States. There was a time, 
however, when the company was faltering and needed to adapt to foreign com-
petition. This exercise will help you see how complex such change can be. 
 1. Do an online search for “Xerox Corporation.”  
 2. Read through the history of the company and describe its current 
strengths, weaknesses, opportunities, and threats (a SWOT analysis; see 
Chapter 7).  
 3. Describe Xerox’s reasons for success.  
 video case   
 Whole Foods Market is a supermarket chain that 
specializes in fresh, organic produce from local 
sources. As an international company with loca-
tions around the world, it has a large operation to 
watch over and a very specific mission to uphold: 
to sell the highest-quality natural and organic prod-
ucts available. 
 Sticking to this goal and keeping up with the 
demands of a rapidly expanding business aren’t 
always easy, though. In order to stay committed to 
stocking sustainable goods, Whole Foods relies on 
an organizational structure that combines aspects 
of a mom-and-pop operation with a traditional 
corporate hierarchy. Thanks to this unique orga-
nizational structure, the company has been able 
to expand to 360 stores and hire more than 58,000 
employees without sacrificing its core principles. 
 Whole Foods got its start when John Mackey 
and Rene Lawson borrowed money from friends 
and family to open a small natural food store in 
Austin, Texas. The couple soon ended up living 
in the market after they were evicted from their 
apartment for storing some of their grocery 
stock there. Fortunately, business began to boom 
once the pair took on a couple of partners and 
merged with another store. But they quickly 
faced another huge setback when the most 
destructive flood Austin had experienced in 
70 years took its toll on the market. Along with 
incurring damage to their building, the store 
also lost all of its produce and inventory. Thanks 
to a massive community cleanup effort, however, 
the market was soon back in business. 
 Whole Foods has never forgotten that lesson—
that having a local, grass-roots structure sensitive 
to drastic and sudden changes in the business 
environment can keep an organization nimble and 
responsive. In the company’s early days, the staff 
was small enough so that everyone could do every 
job. While this kept things running smoothly at 
first, the situation had to change as the company 
grew and opened more stores. They divided the 
labor between the four partners, with each special-
izing in one or more of the tasks critical to the 
business. After designating the leaders for depart-
ments like finance, human resources, and sales, 
Whole Foods began to look like a big company. 
 But John Mackey and his partners still wanted 
their stores to appear like small local markets, not 
corporate mega-grocers. That meant they had to 
make tough choices, like whether they should cen-
tralize supply in warehouses or depend on sepa-
rate, local suppliers in each region they had stores. 
Whole Foods ultimately opted for the latter option. 
To stay responsive to market changes, each region 
received its own manager and the autonomy to 
make certain decisions about supply sources and 
pricing based on the needs of that region, without 
being slowed down waiting for responses from the 
home office. This decentralized structure gives 
Whole Foods the flexibility to adapt to important 
changes without involving needless bureaucracy. 
 WHOLE FOODS 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
238
 Whole Foods Market continues to expand into 
new markets around the world. Despite that fact, 
it’s managed to keep what’s unique about its cul-
ture and pure about its mission: focusing on great, 
natural sources at the local level. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1.  Organizations like Whole Foods need to follow 
the principles of Henri Fayol, such as the “unity 
of command.” What is unity of command?
2.  Whole Foods structures its organization in a 
decentralized manner. What does that mean 
for the company’s operations?
3.  Do you think the corporate culture at Whole 
Foods is somewhat resistant to change or 
accepting of change? Why?
 1. 
John Jullens, “How Emerging Giants Can Take On the 
World,”  Harvard Business Review, December 2013. 
 2. 
Jonathan House and Kathleen Madigan, “U.S. Factories 
Bounce Back in February,”  The Wall Street Journal, March 2, 
2014. 
 3. 
Ann Hadley, “What Not to Do,”  Entrepreneur, September 
2013. 
 4. 
Amol Sharma, Shalini Ramachandran, and Don Clark, 
“Amazon Joins the TV Crush,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 22, 2014. 
 5. 
Natalie Kaddas, “Being Flexible,”  www.huffingtonpost.com , 
November 23, 2013. 
 6. 
Mary Jordan, “The Promise of a ‘Made in America’ Era,”  The 
Washington Post, May 1, 2013. 
 7. 
Fredrik Eliasson, “Emphasizing the Management in ‘Change 
Management,’”  The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2014. 
 8. 
John Mackey and Raj Sisodia,  Conscious Capitalism (Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2013). 
 9. 
Clint Boulton, “Government Must Boost Pay, Change Culture 
to Hire Top Tech Talent,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 6, 
2014. 
 10. 
Jeff Bennett and John Kell, “GM Restores Annual Dividend 
as Sales Shine,”  The Wall Street Journal,  January 15, 2014. 
 11. 
Rashik Parmar, Ian Mackenzie, David Cohn, and David Gann, 
“The New Patterns of Innovation,”  Harvard Business Review, 
January–February 2014. 
 12. 
Raymond Fisman and Tim Sullivan, “The Unsung Beauty of 
Bureaucracy,”  The Wall Street Journal, Mary 16–17, 2014. 
 13. Gary L. Neilson and Julie Wulf, “How Many Direct Reports?” 
Harvard Business Review, April 2012. 
 14. David Gann, Ammon Salter, Mark Dodgson, and Nelson 
Phillips, “Inside the World of the Project Baron,”  Sloan 
Management Review, Spring 2012. 
 15. Mackey and Sisodia,  Conscious Capitalism. 
 16. Braden Kowitz, “Why You Should Listen to the Customer,” 
The Wall Street Journal, February 19, 2014. 
  17. Mary C. Lacity and Leslie P. Willcocks,” Outsourcing Business 
Processes for Innovation,”  Sloan Management Review, 
Spring 2013. 
 18. Tammy Johns and Lynda Gratton, “The Third Wave of Virtual 
Work,”  Harvard Business Review, January–February 2013. 
 19. Kasia Klimasinska, “Obama Budget Predicts Strongest U.S. 
Growth since 2005,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, March 4, 2014. 
 20. Robert I. Sutton and Huggy Rao, “Before You Make Any 
Changes, Ask These Questions,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
March 4, 2014. 
 21. Michael E. Raynor and Mumtaz Ahmed, “Three Rules for 
Making a Company Truly Great,”  Harvard Business Review, 
April 2013. 
 22. Alex (Sandy) Pentland, “The New Science of Building Great 
Teams,”  Harvard Business Review, April 2012. 
 23. Jay Rao and Joseph Weintraub, “How Innovative Is Your 
Company’s Culture?”  Sloan Management Review, Spring 
2013. 
 24. Christopher Hann, “Good Vibes,”  Entrepreneur, February 
2014. 
1.
John Jullens, “How Emerging Gia
 notes 
 Page 211: © D Dipasupil/FilmMagic/Getty 
Images; p. 212: © Huntstock, Inc./age fotostock 
RF; p. 214: Public Domain; p. 216: © Interfoto/
Alamy Images; p. 219: © Jens Wolf/dpa/Corbis; 
p. 222: © Amy Sancetta/AP Images; p. 226: 
© Wavebreak Media LTD/age fotostock RF; 
p. 229: © Lucy Nicholson/Reuters/Corbis; 
p. 230: ©almagami/ Alamy RF; p. 232: © Mark 
Edward Atkinson/Blend Images/Alamy; p. 233: 
© SuperStock.
Page 211: © D Dipasupil/Film
p hoto credits 


240
 Production and 
Operations 
Management 
 9 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 9-1 
Describe the current state of U.S. manufacturing and what 
manufacturers have done to become more competitive. 
 LO 9-2 
Describe the evolution from production to operations 
management. 
 LO 9-3 
Identify various production processes and describe techniques 
that improve productivity, including computer-aided design and 
manufacturing, flexible manufacturing, lean manufacturing, mass 
customization, and robotics. 
 LO 9-4 
Describe operations management planning issues including facility 
location, facility layout, materials requirement planning, 
purchasing, just-in-time inventory control, and quality control. 
 LO 9-5 
Explain the use of PERT and Gantt charts to control manufacturing 
processes.  

241
Shahid Khan
 • CEO of Flex-N-Gate
 • Former dishwasher built an auto 
parts empire
 • Now one of the richest men in 
the world 
www.flex-n-gate.com
@flexngate
W
 hen Shahid Khan 
came to the U.S. at 
age 16, it didn’t take 
him long to feel the 
power of the Ameri-
can Dream in spite of a shaky beginning. 
He moved to Champaign, Illinois, from 
his home country of Pakistan in order to 
earn a degree in engineering. Not only 
was a blizzard bombarding the midwest-
ern town upon his arrival, but also the 
dorms at the University of Illinois hadn’t 
opened yet. Reluctantly, Khan paid $3 for 
a room and a meal at the local YMCA. 
With precious little money to his name, 
Khan began to worry about how he 
would survive for the next four years. 
 But his fears subsided the next morn-
ing when he discovered a notice about an 
opening for a dishwashing job in the 
YMCA kitchen. With a starting salary of 
$1.20 per hour, Khan was shocked that he 
could recoup his losses from the previous 
night so quickly. “It’s like, wow,” said Khan. 
“If you put the $1.20 per hour in terms of 
Pakistan, you’re making more than 99% of 
the people over there. I’m breathing oxy-
gen for the first time.” The opportunities 
offered by the U.S. fueled Khan’s enthusi-
asm for his work in college and beyond. 
After graduating, he landed a job over-
seeing production for a local aftermarket 
auto parts company called Flex-N-Gate. 
At first Khan couldn’t believe the ineffi-
cient manufacturing methods the com-
pany used to make its bumpers, which 
sometimes involved welding together as 
many as 15 different parts. Using his engi-
neering expertise, Khan refined the pro-
cess to make it less complicated. His hard 
work paid off in the form of a revolution-
ary new product: a bumper stamped from 
a single piece of steel that managed to 
slim down the rear end of a truck. 
 After seven years in the aftermarket 
business, Khan realized that the value-
focused industry didn’t provide much 
room for innovation. If Khan wanted his 
product to succeed, he knew he had to 
sell directly to automakers instead of to 
consumers. So armed with little more 
than a post office box and a small busi-
ness loan, Khan started his own company. 
Within two years he earned enough 
money to buy the failing Flex-N-Gate from 
his old boss, giving him additional reve-
nue streams as well as an established 
brand name. While business boomed at 
first, sales eventually ground to a halt 
when its biggest client, General Motors, 
simply passed off Khan’s bumper design 
to its large-scale suppliers instead. 
 Other entrepreneurs would have 
reacted angrily to such a slight, but 
Khan kept on the bright side. “It really 
was the right thing for them,” he says. 
“We had no business going from making 
200 bumpers a day to making 40,000.” 
Plus, his dealings with GM put him in con-
tact with executives at Isuzu, one of 
Japan’s biggest auto companies. Khan 
traveled to Japan in the early 1980s in a 
last-ditch effort to woo clients. His timing 
couldn’t have been better. Japanese car 
companies had been preparing to enter 
the American market, but needed more 
domestic suppliers to fuel their growth. 
Not only did Khan’s company fill this need, 
but he also brought his game-changing 
bumper design to the table. Soon Flex-N-
Gate was manufacturing parts for Isuzu, 
Mazda, and Toyota. As those brands grew 
into some of the biggest names on the 
American market, Khan’s company grew 
right along with them. Today Flex-N-Gate 
auto parts are in two-thirds of the cars and 
trucks sold in the U.S. Flex-N-Gate enjoys 
over $3 billion in sales a year. And since 
Kahn is the sole shareholder, the profit on 
those sales goes to him, making Kahn one 
of the richest men in the world. 
 In 2012 Kahn used some of that 
immense wealth to purchase the Jackson-
ville Jaguars, and in the process realized 
a personal dream to own an NFL fran-
chise. Although the Jaguars aren’t exactly 
Super Bowl contenders now, Khan is con-
fident that the team will become another 
one of his patented comeback stories. 
 By setting Flex-N-Gate on the path to 
productivity, Shahid Khan made a fortune 
while also creating thousands of jobs. It 
has also earned him great respect in 
the auto industry. In this chapter 
you’ll learn about how other com-
pany leaders thrive and survive in 
the production and operations sec-
tor. You’ll also find out why the 
United States is generally moving 
from a production-based economy 
to a service economy. 
 Sources: Brian Solomon, “Shahid Khan: I Felt 
The American Dream in My First 24 Hours 
Here,”  Forbes, March 27, 2014; Henry Winter, 
“Fulham Owner Shahid Khan Preaches 
American Sensibilities, with Respect to English 
Traditions,”  The Telegraph, October 25, 2013; 
and Brian Solomon, “Shahid Khan: The New 
Face of the NFL and the American Dream,” 
Forbes, September 5, 2012.  
 Getting to know  Shahid Khan

242
 name that company 
 Operations management in this hotel company includes restaurants that 
offer the finest in service, elevators that run smoothly, and a front desk that 
processes people quickly. It may include fresh-cut flowers in the lobbies and 
dishes of fruit in every room. Name that company. (The answer can be found in 
this chapter.)  
Describe the current state of U.S. manufacturing and what manufacturers 
have done to become more competitive.
 MANUFACTURING AND SERVICES IN PERSPECTIVE  
 Let’s begin with a little history of manufacturing news in the United States. 
On January 28, 2009,  The Wall Street Journal reported, “Joblessness was 
worst in the West and Midwest, indicating that the industries hit first by the 
recession—housing and manufacturing—continue to lose jobs.”  1 Another 
Wall Street Journal article went on to say that unemployment could reach 
double-digit levels, home values could plunge a total of 36 percent, and stocks 
could fall a total of 55 percent.  2 Such events led President Obama and Con-
gress to propose a stimulus package to “create or save” millions of jobs and 
get the economy moving again—including manufacturing. Much of this 
chapter is devoted to showing you what manufacturers and service providers 
can and are doing to revive the U.S. economy to become world-class 
competitors.  3  
 Sure, there has been lots of bad news about the manufacturing sector, 
but the story may not be as bad as you think.  4 How can we reconcile the fact 
that so many workers in manufacturing are unemployed while manufactur-
ing output continues to increase? The answer is that today’s workers are so 
productive that the United States needs fewer workers to produce more 
goods.  5 The Seeking Sustainability box discusses how one company is pro-
viding a more efficient and sustainable way of producing organic food with 
very few workers. Many manufacturing jobs are 
coming back to the United States as wages increase 
dramatically in other countries.  6  
 Some areas of the country are enjoying eco-
nomic growth from manufacturing while others 
are experiencing declines.  7 One key to ending such 
declines is to adapt to the new realities and attract 
new manufacturers. Boston did that when it 
attracted many high-tech firms and became 
another Silicon Valley. Another key is to train new 
workers in the new production processes.  8 It is 
important at this point to note that many U.S. 
firms are thinking more about producing in the 
United States (versus Japan) since the 2011 earth-
quake, tsunami, and resulting nuclear industry 
problems in Japan made it a less reliable source 
for auto parts. 
LO 9–1
 Volkswagen is just one 
of many auto 
manufacturers that 
have insourced jobs to 
the United States like 
this one in the VW 
Chattanooga, 
Tennessee, plant. Why 
do you suppose so 
many news reports 
emphasize outsourcing 
when thousands of jobs 
are created by 
insourcing? 

243
 American industry is doing what it can to rebuild.  9 The construction 
industry is ready to build homes that are easier to heat and cool, and U.S. 
automakers are scrambling to stage a comeback with more competitive vehi-
cles (e.g., driverless cars).  10 The boom in fracking (a process that uses a high-
pressure mixture of water, sand, and chemicals to fracture rock in order to 
release gas) in the United States is lowering natural gas and electric prices so 
much that the U.S. is becoming one of the lowest-cost countries for 
manufacturing.  11 
 Don’t expect a comeback to result in the same number of jobs as were 
available before the recession. Just as U.S. productivity gains in agriculture 
lowered the number of farmers needed, today’s productivity gains in manufac-
turing have lowered the number of manufacturing workers companies require. 
The U.S. economy is no longer manufacturing-based. Over 70 percent of U.S. 
GDP and over 80 percent of U.S. jobs now are in the  service sector. In fact, the 
majority of college graduates are likely to be employed in the service sector. 
Top-paying jobs already exist in legal services; medical services; entertain-
ment; broadcasting; and business services such as accounting, finance, and 
management consulting. In fact, the service sector in general has suffered 
along with manufacturing as a result of the economic slowdown, but not 
nearly as much.  
 seeking sustainability 
 Imagine sitting in your favorite 
restaurant in Chicago in the mid-
dle of winter with a 12-inch snow-
fall coming your way. You crave 
some of the fresh, locally grown 
produce you enjoy so much in the 
warmer months. Unfortunately, it’s 
winter so it probably won’t be on 
the menu. Well, crave no more. 
Help is on the way thanks to a 
couple of Boston entrepreneurs. 
 Brad McNamara and Jon 
Friedman could not get the results 
they wanted growing produce in a 
rooftop greenhouse. Frustrated, 
Jon came up with the idea that 
using a shipping container to 
grow produce might be more 
appropriate. Thanks to his insight, 
Freight Farms’ customers can now 
grow leafy greens, vine crops, 
and mushrooms hydroponically in 
insulated, climate-controlled con-
tainers. The company uses 
320-square-foot shipping contain-
ers that are retrofitted and 
converted into modular, stackable 
farms that can produce 900 
heads of leafy greens per con-
tainer each week. The entire 
hydroponic system is simple 
enough that it can be digitally 
monitored and controlled from a 
smartphone. The weekly output 
from one of Freight Farms con-
tainers is approximately equiva-
lent to the annual yield of a 
one-acre farm. 
 The immediate goal of Freight 
Farms is to create an appropriate 
infrastructure that fosters local 
food economies. The company 
targets small and medium-sized 
food distributors such as whole-
salers and restaurants with 
revenues between $3 million and 
$75 million. However, it also 
wants to attract nonprofit groups 
involved in food distribution in 
depressed or disaster-relief areas 
as buyers for its $60,000 farms-
in-a-box. But Friedman and 
McNamara do not want to stop 
here. While attracting enough 
customers to make local farming 
a cost-effective option is the key 
goal of Freight Farms today, the 
founders have a much broader 
objective for the future. 
Predicting a global food shortage 
in 2050, they believe Freight 
Farms is the first step in the rede-
sign of the global food system. 
Bon appetit! 
 Sources: Jeremy Quittner, “A One-Acre Farm in a 
320-Square-Foot Box,”  Inc., March 2013; Peter 
Cohan, “Grow Produce Anywhere in Freight 
Farms’ $60,000 Shipping Container,”  Forbes, 
June 27, 2013; and Leon Neyfakh, “If Urban 
Farming Took Off, What Would Boston Look 
Like?”  The Boston Globe, January 19, 2014.  
www.freightfarms.com
 Your Own Farm in a Box 
y

244
 reaching beyond our borders 
 As the European Union (EU) faced 
what seemed like a new financial 
crisis every week, one nation 
stayed above the problems facing 
the continent. Germany clearly 
established itself as the most 
powerful and respected economy 
in the EU. 
 Germany’s economic success 
is mainly attributed to the strength 
of its industrial sector, consisting 
of a longstanding group of small 
manufacturers, many of which 
have been in business for centu-
ries. At the core of this manufac-
turing juggernaut is the 
Mittelstand, consisting of family-
owned, small to midsized compa-
nies that account for 52 percent 
of the country’s economic output 
and supply almost two-thirds of 
the nation’s jobs. Many feel 
Germany could be poised to over-
take the United States as the 
world’s second largest exporter 
primarily based on the strength of 
the Mittelstand. 
 Mittelstand companies com-
pete in very narrow market seg-
ments where they work closely 
with their customers that stretch 
across the globe. These compa-
nies design their own machines 
and production processes by fol-
lowing the philosophy that it’s eas-
ier to maintain and ensure product 
quality with equipment you 
designed yourself. Employees are 
generally very loyal and 
competent. In fact, many come 
from Germany’s vocational col-
leges and stay with a particular 
company for their entire working 
careers. 
 The success of the Mittlestand 
has not gone unnoticed. 
Companies from China pur-
chased 25 German firms this past 
year. The Chinese are attracted 
by the German companies’ atti-
tudes and know-how. They plan 
to learn a great deal from these 
German acquisitions about high-
quality production techniques. 
While most of the world has 
never heard of PWM (the world 
market leader in electronic gas-
station price signs) or BSW, a 
400-employee company that 
uses recycled rubber to make 
products like synthetic surfaces 
for running tracks, the Germans 
don’t care. They intend to let their 
1,300 “hidden champions” in spe-
cialized products keep doing 
what they have been doing for 
centuries. 
 Sources: Leigh Buchanan, “How to Build a 
Company That Lasts Forever,”  Inc., February 2014; 
Wei Gu, “China Finds New Investment 
Opportunities in Germany,”  The Wall Street 
Journal ,  March 27, 2014  ; and “Mittlestand and 
Middle Kingdom,”  The Economist, April 5, 2014. 
www.make-it-in-germany.com/en
 Nobody Does It Better 
r
 Manufacturers and Service Organizations 
Become More Competitive 
 U.S. producers no longer strike fear in the heart of foreign competitors. In 
fact, they have much to learn from them, although one reason foreign produc-
ers have become so competitive is that they are using U.S. technology and 
concepts to increase effectiveness and efficiency. Overall, that’s a good thing 
because it helps reduce poverty and hunger in developing countries and opens 
new markets to the developed world. 
 Foreign producers are also streaming to the United States to take advan-
tage of its labor force and opportunities. The United States is still the leader in 
building big trucks, and in nanotechnology, biotechnology, and other areas.  12
Its workforce is creative and dynamic. Nonetheless, U.S. business cannot 
stand still; it must keep up with the latest production techniques and pro-
cesses. The Reaching Beyond Our Borders box looks at Germany and how 

245
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
some companies there have found a competitive advantage that could be 
applied in the United States.  
 As the U.S. service sector becomes a larger part of the overall economy, 
managers will be more occupied with service productivity, and with blending 
services and manufacturing through the Internet. How can U.S. manufacturers 
and service organizations maintain a competitive edge? Most of them are:
 
• 
Focusing more on customers.  
 
• 
Maintaining closer relationships with suppliers and other companies to 
satisfy customer needs.  
 
• 
Practicing continuous improvement.  13 
 
• 
Focusing on quality.  
 
• 
Saving on costs through site selection.  
 
• 
Relying on the Internet to unite companies that work together.  
 
• 
Adopting production techniques such as enterprise resource planning, 
computer-integrated manufacturing, flexible manufacturing, lean 
manufacturing, and robotics.  
 This chapter explores these and other operations management techniques 
in both the service and the manufacturing sectors. We’ll begin by going over a 
few key terms.  
Describe the evolution from production to operations management. 
FROM PRODUCTION TO 
OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT  
 Production   is the creation of finished goods and services using the factors of pro-
duction: land, labor, capital, entrepreneurship, and knowledge (see Chapter 1). 
Production has historically meant  manufacturing, and the term   production man-
agement  has described the management activities that helped firms create  goods. 
But the nature of business has changed significantly over the last 20 years as the 
service sector, including Internet services, has grown dramatically.  The United 
States has become a service economy—that is, one dominated by the service sector.  
 Operations management is a term that is used in both manufa c turing and 
service organizations.   Operations management   is a specialized area in manage-
ment that converts or transforms resources, including human resources like tech-
nical skills and innovation, into goods and services. It includes inventory 
management, quality control, production scheduling, follow-up services, and 
more. In an automobile plant, operations management transforms raw materials, 
human resources, parts, supplies, paints, tools, and other resources into automo-
biles. It does this through the processes of fabrication and assembly. 
 In a college or university, operations management takes inputs— 
such as information, professors, supplies, buildings, offices, and com-
puter systems—and creates services that transform students 
into educated people. It does this through a process 
called education. For a more extensive discussion, 
see the Free Management Library’s entry on opera-
tions management ( www.managementhelp.org/ops_
mgnt/ops_mgnt.htm ). 
 Some organizations—such as factories, farms, 
and mines—produce mostly goods. Others—such as 
hospitals, schools, and government agencies—produce 
mostly services. Still others produce a combination of goods 
LO 9–2
 production  
 The creation of finished goods 
and services using the factors 
of production: land, labor, 
capital, entrepreneurship, and 
knowledge.  
 production management  
 The term used to describe all 
the activities managers do to 
help their firms create goods.  
 operations management  
 A specialized area in 
management that converts or 
transforms resources (including 
human resources) into goods 
and services.  
 Each year companies 
discover new ways of 
automating that 
eliminate the need for 
human labor. This robot 
demonstrates its ability 
to cook Okonomiyaki, a 
Japanese pancake. The 
robot can take verbal 
orders from customers 
and use standard 
kitchen utensils. Do you 
think there’s a better 
chance the robot will 
get your order right than 
a human would? 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
246
and services. For example, an automobile manufac-
turer not only makes cars but also provides services 
such as repairs, financing, and insurance. At Wen-
dy’s you get goods such as hamburgers and fries, but 
you also get services such as order taking, order fill-
ing, food preparation, and cleanup.  
 Operations Management in 
the Service Sector 
 Operations management in the service industry is 
all about creating a good experience for those who 
use the service.  14 In a Ritz-Carlton hotel, for exam-
ple, operations management includes restaurants 
that offer the finest in service, elevators that run smoothly, and a front desk that 
processes people quickly. It may include fresh-cut flowers in the lobbies and 
dishes of fruit in every room. More important, it may mean spending thousands 
of dollars to provide training in quality management for every new employee. 
 Ritz-Carlton’s commitment to quality is apparent in the many innovations 
and changes the company has initiated over the years. These innovations 
included installation of a sophisticated computerized guest-recognition pro-
gram and a quality management program designed to ensure that all employ-
ees are “certified” in their positions. 
 Hotel customers today want in-room Internet access and a help center 
with toll-free telephone service. Executives traveling on business may need 
video equipment and a host of computer hardware and other aids. At the 
International House in New Orleans, 16 rooms have Apple TV boxes so that 
mobile device-dependent clients can easily stream live video.  15 
 Foreign visitors would like multilingual customer-support services. Hotel 
shops need to carry more than souvenirs, newspapers, and some drugstore 
and food items to serve today’s high-tech travelers: the shops may also carry 
smartphone and laptop computer supplies, electrical adapters, and the like. 
Operations management is responsible for locating and providing such ame-
nities to make customers happy. Ritz-Carlton uses an internal measurement 
system to assess the performance results of its service delivery system. 
 In short, delighting customers by anticipating their needs has become the 
quality standard for luxury hotels, as it has for most other service businesses.  16
But knowing customer needs and satisfying them are two different things. 
That’s why operations management is so important: it is the implementation 
phase of management. Can you see the need for better operations manage-
ment in airports, hospitals, government agencies, schools, and nonprofits like 
the Red Cross? The opportunities seem almost unlimited. Much of the future 
of U.S. growth is in these service areas, but growth is also needed in manufac-
turing. Next we’ll explore production processes and what companies are doing 
to keep the United States competitive in that area.  
 Operations 
management for 
services is all about 
enriching the customer 
experience. Hotels, for 
instance, have 
responded to the needs 
of business travelers 
with in-room Internet 
access and other kinds 
of office-style support, 
as well as stored 
information about the 
preferences of frequent 
guests. How important 
do you think guest-
recognition programs 
are to business 
travelers? 
 • What have U.S. manufacturers done to regain a competitive edge?  
 • What must U.S. companies do to continue to strengthen the country’s 
manufacturing base?  
 • What led companies to focus on operations management rather than 
production?  
•
What have U.S. manuf
 test prep 
facturers done
fac
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

247
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
Identify various production processes and describe techniques that improve 
productivity, including computer-aided design and manufacturing, flexible 
manufacturing, lean manufacturing, mass customization, and robotics.
 PRODUCTION PROCESSES  
 Common sense and some experience have already taught you much of what 
you need to know about production processes. You know what it takes to write 
a term paper or prepare a dinner. You need money to buy the materials, you 
need a place to work, and you need to be organized to get the task done. The 
same is true of the production process in industry. It uses basic inputs to pro-
duce outputs (see  Figure 9.1 ). Production adds value, or utility, to materials or 
processes.  
 Form utility   is the value producers add to materials in the creation of 
finished goods and services, such as by transforming silicon into computer 
chips or putting services together to create a vacation package. Form utility 
can exist at the retail level as well. For example, a butcher can produce a spe-
cific cut of beef from a whole cow, or a baker can make a specific type of cake 
from basic ingredients. We’ll be discussing utility in more detail in Chapter 15. 
 Manufacturers use several different processes to produce goods. Andrew 
S. Grove, the former chairman of computer chip manufacturer Intel, uses this 
analogy to explain production:  
 Imagine that you’re a chef . . . and that your task is to serve a breakfast 
consisting of a three-minute soft-boiled egg, buttered toast, and coffee. 
Your job is to prepare and deliver the three items simultaneously, each 
of them fresh and hot.  
 Grove says this task encompasses the three basic requirements of produc-
tion: (1) to build and deliver products in response to the demands of the cus-
tomer at a scheduled delivery time, (2) to provide an acceptable quality level, 
and (3) to provide everything at the lowest possible cost. 
 Let’s use the breakfast example to understand process and assembly. 
 Process manufacturing   physically or chemically changes materials. For 
example, boiling physically changes the egg. Similarly, process manufactur-
ing turns sand into glass or computer chips. The   assembly process   puts 
together components (eggs, toast, and coffee) to make a product (breakfast). 
Cars are made through an assembly process that puts together the frame, 
engine, and other parts. 
 Production processes are either continuous or intermittent. A   continuous 
process   is one in which long production runs turn out finished goods over 
time. As a chef, you could have a conveyor belt that continuously lowers eggs 
into boiling water for three minutes and then lifts them out. A three-minute 
egg would be available whenever you wanted one. A chemical plant, for exam-
ple, is run on a continuous process. 
LO 9–3
 form utility  
 The value producers add to 
materials in the creation of 
finished goods and services.  
 process manufacturing  
 That part of the production 
process that physically or 
chemically changes materials.  
 assembly process  
 That part of the production 
process that puts together 
components.  
 continuous process  
 A production process in which 
long production runs turn out 
finished goods over time.  
iSee It! Need 
help understanding 
the transformation 
process for goods and 
services? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.
 FIGURE 9.1 THE 
PRODUCTION PROCESS  
 The production process 
consists of taking the factors 
of production (land, etc.) and 
using those inputs to produce 
goods, services, and ideas. 
Planning, routing, scheduling, 
and the other activities are 
the means to accomplish the 
objective—output. 
PRODUCTION  CONTROL
Planning
Routing
Scheduling
Dispatching
Follow-up
INPUTS
Land
Labor
Capital
Entrepreneurship
Knowledge
OUTPUTS
Goods
Services
Ideas

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
248
 It usually makes more sense when responding to specific customer 
orders to use an   intermittent process. Here the production run is short 
(one or two eggs) and the producer adjusts machines frequently to make dif-
ferent products (like the oven in a bakery or the toaster in a diner). Manu-
facturers of custom-designed furniture would use an intermittent process. 
 Today many manufacturers use intermittent processes. Computers, 
robots, and flexible manufacturing processes allow firms to turn out custom-
made goods almost as fast as mass-produced goods were once produced. We’ll 
discuss how they do that in more detail in the next few sections as we explore 
advanced production techniques and technology.  
 The Need to Improve Production Techniques and Cut Costs 
 The ultimate goal of operations management is to provide high-quality goods 
and services instantaneously in response to customer demand. As we stress 
throughout this book, traditional organizations were simply not designed to 
be so responsive to the customer. Rather, they were designed to make goods 
efficiently (inexpensively). The idea behind mass production was to make a 
large number of a limited variety of products at very low cost. 
 Over the years, low cost often came at the expense of quality and flexibil-
ity. Furthermore, suppliers didn’t always deliver when they said they would, so 
manufacturers had to carry large inventories of raw materials and compo-
nents to keep producing. Such inefficiencies made U.S. companies vulnerable 
to foreign competitors who were using more advanced production techniques 
and less expensive labor. 
 As a result of new global competition, companies have had to make a wide 
variety of high-quality custom-designed products at low cost. Clearly, something 
had to change on the production floor to make that possible. Several major 
developments have made U.S. companies more competitive: (1) computer-aided 
design and manufacturing, (2) flexible manufacturing, (3) lean manufacturing, 
(4) mass customization, and (5) robotics.  
 Computer-Aided Design and Manufacturing 
 One development that has changed production techniques is the inte-
gration of computers into the design and manufacturing of products. 
The first thing computers did was help in the design of products, in a 
process called   computer-aided design (CAD). Autodesk makes a 
fully operational computer-aided design software program called 123 
Design that’s free and allows individuals to do things that automakers 
once required mainframe computers to do.  17  
 The next step was to bring computers directly into the pro-
duction process with   computer-aided manufacturing (CAM). 
CAD/CAM, the use of both computer-aided design and 
 computer-aided manufacturing, makes it possible to custom-
design products to meet the needs of small markets with 
very little increase in cost. A manufacturer programs the 
computer to make a simple design change, and that 
change is readily incorporated into production. In 
the clothing industry, a computer program estab-
lishes a pattern and cuts the cloth automatically, 
even adjusting to a specific person’s dimensions to 
create custom-cut clothing at little additional cost. 
In food service, CAM supports on-site, small-
scale, semiautomated, sensor-controlled 
 intermittent process  
 A production process in which 
the production run is short and 
the machines are changed 
frequently to make different 
products.  
 computer-aided design 
(CAD)  
 The use of computers in the 
design of products.  
computer-aided 
manufacturing (CAM)
The use of computers in the 
manufacturing of products.
 Bakers, like Duff 
Goldman of Charm City 
Cakes, add form utility 
to materials by 
transforming basic 
ingredients into special 
customized cakes. Can 
you see how the 
production of such 
cakes involves both 
process manufacturing 
and assembly 
processes?  
(4) mass customization, and (5) ro
 Computer-Aided Desig
 One development that has 
gration of computers into 
The first thing computers 
process called  computer
fully operational compute
Design that’s free and allow
once required mainframe 
 The next step wa
duction process with
CAD/CAM, the us
 computer-aided m
design product
very little incre
computer to m
change is
the cloth
lishes a
even adju
create cu
I

249
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
baking in fresh-baked cookie shops to make consis-
tent quality easy to achieve. Of course, 3D printers 
are among the latest CAM technology. A product is 
made layer by layer until it appears, almost by 
magic, as a finished good. 
 CAD has doubled productivity in many firms. 
In the past CAD machines couldn’t talk to CAM 
machines directly. Today, however, software pro-
grams unite CAD and CAM: the result is   computer-
integrated manufacturing (CIM).  The software is 
expensive, but it cuts as much as 80 percent of the 
time needed to program machines to make parts. 
The printing company JohnsByrne uses CIM in its 
Niles, Illinois, plant and has noticed decreased over-
head, reduced outlay of resources, and fewer errors. 
Consult the  International Journal of Computer Inte-
grated Manufacturing for other examples.  
 Flexible Manufacturing 
  Flexible 
manufacturing   
means 
designing 
machines to do multiple tasks so they can produce a 
variety of products. Allen-Bradley uses flexible man-
ufacturing to build motor starters. Orders come in 
daily, and within 24 hours the company’s 26 
machines and robots manufacture, test, and pack-
age the starters—which are untouched by human 
hands. Allen-Bradley’s machines are so flexible that 
managers can include a special order, even a single 
item, in the assembly without slowing down the 
process. Did you notice that these products were 
made without any labor? One way to compete with cheap overseas labor is to 
have as few workers as possible.  
 Lean Manufacturing 
  Lean manufacturing   is the production of goods using less of everything than 
in mass production: less human effort, less manufacturing space, less invest-
ment in tools, and less engineering time to develop a new product.  18 A company 
becomes lean by continuously increasing its capacity to produce high-quality 
goods while decreasing its need for resources.  19 Here are some characteristics 
of lean companies:
 
• 
They take half the human effort.  
 
• 
They have half the defects in the finished product or service.  
 
• 
They require one-third the engineering effort.  
 
• 
They use half the floor space for the same output.  
 
• 
They carry 90 percent less inventory.  
 Technological improvements are largely responsible for the increase in 
productivity and efficiency of U.S. plants. That technology made labor more 
productive and made it possible to pay higher wages. On the other hand, 
employees can get frustrated by innovations (e.g., they must learn new pro-
cesses), and companies must constantly train and retrain employees to stay 
competitive. The need for more productivity and efficiency has never been 
 computer-integrated 
manufacturing (CIM)  
 The uniting of computer-aided 
design with computer-aided 
manufacturing.  
 flexible manufacturing  
 Designing machines to do 
multiple tasks so that they can 
produce a variety of products.  
 lean manufacturing  
 The production of goods using 
less of everything compared to 
mass production.  
 3-D CAD tools allow 
designers to create 
cloth prototypes without 
a pattern’s traditional 
stages: seaming, trying 
on, alterations, etc. 
What advantages might 
this technology offer to 
smaller manufacturing 
companies? 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
250
greater. The solution to growing the economy depends on such innovations. 
One step in the process is to make products more individualistic. The next sec-
tion discusses how that happens.  
 Mass Customization 
 To  customize means to make a unique product or provide a specific service to 
specific individuals. Although it once may have seemed impossible,   mass 
customization, which means tailoring products to meet the needs of a large 
number of individual customers, is now practiced widely. The National Bicy-
cle Industrial Company in Japan makes 18 bicycle models in more than 2 mil-
lion combinations, each designed to fit the needs of a specific customer. The 
customer chooses the model, size, color, and design. The retailer takes various 
measurements from the buyer and faxes the data to the factory, where robots 
handle the bulk of the assembly. 
 More and more manufacturers are learning to customize their products. 
Some colleges, even, are developing promotions for individual students. Some 
General Nutrition Center (GNC) stores feature machines that enable shoppers 
to custom-design their own vitamins, shampoo, and lotions. The Custom Foot 
stores use infrared scanners to precisely measure each foot so that shoes can 
be made to fit perfectly. Adidas can make each shoe fit perfectly for each cus-
tomer. You can even buy custom-made M&M’s in colors of your choice. See 
the Spotlight on Small Business box for a unique way of using mass 
customization.  
 Mass customization exists in the service sector as well. Capital Protective 
Insurance (CPI) uses the latest computer software and hardware to sell custom-
ized risk-management plans to companies. Health clubs offer unique fitness 
programs for individuals, travel agencies provide vacation packages that vary 
according to individual choices, and some colleges allow students to design 
their own majors. It is much easier to custom-
design service programs than to custom-make 
goods, because there is no fixed tangible good to 
adapt. Each customer can specify what he or she 
wants, within the limits of the service  organization—
limits that seem to be ever-widening.  
 Robotics 
 Industrial robotics can work 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week with great precision. Mass cus-
tomization is no problem for them. At least no 
one has heard them complain. Of course, robots 
 do replace people on the assembly line, but most 
of those jobs are dirty or so repetitive that robots 
are necessary, or at least helpful.  20 No doubt you 
have heard or seen robots that help doctors per-
form the most delicate of procedures.  21 In other 
words robots are slowly, but surely either helping 
people perform better or are replacing them com-
pletely. Soon we may be entering what could be 
known as the robot economy.  22 Most people think 
that China is so successful because of cheap 
labor, but China may soon be the world’s largest 
robot market.  23  
mass customization
Tailoring products to meet the 
needs of individual customers.
 Not only can you 
customize the colors of 
your M&M’s, you can 
also have personal 
messages and/or 
images imprinted on 
them. What other 
customized products 
can you think of? 

251
 Using Sensing, Measurement, and Process Control 
 Most advanced manufacturing techniques are driven by computers working 
with vast amounts of data. Such data controls sensors that measure humidity, 
global positioning trackers (that fix location), or calipers that measure a mate-
rial’s thickness. Products can be tracked from the beginning of production to 
the point of delivery. The moment anything goes wrong, a sensor can detect it 
immediately and notify someone to make the needed changes.  24 Companies 
are also using nanomanufacturing. A nanometer is one-billionth of a meter, so 
nanomanufacturing means being able to manipulate materials on a molecular 
or even atomic scale.  25 
 spotlight on small business 
 Kevin Tully is the first to admit he’s 
no Jimi Hendrix when it comes to 
playing a guitar. Still, as a lifelong 
guitar player he considered his 
two guitars priceless and true 
extensions of himself. While study-
ing for the bar exam, he contacted 
his music-loving friend Dave 
Barry with an idea about starting 
a business where fellow guitar 
players had the opportunity to 
create their own custom guitars. 
 After attracting start-up capital 
of $25,000 from the business 
incubator at his alma mater 
Northeastern University, Moniker 
Guitars was born. While custom-
made guitars were not a new idea, 
the reality was everyday musi-
cians did not have the money or 
reputation to create their own 
signature style guitar. Tully 
believed that by using mass cus-
tomization, Moniker could follow 
Nike’s model called NikeiD 
 Today, Moniker’s website lets 
guitar pickers customize their 
instruments using color and 
graphics, as well as hardware 
and pickups. The company is the 
first in the country to use PPG 
paint on its guitars—the same 
paint used by Lamborgini and 
Ferrari automobiles. If polka dots 
are your passion, or tiger stripes 
turn you on, Moniker will deliver. 
According to Kevin Tully, “Every 
design is different. You never 
paint the same guitar twice. Every 
day is a new project. I love it.” 
 Sources: Sandra Zaragoza, “Boston Duo Starts 
Customized Guitar Shop in Austin,”  Austin 
Business Journal, July 23, 2012; and Chris 
Raymond, “Design Your Own Guitar—This Startup 
Will Build It,”  Popular Mechanics, February 7, 2014. 
 www.monikerguitars.com   
 Make Your Own Kind of Music 
 
 • What is form utility?  
 • Define and differentiate the following: process manufacturing, assembly 
process, continuous process, and intermittent process.  
 • What do you call the integration of CAD and CAM?  
 • What is mass customization?  
•
What is form utility?
 test prep 
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
that lets consumers customize their 
shoes. By using online design tools 
and advanced manufacturing tech-
niques, Moniker was able to produce 
top-quality, personalized guitars for 
what a guitar player would pay for a 
generic model. 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
252
Describe operations management planning issues including facility location, 
facility layout, materials requirement planning, purchasing, just-in-time 
inventory control, and quality control.
 OPERATIONS MANAGEMENT PLANNING 
Operations management planning helps solve many of the problems in the ser-
vice and manufacturing sectors. These include facility location, facility layout, 
materials requirement planning, purchasing, inventory control, and quality 
control. The resources used may be different, but the management issues are 
similar. 
 Facility Location 
  Facility location   is the process of selecting a geographic location for a com-
pany’s operations. In keeping with the need to focus on customers, one strat-
egy is to find a site that makes it easy for consumers to use the company’s 
services and to communicate about their needs. Flower shops and banks have 
placed facilities in supermarkets so that their products and services are more 
accessible than in freestanding facilities. You can find a McDonald’s inside 
some Walmart stores and gas stations. Customers order and pay for their 
meals at the pumps, and by the time they’ve filled their tanks, it’s time to pick 
up their food. 
 The ultimate in convenience is never having to leave home to get services. 
That’s why there is so much interest in Internet banking, Internet shopping, 
online education, and other services. Internet commerce is now using Face-
book and other social media to make transactions even easier. For brick-and-
mortar retailers to beat such competition, they have to choose good locations 
and offer outstanding service. Study the location of service-sector businesses—
such as hotels, banks, athletic clubs, and supermarkets—and you’ll see that 
LO 9–4
 facility location  
 The process of selecting a 
geographic location for a 
company’s operations.  
 Facility location is a 
major decision for 
manufacturing and 
other companies. The 
decision involves taking 
into account the 
availability of qualified 
workers; access to 
suppliers, customers, 
and transportation; and 
local regulations 
including zoning and 
taxes. How has the 
growth of commerce on 
the Internet affected 
company location 
decisions? 

253
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
the most successful are conveniently located. Google is building large data 
centers in the United States where states give out tax breaks and cheap elec-
tricity is readily available in large quantities. They are also located near bodies 
of water for cooling their servers.  
 Facility Location for Manufacturers 
 Geographic shifts in production sometimes result in pockets of unemploy-
ment in some geographic areas and tremendous growth in others. We are wit-
nessing such changes in the United States, as automobile and tractor 
production has shifted to more southern cities.  26 
 Why would companies spend millions of dollars to move their facilities 
from one location to another? In their decisions they consider labor costs; avail-
ability of resources, including labor; access to transportation that can reduce 
time to market; proximity to suppliers; proximity to customers; crime rates; 
quality of life for employees; cost of living; and the need to train or retrain the 
local workforce. 
 Even though labor is becoming a smaller percentage of total cost in highly 
automated industries, availability of low-cost labor or the right kind of skilled 
labor remained a key reason many producers moved their plants to Malaysia, 
China, India, Mexico, and other countries. In general, however, U.S. manufac-
turing firms tend to pay more and offer more benefits than local firms else-
where in the world. 
 Inexpensive resources are another major reason for moving production 
facilities. Companies usually need water, electricity, wood, coal, and other 
basic resources. By moving to areas where these are inexpensive and plentiful, 
firms can significantly lower not only the cost of buying such resources but 
also the cost of shipping finished products. Often the most important resource 
is people, so companies tend to cluster where smart and talented people are. 
Witness Silicon Valley in California and similar areas in Colorado, Massachu-
setts, Virginia, Texas, Maryland, and other states. 
 Time-to-market is another decision-making factor. As manufacturers 
attempt to compete globally, they need sites that allow products to move 
quickly, at the lowest costs, so they can be delivered to customers fast. Access 
to highways, rail lines, waterways, and airports is thus critical.  27 Information 
technology (IT) is also important to quicken response time, so many firms are 
seeking countries with the most advanced information systems. 
 Another way to work closely with suppliers to satisfy customers’ needs is 
to locate production facilities near supplier facilities. That cuts the cost of dis-
tribution and makes communication easier. 
 Many businesses are building factories in foreign countries to get closer 
to their international customers. That’s a major reason the Japanese auto-
maker Honda builds cars in Ohio and the German company Mercedes builds 
them in Alabama. When U.S. firms select foreign sites, they consider whether 
they are near airports, waterways, and highways so that raw and finished 
goods can move quickly and easily. 
 Businesses also study the quality of life for workers and managers. Are 
good schools nearby? Is the weather nice? Is the crime rate low? Does the local 
community welcome new businesses? Do the chief executive and other key 
managers want to live there? Sometimes a region with a high quality of life is 
also an expensive one, which complicates the decision. In short, facility loca-
tion has become a critical issue in operations management. The Making Ethi-
cal Decisions box looks at the kinds of decisions companies must make when 
it comes to locating.  

254
 Taking Operations Management to the Internet 
 Many rapidly growing companies do very little production themselves. Instead, 
they outsource engineering, design, manufacturing, and other tasks to compa-
nies such as Flextronics and Sanmina-SCI that specialize in those functions. 
They create new relationships with suppliers over the Internet, making opera-
tions management an  interfirm process in which companies work closely 
together to design, produce, and ship products to customers. 
 Manufacturing companies are developing Internet-focused strategies that 
will enable them and others to compete more effectively in the future. These 
changes are having a dramatic effect on operations managers as they adjust 
from a one-firm system to an  interfirm environment and from a relatively sta-
ble environment to one that is constantly changing and evolving.  
 Facility Location in the Future 
 Information technology (IT)—that is, computers, modems, e-mail, voice mail, 
text messaging, teleconferencing, etc.—is giving firms and employees increased 
flexibility to choose locations while staying in the competitive mainstream. 
  Telecommuting, working from home via computer, is a major trend in busi-
ness. Companies that no longer need to locate near sources of labor will be 
able to move to areas where land is less expensive and the quality of life may 
be higher. Furthermore, more salespeople are keeping in touch with the com-
pany and its customers through videoconferencing, using computers to talk 
with and show images to others.  28 
 One big incentive to locate in a particular city or state is the tax situation 
there and degree of government support. Some states and local governments 
have higher taxes than others, yet many compete fiercely by offering companies 
tax reductions and other support, such as zoning changes and financial aid, so 
they will locate there. Have you seen, for example, the ads for entrepreneurs to 
locate in New York State? They are offering no taxes for 10 years. Some people 
would like the federal government to offer financial incentives—beyond what is 
already being offered by state and local agencies—to various manufacturing 
companies to build factories in the United States.  
 Facility Layout 
  Facility layout   is the physical arrangement of resources, including people, to 
most efficiently produce goods and provide services for customers. Facility 
 telecommuting  
 Working from home via 
computer.  
 facility layout  
 The physical arrangement of 
resources (including people) in 
the production process.  
 making ethical decisions 
 Suppose the hypothetical com-
pany ChildrenWear Industries has 
long been the economic founda-
tion for its hometown. Most of the 
area’s small businesses and 
schools either supply materials 
the firm needs for production or 
train its future employees. 
ChildrenWear has learned that if it 
were to move its production 
facilities to Asia, however, it could 
increase its profits by 15 percent. 
 Closing operations in the com-
pany’s hometown would cause 
many of the town’s other busi-
nesses, such as restaurants, to 
fail—leaving a high percentage of 
the town’s adults unemployed, 
with no options for reemployment 
there. As a top manager at 
ChildrenWear, you must help 
decide whether the plant should 
be moved and, if so, how soon 
the firm should tell employees. 
The law says you must tell them at 
least 60 days before closing the 
plant. What alternatives do you 
have? What are the conse-
quences of each? Which will you 
choose? 
 Do We Stay or Do We Go? 
materials requirement 
planning (MRP)
A computer-based operations 
management system that uses 
sales forecasts to make sure 
that needed parts and materials 
are available at the right time 
and place.

255
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
layout depends greatly on the processes that are to be 
performed. For services, the layout is usually designed 
to help the consumer find and buy things, including on 
the Internet. Some stores have kiosks that enable cus-
tomers to search for goods online and place orders or 
make returns and credit payments in the store. In 
short, the facilities and Internet capabilities of service 
organizations are becoming more customer-oriented. 
 Some service-oriented organizations, such as hos-
pitals, use layouts that improve efficiency, just as man-
ufacturers do. For manufacturing plants, facilities 
layout has become critical because cost savings of effi-
cient layouts are enormous. 
 Many companies are moving from an  assembly-line 
layout, in which workers do only a few tasks at a time, 
to a  modular layout, in which teams of workers com-
bine to produce more complex units of the final prod-
uct. There may have been a dozen or more workstations 
on an assembly line to complete an automobile engine 
in the past, but all that work might be done in one mod-
ule today. 
 When working on a major project, such as a 
bridge or an airplane, companies use a  fixed-position 
layout that allows workers to congregate around the 
product to be completed. 
 A  process layout is one in which similar equipment 
and functions are grouped together. The order in which 
the product visits a function depends on the design of 
the item. This allows for flexibility. The Igus manufac-
turing plant in Cologne, Germany, can shrink or expand in a flash. Its flexible 
design keeps it competitive in a fast-changing market. Because the layout of 
the plant changes so often, some employees use scooters in order to more effi-
ciently provide needed skills, supplies, and services to multiple workstations. A 
fast-changing plant needs a fast-moving employee base to achieve maximum 
productivity.  Figure 9.2  illustrates typical layout designs.  
 Materials Requirement Planning 
  Materials requirement planning (MRP)   is a computer-based operations 
management system that uses sales forecasts to make sure needed parts and 
materials are available at the right time and place.   Enterprise resource 
planning (ERP), a newer version of MRP, combines the computerized func-
tions of all the divisions and subsidiaries of the firm—such as finance, human 
resources, and order fulfillment—into a single integrated software program 
that uses a single database. The result is shorter time between orders and 
payment, less staff needed to do ordering and order processing, reduced 
inventories, and better customer service. For example, the customer can place 
an order, either through a customer service representative or online, and 
immediately see when the order will be filled and how much it will cost. The 
representative can instantly see the customer’s credit rating and order history, 
the company’s inventory, and the shipping schedule. Everyone else in the 
company can see the new order as well; thus when one department finishes 
its portion, the order is automatically routed via the ERP system to the next 
department. The customer can see exactly where the order is at any point by 
logging into the system.  
 At Cisco Systems, work 
spaces in some offices 
are fluid and 
unassigned, so 
employees with laptops 
and mobile phones can 
choose where to sit 
when they arrive each 
day. What do you think 
are some of the 
advantages of such 
nontraditional facility 
layouts? Are there any 
disadvantages?  
enterprise resource 
planning (ERP)
A newer version of materials 
requirement planning (MRP) 
that combines the 
computerized functions of all 
the divisions and subsidiaries 
of the firm—such as finance, 
human resources, and order 
fulfillment—into a single 
integrated software program 
that uses a single database.

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
256
 FIGURE 9.2 TYPICAL LAYOUT DESIGNS  
Painting
contractor
PROCESS LAYOUT
 
Frequently used in operations that serve different customers’ different needs.
PRODUCT LAYOUT (also called Assembly-Line Layout)
 
Used to produce large quantities of a few types of products.
CELLULAR or MODULE LAYOUT
 
Can accommodate changes in design or customer demand.
FIXED-POSITION LAYOUT
 
A major feature of planning is scheduling work operations.
Plaster
contractor
Electrical
contractor
Masonry
contractor
Plumbing
contractor
Roofing
contractor
General carpentry
and supplies
Grading equipment
and operators
Architect
Finish
carpentry
Saws
Assembly
tables
Drills
Sanders
Planing
machines
Lathes
Storage
Cutting
Stamping
Deburring
Shipping
Packing
Assembly
Bending

257
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
 Purchasing 
  Purchasing  is the function that searches for high-quality material resources, 
finds the best suppliers, and negotiates the best price for quality goods and 
services. In the past, manufacturers dealt with many suppliers so that if one 
couldn’t deliver, the firm could get materials from someone else. Today, how-
ever, manufacturers rely more heavily on just one or two suppliers, because 
the relationship between suppliers and manufacturers is much closer than 
before. Producers share so much information that they don’t want too many 
suppliers knowing their business. 
 The Internet has transformed the purchasing function. A business look-
ing for supplies can contact an Internet-based purchasing service and find 
the best items at the best price. Similarly, a company wishing to sell sup-
plies can use the Internet to find all the companies looking for such sup-
plies. The time and dollar cost of purchasing items has thus been reduced 
tremendously.  
 Just-in-Time Inventory Control 
 One major cost of production is the expense of holding parts, motors, and 
other items in storage for later use. Storage not only subjects items to obsoles-
cence, pilferage, and damage but also requires construction and maintenance 
of costly warehouses. To cut such costs, many companies have implemented a 
concept called   just-in-time (JIT) inventory control.  JIT systems keep a mini-
mum of inventory on the premises—and deliver parts, supplies, and other 
needs just in time to go on the assembly line. To work effectively, however, the 
process requires an accurate production schedule (using ERP) and excellent 
coordination with carefully selected suppliers, who are usually connected 
electronically so they know what will be needed and when. Sometimes the 
suppliers build new facilities close to the main producer to minimize distribu-
tion time. JIT runs into problems when suppliers are farther away. Weather 
may delay shipments, for example. You saw the problems that emerged when 
weather (earthquakes and the resulting tsunami) disrupted the supply chain 
of materials from Japan to the United States in 2011. JIT systems make sure 
the right materials are at the right place at the right time at the cheapest cost 
to meet both customer and production needs. That’s a key step in modern pro-
duction innovation. 
 Quality Control 
 Maintaining   quality  means consistently producing what the customer wants 
while reducing errors before and after delivery. In the past, firms often con-
ducted quality control at the end of the production line. Products were com-
pleted first and then tested for quality. This resulted in several problems:
 
1. The need to inspect work required extra people and resources. 
 
2. If an error was found, someone had to correct the mistake or scrap the 
product. This, of course, was costly. 
 
3. If the customer found the mistake, he or she might be dissatisfied and 
might even buy from another firm thereafter. 
 Such problems led to the realization that quality is not an outcome; it is a 
never-ending process of continually improving what a company produces. 
Quality control should thus be part of the operations management planning 
process rather than simply an end-of-the-line inspection. 
purchasing
The function in a firm that 
searches for high-quality 
material resources, finds the 
best suppliers, and negotiates 
the best price for goods and 
services.
 just-in-time (JIT) inventory 
control  
 A production process in which 
a minimum of inventory is kept 
on the premises and parts, 
supplies, and other needs are 
delivered just in time to go on 
the assembly line.  
 quality  
 Consistently producing what 
the customer wants while 
reducing errors before and 
after delivery to the customer.  

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
258
 Companies have turned to the use of modern 
quality-control standards such as Six Sigma.   Six 
Sigma quality, which sets a benchmark of just 3.4 
defects per million opportunities, detects potential 
problems to prevent their occurrence. That’s impor-
tant to a company that makes 4 million transactions 
a day, like some banks. 
  Statistical quality control (SQC)   is the process 
some managers use to continually monitor all phases 
of the production process and ensure quality is being 
built into the product from the beginning.   Statistical  
 process control (SPC)  is the process of testing statis-
tical samples of product components at each stage of 
production and plotting the test results on a graph. 
Managers can thus see and correct any deviation from 
quality standards. Making sure products meet stan-
dards all along the production process reduces the 
need for a quality-control inspection at the end 
because mistakes are caught much earlier in the pro-
cess. SQC and SPC thus save companies much time 
and money. 
 Some companies use a quality-control approach 
called the Deming cycle (after the late W. Edwards 
Deming, the father of the movement toward quality). 
Its steps are Plan, Do, Check, Act (PDCA). Again, the 
idea is to find potential errors  before they happen. 
 U.S. businesses are getting serious about providing top customer service, 
and many are already doing it. Service organizations are finding it difficult to 
provide outstanding service every time because the process is so labor-intensive. 
Physical goods (e.g., a gold ring) can be designed and manufactured to near 
perfection. However, it is hard to reach such perfection when designing and 
providing a service experience such as a dance on a cruise ship or a cab drive 
through New York City.  
 The Baldrige Awards 
 A standard was set for overall company quality with the introduction of the 
Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Awards, named in honor of a former 
U.S. secretary of commerce. Companies can apply for these awards in each 
of the following areas: manufacturing, services, small businesses, nonprofit/
government, education, and health care. 
 To qualify, an organization has to show quality in key areas such as lead-
ership, strategic planning, customer and market focus, information and anal-
ysis, human resources focus, process management, and business results. 
Major criteria for earning the award include whether customer wants and 
needs are being met and whether customer satisfaction ratings are better 
than those of competitors. As you can see, the focus is shifting away from just 
making quality goods and services to providing top-quality customer service 
in all respects.  
 ISO 9000 and ISO 14000 Standards 
 The International Organization for Standardization (ISO) is a worldwide 
federation of national standards bodies from more than 140 countries that 
set global measures for the quality of individual products. ISO is a 
 Six Sigma quality  
 A quality measure that allows 
only 3.4 defects per million 
opportunities.  
 statistical quality control 
(SQC)  
 The process some managers 
use to continually monitor all 
phases of the production 
process to ensure that quality is 
being built into the product 
from the beginning.  
 The Nestlé Purina 
PetCare Company, 
headquartered in 
St. Louis, received the 
Malcolm Baldrige 
National Quality Award 
in the manufacturing 
category. What quality 
criteria do you think the 
award was based on? 

259
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
 statistical process control 
(SPC)  
 The process of testing 
statistical samples of product 
components at each stage of 
the production process and 
plotting those results on a 
graph. Any variances from 
quality standards are 
recognized and can be 
corrected if beyond the set 
standards.  
nongovernmental organization established to promote the development of 
world standards to facilitate the international exchange of goods and ser-
vices. (ISO is not an acronym. It comes from the Greek word  isos, meaning 
“oneness.”)   ISO 9000   is the common name given to quality management 
and assurance standards. 
 The standards require that a company determine what customer needs 
are, including regulatory and legal requirements, and make communication 
arrangements to handle issues such as complaints. Other standards cover 
process control, product testing, storage, and delivery. 
 What makes ISO 9000 so important is that the European Union (EU) 
demands that companies that want to do business with the EU be certified by 
ISO standards. Some major U.S. companies are also demanding that suppliers 
meet these standards. Several accreditation agencies in Europe and the United 
States will certify that a company meets the standards for all phases of its 
operations, from product development through production and testing to 
installation. 
 ISO 14000   is a collection of the best practices for managing an organiza-
tion’s impact on the environment. As an environmental management system, it 
does not prescribe a performance level. Requirements for certification include 
having an environmental policy, having specific improvement targets, con-
ducting audits of environmental programs, and maintaining top management 
review of the processes. 
 Certification in both ISO 9000 and ISO 14000 would show that a firm has 
a world-class management system in both quality and environmental stan-
dards. In the past, firms assigned employees separately to meet each set of 
standards. Today, ISO 9000 and 14000 standards have been blended so that an 
organization can work on both at once. ISO is now compiling social responsi-
bility guidelines to go with the other standards.  
 ISO 9000  
 The common name given to 
quality management and 
assurance standards.  
 ISO 14000  
 A collection of the best 
practices for managing an 
organization’s impact on the 
environment.  
 • What are the major criteria for facility location?  
 • What is the difference between MRP and ERP?  
 • What is just-in-time inventory control?  
 • What are Six Sigma quality, the Baldrige Award, ISO 9000, and ISO 
14000?  
•
What are the major cr
 test prep 
iteria for facilit
ite
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Explain the use of PERT and Gantt charts to control manufacturing processes.
 CONTROL PROCEDURES: PERT 
AND GANTT CHARTS  
 Operations managers must ensure products are manufactured and delivered 
on time, on budget, and to specifications. How can managers be sure all will go 
smoothly and be completed by the required time? One popular technique for 
monitoring the progress of production was developed in the 1950s for 
LO 9–5

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
260
constructing nuclear submarines: the   program evaluation and review tech-
nique (PERT).  PERT users analyze the tasks to complete a given project, esti-
mate the time needed to complete each, and compute the minimum time 
needed to complete the whole project. 
 The steps used in PERT are (1) analyzing and sequencing tasks that 
need to be done, (2) estimating the time needed to complete each task, (3) 
drawing a PERT network illustrating the information from steps 1 and 2, 
and (4) identifying the critical path. The   critical path   is the sequence of 
tasks that takes the longest time to complete. We use the word  critical 
because a delay anywhere along this path will cause the project or produc-
tion run to be late. 
 Figure  9.3 illustrates a PERT chart for producing a music video. The 
squares indicate completed tasks, and the arrows indicate the time needed to 
complete each. The path from one completed task to another illustrates the 
relationships among tasks; the arrow from “set designed” to “set materials 
purchased” indicates we must design the set before we can purchase the 
materials. The critical path, indicated by the bold black arrows, shows pro-
ducing the set takes more time than auditioning dancers, choreographing 
dances, or designing and making costumes. The project manager now knows 
it’s critical that set construction remain on schedule if the project is to be 
completed on time, but short delays in dance and costume preparation are 
unlikely to delay it.  
 A PERT network can be made up of thousands of events over many 
months. Today, this complex procedure is done by computer. Another, more 
basic strategy manufacturers use for measuring production progress is a Gantt 
chart. A    Gantt chart   (named for its developer, Henry L. Gantt) is a bar graph, 
now also prepared by computer, that clearly shows what projects are being 
worked on and how much has been completed at any given time.  Figure 9.4 , a 
 program evaluation and 
review technique (PERT)  
 A method for analyzing the 
tasks involved in completing a 
given project, estimating the 
time needed to complete each 
task, and identifying the 
minimum time needed to 
complete the total project.  
 critical path  
 In a PERT network, the 
sequence of tasks that takes 
the longest time to complete.  
 Gantt chart  
 Bar graph showing production 
managers what projects are 
being worked on and what 
stage they are in at any given 
time.  
 FIGURE 9.3 PERT CHART FOR A MUSIC VIDEO 
 The minimum amount of time it will take to produce this video is 15 weeks. To get that number, you add the week it takes to pick a 
star and a song to the four weeks to design a set, the two weeks to purchase set materials, the six weeks to construct the set, the 
week of rehearsals, and the final week when the video is made. That’s the critical path. Any delay in that process will delay the final 
video. 
Dance
rehearsed
Dancers
measured
(2 weeks)
(6 weeks)
(4 weeks)
(4 weeks)
(4 weeks)
(1 week)
= The critical path
(1 week)
(2 weeks)
(1 week)
(1 week)
(1 week)
(3 weeks)
(4 weeks)
Set
designed
Dancers
selected
Set
constructed
Dance
choreo-
graphed
Video
filmed
Costumes
made
Star
and song
chosen
Start
Set
materials
purchased
Costumes
designed

261
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
 • Draw a PERT chart for making a breakfast of three-minute eggs, but-
tered toast, and coffee. Define the critical path.  
 • How could you use a Gantt chart to keep track of production?  
•
Draw a PERT chart for
 test prep 
r makingg a brea
r m
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Gantt chart for a doll manufacturer, shows that the dolls’ heads and bodies 
should be completed before the clothing is sewn. It also shows that at the end 
of week 3, the dolls’ bodies are ready, but the heads are about half a week 
behind. Using a Gantt-like computer program, a manager can trace the pro-
duction process minute by minute to determine which tasks are on time and 
which are behind, so that adjustments can be made to allow the company to 
stay on schedule.  
 PREPARING FOR THE FUTURE 
 The United States remains a major industrial country, but competition grows 
stronger each year. Tremendous opportunities exist for careers in operations 
management as both manufacturing and service companies fight to stay com-
petitive. Students who can see future trends and have the skills to own or work 
in tomorrow’s highly automated factories and modern service facilities will 
benefit.
 FIGURE 9.4 GANTT 
CHART FOR A DOLL 
MANUFACTURER  
A Gantt chart enables a 
production manager to see 
at a glance when projects are 
scheduled to be completed 
and what the status is now. For 
example, the dolls’ heads and 
bodies should be completed 
before the clothing is sewn, 
but they could be a little late as 
long as everything is ready for 
assembly in week 6. This chart 
shows that at the end of week 3, 
the dolls’ bodies are ready, but 
the heads are about half a week 
behind. 
Machine A
(Heads molded)
Machine B
(Bodies molded)
Machine C
(Fabric cut)
Machine D
(Clothing sewn)
Line A
(Assembly)
Line B
(Painting)
Week 1
Week 2
Week 3
Week 4
Week 5
Week 6
Week 7
= Completed work
= Work to be done

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
262
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.
 Describe the current state of U.S. manufacturing and what manufacturers 
have done to become more competitive. 
 • 
 What is the current state of manufacturing in the United States?  
 Activity in the nation’s manufacturing sector has declined since its height. 
The result has been fewer jobs in manufacturing. Even though manufac-
turing companies offer fewer jobs, they have become more productive, 
meaning that they need fewer employees to do the same amount of work. 
Today many manufacturing jobs are coming back to the U.S. as labor costs 
increase in other countries. Much of this chapter is devoted to showing 
you what manufacturers and service providers can do to revive the U.S. 
economy to become world-class competitors.  
 • 
 What have U.S. manufacturers done to achieve increased output?  
 U.S. manufacturers have increased output by emphasizing close relation-
ships with suppliers and other companies to satisfy customer needs; con-
tinuous improvement; quality; site selection; use of the Internet to unite 
companies; and production techniques such as enterprise resource plan-
ning, computer-integrated manufacturing, flexible manufacturing, lean 
manufacturing, and robotics.  
 Describe the evolution from production to operations management. 
 • 
 What is production management?  
 Production management consists of all the activities managers do to help 
their firms create goods. To reflect the change in importance from manu-
facturing to services, the term  production is often replaced by the term 
 operations. 
 • 
 What is operations management?  
 Operations management is the specialized area in management that con-
verts or transforms resources, including human resources, into goods and 
services.  
 • 
 What kind of firms use operations managers?  
 Firms in both the manufacturing and service sectors use operations 
managers.  
 Identify various production processes and describe techniques that improve 
productivity, including computer-aided design and manufacturing, flexible 
manufacturing, lean manufacturing, mass customization, and robotics. 
 • 
 What is process manufacturing, and how does it differ from assembly 
processes?  
 Process manufacturing physically or chemically changes materials. Assem-
bly processes put together components.  
 • 
 How do CAD/CAM systems work?  
 Design changes made in computer-aided design (CAD) are instantly incor-
porated into the computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) process. The link-
ing of CAD and CAM is computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM).  
 • 
 What is flexible manufacturing?  
 Flexible manufacturing means designing machines to produce a variety of 
products.  
LO 9–1
•
What is p
LO 9–2
LO 9–3
 summary 

263
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
 • 
 What is lean manufacturing?  
 Lean manufacturing is the production of goods using less of everything 
than in mass production: less human effort, less manufacturing space, less 
investment in tools, and less engineering time to develop a new product.  
 • 
 What is mass customization?  
 Mass customization means making custom-designed goods and services for 
a large number of individual customers. Flexible manufacturing makes mass 
customization possible. Given the exact needs of a customer, flexible 
machines can produce a customized good as fast as mass-produced goods 
were once made. Mass customization is also important in service industries.  
 • 
How do robotics help make manufacturers more competitive?  
 Industrial robotics can work 24 hours a day, seven days a week, with great 
precision. Most of the jobs they replace are dirty or so repetitive that robots 
are necessary, or at least helpful.  
 Describe operations management planning issues including facility location, 
facility layout, materials requirement planning, purchasing, just-in-time 
inventory control, and quality control. 
 • 
 What is facility location and how does it differ from facility layout?  
 Facility location is the process of selecting a geographic location for a com-
pany’s operations. Facility layout is the physical arrangement of resources, 
including people, to produce goods and services effectively and efficiently.  
 • 
 How do managers evaluate different sites?  
 Labor costs and land costs are two major criteria for selecting the right 
sites. Other criteria include whether resources are plentiful and inexpen-
sive, skilled workers are available or are trainable, taxes are low and the 
local government offers support, energy and water are available, trans-
portation costs are low, and the quality of life and of education are high.  
 • 
 What relationship do materials requirement planning (MRP) and enterprise 
resource planning (ERP) have with the production process?  
 MRP is a computer-based operations management system that uses sales 
forecasts to make sure the needed parts and materials are available at the 
right time and place. Enterprise resource planning (ERP), a newer version 
of MRP, combines the computerized functions of all the divisions and sub-
sidiaries of the firm—such as finance, material requirements planning, 
human resources, and order fulfillment—into a single integrated software 
program that uses a single database. The result is shorter time between 
orders and payment, less staff to do ordering and order processing, reduced 
inventories, and better customer service for all the firms involved.  
• 
 What is just-in-time (JIT) inventory control?  
 JIT requires suppliers to deliver parts and materials just in time to go on 
the assembly line so they don’t have to be stored in warehouses.  
 • 
What is Six Sigma quality?  
 Six Sigma quality sets standards at just 3.4 defects per million opportuni-
ties and detects potential problems before they occur. Statistical quality 
control (SQC) is the process some managers use to continually monitor all 
processes in the production process and ensure quality is being built into 
the product from the beginning. Statistical process control (SPC) tests sta-
tistical samples of product components at each stage of the production 
process and plots the results on a graph so managers can recognize and 
correct deviations from quality standards.  
LO 9–4

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
264
 1. Workers on the manufacturing floor are being replaced by robots and 
other machines. On the one hand, this lets companies compete with cheap 
labor from other countries. On the other hand, automation eliminates 
many jobs. Are you concerned that automation may increase unemploy-
ment or underemployment in the United States and around the world? 
Why or why not? 
 2. Computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) has revolutionized the produc-
tion process. What will such changes mean for the clothing industry, the 
shoe industry, and other fashion-related industries? What will they mean 
for other consumer and industrial goods industries? How will you benefit 
as a consumer? 
 3. One way to create new jobs in the United States is to increase innovation 
among new graduates from engineering and the sciences. How can the 
United States motivate more students to major in those areas?  
1
critical thinking
 • 
What quality standards do firms use in the United States? 
 To qualify for the Malcolm Baldrige National Quality Award, a company 
must demonstrate quality in seven key areas: leadership, strategic plan-
ning, customer and market focus, information and analysis, human 
resources focus, process management, and business results. International 
standards U.S. firms strive to meet include ISO 9000 and ISO 14000. The 
first is a world standard for quality and the second is a collection of the 
best practices for managing an organization’s impact on the environment.  
 Explain the use of PERT and Gantt charts to control manufacturing processes. 
 • 
Is there any relationship between a PERT chart and a Gantt chart? 
 Figure 9.3 shows a PERT chart.  Figure 9.4  shows a Gantt chart. Whereas 
PERT is a tool used for planning, a Gantt chart is a tool used to measure 
progress. 
•
Is there a
LO 9–5
key terms
assembly process 247
computer-aided design 
(CAD) 248
computer-aided manufac-
turing (CAM) 248
computer-integrated 
 manufacturing 
(CIM) 249
continuous process 247
critical path 260
enterprise resource 
planning(ERP) 255
facility layout 254
facility location 252
flexible manufacturing 249
form utility 247
Gantt chart 260
intermittent process 248
ISO 14000 259
ISO 9000 259
just-in-time (JIT) inventory 
control 257
lean manufacturing 249
mass customization 250
materials requirement 
planning (MRP) 254
operations 
management 245
process 
manufacturing 247
production 245
production 
management 245
program evaluation and 
review technique 
(PERT) 260
purchasing 257
quality 257
Six Sigma quality 258
statistical process control 
(SPC) 259
statistical quality control 
(SQC) 258
telecommuting 254

265
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To illustrate production processes.  
 EXERCISE 
 Take a virtual tour of the Hershey Foods Corporation’s chocolate factory by 
going to  www.hersheys.com/discover/tour_video.asp  . 
 1. Does Hershey use process manufacturing or the assembly process? Is the 
production of Hershey’s chocolate an intermittent or continuous produc-
tion process? Justify your answers.  
 2. What location factors might go into the selection of a manufacturing site 
for Hershey’s chocolate?  
developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  Choosing the right location for a manufacturing plant or a service organi-
zation is often critical to its success. Form small groups and have each 
group member pick one manufacturing plant or one service organization 
in town and list at least three reasons why its location helps or hinders its 
success. If its location is not ideal, what would be a better one?  
2.  In teams of four or five, discuss the need for better operations manage-
ment in the airline industry. Have the team develop a report listing ( a ) 
problems team members have encountered in traveling by air and ( b ) sug-
gestions for improving operations so such problems won’t occur in the 
future. 
3.  Discuss some of the advantages and disadvantages of producing goods 
overseas using inexpensive labor. Summarize the moral and ethical dimen-
sions of this practice.  
4.  Think of any production facility at your school, such as a sandwich shop, 
library, or copy center, and redesign the layout (make a pencil sketch) to 
more effectively serve customers and allow employees to be more effective 
and efficient.  
 5.  Think about recent experiences you have had with service organizations 
and select one in which you had to wait for an unreasonable length of time 
to get what you wanted. Describe what happens when customers are 
inconvenienced, and explain how management could make the operation 
more efficient and customer-oriented.  
 
 
 
 
 

PART 3
Business Management: Empowering Employees to Satisfy Customers
266
video case 
 We sometimes read a newspaper or magazine or 
listen to a news report and hear about the down-
fall of U.S. manufacturing and how many people 
are losing their jobs in manufacturing plants. It 
sounds depressing but the question is, “Has the 
United States really fallen that far behind other 
countries in manufacturing capability?” The 
answer is no, and this video is meant to highlight 
just one example of a successful manufacturing 
company. There are thousands of others that could 
be discussed in a similar manner. 
 There is no doubt that U.S. manufacturers 
are being challenged by companies in Mexico, 
China, India, Brazil, Indonesia, and all over the 
world—but that is nothing new. The question is 
whether or not the United States can respond 
effectively to such challenges today as it has done 
in the past. Don’t forget that much, if not most, of 
the machinery and equipment being used in for-
eign plants was produced in the United States. 
Note, too, that many companies—like Honda and 
Toyota—have built manufacturing plants in the 
United States. 
 This video features Ball metal beverage con-
tainers. You’ve seen them everywhere. But have 
you given any thought to how those cans came to 
be? Have you wondered why Ball has been so 
successful in the United States that it expanded 
operations by buying four U.S. manufacturing 
plants from giant brewer Anheuser-Busch InBev? 
 The text mentions several things that U.S. 
manufacturers are doing to stay competitive in 
today’s global markets. They include focusing on 
customers; maintaining close relationships with 
suppliers (e.g., using just-in-time inventory con-
trol); practicing continuous improvement; focus-
ing on quality; saving on costs through site 
selection; utilizing the Internet; and adopting new 
production processes like computer-integrated 
manufacturing. Foreign businesses are busy copy-
ing what we do, so U.S. producers need to do 
things better and faster and cheaper, if they can. 
Speaking of cans, you can see and hear what Ball 
is doing to stay competitive in the video. Note that 
Ball is using a continuous process. What other 
processes might the company use? 
 U.S. companies are using computer-aided 
design 
and 
computer-aided 
manufacturing, 
united in computer-integrated manufacturing. 
They also do flexible manufacturing, which 
means they can produce a variety of products 
using the same machinery. It should not surprise 
you to learn that Ball located its facilities close to 
its customers. That makes distribution faster, eas-
ier, and cheaper. 
 Of course, quality is a key consideration in 
any manufacturing plant. Can you imagine 
trying to open a can and having the opener break 
off in your fingers or having a can that leaks all 
over your car? Manufacturers try for zero 
defects, but often settle for some slightly lower 
standard such as Six Sigma (only 3.4 defects per 
million). 
 Next time you take a cold drink from a can, 
think about Ball and the other companies that 
make the United States a major producer of con-
sumer goods. Think, too, of the opportunities that 
will present themselves to tomorrow’s college 
graduates. Students seem less attracted to manu-
facturing today, but that means more opportuni-
ties tomorrow for those students who see growth 
in some areas of manufacturing. That includes, of 
course, companies that produce solar panels, 
power plants, and more. You only have to look 
around your home or office to see the many prod-
ucts being made and the many products that will 
be made using biotechnology, nanotechnology, 
and so on.  
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1.  Looking at the future of manufacturing in the 
United States, do you think U.S. companies 
like Ball are   adapting to the challenges of for-
eign manufacturers? What is Ball doing to 
stay competitive?  
 2.  The video mentions the loss of U.S. manufac-
turing jobs to overseas locations. What is this 
called? What is the opposite trend that has 
occurred in the United States with companies 
like Toyota and Honda?  
 3.  What is meant by Six Sigma?  
 KEEPING YOUR EYE ON THE BALL 

267
Production and Operations Management
CHAPTER 9
 1. 
Conor Dougherty, “Unemployment Rises in Every State,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, January 28, 2009. 
 2. 
Carmen M. Reinhart and Kenneth S. Rogoff, “What Other 
Financial Crises Tell Us,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 3, 
2009. 
 3. 
Spencer Jakab, “Manufacturing Pause Isn’t Cause for Alarm,” 
The Wall Street Journal, January 2, 2014. 
 4. 
Ro Khanna, “Myths about Manufacturing Jobs,”  The Washington 
Post, February 17, 2013. 
 5. 
Richard Stengel, “Made in America, Again,”  Time,  April 22, 2013. 
 6. 
Brad Plumer, “Back to ‘Made in America’?”  The Washington 
Post, May 1, 2013. 
 7. 
Michelene Maynard, “Toyota, Mississippi,”  Forbes, July 16, 
2012. 
 8. 
Thomas A. Kochan, “A Jobs Compact for America’s Future,” 
Harvard Business Review, March 2012. 
 9. 
John Deutch and Edward Steinfeld, “Made in America, and 
Everywhere Else,”  The Wall Street Journal, March 13, 2013. 
 10. 
Emi Kolawole, “It’s Not the Jetsons, But,”  The Washington 
Post, May 1, 2013. 
 11. 
James R. Hagerty, “Manufacturers Gain Ground,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, August 19, 2013. 
 12. 
James R. Hagerty, “In World of Big Stuff, The U.S. Still Rules,” 
The Wall Street Journal, December 4, 2012. 
 13. 
George Halvorson, “The Culture to Cultivate,”  Harvard 
Business Review, July–August, 2013. 
 14. 
Andrea Petersen, “Checking In? Hidden Ways Hotels Court 
Guests Faster,”  The Wall Street Journal, April 12, 2012. 
 15. Alina Dizik, “Why All the Locals Are Lounging in the Hotel 
Lobby,”  The Wall Street Journal, April 19, 2012. 
  16. H. David Sherman and Joe Zhu, “Analyzing Performance in 
Service Organizations,”  Sloan Management Review, Summer 
2013. 
   17. John Koten, “What’s Hot in Manufacturing Technology,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, June 11, 2013. 
 18. Ann C. Logue, “Trimming the Fat,”  Entrepreneur, February 2014. 
 19. Steve Blank, “‘Lean’ Is Shaking Up the Entrepreneurial 
Landscape,”  Harvard Business Review,  July–August, 2013. 
 20. Kevin Kelly, “Better than Human,”  Wired, January 2013. 
 21. Bill Alpert, “Robots in Search of Added Employment,” 
Barron’s, January 28, 2013. 
 22. David Von Drehle, “The Robot Economy,”  Time, September 9, 
2013. 
 23. Dexter Roberts, “The March of Robots into Chinese 
Factories,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, November 29, 2012. 
 24. Ibid. 
 25. Ibid. 
 26. “Time to Head Home for Some Manufacturers,” editorial, 
Bloomberg Businessweek, February 6–12, 2012. 
 27. David Simchi-Levi, James Paul Peruvankal, Narenda Mulani, 
Bill Read, and John Ferreira, “Is It Time to Rethink Your 
Manufacturing Strategy?”  MIT Sloan Management Review, 
Winter 2012. 
 28. Brad Feld, “The Simple Change That’s Completely 
Transformed How I Get Things Done,”  Inc., December–
January 2014. 
Locals Are Lounging in the Hotel
notes 
 Page 241: © Catherine Ivill/AMA/Matthew 
Ashton/AMA Sports Photo/AMA/Corbis; p. 242: 
© Erik Schelzig/AP Images; p. 243: Courtesy of 
Freight Farms; p. 244: © Caro/Alamy; p. 245: 
© Kim Kyung-Hoon/Reuters/Landov; p. 246: 
© PBNJ Productions/Blend Images/Getty 
Images RF; p. 248: © Vince Lupo; p. 249: 
© Benoit Decout/REA/Redux; p. 250: 
© PRNewsFoto/MY M&M’S Chocolate  
Candies/AP Images; p. 251: Courtesy of  
Moniker Guitars; p. 252: © euroluftbild.de/age 
fotostock; p. 255: © Lipo Ching/MCT/Landov; 
p. 258: Courtesy of Nestlé Purina PetCare 
Company. 
/Redux; p 250:
photo credits 

268
 Motivating Employees 
 10 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO 
 LO 10-1 Explain Taylor’s theory of scientific management. 
 LO 10-2 Describe the Hawthorne studies and their significance to 
management. 
 LO 10-3 Identify the levels of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs and apply them 
to employee motivation. 
 LO 10-4 Distinguish between the motivators and hygiene factors identified 
by Herzberg. 
 LO 10-5 Differentiate among Theory X, Theory Y, and Theory Z. 
 LO 10-6 Explain the key principles of goal-setting, expectancy, 
reinforcement, and equity theories. 
 LO 10-7 Show how managers put motivation theories into action through 
such strategies as job enrichment, open communication, and job 
recognition. 
 LO 10-8 Show how managers personalize motivation strategies to appeal 
to employees across the globe and across generations.  
 MANAGEMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services 
PART 4

269
David Novak
 • Executive Chairman of Yum! 
Brands
 • Built a fun culture at Pizza Hut, 
KFC, and PepsiCo
 • Created Walk the Talk Award to 
reward performance
www.yum.com
@yumbrands
Y
 um! Brands ranks as one 
of the largest food com-
panies in the world, 
although there’s a good 
chance that many peo-
ple have never heard of it. That’s 
because consumers are likely more 
familiar with the company’s stable of 
famous fast-food chains like Taco Bell, 
Pizza Hut, and KFC. Thanks to powerful 
brands like these, Yum! stock has grown 
double digits every year since 1997. In 
that span of time, Yum! opened five res-
taurants per day. 
 Keeping such a large operation suc-
cessful requires expert leadership, 
which Executive Chairman David Novak 
provides to a remarkable degree. How-
ever, he’s certainly not the type of per-
son to accept sole credit for a job well 
done. Novak stresses the importance of 
teamwork and recognition of customer-
focused behavior. Using his own 
leadership-development program called 
Taking People with You, Novak teaches 
how positive personal development can 
benefit entire companies by bringing 
people closer together. He shows man-
agers the power of recognition when 
motivating employees. Not only has 
Novak’s program made him indispensi-
ble at Yum!, but he’s also an inspiration 
among the corporate leaders who learn 
his methods at conferences around the 
world. “He is a rocket booster on 
stage,” said Kathleen Matthews, an 
executive vice president at Marriott 
Hotels. “He has an authentic core and 
seems to truly believe what he 
preaches.” 
 After earning a degree in journalism 
with an advertising emphasis from the 
University of Missouri, Novak spent a few 
years in the advertising business before 
landing a job in marketing at Pizza Hut. 
He soon rose through the ranks of the 
fast-food chain and then through Pep-
siCo, its parent company at the time. 
 At the time Novak was promoted to 
run KFC, the company hadn’t hit its profit 
target in many years. The long period of 
declining business created an environ-
ment of animosity in which the company’s 
leadership and the franchisees didn’t like 
or trust each other. Novak believed that a 
change in culture would improve the 
company’s performance dramatically. “I 
think business is fun,” says Novak. “I 
think people would much rather work in 
a fun environment. But people want to 
win. So I wanted to create a team that 
was hardworking, very competitive, but 
we had fun. And I thought the biggest 
thing I could do was tap into the universal 
need for recognition.” So he created the 
Rubber Chicken Award as a lighthearted 
way to recognize employees’ accomplish-
ments and motivate them to further 
greatness. 
 To Novak, most corporate trophies 
are awarded too long after the fact to 
hold any personal importance. That’s 
why he doled out rubber chickens as 
president of KFC and statues of chatter-
ing teeth on legs as CEO of Yum! Brands 
immediately after a person exceeded 
expectations. Novak’s motivational 
efforts had an immediate effect on KFC, 
leading to the brand’s turnaround in the 
1990s. Novak’s success made him the 
natural choice to lead as president of 
Yum! Brands—alongside the late 
Andrall “Andy” Pearson—when it was 
spun off from PepsiCo in 1997. Since 
Novak became CEO in 1999 and 
Chairman in 2001, he has been com-
mitted to growing the company by 
boosting employee morale. “I’m on 
earth to encourage others, lift lives, 
help create leaders, inspire people, 
recognize others,” said Novak. 
“When I’m spending time doing 
that—those are my best days.” 
 In this chapter, you’ll learn about 
the theories and practices managers 
like David Novak use in motivating 
their employees to focus on goals 
common to them and the 
organization. 
 Sources: Geoff Colvin, “Great Job! How Yum! 
Brands Uses Recognition to Build Teams and Get 
Results,”  Fortune, July 25, 2013; Shani Magosky, 
“Heed the Oracle of Kentucky (aka Yum!) Brands 
CEO David Novak,”  The Huffington Post, April 18, 
2013; and Tiffany Hsu, “Yum! CEO David Novak on 
Rubber Chickens, China and Taco Bell,”  Los 
Angeles Times, March 30, 2012. 
 Getting to know  David Novak

270
 name that company 
 Job enlargement combines a series of tasks into one challenging and interest-
ing assignment. This home appliance manufacturer redesigned its washing 
machine production process so that employees could assemble an entire water 
pump instead of just adding one part. Name that company. (Find the answer in 
the chapter.)  
 THE VALUE OF MOTIVATION 
 “If work is such fun, how come the rich don’t do it?” quipped comedian 
Groucho Marx. Well, the rich do work—Bill Gates didn’t make his billions 
playing computer games. And workers can have fun, if managers make the 
effort to motivate them. 
 It’s difficult to overstate the importance of workers’ job satisfaction. 
Happy workers usually lead to happy customers, and happy customers lead to 
successful businesses. On the other hand, unhappy workers are likely to leave. 
When that happens, the company usually loses more than an experienced 
employee. It can also lose the equivalent of 6 to 18 months’ salary to cover the 
costs of recruiting and training a replacement.  1 The “soft” costs of losing 
employees are even greater: loss of intellectual capital, decreased morale of 
remaining workers, increased employee stress, decreased customer service, 
interrupted product development, and a poor reputation.  
 While it is costly to recruit and train new workers, it’s also expensive to 
retain those who are disengaged. The word  engagement is used to describe 
employees’ level of motivation, passion, and commitment. Engaged employees 
work with passion and feel a connection to their company.  2 Disengaged work-
ers have essentially checked out; they plod through their day putting in time, 
but not energy. Not only do they act out their unhappiness at 
work, but disengaged employees undermine the efforts of 
engaged co-workers. A Gallup survey estimated that the lower 
productivity of actively disengaged workers costs the U.S. econ-
omy between $450 to $550 billion a year.  3 
 Motivating the right people to join the organization and stay 
with it is a key function of managers. Top-performing managers 
are usually surrounded by top-performing employees. It is no 
coincidence that geese fly faster in formation than alone. Although 
the desire to perform well ultimately comes from within, good 
managers stimulate people and bring out their natural drive to do 
a good job. People are willing to work, and work hard, if they feel 
their work makes a difference and is appreciated.  4  
 People are motivated by a variety of things, such as recogni-
tion, accomplishment, and status. An   intrinsic reward   is the 
personal satisfaction you feel when you perform well and com-
plete goals. The belief that your work makes a significant contri-
bution to the organization or to society is a form of intrinsic 
reward. An   extrinsic reward   is given to you by someone else as 
recognition for good work. Pay increases, praise, and promo-
tions are extrinsic rewards. 
 This chapter will help you understand the concepts, theo-
ries, and practice of motivation. We begin with a look at some 
 intrinsic reward  
 The personal satisfaction you 
feel when you perform well and 
complete goals.  
 One important type of 
motivator is intrinsic 
(inner) rewards, which 
include the personal 
satisfaction you feel for 
a job well done. People 
who respond to such 
inner promptings often 
enjoy their work and 
share their enthusiasm 
with others. Are you 
more strongly motivated 
by your own desire to 
do well, or by extrinsic 
rewards like pay and 
recognition? 

271
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
traditional theories of motivation. Why should you bother to know about 
these theories? Because sometimes “new” approaches aren’t really new; varia-
tions of them have been tried in the past. Knowing what has gone before will 
help you see what has worked and what hasn’t. First, we discuss the Haw-
thorne studies because they created a new interest in worker satisfaction and 
motivation. Then we look at some assumptions about employees that come 
from the traditional theorists. You will see the names of these theorists over 
and over in business literature and future courses: Taylor, Mayo, Maslow, 
Herzberg, and McGregor. Finally, we’ll introduce modern motivation theories 
and show you how managers apply them.  
Explain Taylor’s theory of scientific management.  
Frederick Taylor: The Father of Scientific Management  
 Several 19th-century thinkers presented management principles, but not until 
the early 20th century did any work with lasting implications appear.  The Prin-
ciples of Scientific Management was written by U.S. efficiency engineer Freder-
ick Taylor and published in 1911, earning Taylor the title “father of scientific 
management.” Taylor’s goal was to increase worker productivity to benefit 
both the firm and the worker. The solution, he thought, was to scientifically 
study the most efficient ways to do things, determine the one “best way” to 
perform each task, and then teach people those methods. This approach 
became known as   scientific management. Three elements were basic to Tay-
lor’s approach: time, methods, and rules of work. His most important tools 
were observation and the stopwatch. Taylor’s thinking lies behind today’s mea-
sures of how many burgers McDonald’s expects its cooks to flip. 
 A classic Taylor story describes his study of men shoveling 
rice, coal, and iron ore with the same type of shovel. Believing dif-
ferent materials called for different shovels, he proceeded to invent 
a wide variety of sizes and shapes of shovels and, stopwatch in 
hand, measured output over time in what were called   time-
motion studies.  These were studies of the tasks performed in a 
job and the time needed for each. Sure enough, an average per-
son could shovel 25 to 35 tons more per day using the most effi-
cient motions and the proper shovel. This finding led to 
time-motion studies of virtually every factory job. As researchers 
determined the most efficient ways of doing things, efficiency 
became the standard for setting goals.  
 Taylor’s scientific management became the dominant strategy 
for improving productivity in the early 1900s. One follower of Taylor was 
Henry L. Gantt, who developed charts by which managers plotted the work 
of employees a day in advance down to the smallest detail. (See Chapter 9 
for a discussion of Gantt charts.) U.S. engineers Frank and Lillian Gilbreth 
used Taylor’s ideas in a three-year study of bricklaying. They developed the 
 principle of motion economy,  showing how every job could be broken into 
a series of elementary motions called a  therblig ( Gilbreth spelled backward 
with the  t and  h transposed). They then analyzed each motion to make it 
more efficient. 
 Scientific management viewed people largely as machines that needed to be 
properly programmed. There was little concern for the psychological or human 
aspects of work. Taylor believed that workers would perform at a high level of 
effectiveness—that is, be motivated—if they received high enough pay. 
 Some of Taylor’s ideas are still in use. Some companies continue to 
emphasize conformity to work rules rather than creativity, flexibility, and 
LO 10–1
 scientific management  
 Studying workers to find the 
most efficient ways of doing 
things and then teaching 
people those techniques.  
extrinsic reward
Something given to you by 
someone else as recognition 
for good work; extrinsic 
rewards include pay increases, 
praise, and promotions.
basic to Tay
ortant tools
today’s mea-
g
t 
n 
y
y
ylor was 
d the work 
Chapter 9
an Gilbreth
veloped the
broken into
d backward 
to make it
needed to be 
al or human 
high level of 
pay. 
ontinue to
ibility, and 
 UPS tells drivers how to 
get out of their trucks, 
how fast to walk, how 
many packages to pick 
up and deliver a day, 
and even how to hold 
their keys. Can you see 
how UPS follows the 
principles of scientific 
management by 
teaching people the one 
“best way” to perform 
each task? 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
272
responsiveness. For example, United Parcel Service (UPS) tells drivers how to 
get out of their trucks (with right foot first), how fast to walk (three feet per 
second), how many packages to pick up and deliver a day (an average of 400), 
and how to hold their keys (teeth up, third finger). Drivers wear ring scanners, 
electronic devices on their index fingers wired to a small computer on their 
wrists. The devices shoot a pattern of photons at a bar code on a package to let 
a customer check the Internet and know exactly where a package is at any 
given moment. If a driver is considered slow, a supervisor rides along, prod-
ding the driver with stopwatches and clipboards. UPS has a training center in 
Landover, Maryland, with simulators that teach employees how to properly 
lift and load boxes, drive their trucks proficiently, and even lessen the risk of 
slipping and falling when carrying a package.  5 
 The benefits of relying on workers to come up with solutions to produc-
tivity problems have long been recognized, as we shall discover next.  
Describe the Hawthorne studies and their significance to management.
 Elton Mayo and the Hawthorne Studies  
 One study, inspired by Frederick Taylor’s research, began at the Western Elec-
tric Company’s Hawthorne plant in Cicero, Illinois, in 1927 and ended six 
years later. Let’s see why it is one of the major studies in management 
literature. 
 Elton Mayo and his colleagues from Harvard University came to the 
 Hawthorne plant to test the degree of lighting associated with optimum pro-
ductivity. In this respect, their study was a traditional scientific management 
study. The idea was to keep records of the workers’ productivity under differ-
ent levels of illumination. But the initial experiments revealed what seemed to 
be a problem. The researchers had expected productivity to fall as the lighting 
was dimmed. Yet the experimental group’s productivity went up regardless of 
whether the lighting was bright or dim, and even when it was reduced to about 
the level of moonlight. 
 In a second series of 13 experiments, a separate test room was set up 
where researchers could manipulate temperature, humidity, and other envi-
ronmental factors. Productivity went up each time; in fact, it increased by 50 
percent overall. When the experimenters repeated the original conditions 
(expecting productivity to fall to original levels), productivity increased yet 
again. The experiments were considered a total failure at this point. No matter 
what the experimenters did, productivity went up. What was causing the 
increase? 
 In the end, Mayo guessed that some human or psychological factor was at 
play. He and his colleagues interviewed the workers, asking about their feel-
ings and attitudes toward the experiment. The answers began a profound 
change in management thinking that still has repercussions today. Here is 
what the researchers concluded:
 
• 
The workers in the test room thought of themselves as a social group. 
The atmosphere was informal, they could talk freely, and they 
interacted regularly with their supervisors and the experimenters. 
They felt special and worked hard to stay in the group. This moti-
vated them.  
 
• 
The workers were included in planning the experiments. For example, 
they rejected one kind of pay schedule and recommended another, 
which was adopted. They believed their ideas were respected and felt 
engaged in managerial decision making. This, too, motivated them.  
LO 10–2
principle of motion 
economy
Theory developed by Frank 
and Lillian Gilbreth that every 
job can be broken down into a 
series of elementary motions.
time-motion studies
Studies, begun by Frederick 
Taylor, of which tasks must be 
performed to complete a job 
and the time needed to do 
each task.

273
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
 
• 
No matter the physical conditions, the 
workers enjoyed the atmosphere of their 
special room and the additional pay for 
being more productive. Job satisfaction 
increased dramatically.  
 Researchers now use the term   Hawthorne 
effect  to refer to people’s tendency to behave differ-
ently when they know they’re being studied. The 
Hawthorne study’s results encouraged researchers 
to study human motivation and the managerial 
styles that lead to higher productivity. Research 
emphasis shifted from Taylor’s scientific manage-
ment 
toward 
Mayo’s 
new 
human-based 
management. 
 Mayo’s findings led to completely new assump-
tions about employees. One was that pay is not the 
only motivator. In fact, money was found to be 
a relatively ineffective motivator. New assump-
tions led to many theories about the human side of motivation. One of the 
best-known motivation theorists was Abraham Maslow, whose work we dis-
cuss next.  
Identify the levels of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs and apply them to employee 
motivation.  
MOTIVATION AND MASLOW’S 
HIERARCHY OF NEEDS  
 Psychologist Abraham Maslow believed that to understand motivation at 
work, we must understand human motivation in general. It seemed to him 
that motivation arises from need. That is, people are motivated to satisfy 
unmet needs. Needs that have already been satisfied no longer provide 
motivation. 
 Figure 10.1  shows   Maslow’s hierarchy of needs   , whose levels are: 
Physiological needs: Basic survival needs, such as the need for food, water, 
and shelter.  
Safety needs: The need to feel secure at work and at home.  
Social needs: The need to feel loved, accepted, and part of the group.  
Esteem needs: The need for recognition and acknowledgment from others, 
as well as self-respect and a sense of status or importance.  
Self-actualization needs: The need to develop to one’s fullest potential.  
 When one need is satisfied, another, higher-level need emerges and moti-
vates us to satisfy it. The satisfied need is no longer a motivator. For example, 
if you just ate a full-course dinner, hunger would not be a motivator (at least 
for several hours), and your attention might turn to your surroundings (safety 
needs) or family (social needs). Of course, lower-level needs (perhaps thirst) 
may reemerge at any time they are not being met and take your attention away 
from higher-level needs. 
 To compete successfully, U.S. firms must create a work environment that 
includes goals such as social contribution, honesty, reliability, service, quality, 
dependability, and unity—for all levels of employees. Chip Conley, founder of 
 Hawthorne effect  
 The tendency for people to 
behave differently when they 
know they are being studied.  
LO 10–3
 Maslow’s hierarchy of 
needs  
 Theory of motivation based on 
unmet human needs from basic 
physiological needs to safety, 
social, and esteem needs to 
self-actualization needs.  
 Little did Elton Mayo 
and his research team 
from Harvard University 
know they would 
forever change 
managers’ beliefs about 
employee motivation. 
Their research at the 
Hawthorne plant of 
Western Electric in 
Cicero, Illinois (pictured 
here), gave birth to the 
concept of human-
based motivation by 
showing that employees 
behaved differently 
simply because they 
were involved in 
planning and executing 
the experiments.  

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
274
Joie de Vivre, a chain of 30 boutique hotels, thinks about higher-level needs 
such as meaning (self-actualization) for all employees, including lower-level 
workers. Half his employees are housekeepers who clean toilets all day. How 
does he help them feel they’re doing meaningful work? One technique is what 
he calls the George Bailey exercise, based on the main character in the movie 
It’s a Wonderful Life. Conley asked small groups of housekeepers what would 
happen if they weren’t there every day. Trash would pile up, bathrooms would 
be full of wet towels, and let’s not even think about the toilets. Then he asked 
them to come up with some other name for housekeeping. They offered sug-
gestions like “serenity keepers,” “clutter busters,” or “the peace-of-mind 
police.” In the end, these employees had a sense of how the customers’ experi-
ence wouldn’t be the same without them. This gave meaning to their work that 
helped satisfy higher-level needs.  6 
Distinguish between the motivators and hygiene factors identified by 
Herzberg.
 HERZBERG’S MOTIVATING FACTORS  
 Another direction in managerial theory explores what managers can do with 
the job itself to motivate employees. In other words, some theorists ask: Of all 
the factors controllable by managers, which are most effective in generating 
an enthusiastic work effort? 
 In the mid-1960s, psychologist Frederick Herzberg conducted the most 
discussed study in this area. Herzberg asked workers to rank various job-
related factors in order of importance relative to motivation. The question 
was: What creates enthusiasm for workers and makes them work to full poten-
tial? The most important factors were:
 
1. Sense of achievement.  
 
2. Earned recognition.  
 
3. Interest in the work itself.  
 
4. Opportunity for growth.  
 
5. Opportunity for advancement.  
LO 10–4
 FIGURE 10.1 MASLOW’S 
HIERARCHY OF NEEDS  
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs 
is based on the idea that 
motivation comes from need. 
If a need is met, it’s no longer 
a motivator, so a higher-level 
need becomes the motivator. 
Higher-level needs demand 
the support of lower-level 
needs. This chart shows the 
various levels of need. Do you 
know where you are on the 
chart right now? 
Esteem needs
Social needs
Safety needs
Physiological needs
Self-
actualization
iSee It! Need help 
understanding Maslow’s 
hierarchy? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation

275
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
 
6. Importance of responsibility.  
 
7. Peer and group relationships.  
 
8. Pay. 
 
9. Supervisor’s fairness.  
 
10. Company policies and rules.  
 
11. Status.  
 
12. Job security.  
 
13. Supervisor’s friendliness.  
 
14. Working conditions.  
 Factors receiving the most votes all clustered around job content. Work-
ers like to feel they contribute to the company (sense of achievement was 
number 1). They want to earn recognition (number 2) and feel their jobs are 
important (number 6). They want responsibility (which is why learning is so 
important) and to earn recognition for that responsibility by having a chance 
for growth and advancement. Of course, workers also want the job to be inter-
esting. Do you feel the same way about your work? 
 Workers did not consider factors related to job environment to be motiva-
tors. It was interesting to find that one of those factors was pay. Workers felt 
the  absence of good pay, job security, and friendly supervisors could cause dis-
satisfaction, but their presence did not motivate employees to work harder; it 
just provided satisfaction and contentment. Would you work harder if you 
were paid more? 
 Herzberg concluded that certain factors, which he called   motivators,   
made employees productive and gave them satisfaction. These factors, as you 
have seen, mostly related to job content. Herzberg called other elements of the 
job   hygiene factors   (or maintenance factors). These related to the job envi-
ronment and could cause dissatisfaction if missing but would not necessarily 
motivate employees if increased. See  Figure 10.2  for a list of motivators and 
hygiene factors.  
 Herzberg’s motivating factors led to this conclusion: The best way to 
motivate employees is to make their jobs interesting, help them achieve their 
objectives, and recognize their achievement through advancement and added 
responsibility.  7 A review of  Figure 10.3  shows the similarity between Maslow’s 
hierarchy of needs and Herzberg’s theory.  
 Look at Herzberg’s motivating factors, identify those that motivate you, 
and rank them in order of importance to you. Keep them in mind as you con-
sider jobs and careers. What motivators do your job opportunities offer you? 
Are they the ones you consider important? Evaluating your job offers in 
terms of what’s really important to you will help you make a wise career 
choice.  
 motivators  
 In Herzberg’s theory of 
motivating factors, job factors 
that cause employees to be 
productive and that give them 
satisfaction.  
 hygiene factors  
 In Herzberg’s theory of 
motivating factors, job factors 
that can cause dissatisfaction if 
missing but that do not 
necessarily motivate 
employees if increased.  
 FIGURE 10.2 HERZBERG’S 
MOTIVATORS AND 
HYGIENE FACTORS  
There’s some controversy 
over Herzberg’s results. For 
example, sales managers often 
use money as a motivator. 
Recent studies have shown 
that money can be a motivator 
if used as part of a recognition 
program. 
Motivators
Hygiene (Maintenance) Factors
(These factors can be used to
motivate workers.)
Work itself
Achievement
Recognition
Responsibility
Growth and advancement
Company policy and administration
Supervision
Working conditions
Interpersonal relations (co-workers)
Salary, status, and job security
(These factors can cause dissatisfaction, but
changing them will have little motivational effect.)

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
276
Differentiate among Theory X, Theory Y, and Theory Z.
 MCGREGOR’S THEORY X AND THEORY Y  
 The way managers go about motivating people at work depends greatly on 
their attitudes toward workers. Management theorist Douglas McGregor 
observed that managers’ attitudes generally fall into one of two entirely differ-
ent sets of managerial assumptions, which he called Theory X and Theory Y.  
 Theory X 
 The assumptions of Theory X management are:
 
• 
The average person dislikes work and will avoid it if possible.  
 
• 
Because of this dislike, workers must be forced, controlled, directed, 
or threatened with punishment to make them put forth the effort to 
achieve the organization’s goals.  
LO 10–5
 FIGURE 10.3 COMPARI-
SON OF MASLOW’S HIER-
ARCHY OF NEEDS AND 
HERZBERG’S THEORY OF 
FACTORS  
Work itself
Achievement
Possibility of growth
Advancement
Recognition
Status
Interpersonal relations
Superior
Subordinates
Peers
Supervision
Company policy and 
administration
Job security
Working conditions
Salary
Personal life
Self-actualization
Maslow
Herzberg
Esteem
Social
Motivational
Hygiene
(Maintenance)
Safety
Physiological
 • What are the similarities and differences between Taylor’s time-motion 
studies and Mayo’s Hawthorne studies?  
 • How did Mayo’s findings influence scientific management?  
 • Draw a diagram of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs. Label and describe the parts.  
 • Explain the distinction between what Herzberg called motivators and 
hygiene factors.  
•
What are the similariti
 test  prep  
ies and differen
ies
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

277
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
 
• 
The average worker prefers to be directed, wishes to avoid responsibility, 
has relatively little ambition, and wants security.  
 
• 
Primary motivators are fear and punishment.  
 The natural consequence of these assumptions is a manager who is 
very busy and watches people closely, telling them what to do and how to 
do it. Motivation is more likely to take the form of punishment for bad 
work than reward for good work. Theory X managers give workers little 
responsibility, authority, or flexibility. Taylor and other theorists who pre-
ceded him would have agreed with Theory X. Time-motion studies 
calculated the one best way to perform a task and the optimal 
time to devote to it. Researchers assumed workers needed to be 
trained and carefully watched to see that they conformed to 
standards. 
 Many managers and entrepreneurs still suspect that 
employees cannot be fully trusted and need to be closely super-
vised. 8 No doubt you have seen such managers in action. How 
did they make you feel? Were these managers’ assumptions accurate regarding 
workers’ attitudes?  
 Theory Y 
 Theory Y makes entirely different assumptions about people:
 
• 
Most people like work; it is as natural as play or rest.  
 
• 
Most people naturally work toward goals to which they are 
committed.  
 
• 
The depth of a person’s commitment to goals depends on the perceived 
rewards for achieving them.  
 
• 
Under certain conditions, most people not only accept but also seek 
responsibility.  
 
• 
People are capable of using a relatively high degree of imagination, 
creativity, and cleverness to solve problems.  
 
• 
In industry, the average person’s intellectual potential is only partially 
realized.  
 
• 
People are motivated by a variety of rewards. Each worker is stimulated 
by a reward unique to him or her (time off, money, recognition, 
and so on).  
 Rather than authority, direction, and close supervision, Theory Y man-
agers emphasize a relaxed managerial atmosphere in which workers are free 
to set objectives, be creative, be flexible, and go beyond the goals set by man-
agement. A key technique here is  empowerment, giving employees authority 
to make decisions and tools to implement the decisions they make. For 
empowerment to be a real motivator, management should follow these three 
steps:
 
1. Find out what people think the problems in the organization are.  
 
2. Let them design the solutions.  
 
3. Get out of the way and let them put those solutions into action.  
 Often employees complain that although they’re asked to engage in com-
pany decision making, their managers fail to actually empower them to make 
decisions. Have you ever worked in such an atmosphere? How did that make 
you feel?  
esponsibility,
r who is 
d how to
t for bad 
kers little
who pre-
dies
 Theory X managers 
don’t live to make their 
employees happy. For 
example, Charlie Ergen, 
the founder and 
chairman of Dish 
Networks, makes 
employees work long 
hours, a whole lot of 
mandatory overtime, 
with few paid holidays. 
Employees describe the 
Ergen-created company 
culture as one of 
condescension and 
distrust. Yet the 
company’s earnings 
have consistently beat 
market expectations. 
Would you prefer to 
work for a Theory X or a 
Theory Y manager? 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
278
 OUCHI’S THEORY Z 
 One reason many U.S. companies choose a more flexible managerial style is to 
meet competition from firms in Japan, China, and the European Union. In the 
1980s, Japanese companies seemed to be outperforming U.S. businesses. Wil-
liam Ouchi, management professor at the University of California–Los Ange-
les, wondered whether the reason was the way Japanese companies managed 
their workers. The Japanese approach, which Ouchi called Type J, included 
lifetime employment, consensual decision making, collective responsibility 
for the outcomes of decisions, slow evaluation and promotion, implied control 
mechanisms, nonspecialized career paths, and holistic concern for employees. 
In contrast, the U.S. management approach, which Ouchi called Type A, relied 
on short-term employment, individual decision making, individual responsi-
bility for the outcomes of decisions, rapid evaluation and promotion, explicit 
control mechanisms, specialized career paths, and segmented concern for 
employees. 
 Type J firms are based on the culture of Japan, which includes a focus on 
trust and intimacy within the group and family. Conversely, Type A firms are 
based on American culture, which includes a focus on individual rights and 
achievements. Ouchi wanted to help U.S. firms adopt successful Japanese 
strategies, but he realized it wouldn’t be practical to expect U.S. managers to 
accept an approach based on the culture of another country. Judge for your-
self. A job for life may sound good until you think of the implications: no 
chance to change jobs and no opportunity to move quickly through the ranks. 
 Ouchi recommended a hybrid approach, Theory Z (see  Figure 10.4 ). The-
ory Z includes long-term employment, collective decision making, individual 
responsibility for the outcomes of decisions, slow evaluation and promotion, 
moderately specialized career paths, and holistic concern for employees 
(including family). Theory Z views the organization as a family that fosters 
cooperation and organizational values.  
 In recent years, demographic and social changes, fierce global competi-
tion, and the worst recession in their country’s history have forced Japanese 
managers to reevaluate the way they conduct business. The effects of the 2011 
earthquake on Japanese businesses reinforced the need to change and become 
more efficient in order to compete effectively. 
 Google has its own 
state-of-the-art gym and 
resistance swimming 
pool to help employees 
work off the extra 
pounds. Large and 
colorful exercise balls 
are everywhere to 
remind employees to 
take care of their 
bodies. Can you think of 
any other examples of 
the kind of holistic 
concern for employees 
suggested by William 
Ouchi’s Theory Z style 
of management? 

279
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
 Electronics giant Hitachi was the first major Japanese company to quit 
requiring corporate calisthenics. Having everyone start the day with group 
exercises had symbolized doing the same thing the same way, and reinforced 
the cultural belief that employees should not take risks or think for themselves. 
Many managers think such conformity is what hurt Japanese business. Will 
Japanese managers move toward the hybrid Theory Z in the future? We’ll have 
to wait and see. An appropriate managerial style matches the culture, situa-
tion, and specific needs of the organization and its employees. (See  Figure 10.5  
for a summary of Theories X, Y, and Z.)  
 FIGURE 10.4 THEORY Z: 
A BLEND OF AMERICAN 
AND JAPANESE 
MANAGEMENT 
APPROACHES  
Type A
 (American)
1. Short-term
      employment
2. Individual
     decision making
3. Individual
    responsibility
4. Rapid
    evaluation
   and promotion
5. Explicit,
   formalized
  control
 6. Specialized
   career paths
  7. Segmented
   concern for 
     employees
Type J
(Japanese)
1. Lifetime
  employment
2. Consensual
   decision making
3. Collective
    responsibility
4. Slow evaluation
    and promotion
5. Implicit, informal
     control
6. Nonspecialized
     career paths
7. Holistic concern
      for employees
Type Z
(Modified American)
1. Long-term employment
  
2. Collective decision making
  
3. Individual responsibility
  
4. Slow evaluation and promotion
  
5. Implicit, informal control with
     
explicit, formalized control
  
6. Moderately specialized
      
career paths
 7. Holistic concern for employees  
  
(including family)
 FIGURE 10.5 A 
COMPARISON OF 
THEORIES X, Y, AND Z  
THEORY X
THEORY Y
THEORY Z
1. Employees dislike work and
    will try to avoid it.
1.  Employees view work as a
    natural part of life.
1.  Employee involvement
 
is the key to increased
 
productivity.
2.  Employees prefer to be
    controlled and directed.
2.  Employees prefer limited
    control and direction.
2.  Employee control is implied
    and informal.
3.  Employees seek security,
    not responsibility.
3.  Employees will seek 
 
responsibility under 
 
proper work conditions.
3.  Employees prefer to share
    responsibility and decision
    making.
4.  Employees must be
    intimidated by managers to
    perform.
4.  Employees perform
 
better in work 
 
environments that are 
 
nonintimidating.
4. Employees perform better
    in environments that foster
    trust and cooperation.
5.  Employees are motivated 
 
by ﬁnancial rewards.
5.  Employees are motivated 
 
by many different needs.
5.  Employees need 
 
guaranteed employment
 
and will accept slow
 
evaluations and promotions.

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
280
Explain the key principles of goal-setting, expectancy, reinforcement, and 
equity theories.
 GOAL-SETTING THEORY AND 
MANAGEMENT BY OBJECTIVES  
 Goal-setting theory   says setting ambitious but attainable goals can motivate 
workers and improve performance if the goals are accepted and accompanied 
by feedback, and if conditions in the organization pave the way for achieve-
ment. All organization members should have some basic agreement about 
both overall goals and specific objectives for each department and individual. 
Thus there should be a system to engage everyone in the organization in goal 
setting and implementation. 
 The late management expert Peter Drucker developed such a system in 
the 1960s. “Managers cannot motivate people; they can only thwart people’s 
motivation because people motivate themselves,” he said. Called   management 
by objectives (MBO)   , Drucker’s system of goal setting and implementation 
includes a cycle of discussion, review, and evaluation of objectives among top 
and middle-level managers, supervisors, and employees. It calls on managers 
to formulate goals in cooperation with everyone in the organization, to com-
mit employees to those goals, and to monitor results and reward accomplish-
ment. Government agencies like the Department of Defense use MBO. 
 MBO is most effective in relatively stable situations when managers can 
make long-range plans and implement them with few changes. Managers 
must also understand the difference between helping and coaching subordi-
nates.  Helping means working with the subordinate and doing part of the work 
if necessary.  Coaching means acting as a resource—teaching, guiding, and 
recommending—but not participating actively or doing the task. The central 
idea of MBO is that employees need to motivate themselves. 
 Employee input and expectations are important.  9 Problems can arise 
when management uses MBO as a strategy for forcing managers and workers 
to commit to goals that are not agreed on together, but are instead set by top 
management. 10
 Victor Vroom identified the importance of employee expectations and 
developed a process called expectancy theory. Let’s examine this concept next.  
 MEETING EMPLOYEE EXPECTATIONS: 
EXPECTANCY THEORY 
 According to Victor Vroom’s   expectancy theory   , employee expectations can 
affect motivation. That is, the amount of effort employees exert on a specific 
task depends on their expectations of the outcome. Vroom contends that 
employees ask three questions before committing their maximum effort to a 
task: (1) Can I accomplish the task? (2) If I do accomplish it, what’s my reward? 
(3) Is the reward worth the effort? (See  Figure 10.6 .) 
 Think of the effort you might exert in class under the following conditions: 
Suppose your instructor says that to earn an A in the course, you must achieve 
an average of 90 percent on coursework plus jump eight feet high. Would you 
exert maximum effort toward earning an A if you knew you could not possibly 
jump eight feet high? Suppose your instructor said any student can earn an A 
in the course, but you know this instructor has not awarded an A in 25 years of 
teaching. If the reward of an A seems unattainable, would you exert significant 
effort in the course? Better yet, let’s say you read online that businesses prefer 
LO 10–6
 goal-setting theory  
 The idea that setting ambitious 
but attainable goals can 
motivate workers and improve 
performance if the goals are 
accepted, accompanied by 
feedback, and facilitated by 
organizational conditions.  
 management by objectives 
(MBO)  
 A system of goal setting and 
implementation; it involves a 
cycle of discussion, review, and 
evaluation of objectives among 
top and middle-level managers, 
supervisors, and employees.  
 expectancy theory  
 Victor Vroom’s theory that the 
amount of effort employees 
exert on a specific task 
depends on their expectations 
of the outcome.  

281
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
hiring C-minus students to A-plus students. Does the reward of an A seem 
worth it? Now think of similar situations that may occur on the job. 
 Expectancy theory does note that expectation varies from individual to 
individual. Employees establish their own views of task difficulty and the 
value of the reward.  11 Researchers David Nadler and Edward Lawler modified 
Vroom’s theory and suggested that managers follow five steps to improve 
employee performance:  12 
 
1. Determine what rewards employees value.  
 
2. Determine each employee’s desired performance standard.  
 
3. Ensure that performance standards are attainable.  
 
4. Guarantee rewards tied to performance.  
 
5. Be certain that employees consider the rewards adequate.  
 REINFORCING EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE: 
REINFORCEMENT THEORY 
 According to   reinforcement theory,  positive reinforcers, negative reinforc-
ers, and punishers motivate a person to behave in certain ways. In other words, 
motivation is the result of the carrot-and-stick approach: individuals act to 
receive rewards and avoid punishment. Positive reinforcements are rewards 
such as praise, recognition, and a pay raise. Punishment includes reprimands, 
reduced pay, and layoffs or firing. Negative reinforcement occurs when people 
work to escape the punishers. Escaping the punishment reinforces or rewards 
the positive behavior. A manager might also try to stop undesirable behavior 
by not responding to it. This response is called extinction because managers 
hope the unwanted behavior will become extinct.  Figure 10.7  illustrates how a 
manager can use reinforcement theory to motivate workers.  
 reinforcement theory  
 Theory that positive and 
negative reinforcers motivate a 
person to behave in certain 
ways.  
 FIGURE 10.6 EXPECTANCY 
THEORY  
The amount of effort 
employees exert on a task 
depends on their expectations 
of the outcome. 
Yes
No
No
Not
motivated
Task:
Can I 
accomplish
the task?
Outcome:
Is the reward
worth it?
Not
motivated
Motivated
Yes
 FIGURE 10.7 REINFORCE-
MENT THEORY 
 Managers can either add 
or subtract stimuli (positive 
reinforcement, negative 
reinforcement, or punishers) to 
increase desired behavior or 
decrease undesired behavior. 
 Source: Casey Limmer, MSW, LCSW, 
Washington University.  
 ADD STIMULI  
 SUBTRACT STIMULI  
Increase 
Behavior 
 Positive Reinforcement: Jill gets 
praise (the reinforcement added) 
for turning in her reports on time 
(target behavior to increase). 
 Negative Reinforcement: Jack is on 
probation (punishment that will be 
removed) until such time as he can 
turn in 3 reports on time (target 
behavior to increase). 
Decrease 
Behavior 
 Punishment: Jack gets written up 
(the punisher) for turning in his 
reports late (target behavior to 
decrease). 
 Extinction: Jill does not get praise 
(reinforcement is removed) when her 
reports are turned in late (target 
behavior to decrease), no matter 
how well done they are. 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
282
 TREATING EMPLOYEES FAIRLY: EQUITY THEORY 
 Equity theory   looks at how employees’ perceptions of fairness affect their 
willingness to perform. It assumes employees ask, “If I do a good job, will it be 
worth it?” and “What’s fair?” Employees try to maintain equity between what 
they put into the job and what they get out of it, comparing those inputs and 
outputs to those of others in similar positions. Workers find comparative 
information through personal relationships, professional organizations, and 
other sources. 
 When workers perceive inequity, they will try to reestablish fairness in a 
number of ways. For example, suppose you compare the grade you earned 
on a term paper with your classmates’ grades. If you think you received a 
lower grade than someone who put out the same effort as you, you may 
(1) reduce your effort on future class projects or (2) rationalize the differ-
ence by saying, “Grades are overvalued anyway!” If you think your paper 
received a higher grade than comparable papers, you will probably (1) 
increase your effort to justify the higher reward in the future or (2) rational-
ize by saying, “I’m worth it!” 
 In the workplace, perceived inequity may lead to lower productivity, 
reduced quality, increased absenteeism, and voluntary resignation. 
 Remember that equity judgments are based on perception and are therefore 
subject to error. When workers overestimate their own contributions—as hap-
pens often—they feel  any rewards given out for performance are inequitable.  13
Sometimes organizations try to deal with this by keeping employee salaries 
secret, but secrecy may make things worse. Employees are likely to overestimate 
the salaries of others, in addition to overestimating their own contribution. The 
best remedy is generally clear and frequent communication. Managers must 
communicate as clearly as possible both the results they expect and the out-
comes that will occur.  14  
 equity theory  
 The idea that employees try to 
maintain equity between inputs 
and outputs compared to 
others in similar positions.  
 • Briefly describe the managerial attitudes behind Theories X, Y, and Z.  
 • Explain goal-setting theory.  
 • Evaluate expectancy theory. When could expectancy theory apply to 
your efforts or lack of effort?  
 • Explain the principles of equity theory.  
•
Briefly describe the m
 test  prep  
managerial attitu
man
Show how managers put motivation theories into action through such 
strategies as job enrichment, open communication, and job recognition.
 PUTTING THEORY INTO ACTION  
 Now that you know what a few theorists have to say about motivation, you 
might be asking yourself “So what? What do all those theories have to do with 
what really goes on in the workplace today?” Fair question. Let’s look at how 
companies put the theories into action through job enrichment, open commu-
nication, and job recognition.  
LO 10–7
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

283
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
 Motivation through Job Enrichment 
 Managers have extended both Maslow’s and Herzberg’s theories through   job 
enrichment   , a strategy that motivates workers through the job itself. Work is 
assigned so that individuals can complete an identifiable task from beginning 
to end and are held responsible for successful achievement. Job enrichment is 
based on Herzberg’s higher motivators, such as responsibility, achievement, 
and recognition.  15 It stands in contrast to  job simplification, which produces 
task efficiency by breaking a job into simple steps and assigning people to 
each. Review Maslow’s and Herzberg’s work to see how job enrichment grew 
from those theories. 
 Those who advocate job enrichment believe that five characteristics of 
work are important in motivation and performance:  16 
 
1.  Skill variety. The extent to which a job demands different skills.  
 
2.  Task identity. The degree to which the job requires doing a task with a 
visible outcome from beginning to end.  
 
3.  Task significance. The degree to which the job has a substantial impact 
on the lives or work of others in the company.  
 
4.  Autonomy. The degree of freedom, independence, and discretion in 
scheduling work and determining procedures.  
 
5.  Feedback. The amount of direct and clear information given about job 
performance.  
 Variety, identity, and significance contribute to the meaningfulness of the 
job. Autonomy gives people a feeling of responsibility; feedback contributes to 
a feeling of achievement and recognition. 
 One type of job enrichment is   job enlargement,  which combines a series 
of tasks into one challenging and interesting assignment. Maytag, the home 
appliance manufacturer, redesigned its washing machine production process 
so that employees could assemble an entire water pump instead of just adding 
one part.   Job rotation   also makes work more interesting and motivating by 
moving employees from one job to another. One problem, of course, is the 
need to train employees to do several different operations. However, the result-
ing increase in motivation and the value of having flexible, cross-trained 
employees usually offsets the costs.  
 Motivating through Open Communication 
 Communication and information must flow freely throughout the organiza-
tion when employees are empowered to make decisions—they can’t make 
them in a vacuum. Procedures for encouraging open 
communication include the following:  17 
 
• 
 Create an organizational culture that rewards 
listening. Top managers must create places 
to talk and show employees that talking 
with 
superiors 
counts—by 
providing 
feedback, adopting employee suggestions, 
and rewarding upward communication—
even 
if 
the 
discussion 
is 
negative. 
Employees must feel free to say anything 
they deem appropriate and believe their 
opinions are valued.  
 
• 
 Train supervisors and managers to listen. 
Most people receive no training in how to 
 job enrichment  
 A motivational strategy that 
emphasizes motivating the 
worker through the job itself.  
 job enlargement  
 A job enrichment strategy that 
involves combining a series of 
tasks into one challenging and 
interesting assignment.  
 job rotation  
 A job enrichment strategy that 
involves moving employees 
from one job to another.  
 Here a worker in 
Baccarat’s factory puts 
the finishing touches on 
a crystal vase. One of 
the hallmarks of job 
enrichment is the 
worker’s ability to 
perform a complete task 
from beginning to end. 
Why do you think this 
might be more 
motivating than simply 
adding a few parts to a 
product on an assembly 
line?

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
284
listen, in school or anywhere else, so organizations must do such training 
themselves or hire someone to do it.  
 
• 
Use effective questioning techniques. We get information through 
questioning. Different kinds of questions yield different kinds of 
information. Closed questions that generate yes/no answers don’t 
encourage the longer, more thoughtful responses that open questions 
do. Appropriate personal questions can create a sense of camaraderie 
between employee and manager.  
 
• 
 Remove barriers to open communication. Separate offices, parking 
areas, bathrooms, and dining rooms for managers only set up barriers. 
Other barriers are different dress codes and different ways of addressing 
one another (like calling workers by their first names and managers by 
their last). Removing such barriers may require imagination and 
managers’ willingness to give up special privileges.  
 
• 
Avoid vague and ambiguous communication. Passive voice appears 
weak and tentative. Statements such as “Mistakes were made” leave 
you wondering who made the mistakes. Hedging is another way 
managers send garbled messages. Terms like  possibly and  perhaps
sound wishy-washy to employees who need more definitive direction.  
 
• 
Make it easy to communicate. Encouraging organization members to 
eat together at large lunch tables, allowing employees to gather in 
conference rooms, having organizational picnics and athletic teams, 
and so on can help workers at all levels mix with one another.  
 
• 
 Ask employees what is important to them. Managers shouldn’t wait 
until the exit interview to ask an employee, “What can I do to keep 
you?” Then it’s too late. Instead they should have frequent  stay 
interviews to find out what matters to employees and what they can do 
to keep them on the job.  
 The Adapting to Change box discusses how social media might be disrup-
tive in the workplace as well as the dangers of trying to restrict its use on com-
pany equipment.  
 Applying Open Communication in Self-Managed Teams 
 Before the recent economic crisis, the auto companies were often cited for 
good practices. At Ford Motor Company, for example, a group known as Team 
Mustang set the guidelines for how production teams should be formed. Given 
the challenge to create a car that would make people dust off their old “Mus-
tang Sally” records and dance into showrooms, the 400-member team was also 
given the freedom to make decisions without waiting for approval from head-
quarters. Everyone worked under one roof in an old warehouse where drafting 
experts sat next to accountants, engineers next to stylists. Budgetary walls 
between departments were knocked down too as department managers were 
persuaded to surrender some control over their subordinates on the team.  
 When the resulting Mustang convertible displayed shaking prob-
lems, engineers were so motivated to finish on time and 
under budget that they worked late into the night, 
sleeping on the floor when necessary. Senior Ford 
executives were tempted to intervene, but they 
stuck with their promise not to meddle. Working 
with suppliers, the team solved the shaking prob-
lem and still came in under budget and a couple 
of months early. The new car was a hit with driv-
ers, and sales soared.  18 
persuaded to surrender
 When the resu
lems, eng
und
s
o
e
 In the car business 
nothing works like the 
“wow” factor. At Ford, 
the 400-member Team 
Mustang group was 
empowered to create the 
“wow” response for the 
company’s sleek 
Mustang convertible. The 
work team, suppliers, 
company managers, and 
even customers worked 
together to make the 
Mustang a winner in the 
very competitive 
automobile market. 

285
 To implement such teams, managers at most companies must reinvent 
work. This means respecting workers, providing interesting work, developing 
workers’ skills, allowing autonomy, decentralizing authority, and rewarding 
good work. Let’s take a look at some of the ways companies recognize and 
reward good work.  
 Recognizing a Job Well Done 
 A recent survey indicated that 79 percent of employees who voluntarily left 
their jobs did so because of lack of appreciation.  19 Letting people know you 
appreciate their work is usually more powerful than giving a raise or bonus 
alone.  20 When 8,000 recent college graduates were asked what was most 
important to them as they were deciding where to work, salary was not the 
ultimate motivator. Yes, they needed enough money to cover their basic needs. 
However, the majority of participants rated career advancement opportunities 
as well as interesting and challenging work to be the most important things.  21
Clearly, providing advancement opportunity and recognizing achievements 
are important in attracting and retaining valuable employees. 
 Promotions aren’t the only way to celebrate a job well done. Recognition 
can be as simple as noticing positive actions out loud, making employees feel 
their efforts are worthwhile and valued enough to be noticed. For example: 
“Sarina, you didn’t say much in the meeting today. Your ideas are usually so 
valuable; I missed hearing them.” This comment lets Sarina know her ideas are 
appreciated, and she’ll be more apt to participate fully in the next meeting. 
 adapting to change 
 There’s no doubt the work envi-
ronment has changed drastically 
over the past few decades. 
Employees often spend their 
entire day, or at least a signifi-
cant part of it, in front of a com-
puter. Social networking sites like 
Facebook, Twitter, Skype, and 
LinkedIn are tools as common to 
today’s workers as typewriters, 
calculators, and copy machines 
were to workers in the past. The 
question businesses must face 
today is, “Should we allow 
employees to use social net-
working sites during the 
workday?” 
 New York research firm Statista 
found that one out of five work-
places block access to Facebook 
on company computers. The most 
common argument for blocking 
access is that time spent on 
Facebook wastes company time. 
There is also concern that 
employees could breach confi-
dentialities and leak private com-
pany information through a social 
networking site. Companies also 
fear they could be vulnerable to 
hack attacks through social 
networks. 
 Proponents of allowing 
Facebook in the workplace 
believe that, far from being a dis-
traction at work, social media 
tools like Facebook enable 
employees to share information 
with each other and better deal 
with customer inquiries. Angelo 
Kinicki, management professor at 
Arizona State University, offers 
four reasons why banning 
Facebook at work is a bad idea. 
According to Professor Kinicki,
 1. You can alienate younger 
employees, like Millennials who 
use social media on a regular 
basis.  
 2. Banning social media suggests 
the business doesn’t trust 
employees.  
 3. If your policy prohibits social 
media, employees won’t feel 
supported by management, 
leading to disengagement and 
lower productivity.  
 4. Social media allows employee 
relaxation from their work situ-
ation. Banning it would be like 
telling employees they cannot 
talk about sports.  
 Whether workers who tweet, 
chat, like, and Skype on the job 
are productive or time wasters is 
something each organization has 
to decide for itself. 
 Sources: Bernhard Warner, “When Social Media at 
Work Don’t Create Productivity-Killing Distractions,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, April 1, 2013; Stephanie 
Vozza, “Why Banning Facebook in Your Workplace 
Is a Stupid Move,”  Entrepreneur, September 30, 
2013; and Rick Mulready, “Why It Might Be Time to 
Ditch Your Facebook Strategy,”  Entrepreneur,  
January 3, 2014. 
 When Is Social Media Too Social? 
e 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
286
 Here are just a few examples of ways managers have raised employee 
spirits without raising paychecks:
 
• 
A Los Angeles law firm sent 400 employees and their families to 
Disneyland for the day. FedEx Office did something similar, but it sent 
high-achieving employees to Disneyland  and put the company’s top 
executives in those employees’ place while they were gone.  
 
• 
Give More Media offers perks like Netflix and XM Satellite Radio 
memberships. It also encourages participation in its Smile and Give 
program, which gives employees three paid days off to work for a 
nonprofit of their choice.  
 
• 
Walt Disney World offers more than 200 employee recognition 
programs. The Spirit of Fred Award is named after an employee named 
Fred, who makes each award (a certificate mounted and varnished on 
a plaque) himself. Fred’s name became an acronym for Friendly, 
Resourceful, Enthusiastic, and Dependable.  
 
• 
Maritz Inc., in Fenton, Missouri, has a Thanks a Bunch program that 
gives flowers to a selected employee in appreciation of a job well done. 
That employee passes the bouquet to someone else who helped. The 
idea is to see how many people are given the flowers throughout the 
day. The bouquet comes with thank-you cards that are entered into a 
drawing for awards like binoculars and jackets.  
 
• 
Hewlett-Packard (HP) bestows its Golden Banana Award for a job 
well done. The award started when an engineer burst into his 
manager’s office saying he’d found the solution to a long-standing 
problem. In his haste to find something to give the employee to 
show his appreciation, the manager grabbed a banana from his 
lunch and said, “Well done! Congratulations!” The Golden Banana 
is now one of the most prestigious honors given to an inventive HP 
employee.  
 The Spotlight on Small Business box offers examples of what a number of 
small businesses have done to motivate employees. 
 Giving valued employees prime parking spots, more vacation days, or 
more flexible schedules may help them feel their work is appreciated, but 
sometimes nothing inspires workers like the prospect of a payout down the 
road. Companies that offer a small equity stake or stock options often have a 
good chance of developing loyal employees 
 The same things don’t motivate all employees. Next we’ll explore how 
employees from different cultures and generations are motivated in different 
ways. 
Show how managers personalize motivation strategies to appeal to 
employees across the globe and across generations.
PERSONALIZING MOTIVATION
Managers cannot use one motivational formula for all employees. They have 
to get to know each worker personally and tailor the motivational effort to the 
individual. This is further complicated by the increase in global business and 
the fact that managers now work with employees from a variety of cultural 
backgrounds. Cultural differences also exist between generations raised in the 
same country. Let’s look at how managers personalize their strategies to appeal 
to employees across the globe and across generations.
LO 10–8
 Travelocity’s Gnomie 
Award, based on the 
company’s mascot, the 
traveling gnome, is 
given to employees 
nominated by their 
peers for outstanding 
performance. Winners 
receive a $750 travel 
voucher, a paid day off, 
recognition at the 
company’s quarterly 
meeting, and a golden 
gnome. What part do 
you think these awards 
play in motivating the 
winners to continue 
their outstanding 
performance?  

287
 Motivating Employees across the Globe 
 Different cultures experience motivational approaches differently; therefore, 
managers study and understand these cultural factors in designing a reward 
system. In a  high-context culture, workers build personal relationships and 
develop group trust before focusing on tasks. In a  low-context culture, workers 
often view relationship building as a waste of time that diverts attention from 
the task. Koreans, Thais, and Saudis tend to be high-context workers who 
often view their U.S. colleagues as insincere due to their need for data and 
quick decision making. 
 Dow Chemical solved a cross-cultural problem with a recognition pro-
gram for its 54,000 employees in over 36 countries who use a wide variety of 
languages and currencies. Globoforce Ltd. created a web-based program for 
Dow called Recognition@Dow that automatically adjusts for differences cre-
ated by cultural preferences, tax laws, and even local standards of living. Thus 
a U.S. employee might receive a gift certificate for Macy’s, whereas a Chinese 
employee receives one for online retailer  Dangdang.com . The system even 
allows employees to nominate colleagues for recognition using an “award wiz-
ard” to help determine the appropriate award.  22 
 Understanding motivation in global organizations and building effective 
global teams are still new tasks for most companies. Developing group leaders 
who are culturally astute, flexible, and able to deal with ambiguity is a chal-
lenge businesses face in the 21st century. See the Reaching Beyond Our Bor-
ders box for more about managing culturally diverse employees.  
 spotlight on small business 
 The competition to attract and 
retain top-notch workers is “job 
one” for all businesses big or small. 
But how can small companies com-
pete against the likes of Apple, 
Amazon, and Google? Wouldn’t 
any talented person choose to 
work for one of these big-name 
employers that offer such perks as 
onsite gourmet meals, putting 
greens, gymnasiums, and 
massages? 
 It’s true small businesses can-
not offer the money, benefits, or 
glory of working for one of the 
corporate heavyweights. But they 
can offer more intangible benefits 
such as collaborative manage-
ment, less bureaucracy, more life-
style balance, a sense of 
independence, and sometimes 
even potential ownership. Many 
small businesses strive to create 
an upbeat, relaxed company cul-
ture that encourages employees 
to bond with one another rather 
than compete against each other 
for the next promotion. By instilling 
the idea that the business’s culture 
belongs to the employees, culture 
can equal perks, fun, and happi-
ness. Small businesses also can 
take advantage of motivating 
employees with open communica-
tion and broad responsibility on 
the job. Individual workers can 
have more say in the company 
and not feel like just another 
drone in a giant corporate 
beehive. 
 This doesn’t mean small busi-
nesses can’t also try their hand at 
the innovative perks department. 
At Sparta Systems employees are 
invited to step away from their 
desks and engage in video and 
board games. Bigcommerce 
offers employees a weekly boot 
camp with a certified trainer. 
Zoosk invites employees to bring 
their dogs to work. Shift 
Communications even gives 
workers outside recess like the 
good-old days of elementary 
school. Not only do businesses 
hope these methods help employ-
ees bond with their colleagues, 
they also hope they become pro-
ductive workers. Do you think 
such workplaces might appeal to 
Millennials? Why? 
 Sources: Gene Marks, “Startup Perks Wal-Mart 
and Amazon Can Never Offer,”  Entrepreneur, 
October 22, 2013; Michael Fertik, “How to 
Cultivate the Culture That Makes Your Company 
Succeed,”  Inc., February 2014; and Laura Garnett, 
“3 Questions That Will Motivate Your Employees,” 
Inc., February 2014.    
 Going Up against the Heavyweights 
 

288
 Motivating Employees across Generations 
 Members of each generation—baby boomers (born between 1946 and 1964), 
Generation X (born between 1965 and 1980), Generation Y, also known as Mil-
lennials or echo boomers (born between 1980 and 1995), Generation Z (born 
1995–2009), Generation Alpha (born after 2010)—are linked through experi-
ences they shared in their formative years, usually the first 10 years of life. 
(Note: The year spans for Gen X, Y, and Z are widely debated so these dates are 
approximations.) The beliefs you accept as a child affect how you view risk, 
challenge, authority, technology, relationships, and economics. When you’re in 
a management position, they can even affect whom you hire, fire, or promote.  
 In general, boomers were raised in families that experienced unprece-
dented economic prosperity, secure jobs, and optimism about the future. Gen 
Xers were raised in dual-career families with parents who focused on work. As 
children, they attended day care or became latchkey kids. Their parents’ lay-
offs added to their insecurity about a lifelong job. Millennials were raised by 
indulgent parents, and most don’t remember a time without cell phones, com-
puters, and electronic entertainment. Gen Zers grew up post 9/11, in the wake 
of the Great Recession and amid countless reports of school violence. 
 The main constant in the lives of Gen Xers, Millennials, and Gen Zers is 
inconstancy. Consider the unprecedented change in the past 20 years in every 
area (i.e., economic, technological, scientific, social, and political). Gen Xers, 
Millennials, and Gen Zers expect change. It is the absence of change that they 
find questionable. 
 How do generational differences among these groups affect motivation in 
the workplace? Boomer managers need to be flexible with their younger employ-
ees, or they will lose them. Gen X employees need to use their enthusiasm for 
change and streamlining to their advantage. Although many are unwilling to pay 
 reaching beyond our borders 
 As companies today become 
more global and employees more 
diverse than ever before, manag-
ers are well aware of their need to 
develop cross-cultural competen-
cies. This means not only under-
standing different languages, but 
also understanding different food 
choices, customs, how people 
want to be addressed, how much 
space should be between people, 
and particularly, how employees 
expect to be managed. 
 Many companies do a respect-
able job in developing cultural 
intelligence in managers before 
they move to different global 
assignments. For example, IBM 
works closely with leaders in busi-
ness, government, academia, and 
community organizations before 
entering a new market. Why then 
do seasoned managers, who 
appreciate diversity and are 
schooled in cross-cultural differ-
ences, often have problems moti-
vating employees in their new 
global environment? 
 According to Professor 
Andrew Molinsky, of Brandeis 
University’s International 
Business School, the problems 
occur because of what he refers 
to as “cultural code-switching.” 
This problem appears when man-
agers are aware of how they 
should approach and deal with 
global employees, but deep 
down they lack the ability to 
adapt their behavior to the situa-
tion. When this happens, their 
behavior seems unauthentic to 
global employees, and therefore 
not effective. An example would 
be an American executive giving 
feedback to Japanese employ-
ees. The American’s natural style 
is to “tell-it-like-it-is,” but 
Japanese workers expect a much 
more indirect approach. That may 
be difficult for the American to 
do. What managers need to 
develop is “global dexterity,” the 
ability to shift one’s own cultural 
behavior in a way that’s effective 
and appropriate in the global set-
ting. It always helps to know what 
to do, but it’s even more impor-
tant to know how to do it. 
 Sources: Andrew Molinsky, Thomas H. Davenport, 
Bala Iyer, and Cathy Davidson, “Three Skills Every 
21st-Century Manager Needs,”  Harvard Business 
Review, February 2012; Dan Schawbel, “Andy 
Molinsky: How to Adapt to Cultural Changes in 
Foreign Countries,”  Forbes, April 10, 2013; and 
Samuel J. Palmisano, “The Former CEO of IBM on 
Working at a Global Scale,”  Fast Company, April 
10, 2014. 
 Beyond Just Knowing Cross-Cultural Differences 
r

289
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
the same price for success their parents and grandparents did, their concern about 
undue stress and long hours doesn’t mean they lack ambition. They want economic 
security as much as older workers, but they have a different approach to achieving 
it. Rather than focusing on job security, Gen Xers tend to focus on career security 
instead and are willing to change jobs to find it. 
 Many Gen Xers are now managers, responsible for motivating other 
employees. What kind of managers are they? In general, they are well equipped 
to motivate people. They usually understand that there is more to life than 
work, and they think a big part of motivating is letting people know you recog-
nize that fact. Gen X managers tend to focus more on results than on hours in 
the workplace. They tend to be flexible and good at collaboration and consen-
sus building. They often think in broader terms than their predecessors because 
the media have exposed them to problems around the world. They also have a 
big impact on their team members. They are more likely to give them the goals 
and outlines of the project and leave them alone to do their work. 
 Perhaps the best asset of Gen X managers is their ability to give employees 
feedback, especially positive feedback. One reason might be that they expect 
more of it themselves. One new employee was frustrated because he hadn’t 
received feedback from his boss since he was hired—two weeks earlier. In short, 
managers need to realize that young workers demand performance reviews and 
other forms of feedback more than the traditional one or two times a year. 
 As Millennials entered the job market, they created a workplace four gen-
erations deep. As a group, they tend to share a number of characteristics: they’re 
often impatient, skeptical, blunt, expressive, and image-driven. Like any other 
generation, they can transform their characteristics into unique skills. For 
example, Millennials tend to be adaptable, tech-savvy, able to grasp new con-
cepts, practiced at multitasking, efficient, and tolerant.  23 Millennials tend to 
place a higher value on work–life balance, expect their employers to adapt to 
them (not the other way around), and are more likely to rank fun and stimula-
tion in their top five ideal-job requirements. 24 What do you think are the most 
effective strategies managers can use to motivate Millennial workers? 
 Many Millennials haven’t rushed to find lifetime careers after graduation. 
They tend to “job surf” and aren’t opposed to living with their parents while 
they test out jobs. Some of this career postponement isn’t by choice as much 
as a result of the state of the economy. The recession hurt younger workers 
more deeply than other workers. In fact, today Millennials are less likely to be 
employed than Gen Xers or boomers were at the same age. The number of 
young people without a job has risen by 30 percent since 2007.  25 The recession 
has increased the competition for jobs as younger workers struggle to enter 
the job market, boomers try to make up lost retirement savings, and Gen Xers 
fight to pay mortgages and raise families. 
 As Millennials assume more responsibilities in the workplace, they 
sometimes must manage and lead others far older than themselves. How 
can young managers lead others who may have more experience than they 
do? Perhaps the three most important things to keep in mind are to be 
confident, be open-minded, and solicit feedback regularly.  26 Just 
remember that asking for input and advice is different from ask-
ing for permission or guidance. 
 As Gen Zers begin to enter the workplace, they are likely to 
be more cautious and security-minded, but inspired to improve 
the world. Since they’ve seen the effects of the economy first-
hand, they are more aware of troubling 
times. A recent survey of Gen Zers shows 
that they believe school violence/shoot-
ings will have the biggest impact on their 
generation, overriding the invention of 
nsibilities in the workplace, they
far older than themselves. How
have more experience than they
ings to keep in mind are to be 
eedback regularly.26 Just
e is different from ask-
lace, they are likely to
t inspired to improve
of the economy first-
 Millennials tend to be 
skeptical, outspoken, 
and image-driven as 
well as adaptable, tech-
savvy employees with a 
sense of fun and 
tolerance. It is important 
for managers of all ages 
to be aware that 
employees of different 
generations 
communicate differently. 
How do you think 
generational differences 
will affect this manager 
and employee?  

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
290
social networking and the election of the first black president. These events make 
them resilient and pragmatic; they want to confront rather than hide from their 
problems.  27  
 It is important for managers of all ages to be aware that employees of dif-
ferent generations communicate differently. The traditionalists, the genera-
tion that lived through the Great Depression and World War II, prefer to 
communicate face-to-face. Their second choice is by phone, but recordings 
often frustrate them. Boomers generally prefer to communicate in meetings or 
conference calls. Gen Xers generally prefer e-mail and will choose meetings 
only if there are no other options. Millennials most often use technology to 
communicate, particularly through social media.  28 
 In every generational shift, the older generation tends to say the same 
thing about the new: “They break the rules.” The traditionalists said it of the 
baby boomers. Boomers look at Gen Xers and say, “Why are they breaking the 
rules?” And now Gen Xers are looking at Millennials and Gen Zers and saying, 
“What’s wrong with these kids?” And you know Gen X and Z will be saying the 
same thing about Generation Alpha someday. 
One thing in business is likely to remain constant: much motivation will 
come from the job itself rather than from external punishments or rewards. 
Managers need to give workers what they require to do a good job: the right 
tools, the right information, and the right amount of cooperation. Motivation 
doesn’t have to be difficult. It begins with acknowledging a job well done—and 
especially doing so in front of others. After all, as we said earlier, the best moti-
vator is frequently a sincere “Thanks, I really appreciate what you’re doing.”
 Gary Kelly, CEO of 
Southwest Airlines, 
shocked his co-workers 
the year he showed up 
at the company 
Halloween party dressed 
as Gene Simmons, front 
man for the rock group 
KISS. Now each year in 
his blog he asks 
Southwest employees to 
suggest his next 
costume. How do you 
think Kelly’s Halloween 
antics help develop 
happy, productive, and 
loyal employees?  
 • What are several steps firms can take to increase internal communica-
tions and thus motivation?
 • What problems may emerge when firms try to implement participative 
management?
 • Why is it important to adjust motivational styles to individual employees? 
Are there any general principles of motivation that today’s managers 
should follow?
 test prep
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

291
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
summary
Explain Taylor’s theory of scientific management.
 • 
What is Frederick Taylor known for?
Human efficiency engineer Frederick Taylor was one of the first people to 
study management and has been called the father of scientific manage-
ment. He conducted time-motion studies to learn the most efficient way of 
doing a job and then trained workers in those procedures. He published 
his book The Principles of Scientific Management in 1911. Henry L. Gantt 
and Frank and Lillian Gilbreth were followers of Taylor.
Describe the Hawthorne studies and their significance to management.
 • 
What led to the more human-based managerial styles?
The greatest impact on motivation theory was generated by the Hawthorne 
studies in the late 1920s and early 1930s. In these studies, Elton Mayo found 
that human factors such as feelings of involvement and participation led to 
greater productivity gains than did physical changes in the workplace.
Identify the levels of Maslow’s hierarchy of needs and apply them to 
employee motivation.
 • 
What did Abraham Maslow find human motivation to be based on?
Maslow studied basic human motivation and found that motivation was 
based on needs. He said that a person with an unfilled need would be moti-
vated to satisfy it and that a satisfied need no longer served as motivation.
 • 
What levels of need did Maslow identify?
Starting at the bottom of Maslow’s hierarchy and going to the top, the lev-
els of need are physiological, safety, social, esteem, and self-actualization.
 • 
Can managers use Maslow’s theory?
Yes, they can recognize what unmet needs a person has and design work 
so that it satisfies those needs.
Distinguish between the motivators and hygiene factors identified by 
Herzberg.
 • 
What is the difference between Frederick Herzberg’s motivator and hygiene 
factors?
Herzberg found that while some factors motivate workers (motivators), 
others cause job dissatisfaction if missing but are not motivators if present 
(hygiene or maintenance factors).
 • 
What are the factors called motivators?
The work itself, achievement, recognition, responsibility, growth, and 
advancement.
 • 
What are the hygiene (maintenance) factors?
Company policies, supervision, working conditions, interpersonal rela-
tionships, and salary.
Differentiate among Theory X, Theory Y, and Theory Z.
 • 
Who developed Theory X and Theory Y?
Douglas McGregor held that managers have one of two opposing attitudes 
toward employees. He called them Theory X and Theory Y.
LO 10–1
Wh t l d
LO 10–2
LO 10–3
LO 10–4
Wh
d
LO 10–5
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help. 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
292
 • 
What is Theory X?
Theory X assumes the average person dislikes work and will avoid it if 
possible. Therefore, people must be forced, controlled, and threatened 
with punishment to accomplish organizational goals.
 • 
What is Theory Y?
Theory Y assumes people like working and will accept responsibility for 
achieving goals if rewarded for doing so.
 • 
What is Theory Z?
William Ouchi based Theory Z on Japanese management styles and 
stresses long-term employment; collective decision making; individual 
responsibility; slow evaluation and promotion; implicit, informal control 
with explicit, formalized control; moderately specialized career paths; and 
a holistic concern for employees (including family).
Explain the key principles of goal-setting, expectancy, reinforcement, 
and equity theories.
 • 
What is goal-setting theory?
Goal-setting theory is based on the notion that setting ambitious but 
attainable goals will lead to high levels of motivation and performance if 
the goals are accepted and accompanied by feedback, and if conditions in 
the organization make achievement possible.
 • 
What is management by objectives (MBO)?
MBO is a system of goal setting and implementation; it includes a cycle of 
discussion, review, and evaluation of objectives among top and middle-
level managers, supervisors, and employees.
 • 
What is the basis of expectancy theory?
According to Victor Vroom’s expectancy theory, employee expectations 
can affect an individual’s motivation.
 • 
What are the key elements of expectancy theory?
Expectancy theory centers on three questions employees often ask about 
performance on the job: (1) Can I accomplish the task? (2) If I do accom-
plish it, what’s my reward? and (3) Is the reward worth the effort?
 • 
What are the variables in reinforcement theory?
Positive reinforcers are rewards like praise, recognition, or raises that a 
worker might strive to receive after performing well. Negative reinforcers 
are punishments such as reprimands, pay cuts, or firing that a worker 
might be expected to try to avoid.
 • 
According to equity theory, employees try to maintain equity between inputs 
and outputs compared to other employees in similar positions. What hap-
pens when employees perceive that their rewards are not equitable?
If employees perceive they are under-rewarded, they will either reduce their 
effort or rationalize that it isn’t important. If they perceive that they are over-
rewarded, they will either increase their effort to justify the higher reward in 
the future or rationalize by saying, “I’m worth it!” Inequity leads to lower pro-
ductivity, reduced quality, increased absenteeism, and voluntary resignation.
Show how managers put motivation theories into action through such 
strategies as job enrichment, open communication, and job recognition.
 • 
What characteristics of work affect motivation and performance?
The job characteristics that influence motivation are skill variety, task 
identity, task significance, autonomy, and feedback.
LO 10–6
LO 10–7

293
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
key terms
equity theory 282
expectancy theory 280
extrinsic reward 270
goal-setting theory 280
Hawthorne effect 273
hygiene factors 275
intrinsic reward 270
job enlargement 283
job enrichment 283
job rotation 283
management by 
objectives (MBO) 280
Maslow’s hierarchy of 
needs 273
motivators 275
principle of motion 
economy 271
reinforcement theory 281
scientific 
management 271
time-motion studies 271
 • 
Name two forms of job enrichment that increase motivation.
Job enlargement combines a series of tasks into one challenging and inter-
esting assignment. Job rotation makes work more interesting by moving 
employees from one job to another.
 • 
How does open communication improve employee motivation?
Open communication helps both top managers and employees understand 
the objectives and work together to achieve them.
 • 
How can managers encourage open communication?
Managers can create an organizational culture that rewards listening, 
train supervisors and managers to listen, use effective questioning tech-
niques, remove barriers to open communication, avoid vague and ambigu-
ous communication, and actively make it easier for all to communicate.
Show how managers personalize motivation strategies to appeal to 
employees across the globe and across generations.
 • 
What is the difference between high-context and low-context cultures?
In high-context cultures, people build personal relationships and develop 
group trust before focusing on tasks. In low-context cultures, people often 
view relationship building as a waste of time that diverts attention from 
the task.
 • 
How are Generation X managers likely to be different from their baby 
boomer predecessors?
Baby boomers tend to be willing to work long hours to build their careers 
and often expect their subordinates to do likewise. Gen Xers may strive for 
a more balanced lifestyle and are likely to focus on results rather than on 
how many hours their teams work. Gen Xers tend to be better than previ-
ous generations at working in teams and providing frequent feedback. 
They usually are not bound by traditions that may constrain those who 
have been with an organization for a long time and are willing to try new 
approaches to solving problems.
 • 
What are some common characteristics of Millennials?
Millennials tend to be adaptable, tech-savvy, able to grasp new concepts, 
practiced at multitasking, efficient, and tolerant. They often place a higher 
value on work–life balance, expect their employers to adapt to them, and 
are more likely to rank fun and stimulation in their top five ideal-job 
requirements.
LO 10–8

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
294
Your job right now is to finish reading this chapter. How strongly would you 
be motivated to do that if you were sweating in a room at 105 degrees Fahren-
heit? Imagine your roommate has turned on the air-conditioning. Once you 
are more comfortable, are you more likely to read? Look at Maslow’s hierar-
chy of needs to see what need would be motivating you at both times. Can you 
see how helpful Maslow’s theory is in understanding motivation by applying it 
to your own life?
You
critical thinking
developing workplace skills
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1. Talk with several of your friends about the subject of motivation. What 
motivates them to work hard or not work hard in school and on the job? 
How important to them is self-motivation as opposed to external reward?
 2. Look over Maslow’s hierarchy of needs and try to determine where you are 
right now on the hierarchy. What needs of yours are not being met? How 
could a company go about meeting those needs and thus motivate you to 
work more effectively?
 3. One recent managerial idea is to let employees work in self-managed teams. 
There is no reason why such teams could not be formed in colleges as well 
as businesses. Discuss the benefits and drawbacks of dividing your class into 
self-managed teams for the purpose of studying, doing cases, and so forth.
 4. Think of all the groups with which you have been associated over the 
years—sports groups, friendship groups, and so on—and try to recall how 
the leaders of those groups motivated the group to action. Did the leaders 
assume a Theory X or a Theory Y attitude? How often was money a moti-
vator? What other motivational tools were used and to what effect?
 5. Herzberg concluded that pay was not a motivator. If you were paid to get 
better grades, would you be motivated to study harder? In your employment 
experiences, have you ever worked harder to obtain a raise or as a result of 
receiving a large raise? Do you agree with Herzberg about the effects of pay?
taking it to the net
PURPOSE
To assess your personality type using the Jung-Myers-Briggs typology test and 
to evaluate how well the description of your personality type fits you.
EXERCISE
Sometimes understanding differences in employees’ personalities helps man-
agers understand how to motivate them. Find out about your personality by 
going to the Human Metrics website (www.humanmetrics.com) and take the 
Jung Typology Test (based on Carl Jung’s and Isabel Myers-Briggs’s approaches 
to typology). (Disclaimer: The test, like all other personality tests, is only a 
rough and preliminary indicator of personality.)

295
Motivating Employees
CHAPTER 10
 1. After you identify your personality type, read the corresponding personality 
portrait. How well or how poorly does the identified personality type fit?
 2. Sometimes a personality test does not accurately identify your personality, 
but it may give you a place to start looking for a portrait that fits. After you 
have read the portraits on the website, ask a good friend or relative which 
one best describes you.
video case 
Service industries strive to relieve their customers’ 
anxieties, but often those stresses are transferred 
to the service employees. For example, help desk 
call center workers face so much tension that 
turnover rates can reach as high as 125 percent 
per year. That amounts to a loss of every employee 
plus a quarter of their replacements in a single 
year. Since finding new people to fill all those 
positions can be expensive, the savviest compa-
nies look for ways to motivate their employees to 
be productive and happy so that they choose to 
stick around for a while.
John Ratliff of Appletree Answers, a company 
that provides call center and receptionist services 
for other businesses, was able to expand his com-
pany from a one-man operation to a thriving 
business with 650 employees at more than 20 
locations. Appletree supports clients ranging from 
sole proprietors to Fortune 500 companies in 
every industry imaginable.
Early in its growth, however, Appletree suffered 
the same high turnover rate that is common in the 
call center industry. Ratliff decided to restructure 
the business to focus on employee satisfaction and 
wellness. First, he developed a new set of company 
principles that encouraged staffers to “think like a 
customer” and “take care of each other.” In order to 
accommodate his largely Generation Y employees, 
Ratliff instituted flexible schedules and arranged 
for additional training programs. Ratliff also 
encourages employees to submit ideas regarding 
the company’s projects. A desktop app called Idea 
Flash lets staffers send their suggestions to execu-
tives, further enriching the job experience.
In his quest to turn his company around, Ratliff 
discovered that some of his employees struggled 
with problems such as serious illnesses, financial 
hardships, and even homelessness. To combat 
these crises, he created the Dream On program to 
provide personalized motivation that doesn’t come 
in a standard paycheck. Similar to the Make a Wish 
Foundation, Dream On strives to help make 
selected employees’ “dreams” come true, whether 
it is a trip to Disney World for a sick child or a lux-
ury honeymoon for a loyal worker.
Working in this newly fulfilling environment 
had a profound effect on Appletree’s staff. No lon-
ger just seat-fillers, their personal commitment to 
the company became an integral part of its goals 
and culture. Because of all this positive reinforce-
ment, Appletree staffers are not only more willing 
to stay at their jobs, but they also perform their 
tasks with more energy and effort. John Ratliff’s 
unique approach gives his company a leg up on 
the industry while still caring deeply for his 
employees. That’s known as a “win–win.”
THINKING IT OVER
 1. Why is employee turnover very costly for 
companies?
 2. How did John Ratliff increase employee motiva-
tion by understanding and adapting the motiva-
tional theories discussed in the chapter? Which 
theory do you think is most appropriate?
 3. How did the Dream On program motivate 
workers and help build stability within the 
organization?
APPLETREE ANSWERS

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
296
 1. 
Suzanne Lucas, “How Much Employee Turnover Really Costs 
You,” Inc., August 30, 2013.
 2. 
Victor Lipman, “Why Are So Many Employees Disengaged?” 
Forbes, January 18, 2014.
 3. 
Victor Lipman, “Most American Workers are Disengaged,” 
Psychology Today, October 10, 2013.
 4. 
Jacquelyn Smith, “The Best Companies to Work for in 2014,” 
Forbes, December 11, 2013; and “100 Best Companies to 
Work For,” www.fortune.com, accessed March 2014.
 5. 
Devin Leonard, “He’ll Make Your Dreams Come True,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, January 5, 2014.
 6. 
Tomio Geron, “Airbnb Hires Joie de Vivre’s Chip Conley as 
Head of Hospitality,” Forbes, September 17, 2013; Mike 
Hofman, “The Idea That Saved My Company,” Inc., October 
2007; and Joie de Vivre Hotels, www.jdvhotels.com, 
accessed March 2014.
 7. 
Nadia Goodman, “Methods for Building Employee Loyalty,” 
Entrepreneur, January 9, 2013.
 8. 
Caleb Hannan, “Management Secrets from the Meanest 
Company in America,” Bloomberg Businessweek, 
January 2, 2013.
 9. 
Steve Denning, “The Golden Age of Management Is Now,” 
Forbes, August 5, 2013.
 10. 
Victor Lipman, “Without This Quality, Management Doesn’t 
Work,” Forbes, October 1, 2013.
 11. 
“The Best Ways to Reward Employees,” www.entrepreneur
.com, accessed March 2014; Kevin Kruse, “25 Low Cost 
Ways to Reward Employees,” Forbes, March 1, 2013; and 
Peter Economy, “5 Secrets for Rewarding Employees,” Inc., 
September 3, 2013.
 12. 
David Nadler and Edward Lawler, “Motivation—a Diagnostic 
Approach,” Perspectives on Behavior in Organizations (New 
York: McGraw-Hill, 1977).
 13. 
David Nicklaus, “What Price Awards?” St. Louis Post-Dispatch,
April 19, 2013.
 14. Jason Daley, “In It for the Long Haul,” Entrepreneur, February 
2013.
 15. “What Makes Employees Unhappy,” Inc., February 2013.
 16. Rob Goffee, “Creating the Best Workplace on Earth,” Harvard 
Business Review, May 2013.
  17. Glenn Llopis, “6 Ways Effective Listening Can Make You a 
Better Leader,” Forbes, May 20, 2013; Josh Patrick, “Do You 
Listen to Your Employees?,” The New York Times, March 7, 
2013; Shirley Engelmeier, “As Employees ‘Lean In,’ Companies 
Must ‘Listen In,’” Fast Company, May 10, 2013; and Rajat 
Paharia, “Your Employees Are Telling You What Motivates 
Them. Why Aren’t You Listening?” Wired, September 12, 2013.
 18. Alisa Priddle and Chris Woodyard, “Ford Improves the 
Convertible in New Mustang,” USA Today, February 27, 2014; 
and Patrick Rall, “Late Run Rush Pushes Ford Mustang Past 
Chevrolet Camaro in February Sales,” Torque News, 
February 3, 2014.
 19. Maria Elana Duran, “How to Boost Morale at Your Business,” 
U.S. News & World Report, March 6, 2014.
 20. Megan M. Biro, “5 Ways Leaders Rock Employee 
Recognition,” Forbes, January 13, 2013.
 21. Jacquelyn Smith, “What Employers Need to Know about the 
Class of 2012,” Forbes, April 3, 2012; and Tim Logan, “What 
Makes for a Good Workplace?” St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 
June 23, 2013.
 22. Dow Chemical Company, www.dow.com, accessed March 2014.
 23. Vineet Nayar, “Handing the Keys to Gen Y,” Harvard 
Business Review, May 2013.
 24. Christopher Hann, “We’re All in This Together,” Entrepreneur, 
March 2013.
 25. “Generation Jobless,” The Economist, April 27, 2013.
 26. Ryan Inzana, “Your New Office BFFs,” Money, May 2013.
 27 . “Generation Z: Rebels with a Cause,” Forbes, May 28, 2013.
 28. Marina Khidekel, “The Misery of Mentoring Millennials,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, March 18–24, 2013.
1.
Suzanne Lucas, “How Much Emp
notes
photo credits
Page 269: Courtesy of Yum! Brands, Inc.; p. 270: 
© Ian Lishman/Juice Images/Corbis RF; p. 271: 
© Dennis MacDonald/Alamy; p. 273: © Bettmann/
Corbis; p. 277: © Robert Galbraith/Reuters/Corbis; 
p. 278: ©  Kimberly White/Corbis; p. 283: © Sipa/
Newscom; p. 284: © Bryan Smith/Zuma Press/ 
Corbis; p. 286: Courtesy of Travelocity; p. 287: 
© walik/E+/Getty Images RF; p. 289: © Marcel 
Weber/Getty Images RF; p. 290: © Jon Freilich/
Bloomberg/Getty Images.


298
 Human Resource 
Management: 
Finding and Keeping the 
Best Employees 
 11 
Learning Objectives  
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 11-1 
Explain the importance of human resource management, and 
describe current issues in managing human resources. 
 LO 11-2 Illustrate the effects of legislation on human resource 
management. 
 LO 11-3 Summarize the five steps in human resource planning. 
 LO 11-4 Describe methods that companies use to recruit new employees, 
and explain some of the issues that make recruitment challenging. 
 LO 11-5 Outline the six steps in selecting employees. 
 LO 11-6 Illustrate employee training and development methods. 
 LO 11-7 Trace the six steps in appraising employee performance. 
 LO 11-8 Summarize the objectives of employee compensation programs, 
and evaluate pay systems and fringe benefits. 
 LO 11-9 Demonstrate how managers use scheduling plans to adapt to 
workers’ needs. 
 LO 11-10 Describe how employees can move through a company: 
promotion, reassignment, termination, and retirement.  

299
Tony Hsieh
 • CEO of Zappos
 • Created an offbeat but efficient 
workplace
 • Empowers staffers to wow 
customers
www.zappos.com
@zappos
A
 lthough online shopping 
sites are becoming the 
dominant force in the 
retail world, they often 
fall short of their brick-
and-mortar rivals in terms of customer 
service. At the online shoe vendor Zap-
pos, however, a unique company culture 
ensures customers don’t have to sacri-
fice quality service for convenience. 
 When Tony Hsieh joined Zappos as 
CEO, he wanted to change the corporate 
work environment for the better. After sell-
ing his first company to Microsoft for a 
whopping $265 million, Hsieh didn’t want 
a job in a gray, cubicle-filled office. “For 
me, I didn’t want to be part of a company 
where I dreaded going into the office,” 
said Hsieh. To set Zappos apart from 
other online retailers, he wanted his ser-
vice representatives to wow customers 
with their energy and expertise. To do that 
Hsieh needed upbeat employees who 
were motivated by the love of their work. 
He gave his call center staffers remark-
able freedom, allowing them to talk to 
customers for hours at a time or send 
flowers and thank-you notes on the com-
pany’s dime. 
 Not only does this strategy do won-
ders for customer satisfaction, it also 
keeps employee morale sky high. In 
order to succeed at this job, Zappos’s 
service reps must be creative, energetic, 
generous, and understanding. But this 
commitment to excellence doesn’t end 
with the company’s spirited call center 
employees. When candidates for depart-
ments like marketing or management 
reach the interview stage, Hsieh starts 
testing them before they even set foot in 
the company’s Las Vegas headquarters. 
“A lot of our job candidates are from out 
of town, and we’ll pick them up from the 
airport in a Zappos shuttle, give them a 
tour, and then they’ll spend the rest of 
the day interviewing,” said Hsieh. “At the 
end of the day of interviews, the 
recruiter will circle back to the shuttle 
driver and ask how he or she was 
treated. It doesn’t matter how well the 
day of interviews went, if our shuttle 
driver wasn’t treated well, then we won’t 
hire that person.” The examination 
doesn’t end once the person lands the 
job. Regardless of their position, new 
hires must spend their first month help-
ing customers in the call center. If they 
can’t thrive, they’re gone. 
A long with creating open and acces-
sible work environments, Hsieh also tries 
to break down as many barriers between 
employees and management as possi-
ble. Zappos executives are affectionately 
referred to as “monkeys,” and the best 
view from the company’s 10-story Vegas 
high-rise is reserved for the call center 
workers. In fact, Hsieh puts so much faith 
in his staff that in 2014 he announced 
Zappos would be eliminating most of its 
traditional managers, corporate titles, 
and hierarchy entirely. Instead, the com-
pany will be replacing its standard 
chain of command with a “hol-
acracy.” This new company 
structure splits employees into 
overlapping but mostly self-
ruling “circles” that allow 
them to have a greater 
voice in how the 
company is run. 
Although time will tell 
whether or not this 
radical system works, Tony 
Hsieh’s commitment to an 
offbeat but efficient workplace 
has already grown Zappos into 
a $2 billion company. If anybody 
can pull off such an unorthodox 
office  structure, it’s Hsieh. 
 In this chapter, you’ll learn 
how businesses that succeed like 
Zappos recruit, manage, and make 
the most of their employees. 
 Sources: Jena McGregor, “Zappos Says Goodbye to 
Bosses,”  The Washington Post, January 3, 2014; Edward 
Lewine, “Tony Hsieh’s Office: Welcome to the Rain 
Forest,”  The New York Times, December 28, 2013; Max 
Nisen, “Tony Hsieh’s Brilliant Strategy for Hiring Kind 
People,”  Business Insider, November 22, 2013; Kim Bhasin, 
“Tony Hsieh: Here’s Why I Don’t Want My Employees to 
Work From Home,”  Business Insider, March 6, 2013; and 
Adam Bryant, “On a Scale of 1 to 10, How Weird Are You?” 
 The New York Times, January 9, 2010.  
 Getting to know  Tony Hsieh

300
 name that company 
 This company manages its global workforce of about 100,000 employees and 
100,000 subcontractors with a database that matches employee skills, experi-
ences, schedules, and references with jobs available. For example, if a client in 
Quebec has a monthlong project that needs a consultant who speaks English 
and French, and has an advanced degree in engineering and experience with 
Linux programming, the system can quickly find the best-suited person avail-
able. Name that company.   (Find the answer in the chapter.)  
 Explain the importance of human resource management, and describe 
current issues in managing human resources.
WORKING WITH PEOPLE IS JUST THE BEGINNING 
 Students often say they want to go into human resource management because 
they want to “work with people.” Human resource managers do work with 
people, but they are also deeply involved in planning, record keeping, and 
other administrative duties. To begin a career in human resource manage-
ment, you need a better reason than “I want to work with people.” This chap-
ter will tell you what else human resource management is all about. 
 Human resource management (HRM)   is the process of determining 
human resource needs and then recruiting, selecting, developing, motivating, 
evaluating, compensating, and scheduling employees to achieve organiza-
tional goals (see  Figure 11.1 ). For many years, human resource management 
was called “personnel” and involved clerical functions such as screening appli-
cations, keeping records, processing the payroll, and finding new employees 
when necessary. The roles and responsibilities of HRM have evolved primarily 
because of two key factors: (1) organizations’ recognition of employees as 
their ultimate resource and (2) changes in the law that rewrote many tradi-
tional practices. Let’s explore both.  
 Developing the Ultimate Resource 
 One reason human resource management is receiving increased attention now 
is that the U.S. economy has experienced a major shift—from traditional man-
ufacturing industries to service and high-tech manufacturing industries that 
require highly technical job skills. This shift means that many workers must 
be retrained for new, more challenging jobs. They truly are the ultimate 
resource. People develop the ideas that eventually become products to satisfy 
consumers’ wants and needs. Take away their creative minds, and leading 
firms such as Disney, Apple, Procter & Gamble, Google, Facebook, and  General 
Electric would be nothing. 
 In the past, human resources were plentiful, so there was little need to 
nurture and develop them. If you needed qualified people, you simply hired 
them. If they didn’t work out, you fired them and found others. Most firms 
assigned the job of recruiting, selecting, training, evaluating, compensating, 
motivating, and, yes, firing people to the functional departments that employed 
them, like accounting, manufacturing, and marketing. Today the job of human 
 human resource 
management (HRM)  
 The process of determining 
human resource needs and 
then recruiting, selecting, 
developing, motivating, 
evaluating, compensating, and 
scheduling employees to 
achieve organizational goals.  
LO 11–1

301
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
resource management has taken on an increased role in the firm since  quali-
fied employees are much scarcer, which makes recruiting and retaining people 
more important and more difficult.  1 
 In the future, human resource management may become the firm’s most 
critical function, responsible for dealing with all aspects of a business’s most 
critical resource—people. In fact, the human resource function has become so 
important that it’s no longer the job of just one department; it’s a responsibility 
of  all managers. What human resource challenges do all managers face? We’ll 
outline a few next.  
 The Human Resource Challenge 
 Many of the changes that have had the most dramatic impact on U.S. business 
are those in the labor force.  2 The ability to compete in global markets depends 
on new ideas, new products, and new levels of productivity—in other words, 
on people with good ideas. These are some of the challenges and opportunities 
in human resources:
 
• 
Shortages of trained workers in growth areas, such as computer 
technology, biotechnology, robotics, green technology, and the sciences.  
 
• 
Large numbers of skilled and unskilled workers from declining industries, 
such as steel and automobiles, who are unemployed or underemployed 
and need retraining.  Underemployed workers are those who have more 
 FIGURE 11.1 HUMAN 
RESOURCE 
MANAGEMENT  
 As this figure shows, human 
resource management is 
more than hiring and firing 
personnel. All activities 
are designed to achieve 
organizational goals within 
the laws that affect human 
resource management. 
(Note that human resource 
management includes 
motivation, as discussed in 
Chapter 10, and employee–
union relations, as discussed in 
Chapter 12.) 
Human
resource
management
Legal Environment
Career
management
Recruitment
Compensation
and benefits
Motivation
(Chapter 10)
Scheduling
Training and
development
Selection
Evaluation
Employee–
union
relations
(Chapter 12)
Organizational
Goals

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
302
skills or knowledge than their current jobs require 
or those with part-time jobs who want to work 
full-time.  
 • 
 A growing percentage of new workers who are 
undereducated and unprepared for jobs in the 
contemporary business environment.  
 • 
 A shortage of workers in skilled trades due to 
the retirement of aging baby boomers.  3 
 • 
 An increasing number of baby boomers who, 
due to the recession, delay retirement (preventing 
the promotion of younger workers) or move to 
lower-level jobs (increasing the supply of 
workers for such jobs).  
 
• 
An increasing number of both single-parent and two-income families, 
resulting in a demand for job sharing, maternity leave, and special 
career advancement programs for women.  
 
• 
A shift in employee attitudes toward work. Leisure time has become a 
much higher priority, as have flextime and a shorter workweek.  
 
• 
A severe recession that took a toll on employee morale and increased 
the demand for temporary and part-time workers.  4 
 
• 
A challenge from overseas labor pools whose members work for lower 
wages and are subject to fewer laws and regulations than U.S. workers. 
This results in many jobs being outsourced overseas.  
 
• 
An increased demand for benefits tailored to the individual yet cost-
effective to the company.  
 
• 
Growing concerns over health care, elder care, child care, drug testing, 
workplace violence (all discussed in Chapter 12), and opportunities for 
people with disabilities.  
 
• 
Changes through the Affordable Care Act that have added a large 
number of new regulations that employers must read, interpret, 
implement, and track.  5 
 
• 
A decreased sense of employee loyalty, which increases employee 
turnover and the cost of replacing lost workers.  
 Given these issues, you can see why human resource management has 
taken a central place in management thinking. However, significant changes 
in laws covering hiring, safety, unionization, equal pay, and affirmative action 
have also had a major influence. Let’s look at their impact on human resource 
management.  
Illustrate the effects of legislation on human resource management.
 LAWS AFFECTING HUMAN 
RESOURCE MANAGEMENT 
 Until the 1930s, the U.S. government had little to do with human resource 
decisions. Since then, legislation and legal decisions have greatly affected all 
areas of human resource management, from hiring to training to monitoring 
working conditions (see  Figure 11.2 ). These laws were passed because many 
businesses did not exercise fair labor practices voluntarily.  
 One of the more important pieces of social legislation passed by Congress 
was the Civil Rights Act of 1964. This act generated much debate and was 
amended 97 times before final passage. Title VII of that act brought the 
 U.S. firms face a short-
age of workers skilled in 
areas like science, green 
technology, and the 
development of clean 
energy sources like 
these solar panels. What 
other job markets do 
you think will grow as 
companies focus more 
on environmentally 
friendly policies? Which 
ones appeal to you?  
LO 11–2

303
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
 National  Labor Relations Act of 1935. Established collective bargaining in labor–management relations and limited 
management interference in the right of employees to have a collective bargaining agent. 
 Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938. Established a minimum wage and overtime pay for employees working more than 
40 hours a week. Amendments expanded the classes of workers covered, raised the minimum wage, redefined 
regular-time work, raised overtime payments, and equalized pay scales for men and women. 
 Manpower Development and Training Act of 1962. Provided for the training and retraining of unemployed workers. 
 Equal Pay Act of 1963. Specified that men and women doing equal jobs must be paid the same wage. 
 Civil Rights Act of 1964. For firms with 15 or more employees, outlawed discrimination in employment based on sex, 
race, color, religion, or national origin. 
 Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967. Outlawed employment practices that discriminate against people 40 
and older. An amendment outlaws requiring retirement by a specific age. 
 Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970. Regulated the degree to which employees can be exposed to hazard-
ous substances and specified the safety equipment the employer must provide. 
 Equal Employment Opportunity Act of 1972. Strengthened the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) 
and authorized the EEOC to set guidelines for human resource management. 
 Comprehensive Employment and Training Act of 1973 (CETA). Provided funds for training unemployed workers. 
 Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973. Extended protection to people with any physical or mental disability. 
 Employee Retirement Income Security Act of 1974 (ERISA). Regulated and insured company retirement plans. 
 Immigration Reform and Control Act of 1986. Required employers to verify employment eligibility of all new hires 
including U.S. citizens. 
 Supreme Court ruling against set-aside programs (affirmative action), 1989. Declared that setting aside 30 percent 
of contracting jobs for minority businesses was reverse discrimination and unconstitutional. 
 Older Workers Benefit Protection Act, 1990. Protects older people from signing away their rights to pensions and 
protection from illegal age discrimination. 
 Civil Rights Act of 1991. For firms with over 15 employees, extends the right to a jury trial and punitive damages to 
victims of intentional job discrimination. 
 Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (1992 implementation). Prohibits employers from discriminating against 
qualified individuals with disabilities in hiring, advancement, or compensation and requires them to adapt the work-
place if necessary. 
 Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993. Businesses with 50 or more employees must provide up to 12 weeks of unpaid 
leave per year upon birth or adoption of an employee’s child or upon serious illness of a parent, spouse, or child. 
 Americans with Disabilities Amendments Act of 2008 (ADA). Provides broader protection for disabled workers and 
reverses Supreme Court decisions deemed too restrictive. Adds disabilities such as epilepsy and cancer to ADA coverage. 
 Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009. Amends the Civil Rights Act of 1964 by changing the start of the 180-day stat-
ute of limitations for filing a discrimination suit from the date of the first discriminatory paycheck to the date of the 
most recent discriminatory paycheck. 
 FIGURE 11.2 GOVERNMENT LEGISLATION AFFECTING HUMAN RESOURCE MANAGEMENT  
government directly into the operations of human resource management. Title 
VII prohibits discrimination in hiring, firing, compensation, apprenticeships, 
training, terms, conditions, or privileges of employment based on race, reli-
gion, creed, sex, or national origin. Age was later added to the conditions of 
the act. The Civil Rights Act of 1964 was expected to stamp out discrimination 
in the workplace, but specific language in it made enforcement quite difficult. 
Congress took on the task of amending the law. 
 In 1972, the Equal Employment Opportunity Act (EEOA) was added as an 
amendment to Title VII. It strengthened the Equal Employment Opportunity 
Commission (EEOC), which was created by the Civil Rights Act, by giving it 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
304
rather broad powers. For example, it permitted the EEOC to issue guidelines 
for acceptable employer conduct in administering equal employment opportu-
nity. The EEOC also mandated specific record-keeping procedures, and Con-
gress vested it with the power of enforcement to ensure these mandates were 
carried out. The EEOC became a formidable regulatory force in the adminis-
tration of human resource management.  6  
 Perhaps the most controversial policy enforced by the EEOC involved 
  affirmative action,  designed to “right past wrongs” by increasing opportuni-
ties for minorities and women. Interpretation of the affirmative action law led 
employers to actively recruit, and in some cases give preference to, women 
and minority group members. Questions persist about the legality of affirma-
tive action and the effect it may have in creating a sort of reverse discrimina-
tion in the workplace.   Reverse discrimination   has been defined as 
discriminating against members of a dominant or majority group (e.g., whites 
or males) usually as a result of policies designed to correct previous discrimi-
nation. The issue has generated heated debate as well as many lawsuits. 
 The Civil Rights Act of 1991 expanded the remedies available to victims of 
discrimination by amending Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964. Now vic-
tims of discrimination have the right to a jury trial and punitive damages. 
Human resource managers must follow court decisions closely to see how the 
law is enforced. 
 The Office of Federal Contract Compliance Programs (OFCCP) ensures 
that employers comply with nondiscrimination and affirmative action laws 
and regulations when doing business with the federal government.  
 Laws Protecting Employees with 
Disabilities and Older Employees 
 As you read above, laws prohibit discrimination related to race, sex, or age in 
hiring, firing, and training. The Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973 extended 
protection to people with any physical or mental disability. 
 The Americans with Disabilities Act of 1990 (ADA) requires employers to 
give applicants with physical or mental disabilities the same consideration for 
employment as people without disabilities. The ADA also protects individuals 
with disabilities from discrimination in public accommoda-
tions, transportation, and telecommunications. 
 The ADA requires making “reasonable accommodations” for 
employees with disabilities, such as modifying equipment or 
widening doorways. Most companies have no trouble making 
structural changes to be accommodating. However, at times such 
changes can be difficult for some small businesses.  7 Employers 
used to think that being fair meant treating everyone the same, 
but  accommodation in fact means treating people  according to 
their specific needs. That can include putting up barriers to isolate 
people readily distracted by noise, reassigning workers to new 
tasks, and making changes in supervisors’ management styles. 
Accommodations are not always expensive; an inexpensive head-
set can allow someone with cerebral palsy to talk on the phone. 
 In 2008, Congress passed the Americans with Disabilities 
Amendments Act, which overturned Supreme Court decisions 
that had reduced protections for certain people with disabilities 
such as diabetes, epilepsy, heart disease, autism, major depres-
sion, and cancer.  8 In 2011, the EEOC issued regulations that 
widened the range of disabilities covered by the ADA and shifted 
the burden of proof of disability in labor disputes from 
 affirmative action  
 Employment activities designed 
to “right past wrongs” by 
increasing opportunities for 
minorities and women.  
 reverse discrimination  
 Discrimination against members 
of a dominant or majority group 
(e.g., whites or males) usually as 
a result of policies designed to 
correct previous discrimination 
against minority or 
disadvantaged groups.  
 The Americans with 
Disabilities Act 
guarantees that all U.S. 
workers have equal 
opportunity in 
employment. This 
legislation requires 
businesses to make 
“reasonable 
accommodations” on 
the job for people with 
disabilities. What 
required 
accommodations do 
you think would be 
reasonable?  

305
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
employees to business owners. Enforcement of this law promises to be a con-
tinuing issue for human resource management. 
 The Age Discrimination in Employment Act of 1967 (ADEA) protects 
individuals 40 or older from employment and workplace discrimination in 
hiring, firing, promotion, layoff, compensation, benefits, job assignments, and 
training. The ADEA is enforced by the EEOC, applies to employers with 20 or 
more employees, and protects both employees and job applicants.  9 It also out-
laws mandatory retirement in most organizations. It does, however, allow age 
restrictions for certain job categories such as airline pilot or bus driver if evi-
dence shows that the ability to perform significantly diminishes with age or 
that age imposes a danger to society.  
 Effects of Legislation 
 Clearly, laws ranging from the Social Security Act of 1935 to the 2008 Ameri-
cans with Disabilities Amendments Act require human resource managers to 
keep abreast of laws and court decisions to effectively perform their jobs. 
Choosing a career in human resource management offers a challenge to any-
one willing to put forth the effort. Remember:
 
• 
Employers must know and act in accordance with the legal rights of 
their employees or risk costly court cases.  
 
• 
Legislation affects all areas of human resource management, from 
hiring and training to compensation.  
 
• 
Court cases demonstrate that it is sometimes legal to provide special 
employment (affirmative action) and training to correct discrimination 
in the past.  
 
• 
New court cases and legislation change human resource management 
almost daily; the only way to keep current is to read the business 
literature and stay familiar with emerging issues.  
 • What is human resource management?  
 • What did Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964 achieve?  
 • What is the EEOC, and what was the intention of affirmative action?  
 • What does  accommodations mean in the Americans with Disabilities 
Act of 1990?  
•
What is human resour
 test  prep  
rce manageme
rce
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.
 Summarize the five steps in human resource planning.
DETERMINING A FIRM’S HUMAN 
RESOURCE NEEDS 
 All management, including human resource management, begins with plan-
ning. The five steps in the human resource planning process are:
 
1.  Preparing a human resource inventory of the organization’s employees.
This inventory should include ages, names, education, capabilities, 
training, specialized skills, and other relevant information (such as 
LO 11–3

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
306
languages spoken). It reveals whether the labor force is technically 
up-to-date and thoroughly trained.  10 
 
2.  Preparing  a job analysis. A   job analysis   is a study of what employees 
do who hold various job titles. It’s necessary in order to recruit and 
train employees with the necessary skills to do the job. The results of 
job analysis are two written statements: job descriptions and job 
specifications. A   job description   specifies the objectives of the job, 
the type of work, the responsibilities and duties, working conditions, 
and the job’s relationship to other functions.   Job specifications   are 
a written summary of the minimal education and skills to do a 
particular job. In short, job descriptions are about the job, and job 
specifications are about the person who does the job. Visit the 
Occupational Information Network (O*NET) at  www.onetcenter.org  
for detailed information about job analyses and job descriptions. 
See  Figure 11.3  for a hypothetical job description and job 
specifications.  
 
3.  Assessing future human resource demand. Because technology changes 
rapidly, effective human resource managers are proactive; that is, they 
forecast the organization’s requirements and train people ahead of 
time or ensure trained people are available when needed.  
 
4.  Assessing future labor supply. The labor force is constantly shifting: 
getting older, becoming more technically oriented, becoming more 
diverse. Some workers will be scarcer in the future, like biomedical 
engineers and robotic repair workers, and others will be oversupplied, 
like assembly-line workers.  
 
5.  Establishing a strategic plan. The human resource strategic plan 
must address recruiting, selecting, training, developing, appraising, 
compensating, and scheduling the labor force. Because the first four 
steps lead up to this one, we’ll focus on them in the rest of the 
chapter.  
 job analysis  
 A study of what employees do 
who hold various job titles.  
 job description  
 A summary of the objectives of 
a job, the type of work to be 
done, the responsibilities and 
duties, the working conditions, 
and the relationship of the job 
to other functions.  
 job specifications  
 A written summary of the 
minimum qualifications required 
of workers to do a particular job.  
 FIGURE 11.3 JOB 
ANALYSIS 
 A job analysis yields two 
important statements: 
job descriptions and job 
specifications. Here you 
have a job description and 
job specifications for a sales 
representative.  
JOB ANALYSIS
Observe current sales representatives doing the job.
Discuss job with sales managers.
Have current sales reps keep a diary of their activities.
JOB DESCRIPTION
JOB SPECIFICATIONS
Primary objective is to sell company’s 
products to stores in Territory Z. 
Duties include servicing accounts and 
maintaining positive relationships 
with clients. Responsibilities include:
 • 
Introducing the new products to 
store managers in the area.
 • 
Helping the store managers esti-
mate the volume to order.
 • 
Negotiating prime shelf space.
 • 
Explaining sales promotion activi-
ties to store managers.
 • 
Stocking and maintaining shelves 
in stores that wish such service.
Characteristics of the person qualifying 
for this job include:
 • 
Two years’ sales experience.
 • 
Positive attitude.
 • 
Well-groomed appearance.
 • 
Good communication skills.
 • 
High school diploma and two years 
of college credit.

307
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
 Some companies use advanced technology to perform the human resource 
planning process more efficiently. IBM manages its global workforce of about 
100,000 employees and 100,000 subcontractors with a database that matches 
employee skills, experiences, schedules, and references with jobs available. 
The company also created a cloud-hosted software suite that’s designed for 
automating and improving human resource tasks.  11 For example, if a client in 
Quebec, Canada, has a monthlong project requiring a consultant who speaks 
English and French, has an advanced degree in engineering, and experience 
with Linux programming, IBM can find the best-suited consultant available 
and put him or her in touch with the client.  
Describe methods that companies use to recruit new employees, and explain 
some of the issues that make recruitment challenging.
 RECRUITING EMPLOYEES FROM 
A DIVERSE POPULATION 
 Recruitment   is the set of activities for obtaining the right number of qualified 
people at the right time. Its purpose is to select those who best meet the needs 
of the organization. You might think a continuous flow of new people into the 
workforce makes recruiting easy. On the contrary, it’s become very challenging 
for several reasons:
 
• 
Some organizations have policies that demand promotions from within, 
operate under union regulations, or offer low wages, which makes 
recruiting and keeping employees difficult or subject to outside influence 
and restrictions.  
 
• 
An emphasis on corporate culture, teamwork, and participative 
management makes it important to hire people who not only are 
skilled but also fit in with the culture and leadership style of the 
company. Wegmans Food Markets (a member of  Fortune magazine’s 
list of best companies to work for 17 straight years) encourages 
employees to do whatever they think is necessary to make a customer 
happy. The company is currently experimenting with a personal 
LO 11–4
recruitment
The set of activities used to 
obtain a sufficient number of the 
right employees at the right time.
iSee It! Need help 
understanding the five 
steps of human resource 
planning? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.
 Human resource 
managers today have 
the opportunity to 
recruit people from a 
wide range of cultural 
and ethnic 
backgrounds. What are 
some of the advantages 
of a diverse workforce?  

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
308
shopper service. This service allows customers to create a shopping 
list on Wegman’s website or smartphone app; employees will gather 
the order and then deliver it to the customer’s car when they come to 
the store.  12  
 
• 
Sometimes people with the necessary skills are not available; then 
workers must be hired and trained internally.  13 
 Human resource managers can turn to many sources for recruiting assis-
tance (see  Figure 11.4 ).  Internal sources include current employees who can be 
transferred or promoted or who can recommend others to hire. Using internal 
sources is less expensive than recruiting from outside and helps maintain 
employee morale. However, it isn’t always possible to find qualified workers 
within the company, so human resource managers also use  external sources such 
as advertisements, public and private employment agencies, college placement 
bureaus, management consultants, Internet sites, professional organizations, 
referrals, and online and walk-in applications. Management consulting firm 
McKinsey uses a database of 27,000 former consultants who left the firm in 
good standing as brand ambassadors and recruiters for the firm.  14  
 Recruiting qualified workers may be particularly difficult for small busi-
nesses with few staff members and less-than-competitive compensation to 
attract external sources.  15  CareerBuilder.com ,  Monster.com , and  Indeed.com  
have helped such firms by attracting more than 80 million visitors per month. 
The Spotlight on Small Business box offers additional ways small businesses 
can recruit.  
 FIGURE 11.4 EMPLOYEE SOURCES  
 Internal sources are often given first consideration, so it’s useful to get a recommendation from a current employee of the firm for which 
you want to work. College placement offices are also an important source. Be sure to learn about such facilities early so that you can plan a 
strategy throughout your college career. 
External sources
Private employment agencies
Public employment agencies
Personal applications
Management consultants 
New graduates
Former employees
Part-time applicants
Competing organizations
Union organizations
Advertisements
Temporary help services
Union halls
Trade schools
College placement offices
Newspaper ads
Trade associations
Business associates
College professors
Internet
Job fairs
Cooperative education
internships 
Transfers
Promotions
Employee recommendations
Retrained employees
Department reorganizations
 
Internal sources
Human Resource
Department
Selection
Hiring
Orientation
and training

309
Outline the six steps in selecting employees.
SELECTING EMPLOYEES WHO 
WILL BE PRODUCTIVE 
 Selection   is the process of gathering information and deciding who should be 
hired, under legal guidelines, to serve the best interests of the individual and 
the organization. Selecting and training employees are extremely expensive 
processes in some firms. Just think what’s involved: advertising or recruiting 
agency fees, interview time, medical exams, training costs, unproductive time 
spent learning the job, possible travel and moving expenses, and more. It can 
cost one and a half times the employee’s annual salary to recruit, process, and 
train even an entry-level worker, and over six figures for a top manager.  16 
 A typical selection process has six steps:
 
1.  Obtaining complete application forms. Although equal employment 
laws limit the kinds of questions that can appear, applications help 
reveal the applicant’s educational background, work experience, career 
objectives, and other qualifications directly related to the job. 
LO 11–5
selection
The process of gathering 
information and deciding who 
should be hired, under legal 
guidelines, to serve the best 
interests of the individual and 
the organization.
 spotlight on small business 
 Most small-business owners 
would agree that attracting top-
quality employees is one of their 
major challenges. Unfortunately, 
competing for the cream of the 
crop is difficult when you can’t 
afford expensive recruiters or pay 
gold-plated benefits to lure quali-
fied workers. Despite these hur-
dles, small businesses can 
compete if they follow certain 
recruiting recommendations. Here 
are a few helpful tips:
 •  Define who you are as a com-
pany. Instead of describing 
what skills and experience are 
required of a prospective 
employee, start off by explain-
ing what your company does 
and what its vision is all about. 
Quite often top-quality candi-
dates will not agree to an inter-
view until they know what the 
job is all about.  
 •  Build a strong staff referral pro-
gram. The more your current 
staff is engaged in the search 
and interview process, the better 
the chance to find recruits with 
the right personality and skills. 
Remember, no recruiter or web-
site knows the organization’s cul-
ture better than its employees.  
 •  Have future employees audi-
tion for the job. Hiring workers 
first on a temporary basis or an 
internship allows you to test 
candidates before deciding 
whether to make an offer of 
permanent employment.  
 •  Look at your customers. Loyal 
and informed customers can 
often be a source of potential 
employees. Build-A-Bear Work-
shop, for example, often hires 
customers who come into its 
stores and exhibit a real interest 
in the company and its products.  
 •  Become involved with commu-
nity organizations. Many commu-
nity organizations have top-notch 
volunteers or employees who 
may be looking for a new oppor-
tunity. Also, don’t forget nonprofit 
organizations or agencies that 
welcome immigrants new to a 
region or people in need of a job 
who may be excellent candi-
dates you can train.  
 •  Actively seek publicity and 
word of mouth to create a 
“buzz” for your company. 
 Publicity is more believable 
than advertising; word of 
mouth is a very effective 
recruiting tool. Building an 
image of a dynamic workplace 
with eager and energetic 
 workers will attract others.  
 •  Make use of Internet services, 
social media, and local govern-
ment agencies. Recruiting on 
an online service like  Monster.
com  is very cost-efficient. Gov-
ernment employment services 
are free and social media cre-
ates opportunities to target key 
employee groups. While not as 
potent as staff referrals, all pro-
vide a source of reaching 
potential prize employees.  
 Sources: Raj Sheth, “Small Business Advice: How 
to Establish a Recruiting Process and Develop a 
Culture,”  The Washington Post, January 29, 2014; 
Ritika Puri, “Four Ways Small Businesses Can 
Recruit Top Talent,”  Forbes, February 18, 2014; 
and Marc Wayshak, “5 Things You Should Not Do 
When Hiring for Your Organization,”  Entrepreneur, 
April 1, 2014. 
www.monster.com
 Competing for the Cream of the Crop 
 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
310
 Large retail employers like Winn-Dixie and Finish Line make the 
application process more efficient by using an automated program 
called Workforce Talent Acquisition.  17 An applicant sits at a computer 
and answers questions about job experience, time available to work, 
and personality. The software e-mails a report to the hiring manager 
recommending whether to interview the applicant and, if so, suggesting 
questions to ask. Mike Marchetti, executive vice president of store 
operations for Finish Line, says his company processed 330,000 
applications, eliminating 60,000 interview hours and reducing turnover 
24 percent.  18  
 
2.  Conducting initial and follow-up interviews.  A staff member from the 
human resource department often screens applicants in a first 
interview. If the interviewer considers the applicant a potential hire, 
the manager who will supervise the new employee may interview the 
applicant as well. It’s important that managers prepare adequately for 
the interview to avoid selection decisions they may regret.  19 No matter 
how innocent the intention, missteps such as asking about pregnancy 
or child care could later be evidence if the applicant files discrimination 
charges.  
 
3.  Giving employment tests.  Organizations often use tests to measure 
basic competency in specific job skills like welding or firefighting, and 
to help evaluate applicants’ personalities and interests. The tests 
should always be directly related to the job. Employment tests have 
been legally challenged as potential means of discrimination. Many 
companies test potential employees in assessment centers where they 
perform actual job tasks. Such testing can make the selection process 
more efficient and will generally satisfy legal requirements. 
 
4.  Conducting background investigations.  Most organizations now 
investigate a candidate’s work record, school record, credit history, 
and references more carefully than in the past to help identify those 
most likely to succeed. It is simply too costly to hire, train, and motivate 
people only to lose them and have to start the process over. Services 
such as LexisNexis allow prospective employers not only to conduct 
speedy background checks of criminal records, driving records, and 
credit histories but also to verify work experience and professional 
and educational credentials.  20 The Adapting to Change box discusses 
how companies use Facebook and other social media to screen job 
applicants and weed out those with undesirable traits. 
 
5.  Obtaining results from physical exams.  There are obvious benefits to 
hiring physically and mentally healthy people. However, according to 
the Americans with Disabilities Act, medical tests cannot be given just 
to screen out individuals. In some states, physical exams can be given 
only after an offer of employment has been accepted. In states that 
allow pre-employment physical exams, they must be given to everyone 
applying for the same position. Pre-employment testing to detect drug 
or alcohol abuse has been controversial, as has screening to detect 
carriers of HIV, the virus that causes AIDS. 
 
6.  Establishing trial (probationary) periods.  Often an organization will 
hire an employee conditionally to let the person prove his or her value 
on the job. After a specified probationary period (perhaps six months 
or a year), the firm can either permanently hire or discharge that 
employee on the basis of supervisors’ evaluations. Although such 
systems make it easier to fire inefficient or problem employees, they 
do not eliminate the high cost of turnover. 

311
 The selection process is often long and difficult, but it is worth the effort to 
select new employees carefully because of the high cost of replacing them.  21
Care helps ensure that new employees meet all requirements, including commu-
nication skills, education, technical skills, experience, personality, and health.  
 Hiring Contingent Workers 
 A company with employment needs that vary—from hour to hour, day to day, 
week to week, or season to season—may find it cost-effective to hire contin-
gent workers.   Contingent workers   include part-time workers (anyone who 
works 1 to 34 hours per week), temporary workers (workers paid by tempo-
rary employment agencies), seasonal workers, independent contractors, 
interns, and co-op students.  
 Companies may also hire contingent workers when full-timers are on 
some type of leave (such as maternity leave), when there is a peak demand for 
labor or products (like the holiday shopping season), or when quick service to 
customers is a priority. Companies also tend to hire more contingent workers 
in an uncertain economy, particularly when they are available and qualified, 
and when the jobs require minimal training. 
 Contingent workers receive few benefits; they are rarely offered health 
insurance, vacation time, or company pensions. They also tend to earn less 
than permanent workers do. On the positive side, many on temporary assign-
ments are eventually offered full-time positions. Managers see using temporary 
workers as a way of weeding out poor workers and finding good hires. Although 
exact numbers are difficult to gather, the Bureau of Labor Statistics estimates 
there are approximately 5.7 million contingent workers in the United States, 
with the majority under age 25.  22 Experts say temps are filling openings in an 
increasingly broad range of jobs, from unskilled manufacturing and distribu-
tion positions to middle management. Increasing numbers of contingent work-
ers are educated professionals such as accountants, attorneys, and engineers. 
 Many companies include college students in their contingent workforce 
plan. Working with temporary staffing agencies, companies have easier access 
 contingent workers  
 Employees that include part-
time workers, temporary 
workers, seasonal workers, 
independent contractors, 
interns, and co-op students.  
 adapting to change 
 Today, the Internet offers compa-
nies a gold mine of information 
concerning potential employees. 
Estimates are that three out of five 
organizations use social network-
ing sites such as LinkedIn, Twitter, 
and of course Facebook to screen 
prospective hires and evaluate a 
person’s fit with a company’s cul-
ture. What this means to you is 
that your social media footprint 
could be a selling tool in your job 
search—or could end up costing 
you a job. 
 What you do online goes into 
the virtual world and stays there. 
The online personality you project 
reflects to employers who you 
really are. The growing use of 
social media background checks 
has created a new set of candi-
date disqualifiers. Some of the 
most flagrant violations that will 
put you in a company’s reject pile 
include posting:
 • Provocative or inappropriate 
photos  
 • Information about excessive 
drinking or using drugs  
 • Negative comments about a 
previous employer  
 • Discriminatory comments 
related to race, gender, reli-
gion, etc.  
 It’s best to use social media to 
your advantage. Many companies 
admit to hiring a candidate 
because of the professional 
image they conveyed on social 
media. If you have reservations 
about posting something on 
Facebook, the best advice is, 
don’t. 
 Sources: Kerry Hannon, “Social Media Can Cost 
You a Job: 6 Solutions,”  Forbes, June 30, 2013; 
Leslie Kwoh, “Beware: Potential Employers Are 
Watching You,”  The Wall Street Journal,  
October 29, 2012; and Ed Zitron, “Social Media 
Habits of Highly Annoying People,”  Inc.,  
February 7, 2014. 
 Keeping the Right Face on Facebook 
e 
www.shrm.org

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
312
to workers who have already been 
screened. Of course, temp agencies bene-
fit college students as well. Once the 
agencies have assessed the workers, their 
information is entered into their data-
bases. Then when students are coming 
back in town for vacations or whatever, 
they can call the agency and ask them to 
put their names into the system for work 
assignments. There is no need to spend 
time searching for openings or running 
around town for interviews. Companies 
such as Randstad USA, a global staffing 
services giant with over 1,000 branches in 
the United States, welcomes college stu-
dents primarily because of their com-
puter skills and familiarity with many of 
the popular software programs that com-
panies use.  23  
 College interns can be considered 
temporary workers. However, when 
these internships are unpaid, ethical 
questions could arise (see the Making 
Ethical Decisions box).  
In an era of rapid change and eco-
nomic uncertainty, some contingent 
workers have even found that temping can be more secure than full-time 
employment.  
 • What are the five steps in human resource planning?  
 • What factors make it difficult to recruit qualified employees?  
 • What are the six steps in the selection process?  
 • Who is considered a contingent worker, and why do companies hire 
such workers?  
•
What are the five step
 test  prep  
ps in hum
man res
ps i
 Seasonal businesses, 
such as Halloween 
stores and haunted 
houses, depend on 
hiring contingent 
(temporary) workers to 
help them through the 
limited times they are 
operational. What are 
the advantages and 
disadvantages of hiring 
contingent workers? 
What are the 
advantages and 
disadvantages of being 
a contingent worker?  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Illustrate employee training and development methods.  
TRAINING AND DEVELOPING EMPLOYEES 
FOR OPTIMUM PERFORMANCE  
 As technology and other innovations change the workplace, companies must 
offer training programs that often are quite sophisticated. The term   training 
and development  includes all attempts to improve productivity by increasing 
an employee’s ability to perform. A well-designed training program often leads 
to higher retention rates, increased productivity, and greater job satisfaction. 
Employers in the United States generally find that money for training is well 
spent.  Training focuses on short-term skills, whereas  development focuses on 
long-term abilities. Both include three steps: (1) assessing organization needs 
LO 11–6

313
 making ethical decisions 
 Traditionally, unpaid internships 
have been a great way for young 
people to transition from college to 
the workforce. The sacrifice of 
financial benefits usually pays off in 
practical experience the interns 
otherwise would not get in a class-
room. Businesses in turn risk noth-
ing financially, but could end up 
benefiting in the long run if an 
intern eventually becomes a key 
paid employee. However, with 
entry-level positions scarce in 
today’s job market, interns can end 
up in an unpaid position for as long 
as six months with no chance of 
advancement. At that point, interns 
may wonder if they are improving 
their chances for a rewarding 
career or simply performing free 
services for the company. 
 In order to distinguish a qual-
ity internship from a dead end, 
simply look at the tasks you’re 
asked to do every day. If your 
central duties include keeping 
the coffee pot full or running 
errands, chances are that those 
jobs will not translate into 
professional gofers. Management 
must also be sure to outline an 
intern’s responsibilities explicitly 
and provide regular feedback. 
Even without a regular paycheck, 
internships can be beneficial as 
long as the person is compen-
sated in experience. 
 Some businesses are quite will-
ing to give interns plenty of pro-
fessional responsibility. For 
example, one Toronto newspaper 
fired all of its paid staff writers and 
replaced them with unpaid interns. 
 Is it ethical for companies to 
use unpaid interns if they know 
they will not have any jobs to offer 
at the end of the internships or if 
the unpaid internships replace 
paid jobs? Why or why not? 
 Sources: Knight Kiplinger, “Are Unpaid Interns 
Exploited by Employers?”  Kiplinger, April 2011; 
Bruce Weinstein, “Dos and Don’ts of Unpaid 
Internships,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, May 28, 
2010; and Cathy Vandewater, “Are Unpaid 
Internships Fair?” Vault Careers,  www.vault.com , 
February 3, 2012.  
college.monster.com/education
 Intern or Indentured Servant? 
s
and employee skills to determine training needs; (2) designing training activi-
ties to meet identified needs; and (3) evaluating the training’s effectiveness. 
Some common training and development activities are employee orientation, 
on-the-job training, apprenticeships, off-the-job training, vestibule training, 
job simulation, and management training. 
 
• 
 Orientation   is the activity that initiates new employees into the 
organization; to fellow employees; to their immediate supervisors; and 
to the policies, practices, and objectives of the firm. Orientation programs 
range from informal talks to formal activities that last a day or more and 
often include scheduled visits to various departments and required 
reading of handbooks. For example, at Zappos every new employee in 
the online retailer’s Henderson, Nevada, headquarters must spend two 
weeks answering customer calls, two weeks learning in a classroom, and 
a week shipping boxes in the company’s Kentucky fulfillment center.  24  
 
• 
 On-the-job training   lets the employee learn by doing, or by watching 
others for a while and then imitating them, right at the workplace. 
Salespeople, for example, are often trained by watching experienced 
salespeople perform (often called  shadowing ). Naturally, this can be 
either quite effective or disastrous, depending on the skills and habits 
of the person being observed. On-the-job training is the easiest kind 
of training to implement when the job is relatively simple (such as 
clerking in a store) or repetitive (such as collecting refuse, cleaning 
orientation
The activity that introduces new 
employees to the organization; 
to fellow employees; to their 
immediate supervisors; and to 
the policies, practices, and 
objectives of the firm.
 on-the-job training  
 Training at the workplace that 
lets the employee learn by 
doing or by watching others for 
a while and then imitating them.  
valuable experience down the 
line. Interns should be taught 
about the day-to-day duties of a 
business, not how to be 
training and development
All attempts to improve 
productivity by increasing an 
employee’s ability to perform. 
Training focuses on short-term 
skills, whereas development 
focuses on long-term abilities.

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
314
carpets, or mowing lawns). More demanding or intricate jobs require 
a more intense training effort. Intranets and other forms of technology 
make cost-effective on-the-job training programs available 24 hours a 
day. Computer systems can monitor workers’ input and give them 
instructions if they become confused about what to do next.  
 
• 
In   apprentice programs   a trainee works alongside an experienced 
employee to master the skills and procedures of a craft. Some apprentice 
programs include classroom training. Trade unions in skilled crafts, 
such as bricklaying and plumbing, require a new worker to serve as an 
apprentice for several years to ensure excellence as well as to limit 
entry to the union. Workers who successfully complete an apprenticeship 
earn the classification  journeyman. As baby boomers retire from skilled 
trades such as pipefitting, welding, and carpentry, shortages of trained 
workers are developing. Apprentice programs may be shortened to 
prepare people for skilled jobs in changing industries such as auto 
repair and aircraft maintenance that require increased knowledge of 
computer technology. About 375,000 apprentices are registered with 
the U.S. Department of Labor.  25  
 
• 
  Off-the-job training   occurs away from the workplace and consists of 
internal or external programs to develop any of a variety of skills or to 
foster personal development. Training is becoming more sophisticated 
as jobs become more sophisticated. Furthermore, training is expanding 
to include education (through the PhD) and personal development. 
Subjects may include time management, stress management, health 
and wellness, physical education, nutrition, and even art and languages.  
 
• 
  Online training   demonstrates how technology is improving the efficiency 
of many off-the-job training programs. Most colleges and universities 
now offer a wide variety of online classes, sometimes called  distance 
learning, including introductory business courses. Both nonprofit and 
profit-seeking businesses make extensive use of online training. The Red 
Cross offers an online tutorial called “Be Red Cross Ready” to help 
citizens prepare for disasters such as floods, tornadoes, or hurricanes. 
Technology giants like EMC and large manufacturers like Timken use the 
online training tool GlobeSmart to teach employees how to operate in 
different cultures.  26 Online training’s key advantage is the ability to 
 apprentice programs  
 Training programs during which 
a learner works alongside an 
experienced employee to 
master the skills and 
procedures of a craft.  
 off-the-job training  
 Internal or external training 
programs away from the 
workplace that develop any of 
a variety of skills or foster 
personal development.  
 online training  
 Training programs in which 
employees complete classes 
via the Internet.  
 At FedEx, time is money. 
That’s why the company 
spends six times more on 
employee training than 
the average firm. Does 
the added expense pay 
off? You bet. FedEx 
enjoys a remarkably low 
4 percent employee turn-
over rate. Should other 
companies follow 
FedEx’s financial commit-
ment to training? Why?  
provide a large number of employees with consistent content 
tailored to specific training needs at convenient times.  
 • 
  Vestibule training   (or near-the-job training) is done in 
classrooms with equipment similar to that used on the job so 
that employees learn proper methods and safety procedures 
before assuming a specific job assignment. Computer and 
robotics training is often completed in a vestibule classroom.  
 • 
  Job simulation   is the use of equipment that duplicates job 
conditions and tasks so that trainees can learn skills before 
attempting them on the job. It differs from vestibule training 
in that it duplicates the  exact combination of conditions that 
occur on the job. This is the kind of training given to 
astronauts, airline pilots, army tank operators, ship captains, 
and others who must learn difficult procedures off the job.  
 Management Development 
 Managers often need special training. To be good communica-
tors, they need to learn listening skills and empathy. They also 
need time management, planning, and human relations skills. 
 vestibule training  
 Training done in schools where 
employees are taught on 
equipment similar to that used 
on the job.  

315
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
  Management development,  then, is the process 
of training and educating employees to become 
good managers, and then monitoring the progress 
of their managerial skills over time. Management 
development programs are widespread, especially 
at colleges, universities, and private management 
development firms. Managers may participate in 
role-playing exercises, solve various management 
cases, and attend films and lectures to improve 
their skills. 
 Management development is increasingly 
being used as a tool to accomplish business objec-
tives. General Electric’s and Procter & Gamble’s 
management teams were built with significant 
investment in their development. Most manage-
ment training programs include several of the following:
 
• 
 On-the-job coaching. A senior manager assists a lower-level manager 
by teaching needed skills and providing direction, advice, and helpful 
feedback. E-coaching is being developed to coach managers 
electronically, though it will take time and experimentation before 
firms figure out how to make coaches come to life online.  
 
• 
 Understudy positions. Job titles such as  undersecretary and  assistant 
are part of a relatively successful way of developing managers. Selected 
employees work as assistants to higher-level managers and participate 
in planning and other managerial functions until they are ready to 
assume such positions themselves.  
 
• 
 Job rotation. So that they can learn about different functions of the 
organization, managers are often given assignments in a variety of 
departments. Such job rotation gives them the broad picture of the 
organization they need to succeed.  
 
• 
 Off-the-job courses and training. Managers periodically go to classes or 
seminars for a week or more to hone technical and human relations 
skills. Major universities like the University of Michigan, MIT, and the 
University of Chicago offer specialized short courses to assist managers 
in performing their jobs more efficiently. McDonald’s Corporation has 
its own Hamburger University. Managers and potential franchisees 
attend six days of classes and complete a course of study equivalent to 
36 hours of college business-school credit.  27 
 Networking 
  Networking   is the process of establishing and maintaining contacts with key 
managers in your own and other organizations, and using those contacts to 
weave strong relationships that serve as informal development systems. Of 
equal or greater importance may be a   mentor,  a corporate manager who 
supervises, coaches, and guides selected lower-level employees by introduc-
ing them to the right people and generally acting as their organizational 
sponsor.  28 In most organizations informal mentoring occurs as experienced 
employees assist less experienced workers. However, many organizations 
formally assign mentors to employees considered to have strong potential.  29  
 It’s also important to remember that networking and mentoring go beyond 
the business environment. For example, college is a perfect place to begin net-
working. Associations you nurture with professors, with local businesspeople 
through internships, and especially with your classmates can provide a valu-
able network to turn to for the rest of your career.  
 management development  
 The process of training and 
educating employees to 
become good managers, and 
then monitoring the progress of 
their managerial skills over time.  
networking
The process of establishing 
and maintaining contacts with 
key managers in and outside 
the organization and using 
those contacts to weave strong 
relationships that serve as 
informal development systems.
 mentor  
 An experienced employee who 
supervises, coaches, and 
guides lower-level employees 
by introducing them to the right 
people and generally being 
their organizational sponsor.  
 NASA’s KC-135 aircraft 
helped astronauts like 
these train for space 
missions. After the plane 
makes a fast and steep 
ascent, it suddenly free-
falls for 20 to 30 
seconds enabling the 
passengers to 
experience “apparent 
weightlessness.” (For 
obvious reasons the 
plane is also known as 
the Vomit Comet.) Do 
you think simulation 
training is effective for 
jobs like this? Why or 
why not?  
job simulation
The use of equipment that 
duplicates job conditions and 
tasks so trainees can learn 
skills before attempting them 
on the job.

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
316
 Diversity in Management Development 
 As more women moved into management, they 
learned the importance of networking and of hav-
ing mentors. Unfortunately, women often have 
more difficulty than men in networking or finding 
mentors, since most senior managers are male. In 
1988, women won a major legal victory when the 
U.S. Supreme Court ruled it illegal to bar women 
from certain clubs, long open to men only, where 
business activity flows and contacts are made. This 
decision allowed more women to enter established 
networking systems or, in some instances, create 
their own. Today, women are members of such 
prestigious clubs such as the Augusta National Golf Club. 
 Similarly, African American and Hispanic managers learned the value 
of networking. Both groups are forming pools of capital and new opportuni-
ties helping many individuals overcome traditional barriers to success.  Black 
Enterprise magazine sponsors several networking forums each year for Afri-
can American professionals. The Hispanic Alliance for Career Enhancement 
(HACE) is committed to building career opportunities and career advance-
ment for Hispanics. Monte Jade is an association that helps Taiwanese and 
Chinese professionals assimilate into U.S. business. Sulekha is an Indian 
networking group that unites Indians in the United States and around the 
world. 
 Companies that take the initiative to develop female and minority manag-
ers understand three crucial principles: (1) grooming women and minorities 
for management positions isn’t about legality, morality, or even morale but 
rather about bringing more talent in the door, the key to long-term profitabil-
ity; (2) the best women and minorities will become harder to attract and 
retain, so companies that commit to development early have an edge; and (3) 
having more women and minorities at all levels lets businesses serve their 
increasingly female and minority customers better. If you don’t have a diver-
sity of people working in the back room, how are you going to satisfy the 
diversity of people coming in the front door?  
Trace the six steps in appraising employee performance.
 APPRAISING EMPLOYEE PERFORMANCE 
TO GET OPTIMUM RESULTS  
 Managers must be able to determine whether their workers are doing an effective 
and efficient job, with a minimum of errors and disruptions. They do so by using 
a   performance appraisal,  an evaluation that measures employee performance 
against established standards in order to make decisions about promotions, com-
pensation, training, or termination. Performance appraisals have six steps:
 
1.  Establishing performance standards. This step is crucial. Standards 
must be understandable, subject to measurement, and reasonable. 
Both manager and subordinate must accept them.  
 
2.  Communicating those standards. It’s dangerous to assume that 
employees know what is expected of them. They must be told clearly 
and precisely what the standards and expectations are, and how to 
meet them.  
LO 11–7
 performance appraisal  
 An evaluation that measures 
employee performance against 
established standards in order 
to make decisions about 
promotions, compensation, 
training, or termination.  
Informal marketing 
gatherings like this help 
professionals make new 
connections with people 
in their fields. Why do 
you think younger 
workers prefer such 
informal gatherings?

317
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
 
3.  Evaluating performance. If the first two steps are done correctly, 
performance evaluation is relatively easy. It is a matter of evaluating 
the employee’s behavior to see whether it matches standards.  
 
4.  Discussing results with employees. Employees often make mistakes and 
fail to meet expectations at first. It takes time to learn a job and do it 
well. Discussing an employee’s successes and areas that need 
improvement can provide managers an opportunity to be understanding 
and helpful and guide the employee to better performance. The 
performance appraisal can also allow employees to suggest how a task 
could be done better.  
 
5.  Taking corrective action. As part of performance appraisal, a manager 
can take corrective action or provide feedback to help the employee 
perform better. The key word here is  perform. The primary purpose 
of an appraisal is to improve employee performance if possible.  30  
 
6.  Using the results to make decisions. Decisions about promotions, 
compensation, additional training, or firing are all based on performance 
evaluations. An effective performance appraisal system is also a way of 
satisfying legal requirements about such decisions.  
 Managing effectively means getting results through top performance. 
That’s what performance appraisals are for at all levels of the organization, 
including at the top where managers benefit from reviews by their subordi-
nates and peers. 
 In the  360-degree review, management gathers opinions from all around 
the employee, including those under, above, and on the same level, to get an 
accurate, comprehensive idea of the worker’s abilities.  Figure 11.5  illustrates 
how managers can make performance appraisals more meaningful.  
 FIGURE 11.5 CONDUCT-
ING EFFECTIVE APPRAIS-
ALS AND REVIEWS 
DO
DON’T
•  DO allow sufﬁcient time, without distractions,
 for appraisal. ( Turn off the phone or close
 the ofﬁce door.)
•  DO include the employee in the process
 as much as possible. (Let the employee
 prepare a self-improvement program.)
•  DO end the appraisal with positive
   suggestions for employee improvement.
• DON’T attack the employee personally.
 Critically evaluate his or her work.
• DON’T make the employee feel 
 uncomfortable or uneasy. Never conduct an 
 appraisal where other employees are present 
 (such as on the shop ﬂoor).
• DON’T wait until the appraisal to address
 problems with the employee’s work that
 have been developing for some time.
 • Name and describe four training techniques.  
 • What is the primary purpose of a performance appraisal?  
 • What are the six steps in a performance appraisal?  
•
Name and describe fo
 test  prep  
our training tec
our
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
318
Summarize the objectives of employee compensation programs, and evaluate 
pay systems and fringe benefits.  
COMPENSATING EMPLOYEES: ATTRACTING 
AND KEEPING THE BEST  
 Companies don’t just compete for customers; they also compete for employ-
ees. Compensation is one of the main tools companies use to attract qualified 
employees, and one of their largest operating costs. The long-term success of a 
firm—perhaps even its survival—may depend on how well it can control 
employee costs and optimize employee efficiency. Service organizations like 
hospitals, hotels, and airlines struggle with high employee costs since these 
firms are  labor-intensive (the primary cost of operations is the cost of labor). 
Manufacturing firms in the auto and steel industries have asked employees to 
take reductions in wages (called givebacks) to make the firms more competi-
tive. (We discuss this in Chapter 12.) Those are just a few reasons compensa-
tion and benefit packages require special attention.  31 In fact, some experts 
believe determining how best to compensate employees is today’s greatest 
human resources challenge. 
 A carefully managed and competitive compensation and benefit program 
can accomplish several objectives:
 
• 
Attracting the kinds of people the organization needs, and in sufficient 
numbers.  
 
• 
Providing employees with the incentive to work efficiently and 
productively.  
 
• 
Keeping valued employees from going to competitors or starting 
competing firms.  
 
• 
Maintaining a competitive position in the marketplace by keeping 
costs low through high productivity from a satisfied workforce.  
 
• 
Providing employees with some sense of financial security through 
fringe benefits such as insurance and retirement benefits.  
 Pay Systems 
 The way an organization chooses to pay its employees can have a dramatic 
effect on efficiency and productivity. Managers thus look for a system that 
compensates employees fairly. 
 Many companies still use the pay system known as the Hay 
system, devised by Edward Hay. This plan is based on job 
tiers, each of which has a strict pay range. The system is set 
up on a point basis with three key factors considered: 
know-how, problem solving, and accountability. 
 Firms like San Francisco–based Skyline Construc-
tion let workers pick their own pay system. They can 
earn a fixed salary or collect a lower salary with 
potential for a bonus. John Whitney, author of  The 
Trust Factor, believes that companies should set 
pay at the market level or better and then award all 
employees the same percentage merit raise. Doing 
so, he says, sends the message that everyone in the 
company is important.  Figure 11.6  outlines some 
of the most common pay systems. Which do you 
think is the fairest?  
LO 11—8
p
 Many 
system, 
tiers, e
up on
kno
t
 Competitive compensa-
tion and benefit pro-
grams can have a 
tremendous impact on 
employee efficiency and 
productivity. Sometimes 
businesses reward 
exceptional performance 
by awarding bonuses. 
Does your instructor ever 
award bonuses for 
exceptional performance 
in class?  

319
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
 Compensating Teams 
 Thus far, we’ve talked about compensating individuals. What about teams? 
Since you want your teams to be more than simply a group of individuals, 
would you compensate them like individuals? If you can’t answer that ques-
tion immediately, you’re not alone. Most managers believe in using teams, but 
fewer are sure about how to pay them. Team-based pay programs are not as 
effective or as fully developed as managers would hope. Measuring and 
rewarding individual performance on teams, while at the same time 
 FIGURE 11.6 PAY 
SYSTEMS 
Fixed compensation computed on weekly, biweekly, or monthly pay periods (e.g., $1,600 per
month or $400 per week). Salaried employees do not receive additional pay for any extra hours
worked.
Salary
Wage based on number of hours or days worked, used for most blue-collar and clerical workers.
Often employees must punch a time clock when they arrive at work and when they leave. Hourly
wages vary greatly. The federal minimum wage is $7.25, and top wages go as high as $40 per
hour or more for skilled craftspeople. This does not include beneﬁts such as retirement systems,
which may add 30 percent or more to the total package.
Hourly wage or daywork
Right to purchase stock in the company at a speciﬁc price over a speciﬁc period. Often this
gives employees the right to buy stock cheaply despite huge increases in the price of the stock.
For example, if over the course of his employment a worker received options to buy 10,000
shares of the company stock at $10 each and the price of the stock eventually grows to $100,
he can use those options to buy the 10,000 shares (now worth $1 million) for $100,000.
Stock options
Wage based on the number of items produced rather than by the hour or day. This type
of system creates powerful incentives to work efﬁciently and productively.
Piecework system
Pay based on some percentage of sales. Often used to compensate salespeople, commission
plans resemble piecework systems.
Commission plans
Extra pay for accomplishing or surpassing certain objectives.There are two types of bonuses:
monetary and cashless. Money is always a welcome bonus. Cashless rewards include written
thank-you notes, appreciation notes sent to the employee’s family, movie tickets, ﬂowers, time
off, gift certiﬁcates, shopping sprees, and other types of recognition.
Bonus plans
Annual bonuses paid to employees based on the company’s proﬁts. The amount paid to each 
employee is based on a predetermined percentage. Proﬁt sharing is one of the most common 
forms of performance-based pay.
Profit-sharing plans
Annual bonuses paid to employees based on achieving speciﬁc goals such as quality measures,
customer satisfaction measures, and production targets.
Gain-sharing plans

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
320
rewarding team performance, is tricky—but it can be done. Professional foot-
ball players, for example, are rewarded as a team when they go to the playoffs 
and to the Super Bowl, but they are paid individually as well. Companies are 
now experimenting with and developing similar incentive systems. 
 Jim Fox, founder and senior partner of compensation and human 
resource specialist firm Fox Lawson & Associates, insists that setting up the 
team right in the first place is the key element to designing an appropriate 
team compensation plan. He believes the pay model to enhance performance 
will be a natural outcome of the team’s development process. Jay Schuster, 
coauthor of a study of team pay, found that when pay is based strictly on 
individual performance, it erodes team cohesiveness and makes the team less 
likely meet its goals as a collaborative effort. Workplace studies indicate over 
50 percent of team compensation plans are based on team goals. Skill-based 
pay and gain-sharing systems are the two most common compensation meth-
ods for teams. 
Skill-based pay rewards the growth of both the individual and the team. 
Base pay is raised when team members learn and apply new skills. Baldrige 
Award winner Eastman Chemical Company rewards its teams for proficiency 
in technical, social, and business knowledge skills. A cross-functional compen-
sation policy team defines the skills. The drawbacks of skill-based pay are two-
fold: the system is complex, and it is difficult to relate the acquisition of skills 
directly to profit gains. 
 Most  gain-sharing systems base bonuses on improvements over previous 
performance.  32 Nucor Steel, one of the largest U.S. steel producers, calculates 
bonuses on quality—tons of steel that go out the door with no defects. There 
are no limits on bonuses a team can earn; they usually average around $20,000 
per employee each year.  33 
 It is important to reward individual team players also. Outstanding team 
players—who go beyond what is required and make an outstanding indi-
vidual contribution—should be separately recognized, with cash or noncash 
rewards. A good way to compensate for uneven team participation is to let 
the team decide which members get what type of individual award. After all, if 
you really support the team process, you need to give teams freedom to reward 
themselves.  
 Fringe Benefits 
 Fringe benefits   include sick-leave pay, vacation pay, pension plans, and health 
plans that provide additional compensation to employees beyond base 
wages. Benefits in recent years grew faster than wages and can’t really be 
considered fringe anymore. In 1929, such benefits accounted for less 
than 2 percent of payroll; today they can account for about 30 per-
cent. Health care costs have been one of the key reasons for the 
increase, forcing employees to pay a larger share of their own health 
insurance bill. Furthermore, it’s still unclear exactly what the cost 
of the Affordable Care Act will be for businesses.  34 Employees 
often will request more fringe benefits instead of salary, in order to 
avoid higher taxes. This has resulted in increased debate and gov-
ernment investigation. 
 Fringe benefits can include recreation facilities, company cars, 
country club memberships, discounted massages, special home-mortgage 
rates, paid and unpaid sabbaticals, day care services, and executive dining 
rooms. Increasingly, employees often want dental care, mental health 
care, elder care, legal counseling, eye care, and even short workweeks.  
 fringe benefits  
 Benefits such as sick-leave pay, 
vacation pay, pension plans, 
and health plans that represent 
additional compensation 
beyond base wages.  
per employe
 It is imp
players—w
vidual con
rewards. A
the team dec
you really su
themselves. 
Fringe B
Fringe ben
plans t
wage
con
th
c
countr
rates, p
rooms
 The workers at 
DreamWorks Studios 
who helped create  
 Shrek   enjoy perks like 
free breakfast and 
lunch, afternoon yoga 
classes, free movie 
screenings, on-campus 
art classes, and monthly 
parties. How might 
fringe benefits like these 
affect employee 
performance?  

321
 Understanding that it takes many incentives to attract and retain the best 
employees, dozens of firms among  Fortune magazine’s “100 Best Companies 
to Work For” list offer so-called soft benefits.  Soft benefits help workers main-
tain the balance between work and family life that is often as important to 
hardworking employees as the nature of the job itself. These perks include 
on-site haircuts and shoe repair, concierge services, and free breakfasts. Free-
ing employees from errands and chores gives them more time for family—
and work. Biotechnology firm Genentech even offers doggie day care and 
Netflix offers employees unlimited vacation days.  35  
 At one time, most employees sought benefits that were similar. Today, 
however, some may seek child care benefits while others prefer attractive pen-
sion plans.  36 To address such growing demands, over half of all large firms 
offer   cafeteria-style fringe benefits, in which employees can choose the ben-
efits they want up to a certain dollar amount. Such plans let human resource 
managers equitably and cost-effectively meet employees’ individual needs by 
allowing them choice. 
 As the cost of administering benefits programs has accelerated, many 
companies have chosen to outsource this function. Managing benefits can be 
especially complicated when employees are located in other countries. The 
Reaching Beyond Our Borders box discusses the human resource challenges 
faced by global businesses. To put it simply, benefits are often as important to 
recruiting top talent as salary and may even become more important in the 
future.  
 cafeteria-style fringe 
benefits  
 Fringe benefits plan that allows 
employees to choose the 
benefits they want up to a 
certain dollar amount.  
 reaching beyond our borders  
 Human resource management of 
a global workforce begins with an 
understanding of the customs, 
laws, and local business needs of 
every country in which the organi-
zation operates. Country-specific 
cultural and legal standards can 
affect a variety of human resource 
functions:
 •  Compensation. Salaries must be 
converted to and from foreign 
currencies. Often employees 
with international assignments 
receive special allowances for 
relocation, children’s educa-
tion, housing, travel, and other 
business-related expenses.  
 •  Health and pension standards. 
There are different social con-
texts for benefits in other coun-
tries. In the Netherlands, the 
government provides retire-
ment income and health care.  
 •  Paid time off. Four weeks of 
paid vacation is the standard of 
many European employers. But 
many other countries lack the 
short-term and long-term 
absence policies offered in the 
payroll department must work 
within each country’s 
regulations.  
 •  Communication. When employ-
ees leave to work in another 
country, they often feel discon-
nected from their home 
country. Wise companies use 
their intranet and the Internet 
to help these faraway employ-
ees keep in direct contact.  
 Human resource policies at 
home are influenced more and 
more by conditions and practices 
in other countries and cultures. 
Human resource managers need 
to sensitize themselves and their 
organizations to overseas cultural 
and business practices. 
 Sources: Roy Mauer, “SHRM Identifies Global HR 
Trends for 2014,”  Society for Human Resource 
Management, February 3, 2014; and Will 
Yakowicz, “The Fine Art of Negotiating in Different 
Cultures,”  Inc., December 6, 2013.  
www.shrm.org
Cultural Challenges without Conflict 
United States, including sick 
leave, personal leave, and fam-
ily and medical leave. Global 
companies need a standard 
definition of  time off. 
 •  Taxation. Each country has dif-
ferent taxation rules, and the 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
322
Demonstrate how managers use scheduling plans to adapt to workers’ 
needs.
 SCHEDULING EMPLOYEES TO MEET 
ORGANIZATIONAL AND EMPLOYEE NEEDS 
 Workplace trends and the increasing costs of transportation have led employ-
ees to look for scheduling flexibility. Flextime, in-home employment, and job 
sharing are important benefits employees seek. 
 Flextime Plans 
 A   flextime plan   gives employees some freedom to choose which hours to 
work, as long as they work the required number of hours or complete their 
assigned tasks. The most popular plans allow employees to arrive between 7:00 
and 9:00 a.m. and leave between 4:00 and 6:00 p.m. Flextime plans generally 
incorporate core time.   Core time  is the period when all employees are expected 
to be at their job stations. An organization may designate core time as 9:00 to 
11:00 a.m. and 2:00 to 4:00 p.m. During these hours all employees are required 
to be at work (see  Figure 11.7 ). Flextime allows employees to adjust to work-
life demands. Two-income families find them especially helpful. Companies 
that use flextime say that it boosts employee productivity and morale.  37  
 Flextime is not for all organizations, however. It doesn’t suit shift work like 
fast-food or assembly processes like manufacturing, where everyone on a given 
shift must be at work at the same time. Another disadvantage is that managers 
often have to work longer days to assist and supervise in organizations that may 
operate from 6:00 a.m. to 6:00 p.m. Flextime also makes communication more 
difficult since certain employees may not be there when others need to talk to 
them. Furthermore, if not carefully supervised, some employees could abuse the 
system, causing resentment among others. 
 Another option that about one in four companies uses is a   compressed 
workweek.  An employee works the full number of hours, but in fewer than 
the standard number of days. For example, an employee may work four 
10-hour days and then enjoy a long weekend, instead of working five 8-hour 
days with a traditional weekend. There are obvious advantages of compressed 
LO 11–9
 flextime plan  
 Work schedule that gives 
employees some freedom to 
choose when to work, as long 
as they work the required 
number of hours or complete 
their assigned tasks.  
core time
In a flextime plan, the period 
when all employees are 
expected to be at their job 
stations.
 compressed workweek  
 Work schedule that allows an 
employee to work a full number 
of hours per week but in fewer 
days.  
 FIGURE 11.7 A FLEXTIME CHART  
 At this company, employees can start work anytime between 6:30 and 9:30 a.m. They take a half hour for lunch anytime between 11:00 a.m. 
and 1:30 p.m. and can leave between 3:00 and 6:30 p.m. Everyone works an eight-hour day. The blue arrows show a typical employee’s 
flextime day. 
7:00
6:30
7:30
8:00
8:30
9:00
9:30 10:00
10:30 11:00 11:30 12:00
12:30
1:00 1:30
2:00
2:30
3:00
3:30
4:00
4:30
5:00
5:30
6:00
6:30
Lunch period
Core time
Core time
Flexible hours
Sarah’s starting
time
Sarah’s lunch
period
Sarah’s quitting
time

323
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
workweeks, but some employees get tired working such long hours, and pro-
ductivity can decline. Others find the system a great benefit, however, and are 
enthusiastic about it.  38 Nurses often work compressed weeks.  
 Home-Based Work 
 Nearly 13 million U.S. workers now work from home at least once per week.  39 
Approximately 12 percent of businesses use some home-based work. Home-
based workers can choose their own hours, interrupt work for child care or other 
tasks, and take time out for personal reasons. Working at home isn’t for everyone. 
It requires discipline to stay focused on the job and not be easily distracted.  40  
 Home-based work can also be a cost saver for employers. Estimates are a 
company can reduce operating costs by almost $6,500 per year for every 
employee who telecommutes just one day a week.  41 However, home-based 
work is not for every company either. In 2013, Yahoo! announced that employ-
ees would no longer be allowed to work from home. Bank of America also 
made significant cuts to its popular My Work program that permits employees 
to work remotely about 60 percent of the time. 
 Many large companies also offer “hot-desking,” or sharing a desk with 
other employees who work at different times. Companies such as Office Depot 
have shifted to U.S. home-based call agents and saved 30 or 40 percent on the 
cost of each call by not providing workspace (or benefits) for its home-based 
call center workers.  Figure 11.8  outlines the benefits and challenges of home-
based work to organizations, individuals, and society.  
 Job-Sharing Plans 
  Job sharing   lets two or more part-time employees share one full-time job. 
Students and parents with small children, for instance, may work only during 
school hours, and older workers can work part-time before fully retiring or 
after retiring. Benefits of job sharing include:
 
• 
Employment opportunities for those who cannot or prefer not to work 
full-time.  
job sharing
An arrangement whereby two 
part-time employees share one 
full-time job.
 Working from home 
gives workers the 
flexibility to choose their 
own hours and to take 
time out for personal 
tasks. It requires self-
discipline in order to 
stay focused on the job 
and not allow yourself 
to be distracted. Do you 
think you have the 
discipline to be a home-
based worker? 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
324
 
• 
An enthusiastic and productive workforce.  
 
• 
Reduced absenteeism and tardiness.  
 
• 
Ability to schedule part-time workers into peak demand periods (e.g., 
banks on payday).  
 
• 
Retention of experienced employees who might otherwise have retired.  
 Disadvantages include the need to hire, train, motivate, and supervise at 
least twice as many people and perhaps prorate some fringe benefits. But 
firms are finding that the advantages generally outweigh the disadvantages.  
Describe how employees can move through a company: promotion, 
reassignment, termination, and retirement.
MOVING EMPLOYEES UP, OVER, AND OUT  
 Employees don’t always stay in the position they were hired to fill. They may 
excel and move up the corporate ladder or fail and move out the door. Employ-
ees can also be reassigned or retire. Of course, some choose to move them-
selves by going to another company.  
Lo 11–10
 FIGURE 11.8 BENEFITS AND CHALLENGES OF HOME-BASED WORK 
 Home-based work (also known as telecommuting) offers many benefits and challenges to organizations, individuals, and society as a whole. 
To Organization
To Individual
To Society
BENEFITS
CHALLENGES
•  Increases productivity due to fewer
 sick days, fewer absences, higher
 job satisfaction, and higher work
 performance ratings
•  Broadens available talent pool
•  Reduces costs of providing on-site
 ofﬁce space
•  Makes more time available for work
 and family by reducing or eliminating
 commute time
•  Reduces expenses of buying and
 maintaining ofﬁce clothes
•  Avoids ofﬁce politics
•  Helps balance work and family
•  Expands employment opportunities
 for individuals with disabilities
•  Decreases trafﬁc congestion
•  Discourages community crime that
 might otherwise occur in bedroom
 communities
•  Increases time available to build
 community ties
•  Makes it more difﬁcult to appraise job
 performance
•  Can negatively affect the social network
 of the workplace and can make it
 difﬁcult to promote team cohesiveness
•  Complicates distribution of tasks (should
 ofﬁce ﬁles, contact lists, and such be
 allowed to leave the ofﬁce?)
•  Can cause feeling of isolation from social
 network
•  Can raise concerns regarding promotions
 and other rewards due to being out of
 sight, out of mind
•  May diminish individual’s inﬂuence
 within company due to limited
 opportunity to learn the corporate
 culture
•  Increases need to resolve zoning
 regulations forbidding business deliveries
 in residential neighborhoods
•  May reduce ability to interact with other
 people in a personal, intimate manner

325
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
 Promoting and Reassigning Employees 
 Many companies find that promotion from within the company improves 
employee morale. It’s also cost-effective in that the promoted employees are 
already familiar with the corporate culture and procedures and don’t need to 
spend valuable time on basic orientation. 
 In the new, flatter corporate structures (see Chapter 8), there are fewer 
levels for employees to reach than in the past. Thus they often move  over to a 
new position rather than  up. Such lateral transfers allow employees to develop 
and display new skills and learn more about the company overall. Reassign-
ment is one way of motivating experienced employees to remain in a company 
with few advancement opportunities.  
 Terminating Employees 
 We’ve seen that the relentless pressure of global competition, shifts in tech-
nology, increasing customer demands for greater value, and uncertain 
economic conditions have human resource managers struggling to 
manage layoffs and firings. Even if the economy is booming, 
many companies are hesitant to hire or rehire workers full-time. 
Why is that the case? One reason is that the cost of terminating 
employees is prohibitively high in terms of lost training costs 
and possible damages and legal fees for wrongful discharge 
suits. That’s why many companies are either using temporary 
employees or outsourcing certain functions. 
 At one time the prevailing employment doctrine in the 
United States was “employment at will.” This meant managers 
had as much freedom to fire workers as workers had to leave 
voluntarily. Most states now limit the at-will doctrine to protect 
employees from wrongful firing. An employer can no longer fire 
someone for exposing the company’s illegal actions or refusing to violate a law. 
Employees who are members of a minority or other protected group also may 
have protections under equal employment law. In some cases, workers fired 
for using illegal drugs have sued on the grounds that they have an illness 
(addiction) and are therefore protected by laws barring discrimination under 
the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA). Well-intended legislation has in 
some ways restricted management’s ability to terminate employees as it 
increased workers’ rights to their jobs. See  Figure 11.9  for advice about how to 
minimize the chance of wrongful discharge lawsuits.  
During the economic 
crisis, managers had to 
terminate a great 
number of employees. 
As the economy slowly 
recovered, have 
employers rehired full-
time workers? Why or 
why not? What 
alternatives do 
employers have?
 Consultants offer this advice to minimize the chance of a lawsuit for wrongful discharge:
 • 
Prepare before hiring by requiring recruits to sign a statement that retains management’s freedom to terminate at will.  
 • 
Don’t make unintentional promises by using such terms as  permanent employment. 
 • 
Document reasons before firing and make sure you have an unquestionable business reason for the firing.  
 • 
Fire the worst first and be consistent in discipline.  
 • 
Buy out bad risk by offering severance pay in exchange for a signed release from any claims.  
 • 
Be sure to give employees the true reasons they are being fired. If you do not, you cannot reveal it to a recruiter 
asking for a reference without risking a defamation lawsuit.  
 • 
Disclose the reasons for an employee’s dismissal to that person’s potential new employers. For example, if you 
fired an employee for dangerous behavior and you withhold that information from your references, you can be 
sued if the employee commits a violent act at his or her next job.  
 FIGURE 11.9 HOW TO AVOID WRONGFUL DISCHARGE LAWSUITS 
 Sources: “In Economics Old and New, Treatment of Workers Is Paramount,”  The Washington Post, February 11, 2001, p. L1; and U.S. Law,  www.uslaw.com . 

 Retiring Employees 
 Companies looking to downsize sometimes offer early retirement benefits to 
entice older (and more expensive) workers to retire. Such benefits can include 
one-time cash payments, known in some companies as  golden handshakes.
The advantage early retirement benefits have over layoffs or firing is the 
increased morale of surviving employees. Retiring senior workers earlier also 
increases promotion opportunities for younger employees.  
 Losing Valued Employees 
 In spite of a company’s efforts to retain them, some talented employees will 
choose to pursue opportunities elsewhere. Knowing their reasons for leaving 
can be invaluable in preventing the loss of other good people in the future. 
One way to learn the reasons is to have an outside expert conduct an  exit inter-
view. Outsiders can provide confidentiality and anonymity that earns more 
honest feedback than employees are comfortable giving in face-to-face inter-
views with their bosses. Web-based systems can capture, track, and statisti-
cally analyze employee exit interview data to generate reports that identify 
trouble areas. Such programs can also coordinate exit interview data with 
employee satisfaction surveys to predict which departments should expect 
turnover to occur. 
 Attracting and retaining the best employees is the key to success in the 
competitive global business environment. Dealing with controversial issues 
employees have on the job is challenging and never-ending. Chapter 12 dis-
cusses such issues.  
PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
326
 • Can you name and describe five alternative compensation techniques?  
 • What advantages do compensation plans such as profit sharing offer an 
organization?  
 • What are the benefits and challenges of flextime? Telecommuting? Job 
sharing?  
•
Can you name and de
 test  prep  
escribe five alte
esc
 summary 
 Explain the importance of human resource management, and describe 
current issues in managing human resources.
 • 
 What are current challenges and opportunities in the human resource area?  
 Many current challenges and opportunities arise from changing demo-
graphics: more women, minorities, immigrants, and older workers in the 
workforce. Others include a shortage of trained workers and an abun-
dance of unskilled workers, skilled workers in declining industries requir-
ing retraining, changing employee work attitudes, and complex laws and 
regulations.  
LO 11–1
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

327
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
 Illustrate the effects of legislation on human resource management.
 • 
 What are some of the key laws?  
 See  Figure 11.2  and review the text section on laws.  
 Summarize the five steps in human resource planning.
 • 
 What are the steps in human resource planning?  
 The five steps are (1) preparing a human resource inventory of the organiza-
tion’s employees; (2) preparing a job analysis; (3) assessing future demand; 
(4) assessing future supply; and (5) establishing a plan for recruiting, hiring, 
educating, appraising, compensating, and scheduling employees.  
 Describe methods that companies use to recruit new employees, and explain 
some of the issues that make recruitment challenging.
 • 
 What methods do human resource managers use to recruit new 
employees?  
 Recruiting sources are classified as either internal or external. Internal 
sources include those hired from within (transfers, promotions, reassign-
ments) and employees who recommend others to hire. External recruit-
ment sources include advertisements, public and private employment 
agencies, college placement bureaus, management consultants, profes-
sional organizations, referrals, walk-in applications, and the Internet.  
 • 
 Why has recruitment become more difficult?  
 Legal restrictions complicate hiring and firing practices. Finding suitable 
employees can be more difficult if companies are considered unattractive 
workplaces.  
 Outline the six steps in selecting employees.
 • 
 What are the six steps in the selection process?  
 The steps are (1) obtaining complete application forms, (2) conducting ini-
tial and follow-up interviews, (3) giving employment tests, (4) conducting 
background investigations, (5) obtaining results from physical exams, and 
(6) establishing a trial period of employment.  
 Illustrate employee training and development methods.
 • 
 What are some training activities?  
 Training activities include employee orientation, on- and off-the-job training, 
apprentice programs, online training, vestibule training, and job simulation.  
 • 
 What methods help develop managerial skills?  
 Management development methods include on-the-job coaching, under-
study positions, job rotation, and off-the-job courses and training.  
 • 
 How does networking fit in this process?  
 Networking is the process of establishing contacts with key managers within 
and outside the organization to get additional development assistance.  
 Trace the six steps in appraising employee performance.
 • 
 How do managers evaluate performance?  
 The steps are (1) establish performance standards; (2) communicate those 
standards; (3) compare performance to standards; (4) discuss results; 
What are
LO 11–2
What are
LO 11–3
LO 11–4
What are
LO 11–5
What are
LO 11–6
How do m
LO 11–7

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
328
(5) take corrective action when needed; and (6) use the results for deci-
sions about promotions, compensation, additional training, or firing.  
 Summarize the objectives of employee compensation programs, and describe 
various pay systems and fringe benefits.
 • 
 What are common types of compensation systems?  
 They include salary systems, hourly wages, piecework, commission plans, 
bonus plans, profit-sharing plans, and stock options.  
 • 
 What types of compensation are appropriate for teams?  
 The most common are gain-sharing and skill-based compensation programs. 
Managers also reward outstanding individual performance within teams.  
 • 
 What are fringe benefits?  
 Fringe benefits include sick leave, vacation pay, company cars, pension 
plans, and health plans that provide additional compensation to employ-
ees beyond base wages. Cafeteria-style fringe benefits plans let employees 
choose the benefits they want, up to a certain dollar amount.  
 Demonstrate how managers use scheduling plans to adapt to workers’ needs.
 • 
 What scheduling plans can adjust work to employees’ need for flexibility?  
 Such plans include job sharing, flextime, compressed workweeks, and 
home-based work.  
 Describe how employees can move through a company: promotion, 
reassignment, termination, and retirement.
 • 
 How can employees move within a company?  
 Employees can be moved up (promotion), over (reassignment), or out (ter-
mination or retirement) of a company. They can also choose to leave a 
company to pursue opportunities elsewhere.   
LO 11–8
What sch
LO 11–9
•
•
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  
LO 11–10
 key terms 
 affirmative action  304
 apprentice programs  314
 cafeteria-style fringe 
benefits 321
 compressed 
workweek  322
 contingent 
workers  311
 core time  322
 flextime plan  322
 fringe benefits  320
 human resource 
management (HRM)  300
 job analysis  306
 job description  306
 job sharing  323
 job simulation  314
 job specifications  306
 management 
development  315
 mentor 315
 networking  315
 off-the-job training  314
 online training  314
 on-the-job training  313
 orientation  313
 performance appraisal  316
 recruitment  307
 reverse discrimination  304
  selection  309
 training and 
development  312
 vestibule training  314

329
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
 1. Does human resource management interest you as a career? What are 
your experiences working with human resource professionals?  
 2. What effects have dual-career families had on the human resource function?  
 3. What problems can arise when family members work together in the same 
firm?  
 4. If you were a human resource manager, how would you address the brain 
drain that occurs as knowledgeable workers retire?  
 5. Imagine you must fire an employee. What effect might the dismissal have 
on remaining employees? Explain how you would tell the employee and 
your other subordinates.  
re
 critical thinking 
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1. Look for job listings online or in your local newspaper and find at least 
two positions you might like to have when you graduate. List the qualifica-
tions specified in each of the ads and identify methods the companies 
might use to determine how well applicants meet them. 
 2. Read several current business periodicals or search online to find infor-
mation about the latest court rulings on benefits, affirmative action, and 
other human resource issues. Summarize your findings. Is there a trend in 
these decisions? If so, what is it, and what will it mean for tomorrow’s col-
lege graduates? 
 3. Recall any on-the-job and off-the-job training sessions you’ve experienced. 
Write a brief critique of each. How would you improve them? Share your 
ideas with the class. 
 4. Consider the following occupations: doctor, computer salesperson, com-
puter software developer, teacher, and assembly worker. Identify the method 
of compensation you think is appropriate for each. Explain your answer.  
 5. Choose one of these positions: a human resource manager notifying 
employees of mandatory drug testing or an employee representative pro-
testing such testing. Write a memorandum supporting your position. 
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 The two purposes here are to illustrate the types of questions managers typi-
cally ask during interviews and to practice answering such questions in a safe 
environment.  

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
330
 video case   
 There are many critical problems affecting Ameri-
ca’s public education system, especially the lack of 
qualified teachers willing to work at troubled 
inner city schools. The teaching profession’s 
human resource management process may be 
breaking down in its ability to find and retain the 
best teachers possible. 
 The government service program Teach for 
America tries to solve this problem by training 
young, highly qualified college grads to teach at 
underperforming schools. For a two-year period, 
Teach for America recruits work with students who 
are dealing with crises like poverty, insufficient 
nutrition, and low self-esteem. Although most par-
ticipants use the program as a first step into an 
education career, others apply the lessons they 
learn from the program to many different 
professions. 
 Ultimately, though, Teach for America’s mis-
sion is to place more quality teachers into the 
schools that need them. Many Professional teach-
ers avoid the challenges of inner-city schools, leav-
ing these institutions understaffed. To the human 
resource managers of many public school sys-
tems, Teach for America recruits are an irreplace-
able resource. That’s because applicants are 
evaluated rigorously through a lengthy recruit-
ment process. After applicants are interviewed by 
phone, they must then develop a prospective les-
son plan. If they pass that stage, they do an in-
person interview, take a written test, and 
participate in a monitored group discussion with 
other applicants. In the end, only about 1 appli-
cant in 10 makes it into the popular program. 
 Once selected, Teach for America recruits go 
through a structured orientation and off-the-job 
training program that ends in job simulation 
exercises. The intensive five-week summer course 
prepares volunteers for the challenges and needs 
of the inner-city classroom. They are then assigned 
to a school, where they receive additional support 
and training. Since the job can be extremely chal-
lenging, Teach for America’s relatively generous 
compensation package serves as a major motiva-
tor. As teachers, recruits earn salaries comparable 
to other colleagues at their grade level. 
 Teach for America closely evaluates the per-
formance of its teachers to judge the overall effec-
tiveness of the program. Teach for America alumni 
perform better than many of their counterparts, 
including some career teachers with more train-
ing and education. And even when performance is 
about the same, recruits may be filling positions 
that were otherwise impossible to fill because of 
lack of candidates and resources. 
 Despite all the good work it’s done so far, Teach 
for America knows that the American public school 
system still has a lot to learn about educating dis-
advantaged children. But with the more than 
10,000 recruits it trains each year, Teach for Amer-
ica continues to provide challenged students with a 
fighting chance to fulfill their untapped potential.
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. What seems to be the primary reason why 
Teach for America teachers perform better 
than many other teachers?  
 2. What types of training do Teach for America 
recruits undergo before they are placed in the 
classroom?  
 3. Why is a rigorous performance appraisal pro-
gram a key part of the Teach for America 
program?  
 TEACH FOR AMERICA 
 EXERCISE 
 Go to  Monster.com  and search for the article “100 Potential Interview Ques-
tions .” This article lists some of the more common questions asked during an 
interview. Click on the questions for advice about how to best answer the ques-
tions. This will give you the opportunity to test your answers so that when you 
do go on an actual interview you are less likely to fumble for an answer.  

331
Human Resource Management: Finding and Keeping the Best Employees
CHAPTER 11
 1. 
“Coming to an Office Near You,”  The Economist, January 18, 2014; 
and “The Onrushing Wave,”  The Economist, January 18, 2014. 
 2. 
Floyd Norris, “Changes in the Labor Force Mask Gains in the 
Jobs Situation,”  The New York Times, November 1, 2013; 
Brad Plumer, “Three Reasons the U.S. Labor Force Keeps 
Shrinking,”  The Washington Post, September 6, 2013; and 
Victoria Stilwell, “Boomers Turn On, Tune In, Drop Out of U.S. 
Labor Force,  Bloomberg Businessweek, February 10, 2014. 
 3. 
Joshua Wright, “America’s Skilled Trades Dilemma: 
Shortages Loom as Most-in-Demand Group of Workers 
Ages,”  Forbes, March 7, 2013. 
 4. 
Brad Plumer, “CBO: Expect Slower Growth This Decade—
and as a Result Higher Deficits,”  The Washington Post, 
February 4, 2014. 
 5. 
Louise Radnofsky and Damien Paletta, “Health Law to Cut 
into Labor Force,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 4, 2014. 
 6. 
Douglas Ernst, “Some Member of Civil-Rights Panel Accuse 
EEOC of Overreach on Racism,”  The Washington Times,  
February 20, 2014; and Jacob Gershman, “EEOC Sues Less, but 
Tactics Draw Flak,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 9, 2014. 
 7. 
Patrick May, “Disabled ‘Serial Plaintiffs’ Do Legal Battle with 
Small Businesses over Access Issues,”  San Jose Mercury 
News, February 18, 2014. 
 8. 
Equal Employment Opportunity Commission,  www.eeoc.gov , 
accessed March 2014. 
 9. 
Penelope Lemov, “What It Takes to Win an Age 
Discrimination Case,”  Forbes, April 30, 2013. 
 10. 
Julian L. Alssid, “A New Gallup Survey Says Colleges and 
Employers Disagree about How Workforce-Ready Graduates 
Are . . . Who’s Right?”  Huffington Post, February 27, 2014. 
 11. 
Juan Carlos Perez, “IBM Preps Talent Suite for Human 
Resources Tasks,”  PC World, January 27, 2014. 
 12. 
Bennett J. Louden, “Rochester Grocers Wary of Tech, Adapt 
Slowly,”  Rochester Democrat and Chronicle, February 28, 2014. 
 13. 
Patricia Stilwell, “Report: Economy Will Face Shortage of 20 
Million Workers in 2020,”  US News & World Report, July 8, 2013. 
 14. 
“Gone But Not Forgotten,”  The Economist, March 1, 2014. 
 15. 
Mark Cohen, “Online Hiring Tools Are Changing Recruiting 
Techniques,”  The New York Times, May 15, 2013; and Raj 
Sheth, “How to Establish a Recruiting Process and Develop a 
Culture,”  The Washington Post, January 29, 2014. 
 16. 
John Brandon, “The Real Cost of Hiring the Wrong 
Employee,”  Inc., September 2013. 
 17. 
Kronos,   www.kronos.com/hiring-software/hiring.aspx , 
accessed March 2014. 
 18. 
Kronos,  www.kronos.ca/Case-Study/Finish-Line.aspx , 
accessed March 2014. 
 19. 
Brandon, “The Real Cost of Hiring the Wrong Employee.” 
 20. “LexisNexis,   www.lexisnexis.com , accessed March 2014; and 
Dave Larsen, “LexisNexis Wins Software Industry Award,” 
Dayton Daily News, February 11, 2014. 
 21. 
Suzanne Lucas, “How Much Employee Turnover Really Costs 
You,”  Inc., August 2013; and Jena MacGregor, “What It Costs 
to Replace a Twenty-Something,”  The Washington Post, 
August 6, 2013. 
 22. U.S. Department of Labor,   www.dol.gov  , accessed March 2014. 
 23. RandstadUSA,  www.us.randstad.com , accessed March 2014. 
 24. Scott Levy, “Why Stellar Customer Service Is Key to Building 
Your Online Brand,”  Entrepreneur, December 23, 2013. 
 25. U.S. Department of Labor,  www.doleta.gov , accessed March 
2014. 
 26. GlobeSmart,   www.globesmart.com , accessed March 2014. 
 27. McDonald’s,   www.mcdonalds.com , accessed March 2014. 
 28. Ross McCammon, “Guiding Lights,”  Entrepreneur, March 2013. 
 29. Jeffrey Dauksevich, “How to Be an Effective Mentor,” 
Entrepreneur, December 27, 2013; and John Brandon, “How 
to Maximize the Benefits of Mentoring,”  Inc., January 2014. 
 30. Daniel Bortz, “Ace Your Annual Review,”  Money, March 2014. 
 31. 
Sharon Wienbar, “Making Sense Out of Cents: Determining 
Employee Compensation,”  Entrepreneur, February 13, 2014. 
 32. Ronald J. Recardo and Diane Pricones, “Is Gainsharing for 
You?”  www.qualitydigest.com , accessed March 2014. 
 33. Motley Fool Staff, “Q-and-A with Nucor CEO Dan DiMicco,” 
The Motley Fool,  www.fool.com , January 10, 2011. 
 34. Chad Terhune, “Health Premiums Expected to Rise for Many 
Small Firms under Obamacare,”  Los Angeles Times, 
February 25, 2014; and Joane Weiner, “Experts Disagree 
about Job Losses and the Moral Status of Obamacare,”  The 
Washington Post, February 26, 2014. 
 35. Amanda Greene, “Nine Companies with the Best Perks,” 
 www.womansday.com/life-9-companies-the-best-perks , 
accessed March 2014. 
 36. Scott Liebs, “You Can Buy Employee Happiness. (But Should 
You?) Companies That Offer Lavish Benefits Believe There Is 
a Return on Their Investment. The Challenge: Figuring Out 
How to Calculate It,”  Inc., January 2014. 
 37. Gwen Moran, “Surviving the Open-Floor Plan,”  Entrepreneur, 
February 13, 2014. 
 38. Scott Benson, “Why Compressed Workweeks Can Be Great for 
Employers and Employees,”  Huffington Post, March 5, 2014. 
 39. Beth Braverman, “Be There—Even When You’re Not,” 
 CNNMoney.com  , March 2013. 
 40. Bill Kolbenschlag, “How to Keep Virtual Teams Connected,” 
Forbes, March 5, 2014. 
 41. 
Anne Kates Smith, “Make Working at Home Work,”  Kiplinger 
Personal Finance, January 2013. 
exis.com, accessed March 2014; and
 notes 
 Page 299: © Brad Swonetz/Redux; p. 302: 
© Tim Boyle/Bloomberg/Getty Images; p. 304: 
© Andersen Ross/The Image Bank/Getty Images; 
p. 307: © Monalyn Gracia/Fancy/age fotostock 
RF; p. 312: © Ben Margot/AP Images; p. 313: 
© AVAVA/iStock/360/Getty Images RF; 
p. 314: © Mike Brown/The Commercial Appeal/
AP Images; p. 315: NASA; p. 316: University of 
Exeter/Creative Commons, https://www
.flickr.com/photos/26126239@N02/6441106901/
in/set-72157628245582169; p. 318: 
© Josh Rinehults/Getty Images RF; p. 320: 
© Paramount Pictures/Photofest; p. 321: © Guy 
Bubb/Gallo Images/Getty Images RF; p. 323: 
© Liam Norris/Cultura/Getty Images RF; 
p. 325: © Steve Cole/Getty Images RF.
mons https://www
 photo credits 

332
 Dealing with Union 
and Employee–
Management Issues 
 12 
 Learning objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 12-1 Trace the history of organized labor in the United States. 
 LO 12-2 Discuss the major legislation affecting labor unions. 
 LO 12-3 Outline the objectives of labor unions. 
 LO 12-4 Describe the tactics used by labor and management during 
conflicts, and discuss the role of unions in the future. 
 LO 12-5 Assess some of today’s controversial employee–management 
issues, such as executive compensation, pay equity, sexual 
harassment, child care and elder care, drug testing, and violence in 
the workplace.  

333
DeMaurice Smith
 • Executive Director of the NFL 
Players Association 
 • Faced off with NFL owners 
during the 2011 players lockout 
 • Negotiates player/ex-player 
issues like safety and health care
www.nfl.com
@demauricesmith
T
 he relationship between 
management and employ-
ees is a delicate one. While 
both have a vested interest 
in seeing their business 
thrive, the needs and desires of each 
party can sometimes be wholly different. 
Few people understand this better than 
DeMaurice Smith, executive director of 
the NFL Players Association (NFLPA). In 
2011 Smith butted heads with team own-
ers during a labor lockout that would 
have delayed the next NFL season if not 
for the last-minute collective bargaining 
deal he negotiated. 
 Before he was brokering high-level 
contracts, Smith spent his childhood in a 
small Maryland town just outside of 
Washington, DC. His parents provided 
plenty of inspiration as he developed the 
attributes that would serve him so well in 
his adult life. Smith’s father was the son 
of a sharecropper in the Jim Crow–era 
South and one of 14 siblings. His mother, 
meanwhile, had suffered severe burns as 
a child and had to relearn how to walk. 
“I’d like to tell you there was some hokey 
speeches about overcoming adversity 
and all those things in my parents’ house 
growing up, but there weren’t,” said 
Smith. “It was a very quiet confidence 
that you could talk about anything, you 
could do anything, and regardless of 
what happens this family will stick 
together.” 
 After getting a bachelor’s degree in 
political science from Cedarville Univer-
sity, Smith earned a law degree at the 
University of Virginia in 1989. He soon 
landed a job as Assistant United States 
Attorney in the District of Columbia 
where he gained a reputation as a tough 
but dedicated trial lawyer. He spent nine 
years as a prosecutor before joining a 
powerful Washington firm that repre-
sented senior executives at some of the 
biggest companies in the nation. The 
valuable connections Smith developed 
at these jobs proved to be the deciding 
factor when the NFLPA elected him as its 
director in 2009. 
 Smith didn’t have much time to 
celebrate his new position, though. 
By then the NFL team owners had 
decided not to renew the collective 
bargaining agreement (CBA) that it had 
struck with players years before. With a 
$4 billion TV deal soon to take effect, 
Smith and the NFLPA knew the owners 
wanted more money before a new CBA 
would be signed. After failing to find a 
compromise before the CBA’s expiration 
date, the NFLPA renounced its collective 
bargaining rights and were “locked out” 
of work. In the months that followed, 
Smith took the spotlight as federal 
mediations failed and an anti-trust suit 
filed against NFL owners gained steam. 
Relations between the two parties only 
became more strained as summer 
arrived without a new deal in place. 
Employees and fans began to prepare 
for the unthinkable: an autumn without 
NFL football. 
 The lockout saga finally came to an 
end when Smith brokered a new CBA in 
July. Although the deal slightly reduced 
salaries for rookies, it also introduced new 
safety rules that extended off-seasons 
and reduced the amount of rough contact 
during practice. With the lockout now 
in his rearview mirror, safety concerns 
are now Smith’s number one priority. 
 Professional sports, of course, is 
not the only industry that has problems 
dealing with labor–management 
relations, employee compensation, 
and other work-related issues. This 
chapter discusses such issues and 
other employee–management con-
cerns, including executive pay, pay 
equity, child and elder care, drug test-
ing, and violence in the workplace. 
 Sources: Jim Trotter, “DeMaurice Smith Chastises NFL 
for Lack of Player Safety,”  Sports Illustrated, January 31, 
2013; Aaron Kuriloff, “Four of Five NFL Players Distrust 
Team Doctor, Survey Says,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
February 1, 2013; and “Executive Director: DeMaurice 
Smith,”  www.nflplayers.com , accessed April 2014.  
 Getting to Know  DeMaurice Smith

334
 name that company 
 The late management consultant Peter Drucker suggested that CEOs should 
not earn more than 20 times the salary of the company’s lowest-paid employee. 
Most firms ignore his suggestion, but at our company executives’ pay is capped 
at 19 times the average employee’s salary. Still, we are one of the fastest- 
growing companies in the United States. Name that company. (The answer is in 
the chapter.)  
 EMPLOYEE–MANAGEMENT ISSUES 
 A good starting point in discussing employee–management relations in the 
United States is a discussion of labor unions. A   union  is an employee organi-
zation whose main goal is representing its members in employee– management 
negotiations over job-related issues. Recently labor unions have been in the 
news more than they have been for years. For example, the conflicts between 
players and various professional sports regarding safety concerns is just one 
issue making headlines. 
 Another major issue involves dealing with public sector labor unions 
(those employees who work for governments, such as teachers, firefighters, 
police officers, etc.). With many states facing serious debt problems, and 
major cities like Detroit declaring bankruptcy, government officials are trying 
to cut costs, particularly labor costs.  1 However, states with public sector 
unions have had limited ability to cut labor costs because of prior agreements 
with the unions that represent public workers. For now, it is enough to say 
that public sector labor unions and governments will have challenges going 
forward due to increasing labor and pension costs to governments. Before we 
get into such issues, however, let’s explore the nature of unions in general and 
what the issues have been over time. 
 The relationship between managers and employees isn’t always smooth. 
Management’s responsibility to produce a profit by maximizing productivity 
sometimes necessitates hard decisions, which limit managers’ chances to win 
popularity contests with workers. Labor (the collective term for nonmanage-
ment workers) is interested in fair and competent management, human dig-
nity, and a reasonable share in the wealth its work generates. Like other 
managerial challenges, employee–management issues require open discus-
sion, goodwill, and compromise. 
 Workers originally formed unions to protect themselves from intolerable 
work conditions and unfair treatment, and also to secure some say in the oper-
ation of their jobs. As the number of private sector union members grew, 
workers gained more negotiating power with managers and more political 
power. For example, labor unions were largely responsible for the establish-
ment of minimum-wage laws, overtime rules, workers’ compensation, sever-
ance pay, child-labor laws, job safety regulations, and more.  2 
 Union strength among private workers, however, has waned as private 
labor unions have lost the economic and political power they once had, and 
membership has declined.  3 Economists suggest that increased global competi-
tion, shifts from manufacturing to service and high-tech industries that are 
 union  
 An employee organization 
whose main goal is representing 
its members in employee–
management negotiation of job-
related issues.  

335
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
less heavily unionized, growth in part-time work, and changes in management 
philosophies are some of the reasons for private labor’s decline. Many insist 
that private unions have seen their brightest days.  4 Let’s first look at labor 
unions and then analyze some key issues affecting employee–management 
relations.  
 Trace the history of organized labor in the United States.
LABOR UNIONS YESTERDAY AND TODAY 
 Historians generally agree that today’s unions are an outgrowth of the eco-
nomic transition caused by the Industrial Revolution of the 19th and early 
20th centuries. Workers who once toiled in the fields, dependent on the mer-
cies of nature for survival, found themselves relying on the continuous roll of 
factory presses and assembly lines for their living. Making the transition 
from an agricultural economy to an industrial economy was quite difficult. 
Over time, workers in businesses learned that strength through unity (unions) 
could lead to improved job conditions, better wages, and job security. 
 Today’s critics of organized labor maintain that few of the inhuman condi-
tions once dominant in U.S. industry exist in the modern workplace. They argue 
that labor is an industry in itself, and protecting workers has become second-
ary. 5 Some workplace analysts maintain that the current legal system and 
changing management philosophies minimize the possibility that sweatshops 
(workplaces of the late 19th and early 20th centuries with unsatisfactory, unsafe, 
or oppressive labor conditions) could reappear in the United States. Let’s look at 
the history of labor unions to see how we got to where we are today.  
 The History of Organized Labor 
 Formal labor organizations in the United States date to the time of the Ameri-
can Revolution. As early as 1792, cordwainers (shoemakers) in Philadelphia 
met to discuss fundamental work issues of pay, hours, conditions, and job 
security—pretty much the same issues that dominate labor negotiations today. 
The cordwainers were a   craft union   , an organization of skilled specialists in a 
particular craft or trade, typically local or regional. Most craft unions were 
established to achieve some short-range goal, such as curtailing the use of 
convict labor as an alternative to available free labor. Often, after attaining 
their goal, the union disbanded. This situation changed dramatically in the 
late 19th century with the expansion of the 
Industrial Revolution in the United States. 
The Industrial Revolution brought enor-
mous productivity increases, gained through 
mass production and job specialization, that 
made the United States an economic world 
power. This growth, however, created prob-
lems for workers in terms of productivity 
expectations, hours of work, wages, job 
security, and unemployment. 
 Workers were faced with the reality 
that productivity was vital. Those who 
failed to produce, or who stayed home 
because they were ill or had family prob-
lems, lost their jobs. Over time, the 
increased emphasis on production led firms 
LO 12–1
 craft union  
 An organization of skilled 
specialists in a particular craft 
or trade.  
 While the technological 
achievement of the 
Industrial Revolution 
brought countless new 
products to market and 
reduced the need for 
physical labor in many 
industries, it also put 
pressure on workers to 
achieve higher produc-
tivity in factory jobs that 
called for long hours 
and low pay. Can you 
see how these condi-
tions made it possible 
for labor unions to take 
hold by the turn of the 
20th century? 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
336
to expand the hours of work. The length of the average workweek in 1900 
was 60 hours, but an 80-hour week was not uncommon for some industries.  6 
Wages were low, and child labor was widespread. Minimum-wage laws and 
unemployment benefits were nonexistent, which made periods of unemploy-
ment hard on families who earned subsistence wages. The nearby Spotlight 
on Small Business box highlights the severity of these conditions and the 
tragedy that resulted.  
 The first truly national labor organization was the   Knights of Labor   , 
formed by Uriah Smith Stephens in 1869. The Knights offered membership to 
all private working people,  including employers, and promoted social causes 
as well as labor and economic issues. By 1886, the organization claimed a 
membership of 700,000. The Knights’ intention was to gain significant  politi-
cal power and eventually restructure the U.S. economy. The organization fell 
from prominence, however, after being blamed for a bomb that killed eight 
policemen during a labor rally at Haymarket Square in Chicago in 1886. 
 A rival group, the   American Federation of Labor (AFL)   , was formed that 
same year. By 1890, the AFL, under the dynamic leadership of Samuel Gomp-
ers, stood at the forefront of the labor movement. The AFL was never one big 
union, but rather an organization of craft unions that championed fundamen-
tal labor issues. It intentionally limited membership to skilled workers (crafts-
people), assuming they would have better bargaining power than unskilled 
workers in obtaining concessions from employers. As a federation, its many 
individual unions can become members yet keep their separate union status. 
 Over time, an unauthorized AFL group called the Committee of Industrial 
Organizations began to organize   industrial unions   , which consisted of 
unskilled and semiskilled workers in mass-production industries such as auto-
mobile manufacturing and mining. John L. Lewis, president of the United 
Mine Workers, led this committee. His objective was to organize both crafts-
people and unskilled workers under one banner. 
 When the AFL rejected his proposal in 1935, Lewis broke away to form 
the   Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO).  The CIO soon rivaled the 
AFL in membership, partly because of the passage of the National Labor Rela-
tions Act (also called the Wagner Act) that same year (see the next section). 
For 20 years, the two organizations struggled for power. It wasn’t until passage 
of the Taft-Hartley Act in 1947 (see  Figure 12.1 ) that they saw the benefits of a 
merger. In 1955, the two groups formed the AFL-CIO. The AFL-CIO today 
maintains affiliations with 56 national and international labor unions and has 
about 12.5 million members.  7 
 Public Sector Union Membership 
 People typically think of union members as workers in construction and manu-
facturing in the private sector of the economy. However, 7.2 million of the 
14.5 million workers in unions work in the public sector, not the private sector. 
This means taxpayers pay the cost of union workers’ wages and benefits.  8 Union 
membership in the public sector stands at 35 percent compared to just 6.6 per-
cent in the private sector.  9 Still, public sector membership has fallen by approxi-
mately 120,000 since 2013 with much of the loss the result of state and local 
government revenue shortfalls caused by the economic crisis beginning in 2008. 
As states and local governments battle with high labor and pension costs, the 
challenge of dealing with public sector unions is sure to continue.  10 Several 
states are also challenging mandatory public sector union membership rules 
called “fair share dues.”  11 The Supreme Court is expected to rule on the issue.  
 Knights of Labor  
 The first national labor union; 
formed in 1869.  
 American Federation of 
Labor (AFL)  
 An organization of craft unions 
that championed fundamental 
labor issues; founded in 1886.  
 industrial unions  
 Labor organizations of unskilled 
and semiskilled workers in 
mass-production industries such 
as automobiles and mining.  
 Congress of Industrial 
Organizations (CIO)  
 Union organization of unskilled 
workers; broke away from the 
American Federation of Labor 
(AFL) in 1935 and rejoined it in 
1955.  

337
 Discuss the major legislation affecting labor unions
LABOR LEGISLATION AND COLLECTIVE 
BARGAINING 
 Much of the growth and influence of organized labor in the United States has 
depended primarily on two major factors: the law and public opinion. 
 Figure 12.1  outlines five major federal laws with a significant impact on the 
rights and operations of labor unions. Take a few moments to read it before 
going on. Note that such laws govern  private workers. 
 The Norris-LaGuardia Act paved the way for union growth in the United 
States. This legislation prohibited employers from using employment con-
tracts that included provisions such as a yellow-dog contract. A   yellow-dog 
contract   required employees to agree, as a condition of employment, not to 
join a union. The National Labor Relations Act (or Wagner Act) passed three 
years later provided labor unions with clear legal justification to pursue key 
issues that were strongly supported by Samuel Gompers and the AFL. One of 
these issues,   collective bargaining   , is the process whereby union and man-
agement representatives negotiate a contract for workers. The Wagner Act 
expanded labor’s right to collectively bargain by obligating employers to meet 
LO 12–2
yellow-dog contract
A type of contract that required 
employees to agree as a 
condition of employment not to 
join a union; prohibited by the 
Norris-LaGuardia Act in 1932.
collective bargaining
The process whereby union 
and management 
representatives form a labor–
management agreement, or 
contract, for workers.
 spotlight on small business 
 On March 25, 1911, a warm spring 
day in New York City, hundreds of 
young women (the youngest 
14 years old) were busy at work at 
the Triangle Shirtwaist Company 
when the unthinkable happened. 
A fire raced from the eighth floor 
to the ninth and then the tenth. As 
the panic-stricken women tried to 
race to safety they found that a 
crucial door was locked, trapping 
them in the fire. It was suggested 
at a later trial that the door was 
kept locked to prevent theft. In 
the blaze that lasted about 18 min-
utes, 146 workers were killed. 
Many of the workers burned to 
death, while others jumped to 
their fate holding hands with their 
clothes burning. The fire became 
the touchstone for organized 
labor and raised support for 
changes in the workplace. 
 Prior to the tragedy at Triangle 
Shirtwaist, workers had struck for 
higher pay, shorter hours (the 
average workweek was often 
60 hours), and safer workplace 
conditions. Unfortunately public 
opinion was strongly against 
them. After the tragedy, the 
International Ladies’ Garment 
Workers’ Union (now called 
Workers United) grew in numbers 
and in public support. Today labor 
leaders say that the Triangle fire is 
evidence of why labor unions are 
crucial to maintain workplace bal-
ance in the United States. At a 
ceremony in New York City com-
memorating the 100th anniversary 
of the fire, labor leaders encour-
aged workers to not let the mod-
ern labor movement die. It’s hard 
to imagine that in the 1950s, 
unions represented 36 percent of 
the private sector workers in the 
United States, compared to just 
6.7 percent today. 
 Sources: “Remembering the 1911 Triangle Factory 
Fire,”  Cornell University, ILR School, accessed 
April 2014; Beth Fouhy, “NYC Marks 100th 
Anniversary of Deadly Factory Fire,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, March 25, 2011; Bureau of Labor 
Statistics,  www.bls.gov , accessed April 2014; and 
Walter Loeb, “Walmart’s Manufacturing Dream Is 
Just a Dream,”  Forbes, January 31, 2014.    
 The Factory Blaze That Fired Up a Movement 
 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
338
at reasonable times and bargain in good faith with respect to wages, hours, 
and other terms and conditions of employment.  12 
 Collective bargaining in public sector unions is a key issue today. In some 
states public employees are not given the privilege of collective bargaining. 
Controversy arises when people perceive that public employees are winning 
more or better health care, more or better hours of work, and so on than work-
ers in the private sector. If this is the case, some have questioned whether or not 
collective bargaining in public unions should be allowed to continue. Public 
and private union members have joined together to fight efforts to take away 
collective bargaining gains among public employees in states like Wisconsin, 
Ohio, and California.  13 
 Union Organizing Campaigns 
 The Wagner Act established an administrative agency (discussed in Bonus 
Chapter A), the National Labor Relations Board (NLRB), to oversee labor–
management relations. The NLRB consists of five members appointed by the 
 Norris-LaGuardia Act, 1932 
 Prohibited courts from issuing injunctions against nonvio-
lent union activities; outlawed contracts forbidding union 
activities; outlawed the use of yellow-dog contracts by 
employers. (Yellow-dog contracts were contractual 
agreements forced on workers by employers whereby 
the employee agreed not to join a union as a condition 
of employment.) 
 National Labor Relations Act 
(Wagner Act), 1935 
 Gave employees the right to form or join labor organiza-
tions (or to refuse to form or join); the right to collectively 
bargain with employers through elected union represen-
tatives; and the right to engage in labor activities such as 
strikes, picketing, and boycotts. Prohibited certain unfair 
labor practices by the employer and the union, and estab-
lished the National Labor Relations Board to oversee 
union election campaigns and investigate labor practices. 
This act gave great impetus to the union movement. 
 Fair Labor Standards Act, 
1938 
 Set a minimum wage and maximum basic hours for 
workers in interstate commerce industries. The first 
minimum wage set was 25 cents an hour, except for 
farm and retail workers. 
 Labor–Management Relations 
Act (Taft-Hartley Act), 1947 
 Amended the Wagner Act; permitted states to pass laws 
prohibiting compulsory union membership (right-to-work 
laws); set up methods to deal with strikes that affect 
national health and safety; prohibited secondary boy-
cotts, closed shop agreements, and featherbedding (the 
requiring of wage payments for work not performed) by 
unions. This act gave more power to management. 
 Labor–Management 
 Reporting and Disclosure Act 
 (Landrum-Griffin Act), 1959 
 Amended the Taft-Hartley Act and the Wagner Act; guar-
anteed individual rights of union members in dealing with 
their union, such as the right to nominate candidates for 
union office, vote in union elections, attend and participate 
in union meetings, vote on union business, and examine 
union records and accounts; required annual financial 
reports to be filed with the U.S. Department of Labor. One 
goal of this act was to clean up union corruption. 
 FIGURE 12.1 MAJOR 
LEGISLATION AFFECTING 
LABOR–MANAGEMENT 
RELATIONS  

339
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
U.S. president and is authorized to investigate and remedy unfair labor prac-
tices. It also provides workplace guidelines and legal protection to workers 
seeking to vote on organizing a union to represent them.  14   Certification   is the 
formal process whereby the NLRB recognizes a labor union as the authorized 
bargaining agent for a group of employees.   Decertification   is the process by 
which workers can take away a union’s right to represent them.  Figure 12.2  
describes the steps in both certification and decertification processes. After an 
election, both the union and company have five days to contest the results 
with the NLRB.  
 certification  
 Formal process whereby a 
union is recognized by the 
National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB) as the bargaining agent 
for a group of employees.  
 decertification  
 The process by which workers 
take away a union’s right to 
represent them.  
 FIGURE 12.2 STEPS IN 
UNION-ORGANIZING 
AND DECERTIFICATION 
CAMPAIGNS  
 Note that the final vote in each 
case requires that the union 
receive over 50 percent of the 
 votes cast.  Note, too, that the 
election is secret. 
Decertification campaign
Contact with employees
of organization 
Campaign for signatures on
authorization cards
Union obtains signed authorization cards
from at least 30% of employees it is
trying to represent
NLRB examiner determines that 30% of
employees have signed authorization
cards and determines appropriate
bargaining unit
Election campaign
Secret ballot election
Does union receive more than 50%
of the votes cast?
Union is certified by
NLRB as exclusive
bargaining agent
Employer
remains
nonunion
Labor contract is not in effect and
union has been bargaining agent for
at least 12 months
Employee or employee
representative (not employer)
campaigns for signatures in
decertification petition
Employee or employee representative files
petition with the NLRB
NLRB determines if at least 30% of the
employees in bargaining unit favor
decertification
Secret ballot election
Do more than 50% of the
votes cast favor decertifying the union?
Union is decertified
and another
representation election
cannot be held for 12
months
Union
remains 
Organizing campaign
Decertification campaign
Yes
Yes
No
No

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
340
 Outline the objectives of labor unions.
Objectives of Organized Labor over Time 
 The objectives of labor unions shift with social and economic trends. The 
 negotiated labor–management agreement, informally referred to as the 
labor contract, sets the tone and clarifies the terms and conditions under 
which management and the union will function over a specific period. Unions 
attempt to address their most pressing concerns in the labor contract such as 
job security and offshore outsourcing. Negotiations can cover a wide range of 
work topics, and it can take a long time to reach an agreement.  Figure 12.3  
lists topics commonly negotiated by management and labor.  
 Labor unions generally insist that a contract contain a   union security 
clause  stipulating that employees who reap union benefits either officially 
join or at least pay dues to the union. After passage of the Wagner Act, unions 
sought strict security in the form of the   closed shop agreement,  which speci-
fied that workers had to be members of a union before being hired for a job. 
To labor’s dismay, the Labor–Management Relations Act (Taft-Hartley Act) 
outlawed this practice in 1947 (see  Figure 12.4 ). 
 Today, unions favor the   union shop agreement,  under which workers do 
not have to be members of a union to be hired but must agree to join within a 
prescribed period (usually 30, 60, or 90 days). However, under a contingency 
called an   agency shop agreement,  employers may hire workers who are not 
required to join the union but must pay a special union fee or regular union 
dues. Labor leaders believe that such fees or dues are justified because the 
union represents all workers in collective bargaining, not just its members. 
 The Taft-Hartley Act recognized the legality of the union shop but granted 
individual states the power to outlaw such agreements through   right-to-work 
laws.   15 To date, 24 states have passed such legislation (see  Figure 12.5 ). In a 
right-to-work state, an   open shop agreement   gives workers the option to join 
or not join a union if one exists. A worker who does not join cannot be forced 
to pay a fee or dues.  16 
 negotiated labor–
management agreement 
(labor contract)  
 Agreement that sets the tone 
and clarifies the terms under 
which management and labor 
agree to function over a period 
of time. 
 union security clause  
 Provision in a negotiated 
labor–management agreement 
that stipulates that employees 
who benefit from a union must 
either officially join or at least 
pay dues to the union.  
 closed shop agreement  
 Clause in a labor–management 
agreement that specified 
workers had to be members of 
a union before being hired 
(was outlawed by the Taft-
Hartley Act in 1947).  
 union shop agreement  
 Clause in a labor–management 
agreement that says workers 
do not have to be members of 
a union to be hired, but must 
agree to join the union within a 
prescribed period.  
 agency shop agreement  
 Clause in a labor–management 
agreement that says employers 
may hire nonunion workers; 
employees are not required to 
join the union but must pay a 
union fee.  
 open shop agreement  
 Agreement in right-to-work 
states that gives workers the 
option to join or not join a 
union, if one exists in their 
workplace.  
LO 12–3
 1. Management rights
 2. Union recognition
 3. Union security clause
 4. Strikes and lockouts
 5. Union activities and responsibilities
 
a. Dues checkoff
 
b. Union bulletin boards
 
c. Work slowdowns
 6. Wages
 
a. Wage structure
 
b. Shift differentials
 
c. Wage incentives
 
d. Bonuses
 
e. Piecework conditions
 
f. Tiered wage structures
 7. Hours of work and time-off policies
 
a. Regular hours of work
 
b. Holidays
 
c. Vacation policies  
 
d. Overtime regulations
 
e. Leaves of absence
 
f. Break periods
 
g. Flextime
 
h. Mealtime allotments
 8. Job rights and seniority principles
 
a. Seniority regulations
 
b. Transfer policies and bumping
 
c. Promotions
 
d. Layoffs and recall procedures
 
e. Job bidding and posting
 9. Discharge and discipline
 
a. Suspension
 
b. Conditions for discharge
 10. Grievance procedures
 
a. Arbitration agreement
 
b. Mediation procedures
 11. Employee benefits, health, and 
welfare
 FIGURE 12.3 ISSUES 
IN A NEGOTIATED 
LABOR–MANAGEMENT 
AGREEMENT 
 Labor and management often 
meet to discuss and clarify the 
terms that specify employees’ 
functions within the company. 
The topics listed in this figure 
are typically discussed during 
these meetings.  
right-to-work laws
Legislation that gives workers 
the right, under an open shop 
agreement, to join or not join a 
union if it is present.

341
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
 Future contract negotiations will likely focus on evolving workplace issues 
such as child and elder care, worker retraining, two-tiered wage plans, drug 
testing, and other such work-related issues. Job security will remain a top union 
priority due to the threat of job losses from offshore outsourcing and free trade 
agreements. For public union employees, the major issue may be collective bar-
gaining in general as states like Wisconsin try to restrict their power to bargain 
collectively, thus significantly reducing the unions’ value to members.  17  
 Unions will continue to support federal changes such as minimum wage 
increases. Many unions (particularly those in the service, retail, and hospitality 
industries) have clauses in their contracts that peg pay to a certain percentage 
above the minimum wage. Any increase in the minimum wage triggers an auto-
matic raise in union wages. Currently the average union worker in these indus-
tries earns $22 an hour, whereas the minimum wage is only $7.25. Critics of the 
recent proposals to raise the minimum wage to $9–$10 say that if it is raised, 
many low-skilled workers would be priced out of the market and unemploy-
ment will increase. In other words, union workers will earn more, while other 
 FIGURE 12.5 STATES 
WITH RIGHT-TO-WORK 
LAWS 
ID
NV
AZ
UT
WY
ND
SD
NE
KS
TX
LA
AR
TN
MS AL
GA
FL
SC
NC
VA
IA
IN
MI
 = Right-to-work states
OK
 FIGURE 12.4 DIFFERENT 
FORMS OF UNION 
AGREEMENTS 
The Taft-Hartley Act made this form of agreement illegal. Under this type of labor agreement,
employers could hire only current union members for a job.
Closed shop
The majority of labor agreements are of this type. In a union shop, the employer can hire
anyone, but as a condition of employment, employees hired must join the union to keep
their jobs.
Union shop
Employers may hire anyone. Employees need not join the union, but are required to pay a union
fee. A small percentage of labor agreements are of this type.
Agency shop
Union membership is voluntary for new and existing employees. Those who don’t join the union
don’t have to pay union dues. Few union contracts are of this type.
Open shop

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
342
workers may lose their jobs.  18 Advocates of the wage increase say that the 
increase is necessary to protect the “working poor.” What do you think?  
 Resolving Labor–Management Disagreements 
 The negotiated labor–management agreement becomes a guide to work rela-
tions between management and the union. However, it doesn’t necessarily end 
negotiations between them because there are sometimes differences concern-
ing interpretations of the agreement. For example, managers may interpret a 
certain clause in the agreement to mean they are free to select who works 
overtime. Union members may interpret the same clause to mean that manag-
ers must select employees for overtime on the basis of seniority. If the parties 
can’t resolve such controversies, employees may file a grievance. 
 A   grievance   is a charge by employees that management is not abiding by 
or fulfilling the terms of the negotiated labor–management agreement as they 
perceive it. Overtime rules, promotions, layoffs, transfers, and job assignments 
are generally sources of employee grievances. Handling them demands a good 
deal of contact between union officials and managers. Grievances, however, do 
not imply that a company has broken the law or the labor agreement. In fact, 
the vast majority of grievances are negotiated and resolved by   shop stewards   
(union officials who work permanently in an organization and represent 
employee interests on a daily basis) and supervisory-level managers. However, 
if a grievance is not settled at this level, formal grievance procedures will begin. 
 Figure 12.6  illustrates the steps a formal grievance procedure could follow.  
 grievance  
 A charge by employees that 
management is not abiding by 
the terms of the negotiated 
labor–management agreement.  
 shop stewards  
 Union officials who work 
permanently in an organization 
and represent employee 
interests on a daily basis.  
 FIGURE 12.6 THE 
GRIEVANCE RESOLUTION 
PROCESS 
 The grievance process may 
move through several steps 
before the issue is resolved. 
At each step, the issue is 
negotiated between union 
officials and managers. If no 
resolution is achieved, an 
outside arbitrator may be 
mutually agreed on. If so, the 
decision by the arbitrator is 
binding (legally enforceable). 
Local union 
Union business manager
Union shop steward
Employee grievance
Union grievance
committee
National
union officer
Corporate officer
Supervisory manager
Plant manager
Labor relations manager
Higher-level manager
No resolution
Negotiation
No resolution
Negotiation
No resolution
Negotiation
No resolution
Negotiation
Arbitrator or
arbitration panel

343
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
 Mediation and Arbitration 
 During the contract negotiation process, there is generally a   bargaining zone   , 
which is the range of options between the initial and final offers that each 
party will consider before negotiations dissolve or reach an impasse. If labor 
and management negotiators aren’t able to agree on alternatives within this 
bargaining zone, mediation may be necessary. 
 Mediation   is the use of a third party, called a  mediator, who encourages 
both sides in a dispute to continue negotiating and often makes suggestions 
for resolving the matter. Keep in mind that mediators evaluate facts in the 
dispute and then make suggestions, not decisions. Elected officials (both cur-
rent and past), attorneys, and college professors often serve as mediators in 
labor disputes. The National Mediation Board provides federal mediators 
when requested in a labor dispute. In 2011, the National Football League and 
the Players Association asked for the assistance of a federal mediator in their 
attempt to forge a new contract. The National Hockey League made the same 
request during its labor dispute in 2012.  19 
 A more extreme option used to resolve conflicts is   arbitration   —an agree-
ment to bring an impartial third party—a single arbitrator or arbitration 
panel—to render a binding decision in a labor dispute. The arbitrator(s) must 
be acceptable to both labor and management. You may have heard of profes-
sional baseball players filing for arbitration to resolve a contract dispute with 
their teams or to contest a penalty imposed by the league.  20 Many negotiated 
labor–management agreements in the United States call for the use of arbitra-
tion to end labor disputes. The nonprofit American Arbitration Association is 
the dominant organization used in dispute resolution.  21 
 Describe the tactics used by labor and management during conflicts, and 
discuss the role of unions in the future.
TACTICS USED IN LABOR–
MANAGEMENT CONFLICTS 
 If labor and management cannot reach an agreement through collective 
bargaining, and negotiations break down, either side, or both, may use 
specific tactics to enhance its negotiating position and perhaps 
sway public opinion. Unions primarily use strikes and boy-
cotts, as well as pickets and work slowdowns. Management 
may implement lockouts, injunctions, and even strike-
breakers. The following sections explain each tactic 
briefly.  
 Union Tactics 
 A   strike  occurs when workers collectively refuse to 
go to work. Strikes have been the most potent 
union tactic. They attract public attention to a 
labor dispute and can cause operations in a company 
to slow down or totally cease. Besides refusing to work, 
strikers may also picket the company, walking around 
carrying signs and talking with the public and the 
media about the issues in the dispute. Unions also 
often use picketing as an informational tool before going 
on strike. One purpose of picketing is to alert the public to an 
 bargaining zone  
 The range of options between 
the initial and final offer that 
each party will consider before 
negotiations dissolve or reach 
an impasse.  
 mediation  
 The use of a third party, called 
a mediator, who encourages 
both sides in a dispute to 
continue negotiating and often 
makes suggestions for 
resolving the dispute.  
 arbitration  
 The agreement to bring in an 
impartial third party (a single 
arbitrator or a panel of 
arbitrators) to render a binding 
decision in a labor dispute.  
LO 12–4
iSee It! Need help 
understanding mediation 
vs. arbitration? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
344
issue stirring labor unrest, even though a strike has not yet been approved by 
the union’s membership. Strikes sometimes lead to the resolution of a labor 
dispute; however, they also have generated violence and extended bitterness. 
Often after a strike is finally settled, labor and management remain openly 
hostile toward each other and mutual complaints of violations of the negoti-
ated labor–management agreement continue. 
 The public often realizes how important a worker is when he or she 
goes on strike. In Chicago, 350,000 students and their parents experienced 
an unexpected seven-day vacation when Chicago teachers went on strike in 
2012. That’s why many states prohibit public safety workers (police and 
firefighters) and teachers from striking, even though they can be unionized. 
Employees of the federal government, such as postal workers, can unionize 
but are also denied the right to strike. When strikes are prohibited, how-
ever, workers sometimes display their frustrations by engaging in sickouts 
(often called the  blue flu ). That is, they arrange as a group to be absent from 
work and claim illness as the reason. In critical industries such as airlines 
and railroads, under the Taft-Hartley Act, the U.S. president can ask for a 
 cooling-off period   ,  during which workers return to their jobs while nego-
tiations continue, to prevent a strike. The cooling-off period can last up to 
80 days. 
 Today, both labor and management seek to avoid strikes. However, as 
technological change, offshore outsourcing, wage disparities, and reductions 
in worker benefits continue it’s unlikely that strikes will disappear.  22 Strikes in 
entertainment, health care, transportation, fast food, professional sports, and 
other industries prove the strike is not dead as a labor tactic. 
 Unions also attempt boycotts as a means to obtain their objectives in a 
labor dispute. Boycotts can be classified as primary or secondary. A   primary 
boycott   occurs when labor encourages both its members and the general pub-
lic not to buy the products or services of a firm engaged in a labor dispute. A 
 secondary boycott   is an attempt by labor to convince others to stop doing 
business with a firm that is the subject of a primary boycott. Labor unions can 
legally authorize primary boycotts, but the Taft-Hartley Act prohibits using 
secondary boycotts. For example, a union could not initiate a secondary boy-
cott against a retail chain because its stores carry products of a company that’s 
the target of a primary boycott.  
 Management Tactics 
 Like labor unions, management also uses specific tac-
tics to achieve its workplace goals. A   lockout   is an 
attempt by management to put pressure on union 
workers by temporarily closing the business. When 
workers don’t work, they don’t get paid. Though man-
agement rarely uses this tactic, high-profile lockouts 
such as the National Football League players and lower-
profile lockouts like the Minnesota Orchestra, show 
that this tactic is still used.  23 Management, however, 
most often uses injunctions and strikebreakers to 
counter labor demands it sees as excessive. 
 An   injunction   is a court order directing someone 
to do something or to refrain from doing something. 
Management has sought injunctions to order strik-
ing workers back to work, limit the number of pick-
ets during a strike, or otherwise deal with any 
actions that could be detrimental to the public 
 strike  
 A union strategy in which 
workers refuse to go to work; 
the purpose is to further 
workers’ objectives after an 
impasse in collective bargaining.  
 cooling-off period  
 When workers in a critical 
industry return to their jobs while 
the union and management 
continue negotiations.  
 primary boycott  
 When a union encourages both 
its members and the general 
public not to buy the products of 
a firm involved in a labor dispute.  
 secondary boycott  
 An attempt by labor to convince 
others to stop doing business 
with a firm that is the subject of 
a primary boycott; prohibited by 
the Taft-Hartley Act.  
 lockout  
 An attempt by management to 
put pressure on unions by 
temporarily closing the business.  
 The conflict between 
NFL players and owners 
in 2011 resulted in the 
owners locking the play-
ers out of team facilities 
for many months. How 
did the lockout affect 
the 2011–2012 season? 
What effect did the lock-
out have on fans? 

345
welfare. For a court to issue an injunction, management must show a just 
cause, such as the possibility of violence or destruction of private property. 
 Employers have had the right to replace striking workers since a 1938 
Supreme Court ruling, but this tactic was used infrequently until the 1980s. 
The use of strikebreakers since then has been a particular source of hostility 
and violence in labor relations.   Strikebreakers   (called scabs by unions) are 
workers hired to do the jobs of striking employees until the labor dispute is 
resolved. Be sure to read the nearby Making Ethical Decisions box, which 
deals with this issue.  
 The Future of Unions and Labor–Management Relations 
 Organized labor is at a crossroads. As noted earlier, less than 7 percent of 
workers in the private sector are unionized and nearly half of all union 
 members work in the public sector, with union membership varying 
 considerably by state (see  Figure 12.7 ). 24 Once-powerful unions like the United 
Auto  Workers (UAW) have lost three-fourths of their membership since 1979.  25 
This loss has occurred despite unions like the UAW granting management 
concessions, or   givebacks   , of previous gains in attempts to save jobs. Both 
public and  private sector union members now face challenges as they try to 
maintain remaining wage and fringe benefit gains achieved in past negotia-
tions. Perhaps what’s even more concerning to labor unions is that union 
membership is highest among workers 45–64 years old and lowest among 
workers 18–25 years old.  26  
 Unions in the future will undoubtedly be quite different from those in the 
past. Today the largest union in the United States is the National Education 
Association (NEA) with 3.2 million members. The Service Employees Interna-
tional Union (SEIU) with 2.2 million members is second. You might note that 
the NEA is a public sector union and the SEIU’s emphasis is on services. To 
grow, unions will have to include more white-collar, female, and foreign-born 
workers than they have traditionally included. The traditional manufacturing 
base that unions depended on for growth needs to give way to organizing 
efforts in industries like health care (over 16 million workers) and information 
 injunction  
 A court order directing 
someone to do something or to 
refrain from doing something.  
 strikebreakers  
 Workers hired to do the jobs of 
striking workers until the labor 
dispute is resolved.  
 givebacks  
 Concessions made by union 
members to management; 
gains from labor negotiations 
are given back to management 
to help employers remain 
competitive and thereby save 
jobs.  
 making ethical decisions 
 The recent economic slowdown 
has been very difficult. Your wallet 
is almost empty, and bills for your 
college expenses, food, and other 
expenses keep going up. You 
read last weekend that Shop-Till-
You-Drop, a local grocery chain in 
your town, is looking for workers 
to replace striking members of 
United Food and Commercial 
Workers (UFCW). The workers are 
striking because of a reduction in 
health insurance benefits and 
reduced payment to their 
pensions. 
 Several classmates at your col-
lege are UFCW members employed 
at Shop-Till-You-Drop stores, and 
many other students at your college 
are supporting the strike. The stores 
also employ many people from your 
neighborhood whose families 
depend on the income and benefits. 
Shop-Till-You-Drop argues that the 
company has made a fair offer to 
the union, but with the increasing 
cost of health care and other bene-
fits, the workers’ demands are 
excessive and could force the com-
pany into bankruptcy. 
 To Cross or Not to Cross? 
s
 Shop-Till-You-Drop is offering 
replacement workers an attractive 
wage rate and flexible schedules 
to cross the picket line and work 
during the strike. The company 
has suggested the possibility of 
permanent employment, depend-
ing on the results of the strike. As 
a struggling student, you could 
use the job and the money for 
tuition and expenses. Will you 
cross the picket line and apply? 
What could be the consequences 
of your decision? Is your choice 
ethical? 
 injunction  
 A court order directing someone 
to do something or to refrain 
from doing something.  

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
346
technology (over 4 million workers).  27 Unions will also need to take on a new 
role in partnering with management in training workers, redesigning jobs, 
and assimilating the changing workforce to the job requirements of the new 
service and knowledge-work economy. How organized labor and management 
handle these challenges may well define the future for labor unions. After the 
Test Prep, we will look at other issues facing employees and managers in the 
21st century.  
 FIGURE 12.7 UNION 
MEMBERSHIP BY STATE  
 Source: Bureau of Labor Statistics, 
www.bls.gov , accessed July 2014. 
ID
NV
AZ
UT
WY
ND
SD
NE
KS
TX
LA
AR
TN
MS
AL
GA
FL
SC
NC
VA
WV
IA
17.0% or more
13.0% to 16.9%
9.0% to 12.9%
5.0% to 8.9%
4.9% or less
MO
IL
WI
MN
IN
KY
OH
PA
NY
ME
MI
MT
CO
NM
CA
OR
WA
AK
DE
DC
Pacific
Mountain
West
North Central
East
North Central
Middle
Atlantic
South
Atlantic
New England
West
South Central
East
South Central
HI
NJ
CT
RI
MA
NH
VT
OK
 • What are the major laws that affected union growth, and what does 
each one cover?  
 • How do changes in the economy affect the objectives of unions?  
 • What are the major tactics used by unions and by management to 
assert their power in contract negotiations?  
 • What types of workers do unions need to organize in the future?  
•
What are the major law
 test  prep  
ws that affecte
ws
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.

347
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
 Assess some of today’s controversial employee–management issues, such as 
executive compensation, pay equity, sexual harassment, child care and elder 
care, drug testing, and violence in the workplace.
CONTROVERSIAL EMPLOYEE–MANAGEMENT 
ISSUES 
 This is an interesting time in the history of employee–management relations. 
Organizations are active in global expansion, offshore outsourcing, and technol-
ogy change. The U.S. economy is recovering from the worst recession in many 
decades. The government is taking a more active role in mandating what bene-
fits and assurances businesses must provide to workers. Employees are raising 
questions of fairness, income inequality, and workplace security. Let’s look at 
several key workplace issues, starting with executive compensation.  
 Executive Compensation 
 Kobe Bryant dribbles his way to $62 million a year, Robert Downey Jr. acts his 
way to $75 million a year, Jennifer Lopez sings her way to $45 million a year, and 
Ellen DeGeneres talks and jokes her way to over $55 million a year.  28 Is it out of 
line, then, for Lawrence Ellison, CEO of Oracle, to make $77 million a year?  29
Chapter 2 explained that the U.S. free-market system is built on incentives that 
allow top executives to make such large amounts—or more. Today, however, the 
government, boards of directors, stockholders, unions, and employees are chal-
lenging this principle and arguing that executive compensation has gotten out of 
line. In fact, the average total CEO compensation (salary, bonuses, and incen-
tives) at a major company was $12.3 million, compared to just over $35,000 for 
the average worker.  30 The Adapting to Change box explores the dis-
parity between what college head coaches earn (millions) 
and what college athletes earn (nothing).  
 In theory, CEO compensation and bonuses are 
determined by the firm’s profitability or an increase 
in its stock price. The logic of this assumption was 
that as the fortunes of a company and its stockhold-
ers grew, so would the rewards of the CEO. Today, 
however, executives generally receive stock options 
(the ability to buy company stock at a set price at a 
later date) and restricted stock (stock issued directly 
to the CEO that can’t be sold usually for three or four 
years) as part of their compensation. Stock options 
account for over 50 percent of a CEO’s compensation, 
and restricted stock makes up almost 25 percent. 
 What’s even more frustrating to those who ques-
tion how much chief executives are paid is that CEOs are 
often rewarded richly even if their company does not meet 
expectations, or they leave under pressure.  31 Leo Apotheker 
was entitled to almost $35 million for less than one year’s work 
at Hewlett-Packard during which time the company stock price 
fell by 46 percent. 32 Ron Johnson was given a $52 million 
 signing bonus from JCPenney and left the company 17 months 
later after the stock price fell by 50 percent. Many CEOs are also 
awarded fat retainers, consulting contracts, and lavish perks 
when they retire. 
LO 12–5
USA Today  listed Disney 
as one of the eight U.S. 
companies that most 
owed their employees a 
raise. The average Dis-
ney World cast member 
earned $8.47 an hour in 
2013. Meanwhile Dis-
ney’s CEO Robert Iger 
enjoyed a total compen-
sation package of 
$34.3 million. Corporate 
boards of directors 
determine executive 
compensation. Do you 
think this is a fair sys-
tem of compensation for 
CEOs? Do you think 
workers should have 
input? 

348
 Noted economist Thomas Piketty believes this income inequality is harm-
ful and unnecessary, “When you pay $10 million instead of $1 [million], you 
don’t have necessarily better performance or much higher productivity. . . . So I 
think there is really very little evidence that we need to pay people 100 times or 
200 times the average wage to get them to work. I think you have people who 
would accept the work for only 10 or 20 times the average wage.”  33 Whole 
Foods is one company that follows the suggestions of Piketty. At Whole Foods, 
executive pay is capped at 19 times the average employee’s salary. Unfortu-
nately, not many companies have placed such limits on executive compensa-
tion. Today the average CEO makes over 350 times what the lowest-paid 
employee earns. 34 Some numbers can be staggering. For example, a custodian 
earning just over minimum wage at CBS would have to work over 3,200 years 
to make what CEO Les Moonves earned in 2013 ($62 million).  35  
 As global competition intensifies, executive paychecks in Europe have 
increased, but European CEOs typically earn considerably less than what U.S. 
 adapting to change 
 Few would argue that football is a 
booming profit center for many 
colleges in the National Collegiate 
Athletic Association (NCAA) 
Division I (the highest level of 
NCAA sports). NCAA basketball is 
no slacker either. The 2014 NCAA 
Men’s Championship drew a sell-
out crowd at AT&T Stadium in 
Dallas while more than 23 million 
watched on television. 
Broadcasting rights for the entire 
tournament cost CBS $771 million. 
Regional economies in college 
towns like Columbia, Missouri; 
College Station, Texas; and South 
Bend, Indiana, reap huge reve-
nues on sports weekends. The 
University of Texas enjoyed reve-
nues of $163 million from athletics 
in 2014. Coaches are given con-
tracts worth millions. All is good 
for everyone. 
 Well, not everyone. There’s one 
group of stakeholders noticeably 
absent from this payday: the play-
ers. College athletes are not 
allowed to draw a salary or 
receive any gifts or other compen-
sation for their extracurricular 
efforts. Of course, some college 
athletes do receive scholarships 
that cover part or all of their tuition 
and room and board. However, 
the amount of revenue generated 
by competitions like basketball’s 
March Madness or football’s 
National Championship have led 
many to demand that student ath-
letes receive a cut of the action. 
After all, they believe they invest 
just as much time with practice 
and travel as their coaches do. 
 Northwestern University’s foot-
ball players won a ruling from the 
National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB) that gave them the right 
to unionize. The players argued 
they deserved collective bargain-
ing rights, financial coverage for 
sports-related injuries, an educa-
tional trust to help players 
graduate, and a team of concus-
sion experts to be placed on the 
sidelines at games. With football 
workweeks stretching out to as 
long as 60 hours, the players 
believed they deserved compen-
sation to justify the sport’s domi-
nance over their lives. 
Northwestern is appealing, claim-
ing the players have an educa-
tional relationship with the school 
rather than an economic one. 
 The school also sees Title IX 
requirements as an obstacle. For 
instance, if the college began pay-
ing its men’s football and basket-
ball team, it would need to do the 
same for its unprofitable athletic 
programs, regardless of sport or 
gender. This is a pay issue that 
could be a game changer. What 
do you think? Are athletes 
employees of the school or are 
they students? Should players be 
paid for their participation or 
should they be treated like partici-
pants in any other voluntary extra-
curricular activity? 
 Sources: Alejandra Cancino, “Northwestern, 
Football Players Cap Off Arguments in Union 
Effort,”  Chicago Tribune, March 18, 2014; Ken 
Badenhausen, “NCAA Tournament 2014: By the 
Numbers,”  Forbes, March 20, 2014; and Brian 
Bennett, “Northwestern Players Get Union Vote,” 
ESPN, March 26, 2014. 
 College Athletes: What Are They Worth? 
www.ncaa.com

349
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
CEOs make. In some European countries, such as Germany, by law workers 
have a say in company management and are entitled to seats on the board of 
directors of major firms. Since boards set executive pay, this could be a reason 
why pay imbalances are less in Germany. This process, called  co-determina-
tion, calls for cooperation between management and workers in decision mak-
ing. In Japan, few Japanese CEOs take home super-sized paychecks like in the 
United States. 
 Today, government and shareholder pressure for full disclosure of execu-
tive compensation is putting U.S. boards of directors on notice that they are 
not there simply to enrich CEOs. The passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street 
Reform and Consumer Protection Act was intended to give shareholders more 
say in compensation decisions and is requiring more information about exec-
utive pay packages. Still, it’s important to remember that most U.S. executives 
are responsible for multibillion-dollar corporations, work 70-plus hours a 
week, and often travel excessively. Many have turned potential problems at 
companies into successes and reaped huge benefits for employees and stock-
holders as well as themselves. Furthermore, there are few seasoned, skilled 
professionals who can manage large companies, especially troubled compa-
nies looking for the right CEO to accomplish a turnaround. There’s no easy 
answer to the question of what is fair compensation for executives, but it’s a 
safe bet the controversy will not go away.  
 Pay Equity 
 The Equal Pay Act of 1963 requires companies to give equal pay to men and 
women who do the same job. For example, it’s illegal to pay a female nurse 
less than a male nurse unless factors such as seniority, merit pay, or perfor-
mance incentives are involved. But  pay equity goes beyond the concept of 
equal pay for equal work; it says people in jobs that require similar levels of 
education, training, or skills should receive equal pay. Pay equity com-
pares the value of a job like a hair stylist or librarian (traditionally wom-
en’s jobs) with jobs like a plumber or truck driver (traditionally men’s 
jobs). Such a comparison shows that “women’s” jobs tend to pay less—
sometimes much less. This disparity caused a brief reconsideration of a 
1980s concept called  comparable worth that suggested people in jobs 
requiring similar levels of education, training, or skills should receive 
equal pay. Evidence did not support that comparable worth would lead to 
better market equilibrium, only more chaos and inequity.  
 In the United States today, women earn 77 percent of what men earn, 
although the disparity varies by profession, job experience and tenure, and 
level of education.  36 In the past, the primary explanation for this disparity 
was that women worked only 50 to 60 percent of their available years once 
they left school, whereas men normally worked all those years. This expla-
nation doesn’t have much substance today because fewer women leave the 
workforce for an extended time. Other explanations suggest many women 
devote more time to their families than men do and thus accept lower-
paying jobs with more flexible hours. 
 Today women are competing financially with men in fields such as 
health care, biotechnology, information technology, and other knowledge-
based jobs. Younger women are faring better than older women finan-
cially. Recent reports suggest that young urban women actually earn 8 
percent more than their male counterparts due to their higher college 
graduation rates. Today women earn almost 60 percent of the bachelor’s 
and master’s degrees awarded.  37 With more women earning business 
degrees, the number of women in management and high-paying finance 
  Women have made 
important strides in 
business, politics, and 
sports. They still, how-
ever, are behind when it 
comes to getting paid. 
Today women earn only 
77 percent of what men 
earn. Such disparities 
cause many to support 
the case for comparable 
worth and a more equi-
table workplace. What’s 
your opinion concerning 
this issue? 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
350
jobs has also increased considerably over the past 10 years. Still, Heather 
Boushey, a senior economist at the Center for American Progress, believes that 
the government puts too much faith in the idea that education will automati-
cally close the pay gap.  38 She and other critics claim that women, especially 
women with children, still earn less, are less likely to go into business, and are 
more likely to live in poverty than men.  39 There is no question that pay equity 
promises to remain a challenging employee–management issue.  
 Sexual Harassment 
 Sexual harassment   refers to unwelcome sexual advances, requests for sexual 
favors, and other verbal or physical conduct of a sexual nature that creates a 
hostile work environment.  40 The Civil Rights Act of 1991 governs sexual 
harassment of both men and women. In 1997, the Supreme Court reinforced 
this fact when it said same-sex harassment also falls within the purview of 
sexual harassment law. Managers and workers are now much more sensitive 
to sexual comments and behavior than they were in the past. The number of 
complaints filed with the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission 
(EEOC) has declined significantly over the past 20 years yet EEOC statistics 
show sexual harassment remains a persistent employee complaint.  41 The 
number of reports of sexual harassment and assault in the military, to both 
men and women, has risen sharply in recent years.  42 Conduct on the job can 
be considered illegal under specific conditions:
 
• 
An employee’s submission to such conduct is explicitly or implicitly 
made a term or condition of employment, or an employee’s submission 
to or rejection of such conduct is used as the basis for employment 
decisions affecting the worker’s status. A threat like “Go out with me 
or you’re fired” or “Go out with me or you’ll never be promoted here” 
constitutes  quid pro quo sexual harassment. 
 
• 
The conduct unreasonably interferes with a worker’s job performance 
or creates an intimidating, hostile, or offensive work environment. 
This type of harassment is  hostile work environment sexual harassment.
 The Supreme Court broadened the scope of what can be considered a 
hostile work environment; the key word seemed to be  unwelcome, a term for 
behavior that would offend a reasonable person. Companies and individuals 
have found that the U.S. justice system means business in enforcing sexual 
harassment laws. In a highly publicized case, the Mayor of San 
Diego, California, was forced to resign in 2013 after a sexual 
harassment scandal.  43 Banking giant JPMorgan paid $1.5 mil-
lion to settle a sexual harassment suit that alleged a hostile work 
environment for female mortgage bankers. Foreign companies 
doing business in the United States are also not immune to sex-
ual harassment charges as both Toyota and Nissan discovered. 
 A key problem is that workers and managers often know a 
policy concerning sexual harassment exists, but have no idea 
what it says. To remedy this, some states have taken the lead. 
California and Connecticut require all companies with 50 
employees or more to provide sexual harassment prevention 
training to supervisors. Maine requires such training for compa-
nies with 15 or more employees. Many companies have set up 
rapid, effective grievance procedures and react promptly to alle-
gations of harassment. Such efforts may save businesses millions 
of dollars in lawsuits and make the workplace more productive 
 sexual harassment  
 Unwelcome sexual advances, 
requests for sexual favors, and 
other conduct (verbal or 
physical) of a sexual nature that 
creates a hostile work 
environment.  
 Unwelcome sexual 
advances, requests for 
sexual favors, and other 
verbal or physical con-
duct are prohibited 
under the Civil Rights 
Act of 1991. While most 
employees are aware of 
sexual harassment poli-
cies in the workplace, 
they are often not cer-
tain what sexual harass-
ment actually means. 
Should companies train 
employees about the 
dos and don’ts of 
acceptable sexual con-
duct on the job? 

351
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
and harmonious. Nonetheless, there is a long way to go before sexual harass-
ment as a key employee–management issue disappears.  
 Child Care 
 Today women make up almost half the workforce in the United States. Approxi-
mately three-fourths of women with children under 18 (including over 60 per-
cent of mothers with children under age 3) are in the workforce. Such statistics 
concern employers for two reasons: (1) absences related to child care cost U.S. 
businesses billions of dollars annually, and (2) the issue of who should pay for 
employee child care raises a question that often divides employees. Many co-
workers oppose child care benefits for parents or single parents, arguing that 
single workers and single-income families should not subsidize child care. Oth-
ers contend that employers and the government have the responsibility to create 
child care systems to assist employees. Unfortunately federal assistance has not 
increased since passage of the Welfare Reform Act many years ago, and few 
expect new government spending for child care due to the current federal deficit 
problems. Thus, child care remains an important workplace issue.  
 A number of large companies offer child care as an employee benefit. 
 Working Mother magazine compiles an annual list of the 100 best companies 
for working mothers.  44 Both IBM and Johnson & Johnson have been praised 
as particularly sympathetic and cooperative with working mothers and have 
made the list every year for the past 25 years. Other large firms with extensive 
child care programs include American Express, Bristol-Myers Squibb, and 
Intel, which provide online homework assistance for employees’ children. 
Some additional child care benefits provided by employers include:
 
• 
Discount arrangements with national child care chains.  
 
• 
Vouchers that offer payments toward child care the employee selects.  
 
• 
Referral services that help identify high-quality child care facilities to 
employees.  
  On-site day care is still a 
relatively uncommon 
employee benefit in the 
United States today. 
Although it is often 
expensive to operate, it 
can pay big dividends in 
employee satisfaction 
and productivity. Who 
should pay for 
employee benefits like 
child care and elder 
care, the employee or 
the company? 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
352
 
• 
On-site child care centers at which parents can visit children at lunch 
or during lag times throughout the workday.  
 
• 
Sick-child centers to care for moderately ill children.  
 Unfortunately, small businesses with fewer than 100 employees cannot 
compete with big companies in providing assistance with child care. Some 
small companies, however, have found that implementing creative child care 
programs can help them compete with larger organizations in hiring and 
retaining qualified employees. Haemonetics, located in Braintree, Massachu-
setts, is a leading company in blood processing technology that believes creat-
ing a work–life balance is the key to keeping valued workers. The company 
operates “Kid’s Space at Haemonetics” at its corporate headquarters staffed by 
highly qualified early childhood educators from Bright Horizons who develop 
planned and spontaneous daily activities. 
 Twenty-five years ago, entrepreneurs Roger Brown and Linda Mason rec-
ognized the emerging need for child care as a benefit in the workplace. The 
husband-and-wife team started Bright Horizons Family Solutions Inc. to pro-
vide child care at worksites for employers. Today, their company is the lead-
ing provider in the corporate-sponsored child care market and runs nearly 
700 child care centers for about 400 companies including almost 100 Fortune 
500 companies. Increasing numbers of two-income households and the over 
13.7 million single-parent households in the United States ensure that child 
care will remain a key employee–management issue even as businesses face 
the growing challenge of elder care.  45  
 Elder Care 
 Currently, there are approximately 40.3 million Americans over the age of 65. 
Over the next 20 years, the number of Americans over 65 is expected to grow 
to over 70 million; that will be approximately 20 percent of the U.S. popula-
tion in 2030. The likelihood that an American age 65 will live to age 90 has also 
increased significantly.  46 What this means is that many workers will be con-
fronted with how to care for older parents and other relatives.  47 Today in the 
United States, 65.7 million caregivers (constituting 31 percent of U.S. house-
holds) are providing some care to an elderly person.  48 According to the 
National Alliance for Caregiving, such caregiving obligations cause employees 
to miss approximately 15 million days of work per year. Companies are losing 
an estimated $35 billion a year in reduced productivity, absenteeism, and turn-
over from employees responsible for aging relatives.  49 Elder care is becoming 
a key workplace issue. 
 The U.S. Office of Personnel Management (OPM) found that employees 
with elder care responsibilities need information about medical, legal, and 
insurance issues, as well as the full support of their supervisors and com-
pany.  50 The OPM also suggests such caregivers may require flextime, telecom-
muting, part-time employment, or job sharing. Some firms offer employee 
assistance programs. DuPont and JPMorgan Chase provide elder care man-
agement services that include a needs assessment program for the employee. 
AAA and UPS offer health-spending accounts in which employees can put 
aside pretax income for elder care expenses. However, the number of compa-
nies offering elder care benefits is small compared to the number offering 
child care benefits. A Hewitt Associates survey found that only 49 percent of 
companies either currently had an elder care program or planned to introduce 
one in the near future. Unfortunately, the government does not provide much 
relief since both Medicare and Medicaid place heavy financial burdens for 
care on family caregivers.  51 

353
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
 According to the American Association of 
Retired Persons (AARP), as more experienced and 
high-ranking employees care for older parents and 
relatives, the costs to companies will rise even 
higher. This argument makes sense, since older, 
more experienced workers often hold jobs more 
critical to a company than those held by younger 
workers (who are most affected by child care 
issues). Many firms now face the fact that trans-
fers and promotions are often out of the question 
for employees whose elderly parents need ongoing 
care. Unfortunately, as the nation gets older, the 
elder care situation will grow considerably worse, 
meaning this employee–management issue will 
persist well into the future.  
 Drug Testing 
 Not long ago, acquired immunodeficiency syndrome (AIDS) caused great con-
cern in the workplace. Many companies called for pre-employment testing for 
AIDS. Thankfully, the spread of AIDS has declined in the United States—good 
news for all citizens and for business. However, alcohol and drug abuse are 
serious workplace issues that touch far more workers and stretch from factory 
floors to construction sites to the locker rooms of professional sports teams. 
 Alcohol is the most widely used drug in the workplace, with an estimated 
6.5 percent of full-time U.S. employees believed to be heavy drinkers.  52
Approximately 40 percent of industrial injuries and fatalities can be linked to 
alcohol consumption. According to the Department of Health and Human 
Services’ Substance Abuse & Mental Health Services Association, more than 8 
percent of full-time workers ages 18–49 use illegal drugs. In some industries, 
such as food services and construction, the percentage of workers using illegal 
drugs is much higher. How do you think the legalization of marijuana in states 
like Colorado and Washington will affect the workplace?  
 Individuals who use illegal drugs are three and a half times more likely to 
be in workplace accidents and five times more likely to file a workers’ compen-
sation claim than other employees. According to the National Institute on 
Drug Abuse, employed drug users cost their employers about twice as much in 
medical and workers’ compensation claims as do their drug-free co-workers. 
The U.S. Department of Labor projects that over a one-year period, drug abuse 
costs the U.S. economy $414 billion in lost work, health care costs, crime, traf-
fic accidents, and other expenses, and over $150 billion in lost productivity.  53
The National Institutes of Health estimates each drug abuser can cost an 
employer approximately $10,000 annually. Drug abusers are associated with 
50 percent on-the-job accident rates, 10 percent higher absenteeism, 30 per-
cent more turnover, and more frequent workplace violence incidents. Today, 
over 80 percent of major companies drug test new employees and 40 percent 
conduct random drug testing.  
 Violence in the Workplace 
 The school shootings at Sandy Hook Elementary School shocked the nation. 
The tragedy also reminded businesses that even though workplace violence 
has declined since the 1990s, the threat has in no way disappeared.  54 Employ-
ers must be vigilant about potential violence in the workplace. The Bureau of 
Labor Statistics reports that more than 2 million Americans are impacted by 
 Drug abuse costs the 
U.S. economy hundreds 
of billions of dollars in 
lost work, health care 
costs, crime, traffic acci-
dents, and productivity. 
It is estimated that each 
drug abuser can cost an 
employer approximately 
$10,000 a year. Today, 
over 80 percent of 
major companies drug 
test new employees and 
40 percent conduct ran-
dom drug testing. Do 
you think these efforts 
are successful in reduc-
ing drug abuse in the 
workplace? Why or why 
not? 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
354
workplace violence annually. The Occupational Safety and Health Administra-
tion (OSHA) reports that homicides account for 16 percent of all workplace 
deaths and are the number one cause of death for women in the workplace. In 
fact, one in six violent crimes in the United States occurs at work. 
 Many companies have taken action to prevent problems before they 
occur. They have held focus groups that invite employee input, hired manag-
ers with strong interpersonal skills, and employed skilled consultants to deal 
with any growing potential for workplace violence. State Farm Insurance and 
Verizon Wireless are among companies that have initiated policies to deal 
with this growing threat. At software firm Mindbridge, based in Worcester, 
Pennsylvania, two company officials must be present whenever an employee 
is disciplined or fired. In many states employers can seek a temporary restrain-
ing order on behalf of workers experiencing threats or harassment. 
 Some companies believe that the media exaggerates reports of workplace 
violence. According to the Bureau of Labor Statistics, 70 percent of U.S. work-
places neither provide any formal training for dealing with prevention of vio-
lence at work nor have a policy that addresses workplace violence. Unfortunately, 
organizations such as the U.S. Postal Service, U.S. Military, and Xerox can 
attest that workplace violence is all too real and is likely to be an issue for the 
foreseeable future. 
 Firms that have healthy employee–management relations have a better 
chance to prosper than those that don’t. Taking a proactive approach is the 
best way to ensure positive employee–management work environments. The 
proactive manager anticipates potential issues and works toward resolving 
them before they get out of hand—a good lesson for any manager.  
 • How does top-executive pay in the United States compare with top-
executive pay in other countries?  
 • What’s the difference between pay equity and equal pay for equal work?  
 • How is the term  sexual harassment defined, and when does sexual 
behavior become illegal?  
 • What are some of the issues related to child care and elder care, and 
how are companies addressing those issues?  
•
How does top-executi
 test  prep  
ive pay in the U
ive
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course to 
check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  
 Trace the history of organized labor in the United States.
 • 
 What was the first union?  
 The cordwainers (shoemakers) organized a craft union of skilled special-
ists in 1792. The Knights of Labor, formed in 1869, was the first national 
labor organization.  
 • 
 How did the AFL-CIO evolve?  
 The American Federation of Labor (AFL), formed in 1886, was an organi-
zation of craft unions. The Congress of Industrial Organizations (CIO), a 
group of unskilled and semiskilled workers, broke off from the AFL in 
1935. Over time, the two organizations saw the benefits of joining and 
What was
LO 12–1
 summary 

355
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
became the AFL-CIO in 1955. The AFL-CIO is a federation of labor unions, 
not a national union.  
 Discuss the major legislation affecting labor unions.
 • 
 What are the provisions of the major legislation affecting labor unions?  
 See  Figure 12.1 . 
 Outline the objectives of labor unions.
 • 
 What topics typically appear in labor–management agreements?  
 See  Figure 12.3 . 
 Describe the tactics used by labor and management during conflicts, and 
discuss the role of unions in the future.
 • 
 What are the tactics used by unions and management in conflicts?  
 Unions can use strikes and boycotts. Management can use strikebreakers, 
injunctions, and lockouts.  
 • 
 What will unions have to do to cope with declining membership?  
 Unions are facing a changing workplace. The National Education Associa-
tions is now the nation’s largest union. The Service Employees Interna-
tional Union (SEIU), with 2.2 million members, is the second largest 
union. Going forward, unions must adapt to an increasingly white-collar, 
female, and culturally diverse workforce. To help keep U.S. businesses 
competitive in global markets, many have taken on a new role in assisting 
management in training workers, redesigning jobs, and assimilating the 
changing workforce.  
 Assess some of today’s controversial employee–management issues, such as 
executive compensation, pay equity, sexual harassment, child care and elder 
care, drug testing, and violence in the workplace.
 • 
 What is a fair wage for managers?  
 The market and the businesses in it set managers’ salaries. What is fair is 
open to debate.  
 • 
 How are equal pay and pay equity different?  
 The Equal Pay Act of 1963 provides that workers receive equal pay for 
equal work (with exceptions for seniority, merit, or performance). Pay 
equity is the demand for equivalent pay for jobs requiring similar levels of 
education, training, and skills.  
 • 
 How are some companies addressing the child care issue?  
 Responsive companies are providing child care on the premises, emer-
gency care when scheduled care is interrupted, discounts with child care 
chains, vouchers to be used at the employee’s chosen care center, and 
referral services.  
 • 
 What is elder care, and what problems do companies face with regard to this 
growing problem?  
 Workers who need to provide elder care for dependent parents or others 
are generally more experienced and vital to the mission of the organization 
than younger workers are. The cost to business is very large and growing.  
LO 12–5
Wh t
LO 12–2
What top
LO 12–3
LO 12–4

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
356
 • 
 Why are more and more companies now testing workers and job applicants 
for substance abuse?  
 Drug abuse costs the U.S. economy $414 billion in lost work, health care 
costs, crime, traffic accidents, and other expenses, and over $150 billion in 
lost productivity. Individuals who use drugs are three and a half times 
more likely to be in workplace accidents and five times more likely to file 
a workers’ compensation claim than those who do not use drugs.  
 key terms 
 agency shop 
agreement  340
 American Federation of 
Labor (AFL)  336
 arbitration  343
 bargaining zone  343
 certification  339
 closed shop agreement  340
 collective bargaining  337
 Congress of Industrial 
Organizations (CIO)  336
 cooling-off period  344
 craft union  335
 decertification  339
 givebacks  345
 grievance  342
 industrial unions  336
 injunction  344
 Knights of Labor  336
 lockout 344
 mediation 343
 negotiated labor–
management agreement 
(labor contract)  340
 open shop agreement  340
 primary boycott  344
 right-to-work laws  340
 secondary boycott  344
 sexual harassment  350
  shop stewards  342
 strike  343
 strikebreakers  345
 union  334
 union security clause  340
 union shop agreement  340
 yellow-dog contract  337
 1. Do you believe that union shop agreements are violations of a worker’s 
freedom of choice in the workplace? Do you think open shop agreements 
unfairly penalize workers who pay dues to unions they have elected to rep-
resent them in the workplace?  
 2. Some college football and basketball coaches earn huge incomes. Should 
college volleyball and swimming coaches be paid comparably? Should col-
leges pay their student athletes to play? Should players in the Women’s 
National Basketball Association (WNBA) be paid the same as their male 
counterparts in the National Basketball Association (NBA)? What role 
should market forces and government play in determining such wages?  
 3. If a company provides employer-paid child care services to workers with 
children, should those who don’t have children or don’t need child care 
services be paid extra?  
1
 critical thinking 
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology 
1. Check whether your state supports the right of public employees (police, 
firefighters, teachers) to unionize and collectively bargain. If not, should 
it? Should such workers be allowed to strike?  
2. Evaluate the following statement: “Labor unions are dinosaurs that have 
outlived their usefulness in today’s knowledge-based economy.” After your 
evaluation, take the position on this statement that differs from your own 

357
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To understand why workers choose to join unions and how unions have made 
differences in certain industries.  
 EXERCISE 
 Visit the AFL-CIO website (  www.aflcio.org ) and find information about why 
workers join unions and what the benefits have been. 
 1. Explain how union membership has affected minorities, women, older 
workers, and part-time workers.  
 2. The AFL-CIO site presents the union’s perspective on labor issues. Look at 
the key issues and check sources such as the National Association of Man-
ufacturers (  www.nam.org ) and the National Right to Work Legal Defense 
Foundation (  www.righttowork.org ) that support management’s perspec-
tives and compare their positions on these issues.  
point of view and defend that position. Be sure to consider such questions 
as: Do unions serve a purpose in some industries? Do unions make the 
United States less competitive in global markets?  
 3. Research federal and state legislation related to child care, parental leave, 
and elder care benefits for employees. Are specific trends emerging? 
Should companies be responsible for providing such workplace benefits, 
or should the government share some responsibility? Why?  
 4. Compile a list of two or three employee–management issues not covered 
in the chapter. Compare your list with those of several classmates and see 
which issues you selected in common and which are unique to each indi-
vidual. Pick an issue you all agree will be important in the future and dis-
cuss its likely effects and outcomes.  
 5. Do businesses and government agencies have a duty to provide additional 
benefits to employees beyond fair pay and good working conditions? Pro-
pose a system you consider fair and equitable for employees and employers.  
 Video Case   
 After reading this chapter, you should be familiar 
with the history of labor unions. You have learned 
the tactics that labor uses to demand new benefits 
from management, and you have learned the tac-
tics that management uses to respond to labor 
demands. You are also familiar with the various 
laws that are involved in labor–management dis-
putes. You may get the impression from the media 
that labor unions are in decline and don’t have 
much clout anymore. In fact, the number of 
people in labor unions has declined dramatically, 
but that doesn’t mean that labor unions are not 
important today or that they have lost their pas-
sion for seeking fair treatment by companies. 
 We are so accustomed to thinking about labor 
unions in the auto, steel, and other related indus-
tries that we tend to overlook some truly key 
industries where labor unions are very important. 
No doubt you have heard in passing of the Screen 
Actors Guild (SAG), the American Federation of 
 UNITED WE STAND 

PART 4
Management of Human Resources: Motivating Employees to Produce Quality Goods and Services
358
Television and Radio Artists, and the Writers 
Guild of America. But do you have any idea what 
issues the membership faces in such unions? Are 
they the same issues that unions have always 
had—seniority, pay, benefits, etc.—or are they 
somehow different? 
 Many young people dream of becoming a 
“movie star.” They see the glamour, the excite-
ment, the adulation of the fans, and the huge pay-
checks. What they don’t see behind the scenes is 
the constant fight going on to win and keep cer-
tain privileges that past actors have won. Back in 
the 1930s, actors worked unrestricted hours, had 
no required meal breaks, and had unbreakable 
seven-year contracts. The producers tried to con-
trol whom you could marry, what political views 
you expressed, and what your morals should be. 
The Screen Actors Guild won some concessions 
for the actors in 1937, but the studios pretty much 
still “owned” their stars. Eventually the stars won 
the right to better contracts, to the point where 
independent studios were formed and actors 
could control their own careers, even demanding 
a percentage of the gross for their pay. 
 Other issues concerned residuals for films 
shown on TV and in reruns. Contracts had to do 
with things such as commercials and how the 
actors would be paid for them. Today’s contracts 
deal with issues like diversity, salary and work con-
ditions, financial assurances, safety considerations, 
and so on. Stipulations are constantly changing for 
actors. For example, independent film producers 
in the United States and around the world have dif-
ferent rules and requirements. TV commercials 
now appear on cell phones. The Screen Actors 
Guild keeps up with such changes to ensure fair 
treatment of its members. 
 While SAG is for movie actors, the American 
Federation of Television and Radio Artists is a 
performer’s union for actors, radio and TV 
announcers, and newspersons, singers, and others 
who perform on radio and/or TV. It negotiates 
wages and working conditions much like SAG, 
including health care and pensions. You can imag-
ine negotiating an issue like equal pay for equal 
work when dealing with highly paid actors with 
huge egos. 
 The Writers Guild of America (WGA) represents 
writers in the motion picture, broadcast, and news 
media industries. Like actors, writers have issues 
dealing with pay, benefits, retirement, etc. The more 
you think about it, the more it will become clear to 
you that actors and others in the entertainment 
industry need unions or some other kind of organi-
zation to protect them from unfair practices. You 
can only imagine what treatment actors and others 
get from independent companies in other countries 
if they don’t have representation. 
 Unions today are gathering momentum in 
nontraditional professions like nursing and teach-
ing (including college teachers). They are also 
gaining support in low paying jobs like fast food 
where the push is on for more equitable wages. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. What is the general attitude in your class 
toward labor unions? Are there many union 
workers in your town? Do you see labor 
unions gaining strength in the future?  
 2. One of the primary concerns of traditional 
labor unions is the treatment of outsourcing. 
Could the entertainment industry outsource 
operations? How would this affect SAG and 
the other unions?  
 3. The video touches on the era of Senator Joe 
McCarthy and the House Un-American Activi-
ties Committee. How has the government 
impacted on the growth and stability of labor 
unions?  
 1. 
Alana Semeuls and Michael Muskal, “Bankruptcy Protection 
Offers Hope for Detroit, Setback for Its Unions,”  Los Angeles 
Times, December 3, 2013; and “In a Hit to Unions, Detroit 
Bankruptcy OK’d,”  Associated Press, December 3, 2013. 
 2. 
Tom Watson, “Jobs with Justice: New Campaign Takes Aim 
at Low Wages, Working Poor, Falling Middle Class,”  Forbes, 
December 30, 2013. 
 3. 
Chris Isidore, “Union Membership at Businesses Grows,” 
CNN Money, January 27, 2014. 
 4. 
Steve Greenhouse, “Share of Workforce in a Union Falls to 
a 97-Year Low,” The  New York Times, January 23, 2013; and 
“Union Decline in Public Sector,”  The New York Times,  
January 24, 2014. 
 5. 
Luke Rosiak, “Union Bosses’ Salaries Put ‘Big’ in Big Labor,” 
Washington Times, January 11, 2013; and Andrew 
Doughman, “Union Leaders Salaries Stay High Even in Hard 
Times,”  Las Vegas Sun, August 19, 2013. 
 6. 
Morgan Housal, “50 Reasons Why This Is the Greatest Time 
Ever,”  USA Today, February 2, 2014. 
 7. 
  www.aftcio.org  , accessed January 2014. 
 8. 
Charles Lane, “Public Sector Unions Interfere with the Public 
Interest,”  The Washington Post, January 27, 2014. 
 9. 
  www.bls.gov , accessed January 2014. 
 10. 
Andrew Harris and Tim Jones, “Illinois Unions Sue to Stop 
$100 Billion Pension Funding Fix,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
January 29, 2014. 
1.
Alana Semeuls and Michael Musk
 notes 

359
Dealing with Union and Employee–Management Issues
CHAPTER 12
  11. David Savage, “Scalia May Be the Swing Vote in Union Fees 
Case,”  Los Angeles Times, January 21, 2014; and Garrett 
Epps, “The Supreme Court Case That Could Clobber Public-
Sector Unions,”  The Atlantic, January 21, 2014. 
 12. Drew Sharp, “College Athletes’ Fight Not Equal to Unions, But 
Reform Needed,”  The Detroit Free Press, January 30, 2014. 
 13. Tim Reid, “Democrats Feud over California Pension Reform 
Measure,”  Chicago Tribune, February 4, 2014. 
 14. Sam Hananel, “Labor Board Tries Again to Change Union 
Rules,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, February 5, 2014. 
 15. Frank Keating and Brandon Dutcher, “Right-to-Work Laws 
Help States like Oklahoma Shine,”  Forbes, October 18, 
2013. 
 16.  www.carpenters.org , accessed April 2014; and Austin Smith, 
“What Right-to-Work Would Do for New York,”  New York 
Post, December 12, 2012. 
  17. Steven Greenhouse, “Wisconsin’s Legacy for Unions,” 
The New York Times, February 22, 2014. 
 18. Richard Berman, “Why Unions Want a Higher Minimum 
Wage,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 25, 2013. 
 19. Ira Podell, “NHL Lockout 2012: Mediator Gets League, Union 
Back Together,”  Associated Press, January 5, 2013; and Mike 
Brehm and Kevin Allen, “NHL Lockout Ends at 113 Days: A 
Daily Look Back,”  USA Today, January 6, 2013. 
 20. Steve Eder, “Arbitrator’s Ruling Banishes the Yankee’s Alex 
Rodriguez for a Season,”  The New York Times, January 11, 
2014; and Mason Levinson, “Heyward Signs Two Year 
Contract with Braves to Avoid Arbitration,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, February 4, 2014. 
 21.   www.adr.org , accessed April 2014. 
 22. Steve Greenhouse, “Wage Strike Planned at Fast Food 
Outlets,”  The New York Times, December 1, 2013. 
 23. Kristin Tillotson, “After Bitter Labor Battle, Minnesota 
Orchestra Seeks Harmony,”  Minneapolis Star Tribune, 
February 4, 2014; and Michael Cooper, “Minnesota Orchestra 
Contract Ends Long Labor Lockout,”  The New York Times, 
January 14, 2014. 
 24. Amanda Becker, “U.S. Union Membership Steady at 11.3 
Percent in 2013,”  Reuters, January 24, 2014; and Melanie 
Trottman, “Labor Union Membership Rate Stays Steady in 
2013,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2014. 
 25. Paul A. Eisenstein, “UAW Consider First Dues Hike Since 
1967,”  CNBC, December 3, 2013. 
 26.  www.bls.gov , accessed April 2014. 
 27. Charles Kenny, “Factory Jobs Are Gone; Get over It,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, January 23, 2014. 
 28. Dorothy Pomerantz, “The Celebrity 100,”  Forbes, July 15, 2013. 
 29. Christopher Matthews, “Top 10 Highest Paid CEOs,”  Time, 
December 4, 2013. 
 30. Jennifer Liberto, “CEOs Earn 354 Times More Than Average 
Workers,”  CNN Money, April 15, 2013. 
 31. Jeff Green, “Why Fired CEOs Go Straight to the Bank,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, June 6, 2013. 
 32. Jeff Green, “Golden Hellos,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
December 8, 2013. 
 33. Damian Paletta, “5 Takeaways on Wealth and Inequality from 
Piketty,”  The Wall Street Journal, April 14, 2014. 
 34. Michael Hiltzak, “CEO-to-Worker Pay Gap Is Obscene: Want 
to Know How Obscene?”  Los Angeles Times, October 20, 
2013; and Dave Michaels, “CEO-to-Worker Pay Ratio 
Disclosure Proposed by Divided SEC,”  Bloomberg Personal 
Finance, September 18, 2013. 
 35. Elliot Blair Smith and Phil Kuntz, “Disclosed: The Pay Gap 
Between CEOs and Employees,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
May 2, 2013; and Christopher Matthews, “Top 10 Highest 
Paid CEOs,”  Time, December 4, 2013. 
 36. Ben Weber, “Gender Bias by the Numbers,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, January 27, 2014. 
 37. Anne Fisher, “Boys versus Girls: What’s Behind the College 
Grad Gender Gap?”  Fortune, March 27, 2013. 
 38.   www.americanprogress.org/boushey , accessed April 2014. 
 39.  www.americanprogress.org , accessed May 2012. 
 40.   www.eeoc.gov , accessed April 2014. 
 41.  Ibid.  
 42. Jennifer Steinhauer, “Reports of Sexual Assault Rise Sharply,” 
The New York Times, November 9, 2014. 
 43. Robin Abcarian, “Lessons from Ex-San Diego Mayor Filner’s Sex 
Harassment Scandal,”  Los Angeles Times, October 15, 2013; 
and James Nash, “San Diego Mayor to End Sexual Harassment 
Case,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, August 22, 2013. 
 44.   www.workingmother.com , accessed April 2014. 
 45.   www.censusbureau.gov , accessed April 2014. 
 46. Janet Novack, “Essential Numbers for Retirement Planning: 
Your Personal Life Expectancy,”  Forbes, January 21, 2014. 
 47. Gary Drevitch, “Welcome to Age 50: Top Caregiving Tips,” 
Forbes, January 8, 2014. 
 48. Kathy Caprino, “7 Ways to Transform Caregiving from Burden 
to Opportunity,”  Forbes, December 30, 2013. 
 49.   www.caregiving.org , accessed April 2014. 
 50. Julie Landry Laviolette, “Tips in Caring for Your Aging 
Parents,”  Miami Herald, February 4, 2014. 
 51. Ann Carrns, “Assessing the Costs of Caring for an Aging 
Relative,”  The New York Times, August 28, 2013. 
 52.  www.nih.gov , accessed April 2014. 
 53.   www.dol.gov , accessed April 2014. 
 54. Kimberly Hefling, “School Shootings Continue Despite 
Increased Security after Sandy Hook Killings,”  Huffington 
Post, February 2, 2014. 
 Page 333: © Evan Pinkus/AP Images; p. 335: 
© Lewis W. Hine/Buyenlarge/Getty Images; 
p. 337: © Underwood & Underwood/Corbis; 
p. 343: © Ramin Talaie/Corbis; p. 344: © Leon T. 
Switzer/CSM/Landov; p. 347: © Eric Charbonneau/
Invision/AP Images; p. 348: © Wesley Hitt/Getty 
Images; p. 350: © jayfish/Alamy RF; p. 351: 
© Michael Hall Photography Pty Ltd/Corbis RF; 
p. 353: © Tony Freeman/PhotoEdit.
348: © Wesley Hitt/Getty
 photo credits 

360
 Marketing: Helping 
Buyers Buy 
 MARKETING: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
 13 
PART 5
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 13-1 Define  marketing, and apply the marketing concept to both 
for-profit and nonprofit organizations. 
 LO 13-2 Describe the four Ps of marketing. 
 LO 13-3 Summarize the marketing research process. 
 LO 13-4 Show how marketers use environmental scanning to learn about 
the changing marketing environment. 
 LO 13-5 Explain how marketers apply the tools of market segmentation, 
relationship marketing, and the study of consumer behavior. 
 LO 13-6 Compare the business-to-business market and the consumer 
market.  

361
Daymond John 
 • Founder of FUBU
 • Started by sewing wool hats in 
his apartment
 • Turned FUBU into a 
multimillion-dollar lifestyle brand
www.fubu.com
@fubuapparel
I
 n the business world, you don’t nec-
essarily have to be the first person to 
think of a good idea in order for it to 
become successful. Oftentimes, the 
entrepreneurs who uniquely market 
an existing product or service enjoy big 
returns on their investments. 
 Daymond John set off on his path to 
prosperity in 1989 when he began sew-
ing wool hats in his Queens, New York, 
apartment. For the previous few weeks 
he had noticed young men in the neigh-
borhood sporting short snowcaps with 
the tops cut off and cinched together 
with string. John couldn’t believe that 
department stores were selling the hats 
for as much as $20. So, with the help of a 
neighbor, he sewed dozens of hats and 
sold them for $10 in front of the New York 
Coliseum. John was astounded when he 
ended up with $800 after his first day. 
Knowing he had a great concept on his 
hands, John threw himself into his new 
apparel business. As a nod to the do-it-
yourself origins of the venture, he named 
the company FUBU—“For Us By Us.” 
 To go along with his distinctive brand 
name, John designed a graffiti-inspired 
logo and sewed it onto sweatshirts, tees, 
and other sportswear. Despite a strong 
start, John soon ran into problems. “Like 
most entrepreneurs, the initial struggle 
was to go past the point of imagination 
and make it a point of conception, where 
I was actually putting together a product 
and producing it,” said John. “Everyone 
has an idea, but it’s taking those first 
steps toward turning that idea into a real-
ity that are always the toughest.” Finding 
the time to accomplish all this proved dif-
ficult. After a day of calling distributors 
and sewing, John would then trudge off 
to his night job as a server at Red Lob-
ster. FUBU ended up running out of 
money three times, causing John to con-
sider abandoning the idea altogether. 
 But in 1992 he relaunched the brand 
with the help of three partners and a 
new business strategy. John knew he 
certainly wasn’t the only talented individ-
ual living in Hollis, Queens. The neigh-
borhood had been home to hip-hop 
legends like Run-DMC, Salt-N-Pepa, and 
LL Cool J. In order to get FUBU into the 
public eye, John worked hard to put his 
clothes into the hands of his famous 
friends. “I’d give them a shirt to wear on 
stage, sneak in their trailer, steal it and 
give it to another rapper,” said John. The 
company’s big break came in 1993 
when LL Cool J wore a FUBU hat in a 
commercial for Gap. The retailer pulled 
the commercial a month later when 
executives realized they had been 
unknowingly promoting another brand, 
but by then the spot had done wonders 
to raise FUBU’s profile. Still, the company 
wasn’t solvent enough to receive 
approval for a small-business loan. As a 
result, John and his mother mortgaged 
their house for $100,000 and bet their 
future on FUBU’s success. 
 It turned out to be a good decision. 
John achieved another professional coup 
when he took the brand to a famous 
industry trade show in Las Vegas. Despite 
not having enough money to buy a booth 
at the event, John and his partners man-
aged to negotiate more than $300,000 
worth of orders out of a hotel room. 
Meanwhile, the brand continued to gain 
traction with many in the hip-hop commu-
nity. In 1996 FUBU secured LL Cool J’s 
services as an official celebrity spokes-
man. “I’m a firm believer in utilizing celeb-
rities because they tap into people on an 
emotional basis,” said John. “When you 
get behind a celebrity, he’ll get behind 
you.” By the end of the 1990s, FUBU was 
bringing in more than $350 million in 
annual revenue. Since then, John has 
used his position as a millionaire mogul 
to invest in tech start-ups and advise 
other entrepreneurs, especially in his role 
as a judge on the TV show  Shark Tank.  
 In this chapter you’ll learn how master 
marketers like Daymond John 
identify their audience and fig-
ure out how to reach them. 
Whether through distribu-
tion, advertising, or public-
ity, successful marketing 
makes a connection with 
a customer that they 
won’t soon forget. 
 Sources: Emily Inverso, “Shark 
Tank’s Daymond John on the 
Business of Being Broke—And 
More,”  Forbes, March 6, 2014; 
Harley Finkelstein, “Daymond John 
Answers Your Questions,” 
 Huffington Post, February 10, 2014; 
and Teri Evans, “Shark Tank’s 
Daymond John on Thinking Big,” 
Entrepreneur, October 31, 2012. 
 Getting to Know  Daymond John

362
 name that company 
 This company studies population growth and regional trends as it expands its 
product line for specific regions of the country. Its research led to the creation 
of Creole flavors targeted primarily to the South and spicy nacho cheese flavors 
made especially for Texas and California. Name that company. (The answer can 
be found in this chapter.)  
Define marketing, and apply the marketing concept to both for-profit and 
nonprofit organizations.
 WHAT IS MARKETING?  
 The term  marketing means different things to different people. Many think of 
marketing as simply “selling” or “advertising.” Yes, selling and advertising are 
part of marketing, but it’s much more. The American Marketing Association 
has defined   marketing   as the activity, set of institutions, and processes for 
creating, communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value 
for customers, clients, partners, and society at large. We can also think of mar-
keting, more simply, as the activities buyers and sellers perform to facilitate 
mutually satisfying exchanges. 
 In the past marketing focused almost entirely on helping the seller sell. 
That’s why many people still think of it as mostly selling, advertising, and dis-
tribution from the seller to the buyer . Today, much of marketing is instead 
about helping the buyer buy.  1 Let’s examine a couple of examples. 
 Today, when people want to buy a new or used car, they often go online 
first. They go to a website like  Cars.com  to search for the vehicle they want. At 
other websites they compare prices and features. By the time they go to the 
dealer, they may know exactly which car they want and the best price available. 
 The websites have helped the buyer buy . Not only are customers spared 
searching one dealership after another to find the best price, but manufactur-
ers and dealers are eager to participate so that they don’t lose customers. The 
future of marketing is doing everything you can to help the buyer buy. The 
easier a marketer makes the purchase decision process, the more that mar-
keter will sell.  2 
 Let’s look at another case. In the past, one of the few ways students and 
parents could find the college with the right “fit” was to travel from campus to 
campus, a grueling and expensive process. Today, colleges use podcasts, vir-
tual tours, live chats, and other interactive technologies to make on-campus 
visits less necessary. Such virtual tours help students and their parents buy. 
 Of course, helping the buyer buy also helps the seller sell. Think about 
that for a minute. In the vacation market, many people find the trip they want 
themselves. They go online to find the right spot, and then make choices, 
sometimes questioning potential sellers. In industries like this, the role of 
marketing is to make sure that a company’s products or services are easily 
found online, and that the company responds effectively to potential custom-
ers. Websites like Expedia, Travelocity, and Priceline allow customers to find 
the best price or set their own. 
 These are only a few examples of the marketing trend toward helping buy-
ers buy. Consumers today spend hours searching the Internet for good deals. 
LO 13–1
 marketing  
 The activity, set of institutions, 
and processes for creating, 
communicating, delivering, and 
exchanging offerings that have 
value for customers, clients, 
partners, and society at large.  

363
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
Wise marketers provide a wealth of information online and even cultivate cus-
tomer relationships using blogs and social networking sites such as Facebook 
and Twitter.  3  
 Online communities provide an opportunity to observe people (custom-
ers and others) interacting with one another, expressing their own opinions, 
forming relationships, and commenting on various goods and services. It is 
important for marketers to track what relevant bloggers are writing by doing 
blog searches using key terms that define their market. Vendors who have 
text-mining tools can help companies measure conversations about their 
products and their personnel. Much of the future of marketing lies in mining 
such online conversations and responding appropriately. For example, mar-
keters are learning why people shop online, put the goods into a shopping 
cart, but then end the sale before they give their credit card information.  4 
Retailers and other marketers who rely solely on traditional advertising and 
selling are losing out to new ways of marketing.  5 
 The Evolution of Marketing 
 What marketers do at any particular time depends on what they need to do to 
fill customers’ needs and wants, which continually change. Let’s take a brief 
look at how those changes have influenced the evolution of marketing. Market-
ing in the United States has passed through four eras: (1) production, (2) selling, 
(3) marketing concept, and (4) customer relationship. Today, a new era is emerg-
ing: mobile/on-demand marketing (see  Figure 13.1 ).  
 The Production Era  
From the time the first European settlers began their 
struggle to survive in America until the early 1900s, the general philosophy 
of business was “Produce as much as you can, because there is a limitless 
market for it.” Given the limited production capability and vast demand for 
products in those days, that production philosophy was both logical and 
profitable. Business owners were mostly farmers, carpenters, and trade 
workers. They needed to produce more and more, so their goals centered on 
production.  
 The Selling Era  
By the 1920s, businesses had developed mass-production 
techniques (such as automobile assembly lines), and production capacity often 
exceeded the immediate market demand. Therefore, the business philosophy 
 FIGURE 13.1 MARKETING 
ERAS 
 The evolution of marketing in 
the United States involved four 
eras: (1) production, (2) selling, 
(3) marketing concept, and 
(4) customer relationship. 
Today a new era is emerging: 
mobile/on-demand marketing. 
Customer
relationship
Marketing
concept
Sales
Production
1860
1880
1900
1920
1940
1960
1980
2000

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
364
turned from producing to selling . Most companies emphasized selling and 
advertising in an effort to persuade consumers to buy existing products; few 
offered extensive service after the sale.  
 The Marketing Concept Era  
After World War II ended in 1945, returning 
soldiers starting new careers and beginning families sparked a tremendous 
demand for goods and services. The postwar years launched the sudden 
increase in the birthrate that we now call the baby boom, and also a boom in 
consumer spending. Competition for the consumer’s dollar was fierce. Busi-
nesses recognized that they needed to be responsive to consumers if they 
wanted to get their business, and a philosophy emerged in the 1950s called the 
marketing concept. 
 The   marketing concept   had three parts:
 
1.  A customer orientation. Find out what consumers want and provide it 
for them. (Note the emphasis on meeting consumer needs rather than 
on promotion or sales.)  
 
2.  A service orientation. Make sure everyone in the organization has the 
same objective: customer satisfaction. This should be a total and 
integrated organizational effort. That is, everyone from the president 
of the firm to the delivery people should be customer-oriented. Does 
that seem to be the norm today?  
 
3.  A profit orientation. Focus on those goods and services that will earn 
the most profit and enable the organization to survive and expand to 
serve more consumer wants and needs.  
 It took awhile for businesses to implement the marketing concept. The 
process went slowly during the 1960s and 1970s. During the 1980s, businesses 
began to apply the marketing concept more aggres-
sively than they had done over the preceding 
30 years. That led to a focus on customer relation-
ship management (CRM) that has become very 
important today. We explore that concept next.  
 The Customer Relationship Era  
In the 1990s 
and early 2000s, some managers extended the mar-
keting concept by adopting the practice of customer 
relationship management.   Customer relationship 
management (CRM)   is the process of learning as 
much as possible about present customers and 
doing everything you can over time to satisfy 
them—or even to exceed their expectations—with 
goods and services.  6 The idea is to enhance cus-
tomer satisfaction and stimulate long-term cus-
tomer loyalty. For example, most airlines offer 
frequent-flier programs that reward loyal custom-
ers with free flights. The newest in customer rela-
tionship building, as mentioned earlier, involves 
social networks, online communities, tweets, and 
blogs. Relationship building is important in global 
markets as well. For example, it’s important to build 
good relationships with partners in China.  7  
 Clearly, the degree of consumer dissatisfaction 
that exists, especially with services such as airlines 
and phone companies, shows that marketers have 
marketing concept
A three-part business 
philosophy: (1) a customer 
orientation, (2) a service 
orientation, and (3) a profit 
orientation.
 In the selling era, the 
focus of marketing was 
on selling, with little 
service afterward and 
less customization. 
What economic and 
social factors made this 
approach appropriate 
for the time? 
customer relationship 
management (CRM)
The process of learning as 
much as possible about 
customers and doing 
everything you can to satisfy 
them—or even exceed their 
expectations—with goods and 
services.

365
a long way to go to create customer satisfaction and loyalty. Since many con-
sumers today are interested in green products and protecting the environ-
ment, relationship building also means responding to that desire. The Seeking 
Sustainability box explores sustainability in the food industry. 
 The Emerging Mobile/On-Demand Marketing Era  
The digital age is 
increasing consumers’ power and pushing marketing toward being on demand, 
not just always “on.” Consumers are demanding relevant information exactly 
when they want it, without all the noise of unwanted messages. Search tech-
nologies have made product information pervasive. Consumers share, com-
pare, and rate experiences through social media; and mobile devices make it 
all available 24/7. 
 Developments such as inexpensive microtransmitters embedded in prod-
ucts will allow consumers to search by image, voice, or gestures. For example, 
if your friend has a product you like, you will be able to just tap it with your 
phone and instantly get product reviews, prices, and so on. If you can’t decide 
what color to buy, you can just send the photo to your Facebook friends who 
can vote for their favorite. After you buy it, you will get special offers from the 
manufacturer or its partners for similar products or services. 
 As digital technology continues to grow, consumer demands are likely to 
rise in four areas: 8 
 
1.  Now. Consumers want to interact anywhere, anytime. 
 
2.  Can I?  They want to do new things with different kinds of information in 
ways that create value for them. For example, a couple wanting to know 
if they can afford to buy a house they walk by could simply snap a photo 
and instantly see the sale price and other property information; while at 
 seeking sustainability 
 We probably all remember 
enjoying a piping hot bowl of 
Campbell’s soup on a blustery 
day. As the company slogan 
said, it was “mmm mmm” good. 
What you may not know is 
Campbell Soup is one of only 
18 U.S. companies named to 
the Global 100 Most 
Sustainable Corporations in the 
World list. Through its corporate 
social responsibility program, the 
company strives to make a posi-
tive impact in the markets it 
serves. Its work with the Food 
Bank of South New Jersey is a 
great example of being responsi-
ble and promoting sustainability. 
 The Food Bank of South Jersey 
learned that local farmers were 
discarding almost 1 million 
peaches a year in landfills. The 
peaches were perfectly fine to 
eat, but had bruises and other 
imperfections that made them 
unacceptable to grocery store 
produce managers. When the 
food bank asked if it could have 
the peaches, the farmers agreed 
to donate them at no cost. The 
question of what to do with the 
peaches was challenging until the 
Food Bank and Campbell’s 
teamed up and “Just Peachy 
Salsa” was born. 
 Campbell’s agreed to manufac-
ture the salsa at no cost. In fact, 
employees donated their time 
and agreed to label 42,000 jars 
of “Just Peachy Salsa” by hand. 
Because of the collaboration, 
South Jersey farmers did not 
have the expense of dumping 
peaches or the negative environ-
mental impact of clogging land-
fills. The local Food Bank was 
able to generate close to $100,000 
per year to provide additional food 
products to people in need, and 
consumers can enjoy a healthy 
product. When it comes to seeking 
sustainability, Campbell’s really is 
“mmm mmm” good. 
 Sources: Kurt Kuehn and Lynnette McIntire, 
“Sustainability a CFO Can Love,”  Harvard 
Business Review, April 2014; “Campbell Soup 
Company Named to Global 100 Sustainability 
Index,”  Reuters, January 22, 2014; and Campbell 
Soup Company,  www.campbellsoupcompany.com 
(accessed April 2014). 
 www.campbellsoupcompany.com   
 Making Sustainability Just Peachy 
y

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
366
the same time the device automatically 
accesses their financial information, contacts 
mortgagers, and obtains loan preapproval.  
 
3.  For me. Consumers expect all data stored 
about them to be used to personalize what 
they experience.  
 
4.  Simple. Consumers expect all interactions 
to be easy.  
 Companies will be looking for employees who 
can improve the business’s handling of social 
media, big data, and customer experiences. Maybe 
you will be one of them.  
Kids will spend 11 minutes
dressing Spike up
like a princess.
How about two
minutes to brush
their teeth?
Brushing for two minutes now can save your
child from severe tooth pain later. Two minutes, twice a day. They have the
time. For fun, 2-minute videos to watch while brushing, go to 2min2x.org.
©2013 Healthy Mouths, Healthy Lives
 The Ad Council 
sponsors many public 
service ads like this one. 
The idea is to make the 
public more aware of 
various needs that only 
nonprofit organizations 
are meeting. The ads 
then encourage the 
public to get engaged in 
the issue somehow, if 
only by donating money. 
Have you responded to 
any Ad Council 
advertisements?  
 Nonprofit Organizations and Marketing 
 Even though the marketing concept emphasizes a 
profit orientation, marketing is a critical part of 
almost all organizations, including nonprofits.  9
Charities use marketing to raise funds for combat-
ing world hunger, for instance, or to obtain other 
resources. The Red Cross uses promotion to 
encourage people to donate blood when local or 
national supplies run low. Greenpeace uses market-
ing to promote ecologically safe technologies. Envi-
ronmental groups use marketing to try to cut 
carbon emissions. Churches use marketing to attract 
new members and raise funds. Politicians use marketing to get votes. 
 States use marketing to attract new businesses and tourists. Many states, 
for example, have competed to get automobile companies from other countries 
to locate plants in their area. Schools use marketing to attract new students. 
Other organizations, such as arts groups, unions, and social groups, also use 
marketing. The Ad Council, for example, uses public service ads to create aware-
ness and change attitudes on such issues as drunk driving and fire prevention. 
 Organizations use marketing, in fact, to promote everything from envi-
ronmentalism and crime prevention (“Take A Bite Out Of Crime”) to social 
issues (“Friends Don’t Let Friends Drive Drunk”).  
Describe the four Ps of marketing.
 THE MARKETING MIX  
 We can divide much of what marketing people do into four factors, called the 
four Ps to make them easy to remember. They are:
 
1. Product  
 
2. Price 
 
3. Place  
 
4. Promotion  
 Managing the controllable parts of the marketing process means 
(1) designing a want-satisfying product, (2) setting a price for the product, 
(3) putting the product in a place where people will buy it, and (4) promoting the 
product. These four factors are called the   marketing mix   because businesses 
blend them together in a well-designed marketing program (see  Figure 13.2 ).  
LO 13–2
 marketing mix  
 The ingredients that go into a 
marketing program: product, 
price, place, and promotion.  
iSee It! Need help 
understanding the 
marketing mix? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.

367
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
 Applying the Marketing Process 
 The four Ps are a convenient way to remember the basics of marketing, but 
they don’t necessarily include everything that goes into the marketing process 
for all products. One of the best ways to understand the entire marketing pro-
cess is to take a product or a group of products and follow the process that led 
to their development and sale (see  Figure 13.3 ). 
 Imagine, for example, that you and your friends want to start a money-
making business near your college. You’ve noticed a lot of vegetarians among 
your acquaintances. You do a quick survey in a few dorms, sororities, and 
fraternities and find many vegetarians—and other students who like to eat 
vegetarian meals once in a while. Your preliminary research indicates some 
demand for a vegetarian restaurant nearby. You check the fast-food stores in 
the area and find that none offer more than one or two vegetarian meals. In 
fact, most don’t have any, except salads and some soups. 
 You note that haute-vegetarian menus are big in Europe.  10 Why not in the 
United States? You also note that McDonald’s went vegetarian in India in 
2013.  11 You find that KFC Canada offers a vegan version of its chicken sand-
wich in 500 of its 750 outlets. Further research identifies a number of different 
kinds of vegetarians. Vegans eat neither eggs nor dairy products. Vegan diets 
took off when Beyonce’s 22-day vegan diet was announced. Bill Clinton says 
he’s been vegan since 2009.  12 Such publicity led to the announcement that 
2014 was “the year of the vegan.”  13 
 You conclude that a vegetarian restaurant would have to appeal to all 
kinds of vegetarians to be a success. Your research identifies vegan farmers 
who don’t use any synthetic chemical fertilizers, pesticides, herbicides, or 
genetically modified ingredients. You also find that there is a company that is 
making an egg-like product from vegetables. That would appeal to those veg-
etarians who don’t eat eggs.  14 
 You’ve just performed the first few steps in the marketing process. You 
noticed an opportunity (a need for vegetarian food, perhaps near campus). 
You conducted some preliminary research to see whether your idea had any 
merit. And then you identified groups of people who might be interested in 
your product. They will be your  target market (the people you will try to per-
suade to come to your restaurant).  
 FIGURE 13.2 MARKETING 
MANAGERS AND THE 
MARKETING MIX  
 Marketing managers must 
choose how to implement 
the four Ps of the marketing 
mix: product, price, place, and 
promotion. The goals are to 
please customers and make 
a profit. 
Marketing Manager
Marketing
mix
Product
Price
Place
Promotion

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
368
 Designing a Product to Meet 
Consumer Needs 
 Once you’ve researched consumer needs 
and found a target market (which we’ll 
discuss in more detail later) for your 
product, the four Ps of marketing come 
into play. You start by developing a prod-
uct or products. A   product  is any physi-
cal good, service, or idea that satisfies a 
want or need, plus anything that would 
enhance the product in the eyes of con-
sumers, such as the brand name. In this 
case, your proposed product is a restau-
rant that would serve different kinds of 
vegetarian meals. You keep up your 
research, and find that a restaurant 
called Freshii is bringing quinoa and kale 
to the masses. 15 You are getting a better 
idea of what your products should be. 
 It’s a good idea at this point to do 
concept testing. That is, you develop an 
accurate description of your restaurant 
and ask people, in person or online, 
whether the idea of the restaurant and 
the kind of meals you intend to offer 
appeals to them. If it does, you might go 
to a supplier that offers vegetarian prod-
ucts to get the ingredients to prepare 
samples that you can take to consumers 
to test their reactions. The process of 
testing products among potential users 
is called   test marketing. For example, 
you can test market your vegetarian 
burgers and learn how best to prepare 
them.  16 
 If consumers like the products and 
agree they would buy them, you have 
the information you need to find inves-
tors and look for a convenient location 
to open a restaurant. You’ll have to think 
of a catchy name. (For practice, stop for 
a minute and try to think of one.) We’ll 
use Very Vegetarian in this text, although 
we’re sure you can think of a better 
name. Meanwhile, let’s continue with 
the discussion of product development. 
 You may want to offer some well-
known brand names to attract people 
right away. A   brand name   is a word, letter, or group of words or letters that 
differentiates one seller’s goods and services from those of competitors. Brand 
names of vegetarian products include Tofurky, Mori-Nu, and Yves Veggie Cui-
sine. We’ll discuss the product development process in detail in Chapter 14, 
and follow the Very Vegetarian case to show you how all marketing and other 
business decisions tie together. For now, we’re simply sketching the whole 
 product  
 Any physical good, service, or 
idea that satisfies a want or 
need plus anything that would 
enhance the product in the 
eyes of consumers, such as the 
brand.  
 test marketing  
 The process of testing products 
among potential users.  
 brand name  
 A word, letter, or group of 
words or letters that 
differentiates one seller’s 
goods and services from those 
of competitors.  
 FIGURE 13.3 THE 
MARKETING PROCESS 
WITH THE FOUR PS  
Conduct research
Identify a
target market
Find opportunities
Design a product to 
meet the need based 
on research
Do product testing
Select a distribution 
system
Design a promotional 
program
Build a relationship 
with customers
Product
Price
Place
Promotion
Determine a brand
name, design a
package, and set a price

 • What does it mean to “help the buyer buy”?  
 • What are the three parts of the marketing concept?  
 • What are the four Ps of the marketing mix?  
•
What does it mean to
 test prep   
“help the buye
“he
369
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
marketing process to give you an overall picture. So far, 
we’ve covered the first P of the marketing mix: prod-
uct. Next comes price.  
 Setting an Appropriate Price 
 After you’ve decided what products and services you 
want to offer consumers, you have to set appropriate 
prices. Those prices depend on a number of factors. 
In the restaurant business, the price could be close to 
what other restaurants charge to stay competitive. Or 
you might charge less to attract business, especially at the beginning. 
Or you may offer high-quality products for which customers are willing to pay 
a little more (as Starbucks does). You also have to consider the costs of produc-
ing, distributing, and promoting the product, which all influence your price. 
We’ll discuss pricing issues in more detail in Chapter 14.  
 Getting the Product to the Right Place 
 There are several ways you can serve the market for vegetarian meals. You can 
have people come in, sit down, and eat at the restaurant, but that’s not the only 
alternative—think of pizza. You could deliver the food to customers’ dorms, 
apartments, and student unions. You may want to sell your products in super-
markets or health-food stores, or through organizations that specialize in dis-
tributing food products. Such intermediaries are the middle links in a series of 
organizations that distribute goods from producers to consumers. (The more 
traditional word for them is  middlemen. ) Getting the product to consumers 
when and where they want it is critical to market success. Don’t forget to con-
sider the Internet as a way to reach consumers. We’ll discuss the importance 
of marketing intermediaries and distribution in detail in Chapter 15.  
 Developing an Effective Promotional Strategy 
 The last of the four Ps of marketing is promotion.   Promotion   consists of all 
the techniques sellers use to inform people about and motivate them to buy 
their products or services. Promotion includes advertising; personal selling; 
public relations; publicity; word of mouth (viral marketing); and various sales 
promotion efforts, such as coupons, rebates, samples, and cents-off deals. 
We’ll discuss promotion in detail in Chapter 16. 
 Promotion often includes relationship building with customers. Among 
other activities, that means responding to suggestions consumers make to 
improve the products or their marketing, including price and packaging. For 
Very Vegetarian, postpurchase, or after-sale, service may include refusing pay-
ment for meals that weren’t satisfactory and stocking additional vegetarian 
products customers say they would like. Listening to customers and respond-
ing to their needs is the key to the ongoing process that is marketing.  
 promotion  
 All the techniques sellers use 
to inform people about and 
motivate them to buy their 
products or services.  
 A vegetarian restaurant 
might fill a popular need 
in the neighborhood of 
many college campuses 
today. Is there one near 
your school? What can 
you tell about its man-
ager’s application of the 
four Ps of marketing—
product, price, place, 
and promotion?  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course to 
check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
370
Summarize the marketing research process.  
 PROVIDING MARKETERS WITH INFORMATION  
 Every decision in the marketing process depends on information. When they 
conduct   marketing research, marketers analyze markets to determine oppor-
tunities and challenges, and to find the information they need to make good 
decisions. 
 Marketing research helps identify what products customers have pur-
chased in the past, and what changes have occurred to alter what they want 
now and what they’re likely to want in the future. Marketers also conduct 
research on business trends, the ecological impact of their decisions, global 
trends, and more. Businesses need information to compete effectively, and 
marketing research is the activity that gathers it. You have learned, for exam-
ple, how important research is to a person contemplating starting a vegetarian 
restaurant. Besides listening to customers, marketing researchers also pay 
attention to what employees, shareholders, dealers, consumer advocates, 
media representatives, and other stakeholders have to say. As noted earlier, 
much of that research is now being gathered online through social media. 
Despite all that research, however, marketers still have difficulty understand-
ing their customers as well as they should.  17 
 The Marketing Research Process 
 A simplified marketing research process consists of at least four key steps:
 
1. Defining the question (the problem or opportunity) and determining 
the present situation.  
 
2. Collecting research data.  
 
3. Analyzing the research data.  
 
4. Choosing the best solution and implementing it.  
 The following sections look at each of these steps.  
 Defining the Question and Determining the Present Situation  
Marketing 
researchers need the freedom to discover what the present situation is, what 
the problems or opportunities are, what the alternatives are, what information 
they need, and how to go about gathering and analyzing data.  
 Collecting Data  
Usable information is vital to the marketing research pro-
cess. Research can become quite expensive, however, so marketers must often 
make a trade-off between the need for information and 
the cost of obtaining it. Normally the least expensive 
method is to gather information already compiled by 
others and published in journals and books or made 
available online. 
 Such existing data are called   secondary data,  since 
you aren’t the first one to gather them.  Figure 13.4  lists 
the principal sources of secondary marketing research 
information. Despite its name,  secondary data is what 
marketers should gather  first to avoid incurring unnec-
essary expense. To find secondary data about vegetari-
ans, go to the website for  Vegetarian Times ( www
.vegetariantimes.com ) or search other websites on 
vegetarianism.  
LO 13–3
 marketing research  
 The analysis of markets to 
determine opportunities and 
challenges, and to find the 
information needed to make 
good decisions.  
 secondary data  
 Information that has already 
been compiled by others and 
published in journals and 
books or made available 
online.  
 Personal interviews are 
one way of collecting 
primary research data 
about customers’ needs, 
wants, and buying 
habits. Perhaps 
someone has stopped 
you in a shopping mall 
recently to ask you 
some questions about a 
product or product 
category you use. What 
might contribute to the 
difficulty of collecting 
information through 
such interviews, and 
how can marketers 
improve the process?  

371
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
 Often, secondary data don’t provide all the information managers need 
for important business decisions. To gather additional in-depth information, 
marketers must do their own research. The results of such  new studies are 
called   primary data.  One way to gather primary data is to conduct a survey. 
 Telephone surveys, online surveys, mail surveys, and personal interviews 
are the most common forms of primary data collection. Focus groups (defined 
below) are another popular method of surveying individuals. What do you 
think would be the best way to survey students about your potential new res-
taurant? Would you do a different kind of survey after it had been open a few 
months? How could you help vegetarians find your restaurant? That is, how 
could you help your buyers buy? One question researchers pay close attention 
to is: “Would you recommend this product to a friend?” 
 A   focus group   is a group of people who meet under the direction of a 
discussion leader to communicate their opinions about an organization, its 
products, or other given issues. This textbook is updated periodically using 
many focus groups made up of faculty and students. They tell us, the authors, 
what subjects and examples they like and dislike, and the authors follow their 
suggestions for changes.  
 Marketers can now gather both secondary and primary data online. The 
authors of this text, for example, do much research online, but they also gather 
data from books, articles, interviews, and other sources.  
 primary data  
 Data that you gather yourself 
(not from secondary sources 
such as books and magazines).  
 focus group  
 A small group of people who 
meet under the direction of a 
discussion leader to 
communicate their opinions 
about an organization, its 
products, or other given issues.  
PRIMARY SOURCES
SECONDARY SOURCES
Interviews
Surveys
Observation
Focus groups
Online surveys
Questionnaires
Customer comments
Letters from 
customers
Government Publications
Statistical Abstract of the United States  Census of Transportation
Survey of Current Business        Annual Survey of Manufacturers
Census of Retail Trade
Commercial Publications
ACNielsen Company studies on retailing and media
Marketing Research Corporation of America studies on consumer purchases
Selling Areas—Marketing Inc. reports on food sales
Magazines
Entrepreneur
Bloomberg Businessweek
Fortune
Inc.
Advertising Age
Forbes
Harvard Business Review
Journal of Marketing
Journal of Retailing
Journal of Consumer 
Research
Journal of Advertising
Journal of Marketing 
Research
Marketing News
Hispanic Business
Black Enterprise
Journal of Advertising 
Research
Trade magazines 
appropriate to your 
industry such as 
Progressive Grocer
Reports from various 
chambers of commerce
Newspapers
The Wall Street Journal, Barron’s, your local newspapers
Internal Sources
Company records 
Income statements
Balance sheets 
Prior research reports
General Sources
Internet searches 
Commercial databases
Google-type searches
 FIGURE 13.4 SELECTED SOURCES OF PRIMARY AND SECONDARY INFORMATION  

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
372
 Analyzing the Research Data  
Marketers must turn the data they collect in 
the research process into useful information. Careful, honest interpretation of 
the data can help a company find useful alternatives to specific marketing 
challenges. For example, by doing primary research, Fresh Italy, a small Italian 
pizzeria, found that its pizza’s taste was rated superior to that of the larger 
pizza chains. However, the company’s sales lagged behind the competition. 
Secondary research on the industry revealed that free delivery (which Fresh 
Italy did not offer) was more important to customers than taste. Fresh Italy 
now delivers—and has increased its market share.  
 Choosing the Best Solution and Implementing It  
After collecting and ana-
lyzing data, market researchers determine alternative strategies and make rec-
ommendations about which may be best and why. This final step in a research 
effort also includes following up on actions taken to see whether the results 
were what was expected. If not, the company can take corrective action and 
conduct new studies in its ongoing attempt to provide consumer satisfaction at 
the lowest cost. You can see, then, that marketing research is a continuous pro-
cess of responding to changes in the marketplace and in consumer preferences.  
Show how marketers use environmental scanning to learn about the 
changing marketing environment.
 THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  
 Marketing managers must be aware of the surrounding environment when 
making marketing mix decisions.   Environmental scanning   is the process 
of identifying factors that can affect marketing success. As you can see in 
 Figure 13.5 , they include global, technological, sociocultural, competitive, 
and economic influences. We discussed these factors in some detail in 
Chapter 1, but now let’s review them from a strictly marketing perspective.  
LO 13–4
 environmental scanning  
 The process of identifying the 
factors that can affect 
marketing success.  
 The authors of this text 
enjoy the benefits of 
using focus groups. 
College faculty and 
students come to these 
meetings and tell us 
how to improve this 
book and its support 
material. We listen 
carefully and make as 
many changes as we 
can in response. 
Suggestions have 
included adding more 
descriptive captions to 
the photos in the book 
and making the text as 
user-friendly as 
possible. How are we 
doing so far?  

373
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
 Global Factors 
 Using the Internet, businesses can reach many of the world’s consumers rela-
tively easily and carry on a dialogue with them about the goods and services 
they want (see the Reaching Beyond Our Borders box). The globalization pro-
cess puts more pressure on those whose responsibility it is to deliver products 
to these global customers.  
 Technological Factors 
 The most important technological changes also relate to the Internet. Using 
consumer databases, blogs, social networking, and the like, companies can 
develop products and services that closely match consumers’ needs. As you 
read in Chapter 9, firms can now produce customized goods and services for 
about the same price as mass-produced goods. Thus flexible manufacturing 
and mass customization are also major influences on marketers. You can 
imagine, for example, using databases to help you devise custom-made fruit 
mixes and various salads for your customers at Very Vegetarian.  
 Sociocultural Factors 
 Marketers must monitor social trends to maintain their close relationship 
with customers, since population growth and changing demographics can 
have an effect on sales. One of the fastest-growing segments of the U.S. popu-
lation in the 21st century is people over 65. The increase in the number of 
older adults creates growing demand for retirement communities, health care, 
prescription drugs, recreation, continuing education, and more. Do you see 
any evidence that older people would enjoy having more vegetarian meals? 
 FIGURE 13.5 THE MARKETING ENVIRONMENT  
 
 
 
 
Sociocultural
Population shifts
Values
Attitudes
Trends
Economic
 
 
 
 
GDP
Disposable income
Competition
Unemployment
Technological
 
Computers
 
Telecommunications
 
Bar codes
 
Data interchange
 
Internet changes
Global
 
Trade agreements
 
Competition
 
Trends
 
Opportunities
 
Internet
Competitive
 
 
 
 
Speed
Service
Price
Selection
Product
Price
Place
Promotion
CONSUMER

374
 Other shifts in the U.S. population are creating new challenges for market-
ers as they adjust their products to meet the tastes and preferences of Hispanic, 
Asian, and other growing ethnic groups. To appeal to diverse groups, marketers 
must listen better and be more responsive to unique ethnic needs. What might 
you do to appeal to specific ethnic groups with Very Vegetarian?  
 Competitive Factors 
 Of course, marketers must pay attention to the dynamic competitive environ-
ment. Many brick-and-mortar companies must be aware of new competition 
from the Internet, including firms that sell automobiles, insurance, music, 
and clothes. In the book business, Barnes & Noble is still adjusting to the new 
reality of Amazon.com’s huge selection of books at good prices. Borders Books 
went out of business. What will the challenge from Kindle and other eReaders 
provide? Now that consumers can literally search the world for the best buys 
online, marketers must adjust their pricing, delivery, and services accordingly. 
Can you see any opportunities for Very Vegetarian to make use of the Internet 
and social media?  
 Economic Factors 
 Marketers must pay close attention to the economic environment. As we began 
the new millennium, the United States was experiencing slow growth, and few 
customers were eager to buy the most expensive automobiles, watches, and vaca-
tions. As the economy slowed, marketers had to adapt by offering products that 
 reaching beyond our borders 
 After more than 35 years of a 
strict one-child policy, China 
agreed to change the infamous 
regulation. The new law allows 
married couples to have two chil-
dren if one of the spouses is an 
only child. Besides affecting 
countless families, the new reform 
promises to have a big impact on 
businesses as the policy switch 
could mean 9.5 million additional 
babies coming into the Chinese 
market in the next five years. 
Producers of everything from 
baby formula and diapers, to vio-
lins and  guzhengs (a Chinese 
string instrument) predict a future 
sales windfall with the new policy. 
 While many businesses can 
expect added growth due to the 
policy shift, one the greatest 
long-term beneficiaries of the 
change may be Lego, the world’s 
second largest toymaker. Since 
the company has little room to 
grow in the U.S. (where Lego con-
trols 85 percent of the construc-
tion toy market), China is now one 
of its key target markets. In 2013, 
Lego enjoyed sales growth in 
China of 70 percent as parents 
sought educational toys for their 
children. Chinese parents are par-
ticularly attracted to Lego 
because they feel the toy helps 
develop their children’s creativity. 
 Lego, however, faces a price 
obstacle in China because its 
sets cost twice as much as they 
do in the United States due to 
import and distribution costs. To 
reduce the high cost of Legos in 
China, the company has commit-
ted to build a factory in Jiaxing, 
an industrial town near 
Shanghai. The cost of building a 
factory may be a relatively small 
price to pay since the Asia-
Pacific region is predicted to 
overtake North America as the 
largest regional toy market 
sometime in the next few years. 
With the expected number of 
Chinese children expected to 
grow significantly, Lego feels this 
is a market it can clearly “build 
on.” 
 Sources: Isabella Steger and Laurie Burkitt, 
“Chinese Couples—and Investors—Are Pregnant 
with Anticipation,”  The Wall Street Journal,  
November 19, 2013; Ted Trautman, “The Year of 
the Lego,”  The New Yorker, November 11, 2013; 
and Susan Scutti, “One-Child Policy Is One Big 
Problem for China,”  Newsweek, January 23, 2014. 
www.lego.com
 Two Is Better Than One 
r

 • What are the four steps in the marketing research process?  
 • What is environmental scanning?  
 • What factors are included in environmental scanning?  
•
What are the four step
 test prep   
ps in thee marke
ps i
375
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
were less expensive and more tailored to consumers 
with modest incomes. 
 What economic changes are occurring around 
your school that might affect a new vegetarian restau-
rant? How has the economic crisis or natural disas-
ters, such as floods and drought, affected your area?  
 TWO DIFFERENT MARKETS: 
CONSUMER AND BUSINESS-
TO-BUSINESS (B2B) 
 Marketers must know as much as possible about 
the market they wish to serve. As we defined it in Chapter 6, a market consists 
of people with unsatisfied wants and needs who have both the resources and 
the willingness to buy. There are two major markets in business: the  consumer 
market and the  business-to-business market. The   consumer market   consists 
of all the individuals or households that want goods and services for personal 
consumption or use and have the resources to buy them.  
 The   business-to-business (B2B) market   consists of all the individuals 
and organizations that want goods and services to use in producing other 
goods and services or to sell, rent, or supply goods to others.  18 Oil-drilling bits, 
cash registers, display cases, office desks, public accounting audits, and busi-
ness software are B2B goods and services. Traditionally, they have been known 
as  industrial goods and services because they are used in industry. 
 The important thing to remember is that the buyer’s reason for buying—
that is, the end use of the product—determines whether a product is a con-
sumer product or a B2B product. A cup of yogurt that a student buys for 
breakfast is a consumer product. However, when Very Vegetarian purchases 
the same cup of yogurt to sell to its breakfast customers, it has purchased a 
B2B product. The following sections outline consumer and B2B markets.  
 consumer market  
 All the individuals or 
households that want goods 
and services for personal 
consumption or use.  
 business-to-business (B2B) 
market  
 All the individuals and 
organizations that want goods 
and services to use in 
producing other goods and 
services or to sell, rent, or 
supply goods to others.  
 The business-to-
business (B2B) market 
consists of individuals 
and organizations that 
sell goods and services 
to other businesses. A 
manufacturer, for 
instance, buys its parts 
and supplies in the B2B 
market.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course to 
check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Explain how marketers apply the tools of market segmentation, relationship 
marketing, and the study of consumer behavior.
 THE CONSUMER MARKET  
 The total potential consumer market consists of the billions of people in global 
markets. Because consumer groups differ greatly by age, education level, 
income, and taste, a business usually can’t fill the needs of every group. It 
must decide which groups to serve, and then develop products and services 
specially tailored to their needs. 
 Take the Campbell Soup Company, for example. You know Campbell for  
its traditional soups such as chicken noodle and tomato. You may also have 
LO 13–5

Main Dimension
Sample Variables
Typical Segments
Geographic
segmentation
Region
Northeast, Midwest, South, West
City or county size
Density
Under 5,000; 5,000–10,999; 11,000–19,999; 20,000–49,000; 50,000 and up
Urban, suburban, rural
Demographic
segmentation
Gender
Male, female
Age
Under 5; 5–10; 11–18; 19–34; 35–49; 50–64; 65 and over
Education
Some high school or less, high school graduate, some college, college graduate,
postgraduate
Race
Caucasian, African American, Indian, Asian, Hispanic
Nationality
American, Asian, Eastern European, Japanese
Life stage
Infant, preschool, child, teenager, collegiate, adult, senior
Income
Under $15,000; $15,000–$24,999; $25,000–$44,999; $45,000–$74,999; $75,000
and over
Household size
1; 2; 3–4; 5 or more
Occupation
Professional, technical, clerical, sales supervisors, farmers, students, home-based
business owners, retired, unemployed
Psychographic
segmentation
Personality
Gregarious, compulsive, extroverted, aggressive, ambitious
Values
Actualizers, fulﬁllers, achievers, experiencers, believers, strivers, makers, strugglers
Lifestyle
Upscale, moderate
Beneﬁt
segmentation
Comfort
Convenience
Durability
Economy
Health
Luxury
Safety
Status
(Beneﬁt segmentation divides an already established market into smaller, more
homogeneous segments. Those people who desire economy in a car would be
an example. The beneﬁt desired varies by product.)
Volume
segmentation
Usage
Loyalty status
Heavy users, light users, nonusers
None, medium, strong
PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
376
noticed that Campbell has expanded its U.S. product line to appeal to a num-
ber of different tastes. Aware of population growth in the South and in Latino 
communities in cities across the nation, it introduced a Creole soup for the 
southern market and a red bean soup for the Latino market. In Texas and Cali-
fornia, where people like their food with a bit of kick, Campbell makes its 
nacho cheese soup spicier than in other parts of the country. It’s just one com-
pany that has had some success studying the consumer market, breaking it 
down into categories, and developing products for separate groups. 
 The process of dividing the total market into groups with similar charac-
teristics is called   market segmentation.  Selecting which groups or segments 
an organization can serve profitably is   target marketing.  For example, a shoe 
store may choose to sell only women’s shoes, only children’s shoes, or only 
athletic shoes. The issue is finding the right  target market —the most profitable 
segment—to serve.  
 Segmenting the Consumer Market 
 A firm can segment the consumer market several ways (see  Figure 13.6 ). Rather 
than selling your product throughout the United States, you might focus on just 
 market segmentation  
 The process of dividing the 
total market into groups whose 
members have similar 
characteristics.  
 target marketing  
 Marketing directed toward 
those groups (market 
segments) an organization 
decides it can serve profitably.  
 FIGURE 13.6 MARKET 
SEGMENTATION 
This table shows some of 
the methods marketers use 
to divide the market. The 
aim of segmentation is to 
break the market into 
smaller units.

377
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
one 
or 
two 
regions 
where you can be most 
successful, say, southern 
states such as Florida, 
Texas, and South Caro-
lina. Dividing a market 
by cities, counties, states, 
or regions is   geographic 
segmentation.   
 Alternatively, 
you 
could aim your prod-
uct’s promotions toward 
people ages 25 to 45 
who have some college 
education and above-
average incomes. Auto-
mobiles such as Lexus 
are often targeted to this 
audience. Age, income, 
and education level are criteria for   demographic segmentation.  So are religion, 
race, and occupation. Demographics are the most widely used segmentation 
variable, but not necessarily the best. 
 You may want your ads to portray a target group’s lifestyle. To do that, 
you would study the group’s values, attitudes, and interests in a strategy called 
  psychographic  s egmentation.  If you decide to target Generation Y, you 
would do an in-depth study of members’ values and interests, like which TV 
shows they watch and which personalities they like best. With that informa-
tion you would develop advertisements for those TV shows using those stars. 
Some marketers talk about ethnographic segmentation. Basically, such seg-
mentation is like psychographic segmentation in that the idea is to talk with 
consumers and develop stories about the product from their perspective. Often 
customers have an entirely different view of your product than you do.  19  
 In marketing for Very Vegetarian, what benefits of vegetarianism might 
you talk about? Should you emphasize freshness, heart-healthiness, taste, or 
something else? Determining which product benefits your target market pre-
fers and using those benefits to promote a product is   benefit segmentation.   
 You can also determine who are the big eaters of vegetarian food. Does 
your restaurant seem to attract more men or more women? More students or 
more faculty members? Are your repeat customers from the local community 
or are they commuters? Separating the market by volume of product use is 
called   volume   (or usage) segmentation.  Once you know who your customer 
base is, you can design your promotions to better appeal to that specific group 
or groups. 
 The best segmentation strategy is to use all the variables to come up with 
a consumer profile that represents a sizable, reachable, and profitable target 
market. That may mean not segmenting the market at all and instead going 
after the total market (everyone). Or it may mean going after ever-smaller seg-
ments. We’ll discuss that strategy next.  
 Reaching Smaller Market Segments 
  Niche marketing   is identifying small but profitable market segments and 
designing or finding products for them. Because it so easily offers an unlim-
ited choice of goods, the Internet is transforming a consumer culture once 
based on big hits and best-sellers into one that supports more specialized 
 geographic segmentation  
 Dividing a market by cities, 
counties, states, or regions.  
 demographic segmentation  
 Dividing the market by age, 
income, and education level.  
 psychographic 
segmentation  
 Dividing the market using 
groups’ values, attitudes, and 
interests.  
 benefit segmentation  
 Dividing the market by 
determining which benefits of 
the product to talk about.  
 volume (or usage) 
segmentation  
 Dividing the market by usage 
(volume of use).  
niche marketing
The process of finding small 
but profitable market segments 
and designing or finding 
products for them.
Bass Pro Shops offers a 
vast array of products 
for the wide range of 
outdoor enthusiasts 
who visit its stores. 
Dividing its market into 
identifiable segments is 
crucial to the success of 
the company. What 
different market 
segments do you think 
the company targets?

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
378
niche products. With only 5 percent of Americans identifying themselves as 
vegetarians, what types of vegetarian products do you think Very Vegetarian 
might sell online to this niche market? 
  One-to-one marketing   means developing a unique mix of goods and ser-
vices for each individual customer . Travel agencies often develop such pack-
ages, including airline reservations, hotel reservations, rental cars, restaurants, 
and admission to museums and other attractions for individual customers. 
This is relatively easy to do in B2B markets where each customer may buy in 
huge volume. But one-to-one marketing is possible in consumer markets as 
well. Computer companies like Dell and Apple can produce a unique com-
puter system for each customer. Can you envision designing special Very Veg-
etarian menu items for individual customers? 
 Building Marketing Relationships 
 In the world of mass production following the Industrial Revolution, marketers 
responded by practicing mass marketing.   Mass marketing   means developing 
products and promotions to please large groups of people. That is, there is little 
market segmentation. The mass marketer tries to sell the same products to as 
many people as possible. That means using mass media such as TV, radio, and 
newspapers to reach them. Although mass marketing led many firms to success, 
marketing managers often got so caught up with their products and competi-
tion that they became less responsive to the market. Airlines, for example, are so 
intent on meeting competition that they often annoy their customers. 
  Relationship marketing   tends to lead away from mass production and 
toward custom-made goods and services. The goal is to keep individual cus-
tomers over time by offering them new products that exactly meet their 
requirements. Technology enables sellers to work with individual buyers to 
determine their wants and needs and to develop goods and services specifi-
cally designed for them, like hand-tailored shirts and unique vacations. 
 Understanding consumers is so important to marketing that a whole area 
of marketing has emerged called the study of  consumer behavior. 20 We explore 
that area next.  
 The Consumer Decision-Making Process 
 The first step in the consumer decision-making process is  problem recognition, 
which may occur when your washing machine breaks down and you realize you 
need a new one. This leads to an  information search —you look for ads and bro-
chures about washing machines. You may consult a secondary data source like 
 Consumer Reports or other information online. And you’ll likely seek advice from 
other people who have purchased washing machines. The Adapting to Change 
box discusses how online reviews influence consumer decision making.  
 After compiling all this information, you  evaluate alternatives and make a 
 purchase decision. But your buying process doesn’t end there. After the pur-
chase, you may ask the people you spoke to previously how their machines 
perform and then do other comparisons to your new washer. 
 Marketing researchers investigate these consumer thought processes and 
behavior at each stage in a purchase to determine the best way to help the 
buyer buy. As we mentioned, this area of study is called  consumer behavior. 
Factors that affect consumer behavior include the following. 
 
• 
 Learning creates changes in an individual’s behavior resulting from 
previous experiences and information. If you’ve tried a particular 
brand of shampoo and don’t like it, you’ve learned not to buy it again.  
 one-to-one marketing  
 Developing a unique mix of 
goods and services for each 
individual customer.  
 mass marketing  
 Developing products and 
promotions to please large 
groups of people.  
 relationship marketing  
 Marketing strategy with the 
goal of keeping individual 
customers over time by offering 
them products that exactly 
meet their requirements.  
iSee It! Need help 
understanding how 
marketers segment 
target market? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.

379
 
• 
Reference group is the group an individual uses as a reference point in 
forming beliefs, attitudes, values, or behavior. A college student who 
carries a briefcase instead of a backpack may see businesspeople as 
his or her reference group.  
 
• 
Culture is the set of values, attitudes, and ways of doing things transmitted 
from one generation to another in a given society. The U.S. culture 
emphasizes and transmits the values of education, freedom, and diversity.  
 
• 
Subculture is the set of values, attitudes, and ways of doing things that 
results from belonging to a certain ethnic group, racial group, or other 
group with which one closely identifies (e.g., teenagers).  
 
• 
Cognitive dissonance is a type of psychological conflict that can occur 
after a purchase. Consumers who make a major purchase may have 
doubts about whether they got the best product at the best price. 
Marketers must reassure such consumers after the sale that they made 
a good decision. An auto dealer, for example, may send positive press 
articles about the particular car a consumer purchased, offer product 
guarantees, and provide certain free services.  
 adapting to change 
 When Amazon invited customers 
to start posting reviews of prod-
ucts 20 years ago, many thought 
the online retailer had lost its 
good sense. Today, market 
researchers admit that Amazon’s 
move created a monumental 
change in the consumer decision-
making process. A recent Nielsen 
research report helped confirm 
this shift. The company surveyed 
28,000 Internet users in 56 coun-
tries and found that online 
reviews from sites like Amazon 
are the second most trusted 
source of a brand’s reliability (sec-
ond only to the recommendations 
of friends and family). It’s no won-
der then that in this digital age, 
we are overwhelmed with the 
opinions of others about products, 
opinions we tend to treat as trust-
worthy and factual. But exactly 
how reliable are the ratings 
assigned by reviewers? Is the 
trust we place in these ratings 
misplaced? The best answer 
might be “maybe.” 
 As human beings we have a 
“herding” tendency that often 
causes us to think and act in the 
same way as people around us. 
Therefore, if reviewers read other 
product reviews that lean posi-
tively toward a product, there’s a 
good chance they may rate the 
product favorably even if that was 
not their original impression. Such 
behavior may be a major reason 
why extremely high ratings easily 
outnumber negative ratings on 
Amazon. Researchers also 
believe that online reviewers are 
more positively predisposed to a 
product because they voluntarily 
bought the product and are less 
likely to criticize it. This is gener-
ally referred to as a  selection 
bias.  
 Another problem with the valid-
ity of online reviews is that review-
ers will sometimes rate products 
negatively when there are ship-
ping or other ordering problems 
that have nothing to do with the 
quality of the products 
themselves. Amazon has tried to 
correct these inherent challenges 
through the creation of Amazon 
Vine, an invitation-only program 
that involves the site’s top review-
ers. These elite reviewers are sent 
free merchandise to review. 
Amazon believes working with the 
site’s most trusted reviewers pro-
vides more useful reviews for cus-
tomers to consider. Still, critics 
contend that giving products for 
free might create a bias toward a 
positive rather than negative rat-
ing. However, research has shown 
that the Vine reviewers actually 
bestow fewer stars than regular 
reviewers. Strangely, research has 
also shown that even a product 
with only negative reviews sells 
better than a product with no 
reviews at all. Go figure. 
 Sources: Lisa Chow, “Top Reviewers on Amazon 
Get Tons of Free Stuff,”  NPR, October 30, 2013; 
Joe Queenan, “Why I’m Hating All That Online 
Rating,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 21, 
2014; and Sinan Aral, “The Problem with Online 
Ratings,”  MIT Sloan Management Review, Winter 
2014. 
 Turning Negatives to Positive 
e 
www.amazon.com

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
380
 Many universities have expanded the marketing curriculum to include 
courses in business-to-business marketing. As you’ll learn below, that market is 
huge.  
Compare the business-to-business market and the consumer market.
THE BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS MARKET 
 Business-to-business (B2B) marketers include manufacturers; intermediaries 
such as retailers; institutions like hospitals, schools, and charities; and the 
government. The B2B market is larger than the consumer market because 
items are often sold and resold several times in the B2B process before they 
reach the final consumer. B2B marketing strategies also differ from consumer 
marketing because business buyers have their own decision-making process. 
Several factors make B2B marketing different, including these:
 
1. Customers in the B2B market are relatively few; there are just a few 
large construction firms or mining operations compared to the 
80 million or so households in the U.S. consumer market.  21 
 
2. Business customers are relatively large; that is, big organizations 
account for most of the employment in the production of various 
goods and services. Nonetheless, there are many small- to medium-
sized firms in the United States that together make an attractive 
market. 
 
3. B2B markets tend to be geographically concentrated. For example, 
oilfields are found in the Southwest and Canada. Thus B2B marketers 
can concentrate their efforts on a particular area and minimize 
distribution problems by locating warehouses near industrial 
centers.  
 
4. Business buyers are generally more rational and less emotional than 
ultimate consumers; they use product specifications to guide buying 
choices and often more carefully weigh the total product offer, 
including quality, price, and service.  
 
5. B2B sales tend to be direct, but not always. Tire manufacturers sell 
directly to auto manufacturers but use intermediaries, such as 
wholesalers and retailers, to sell to ultimate consumers.  
 
6. Whereas consumer promotions are based more on  advertising, B2B 
sales are based on  personal selling. There are fewer customers and they 
usually demand more personal service.  
 Figure 13.7 shows some of the differences between buying behavior in the 
B2B and consumer markets. B2B buyers also use the Internet to make pur-
chases. You’ll learn more about the business-to-business market in advanced 
marketing courses.  
 YOUR PROSPECTS IN MARKETING 
 There is a wider variety of careers in marketing than in most business disci-
plines. If you major in marketing, an array of career options will be available 
to you. You could become a manager in a retail store like Saks or Target. You 
could do marketing research or work in product management. You could go 
into selling, advertising, sales promotion, or public relations. You could work 
in transportation, storage, or international distribution. You could design 
interactive websites. These are just a few of the possibilities. Think, for 
LO 13–6

 • Can you define the terms  consumer market and  business-to-business 
market?  
 • Can you name and describe five ways to segment the consumer 
market?  
 • What is niche marketing, and how does it differ from one-to-one 
marketing?  
 • What are four key factors that make B2B markets different from con-
sumer markets?  
•
Can you define the te
 test prep   
rms consumer
rm
381
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
 FIGURE 13.7 COMPARING BUSINESS-TO-BUSINESS AND CONSUMER BUYING BEHAVIOR  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course to 
check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 Define   marketing, and apply the marketing concept to both for-profit and 
nonprofit organizations. 
 • 
 What is marketing?  
 Marketing is the activity, set of institutions, and processes for creating, 
communicating, delivering, and exchanging offerings that have value for 
customers, clients, partners, and society at large.  
LO 13–1
 summary 
Business-to-business Market
Consumer Market
Relatively few potential customers
Larger purchases
Geographically concentrated
Require technical, complex products
Frequently require customization
Frequently require technical advice, delivery,
and after-sale service
Buyers are trained
Negotiate details of most purchases
Follow objective standards
Often buy from multiple sources
Many potential customers
Smaller purchases
Geographically dispersed
Require less technical products
Sometimes require customization
Sometimes require technical advice, delivery,
and after-sale service
No special training
Accept standard terms for most purchases
Use personal judgment
Closer relationships between marketers and buyers
Impersonal relationships between marketers and 
consumers
Formal process involving speciﬁc employees
Informal process involving household members
Rarely buy from multiple sources
Market 
Structure
Products
Buying 
Procedures
example, of the many ways to use Facebook, Google, and other new technolo-
gies in marketing. As you read through the following marketing chapters, con-
sider whether a marketing career would interest you.  

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
382
 • 
 How has marketing changed over time?  
 During the  production era, marketing was largely a distribution function. 
Emphasis was on producing as many goods as possible and getting them to 
markets. By the early 1920s, during the  selling era, the emphasis turned to 
selling and advertising to persuade customers to buy the existing goods 
produced by mass production. After World War II, the tremendous demand 
for goods and services led to the  marketing concept era, when businesses 
recognized the need to be responsive to customers’ needs. During the 1990s, 
marketing entered the  customer relationship era, focusing on enhancing 
customer satisfaction and stimulating long-term customer loyalty. Today 
marketers are using mobile/on-demand marketing to engage customers.  
 • 
 What are the three parts of the marketing concept?  
 The three parts of the marketing concept are (1) a customer orientation, 
(2) a service orientation, and (3) a profit orientation (that is, marketing 
goods and services that will earn a profit and enable the firm to survive and 
expand).  
 • 
 What kinds of organizations are involved in marketing?  
 All kinds of organizations use marketing, including for-profit and nonprofit 
organizations like states, charities, churches, politicians, and schools.  
 Describe the four Ps of marketing. 
 • 
 How do marketers implement the four Ps?  
 The idea behind the four Ps is to design a  product people want,  price it 
competitively,  place it where consumers can find it easily, and  promote it 
so consumers know it exists.  
 Summarize the marketing research process. 
 • 
 What are the steps in conducting marketing research?  
 (1) Define the problem or opportunity and determine the present situation, 
(2) collect data, (3) analyze the data, and (4) choose the best solution.  
 Show how marketers use environmental scanning to learn about the 
changing marketing environment. 
 • 
 What is environmental scanning?  
 Environmental scanning is the process of identifying factors that can 
affect marketing success. Marketers pay attention to all the environmental 
factors that create opportunities and threats.  
 • 
 What are some of the more important environmental trends in marketing?  
 The most important global and technological change is probably the 
growth of the Internet and mobile marketing. Another is the growth of 
consumer databases, with which companies can develop products and ser-
vices that closely match consumers’ needs. Marketers must monitor social 
trends like population growth and shifts to maintain their close relation-
ship with customers. They must also monitor the dynamic competitive and 
economic environments.  
 Explain how marketers apply the tools of market segmentation, relationship 
marketing, and the study of consumer behavior. 
 • 
 What are some of the ways marketers segment the consumer market?  
 Geographic segmentation means dividing the market into different regions. 
Segmentation by age, income, and education level is  demographic 
Ho
do m
LO 13–2
What are
LO 13–3
LO 13–4
LO 13–5
 •
 •
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  

383
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
segmentation. We study a group’s values, attitudes, and interests using  psy-
chographic segmentation. Determining which benefits customers prefer 
and using them to promote a product is  benefit segmentation. Separating 
the market by usage is called  volume segmentation. The best segmentation 
strategy is to use all the variables to come up with a consumer profile for 
a target market that’s sizable, reachable, and profitable.  
 • 
 What is the difference between mass marketing and relationship marketing?  
 Mass marketing means developing products and promotions to please 
large groups of people. Relationship marketing tends to lead away from 
mass production and toward custom-made goods and services. Its goal is 
to keep individual customers over time by offering them products or ser-
vices that meet their needs.  
 • 
 What are some of the factors that influence the consumer decision-making 
process? 
 Factors that influence the consumer decision-making process include 
learning, reference group, culture, subculture, and cognitive dissonance.  
 Compare the business-to-business market and the consumer market. 
 • 
 What makes the business-to-business market different from the consumer 
market?  
 Customers in the B2B market are relatively few and large. B2B markets 
tend to be geographically concentrated, and industrial buyers generally 
are more rational than ultimate consumers in their selection of goods and 
services. B2B sales tend to be direct, and there is much more emphasis on 
personal selling than in consumer markets.  
What ma
LO 13–6
 key terms 
 benefit segmentation 377 
 brand name 368  
 business-to-business 
(B2B) market 375 
 consumer market 375 
 customer relationship 
management (CRM) 364  
 demographic 
segmentation 377  
 environmental 
scanning 372  
 focus group 371 
 geographic 
segmentation 377  
 marketing 362 
 marketing concept 364 
 marketing mix 366 
 marketing research 370 
 market segmentation 376  
 mass marketing 378  
 niche marketing 377  
 one-to-one marketing 378 
 primary data 371 
 product 368  
 promotion 369 
 psychographic 
segmentation 377  
 relationship 
marketing 378  
 secondary data 370 
 target marketing 376  
 test marketing 368  
 volume (or usage) 
segmentation 377  
 1. When businesses buy goods and services from other businesses, they usu-
ally buy in large volume. Salespeople in the business-to-business market 
usually are paid on a commission basis; that is, they earn a certain per-
centage of each sale they make. Why might B2B sales be a more finan-
cially rewarding career area than consumer sales?  
 2. Industrial companies sell goods such as steel, lumber, computers, engines, 
parts, and supplies. Name three such companies.  
u-
 critical thinking 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
384
 3. What environmental changes are occurring in your community? What 
was the impact of the recent economic crisis? What environmental changes 
in marketing are most likely to change your career prospects in the future? 
How can you learn more about those changes? What might you do to pre-
pare for them?  
 4. Which of your needs are not being met by businesses and/or nonprofit orga-
nizations in your area? Are there enough people with similar needs to attract 
an organization that would meet those needs? How would you find out?  
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  Think of an effective marketing mix for a new electric car or a brushless car 
wash for your neighborhood. Be prepared to discuss your ideas in class. 
 2.  Working in teams of five, think of a product or service your friends want 
but cannot get on or near campus. You might ask your friends at other 
schools what’s available there. What kind of product would fill that need? 
Discuss your results in class and how you might go about marketing that 
new product or service.  
 3.  Business has fallen off greatly at your upscale restaurant because of the 
slow economy. List four things you can do to win back the loyalty of your 
past customers.  
 4.  Working in teams of four or five, list as many brand names of pizza as you 
can, including from pizza shops, restaurants, supermarkets, and so on. 
Merge your list with the lists from other groups or classmates. Then try to 
identify the target market for each brand. Do they all seem to be after the 
same market, or are there different brands for different markets? What are 
the separate appeals?  
 5.  Take a little time to review the concepts in this chapter as they apply to 
Very Vegetarian, the restaurant we used as an example throughout. Have 
an open discussion in class about ( a ) a different name for the restaurant, 
( b ) a location for the restaurant, ( c ) a promotional program, and ( d ) a way 
to establish a long-term relationship with customers.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To demonstrate how the Internet can be used to enhance marketing 
relationships.  
 EXERCISE 
 Nike wants to help its customers add soul to their soles and express their indi-
viduality by customizing their own shoes. See for yourself at  www.nike.com.  
Enter “customize” in the search box and build a shoe that fits your style. 
 1. What if you’re in the middle of your shoe design and have questions about 
what to do next? Where can you go for help?  

385
Marketing: Helping Buyers Buy
CHAPTER 13
 2. How does Nike’s website help the company strengthen its relationships 
with its stakeholders? Give examples to support your answer.  
 3. How do the elements of the website reflect Nike’s target market?  
 4. Does Nike invite comments from visitors to its website? If so, how does 
this affect its attempt to build positive relationships with its customers?  
 video case   
 The Energizer Bunny is a marketing icon. How 
many people are not familiar with this marketing 
campaign? The precursor to the company known 
today as Energizer was founded by two inven-
tors: the inventor of the battery and the inventor 
of the flashlight. The synergy should be obvious. 
This partnership grew into the leading manufac-
turer and seller of batteries in the world today. 
Energizer is truly a global company—operating 
across the globe. Energizer has developed and 
implemented an outstanding marketing approach 
to its product lines. In fact, Energizer demon-
strates the full range of marketing concepts, 
including the use of social media and market 
research in successfully promoting and sustain-
ing a brand. 
 Advertising Age magazine ranks the brand 
icon Energizer Bunny as the number five brand 
icon of the twentieth century. This provides 
Energizer a competitive advantage in many of its 
markets. The company is continually involved in 
new product development through the identifi-
cation and understanding of consumer needs, 
including how a person intends to use a battery, 
in what devices, and the types of users for vari-
ous products where Energizer batteries can 
be used. 
 Energizer has a well-developed and highly 
effective marketing division that is responsible for 
helping to ensure the success of current and new 
products. The video walks the viewer through the 
four Ps of marketing—product, price, place, and 
promotion—and shows how Energizer utilizes 
marketing concepts effectively. 
 The company views its approach to marketing 
and selling its product lines as one that is focused 
on developing, cultivating, and expanding cus-
tomer relationships. Energizer is a company that 
has been significantly impacted by the growth of 
technology and uses this and the growth of the 
Internet as parts of its overall marketing commu-
nications approach to develop strong and lasting 
relationships with its customers. 
 The video demonstrates the importance of rela-
tionship marketing as a key to Energizer’s success. 
The complexities involved in the marketing mix, 
marketing research, and new product development 
are highlighted through specific examples in the 
video, such as the new product introduced by the 
company each summer. We see how the company 
uses qualitative data such as focus groups and sec-
ondary data to test market its product, elicit cus-
tomer feedback, collect demographic and other 
data, and match its marketing strategy to be consis-
tent with the appropriate segmentation factors. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. Identify the elements that must be considered 
in the marketing environment.  
 2. Briefly discuss the evolution of marketing at 
Energizer as described in the video.  
 3. The Energizer Bunny is considered a market-
ing icon. What does this mean?  
 USING THE 4 Ps AT ENERGIZER 
 1. 
Brent Adamson, Matthew Dixon, and Nicholas Toman, “A New 
Guide to Selling,”  Harvard Business Review, August 2012. 
 2. 
Patrick Spenner and Karen Freeman, “To Keep Your 
Customers, Keep It Simple,”  Harvard Business Review, May 
2012. 
 3. 
Barbara Giamanco and Kent Gregoire, “Tweet Me, Friend Me, 
Make Me Buy,”  Harvard Business Review, July–August 2012. 
 4. 
Kasey Wehrum, “Their Carts Are Full, So Why Won’t They 
Buy?”  Inc., December 2013. 
 5. 
J. J. Martin, “The Shopping Social Networks,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, October 27–28, 2012. 
 6. 
Jason Fried, “Marketing Without Marketing,”  Inc., January 2014. 
 7. 
Roy J. Chua, “Building Effective Relationships in China,” 
Sloan Management Review, Summer 2012. 
arts Are Full, So Why Won’t They
 notes 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
386
 8. 
Peter Dahlström and David Edelman, “The Coming Era of 
‘On-Demand’ Marketing,”  McKinsey Quarterly, April 2013. 
 9. 
Vanessa Small, “LinkedIn Connects Members with Volunteer 
Options,”  The Washington Post, January 21, 2014. 
 10. 
Alexander Lobrano, “La Nouvelle Veg,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, April 20–21, 2013. 
 11. 
Annie Gasparro and Juoie Jargon, “McDonald’s to Go 
Vegetarian in India,”  The Wall Street Journal, September 5, 2012. 
 12. 
Jenn Harris, “Al Gore Is Now Vegan, Just Like Bill Clinton,” 
Los Angeles Times, November 26, 2013. 
 13. 
Trupti Rami, “Veganism in Seven Decades,”  New York,  January 
20–27, 2014. 
 14. 
Terence Chea, “San Francisco Startup Seeks Egg Alternatives,” 
 The Washington Times, December 9, 2013. 
 15. Dinah Eng, “A Fresh Take on Food,”  Fortune, April 29, 2013. 
 16. Tim Kraft, “The Trick to Getting NoBull on More Grills,”  The 
Washington Post, January 20, 2013. 
  17. Susan Dumenco, “Data, Data Everywhere, and Not an Insight 
in Sight,”  Advertising Age, March 18, 2013. 
  18. Mark Henricks, “B2B,”  Inc., February 2014. 
  19. Julien Cayla, Robin Beers, and Eric Arnould, “Stories That 
Deliver Business Insights,”  Sloan Management Review, 
Winter 2014. 
 20. Julie Liesse, “How Understanding Consumers’ Purchase Cycle 
Can Help Brands Grow,”  Advertising Age, September 30, 
2013. 
 21. 
U.S. Census Bureau,  www.census.gov , accessed April 2014. 
 Page 361: © Frederick M. Brown/Stringer/Getty 
Images; p. 364: © Bettmann/Corbis; p. 365: 
© Foodcollection/Getty Images RF; p. 366: Cour-
tesy of the Dental Trade Alliance and the Ad 
Council; p. 369: © Burke/Triolo/Brand X Pictures 
RF; p. 370: © Jon Feingersh/Blend Images/Alamy; 
p. 372: © David Sacks/Getty Images RF; p. 374: 
© NI QIN/E+/Getty Images RF; p. 375: © Torsten 
Silz/AFP/Getty Images; p. 377: © RJ Sangosti/The 
Denver Post/Getty Images.
Page 361: © Frederick M Bro
 photo credits 


388
 Developing 
and Pricing Goods 
and Services 
 14 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 14-1 Describe a total product offer. 
 LO 14-2 Identify the various kinds of consumer and industrial goods. 
 LO 14-3 Summarize the functions of packaging. 
 LO 14-4 Contrast  brand, brand name, and  trademark, and show the value 
of brand equity. 
 LO 14-5 Explain the steps in the new-product development process. 
 LO 14-6 Describe the product life cycle. 
 LO 14-7 Identify various pricing objectives and strategies.  

389
Kathy Ireland
 • CEO of Kathy Ireland Worldwide
 • Former supermodel
 • Built a $2 billion business 
empire
www.kathyireland.com
@kathyireland
I
 n today’s fame-fueled culture, celeb-
rities can make a quick buck by 
using their names to advertise prod-
ucts. The problem with these 
endorsement deals, though, is that 
they last only as long as the spokesper-
son stays famous. For former super-
model Kathy Ireland, such an 
unsustainable plan simply would not do. 
 Ireland caught the entrepreneurial 
bug early in life. “I was 4 years old, and I 
sold rocks I painted from my wagon,” 
said Ireland. “It was before mace, so 
people used them as self-defense.” By 
age 11 she was earning $60 a month 
delivering newspapers. Five years later 
Ireland saw her income grow even more 
when a representative for the Elite Mod-
eling Agency discovered her at finishing 
school. At 20 she appeared in the  Sports 
Illustrated Swimsuit Issue for the first of 
13 consecutive appearances. When she 
finally graced the magazine’s cover in 
1989, it became  Sports Illustrated ’s best-
selling issue ever. 
 Modeling brought Ireland wealth and 
fame, but she had the good sense to 
know that it wouldn’t last forever. “The 
modeling industry was not part of my 
path or my plan,” said Ireland. “In fact, 
the entire time I worked in the modeling 
industry, I tried and failed at many busi-
nesses.” In 1993 she received an offer to 
model socks, a gig that most jet-setting 
supermodels would reject outright. 
Rather than get herself down about such 
an unglamorous job, Ireland used her 
experience to turn it into a business 
opportunity. Instead of acting solely as a 
spokesperson, she suggested to brand 
the socks with her name. Ireland ended 
up striking a deal with the socks’ mar-
keter that allowed her a royalty for every 
product sold. Along with the help of a 
$50,000 personal loan, Kathy Ireland 
Worldwide was officially in business. 
 Once the socks turned out to be a 
success, Ireland started licensing her 
name out to other types of apparel like 
exercise clothes and swimwear. By 1994 
she signed an exclusive deal to sell her 
products at Kmart. The retailer hoped 
Ireland would do for clothing what Mar-
tha Stewart had done for housewares. 
However, Ireland’s plans stretched out 
far beyond apparel. The legendary 
investor and billionaire Warren Buffett 
once told her that while fashion changes 
constantly, the home stays relatively the 
same. Ireland took that advice to heart 
when her company expanded into furni-
ture by 1998. With this new market, Ire-
land had finally found a motto for her 
brand: “Finding solutions for families, 
especially busy moms.” Within a year 
Kathy Ireland Worldwide expanded into 
carpets, flooring, and floor tiles. Kmart, 
on the other hand, had fallen into bank-
ruptcy around the turn of the millennium. 
Realizing her entire enterprise rested 
upon one shaky retailer, in 2003 Ireland 
made the decision to break her relation-
ship with Kmart as well as apparel all 
together. “When I wanted to make a bold 
change, people said I was crazy,” said 
Ireland. “They said what I wanted to do 
had never been done. But ‘it’s never 
been done’ does not mean it can’t be 
done.” 
 Though her choice seemed risky at 
the time, Ireland’s gamble paid off hand-
somely in the long run. By attaching a 
celebrity name to mundane products like 
replacement windows and area rugs, Ire-
land created a recognizable, reliable 
brand that earns $2 billion in annual 
retail revenue. Kathy Ireland Worldwide 
itself manages to bring in more than 
$300 million a year in profit, more than 
Martha Stewart, thanks to the amazingly 
low overhead brought on by its licensing 
model. Although this type of operation 
requires significant legal and financial 
expertise, Ireland maintains an active 
role by working as chief designer for the 
company’s many products. In fact, the 
designs for each of the company’s more 
than 15,000 products started with an 
idea from Ireland herself. 
 Like Kathy Ireland, the companies 
that command the business world are 
innovative pioneers. In this chapter you’ll 
learn all about how entrepreneurs 
develop and price new products and ser-
vices. You will also learn about packag-
ing, branding, and other elements of a 
total product offer. 
 Sources: Eric T. Wagner, “From Bikini to Boardroom: 
4 Secrets from Kathy Ireland,”  Forbes, December 10, 
2013; “Kathy Ireland: How Did I Get Here?”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, July 25, 2013; and Dorothy Pomerantz, 
“How Sports Illustrated Swimsuit Model Kathy Ireland 
Became a $350 Million Mogul,”  Forbes, February 8, 2012.  
 Getting to Know  Kathy Ireland

390
 name that company 
 You’ve been using my product for years, yet it took over 15 years for it to be 
accepted in the market. It finally became popular during World War I, and today 
you’ll find it on your pants, your travel bags, and your hoodie. Who am I and 
what do I make? (Find the answer in the chapter.)  
Describe a total product offer.
 PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT 
AND THE TOTAL PRODUCT OFFER  
 Global managers will be challenging U.S. managers with new products at low 
prices.  1 The best way to compete is to design and promote better products, 
meaning products that customers perceive to have the best   value   —good qual-
ity at a fair price. One of the American Marketing Association’s definitions of 
marketing says it’s “a set of processes for creating, communicating, and deliv-
ering  value to customers.” When consumers calculate the value of a product, 
they look at the benefits and then subtract the cost (price) to see whether the 
benefits exceed the costs, including the cost of driving to the store (or shipping 
fees if they buy the product online). You may have noticed that many restau-
rants pushed “value meals” when the economy slowed. John Mackey of Whole 
Foods says that Trader Joe’s offers customers great  value every day rather than 
have frequent sales, as many retailers do.  2 
 Whether consumers perceive a product as the best value depends on 
many factors, including the benefits they seek and the service they receive. To 
satisfy consumers, marketers must learn to listen better and constantly adapt 
to changing market demands.  3 See the Adapting to Change box for an example 
of how one bar uses Facebook and Twitter to let customers decide which craft 
beers to have on tap.  
 Marketers have learned that adapting products to new competition and new 
markets is an ongoing need. We’re sure you’ve noticed menu changes at your 
local fast-food restaurants over time. An organization can’t do a one-time survey 
of consumer wants and needs, design a group of products to meet those needs, 
put them in the stores, and then just relax. It must constantly monitor changing 
consumer wants and needs, and adapt products, policies, and services accord-
ingly. For example, consumers are looking for healthier food choices today than 
in the past. Did you know that McDonald’s now sells as much chicken as beef? 
 McDonald’s and other restaurants are constantly trying new ideas.  4 For 
example, McDonald’s added smoothies and oatmeal with fruit. It also offers a 
choice of side salad, fruit, or vegetables in place of fries with its value meals. It 
is trying an all-day breakfast menu. Burger King often follows McDonald’s 
with its offerings.  5 Have you noticed, for example, that Burger King has added 
lattes and flavored coffee to its menus?  6 
 Of course, McD’s answers with more new ideas. For example, in Kokomo, 
Indiana, McDonald’s tried waiter service and a more varied menu. In New 
York, it offered McDonuts to compete with Krispy Kreme. In Atlanta and other 
cities, McDonald’s had computer stations linked to the Internet. In Hawaii, it 
tried a Spam breakfast platter, and in Columbus, Ohio, a mega-McDonald’s 
had a karaoke booth. 
LO 14–1
 value  
 Good quality at a fair price. 
When consumers calculate the 
value of a product, they look at 
the benefits and then subtract 
the cost to see if the benefits 
exceed the costs.  

391
 McDonald’s is challenging Starbucks and Dunkin’ Donuts for the coffee 
market.  7 What was Starbucks’s answer to the new challenges? It began offer-
ing more food products. The new menu includes Starbucks’s own pastries and 
juices. 8 Oatmeal has become a huge success there as well. Have you seen the 
Starbucks displays in your local supermarket? Starbucks is reaching out to 
many new distributors with its products. 
 Offerings may differ in various locations, according to the wants of the 
local community. In Iowa pork tenderloin is big, but in Oklahoma City it’s tor-
tilla scramblers. Globally, companies must adapt to local tastes. At Bob’s Big 
Boy in Thailand, you can get Tropical Shrimp; at Carl’s Jr. in Mexico, you can 
order the Machaca Burrito; and at Shakey’s Pizza in the Philippines, you can 
get Cali Shandy, a Filipino beer. Product development, then, is a key activity in 
any modern business, anywhere in the world. 
 You can imagine what can happen when your product loses some of its 
appeal.  9 Zippo lighters, for example, has lost some market as people turn away 
from smoking cigarettes to using E-Cigarettes.  10 Zippo, therefore, tried offer-
ing products such as key holders, tape measures, and belt buckles. They are no 
 adapting to change 
 Social media is in a constant 
state of change. Do businesses 
have to keep up with it? 
Absolutely. At least that’s how 
Chris Dilla, owner of Bocktown 
Beer and Grill, sees it. As she 
puts it, “The minute I met Twitter, 
I realized how valuable it would 
be.” Without having the money 
for advertising, she turned to 
social media to help make the 
Pittsburgh gastro pub a staple on 
the city’s craft beer scene. In 
addition to making maximum use 
of Twitter and Facebook, 
Bocktown also optimized its 
mobile website, making it easier 
for customers to engage with the 
brand when they are on the go. 
 But Dilla’s relationship with 
social media isn’t limited to giants 
like Twitter and Facebook. A few 
years back Bocktown introduced 
Tabbedout, a mobile payment 
app that allows customers to pay 
straight from their smartphones. 
Developed by a start-up in Austin, 
Texas, customers can get started 
with the service by entering their 
credit card information on the 
app. The data are stored on their 
device and remain encrypted, 
ensuring that Tabbedout is even 
safer than dropping off your 
credit card with a server. Bar 
patrons at Bocktown can use 
Tabbedout to immediately open a 
tab through the app. They can 
also create a unique five-digit 
code that tallies their total bill. 
When they are ready to call it a 
day or night, all customers need 
to do to settle their tab is press a 
button on the app and then walk 
out the door. 
 Dilla has no intention of slow-
ing down the Beer and Grill’s 
social media presence. The bar 
recently added a new app called 
NoWait which saves customers 
time by letting them see the res-
taurant’s wait time, add their 
names to a wait list, check their 
place in line, and receive a text 
when their table is ready. It’s 
places like Bocktown that are 
fueling the tremendous growth of 
the craft beer industry. Who 
knows when Bocktown Beer and 
Grill’s relationship with social 
media will come to a head. 
 Sources: Brad Tuttle, “7 Signs That the Craft Beer 
Craze Has Gone Totally Mainstream,”  Time, 
September 22, 2013; Kim Lyons, “Passionate 
Owner of Two Suburban Pittsburgh Restaurants 
Attuned to Social Media,”  Pittsburgh Post-Gazette, 
March 5, 2014; and Bocktown Beer & Grill,  www.
bocktown.com , accessed April 2014.  
 Bellying Up to Social Media 
e 
www.bocktown.com

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
392
longer being sold, but Zippo introduced a new 
men’s fragrance and a clothing line that includes 
hoodies, ball caps, and jeans. 
 Who would have guessed that Cokes would 
someday be sold in Keurig-type machines? Watch 
out SodaStream.  11 And who would have expected 
watchmakers, like Piaget and Swatch (Omega and 
Breguet), to push jewelry in their stores?  12 It’s all 
part of a movement across the world to offer con-
sumers new products.  
 Distributed Product Development 
 The increase in outsourcing and alliance building 
has resulted in innovation efforts that often require 
using multiple organizations separated by cultural, 
geographic, and legal boundaries.   Distributed 
product development   is the term used to describe handing off various parts 
of your innovation process—often to companies in other countries. It is diffi-
cult enough to coordinate processes within a firm; it becomes substantially 
more difficult when trying to coordinate multifirm processes. Great care must 
be taken to establish goals and procedures and standards before any such 
commitment is made. One company that has collaborated with many other 
firms to make innovative products is 3M Company. It has developed some 
55,000 products from Scotch tape to Thinsulate, and many of those products 
are embedded in other products such as the iPhone. 
 Developing a Total Product Offer  
From a strategic marketing viewpoint, 
a product is more than just the physical good or service. A   total product 
offer   consists of everything consumers evaluate when deciding whether to 
buy something. Thus, the basic product or service may be a washing machine, 
an insurance policy, or a beer, but the total product offer includes some or all 
of the  value  enhancers in  Figure  14.1 . You may hear some people call the 
basic product the “core product” and the total product offer the “augmented 
product.” Can you see how sustainability can be part of the augmented 
product?  13  
 When people buy a product, they may evaluate and compare total prod-
uct offers on many dimensions. Some are tangible (the product itself and its 
package); others are intangible (the producer’s reputation and the image cre-
ated by advertising). A successful marketer must begin to think like a con-
sumer and evaluate the total product offer as a collection of impressions 
created by all the factors listed in  Figure 14.1 . It is wise to talk with consumers 
to see which features and benefits are most important to them and which 
value enhancers they want or don’t want in the final offering.  14 Frito-Lay, for 
example, had to drop biodegradable bags because they were “too noisy.” Who 
would think of such a thing when developing a product? 
 What questions might you ask consumers when developing the total 
product offer for Very Vegetarian? (Recall the business idea we introduced in 
Chapter 13.) Remember, store surroundings are important in the restaurant 
business, as are the parking lot and the condition of bathrooms. 
 Sometimes an organization can use low prices to create an attractive total 
product offer.  15 For example, outlet stores offer brand-name goods for less. 
Shoppers like getting high-quality goods and low prices, but they must be 
careful. Outlets also carry lower-quality products with similar but not exactly 
 distributed product 
development  
 Handing off various parts of 
your innovation process—often 
to companies in other 
countries.  
 total product offer  
 Everything that consumers 
evaluate when deciding 
whether to buy something; also 
called a value package.  
Apple, Samsung, and 
other smartphone 
makers are fighting for 
a greater share of the 
huge mobile market. 
Each continues to 
improve and add 
features hoping to win 
customers. What 
features would a 
smartphone company 
have to add to its 
product offer in order to 
convince you to switch 
phones or carriers?

393
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
the same features as goods carried in regular stores. Different consumers may 
want different total product offers, so a company must develop a variety of 
offerings.  
 Product Lines and the Product Mix 
 Companies usually don’t sell just one product. A   product line   is a group of 
products that are physically similar or intended for a similar market. They usu-
ally face similar competition. In one product line, there may be several compet-
ing brands. Notice, for example, Diet Coke, Diet Coke with Splenda, Coke Zero, 
Diet Coke with Lemon, Diet Coke with Lime, Diet Vanilla Coke, and Diet Cherry 
Coke. Now Coca-Cola is creating low-sugar drinks that taste better.  16 Makes it 
kind of hard to choose, doesn’t it? Both Coke and Pepsi have added water and 
sports drinks to their product lines to meet new consumer tastes. 
 Procter & Gamble (P&G) has many brands in its laundry detergent prod-
uct line, including Tide, Era, Downy, and Bold. P&G’s product lines together 
make up its   product mix, the combination of all product lines offered by a 
manufacturer. Have you noticed that there are more than 300 distinct types of 
toothpastes available in stores? Do you think that is too many or not? 
 Service providers have product lines and product mixes as well. A bank or 
credit union may offer a variety of services from savings accounts, automated 
teller machines, and computer banking to money market funds, safe deposit 
boxes, car loans, mortgages, traveler’s checks, online banking, and insurance.  17 
AT&T combines services (communications) with goods (phones) in its prod-
uct mix, with special emphasis on wireless. The Spotlight on Small Business 
box features a story about how an entrepreneur expanded his company’s prod-
uct mix by adding new products and services.  
 product line  
 A group of products that are 
physically similar or are 
intended for a similar market.  
 product mix  
 The combination of product 
lines offered by a manufacturer.  
 FIGURE 14.1 POTENTIAL 
COMPONENTS OF A 
TOTAL PRODUCT OFFER  
Guarantee
Speed
of
delivery
Reputation
of
producer
Image
created
by
advertising
Price
Convenience
Package
Brand
name
Store
surroundings
Internet
access
Service
Buyer’s
past
experience

 spotlight on small business 
 As a Navy Seal, Randy Hetrick 
had to keep his body in the same 
type of peak physical condition as 
a professional athlete. But during 
a training mission in Southeast 
Asia, Hetrick and his team had to 
remain undercover in a ware-
house for weeks with only enough 
room for pushups and sit-ups. He 
remembered a workout that used 
his body weight as resistance 
rather than barbells, and created 
a “gizmo” out of spare parachute 
harnesses and nylon webbing 
that he attached to the end of a 
door. It worked great for him and 
his seal team. As time passed, his 
“gizmo” became Hetrick’s pas-
sion. Along with the help of his 
fellow Seals, he worked to 
develop and improve the product. 
 Although Hetrick had a tough 
time convincing people that his 
idea was worth anything, he 
worked on his product with 
conditioning coaches at the 
school’s gym and eventually cre-
ated a refined prototype. His 
“gizmo” had evolved into a 
sophisticated piece of equipment 
featuring three adjustable straps 
attached to a metal ring. It 
allowed users to perform hun-
dreds of different exercises by 
suspending their legs in the air or 
simply by leaning forward. 
 Hetrick’s beloved “gizmo” 
evolved into the TRX Suspension 
Trainer. As his business grew, 
Hetrick wondered if it was time 
to reevaluate his marketing plan 
to take advantage of the compa-
ny’s success. He launched 
Fitness Anywhere and began 
providing classes, instructional 
DVDs, and online videos about 
suspension training. These 
added services launched the 
company into profitability. Today, 
Fitness Anywhere is a 
$50  million business occupying 
four floors of a San Francisco 
office building. The top floor is a 
2,500-square-foot gym overlook-
ing the city and kitchens through-
out the office offer an array of 
energy bars and protein shakes. 
“Working out is not only sanc-
tioned, it almost is required,” says 
the former Navy Seal. 
 Sources: Brent Gleeson, “Veteran-Owned 
Businesses: Taking the Country by Storm,” 
Forbes, April 3, 2014; and Katie Lobosco, “Vet 
Turns Military Training into $50 Million Fitness 
Company,”  CNN Money, November 10, 2013. 
www.trxtraining.com
 Sealing the Deal 
s
394
Identify the various kinds of consumer and industrial goods.
 PRODUCT DIFFERENTIATION  
 Product differentiation   is the creation of real or perceived product differ-
ences. Actual product differences are sometimes quite small, so marketers 
must use a creative mix of branding, pricing, advertising, and packaging (value 
enhancers) to create a unique, attractive image. Note the positive effect of 
developing brands like Samsung, Google, and YouTube.  18 Various bottled 
water companies have successfully attempted product differentiation. The 
companies made their bottled waters so attractive through branding, pricing, 
and promotion that now restaurant customers often order water by brand 
name. 
 There’s no reason why you couldn’t create a similar attractive image for 
Very Vegetarian, your vegetarian restaurant. Small businesses can often win 
market share with creative product differentiation. One yearbook entrepreneur 
competes by offering multiple clothing changes, backgrounds, and poses along 
with special allowances, discounts, and guarantees. His small business has the 
advantage of being more flexible in adapting to customer needs and wants, and 
he’s able to offer attractive product options. He has been so successful that 
companies use him as a speaker at photography conventions. How could you 
respond creatively to the consumer wants of vegetarians? Note the success that 
companies have had using the term organic in their promotions.  19  
LO 14–2
 product differentiation  
 The creation of real or 
perceived product differences.  

395
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
 Marketing Different Classes of Consumer Goods 
and Services 
 One popular classification of consumer goods and services has 
four general categories—convenience, shopping, specialty, and 
unsought. 
 
1.   Convenience goods and services   are products the 
consumer wants to purchase frequently and with a 
minimum of effort, like candy, gum, milk, snacks, gas, and 
banking services. One store that sells mostly convenience 
goods is 7-Eleven. Location, brand awareness, and image 
are important for marketers of convenience goods and 
services. The Internet has taken convenience to a whole 
new level, especially for banks and other service 
companies.  
 
2.   Shopping goods and services   are products the 
consumer buys only after comparing value, quality, 
price, and style from a variety of sellers. Target is one 
store that sells mostly shopping goods. Because many 
consumers carefully compare such products, marketers 
can emphasize price differences, quality differences, or 
some combination of the two. Think of how the Internet 
has helped you find the right shopping goods.  20 Think 
also of how people compare prices at competing wireless carriers.  21 
 
3.   Specialty goods and services   are consumer products with unique 
characteristics and brand identity. Because consumers perceive that 
specialty goods have no reasonable substitute, they put forth a special 
effort to purchase them. Examples include fine watches, expensive 
wine, fur coats, jewelry, imported chocolates, and services provided by 
medical specialists or business consultants. Specialty goods are often 
marketed through specialty magazines. Specialty skis may be sold 
through sports magazines and specialty foods through gourmet 
magazines. Again, the Internet helps buyers find specialty goods. In 
fact, some specialty goods can be sold exclusively on the Internet.  
 
4.   Unsought goods and services   are products consumers are unaware 
of, haven’t necessarily thought of buying, or suddenly find they need to 
solve an unexpected problem. They include emergency car-towing 
services, burial services, and insurance.  
 The marketing task varies according to the category of product; conve-
nience goods are marketed differently from specialty goods. The best way to 
promote convenience goods is to make them readily available and create the 
proper image. Some combination of price, quality, and service is the best 
appeal for shopping goods. Specialty goods rely on reaching special market 
segments through advertising. Unsought goods such as life insurance often 
rely on personal selling. Car towing relies heavily on online directories, such 
as Yelp. 
 Whether a good or service falls into a particular class depends on the indi-
vidual consumer. Coffee can be a shopping good for one consumer, while fla-
vored gourmet roast is a specialty good for another. Some people shop around 
to compare different dry cleaners, so dry cleaning is a shopping service for 
them. Others go to the closest store, making it a convenience service. Market-
ers must carefully monitor their customer base to determine how consumers 
perceive their products.  
 convenience goods and 
services  
 Products that the consumer 
wants to purchase frequently 
and with a minimum of effort.  
 shopping goods and services  
 Those products that the 
consumer buys only after 
comparing value, quality, price, 
and style from a variety of sellers.  
 specialty goods and services  
 Consumer products with unique 
characteristics and brand 
identity. Because these 
products are perceived as 
having no reasonable substitute, 
the consumer puts forth a 
special effort to purchase them.  
 unsought goods and 
services  
 Products that consumers are 
unaware of, haven’t necessarily 
thought of buying, or find that 
they need to solve an 
unexpected problem.  
When you’re in a hurry 
and need something 
quickly, convenience 
stores offer a variety of 
goods that you can get 
when you’re in a pinch. 
What convenience 
goods do you buy, and 
where do you find them?

 • What value enhancers may be included in a total product offer?  
 • What’s the difference between a product line and a product mix?  
 • Name the four classes of consumer goods and services, and give exam-
ples of each.  
 • Describe three different types of industrial goods.  
•
What value enhancers
 test prep   
s may be includ
s m
PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
396
 Marketing Industrial Goods and Services 
 Many goods could be classified as consumer goods or industrial goods, based 
on their uses. A computer kept at home for personal use is clearly a consumer 
good. But in a commercial setting, such as an accounting firm or manufactur-
ing plant, the same computer is an industrial good. 
 Industrial goods   (sometimes called business goods or B2B goods) are 
products used in the production of other products. They are sold in the 
business-to-business (B2B) market.  22 Some products can be both consumer 
and industrial goods. We’ve just mentioned how personal computers fit in 
both categories. As a consumer good, a computer might be sold through 
electronics stores or computer magazines. Most of the promotion would be 
advertising. As an industrial good, personal computers are more likely to be 
sold through salespeople or on the Internet. Advertising is less of a factor 
when selling industrial goods.  23 Thus, you can see that classifying goods by 
user category helps marketers determine the proper marketing mix 
strategy.  24  
 Figure 14.2  shows some categories of both consumer goods and indus-
trial goods and services.  Installations consist of major capital equipment 
such as new factories and heavy machinery.  Capital items are expensive prod-
ucts that last a long time. A new factory building is both a capital item and 
an installation.  Accessory equipment consists of capital items that are not 
quite as long-lasting or expensive as installations—like computers, copy 
machines, and various tools. Various categories of industrial goods are 
shown in the figure.  
 industrial goods  
 Products used in the 
production of other products. 
Sometimes called business 
goods or B2B goods.  
 Many goods could be 
classified as consumer 
goods or industrial 
goods, based on their 
uses. For example, a 
computer that a person 
uses at home for 
personal use would 
clearly be a consumer 
good. But that same 
computer used in a 
commercial setting, 
such as a hospital, 
would be classified as 
an industrial good. What 
difference does it make 
how a good is 
classified?  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

397
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
Summarize the functions of packaging.
 PACKAGING CHANGES THE PRODUCT  
 We’ve said that consumers evaluate many aspects of the total product offer, 
including the brand. It’s surprising how important packaging can be in such 
evaluations of various goods. Many companies have used packaging to change 
and improve their basic product. We have squeezable ketchup bottles that stand 
upside down; square paint cans with screw tops and integrated handles; plastic 
bottles for motor oil that eliminate the need for funnels; single-use packets of 
spices; and so forth. Another interesting innovation is aromatic packaging. Ari-
zona Beverage Company now has aromatic caps on its flavored iced teas. 
 In each case, the package changed the product in consumers’ minds and 
opened large new markets. Do you sometimes have difficulty opening plastic 
packaging? Which packaging innovations do you like best? Can you see 
some market potential in developing better packaging? Packaging has even 
become a profession. Check out the Michigan State University School of 
LO 14–3
 FIGURE 14.2 VARIOUS CATEGORIES OF CONSUMER AND INDUSTRIAL GOODS AND SERVICES  
Consumer
goods/services
Industrial
goods/services
Goods/services
Shopping
Convenience
Support 
goods
Component parts
(engines)
Raw materials
Production 
materials
(nuts and bolts)
Supplies
(paper clips, 
stationery, and 
other office 
supplies)
Accessory 
equipment
(tools and office 
equipment) 
Installations 
(buildings, 
equipment, and
capital rentals) 
Service
(maintenance 
and repair)
Production 
goods
Specialty
Unsought

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
398
price, size, color, and other attributes. In short, packaging changes 
the product by changing its visibility, usefulness, or attractiveness. 
 One relatively new packaging technology for tracking prod-
ucts is the radio frequency identification (RFID) chip, especially 
the ones made with nanoparticle powder. When attached to a 
product, the chip sends out signals telling a company where the 
product is at all times. RFID chips carry more information than 
bar codes, don’t have to be read one at a time (whole pallets can 
be read in an instant), and can be read at a distance. Walmart has been a leader 
in using RFID technology.  
 The Growing Importance of Packaging 
 Packaging has always been an important aspect of the product offer, but today 
it’s carrying more of the promotional burden than in the past. Many products 
once sold by salespersons are now sold in self-service outlets, and the package 
has acquired more sales responsibility. The Fair Packaging and Labeling Act 
was passed to give consumers much more quantity and value information on 
product packaging. 
 Packaging may make use of a strategy called   bundling,  which combines 
goods and/or services for a single price. Virgin Airlines has bundled door-to-
door limousine service and in-flight massages in its total product offer. Finan-
cial institutions are offering everything from financial advice to help in 
purchasing insurance, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and more. When combin-
ing goods or services into one package, marketers must not include so much 
that the price gets too high. It’s best to work with customers to develop value 
enhancers that meet their individual needs.  
Contrast brand, brand name, and trademark, and show the value of brand equity.
 BRANDING AND BRAND EQUITY  
 A   brand   is a name, symbol, or design (or combination thereof) that identifies 
the goods or services of one seller or group of sellers and distinguishes them 
from the goods and services of competitors. The word  brand includes practi-
cally all means of identifying a product. As we noted in Chapter 13, a  brand 
name consists of a word, letter, or group of words or letters that differentiates 
one seller’s goods and services from those of competitors. Brand names you 
 bundling  
 Grouping two or more 
products together and pricing 
them as a unit.  
LO 14–4
brand
A name, symbol, or design (or 
combination thereof) that 
identifies the goods or services 
of one seller or group of sellers 
and distinguishes them from 
the goods and services of 
competitors.
 Even industrial products 
can benefit from 
innovative packaging. 
This foot-tall High-Tech 
CFO Action Figure is a 
talking doll created by a 
design consulting firm in 
response to a client’s 
request for a written 
report for business 
analysts. Long after a 
report would have been 
filed, the Chief Financial 
Officer doll is still sitting 
on executives’ desks. 
Can you think of other 
packaging innovations 
for office products?  
Packaging, for example. Packages must perform the following 
functions:
 
1. Attract the buyer’s attention.  
 
2. Protect the goods inside, stand up under handling and 
storage, be tamperproof, and deter theft.  
 
3. Be easy to open and use.  
 
4. Describe and give information about the contents.  
 
5. Explain the benefits of the good inside.  
 
6. Provide information on warranties, warnings, and other 
consumer matters.  
 
7. Give some indication of price, value, and uses.  
 Packaging can also make a product more attractive to retail-
ers. The Universal Product Codes (UPCs) on many packages help 
stores control inventory. They combine a bar code and a preset 
number that gives the retailer information about the product’s 

399
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
may be familiar with include Red Bull, Sony, Del Monte, Campbell, Levi’s, 
Google, Borden, Michelob, and of course many more. Brand names give 
products a distinction that tends to make them attractive to consumers. 
Apple and Google now rein as brand champions—we’re sure you 
understand why.  25 The Reaching Beyond Our Borders box discusses 
product names in more depth.  
 A   trademark   is a brand that has exclusive legal protection for 
both its brand name and its design. Trademarks like McDonald’s 
golden arches are widely recognized and help 
represent the company’s reputation and 
image. McDonald’s might sue to prevent a 
company from selling, say, McDonnel 
hamburgers. Did you know there are 
Starsbuck coffee shops in China? (Look closely 
at that name.) 
 People are often impressed by certain brand names, even though they say 
there’s no difference between brands in a given product category. For example, 
even when people say that all aspirin is alike, if you put two aspirin bottles in 
front of them—one with the Bayer label and one with an unknown name—
most choose the one with the well-known brand name. Gasoline buyers often 
choose a brand name (e.g., Exxon) over price. 
 For the buyer, a brand name ensures quality, reduces search time, and 
adds prestige to purchases. For the seller, brand names facilitate new-product 
introductions, help promotional efforts, add to repeat purchases, and differ-
entiate products so that prices can be set higher. What brand-name products 
do you prefer?  
 Brand Categories 
 Several categories of brands are familiar to you.   Manufacturers’ brands   rep-
resent manufacturers that distribute products nationally—Xerox, Sony, and 
Dell, for example. 
 Dealer   (private-label) brands   are products that don’t carry the manu-
facturer’s name but carry a distributor or retailer’s name instead. Kenmore 
and DieHard are dealer brands sold by Sears. These brands are also known as 
house brands or  distributor brands. 
 Many manufacturers fear having their brand names become generic 
names. A  generic name is the name for a whole product category. Did you know 
that aspirin and linoleum were once brand names? So were nylon, escalator, 
kerosene, and zipper. All those names became so popular, so identified with the 
product, that they lost their brand status and became generic. (Such issues are 
decided in the courts.) Their producers then had to come up with new names. 
The original Aspirin, for example, became Bayer aspirin. Companies working 
hard to protect their brand names today include Xerox and Rollerblade (in-line 
skates). 
 Generic goods   are nonbranded products that usually sell at a sizable dis-
count compared to national or private-label brands. They feature basic pack-
aging and are backed with little or no advertising. Some are of poor quality, 
but many come close to the same quality as the national brand-name goods 
they copy. There are generic tissues, generic cigarettes, generic drugs, and so 
on. Consumers today are buying large amounts of generic products because 
their overall quality has improved so much in recent years. What has been 
your experience trying generic products? 
  Knockoff brands   are illegal copies of national brand-name goods. If you 
see an expensive brand-name item such as a Polo shirt or a Rolex watch for 
sale at a ridiculously low price, you can be pretty sure it’s a knockoff. Often the 
 trademark  
 A brand that has exclusive legal 
protection for both its brand 
name and its design.  
 manufacturers’ brands  
 The brand names of 
manufacturers that distribute 
products nationally.  
 dealer (private-label) brands  
 Products that don’t carry the 
manufacturer’s name but carry 
a distributor or retailer’s name 
instead.  
 generic goods  
 Nonbranded products that 
usually sell at a sizable 
discount compared to national 
or private-label brands.  
knockoff brands
Illegal copies of national brand-
name goods.
The Heinz Dip & 
Squeeze® ketchup 
package allows 
restaurant owners to 
offer their customers a 
choice of peeling off the 
lid for dipping or tearing 
off the top for 
squeezing.  The 
package contains three 
times as much ketchup 
as traditional sachets 
and uses less 
packaging.  Shaped like 
the iconic Heinz tomato 
ketchup glass bottles, 
the packets reinforce 
the Heinz Ketchup 
brand.

 reaching beyond our borders 
 So, you’ve developed a product 
and you’re ready to take it on the 
market. What should you call it? 
America’s favorite cookie, Oreo, is 
said to be a great name because 
the two O’s nicely mirror the 
shape of the cookie itself. Could 
the name be part of the charm? 
Think of other names that come 
to your mind when you think of 
American products: Coke, Nike, 
and Häagen-Dazs. 
 Are you surprised that Häagen-
Dazs is an American product? 
Häagen Dazs was founded in 
1961. Company founder Reuben 
Mattas wanted a name that pro-
jected high quality. Being enam-
ored with Dutch/Swedish modern 
architecture and impressed with 
the quality of Duncan Hines prod-
ucts, Mattas played around with 
words until he came up with the 
name Häagen-Dazs. The name 
means absolutely nothing but it 
seemed to project another world 
quality he wanted for his premium 
ice cream. Today, the Häagen-
Dazs name resonates around the 
globe, including nations like Japan 
where it has just introduced inno-
vative veggie flavors like tomato 
cherry and carrot orange. 
 At one time, finding a name like 
Häagen-Dazs was relatively sim-
ple. Now, with a couple hundred 
countries on the cyber-platform, 
choosing the right name is a 
global issue. For example, when 
Russian gas company Gazprom 
formed a joint venture with 
Nigeria’s NNPC, the company was 
called NiGaz. Not a great name, 
we’d say. On the other hand, a 
web development company in 
New Zealand chose the name 
hairyLemon. It has been estimated 
that at least a third of hairyLemon’s 
business was because of its name. 
 Every once in a while, a suc-
cessful name is created by acci-
dent. Google is a good example. 
The global search engine was 
supposed to be called Googol 
(a scientific name for 1 followed by 
one hundred zeros). However, the 
founders made a typo when regis-
tering the domain name. The error 
resulted in a warm, catchy, human-
sounding name. Some mistakes 
turn out to be luckier than others. 
 Sources: Greg Emerson, “Häagen-Dazs Vegetable 
Ice Cream Flavors to Debut in Japan,”  Newsday,  
April 20, 2014; Gwen Moran, “5 Strategies to Build 
a Global Brand,”  Entrepreneur, May 7, 2013; and 
Interbrand,  www.interbrand.com , accessed April 
2014.  
www.haagendazs.com
 Playing the Name Game 
r
400
brand name is just a little off, too, like Palo (Polo) or Bolex (Rolex). Look care-
fully. Zippo has taken to calling counterfeit copies “Rippos.”  
 Generating Brand Equity and Loyalty 
 A major goal of marketers in the future will be to reestablish the notion of 
brand equity.   Brand equity   is the value of the brand name and associated 
symbols. Usually, a company cannot know the value of its brand until it sells it 
to another company. Brand names with high reported brand equity ratings 
include Reynolds Wrap aluminum foil and Ziploc food bags. What’s the most 
valuable brand name today? It’s Apple.  26 
 The core of brand equity is   brand  l oyalty, the degree to which customers 
are satisfied, like the brand, and are committed to further purchases. A loyal 
group of customers represents substantial value to a firm, and that value can 
be calculated. One way manufacturers are trying to create more brand loyalty 
is by lowering the carbon footprint of their products. 
 Companies try to boost their short-term performance by offering coupons 
and price discounts to move goods quickly. This can erode consumers’ com-
mitment to brand names, especially of grocery products. Many consumers 
complain when companies drop brand names like Astro Pops or Flex sham-
poo. Such complaints show the power of brand names. Now companies real-
ize the value of brand equity and are trying harder to measure the earning 
power of strong brand names.  27 
 brand equity  
 The value of the brand name 
and associated symbols.  
 brand loyalty  
 The degree to which 
customers are satisfied, like the 
brand, and are committed to 
further purchases.  

 • What seven functions does packaging now perform?  
 • What’s the difference between a brand name and a trademark?  
 • Can you explain the difference between a manufacturer’s brand, a 
dealer brand, and a generic brand?  
 • What are the key components of brand equity?  
•
What seven functions
 test prep   
does paackagin
do
401
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
 Brand awareness   refers to how quickly or easily a given brand name 
comes to mind when someone mentions a product category. Advertising helps 
build strong brand awareness. Established brands, such as Coca-Cola and 
Pepsi, are usually among the highest in brand awareness. Sponsorship of 
events, like football’s Orange Bowl and NASCAR’s Cup Series, helps improve 
brand awareness. Simply being there over and over also increases brand 
awareness. That’s one way Google became such a popular brand. 
 Perceived quality is an important part of brand equity. A product that’s 
perceived as having better quality than its competitors can be priced accord-
ingly. The key to creating a perception of quality is to identify what consumers 
look for in a high-quality product, and then to use that information in every 
message the company sends out. Factors influencing the perception of quality 
include price, appearance, and reputation. 
 Consumers often develop  brand preference —that is, they prefer one brand 
over another—because of such cues. When consumers reach the point of  brand 
insistence, the product becomes a specialty good. For example, a consumer 
may insist on Goodyear tires for his or her car. 
 It’s now so easy to copy a product’s benefits that off-brand products can 
draw consumers away from brand-name goods. Brand-name manufacturers 
like Intel Corporation have to develop new products and new markets faster 
and promote their names better than ever before to hold off challenges from 
competitors.  
 Creating Brand Associations 
 The name, symbol, and slogan a company uses can assist greatly in brand rec-
ognition for that company’s products.   Brand association   is the linking of a 
brand to other favorable images, like famous product users, a popular celeb-
rity, or a particular geographic area. Note, for example, how ads for Mercedes-
Benz associate its company’s cars with successful people who live luxurious 
lives. The person responsible for building brands is known as a brand man-
ager or product manager. We’ll discuss that position next.  
 Brand Management 
 A   brand manager    ( known as a  product manager in some firms) has direct 
responsibility for one brand or product line, and manages all the elements of 
its marketing mix: product, price, place, and promotion. Thus, you might 
think of the brand manager as the president of a one-product firm. 
 One reason many large consumer-product companies created this position 
was to have greater control over new-product development and product promo-
tion. Some companies have brand-management  teams to bolster the overall effort. 
In B2B companies, brand managers are often known as product managers.  
 brand awareness  
 How quickly or easily a given 
brand name comes to mind 
when a product category is 
mentioned.  
 brand association  
 The linking of a brand to other 
favorable images.  
 brand manager  
 A manager who has direct 
responsibility for one brand or 
one product line; called a 
product manager in some 
firms.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
402
Explain the steps in the new-product development process.
 THE NEW-PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT PROCESS  
 The odds a new product will fail are high. Not delivering what is promised is a 
leading cause of new-product failure. Other causes include getting ready for 
marketing too late, poor positioning, too few differences from competitors, 
and poor packaging. As  Figure 14.3  shows, new-product development for pro-
ducers consists of six stages. 
 New products continue to pour into the market every year, and their profit 
potential looks tremendous. Think, for example, of 3D printing, streaming TV, 
video games and products, smartphones, tablets, and other innovations. 
Where do these ideas come from? How are they tested? What’s the life span for 
an innovation? Let’s look at these issues.  
 Generating New-Product Ideas 
 It now takes about seven ideas to generate one commercial product. Most ideas 
for new industrial products come from employee suggestions rather than 
research and development. Research and development, nonetheless, is a major 
source of new products. Employees are a major source for new  consumer-goods 
ideas. Firms should also listen to their suppliers for  new-product ideas because 
suppliers are often exposed to new ideas. 
Present customers are also a good source for 
new-product ideas.  
 Product Screening 
 Product screening  reduces the number of 
new-product ideas a firm is working on at 
any one time so it can focus on the most 
promising.  Screening applies criteria to 
determine whether the product fits well with 
present products, has good profit potential, 
and is marketable. The company may assign 
each of these factors a weight and compute a 
total score for each new product so that it 
can compare their potentials.  
 Product Analysis 
 After product screening comes   product 
analysis,  or making cost estimates and sales 
forecasts to get a feeling for the profitability 
of new-product ideas. Products that don’t 
meet the established criteria are withdrawn 
from consideration.  
 Product Development and Testing 
 If a product passes the screening and analysis 
phase, the firm begins to develop it further, 
testing many different product concepts or 
LO 14–5
 product screening  
 A process designed to reduce 
the number of new-product 
ideas being worked on at any 
one time.  
 product analysis  
 Making cost estimates and 
sales forecasts to get a feeling 
for profitability of new-product 
ideas.  
 FIGURE 14.3 THE 
NEW-PRODUCT 
DEVELOPMENT PROCESS  
 Product development is a six-
stage process. Which stage 
do you believe to be the most 
important? 
Idea generation
(based on consumer
wants and needs)
Product screening
Product analysis
Development
(including building
prototypes)
Testing
Commercialization
(bringing the product
to the market)

403
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
alternatives. A firm that makes packaged meat products may develop the con-
cept of a chicken dog—a hot dog made of chicken that tastes like an all-beef hot 
dog. It will develop a prototype, or sample, so that consumers can try the taste. 
The Adapting to Change box discusses how one company gets their customers 
to help them develop new products.  
  Concept testing   takes a product idea to consumers to test their reac-
tions. Do they see the benefits of this new product? How frequently would 
they buy it? At what price? What features do they like and dislike? What 
changes in it would they make? The firm tests samples using different pack-
aging, branding, and ingredients until a product emerges that’s desirable 
from both production and marketing perspectives. As you plan for Very Veg-
etarian, can you see the importance of concept testing for new vegetarian 
dishes?  
 Commercialization 
 Even if a product tests well, it may take quite awhile to achieve success in the 
market. Take the zipper, for example, the result of one of the longest develop-
ment efforts on record for a consumer product. After Whitcomb Judson 
received the first patents for his clothing fastener in the early 1890s, it took 
more than 15 years to perfect the product—and even then consumers weren’t 
interested. Judson’s company suffered numerous financial setbacks, name 
changes, and relocations before settling in Meadville, Pennsylvania. Finally, 
the U.S. Navy started using zippers during World War I. Today, Talon Inc. is 
the leading U.S. maker of zippers, producing some 500 million of them a 
year. 
 The example of the zipper shows why the marketing effort must include 
  commercialization,  which includes (1) promoting the product to distributors 
and retailers to get wide distribution, and (2) developing strong advertising 
and sales campaigns to generate and maintain interest in the product among 
distributors and consumers. New products are now getting rapid exposure to 
global markets through commercialization on the Internet and social media. 
Websites enable consumers to view new products, ask questions, and make 
purchases easily and quickly.  
 concept testing  
 Taking a product idea to 
consumers to test their 
reactions.  
 commercialization  
 Promoting a product to 
distributors and retailers to get 
wide distribution, and 
developing strong advertising 
and sales campaigns to 
generate and maintain interest 
in the product among 
distributors and consumers.  
 Tom Szaky of TerraCycle 
makes new products 
such as plant food 
planters, pencil cases, 
and tote bags from 
discarded products 
made by other 
companies. (To see his 
bags made from drink 
pouches and Oreo 
cookie wrappers, go to 
 www.terracycle.net  .) Do 
you own products that 
are made of recycled 
material?  

 adapting to change 
 The fashion industry is a compli-
cated combination of designers, 
buyers, brands, and media taste-
makers who work hard to make 
fashion exclusive and unpredict-
able. For ModCloth founders Eric 
and Susan Gregg Koger, however, 
fashion is a more democratic 
endeavor than fashion gurus at 
Vogue let on. The company’s 
website sells the work of more 
than 600 independent designers. 
The vintage-style outfits on 
ModCloth appeal to shoppers 
looking for funky clothes that 
don’t normally find their way into 
women’s shops or department 
stores. 
 For the Kogers, stocking unique 
merchandise is the key to their 
success. After all, the Internet is 
home to thousands of apparel 
sites, from big-name retailers to 
small independent vendors. The 
most successful online operations 
have a defining characteristic that 
separates them from the rest of 
the pack. Customers keep coming 
back to ModCloth because of the 
interactivity of the brand. 
 The company is able to retain 
customer loyalty by continuously 
trying to engage its customers. For 
example, the company’s clothing 
design contest, “Make the Cut,” 
invites customers to submit their 
own dress sketches. Contest win-
ners have a chance to have their 
designs produced and sold on the 
company’s website. In the most 
recent contest, more than 1,900 
designs were sent in during the 
two-week submission period. With 
the company’s “Be the Buyer” pro-
gram, ModCloth accepts a sample 
from a designer, puts the photos 
online, then asks customers if it 
should produce the item. Any cus-
tomers who would like the help of 
a fashion advisor can get help from 
Modstylists, who are available 
24/7. Customers can chat, call, or 
e-mail an in-house stylist to get 
advice dealing with questions 
about fit, sizing, or styling. The 
company’s marketing objective is 
to be “the fashion company you 
are friends with.” That’s why the 
Kogers continue to look for even 
more ways to engage customers. 
 Sources: Marisa Meltzer, “ModCloth Is Selling an 
Era They Missed Out On,”  The New York Times, 
September 11, 2013; Barbara Thau, “Retailers 
Wake Up to Plus-Size Market with Trendier, Tonier 
Fare,”  Forbes, January 10, 2014; and Alice Truong, 
“ModCloth Wraps Up a Very Social Year,”  Fast 
Company, January 17, 2014. 
 Making the Right Cut 
404
Describe the product life cycle.
 THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE  
 Once a product has been developed and tested, it goes to market. There it may 
pass through a   product life cycle   of four stages: introduction, growth, matu-
rity, and decline (see  Figure 14.4 ). This cycle is a  theoretical model of what 
happens to sales and profits for a  product class over time. However, not all 
individual products follow the life cycle, and particular brands may act differ-
ently. For example, while frozen foods as a generic class may go through the 
entire cycle, one brand may never get beyond the introduction stage. Some 
product classes, such as microwave ovens, stay in the introductory stage for 
years. Some products, like catsup, become classics and never experience 
decline. Others, such as fad clothing, may go through the entire cycle in a few 
months. Still others may be withdrawn from the market altogether. Nonethe-
less, the product life cycle may provide some basis for anticipating future mar-
ket developments and for planning marketing strategies.  
LO 14–6
 product life cycle  
 A theoretical model of what 
happens to sales and profits for 
a product class over time; the 
four stages of the cycle are 
introduction, growth, maturity, 
and decline.  
www.modcloth.com
Floral Dress from ModCloth’s Private 
Label “Myrtlewood,” www.
modcloth.com/shop/dresses/
spellbinding-ability-dress.

405
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
 Example of the Product Life Cycle 
 The product life cycle can give marketers valuable clues to successfully pro-
moting a product over time. Some products, like crayons and sidewalk chalk, 
have very long product life cycles, change very little, and never seem to go into 
decline. Crayola has been successfully selling crayons for 100 years! How long 
do you think the new virtual video games will last? 
 You can see how the theory works by looking at the product life cycle of 
instant coffee. When it was introduced, most people didn’t like it as well as 
“regular” coffee, and it took several years for instant coffee to gain general 
acceptance (introduction stage). At one point, though, instant coffee grew rap-
idly in popularity, and many brands were introduced (growth stage). After a 
while, people became attached to one brand and sales leveled off (maturity 
stage). Sales then went into a slight decline when freeze-dried coffees were 
introduced (decline stage). Now freeze-dried coffee is, in turn, at the decline 
stage as consumers are buying bags of coffee from Starbucks and brewing 
them at home. It’s extremely important for marketers to recognize what stage 
a product is in so that they can make intelligent and efficient marketing deci-
sions about it.  
 Using the Product Life Cycle 
 Different stages in the product life cycle call for different marketing strategies. 
 Figure 14.5  outlines the marketing mix decisions you might make. As you go 
through the figure, you’ll see that each stage calls for multiple marketing mix 
changes. Remember, these concepts are largely theoretical and you should use 
them only as guidelines. We’ll discuss the price strategies mentioned in the 
figure later in this chapter.  
 Figure 14.6  shows in theory what happens to sales volume, profits, and 
competition during the product life cycle. Compare it to  Figure 14.4 . Both fig-
ures show that a product at the mature stage may reach the top in sales growth 
while profit is decreasing. At that stage, a marketing manager may decide to 
create a new image for the product to start a new growth cycle. You may have 
iSee It! Need help 
understanding product 
life cycle? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.
 FIGURE 14.4 SALES AND 
PROFITS DURING THE 
PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE  
 Note that profit levels start to 
fall  before sales reach their 
peak. This is due to increasing 
price competition. When profits 
and sales start to decline, it’s 
time to come out with a new 
product or to remodel the old 
one to maintain interest and 
profits. 
All-electric
cars
Hybrid cars
Sales
Videocassette
recorders
Smartphones
Profit
Decline
Maturity
Time
Growth
Sales
Introduction

 • What are the six steps in the new-product development process?  
 • What is the difference between product screening and product analysis?  
 • What are the two steps in commercialization?  
 • What is the theory of the product life cycle?  
•
What are the six steps
 test prep   
s in the new-pr
s in
Life Cycle Stage
Product
Price
Place
Promotion
Introduction
Offer market tested
product; keep
mix small
Go after innovators with
high introductory price
(skimming strategy) or
use penetration pricing
Use wholesalers,
selective distribution
Dealer promotion and heavy
investment in primary demand
advertising and sales promotion
to get stores to carry the
product and consumers
to try it
Growth
Improve product;
keep product mix
limited
Adjust price to meet
competition
Increase distribution
Heavy competitive advertising
Maturity
Differentiate product
to satisfy different
market segments
Further reduce price
Take over wholesaling
function and intensify
distribution
Emphasize brand name
as well as product beneﬁts
and differences
Decline
Cut product mix;
develop new product
ideas
Consider price
increase
Consolidate
distribution; drop
some outlets
Reduce advertising to
only loyal customers
MARKETING MIX ELEMENTS
PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
406
noticed how Arm & Hammer baking soda gets a new image every few years to 
generate new sales. One year it’s positioned as a deodorant for refrigerators 
and the next as a substitute for harsh chemicals in swimming pools. Knowing 
what stage in the cycle a product has reached helps marketing managers 
decide when such strategic changes are needed. 
 Theoretically, all products go through these stages at various times in 
their life cycle. What happens to sales as a product matures?  
 FIGURE 14.5 SAMPLE STRATEGIES FOLLOWED DURING THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE 
Life Cycle Stage
Sales
Profits
Competitors
Introduction
Low sales
Losses may occur
Few
Growth
Rapidly rising sales
Very high proﬁts
Growing number
Maturity
Maturity
Declining proﬁts
Stable number,
then declining
Decline
Falling sales
Proﬁts may fall to
become losses
Declining number
 FIGURE 14.6 HOW 
SALES, PROFITS, AND 
COMPETITION VARY 
OVER THE PRODUCT 
LIFE CYCLE 
t
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

407
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
Identify various pricing objectives and strategies.
 COMPETITIVE PRICING  
 Pricing is so important to marketing and the development of total product offers 
that it has been singled out as one of the four Ps in the marketing mix, along 
with product, place, and promotion. It’s one of the most difficult of the four Ps 
for a manager to control, however, because price is such a critical ingredient in 
consumer evaluations of the product. In this section, we’ll explore price both as 
an ingredient of the total product offer and as a strategic marketing tool.  
 Pricing Objectives 
 A firm may have several objectives in mind when setting a pricing strategy. 
When pricing a new vegetarian offering, we may want to promote the prod-
uct’s image. If we price it  high and use the right promotion, maybe we can 
make it the BMW of vegetarian meals. We also might price it high to achieve a 
certain profit objective or return on investment. We could also price our prod-
uct  lower than its competitors, because we want low-income people to afford 
this healthy meal. That is, we could have some social or ethical goal in mind. 
Low pricing may also discourage competition because it reduces the profit 
potential, but it may help us capture a larger share of the market. 
 A firm may have several pricing objectives over time, and it must formu-
late these objectives clearly before developing an overall pricing strategy. Pop-
ular objectives include the following:
 
1.  Achieving a target return on investment or profit. Ultimately, the goal of 
marketing is to make a profit by providing goods and services to 
others. Naturally, one long-run pricing objective of almost all firms is 
to optimize profit. One way companies have tried to increase profit is 
by reducing the amount provided to customers. Thus cereal companies 
have cut the amount of cereal in a box, toilet paper companies are 
making their products smaller, and so on. Have you noticed this 
happening for products you buy?  
 
2.  Building traffic. Supermarkets often advertise certain products at or 
below cost to attract people to the store. These products are called  loss 
leaders. The long-run objective is to make profits by following the 
short-run objective of building a customer base.  
 
3.  Achieving greater market share. One way to capture a larger part of the 
market is to offer lower prices, low finance rates (like 0 percent 
financing), low lease rates, or rebates.  
 
4.  Creating an image. Certain watches, perfumes, and other socially 
visible products are priced high to give them an image of exclusivity 
and status.  
 
5.  Furthering social objectives. A firm may want to price a product low so 
people with little money can afford it. The government often subsidizes 
the price of farm products to keep basic necessities affordable.  
 A firm may have short-run objectives that differ greatly from its long-run 
objectives. Managers should understand both types at the beginning and put 
both into their strategic marketing plan. They should also set pricing objec-
tives in the context of other marketing decisions about product design, pack-
aging, branding, distribution, and promotion. All these marketing decisions 
are interrelated. 
LO 14–7

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
408
 Intuition tells us the price charged for a product must bear 
some relationship to the cost of producing it. Prices usually  are 
set somewhere above cost. But as we’ll see, price and cost aren’t 
always related. In fact, there are three major approaches to pric-
ing strategy: cost-based, demand-based (target costing), and 
competition-based.  
 Cost-Based Pricing 
 Producers often use cost as a primary basis for setting price. 
They develop elaborate cost accounting systems to measure pro-
duction costs (including materials, labor, and overhead), add in a 
margin of profit, and come up with a price. Picture the process in 
terms of producing a car. You add up all the various  components—
engine parts, body, tires, radio, door locks and windows, paint, 
and labor—add a profit margin, and come up with a price. The 
question is whether the price will be satisfactory to the market as 
well. In the long run, the market—not the producer—determines 
what the price will be (see Chapter 2). Pricing should take into 
account costs, but it should also include the expected costs of 
product updates, the marketing objectives for each product, and 
competitor prices.  
 Demand-Based Pricing 
 Unlike cost-based pricing,   target costing   is demand based. That means we 
design a product so it not only satisfies customers but also meets the profit 
margins we’ve set. Target costing makes the final price an  input to the product 
development process, not an outcome of it. You first estimate the selling price 
people would be willing to pay for a product and then subtract your desired 
profit margin. The result is your target cost of production, or what you can 
spend to profitably produce the item.  
 Competition-Based Pricing 
  Competition- b ased pricing   is a strategy based on what all the other competi-
tors are doing. The price can be at, above, or below competitors’ prices. Pric-
ing depends on customer loyalty, perceived differences, and the competitive 
climate.  28   Price  l eadership   is the strategy by which one or more dominant 
firms set pricing practices all competitors in an industry follow. You may have 
noticed that practice among oil companies and some fast-food companies.  29 
 Break-Even Analysis 
Before you begin selling a new vegetarian sandwich, it may be wise to determine 
how many sandwiches you’d have to sell before making a profit. You’d then 
determine whether you could reach such a sales goal.   Break-even analysis   is 
the process used to determine profitability at various levels of sales. The break-
even point is the point where revenues from sales equal all costs. The formula 
for calculating the break-even point is as follows:  
Break-even point (BEP) 5  
Total fixed costs (FC) 
 
 
___________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
Price of one unit (P) 2 Variable costs (VC) of one unit  
  Total fixed costs   are all the expenses that remain the same no matter 
how many products are made or sold. Among the expenses that make up 
 target costing  
 Designing a product so that it 
satisfies customers and meets 
the profit margins desired by 
the firm.  
 competition-based pricing  
 A pricing strategy based on 
what all the other competitors 
are doing. The price can be set 
at, above, or below 
competitors’ prices.  
 price leadership  
 The strategy by which one or 
more dominant firms set the 
pricing practices that all 
competitors in an industry follow.  
 break-even analysis  
 The process used to determine 
profitability at various levels of 
sales.  
 Shoppers around the 
world look for bargains, 
as these consumers in 
 Austria  are doing. How 
many different ways can 
marketers appeal to 
shoppers’ desires to find 
the lowest price? Do 
online retailers adopt 
different pricing 
strategies?  

409
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
fixed costs are the amount paid to own or rent a factory or warehouse and 
the amount paid for business insurance.   V ariable costs   change according to 
the level of production. Included are the expenses for the materials used in 
making products and the direct costs of labor used in making those goods. 
For producing a specific product, let’s say you have a fixed cost of $200,000 
(for mortgage interest, real estate taxes, equipment, and so on). Your variable 
cost (e.g., labor and materials) per item is $2. If you sold the products for $4 
each, the break-even point would be 100,000 items. In other words, you 
wouldn’t make any money selling this product unless you sold more than 
100,000 of them:
BEP 5  FC 
______ 
P2VC   5  $200,000 
___________ 
$4.002$2.00   5  $200,000 
________ 
$2.00   5 100,000 boxes
 Other Pricing Strategies 
 Let’s say a firm has just developed a new line of products, such as 3D printers. 
The firm has to decide how to price these units at the introductory stage of the 
product life cycle. A   skimming price strategy   prices a new product high to 
recover research and development costs and make as much profit as possible 
while there’s little competition. Of course, those large profits will eventually 
attract new competitors. 
 A second strategy is to price the new products low. Low prices will attract 
more buyers and discourage other companies from making similar products 
because profits are slim. This   penetration strategy   enables the firm to pene-
trate or capture a large share of the market quickly.  30 
 Retailers use several pricing strategies.   Everyday low pricing (EDLP)   is 
the choice of Home Depot and Walmart. They set prices lower than competitors 
and don’t usually have special sales. The idea is to bring consumers to the store 
whenever they want a bargain rather than having them wait until there is a sale. 
 Department stores and some other retailers most often use a   h igh–low 
pricing strategy.   Regular prices are higher than at stores using EDLP, but 
during special sales they’re lower. The problem with such pricing is that it 
encourages consumers to wait for sales, thus cutting into profits. One store 
that tried such pricing was JCPenney. When the store moved away from that 
strategy, sales fell off dramatically and may never recover, even though the 
store has since returned to that strategy. As online shopping continues to 
grow, you may see fewer stores with a high–low strategy because consum-
ers will be able to find better prices online.  31 
 Retailers can use price as a major determinant of the goods they carry. 
Some promote goods that sell for only 99 cents, or for less than $5.00. 
Some of those 99-cent stores have raised their prices to over a dollar 
because of rising costs. On the other hand, Family Dollar Store is learning 
that, for low-income buyers, even $1.00 may be too expensive.  32 
 Psychological pricing   means pricing goods and services at price points 
that make the product appear less expensive than it is. A house might be 
priced at $299,000 because that sounds like a lot less than $300,000. Gas sta-
tions almost always use psychological pricing.  
 How Market Forces Affect Pricing 
 Recognizing that different consumers may be willing to pay different prices, 
marketers sometimes price on the basis of consumer demand rather than 
cost or some other calculation. That’s called  demand-oriented pricing, and you 
can observe it at movie theaters with low rates for children and drugstores 
with discounts for senior citizens. 
 variable costs  
 Costs that change according to 
the level of production.  
 skimming price strategy  
 Strategy in which a new 
product is priced high to make 
optimum profit while there’s 
little competition.  
 penetration strategy  
 Strategy in which a product is 
priced low to attract many 
customers and discourage 
competition.  
 everyday low pricing (EDLP)  
 Setting prices lower than 
competitors and then not 
having any special sales.  
 high–low pricing strategy  
 Setting prices that are higher 
than EDLP stores, but having 
many special sales where the 
prices are lower than 
competitors’ prices.  
ts
be 
ta-
s, 
n 
ou 
res 
 Some products are 
priced high to create a 
high-status image of 
exclusivity and 
desirability. Jimmy Choo 
shoes fall into this 
category. What is the 
total product offer for a 
product like this?  
 total fixed costs  
 All the expenses that remain 
the same no matter how many 
products are made or sold.  

 • Can you list two short-term and two long-term pricing objectives? Can 
the two be compatible?  
 • What are the limitations of a cost-based pricing strategy?  
 • What is psychological pricing?  
•
Can you list two short
 test prep   
t-term annd two
t-te
PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
410
 Today, marketers are facing a pricing problem: Most customers compare 
prices of goods and services online.  Priceline.com  introduced consumers to a 
“demand collection system,” in which buyers post the prices they are willing 
to pay and invite sellers to accept or decline the price. Consumers can get 
great prices on airlines, hotels, and other products by naming their price. They 
can also get used goods online at places like Craigslist. Clearly, price competi-
tion is going to heat up as consumers have more access to price information 
from all around the world. As a result, nonprice competition is likely to 
increase.  
 NONPRICE COMPETITION 
 Marketers often compete on product attributes other than price. You may 
have noted that price differences are small for products like gasoline, candy 
bars, and even major products such as compact cars and private colleges. 
 You won’t typically see price as a major promotional appeal on television. 
Instead, marketers tend to stress product images and consumer benefits such 
as comfort, style, convenience, and durability. 
 Many small organizations promote the services that accompany basic 
products rather than price in order to compete with bigger firms. Good service 
will enhance a relatively homogeneous product. Danny O’Neill, for example, is 
a small wholesaler who sells gourmet coffee to upscale restaurants. He has to 
watch competitors’ prices  and the services they offer so that he can charge the 
premium prices he wants. To charge high prices, he has to offer and then pro-
vide superior service. Larger companies often do the same thing. Some air-
lines stress friendliness, large “sleeping” seats, promptness, abundant flights, 
and other such services. Many hotels stress “no surprises,” business services, 
health clubs, and other extras.  
h
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
psychological pricing
Pricing goods and services at 
price points that make the 
product appear less expensive 
than it is.
 Describe a total product offer. 
 • 
What’s included in a total product offer? 
 A total product offer consists of everything consumers evaluate when 
deciding whether to buy something. It includes price, brand name, and 
satisfaction in use.  
 • 
 What’s the difference between a product line and a product mix?  
 A product line is a group of physically similar products with similar com-
petitors. A product line of gum may include bubble gum and sugarless 
gum. A product mix is a company’s combination of product lines. A 
 summary 
What’s in
LO 14–1
•
•
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  

411
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
manufacturer may offer lines of gum, candy bars, and breath mints in its 
product mix.  
 • 
 How do marketers create product differentiation for their goods and 
services?  
 Marketers use a combination of pricing, advertising, and packaging to 
make their products seem unique and attractive.  
 Identify the various kinds of consumer and industrial goods. 
 • 
 What are consumer goods?  
 Consumer goods are sold to ultimate consumers like you and me for per-
sonal use.  
 • 
 What are the four classifications of consumer goods and services, and how 
are they marketed?  
 There are convenience goods and services (requiring minimum shopping 
effort); shopping goods and services (for which people search and com-
pare price and quality); specialty goods and services (which consumers go 
out of their way to get, and for which they often demand specific brands); 
and unsought goods and services (products consumers are unaware of, 
haven’t thought of buying, or need to solve an unexpected problem). Con-
venience goods and services are best promoted by location, shopping 
goods and services by some price/quality appeal, and specialty goods and 
services by specialty magazines and interactive websites.  
 • 
 What are industrial goods, and how are they marketed differently from con-
sumer goods?  
 Industrial goods are products sold in the business-to-business (B2B) mar-
ket and used in the production of other products. They’re sold largely 
through salespeople and rely less on advertising.  
 Summarize the functions of packaging. 
 • 
 What are the seven functions of packaging?  
 Packaging must (1) attract the buyer’s attention; (2) protect the goods 
inside, stand up under handling and storage, be tamperproof, and deter 
theft; (3) be easy to open and use; (4) describe the contents; (5) explain the 
benefits of the good inside; (6) provide information about warranties, 
warnings, and other consumer matters; and (7) indicate price, value, and 
uses. Bundling means grouping two or more products into a unit, through 
packaging, and charging one price for them.  
Contrast   brand, brand name, and  trademark, and show the value of brand equity. 
 • 
 Can you define brand, brand name, and trademark?  
 A  brand is a name, symbol, or design (or combination thereof) that identi-
fies the goods or services of one seller or group of sellers and distinguishes 
them from the goods and services of competitors. The word  brand includes 
all means of identifying a product. A  brand name consists of a word, letter, 
or group of words or letters that differentiates one seller’s goods and ser-
vices from those of competitors. A  trademark is a brand that has exclusive 
legal protection for both its brand name and design.  
 • 
 What is brand equity, and how do managers create brand associations?  
 Brand equity is the value of a brand name and associated symbols. Brand 
association is the linking of a brand to other favorable images such as 
product users, a popular celebrity, or a geographic area.  
Wh t
LO 14–2
What are
LO 14–3
Can you
LO 14–4

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
412
 • 
 What do brand managers do?  
 Brand managers coordinate product, price, place, and promotion deci-
sions for a particular product.  
 Explain the steps in the new-product development process. 
 • 
 What are the six steps of the product development process?  
 The steps of product development are (1) generation of new-product ideas, 
(2) product screening, (3) product analysis, (4) development, (5) testing, 
and (6) commercialization.  
 Describe the product life cycle. 
 • 
 What is the product life cycle?  
 The product life cycle is a theoretical model of what happens to sales and 
profits for a product class over time.  
 • 
 What are the four stages in the product life cycle?  
 The four product life cycle stages are introduction, growth, maturity, and 
decline. 
 Identify various pricing objectives and strategies. 
 • 
 What are pricing objectives?  
 Pricing objectives include achieving a target profit, building traffic, 
increasing market share, creating an image, and meeting social goals.  
 • 
 What strategies can marketers use to determine a product’s price?  
 A skimming strategy prices the product high to make big profits while 
there’s little competition. A penetration strategy uses low price to attract 
more customers and discourage competitors. Demand-oriented pricing 
starts with consumer demand rather than cost. Competition-oriented pric-
ing is based on all competitors’ prices. Price leadership occurs when all 
competitors follow the pricing practice of one or more dominant 
companies.  
 • 
 What is break-even analysis?  
 Break-even analysis is the process used to determine profitability at vari-
ous levels of sales. The break-even point is the point where revenues from 
sales equal all costs.  
 • 
 Why do companies use nonprice strategies?  
 Pricing is one of the easiest marketing strategies to copy. It’s often not a 
good long-run competitive tool.  
Wh t
LO 14–5
Wh t i t
LO 14–6
Wh t
LO 14–7
 key terms 
 brand 398  
 brand association 401  
 brand awareness 401  
 brand equity 400  
 brand loyalty 400  
 brand manager 401 
 break-even analysis 408 
 bundling 398  
 commercialization 403  
 competition-based 
pricing 408  
 concept testing 403 
 convenience goods and 
services 395  
 dealer (private-label) 
brands 399 
 distributed product 
development 392  
 everyday low pricing 
(EDLP) 409  
 generic goods 399  
 high–low pricing 
strategy 409  
 industrial goods 396  
 knockoff brands 399 
 manufacturers’ 
brands 399  

413
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
 penetration 
strategy 409  
 price leadership 408  
 product analysis 402  
 product 
differentiation 394  
 product life cycle 404 
 product line 393  
 product mix 393 
 product screening 402  
 psychological 
pricing 409  
 shopping goods and 
services 395 
 skimming price 
strategy 409  
 specialty goods and 
services 395 
 target costing 408 
 total fixed costs 408 
 total product offer 392 
 trademark 399  
 unsought goods and 
services 395  
 value 390 
 variable costs 409  
 1. What value enhancers affected your choice of the school you attend? Did 
you consider size, location, price, reputation, WiFi services, library and 
research services, sports, and courses offered? What factors were most 
important? Why? What schools were your alternatives? Why didn’t you 
choose them?  
 2. What could you do to enhance the product offer of Very Vegetarian, other 
than changing the menu from time to time?  
 3. How could you use psychological pricing when making up the menu at 
Very Vegetarian?  
 4. Are you impressed by the use of celebrities in product advertisements? 
What celebrity could you use to promote Very Vegetarian?  
id
 critical thinking 
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  Look around your classroom and notice the different types of shoes stu-
dents are wearing. What product qualities were they looking for when they 
chose their shoes? How important were price, style, brand name, and 
color? Describe the product offerings you would feature in a new shoe 
store designed to appeal to college students.  
 2.  A total product offer consists of everything consumers evaluate when 
choosing among products, including price, package, service, and reputa-
tion. Working in teams, compose a list of factors consumers might con-
sider when evaluating the total product offer of a vacation resort, a 
smartphone, and a rental apartment.  
 3.  How important is price to you when buying the following: clothes, milk, 
computers, haircuts, rental cars? What nonprice factors, if any, are more 
important than price? How much time do you spend evaluating factors 
other than price when making such purchases?  
 4.  Go through several local stores of different types and note how often 
they use psychological pricing. Discuss the practice with the class to see 
whether students recognize the influence psychological pricing has 
upon them.  
 
 
 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
414
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To assess how consumers can use the Internet to shop for various goods.  
 EXERCISE 
 Shopbots are Internet sites for finding the best prices on goods you need. No 
shopbot searches the entire Internet, so it’s a good idea to use more than one to 
get the best deals. Furthermore, not all shopbots quote shipping and handling 
costs. Here are some to try:  MySimon.com ,  PriceGrabber.com ,  PriceSCAN.
com , and  YahooShopping.com . 
 1. Which of the shopbots offers the most goods and the most information? 
How helpful are the consumer reviews? The product descriptions?  
 2. Which shopbot is easiest to use? The hardest? Why?  
 3. Write down some of the prices you find on the Internet and then go to a 
local store, such as Walmart or Target, and compare prices. Does either 
source (online or brick-and-mortar) consistently offer the best price?  
 4. Compare shopping on the Internet to shopping in stores. What are the advan-
tages and disadvantages of each? Which has the best total product offer?  
 video case   
 Dream Dinners is a Washington-based, innovative 
food-to-go concept. The company is franchised 
around the country and collectively sells over 
700,000 servings each month. At Dream Dinners, 
customers are able to put together a variety of 
meals that can be taken home and prepared in 
minutes. This approach provides a nutritious 
meal, saves customers time, and is convenient, 
while also helping families reestablish “dinner 
time” as an important social event. The value 
proposition in this product includes saving time, 
while providing convenient, nutritional family 
meals for customers. The Dream Dinners concept 
demonstrates the process of the total product 
offering and each of the steps in the process. 
 This business concept evolved from the expe-
riences of a group of friends who met monthly to 
cook dinners to place in freezers to help each 
other out. The group did this for about seven years 
before launching the business model. The driving 
force behind the concept is to reemphasize the 
value of family time at dinner. Providing custom-
ers the ability to assemble a month’s worth of din-
ners would save tremendous time at home and 
would allow for more quality time to be spent 
with family members. The company describes its 
core demographic as women with school-age 
children. 
 Dream Dinners seeks to influence how its cus-
tomers value its product. The company discovered 
that its best marketing promotion comes from 
social media and word of mouth of customers 
who are in the stores—a satisfied customer tells 
her friends and so on. Customers perceive value 
from a product by weighing the benefits they 
expect from the product and the cost of receiving 
those goods. The importance of listening to the 
customer is critical to success in today’s competi-
tive marketplace. The video explains how Dream 
Dinners engages in the product development pro-
cess through growing its markets by offering envi-
ronmentally friendly products. To this end, Dream 
Dinners provides 3–4 new dinner options each 
month. The company gauges its business success 
through a pricing model that is based on a cost-
plus margin. 
 Success is defined as an average dollar ticket 
that consists of a customer spending a minimum 
of $150 per month by assembling 6 full-size din-
ners or 12 small-size dinners. The company has 
 DREAM DINNERS FOOD-TO-GO 

415
Developing and Pricing Goods and Services
CHAPTER 14
four key principles that it uses to assess its over-
all effectiveness. These principles are (1) that the 
meals are easy, wonderful, and delicious; (2) that 
customers have a great experience in the store 
assembling meals; (3) that the menu items are 
easy for the store owner to provide; and (4) that 
the menu items are acceptable to the home 
office. The key differentiator for Dream Dinners 
is the quality of the food when compared with 
competitors.
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. In what classification of consumer products 
would you consider Dream Dinners? Why did 
you select that category? 
 2. What are the steps in the new-product devel-
opment process? 
 3. What stage of the product life cycle is Dream 
Dinners currently in? Why did you make that 
choice? 
 1. 
Timothy Appel, “A Crib for Baby: Made in China or Made in 
U.S.A.,”  The Wall Street Journal, May 22, 2012. 
 2. 
John Mackey and Raj Sisodia,  Conscious Capitalism (Boston, 
MA: Harvard Business Review Press, 2013). 
 3. 
Dana Mattioli and Miguel Bustillo, “Can Texting Save Stores?” 
The Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2012. 
 4. 
Annie Gasparro and Melodie Warner, “New Menu Boosts 
McDonalds,”  The Wall Street Journal, June 11, 2013; Maureen 
Morrison, “The Breakfast Club: Restaurant Marketers Wake 
Up to $50 Billion Opportunity,”  Advertising Age, May 13, 
2013; Julie Jargon, “McDonald’s Pledges to Offer Veggies,” 
The Wall Street Journal, September 27, 2013; and editorial in 
Nutrition Action Newsletter, January/February 2014. 
 5. 
Maureen Morrison, “Did Someone Say McCopycat? BK 
Emulates McD’s Menu,”  Advertising Age, December 2, 2013. 
 6. 
Annie Gasparro, “Burger King Steps Up Its Coffee Offerings,” 
The Wall Street Journal, February 13, 2013. 
 7. 
Maureen Morrison and E. J. Schultz, “McD’s Looking to Clean 
Up in the Coffee Aisle,”  Advertising Age, November 11, 2013. 
 8. 
Julie Jargon, “Evolution of Starbucks Food,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, October 2, 2013. 
 9. 
“E-Cig Ad Fires Across Bow of Traditional Tobacco Companies,” 
editorial,  Advertising Age, January 6, 2014. 
 10. 
Lauren Weber and Mike Esterl, “E-Cigarette Rise Poses Quandary 
for Employers,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2014. 
 11. 
Annie Gasparro and Mike Esterl, “Secret to Homemade 
Coke: Instant Cold, No Canisters,”  The Wall Street Journal,  
February 7, 2014. 
 12. 
John Revill, “From Swiss Watches to Necklaces,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, January 23, 2014. 
 13. 
Knut Haanaes, David Michael, Jeremy Jurgens, and 
Subramanian Ragan, “Making Sustainability Profitable,” 
Harvard Business Review, March 2013. 
 14. 
Emma K. Macdonald, Hugh N. Wilson, and Umut Konus, “Better 
Customer Insight—In Real Time,”  Harvard Business Review, 
September 2012. 
 15. Serena Ng, “At P&G, New Tide Comes In, Old Price Goes 
Up,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 11, 2014. 
 16. E. J. Schultz, “How Pepsico and Coca-Cola Are Creating the 
Cola of the Future,”  Advertising Age, December 2, 2013. 
  17. Ismat Sarah Mangla, “Credit Unions’ Homey Image Starts to 
Fray,”  Money, April 6, 2013. 
 18. “World’s Top Brands,” editorial in  Time, February 3, 2014. 
 19. Sarah Nassauer, “Organic Tries to Grow Up,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, January 23, 2014. 
  20. Miriam Gottfried, “Amazon: It’s Not Just for Christmas,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, February 1–2, 2014. 
 21. Victor Luckerson, “Service Charge,”  Time, January 27, 2014. 
 22. Mark Henricks, “Business to Business & Service Concepts 
Lead Franchising Growth,”  Inc., February 2014. 
 23. Linda McGovern, “B-To-B Player USG Looks to Rebrand with 
Olympic Sponsorship,”  Advertising Age, January 6, 2014. 
 24. Richard Ettenson, Eduardo Conrado, and Jonathan Knowles, 
“Rethinking the 4 P’s,”  Harvard Business Review, January–
February 2013. 
 25. Vauhini Vara, “The Cycle of Brand Backlash,”  This Week, 
October 11, 2013. 
 26. “The World’s Most Valuable Brands,”  Forbes,  www.forbes
.com , accessed April 2014. 
 27. Marine Cole, “Lemkau Chases What Matters—Brand Image,” 
Advertising Age, January 20, 2014. 
 28. Geoffrey A. Fowler, “Price Check: Do Online Grocers Beat 
Supermarkets?”  The Wall Street Journal, January 8, 2014. 
 29. Anne Gasparro, “McDonald’s, Wendy’s in Price Fight,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2013. 
 30. Judith Ohikuare, “New Year, No Excuses,”  Inc.,  
February 2013. 
 31. Kerri Anne Renzulli, “People Who Shop on the Web . . . At the 
Store,”  Money, December 2013. 
 32. Paul Ziobro and Suzanne Kapner, “Last Cent: Dollar Store 
Is Getting Too Expensive,”  The Wall Street Journal,  
January 10, 2014. 
w Tide Comes In, Old Price Goes
 notes 
Page 389: © David Becker/Stringer/Getty Images; 
p. 391: Courtesy of Bocktown Beer and Grill; 
p. 392: © Griswold KRT/Newscom; p. 394: 
© Spencer Brown/San Francisco Business Times; 
p. 395: © Jeff Greenberg/Alamy; p. 396 (left): 
© BananaStock/JupiterImages RF; p. 396 (right): 
© Bambu Productions/Iconica/Getty Images RF; 
p. 398: Courtesy of Future Partners LLC; 
p. 399: Courtesy of H. J. Heinz Company; p. 400: 
© Mbr/MCRT/Newscom; p. 403: © Tony Kurdzuk/
Star Ledger/Corbis; p. 404: Courtesy of Mod-
Cloth, www.modcloth.com; p. 408: © Heinz-Peter 
Bader/Reuters/Corbis; p. 409: © Hugh Threlfall/
Alamy.
ture Partners LLC;
 photo credits 

416
 Distributing Products 
 15 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 15-1 Explain the concept of marketing channels and their value. 
 LO 15-2 Demonstrate how intermediaries perform the six marketing 
utilities. 
 LO 15-3 Identify the types of wholesale intermediaries in the distribution 
system. 
 LO 15-4 Compare the distribution strategies retailers use. 
 LO 15-5 Explain the various kinds of nonstore retailing. 
 LO 15-6 Explain the various ways to build cooperation in channel systems. 
 LO 15-7 Describe logistics and outline how intermediaries manage the 
transportation and storage of goods.  

417
 Reed  Hastings  
 • CEO of Netflix 
 • Transformed Netflix from DVD 
delivery service to king of 
streaming video 
 www.netflix.com 
 @netflix 
W
 hen it comes to exe-
cuting a corporate 
comeback, there’s 
nobody quite like 
Netflix CEO Reed 
Hastings. He’s faced critics repeatedly in 
his career, beginning with those who 
doubted that his DVD-by-mail company 
could compete against traditional video 
stores. After almost singlehandedly end-
ing the era of brick-and-mortar video dis-
tribution, Hastings nearly lost it all when 
he split Netflix’s Internet streaming and 
DVD delivery services into two separate 
entities. But the brand bounced back in a 
big way thanks to Hastings’s commit-
ment to his company’s instant streaming 
capabilities. In fact, now on any given 
weeknight Netflix is responsible for more 
than a third of all Internet traffic. 
 Even before he entered the business 
world, Hastings had an eye for disrupting 
standard procedures in order to improve 
efficiency. While studying mathematics at 
Bowdoin College, he spent his summers 
training with the Marines and continued 
his service after graduation. Although 
Hastings was dedicated to serving his 
country, his inquiring mind didn’t work 
well in a military environment. “I found 
myself questioning how we packed our 
backpacks and how we made our beds,” 
said Hastings. “My questioning wasn’t par-
ticularly encouraged, and I realized I might 
be better off in the Peace Corps.” The 
Marines granted his transfer, and soon 
Hastings found himself in Swaziland 
teaching geometry and algebra to high 
school students. Three years in the impov-
erished African nation taught Hastings a 
great deal about the world around him 
and his own role within it. “Once you have 
hitchhiked across Africa with 10 bucks in 
your pocket, starting a business doesn’t 
seem too intimidating,” said Hastings. 
 Hastings returned to the U.S. in the late 
1980s and earned his Master’s degree in 
computer engineering from Stanford. A 
few years later he founded his first com-
pany, a troubleshooting and debugging 
developer called Pure Software. A larger 
tech firm soon purchased the profitable 
start-up from Hastings, giving him the 
opportunity and the capital to pursue his 
riskiest venture yet—Netflix. Hastings 
came up with the idea after he racked up a 
$40 late fee at a video rental store for a 
VHS copy of  Apollo 13. “I had misplaced 
the cassette,” said Hastings. “I didn’t 
want to tell my wife about it. And I said to 
myself, ‘I’m going to compromise the 
integrity of my marriage over a late fee?’” 
Netflix’s concept connected with consum-
ers quickly: for a monthly fee they could 
receive and return DVDs through the mail 
with no risk of late fees. 
 Despite its success, Hastings saw lim-
its to the DVD-mailing game. He knew 
the instant access offered by streaming 
video would eventually put him out of 
business. “Back when we were just mail-
ing DVDs, we were thinking, ‘Can we be 
ready for the transformation to stream-
ing?’” said Hastings. “ ‘Can we know our 
subscribers well enough to show them 
what they want?’ ” So he and his team 
worked tirelessly to acquire TV and film 
licenses while also developing technol-
ogy to stream video on a mass scale. 
Netflix rolled out its streaming service in 
the late 2000s to great interest, attract-
ing millions of subscribers within a few 
years. However, Hastings made a mis-
take in 2011 when he tried to spin off 
Netflix’s DVD-mailing into an entirely dif-
ferent company called Qwikster. He 
backed down following a customer 
revolt, but the brand suffered for months. 
But with original, critically acclaimed pro-
grams like  House of Cards now stream-
ing on Netflix, there’s no doubt that 
Hastings has changed the ways many 
people enjoy entertainment. 
 The four Ps of marketing are product, 
place, promotion, and price. This chapter 
is all about place. The place function 
goes by many other names as well, 
including shipping, warehousing, distri-
bution, logistics, and supply-chain man-
agement. We’ll explore all these 
concepts in this chapter. At the end, 
you will have a much better under-
standing of the many steps required 
to get products from the producer to 
the consumer. 
 Sources: Michael J. de la Merced, “Netflix Says 
It Opposes Comcast’s Merge Bid,”  The New 
York Times, April 21, 2014; Amy Zipkin, “Out of 
Africa, Onto the Web,”  The New York Times,  
December 17, 2006; Nancy Hass, “And the 
Award for the Next HBO Goes to . . .”  GQ,  
February 2013; Kevin Spacey, “The 2011 Time 
100: Reed Hastings,”  Time, April 21, 2011; and 
Ashlee Vance, “Netflix, Reed Hastings Survive 
Missteps to Join Silicon Valley’s Elite,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, May 9, 2013.  
 Getting to know  Reed Hastings

418
 name that company 
 This U.S. company is known for having low prices all the time. One way it keeps 
prices low is by eliminating as many wholesalers as possible and doing the 
wholesale function itself. Name that company? (Find the answer in this chapter.)  
 Explain the concept of marketing channels and their value.  
 THE EMERGENCE OF MARKETING 
INTERMEDIARIES 
 It’s easy to overlook distribution and storage in marketing, where the focus is 
often on advertising, selling, marketing research, and other functions. But it 
doesn’t take much to realize how important distribution is. Imagine the chal-
lenge Timberland faces of getting raw materials together, making millions of 
pairs of shoes, and then distributing those shoes to stores throughout the 
world. That’s what thousands of manufacturing firms—making everything 
from automobiles to furniture and toys—have to deal with every day.  1 Imagine 
further that there has been a major volcano eruption or tsunami that has 
caused a disruption in the supply of goods. Such issues are commonplace for 
distribution managers.  2 
 Fortunately there are hundreds of thousands of companies and individuals 
whose job it is to help move goods from the raw-material state to producers, 
and then on to consumers. Then, as is often the case, the products are sent 
from consumers to recyclers and back to manufacturers or assemblers.  3 Did 
you know that 75 percent of the waste in the U.S. is recyclable, but only 30 per-
cent of it makes into the recycling system?  4 See the Seeking Sustainability box 
for more on sustainability and the distribution process. 
 Managing the flow of goods has become one of the most important manage-
rial functions for many organizations. Let’s look at how this function is carried out.  
  Marketing intermediaries   (once called  middlemen ) are organizations that 
assist in moving goods and services from producers to businesses (B2B) and 
from businesses to consumers (B2C). They’re called intermediaries because 
they’re in the middle of a series of organizations that join together to help dis-
tribute goods from producers to consum-
ers. A   channel of distribution   consists of 
a whole set of marketing intermediaries, 
such as agents, brokers, wholesalers, and 
retailers, that join together to transport 
and store goods in their path (or channel) 
from producers to consumers.   Agents/
brokers   are marketing intermediaries 
who bring buyers and sellers together and 
assist in negotiating an exchange but 
don’t take title to the goods—that is, at no 
point do they own the goods. Think of 
real estate agents as an example. 
 A   wholesaler   is a marketing inter-
mediary that sells to other organizations, 
such as retailers, manufacturers, and 
hospitals.  5 Wholesalers are part of the 
B2B system. Because of high distribution 
LO 15–1
 marketing intermediaries  
 Organizations that assist in 
moving goods and services 
from producers to businesses 
(B2B) and from businesses to 
consumers (B2C).  
 channel of distribution  
 A whole set of marketing 
intermediaries, such as agents, 
brokers, wholesalers, and 
retailers, that join together to 
transport and store goods in 
their path (or channel) from 
producers to consumers.  
 agents/brokers  
 Marketing intermediaries who 
bring buyers and sellers 
together and assist in 
negotiating an exchange but 
don’t take title to the goods.  
 Distribution warehouses, 
such as Amazon’s 
distribution center in 
Phoenix, Arizona, store 
goods until they are 
needed. Have you ever 
thought about the 
benefits of having food, 
furniture, clothing, and 
other needed goods 
close at hand?  

419
costs, Walmart has been trying to eliminate independent wholesalers from its 
system and do the job itself. That is, Walmart provides its own warehouses and 
has its own trucks. It has over 120 distribution centers and 53,000 trailers to 
distribute goods to its stores. Finally, a   retailer   is an organization that sells to 
ultimate consumers (people like you and me). 
 Channels of distribution help ensure communication flows  and the flow of 
money and title to goods. They also help ensure that the right quantity and 
assortment of goods will be available when and where needed.  Figure  15.1  
shows selected channels of distribution for both consumer and industrial goods.  
 You can see the distribution system in the United States at work when you 
drive down any highway and see the thousands of trucks and trains moving 
goods from here to there. Less visible, however, are the many distribution ware-
houses that store goods until they are needed. Have you ever thought about the 
benefits of having food, furniture, and other needed goods close at hand? Have 
you seen distribution warehouses along the road as you drive from town to town?  
 Why Marketing Needs Intermediaries 
 Figure 15.1  shows that some manufacturers sell directly to consumers. So why 
have marketing intermediaries at all? The answer is that intermediaries 
 perform certain marketing tasks—such as transporting, storing, selling, adver-
tising, and relationship building—faster and more cheaply than most manu-
facturers could. Here’s a simple analogy: You could personally deliver packages 
to people anywhere in the world, but usually you don’t. Why not? Because it’s 
generally cheaper and faster to have them delivered by the U.S. Postal Service 
or a private firm such as UPS. 
 Similarly, you could sell your home by yourself or buy stock directly from 
individual companies, but you probably wouldn’t. Why? Again, because agents 
 retailer  
 An organization that sells to 
ultimate consumers.  
 seeking sustainability 
 When IKEA, the world’s largest 
furniture and home-furnishings 
retailer, introduced its “People 
and Planet Positive” program, it 
pledged to do its part to take 
care of the environment. The 
company’s recent Sustainability 
Report shows that it is keeping 
that pledge. 
 One example is the wind-
energy investment the com-
pany is making in the United 
States. IKEA recently announced 
to a congressional task force on 
climate change that it plans to 
construct a wind farm in Illinois 
with 49 wind turbines that will gen-
erate enough electricity for 34,000 
homes. Interestingly, the wind farm 
will not supply any energy to 
IKEA’s 38 stores in North America. 
It’s part of the company’s goal to 
be energy neutral—that is, not 
using any more energy at its 
stores than it’s able to produce. 
 Its interest in renewable energy 
sources is only one example of 
IKEA’s sustainability efforts. The 
company continuously focuses on 
how it uses resources and ways 
to make better use of them. For 
example, in the shipping world, 
almost everything ends up 
stacked on a wooden pallet. After 
years of research, IKEA devel-
oped a type of pallet that’s lighter 
and cheaper than its wooden 
equivalent. Made of paper, the 
pallet is 90 percent lighter than 
wood and weighs just five and 
a half pounds. Still, IKEA offi-
cials aren’t satisfied and are 
already at work seeking a bet-
ter alternative than paper. Chief 
Sustainability Officer Steve 
Howard makes it clear that 
 sustainability will be a decisive 
 factor in determining which 
 businesses will still be here 30 
years from now. IKEA is commit-
ted to “future proofing” the 
 company and being around in the 
2040s and beyond. 
 Sources: Julie Wernau, “IKEA Invests in Wind Farm 
in Illinois,”  Chicago Tribune, April 11, 2014; Peter 
Kelly-Detweiler, “IKEA’s Aggressive Approach to 
Sustainability Creates Enormous Business 
Opportunities,”  Forbes, February 7, 2014; and 
Andria Cheng, “IKEA Assembles a Sustainability 
Program,”  The Wall Street Journal, April 15, 2014.  
 www.ikea.com   
 Answer May Be Blowing in the Wind  
y
 
wholesaler
A marketing intermediary that 
sells to other organizations.

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
420
and brokers are marketing intermediaries who make the exchange process 
easier and more efficient and profitable. In the next section, we’ll explore how 
intermediaries improve the efficiency of various exchanges. 
 How Intermediaries Create Exchange Efficiency 
 Here is an easy way to see the benefits of using marketing intermediaries. Sup-
pose five manufacturers of various food products each tried to sell directly to 
five retailers. The number of exchange relationships needed to create this 
market is 5 times 5, or 25. 
 But picture what happens when a wholesaler enters the system. The five 
manufacturers each contact the wholesaler, establishing five exchange 
 relationships. The wholesaler then establishes contact with the five retailers, 
 FIGURE 15.1 SELECTED CHANNELS OF DISTRIBUTION FOR CONSUMER AND INDUSTRIAL GOODS AND SERVICES  
Wholesaler
Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Channels for consumer goods
Industrial users
Wholesaler
Wholesaler
Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Consumers
Farmer
Channels for industrial goods
This is the
common
channel for
industrial
products such
as glass, tires,
and paint
for
automobiles.
This is the
way that
lower-cost
items such as
supplies are
distributed.
The wholesaler
is called an
industrial
distributor.
Retailer
Retailer
Retailer
Store
Service
organization
Broker
Broker
This channel
is the most
common
channel for
consumer
goods
such as
groceries,
drugs, and
cosmetics.
This is a
common
channel for
food items
such as
produce.
This channel
is used by
craftspeople
and
small farmers.
This channel
is used for
cars, furniture,
and clothing.
This is a
common
channel for
consumer
services such
as real estate,
stocks and
bonds,
insurance, and
nonproﬁt
theater groups.
This is a
common
channel for
nonproﬁt
organizations
that want to
raise funds.
Included are
museums,
government
services, and
zoos.
Nonproﬁt
organization
 

421
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
 creating five more exchange relationships. The wholesaler’s existence reduces 
the number of exchanges from 25 to only 10.  Figure 15.2 shows this process.  
 Some economists have said that intermediaries add  costs and should be elim-
inated. Marketers say intermediaries add  value, and that the  value greatly exceeds 
the cost. Let’s explore this debate and see what value intermediaries provide.  
 The Value versus the Cost of Intermediaries 
 The public has often viewed marketing intermediaries with a degree of suspi-
cion. Some surveys show about half the cost of what we buy is marketing costs 
that go largely to pay for the work of intermediaries. If we could only get rid of 
intermediaries, people reason, we could greatly reduce the cost of everything 
we buy. Sounds good, but is the solution really that simple? 
 Take a box of cereal that sells for $4. How could we, as consumers, get the 
cereal for less? Well, we could all drive to Michigan, where some cereal is pro-
duced, and save shipping costs. But imagine millions of people getting in their 
cars and driving to Michigan just to buy cereal. No, it doesn’t make sense. It’s 
much cheaper to have intermediaries bring the cereal to major cities. That 
might make transportation and warehousing by wholesalers necessary. These 
steps add cost, don’t they? Yes, but they add value as well—the value of not 
having to drive to Michigan. 
 The cereal is now in a warehouse somewhere on the outskirts of the city. 
We could all drive down to the wholesaler and pick it up. But that still isn’t the 
most economical way to buy cereal. If we figure in the cost of gas and time, 
the cereal will again be too expensive. Instead, we prefer to have someone 
move the cereal from the warehouse to a truck, drive it to the corner super-
market, unload it, unpack it, price it, shelve it, and wait for us to come in to 
 FIGURE 15.2 HOW 
INTERMEDIARIES CREATE 
EXCHANGE EFFICIENCY  
 This figure shows that adding 
a wholesaler to the channel of 
distribution cuts the number 
of contacts from 25 to 10. This 
improves the efficiency of 
distribution. 
Retailers
Retailers
Manufacturers
Manufacturers
Wholesaler

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
422
buy it. To make it even more convenient, the supermarket may stay open for 
24 hours a day, seven days a week. Think of the costs. But think also of the 
value! For $4, we can get a box of cereal  when we want it, and with little effort. 
 If we were to get rid of the retailer, we could buy a box of cereal for slightly 
less, but we’d have to drive farther and spend time in the warehouse looking 
through rows of cereals. If we got rid of the wholesaler, we could save a little more 
money, not counting our drive to Michigan. But a few cents here and there add 
up—to the point where distribution (marketing) may add up to 75 cents for every 
25 cents in manufacturing costs.  Figure 15.3  shows where your money goes in the 
distribution process. The largest percentage goes to people who drive trucks and 
work in wholesale and retail organizations. Note that only 3.5 cents goes to profit.  
 Here are three basic points about intermediaries:
 
1. Marketing intermediaries can be eliminated, but their activities can’t; 
that is, you can eliminate some wholesalers and retailers, but then 
consumers or someone else would have to perform the intermediaries’ 
tasks, including transporting and storing goods, finding suppliers, 
and establishing communication with suppliers. Not all organizations 
use all the intermediaries. Ringling Barnum and Bailey Circus, for 
example, have their own train. They need such a train because they 
have to move 120 human performers, about 60 animals, and a crew 
of over 100 people. The train is more than a mile long.  6 That doesn’t 
mean that the circus doesn’t use intermediaries, such as retailers; it 
just means that some intermediary functions can be done in-house.  
 
2. Intermediary organizations have survived because they perform 
marketing functions faster and more cheaply than others can. To 
maintain their competitive position in the channel, they now must 
adopt the latest technology. That includes search engine optimization, 
social networking (on sites like Facebook), and analyzing website 
statistics to understand their customers better.  
 
3. Intermediaries add costs to products, but these costs are usually more 
than offset by the values they create.  
 FIGURE 15.3 
DISTRIBUTION’S EFFECT 
ON YOUR FOOD DOLLAR  
 Note that the farmer gets 
only 25 cents of your food 
dollar. The bulk of your money 
goes to intermediaries to 
pay distribution costs. Their 
biggest cost is labor (truck 
drivers, clerks), followed by 
warehouses and storage.  
 
To
tal
 di
str
ib
uti
on 
co
sts
 =
Farmer
25¢
Building costs
(warehouses, stores)
14¢
Labor
(retail store clerks,
truck drivers)
34¢
Packaging 7.5¢
Transportation 4.5¢
Advertising 4¢
Profits 3.5¢
Misc.
7.5¢

423
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
 Demonstrate how intermediaries perform the six marketing utilities.  
 THE UTILITIES CREATED BY INTERMEDIARIES 
 Utility,  in economics, is the want-satisfying ability, or value, that organiza-
tions add to goods or services by making them more useful or accessible to 
consumers than they were before. The six kinds of utility are form, time, place, 
possession, information, and service. Although producers provide some utili-
ties, marketing intermediaries provide most. Let’s look at how.  
 Form Utility 
 Traditionally, producers rather than intermediaries have provided form utility 
(see Chapter 9) by changing raw materials into useful products. Thus, a farmer 
who separates the wheat from the chaff and the processor who turns the wheat 
into flour are creating form utility. Retailers and other marketers sometimes 
provide form utility as well. For example, retail butchers cut pork chops from 
a larger piece of meat and trim off the fat. The baristas at Starbucks make cof-
fee just the way you want it.  
 Time Utility 
 Intermediaries, such as retailers, add   time utility   to products by making them 
available when consumers need them. Devar Tennent lives in Boston. One 
winter evening while watching TV with his brother, Tennent suddenly got the 
urge for a hot dog and a Coke. The problem was there were no hot dogs or 
Cokes in the house. 
 Devar ran down to the corner delicatessen and bought some hot dogs, 
buns, Cokes, and potato chips. He also bought some frozen strawberries and 
ice cream. Devar was able to get these groceries at midnight because the local 
deli was open 24 hours a day. That’s time utility. You can buy goods at any time 
on the Internet, but you can’t beat having them available right around the cor-
ner  when you want them. On the other hand, note the value an Internet com-
pany provides by staying accessible 24 hours a day.  
 Place Utility 
 Intermediaries add   place utility   to products by placing them  where people 
want them. While traveling through the badlands of South Dakota, Juan-
ita Ruiz got hungry and thirsty. There are no stores for miles in this part 
of the country, but Juanita saw signs along the road saying a 7-Eleven 
was ahead. Following the signs, she stopped at the store for refresh-
ments. She also bought some sunglasses and souvenir items there. The 
goods and services provided by 7-Eleven are in a convenient place for 
vacationers. 
 Throughout the United States, 7-Eleven stores remain popular 
because they are usually in easy-to-reach locations. They provide 
place utility. As more and more sales become global, place utility 
will grow in importance. Grocery stores are now adding pickup ser-
vices, so that customers can order online and then pick up their 
food at a convenient time and place. This is just one more example 
of place utility.  7  
LO 15–2
 utility  
 In economics, the want-
satisfying ability, or value, that 
organizations add to goods or 
services.  
 time utility  
 Adding value to products by 
making them available when 
they’re needed.  
 place utility  
 Adding value to products by 
having them where people 
want them.  
 Think of how many 
stores provide time 
utility by making goods 
and services available 
to you 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week. 
Have you ever needed 
to renew a prescription 
late at night or needed 
a late-night snack? Can 
you see how time utility 
offers added value? 

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
424
 Possession Utility 
 Intermediaries add   possession utility   by doing 
whatever is necessary to transfer ownership from 
one party to another, including providing credit. 
Activities associated with possession utility include 
delivery, installation, guarantees, and follow-up 
service. Larry Rosenberg wanted to buy a nice 
home in the suburbs. He found just what he 
wanted, but he didn’t have the money he needed. 
So he went with the real estate broker to a local 
savings and loan and borrowed money to buy the 
home. Both the real estate broker and the savings 
and loan are marketing intermediaries that provide 
possession utility. For those who don’t want to own 
goods, possession utility makes it possible for them 
to use goods through renting or leasing.  
 Information Utility 
 Intermediaries add   information utility   by opening two-way flows of informa-
tion between marketing participants. Jerome Washington couldn’t decide 
what kind of TV set to buy. He looked at various ads in the newspaper, talked 
to salespeople at several stores, read material at the library and on the Inter-
net, and tweeted his friends. Newspapers, salespeople, libraries, websites, and 
government publications are all information sources made available by inter-
mediaries. They provide information utility.  
 Service Utility 
 Intermediaries add   service utility   by providing fast, friendly service during 
and after the sale and by teaching customers how to best use products over 
time. Sze Leung bought a Mac from Apple for his home office. The Apple store 
Leung used continues to offer help whenever he needs it. He also gets software 
updates to keep his computer up-to-date. What attracted Leung to Apple in the 
first place was the helpful, friendly service he received from the salesperson in 
the store and the service from the techies at the Genius Bar. Service utility is 
rapidly becoming the most important utility for many retailers, because with-
out it they would lose business to direct marketing (e.g., marketing by catalog 
or online). Can you see how the Internet can provide some forms of service 
utility?  
 possession utility  
 Doing whatever is necessary to 
transfer ownership from one 
party to another, including 
providing credit, delivery, 
installation, guarantees, and 
follow-up service.  
 information utility  
 Adding value to products by 
opening two-way flows of 
information between marketing 
participants.  
 service utility  
 Adding value by providing fast, 
friendly service during and after 
the sale and by teaching 
customers how to best use 
products over time.  
 Service after the sale is 
one of the contributing 
factors to Apple’s 
success. Customers can 
call to make an 
appointment with an 
Apple Genius who will 
help them learn how to 
use their computers, 
iPhones, or iPads. How 
does this service add 
value to Apple’s 
products? 
 • What is a channel of distribution, and what intermediaries participate in it?  
 • Why do we need intermediaries? Illustrate how intermediaries create 
exchange efficiency.  
 • How would you defend intermediaries to someone who said getting rid 
of them would save consumers millions of dollars?  
 • Can you give examples of the utilities intermediaries create and how 
they provide them?  
• What is a channel of d
 test prep   
istribution, and
istr
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

425
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
 Identify the types of wholesale intermediaries in the distribution system.  
 WHOLESALE INTERMEDIARIES 
 Let’s stop for a minute and distinguish wholesaling from retailing and clearly 
define the functions of each. Some producers deal only with wholesalers and 
won’t sell directly to retailers or to end users (consumers). Some producers 
deal with both wholesalers and retailers, but give wholesalers a bigger dis-
count. In turn, some wholesalers sell to both retailers and consumers. The 
office superstore Staples is a good example. It sells office supplies to small 
businesses and to consumers as well. Warehouse clubs such as Sam’s Club and 
Costco are other companies with both wholesale and retail functions. 
 The difference is this: A  retail sale is the sale of goods and services to con-
sumers  for their own use. A  wholesale sale is the sale of goods and services to 
businesses and institutions, like schools or hospitals,  for use in the business, or 
to wholesalers or retailers  for resale. 
 Wholesalers make business-to-business sales. Most people are not as 
familiar with the various kinds of wholesalers as they are with retailers. So, 
let’s explore some of these helpful wholesale intermediaries. Most of them pro-
vide a lot of marketing jobs and offer you a good opportunity.  
 Merchant Wholesalers 
 Merchant wholesalers   are independently owned firms that take title to the 
goods they handle. About 80 percent of wholesalers fall in this category. There 
are two types of merchant wholesalers: full-service and limited-function.  Full-
service wholesalers perform all the distribution functions (see  Figure  15.4 ). 
Limited-function wholesalers perform only selected functions, but try to do 
them especially well. Three common types of limited-function wholesalers are 
rack jobbers, cash-and-carry wholesalers, and drop shippers.  
LO 15–3
 merchant wholesalers  
 Independently owned firms that 
take title to the goods they 
handle.  
 FIGURE 15.4 A FULL-SERVICE WHOLESALER  
 A FULL-SERVICE WHOLESALER WILL:  
 THE WHOLESALER MAY PERFORM THE FOLLOWING 
SERVICES FOR CUSTOMERS: 
  1. Provide a sales force to sell the goods to retailers and 
other buyers.  
   2. Communicate manufacturers’ advertising deals and 
plans.  
  3. Maintain inventory, thus reducing the level of the 
inventory suppliers have to carry.  
  4. Arrange or undertake transportation.  
   5. Provide capital by paying cash or making quick pay-
ments for goods.  
   6. Provide suppliers with market information they can’t 
afford or can’t obtain themselves.  
  7. Undertake credit risk by granting credit to customers 
and absorbing any bad debts, thus relieving the sup-
plier of this burden.  
   8. Assume the risk for the product by taking title.  
 1. Buy goods the end market will desire and make them 
available to customers.  
 2. Maintain inventory, thus reducing customers’ costs.  
 3. Transport goods to customers quickly.  
 4. Provide market information and business consulting 
services.  
 5. Provide financing through granting credit, which is 
especially critical to small retailers.  
 6. Order goods in the types and quantities customers 
desire.  
   Source: Thomas C. Kinnear,  Principles of Marketing, 4th ed., © 1995, p. 394. Reprinted by permission of Pearson Education, Inc., Upper Saddle River, NJ. 

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
426
 Rack jobbers   furnish racks or shelves full of merchandise, like music, 
toys, hosiery, and health and beauty aids, to retailers. They display the prod-
ucts and sell them on consignment, meaning they keep title to the goods until 
they’re sold and then share the profits with the retailer. Have you seen shelves 
at the supermarket full of magazines and related items? Rack jobbers likely 
put them there. 
 Cash-and-carry wholesalers   serve mostly smaller retailers with a lim-
ited assortment of products. Traditionally, retailers went to such wholesalers, 
paid cash, and carried the goods back to their stores—thus the term  cash-and-
carry. Today, stores such as Staples allow retailers and others to use credit 
cards for wholesale purchases. Thus the term cash-and-carry is becoming 
obsolete for wholesalers. 
  Drop shippers   solicit orders from retailers and other wholesalers and 
have the merchandise shipped directly from a producer to a buyer. They own 
the merchandise but don’t handle, stock, or deliver it. That’s done by the pro-
ducer. Drop shippers tend to handle bulky products such as coal, lumber, and 
chemicals.  
 Agents and Brokers 
 Agents and brokers bring buyers and sellers together and assist in negotiating 
an exchange. However, unlike merchant wholesalers, agents and brokers never 
own the products they distribute. Usually they do not carry inventory, provide 
credit, or assume risks. While merchant wholesalers earn a profit from the 
sale of goods, agents and brokers earn commissions or fees based on a per-
centage of the sales revenues. Agents often maintain long-term relationships 
with the people they represent, whereas brokers are usually hired on a tempo-
rary basis.  
 Agents who represent producers are either  manufacturer’s agents or  sales 
agents. As long as they do not carry competing products, manufacturer’s agents 
may represent several manufacturers in a specific territory. They often work in 
the automotive supply, footwear, and fabricated steel industries. Sales agents 
represent a single producer in a typically larger territory. 
 Brokers have no continuous relationship with the buyer or seller. Once 
they negotiate a contract between the parties, their relationship ends. Produc-
ers of seasonal products like fruits and vegetables often use brokers, as does 
the real estate industry.  
 rack jobbers  
 Wholesalers that furnish racks 
or shelves full of merchandise 
to retailers, display products, 
and sell on consignment.  
 cash-and-carry wholesalers  
 Wholesalers that serve mostly 
smaller retailers with a limited 
assortment of products.  
 drop shippers  
 Wholesalers that solicit orders 
from retailers and other 
wholesalers and have the 
merchandise shipped directly 
from a producer to a buyer.  
 Agents and brokers are 
a familiar type of 
intermediary. Typically 
they don’t take 
possession of the goods 
they sell. A real estate 
broker, for instance, 
facilitates the 
transaction between 
seller and buyer but 
never holds title to the 
house. What functions 
does a realtor provide in 
a home sale?  
 Compare the distribution strategies 
retailers use.  
 RETAIL INTERMEDIARIES 
 A retailer, remember, is a marketing interme-
diary, like a supermarket, that sells to ulti-
mate consumers. The United States boasts 
more than 2 million retail stores, not includ-
ing retail websites. Retail organizations 
employ more than 5 million people and are 
one of the major employers of marketing 
graduates.  8 The recent recession has affected 
retailers, forcing many to cut back on 
employees. No doubt you’re aware of the 
intense competition between retail stores 
LO 15–4

427
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
and Amazon. Retail stores are fighting back, but some say that Amazon will 
win in the end.  9 If so, what effect will Amazon’s success have on the number of 
retail jobs? 
 Figure 15.5  lists, describes, and gives examples of various kinds of retail-
ers. Have you shopped in each kind of store? What seem to be the advantages 
of each? Would you enjoy working in a retail store of some kind? Some retail-
ers seem to compete mostly on price, but others, such as specialty stores, use 
variety as a competitive tool. The Adapting to Change box describes how 
mobile food services compete using place and social media. Marketers use 
several strategies for retail distribution. We explain them next.  
 Retail Distribution Strategy 
 Because different products call for different retail distribution strategies, a 
major decision marketers must make is selecting the right retailers to sell their 
products. There are three categories of retail distribution: intensive, selective, 
and exclusive. 
 Intensive distribution   puts products into as many retail outlets as pos-
sible, including vending machines. Products that need intensive distribution 
include convenience goods such as candy, gum, and popular magazines. 
 Selective distribution  uses only a preferred group of the available retail-
ers in an area. Such selection helps ensure producers of quality sales and ser-
vice. Manufacturers of appliances, furniture, and clothing (shopping goods) 
use selective distribution. 
 Exclusive distribution  is the use of only one retail outlet in a given geo-
graphic area. The retailer has exclusive rights to sell the product and is there-
fore likely to carry a large inventory, give exceptional service, and pay more 
attention to this brand than to others. Luxury auto manufacturers often use 
exclusive distribution, as do producers of specialty goods such as skydiving 
equipment.  
 intensive distribution  
 Distribution that puts products 
into as many retail outlets as 
possible.  
 selective distribution  
 Distribution that sends products 
to only a preferred group of 
retailers in an area.  
 exclusive distribution  
 Distribution that sends products 
to only one retail outlet in a 
given geographic area.  
 TYPE  
 DESCRIPTION  
 EXAMPLE  
 Department store 
 Sells a wide variety of products (clothes, furniture, 
housewares) in separate departments 
 Sears, JCPenney, Nordstrom 
 Discount store 
 Sells many different products at prices generally 
below those of department stores 
 Walmart, Target 
 Supermarket 
 Sells mostly food with other nonfood products 
such as detergent and paper products 
 Safeway, Kroger, Albertson’s 
 Warehouse club 
 Sells food and general merchandise in facilities 
that are usually larger than supermarkets and offer 
discount prices; membership may be required 
 Costco, Sam’s Club 
 Convenience 
store 
 Sells food and other often-needed items at conve-
nient locations; may stay open all night 
 7-Eleven 
 Category killer 
 Sells a huge variety of one type of product to 
dominate that category of goods 
 Toys “R” Us, Bass Pro Shops, Office 
Depot 
 Outlet store 
 Sells general merchandise directly from the manu-
facturer at a discount; items may be discontinued 
or have flaws (“seconds”) 
 Nordstrom Rack, Liz Claiborne, Nike, TJ 
Maxx 
 Specialty store 
 Sells a wide selection of goods in one category 
 Jewelry stores, shoe stores, bicycle shops 
 FIGURE 15.5 TYPES OF RETAIL STORES  

428
 adapting to change 
 It’s a typical hectic lunch hour in 
New York City, and people of all 
ages are lined up for one of the 
city’s favorite lunch fares. You’re 
probably thinking the eager din-
ers are waiting for a table at one 
of New York’s famous restau-
rants like Delmonico’s. You might 
be surprised to learn the line is 
for Korilla BBQ food truck’s 
Korean-style burritos. The worker’s 
pace at Korilla’s is constant until 
the word goes out “That’s a wrap” 
meaning the truck is sold out. As 
the truck makes its exit, Korilla’s 
chef pulls out his iPhone and 
sends a tweet to the truck’s 
22,000 followers: Korilla @116th & 
Amsterdam open for dinner at 
5:00 p.m. 
 The food truck craze swept cit-
ies like New York just about the 
same time that Twitter and 
Facebook began their market 
surge. Food truck vendors now 
use Twitter and other social media 
to reveal their current locations 
and build customer relationships. 
Special food truck app TruxMap 
Lite is active in 24 U.S. cities and 
tells you exactly where gourmet 
trucks nearest to you are. In other 
instances, customers who enjoy 
the thrill of the chase use social 
media to track their favorite food 
trucks as they move about the city. 
 Today, the over 3 million food 
trucks cruising around the 
United States have also 
advanced from the days of 
strictly hawking hot dogs and 
other traditional foods. 
Ambitious young chefs pre-
pare cuisine such as specialty 
crepes, kimchi pork fries, osso 
bucco, French rotisserie 
RoliRoti, Vietnamese banh mi and 
Gruyère grilled cheese. If you 
haven’t already done so, take a 
look online for a food truck near 
you. Say, how about a Very 
Vegetarian truck? 
 Sources: Kim LaChance Shandrow, “Lunch 
Seekers: 3 Free Apps to Help You Locate 
Gourmet Food Trucks,”  Entrepreneur, February 27, 
2014; Jane Seo, “The New Cool Kid on the Block: 
How Food Trucks Evolved From Roach Coaches 
to Cultural Phenomena,”  Huffington Post, August 
8, 2013; and Karsten Strauss, “Food Trucks: 25 of 
the Coolest,”  Forbes, November 18, 2013.    
 Truckin’ On with Social Media 
 
a
 • Describe the activities of rack jobbers and drop shippers.  
 • What kinds of products would call for each of the different distribution 
strategies: intensive, selective, and exclusive?  
•
Describe the activities
 test prep   
s of rack jobbe
s of
 Explain the various kinds of nonstore retailing.  
 NONSTORE RETAILING 
 Nothing else in retailing has received more attention recently than electronic 
retailing. Internet retailing (e.g., Amazon) is just one form of nonstore retail-
ing. Other categories include telemarketing; vending machines, kiosks, and 
carts; direct selling; multilevel marketing; and direct marketing. Small busi-
nesses can use nonstore retailing to open up new channels of distribution for 
their products.  
 Electronic Retailing 
  Electronic retailing   consists of selling goods and services to ultimate 
consumers online.   Social commerce   is a form of electronic commerce 
that involves using social media, online media that supports social 
LO 15–5
 electronic retailing  
 Selling goods and services to 
ultimate customers (e.g., you 
and me) over the Internet.  
 social commerce  
 A form of electronic commerce 
that involves using social 
media, online media that 
supports social interaction, and 
user contributions to assist in 
the online buying and selling of 
products and services  .
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

429
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
interaction, and user contributions to assist in the online buying and sell-
ing of  products and services (see  Figure 15.6  for a list of different types of 
social commerce).  
 Thanks to website improvements and discounting, online retail sales have 
risen dramatically over the last few years.  10 But getting customers is only half 
the battle. The other half is delivering the goods, providing helpful service, and 
keeping your customers. When electronic retailers lack sufficient inventory or 
fail to deliver goods on time (especially at holidays and other busy periods), 
customers often give up and go back to brick-and-mortar stores. 
 Most online retailers offer e-mail order confirmation. But sometimes they 
are not as good as stores at handling complaints, accepting returns, and pro-
viding personal help. Some online sellers are improving customer service by 
adding help buttons that lead customers to real-time online assistance from a 
human employee. 
 Old brick-and-mortar stores that add online outlets are sometimes called 
brick-and-click stores. They allow customers to choose which shopping tech-
nique suits them best. Most companies that want to compete in the future will 
probably need both a real store and an online presence to provide consumers 
with all the options they want. 
 Traditional retailers like Sears have learned that selling online calls for 
a new kind of distribution. Sears’s warehouses were accustomed to deliver-
ing truckloads of goods to the company’s retail outlets. But they were not 
prepared to deliver to individual consumers, except for large orders like fur-
niture and appliances. It turns out, therefore, that both traditional and 
online retailers have to develop new distribution systems to meet the 
demands of today’s Internet-savvy shoppers. It’s often easy to sell goods and 
services on eBay, but there is always the need to distribute those goods. 
Most people outsource that function to FedEx or UPS, which have the 
needed expertise.  
Social commerce denotes a wide range of shopping, recommending, and selling 
behaviors. As these models are tested and proven to increase sales and customer 
satisfaction, more will be introduced.
1.  Peer-to-peer sales platforms (eBay, Etsy, Amazon Marketplace): Community-
based marketplaces, or bazaars, where individuals communicate and sell directly 
to other individuals.  
2.   Social network–driven sales (Facebook, Pinterest, Twitter): Sales driven by refer-
rals from established social networks.  
3.   Group buying (Groupon, LivingSocial): Products and services offered at a 
reduced rate.  
4.   Peer recommendations (Amazon, Yelp, JustBoughtIt): Sites that aggregate prod-
uct or service reviews, recommend products based on others’ purchasing history.  
5.   User-curated shopping (The Fancy, Lyst, Svpply): Shopping-focused sites where 
users create and share lists of products and services where others can shop.  
6.   Participatory commerce (Threadless, Kickstarter, CutOnYourBias): Consumers 
become involved directly in the production process through voting, funding and 
collaboratively designing products.  
7.   Social shopping (Motilo, Fashism, GoTryItOn): Sites that attempt to replicate shop-
ping offline with friends by including chat and forum features for exchanging 
advice and opinions.  
 Source: Lauren Indvik, “The Seven Species of Social Commerce,”  Mashable,   www.mashable.com , accessed 
April 2014. 
 FIGURE 15.6 TYPES OF 
SOCIAL COMMERCE  

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
430
 Telemarketing 
  Telemarketing   is the sale of goods and services by telephone. Many compa-
nies use it to supplement or replace in-store selling and complement online 
selling. Many send a catalog to consumers, who order by calling a toll-free 
number. Many electronic retailers provide a help feature online that serves the 
same function.  
 Vending Machines, Kiosks, and Carts 
 Vending machines dispense convenience goods when consumers deposit suf-
ficient money. They carry the benefit of location—they’re found in airports, 
office buildings, schools, service stations, and other areas where people want 
convenience items. In Japan, they sell everything from bandages and face 
cloths to salads and spiced seafood. Vending by machine will be an interest-
ing area to watch as more innovations are introduced in the United States. 
U.S. vending machines are already selling iPods, Bose headphones, sneak-
ers, digital cameras, and DVD movies. You can even find earthworms or 
Chardonnay in some vending machines. An ATM in Abu Dhabi dispenses 
gold.  
 Carts and kiosks have lower overhead costs than stores do, so they can 
offer lower prices on items such as T-shirts, purses, watches, and cell 
phones. You often see vending carts outside stores or along walkways in 
malls. Some mall owners love them because they’re colorful and create a 
marketplace atmosphere. Kiosk workers often dispense coupons and help-
ful product information. You may have noticed airlines are using kiosks to 
speed the process of getting on the plane. Most provide a boarding pass 
and allow you to change your seat. Many kiosks serve as gateways to the 
Internet, so in one place consumers can shop at a store and still have access 
to all the products available on the Internet. What’s your reaction to such 
kiosks?  
 Direct Selling 
  Direct selling   reaches consumers in their homes or workplaces. Many busi-
nesses use direct selling to sell cosmetics, household goods, lingerie, art-
work, and candles at house parties they sponsor. Because so many men and 
women work outside the home and aren’t in during the day, companies that 
use direct selling are sponsoring parties at workplaces or at home on eve-
nings and weekends. Some companies, however, such as those in encyclope-
dia sales, have dropped most of their direct selling efforts in favor of online 
selling.  
 Multilevel Marketing 
 Many companies have had success using multi-
level marketing (MLM) and salespeople who 
work as independent contractors. Some of the 
best known MLM companies include Avon, 
Amway, and Herbalife.  11 Salespeople earn com-
missions on their own sales, create commissions 
for the “upliners” who recruited them, and 
receive commissions from any “downliners” they 
recruit to sell. When you have hundreds of down-
liners—people recruited by the people you 
 telemarketing  
 The sale of goods and services 
by telephone.  
 direct selling  
 Selling to consumers in their 
homes or where they work.  
 Would you like a 
pizzeria that never 
closes? Let’s Pizza 
vending machines bake 
fresh pizza from scratch 
in less than three 
minutes 24/7. The 
process starts as soon 
as a customer inserts 
payment and chooses 
from the four varieties 
available. The machine 
mixes the flour and 
water, kneads the 
dough, rolls it out, adds 
the toppings and bakes 
while you watch. To see 
it in action, just do a 
YouTube search.  

431
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
recruit—your commissions can be sizable. Some people make tens of thou-
sands of dollars a month this way. The main attraction of multilevel market-
ing for employees, other than the potential for making money, is the low 
cost of entry. For a small investment, the average person can get started and 
begin recruiting others. 
 That doesn’t mean you should get involved with such schemes. Many peo-
ple question MLM because some companies using it have acted unethically. 
More often than not, people at the bottom buy the products themselves and 
sell a bare minimum, if anything, to others. In other words, be careful of mul-
tilevel schemes as a seller and as a buyer. But do not dismiss them out of hand, 
because some are successful. Potential employees must be very careful to 
examine the practices of such firms.  
 Direct Marketing 
 Direct marketing   includes any activity that directly links manufacturers or 
intermediaries with the ultimate consumer. It includes direct mail, catalog 
sales, and telemarketing as well as online marketing. Popular consumer cata-
log companies that use direct marketing include L.L.Bean and Lands’ End. 
Direct marketing has created tremendous competition in some high-tech areas 
as well. 
 Direct marketing has become popular because shopping from home or 
work is more convenient for consumers than going to stores. Instead of driv-
ing to a mall, people can shop online. Or they can browse catalogs and adver-
tising supplements in the newspaper and magazines and then buy by phone, 
mail, or online. Interactive online selling provides increasing competition for 
retail stores. For example, L.L.Bean put pressure on rivals by eliminating ship-
ping charges. That made L.L.Bean even more attractive to people who like to 
shop by catalog or online. 
 Direct marketing took on a new dimension with interactive video. Com-
panies that use interactive video have become major competitors for those 
who market through static paper catalogs. For example, customers watch-
ing a video of a model moving and turning around in a dress get a much 
better idea of the look and feel of the outfit than simply seeing it in a printed 
photo. 
 To offer consumers the maximum benefit, marketing intermediaries must 
work together to ensure a smooth flow of goods and services. There hasn’t 
always been total harmony in the channel of distribution. As a result, channel 
members have created systems to make the flows more efficient. We’ll discuss 
those next.  
 Explain the various ways to build cooperation in channel systems.  
 BUILDING COOPERATION IN CHANNEL SYSTEMS 
 One way traditional retailers can compete with online retailers is to be so 
efficient that online retailers can’t beat them on cost—given the need for 
customers to pay for delivery. That means manufacturers, wholesalers, and 
retailers must work closely to form a unified system. How can manufactur-
ers get wholesalers and retailers to cooperate in such a system? One way is 
to link the firms in a formal relationship. Four systems have emerged to tie 
firms together: corporate systems, contractual systems, administered sys-
tems, and supply chains.  
 direct marketing  
 Any activity that directly links 
manufacturers or intermediaries 
with the ultimate consumer.  
LO 15–6

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
432
 Corporate Distribution Systems 
 In a   corporate  d istribution system   one firm owns all the organizations in 
the channel of distribution. If the manufacturer owns the retail firm, clearly it 
can maintain a great deal of control over its operations. Sherwin Williams, for 
example, owns its own retail stores and coordinates everything: display, pric-
ing, promotion, inventory control, and so on.  
 Contractual Distribution Systems 
 If a manufacturer can’t buy retail stores, it can try to get retailers to sign a 
contract to cooperate with it. In a   contractual distribution system   members 
are bound to cooperate through contractual agreements. There are three 
forms of contractual systems:
 
1.  Franchise systems such as McDonald’s, KFC, Baskin-Robbins, and 
AAMCO. The franchisee agrees to all the rules, regulations, and 
procedures established by the franchisor. This results in the consistent 
quality and level of service you find in most franchised organizations.  
 
2.  Wholesaler-sponsored chains such as Ace Hardware and IGA food 
stores. Each store signs an agreement to use the same name, participate 
in chain promotions, and cooperate as a unified system of stores, even 
though each is independently owned and managed.  
 
3.  Retail cooperatives such as Associated Grocers. This arrangement is 
much like a wholesaler-sponsored chain except it is initiated by the 
retailers. The same degree of cooperation exists, and the stores 
remain independent. Normally in such a system, retailers agree to 
focus their purchases on one wholesaler, but cooperative retailers 
could also purchase a wholesale organization to ensure better 
service.  
 Administered Distribution Systems 
 If you were a producer, what would you do if you couldn’t get retailers to sign 
an agreement to cooperate? You might manage all the marketing functions 
yourself, including display, inventory control, pricing, and promotion. A sys-
tem in which producers manage all the marketing functions at the retail level 
is called an   administered distribution system.  Kraft does that for its cheeses. 
Scott does it for its seed and other lawn care products. Retailers 
cooperate with producers in such systems because they get a 
great deal of free help. All the retailer has to do is ring up the 
sale. 
 Supply Chains 
 A   supply chain (or value chain)   consists of all 
the linked activities various organizations must 
perform to move goods and services from the 
sources of raw materials to ultimate consumers. 
A supply chain is longer than a channel of distri-
bution because it includes links from suppliers 
to manufacturers, whereas the channel of distri-
bution begins with manufacturers. Channels of 
distribution are part of the overall supply chain 
(see  Figure 15.7 ). 
 corporate distribution 
system  
 A distribution system in which 
all of the organizations in the 
channel of distribution are 
owned by one firm.  
 contractual distribution 
system  
 A distribution system in which 
members are bound to 
cooperate through contractual 
agreements.  
 administered distribution 
system  
 A distribution system in which 
producers manage all of the 
marketing functions at the retail 
level.  
 supply chain (value chain)  
 The sequence of linked 
activities that must be 
performed by various 
organizations to move goods 
from the sources of raw 
materials to ultimate consumers.  
 Franchisors like 
Chocolate Chocolate 
Chocolate Company 
use a contractual 
distribution system that 
requires franchisees to 
follow the franchisors’ 
rules and procedures. 
How does such a 
system ensure 
consistent quality and 
level of service? 

433
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
 Included in the supply chain are farmers, miners, suppliers of all 
kinds (parts, equipment, supplies), manufacturers, wholesalers, and 
retailers.   Supply-chain management   is the process of managing the 
movement of raw materials, parts, work in progress, finished goods, and 
related information through all the organizations in the supply chain; 
managing the return of such goods if necessary; and recycling materials 
when appropriate.  12 A key issue today is making the supply chain sustain-
able because so much of what affects the environment is caused by 
distribution.  13  
 One complex supply chain is that for the automaker Kia’s Sorento model. 
The Sorento is assembled in South Korea and made of over 30,000 compo-
nents from all over the world. The shock and front-loading system is from AF 
Sachs AG, the front-wheel drive is from BorgWarner, and the tires are from 
Michelin. Air bags are sometimes flown in from Swedish company Autoliv 
Inc., which makes them in Utah. As you can see, supply-chain management is 
interfirm and international. 
 Companies like SAP, i2, and Oracle have developed software to coor-
dinate the movement of goods and information so that producers can 
translate consumer wants into products with the least amount of materi-
als, inventory, and time. Firms can move parts and information so 
smoothly, they look like one firm.  14 Naturally, the software systems are 
quite complex and expensive, but they can pay for themselves in the long 
run because of inventory savings, customer service improvement, and 
responsiveness to market changes. Because such systems are so effective 
and efficient, they are sometimes called  value chains instead of supply 
chains. 
 Not all supply chains are as efficient as they can be. Some companies 
have struggled with high distribution costs, including the cost of disrup-
tions, inefficient truck routes, and excess inventory. The complexity of 
supply-chain management often leads firms to outsource the whole process 
to experts that know how to integrate it. Imagine a company that does busi-
ness in 125 countries with 37 different currencies. It may use services such 
as Oracle’s PeopleSoft Supply Chain Management and Financial Manage-
ment solutions. PeopleSoft provides financial help, making it easier and 
less expensive to ship goods anywhere in the world and be sure of 
payment. 
 Outsourcing supply-chain management is on the rise as more firms real-
ize how complex distribution is. Outsourcing this function can have serious 
consequences, as companies learned when they found lead paint in toys and 
contaminants in the drug heparin. The Reaching Beyond Our Borders box 
discusses how the supply is only as strong as its weakest link.  
 supply-chain management  
 The process of managing the 
movement of raw materials, 
parts, work in progress, finished 
goods, and related information 
through all the organizations 
involved in the supply chain; 
managing the return of such 
goods, if necessary; and 
recycling materials when 
appropriate.  
 FIGURE 15.7 THE SUPPLY CHAIN  
Manufacturers
Suppliers’
plants
Retailers
Consumers
Wholesalers
Channel of Distribution
Supply Chain

434
 Describe logistics and outline how intermediaries manage the transportation 
and storage of goods.  
 LOGISTICS: GETTING GOODS TO 
CONSUMERS EFFICIENTLY 
 Shipping costs have risen dramatically in recent years. It has been estimated 
that distribution makes up almost 10 percent of GDP.  15 When shipping from 
country to country, it is often impossible to use trucks or trains because the 
goods have to travel over water. Shipping by air is often prohibitively expen-
sive, which sometimes narrows the choice to moving goods by ship. But how 
do you get the goods to the ship—and from the ship to the buyer? How do you 
keep costs low enough to make exchanges beneficial for you and your custom-
ers? 16 And how do you handle foreign trade duties and taxes? Distributing 
goods globally is complicated. As transportation and distribution have grown 
more complex, marketers have responded by developing more sophisticated 
systems. 
 To better manage customs problems, for instance, many turn to web-
based trade compliance systems. Firms like TradePoint and Xporta determine 
what paperwork is needed, cross-checking their databases for information 
about foreign trade duties and taxes, U.S. labor law restrictions, and federal 
regulations from the Food and Drug Administration or the Bureau of Alcohol, 
Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives. In other words, they manage logistics. 
LO 15–7
 reaching beyond our borders 
 For companies around the 
globe, carefully constructed 
supply chains can cut costs sig-
nificantly. For example, you can 
imagine components traveling 
from Thailand, the Philippines, 
Malaysia, and Taiwan to a factory 
in China where they are assem-
bled before being sold as iPhones 
or iPads in an Apple store in New 
York. When nothing goes wrong, 
supply chains can be a smashing 
success; costs are reduced, sup-
plies uninterrupted, and all is well. 
But in this imperfect world, any-
thing can happen and sometimes 
things do go wrong. 
 Natural disasters can wreak 
economic havoc on supply chains. 
Catastrophes like the floods in 
Thailand in 2013 devastated the 
region causing billions of dollars in 
damage. The flooding also 
resulted in Honda having to cut 
the operating hours of its 
Ohio factory in half when the rag-
ing water overwhelmed its over-
seas suppliers. As Honda and 
other companies found out, supply 
chains may be great at keeping 
overhead low, but those savings 
could be moot if an unforeseen 
disaster brings the entire business 
grinding to a halt. 
 Managing the integrity of prod-
ucts throughout the entire supply 
chain is also a major concern. 
According to the Bureau of 
Industry and Security of the U.S. 
Department of Commerce, coun-
terfeit products are making their 
way through supply chains across 
a number of industry sectors. 
Aston Martin, a British luxury sports 
carmaker, was forced to recall 
5,000 cars because of problems 
caused by counterfeit throttle 
pedal arms from China. As you 
may have guessed, the com-
pany is moving manufacturing of 
the pedal arms back to England. 
 Businesses must devise ways 
to make their supply chains more 
robust and not just more cost 
effective. Let’s hope they spot the 
weak links before the supply 
chain breaks. 
 Sources: Christina Larson, “James Bond’s Sports 
Car Has China Supply Chain Problems,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, February 5, 2014; and 
Suzanne Kapner and Ben Fox Rubin, “Supply-
Chain Problems Dog Lululemon,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, January 13, 2014. 
 Weak Links Can Break a Chain 
the operating hours of
of its

435
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
  Logistics   is the planning, implementing, and controlling of the physical 
flow of materials, final goods, and related information from points of origin to 
points of consumption to meet customer requirements at a profit. Logistics 
describes how companies perform the 7 Rs: getting the right product to the 
right place, to the right customer, at the right time, in the right quantity, in the 
right condition, and at the right price.  17   Inbound logistics   brings raw materi-
als, packaging, other goods and services, and information from suppliers to 
producers. 
  Materials handling   is the movement of goods within a warehouse, from 
warehouses to the factory floor, and from the factory floor to various worksta-
tions.  Factory processes change raw materials and parts and other inputs into 
outputs, such as finished goods like shoes, cars, and clothes. 
  Outbound logistics   manages the flow of finished products and informa-
tion to business buyers and ultimately to consumers like you and me. What do 
you think of Amazon’s idea of using drones to deliver goods to your home? 
Even if the company does follow through, widespread use of delivery drones is 
probably a long way into the future.  18   Reverse logistics   brings goods back to 
the manufacturer because of defects or for recycling materials.  19 
 Logistics is as much about the movement of  information as it is about the 
movement of goods. Customer wants and needs must flow through the system 
all the way to suppliers and must do so in real time. Information must also 
flow down through the system with no delay. That, of course, demands sophis-
ticated hardware and software. 
 Third-party logistics is the use of outside firms to help move goods from 
here to there. It is part of the trend to outsource functions your firm cannot do 
more efficiently than outside firms. The 3PLs (third-party logistics providers) 
that have superior capability in business intelligence and are proactively shar-
ing that knowledge are the ones who will grow in the future. 
 How do you get products to people around the world after the sale? What 
are your options? You could send goods by truck, train, ship, or pipeline. You 
could use a shipping specialist, such as UPS, FedEx, or the U.S. Postal Service, 
but often that is expensive, especially for large items. Nonetheless, some of the 
most sophisticated marketers outsource the distribution process to such spe-
cialists. All transportation modes can be evaluated on basic service criteria: cost, 
speed, dependability, flexibility, frequency, and reach.  Figure 15.8  compares the 
various transportation modes on these criteria.  
 logistics  
 The marketing activity that 
involves planning, 
implementing, and controlling 
the physical flow of materials, 
final goods, and related 
information from points of origin 
to points of consumption to 
meet customer requirements at 
a profit.  
 inbound logistics  
 The area of logistics that 
involves bringing raw materials, 
packaging, other goods and 
services, and information from 
suppliers to producers.  
 materials handling  
 The movement of goods within 
a warehouse, from warehouses 
to the factory floor, and from 
the factory floor to various 
workstations.  
 outbound logistics  
 The area of logistics that 
involves managing the flow of 
finished products and 
information to business buyers 
and ultimate consumers 
(people like you and me).  
 reverse logistics  
 The area of logistics that 
involves bringing goods back 
to the manufacturer because of 
defects or for recycling 
materials.  
 How do you move 
heavy raw materials like 
timber from one country 
to another? This photo 
shows some of the firms 
engaged in the logistics 
process. A trucking firm 
brings the logs to a 
dock where huge 
cranes lift them into the 
hold of a ship. The ship 
must be unloaded and 
the logs put on another 
truck to travel to a 
processing plant. Why is 
managing the logistics 
process a key to 
survival in some 
industries? 

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
436
 Trains Are Great for Large Shipments 
 The largest percentage of goods in the United States (by volume) is shipped by 
rail.  20 Railroad shipment is best for bulky items such as coal, wheat, automo-
biles, and heavy equipment; and it is quickly becoming an alternative for 
transporting oil.  21 
 Railroads should continue to hold their own in competition with other 
modes of transportation.  22 They offer a relatively energy-efficient way to move 
goods and could experience significant gains if fuel prices climb. This is true 
in China as well as the United States.  23 Even short-line railroads (those that 
connect local branches of track to larger lines) will be growing.  24 
 A company may not ship enough goods to think of using a railroad. Such 
smaller manufacturers or marketers can get good rates and service by using a 
  freight forwarder,  which puts many small shipments together to create a 
single large one that can be transported cost-effectively by truck or train. 
Such shipments are known as less-than-carload (LCL) shipments.  25 Some 
freight forwarder
An organization that puts many 
small shipments together to 
create a single large shipment 
that can be transported cost-
effectively to the final 
destination.
 MODE 
 COST  
 SPEED 
 ON-TIME 
DEPENDABILITY  
 FLEXIBILITY 
HANDLING 
PRODUCTS  
 FREQUENCY OF 
SHIPMENTS  
 REACH  
Railroads
 Medium 
 Slow 
 Medium 
 High 
 Low 
 High 
 Trucks 
 High 
 Fast 
 High 
 Medium 
 High 
 Highest 
Pipelines
 Low 
 Medium 
 Highest 
 Lowest 
 Highest 
 Lowest 
 Ships (water) 
 Lowest 
 Slowest 
 Lowest 
 Highest 
 Lowest 
 Low 
Airplanes
 Highest 
 Fastest 
 Low 
 Low 
 Medium 
 Medium 
 FIGURE 15.8 COMPARING TRANSPORTATION MODES 
 Combining trucks with railroads lowers cost and increases the number of locations reached. The same is true when combining trucks with 
ships. Combining trucks with airlines speeds goods over long distances and gets them to almost any location.  
 Railroads carry over a 
third of all goods 
shipped within the 
United States, and are 
expected to remain a 
dominant transportation 
mode. What are some of 
the advantages of 
shipping by rail, for both 
large and small 
producers?  

437
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
freight forwarders also offer warehousing, customs assistance, and other ser-
vices along with pickup and delivery. You can see the benefits of such a com-
pany to a smaller seller. A freight forwarder is just one of many distribution 
specialists that have emerged to help marketers move goods from one place 
to another.  
 Trucks Are Good for Small Shipments to Remote Locations 
 The second-largest surface transportation mode is motor vehicles (trucks and 
vans). As  Figure 15.8  shows, trucks reach more locations than trains and can 
deliver almost any commodity door-to-door. 
 You could buy your own truck to make deliveries, but for widespread 
delivery you can’t beat trucking specialists. Like freight forwarders, they 
have emerged to supply one important marketing function—transporting 
goods. 
 When fuel prices rise, trucking companies look for ways to cut costs. The 
newest measure of transportation from farm to consumer is the  carbon cost. 
Some argue that the fewer miles food travels, the better for the environment, 
but that may not always be true.  
 Water Transportation Is Inexpensive but Slow 
 When sending goods overseas, often the least expensive way is by ship. 
Obviously, ships are slower than ground or air transportation, so water 
transportation isn’t appropriate for goods that need to be delivered quickly. 
Water transport is local as well as international.  26 If you live near the Mis-
sissippi River, you’ve likely seen towboats hauling as many as 30 barges at 
a time, with a cargo of up to 45,000 tons. On smaller rivers, towboats can 
haul about eight barges, carrying up to 20,000 tons—that’s the equivalent 
of four 100-car railroad trains. Add to that Great Lakes shipping, shipping 
from coast to coast and along the coasts, and international shipments, 
and water transportation takes on a new dimension as a key transporta-
tion mode.  
 Pipelines Are Fast and Efficient 
 One transportation mode we don’t often observe is pipelines. Pipelines pri-
marily transport water, petroleum, and petroleum products—but a lot more 
products than you may imagine are shipped by pipelines. For example, coal 
can be sent by pipeline by first crushing it and mixing it with water. Today, 
there is a lot of discussion about shipping natural gas by pipeline. Much shale 
oil is now being shipped by rail, but recent accidents are leading companies 
to move to pipelines.  27 The battle between railroads and pipelines is going to 
be a huge one.  28  
 Air Transportation Is Fast but Expensive 
 Today, only a small proportion of shipping goes by air.  29 Nonetheless, air trans-
portation is a critical factor in many industries, carrying everything from 
small packages to luxury cars and elephants. Its primary benefit is speed. No 
firms know this better than FedEx and UPS. As just two of several competitors 
vying for the fast-delivery market, FedEx and UPS have used air transport to 
expand into global markets. 

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
438
 The air freight industry is starting to focus on global distribution. Emery, 
now part of UPS, has been an industry pioneer in establishing specialized 
sales and operations teams aimed at serving the distribution needs of spe-
cific industries. KLM Royal Dutch Airlines has cargo/passenger planes that 
handle high-profit items such as diplomatic pouches and medical supplies. 
Specializing in such cargo has enabled KLM to compete with FedEx, TNT, 
and DHL.  
 Intermodal Shipping 
  Intermodal shipping   uses multiple modes of transportation—highway, air, 
water, rail—to complete a single long-distance movement of freight. Services 
that specialize in intermodal shipping are known as intermodal marketing 
companies.  30 Today, railroads are merging with each other and with other 
transportation companies to offer intermodal distribution.  31 
 Railroads joined with trucking firms to create a shipping process called 
 piggybacking. A truck trailer is detached from the cab, loaded onto a rail-
road flatcar, and taken to a destination where it is offloaded, attached to a 
truck, and driven to the customer’s plant. Sometimes two truck trailers are 
stacked together to form a 20-foot-high railroad car, called a double stack. 
When truck trailers are placed on ships to travel long distances at lower 
rates, it’s called  fishyback. When they are placed in airplanes, that’s 
 birdyback.  
 Picture an automobile made in Japan for sale in the United States. It’s 
shipped by truck to a loading dock, and from there moved by ship to a port in 
the United States. It may be placed on another truck and then taken to a rail-
road station for loading on a train that will take it across the country, to again 
be loaded on a truck for delivery to a local dealer. Now imagine that one inte-
grated shipping firm handled all that movement. That’s what intermodal ship-
ping is all about.  
 The Storage Function 
 The preceding sections detailed the various ways of shipping goods once the 
company has sold them. But that’s only the first step in understanding the sys-
tem that moves goods from one point to another. Another important part of a 
complex logistics system is storage. 
 Buyers want goods delivered quickly. That means marketers must have 
goods available in various parts of the country ready to be shipped locally 
when ordered. Macy’s is building warehouses all across the country in order 
to get goods to consumers faster.  32 A good percentage of the total cost of 
logistics is for storage. This includes the cost of the 
storage warehouse (distribution facility) and its 
operation, plus movement of goods within the 
warehouse. 
 There are two major kinds of warehouses: 
storage and distribution. A  storage warehouse holds 
products for a relatively long time. Seasonal goods 
such as lawn mowers are kept in such a warehouse. 
 Distribution warehouses are facilities used to 
gather and redistribute products. You can picture 
a distribution warehouse for FedEx or UPS han-
dling thousands of packages in a very short time. 
The packages are picked up at places throughout 
 intermodal shipping  
 The use of multiple modes of 
transportation to complete a 
single long-distance movement 
of freight.  
 RFID tags are being 
used in all kinds of 
situations, from the 
movement of goods to 
the tracking of livestock. 
RFID tags in products 
like these  clothes help 
retailers and producers 
track products from the 
suppliers’ docks through 
the retailers’ doors. How 
can RFID tags help you 
avoid losing your 
luggage, car keys, and 
other things?  

439
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
the country and then processed for reshipment at these centers. General 
Electric’s combination storage and distribution facility in San Gabriel Val-
ley, California, gives you a feel for how large such buildings can be. It is 
nearly half a mile long and 465 feet wide—that’s enough to hold almost 27 
football fields.  
 Tracking Goods 
 How do producers keep track of where their goods are at any given time? As 
we noted in Chapter 14, some companies use Universal Product Codes—the 
familiar black-and-white bar codes and a preset number—to keep track of 
inventory. Bar codes got a big lift when camera phone apps made it possible 
to compare prices and read reviews about products from different 
suppliers. 
 Radio frequency identification (RFID), which we also mentioned earlier, 
tags merchandise so that it can be tracked from its arrival on the supplier’s 
docks to its exit through the retailer’s door.  33 Walmart, Target, and other orga-
nizations all plan to require suppliers to use RFID. The U.S. uses RFID codes 
to track military equipment.  34 
 Few companies are more interested in tracking items than UPS, which 
now uses a mix of Bluetooth’s short-range radio capability and wireless 
receivers to track merchandise. It claims the system is even better than RFID. 
The U.S. State Department offers an electronic passport card as a substitute 
for passport books for use by U.S. citizens who travel often to Canada, Mex-
ico, and the Caribbean. It uses an RFID chip to provide data about the user 
and is more convenient and less expensive than a passport book. The card is 
very controversial, however, because some people believe it can be easily 
altered.  
 WHAT ALL THIS MEANS TO YOU 
 The life or death of a firm often depends on its ability to take orders, process 
orders, keep customers informed about the progress of their orders, get the 
goods out to customers quickly, handle returns, and manage any recycling 
issues. Some of the most exciting firms in the marketplace are those that assist 
in some aspect of supply-chain management. 
 What all this means to you is that many new jobs are becoming available 
in the exciting area of supply-chain management. These include jobs in distri-
bution: trains, airplanes, trucks, ships, and pipelines. It also means jobs han-
dling information flows between and among companies, including website 
development. Other jobs include processing orders, keeping track of inven-
tory, following the path of products as they move from seller to buyer and 
back, recycling goods, and much more.  
 • What four systems have evolved to tie together members of the chan-
nel of distribution?  
 • How does logistics differ from distribution?  
 • What are inbound logistics, outbound logistics, and reverse logistics?  
•
What four systems ha
 test prep   
ve evolvved to t
ve
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
440
 Explain the concept of marketing channels and their value.
 • 
 What is a channel of distribution?  
 A channel of distribution consists of a whole set of marketing intermediar-
ies, such as agents, brokers, wholesalers, and retailers, that join together 
to transport and store goods in their path (or channel) from producers to 
consumers.  
 • 
 How do marketing intermediaries add value?  
 Intermediaries perform certain marketing tasks—such as transporting, 
storing, selling, advertising, and relationship building—faster and more 
cheaply than most manufacturers could. Channels of distribution ensure 
communication flows and the flow of money and title to goods. They also 
help ensure that the right quantity and assortment of goods will be avail-
able when and where needed.  
 • 
 What are the principles behind the use of such intermediaries?  
 Marketing intermediaries can be eliminated, but their activities can’t. 
Without wholesalers and retailers, consumers would have to perform 
the tasks of transporting and storing goods, finding suppliers, and 
establishing communication with them. Intermediaries add costs to 
products, but these costs are usually more than offset by the values they 
create.  
 Demonstrate how intermediaries perform the six marketing utilities.
 • 
 How do intermediaries perform the six marketing utilities?  
 A retail grocer may cut or trim meat, providing some form utility. But 
marketers are more often responsible for the five other utilities. They pro-
vide time utility by having goods available  when people want them, and 
place utility by having goods  where people want them. Possession utility 
makes it possible for people to own things and includes credit, delivery, 
installation, guarantees, and anything else that completes the sale. Mar-
keters also inform consumers of the availability of goods and services with 
advertising, publicity, and other means. That provides information utility. 
Finally, marketers provide fast, friendly, and efficient service during and 
after the sale (service utility).  
 Identify the types of wholesale intermediaries in the distribution system.
 • 
 What is a wholesaler?  
 A wholesaler is a marketing intermediary that sells to organizations and 
individuals, but not to final consumers.  
 • 
 What are some wholesale organizations that assist in the movement of 
goods from manufacturers to consumers?  
Merchant wholesalers are independently owned firms that take title to 
the goods they handle.  Rack jobbers furnish racks or shelves full of mer-
chandise to retailers, display products, and sell on consignment.  Cash-
and-carry wholesalers serve mostly small retailers with a limited 
assortment of products.  Drop shippers solicit orders from retailers and 
other wholesalers and have the merchandise shipped directly from a 
producer to a buyer.  
•
What is a
LO 15–1
•
How do i
LO 15–2
•
What is a
LO 15–3
 summary 
 •
 •
•
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  

441
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
 Compare the distribution strategies retailers use.
 • 
 What is a retailer?  
 A retailer is an organization that sells to ultimate consumers. Marketers 
develop several strategies based on retailing.  
 • 
 What are three distribution strategies marketers use?  
 Marketers use three basic distribution strategies: intensive (putting prod-
ucts in as many places as possible), selective (choosing only a few stores in 
a chosen market), and exclusive (using only one store in each market 
area).  
 Explain the various kinds of nonstore retailing.
 • 
 What are some of the forms of nonstore retailing?  
 Nonstore retailing includes electronic retailing; telemarketing (marketing 
by phone); vending machines, kiosks, and carts (marketing by putting 
products in convenient locations, such as in the halls of shopping cen-
ters); direct selling (marketing by approaching consumers in their homes 
or places of work); multilevel marketing (marketing by setting up a sys-
tem of salespeople who recruit other salespeople and help them to sell 
directly to customers); and direct marketing (direct mail and catalog 
sales). Telemarketing and online marketing are also forms of direct 
marketing.  
 Explain the various ways to build cooperation in channel systems.
 • 
 What are the four types of distribution systems?  
 The four distribution systems that tie firms together are (1)  corporate sys-
tems, in which all organizations in the channel are owned by one firm; (2) 
contractual systems, in which members are bound to cooperate through 
contractual agreements; (3)  administered systems, in which all marketing 
functions at the retail level are managed by manufacturers; and (4)  supply 
chains, in which the various firms in the supply chain are linked electroni-
cally to provide the most efficient movement of information and goods 
possible.  
 Describe logistics and outline how intermediaries manage the transportation 
and storage of goods.
 • 
 What is logistics?  
 Logistics includes planning, implementing, and controlling the physical 
flow of materials, final goods, and related information from points of ori-
gin to points of consumption to meet customer requirements at a profit.  
 • 
 What is the difference between logistics and distribution?  
 Distribution generally means transportation. Logistics is more complex. 
 Inbound logistics brings raw materials, packaging, other goods and ser-
vices, and information from suppliers to producers.  Materials handling is 
the moving of goods from warehouses to the factory floor and to various 
workstations.  Outbound logistics manages the flow of finished products 
and information to business buyers and ultimate consumers (people like 
you and me).  Reverse logistics brings goods back to the manufacturer 
because of defects or for recycling materials.  
•
What is a
LO 15–4
•
What are
LO 15–5
•
What are
LO 15–6
LO 15–7

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
442
 • 
 What are the various transportation modes?  
 Transportation modes include rail (for heavy shipments within the coun-
try or between bordering countries); trucks (for getting goods directly to 
consumers); ships (for slow, inexpensive movement of goods, often inter-
nationally); pipelines (for moving water, oil, and other such goods); and 
airplanes (for shipping goods quickly).  
 • 
 What is intermodal shipping?  
 Intermodal shipping uses multiple modes of transportation—highway, air, 
water, rail—to complete a single long-distance movement of freight.  
 • 
 What are the different kinds of warehouses?  
 A storage warehouse stores products for a relatively long time. Distribu-
tion warehouses are used to gather and redistribute products.  
 1. Imagine that we have eliminated marketing intermediaries, and you need 
groceries and shoes. How would you find out where the shoes and grocer-
ies are? How far would you have to travel to get them? How much money 
do you think you’d save for your time and effort?  
 2. Which intermediary do you think is most important today and why? What 
changes are happening to companies in that area?  
 3. One scarce item in the future will be water. If you could think of an inex-
pensive way to get water from places of abundance to places where it is 
needed for drinking, farming, and other uses, such as fracking, you could 
become a wealthy marketing intermediary. Pipelines are an alternative, 
but could you also freeze the water and ship it by train or truck? Could you 
use ships to tow icebergs to warmer climates? What other means of trans-
porting water might there be?  
1
 critical thinking 
 key terms 
 administered distribution 
system 432 
 agents/brokers 418 
 cash-and-carry 
wholesalers 426 
 channel of 
distribution 418 
 contractual distribution 
system 432 
 corporate distribution 
system 432 
 direct marketing 431 
 direct selling 430  
 drop shippers 426  
 electronic retailing 428  
 exclusive distribution 427  
 freight forwarder 436  
 inbound logistics 435  
 information utility 424 
 intensive 
distribution 427  
 intermodal 
shipping 438 
 logistics 435  
 marketing 
intermediaries 418 
 materials handling 435  
 merchant 
wholesalers 425  
 outbound logistics 435 
 place utility 423 
 possession utility 424  
  rack jobbers 426  
 retailer 419  
 reverse logistics 435 
 selective 
distribution 427  
 service utility 424  
 social commerce 428 
 supply chain 
(value chain) 432  
 supply-chain 
management 433  
 telemarketing 430  
 time utility 423  
 utility 423  
 wholesaler 418  

443
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  The six utilities of marketing are form, time, place, possession, informa-
tion, and service. Give examples of organizations in your area that perform 
each of these functions.  
 2.  Form small groups and diagram how Dole might get pineapples from a 
field in Thailand to a canning plant in California to a store near your col-
lege. Include the intermediaries and the forms of transportation each one 
might use.  
 3.  Compare the merits of buying and selling goods in brick-and-mortar stores 
and on online. What advantages do physical stores have? Has anyone in 
the class tried to sell anything online? How did he or she ship the 
product?  
 4.  In class, discuss the differences between wholesaling and retailing and 
why retailing has more appeal for students considering jobs. Since fewer 
students seek jobs in wholesaling than in retailing, do you think wholesal-
ing jobs may be easier to get?  
 5.  One part of retailing is using auction sites like eBay to sell new and used 
merchandise. Form small groups and discuss group members’ experiences 
using eBay. What tips have they learned? How do eBay users minimize the 
problems associated with shipping?  
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To examine how small businesses can learn to use the Internet to distribute 
their products directly to customers.  
 EXERCISE 
 Many small-business owners have no idea how to begin selling goods online. 
Several free websites have been developed to help them get started with tasks 
from setting up their site to doing online marketing, handling credit pur-
chases, and more. Go to   Homestead.com  or   BlueVoda.com  and listen to the 
presentations they make. Search the web to find other sources of help in 
designing your own website. Then answer the following questions:
 1. How long do the websites say that it takes to get started?  
 2. Does the process seem easier or harder than you imagined?  
 3. Do you have questions that the websites did not answer?  
 4. What help are you given, if any, in planning how to ship your goods?  

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
444
 video case   
 FedEx is the world’s largest express delivery com-
pany. Every year the Memphis-based freighter 
moves more than 4 million packages to 220 coun-
tries. All told, the company’s annual payload 
weighs in at a gargantuan 11 million pounds. By 
getting products to businesses and consumers 
quickly, FedEx thrives in its role as a marketing 
intermediary. 
 Despite its success, FedEx isn’t as self-sufficient 
as it might appear. After all, much of FedEx’s 
income is dependent on other businesses using the 
freighter to ship their wares. If these clients become 
big enough, though, they could start to look for 
ways to consolidate their business. Oftentimes that 
means getting rid of intermediaries like FedEx. 
Once these outside ties are cut, the companies are 
then free to establish their own in-house distribu-
tion systems. 
 However, companies like FedEx provide busi-
nesses with more than just delivery services. 
Although marketing intermediaries do not create 
stand-alone value for their clients, they add vital 
utility to existing products and services. In fact, 
many companies find that they’re better off 
improving their current services with the help of 
outside firms rather than build their own depart-
ments from scratch. 
 For instance, a shipping company that spe-
cializes in transporting massive loads of raw 
materials may try to cut costs by taking control 
of its small-scale shipping as well. Items on the 
large-scale side of the supply chain are normally 
freighted by trains or cargo ships, which are a 
far cry from the small, individually driven 
trucks that FedEx uses. Because of this huge 
difference in operations, even the most efficient 
freighters would be hard pressed to juggle both 
large- and small-scale shipping successfully. In 
this way, FedEx’s ability to ship lots of smaller 
volume orders quickly makes it an ideal 
partner. 
 A typical transaction works like this: Manufac-
turers purchase a label from FedEx’s website and 
place it on their shipment, which can be anything 
from a single box to a whole palette full of prod-
ucts. A company driver then picks up the delivery 
at a scheduled time and scans it into a tracking 
system. She then takes it to the nearest FedEx pro-
cessing center to be flown to a transport hub. The 
hub sends the package to another airport, which 
sends it to another FedEx processing center. From 
there, it’s put on a truck and delivered to the 
wholesaler who ordered it. The process is so effi-
cient that a product ordered in the evening may be 
at the wholesaler’s door by the next morning. And 
throughout the process, the package’s location can 
be tracked, the shipment insured, and the time of 
delivery predictably guaranteed and protected by 
a requirement of face-to-face delivery. 
 This fast-acting infrastructure is FedEx’s 
greatest asset. Because of its speed, its retail cli-
ents don’t need to waste precious sales floor space 
by overstocking products. What’s more, FedEx 
can keep its prices below what it would cost the 
wholesaler to maintain its own fleet of delivery 
vehicles. That’s because FedEx controls each step 
of the process from pickup to dropoff. Through its 
strong commitment to logistics, FedEx stands to 
be successful for a long time. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. Why would companies choose to use an inter-
mediary like FedEx instead of taking on distri-
bution responsibilities themselves?  
 2. Significant numbers of consumers are choosing 
to do their shopping online. Will this decision 
most likely hurt or help FedEx’s business?  
 3. What utilities does FedEx provide for its cus-
tomers? Which utility is probably the most 
important to its customers?  
 FEDEX 

445
Distributing Products
CHAPTER 15
 1. 
Jens Hansegard and Niclas Rolander, “For IKEA, Online Isn’t 
the Main Showroom,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 29, 
2014. 
 2. 
David Gould, “Risk Gets Sophisticated,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, March 4–March 10, 2013. 
 3. 
Patrick Burnson, “Reverse Logistics: Closing the Global Supply 
Chain Loop,”  Logistics Management, February 2013. 
 4. 
“CSU Students Favor a Plastic Ban,”  Rocky Mountain Collegian,
April 3, 2014. 
 5. 
Norm Brodsky, “The Wholesalers Dilemma,”  Inc., October 
2012. 
 6. 
Catherine Dunn, “Travel with a Trunk,”  Fortune, February 3, 2014. 
 7. 
Christopher Matthews, “It’s in the Bag,”  Time, February 3, 2014. 
 8. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics,  www.bis.gov , accessed April 2014. 
 9. 
Shelly Banjo, “Wal-Mart’s E-Stumble,”  The Wall Street Journal,
June 19, 2013. 
 10. 
James K. Glassman, “Top Dogs in E-tailing,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance, June 2012. 
 11. 
“The Bottom Line,”  The Economist, January 5, 2013. 
 12. 
 Fortune, advertisement, April 8, 2013. 
 13. 
David Beederman, “Charting Sustainability,”  The Journal of 
Commerce, September 2, 2013. 
 14. 
Richard Kauffeld, Adam Michaels, and Curt Michaels, 
“Designing the Right Supply Chain,”  Strategy   1 Business,  
Spring 2013. 
 15. 
John D. Schultz, “New Order, New Opportunities on the 
Rise,”  Logistics Management, July 2013. 
 16. 
Margaret Littman, “Get It Out There,”  Entrepreneur, August 
2012. 
 17. 
C. Shane Hunt and John E. Mello,  Marketing (New York: 
McGraw-Hill Education, 2015). 
 18. 
Joe Queenan, “Give a Drone an Inch, and It’ll Fly a Mile,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, January 25–26, 2014. 
  19. Dale S. Rogers, Ron Lambke, and John Benardino, “Taking 
Control of Reverse Logistics,”  Logistics Management, May 
2013. 
 20. Jeff Berman, “Rail,”  Logistics Management, July 2013. 
 21. Steven Mufson and Juliet Eilperin, “Railroads Emerge as 
Alternative to Transport Canadian Oil Sands,”  The 
Washington Post, March 2013. 
 22. Betsy Morris, “Boom Times on the Tracks: Rail Capacity, 
Spending Soar,”  The Wall Street Journal, March 27, 2013. 
 23. Dexter Roberts, Henry Meyer, and Dorothee Tschampa, 
“When It Doesn’t Have to Be There Overnight,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, December 24–January 6, 2013. 
 24. Teresa Rivas, “Ride on This Rail,”  Barron’s, January 27, 2014. 
 25. William B. Cassidy, “Smaller or Smarter?”  The Journal of 
Commerce, July 8, 2013. 
 26. Inti Landauro, “Meet the World’s Largest Cargo Ships,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, January 8, 2013. 
 27. Patrice Hill, “Rail Accidents Fuel Pipeline Push,”  The 
Washington Times, January 27, 2014. 
 28. Matthew Philips and Asjylyn Loder, “All Aboard the Crude 
Express,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, June 17–June 23, 2013. 
 29. Patrick Burnson, “Air—Marginal Growth, Freight Volumes 
Stagnant,”  Logistics Management, July, 2013. 
 30. Brooks Bentz and Scott Fata, “Getting Serious about Multi-
Modal,”  Logistics Management, October, 2013. 
 31. Mary C. Holcomb and Karl B. Manrodt, “Masters Co-Create 
Value,”  Logistics Management, September, 2013. 
 32. Dana Mattioli, “Macy’s Regroups in Warehouse Wars,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, May 15, 2012. 
 33. Maida Napolitano, “RFID Settles In,”  Logistics Management, 
April, 2013. 
 34. Marjorie Censer, “Branching Out beyond Military Work,”  The 
Washington Post, August 19, 2013. 
bke, and John Benardino, “Taking
 notes 
photo credits
Page 417: © Richard Brian/Reuters/Landov; 
p. 418: © Ralph D. Freso/Reuters/Corbis; 
p. 419: Jondaar_1/Creative Commons, https://
www.flickr.com/photos/jondaar/7851934266; 
p. 423: © Zig Urbanski/Alamy RF; p. 424: 
© Andy Kropa/Redux; p. 426: © Fuse/Getty 
Images RF; p. 428: © Miguel Sobreira/ age 
fotostock; p. 430: © Let’sPizzaUSA/Splash/
Newscom; p. 432: Courtesy of Chocolate Choco-
late Chocolate Company; p. 434: © Oxford/
iStock/360/Getty Images RF; p. 435: © Corbis 
RF; p. 436: © Paul Horsley/All Canada Photos/
Corbis; p. 438: © Anna Zielinska/Getty 
Images RF.

446
 Using Effective 
Promotions 
 16 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO 
  LO 16-1 Identify the new and traditional tools that make up the promotion 
mix. 
 LO 16-2 Contrast the advantages and disadvantages of various advertising 
media, including the Internet and social media. 
 LO 16-3 Illustrate the steps of the B2B and B2C selling processes. 
  LO 16-4 Describe the role of the public relations department, and show 
how publicity fits in that role. 
 LO 16-5 Assess the effectiveness of various forms of sales promotion, 
including sampling. 
  LO 16-6 Show how word of mouth, viral marketing, blogging, podcasting, 
e-mail marketing, and mobile marketing work.  

447
Chris Hardwick
 • Co-founder of Nerdist Industries
 • Comedian
 • Used his self-promotion skills to 
build a nerdy media empire
www.nerdist.com
@nerdist
 n the digital age, savvy self-promotion 
is often the key to success. But with 
so much new content added online 
every day, it can be difficult to tell if 
your hard work will ever pay off with a 
viral hit. Few people understand this bet-
ter than Chris Hardwick, comedian and 
co-founder of the media company Nerd-
ist Industries. After years of diminishing 
returns in show business, Hardwick 
started a blog and a podcast that served 
as an outlet for his geeky passions. Over 
the span of just a few months, “The Nerd-
ist” did more to launch Hardwick’s career 
than a decade’s worth of stand-up com-
edy and TV hosting gigs. 
 After graduating from UCLA with a 
degree in philosophy, Hardwick first broke 
into the entertainment industry as a radio 
DJ. His energetic presence and strong 
sense of humor brought him to the atten-
tion of MTV, who hired Hardwick 
to host the dating show  Singled Out in 
1995. Although the hit show gave him 
national exposure, it didn’t lead to the kind 
of Hollywood opportunities that Hardwick 
hoped for. In between hosting various TV 
shows and acting in low-budget movies, 
Hardwick honed his stand-up skills in 
comedy clubs across the country. 
 In order to put his career back into his 
own hands, Hardwick realized he 
needed to explore the subjects that 
really interested him. He was a lifelong 
fan of comic books and science fiction. 
Hardwick couldn’t focus on these nerdy 
pursuits when he was playing it cool in 
front of the MTV cameras. Demand for 
geeky media hit an all-time high as previ-
ously niche products like computers and 
gadgets became mainstream. “If you 
were a nerd when I was growing up, in 
the 80s, you were socially ostracized,” 
said Hardwick. “But now everything’s so 
readily available everywhere, all the time. 
People don’t necessarily have to be into 
just one or two things anymore.” So in 
2008 Hardwick launched a blog and 
Twitter account called The Nerdist as a 
way to discuss his interests as well as 
promote his stand-up dates. He updated 
the blog with posts covering everything 
from the latest iPhone rumors to news 
about Star Trek. As his following grew 
steadily, he started recording a podcast 
with two comedian friends. Within a year 
the show was averaging 75,000 down-
loads per episode while The Nerdist 
Twitter account boasted more than 1.4 
million followers. 
 All this buzz brought Hardwick into 
contact with Peter Levin, an entrepre-
neur and former entertainment 
executive who ran a successful e-mail 
newsletter called GeekChicDaily. The 
two recognized how Levin’s business 
acumen could complement Hardwick’s 
personality and fan base. They 
entered a partnership in 2011 and formed 
Nerdist Industries with Levin as CEO and 
Hardwick as chief creative officer. The 
pair brought in other writers and pod-
casters under the Nerdist banner, while 
generating revenue through advertising. 
By 2013, the Nerdist had accumulated 
more than 4.5 million followers across its 
associated accounts. The company also 
began to move into television, including 
the Hardwick-hosted, social media–
driven game show  @midnite. The 
brand’s success brought it to the atten-
tion of Legendary Entertainment, the 
production company responsible for the 
Dark Knight and  Hangover franchises. 
Legendary purchased Nerdist Industries 
for an undisclosed sum, but kept the 
company’s founders in charge of the 
multi-million-dollar operation. 
 Sometimes the only thing keeping a 
good idea from being a successful idea 
is promotional expertise. In this chapter 
we explore all the traditional and newer 
elements of promotion. We’ll explain how 
marketers use different media and the 
advantages and disadvantages of each. 
We’ll also take a look at the role of public 
relations as well as the differences 
between B2C and B2B promotions. 
Finally, throughout the chapter we’ll pay 
particular attention to the pro-
motional uses of Chris Hard-
wick’s areas of expertise: 
electronic media like blog-
ging, social networking, and 
podcasts. 
 Sources: John Patrick Pullen, “Inside 
Nerdist’s Media Empire for the 
Internet Age,”  Entrepreneur, 
August 21, 2013; Joel 
Warner, “Nerd Inc.: CEO 
Peter Levin Takes Nerdist 
Industries Mainstream,” 
 Bloomberg 
Businessweek, July 11, 
2013; Grace Bello, “Talking to 
The Nerdist’s Chris Hardwick,” 
 The Awl, January 13, 2012; and Michael 
Ventre, “Chris Hardwick on Becoming TV’s 
Nerd Icon,”  Esquire, October 22, 2013. 
 Getting to know  Chris Hardwick
I

448
 name that company 
 This company put its product into the hands of Spiderman. Viewers watched as 
the superhero used the product throughout his latest movie. Name that com-
pany. (Find the answer in the chapter.)  
 Identify the new and traditional tools that make up the promotion mix.  
 PROMOTION AND THE PROMOTION MIX 
 Promotion is one of the four Ps of marketing. As noted in Chapter 13, promotion 
consists of all the techniques sellers use to motivate people to buy their products 
or services. Both profit-making and nonprofit organizations use promotional 
techniques to communicate with people in their target markets about goods and 
services, and to persuade them to participate in a marketing exchange.  1 Market-
ers use many different tools to promote their products. Traditionally, those tools 
were advertising, personal selling, public relations, and sales promotion. Today 
they also include e-mail promotions, mobile promotions, social networking, 
blogging, podcasting, tweets, and more.  2  
 The combination of promotional tools an organization uses is called its 
 promotion mix;  see  Figure 16.1 . We show the product in the middle of the 
figure to illustrate that the product itself can also be a promotional tool, such 
as when marketers give away free samples.  
  Integrated marketing communication (IMC)   combines the promo-
tional tools into one comprehensive, unified promotional strategy.  3 With IMC, 
marketers can create a positive brand image, meet the needs of the consumer, 
and meet the strategic marketing and promotional goals of the firm. Emphasis 
today is on integrating traditional media, like TV, with social media, or inte-
grating print media with online sites.  4 
 Figure 16.2 shows the six steps in a typical promotional campaign. Let’s 
begin exploring promotional tools by looking at advertising—the most visible 
tool. 
LO 16–1
 promotion mix  
 The combination of 
promotional tools an 
organization uses.  
 integrated marketing 
communication (IMC)  
 A technique that combines all 
the promotional tools into one 
comprehensive, unified 
promotional strategy.  
 FIGURE 16.1 THE 
TRADITIONAL 
PROMOTION MIX  
Personal
selling
Public
relations
Sales
promotion
Advertising
Product
iSee It!  Need 
help understanding 
integrated marketing 
communication? Visit 
your Connect e-book 
video tab for a brief 
animated explanation.

449
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
 Contrast the advantages and disadvantages of various advertising media, 
including the Internet and social media.  
 ADVERTISING: INFORMING, 
PERSUADING, AND REMINDING 
 Advertising   is paid, nonpersonal communication through various media by 
organizations and individuals who are in some way  identified in the message.
Identification of the sender separates advertising from  propaganda, which is 
nonpersonal communication that  does not have an identified sponsor.  Figure 16.3  
lists various categories of advertising. Take a minute to look it over; you’ll see 
there’s a lot more to advertising than just television commercials.  
LO 16–2
 advertising  
 Paid, nonpersonal 
communication through various 
media by organizations and 
individuals who are in some 
way identified in the advertising 
message.  
FIGURE 16.2 STEPS IN A PROMOTIONAL CAMPAIGN
Different kinds of advertising are used by various organizations to reach different market targets.
 • 
Retail advertising—advertising to consumers by various retail stores such as supermarkets and shoe stores.
 • 
Trade advertising—advertising to wholesalers and retailers by manufacturers to encourage them to carry their 
products.
 • 
Business-to-business advertising—advertising from manufacturers to other manufacturers. A firm selling motors to 
auto companies would use business-to-business advertising.
 • 
Institutional advertising—advertising designed to create an attractive image for an organization rather than for a 
product. “We Care about You” at Giant Food is an example. “Virginia Is for Lovers” and “I ❤ New York” were two 
institutional campaigns by government agencies.
 • 
Product advertising—advertising for a good or service to create interest among consumer, commercial, and indus-
trial buyers.
 • 
Advocacy advertising—advertising that supports a particular view of an issue (e.g., an ad in support of gun control 
or against nuclear power plants). Such advertising is also known as cause advertising.
 • 
Comparison advertising—advertising that compares competitive products. For example, an ad that compares two 
different cold care products’ speed and benefits is a comparative ad.
 • 
Interactive advertising—customer-oriented communication that enables customers to choose the information they 
receive, such as interactive video catalogs that let customers select which items to view.
 • 
Online advertising—advertising messages that appear on computers as people visit different websites.
 • 
Mobile advertising—advertising that reaches people on their smartphones.
 FIGURE 16.3 MAJOR CATEGORIES OF ADVERTISING  
1. Identify a target market. (Refer back to Chapter 13 for a discussion of segmentation and target marketing.)
2. Define the objectives for each element of the promotion mix. Goals should be clear and measurable.
3. Determine a promotional budget. The budgeting process will clarify how much can be spent on advertising, per-
sonal selling, and other promotional efforts.
4. Develop a unifying message. The goal of an integrated promotional program is to have one clear message com-
municated by advertising, public relations, sales, and every other promotional effort.
5. Implement the plan. Advertisements, blogs, and other promotional efforts must be scheduled to complement 
efforts being made by public relations and sales promotion. Salespeople should have access to all materials to 
optimize the total effort.
6. Evaluate effectiveness. Measuring results depends greatly on clear objectives. Each element of the promotional 
mix should be evaluated separately, and an overall measure should be taken as well. It is important to learn what is 
working and what is not.

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
450
 It’s also easy to appreciate the impact of advertising spending on the U.S. 
economy; see  Figure 16.4 . Total ad volume was estimated to be about $215 billion 
for 2013. Note that TV is the number one medium, with expenditures of about 
$66 billion.  
 How do we, as consumers, benefit from these advertising expenditures? 
Ads are informative. Direct mail is full of information about products, prices, 
features, store policies, and more; so is newspaper advertising. Newspaper 
advertising is down because more and more people are getting their news on 
mobile devices. While many people look at the ads on mobile devices, the ads 
are often too small to be very effective.  5 Nonetheless, mobile advertising is 
growing very, very fast.  6 
 FIGURE 16.4 ESTIMATED U.S. ADVERTISING SPENDING IN 2013 BY MEDIUM (IN BILLIONS OF DOLLARS) 
 Advertising seems to be 
everywhere as we go 
about our daily lives. 
How many 
advertisements can you 
spot in this photo? Can 
the noise created by so 
many ads interfere with 
the messages the 
advertisers are trying to 
communicate? 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
0
10
Medium
TV
Direct mail
Digital
Newspapers
Radio
Magazines
Outdoor
Directories
Projected advertising spending

451
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
 Not only does advertising inform us, but the money advertisers spend for 
commercial time pays the production costs of TV and radio programs. Advertis-
ing also helps cover the major costs of producing newspapers and magazines. 
Subscriptions and newsstand revenues may cover only mailing and promo-
tional costs.  Figure 16.5  compares the advantages and disadvantages for mar-
keters of various advertising media. Notice that newspapers, radio, and 
directories are especially attractive to local advertisers.  
 Marketers must choose which media will best reach the audience they 
desire. Radio advertising, for example, is less expensive than TV advertising 
and often reaches people when they have few other distractions, such as while 
they’re driving. Recent research has revealed the effectiveness of radio as a 
traditional medium.  7 Radio is especially effective at selling services people 
don’t usually read about in print media—banking, mortgages, continuing 
education, and brokerage services, to name a few. On the other hand, radio 
has become so commercial-ridden that many people pay to switch to 
 commercial-free satellite radio. Marketers also search for other places to put 
advertising, such as on video screens mounted in elevators. Have you noticed 
ads on park benches and grocery carts? You’ve certainly seen them on web-
sites you visit. 
 FIGURE 16.5 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF VARIOUS ADVERTISING MEDIA 
 The most effective media are often very expensive. The inexpensive media may not reach your market. The goal is to use the medium that 
can reach your desired market most effectively and efficiently. 
Advantages
Medium
Disadvantages
Television
Uses sight, sound, and motion; reaches all
audiences; high attention with no
competition from other material.
High cost; short exposure time; takes time
to prepare ads. Digital video recorders skip
over ads.
Radio
Low cost; can target speciﬁc audiences;
very ﬂexible; good for local marketing.
People may not listen to ads; depends on
one sense (hearing); short exposure time;
audience can’t keep ads.
Magazines
Can target speciﬁc audiences; good use of
color; long life of ads; ads can be clipped
and saved.
Inﬂexible; ads often must be placed weeks
before publication; cost is relatively high.
Outdoor
High visibility and repeat exposures; low
cost; local market focus.
Limited message; low selectivity of
audience.
Direct mail
Best for targeting speciﬁc markets; very
ﬂexible; ads can be saved.
High cost; consumers may reject ads as
junk mail; must conform to post ofﬁce
regulations.
Directories (Yellow Pages–type
print and online advertising)
Great coverage of local markets; widely
used by consumers.
Competition with other ads; cost may be
too high for very small businesses.
Internet
Inexpensive global coverage; available
at any time; interactive.
Customers may leave the site before
buying.
Mobile advertising
Great reach among younger shoppers.
Easy to ignore, avoid.
Social media
Wonderful communication tools.
Time drain.
Good coverage of local markets; ads can be
placed quickly; high consumer acceptance;
ads can be clipped and saved.
Ads compete with other features in paper;
poor color; ads get thrown away with
paper (short life span).
Newspapers

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
452
 Mobile marketing via smartphones started out mostly as text messages, 
but now stores like Starbucks can send signals to your phone as you approach 
the store, reminding you to stop in for a latte. Kraft Foods developed the 
iPhone Assistant, an iPhone application that serves up recipes for users—
recipes made with Kraft products. Other retailers use e-mail advertisements 
to build brand awareness and drive people to their stores or websites. Social 
media in general are growing so fast that some marketers can hardly keep 
up. In the next sections, we’ll look in more depth at traditional advertising 
media.  
 Television Advertising 
 Television offers many advantages to national advertisers, but it’s expensive. 
Thirty seconds of advertising during the Super Bowl telecast can cost $4 mil-
lion. 8 That’s not including the production costs of the ads. How many bottles 
of beer or automobiles must a company sell to pay for such commercials? A 
lot, but few media besides television allow advertisers to reach so many people 
with such impact, although not all ads are equally effective.  9 Were you disap-
pointed with some of the TV ads during the last Super Bowl? Of course, adver-
tisers can book cheaper airtime on other TV shows. For example, 30 seconds 
on America’s Funniest Home Videos costs just over $63,000 or on CSI just over 
$113,000.  10 
 Despite what you may read about the growth of alternative promotional 
tools, TV advertising is still a dominant medium; sometimes that means local 
(spot) TV.  11 There are even TV ads within TV ads. Did you see, for example, 
the ad for TaylorMade inside a BMW ad?  12 Of course, TV is helped by the fact 
that many people tweet about what they have seen on TV, making Twitter a 
“force multiplier” for TV.  13 DVRs enable consumers to skip the ads on TV. 
This may make TV less attractive to advertisers unless commercials get so 
much better that people  want to watch them. Program delivery systems, such 
as video on demand, make it even more difficult for TV advertisers to catch 
consumers’ eyes. Thus marketers are demanding better and more accurate 
 Product placement is 
often subtle. You can 
see products like the 
ones shown on the table 
in movies and on TV 
shows.  The goal is to 
influence you to want 
that product yourself. 
What product 
placements have you 
noticed in your favorite 
TV shows and movies?  

453
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
measurements of the effectiveness of TV advertising, and many are switching 
to social media as a result. After all, more than half of U.S. consumers now 
have smartphones.  14  
 Product Placement 
 TV advertising isn’t limited to traditional commercials; sometimes the prod-
ucts appear in the programs themselves. With   product placement, advertis-
ers pay to put their products into TV shows and movies where the audience 
will see them. One classic example of product placement is the trail of Reese’s 
Pieces in the movie  E.T. Many placements are subtler, like the wheeled luggage 
from ZÜCA Inc. that appeared on the TV show  CSI. In  The Amazing Spider-
man, the superhero uses a Sony Experia mini pro smartphone to make calls to 
his girlfriend, check voice mail, and listen to a police radio broadcast. He also 
plays a game on the phone screen.  15 
 In addition to TV and movies, product placement is also used in video 
games. If you’re a gamer, you’ve seen in-game ads, like ads around the court 
in basketball games. Technology allows vending machines in racing games 
to be branded and rebranded over time, depending on whether Coke, Pepsi, 
Exxon, or Shell has purchased ad time. Do you think people are influenced 
by such exposure?  
 Infomercials 
 An   infomercial   is a full-length TV program devoted exclusively to promoting 
a particular good or service. Infomercials have been successful because they 
show the product and how it works in great detail. They are the equivalent of 
sending your very best salespeople to a person’s home and having them use all 
of their techniques to make the sale: drama, demonstration, testimonials, 
graphics, and more. 
 Products that have earned over $1 billion in sales through infomer-
cials include Proactiv (acne cream), Soloflex, Total Gym, Bowflex 
(exercise machines), the George Foreman Grill, and Ron Popeil’s Rotis-
serie and Grill. Some products, such as personal development semi-
nars, real estate programs, and workout tapes, are hard to sell without 
showing people a sample of their contents and using testimonials. 
Have you purchased any products that you saw in an 
infomercial?  
 Online Advertising 
 When marketers advertise on an online search engine such as 
Google or Bing, they can reach the people they most want to 
reach—consumers looking for information about specific prod-
ucts. 16 One goal of online advertising is to get potential custom-
ers to a website where they can learn more about the company 
and its products—and the company can learn more about them.  17 
If users click through an ad to get to the website, the company has 
an opportunity to gather their names, addresses, opinions, and 
preferences. Online advertising thus brings customers and com-
panies together. Another advantage is that it enables advertisers 
to see just how many people have clicked on an ad and how 
much of it each potential customer has read or watched. It is 
one of the fastest-growing parts of advertising. 
product placement
Putting products into TV shows, 
movies, and other media where 
they will be seen.
 infomercial  
 A full-length TV program 
devoted exclusively to 
promoting goods or services.  
 Online advertising is the 
fastest-growing type of 
advertising and can 
offer more than just a 
list of products and their 
features. For example, 
Obsessive Ink’s website 
allows users to upload a 
photo of themselves 
and designs they might 
like to have etched into 
their skin. They can 
experiment with size 
and placement and use 
social media to gather 
opinions of friends and 
family before making a 
lifelong decision.

454
 making ethical decisions 
 In the world of Twitter, 
not all tweets are cre-
ated equal. Anyone can 
join the social network 
for free, leading to a user 
base ranging from stu-
dents to celebrities. It’s 
these high-profile per-
sonalities, however, that 
can really make the most 
of their 140-character 
statements. 
 By teaming up with 
special marketing com-
panies, people like 
Justin Bieber and Kim 
Kardashian earn thou-
sands of dollars simply 
by mentioning a prod-
uct in their tweets. 
Bieber, for instance, 
urged his millions of fol-
lowers to send Mother’s 
Day flowers through 
 1-800-Flowers.com . 
Celebrities get paid on 
a sliding scale depend-
ing on how many users 
“follow” their Twitter account. 
That means a celebrity like Khloe 
Kardashian, who boasts more 
than 9 million followers, can earn 
as much as $13,000 per endorse-
ment of Sugar Bear. In some 
cases celebrities don’t even 
need to worry about writing the 
tweets themselves. Media mar-
keters like Ad.ly or IZEA will com-
pose the spots themselves in 
order to maximize the message’s 
effectiveness. 
 Of course, celebrities don’t 
want their followers to know that, 
and will hide the fact that 
these are ads within their 
many hashtags. The per-
sonal touch that many 
Twitter users love could 
be lost if more people 
discover that the famous 
figures they admire are 
only using the service to 
shill for other companies. 
On the other hand, it’s not 
like the idea of a celebrity 
spokesperson is a 
brand-new concept devel-
oped by Twitter. People in 
the public eye will always 
leverage their fame to 
make money. In the end, 
fans will need to be wary 
about what to believe in 
their Twitter feeds. Do you 
think it is ethical for celeb-
rities to get paid to tweet 
prewritten ads that appear 
to be their own personal 
comments without using 
#ad? 
 Sources: Liat Kornowski, “Celebrity Sponsored 
Tweets: What the Stars Get Paid for Advertising 
in 140 Characters,”  Huffington Post, May 30, 
2013; Bryanna Cappadonna, “Celebrities Are 
Paid How Much to Tweet?! Not at Unreal 
Candy,”  Boston Magazine, June 11, 2013; and 
Melinda Emerson, “When Celebrities Tweet 
about Your Business,”  Huffington Post, January 
24, 2014. 
 Pay-per-Tweet 
 E-mail marketing is a big component of online advertising. However, 
advertisers have to be careful not to overuse it because many customers don’t 
like to see too much promotional e-mail in their in-boxes. Thus some compa-
nies use e-mail as an alert to send users to other social media such as Facebook 
and Twitter. The Making Ethical Decisions box discusses how some businesses 
pay celebrities to tweet prewritten ads.  
 Interactive promotion   allows marketers to go beyond a  monologue, in 
which sellers try to persuade buyers to buy things, to a  dialogue, in which 
buyers and sellers work together to create mutually beneficial exchange rela-
tionships. Technology has greatly improved customer communications and 
has fundamentally changed the way marketers work with customers. Notice 
interactive promotion
Promotion process that allows 
marketers to go beyond a 
monologue, where sellers try to 
persuade buyers to buy things, 
to a dialogue in which buyers 
and sellers work together to 
create mutually beneficial 
exchange relationships.

455
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
we said  working with rather than  promoting to. Marketers now want to  build 
relationships with customers over time. That means carefully listening to 
what consumers want, tracking their purchases, providing them with excel-
lent service, and giving them access to a full range of information.  
 Using Social Media to Monitor Ad Effectiveness 
 Dr Pepper has millions of fans on Facebook. The company can track and test 
users who “like” the soft drink. The company can measure how many times a 
message is reviewed, how many times it is shared, and what the fan response 
is. Social media have made it possible for organizations to test ads before air-
ing them on traditional media, like TV, and to listen to the reasons why people 
like and dislike messages. 
 It is best, if a company wants to establish a base with customers, to 
include top managers in the dialogue. For example, Richard Branson of Virgin 
Group Ltd. and Tony Hsieh of Zappos tweet their customers. Sherry Chris of 
Better Homes & Gardens Real Estate LLC spends two hours each day reading 
and contributing to Twitter, Facebook, LinkedIn, and Foursquare. Such 
involvement with customers has become a major part of many companies’ 
listening strategy. It may take time, but there is not a better way to learn about 
what customers are thinking and saying about your firm.  
 Global Advertising 
 Global advertising requires the marketer to develop a single product and 
promotional strategy it can implement worldwide. Certainly global adver-
tising that’s the same everywhere can save companies money in research 
and design. In some cases, however, promotions tailored to specific coun-
tries or regions may be more successful since each country or region has its 
own culture, language, and buying habits.  
 Some problems do arise when marketers use one campaign in all coun-
tries. When a Japanese company tried to use English words to 
name a popular drink, it came up with Pocari Sweat, not a 
good image for most English-speaking people. In England, the 
Ford Probe didn’t go over too well because the word probe 
made people think of doctors’ waiting rooms and medical 
examinations. People in the United States may have difficulty 
with Krapp toilet paper from Sweden. But perhaps worse was 
the translation of Coors’s slogan “Turn it loose,” which became 
“Suffer from diarrhea.” Clairol introduced its curling iron, the 
Mist Stick, to the German market, not realizing  mist in Ger-
man can mean “manure.” As you can see, getting the words 
right in international advertising is tricky and critical. So is 
understanding the culture, which calls for researching each 
country, designing appropriate ads, and testing them. The 
Reaching Beyond Our Borders box discusses how a well-known 
company promotes products in foreign markets. 
 Many marketers today are moving from globalism (one ad 
for everyone in the world) to regionalism (specific ads for each 
country or for specific groups within a country). In the future, 
marketers will prepare more custom-designed promotions to 
reach even smaller audiences—audiences as small as one 
person.  
 This ad is designed for 
 African American  
women. There are many 
ads directed toward the 
Latina and Asian 
markets as well. What 
other groups are 
attractive candidates for 
targeted ads?  

456
 Illustrate the steps of the B2B and B2C selling processes.  
 PERSONAL SELLING: PROVIDING 
PERSONAL ATTENTION 
  Personal selling   is the face-to-face presentation and promotion of goods and 
services, including the salesperson’s search for new prospects and follow-up 
service after the sale. Effective selling isn’t simply a matter of persuading oth-
ers to buy. In fact, it’s more accurately described today as helping others sat-
isfy their wants and needs (again, helping the buyer buy). 
 Given that perspective, you can see why salespeople use smartphones, 
tablets, laptops and other technology to help customers search for informa-
tion, design custom-made products, look over prices, and generally do every-
thing it takes to complete the order. The benefit of personal selling is having a 
person help you complete a transaction. The salesperson should listen to your 
needs, help you reach a solution, and do everything possible to make accom-
plishing it smoother and easier. 
 It’s costly for firms to provide customers with personal attention, so 
those companies that retain salespeople must train them to be especially 
effective, efficient, and helpful. To attract new salespeople, companies are 
paying them quite well. The average cost of a single sales call to a potential 
business-to-business (B2B) buyer is about $500.  18 Surely no firm would pay 
that much to send anyone but a skillful and highly trained professional sales-
person and consultant.  
LO 16–3
 personal selling  
 The face-to-face presentation 
and promotion of goods and 
services.  
 reaching beyond our borders 
 For more than 100 years, to 
Americans an Oreo was just 
an Oreo: two layers of 
crunchy cookie sandwich-
ing a creamy vanilla cen-
ter. For many years, Kraft 
Foods, the maker of 
Oreos, followed the old 
adage “If it ain’t broke, 
don’t fix it.” Today, how-
ever, if you visit the 
cookie aisle in your local super-
market, you find variations of 
Oreos such as cookie dough, 
marshmallow crispy, even birthday 
cake. Kraft knew to keep the 
brand vibrant and to reach differ-
ent segments of the market, 
expanding its flavors was a good 
option. 
 It also knew it was a good 
decision to expand Oreos into 
global markets. Today, you can 
find Oreos in more than 100 
countries across the globe. 
However, Kraft understood that 
globally consumer tastes vary just 
like in the United States. What 
some people consider mouth-
watering in one country will be 
frowned upon somewhere 
else. So with Oreos spanning 
the globe, additional varia-
tions on the original cookie-
and-creme formula became 
even more extreme. China, 
for instance, prefers green 
tea–flavored Oreos. In 
Indonesia, consumers pre-
fer Blueberry Ice Cream 
and Orange Ice Cream–fla-
vored Oreos. Argentines like their 
Oreos stuffed with banana and 
dulce de leche, a type of candied 
milk. 
 Sources: Samantha Grossman, “Oreo Launches 
Two New Flavors, and They’re Both Delicious,” 
Time, January 23, 2014; and Gina Pace, “Oreo to 
Launch Two New Cookie Flavors,”  The New York 
Daily News, January 24, 2014.  
 www.nabisco.com   
 What’s in Your Oreo? 
r
o 
st
f
e
t

457
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
 Steps in the Selling Process 
 The best way to understand personal selling is to 
go through the selling process. Imagine you are a 
software salesperson whose job is to show business 
users the advantages of various products your firm 
markets. One product critically important to estab-
lishing long-term relationships with customers is 
customer relationship management (CRM) soft-
ware, particularly social CRM that integrates social 
media to create a community-based relationship 
with customers. Let’s go through the seven steps of 
the selling process to see what you can do to sell 
social CRM software.  
 Although this is a business-to-business (B2B) 
example, the process in consumer selling is similar, 
but less complex. In both cases the salesperson 
must have deep product knowledge—that is, he or 
she must know the product—and competitors’ 
products—thoroughly. 
 1. Prospect and Qualify  
The first step in the sell-
ing process is   prospecting, researching potential 
buyers and choosing those most likely to buy. The selection process is called 
  qualifying.  To qualify people means to make sure they have a need for the 
product, the authority to buy, and the willingness to listen to a sales message. 
Some people call prospecting and qualifying the process of  lead generation. 
 A person who meets the qualifying criteria is called a   prospect.  Salespeo-
ple often meet prospects at trade shows, where they come to booths sponsored 
by manufacturers and ask questions. Others may visit your website seeking 
information. But often the best prospects are people recommended to you by 
others who use or know about your product. Salespeople often e-mail prospects 
with proposals to see whether there is any interest before making a formal visit.  
 2. Preapproach  
The selling process may take a long time, and gathering 
information before you approach the customer is crucial. Before making a 
sales call, you must do some further research. In the preapproach phase, you 
learn as much as possible about customers and their wants and needs.  19 
Before you try to sell the social CRM software, you’ll want to know which 
people in the company are most likely to buy or use it. What kind of customers 
do they deal with? What kind of relationship strategies are they using now? 
How is their system set up, and what kind of improvements are they looking 
for? All that information should be in a database so that, if one representative 
leaves the firm, the company can carry information about customers to the 
new salesperson.  
 3. Approach  
“You don’t have a second chance to make a good first impres-
sion.” That’s why the approach is so important. When you call on a customer 
for the first time, you want to give an impression of friendly professionalism, 
create rapport, build credibility, and start a business relationship. Often a 
company’s decision to use a new software package is based on the buyer’s per-
ception of reliable service from the salesperson. In selling social CRM prod-
ucts, you can make it known from the start that you’ll be available to help your 
customer train its employees and to upgrade the package when necessary.  
 prospecting  
 Researching potential buyers 
and choosing those most likely 
to buy.  
 qualifying  
 In the selling process, making 
sure that people have a need 
for the product, the authority to 
buy, and the willingness to 
listen to a sales message.  
 prospect  
 A person with the means to 
buy a product, the authority to 
buy, and the willingness to 
listen to a sales message.  
 You’re familiar with all 
kinds of situations in 
which people do 
personal selling. They 
work in local 
department stores and 
sell all kinds of goods 
and services like 
automobiles, insurance, 
and real estate. What 
could they do to be 
more helpful to you, the 
customer?  

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
458
 4. Make a Presentation  
In your actual pre-
sentation of the software, you’ll match the 
benefits of your value package to the client’s 
needs. Since you’ve done your homework and 
know the prospect’s wants and needs, you can 
tailor your sales presentation accordingly. 
The presentation is a great time to use testi-
monials, showing potential buyers that 
they’re joining leaders in other firms who are 
using the product.  
 5. Answer Objections  
Salespeople should 
anticipate any objections the prospect may 
raise and determine the proper responses. 
They should think of questions as opportuni-
ties for creating better relationships, not as 
challenges to what they’re saying. Customers may have legitimate doubts, and 
salespeople are there to resolve them. Successfully and honestly working with 
others helps build relationships based on trust. Often salespeople can intro-
duce the customer to others in the firm who can answer their  questions and 
provide them with anything they need. Using a laptop or other mobile device, 
salespeople may set up a virtual meeting in which the  customer can chat with 
company colleagues and begin building a relationship.  
 6. Close the Sale  
After a salesperson has answered questions and objec-
tions, he or she may present a   trial close,  a question or statement that moves 
the selling process toward the actual purchase. A salesperson might ask, 
“When would be the best time to train your staff to use the new software?” The 
final step is to ask for the order and show the client where to sign. Once a rela-
tionship is established, the goal of the sales call may be to get a testimonial 
from the customer.  
 7. Follow Up  
The selling process isn’t over until the order is approved and 
the customer is happy. Salespeople need to be providers of solutions for their 
customers and to think about what happens after the sale. The follow-up step 
includes handling customer complaints, making sure the customer’s questions 
are answered, and quickly supplying what the customer wants. Often, cus-
tomer service is as important to the sale as the product itself. That’s why most 
manufacturers have websites where customers can find information and get 
questions answered. You can see why we describe selling as a process of estab-
lishing relationships , not just exchanging goods or services. The sales relation-
ship may continue for years as the salesperson responds to new requests for 
information and provides new services. 
 The selling process varies somewhat among different goods and services, 
but the general idea stays the same. The goals of a salesperson are to help the 
buyer buy and make sure the buyer is satisfied after the sale.  
 The Business-to-Consumer Sales Process 
 Most sales to consumers take place in retail stores, where the role of the sales-
person differs somewhat from that in B2B selling. In both cases, knowing the 
product comes first. However, in business-to-consumer (B2C) sales, the sales-
person does not have to do much prospecting or qualifying. The seller assumes 
most people who come to the store are qualified to buy the merchandise 
(except in sales of expensive products, such as automobiles and furniture, 
 trial close  
 A step in the selling process 
that consists of a question or 
statement that moves the 
selling process toward the 
actual close.  
Making the sale isn’t the 
end of the salesperson’s 
relationship with the 
customer. The 
salesperson should 
follow up on the sale to 
make sure the customer 
is happy and perhaps 
suggest something to 
complement what the 
customer purchased. 
Have salespeople been 
able to sell you more 
because they used 
effective follow-up 
procedures? How did 
they do it?

459
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
during which salespeople may have to ask a few questions to qualify prospec-
tive customers before spending too much time with them). 
 Similarly, retail salespeople don’t usually have to go through a preap-
proach step, although they should understand as much as possible about the 
type of people who shop at a given store. Often the people who come to a store 
have already done some research online and know exactly what they want.  20
The salesperson does need to focus on the customer and refrain from talking 
to fellow salespeople—or, worse, to friends on the phone. Have you ever expe-
rienced such rude behavior from salespeople? What did you think? 
 The first formal step in the B2C sales process is the approach. Too many 
salespeople begin with a line like “May I help you?” but the answer too often is 
“No.” A better approach is “How can I help you?” or, simply, “Welcome to our 
store.” The idea is to show the customer you are there to help and are friendly 
and knowledgeable.  21 
 Discover what the customer wants first, and then make a presentation. 
Salespeople should show customers how the company’s products meet their 
needs and answer questions that help customers choose the right products for 
them. 
 As in B2B selling, it is important to make a trial close, like “Would you 
like me to put that on hold?” or “Will you be paying for that with your store 
credit card?” Selling is an art, and a salesperson must learn how to walk the 
fine line between being helpful and being pushy. Often individual buyers need 
some time alone to think about the purchase. The salesperson must respect 
that need but still be clearly available when needed. 
 After-sale follow-up is an important but often neglected step in B2C sales. 
If the product is to be delivered, the salesperson should follow up to be sure it 
is delivered on time. The same is true if the product has to be installed. There 
is often a chance to sell more merchandise when a salesperson follows up on a 
sale.  Figure 16.6  shows the whole B2C selling process. Compare it to the seven-
step process we outlined earlier for B2B selling.  
 FIGURE 16.6 STEPS 
IN THE BUSINESS-
TO-CONSUMER (B2C) 
SELLING PROCESS  
Ask questions
Make presentation
Close sale
Follow up
Approach
Start
 • What are the four traditional elements of the promotion mix?  
 • What are the three most important advertising media in order of dollars 
spent?  
 • What are the seven steps in the B2B selling process? How does it differ 
from the B2C selling process?  
•
What are the four trad
 test prep   
ditional elemen
ditio
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
460
 Describe the role of the public relations department, and show how publicity 
fits in that role.  
 PUBLIC RELATIONS: BUILDING RELATIONSHIPS 
 Public relations (PR)   is the function that evaluates public attitudes, changes 
policies and procedures in response to the public’s requests, and executes a 
program of action and information to earn public understanding and accep-
tance. In other words, a good public relations program has three steps:
 
1.  Listen to the public. Public relations starts with good marketing 
research to evaluate public attitudes. The best way to learn what the 
public wants is to listen to people often—in different forums, 
including on social media. For example, General Mills learned that 
consumers were concerned about genetically modified organisms 
(GMOs) in the products they bought when it noticed the tens of 
thousands of Facebook posts supporting the efforts of an anti-GMO 
activist group.  22  
 
2.  Change policies and procedures. Businesses earn understanding not by 
bombarding the public with propaganda but by creating programs 
and practices in the public interest. For example, General Mills 
responded to the anti-GMO concerns by removing GMOs from 
original-flavored Cheerios.  
 
3.  Inform people you’re responsive to their needs. It’s not enough to simply 
have programs in the public interest. You have to  tell the public about 
those programs. Public relations has more power to influence 
consumers than other corporate communications because the message 
comes via the media, a source usually perceived as trustworthy. That’s 
exactly what General Mills did by placing a GMO-free label on its new 
Cheerios box.  23  
 Recent events have emphasized the need for good public relations. Such 
events include GM’s safety problems, Japan’s nuclear power problems, and the 
issues surrounding some politicians, key actors, and sports personalities.  24 
 The PR department maintains close ties with company stakeholders (cus-
tomers, media, community leaders, government officials, and other corporate 
stakeholders). Marketers are looking for alternatives to advertising. Public rela-
tions is a good alternative. As newspapers cut back on their reporting staff, people 
are looking for other sources of news information, including publicity releases. 
Linking up with bloggers has become an important way to keep company names 
in the news. Public relations is so important to some firms that everyone in other 
departments beyond the PR department are participating as well.  25  
 Publicity: The Talking Arm of PR 
 Publicity is the talking arm of public relations and one of the major functions 
of almost all organizations. Here’s how it works: Suppose you want to intro-
duce your store, Very Vegetarian, to consumers, but you have little money to 
promote it. You need to get some initial sales to generate funds. One effective 
way to reach the public is through publicity. 
 Publicity   is any information about an individual, product, or organiza-
tion that’s distributed to the public through the media and is not paid for or 
controlled by the seller. It takes skill to write interesting or newsworthy press 
releases that the media will want to publish. You may need to write different 
LO 16–4
 public relations (PR)  
 The function that evaluates 
public attitudes, changes 
policies and procedures in 
response to the public’s 
requests, and executes a 
program of action and 
information to earn public 
understanding and acceptance.  
 publicity  
 Any information about an 
individual, product, or 
organization that’s distributed 
to the public through the media 
and that’s not paid for or 
controlled by the seller.  

461
stories for different media.  26 One story may intro-
duce the new owners. Another may describe the 
unusual product offerings. If the stories are pub-
lished, news about your store will reach many 
potential consumers (and investors, distributors, 
and dealers) and you may be on your way to 
becoming a successful marketer.  27 John D. Rocke-
feller once remarked, “Next to doing the right 
thing, the most important thing is to  let people 
know that you are doing the right thing.” What 
might Very Vegetarian do to help the community 
and thus create more publicity?  
 Besides being free, publicity has several further 
advantages over other promotional tools like adver-
tising. It may reach people who wouldn’t read an ad. 
It may appear on the front page of a newspaper or 
in some other prominent position, or be given air 
time on a television news show. Perhaps the greatest 
advantage of publicity is its believability. When a 
newspaper or magazine publishes a story as news, 
the reader treats that story as news—and news is 
more believable than advertising. 
 Publicity has several disadvantages as well. 
For example, marketers have no control over 
whether, how, and when the media will use the 
story. The media aren’t obligated to use a publicity 
release, most of which are thrown away. Furthermore, the media may alter 
the story so that it’s not positive. There’s good publicity (customers camp out 
all night to buy your products) and bad publicity (defective products are 
recalled). Also, once a story has run, it’s not likely to be repeated. Advertising, 
in contrast, can be repeated as often as needed. One way to see that the media 
handle your publicity well is to establish a friendly relationship with media 
representatives and be open with them.  
 Assess the effectiveness of various forms of sales promotion, including 
sampling.  
 SALES PROMOTION: GIVING BUYERS INCENTIVES 
  Sales promotion   is the promotional tool that stimulates consumer purchas-
ing and dealer interest by means of short-term activities. These activities 
include such things as displays, trade shows and exhibitions, event sponsor-
ships, and contests.  Figure 16.7  lists some B2B sales promotion techniques.  
 For consumer sales promotion activities, think of those free samples you 
get in the mail, cents-off coupons you clip from newspapers, contests that var-
ious retail stores sponsor, and prizes in cereal boxes (see  Figure 16.7 ). Some 
experts caution not to give too much away during such promotions.  28 You can 
stimulate sales at Very Vegetarian by putting half-off coupons in the school 
paper and home mailers. Do you see any problems that might emerge by using 
Groupon to bring in customers? 
 Sales promotion programs are designed to supplement personal sell-
ing, advertising, public relations, and other promotional efforts by creat-
ing enthusiasm for the overall promotional program. Sales promotion can 
take place both within and outside the company. The most important 
LO 16–5
 sales promotion  
 The promotional tool that 
stimulates consumer 
purchasing and dealer interest 
by means of short-term 
activities.  
 Some companies will 
race to extremes to 
generate publicity. This 
streaker avoided Super 
Bowl XXXVIII security to 
show off a tattooed 
message for Internet 
casino GoldenPalace 
.com. Which do you 
think attracts more 
attention for a firm, an 
appealing news story or 
a paid ad? 

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
462
internal sales promotion efforts are directed at salespeople and other 
 customer-contact people, such as customer service representatives and 
clerks. Internal sales promotion efforts include (1) sales training; (2) the 
development of sales aids such as flip charts, portable audiovisual dis-
plays, and videos; and (3) participation in trade shows where salespeople 
can get leads. Other employees who deal with the public may also receive 
special training to improve their awareness of the company’s offerings and 
make them an integral part of the total promotional effort.  
 After generating enthusiasm internally, marketers want to make distribu-
tors and dealers eager to help promote the product. Trade shows allow mar-
keting intermediaries to see products from many different sellers and make 
comparisons among them. Today, virtual trade shows on the Internet, called 
webinars, enable buyers to see many products without leaving the office. Such 
 promotions are usually interactive, so buyers can ask questions, and the infor-
mation is available 24 hours a day, seven days a week. 
The International 
Manufacturing Trade 
Show in Chicago 
featured more than 
2,000 booths, giving 
buyers for other 
businesses thousands 
of new products to 
explore and purchase. 
Can you see why trade 
shows in many 
industries are an 
efficient and necessary 
way to stay abreast of 
the latest developments, 
competitors, and 
consumer reactions and 
needs?
 FIGURE 16.7 SALES PROMOTION TECHNIQUES 
•  Coupons 
•  Cents-off promotions
•  Sampling 
•  Premiums
•  Sweepstakes
•  Contests
•  Bonuses (buy one, get one free)
•  Catalogs
•  Demonstrations
•  Special events
•  Lotteries
•  In-store displays
•  Catalogs
•  Conventions
•  Trade shows
•  Portfolios for salespeople 
•  Deals (price reductions)
B2B
B2C

463
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
 After the company’s employees and intermediaries have been motivated 
with sales promotion efforts, the next step is to promote to final consumers 
using samples, coupons, cents-off deals, displays, store demonstrations, pre-
miums, contests, rebates, and so on. Sales promotion is an ongoing effort to 
maintain enthusiasm, so sellers use different strategies over time to keep the 
ideas fresh. You could put food displays in your Very Vegetarian store to 
show customers how attractive the products look. You could also sponsor 
in-store cooking demonstrations to attract new vegetarians.  
 One popular sales promotion tool is   sampling   —letting consumers 
have a small sample of the product for no charge. Because many con-
sumers won’t buy a new product unless they’ve had a chance to see it or 
try it, grocery stores often have people standing in the aisles handing 
out small portions of food and beverage products. Sampling is a 
quick, effective way of demonstrating a product’s superiority when 
consumers are making a purchase decision. Standing outside Very 
Vegetarian and giving out samples would surely attract attention. 
 Event marketing involves sponsoring events such as rock 
concerts or being at various events to promote products. When 
Pepsi introduced its SoBe (herbal fortified drinks) product line, 
it used a combination of sampling, event marketing, and a new 
website. Pepsi first sent samples to beach cities during spring 
break where students got samples of the drinks. Sampling and 
event marketing can be effective promotional tools used to intro-
duce new products.  
 sampling  
 A promotional tool in which a 
company lets consumers have 
a small sample of a product for 
no charge.  
 • What are the three steps in setting up a public relations program?  
 • What are the sales promotion techniques used to reach consumers?  
 • What sales promotion techniques are used to reach businesses?  
•
What are the three ste
 test prep   
eps in seetting u
eps
 Everyone likes a free 
sample. Sampling is a 
promotional strategy 
that lets people try a 
new product, often in a 
situation when they can 
buy it right away if they 
like it. What are some 
advantages of sampling 
food products that 
advertising can’t 
duplicate?  
 Show how word of mouth, viral marketing, blogging, podcasting, e-mail 
marketing, and mobile marketing work.  
 WORD OF MOUTH AND OTHER 
PROMOTIONAL TOOLS 
 Although word of mouth was not traditionally listed as one of the major pro-
motional efforts (it was not considered to be manageable), it is now one of 
the most effective, especially on the Internet.  29 In   word-of-mouth promo-
tion,  people tell other people about products they’ve purchased. We’ve 
already discussed the role of social media in spreading word of mouth. 
Beyond word of mouth is customer participation, that is, getting customers 
to provide constructive suggestions and share their ideas on how to shape 
product and service offerings.  30  
 Anything that encourages people to talk favorably about an organization 
can be effective word of mouth.  31 Notice, for example, how stores use clowns, 
banners, music, fairs, and other attention-getting devices to create word of 
mouth. Clever commercials can also generate word of mouth. The more that 
LO 16–6
 word-of-mouth promotion  
 A promotional tool that 
involves people telling other 
people about products they’ve 
purchased.  
samp
mp
mplililing
ng
ng  
A
ti
l t
l i
hi h
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

464
people talk about your products and your brand name, the more easily cus-
tomers remember them when they shop. 
 One especially effective strategy for spreading positive word of mouth is 
to send testimonials to current customers. Most companies use these only in 
promoting to new customers, but testimonials are also effective in confirming 
customers’ belief that they chose the right company. Therefore, some compa-
nies make it a habit to ask customers for referrals. 
 Word of mouth is so powerful that negative word of mouth can hurt a 
firm badly. Criticism of a product or company can spread through online 
forums, social media, and websites (see the Adapting to Change box). Address-
ing consumer complaints quickly and effectively is one of the best ways to 
reduce the effects of negative word of mouth. 
 You may enjoy brainstorming strategies for creating word of mouth about 
Very Vegetarian. If your efforts are great, your message may “go viral” and be 
seen by millions of consumers.  32   Viral marketing   includes any strategy that 
encourages people to pass on a marketing message to others, creating expo-
nential growth in the message’s influence as the message reaches thousands, 
to millions.  33 Many viral marketing programs give away free products or ser-
vices, often in exchange for valuable e-mail addresses. Free attracts attention; 
once you have consumers’ attention they can see other products or services 
you offer and buy those.  
 Blogging 
 There are hundreds of millions of blogs online. How do blogs affect market-
ing? Creating a blog is great way to interact with the customers. Business can 
 viral marketing  
 Any strategy that encourages 
people to pass on a marketing 
message to others, creating 
exponential growth in the 
message’s influence as the 
message reaches thousands, 
to millions.  
 adapting to change 
 Restaurants, carpet cleaning ser-
vices, and car repair services are 
businesses that truly benefit from 
the power of word-of-mouth pro-
motion. In fact, word of mouth is 
perhaps the most important pro-
motional tool small businesses 
have. That’s why businesses from 
bakeries to barbershops were 
happy to greet the introduction of 
 Yelp.com in the early 2000s. At 
Yelp, users can log on and review 
their experiences with a business 
and hopefully spread some love 
that will help the business grow. 
Unfortunately, many businesses 
that live and die by these online 
reviews are now questioning the 
methodology and ethics of Yelp. 
 The Federal Trade Commission 
has received more than 2,046 
complaints filed about Yelp since 
2008. The majority of the 
complaints are from small busi-
nesses that claim to have received 
unfair or fraudulent reviews after 
turning down an offer to advertise 
on Yelp. Consumer review web-
sites, like Yelp and Angie’s List, 
are protected against liability for 
defamation claims that stem from 
user comments under the 
Communications Decency Act 
passed in 1996. This protection 
riles business owners who say the 
system is stacked against them. 
 Yelp agrees that fake reviews 
are not fair, and boasts that it has 
fought against such reviews since 
its inception. The company main-
tains its “review filter” is the most 
efficient and sophisticated in the 
industry. Yet it will not explain 
exactly how the filter works. 
Ultimately, Yelp is going to have to 
answer three key questions: Is it 
punishing small or midsized busi-
nesses that do not purchase 
advertising on the site? Is it effec-
tive at removing fake reviews? Is it 
providing bad reviews for compet-
itors of paying advertisers? 
 New York’s attorney general 
Eric Schneiderman says the pro-
cess of posting false reviews 
online is “the 21st century’s ver-
sion of false advertising.” His 
department recently completed a 
sting operation that caught 19 dif-
ferent companies that were hired 
to write fake reviews. The compa-
nies were fined varying amounts 
that totaled $350,000. 
 Sources: Daniel Roberts, “Yelp’s Fake Review 
Problem,”  CNN Money, September 26, 2013; 
Angus Loten, “Yelp Reviews Brew a Fight over 
Free Speech vs. Fairness,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, April 2, 2014; and Brian Nichols, “Yelp: 
Will Smoke Lead to a Stock Fire?”  The Motley 
Fool, April 4, 2014. 
 What Are Companies Yelping About? 
 www.yelp.com  

465
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
attract new customers when they coordinate their social media profiles with 
their blogs. As people click to a company’s blog through the social media 
profile, it helps improve the company’s website ranking. People love to 
share content they find relevant. In order for a blog to succeed, a business 
must take time to post and respond to the customers that leave comments. 
They can use some of the comments to help create new posts. They have to 
post consistently in order to be recognized by the search engines, and to 
keep customers coming back to the blog for new information. If the 
blog isn’t kept updated, it will lose traffic and, therefore, its power as 
a promotional tool.  
 Podcasting 
 Podcasting   is a means of distributing multimedia digital files on the 
Internet for downloading to a portable media player. Podcasts are 
important because they are a great way to capture your existing and 
prospective customers’ attention for an extended period of time by giv-
ing them something of value that is easy for them to understand.  34 Of 
course, many companies have also found success in creating videos for 
YouTube.  
 E-Mail Promotions 
 Armstrong, the flooring manufacturer, has an e-mail marketing pro-
gram designed to increase brand awareness among commercial sup-
pliers. At one time it sent out monthly e-mails to announce new 
products and product updates and to keep people loyal to the brand. 
Over time, however, those e-mails lost their power. Armstrong then 
turned to an e-mail service provider that completely revamped the 
program. The provider divided the market into four separate seg-
ments and tracked the success of the e-mails much more closely.  
 Mobile Marketing 
 Most marketers make sure their media are viewable on mobile devices like 
tablets and smartphones. One key to success, therefore, is to keep the message 
brief, because mobile users don’t want to read through much text. With mobile 
media, marketers can use text messaging to promote sweepstakes, send cus-
tomers news or sports alerts, and give them company information. Companies 
can determine where you are and send you messages about restaurants and 
other services in your vicinity.  
 MANAGING THE PROMOTION MIX: 
PUTTING IT ALL TOGETHER 
 Each target group calls for a separate promotion mix. Advertising is most effi-
cient for reaching large groups of consumers whose members share similar 
traits. Personal selling is best for selling to large organizations. To motivate peo-
ple to buy now rather than later, marketers use sales promotions like sampling, 
coupons, discounts, special displays, and premiums. Publicity supports other 
efforts and can create a good impression among all consumers. Word of mouth 
is often the most powerful promotional tool. Generate it by listening, being 
responsive, and creating an impression worth passing on to others that you 
spread through blogging, podcasting, and tweeting.  
 podcasting  
 A means of distributing 
multimedia digital files on the 
Internet for downloading to a 
portable media player.  
 Mobile media allow 
marketers to reach 
customers through text 
messaging. Have you 
received such 
promotional messages? 
For which products are 
they most effective?  

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
466
 Promotional Strategies 
 How do producers move products to consumers? In a   push strategy,  the pro-
ducer uses advertising, personal selling, sales promotion, and all other promo-
tional tools to convince wholesalers and retailers to stock and sell merchandise, 
pushing it through the distribution system to the stores. If the push strategy 
works, consumers will walk into a store, see the product, and buy it. 
 A   pull strategy   directs heavy advertising and sales promotion efforts 
toward  consumers. If the pull strategy works, consumers will go to the store 
and ask for the products. The store owner will order them from the wholesaler, 
who in turn will order them from the producer. Products are thus  pulled
through the distribution system. 
 It has been important to make promotion part of a total systems approach 
to marketing. That is, promotion was part of supply-chain management. In 
such cases, retailers would work with producers and distributors to make the 
supply chain as efficient as possible. Then a promotional plan would be devel-
oped for the  whole system. The idea would be to develop a total product offer 
that would appeal to everyone: manufacturers, distributors, retailers, and 
consumers.  
push strategy
Promotional strategy in which 
the producer uses advertising, 
personal selling, sales 
promotion, and all other 
promotional tools to convince 
wholesalers and retailers to 
stock and sell merchandise.
 pull strategy  
 Promotional strategy in which 
heavy advertising and sales 
promotion efforts are directed 
toward consumers so that 
they’ll request the products 
from retailers.  
 • What is viral marketing?  
 • What are blogging and podcasting?  
 • Describe a push strategy and a pull strategy.  
•
What is viral marketin
 test prep   
g?
g?
 Ads in bus shelters are 
nothing new, but Kraft 
pumped hot air into 10 
Chicago bus stops to 
promote its Stove Top 
stuffing mix. The idea 
was to remind consumers 
of the warm feeling they 
got when eating the 
product. Do you think 
giving consumers 
experiences (like warmth 
on a cold day) is an 
effective way to remind 
them of a product?  
t
c
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

467
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
 Identify the new and traditional tools that make up the promotion mix.
 • 
 What is promotion?  
 Promotion is an effort by marketers to inform and remind people in the 
target market about products and to persuade them to participate in an 
exchange. 
 • 
 What are the four traditional promotional tools that make up the promotion 
mix? 
 The four traditional promotional tools are advertising, personal selling, 
public relations, and sales promotion. The product itself can also be a pro-
motional tool—that’s why it is shown in the middle of  Figure 16.1 . 
 Contrast the advantages and disadvantages of various advertising media, 
including the Internet and social media.
 • 
 What is advertising?  
 Advertising is limited to paid, nonpersonal (not face-to-face) communica-
tion through various media by organizations and individuals who are in 
some way identified in the advertising message.  
 • 
 What are the advantages of using the various media?  
 Review the advantages and disadvantages of the various advertising media 
in  Figure 16.5 . 
 • 
 Why the growing use of infomercials?  
 Infomercials are growing in importance because they show products in 
use and present testimonials to help sell goods and services.  
 Illustrate the steps of the B2B and B2C selling processes.
 • 
What is personal selling? 
 Personal selling is the face-to-face presentation and promotion of prod-
ucts and services. It includes the search for new prospects and follow-up 
service after the sale.  
 • 
 What are the seven steps of the B2B selling process?  
 The steps of the selling process are (1) prospect and qualify, (2) preap-
proach, (3) approach, (4) make presentation, (5) answer objections, (6) 
close sale, and (7) follow up.  
 • 
 What are the steps in the B2C selling process?  
 The steps are the approach, which includes asking questions; the presenta-
tion, which includes answering questions; the close; and the follow-up.  
 Describe the role of the public relations department, and show how publicity 
fits in that role.
 • 
 What is public relations?  
 Public relations (PR) is the function that evaluates public attitudes, 
changes policies and procedures in response to the public’s requests, and 
executes a program of action and information to earn public understand-
ing and acceptance.  
 • 
 What are the three major steps in a good public relations program?  
 (1) Listen to the public, (2) develop policies and procedures in the public 
interest, and (3) tell people you’re being responsive to their needs.  
•
What is p
LO 16–1
LO 16–2
•
What is p
LO 16–3
LO 16–4
i
 summary 
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
468
 key terms 
 advertising 449 
 infomercial 453  
 integrated marketing 
communication 
(IMC) 448  
 interactive 
promotion 454  
 personal selling 456  
 podcasting 465  
 product placement 453  
 promotion mix 448 
 prospect 457  
 prospecting 457  
 publicity 460 
 public relations (PR) 460  
 pull strategy 466 
 push strategy 466  
 qualifying 457 
 sales promotion 461  
 sampling 463  
 trial close 458  
 viral marketing 464 
 word-of-mouth 
promotion 463  
 • 
 What is publicity?  
 Publicity is the talking part of sales promotion; it is information distrib-
uted by the media that’s not paid for, or controlled by, the seller. Publicity’s 
greatest advantage is its believability.  
 Assess the effectiveness of various forms of sales promotion, including 
sampling.
 • 
 How are sales promotion activities used both within and outside the 
organization?  
 Internal sales promotion efforts are directed at salespeople and other 
 customer-contact people to keep them enthusiastic about the company. 
Internal sales promotion activities include sales training, sales aids, audio-
visual displays, and trade shows. External sales promotions to consumers 
rely on samples, coupons, cents-off deals, displays, store demonstrators, 
premiums, and other incentives.  
 Show how word of mouth, viral marketing, blogging, podcasting, e-mail 
marketing, and mobile marketing work.
 • 
 Is word of mouth a major promotional tool?  
 Word of mouth was not one of the traditional forms of promotion because 
it was not considered to be manageable, but it has always been an effective 
way of promoting goods and services.  
 • 
 How is word of mouth used in promotion today?  
 The goal of word of mouth is to get the company’s message to as many 
people as possible. Viral marketing includes any strategy that encourages 
people to pass on a marketing message to others, creating exponential 
growth in the message’s influence as the message reaches thousands, to 
millions. Many viral marketing programs give away free products or ser-
vices, often in exchange for valuable e-mail addresses.  
 • 
 What other promotional tools can marketers use to promote products?  
 Other promotional tools include blogging, podcasting, e-mail promotions, 
and mobile marketing.  
 • 
 What are the major promotional strategies?  
 In a  push strategy, the producer uses advertising, personal selling, sales 
promotion, and all other promotional tools to convince wholesalers and 
retailers to stock and sell merchandise. In a  pull strategy, heavy advertising 
and sales promotion efforts are directed toward consumers so they’ll 
request the products from retailers.   
LO 16–5
LO 16–6

469
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  Using at least two different media—a newspaper, magazine, television, 
radio, the Internet—choose two ads you consider effective and two you 
find ineffective. Be prepared to explain your choices.  
 2.  Scan your local newspaper or search online for examples of publicity (sto-
ries about new products) and sales promotion (coupons, contests, sweep-
stakes). Share your examples and discuss the effectiveness of such 
promotional efforts with the class.  
 3.  Many students shy away from careers in selling, often because they think 
they are not outgoing enough or that salespeople are dishonest or pushy. 
Prepare a one-page document about your experience with salespeople and 
what you think of selling as a career.  
 4.  In small groups, discuss whether you are purchasing more goods using 
catalogs and/or the Internet and why. Do you look up information online 
before buying goods and services? How helpful are such searches? Present 
your findings to the class.  
 5.  In small groups, list six goods and services most students own or use and 
discuss promotional techniques that prompt you to buy them: advertising, 
personal selling, social media, publicity, sales promotion, or word of 
mouth. Which seems most effective for your group? Why?  
 1. What kinds of problems can emerge if a firm doesn’t communicate with 
environmentalists, the news media, and the local community? Do you 
know of any firms that aren’t responsive to your community? What are the 
consequences?  
 2. How often do you buy online? If you don’t actually buy, do you use the 
Internet to compare goods and prices? Do you or your friends take advan-
tage of low prices on used goods on eBay or other online sites like Craig-
slist? Do you look at ads on the Internet? Do they seem to be effective?  
 3. As interactive communications between companies and customers grow, 
do you think traditional advertising will grow or decline? What will be the 
effect of growth or decline on the price we pay for TV programs, newspa-
pers, and magazines?  
 4. How have blogging, podcasting, and social media affected other media 
you use, like newspapers or television? Do you read print newspapers now 
or do you get your news some other way? Do you watch programs on TV 
or on other devices? How has the move away from print and network tele-
vision affected advertising?  
th
 critical thinking 

PART 5
Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
470
 South by Southwest (SXSW) is an annual music, 
film, and technology festival held in Austin, Texas. 
For 10 days in March, the city welcomes thou-
sands of concertgoers, film buffs, and industry 
insiders. Part trade show and part mega-concert, 
this enormous event not only makes fans of hip 
art happy; it also serves as a meeting point for 
new artists and potential managers, collaborators, 
and industry executives. 
 The music portion of the most recent SXSW 
featured more than 2,000 acts playing for tens of 
thousands of roving guests. With so many people 
in attendance, the event presents ample opportu-
nity for promotions of all types. Each year the fes-
tival teams up with corporate sponsors like 
Doritos, AT&T, and Chevrolet to advertise at the 
event. These business-to-business (B2B) relation-
ships benefit both parties by giving SXSW crucial 
operating income while providing the companies 
with a presence at a cool event. 
 SXSW also features several business-to-consumer 
(B2C) promotions. For a lower price, attendees can 
choose to access just a single event, like the film fes-
tival. But buying a higher-priced badge not only 
gets the attendees into all events, but grants them 
access to VIP keynote speakers, parties, and work-
shops. These types of deals represent the lifeblood 
of the event and the main source of the festival’s 
income. 
 With so much to do and see, SXSW naturally 
generates a lot of publicity. Radio stations and 
magazines run dozens of stories in the run-up to 
the festival because they consider the event to be 
news. Each of those stories ends up becoming free 
publicity for SXSW, giving organizers an incentive 
to create as much buzz as possible. To accomplish 
this goal, a public relations team hired by the fes-
tival actively seeks publicity from interested stake-
holders. This includes the city of Austin itself, 
which is more than happy to let SXSW fly banners 
over the streets. As the largest revenue-generating 
event in Austin, the city’s cooperation with the fes-
tival makes a lot of sense. 
 Music is a product that benefits from a per-
sonal touch, so many bands that attend SXSW 
rely on “street teams” to get the word out. These 
dedicated fans work for free to promote the band 
and, by proxy, the event. The fans are more than 
happy to hand out fliers or talk about the event at 
local record stores and coffee shops in order to 
make people aware of their favorite performers. 
All of this personal selling benefits not only the 
bands, but the event as well. After all, these street 
teams consist of thousands of people  volunteering
to talk about the festival. You can’t buy promotion 
like that. 
 That kind of grass-roots publicity is some of 
the most effective and least expensive available. 
Every time a music fan tweets about the event, 
mentions it in a YouTube video or podcast, or 
blogs about the great time he or she had at the last 
SXSW, that positive message spreads to several 
 video case   
 SXSW 
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To learn about business blogs.  
 EXERCISE 
 Go to  www.google.com/blogger  to learn how easy it is to start your own blog. 
Then go to the following business-oriented blogs:  VentureBlog.com  ( www.ven-
tureblog.com ) and  PatentPending.blogs.com  ( http://patentpending.blogs.
com ). 
 1. What kind of subjects are covered in each blog?  
 2. What are the advantages and disadvantages of reading such blogs?  
 3. Would you like to see a blog for this course? For your school?  

471
Using Effective Promotions
CHAPTER 16
Page 447: © Rick Diamond/Getty Images; p. 450: 
© Show Media/AP Images; p. 452: © Sony 
Pictures Entertainment/PhotoFest; p. 453: 
© Europics/Newscom; p. 454: © Colin Anderson/
Getty Images RF; p. 455: © Michael Newman/
PhotoEdit; p. 456: © Jonathan Ellgen; p. 457: 
© Blend Images/Getty Images RF; p. 458: © Petri 
Artturi Asikainen/Taxi Japan/Getty Images; 
p. 461: © Elsa/Getty Images; p. 462: Courtesy of 
AMT-The Association For Manufacturing Tech-
nology; p. 463: © Jeff Greenberg/Alamy Images; 
p. 465: © monkeybusinessimages/iStock/360/
Getty Images RF; p. 466: © Kevin Zolkiewicz.
Japan/Getty Images;
 photo credits 
 1. 
Julie Liesse, “15 on 15: Council Founders Share Industry 
Highlights,”  Advertising Age, Special Advertising Section, 
November 11, 2013. 
 2. 
Caitlin Laluza, “The Explosion of Mobile Audiences: What It 
Means for Public Relations,”  The Public Relations Strategist, 
Fall 2013. 
 3. 
“Coke: Buzz Doesn’t Work, but Social Is Crucial,”  Advertising 
Age, editorial, March 25, 2013. 
 4. 
Wes Nichols, “The Future of Advertising,”  Harvard Business 
Review, March 2013. 
 5. 
Sunil Gupta, “For Mobile Devices, Think Apps, Not Ads,” 
Harvard Business Review, March 2013. 
 6. 
Miguel Helft, “Selling Brands on Facebook,”  Fortune, March 18, 
2013. 
 7. 
Benjamin Palmer, “Why Modern Marketers and Creatives 
Need to Reevaluate Radio, the World’s Most Popular 
Medium,”  Advertising Age, September 30, 2013. 
 8. 
Suzanne Vranica, “And Now, Ads for the Super Bowl Ads,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, January 27, 2014. 
 9. 
Jack Neff, “80% of Super Bowl Ads Flop: Study,”  Advertising 
Age, January 6, 2014. 
 10. 
You can find data on the cost of various 30-second spots in 
Advertising Age, October 21, 2013. 
 11. 
Jack Neff, “Walmart Takes TV Fight Local,”  Advertising Age, 
April 8, 2013. 
 12. 
Michael McCarthy, “BMW Teams Up with TaylorMade for Ad 
within Ad,”  Advertising Age, July 15, 2013. 
 13. 
Jeff Bercovici, “Can Twitter Save TV?”  Forbes, October 28, 2013. 
 14. 
 Advertising Age, August 19, 2013. 
 15. 
Mark Milian and Michael White, “Sony’s Scene-Stealing 
Product Placements,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
July 16–July 22, 2012. 
 16. 
Amal Sharma, Shalini Ramachandran, and Don Clark, 
“Amazon Joins the TV Crush,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 22, 2014. 
 17. 
Ralph Anderson, Srinvason Swaminathan, and Rajiv Metha, 
“How to Drive Customer Satisfaction,”  Sloan Management 
Review, Summer 2013. 
 18. Russ Hill, “What Is the Cost of a B2B Sales Call?”  CRM 
Insights,  www.crm-insights.com  , November 4, 2013. 
 19. Brent Adamson, Matthew Dixon, and Nicholas Toman, “The 
End of Solution Sales,”  Harvard Business Review, July–
August 2012. 
  20. James Farley, “How to Sell to Customers Who Know 
Everything,”  Harvard Business Review, July–August 2012. 
 21. Katrina Pugh and Laurance Prusak, “”Designing Effective 
Knowledge Networks,”  Sloan Management Review, Fall 2013. 
 22. “General Mills Notches PR Win with GMO-Free Cheerios (But 
Activists Want More),” editorial,  Advertising Age, January 6, 
2014. 
 23. Ibid. 
 24. Stephen Dupont, “Understanding the Language of 
Economics Is Critical to Communicating Effectively,”  The 
Public Relations Strategist, Winter 2013. 
 25. Todd Henneman, “Is HR at Its Breaking Point?”  Workforce 
Management, April 2013. 
 26. Lisa Ward, “What to Do after Your 15 Minutes of Fame,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, December 2, 2013. 
 27. Ibid. 
 28. V. Kumar and Bharath Rajan, “The Perils of Social Coupon 
Campaigns,”  Sloan Management Review, Summer 2012. 
 29. Rakesh Niraj, “Just How Much Is Word of Mouth Worth?” 
Weatherhead Collection, Fall 2013. 
 30. Michael McCarthy, “Tesla Generates Small Sales, Huge Buzz 
Without Paid Ads,”  Advertising Age, June 10, 2013; and Omar 
Merlo, Andreas B. Eisingerich, and Seigyoung Auh, “Why 
Customer Participation Matters,”  Sloan Management Review, 
Winter 2014. 
 31. “Get ’Em Talking,”  Entrepreneur, editorial, August 2012. 
 32. Michael Fitzgerald, “The Myth about Viral Marketing,”  Sloan 
Management Review, Spring 2013. 
 33. Ralph F. Wilson, “The Six Simple Principles of Viral 
Marketing,”  Web Marketing Today,   www.webmarketingtoday.
com  , May 12, 2012. 
 34. Kim Garst, “Social Media Marketing World 2014,”  Huffington 
Post,   www.huffingtonpost  , April 9, 2014. 
ost of a B2B Sales Call?” CRM
 notes 
new people. And in today’s social media–driven 
world, a dependable word-of-mouth recommen-
dation might be the most important type of pro-
motion. Still, it’s impossible to completely control 
the things that people say about you or your com-
pany. That’s why SXSW employs a number of dif-
ferent promotional strategies in its quest to stay 
cool. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. What are the critical differences between pub-
licity and advertising?  
 2. Identify the four elements of the promotion 
mix. 
 3. On which of the four elements of the promo-
tion mix does SXSW rely most?  

472
 Understanding 
Accounting and 
Financial Information 
 MANAGING FINANCIAL RESOURCES 
 17 
PART 6
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 17-1 Demonstrate the role that accounting and financial information 
play for a business and its stakeholders. 
 LO 17-2 Identify the different disciplines within the accounting profession. 
 LO 17-3 List the steps in the accounting cycle, distinguish between 
accounting and bookkeeping, and explain how computers are used 
in accounting. 
 LO 17-4 Explain how the major financial statements differ. 
 LO 17-5 Demonstrate the application of ratio analysis in reporting financial 
information.  

John Raftery
 • Founder of Patriot Contractors
 • Used accounting knowledge and 
military experience to start own 
business
wwww.patriotcontractorsinc.com
@RafteryJ
A
 fter John Raftery was 
sworn into the United 
States Marine Corps in 
1999, he served in the 
infantry and then in a 
reconnaissance battalion. He was 
deployed to the Middle East and was one 
of many Marines who took part in Opera-
tion Iraqi Freedom, helping liberate 
 Baghdad in 2003. After his discharge 
from the Marine Corps, Raftery faced the 
same challenge as many of his fellow 
 veterans: how to transfer what he learned 
in the military to the business world. He 
chose to take advantage of his GI Bill 
educational benefits to go to Dallas Bap-
tist University (DBU). John studied 
accounting and served as vice president 
of the DBU Accounting Society and as 
the campus representative for the Becker 
CPA Review. He learned that accounting 
offered solid career opportunities. 
 After earning his degree in account-
ing, Raftery went to work at a health care 
firm as an accounting assistant. He 
worked hard learning the ins-and-outs of 
public accounting, but soon realized that 
a career as an accountant wasn’t for him. 
Raftery’s real aspiration was to be an 
entrepreneur. He applied for admission 
to a program called the Entrepreneurship 
Boot Camp for Veterans with Disabilities. 
The weeklong intensive training course 
was specifically designed for vets with 
disabilities interested in starting their 
own businesses. John was one of the 
first veterans accepted into the program. 
 After completing the entrepreneurship 
program, John felt confident enough to 
launch his own business, Patriot Contrac-
tors, in Red Oak, Texas. The company 
“accessorizes” buildings in the commer-
cial and government sector—building out 
interior space with cabinets, countertops, 
railings and other items.  Inc. magazine 
ranked Patriot Contractors as one of the 
fastest-growing private companies in 
America. The company also received 
special recognition from President 
Obama, who invited Raftery to Washing-
ton to attend his speech to Congress 
introducing the Jumpstart Our Business 
Startups Act (JOBS Act). Patriot Contrac-
tors was cited by the president as an 
example of the potential of veteran 
entrepreneurship. 
 As Patriot Contractors adds employ-
ees and increases revenues, Raftery 
credits two key personal accomplish-
ments for his company’s success. One 
was his experience as part of a military 
recon team that helped him understand 
the importance of applying the capabili-
ties and limitations of his team mem-
bers to complete a mission 
successfully. He also credits his knowl-
edge of accounting for helping him 
develop into a businessperson who can 
speak the language of business. John 
readily admits, “Not a day goes by in 
running my company that I don’t lever-
age some part of my accounting 
knowledge.” 
 Controlling costs, managing cash 
flows, understanding profit margins and 
taxes, and reporting finances accurately 
are keys to survival for both growing 
organizations like Patriot Contractors and 
large corporations. This chapter will 
introduce you to the accounting funda-
mentals and financial information critical 
to business success. The chapter also 
briefly explores the financial ratios that 
are essential in measuring business per-
formance in a large or small business. 
 Sources: Patriot Contractors,  www.patriot
.com , accessed May 2014; Gwen 
Moran, “How Military Veterans Are 
Finding Success in Small 
Business,”  Entrepreneur, 
February 20, 2012; and an 
interview with John 
Raftery, April 2014. 
  Getting to know John Raftery 
473

474
 name that company 
 Accounting software makes financial information available whenever the 
organization needs it. We specialize in software that addresses the accounting 
needs of small businesses that are often very different from major corporations. 
Name that company. (Find the answer in the chapter.)  
 Demonstrate the role that accounting and financial information play for a 
business and for its stakeholders.
THE ROLE OF ACCOUNTING INFORMATION 
Small and large businesses often survive or fail according to how well they 
handle financial procedures. Financial management is the heartbeat of 
 competitive businesses, and accounting information helps keep the heartbeat 
stable.
 Accounting reports and financial statements reveal as much about a busi-
ness’s health as pulse and blood pressure readings tell us about a person’s 
health. Thus, you have to know something about accounting if you want to 
succeed in business. It’s almost impossible to understand business operations 
without being able to read, understand, and analyze accounting reports and 
financial statements. 
 By the end of the chapter, you should have a good idea what accounting 
is, how it works, and the value it offers businesses. You should also know some 
accounting terms and understand the purpose of accounting statements. Your 
new understanding will pay off as you become more active in business, or will 
help you in simply understanding what’s going on in the world of business and 
finance. 
 What Is Accounting? 
 Accounting   is the recording, classifying, summarizing, and interpreting of 
financial events and transactions in an organization to provide management 
and other interested parties the financial information they need to make good 
decisions about its operation. Financial transactions include buying and sell-
ing goods and services, acquiring insurance, paying employees, and using sup-
plies. Usually we group all purchases together, and all sales transactions 
together. The method we use to record and summarize accounting data into 
reports is an  accounting system (see  Figure 17.1 ). 
 A major purpose of accounting is to help managers make well-informed 
decisions. Another is to report financial information about the firm to inter-
ested stakeholders, such as employees, owners, creditors, suppliers, unions, 
community activists, investors, and the government (for tax purposes) (see 
 Figure 17.2 ). Accounting is divided into several major disciplines. Let’s look at 
those next.  
LO 17–1
 accounting  
 The recording, classifying, 
summarizing, and interpreting 
of financial events and 
transactions to provide 
management and other 
interested parties the 
information they need to make 
good decisions.  

TYPE OF REPORT
•  Government regulatory agencies
•  People interested in the organization’s income
 and ﬁnancial position (e.g., owners, creditors,
 ﬁnancial analysts, suppliers)
•  Government taxing authorities (e.g., the
 Internal Revenue Service)
•  Required reports
•  Financial statements found in annual reports
 (e.g., income statement, balance sheet,
 statement of cash ﬂows)
•  Managers of the ﬁrm
•  Financial statements and various internally
 distributed ﬁnancial reports
•  Tax returns
USERS
475
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
 Identify the different disciplines within the accounting profession.
ACCOUNTING DISCIPLINES 
 You may think accounting is only for profit-seeking firms. Nothing could be 
further from the truth. Accounting, often called the language of business, 
allows us to report financial information about nonprofit organizations such 
as churches, schools, hospitals, fraternities, and government agencies.  1 The 
accounting profession is divided into five key working areas: managerial 
accounting, financial accounting, auditing, tax accounting, and governmental 
and not-for-profit accounting. All five are important, and all create career 
opportunities.  2 Let’s explore each.  
 Managerial Accounting 
 Managerial accounting   provides information and analysis to managers  inside
the organization to assist them in decision making. Managerial accounting is 
concerned with measuring and reporting costs of production, marketing, and 
other functions; preparing budgets (planning); checking whether or not units 
are staying within their budgets (controlling); and designing strategies to min-
imize taxes. 
LO 17–2
 managerial accounting  
 Accounting used to provide 
information and analyses to 
managers inside the 
organization to assist them in 
decision making.  
 FIGURE 17.1 THE ACCOUNTING SYSTEM  
 The inputs to an accounting system include sales documents and other documents. The data are recorded, classified, and summarized. 
They’re then put into summary financial statements such as the income statement and balance sheet and statement of cash flows. 
Inputs
Accounting Documents
Sales documents
Purchasing documents
Shipping documents
Payroll  records
Bank records
Travel records
Entertainment records
Processing
1.  Entries are made into
journals: recording
2.  The effects of these
journal entries are
transferred or posted
into ledgers: classifying
3.  All accounts are
summarized
Outputs
Financial Statements
Balance sheet
Income statement
Statement of cash flows
Other reports
(e.g., annual reports)
 FIGURE 17.2 USERS 
OF ACCOUNTING 
INFORMATION AND THE 
REQUIRED REPORTS 
 Many types of organizations 
use accounting information to 
make business decisions. The 
reports need to vary according 
to the information each user 
requires. An accountant must 
prepare the appropriate forms. 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
476
 If you are a business major, you’ll probably take a course in managerial 
accounting. You may even pursue a career as a certified management accoun-
tant. A   certified management accountant (CMA)   is a professional accoun-
tant who has met certain educational and experience requirements, passed a 
qualifying exam, and been certified by the Institute of Certified Management 
Accountants.  3 With the growing emphasis on global competition, outsourcing, 
and organizational cost-cutting, managerial accounting is one of the most 
important areas you may study in your college career.  4 
 Financial Accounting 
  Financial accounting   differs from managerial accounting in that the financial 
information and analyses it generates are for people primarily  outside the orga-
nization. The information goes not only to company owners, managers, and 
employees, but also to creditors and lenders, employee unions, customers, sup-
pliers, government agencies, and the general public. External users are inter-
ested in questions like: Is the organization profitable? Is it able to pay its bills? 
How much debt does it owe? These questions and others are often answered in 
the company’s   annual report   , a yearly statement of the financial condition, 
progress, and expectations of an organization. As pressure from stakeholders 
for detailed financial information has grown, companies are seeking to reduce 
cost by putting the annual report on the firm’s website and making better use of 
the Form 10-K that is required by the Securities and Exchange Commission.  5  
 It’s critical for firms to keep accurate financial information. Therefore, 
many organizations employ a   private accountant   who works for a single 
firm, government agency, or nonprofit organization. However, not all firms or 
nonprofit organizations want or need a full-time accountant. Fortunately, 
thousands of accounting firms in the United States provide the accounting 
services an organization needs through public accountants. 
 For a fee, a   public accountant   provides accounting services to individu-
als or businesses. Such services can include designing an accounting system, 
helping select the correct software to run the system, and analyzing an organi-
zation’s financial performance. An accountant who passes a series of examina-
tions established by the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants 
(AICPA) and meets the state’s requirement for education and experience is rec-
ognized as a   certified public accountant (CPA).  CPAs find careers as private 
or public accountants and are often sought to fill other financial positions 
within organizations. Today, there are over 645,000 CPAs in the United States, 
386,000 of whom are members of the AICPA.  6 
 Accountants know it’s vital for users of a firm’s accounting information to 
be assured the information is accurate. The independent Financial Accounting 
Standards Board (FASB) defines the  generally accepted accounting principles 
(GAAP) that accountants must follow.  7 If accounting reports are prepared in 
accordance with GAAP, users can expect the information to meet standards 
upon which accounting professionals have agreed. 
 Unfortunately, the accounting profession suffered a 
dark period in the early 2000s when accounting scan-
dals at WorldCom, Enron, and Tyco raised public suspi-
cions about the profession and corporate integrity in 
general. Arthur Andersen, one of the nation’s leading 
accounting firms, was forced out of business after being 
convicted of obstruction of justice for shredding records 
in the Enron case (the conviction was later overturned 
by the U.S. Supreme Court).  8 
 Scrutiny of the accounting industry intensified, 
and resulted in the U.S. Congress’s passage of the 
certified management 
accountant (CMA)
A professional accountant who 
has met certain educational 
and experience requirements, 
passed a qualifying exam, and 
been certified by the Institute 
of Certified Management 
Accountants.
 financial accounting  
 Accounting information and 
analyses prepared for people 
outside the organization.  
 annual report  
 A yearly statement of the 
financial condition, progress, and 
expectations of an organization.  
 private accountant  
 An accountant who works for a 
single firm, government agency, 
or nonprofit organization.  
 public accountant  
 An accountant who provides 
accounting services to 
individuals or businesses on a 
fee basis.  
  Assembling  an aircraft 
engine requires many 
tools, parts, raw materi-
als, and other compo-
nents as well as labor 
costs. Keeping these 
costs at a minimum and 
setting realistic produc-
tion schedules is critical 
to a business’s survival. 
What other internal 
departments must man-
agement accountants 
team with to ensure 
company 
competitiveness? 

477
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
Sarbanes-Oxley Act (called Sarbox).  9 This legislation created new government 
reporting standards for publicly traded companies. It also created the Public 
Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB), which is charged with oversee-
ing the AICPA. Prior to the passage of Sarbox, the accounting profession was 
self-regulated.  Figure 17.3  lists some of the major provisions of Sarbanes-Oxley.  
 The financial crisis beginning in 2008 led Congress to pass the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protection Act.  10 The Dodd-Frank 
Act increased financial regulation affecting accounting by increasing the 
power of the PCAOB to oversee auditors of brokers and dealers in securities 
markets.  11 We’ll discuss the Dodd-Frank Act in more depth in Chapter 19. 
 The accounting profession understands that to be effective, accountants 
must be considered as professional as doctors or lawyers. Besides completing 
150 hours of college coursework and a rigorous exam, CPAs on average take 
40 hours of continuing education training a year, are subject to recertification, 
undergo ethics training requirements, and must pass an ethics exam.  
 Auditing 
 Reviewing and evaluating the information used to prepare a company’s finan-
cial statements is referred to as   auditing. Private accountants within an orga-
nization often perform internal audits to guarantee that the organization is 
carrying out proper accounting procedures and financial reporting. Public 
accountants also conduct independent audits of accounting information and 
related records. An   independent audit   is an evaluation and unbiased opinion 
about the accuracy of a company’s financial statements. Annual reports often 
include an auditor’s unbiased written opinion.  12 
 After the accounting scandals of the early 2000s, questions surfaced about 
the ethics of allowing an accounting firm to do both auditing and consulting 
work for the same company. In response, the Sarbanes-Oxley Act put in place 
new rules about auditing and consulting to ensure the integrity of the auditing 
process.  13 Auditing procedures, however, again came under fire in 2011, caus-
ing many to call for stricter controls over auditing procedures after analyzing 
the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008 and the financial crisis that followed. 
 In doing their job, auditors not only examine the financial health of an 
organization but also its operational efficiencies and effectiveness.  14 Accoun-
tants who have a bachelor’s degree and two years of experience in internal 
auditing, and who pass an exam administered by the Institute of Internal 
Auditors, can earn professional accreditation as a   certified internal auditor 
(CIA). 15 See the Adapting to Change box for a discussion of a special type of 
accountant dedicated to uncovering financial fraud.  
 auditing  
 The job of reviewing and 
evaluating the information used 
to prepare a company’s 
financial statements.  
 independent audit  
 An evaluation and unbiased 
opinion about the accuracy of a 
company’s financial statements.  
 certified internal auditor (CIA)  
 An accountant who has a 
bachelor’s degree and two 
years of experience in internal 
auditing, and who has passed 
an exam administered by the 
Institute of Internal Auditors.  
 • 
Prohibits accounting firms from providing certain non-auditing work 
(such as consulting services) to companies they audit.  
 • 
Strengthens the protection for whistle-blowers who report wrongful actions of 
company officers.  
 • 
Requires company CEOs and CFOs to certify the accuracy of financial reports and 
imparts strict penalties for any violation of securities reporting (e.g., earnings 
misstatements).  
 • 
Prohibits corporate loans to directors and executives of the company.  
 • 
Establishes the five-member Public Company Accounting Oversight Board (PCAOB) 
under the Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) to oversee the accounting industry.  
 • 
Stipulates that altering or destroying key audit documents will result in felony charges 
and significant criminal penalties.  
 FIGURE 17.3 KEY 
PROVISIONS OF THE 
SARBANES-OXLEY ACT  
certified public accountant 
(CPA)
An accountant who passes a 
series of examinations 
established by the American 
Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA).

 adapting to change 
 Fraud damages businesses both 
large and small. According to the 
Association of Certified Fraud 
Examiners, many large corpora-
tions lose almost 5 percent of 
their revenue each year due to 
fraud, and nearly half of all small 
businesses deal with financial 
fraud at some time in their busi-
ness lives. Mary Jo White, Chair of 
the Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC), has made it 
clear that the SEC is committed to 
fighting financial fraud. The SEC 
has increased efforts to investi-
gate and punish accounting 
wrongdoers. 
 Unfortunately, that may be a 
problem. Company auditors and 
CPAs are not specifically trained 
in uncovering financial fraud. 
They are trained to make sure 
accounting standards are being 
applied correctly and manage-
ment’s estimates are fairly stated. 
In fact, less than 1 percent of the 
CPA exam focuses on fraud. 
So, if auditors and CPAs are not 
prepared to search for and 
 identify signs of financial fraud, 
“Who you gonna call?” 
 The answer is elementary. 
Meet the Sherlock Holmes of the 
accounting industry—a forensic 
accountant. Forensic accountants 
sift through mountains of com-
pany information, trying to put 
together a paper trail to identify 
any rogues responsible for fraud. 
Jack Damico, founding partner of 
MDD Forensic Accountants, 
described such people as “inves-
tigative accountants who look 
below the surface and read 
between the lines.” Many colleges 
now offer advanced degrees and 
specialties in forensic accounting. 
With companies coming under 
closer scrutiny from the SEC and 
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, expect 
forensic accountants to stay busy. 
 Sources: Ben DiPietro, “Accountants Should 
Focus on Detecting Fraud, Experts Say,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, October 9, 2013; Brian Fox, 
“Accounting for Fraud,”  Financial Times, 
December 5, 2013; and Janet Novack, “How 
SEC’s New RoboCop Profiles Companies for 
Accounting Fraud,”  Forbes, August 9, 2013. 
 Elementary, Mr. Auditor, Elementary 
www.aicpa.org
478
 Tax Accounting 
 Taxes enable governments to fund roads, parks, schools, police protection, the 
military, and other functions. Federal, state, and local governments require 
individuals and organizations to file tax returns at specific times and in a pre-
cise format. A   tax accountant   is trained in tax law and is responsible for pre-
paring tax returns, or developing tax strategies. Since governments often 
change tax policies according to specific needs or objectives, the job of the tax 
accountant is always challenging.  16 As the burden of taxes grows in the econ-
omy, the role of the tax accountant becomes increasingly valuable to the orga-
nization, individual, or entrepreneur.  
 Government and Not-for-Profit Accounting 
  Government and not-for-profit accounting   sup-
ports organizations whose purpose is not generat-
ing a profit, but serving ratepayers, taxpayers, and 
others according to a duly approved budget. Fed-
eral, state, and local governments require an 
accounting system that helps taxpayers, special 
interest groups, legislative bodies, and creditors 
ensure that the government is fulfilling its obliga-
tions, and making proper use of taxpayers’ money. 
Government accounting standards are set by an 
organization called the Governmental Accounting 
Standards Board (GASB).  17 The Federal Bureau of 
Investigation, the Internal Revenue Service, the 
Missouri Department of Natural Resources, and 
the Cook County Department of Revenue are just a 
 The National Park 
Service, with its 
workforce of over 
26,000 employees, 
maintains and protects 
places special to the 
people of the United 
States, like the faces on 
Mount Rushmore. Such 
government 
organizations employ 
accountants, auditors, 
and financial managers.  

479
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
few of the many government agencies that offer career possibilities to accoun-
tants seeking to work in government accounting. 
 Not-for-profit organizations often require accounting professionals. 
Charities like the Salvation Army, Red Cross, museums, and hospitals all hire 
accountants to show contributors how their money is spent. In fact, their 
need for trained accountants is growing since donors to nonprofits usually 
want to see exactly how and where the funds they contribute are being spent. 
During the recent recession, many businesses and individuals cut back on 
donations, making it more important than ever to account for every dollar 
contributed.  18  
 As you can see, managerial and financial accounting, auditing, tax 
accounting, and governmental and not-for-profit accounting each require spe-
cific training and skill. After the Test Prep, we will clarify the difference 
between accounting and bookkeeping.  
 tax accountant  
 An accountant trained in tax 
law and responsible for 
preparing tax returns or 
developing tax strategies.  
 • What is the key difference between managerial and financial 
accounting?  
 • How is the job of a private accountant different from that of a public 
accountant?  
 • What is the job of an auditor? What’s an independent audit?  
•
What is the key differe
 test prep  
ence between
enc
government and not-for-
profit accounting
Accounting system for 
organizations whose purpose 
is not generating a profit but 
serving ratepayers, taxpayers, 
and others according to a duly 
approved budget.
iSee It! Need help 
understanding the 
accounting cycle? Visit 
your Connect e-book 
video tab for a brief 
animated explanation.
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
List the steps in the accounting cycle, distinguish between accounting and 
bookkeeping, and explain how computers are used in accounting.
 THE ACCOUNTING CYCLE  
 The   accounting cycle   is a six-step procedure that results in the preparation 
and analysis of the major financial statements (see  Figure 17.4 ). It relies on 
the work of both a bookkeeper and an accountant.   Bookkeeping , the record-
ing of business transactions, is a basic part of financial reporting. Accounting, 
however, goes far beyond the mere recording of financial information. Accoun-
tants classify and summarize financial data provided by bookkeepers, and 
then interpret the data and report the information to management. They also 
suggest strategies for improving the firm’s financial condition and prepare 
financial analyses and income tax returns.  
 A bookkeeper’s first task is to divide all the firm’s transactions into mean-
ingful categories, such as sales documents, purchasing receipts, and shipping 
documents, being very careful to keep the information organized and 
 manageable. Bookkeepers then record financial data from the original trans-
action documents (sales slips and so forth) into a record book or computer 
program called a   journal.  The word  journal comes from the French word 
 jour, which means “day.” Therefore, a journal is where the day’s transactions 
are kept. 
 It’s quite possible to make a mistake when recording financial transac-
tions, like entering $10.98 as $10.89. That’s why bookkeepers record all trans-
actions in two places, so they can check one list of transactions against the 
other to make sure both add up to the same amount. If the amounts are not 
LO 17–3
 accounting cycle  
 A six-step procedure that 
results in the preparation and 
analysis of the major financial 
statements.  
 bookkeeping  
 The recording of business 
transactions.  
 journal  
 The record book or computer 
program where accounting 
data are first entered.  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
480
equal, the bookkeeper knows there is a mistake. The practice of writing every 
transaction in two places is called   double-entry bookkeeping.  It requires 
two entries in the journal and in the ledgers (discussed next) for each 
transaction. 
 Suppose a business wanted to determine how much it paid for office sup-
plies in the first quarter of the year. Without a specific bookkeeping tool, that 
would be difficult—even with accurate accounting journals. Therefore, book-
keepers use a specialized accounting book or computer program called a   ledger. 
In the ledger, they transfer (or post) information from accounting journals into 
specific categories so managers can find all the information about a single 
account, like office supplies or cash, in one place. 
 The next step in the accounting cycle is to prepare a   trial balance   ,  a sum-
mary of all the financial data in the account ledgers that ensures the figures are 
correct and balanced. If the information in the account ledgers is not accurate, 
the accountant must correct it before preparing the firm’s financial statements. 
Using the correct information, the accountant then prepares the firm’s financial 
statements—including a balance sheet, an income statement, and a statement 
of cash flows—according to GAAP.  
 Using Technology in Accounting 
 A long while ago, accountants and bookkeepers needed to enter all of a firm’s 
financial information by hand. The advent of adding machines and calculators 
made the job a bit simpler, but still generally required a paper entry. Toward 
the end of the 20th century, technology simplified the accounting process con-
siderably. Today, computerized accounting programs can post information 
from journals instantaneously from remote locations to encrypted laptops or 
cell phones, making financial information available whenever the organiza-
tion needs it. The company’s sensitive financial information is safe and secure, 
but is in the accountant’s hands when needed. Such assistance frees accoun-
tants’ time for more important tasks such as financial analysis and financial 
forecasting. 
 Computerized accounting programs are also particularly helpful to small-
business owners, who don’t often have the variety of accounting personnel 
within their companies that larger firms enjoy. Accounting software—such as 
Intuit’s QuickBooks—addresses the specific needs of small businesses that are 
often significantly different from the needs of a major corporation.  19 Small-
business owners, however, need to understand exactly which programs are 
best suited for their particular company needs. That’s one reason why entre-
preneurs planning to start a business should either hire or consult with an 
 double-entry bookkeeping  
 The practice of writing every 
business transaction in two 
places.  
 ledger  
 A specialized accounting book 
or computer program in which 
information from accounting 
journals is accumulated into 
specific categories and posted 
so that managers can find all 
the information about one 
account in the same place.  
 trial balance  
 A summary of all the financial 
data in the account ledgers that 
ensures the figures are correct 
and balanced.  
 FIGURE 17.4 STEPS IN THE ACCOUNTING CYCLE  
Balance
sheet
Income
statement
6
 5
     
Take a
trial
balance
4
      
Transfer 
(post)
journal
entries to 
ledger
3
         
Record
transactions
in journals
2
            
Analyze 
source
documents
(sales slips,
travel
records, etc.)
1

481
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
accountant to identify the particular needs of their firm.  20 They can then 
develop a specific accounting system that works with the accounting software 
they’ve chosen. 
 With sophisticated accounting software available and technology capa-
bilities growing, you might wonder why you need to study and understand 
accounting. Without question technology has greatly assisted businesspeople 
and certainly helped ease the monotony of bookkeeping and accounting work. 
Unfortunately the work of an accountant requires training and very specific 
competencies that computers are not programmed to handle. It’s the partner-
ship of technology and an accountant’s knowledge that helps a firm make the 
right financial decisions. After the Test Prep, we’ll explore the balance sheet, 
income statement, and statement of cash flows. It’s from the information con-
tained in these financial statements that the accountant analyzes and evalu-
ates the financial condition of the firm.  
 • How is the job of the bookkeeper different from that of an accountant?  
 • What’s the purpose of accounting journals and of a ledger?  
 • Why does a bookkeeper prepare a trial balance?  
 • How has computer software helped businesses in maintaining and com-
piling accounting information?  
•
How is the job of the b
 test prep  
bookkeeper dif
boo
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Explain how the major financial statements differ.
 UNDERSTANDING KEY FINANCIAL STATEMENTS  
 An accounting year is either a calendar or fiscal year. A calendar year begins 
January 1 and ends December 31. A fiscal year can begin at any date desig-
nated by the business. A   financial statement   is a summary of all the financial 
transactions that have occurred over a particular period. Financial statements 
indicate a firm’s financial health and stability, and are key factors in manage-
ment decision making.  21 That’s why stockholders (the owners of the firm), 
bondholders and banks (people and institutions that lend money to the firm), 
labor unions, employees, and the Internal Revenue Service are all interested 
in a firm’s financial statements. The key financial statements of a business 
are:
 
1. The  balance sheet, which reports the firm’s financial condition  on a 
specific date. 
 
2. The  income statement, which summarizes revenues, cost of goods, and 
expenses (including taxes), for a specific period and highlights the 
total profit or loss the firm experienced  during that period. 
 
3. The  statement of cash flows, which provides a summary of money 
coming into and going out of the firm. It tracks a company’s cash 
receipts and cash payments.  
 The differences among the financial statements can best be summarized 
this way: The balance sheet details what the company owns and owes on a 
certain day; the income statement shows the revenue a firm earned selling its 
LO 17–4
 financial statement  
 A summary of all the financial 
transactions that have occurred 
over a particular period.  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
482
products compared to its selling costs (profit or loss) over a specific period of 
time; and the statement of cash flows highlights the difference between cash 
coming in and cash going out of a business. To fully understand this important 
financial information, you need to know the purpose of an organization’s 
financial statements. To help with this task, we’ll explain each statement in 
more detail next.  
 The Fundamental Accounting Equation 
 Imagine you don’t owe anybody money. That is, you have no liabilities (debts). 
In this case, your assets (cash and so forth) are equal to what you  own (your 
equity). However, if you borrow some money from a friend, you have incurred 
a liability. Your assets are now equal to what you  owe plus what you own. 
Translated into business terms, Assets  5  Liabilities  1  Owners’ equity. 
In accounting, this equation must always be balanced. For example, sup-
pose you have $50,000 in cash and decide to use that money to open a small 
coffee shop. Your business has assets of $50,000 and no debts. The accounting 
equation would look like this:
Assets 5 Liabilities 1 Owner’s equity
                                $50,000 5 $0      1 $50,000
 You have $50,000 cash and $50,000 owners’ equity (the amount of your 
investment in the business—sometimes referred to as net worth). However, 
before opening the business, you borrow $30,000 from a local bank; now the 
equation changes. You have $30,000 of additional cash, but you also have a 
debt (liability) of $30,000. (Remember, in double-entry bookkeeping we record 
each business transaction in two places.) 
Your financial position within the business has changed. The equation is 
still balanced, but we change it to reflect the borrowing transaction:
Assets 5 Liabilities 1 Owner’s equity
                                $80,000 5 $30,000  1 $50,000
This fundamental accounting equation is the basis for the balance sheet. 
 The Balance Sheet 
 A   balance sheet   is the financial statement that reports a firm’s financial 
condition at a specific time. As highlighted in the sample balance sheet in 
 Figure  17.5  (for our hypothetical vegetarian restaurant, Very Vegetarian, 
introduced in Chapter 13), assets are listed in a separate column from lia-
bilities and owners’ (or stockholders’) equity. The assets are equal to, or 
 balanced with, the liabilities and owners’ (or stockholders’) equity. The 
balance sheet is that simple.  
 Let’s say you want to know what your financial condition is at a 
given time. Maybe you want to buy a house or car and therefore need to 
calculate your available resources. One of the best measuring sticks is 
your balance sheet. First, add up everything you own—cash, property, 
and money owed you. These are your assets. Subtract from that the 
money you owe others—credit card debt, IOUs, car loan, student loans 
and the like. These are your liabilities. The resulting figure is your net 
worth, or equity. This is fundamentally what companies do in preparing 
a balance sheet: they follow the procedures set in the fundamental 
accounting equation. In that preparation, any company that is 
publicly traded is required by the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission (discussed in depth in Chapter 19) to follow GAAP.  22 
 fundamental accounting 
equation  
 Assets  5  Liabilities  1  Owners’ 
equity; this is the basis for the 
balance sheet.  
 balance sheet  
 Financial statement that reports 
a firm’s financial condition at a 
specific time and is composed 
of three major accounts: assets, 
liabilities, and owners’ equity.  
 Service businesses like 
dog groomers rely on 
the same set of financial 
statements as 
manufacturers like Ford 
and retail sales firms 
like Macy’s. What are 
some of the assets and 
liabilities a typical 
service business like 
this one would carry on 
its balance sheet?  

483
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
 FIGURE 17.5 SAMPLE 
VERY VEGETARIAN 
BALANCE SHEET  
➀  Current assets: Items that 
can be converted to cash 
within one year. 
➁   Fixed assets: Items such 
as land, buildings, and 
equipment that are relatively 
permanent. 
➂   Intangible assets: Items of 
value such as patents and 
copyrights that don’t have a 
physical form. 
➃   Current liabilities: Payments 
that are due in one year or 
less. 
➄  Long-term liabilities: 
Payments that are not due 
for one year or longer. 
➅  Owners’ equity: The value 
of what stockholders 
own in a firm (also called 
stockholders’ equity). 
VERY VEGETARIAN
Balance Sheet
December 31, 2015
Assets
➀  Current assets
  Cash
$ 15,000
  Accounts receivable
200,000
  Notes receivable
50,000
  Inventory
335,000
   Total current assets
$600,000
➁  Fixed assets
  Land
$ 40,000
  Building and improvements
$200,000
   Less: Accumulated depreciation
290,000
110,000
  Equipment and vehicles
$ 120,000
   Less: Accumulated depreciation
280,000
40,000
  Furniture and fixtures
$  26,000
   Less: Accumulated depreciation
210,000
  16,000
    Total fixed assets
206,000
➂  Intangible assets
  Goodwill
$ 20,000
   Total intangible assets
    20,000
    Total assets
$826,000
Liabilities and Owners’ Equity
➃  Current liabilities
  Accounts payable
$ 40,000
  Notes payable (due June 2016)
8.000
  Accrued taxes
150,000
  Accrued salaries
    90,000
   Total current liabilities
$288,000
➄  Long-term liabilities
  Notes payable (due Mar. 2020)
$ 35,000
  Bonds payable (due Dec. 2025)
  290,000
   Total long-term liabilities
  325,000
    Total liabilities
$ 613,000
➅  Owners’ equity
  Common stock (1,000,000 shares)
$100,000
  Retained earnings
   113,000
   Total owners’ equity
   213,000
     Total liabilities & owners’ equity
$826,000
 Since it’s critical that you understand the financial information on the 
balance sheet, let’s take a closer look at what is in a business’s asset account 
and what is in its liabilities and owners’ equity accounts.  
 Classifying Assets 
 Assets   are economic resources (things of value) owned by a firm. Assets 
include productive, tangible items such as equipment, buildings, land, furni-
ture, and motor vehicles that help generate income, as well as intangible items 
assets
Economic resources (things of 
value) owned by a firm.

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
484
with value like patents, trademarks, copyrights, and goodwill. Goodwill repre-
sents the value attached to factors such as a firm’s reputation, location, and 
superior products. Goodwill is included on a balance sheet when one firm 
acquires another and pays more for it than the value of its tangible assets. 
Intangible assets like brand names can be among the firm’s most valuable 
resources. Think of the value of brand names such as Starbucks, Coca-Cola, 
McDonald’s, and Apple. Not all companies, however, list intangible assets on 
their balance sheets. 
 Accountants list assets on the firm’s balance sheet in order of their   liquid-
ity  , or the ease with which they can convert them to cash. Speedier conver-
sion means higher liquidity. For example, an  account receivable is an amount 
of money owed to the firm that it expects to receive within one year. It is 
considered a liquid asset because it can be quickly converted to cash. Land, 
however, is not considered a liquid asset because it takes time, effort, and 
paperwork to sell. It is considered as a fixed or long-term asset. Assets are 
thus divided into three categories, according to how quickly they can be 
turned into cash: 
 
1.   Current assets   are items that can or will be converted into cash within 
one year. They include cash, accounts receivable, and inventory.  
 
2.    Fixed assets   are long-term assets that are relatively permanent such 
as land, buildings, and equipment. (On the balance sheet we can also 
refer to these as property, plant, and equipment.)  
 
3.   Intangible assets   are long-term assets that have no physical form but 
do have value. Patents, trademarks, copyrights, and goodwill are 
intangible assets.  
 Liabilities and Owners’ Equity Accounts 
  Liabilities   are what the business owes to others—its debts.  Current liabilities 
are debts due in one year or less.  Long-term liabilities are debts not due for one 
year or more. The following are common liability accounts recorded on a bal-
ance sheet (look at  Figure 17.5  again):
 
1.   Accounts payable   are current liabilities or bills the company owes 
others for merchandise or services it purchased on credit but has not 
yet paid for.  
 
2.   Notes payable   can be short-term or long-term liabilities (like loans 
from banks) that a business promises to repay by a certain date.  
 
3.   Bonds payable   are long-term liabilities; money lent to the firm that it 
must pay back. (We discuss bonds in depth in Chapters 18 and 19.)  
 As you saw in the fundamental accounting equation, the value of things 
you own (assets) minus the amount of money you owe others (liabilities) is 
called  equity. The value of what stockholders own in a firm (minus liabili-
ties) is called  stockholders’ equity or  shareholders’ equity. Because stockhold-
ers are the owners of a firm, we also call stockholders’ equity   owners’ 
equity , or the amount of the business that belongs to the owners, minus any 
liabilities the business owes. The formula for owners’ equity, then, is assets 
minus liabilities. 
 The owners’ equity account will differ according to the type of organiza-
tion. For sole proprietors and partners, owners’ equity means the value of 
everything owned by the business minus any liabilities of the owner(s), such 
as bank loans. Owners’ equity in these firms is called the  capital account. 
 For corporations, the owners’ equity account records the owners’ claims 
to funds they have invested in the firm (such as stock), as well as retained 
 liquidity  
 The ease with which an asset 
can be converted into cash.  
 current assets  
 Items that can or will be converted 
into cash within one year.  
 fixed assets  
 Assets that are relatively 
permanent, such as land, 
buildings, and equipment.  
 intangible assets  
 Long-term assets (e.g., patents, 
trademarks, copyrights) that 
have no real physical form but 
do have value.  
 liabilities  
 What the business owes to 
others (debts).  
accounts payable
Current liabilities or bills the 
company owes to others for 
merchandise or services 
purchased on credit but not yet 
paid for.
notes payable
Short-term or long-term liabilities 
that a business promises to 
repay by a certain date.
bonds payable
Long-term liabilities that 
represent money lent to the 
firm that must be paid back.
owners’ equity
The amount of the business 
that belongs to the owners 
minus any liabilities owed by 
the business.

485
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
earnings.   Retained earnings   are accumulated earnings from the firm’s profit-
able operations that are reinvested in the business and not paid out to stock-
holders in distributions of company profits. (Distributions of profits, called 
dividends, are discussed in Chapter 19.) Take a few moments to look again at 
 Figure 17.5  and see what facts you can determine about the vegetarian restau-
rant, Very Vegetarian, from its balance sheet. After the Test Prep, have some 
fun and estimate your own personal net worth, following the directions in 
 Figure 17.6 . 
 retained earnings  
 The accumulated earnings from 
a firm’s profitable operations 
that were reinvested in the 
business and not paid out to 
stockholders in dividends.  
 • What do we call the formula for the balance sheet? What three accounts 
does it include?  
 • What does it mean to list assets according to liquidity?  
 • What’s the difference between long-term and short-term liabilities on 
the balance sheet?  
 • What is owners’ equity, and how is it determined?  
•
What do we call the fo
 test prep   
ormula for the b
orm
 ASSETS  
 LIABILITIES  
 Cash 
 $  _____  
 Installment loans & interest 
 $  _____  
 Savings account 
  _____  
 Other loans & interest 
  _____  
 Checking account 
  _____  
 Credit card accounts 
  _____  
 Home 
 _____  
 Mortgage 
 _____  
 Stocks & bonds 
  _____  
 Taxes 
  _____  
 Automobile 
  _____  
 Cell phone service 
  _____  
 IRA or Keogh 
  _____  
 
 
 Personal property 
  _____  
 
 
 Other assets 
  _____  
 
 
 Total assets 
 $  _____  
 Total liabilities 
 $  _____  
Determine your net worth: 
 
  
 
 Total assets 
 $  _____  
 
 
 Total liabilities 
 — _____  
 
 
 Net worth 
 $  _____  
 
 
 FIGURE 17.6 YOU 
INCORPORATED 
 How do you think You Inc. 
stacks up financially? Let’s take 
a little time to find out. You may 
be pleasantly surprised, or you 
may realize that you need to 
think hard about planning your 
financial future. Remember, 
your net worth is nothing more 
than the difference between 
what you own (assets) and 
what you owe (liabilities). Be 
honest, and do your best to 
give a fair evaluation of your 
private property’s value.  
 The Income Statement 
 The financial statement that shows a firm’s bottom line—that is, its profit after 
costs, expenses, and taxes—is the   income statement.  The income statement 
summarizes all the resources, called  revenue, that have come into the firm 
from operating activities, money resources the firm used up, expenses it 
incurred in doing business, and resources it has left after paying all costs and 
expenses, including taxes. The resources (revenue) left over or depleted are 
referred to as   net income or net loss   (see  Figure 17.7 ). 
 income statement  
 The financial statement that 
shows a firm’s profit after costs, 
expenses, and taxes; it 
summarizes all of the resources 
that have come into the firm 
(revenue), all the resources that 
have left the firm (expenses), 
and the resulting net income or 
net loss.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
net income or net loss
Revenue left over or depleted 
after all costs and expenses, 
including taxes, are paid.

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
486
The income statement reports the firm’s financial operations over a par-
ticular period of time, usually a year, a quarter of a year, or a month. It’s the 
financial statement that reveals whether the business is actually earning a 
profit or losing money. The income statement includes valuable financial infor-
mation for stockholders, lenders, potential investors, employees, and, of course, 
the government. Because it’s so valuable, let’s take a quick look at how to com-
pile the income statement. Then we will discuss what each element in it means.
Revenue
Cost of goods sold
Gross proﬁt (gross margin)
Operating expenses
Net income before taxes
Taxes
Net income or loss
VERY VEGETARIAN
Income Statement
For the Year Ended December 31, 2015
➀  Revenues
  Gross sales
$     720,000
  Less: Sales returns and allowances
$   12,000
     Sales discounts
8,000
2 20,000
  Net sales
$ 700,000
➁  Cost of goods sold
  Beginning inventory, Jan. 1
$   200,000
  Merchandise purchases
$400,000
  Freight
40,000
  Net purchases
    440,000
  Cost of goods available for sale
$ 640,000
  Less ending inventory, Dec. 31
2230,000
   Cost of goods sold
2410,000
➂  Gross profit
$290,000
➃  Operating expenses
  Selling expenses
   Salaries for salespeople
$    90,000
   Advertising
18,000
   Supplies
          2,000
    Total selling expenses
$    110,000
  General expenses
   Office salaries
$   67,000
   Depreciation
1,500
   Insurance
1,500
   Rent
28,000
   Light, heat, and power
12,000
   Miscellaneous
          2,000
     112,000
  Total operating expenses
    222,000
  Net income before taxes
$   68,000
   Less: Income tax expense
      19,000
➄  Net income after taxes
$    49,000
 FIGURE 17.7 SAMPLE 
VERY VEGETARIAN 
INCOME STATEMENT 
➀  Revenues: Value of what’s 
received from goods sold, 
services rendered, and other 
financial sources. 
➁  Cost of goods sold: Cost of 
merchandise sold or cost 
of raw materials or parts 
used for producing items for 
resale. 
➂   Gross profit: How much the 
firm earned by buying or 
selling merchandise. 
➃   Operating expenses: Cost 
incurred in operating a 
business. 
➄   Net income after taxes: Profit 
or loss over a specific period 
after subtracting all costs 
and expenses, including 
taxes. 

487
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
 Revenue 
 Revenue is the monetary value of what a firm received for goods sold, services 
rendered, and other payments (such as rents received, money paid to the firm 
for use of its patents, interest earned, etc.). Be sure not to confuse the terms 
 revenue and  sales; they are not the same thing. True, most revenue the firm 
earns does come from sales, but companies can also have other sources of 
revenue. Also, a quick glance at the income statement shows you that  gross 
sales refers to the total of all sales the firm completed.  Net sales are gross sales 
minus returns, discounts, and allowances.  
 Cost of Goods Sold 
 The   cost of goods sold (or cost of goods manufactured)   measures the cost of 
merchandise the firm sells or the cost of raw materials and supplies it used in 
producing items for resale. It makes sense to compare how much a business 
earned by selling merchandise and how much it spent to make or buy the mer-
chandise. The cost of goods sold includes the purchase price plus any freight 
charges paid to transport goods, plus any costs associated with storing the 
goods. 
 In financial reporting, it doesn’t matter when a firm places a particular 
item in its inventory, but it does matter how an accountant records the cost of 
the item when the firm sells it. To find out why, read the Spotlight on Small 
Business box about two different inventory valuation methods. 
 When we subtract the cost of goods sold from net sales, we get gross 
profit or gross margin.   Gross profit (or gross margin)   is how much a firm 
earned by buying (or making) and selling merchandise. In a service firm, there 
may be no cost of goods sold; therefore, gross profit could  equal net sales. 
Gross profit does not tell you everything you need to know about the firm’s 
financial performance. To get that, you must also subtract the business’s 
expenses.  
 Operating Expenses 
 In selling goods or services, a business incurs certain   operating 
expenses   such as rent, salaries, supplies, utilities, and insurance. 
Other operating expenses that appear on an income statement, like 
depreciation, are a bit more complex. For example, have you ever 
heard that a new car depreciates in market value as soon as you 
drive it off the dealer’s lot? The same principle holds true for 
assets such as equipment and machinery.    Depreciation   is the 
systematic write-off of the cost of a tangible asset over its esti-
mated useful life. Under accounting rules set by GAAP and the 
Internal Revenue Service (which are beyond the scope of this 
chapter), companies are permitted to recapture the cost of 
these assets over time by using depreciation as an operating 
expense. 
 We can classify operating expenses as either selling or gen-
eral expenses.  Selling expenses are related to the marketing and 
distribution of the firm’s goods or services, such as advertising, 
salespeople’s salaries, and supplies.  General expenses are admin-
istrative expenses of the firm such as office salaries, deprecia-
tion, insurance, and rent. Accountants are trained to help you 
record all applicable expenses and find other relevant expenses 
you can deduct from your taxable income as a part of doing 
business.  
 cost of goods sold (or cost 
of goods manufactured)  
 A measure of the cost of 
merchandise sold or cost of raw 
materials and supplies used for 
producing items for resale.  
 gross profit (or gross 
margin)  
 How much a firm earned by 
buying (or making) and selling 
merchandise.  
 operating expenses  
 Costs involved in operating a 
business, such as rent, utilities, 
and salaries.  
 Jennifer Behar runs a 
small bakery that sells 
products like chocolate 
biscotti and rosemary 
flatbread to high-end 
retailers like Whole 
Foods Market and Dean 
& DeLuca. Behar began 
her business with 
borrowed funds and 
doubled revenues in 
one year. What is the 
difference between 
revenue and sales?  

488
 spotlight on small business 
 Generally accepted accounting 
principles (GAAP) sometimes per-
mit an accountant to use different 
methods of accounting for a firm’s 
inventory. Two of the most popu-
lar treatments are called FIFO and 
LIFO. 
Let’s look at a simple example. 
Say your college bookstore buys 
100 copies of a particular textbook 
in July at $100 a copy. When 
classes begin in mid-August, the 
bookstore sells 50 copies of the 
text to students at $120 each. 
Since the same book will be used 
again next term, the bookstore 
places the 50 copies it did not sell 
in its inventory until then.
 In late December, the book-
store orders 50 additional copies 
of the text to sell for the coming 
term. However, the publisher’s 
price has increased to $120 a 
copy due to inflation and other 
increased production and distribu-
tion costs. The bookstore now has 
in its inventory 100 copies of the 
same textbook, purchased during 
different buying cycles. If it sells 50 
copies to students at $140 each at 
the beginning of the new term in 
January, what’s the bookstore’s 
cost of the book for accounting 
purposes? Actually, it depends. 
 The books sold are identical, 
but the accounting treatment 
could be different. If the book-
store uses a method called first in, 
first out (FIFO), the cost of goods 
sold is $100 for each textbook, 
because the textbook the store 
bought first—the  first in —cost 
$100. The bookstore could use 
another method, however. Under 
last in, first out (LIFO), its  last pur-
chase of the textbooks, at $120 
each, determines the cost of 
each of the 50 textbooks sold. 
 If the book sells for $140, what 
is the difference in gross profit 
(margin) between using FIFO and 
using LIFO? As you can see, the 
inventory valuation method used 
makes a difference.    
www.aicpa.org
 The Ins and Outs of Valuing Inventory 
s
 Net Profit or Loss 
 After deducting all expenses, we can determine the firm’s net income before 
taxes, also referred to as net earnings or net profit (see  Figure 17.7  again). 
After allocating for taxes, we get to the  bottom line, which is the net income (or 
perhaps net loss) the firm incurred from revenue minus sales returns, costs, 
expenses, and taxes over a period of time. We can now answer the question, 
“Did the business earn or lose money in the specific reporting period?” 
 As you can see, the basic principles of the balance sheet and income state-
ment are already familiar to you. You know how to keep track of costs and 
expenses when you prepare your own budget. If your rent and utilities exceed 
your earnings, you know you’re in trouble. If you need more money, you may 
need to sell some of the things you own to meet your expenses. The same is 
true in business. Companies need to keep track of how much money they earn 
and spend, and how much cash they have on hand. The only difference is that 
they tend to have more complex problems and a good deal more information 
to record than you do. 
 Users of financial statements are interested in how a firm handles the 
flow of cash coming into a business and the cash flowing out of the business. 
Cash flow problems can plague both businesses and individuals. Keep this in 
mind as we look at the statement of cash flows next.  
depreciation
The systematic write-off of the 
cost of a tangible asset over its 
estimated useful life.

489
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
 The Statement of Cash Flows 
 The   statement of cash flows   reports cash receipts 
and cash disbursements related to the three major 
activities of a firm:
 
• 
Operations are cash transactions associated 
with running the business.  
 
• 
Investments are cash used in or provided 
by the firm’s investment activities.  
 
• 
Financing is cash raised by taking on new 
debt, or equity capital or cash used to pay 
business expenses, past debts, or company 
dividends.  
 Accountants analyze all changes in the firm’s 
cash that have occurred from operating, investing, and financing in order to 
determine the firm’s net cash position. The statement of cash flows also gives 
the firm some insight into how to handle cash better so that no cash flow 
problems occur—such as having no cash on hand for immediate expenses.  23 
 Figure  17.8  shows a sample statement of cash flows, again using the 
example of Very Vegetarian. As you can see, the statement of cash flows 
answers such questions as: How much cash came into the business from cur-
rent operations, such as buying and selling goods and services? Did the firm 
use cash to buy stocks, bonds, or other investments? Did it sell some invest-
ments that brought in cash? How much money did the firm take in from issu-
ing stock? 
 We analyze these and other financial transactions to see their effect on 
the firm’s cash position. Managing cash flow can mean success or failure of 
any business, which is why we analyze it in more depth in the next section.  
 statement of cash flows  
 Financial statement that reports 
cash receipts and 
disbursements related to a 
firm’s three major activities: 
operations, investments, and 
financing.  
 Most businesses incur 
operating expenses 
including rent, salaries, 
utilities, supplies, and 
insurance. What are 
some of the likely 
operating expenses for 
companies like 
Starbucks?
 VERY VEGETARIAN 
 Statement of Cash Flows 
 For the Year Ended December 31, 2015 
➀ Cash flows from operating activities 
  
 
   Cash received from customers 
 $700,000 
 
   Cash paid to suppliers and employees 
 (567,000) 
  
   Interest paid 
 (64,000) 
  
   Income tax paid 
 (19,000) 
  
   Interest and dividends received 
        2,000  
 
  Net cash provided by operating activities 
  
 $52,000 
 ➁ Cash flows from investing activities 
  
 
   Proceeds from sale of plant assets 
 $       4,000 
  
   Payments for purchase of equipment 
         (23,000 ) 
  
  Net cash provided by investing activities 
  
 (19,000) 
 ➂ Cash flows from financing activities 
  
 
   Proceeds from issuance of short-term debt 
 $2,000 
 
   Payment of long-term debt 
 (8,000) 
  
   Payment of dividends 
                            (15,000 ) 
  
  Net cash inflow from financing activities 
  
           (21,000 ) 
  Net change in cash and equivalents 
  
 $ 12,000 
  Cash balance (beginning of year) 
  
         3,000 
  Cash balance (end of year) 
  
 $       15,000  
 FIGURE 17.8 SAMPLE 
VERY VEGETARIAN 
STATEMENT OF CASH 
FLOWS 
➀  Cash receipts from sales, 
commissions, fees, interest, 
and dividends. Cash 
payments for salaries, 
inventories, operating 
expenses, interest, and 
taxes. 
➁  Includes cash flows that 
are generated through a 
company’s purchase or sale 
of long-term operational 
assets, investments in other 
companies, and its lending 
activities. 
➂  Cash inflows and outflows 
associated with the 
company’s own equity 
transactions or its borrowing 
activities.  

490
 The Need for Cash Flow Analysis 
 Cash flow, if not properly managed, can cause a business much concern.  24
Understanding cash flow analysis is important and not difficult to under-
stand. Let’s say you borrow $100 from a friend to buy a used bike and agree 
to pay her back at the end of the week. You then sell the bike for $150 to 
someone else, who also agrees to pay you by the end of the week. Unfortu-
nately, by the weekend your buyer does not have the money as promised, and 
says he will have to pay you next month.  Meanwhile, your friend wants the 
$100 you agreed to pay her by the end of the week! 
 What seemed a great opportunity to make an easy $50 profit is now a 
cause for concern. You owe $100 and have no cash. What do you do? If you 
were a business, you might default on the loan and possibly go bankrupt, even 
though you had the potential for profit.  
 It’s possible for a business to increase its sales and profits yet still suffer 
cash flow problems.   Cash flow  is simply the difference between cash com-
ing in and cash going out of a business. Poor cash flow constitutes a major 
operating problem for many companies, and is particularly difficult for 
small and seasonal businesses.  25 Accountants some-
times face tough ethical challenges in reporting the 
flow of funds into a business. Read the Making Ethi-
cal Decisions box to see how such an ethical dilemma 
can arise. 
 How do cash flow problems start? Often in order 
to meet the growing demands of customers, a business 
buys goods on credit (using no cash). If it then sells a 
large number of goods on credit (getting no cash), the 
company needs more credit from a lender (usually a 
bank) to pay its immediate bills. If a firm has reached 
its credit limit and can borrow no more, it has a severe 
cash flow problem. It has cash coming in at a later 
 cash flow  
 The difference between cash 
coming in and cash going out 
of a business.  
 Cash flow is the 
difference between 
money coming into and 
going out of a business. 
Careful cash flow 
management is a must 
for a business of any 
size, but it’s particularly 
important for small 
businesses and for 
seasonal businesses 
like ski resorts. Have 
you read of any firms 
that were forced into 
bankruptcy because of 
cash flow problems?  
cash flow
 making ethical decisions 
 The recent recession hit small 
manufacturers very hard. Many 
did not survive the downturn. You 
are the lone accountant employed 
by Keegan’s Feast, a small pro-
ducer of premium dog food that 
sells directly online. Many of the 
company’s customers became 
cost-conscious during the down-
turn and purchased lower-cost 
brands. Fortunately, with the 
economy recovering, many of the 
firm’s old customers are returning 
and things are looking up. The 
problem is the company’s cash 
flow suffered during the reces-
sion, and the firm needs immedi-
ate funding to continue to pay its 
bills. You know the CEO has pre-
pared a proposal to a local bank 
asking for short-term financing. 
Unfortunately, you are aware that 
Keegan’s financial statements for 
the past year will not show good 
results. Your expectation is the 
bank will not approve the loan on 
the basis of the financial informa-
tion, even though the firm seems 
to be coming back. 
 Before you close the books 
for the end of the year, the CEO 
suggests you might “improve” 
the company’s financial state-
ments by treating the sales made 
at the beginning of January of 
the current year as if they were 
made in December of the past 
year. He is confident the com-
pany auditors will not discover 
the discrepancy. 
 You know this is against the 
rules of the Financial Accounting 
Standards Board (FASB), and you 
refuse to alter the information. 
The CEO warns that without the 
bank loan, the business is likely to 
close, meaning you and everyone 
else will be out of a job. You know 
he’s probably right, and also know 
it’s unlikely the firm’s employees 
will find new jobs. What are your 
alternatives? What are the likely 
consequences of each? What will 
you do? 
www.fasb.org
 Would You Cook the Books? 

491
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
date, but no cash to pay current expenses. That problem could, unfortunately, 
force the firm into bankruptcy, even though sales may be strong—all because 
no cash was available when it was most needed. Cash flow analysis shows that 
a business’s relationship with its lenders is critical to preventing cash flow 
problems. Accountants can provide valuable insight and advice to businesses 
in managing cash flow, suggesting whether they need cash and how much. 
After the Test Prep, we will see how accountants analyze financial statements 
using ratios.  
 • What are the key steps in preparing an income statement?  
 • What’s the difference between revenue and income on the income 
statement?  
 • Why is the statement of cash flows important in evaluating a firm’s 
operations?  
•
What are the key step
 test prep  
ps in preparing
ps i
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Demonstrate the application of ratio analysis in reporting financial 
information.
 ANALYZING FINANCIAL 
PERFORMANCE USING RATIOS  
 The firm’s financial statements—its balance sheet, income statement, and 
statement of cash flows—form the basis for financial analyses performed by 
accountants inside and outside the firm.   Ratio analysis   is the assessment of 
a firm’s financial condition, using calculations and financial ratios developed 
from the firm’s financial statements. Financial ratios are especially useful in 
comparing the company’s performance to its financial objectives and to the 
performance of other firms in its industry. You probably are already familiar 
with the use of ratios. For example, in basketball, we express the number of 
shots made from the foul line with a ratio: shots made to shots attempted. A 
player who shoots 85 percent from the foul line is considered an outstanding 
foul shooter; you don’t want to foul this player in a close game. 
 Whether ratios measure an athlete’s performance or the financial health of a 
business, they provide valuable information. Financial ratios provide key insights 
into how a firm compares to other firms in its industry on liquidity, amount of 
debt, profitability, and overall business activity. Understanding and interpreting 
business ratios is important to sound financial analysis. Let’s look briefly at four 
key types of ratios businesses use to measure financial performance.  
 Liquidity Ratios 
 We’ve discussed that  liquidity refers to how fast an asset can be converted to 
cash. Liquidity ratios measure a company’s ability to turn assets into cash to 
pay its short-term debts (liabilities that must be repaid within one year). These 
short-term debts are of particular importance to the firm’s lenders who expect 
to be paid on time. Two key liquidity ratios are the current ratio and the acid-
test ratio. 
LO 17–5
 ratio analysis  
 The assessment of a firm’s 
financial condition using 
calculations and interpretations 
of financial ratios developed 
from the firm’s financial 
statements.  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
492
The  current ratio is the ratio of a firm’s current assets to its current lia-
bilities. This information appears on the firm’s balance sheet. Look back at 
 Figure  17.5 , which details Very Vegetarian’s balance sheet. The company 
lists current assets of $600,000 and current liabilities of $288,000, yielding a 
current ratio of 2.08, which means Very Vegetarian has $2.08 of current 
assets for every $1 of current liabilities. See the following calculation:
Current ratio
Current assets
Current liabilities
5
$600,000
$288,000
$2.08
5
5
 The question the current ratio attempts to answer is: Is Very Vegetarian 
financially secure for the short term (less than one year)? It depends! Usually 
a company with a current ratio of 2 or better is considered a safe risk for lend-
ers granting short-term credit, since it appears to be performing in line with 
market expectations. However, lenders will also compare Very Vegetarian’s 
current ratio to that of competing firms in its industry and to its current ratio 
from the previous year to note any significant changes. 
Another key liquidity ratio, called the  acid-test or  quick ratio, measures 
the cash, marketable securities (such as stocks and bonds), and receivables of 
a firm, compared to its current liabilities. Again, this information is on a firm’s 
balance sheet.
Acid-test ratio
Cash
Accounts receivable
Marketable securities
Current liabilities
$265,000
0.92
$288,000
 This ratio is particularly important to firms with difficulty converting 
inventory into quick cash. It helps answer such questions as: What if sales 
drop off and we can’t sell our inventory? Can we still pay our short-term debt? 
Though ratios vary among industries, an acid-test ratio between 0.50 and 1.0 
is usually considered satisfactory, but bordering on cash flow problems. There-
fore, Very Vegetarian’s acid-test ratio of 0.92 could raise concerns that perhaps 
the firm may not meet its short-term debt and may have to go to a high-cost 
lender for financial assistance.  
 Leverage (Debt) Ratios 
Leverage (debt) ratios measure the degree to which a firm relies on borrowed 
funds in its operations. A firm that takes on too much debt could experience 
problems repaying lenders or meeting promises made to stockholders. The 
 debt to owners’ equity ratio measures the degree to which the company is 
financed by borrowed funds that it must repay. Again, let’s use  Figure 17.5  to 
measure Very Vegetarian’s level of debt:
Debt to owners’ equity ratio
Total liabilities
5 Owners’ equity
$613,000
$213,000
5
5 288%
 Anything above 100 percent shows a firm has more debt than equity. With 
a ratio of 288 percent, Very Vegetarian has a rather high degree of debt com-
pared to its equity, which implies that lenders and investors may perceive the 
firm to be quite risky. However, again  it’s important to compare a firm’s debt 
ratios to those of other firms in its industry, because debt financing is more 
acceptable in some industries than in others. Comparisons with the same 
firm’s past debt ratios can also identify possible trends within the firm or 
industry.  

493
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
 Profitability (Performance) Ratios 
 Profitability (performance) ratios mea-
sure how effectively a firm’s managers 
are using its various resources to achieve 
profits. Three of the more important 
ratios are earnings per share (EPS), 
return on sales, and return on equity. 
EPS is a revealing ratio because 
earnings help stimulate the firm’s 
growth and provide for stockholders’ 
dividends. The Financial Accounting 
Standards Board requires companies to 
report their quarterly EPS in two ways: 
basic and diluted. The  basic earnings per 
share (basic EPS) ratio helps determine 
the amount of profit a company earned 
for each share of outstanding common 
stock. The  diluted earnings per share (diluted EPS) ratio measures the amount 
of profit earned for each share of outstanding common stock, but also consid-
ers stock options, warrants, preferred stock, and convertible debt securities 
the firm can convert into common stock. For simplicity’s sake, we will com-
pute only the basic EPS for Very Vegetarian:
Basic earnings per share
Net income after taxes
5 Number of common stock shares outstanding
$49,000
$1,000,000 shares
$0.049 per share
5
5
Another reliable indicator of performance is  return on sales, which 
tells us whether the firm is doing as well as its competitors in generating 
income from sales. We calculate it by comparing net income to total sales. 
Very Vegetarian’s return on sales is 7 percent, a figure we must measure 
 Building luxury hotels, 
like the Cosmopolitan 
and Vdara hotels in Las 
Vegas generally 
requires taking on a 
high degree of debt 
before the hotel ever 
earns its first dollar. 
Once opened, the 
companies incur heavy 
expenses daily just to 
keep the business 
functioning efficiently. 
Would monitoring the 
four key accounting 
ratios be a major part of 
the accountants’ jobs at 
the new hotels? 
 Inventory turnover is 
critical to just about any 
business, particularly 
restaurants that serve 
perishable items and 
that must turn over 
tables to keep the flow 
of food moving and 
profits up. Can you think 
of other businesses that 
need to watch their 
inventory turnover 
closely?  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
494
against similar numbers for competing firms to judge Very Vegetarian’s 
performance:
Return on sales
Net income
Net sales
$49,000
5
5 $700,000
7
5
%
The higher the risk of failure or loss in an industry, the higher the return 
investors expect on their investment; they expect to be well compensated for 
shouldering such odds.  Return on equity indirectly measures risk by telling us 
how much a firm earned for each dollar invested by its owners. We calculate it 
by comparing a company’s net income to its total owners’ equity. Very Vegetar-
ian’s return on equity looks reasonably sound since some believe anything 
over 15 percent is considered a reasonable return:
Return on equity
Net income after tax
Total owners’ equity
5
$49,000
$213,000
5
5 23%
 Remember that profits help companies like Very Vegetarian grow. That’s 
why profitability ratios are such closely watched measurements of company 
growth and management performance.  
 Activity Ratios 
 Converting the firm’s inventory to profits is a key function of management. 
Activity ratios tell us how effectively management is turning over inventory. 
The  inventory turnover ratio measures the speed with which inventory 
moves through the firm and gets converted into sales. Idle inventory sitting in 
a warehouse earns nothing and costs money. The more efficiently a firm sells 
or turns over its inventory, the higher its revenue. We can measure the inven-
tory turnover ratio for Very Vegetarian as follows:
Inventory turnover
Costs of goods sold
Average inventory
5
$410,000
$215,000
5
5 1.9 times
 A lower-than-average inventory turnover ratio often indicates obsolete 
merchandise on hand or poor buying practices. Managers need to be aware 
 FIGURE 17.9 ACCOUNTS IN THE BALANCE SHEET AND INCOME STATEMENT 
Assets
Liabilities
Owners’ Equity
Cash
Accounts payable
Capital stock
Accounts 
receivable
Notes payable
Retained 
earnings
Inventory
Bonds payable
Common stock
Investments
Equipment
Land
Buildings
Motor vehicles
Goodwill
Taxes payable
Treasury stock
BALANCE SHEET ACCOUNTS
Revenues
Cost of Goods Sold
Expenses
Sales revenue
Cost of buying goods
Wages
Interest
Rental revenue
Cost of storing goods
Rent
Donations
Commissions
revenue
Repairs
Licenses
Royalty
revenue
Travel
Insurance
Utilities
Entertainment
Storage
Supplies
Advertising
Taxes
Fees
INCOME STATEMENT ACCOUNTS

495
 reaching beyond our borders 
 Throughout this text you’ve read 
about the tremendous impact the 
global market has on business. 
U.S. companies like Coca-Cola 
earn the majority of their reve-
nues from global markets, which 
helps their profitability. However, 
this also creates considerable 
accounting headaches. Since no 
global accounting system exists, 
multinationals like Coca-Cola 
must adapt their accounting pro-
cedures to different countries’ 
rules. Fortunately, help may be on 
the way. The Financial Accounting 
Standards Board (FASB) in the 
United States and the London-
based International Accounting 
Standards Board (IASB) hope that 
situation will change. 
 With over 100 countries using 
the International Financial 
Reporting Standards (IFRS), the 
governing bodies of the account-
ing profession in the United 
States proposed the integration 
of the U.S. accounting code with 
the IFRS used around the world. 
The U.S. Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC) seemed to 
support such a change, and even 
suggested the IFRS might 
replace the long-standing gener-
ally accepted accounting princi-
ples (GAAP). However, the 
financial crisis shifted the agen-
cy’s priorities to the financial rule 
making required by the Dodd-
Frank Act and away from IFRS. 
The SEC’s strategic plan, extend-
ing through 2018, does not offer 
a strong endorsement of moving 
to one global accounting stan-
dard. The agency also noted a 
lack of strong support for the 
adoption of IFRS in the United 
States. 
 Nonetheless many accountants 
continue to support the shift to 
global standards for accounting. 
James Quigley, former chief exec-
utive officer of Deloitte Touche 
Tohmatsu, one of the Big Four 
U.S. accounting firms, believes 
that since we have global capital 
markets, we need global stan-
dards for accounting. Still, it 
appears that IFRS is coming later 
rather than sooner to an account-
ing department near you. 
 Sources: Emily Chasan, “SEC’s New Strategic 
Plan Backs Away from IFRS,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, February 4, 2014; Michael Cohn, “NASBA 
Questions FAF Funding of IFRS Foundation,” 
 Accounting Today, February 20, 2014; and 
Securities and Exchange Commission,  www.sec
.gov , accessed March 2014. 
 Speaking a Universal Accounting Language 
 • What is the primary purpose of performing ratio analysis using the firm’s 
financial statements?  
 • What are the four main categories of financial ratios?  
•
What is the primary pu
 test prep  
urpose of perfo
urp
of proper inventory control and anticipated inventory turnover to ensure 
proper performance. For example, have you ever worked as a food server in 
a restaurant like Very Vegetarian? How many times did your employer expect 
you to  turn over a table (keep changing customers at the table) in an eve-
ning? The more times a table turns, the higher the return to the owner. Of 
course, like other ratios, rates of inventory turnover vary from industry to 
industry. 
 Accountants and other finance professionals use several other specific 
ratios, in addition to the ones we’ve discussed. To review where the accounting 
information in ratio analysis comes from, see  Figure 17.9  for a quick refer-
ence. Remember, financial analysis begins where the accounting financial 
statements end.  
 Like other business disciplines, accounting is subject to change. The 
accounting profession is feeling the impact of the global market. The Reach-
ing Beyond Our Borders box discusses a movement to globalize accounting 
procedures. It’s something that accountants will be following closely. Before 
leaving this chapter, it’s worth saying once more that, as the language of busi-
ness, accounting is a worthwhile language to learn.  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
496
 Demonstrate the role that accounting and financial information play for a 
business and for its stakeholders. 
 • 
 What is accounting?  
 Accounting is the recording, classifying, summarizing, and interpreting of 
financial events and transactions that affect an organization. The methods 
we use to record and summarize accounting data into reports are called 
an accounting system.  
 Identify the different disciplines within the accounting profession. 
 • 
 How does managerial accounting differ from financial accounting?  
 Managerial accounting provides information and analyses to managers 
within the firm to assist them in decision making. Financial accounting 
provides information and analyses to external users of data such as credi-
tors and lenders.  
 • 
 What is the job of an auditor?  
 Auditors review and evaluate the standards used to prepare a company’s 
financial statements. An independent audit is conducted by a public 
accountant and is an evaluation and unbiased opinion about the accuracy 
of a company’s financial statements.  
 • 
 What is the difference between a private accountant and a public accountant?  
 A public accountant provides services for a fee to a variety of companies, 
whereas a private accountant works for a single company. Private and 
public accountants do essentially the same things with the exception of 
independent audits. Private accountants do perform internal audits, but 
only public accountants supply independent audits.  
  List the steps in the accounting cycle, distinguish between accounting and 
bookkeeping, and explain how computers are used in accounting. 
 • 
 What are the six steps of the accounting cycle?  
 The six steps of the accounting cycle are (1) analyzing documents; 
(2) recording information into journals; (3) posting that information into 
ledgers; (4) developing a trial balance; (5) preparing financial statements—
the balance sheet, income statement, and statement of cash flows; and 
(6) analyzing financial statements.  
 • 
 What is the difference between bookkeeping and accounting?  
 Bookkeeping is part of accounting and includes the systematic recording 
of data. Accounting includes classifying, summarizing, interpreting, and 
reporting data to management.  
 • 
 What are journals and ledgers?  
 Journals are the first place bookkeepers record transactions. Bookkeepers 
then summarize journal entries by posting them to ledgers. Ledgers are 
specialized accounting books that arrange the transactions by homoge-
neous groups (accounts).  
 • 
 How do computers help accountants?  
 Computers can record and analyze data and provide financial reports. 
Software can continuously analyze and test accounting systems to be sure 
they are functioning correctly. Computers can help decision making by 
providing appropriate information, but they cannot themselves make good 
LO 17–1
•
How doe
LO 17–2
LO 17–3
 summary 
 •
•
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  

497
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
financial decisions. Accounting applications and creativity are still human 
functions.  
 Explain how the major financial statements differ. 
 • 
 What is a balance sheet?  
 A balance sheet reports the financial position of a firm on a particular day. 
The fundamental accounting equation used to prepare the balance sheet is 
Assets  5  Liabilities  1  Owners’ equity.  
 • 
 What are the major accounts of the balance sheet?  
 Assets are economic resources owned by the firm, such as buildings and 
machinery. Liabilities are amounts the firm owes to creditors, bondhold-
ers, and others. Owners’ equity is the value of everything the firm owns—its 
assets—minus any liabilities; thus, Owners’ equity  5  Assets  2  Liabilities.  
 • 
 What is an income statement?  
 An income statement reports revenues, costs, and expenses for a specific 
period of time (say, the year ended December 31, 2015). The formulas we 
use in preparing the income statement are:
  
•   Revenue   2    Cost of goods sold   5    Gross margin  
•   Gross margin   2    Operating expenses   5    Net income before taxes 
•   Net income before taxes   2    Taxes   5    Net income (or net loss) 
 
 Net income or loss is also called the bottom line.  
 • 
 What is a statement of cash flows?  
 Cash flow is the difference between cash receipts (money coming in) and 
cash disbursements (money going out). The statement of cash flows 
reports cash receipts and disbursements related to the firm’s major activi-
ties: operations, investments, and financing.  
Demonstrate the application of ratio analysis in reporting financial 
information. 
 • 
 What are the four key categories of ratios?  
 The four key categories of ratios are liquidity ratios, leverage (debt) ratios, 
profitability (performance) ratios, and activity ratios.  
 • 
 What is the major value of ratio analysis to the firm?  
 Ratio analysis provides the firm with information about its financial posi-
tion in key areas  for comparison to other firms in its industry and its own 
past performance. 
•
What is a
LO 17–4
LO 17–5
 key terms 
 accounting  474
 accounting cycle  479
 accounts payable  484
 annual report  476
 assets  483
 auditing  477
 balance sheet  482
 bonds payable  484
 bookkeeping  479
 cash flow  490
 certified internal auditor 
(CIA) 477
 certified management 
accountant (CMA)  476
 certified public 
accountant (CPA)  476
 cost of goods sold (or 
cost of goods 
manufactured)  487
 current assets  484
 depreciation  487
 double-entry 
bookkeeping  480
 financial accounting  476
 financial statement  481
 fixed assets  484
 fundamental accounting 
equation 482
 government and not-for-
profit accounting  478
 gross profit (or gross 
margin)  487

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
498
 income statement  485
 independent audit  477
 intangible assets  484
 journal 479
 ledger  480
 liabilities  484
 liquidity  484
 managerial accounting  475
 net income or net loss  485
 notes payable  484
 operating expenses  487
 owners’ equity  484
 private accountant  476
 public accountant  476
 ratio analysis  491
 retained earnings  485
 statement of 
cash flows  489
 tax accountant  478
 trial balance  480
 1. As a potential investor in a firm or perhaps the buyer of a particular busi-
ness, would it be advisable for you to evaluate the company’s financial 
statements? Why or why not? What key information would you seek from 
a firm’s financial statements?  
 2. Why must accounting reports be prepared according to specific proce-
dures (GAAP)? Should we allow businesses some flexibility or creativity in 
preparing financial statements? Why or why not?  
 3. What value do financial ratios offer investors in reviewing the financial 
performance of a firm?  
 4. Why is it important to remember financial ratios can differ from industry 
to industry?  
1
 critical thinking 
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  Contact a CPA at a firm in your area, or talk with a CPA in your college’s 
business department. Ask what challenges, changes, and opportunities he 
or she foresees in the accounting profession in the next five years. List the 
CPA’s forecasts on a sheet of paper and then compare them with the infor-
mation in this chapter.  
 2.  Go to the websites of the American Institute of Certified Public Accoun-
tants ( www.aicpa.org ) and the Institute of Management Accountants 
( www.imanet.org ). Browse the sites and find the requirements for becom-
ing a certified public accountant (CPA) and a certified management 
accountant (CMA). Compare the requirements of the programs and decide 
which program is more appealing to you.  
 3.  Suppose you are a new board member for an emerging not-for-profit 
organization hoping to attract new donors. Contributors want to know 
how efficiently not-for-profit organizations use their donations. Unfortu-
nately, your fellow board members see little value in financial reporting 
and analysis and believe the good works of the organization speak for 
themselves. Prepare a fact sheet convincing the board of the need for 
effective financial reporting with arguments about why it helps the orga-
nization’s fund-raising goals.  
 4.  Obtain a recent annual report for a company of your choice. (Hints:  The 
Wall Street Journal has a free annual reports service, and virtually all major 
companies post their annual reports on their websites.) Look over the 
firm’s financial statements and see whether they match the information in 
 
 

499
Understanding Accounting and Financial Information
CHAPTER 17
 video case   
 Goodwill Industries is a major charitable organi-
zation that relies primarily on financial and 
 nonfinancial donations and grants. It has retail 
operations that help sustain its financial opera-
tions so as to fulfill its mission to help train, 
 support, and employ disadvantaged individuals 
and those with disabilities. 
 The video introduces the accounting function 
and the specific steps involved in the accounting 
cycle. The similarities and differences between 
for-profit and not-for-profit entities are discussed 
in detail. The importance of accounting in provid-
ing financial information and analysis is featured. 
Emphasis is placed on financial statements as 
well as ratio analysis in helping gauge the finan-
cial health of the organization. 
 Accounting is crucial for all organizations, 
whether they are a small business, large corpora-
tion, or a governmental or not-for-profit organi-
zation. The different types of accounting are 
discussed, including managerial, financial, tax, 
auditing, governmental, and not-for-profit. Bal-
ance sheets, income statements, and statements 
of cash flows provide important information 
for managers and others in the organization, 
helping to demonstrate whether the organization 
is on budget or whether there are variances 
between projected and actual revenues. Costs and 
 THE ACCOUNTING FUNCTION AT GOODWILL INDUSTRIES 
this chapter. Read the auditor’s opinion (usually at the end of the report) 
and evaluate what you think are the most important conclusions of the 
auditors.  
 5.  Obtain a recent annual report for a company of your choice (see the hints 
in exercise 4) and try your hand at computing financial ratios. Compute 
the current ratio, debt to owners’ equity ratio, and basic earnings per share 
ratio. Then request an annual report from one of the firm’s major competi-
tors and compute the same ratios for that company. What did you find?  
 
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To calculate and analyze the current and quick (acid-test) ratios of different 
businesses.  
 EXERCISE 
 Potz and Pans, a small gift shop, has current assets of $45,000 (including 
inventory valued at $30,000) and $9,000 in current liabilities. WannaBees, a 
specialty clothing store, has current assets of $150,000 (including inventory 
valued at $125,000) and $85,000 in current liabilities. Both businesses have 
applied for loans. Click the Calculators box on the toolbar at   www.bankrate
.com and then click on Small Business to answer the following questions:
 1. Calculate the current ratio for each company. Which company is more 
likely to get the loan? Why?  
 2. The acid-test ratio subtracts the value of the firm’s inventory from its total 
current assets. Because inventory is often difficult to sell, this ratio is con-
sidered an even more reliable measure of a business’s ability to repay loans 
than the current ratio. Calculate the acid-test ratio for each business and 
decide whether you would give either the loan. Why or why not?  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
500
expenses have to be kept in line and are carefully 
monitored and analyzed by the accounting 
function. 
 Sufficient cash flow is critical to the sustain-
ability of any organization, particularly the not-for-
profit organization; in this case, Goodwill. 
Not-for-profit organizations utilize performance 
ratio analysis to gauge their overall financial per-
formance. The results of these analyses help man-
agement assess the organization’s performance 
against its plan or budget. They also help develop 
strategic plans for the future as well as benchmark 
against other similar companies. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. What’s the difference between assets and lia-
bilities? Which of the key financial statements 
features these categories prominently? 
 2 Identify the six steps in the accounting cycle. 
 3. What are the key reasons that firms do ratio 
analysis? 
 1. 
Eric Sobota, “Doing Business with the Government: 
Administrative Challenges Faced by Nonprofits,”  Nonprofit 
Quarterly, January 14, 2014; and John A Byrne, “The GMAT: 
An Exam with Greater Profit Margins Than Apple,”  Fortune, 
February 17, 2014. 
 2. 
Evan Taylor, “Best Jobs: Accountant,”  U.S. News and World 
Report, January 22, 2014. 
 3. 
 www.imanet.org/certification , accessed May 2014. 
 4. 
Michael Cohn, “AICPA and CIMA Propose Management 
Accounting Framework,”  Accounting Today, February 10, 2014. 
 5. 
Nellie S. Huang, “Make the Most of an Annual Report,” 
Kiplinger’s Personal Finance, March 2014. 
 6. 
  www.aicpa.org , accessed May 2014. 
 7. 
Mariella Segarra, “FASB Issues New Private Company 
Accounting Alternatives,”  CFO, January 20, 2014. 
 8. 
Jerry Markon and Alice Crites, “Accenture, Hired to Help Fix 
HealthCare.gov, Has Had a Series of Stumbles,”  The 
Washington Post, February 9, 2014; and Sam Fleming, 
“Accountants PwC, Deloitte, KPMG, and EY Face Taming 
Moves,”  Financial Times, February 12, 2014. 
 9. 
“Shining a Light on the Auditors,”  The Economist, 
December 7, 2013. 
 10. 
Stephanie Armour, “Lew Says Reforms Making Financial 
System Safer,”  The Wall Street Journal, December 5, 2013. 
 11. 
Karen Weise, “Will Dodd-Frank Ever Be Finished?” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, August 20, 2013. 
 12. 
Michael Rapoport, “Audit Reports Add Beef,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, August 13, 2013; and Nellie Huang, “7 Clues for 
Investors to Look for Within Annual Reports,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance, March 2014. 
 13. 
Michael Rapoport, “KPMG to Pay $8.2 Million to Settle SEC 
Charges,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 24, 2014. 
 14. 
Kathy Hoffelder, “Top Audit Deficiency: Evidence Collection,” 
CFO, May 10, 2013. 
 15. 
 www.thiia.org/certification , accessed May 2014. 
 16. 
Amrick Randhawa, “Don’t Have a Tax Pro Yet? Time to Get 
Moving,”  Entrepreneur, February 12, 2014; and Pamela Yip, 
“Be Picky When Choosing a Tax Preparer,”  Dallas Morning 
News, January 26, 2014. 
 17. 
  www.gasb.org , accessed May 2014. 
 18. 
Colleen O’Connor, “More Than Half of Nonprofits Haven’t 
Recovered Recession Losses,”  The Denver Post, 
December 10, 2013. 
 19. 
Michael Cohn, “Wave Adds Bank Reconciliation to Online 
Accounting Software,”  Accounting Today, February 11, 2014; 
and Pedro Hernandez, “Plan for Small Business Success,” 
Small Business Computing, February 14, 2014. 
 20. Tom Taulli, “Xero: Taking Aim at the Intuit Goliath,”  Forbes, 
January 26, 2014. 
 21. 
Mary Ellen Biery, “What Are Your Financial Statements Telling 
You?”  Forbes, December 22, 2013. 
 22. Catherine Clifford, “New Accounting Framework to Ease 
Burdens for Small Business,”  Entrepreneur, June 10, 2013. 
 23. Jonathan Lack, “How to Manage Your Cash Flow Better in 
2014,”  Houston Business Journal, January 23, 2014. 
 24. Jill Hamburg-Conlon, “Don’t Run Out of Cash: 3 Growth 
Company Case Studies,”  Inc., January 2014. 
 25. Joe Worth, “How Much Cash On Hand Is Too Much? And 
What Should I Do with It?”  Entrepreneur, January 2014. 
1.
Eric Sobota, “Doing Business with
 notes 
Page 473: Photo by Mindy McGee; p. 476: © 
Balint Porneczi/Bloomberg/Getty Images; 
p. 478: © Charlie Riedel/AP Images; p. 482: © 
Saxon Reed/AP Images; p. 487: © Chip Lither-
land/Redux; p. 488: © Photodisc/Getty Images 
RF; p. 489: © Imaginechina/Corbis; p. 490: © 
ImageShop/Corbis RF; p. 493 (top): © Texas 
Stock Photo/Alamy; p. 493 (bottom): © Franck 
Guiziou/Hemis/Corbis.
Page 473: Photo by Mindy M
 photo credits 


502
 Financial 
Management 
 18 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 18-1 Explain the role and responsibilities of financial managers. 
 LO 18-2 Outline the financial planning process, and explain the three key 
budgets in the financial plan. 
 LO 18-3 Explain why firms need operating funds. 
 LO 18-4 Identify and describe different sources of short-term financing. 
 LO 18-5 Identify and describe different sources of long-term financing.  

503
 Sabrina  Simmons  
 •  CFO of Gap 
 •  Balanced the company's books 
 •  Accepted and learned from 
failures 
 www.gap.com 
@Gap
 Getting to know  Sabrina Simmons
 s chief financial officer 
(CFO) of Gap, Sabrina 
Simmons knows a thing 
or two about keeping 
current with trends. 
Fashion is a volatile industry that can 
shift suddenly on the whims of consum-
ers. Companies that lose their “cool” 
 factor can quickly disappear from the 
market if they fail to rebuild their brand. 
Gap was in the middle of a crisis of this 
scale when Simmons joined as treasurer 
in 2001. Besides being stuck in a cre-
ative rut, a series of poor capital market 
investments had hurt the company’s 
finances. In her first act on the job, Sim-
mons balanced the books and made 
executives swear that the company 
would never rely on risky investments to 
drive revenue again. It’s an accomplish-
ment that she remains proud of to this 
day. “Nobody is coming through this 
recession unscathed, but it feels great to 
sleep at night knowing our balance sheet 
is rock solid,” said Simmons. 
 Before making a splash at Gap, Sim-
mons earned her bachelor’s degree in 
finance from University of California, 
Berkeley, and her MBA from UCLA. A 
certified public accountant, Simmons 
spent her post-grad years in various 
bookkeeping jobs at companies like 
Hewlett-Packard and Ford subsidiary 
USL Capital. She took her first foray 
into fashion as an assistant treasurer at 
Levi Strauss. Her performance at the 
iconic blue jean maker caught the eye 
of British genetics firm Sygen Interna-
tional, which hired Simmons as its CFO 
in the late 1990s. However, the slow 
world of science made Simmons miss 
the apparel business. When a treasurer 
position at Gap opened up, she seized 
the opportunity to get back into 
fashion. 
 While her handling of the company’s 
early-2000s identity crisis put her in the 
spotlight, Simmons didn’t have time to 
celebrate. Soon Gap began investing 
millions in an offshoot store called 
Forth & Towne. Unlike the company’s 
collection of youthful brands, like Old 
Navy and Banana Republic, Forth & 
Towne was meant to appeal to older 
shoppers who had lost touch with 
Gap over the years. Unfortunately, 
the retailer’s heavily hyped launch 
did little to generate interest among 
its target market. “After investing 
tens of millions of dollars, we made 
the difficult decision to cut our losses 
and shut it down after two years,” said 
Simmons. “The silver lining is we 
learned many tough lessons. And this 
failure, though very public, didn’t stop 
us from taking those lessons learned 
and investing in other good ideas.” 
 One of those good ideas was 
 Piperlime.com , an accessories brand that 
launched a year after Forth & Towne’s 
failure. The online boutique quickly 
developed a customer base and 
 continues to grow. In recognition of her 
accomplishments with the company, Gap 
appointed Simmons CFO in 2008. She’s 
had to put out a number of fires since 
then, including the closing of hundreds 
of stores in 2012. Nevertheless, Simmons 
is steadfast in her commitment to never 
accept defeat. “Take intelligent risks and 
accept sensible failures,” said Simmons. 
“Tenacity and persistence are great 
traits. And don’t be afraid to fail. It’s 
a great way to learn.” 
 Risk and uncertainty clearly 
define the role of financial 
management. In this chapter, 
you’ll explore the role of 
finance in business. We’ll 
discuss the challenges and 
the tools top managers like 
Sabrina Simmons use to 
attain financial stability and 
growth. 
 Sources: Paul Quintaro, “Gap 
Offers Details on Advances in 
Omni-Channel Retailing, Global 
Growth,”  Benzinga, April 16, 
2014; Sabrina Simmons, 
“Commencement Address 
2010: Berkeley-Haas 
Undergraduate Program,” 
  www.Haas.Berkeley.edu  , 
May 19 2010; and Susan 
Berfield, “Can Rebekka 
Bay Fix the Gap?” 
 Bloomberg 
Businessweek, March 
20, 2014. 
A

504
     name that company 
 This company spends over $6 billion a year on research to develop new 
products even though it may take as long as 10 years before the products are 
approved and introduced to the market. Since long-term funding is critical in 
our business, high-level managers are very involved in the finance decisions. 
What is the name of this company? (Find the answer in the chapter.)  
 Explain the role and responsibilities of financial managers.  
 THE ROLE OF FINANCE AND 
FINANCIAL MANAGERS 
 The goal of this chapter is to answer two major questions: “What is finance?” and 
“What do financial managers do?”   Finance   is the function in a business that 
acquires funds for the firm and manages them within the firm. Finance activities 
include preparing budgets; doing cash flow analysis; and planning for the expendi-
ture of funds on such assets as plant, equipment, and machinery.   Financial 
 management   is the job of managing a firm’s resources to meet its goals and objec-
tives. Without a carefully calculated financial plan and sound financial manage-
ment, a firm has little chance for survival, regardless of its product or marketing 
effectiveness. Let’s briefly review the roles of accountants and financial managers. 
 We can compare an accountant to a skilled laboratory technician who 
takes blood samples and other measures of a person’s health and writes the 
findings on a health report (in business, this process is the preparation of finan-
cial statements). A financial manager is like the doctor who interprets the 
report and makes recommendations that will improve the patient’s health. In 
short,   financial managers   examine financial data prepared by accountants 
and recommend strategies for improving the financial performance of the firm. 
 Clearly financial managers can make sound financial decisions only if 
they understand accounting information. That’s why we examined accounting 
in Chapter 17. Similarly, a good accountant needs to understand finance. 
Accounting and finance go together like peanut butter and jelly. In large and 
medium-sized organizations, both the accounting and finance functions are 
generally under the control of a chief financial officer (CFO). A CFO is gener-
ally the second highest paid person in an organization and CFOs often advance 
to the top job of CEO.  1 However, financial management could also be in the 
hands of a person who serves as company treasurer or vice president of 
finance. A comptroller is the chief  accounting officer. 
 Figure 18.1 highlights a financial manager’s tasks. As you can see, two key 
responsibilities are to obtain funds and to effectively control the use of those 
funds. Controlling funds includes managing the firm’s cash, credit accounts 
(accounts receivable), and inventory. Finance is a critical activity in both 
profit-seeking and nonprofit organizations.  2 
 Finance is important, no matter what the firm’s size. As you may remem-
ber from Chapter 6, financing a small business is essential if the firm expects 
to survive its important first five years. But the need for careful financial man-
agement remains a challenge that any business, large or small, must face 
throughout its existence. This is a lesson many U.S. businesses learned the 
hard way when the recent financial crisis threatened the economy.  3 
LO 18–1
 finance  
 The function in a business that 
acquires funds for the firm and 
manages those funds within 
the firm.  
 financial management  
 The job of managing a firm’s 
resources so it can meet its 
goals and objectives.  
 financial managers  
 Managers who examine 
financial data prepared by 
accountants and recommend 
strategies for improving the 
financial performance of the 
firm.  

505
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
 FIGURE 18.1 WHAT 
FINANCIAL MANAGERS 
DO 
Budgeting
Planning
Managing
taxes
Advising top
management on
financial matters
Obtaining
funds
Collecting funds
(credit
management)
Auditing
Controlling funds
(funds
management)
Cash
 General Motors (GM), once the world’s dominant automaker, faced extinc-
tion in 2009 because of severe financial problems. The company survived due to 
a direct government loan of $7 billion and an additional $43 billion in bailout 
funds from the U.S. Treasury.  4 The $43 billion in bailout funds gave the govern-
ment 60 percent ownership in the company. (The government sold its last share 
of GM in 2013 for a total loss of about $10 billion.) 5 The government also approved 
an $85 billion loan to save insurance giant American International Group (AIG) 
from collapse and passed the $700 billion Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP) 
to help restore confidence and stability in the U.S. financial system. Today, many 
small banks are still struggling to repay the TARP funds.  6  
 The Value of Understanding Finance 
 Three of the most common reasons a 
firm fails financially are:
 
1. Undercapitalization (insufficient 
funds to start the business).  
 
2. Poor control over cash flow. 
 
3. Inadequate expense control. 
 You can see all three in the follow-
ing classic story: 
 Two friends, Elizabeth Bertani and 
Pat Sherwood, started a company called 
Parsley Patch on what can best be 
described as a shoestring budget. It 
began when Bertani prepared salt-free 
seasonings for her husband, who was 
on a no-salt diet. Her friend Sherwood 
 Michael Miller 
overhauled the 
underperforming 
Goodwill Industries 
operation in Portland, 
Oregon, by treating the 
nonprofit like a for-profit 
business. He trimmed 
operating expenses 
comparing sales by 
store, closing weak 
outlets and opening 
new ones in better 
locations, and cutting 
distribution costs. Sales 
soared from $4 million 
to over $135 million, 
eliminating the need for 
outside funding. 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
506
thought the seasonings were good enough to sell. 
Bertani agreed, and Parsley Patch Inc. was born. 
The business began with an investment of $5,000 
that was rapidly depleted on a logo and label 
design. Bertani and Sherwood quickly learned 
about the need for capital in getting a business 
going. Eventually, they invested more than $100,000 
of their own money to keep the business from being 
undercapitalized. 
 Everything started well, and hundreds of gour-
met shops adopted the product line. But when 
sales failed to meet expectations, the women 
decided the health-food market offered more 
potential because salt-free seasonings were a natu-
ral for people with restricted diets. The choice was 
a good one. Sales soared, approaching $30,000 a 
month. Still, the company earned no profits. 
 Bertani and Sherwood weren’t trained in monitoring cash flow or in con-
trolling expenses. In fact, they were told not to worry about costs, and they 
hadn’t. They eventually hired a certified public accountant (CPA) and an expe-
rienced financial manager, who taught them how to compute the costs of their 
products, and how to control expenses as well as cash moving in and out of the 
company (cash flow). Soon Parsley Patch was earning a comfortable margin 
on operations that ran close to $1 million a year. Luckily, the owners were able 
to turn things around before it was too late. Eventually, they sold the firm to 
spice and seasonings giant McCormick.  7  
 If Bertani and Sherwood had understood finance before starting their 
business, they might have been able to avoid the problems they encountered. 
The key word here is  understood. You do not have to pursue finance as a career 
to understand it. Financial understanding is important to anyone who wants 
to start a small business, invest in stocks and bonds, or plan a retirement fund. 
In short, finance and accounting are two areas everyone in business should 
study. Since we discussed accounting in Chapter 17, let’s look more closely at 
what financial management is all about.  
 What Is Financial Management? 
 Financial managers are responsible for paying the company’s bills at the 
appropriate time, and for collecting overdue payments to make sure the com-
pany does not lose too much money to bad debts (people or firms that don’t 
pay their bills). Therefore, finance functions, such as buying merchandise on 
credit (accounts payable) and collecting payment from customers (accounts 
receivable), are key components of the financial manager’s job. While these 
functions are vital to all types of businesses, they are particularly critical to 
small and medium-sized businesses, which typically have smaller cash or 
credit cushions than large corporations.  8 
 It’s also essential that financial managers stay abreast of changes or 
opportunities in finance, such as changes in tax law, since taxes represent an 
outflow of cash from the business.  9 Financial managers must also analyze the 
tax implications of managerial decisions to minimize the taxes the business 
must pay. Usually a member of the firm’s finance department, the internal 
auditor, also checks the journals, ledgers, and financial statements the account-
ing department prepares, to make sure all transactions are in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles (GAAP). Without such audits, 
accounting statements would be less reliable.  10 Therefore, it is important that 
internal auditors be objective and critical of any improprieties or deficiencies 
 Most businesses have 
predictable day-to-day 
needs, like the need to 
buy supplies, pay for 
fuel and utilities, and 
pay employees. 
Financial management 
is the function that 
helps ensure firms have 
the funds they need 
when they need them. 
What would happen to 
the company providing 
the work in this photo if 
it couldn’t buy fuel for 
its trucks? 

507
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
noted in their evaluation.  11 Thorough internal audits assist the firm in finan-
cial planning, which we’ll look at next.  
 Outline the financial planning process, and explain the three key budgets in 
the financial plan.  
 FINANCIAL PLANNING 
 Financial planning means analyzing short-term and long-term money flows to 
and from the firm. Its overall objective is to optimize the firm’s profitability 
and make the best use of its money. It has three steps: (1) forecasting the firm’s 
short-term and long-term financial needs, (2) developing budgets to meet 
those needs, and (3) establishing financial controls to see whether the com-
pany is achieving its goals (see  Figure 18.2 ). Let’s look at each step and the role 
it plays in improving the organization’s financial health.  
 Forecasting Financial Needs 
 Forecasting is an important part of any firm’s financial plan. A   short-term fore-
cast   predicts revenues, costs, and expenses for a period of one year or less. Part 
of the short-term forecast may be a   cash flow forecast,  which predicts the cash 
inflows and outflows in future periods, usually months or quarters. The inflows 
and outflows of cash recorded in the cash flow forecast are based on expected 
sales revenues and various costs and expenses incurred, as well as when they 
are due for payment. The company’s sales forecast estimates projected sales for 
a particular period. A business often uses its past financial statements as a basis 
for projecting expected sales and various costs and expenses. 
 A   long-term forecast   predicts revenues, costs, and expenses for a period 
longer than 1 year, sometimes as long as 5 or 10 years. This forecast plays a 
LO 18–2
 short-term forecast  
 Forecast that predicts 
revenues, costs, and expenses 
for a period of one year or less.  
 cash flow forecast  
 Forecast that predicts the cash 
inflows and outflows in future 
periods, usually months or 
quarters.  
 long-term forecast  
 Forecast that predicts 
revenues, costs, and expenses 
for a period longer than 1 year, 
and sometimes as far as 5 or 10 
years into the future.  
 FIGURE 18.2 FINANCIAL 
PLANNING  
 Note the close link between 
financial planning and 
budgeting. 
Short-term
forecasting
Financial
plan
Long-term
forecasting
Operating
(master)
budget
Financial
controls
Capital
budget
Cash
budget
Feedback
Feedback

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
508
crucial part in the company’s long-term strategic plan, which asks questions 
such as: What business are we in? Should we be in it five years from now? 
How much money should we invest in technology and new plant and equip-
ment over the next decade? Will we have cash available to meet long-term 
obligations? Innovations in web-based software help financial managers 
address these long-term forecasting questions. 
 The long-term financial forecast gives top management, as well as opera-
tions managers, some sense of the income or profit potential of different stra-
tegic plans.  12 It also helps in preparing company budgets.  
 Working with the Budget Process 
 A   budget   sets forth management’s expectations for revenues and, on the basis 
of those expectations, allocates the use of specific resources throughout the 
firm. As a financial plan, it depends heavily on the accuracy of the firm’s bal-
ance sheet, income statement, statement of cash flows, and short-term and 
long-term financial forecasts, which all need to be as accurate as possible. To 
effectively prepare budgets, financial managers must take their forecasting 
responsibilities seriously.  13 A budget becomes the primary guide for the firm’s 
financial operations and expected financial needs. 
 There are usually several types of budgets in a firm’s financial plan:
 
• 
A capital budget.  
 
• 
A cash budget.  
 
• 
An operating or master budget.  
 Let’s look at each. 
 A   capital budget   highlights a firm’s spending plans for major asset pur-
chases that often require large sums of money, like property, buildings, and 
equipment. 
 A   cash budget   estimates cash inflows and outflows during a particular 
period, like a month or a quarter. It helps managers anticipate borrowing 
needs, debt repayment, operating expenses, and short-term investments, and 
is often the last budget prepared. A sample cash budget for our example com-
pany, Very Vegetarian, is provided in  Figure 18.3 . 
 The   operating (or master) budget   ties together the firm’s other budgets 
and summarizes its proposed financial activities. More formally, it estimates 
costs and expenses needed to run a business, given projected revenues. The firm’s 
spending on supplies, travel, rent, technology, advertising, and salaries is deter-
mined in the operating budget, generally the most detailed a firm prepares.  
 Financial planning obviously plays an important role in the firm’s opera-
tions and often determines what long-term investments it makes, when it will 
need specific funds, and how it will generate them. Once a company forecasts 
its short-term and long-term financial needs and compiles budgets to show 
how it will allocate funds, the final step in financial planning is to establish 
financial controls. Before we talk about those, however,  Figure 18.4 challenges 
you to check your personal financial planning skill by developing a monthly 
budget for “You Incorporated.”  
 Establishing Financial Controls 
  Financial control   is a process in which a firm periodically compares its actual 
revenues, costs, and expenses with its budget. Most companies hold at least 
monthly financial reviews as a way to ensure financial control. Such control 
procedures help managers identify variances to the financial plan and allow 
 budget  
 A financial plan that sets forth 
management’s expectations 
and, on the basis of those 
expectations, allocates the use 
of specific resources 
throughout the firm.  
 capital budget  
 A budget that highlights a firm’s 
spending plans for major asset 
purchases that often require 
large sums of money.  
 cash budget  
 A budget that estimates cash 
inflows and outflows during a 
particular period like a month 
or a quarter.  
 operating (or master) 
budget  
 The budget that ties together 
the firm’s other budgets and 
summarizes its proposed 
financial activities.  
 financial control  
 A process in which a firm 
periodically compares its actual 
revenues, costs, and expenses 
with its budget.  

509
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
 • Name three finance functions important to the firm’s overall operations 
and performance.  
 • What three primary financial problems cause firms to fail?  
 • How do short-term and long-term financial forecasts differ?  
 • What is the purpose of preparing budgets in an organization? Can you 
identify three different types of budgets?  
•
Name three finance fu
 test prep   
unctionss impor
unc
 VERY VEGETARIAN 
 Monthly Cash Budget 
 JANUARY 
 FEBRUARY 
  MARCH  
 Sales forecast 
 $50,000 
 $45,000 
 $40,000 
 Collections 
  
 
 Cash sales (20%) 
 $   9,000 
 $  8,000 
 Credit sales (80% of past month) 
 $40,000 
 $36,000 
 Monthly cash collection 
 $49,000 
 $44,000 
 Payments schedule 
  
 
 Supplies and material 
 $    11,000 
 $   10,000 
 Salaries 
     12,000 
      12,000 
 Direct labor 
    9,000 
    9,000 
 Taxes 
   3,000 
    3,000 
 Other expenses 
     7,000  
  5,000 
 Monthly cash payments 
 $42,000 
 $39,000 
 Cash budget 
  
 
 Cash flow 
 $    7,000 
 $  5,000 
 Beginning cash 
   2 1,000 
  6,000  
 Total cash 
 $  6,000 
 $     11,000 
 Less minimum cash balance 
    2 6,000 
   2 6,000 
 Excess cash to market securities 
 $      0 
 $  5,000 
 Loans needed for minimum balance 
        0 
      0 
 FIGURE 18.3 A SAMPLE 
CASH BUDGET FOR VERY 
VEGETARIAN  
them to take corrective action if necessary. Financial controls also help reveal 
which specific accounts, departments, and people are varying from the finan-
cial plan. Finance managers can judge whether these variances are legitimate 
and thereby merit adjustments to the plan. Shifts in the economy or unex-
pected global events can also alter financial plans. For example, currency 
problems in emerging markets or a slowdown in the Chinese economy can 
cause many companies to consider adjusting their financial plans.  14 After the 
Test Prep, we’ll see why firms need readily available funds.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
510
 EXPECTED  
 ACTUAL  
 DIFFERENCE  
Monthly income 
 
 
 Wages (net pay after taxes) 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Savings account withdrawal 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Family support 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Loans 
  _______  
 _______  
  _______  
 Other sources 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Total monthly income 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
Monthly expenses 
 
 
 
 Fixed expenses 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Rent or mortgage 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Car payment 
  _______  
 _______  
  _______  
 Health insurance 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Life insurance 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Tuition or fees 
  _______  
 _______  
  _______  
 Other fixed expenses 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
  Subtotal of fixed expenses 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Variable expenses 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Food 
  _______  
 _______  
  _______  
 Clothing 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Entertainment 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Transportation 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Phone 
  _______  
 _______  
  _______  
 Utilities 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Publications 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Internet connection 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
  Cable television 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Other expenses 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
  Subtotal of variable expenses 
  _______  
 _______  
  _______  
 Total expenses 
  _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 Total income  2  Total expenses  5  Cash 
on hand/(Cash deficit) 
 _______  
 _______  
 _______  
 FIGURE 18.4 YOU 
INCORPORATED 
MONTHLY BUDGET 
 In Chapter 17, you compiled 
a sample balance sheet for 
You Inc. Now, let’s develop a 
monthly budget for You Inc. Be 
honest and think of everything 
that needs to be included for 
an accurate monthly budget 
for You!  
 Explain why firms need operating funds.  
 THE NEED FOR OPERATING FUNDS 
 In business, the need for operating funds never seems to end. That’s why sound 
financial management is essential to all businesses. And like our personal 
financial needs, the capital needs of a business change over time. Remember 
LO 18–3

511
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
the example of Parsley Patch to see why a small business’s financial require-
ments can shift considerably. The same is true for large corporations such as 
Apple, Johnson & Johnson, and Nike when they venture into new-product 
areas or new markets. Virtually all organizations have operational needs for 
which they need funds. Key areas include:
 
• 
Managing day-by-day needs of the business.  
 
• 
Controlling credit operations.  
 
• 
Acquiring needed inventory.  
 
• 
Making capital expenditures.  
 Let’s look carefully at the financial needs of these key areas, which affect 
both the smallest and the largest of businesses.  
 Managing Day-by-Day Needs of the Business 
 If workers expect to be paid on Friday, they don’t want to wait until Monday for 
their paychecks. If tax payments are due on the 15th of the month, the government 
expects the money on time. If the interest payment on a business loan is due on the 
30th of this month, the lender doesn’t mean the 1st of next month. As you can see, 
funds have to be available to meet the daily operational costs of the business. 
 Financial managers must ensure that funds are available to meet daily 
cash needs without compromising the firm’s opportunities to invest money for 
its future. Money has a  time value. 15 In other words, if someone offered to give 
you $200 either today or one year from today, you would benefit by taking the 
$200 today. Why? It’s very simple. You could invest the $200 you receive today 
and over a year’s time it would grow. The same is true in business; the interest 
a firm gains on its investments is important in maximizing the profit it will 
gain. That’s why financial managers often try to minimize cash expenditures 
to free up funds for investment in interest-bearing accounts. They suggest the 
company pay its bills as late as possible (unless a cash discount is available for 
early payment). They also advise companies to try to collect what’s owed them 
as fast as possible, to maximize the investment potential of the firm’s funds. 
Unfortunately, collecting funds as fast as possible can be particularly challeng-
ing. This was especially true during the Great Recession.  16 Efficient cash man-
agement is particularly important to small firms since their access to capital is 
much more limited than larger businesses.  17 
 Controlling Credit Operations 
 Financial managers know that in today’s highly competitive business environ-
ment, making credit available helps keep current customers happy and helps 
attract new ones. Credit for customers can be especially important during 
tough financial times like the recession that began in 2008 when lenders were 
hesitant to make loans. 
 The problem with selling on credit is that as much as 25 per-
cent of the business’s assets could be tied up in its credit accounts 
(accounts receivable). This forces the firm to use its own 
funds to pay for goods or services sold to customers who 
bought on credit. Financial managers in such firms often 
develop efficient collection procedures, like offering 
cash or quantity discounts to buyers who pay their 
accounts by a certain time. They also scrutinize old 
and new credit customers to see whether they have a his-
tory of meeting credit obligations on time. 
 It’s difficult to think of a 
business that doesn’t 
make credit available to 
its customers. However, 
collecting accounts 
receivable can be time-
consuming and expen-
sive. Accepting credit 
cards such as Visa, 
MasterCard, and Ameri-
can Express can simplify 
transactions for sellers 
and guarantee pay-
ment. What types of 
products do you regu-
larly purchase with a 
credit card?  

512
 One convenient way to decrease the time and expense of collecting 
accounts receivable is to accept bank credit cards such as MasterCard or Visa. 
The banks that issue these cards have already established the customer’s cred-
itworthiness, which reduces the business’s risk. Businesses must pay a fee to 
accept credit cards, but the costs are usually offset by the benefits.  18 In an 
effort to reduce those credit card costs as well as speed up the transaction pro-
cess, many businesses today accept mobile payments through services like 
Square and Level Up.  19 For example, Chipotle, Starbucks, and Dunkin Donuts 
have invested in mobile payment systems.  20 Mobile payment systems not only 
make transactions quick and simple, the processors usually charge lower fees 
than traditional credit card companies.  21 
 Acquiring Needed Inventory 
 As we saw in Chapter 13, effective marketing requires focusing on the cus-
tomer and providing high-quality service and readily available goods. A care-
fully constructed inventory policy helps manage the firm’s available funds and 
maximize profitability. Doozle’s, an ice cream parlor in St. Louis, Missouri, 
deliberately ties up fewer funds in its inventory of ice cream in winter. It’s 
obvious why: demand for ice cream is lower in winter. 
 Just-in-time inventory control (see Chapter 9) and other such methods 
can reduce the funds a firm must tie up in inventory. Carefully evaluating its 
inventory turnover ratio (see Chapter 17) can also help a firm control the out-
flow of cash for inventory. A business of any size must understand that poorly 
managed inventory can seriously affect cash flow and drain its finances dry. 
The nearby Making Ethical Decisions box raises an interesting question about 
sound financial management and inventory control in a critical industry.  
 Making Capital Expenditures 
 Capital expenditures   are major investments in either tangible long-term 
assets such as land, buildings, and equipment, or intangible assets such as 
patents, trademarks, and copyrights. In many organizations the purchase of 
major assets—such as land for future expansion, manufacturing plants to 
increase production capabilities, research to develop new-product ideas, and 
 capital expenditures  
 Major investments in either 
tangible long-term assets such 
as land, buildings, and 
equipment or intangible assets 
such as patents, trademarks, 
and copyrights.  
 making ethical decisions 
 Imagine that you have just earned 
your business degree and have 
been hired as a hospital adminis-
trator at a small hospital that, like 
many others, is experiencing 
financial problems. Having stud-
ied finance, you know that 
 efficient cash management is 
important to all firms in all indus-
tries to meet the day-by-day oper-
ations of the firm. One way to 
ensure such efficiency is to use a 
carefully planned and managed 
inventory control system that can 
reduce the amount of cash an 
organization has tied up in inven-
tory. Being familiar with just-
in-time inventory, you know it 
is a proven system that helps 
reduce the costs of managing 
inventory. 
 At a meeting of the hospital’s 
executive committee, you recom-
mend that the hospital save 
money by using a just-in-time 
inventory system to manage its 
drug supply. You suggest discon-
tinuing the hospital’s large 
stockpile of drugs, especially 
expensive cancer treatment drugs 
that tie up a great deal of the 
 hospital’s cash, and shift to order-
ing them just when they are 
needed. Several members seem 
to like the idea, but the doctors in 
charge of practicing medicine and 
oncology are outraged, claiming 
you are sacrificing patients’ well-
being for cash. After debate, the 
committee says the decision is up 
to you. What will you do? What 
could result from your decision? 
 Good Finance or Bad Medicine? 

513
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
equipment to maintain or exceed current levels of output—is essential. 
Expanding into new markets can be expensive with no guarantee of success. 
Therefore, it’s critical that companies weigh all possible options before com-
mitting a large portion of available resources. 
 Consider a firm that needs to expand its production capabilities due to 
increased customer demand. It could buy land and build a new plant,  purchase 
an existing plant, or rent space. Can you think of financial and accounting 
considerations at play in this decision? 
 The need for operating funds raises several questions for financial man-
agers: How does the firm obtain funds to finance operations and other busi-
ness needs? Will it require specific funds in the long or the short term? How 
much will it cost (i.e., interest) to obtain these funds? Will they come from 
internal or external sources? We address these questions next.  
 Alternative Sources of Funds 
 We described finance earlier as the function in a business responsible for 
acquiring and managing funds. Sound financial management determines the 
amount of money needed and the most appropriate sources from which to 
obtain it. A firm can raise needed capital by borrowing money (debt), selling 
ownership (equity), or earning profits (retained earnings).   Debt financing  
refers to funds raised through various forms of borrowing that must be repaid. 
 Equity financing   is money raised from within the firm, from operations or 
through the sale of ownership in the firm (stock). Firms can borrow funds 
either short-term or long-term.   Short-term financing   refers to funds needed 
for a year or less.   Long-term financing   covers funds needed for more than a 
year (usually 2 to 10 years).  Figure  18.5  highlights reasons why firms may 
need short-term and long-term funds.  
 We’ll explore the different sources of short- and long-term financing next. 
Let’s first pause to check your understanding by doing the Test Prep. 
 short-term financing  
 Funds needed for a year or 
less.  
 long-term financing  
 Funds needed for more than a 
year (usually 2 to 10 years).  
 debt financing  
 Funds raised through various 
forms of borrowing that must 
be repaid.  
 equity financing  
 Money raised from within the 
firm, from operations or through 
the sale of ownership in the 
firm (stock or venture capital).  
iSee It! Need help 
understanding equity 
financing and debt 
financing? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.
 FIGURE 18.5 WHY FIRMS NEED FUNDS 
 • Money has time value. What does this mean?  
 • Why is accounts receivable a financial concern to the firm?  
 • What’s the primary reason an organization spends a good deal of its 
available funds on inventory and capital expenditures?  
 • What’s the difference between debt and equity financing?  
•
Money has time value
 test prep   
e. What does th
e. W
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
SHORT-TERM FUNDS
Monthly expenses
Unanticipated emergencies
Cash ﬂow problems
Expansion of current inventory
Temporary promotional programs
LONG-TERM FUNDS
New-product development
Replacement of capital equipment
Mergers or acquisitions
Expansion into new markets (domestic or
global)
New facilities

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
514
 Identify and describe different sources of short-term financing.  
 OBTAINING SHORT-TERM FINANCING 
 The bulk of a finance manager’s job does not relate to obtaining long-term 
funds. In small businesses, for example, long-term financing is often out of the 
question.  22 Instead, day-to-day operations call for the careful management of 
short-term financial needs. Firms may need to borrow short-term funds for 
purchasing additional inventory or for meeting bills that come due unexpect-
edly. Like an individual, a business, especially a small business, sometimes 
needs to secure short-term funds when its cash reserves are low. Let’s see how 
it does so.  
 Trade Credit 
 Trade credit   is the practice of buying goods or services now and paying for 
them later. It is the most widely used source of short-term funding, the least 
expensive, and the most convenient. Small businesses rely heavily on trade 
credit from firms such as United Parcel Service, as do large firms such as 
Kmart or Macy’s. When a firm buys merchandise, it receives an invoice (a bill) 
much like the one you receive when you buy something with a credit card. As 
you’ll see, however, the terms businesses receive are often different from those 
on your monthly statement. 
 Business invoices often contain terms such as  2/10, net 30. This means the 
buyer can take a 2 percent discount for paying the invoice within 10 days. Oth-
erwise the total bill (net) is due in 30 days. Finance managers pay close atten-
tion to such discounts because they create opportunities to reduce the firm’s 
costs. Think about it for a moment: If the terms are 2/10, net 30, the customer 
will pay 2 percent more by waiting an extra 20 days to pay the invoice. If the 
firm  can pay its bill within 10 days, it is needlessly increasing its costs by not 
doing so. 
 Some suppliers hesitate to give trade credit to an organization with a poor 
credit rating, no credit history, or a history of slow payment. They may insist 
the customer sign a   promissory note,  a written contract with a promise to 
pay a supplier a specific sum of money at a definite time. Promis-
sory notes are negotiable. The supplier can sell them to a bank at a 
discount (the amount of the promissory note less a fee for the bank’s 
services in collecting the amount due), and the business is then 
responsible for paying the bank.  
 Family and Friends 
 As we discussed in Chapter 17, firms often have several bills coming 
due at the same time with no sources of funds to pay them. Many 
small firms obtain short-term funds by borrowing money from fam-
ily and friends. Such loans can create problems, however, if all par-
ties do not understand cash flow. That’s why it’s sometimes better, 
when possible, to go to a commercial bank that fully understands 
the business’s risk and can help analyze its future financial needs 
rather than borrow from friends or relatives.  23 
 Entrepreneurs appear to be listening to this advice. According 
to the National Federation of Independent Business, entrepreneurs 
today are relying less on family and friends as a source of borrowed 
funds than they have in the past.  24 If an entrepreneur decides to ask 
LO 18–4
 trade credit  
 The practice of buying goods 
and services now and paying 
for them later.  
 promissory note  
 A written contract with a 
promise to pay a supplier a 
specific sum of money at a 
definite time.  
 One thing you can never 
have too much of is 
cash. Financial 
managers must make 
certain there is enough 
cash available to meet 
daily financial needs 
and still have funds to 
invest in its future. What 
does it mean when we 
say cash has a time 
value?  

515
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
family or friends for financial assistance, it’s important that both parties (1) 
agree to specific loan terms, (2) put the agreement in writing, and (3) arrange 
for repayment in the same way they would for a bank loan. Such actions help 
keep family relationships and friendships intact.  
 Commercial Banks 
 Banks, being sensitive to risk, generally prefer to lend short-term money to 
larger, established businesses. Imagine the different types of businesspeople 
who go to banks for a loan, and you’ll get a better idea of the requests bankers 
evaluate. Picture, for example, a farmer going to the bank in spring to borrow 
funds for seed, fertilizer, equipment, and other needs that will be repaid after 
the fall harvest. Or consider a local toy store buying merchandise for Christ-
mas sales. The store borrows the money for such purchases in the summer 
and plans to pay it back after Christmas. Restaurants often borrow funds at 
the beginning of the month and pay at the end of the month.  
 How much a business borrows and for how long depends on the kind of 
business it is, and how quickly it can resell the merchandise it purchases with a 
bank loan or use it to generate funds. In a large business, specialists in a compa-
ny’s finance and accounting departments do a cash flow forecast. Small-business 
owners generally lack such specialists and must monitor cash flow themselves. 
 The Great Recession severely curtailed bank lending to small businesses. 
It was difficult for even a promising and well-organized small business to 
obtain a bank loan. Fortunately, the situation seems to be changing as the 
economy is improving. The Consumer Finance Protection Bureau is even said 
to be considering investigating loans to small businesses as part of its job.  25 
What’s important for a small firm to remember is if it gets a bank loan, the 
owner or person in charge of finance should keep in close touch with the bank 
and send regular financial statements to keep the bank up-to-date on its oper-
ations. The bank may spot cash flow problems early or be more willing to lend 
money in a crisis if the business has established a strong relationship built on 
trust and sound management. The Adapting to Change box discusses how 
changing its strategy helped one business attract investors.  
 Did you ever wonder 
how retail stores get the 
money to buy all the 
treasures we splurge on 
during the holidays? 
Department stores and 
other large retailers 
make extensive use of 
commercial banks and 
other lenders to borrow 
the funds they need to 
buy merchandise and 
stock their shelves. How 
do the stores benefit 
from using this type of 
financing? 

516
 adapting to change 
 Coming up with a great idea is only 
the first step in starting a business. 
Entrepreneurs need money to turn 
their ideas into reality. Luckily, a 
number of potential investors are 
willing to open their wallets for 
what they think is going to be the 
next big thing. But to attract these 
“angel investors,” entrepreneurs 
must be sure their business con-
cepts have been carefully 
planned. James Reinhart, CEO 
of the clothing exchange web-
site thredUP, knows this about 
as well as anyone. 
 While attending college, 
Reinhart and his roommate real-
ized that they owned too many 
clothes. After gathering start-up 
funds of $70,000 from family, 
friends, and personal savings, 
Reinhart and his partners 
launched thredUP, a website 
where people could buy and sell 
used clothing cheaply. Within 
three months the site drew in 
more than 10,000 members. 
 Reinhart soon discovered that 
the market for used children’s 
clothes was much larger than the 
adult market since children grow 
out of their clothes every three to 
six months. So the site changed 
its focus to targeting parents look-
ing to “trade up” their kids’ ward-
robes. Parents send in clothes 
that are assessed by professional 
buyers to judge quality and the 
firm’s ability to resell them. The 
higher the quality, the more 
money the company pays the 
sender. The company then resells 
the clothing on its website. 
 Reinhart was able to improve the 
site thanks to a $250,000 angel 
investor who loved thredUP’s new 
strategy. Soon thredUP attracted 
$1.4 million more in investment, 
which it used to phase out the site’s 
original service entirely to focus 
solely on the children’s clothing. 
The next year, the company 
secured a round of venture capi-
tal funding, this time topping out 
at a whopping $50 million. With 
the new investment, Reinhart 
could have expanded thredUP 
into other areas. Instead he 
focused on spending the money to 
improve the current business 
model. “As an entrepreneur, you’re 
always thinking about the adjacent 
things to do, but we have the 
opportunity to build a really big, 
important business in the market,” 
Reinhart said. “That’s what we’re 
going to do.” 
 Sources: thredUP,  www.thredUP.com , accessed 
April 2014; Philip Levinson, “thredUP’s HBS 
Founders Master the Art of the Pivot,”  The 
Harbus, March 7, 2012; and “ thredUP.com 
Releases Second Annual Clothing Resale Report,” 
 The Providence Journal, February 26, 2014. 
 Threading the Financial Needle 
y 
s
s
$
w
o
s
T
 www.thredUP.com 
 Different Forms of Short-Term Loans 
 Commercial banks offer different types of short-term loans. A   secured loan   is 
backed by  collateral, something valuable such as property. If the borrower fails 
to pay the loan, the lender may take possession of the collateral. An automo-
bile loan is a secured loan. If the borrower doesn’t repay it, the lender will 
repossess the car. Inventory of raw materials like coal, copper, and steel often 
serve as collateral for business loans. Collateral removes some of the bank’s 
risk in lending the money. 
 Accounts receivable are company assets often used as collateral for a 
loan; this process is called  pledging and works as follows: A percentage of the 
value of a firm’s accounts receivable pledged (usually about 75 percent) is 
advanced to the borrowing firm. As customers pay off their accounts, the 
funds received are forwarded to the lender in repayment of the funds that 
were advanced. 
 An   unsecured loan   is more difficult to obtain because it doesn’t require 
any collateral. Normally, lenders give unsecured loans only to highly 
regarded customers—long-standing businesses or those considered finan-
cially stable. 
 If a business develops a strong relationship with a bank, the bank may 
open a   line of credit  for the firm, a given amount of unsecured short-term 
 secured loan  
 A loan backed by collateral, 
something valuable such as 
property.   
 unsecured loan  
 A loan that doesn’t require any 
collateral.  
line of credit
A given amount of unsecured 
short-term funds a bank will 
lend to a business, provided 
the funds are readily available.

517
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
funds a bank will lend to a business, provided the funds are readily available. 
A line of credit is  not guaranteed to a business. However, it speeds up the bor-
rowing process since a firm does not have to apply for a new loan every time it 
needs funds.  26 As a business matures and becomes more financially secure, 
banks will often increase its line of credit. Some even offer a   revolving credit 
agreement,  a line of credit that’s guaranteed but usually comes with a fee. 
Both lines of credit and revolving credit agreements are particularly good 
sources of funds for unexpected cash needs.  
 If a business is unable to secure a short-term loan from a bank, the finan-
cial manager may seek short-term funds from   commercial finance 
 companies.  These non-deposit-type organizations make short-term loans to 
borrowers who offer tangible assets like property, plant, and equipment as 
collateral. Commercial finance companies will often make loans to businesses 
that cannot get short-term funds elsewhere. Since commercial finance compa-
nies assume higher degrees of risk than commercial banks, they usually charge 
higher interest rates. General Electric Capital is one of the world’s largest com-
mercial finance companies, with $584 billion in assets and operations in over 
50 countries around the world.  27 
 Factoring Accounts Receivable 
 One relatively expensive source of short-term funds for a firm is   factoring,  the 
process of selling accounts receivable for cash. Factoring dates as far back as 
4,000 years, during the days of ancient Babylon. Here’s how it works: Let’s say 
a firm sells many of its products on credit to consumers and other businesses, 
creating a number of accounts receivable. Some buyers may be slow in paying 
their bills, so a large amount of money is due the firm. A  factor is a market 
intermediary (usually a financial institution or a commercial bank) that agrees 
to buy the firm’s accounts receivable, at a discount, for cash. The discount 
depends on the age of the accounts receivable, the nature of the business, and 
the condition of the economy. When it collects the accounts receivable that 
were originally owed to the firm, the factor keeps them. 
 revolving credit agreement  
 A line of credit that’s 
guaranteed but usually comes 
with a fee.  
 commercial finance 
companies  
 Organizations that make short-
term loans to borrowers who 
offer tangible assets as 
collateral.  
 factoring  
 The process of selling accounts 
receivable for cash.  
 A secured loan is 
backed by collateral, a 
tangible item of value. A 
car loan, for instance, is 
a secured loan in which 
the car itself is the 
collateral. What is the 
collateral in a mortgage 
loan? 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
518
 While factors charge more than banks’ loan rates, remember many small 
businesses cannot qualify for a loan. So even though factoring is an expensive 
way of raising short-term funds, it is popular among small businesses. A com-
pany can often reduce its factoring cost if it agrees to reimburse the factor for 
slow-paying accounts, or to assume the risk for customers who don’t pay at all. 
Remember, factoring is not a loan; it is the sale of a firm’s asset (accounts 
receivable). Factoring is common in the textile and furniture businesses, and 
in growing numbers of global trade ventures.  
 Commercial Paper 
 Often a corporation needs funds for just a few months and prefers not to have 
to negotiate with a commercial bank. One strategy available to larger firms is 
to sell commercial paper.   Commercial paper   consists of  unsecured promis-
sory notes, in amounts of $100,000 and up, that mature or come due in 270 
days or less. Commercial paper states a fixed amount of money the business 
agrees to repay to the lender (investor) on a specific date at a specified rate of 
interest. 
 Because commercial paper is unsecured, only financially stable firms 
(mainly large corporations with excellent credit reputations) are able to sell it. 
Commercial paper can be a quick path to short-term funds at lower interest 
than charged by commercial banks. Even very stable firms like General Elec-
tric, however, had trouble selling commercial paper during the Great Reces-
sion. The Federal Reserve had to step in and assist many companies with their 
short-term financing by purchasing their short-term commercial paper. Since 
most commercial paper matures in 30 to 90 days, it can be an investment 
opportunity for buyers who can afford to put up cash for short periods to earn 
some interest on their money.  28 
 Credit Cards 
 According to the National Small Business Association (NSBA), nearly one-
third of all small firms now use credit cards to finance their businesses.  29 Even 
though more businesses are turning to credit cards for financing, two-thirds 
believe the terms of their cards are getting worse and it’s very likely they are 
correct. The Credit Card Responsibility Accountability and Disclosure Act 
reduced consumer interest rates and approved many protections for consum-
ers against card-company abuses. Unfortunately rates for small-business and 
corporate credit cards did not fall under the protection of the law. Still, with 
many traditional financing options closed to them, entrepreneurs are often 
forced to finance their firms with credit cards. 
 Credit cards provide a readily available line of credit that can save time 
and the likely embarrassment of being rejected for a bank loan. Of course, in 
contrast to the convenience they offer, credit cards are extremely risky and 
costly. Interest rates can be exorbitant, and there can be considerable penal-
ties if users fail to make their payments on time. Savvy businesspersons study 
the perks that are offered with many cards and determine which might be the 
most beneficial to their companies. Joe Speiser, of pet-food distributor 
 Petflow.com , found a cash-back card that helped put additional dollars back 
into his business.  30 Still, when dealing with credit cards, remember it’s an 
expensive way to borrow money and credit cards are probably best used as a 
last resort. 
 After the Test Prep questions, we’ll look into long-term financing 
options.  
 commercial paper  
 Unsecured promissory notes of 
$100,000 and up that mature 
(come due) in 270 days or less.  

519
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
 Identify and describe different sources of long-term financing.  
 OBTAINING LONG-TERM FINANCING 
 In a financial plan, forecasting determines the amount of funding the firm will 
need over various periods and the most appropriate sources for obtaining 
those funds. In setting long-term financing objectives, financial managers gen-
erally ask three questions:
 
1. What are our organization’s long-term goals and objectives?  
 
2. What funds do we need to achieve the firm’s long-term goals and 
objectives?  
 
3. What sources of long-term funding (capital) are available, and which 
will best fit our needs?  
 Firms need long-term capital to purchase expensive assets such as plant 
and equipment, to develop new products, or perhaps finance their expan-
sion. In major corporations, the board of directors and top management 
usually make decisions about long-term financing, along with finance and 
accounting executives. Pfizer, one of the world’s largest research-based bio-
medical and pharmaceutical companies, spends over $6 billion a year 
researching and developing new products.  31 The development of a single 
new drug could take 10 years and cost the firm over $1 billion before it brings 
in any profit. Plus the company loses its patent protection on a drug after 
20 years.  32 It’s easy to see why high-level managers make the long-term 
financing decisions at Pfizer. Owners of small and medium-sized businesses 
are almost always actively engaged in analyzing their long-term financing 
decisions. 
 As we noted earlier, long-term funding comes from two major sources, 
debt financing and equity financing. Let’s look at these sources next. But first 
check out the Reaching Beyond Our Borders box to learn why a source of 
long-term funding is raising eyebrows in the financial community.  
 Debt Financing 
 Debt financing is borrowing money the company has a legal obligation to 
repay. Firms can borrow by either getting a loan from a lending institution or 
issuing bonds. 
 Debt Financing by Borrowing from Lending Institutions  
Long-term loans 
are usually due within 3 to 7 years but may extend to 15 or 20 years. A   term-loan 
agreement  is a promissory note that requires the borrower to repay the loan 
LO 18–5
term-loan agreement
A promissory note that requires 
the borrower to repay the loan 
in specified installments.
 • What does an invoice containing the terms  2/10, net 30 mean?  
 • What’s the difference between trade credit and a line of credit?  
 • What’s the key difference between a secured and an unsecured loan?  
 • What is factoring? What are some of the considerations factors consider 
in establishing their discount rate?  
•
What does an invoice
 test prep   
containing the
co
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

520
 reaching beyond our borders 
 Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) 
are large investment companies 
that are owned by governments. 
They have been a part of global 
financial markets for decades and 
today are currently valued at over 
$6 trillion. The largest SWFs are 
operated by Norway, United Arab 
Emirates, Saudi Arabia, China, 
Kuwait, and Singapore. During the 
recent financial crisis, SWFs were 
hailed as heroes and saviors in 
the U.S. financial community 
because of the billions of dollars 
they invested in U.S. companies 
that were struggling to survive. 
Although SWFs provide dis-
tressed companies with much-
needed capital when it is needed, 
the presence of foreign govern-
ments in the U.S. business world 
makes some people nervous. This 
is especially true with SWFs 
controlled by nations that the 
United States sometimes has 
shaky relationships with in global 
affairs. 
 Time Warner’s Manhattan 
headquarters found ready buyers 
from the SWFs of Abu Dhabi and 
Singapore. New foreign investors 
from China’s SWF are making 
their debut in the U. S. economy. 
Such activity has caused some 
politicians and business execu-
tives to question the motives and 
intentions of these government-
operated investment funds. 
 Fortunately, the facts don’t 
seem to support the suspicions 
about SWFs. Although purchases 
like Time Warner’s headquarters 
raise questions about U.S. real 
estate being taken over by for-
eign governments, in reality for-
eign investment in the United 
States accounted for only 10 per-
cent of the total real estate pur-
chases in 2013. SWFs also face 
significant investigation by the 
U.S. government if they attempt to 
purchase more than 10 percent of 
a U.S.-based company. It seems 
that SWFs provide more advan-
tages for the U.S. economy than 
serious threats. However, it’s 
always safe to be prudent when 
inviting investments from foreign 
governments. For the moment, 
though, foreign governments 
seem more focused on address-
ing their own problems rather 
than causing a stir here. 
 Sources: Eliot Brown, “Time Warner Nears Deal to 
Sell Headquarters,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 15, 2014; Ashley Stahl, “The Promise and 
Perils of Sovereign Wealth Funds,”  Forbes, 
December 19, 2013; and John Aziz, “Does the 
United States Need a Sovereign Wealth Fund?” 
 The Week, January 20, 2014. 
 Are They Heroes or Hustlers? 
 www.adia.ae  
with interest in specified monthly or annual installments. A major advantage is 
that the loan interest is tax-deductible. 
 Long-term loans are both larger and more expensive to the firm than 
short-term loans. Since the repayment period can be quite long, lenders 
assume more risk and usually require collateral, which may be real estate, 
machinery, equipment, company stock, or other items of value. Lenders may 
also require certain restrictions to force the firm to act responsibly. The inter-
est rate is based on the adequacy of collateral, the firm’s credit rating, and the 
general level of market interest rates. The greater the risk a lender takes in 
making a loan, the higher the rate of interest. This principle is known as the 
 risk/return trade-off. 
 Debt Financing by Issuing Bonds 
If an organization is unable to obtain its 
long-term financing needs by getting a loan from a lending institution such as 
a bank, it may try to issue bonds. To put it simply, a bond is like an IOU with a 
promise to repay the amount borrowed, with interest, on a certain date. The 
terms of the agreement in a bond issue are the   indenture terms. The types of 
organizations that can issue bonds include federal, state, and local govern-
ments; federal government agencies; foreign governments; and corporations. 
 You may already be familiar with bonds. You may own investments like 
U.S. government savings bonds, or perhaps you volunteered your time to help a 
local school district pass a bond issue. If your community is building a new sta-
dium or cultural center, it may sell bonds to finance the project. Businesses and 
governments compete when issuing bonds. Potential investors (individuals and 
institutions) measure the risk of purchasing a bond against the return the bond 
promises to pay—the interest—and the issuer’s ability to repay when promised. 
 risk/return trade-off  
 The principle that the greater 
the risk a lender takes in 
making a loan, the higher the 
interest rate required.  
 indenture terms  
 The terms of agreement in a 
bond issue.  

521
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
 Like other forms of long-term debt, bonds can be secured or unsecured. A 
  secured bond   is issued with some form of collateral, such as real estate, 
equipment, or other pledged assets. If the bond’s indenture terms are violated 
(e.g., not paying interest payments), the bondholder can issue a claim on the 
collateral. An   unsecured bond,  called a debenture bond, is backed only by the 
reputation of the issuer. Investors in such bonds simply trust that the organi-
zation issuing the bond will make good on its financial commitments. 
 Bonds are a key means of long-term financing for many organizations. 
They can also be valuable investments for private individuals or institutions. 
Given this importance, we will discuss bonds in depth in Chapter 19.  
 Equity Financing 
 If a firm cannot obtain a long-term loan from a lending institution or is unable 
to sell bonds to investors, it may seek equity financing. Equity financing makes 
funds available when the owners of the firm sell shares of ownership to out-
side investors in the form of stock, when they reinvest company earnings in 
the business, or when they obtain funds from venture capitalists. 
 Equity Financing by Selling Stock  
The key thing to remember about stock 
is that stockholders become owners in the organization. Generally, the corpo-
ration’s board of directors decides the number of shares of stock that will be 
offered to investors for purchase. The first time a company offers to sell its 
stock to the general public is called an  initial public offering (IPO). Selling stock 
to the public to obtain funds is by no means easy or automatic. U.S. companies 
can issue stock for public purchase only if they meet requirements set by the 
U.S. Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) and various state agencies.  33 
They can offer different types of stock such as common and preferred. We’ll 
discuss IPOs and common and preferred stock in depth in Chapter 19.  
 Equity Financing from Retained Earnings  
You probably remember from 
Chapter 17 that the profits the company keeps and reinvests in the firm are 
called  retained earnings. Retained earnings often are a major source of 
 secured bond  
 A bond issued with some form 
of collateral.  
 unsecured bond  
 A bond backed only by the 
reputation of the issuer; also 
called a debenture bond.  
 Major League Baseball 
is a big business, and 
building a new stadium 
requires big dollars. 
When the St. Louis 
Cardinals needed 
financing to replace 
their old stadium with a 
new state-of-the-art 
facility, St. Louis County 
issued bonds that 
helped finance the 
construction of the 
Cardinals’ new home. 
What organizations in 
your community have 
issued bonds, and for 
what purpose?  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
522
long-term funds, especially for small businesses since they often have fewer 
financing alternatives, such as selling stock or bonds, than large businesses 
do. However, large corporations also depend on retained earnings for needed 
long-term funding. In fact, retained earnings are usually the most favored 
source of meeting long-term capital needs. A company that uses them saves 
interest payments, dividends (payments for investing in stock), and any pos-
sible underwriting fees for issuing bonds or stock. Retained earnings also 
 create no new ownership in the firm, as stock does. 
 Suppose you wanted to buy an expensive personal asset such as a new car. 
Ideally you would go to your personal savings account and take out the neces-
sary cash. No hassle! No interest! Unfortunately, few people have such large 
amounts of cash available. Most businesses are no different. Even though they 
would like to finance long-term needs from operations (retained earnings), 
few have the resources available to accomplish this.  
 Equity Financing from Venture Capital  
The hardest time for a business to 
raise money is when it is starting up or just beginning to expand.  34 A start-up 
business typically has few assets and no market track record, so the chances of 
borrowing significant amounts of money from a bank are slim.   Venture  capital   
is money invested in new or emerging companies that some investors—venture 
capitalists—believe have great profit potential. Venture capital helped firms 
like Intel, Apple, and Cisco Systems get started and helped Facebook and 
Google expand and grow. Venture capitalists invest in a company in return for 
part ownership of the business. They expect higher-than-average returns and 
competent management performance for their investment. 
 The venture capital industry originally began as an alternative investment 
vehicle for wealthy families. The Rockefeller family, for example (whose vast 
fortune came from John D. Rockefeller’s Standard Oil Company, started in the 
19th century), financed Sanford McDonnell when he was operating his com-
pany from an airplane hangar. That small venture eventually grew into McDon-
nell Douglas, a large aerospace and defense contractor that merged with 
Boeing Corporation in 1997. The venture capital industry grew significantly in 
 venture capital  
 Money that is invested in new 
or emerging companies that 
are perceived as having great 
profit potential.  
 When credit grew tight 
in the recent financial 
crisis, John Mickey, who 
makes promotional 
items with corporate 
logos, tapped his 
retirement funds to 
obtain start-up money 
for his new venture. 
Why is this financing 
strategy considered 
risky?  

523
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
the 1990s, especially in high-tech centers like California’s Silicon Valley, where 
venture capitalists concentrated on Internet-related companies. Problems in 
the technology industry and a slowdown in the economy in the early 2000s 
reduced venture capital expenditures. The Great Recession caused venture 
capital spending to drop to new lows. Today, as the economy recovers from the 
recession, venture capital is slowly rising again.  
 Comparing Debt and Equity Financing 
 Figure 18.6  compares debt and equity financing options. Raising funds through 
borrowing to increase the firm’s rate of return is referred to as   leverage.   
Though debt increases risk because it creates a financial obligation that must 
be repaid, it also enhances the firm’s ability to increase profits. Recall that two 
key jobs of the financial manager or CFO are forecasting the firm’s need for 
borrowed funds and planning how to manage these funds once they are 
obtained.  
 Firms are very concerned with the cost of capital.   Cost of capital   is the 
rate of return a company must earn in order to meet the demands of its lend-
ers and expectations of its equity holders (stockholders or venture capitalists). 
If the firm’s earnings are larger than the interest payments on borrowed funds, 
business owners can realize a higher rate of return than if they used equity 
financing.  Figure 18.7  describes an example, again involving our vegetarian 
restaurant, Very Vegetarian (introduced in Chapter 13). If Very Vegetarian 
needed $200,000 in new financing, it could consider debt by selling bonds or 
equity through offering stock. Comparing the two options in this situation, 
you can see that Very Vegetarian would benefit by selling bonds since the com-
pany’s earnings are greater than the interest paid on borrowed funds (bonds). 
However, if the firm’s earnings were less than the interest paid on borrowed 
funds (bonds), Very Vegetarian could lose money. It’s also important to remem-
ber that bonds, like all debt, have to be repaid at a specific time.  
 Individual firms must determine exactly how to balance debt and equity 
financing by comparing the costs and benefits of each. Leverage ratios (dis-
cussed in Chapter 17) can also give companies an industry standard for this 
balance, to which they can compare themselves. Still debt varies considerably 
among major companies and industries. Tech leader Apple, for example, has 
modest long-term debt of $16 billion even though it has more than $140 bil-
lion in cash available. Automaker Ford Motor Company has almost $110 
 leverage  
 Raising needed funds through 
borrowing to increase a firm’s 
rate of return.  
 cost of capital  
 The rate of return a company 
must earn in order to meet the 
demands of its lenders and 
expectations of its equity 
holders.  
 FIGURE 18.6 DIFFERENCES BETWEEN DEBT AND EQUITY FINANCING 
Type of Financing
Conditions          
   Debt  
 
         Equity
Management inﬂuence
Repayment
Yearly obligations
Tax beneﬁts
There’s usually none unless special
conditions have been agreed on.
Debt has a maturity date.
Principal must be repaid.
Payment of interest is a contractual
obligation.
Interest is tax-deductible.
Common stockholders have voting
rights.
Stock has no maturity date.
The company is never required to
repay equity.
The ﬁrm isn’t legally liable to pay
dividends.
Dividends are paid from after-tax
income and aren’t deductible.

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
524
 FIGURE 18.7 USING 
LEVERAGE (DEBT) 
VERSUS EQUITY 
FINANCING 
 Very Vegetarian wants to 
raise $200,000 in new capital. 
Compare the firm’s debt and 
equity options. 
billion of debt on its balance sheet, mild compared to General Electric, which 
has over $360 billion of debt on its balance sheet. According to Standard & 
Poor’s and Moody’s Investors Service (firms that provide corporate and finan-
cial research), the debt of large industrial corporations and utilities typically 
ranges between 30 and 35 percent of its total assets. The amount of small-
business debt obviously varies considerably from firm to firm.  
 Lessons Learned from the Recent Financial Crisis 
 The financial crisis that started in 2008 caused financial markets to suffer 
their worst fall since the Great Depression of the 1920s and 1930s. The col-
lapse of financial markets could be laid at the feet of financial managers for 
failing to do their job effectively. Poor investment decisions and risky financial 
dealings (especially in real estate) caused long-standing financial firms such 
as Lehman Brothers to close their doors. The multibillion-dollar Ponzi scheme 
of once-respected “financial manager” Bernie Madoff further caused the pub-
lic’s trust in financial managers to disappear. Unfortunately, it also caused 
many investors’ funds to disappear as well. 
 The financial meltdown led the U.S. Congress to pass sweeping financial 
regulatory reform. The Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and Consumer Protec-
tion Act affects almost every aspect of the U.S. financial services industry. As 
the government increases its involvement and intervention in financial mar-
kets, the requirements of financial institutions and financial managers have 
become more stringent.  35 This means that the job of the financial manager 
promises to become even more challenging. The events in the late 2000s ques-
tioned the integrity and good judgment of financial managers much like events 
in the early 2000s questioned the integrity and judgment of the accounting 
industry (see Chapter 17). Without a doubt, financial managers have a long 
road back to earning the trust of the public. 
 Chapter 19 takes a close look at securities markets as a source of securing 
long-term financing for businesses and as a base for investment options for 
private investors. You will learn how securities exchanges work, how firms 
issue stocks and bonds, how to choose the right investment strategy, how to 
buy and sell stock, where to find up-to-date information about stocks and 
bonds, and more. Finance takes on a new dimension when you see how you 
can participate in financial markets yourself.  
Additional Debt
Additional Equity
Stockholders’ equity  
$500,000
Additional equity  
—
Total equity  
$500,000
Bond @ 8% interest  
200,000
Total shareholder equity  
$500,000
Gross proﬁt  
$100,000
Less bond interest  
216,000
Operating proﬁt  
$ 84,000
Return on equity  
16.8%
($84,000 ÷ $500,000 = 16.8%)
Stockholders’ equity  
$500,000
Additional equity  
$200,000
Total equity  
$700,000
Bond interest  
—
Total shareholder equity  
$700,000
Gross proﬁt  
$100,000
Less interest  
—
Operating proﬁt  
$100,000
Return on equity  
14.3%
($100,000 ÷ $700,000 = 14.3%)
Year-End Earnings

525
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
  Explain the role and responsibilities of financial managers. 
 • 
 What are the most common ways firms fail financially?  
 The most common financial problems are (1) undercapitalization, (2) 
poor control over cash flow, and (3) inadequate expense control.  
 • 
 What do financial managers do?  
 Financial managers plan, budget, control funds, obtain funds, collect 
funds, conduct audits, manage taxes, and advise top management on 
financial matters.  
  Outline the financial planning process, and explain the three key budgets in 
the financial plan. 
 • 
 What are the three budgets in a financial plan?  
 The capital budget is the spending plan for expensive assets such as prop-
erty, plant, and equipment. The cash budget is the projected cash balance 
at the end of a given period. The operating (master) budget summarizes 
the information in the other two budgets. It projects dollar allocations to 
various costs and expenses given various revenues.  
  Explain why firms need operating funds. 
 • 
 What are firms’ major financial needs?  
 Businesses need financing for four major tasks: (1) managing day-by-day 
operations, (2) controlling credit operations, (3) acquiring needed inven-
tory, and (4) making capital expenditures.  
 • 
 What’s the difference between debt financing and equity financing?  
 Debt financing raises funds by borrowing. Equity financing raises funds 
from within the firm through investment of retained earnings, sale of 
stock to investors, or sale of part ownership to venture capitalists.  
 • 
 What’s the difference between short-term and long-term financing?  
 Short-term financing raises funds to be repaid in less than a year, whereas 
long-term financing raises funds to be repaid over a longer period.  
Identify and describe different sources of short-term financing. 
 • 
 Why should businesses use trade credit?  
 Trade credit is the least expensive and most convenient form of short-term 
financing. Businesses can buy goods today and pay for them sometime in 
the future.  
LO 18–1
LO 18–2
LO 18–3
LO 18–4
 summary 
 • What are the two major forms of debt financing available to a firm?  
 • How does debt financing differ from equity financing?  
 • What are the three major forms of equity financing available to a firm?  
 • What is leverage, and why do firms choose to use it?  
•
What are the two majo
 test prep   
or forms of deb
or f
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
526
 • 
 What is meant by a line of credit and a revolving credit agreement?  
 A line of credit is an agreement by a bank to lend a specified amount of 
money to the business at any time, if the money is available. A revolving 
credit agreement is a line of credit that guarantees a loan will be available—
for a fee.  
 • 
 What’s the difference between a secured loan and an unsecured loan?  
 An unsecured loan has no collateral backing it. Secured loans have collat-
eral backed by assets such as accounts receivable, inventory, or other 
property of value.  
 • 
 Is factoring a form of secured loan?  
 No, factoring means selling accounts receivable at a discounted rate to a 
factor (an intermediary that pays cash for those accounts and keeps the 
funds it collects on them).  
 • 
 What’s commercial paper?  
 Commercial paper is a corporation’s unsecured promissory note maturing 
in 270 days or less.  
  Identify and describe different sources of long-term financing. 
 • 
 What are the major sources of long-term financing?  
 Debt financing is the sale of bonds to investors and long-term loans from 
banks and other financial institutions. Equity financing is obtained 
through the sale of company stock, from the firm’s retained earnings, or 
from venture capital firms.  
 • 
 What are the two major forms of debt financing?  
 Debt financing comes from two sources: selling bonds and borrowing 
from individuals, banks, and other financial institutions. Bonds can be 
secured by some form of collateral or unsecured. The same is true of loans.  
 • 
 What’s leverage, and how do firms use it?  
 Leverage is borrowing funds to invest in expansion, major asset purchases, 
or research and development. Firms measure the risk of borrowing against 
the potential for higher profits.  
 
•
What are
LO 18–5
 key terms 
 budget 508
 capital budget  508
 capital expenditures  512
 cash budget  508
 cash flow forecast  507
 commercial finance 
companies  517
 commercial paper  518
 cost of capital  523
 debt financing  513
 equity financing  513
 factoring  517
 finance 504
 financial control  508
 financial management  504
 financial managers  504
 indenture terms  520
 leverage  523
 line of credit  516
 long-term financing  513
 long-term forecast  507
 operating (or master) 
budget  508
 promissory note  514
 revolving credit 
agreement  517
 risk/return trade-off  520
 secured bond   521
 secured loan  516
 short-term financing  513
 short-term forecast  507
 term-loan agreement  519
 trade credit  514
 unsecured bond  521
 unsecured loan  516
 venture capital  522

527
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
 1. What are the primary sources of short-term funds for new business own-
ers? What are their major sources of long-term funds? 
 2. Why does a finance manager need to understand accounting information 
if the firm has a trained accountant on its staff? 
 3. Why do firms generally prefer to borrow funds to obtain long-term financ-
ing rather than issue shares of stock? 
n-
 critical thinking 
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  Go to your college’s website and see whether its operating budget is online. 
If not, go to the campus library and see whether the reference librarian 
has a copy of your college’s operating budget for the current year. Try to 
identify major capital expenditures your college has planned for the future.  
 2.  One of the most difficult concepts to get across to small-business owners 
is the need to take all the trade credit they can get. For example, the credit 
terms 2/10, net 30 can save businesses money if they pay their bills in the 
first 10 days. Work with a group of classmates to build a convincing finan-
cial argument for using trade credit. 
 3.  Go online and check the capitalization required to open a franchise of 
your choice, like Subway or McDonald’s. Does the franchisor offer finan-
cial assistance to prospective franchisees? Evaluate the cost of the fran-
chise versus its business potential using the risk/return trade-off discussed 
in the chapter. 
 4.  Contact a lending officer at a local bank in your community, or visit the 
bank’s website, to check the bank’s policies on providing a business a line 
of credit and a revolving line of credit. Evaluate the chances that this bank 
will give a small business either form of short-term loan. 
 5.   Factoring accounts receivable is a form of financing used since the days of 
Babylonian King Hammurabi 4,000 years ago. Today it’s still a source of 
short-term funds used by small businesses. Visit  www.21stfinancialsolutions.
com to get more in-depth information about factoring and be prepared to 
discuss the pros and cons of factoring to the class.  
 
 
  
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To identify which types of companies qualify for financing through the Small 
Business Administration. 
 EXERCISE 
 Many small-business owners have a difficult time finding financing to start or 
expand their business. The Small Business Administration is one potential 
source of financing for many types of small businesses, but there are also 
 
 
 
 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
528
some businesses that do not qualify for SBA loans. Go to   www.sba.gov/content/
businesses-eligible-ineligible-sba-assistance  and see whether the following 
businesses are eligible to apply for SBA financing:
 1. Growing Like a Weed is a lawn care business that needs funding to buy 
additional equipment in order to expand. Does it meet SBA criteria? Why 
or why not?  
 2. Glamour Galore is a cosmetic company that pays sales commissions based 
on a system that depends upon salespeople recruiting additional salespeo-
ple. It needs funding to build a marketing campaign. Does it meet SBA 
criteria? Why or why not?  
 3. Glory Days is an old-time pinball and jukebox refurbishing company. Its 
founding partners need funding to buy inventory. Do they meet SBA crite-
ria? Why or why not?  
 4. Lettuce Entertain U is a company needing funding to remodel an old 
warehouse to house its latest vegan restaurant. Does it meet SBA criteria? 
Why or why not?  
 video case   
 This video features the start-up company called 
Tom and Eddie’s, an upscale hamburger restaurant 
in the Chicago area. Started in 2009 at the height 
of the great recession, the partners had a difficult 
time securing bank financing. As a result, they 
financed the operation themselves with the help of 
a third partner, Vince Nocarando. The partners 
both had long and successful careers as executives 
with McDonald’s. Tom was executive vice presi-
dent for new locations and Eddie was the president 
and CEO of North American operations. 
 Both partners, as a result of their experience at 
McDonald’s, are well suited for the restaurant busi-
ness. One of the most challenging and important 
elements of a successful start-up, like Tom and 
Eddie’s, is a talented financial manager. Recognizing 
the importance of the financial function, they hired 
another former McDonald’s executive, Brian Gor-
don, as CFO. Gordon explains that cash flow is the 
most important element in starting up a restaurant. 
In fact, cash flow is more important than profits in 
the first and perhaps second year of operation. Sec-
ond to cash flow in terms of importance for sustain-
ability is the management and control of inventory. 
 Cash flow is important, according to the CFO, 
because of the “known” costs, such as rent, pay-
roll, inventory, taxes, and utilities. These are 
“known” costs because they are recurring and the 
relative costs are known on a weekly or monthly 
basis. CFO Gordon explains that cash flow is 
important in managing these known costs because 
of the significant “unknown” factor, which is sales. 
 Tom and Eddie’s uses a very technology-
intensive inventory management and control system 
because of the perishable nature of foodstuffs 
associated with the restaurant business. Accord-
ing to CFO Gordon, the restaurant has “net 14” 
terms with its food vendors. This means that the 
invoice is paid 14 days after the receipt of the 
goods. This is a form of financing, according to 
the CFO, that allows the company to turn that 
inventory once or twice during the 14-day period. 
 At the time of the video, Tom and Eddie’s was 
in its fifteenth month of operation with three res-
taurants in the Chicago area. According to one of 
the partners, Eddie, the goal is to grow to 10 stores 
and then look at franchising the operation. When 
considering where to open a new operation, Eddie 
indicates that careful consideration is given to the 
demographics of the area, including the average 
income level of those working and living in the 
area to be served, the age of the population, the 
square footage of the surrounding commercial 
space, and ease of access to the location. Equip-
ment is purchased rather than financed by the 
partners. 
 According to the partners, entrepreneurs 
think in terms of opportunities, not in terms of 
potential failure. With 15 months of successful 
operation, capital will be easier to raise from tra-
ditional sources of financing, such as banks, to 
expand the operation. Who knows, maybe a fran-
chised Tom and Eddie’s will be opening soon in a 
location near you. 
 STARTING UP: TOM AND EDDIE’S 

529
Financial Management
CHAPTER 18
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1.  What are the three factors associated with 
operating funds, according to the video?  
 2.  What is meant by the term “front of the house”?  
 3.  Why, according to the video, was bank financ-
ing unavailable for Tom and Eddie’s start-up?  
 1. 
Karen Weise, “Big Paydays for CFOs,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, May 19, 2013; and Emily Coyle, “Meet the Five 
Highest Paid CFOs in the S&P 500,”  The Week, July 8, 2013. 
 2. 
Mariella Segarra and David M. Katz, “What’s It Like to Be a 
Nonprofit CFO?”    CFO.com , November 27, 2013. 
 3. 
Jake Grouvm, “2008 Financial Crisis Impact Still Hurting 
States,”  USA Today, September 15, 2013. 
 4. 
Tim Higgins, Ian Katz, and Kasia Kimasinaska, “GM Bailout 
Ends as U.S. Sells Last of ‘Government Motors,’”  Bloomberg 
Personal Finance, December 9, 2013; and Bill Vlasic and 
Anne Lowery, “U.S. Ends Bailout of G.M., Selling Last Shares 
of Stock,”  The New York Times, December 9, 2013. 
 5. 
Ibid. 
 6. 
Saabria Chaudhuri, Michael Rapoport, and Alan Zibel, “Small 
Banks Face TARP Hit,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 7, 2014. 
 7. 
McCormick,   www.mccormick.com  , accessed February 2014. 
 8. 
Amy Haimerl, “15 Costly Mistakes Startups Make,”  Crain’s 
Detroit Business, February 10, 2014. 
 9. 
Glenn Kessler, “Senator Scott’s Claim That the Medical 
Device Tax Will Cost Small Business $29 Billion,”  The 
Washington Post, February 4, 2014. 
 10. 
Kathy Hoffelder, “Poor Internal Control Tests Hurt Financial 
Statement Audits,”  CFO, October 13, 2013. 
 11. 
Kathy Hoffelder, “Internal Audit Shines Brighter with Boards,” 
CFO, March 22, 2013. 
 12. 
Bill Conerly, “Long-Term Economic Forecast: Key Issues and 
Business Strategy Implications,”  Forbes, January 12, 2014. 
 13. 
Russ Banham, “May the Field Be with You,”  CFO, October 9, 
2013. 
 14. 
Keith Bradsher, “As China’s Economy Slows, the Pain Hits 
Home,”  The New York Times, January 29, 2014; and Steve 
Shafer, “Why Panic-Prone Emerging Markets Are Breaking 
Down in 2014,”  Forbes, February 3, 2014. 
 15. 
Khan Academy,   www.khanacademy.org  , accessed February 
2014. 
 16. 
Edward Teach, “Calm, Cool, and Collecting,”  CFO, October 
15, 2013; and Jennifer Smith, “Law Firms Press to Get Bill Paid 
by Year End,”  The Wall Street Journal, December 22, 2013. 
 17. 
Scott Liebs, “4 Money Mistakes That Entrepreneurs Must 
Avoid,”  Inc., February 2014. 
 18. 
T. J. McCue, “Why Don’t More Small Businesses Accept 
Credit Cards?”  Forbes, August 8, 2013; and “What You May 
Not Know about Your Credit Card Processor,”  Milwaukee 
Journal Sentinal, February 3, 2014. 
 19. 
Scott Kirsner, “Startups Offer Tech to Change the Way You 
Pay,”  The Boston Globe, February 9, 2014. 
 20. Venessa Wong, “Chipotle Wants to Speed Up with Mobile 
Payments,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, February 3, 2014. 
 21. J. J. Colao, “Interchange Fees Are for Suckers: LevelUp Hints 
at the Future of Mobile Payments,”  Forbes, March 21, 2013. 
 22. Ty Kisel, “Small Business Financing Is Available, Just Not 
Where You’re Looking,”  Forbes, September 24, 2013. 
 23. Karen Haywood Queen, “Borrowing from Friends and 
Family,”  MSN Money, September 3, 2013. 
 24. National Federation of Independent Business,   www.nfib.com  , 
accessed February 2014. 
 25. “Consumer Finance Protection Bureau,”  The Economist, 
February 1, 2014. 
 26. Stephen D. Simpson, CFA, “The Basics of Lines of Credit,” 
Forbes.com , August 6, 2013. 
 27.  www.gecapital.com  , accessed February 2014; and Chanella 
Bessette, “At GE, a Push for Innovation Through 
Partnerships,”  Fortune, February 7, 2014. 
 28. John Parry, “U.S. Commercial Paper Contracts to Lowest Level 
Since September,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, January 23, 2014. 
 29. Catherine Clifford, “Best Credit Cards for Small Business 
Owners in 2013,”  Entrepreneur, June 7, 2013; and National Small 
Business Advocate,   www.nsba.biz  , accessed February 2014. 
 30. Annamaria Andriotis, “The Return of Small-Business Credit 
Cards,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 16, 2012; “American 
Express OPEN Revamps Simple Cash (R) Business Credit 
Card by Giving Small Business Owners the Ability to 
Customize Their Cash Back Rewards,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, January 28, 2014; and “  Petflow.com  Continues 
Dominant Rise to Become Highest-Trafficked Online Pet 
Property in North America,”  Business Wire, February 13, 2014. 
 31. Jonathan D. Rockoff and Tess Stynes, “Pfizer Is Upbeat 
about Breast Cancer Drug, Pneumonia Vaccine,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, January 28, 2014. 
 32. Dan Carroll, “Pfizer Beats Falling Profit as the Dow Bounces 
Back from Recent Lows,”  The Motley Fool, January 28, 2014; 
and Johanna Bennett, “Pfizer’s Finally a Buy,”  Barron’s, 
February 12, 2014. 
 33. Ryan C. Fuhrman, “The Road to Creating an IPO,”  Forbes, 
August 28, 2013; and David Gelles and Michael J. de la 
Merced, “New IPO Rules Promise a Lot Less Information,” 
Boston Globe, February 10, 2014. 
 34. Sam Hogg, “Why So Many Startups Never Reach Their 
Second Funding Round,”  Entrepreneur, February 8, 2014. 
 35. Abha Bhattarai and Catherine Ho, “Four Years into Dodd-
Frank, Local Banks Say This Is the Year They’ll Feel the Most 
Impact,”  The Washington Post, February 7, 2014. 
e Wants to Speed Up with Mobile
 notes 
Page 503: © Kim White/Bloomberg/Getty Images; 
p. 505: © Jim Thompson/Albuquerque Journal/
Zumapress.com/Alamy; p. 506: © Justin Kase/
Alamy RF; p. 511: © ICP/age fotostock; p. 514: 
© Piet Mall/Getty Images; p. 515: © Richard 
Levine/Alamy; p. 516: Courtesy of thredUP; 
p. 517: © benedek/iStock/360/Getty Images RF; 
p. 521: © James A. Finley/AP Images; p. 522: 
© Steve Kagan/Redux.
Courtesy of thredUP;
 photo credits 

530
 Using Securities 
Markets for Financing 
and Investing 
Opportunities 
 19 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 19-1 Describe the role of securities markets and of investment bankers. 
 LO 19-2 Identify the stock exchanges where securities are traded. 
 LO 19-3 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of equity financing by 
issuing stock, and detail the differences between common and 
preferred stock. 
 LO 19-4 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of obtaining debt 
financing by issuing bonds, and identify the classes and features of 
bonds. 
 LO 19-5 Explain how to invest in securities markets and set investment 
objectives such as long-term growth, income, cash, and protection 
from inflation. 
 LO 19-6 Analyze the opportunities stocks offer as investments. 
 LO 19-7 Analyze the opportunities bonds offer as investments. 
 LO 19-8 Explain the investment opportunities in mutual funds and 
exchange-traded funds (ETFs). 
 LO 19-9 Describe how indicators like the Dow Jones Industrial Average 
affect the market.  

531
 Mellody  Hobson  
 • President of Ariel Investments 
 • Expert investor 
 • Financial educator 
 www.arielinvestments.com/ 
 @ArielFunds 
I
 n some ways, making a stock trade in 
the modern age has become easy. 
Anybody with an e-mail address and a 
bank account can sign up with an 
online brokerage like E*Trade or 
Schwab and instantly start trading stocks 
from around the globe. However, having 
the ability to make  wise trades is another 
matter. 
 Many people, hoping to understand 
investing, turn to experts like Mellody 
Hobson. As president of Ariel Invest-
ments, Hobson oversees assets of more 
than $9 billion. Hobson is interested in 
more than just her company’s bottom 
line. As a staunch advocate for eco-
nomic literacy and investor education, 
Hobson regularly contributes financial 
advice on radio, TV, and a column in 
Black Enterprise Magazine. She sits on 
the boards of prominent companies like 
DreamWorks Animation, Starbucks, and 
Estee Lauder. As a result, Hobson is 
considered to be one of the most intelli-
gent and capable financial advisors in 
the industry. “She is the Picasso of 
questions,” said DreamWorks CEO Jeff 
Katzenberg. “She can ask a question 
like nobody else. You have to find in 
yourself the answer to it. There’s a real 
art to that.” 
 Hobson was born the youngest of six 
children to a single mom in Chicago. She 
developed a strong work ethic, and was 
the first person in her family to attend 
college, graduating from Princeton Uni-
versity in 1991. She interned at Ariel 
Investments while in college and 
returned there to accept an entry-level 
position when she finished school. On 
her first day, Hobson received a crucial 
bit of advice from CEO John Rogers that 
still sticks with her: “John informed me 
that I would frequently find myself in the 
company of rich and successful people 
with big titles, lots of degrees and lots of 
experience,” said Hobson. “And yet, my 
ideas could still be as good or even 
better.” 
 Rogers’s words encouraged Hobson 
as she rose through the ranks at Ariel. 
By 2000 she was appointed company 
president, placing her among the most 
prominent African American women in 
business. Under her watch Ariel Invest-
ments has grown to become the largest 
minority-owned mutual fund in the 
world. 
 Hobson has often said that her 
odds-defying rise to the top would not 
have been possible without a patient 
attitude. In fact, patience lies at the 
heart of Hobson’s investment strategy 
at Ariel. True to its turtle logo, the com-
pany focuses on stocks and equity 
funds that will perform well in the long 
term, as opposed to risky but poten-
tially lucrative short-term options. “For 
30 years, we have been underscoring 
this idea of patient investing,” said Hob-
son. “However, patience is not just our 
investment strategy but also how we 
build our business. Ariel is the only 
job I have ever had, and I have 
worked here more than 22 years. 
We live these values.” 
 Expert investors like Mellody 
Hobson value sound judgment over 
just about anything else. But to be a 
successful investor, you need a little 
education on other important topics 
as well. In this chapter you’ll learn 
about the many ways that money can be 
invested in securities markets. 
 Sources: Ben Lillie, “Be Color Brave, Not Color Blind: 
Mellody Hobson at TED2014,”  TED Blog, March 20, 
2014; Mellody Hobson and Jeffrey Katzenberg, “The 
Best Advice I Ever Got,”  Fortune, November 1, 2013; 
Mellody Hobson, “Lean In Stories: Mellody Hobson 
on the Difference Between Assertive and 
Abrasive,”  Blue Sky–Chicago 
Tribune, December 7, 2013; 
and “Patient Investing: An 
Interview with Mellody 
Hobson,”  Leaders 
Magazine, January 
2014. 
 Getting to know  Mellody Hobson

532
 name that company 
 If someone had bought 100 shares in this company when it was first available to 
the public in 1965, it would have cost $2,250. If he or she held on to the stock, 
the number of shares the person would have today would be 74,360 (after 12 
stock splits) with a value of approximately $7.4 million. What is the name of this 
company? (Find the answer in the chapter.)  
 Describe the role of securities markets and of investment bankers. 
THE FUNCTION OF SECURITIES MARKETS 
 Securities markets—financial marketplaces for stocks, bonds, and other 
investments—serve two major functions. First, they assist businesses in finding 
long-term funding to finance capital needs, such as expanding operations, devel-
oping new products, or buying major goods and services. Second, they provide 
private investors a place to buy and sell securities (investments), such as stocks 
and bonds, that can help them build their financial future. In this chapter, we 
look at securities markets first from the perspective of funding for businesses 
and second as markets for private investors to buy and trade investments.  
 Securities markets are divided into primary and secondary markets.  Primary 
markets handle the sale of  new securities. This is an important point to under-
stand. Corporations make money on the sale of their securities (stock) only 
once—when they sell it on the primary market. The first public offering of a 
corporation’s stock is called an   initial public offering (IPO)   . After that, the 
secondary market  handles the trading of these securities between investors, 
with the proceeds of the sale going to the investor selling the stock, not to the 
corporation whose stock is sold. For example, imagine your vegetarian restau-
rant, Very Vegetarian, has grown into a chain and your products are available 
in many retail stores throughout the country. You want to raise additional 
funds to expand further. If you offer 1 million shares of stock in your company 
at $10 a share, you can raise $10 million at this initial offering. However, after 
the initial sale, if Shareholder Jones decides to sell 100 shares of her Very Veg-
etarian stock to Investor Smith, Very Vegetarian collects nothing from 
that transaction. Smith buys the stock from Jones, not from Very 
Vegetarian. It is possible, however, for companies like Very Vegetar-
ian to offer additional shares of stock for sale to raise additional 
capital. 
 As mentioned in Chapter 18, we can’t overempha-
size the importance of long-term funding to busi-
nesses. Given a choice, businesses normally prefer to 
meet their long-term financial needs by using 
retained earnings or borrowing funds either from a 
lending institution (bank, pension fund, insurance 
company) or corporate bond issue. However, if 
long-term funds are not available from retained 
earnings or lenders, a company may be able to 
raise capital by issuing corporate stock. (Recall 
from Chapter 18 that selling stock in the corpora-
tion is a form of  equity financing  and issuing 
THE FUN
LO 19–1
 initial public offering (IPO)  
 The first public offering of a 
corporation’s stock.  
 David and Tom Gardner, 
the Motley Fools, are 
passionate about 
spreading the message 
that securities markets 
can provide 
opportunities for all. The 
brothers have built their 
careers on providing 
high-quality financial 
information to investors 
regardless of education 
or income. Visit their 
website at  www.fool.
com  for more 
information. 
that transactio
Vegetarian. It
ian to offe
capi

533
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
corporate bonds is a form of  debt financing. ) Social networking giant Face-
book’s IPO in 2012 raised $16 billion for the company.  1 Visa, however, remains 
the largest U.S. IPO of the past 25 years raising $18 billion from its IPO in 2008. 
These sources of equity and bond financing are not available to all companies, 
especially small businesses. 
 Let’s imagine you need further long-term financing to  expand operations at 
Very Vegetarian. Your chief financial officer (CFO) says the company lacks suf-
ficient retained earnings and she doesn’t think it can secure the needed funds 
from a lending institution. She suggests that you offer shares of stock or issue 
corporate bonds to private investors to secure the funding. She warns, however, 
that issuing shares of stock or corporate bonds is not simple or automatic. To 
get approval for stock or bond issues you must make extensive financial disclo-
sures and undergo detailed scrutiny by the U.S. Securities and Exchange Com-
mission (SEC). Because of these requirements, your CFO recommends that the 
company turn to an investment banker for assistance. Let’s see why.  
 The Role of Investment Bankers 
 Investment bankers   are specialists who assist in the issue and sale of new 
securities. These large financial firms can help companies like Very Vegetarian 
prepare the extensive financial analyses necessary to gain SEC approval for 
bond or stock issues. Investment bankers can also  underwrite new issues of 
stocks or bonds. That is, the investment banking firm buys the entire stock or 
bond issue at an agreed-on discount, which can be quite sizable, and then sells 
the issue to private or institutional investors at full price. 
  Institutional investors   are large organizations—such as pension funds, 
mutual funds, and insurance companies—that invest their own funds or the 
funds of others. Because of their vast buying power, institutional investors are 
a powerful force in securities markets. 
 Before we look at stocks and bonds as long-term financing and invest-
ment opportunities in more depth, it’s important to understand stock 
exchanges—the places where stocks and bonds are traded.  
 Identify the stock exchanges where securities are traded. 
STOCK EXCHANGES 
 As the name implies, a   stock exchange   is an organization whose members can 
buy and sell (exchange) securities on behalf of companies and individual inves-
tors. The New York Stock Exchange (NYSE) was founded in 1792 and was then 
primarily a floor-based exchange, which means trades physically took place on 
the floor of the stock exchange. Things changed in 2005 when the NYSE merged 
with Archipelago, a securities trading company that specialized in electronic 
trades. Two years later, it merged with Europe’s Euronext exchange, and became 
the NYSE Euronext. In 2013, the Intercontinental Exchange (ICE) located in 
Atlanta purchased the NYSE Euronext for $8.2 billion.  2  
 Today, the once active floor of the NYSE Euronext is now largely sym-
bolic. 3 Most trading takes place on computers that can transact thousands of 
stock trades within seconds. In fact, trading stocks has become a very small 
part of the exchange’s revenue.  4 The bulk of the company’s revenue comes 
from selling complex financial contracts and market information to compa-
nies like Yahoo and Google that offer stock quotes as a service on their web-
sites. They also earn revenue from fees paid by over 8,000 companies listed on 
the NYSE Euronext.  5 
 investment bankers  
 Specialists who assist in the 
issue and sale of new 
securities.  
 institutional investors  
 Large organizations—such as 
pension funds, mutual funds, 
and insurance companies—that 
invest their own funds or the 
funds of others.  
LO 19–2
 stock exchange  
 An organization whose 
members can buy and sell 
(exchange) securities for 
companies and individual 
investors.  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
534
 Not all securities are traded on registered stock exchanges. The   over-
the-counter (OTC) market   provides companies and investors with a means 
to trade stocks not listed on the large securities exchanges. The OTC market 
is a network of several thousand brokers who maintain contact with one 
another and buy and sell securities through a nationwide electronic system. 
Trading is conducted between two parties directly, instead of through an 
exchange like the NYSE Euronext. 
 The   NASDAQ   (originally known as the National Association of Securities 
Dealers Automated Quotations) was the world’s first electronic stock market. 
It evolved from the OTC market but is no longer part of it. The NASDAQ is an 
electronic-based network that links dealers so they can buy and sell securities 
electronically rather than in person. In 2007, the NASDAQ purchased the 
Swedish OMX Group and is now the NASDAQ OMX Group. It is the largest 
U.S. electronic stock trading market and has more trading volume than any 
electronic exchange in the world. The NASDAQ originally dealt mostly with 
smaller firms, but today well-known companies such as Facebook, Microsoft, 
Intel, Google, and Starbucks trade their stock on the NASDAQ. The NASDAQ 
also handles federal, state, and city government bonds and lists approximately 
3,300 companies with a market value over $8 trillion.  6 
 Adding a company to an exchange is a highly competitive undertaking, and 
the battle between the stock exchanges for a stock listing is often fierce.  7 If a 
company fails to meet the requirements of an exchange, the stock can be del-
isted from the exchange.  8 You can find the requirements for registering (listing) 
stocks on the NYSE Euronext and NASDAQ on their websites at  www.nyx.com  
and  www.nasdaqomx.com . The Spotlight on Small Business box discusses how 
the JOBS Act now gives small businesses access to public securities markets.  
 Securities Regulations and the Securities and 
Exchange Commission 
 The   Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC)   is the federal agency respon-
sible for regulating the various stock exchanges. The Securities Act of 1933 helps 
protect investors by requiring full disclosure of financial information by firms 
selling bonds or stock. The U.S. Congress passed this legislation to deal with the 
free-for-all atmosphere that existed in the securities markets during the 1920s 
and the early 1930s that helped cause the Great Depression. The Securities 
and Exchange Act of 1934 created the SEC. 
 Companies trading on the national exchanges must register with the SEC 
and provide it with annual updates. The 1934 act also established specific 
guidelines that companies must follow when issuing financial securities, such 
as stocks or bonds. For example, before issuing either stocks or bonds for sale 
to the public, a company must file a detailed registration statement with the 
 over-the-counter (OTC) 
market  
 Exchange that provides a 
means to trade stocks not 
listed on the national 
exchanges.  
 NASDAQ  
 A nationwide electronic system 
that links dealers across the 
nation so that they can buy and 
sell securities electronically.  
 Securities and Exchange 
Commission (SEC)  
 The federal agency that has 
responsibility for regulating the 
various stock exchanges.  
 The NYSE Euronext was 
the largest floor-based 
exchange, where stock 
trades were made on the 
crowded floor of the 
exchange. Today stocks 
are bought and sold 
primarily on electronic 
networks. The illustration 
(on the right) of the 
exchange floor today 
seems deserted 
compared to the old 
days.  

535
SEC that includes extensive economic and financial information. The con-
densed version of that registration document—called a   prospectus   —must be 
sent to prospective investors. 
 The 1934 act also established guidelines to prevent insiders within the 
company from taking advantage of privileged information they may have. 
 Insider trading is using knowledge or information that individuals gain through 
their position that allows them to benefit unfairly from fluctuations in secu-
rity prices. The key words here are  benefit unfairly. Insiders within a firm are 
permitted to buy and sell stock in the company they work for, so long as they 
do not take unfair advantage of information unknown to the public. 
 Originally, the SEC defined the term  insider rather narrowly as covering a 
company’s directors and employees and their relatives. Today the term has 
been broadened to include just about anyone with securities information not 
available to the general public. Let’s say the CFO of Very Vegetarian tells her 
next-door neighbor she is finalizing paperwork to sell the company to a large 
corporation, and the neighbor buys the stock based on this information. 
A court may well consider the purchase an insider trade. Penalties for insider 
trading can include fines or imprisonment.  9 For example, billionaire hedge 
fund manager Raj Rajaratnam was convicted of insider trading in a high-profile 
case in 2011. SAC Capital portfolio manager Matthew Martoma was convicted 
in 2014 in the largest insider-trading scheme ever, and could face 15 to 20 years 
in prison. The company paid $1.5 billion in fines.  10 Look at  Figure 19.1  and test 
your skill in identifying insider trading.  
 prospectus  
 A condensed version of 
economic and financial 
information that a company 
must file with the SEC before 
issuing stock; the prospectus 
must be sent to prospective 
investors.  
 spotlight on small business 
 The most frequent complaint from 
small businesses is the lack of 
available financing. This scarcity 
of funding often thwarts any 
expansion or hiring plans small 
businesses may be considering. 
The goal of the Jumpstart Our 
Business Startups Act (JOBS Act) 
is to ease small business financ-
ing problems. In the JOBS Act, 
securities rules are streamlined to 
give small firms access to public 
securities markets. The Securities 
and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
was charged with adopting rules 
on general solicitations and equity 
crowdfunding. 
 The SEC altered securities laws 
in a number of ways. A brief sum-
mary includes:
 • Raised from 500 to 2,000 the 
number of shareholders a com-
pany could have before it’s 
required to register its stock 
with the SEC.  
 • Allows private companies to 
advertise to investors, but 
permits companies to accept 
funds only from individuals who 
earn more than $200,000 a 
year or have personal assets in 
excess of $1 million.  
 • Exempts emerging growth 
companies with gross 
revenues less than $1 billion 
from some of the stringent 
financial reporting rules of the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act 
(see Chapter 17).  
 • Allows  equity crowdfunding 
through investment brokers or 
portals, but limits the amount 
individuals with modest 
incomes or net worth can 
invest to a percentage of their 
annual income or assets.  
 • Expanded the ability of 
private companies to raise 
capital through limited stock 
offerings.  
 Many in the investment com-
munity have cheered the act’s 
passage as a tremendous 
means for small businesses to 
generate needed funds. 
However, many investment 
analysts see major problems. 
One problem is the high number 
of small businesses that fail 
every year. Another is how 
investors will be able to resell 
stock when there is no 
broker or exchange to facilitate 
the sale. Still others have 
blasted the law as ripe for 
investment fraud. Time will tell if 
the JOBS Act is a boom or bust 
for many small businesses and 
investors. 
 Sources: Kathy Kristof, “Investor Beware,” 
Kiplinger’s Personal Finance, February 2014; Eric 
T. Wagner, “Equity Crowdfunding 101: Is It Right for 
Your Startup?”  Forbes, March 18, 2014; and 
Kendall Almerico, “The JOBS Act Provision That 
Could Change IPOs Forever,”  Entrepreneur, 
February 21, 2014. 
 www.sec.gov  
 Giving Small Business a Jump on Funding 
 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
536
 Foreign Stock Exchanges 
 Thanks to expanded communications and the relaxation of many legal barri-
ers, investors can buy securities from companies almost anywhere in the 
world. If you uncover a foreign company you feel has great potential for 
growth, you can purchase shares of its stock with little difficulty from U.S. 
brokers who have access to foreign stock exchanges. Foreign investors can 
also invest in U.S. securities, and large foreign stock exchanges, like those in 
London and Tokyo, trade large amounts of U.S. securities daily. In addition to 
the London and Tokyo exchanges, other major stock exchanges are located in 
Shanghai, Sydney, Hong Kong, São Paolo, and Toronto. Stock exchanges have 
become active in Africa as well.  11 
 Raising long-term funds using equity financing by issuing stock is an 
option many companies pursue. After the Test Prep, let’s look in more depth at 
how firms raise capital by issuing stock.  
 • What is the primary purpose of a securities exchange?  
 • What does NASDAQ stand for? How does this exchange work?  
•
What is the primary pu
 test prep 
urpose of a sec
urp
 FIGURE 19.1 IS IT 
INSIDER TRADING OR 
NOT? 
Insider trading involves buying or selling 
a stock on the basis of company informa-
tion not available to the investing public. 
These hypothetical examples will give 
you an idea of what’s legal and what’s 
illegal. The answers are at the bottom of 
the box.  
 1. You work in research and develop-
ment at a large company and have 
been involved in a major effort that 
should lead to a blockbuster new 
product coming to the market. News 
about the product is not public, and 
very few other workers even know 
about it. Can you purchase stock in 
the company?
 2. Pertaining to the above situation, 
you are in a local coffee bar and 
mention to a friend about what’s 
going on at the company. Another 
customer seated at an adjoining 
table overhears your discussion. Can 
this person legally buy stock in the 
company before the public 
announcement?
 3. You work as an executive secretary at 
a major investment banking firm. You 
are asked to copy documents that 
detail a major merger about to happen 
that will keenly benefit the company 
being taken over. Can you buy stock in 
the company before the announce-
ment is made public?
 4. Your stockbroker recommends that 
you buy shares in a little-known com-
pany. The broker seems to have some 
inside information, but you don’t ask 
any questions about his source. Can 
you buy stock in this company?
 5. You work as a cleaning person at a 
major securities firm. At your job you 
come across information from the 
trash cans and computer printers of 
employees of the firm that provide 
detailed information about several 
upcoming deals the firm will be 
handling. Can you buy stock in the 
companies involved?
Answers: 1. No; 2. Yes; 3. No; 4. Yes; 5. No.
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

537
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of equity financing by issuing 
stock, and detail the differences between common and preferred stock.
HOW BUSINESSES RAISE CAPITAL 
BY SELLING STOCK 
 Stocks   are shares of ownership in a company. A   stock certificate   represents 
stock ownership. It specifies the name of the company, the number of shares 
owned, and the type of stock it represents. Companies, however, are not 
required to issue paper stock certificates to owners since stock is generally 
held electronically. 
 Stock certificates sometimes indicate a stock’s  par value, which is a dollar 
amount assigned to each share of stock by the corporation’s charter. Today, 
since par values do not reflect the market value of the stock (what the stock is 
actually worth), most companies issue stock with a very low par value or no 
par value.   Dividends   are part of a firm’s profits that the firm may (but is not 
required to) distribute to stockholders as either cash payments or additional 
shares of stock.  12 Dividends are declared by a corporation’s board of directors 
and are generally paid quarterly.  
 Advantages and Disadvantages of Issuing Stock 
 Some advantages to a firm of issuing stock include:
 
• 
As owners of the business, stockholders never have to be repaid their 
investment.  
 
• 
There’s no legal obligation to pay dividends to stockholders; therefore, 
the firm can reinvest income (retained earnings) to finance future 
needs.  
 
• 
Selling stock can improve the condition of a firm’s balance sheet since 
issuing stock creates no debt. (A corporation may also buy back its 
stock to improve its balance sheet and make the company appear 
stronger financially.)  13 
 Disadvantages of issuing stock include:
 
• 
As owners, stockholders (usually only common stockholders) have the 
right to vote for the company’s board of directors. (Typically, one vote 
is granted for each share of stock.) Issuing new shares of stock can 
thus alter the control of the firm.  
 
• 
Dividends are paid from profit after taxes and are not tax-deductible.  
 
• 
The need to keep stockholders happy can affect managers’ decisions.  
 Companies can issue two classes of stock: common and preferred. Let’s 
see how these two forms of equity financing differ.  
 Issuing Shares of Common Stock 
 Common stock   is the most basic form of ownership in a firm. In fact, if a com-
pany issues only one type of stock, by law it must be common stock. Holders of 
common stock have the right to (1) elect members of the company’s board of 
directors and vote on important issues affecting the company and (2) share in 
the firm’s profits through dividends, if approved by the firm’s board of direc-
tors. Having voting rights in a corporation allows common stockholders to 
LO 19–3
 stocks  
 Shares of ownership in a 
company.  
 stock certificate  
 Evidence of stock ownership 
that specifies the name of the 
company, the number of shares 
it represents, and the type of 
stock being issued.  
 dividends  
 Part of a firm’s profits that the 
firm may distribute to 
stockholders as either cash 
payments or additional shares 
of stock.  
common stock
The most basic form of 
ownership in a firm; it confers 
voting rights and the right to 
share in the firm’s profits 
through dividends, if approved 
by the firm’s board of directors.

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
538
influence corporate policy because the board members they elect choose the 
firm’s top management and make major policy decisions. Common stockhold-
ers also have a  preemptive right to purchase new shares of common stock 
before anyone else. This allows common stockholders to maintain their pro-
portional share of ownership in the company.  
 Issuing Shares of Preferred Stock 
 Owners of   preferred stock   are given preference in the payment of company 
dividends and must be paid their dividends in full before any common stock 
dividends can be distributed (hence the term  preferred ). They also have a prior 
claim on company assets if the firm is forced out of business and its assets 
sold. Normally, however, preferred stockholders do not get voting rights in the 
firm. 
 Preferred stock may be issued with a par value that becomes the base for 
a fixed dividend the firm is willing to pay. For example, if a preferred stock’s 
par value is $50 a share and its dividend rate is 4 percent, the dividend is $2 a 
share. An owner of 100 preferred shares receives a fixed yearly dividend of 
$200 if dividends are declared by the board of directors. 
 Preferred stock can have other special features that common stock doesn’t 
have. 14 For example it can be  callable, which means preferred stockholders 
could be required to sell their shares back to the corporation. Preferred stock 
can also be converted to shares of common stock (but not the other way 
around), and it can be  cumulative. That is, if one or more dividends are not 
paid when promised, they accumulate and the corporation must pay them in 
full at a later date before it can distribute any common stock dividends.  15 
 Companies often prefer to raise capital by debt financing. One debt fund-
ing option frequently used by larger firms is issuing corporate bonds. Let’s 
look at what’s involved with issuing corporate bonds and how they differ from 
issuing stock.  
 preferred stock  
 Stock that gives its owners 
preference in the payment of 
dividends and an earlier claim 
on assets than common 
stockholders if the company is 
forced out of business and its 
assets sold.  
 When Twitter issued its 
initial public offering 
(IPO), the company 
raised more than $2.1 
billion from the sale. 
Can you see why 
issuing stock can be an 
appealing option for 
financing a company’s 
growth?  

539
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of obtaining debt financing by 
issuing bonds, and identify the classes and features of bonds.
HOW BUSINESSES RAISE 
CAPITAL BY ISSUING BONDS 
 A   bond   is a corporate certificate indicating that an investor has lent money to 
a firm (or a government). An organization that issues bonds has a legal obliga-
tion to make regular interest payments to investors and to repay the entire 
bond principal amount at a prescribed time. Let’s further explore the language 
of bonds so you understand exactly how they work.  
 Learning the Language of Bonds 
 Corporate bonds are usually issued in units of $1,000 (government bonds can 
be in much larger amounts). The  principal is the face value (dollar value) of a 
bond, which the issuing company is legally bound to repay in full to the bond-
holder on the   maturity date  .   Interest  is the payment the bond issuer makes 
to the bondholders to compensate them for the use of their money. If Very 
Vegetarian issues a $1,000 bond with an interest rate of 5 percent and a matu-
rity date of 2025, it is agreeing to pay the bondholder a total of $50 interest 
each year until a specified date in 2025, when it must repay the full $1,000. 
Maturity dates can vary. Firms such as Disney, IBM, and Coca-Cola have 
issued so-called century bonds with 100-year maturity dates.  16 
 Bond interest is sometimes called the  coupon rate, a term that dates back 
to when bonds were issued as  bearer bonds. The holder, or bearer, was consid-
ered the bond’s owner. Back then, the company issuing the bond kept no 
record of changes in ownership. Bond interest was paid to whoever clipped 
coupons attached to the bond and sent them to the issuing company for pay-
ment. Today, bonds are registered to specific owners and changes in owner-
ship are recorded electronically. 
 The interest rate paid by U.S. government bonds influences the bond 
interest rate businesses must pay. U.S. government bonds are considered safe 
investments, so they can pay lower interest.  Figure 19.2  describes several types 
of government bonds that compete with U.S. corporate bonds in securities 
markets. Bond interest rates also vary according to the state of the economy, 
the reputation of the issuing company, and the interest rate for bonds of simi-
lar companies. Though bond interest is quoted for an entire year, it is usually 
paid in two installments, and the rate generally cannot be changed.  
 Bond rating organizations assess the creditworthiness of a corporation’s 
bond issues. Independent rating firms such as Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s 
Investors Service, and Fitch Ratings rate bonds according to their degree of 
LO 19—4
 bond  
 A corporate certificate 
indicating that a person has 
lent money to a firm (or a 
government).  
 maturity date  
 The exact date the issuer of a 
bond must pay the principal to 
the bondholder.  
 interest  
 The payment the issuer of the 
bond makes to the 
bondholders for use of the 
borrowed money.  
 • Name at least two advantages and two disadvantages of a company’s 
issuing stock as a form of equity financing.  
 • What are the major differences between common stock and 
preferred stock?  
•
Name at least two adv
 test prep 
vantages and t
van
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

Issued by the federal government; considered the safest type of bond investment
U.S. government bond
Matures in less than a year; issued with a minimum denomination of $1,000
Treasury bill (T-bill)
Matures in 10 years or less; sold in denominations of $1,000 up to $1,000,000
Treasury note
Matures in 25 years or more; sold in denominations of $1,000 up to $1,000,000
Treasury bond
Issued by states, cities, counties, and other state and local government agencies;
usually exempt from federal taxes
Municipal bond
Issued by a foreign government; payable in U.S. dollars
Yankee bond
PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
540
risk. Bonds can range from the highest quality to junk bonds (which we dis-
cuss later in this chapter).  Figure 19.3 gives an example of the range of bond 
ratings issued by the ratings agencies.  
 Advantages and Disadvantages of Issuing Bonds 
 Bonds offer long-term financing advantages to an organization:
 
• 
Bondholders are creditors of the firm, not owners. They seldom vote 
on corporate matters; thus, management maintains control over the 
firm’s operations.  
 
• 
Bond interest is a business expense and tax-deductible to the firm (see 
Chapter 17).  
 
• 
Bonds are a temporary source of funding. They’re eventually repaid 
and the debt obligation is eliminated.  
 
• 
Bonds can be repaid before the maturity date if they are  callable. Bonds 
can also be converted to common stock. (We discuss both features below.)  
 Bonds also have financing drawbacks:
 
• 
Bonds increase debt (long-term liabilities) and may adversely affect 
the market’s perception of the firm.  
 
• 
Paying interest on bonds is a legal obligation. If interest is not paid, 
bondholders can take legal action to force payment.  
 
• 
The face value of the bond must be repaid on the maturity date. 
Without careful planning, this obligation can cause cash flow problems 
when the repayment comes due.  
 Different Classes of Bonds 
 Corporations can issue two different classes of corporate bonds.  Unsecured 
bonds, usually called   debenture bonds   , are not backed by any specific col-
lateral (such as land or equipment). Only firms with excellent reputations 
debenture bonds
Bonds that are unsecured (i.e., 
not backed by any collateral 
such as equipment).
 FIGURE 19.2 TYPES 
OF GOVERNMENT 
SECURITIES THAT 
COMPETE WITH 
CORPORATE BONDS 

541
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
and credit ratings can issue debenture bonds, due to the lack of security they 
provide investors.  Secured bonds, sometimes called mortgage bonds, are 
backed by collateral such as land or buildings that is pledged to bondholders 
if interest or principal isn’t paid when promised. A corporate bond issuer can 
choose to include different bond features. Let’s look at some special 
features.  
 Special Bond Features 
 By now you should understand that bonds are issued with an interest rate, 
are unsecured or secured by some type of collateral, and must be repaid at 
their maturity date. This repayment requirement often leads companies (or 
governments) to establish a reserve account called a   sinking fund   . Its 
primary purpose is to ensure that enough money will be available to repay 
bondholders on the bond’s maturity date. Firms issuing sinking-fund bonds 
periodically  retire (set aside) some part of the principal prior to maturity so 
that enough funds will accumulate by the maturity date to pay off the bond. 
Sinking funds are generally attractive to both issuing firms and investors for 
several reasons:
 
• 
They provide for an orderly retirement (repayment) of a bond issue.  
 
• 
They reduce the risk the bond will not be repaid.  
 
• 
They support the market price of the bond because they reduce the 
risk the bond will not be repaid.  
 A  callable bond permits the bond issuer to pay off the bond’s principal 
before its maturity date. This gives companies some discretion in their long-
term forecasting. Suppose Very Vegetarian issued $10 million in 20-year bonds 
at 10 percent interest. Its yearly interest expense is $1 million ($10 million 
times 10 percent). If market conditions change and bonds of the same quality 
now pay only 7 percent, Very Vegetarian will be paying 3 percent, or $300,000 
($10 million times 3 percent), in excess interest yearly. The company could 
benefit by calling in (paying off) the old bonds and issuing new bonds at the 
lower rate. If a company calls a bond before maturity, it often pays investors a 
price above the bond’s face value. 
 Investors can convert  convertible bonds into shares of common stock in 
the issuing company. This can be an incentive for an investor because com-
mon stock value tends to grow faster than a bond. Therefore, if the value of 
the firm’s common stock grows sizably over time, bondholders can compare 
the value of continued bond interest earned with the potential profit of a 
 sinking fund  
 A reserve account in which the 
issuer of a bond periodically 
retires some part of the bond 
principal prior to maturity so 
that enough capital will be 
accumulated by the maturity 
date to pay off the bond.  
 
Aaa  
AAA  
AAA  
Highest quality (lowest default risk)
 
Aa  
AA  
AA  
High quality
 
A  
A  
A  
Upper medium grade
 
Baa  
BBB  
BBB  
Medium grade
 
Ba  
BB  
BB  
Lower medium grade
 
B  
B  
B  
Speculative
 
Caa  
CCC, CC  
CCC  
Poor (high default risk)
 
Ca  
C  
DDD  
Highly speculative
 
C  
D  
D  
Lowest grade
Bond Rating Agencies
Moody’s         Standard & Poor’s         Fitch Ratings         Descriptions
 FIGURE 19.3 BOND 
RATINGS: MOODY’S 
INVESTORS SERVICE, 
STANDARD & POOR’S 
INVESTOR SERVICE, AND 
FITCH RATINGS 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
542
specified number of shares of common stock into which the bonds can be 
converted. 17  
 Now that you understand the advantages and disadvantages of stocks and 
bonds as a financing tool from a company’s perspective, let’s explore the 
opportunities stocks and bonds provide for  investors. First, though, check 
your progress with the Test Prep questions.  
 Explain how to invest in securities markets and set investment objectives 
such as long-term growth, income, cash, and protection from inflation.
HOW INVESTORS BUY SECURITIES 
 Investing in stocks and bonds is not difficult. First, you decide what stock or 
bond you want to buy. After that, you find a brokerage firm authorized to 
trade securities to execute your order. A   stockbroker   is a registered represen-
tative who works for a brokerage firm as a market intermediary to buy and 
sell securities for clients. Stockbrokers place an order and negotiate a price. 
After the transaction is completed, the trade is reported to your broker, who 
notifies you. Today, large brokerage firms maintain automated order systems 
that allow brokers to enter your order the instant you make it. The order can 
be confirmed in seconds. 
Lo 19–5
stockbroker
A registered representative 
who works as a market 
intermediary to buy and sell 
securities for clients.
 • Why are bonds considered a form of debt financing?  
 • What does it mean if a firm issues a 9 percent debenture bond due in 
2025? 
 • Explain the difference between an unsecured and a secured bond.  
 • Why are convertible bonds attractive to investors?  
•
Why are bonds consid
 test prep 
dered a form of
der
 Online brokers like TD 
Ameritrade, Scottrade, 
and E*Trade specialize 
in providing information 
for investors. What are 
some of the features of 
this website that are 
designed to provide 
investment information?  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

543
 A stockbroker can also be a source of information about what stocks or 
bonds would best meet your financial objectives, but it’s still important to 
learn about stocks and bonds on your own.  18 Investment analysts’ advice may 
not always meet your specific expectations and needs.  
 Investing through Online Brokers 
 Investors can also choose from multiple online trading services to buy and sell 
stocks and bonds. TD Ameritrade, E*Trade, Charles Schwab, and Fidelity are 
among the leaders.  19 Investors who trade online are willing to do their own 
research and make investment decisions without the direct assistance of a 
broker. This allows online brokers the ability to charge much lower trading 
fees than traditional stockbrokers. The leading online services do provide 
important market information, such as company financial data, price histo-
ries of a stock, and analysts’ reports. Often the level of information services 
you receive depends on the size of your account and your level of trading. 
 Whether you decide to use an online broker or to invest through a tradi-
tional stockbroker, remember that investing means committing your money 
with the hope of making a profit. The dot-com bubble in the early 2000s and 
the financial crisis that began in 2008 proved again that investing is a risky 
business.  20 Therefore, the first step in any investment program is to analyze 
your level of risk tolerance. Other factors to consider include your desired 
income, cash requirements, and need to hedge against inflation, along with 
the investment’s growth prospects. The Making Ethical Decisions box describes 
an interesting stock investment decision. 
 You are never too young or too old to invest, but you should first ask ques-
tions and consider investment alternatives. Let’s take a look at several strategies. 
 Choosing the Right Investment Strategy 
 Investment objectives change over the course of a person’s life. A young per-
son can better afford to invest in high-risk investment options, such as stocks, 
than can a person nearing retirement. Younger investors generally look for 
significant growth in the value of their investments over time. If stocks go into 
a tailspin and decrease in value, as they did in 2008, a younger person has time 
to wait for stock values to rise again. Older people, perhaps on a fixed income, 
lack the luxury of waiting and may be more inclined to invest in bonds that 
offer a steady return as a protection against inflation. 
making ethical decisions
You recently received news that 
your Uncle Alex passed away 
after a long battle with lung can-
cer. To your surprise, he left you 
$25,000 in his will, saying you 
were his favorite nephew. You 
remember your uncle as a hard-
working man who loved baseball 
and liked nothing better than to 
watch you pitch for your college 
team. Unfortunately, your uncle 
started smoking as a young man 
and eventually became a heavy 
chain-smoker. His doctors said 
that smoking was the primary 
cause of his lung cancer.
After receiving the inheritance, 
you wonder where to invest the 
money. Your old teammate, Jack, 
who is now a financial advisor, 
recommends that you buy stock 
in a well-known multinational firm 
that offers a good dividend and 
has solid global growth potential. 
He tells you the firm’s primary 
product is tobacco, but assures 
you it produces many other prod-
ucts as well. You know Jack has 
your best interests at heart. You 
also believe Uncle Alex would like 
to see the money he left you 
grow. However, you wonder if a 
company that markets tobacco is 
an appropriate place to invest the 
inheritance from Uncle Alex. What 
are the ethical alternatives in this 
situation? What are the conse-
quences of the alternatives? What 
will you do?
Money Going Up in Smoke
s

544
 Consider five key criteria when selecting investment options:
 
1.  Investment risk.  The chance that an investment will be worth less at 
some future time than it’s worth now. 
 
2.   Yield. The expected return on an investment, such as interest or 
dividends, usually over a period of one year.  
 
3.  Duration. The length of time your money is committed to an investment.  
 
4.  Liquidity. How quickly you can get back your invested funds in cash if 
you want or need them. 
 
5.  Tax consequences. How the investment will affect your tax situation. 
 What’s important in any investment strategy is the risk/return trade-off. 
Setting investment objectives such as  growth (choosing stocks you believe will 
increase in price) or  income (choosing bonds that pay consistent interest) 
should set the tone for your investment strategy. 
 Reducing Risk by Diversifying Investments 
  Diversification   involves buying several different types of investments to spread 
the risk of investing. An investor may put 25 percent of his or her money into 
U.S. stocks that have relatively high risk but strong growth potential, another 25 
 diversification  
 Buying several different 
investment alternatives to 
spread the risk of investing.  
 reaching beyond our borders 
 Concerns about the ups and 
downs of U.S. stocks may keep 
you from even thinking about 
investing in global stocks. If you 
also read the news about conflicts 
in Eastern Europe and the Middle 
East and natural disasters in Japan 
and Indonesia, the thought of 
investing globally may grow even 
less attractive. Your inclination is to 
forget about global stocks and 
play it safe with what may seem to 
be relatively secure U.S. securities. 
However, financial analysts gener-
ally recommend investing in some 
global stocks in order to diversify 
your investments. 
 Let’s consider a few market 
facts that support their sugges-
tion. If you research respected 
U.S. blue-chip stocks like Coca-
Cola, IBM, and McDonald’s, you 
will find they earn a large portion 
of their revenue from global mar-
kets. It’s also important to note, at 
one time the United States 
accounted for over half of the 
global economy; today it accounts 
for about one-fourth. Economists 
also project developing econo-
mies in areas such as Asia and 
Africa will grow at a much faster 
pace than the United States. 
 Given the potential return, you 
would be remiss to not at least 
explore the opportunities that exist 
in global markets. However, like 
any investments, set your long-
term financial goals and stay 
abreast of the daily news. Keep the 
following suggestions in mind as 
you consider global investments:
 • Invest in familiar global compa-
nies with a solid reputation and 
record of performance. Compa-
nies like Honda (Japan), Nestlé 
(Switzerland), Samsung (South 
Korea), and Siemens (Germany) 
come to mind. 
 • Invest in only global stocks 
listed on U.S. exchanges. 
These companies must comply 
with U.S. accounting standards 
and rules of the SEC. American 
Depository Receipts (ADRs) are 
global stocks traded on U.S. 
exchanges and represent a set 
number of shares in a foreign 
company that are held on 
deposit at a U.S. bank. 
 • Invest in mutual and exchange-
traded funds (ETFs), which offer 
a wide range of global opportu-
nities. Many funds and ETFs 
have a mix of U.S. and foreign 
stocks. Others may focus strictly 
on specific countries such as 
China, on entire regions such as 
Africa, Asia, Europe, or Latin 
America, or on the entire world.  
 • Avoid Investing in stocks from 
countries with a history of 
currency problems or political 
instability. 
 Sources: Selena Maranjian, “Foreign Stocks with 
Dividends,”  The Motley Fool, January 2, 2014; 
Robert Schmansky, “How Much Should You Invest 
in International Stock Mutual Funds?”  Forbes, 
August 8, 2013; and John Waggoner, “Investing: 
Simplify Life, Go Global, with Funds,”  USA Today, 
March 14, 2013. 
 www.schwab.com 
 Global Stocks: Love Them or Leave Them 
r

545
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
percent in conservative government bonds, 25 percent in dividend-paying stocks 
that provide income, 10 percent in an international mutual fund (discussed 
later), and the rest in the bank for emergencies and other possible investment 
opportunities. By diversifying with such a  portfolio strategy or  allocation model, 
investors decrease the chance of losing everything they have invested.  21  
 Both stockbrokers and certified financial planners (CFPs) are trained to 
give advice about the investment portfolio that would best fit each client’s finan-
cial objectives. However, the more investors themselves read and study the mar-
ket, the higher their potential for gain. A short course in investments can also be 
useful. Stocks and bonds are investment opportunities individuals can use to 
enhance their financial future. The Reaching Beyond Our Borders box discusses 
growing opportunities investors can find in global stocks. Before we look at 
stocks and bonds in depth, let’s check your understanding with the Test Prep.  
 • What is the key advantage of investing through online brokers? What is 
the key disadvantage?  
 • What is the primary purpose of diversifying investments?  
•
What is the key advan
 test prep 
ntage off investi
ntag
 It’s fun to stop and enjoy 
a Dairy Queen sundae, 
especially if you own the 
company. Warren 
Buffett, America’s most 
successful investor, built 
his fortune through 
prudent investing and is 
the second wealthiest 
person (after Bill Gates) 
in the United States. 
Rather than waiting until 
after his death, Buffett 
began giving the bulk of 
his fortune to the Gates 
Foundation in 2006. His 
annual donation is 
approximately $2 billion.  
Analyze the opportunities stocks offer as investments.  
INVESTING IN STOCKS 
 Buying stock makes investors part owners of a company. This means that as 
stockholders they can participate in its success. Unfortunately, they can also 
lose money if a company does not do well or the overall stock market declines. 
 Stock investors are often called bulls or bears according to their percep-
tions of the market.  Bulls believe that stock prices are going to rise; they buy 
stock in anticipation of the increase. A bull market is when overall stock prices 
are rising.  Bears expect stock prices to decline and sell their stocks in anticipa-
tion of falling prices. That’s why, when stock prices are declining, the market is 
called a bear market. 
 The market price and growth potential of most stock depends heavily on 
how well the corporation is meeting its business objectives. A company that 
achieves its objectives offers great potential for   capital gains   , the pos-
itive difference between the price at which you bought a 
stock and what you sell it for. For example, an invest-
ment of $2,250 in 100 shares of McDonald’s when 
the company first offered its stock to the public in 
1965 would have grown to 74,360 shares (after 
the company’s 12 stock splits) worth approxi-
mately $7.4 million as of year-end market close on 
December 31, 2013.  22 Now that’s a lot of Big Macs! 
 Investors often select stocks depending on 
their investment strategy. Stocks issued by higher-
quality companies such as Coca-Cola, Johnson & 
Johnson, and IBM are referred to as  blue-chip 
stocks (a term derived from poker where the high-
est value chip was the blue chip). These stocks 
LO 19–6
 capital gains  
 The positive difference 
between the purchase price of 
a stock and its sale price.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
546
generally pay regular dividends and experience consistent 
price appreciation. 
 Stocks of corporations in emerging fields such as technol-
ogy, biotechnology, or Internet-related firms, whose earnings 
are expected to grow at a faster rate than other stocks, are 
referred to as  growth stocks. While riskier, growth stocks may 
offer the potential for higher returns. Stocks of public utilities 
are considered  income stocks because they usually offer inves-
tors a high dividend yield that generally keeps pace with infla-
tion. There are even  penny stocks, representing ownership in 
companies that compete in high-risk industries like oil explora-
tion. Penny stocks sell for less than $2 (some analysts say less 
than $5) and are considered risky investments.  23 
 When purchasing stock, investors have choices when plac-
ing buy orders. A  market order tells a broker to buy or sell a 
stock immediately at the best price available. A  limit order tells 
the broker to buy or sell a stock at a specific price, if that price 
becomes available. Let’s say a stock is selling for $40 a share. 
You believe the price will eventually go higher but could drop to 
$36 first. You can place a limit order at $36, so your broker will 
buy the stock at $36 if it drops to that price. If the stock never 
falls to $36, the broker will not purchase it for you.  
 Stock Splits 
 Brokers prefer stock purchases in  round lots of 100 shares at a 
time. Investors, however, often cannot afford to buy 100 shares, and therefore 
often buy in  odd lots, or fewer than 100 shares at a time. High per-share prices 
can induce companies to declare   stock splits   , in which they issue two or more 
shares for every one that’s outstanding. If Very Vegetarian stock were selling 
for $100 a share, the firm could declare a two-for-one stock split. Investors 
who owned one share of Very Vegetarian would now own two, each worth 
only $50 (half as much as before the split). 
 Stock splits cause no change in the firm’s ownership structure and no 
immediate change in the investment’s value. Investors generally approve of 
stock splits, however, because they believe demand for a stock may be greater 
at $50 than at $100, and the price may then go up in the near future. A com-
pany cannot be forced to split its stock, and today stock splits are becoming 
less common. 24 Legendary investor Warren Buffett’s firm, Berkshire Hatha-
way, has never split its Class A stock even when its per-share price surpassed 
$150,000. Google, however, decided to split its stock two-for-one after the 
stock price exceeded $1,000 per share, and credit card giant MasterCard split 
its stock ten-for-one as its stock price neared $900 per share.  25 
 Buying Stock on Margin 
  Buying stock on margin   means borrowing some of the stocks’ purchase cost 
from the brokerage firm. The margin is the portion of the stocks’ purchase 
price that investors must pay with their own money. The board of governors of 
the Federal Reserve System sets  margin rates in the U.S. market. Briefly, if the 
margin rate is 50 percent, an investor who qualifies for a margin account may 
borrow up to 50 percent of the stock’s purchase price from the broker. 
 Although buying on margin sounds like an easy way to buy more stocks, 
the downside is that investors must repay the credit extended by the broker, 
plus interest. If the investor’s account goes down in value, the broker may 
issue a  margin call, requiring the investor to come up with funds to cover the 
 stock splits  
 An action by a company that 
gives stockholders two or more 
shares of stock for each one 
they own.  
 If you stroll through 
Times Square in New 
York City, you never 
have to wonder how 
stocks on the NASDAQ 
exchange are 
performing. The 
NASDAQ price wall 
continuously updates 
prices and the number 
of shares being traded. 
Originally, the NASDAQ 
dealt primarily with 
small companies; today, 
it competes with the 
NYSE Euronext for new 
stock listings.  
buying stock on margin
Purchasing stocks by 
borrowing some of the 
purchase cost from the 
brokerage firm.

547
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
losses the account has suffered.  26 If the investor is unable to fulfill the margin 
call, the broker can legally sell off shares of the investor’s stock to reduce the 
broker’s chance of loss. Margin calls can force an investor to repay a signifi-
cant portion of his or her account’s loss within days or even hours. Buying on 
margin is thus a risky way to invest in stocks.  
 Understanding Stock Quotations 
 Publications like  The Wall Street Journal,  Barron’s, and  Investor’s Business Daily 
carry a wealth of information concerning stocks and other investments. Your 
local newspaper may carry similar information as well. Financial websites like 
MSN Money, Yahoo! Finance, and CNBC carry up-to-the-minute information 
about companies that is much more detailed and only a click away. Take a look 
at  Figure 19.4  to see an example of a stock quote from MSN Money for Micro-
soft. Microsoft trades on the NASDAQ exchange under the symbol MSFT. Pre-
ferred stock is identified by the letters  pf following the company symbol. 
Remember, corporations can have several different preferred stock issues.  
 The information provided in the quote is easy to understand. It includes 
the highest and lowest price the stock traded for that day, the stock’s high and 
low over the past 52 weeks, the dividend paid (if any), the stock’s dividend 
yield (annual dividend as a percentage of the stock’s price per share), impor-
tant ratios like the price/earnings (P/E) ratio (the price of the stock divided by 
the firm’s per-share earnings), and the earnings per share. Investors can also 
see the number of shares traded (volume) and the total market capitalization 
of the firm. More technical features, such as the stock’s beta (which measures 
the degree of the stock’s risk), may also appear.  Figure  19.4  illustrates the 
stock’s intraday trading (trading throughout the current day), but you can also 
click to see charts for different time periods. Similar information about bonds, 
mutual funds, and other investments is also available online. 
 You might want to follow the market behavior of specific stocks that catch 
your interest, even if you lack the money to invest in them. Many successful 
investors started in college by building hypothetical portfolios of stocks and 
tracking their performance. The more you know about investing before you 
 FIGURE 19.4 UNDERSTANDING STOCK QUOTATIONS  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
548
actually risk your money, the better. (The Developing Workplace Skills and Tak-
ing It to the Net exercises at the end of this chapter have exercises you can use 
for practice.)  
 Analyze the opportunities bonds offer as investments.
INVESTING IN BONDS 
 Investors looking for guaranteed income and limited risk often turn to U.S. gov-
ernment bonds for a secure investment. These bonds have the financial backing 
and full faith and credit of the federal government. Municipal bonds are offered 
by local governments and often have advantages such as tax-free interest. Some 
may even be insured. Corporate bonds are a bit riskier and more challenging. 
 First-time corporate bond investors often ask two questions. The first is, 
“If I purchase a corporate bond, do I have to hold it until the maturity date?” 
No, you do not. Bonds are bought and sold daily on major securities exchanges 
(the secondary market we discussed earlier). However, if you decide to sell 
your bond to another investor before its maturity date, you may not get its 
face value. If your bond does not have features that make it attractive to other 
investors, like a high interest rate or early maturity, you may have to sell at a 
discount, that is, a price less than the bond’s face value. But if other investors 
do highly value it, you may be able to sell your bond at a  premium, a price 
above its face value. Bond prices generally fluctuate inversely with current 
market interest rates. This means  as interest rates go up, bond prices fall, and 
vice versa. Like all investments, however, bonds have a degree of risk. 
 The second question is, “How can I evaluate the investment risk of a particu-
lar bond issue?” Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s Investors Service, and Fitch Ratings 
rate the risk of many corporate and government bonds (look back at  Figure 19.3 ). 
In evaluating the ratings, recall the risk/return trade-off: The higher the risk of 
a bond, the higher the interest rate the issuer must offer. Investors will invest 
in a bond considered risky only if the potential return (interest) is high enough. 
In fact, some will invest in bonds considered junk.  
 Investing in High-Risk (Junk) Bonds 
 Although bonds are considered relatively safe investments, some investors look 
for higher returns through riskier high-yield bonds called   junk bonds  . Stan-
dard & Poor’s, Moody’s Investors Service, and Fitch Ratings define junk bonds 
as those with high risk  and high default rates.  27 Junk bonds pay investors inter-
est as long as the value of the company’s assets remains high and its cash flow 
stays strong. Although the interest rates are attractive and often tempting, if the 
company can’t pay off the bond, the investor is left with an investment that isn’t 
worth more than the paper it’s written on—in other words, junk.  
 Understanding Bond Quotations 
 Bond prices are quoted as a percentage of $1,000, and their interest rate is often 
followed by an  s for easier pronunciation. For example, 9 percent bonds due in 
2025 are called 9s of 25.  Figure 19.5  is an example of a bond quote for Goldman 
Sachs from Yahoo! Finance. The quote highlights the bond’s interest rate (cou-
pon rate), maturity date, rating, current price, and whether it’s callable. The 
more you know about bonds, the better prepared you will be to discuss your 
financial objectives with investment advisors and brokers and be sure their 
advice is consistent with your best interests and objectives.  
LO 19–7
 junk bonds  
 High-risk, high-interest bonds.  

549
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
 FIGURE 19.5  
UNDERSTANDING BOND 
QUOTATIONS  
 Explain the investment opportunities in mutual funds and exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs).
INVESTING IN MUTUAL FUNDS AND 
EXCHANGE-TRADED FUNDS 
 A   mutual fund   buys stocks, bonds, and other investments and then sells shares 
in those securities to the public. A mutual fund is like an investment company 
that pools investors’ money and then buys stocks or bonds (for example) in 
many companies in accordance with the fund’s specific purpose. Mutual fund 
managers are specialists who pick what they consider to be the best stocks and 
bonds available and help investors diversify their investments. 
 Mutual funds range from very conservative funds that invest only in 
government securities to others that specialize in emerging biotechnology 
firms, Internet companies, foreign companies, precious metals, and other 
investments with greater risk. Some funds will have a mix of investments like 
stocks and bonds. The number of mutual funds available today is staggering. 
For example, there were over 4,600 mutual funds investing in U.S. stocks in 
2013.  28 Investors have invested over $13 trillion in mutual funds.  Figure 19.6  
gives you a list of some mutual fund investment options.  
 Young or new investors are often advised to buy shares in  index funds that 
invest in a certain kind of stocks or bonds or in the market as a whole.  29 An index 
fund may focus on large companies, small companies, emerging countries, or 
real estate (real estate investment trusts, or REITs). One way to diversify your 
investments is by investing in a variety of index funds. A stockbroker, certified 
financial planner (CFP), or banker can help you find the option that best fits 
your investment objectives. The  Morningstar Investor newsletter is an excel-
lent resource for evaluating mutual funds, as are business publications such 
as  Bloomberg Businessweek, The Wall Street Journal, Money, Forbes, Investor’s 
Business Daily, and many others. 
 With mutual funds it’s simple to change your investment objectives if your 
financial objectives change. For example, moving your money from a bond 
fund to a stock fund is no more difficult than making a phone call, clicking a 
mouse, or tapping your cellphone. Another advantage of mutual funds is that 
you can generally buy directly from the fund and avoid broker fees or 
LO 19–8
 mutual fund  
 An organization that buys 
stocks and bonds and other 
investments, then sells shares 
in those securities to the public.  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
550
commissions. However, check for fees and charges of the mutual fund because 
they can differ significantly. A  load fund,  for example, charges investors a com-
mission to buy or sell its shares; a  no-load fund charges no commission. 30 
 It’s important to check the long-term performance of the fund’s managers; 
the more consistent the performance of the fund’s management, the better. 
Mutual funds called  open-end funds will accept the investments of any inter-
ested investors.  Closed-end funds,  however, limit the number of shares; once 
the fund reaches its target number, no new investors can buy into the fund.  31 
  Exchange-traded funds (ETFs)   resemble both stocks and mutual funds. 
They are collections of stocks, bonds, and other investments that are traded on 
securities exchanges, but are traded more like individual stocks than like 
mutual funds. Mutual funds, for example, permit investors to buy and sell 
shares only at the close of the trading day. ETFs can be purchased or sold at 
any time during the trading day just like individual stocks. Investors have 
invested over $1.6 trillion in ETFs. 
 The key points to remember about mutual funds and ETFs is that they 
offer small investors a way to spread the risk of stock and bond ownership and 
have their investments managed by a financial specialist for a fee. Financial 
advisors put mutual funds and ETFs high on the list of recommended invest-
ments, particularly for small or first-time investors. 32 
 Understanding Mutual Fund Quotations 
 You can investigate the specifics of various mutual funds by contacting a 
broker or contacting the fund directly by phone or through its website. Busi-
ness publications and online sources also provide information about mutual 
funds. 
 Look at the example of the Pimco High Income fund from Yahoo! Finance 
in  Figure 19.7 . The fund’s name is listed in large letters. The quotation includes 
the price of the fund, as well as the previous day’s closing price and the opening 
price. The chart also shows the 52-week range, the daily and average volumes, 
the earnings per share, and the dividend/yield. 
 Figure 19.8  evaluates bonds, stocks, mutual funds, and ETFs according to 
risk, income, and possible investment growth (capital gain). 
 exchange-traded funds 
(ETFs) 
 Collections of stocks, bonds, 
and other investments that are 
traded on exchanges but are 
traded more like individual 
stocks than like mutual funds.  
 AB 
 Investment-grade corporate bonds 
MP
Stock and bond fund
 AU 
 Gold oriented 
MT
Mortgage securities
 BL 
 Balanced 
MV
Mid-cap value
 EI 
 Equity income 
NM
 Insured municipal bonds 
 EM 
 Emerging markets 
 NR 
 Natural resources 
 EU 
 European region 
 PR 
 Pacific region 
 GL 
 Global 
 SB 
 Short-term corporate bonds 
 GM  General municipal bond 
 SC 
 Small-cap core 
 GT 
 General taxable bonds 
 SE 
 Sector funds 
 HB 
 Health/biotech 
 SG 
 Small-cap growth 
 HC 
 High-yield bonds 
 SM 
 Short-term municipal bonds 
 HM  High-yield municipal bonds 
 SP 
 S&P 500 
 IB 
 Intermediate-term corporate bonds 
 SQ 
 Specialty 
 IG 
 Intermediate-term government bonds 
 SS 
 Single-state municipal bonds 
 IL 
 International 
 SU 
 Short-term government bonds 
 IM 
 Intermediate-term municipal bonds 
 SV 
 Small-cap value 
 LC 
 Large-cap core 
 TK 
 Science & technology 
 LG 
 Large-cap growth 
 UN 
 Unassigned 
 LT 
 Latin America 
 UT 
 Utility 
 LU 
 Long-term U.S. bonds 
 WB 
 World bonds 
 LV 
 Large-cap value 
 XC 
 Multi-cap core 
 MC  Mid-cap core 
 XG 
 Multi-cap growth 
 MG  Mid-cap growth 
 XV 
 Multi-cap value 
 Sources:  The Wall Street Journal and  Investor’s Business Daily. 
 FIGURE 19.6 MUTUAL 
FUND OBJECTIVES 
 Mutual funds have a wide 
array of investment categories. 
They range from low-risk, 
conservative funds to others 
that invest in high-risk 
industries. Listed here are 
abbreviations of funds and what 
these abbreviations stand for.  

551
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
Describe how indicators like the Dow Jones Industrial Average affect 
the market. 
UNDERSTANDING STOCK MARKET INDICATORS 
 Investors today have an enormous wealth of investment information available 
to them. Newspapers like  The Wall Street Journal, Barron’s, and Investor’s Busi-
ness Daily provide vast amounts of information about companies and global 
markets. Television networks like MSNBC and CNBC offer daily investment 
analysis and different viewpoints to assist investors. Websites like MSN Money 
LO 19–9
 FIGURE 19.7  
UNDERSTANDING 
MUTUAL FUND 
QUOTATIONS  
 • What is a stock split? Why do companies sometimes split their stock?  
 • What does buying stock on margin mean?  
 • What are mutual funds and ETFs?  
 • What is the key benefit to investors in investing in a mutual fund or ETF?  
•
What is a stock split? W
 test prep 
Why do compa
Wh
 FIGURE 19.8  
COMPARING 
INVESTMENTS 
Preferred stock
Common stock
Mutual funds
ETFs
Investment
Bonds
Degree of
risk
Medium
High
Medium
Medium
Low
Steady
Variable
Variable
Variable
Expected
income
Secure
Little
Good
Good
Good
Possible growth
(capital gain)
Little
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
552
and Yahoo! Finance offer financial information to investors free of charge that 
not long ago was available only to brokers for a hefty fee. But keep in mind 
that investing is an inexact science. Every time someone sells a stock, believing 
it will fall, someone else is buying it, believing its price will go higher. 
 You often hear business news reports include a comment like, “The Dow 
was up 90 points today in active trading.” Ever wonder what that’s all about? 
The   Dow Jones Industrial Average (the Dow)   is the average cost of 30 
selected industrial stocks. The financial industry uses it to give an indication 
of the direction (up or down) of the stock market over time. Charles Dow 
began the practice of measuring stock averages in 1884, using the prices of 
12 key stocks. In 1982, the Dow was broadened to include 30 stocks. The 12 
original and the 30 current stocks in the Dow are illustrated in  Figure 19.9 . Do 
you recognize any of the 12 original companies?  
 Today, Dow Jones & Company substitutes new stocks in the Dow when it’s 
deemed appropriate. In 1991, Disney was added to reflect the increased eco-
nomic importance of the service sector. In 1999, the Dow added Home Depot 
and SBC Communications along with its first NASDAQ stocks, Intel and 
Microsoft. In 2013, Visa, Goldman Sachs, and Nike replaced Alcoa, Bank of 
America, and Hewlett-Packard.  33 
 Critics argue that the 30-company Dow sample is too small to get a good 
statistical representation of the direction of the market over time. Many investors 
and analysts prefer to follow stock indexes like the Standard & Poor’s 500 (S&P 
500), which tracks the performance of 400 industrial, 40 financial, 40 public util-
ity, and 20 transportation stocks. Investors also closely follow the NASDAQ aver-
age, which is quoted each trading day to show trends in this important exchange. 
 Staying abreast of the market will help you decide what investments seem 
most appropriate to your needs and objectives. Remember two key investment 
realities: Your personal financial objectives and needs change over time, and 
markets can be volatile. Let’s look at market volatility and the challenges that 
present investors with new risks and opportunities.  
 Dow Jones Industrial 
Average (the Dow)  
 The average cost of 30 
selected industrial stocks, used 
to give an indication of the 
direction (up or down) of the 
stock market over time.  
THE ORIGINAL DOW 12
American Cotton Oil
American Sugar Reﬁning Co.
American Tobacco
Chicago Gas
Distilling & Cattle Feeding Co.
General Electric Co.
Laclede Gas Light Co.
National Lead
North American Co.
Tennessee Coal, Iron & Railroad Co.
U.S. Leather
U.S. Rubber Co.
THE 30 CURRENT DOW COMPANIES
American Express  
JPMorgan Chase
AT&T 
McDonald’s
Boeing 
Merck
Caterpillar 
Microsoft
Chevron 
3M
Cisco 
Nike
Coca-Cola 
Pﬁzer
DuPont 
Procter & Gamble
ExxonMobil 
Travelers
General Electric 
United Health Group
Goldman Sachs 
United Technologies
Home Depot 
Verizon
IBM 
Visa
Intel 
Wal-Mart Stores
Johnson & Johnson 
Walt Disney
 FIGURE 19.9 THE 
ORIGINAL DOW AND 
CURRENT DOW    

553
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
 Riding the Market’s Roller Coaster 
 Throughout the 1900s, the stock market had its ups and downs, spiced with 
several major tremors. The first major crash occurred on Tuesday, October 29, 
1929 (called Black Tuesday), when the stock market lost almost 13 percent of 
its value in a single day. This day, and the deep depression that followed, rein-
forced the reality of market volatility, especially to those who bought stocks 
heavily on margin. On October 19, 1987, the stock market suffered the largest 
one-day drop in its history, losing over 22 percent of its value. On October 27, 
1997, investors again felt the market’s fury. Fears of an impending economic 
crisis in Asia caused panic and widespread losses. Luckily, the market regained 
its strength after a short downturn. 
 After regaining strength in the late 1990s, the market again suffered misfor-
tune in the early 2000s. All told, investors lost $7 trillion in market value from 
2000 through 2002 due to the burst of the tech stock bubble. A recovery that 
started in the mid-2000s was cut short in 2008, when the financial crisis fueled a 
massive exodus from the stock market, resulting in record losses. 
 What caused the market turmoil of 1987, 1997, 2000–2002, and 2008? 
In 1987, many analysts agreed it was   program trading   , in which investors 
give their computers instructions to sell automatically to avoid potential 
losses, if the price of their stock dips to a certain point. On October 19, 1987, 
computers’ sell orders caused many stocks to fall to unbelievable depths. 
The crash prompted the U.S. exchanges to create mechanisms called  curbs 
and  circuit breakers to restrict program trading whenever the market moves 
up or down by a large number of points in a trading day. A key computer is 
turned off and program trading is halted. If you watch programming on 
CNBC or MSNBC, you’ll see the phrase  curbs in appear on the screen. 
 Circuit breakers are more drastic than curbs and are triggered when the 
Dow falls 10, 20, or 30 percent in a day. That happened on October 27, 1997, 
when the market suffered an approximate 7 percent decline and the market 
closed for the day at 3:30 p.m. instead of 4:00. Many believe the 1997 market 
drop (caused by the financial crisis in Asia) could have been much worse with-
out the trading restrictions. Depending on the rate of decline and the time of 
day, circuit breakers will halt trading for half an hour to two hours so traders 
have time to assess the situation. 
program trading
Giving instructions to 
computers to automatically sell 
if the price of a stock dips to a 
certain point to avoid potential 
losses.
 Investing in the stock 
market has never been 
for the faint of heart. 
The market seems to 
have continuous steep 
climbs and sharp falls. 
Do you have the risk 
tolerance to survive the 
wild market swings?  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
554
 In the late 1990s the stock market reached 
unparalleled heights only to collapse into a deep 
decline in 2000–2002. The bursting of the dot-com 
bubble was the primary reason. A bubble is caused 
when too many investors drive the price of something 
(in this case dot-com stocks) unrealistically high. 
 The dot-com crash was, unfortunately, accom-
panied by disclosures of financial fraud at compa-
nies such as WorldCom, Enron, and Tyco. Investors 
had trusted that the real value of these companies 
was fairly reflected in their financial statements. 
This trust was shattered when they found invest-
ment analysts often provided clients with wildly 
optimistic evaluations and recommendations about 
companies they knew were not worth their current prices.  
 After the financial downturn caused by the dot-com bubble, the stock 
market surged in the mid-2000s and set a new high. The market’s growth was 
dramatic, especially in the real estate sector. From 2000 to 2006 prices of 
existing homes rose 50 percent; however, between 2006 and 2011, housing 
values fell $6.3 trillion. The real estate bubble was like the dot-com bubble 
before it: Investors believed that home prices would increase forever. Finan-
cial institutions reduced their lending requirements for buyers, homebuilders 
overbuilt, and buyers overspent, all sharing blame for the crisis. The govern-
ment also contributed to the problem by requiring more mortgages be given 
to low- and moderate-income buyers, many with weak credit scores or no 
verification of income or assets. These  subprime loans were pooled together 
and repackaged as mortgage-backed securities that were sold to investors 
(discussed in Chapter 20). What followed were huge numbers of foreclosures, 
the failure of government-sponsored mortgage giants Fannie Mae and Fred-
die Mac, and more than 350 bank failures. 
 The collapse of the real estate market caused the economy a combined 
loss of $8 trillion in housing and commercial property. Financial institutions, 
like Lehman Brothers, went out of business and Wall Street icon Merrill Lynch 
was purchased by Bank of America. With financial markets in the worst con-
dition since the Great Depression and the economy in a deep recession, the 
federal government took action. Congress passed a $700 billion financial pack-
age called the Troubled Asset Relief Program (TARP) that allowed the Treasury 
Department to purchase or insure “troubled assets” to bolster banks and bail 
out the automotive industry and insurer American International Group (AIG). 
Unfortunately, in 2009 the economy continued to decline and unemployment 
grew to double digits, causing President Obama to encourage passage of an 
$800 billion economic stimulus package—a blend of tax cuts and increased 
government spending—that was intended to reduce unemployment and pro-
vide a “significant boost” to the crippled economy. 
 Since 2009, the economy has slowly recovered. Unfortunately, unemploy-
ment has remained high and consumers remain skeptical about the nation’s 
economic future. Also, of the 5 million Americans who suffered foreclosure 
on their homes due to the financial crisis, many do not see owning another 
home as part of the “American Dream.”  34 On the positive side, the amount of 
TARP funds the government spent did not approximate the $700 billion that 
was appropriated. The troubled banks repaid most of the money they received 
through TARP (with interest) and AIG repaid the government in full. The gov-
ernment did lose $10 billion when it sold its final shares of General Motors. 
Since then, the stock market has experienced growth and again moved to new 
highs.  35 What the future of the stock market will be remains to be seen.  
 Huge swings in the 
market cause much 
anguish among Wall 
Street workers and 
people in general. What 
have we learned from 
market bubbles like 
those in technology and 
real estate?  

• Gave the government power to seize and shutter large ﬁnancial institutions on the verge
 of collapse.
• Put derivatives and complicated ﬁnancial deals (including those that packaged subprime
 mortgages) under strict governmental oversight.
• Required hedge funds to register with the SEC and provide information about trades and
 portfolio holdings.
• Created the Consumer Financial Protection Bureau to watch over the interests of American
 consumers by reviewing and enforcing federal ﬁnancial laws.
Key Dodd-Frank Provisions
555
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
 Investing Challenges in the 21st-Century Market 
 As you can see from the previous section, in the stock market, what goes up 
may also go down. Financial markets will likely experience changes in the 
future that will only heighten investor risk. The financial crisis also reinforced 
the fact that the world’s economies are closely linked. The United States was 
not the only nation affected by the financial crisis; financial markets in Europe, 
Asia, and South America felt the pain as well. Persistent challenges and even 
political and social change promise to make securities markets exciting but 
not stable places to be in the 21st century.  Figure 19.10  highlights new govern-
ment regulations designed to address some of these challenges.  
 Remember to diversify your investments, and be mindful of the risks of 
investing. Taking a long-term perspective is also a wise idea. There’s no such 
thing as easy money or a sure thing. If you carefully research companies and 
industries, keep up with the news, and make use of investment resources—
such as newspapers, magazines, newsletters, the Internet, TV programs, and 
college classes—the payoff can be rewarding over time.   
 • What does the Dow Jones Industrial Average measure? Why is it 
important?  
 • Why do the 30 companies comprising the Dow change periodically?  
 • Explain program trading and the problems it can create.  
•
What does the Dow Jo
 test prep 
ones Industrial
one
 FIGURE 19.10 CLEANING 
UP THE STREET 
 Key Provisions of the Dodd-
Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act    
summary
  Describe the role of securities markets and of investment bankers. 
 • 
 What opportunities do securities markets provide businesses and individual 
investors?  
 By issuing securities businesses are able to raise much-needed funding to 
help finance their major expenses. Individual investors can share in the 
success and growth of emerging or established firms by investing in 
them.  
•
What opp
LO 19–1
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
556
 • 
 What role do investment bankers play in securities markets?  
 Investment bankers are specialists who assist in the issue and sale of new 
securities.  
  Identify the stock exchanges where securities are traded. 
 • 
 What are stock exchanges?  
 Stock exchanges are securities markets whose members are engaged in 
buying and selling securities such as stocks and bonds.  
 • 
 What are the different exchanges?  
 The NYSE Euronext lists the stock of over 8,000 companies. The NASDAQ 
is a telecommunications network that links dealers across the nation so 
that they can buy and sell securities electronically rather than in person. It 
is the largest U.S. electronic stock trading market. There are stock 
exchanges all over the world.  
 • 
 What is the over-the-counter (OTC) market?  
 The OTC market is a system for exchanging stocks not listed on the 
national exchanges.  
 • 
 How are securities exchanges regulated?  
 The Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) regulates securities 
exchanges and requires companies that intend to sell bonds or stocks to 
provide a prospectus to potential investors.  
 • 
 What is insider trading?  
 Insider trading is the use of information or knowledge that individuals 
gain that allows them to benefit unfairly from fluctuations in security 
prices.  
  Compare the advantages and disadvantages of equity financing by issuing 
stock, and detail the differences between common and preferred stock. 
 • 
 What are the advantages and disadvantages to a firm of selling stock?  
 The advantages of selling stock include the following: (1) the stock price 
never has to be repaid to stockholders, since they become owners in the 
company; (2) there is no legal obligation to pay stock dividends; and (3) 
the company incurs no debt, so it may appear financially stronger. Disad-
vantages of selling stock include the following: (1) stockholders become 
owners of the firm and can affect its management by voting for the board 
of directors; (2) it is more costly to pay dividends since they are paid in 
after-tax profits; and (3) managers may be tempted to make stockholders 
happy in the short term rather than plan for long-term needs.  
 • 
 What are the differences between common and preferred stock?  
 Holders of common stock have voting rights in the company. In exchange 
for having no voting rights, preferred stockholders receive a fixed dividend 
that must be paid in full before common stockholders receive a dividend. 
Preferred stockholders are also paid back their investment before com-
mon stockholders if the company is forced out of business.  
 Compare the advantages and disadvantages of obtaining debt financing by 
issuing bonds, and identify the classes and features of bonds. 
 • 
 What are the advantages and disadvantages of issuing bonds?  
 The advantages of issuing bonds include the following: (1) management 
retains control since bondholders cannot vote; (2) interest paid on bonds is 
•
What are
LO 19–2
LO 19–3
LO 19–4

557
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
tax-deductible; (3) bonds are only a temporary source of financing, and 
after they are paid off the debt is eliminated; (4) bonds can be paid back 
early if they are callable; and (5) sometimes bonds can be converted to 
common stock. The disadvantages of bonds include the following: (1) 
because bonds are an increase in debt, they may adversely affect the mar-
ket’s perception of the company; (2) the firm must pay interest on its bonds; 
and (3) the firm must repay the bond’s face value on the maturity date.  
 • 
What are the different types of bonds? 
 Unsecured (debenture) bonds are not supported by collateral, whereas 
secured bonds are backed by tangible assets such as mortgages, buildings, 
and equipment.  
  Explain how to invest in securities markets and set investment objectives 
such as long-term growth, income, cash, and protection from inflation. 
 • 
 How do investors normally make purchases in securities markets?  
 Investors can purchase investments through market intermediaries called 
stockbrokers, who provide many different services. Online investing, how-
ever, has become extremely popular.  
 • 
 What are the criteria for selecting investments?  
 Investors should determine their overall financial objectives and evaluate 
investments according to (1) risk, (2) yield, (3) duration, (4) liquidity, and 
(5) tax consequences.  
 • 
 What is diversification?  
 Diversification means buying several different types of investments 
(government bonds, corporate bonds, preferred stock, common stock, 
global stock) with different degrees of risk. The purpose is to reduce the 
overall risk an investor would assume by investing in just one type of 
security. 
  Analyze the opportunities stocks offer as investments. 
 • 
 What is a market order?  
 A market order tells a broker to buy or sell a security immediately at the best 
price available.  
 • 
 A limit order?  
 A limit order tells the broker to buy or sell if the stock reaches a specific 
price.  
 • 
 What does it mean when a stock splits?  
 When a stock splits, stockholders receive two (or more) shares of stock for 
each share they own. Each is worth half (or less) of the original share, so 
while the number of the shares increases, the total value of stockholders’ 
holdings stays the same. Stockholders hope the lower per-share price that 
results may increase demand for the stock.  
 • 
 What does buying on margin mean?  
 An investor buying on margin borrows part (the percentage allowed to be 
borrowed is set by the Federal Reserve) of the cost of a stock from the bro-
ker to get shares of stock without immediately paying the full price.  
 • 
 What type of information do stock quotations give you?  
 Stock quotations provide the highest and lowest price in the last 
52 weeks; the dividend yield; the price/earnings ratio; the total shares 
traded that day; and the closing price and net change in price from the 
previous day.  
LO 19–5
•
What is a
LO 19–6

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
558
 Analyze the opportunities bonds offer as investments. 
 • 
 What is the difference between a bond selling at a discount and a bond sell-
ing at a premium?  
 In the secondary market a bond selling at a premium is priced above its 
face value. A bond selling at a discount sells below its face value.  
 • 
 What is a junk bond?  
 Junk bonds are high-risk (rated BB or below), high-interest debenture 
bonds that speculative investors often find attractive.  
 • 
 What information does a bond quotation give you?  
 A bond quotation gives the bond’s interest rate (coupon rate), maturity 
date, rating, current price, and whether it’s callable.  
  Explain the investment opportunities in mutual funds and exchange-traded 
funds (ETFs). 
 • 
 How can mutual funds help individuals diversify their investments?  
 A mutual fund is an organization that buys stocks and bonds and then 
sells shares in those securities to the public, enabling individuals to invest 
in many more companies than they could otherwise afford.  
 • 
 What are ETFs?  
 Like mutual funds, ETFs are collections of stocks that are traded on secu-
rities exchanges, but they are traded more like individual stocks.  
  Describe how indicators like the Dow Jones Industrial Average affect the 
market. 
 • 
 What is the Dow Jones Industrial Average?  
 The Dow Jones Industrial Average is the average price of 30 specific stocks 
that analysts use to track the direction (up or down) of the stock market.   
•
What is t
LO 19–7
LO 19–8
LO 19–9
 1. Imagine you inherited $50,000 and you want to invest it to meet two finan-
cial goals: ( a ) to save for your wedding, which you plan to have in two 
years, and ( b ) to save for your retirement a few decades from now. How 
would you invest the money? Explain your answer.  
1
 critical thinking 
 key terms 
 bond 539
 buying stock on 
margin  546
 capital gains  545
 common stock  537
 debenture bonds  540
 diversification  544
 dividends  537
 Dow Jones Industrial 
Average (the Dow)  552
 exchange-traded funds 
(ETFs) 550
 initial public offering 
(IPO) 532  
 institutional 
investors  533
 interest  539
 investment bankers  533
 junk bonds  548
 maturity date  539
 mutual fund  549
 NASDAQ 534
 over-the-counter (OTC) 
market  534
 preferred stock  538
 program trading  553
 prospectus  535
 Securities and 
Exchange Commission 
(SEC)  534
 sinking fund  541
 stockbroker   542
 stock certificate  537
 stock exchange  533
 stocks 537
 stock splits  546

559
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1. Go to the websites of Charles Schwab ( www.schwab.com ), E*Trade 
( www.etrade.com ), and TD Ameritrade ( www.tdameritrade.com ). Investi-
gate each of these brokerage companies to compare their fees and what 
they offer in terms of research and advice. Which firm seems most appro-
priate to your investment objectives? Be prepared to defend your choice to 
the class.  
 2. Visit MSN Money or Yahoo! Finance and select six stocks for your 
portfolio—three from the NYSE and three from the NASDAQ. Track the 
stocks daily for three weeks using the graphs provided on the websites to 
see how market trends and information affected your stock’s performance. 
Report your observations. 
 3. U.S. government bonds compete with corporations for investors’ dollars. 
Check out the different types of bonds the federal government offers and 
list the types most appealing to you. (Hint: See  www.treasurydirect.gov .) 
Be sure to check out TIPs. 
 4. See whether anyone in class is interested in forming an investment group. 
If so, each member should choose one stock and one mutual fund or ETF. 
Record each student’s selections and the corresponding prices. In two 
weeks measure the percentage of change in the investments and discuss 
the results. 
 5. Go to the websites of Charles Schwab ( www.schwab.com ), E*Trade 
( www.etrade.com ), or TD Ameritrade ( www.tdameritrade.com ) and find 
two IPOs offered in the past year or so. Track the performance of each 
from its introduction to its present market price. Report your 
observations.  
 2. If you are considering investing in the bond market, how could informa-
tion provided by Standard & Poor’s, Moody’s Investors Service, and Fitch 
Ratings help you?  
 3. Why do companies like callable bonds? Why are investors generally not 
very fond of them?  
 4. If you were thinking about investing in the securities market, would you 
prefer individual stocks, mutual funds, or ETFs? Explain your choice by 
comparing the advantages and disadvantages of each.  
 5. Consider the companies added and subtracted from the Dow Jones Indus-
trial Average over the past five years. (Go to  www.djaverages.com , then 
proceed to Dow Jones Learning Center to learn more about these compa-
nies.) What types of companies were added and deleted? Why do you think 
the changes were made? Do you think new changes will be made in the 
next five years? Why?  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
560
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To evaluate and understand the advantages and disadvantages of ETFs.  
 EXERCISE 
 Exchange-traded funds (ETFs) are a low-cost, flexible way to diversify a port-
folio. To learn more, go to Yahoo! Finance (  www.finance.yahoo.com  ) and click 
on investing, then on the ETFs tab. 
 1. What are the pros and cons of investing in ETFs?  
 2. What are the five most actively traded ETFs?  
 3. Which ETFs grew the most in the last three years?  
 4. In which industry sectors or countries do these high-growth ETFs specialize?  
 video case   
 We all hear about the importance of investing, but 
how do you know what the best investments are? 
Is there an objective source you can use to get 
investment advice? The answer is, yes, you can get 
much helpful and unbiased information from a 
company called Morningstar. 
 Most people choose between stocks and 
bonds. When you buy stocks, you buy part owner-
ship of a firm. You can choose from large firms 
like AT&T and Microsoft or smaller firms. Morn-
ingstar can help you choose from the thousands 
of firms available. 
 One way to spread the risk of investing in 
stock is to diversify. That is, you can buy stock in a 
variety of firms in a variety of sectors. For exam-
ple, you can buy stock in firms from other coun-
tries, in service firms, manufacturing firms, health 
care firms, and so on. One easy way to diversify is 
to buy mutual funds. Such funds buy a whole 
range of stocks and then sell you a portion of that 
fund. ETFs, or exchange-traded funds, are much 
like mutual funds, but you buy and sell them 
through stock exchanges much like you would 
buy individual shares of stock. 
 In the long run, most investment advisors rec-
ommend investing in stock. Yes, the stock market 
goes up and down, but they say, in the long run, 
stocks usually go up. Since young people can wait 
for years to sell their stock, investment advisors 
like Morningstar would usually recommend stock 
(or mutual funds) to them. 
 Would Morningstar also be likely to recom-
mend bonds? Sure. When you buy a bond, you are 
actually lending a company, the government, or 
some government agency money. The company 
(or the government) promises to return the money 
to you, plus interest. If the interest is high enough, 
such an investment makes sense. Of course, some 
companies are riskier than others, so the interest 
paid on bonds varies. Morningstar will help you 
choose bonds that are appropriate for you and 
your situation. 
 Almost everyone needs some investment 
advice. Morningstar has earned a reputation for 
being objective and helpful. This video is meant to 
reveal the benefits and drawbacks of investing. 
But stocks and bonds can earn you a nice return 
on your investment if you know what you are 
doing. If you don’t know what you are doing, you 
can lose your savings rather quickly. Morningstar 
is just one source of information. You should 
explore as many sources as possible to learn about 
investing. Such sources include your textbook, 
your local newspaper, magazines such as  Money
and  Personal Finance, and TV shows featuring 
financial news. 
 Everyone should have some money set aside 
(e.g., in a bank) for emergencies. Everyone should 
 WHERE DID ALL MY MONEY GO? 

561
Using Securities Markets for Financing and Investing Opportunities
CHAPTER 19
diversify their investments among stocks, bonds, 
real estate, and other investments, depending on 
their income and their willingness to assume risk. 
 Morningstar and other sources of advice are 
very important to your financial health. You have 
seen how some people believed that real estate 
could do nothing but go up. The recent real estate 
crash proved them wrong. The same is true of 
stocks, bonds, gold, oil, and other investments. 
They all involve risk, and expert advice is often 
wrong; but in any case, it pays to have the best, 
unbiased advice you can get, like that from Morn-
ingstar. It also helps to have several other sources 
of advice, including your own knowledge, gath-
ered carefully over time. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1.  Are you confident about investing in stocks, 
bonds, mutual funds, ETFs, and other invest-
ments? What sources of information would you 
use to make a decision about investments?  
 2.  Should you totally rely on Morningstar or any 
other investment advice service or should you 
search out several sources of advice? How can 
you know what advice is best?  
 3.  Given what you’ve read in this text and from 
other sources, would you recommend that 
your fellow students’ first investment be in 
stocks, bonds, mutual funds, ETFs, real estate, 
or some other investments? Why?  
 1. 
Katie Roof, “Big Tech IPOs for 2014,”  Forbes, December 
23, 2013. 
 2. 
Nandini Sukumar, “BME May Evaluate NYSE Technology 
Units, Won’t Buy Euronext Stake,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
February 24, 2014; and Steven M. Sears, “Master of the 
Markets,”  Barron’s, February 10, 2014. 
 3. 
“The End of the Street,”  The Economist, November 16, 2013. 
 4. 
Bradley Hope and Keiko Morris, “NYSE’s New York City 
Footprint May Shrink,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
February 17, 2014. 
 5. 
NYSE Euronext,   www.nyx.com  , accessed May 2014. 
 6. 
NASDAQ OMX,   www.nasdaqomx.com  , accessed May 2014. 
 7. 
Chris Dieterich, “Big Board Scores One for Humans,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, January 5, 2014; and Sam Mamudi and 
Ari Levy, “NASDAQ Offers an IPO Alternative,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, February 13, 2014. 
 8. 
Dan Stumpf, “U.S. Public Companies Rise Again,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, February 5, 2014. 
 9. 
Peter J. Henning, “Paying the Price for Insider Trading 
Profits,”  The New York Times, February 24, 2014. 
 10. 
Christopher M. Matthews, “Prosecutors Tell Jury to Convict 
Martoma, As Insider Trading Trial Nears End,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, February 3, 2014; and Michelle Celarier, “Ex-SAC 
Martoma Asks Judge to Toss Guilty Verdict,”  New York Post, 
February 24, 2014. 
 11. 
“Bull Runs Free in African Stock Markets,”  USA Today, May 
27, 2013. 
 12. 
Shirley A. Lazo, “Global Payouts Hit $1 Trillion,”  Barron’s, 
March 1, 2014. 
 13. 
Kopin Tan, “Buyback Bonbons,”  Barron’s, January 6, 2014. 
 14. 
“Common and Preferred Stock: What’s the Difference,”  The 
Motley Fool, February 23, 2014. 
 15. 
Tom Konrad, “Power REIT’s Preferred Stock Offering: A 
Hedge That Pays 7.75%,”  Forbes, February 7, 2014. 
 16. 
Katy Burne, “Bankers Pitch 100-Year Bonds,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, August 23, 2010; Vivianne Sander, Michael 
Mackenzie, and Henny Sander, “Verizon Eyes Maturities of 
100 Years for Bonds,”  Financial Times, September 7, 2013; and 
Katie Linsell, “EDF’s Borrowing Exceeds $12 Billion This Week 
with 100-Year Bond,”  Bloomberg News, January 17, 2014. 
 17. William Baldwin, “Six Ways to Inflation-Proof Your Bonds,” 
Forbes, March 2, 2011; and 4 Ways Bonds Can Fit into Your 
Portfolio,”  Forbes,  February 9, 2012. 
 18. Kevin Harlan, “The Changing Broker Scene Offers Options 
for Traders,”  Investor’s Business Daily, April 25, 2011; and Eve 
Kaplan, “The Difference between a Stockbroker, Financial 
Advisor and Planner Explained,”  Forbes, March 15, 2012. 
 19. Selena Maranjian, “How to Find the Best Online Brokers,” 
The Motley Fool, June 25, 2013; and Ken Hoover and Donald 
Gold, “Research, Stock Trading Tools Sharpen at Top 
Brokers,” November 25, 2013. 
 20. Carolyn Bigda, “Happy Fifth Birthday, Mr. Bull,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance, March 2014. 
 21. 
Ryan Caldbeck, “Successful Venture Investing: The 
Importance of Understanding Risks, and Diversification,” 
Forbes, February 19, 2014. 
 22. McDonald’s   www.mcdonalds.com/aboutmcdonalds/
stocksplit  , accessed May 2014. 
 23. Andrew Tangel, “‘Massive Trading Suspensions’ Highlight 
Threat of Penny Stock Fraud,”  Los Angeles Times, February 
3, 2014. 
 24. Ben Levisohn, “Splits Dive; Cheap Stocks Thrive,”  Barron’s, 
January 6, 2014. 
 25. Dakin Campbell and Elizabeth Dexheimer, “MasterCard 
Boosts Dividend 83%, Announces 10 for 1 Stock Split,” 
Bloomberg Personal Finance, December 10, 2013; and 
Alistar Barr, “Google Hits Record on Revenue Gain, Stock 
Split,”  USA Today, January 30, 2014. 
 26. “Motley Fool—Buying on Margin Is a Tightrope Deal,”  The 
Columbus Dispatch, February 2, 2014. 
 27. Michael Aneiro, “Junk Yields: Too Low for Comfort,”  Barron’s,  
January 6, 2014; and Vivianne Rodrigues, “Taper Time-Bomb 
Hits High U.S. Yield Debt,”  Financial Times, February 10, 2014. 
 28. Rob Silverblatt, “Are There Too Many Mutual Funds?”  U.S. 
News & World Report, June 10, 2013. 
 29. Jia Lynn Yung, “Warren Buffett Reveals the One Stock Fund 
You Need to Invest In,”  The Washington Post, February 24, 
2014. 
 30. Jeff Sommer, “Give Fees an Inch and They’ll Take a Mile,” 
 The New York Times, March 1, 2014. 
ys to Inflation-Proof Your Bonds,”
 notes 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
562
 31. 
Andrew Bary, “The Case for Closed-End Funds,”  Barron’s, 
December 23, 2013. 
 32. Patrick Graham, “Wealth Advisor: Embracing ETFs Over 
Index Mutual Funds,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 21, 
2014; and David Ning, “Signs Index Funds Aren’t for You,” 
U.S. News & World Report, February 26, 2014. 
 33. Jeffrey R. Kosnett, “The Dow Loves Dividends,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance, December 2013; and Rodney Brooks, 
John Waggoner, and Matt Krantz, “Dow 30 Adds 
Goldman Sachs, Nike, and Visa,”  USA Today, 
September 10, 2013. 
 34. V. Dionne Hayes, Peyton Craighill, and Scott Clement, “For 
More People, the American Dream Does Not Include a Home 
of Their Own,”  The Washington Post, March 1, 2014. 
 35. Stan Choe, “Five Years into Bull Market, Returns Can Be 
Deceiving,”  The Boston Globe, March 2, 2014. 
Page 531: © Marc Bryan-Brown/WireImage/Getty 
Images; p. 532: © Dirck Halstead/Liaison/Getty 
Images; p. 534 (left): © Ted Thai/The Life Picture 
Collection/Getty Images; p. 534 (right): © Scott 
Eells/Bloomberg/Getty Images; p. 538: © Scott 
Eells/Bloomberg/Getty Images; p. 542: © NetPho-
tos/Alamy; p. 545: © Frederic J. Brown/AFP/Getty 
Images; p. 546: © Justin Lane/EPA/Landov; 
p. 553: © Shenval/Alamy RF; p. 554: © Scott 
Olson/Getty Images.
Page 531: © Marc Bryan-Bro
 photo credits 


564
 Money, Financial 
Institutions, and the 
Federal Reserve 
 20 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 LO 20-1 Explain what money is and what makes money useful. 
 LO 20-2 Describe how the Federal Reserve controls the money supply. 
 LO 20-3 Trace the history of banking and the Federal Reserve System. 
 LO 20-4 Classify the various institutions in the U.S. banking system. 
 LO 20-5 Briefly trace the causes of the banking crisis, and explain how the 
government protects your funds during such crises. 
 LO 20-6 Describe how technology helps make banking more efficient. 
 LO 20-7 Evaluate the role and importance of international banking, the 
World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.  

565
Janet Yellen
 • First female chair of the Federal 
Reserve
 • Economist
 • Passionate about reducing 
unemployment
www.federalreserve.gov
@The_Yellen
J
 anet Yellen is the head of the 
Federal Reserve, the agency 
in charge of the nation’s mon-
etary policy. At the Fed, she 
manages the money supply 
and interest rates, which keeps her con-
stantly in the public eye. But Yellen’s 
economic responsibilities aren’t the only 
reason she attracts attention: she is also 
the first woman to chair the Fed in the 
institution’s 100-year history. 
 Growing up in Brooklyn, Yellen was 
an overachiever at a young age. In high 
school she served as editor in chief of 
the newspaper and earned the title of 
class scholar while holding prominent 
positions in the booster, history, and psy-
chology clubs. Yellen was named vale-
dictorian and winner of multiple 
scholastic awards. She continued this 
commitment to excellence at Brown Uni-
versity where she was one of the first 
women to major in economics. Yellen 
was inspired to study the subject after 
attending a lecture by James Tobin, a 
prominent professor and devotee of the 
famous economist John Maynard 
Keynes. After getting her undergrad 
degree, she moved on to Yale University 
to earn a doctorate in economics, where 
Tobin served as her advisor. 
 After completing her education, Yel-
len switched to the other side of the 
classroom and began teaching at the 
University of California–Berkeley’s Haas 
School of Business. She used her time in 
the academic world to make major 
advances in economics, particularly in 
regard to unemployment. As a pioneer-
ing thinker on “efficiency wage” unem-
ployment, Yellen discovered that not only 
do employees become less productive 
when their pay is cut, but they’re also far 
more likely to quit. She has been com-
mitted to reducing the effects of unem-
ployment ever since. “These are not just 
statistics to me,” said Yellen. “We know 
that long-term unemployment is devas-
tating to workers and their families. The 
toll is simply terrible on the mental and 
physical health of workers.” 
 Yellen’s passion for her work and 
unrivaled expertise brought her to the 
attention of President Clinton, who 
appointed her to the Federal Reserve 
Board of Governors. Although Yellen 
was new to government service, she 
was never afraid to disagree with her 
superiors. In one famous instance, Yel-
len publicly debated former Fed chair 
Alan Greenspan about rising inflation. 
While Greenspan wanted to drive infla-
tion down to zero, Yellen argued that a 
small amount of inflation would actually 
help to reduce the frequency of reces-
sions. Her use of scholarship and 
research to back up her claims earned 
her many admirers as well as detractors, 
who felt she should have stuck closer to 
the party line. Despite these critics, Yel-
len continued to rise through the ranks. 
After leading the White House Council 
of Economic Advisers, Yellen was 
appointed president of the Federal 
Reserve Bank of San Francisco. Her 
presence turned around the ailing 
branch almost immediately. “People 
became much more ambitious when she 
got there,” said economist Justin Wolf-
ers. Yellen’s San Francisco success 
made her a natural candidate to 
become vice chair of the Fed in 2010 
and then chair in 2014. Only time will tell 
if success will follow Yellen yet again as 
she tackles her biggest challenge yet. 
 You will learn more about the Federal 
Reserve and the banking system in gen-
eral in this chapter. Using that informa-
tion, you can better understand Yellen’s 
decisions. Keep up with what she is 
doing by reading the business press and 
listening to business reports. Her suc-
cesses and failures will be making head-
lines for a long time. 
 Sources: Sheelah Kolhatkar and Matthew 
Philips, “Who Is Janet 
Yellen? A Look at the 
Frontrunner for the Next 
Fed Chairman,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek,
September 19, 2013; 
Binyamin Appelbaum, 
“Possible Fed 
Successor Has 
Admirers and Foes,” 
The New York Times,  
April 24, 2013; and 
Dylan Matthews, “Nine 
Amazing Facts about 
Janet Yellen, Our Next 
Fed Chair,”  The 
Washington Post, 
October 9, 2013.  
 Getting to know  Janet Yellen

566
 name that company 
 This company recently opened an online store using a new form of money. 
What is the name of this company and what currency does it use? (You can find 
the answer in this chapter.) 
Explain what money is and what makes money useful.
 WHY MONEY IS IMPORTANT  
 The Federal Reserve, or the Fed, is the organization in charge of money in the 
United States. You will be hearing a lot about it and its head, Janet Yellen, in the 
coming years. That is why we chose her to be the subject of the Getting to Know 
feature for this chapter. Once you have some understanding of the Federal 
Reserve, our goal in this chapter is to introduce you to the world of banking. 
 Two of the most critical issues in the United States today, economic growth 
and the creation of jobs, depend on the ready availability of money. Money is so 
important to the economy that many institutions have evolved to manage it and 
make it available when you need it. Today you can get cash from an automated 
teller machine (ATM) almost anywhere in the world, and most organizations will 
also accept a check, credit card, debit card, or smart card for purchases. Some 
businesses will even accept Bitcoins, an online version of money.  1 We shall talk 
about Bitcoins later in the chapter. Behind the scenes is a complex system of 
banking that makes the free flow of money possible. Each day, about $4 trillion 
is exchanged in the world’s currency markets. Therefore, what happens to any 
major country’s economy has an effect on the U.S. economy and vice versa. 
 Let’s start at the beginning by discussing exactly what the word  money
means and how the supply of money affects the prices you pay for goods and 
services.  
 What Is Money? 
 Money   is anything people generally accept as payment for goods and services. 
In the past, objects as diverse as salt, feathers, fur pelts, stones, rare shells, tea, 
and horses have served as money. In fact, until the 1880s, cowrie shells were 
one of the world’s most popular currencies. 
LO 20–1
 money  
 Anything that people generally 
accept as payment for goods 
and services.  
 Newer engraved bills 
make counterfeiting 
much more difficult than 
in the past. The bills 
look a little different 
from older ones and are 
different colors. If you 
owned a store, what 
would you do to make 
sure employees 
wouldn’t accept 
counterfeit bills? 

567
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
  Barter  is the direct trading of goods or services for other goods or ser-
vices.  2 Though barter may sound like something from the past, many people 
have discovered the benefits of bartering online.  3 One entrepreneur describes 
his bartering experience as follows: “Last year we bartered the creation of a 
full-color graphic novel in exchange for a new website design. . . . The value 
of the trade was $50,000. We provided three months of writing 
services to provide the graphic novel story line . . . and then 
five months of illustration. In exchange, they helped us 
to define, design and then program our new 
website.”  4  
 Some people barter goods and services the old-
fashioned way. In Siberia, for example, people have 
bought movie tickets with two eggs, and in Ukraine peo-
ple have paid their energy bills with sausages and milk. Today 
you can go to a  barter exchange where you can put goods or ser-
vices into the system and get trade credits for other goods and ser-
vices that you need. The barter exchange makes it easier to barter because 
you don’t have to find people with whom to barter. The exchange does that 
for you.  
 The problem with traditional barter is that eggs and milk are difficult to 
carry around. Most people need some object that’s portable, divisible, durable, 
and stable so that they can trade goods and services without carrying the 
actual goods around with them. One solution is coins and paper bills. The five 
standards for a useful form of money are:
 
• 
 Portability. Coins and paper money are a lot easier to take to market 
than pigs or other heavy products.  
 
• 
 Divisibility. Different-sized coins and bills can represent different 
values. Prior to 1963, a U.S. quarter had half as much silver content as 
a half-dollar coin, and a dollar had four times the silver of a quarter. 
Because silver is now too expensive, today’s coins are made of other 
metals, but the accepted values remain.  
 
• 
 Stability. When everybody agrees on the value of coins, the value of 
money is relatively stable. In fact, U.S. money has become so stable 
that much of the world has used the U.S. dollar as the measure of value. 
If the value of the dollar fluctuates too rapidly, the world may turn to 
some other form of money, such as the euro, for the measure of value.  
 
• 
 Durability. Coins last for thousands of years, even when they’ve sunk to 
the bottom of the ocean, as you’ve seen when divers find old coins in 
sunken ships.  
 
• 
 Uniqueness. It’s hard to counterfeit, or copy, elaborately designed and 
minted coins. With the latest color copiers, people are able to duplicate 
the look of paper money relatively easily. Thus, the government has had 
to go to extra lengths to make sure  real dollars are readily identifiable. 
That’s why you have newer paper money with the picture slightly off 
center and with invisible lines that quickly show up when reviewed by 
banks and stores. On the new $100 bill, for example, Ben Franklin shares 
space with colorful illustrations, hidden text, and pictographs that reveal 
themselves only when they are lit from behind or exposed to ultraviolet 
light.  5 Coins and paper money simplified exchanges. Most countries 
have their own currencies, and they’re all about equally portable, 
divisible, and durable. However, they’re not always equally stable.  
 Electronic cash (e-cash) is one of the newest forms of money. You can 
make online payments using Quicken or Microsoft Money or e-mail e-cash 
 barter  
 The direct trading of goods or 
services for other goods or 
services.  
 Although people have 
long used barter to 
exchange goods without 
money, one problem is 
that objects like 
chickens and eggs are 
harder to carry around 
than a ten-dollar bill. 
What other drawbacks 
does bartering have?  

568
using PayPal. Recipients can choose automatic deposit to their bank, e-dollars 
for spending online, or a traditional check in the mail. Bitcoin is a digital ver-
sion of money that is tougher to forge, cuts across international boundaries, 
and can be stored on your hard drive instead of in a bank. However, the Bit-
coin is not yet generally accepted.  6 Nonetheless, efforts will be made in the 
future to create a cashless society using some other form of currency than the 
bills and coins we now use. Cryptocurrencies like Bitcoin are too new to know 
their value, but many competitors have arisen in recent years. They include 
Litecoin, Peercoin, NXT, and Dogcoin.  7 Bitcoin, however, now has its own 
online store called Bitcoin Shop Inc.  8 See the Adapting to Change box for 
more about Bitcoin. 
 No one knows which of the cryptocurrencies will succeed. On the other 
hand, no one can be sure of the future of the nickel or the penny either. The 
U.S. Mint is examining different metals and alloys to bring down the produc-
tion costs of the nickel, dime, and quarter. It now costs 1.8 cents to make a 
penny and 9.4 cents to make a nickel.  9 Someday you may find that your nick-
els and pennies are lighter and a different color.  
 adapting to change 
 It’s difficult to imagine a cur-
rency being called cool or 
trendy. But these terms are 
often used when describing 
Bitcoin, a form of digital cur-
rency created in 2008. Bitcoin 
is accepted at online operations 
ranging from tech-savvy retail-
ers, to pizza parlors, to shady 
gambling sites. 
 Bitcoin is attractive to many 
users because there’s no cen-
tral authority that regulates the 
currency. Transactions involve 
two people anywhere in the 
world with no intermediaries 
(banks), government regulations, 
or transaction fees involved. In 
fact, you do not even have to give 
your name. Bitcoins are stored in 
a digital wallet that serves as a 
virtual bank account or on a 
user’s computer. Several market-
places, called “Bitcoin 
exchanges,” are available for con-
sumers to buy Bitcoins using dif-
ferent currencies. MtGox was 
once the largest Bitcoin 
exchange. (Claiming it had been 
hacked, MtGox lost around $412.5 
million belonging to customers 
and over $55 million of its own 
money, and filed for bankruptcy in 
2014.) 
 So just how much is a Bitcoin 
worth? That’s a very good ques-
tion. Bitcoin’s volatility stems 
from its decentralized valuation 
system. Value is based on 
demand, as transactions run 
across a peer-to-peer network of 
personal computers. Since 
Bitcoins are not managed from a 
central bank like typical curren-
cies, an arsenal of algorithms 
constantly recalculates the 
currency’s value. This system 
has caused the value of 
Bitcoins to spike wildly—then 
fall in value almost as fast. The 
value of Bitcoins has fluctuated 
from $13 in 2012 to $1,200 in 
December of 2013. This unpre-
dictability has given skeptics 
plenty of reasons to question 
Bitcoin’s practicality. 
Governments are concerned 
about illegal activities being 
conducted through Bitcoin 
transactions. They are also 
considering taxation issues. 
 Bitcoin is just one of many 
digital currencies that have hit 
the market. Whether these curren-
cies achieve a level of stability or 
just become interesting financial 
case studies for the digital age 
remains to be seen. 
 Sources: Sunny Freeman, “What Is Bitcoin? 
11 Things You Need to Know About the Digital 
Currency,”  Huffington Post, January 26, 2014; 
Jose Pagliary, “New IRS Rules Make Using 
Bitcoins a Fiasco,”  CNN Money, March 31, 2014; 
Ashley Vance and Brad Stone, “The Bitcoin-
Mining Arms Race Heats Up,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, January 9, 2014; and Ryan 
Derousseau, “Boom in Virtual Money Mints Real 
Gains and Losses,”  Money, January–February 
2014. 
 The Bitcoin Is in the Mail 
www.bitcoin.com

569
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
Describe how the Federal Reserve controls the money supply.
 What Is the Money Supply?  
 As Fed chairperson, Janet Yellen is in control of the U.S. money supply. Two 
questions emerge from that sentence. What is the money supply? Why does it 
need to be controlled? 
 The   money supply   is the amount of money the Federal Reserve makes 
available for people to buy goods and services. And, yes, the Federal Reserve, 
in tandem with the U.S. Treasury, can create more money if it is needed. For 
example, some of the trillions of dollars that were being spent over the last few 
years to get the economy moving again were printed with authorization from 
the Federal Reserve. The terms QE 1 and QE 2 mean quantitative easing one 
and two, but the real meaning was that the Fed was creating more money 
($85 billion a month) because it believed that money was needed to get the 
economy moving again. Before he left office, former Fed chairperson Ben Ber-
nanke announced that the Fed was cutting back its support for the economy 
from $85 billion a month to $75 billion.  10 It did that by cutting back $5 billion 
each on the purchase of mortgage and Treasury bond purchases.  11 Yellen is 
continuing the process of cutting back on the creation of new money. We’ll see 
if that slows the economy or not. 
 Recently, Yellen announced further cutbacks. That was not good news for 
banks because they had been paying very low interest rates and lending at 
much higher rates.  12 It was not good news for young people who have to bor-
row money to buy homes either. 
 There are several ways of referring to the U.S. money supply. They’re 
called M-l, M-2, and M-3. The M stands for money, and the 1, 2, and 3 stand 
for different definitions of the money supply.   M-l  includes coins and paper 
bills, money that’s available by writing checks (demand deposits and share 
drafts), and money held in traveler’s checks—that is, money that can be 
accessed quickly and easily.   M-2   includes everything in M-l plus money in sav-
ings accounts, and money in money market accounts, mutual funds, certifi-
cates of deposit, and the like—that is, money that may take a little more time 
to obtain than coins and paper bills. M-2 is the most commonly used defini-
tion of money.   M-3   is M-2 plus big deposits like institutional money market 
funds.  
 Managing Inflation and the Money Supply 
 Imagine what would happen if governments (or in the case of the United 
States, the Federal Reserve, a nongovernmental organization) were to gener-
ate twice as much money as exists now (that wouldn’t be too hard to imagine 
if the Fed kept pumping $75 billion a month into the economy.) There would 
be twice as much money available, but still the same amount of goods and 
services. What would happen to prices? (Hint: Remember the laws of supply 
and demand from Chapter 2.) Prices would go  up, because more people would 
try to buy goods and services with their money and bid up the price to get 
what they wanted. This rise in price is called  inflation, which some people call 
“too much money chasing too few goods.” 
 Now think about the opposite: What would happen if the Fed took money 
out of the economy, or put less money in? Prices would go down because there 
would be an oversupply of goods and services compared to the money avail-
able to buy them; this decrease in prices is called  deflation. 
 Now we come to our second question about the money supply: Why does 
it need to be controlled? The reason is that doing so allows us to manage, 
LO 20–2
 money supply  
 The amount of money the 
Federal Reserve Bank makes 
available for people to buy 
goods and services.  
 M-l  
 Money that can be accessed 
quickly and easily (coins and 
paper money, checks, traveler’s 
checks, etc.)  .
 M-2  
 Money included in M-l plus 
money that may take a little 
more time to obtain (savings 
accounts, money market 
accounts, mutual funds, 
certificates of deposit, etc.).  
 M-3  
 M-2 plus big deposits like 
institutional money market 
funds.  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
570
somewhat, the prices of goods and services. The size of the money supply also 
affects  employment and  economic growth or decline. That’s why the Fed and 
Janet Yellen are so important.  13 
 The European Central Bank (ECB) may also do quantitative easing 
(increase the money supply), and has seriously considered doing so.  14 At this 
point, it is good for you to know that the global money supply is controlled by 
 central banks like the Federal Reserve, and what central banks do affects the 
economies of the world.  
 The Global Exchange of Money 
 A  falling dollar value means that the amount of goods and services you can buy 
with a dollar decreases. A  rising dollar value means that the amount of goods 
and services you can buy with a dollar goes up. Thus, the price in euros you 
pay for a German car will be lower if the U.S. dollar rises relative to the euro. 
However, if the euro rises relative to the dollar, the cost of cars from Germany 
will go up and U.S. consumers may buy fewer German cars. 
 What makes the dollar weak (falling value) or strong (rising value) is the 
position of the U.S. economy relative to other economies. When the economy 
is strong, the demand for dollars is high, and the value of the dollar rises. 
When the economy is perceived as weakening, however, the demand for dol-
lars declines and the value of the dollar falls. The value of the dollar thus 
depends on a relatively strong economy. (See Chapter 3 for further discussion 
of effects of changes in currency values or exchange rates.) In the following 
section, we’ll discuss in more detail the money supply and how it’s managed. 
Then we’ll explore the U.S. banking system and how it lends money to busi-
nesses and individuals, like you and me.  
 CONTROL OF THE MONEY SUPPLY 
 Theoretically, with the proper monetary policy in place to control the money 
supply, one can keep the economy growing without causing inflation. (See 
Chapter 2 to review monetary policy.) Again, the organization in charge of 
monetary policy is the Federal Reserve.  
 Basics about the Federal Reserve 
 The Federal Reserve System consists of five major parts: (1) the board of gov-
ernors; (2) the Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC); (3) 12 Federal 
Reserve banks; (4) three advisory councils; and (5) the member banks of the 
system.  Figure 20.1 shows where the 12 Federal Reserve banks are located. 
(You should know that the Federal Reserve is  not a part of the U.S. govern-
ment, despite its name. It is a private firm.)  
 The board of governors administers and supervises the 12 Federal Reserve 
banks. The seven members of the board are appointed by the president and 
confirmed by the senate. The board’s primary function is to set monetary pol-
icy. The Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) has 12 voting members and 
is the policy-making body. The committee is made up of the seven-member 
board of governors plus the president of the New York reserve bank and four 
members who rotate in from the other reserve banks. The advisory councils 
represent the various banking districts, consumers, and member institutions, 
including banks, savings and loan institutions, and credit unions. They offer 
suggestions to the board and to the FOMC. 
 The Fed buys and sells foreign currencies, regulates various types of 
credit, supervises banks, and collects data on the money supply and other 

571
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
economic activity. As part of monetary policy, the Fed determines the reserve 
requirement, that is, the level of reserve funds all financial institutions must 
keep at one of the 12 Federal Reserve banks. It buys and sells government 
securities in  open-market operations. Finally, it lends money to member banks 
at an interest rate called the  discount rate. 
 As noted, the three basic tools the Fed uses to manage the money supply 
are reserve requirements, open-market operations, and the discount rate (see 
 Figure 20.2 ). Let’s explore how it administers each. Note how each move the 
Fed makes affects the economy.  
 FIGURE 20.1 THE 
12 FEDERAL RESERVE 
DISTRICT BANKS  
1
12
3
5
6
8
9
11
10
2
7
San Francisco
Dallas
Kansas
City
Minneapolis
Chicago
St. Louis
Atlanta
Richmond
Cleveland
4
Philadelphia
New
York
Boston
 FIGURE 20.2 HOW THE 
FEDERAL RESERVE 
CONTROLS THE MONEY 
SUPPLY 
A. Increase.
Banks put more money into the Fed, reducing money
supply; thus, there is less money available to lend to
customers.
Economy slows.
B. Decrease.
Banks put less money into the Fed, increasing the
money supply; thus, there is more money available
to lend to customers.
Economy speeds up.
Reserve Requirements
Control Method 
Immediate Result 
Long-Term Effect
A. Fed sells bonds.
Money ﬂows from the economy to the Fed.
Economy slows.
B. Fed buys bonds.
Money ﬂows into the economy from the Fed.
Economy speeds up.
Open-Market Operations
Control Method 
Immediate Result 
Long-Term Effect
A. Rate increases.
Banks borrow less from the Fed; thus, there is less
money to lend.
Economy slows.
B. Rate decreases.
Banks borrow more from the Fed; thus, there is more
money to lend.
Economy speeds up.
Managing the Discount Rate
Control Method 
Immediate Result 
Long-Term Effect

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
572
 The Reserve Requirement 
 The   reserve requirement   is a percentage of commercial banks’ checking and 
savings accounts they must keep in the bank (as cash in the vault) or in a non-
interest-bearing deposit at the local Federal Reserve district bank. The reserve 
requirement is one of the Fed’s tools. When it increases the reserve requirement, 
money becomes scarcer, which in the long run tends to reduce inflation. For 
instance, if Omaha Security Bank holds deposits of $100 million and the reserve 
requirement is, say, 10 percent, then the bank must keep $10 million on reserve. 
If the Fed were to increase the reserve requirement to 11 percent, then the bank 
would have to put an additional $1 million on reserve,  reducing the amount it 
could lend out. Since this increase in the reserve requirement would affect all 
banks, the money supply would be reduced and prices would likely fall. 
 A decrease of the reserve requirement, in contrast,  increases the funds 
available to banks for loans, so they can make more loans, and money tends to 
become more readily available. An increase in the money supply can  stimulate 
the economy to achieve higher growth rates, but it can also create inflationary 
pressures. That is, the prices of goods and services may go up. Can you see 
why the Fed may want to decrease the reserve requirement when the economy 
is in a recession? Can you also see the danger of inflation? 
 Open-Market Operations 
  Open-market operations   consist of the buying and selling of government 
bonds. To decrease the money supply, the federal government sells U.S. gov-
ernment bonds to the public. The money it gets as payment is no longer in 
circulation, decreasing the money supply. If the Fed wants to increase the 
money supply, it buys government bonds back from individuals, corporations, 
or organizations that are willing to sell. The money the Fed pays for these 
securities enters circulation, increasing the money supply. That’s why the Fed 
bought bonds during the recent recession. The idea was to get the economy 
growing again, though it wasn’t as successful as hoped.  15 
 The Discount Rate 
 The Fed has often been called the bankers’ bank, because member banks can 
borrow money from the Fed and pass it on to their customers in the form of 
loans. The   discount rate   is the interest rate the Fed charges for loans to mem-
ber banks. An increase in the discount rate discourages banks from borrowing 
and reduces the number of available loans, decreasing the money supply. In 
contrast, lowering the discount rate encourages member banks to borrow 
money and increases the funds they have available for loans, which is sup-
posed to increase the money supply. For many months, the Fed lowered the 
discount rate to almost zero, hoping to increase bank lending. Nonetheless, 
many banks still seemed reluctant to make loans. 
 The discount rate is one of two interest rates the Fed controls. The other 
is the rate banks charge each other, called the  federal funds rate. 16 
 The Federal Reserve’s Check-Clearing Role 
 If you write a check to a local retailer that uses the same bank you do, it is a 
simple matter to reduce your account by the amount of the check and increase 
the amount in the retailer’s account. But what happens if you write a check to 
a retailer in another state? That’s where the Fed’s check-clearing function 
comes into play. 
 reserve requirement  
 A percentage of commercial 
banks’ checking and savings 
accounts that must be 
physically kept in the bank.  
 open-market operations  
 The buying and selling of U.S. 
government bonds by the Fed 
with the goal of regulating the 
money supply.  
 discount rate  
 The interest rate that the Fed 
charges for loans to member 
banks.  
iSee It! Need help 
understanding how 
the Federal Reserve 
tries to stablize the 
economy? Visit your 
Connect e-book video 
tab for a brief animated 
explanation.

573
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
 That retailer will take the check to its bank. That bank will deposit the 
check for credit in the closest Federal Reserve bank. That bank will send the 
check to your local Federal Reserve bank for collection. The check will then be 
sent to your bank and the amount of the check will be withdrawn. Your bank 
will authorize the Federal Reserve bank in your area to deduct the amount of 
the check. That bank will pay the Federal Reserve bank that began the process 
in the first place. It will then credit the deposit account in the bank where the 
retailer has its account. That bank will then credit the account of the retailer. 
(See  Figure 20.3  for a diagram of such an interstate transaction.) This long 
and involved process is a costly one for the Fed; therefore, banks have taken 
many measures to lessen the use of checks. Such efforts include the use of 
credit cards, debit cards, and other electronic transfers of money.  
 As you can see, the whole economy is affected by the Federal Reserve Sys-
tem’s actions. Next we’ll briefly discuss the history of banking to give you some 
background about why the Fed came into existence about 100 years ago.  17 
Then we’ll explore what’s happening in banking today.  
 FIGURE 20.3 CHECK-
CLEARING PROCESS 
THROUGH THE FEDERAL 
RESERVE BANK SYSTEM  
Buyer (farmer in
Quince Orchard, MD)
Federal Reserve Bank
of Richmond
6
Local bank in Quince
Orchard
7
5
4
1
 1. Mr. Brown sends his check to the tractor dealer.
 2. The dealer deposits the check in his account at a local bank in Austin.
 3. The Austin bank deposits the check for credit in its account at the
 
 Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
 4. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas sends the check to the Federal Reserve Bank of
 
 Richmond for collection.
 5. The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond forwards the check to the local bank in
 
 Quince Orchard, where Mr. Brown has his account.
 6. The local bank in Quince Orchard deducts the check amount from Mr. Brown’s account.
 7. The Quince Orchard bank authorizes the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond
 
 to deduct the check amount from its deposit account with the Federal Reserve Bank.
 8. The Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond pays the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas.
 9. The Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas credits the Austin bank’s deposit account.
 10. The Austin bank credits the tractor dealer’s account.
Suppose Mr. Brown, a farmer from Quince Orchard, Maryland, purchases a tractor
from a dealer in Austin, Texas.
8
Seller (tractor dealer
in Austin, TX)
Federal Reserve Bank
of Dallas
Local bank in Austin
3
9
2
10

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
574
Trace the history of banking and the Federal Reserve System.
 THE HISTORY OF BANKING 
AND THE NEED FOR THE FED  
 There was a time when there were no banks in the United States. Strict laws in 
Europe limited the number of coins people could bring to the colonies in the 
New World. Thus, colonists were forced to  barter for goods; for example, they 
might trade cotton and tobacco for shoes and lumber. 
 The demand for money was so great that Massachusetts issued its own 
paper money in 1690, and other colonies soon followed suit. But continental 
money, the first paper money printed in the United States, became worthless 
after a few years because people didn’t trust its value. 
 Land banks were established to lend money to farmers. But Great Britain, 
still in charge of the colonies at that point, ended land banks by 1741. The 
colonies rebelled against these and other restrictions on their freedom, and a 
new bank was formed in Pennsylvania during the American Revolution to 
finance the war against England. 
 In 1791, after the United States gained independence, Alexander Hamilton 
persuaded Congress to form a  central bank (a bank at which other banks could 
keep their funds and borrow funds if needed). This first version of a federal 
bank closed in 1811, only to be replaced in 1816 because state-chartered banks 
couldn’t support the War of 1812. The battle between the Second (Central) 
Bank of the United States and state banks got hot in the 1830s. Several banks in 
Tennessee were hurt by pressure from the Central Bank. The fight ended when 
the Central Bank was closed in 1836. You can see that there was great resis-
tance to a central bank, like the Federal Reserve, through much of U.S. history. 
 By the time of the Civil War, the U.S. banking system was a mess.  18 Differ-
ent banks issued different kinds of currencies. People hoarded gold and silver 
coins because they were worth more as precious metal than as money. That 
may be happening again today. In any case, the chaos continued long after the 
war ended, reaching something of a climax in 1907, when many banks failed. 
People got nervous about the safety of banks and, in a run on the banks, 
attempted to withdraw their funds. Soon the cash was depleted and some 
banks had to refuse money to depositors. This caused people to distrust the 
banking system in general. 
 Despite the long history of opposition to a central bank, the cash shortage 
problems of 1907 led to the formation of an organization that could lend 
money to banks—the Federal Reserve System. It was to be a “lender of last 
LO 20–3
 • What is money?  
 • What are the five characteristics of useful money?  
 • What are “Bitcoins”?  
 • What is the money supply, and why is it important?  
 • How does the Federal Reserve control the money supply?  
 • What are the major functions of the Federal Reserve? What other func-
tions does it perform?  
•
What is money?
 test prep   
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

575
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
resort” in such emergencies. Under the Federal Reserve Act of 1913, all feder-
ally chartered banks had to join the Federal Reserve. State banks could also 
join. The Federal Reserve became the bankers’ bank. If banks had excess 
funds, they could deposit them in the Fed; if they needed extra money, they 
could borrow from the Fed. The Federal Reserve System has been intimately 
related to banking ever since, but never more than now.  19 
 Banking and the Great Depression 
 The Federal Reserve System was designed to prevent a repeat of the 1907 panic. 
Nevertheless, the stock market crash of 1929 led to bank failures in the early 
1930s. When the stock market began tumbling, people hurried to banks to with-
draw cash. In spite of the Federal Reserve System, the banks ran out of money, 
and states were forced to close them. President Franklin D. Roosevelt extended 
the period of bank closings in 1933 to gain time to come up with a solution to 
the problem. In 1933 and 1935, Congress passed legislation to strengthen the 
banking system. The most important move was to establish federal deposit 
insurance to further protect the public from bank failures. As you can see, bank 
crises are nothing new; they often occur during a recession. From 1945 to 2009, 
the United States experienced 11 recessions. The average duration was 10 
months; the longest recession (2008–2009) was 18 months. Now that you know 
something about the Federal Reserve, let’s turn our attention to U.S. banks.  
 Classify the various institutions in the U.S. banking system.
 THE U.S. BANKING SYSTEM 
 The U.S. banking system consists of commercial banks, savings and loan asso-
ciations, and credit unions. In addition, there are various financial organiza-
tions, or nonbanks, that accept no deposits but offer many of the services of 
regular banks. Let’s discuss the activities and services of each, starting with 
commercial banks. 
LO 20–4
 The Federal Reserve 
S ystem  was designed in 
1913 to prevent the kind 
of run on banks that 
had occurred in 1907. 
Yet the stock market 
crash of 1929 caused 
depositors to make 
another run on their 
banks and take big 
withdrawals. Federal 
deposit insurance was 
established in 1933 to 
protect depositors’ 
money. Do you think 
that these protections 
are enough?  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
576
 Commercial Banks 
 The banks that are probably the most familiar to you are commercial banks. 
A   commercial bank   is a profit-seeking organization that receives deposits 
from individuals and corporations in the form of checking and savings 
accounts, and uses these funds to make loans. It has two types of customers—
depositors and borrowers—and is equally responsible to both. A commercial 
bank makes a profit by efficiently using depositors’ funds as inputs (on which 
it pays interest) to invest in interest-bearing loans to other customers. If the 
revenue generated by loans exceeds the interest paid to depositors plus operat-
ing expenses, the bank makes a profit.  
 Services Provided by Commercial Banks 
 Individuals and corporations that deposit money in a checking account can 
write personal checks to pay for almost any purchase or transaction. The tech-
nical name for a checking account is a   demand deposit   because the money is 
available on demand from the depositor. Some banks impose a service charge 
for check-writing privileges or demand a minimum deposit. They might also 
charge a small handling fee for each check written.  20 For corporate depositors, 
the amount of the service charge often depends on the average daily balance in 
the checking account, the number of checks written, and the firm’s credit rat-
ing and credit history. 
 In the past, checking accounts paid no interest to depositors, but interest-
bearing checking accounts have experienced phenomenal growth in recent 
years. Commercial banks also offer a variety of savings account options. A sav-
ings account is technically a   time deposit   because the bank can require a 
prior notice before you make a withdrawal. It would be wise for you to com-
pare online and neighborhood banks to find where your money can earn the 
most interest. (In most cases, you won’t earn much interest in any bank today.) 
 A   certificate of deposit (CD)   is a time-deposit (savings) account that 
earns interest, to be delivered on the certificate’s maturity date. The depositor 
agrees not to withdraw any of the funds until then. CDs are now available for 
periods of months to years; usually the longer the period, the higher the inter-
est rate. The interest rates also depend on economic conditions. At the present 
time, interest rates are very low because the economy is not robust. 
 Commercial banks may also offer credit cards to creditworthy customers, 
life insurance, inexpensive brokerage services, financial counseling, automatic 
payment of bills, safe-deposit boxes, individual retirement accounts (IRAs), 
traveler’s checks, trust departments, automated teller machines, and overdraft 
checking account privileges. The latter means preferred customers can auto-
matically get loans when they’ve written checks exceeding their account 
balance.  
 Services to Borrowers 
 Commercial banks offer a variety of services to individuals and corporations 
in need of a loan. Generally, loans are given on the basis of the recipient’s cred-
itworthiness, although the recent real estate collapse was partially due to 
banks ignoring that rule.  21 Banks want to manage their funds effectively, and 
are supposed to screen loan applicants carefully to ensure that the loan plus 
interest will be paid back on time. Clearly banks failed to do that in the period 
leading up to the banking crisis. We will discuss why that happened later in 
the chapter. The Making Ethical Decisions box explores a more minor issue 
that could occur in your banking efforts. 
 commercial bank  
 A profit-seeking organization 
that receives deposits from 
individuals and corporations in 
the form of checking and 
savings accounts and then 
uses some of these funds to 
make loans.  
 demand deposit  
 The technical name for a 
checking account; the money 
in a demand deposit can be 
withdrawn anytime on demand 
from the depositor.  
 time deposit  
 The technical name for a 
savings account; the bank can 
require prior notice before the 
owner withdraws money from a 
time deposit.  
certificate of deposit (CD)
A time-deposit (savings) 
account that earns interest to 
be delivered at the end of the 
certificate’s maturity date.

577
 Meanwhile, it is good to know that banks are doing their best to adapt to 
mobile users. 22 Coin, for example, is a credit card–size device that digitally 
stores up to eight credit, debit, gift, or membership cards, which you can tog-
gle between using your mobile phone.  23 Nearly two-thirds of the country’s big-
gest banks now let customers make a deposit by taking a photo of the check.  
 Savings and Loan Associations (S&Ls) 
 A   savings and loan association (S&L)   is a financial institution that accepts 
both savings and checking deposits, and provides home mortgage loans. S&Ls 
are often known as thrift institutions because their original purpose (starting 
in 1831) was to promote consumer thrift and home ownership. To help them 
encourage home ownership, thrifts were permitted for many years to offer 
slightly higher interest rates on savings deposits than banks. Those rates 
attracted a large pool of funds, which S&Ls used to offer long-term fixed-rate 
mortgages. 
 Between 1986 and 1995, nearly 1,300 S&Ls failed. Reasons for the fail-
ures included the inflation of the 1970s, deregulation, regulatory failure (regu-
lators allowed insolvent thrifts to stay open while their situations worsened), 
and fraud.  24 Today, S&Ls no longer offer better rates than banks because of 
changes in government laws, and many S&Ls have become banks. According 
to the FDIC, there are now about 934 savings and loan companies in the 
United States.  
 Credit Unions 
 Credit unions   are nonprofit, member-owned financial cooperatives that offer 
the full variety of banking services to their members—interest-bearing check-
ing accounts at relatively high rates, short-term loans at relatively low rates, 
financial counseling, life insurance policies, and a limited number of home 
mortgage loans. They are organized by government agencies, corporations, 
unions, and professional associations. Today, credit unions are growing in 
popularity.  25 
 As nonprofit institutions, credit unions enjoy an exemption from fed-
eral income taxes.  26 You might want to visit a local credit union to see 
whether you are eligible to belong, and then compare the rates to those at 
local banks. Credit unions often have fewer branches than banks and less 
access to ATMs. It’s best to determine what services you need, and then com-
pare those services to the same services offered by banks. It is good to know 
that the money in credit union accounts is also insured for $250,000—as it is 
in your local bank.  
 savings and loan 
association (S&L)  
 A financial institution that 
accepts both savings and 
checking deposits and 
provides home mortgage 
loans.  
 credit unions  
 Nonprofit, member-owned 
financial cooperatives that offer 
the full variety of banking 
services to their members.  
 making ethical decisions 
 You are at the teller window of 
your bank making a withdrawal. 
The teller counts out your money 
and says: “OK, here’s your $300.” 
You count the money and see the 
teller has given you $320 by 
mistake. When you point this out, 
the teller replies indignantly, “I 
don’t think so. I counted the 
money in front of you.” 
 You are upset by her quick 
denial of a mistake and her 
attitude. You have to decide 
whether or not to give her back 
the overpayment of $20. What 
are your alternatives? What 
would you do? Is that the ethical 
thing to do? 
 Would You Tell the Teller? 
s 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
578
 Other Financial Institutions (Nonbanks) 
  Nonbanks   are financial organizations that accept no deposits but offer many 
of the services provided by regular banks. Nonbanks include life insurance 
companies, pension funds, brokerage firms, commercial finance companies, 
and corporate financial services (like GE Capital). 
 As competition between banks and nonbanks has increased, the dividing 
line between them has become less apparent. This is equally true in Europe, 
where U.S. companies compete with European banks. The diversity of financial 
services and investment alternatives nonbanks offer has led banks to expand 
their own services. In fact, many banks have merged with brokerage firms to 
offer full-service financial assistance. 
 Life insurance companies provide financial protection for policyhold-
ers, who periodically pay premiums. In addition, insurers invest the funds 
they receive from policyholders in corporate and government bonds. In 
recent years, more insurance companies have begun to provide long-term 
financing for real estate development projects. Do you think that was a wise 
decision? 
  Pension funds   are monies put aside by corporations, nonprofit organiza-
tions, or unions to help fund their members’ financial needs when they retire. 
Contributions to pension funds are made by employees, employers, or both. 
To generate additional income, pension funds typically invest in low-return 
but safe corporate stocks or other conservative investments, such as govern-
ment securities and corporate bonds. 
 Many financial services organizations that provide retirement and health 
benefits, such as TIAA-CREF, are becoming a major force in U.S. financial 
markets. They also lend money directly to corporations. 
 Brokerage firms have traditionally offered investment services in stock 
exchanges in the United States and abroad. They have also made serious 
 nonbanks  
 Financial organizations that 
accept no deposits but offer 
many of the services provided 
by regular banks (pension 
funds, insurance companies, 
commercial finance companies, 
consumer finance companies, 
and brokerage houses).  
 pension funds  
 Amounts of money put aside 
by corporations, nonprofit 
organizations, or unions to 
cover part of the financial 
needs of members when they 
retire.  
 Credit unions are 
member-owned 
financial cooperatives 
that offer their members 
a wide range of banking 
services and, because 
they are nonprofits, are 
exempt from federal 
income tax. Do you 
belong to a credit 
union?  

579
 • Why did the United States need a Federal Reserve Bank?  
 • What are the differences among banks, savings and loan associations, 
and credit unions?  
 • What is a consumer finance company?  
•
Why did the United St
 test prep   
tates need a Fe
tate
inroads into regular banks’ domain by offering high-yield combination savings 
and checking accounts. In addition, they offer money market accounts with 
check-writing privileges and allow investors to borrow, using their securities 
as collateral. 
 Commercial and consumer finance companies sometimes offer short-
term loans to those who cannot meet the credit requirements of regular banks, 
such as new businesses, or who have exceeded their credit limit and need more 
funds. Be careful when borrowing from such institutions, however, because 
their interest rates can be quite high. The Spotlight on Small Business box 
offers an example of a newer type of nonbank that offers a way for small busi-
ness owners to raise the funds they need to start or expand their businesses.  
 spotlight on small business 
 Ivan Rincon was convinced his 
online swimwear shop could float 
if he could just get needed capi-
tal. Unfortunately, banks rejected 
him because he didn’t have col-
lateral. This caused him to do 
what many small businesses 
have to do; he turned to a non-
bank lender called a merchant 
cash advance provider. He 
obtained a cash advance of 
$200,000, but soon realized he 
was paying an annual interest 
rate of more than 50%. 
Fortunately, he was able to pay 
back the loan before things got 
desperate. He then heard about 
Dealstruck. 
 Dealstruck is an example of a 
new type of alternative, nonbank 
lender. The company provides a 
middle ground between banks 
that lend to only very creditworthy 
small businesses and merchant 
cash advance lenders that have 
lower criteria for lending, but 
much higher interest rates. 
Dealstruck, like competitors 
Funding Circle and Fundation, 
uses a peer-to-peer model where 
wealthy investors provide the cap-
ital for the loans. The loans are 
secured by the owner’s personal 
guarantees or business assets. 
Dealstruck’s interest rates range 
from 8 to 24 percent for loans up 
to $250,000, and can stretch over 
a period of three years. Ethan 
Senturia, CEO of Dealstruck, 
promises, “Our loans are not 
always cheap, but we tell you 
what we are charging and why.” 
 The peer-to-peer lending 
model has played an active role 
in  individual lending for a while, 
with Lending Club a pioneer in this 
area. As Dealstruck and its com-
petitors grow and heat up the mar-
ket for peer-to-peer small-business 
lending, Lending Club has decided 
to become one of the newest 
competitors in small-business 
lending and offer peer-to-peer 
loans to small businesses too. 
 Sources: Patrick Clark, “A U.K. Peer-to-Peer 
Lender Wants U.S. Businesses to Forget Banks,” 
Bloomberg Businessweek, October 24, 2013; and 
Amy Cortese, “Can’t Get a Bank Loan? The 
Alternatives Are Expanding,”  The New York 
Times, March 5, 2014.  
www.dealstruck.com
 Taking a Bite Out of the Sharks 
 
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
580
Briefly trace the causes of the banking crisis, and explain how the 
government protects your funds during such crises.
 THE BANKING CRISIS AND HOW THE 
GOVERNMENT PROTECTS YOUR MONEY  
 What led to the banking crisis that occurred a few years ago? There is no 
simple answer. Some people believe the Federal Reserve is partly responsible 
because it kept the cost of borrowing so low that people were tempted to bor-
row more than they could afford to pay back. Congress, very interested in 
creating more “affordable housing,” prodded banks to lend to people with 
minimal assets. The Community Reinvestment Act further encouraged loans 
to families with questionable ability to repay. You get the idea that banks were 
partially responsible for the crisis when you hear that JPMorgan Chase agreed 
to pay $13 billion for its role in the crisis.  27 
 Other organizations pressured banks, normally quite risk-averse, to make 
risky loans. Banks learned they could avoid much of the risk by dividing their 
portfolios of mortgages up and selling the mortgage-backed securities (MBSs) 
to other banks and other organizations all over the world. These securities 
seemed quite safe because they were backed by the homes that were mort-
gaged. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are both quasi-government agencies that 
seemed to guarantee the value of MBSs. Banks sold more and more of such 
seemingly safe securities, hoping to make lots of money. Bankers were then 
accused of pushing loans onto naive consumers. 
 Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve and the Securities and Exchange Com-
mission failed to issue sufficient warnings. That is, it failed in its regulatory 
duties. When the value of homes began to decline, people began defaulting on 
their loans (not paying them) and turned the properties back over to the 
banks. Almost 5 million households have suffered through housing foreclo-
sures since the housing bubble burst in 2007. Since the banks owned the 
mortgages on those homes, their profits declined dramatically, leading to a 
banking crisis—and the need for the government and the Fed to help the 
banks out. Not doing so was considered too risky because the whole economy 
might fail otherwise. The long-term effects of that process are not yet known. 
There is much in the newspapers and on TV about the rise in housing prices 
and how the crisis is over, but such optimism may be overdone. As of May 
2014, there were still almost 10 million households (one-fifth of those with 
mortgages) that owed more on their homes than the houses were worth. Thus 
far, the government’s Home Affordable Modification Program has helped only 
one-quarter of the 4 million homeowners it was intended to serve.  28  
 So whom do we blame for the banking cri-
sis? The answer is that we could blame the Fed 
for suppressing interest rates, Congress for pro-
moting questionable loans, the banks for making 
such loans and creating mortgage-backed securi-
ties that were not nearly as safe as promoted, 
government regulatory agencies for not doing 
their job, and people who took advantage of low 
interest rates to borrow money they couldn’t rea-
sonably hope to repay. No matter who was to 
blame, the crisis still needed to be solved. 
 Toward the end of George W. Bush’s presi-
dency, the Treasury Department proposed a $700 
billion “bailout” package, known as the Troubled 
Asset Relief Program (TARP). The program was 
LO 20–5
 The bursting of the 
housing bubble forced a 
sharp decline in home 
values. When 
homeowners discovered 
they owed more on their 
mortgages than their 
homes were worth, 
many stopped paying 
off their loans, and the 
banks foreclosed on 
their homes. While 
home prices have since 
risen in many areas of 
the country, as of 2014 
one-fifth of the 
households with 
mortgages still owed 
more than the homes 
were worth.  

581
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
enacted in October 2008. President Barack Obama, who took office in January 
2009, proposed over $800 billion in additional government spending plus a 
stimulus package. The economy responded, but very slowly.  
 Protecting Your Funds 
 The recent banking crisis is nothing new. The government had seen similar 
problems during the Great Depression of the 1930s. To prevent investors from 
ever again being completely wiped out during an economic downturn, it cre-
ated three major organizations to protect your money: the Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation (FDIC); the Savings Association Insurance Fund 
(SAIF); and the National Credit Union Administration (NCUA). All three insure 
deposits in individual accounts up to a certain amount. Because these organi-
zations are so important to the safety of your money, let’s explore them indi-
vidually in more depth.  
 The Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
 The   Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC)   is an independent 
agency of the U.S. government that insures bank deposits. If a bank were to 
fail, the FDIC would arrange to have that bank’s accounts transferred to 
another bank or reimburse depositors up to $250,000 per account. The FDIC 
covers many institutions, mostly commercial banks. Of course, one problem is 
that the government doesn’t have unlimited money to cover all losses if too 
many banks should fail.  
 The Savings Association Insurance Fund (SAIF) 
 The   Savings Association Insurance Fund (SAIF)   insures holders of accounts 
in savings and loan associations. A brief history will show why it was created. 
Some 1,700 bank and thrift institutions had failed during the early 1930s, and 
people were losing confidence in them. The FDIC and the Federal Savings and 
Loan Insurance Corporation (FSLIC) were designed (in 1933 and 1934, 
respectively) to create more confidence in banking institutions by protecting 
people’s savings from loss. Recently, to get more control over the banking sys-
tem in general, the government placed the FSLIC under the FDIC and gave it 
a new name: the Savings Association Insurance Fund (SAIF).  
 The National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) 
 The National Credit Union Administration (NCUA) provides up to $250,000 
coverage per individual depositor per institution. This coverage includes all 
accounts—checking accounts, savings accounts, money market accounts, and 
certificates of deposit. Depositors qualify for additional protection by holding 
accounts jointly or in trust. Individual retirement accounts (IRAs) are also sepa-
rately insured up to $250,000. Credit unions, like banks, suffered from the bank-
ing crisis, and got money from the federal government to make more loans.  
Describe how technology helps make banking more efficient.
 USING TECHNOLOGY TO MAKE 
BANKING MORE EFFICIENT  
 Imagine the cost to a bank of approving a written check, physically processing 
it through the banking system, and mailing it back to you. It’s expensive. Bank-
ers have long looked for ways to make the system more efficient. 
 Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC)  
 An independent agency of the 
U.S. government that insures 
bank deposits.  
 Savings Association 
Insurance Fund (SAIF)  
 The part of the FDIC that 
insures holders of accounts in 
savings and loan associations.  
LO 20–6

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
582
 One solution was to issue credit cards to reduce the flow of checks, but 
they too have their costs: there’s still paper to process. Accepting credit cards 
costs retailers about 2 percent of the amount charged. In the future we’ll see 
much more electronic rather than physical exchange of money, because it is 
the most efficient way to transfer funds. 
 If you must use a credit card, be sure to search for one that offers the best 
deal for you. Some offer cash back, others offer free travel, and so forth.  29 
Don’t just sign up for whatever card is offering free T-shirts on campus. Do 
your research. 
 In an   electronic funds transfer (EFT) system,  messages about a transac-
tion are sent from one computer to another. Thus, organizations can transfer 
funds more quickly and economically than with paper checks. 
EFT tools include electronic check conversion, debit cards, 
smart cards, direct deposits, and direct payments. 
 A   debit card   serves the same function as a 
check—it withdraws funds from a checking account. 
When the sale is recorded, the debit card sends an 
electronic signal to the bank, automatically trans-
ferring funds from your account to the seller’s. A 
record of transactions immediately appears online. 
Debit transactions surpassed credit years ago and 
continue to grow. 
 Payroll debit cards are an efficient way for some 
firms to pay their workers, and are an alternative to 
cash for those who don’t qualify for a credit or debit 
card— the so-called unbanked.  30 Employees can access funds in their accounts 
immediately after they are posted, withdraw them from an ATM, pay bills 
online, or transfer funds to another cardholder. The system is much cheaper 
for companies than issuing checks, and more convenient for employees. On 
the other hand, debit cards don’t offer the same protection as credit cards. If 
someone steals your credit card, you are liable only for a certain amount. You 
are liable for everything when someone steals your debit card.  31  
 A   smart  c ard  i s an electronic funds transfer tool that combines a credit 
card, debit card, phone card, driver’s license card, and more. Smart cards 
replace the typical magnetic strip on a credit or debit card with a micropro-
cessor. The card can then store a variety of information, including the holder’s 
bank balance. Merchants can use this information to check the card’s validity 
and spending limits, and transactions can debit up to the amount on the card.  
 Some smart cards have embedded radio frequency identification (RFID) 
chips that make it possible to enter buildings and secure areas and to buy gas 
and other items with a swipe of the card. A biometric function lets you use 
your fingerprint to boot up your computer. Students are using smart cards to 
open locked doors to dorms and identify themselves to retailers near campus 
and online. The cards also serve as ATM cards. 
 For many, the ultimate convenience in banking is automatic transactions 
such as direct deposit and direct payments. A  direct deposit is a credit made 
directly to a checking or savings account in place of a paycheck. The employer 
contacts the bank and orders it to transfer funds from the employer’s account 
to the worker’s account. Individuals can use direct deposits to transfer funds 
to other accounts, such as from a checking account to a savings or retirement 
account. 
 A  direct payment is a preauthorized electronic payment. Customers sign a 
separate form for each company whose bill they would like to automatically pay 
from their checking or savings account on a specified date. The customer’s bank 
completes each transaction and records it on the customer’s monthly statement. 
 electronic funds transfer 
(EFT) system  
 A computerized system that 
electronically performs financial 
transactions such as making 
purchases, paying bills, and 
receiving paychecks.  
 debit card  
 An electronic funds transfer 
tool that serves the same 
function as checks: it withdraws 
funds from a checking account.  
 smart card  
 An electronic funds transfer 
tool that is a combination credit 
card, debit card, phone card, 
driver’s license card, and more.  
 Need to pass the 
security check in your 
office building, put gas 
in your car, and get cash 
at the ATM? No 
problem. Smart cards 
with embedded RFID 
chips take care of these 
tasks and then some. 
Has cash become a 
thing of the past?  

583
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
 Online Banking 
 Almost all top U.S. retail banks allow customers to access their 
accounts online, and most have bill-paying capacity. Thus, you can 
complete all your financial transactions from home, using your tele-
phone, computer, or mobile device to transfer funds from one 
account to another, pay your bills, and check the balance in each 
of your accounts. You can apply for a car loan or mortgage and 
get a response while you wait. Buying and selling stocks and 
bonds is equally easy. 
 Internet banks such as E*Trade Bank offer online banking 
only, not physical branches. They can offer customers slightly 
higher interest rates and lower fees because they do not have 
the overhead costs traditional banks have. While many consum-
ers are pleased with the savings and convenience, not all are 
happy with the service. Why? Some are nervous about security. 
People fear putting their financial information into cyberspace, 
where others may see it despite all the assurances of privacy.  
Evaluate the role and importance of international banking, 
the World Bank, and the International Monetary Fund.
 INTERNATIONAL BANKING AND 
BANKING SERVICES  
 Banks help companies conduct business in other countries by providing three 
services: letters of credit, banker’s acceptances, and money exchange. If a U.S. 
company wants to buy a product from Germany, the company could pay a 
bank to issue a letter of credit. A   letter of credit   is a promise by the bank to 
pay the seller a given amount if certain conditions are met. For example, the 
German company may not be paid until the goods have arrived at the U.S. 
company’s warehouse. A   banker’s acceptance   promises that the bank will 
pay some specified amount at a particular time. No conditions are imposed. 
Finally, a company can go to a bank and exchange U.S. dollars for euros to use 
in Germany; that’s called  currency or  money exchange. 
 Banks are making it easier than ever for travelers and businesspeople to 
buy goods and services overseas. Automated teller machines now provide yen, 
euros, and other foreign currencies through your personal Visa, MasterCard, 
Cirrus, or American Express card.  
 Leaders in International Banking 
 It would be shortsighted to discuss the U.S. economy apart from the world 
economy. If the Federal Reserve decides to lower interest rates, within min-
utes foreign investors can withdraw their money from the United States and 
put it in countries with higher rates. Of course, the Fed’s increasing of interest 
rates can draw money to the United States equally quickly. 
 Today’s money markets thus form a global market system of which the 
United States is just a part. International bankers make investments in any 
country where they can get a maximum return for their money at a reasonable 
risk. About $4 trillion is traded daily! The net result of international banking 
and finance has been to link the economies of the world into one interrelated 
system with no regulatory control. U.S. firms must compete for funds with 
firms all over the world. An efficient firm in London or Tokyo is more likely to 
LO 20–7
letter of credit
A promise by the bank to pay 
the seller a given amount if 
certain conditions are met.
 banker’s acceptance  
 A promise that the bank will 
pay some specified amount at 
a particular time.  
Smartphone apps, such 
as PayPal’s, allow users 
to pay for purchases 
with their phones. What 
problems could there be 
with such capabilities?

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
584
get international financing than a less efficient firm in Detroit or Chicago. 
Global markets mean that banks do not necessarily keep their money in their 
own countries. They make investments where they get the maximum return. 
 What this means for you is that banking is no longer a domestic issue; it’s 
a global one. To understand the U.S. financial system, you must learn about 
the global financial system, including foreign central banks.  32 To understand 
the state of the U.S. economy, you need to learn about the economic condition 
of countries throughout the world. In the new world economy financed by 
international banks, the United States is just one player. To be a winner, it 
must stay financially secure and its businesses must stay competitive in world 
markets. Recently, some countries have restricted the free flow of money 
among nations. The future of such movements is yet to be determined.  33 
 The World Bank and the International Monetary Fund (IMF) 
 The bank primarily responsible for financing economic development is the 
International Bank for Reconstruction and Development, or the   World Bank.  
After World War II, it lent money to countries in Western Europe so they could 
rebuild. Today, it lends most of its money to developing nations to improve 
their productivity and help raise standards of living and quality of life. That 
includes working to eliminate diseases that kill millions of people each year. 
 The World Bank has faced considerable criticism and protests around the 
world. Environmentalists charge that it finances projects damaging to the eco-
system. Human rights activists and unionists say the bank supports countries 
that restrict religious freedoms and tolerate sweatshops. AIDS activists com-
plain that it does not do enough to get low-cost AIDS drugs to developing 
nations.  
 Despite its efforts to improve, the World Bank still has 
many critics. Some want it to forgive the debts of developing 
countries and others want it to stop making such loans until the 
countries institute free markets and the right to own property. 
Some changes in World Bank policy may lie ahead. 
 In contrast to the World Bank, the   International Mone-
tary Fund (IMF)   was established to foster cooperative mone-
tary policies that stabilize the exchange of one national currency 
for another. About 188 countries are voluntary members of the 
IMF and allow their money to be freely exchanged for foreign 
money, keep the IMF informed about changes in monetary pol-
icy, and modify those policies on the advice of the IMF to accom-
modate the needs of the entire membership.  34 
 The IMF is designed to oversee member countries’ mone-
tary and exchange rate policies. Its goal is to maintain a global 
monetary system that works best for all nations and enhances 
world trade.  35 While it is not primarily a lending institution like 
the World Bank, its members do contribute funds according to 
their ability, and those funds are available to countries in finan-
cial difficulty. The Reaching Beyond Our Borders box discusses 
what is happening today at the World Bank and the IMF.
 World Bank  
 The bank primarily responsible 
for financing economic 
development; also known as 
the International Bank for 
Reconstruction and 
Development.  
 International Monetary 
Fund (IMF)  
 Organization that assists the 
smooth flow of money among 
nations .
 The World Bank and the 
International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) are 
intergovernmental 
organizations that help 
support the global 
banking community. 
Both draw protests for 
their actions. Why?  

 Explain what money is and what makes money useful. 
 • 
 What is money?  
 Money is anything people generally accept as payment for goods and 
services.  
 • 
 What are the five standards for a useful form of money?  
 The five standards for a useful form of money are portability, divisibility, 
stability, durability, and uniqueness.  
 • 
 What are “Bitcoins,” and can you buy things online with them?  
 Bitcoins are a form of online money. Bitcoin has an online store that 
accepts the currency.  
•
What is m
LO 20–1
 summary 
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
585
 • What are some of the causes for the banking crisis that began in 2008?  
 • What is the role of the FDIC?  
 • How does a debit card differ from a credit card?  
 • What is the World Bank and what does it do?  
 • What is the IMF and what does it do?  
•
What are some of the
 test prep   
causes for the
ca
 reaching beyond our borders 
 Things certainly look brighter 
today than they did before the 
annual meeting of the IMF/World 
Bank six years ago. Back then the 
fall of Lehman Brothers and the 
extreme vulnerability of the global 
financial system had shocked 
financial officials around the world. 
Trade was plummeting, economic 
confidence had reached bottom, 
and high unemployment seemed 
inevitable. Fortunately, the global 
financial system is no longer a 
dark threat to the world economy. 
Still, the global economy today is 
far from healthy, which means the 
World Bank and the IMF have new 
challenges to face throughout the 
world. 
 Christine Lagarde, the manag-
ing director of the IMF, has pro-
moted a gradual change in the 
188-member organization’s cul-
ture and role in global finance. 
Under her direction, the IMF pro-
vides policy advice to member 
countries when requested. The 
organization has also spoken out 
on issues such as climate change 
and income inequality. The IMF 
has also initiated research on the 
link between job creation, labor 
market policies, and 
unemployment. 
 One of Ms. Lagarde’s major 
fears is that the financial crisis did 
lasting harm to the potential pace 
of growth in many economies 
across the globe. This means the 
global economy risks years of 
sluggish growth unless aggres-
sive steps are taken by central 
bankers and lawmakers in both 
advanced and emerging countries 
to make their economies more 
competitive. The IMF and the 
World Bank are both trying to 
come up with answers to key 
global issues before there is 
another serious crisis. 
 Sources: Ian Talley, “IMF’s Lagarde: Global 
Economy May Face Years of Slow, Subpar 
Growth,”  The Wall Street Journal, April 2, 2014; 
Mohammed El-Erian, “What We Need from the 
IMF/World Bank Meetings,”  Financial Times, 
October 6, 2013; and David Wessel, “The Likely 
Buzz at the IMF/World Bank Meetings,”  The Wall 
Street Journal, April 9, 2014. 
www.imf.org
 New Day, New Issues across the Globe 
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
 learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.  

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
586
 Describe how the Federal Reserve controls the money supply. 
 • 
 How does the Federal Reserve control the money supply?  
 The Federal Reserve makes financial institutions keep funds in the Federal 
Reserve System (reserve requirement), buys and sells government securi-
ties (open-market operations), and lends money to banks (the discount 
rate). To increase the money supply, the Fed can cut the reserve require-
ment, buy government bonds, and lower the discount rate.  
Trace the history of banking and the Federal Reserve System. 
 • 
 How did banking evolve in the United States?  
 Massachusetts issued its own paper money in 1690; other colonies followed 
suit. British land banks lent money to farmers but ended such loans by 
1741. After the American Revolution, there was much debate about the role 
of banking, and heated battles between the Central Bank of the United 
States and state banks. Eventually, a federally chartered and state-chartered 
system was established, but chaos continued until many banks failed in 
1907. The system was revived by the Federal Reserve only to fail again 
during the Great Depression. There have been 11 recessions since then, 
including the recent one.  
Classify the various institutions in the U.S. banking system.
 • 
 What institutions make up the banking system?  
 Savings and loans, commercial banks, and credit unions are all part of the 
banking system.  
 • 
 How do they differ from one another?  
 Before deregulation in 1980, commercial banks were unique in that 
they handled both deposits and checking accounts. At that time, sav-
ings and loans couldn’t offer checking services; their main function was 
to encourage thrift and home ownership by offering high interest rates 
on savings accounts and providing home mortgages. Deregulation 
closed the gaps between banks and S&Ls, and they now offer similar 
services.  
 • 
 What kinds of services do they offer?  
 Banks and thrifts offer such services as savings accounts, checking 
accounts, certificates of deposit, loans, individual retirement accounts 
(IRAs), safe-deposit boxes, online banking, life insurance, brokerage ser-
vices, and traveler’s checks.  
 • 
 What is a credit union?  
 A credit union is a member-owned cooperative that offers everything a 
bank does—it takes deposits, allows you to write checks, and makes loans. 
It also may sell life insurance and offer mortgages. Credit union interest 
rates are sometimes higher than those from banks, and loan rates are 
often lower.  
 • 
 What are some of the other financial institutions that make loans and per-
form banklike operations?  
 Nonbanks include life insurance companies that lend out their funds, 
pension funds that invest in stocks and bonds and make loans, brokerage 
firms that offer investment services, and commercial finance 
companies.  
•
How doe
LO 20–2
•
How did
LO 20–3
•
What inst
LO 20–4

587
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
Briefly trace the causes of the banking crisis, and explain how the 
government protects your funds during such crises.
 • 
 What caused the banking crisis?  
 The goal was to have affordable housing, so the government urged banks 
to make loans to some who could not afford to repay. The banks wanted to 
minimize the risk of such loans, so they created mortgage-backed securi-
ties and sold them to other banks and organizations throughout the world. 
The government did not regulate these transactions well, and many banks 
failed because housing values fell and people defaulted on their loans. 
Many have been blamed for the loss: the Fed, Congress, bank managers, 
Fannie Mae, and Freddie Mac, among them.  
 • 
 What agencies insure the money you put into a bank, S&L, or credit union?  
 Money deposited in banks is insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation (FDIC). Money in S&Ls is insured by another agency con-
nected to the FDIC, the Savings Association Insurance Fund (SAIF). 
Money in credit unions is insured by the National Credit Union Adminis-
tration (NCUA). Accounts are now insured to $250,000.  
Describe how technology helps make banking more efficient. 
 • 
 What are debit cards and smart cards?  
 A debit card looks like a credit card but withdraws money that is already 
in your account. When the sale is recorded, the debit card sends an elec-
tronic signal to the bank, automatically transferring funds from your 
account to the seller’s. A smart card is an electronic funds transfer tool 
that combines a credit card, debit card, phone card, driver’s license card, 
and more. Smart cards replace the typical magnetic strip on a credit or 
debit card with a microprocessor.  
 • 
 What is the benefit of automatic transactions and online banking?  
 A  direct deposit is a credit made directly to a checking or savings account in 
place of a paycheck. A  direct payment is a preauthorized electronic payment. 
Customers sign a separate form for each company whose bill they would 
like to automatically pay from their checking or savings account on a speci-
fied date. The customer’s bank completes each transaction and records it on 
the customer’s monthly statement. All top U.S. retail banks now allow cus-
tomers to access their accounts online, and most have bill-paying capacity.  
Evaluate the role and importance of international banking, the World Bank, 
and the International Monetary Fund. 
 • 
 What do we mean by global markets?  
 Global markets mean that banks do not necessarily keep their money in 
their own countries. They make investments where they get the maximum 
return. What this means for you is that banking is no longer a domestic 
issue; it’s a global one.  
 • 
 What roles do the World Bank and the IMF play?  
 The World Bank (also called the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development) is primarily responsible for financing economic devel-
opment. The International Monetary Fund (IMF), in contrast, was estab-
lished to assist the smooth flow of money among nations. It requires 
members (who join voluntarily) to allow their own money to be exchanged 
for foreign money freely, to keep the IMF informed about changes in mon-
etary policy, and to modify those policies on the advice of the IMF to 
accommodate the needs of the entire membership.    
LO 20–5
•
What are
LO 20–6
LO 20–7

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
588
 key terms 
 banker’s acceptance 583  
 barter 567  
 certificate of deposit 
(CD) 576  
 commercial bank 576  
 credit unions 577  
 debit card 582  
 demand deposit 576 
 discount rate 572  
 electronic funds 
transfer (EFT) 
system 582  
 Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC) 581  
 International Monetary 
Fund (IMF) 584  
 letter of credit 583  
 M-l 569 
 M-2 569 
 M-3 569 
 money 566 
 money supply 569 
 nonbanks 578  
 open-market 
operations 572  
 pension funds 578 
 reserve requirement 572  
 savings and loan 
association (S&L) 577  
 Savings Association 
Insurance Fund 
(SAIF) 581 
 smart card 582  
 time deposit 576  
 World Bank 584 
 1. If you were chairperson of the Federal Reserve, what economic figures 
might you use to determine how well you were doing? What role did Ben 
Bernanke, the previous head of the Fed, play in the recent banking crisis?  
 2. How much cash do you usually carry with you? What other means do you 
use to pay for items at the store or on the Internet? What trends do you see 
in such payments? How might those trends make your purchase experi-
ence more satisfactory?  
 3. If the value of the dollar declines relative to the euro, what will happen to 
the price of French wine sold in U.S. stores? Will people in France be more 
or less likely to buy a U.S.-made car? Why?  
 4. Do you keep your savings in a bank, an S&L, a credit union, or some com-
bination? Have you compared the benefits you could receive from each? 
Where would you expect to find the best loan values?  
1
 critical thinking 
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  In a small group, discuss the following: What services do you use from 
banks and S&Ls? Does anyone use online banking? What seem to be its 
pluses and minuses? Use this opportunity to go online to compare the 
rates and services of various local banks and S&Ls.  
 2.  Poll the class to see who uses a bank and who uses a credit union. Have 
class members compare the services at each (interest rates on savings 
accounts, services available, loan rates). If anyone uses an online service, 
see how those rates compare. If no one uses a credit union or online bank, 
discuss the reasons.  
 3.  One role of the Federal Reserve is to help process your checks. In small 
groups discuss when and where you use checks, credit cards, debit cards, 
and cash. Do you often write checks for small amounts? Would you stop if 
you calculated how much it costs to process such checks? Have you 
switched to debit cards as a result? Discuss your findings with the class.  
 
 
 
 
 
 

589
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
 4.  Form several smaller groups and discuss the recent banking crisis. How 
has it affected the people in the class? What has happened to banks and 
the economy in general since the start of the banking crisis? What have 
been the political implications of recent economic changes?  
 5.  Write a one-page paper on the role of the World Bank and the Interna-
tional Monetary Fund in providing loans to countries. Is it important for 
U.S. citizens to lend money to people in other countries through such 
organizations? Why or why not? Be prepared to debate the value of these 
organizations in class.  
 
 
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To learn more about the banking crisis that began in 2008 and what has hap-
pened since.  
 EXERCISE 
 1. Do an Internet search to find the latest articles on the global financial cri-
sis. What has happened to banking in the United States and around the 
world since 2009? What role has the Fed played in trying to end the crisis 
in the United States?  
 2. How many search items have appeared covering this issue? What does the 
number of articles tell you about the importance of this issue?  
 3. Develop your own story about the causes of the banking crisis. Talk to oth-
ers in the class and compare stories. What organizations share the blame 
for the crisis?  
 video case   
 Looking back a few years ago in 2011, millions 
had lost homes, businesses had failed, foreclo-
sures were at an all-time record high, and unem-
ployment remained very high at 9 percent. These 
outcomes were due, in large part, to the financial 
crisis of 2006–2010. 
 In the year 2000, the tech stock bubble burst, 
which sent markets plummeting around the globe. 
Around the same time, ethics violations surfaced 
for major companies including Enron, World-
Com, Global Crossing, and Tyco. With the econ-
omy in a slump, the government wanted to 
stimulate consumer spending and business invest-
ment. To do this, the Federal Reserve lowered the 
prime interest rate from 6.5 percent to 1 percent. 
This ease of credit made mortgages, credit cards, 
and other consumer loans easy to get. In fact, the 
average household debt to disposable income in 
2007 was 127 percent. 
 The U.S. Congress, through the 2010 financial 
crisis investigating committee, determined that 
the crisis was avoidable. Some of the factors iden-
tified as leading to the crisis included the prolif-
eration of subprime mortgages that, in the period 
between 2004 and 2006, comprised about 20 per-
cent of all mortgages. This was a twofold increase 
in subprime loans. 
 The SEC lowered the leverage requirements 
for investment banks, leading banks to borrow 
significantly more than they had in reserves. 
During this period of time, mortgage-backed secu-
rities (MBSs) were bundled and sold to investors. 
These MBS products included subprime mort-
gages, as well. During this same period of time, 
the major financial rating agencies such as 
Moody’s and Standard and Poor’s continued to 
provide AAA ratings (the highest rating) for MBS 
products, assuring investors of their value. 
 THE FINANCIAL CRISIS 

PART 6
Managing Financial Resources
590
 In 2007, the housing bubble burst, with hous-
ing prices tumbling and the value of MBS prod-
ucts falling, in some cases, to worthless status. 
Many people found themselves “underwater,” 
meaning that they owed more on their houses 
than they were worth. These folks and many who 
had subprime mortgages defaulted on their obli-
gations. As the MBS declined in value, investment 
banks and other financial firms began to fail, as 
their debt was higher than the value of their assets. 
 This financial crisis had global consequences. 
The failure of very large (or “too big to fail”) 
investment banks could not be allowed to stand; 
thus, the federal government intervened with a 
$700 billion bailout for banks called the Troubled 
Asset Relief Program (TARP), designed to bail out 
troubled banks and prevent further failures. In 
2009, the president signed an $800 billion stimu-
lus designed to help stimulate the economy, help 
businesses borrow and invest, and as a result, cre-
ate jobs. 
 The global crisis of confidence described in 
the video represents the largest economic failure 
since the Great Depression of the 1930s. The long-
term effects of the financial crisis are yet to be 
completely determined. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. Describe how the Federal Reserve can use its 
authority 
to 
attempt 
to 
stimulate 
the 
economy.  
 2. One of the major problems that led to the 
financial crisis was the housing bubble. What 
is meant by the “housing bubble”?  
 3. Name and explain two of the reasons the Con-
gressional committee identified for the recent 
financial crisis.  
 1. 
Brian Wesbury, “How Much Does That Burger Cost in 
Bitcoins?”  The Wall Street Journal, December 16, 2013. 
 2. 
Christina Le Beau, “Rules of the Trade,”  Entrepreneur, 
February 2014. 
 3. 
Norm Brodsky, “Don’t Worry; Grow Happy,”  Inc., May 2013. 
 4. 
J. D. Harrison, “When Cashflow Is Tight, Some Businesses 
Barter,”  The Washington Post, March 17, 2013. 
 5. 
Nomann Merchant, “$100 Bill Undergoes Major Makeover,” 
The Washington Times, September 26, 2013. 
 6. 
Mohana Ravidranath, “In D.C., Bitcoin Starting to Gain 
Currency,”  The Washington Post, December 23, 2013. 
 7. 
 Tomorrow in Review, January 16, 2014,   tomorrowinreview@
Agorafinancial.com  , accessed May 2014. 
 8. 
Joe Light, “New Perch in Markets for Bitcoin,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, February 7, 2014. 
 9. 
Jeffrey Sparshott, “Change for a Nickel? Mint Considers It,” 
The Wall Street Journal, January 17, 2014. 
 10. 
Ira Iosebishvili, “Signs Point to Year of the Dollar’s Ascent,” 
The Wall Street Journal, December 27, 2013. 
 11. 
Ylan Q. Mui, “Fed Will Begin Easing Stimulus,”  The 
Washington Post, December 19, 2013. 
 12. 
Francesco Guerrera, “Tallying Winners, Losers in ‘QE’ Era,” 
The Wall Street Journal, January 14, 2014. 
 13. 
Zachary Karabell, “Maybe the All-Powerful Federal Reserve 
Isn’t,”  The Washington Post, November 24, 2013. 
 14. 
Jonathan Buck, “ECB Will Boost Support If Euro Zone 
Stumbles,”  Barron’s, January 13, 2014. 
 15. 
Thomas V. DiBacco, “Federal Reserve’s Woeful Century,”  The 
Washington Times, December 23, 2013. 
 16. 
Patrice Hill, “Markets Reel as the Fed Cuts Back Stimulus,” 
The Washington Times, January 30, 2014. 
 17. 
Robert E. Grady, “The Fed Celebrates Its 100th Birthday,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, December 23, 2013. 
 18. 
To read more about this era, see John Steele Gordon, “How 
the Civil War United Our Money,”  Barron’s, January 21, 2013. 
 19. Patrice Hill, “Markets Reel as the Fed Cuts Back Stimulus,” 
The Washington Times, January 30, 2014. 
 20. Anna Maria Andriotis and Saabira Chaudhuri, “Free Checks 
Go Way of Free Lunch,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 6, 
2014. 
 21. 
Sheila Bair, “When It Comes to the New Banking Rules, More 
Isn’t Always Better,”  Fortune, February 3, 2014. 
  22.  Fortune, advertisement, January 13, 2014. 
 23. Hanah Cho, quoted in “Banking: Meeting the Mobile 
Challenge,”  The Week, December 27, 2013. 
 24. Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation,   www.fdic.gov  , 
accessed May 2014. 
 25. Lisa Brown, “Credit Unions Promote, Gain Share,”  St. Louis 
Post-Dispatch, August, 30, 2013. 
 26. Brendan Greeley, “Have Credit Unions Become Stealth 
Banks?”  Bloomberg Businessweek, May 20–26, 2013. 
 27.  World, editorial, December 14, 2013. 
 28. Peter Dreier, “What Housing Recovery?”  The New York 
Times, May 8, 2014. 
 29. Lisa Gerstner, “Pick the Best Credit Card for You,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance, February 2013. 
 30. Danielle Douglas, “Rise in Prepaid Debit Cards Entices Banks 
to Sponsor Them,”  The Washington Post, January 24, 2014. 
 31. 
Danielle Douglas, “When It Comes to Plastic, Credit and Debit 
Not Created Equally,”  The Washington Post, February 7, 2014. 
 32. Brian Blackstone and Todd Buell, “Europe Central Banks Ready 
for New Stimulus,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 7, 2014. 
 33. Rana Foroohar, “The End of Easy Money,”  Time, April 15, 
2013. 
 34. Martin Crutsinger, “IMF Raises Outlook for Global and U.S. 
Economic Growth,”  The Washington Times, January 22, 2014; 
and the International Monetary Fund,   www.imf.org  , accessed 
May 2014. 
 35. Howard Schneider, “After Financial Crisis, IMF Pauses to 
Take Stock of Policies,”  The Washington Post, April 17, 2013. 
1.
Brian Wesbury, “How Much Does
 notes 

591
Money, Financial Institutions, and the Federal Reserve
CHAPTER 20
photo credits
p. 578: © Tom Carter/Alamy RF; p. 579: © YAY 
Media AS/Alamy RF; p. 580: © Andy Dean Photog-
raphy/Alamy RF; p. 582: © George Ruhe/Redux; 
p. 583: © Ian Dagnall Smartphones/Alamy; p. 584: 
© Yoshikazu Tsuno/AFP/Getty Images. 
Page 565: © Susan Walsh/AP Images; p. 566: 
Bureau of Engraving and Printing, U.S. Depart-
ment of the Treasury; p. 567: © Photodisc/Getty 
Images RF; p. 568: © pagadesign/iStock/360/Getty 
Images RF; p. 575: © Bettmann/Corbis; 

A
BONUS CHAPTER
 A  Working within the 
Legal Environment 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS BONUS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
A-1 
Define  business law,  distinguish between statutory and common law, 
and explain the role of administrative agencies. 
 A-2 
Define  tort law and explain the role of product liability in tort law. 
A-3 
 Identify the purposes and conditions of patents, copyrights, and 
trademarks. 
 A-4 
Describe warranties and negotiable instruments as covered in the 
Uniform Commercial Code. 
 A-5 
List and describe the conditions necessary to make a legally 
enforceable contract, and describe the possible consequences if such 
a contract is violated. 
 A-6 
Summarize several laws that regulate competition and protect 
consumers in the United States. 
 A-7 
Explain the role of tax laws in generating income for the government 
and as a method of discouraging or encouraging certain behaviors 
among taxpayers. 
 A-8 
Distinguish among the various types of bankruptcy as outlined by the 
Bankruptcy Code. 
 A-9 
Explain the role of deregulation as a tool to encourage competition.   

A-1
Eve Wright Taylor 
 • Vice president & associate general 
counsel for Miami Heat
 • Deals with every legal issue that 
involves the team, including the 
arena
www.nba.com/heat
@EveWrightExec
 e Bron James is considered by 
many to be one of the NBA’s 
most valuable players. He was 
the mainstay of the two-time 
league champion Miami Heat 
before moving back to the Cleveland 
Cavaliers. As familiar as you may be with 
players like LeBron, it’s unlikely you’re 
familiar with another valuable member of 
the Miami Heat team: Eve Wright Taylor. 
That’s because Taylor doesn’t make her 
mark shooting three-pointers. She serves 
as vice president and associate general 
counsel of the Miami Heat and the 
AmericanAirlines Arena. 
 Taylor received her undergraduate 
degree from DePauw University and 
went on to law school at the University of 
Indiana. After graduation, she worked in 
a corporate law firm in Minneapolis 
before deciding to embark on a new 
challenge. She became legal counsel 
and senior director of business affairs for 
the Ladies Professional Golf Association 
(LPGA). At the LPGA, Taylor was involved 
with many legal and 
business parts of the organization includ-
ing tournament contracts, licensing 
agreements, corporate sponsorships, 
trademark management, television 
broadcast rights, and other duties. After 
six successful years at the LPGA, Taylor 
was offered a new opportunity in one of 
the most male-dominated industries in 
the world, the National Basketball 
Association (NBA). 
 When she joined the Heat, Taylor 
quickly found that not only was the Heat 
one of the hottest teams in basketball, 
her job was also a hot spot. It seemed 
that no two days were alike and her job 
touched every aspect of the organiza-
tion. She quickly found there was a legal 
component to virtually everything that 
involved the team including the 
AmericanAirlines Arena that the Heat 
called home. On a particular day 
Taylor may be asked for legal 
advice on issues involving marketing 
and promotions, arena concerts and 
events, corporate sales, merchandising 
initiatives, and player-related matters, 
such as obtaining visas for foreign play-
ers on the team. 
 It’s doubtful Taylor will ever reach the 
fame of LeBron James or be inducted 
into the NBA Hall of Fame, but that 
doesn’t mean the Heat doesn’t appreci-
ate her efforts. Besides having two rings 
celebrating the Heat’s NBA 
Championships, Taylor, who is Vice 
President and Associate General 
Counsel of the team, is also a sought-
after speaker who regularly presents 
seminars on sports business, licensing, 
sponsorship, and other legal issues. She 
recently published her first book,  Life at 
the Speed of Passion, and promises 
more to come. When it comes to Eve 
Wright Taylor, there’s no doubt about it, 
life is a full-court press. 
 Professional sports, of course, is not 
the only industry where legal issues 
affect almost every area of the business. 
The United States has more lawyers than 
any nation and is the world’s most liti-
gious society. In this chapter, we briefly 
discuss the history and structure of the 
U.S. legal system. Then we’ll take a look 
at key areas of business law such as 
torts, patents, copyrights, and trademarks 
as well as sales law, contract law, laws to 
protect competition and consumers, tax 
law, and bankruptcy law. We also discuss 
the controversial topic of deregulation. 
You probably won’t be ready for a game 
of one-on-one with Eve Wright 
Taylor after reading this chapter, but if 
you use it as a foundation to the study 
of law, who knows what your future 
may be? 
 Sources: “Forty Under 40,”  Sports Business 
Journal, March 12, 2012; Sonja D. Mack, “40 
Rising Stars 40 & Under,”  Black Enterprise, 
February 2012; and “Calculated Risk Taker,” 
National Black Law Students Association,  www.
nblsa.com , accessed May 2014.
Getting to know Eve Wright Taylor
L

A-2
 As a key federal government agency, we have a key role in mergers and 
acquisitions in the U.S. business community. Without our approval, merg-
ers or acquisitions can be rejected. For example, we approved the merger of 
American Airlines with U.S. Airways, but rejected a merger between AT&T and 
T-Mobile. Name our organization. (Find the answer in this chapter.)  
  name that company 
 Define business law, distinguish between statutory and common law, and 
explain the role of administrative agencies.
THE CASE FOR LAWS 
 Imagine a society without laws. Just think: no speed limits, no age restrictions 
on the consumption of alcohol, no limitations on who can practice law or 
medicine—a society where people are free to do whatever they choose, with 
no interference. Obviously, the more we consider this possibility, the more 
unrealistic we realize it is. Laws are an essential part of a civilized nation. 
Over time, though, the depth and scope of the body of laws must change to 
continue reflecting the needs of society. The  judiciary   is the branch of govern-
ment chosen to oversee the legal system through a system of courts. 
 The U.S. court system is organized at the federal, state, and local levels. At 
both the federal and state levels, trial courts hear cases involving criminal and 
civil law.  Criminal law defines crimes, establishes punishments, and regulates 
the investigation and prosecution of people accused of committing crimes. 
Civil law proceedings cover noncriminal acts—marriage, personal injury suits, 
and so on. Both federal and state systems have appellate courts that hear 
appeals from the losing party about decisions made at the trial-court level. 
Appellate courts can review and overturn these decisions. 
 The judiciary also governs the activities and operations of business, includ-
ing hiring and firing practices, unpaid leave for family emergencies, environ-
mental protection, worker safety, freedom from sexual harassment at work, and 
more. As you may suspect, businesspeople prefer to set their own standards of 
behavior and often complain that the government is overstepping its bounds in 
governing business. Unfortunately, the economic crisis highlighted that the U.S. 
business community did not implement acceptable standards—particularly in 
financial markets—causing the government to expand its control and enforce-
ment procedures.  1  This chapter will look at specific laws and regulations and 
how they affect businesses. 
 Business law   refers to the rules, statutes, codes, and regulations that pro-
vide a legal framework for the conduct of business and that are enforceable by 
court action. A businessperson must be familiar with laws regarding product 
liability, sales, contracts, fair competition, consumer protection, taxes, and 
bankruptcy. Let’s start by briefly discussing the foundations of law and what 
the legal system is all about. 
 Statutory and Common Law 
 Two major fields of law are important to businesspeople: statutory law and 
common law. 
LO A–1
judiciary
The branch of government 
chosen to oversee the legal 
system through a system of 
courts.
business law
The rules, statutes, codes, and 
regulations that provide a legal 
framework for the conduct of 
business and that are 
enforceable by court action.

In the U.S. judicial 
system, judges are 
guided in their decisions 
by the precepts of 
common law (often 
called unwritten law 
because it is based on 
previous court 
decisions). Such 
decisions become 
precedent and assist 
other judges in making 
legal rulings. What are 
some practical benefits 
of this process?
A-3
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
  Statutory law   includes state and federal constitutions, legislative enact-
ments, treaties of the federal government, and ordinances—in short, written 
law. You can read the statutes that make up this body of law, but they are often 
written in language whose meaning must be determined in court. With over 
1.2 million licensed lawyers, the United States has more lawyers per citizen 
than any country in the world. 2 
  Common law  is the body of law that comes from decisions handed down 
by courts. We often call it  unwritten law  because it does not appear in any 
legislative enactment, treaty, or other written document. Under common law 
principles, what judges have decided in previous cases is very important in 
deciding today’s cases. Such decisions are called   precedent,  and they guide 
judges in the handling of new cases. Common law evolves through decisions 
made in trial courts, appellate courts, and special courts (e.g., probate courts 
or bankruptcy courts). Lower courts (trial courts) must abide by the prece-
dents set by higher courts (e.g., appellate courts) such as the U.S. Supreme 
Court. 
 Administrative Agencies 
  Administrative agencies   are federal or state institutions and other govern-
ment organizations created by Congress or state legislatures with delegated 
power to create rules and regulations within their given area of authority. 
 Legislative bodies can create administrative agencies and also terminate 
them. Some administrative agencies hold quasi-legislative, quasi-executive, 
and quasi-judicial powers. This means that an agency is allowed to pass rules 
and regulations within its area of authority, conduct investigations in cases of 
suspected rules violations, and hold hearings if it feels rules and regulations 
have been violated. 
 Administrative agencies issue more rulings affecting business and settle 
more business disputes than courts do. Such agencies include the Securities and 
Exchange Commission (SEC), the Federal Communications Commission, and 
the Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC).  Figure A.1  lists 
and describes the powers and functions of several administrative agencies at the 
federal, state, and local levels of government. 
statutory law
State and federal constitutions, 
legislative enactments, treaties 
of the federal government, and 
ordinances—in short, written law.
common law
The body of law that comes 
from decisions handed down 
by courts; also referred to as 
unwritten law.
precedent
Decisions judges have made in 
earlier cases that guide the 
handling of new cases.
administrative agencies 
Federal or state institutions and 
other government organizations 
created by Congress or state 
legislatures with delegated 
power to create rules and 
regulations within their 
mandated area of authority.

Federal Trade
Commission
Enforces laws and guidelines regarding unfair business practices and
acts to stop false and deceptive advertising and labeling.
Food and Drug
Administration
Enforces laws and regulations to prevent distribution of adulterated
or misbranded foods, drugs, medical devices, cosmetics, and veterinary
products, as well as any hazardous consumer products.
Federal Agencies
Examples
Powers and Functions
Public utility
commissions
Set rates that can be charged by various public utilities to prevent unfair
pricing by regulated monopolies (e.g., natural gas, electric power companies).
State licensing
boards
License various trades and professions within a state (e.g., state cosmetology
board, state real estate commission).
State Agencies
Examples
Powers and Functions
Maricopa County
Planning
Commission
Oversees land-use proposals, long-term development objectives, and
other long-range issues in Maricopa County, Arizona.
City of
Chesterﬁeld
Zoning Board
Recommends policy regarding zoning of commercial and residential
property in the city of Chesterﬁeld, Missouri.
Local Agencies
Examples
Powers and Functions
BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
A-4
Define tort law and explain the role of product liability in tort law.
TORT LAW
A   tort  is a wrongful act that causes injury to another person’s body, property, or 
reputation. Although torts often are noncriminal acts, courts can award victims 
compensation if the conduct that caused the harm is considered intentional. 
Legally, an  intentional tort is a willful act that results in injury. The question of 
intent was a major factor in the lawsuits against the U.S. tobacco industry. 
Courts had to decide whether tobacco makers intentionally withheld informa-
tion from the public about the harmful effects of their products.
 Negligence,  in tort law, describes behavior that causes  unintentional
harm or injury. A court’s finding of negligence can lead to huge judgments 
against businesses. In another classic case, McDonald’s lost a lawsuit to an 
elderly woman severely burned by hot coffee bought at a drive-through 
LO A–2
tort
A wrongful act that causes 
injury to another person’s body, 
property, or reputation.
negligence
In tort law, behavior that causes 
unintentional harm or injury.
 
• What is business law?
 
• What’s the difference between statutory and common law?
 
• What is an administrative agency?
• What is business law?
test prep
?
FIGURE A.1 EXAMPLES OF FEDERAL, STATE, AND LOCAL ADMINISTRATIVE AGENCIES
T
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.

A-5
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
window. The jury felt that McDonald’s failed to provide an adequate warning 
on the cup. Product liability is a controversial area of tort law, so let’s take a 
closer look at this issue. 
 Product Liability 
 Few issues in business law raise as much debate as product liability. Critics 
believe product liability laws have gone too far; others feel these laws should 
be expanded.   Product liability   holds businesses liable for harm that results 
from the production, design, or inadequate warnings of products they mar-
ket.  3  The average product liability case can cost businesses millions, including 
defense costs, out-of-court settlements, and jury awards. 
 At one time the legal standard for measuring product liability was whether 
a producer knowingly placed a hazardous product on the market. Today, many 
states have extended product liability to the level of   strict product liability   —
legally meaning liability without regard to fault. That is, a company that places 
a defective product on the market can be held liable for damages—a monetary 
settlement awarded to a person injured by another’s actions—even if the com-
pany did not know of the defect at the time of sale. 
 Strict product liability is a major concern for businesses. More than 
70 companies have been forced into bankruptcy due to asbestos litigation 
and the issue is not yet closed.  4 About 2,000 new cases of mesothelioma (a 
cancer linked to asbestos exposure) are diagnosed every year according to the 
Mesothelioma Center, keeping the legal docket busy.  5   Lead-based paint pro-
ducers continue to face expensive lawsuits even though lead-based paint has 
been banned in the United States since 1978.  6 Mattel was forced in the mid-
2000s to recall over 9 million toys produced in China due to lead paint con-
cerns. In 2014, Toyota Motors quickly issued stop-sale orders for its Camry 
and Corolla models after finding seat material did not comply with U.S. fire 
safety standards.  7 The company was forced to recall 8.1 million cars begin-
ning in 2009 due to sudden acceleration incidents, and in 2014 reached a $1.2 
billion settlement with the U.S. government admitting that it misled U.S. con-
sumers by making deceptive statements about safety issues.  8 At the time of 
this writing, GM is undergoing congressional investigation of why it took the 
company years to recall vehicles with known defects linked to 13 deaths.  9  
 Some product liability cases have raised intriguing questions about 
responsibility. Handgun manufacturers were unsuccessfully sued by cities 
including Chicago and Miami for the costs of police work and medical care 
necessitated by gun violence. McDonald’s faced a product liability suit (later 
dismissed) claiming that its food caused obesity, diabetes, and other health 
problems in children. Some communities, however, have reacted by banning 
trans fats in food, regulating menu information, and eliminating toys in chil-
dren’s products like McDonald’s Happy Meals. New York City even attempted 
to place a ban on large sugary soft drinks sold at restaurants, sports arenas, and 
other venues.  10 The ban was later ruled unconstitutional. Many schools, how-
ever, are replacing soft drinks in vending machines with fruit juice and water. 
 Tort and product liability reform remains a key objective of business. 
Congress took action with passage of the Class Action Fairness Act in 2005, 
which expanded federal jurisdiction over many large class-action lawsuits. 
The legislation has been beneficial to some businesses since their cases were 
brought to federal court rather than state courts where awards were typically 
much higher. Still, businesses and insurance companies argue that more needs 
to be done to assist companies with product liability.  11 Consumer protection 
groups disagree and feel not enough is being done to protect consumers. 
 Figure A.2  highlights a brief history of several major product liability awards 
that have cost companies dearly. 
product liability
Part of tort law that holds 
businesses liable for harm that 
results from the production, 
design, or use of products they 
market.
strict product liability
Legal responsibility for harm or 
injury caused by a product 
regardless of fault.

Company
Year
Settlement
Ford Motor Company
1978
$125 million in punitive damages awarded in the case of a 13-year-old boy severely burned in a
rear-end collision involving a Ford Pinto
A. H. Robins
1987
Dalkon Shield intrauterine birth-control devices recalled after eight separate 
punitive-damage awards
Playtex Company
1988
Considered liable and suffered a $10 million damage award in the case of a toxic shock
syndrome fatality in Kansas; removed certain types of tampons from the market
Jack in the Box
1993
Assessed large damages after a two-year-old child who ate at Jack in the
Box died of E. coli poisoning and others became ill
Sara Lee Corporation
1998
Costly company recall necessitated when tainted hot dogs caused food poisoning death
of 15 people
General Motors
1999
Suffered $4.8 billion punitive award in a faulty fuel-tank case
Major Tobacco Firms
Sources: U.S. Department of Justice and American Trial Lawyers Association.
2004
$130 billion sought by the federal government for smoking cessation programs
(settled for $10 billion)
BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
A-6
Identify the purposes and conditions of patents, copyrights, and trademarks.
 LEGALLY PROTECTING IDEAS: PATENTS, 
COPYRIGHTS, AND TRADEMARKS 
 Have you ever invented a product you think may have commercial value? Many 
people have, and to protect their ideas they took the next step and applied for a 
patent. A   patent   is a document that gives inventors exclusive rights to their 
inventions for 20 years from the date they file the patent applications. 
 Patent applicants must make sure a product is truly unique and should 
seek the advice of an attorney; in fact, fewer than 2 percent of product inventors 
file on their own. How good are your chances of receiving a patent if you file for 
one? About 50 percent of patent applications received by the U.S. Patent and 
Trademarks Office (USPTO) are approved, with fees that vary according to the 
complexity of the patent. A patent dealing with complex technology can cost 
anywhere from $10,000 to $30,000, whereas a patent dealing with simpler con-
cepts (like a better mousetrap) will cost the inventor about $5,000 to $10,000.  12
 Patent owners have the right to sell or license the use of their patent to 
others. Foreign companies are also eligible to file for U.S. patents. They 
account for nearly half the U.S. patents issued. Penalties for violating a patent 
(patent infringement) can be costly. Dr. Gary Michelson received a settlement 
of $1.35 billion from Medtronic Inc. to end litigation and license patents cov-
ering a range of back-surgery products.  13  The USPTO does not take action on 
behalf of patent holders if patent infringement occurs. The defense of patent 
rights is solely the job of the patent holder. 
 The American Inventors Protection Act was passed to require that patent 
applications be made public after 18 months regardless of whether a patent 
LO A–3
patent
A document that gives 
inventors exclusive rights to 
their inventions for 20 years.
FIGURE A.2 MAJOR PRODUCT LIABILITY CASES

A-7
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
has been awarded. This law was passed in part to address critics 
who argued that some inventors intentionally delayed or dragged 
out a patent application because they expected others to eventu-
ally develop similar products or technology. Then when someone 
(usually a large company) filed for a similar patent, the inventor 
surfaced to claim the patent—referred to as a  submarine patent —
and demanded large royalties (fees) for its use. The late engineer 
Jerome Lemelson reportedly collected more than $1.3 billion in patent royal-
ties for a series of long-delayed patents—including forerunners of the fax 
machine, industrial robots, and the bar-code scanner—from auto, computer, 
retail, and electronics companies.  14 
 Technology companies like Apple and Google have been the subject of 
lawsuits filed by “patent trolls” that license patents (or buy the licensed pat-
ents) and file infringement lawsuits against companies that often cost millions 
of dollars.  15 The trolls never intend to use the patents; their only intention is to 
file the lawsuits in the hopes of a financial settlement.  16 Apple, Google, and 
other companies have asked for assistance from the U.S. Supreme Court, 
which is expected to rule on this issue.  17 Verizon, Google, and Cisco took 
action to defend themselves against patent infringement suits by joining Allied 
Security Trust, a not-for-profit firm that acquires intellectual property of inter-
est to its members. The idea is to buy up patents that could impact their com-
panies before they fall into the hands of others (mainly patent trolls) looking 
to pursue settlements or legal damages against the tech firms.  18 
 Just as a patent protects an inventor’s right to a product or process, a 
 copyright   protects a creator’s rights to materials such as books, articles, pho-
tos, paintings, and cartoons. Copyrights are filed with the Library of Congress 
and require a minimum of paperwork. They last for the lifetime of the author 
or artist plus 70 years and can be passed on to the creator’s heirs. The Copyright 
Act of 1978, however, gives a special term of 75 years from publication to 
works published before January 1, 1978, whose copyrights had not expired by 
that date. The holder of a copyright can either prevent anyone from using the 
copyrighted material or charge a fee for using it. Author J. K. Rowling won a 
copyright violation suit against a fan who wanted to publish an unauthorized 
Harry Potter encyclopedia. If a work is created by an employee in the normal 
course of a job, the copyright belongs to the employer and lasts 95 years from 
publication or 120 years from creation, whichever comes first. 
 A  trademark is a legally protected name, symbol, or design (or combina-
tion of these) that identifies the goods or services of one seller and distin-
guishes them from those of competitors. Trademarks generally belong to the 
owner forever, as long as they are properly registered and renewed every 10 
years. Some well-known trademarks include the Aflac duck, Disney’s Mickey 
Mouse, the Nike swoosh, and the golden arches of McDonald’s. Like a patent, 
a trademark is protected against infringement. Businesses fight hard to pro-
tect trademarks, especially in global markets where trademark pirating can be 
extensive. (Chapter 14 discusses trademarks in more detail.) 
copyright
A document that protects a 
creator’s rights to materials 
such as books, articles, photos, 
paintings, and cartoons.
Viacom filed a lawsuit 
against YouTube (now 
owned by Google) for 
allowing users to upload 
its content to the video-
sharing website. After a 
seven-year copyright 
violation battle costing 
Google more than $100 
million, the two finally 
reached an out-of-court 
settlement in 2014. 
Viacom was seeking $1 
billion in damages, but 
the terms of the final 
agreement were not 
disclosed.
 
• What is tort law?
 
• What is product liability? What is strict product liability?
 
• How many years is a patent protected from infringement?
 
• What is a copyright?
• What is tort law?
test prep
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.

BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
A-8
 Describe warranties and negotiable instruments as covered in the Uniform 
Commercial Code. 
 SALES LAW: THE UNIFORM COMMERCIAL CODE 
 At one time, laws governing businesses varied from state to state, making 
interstate trade extremely complicated. Today, all states have adopted the 
same commercial law. The   Uniform Commercial Code (UCC)   is a compre-
hensive commercial law that covers sales laws and other commercial laws. 
Since all 50 states have adopted the law (although it does not apply in certain 
sections of Louisiana), the UCC simplifies commercial transactions across 
state lines. 
 The UCC has 11 articles, which contain laws covering sales; commercial 
paper such as promissory notes and checks; bank deposits and collections; 
letters of credit; bulk transfers; warehouse receipts, bills of lading, and other 
documents of title; investment securities; and secured transactions. We do 
not have space in this text to discuss all 11 articles, but we will discuss two: 
Article 2, which regulates warranties, and Article 3, which covers negotiable 
instruments. 
 Warranties 
 A  warranty guarantees that the product sold will be acceptable for the purpose 
for which the buyer intends to use it. There are two types of warranties. 
  Express warranties   are specific representations by sellers that buyers rely on 
regarding the goods they purchase. The warranty you receive in the box with 
an iPad or a toaster is an express warranty. 
  Implied warranties   are legally imposed on 
the seller, specifying that a product will conform to 
the customary standards of the trade or industry in 
which it competes. An implied warranty entitles 
you to expect that a toaster will toast your bread to 
your desired degree (light, medium, dark) or that 
food you buy for consumption off an establish-
ment’s premises is fit to eat. 
 Warranties can be either full or limited. A full 
warranty requires a seller to replace or repair a 
product at no charge if the product is not function-
ing or defective, whereas a limited warranty typi-
cally limits the defects or mechanical problems the 
seller covers. Companies often offer extended war-
ranties that provide more coverage, but for a price, 
of course.  19  Many of the rights of buyers, including 
the right to accept or reject goods, are spelled out 
in Article 2 of the UCC.  
 Negotiable Instruments 
  Negotiable instruments   are forms of commercial 
paper (such as checks) that are transferable among 
businesses and individuals; they represent a prom-
ise to pay a specified amount. Article 3 of the 
Uniform Commercial Code requires negotiable 
instruments to follow four conditions. They must 
LO A–4
Uniform Commercial Code 
(UCC)
A comprehensive commercial 
law adopted by every state in 
the United States that covers 
sales laws and other 
commercial laws.
Would you buy a new 
car if the dealer offered 
no warranty? How 
about an iPhone or a 
major kitchen appliance 
with no guarantee of 
performance? 
Warranties are an 
important part of a 
product and are 
generally of major 
concern to purchasers. 
It’s important to check 
whether a product’s 
warranty is full or 
limited. Should colleges 
offer students 
warranties with their 
degree programs?

A-9
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
(1) be written and signed by the maker or drawer, (2) be made payable on 
demand or at a certain time, (3) be made payable to the bearer (the person 
holding the instrument) or to specific order, and (4) contain an unconditional 
promise to pay a specified amount of money. Checks or other forms of nego-
tiable instruments are transferred (negotiated for payment) when the payee 
signs the back. The payee’s signature is called an  endorsement. 
List and describe the conditions necessary to make a legally enforceable 
contract, and describe the possible consequences if such a contract is violated.
 CONTRACT LAW 
 If I offer to sell you my bike for $50 and later change my mind, can you force 
me to sell the bike by saying we had a contract? If I lose $120 to you in a poker 
game, can you sue in court to get your money? If I agree to sing at your wed-
ding for free and back out at the last minute, can you claim I violated a con-
tract? These are the kinds of questions contract law answers. 
 A   contract    i s a legally enforceable agreement between two or more 
parties.   Contract law  specifies what constitutes a legally enforceable 
agreement. Basically, a contract is legally binding if the following condi-
tions are met:
 
1.  An offer is made. An offer to do something or sell something can be 
oral or written. If I agree to sell you my bike for $50, I have made an 
offer. That offer is not legally binding, however, until the following 
other conditions are met.  
 
2.  There is a voluntary acceptance of the offer. The principle of  mutual 
acceptance means that both parties to a contract must agree on the 
terms. If I use duress—coercion through force or threat of force—in 
getting you to agree to buy my bike, the contract will not be legal. You 
couldn’t use duress to get me to sell my bike, either. Even if we both 
agree, though, the contract is still not legally binding without the next 
four conditions.  
 
3.  Both parties give consideration.   Consideration   means something of 
value. If I agree to sell you my bike for $50, the bike and the $50 are 
consideration, and we have a legally binding contract. If I agree to sing 
at your wedding and you do not give me anything in return 
(consideration), we have no contract.
 
4.  Both parties are competent. A person under the influence of alcohol or 
drugs, or a person of unsound mind (one who has been legally declared 
incompetent), cannot be held to a contract. In many cases, a minor 
may not be held to a contract either. If a 15-year-old agrees to pay 
$10,000 for a car, the seller will not be able to enforce the contract due 
to the buyer’s lack of competence.  
 
5.  The contract covers a legal act. A contract covering the sale of illegal 
drugs or stolen merchandise is unenforceable since such sales are 
violations of criminal law. (If gambling is prohibited by state law in 
your state, you cannot sue to collect the poker debt.)  
 
6.  The contract is in proper form. An agreement for the sale of goods 
worth $500 or more must be in writing. Contracts that cannot be 
fulfilled within one year also must be put in writing. Contracts 
regarding real property (land and everything attached to it) must be in 
writing.  
contract
A legally enforceable 
agreement between two or 
more parties.
contract law
Set of laws that specify what 
constitutes a legally 
enforceable agreement.
consideration
Something of value; 
consideration is one of the 
requirements of a legal 
contract.
express warranties
Specific representations by the 
seller that buyers rely on 
regarding the goods they 
purchase.
implied warranties
Guarantees concerning 
products legally imposed on 
the seller.
negotiable instruments
Forms of commercial paper 
(such as checks) that are 
transferable among businesses 
and individuals and represent a 
promise to pay a specified 
amount.
LO A–5

BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
A-10
 Breach of Contract 
 Both parties in a contract may voluntarily choose to end the agreement. 
 Breach of contract   occurs when one party fails to follow the terms of a con-
tract. 20 If that happens the following may occur:
 
1.  Specific performance. The party who violated the contract may be 
required to live up to the agreement if money damages would not be 
adequate. If I legally offered to sell you a rare painting, I would have to 
sell you that painting.  
 
2.  Payment of damages. If I fail to live up to a contract, you can sue me for 
  damages, usually the amount you would lose from my nonperformance. 
If we had a legally binding contract for me to sing at your wedding, for 
example, and I failed to come, you could sue me for the cost of hiring 
a new singer.
 
3.  Discharge of obligation. If I fail to live up to my end of a contract, you 
can agree to drop the matter. Generally you would not have to live up 
to your end of the agreement either.  
 Lawyers would not be paid so handsomely if contract law were as simple 
as implied in these rules. That’s why it’s always best to put a contract in writ-
ing even though oral contracts can be enforceable under contract law. The 
contract should clearly specify the offer and consideration, and the parties to 
the contract should sign and date it. A contract does not have to be compli-
cated as long as (1) it is in writing, (2) it specifies mutual consideration, and 
(3) it contains a clear offer and agreement. 
breach of contract
When one party fails to follow 
the terms of a contract.
 damages  
 The monetary settlement 
awarded to a person who is 
injured by a breach of contract.  
 
• What is the purpose of the Universal Commercial Code (UCC)?
 
• Compare express and implied warranties.
 
• What are the four elements of a negotiable instrument specified in 
the UCC?
 
• What are the six conditions for a legally binding contract?  What can 
happen if a contract is breached?
• What is the purpose o
test prep
of the Universa
of th
Summarize several laws that regulate competition and protect consumers in 
the United States.
 PROMOTING FAIR AND COMPETITIVE 
BUSINESS PRACTICES 
 Competition is a cornerstone of the free-market system (see Chapter 2). A key 
responsibility of legislators is to pass laws that ensure a competitive atmo-
sphere among businesses and promote fair business practices. The U.S. Justice 
Department’s antitrust division and other government agencies serve as watch-
dogs to guarantee competition in markets flows freely and new competitors 
have open access to the market. The government’s power here is broad. 
The Justice Department’s antitrust division has investigated the competitive 
LO A–6
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.

A-11
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
practices of market giants such as Microsoft, Apple, Visa, and Google.  Figure A.3  
highlights several high-profile antitrust cases. 
 Antitrust oversight was not always the rule, however. Big businesses were 
once able to force smaller competitors out of business with little government 
resistance. The following brief history details how government responded to past 
problems. We’ll also look at new challenges government regulators face today. 
 The History of Antitrust Legislation 
 In the late 19th century, big oil companies, railroads, steel companies, and 
other industrial firms dominated the U.S. economy. Some feared that such 
large and powerful companies would be able to crush any competitors and 
then charge high prices. In that atmosphere, Congress passed the Sherman 
Antitrust Act in 1890 to prevent large organizations from stifling the competi-
tion of smaller or newer firms. The Sherman Act forbids (1) contracts, combi-
nations, or conspiracies in restraint of trade, and (2) the creation of actual 
monopolies or attempts to monopolize any part of trade or commerce. 
 Because some of the language in the Sherman Act was vague, there was 
doubt about just what practices it prohibited. To clarify its intentions Congress 
enacted the following laws. 
 
• 
 The Clayton Act of 1914. The Clayton Act prohibits exclusive dealing, 
tying contracts, and interlocking directorates. It also prohibits buying 
large amounts of stock in competing corporations.  Exclusive dealing is 
selling goods with the condition that the buyer will not buy from a 
competitor (when the effect lessens competition). A  tying contract 
requires a buyer to purchase unwanted items in order to purchase 
desired ones. Let’s say I wanted to purchase 20 cases of Pepsi-Cola per 
week to sell in my restaurant. Pepsi, however, says it will sell me the 20 
cases only if I also agree to buy 10 cases each of its Mountain Dew and 
Diet Pepsi products. My purchase of Pepsi-Cola would be  tied to the 
purchase of the other two products. An  interlocking directorate occurs 
when a company’s board of directors includes members of the boards 
of competing corporations.  
 
• 
 The Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914. The Federal Trade Commis-
sion Act prohibits unfair methods of competition in commerce. This 
Case
Outcome
United States v.
Standard Oil 1911
Standard Oil broken up into 34 companies; Amoco, Chevron, and
ExxonMobil are results of the breakup
United States v.
American Tobacco 1911
American Tobacco split into 16 companies; British Tobacco and
R.J.Reynolds are results of the breakup
United States v. E. I. du
Pont de Nemours 1961
DuPont ordered to divest its 23 percent ownership stake
in General Motors
United States v.
AT&T 1982
Settled after Ma Bell agreed to spin off its local telephone
operations into seven regional operating companies
United States v.
Microsoft 2000
Microsoft ordered to halt prior anticompetitive practices
Source: U.S. Department of Justice.
FIGURE A.3 HISTORY 
OF HIGH-PROFILE 
ANTITRUST CASES

BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
A-12
legislation set up the five-member Federal Trade Commission (FTC) to 
enforce compliance with the act. The FTC deals with a wide range of 
competitive issues—everything from preventing companies from 
making misleading “Made in the USA” claims to insisting funeral 
providers give consumers accurate, itemized price information about 
funeral goods and services. It has the added responsibility for 
overseeing mergers and acquisitions (Chapter 5) in health care, 
defense, scientific, industrial, and technology industries.  21 For 
example, the FTC approved the American Airlines and U.S. Airways 
merger, but rejected the merger of AT&T and T-Mobile.  22 The Wheeler-
Lea Amendment of 1938 also gave the FTC additional jurisdiction over 
false or misleading advertising, along with the power to increase fines 
if its requirements are not met within 60 days.  
 
• 
The Robinson-Patman Act of 1936. The Robinson-Patman Act prohibits 
price discrimination and applies to both sellers and buyers who 
knowingly induce or receive price discrimination. Certain types of price 
cutting are criminal offenses punishable by fine and imprisonment. 
That includes price differences that “substantially” weaken competition 
unless they can be justified by lower selling costs associated with 
larger purchases. The law also prohibits advertising and promotional 
allowances unless they are offered to all retailers, large and small. 
Remember that this legislation applies to business-to-business trans-
actions and not to business-to-consumer transactions.  
 The change in U.S. business from manufacturing to knowledge-based 
technology has created new regulatory challenges for federal agencies. In 
the early 2000s, Microsoft’s competitive practices were the focus of an 
intense antitrust investigation by the Justice Department. The government 
charged that Microsoft hindered competition by refusing to sell its 
Windows operating system to computer manufacturers that refused to sell 
Windows-based computers exclusively. The case ended with a settlement 
between the Justice Department and Microsoft that expired in 2011. The 
Federal Trade Commission reached an agreement with Google a year later 
that avoided a long investigation after the company agreed to change some 
of its business practices.  23 Many antitrust advocates believe these cases 
broadened the definition of anticompetitive behavior and proved the gov-
ernment’s resolve in enforcing antitrust laws. The FTC’s decision involving 
Comcast’s $45 billion offer for Time Warner’s cable business will be an 
interesting case to follow.  24 It’s safe to conclude antitrust issues will per-
sist well into the future.  
 LAWS TO PROTECT CONSUMERS 
  Consumerism   is a social movement that seeks to increase and strengthen the 
rights and powers of buyers in relationship to sellers. It is the 
people’s way of getting a fair share and equitable treatment in 
marketing exchanges. The Public Company Accounting 
Reform and Investor Protection Act (better known as the 
Sarbanes-Oxley Act) was passed to allay concerns about falsi-
fied financial statements from companies like Enron and 
WorldCom in the early 2000s. The financial crisis again fueled 
consumer anger, this time against the Treasury Department, 
Federal Reserve, and Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC) for their lack of oversight of the financial markets. 
The collapse of the real estate market, crisis in the banking 
 consumerism  
 A social movement that seeks 
to increase and strengthen the 
rights and powers of buyers in 
relation to sellers.  
Although Vibram denied 
any wrongdoing, it 
offered refunds to buyers 
of its FiveFinger shoes in 
order to settle a class 
action lawsuit. The 
lawsuit claimed the 
company misrepresented 
health research by 
advertising that its shoes 
(which are designed to 
mimic barefoot running) 
improved posture, 
strengthened muscles 
and reduced injuries. 
Both Reebok and 
Skechers had to pay 
$25 to $40 million to 
settle similar suits.

A-13
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
industry, and failure of quasi-governmental mortgage agencies such as Fannie 
Mae and Freddie Mac led to passage of the Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform 
and Consumer Protection Act. This legislation created the Consumer Financial 
Protection Bureau that provides government oversight involving consumers in 
areas such as online banking, home mortgage loans, and high-interest payday 
loans.  25   Figure A.4  lists other major consumer protection laws. 
Child Protection
Act (1966)
Removes from sale potentially harmful toys and allows the
FDA to pull dangerous products from the market.
Fair Packaging and
Labeling Act (1966)
Makes unfair or deceptive packaging or labeling of certain
consumer commodities illegal.
Truth-in-Lending
Act (1968)
Requires full disclosure of all ﬁnance charges on consumer
credit agreements and in advertisements of credit plans.
Child Protection and
Toy Safety Act (1969)
Protects children from toys and other products that contain
thermal, electrical, or mechanical hazards.
Fair Credit Reporting
Act (1970)
Requires that consumer credit reports contain only accurate,
relevant, and recent information and are conﬁdential unless a
proper party requests them for an appropriate reason.
Consumer Product
Safety Act (1972)
Created an independent agency to protect consumers from
unreasonable risk of injury arising from consumer products
and to set safety standards.
Magnuson-Moss
Warranty–Federal
Trade Commission
Improvement Act (1975)
Provides for minimum disclosure standards for written consumer
product warranties and allows the FTC to prescribe interpretive
rules and policy statements regarding unfair or deceptive practices.
Alcohol Labeling
Legislation (1988)
Provides for warning labels on liquor saying that women shouldn’t
drink when pregnant and that alcohol impairs a person’s abilities.
Nutrition Labeling and
Education Act (1990)
Requires truthful and uniform nutritional labeling on every food the
FDA regulates.
Consumer Credit
Reporting Reform
Act (1997)
Increases responsibility of credit issuers for accurate credit
data and requires creditors to verify that disputed data are
accurate. Consumer notiﬁcation is necessary before
reinstating the data.
Children’s Online
Privacy Protection
Act (2000)
Gives parents control over what information is collected
online from their children under age 13; requires website
operators to maintain the conﬁdentiality, security, and integrity
of the personal information collected from children.
Country of Origin
Labeling Law (2009)
Requires that the product label on most food products sold in
U.S. supermarkets gives the product’s country of origin.
Credit Card
Accountability,
Responsibility,
and Disclosure (CARD)
Act (2009)
Designed to protect consumers from unfair credit card
practices.
FIGURE A.4 CONSUMER 
PROTECTION LAWS

BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
A-14
Explain the role of tax laws in generating income for the government and as a 
method of discouraging or encouraging certain behaviors among taxpayers.
 TAX LAWS 
 Mention taxes and most people frown.   Taxes  are the way federal, state, and 
local governments raise money. They affect almost every individual and busi-
ness in the United States. 
 Governments primarily use taxes as a source of funding for their opera-
tions and programs. Taxes can also help discourage or encourage certain behav-
iors among taxpayers. If the government wishes to reduce consumer use of 
certain classes of products like cigarettes or liquor, it can pass  sin taxes on them 
to raise their cost. Since the Great Recession, increasing sin taxes (i.e., taxes on 
things like liquor and cigarettes) has become a popular way for cash-starved 
states to raise revenue.  26 Colorado and Washington are the only two states that 
have legalized recreational marijuana. Both have levied taxes they believe will 
help their economies.  27 In fact, Colorado expects to bring in approximately $100 
million a year in taxes on marijuana sales.  28 In other situations, the government 
may encourage businesses to hire new employees or purchase new equipment 
by offering a  tax credit, an amount firms can deduct from their tax bill. 
 Taxes are levied from a variety of sources. Income taxes (personal and 
business), sales taxes, and property taxes are the major bases of tax revenue. 
The federal government receives its largest share of taxes from income. States 
and local communities make extensive use of sales taxes. School districts gen-
erally depend on property taxes. 
 The tax policies of states and cities are important considerations when busi-
nesses seek to locate operations. They also affect personal decisions such as retire-
ment. As government revenues at all levels have decreased, new tax issues were 
debated. One such issue involved taxing Internet sales. Many states claimed they 
were losing billions in sales taxes by not collecting from Internet sales transac-
tions. Large states like California, New York, and Illinois have already taken 
action on Internet sales taxes, as have many smaller states. New York, for exam-
ple, passed a law that requires out-of-state online companies to collect sales taxes 
from New York shoppers. Other states are petitioning Congress to pass a law per-
mitting them to collect sales taxes from e-commerce transactions. The European 
Union levies certain Internet taxes, so expect the U.S. debate to intensify.  Figure 
A.5  highlights the primary types of taxes levied on individuals and businesses. 
LO A–7
taxes
How the government (federal, 
state, and local) raises money.
Income taxes
Taxes paid on the income received by businesses and individuals. Income taxes are the
largest source of tax income received by the federal government.
Property taxes
Taxes paid on real and personal property. Real property is real estate owned by individuals
and businesses. Personal property is a broader category that includes any movable property
such as tangible items (wedding rings, equipment, etc.) or intangible items (stocks, checks,
mortgages, etc.). Taxes are based on their assessed value.
Sales taxes
Taxes paid on merchandise sold at the retail level.
Excise taxes
Taxes paid on selected items such as tobacco, alcoholic beverages, airline travel, gasoline,
and ﬁrearms. These are often referred to as sin taxes. Income generated from the tax goes
toward a speciﬁcally designated purpose. For example, gasoline taxes often help the
federal government and state governments pay for highway construction or improvements.
Types of Taxes
Type
Purpose
FIGURE A.5 TYPES OF TAXES

A-15
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
 Distinguish among the various types of bankruptcy as outlined by 
the Bankruptcy Code. 
BANKRUPTCY LAWS 
 Bankruptcy   is the legal process by which a person, business, or government 
entity, unable to meet financial obligations, is relieved of those debts by a 
court. Courts divide any of the debtor’s assets among creditors, allowing them 
to recover at least part of their money and freeing the debtor to begin anew. 
The U.S. Constitution gives Congress the power to establish bankruptcy laws, 
and legislation has existed since the 1890s. Major amendments to the bank-
ruptcy code include the Bankruptcy Amendments and Federal Judgeship Act 
of 1984, the Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1994, and the Bankruptcy Abuse 
Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005. 
 The 1984 law allows a person who is bankrupt to keep part of the equity 
(ownership) in a house and car, and some other personal property. The 1994 
Act amended more than 45 sections of the bankruptcy code and created 
reforms to speed up and simplify the process. The Bankruptcy Abuse 
Prevention and Consumer Protection Act of 2005 was passed to reduce the 
total number of bankruptcy filings and to eliminate the perceived ease of filing 
for bankruptcy. The legislation increased the cost of filing and made it difficult 
for people (especially those with high incomes) to escape overwhelming debt 
from credit cards, medical bills, student loans, or other loans not secured 
through a home or other asset. It also requires debtors to receive credit 
counseling. 
 Bankruptcies started growing in the late 1980s and have increased 
tremendously since. Many attribute the increase to a lessening of the stigma 
of bankruptcy, an increase in understanding of bankruptcy law and its pro-
tections, and increased advertising by bankruptcy attorneys. Some suggest 
that the ease with which certain consumers could get credit contributed to 
the number of filings by allowing people to readily overspend. The 2005 
reform helped reduce the annual number of bankruptcy filings to 600,000 
from an average of 1.5 million between 2001 and 2004. However, the finan-
cial crisis pushed the number of bankruptcies again to over a million. As the 
economy continues to come back slowly, bankruptcies reached 1.03 million 
in 2013.  29 Although high-profile bankruptcies of businesses—such as 
Blockbuster, Circuit City, Borders, and the City of Detroit—tend to dominate 
the news, over 90 percent of bankruptcy filings each year are by 
individuals.  30  
 Bankruptcy can be either voluntary or involuntary. In   voluntary bankruptcy,   
the debtor applies for bankruptcy; in   involuntary bankruptcy,  the creditors 
start legal action against the debtor. Most bankruptcies are voluntary, since 
creditors usually wait in hopes they will be paid all the money due them rather 
than settle for only part of it. 
 Bankruptcy procedures begin when a petition is filed with the court under 
one of the following sections of the Bankruptcy Code:
 Chapter 7—“straight bankruptcy” or liquidation (used by businesses and 
individuals).  
 Chapter 11—reorganization (used almost exclusively by businesses).  
 Chapter 13—repayment (used by individuals).  
 Chapter 7 is the most popular form of bankruptcy among individuals; it 
requires the sale of nonexempt assets. Under federal exemption statutes, a 
debtor may be able to retain (exempt) up to $22,975 of equity in a home; up to 
$3,675 of equity in an automobile; up to $12,250 in household furnishings, 
LO A–8
bankruptcy
The legal process by which a 
person, business, or 
government entity, unable to 
meet financial obligations, is 
relieved of those obligations by 
a court that divides any assets 
among creditors, allowing 
creditors to get at least part of 
their money and freeing the 
debtor to begin anew.
voluntary bankruptcy
Legal procedures initiated by a 
debtor.
involuntary bankruptcy
Bankruptcy procedures filed by 
a debtor’s creditors.

BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
A-16
apparel, and musical instruments; and up to $1,550 in jewelry.  31 States can 
choose different exemption statutes. When the sale of assets is over, creditors, 
including the government if taxes are owed, divide the remaining cash as stip-
ulated by law. First, creditors with secured claims receive the collateral for 
their claims or repossess the claimed asset (such as an automobile or home); 
then unsecured claims (backed by no asset) are paid in this order:
 
1. Costs of the bankruptcy case.  
 
2. Any business costs incurred after bankruptcy was filed.  
 
3. Wages, salaries, or commissions owed (limited to $2,000 per creditor).  
 
4. Contributions to employee benefit plans.  
 
5. Refunds to consumers who paid for products that weren’t delivered 
(limited to $900 per claimant).  
 
6. Federal and state taxes. 
 Figure A.6  outlines the steps used in liquidating assets under Chapter 7.  
 In Chapter 11 bankruptcy, a company sued by creditors continues to oper-
ate under court protection while it tries to work out a plan for paying off its 
debts. Under certain conditions it may sell assets, borrow money, and change 
company officers to strengthen its market position. A court-appointed trustee 
supervises the proceedings and protects the creditors’ interests. 
 A company does not have to be insolvent to file for relief under Chapter 11. 
In theory, it is a way for sick companies to recover, designed to help both debt-
ors and creditors find the best solution. In reality, however, less than one-third 
of Chapter 11 companies survive—usually those with lots of cash available.  32 
The Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1994 provides a fast-track procedure for small 
businesses filing under Chapter 11. Individuals can also file under Chapter 11, 
but it’s uncommon. 
Voluntary 
Debtor petitions 
bankruptcy
court for
bankrupt status
Involuntary 
Creditors
start legal action
against debtor
Debtor must 
answer 
creditors’
charges
Creditors
elect trustee
Case dismissed
due to lack
of evidence
Trustee converts
assets to cash
Necessary 
expenses and 
priority claims
are paid
Remaining cash
is divided 
among
unsecured 
creditors
FIGURE A.6 HOW ASSETS ARE DIVIDED IN BANKRUPTCY
This ﬁ gure shows that the creditor (the person owed money) selects the trustee (the person or organization that handles the sale of assets). 
Note that the process may be started by the debtor or the creditors.

A-17
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
 Chapter 13 permits individuals, including small-business owners, to pay 
back creditors over three to five years. Chapter 13 proceedings are less compli-
cated and less expensive than Chapter 7 proceedings. The debtor files a pro-
posed plan with the court for paying off debts. If the plan is approved, the 
debtor pays a court-appointed trustee in monthly installments as agreed on in 
the repayment plan. The trustee then pays each creditor.  
 Explain the role of deregulation as a tool to encourage competition.
DEREGULATION VERSUS REGULATION 
 Under Article I, Section 8, Clause 3 of the U.S. Constitution, the Commerce 
Clause gives Congress the right “to regulate commerce.” The debate concerning 
the degree of regulation, however, has been a source of disagreement for many 
years. At one time, the United States had laws and regulations covering almost 
every aspect of business. Some felt there were too many laws and regulations, 
costing the public too much money (see  Figure A.7 ). A movement toward 
deregulation took hold.   Deregulation   means that the government withdraws 
certain laws and regulations that seem to hinder competition. The most publi-
cized examples of deregulation first occurred in the airline and telecommuni-
cations industries. 
 Consumers clearly benefited from the Airline Deregulation Act of 1978 
that ended federal control of commercial airlines. Before passage of the act, 
the government restricted where airlines could land and fly. When the restric-
tions were lifted, airlines began competing for different routes and charging 
lower prices. The skies were also opened to new competitors, such as 
Southwest, to take advantage of new opportunities. Today some believe the 
airline industry could use more government intervention since passenger ser-
vices have decreased, delays and flight cancellations have increased, direct 
flights have decreased, and charges, such as bag fees, have become common. 
LO A–9
deregulation
Government withdrawal of 
certain laws and regulations 
that seem to hinder 
competition.
Quiznos, one of the 
nation’s largest 
sandwich shop chains, 
filed for bankruptcy 
protection in 2014. 
Thousands of Quiznos 
stores have closed in 
recent years, but there 
are still 2,000 stores 
open around the world. 
The company hopes 
restructuring will help 
keep them open. Do you 
know of other 
companies forced into 
bankruptcy?

BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
A-18
 Passage of the Telecommunications Act in 1996 brought similar deregula-
tion to telecommunications and gave consumers a flood of options in local 
telephone service markets. There was also a significant increase in retail video 
competition. In the past, most homes received only four TV channels (the 
three major networks—NBC, CBS, and ABC—and public broadcasting). Today 
most households receive a dozen or more over-the-air stations and hundreds 
more on cable, satellite, and the Internet. 
 Deregulation efforts have also been attempted in the electric power indus-
try. Twenty-four states have passed utility deregulation laws intended to 
increase competition and provide consumers with lower price options. 
California became the first state to deregulate electric power in the late 1990s 
and experienced significant problems, especially with large-scale blackouts 
(loss of power). Blackouts also occurred on the East Coast. Still, some utility 
deregulation programs have been somewhat successful.  33 Time will tell 
whether utility deregulation will survive and prosper across the United States. 
 The financial market crisis reopened the question of how much deregula-
tion is too much. Deregulation in the banking and investments industries had 
changed the nature of financial and mortgage markets and created huge prob-
lems. For example, the Federal Reserve System’s reluctance to toughen mortgage 
regulations and the government’s insistence on providing more home loans to 
high-risk borrowers contributed to the collapse in the real estate market. The 
financial crisis that followed led to passage of the most sweeping regulation of 
financial markets since the Great Depression. 
 In 2010, the U.S. Congress passed the Patient Protection and Affordable 
Care Act (PPACA), also known as Obamacare. The new law was implemented 
in 2013, and introduced a comprehensive system of mandated health insur-
ance for Americans not covered under an insurance plan. The law also provides 
for increased government regulation of the insurance industry. While the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act is to be phased in over a four-year 
 
Meat
As many as six inspections under 
Federal Meat Inspection Act can 
occur during processing
Use of growth-stimulating drugs
must end 2 weeks before slaughter
Must be fresh or frozen chopped
beef and not contain added water, 
binders, or extenders
No more than 5 parts of the
pesticide DDT per 1 million parts
meat 
No more than 30% fat content
 
Bun
Enriched bun must 
contain: 
1.8 mg thiamine
1.1 mg riboflavin
8–12 mg iron
Lettuce—must be fresh
Pickle—slice must be
1/8 to 3/4 inch thick
Tomato—must be mature 
but not overripe
Condiments
Ketchup—must be
Grade A Fancy and flow no 
more than 9 cm in 30 seconds 
at 69°F
Mayonnaise—may be seasoned 
or flavored
Cheese—must contain 50% 
milk fat, or be cured for at
least 60 days at 35°F
Vegetables
FIGURE A.7 HAMBURGER REGULATIONS
Does this amount of regulation seem just right, too little, or too much for you?

A-19
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
period, proposed adjustments to the legislation promise to keep the PPACA in 
the news. 34 
 Most agree some regulation of business seems necessary to ensure fair and 
honest dealings with the public. Corporate scandals in the early 2000s and the 
financial crisis led consumers and investors to call for increased government 
regulation in the financial sector. While the final implementation of the health 
care law is still evolving, it’s almost certain that businesses will need to deal 
with some form of health care regulation. With increasing global competition, 
U.S. business will need to work with government to create a competitive envi-
ronment that is fair and open and accepts responsibilities to all stakeholders. 
 
• What is the primary purpose of antitrust law?
 
• Describe the different bankruptcy provisions under Chapters 7, 11, and 13.
 
• What is deregulation? Give examples of successful and unsuccessful 
deregulation.
• What is the primary pu
test prep
urpose of antit
urp
summary
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.
 Define  business law, distinguish between statutory and common law, and 
explain the role of administrative agencies. 
 • 
 What is the difference between statutory law and common law?  
 Statutory law includes state and federal constitutions, legislative enact-
ments, treaties of the federal government, and ordinances—in short, writ-
ten law. Common law is the body of unwritten law that comes from 
decisions handed down by judges. 
 • 
 What are administrative agencies? 
 Administrative agencies are federal or state institutions and other govern-
ment organizations created by Congress or state legislatures with power to 
create rules and regulations within their area of authority. 
 Define  tort law and explain the role of product liability in tort law. 
 • 
 What is an intentional tort? 
 An intentional tort is a willful act that results in injury.  
 • 
 What is negligence? 
 Negligence, in tort law, is behavior that causes  unintentional harm or 
injury. Findings of negligence can lead to huge judgments against 
businesses. 
 Identify the purposes and conditions of patents, copyrights, and trademarks. 
 • 
 What are patents and copyrights? 
 A patent is a document that gives inventors exclusive rights to their inven-
tions for 20 years from the date they file the patent applications. A copyright 
protects a creator’s rights to materials such as books, articles, photos, paint-
ings, and cartoons.  
LO A–1
What is
LO A–2
What ar
LO A–3
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.

A-20
BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
 • 
 What is a trademark?  
 A trademark is a legally protected name, symbol, or design (or combina-
tion of these) that identifies the goods or services of one seller and distin-
guishes them from those of competitors.  
 Describe warranties and negotiable instruments as covered in the Uniform 
Commercial Code. 
 • 
 What does Article 2 of the UCC cover?  
 Article 2 contains laws regarding warranties. Express warranties are guar-
antees made by the seller, whereas implied warranties are guarantees 
imposed on the seller by law.  
 • 
 What does Article 3 of the UCC cover?  
 Article 3 covers negotiable instruments such as checks. A negotiable 
instrument must (1) be written and signed by the maker or drawer, (2) be 
made payable on demand or at a certain time, (3) be made payable to the 
bearer (the person holding the instrument) or to specific order, and (4) 
contain an unconditional promise to pay a specified amount of money. 
 List and describe the conditions necessary to make a legally enforceable 
contract, and describe the possible consequences if such a contract is violated.  
 • 
 What makes a contract enforceable under the law?  
 An enforceable contract must meet six conditions: (1) an offer must be 
made, (2) the offer must be voluntarily accepted, (3) both parties must 
give consideration, (4) both parties must be competent, (5) the contract 
must be legal, and (6) the contract must be in proper form.  
 • 
 What are the possible consequences if a contract is violated?  
 If a contract is violated, one of the following may be required: (1) specific 
performance, (2) payment of damages, or (3) discharge of obligation.  
 Summarize several laws that regulate competition and protect consumers in 
the United States. 
 • 
 What does the Sherman Act cover?  
 The Sherman Act forbids contracts, combinations, or conspiracies in 
restraint of trade and actual monopolies or attempts to monopolize any 
part of trade or commerce.  
 • 
 What does the Clayton Act add?  
 The Clayton Act prohibits exclusive dealing, tying contracts, interlocking 
directorates, and buying large amounts of stock in competing corporations.  
 • 
 Which act regulates false and deceptive advertising?  
 The Federal Trade Commission Act prohibits unfair methods of competi-
tion in commerce, including deceptive advertising.  
 • 
 Which act prohibits price discrimination and demands proportional promo-
tional allowances?  
 The Robinson-Patman Act applies to both sellers and buyers who know-
ingly induce or receive an unlawful discrimination in price.  
 Explain the role of tax laws in generating income for the government and as a 
method of discouraging or encouraging certain behaviors among taxpayers. 
 • 
 How does the government use taxes to encourage or discourage certain 
behavior among taxpayers?  
LO A–4
LO A–5
LO A–6
LO A–7

A-21
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
 If the government wishes to change citizens’ behavior, it can reduce 
their use of certain classes of products (cigarettes, liquor) by passing  sin 
taxes to raise their cost. In other situations, the government may offer 
tax credits to encourage businesses to hire new employees or purchase 
new equipment.  
 Distinguish among the various types of bankruptcy as outlined by the 
Bankruptcy Code. 
 • 
 What are the bankruptcy laws? 
 Chapter 7 calls for straight bankruptcy, in which all assets are divided among 
creditors after exemptions. Chapter 11 allows a firm to reorganize and con-
tinue operation after paying only a limited portion of its debts. Chapter 13 
allows individuals to pay their creditors over an extended period of time.  
 Explain the role of deregulation as a tool to encourage competition. 
 • 
 What are a few of the most publicized examples of deregulation?  
 Perhaps the most publicized examples of deregulation have been those in 
the airline and telecommunications industries. Some states have attempted 
deregulation of utilities.  
LO A–8
LO A–9
key terms
 administrative agencies  3 
 bankruptcy  15
 breach of contract  10
 business law  2 
 common law  3 
 consideration  9
 consumerism  12
 contract  9
 contract law  9
 copyright  7 
 damages 10
 deregulation  17
 express warranties  8
 implied warranties  8 
 involuntary 
bankruptcy  15
 judiciary  2
 negligence  4
 negotiable 
instruments  8 
 patent 6 
 precedent  3 
 product liability  5 
 statutory law  3
 strict product liability  5 
 taxes 14
  tort 4
 Uniform Commercial 
Code (UCC)  8 
 voluntary bankruptcy  15
critical thinking
 1. Supporters of tort reform say it’s unfair that plaintiffs (the parties bringing 
lawsuits) don’t have to pay damages to the defendants (the parties subject 
to the lawsuits) if they lose the case. Should plaintiffs pay damages if they 
lose a case? Why or why not?  
 2. Go to the website of the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (www.uspto.
gov) and view the information about obtaining a patent. See whether you 
can estimate how long the process will take and what your cost will be.  
 3. Call your local real estate board or visit a realtor and obtain a copy of a 
real estate contract. Read it carefully to see how it meets the six require-
ments stated in the chapter for a contract to be legal and binding.  
 4. Twenty-four states have implemented utility deregulation. Has your state 
or a neighboring state implemented utility deregulation? How does it seem 
to be working?  

A-22
BONUS CHAPTER A
Working within the Legal Environment
developing workplace skills
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  Do you think the laws that promote fair and competitive practices are effec-
tive in the United States? Why or why not? Provide evidence for your view.  
 2.  Increasing numbers of individuals file for bankruptcy each year. Do you 
think the U.S. Congress was correct in toughening the bankruptcy laws? 
 3.  Divide the class into teams to debate the question: Should government 
action to deal with deceptive business practices increase, or should we 
count on business to regulate itself to prevent deceptive practices? Which 
solution is better for society and business in the long run?  
 4.  Go online to find the answers to the following questions. Does your state 
have an income tax? What percentage of your income do you have to pay 
in state income tax? What about property taxes and sales taxes? How do 
these taxes in your area compare to those in three other states and com-
munities of your choice?  
 5.  In 2005, Congress passed bankruptcy reform legislation that makes it 
more difficult for individuals to file for bankruptcy under Chapter 7 and 
limits certain debts that cannot now be eliminated. Research the law 
online and offer reasons why you support or oppose it. You might want to 
go to  www.bankruptcyaction.com  for help.  
taking it to the net
 PURPOSE 
 You and several of your musician friends decide to start a band you want to 
call the Individual Mandates. You want to protect the band name and the 
new songs you’ve written so that other groups can’t use them. Go to the U.S. 
Patent and Trademark Ofﬁ ce’s website ( www.uspto.gov  ) to ﬁ nd out how to get 
the protection you seek.  
 EXERCISE 
 1. Do you need to apply for patents, copyrights, or trademarks, or some com-
bination of these to protect your band name and songs?  
 2. When can you use the trademark symbols TM and  ® ? 
 3. How can you secure a copyright for your songs?  
 4. What are the advantages of registering copyrights?  
 1.  Charles W. Calomiris and Allen H. Meltzer, “How Dodd-Frank 
Doubles Down on ‘Too Big to Fail,’”  The Wall Street Journal,  
February 12, 2014. 
 2. American Bar Association Market Research Department, 
www.americanbar.org, accessed May 2014. 
 3. Peter Loftus, “Merck to Settle Contraceptive Product Liability 
Lawsuits,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 7, 2014. 
 4. Henry C. Jackson, “House Votes to Increase Asbestos Claim 
Disclosure,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, November 13, 2013; 
and “W.R. Grace Emerges from Bankruptcy,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, February 3, 2014. 
1.
Charles W. Calomiris and Allen H
notes

A-23
Working within the Legal Environment
BONUS CHAPTER A
 5.  Mesothelioma Center,   www.asbestos.com , accessed May 2014. 
  6. James R. Hagerty and Dionne Searcy, “Long Time Seen for 
Lead-Paint Ruling,”  The Wall Street Journal, December 17, 
2013; and Daniel Fisher, “Slumlords Are the Big Winners 
in California Judge’s $1 Billion Lead-Paint Ruling,”  Forbes, 
December 17, 2013. 
  7. Joann Muller, “Toyota Halts Sales of Popular Models to Fix 
Seat Heaters,”   Forbes, January 30, 2014; and Ben Klayman, 
“Toyota Tells U.S. Agency Seat Issue Could Lead to Recall,” 
Chicago Tribune, January 30, 2014. 
  8. Shaya Tayefe Mohajir, “Toyota Settlement: Orange County 
to Receive $16 Million over Acceleration, Braking Issues,” 
Huffington Post, April 5, 2013; Jerry Hirsch, “NHTSA Opens 
Probe into Brake Failures of Toyota Camry Hybrid Sedan,” 
Los Angeles Times, January 27, 2014; and Chris Woodward 
and Kevin Johnson, “Toyota to Pay $1.2 Billion to Settle 
Criminal Probe,”  USA Today, March 20, 2014. 
  9. Jeff  Plungis, “GM Investigated over Ignition Recall Linked to 
13 Deaths,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, February 27, 2014. 
  10. Gary Strauss and Rebecca Castagna, “NYC Ban on Large 
Sugary Drinks Fizzles Again,”  USA Today, July 30, 2013. 
  11. Dimitra Kessenides, “The Case against Class Actions, Sort 
Of,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, January 19, 2014. 
  12. Christopher Hann, “Protect Your Brilliant Idea,”  Entrepreneur, 
June 2013; and United States Patent and Trademark Offi  ce, 
www.USPTO.gov, accessed May 2014. 
  13. Larry Gordon, “Surgeon and Inventor Gives $50 Million for 
USC Building,”  Los Angeles Times, January 13, 2014. 
  14. Laura Braverman, “Patent Law Changes Alter Entrepreneurs’ 
Planning,”  USA Today, September 19, 2013; “Can You Keep a 
Secret?”  The Economist, March 16, 2013; and Issie Lapowsky, 
“Patents: The Race Now Goes to the Swiftest,”  Inc., June 
2013. 
  15. Greg Stohr and Susan Decker, “The Supreme Court Takes on 
Patent Trolls,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, February 13, 2014. 
  16. Jeremy Quittner, “Is This the Beginning of the End for Patent 
Trolls? Let’s Hope So,”  Inc., January 2014; and Bill McClel-
lan, “A Patent Attorney Steals the Spotlight,”  St. Louis Post 
Dispatch, May 16, 2014. 
  17. Susan Decker, “Google’s Giant $1 Patent Victory,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, February 6, 2014. 
               18 . Rachel Abrams, “Market for Patents Was Softer in 2013, 
Firms Say,”  The New York Times, February 4, 2014. 
                19. Rachel Rothman, “Worth It or Not: Extended Warranties,” 
Good Housekeeping, February 1, 2014. 
        20. Eric Markowitz, “When Kickstarter Investors Want Their 
Money Back,”  Inc., January 2013. 
               21. Federal Trade Commission, www.ftc.gov/about-ftc/bureaus-
offi  ces, accessed May 2014. 
        22. Ben Metzabaugh, “First U.S. Airways Plane Flies with the 
New American Livery,”  USA Today, January 30, 2014; and 
Terry Maxon, “American Airlines, U.S. Airways Tie Their Route 
Networks Together,”  Dallas Morning News, February 5, 2014. 
  23. Sharon Gaudin, “Antitrust Deal Leaves Google Unscathed,” 
Computerworld, February 6, 2014. 
       24.  Cecilia Kang, “Comcast, Time Warner Cable Agree to Merge 
in $45 Billion Deal,”  The Washington Post, February 12, 2014. 
       25.  “Caveat Vendor: A New Regulator Takes an Expansive View 
of Its Remit,”  The Economist, February 1, 2014. 
       26.  Jay Miller, “Will Support Be on Display for Another Sin Tax—
One Supporting Arts in 2015?”  Crain’s Cleveland Business, 
February 18, 2014. 
  27.   B. Shane Scott, “Why Colorado and Washington Were Wise to 
Legalize Pot,”  Entrepreneur, January 20, 2014; and Brian Brem-
ner and Vincent Del Guidice, “Legal Weed’s Strange Economics 
in Colorado,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, January 9, 2014. 
       28 . Jolie Lee, “Colorado Makes $3.5 in Pot Revenue in January,” 
USA Today, March 11, 2014. 
  29. Tom Hals, “U.S. Business Bankruptcies Dropped by 24 Per-
cent in 2013,”  Reuters, January 6, 2014. 
  30. Matt Helms and Nathan Bomey, “Detroit’s Bankruptcy Blue-
print: Here’s What to Expect,”  USA Today, February 18, 2014. 
  31. Nolo,   www.nolo.com , accessed May 2014. 
  32 . Andy McDonald, “8 Companies You Didn’t Know Went Bank-
rupt,”  Huffington Post, July 11, 2013. 
  33. William Pentland, “After Decades of Doubt, Deregulation 
Delivers Lower Electricity Prices,”  Forbes, October 13, 2013. 
  34. “At the Obamacare Improv,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
February 14, 2014; Jennifer Rubin, “Obamacare Delay, Instant 
Ridicule,”  The Washington Post, February 11, 2014; and Noam 
M. Levey, “U.S. to Further Delay Employer Care Mandate,” 
Los Angeles Times, February 10, 2014.  
 photo credits 
Page A-1: Courtesy of Eve Wright,  photo by David 
Alvarez; p. A-3: © Image Source/Getty Images RF; 
p. A-7: © Ingvar Björk/Alamy; p. A-8: © Banana-
Stock/Masterfile RF; p. A-12: © Dallas Morning 
News/Newscom Images; p. A-17: Nicholas Eckhart/
Creative Commons, https://www.flickr.com/pho-
tos/fanofretail/8886078301.

2B
 B  Using Technology to 
Manage Information 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS BONUS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 B-1 
Outline the changing role of business technology. 
 B-2 
List the types of business information, identify the characteristics of 
useful information, and discuss how data are stored and analyzed. 
 B-3 
Compare the scope of the Internet, intranets, extranets, and virtual 
private networks and explain how broadband technology enabled the 
evolution to Web 2.0 and 3.0. 
 B-4 
Explain virtual networking and discuss the benefits and drawbacks for 
cloud computing. 
 B-5 
Evaluate the human resource, security, privacy, and stability issues 
affected by information technology.  
BONUS CHAPTER

1
T
1
B-1
Jack Dorsey
 • Co-founder of Twitter
 • Founder of Square
 • Programmer, pioneer
www.twitter.com
@jack
  echnology innovators strive to 
change the ways we communicate 
and manage information through 
hardware, software, and the 
Internet. Today’s tech experts often 
move from company to company, hoping 
that one of their new ventures turns into 
“the next big thing.” 
 Programmer and entrepreneur Jack 
Dorsey discovered a way to make “the 
next big thing”—twice. In 2006 he co-
founded the microblogging site Twitter. 
He also launched Square, a service that 
allows businesses to accept debit and 
credit card payments through mobile 
devices. These revolutionary enterprises 
made Dorsey a billionaire by the time he 
turned 35. 
 Before he took the tech world by 
storm, Dorsey was just a data-obsessed 
kid from St. Louis, Missouri. Using his 
father’s CB radio and a police scanner, he 
would spend hours tracking the city’s 
police and emergency personnel. Dorsey’s 
dad bought him a computer so he could 
record and analyze the movements fur-
ther. After learning a coding language, 
Dorsey constructed a program that graphi-
cally showed the movements of all the 
vehicles. Dorsey devoted his full attention 
to the hypnotizing program. “It’s a rush,” 
said Dorsey. “You forget to sleep. You for-
get to eat. I just felt so great, because, Oh, 
I can actually build something that enables 
me to see the city.” But Dorsey knew that 
an important element was missing from 
the program: people. “I could see ambu-
lances, I could see black cars, but I was 
missing the individuals,” said Dorsey. 
 Transferring the real world into a virtual 
landscape became Dorsey’s ultimate goal. 
He explored the idea further as a computer 
science and math student at the Missouri 
University of Science and Technology. 
Meanwhile, the car-tracking software he 
created as a kid got the attention of a bike-
messenger start-up in New York. Dorsey 
left the Midwest in his junior year to join 
the company while going to New York 
University. He eventually moved to San 
Francisco to start his own web-based taxi 
dispatching service, but the dot-com bust 
of the late-1990s ended that dream. 
 Dorsey spent the next few years cod-
ing at various companies. He also 
trained as a massage therapist, 
developed a secure ticketing system for 
the tourist ferry to Alcatraz Island, and 
even briefly studied fashion design. No 
matter what he did, though, Dorsey 
couldn’t stop thinking about his people-
free mapping program. By the mid-
2000s, his obsession with SMS text 
messaging and the growing influence of 
social media had finally given him a 
solution to his problem. One day when 
he was sitting with two friends, Dorsey 
asked, “What if we used SMS to report 
what you’re doing, and also to receive 
news of what everyone else is doing?” 
The trio soon set to work on a messag-
ing service that could keep people con-
nected through small bursts of 
information. They named the service 
Twitter after the way a cell phone 
vibrates when receiving a message. At 
first many people wondered why they 
would want to limit their communication 
to just 140 characters. As the years went 
by, however, hundreds of millions were 
drawn to Twitter’s ability to plug into an 
international conversation with other 
users, companies, and celebrities. 
 Despite the social network’s runaway 
success, Dorsey wasn’t finished disrupt-
ing things. His mobile-payment company 
Square recently struck a deal with 
Starbucks, which will soon use the ser-
vice in its more than 7,000 American 
stores. In fact, as developers like Jack 
Dorsey and tech companies continue to 
change the face of the digital landscape, 
it’s possible that even the most 
entrenched technologies could become 
obsolete in a few years. In this bonus 
chapter you’ll learn about how this 
ever-changing tech world 
affects business. 
 Sources: D. T. Max, “Two-Hit 
Wonder,”  The New Yorker,  
October 21, 2013; Seth 
Stevenson, “Simplicity 
and Order For All,”  The 
Wall Street Journal,  
October 26, 2012; Jake 
Tapper and Sherisse 
Pham, “Jack Dorsey on 
His Desire to Be Mayor 
of New York City, Steve 
Jobs, and Being a 
Bachelor,”  CNN, March 
21, 2013; Tim Bradshaw, 
“Jack Dorsey: Twitter 
Star Seeking Investors,” 
 Financial Times,  
October 4, 2013.  
 Getting to know  Jack Dorsey

B-2
 This company used social media to build its business. Its customers design new 
products, name them, and enter them in the company’s database. Customers 
may even make YouTube commercials that are featured on the company’s 
video wall. If other customers buy the new product, the creator gets a small 
store credit. Name that company. (Find the answer in the chapter.)  
 name that company 
 Outline the changing role of business technology.
THE ROLE OF INFORMATION TECHNOLOGY 
 The importance of business knowledge is nothing new—what is newer is the 
recognition of the need to manage it like any other asset. To manage knowledge, 
a company needs to share information efficiently throughout the organization 
and to implement systems for creating new knowledge. This need is constantly 
leading to new technologies that support the exchange of information among 
staff, suppliers, and customers. Studies have shown that data-driven decision 
making (i.e., collecting data, analyzing it, and using it to make crucial decisions, 
like whether to create a new product or service) lifts productivity 5 percent 
higher than decision making based on experience and intuition.  1   
 Evolution from Data Processing to Business Intelligence 
 To understand technology today, it is helpful to review how we got here. 
 
• 
In the 1970s, business technology was known as   data processing 
(DP)  . (Although many people use the words  data and  information
interchangeably, they mean different things.  Data are raw, unanalyzed, 
and unorganized facts and figures.  Information is processed and 
organized data that managers can use for decision making.) The 
primary purpose of data processing was to improve the flow of 
financial information. Data processing employees were support staff 
who rarely came in contact with customers. 
 
• 
In the 1980s, business technology became known as   information systems 
(IS)  when it moved out of the back room and into the center of the 
business. Its role changed from  supporting the business to  doing business. 
Customers began to interact with a wide array of technological tools, from 
automated teller machines (ATMs) to voice mail. As business increased its 
use of information systems, it became more dependent on them. 
 
• 
 Until the late 1980s, business technology was just an addition to the 
existing way of doing business. Keeping up-to-date was a matter of 
using new technology on old methods. But things started to change 
when businesses applied new technology to new methods. Business 
technology then became known as   information technology (IT),  and 
its role became to  change business by storing, retrieving, and sending 
information efficiently. 
 
• 
 In the 1990s, the introduction of the World Wide Web changed the way 
that people interacted with one another and information. Online 
services such as Google offered a new way of accessing information. In 
addition, bluetooth technology created conveniences by providing 
LO B–1
 data processing (DP)  
 Name for business technology 
in the 1970s; included 
technology that supported an 
existing business and was 
primarily used to improve the 
flow of financial information.  
 information systems (IS)  
 Technology that helps 
companies do business; 
includes such tools as 
automated teller machines 
(ATMs) and voice mail.  
 information technology (IT)  
 Technology used to store, 
retrieve, and send information 
efficiently.  

B-3
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
wireless communication systems to replace cables that 
typically connected devices, thus freeing people to access 
information wherever they wanted. 
 
• 
 In the 2000s, as this technology became more sophisticated, 
it became better known as   business intelligence (BI )  or  
 analytics   . BI refers to a variety of software applications 
used to analyze an organization’s raw data and derive useful 
insights from it. BI activities include data mining (which we 
discuss later in this chapter), online analytical processes, 
querying, and reporting.  2 Knowledge is information charged 
with enough intelligence to make it relevant and useful. 
Knowledge technology adds a layer of intelligence to filter 
appropriate information and deliver it when it is needed. 
 BI changes the traditional flow of information. Instead of an 
individual going to the database, the database comes to the individ-
ual. Managers can put a new employee at a workstation using BI train-
ing software and let the system take over everything from laying out a 
checklist of the tasks required on a shift to providing answers and insights 
that once would have taken up a supervisor’s time. 
 BI helps businesspeople focus on what’s important: deciding how to react 
to problems and opportunities. For example, imagine you’re a sales rep who 
just closed a big deal. While you celebrate your success, the finance depart-
ment is upset because your customer never pays on time, which costs the com-
pany a lot of money. BI could provide you that insight so that you could nego-
tiate different payment terms with the customer, thus connecting sales activity 
to financial requirements in a seamless process. 
 Technology changes react with one another to create more change. 
Maintaining the flexibility to successfully integrate these changes is crucial to 
business survival. Packard Bell and Kodak once dominated their industries, 
but failed to compete effectively and lost market share. In the case of Kodak, 
even though it invented the first digital camera, the company was concerned 
that digital photography would eat into its traditional film business. So Kodak 
decided to continue to focus on film rather than digital cameras, a decision 
that eventually led to the company’s bankruptcy.  3 Both Packard Bell and 
Kodak had size and money, but not flexibility. 
 Knowledge sharing is at the heart of keeping pace with change. Of course, 
it can be difficult to predict which new technologies will be successful. For a 
fun look at the worst tech predictions of all time, see  Figure B.1 . 
 Obviously, the role of the IT staff has changed as technology itself has 
improved and evolved. The chief information officer (CIO) has moved out of the 
back room and into the boardroom, and now spends less time worrying about 
keeping systems running and more time finding ways to boost business by 
applying technology to purchasing decisions, operational strategy, and market-
ing and sales. Today the role of the CIO is to help the business use technology to 
communicate better with others, while offering better service and lower costs.  4  
 How Information Technology Changes Business 
 Time and place have always been at the center of business. Customers once 
had to go to the business during certain hours to satisfy their needs. For exam-
ple, people went to the store to buy clothes. They went to the bank to arrange 
for a loan. Businesses decided when and where they did business with them. 
Today, IT allows businesses to deliver goods and services whenever and wher-
ever the customer wants them. You can order books and clothes, arrange a 
home mortgage loan, and buy music or a car online, anytime you choose. 
business intelligence (BI) 
or analytics
The use of data analytic tools 
to analyze an organization’s 
raw data and derive useful 
insights from it.
The Fire Phone, 
Amazon’s first entry into 
the smartphone market, 
offers a unique feature 
called Firefly. Imagine 
noticing your friend 
sporting a cool new 
headset. With just a 
click of a button, Firefly 
will identify the headset 
and show you all the 
purchasing info you 
need—including 
reviews, of course. 
Another click and it’s on 
the way to your home—
all before you’ve had a 
chance to reconsider 
whether you really need 
that headset. Can you 
see how Firefly helps 
buyers buy?

BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
B-4
 Consider how IT has changed the entertainment industry. Forty-five years 
ago, you had to go to a movie theater if you wanted to see a movie. Forty years 
ago, you could wait for it to be on television. Thirty years ago, you could wait 
for it to be on cable television. Twenty-five years ago, you could go to a video 
store and rent it. Now you can order video on demand by satellite, cable, or 
WiFi or download it to watch on your TV, computer, smartphone, iPad, or 
other device whenever and wherever you wish. 
 As IT broke time and location barriers, it created new organizations and 
services that are independent of location. For example, NASDAQ is an elec-
tronic stock exchange without trading floors where buyers and sellers make 
trades by computer. Smartphones, laptops, and tablets allow you access to 
people and information as if you were in the office. That independence brings 
work to people instead of people to work. 
 The way people do business drastically changes when companies increase 
their technological capabilities. Electronic communications can provide sub-
stantial time savings. E-mail and texting have put an end to tedious games of 
telephone tag and are far faster than paper-based correspondence. Internet 
and intranet communications using shared documents and other methods 
allow contributors to work on a common document without time-consuming 
meetings. See  Figure B.2  for other examples of how information technology is 
changing business. 
FIGURE B.1 THE WORST 
TECH PREDICTIONS OF 
ALL TIME
You can’t be right all the time. 
Here are a few quotes from 
technology leaders who got it 
wrong—way wrong.
“Inventions have long since reached their
limit, and I see no hope for further
developments.”
—Roman engineer Julius Sextus Frontinus, 10 A.D.
“Who the hell wants to
hear actors talk?”
—H. M. Warner,
Warner Brothers, 1927
“This ‘telephone’ has
too many shortcomings
to be seriously considered
as a means of communication.”
— Western Union internal memo, 1876
“Do not bother to
sell your gas shares.
The electric light has
no future.”
—Professor John Henry
Pepper, scientist, 1870s
“Television won’t be able to hold onto
any market it captures after the ﬁrst six
months. People will soon get tired of
staring at a plywood box every night.”
—Darryl Zanuck, Executive at
20th Century Fox, 1946
“I predict the Internet will soon go
spectacularly supernova and in 1996
catastrophically collapse.”
—Robert Metcalfe, founder of 3Com, 1995
“I think there is a world
market for maybe ﬁve
computers.”
—Thomas Watson,
president of IBM, 1943
“There is no reason anyone would want a computer
in their home.”
—Ken Olsen, founder of Digital Equipment Corporation, 1977
“Remote shopping,
while entirely feasible,
will ﬂop.”
—Time, 1966
Sources: David Zeiler, “The 10 Worst Tech Predictions of All Time,” Money Morning, www.moneymorning.com,
accessed June 2014; and Mark Spoonauer, “10 Worst Tech Predictions of All Time,” Labtop, August 7, 2013.

B-5
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
 List the types of business information, identify the characteristics of useful 
information, and discuss how data are stored and analyzed.
TYPES OF INFORMATION 
 Today, information flows into and through an organization from many differ-
ent directions. The types of information available to businesses today include:
 
• 
Business process information. This includes all transaction data 
gathered at the point of sale as well as information gained through 
operations like enterprise resource planning, supply chain management, 
and customer relationship management systems.  
 
• 
Physical-world observations. These result from the use of radio frequency 
identification (RFID) devices, miniature cameras, wireless access, 
global positioning systems, and sensor technology—all of which have to 
do with where people or items are located and what they are doing. 
LO B–2
FIGURE B.2 HOW 
INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY IS 
CHANGING BUSINESS
This table shows a few ways 
that information technology 
is changing businesses, their 
employees, suppliers, and 
customers.
 
• How has the role of information technology changed since the days 
when it was known as data processing?
 
• How has information technology changed the way we do business?
• How has the role of info
test prep
n technology ch
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Technology is breaking down corporate barriers, allowing functional departments or product
groups (including factory workers) to share critical information instantly.
Organization
Technology shrinks cycle times, reduces defects, and cuts waste. Service companies use
technology to streamline ordering and communication with suppliers and customers.
Operations
Technology eliminates layers of management and cuts the number of employees. Companies
use computers and telecommunication equipment to create “virtual ofﬁces” with employees in
various locations.
Staffing
Information technology cuts development cycles by feeding customer and marketing comments
to product development teams quickly so that they can revive products and target speciﬁc
customers.
New products
Customer service representatives can solve customers’ problems instantly by using company-
wide databases to complete tasks from changing addresses to adjusting bills. Information
gathered from customer service interactions can further strengthen customer relationships.
Customer relations
Since it is no longer necessary for customers to walk down the street to get to stores, online
businesses can attract customers to whom they wouldn’t otherwise have access.
New markets

BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
B-6
Computer chips cost pennies apiece and can be found in a 
wide range of products, including credit cards, printer ink 
cartridges, baseballs, tire valves, running shoes, vacuum 
cleaners, and even beer mugs. That’s right—Mitsubishi 
has produced a “smart” beer mug that senses when it is 
time for a refill and sends a signal to the bartender.  
 •   Biological data. Forms of identification include 
improved fingerprinting technology and biometric 
devices that scan retinas, recognize faces and voices, 
and analyze DNA. Although such information usually 
serves security purposes, it can also be used to 
customize products and services by tracking 
shoppers’ eyes in stores.  5 
 
• 
  Public data. Free and accessible, public data include the electronic traces 
we leave when posting to the Internet, sending e-mail, and using instant 
messaging. More and more, public data are being stored, shared, or sold.  
 
• 
 Data that indicate personal preferences or intentions. Online shoppers 
leave a trail of information that can reveal personal likes and dislikes.  
 The volume and complexity of all these data and information are staggering. 
Computing systems can search through text, numbers, audio, and video—and 
identify, categorize, and refine relevant opinions on any topic imaginable. 
 Managing Information 
 Even before the use of computers, managers had to sift through mountains of 
information to find what they needed to help them make decisions. Today, 
businesspeople are faced with  infoglut, an overabundance of data. Have you 
seen the classic episode of TV’s  I Love Lucy with Lucy and Ethel working in a 
factory on the candy line? Everything was going OK until the candy started 
coming too fast for them. Then mayhem broke loose. That’s what’s happening 
to many managers today, with information instead of candy. Too much infor-
mation can confuse issues rather than clarify them. 
 How can managers keep from getting buried in the infoglut? Stepping 
back to gain perspective is the key. It is important to identify the four or five 
key goals you wish to reach, and eliminate information not related to them. 
That can cut the information flow by half. As we were gathering information 
for this chapter, we collected hundreds of print journal articles and found 
thousands more online. Feeling the pressure of information overload, we iden-
tified the objectives we wanted the chapter to help you accomplish and elimi-
nated all the articles that didn’t address those objectives. As we further refined 
our objectives, the huge file gradually dropped to a manageable size. 
 Obviously, not all the information that ends up on your desk will be useful. 
The usefulness of management information depends on four characteristics:
 
1.  Quality. Quality means that the information is accurate and reliable. 
When the clerk at a fast-food restaurant enters your order into the cash 
register, it may be automatically fed to a computer that calculates the 
day’s sales and profits as soon as the store closes. The sales and expense 
data must be accurate, or the rest of the calculations will be wrong. 
Quality can be a real problem when a large number of calculations are 
based on questionable sales forecasts rather than actual sales.  
 
2.  Completeness. There must be enough information to allow you to make a 
decision, but not so much as to confuse the issue. Today, as we have 
noted, the problem is often too much information rather than too little.  
Advances in retinal 
scanning technology 
allow companies like 
Kimberly Clark to track 
how many seconds a 
person spends looking 
at different packaging 
designs for paper 
towels. Retinal scanning 
simulations aid 
marketers in 
determining what will 
attract customers the 
most. What other ways 
can you think of for 
businesses to make use 
of biometric technology?

B-7
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
 
3.  Timeliness. Information must reach managers quickly. E-mail and 
texting can let marketing, engineering, and production know about a 
problem with a product the same day the salesperson hears about it, 
so customer complaints can be handled instantly if possible, or 
certainly within a day. Product changes can be made on the spot using 
computer-integrated manufacturing, as discussed in Chapter 9.  
 
4.  Relevance. Different managers have different information needs. Since 
information systems often provide too much data, managers must 
learn which questions to ask to get the answers they seek.  
 Remember, though, that you can never read everything available. Set 
objectives for yourself, and do the best you can.  
 Organizing E-Mail and Electronic Files 
 Even though many businesspeople communicate through real-time technol-
ogy, such as instant messaging, videoconferencing, or Internet relay chats, 
e-mail is still a dominant method of communication, particularly when send-
ing attached electronic files. Today’s information management tools make it 
easier than ever for individuals and small businesses to organize information. 
Here are some tips for sorting e-mail and electronic files so that you can find 
what you need easily and quickly:  6 
 
1.  Use your e-mail program’s organizing tools. Most e-mail programs allow 
you to create folders for specific topics, projects, or clients. As you 
work through your in-box, move the messages you want to keep to the 
appropriate folders. Archive your old e-mail monthly.  Figure B.3  offers 
suggestions for ways to reduce the number of distractions caused by 
sending and receiving e-mail.  
 
2.  Use consistent file names. Save related materials across multiple 
software programs under the same name, and file them together. 
Perhaps you’ve been assigned to work with a team of other students to 
create a sample business plan for this course. You could save all files 
(whether e-mail, spreadsheets, PowerPoint, or Word documents) with 
a file name that begins “Business Plan Project” and store them in one 
folder in “My Documents.”  
 • 
Turn off all electronic alerts.
 • 
Limit the number of times you check e-mail to no more than a few times a day.
 • 
Delete garbage messages (i.e., spam, junk mail, etc.) first.
 • 
Reply immediately only to urgent alerts and messages that take less than 2 minutes 
to write a response and save the rest for later.
 • 
Set a specific time (i.e., at the end of the workday) to respond to remaining messages.
 • 
Limit use of the reply-all button.
 • 
Use an automatic out-of-office message such as “I will be offline until after 5 p.m. 
Please call me if you have an urgent message.” This will give you time to focus on 
work while letting others know not to expect a reply soon.
 • 
Don’t limit your communication to e-mail or texting. Communicating by phone or in 
person can sometimes save time and build relationships.
Sources:  Joanna Stern, “Cellphone Users Check Phones 150x/Day and Other Internet Fun Facts,” ABC News, 
www.abcnews.com, May 29, 2013; “Get More Done by Only Checking Email Twice a Day,” Time Management Ninga, 
www.timemanagementninja.com, accessed June 2014; and Bob Sullivan and Hugh Thomas, “Brain Interrupted,” 
The New York Times, May 3, 2013.
FIGURE B.3 TAMING 
ELECTRONIC 
COMMUNICATION 
INTERRUPTIONS
Typical offi  ce workers are 
interrupted every 11 minutes, 
and it takes them about 25 
minutes to return to the original 
task. Studies show that people 
don’t really multitask, but rather 
toggle rapidly between tasks, 
and there are costs involved in 
doing so. So much interruption 
undermines workers’ attention 
spans, increases stress, and 
decreases job satisfaction 
and creativity. Here are a few 
hints to reduce the number of 
electronic distractions.

BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
B-8
 
3.  Use online backup services. Backup, backup, backup—we’ve all heard 
how important it is to back up our files, but we often forget to follow 
through. Don’t risk an avoidable loss. As the cost of online storage 
continues to drop, backing up files to online services such as Dropbox 
can be a very cost-effective way to protect your files.  
 
4.  Use desktop search software. Finding files can be easier with a desktop 
search software program like Google Desktop or Windows Live Search. 
Google Desktop has an enterprise version for midsize companies. 
Larger companies also have access to Google but may need to pay for 
additional tech support.  
 Big Data and Data Analytics 
 Chances are that some program is keeping track of every click you make online, 
every movement you make as you shop in stores, every restaurant you go to for 
lunch—even what you eat. Collecting such data isn’t enough; you have to derive 
meaning from it. And when you collect more data, you need more storage. 
How do businesses store and organize a data glut so that it eventually becomes 
useful information? The answer for many companies is data analytics.   Data 
analytics   is the process of collecting, organizing, storing, and analyzing large 
sets of data (“big data”) in order to identify patterns and other information that 
is most useful to the business now and for making future decisions.  7  
 One part of data analytics is  data mining, a technique for looking for hid-
den patterns and previously unknown relationships among the data. The leg-
endary example is a study by a retail chain that revealed a spike in beer sales 
coinciding with a spike in diaper sales on weekdays between 5:00 and 7:00 p.m. 
The conclusion that thirsty dads pick up diapers on the way home from work 
prompted store managers to consider moving the diapers next to the beer to 
boost sales. The retailer never did pair the Heineken with the Huggies, but the 
story led to a new science of tracking what’s selling where and who’s buying it. 
For example, because data mining showed Walmart that U.S. consumers like 
to buy Pop-Tarts (particularly strawberry) just before a hurricane hits, the 
company makes sure they’re available in the right place at the right time. 
 The lesson here is that companies can gain a competitive advantage with 
high-quality data that support management decisions. Companies can better tar-
get their goods and service, attract new customers, and adjust prices.  Figure B.4  
offers a few examples of sectors that benefit from big data and data analytics. 
 Of course, when so much data and such powerful analytic tools are used 
by so many companies, mistakes are bound to happen. For example, an out-
of-print book was recently listed on Amazon as having 17 copies available: 15 
used from $35.54 and two new from $23,698,655.93 (plus $3.99 shipping). 
The astronomical price was the result of two sellers’ automated programs that 
each raised the book price based on the other’s price. While the only thing 
these two sellers lost in this automated bidding war was a book sale, another 
Amazon seller, a T-shirt company called Solid Gold Bomb, didn’t fare so well. 
 Solid Gold Bomb uses a program that takes libraries of words that are used 
in popular phrases, such as “Keep Calm and Carry On,” and automatically mixes 
them with other popular words. It then designs a T-shirt emblazoned with the 
new phrase (it doesn’t actually print the shirt until someone orders it) and auto-
matically posts it on Amazon. You can imagine the public relations nightmare 
when the shirt “Keep Calm and Rape a Lot” was posted for sale. Since it was all 
done automatically, no one at Solid Gold Bomb had actually seen the listing 
until the complaints poured in. The company’s reputation was damaged by a 
T-shirt that never actually existed. The lesson to be learned is that companies 
must make certain that the applications they use to analyze data are not flawed.  8 
 Data analytics  
 The process of collecting, 
organizing, storing, and 
analyzing large sets of data 
(“big data”) in order to identify 
patterns and other information 
that is most useful to the 
business now and for making 
future decisions.  

B-9
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
FIGURE B.4 EXAMPLES 
OF SECTORS THAT 
BENEFIT FROM BIG DATA 
AND DATA ANALYTICS
 Compare the scope of the Internet, intranets, extranets, and virtual private 
networks and explain how broadband technology enabled the evolution to 
Web 2.0 and 3.0.
THE HEART OF KNOWLEDGE 
MANAGEMENT: THE INTERNET 
 You already know the Internet is a network of computer networks that evolved 
from a one-to-one communications tool to a one-to-many broadcast commu-
nication tool. Today it is the  heart of knowledge management.  Internet users 
can point and click their way from site to site with complete freedom. But 
what if you don’t want just anybody to have access to your website? You might 
create an intranet, extranet, or virtual private network. 
Intranets 
An   intranet  is a companywide network, closed to public access, that 
uses Internet-type technology. To prevent unauthorized outsiders (particularly 
LO B–3
intranet
A companywide network, 
closed to public access, that 
uses Internet-type technology.
 
• What types of information are available to businesses today?
 
• What are the four characteristics of information that make it useful?
 
• What is data mining and how do businesses use it?
• What types of informa
test prep
ation are availa
atio
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
Online sellers can analyze cart data to change prices for people who leave items behind
in order to attract them back to the site and follow through on the purchase.
E-commerce
Stores such as Target can tell from a woman’s previous purchases that she’s pregnant. It can
then send her coupons and other promotions for baby products. It can analyze the data a little
more and promote similar products to the grandparents-to-be.
Retail
Beach house rental agents can target vacation promotions to people who buy
sunscreen frequently.
Real estate
Video cameras in light ﬁxtures collect and feed data to software that can spot long lines,
recognize license plates, and even identify suspicious activity, sending alerts to the appropriate
staff. Sensors in the ﬁxtures can pinpoint a gunshot, sense an earthquake or dangerous gas,
or spot a person stopping at various cars in a parking lot.
Law enforcement
Smartphones with motion sensors can detect early signs of Parkinson’s disease.
Health care
Sources: Adam Tanner, “How Much Did You Pay for That Lipstick?” Forbes, April 14, 2014; “Dynamic Data,” Fortune,
October 7, 2013; Diane Cardwell, “At Newark Airport the Lights Are On, and They’re Watching You,” The New York Times,
February 17, 2014; Philip Atiba Goff, “Can Big Data Transform Social Justice,” CNN, www.cnn.com, May 2, 2014; and
 “Tech,” The Kiplinger Letter, May 23, 2014.

BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
B-10
the competition) from accessing their sites, companies can construct a firewall 
between themselves and the outside world. A firewall can consist of hardware, 
software, or both. Firewalls allow only authorized users to access the intranet. 
Some companies use intranets only to publish employee phone lists and policy 
manuals, while others create interactive applications that fully exploit the tech-
nology’s possibilities. They allow employees to update their addresses or submit 
company forms such as supply requisitions, time sheets, or payroll forms online, 
eliminating paper handling and speeding decision making.  9  
Extranets 
 Many businesses choose to open their intranets to other, selected 
companies and even customers, through the use of extranets. An   extranet   is a 
semiprivate network that lets more than one company access the same informa-
tion or allows people on different servers to collaborate. Now almost all compa-
nies can use extranets for electronic data interchange (EDI) functions like shar-
ing data and processing orders, specifications, invoices, and payments. 
 Notice that we described an extranet as a semiprivate network. This 
means that outsiders cannot access the network easily, but since an extranet 
does use public lines, knowledgeable hackers can gain unauthorized access. 
Most companies want a network as private and secure as possible, so they use 
dedicated lines (lines reserved solely for the network). 
 Dedicated lines are expensive, however, and they limit extranet use only 
to computers directly linked to those lines. What if your company needs to 
link securely with another firm or an individual for just a short time? Installing 
dedicated lines in this case would be too expensive and time-consuming. 
Virtual private networks are a solution. 
Virtual Private Networks 
 A   virtual private network (VPN)   is a private data 
network that creates secure connections, or “tunnels,” over regular Internet 
lines. It gives users the same capabilities as an extranet at much lower cost by 
using shared public resources rather than private ones. Just as phone compa-
nies provide secure shared resources for voice messages, VPNs provide the 
same secure sharing of public resources for data. This allows for on-demand 
networking: An authorized user can join the network for any desired function 
at any time, for any length of time, while keeping the corporate network secure. 
You probably use a VPN when you log on to your school’s website. VPNs are 
commonplace in schools across the country that want to allow only affiliated 
students and faculty access to accounts like Blackboard (an online tool used to 
enhance teaching and learning, share course documentation and register for 
courses). If you don’t have access to a corporate VPN, you can easily set up an 
account at a public VPN provider like WiTopia, StrongVPN, or Hotspot Shield. 10 
 How do users log on to an organization’s network? They do so through an 
 enterprise portal that centralizes information and transactions and serves as an 
entry point to a variety of resources, such as e-mail, financial records, schedules, 
and employment and benefits files. Portals can even include streaming video of the 
company’s day care center. They are more than simply web pages with links. They 
identify users and allow them access to areas of the intranet according to their 
roles: customers, suppliers, employees, and so on. They make information available 
in one place so that users don’t have to deal with a dozen different web interfaces. 
 The challenge to the chief information officer (CIO) is to integrate 
resources, information, reports, and so on—all of which may be in a variety of 
places—so that they appear seamless to the user. 
 Broadband Technology 
 The more traffic on the Internet, the slower connections become. Tools to unlock 
these traffic jams include   broadband technology,  a continuous connection to 
the Internet that allows users to send and receive mammoth video, voice, and data 
extranet
A semiprivate network that 
uses Internet technology and 
allows more than one company 
to access the same information 
or allows people on different 
servers to collaborate.
virtual private network 
(VPN)
A private data network that 
creates secure connections, or 
“tunnels,” over regular Internet 
lines.
broadband technology
Technology that offers users a 
continuous connection to the 
Internet and allows them to 
send and receive mammoth 
files that include voice, video, 
and data much faster than ever 
before.

B-11
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
files faster than ever before. Even though broadband in the 
United States is dramatically faster than old dial-up connec-
tions, its average speed of 9.8 megabits per second is snail-like 
compared to the 22.1 and 13.3 averages of South Korea and 
Japan, respectively.  11 President Obama has made improving 
and expanding broadband technology a priority of his admin-
istration.  12 As people use more and more bandwidth to stream 
videos on services like Netflix or music on apps like Pandora, 
Internet service providers have begun to place caps on the 
amount of broadband consumers can use. Right now this isn’t 
a problem for most users since average usage is well below the 
current caps, but as more mobile devices and services come 
online, the more likely broadband will become a consumption-
based service (i.e., you pay for the broadband you use). 
Net Neutrality 
 Today there is plenty of debate about “net 
neutrality” and the Federal Communication Commission’s 
(FCC) role in regulating it.  13 One issue is defining what net 
neutrality even is. Some say it is treating all traffic on the 
Internet the same, whether it’s e-mail from your mom or web page traffic on 
Google. Others say net neutrality is treating all the same type of content the same 
way, whether it’s a video of frolicking kittens or a video of an ongoing surgery. 
Still others say net neutrality is nothing more than forbidding ISPs from block-
ing specific websites or services.  14 As video streaming services like Netflix and 
Amazon increasingly hog the lines, the debate over how the existing broadband 
should be distributed and who should regulate the distribution should go on for 
quite some time. What does this mean to you? If ISPs can charge for speed, deep-
pocketed companies like Netflix and Amazon can pay the fees (passing them on 
to you, the customer, of course); and low-budget and start-up sites are likely to 
lose customers unwilling to travel at slower speeds, reducing competition and 
innovation. It is also possible that ISPs can begin charging people to go to certain 
websites; the more money you’re willing to pay, the more sites you’ll have access 
to. Rich customers and poor customers will get two different webs. 15  
 Meanwhile new services like Google Fiber, a high-speed fiber network up 
to 100 times faster than average connections, give us hope that broader pipes 
may be on the horizon.  16 
Internet2 
 Even with broadband technology, scientists and other scholars 
who access, transmit, and manipulate complex mathematical models, data 
sets, and other digital elements need a faster solution. Their answer? Create a 
private Internet reserved for research purposes only.   Internet2  runs more 
than 22,000 times faster than today’s public infrastructure, and supports 
heavy-duty applications such as videoconferencing, collaborative research, 
distance education, digital libraries, and full-body simulations known as tele-
immersion.  17   A key element of Internet2 is a network called very-high-speed 
backbone network service (vBNS), which was set up in 1995 as a way to link 
government supercomputer centers and a select group of universities. The 
power of Internet2 makes it possible for a remote medical specialist to assist 
in a medical operation over the Internet without having the connection dete-
riorate as, say, home users watch House of Cards. 
 Internet2 became available to only a few select organizations in late 1997, 
but there are now more than 500 member universities, government agencies, 
corporations, and laboratories in over 100 countries.  18  Whereas the public 
Internet divides bandwidth equally among users (if there are 100 users, they 
each get to use 1 percent of the available bandwidth), Internet2 is more capi-
talistic. Users who are willing to pay more can use more bandwidth. 
Internet2
The private Internet system that 
links government 
supercomputer centers and a 
select group of universities; it 
runs more than 22,000 times 
faster than today’s public 
infrastructure and supports 
heavy-duty applications.
How the existing 
broadband should be 
distributed and who 
should regulate the 
distribution are major 
concerns today. Why 
does it matter how 
broadband is divided 
and distributed? Some 
people are concerned 
that ISPs will charge 
customers to go to 
certain websites: the 
more money you’re 
willing to pay, the more 
and better sites you’ll 
have access to. Rich 
customers and poor 
customers could get two 
different webs. Other 
people say that it’s only 
fair that whoever uses 
the most broadband 
should pay the most. 
What do you think?

BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
B-12
 Some fear that Internet2 may soon be overrun by undergrads engaged in 
video streaming and other resource-hogging pursuits. But the designers of 
Internet2 are thinking ahead. Not only do they expect Internet history to 
repeat itself; they are counting on it. They are planning to filter Internet2 tech-
nology out to the wider Internet community in such a way that there is plenty 
of room on the road for all of us—at a price, of course.  
 Social Media and Web 2.0 
 For businesses, social media provide an array of opportunities and challenges. 
They are an inexpensive way to gain exposure. Most important, they give busi-
nesses tools to collaborate with consumers on product development, service 
enhancement, and promotion. Until now, using social media has been optional 
for most businesses. However, many believe that businesses that do not have a 
social media presence will not survive. We’re not talking just about a Facebook 
page with an occasional update. Successful businesses will have a social media 
ecosystem and comprehensive strategy where every part of the organization 
collaborates and where customers are part of the conversation instantly. 
 Adam Kidron, co-founder of Manhattan hamburger restaurant 4food, 
says he wouldn’t be in business if it were not for social media. The restaurant 
is based on customization. Customers choose the type of bun (i.e., bagel, mul-
tigrain, brioche, pumpernickel, etc.), donut-shaped burger (i.e., beef, lamb, 
egg, turkey, salmon, veggie, sausage, etc.), “scoop” to fill the donut hole (i.e., 
avocado and chili mango, potato and chorizo hash, etc.), and then finally the 
cheese and condiments. Social media become part of the fundamental prod-
uct when a customer creates a new product and they use their own mobile 
device or one of the iPads placed around the restaurant to create a name for 
FIGURE B.5 TIPS FOR 
USING SOCIAL MEDIA 
TO PARTNER WITH 
CUSTOMERS
Using social media is about 
trusting your brand and identity 
to your customers, partners, 
and the world at large. The 
world is going to do things with 
your brand, whether or not you 
participate in the process. Here 
are some tips to keep in mind.
Sources: Stephanie Frasco, “100 Facts about Twitter, and Why They Matter to Your Business,” Social Media Today,
www.socialmediatoday.com, September 26, 2013; “Effective Social Media Strategies—Four Tips, Four Beneﬁts,”
Oracle, www.oracle.com, accessed June 2014; and Cindy King, “10 Social Media Tips to Enhance Your Marketing,”
Social Media Examiner, www.socialmediaexaminer.com, March 12, 2014.
• If your competition is using social media, you had better be using it too. More than
 50 percent of Twitter users say that they follow companies, brands, or products
 on social networks.
• Let the network mature and develop a comprehensive social media strategy.
 Don’t just set up a network and immediately begin exploiting it. For example, when the list of
 online supporters started to grow, the Obama fund-raisers wanted to immediately tap them for
 contributions. They were persuaded to wait until his e-mail team created an environment that
 let people know they were part of the campaign.
• Take customers’ comments seriously and establish two-way communication. People expect
 to be listened to. If you respond, they’ll keep coming back. Post questions and surveys.
• Ask your customers to answer common questions. Asking your most active fans and
 advocates to answer common questions is an effective way of acknowledging the value of
 loyal customers while adding credibility to information about your product or service.
• Be authentic. You have to talk directly with your customers, not just make an announcement
 as you would in a press release. Keep it authentic and you’ll build a personality around your
 company and your brand.
• Make your corporate site social. Provide social sharing opportunities by offering share
 buttons, tweet widgets, and Facebook like buttons to make it easier to share across social
 networks.

B-13
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
their burger and save it in 4food’s database. If they like the burger, they can 
post their creation directly to Twitter or Facebook. If they  really like the burger, 
they can create a YouTube commercial that is shown on the restaurant’s giant 
video wall along with Twitter feeds. If another customer buys the burger, the 
creator gets a 25-cent credit on his or her 4food account.  19 
 It is inevitable that at some point a company is going to suffer some nega-
tive social media buzz. For example, when McDonald’s introduced its new 
Happy Meal mascot, Happy, the company was hit with a storm of social media 
criticism about the weird-looking guy. What did McDonald’s do? Well, it just 
acknowledged it and tweeted back with an image of Happy reading all the nega-
tive comments on his laptop. After the image was sent to McDonald’s 2.5 million 
Twitter followers and 31 million Facebook friends, a social media monitoring 
tool showed that there were 190 positive comments to every one negative com-
ment about Happy. Soon there were no comments at all. The lesson to be learned 
here is that all businesses and organizations should monitor and respond quickly 
to social chatter. When bad buzz happens, a company should identify the source 
and nature of the buzz and develop a quick response to contain it.  20  
 Figure B.5  offers suggestions to consider when using social media in busi-
ness. The most important thing to remember is that the social media have to 
serve a unique purpose and not be just gimmicky add-ons. 
 Social networking is the best example of what tech publisher Tim O’Reilly 
dubbed “Web 2.0.”   Web 2.0   is the set of tools that allow people to build social 
and business connections, share information, and collaborate on projects 
online with user-generated sites like blogs, wikis, social networking sites and 
other online communities, and virtual worlds. (In this context,  Web 1.0 refers 
to corporate-generated sites like Google and Amazon.) YouTube and the 
microblogging site Twitter are among the largest Web 2.0 businesses, where 
ordinary people create all the content. 
 Web 3.0 
 Another generation of web innovators has expanded the utility of the web so 
that it enables an unprecedented level of intelligence in almost all applications. 
The objective is to pull data in real time, as needed. As you pull data, the system 
learns about you and your interests and pushes information it “thinks” you 
might like toward you.  21 Known as Web 3.0, this technology represents a shift in 
how people interact with the web, and vice versa.  22 Those who describe Web 1.0 
as the Static Web and Web 2.0 as the Social Web, describe Web 3.0 as the Personal 
Web. You could think of Web 3.0 as Web 2.0 with a brain.   Web 3.0   technology is 
made up of three basic components: semantic web, mobile web, and immersive 
Internet, which are all leading to what many call the Internet of Things.  23  
 Semantic Web  
The semantic web refers to powerful intelligent decision-
making applications.  24 For example, Amdocs is a company that interacts with 
customers on behalf of its clients in service industries such as telecom, health 
care, utilities, and insurance. This requires the Amdocs representatives to have 
real-time knowledge from internal sources—such as service disruptions and 
policy management—and external forces, such as social trends and competitive 
offers. Using Web 3.0 semantic technologies, Amdocs combines information 
from a variety of sources in real time to anticipate the reason for a customer’s 
call. Responses can be made 30 percent faster, which makes customers happy.  25 
 Mobile Web  
The mobile web allows users to use the web as they move 
from one device to another and one location to another. Location-based ser-
vices are tied to devices that can track a user’s whereabouts and suggest 
Web 2.0
The set of tools that allow 
people to build social and 
business connections, share 
information, and collaborate on 
projects online (including blogs, 
wikis, social networking sites 
and other online communities, 
and virtual worlds).
Web 3.0
A combination of technologies 
that adds intelligence and 
changes how people interact 
with the web, and vice versa 
(consists of the semantic web, 
mobile web, and immersive 
Internet).

BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
B-14
places, like restaurants or shops, in the area. You can 
get a message from Starbucks offering you a discount 
on a latte as you walk by the door. If you do drop in the 
store, you can use an app on your smartphone to pay 
for your drink. Because so many customers use multi-
ple devices throughout the day, it is important that a 
business uses the same design in apps for all types of 
computers, phones, and tablets. Then users will be able 
to rely on consistent, high-quality access no matter 
what type of device they’re using. Users can be frus-
trated or annoyed when they can’t find what they need 
or where they were earlier.  26  
 Immersive Internet  
The immersive Internet includes 
virtual worlds, augmented reality, and 3D environments. 
The use of virtual worlds, simulations, augmented reality, and multiplayer 
gaming technologies is expected to increase dramatically for learning in the 
next few years. For example, Intel’s Real Sense technology recognizes ges-
tures and facial features, which allows it to understand movement and emo-
tions. It recognizes foregrounds and backgrounds, which allows it to enhance 
interactive reality; and it can scan items in three dimensions. The use of ges-
tures, voice, and touch encourages children to become more active partici-
pants in learning games. In a game based on Scholastic’s Clifford the Big Red 
Dog, kids can use arm and hand motions, talk, and touch to move within the 
game and learn core literacy skills while playing. For us bigger kids, Intel is 
working with DreamWorks animation to bring users new experiences with 
characters and content. The Real Sense technology is also expected to bring 
3D scanning and printing to mainstream users, allowing them to easily and 
affordably create 3D items.  27  
 Internet of Things  
The Internet connects more people faster than ever 
before, and mobile devices let people be online all of the time. However, it’s 
not just phones and tablets that connect us to the Internet. There are so 
many other things that connect us that the term the “Internet of Things 
(IoT) has become popular in mainstream media. IoT refers to technology 
that enables ordinary objects to be connected to the Internet by using sen-
sors, cameras, software, databases, and massive data centers.  28 There are 
WiFi-based home automation networks that automatically cool or heat 
your home, turn the lights on and off, and change the controls on your 
garage doors, from your smartphone or computer. A technology called 
Echo can monitor your home’s water, gas, and electricity consumption and 
reward you for conserving. Wearables such as smart watches or conductive 
fibers woven into the fabric of your workout clothes can monitor your 
breathing and heart rate, count your steps, and send the information to 
your phone.  29  
 Soon every part of our lives will be quantifiable and we could be even 
more accountable for our decisions. For example, skipping the gym too many 
times may prompt your gym shoes to auto tweet to your health insurance net-
work, which may decide to increase your premiums. While this may seem 
futuristic, there are many companies today that get measurable results by ana-
lyzing data collected from networked things. For example, John Deere can do 
remote, wireless diagnostics of tractors and combines, saving farmers days of 
down time. Union Pacific reduced the number of train derailments caused by 
failed bearings by 75 percent using near-real-time analysis of data collected by 
sensors along the tracks.  30 
Wearable technology 
such as Google Glass, 
smart watches and 
other hands-free 
technology may change 
the way we 
communicate, and how 
we work and play. 
Some Google Glass 
Explorers (as the first 
adopters are called) 
have encountered 
negative reactions from 
other people. For 
example, some people 
want them to leave or 
take the glasses off, 
since the wearers could 
be taking photos or 
videos of them. What 
do you think the 
benefits and drawbacks 
of Google Glass are?

B-15
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
 Who’s the “Boss” of the Internet? 
 The U.S. Defense Department created the first computer network in the late 
1960s; and Tim Berners-Lee, a software engineer in a physics lab in Switzerland, 
invented the World Wide Web in 1990. 31 But who controls the Internet now? 
Well, the U.S. Commerce Department controls the root server for the domain 
name system, a digital directory that tells your computer where to go when 
you type in a web address, including “.gov” or “.edu.” This gives the U.S. hazy 
ownership rights to the Internet. The U.S. created the Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Numbers (ICANN) in 1998 to keep the management of 
networks in the hands of a private sector system of committees representing 
multiple stakeholders including companies, academics, and governments. 
 The U.S. government agreed to work with ICANN to give away all of its 
ownership of the Internet to the private sector by sometime in 2015. Some 
people believe that the U.S. giving up Internet ownership will give countries 
like Russia and China the ability to convince other countries to add regulatory 
power that would limit access to certain sites as they tried to do in 2013.  32 
Others believe the opposite is true, that giving up U.S. ownership weakens 
Russia’s and China’s argument that the Internet is controlled by one country.  33
To date, the U.S. has been successful in building a coalition of nations that 
agrees the Internet should be free of government regulations or restrictions on 
free speech.  34 What does this mean to you? It could mean that someday the 
Internet would be very different than it is today; you may not be free to go
where you want or say what you want on the Internet. On the other hand, the 
coalition may remain strong enough to keep the Internet open to everyone. 
We’ll have to wait and see. 
 
• How do computer networks change the way employees gather 
information?
 
• What is the Internet of Things?
• How do computer net
test prep
tworks change
two
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 
 Explain virtual networking and discuss the benefits and drawbacks for cloud 
computing.
VIRTUAL NETWORKING AND CLOUD COMPUTING 
 Computers can be networked a couple of ways: by hardware (i.e., cables, 
switches, etc.) or by software. For every computer a company has in its hardware- 
based network, an array of potential problems lurks in the shadows, from 
time-wasting crashes to crippling viruses. To remedy this, many companies 
have turned to   virtual networking,  a process that allows software-based net-
worked computers to run multiple operating systems and programs, and share 
storage. Virtual networking can be either external or internal.  External  net-
working treats the network as a single pool of resources that can all be accessed 
regardless of its physical components (i.e., networked computers share the 
resources of all the other computers on the network).  Internal networking 
LO B–4
 virtual networking  
 A process that allows software-
based networked computers to 
run multiple operating systems 
and programs, and share 
storage.  

BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
B-16
shares the resources of one central computer with all the 
networked computers. 35 You might think of external net-
working as being decentralized and internal networking 
as being centralized. 
 Companies that want to virtualize but not to store all 
those data in their own offices need only look to the sky 
for a solution called   cloud computing. This technology 
stores a company’s data and applications at offsite data 
centers, accessed over the Internet. 36 The data aren’t nec-
essarily stored in a single data center; portions could be in 
a series of centers anywhere in the world. The data are 
easily accessible from any computer with an Internet con-
nection. Vendors like Amazon, Google, Apple, and IBM 
offer cloud computing for a monthly pay-as-you-go fee.  37  
 There are three types of cloud computing: (1)  private
clouds (wholly behind a firewall),  public clouds (run on 
remote computers), and (3)  hybrid clouds (consist of a private 
cloud for essential tasks, but use a public cloud as needed).  38 
 The advantages of cloud computing include:  39 
 1.  Reduced software costs. Most software is free 
because the service provider supplies it. No more 
paying for upgrades or spending time installing all 
those patches since they’re installed in the cloud.  
 
2.  Improved security. Offsite centers provide full and regular backups of 
data, etc., which is something many small businesses fail to do regularly.  
 
3.  Flexible capacity. Sometimes businesses need large chunks of capacity 
during peak demand periods, but much less at other times. Cloud 
computing allows the company to rent only what it needs when it needs 
it. If its needs increase, it just rents more. This is especially important 
to growing businesses that don’t know what their needs will be.  
 
4.  Lower equipment costs. Since applications run in the cloud and not 
on your desk, you don’t need to buy expensive equipment.  
 
5.  Easier access. Since you access all of your documents in the cloud via 
the Internet, it is much easier to share documents and make sure that 
everyone is working with the latest version.  
 Of course, cloud computing has its disadvantages as well. Primarily these 
involve concerns about security, stability, and control of data.  40 (We’ll discuss 
these issues in more detail later in the chapter.) Popular cloud-storage service 
Dropbox suffered a 3-hour outage in early 2014 and another outage a few 
months later. Its 100 million customers were temporarily locked out of their 
files. 41 Dropbox was also accused of misleading users about the security and 
privacy of their files.  42 VMware provides a service that lets IT managers con-
trol the data on private and public clouds so that they can enjoy the cost sav-
ings and flexibility of cloud services, but still maintain control over security. 
 cloud computing  
 A form of virtualization in which 
a company’s data and 
applications are stored at offsite 
data centers that are accessed 
over the Internet (the cloud).  
Cloud computing 
changes the way people 
and businesses use 
technology. Since their 
data are stored in the 
cloud rather than locked 
on their computers, 
users are free to access 
the data from anywhere 
with any device rather 
than only from their own 
personal computers. 
How has cloud 
computing changed the 
way you access your 
programs and files?
 
• How do computer networks change the way employees manage 
information?
 
• What are the benefits and drawbacks of cloud computing?
• How do computer net
test prep
tworks change
two
tr
in
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

B-17
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
 Evaluate the human resource, security, privacy, and stability issues affected 
by information technology. 
EFFECTS OF INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY ON MANAGEMENT 
 The increase of information technology has affected management greatly and 
will continue to do so. Four major issues today are human resource changes, 
security threats, privacy concerns, and stability. 
 Human Resource Issues 
 We talked in Chapter 8 about tall versus flat organization structures. Computers 
often eliminate middle-management functions and thus flatten organization 
structures. 
 Human resource managers need to recruit employees who know how 
to use the new technology or train those who already work in the company. 
The speed at which technology has advanced has created a generational 
divide in terms of tech skills among different-aged workers. This creates 
greater challenges when it comes to recruitment and training. Companies 
often hire consultants instead of internal staff to address these concerns. 
Outsourcing technical training allows them to concentrate on their core 
businesses. 
 Perhaps the most revolutionary effect of computers and the Internet is 
telecommuting. Using computers linked to the company’s network, mobile 
employees can transmit their work to the office from anywhere as easily as 
they can walk to the boss’s office. Naturally, that decreases travel time and 
overall costs, and often increases productivity. Having fewer employees in the 
office also means that a company can get by with smaller, and therefore less 
expensive, office space than before. 
 Telecommuting enables men and women to work while staying home 
with small children or elders. It has also been a tremendous boon for workers 
with disabilities. Employees who can work after hours on their home comput-
ers, rather than staying late at the office, report lowered stress and improved 
morale. Telecommuting is most successful among people who are self-starters, 
who don’t have home distractions, and whose work doesn’t require face-to-
face interaction with co-workers. 
 Electronic communication can never replace face-to-face communication 
for creating enthusiasm and team spirit, however. Even as telecommuting has 
grown in popularity, some telecommuters report that a consistent diet of long-
distance work leaves them feeling dislocated or 
left out of the loop. Some miss the energy of social 
interaction or dislike the intrusion of work into 
what is normally a personal setting. Often people 
working from home don’t know when to turn the 
work off. Some companies are therefore using 
telecommuting only as a part-time alternative. In 
fact, industry now defines telecommuting as work-
ing at home a minimum of two days a week. 
 Figure B.6  illustrates how information tech-
nology changes the way managers and workers 
interact. For additional information about tele-
commuting and home-based workers, review 
Chapters 6 and 11. 
LO B–5
Telecommuting is one of 
the biggest human 
resource boons of the 
wireless age, but some 
employees are better 
suited to its demands 
than others. Do you 
have what it takes?

BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
B-18
 Security Issues 
 “Secure” information may be at risk from hackers who break into companies’ 
networks; from employees who steal it; or from companies’ own incompetence, 
poor gatekeeping, or sloppy procedures. Computer security is more complicated 
today than ever, as smartphones and the networks they run on, social networks 
and online games, and USB storage devices (flash drives and memory cards) 
become hackers’ targets. When information was processed on mainframes, the 
single data center was easier to control because there was limited access to it. 
Today, however, computers are accessible not only in all areas within the com-
pany but also in all areas of other companies with which the firm does business. 
Viruses 
 An ongoing security threat is the spread of computer viruses over 
the Internet. A   virus  is a piece of programming code inserted into other pro-
gramming that usually lies dormant until triggered to cause some unexpected 
and, for the victim, usually undesirable event. Users pick up viruses by 
unknowingly downloading infected programming over the Internet or sharing 
an infected USB storage device. Often the source of the infected file is unaware 
of the virus. Some viruses are playful messages (“Kilroy was here!”), but some 
can be quite harmful, erasing data or causing your hard drive to crash. 
Programs such as Norton AntiVirus inoculate your computer so that it doesn’t 
catch a known virus. But because new viruses are being developed constantly, 
antivirus programs may have only limited success. Thus it is important to 
keep your antivirus protection up-to-date and, more important, practice safe 
computing by not downloading files from unknown sources. 
Hackers 
 If a business stores customer data, it is subject to laws and regula-
tions regarding the proper protection of these data. Many smaller businesses 
that don’t have the manpower to handle security concerns might consider hir-
ing a managed security services provider (MSSP) like Alert Logic or Perimeter 
E-Security.  43 MSSPs can install and manage firewalls, virtual private net-
works, web filtering and antispam programs, security intelligence services, 
 virus  
 A piece of programming code 
inserted into other 
programming to cause some 
unexpected and, for the victim, 
usually undesirable event.  
FIGURE B.6 WHEN 
INFORMATION 
TECHNOLOGY ALTERS 
THE WORKPLACE
MANAGERS MUST
• Instill commitment in subordinates
 rather than rule by command and
 control.
• Become initiators, able to act without
 management direction.
• Become coaches, training workers in
 necessary job skills, making sure they
 have resources to accomplish objectives,
 and explaining links between a
 job and what happens elsewhere in
 the company.
• Become ﬁnancially literate so that
 they can understand the business
 implications of what they do and
 changes they suggest.
• Give greater authority to workers
 over scheduling, priority setting, and
 even compensation.
• Learn group interaction skills,
 including how to resolve disputes
 within their work group and how to
 work with other functions across
 the company.
• Use new information technologies to
 measure workers’ performance, possibly
 based on customer satisfaction or the
 accomplishment of speciﬁc objectives.
• Develop new math, technical, and
 analytical skills to use newly available
 information on their jobs.
WORKERS MUST

B-19
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
and wireless and mobile functions. Even with all of this security protection, it 
is still possible that hackers can get through. Perhaps you were one of the tens 
of millions who had to get new credit or debit cards and monitor their credit 
reports when hackers breached Target’s system and stole credit and debit card 
numbers. Target is now offering new credit cards with chip-and-pin technol-
ogy to prevent further fraud.  44 
 Some security experts advise businesses to assume that their systems 
have been breached and take the fight to the hackers. They recommend using 
methods that will frustrate the hackers and drive up their cost in order to deter 
them from future hacking. These methods include planting false information 
on their systems to mislead data thieves, and creating decoys that gather infor-
mation about intruders. CloudFare offers a service called Maze, which it 
describes as “a virtual labyrinth of gibberish and gobbledygook.”  45 Bottom 
line is that businesses that store data will need stronger and smarter tools to 
protect themselves from hackers. 
Phishing 
 Phishing is another type of online security threat. A scammer will 
embellish an e-mail message with a stolen logo for a well-recognized brand 
such as eBay, PayPal, or Citibank that makes the message look authentic. 
Phishing messages often state something like “Account activation required” or 
“Your account will be canceled if you do not verify.” When the victims click the 
link contained in the message, they are sent to a phony website that takes their 
personal information and uses it to commit fraud. The best way to avoid a 
phishing scam is never to access a website through a link in an e-mail mes-
sage. Instead, open a new window and go to the home page of the company’s 
website directly. 
 As more people log on to the Internet, the number of legal issues sur-
rounding its use will likely increase. Today, copyright and pornography laws 
are entering into the virtual world. Other legal questions relate to intellectual 
property and contract disputes, online sexual and racial harassment, and the 
use of electronic communication to promote crooked sales schemes. 
Cybercrimes cost the United States billions of dollars a year.  46 
Cyberterrorism 
 Until September 11, 2001, corporate and government secu-
rity officials worried mostly about online theft, credit card fraud, and hackers. 
Today, however, they are most concerned about  cyberterrorism. Terrorist hack-
ers could shut down the entire communications, money supply, electricity, and 
transportation systems. Recently hackers tried to get control of the CIA’s main 
computer, and there were a string of denial of service attacks on other govern-
ment computers. Although these sophisticated cyberattacks inconvenienced 
governmental agencies and had little impact on day-to-day public life, many 
are increasingly worried about an attack on the energy 
sector. In fact, the most sophisticated cyberthreat yet, 
called the Mask, was detected by an Internet security 
company in 2014 and has taken over thousands of IP 
addresses in dozens of countries. Its most likely target is 
oil and natural gas companies.  47 
 The Critical Infrastructure Protection Board, a part 
of the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, was created 
after September 11, 2001, to devise a plan for improving 
the security of the United States’ critical infrastructure. 
The agency needs the cooperation of businesses across 
the country, because 85 percent of the system it needs to 
protect is in the private sector. Companies have been 
reluctant to file reports about security breaches, however, 
Were you one of the 
tens of millions who had 
to get a new credit or 
debit card when 
hackers breached 
Target’s system and 
stole credit and debit 
card numbers? What 
can you do to protect 
yourself from loss when 
someone steals your 
vital information from a 
third party? How did the 
hacking affect Target’s 
relationship with you 
and other customers? 
How did it affect the 
company’s finances?

BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
B-20
for fear the public will lose faith in their ability to protect their 
assets. To encourage the sharing of such information, Congress 
passed the Critical Infrastructure Information Act of 2002, 
assuring businesses that any information they provide the 
Department of Homeland Security will remain secret through 
an exemption from the Freedom of Information Act. This is 
only a start on what is likely to be a long effort to improve secu-
rity technologies.  
 Privacy Issues 
 The increasing use of technology creates major concerns about 
privacy. In 2013, Edward Snowden leaked classified docu ments 
to the media regarding NSA’s tactics in tracking U.S. 
citizens, international governments, and companies. Snowden’s 
revelations changed the public conversation about privacy and 
security. 48 
 You don’t need to be the target of a criminal investigation 
to have your e-mail or phone calls snooped, and you’re being 
watched by many more entities than the government. Of course, 
we’ve already talked about how your online clicks are moni-
tored by private industry.  49 In addition, many U.S. companies 
scan employee e-mail regularly, and it’s legal. They look for trade secrets, non-
work-related traffic, harassing messages, and conflicts of interest. Any hacker 
with a desire to read your thoughts can also trap and read your messages, 
most of which are unencrypted. Some e-mail systems, such as Lotus Notes, 
can encrypt e-mail to keep corporate messages private. If you use browser-
based e-mail, you can obtain a certificate that has an encryption key from a 
company such as VeriSign. Legitimate users who want to decrypt your mail 
need to get an unlocking key. 
 The Internet presents increasing threats to your privacy, as more per-
sonal information is stored in computers and more people are able to access 
it, legally or not. Some websites allow people to search for vehicle ownership 
from a license number or to find other individuals’ real estate property 
records. One key question in the debate over protecting our privacy is “Isn’t 
this personal information already public anyway?” Civil libertarians have 
long fought to keep certain kinds of information available to the public. If 
access to such data is restricted on the Internet, wouldn’t we have to reevalu-
ate our policies on all public records? Privacy advocates don’t think so. After 
all, the difference is that the Internet makes obtaining personal information 
 too easy. Would your neighbors or friends even consider going to the appro-
priate local agency and sorting through public documents for hours to find 
your driving records or to see your divorce settlement? Probably not. But they 
might dig into your background if all it takes is a few clicks of a button. 
 Many web servers track the online movements of users willing to swap 
such personal details for free access to online information. Site owners can 
share your data with others without your permission. Websites also often send 
  cookies   to your computer that stay on your hard drive. These are pieces of 
information such as registration data (name and password) or user prefer-
ences that the browser sends back to the server whenever you return to that 
website. Some software, known as spyware, can be installed on your computer 
without your knowledge. The spyware can then infect your system with viruses 
and track your online behavior. 
 Do you mind someone watching over your shoulder while you’re on the 
web? Tim Berners-Lee, the researcher who invented the World Wide Web, led 
 cookies  
 Pieces of information, such as 
registration data or user 
preferences, sent by a website 
over the Internet to a web 
browser that the browser 
software is expected to save 
and send back to the server 
whenever the user returns to 
that website.  
How many of the online 
and mobile apps that 
you use track your 
whereabouts (both your 
physical location and 
where you go online) 
and share that 
information with third 
parties? Probably more 
than you think.

B-21
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
the development of a way to prevent you from receiving cookies without your 
permission. His Platform for Privacy Preferences, or P3, allows a website to 
automatically send information on its privacy policies.  50 With P3 you can set up 
your web browser to communicate only with those websites that meet certain 
criteria. You need to decide how much information about yourself you are will-
ing to give away. Remember, we are living in an information economy, and infor-
mation is a commodity—that is, an economic good with a measurable value.  51  
 Stability Issues 
 Although technology can provide significant increases in productivity and effi-
ciency, instability has a significant impact on business. Candy maker Hershey 
discovered the Halloween trick was on it one year when the company couldn’t 
get its treats to stores on time. Failure of its new $115 million computer sys-
tem disrupted shipments, and retailers were forced to order Halloween candy 
from other companies, leaving Hershey with a 12 percent decrease in sales 
that quarter. 
 What’s to blame? Experts say it is a combination of computer error; 
human error; malfunctioning software; and an overly complex marriage of 
software, hardware, and networking equipment. Some systems are launched 
too quickly to be bug-proof, and some executives don’t have the technical 
knowledge to challenge computer specialists. As critical as technology is to 
business, some of it is not built for rigorous engineering, and some people 
aren’t properly trained to use it. As things get more complex, we will probably 
be prone to more errors.  
 TECHNOLOGY AND YOU 
 If you’re beginning to think being computer illiterate may be occupational 
suicide, you’re getting the point. As information technology eliminates old 
jobs while creating new ones, it will be up to you to learn and maintain the 
skills you need to be certain you aren’t left behind. And, who knows, maybe 
you can find a job like Gabi Gregg did. MTV appreciated so much the trust 
and passion she shared with her many Twitter followers that it offered her a 
job. It made her MTV first “TJ” in order to help “amplify the voice of our audi-
ence as part of the global conversation.” She loves her new job, and the 
$100,000 a year salary isn’t bad either! 
 
• How has information technology changed the way people work?
 
• What management issues have been affected by the growth of informa-
tion technology?
• How has information t
test prep
technoloogy cha
tec
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

B-22
BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
  Outline the changing role of business technology. 
 • 
 What have been the various names and roles of business technology 
since 1970?  
 In the 1970s, business technology was called data processing (DP) and its 
role was to support existing business. In the 1980s, its name became infor-
mation systems (IS) and its role changed to doing business. In the 1990s, 
business technology became information technology (IT) and its role now 
is to change business. As technology became more sophisticated in the 
2000s, it became known as business intelligence (or analytics) and includes 
data mining, online analytical processes, querying, and reporting.  
 • 
 How does information technology change business?  
 Information technology has minimized the importance of time and place 
to businesses. Firms that are independent of time and location can deliver 
products and services whenever and wherever convenient for the cus-
tomer. See  Figure B.6  for examples of how information technology changes 
business.  
 • 
 What is business intelligence?  
 Business intelligence refers to a variety of software applications that ana-
lyze an organization’s raw data and take out useful insights from it.  
 List the types of business information, identify the characteristics of useful 
information, and discuss how data are stored and analyzed. 
 • 
 What types of information are available to businesses today?  
 The types of information available to businesses today include (1) busi-
ness process information, (2) physical-world observations, (3) biological 
data, (4) public data, and (5) data that indicate personal preferences or 
intentions.  
 • 
 How can you deal with information overload?  
 The most important step in dealing with information overload is to iden-
tify your four or five key goals. Eliminate information that will not help 
you meet them.  
 • 
 What makes information useful?  
 The usefulness of management information depends on four characteris-
tics: quality, completeness, timeliness, and relevance.  
 • 
 What is big data and data analytics?  
 Data analytics is the process of collecting, organizing, storing, and analyz-
ing large sets of data (“big data”) in order to identify patterns and other 
information that is most useful to the business now and for making future 
decisions. Data mining is the part of data analytics that involves looking 
for hidden patterns and previously unknown relationships among the data.  
 Compare the scope of the Internet, intranets, extranets, and virtual private 
networks and explain how broadband technology enabled the evolution to 
Web 2.0 and 3.0. 
 • 
 What information technology is available to help business manage information?  
 The heart of information technology involves the Internet, intranets, extranets, 
and virtual private networks. The Internet is a massive network of thousands 
of smaller networks open to everyone with a computer and a modem. 
Wh t h
LO B–1
LO B–2
LO B–3
 
 
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.
LO
summary

B-23
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
An intranet is a companywide network protected from unauthorized entry 
by outsiders. An extranet is a semiprivate network that allows more than 
one company to access the same information. A virtual private network is 
a private data network that creates secure connections, or “tunnels,” over 
regular Internet lines.  
 • 
 What is Web 2.0?  
 Web 2.0 is the set of tools that allows people to build social and business con-
nections, share information, and collaborate on projects online with user-
generated sites like blogs, wikis, social networking sites and other online 
communities, and virtual worlds. YouTube and Twitter are among the largest 
Web 2.0 businesses, where ordinary people create all the content.  
 • 
 What is Web 3.0?  
 Web 3.0 is technology that adds a level of intelligence to interacting with 
the Web. It could be described as the Personal Web, whereas Web 1.0 can 
be thought of as the Static Web and Web 2.0 as the Social Web. Web 3.0 is 
made up of three basic components: the semantic web, the mobile web, 
and the immersive Internet, which are all leading to what many call the 
Internet of Things.  
 • 
 What is the Internet of Things?  
 Internet of Things refers to technology that enables ordinary objects to be 
connected to the Internet by using sensors, cameras, software, databases, 
and massive data centers.  
 Explain virtual networking and discuss the benefits and drawbacks for cloud 
computing. 
 • 
 What is virtual networking?  
 Virtual networking is a process that allows software-based networked 
computers to run multiple operating systems and programs, and share 
storage. Virtual networking can be either external or internal.  External  net-
working treats the network as a single pool of resources that can all be 
accessed regardless of its physical components (i.e., networked computers 
share the resources of all the other computers on the network).  Internal 
networking shares the resources of one central computer with all the net-
worked computers  .
 • 
 What is cloud computing and what are its benefits and drawbacks?  
 Cloud computing is technology that stores a company’s data and applica-
tions at offsite data centers, accessed over the Internet. Its benefits are 
reduced software costs, improved security, flexible capacity, lower equip-
ment costs, and easier access. The drawbacks of cloud computing are con-
cerns about security, stability, and control of data.  
 Evaluate the human resource, security, privacy, and stability issues affected 
by information technology. 
 • 
 What effect has information technology had on business management?  
 Computers eliminate some middle management functions and thus flatten 
organization structures. Computers also allow employees to work from 
their own homes. On the negative side, computers sometimes allow infor-
mation to fall into the wrong hands. Concern for privacy is an issue 
affected by the vast store of information available on the Internet. Finding 
the balance between freedom to access private information and individuals’ 
right to maintain privacy will require continued debate.  
LO B–4
LO B–5

developing workplace skills
critical thinking
key terms
B-24
BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
 broadband technology  10 
 business intelligence (BI) 
or   analytics  3
 cloud computing  16
 cookies  20
 data analytics  8
 data processing (DP)  2
 extranet  10
 information systems 
(IS)  2
 information 
technology (IT)  2
 Internet2  11
 intranet  9
 virtual networking  15
 virtual private network 
(VPN)  10
 virus  18
 Web 2.0  13
 Web 3.0 13
 1. What information, either for your personal life or for your job, would you 
like to receive exactly when and where you need it?  
 2. What are the implications for world trade given the ability firms and gov-
ernment organizations now have to communicate across borders so 
easily?  
 3. How will the introduction and integration of more and more devices into 
the Internet of Things affect your life? Do you think they will widen or nar-
row the gap between the haves and have-nots (rich and poor people)?  
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.  Imagine you have $2,000 to buy or upgrade a computer system. Research 
hardware and software in computer magazines and on websites such as 
ZDNet ( www.zdnet.com ). Visit a computer store or shop online to find the 
best value. List what you would buy, and write a summary explaining your 
choices. 
 2.  Interview someone who bought a computer to use in his or her business. 
Ask why he or she bought that specific computer and how it is used. Ask 
about any problems that occurred during the purchase process or in 
installing and using the system. What would the buyer do differently next 
time? What software does he or she find especially useful?  
 3.  Describe one computer glitch you’ve experienced and what you did to 
resolve it. Discuss the consequences of the interruption (lost data, 
decreased productivity, increased stress). What steps have you taken to 
prevent a recurrence of the problem you faced?  
 4.  Choose a topic that interests you and use two search engines to find infor-
mation about it online. Narrow your search using the tips offered by the 
search engine. Did both search engines find the same websites? If not, 
how were their results different? Which engine found the most appropri-
ate information?  

B-25
Using Technology to Manage Information
BONUS CHAPTER B
 5.  How has technology changed your relationship with specific businesses 
or organizations such as your bank, your school, and your favorite places 
to shop? Has it strengthened or weakened your relationship? Has technol-
ogy affected your relationship with your family, friends, and community? 
Take a sheet of paper and write down how technology has helped build 
your business and personal relationships on one side. On the other side, 
list how technology has weakened those relationships. What can you and 
others do to use technology more effectively to reduce any negative 
impact?  
taking it to the net
 PURPOSE 
 To identify how the Internet of Things (IoT) uses connected devices to gather 
and analyze data to provide information useful to both businesses and 
individuals.  
 EXERCISE 
 Go to  http://postscapes.com/what-exactly-is-the-internet-of-things-infographic  
and scroll through the infographic “What Exactly Is the Internet of Things?”
 1. IoT is driven by a combination of what three components? Give three 
examples of each of them.  
 2. List three smart devices and applications created by the interaction of the 
three components of IoT identified in question 1.  
 3. How is IoT impacting business?  
notes
 1. John Naughton, “We’re All Being Mined for Data—but Who 
Are the Real Winners?”  The Guardian, June 7, 2014. 
 2.  Ryan Mulcahy, “Business Intelligence Deﬁ nition and Solu-
tions,”  CIO,  www.cio.com  , accessed June 2014. 
 3.  “Kodak Files for Bankruptcy, No More Kodak Moments,”  Busi-
ness Today,  www.businesstoday.com  , accessed June 2014. 
 4.  Ernest von Simson, “The New Role of the CIO,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, May 22, 2013; and Shane O’Neill, “Digital 
Business Skills: Most Wanted List,”  InformationWeek, May 1, 
2014. 
 5.  Scott Young, “Bringing Eye-Tracking to the Stores,”  Percep-
tion Research Services,  www.prservices.com  , accessed 
June 2014. 
 6.  Jilly Duff y, “Get Organized: How to Clean Out Your Inbox,” 
PCMagazine, September 23, 2013; and Jennifer Forker, “Tips 
to Organize Your Email and Other Digital Clutter,”  Huffington 
Post, March 5, 2013. 
 7.  Brady Dale, “In Brooklyn, a Grasp at Giving ‘Big Data’ Mean-
ing,”  CNN Money, April 28, 2014; Irving Wladawsky-Berger, 
“Data-Driven Decision Making: Promises and Limits,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, September 27, 2013; and Katherine 
Noyes, “IBM Stakes Its Claim in ‘Scale-Out’ Storage for Big 
Data,”  CNN Money, May 14, 2014. 
 8.  Joshua Klein, “When Big Data Goes Bad,”  CNN Money, No-
vember 5, 2013. 
 9.  Juan Carlos Perez, “Badgeville Aims to Make Child’s Play 
Out of Software Deployment,”  PC World, June 10, 2014. 
 10.  Roland Waddilove, “How to Set Up a VPN Service to Surf the 
Web Anonymously,”  PC World, May 19, 2014. 
 11.  Emil Protalinski, “Akamai: Average Internet Speed Grew 29% 
Year-over-Year to 3.6 Mbps,”  The Next Web,  www.tnw.com  , 
accessed June 2014. 
 12.  National Broadband Plan,   www.broadband.gov  , accessed 
June 2014. 
 13.  David Nicklaus, Todd Shields, and Chris Strohm, “FCC 
Advances Fast Lane Rules,”  St. Louis Post-Dispatch, May 16, 
2014. 
 14.  Nancy Scola, “Five Myths about Net Neutrality,”  The Wash-
ington Post, ” June 12, 2014. 
 15.  Betsy Issacson, “Web 3.0: What the Web Could Look Like 
without Net Neutrality,”  Huffington Post, January 25. 2014. 
 16.  Fiber Google,   www.ﬁ ber.google.com  , accessed June 2014. 
 17.  Jim Clayman, “Internet2 CIO to Discuss the Emerging Higher 
Education Community Cloud at Three Rivers Systems’ An-
nual Global Users Conference,”  St. Louis Post-Dispatch, 
June 8, 2014. 
 18.  Internet2,   www.internet2.edu  , accessed June 2014. 
 19.  4food,   www.4food.com  , accessed June 2014. 
 20.  Randy Hlavac, “ Because We’re Happy: Using Social Media 
to Turn Audiences Around,”  Forbes, June 3, 2014. 

B-26
BONUS CHAPTER B
Using Technology to Manage Information
 21.  Anjana Ahuja, “Thinking Machines Are Ripe for a World Take-
over,”  Financial Times, June 10, 2014. 
 22.  Trish Winters, “Web 3.0,”  Bitcoin Magazine,  
www.bitcoinmagazine.com  , April 25, 2014; and Harry Siegel, 
“Humanity, We Had a Good Run,”  The New York Daily News, 
June 9, 2014. 
 23.  Anthony Wing Cosner, “Famo.us Part I: New Concepts 
Will Increase the Flow of Highly Dynamic Web 3.0  Apps,” 
Forbes, May 27, 2014. 
 24.  World Wide Web Consortium,   www.w3c.org  , accessed June 2014. 
 25.  PR Newswire, “Amdocs Announces Self-Optimizing Networks 
Solution for Customer Experience-Driven Network Automa-
tion,”  Web 2.0 Journal,  web2.sys-con.com  , February 10, 2014. 
 26.  George Glover, “Why Responsive Web Design Is the 
Cornerstone to Any Mobile Strategy,”  Business 2 Community, 
 www.business2community.com  , June 2, 2014. 
 27.  “Intel Brings Immersive, Human Interaction to Devices in 
2014,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 6, 2014; Bob Tita, 
“How 3-D Printing Works,”  The Wall Street Journal, June 11, 
2013; and Mark Jenkins, “3-D Printing Can Make Everyone a 
Designer,”  Washington Post, March 15, 2013. 
 28.  Lori Kozlowski, “Everthing Is Connected: What “The ‘Internet 
of Things’ Means Now,”  Forbes, April 23, 2014; and Stuart 
Dredge, “10 Things We Learned from Pew Research’s 
Internet of Things Report,”  The Guardian, May 14, 2014. 
 29.  “An Uncommon Thread,”  The Economist, ” March 8., 2014. 
 30.  Chris Murphy, “Internet of Things: What’s Holding Us Back,” 
InformationWeek,  www.informationweek.com  , May 5, 2014. 
 31.  “Who Invented the Internet?”  History,   www.history.com  , 
December 18, 2013; and  World Wide Web Foundation, 
 www.webfoundation.org  , accessed June 2014. 
 32.  Todd Shields, “House Republicans Question U.S. Plan to 
Give Up Internet Control,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, April 2, 
2014; and Brendan Greeley, “The U.S. Gives Up Its Control of 
the Free Speech Internet,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
March 17, 2014. 
 33.  Emma Woollacott, “U.S. Government Cedes Control of the 
Internet,”  Forbes, March 15, 2014. 
 34.  Tom Risen, “The U.S. Gives the Internet to the World,”  U.S. 
News & World Report, March 17, 2014. 
 35.  Network Virtualization,  Webopedia,   www.webopedia.com  , ac-
cessed June 2014; and Kurt Marko, “Network Virtualization: The 
Final Piece of the Private Cloud,”  Forbes, March 25, 2014. 
 36.  Quentin Hardy, “Cloud Computing, in Translation,” 
The  New York Times, June 11, 2014. 
 37.  David Kramer, “A Layman’s Guide to Cloud Computing,” 
Huffington Post, June 12, 2014. 
 38.  Quentin Hardy, “The Era of Cloud Computing,”  The New York 
Times, June 11, 2014; and “Migration: A Planned, Structured 
Cloud Approach,”  CIO. ,  www.cio.com  , June 11, 2014. 
 39.  Joe McKendrick, “5 Beneﬁ ts of Cloud Computing You Aren’t 
Likely to See in a SalesBrochure,”  Forbes, July 12, 2013; Ian 
Stone, “Cloud Computing Enables Businesses to Discover 
Their Entrepreneurial Spirit,”  The Guardian, April 15, 2014; 
and “Cloud Computing Industry Analysis and Infographic: 
Companies Overspend on Infrastructure by 30% or More,” 
PRWeb,  www.prweb.com  , June 3, 2014. 
 40.  Archana Venkatraman, “Advantages and Disadvantages of 
Cloud Computing,”  ComputerWeekly,   www.computerweekly
.com  , accessed June 2014; and Mikal E. Belicove, “Will the 
Cloud Rain on My Parade?,”  Entrepreneur, August 2013. 
 41.  Zack Whittaker, “Dropbox Hit by Outage; File Sync Busted,” 
ZDNet,   www.zdnet.com  , March 14, 2014. 
 42.  Warwick Ashford, “Dropbox Can Be Hacked, Say Security 
Researchers,”  ComputerWeekly,  www.computerweekly.com  , 
August 29, 2014. 
 43.  C. J. Ariottta, “Top Emerging Managed Security Service 
Providers,”  MSPMentor,  www.mspmentor.com  , January 14, 
2013. 
 44.  Shan Li, “Target Hires New Security Chief from General 
Motors after Security Breach,”  Los Angeles Times, June 11, 2014. 
 45.  “Firewalls and Fireﬁ ghts,”  The Economist,  August 10, 2013. 
 46.  “SIRF’s Up,”  The Economist,  November 30, 2014. 
 47.  Christopher Harress, “Obama Says Cyberterrorism Is the 
Country’s Biggest Threat, U.S. Government Assembles 
‘Cyber Warriors,’”  International Business Times, February 18, 
2014. 
 48.  Daniel Terdiman, “The Most Anticipated SXSW Talk in Years, 
Snowden Fires Up Austin,”  CNet,  www.cnet.com  , 
March 10, 2014. 
 49.  Josh Gerstein and Stephanie Simon, “Who Watches the 
Watchers? Big Data Goes Unchecked,”  Politico,   www.politico
.com  , May 14, 2014. 
 50.  Platform for Privacy Preferences,   www.w3.org/P3P  , accessed 
June 2014. 
 51.  “Hiding from Big Data,”  The Economist,  June 7, 2014. 
photo credits
Page B-1: © Nancy Kaszerman/Zumapress.com/
Newscom; p. B-3: © Ted S. Warren/AP Images; 
p. B-6: © Anthony Lee/caia image/Alamy RF; 
p. B-11: © Martin McCarthy/iStock/360/Getty 
Images RF; p. B-14: © epa european pressphoto 
agency b.v./Alamy; p. B-16: © liewy/iStock/360/
Getty Images RF; p. B-17: © pixdeluxe/iStock/360/
Getty Images RF; p. B-19: © The Detroit Free 
Press/MCT/Getty Images; p. B-20: © Design Pics 
Inc./Alamy RF.


BONUS CHAPTER
C
 C  Managing Risk 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS BONUS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 C-1 
Identify the environmental changes that have made risk management 
important. 
 C-2 
Explain the four ways of managing risk, and distinguish between 
insurable and uninsurable risk. 
 C-3 
Define insurance policies, and explain the law of large numbers and 
the rule of indemnity. 
 C-4 
Discuss the various types of insurance businesses can buy to manage 
risk. 
 

C-1
Dan Amos
 • CEO of Aflac
 • Limits operations to two 
countries, U.S. and Japan
www.aflac.com
@AFLAC
 t may seem a bit strange that a multi-
national company would credit its 
existence to three brothers, an idea, 
and a duck; yet that’s how one of the 
giants of the insurance industry 
describes its company history. Sixty 
years ago, John, Paul, and Bill Amos 
did not claim to be insurance experts, 
but they knew people in the U.S. wanted 
financial protection against the risk of an 
accident or illness. The brothers created 
the American Family Life Assurance 
Company with a firm promise to be there 
when policyholders needed them. In 
1989, the company changed its name to 
the acronym Aflac. Dan Amos, son of co-
founder Paul Amos, has been CEO of 
Aflac for over a quarter of a century. 
 Today, Aflac is the largest provider of 
supplemental health insurance in the 
United States. Supplemental insurance 
helps pay for expenses that normal 
health insurance doesn’t cover when 
accidents or illness occur. Generally, 
benefits are paid directly to a person to 
help with out-of-pocket medical 
expenses or lost wages. CEO Amos sees 
growing opportunities for Aflac as the 
United States appears to be moving 
toward national health care under the 
Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act (also called Obamacare). Amos pre-
dicts the company will find more oppor-
tunities to grow, especially among 
smaller employers. Amos speculates the 
company may decide to offer major med-
ical insurance in the future. 
 Aflac decided to limit its operations to 
two countries, the United States and 
Japan. The company in fact has a long-
standing presence in Japan. John Amos, 
Aflac’s first CEO, visited the Osaka 
World’s Fair in 1970 and observed that 
fairgoers were all wearing surgical 
masks. He reasoned that if people would 
buy surgical masks to protect them-
selves from getting sick, they probably 
would buy health insurance to protect 
themselves financially if they did get sick. 
Today, approximately 75 percent of the 
company’s revenue is from Japan. Aflac 
is the number one life insurance com-
pany in terms of individual policies in 
Japan, and almost 90 percent of the 
companies listed on the Tokyo Stock 
Exchange offer Aflac products to 
employees. 
 Aflac was named one of the 100 best 
U.S. companies to work for. Amos says 
he owes a great deal of credit for this 
success to a duck. The Aflac Duck made 
his television debut in 2000 and has 
appeared in many commercials with a 
host of celebrities. He even appeared in 
a series of commercial spots where he 
fractured his beak and needed supple-
mental insurance. The message was, “If 
the Aflac duck can get hurt, anyone can 
get hurt. That’s why you need Aflac.” The 
duck has been enshrined on Madison 
Avenue’s Walk of Fame as one of 
America’s favorite advertising icons. 
 In this bonus chapter, you will learn 
something about risk management. The 
industry is so large and there is so much 
to learn that we only scratch the surface. 
Nonetheless, risk management 
has become such a huge 
part of every manager’s 
responsibilities that you 
need to know the basics 
of risk management 
before you become 
involved in any kind of 
business. The best 
advice we can offer to you 
is: Don’t duck this chapter. 
 Sources: Chuck Williams, “Sunday 
Interview with Aflac CEO Dan Amos,” 
Columbus Ledger Enquirer, March 1, 
2014; Tim Nudd, “ The Spot: Lame 
Duck,”  Ad Week, February 13, 
2013; and Aflac,  www.aflac.
com , accessed May 
2014. 
 Getting to know Dan Amos 
I

C-2
 This insurance company is a nonprofit organization owned by its policyholders. 
Any excess funds (over losses, expenses, and growth costs) go to the policy-
holders in the form of dividends or premium reductions. Name that company. 
(The answer is this chapter).  
  name that company 
 Identify the environmental changes that have made risk management 
important. 
UNDERSTANDING BUSINESS RISKS 
 No one knows better than Dan Amos at Aflac that managing risk is a challenge 
for businesses throughout the world. Almost every day we hear of a tornado, 
hurricane, earthquake, flood, fire, airplane crash, terrorist threat, or car acci-
dent that destroyed property or injured or killed someone. The Insurance 
Institute for Business & Home Safety says that one out of four small busi-
nesses is forced to permanently close after a disaster.  1 
 Hackers and viruses are an increasing threat to computers, and identity 
theft is commonplace. Theft and fraud can destroy a small business. Business 
lawsuits in recent years have covered everything from job-related accidents to 
product liability. 
 Such reports are so much a part of the news that we tend to accept these 
events as part of everyday life. But the losses of property, equipment, transpor-
tation, communications, security, energy, and other resources mean a great 
deal to the people and organizations injured by them. In some states, insur-
ance against such loss is not available or is too expensive for high-risk busi-
nesses. New legislation in some areas aims to lessen some of these risks so that 
companies can obtain insurance coverage again at a reasonable price. 
LO C–1
Edward Snowden, 
former technical 
assistant for the CIA, 
leaked classified 
documents to the media 
regarding NSA’s tactics 
in tracking U.S. citizens, 
international 
governments, and 
companies. What 
strategies can help firms 
and even governments 
protect themselves 
against this type of pure 
risk?

C-3
Managing Risk
BONUS CHAPTER C
 A recent report found that 80 percent of organizations either have or are 
in the process of developing an ERM (Enterprise Risk Management) pro-
gram.  2 An ERM program usually has a few well-defined goals, such as defin-
ing (1) which risks the program will manage; (2) what risk management pro-
cesses, technologies, and investments will be required; and (3) how risk 
management efforts will be coordinated across the firm.  3 
 How Rapid Change Affects Risk Management 
 Risk goes beyond the obvious dangers of fire, theft, or accident. It is inherent 
in every decision a manager makes, and the prudent company assesses its 
exposure in all of them. Risk managers are expanding their expertise into 
human resources, information technology, security, legal, site construction, 
and more. Change is occurring so fast that it is difficult to identify new risks 
until they are upon us. Who can evaluate the risks of buying or selling prod-
ucts online? How will currencies fluctuate in the next financial crisis, and how 
will their daily ups and downs affect the profits of global trade?  4 How will cli-
mate change affect farms, cattle, and the price of food?  5 What would happen 
to the economy if there were a new terrorist attack or a flu epidemic? What 
can we do to manage the risks of financial failure at home and social unrest 
abroad?  6 Let’s explore how companies go about managing risk. We’ll begin by 
going over a few key terms.  
 Explain the four ways of managing risk, and distinguish between insurable 
and uninsurable risk. 
MANAGING RISK 
 Risk  is the chance of loss, the degree of probability of loss, and the amount of 
possible loss. There are two different kinds of risk:
 
• 
 Speculative risk   can result in  either profit or loss. A firm takes on 
speculative risk by buying new machinery, acquiring more inventory 
or a new plant, and making other potentially profitable decisions in 
which the probability of loss may be relatively low and the amount of 
loss known. An entrepreneur’s chance to make a profit is a speculative 
risk. Banks that bought mortgage-backed securities were taking a 
speculative risk.
 
• 
 Pure risk   is the threat of loss with  no chance for profit, such as the 
threat of fire, accident, or theft. If such events occur, a company loses 
money, but if they don’t, the company gains nothing.
 The risk that most concerns businesspeople is pure risk. It threatens the 
very existence of some firms. Once they identify pure risks, firms have several 
options:
 
1. Reduce the risk.  
 
2. Avoid the risk.  
 
3. Self-insure against the risk.  
 
4. Buy insurance against the risk.  
 We’ll discuss the option of buying insurance in detail later in this chapter. 
First we’ll discuss each of the other alternatives for managing risk, which 
reduce the need for outside insurance. 
LO C–2
 risk  
 The chance of loss, the degree 
of probability of loss, and the 
amount of possible loss.  
pure risk
The threat of loss with no 
chance for profit.
speculative risk
A chance of either profit or loss.

BONUS CHAPTER C
Managing Risk
C-4
 Reducing Risk 
 A firm can reduce risk by establishing loss-prevention programs such as fire 
drills, health education, safety inspections, equipment maintenance, accident 
prevention programs, and so on. Many retail stores use mirrors, video cam-
eras, and other devices to prevent shoplifting. Water sprinklers and smoke 
detectors help minimize fire loss. Most industrial machines have safety devices 
to protect workers’ fingers, eyes, and so on. 
 Employees as well as managers can reduce risk. Truck drivers can wear 
seat belts to minimize injuries from accidents, operators of loud machinery 
can wear earplugs to reduce the chance of hearing loss, and those who lift 
heavy objects can wear back braces. The beginning of an effective risk man-
agement strategy is a good loss-prevention program.  7 However, high insur-
ance rates have forced some firms to go beyond merely preventing risks to 
avoiding them, in extreme cases by going out of business. Avoiding accidents 
is critical to the survival of the firm and its workers.  8 
 Avoiding Risk 
 We can’t avoid every risk. There is always the chance of fire, theft, accident, or 
injury. But some companies are avoiding risk by not accepting hazardous jobs 
and by outsourcing shipping and other functions. The threat of lawsuits has 
driven some drug companies to stop manufacturing vaccines, and some con-
sulting engineers refuse to work on hazardous sites. Some companies are losing 
outside members of their boards of directors who don’t have liability coverage 
protecting them from legal action against the firms they represent. Many com-
panies have cut back on their investments to avoid the risk of financial losses. 
   Self-Insurance 
  Self-insurance   is the practice of setting aside money to cover routine claims, 
and buying only “catastrophe” insurance policies to cover big losses. It is most 
appropriate when a firm has several widely distributed facilities. Firms with a 
single huge facility, in which a major fire or earthquake could destroy the 
entire operation, usually turn to insurance companies to cover the risk of loss. 
 self-insurance  
 The practice of setting aside 
money to cover routine claims 
and buying only “catastrophe” 
policies to cover big losses.  
This is what remained of 
a car repair shop after a 
tornado passed through 
Revere, Massachusetts, 
in 2014. Businesses 
cannot accurately 
estimate damage from 
natural disasters like 
tornadoes beforehand. 
That’s the reason for 
having insurance. Do you 
think this car repair shop’s  
insurance covered most 
of the damage caused 
by the storm?

C-5
Managing Risk
BONUS CHAPTER C
 One of the riskier self-insurance strategies is for a company to “go bare,” 
paying claims from its operating budget instead of from a special fund. The 
whole firm could go bankrupt over one claim if the damages are high enough. 
A less risky alternative is to form group-insurance pools that share similar risks.  
 Buying Insurance to Cover Risk 
 Although well-designed and enforced risk-prevention programs reduce the 
probability of claims, accidents do happen. Insurance is the armor individu-
als, businesses, and nonprofit organizations use to protect themselves from 
various financial risks. Together they spend about 10 percent of gross domes-
tic product (GDP) on insurance premiums. The federal government provides 
some insurance protection (see  Figure C.1 ), but individuals and businesses 
must cover most on their own. 
 To reduce the cost of insurance, some companies buy a business owner-
ship policy (BOP)—a package that includes property and liability insurance. 
We will continue our discussion of insurance by identifying the types of risks 
that are uninsurable and insurable.  
 What Risks Are Uninsurable? 
 Not all risks are insurable. An   uninsurable risk   is one that no insurance com-
pany will cover. Examples of things that you cannot insure include market 
risks (e.g., losses that occur because of price changes, style changes, or new 
products that make your product obsolete); political risks (e.g., losses from 
war or government restrictions on trade); some personal risks (such as loss of 
a job); and some risks of operation (e.g., strikes or inefficient machinery). 
 uninsurable risk  
 A risk that no insurance 
company will cover.  
FIGURE C.1 PUBLIC 
INSURANCE
State or federal government 
agencies that provide 
insurance protection.
Provides ﬁnancial beneﬁts, job counseling, and placement services for unemployed workers.
Unemployment Compensation
Provides retirement beneﬁts, life insurance, health insurance, and disability income insurance.
Social Security
Provides mortgage insurance to lenders to protect against default by home buyers.
Federal Housing Administration (FHA)
Provides compensation for damaged crops.
Federal Crop Insurance
Insures pension plans to prevent loss to employees if the company declares bankruptcy or
goes out of business.
Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation
Provides compensation for damage caused by ﬂooding and mudslides to properties located
in ﬂood-prone areas.
National Flood Insurance Association
Provides insurance to property owners in high-crime areas.
Federal Crime Insurance

BONUS CHAPTER C
Managing Risk
C-6
 What Risks Are Insurable? 
 An   insurable risk   is one the typical insurance company will cover, using the 
following guidelines:
 
1. The policyholder must have an   insurable interest   , which means the 
policyholder is the one at risk to suffer a loss. You cannot buy fire 
insurance on your neighbor’s house and collect if it burns down.
 
2. The loss must be measurable.  
 
3. The chance of loss must be measurable.  
 
4. The loss must be accidental.  
 
5. The insurance company’s risk should be dispersed; that is, spread 
among different geographical areas so a flood or other natural disaster 
in one area will not bankrupt the insurance company.  
 
6. The insurance company must be able to set standards for accepting 
the risk. 
 insurable risk  
 A risk that the typical insurance 
company will cover.  
 insurable interest  
 The possibility of the 
policyholder to suffer a loss.  
 
• Why are companies more aware now of the need to manage risk?
 
• What is the difference between pure risk and speculative risk?
 
• What are the four major options for handling risk?
 
• What are some examples of uninsurable risk?
• Why are companies m
test prep
more awaare now
mor
 Define insurance policies, and explain the law of large numbers and the rule 
of indemnity. 
 UNDERSTANDING INSURANCE POLICIES 
 An   insurance policy   is a written contract between the insured, whether an 
individual or organization, and an insurance company that promises to pay 
for all or part of a loss by the insured. A   premium   is the fee the insurance 
company charges, the cost of the policy to the insured. A   claim  is a state-
ment of loss that the insured sends to the insurance company to request 
payment. 
   Like all private businesses, insurance companies are designed to make a 
profit. They therefore gather data to determine the extent of various risks. 
What makes it possible for insurance companies to accept risk and profit is 
the law of large numbers. 
 The   law of large numbers   says that if a large number of people or orga-
nizations are exposed to the same risk, a predictable number of losses will 
occur during a given period of time. (For your information, the figures for 
homes are as follows: Over the course of a 30-year mortgage, a home has a 9 
percent chance of catching fire and a 26 percent chance of flooding.) Once the 
insurance company predicts the number of losses likely to occur, it can deter-
mine the appropriate premiums for each policy it issues against that loss. The 
premium will be high enough to cover expected losses and yet earn a profit for 
the firm and its stockholders. Today, many insurance companies are charging 
high premiums not for expected losses but for the costs they anticipate from 
the increasing number of court cases and high damage awards. 
LO C–3
 insurance policy  
 A written contract between the 
insured and an insurance 
company that promises to pay 
for all or part of a loss.  
premium
The fee charged by an 
insurance company for an 
insurance policy.
claim
A statement of loss that the 
insured sends to the insurance 
company to request payment.
 law of large numbers  
 Principle that if a large number 
of people are exposed to the 
same risk, a predictable 
number of losses will occur 
during a given period of time.  
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.

C-7
Managing Risk
BONUS CHAPTER C
 Rule of Indemnity 
 The   rule of indemnity   says an insured person or organization cannot collect 
more than the actual loss from an insurable risk. Nor can you buy two insurance 
policies, even from two insurance companies, and collect from both for the same 
loss. You cannot gain from risk management; you can only minimize losses. 
 Types of Insurance Companies 
 There are two major types of insurance companies. A   stock insurance company   
is owned by stockholders, just like any other investor-owned company. 
A   mutual insurance company   is an organization owned by its policyholders. 
It is a nonprofit organization, and any excess funds (over losses, expenses, and 
growth costs) go to the policyholders in the form of dividends or premium 
reductions. New York Life is the largest mutual insurance company in the U.S. 
 rule of indemnity  
 Rule saying that an insured 
person or organization cannot 
collect more than the actual 
loss from an insurable risk.  
 stock insurance company  
 A type of insurance company 
owned by stockholders.  
mutual insurance company
A type of insurance company 
owned by its policyholders.
Almost everyone who 
drives is exposed to the 
risk of having an 
accident at some point. 
Insurance companies 
use the law of large 
numbers to predict the 
losses such accidents 
will cause and set their 
policy premiums high 
enough to cover the 
losses while earning a 
profit. How much do you 
pay for your auto policy?
 
• What is the law of large numbers?
 
• What is the rule of indemnity?
• What is the law of larg
test prep
ge numbers?
ge n
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.
 Discuss the various types of insurance businesses can buy to manage risk. 
 INSURANCE COVERAGE FOR VARIOUS
KINDS OF RISK 
 There are many types of insurance to cover various losses: property and liabil-
ity insurance, health insurance, and life insurance. Property losses result from 
fires, accidents, theft, or other perils. Liability losses result from property 
LO C–4

BONUS CHAPTER C
Managing Risk
C-8
damage or injuries suffered by others for which the policyholder is held 
responsible.  Figure C.2  lists the types of insurance available. Let’s begin our 
exploration of insurance by looking at health insurance. 
FIGURE C.2 PRIVATE 
INSURANCE
Group life insurance  
Covers all the employees of a ﬁrm or members of a group.
Owner or key executive
insurance
Enables businesses of sole proprietors or partnerships to pay bills and
continue operating, saving jobs for the employees. Enables corporations
to hire and train or relocate another manager with no loss to the ﬁrm.
Retirement and pension
plans
Provides employees with supplemental retirement and
pension plans.
Credit life insurance  
Pays the amount due on a loan if the debtor dies.
Life Insurance
Fire  
Covers losses to buildings and their contents from ﬁre.
Automobile  
Covers property damage, bodily injury, collision, ﬁre, theft,
 
vandalism, and other related vehicle losses.
Homeowner’s  
Covers the home, other structures on the premises, home contents,
 
expenses if forced from the home because of an insured peril,
 
third-party liability, and medical payments to others.
Computer coverage  
Covers loss of equipment from ﬁre, theft, and sometimes spills, power
 
surges, and accidents.
Professional liability  
Protects from suits stemming from mistakes made or bad advice given
 
in a professional context.
Business interruption  
Provides compensation for loss due to ﬁre, theft, or similar disasters
 
that close a business. Covers lost income, continuing expenses, and
 
utility expenses.
Criminal loss protection  Protects from loss due to theft, burglary, or robbery.
Commercial credit 
Protects manufacturers and wholesalers from credit losses due to 
insurance 
insolvency or default.
Public liability insurance  Provides protection for businesses and individuals against losses
 
resulting from personal injuries or damage to the property of others
 
for which the insured is responsible.
Extended product 
Covers potentially toxic substances in products; environmental liability; 
liability insurance 
and, for corporations, director and ofﬁcer liability.
Fidelity bond 
Protects employers from employee dishonesty.
Surety bond  
Covers losses resulting from a second party’s failure to fulﬁll a contract.
Title insurance  
Protects buyers from losses resulting from a defect in title to property.
Cyber attack insurance  Helps protect companies from hackers.
Nonperformance loss 
Protects from failure of a contractor, supplier, or other person to fulﬁll
protection 
an obligation.
Property and Liability
Basic health insurance  Covers losses due to sickness or accidents.
Major medical insurance  Protects against catastrophic losses by covering expenses beyond the
 
limits of basic policies
Hospitalization insurance  Pays for most hospital expenses.
Surgical and medical
insurance
Health Insurance
Pays costs of surgery and doctor’s care while recuperating in a hospital.
Dental insurance  
Pays a percentage of dental expenses.
Disability income
insurance
Pays income while the insured is disabled as a result of
accident or illness.

C-9
Managing Risk
BONUS CHAPTER C
 Health Insurance 
 The United States is going through a period of major changes in health insur-
ance. Recent legislation, such as the Affordable Care Act (Obamacare), has the 
government much more involved in the health insurance process. Because it is 
so important to your future, you should keep up with these changes. We are 
likely to see many variations of health coverage in the future. Some companies 
have decided to self-insure against health care costs.  
 Health Savings Accounts 
  Health savings accounts (HSAs)   (formerly called medical savings accounts) 
are tax-deferred savings accounts linked to low-cost, high-deductible health 
insurance policies. The idea is for your employer (or you) to take the money 
currently spent on high-cost, low-deductible health insurance and deposit it 
into a health savings account. You would use the money only for needed health 
care services. At the end of the year, you get to keep the money you don’t spend 
in the account for future medical coverage. One major benefit to you is that 
the money grows tax-free until you take it out. There are likely to be other 
such plans proposed to compete with the comprehensive national health care 
system now being offered. 
 Disability Insurance 
 Disability insurance replaces part of your income—usually 50 to 70 percent—
if you become disabled and unable to work. You must usually be disabled 
for a certain period, such as 60 days, before you can begin collecting. 
Insurance experts recommend getting disability insurance if your employer 
does not offer it, because the chances of becoming disabled by a disease or 
accident when you are young are much higher than the chance of dying. The 
premiums for disability insurance vary according to age, occupation, and 
income. 
 health savings accounts 
(HSAs)  
 Tax-deferred savings accounts 
linked to low-cost, high-
deductible health insurance 
policies.  
An employee with a 
work-related illness or 
injury can get workers’ 
compensation benefits 
regardless of who was 
at fault. In exchange for 
these benefits, 
employees usually do 
not have the right to sue 
the employer for 
damages related to 
those injuries.

BONUS CHAPTER C
Managing Risk
C-10
 Workers’ Compensation 
 Workers’ compensation insurance guarantees payment of wages, medical 
care, and rehabilitation services, such as retraining, for employees injured on 
the job. Employers in every state are required to provide this insurance. It 
also pays benefits to the survivors of those who die as a result of work-related 
injuries. The cost of workers’ compensation varies by the company’s safety 
record, the size of its payroll, and the types of hazards its workers face. It 
costs more to insure a steelworker than an accountant because the risk of 
injury is greater.  
 Liability Insurance 
 Professional liability insurance covers people found liable for professional neg-
ligence. If a lawyer gives advice carelessly and the client loses money, the cli-
ent may sue the lawyer for an amount equal to that lost, and liability insur-
ance will cover the lawyer’s loss. Professional liability insurance is also known 
as  malpractice insurance. That term may bring doctors and dentists to mind, 
but many other professionals, including mortgage brokers and real estate 
appraisers, are buying professional liability insurance because of large law-
suits their colleagues have faced. 
 Product liability insurance covers liability arising out of products sold. 
A person injured by, say, a ladder or some other household good may sue the 
manufacturer for damages. Insurance usually covers such losses.  
 Life Insurance for Businesses 
 Regardless of how careful we are, we all face the prospect of death. To ensure that 
those left behind will be able to continue the business, entrepreneurs often buy 
life insurance that will pay partners and others what they need to keep the firm 
going.  9 The best kind of insurance to cover executives in the firm is term insur-
ance, but dozens of new policies with interesting features are now available.  10  
 Insurance Coverage for Home-Based Businesses 
 Homeowner’s policies usually don’t have adequate protection for a home-based 
business.  11 For example, they may have a limit for business equipment. For 
more coverage, you may need to add an endorsement, sometimes called a 
 rider, to your homeowner’s policy. If clients visit your office or if you receive 
deliveries regularly, you may need home-office insurance. It protects you from 
slip-and-fall lawsuits and other risks associated with visitors. For more elabo-
rate businesses, such as custom cabinetry shops and other types of manufac-
turing or inventory-keeping businesses, you may need a business-owner policy. 
Unless you are an expert on insurance, you will need to consult an insurance 
agent about the best insurance for your home-based business needs.  
 The Risk of Damaging the Environment 
 Risk management now goes far beyond the protection of individuals, businesses, 
and nonprofit organizations from known risks. It means the evaluation of 
worldwide risks with many unknowns, such as climate change.  12 It also means 
prioritizing these risks so that international funds can be spent where they can 
do the most good. No insurance company can protect humanity from all such 
risks. These risks are the concern of businesses and governments throughout 
the world, with the assistance of the international scientific community. They 
should also be your concern as you study risk management in all its 

C-11
Managing Risk
BONUS CHAPTER C
dimensions. For example, think of the risks that accompany the search for 
natural gas using fracking. Now that such a search has gone global, companies 
throughout the world are examining the risks involved.  13 That means more 
jobs and more interest in risk management in general.  
 Protection from Cyber Attacks 
 Often you will see articles in newspapers about a company being hacked by 
some outside (or inside) individuals or groups that steal your private informa-
tion, such as social security numbers, address, and so on. Cyber risk insurance 
can help a business prepare for the worst. For example, it will cover a com-
pany should its employees or customers decide to file against them in the 
event that their information is leaked.  14 
 
• Why should someone buy disability insurance?
 
• How many different kinds of private insurance can you name?
• Why should someone
test prep
buy disability
bu
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.
 Identify the environmental changes that have made risk management 
important.
 • 
 What changes have made risk management more important?  
 Hurricanes, floods, terrorist threats, identity theft, and an unstable econ-
omy have all contributed to additional risk and the need for more risk 
management.  
 Explain the four ways of managing risk, and distinguish between insurable 
and uninsurable risk.
 • 
 What are the four major ways of managing risk?  
 The major ways of managing risk are (1) reduce risk, (2) avoid risk, (3) 
self-insure, and (4) buy insurance.  
 • 
 What’s the difference between insurable and uninsurable risk?  
 Uninsurable risk is risk that no insurance company will cover. Examples 
of things that you cannot insure include market risks, political risks, some 
personal risks (such as loss of a job), and some risks of operation (e.g., 
strikes or inefficient machinery). 
 An insurable risk is one the typical insurance company will cover. Gener-
ally, insurance companies use the following guidelines when evaluating 
whether a risk is insurable: (1) the policyholder must have an insurable 
interest, (2) the amount of loss should be measurable, (3) the chance of 
loss should be measurable, (4) the loss should be accidental, (5) the risk 
should be dispersed, and (6) the insurance company can set standards for 
accepting risks.  
LO C–1
LO C–2
summary
n-
k
) 
Access your instructor's 
Connect course to check 
out LearnSmart or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com 
for help.

C-12
BONUS CHAPTER C
Managing Risk
 Define insurance policies, and explain the law of large numbers and the rule 
of indemnity.
 • 
 What is the rule of indemnity?  
 The rule of indemnity says an insured person or organization cannot col-
lect more than the actual loss from an insurable risk.  
 Discuss the various types of insurance businesses can buy to 
manage risk.
 • 
 What are the two kinds of insurance companies?  
 A stock insurance company is owned by stockholders, just like any other 
investor-owned company. A mutual insurance company is owned by its 
policyholders.  
 • 
 What kind of policies cover health risks?  
 The United States is going through a period where government involve-
ment with health care is being debated and tested in the courts. It is too 
early to tell what the final outcome will be. Health savings accounts (HSAs) 
enable you to pay for your doctors from a tax-deferred savings account 
and buy insurance for catastrophes.  
 • 
 What is workers’ compensation insurance?  
 Workers’ compensation insurance guarantees payment of wages, medical 
care, and rehabilitation services like retraining for employees injured on 
the job. Employers in every state are required to provide this insurance. 
Professional liability insurance covers people found liable for professional 
negligence. Product liability insurance provides coverage against liability 
arising out of products sold. Most businesses also have some kind of life 
insurance for their executives. Serving as a director on a corporate board 
carries with it great standing—and great risk of liability. If you conduct 
business from home, you should also have some form of home-office 
insurance to cover liabilities.  
 • 
 What are businesses doing to cover the risks of harming the environment?  
 Many businesses are doing what they can to minimize damage to the envi-
ronment. Such risks, however, are often beyond what businesses can man-
age. They are also the concern of governments around the world.  
LO C–3
LO C–4
key terms
 claim 6
 health savings accounts 
(HSAs)  9
 insurable interest  6
 insurable risk  6
 insurance policy  6
 law of large numbers  6
 mutual insurance 
company  7
 premium  6
 pure risk  3
 risk  3
 rule of indemnity  7
 self-insurance  4
 speculative risk  3
 stock insurance 
company  7
 uninsurable risk  5
 1. Are you self-insuring your residence and your assets? What have you done 
to reduce your risk? Have you done anything to avoid risk? How much 
would it cost to buy insurance for your dwelling and the contents?  
1
critical thinking

C-13
Managing Risk
BONUS CHAPTER C
 2. What risks do you take that insurance cannot cover?  
 3. What actions have you taken to avoid risk?  
 4. What can you do to lower your personal risk of loss from natural disasters 
such as floods, hurricanes, and tornadoes?  
developing workplace skills
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1.   Write a one-page paper about ways you could reduce risk in your life (such 
as not driving above the speed limit). Form small groups and share what 
you have written. Which of your classmates’ suggestions can you adopt in 
your life?  
 2.   You cannot insure yourself against speculative risk. However, you can 
minimize the risks you take when investing. Compare and contrast the 
risks of investing in stocks versus investing in bonds for the long term.  
 3.   Much of risk management consists of reducing risky behavior. What kinds 
of risky behavior have you observed among fellow college students? How 
can college students learn about and minimize these risks? Are they doing 
so? Discuss the merits of having a risk manager for education facilities.  
 4.   Form small groups and discuss liability insurance, automobile insurance, 
health insurance (i.e., Obamacare), renter’s insurance, life insurance, and 
disability insurance. Develop a list of questions to discuss openly in class 
so that everyone is more informed about these issues. Do your fellow stu-
dents understand all of these types of insurance?  
 5.   Write a two-page essay on the risks of a terrorist attack, a natural disaster, 
climate change, or a major health disaster. Which risk do you perceive as 
most likely? Most dangerous? Discuss what you could do to warn others of 
such risks and motivate them to do something about them.  
taking it to the net
 PURPOSE 
 To learn about insurance for your dwelling and property, and to examine the 
issue of liability.  
 EXERCISE 
 Go to the Information Insurance Institute’s website (  www.iii.org  ). Explore the 
site and then answer the following questions:
 1. What is homeowner’s insurance?  
 2. What is in a standard policy?  
 3. What different types of homeowner’s policies are there?  
 4. What is renter’s insurance?  
 5. Is an umbrella policy a wise purchase? Why or why not?  

C-14
BONUS CHAPTER C
Managing Risk
notes
 1. 
 Jeff rey McKinney, “Before Disaster Strikes,”  Black Enterprise, 
May 2013. 
  2. 
David Gould, “The Root of Risk,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
October 7–13, 2013. 
  3. 
A special advertisement in  Bloomberg Businessweek, March 
10, 2013. 
  4. 
Rachel Ensign and Ari I. Weinberg, “Now Let’s All Raise Our 
Glasses to Risk-Modeling and Optimization,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, March 4, 2013. 
   5. 
Evan Rothman, “Strategic Security, “  Bloomberg Business-
week,  February 4, 2013. 
  6. 
A special advertisement in  Bloomberg Businessweek, March 
4—10, 2013. 
   7.  
Ensign and Weinberg, “Now Let’s All Raise Our Glasses to 
Risk Modeling and Optimization.” 
 8.  
Gregory J. Millman and Samuel Rubenfeld, “For Corporate 
America, Risk Is Big Business,”  The Wall Street Journal, 
January 16, 2014. 
 9.  
Bill Harris, “Irreplaceable You,”  Inc., February 2013. 
   10. 
Charles Passy, “Outliving Expectations,”  Smart Money, 
March, 2012; and Russ Banham, “Protecting the Corporate 
Executive,”  The Wall Street Journal, May 21, 2013. 
   11. 
Lisa Gibbs, “Covered? Don’t Be So Sure,”  Money, April 2013. 
   12. 
David Deming, “Another Year of Global Cooling,”  The Wash-
ington Times,  January 17, 2014. 
   13. 
Brian Swint, “Shale Goes Global,”  Bloomberg Businessweek, 
November 18, 2013–January 2, 2014. 
   14. 
Lisa Gerstner, “Why Chip Cards Are a Safer Bet,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance,” April 2014. 
Page C-1: © Joe Paull/The Ledger-Enquirer/AP 
Images; p. C-2: © Barton Gellman/Getty Images; 
p. C-4: © Dominick Reuter/Reuters/Landov 
Images; p. C-7: © Yellow Dog Productions/Getty 
Images; p. C-9: © Ana Abejon/E+/Getty 
Images RF.
Page C-1: © Joe Paull/The Le
photo credits


2D
 D  Managing Personal 
Finances 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS BONUS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO  
 D-1 
Outline the six steps for controlling your assets. 
 D-2 
Explain how to build a financial base, including investing in real estate, 
saving money, and managing credit. 
 D-3 
Explain how buying the appropriate insurance can protect your 
financial base. 
 D-4 
Outline a strategy for retiring with enough money to last a lifetime.  
BONUS CHAPTER

1
I
1
D-1
Alexa von Tobel
 • Founder and CEO of LearnVest
 • Certified financial planner
 • Named "One of the Coolest 
Young Entrepreneurs" by Inc. 
magazine
www.learnvest.com
@alexavontobel
 t is important for all of us to keep our 
personal finances in order. The recent 
financial crisis proved to us just how 
volatile the economy can be. 
Many who did not plan responsibly 
during the good times found themselves 
in trouble when the economy turned 
sour. 
 Few people understand the impor-
tance of financial planning better than 
Alexa von Tobel, a certified financial 
planner (CFP) and founder and CEO of 
LearnVest, a personal financial planning 
website. A graduate of Harvard College, 
von Tobel worked at Morgan Stanley 
before becoming head of business 
development at former file sharing ser-
vice Drop.io. From there, she attended 
Harvard Business School until she took a 
leave of absence to start LearnVest with 
the hope of bringing financial planning to 
the masses. 
 Research showed that people in the 
U.S. are poor financial planners and poor 
savers. Only 30 percent had a long-term 
savings plan and only 10 percent had 
ever spoken to a financial planner. One 
obvious reason why consumers failed to 
contact a financial planner was the cost. 
Traditional financial plans typically are 
priced in the range of $3,000–$5,000, 
and often require minimum balances. 
Von Tobel believed the cost structure of 
the industry was way out of the reach of 
most consumers. LearnVest offers finan-
cial planning services with reasonable 
flat rates that vary with the customer’s 
financial needs. The company charges 
no percentage fees and does not require 
minimum balances. 
 The original mission of LearnVest was 
to help female consumers to plan for 
their financial future. Today, men make 
up approximately 25 percent of the site’s 
users. Von Tobel proposes a simple 
50/20/30 plan that anyone can follow to 
help build a firm financial future. The 
50/20/30 formula suggests that 50 per-
cent of your take-home pay goes to pay 
for essentials (rent/mortgage, utilities, 
groceries, transportation); 20 percent 
goes to your future (savings for emer-
gencies, debt repayment, retirement 
funds); and 30 percent goes to your life-
style (travel, shopping, restaurants, etc.). 
She warns younger people, particularly 
in their 20s and 30s, to not make big 
mistakes like accumulating too much 
credit card debt and paying bills late. It 
helps to remember her words, “Money is 
a tool that allows you to live your richest 
life. And remember, you can take out a 
loan for college, but you can’t take out a 
loan for retirement.” 
 Alexa von Tobel doesn’t suggest how 
you should live and what you should buy; 
she only wants to help you to think about 
why you are buying something and its 
financial ramifications. Her new book 
Financially Fearless sounds like a good 
investment. In this chapter we’ll take a 
look at all the ways that will help you 
keep your finances in order. 
 Sources: Claire Suddath, “Your Women’s Financial 
Planning: Alexa von Tobel’s Advice,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, December 19, 2013; Meghan 
Casserly, “LearnVest’s Planning $16.5 Million 
Cash Infusion,”  Forbes, June 26, 2013; 
Dan Schwabel, “Alexa von Tobel: 
How to Be the Master of Your 
Personal Future,”  Forbes, 
January 20, 2014; and Janet 
Novack and Samantha 
Sharf, “The Recession 
Generation,”  Forbes, 
August 18, 2014.  
 Getting to know Alexa von Tobel 

D-2
 One way to save money is to use your credit cards wisely. There are 
organizations that can help you compare credit cards to get the most 
out of them. What is the name of one of those organizations? (You can 
ﬁ nd the answer in this bonus chapter.)  
 name that company 
 Outline the six steps for controlling your assets. 
THE NEED FOR PERSONAL FINANCIAL PLANNING 
 The United States is largely a capitalist country. It follows, then, that the secret 
to success in such a country is to have capital, or money. With capital, you can 
take nice vacations, raise a family, invest in stocks and bonds, buy the goods 
and services you want, give generously to others, and retire with enough 
money to see you through. Money management, however, is not easy. You have 
to earn the money in the first place. Your chances of becoming wealthy are 
much greater if you choose to become an entrepreneur. That’s one of the rea-
sons why we have put so much emphasis on entrepreneurship throughout the 
text, including a whole chapter on the subject. Of course, there are risks in 
starting a business, but the best time to take risks is when you are young. 
Would it help you to be more motivated if you knew that there are over a thou-
sand billionaires in the world and they average some $4.5 billion in wealth? 
Not all billionaires are in the United States, For example, there are 55 billion-
aires in Africa.  1 
 After you earn so much money, you have to learn to spend it wisely, save 
some, and insure yourself against the risks of serious accidents, illness, or 
death. With a little bit of luck, you may be one of the millionaires or billion-
aires discussed in this book. 
 You’ll likely need some help. Recently high school seniors averaged a 
grade of less than 50 percent on questions having to do with financial con-
cepts. Another report found that college students are also poorly educated 
about financial matters such as IRAs and 401(k) plans.  2 Even people who are 
retired are finding that they don’t know enough about such plans. This bonus 
chapter will give you the basics so that you’ll be ahead of the game. Financial 
management is so important to your fiscal health that you may enjoy taking 
an entire class on it.  3 Check your school to see what is available. 
 Financial Planning Begins with Making Money 
 You already know that one of the secrets to finding a good-paying job is 
having a good education. That is still true, although what you major in does 
matter. 4 Throughout history, an investment in business education has paid 
off regardless of the state of the economy or political ups and downs. 
Benjamin Franklin said, “If a man empties his purse into his head, no one 
can take it away from him. An investment in knowledge always pays the 
best interest.” Education has become even more important since we entered 
the information age. One way to start to become a millionaire, therefore, is 
to finish college. Make sure you investigate all the financial help available 
to you. 
LO D–1

D-3
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
 Making money is one thing; saving, investing, and spending it wisely is 
something else. Following the advice in the next section will help you become 
one of those with enough to live in comfort throughout your life. 5 
 Six Steps to Controlling Your Assets 
 The only way to save enough money to do all the things you want to do in life 
is to spend less than you make. Although you may find it difficult to save today, 
it is not only possible but also imperative if you want to accumulate enough to 
be financially secure. Fewer than 1 in 10 U.S. adults has accumulated enough 
money by retirement age to live comfortably, and 1 in 4 U.S. households does 
not have a retirement account at all.  6 Don’t become one of them. The following 
are six steps you can take today to get control of your finances.  
 Step 1: Take an Inventory of Your Financial Assets  
To take inventory, you 
need to develop a balance sheet for yourself, like the one in Chapter 17. Remember, 
a balance sheet starts with the fundamental accounting equation: Assets  =
Liabilities  + Owners’ equity. List your tangible assets (such as big-screen TV, 
DVR player, iPad, computer, cell phone, bicycle, car, jewelry, clothes, and sav-
ings account) on one side, and your liabilities (including mortgage, credit card 
debt, and auto and education loans) on the other. 
 Assign a dollar figure to each of your assets, based on its current value, 
not what you originally paid for it. If you have debts, subtract them from 
your assets to get your net worth. If you have no debts, your assets equal 
your net worth. If your liabilities exceed the value of your assets, you are not 
on the path to financial security. You may need more financial discipline in 
your life. 
 Let’s also create an income statement for you. At the top of the statement 
is revenue (all the money you take in from your job, investments, and so on). 
Subtract all your costs and expenses (rent or mortgage, credit card and other 
loan payments, utilities, commuting costs, and so on) to get your net income 
or profit. Software programs like Quicken and websites like  Dinkytown.net 
have a variety of tools that can easily help you with these calculations. 
 Now is also an excellent time to think about how much money you will 
need to accomplish all your goals. The more clearly you can visualize your 
goals, the easier it is to begin saving for 
them. 
 Step 2: Keep Track of All Your 
Expenses 
Do you occasionally find 
yourself running out of cash? If you expe-
rience a cash flow problem, the only 
way to trace where the money is 
going is to keep track of every 
cent you spend. Keeping records 
of your expenses can be tedious, 
but it’s a necessary step if you 
want 
to 
learn 
discipline. 
Actually, it could turn out to be 
enjoyable because it gives you 
such a feeling of control. 
 Here’s what to do: List 
everything you spend as 
you go through the day. 
That list is your journal. 
It might take a little time 
to balance your income 
with your expenses to 
make sure you have 
money left to save and 
invest, but the effort is 
worth it. People who 
don’t take this step can 
reach retirement 
without enough funds to 
live on. How could you 
cut back your expenses?

BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
D-4
At the end of the week, transfer your journal entries into a record book or 
computerized accounting program. 
 Develop spending categories (accounts) to make your task easier and 
more informative. You can have a category called “Food” for all food you 
bought from the grocery or convenience store during the week. You might 
want a separate account for meals eaten away from home, because you can 
dramatically cut these costs if you make your meals at home. 
 Other accounts could include rent, insurance, automobile repairs and 
gasoline, clothing, utilities, toiletries, entertainment, and donations to charity. 
Most people also like to have a category called “Miscellaneous” for impulse 
items like latte and candy. You won’t believe how much you fritter away on 
miscellaneous items unless you keep a  detailed record for at least a couple of 
months. 
 Develop your accounts on the basis of what’s most important to you or 
where you spend the most money. Once you have recorded all your expenses 
for a few months, you’ll easily see where you are spending too much and what 
you have to do to save more. A venti mocha frappuccino at a coffee specialty 
shop may cost about $4.25. If you cut back from five to one a week, you’ll save 
$17 a week, or over $850 a year. Over 10 years, that could mean an extra 
$12,000 for retirement, if you invest the money wisely.  
 Step 3: Prepare a Budget  
Once you know your financial situation and your 
sources of revenue and expenses, you’re ready to make a personal budget. 
Remember, budgets are financial plans. A household budget includes mort-
gage or rent, utilities, food, clothing, vehicles, furniture, life insurance, car 
insurance, medical care, and taxes. 
 You’ll need to choose how much to allow for such expenses as eating out, 
entertainment, cell phone use, and so on. Keep in mind that what you spend 
now reduces what you can save later. Spending $5 or more a day for cigarettes 
or coffee adds up to about $35 a week, $140 a month, $1,700 a year. If you can 
save $5 a day, you’ll have about $1,700 saved by the end of the year. Keep this 
up during four years of college and you’ll have about $7,000 by graduation. 
And that’s before adding any interest your money will earn. If you would invest 
the savings in a mutual fund earning 6 percent compounded annually, you 
would double your money every 12 years. The Rule of 72 says that your money 
doubles every 12 years at 6%. You do that calculation by dividing the percent-
age earned into 72 (72 divided by 6  = 12). Cost-saving choices you might con-
sider to reach this goal are listed in  Figure D.1 . 
 Running a household is similar to running a small business. It takes the 
same careful record keeping, the same budget processes and forecasting, and 
the same control procedures. Sometimes it also creates the same need to bor-
row funds or rely on a credit card and become familiar with interest rates. The 
time you spend practicing budgeting techniques will benefit you throughout 
your life. You might start by going online to  Mint.com . It will help you with 
your budgeting needs. 
 Step 4: Pay Off Your Debts  
The first thing to do with the money remaining 
after you pay your monthly bills is to pay off your debts, starting with those 
carrying the highest interest rates. Credit card debt may be costing you 18 per-
cent or more a year. A survey of 100 campuses found that over one-fourth of 
college students said they had been charged a fee for a late payment. It’s better 
to pay off a debt that costs 18 percent than put the money in a bank account that 
earns, say, 2 percent or less. 7 Check credit card statements and other mailings 
carefully to make certain the charges are accurate.  

D-5
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
 Step 5: Start a Savings Plan  
It’s important to save some money each month 
in a separate account for large purchases you’re likely to make (such as a car 
or house). Then, when it comes time to make that purchase, you’ll have the 
needed cash. Save at least enough for a significant down payment so that you 
can reduce the finance charges you’ll pay to borrow the rest. 
 The best way to save money is to  pay yourself first. When you get your 
paycheck, first take out money for savings and then plan what to do with the 
rest. You can arrange with your bank or mutual fund to deduct a certain 
amount for savings every month. You’ll be pleasantly surprised when the 
money starts accumulating and earning interest over time. With some disci-
pline, you can eventually reach your goal of becoming a millionaire. It’s not as 
difficult as you may think.  Figure D.2  shows how $5,000 grows over various 
periods at different rates of return. If you start saving at age 40, you’ll have 
25 years in by the time you reach 65. 
 Step 6: Borrow Only to Buy Assets That Increase in Value or Generate 
Income 
Don’t borrow money for ordinary expenses; you’ll only get into more 
debt that way. If you have budgeted for emergencies, such as car repairs and 
FIGURE D.1 POSSIBLE COST-SAVING CHOICES
The choices you make today can have a dramatic impact on your ﬁ nancial future. Compare the diff erences these few choices you can 
make now would mean to your future net worth. If you would make the lower-cost choices ﬁ ve days a week during your four years of 
college, you’d have more than $8,300 by graduation. (Note that the figures in this chart are based on 20 weekdays per month.)
First Choice Cost per Month
Alternate Choice Cost per Month
Savings per Month
Starbucks tall caffè latte
$3.00 for 20 days = $60.00
Service station cappuccino $0.70 for 20 days = $14.00
$ 46.00
Fast-food lunch of burger, fries, and
soft drink $5.00 for 20 days = $100.00
Lunch brought from home $2 for 20 days = $40.00
60.00
Bottled water
$1.50 for 20 days = $30.00
Reﬁll water bottle $0 for 20 days = $0
30.00
Download album = $10.00
Listen to your old albums = $0.00
10.00
Banana Republic T-shirt = $40.00
Old Navy T-shirt = $12.00
Total savings per month
Total savings through 4 years of college
28.00
$174.00
× 48 months
$8,352.00
FIGURE D.2 HOW 
MONEY GROWS
This chart illustrates how 
$5,000 would grow at various 
rates of return. Recent savings 
account interest rates were 
very low (less than 2 percent), 
but in earlier years they’ve 
been over 5 percent.
Time
2%
5%
8%
11%
5 years
10 years
15 years
20 years
25 years
$5,520
6,095
6,729
7,430
8,203
$ 6,381
8,144
10,395
13,266
16,932
$ 7,347
10,795
15,861
23,305
34,242
$ 8,425
14,197
23,923
40,312
67,927
ANNUAL RATE OF RETURN

BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
D-6
health care costs, you should be able to stay financially secure. Most financial 
experts advise saving about six months of earnings for contingencies. Keep 
this money in highly liquid accounts, such as a bank account or money market 
fund. 
 Only the most unexpected of expenses should cause you to borrow. It is 
hard to wait until you have enough money to buy what you want, but learning 
to wait is a critical part of self-discipline. Of course, you can always try to pro-
duce more income by working overtime or by working on the side for extra 
revenue. 
 If you follow these six steps, not only will you have money for investment, 
but you’ll have developed most of the financial techniques needed to become 
financially secure. If you find it hard to live within a budget at first, remember 
the payoff is well worth the effort.  
 Explain how to build a financial base, including investing in real estate, saving 
money, and managing credit. 
BUILDING YOUR FINANCIAL BASE 
 The path to success in a capitalist system is to have capital to invest, yet many 
students today graduate with debt. As you’ve read, accumulating capital takes 
discipline and careful planning. With the money you save, however, you can 
become an entrepreneur, one of the fastest ways to wealth. 
 Living frugally is extremely difficult for the average person. Most people 
are eager to spend their money on a new car, furniture, electronics, clothes, 
entertainment, and the like. They look for a fancy apartment with all the ame-
nities. A capital-generating strategy may require forgoing most (though not 
all) of these purchases to accumulate investment money. It might mean living 
like a frugal college student, in a relatively inexpensive apartment furnished in 
hand-me-downs from parents, friends, Craigslist, and resale shops. 
 For five or six years, you can manage with the old sound system, a used 
car, and a few nice clothes. The strategy is sacrifice, not luxury. It’s important 
not to feel burdened by this plan; instead, feel happy knowing your financial 
future will be more secure. That’s the way the majority of millionaires got their 
money. If living frugally seems too restrictive for you, you can still save at least 
a little. It’s better to save a smaller amount than not to save at all. 
 It’s wise to plan your financial future with the same excitement and dedi-
cation you bring to other aspects of your life. If you get married, for example, 
it is important to discuss financial issues with your spouse. Conflicts over 
money are a major cause of divorce, so agreeing on a financial strategy before 
marriage is very important. 
 A great strategy for couples is to try to live on one income and to save the 
other. The longer you wait to marry, the more likely it will be that one of you 
can be earning enough to do that—as a college graduate. If the second spouse 
makes $35,000 a year after taxes, saving that income for five years quickly 
adds up to $175,000 (plus interest). 
 What do you do with the money you accumulate? Your first investment 
might be a low-priced home. Why? The purpose of this investment is to lock in 
payments for your shelter at a fixed amount. Through the years, home owner-
ship has been a wise investment, unlike renting, but that may be changing.  8 
 Many people take huge risks by buying too much home for their income. 
Furthermore people sometimes take out interest-only or other loans that are 
very risky, as recent headlines have shown. The old rule of thumb “Don’t buy a 
home that costs more than two and a half times your annual income” still 
LO D–2

D-7
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
stands. Buy for the long term, and stay within your means. What has hap-
pened to housing prices in your area over the last couple of years? Lower 
prices may mean opportunity if the market gains strength. 
 Real Estate: Historically, a Relatively Secure Investment 
 The real estate bust that began in 2008 was a relatively uncommon occur-
rence. House prices had risen dramatically, causing a bubble that burst. 
Prices fell sharply until the spring of 2012 when prices began to rise again. 
While prices aren’t back to their peak in most areas, real estate is likely to 
continue to provide several investment benefits. First, a home is the one 
investment that you can live in. Second, once you buy a home, your mort-
gage payments are relatively fixed (though taxes and utilities may go up). 
As your income rises, mortgage payments get easier to make, but renters 
often find that rents go up at least as fast as income. On the other hand, the 
changes in home prices have made it more important than ever for you to 
check whether it is better to own or rent.  9 How deeply particular cities 
were affected by the falling housing prices varies greatly from region to 
region. 
 Paying for a home has historically been a good way of forcing yourself to 
save. You must make the payments every month. Those payments are an 
investment that can prove to be very rewarding over time. A home is also a 
good asset to use when applying for a business loan. 
 Some couples have used the seed money accumulated from saving one 
income (in the strategy outlined above) to buy two attached homes so that 
they can live in one part and rent out the other. The rent they earn covers a 
good part of the payments for both homes, so the couple can live comfortably, 
yet inexpensively, while their investment in a home appreciates. In this way 
they accumulate capital, and, as they grow older, they pull far ahead of their 
peers in terms of financial security. As capital accumulates and values rise, 
they can sell and buy an even larger apartment building or a single-family 
home. Many have made fortunes in real estate in just this way. 
Buying a home has 
usually been a very 
good and safe 
investment. But 
sometimes housing 
prices can rise fast, as 
they did between 2000 
and 2007, and then fall, 
as they did between 
2008 and 2012. 
Housing prices have 
been recovering since 
then in many areas. 
What has happened to 
housing prices in your 
area over the last few 
years?

BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
D-8
 Many people are making an income by renting unused space on Airbnb.  10 Of 
course, it all depends on how valuable your space is. A double in New York City 
may bring in some real income if you rent it while away. Such rentals may be part 
of a “shared economy” that is emerging. That is, people are learning to share cars, 
homes, bicycles, driveways, and tools as a way of saving some money.  11  
 Once you understand the benefits of home ownership versus renting, you 
can decide whether those same principles apply to owning the premises where 
you set up your own business—or owning your own equipment, vehicles, and 
the like.  Figure D.3  will give you some idea of how expensive a house you can 
afford, given your income. You can find current mortgage interest rates and 
mortgage calculators at  Interest.com . 
 Tax Deductions and Home Ownership 
 Buying a home is likely to be the largest and perhaps the most important invest-
ment you’ll make. It’s nice to know that the federal government is willing to 
help you with it. Here’s how: Interest on your home mortgage payments is tax 
deductible. So are your real estate taxes. Since virtually all your mortgage pay-
ments during the first few years are applied to the interest on your loan, almost 
all the early payments are tax deductible—a tremendous benefit. If your pay-
ments are $1,000 a month and your income is in a 25 percent tax bracket, dur-
ing the early years of your mortgage the government will, in effect, give you 
credit for about $250 of your payment, lowering your real cost. This makes 
home ownership much more competitive with renting than it may appear. 
 It is said that there are three keys to getting the optimal return on a home 
or any real estate investment: location, location, and location. A home in the 
best part of town, near good schools, shopping, and work, is usually a sound 
financial investment. Less expensive homes may appreciate in value more 
slowly than homes in the city or town center. It’s usually better, from a finan-
cial viewpoint, to buy a smaller home in a great location than a large home in 
a not-so-great setting.  
 Where to Put Your Savings 
 Where are some other good places to save your money? For a young person, 
one of the  worst places to keep long-term investments is a bank or savings and 
loan. It is important to have savings equivalent to about six months of living 
expenses in the bank for emergencies, but the bank is not the best place to 
invest. Internet banks pay higher interest than your local bank, but even their 
rates are relatively low. 
 One of the best places to invest over time has been the stock market. The 
stock market does tend to go up and down, but over a longer period of time it 
FIGURE D.3 HOW 
MUCH HOUSE CAN YOU 
AFFORD?
Monthly mortgage payments—
including interest, principal, 
real estate taxes, and 
insurance—generally shouldn’t 
amount to more than 
28 percent of your monthly 
income. Here’s how much 
people in various income 
categories can aff ord to pay 
for a home if they use a 
30-year mortgage and make a 
10 percent down payment.
Income
Monthly Payment
5%
6%
7%
$ 30,000
50,000
80,000
100,000
Source: Federal Housing Finance Board.
$  700
1,167
1,867
2,333
$106,263
180,291
287,213
361,240
$ 98,303
167,081
266,056
334,832
$ 91,252
155,376
247,308
311,433
$ 56,870
98,606
155,916
198,013
15%
INTEREST RATES

D-9
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
has proved to be one of the best investments. About half of U.S. households 
own stock and mutual funds. Most financial experts believe the stock market 
will grow more slowly in the future than it has over the last 50 years, but the 
U.S. economy has always managed to rise up after a crisis, like the stock mar-
ket fall of recent years. 
 The future always looks gloomy during a financial crisis, but that doesn’t 
mean you shouldn’t take risks. Remember, the greater the risk, usually the 
greater the return. When stock prices are low, that’s the time to  buy. When 
stocks collapse, it’s an opportunity to get into the stock market, not avoid it. 
The average investor buys when the market is high and sells when it’s low. 
Clearly, that’s not a good idea. It takes courage to buy when everyone else is 
selling. In the long run, however, this   contrarian approach   to investing is the 
way the rich get richer.  12 
 Chapter 19 gave you a foundation for starting an investment program. 
That chapter also talked about bonds, but bonds have traditionally lagged 
behind stocks as a long-term investment.  
 Learning to Manage Credit 
 Credit cards are an important element in your personal financial system, even 
if you rarely use them. First, you may have to own a credit card to buy certain 
goods or even rent a car, because some businesses require one for identifica-
tion and to ensure payment. Second, you can use a credit card to keep track of 
purchases. A gasoline credit card gives you records of purchases over time for 
your income tax returns (if you drive for work) and financial planning pur-
poses. Third, a credit card is more convenient than cash or checks. You can 
carry less cash and easily cancel a stolen card to protect your account. Not all 
credit cards are alike, however. One card, called Coin, stores data for your 
credit, debit, loyalty, membership, and gift cards.  13 You can decide which card 
is best for you by comparing them at  CardRatings.com  or  CreditCards.com . 
The most secure cards will be PIN and chip cards, since such cards are much 
less prone to identity theft.  14 
 contrarian approach  
 Buying stock when everyone 
else is selling or vice versa.  
Credit card companies 
like Visa often 
encourage young 
people to apply for 
credit cards—even 
during halftime as 
they’re doing here at a 
Purdue basketball 
game. Why are such 
companies so willing to 
give you a credit card?

BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
D-10
 College credit card debt is on the rise. Half of college students have four 
or more cards and only 17 percent report regularly paying off their balance. If 
you do use a credit card, pay the balance in full during the period when no 
interest is charged. Finance charges on credit card purchases usually amount 
to 12 to 26 percent annually. Some credit card companies will reward you for 
paying on time. If you finance a TV, home appliances, or other purchases with 
a credit card, you may end up spending much more than if you pay with cash. 
Not having to pay 18 percent or more in interest is as good as earning 18 per-
cent tax-free. You may want to choose a card that pays you back in cash or 
offers credits toward the purchase of a car or frequent-flier miles. The value of 
these “givebacks” can be as high as 6 percent.  15 Some cards have no annual 
fees; others have lower interest rates. 
 The danger of a credit card is the flip side of its convenience. It’s too easy 
to buy things you wouldn’t buy if you had to pay cash, or to pile up debts you 
can’t repay. If you aren’t the type who can stick to a financial plan or house-
hold budget,  it may be better not to have a credit card at all. Imagine a cus-
tomer who has a $10,000 balance on his or her credit card with a 16 percent 
interest rate and pays the minimum 4 percent monthly payment. How long 
will it take to pay off the debt, and what would the cost for interest be? The 
answers: 14 years and nearly $5,000—and that’s without using the card again 
to purchase so much as a candy bar. Prior to 2006, the minimum payment 
was 2 percent. The lower minimum payment may have been enticing for the 
short term, but over time that same $10,000 balance would have taken over 
30 years to repay and cost over $18,000 in interest if only the 2 percent mini-
mum was paid. 
 Another danger of credit cards is the issue of hacking. Stores like Target, 
Neiman Marcus, and Michael’s have had credit card numbers stolen.  16 This 
identity theft results in people getting access to your e-mail addresses, names, 
and account numbers. The newer credit cards use both a chip embedded in 
the card and a customer PIN. Time will tell if these cards will cut down on the 
losses due to stolen credit card numbers.  17 
 Some people would be better off with a  debit card only. Debit cards don’t 
allow you to spend more than what you have in the bank, a great benefit for 
those who are not as careful with their spending as they should be.  18
Furthermore, there are no interest payments or annual fees. 
 Of the debtors seeking help at the National Consumer Counseling 
Service, more than half were between 18 and 32. A recent credit card law 
created new consumer credit card protections. The new law allows card 
issuers to increase interest rates for only a limited number of reasons and 
restricts increasing rates at all during the first year of a new card account. 
People must be at least 21 years old or get an adult to co-sign with them if 
they want new credit cards on their own. The Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau regulates financial products and services, including mortgages, 
credit cards, student loans, and debt collection. You would be wise to explore 
what is available to you. 
 
• What are the six steps you can take to control your finances?
 
• What steps should a person follow to build capital?
 
• Why is real estate a good investment?
• What are the six steps
test prep
s you can take
s yo
w
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.

D-11
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
 Explain how buying the appropriate insurance can protect your financial 
base. 
PROTECTING YOUR FINANCIAL 
BASE: BUYING INSURANCE 
 One of the last things young people think about is the idea that they may 
become sick, get injured, or die. It is not a pleasant thought, but the unex-
pected does happen every day. To protect your loved ones from the loss of your 
income, you should buy life insurance.  19 Nearly a third of U.S. households 
have no life insurance coverage. This is one sign of how the financial pressures 
of today have affected families. 
 The simplest and least expensive form of life insurance is   term insurance. It 
is pure insurance protection for a given number of years that typically costs less 
the younger you buy it (see  Figure D.4 ). Every few years, you might have to 
renew the policy, and the premium can then rise. Check prices through a service 
like  InsWeb.com  or use one of Quicken’s personal finance software packages. 
 How much insurance do you need?  Newsweek posed this question: We 
just had our first baby; how much life insurance should we have? Answer: 
Seven times your family income plus $100,000 for college. Apportion your 
coverage so that a spouse earning 60 percent of the income carries 60 percent 
of the insurance. 
 Multiyear level-premium insurance guarantees that you’ll pay the same 
premium for the life of the policy. Recently, 40 percent of new term policies 
guaranteed a set rate for 20 years or more. Some companies allow you to 
switch your term policy for a more expensive whole or universal life policy. 
 Whole life insurance   combines pure insurance and savings, so you are 
buying both insurance and a savings plan. This may be a good idea for those 
people who have trouble saving money. A universal life policy lets you choose 
how much of your payment should go to insurance and how much to invest-
ments. The investments in such plans traditionally are very conservative but 
pay a steady interest rate. 
 Variable life insurance   is a form of whole life insurance that invests the 
cash value of the policy in stocks or other high-yielding securities. Death ben-
efits may thus vary, reflecting the performance of the investments. 
 Life insurance companies recognized people’s desire to earn higher 
returns on their insurance (and to protect themselves against running out of 
money before they die) and began selling annuities. An   annuity   is a contract 
to make regular payments to a person for life or for a fixed period. With an 
LO D–3
 term insurance  
 Pure insurance protection for a 
given number of years.  
 whole life insurance  
 Life insurance that combines 
pure insurance and savings.  
 variable life insurance  
 Whole life insurance that 
invests the cash value of the 
policy in stocks or other high-
yielding securities.  
 annuity  
 A contract to make regular 
payments to a person for life or 
for a fixed period.  
FIGURE D.4 WHY BUY 
TERM INSURANCE?
INSURANCE NEEDS IN EARLY YEARS
ARE HIGH
1. Children are young and need money
 for education.
1. Children are grown.
2. Mortgage is high relative to income.
2. Mortgage is low or completely paid off.
3. Often there are auto payments and
 other bills to pay.
3. Debts are paid off.
4. Loss of income would be disastrous.
4. Insurance needs are few.
5. Retirement income is needed.
INSURANCE NEEDS DECLINE
AS YOU GROW OLDER

BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
D-12
annuity, you are guaranteed to have an income until you die (or for the agreed 
upon period). 
 There are two kinds of annuities: fixed and variable.  Fixed annuities are 
investments that pay the policyholder a specified interest rate. They are not as 
popular as  variable annuities, which provide investment choices identical to 
mutual funds. Such annuities are becoming more popular than term or whole 
life insurance. But buyers must be careful in selecting an insurance company 
and choosing the investments made with their money. 
 Consult a financial advisor who is not an insurance agent and who can 
help you make the wisest decision about insurance. You can also check out the 
insurance company through a rating service such as A.M. Best ( www.ambest
.com ) or Moody’s Investors Service ( www.moodys.com ). 
 Health Insurance 
 The law called the Patient Protection and Affordable Care Act (PPACA) requires 
nonexempt individuals to maintain a minimum level of health insurance or 
pay a tax penalty. The Supreme Court ruled that this highly controversial law 
(often called Obamacare) was constitutional in that it was within Congress’s 
power to tax. It is important that you follow the changes as the new law is 
implemented because almost everything to do with your health care could be 
affected. 
 You may already have health insurance coverage through your employer. 
If not, you can buy health insurance through the government’s health care 
Marketplace at  healthcare.gov  or directly from insurance companies like 
United Healthcare or Blue Cross/Blue Shield. One of the more popular health 
insurance alternatives is a health savings account (HSA), a tax-deferred sav-
ings account linked to a low-cost, high-deductible health insurance policy. The 
idea is to use the money that would have been spent on high-cost, low-deduct-
ible health insurance and deposit it in a health savings account. You can use 
the money in the HSA only for needed health care services. One major benefit 
to you is that the money grows tax-free until you take it out.  
 Disability Insurance 
 Your chances of becoming disabled at an early age are much higher than your 
chances of dying in an accident. It’s dangerous financially not to have any 
health insurance. Hospital costs are simply too high to risk financial ruin by 
going uninsured. It is often a good idea to supplement health insurance poli-
cies with   disability insurance   that pays part of the cost of a long-term sick-
ness or an accident. Disability insurance replaces part of your lost income, 
and, in some cases, pays disability related costs not covered by health insur-
ance. Call an insurance agent or check online for possible costs of such insur-
ance. The cost is relatively low to protect yourself from losing your income for 
an extended period. 
 Homeowner’s or Renter’s Insurance 
 You may be surprised how much it would cost to replace all the things you 
own. As you begin to accumulate possessions, you may want to have apart-
ment or homeowner’s insurance that covers their loss. Specify that you want 
 guaranteed replacement cost. That means the insurance company will give 
you whatever it costs to buy all those things  new. It costs a little more than a 
policy without guaranteed replacement, but you will get a lot more if you 
have a loss.  20  
disability insurance
Insurance that pays part of the 
cost of a long-term sickness or 
an accident.

D-13
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
 The other option is insurance that covers the  depreciated cost of the items. 
A sofa you bought five years ago for $600 may be worth only $150 now. That 
current value is what your insurance would pay you, not the $700 or more to 
buy a brand-new sofa. If your computer is stolen, you might get only a couple 
hundred dollars rather than its replacement cost. 
 Most policies don’t cover expensive items like engagement and wedding 
rings. You can buy a  rider to your policy to cover them at a reasonable cost.  
 Other Insurance 
 Most states require drivers to have automobile insurance; if your state doesn’t, 
it’s a good idea to buy it anyway. Be sure to insure against losses from unin-
sured motorists. Consider accepting a large deductible to keep the premiums 
low, and pay for small damages yourself. 
 You’ll also need liability insurance to protect yourself against being sued 
by someone you accidentally injure. Often you can get a discount by buying all 
your insurance (life, health, homeowner’s, automobile) with one company. 
This is called an   umbrella policy. Look for other discounts such as for safe 
driving, good grades, and more.  
 Outline a strategy for retiring with enough money to last a lifetime. 
PLANNING YOUR RETIREMENT 
 It may seem a bit early to be planning your retirement; however, not doing so 
would be a big mistake. Successful financial planning means long-range plan-
ning, and retirement is a critical phase of life. What you do now could make a 
world of difference in your quality of life after age 65, or whenever you retire. 
Presently, only 58 percent of workers say they or their spouses are currently 
saving for later life. Over 65 percent of workers say they are behind schedule 
in planning and saving for retirement.  21 As you can see, many people  never get 
around to saving enough money for retirement.   22 
 umbrella policy  
 A broadly based insurance 
policy that saves you money 
because you buy all your 
insurance from one company.  
LO D–4
One purpose of 
planning your personal 
finances is to have 
enough money for 
retirement. If you plan to 
relax and travel when 
you retire, you need to 
begin saving now. What 
are your retirement 
goals, and what 
resources will you need 
to accomplish them?

BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
D-14
 Social Security 
  Social Security   is the Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability Insurance Program 
established by the Social Security Act of 1935. It consists not of a fund of 
money but of a continuous flow of contributions in and payments out. The 
Social Security money you’ll begin to receive when you retire will come 
directly from the Social Security taxes being paid by workers at that time. 
However, the number of people retiring and living longer is increasing dra-
matically, while the number paying into Social Security is declining. 
Maintaining Social Security may thus require reducing benefits, encouraging 
people to retire later, limiting cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) made to ben-
efits over time, and increasing Social Security taxes.  23 
 Social Security will not provide you with ample funds for retirement. Plan 
now to save your own funds for your nonworking years. The government has 
established incentives to encourage you. Here are some specifics. 
  Individual Retirement Accounts (IRAs) 
 Traditionally, an   individual retirement account (IRA)   has been a tax-deferred 
investment plan that enables you (and your spouse, if you are married) to save 
part of your income for retirement. A traditional IRA allows people who qual-
ify to deduct from their reported income the money they put into an account. 
  Tax-deferred contributions   are those for which you pay no current taxes, but 
the earnings gained in the IRA are taxed as income when they are withdrawn 
from your IRA after retirement. 
 Let’s see why a traditional IRA is a good deal for an investor. The tremen-
dous benefit is the fact that the invested money is not taxed. That means faster 
and higher returns for you. Say you put $5,500 into an IRA each year. (The 
maximum IRA contribution was $5,500 in 2014. If you’re 50 or older, you can 
make an additional $1,000 “catch-up” contribution.) Normally you’d pay taxes 
on that $5,500 when you receive it as income. But because you put it into an 
IRA, you won’t. If you’re in the 25 percent tax bracket, that means you’ll save 
$1,375 in taxes! Put another way, the $5,500 you save costs you only $4,125—a 
huge bargain. 
 The earlier you start saving, the better—because your money has a chance 
to double and double again. If you save $5,500 a year for 35 years in an IRA 
and earn 10 percent a year, you’ll accumulate savings of more than $1.6 mil-
lion. If you start when you’re just out of school, you’ll be a millionaire by the 
time you’re 50. All you have to do is save $5,500 a year and earn 10 percent. 
You may be wise to use a Roth IRA instead (see the following). 
 If you increase your contribution to the maximum allowable each time it 
is raised, you can reach your million-dollar goal even earlier. The actual rate of 
return depends on the type of investments you choose. No one can predict 
future rates of return with certainty, and investments with higher rates of 
return also have higher risk. The actual rate of return on investments can vary 
widely over time (from the highest gain of 61 percent in 1983 to the lowest loss 
of  - 43 percent in 2008), but the average annual gain for the S&P 500 between 
1970 and 2013 was 10.6 percent.  24 Some analysts expect it to be lower in the 
coming years, so you may need to save more to reach the same goals. 
 The earlier you start saving, the better. Consider this: If you were to start 
contributing $5,500 to an IRA earning 10 percent when you’re 22 years old 
and do so for only five years, you’d have about $37,000 by the time you’re 27. 
Even if you  never added another  penny to the IRA, by the time you’re 65 you’d 
have almost $1.4 million. If you waited until you were 30 to start saving, you 
would need to save $5,500 every year for 32 years to have the same nest egg. 
 Social Security  
 The term used to describe the 
Old-Age, Survivors, and 
Disability Insurance Program 
established by the Social 
Security Act of 1935.  
 individual retirement 
account (IRA)  
 A tax-deferred investment plan 
that enables you (and your 
spouse, if you are married) to 
save part of your income for 
retirement; a traditional IRA 
allows people who qualify to 
deduct from their reported 
income the money they put into 
an account.  
 tax-deferred contributions  
 Retirement account deposits 
for which you pay no current 
taxes, but the earnings gained 
are taxed as regular income 
when they are withdrawn at 
retirement.  

D-15
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
And what would you have if you started saving at 22  and continued nonstop 
every year until 65? More than $3.5 million! Can you see why investment advi-
sors often say that an IRA is the best way to invest in your retirement? 
 A second kind of IRA is the   Roth IRA.  You don’t get up-front deductions 
from your taxes as with a traditional IRA, but earnings grow tax-free and are 
tax-free when withdrawn.  This is often the best deal for college-age 
students. You can transfer money from a traditional IRA into a Roth IRA. You 
will have to pay taxes first, but the long-term benefits often make this exchange 
worthwhile if you believe your tax rate will be higher when you retire 
than it is now. 
 Both types of IRA have advantages and disadvantages, so ask a financial 
advisor which is best for you. You may decide to have both. 
 You can’t take money from either type of IRA until you are 59½ years old with-
out paying a 10 percent penalty. That’s a benefit for you, because it can keep you 
from tapping into your IRA in an emergency or when you’re tempted to make a 
large impulse purchase. But the money is there if a real need or emergency arises. 
The government now allows you to take out some funds to invest in an education 
or a first home. But check the rules; they change over time. 
 Your local bank, savings and loan, and credit union all have different 
types of IRAs. Insurance companies offer them too. If you’re looking for a 
higher return (and more risk), you can put your IRA funds into U.S. and 
international stocks, bonds, mutual funds, exchange-traded funds, or pre-
cious metals. You can switch from fund to fund or from investment to 
investment. You can even open several different IRAs as long as the total 
doesn’t exceed the government’s limit. Consider contributing to an IRA 
through payroll deductions to ensure that you invest the money before 
you’re tempted to spend it.  
 Simple IRAs 
 Companies with 100 or fewer workers can provide them with a simple IRA. 
Employees can contribute a larger part of their income annually than with a 
regular IRA (up to $12,000 versus $5,500), and the company matches their 
contribution. This plan enables people to save much more money over time 
and can help small companies compete for available workers.  
 MyIRAs 
 In 2014, President Obama announced a new a Roth IRA–type 
retirement savings plan called myIRA for low- and middle-
income individuals. Simple and Roth IRAs typically require a 
$2,000 deposit to open and $500 thereafter, and banks or bro-
kerages often charge fees to maintain accounts with 
lower balances. With a myIRA, households earning 
less than $191,000 can open an account with as little 
as $25, with additional contributions as low as $5, 
and there are no fees. Savers invest after-tax dollars 
and can withdraw the money in retirement tax-free. 
 Unlike other IRAs, myIra funds can only be 
invested in government savings bonds. Since the 
bonds are backed by the government, savers will 
never lose their principal investment. However, the 
accounts won’t grow very quickly since the interest 
rates on these bonds are usually low. There is no 
penalty if the principal is withdrawn early; but 
 Roth IRA  
 An IRA where you don’t get 
up-front deductions on your 
taxes as you would with a 
traditional IRA, but the earnings 
grow tax-free and are also tax-
free when they are withdrawn.  
If the value of your 
retirement account 
plunges, you may have 
to defer your dream of 
an early retirement. If 
you have already 
started to save for your 
retirement, is your 
portfolio well 
diversified?

BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
D-16
there is a penalty for early interest withdrawal. The account balance can be 
rolled over to a Roth at any time, but must be rolled over when it reaches 
$15,000.  25 You obviously won’t become a millionaire with a myIRA, but if you 
have extremely limited funds this may be at least a start toward saving for 
retirement. The myIRA is currently a pilot program, so it may be awhile before 
we know how successful this new type of retirement account is.  
 401(k) Plans 
 A   401(k) plan   is an employer-sponsored savings plan that allows you to deposit 
a set amount of pretax dollars and collect compounded earnings tax-free until 
withdrawal, when the money is taxed at ordinary income tax rates. These or 
similar plans are the only pension many people have, but only about 70 per-
cent of eligible employees make any contributions, and many companies are 
discontinuing their benefits. As a result, there have been several proposals for 
how to improve 401(k) plans.  26 Private equity firms, like the Blackstone Group, 
are eager to get people to sign up for their own 401(k) plans because so much 
money is involved.  27 Meanwhile, firms like IBM are actually cutting back on 
the amount they pay out from 401(k) plans by making only end-of-the-year 
payments to the fund rather than periodic contributions. All such actions can 
only add to the woes of future retirees.  28 
 The plans have three benefits: (1) your contributions reduce your present 
taxable income, (2) tax is deferred on the earnings, and (3) many employers 
will match your contributions, sometimes 50 cents on a dollar. No investment 
will give you a better deal than an instant 50 percent return on your money. 
Not all companies have equally good programs, so be sure to check out what 
is available to you. 
 You should deposit at least as much as your employer matches, often up 
to 15 percent of your salary. You can usually select how the money in a 401(k) 
plan is invested: stocks, bonds, and in some cases real estate. Be careful not to 
invest all your money in the company where you work. It’s always best to 
diversify your funds among different companies and among stocks, bonds, 
and real estate investment trusts. 
401(k) plan
A savings plan that allows you 
to deposit pretax dollars and 
whose earnings compound 
tax-free until withdrawal, when 
the money is taxed at ordinary 
income tax rates.
Your financial assets can 
protect your children 
and even your 
grandchildren far into 
the future, if you have 
taken the right steps 
through estate planning. 
What can you do now in 
order to make sure your 
assets are divided the 
way you would like them 
to be when you’re gone?

D-17
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
 Like the simple IRA, there is a simple 401(k) plan for those firms that 
employ 100 or fewer employees. Employees again are allowed to invest an 
amount (maximum of $17,500 in 2014) that is matched by the employer. This 
is a rather new program, but it should also prove popular among small busi-
nesses in attracting new workers. 
  Keogh Plans 
 Millions of small-business owners don’t have the benefit of a corporate retire-
ment system. Such people can contribute to an IRA, but the amount they can 
invest is limited. The alternative for all those doctors, lawyers, real estate agents, 
artists, writers, and other self-employed people is to establish their own Keogh 
plan. It’s like an IRA for entrepreneurs. You can also look into simplified 
employee pension (SEP) plans, the best types of IRAs for sole proprietors. 
 The advantage of Keogh plans is that participants can invest up to $52,000 
per year. Like simple IRAs, Keogh funds aren’t taxed until they are withdrawn, 
nor are the returns the funds earn. Thus, a person in the 25 percent tax bracket 
who invests $10,000 yearly in a Keogh saves $2,500 in taxes. That means, in 
essence, that the government is financing 25 percent of his or her retirement 
fund. As with an IRA, this is an excellent deal. 
 As with an IRA, there’s a 10 percent penalty for early withdrawal. Also like 
an IRA, funds may be withdrawn in a lump sum or spread out over the years. 
However, the key decision is the one you make now—to begin early to put 
funds into an IRA, a Keogh plan, or both so that the “magic” of compounding 
can turn that money into a sizable retirement fund.  
 Financial Planners 
 If the idea of developing a comprehensive financial plan for yourself or your 
business seems overwhelming, relax; help is available from financial planners. 
Be careful, though—anybody can claim to be a financial planner today. It’s 
often best to find a certified financial planner (CFP), that is, a professional 
with a bachelor’s degree who has completed a curriculum in personal finan-
cial planning, passed a 10-hour examination, and has at least three years of 
experience in financial planning.  29 Unfortunately, many so-called financial 
planners are simply insurance salespeople. 
 In the past few years, there has been an explosion in the number of com-
panies offering other businesses financial services, sometimes called one-stop 
financial centers or financial supermarkets because they provide a variety of 
financial services, ranging from banking service to mutual funds, insurance, 
tax assistance, stocks, bonds, and real estate. It pays to shop around for finan-
cial advice. Find someone who understands your business and is willing to 
spend some time with you. 
 Financial planning covers all aspects of investing, from life and health 
insurance all the way to retirement and death. Financial planners can advise 
you on the proper mix of IRAs, stocks, bonds, real estate, and so on.  
 Estate Planning 
 Your retirement may be far away, but it is never too early to begin thinking 
about estate planning, or making financial arrangements for those who will 
inherit from you. You may even help your parents or others to do such plan-
ning. An important first step is to select a guardian for your minor children. 
That person should have a genuine concern for your children as well as a 
parental style and moral beliefs you endorse. 

D-18
BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
 Also ensure that you leave sufficient resources to rear your children, not 
only for living expenses but also for medical bills, college, and other major 
expenses. Often life insurance is a good way to ensure such a fund. Be sure to 
discuss all these issues with the guardian, and choose a contingent guardian in 
case the first choice is unable to perform the needed functions. 
 A second step is to prepare a   will,  a document that names the guardian 
for your children, states how you want your assets distributed, and names the 
executor for your estate. An   executor  assembles and values your estate, files 
income and other taxes, and distributes assets. 
 A third step is to prepare a durable power of attorney. This document 
gives an individual you name the power to take over your finances if you 
become incapacitated. A  durable power of attorney for health care delegates 
power to a person you name to make health care decisions for you if you are 
unable to make such decisions yourself. 
 Other steps to follow are beyond the scope of this text. You may need to 
contact a financial planner/attorney to help you do the paperwork and plan-
ning to preserve and protect your investments for your children and spouse 
and others. But it all begins with a strong financial base. 
will
A document that names the 
guardian for your children, 
states how you want your 
assets distributed, and names 
the executor for your estate.
executor
A person who assembles and 
values your estate, files income 
and other taxes, and distributes 
assets.
 
• What are three advantages of using a credit card?
 
• What kind of life insurance is recommended for most people?
 
• What are the advantages of investing through an IRA? A Keogh 
account? A 401(k) account?
 
• What are the main steps in estate planning?
• What are three advan
test prep
tages off using
tag
summary
 Outline the six steps for controlling your assets.
 • 
 What are the six steps to managing personal assets?  
 (1) Take an inventory of your financial assets by developing a balance 
sheet for yourself with the fundamental accounting equation: Assets  =
Liabilities  + Owners’ equity; (2) keep track of all your expenses; (3) pre-
pare a budget; (4) pay off your debts; (5) start a savings plan (the best way 
is to pay yourself first); and (6) if you must borrow, borrow only for assets 
that can increase in value or generate income. 
 Explain how to build a financial base, including investing in real estate, saving 
money, and managing credit.
 • 
 How can I accumulate funds? 
 First, find a job. Try to live as frugally as possible. Invest your savings to 
generate even more capital. One such investment is a duplex home where 
the renter helps the owner pay the mortgage. 
 • 
 Why is real estate such a good investment? 
 First, a home is the one investment you can live in. Second, once you buy 
a home, the payments are relatively fixed (though taxes and utilities may 
LO D–2
•
What ar
LO D–1
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help.

D-19
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
go up). As your income rises, the house payments get easier to make, while 
rents tend to go up at least as fast as income.  
 • 
 How does the government help you buy real estate?  
 The government allows you to deduct interest payments on the mortgage, 
which lets you buy more home for the money.  
 • 
 Where is the best place to keep savings?  
 It is best, in the long run, to invest in stocks. Although they go up and 
down in value, in the long run stocks earn more than most other invest-
ments. Diversify among mutual funds and other investments.  
 • 
 What is a good way to handle credit cards?  
 Pay the balance in full during the period when no interest is charged. Not 
having to pay 16 percent interest is as good as earning 16 percent tax-free. 
Often a debit card is better than a credit card because it limits your spend-
ing to the amount you have in the bank.  
 Explain how buying the appropriate insurance can protect your financial 
base.
 • 
 What is the role of insurance in protecting capital?  
 Insurance protects you from loss. If you were to die, your heirs would lose 
the income you would have earned. You can buy life insurance to make up 
for some or all of that loss.  
 • 
 Why is term insurance preferred?  
 Term insurance is pure insurance protection for a given number of years. 
You can buy much more term insurance than whole life insurance for the 
same amount of money.  
 • 
 Do I need other insurance?  
 It is important to have health insurance to protect against large medical 
bills. You also need car insurance (get a high deductible) and liability 
insurance in case you injure someone. You should also have homeowner’s 
or renter’s insurance. Often an umbrella policy will provide all your insur-
ance protection for a lower cost.  
 Outline a strategy for retiring with enough money to last a lifetime.
 • 
 Can I rely on Social Security to cover my retirement expenses?  
 Social Security depends on payments from current workers to cover the 
needs of retired people. Fewer workers are paying into the system, so you 
cannot rely on it to cover all your retirement expenses.  
 • 
 What are the basics of saving for retirement?  
 Supplement Social Security with savings plans of your own. Everyone 
should have an IRA or some other retirement account. A Roth IRA is espe-
cially good for young people because your money grows tax-free and is 
tax-free when you withdraw it. For entrepreneurs, a Keogh plan or simpli-
fied employee pension (SEP) plan is wise. If you work for someone else, 
check out the 401(k) plan. Find a financial advisor who can recommend 
the best savings plan and help you make other investments.  
 • 
 What are the basics of estate planning?  
 You need to choose a guardian for your children, prepare a will, and assign 
an executor for your estate. Sign a durable power of attorney to enable 
someone else to handle your finances if you are not capable. The same 
LO D–3
LO D–4

D-20
BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
applies to a health durable power of attorney. Estate planning is complex 
and often calls for the aid of a financial planner/attorney, but the money is 
well spent to protect your assets. 
key terms
 annuity 11
 contrarian 
approach 9
 disability insurance 12
 executor 18
 401(k) plan 16 
 individual retirement 
account (IRA) 14
 Roth IRA 15
 Social Security 14
 tax-deferred 
contributions 14 
 term insurance 11
 umbrella policy 13
 variable life insurance 11
 whole life insurance 11
 will 18
critical thinking
 1. Have you given any thought to becoming an entrepreneur? Do the statis-
tics about millionaires in this chapter give you some courage to pursue 
such a venture? 
 2. Housing prices in many parts of the United States are falling. What is the 
situation where you live? Would you encourage a college graduate in your 
area to buy a home or rent? 
 3. What kinds of questions must a person ask before considering the purchase 
of a home? 
 4. What insurance coverage do you have? What type of insurance do you 
need to buy next? 
developing workplace skills
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology 
 1.  Check your local paper or use an online realtor to gather information regard-
ing the cost to rent a two-bedroom apartment and to buy a two-bedroom 
condominium in your area. Go to  Dinkytown.net  and use the site’s “rent-
versus-buy calculator” to compare these costs. Discuss your findings in 
small groups. 
 2.  Talk with someone you know who has invested in a family home. What 
appreciation has he or she gained on the purchase price? (Or, conversely, 
how has the value depreciated?) What other benefits has the home 
brought? Draw up a list of the benefits and drawbacks of owning a home 
and real estate in general as an investment. Be prepared to give a one-
minute presentation on what you learned. 
 3.  Go online and find out the cost of major medical/hospital treatments in 
your area. Ask some older friends or acquaintances about medical insur-
ance and whether they have ever gone without any. What types of insur-
ance do they recommend? Discuss your results with the class. 

D-21
Managing Personal Finances
BONUS CHAPTER D
 4.   The best time to start saving for the future is  now. To prove this point to 
yourself, find a savings calculator online and calculate how much you will 
have at age 65 if you begin saving $100 a month now, and $100 a month 10 
years from now.  
 5.   Go online and check out the benefits and drawbacks of both traditional 
and Roth IRAs. Be prepared to make a two-minute presentation about 
each and to discuss your findings in class.  
taking it to the net
 PURPOSE 
 To use online resources to make smart personal finance decisions.  
 EXERCISE 
 Use the calculators at   Dinkytown.net  to answer the following questions:
 1. You need $5,000 for a trip to Europe in two years. How much would you 
have to deposit monthly in a savings account paying 1 percent in order to 
meet your goal?  
 2. Investing $1,000 at 6 percent for five years, what is the difference in pur-
chasing power of your savings if inflation increases by 2 percent annually 
during that time? By 4 percent?  
 3. Starting today, how much would you need to save each month in order to 
become a millionaire before you retire?  
 4. You need a new car. What car can you afford if you have $1,500 for a down 
payment, can make monthly payments of $300, and get $1,000 for trading 
in your old clunker?  
 5. How much house can you afford if you earn $36,000 a year and have $10,000 
savings for a down payment, a $6,000 car loan balance, and no credit card 
debts?  
notes
 1. 
 “Africa’s Billionaires Club,”  Time,  October 21, 2013. 
 2. 
Kelly Greene, “How to Fine-Tune Your 401 (k),”  The Wall 
Street Journal,  January 25–26, 2014. 
 3. 
Veronica Dagher, “Wanted: Ideas to Teach Teenagers about 
Money,”  The Wall Street Journal,  February 4, 2014. 
 4. 
 Alexandra Wolfe, “Drew Faust” (President of Harvard),  The 
Wall Street Journal,  February 1–2, 2014. 
 5. 
Anne Tergesen, “Seven Resolutions to Get Your Nest Egg in 
Shape,”  The Wall Street Journal,  January 14, 2013. 
 6. 
Marketwatch, “1 in 4 Americans Aren’t Saving for 
Retirement,”  New York Post, May 23, 2014. 
 7. 
Elizabeth Dwoskin and Frank Bass, “Who’s Complaining 
about Your Bank,”  Bloomberg Businessweek,  April 8–14, 
2013. 
 8. 
“Signs You Should Keep Renting,”  The Week, May 9, 2014. 
 9. 
Carol Hymowitz, “The Buy/Rent Balance Shifts,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, January 6–12, 2014. 
 10. 
Emily Belz, “A Room of One’s Own,”  World, December 14, 
2013. 
 11. 
Tomio Geron, “The Share Economy,”  Forbes, February 11, 
2013. 
 12. 
Anne Kates Smith, “Where to Put Your Money Now,” 
 Kiplinger’s Personal Finance, July 2014. 
 13. 
Lisa Gerstner, “One Card That Claims to Do It All,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance,  March 2014. 
 14. 
Meredith Derby Berg, “Seven Ways Retailers Are Embracing 
Tech,”  Advertising Age,  February 3, 2014. 
 15. 
Odysseas Papadimitriou, “Best Credit Cards for 2014,” 
 Bottom Line Personal,  February 1, 2014. 
 16. 
Charles Levinson and Danny Yadron, “Card-Theft Code Grew 
in the Net’s Dark Alleys,”  The Wall Street Journal,  January 
22, 2014. 
 17. 
Bill Saporito, “Plastic Surgery,”  Time, February 10, 2014. 

D-22
BONUS CHAPTER D
Managing Personal Finances
 18. Lisa Gerstner, “Credit or Debit: Pick Your Plastic,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance, August 2013. 
 19. Peter Katt, “Life Insurance Cash Value: A Practical 
Discussion,”  AAII Journal, January 2014. 
 20. An editorial in  AAA World, November/December 2013. 
 21. Tergesen, “Seven Resolutions to Get Your Nest Egg in 
Shape.” 
 22. Michael A. Fletcher, “Future Retirees at Greater Fiscal Risk,” 
The Washington Post,  February 17, 2013. 
 23. Ezra Klein, “Entitlements Are the Problem? Maybe They’re 
the Answer,”  The Washington Post,  April 7, 2013. 
 24.  www.standardandpoors.com , accessed May 2014. 
 25. Michael A. Fletcher, “New Retirement Savings Option Is Seen 
as a Moderate First Step,”  The Washington Post, January 20, 
2014; Lydia DePillis, “Bit by Bit to Build a Nest Egg,”  The 
Washington Post, February 2, 2014; an editorial in  The 
Washington Times, February 3, 2014; and “Nine Things to 
Know about Obama’s myIRA Accounts,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, January 29, 2014. 
 26. Knight Kiplinger, “A Bold 401(k) Overhaul,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance,  June 2013. 
 27.  Margaret Collins and Devin Banerjee, “Would You Like Some 
PE in Your 401(k)?”  Bloomberg Businessweek, April 8–14, 
2013. 
 28. Anjelica Tan, “IBM Sets a Stingier 401(k) Standard,” 
 Kiplinger’s Personal Finance,  March 2013. 
 29.  Certified Financial Planner Board of Certification,   www.cfp.
net , accessed May 2014. 
Page D-1: © Paul Morigi/Stringer/Getty Images; 
p. D-3: © Dean Mitchell/E+/Getty Images RF; 
p. D-7: © Blend Images/Alamy RF; p. D-9: © Joe 
Robbins/Getty Images; p. D-13: © Fuse/Getty 
Images RF; p. D-15: © Andersen Ross/Getty 
Images RF; p. D-16: © Jack Hollingsworth/Digital 
Vision/Getty Images RF.
Page D-1: © Paul Morigi/Strin
photo credits


E
EPILOGUE
 Getting the Job 
You Want 
 We hope that as you’ve read the text, you’ve developed an idea of the 
type of career you’d like to build for yourself. If so, how will you go 
about getting a job you want in your chosen field? That is what this 
Epilogue is all about. Good luck—we hope you find a job doing some-
thing you love!
 
• 
Job Search Strategy  
 
• 
Search for Jobs Online  
 
• 
Job Search Resources  
 
• 
Writing Your Résumé  
 
• 
Putting Your Résumé Online  
 
• 
Writing a Cover Letter  
 
• 
Preparing for Job Interviews  
 
• 
Be Prepared to Change Careers  

E-1
Getting the Job You Want
EPILOGUE 
 One of the most important goals of this book is to 
help you get the job you want. First, you have to 
decide what you want to do. So far we’ve helped 
you explore this decision by explaining what peo-
ple do in the various business functions: human 
resource management, marketing, accounting, 
finance, and so on. There are many good books 
about finding the job you want, so we can only 
introduce the subject here. 
 If you are a returning student, you have both 
blessings and handicaps that younger students do 
not have. First, you may have had a full-time job 
already. Second, you are more likely to know what 
kind of job you don’t want. That is a real advan-
tage. By exploring the various business careers in depth, you should be able to 
choose a career path that will meet your objectives. 
 If you have a full-time job right now, you already know that working while 
going to school requires juggling school and work responsibilities. Many older 
students must also balance family responsibilities in addition to those of 
school and work. But take heart. You have also acquired many skills from 
these experiences. Even if they were acquired in unrelated fields, these skills 
will be invaluable as you enter your new career. You can compete with younger 
students because you have the focus that comes with experience. Instructors 
enjoy having both kinds of students in class because they have different 
perspectives. 
 So, whether you’re beginning your first career or your latest career, it’s 
time to develop a strategy for finding and getting a personally satisfying job. 
 JOB SEARCH STRATEGY 
 It is never too early to begin thinking about a future career or careers. The fol-
lowing strategies will give you some guidance in that pursuit:
 
1.  Begin with self-analysis. You might begin your career quest by 
completing a self-analysis inventory. You can refer to  Figure E.1  for a 
sample of a simple assessment. 
 
2.  Search for jobs you would enjoy. Begin at your college’s career 
planning office or website, if your school has one. Talk to people in 
various careers, even after you’ve found a job. Career progress demands 
continuous research.  
 
3.  Begin the networking process. Networking remains the number one 
way for new job seekers to get their foot in the door. You can start with 
your fellow students, family, relatives, neighbors, friends, professors, 
and local businesspeople. Be sure to keep a record of names, addresses, 
and phone numbers of contacts, including where they work, the person 
who recommended them to you, and the relationship between the 
source person and the contact. A great way to build contacts and make 
a good impression on employers is to do part-time work and summer 
internships for firms you find interesting.  
 
4.  Use social media for help. Many professionals use online social 
networking sites, like Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn, to expand their 
networks and share industry news. If you haven’t already, start profiles 
with these sites and start making connections. Don’t sign up for a 
profile if you won’t use it; employers will only think you don’t finish 
Do you look forward to 
saying, “I got the job!” 
after your years of 
college study? Job fairs 
are among the many 
resources that can help 
you find the right job for 
you. Is it ever too early 
to start thinking about 
your career?

EPILOGUE
Getting the Job You Want
E-2
Interests
     1. How do I like to spend my time?
2. Do I enjoy being with people?
3. Do I like working with mechanical things?
4. Do I enjoy working with numbers?
5. Am I a member of many organizations?
6. Do I enjoy physical activities?
    7. Do I like to read?
Abilities
      1. Am I adept at working with numbers?
2. Am I adept at working with 
mechanical things?
3. Do I have good verbal and written communication 
skills?
4. What special talents do I have?
5. In which abilities do I wish I were 
more adept?
Education
      1. Have I taken certain courses that have prepared me 
for a particular job?
2. In which subjects did I perform the best? The worst?
3. Which subjects did I enjoy the most? The least?
4. How have my extracurricular activities prepared me 
for a particular job?
5. Is my GPA an accurate picture of my academic abil-
ity? Why?
6. Do I want a graduate degree? Do I want to earn it 
before beginning my job?
    7. Why did I choose my major?
Experience
      1. What previous jobs have I held? What were my 
responsibilities in each?
2. Were any of my jobs applicable to positions I may be 
seeking? How?
3. What did I like the most about my previous jobs? Like 
the least?
4. Why did I work in the jobs I did?
5. If I had to do it over again, would I work in these 
jobs? Why?
Personality
                1. What are my good and bad traits?
          2. Am I competitive?
          3. Do I work well with others?
          4. Am I outspoken?
          5. Am I a leader or a follower?
         6. Do I work well under pressure?
              7. Do I work quickly, or am I methodical?
          8. Do I get along well with others?
          9. Am I ambitious?
10. Do I work well independently of others?
Desired job environment
                1. Am I willing to relocate? Why?
         2. Do I have a geographic preference? Why?
          3. Would I mind traveling in my job?
          4. Do I have to work for a large, nationally known 
firm to be satisfied?
         5. Must I have a job that initially offers a high salary?
         6. Must the job I assume offer rapid promotion 
opportunities?
             7. In what kind of job environment would I feel most 
comfortable?
         8. If I could design my own job, what characteristics 
would it have?
Personal goals
                1. What are my short- and long-term goals? Why?
         2. Am I career-oriented, or do I have broader 
interests?
          3. What are my career goals?
          4. What jobs are likely to help me achieve my goals?
         5. What do I hope to be doing in 5 years? In 10 years?
         6. What do I want out of life?
FIGURE E.1 A PERSONAL ASSESSMENT
what you start. When posting to these websites, be careful to include 
only information you would want a potential hiring agent to see and 
not something that might hurt your chances for landing a job.  
 
5.  Prepare a good cover letter and résumé. Once you know what you 
want to do and where you would like to work, you need to develop a 
good résumé and cover letter. Your résumé lists your education, work 
experience, and activities. We’ll talk about these key job search tools in 
more detail. We’ll also give you a list of resources you can use.  
 
6.  Develop interviewing skills. Interviewers will be checking your 
appearance (clothes, haircut, fingernails, shoes); your attitude (friendly, 
engaged); your verbal ability (speaking clearly); and your motivation 

E-3
Getting the Job You Want
EPILOGUE 
(enthusiasm, passion). Note also that 
interviewers want you to have been active 
outside of school and to have set goals. 
Have someone evaluate you on these 
qualities now to see if you have any weak 
points. You can then work on those 
weaknesses before you have any actual job 
interviews. We’ll give you some clues on 
how to do this later.  
 
7.  Follow up. Write a thank-you e-mail after 
interviews, even if you think they didn’t go 
well. You have a chance to make a lasting 
impression with a follow-up note. If you 
are interviewed by a group of people, ask 
for their business cards at the interview 
and e-mail them each separately. Let the company know you are still 
interested and indicate your willingness to travel to be interviewed. 
Get to know people in the company and learn from them whom to 
contact and what qualifications to emphasize.  
 SEARCHING FOR JOBS ONLINE 
 Social networking has become a powerful force in the job search. This should 
be no surprise; networking has always been the best way to hear about job 
leads, and networking online only makes it easier to connect and communi-
cate with the people who could one day hire you. 
 Employers can use your online profiles to find your previous employ-
ers, learn more about your personality and interests, and gauge if you’d 
match the company’s needs. Employers can also find red flags that can keep 
you from being hired, such as provocative photos, evidence of excessive 
drinking or drug use, bad-mouthing of previous employers, or discrimina-
tory comments about race, age, gender, or other topics. The key is to build 
a professional yet genuine personality online, one you won’t mind showing 
to your future boss. 
 You can be sure that a future employer will check out your social media per-
sonality before hiring you. Here are a few social media sites you should be on:
 
• 
Facebook—“Like” the company’s page on Facebook and look through its 
posts, photos, and comments to get a sense for what the company does.  
 
• 
Twitter—Follow people who work in the industries and positions you 
are applying for. Share links to interesting articles or updates, and 
“re-tweet,” or repeat, interesting stories from other professionals.  
 
• 
LinkedIn—Companies have always relied on current employees to 
find their best new employees, and LinkedIn makes finding those 
connections easier. Using LinkedIn, you may find out that your high 
school friend’s old college roommate is hiring, and that connection 
could be enough to get you the job.  
 
• 
Google1: Organize your business contacts into “circles” and consider 
reaching out to them in “hangouts” to discuss industry news and find 
job openings.  
 
• 
Pinterest: Share photos or videos that showcase your skills, especially 
if your experiences are creative or visual. Or, just show employers your 
personality by sharing images you enjoy.  
Professional interview 
behavior includes 
writing a follow-up letter 
to thank the person or 
persons you met. What 
are your goals in writing 
such a letter?

EPILOGUE
Getting the Job You Want
E-4
 
• 
YouTube: Show off your communication skills and personality by 
posting videos. If you don’t have videos from your previous work 
experiences, consider starting a video blog where you share your 
opinions on topics relevant to your business.  
 
• 
Blog/Personal Website: While you should be careful about posting any 
personal information that could lead to identity theft on a public 
website, consider the value of writing regularly about a topic related to 
your career interests. A well-written blog can attract the attention of 
employers. However, if you create a blog, remember to proofread 
everything you post. Be sure to call attention to your blog posts by 
using Twitter and LinkedIn updates with links to what you write.  
 JOB SEARCH RESOURCES 
 Your school placement bureau’s office and website are good places to begin 
learning about potential employers. On-campus interviewing is often a great 
source of jobs (see  Figure E.2 ). Your library and the Internet may have annual 
reports that will give you even more information about your selected 
companies. 
 Other good sources of jobs include the want ads, job fairs, summer and 
other internship programs, placement bureaus, and sometimes walking into 
firms that appeal to you and asking for an interview. The  Occupational Outlook 
Quarterly, produced by the U.S. Department of Labor, says this about job 
hunting: 
 The skills that make a person employable are not so much the ones 
needed on the job as the ones needed to get the job, skills like the abil-
ity to find a job opening, complete an application, prepare the résumé, 
and survive an interview.  
 Here are a few printed sources you can use for finding out about jobs, 
writing résumés and cover letters, and other career information:
 
1. U.S. Department of Labor, “Occupational Outlook Handbook,” 
2013–2014  
 
2. Carole Martin,  What to Say in Every Job Interview (McGraw-Hill, 2014)  
 
3. Martin Yate,  Knock ’em Dead 2014: The Ultimate Job Search Guide
(Adams Media Corporation, 2014)  
 
4. Damien Birket,  The Job Search Checklist (AMACON, 2013)  
FIGURE E.2 WHERE 
COLLEGE STUDENTS 
FIND JOBS
SOURCE OF JOB
Online searches
College faculty/staff referrals
On-campus interviewing
Internship programs
Write-ins
High-demand major programs
Current employee referrals
Minority career programs
Job listings with placement office
Part-time employment
Responses from want ads
Unsolicited referrals from placement
Walk-ins
Women’s career programs
Cooperative education programs
Job listings with employment agencies
Summer employment
Referrals from campus organizations

E-5
Getting the Job You Want
EPILOGUE 
 
5. Richard N. Bolles,  What Color Is Your Parachute? 2014: A Practical 
Manual for Job-Hunters and Career-Changers (Ten Speed Press, 2014)  
 
6. Paul D. Tieger, Barbara Barron, and Kelly Tieger,  Do What You Are: 
Discover the Perfect Career for You Through the Secrets of Personality 
Type (Little, Brown, and Company, 2014)  
 
7. Nicolas Lore,  The Pathfinder: How to Choose or Change Your Career for 
a Lifetime of Satisfaction and Success (Touchstone Books, 2012)  
 
8. Gwenn Wilson,  100% Job Search Success (Cengage Learning, 2014)  
 
9. Fred Koon,  Leveraging LinkedIn: For Job Success in 2014 (Create Space 
Independent Publishing Platform, 2014)  
 To find information about careers or internships online, try these sites 
(though keep in mind that addresses on the Internet are subject to sudden and 
frequent change):
 
• 
 www.CareerBuilder.com  
 
• 
 www.Monster.com  
 
• 
 www.JobSearch.about.com  
 
• 
 www.Indeed.com  
 
• 
 www.GlassDoor.com  
 
• 
 www.TweetMyJobs.com  
 It’s never too early in your career to begin designing a résumé and think-
ing of cover letters. A quality résumé is both deep and wide: deep, meaning 
you had a deep commitment to your activities (leadership roles, responsibili-
ties, long-term commitments), and wide, meaning you were active in several, 
varied areas (jobs, internships, clubs, volunteering). 
 By preparing a résumé now, you may find gaps that need to be filled 
before you can land the job you want. For example, if you discover that you 
haven’t been involved in enough outside activities to impress an employer, join 
a club or volunteer your time. If you are weak on job experience, seek an 
internship or part-time job to fill in that gap. 
 It’s never too soon to prepare a résumé, so let’s discuss how.  
 WRITING YOUR RÉSUMÉ 
 A résumé is a one-page document that lists information an employer would need 
to evaluate whether you qualify for that company’s job opening. A résumé explains 
your immediate goals and career objectives as well as your educational back-
ground, experience, interests, and other relevant data. For example, experience 
working with teams is important to many companies. If you don’t show an 
employer you have experience working with teams on your résumé, how can that 
employer decide if you should get an interview? Employers don’t  read résumés—
they  scan them, so use action words like those listed in  Figure E.3  to grab an 
employer’s attention quickly. You must be comprehensive and clear in your 
résumé if you are to communicate all your attributes. 
 Your résumé is an advertisement for yourself. If your ad is better than the 
other person’s ad, you’re more likely to get the interview. In this case,  better means 
that your ad highlights your attributes more attractively. In discussing your educa-
tion, for example, be sure to highlight your extracurricular activities such as part-
time jobs, sports, and clubs. If you did well in school, include your grades. Be sure 
to describe your previous jobs, including your responsibilities, achievements, and 
special projects. If you include an interests section, don’t just list your hobbies, but 
describe how deeply you are involved. If you organized the club, volunteered your 

EPILOGUE
Getting the Job You Want
E-6
time, or participated in an organization, make sure to say so in the résumé. The 
idea is to make yourself look as good on paper as you are in reality. 
 Here are some hints on preparing your résumé:
 
• 
Keep it simple. Put a summary of your skills and your objective at 
the top so that the reader can capture as much as possible in the first 
30 seconds.  
 
• 
If you e-mail your résumé, send it in the text of the message; don’t just 
send it as an attachment. It takes too long for the receiver to open an 
attachment.  
 
• 
Customize each mailing to that specific company. You may use a 
standard résumé, but add data to customize it and to introduce it.  
 
• 
Use any advertised job title as the subject of your e-mail message, 
including any relevant job numbers.  
 See  Figure E.4  for a sample résumé. Most companies prefer that you keep 
your résumé to one page unless you have many years of experience. 
 PUTTING YOUR RÉSUMÉ ONLINE 
 Many larger firms seek candidates on the Internet, and online tools can help 
you expand your résumé into a portfolio complete with links, work samples, 
and even video. An online résumé can thus allow you to reach the greatest 
number of potential employers with the least amount of effort. 
 But remember, thousands of other eager job hunters send résumés online, 
and the volume can overwhelm recruiters. That doesn’t mean you shouldn’t 
post your résumé online, but you can’t just send a few hundred résumés into 
cyberspace and then sit back and wait for the phone to ring. Include online 
résumés as a tool in your job search process, but continue to use the more 
traditional tools, such as networking. 
 If you are sending a résumé through a career listing site like  Monster.
com , the company may be using a computer program to scan your résumé for 
keywords before actual humans get their hands on it. Computer programs 
look at résumés much differently than people do, so some people’s perfectly 
executed, beautifully worded résumés don’t pass the computer’s test. If you are 
submitting a résumé online, you must understand what the computer is pro-
grammed to look for. While scannable résumés are on their way out, you may 
still find value in creating an online résumé that will pass the computer scan 
with flying colors. Here are five ways to write an online résumé that will get 
you past the computer evaluation stage:
 
• 
Include as many of the keywords in the company’s job description as 
possible. If you are applying for a sales management position, use the 
words “sales,” “managed,” and “manager” often in your résumé.  
 
• 
Visit the employer’s website. Are there any words they use to describe 
their corporate culture? If so, include those adjectives in your résumé 
as well.  
FIGURE E.3 SAMPLE 
ACTION WORDS
Administered
Directed
Investigated
Scheduled
Budgeted
Established
Managed
Served
Conducted
Handled
Operated
Supervised
Coordinated
Implemented
Organized
Teamed
Designed
Improved
Planned
Trained
Developed
Increased
Produced
Wrote

E-7
Getting the Job You Want
EPILOGUE 
FIGURE E.4 SAMPLE 
RÉSUMÉ
Yann Ng
345 Big Bend Boulevard
Kirkwood, MO, 63122
314-555-5385
yng@stilnet.com
Job objective: Sales representative in business-to-business marketing
Education: Earned 100 percent of college expenses working 35 hours per week
Language Skills: Fluent in English, Vietnamese, and French 
A.A. in Business, May 2013
St. Louis Community College at Meramec 
Grade Point Average: 3.6
B.S. in Business, Marketing Major, expected May 2015
University of Missouri, St. Louis 
Grade Point Average: 3.2 overall, 3.5 in major 
Dean’s List for two semesters 
Schnuck’s Supermarket, Des Peres, MO, 5/11 – present
   • Responded to customer requests quickly as evening and weekend checkout cashier
   • Trained new hires to build customer retention, loyalty, and service
   • Learned on-the-job principles behind brand management, retail sales, and 
      consumer product marketing
Experience 
Mary Tuttle’s Flowers, Kirkwood, MO, Summer 2009 and Summer 2010 
   • Created flower arrangements to customer specifications, managed sales 
       transactions, and acted as an assistant to the manager
   • Developed skills in customer relationship management
   • Created window displays to enhance visual merchandising and retail marketing to 
      consumers 
Computer Skills: Microsoft Office, Photoshop, and HTML/Web Publishing 
    • Developed own website (www.yng@stilnet.com)
    • Created effective PowerPoint slides using Photoshop for Consumer Behavior class
Student Leadership  
SLCC Student Representative Board: Created action plan for fundraising 
 
drive, which resulted in our largest donations ever to Habitat for Humanity 
UMSL Student American Marketing Association:  Ran team-building
 
and recruitment activities, which resulted in a 10 percent increase in
 
membership 
UMSL Student Government Association: Ran focus groups to help 
 
prioritize goals, helping us target changes in the way we allocate student fees 
 
• 
Keep your formatting simple and streamlined. Avoid underlining, 
italics, and boxes. You don’t want to confuse the computer with fancy 
designs. Keep it simple and save your formatted résumé for the next 
stages in the process.  
 
• 
List all the universities or colleges you’ve attended, even if it was just 
for a class or a semester. Some computer programs assign higher point 
values to prestigious universities.  
 
• 
Don’t ever lie, exaggerate, or cheat the system. You’ll get caught, and 
you won’t get the job.  

EPILOGUE
Getting the Job You Want
E-8
 Figure E.5  offers a sample online résumé, but you should consult the lat-
est résumé handbook to see what the newer résumés should look like. 
 Posting résumés to online job sites can cause privacy nightmares for job 
seekers, who fear everything from identity theft to losing their current job 
when employers find out that they are looking for new jobs. Sometimes posted 
résumés are sold to other sites or individuals willing to pay for them. Scam 
artists posing as recruiters can download all the résumés they want and do 
virtually whatever they want with them. At worst, online résumés can give 
identity thieves a starting point to steal personal information. 
FIGURE E.5 SAMPLE 
ONLINE RÉSUMÉ
Yann Ng
345 Big Bend Boulevard
Kirkwood, MO, 63122
314-555-5385
yng@stilnet.com
Job objective: Sales representative in business-to-business marketing
B.S. in Business, Marketing major, expected May 2015
University of Missouri, St. Louis
Grade point average: 3.2 overall, 3.5 in major
Dean’s List for two semesters
Experience:
Schnuck’s Supermarket, Des Peres, MO, 5/11 – present Responded to customer 
requests quickly as evening and weekend checkout cashier. Trained new hires to 
build customer retention, loyalty, and service. Learned on-the-job principles behind 
brand management, retail sales, and consumer product marketing.
Mary Tuttle’s Flowers, Kirkwood, MO, Summer 2009 and Summer 2010 Created 
flower arrangements to customer specifications, managed sales transactions, and 
acted as an assistant to the manager. Developed skills in customer relationship 
management.  Created window displays to enhance visual merchandising and 
retail marketing to consumers. 
Student Leadership  
SLCC Student Representative Board: Created action plan for fundraising drive
UMSL Student American Marketing Association: Ran team-building and recruitment 
activities UMSL Student Government Association: Ran focus groups to help 
prioritize goals. 
Language Skills  
English 
Vietnamese 
French  
Computer Skills  
Microsoft Office 
Photoshop 
HTML/Web Publishing 
Education:
A.A. in Business, May 2013
St. Louis Community College at Meramec
Grade point average: 3.6

E-9
Getting the Job You Want
EPILOGUE 
 Here are tips to protect your résumé and your identity:
 
• 
 Never include highly private information, such as Social Security 
numbers and birthdays.  
 
• 
Check job boards’ privacy policies to see how information is used and 
resold.  
 
• 
Post résumés directly to employers if possible.  
 
• 
Date résumés and remove them promptly after finding a job.  
 
• 
If possible, withhold confidential information such as telephone numbers 
and your name and use temporary e-mail addresses for contacts.  
 Some companies take résumés via Twitter before accepting full-page résu-
més by e-mail. Find a creative way to shorten your career objectives, experience, 
and interests to under 140 characters and share it with your connections.  
 WRITING A COVER LETTER 
 A cover letter is used to announce your availability and to introduce the 
résumé, but it also showcases your personality to an employer, often for the 
first time. The cover letter is probably one of the most important advertise-
ments anyone will write in a lifetime—so it should be done right. 
 First, the cover letter should indicate that you’ve researched the organiza-
tion and are interested in a job there. Let the organization know what sources 
you used and what you know in the first paragraph to get the attention of the 
reader and show your interest. 
 You may have heard people say, “What counts is not what you know, but 
whom you know.” If you don’t know anyone,  get to know someone. You can do 
this by calling the organization, visiting the offices, or reaching out on social 
media to talk to people who already have the kind of job you’re hoping to get. 
Then, at the beginning of your cover letter, mention that you’ve talked with 
some of the firm’s employees, showing the letter reader that you “know some-
one,” if only casually, and that you’re interested enough to actively pursue the 
organization. This is all part of networking. 
 Describe yourself in the next paragraph of your cover letter. Be sure to 
show how your experiences will benefit the organization. For example, don’t 
just say, “I will be graduating with a degree in marketing.” Say, “You will find 
that my college training in marketing and marketing research has prepared 
me to learn your marketing system quickly and begin making a contribution 
right away.” The sample cover letter in  Figure E.6  will give you a better feel for 
how this looks. 
 Use the last paragraph of your cover letter to say you are available for an 
interview at a time and place convenient for the interviewer. Offer to follow up 
with a phone call or e-mail if you don’t hear from the employer after some 
time. Again, see the sample cover letter in  Figure E.6  for guidance. Notice in 
this letter how the writer subtly shows that she reads business publications 
and draws attention to her résumé. 
 Principles to follow in writing a cover letter and preparing your résumé 
include:
 
• 
Be confident. List all your good qualities and attributes.  
 
• 
Don’t be apologetic or negative. Write as one professional to another, 
not as a humble student begging for a job.  
 
• 
Describe how your experience and education can add value to the 
organization.  

EPILOGUE
Getting the Job You Want
E-10
 
• 
Research every prospective employer thoroughly before writing 
anything. Use a rifle approach rather than a shotgun approach. That 
is, write effective marketing-oriented letters to a few select companies 
rather than general letters to a long list.  
 
• 
Have your materials prepared by an experienced keyboarder if you are 
not highly skilled yourself. Use printing services like FedEx Office if 
you do not have access to a good-quality printer.  
 
• 
Have someone edit your materials for spelling, grammar, and style. 
Don’t be like the student who sent out a second résumé to correct “some 
mixtakes.” Or another who said, “I am acurite with numbers.”  
 
• 
Don’t send the names of references until asked.  
FIGURE E.6 SAMPLE 
COVER LETTER
345 Big Bend Blvd.
Kirkwood, MO 63122 
October 10, 2015 
Mr. Carl Karlinski 
Premier Designs 
45 Apple Court 
Chicago, IL 60536 
Dear Mr. Karlinski: (Address the letter to a real person whenever possible.) 
Recent articles in Inc. and Success praised your company for its innovative 
products and strong customer orientation. Having used your creative display 
materials at Mary Tuttle’s Flowers, I’m familiar with your visually stimulating 
designs. Christie Bouchard, your local sales representative, told me all about your
products and your sales training program at Premier Designs. Having talked with 
her about the kind of salespeople you are seeking, I believe I have the motivation 
and people skills to be successful. 
Proven Sales Ability: For two summers, I created and sold flower arrangements
at Mary Tuttle’s Flowers, developing a loyal customer base. Also, for four years, 
I’ve practiced personable customer relations, based on the excellent 
customer-oriented training program that Schnuck’s Supermarket delivers in the 
St. Louis region. I know our regular customers by name; they’ve told me that they 
first look for my station when they are checking out. I would bring this same 
attention to developing relationships in a business-to-business sales position. 
Self-Motivation: I’ve worked 35 hours per week and every summer during my 
college years and have paid for 100 percent of my expenses. In addition, I’ve paid
for trips to Asia, Europe, and the Americas.
Leadership: I’ve served actively in student governance both on the Student 
Representative Board at St. Louis Community College and as a part of the student
government at the University of Missouri. I’ve always gotten to know other students
to find out how I could make a difference through my student government work.
I would take the initiative to not only serve customers well but also to help other
new salespeople. 
I will be in the Chicago area the week of January 4–9 and would appreciate the 
opportunity to meet with you to learn more about Premier’s sales opportunities.
I will phone your administrative assistant to check on your availability. Thank you
for considering my application. I would work hard to maintain and expand the 
business-to-business relationships that have made Premier Designs so successful. 
Sincerely,
Yann Ng 

E-11
Getting the Job You Want
EPILOGUE 
 PREPARING FOR JOB INTERVIEWS 
 Companies use interviews to decide which qualified candidates are the best 
match for the job, so be prepared for your interviews. There are five stages of 
interview preparation:
 
1.  Do research about the prospective employers. Learn what industry the 
firm is in, its competitors, the products or services it produces and their 
acceptance in the market, and the title of your desired position. You can 
find such information in the firm’s annual reports, in Standard & Poor’s, 
Hoover’s, Moody’s manuals, and various business publications such as 
 Fortune,  Bloomberg  Businessweek, and  Forbes. Ask your librarian for help 
or search the Internet. You can look in the  Reader’s Guide to Business 
Literature to locate the company name and to look for articles about it. 
This important first step shows you have initiative and interest in the firm.  
 
2.  Practice the interview.  Figure E.7  lists some of the more frequently 
asked questions in an interview. Practice answering these questions at 
the placement office and with your roommate, parents, or friends. 
Don’t memorize your answers, but do be prepared—know what you’re 
going to say. Interviewers will be impressed if you prepare questions for 
them about the products, job, company culture, and so on.  Figure E.8  
shows sample questions you might ask. Be sure you know whom to 
contact, and write down the names of everyone you meet. Review the 
action words in  Figure E.3  and try to fit them into your answers. 
FIGURE E.7 FREQUENTLY ASKED QUESTIONS
 • 
How would you describe yourself?
 • 
 What are your greatest strengths and weaknesses?
 • 
How did you choose this company?
 • 
What do you know about the company?
 • 
What are your long-range career goals?
 • 
What courses did you like best? Least?
 • 
What are your hobbies?
 • 
Do you prefer a specific geographic location?
 • 
Are you willing to travel (or move)?
 • 
 Which accomplishments have given you the most 
satisfaction?
 • 
 What things are most important to you in a job?
 • 
Why should I hire you?
 • 
 What experience have you had in this type of work?
 • 
How much do you expect to earn?
 • 
Who are your major competitors, and how would you 
rate their products and marketing relative to yours?
 • 
How long does the training program last, and what is 
included?
 • 
How soon after school would I be expected to start?
 • 
What are the advantages of working for this firm?
 • 
How much travel is normally expected?
 • 
What managerial style should I expect in my area?
 • 
How would you describe the working environment in 
my area? 
 • 
How would I be evaluated?
 • 
What is the company’s promotion policy?
 • 
What is the corporate culture?
 • 
What is the next step in the selection procedures?
 • 
How soon should I expect to hear from you?
 • 
What other information would you like about my 
background, experience, or education?
 • 
What is your highest priority in the next six months 
and how could someone like me help?
FIGURE E.8 SAMPLE QUESTIONS TO ASK THE INTERVIEWER

EPILOGUE
Getting the Job You Want
E-12
 
3.  Be professional during the interview. You should look and sound 
professional throughout the interview. Dress appropriately. When you 
meet the interviewers, greet them by name, smile, and maintain good 
eye contact. Sit up straight in your chair and be alert and enthusiastic. 
If you have practiced, you should be able to relax and be confident. 
Other than that, be yourself, answer questions, and be friendly and 
responsive. (You learned about what types of questions job 
interviewers are legally allowed to ask you in Chapter 11.) Remember, 
the interview is not one-way communication; don’t forget to ask the 
questions you’ve prepared before the interview. Do  not ask about 
salary, however, until you’ve been offered a job. When you leave, thank 
the interviewers and, if you’re still interested in the job, tell them so. 
If they don’t tell you, ask them what the next step is. Maintain a 
positive attitude.  Figures E.9  and  E.10  outline what the interviewers 
will be evaluating. 
 
4.  Follow up on the interview. First, write down what you can remember 
from the interview: names of the interviewers and their titles, dates for 
training, and so forth, so you can send a follow-up letter, a letter of 
FIGURE E.9 TRAITS 
RECRUITERS SEEK IN 
JOB PROSPECTS
  1. Ability to communicate. Do you have the ability to organize your thoughts and 
ideas effectively? Can you express them clearly when speaking or writing? Can you 
present your ideas to others in a persuasive way?
 2. Intelligence. Do you have the ability to understand the job assignment? Learn the 
details of operation? Contribute original ideas to your work?
 3. Self-confidence. Do you demonstrate a sense of maturity that enables you to deal 
positively and effectively with situations and people?
 4. Willingness to accept responsibility. Are you someone who recognizes what needs 
to be done and is willing to do it?
 5. Initiative. Do you have the ability to identify the purpose of work and to take action?
 6. Leadership. Can you guide and direct others to obtain the recognized objectives?
 7. Energy level. Do you demonstrate a forcefulness and capacity to make things move 
ahead? Can you maintain your work effort at an above-average rate?
 8. Imagination. Can you confront and deal with problems that may not have standard 
solutions?
 9. Flexibility. Are you capable of changing and being receptive to new situations and 
ideas?
 10. Interpersonal skills. Can you bring out the best efforts of individuals so they 
become effective, enthusiastic members of a team?
 11. Self-knowledge. Can you realistically assess your own capabilities? See yourself as 
others see you? Clearly recognize your strengths and weaknesses?
 12. Ability to handle conflict. Can you successfully contend with stress situations and 
antagonism?
 13. Competitiveness. Do you have the capacity to compete with others and the willing-
ness to be measured by your performance in relation to that of others?
 14. Goal achievement. Do you have the ability to identify and work toward specific 
goals? Do such goals challenge your abilities?
 15. Vocational skills. Do you possess the positive combination of education and skills 
required for the position you are seeking?
 16. Direction. Have you defined your basic personal needs? Have you determined what 
type of position will satisfy your knowledge, skills, and goals?
Source: “So You’re Looking for a Job?” The College Placement Council.

E-13
Getting the Job You Want
EPILOGUE 
Candidate: “For each characteristic listed below there is a rating scale of 1 through 7, 
where ‘1’ is generally the most unfavorable rating of the characteristic and ‘7’ the 
most favorable. Rate each characteristic by circling just one number to represent 
the impression you gave in the interview that you have just completed.”
Name of Candidate 
1. Appearance
    Sloppy
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Neat
2. Attitude
    Unfriendly
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Friendly
3. Assertiveness/Verbal Ability
     a. Responded completely to questions asked
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Excellent
     b. Clarified personal background and related it to job opening and description
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Excellent
     c. Able to explain and sell job abilities
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Excellent
     d. Initiated questions regarding position and firm
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Excellent
     e. Expressed thorough knowledge of personal goals and abilities
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Excellent
4. Motivation
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
High
5. Subject/Academic Knowledge
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Good
6. Stability
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Good
7. Composure
    III at ease
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Relaxed
8. Personal Involvement/Activities, Clubs, Etc.
    Low
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Very high
9. Mental Impression
    Dull
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Alert
10. Adaptability
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Good
11. Speech Pronunciation
    Poor
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Good
12. Overall Impression
    Unsatisfactory
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Highly 
satisfactory
13.  Would you hire this individual if you were permitted to make a decision 
right now?
Yes
No
FIGURE E.10 INTERVIEW 
RATING SHEET
recommendation, or some other information to keep their interest. 
Your enthusiasm for working for the company could be a major factor 
in them hiring you.  
 
5.  Be prepared to act. Know what you want to say if you do get a job 
offer. You may not want the job once you know all the information. 
Don’t expect to receive a job offer from everyone you meet, but do 
expect to learn something from every interview. With some practice 
and persistence, you should find a rewarding and challenging job.

EPILOGUE
Getting the Job You Want
E-14
 BE PREPARED TO CHANGE CAREERS 
 If you’re like most people, you’ll follow several different career paths 
over your lifetime. This enables you to try different jobs and to stay 
fresh and enthusiastic. The key to moving forward and finding per-
sonal satisfaction in your career is a willingness to change and grow. 
This means that you’ll have to write many cover letters and résu-
més and go through many interviews. Each time you change 
jobs, go through the steps in this section of the Epilogue to be 
sure you’re fully prepared. Good luck! 
All your efforts pay off 
when you land the job 
you want and take the 
first big step in your 
career. Go for it!
Page E-1: © Andrew Harrer/Bloomberg/Getty 
Images; p. E-3: © Ryan McVay/Getty Images
RF; p. E-14: © Winston Davidian/Getty 
Images RF. 
Page E-1: © Andrew Harrer/
photo credits


A
absolute advantage (p. 64) The advantage that 
exists when a country has a monopoly on produc-
ing a specific product or is able to produce it 
more efficiently than all other countries.
accounting (p. 474) The recording, classifying, 
summarizing, and interpreting of financial events 
and transactions to provide management and 
other interested parties the information they 
need to make good decisions.
accounting cycle (p. 479) A six-step procedure 
that results in the preparation and analysis of the 
major financial statements.
accounts payable (p. 484) Current liabilities 
involving money owed to others for merchan-
dise or services purchased on credit but not yet 
paid for.
acquisition (p. 135) One company’s purchase of 
the property and obligations of another company.
administered distribution system (p. 432) A dis-
tribution system in which producers manage all 
of the marketing functions at the retail level.
administrative agencies (p. A-3) Federal or state 
institutions and other government organizations 
created by Congress or state legislatures with del-
egated power to pass rules and regulations within 
their mandated area of authority.
advertising (p. 449) Paid, nonpersonal commu-
nication through various media by organizations 
and individuals who are in some way identified in 
the advertising message.
affiliate marketing (p. 159) An Internet-based mar-
keting strategy in which a business rewards indi-
viduals or other businesses (affiliates) for each 
visitor or customer the affiliate sends to its website.
affirmative action (p. 304) Employment activi-
ties designed to “right past wrongs” by increasing 
opportunities for minorities and women.
agency shop agreement (p. 340) Clause in a labor–
management agreement that says employers may 
hire nonunion workers; employees are not required 
to join the union but must pay a union fee.
agents/brokers (p. 418) Marketing intermediar-
ies who bring buyers and sellers together and 
assist in negotiating an exchange but don’t take 
title to the goods.
American Federation of Labor (AFL) (p. 336) An 
organization of craft unions that championed 
fundamental labor issues; founded in 1886.
annual report (p. 476) A yearly statement of the 
financial condition, progress, and expectations of 
an organization.
annuity (p. D-11) A contract to make regular pay-
ments to a person for life or for a fixed period.
apprentice programs (p. 314) Training programs 
involving a period during which a learner works 
alongside an experienced employee to master the 
skills and procedures of a craft.
arbitration (p. 343) The agreement to bring in an 
impartial third party (a single arbitrator or a 
panel of arbitrators) to render a binding decision 
in a labor dispute.
assembly process (p. 247) That part of the pro-
duction process that puts together components.
assets (p. 483) Economic resources (things of 
value) owned by a firm.
auditing (p. 477) The job of reviewing and evalu-
ating the information used to prepare a compa-
ny’s financial statements.
autocratic leadership (p. 197) Leadership style 
that involves making managerial decisions with-
out consulting others.
B
balance of payments (p. 66) The difference 
between money coming into a country (from 
exports) and money leaving the country (for im -
ports) plus money flows from other factors such 
as tourism, foreign aid, military expenditures, 
and foreign investment.
balance of trade (p. 66) The total value of a 
nation’s exports compared to its imports over a 
particular period.
balance sheet (p. 482) Financial statement that 
reports a firm’s financial condition at a specific 
time and is composed of three major accounts: 
assets, liabilities, and owners’ equity.
ballyhooed Talked about in an exaggerated way.
banker’s acceptance (p. 583) A promise that the 
bank will pay some specified amount at a particu-
lar time.
A
a
e
i
m
a
s
a
o
n
a
t
m
a
i
d
p
a
t
a
t
o
a
i
G L O S S A R Y
 Note: Terms and definitions printed in italics are considered business slang, or jargon. 
G

G-1
GLOSSARY
bankruptcy (p. A-15) The legal process by which a 
person, business, or government entity unable to 
meet financial obligations is relieved of those 
obligations by a court that divides any assets 
among creditors, allowing creditors to get at least 
part of their money and freeing the debtor to begin 
anew.
bargaining zone (p. 343) The range of options 
between the initial and final offer that each party 
will consider before negotiations dissolve or 
reach an impasse.
barter (p. 567) The direct trading of goods or 
services for other goods or services.
bear market Situation where the stock market is 
declining in value and investors feel it will con-
tinue to decline.
been there, done that Prior experience.
benchmarking (p. 228) Comparing an organiza-
tion’s practices, processes, and products against 
the world’s best.
benefit segmentation (p. 377) Dividing the mar-
ket by determining which benefits of the product 
to talk about.
bond (p. 539) A corporate certificate indicating 
that a person has lent money to a firm.
bonds payable (p. 484) Long-term liabilities that 
represent money lent to the firm that must be 
paid back.
bookkeeping (p. 479) The recording of business 
transactions.
bottom line The last line in a profit and loss state-
ment; it refers to net profit or loss.
brain drain (p. 41) The loss of the best and bright-
est people to other countries.
brainstorming (p. 192) Coming up with as many 
solutions to a problem as possible in a short 
period of time with no censoring of ideas.
brand (p. 398) A name, symbol, or design (or 
combination thereof) that identifies the goods or 
services of one seller or group of sellers and dis-
tinguishes them from the goods and services of 
competitors.
brand association (p. 401) The linking of a brand 
to other favorable images.
brand awareness (p. 401) How quickly or easily 
a given brand name comes to mind when a prod-
uct category is mentioned.
brand equity (p. 400) The value of the brand 
name and associated symbols.
brand loyalty (p. 400) The degree to which cus-
tomers are satisfied, like the brand, and are com-
mitted to further purchases.
brand manager (p. 401) A manager who has 
direct responsibility for one brand or one product 
line; called a product manager in some firms.
brand name (p. 368) A word, letter, or group of 
words or letters that differentiates one seller’s 
goods and services from those of competitors.
breach of contract (p. A-10) When one party fails 
to follow the terms of a contract.
break-even analysis (p. 408) The process used to 
determine profitability at various levels of sales.
brightest days The best of times for a person or 
organization.
broadband technology (p. B-10) Technology that 
offers users a continuous connection to the 
Internet and allows them to send and receive 
mammoth files that include voice, video, and 
data much faster than ever before.
budget (p. 508) A financial plan that sets forth 
management’s expectations, and, on the basis of 
those expectations, allocates the use of specific 
resources throughout the firm.
bull market Situation where the stock market is 
increasing in value and investors feel it will con-
tinue to grow.
bundling (p. 398) Grouping two or more prod-
ucts together and pricing them as a unit.
bureaucracy (p. 217) An organization with many 
layers of managers who set rules and regulations 
and oversee all decisions.
business (p. 4) Any activity that seeks to provide 
goods and services to others while operating at a 
profit.
business cycles (p. 49) The periodic rises and 
falls that occur in economies over time.
business environment (p. 11) The surrounding 
factors that either help or hinder the develop-
ment of businesses.
business intelligence (BI) (or analytics) (p. B-3) The 
use of data analytic tools to analyze an organi-
zation’s raw data and derive useful insights 
from them. 
business law (p. A-2) Rules, statutes, codes, and 
regulations that are established to provide a legal 

GLOSSARY
G-2
framework within which business may be con-
ducted and that are enforceable by court action.
business plan (p. 167) A detailed written state-
ment that describes the nature of the business, 
the target market, the advantages the business 
will have in relation to competition, and the 
resources and qualifications of the owner(s).
business-to-business (B2B) market (p. 375) All 
the individuals and organizations that want goods 
and services to use in producing other goods and 
services or to sell, rent, or supply goods to 
others.
buying stock on margin (p. 546) Purchasing 
stocks by borrowing some of the purchase cost 
from the brokerage firm.
C
cafeteria-style fringe benefits (p. 321) Fringe 
benefits plan that allows employees to choose 
the benefits they want up to a certain dollar 
amount.
cannibalize a business One franchise pulls busi-
ness away from another franchise, for example.
capital budget (p. 508) A budget that highlights 
a firm’s spending plans for major asset purchases 
that often require large sums of money.
capital expenditures (p. 512) Major investments 
in either tangible long-term assets such as land, 
buildings, and equipment or intangible assets 
such as patents, trademarks, and copyrights.
capital gains (p. 545) The positive difference 
between the purchase price of a stock and its sale 
price.
capitalism (p. 34) An economic system in which 
all or most of the factors of production and distri-
bution are privately owned and operated for 
profit.
cash-and-carry wholesalers (p. 426) Wholesal ers 
that serve mostly smaller retailers with a limited 
assortment of products.
cash budget (p. 508) A budget that estimates 
cash inflows and outflows during a particular 
period like a month or a quarter.
cash flow (p. 490) The difference between cash 
coming in and cash going out of a business.
cash flow forecast (p. 507) Forecast that predicts 
the cash inflows and outflows in future periods, 
usually months or quarters.
center stage A very important position.
centralized authority (p. 218) An organization 
structure in which decision-making authority is 
maintained at the top level of management at the 
company’s headquarters.
certificate of deposit (CD) (p. 576) A time-deposit 
(savings) account that earns interest to be deliv-
ered at the end of the certificate’s maturity date.
certification (p. 339) Formal process whereby a 
union is recognized by the National Labor 
Relations Board (NLRB) as the bargaining agent 
for a group of employees.
certified 
internal 
auditor 
(CIA) 
(p. 477) An 
accountant who has a bachelor’s degree and two 
years of experience in internal auditing, and who 
has passed an exam administered by the Institute 
of Internal Auditors.
certified management accountant (CMA) (p. 476) 
A professional accountant who has met certain 
educational and experience requirements, passed a 
qualifying exam in the field, and been certified by 
the Institute of Certified Management Accountants.
certified public accountant (CPA) (p. 476) An 
accountant who passes a series of examinations 
established by the American Institute of Certified 
Public Accountants (AICPA).
chain of command (p. 216) The line of authority 
that moves from the top of a hierarchy to the low-
est level.
channel of distribution (p. 418) A whole set of 
marketing intermediaries, such as agents, bro-
kers, wholesalers, and retailers, that join together 
to transport and store goods in their path (or 
channel) from producers to consumers.
claim (p. C-6) A statement of loss that the 
insured sends to the insurance company to 
request payment.
climate change (p. 19) The movement of the 
temperature of the planet up or down over time.
climbed the ladder Promoted to higher-level jobs.
closed shop agreement (p. 340) Clause in a labor– 
management agreement that specified workers 
had to be members of a union before being hired 
(was outlawed by the Taft-Hartley Act in 1947).
cloud computing (p. B-16) A form of virtualiza-
tion in which a company’s data and applications 
are stored at offsite data centers that are accessed 
over the Internet (the cloud).

G-3
GLOSSARY
collective 
bargaining 
(p. 337) The 
process 
whereby union and management representatives 
form a labor–management agreement, or con-
tract, for workers.
command economies (p. 42) Economic systems 
in which the government largely decides what 
goods and services will be produced, who will get 
them, and how the economy will grow.
commercial bank (p. 576) A profit-seeking orga-
nization that receives deposits from individuals 
and corporations in the form of checking and 
savings accounts and then uses some of these 
funds to make loans.
commercial finance companies (p. 517) Organi-
zations that make short-term loans to borrowers 
who offer tangible assets as collateral.
commercialization (p. 403) Promoting a product 
to distributors and retailers to get wide distribu-
tion, and developing strong advertising and sales 
campaigns to generate and maintain interest in 
the product among distributors and consumers.
commercial paper (p. 518) Unsecured promis-
sory notes of $100,000 and up that mature (come 
due) in 270 days or less.
common law (p. A-3) The body of law that comes 
from decisions handed down by judges; also 
referred to as unwritten law.
common market (p. 79) A regional group of 
countries that have a common external tariff, no 
internal tariffs, and a coordination of laws to 
facilitate exchange; also called a trading bloc. An 
example is the European Union.
common stock (p. 537) The most basic form of 
ownership in a firm; it confers voting rights and 
the right to share in the firm’s profits through div-
idends, if offered by the firm’s board of directors.
communism (p. 42) An economic and political 
system in which the government makes almost 
all economic decisions and owns almost all the 
major factors of production.
comparative advantage theory (p. 64) Theory 
that states that a country should sell to other 
countries those products that it produces most 
effectively and efficiently, and buy from other 
countries those products that it cannot produce 
as effectively or efficiently.
competition-based pricing (p. 408) A pricing 
strategy based on what all the other competitors 
are doing. The price can be set at, above, or below 
competitors’ prices.
compliance-based ethics codes (p. 100) Ethical 
standards that emphasize preventing unlawful 
behavior by increasing control and by penalizing 
wrongdoers.
compressed workweek (p. 322) Work schedule 
that allows an employee to work a full number of 
hours per week but in fewer days.
computer-aided design (CAD) (p. 248) The use of 
computers in the design of products.
computer-aided manufacturing (CAM) (p. 248)  The 
use of computers in the manufacturing of products.
computer-integrated manufacturing (CIM) (p. 249) 
The uniting of computer-aided design with 
computer-aided manufacturing.
concept testing (p. 403) Taking a product idea to 
consumers to test their reactions.
conceptual skills (p. 194) Skills that involve the 
ability to picture the organization as a whole and 
the relationship among its various parts.
conglomerate merger (p. 135) The joining of 
firms in completely unrelated industries.
Congress 
of 
Industrial 
Organizations 
(CIO) 
(p. 336) Union organization of unskilled work-
ers; broke away from the American Federation of 
Labor (AFL) in 1935 and rejoined it in 1955.
consideration (p. A-9) Something of value; con-
sideration is one of the requirements of a legal 
contract.
consumerism (p. A-12) A social movement that 
seeks to increase and strengthen the rights and 
powers of buyers in relation to sellers.
consumer market (p. 375) All the individuals or 
households that want goods and services for per-
sonal consumption or use.
consumer price index (CPI) (p. 48) Monthly sta-
tistics that measure the pace of inflation or 
deflation.
contingency planning (p. 191) The process of pre-
paring alternative courses of action that may be 
used if the primary plans don’t achieve the orga-
nization’s objectives.
contingent workers (p. 311) Workers who do not 
have 
the 
expectation 
of 
regular, 
full-time 
employment.
continuous process (p. 247) A production pro-
cess in which long production runs turn out fin-
ished goods over time.

GLOSSARY
G-4
contract (p. A-9) A legally enforceable agree-
ment between two or more parties.
contract law (p. A-9) Set of laws that specify what 
constitutes a legally enforceable agreement.
contract manufacturing (p. 69) A foreign coun-
try’s production of private-label goods to which a 
domestic company then attaches its brand name 
or trademark; part of the broad category of 
outsourcing.
contractual distribution system (p. 432) A distri-
bution system in which members are bound to 
cooperate through contractual agreements.
contrarian approach (p. D-9) Buying stock when 
everyone else is selling or vice versa.
controlling (p. 188) A management function that 
involves establishing clear standards to deter-
mine whether or not an organization is progress-
ing toward its goals and objectives, rewarding 
people for doing a good job, and taking corrective 
action if they are not.
convenience goods and services (p. 395) Prod-
ucts that the consumer wants to purchase fre-
quently and with a minimum of effort.
conventional (C) corporation (p. 127) A state-
chartered legal entity with authority to act and 
have liability separate from its owners.
cookies (p. B-20) Pieces of information, such as 
registration data or user preferences, sent by a 
website over the Internet to a web browser that 
the browser software is expected to save and send 
back to the server whenever the user returns to 
that website.
cooking the books Making accounting informa-
tion look better than it actually is to outside 
 observers and users of financial information of a 
company.
cooling-off period (p. 344) When workers in a 
critical industry return to their jobs while the 
union and management continue negotiations.
cooperative (p. 143) A business owned and con-
trolled by the people who use it—producers, con-
sumers, or workers with similar needs who pool 
their resources for mutual gain.
copyright (p. A-7) A document that protects a 
creator’s rights to materials such as books, arti-
cles, photos, and cartoons.
core competencies (p. 229) Those functions that 
the organization can do as well as or better than 
any other organization in the world.
core inflation (p. 48) CPI minus food and energy 
costs.
core time (p. 322) In a flextime plan, the period 
when all employees are expected to be at their job 
stations.
corporate distribution system (p. 432) A distribu-
tion system in which all of the organizations in the 
channel of distribution are owned by one firm.
corporate philanthropy (p. 103) The dimension 
of social responsibility that includes charitable 
donations.
corporate policy (p. 104) The dimension of social 
responsibility that refers to the position a firm 
takes on social and political issues.
corporate responsibility (p. 104) The dimension of 
social responsibility that includes everything from 
hiring minority workers to making safe products.
corporate social initiatives (p. 104) Enhanced 
forms of corporate philanthropy directly related 
to the company’s competencies.
corporate social responsibility (CSR) (p. 102)  A 
business’s concern for the welfare of society.
corporation (p. 120) A legal entity with authority 
to act and have liability separate from its owners.
cost of capital (p. 523) The rate of return a com-
pany must earn in order to meet the demands of 
its lenders and expectations of its equity holders.
cost of goods sold (or cost of goods manufac-
tured) (p. 487) A measure of the cost of mer-
chandise sold or cost of raw materials and 
supplies used for producing items for resale.
couch potatoes People who sit and watch TV for 
hours at a time.
countertrading (p. 76) A complex form of bartering 
in which several countries may be involved, each 
trading goods for goods or services for services.
counting on it Expecting it.
craft union (p. 335) An organization of skilled 
specialists in a particular craft or trade.
credit unions (p. 577) Nonprofit, member-owned 
financial cooperatives that offer the full variety of 
banking services to their members.
critical path (p. 260) In a PERT network, the 
sequence of tasks that takes the longest time to 
complete.
cross-functional self-managed teams (p. 226) 
Groups of employees from different departments 
who work together on a long-term basis.

G-5
GLOSSARY
current assets (p. 484) Items that can or will be 
converted into cash within one year.
customer 
relationship 
management 
(CRM) 
(p. 364) The process of learning as much as pos-
sible about customers and doing everything you 
can over time to satisfy them—or even exceed 
their expectations—with goods and services.
D
damages (p. A-10) The monetary settlement 
awarded to a person who is injured by a breach of 
contract.
data analytics (p. B-8) The process of collecting, 
organizing, storing, and analyzing large sets of 
data (“big data”) in order to identify patterns and 
other information that is most useful to the busi-
ness now and for making future decisions.
database (p. 15) An electronic storage file for 
information.
data processing (DP) (p. B-2) Name for business 
technology in the 1970s; included technology that 
supported an existing business and was primarily 
used to improve the flow of financial information.
dealer (private-label) brands (p. 399) Products 
that don’t carry the manufacturer’s name but 
carry a distributor or retailer’s name instead.
debenture bonds (p. 540) Bonds that are unse-
cured (i.e., not backed by any collateral such as 
equipment).
debit card (p. 582) An electronic funds transfer 
tool that serves the same function as checks: it 
withdraws funds from a checking account.
debt financing (p. 513) Funds raised through 
various forms of borrowing that must be repaid.
decentralized authority (p. 218) An organization 
structure in which decision-making authority is 
delegated to lower-level managers more familiar 
with local conditions than headquarters manage-
ment could be.
decertification (p. 339) The process by which 
workers take away a union’s right to represent them.
decision making (p. 192) Choosing among two 
or more alternatives.
deflation (p. 48) A situation in which prices are 
declining.
demand (p. 37) The quantity of products that 
people are willing to buy at different prices at a 
specific time.
demand deposit (p. 576) The technical name for 
a checking account; the money in a demand 
deposit can be withdrawn anytime on demand 
from the depositor.
demographic segmentation (p. 377) Dividing the 
market by age, income, and education level.
demography (p. 17) The statistical study of the 
human population with regard to its size, density, 
and other characteristics such as age, race, gen-
der, and income.
departmentalization (p. 220) The dividing of 
organizational functions into separate units.
depreciation (p. 487) The systematic write-off of 
the cost of a tangible asset over its estimated use-
ful life.
depression (p. 49) A severe recession, usually 
accompanied by deflation.
deregulation (p. A-17) Government withdrawal 
of certain laws and regulations that seem to hin-
der competition.
devaluation (p. 76) Lowering the value of a 
nation’s currency relative to other currencies.
digital natives (p. 229) Young people who have 
grown up using the Internet and social networking.
direct marketing (p. 431) Any 
activity 
that 
directly links manufacturers or intermediaries 
with the ultimate consumer.
direct selling (p. 430) Selling to consumers in 
their homes or where they work.
disability insurance (p. D-12) Insurance that pays 
part of the cost of a long-term sickness or an 
accident.
discount rate (p. 572) The interest rate that the 
Fed charges for loans to member banks.
disinflation (p. 48) A situation in which price 
increases are slowing (the inflation rate is 
declining).
distributed product development (p. 392) Hand  ing 
off various parts of your innovation process—
often to companies in other countries. 
diversification (p. 544) Buying several different 
investment alternatives to spread the risk of 
investing.
dividends (p. 537) Part of a firm’s profits that 
the firm may distribute to stockholders as either 
cash payments or additional shares of stock.
double-entry bookkeeping (p. 480) The practice 
of writing every business transaction in two places.
Dow Jones Industrial Average (the Dow) (p. 552) 
The average cost of 30 selected industrial stocks, 

GLOSSARY
G-6
used to give an indication of the direction (up or 
down) of the stock market over time.
drop shippers (p. 426) Wholesalers that solicit 
orders from retailers and other wholesalers and 
have the merchandise shipped directly from a 
producer to a buyer.
dumping (p. 67) Selling products in a foreign 
country at lower prices than those charged in the 
producing country.
E
e-commerce (p. 14) The buying and selling of 
goods over the Internet.
economic pie The money available in the 
economy.
economics (p. 30) The study of how society 
chooses to employ resources to produce goods 
and services and distribute them for consump-
tion among various competing groups and 
individuals.
economies of scale (p. 214) The situation in 
which companies can reduce their production 
costs if they can purchase raw materials in bulk; 
the average cost of goods goes down as produc-
tion levels increase.
electronic funds transfer (EFT) system (p. 582)  A 
computerized system that electronically performs 
financial transactions such as making purchases, 
paying bills, and receiving paychecks.
electronic retailing (p. 428) Selling goods and 
services to ultimate customers (e.g., you and me) 
over the Internet.
e-mail snooped When someone other than the 
addressee reads e-mail messages.
embargo (p. 78) A complete ban on the import 
or export of a certain product, or the stopping of 
all trade with a particular country.
empowerment (p. 16) Giving frontline workers 
the responsibility, authority, freedom, training, 
and equipment they need to respond quickly to 
customer requests.
enabling (p. 199) Giving workers the education 
and tools they need to make decisions.
enterprise resource planning (ERP) (p. 255) A 
newer version of materials requirement planning 
(MRP) that combines the computerized functions 
of all the divisions and subsidiaries of the 
firm—such as finance, human resources, and 
order fulfillment—into a single integrated soft-
ware program that uses a single database.
enterprise zones (p. 161) Specific geographic 
areas to which governments try to attract private 
business investment by offering lower taxes and 
other government support.
entrepreneur (p. 4) A person who risks time and 
money to start and manage a business.
entrepreneurial team (p. 157) A group of experi-
enced people from different areas of business 
who join together to form a managerial team 
with the skills needed to develop, make, and mar-
ket a new product.
entrepreneurship (p. 152) Accepting the risk of 
starting and running a business.
environmental scanning (p. 372) The process of 
identifying the factors that can affect marketing 
success.
equity financing (p. 513) Money raised from 
within the firm, from operations or through the 
sale of ownership in the firm (stock or venture 
capital).
equity theory (p. 282) The idea that employees 
try to maintain equity between inputs and out-
puts compared to others in similar positions.
ethics (p. 96) Standards of moral behavior, that 
is, behavior accepted by society as right versus 
wrong.
everyday low pricing (EDLP) (p. 409) Setting 
prices lower than competitors and then not hav-
ing any special sales.
exchange rate (p. 75) The value of one nation’s 
currency relative to the currencies of other 
countries.
exchange-traded funds (ETFs) (p. 550) Collec-
tions of stocks that are traded on exchanges but 
are traded more like individual stocks than like 
mutual funds.
exclusive distribution (p. 427) Distribution that 
sends products to only one retail outlet in a given 
geographic area.
executor (p. D-18) A person who assembles and 
values your estate, files income and other taxes, 
and distributes assets.
expectancy theory (p. 280) Victor Vroom’s the-
ory that the amount of effort employees exert on 
a specific task depends on their expectations of 
the outcome.

G-7
GLOSSARY
exporting (p. 63) Selling products to another 
country.
express warranties (p. A-8) Specific representa-
tions by the seller that buyers rely on regarding 
the goods they purchase.
external customers (p. 202) Dealers, who buy 
products to sell to others, and ultimate customers 
(or end users), who buy products for their own 
personal use.
extranet (p. B-10) A semiprivate network that 
uses Internet technology and allows more than 
one company to access the same information or 
allows people on different servers to collaborate.
extrinsic reward (p. 270) Something given to you 
by someone else as recognition for good work; 
extrinsic rewards include pay increases, praise, 
and promotions.
F
facility layout (p. 254) The physical arrangement 
of resources (including people) in the production 
process.
facility location (p. 252) The process of selecting a 
geographic location for a company’s operations.
factoring (p. 517) The process of selling accounts 
receivable for cash.
factors of production (p. 10) The resources used 
to create wealth: land, labor, capital, entrepre-
neurship, and knowledge.
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) 
(p. 581) An independent agency of the U.S. 
government that insures bank deposits.
finance (p. 504) The function in a business that 
acquires funds for the firm and manages those 
funds within the firm.
financial accounting (p. 476) Accounting infor-
mation and analyses prepared for people outside 
the organization.
financial control (p. 508) A process in which a 
firm periodically compares its actual revenues, 
costs, and expenses with its budget.
financial management (p. 504) The job of man-
aging a firm’s resources so it can meet its goals 
and objectives.
financial 
managers 
(p. 504) Managers 
who 
examine financial data prepared by accountants 
and recommend strategies for improving the 
financial performance of the firm.
financial statement (p. 481) A summary of all the 
transactions that have occurred over a particular 
period.
fiscal policy (p. 49) The federal government’s 
efforts to keep the economy stable by increasing 
or decreasing taxes or government spending.
fixed assets (p. 484) Assets that are relatively per-
manent, such as land, buildings, and equipment.
flat organization structure (p. 219) An organiza-
tion structure that has few layers of management 
and a broad span of control.
flexible manufacturing (p. 249) Designing ma-
chines to do multiple tasks so that they can pro-
duce a variety of products.
flextime plan (p. 322) Work schedule that gives 
employees some freedom to choose when to 
work, as long as they work the required number 
of hours.
focus group (p. 371) A small group of people 
who meet under the direction of a discussion 
leader to communicate their opinions about an 
organization, its products, or other given issues.
foreign direct investment (FDI) (p. 71) The buying 
of permanent property and businesses in foreign 
nations.
foreign subsidiary (p. 71) A company owned in a 
foreign country by another company, called the 
parent company.
formal organization (p. 232) The structure that 
details lines of responsibility, authority, and posi-
tion; that is, the structure shown on organization 
charts.
form utility (p. 247) The value producers add to 
materials in the creation of finished goods and 
services.
401(k) plan (p. D-16) A savings plan that allows 
you to deposit pretax dollars and whose earnings 
compound tax free until withdrawal, when the 
money is taxed at ordinary income tax rates.
franchise (p. 136) The right to use a specific 
business’s name and sell its products or services 
in a given territory.
franchise agreement (p. 136) An arrangement 
whereby someone with a good idea for a business 
sells the rights to use the business name and sell a 
product or service to others in a given territory.
franchisee (p. 136) A person who buys a 
franchise.

GLOSSARY
G-8
franchisor (p. 136) A company that develops a 
product concept and sells others the rights to 
make and sell the products.
free-for-all atmosphere A situation where all 
order seems to be lost in conducting business.
free-market economies (p. 42) Economic sys-
tems in which the market largely determines 
what goods and services get produced, who gets 
them, and how the economy grows.
free-rein leadership (p. 198) Leadership style 
that involves managers setting objectives and 
employees being relatively free to do whatever it 
takes to accomplish those objectives.
free trade (p. 63) The movement of goods and 
services among nations without political or eco-
nomic barriers.
freight forwarder (p. 436) An organization that 
puts many small shipments together to create a 
single large shipment that can be transported 
cost-effectively to the final destination.
fringe benefits (p. 320) Benefits such as sick-
leave pay, vacation pay, pension plans, and health 
plans that represent additional compensation to 
employees beyond base wages.
from scratch From the beginning.
fundamental 
accounting 
equation 
(p. 482)  
Assets 5 Liabilities 1 Owners9 equity; this is the 
basis for the balance sheet.
G
Gantt chart (p. 261) Bar graph showing produc-
tion managers what projects are being wor ked 
on and what stage they are in at any given time.
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade (GATT) 
(p. 79) A 1948 agreement that established an 
international forum for negotiating mutual 
reductions in trade restrictions.
general partner (p. 123) An owner (partner) who 
has unlimited liability and is active in managing 
the firm.
general partnership (p. 123) A partnership in 
which all owners share in operating the business 
and in assuming liability for the business’s debts.
generic goods (p. 399) Nonbranded products 
that usually sell at a sizable discount compared to 
national or private-label brands.
geographic segmentation (p. 377) Dividing the 
market by cities, counties, states, or regions.
get in on the dough Take the opportunity to make 
some money.
givebacks (p. 345) Concessions made by union 
members to management; gains from labor negotia-
tions are given back to management to help employ-
ers remain competitive and thereby save jobs.
goals (p. 189) The broad, long-term accomplish-
ments an organization wishes to attain.
goal-setting theory (p. 280) The idea that setting 
ambitious but attainable goals can motivate 
workers and improve performance if the goals 
are accepted, accompanied by feedback, and 
facilitated by organizational conditions.
go for the gold To work to be the very best (figura-
tively winning a gold medal).
go out with me Go with me to dinner or to a 
movie or some other entertainment.
gone off the deep end Doing something risky, 
almost crazy—like jumping into the deep end of a 
swimming pool when you can’t swim.
goods (p. 4) Tangible products such as comput-
ers, food, clothing, cars, and appliances.
goofing off Doing things at work not associated 
with the job, such as talking with others at the 
drinking fountain.
government and not-for-profit accounting (p. 478) 
Accounting system for organizations whose pur-
pose is not generating a profit but serving rate-
payers, taxpayers, and others according to a duly 
approved budget.
greening (p. 19) The trend toward saving energy 
and producing products that cause less harm to 
the environment.
grievance (p. 342) A charge by employees that 
management is not abiding by the terms of the 
negotiated labor–management agreement.
gross domestic product (GDP) (p. 46) The total 
value of final goods and services produced in a 
country in a given year.
gross output (GO) (p. 46) A measure of total 
sales volume at all stages of production.
gross profit (or gross margin) (p. 487) How much 
a firm earned by buying (or making) and selling 
merchandise.
H
hand over the keys Give access to others.
hard copy Copy printed on paper.
Hawthorne effect (p. 273) The tendency for peo-
ple to behave differently when they know they are 
being studied.

G-9
GLOSSARY
health savings accounts (HSAs) (p. C-9) Tax-
deferred savings accounts linked to low-cost, 
high-deductible health insurance policies.
heart The most important part of something; the 
central force or idea.
hierarchy (p. 216) A system in which one per-
son is at the top of the organization and there is 
a ranked or sequential ordering from the top 
down of managers who are responsible to that 
person.
high–low pricing strategy (p. 409) Setting prices 
that are higher than EDLP stores, but having 
many special sales where the prices are lower 
than competitors’.
horizontal merger (p. 135) The joining of two 
firms in the same industry.
hot second Immediately.
human relations skills (p. 194) Skills that involve 
communication and motivation; they enable man-
agers to work through and with people.
human resource management (HRM) (p. 300)  
The process of determining human resource 
needs and then recruiting, selecting, developing, 
motivating, 
evaluating, 
compensating, 
and 
scheduling employees to achieve organizational 
goals.
hygiene factors (p. 275) In Herzberg’s theory of 
motivating factors, job factors that can cause dis-
satisfaction if missing but that do not necessarily 
motivate employees if increased.
I
identity theft (p. 16) The obtaining of individu-
als’ personal information, such as Social Security 
and credit card numbers, for illegal purposes.
If it isn’t broken, don’t fix it Don’t risk making 
things worse by changing things that don’t need to 
be changed.
implied warranties (p. A-8) Guarantees legally 
imposed on the seller.
importing (p. 63) Buying products from another 
country.
import quota (p. 78) A limit on the number of 
products in certain categories that a nation can 
import.
inbound logistics (p. 435) The area of logistics 
that involves bringing raw materials, packaging, 
other goods and services, and information from 
suppliers to producers.
income statement (p. 485) The financial state-
ment that shows a firm’s profit after costs, 
expenses, and taxes; it summarizes all of the 
resources that have come into the firm (reve-
nue), all the resources that have left the firm, 
expenses, and the resulting net income or net 
loss.
incubators (p. 161) Centers that offer new busi-
nesses low-cost offices with basic business 
services.
indenture terms (p. 520) The terms of agree-
ment in a bond issue.
independent audit (p. 477) An evaluation and 
unbiased opinion about the accuracy of a com-
pany’s financial statements.
individual retirement account (IRA) (p. D-14) A 
tax-deferred investment plan that enables you (and 
your spouse, if you are married) to save part of 
your income for retirement; a traditional IRA 
allows people who qualify to deduct from their 
reported income the money they put into an 
account.
industrial goods (p. 396) Products used in the 
production of other products. Sometimes called 
business goods or B2B goods.
industrial unions (p. 336) Labor organizations of 
unskilled and semiskilled workers in mass-
production industries such as automobiles and 
mining.
inflation (p. 47) A general rise in the prices of 
goods and services over time.
infomercial (p. 453) A full-length TV program 
devoted exclusively to promoting goods or services.
informal organization (p. 225) The system that 
develops spontaneously as employees meet and 
form cliques, relationships, and lines of authority 
outside the formal organization; that is, the 
human side of the organization that does not 
appear on any organization chart.
information systems (IS) (p. B-2) Technology that 
helps companies do business; includes such tools 
as automated teller machines (ATMs) and voice 
mail.
information technology (IT) (p. B-2) Technology 
used to store, retrieve, and send information 
efficiently.
information utility (p. 424) Adding value to prod-
ucts by opening two-way flows of information 
between marketing participants.

GLOSSARY
G-10
initial public offering (IPO) (p. 532) The first pub-
lic offering of a corporation’s stock.
injunction (p. 344) A court order directing some-
one to do something or to refrain from doing 
something.
insider trading (p. 105) An unethical activity in 
which insiders use private company information 
to further their own fortunes or those of their 
family and friends.
institutional 
investors 
(p. 533) Large 
organizations—such as pension funds, mutual 
funds, and insurance companies—that invest their 
own funds or the funds of others.
insurable interest (p. C-6) The possibility of the 
policyholder to suffer a loss.
insurable risk (p. C-6) A risk that the typical 
insurance company will cover.
insurance policy (p. C-6) A written contract 
between the insured and an insurance company 
that promises to pay for all or part of a loss.
intangible assets (p. 484) Long-term assets (e.g., 
patents, trademarks, copyrights) that have no 
real physical form but do have value.
integrated 
marketing 
communication 
(IMC) 
(p. 448) A technique that combines all the pro-
motional tools into one comprehensive and uni-
fied promotional strategy.
integrity-based ethics codes (p. 100) Ethical 
standards that define the organization’s guiding 
values, create an environment that supports ethi-
cally sound behavior, and stress a shared account-
ability among employees.
intensive distribution (p. 427) Distribution that 
puts products into as many retail outlets as 
possible.
interactive promotion (p. 454) Promotion pro-
cess that allows marketers to go beyond a mono-
logue, where sellers try to persuade buyers to buy 
things, to a dialogue in which buyers and sellers 
work together to create mutually beneficial 
exchange relationships.
interest (p. 539) The payment the issuer of the 
bond makes to the bondholders for use of the 
borrowed money.
intermittent process (p. 248) A production pro-
cess in which the production run is short and the 
machines are changed frequently to make differ-
ent products.
intermodal shipping (p. 438) The use of multiple 
modes of transportation to complete a single 
long-distance movement of freight.
internal customers (p. 202) Individuals 
and 
units within the firm that receive services from 
other individuals or units.
International Monetary Fund (IMF) (p. 584) Or -
ganization that assists the smooth flow of money 
among nations.
Internet2 (p. B-11) The private Internet system 
that links government supercomputer centers 
and a select group of universities; it runs more 
than 22,000 times faster than today’s public infra-
structure and supports heavy-duty applications.
intranet (p. B-9) A companywide network, closed 
to public access, that uses Internet-type technology.
intrapreneurs (p. 160) Creative people who work 
as entrepreneurs within corporations.
intrinsic reward (p. 270) The personal satisfac-
tion you feel when you perform well and com-
plete goals.
inverted organization (p. 230) An organization 
that has contact people at the top and the chief 
executive officer at the bottom of the organiza-
tion chart.
investment bankers (p. 533) Specialists who 
assist in the issue and sale of new securities.
invisible hand (p. 33) A phrase coined by Adam 
Smith to describe the process that turns self-
directed gain into social and economic benefits 
for all.
involuntary 
bankruptcy 
(p. A-15) Bankruptcy 
procedures filed by a debtor’s creditors.
IOU Debt; abbreviation for “I owe you.”
ISO 14000 (p. 259) A collection of the best prac-
tices for managing an organization’s impact on 
the environment.
ISO 9000 (p. 259) The common name given to 
quality management and assurance standards.
J
job analysis (p. 306) A study of what is done by 
employees who hold various job titles.
job description (p. 306) A summary of the objec-
tives of a job, the type of work to be done, the 
responsibilities and duties, the working conditions, 
and the relationship of the job to other functions.

G-11
GLOSSARY
job enlargement (p. 283) A job enrichment strat-
egy that involves combining a series of tasks into 
one challenging and interesting assignment.
job enrichment (p. 283) A motivational strategy 
that emphasizes motivating the worker through 
the job itself.
job rotation (p. 283) A job enrichment strategy 
that involves moving employees from one job to 
another. 
job sharing (p. 323) An arrangement whereby 
two part-time employees share one full-time job.
job simulation (p. 314) The use of equipment 
that duplicates job conditions and tasks so that 
trainees can learn skills before attempting them 
on the job.
job specifications (p. 306) A written summary of 
the minimum qualifications required of workers 
to do a particular job.
joint venture (p. 70) A partnership in which two 
or more companies (often from different coun-
tries) join to undertake a major project.
journal (p. 479) The record book or computer 
program where accounting data are first entered.
judiciary (p. A-2) The branch of government cho-
sen to oversee the legal system through the court 
system.
jumped headfirst Began quickly and eagerly 
without hesitation.
junk bonds (p. 548) High-risk, high-interest 
bonds.
just-in-time (JIT) inventory control (p. 257) A pro-
duction process in which a minimum of inven-
tory is kept on the premises and parts, supplies, 
and other needs are delivered just in time to go 
on the assembly line.
K
Keynesian economic theory (p. 51) The theory 
that a government policy of increasing spending 
and cutting taxes could stimulate the economy in 
a recession.
key player Important participant.
kick back and relax To take a rest.
Knights of Labor (p. 336) The first national labor 
union; formed in 1869.
knockoff 
brands 
(p. 399) Illegal 
copies 
of 
national brand-name goods.
know-how A level of specific expertise.
knowledge management (p. 199) Finding the 
right information, keeping the information in a 
readily accessible place, and making the informa-
tion known to everyone in the firm.
L
latchkey kids School-age children who come 
home to empty houses since all of the adults are at 
work.
law of large numbers (p. C-6) Principle that if a 
large number of people are exposed to the same 
risk, a predictable number of losses will occur 
during a given period of time.
leading (p. 188) Creating a vision for the organi-
zation and guiding, training, coaching, and moti-
vating others to work effectively to achieve the 
organization’s goals and objectives.
lean manufacturing (p. 249) The production of 
goods using less of everything compared to mass 
production.
ledger (p. 480) A specialized accounting book 
or computer program in which information 
from accounting journals is accumulated into 
specific categories and posted so that managers 
can find all the information about one account 
in the same place. 
letter of credit (p. 583) A promise by the bank to 
pay the seller a given amount if certain condi-
tions are met.
level playing field Treating everyone equally.
leverage (p. 523) Raising needed funds through 
borrowing to increase a firm’s rate of return.
leveraged buyout (LBO) (p. 136) An attempt by 
employees, management, or a group of investors 
to purchase an organization primarily through 
borrowing.
liabilities (p. 484) What the business owes to 
others (debts).
licensing (p. 68) A global strategy in which a 
firm (the licensor) allows a foreign company (the 
licensee) to produce its product in exchange for a 
fee (a royalty).
limited liability (p. 123) The responsibility of a 
business’s owners for losses only up to the amount 
they invest; limited partners and shareholders 
have limited liability.
limited liability company (LLC) (p. 132) A com-
pany similar to an S corporation but without the 
special eligibility requirements.

GLOSSARY
G-12
limited liability partnership (LLP) (p. 123) A part-
nership that limits partners’ risk of losing their 
personal assets to only their own acts and omis-
sions and to the acts and omissions of people 
under their supervision.
limited partner (p. 123) An owner who invests 
money in the business but does not have any 
management responsibility or liability for losses 
beyond the investment.
limited partnership (p. 123) A partnership with 
one or more general partners and one or more 
limited partners.
line of credit (p. 516) A given amount of unse-
cured short-term funds a bank will lend to a busi-
ness, provided the funds are readily available.
line organization (p. 223) An organization that 
has direct two-way lines of responsibility, author-
ity, and communication running from the top to 
the bottom of the organization, with all people 
reporting to only one supervisor.
line personnel (p. 223) Employees who are part 
of the chain of command that is responsible for 
achieving organizational goals.
liquidity (p. 484) The ease with which an asset 
can be converted into cash.
lockout (p. 344) An attempt by management to 
put pressure on unions by temporarily closing 
the business.
logistics (p. 435) The marketing activity that 
involves planning, implementing, and controlling 
the physical flow of materials, final goods, and 
related information from points of origin to 
points of consumption to meet customer require-
ments at a profit.
long-term financing (p. 513) Funds needed for 
more than a year (usually 2 to 10 years).
long-term forecast (p. 507) Forecast that pre-
dicts revenues, costs, and expenses for a period 
longer than 1 year, and sometimes as far as 5 or 
10 years into the future.
loss (p. 4) When a business’s expenses are more 
than its revenues.
M
M-1 (p. 569) Money that can be accessed quickly 
and easily (coins and paper money, checks, trav-
eler’s checks, etc.).
M-2 (p. 569) Money included in M-1 plus money 
that may take a little more time to obtain (savings 
accounts, money market accounts, mutual funds, 
certificates of deposit, etc.).
M-3 (p. 569) M-2 plus big deposits like institu-
tional money market funds.
Ma Bell Telecommunication giant AT&T.
macroeconomics (p. 30) The part of economics 
study that looks at the operation of a nation’s 
economy as a whole.
management (p. 187) The 
process 
used 
to 
accomplish organizational goals through plan-
ning, organizing, leading, and controlling people 
and other organizational resources.
management by objectives (MBO) (p. 280) Peter 
Drucker’s system of goal setting and implementa-
tion; it involves a cycle of discussion, review, and 
evaluation of objectives among top and middle-
level managers, supervisors, and employees.
management development (p. 315) The process 
of training and educating employees to become 
good managers and then monitoring the progress 
of their managerial skills over time.
managerial accounting (p. 475) Accounting used 
to provide information and analyses to managers 
within the organization to assist them in decision 
making.
manufacturers’ brands (p. 399) The brand names 
of 
manufacturers 
that 
distribute 
products 
nationally.
market (p. 172) People with unsatisfied wants 
and needs who have both the resources and the 
willingness to buy.
marketing (p. 362) The activity, set of institu-
tions, and processes for creating, communicat-
ing, delivering, and exchanging offerings that 
have value for customers, clients, partners, and 
society at large.
marketing concept (p. 364) A three-part business 
philosophy: (1) a customer orientation, (2) a ser-
vice orientation, and (3) a profit orientation.
marketing intermediaries (p. 418) Organiza tions 
that assist in moving goods and services from 
producers to businesses (B2B) and from busi-
nesses to consumers (B2C).
marketing mix (p. 366) The ingredients that go 
into a marketing program: product, price, place, 
and promotion.
marketing research (p. 370) The analysis of mar-
kets to determine opportunities and challenges, 

G-13
GLOSSARY
and to find the information needed to make good 
decisions.
market price (p. 37) The price determined by 
supply and demand.
market segmentation (p. 376) The process of 
dividing the total market into groups whose 
members have similar characteristics.
marriage of software, hardware, etc. Com-
bination of various technologies.
Maslow’s hierarchy of needs (p. 273) Theory of 
motivation based on unmet human needs from 
basic physiological needs to safety, social, and 
esteem needs to self-actualization needs.
mass customization (p. 250) Tailoring products 
to meet the needs of individual customers.
mass marketing (p. 378) Developing products 
and promotions to please large groups of people.
master limited partnership (MLP) (p. 123) A part-
nership that looks much like a corporation (in 
that it acts like a corporation and is traded on a 
stock exchange) but is taxed like a partnership 
and thus avoids the corporate income tax.
materials handling (p. 435) The movement of 
goods within a warehouse, from warehouses to 
the factory floor, and from the factory floor to 
various workstations.
materials requirement planning (MRP) (p. 255)  A 
computer-based operations management system 
that uses sales forecasts to make sure that needed 
parts and materials are available at the right time 
and place.
matrix organization (p. 224) An organization in 
which specialists from different parts of the orga-
nization are brought together to work on specific 
projects but still remain part of a line-and-staff 
structure.
maturity date (p. 539) The exact date the issuer 
of a bond must pay the principal to the 
bondholder.
measuring stick Tool used to evaluate or compare 
something.
mediation (p. 343) The use of a third party, 
called a mediator, who encourages both sides in a 
dispute to continue negotiating and often makes 
suggestions for resolving the dispute.
mentor (p. 315) An experienced employee who 
supervises, coaches, and guides lower-level 
employees by introducing them to the right peo-
ple and generally being their organizational 
sponsor.
merchant 
wholesalers 
(p. 425) Independently 
owned firms that take title to the goods they handle.
merger (p. 135) The result of two firms forming 
one company.
Mickey D’s Nickname for McDonald’s.
microeconomics (p. 30) The part of economics 
study that looks at the behavior of people and 
organizations in particular markets.
micropreneurs (p. 157) Entrepreneurs willing to 
accept the risk of starting and managing the type 
of business that remains small, lets them do the 
kind of work they want to do, and offers them a 
balanced lifestyle.
middle management (p. 194) The level of man-
agement that includes general managers, division 
managers, and branch and plant managers who 
are 
responsible 
for 
tactical 
planning 
and 
controlling.
mine the knowledge Make maximum use of the 
knowledge employees have.
mission statement (p. 189) An outline of the fun-
damental purposes of an organization.
mixed economies (p. 43) Economic systems in 
which some allocation of resources is made by 
the market and some by the government.
monetary policy (p. 51) The management of the 
money supply and interest rates by the Federal 
Reserve Bank.
money (p. 566) Anything that people generally 
accept as payment for goods and services. 
money supply (p. 569) The amount of money 
the Federal Reserve Bank makes available for 
people to buy goods and services.
monopolistic competition (p. 39) The degree of 
competition in which a large number of sellers 
produce very similar products that buyers never-
theless perceive as different.
monopoly (p. 39) A degree of competition in 
which only one seller controls the total supply of 
a product or service, and sets the price.
more than meets the eye More than one can see 
with his or her own eyes; much is happening that 
is not visible.
motivators (p. 275) In Herzberg’s theory of 
motivating factors, job factors that cause emp-
loyees to be productive and that give them 
satisfaction.
mouse-click away Ease of doing something by 
using the computer or Internet.

GLOSSARY
G-14
muddy the water Making things even more diffi-
cult than they currently are.
multinational corporation (p. 71) An organization 
that manufactures and markets products in many 
different countries and has multinational stock 
ownership and multinational management.
mutual fund (p. 549) An organization that buys 
stocks and bonds and then sells shares in those 
securities to the public.
mutual insurance company (p. C-7) A type of 
insurance company owned by its policyholders.
N
NASDAQ (p. 534) A nationwide electronic sys-
tem that communicates over-the-counter trades 
to brokers.
national debt (p. 50) The sum of government 
deficits over time.
negligence (p. A-4) In tort law, behavior that 
causes unintentional harm or injury.
negotiable instruments (p. A-8) Forms of com-
mercial paper (such as checks) that are transfer-
able among businesses and individuals and 
represent a promise to pay a specified amount.
negotiated labor–management agreement (labor 
contract) (p. 340) Agreement that sets the tone 
and clarifies the terms under which management 
and labor agree to function over a period of time.
net income or net loss (p. 485) Revenue left over 
after all costs and expenses, including taxes, are 
paid.
networking (pp. 226, 315) The process of establish-
ing and maintaining contacts with key managers in 
one’s own organization and other organizations 
and using those contacts to weave strong relation-
ships that serve as informal development systems.
niche marketing (p. 377) The process of finding 
small but profitable market segments and design-
ing or finding products for them.
nonbanks (p. 578) Financial organizations that 
accept no deposits but offer many of the services 
provided by regular banks (pension funds, insur-
ance companies, commercial finance companies, 
consumer finance companies, and brokerage 
houses).
nonprofit organization (p. 7) An organization 
whose goals do not include making a personal 
profit for its owners or organizers.
North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA) 
(p. 80) Agreement that created a free-trade 
area among the United States, Canada, and 
Mexico.
notes payable (p. 484) Short-term or long-term 
liabilities that a business promises to repay by a 
certain date.
O
objectives (p. 189) Specific, short-term state-
ments detailing how to achieve the organization’s 
goals.
off-the-job training (p. 314) Training that occurs 
away from the workplace and consists of internal 
or external programs to develop any of a variety 
of skills or to foster personal development.
oligopoly (p. 39) A degree of competition in 
which just a few sellers dominate the market.
one-to-one marketing (p. 378) Developing 
a 
unique mix of goods and services for each indi-
vidual customer.
online training (p. 314) Training programs in 
which employees complete classes via the Internet.
on-the-job training (p. 313) Training at the work-
place that lets the employee learn by doing or by 
watching others for a while and then imitating 
them.
open-market operations (p. 572) The buying and 
selling of U.S. government bonds by the Fed with 
the goal of regulating the money supply.
open shop agreement (p. 340) Agreement in 
right-to-work states that gives workers the option 
to join or not join a union, if one exists in their 
workplace.
operating (or master) budget (p. 508) The bud-
get that ties together the firm’s other budgets and 
summarizes its proposed financial activities.
operating expenses (p. 487) Costs involved in 
operating a business, such as rent, utilities, and 
salaries.
operational planning (p. 190) The process of set-
ting work standards and schedules necessary to 
implement the company’s tactical objectives.
operations management (p. 245) A specialized 
area in management that converts or transforms 
resources (including human resources) into 
goods and services.

G-15
GLOSSARY
organizational (or corporate) culture (p. 231)  
Widely shared values within an organization that 
provide unity and cooperation to achieve com-
mon goals.
organization chart (p. 216) A visual device that 
shows relationships among people and divides 
the organization’s work; it shows who is account-
able for the completion of specific work and who 
reports to whom.
organizing (p. 188) A management function 
that includes designing the structure of the 
organization and creating conditions and sys-
tems in which everyone and everything work 
together to achieve the organization’s goals and 
objectives.
orientation (p. 313) The activity that introduces 
new employees to the organization; to fellow 
employees; to their immediate supervisors; and 
to the policies, practices, and objectives of the 
firm.
other side of the tracks The area where people 
with less money live.
outbound logistics (p. 435) The area of logistics 
that involves managing the flow of finished 
products and information to business buyers 
and ultimate consumers (people like you and 
me).
out of the office loop Out of the line of communi-
cation that occurs in the workplace.
outsourcing (p. 6) Contracting with other com-
panies (often in other countries) to do some or all 
of the functions of a firm, like its production or 
accounting tasks.
over-the-counter 
(OTC) 
market 
(p. 534) Ex -
change that provides a means to trade stocks not 
listed on the national exchanges.
owners’ equity (p. 484) The amount of the busi-
ness that belongs to the owners minus any liabili-
ties owed by the business.
P
participative 
(democratic) 
leadership 
(p. 198)  
Leadership style that consists of managers and 
employees working together to make decisions.
partnership (p. 120) A legal form of business 
with two or more owners.
patent (p. A-6) A document that gives inventors 
exclusive rights to their inventions for 20 years.
pave the way Process of making a task easier.
peanut butter and jelly Popular combination for 
sandwich; the two are seen as perfect complemen-
tary products.
penetration strategy (p. 409) Strategy in which a 
product is priced low to attract many customers 
and discourage competition.
pension funds (p. 578) Amounts of money put 
aside by corporations, nonprofit organizations, 
or unions to cover part of the financial needs of 
members when they retire.
perks Short for perquisites; compensation in 
addition to salary, such as day care or a com -
pany car.
perfect competition (p. 38) The degree of com-
petition in which there are many sellers in a mar-
ket and none is large enough to dictate the price 
of a product.
performance appraisal (p. 316) An evaluation 
that measures employee performance against 
established standards in order to make decisions 
about promotions, compensation, training, or 
termination.
personal selling (p. 456) The face-to-face pre-
sentation and promotion of goods and services.
piece of the action A share in the opportunity.
pink slip A notice that you’ve lost your job.
pitch in To help as needed.
place utility (p. 423) Adding value to products by 
having them where people want them.
planning (p. 188) A management function that 
includes anticipating trends and determining the 
best strategies and tactics to achieve organiza-
tional goals and objectives.
PMI (p. 192) Listing all the pluses for a solution 
in one column, all the minuses in another, and 
the implications in a third column.
podcasting (p. 465) A means of distributing 
audio and video programs via the Internet that 
lets users subscribe to a number of files, also 
known as feeds, and then hear or view the mate-
rial at the time they choose.
possession utility (p. 424) Doing whatever is 
necessary to transfer ownership from one 
party to another, including providing credit, 
delivery, installation, guarantees, and follow-up 
service.
poster child Best example.

GLOSSARY
G-16
precedent (p. A-3) Decisions judges have made in 
earlier cases that guide the handling of new cases.
preferred stock (p. 538) Stock that gives its own-
ers preference in the payment of dividends and 
an earlier claim on assets than common stock-
holders if the company is forced out of business 
and its assets sold.
premium (p. C-6) The fee charged by an insur-
ance company for an insurance policy.
price leadership (p. 408) The strategy by which 
one or more dominant firms set the pricing 
practices that all competitors in an industry 
follow.
primary boycott (p. 344) When a union encour-
ages both its members and the general public not 
to buy the products of a firm involved in a labor 
dispute.
primary data (p. 371) Data that you gather your-
self (not from secondary sources such as books 
and magazines).
principle of motion economy (p. 271) Theory 
developed by Frank and Lillian Gilbreth that 
every job can be broken down into a series of ele-
mentary motions.
private accountant (p. 476) An accountant who 
works for a single firm, government agency, or 
nonprofit organization.
problem solving (p. 192) The process of solving 
the everyday problems that occur. Problem solv-
ing is less formal than decision making and usu-
ally calls for quicker action.
process manufacturing (p. 247) That part of the 
production process that physically or chemically 
changes materials.
producer price index (PPI) (p. 48) An index that 
measures prices at the wholesale level.
product (p. 368) Any physical good, service, or 
idea that satisfies a want or need plus anything 
that would enhance the product in the eyes of 
consumers, such as the brand name.
product analysis (p. 402) Making cost estimates 
and sales forecasts to get a feeling for profitabil-
ity of new-product ideas.
product differentiation (p. 394) The creation of 
real or perceived product differences.
production (p. 245) The creation of finished 
goods and services using the factors of 
production: land, labor, capital, entrepreneur-
ship, and knowledge.
production management (p. 245) The term used 
to describe all the activities managers do to help 
their firms create goods.
productivity (p. 14) The amount of output you 
generate given the amount of input (e.g., hours 
worked).
product liability (p. A-5) Part of tort law that 
holds businesses liable for harm that results from 
the production, design, sale, or use of products 
they market.
product life cycle (p. 404) A theoretical model of 
what happens to sales and profits for a product 
class over time; the four stages of the cycle are 
introduction, growth, maturity, and decline.
product line (p. 393) A group of products that 
are physically similar or are intended for a simi-
lar market.
product mix (p. 393) The combination of prod-
uct lines offered by a manufacturer.
product placement (p. 453) Putting products into 
TV shows and movies where they will be seen.
product screening (p. 402) A process designed to 
reduce the number of new-product ideas being 
worked on at any one time.
profit (p. 4) The amount of money a business 
earns above and beyond what it spends for sala-
ries and other expenses.
program evaluation and review technique (PERT) 
(p. 260) A method for analyzing the tasks 
involved in completing a given project, estimat-
ing the time needed to complete each task, and 
identifying the minimum time needed to com-
plete the total project.
program trading (p. 553) Giving instructions to 
computers to automatically sell if the price of a 
stock dips to a certain point to avoid potential 
losses.
promissory note (p. 514) A written contract with 
a promise to pay a supplier a specific sum of 
money at a definite time.
promotion (p. 369) All the techniques sellers use 
to inform people about and motivate them to buy 
their products or services.
promotion mix (p. 448) The combination of pro-
motional tools an organization uses.

G-17
GLOSSARY
pros and cons Arguments for and against 
something.
prospect (p. 457) A person with the means to 
buy a product, the authority to buy, and the will-
ingness to listen to a sales message.
prospecting (p. 457) Researching potential buy-
ers and choosing those most likely to buy.
prospectus (p. 535) A condensed version of eco-
nomic and financial information that a company 
must file with the SEC before issuing stock; the 
prospectus 
must 
be 
sent 
to 
prospective 
investors.
psychographic segmentation (p. 377) Dividing 
the market using the group’s values, attitudes, 
and interests.
psychological pricing (p. 409) Pricing goods and 
services at price points that make the product 
appear less expensive than it is.
public accountant (p. 476) An accountant who 
provides accounting services to individuals or 
businesses on a fee basis.
public domain software (or freeware) (p. B-16) 
Software that is free for the taking.
publicity (p. 460) Any information about an 
individual, product, or organization that’s distrib-
uted to the public through the media and that’s 
not paid for or controlled by the seller.
public relations (PR) (p. 460) The management 
function that evaluates public attitudes, changes 
policies and procedures in response to the pub-
lic’s requests, and executes a program of action 
and information to earn public understanding 
and acceptance.
pull strategy (p. 466) Promotional strategy in 
which heavy advertising and sales promotion 
efforts are directed toward consumers so that 
they’ll request the products from retailers.
pump up the profits Making profits in a company 
appear larger than they actually are under recog-
nized accounting rules.
purchasing (p. 257) The function in a firm that 
searches for quality material resources, finds the 
best suppliers, and negotiates the best price for 
goods and services.
pure risk (p. C-3) The threat of loss with no 
chance for profit.
push strategy (p. 466) Promotional strategy in 
which the producer uses advertising, personal 
selling, sales promotion, and all other promo-
tional tools to convince wholesalers and retailers 
to stock and sell merchandise.
Q
qualifying (p. 457) In the selling process, making 
sure that people have a need for the product, the 
authority to buy, and the willingness to listen to a 
sales message.
quality (p. 257) Consistently producing what the 
customer wants while reducing errors before and 
after delivery to the customer.
quality of life (p. 6) The general well-being of a 
society in terms of its political freedom, natural 
environment, 
education, 
health 
care, 
safety, 
amount of leisure, and rewards that add to the sat-
isfaction and joy that other goods and services 
provide.
quid pro quo Latin phrase meaning “something 
given in return for something else.”
quite a stir Something that causes a feeling of 
concern.
R
rack jobbers (p. 426) Wholesalers that furnish 
racks or shelves full of merchandise to retailers, 
display products, and sell on consignment.
ratio analysis (p. 491) The assessment of a firm’s 
financial condition using calculations and inter-
pretations of financial ratios developed from the 
firm’s financial statements.
real time (p. 227) The present moment or the 
actual time in which something takes place.
recession (p. 49) Two or more consecutive quar-
ters of decline in the GDP.
recruitment (p. 307) The set of activities used to 
obtain a sufficient number of the right people at 
the right time.
reinforcement theory (p. 281) Theory that posi-
tive and negative reinforcers motivate a person to 
behave in certain ways.
relationship marketing (p. 378) Marketing strat-
egy with the goal of keeping individual customers 
over time by offering them products that exactly 
meet their requirements.
reserve requirement (p. 572) A percentage of 
commercial banks’ checking and savings accounts 
that must be physically kept in the bank.

GLOSSARY
G-18
resource development (p. 31) The study of how 
to increase resources and to create the conditions 
that will make better use of those resources.
restructuring (p. 230) Redesigning an organiza-
tion so that it can more effectively and efficiently 
serve its customers.
retailer (p. 419) An organization that sells to ulti-
mate consumers.
retained earnings (p. 485) The accumulated 
earnings from a firm’s profitable operations that 
were reinvested in the business and not paid out 
to stockholders in dividends.
revenue (p. 4) The total amount of money a 
business takes in during a given period by selling 
goods and services. 
reverse discrimination (p. 304) Discrimination 
against whites or males in hiring or promoting.
reverse logistics (p. 435) The area of logistics that 
involves bringing goods back to the manufacturer 
because of defects or for recycling materials.
revolving credit agreement (p. 517) A line of credit 
that is guaranteed but usually comes with a fee.
right-to-work laws (p. 340) Legislation that gives 
workers the right, under an open shop, to join or 
not join a union if it is present.
risk/return trade-off (p. 520) The principle that 
the greater the risk a lender takes in making a 
loan, the higher the interest rate required.
Roth IRA (p. D-15) An IRA where you don’t get 
upfront deductions on your taxes as you would with 
a traditional IRA, but the earnings grow tax-free 
and are also tax-free when they are withdrawn.
rule of indemnity (p. C-7) Rule saying that an 
insured person or organization cannot collect 
more than the actual loss from an insurable risk.
rules-of-the-road orientation Introduction to the 
proper procedures within an organization.
S
sales promotion (p. 461) The promotional tool 
that stimulates consumer purchasing and dealer 
interest by means of short-term activities.
sampling (p. 463) A promotional tool in which a 
company lets consumers have a small sample of a 
product for no charge.
savings and loan association (S&L) (p. 577) A 
financial institution that accepts both savings 
and checking deposits and provides home mort-
gage loans.
Savings Association Insurance Fund (SAIF) 
(p. 581) The part of the FDIC that insures hold-
ers of accounts in savings and loan associations.
scientific management (p. 271) Studying work-
ers to find the most efficient ways of doing things 
and then teaching people those techniques.
S corporation (p. 132) A unique government cre-
ation that looks like a corporation but is taxed 
like sole proprietorships and partnerships.
sea of information Lots of information, often too 
much to process.
secondary boycott (p. 344) An attempt by labor 
to convince others to stop doing business with a 
firm that is the subject of a primary boycott; pro-
hibited by the Taft-Hartley Act.
secondary data (p. 370) Information that has 
already been compiled by others and published 
in journals and books or made available online.
secured bond (p. 521) A bond issued with some 
form of collateral.
secured loan (p. 516) A loan backed by collateral 
(something valuable, such as property).
Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) 
(p. 534) Federal agency that has responsibility 
for regulating the various exchanges.
selection (p. 309) The process of gathering 
information and deciding who should be hired, 
under legal guidelines, for the best interests of 
the individual and the organization.
selective distribution (p. 427) Distribution that 
sends products to only a preferred group of retail-
ers in an area.
self-insurance (p. C-4) The practice of setting 
aside money to cover routine claims and buying 
only “catastrophe” policies to cover big losses.
Service Corps of Retired Executives (SCORE) 
(p. 175) An SBA office with volunteers from indus-
try, trade associations, and education who counsel 
small businesses at no cost (except for expenses).
services (p. 4) Intangible products (i.e., prod-
ucts that can’t be held in your hand) such as edu-
cation, health care, insurance, recreation, and 
travel and tourism.
service utility (p. 424) Adding value by providing 
fast, friendly service during and after the sale and 
by teaching customers how to best use products 
over time.

G-19
GLOSSARY
sexual harassment (p. 350) Unwelcome sexual 
advances, requests for sexual favors, and other 
conduct (verbal or physical) of a sexual nature 
that creates a hostile work environment.
shaky ground Idea that possible problems lie ahead.
Sherlock Holmes A famous fictional detective 
who was particularly adept at uncovering informa-
tion to solve very difficult mysteries.
shoestring budget A budget that implies the com-
pany is short on funds and includes only a mini-
mal amount of financial expenditures (i.e., it’s as 
thin as a shoestring).
shopping goods and services (p. 395) Those 
products that the consumer buys only after com-
paring value, quality, price, and style from a vari-
ety of sellers.
shop stewards (p. 342) Union officials who work 
permanently in an organization and represent 
employee interests on a daily basis.
short-term financing (p. 513) Funds needed for a 
year or less.
short-term forecast (p. 507) Forecast that predicts 
revenues, costs, and expenses for a period of one 
year or less.
sift through mountains of information Sort 
through large volumes of information.
sinking fund (p. 541) A reserve account in which 
the issuer of a bond periodically retires some part 
of the bond principal prior to maturity so that 
enough capital will be accumulated by the matu-
rity date to pay off the bond.
sin taxes Taxes used to discourage the use of 
goods like liquor or cigarettes.
Six Sigma quality (p. 258) A quality measure that 
allows only 3.4 defects per million opportunities.
skimming price strategy (p. 409) Strategy in 
which a new product is priced high to make opti-
mum profit while there’s little competition.
small business (p. 162) A business that is inde-
pendently owned and operated, is not dominant 
in its field of operation, and meets certain stan-
dards of size (set by the Small Business Admi nis-
tration) in terms of employees or annual receipts.
Small Business Administration (SBA) (p. 171) A 
U.S. government agency that advises and assists 
small businesses by providing management train-
ing and financial advice and loans.
Small Business Investment Company (SBIC) 
Program (p. 172) A program through which pri-
vate investment companies licensed by the Small 
Business Administration lend money to small 
businesses.
smart card (p. 582) An electronic funds transfer 
tool that is a combination credit card, debit card, 
phone card, driver’s license card, and more.
smoking gun An issue or other disclosure that 
could prove a person or organization has done 
something wrong.
social audit (p. 108) A systematic evaluation of 
an organization’s progress toward implementing 
socially responsible and responsive programs.
social commerce (p. 428) A form of electronic 
commerce that involves using social media, 
online media that supports social interaction, 
and user contributions to assist in the online buy-
ing and selling of products and services.
socialism (p. 41) An economic system based on 
the premise that some, if not most, basic busi-
nesses should be owned by the government so that 
profits can be more evenly distributed among the 
people.
Social Security (p. D-14) The term used to 
describe the Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability 
Insurance Program established by the Social 
Security Act of 1935.
sole proprietorship (p. 120) A business that is 
owned, and usually managed, by one person.
sovereign wealth funds (SWFs) (p. 72) Invest-
ment funds controlled by governments holding 
large stakes in foreign companies.
span of control (p. 219) The optimum number of 
subordinates a manager supervises or should 
supervise.
specialty goods and services (p. 395) Consumer 
products with unique characteristics and brand 
identity. Because these products are perceived as 
having no reasonable substitute, the consumer 
puts forth a special effort to purchase them.
speculative risk (p. C-3) A chance of either profit 
or loss.
squeezing franchisees’ profits Tightening 
or 
reducing profits.
staffing (p. 195) A management function that 
includes hiring, motivating, and retaining the 
best people available to accomplish the compa-
ny’s objectives.

GLOSSARY
G-20
staff personnel (p. 223) Employees who advise 
and assist line personnel in meeting their goals.
stagflation (p. 48) A situation when the economy 
is slowing but prices are going up anyhow.
stakeholders (p. 6) All the people who stand to 
gain or lose by the policies and activities of a 
business and whose concerns the business needs 
to address.
standard of living (p. 5) The amount of goods and 
services people can buy with the money they have.
state capitalism (p. 35) A combination of freer 
markets and some government control.
statement of cash flows (p. 489) Financial state-
ment that reports cash receipts and disburse-
ments related to a firm’s three major activities: 
operations, investments, and financing.
state-of-the-art The most modern type available.
statistical process control (SPC) (p. 258) The 
process of taking statistical samples of product 
components at each stage of the production pro-
cess and plotting those results on a graph. Any 
variances from quality standards are rec ogni zed 
and can be corrected if beyond the set standards.
statistical quality control (SQC) (p. 258) The pro-
cess some managers use to continually monitor 
all phases of the production process to assure 
that quality is being built into the product from 
the beginning.
statutory law (p. A-3) State and federal constitu-
tions, legislative enactments, treaties of the fed-
eral government, and ordinances—in short, 
written law.
staying afloat Staying in business during tough 
times.
stockbroker (p. 542) A registered representative 
who works as a market intermediary to buy and 
sell securities for clients.
stock certificate (p. 537) Evidence of stock own-
ership that specifies the name of the company, 
the number of shares it represents, and the type 
of stock being issued.
stock exchange (p. 533) An organization whose 
members can buy and sell (exchange) securities 
for companies and investors.
stock insurance company (p. C-7) A type of insur-
ance company owned by stockholders.
stocks (p. 537) Shares of ownership in a 
company.
stock splits (p. 546) An action by a company 
that gives stockholders two or more shares of 
stock for each one they own.
strategic alliance (p. 71) A long-term partnership 
between two or more companies established to 
help each company build competitive market 
advantages.
strategic planning (p. 190) The process of deter-
mining the major goals of the organization and 
the policies and strategies for obtaining and using 
resources to achieve those goals.
strict product liability (p. A-5) Legal responsibil-
ity for harm or injury caused by a product regard-
less of fault.
strike (p. 343) A union strategy in which work-
ers refuse to go to work; the purpose is to further 
workers’ objectives after an impasse in collective 
bargaining.
strikebreakers (p. 345) Workers hired to do the 
jobs of striking workers until the labor dispute is 
resolved.
supervisory management (p. 194) Managers who 
are directly responsible for supervising workers 
and evaluating their daily performance.
supply (p. 37) The quantity of products that 
manufacturers or owners are willing to sell at dif-
ferent prices at a specific time.
supply chain (or value chain) (p. 432) The 
sequence of linked activities that must be per-
formed by various organizations to move goods 
from the sources of raw materials to ultimate 
consumers.
supply-chain management (p. 433) The process 
of managing the movement of raw materials, 
parts, work in progress, finished goods, and 
related information through all the organizations 
involved in the supply chain; managing the return 
of such goods, if necessary; and recycling materi-
als when appropriate.
SWOT analysis (p. 189) A planning tool used to 
analyze an organization’s strengths, weaknesses, 
opportunities, and threats.
T
tactical planning (p. 190) The process of develop-
ing detailed, short-term statements about what is 
to be done, who is to do it, and how it is to be done.
tall organization structure (p. 219) An organiza-
tional 
structure 
in 
which 
the 
pyramidal 

G-21
GLOSSARY
organization chart would be quite tall because of 
the various levels of management.
target costing (p. 408) Designing a product so 
that it satisfies customers and meets the profit 
margins desired by the firm.
target marketing (p. 376) Marketing directed 
toward those groups (market segments) an orga-
nization decides it can serve profitably.
tariff (p. 78) A tax imposed on imports.
tax accountant (p. 478) An accountant trained in 
tax law and responsible for preparing tax returns 
or developing tax strategies.
tax-deferred contributions (p. D-14) Retirement 
account deposits for which you pay no current 
taxes, but the earnings gained are taxed as regular 
income when they are withdrawn at retirement.
taxes (p. A-14) How the government (federal, 
state, and local) raises money.
technical skills (p. 194) Skills that involve the 
ability to perform tasks in a specific discipline or 
department.
technology (p. 14) Everything from phones and 
copiers to computers, medical imaging devices, 
personal digital assistants, and the various soft-
ware programs that make business processes 
more effective, efficient, and productive.
telecom Short for telecommunications.
telecommuting (p. 254) Working from home via 
computer and modem.
telemarketing (p. 430) The sale of goods and 
services by telephone.
telephone tag To leave a telephone message when 
you attempt to return a message left for you.
term insurance (p. D-11) Pure insurance protec-
tion for a given number of years.
term-loan agreement (p. 519) A promissory note 
that requires the borrower to repay the loan in 
specified installments.
test marketing (p. 368) The process of testing 
products among potential users.
thorny issue An issue that can cause pain or dif-
ficulty (as a thorn on a rose bush may).
through the grapevine Informal information com-
munication; stories told by one person to the next.
time deposit (p. 576) The technical name for a 
savings account; the bank can require prior notice 
before the owner withdraws money from a time 
deposit.
time in the trenches Working with the other 
employees and experiencing what they contend 
with as opposed to managing from an office and 
relying solely on reports about what is happening 
in the workplace.
time-motion studies (p. 271) Studies, begun by 
Frederick Taylor, of which tasks must be per-
formed to complete a job and the time needed to 
do each task.
time utility (p. 423) Adding value to products by 
making them available when they’re needed.
top management (p. 193) Highest level of man-
agement, consisting of the president and other key 
company executives who develop strategic plans.
to take a break To slow down and do something 
besides work.
tort (p. A-4) A wrongful act that causes injury to 
another person’s body, property, or reputation.
total fixed costs (p. 408) All the expenses that 
remain the same no matter how many products 
are made or sold.
total product offer (p. 392) Everything that con-
sumers evaluate when deciding whether to buy 
something; also called a value package.
trade credit (p. 514) The practice of buying 
goods and services now and paying for them later.
trade deficit (p. 66) An unfavorable balance of 
trade; occurs when the value of a country’s 
imports exceeds that of its exports.
trademark (p. 399) A brand that has exclusive legal 
protection for both its brand name and its design.
trade protectionism (p. 77) The use of govern-
ment regulations to limit the import of goods and 
services.
trade surplus (p. 66) A favorable balance of 
trade; occurs when the value of a country’s 
exports exceeds that of its imports.
training and development (p. 312) All attempts to 
improve productivity by increasing an employee’s 
ability to perform. Training focuses on short-term 
skills, whereas development focuses on long-term 
abilities.
transparency (p. 196) The presentation of a com-
pany’s facts and figures in a way that is clear and 
apparent to all stakeholders.

GLOSSARY
G-22
trial balance (p. 480) A summary of all the finan-
cial data in the account ledgers that ensures the 
figures are correct and balanced.
trial close (p. 458) A step in the selling process 
that consists of a question or statement that 
moves the selling process toward the actual close.
trigger-happy Term that refers to people reacting 
too fast to the circumstances facing them in a dif-
ficult situation.
turn a blind eye Ignore something of importance.
turn the work off Stop working.
U
umbrella policy (p. D-13) A broadly based insur-
ance policy that saves you money because you 
buy all your insurance from one company.
unemployment rate (p. 46) The number of civil-
ians at least 16 years old who are unemployed 
and tried to find a job within the prior four weeks.
Uniform Commercial Code (UCC) (p. A-8) A com-
prehensive commercial law, adopted by every 
state in the United States, that covers sales laws 
and other commercial laws.
uninsurable risk (p. C-5) A risk that no insurance 
company will cover.
union (p. 334) An employee organization that 
has the main goal of representing members in 
employee–management bargaining over job-
related issues.
union security clause (p. 340) Provision in a 
negotiated labor–management agreement that 
stipulates that employees who benefit from a 
union must either officially join or at least pay 
dues to the union.
union shop agreement (p. 340) Clause in a 
labor–management agreement that says workers 
do not have to be members of a union to be hired, 
but must agree to join the union within a pre-
scribed period.
unlimited liability (p. 121) The responsibility of 
business owners for all of the debts of the 
business.
unsecured bond (p. 521) A bond backed only by 
the reputation of the issuer; also called a deben-
ture bond.
unsecured loan (p. 516) A loan that doesn’t 
require any collateral.
unsought goods and services (p. 395) Products 
that consumers are unaware of, haven’t necessar-
ily thought of buying, or find that they need to 
solve an unexpected problem.
utility (p. 423) In economics, the want-satisfying 
ability, or value, that organizations add to goods 
or services when the products are made more use-
ful or accessible to consumers than they were 
before.
V
value (p. 390) Good quality at a fair price. When 
consumers calculate the value of a product, they 
look at the benefits and then subtract the cost to 
see if the benefits exceed the costs.
variable costs (p. 409) Costs that change accord-
ing to the level of production.
variable life insurance (p. D-11) Whole life insur-
ance that invests the cash value of the policy in 
stocks or other high-yielding securities.
venture capital (p. 522) Money that is invested 
in new or emerging companies that are perceived 
as having great profit potential.
venture capitalists (p. 170) Individuals or com-
panies that invest in new businesses in exchange 
for partial ownership of those businesses.
vertical merger (p. 135) The joining of two com-
panies involved in different stages of related 
businesses.
vestibule training (p. 314) Training done in 
schools where employees are taught on equip-
ment similar to that used on the job.
viral marketing (p. 464) The term now used to 
describe everything from paying customers to say 
positive things on the Internet to setting up mul-
tilevel selling schemes whereby consumers get 
commissions for directing friends to specific 
websites.
virtual corporation (p. 227) A temporary net-
worked organization made up of replaceable 
firms that join and leave as needed.
virtual networking (p. B-15) A process that allows 
software-based networked computers to run multiple 
operating systems and programs, and share storage.
virtual private network (VPN) (p. B-10) A private 
data network that creates secure connections, or 
“tunnels,” over regular Internet lines.

G-23
GLOSSARY
virus (p. B-18) A piece of programming code 
inserted into other programming to cause some 
unexpected and, for the victim, usually undesir-
able event.
vision (p. 189) An encompassing explanation of 
why the organization exists and where it’s trying 
to head.
volume (or usage) segmentation (p. 377) Divid-
ing the market by usage (volume of use).
voluntary bankruptcy (p. A-15) Legal procedures 
initiated by a debtor.
W
walk out the door Leave the company; quit your 
job.
watching over your shoulder Looking at every-
thing you do.
Web 2.0 (p. B-13) The set of tools that allow peo-
ple to build social and business connections, 
share information, and collaborate on projects 
online (including blogs, wikis, social networking 
sites and other online communities, and virtual 
worlds).
Web 3.0 (p. B-13) A combination of technologies 
that adds intelligence and changes how people 
interact with the web, and vice versa (consists of 
the semantic web, mobile web, and immersive 
Internet).
whistleblowers (p. 101) Insiders who report illegal 
or unethical behavior.
whole life insurance (p. D-11) Life insurance that 
stays in effect until age 100.
wholesaler (p. 418) A marketing intermediary 
that sells to other organizations.
will (p. D-18) A document that names the guardian 
for your children, states how you want your assets 
distributed, and names the executor for your estate.
word-of-mouth promotion (p. 463) A promo-
tional tool that involves people telling other peo-
ple about products they’ve purchased.
World Bank (p. 584) The bank primarily respon-
sible for financing economic development; also 
known as the International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development.
World Trade Organization (WTO) (p. 79) The 
inter national organization that replaced the 
General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade, and was 
assigned the duty to mediate trade disputes 
among nations.
Y
yellow-dog contract (p. 337) A type of contract 
that required employees to agree as a condition 
of employment not to join a union; prohibited by 
the Norris-LaGuardia Act in 1932.


A
 Abcarian, Robin,   359 
 Abrams, Rachel,   A-23 
 Acs, Aoltan J.,   117 
 Adams, Susan,   P-13 
 Adamson, Brent,   385, 471  
 Adomanis, Mark,   90 
 Ahmed, Mumtaz,   238  
 Ahmed, Rumman,   90 
 Ahuja, Anjana,   B-26 
 Akalp, Nellie,   149  
 Albert, Bill,   267  
 Ali, Abdul,   182 
 Allen, Kevin,   359  
 Allen, Stephanie,   140  
 Almerico, Kendall,   535 
 Alssid, Julian L.,   331 
 Amos, Bill,   C-1 
 Amos, Dan,   C-1, C-2  
 Amos, John,   C-1  
 Amos, Paul,   C-1 
  Anderlini, Jamil,   90 
 Anders, George,   181 
 Anderson, J. Craig,   149, 171  
 Anderson, Ralph,   471 
 Anderson, Stacey,   9  
 Andriotis, Anna Maria,   529, 590  
 Andruss, Paula,   149 
 Aneiro, Michael,   561 
 Ankeny, Jason,   61 
 Apotheker, Leo,   347  
 Appel, Timothy,   415 
 Appelbaum, Binyamin,   565 
 Aral, Sinan,   379  
 Aristotle,   96  
 Armour, Stephanie,   500  
 Arnold, Mason,   107 
 Arnould, Eric,   386  
 Arriotta, C. J.,   B-26 
 Arthur, Lisa,   208 
 Ashford, Warwick,   B-26 
  Auh, Seigyoung,   471 
 Aziz, John,   520 
B
 Badenhausen, Ken,   348 
 Baer, Justin,   117  
 Baetz, Juergen,   90  
 Bahaudur, Nina,   185 
 Bair, Sheila,   181, 590  
 Bakhsh, Nidaa,   57  
 Baldwin, William,   561 
 Banerjee, Devin,   D-22  
 Banham, Russ,   529, C-14  
 Banjo, Shelly,   445  
 Barooah, Jahnabi,   117  
 Barr, Alistar,   561 
 Barra, Mary,   200 
 Barron, Barbara,   E-5 
 Barry, Dave,   251 
 Bary, Andrew,   562  
 Baskin, Burton,   128 
 Bass, Frank,   D-21 
 Baysden, Chris,   230  
 Baziger, Benno,   88 
  Becker, Amanda,   359  
 Beederman, David,   445  
 Beers, Robin,   386 
 Beiler, Anne,   119  
 Bellcove, Mikal E.,   B-26 
 Bellin, Joshua,   89 
 Bello, Grace,   447 
 Belz, Emily,   D-21 
 Bennett, Brian,   348 
 Bennett, Jeff,   207, 238 
 Bennett, Johanna,   529 
 Bensinger, Greg,   207 
 Benson, Scott,   331 
 Bentz, Brooks,   445 
 Bercovici, Jeff,   471 
 Berfield, Susan,   503 
 Berg, Carolyn,   89 
 Berg, Meredith Derby,   D-21 
 Bergfield, Susan,   90 
 Bergsten, C. Fred,   65, 89  
  Berkowitz, Roger,   19 
 Berman, Jeff,   445  
 Berman, Richard,   359 
 Bernanke, Ben S.,   569  
 Bernardino, John,   445 
 Berners-Lee, Tim,   B-15, 
B-20 to B-21  
 Bertani, Elizabeth,   505–506 
 Beschloss, Morris,   90 
 Bessette, Chanella,   529 
 Bezos, Jeff,   152 
 Bhasin, Kim,   299 
 Bhattarai, Abha,   529 
 Bieber, Justin,   454 
 Biery, Mary Ellen,   500 
 Bigda, Carolyn,   561 
 Bird, Alan,   207 
 Birkenfeld, Bradley,   101 
 Birket, Damien,   E-4 
 Biro, Meghan M.,   112, 296  
 Blackstone, Brian,   590 
  Blanchard, Kenneth,   98, 117 
 Blank, Steve,   181, 267  
 Blass, Charles,   29 
 Blatt, Ruth,   181 
 Blumenthal, Neil,   116 
 Boden, Richard,   181 
 Boehme, Donna,   117 
 Bolles, Richard Nelson,   E-5 
 Bomey, Nathan,   A-23 
 Bonaminio, Jim,   152 
 Bond, Vince, Jr.,   200 
 Bortz, Daniel,   331 
 Boudreau, Kevin J.,   182 
 Boudway, Ira,   89 
 Boulton, Clint,   238 
 Boushey, Heather,   117, 350 
 Bowling, Caitlin,   149  
 Boyle, Douglas M.,   117 
 Bradsher, Keith,   529 
 Bradsher, Tim,   B-1 
  Brandon, John,   331 
 Branson, Richard,   455 
 Braverman, Beth,   331 
 Braverman, Laura,   A-23 
 Bray, Chad,   117 
 Brehm, Mike,   359 
 Bremmer, Brian,   A-23 
 Bridgeman, Junior,   140–141 
 Brodsky, Norm,   181, 445, 590  
 Brooks, Rodney,   562 
 Brown, Abram,   27 
 Brown, Eliot,   520 
 Brown, Lisa,   590  
 Brown, Roger,   352 
 Brummer, Chris,   181 
 Bryant, Adam,   299 
 Bryant, Kobe,   347 
 Buchanan, Leigh,   207, 244  
 Buck, Jonathan,   590 
 Buell, Todd,   590 
 Buffett, Warren,   389, 545, 546 
 Burkitt, Laurie,   374  
 Burne, Katy,   561 
 Burnham, Jennifer,   159 
 Burnson, Patrick,   445 
 Burr, Mike,   3 
 Bush, George W.,   580 
 Bustillo, Miguel,   415 
 Byrne, John A.,   500  
C
 Caldbeck, Ryan,   561  
 Callinan, Adam,   228 
 Calomiris, Charles, W.,   A-22 
 Campbell, Dakin,   561 
 Cancino, Alejandra,   348  
 Cappadonna, Bryanna,   454 
 Caprino, Kathy,   181, 359 
 Cardwell, Diane,   B-9 
 Carlyle, Erin,   151 
 Carlyle, Thomas,   32 
 Carpenter, Brian W.,   117 
 Carpenter, Claudia,   39 
 Carrns, Ann,   359 
 Carroll, Dan,   529 
 Casserly, Meghan,   D-1  
 Cassidy, John,   57 
 Cassidy, William B.,   445  
 Castegna, Rebecca,   A-23  
 Catlette, Bill,   106, 117 
 Cayla, Julien,   386 
  Celarier, Michelle,   561 
 Censer, Marjorie,   445 
 Chang, Gordon,   89 
 Chang, Julia,   181 
 Chapman, Lizette,   181 
 Charski, Mindy,   181 
 Chasan, Emily,   495 
 Chaudhuri, Saabira,   529, 590 
 Chea, Terence,  386  
 Chen, Steve,   153 
 Cheng, Andria,   419 
 Cho, Hanah,   590 
 Choe, Stan,   562 
 Chow, Jason,   74 
 Chow, Lisa,   379 
 Chris, Sherry,   455  
 Chua, Roy J.,   385 
 Clark, Don,   238, 471 
 Clark, Dorrie,   208 
 Clark, Patrick,   15, 579 
  Clarke, Cynthia,   175 
 Clayman, Jim,   B-25 
 Clement, Scott,   562 
 Clifford, Catherine,   500, 529 
 Clinton, Bill,   185, 367, 565  
 Cohan, Peter,   243 
 Cohen, Mark,  181, 331 
 Cohen, Steven,   105 
 Cohn, David,   238 
 Cohn, Michael,   117, 495, 500 
 Colao, J. J.,   529  
 Cole, Marine,   415 
 Collins, Margaret,   D-22  
 Colman, David,   211 
 Colvin, Geoff,   149, 269 
 Conchado, Alfredo,   90 
 Conerly, Bill,   529 
 Confucius,   96 
 Conley, Chip,   273–274 
 Conniff, Ben,   165 
  Conrado, Eduardo,   415 
 Cooper, Amy C.,   208  
I-1
 N A M E  I N D E X 

NAME INDEX
I-2
 Cooper, Michael,   359  
 Corley, Jacklyn,   139 
 Corrin, Matthew,   142 
 Cortese, Amy,   579 
 Cosner, Anthony Wing,   B-26 
 Cote, Michelle,   139  
 Coultas, Carol,   149 
 Coy, Peter,   57, 58  
 Coyle, Emily,   529  
 Craighill, Peyton,   562 
 Cramer, Jim,  P-5  
 Crites, Alice,   500  
 Cronin, Brenda,   58 
 Cruise, Tom,   63 
 Crutsinger, Martin,   590  
D
 Dagher, Veronica,   D-21 
 Dahl, Darren,   181–182  
 Dahlström, Peter,   386 
 Dale, Brady,   B-25 
 Daley, Jason,   181, 296  
 Daly, Jason,   149 
 Dame, Joey,  137  
 Dame, John,   137  
 Damico, Jack,   478 
 Damon, Matt,   63 
 Dauksevich, Jeffrey,   331 
 Dauten, Dale,   155 
 Davenport, Thomas H.,   288  
 Davidson, Cathy,   288 
 Davidson, Paul,   89 
 De Jong, David,   185 
 De la Merced, Michael J.,   417, 529  
 Dean, Josh,   174 
 Dearie, John,   27 
 Decker, Susan,   A-23 
  DeGeneres, Ellen,   347  
 Del Giudice, Vincent,   A-23 
 Dell, Michael,   136, 153  
 Deming, David,   C-14  
 Deming, W. Edwards,   258 
 Denning, Steve,   296 
 DePillis, Lydia,   D-22 
 Derousseau, Ryan,   568 
 Deutch, John,   267  
 Dexheimer, Elizabeth,   561 
 Di Lulla, Roni,   163  
 Diamond, Mike,   9 
 DiBacco, Thomas V.,   590 
 Dieterich, Chris,   561  
 Dilla, Chris,   391 
 Dimin, Michael,   130  
 DiPietro, Ben,   117, 478 
 D’Ippolito, Matthew,   149 
 Disney, Walt,   154 
 Dixon, Matthew,   385, 471  
  Dizik, Alina,   267 
 Dodgson, Mark,   238  
 Dolan, Kerry,   208 
 Donnan, Shawn,   90 
 Dorsey, Jack,   153, B-1 
 Dougherty, Conor,   267  
 Doughman, Andrew,   358 
 Douglas, Danielle,   590 
 Dow, Charles,   552  
 Dowd, Maureen,   93  
 Downey, Robert, Jr.,   347  
 Dredge, Stuart,   B-26 
 Dreier, Peter,   590 
 Drevitch, Gary,   359 
 Drexler, Mickey,   211 
 Drucker, Peter,   10, 280  
 Du Pont de Nemours, Éleuthère Irénée,   152 
 Duffy, Jilly,   B-25 
 Dumenco, Susan,   386 
 Duncan, Katherine,   207 
  Dunn, Catherine,   61, 445  
 Dupont, Stephen,   471 
 Duran, Maria Elana,   296 
 Dutcher, Brandon,   359 
 Dwight, Mark,   109 
 Dwoskin, Ellizabeth,   D-21 
 Dyer, Davis,   207 
E
 Eastman, George,   152 
 Easton, Nina,   27 
 Eberstadt, Nicholas,   57 
 Economy, Peter,   296 
 Edelman, David,   386 
 Eder, Steve,  359 
 Edison, Thomas,   144 
 Edmunds, Gladys,   182 
 Ehrlich, Thomas,   117 
 Eigeman, Ann,   117 
 Eilperin, Juliet,   445 
 Eisenstein, Paul A.,   359 
 Eisingerich, Andreas B.,   471  
 El-Erian, Mohammed,   585 
 Eliasson, Fredrik,   238 
 Ellison, Lawrence,   347 
 Emerson, Greg,   400 
 Emerson, Melinda,   454 
 Eng, Dinah,   119, 386  
 Engelmeier, Shirley,   112, 296 
  Ensign, Rachel Louis,   117, C-14 
 Epps, Garrett,   359 
 Epstein, Gene,   58 
 Erforth, Jeano,   88 
 Ergen, Charlie,   277 
 Ernst, Douglas,   331 
 Esch, Justin,   155  
 Esterl, Mike,   415 
 Ettenson, Richard,   415 
 Evans, Teri,   361 
F
 Fallon, Jimmy,   26 
 Fallon, Nicole,   171 
 Farley, James,   471 
 Fata, Scott,   445 
 Fayol, Henri,   214–215, 234 
 Feinberg, Andrew,   27 
 Feintzeig, Rachel,   130 
 Feld, Brad,   267 
 Ferrara, John,   267 
 Fertik, Michael,   287 
 Feulner, Ed,   27, 57, 181  
 Fickenscher, Lisa,   151 
 Finkelstein, Harley,   361 
 Fisher, Anne,   359 
 Fisher, Daniel,   A-23 
 Fisher, Susan,   P-13 
 Fisman, Raymond,   238 
 Fitzgerald, Michael,   471 
 Flannery, Matt,   29 
 Flannery, Russell,   89, 117  
  Fleming, Sam,   500 
 Fletcher, Michael A.,   D-22  
 FlorCruz, Michelle,   74  
 Folino, Lauren,   181 
 Follett, Patrick,   85  
 Fontevecchia, Agustino,   90  
 Ford, Henry,   144, 152  
 Foreno, Juan,   90 
 Forker, Jennifer,   B-25 
 Foroohar, Rana,   590 
 Fouhy, Beth,   337 
 Fowler, Geoffrey A.,   415 
 Fox, Brian,   478 
 Fox, Jim,  320 
 Franklin, Benjamin,   D-2 
 Frasco, Stephanie,   B-12 
 Freeman, Karen,   385 
 Freeman, Sunny,   568  
 Freston, Tom,   131 
 Fried, Jason,   385 
  Friedman, Jon,   243 
 Friedman, Milton,   103  
 Fry, Art,  160 
 Fu, Ernestine,   117 
 Fuhrman, Ryan C.,   529  
G
 Gallum, Alby,   90 
 Gamble, James,   152 
 Gamerman, Ellen,   181 
 Gann, David,   238 
 Gantt, Henry L.,   261, 271, 291 
 Garant, Robert Ben,   26  
 Gardner, David,   532 
 Gardner, Tom,   532  
 Garnett, Laura,   287 
 Garst, Kim,   471 
 Garvin, David A.,   207  
 Gasparro, Annie,   117, 386, 415 
 Gates, Bill,   5, 144, 153, 154, 270  
 Gaudin, Sharon,   A-23 
 Geduldig, Courtney,   27 
 Gelles, David,   529 
 Gellman, Lindsay,   130, 200 
 Geron, Tomio,   296, D-21 
 Gershman, Jacob,   331 
 Gerstein, Josh,   B-26 
  Gerstner, Lisa,   27, 590, C-14, 
D-21, D-22  
 Giacomazzo, Bernadette R.,   151 
 Giamanco, Barbara,   385 
 Giammona, Craig,   27 
 Giang, Vivian,   70  
 Gibbs, Lisa,   C-14 
 Gilbert, Jonathan,   90 
 Gilbreth, Frank,   271, 291 
 Gilbreth, Lillian,   271, 291 
 Glassman, Barry,   208 
 Glassman, James K.,   445 
 Glassman, Mark,   90 
 Gleeson, Brent,   394 
 Glenn, Don,   15  
 Glenn, Sarah Jane,   117 
 Glover, George,  B-26 
 Glusac, Elaine,   27 
 Gneckow, Eric,   117 
 Goel, Vindu,   200 
 Goff, Philip Atiba,   B-9 
  Goffee, Rob,   296  
 Gold, Donald,   561 
 Goldman, Duff,   248  
 Goleman, Daniel,   207  
 Gompers, Samuel,   336 
 Goodman, Michelle,   149, 181 
 Goodman, Nadia,   296  
 Gordon, Brian,   528 
 Gordon, John Steele,   590 
 Gordon, Larry,   A-23 
 Gorfine, Daniel,   181 
 Gottfried, Miriam,   208, 415 
 Gould, David,   445, C-14  
 Goya, Francisco,   151 
 Grady, Robert E.,   590 
 Graham, Patrick,   562 
 Gratton, Lynda,   238 
 Gray, Kevin,   85 

I-3
NAME INDEX
 Greeley, Brendan,   590, B-26  
 Green, Chuck,   181  
 Green, Jeff,   359 
 Greene, Amanda,   331  
 Greene, Kelly,   D-21 
 Greenhouse, Steve,   358, 359  
 Greenspan, Alan,   565 
 Gregg, Gabi,   B-21 
 Gregoire, Kent,   385  
 Grossman, Samantha,   456 
 Grouvm, Jake,  529 
 Grove, Andrew S.,   247  
 Gu, Wei,  244  
 Guerrera, Francesco,   590 
 Guglielmo, Connie,   149 
 Gulati, Nikhul,   90 
 Gupta, Gautam,   181 
 Gupta, Sunil,   471 
 Guthrie, Doug,   117  
H
 Haanaes, Knut,   415 
 Hadden, Richard,   106, 117  
 Hadley, Ann,   238 
 Hagar, Sammy,   3  
 Hagerty, James R.,   27, 267, A-23  
 Haimerl, Amy,   529 
 Hals, Tom,   A-23 
 Halvorson, George,   267 
 Halzack, Sarah,   117 
 Hamburg-Conlon, Jill,   500  
 Hamill, Sean D.,   90 
 Hamilton, Alexander,   574 
 Hammond, Dave,   176 
 Hananel, Sam,   359 
 Handler, Elliot,   173 
 Handler, Ruth,   173 
 Hann, Christopher,   238, 296, A-23  
 Hannen, Caleb,   296  
 Hannon, Kerry,   181, 311 
 Hannon, Paul,   58, 90  
  Hansegard, Jens,   445  
 Hardaway, Francine,   181  
 Hardwick, Chris,   447  
 Hardy, Quentin,   B-26  
 Harlan, Kevin,   561 
 Harper, Philipp,   181  
 Harress, Christopher,   B-26 
 Harris, Andrew,   358 
 Harris, Bill,   C-14 
 Harris, Jenn,   386 
 Harrison, Crayton,   90 
 Harrison, Dianne,   175 
 Harrison, J. D.,   590  
 Harrison, Kate,   181  
 Hartz, Julia,   124 
 Hartz, Kevin,   124 
 Harvey, Melissa,   154 
 Haski-Leventhal, Debbie,   117 
 Hass, Nancy,   417 
 Hastings, Reed,   417  
  Hatchuel, Romain,   57 
 Haugen, Eric,   181  
 Hay, Edward,   318 
 Hayes, V. Dionne,   562 
 Headd, Brian,   181 
 Healy, Paul M.,   27 
 Hefling, Kimberly,   359  
 Helft, Miguel,   185, 471  
 Helms, Matt,   A-23  
 Hendrix, Jimi,   251 
 Hendrix, Steve,   93 
 Henley, Kari,   117 
 Henneman, Todd,   471 
 Henning, Peter J.,   561 
 Henricks, Mark,   386, 415 
 Henriques, Diana B.,   95  
 Hermanson, Dana R.,   117 
 Hernandez, Pedro,   500 
 Herzberg, Frederick,   274–275, 283, 291  
 Hetrick, Randy,   394  
  Higgins, Tim,   529 
 Hill, Patrice,   445, 590 
 Hill, Russ,   471 
 Hiltzak, Michael,   359 
 Hirsch, Jerry,   A-23 
 Hirshorn, Susan,   182  
 Hlavac, Randy,   B-25 
 Ho, Anthony,   181 
 Ho, Catherine,   529 
 Hobson, Mellody,   531 
 Hoffelder, Kathy,   500, 529  
 Hofman, Mike,   296 
 Hogg, Sam,   529 
 Holcomb, Mary C.,   445  
 Holden, Luke,   165 
 Honan, Mat,   181 
 Hook, Janet,   57 
 Hoover, Kent,   561  
 Hope, Bradley,   561  
 Hornby, Lucy,  90 
  Hotakainen, Rob,   89 
 Housal, Morgan,   358 
 House, Jonathan,   58, 238 
 Howard, Steve,   419 
 Hsieh, Tony,   207, 299, 455 
 Hsu, Tiffany,   269 
 Huang, Nellie S.,   500 
 Hunt, C. Shane,   445 
 Hurley, Chad,   153 
 Husock, Howard,   117 
 Hymowitz, Carol,   149, D-21 
I
 Ibrahim, Mo,   155 
 Iger, Robert,   347  
 Indvik, Lauren,   429 
 Inverso, Emily,   361 
 Inzana, Ryan,   296 
 Iosebishvili, Ira,   590 
 Ireland, Kathy,   389  
 Isaacson, Betsy,   B-25 
 Isidore, Chris,   90, 358 
 Iyer, Bala,   288 
J
 Jackson, Henry C.,   A-22 
 Jackson, Phil,   197–198  
 Jackson, Victoria,   173 
 Jakab, Spencer,   267 
 James, LeBron,   93, A-1  
 Janah, Leila,   61 
 Jargon, Julie,   386, 415 
 Javier, Luzi Ann,   39 
 Jefferson, Thomas,   96 
 Jeffrey, Chris,   142 
 Jenkins, Mark,   B-26 
 Jobs, Steve,   131, 144, 157  
 John, Daymond,   361 
 Johns, Tammy,   238 
 Johnson, Kevin,   A-23 
 Johnson, Ron,   347 
 Jones, Tim,   358 
 Jordan, Mary,   238  
 Judson, Whitcomb,   403 
 Jules, Claudy,   89 
  Juliens, John,   238 
 Julius Sextus Frontinus,   B-4 
 Jurgens, Jeremy,   415 
K
 Kaddas, Natalie,   238 
 Kang, Cecilia,   230, A-23 
 Kaplan, David A.,   117 
 Kaplan, Eve,   561 
 Kapner, Suzanne,   415, 434 
 Karabell, Zachary,   590  
 Kardashian, Khloe,   454 
 Kardashian, Kim,   454  
 Karol, Gabrielle,   149  
 Katt, Peter,   D-22  
 Katz, David M.,   529 
 Katz, Ian,   529 
 Katzenberg, Jeff,   531 
 Kauffeld, Richard,   445 
 Kaufman, Ben,   174 
 Keating, Frank,   359 
 Kell, John,   207, 238 
 Kelly, Gary,  290 
 Kelly, Kevin,  267 
 Kelly-Detweiler, Peter,   419  
  Kemp, Stuart,   89  
 Kennedy, John F.,   104 
 Kennedy, Simon,   90 
 Kenny, Charles,   57, 359  
 Kessenides, Dimitra,   A-23  
 Kessler, Glenn,   529  
 Kew, Janice,  89 
 Keynes, John Maynard,   51, 565  
 Khan, Shahid,   241 
 Khanna, Ro,   267 
 Khidekel, Marina,   296 
 Kidron, Adam,   B-12 
 Kimasinaska, Kasia,   529 
 King, Cindy,   B-12 
 Kinicki, Angela,   285  
 Kinnear, Thomas C.,   425 
 Kiplinger, Knight,   313, D-22  
 Kirsner, Scott,   529 
 Kisel, Ty,  529 
 Kitsock, Greg,   89 
  Klayman, Ben,   A-23 
 Klein, Ezra,   D-22 
 Klein, Joshua,   B-25  
 Klein, Karen E.,   181 
 Klimasinska, Kasia,   238 
 Knowles, Jonathan,   415 
 Koch, Jim,  196 
 Kochan, Thomas A.,   267 
 Koger, Eric,   167, 404 
 Koger, Susan,   167, 404 
 Kolawole, Emi,   267 
 Kolbenschlag, Bill,   331 
 Kolhatkar, Sheelah,   565  
 Konrad, Tom,   561 
 Konus, Umut,   415 
 Koon, Fred,   E-5 
 Korkiki, Phyllis,   228 
 Kornowski, Liat,   454 
 Kosnett, Jeffrey R.,   562 
 Koten, John,   267 
  Kowitz, Braden,   238 
 Kozlowski, Lori,   B-26  
 Kraft, AnnaLisa,   89 
 Kraft, Tim,   386  
 Kramer, David,   B-26 
 Krantz, Matt,   562 
 Kristof, Kathy,   535  
 Kroc, Ray,  168 
 Kruse, Kevin,   296 
 Kuehn, Kurt,  365 
 Kullman, Ellen,   196 
 Kumar, Kavita,   149 
 Kumar, V.,   471 
 Kuntz, Phil,   359 

NAME INDEX
I-4
 Kuriloff, Aaron,   333 
 Kurlantzick, Joshua,   89 
 Kurtzleben, Danielle,   P-13  
 Kwoh, Leslie,   311 
L
 Lacity, Mary C.,   238  
 Lack, Jonathan,   500  
 Laffer, Arthur,   58 
 Lafley, A. G.,  212 
 Lagarde, Christine,   585  
 Lakhani, Karim R.,   182 
 Laluza, Caitlin,   471 
 Lambke, Ron,   445  
 Lambro, Donald,   57 
 Landauro, Inti,   445 
 Lane, Charles,   57, 358  
 Lapowsky, Issie,   A-23  
 Larsen, Dave,   331 
 Larson, Christina,   434, P-13  
 Larson, Erik,   95 
 Lavenda, David,   P-13 
 Laviolette, Julie Landry,   359  
 Lawler, Edward,   281, 296  
 Lawson, Rene,   237  
 Lazo, Shirley A.,   561 
  LeBeau, Christina,   90, 590  
 Lee, Jolie,   A-23 
 Lefkow, Dave,   155 
 Lemelson, Jerome,   A-7 
 Lemov, Penelope,   331 
 Lennon, Thomas,   26 
 Leonard, Devin,   296 
 Lerner, David,   153 
 Lerner, Hanny,   181 
 Lessard, Donald,   89  
 Leung, Sze,  424  
 Levey, Noam M.,  A-23 
 Levin, Peter,  447 
 Levinson, Charles,   D-21 
 Levinson, Mason,   359  
 Levinson, Philip,   516 
 Levisohn, Ben,   561 
 Lev-Ram, Michael,   181 
 Levy, Ari,   15, 561  
 Levy, Scott,   331 
  Lewine, Edward,   299  
 Lewis, John L.,   336 
 Lewis, Nathan,   90 
 Li, Shan,   B-26 
 Liberto, Jennifer,   359  
 Liebs, Scott,   331, 529  
 Liesse, Julie,   386, 471  
 Light, Joe,   590 
 Lillie, Ben,   531  
 Linsell, Katie,   561  
 Lipman, Victor,   117, 296  
 Littman, Margaret,   445  
 LL Cool J,  361 
 Llopis, Glenn,   296 
 Lobosco, Katie,   394 
 Lobrano, Alexander,   386 
 Loder, Asjylyn,   445 
 Loeb, Walter,   90, 337 
 Loftus, Peter,   A-22 
 Logan, Tim,   296 
  Logue, Ann C.,   267 
 Lombardi, Vince,   155 
 Lopez, Jennifer,   347 
 Lore, Nicolas,   E-5  
 Loten, Angus,   171, 464  
 Louden, Bennett J.,   331 
 Lowenstein, Roger,   57 
 Lowery, Anne,  529 
 Lowry, Brian,   89 
 Lucas, Suzanne,   117, 296, 331  
 Lucea, Rafael,   89 
 Luckerson, Victor,   415 
 Luk, Lorraine,   27 
 Lynton, Nandani,   89 
 Lyons, Jenna,   211 
 Lyons, Kim,   391 
M
 Ma, Jason,   153  
 Macdonald, Emma K.,   415  
 MacGregor, Jena,   331 
 Mack, Sonja D.,   A-1 
 Mackenzie, Ian,   238 
 Mackenzie, Michael,   561 
 Mackey, John,   27, 34–35, 57, 207, 226, 
237, 238, 390, 415  
 Madigan, Kathleen,   238 
 Madoff, Bernard,   95, 524 
 Magosky, Shani,   269 
 Mah, Jessica,   153 
 Malhotra, Deepak,   182 
 Malpass, David,   27, 207 
 Malthus, Thomas,   32, 33, 56 
 Mamudi, Sam,   561  
 Mangla, Ismet Sarah,   415 
 Manjoo, Farhad,   27 
 Manrodt, Karl B.,   445  
 Maranjian, Selena,   544, 561 
 Marchetti, Mike,   310 
  Markkula, Mike,   157  
 Marko, Kurt,   B-26 
 Markon, Jerry,  500 
 Markowitz, Eric,   A-23 
 Marks, Gene,  287  
 Martin, Carole,   E-4 
 Martin, J. J.,   385 
 Martin, Roger L.,   207 
 Martinez, Janel,   27 
 Martoma, Michael,   535 
 Marx, Groucho,   270 
 Maslow, Abraham,   273–274, 283, 291  
 Mason, Linda,   352 
 Mattas, Reuben,   400 
 Matthews, Christopher,   359, 445 
 Matthews, Christopher M.,   117, 561 
 Matthews, Dylan,   565 
 Matthews, Kathleen,   269  
 Matthews, Steve,   27, 57  
 Mattioli, Dana,   415, 445  
  Mauer, Roy,  321 
 Max, D. T.,   B-1 
 Maxon, Terry,  A-23 
 May, Patrick,   331 
 Maynard, Michelene,   267 
 Mayo, Elton,   272–273, 291 
 McCammon, Ross,   331 
 McCarthy, Michael,   471 
 McCartney, Scott,   19 
 McClellan, Bill,   A-23  
 McClintock, Pamela,   89  
 McConnell, David,   152 
 McCormick, Cyrus,   20 
 McCue, T. J.,  529 
 McDonald, Andy,   A-23  
 McDonnell, Sanford,   522 
 McGovern, Linda,   415  
 McGrath, Maggie,   27  
 McGregor, Douglas,   276, 291 
 McGregor, Jena,   299 
  McIntire, Lynnette,   365 
 McKendrick, Joe,   B-26 
 McKinney, Jeffrey,   27, C-14 
 McMahon, Barbara,   211  
 McNamara, Bret,   243 
 Meister, Jeanne,   P-13 
 Mello, John E.,   445 
 Meltzer, Allen H.,   A-22 
 Meltzer, Marisa,   404  
 Menardi, Riane,   97 
 Merchant, Normann,   590 
 Merlo, Omar,   471 
 Metcalfe, Robert,   B-4 
 Metha, Rajiv,   471 
 Metzenbaugh, Ben,   A-23 
 Meyer, Henry,  445 
 Michael, David,   415  
 Michaels, Adam,   445 
 Michaels, Curt,   445 
 Michaels, Dave,   359 
  Michelson, Gary,   A-6 
 Mickey, John,   522 
 Milian, Mark,   471 
 Miller, Jay,   A-23 
 Miller, Michael,   505 
 Miller, Terry,  57  
 Millman, Gregory J.,   117, 
208, C-14 
 Misra, Tanvi,   89 
 Missett, Judi Sheppard,   141 
 Mlot, Stephanie,   174 
 Mohajir, Shaya Tayefe,   A-23 
 Molinsky, Andrew,   288, P-13  
 Moonves, Les,   348 
 Moran, Gwen,   331, 400, 473 
 Moroney, Tom,   181  
 Morris, Betsy,   445 
 Morris, Keiko,   561 
 Morrison, Maureen,   415 
 Mufson, Steven,   445  
 Mui, Ylan Q.,   590  
 Mulally, Alan,   198  
 Mulani, Narenda,   267 
 Mulcahy, Ryan,   B-25 
 Muller, Joann,   182, A-23 
 Mulready, Rick,   285 
 Murphy, Chris,   B-26 
 Muskal, Michael,   358  
N
 Nadler, David,   281, 296 
 Napolitano, Maida,   445  
 Nash, James,   359 
 Nassauer, Sarah,   415 
 Naughton, John,   B-25 
 Nayar, Vineet,   296 
 Nazar, Jason,   181 
 Neff, Jack,  27, 471 
 Neilson, Gary L.,   238 
 Neuman, William,   90  
 Newman, Melinda,   9 
 Neyfakh, Leon,   243 
 Ng, Serena,   415 
 Nguyen, Henry,   70 
 Nichols, Brian,   464 
 Nichols, Wes,   471 
 Nicklaus, David,   90, 296, B-25 
 Ning, David,   562 
 Niraj, Rakesh,   471 
 Nisen, Max,   299 
  Nitti, Tony,   149 
 Nocarando, Vince,   528 
 Noer, Michael,   181 
 Norris, Floyd,   331 
 Northrup, Jack,   181 
 Novack, Janet,   359, 478, D-1 
 Novak, David,   269 
 Noyes, Katherine,   B-25 
 Nucci, Alfred,   181 
 Nudd, Tim,   C-1  

I-5
NAME INDEX
O
 Obama, Barack,   12, 65, 93, 161, 242, 
473, 554, 581, B-11, D-15  
 O’Brien, Denis,   5 
 Ocker, Lisa,   181 
 O’Connor, Colleen,   500  
 Ohikuare, Judith,   415  
 Oliver, Christian,   90 
 Olsen, Ken,  B-4 
 Olson, Parmy,   27 
 O’Neill, Danny,   410  
 O’Neill, Shane,   B-25 
 Onyemah, Vincent,   182 
 O’Reilly, Tim,   B-13 
 Ortelle, John,   39 
 O’Sullivan, John,   44  
 Ouchi, William,   278, 292  
 Overly, Steven,   207  
P
 Pace, Gina,   456  
 Pachter, Barbara,   P-13  
 Pagliery, Jose,   228, 568  
 Paharia, Rajat,   296 
 Paletta, Damian,   331, 359  
 Paley, Eric,   182, 207  
 Palmer, Benjamin,   471 
 Palmisano, Samuel J.,   288 
 Papadimitriou, Odysseas,   D-21  
 Pappas, Brian,   139 
 Pappe, Charles,   148  
 Parks, Ken,   90 
 Parmar, Rashik,   238  
 Parry, John,   529  
 Passy, Charles,   C-14 
 Patrick, Josh,   296  
 Patton, Leslie,   149  
 Pawlak, Jim,   208 
 Peale, Norman Vincent,   98, 117  
 Pentland, Alex (Sandy),   238 
  Pentland, William,   A-23 
 Pepper, John Henry,   B-4 
 Peralta, Katie,   89 
 Perez, Juan Carlos,   331, B-25  
 Perez, Marvin G.,   39 
 Peruvankal, James Paul,   267 
 Peters, Mitchell,   3 
 Petersen, Andrea,   267  
 Peterson, Kristina,   57 
 Pham, Sherisse,   B-1 
 Philips, Matthew,   445, 565  
 Phillips, Nelson,   238  
 Piketty, Thomas,   348  
 Plumer, Brad,   267, 331  
 Plungis, Jeff,   A-23 
 Podell, Ira,   359  
 Pofeldt, Elaine,   149 
 Pomerantz, Dorothy,   359, 389  
 Popeil, Ron,   453 
 Popovic, Daniel,   171 
  Pricones, Diane,   331 
 Priddle, Alisa,   296 
 Procter, William,   152 
 Protalinski, Emil,   B-25 
 Prusak, Laurance,   471  
 Puga, Kristina,   151 
 Pugh, Katrina,   471 
 Pullen, John Patrick,   447  
 Puri, Ritika,   309 
Q
 Qi, Liyan,   90 
 Quast, Lisa,   181 
 Queen, Karen Haywood,   529 
 Queenan, Joe,  379, 445 
 Quigley, James,   495  
 Quinn, Jane Bryant,   181 
 Quintaro, Paul,   503 
 Quittner, Jeremy,   243, A-23  
R
 Radnofsky, Louise,   331 
 Raftery, John,   473 
 Ragan, Subramanian,   415  
 Rajan, Bharath,   471 
 Rajaratnam, Raj,   105, 535 
 Rall, Patrick,   296 
 Ramachandran, Shalini,   238, 471  
 Ramanna, Karthik,   27 
 Rami, Trupti,   386  
 Rampell, Catherine,   181 
 Ramsinghani, Mahendra,   182  
 Randhawa, Amrick,   500 
 Rao, Huggy,   238 
 Rao, Jay,  238 
 Rapoport, Michael,   500, 529 
 Ratliff, John,   295 
 Rauch, Doug,   214 
 Ravindranath, Mohana,   29, 590 
 Raymond, Chris,   251  
 Raynor, Michael E.,   238 
  Read, Bill,   267 
 Recardo, Ronald J.,   331 
 Reeve, Rebecca,  181 
 Reid, Tim,   359 
 Reinhart, Carmen M.,   267 
 Reinhart, James,   516 
 Renzulli, Kerri Anne,   415  
 Resnick, Nathan,   153 
 Resnik, Marc,   159 
 Revill, John,   415 
 Ricardo, David,   64 
 Richardson, Vanessa,   181 
 Rines, Samuel,   57 
 Risen, Tom,   B-26 
 Rivas, Teresa,   445 
 Rivera, Martha,   182 
 Robbins, Irvine,   128 
 Roberts, Daniel,   464 
 Roberts, Dexter,   267, 445 
 Robinson, Joe,   181 
  Rockefeller, John D.,   461, 522  
 Rockoff, Jonathan D.,   529 
 Rodrigues, Vivianne,   561 
 Rogers, Dale S.,   445 
 Rogers, John,   531 
 Rogoff, Kenneth S.,   267  
 Rohr, Catherine,   97 
 Rolander, Niclas,   445 
 Romero, SImon,   90 
 Roof, Katie,   561 
 Roosevelt, Franklin D.,   36, 
53, 575 
 Root, James,   207 
 Rosati, Fabio,   15 
 Rosenberg, Larry,   424  
 Rosenthal, Elizabeth,   85 
 Rosiak, Luke,   358  
 Roth, David Lee,   3 
 Rothman, Evan,   C-14 
 Rothman, Rachel,   A-23 
 Rowling, J. K.,   A-7 
  Rubenfeld, Samuel,   117, 208, C-14 
 Rubin, Ben Fox,   434  
 Rubin, Jennifer,   A-23  
 Rugaber, Christopher S.,   27 
 Ruiz, Juanita,   423 
 Rust, Roland,   200 
S
 Sacks, Danielle,   211 
 Salter, Ammon,   238 
 Samuelson, Robert J.,   57 
 Sandberg, Sheryl,   185 
 Sander, Henny,   561  
 Sander, Vivienne,   561 
 Saporito, Bill,   D-21 
 Satchell, Arlene,   149 
 Savage, David,   359 
 Sayare, Scott,   230  
 Scanlin, Mike,   228 
 Schawbel, Dan,   288  
 Schmansky, Robert,   544 
 Schneider, Howard,   590 
 Schneiderman, Eric,   464 
 Schoemaker, Paul J. H.,   117  
 Schultz, E. J.,   415 
 Schultz, Howard,   65, 153 
 Schultz, John D.,   445  
 Schumpeter, Joseph,   49 
  Schwabel, Dan,   D-1  
 Scola, Nancy,   B-25 
 Scott, B. Shane,   A-23  
 Scutti, Susan,   374 
 Searcy, Dionne,   A-23 
 Sears, Steven M.,   561 
 Segarra, Mariella,   500, 529 
 Semeuls, Alana,   358 
 Senturia, Ethan,   579 
 Seo, Jane,   428  
 Shafer, Steve,   529  
 Shandrow, Kim LaChance,   428 
 Sharf, Samantha,   D-1 
 Sharma, Amol,   238, 471 
 Sharp, Drew,   359 
 Shellenbarger, Sue,   27 
 Shen, Samuel,   90 
 Sherman, Erik,   P-13 
 Sherman, H. David,   267 
 Sherwood, Pat,   505–506 
  Sheth, Raj,   309, 331 
 Shields, Todd,   B-26 
 Shirozu, Norihiko,   90 
 Shutts, Carole,   141 
 Siegel, Harry,   B-26 
 Signore, Dino,   208 
 Silverblatt, Rob,   561  
 Simchi-Levi, David,   267  
 Simmons, Gene,   290 
 Simmons, Russell,   155 
 Simmons, Sabrina,   503  
 Simon, Ruth,   171  
 Simon, Stephanie,   B-26  
 Simpson, Stephen D.,   529 
 Sisodia, Raj,   27, 57, 207, 238, 415 
 Skidelsky, Robert,   89 
 Skousen, Mark,   57 
 Slaughter, Matthew J.,   89 
 Small, Vanessa,   386 
 Smith, Adam,   32–33, 34, 56, 103  
  Smith, Anne Kates,   331, D-21 
 Smith, Austin,   359 
 Smith, DeMaurice,   333 
 Smith, Elliot Blair,   359 
 Smith, Erin,   70 
 Smith, Jacquelyn,   181, 296 
 Smith, Jennifer,   529 
 Smith, Troy,   148 
 Snowden, Edward,   B-20, C-2  
 Sobota, Eric,   500 
 Solomon, Brian,   241  
 Sommer, Jeff,  561 
 Spacey, Kevin,   417 
 Spar, Debora,   27 

NAME INDEX
I-6
 Sparshott, Jeffrey,   590  
 Speiser, Joe,   518 
 Spenner, Patrick,   385 
 Stadler, Christian,   207  
 Stahl, Ashley,   90, 520  
 Steger, Isabella,   374 
 Steinberg, Julie,   117 
 Steinfeld, Edward,   267 
 Steinhauer, Jennifer,   359 
 Stengel, Richard,   27, 267  
 Stephens, Philip,   90 
 Stephenson, James,   181 
 Stephenson, Randall,   57 
 Stern, Joanna,   B-7 
 Stern, Seth,   117 
 Sterngold, James,   95 
 Stevenson, Mark,   90 
 Stevenson, Seth,   B-1 
 Stewart, Martha,   389  
 Stilwell, Patricia,   331  
  Stilwell, Victoria,   331 
 Stohr, Greg,   A-23 
 Stone, Brad,   568 
 Stone, Ian,   B-26 
 Stonesifer, Patty,   93 
 Strain, Michael R.,   27 
 Strauss, Gary,   A-23 
 Strauss, Karsten,   428  
 Strauss, Levi,   144 
 Streep, Meryl,   63 
 Stumpf, Dan,   561 
 Stynes, Tess,   529 
 Suddath, Claire,   D-1 
 Sukumar, Nandini,   561  
 Sullivan, Bob,   B-7 
 Sullivan, Tim,   238 
 Summers, Lawrence,   185  
 Sutton, Robert I.,   238 
 Swack, Michael,   181  
 Swain, Jerry,   121 
  Swaminathan, 
Srinvason,   471  
 Sweet, Ken,   27  
 Swimmurn, Nick,   207  
 Swint, Brian,   C-14 
 Szaky, Tom,  403 
T
 Talik, Visi R.,   61  
 Talley, Ian,   585  
 Tan, Anjelica,   D-22  
 Tan, Kopin,   561  
 Tangel, Andrew,   561 
 Tanner, Adam,   B-9 
 Tapper, Jake,   B-1 
 Tassi, Paul,   181  
 Taulli, Tom,   500 
 Taylor, Evan,   500 
 Taylor, Eve Wright,   A-1 
 Taylor, Frederick,   
271–272, 291  
 Taylor, Kate,   70, 149  
 Teach, Edward,   529 
 Telfer, Clint,   180 
 Telfer, Jennifer,   180  
 Tennent, Devar,   423  
 Terdiman, Daniel,   B-26 
 Tergesen, Anne,   D-21, D-22 
 Terhune, Chad,   331  
  Thau, Barbara,   404 
 Thomas, Emma Ross,   90  
 Thomas, Hugh,   B-7 
 Thomas, Robert J.,   89 
 Thompson, Cadie,   181 
 Tieger, Kelly,   E-5 
 Tieger, Paul D.,   E-5 
 Tillotson, Kristin,   359 
 Tita, Bob,   B-26 
 Tobak, Steve,   181 
 Tobin, James,   565 
 Toman, Nicholas,   385, 471 
 Trautman, Ted,   374 
 Trotter, Jim,   333 
 Trottman, Melanie,   359 
 Trudeau, Garry,   110 
 Trung, Ly Qui,   69, 143 
 Truong, Alice,   404 
 Tschampa, Dorothee,   445 
 Tully, Kevin,  251 
  Turner, Taos,   90 
 Tuttle, Brad,   391 
U
 Unanue, Bob,   151 
 Unanue, Joseph,   151 
 Unanue, Prudencio,   151 
 Unruh, Gregory C.,   89 
V
 Van Halen, Eddie,   3 
 Van Voorhis, Kenneth R.,   157 
 Vance, Ashlee,   417, 568 
 Vanderbilt, Cornelius,   165 
 Vandewater, Cathy,   313 
 Vara, Vauhini,   415  
 Vedder, Richard,   27, 58 
 Venkatraman, Archana,   B-26 
 Ventre, Michael,   447 
 Villano, Matt,   182  
 Vives, Luis,   89 
 Vlasic, Bill,   529 
 Von Drehle, David,   27, 267 
 Von Simson, Ernest,   B-25 
 Von Tobel, Alexa,   D-1 
 Vozza, Stephanie,   285 
 Vranica, Suzanne,   471 
 Vroom, Victor,   280, 292  
W
 Waddilove, Roland,   B-25 
 Waggoner, John,   544, 562  
 Wagner, Eric T.,   181, 389, 535  
 Walt, Vivienne,   90 
 Walton, Sam,   4, 5, 144 
 Ward, Lisa,   471 
 Warner, Bernhard,   285  
 Warner, H. M.,   B-4 
 Warner, Joel,  447 
 Warner, Melodie,   415 
 Washington, Jerome,   424 
 Watson, Thomas,   B-4 
 Watson, Tom,   358 
 Wayshak, Marc,   309 
 Weber, Ben,   359 
 Weber, Laura,   15 
 Weber, Lauren,   415 
 Weber, Max,   214, 216, 234 
 Wehrum, Kasey,   385 
 Weinberg, Ari I.,   C-14 
  Weiner, Joane,   331 
 Weinstein, Bruce,   313 
 Weintraub, Joseph,   238 
 Weise, Karen,   500, 529  
 Welsh, Liz,  3 
 Wernau, Julie,   419 
 Wesbury, Brian,   590  
 Wessel, David,   585 
 Wherry, Elaine,   P-13  
 White, Mary Jo,   478  
 White, Michael,   471 
 White, Thomas I.,   99 
 Whitney, Eli,   20 
 Whitney, John,   318 
 Whittaker, Zack,   B-26 
 Wienbar, Sharon,   331 
 Willcocks, Leslie P.,   238 
 Williams, Chuck,   C-1  
 Williams, Whitney,   153 
 Wilson, Gwenn,   E-5 
  Wilson, Hugh N.,   415 
 Wilson, Jeff,   39 
 Wilson, Ralph F.,   471 
 Winter, Henry,  241 
 Winters, Trish,   B-26 
 Wladawsky-Berger, Irving,   B-25 
 Wolf, Charles, Jr.,   57 
 Wolfe, Alexandra,   89, D-21 
 Wolfers, Justin,   565 
 Wolversen, Roya,   181 
 Wong, Venessa,   117, 529 
 Wood, Barry,   89  
 Woodman, Nick,   5 
 Woods, Patti,   149  
 Woodward, Chris,   A-23 
 Woody, Todd,   181 
 Woodyard, Chris,   296 
 Woollacott, Emma,   B-26 
 Workman, Zach,   153  
 Worth, Joe,   500 
  Wozniack, Steve,   157 
 Wrage, Alexandra,   90 
 Wright, Joshua,   331 
 Wright, Molly,   149 
 Wulf, Julie,   238 
Y
 Yadron, Danny,   D-21 
 Yakowicz, Will,   19, 117, 321 
 Yao Ming,   74 
 Yardley, Jim,   117 
 Yate, Martin,   E-4 
 Yellen, Janet,   51, 565, 566, 569, 570  
 Yip, Pamela,   500  
 Young, Jeremy,  153  
 Young, Scott,   B-25 
 Yung, Jia Lynn,   561  
Z
 Zanuck, Darryl,   B-4 
 Zaragoza, Sandra,   251 
 Zetlin, Minda,   142 
 Zhou Wenting,   90 
 Zhu, Grace,   90 
 Zhu, Joe,  267 
 Zibel, Alan,   529 
 Zien, Jake,   174 
 Ziobro, Paul,   415 
 Zipkin, Amy,   417 
 Zitron, Ed,   311 
 Zuckerberg, Mark,   153, 185 
 Zuckerman, Mortimer,   58  
 Zwilling, Martin,   181 

A 
AAA,   352  
 AAMCO,  432 
 AARP,  353 
 ABC,  A-18  
 AC Hotels,   70 
 Ace Hardware,   144, 432  
 adidas,   250  
 Ad.ly,  454 
 Advertising Council,   365  
 Aetna Insurance,   85 
 AF Sachs AG,   433  
 Aflac,   A-7, C-1, C-2  
 AFL-CIO,  336 
 AICPA;  see American Institute of Certi-
fied Public Accountants  
 AIG;  see American International Group  
 AirBnb,   D-8 
 Al Muhairy Group,   69 
 Alcoa,  552 
 Allen-Bradley,   249  
 Allied Security Trust,   A-7 
  Amazon.com,   15, 152, 180, 207, 212, 
374, 379, 418, 429, 435, B-3, B-8, 
B-11, B-13, B-16  
 Amdocs,   B-13  
 American Airlines,   A-12 
 American Arbitration Association,   343 
 American Cotton Oil,   552  
 American Eagle,   21 
 American Express,   351, 511, 552  
 American Federation of Television and 
Radio Artists,   357–358 
 American Institute of Certified Public 
Accountants (AICPA),   476, 477  
 American International Group (AIG),  
 505, 554  
 American Marketing Association,   390 
 American Sugar Refining Co.,   552  
 American Tobacco,   552, A-11  
 Amway,  430  
 AngelList,   170  
 Angie’s List,   464 
 Anheuser-Busch,   136, 266 
 AOL,   185 
 Apple Computer,   7, 74, 128, 131, 157, 186, 
198, 246, 300, 378, 392, 399, 424, 434, 
484, 511, 522, 523, A-7, A-11, B-16  
  Appletree Answers,   295  
 Archipelago,   533 
 Ariel Investments,   531 
 Arizona Beverage Company,   397  
 Arm & Hammer,   406 
 Armstrong,   465  
 Arthur Andersen,   476  
 Associated Grocers,   432 
 Associated Press,   144 
 Association of Certified Fraud Examiners,  
 107, 478  
 Aston Martin,   434 
 AT&T,  198, 393, 470, 552, 560, A-11, A-12  
 Auntie Anne’s Pretzels,   119, 140, 142  
 Autoliv Inc.,   433  
 Avon,  152, 180, 430  
B
 Baccarat,   283 
 Ball,  266  
 Bank of America,   154, 323, 552, 554  
 Barclays Premier Soccer League,   63 
 Barnes & Noble,   374  
 Barney’s,   121 
 Baskin-Robbins,   128, 137, 432  
 Bass Pro Shops,   377  
 Bayer,  399  
 Bed Bath & Beyond,   174  
 Berkshire Hathaway,   546 
 Better Business Bureau,   175 
 Better Homes & Gardens Real Estate 
LLC,  455  
 Bigcommerce,   287 
 Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation;  see 
Gates Foundation  
 Bitcoin Shop Inc.,   568 
 Blackstone Group,   D-16 
 Blockbuster,   190, A-15 
 BLS;  see Bureau of Labor Statistics  
 Blue Cross/Blue Shield,   D-12  
 Blue Diamond,   144 
 BlueNile.com,   160  
 BMW,  452 
 Bob’s Big Boy,   391 
 Bocktown Beer and Grill,   391 
 Boeing,   64, 94, 522, 552  
 Boise Cascade,   110 
 Borden,   399  
 Borders Books,   374, A-15 
 BorgWarner,   433 
 Born to Sell,   228  
 Boston Beer Company,   196  
 Boston Legal Sea Foods,   19 
 BP,  72  
 Bricks 4 Kidz,   139 
 Bridgeman Foods,   140–141 
 Bright Horizons Family Solutions, Inc.,   352  
 Bristol-Myers Squibb,   351 
 British Airways,   19 
 BSW,  244  
 Build-A-Bear Workshop Inc.,   142, 309  
 Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms, 
and Explosives   434 
 Bureau of Economic Analysis,   56 
 Bureau of Export Assistance,   66 
 Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS),   56, 
311, 353–354  
 Burger King,   136, 390 
C
 Cabo Wabo Cantina,   3 
 Campbell Soup Company,   365, 375–376, 
399 
 Candy Bouquet International,   141–142 
 Capital Protective Insurance (CPI),   250 
 Careerbuilder.com,   308, E-5 
 Carl’s Junior,   391  
 Caterpillar,   64, 552 
 CBS,   348, A-18  
 Celestial Seasonings,   105 
 Celtel,   155 
 Census Bureau,   25, 96, 136  
 Center for American Progress,   350 
 Charles Schwab,   531, 543 
 Charm City Cakes,   248 
 Chef America,   71 
 Chevron,  72, 552 
 Chicago Gas,   552  
 China National Petroleum,   72 
 Chipotle,   512 
 Chocolate Chocolate Chocolate 
Company,   432 
 Chrysler,  136 
 Ciba Specialty Chemicals,   108  
 Circuit City,   A-15 
 Cisco Systems,   198, 255, 522, 534, 552, A-7  
 Citigroup,   110 
 City of Chesterfield Zoning Board,   A-4 
 CJ Products,   180 
 Clairol,   455 
 CloudFare,   B-19 
 CNBC,   547, 551, 553 
 CNOOC,   136 
 Coca-Cola,   13, 19, 68, 71, 73, 74, 128, 
392, 393, 400, 401, 484, 495, 539, 
544, 545, 552  
 Coldwater Creek,   431 
 Comcast,   A-12 
 Cook County Department of Revenue,   478 
 Coors Brewing Company,   75, 455 
 Copioisty,   175 
 Costco,   106, 121, 425 
 CPI;  see Capital Protective Insurance  
 Craigslist,   15  
 Crayola Crayons,   405 
 Critical Infrastructure Protection Board,  
 B-19 to B-20  
 Custom Foot,   250 
 CutOnYourBias,   429  
D
 Dealstruck,   579 
 Decorating Den,   140 
 Def Jam Records,   155 
 Defy Ventures,   97 
 Del Monte,   399 
 Dell Computer,   69, 136, 153, 229, 378  
 Deloitte Touche Tomatsu,   495 
 DHL,   438 
 Digicel,   5 
 Digital Equipment Corporation,   B-4 
 Dip ‘N’ Strip,   142 
 Dish Networks,   277  
 Disney Company,   13, 15, 70, 154, 180, 
286, 300, 347, 539, 552, A-7  
 Distilling & Cattle Feeding Co.,   552 
 Domino’s Pizza,   69, 140 
 Door-to-Door Dry Cleaning,   137  
 Doozle’s,   512 
 Dow Chemical,   110, 287 
 Dow Jones & Company,   552 
 Dr Pepper,   455  
 Dream Dinners,   140, 414–415 
 Dreamworks,   320, 531, B-14 
 Dreyer’s Ice Cream,   71 
 Dropbox,   B-16 
 Drop.io,   D-1 
 Dunkin’ Donuts,   69, 139, 291, 512  
 DuPont,   19, 152, 180, 196, 352, 552, A-11 
 E
E*Trade,   531, 542, 543 
 E*Trade Bank,   583  
 Early Shares,   170 
 Eastman Chemical Company,   320 
 Eastman Kodak,   152, B-3 
 eBay,  15, 61, 105, 429 
 Economic Development Authority,   168 
 Elance,  15, 157 
 Electra Bicycle Company,   88–89 
 Electrolux,   75  
 Elite Modeling Agency,   389 
 EMC,   314  
 Emirates Associated Business Group,   68 
 Energizer,   385 
 Enron,  94, 102, 476, 554, 589, A-12  
I-7
 O R G A N I Z AT I O N  I N D E X 

ORGANIZATION INDEX
I-8
 Estee Lauder,   531 
 Ethisphere,   109 
 Etsy,  429 
 Euronext,   533  
 Eventbrite,   124 
 Expedia,   362 
 ExxonMobil,   72, 552  
 F 
Facebook,  4, 14, 153, 160, 185, 200, 212, 
229, 285, 300, 311, 363, 365, 381, 
391, 422, 428, 429, 454, 455, 460, 
522, 533, 534, B-12, B-13, E-1 to 
E-2, E-3, P-6 to P-7  
 Fancy,  429 
 Fannie Mae;  see Federal National Mort-
gage Association  
 Farmers Home Administration,   168  
 Fashism,   429 
 Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corpora-
tion (Freddie Mac),   554, 580, A-13  
 Federal National Mortgage Association 
(Fannie Mae),   94, 554, 580, A-13  
 FedEx,   228, 314, 429, 435, 437, 438, 444  
 FedEx Office,   286, E-10  
 Fidelity,   543 
 Finish Line,   310  
 Fitch Ratings,   539–540, 541, 548  
 Fitness Anywhere,   394 
 Flex-N-Gate,   241  
 Flextronics,   254  
 Florida Power and Light,   40, 103  
 Florida Public Service Commission,   40 
 FNMA;  see Federal National Mortgage 
Association  
 Food and Drug Administration,   434 
  Food Bank of South New Jersey,   365 
 Ford Motor Company,   46, 76, 152, 180, 
214, 229, 284, 455, 503, 523–524, A-6  
 4Food,   B-12 to B-13  
 Foursquare,   455 
 Fox Lawson & Associates,   320 
 Freddie Mac;  see Federal Home Loan 
Mortgage Corporation  
 Frederick’s of Hollywood,   68 
 Free Management Library,   245 
 Freight Farms,   243 
 Fresh Italy,   372 
 Freshii,   142 
 Frito-Lay,   392 
 FUBU,   361 
 Fundation,   579 
 Funding Circle,   579  
G
 Galleon Group,   105 
 Gallup,   270 
 Gap,  211, 361, 503  
 Gates Foundation,   93, 104  
 Gazprom,  400  
 GE;  see General Electric  
 Genentech,   136, 321  
 General Electric Capital Corporation,  
 517, 518, 578  
 General Electric (GE),   19, 75, 127, 193, 
300, 315, 439, 524, 552  
 General Mills,   460 
 General Motors (GM),   188, 200, 214, 
229, 241, 460, 505, 554, A-5, A-6  
 General Nutrition Center (GNC),   250  
 Give More Media,   286  
 Global Crossing,   589  
 Globoforce Ltd.,   287  
 GM;  see General Motors  
 GNC;  see General Nutrition Center  
 GoldenPalace.com,   460 
 Goldman Sachs,   82, 110, 548–549, 552  
 Gold’s Gym,   138  
 Goodwill Industries,   499–500, 505  
 Goodyear,  401 
 Google,  61, 185, 186, 195, 198, 212, 253, 
278, 300, 381, 394, 399, 400, 401, 
522, 533, 534, 546, A-7, A-11, A-12, 
B-2, B-8, B-11, B-13, B-14, B-16, E-3  
 GoPro,   5 
 GoTryItOn,   429  
 Goya Foods,   151 
 Greenling,   107  
 GreenNote,   170 
 Greenpeace,   365 
 Groupon,   429 
 Gymboree,  136  
H
 H. B. Fuller Company,   76 
 A. H. Robins,   A-6 
 H&R Block,   143 
 Häagen-Dazs,   400 
 HACE;  see Hispanic Alliance for Career 
Enhancement  
 Haemonetics,   352 
 hairyLemon,   400 
 Hallmark,   137  
 Harvard University,   272 
 HealthSouth,   94  
 Herbalife,   430 
 Hershey Foods Corporation,   B-21 
 Hertz Corporation,   136 
 Hewitt Associates,   352 
 Hewlett-Packard (HP),   71, 286, 347, 
503, 552  
 Hilton,   105  
 Hispanic Alliance for Career Enhance-
ment (HACE),   316 
 Hitachi,   71, 279 
 H.J. Heinz Company,   399 
 Holiday Inn,   69, 136, 143  
 Home Depot,   110, 217, 218, 409, 552  
 Hon Hai Precision Industry Company,   7 
 Honda,   7, 46, 71, 253, 434, 544  
 Hoover’s,  E-11 
 HP;  see Hewlett-Packard  
 Hulu,  190 
 Hyundai,   7 
I
 i2,  433  
 IASB;  see International Accounting Stan-
dards Board  
 IBM,  15, 64, 69, 74, 83, 104, 105–106, 
121, 128, 198, 288, 307, 351, 539, 
544, 545, 552, B-4, B-16, D-16  
 ICANN;  see Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Numbers  
 IGA,  432 
 Igus,  255  
 IKEA,  419 
 Imax Corporation,   82 
 ImClone,   94 
 InBev,  136, 266 
 Indeed.com,   308 
 Indigogo,   29, 171 
 Institute of Certified Management 
Accountants,   476 
 Intel,  74, 105, 247, 351, 401, 522, 
552, B-14  
 Intercontinental Exchange Inc.,   533 
 International Accounting Standards 
Board (IASB),   495 
 International Franchise Association,  
 136, 138, 140  
 International House,   246 
 International Ladies Garment Workers 
Union,  337  
 International Trade Commission,   176 
 Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers (ICANN),   B-15  
 InternshipIn,   153 
 Intuit,   480 
 Isuzu,  241 
 IZEA,   454 
J
 J. Crew,   211 
 Jack in the Box,   A-6 
 Jacksonville Jaguars,   241 
 Japan Post Holdings,   72 
 Jazzercise,   139, 140, 141 
 JCPenney,   144, 347, 409 
 Jenny Craig,   71 
 Jiffy Lube,   136 
 John Deere,  193, B-14  
 Johns-Byrne,   249 
 Johnson & Johnson,   19, 100, 102, 351, 
511, 545, 552 
 Joie de Vivre,   273–274 
 JPMorgan Chase,   109, 350, 352, 
552, 580 
 Jungle Jim’s International Market,   152 
 JustBoughtIt,   429 
K
 K2 Skis,  228 
 Kathy Ireland Worldwide,   389 
 KFC,   69, 74, 75, 139, 269, 367, 432 
 Kia,   433 
 Kickstarter,   29, 170, 171, 429 
 Kimberly Clark,   B-6 
 Kiva.org,   29 
 KLM Royal Dutch Airlines,   438 
 Kmart,   389, 514 
 Kodak;  see Eastman Kodak  
 Korilla BBQ,   428 
 Kraft Foods,   432, 452, 456 
 Krispy Kreme,   140, 390  
 Kumon Learning Centers,   143 
L
 Laclede Gas Light Co.,   552 
 Ladies Professional Golf Association 
(LPGA),   A-1 
 Land O Lakes,   144 
 Lands’ End,   431 
 LearnVest,   D-1 
 LegalZoom,   133  
 Legendary Entertainment,   447 
 Lego,  139, 374  
 Lehman Brothers,   477, 524, 554 
 Lending Club,   579 
 Let’s Pizza,   430 
 Levi-Strauss,   83, 399, 503  
 LexisNexis,   310 
 Lexus,  377 
 Library of Congress,   A-7 
 LinkedIn,   285, 311, 455, E-1 to E-2, E-3, E-4  

I-9
ORGANIZATION INDEX
 Living Social,   429 
 L.L.Bean,  431 
 Lockheed Martin Corporation,   161 
 Los Angeles Lakers,   197–198  
 Lotus Development,   105–106  
 Lowe’s,   218 
 Luke’s Lobster,   165  
 Lyst,  429 
M
 A. M. Best,   D-12  
 Macy’s,   218, 287, 438, 514  
 Major League Baseball (MLB),   
180, 521  
 Maricopa County Planning 
Commission,   A-4 
 Maritz, Inc.,   286 
 Marriott International,   70, 142, 269  
 Mars,  104, 136  
 Martha’s Table,   93 
 Mary Kay,   65 
 MasterCard,   511, 512, 546  
 Mattel,  173, A-5  
 Maytag,   283  
 Mazda,  241 
 McCormick,   506 
 McDonald’s,   69, 70, 73, 103–104, 110, 
136, 137, 140, 142, 143, 168, 218, 
231, 252, 271, 315, 367, 390–391, 
399, 432, 484, 528, 544, 545, 552, 
A-4 to A-5, A-7, B-13  
 McDonnell Douglas,   522  
 McKinsey & Company,   308 
 MDD Forensic Accountants,   478 
 Medtronic Inc.,   83, A-6  
 Meinike,  138   
 Mercedes,  71, 253, 401  
 Merck,  552 
 Meridan Group,   65 
 Merrill Lynch,   554 
 Miami Heat,   A-1 
 Michelin,   433 
 Michelob,   399  
 Michigan State University School of 
Packaging,   397–398  
 Microsoft,   5, 61, 93, 127, 153, 154, 195, 
299, 534, 547, 552, 560, 567, A-11  
 Miller Brewing Company,   136  
 Mindbridge,   354  
 Minnesota Orchestra,   344 
 Minority Business Development Agency,  
 168 
 Missouri Department of Natural 
Resources,  478 
 MLB;  see Major League Baseball  
 ModCloth,   167, 404  
 Moniker Guitars,   251 
 Monster.com,   308, 309, E-5, E-6  
 Monte Jade,   316 
  Moody’s Investor Services,   524, 539–540, 
541, 548, 589, D-12, E-11  
 Morgan Stanley,   D-1  
 Morningstar,   560–561  
 Motilo,   429 
 Motley Fool,   532 
 MSNBC,  551, 553  
 MTV,   26, 131, 447, B-21  
N
 NASA,  315 
 NASCAR,   401 
 National Alliance for Caregiving,   352 
 National Basketball Association (NBA),  
 62, 74, 93, 140, 197–198, A-1  
 National Bicycle Industrial Company,   250 
 National Business Incubator Association 
(NBIA),  162 
 National Collegiate Athletic Association 
(NCAA),  180, 348 
 National Consumer Counseling 
Service,  D-10  
 National Cooperative Business 
Association,   143 
 National Education Association (NEA),   345  
 National Federation of Independent 
Business,   514 
 National Football League (NFL),   62, 63, 
241, 333, 343, 344  
 National Football League Players Associ-
ation (NFLPA),   333, 343, 344  
 National Hockey League,   343 
 National Institute on Drug Abuse,   353  
 National Institutes of Health,   353  
 National Lead,   552 
 National Mediation Board,   343  
 National Park Service,   478  
 National Small Business Association,   518  
 National Venture Capital Association,   170 
 NBA;  see National Basketball 
Association  
 NBC,   A-18 
 NBIA;  see National Business Incubator 
Association  
 NCAA;  see National Collegiate Athletic 
Association  
 NEA;  see National Education Association  
 Nerdist Industries,   447 
 Nestlé,   19, 71–72, 75, 544  
 Nestlé Purina PetCare Company,   258 
 Netflix,   190, 286, 417, B-11  
 NetworkforGood.org,   104 
 New York Knicks,   198 
 New York Life,   C-7  
 NFL;  see National Football League  
 NFLPA;  see National Football League 
Players Association  
 Nielsen,   105, 379  
 NiGaz,  400 
 Nike,  74, 83, 110–111, 229, 251, 400, 
511, 552, A-7  
 Nissan,   350 
 NNPC,   400 
 Nordstrom,   217 
 North American Co.,   552 
 Northwestern University,   348 
 Norton,   B-18 
 Nucor Steel,   320 
 NYSE Euronext,   533, 534 
O
 Occupational Information Network 
(O*NET),   306 
 Occupational Safety and Health Admin-
istration (OSHA),   354 
 Ocean Spray,   144 
 ODesk,  15, 157, 228  
 OECD;  see Organization for Economic 
Cooperation and Development  
 Office Depot,   323 
 Office of Federal Contract Compliance 
Programs,   304 
 Office of Personnel Management (OPM),  
 352 
 OMX Group,   534 
 1-800-Flowers,   454 
 OPM;  see Office of Personnel 
Management  
 Oracle Corporation,   347, 433 
 OrderUp,   142 
 Organization for Economic Cooperation 
and Development (OECD),   77, 113 
 Organization of American States,   113 
 OSHA;  see Occupational Safety and 
Health Administration  
P
 Packard Bell,   B-3 
 Palo Alto Software,   168 
 Pandora,   B-11 
 Parsley Patch,   505–506, 511 
 Patagonia,   104 
 Patriot Contractors,   473 
 PayPal,   176, 568, 583 
 PBD,  230 
 People Capital,   170 
 PEP;  see Prison Entrepreneurship Program  
 PepsiCo,   70–71, 75, 108, 269, 393, 401, 463  
 Perdue Chicken,   75 
 Perrier,   71 
 Peterson Institute for International Eco-
nomics,  65 
 Petflow.com,   518 
 PetZen Products LLC,   132 
 Pfizer,  217, 519, 552  
 Pho24,  69, 143 
 Piaget,   392 
 Pinterest,   429, E-3 
 Pizza Hut,   69, 269 
 Playtex Company,   A-6 
 Pollo Campara,   69 
 PPG,  251 
 Priceline,   362, 410  
 PricewaterhouseCoopers,   230 
 Printinginabox.com,   141 
 Prison Entrepreneurship Program (PEP),   97 
 Procter & Gamble,   152, 212, 300, 315, 
393, 552 
 Prosper Marketplace,   170 
 Pure and Simple Organizing,   159 
 Pure Software,   417 
 PVH,  110 
 PWM,   244  
Q
 Quirky,   174 
 Quiznos,   A-17 
R
 Rainforest Action Network (RAN),   109, 110  
 Ralston Purina,   71 
 RAN;  see Rainforest Action Network  
 Randstad USA,   312 
 Red Bull,   399 
 Red Cross,   7, 365, 479  
 Red Lobster,   361  
 Redbox,  29 
 Riceland Foods,   144 
 Rickshaw Bagworks,   109 
 Right Management,   230  
 Ringling Barnum and Baily Circus,   422 
 Ritz-Carlton Hotel Company,   246 
 RJR Nabisco,   136 
 Roche,   136  
 Rockaway Plate Lunch Truck,   9 
 Rocky Mountain Chocolate Factory,   69, 141  
 Rollerblade,   399  

ORGANIZATION INDEX
I-10
S
 S&P;  see Standard & Poor’s  
 SAB,  136 
 SAC Capital Advisors,   105, 535  
 SAG;  see Screen Actors Guild  
 St. Louis Cardinals,   521 
 Salvation Army,   7, 479 
 Samasource,   61  
 Sammy’s Beach Bar,   3  
 Sam’s Club,   425 
 Samsung,   71, 392, 394, 544  
 Samuel Adams,   65  
 Sanmina-SCI,   254 
 SAP,  433 
 Sara Lee Corporation,   A-6  
 Sausalito Cyclery,   3 
 SBC Communications Inc.,   552 
 Schwinn,   88 
 Scott,   432 
 Scottrade,   542, 543  
 Screen Actors Guild (SAG),   357–358 
  Sea2Tabke,  130 
 Sears, Roebuck & Company,   110, 111–112, 
399, 429  
 Second Bank of the United States,   574 
 Service Employees International Union 
(SEIU),   345  
 7-Eleven,  136, 395, 423  
 Shakey’s Pizza,   391 
 Shanghai Electric,   19 
 Shanghai Shendi Group,   70 
 Shell Oil,   19, 72 
 Sherwin-Williams,   432  
 Shift Communications,   287 
 Siemens,   83, 544  
 SimplyHired,   153  
 Sinopec Group,   72 
 Six Flags,   190  
 SkimLinks,   160 
 Skyline Construction,   318 
 Small Business Exporters Association,   66  
 SodaStream,   392 
 Solid Gold Bomb,   B-8  
 Sonic Drive-In,   148 
 Sony,  75, 195, 399, 453  
 Southwest Airlines,   290, A-17  
 Sparta Systems,   287 
 Square,   B-1 
 Standard & Poor’s,   524, 539–540, 541, 
548, 589, E-11  
 Standard Oil,   522, A-11  
 Staples,   425, 426  
 Starbucks,   65, 153, 212, 369, 391, 405, 423, 
452, 484, 489, 512, 531, 534, B-1, B-14  
 StarKist,   108 
 State Farm Insurance,   354  
 State Grid,   72 
 Statista,   285  
 Students for Responsible Business,   104  
 Substance Abuse & Mental Health 
 Services Association,   353 
 Subway,  69, 140, 142, 143  
 SugarBear,   454 
 Sulekha,  316 
 Sunkist,   144 
  Supply,   429 
 Sygen International,   503 
T
 T. Rowe Price,  550–551  
 Taco Bell,   69, 190, 269  
 Talon, Inc.,   403 
 Target,   16, 174, 218, 228, 230, 395, 439, 
B-9, B-19 
 Tata Global Beverages,   70–71 
 TaylorMade,   452 
 TD Ameritrade,   542, 543 
 Teach for America,   330 
 Tennessee Coal, Iron & Railroad Co.,   552  
 TerraCycle,  403  
 Threadless,   429 
 thredUp,   516 
 3Com,  B-4 
 3M,  160–161, 392, 552  
 ThrowThings.com,   159 
 TIAA-CREF,   578  
 Timberland,   418  
 Time Warner,   520, A-12 
 Timken,   314 
 Tivo,   29 
  T-Mobile,   A-12 
 TNT,  104, 438  
 Tokyo Stock Exchange,   C-1  
 Tom and Eddie’s,   528  
 Toyota Motor,   7, 71, 72, 241, 350, A-5  
 Toys “R” Us,   136 
 TradePoint,   434  
 Trader Joe’s,   214, 390  
 Tramonti,   153 
 Transparency International,   77, 83 
 Travelers,   552 
 Travelocity,   286, 362 
 Trek,   89 
 Triangle Shirtwaist Company,   337 
 True Value Hardware,   144 
 20th Century Fox,   B-4 
 Twitter,  14, 153, 200, 285, 311, 363, 391, 428, 
429, 447, 452, 454, 455, 538, B-1, B-12, 
B-13, B-21, E-1 to E-2, E-3, E-4, E-9  
 Tyco International,   94, 476, 554, 589 
U
 UBS,  101 
 Ugly Dolls,   65 
 Union Pacific,   B-14 
 United Auto Workers,   345  
 United Health Group,   552 
 United Healthcare,   D-12 
 United Mine Workers,   336 
 United Parcel Service (UPS),   62, 193, 
207, 216, 228, 271, 272, 352, 419, 
429, 435, 437, 438, 439, 514  
 U.S. Department of Commerce,   65, 66, 
68, 140, 434, B-15  
 U.S. Department of Defense,   280, B-15 
 U.S. Department of Health and Human 
Services,  353  
 U.S. Department of Homeland Security,  
 B-19 to B-20  
 U.S. Department of Justice,   A-10 to A-11  
 U.S. Department of Labor,   106, 314, 
353, E-4 
 U.S. Department of State,   439  
 U.S. Department of Treasury,   569, A-12 
 U.S. Government Printing Office,   66 
 U.S. Navy,  403 
 U.S. Patent and Trademark Office 
(USPTO),  A-6  
  U.S. Postal Service,   354, 419, 435  
 U.S. Supreme Court,   303, 316, 350, A-3, A-7  
 United Technologies,   552 
 United Way,   7 
 University of California–Los Angeles,   278 
 University of Maryland,   175 
 University of Pittsburgh,   71 
 UPS;  see United Parcel Service  
 UPS Store,   137, 138 
 U.S. Airways,   A-12 
 U.S. Leather,   552 
 U.S. Rubber Co.,   552 
 USL Capital,   503 
 V
 VeriSign,   B-20 
 Verizon Wireless,   354, 552, A-7 
 Viacom,   A-7 
 Vibram,   A-12 
 Victoria Jackson Cosmetics 
Company,   173  
 Virgin Airlines,   398 
 Virgin Group Ltd,   455 
 Virginia Tech,   175 
 Visa,   511, 512, 533, 552, A-11, D-9 
 VisionSpring,   116  
 VMware,  B-16 
 Volkswagen,   230, 242 
 VolunteerMatch.org,   104  
W
 Walmart,   4, 5, 18, 62, 72, 74, 82, 106, 
127, 152, 180, 228, 252, 398, 409, 
418–419, 439, 552  
 Walt Disney Company;  see Disney Company  
 Warby Parker,   116 
 Warner Bros.,   68, B-4 
 Wegman’s Food Markets,   307–308 
 Weight Watchers,   136 
 Welch’s,  144  
 WellPoint,   85 
 Wells Fargo Bank,   104 
 Wendy’s,   246 
 Western Electric,   272–273 
 Western Union,   B-4 
 Whole Foods Market,   34–35, 188, 226, 
237–238, 348, 390  
 Will n’ Roses LLC,   154 
 Wilson Sporting Goods,   222 
 Winn-Dixie,   310 
 Wipro Health Science,   84 
 Wizard Vending,   176 
 Workers United,   337 
 WorldCom,  94, 106, 476, 554, 589, A-12  
 Wrigley Company,   136 
 Writers Guild of America,   358 
 Wyeth,   228 
X
 Xerox Corporation,   69, 104, 354, 399 
 Xporta,   434 
 XSAg.com,   15 
Y
 Yahoo!,  323, 533, 547, 548–549, 550–552  
 Yao Family WInes,   74 
 Yelp,  429, 464  
 Yogen Fruz,   143 
 YoungEntrepreneur.com,   175 
 YouTube,  153, 394, 470, A-7, E-4  
 Yum! Brands,   69, 139, 269 
Z
 Zappos,   207, 299, 313, 455 
 Zippo,   391–392, 400  
 Zoosk,  287 

A
 Absolute advantage,   64 
 Accessory equipment,   396 
 Accountability,   196  
 Accountants  
 certified management,   476 
 certified public,   476 
 forensic,   478 
 private,   476 
 public,   476  
 Accounting  
 areas 
 auditing,   477, 506–507  
 financial,   476–477  
 forensic,   478 
 government and not-for-profit,  
 478–479  
 managerial,   475–476 
 tax,  478 
 defined,   474  
 distinction from bookkeeping,   479 
 ethical issues,   490 
 fundamental equation,   482  
 journals,   479 
 ledgers,   480 
 oversight of profession,   477 
 purposes,   474 
 relationship to finance,   504 
 reports,   475  
 scandals,   476 
 in small businesses,   173–174, 480–481 
 technology used in,   480–481  
 users of information,   474, 475  
 Accounting cycle,   479–480 
 Accounting firms, scandals,   476 
 Accounting standards  
 generally accepted principles,   476, 
487, 495  
 international,   495  
 Accounting system,   474, 475  
 Accounts payable,   484 
 Accounts receivable  
 collecting,   511  
 as current asset,   484 
 factoring,   517–518  
 pledging,   516 
 Acid-test (quick) ratio,   492 
 Acquisitions, 135;  see also Mergers and 
acquisitions  
 Activity ratios,   494–495 
 ADA;  see Americans with Disabilities Act  
 ADEA;  see Age Discrimination in 
Employment Act  
 Administered distribution systems,   432 
 Administrative agencies,   A-3 to A-4  
 ADRs;  see American depository receipts  
 Advantage  
 absolute,   64 
 comparative,   64 
 Advertising  
 categories,   449 
 defined,   449  
 direct mail;  see Direct mail  
 expenditures,   450  
 in foreign countries,   73, 75, 455  
 infomercials,   453 
 Internet,  450, 451, 453–455  
 magazine,   451 
 media,  450–451  
 mobile,   450, 451, 452, 465  
 newspaper,   450, 451  
 outdoor,   451, 466  
 product placement,   453 
 public benefits of,   450–451 
 public service,   365 
 radio,   451 
 on social media,   391, 451, 452, 455  
 television,   450, 451, 452–453  
 testimonials,   464 
 Yellow Pages,   451 
 Affiliate marketing,   159–160 
 Affirmative action,   303, 304  
 Affordable Care Act (ACA),   301, 320, 
A-18 to A-19, C-9, D-12  
 AFL;  see American Federation of Labor  
 AFL-CIO,  336 
 Africa  
 common markets,   80 
 economic growth,   44 
 African Americans;  see also Minorities  
 affirmative action,   303, 304  
 franchising opportunities,   140–141  
 managers,   316  
 Age;  see Aging of population; 
Demography  
 Age Discrimination in Employment Act 
(ADEA) of 1967,   303, 305  
 Agency shop agreements,   340, 341 
 Agents/brokers,   418, 426 
 Aging of population  
 baby boomers,   17–18 
 consumers,   17–18, 373  
 elder care,   352–353  
 in United States,   17–18, 373  
 Agriculture;  see also Food industry  
 cooperatives,   143–144  
 history,   20 
 local,   243, 365  
 number of farmers,   20 
 prices,   39 
 technology used in,   15  
 Air transportation,   437–438 
 Airlines  
 costs of increased security,   18 
 deregulation,   A-17 
 Alcohol abuse,   353 
 Alcohol Labeling Legislation (1988),   A-13 
 Alliances, strategic,   71  
 Allocation model,   545 
 American depository receipts (ADRs),  
 544 
 American Federation of Labor (AFL),   336  
 American Indians;  see Minorities  
 American Inventor’s Protection Act,   
A-6 to A-7 
 Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 
1990,  303, 304–305, 310, 325  
 Americans with Disabilities Amend-
ments Act of 2008,   303, 304  
 Angel investors,   170, 516 
 Annual reports,   476, 477, E-11  
 Annuities,   D-11 to D-12  
 Antitrust laws,   39–40, A-10 to A-12  
 Application forms,   309–310  
 Application software;  see  Apps; Software  
 Apprentice programs,   314 
 Apps, 391;  see also Mobile technology  
 Arbitration,   343 
 Argentina, Mercosur,   80 
 Articles of incorporation,   131 
 ASEAN Economic Community,   80 
 Asia;  see also  individual countries 
 common markets,   80 
 franchises,   142 
 manufacturing,   18 
 markets,   82, 83 
 sweatshop labor,   110 
 Asian Americans, 316;  see also 
Minorities  
 Assembly-line layouts,   255, 256  
 Assembly process,   247 
 Assets  
 accounts receivable,   516 
 on balance sheet,   483–484 
 in bankruptcies,   A-16 
 capital expenditures,   512–513  
 as collateral for loans,   516 
 current,  484 
 defined,   483–484  
 depreciation,   487 
 fixed,  484 
 goodwill,   484 
 intangible,   484 
 liquidity,   484 
 personal,   D-3 to D-6  
 ATMs;  see Automated teller machines  
 Auditing,   477, 506–507 
 Audits, social,   108–110 
 Authority  
 centralized,   215, 218, 219 
 decentralized,   218, 219 
 line versus staff,   223 
 managerial,   215  
 Autocratic leadership,   197–198  
 Automated teller machines (ATMs),   583 
 Automation;  see Technology  
  Automobile industry  
 in China,   82 
 government bailout,   554 
 mass production,   214 
 non-U.S. manufacturers,   7, 71, 73, 253 
 supply-chain management,   433, 434 
 Automobile insurance,   D-13 
B
 B corporations,   130 
 B2B;  see Business-to-business market  
 B2C;  see Business-to-consumer 
transactions  
 Baby boomers  
 aging of,   17–18 
 births of,   364 
 differences from other generations,  
 288–289, 290  
 retirement,   301, 314 
 Background investigations,   310, 311 
 Balance of payments,   66 
 Balance of trade,   66  
 Balance sheets;  see also Ratio analysis  
 accounts,   494 
 assets,   484 
 defined,   482 
 liabilities and owners’ equity,   484–485 
 personal,   482, 485, D-3 
 sample,   483 
 Baldrige Awards,   258–259, 320 
 Bangladesh, factory fire,   111  
  Banker’s acceptances,   583 
 Bankruptcies;  see also Business failures  
 corporate,   A-15 to A-17  
 defined,   A-15  
 division of assets,   A-16 
 involuntary,   A-15 
 laws,   A-15 to A-17  
 number of,   A-15 
 procedures,   A-16 to A-17  
 voluntary,   A-15 
I-11
 S U B J E C T  I N D E X 

SUBJECT INDEX
I-12
 Bankruptcy Abuse Prevention and 
 Consumer Protection Act of 2005,  
 A-15 
 Bankruptcy Amendments and Federal 
Judgeships Act of 1984,   A-15 
 Bankruptcy Reform Act of 1994,   
A-15, A-16  
 Banks;  see also Central banks; Financial 
crisis of 2008; Investment bankers  
 automated teller machines,   583 
 banker’s acceptances,   583 
 certificates of deposit,   576 
 check-clearing,   572–573 
 commercial,   576–577 
 community development financial 
institutions,   168–170  
 credit cards;  see Credit cards  
 debit cards,   582, D-10  
 demand deposits,   576  
 deregulation,   A-18 
 failures,   554, 575, 590  
 federal deposit insurance,   575, 581  
 history in United States,   574–575 
 international,   583–584  
 IRAs,  D-15 
 letters of credit,   583 
 loans;  see Loans  
 online banking,   583 
 regulation of,   524, 555  
 relationships with,   516–517  
 reserve requirements,   571, 572  
 short-term financing,   515–517  
 small businesses and,   167–170, 175  
 technology used in,   577, 581–583  
 time deposits,   576  
 trade financing,   583  
 Troubled Assets Relief Program,   505, 
554, 580–581, 590  
 Bar codes,   398, 439  
 Bargaining zone,   343 
 Barriers to trade;  see Trade barriers  
 Barron’s,  551 
 Barter,   76, 567, 574  
 Baseball, major league,   521 
 Basic earnings per share,   493 
 “Basic Guide to Exporting,”   66 
 Bears,  545 
 Benchmarking,   228–229  
 Benefit corporations,   130  
 Benefit segmentation,   376, 377  
 Benefits;  see Fringe benefits  
 BI;  see Business intelligence  
 Bible,   96 
 Big data,   B-8 to B-9  
 Billboards,   451 
 Biometric devices,   B-6 
 Bitcoins,   566, 568 
 Black Enterprise magazine,   316 
 Blogs,   363, 447, 464–465, E-4  
 Bloomberg Businessweek,  549 
 Blue-chip stocks,   545–546  
 Boards of directors,   129, 131, C-4  
 Bolivia,   80 
 Bonds  
 advantages and disadvantages,   540 
 debenture,   540–541  
 defined,   539  
 features  
 call provisions,   541  
 convertible,   541–542  
 sinking funds,   541 
 government,   539, 572  
 indenture terms,   520 
 interest,   539, 548  
 investing in,   548 
 issuing,   520–521, 533 
 junk,  548 
 maturity dates,   539 
 prices,   548–549 
 quotations,   548–549 
 ratings,   539–540, 541, 548  
 secured,   521, 541 
 unsecured,   521, 540–541  
 Bonds payable,   484 
 Bonus plans,   319 
 Bookkeeping,   479  
 Booms,   49  
 Borrowing;  see Credit; Debt; Loans  
 Boycotts,   344 
 Brain drain,   41 
 Brainstorming,   192 
 Brand associations,   401 
 Brand awareness,   401  
 Brand equity,   400–401  
 Brand insistence,   401 
 Brand loyalty,   400  
 Brand managers,   401 
 Brand names,   368, 398–399, 484 
 Brand preferences,   401 
 Brands;  see also Trademarks  
 categories,   399 
 defined,   398 
 knockoff,   399–400  
 Brazil  
 bribery in,   110 
 dumping disputes,   67 
 economic growth,   83 
 Mercosur,  80 
 Breach of contract,   A-10 
 Break-even analysis,   408–409 
 Breweries,   65  
 Bribery, 34, 77, 110, 112–113;  see also 
Corruption  
 BRIC economies, 83;  see also Brazil; 
China; India; Russia  
 Broadband technology,   B-10 to B-11  
 Brokerage firms  
 online,   543  
 services,  578–579  
 stockbrokers,   542, 545 
 Brokers;  see Agents/brokers; 
Stockbrokers  
 Brunei,  80  
 Bubbles  
 real estate,   554, 580, 590, D-7  
 in securities markets,   554  
 Budget deficits,   50  
 Budgets  
 capital,   508  
 cash,  508, 509  
 defined,   508  
 developing,   508 
 operating (master),   508 
 personal,   510, D-4  
 Bulls,   545 
 Bundling,   398  
 Bureaucracy,   216, 217 
 Business  
 benefits to community,   33  
 defined,   4 
 evolution in United States,   20–22 
 future careers in,   22 
 Business cycles, 49;  see also Recessions  
 Business environment;  see also Legal 
environment  
 competitive,   16 
 defined,   11 
 ecological,   19 
 economic and legal,   11–13, 74–76, 
374–375  
 elements of,   11, 12 
 global,   18–19 
 importance,   11 
 social,   17–18, 73–74, 373–374 
 technological,   14–16 
 Business ethics;  see Ethics  
 Business failures;  see also Bankruptcies  
 banks,   554, 575, 590 
 causes,   163–164, 505  
 Internet companies,   160  
 number of,   4, 163  
 savings and loan associations,   577 
 small businesses,   163–164 
 Business information systems;  see 
 Information technology  
 Business intelligence (BI),   B-3 
 Business law, A-2;  see also Legal 
environment  
 Business leaders, successful, 144;  
see also Entrepreneurs  
 Business ownership forms  
 comparison,   134  
 cooperatives,   143–144 
 corporations, 120;  see also 
Corporations  
 franchises, 136–137;  see also 
Franchises  
 numbers of and total receipts,   120  
 partnerships,   120, 123–126 
 selecting,   144  
 sole proprietorships,   120, 121–123  
 Business Plan Pro,   168 
 Business plans,   167–168, 169 
 Business process information,   B-5 
 Businesses, starting;  see also Business 
ownership forms; Entrepreneurship  
 business plans,   167–168, 169 
 ethical issues,   166 
 government assistance,   161–162 
 number of new businesses,   120 
 small businesses,   163–164 
 Web-based,   159 
 Business-to-business (B2B) companies, 
15, 257;  see also Marketing 
intermediaries  
 Business-to-business (B2B) market  
 channels of distribution,   418–419, 420 
 comparison to consumer market,   
380, 381 
 defined,   375 
 industrial goods and services,   396, 
397, 420 
 personal selling,   378, 456–458 
 sales promotion techniques,   461, 462 
 Business-to-business (B2B) 
transactions,   15 
 Business-to-consumer (B2C) 
 transactions, 15, 458–459;  see also 
Consumer market  
 Buying behavior;  see Consumer behavior  
 Buying stock on margin,   546–547 
C
 C corporations,   127 
 CAD;  see Computer-aided design  
 Cafeteria-style fringe benefits,   321 
 CAFTA;  see Central American Free Trade 
Agreement  
 California  
 Silicon Valley,   253, 522–523 
 utility deregulation,   A-18 

I-13
SUBJECT INDEX
 Callable bonds,   541 
 Callable preferred stock,   538  
 CAM;  see Computer-aided 
manufacturing  
 Cambodia,   80 
 Canada, franchises, 143;  see also North 
American Free Trade Agreement  
 Capital;  see also Equity financing  
 cost of,   523 
 as factor of production,   10–11 
 Capital budgets,   508 
 Capital expenditures,   512–513 
 Capital gains,   545  
 Capital items,   396 
 Capitalism;  see also Markets 
 compared to other systems,   44–45 
 conscious,   35 
 defined,   34 
 foundations of,   35–36  
 inequality in,   34–35, 40  
 rights in,   35–36  
 state,  35  
 in United States,   34–35  
 wealth creation,   32–33, 34, 40  
 Carbon footprints,   107–108 
 Careers 
 changing,   E-14 
 in global business,   84 
 information sources,   E-3, E-4 to E-5  
 in marketing,   380–381 
 new,  P-3, P-4  
 in nonprofits,   7 
 in operations management,   261 
 self-assessments,   P-4, E-1, E-2  
 in supply-chain management,   439 
 working for large businesses,   8 
 Cars;  see Automobile industry  
 Carts and kiosks,   430 
 Cash budgets,   508, 509  
 Cash flow;  see also Statement of cash 
flows  
 defined,   490  
 personal,   D-3 
  Cash flow analysis,   490–491  
 Cash flow forecasts,   507 
 Cash-and-carry wholesalers,   426 
 Catalog sales;  see Direct mail  
 Category killer stores,   427 
 CDFIs;  see Community development 
financial institutions  
 CDs;  see Certificates of deposit  
 Celebrity endorsements,   401, 454  
 Cell phones, P-6, 44;  see also Mobile 
technology  
 Cellular layouts;  see Modular layouts  
 Central American Free Trade Agreement 
(CAFTA),  81 
 Central banks;  see also Federal Reserve 
System  
 history,   574–575 
 influence on interest rates,   51, 571, 572  
 monetary policy,   570 
 Centralized authority,   215, 218, 219  
 CEOs;  see Chief executive officers; 
Managers  
 Certificates of deposit (CDs),   576 
 Certification,   339 
  Certified financial planners (CFPs),   
545, D-17 
 Certified internal auditors (CIAs),   477  
 Certified management accountants 
(CMAs),  476 
 Certified public accountants (CPAs),   
476, 477  
 CFOs;  see Chief financial officers  
 CFPs;  see Certified financial planners  
 Chain of command,   216 
 Change 
 adapting to,   212, 229–232  
 management of,   214 
 risk management and,   C-3  
 Channels of distribution, 418–419, 420; 
 see also Distribution; Supply-chain 
management  
 Chapter 7 bankruptcies,   A-15 to A-16  
 Chapter 11 bankruptcies,   A-16 
 Chapter 13 bankruptcies,   A-17 
 Charitable giving, 103–104;  see also Non-
profit organizations  
 Check-clearing,   572–573  
 Checking accounts,   576 
 Chief executive officers (CEOs), 193, 
347–349;  see also Managers  
 Chief financial officers (CFOs),   193, 504 
 Chief information officers (CIOs),  
 193–194, B-3 
 Chief knowledge officers (CKOs),   193 
 Chief operating officers (COOs),   193  
 Child care benefits,   351–352  
 Child Protection Act (1966),   A-13 
 Child Protection and Toy Safety Act 
(1969),   A-13 
 Children  
 child care benefits,   351–352 
 guardians,   D-17 to D-18  
 Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act 
(2000),   A-13 
 Chile,   80  
 China 
 bribery in,   110 
 competition with United States,   18 
 dumping disputes,   67 
 exports,   62, 66, 82, 110  
 family planning policies,   374 
 foreign investment,   82, 244 
 franchises,   69, 70, 142  
 imports,   65 
 joint ventures in,   70 
 manufacturing,   18, 66, 83, 250  
 as market,   82, 374 
 oil companies,   136 
 prison labor,   110, 111–112  
 sovereign wealth fund,   72 
 state capitalism,   35 
 WTO membership,   82 
 CIAs;  see Certified internal auditors  
 CIM;  see Computer-integrated 
manufacturing  
 CIO;  see Congress of Industrial 
Organizations  
 CIOs;  see Chief information officers  
 Circuit breakers,   553 
 Civil law,   A-2 to A-3  
 Civil Rights Act of 1964,   302–303 
 Civil Rights Act of 1991,   303, 304, 350  
 CKOs;  see Chief knowledge officers  
 Claims, insurance,   C-6 
 Class Action Fairness Act,   A-5 
 Clayton Act of 1914,   A-11  
 Climate change,   19 
 Closed shop agreements,   340, 341 
 Closed-end mutual funds,   550 
 Cloud computing,   B-16 
 CMAs;  see Certified management 
accountants  
 Coattail effect,   140  
 Codes of ethics,   100–101, 102 
 Cognitive dissonance,   379 
 Collection procedures,   511 
 Collective bargaining,   337–338 
 Colleges and universities;  see also 
 Education; Students  
 athletes,   348 
 value of education,   P-3, D-2 
 virtual tours,   362 
 COMESA,   80 
 Command economies, 42;  see also 
 Communism; Socialism  
 Commercial banks, 576–577;  see also 
Banks 
 Commercial finance companies,   517, 
578, 579  
 Commercial law, A-8 to A-9;  see also 
Legal environment  
 Commercial paper,   518 
 Commercialization,   403  
 Commissions,   319 
 Common markets, 79–80;  see also 
 European Union  
 Common stock, 537–538;  see also Stocks  
 Communication, open,   283–285 
 Communications technology;  see 
 Internet; Mobile technology; 
 Networks; Technology  
 Communism,   42, 43, 44–45 
 Community development financial 
 institutions (CDFIs),   168–170 
 Community Reinvestment Act,   580  
 Community service,   104 
 Comparable worth,   349 
 Comparative advantage theory,   64 
 Compensation;  see also Fringe benefits  
 comparable worth,   349 
 employee retention and,   106 
 executive,  347–349 
 in foreign countries,   321 
 as motivator,   273, 275 
 objectives,   318 
 pay equity,   349–350 
 pay systems,   318–319 
 of teams,   319–320 
 wages,   319 
 Competition  
 antitrust laws,   39–40, A-10 to A-12  
 effects on marketing,   374 
 empowerment and,   16 
 in free markets,   38–40 
 global,   18 
 monopolistic,   39 
 nonprice,   410 
 perfect,  38 
 Competition-based pricing,   408 
 Competitive environment,   16 
 Compliance-based ethics codes,   100, 101  
 Comprehensive Employment and 
 Training Act of 1973,   303 
 Compressed workweek,   322–323 
 Comptrollers,   504 
 Computer viruses,   B-18 
 Computer-aided design (CAD),   248 
 Computer-aided manufacturing (CAM),  
 248–249 
 Computer-integrated manufacturing 
(CIM),  249 
 Computers;  see Information technology  
 Concept testing,   368, 403 
 Conceptual skills,   194–195 
 Conglomerate mergers,   135 
 Congress of Industrial Organizations 
(CIO),  336  
 Conscious capitalism,   35 
 Consideration,   A-9 

SUBJECT INDEX
I-14
 Constitution, U.S.,   A-15, A-17  
 Consumer behavior,   378–380  
 Consumer credit;  see Credit cards; Per-
sonal financial planning  
 Consumer Credit Reporting Reform Act 
(1997),  A-13 
 Consumer finance companies,   579  
 Consumer Financial Protection Bureau,  
 515, 555, A-13, D-10  
 Consumer market;  see also Retail 
industry  
 brand preferences,   401  
 channels of distribution,   419, 420  
 comparison to business-to-business 
market,  380, 381  
 defined,   375 
 goods and services classification,   
395, 397 
 green products,   107–108, 109  
 mass marketing,   378  
 niche marketing,   377–378 
 one-to-one marketing,   378  
 relationship marketing,   378 
 sales promotion techniques,   461, 
462, 463 
 segmentation,   375–377  
 Consumer price index (CPI),   48 
 Consumer Product Safety Act (1972),  
 A-13 
 Consumer protection,   A-12 to A-13  
 Consumerism,   A-12 
 Consumers;  see Consumer market; 
Customers  
 Contingency planning,   191  
 Contingent workers, 311–312;  see also 
Temporary employees  
 Continuous process,   247  
 Contract law,   A-9 to A-10  
 Contract manufacturing,   69, 110–111  
 Contracts  
 breach of,   A-10 
 conditions for legal enforcement,   A-9 
 defined,   A-9 
 Contractual distribution systems,   432  
 Contrarian approach,   D-9 
 Control procedures  
 Gantt charts,   261  
 PERT charts,   260–261  
 Controlling  
 defined,   189 
 performance standards,   201–202  
 steps,   201  
 Convenience goods and services,   395 
 Convenience stores,   427 
 Conventional (C) corporations,   127 
 Convertible bonds,   541–542 
 Convertible preferred stock,   538  
 Cookies,   B-20 
 Cooling-off periods,   344  
 Cooperatives  
 agricultural,   143–144  
 defined,   143 
 food,   143, 432 
 COOs;  see Chief operating officers  
 Copyright Act of 1978,   A-7  
 Copyrights, A-7, B-19;  see also Intellec-
tual property protection  
 Core competencies,   229 
 Core inflation,   48  
 Core time,  322  
 Corporate and Criminal Fraud Account-
ability (Sarbanes-Oxley) Act,   
101–102, 476–477, 478, 535, A-12  
 Corporate bonds;  see Bonds  
 Corporate distribution systems,   432 
 Corporate income taxes,   130, 132, A-14  
 Corporate philanthropy,   103–104  
 Corporate policy,   104 
 Corporate responsibility, 104;  see also 
Corporate social responsibility  
 Corporate scandals  
 accounting-related,   476, 478 
 recent,  94, 105, 106  
 Corporate social initiatives,   104 
 Corporate social responsibility (CSR)  
 activities,   365 
 community service by employees,   104  
 competitive benefits,   105 
 debates on,   102–103  
 defined,   102 
 elements of,   103–104 
 environmental issues,   107–108, 109  
 international standards,   113 
 investors and,   109 
 responsibilities to stakeholders  
 customers,   104–105, 110 
 employees,   106–107 
 investors,   105–106 
 society and environment,   107–108  
 social audits,   108–110  
 watchdogs,   109–110 
 Corporations  
 advantages,   127–129  
 articles of incorporation,   131 
 benefit,   130 
 boards of directors,   129, 131, C-4 
 bylaws,   131  
 conventional (C),   127  
 defined,   120 
 disadvantages,   129–131 
 financing sources,   128 
 incorporation process,   129–130, 131 
 individuals as,   131 
 limited liability companies,   132–133 
 S,  132 
 separation of ownership and manage-
ment,  127, 129  
 sizes,  127, 128, 130  
 taking private,   136 
 taxes,  130, 132, A-14 
 types,  128 
 virtual,   227  
 Corruption;  see also Corporate scandals  
 bribery,   34, 77, 110 
 in business,   13, 34 
 in developing countries,   34, 77 
 in foreign countries,   83, 110 
 international agreements on,   113 
 laws against,   13, 77, 112–113 
 Cost accounting,   408  
 Cost of capital,   523 
 Cost of goods sold (or cost of goods 
manufactured),   487  
 Cost-based pricing,   408 
 Costs;  see also Expenses  
 cutting,   248 
 forecasting,   507–508  
 operating,   487 
 total fixed,   408–409 
 variable,   409 
 Counterfeiting,   434, 566, 567 
 Countertrading,   76 
 Country of Origin Labeling Law (2009),  
 A-13 
 Coupons, bond,   539 
 Coupons, promotional,   461 
 Court system, A-2, A-3;  see also Legal 
environment  
 Cover letters,   E-2, E-9 to E-10  
 CPAs;  see Certified public accountants  
 CPI;  see Consumer price index  
 Craft unions,   335  
 Credit;  see also Debt; Loans; Short-term 
financing  
 managing,   D-9 to D-10  
 microlending firms,   29 
 peer-to-peer,   170, 579 
 for small businesses,   168–170 
 trade,   514 
  Credit Card Act (2009),   A-13 
 Credit Card Responsibility  Accountability 
and Disclosure Act of 2009,   518  
 Credit cards  
 accepting,   512, 582 
 financing small businesses,   518 
 interest rates,   518, D-4, D-10 
 managing,   D-9 to D-10  
 payment apps,   391, 583 
 processing costs,   582 
 security,  B-19, D-9, D-10  
 smart cards,   582 
 Credit lines,   516–517 
 Credit operations,   511–512 
 Credit unions,   577, 581, D-15  
 Crime;  see also Corruption  
 cyber-,   B-19, C-11  
 employee fraud,   107  
 ex-convicts,   97 
 fraud,   40, 95, 524 
 identity theft,   16, E-8 to E-9  
 insider trading,   105–106, 535–536 
 violent,   353–354  
 Criminal law,   A-2 
 Crisis planning,   191  
 Critical Infrastructure Information Act,  
 B-20 
 Critical path,   260 
 CRM;  see Customer relationship 
management  
 Cross-functional self-managed teams,  
 225–226, 284–285  
 Crowdfunding,   29, 170, 171, 535 
 Crowdinvesting,   170, 171 
 CSR;  see Corporate social responsibility  
 Cuba  
 economy,  42 
 embargo on,   78 
 Cultural competencies,   288  
 Cultural diversity;  see also Diversity  
 ethical issues,   111, 112 
 in global markets,   73–74 
 management issues,   288  
 motivational approaches,   286–287 
  in United States,   17, 73, 374, 455 
 Culture;  see also Organizational culture  
 influences on buying decisions,   379 
 meaning,   73 
 sub-,  379  
 Cumulative preferred stock,   538 
 Curbs,  553  
 Currencies  
 Bitcoins,   566, 568 
 convertible,   12–13 
 devaluations,   76 
 euro,  79 
 exchange rates,   75–76, 570 
 exchanging,   583 
 trading,   75, 566  
 U.S. dollar,   75, 570 

I-15
SUBJECT INDEX
 Current assets,   484  
 Current liabilities,   484  
 Current ratio,   492  
 Customer databases,   15–16, 373  
 Customer group departmentalization,  
 220–221  
 Customer relationship era,   364–365  
 Customer relationship management 
(CRM) 
 activities,   369  
 defined,   364  
 software,   457  
 Customer service  
 in corporate cultures,   232  
 improving,   217, 231  
 Customers  
 aging of population,   17–18, 373  
 buying decisions,   110, 378–380  
 complaints,   464  
 consumer protection,   555, A-12 to A-13  
 corporate responsibility to,   
104–105, 110  
 diverse population,   17, 374 
 expectations,   16 
 external,   202 
 focus on,   232 
 internal,   202  
 knowing,   172–173 
 marketing to,   362–363  
 online dialogues,   454–455  
 product development involvement,  
 225–226  
 prospects,   457  
 qualifying,   457 
 responsiveness to,   15–16  
 satisfaction,   202 
 of small businesses,   172–173 
 Customization,   250, 251  
 Cybercrime,   B-19, C-11  
 Cyberterrorism,   B-19 to B-20  
 Cyclical unemployment,   47  
D
 Damages,   A-10 
 Data  
 managing,   B-7 to B-8  
 for marketing research,   370–371  
 primary,  371 
 secondary,   370, 371  
 Data analytics,   B-8 to B-9  
 Data mining,   B-8 
 Data processing (DP), B-2;  see also Infor-
mation technology  
 Databases,   15–16, 373  
 Day care;  see Child care benefits  
 Dealer (private-label) brands,   399  
 Debenture bonds,   540–541 
 Debit cards,   582, D-10 
 Debt;  see also Bonds; Credit cards; 
Loans; Mortgages  
 leverage ratios,   492, 523–524  
 personal,   D-4 
 Debt financing  
 balancing with equity,   523–524  
 bonds,   520–521, 533  
 compared to equity financing,  
 523–524  
 defined,   513  
 loans,   519–520  
 Debt to owners’ equity ratio,   492  
 Decentralized authority,   218, 219, 231  
 Decertification,   339  
 Decision making  
 centralized or decentralized,   215, 
218, 219 
 defined,   192 
 empowering employees, 198–199, 217; 
 see also Empowerment  
 ethical,   97–98, 196, 197  
 rational model,   192 
 Deficits  
 budget,   50 
 trade,   66 
 Defined-contribution plans,   D-16 to D-17  
 Deflation,   48, 569  
 Demand,   37 
 Demand curve,   37, 38 
 Demand deposits,   576 
 Demand-based pricing,   408 
 Deming cycle,   258 
 Democratic leadership,   198 
 Demographic segmentation,   376, 377 
 Demography;  see also Aging of 
 population; Diversity  
 defined,   17 
 population growth,   32 
 single parents,   18 
 world population by continent,   62 
 Department of Motor Vehicles 
(DMV),   215  
 Department stores,   427 
 Departmentalization,   213, 220–222  
 Depreciation,   487 
 Depressions, 49;  see also Great 
Depression  
 Deregulation,   40, A-17 to A-18  
 Devaluations,   76 
 Developing countries  
 corruption,   34, 77  
 countertrading,   76 
 obstacles to trade with,   77 
 population growth,   32  
 transportation and storage 
systems,   77  
 Digital natives,   229 
 Digital video recorders,   452 
 Diluted earnings per share,   493  
 Direct deposits,   582 
 Direct mail,   450, 451  
 Direct marketing,   431 
 Direct payments,   582 
 Direct selling,   430 
 Directing,   198 
 Directors, corporate,   129, 131, C-4 
 Disability insurance,   C-9, D-12 
 Disaster aid,   104 
 Discount rate,   571, 572  
 Discount stores,   427  
 Discrimination  
 in employment tests,   310  
 gender-based,   349–350  
 laws prohibiting,   302–304, 325  
 price,   A-12 
  reverse,   303, 304 
 Disinflation,   48 
 Distance learning,   314  
 Distributed product development,   392 
 Distribution;  see also Marketing 
intermediaries; Supply-chain 
management  
 administered systems,   432  
 channels of,   418–419, 420  
 contractual systems,   432 
 cooperation in,   431–433 
 corporate systems,   432 
 for e-commerce transactions,   429 
 of new products,   369 
 outsourcing,   435 
 physical,   434–438  
 retail strategies,   427 
 sustainability issues,   419 
 Distributors, 226;  see also Marketing 
intermediaries  
 Diversification,   544–545 
 Diversity;  see also Cultural diversity  
 of customers,   17, 374  
 in franchising,   140–141 
 generational differences,   17–18, 
288–290  
 groups,   17 
 in management development,   316 
 of U.S. population,   17 
 of workforce,   17 
 Dividends  
 common stock,   537, 546 
 preferred stock,   538 
 Division of labor,   212–213, 215 
 DMV;  see Department of Motor Vehicles  
 Dodd-Frank Wall Street Reform and 
Consumer Protection Act,   102, 349, 
477, 495, 524, 555, A-13 
 Doha Round,   79 
 Dollar, U.S., 75, 570;  see also Currencies  
 Dot-coms;  see Internet companies  
 Double-entry bookkeeping,   479–480  
 Dow Jones Industrial Average,   552, 553 
 DP;  see Data processing  
 Drop shippers,   426 
 Drug testing,   353  
 Dumping,   67 
 Durable power of attorney,   D-18  
E
 EAC;  see East Africa Community  
 EACs;  see Export Assistance Centers  
 Earnings;  see also Compensation; 
Income 
 of college graduates,  P-3,  D-6  
 gender differences,   349–350  
 retained,   484–485, 521–522 
 Earnings per share (EPS),   493 
 basic,   493 
 diluted,   493 
 price/earnings ratios,   547 
 Earnings statement;  see Income 
statement  
 East Africa Community (EAC),   77 
 ECB;  see European Central Bank  
 Ecological environment, 19;  see also 
Environmental issues  
 E-commerce;  see also Internet 
 affiliate marketing,   159–160 
 combined with traditional retail stores 
(click-and-brick),   429 
 customer relationships,   429, 454–455  
 defined,   16 
 distribution systems,   429 
 in franchising,   141  
 global opportunities,   176 
 growth,   15  
 interactive features,   431, 454–455  
 marketing,   373 
 niche marketing,   377–378 
 price comparisons,   410 
 sales,   159 
 setting up,   159 
 taxes,  A-14 

SUBJECT INDEX
I-16
 Economic and legal environment,   11–13, 
74–76, 374–375  
 Economic crises;  see Financial crisis of 
2008  
 Economic systems;  see also 
Capitalism; Markets  
 command economies,   42 
 communism,   42, 43, 44–45  
 comparison,   44–45 
 free-market,   42 
 mixed economies,   43, 44–45  
 socialism,   41–42, 43, 44–45  
 Economics  
 allocation of resources,   31 
 business and,   30, 31–32  
 defined,   30  
 as “dismal science,”   32  
 Keynesian,   51  
 macro-,  30  
 micro-,  30  
 Economies of scale,   214 
 Ecuador, Mercosur and,   80 
 EDI;  see Electronic data interchange   
 EDLP;  see Everyday low pricing  
 Education;  see also Colleges and 
 universities; Students; Training and 
development  
 economic development and,   32 
 investing in,   D-2 
 EEOA;  see Equal Employment 
 Opportunity Act  
 EEOC;  see Equal Employment 
 Opportunity Commission  
 Efficiency,   14 
 EFT;  see Electronic funds transfer (EFT) 
systems  
 Elder care,   352–353 
 Elderly people;  see Senior citizens  
 Electric utilities, 40;  see also Utilities  
 Electronic cash,   567–568  
 Electronic data interchange (EDI),   B-10 
 Electronic funds transfer (EFT) systems,  
 582  
 Electronic retailing, 428–429;  see also 
E-commerce  
 E-mail;  see also Internet  
 advertising,   454, 464  
 managing,   B-7 
 netiquette,   P-6 
 phishing scams,   B-19 
 privacy,   B-20 
 promotion via,   465  
 work-related,   230 
 Embargoes,   78 
 Emerging markets;  see BRIC countries; 
Developing countries; Global 
markets 
 Employee benefits;  see Fringe benefits  
 Employee Retirement Income Security 
Act (ERISA) of 1974,   303  
 Employee–management relations;  see 
also Unions  
 arbitration,   343 
 bargaining zone,   343  
 ethical values in,   98–100, 112, 213  
 fairness in,   106–107  
 future of,   345–346 
 grievances,   342  
 helping vs. coaching,   280  
 impact of technology,   B-18 
 issues,   334  
 child care,   351–352  
 drug testing,   353  
 elder care,   352–353 
 e-mail privacy,   B-20  
 executive compensation,   347–349 
 pay equity,   349–350 
 sexual harassment,   350–351  
 violence in workplace,   353–354 
 lockouts,   333, 344  
 mediation,   343 
 resolving disagreements,   342–343  
 in small businesses,   173 
 tactics used in conflicts,   343–345  
 Employees;  see also Compensation; 
Diversity; Empowerment; Human 
resource management; Labor; 
Recruitment; Staffing; Teams; 
Training and development  
 community service,   104  
 contingent,   311–312  
 corporate responsibility to,   106–107 
 e-mail use,   230, B-20  
 enabling,   199 
 engagement,   270 
 fraud by,   107 
 line personnel,   223 
 losing,   326 
 orientation,   313 
 part-time,   311, 323–324 
 performance appraisals,   316–317 
 promotions,   325 
 retention,   106, 326  
 retirements,   326  
 safety issues,   213 
 scheduling,   322–324  
 staff personnel,   223  
 terminating,   325 
 transfers,   325 
 Employment;  see Careers; Jobs; 
Recruitment 
 Empowerment  
 as competitive advantage,   16 
 decision making,   199, 217, 231  
 defined,   16  
 effects on managerial authority,   215  
 increased span of control,   219 
  knowledge needed for,   199 
 as motivator,   277 
 restructuring for,   230–231 
 role of managers in,   188, 198–199 
 of self-managed teams,   225–226  
 Theory Y management and,   277  
 EMS;  see Environmental management 
system 
 Enabling,   199 
 Endorsements, celebrity,   401, 454  
 Energy use;  see Greening  
 Engagement, employee,   270 
 Enterprise portals,   B-10 
 Enterprise resource planning (ERP),   255 
 Enterprise risk management (ERM),   C-3 
 Enterprise zones,   161 
 Entertainment industry;  see Movies; 
Television  
 Entrepreneur magazine,   158 
 Entrepreneurial teams,   157 
 Entrepreneurs  
 defined,   4 
 ex-convicts,   97 
 innovation sources,   155 
 microloans,   29 
 micropreneurs,   157–160 
 millionaires,   D-2 
 minority group members,   8 
 opportunities for,   8–9 
 personality traits,   154–155 
 readiness questionnaire,   156–157 
 retirement planning,   D-17 
 successful,   4, 144, 152–153, 154–155 
 wealth creation by,   9–10  
 women,  8–9, 140 
 young,  153 
 Entrepreneurship;  see also Businesses, 
starting; Home-based businesses; 
Small businesses  
 advantages,   8–9 
 compared to working in large busi-
nesses,   8  
 defined,   152  
 as factor of production,   10, 11 
 within firms,   160–161 
 government support of,   12, 161–162 
 history,   152 
 laws encouraging,   12, 161–162, 
170, 171 
 motivations,   153–154 
 opportunities,   155 
 Environment;  see Business environment  
 Environmental issues;  see also Greening; 
Sustainability  
 carbon cost of transportation,   437 
 climate change,   19 
 corporate responsibility and,  
 107–108, 109  
 ISO 14000 standards,   259 
 risks,   C-10 to C-11  
 Environmental management system 
(EMS),  259  
 Environmental scanning,   372–375 
 EPS;  see Earnings per share  
 Equal Employment Opportunity Act 
(EEOA),  303–304  
 Equal Employment Opportunity 
 Commission (EEOC)  
 age discrimination cases,   305 
 disabilities regulations,   304–305 
 influence on business,   A-3 
 powers,   303–304 
 sexual harassment complaints to,   350 
 Equal Pay Act of 1963,   303 
 Equilibrium prices,   37–38 
 Equipment,   396 
 Equity, owners’;  see Owners’ equity  
 Equity crowdfunding,   170, 171, 535 
 Equity financing, 521, 535;  see also 
Stocks  
 balancing with debt,   523–524 
 compared to debt financing,   523–524 
 defined,   513 
 retained earnings,   521–522 
 selling stock,   521, 532–533 
 for small businesses,   535 
 venture capital,   170, 516, 522–523 
 Equity theory,   282 
 ERISA;  see Employee Retirement 
Income Security Act  
 ERM;  see Enterprise risk management  
 ERP;  see Enterprise resource planning   
 Estate planning,   D-17 to D-18  
 ETFs;  see Exchange-traded funds  
 Ethics;  see also Corporate scandals; Cor-
porate social responsibility; 
Corruption  
 in accounting,   490  
 in banks,   577 
 celebrity endorsements,   454 
 cheating by students,   96–97 
 cultural differences and,   111, 112  

I-17
SUBJECT INDEX
 defined,   96  
 dilemmas,   14, 97–98, 197, 313  
 enforcement,   102 
 failures,   13 
 in financial management,   512 
 formal policies,   100–102  
 in global markets,   77, 110–113  
 individual responsibility,   P-7, 14, 96–98  
 insider trading,   105–106, 535–536  
 investment decisions,   543 
 legality and,   94–95, 98  
 multilevel marketing,   431 
 organizational,   98–100, 196  
 orientation questionnaire,   99  
 in outsourcing,   85, 254 
 in partnerships,   127  
 promoting,   196 
 safety issues,   213  
 standards,   96 
 starting businesses,   166 
  strikebreakers,   345  
 values in organizational cultures,   213 
 Ethics codes,   100–101, 102  
 Ethics offices,   102 
 Ethnic groups, marketing to, 374;  see 
also Cultural diversity; Minorities  
 Ethnocentricity,   73 
 Etiquette,   P-5 to P-7  
 Euro, 79;  see also Currencies  
 Europe;  see also  individual countries 
 codetermination,   349 
 executive compensation,   348–349 
 financial institutions,   578  
 European Central Bank (ECB),   570 
 European Economic Community,   79 
 European Union (EU)  
 anti-corruption statements,   113 
 euro,   79 
 history,   79 
 Internet taxation,   A-14  
 members,   79  
  quality standards,   259 
 Transatlantic Trade and Investment 
Partnership,   81 
 Everyday low pricing (EDLP),   409 
 Exchange efficiency,   420–421  
 Exchange rates,   75–76, 570  
 Exchanges;  see Stock exchanges  
 Exchange-traded funds (ETFs),   544, 550 
 Exclusive dealing,   A-11 
 Exclusive distribution,   427  
 Executive compensation,   347–349  
 Executives;  see Managers  
 Executors,   D-18 
 Exit interviews,   326  
 Expectancy theory,   280–281 
 Expenses;  see also Costs  
 forecasting,   507–508  
 general,  487 
 operating,   487  
 personal, D-3 to D-4,   D-5, D-6  
 selling,   487   
 Export Administration Act of 1979,   78 
 Export Assistance Centers (EACs),   68 
 Exporting;  see also Global markets; 
Trade  
 challenges,   176  
 defined,   63  
 financing,   176 
 government assistance,   66, 68, 176  
 information on,   66, 176  
 jobs created by,   65 
 letters of credit and,   583  
 obstacles,   77 
 opportunities,   65–66 
 regulations,   78 
 by small businesses,   68–69, 176 
 Export-trading companies,   68–69  
 Express warranties,   A-8, A-9  
 External customers,   202 
 Extranets,   B-10 
 Extrinsic rewards,   270 
F
 Facility layout,   254–255, 256 
 Facility location  
 defined,   252 
 ethical issues,   254 
 factors,   253, 254  
 in foreign countries,   253 
 in future,   254 
 for manufacturers,   253 
 for service businesses,   252–253  
 Factoring,   517–518  
 Factors of production,   10–11, 34  
 Failures;  see Business failures  
 Fair Credit Reporting Act (1970),   A-13 
 Fair Labor Standards Act of 1938,   
303, 338 
 Fair Packaging and Labeling Act (1966),  
 398, A-13 
 Families;  see also Children  
 elder care,   352–353  
 financing from,   514–515 
 single parents,   18 
 Family and Medical Leave Act of 1993,  
 303 
 Family-friendly fringe benefits,   18 
 Farming;  see Agriculture  
 FASB;  see Financial Accounting Stan-
dards Board  
 FBI;  see Federal Bureau of Investigation  
 FDA;  see Food and Drug Administration  
 FDIC;  see Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation  
 Federal budget deficit,   50 
 Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI),  
 478 
 Federal Communications Commission,  
 A-3, B-11 
 Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation 
(FDIC),  577, 581 
 Federal funds rate,   572 
 Federal government;  see U.S. 
government  
 Federal Housing Administration (FHA),   C-5  
 Federal Open Market Committee 
(FOMC),  570 
 Federal Reserve Act of 1913,   575 
 Federal Reserve System  
 banks,   570, 571 
 check-clearing role,   572–573 
 Consumer Financial Protection 
Bureau,   515, 555, A-13, D-10  
  discount rate,   571, 572  
 financial crisis of 2008 and,   518, 580, 
A-12, A-18 
 formation,   574–575 
 functions,   569–573, 575  
 interest rates,   571, 572, 580, 583, 589  
 margin rates,   546 
 monetary policy,   51, 569–572 
 money supply,   569–570 
 need for,  574 
 open-market operations,   571, 572 
 organization of,   570 
 quantitative easing,   569 
 reserve requirements,   571, 572 
 Yellen’s career,   565 
 Federal Savings and Loan Insurance 
Corporation (FSLIC),   581 
 Federal Trade Commission Act of 1914,  
 A-11 to A-12  
 Federal Trade Commission (FTC),   16, 
140, 464, A-4, A-11 to A-12, A-13  
 FHA;  see Federal Housing 
Administration  
 FIFO (first in, first out),   488 
 Films;  see Movies  
 Finance;  see also Financial management  
 defined,   504 
 importance,   504–506 
 relationship to accounting,   504 
 Financial accounting, 476–477;  see also 
Accounting  
 Financial Accounting Standards Board 
(FASB),   476, 490, 493, 495 
 Financial control,   508–509 
 Financial crisis of 2008  
 bank failures,   554, 590 
 causes,   13, 554, 580, 589–590 
 credit crunch,   518  
 effects in retail,   374–375 
 effects on small businesses,   515 
 effects on workers,   187, 289  
 federal bailouts,   51, 505, 554, 
580–581, 590 
 federal stimulus package,   51, 242, 
554, 581, 590 
 fiscal policy responses,   51 
 global effects,   585, 590 
 recovery,  554  
 regulatory shortcomings,   580, 589, 
A-12, A-18 
 stock market decline,   553 
 subprime mortgages,   13, 554, 589, 590 
 unemployment,   242 
 Financial institutions;  see Banks; Credit 
unions; Nonbanks; Savings and 
loan associations  
 Financial leverage,   523–524 
 Financial management;  see also Finan-
cial planning; Short-term financing  
 debt financing,   513, 519–521 
 defined,   504  
 equity financing,   513, 521–523 
 ethical issues,   512 
 leverage,  523  
 long-term financing,   513, 519 
 operating funds,   510–513 
 reasons for business failures,   505 
 in recessions,   515, 524 
 in small businesses,   168–170, 505–506 
 sources of funds,   513 
 tax management,   506  
  Financial managers  
 defined,   504 
 tasks,   504, 505, 506–507 
 titles,   504 
 Financial markets;  see Securities markets  
 Financial planning  
 budgets,   508 
 controls,   508–509 
 forecasts,   507–508 
 importance,   508 
 personal;  see Personal financial 
planning  
 steps,   507–509 

SUBJECT INDEX
I-18
 Financial ratios;  see Ratio analysis  
 Financial services;  see Banks  
 Financial statements  
 annual reports,   476, E-11  
 auditing,   477, 506–507  
 balance sheet  
 accounts,   494  
 assets,   483–484  
 defined,   481, 482  
 liabilities and owners’ equity,  
 484–485  
 personal,   482, 485, D-3 
 defined,   481 
 income statement  
 accounts,   494  
 cost of goods sold,   487  
 defined,   481–482, 485  
 net income,   485, 488  
 operating expenses,   487  
 personal,   D-3  
 revenue,  487  
 sample,   486  
  statement of cash flows,   481, 482, 489  
 Firewalls,   B-10 
 Firing employees,   325  
 Firms;  see Corporations  
 First in, first out (FIFO),   488  
 First-line managers,   194, 195, 197  
 Fiscal policy,   49–51  
 Fixed assets,   484 
 Fixed-position layouts,   255, 256  
 Flat organization structures,   219 
 Flexible manufacturing,   249 
 Flextime plans,   322–323  
 Floating exchange rates,   75–76  
 Florida oranges,   39 
 Focus groups,   371, 372  
 FOMC;  see Federal Open Market 
Committee  
 Food and Drug Administration (FDA),  
 A-4, A-13  
 Food industry;  see also Agriculture  
 cooperatives,   143, 432  
 marketing intermediaries,   420–422  
 regulation of,   A-13, A-18 
 supermarkets,   307–308, 427, 463  
 suppliers,   243  
 sustainable companies,   365 
 Food trucks,   428  
 Forecasts,   507–508  
 Foreign Corrupt Practices Act of 1978,  
 77, 112–113  
 Foreign currencies;  see Currencies  
 Foreign direct investment,   71–72, 82  
 Foreign exchange;  see Currencies  
 Foreign markets;  see Exporting; Global 
markets; Trade  
 Foreign stock exchanges,   536, 544  
 Foreign subsidiaries,   71  
 Forensic accountants,   478 
 Form utility,   247, 423  
 Formal organization,   232 
 Forms of business ownership;  see Busi-
ness ownership forms  
 Fortune, “100 Best Companies to Work 
For,”   321  
 Four Ps of marketing,   366–369   
 401(k) plans,   D-16 to D-17  
 France 
 labor regulations,   230 
 McDonald’s stores,   218  
 Franchise agreements,   136  
 Franchisees,   136  
 Franchises  
 advantages,   137–138 
 defined,   136  
 digital,   142 
 disadvantages,   139–140 
 as distribution system,   432  
 diversity in,   140–141 
 e-commerce use,   141 
 evaluation checklist,   138 
 fast-growing,   137 
 home-based,   141 
 international,   69, 142–143 
 scams,  138, 140  
 start-up costs,   139 
 success rates,   138  
 technology used in,   141–142  
 websites ,  141 
 Franchisors,   136  
 Fraud;  see also Corporate scandals  
 by businesses,   40  
 by employees,   107 
 by franchisors,   138, 140 
 home-based business scams,   159 
 investigations,   478  
 phishing scams,   B-19 
 Ponzi schemes,   95, 524 
 Free markets;  see Markets 
 Free trade;  see also Trade  
 defined,   63 
 laws to ensure fairness,   67 
 pros and cons,   64 
 Free trade agreements,   79–81  
 Freedom,  30, 32, 35–36  
 Freelancers,   15 
 Free-market economies, 42;  see also Cap-
italism; Markets  
 Free-rein leadership,   198  
 Freight forwarders,   436–437  
 Frictional unemployment,   47 
 Fringe benefits  
 cafeteria-style,   321 
 child care,   351–352  
 defined,   320 
 employee retention and,   106 
 family-friendly,   18  
 in foreign countries,   321 
 401(k) plans,   D-16 to D-17  
 health insurance,   320, C-9 
 objectives,   318 
 outsourcing,   321 
 pensions,   578  
 soft,   321 
 vacation time,   321 
 FSLIC;  see Federal Savings and Loan 
Insurance Corporation  
 FTC;  see Federal Trade Commission  
 Full-service wholesalers,   425   
 Functional departmentalization,   220, 221  
 Fundamental accounting equation,   482 
 Funds;  see Financial management; 
Mutual funds  
G
 GAAP;  see Generally accepted account-
ing principles  
 Gain-sharing plans,   319, 320 
 Gantt charts,   261 
 GASB;  see Governmental Accounting 
Standards Board  
 GATT;  see General Agreement on Tariffs 
and Trade  
 GDP (gross domestic product),   46 
 Gender discrimination, 349–350;  see also 
Women 
 General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 
(GATT),   79 
 General expenses,   487 
 General partners,   123 
 General partnerships,   123 
 Generally accepted accounting princi-
ples (GAAP),   476, 487, 495 
 Generation Alpha,   288, 290 
 Generation X,   288–289, 290 
 Generation Y (Millennials),   288, 289, 
290, 377 
 Generation Z,   288, 289–290  
 Generational differences,   17–18, 288–290  
 Generic goods,   399 
 Generic names,   399  
 Geographic departmentalization,   
221, 222 
 Geographic segmentation,   376–377  
 Germany 
 codetermination,   349 
 imported beer,   65 
 manufacturing,   244 
 Mittelstand companies,   244 
 standard of living,   5 
 Givebacks,   345 
 Global business;  see also Multinational 
corporations  
 accounting standards,   495 
 careers in,   84 
 opportunities,   65–66 
 supply-chains,   433, 434 
 Global environment,   18–19  
 Global markets;  see also Exporting; 
Importing; Trade  
 adapting products for,   391, 456 
 adapting to other cultures,   70, 73–74, 
455 
 advertising,   455  
 banking,   583–584  
 business etiquette,   P-7 
 countertrading,   76 
 currency markets,   75, 566 
 distribution,   433 
 effects on marketing process,   373 
 ethical concerns in,   77, 110–113 
 forces affecting  
 economic,  74–76 
 legal and regulatory,   76–77 
 physical and environmental,   77 
 sociocultural,   73–74 
 foreign direct investment,   71–72, 82 
 large businesses,   64 
 local contacts,   77  
 marketing strategies,   73 
 measuring,   66 
 securities markets,   536, 544 
 size of,  62 
 small businesses,   64–65, 176 
 stock exchanges,   536, 544 
 strategies for reaching,   67, 72 
 contract manufacturing,   69 
 direct investment,   71–72, 82 
 franchises,   69  
 joint ventures,   70–71 
 licensing,   68  
 strategic alliances,   71 
 Global warming,   19 
 Globalization,   18 
 GO;  see Gross output  
 Goals,  189 
 Goal-setting theory,   280 

I-19
SUBJECT INDEX
 Going public;  see Initial public offerings; 
Stocks 
 Golden handshakes,  326 
 Golden Rule,  96 
 Goods;  see also Products 
 defined,  4 
 industrial,  396, 397, 420 
 Goodwill,  484 
 Government and not-for-profit account-
ing,  478–479 
 Government bonds,  539, 572 
 Governmental Accounting Standards 
Board (GASB),  478 
 Governments;  see also Local govern-
ments; State governments; U.S. 
government 
 accounting,  478–479 
 bribery of officials,  77, 110 
 economic policies,  51 
 entrepreneurship encouraged by,  12, 
161–162 
 fiscal policy,  49–51 
 monetary policy,  51, 569–572 
 regulations;  see Regulations 
 relations with businesses,  11–13 
 sovereign wealth funds,  72, 520 
 spending policies,  50–51 
 taxes;  see Taxes 
 Grapevine,  232 
 Great Depression,  49, 575, 581 
 Greening;  see also Environmental issues; 
Sustainability 
 defined,  19 
 jobs created by,  108 
 products,  107–108, 109 
 wind energy,  419 
 Grievances,  342 
 Grocery stores;  see Supermarkets 
 Gross domestic product (GDP),  46 
 Gross output (GO),  46 
 Growth stocks,  546 
H
 Hackers,  B-18 to B-19, B-20 
 Hamburger University (McDonald’s), 
 137, 315 
 Hawthorne effect,  272–273 
 Hawthorne studies,  272–273 
 Health care 
 durable power of attorney,  D-18 
 offshore outsourcing,  83–84, 85 
 Health insurance 
 Affordable Care Act,  301, 320, A-18 to 
A-19, C-9, D-12 
 buying,  D-12 
 for employees,  320, C-9 
 types,  C-8 
 Health savings accounts (HSAs),   
C-9, D-12  
 Hedge funds,  105, 555 
 Herzberg’s motivating factors,  274–276 
 Hierarchy,  193–194, 215, 216–217 
 Hierarchy of needs,  273–274, 276 
 High-context cultures,  287 
 Higher education;  see Colleges and uni-
versities; Education 
 High–low pricing strategy,  409 
 High–tech companies;  see Internet com-
panies; Technology 
 Hiring;  see Recruitment 
 Hispanic Americans,  8, 316 
 Home countries,  71 
 Home-based businesses;  see also Small 
businesses 
 challenges,  158 
 franchises,  141 
 insurance coverage,  C-10 
 potential areas,  158 
 reasons for growth of,  157–158 
 scams,  159 
 technology used in,  157–158, 159 
 types,  158 
 Home-based work;  see Telecommuting 
 Homeowner’s insurance,  C-8, C-10, D-12 
to D-13 
 Homes, buying,  D-6 to D-8 
 Homosexuals;  see Diversity 
 Horizontal mergers,  135 
 Host countries,  71 
 Hotels,  246, 273–274 
 Housing;  see Mortgages; Real estate 
 HRM;  see Human resource management 
 HSAs;  see Health savings accounts 
 Human relations skills,  194 
 Human resource management;  see also 
Recruitment; Training and 
development 
 activities,  300, 301 
 challenges,  301–302 
 cultural differences,  73–74, 321 
 defined,  300 
 ethical issues,  313 
 global workforce and,  321 
 laws affecting,  302–305 
 performance appraisals,  316–317 
 planning,  305–307 
 promotions and transfers,  325 
 technology-related issues,  B-17 to B-18  
 terminations,  325 
 trends,  300–301 
 Hurricane Sandy,  9 
 Hygiene factors,  275 
I
 Identity theft,  16, E-8 to E-9 
 IFRS;  see International Financial 
Reporting Standards 
 IMC;  see Integrated marketing 
communication 
 IMF;  see International Monetary Fund 
 Immersive Internet,  B-14 
 Immigrants, 161;  see also Cultural diver-
sity; Minorities 
 Immigration Act of 1990,  161 
 Immigration Reform and Control Act of 
1986,  303 
 Implied warranties,  A-8, A-9 
 Import quotas,  78 
 Importing;  see also Global markets; Tar-
iffs; Trade 
 defined,  63 
 letters of credit and,  583 
 opportunities,  65 
 Inbound logistics,  435 
 Income;  see also Compensation; Earn-
ings; Profits 
 net,  485, 488 
 retained earnings,  484–485, 521–522 
 Income inequality,  348 
 Income statement 
 accounts,  494 
 cost of goods sold,  487 
 defined,  481–482, 485 
 net income,  485, 488 
 operating expenses,  487 
 personal,  D-3 
 revenue,  485, 486–487 
 sample,  486 
 Income stocks,  546 
 Income taxes;  see Taxes 
 Incorporation;  see also Corporations 
 articles of,  131 
 of individuals,  131 
 process,  129–130, 131 
 Incubators,  162, 163  
 Indenture terms,  520 
 Independent audits,  477 
 Index funds,  549 
 India 
 competition with United States,  18 
 franchises,  70 
 joint ventures in,  70–71 
 as market,  74, 82 
 nontariff barriers,  78 
 outsourcing to,  83–84 
 service industries,   83–84 
 Individual retirement accounts (IRAs) 
 deposit insurance,  581 
 MyIRAs,  D-15 to D-16 
 Roth,  D-15 
 SEP plans,  D-17 
 Simple,  D-15 
 traditional,  576, D-14 to D-15 
Individuals with disabilities; see also 
Diversity
accommodations, 304
laws protecting, 303, 304–305, 325
telecommuting, B-17
 Indonesia 
 ASEAN Economic Community,  80 
 as market,  83, 142 
 Industrial goods,  396, 397, 420 
 Industrial Revolution,  335 
 Industrial unions,  336 
 Inequality,  33, 34–35, 40 
 Infant industries,  78 
 Inflation,  47–48, 569–570, 572 
 Infoglut,  B-6 
 Infomercials,  453 
 Informal organization,  232–233 
 Information 
 managing,  B-6 to B-8 
 public,  B-6, B-20 
 types,  B-5 to B-6 
 Information systems (IS),  B-2 
 Information technology (IT);  see also Inter-
net; Networks; Software; Technology  
 cloud computing,   B-16 
 computer-aided design and 
 manufacturing,  248–249 
 defined,  B-2 
 effects on management,  B-17 to B-21 
 for employee training and 
 development,  314 
 enterprise resource planning,  255 
 privacy issues,  B-20 to B-21 
 role in business,  B-2 to B-5 
 security issues,  B-18 to B-20 
 skills needed,  B-17, B-21 
 stability issues,  B-21 
 training,  B-17 
 use in manufacturing,  248–249, 251 
 Information utility,  424 
 Initial public offerings (IPOs),  521, 532–533  
 Injunctions,  344–345 
 Innovation, by entrepreneurs, 155;  see 
also Product development 

SUBJECT INDEX
I-20
 Insider trading,   105–106, 535–536  
 Insourcing,   7, 229  
 Installations,   396 
 Institutional investors,   533 
 Insurable interest,   C-6 
 Insurable risk,   C-6 
 Insurance;  see also Health insurance  
 annuities,   D-11 to D-12  
 automobile,   D-13 
 for boards of directors,   C-4  
 business ownership policies,   C-5 
 buying,   C-5, C-6  
 claims,   C-6 
 cyber risk,   C-11 
 disability,   C-9, D-12 
 government programs,   C-5 
 for home-based businesses,   C-10 
 homeowner’s,   C-8, C-10, D-12 to D-13  
 liability,   C-8, C-10, D-13 
 life,   C-8, C-10, D-11 
  premiums,   C-5, C-6  
 property,   C-8 
 renter’s,  D-12 to D-13  
 rule of indemnity,   C-7 
 self-,  C-4 to C-5  
 for small businesses,   175 
 umbrella policies,   D-13 
 uninsurable risks,   C-5 
 workers’ compensation,   C-10 
 Insurance companies  
 IRAs with,   D-15 
 life,   578 
 mutual,   C-7 
 ratings,   D-12 
 stock,   C-7 
 Insurance policies,   C-6 to C-7  
 Intangible assets,   484 
 Integrated marketing communication 
(IMC),  448 
 Integrity-based ethics codes,   100, 101  
 Intellectual property protection  
 copyrights,   96, A-7, B-19  
 Internet issues,   96, B-19  
 patents,   A-6 to A-7  
 trademarks,   399, A-7 
 Intensive distribution,   427 
 Interactive promotion,   454–455  
 Interest, on bonds,   539 
 Interest rates  
 on bonds,   539, 548  
 central bank influence on,   51, 571, 
572, 583, 589  
 on credit cards,   518, D-4, D-10 
 discount rate,   571, 572  
 federal funds rate,   572 
 on loans,   520 
 risk/return trade-off,   520 
 Intermediaries;  see Marketing 
intermediaries  
 Intermittent process,   248  
 Intermodal shipping,   438 
 Internal customers,   202 
 Internal Revenue Service (IRS),   101, 
102, 132, 478, 487  
 International Bank for Reconstruction 
and Development;  see World Bank  
 International banking, 583–584;  see also 
Banks 
 International business;  see Global 
 business; Multinational 
corporations  
 International Financial Reporting 
 Standards (IFRS),   495  
 International Manufacturing Trade 
Show,   462 
 International markets;  see Global 
markets 
 International Monetary Fund (IMF),   30, 
584, 585 
 International Organization for Standard-
ization (ISO),   113, 259  
 International trade;  see Global markets; 
Trade  
 Internet;  see also E-commerce; Social 
media  
 advertising on,   450, 453–455  
 agriculture-related websites,   15 
 banking,   583 
 blogs,   363, 447, 464–465, E-4  
 business use,   B-9 to B-14  
 connections to,   B-10 to B-11  
 consumer use for research,   362–363, 
379, 410 
 cookies,  B-20 
  cybercrime,   B-19, C-11  
 dialogues with customers,   454–455 
 e-mail;  see E-mail  
 employee familiarity with,   229  
 financial sites,   547 
 financing websites,   170, 579 
 future uses,   B-13 to B-14  
 intellectual property violations,   96, B-19  
 interactions among firms,   226–227, 254  
 investment information,   547, 548, 
550, 551–552  
 job search resources,   E-3, E-5 
 mobile access,   B-13 to B-14  
 net neutrality,   B-11 
 netiquette,   P-6 to P-7, 311  
 online brokers,   543 
 operations management using,   254 
 ownership,   B-15 
 phishing scams,   B-19 
 podcasting,   447, 465  
 privacy issues,   B-20 to B-21, 
E-8 to E-9  
 product reviews,   379, 429 
 recruiting employees,   308  
 résumés posted on,   E-6 to E-9  
 review sites,   429, 464 
 security issues,   16, B-10, B-18 to B-20  
 small business websites,   176  
 training programs,   314 
 viral marketing,   464  
 virtual trade shows,   462  
 viruses,   B-18 
 Internet companies;  see also 
E-commerce 
 failures,   160 
 setting up,   159 
 stock bubble,   554 
 successful,   160 
 venture capital investments,   522–523 
 Internet of Things,   B-14 
 Internet2,  B-11 to B-12  
 Internships,   175, 313  
 Interviews,   310, E-2 to E-3, E-11 to E-13  
 Intranets,   B-9 to B-10  
 Intrapreneurs,   160–161 
 Intrinsic rewards,   270 
 Inventory  
 acquiring,   512 
 as collateral for loans,   516 
 as current asset,   484 
 just-in-time,   257, 512  
 valuation,   488  
 Inventory turnover ratio,   494–495 
 Inverted organizations,   230–231 
 Investing;  see also Mutual funds; 
 Securities markets  
 in bonds,   548 
 buying securities,   542–543 
 capital gains,   545 
 comparing investments,   550–551  
 contrarian approach,   D-9  
 diversification,   544–545 
 ethical issues,   543 
 401(k) plans,   D-16 to D-17  
 in global markets,   544 
 information sources,   547, 549, 
551–552 
 IRAs,  576, 581, D-14 to D-16  
 in mutual funds,   549–550 
 in real estate,   D-6 to D-8  
 risks,   544–545 
 selling securities,   542–543 
 in stocks,   545–548, D-8 to D-9  
 strategies,   543–544, 545–546 
 in 21st century,   555  
 Investment  
 foreign direct,   71–72, 82 
 sovereign wealth funds,   72, 520 
 Investment bankers,   533 
 Investors;  see also Owners’ equity; Ven-
ture capitalists  
 angels,   170 
 corporate responsibility to,   105–106  
 institutional,   533 
 socially conscious,   109 
 Investor’s Business Daily,  549, 551 
  Invisible hand,   33 
 Involuntary bankruptcy,   A-15 
 IPOs;  see Initial public offerings  
 IRAs;  see Individual retirement accounts  
 IRS;  see Internal Revenue Service  
 IS;  see Information systems  
 ISO 9000 standards,   259 
 ISO 14000 standards,   259  
 Israel, McDonald’s franchises,   70 
 IT;  see Information technology  
 Italy 
 bribery in,   110 
 joint ventures in,   71 
J
 Jamaica,   76 
 Japan  
 bribery scandal,   110 
 earthquake and tsunami,   214, 242, 
257, 278 
 executive compensation,   349 
 franchises,   69, 70, 143 
 management approach,   278–279  
 mass customization,   250 
 standard of living,   5 
 vending machines,   430 
 JIT;  see Just-in-time inventory control  
 Job analysis,   306 
 Job descriptions,   306 
 Job enlargement,   283 
 Job enrichment,   283 
 Job interviews,   310 
 Job rotation,   283, 315  
 Job searches;  see also Recruitment; 
Résumés 
 Internet resources,   E-3, E-5 
 interviews,   E-2 to E-3, E-11 to E-13  
 networking,   E-1, E-9 

I-21
SUBJECT INDEX
 resources,   E-4 to E-5  
 self-assessments,   P-4, E-1, E-2   
 social media and,   311 
 sources of jobs,   E-4 
 strategies,   E-1 to E-3  
 traits sought by recruiters,   E-12 
 Job simplification,   283 
 Job simulation,   314 
 Job specialization,   212–213  
 Job specifications,   306  
 Jobs;  see also Careers; Outsourcing; 
Recruitment 
 created by small businesses,   163 
 displaced by technology,   250 
 global trade and,   80–81 
 in green industries,   108 
 in service industries,   243  
 JOBS Act;  see Jumpstart Our Business 
Startups Act of 2012  
 Job-sharing plans,   323–324  
 Joint ventures, international,   70–71 
 Journals,   479  
 Journeymen,  314 
 Judiciary, A-2, A-3;  see also Legal 
environment  
 Jumpstart Our Business Startups (JOBS) 
Act of 2012,   161, 170, 171, 535  
 Junk bonds,   548 
 Just-in-time (JIT) inventory control,   
257, 512  
K
 Keogh plans,   D-17 
 Key economic indicators,   45–48  
 Keynesian economic theory,   51 
 Knights of Labor,   336 
 Knockoff brands,   399–400  
 Knowledge  
 as factor of production,   10, 11  
 retention,   P-5 
 Knowledge management,   199–200  
 Koran,  96  
 Korea;  see North Korea; South Korea  
L
 Labor;  see also Employee–management 
relations; Employees; Unions  
 as factor of production,   10 
 legislation related to,   337–339, 344  
 productivity,   14 
 sweatshop conditions,   110–111, 335  
 Labor-Management Relations Act (Taft-
Hartley Act),   336, 338, 340, 344  
 Labor-Management Reporting and Disclo-
sure Act (Landrum-Griffin Act),   338  
 Land, as factor of production,   10 
 Land banks,   574  
 Landrum-Griffin Act,   338  
 Lao People’s Democratic Republic,   80 
 Last in, first out (LIFO),   488 
 Latin America  
 common markets,   80 
 relations between managers and 
workers,  73–74, 112  
 Law of large numbers,   C-6  
 Laws;  see Legal environment  
 Lawsuits  
 class action,   A-5 
 product liability,   A-5 to A-6, C-10  
 threat of,   C-4 
 wrongful discharge,   325  
 Lawyers,   174–175  
 Layoffs;  see Terminating employees  
 Layout, facility,   254–255, 256 
 LBOs;  see Leveraged buyouts  
 Leadership  
 autocratic,   197–198  
 free-rein,   198 
 need for,  196  
 participative (democratic),   198 
 styles,   197–198 
 Leading  
 defined,   188 
 empowering workers,   198–199 
 knowledge management,   199–200 
 need for,  196  
 roles,  196 
 styles,   197–198 
 Lean manufacturing,   249 
 Ledgers,   480  
  Legal environment;  see also Intellectual 
property protection; Lawsuits; 
 Regulations; Taxes  
 administrative agencies,   A-3 to A-4  
 antitrust laws,   39–40, A-10 to A-12  
 bankruptcy laws,   A-15 to A-17  
 business law,   A-2 
 consumer protection,   A-12 to A-13  
 contract law,   A-9 to A-10  
 credit cards,   518 
 cybercrime,   B-19 
 deregulation,   40, A-17 to A-18  
 effects on global markets,   76–77 
 ethical decisions,   94–95, 98  
 human resource management,  
 302–305 
 incorporation process,   129–130, 131  
 labor laws,   337–339, 344 
 need for laws,   A-2 
 negotiable instruments,   A-8 to A-9  
 partnership laws,   124, 126 
 product liability,   A-5 to A-6  
 punishment for corporate wrongdo-
ing,   94–95 
 sales law,   A-8 to A-9  
 tort law,   A-4 to A-5  
 trade-related laws,   67 
 types of laws,   A-2 to A-3  
 warranties,   A-8, A-9  
 Legislation;  see Legal environment  
 Less-developed countries;  see Developing 
countries  
 Letters of credit,   583 
 Leverage,   523 
 Leverage ratios,   492, 523–524  
 Leveraged buyouts (LBOs),   136 
 Liabilities;  see also Debt  
 current,  484 
 defined,   484  
 long-term,   484 
 Liability  
 limited,   123, 127  
 unlimited,   121–122, 125  
 Liability insurance,   C-8, C-10, D-13  
 Licensing,   68  
 Life cycle, product,   404–406 
 Life insurance,   C-8, C-10, D-11 
 Life insurance companies,   578 
 LIFO (last in, first out),   488 
 Lilly Ledbetter Fair Pay Act of 2009,   303 
 Limit orders,   546 
 Limited liability,   123, 127  
 Limited liability companies (LLCs),  
 132–133 
 Limited liability partnerships (LLPs),  
 123–124 
 Limited partners,   123 
 Limited partnerships,   123 
 Limited-function wholesalers,   425–426 
 Line organizations,   223 
 Line personnel,   223 
 Line-and-staff organizations,   223, 224 
 Lines of credit,   516–517 
 Liquidity,   484  
 Liquidity ratios,   491–492 
 LLCs;  see Limited liability companies  
 LLPs;  see Limited liability partnerships  
 Loans;  see also Credit; Debt; Mortgages  
 bank,   515–517, 576 
 from commercial finance companies,  
 517, 579  
 long-term,   519–520 
 microlending firms,   29 
 peer-to-peer,   170, 579 
 secured,   516 
 short-term,   515–517 
 unsecured,   516 
 Local governments  
 administrative agencies,   A-4 
 municipal bonds,   540, 548 
 taxes,  254, A-14  
 Location, facility;  see Facility location  
 Location-based services,   B-13 to B-14  
 Lockouts,   333, 344 
 Logistics  
 defined,   435  
 inbound,   435 
 international,   434 
 need for,  434 
 outbound,   435 
 reverse,   435 
 storage,   438–439  
 third-party,   435 
 Logistics companies,   435 
 Long-term financing  
 balancing debt and equity,   523–524  
 debt,   513, 519–521 
 defined,   513 
 equity,   513, 521–523 
 objectives,   519 
 Long-term forecasts,   507–508 
 Long-term liabilities,   484 
 Loss leaders,   407  
 Losses  
 defined,   4 
 net,  485, 488 
 Low-context cultures,   287 
M
 M-1,  569 
 M-2,  569 
 M-3,  569 
 M&A;  see Mergers and acquisitions  
 Macroeconomics,   30 
 Magazine advertising,   451 
 Magnuson-Moss Warranty-Federal Trade 
Commission Improvement Act 
(1975),   A-13 
 Mail;  see Direct mail; E-mail  
 Mail-order firms;  see Direct mail  
 Malaysia  
 ASEAN Economic Community,   80 
 as market,   83, 142 
 Malcolm Baldrige National Quality 
Awards,   258–259, 320 
 Malpractice insurance,   C-10  

SUBJECT INDEX
I-22
 Managed security services providers 
(MSSPs),   B-18 to B-19  
 Management;  see also Employee- 
management relations; 
 Empowerment; Motivation; Small 
business management  
 American vs. Japanese styles,   278–279  
 boards of directors,   129, 131, C-4  
 challenges,   187  
 of change,   214 
 controlling,   188, 189, 201–202  
 decision making,   192 
 defined,   187  
 directing,   198 
 effects of information technology,  
 B-17 to B-21  
 ethics in,   98–100, 196, 197  
 functions,   187–188  
 leading  
 defined,   188  
 empowering workers,   198–199  
 knowledge management,   199–200  
 need for,  196  
 styles,   197–198 
 levels  
 bureaucracies,   216, 217  
 middle,   194 
 number of,   219 
 supervisory,   194, 195, 197  
 tasks and skills,   194–195  
 top,   193–194  
 organizing;  see Organizing  
 planning  
 contingency,   191 
 defined,   188 
 forms,   190–192  
 goals and objectives,   189  
 importance,   189  
 mission statements,   189 
 operational,   190–191  
 performance standards,   201–202 
 questions answered by,   189–190 
 strategic,   190  
 SWOT analysis,   189–190  
 tactical,   190  
 vision creation,   189  
 problem solving,   192 
 separation from ownership,   127, 129  
 staffing function,   195  
 tactics used in conflicts with labor,   344–345  
 Management by objectives (MBO),   280 
 Management development,   314–316  
 Managerial accounting,   475–476  
 Managers  
 authority,   215  
 changing roles,   186–187  
 compensation,   347–349  
 differences from leaders,   196  
 generational differences,   288–290  
 in Latin America,   73–74 
 mentors,   315  
 progressive,   186, 199  
 span of control,   219–220 
 supervisory,   194, 195  
 Managing diversity;  see Diversity  
 Manpower Development and Training 
Act of 1962,   303 
  Manufacturer’s agents,   426 
 Manufacturers’ brands,   399  
 Manufacturing;  see also Automobile 
industry; Operations management  
 competitiveness,   244, 248  
 contract,   69, 110–111  
 costs,   248 
 facility layout,   254–255, 256 
 facility location,   253 
 foreign companies in United States,  
 244, 253 
 in Germany,   244 
 mass production,   214 
 output,   242 
 outsourcing,   69, 83, 110–111, 253, 434  
 production techniques  
 computer-aided design and manu-
facturing,   248–249 
 flexible manufacturing,   249  
 improving,   248–249 
 Internet purchasing,   257 
 just-in-time inventory control,   257 
 lean manufacturing,   249 
 mass customization,   250 
 productivity improvements,   20, 48, 
242, 243 
 technology used in,   249–251, 255  
 in United States,   242–243  
 Margin, buying stock on,   546–547 
 Market indices,   551–552 
 Market orders,   546 
 Market prices,   37–38, 409–410  
 Market segmentation,   375–377  
 Marketable securities;  see Securities 
markets  
 Marketing;  see also Personal selling; 
Promotion  
 careers in,   380–381  
 consultants,   175 
 consumer decision-making process,  
 378–380  
 defined,   362 
 eras,   363–366 
 four Ps,   366–369  
 helping buyers buy,   362–363  
 on Internet,   373  
 mass,   378 
 by nonprofit organizations,   365  
 one-to-one,   378 
 by small businesses,   172–173, 175  
 test,   368 
 value in,   390 
 Marketing concept,   364 
 Marketing concept era,   364 
 Marketing environment,   372–375 
 Marketing intermediaries;  see also 
 Business-to-business companies; 
Retail industry; Wholesalers  
 cooperation among,   431–433  
 defined,   418 
 exchange efficiency created by,   420–421  
 in food industry,   420–422 
 need for,  419–422 
 roles,   369 
 sales promotion to,   462 
 types,  418–419 
 utilities created by,   423–424 
 value versus cost of,   421–422 
  Marketing mix,   366–369, 406  
 Marketing research  
 data analysis,   372 
 data collection,   370–371  
 data sources,   370–371  
 defined,   370 
 focus groups,   371, 372 
 process,   370–372 
 by small businesses,   175 
 strategy implementation,   372  
 surveys,  371 
 Markets;  see also Business-to-business 
market; Consumer market; Global 
markets; Securities markets  
 competition in,   38–40 
 defined,   172 
 demand and supply,   37 
 free,  40 
 functioning of,   36–38  
 price determination,   37–38 
 Maslow’s hierarchy of needs,   273–274, 276  
 Mass customization,   250 
  Mass marketing,   378 
 Mass production,   214, 249 
 Master limited partnerships (MLPs),   123 
 Materials handling,   435 
 Materials requirement planning (MRP),  
 255 
 Matrix organizations,   223–225 
 Maturity dates,   539 
 MBO;  see Management by objectives  
 MBS;  see Mortgage-backed securities  
 Media, 460–461;  see also Advertising; 
Newspapers; Social media; 
Television  
 Mediation,   343 
 Medicine;  see Health care  
 Mentors,   315 
 Mercantilism,   78  
 Merchant wholesalers,   425 
 Mercosur,  80 
 Mergers and acquisitions  
 conglomerate mergers,   135 
 defined,   135 
 foreign companies involved in,   136 
 horizontal mergers,   135 
 leveraged buyouts,   136 
 types,  135 
 vertical mergers,   135 
 Mexico, 10, 85;  see also North American 
Free Trade Agreement  
 Microeconomics, 30;  see also Prices  
 Microlending firms,   29 
 Micropreneurs,   157–160 
 Middle management,   194  
 Middlemen;  see Marketing 
intermediaries  
 Millennial generation (Gen Y),   288, 289, 
290, 377 
 Minimum wages,   341–342 
 Minorities;  see also African Americans; 
Discrimination; Diversity  
 entrepreneurs,   8 
 franchisees,   140–141  
 Hispanic Americans,   8, 316 
 managers,   316  
 Mission statements,   189 
 Mississippi River,   437 
 Mixed economies,   43, 44–45 
 MLM;  see Multilevel marketing  
 MLPs;  see Master limited partnerships  
 MNCs;  see Multinational corporations  
 Mobile advertising,   450, 451, 452, 465 
 Mobile technology  
 apps,   391  
 banking,   577 
 cell phones,  P-6,  44 
 employee use,   230 
 Internet access,   B-13 to B-14  
 marketing through,   365–366 
 payment systems,   391, 512, 577, 583  
 smartphones,   391 
 Mobile/on demand marketing era,  
 365–366  

I-23
SUBJECT INDEX
 Model Business Corporation Act,   126 
 Modular layouts,   255, 256  
 Monetary policy,   51, 569–572, 584  
 Money;  see also Currencies  
 coins,  567, 568  
 counterfeiting,   566, 567  
 defined,   566  
 electronic cash,   567–568 
 history,   566–567, 574–575  
 importance,   566 
 time value of,   511  
 Money magazine,   549  
 Money management;  see Personal finan-
cial planning  
 Money supply,   51, 569–570  
 Monopolies  
 absolute advantage,   64  
 antitrust laws,   39–40, A-10 to A-12  
 defined,   39  
 Monopolistic competition,   39 
 Moral values, 96;  see also Ethics  
 Morningstar Investor,  549–550  
 Mortgage bonds,   541  
 Mortgage-backed securities (MBS),   554, 
580, 589–590  
 Mortgages  
 FHA,   C-5 
 foreclosures,   554, 580  
 payments,   D-7, D-8  
 savings and loan associations,   577 
 subprime,   13, 554, 589, 590  
 tax deduction for interest payments,   D-8  
 Motion pictures;  see Movies  
 Motivation  
 cultural differences and,   286–287  
 equity theory,   282  
 expectancy theory,   280–281  
 extrinsic rewards,   270  
 generational differences,   288–290  
 goal-setting theory,   280 
 Herzberg’s factors,   274–276  
 importance,   270 
 intrinsic rewards,   270  
 job enrichment and,   283 
 management by objectives,   280  
 Maslow’s hierarchy of needs,   273–274, 
276 
 by money,  273, 275  
 personalizing,   286–290  
 recognition,   285–286, 287  
 reinforcement theory,   281  
 in small businesses,   287 
 Theory X and Theory Y,   276–277, 279  
 Theory Z,  278–279 
 Motivators,   275  
 Motor vehicles;  see Automobile industry  
 Movies  
 global market,   63 
 product placement,   453  
 MRP;  see Materials requirement 
planning  
 MSSPs;  see Managed security services 
providers  
 Multicultural population, 374;  see also 
Cultural diversity  
 Multilevel marketing (MLM),   430–431 
 Multinational corporations;  see also 
Global markets  
 accounting standards,   495  
 defined,   71 
 ethical issues,   110–113  
 foreign direct investment,   71–72, 82  
 foreign subsidiaries,   71  
 largest,   72 
 mergers and acquisitions,   136 
 Municipal bonds,   540, 548 
 Muslims,   73, 96 
 Mutual funds  
 closed-end,   550 
 defined,   549 
 fees,  550 
 index funds,   549 
 international stocks,   544 
 investing in,   549–550 
 net asset values,   550 
 no-load,   550  
 objectives,   550  
 quotations,   550–551 
 socially responsible,   109 
 Mutual insurance companies,   C-7 
 Myanmar,   80 
 MyIRAs,   D-15 to D-16  
N
 NAFTA;  see North American Free Trade 
Agreement  
 NASDAQ 
 average,   552  
 defined,   534 
 as electronic stock exchange,   534, B-4  
 stock quotations,   547 
 stocks and bonds traded on,   534, 552 
 Times Square price wall,   546 
 National Association of Securities Deal-
ers Automated Quotations;  see 
NASDAQ 
 National banks,   574 
 National Credit Union Administration 
(NCUA),  581 
 National debt,   50 
 National Flood Insurance Association,   C-5 
 National Labor Relations Act of 1935 
(Wagner Act),   303, 336, 
337–338, 340  
 National Labor Relations Board 
(NLRB),  338–339, 348  
 Natural disasters,   434, C-4  
 NCUA;  see National Credit Union 
Administration  
 Needs, hierarchy of,   273–274, 276  
 Negligence,   A-4 to A-5  
  Negotiable instruments,   A-8 to A-9  
 Negotiated labor–management agree-
ments (labor contracts),   340–341  
 Neo-Malthusians,   32 
 Net;  see Internet  
 Net income or net loss,   485, 488  
 Net neutrality,   B-11 
 Netiquette,   P-6 to P-7, 311  
 Networking;  see also Social media  
 among firms,   226–227, 254  
 in job searches,   E-1, E-9 
 by managers,   315 
 by students,   P-4  
 Networks;  see also Internet; Mobile 
technology  
 broadband,   B-10 to B-11  
 extranets,   B-10 
 firewalls,   B-10 
 intranets,   B-9 to B-10  
 portals,   B-10 
 virtual,   B-15 to B-16  
 virtual private,   B-10  
 New businesses;  see Businesses, starting; 
Entrepreneurs  
 New product development;  see Product 
development  
 New York Stock Exchange (NYSE)  
 crashes,   553 
 Dow Jones Industrial Average,   552, 553  
 electronic trading,   533 
 history,   533 
 listing requirements,   534 
 News releases,   460–461 
 Newspapers  
 advertising,   450, 451 
 publicity in,   460–461 
 stock quotations,   547 
 Niche marketing,   377–378 
 NLRB;  see National Labor Relations 
Board  
 No-load mutual funds,   550 
 Nonbanks,   517, 575, 578–579 
 Nonprice competition,   410 
 Nonprofit organizations;  see also 
 Charitable giving  
 accounting,   479  
 defined,   7 
 marketing,   365 
 objectives,   7 
 starting,   97 
 using business principles in,   7 
 volunteering for,   104 
 Nonstore retailing,   428–431 
 Nontariff barriers,   78 
 Norris-LaGuardia Act,   337, 338 
 North American Free Trade Agreement 
(NAFTA),   80–81 
 North Korea  
 economic conditions,   31 
 famine,   42 
 Norway, sovereign wealth fund,   72 
 Notes payable,   484 
 Not-for-profit organizations;  see Non-
profit organizations  
 Nutrition Labeling and Education Act 
(1990),   A-13 
 NYSE;  see New York Stock Exchange  
O
 Obamacare;  see Affordable Care Act  
 Objectives,   189 
 Occupational Safety and Health Act of 
1970,   303 
 Occupations;  see Careers; Jobs  
 Odd lots,   546 
 Off-the-job training,   314, 315 
 Old-Age, Survivors, and Disability 
 Insurance Program;  see Social 
Security 
 Older customers,   17–18  
 Older Workers Benefit Protection Act,  
 303 
 Oligopolies,   39 
 One-to-one marketing,   378 
 Online banking,   583 
 Online brokers,   543 
 Online business;  see E-commerce; 
Internet 
 Online training,   314  
 On-the-job training,   313 
 Open communication,   283–285 
 Open shop agreements,   340, 341 
 Open-end mutual funds,   550 
  Open-market operations,   571, 572 
 Operating (master) budgets,   508 
 Operating expenses,   487 

SUBJECT INDEX
I-24
 Operating funds  
 for capital expenditures,   512–513  
 credit operations,   511–512  
 day-to-day needs,   511 
 for inventory,   512 
 need for,   510–511  
 sources,   513  
 Operational planning,   190–191  
 Operations management  
 careers in,   261  
 control procedures,   260–261  
 defined,   245  
 in manufacturing,   245, 247–248  
 in service industries,   246  
 use of Internet,   254 
 Operations management planning,   252  
 enterprise resource planning,   255 
 facility layout,   254–255, 256  
 facility location,   252–254  
 materials requirement planning,   255 
 quality control,   257–258   
 Opportunities;  see SWOT analysis  
 Options, stock,   319, 347 
 Organization charts,   213, 216–217  
 Organizational (or corporate) culture  
 defined,   231  
 informal organization,   232–233  
 negative,   231–232  
 open communication in,   283–285  
 values,  196, 213  
 Organizational design;  see also Teams  
 bureaucracy,   216, 217  
 centralization,   215, 218, 219  
 chain of command,   216  
 decentralization,   218, 219  
 departmentalization,   213, 220–222  
 division of labor,   212–213, 215  
 Fayol’s principles,   214–215  
 functional structures,   220 
 hierarchy,  193–194, 215, 216–217  
 historical development,   214–216  
 hybrid forms,   222 
 informal organization,   232–233  
 inverted structures,   230–231  
 line organizations,   223  
 line-and-staff organizations,   223, 224  
 matrix organizations,   223–225  
 pyramid structures,   216–217, 219, 231  
 restructuring,   230–231 
 span of control,   219–220 
 tall versus flat structures,   219 
 traditional principles,   214–216 
 Weber’s principles,   216  
 Organized labor;  see Unions  
 Organizing  
 change in,   214, 229–232  
 defined,   188  
 interactions among firms,   226–227 
 levels of management,   193–194, 216–217  
 Orientation,   313 
 OTC markets;  see Over-the-counter 
markets 
 Outbound logistics,   435  
 Outdoor advertising,   451, 466  
 Outlet stores,   427 
 Output;  see Gross output  
 Outsourcing;  see also Suppliers  
 cloud computing,   B-16 
 contract manufacturing,   69, 110–111  
 decisions,   6, 7 
 defined,   6  
 distribution,   435 
 employee benefits,   321  
 ethical issues,   85, 254 
 logistics,   435 
 offshore,   83–84 
 production,   83, 253, 434 
 pros and cons,   84 
 reversing decisions,   229  
 by small businesses,   228 
 supply-chain management,   433 
 sweatshop labor issue,   110–111  
 Web resources,   158  
 Over-the-counter (OTC) markets,   534 
 Owners’ equity;  see also Stocks  
 defined,   484 
 ratio of debt to,   492 
 return on,   494 
 Ownership, separation from 
 management, 127, 129;  see also 
Business ownership forms  
P
 Packaging,   397–398  
 Pakistan  
 bribery in,   110 
 foreign companies in,   73  
 Par value, of stock,   537 
 Paraguay, Mercosur and,   80 
 Parent companies,   71 
 Parents, single, 18;  see also Children; 
Families  
 Participative (democratic) leadership,   198  
 Partnerships  
 advantages,   124–125  
 agreements,   126 
 choosing partners,   125 
 defined,   120 
 disadvantages,   125–126 
 general,   123 
 limited,   123 
 limited liability,   123–124 
 master limited,   123 
 Part-time employees,   311, 323–324  
 Patents, A-6 to A-7;  see also Intellectual 
property protection  
 Patient Protection and Affordable Care 
Act;  see Affordable Care Act  
 Pay equity,   349–350 
 Pay systems, 318–319;  see also 
Compensation  
 Payroll debit cards,   582 
 PCAOB;  see Public Company Accounting 
Oversight Board  
 P/E;  see Price/earnings ratio  
 Peer-to-peer lending,   170, 579  
 Penetration pricing strategy,   409 
 Penny stocks,   546 
 Pension Benefit Guaranty Corporation,   C-5  
 Pension funds,   578 
 People’s Republic of China;  see China 
 Perfect competition,   38 
 Performance appraisals,   316–317 
 Performance ratios,   493–494  
 Performance standards,   201–202 
 Personal financial planning  
 advisers,   D-17 
 balance sheets,   482, 485, D-3  
 budgets,   510, D-4  
 building financial base,   D-6 to D-10  
 debts,   D-4, D-9 to D-10  
 estate planning,   D-17 to D-18  
 expenditures,   D-3 to D-4, D-5, D-6  
 income statements,   D-3 
 insurance,   D-11 to D-13  
 investments;  see Investing  
 need for,  D-2  
 real estate,   D-6 to D-8  
 retirement planning,   D-13 
 401(k) plans,   D-16 to D-17  
 IRAs,  576, 581, D-14 to D-16  
 Keogh plans,   D-17  
 Social Security,   17–18, C-5, D-14 
 savings,   D-4, D-5 to D-6, D-8 to D-9  
 steps,   D-3 to D-6  
 Personal selling;  see also Sales 
representatives  
 benefits,   456 
 in business-to-business market,   378, 
456–458  
 defined,   456 
 relationships with customers,   458  
 steps,   457–458 
 Personnel;  see Employees; Human 
resource management  
 PERT (program evaluation and review 
technique) charts,   260–261 
 Peru 
 foreign companies in,   74 
 Mercosur and,   80 
 Philanthropy;  see Charitable giving  
 Philippines  
 ASEAN Economic Community,   80 
 franchises,   142 
 as market,   83 
 Phishing,   B-19 
 Physical distribution;  see Distribution  
 Physically challenged;  see Individuals 
with disabilities  
 Piecework pay systems,   319  
 Pipelines,   437  
 Place utility,   423 
 Planning;  see also Financial planning; 
Operations management  
 business plans,   167–168, 169 
 contingency,   191 
 defined,   188 
 forms,  190–192 
 goals and objectives,   189 
 human resources,   305–307 
 importance,   189 
 mission statements,   189 
 operational,   190–191  
 performance standards,   201–202 
 questions answered by,   189–190 
 in small businesses,   167–168 
 strategic,   190 
 SWOT analysis,   189–190 
 tactical,   190 
 vision creation,   189 
 PMI (pluses, minuses, implications),   192 
 Podcasting,   447, 465  
 Political economy,   78 
 Pollution;  see Environmental issues  
 Ponzi schemes,   95, 524 
 Population growth, 32;  see also 
Demography  
 Portals,   B-10 
 Portfolio strategy,   545 
 Possession utility,   424 
 Post-it Notes,   160–161 
 Poverty,   33 
 PPI;  see Producer price index  
 PR;  see Public relations  
 Precedents,   A-3 
 Preemptive rights,   538  
 Preferred stock,   538 
 Premiums,   C-5, C-6  

I-25
SUBJECT INDEX
 Press releases,   460–461  
 Price discrimination,   A-12  
 Price indexes,   47–48  
 Price leadership,   408  
 Price/earnings ratio (P/E),   547  
 Prices  
 comparing on Internet,   410 
 determination of,   37–38 
 equilibrium,   37–38 
 inflation and deflation,   47–48 
 market,   37–38, 409–410  
 market forces and,   37–38, 409–410  
 of new products,   369, 407–410  
 Pricing strategies  
 break-even analysis,   408–409  
 bundling,   398 
 competition-based pricing,   408  
 cost-based pricing,   408  
 demand-based pricing,   408 
 everyday low pricing,   409  
 high–low,   409  
 objectives,   407 
 penetration,   409 
 psychological pricing,   409  
 in retail,   409  
 skimming,   409  
 Primary boycotts,   344 
 Primary data,   371 
 Primary markets,   532 
 Principle of motion economy,   271, 272  
 Privacy, on Internet,   B-20 to B-21, 
E-8 to E-9  
 Private accountants,   476 
 Private enterprise system;  see Capitalism  
 Private property,   35 
 Private-label brands,   399  
 Problem solving,   192  
 Process departmentalization,   221, 222  
 Process layouts,   255, 256  
 Process manufacturing,   247 
 Processes, production,   247–248  
 Producer price index (PPI),   48 
  Product analysis,   402 
 Product departmentalization,   220, 221  
 Product development  
 commercialization,   403  
 concept testing,   368, 403  
 design,   109, 368–369  
 distributed,   392 
 process,   368–369, 402–403  
 prototypes,   403 
 test marketing,   368  
 total product offer,   392–393  
 value enhancers,   392 
 Product differentiation,   39, 394  
 Product liability  
 defined,   A-5 
 insurance,   C-10 
 major awards,   A-5, A-6  
 strict,   A-5 
 Product life cycle,   404–406  
 Product lines,   393  
 Product managers,   401  
 Product mix,   393 
 Product placement,   453  
 Product screening,   402 
 Production;  see also Manufacturing; Quality  
 computer-aided design and 
 manufacturing,   248–249 
 control procedures,   251, 260–261  
 costs,   408–409  
 defined,   245 
 factors of,   10–11, 34  
 flexible manufacturing,   249 
 just-in-time inventory control,   257, 512  
 lean manufacturing,   249  
 mass,   214 
 mass customization,   250  
 outsourcing of,   83, 253, 434  
 processes,   247–248  
 Production era,   363 
 Production management,   245, 247–248  
 Productivity  
 agricultural,   20 
 benefits of flextime plans,   322 
 defined,   14 
 Hawthorne effect,   272–273 
 impact of training,   312 
 increases in  
 in manufacturing,   20, 48, 242, 243 
 technology use,   14, 48–49, 248–249  
 in United States,   48–49, 242, 243  
 labor,  14  
 scientific management and,   271 
 in service sector,   48–49 
 in United States,   48–49, 242, 243  
 Products  
 adapting,   390–391 
 brands, 398–401;  see also Brand 
names  
 complaints about,   464 
 consumer goods and services,   395, 397  
 customized,   250, 251  
 defined,   368 
 development;  see Product development  
 distribution;  see Distribution  
 failures,   402 
 generic goods,   399 
 green,   107–108, 109 
 industrial goods and services,   396, 
397, 420 
 naming,   400 
 packaging,   397–398 
 pricing,   369 
 tracking technology,   398, 439, B-5 
 Professional behavior,   P-5 to P-7  
 Professional business strategies,   P-4 to P-5  
 Profit and loss statement;  see Income 
statement  
 Profitability ratios,   493–494 
 Profits;  see also Income 
 defined,   4 
 matching risk and,   5 
 net,  488 
 Profit-sharing plans,   319 
 Program evaluation and review 
 technique (PERT) charts,   260–261  
 Program trading,   553 
 Project management  
 Gantt charts,   261 
 PERT charts,   260–261 
 Project managers,   224, 225 
 Promissory notes,   514 
 Promotion;  see also Advertising; 
 Personal selling  
 campaign steps,   448–449 
 defined,   369 
 integrated marketing communication,  
 448 
 interactive,   454–455 
 on Internet,   453–455, 462  
 sales,   461–463 
 on social media,   454 
 strategies,   466  
 techniques,   369, 448  
 word of mouth,   463–465 
 Promotion mix,   448, 465–466 
 Promotions, of employees,   325 
 Property, private ownership,   35 
 Property insurance,   C-8, D-12 to D-13  
 Property taxes,   A-14, D-8  
 Prospecting,   457  
 Prospects,   457 
 Prospectuses,   535 
 Protectionism,   77–78 
 Protective tariffs,   78 
 Prototypes,   403 
 Psychographic segmentation,   376, 377 
 Psychological pricing,   409 
 Public, business responsibility to;  see 
Corporate social responsibility  
 Public accountants,   476 
 Public Company Accounting Oversight 
Board (PCAOB),   477  
 Public information,   B-6, B-20 
 Public insurance,   C-5  
 Public relations (PR),   460–461 
 Public sector;  see Governments  
 Public sector unions,   334, 336, 
338, 341  
 Public service advertising,   365 
 Public utilities;  see Utilities  
 Publicity,   460–461 
  Pull strategy,   466 
 Purchasing, 257;  see also Suppliers; 
 Supply-chain management  
 Pure risk,   C-3  
 Push strategy,   466 
Q
 Qualifying,   457 
 Quality  
 Baldrige Awards,   258–259, 320 
 defined,   257 
 ISO 9000 standards,   259 
 perceived,   401 
 Six Sigma,   258 
 Quality control  
 continuous improvement process,   258 
 at end of production,   257 
 Quality of life,   6, 253 
 Quick ratio,   492 
R
 Race;  see Diversity; Minorities  
 Rack jobbers,   426  
 Radio advertising,   451 
 Radio frequency identification (RFID),  
 15, 398, 439, 582, B-5 
 Railroads,   436–437, 438 
 Ratio analysis  
 activity ratios,   494–495 
 defined,   491 
 leverage ratios,   492, 523–524 
 liquidity ratios  
 acid-test (quick) ratio,   492 
 current ratio,   492  
 purpose,   491 
 profitability ratios  
 basic earnings per share,   493 
 diluted earnings per share,   493 
 return on equity,   494 
 return on sales,   493–494 
 Real estate;  see also Mortgages  
 bubbles,   554, 580, 590, D-7  
 investing in,   D-6 to D-8  
 property taxes,   A-14, D-8 

SUBJECT INDEX
I-26
 Real time,   227 
 Realtors,   424  
 Recessions;  see also Financial crisis of 
2008  
 definition,   49 
 duration,   575  
 effects in retail,   374–375  
 financial management,   515, 524  
 Recognizing employees,   285–286, 287  
 Recruitment, employee;  see also Job 
searches 
 affirmative action and,   304 
 application forms,   309–310  
 background investigations,   310, 311  
 challenges,   307–308  
 of contingent workers,   311–312  
 defined,   307  
 employment tests,   310 
 interviews,   E-2 to E-3, E-11 to E-13  
 online services,   308  
 physical exams,   310  
 selecting employees,   309–311  
 by small businesses,   308, 309  
 sources,   308  
 traits sought,   E-12  
 trial periods,   310 
 Reference groups,   379 
 Regulations;  see also Legal environment  
 consumer protection,   555, 
A-12 to A-13  
 deregulation,   40, A-17 to A-18  
 effects on global markets,   76–77  
 financial services,   524, 555, A-12 to 
A-13, A-18 
 on hamburgers,   A-18  
 health care system,   A-18 to A-19  
 need for,  40 
 packaging,   398  
 securities markets,   521, 534–536  
 support for,   A-19  
 Reinforcement theory,   281  
 Relationship marketing,   378 
 Religious differences,   73 
 Renter’s insurance,   D-12 to D-13  
 Research;  see Marketing research; Prod-
uct development  
 Reserve requirements,   571, 572  
 Resignations,   326 
 Resource development,   31 
 Resource files,   P-5 
 Resources;  see Factors of production  
 Restrictions on trade;  see Trade barriers  
 Restructuring, for empowerment,  
 230–231 
 Résumés 
 cover letters,   E-2, E-9 to E-10  
 key words,   E-5, E-6 
 posting on Internet,   E-6 to E-9  
 sample,   E-7, E-8 
 writing,   P-5, E-2, E-5 to E-6  
 Retail industry;  see also E-commerce 
 cooperatives,   432  
 decentralized authority,   217, 218  
 distribution strategies,   427 
 jobs in,   21 
 nonstore retailing,   428–431  
 number of stores in United States,   426  
 pricing strategies,   409  
 in recessions,   374–375  
 salespersons,   458–459  
 supermarkets,   307–308, 427, 463  
 sustainability,   419  
 types of stores,   427  
 Retailers,   419, 425 
 Retained earnings,   484–485, 521–522  
 Retirement planning,   D-13 
 defined-contribution plans,   D-16 to 
D-17  
 401(k) plans,   D-16 to D-17  
 IRAs,  576, 581, D-14 to D-16  
 Keogh plans,   D-17  
 Social Security,   17–18, C-5, D-14 
 Retirements,   326 
 Return on equity (ROE),   494 
 Return on investment (ROI),   407 
 Return on sales,   493–494  
 Returns, risk and,   520, 548  
 Revenue tariffs,   78  
 Revenues 
 defined,   4, 485, 487  
 forecasting,   507–508 
 Reverse discrimination,   303, 304  
 Reverse logistics,   435 
 Revolving credit agreements,   517 
 RFID;  see Radio frequency identification  
 Right-to-work laws,   340, 341 
 Risk 
 avoidance,   C-4  
 defined,   5, C-3 
 insurable,   C-6 
 investment,   544–545, 548  
 matching profits and,   5 
 pure,  C-3 
 reduction,   C-4 
 return on equity,   494 
 speculative,   C-3  
 uninsurable,   C-5 
 Risk management;  see also  Insurance  
 environmental risks,   C-10 to C-11  
 importance,   C-2  
 options,   C-3 to C-5  
 rapid change and,   C-3  
 Risk/return trade-off,   520, 548  
 Robinson-Patman Act of 1936,   A-12 
 Robotics,   250 
 Rockefeller family,   522  
 ROE;  see Return on equity  
 ROI;  see Return on investment  
 Ronald McDonald Houses,   103–104  
 Roth IRAs,   D-15  
 Royalties,   68, 139 
 Rule of indemnity,   C-7 
 Russia  
 barter trade,   567  
 corruption,   83 
 dumping disputes,   67 
 factors of production,   10 
 income tax rates,   42 
  as market,   83 
S
 S corporations,   132 
 S&Ls;  see Savings and loan associations  
 SADC;  see Southern African Develop-
ment Community  
 Safety,   213 
 SAIF;  see Savings Association Insurance 
Fund 
 Salaries, 319;  see also Compensation  
 Sales;  see also Personal selling  
 difference from revenues,   487 
 gross,   487 
 net,  487 
 return on,   493–494 
 Sales agents,   426 
 Sales law,   A-8 to A-9  
 Sales promotion;  see also Promotion  
 defined,   461 
 internal,   461–462  
 sampling,   463 
 techniques,   461–463  
 Sales representatives;  see also Personal 
selling  
 earnings,   456  
 in retail stores,   458–459 
 sales promotion to,   461–462 
 Sales taxes,   41, A-14 
 Sampling,   463  
 Sarbanes-Oxley Act,   101–102, 476–477, 
478, 535, A-12 
 Saudi Arabia  
 flag,  73 
 franchises in,   73 
 imports,   65 
 Savings;  see also Retirement planning  
 personal,   D-4, D-5 to D-6, D-8 to D-9  
 rates of return,   D-5 
 Savings accounts,   576 
 Savings and loan associations (S&Ls)  
 defined,   577  
 failures,   577 
 federal deposit insurance,   581 
 IRAs,  D-15 
 as marketing intermediaries,   424  
 services,   577 
 Savings Association Insurance Fund 
(SAIF),   581 
 SBA;  see Small Business 
Administration  
 SBDCs;  see Small Business Development 
Centers 
 SBIC;  see Small Business Investment 
Company 
 Scandals;  see Corporate scandals; 
Corruption  
 Scientific management,   271–273 
 SCM;  see Supply-chain management  
 SCORE;  see Service Corps of Retired 
Executives  
 SEA;  see Self-Employment Assistance 
program  
 Seasonal unemployment,   47  
 Seasonal workers;  see Temporary 
employees 
 SEC;  see Securities and Exchange 
Commission  
 Secondary boycotts,   344  
 Secondary data,   370, 371 
 Secondary markets,   532  
 Secured bonds,   521, 541 
 Secured loans,   516 
 Securities;  see Bonds; Securities mar-
kets; Stocks  
 Securities Act of 1933,   534  
 Securities and Exchange Act of 1934,  
 534–535 
 Securities and Exchange Commission 
(SEC) 
 accounting oversight,   478  
 accounting standards,   495 
 crowdfunding regulations,   171, 535 
 defined,   534  
 enforcement actions,   94, 95, 106 
 establishment,   534 
 fair disclosure regulation,   106 
 financial crisis of 2008 and,   580, 589, 
A-12 
 influence on business,   A-3 

I-27
SUBJECT INDEX
 insider trading regulations,   105–106, 
535 
 Public Company Accounting Over-
sight Board,   477 
 regulation of markets,   534–535, 544  
 regulation of stock and bond issuance,  
 521, 533, 534–535  
 Securities markets;  see also Investing; 
Stock exchanges  
 bubbles,   554  
 functions,   532  
 insider trading,   105–106, 535–536  
 over-the-counter,   534 
 primary,  532 
 quotations,   547 
 regulation of,   521, 534–536  
 secondary,   532 
 volatility,   553–554  
 Security 
 costs,   18 
 credit cards,   B-19, D-9, D-10  
 information technology,   B-18 to B-20  
 Selection of employees,   309–311  
 Selective distribution,   427  
 Self-Employment Assistance (SEA) pro-
gram,   161 
 Self-insurance,   C-4 to C-5  
 Self-managed teams,   225–226, 284–285  
 Selling;  see Personal selling; Retail 
industry; Sales promotion  
 Selling era,   363–364  
 Selling expenses,   487  
 Semantic Web,   B-13 
 Senior citizens;  see also Aging of 
population  
 as consumers,   17–18, 373  
 elder care,   352–353  
 Service Corps of Retired Executives 
(SCORE),  175  
 Service industries  
 competitiveness,   244, 245  
 facility layout,   255  
 facility location,   252–253  
 growth,   245 
 home-based businesses,   158  
 inverted organizations,   230–231  
 jobs in,   20–22, 243  
 online reviews,   464 
 operations management,   246  
 outsourcing jobs,   83–84  
 packaging,   398  
 product lines and product mixes,   393 
 productivity,   48–49  
 types of organizations,   21 
 unions,   345–346  
 in United States,   243, 245  
 Service utility,   424 
 Services, defined,   4 
 Sexual harassment,   350–351  
 Sexual orientation;  see Diversity  
 Shadowing,   313 
 Shareholders;  see Stockholders  
 Sherman Antitrust Act,   A-11  
 Shipping;  see Logistics; Transportation  
 Ships,   437  
 Shop stewards,   342 
 Shopping goods and services,   395 
 Short-term financing  
  banks,  515–517 
 commercial paper,   518  
 defined,   513 
 family and friends,   514–515  
 lines of credit,   516–517  
 loans,   515–517 
 promissory notes,   514 
 revolving credit agreements,   517 
 for small businesses,   514–515 
 trade credit,   514 
 Short-term forecasts,   507 
 Simple IRAs,   D-15  
 Sin taxes,   A-14 
 Singapore  
 ASEAN Economic Community,   80 
 as market,   83, 142  
 sovereign wealth fund,   72 
 Single parents,   18 
 Sinking funds,   541 
 Site selection;  see Facility location  
 Six Sigma quality,   258  
 Skill-based pay,   320 
 Skills;  see also Training and development  
 conceptual,   194–195 
 human relations,   194 
 management,   194–195  
 technical,   194, B-17, B-21 
 Skimming price strategy,   409 
 Small Business Administration (SBA)  
 business financing from,   168, 171–172  
 defined,   171 
 export financing,   176 
 information on exporting,   66, 176  
 Service Corps of Retired Executives,  
 175 
 small business definition,   162–163 
 website,   168, 171, 174  
 Small Business Development Centers 
(SBDCs),   172 
 Small Business Investment Company 
(SBIC) Program,   172 
 Small business management  
 accounting systems,   173–174, 480–481  
 employee management,   173 
 financial management,   168–170, 
505–506 
 financing  
 bank loans,   168–170  
 credit cards,   518 
 equity,   535 
 retained earnings,   521–522  
 short-term,   514–515 
 sources,   168–170, 579 
 venture capital,   170, 516, 522–523 
 functions,   167 
 importance,   167 
 insurance,   175 
 learning about,   165–166 
 legal environment,   12 
 marketing,   172–173, 175  
 MBA students as interns,   175 
 motivating employees,   287 
 planning,   167–168 
 promotion,   464 
 recruiting employees,   308, 309 
 retirement plans,   D-15, D-17 
 Small businesses;  see also Businesses, 
starting; Entrepreneurship; Home-
based businesses  
 banks and,   167–170, 175  
 defined,   162–163 
 exporting,   68–69, 176  
 failures,   163–164 
 family-run,   173 
 global markets,   64–65, 176  
 importance,   163 
 jobs created by,   163  
 legal help,   174–175 
 markets,   172–173 
 nonprice competition,   410 
 number of,   163  
 outsourcing by,   228 
 product development,   394 
 product differentiation,   394 
 success factors,   164, 165 
 taking over existing firms,   166 
 websites,   176 
 Smart cards,   582 
 Smartphones, 391;  see also Mobile 
technology  
 Social audits,   108–110  
 Social commerce,   428–429  
 Social environment,   17–18, 73–74, 
373–374  
 Social justice,   107  
 Social media  
 advertising on,   391, 451, 452, 455 
 business use of,   428–429, B-12 to B-13  
 communication with customers,   
105, 200  
 crowdfunding,   29, 170, 171 
 employee use,   P-6 to P-7, 285  
 food trucks,   428  
 job searches and,   311, E-1 to E-2, E-3 
to E-4  
 marketing and,   365 
 monitoring ad effectiveness,   455  
 professional behavior,   P-6 to P-7, 311  
 promotion on,   454 
 promotional strategies,   455 
 Social responsibility;  see Corporate 
social responsibility  
  Social Security,   17–18, C-5, D-14 
 Social Security Act of 1935,   D-14 
 Socialism  
 benefits,   41 
 command economies,   42 
 compared to other systems,   44–45 
 defined,   41 
 government functions,   41 
 income redistribution,   41 
 negative consequences,   41–42, 43 
 Socially responsible investing (SRI),   109 
 Society, responsibility to;  see Corporate 
social responsibility  
 Soft benefits,   321 
 Software;  see also Information 
technology  
 accounting,   480–481 
 antivirus,   B-18 
 business intelligence,   B-3 
 business plan,   168 
 cookies,  B-20 
 customer relationship management,  
 457  
  employee application screening,   310 
 Microsoft’s competitive practices,   
A-12 
 supply-chain management,   433 
 Sole proprietorships  
 advantages,   121 
 defined,   120 
 disadvantages,   121–123 
 owner’s equity,   484  
 South Africa, franchises,   142 
 South by Southwest (SXSW),   470–471 
 South Korea  
 bribery in,   110 
 economic conditions,   31 
 as market,   83 
 nontariff barriers,   78 

SUBJECT INDEX
I-28
 Southern African Development 
 Community (SADC),   80 
 Sovereign wealth funds (SWFs),   72, 520 
 Soviet Union (former);  see Russia  
 Span of control,   219–220  
 SPC;  see Statistical process control  
 Specialty goods and services,   395 
 Specialty stores,   427 
 Speculative risk,   C-3 
 Spending;  see Expenses  
 Sports  
 baseball,   521  
 college,   348 
 Super Bowl,   452 
 unions,   333, 343, 348  
 Spyware,   B-20  
 SQC;  see Statistical quality control  
 SRI;  see Socially responsible investing  
 Staff personnel,   223 
 Staffing;  see also Employees; 
Recruitment 
 defined,   195  
 importance,   195 
 retention,   106, 326  
 Stagflation,   48  
 Stakeholders  
 defined,   6 
 responding to,   6–7, 202  
 responsibilities to,   104–108 
 Standard & Poor’s   500, 552  
 Standard of living  
 contribution of business,   5–6  
 defined,   5 
 measuring,   5–6 
 Standards;  see also Regulations  
 accounting,   476, 487, 495  
 ISO,  259 
 Startup America,   162 
 Start-up companies;  see Businesses, starting  
 State capitalism,   35 
 State governments  
 administrative agencies,   A-4 
 competition to attract businesses,   365 
 public sector unions and,   334, 336, 
338, 341  
 right-to-work laws,   340, 341  
 support for entrepreneurs,   162 
 taxes,  254, A-14 
 Statement of cash flows,   481, 482, 489  
 Statement of financial position;  see 
 Balance sheets  
 Statement of income and expenses;  see 
Income statement  
 Statistical process control (SPC),   258  
 Statistical quality control (SQC),   258 
 Statutory law, A-2 to A-3;  see also Legal 
environment  
 Stock certificates,   537  
 Stock exchanges;  see also NASDAQ; New 
York Stock Exchange; Securities 
markets  
 crash of 1929,   575 
 defined,   533 
 electronic,   533, 534, B-4  
 global,   536, 544  
 indicators,   551–552  
 listing requirements,   534 
 program trading,   553 
 U.S.,  533–534  
 volatility,   553–554  
 Stock insurance companies,   C-7  
 Stock options,   319, 347  
 Stock splits,   546 
 Stockbrokers, 542, 545;  see also Broker-
age firms  
 Stockholders, 127, 131, 484, 537–538;  see 
also Owners’ equity  
 Stocks 
 advantages and disadvantages,   537 
 American depository receipts,   544  
 buying on margin,   546–547  
 defined,   537 
 dividends,   537, 546  
 in 401(k) plans,   D-16 
 initial public offerings,   521, 532–533  
 investing in,   545–548, D-8 to D-9  
 issuing,   521, 532–533, 537–538  
 par value,   537  
 preferred,   538 
 price/earnings ratios,   547 
 quotations,   547  
 Storage,   438–439 
 Stores;  see Retail industry; 
Supermarkets  
 Strategic alliances,   71 
 Strategic planning,   190 
 Strengths;  see SWOT analysis  
 Strict product liability,   A-5 
 Strikebreakers,   345 
 Strikes  
 defined,   344  
 laws prohibiting,   344 
 use as tactic,   233, 343–344  
 Structural unemployment,   47 
 Students;  see also Education  
 cheating,   96–97  
 course resources,   P-11 to P-13  
 employment,   311–312  
 internships,   175, 313 
 knowledge retention,   P-5 
 networking,   P-4  
 professional behavior,   P-5 to P-7  
  resource files,   P-5  
 social media use,   311 
 study hints,   P-7 to P-9  
 test-taking hints,   P-9  
 time management,   P-10 to P-11  
 Study hints,   P-7 to P-9  
 Subcontracting;  see Outsourcing  
 Subcultures,   379 
 Submarine patents,   A-7 
 Subprime mortgage crisis,   13, 554, 589, 590  
 Subsidiaries, foreign,   71  
 Substance abuse,   353 
 Supermarkets  
 defined,   427 
 employees,   307–308 
 loss leaders,   407 
 sampling,   463  
 Supervisory management,   194, 195, 197 
 Suppliers;  see also Outsourcing  
 financing from,   168 
 including in cross-functional teams,  
 225–226 
 Internet use,   257 
 just-in-time inventory control,   257 
 locations,   253 
 relationships with,   257 
 sweatshop labor issue,   110–111 
 Supply,  37 
 Supply-chain, 432–433;  see also 
 Marketing intermediaries  
 Supply-chain management (SCM), 433, 
439;  see also Distribution  
 Supply curve,   37, 38  
 Surcharges;  see Tariffs  
 Surface transportation,   436–437, 438 
 Surveys, marketing research,   371 
 Sustainability;  see also Environmental 
issues; Greening  
 B corporations,   130 
 corporate programs,   365, 419 
 local food production,   243, 365 
 product durability,   109 
 renewable energy,   419 
 supply-chain management,   433  
 Sweatshop labor,   110–111, 335 
 SWFs;  see Sovereign wealth funds  
 SWOT analysis,   189–190 
 SXSW;  see South by Southwest  
T
 Tactical planning,   190 
 Taft-Hartley Act;  see Labor-Management 
Relations Act  
 Tall organization structures,   219 
 Target costing,   408 
 Target marketing,   376 
 Tariffs  
 in common markets,   79 
 defined,   78 
 lowered by international agreements,   79  
 protective,   78 
 revenue,  78  
 TARP;  see Troubled Assets Relief 
Program  
 Tax accountants,   478 
 Tax-deferred contributions,   D-14 
 Taxes 
 defined,   A-14 
 excise,  A-14 
 government policies,   49–50 
 incentives,   254 
 income 
 corporate,   130, 132, A-14 
 deductions for homeowners,   D-8 
 federal,   A-14 
 personal,   41, A-14 
 rates,  41 
 on Internet transactions,   A-14 
 laws,  A-14 
 management of,   506 
 property,   A-14, D-8 
 sales,   41, A-14 
 sin,   A-14 
 Social Security,   D-14 
 types,  A-14 
 value-added,   41 
 wealth,   30 
 Teams 
 compensation,   319–320 
 cross-functional self-managed,   
225–226, 284–285 
 entrepreneurial,   157 
 global,   226  
 interests,   215  
 matrix organizations,   223–225  
 open communication and,   284 
 problem-solving,   192 
 Technical skills,   194, B-17, B-21 
 Technological environment, impact on 
businesses,   14–16 
 Technology;  see also Information 
 technology; Internet; Mobile 
 technology; Networks; Social 
media; Telecommuting  
 in banking,   577, 581–583  
 benefits,   14–15 

I-29
SUBJECT INDEX
 customer-responsiveness and,   15–16  
 defined,   14  
 in developing countries,   77  
 digital video recorders,   452  
 effects on marketing,   373 
 jobs displaced by,   250  
 in manufacturing,   249–251, 255  
 predictions about,   B-4 
 product tracking,   398, 439, B-5  
 productivity improvements,   14–15, 
48–49, 248–249  
 robotics,   250 
 Telecommunications Act of 1996,   A-18 
 Telecommuting  
 benefits,   323, 324, B-17  
 challenges,   323, 324, B-17  
 effects on facility location decisions,  
 254 
 Telemarketing,   430 
 Television  
 advertising,   450, 451, 452–453  
 digital video recorders,   452  
 infomercials,   453 
 product placement,   453  
 Temporary employees, 15;  see also Con-
tingent workers  
 Ten Commandments,   96 
 Term insurance,   D-11 
 Terminating employees,   325 
 Term-loan agreements,   519–520  
 Terrorism  
 cyber-,  B-19 to B-20  
 threat of,   18 
 Test marketing,   368 
 Testimonials,   464  
 Testing  
 drug,  353  
 of potential employees,   310 
 Test-taking hints,   P-9  
 Text messaging,   465  
 Thailand  
 ASEAN Economic Community,   80 
 franchises,   70, 142  
 as market,   83  
 Theory X management,   276–277, 279  
 Theory Y management,   277, 279  
 Theory Z management,   278–279  
 Therbligs,   271  
 Third-party logistics,   435 
 Threats;  see SWOT analysis  
 360-degree reviews,   317 
 Thrift institutions;  see Savings and loan 
associations  
 Time deposits,   576 
 Time management,   P-10 to P-11  
 Time utility,   423 
 Time value of money,   511 
 Time-motion studies,   271, 272  
 Title VII, Civil Rights Act of 1964,  
 302–303 
 Tobacco industry,   A-4, A-6  
 Top management,   193–194  
 Tort law,   A-4 to A-5  
 Total fixed costs,   408–409  
 Total product offer,   392–393  
 Trade;  see also Exporting; Global mar-
kets; Importing  
 balance of,   66 
 common markets,   79–80  
 comparative advantage theory,   64 
 dumping disputes,   67  
 financing,   583 
 free,  63 
 future issues,   81–84 
 growth,   18  
 importance,   18, 63 
 international agreements,   79 
 largest trading countries,   66 
 laws to ensure fairness,   67  
 measuring,   66  
 motives for,   63 
 opportunities,   65–66  
 Trade barriers  
 embargoes,   78 
 import quotas,   78 
 nontariff,   78 
 tariffs,   78, 79  
 Trade credit,   514  
 Trade deficits,   66 
 Trade protectionism,   77–78 
 Trade shows,   462 
 Trade surpluses,   66 
 Trade unions;  see Unions  
 Trademarks, 399, A-7;  see also Brand 
names; Intellectual property 
protection  
 Trading blocs,   79–80 
 Trading securities;  see Brokerage firms; 
Securities markets  
 Training and development  
 activities,   313–314  
 apprentice programs,   314  
 benefits,   312  
 computer systems,   314  
 defined,   313 
 by franchisors,   137 
 job rotation and,   283 
 job simulation,   314  
 management development,   314–316 
 mentoring,   315 
 off-the-job,   314, 315  
 online programs,   314 
 on-the-job,   313–314 
 technical,   B-17 
 vestibule training,   314 
 Transatlantic Trade and Investment Part-
nership,   81 
 Transfers, employee,   325 
 Trans-Pacific Partnership,   81 
 Transparency,   196, 227  
 Transportation;  see also Distribution; 
Logistics  
 air,   437–438  
 carbon cost,   437 
 costs,   434 
 intermodal,   438 
 mode comparison,   435–436  
 pipelines,   437 
 railroads,   436–437, 438  
 surface,   436–437, 438  
 water,  437 
 Treasurers,   504  
 Treasury bills, bonds, and notes,   540, 572   
 Trial balances,   480 
 Trial close,   458, 459 
 Triangle fire,   337 
 Troubled Assets Relief Program (TARP),  
 505, 554, 580–581, 590  
 Trucking,   437, 438  
 Truth-in-Lending Act (1968),   A-13 
U
 UCC;  see Uniform Commercial Code  
 Umbrella policies,   D-13  
 Underemployed workers,   301–302  
 Unemployment,   46–47, 242 
 Unemployment compensation,   C-5 
 Unemployment rate,   46–47 
 Unethical behavior;  see Ethics  
 Uniform Commercial Code (UCC),   12, 
A-8 to A-9 
 Uniform Partnership Act (UPA),   124 
 Uninsurable risk,   C-5  
 Union security clause,   340 
 Union shop agreements,   340, 341 
 Unions;  see also Employee–management 
relations  
 apprentice programs,   314 
 boycotts,   344 
 certification,   339 
 collective bargaining,   337–338  
 contracts,   340–341 
 corporate responsibility and,   110 
 craft,   335 
 decertification,   339  
 decline of,   334–335, 336, 345 
 defined,   334 
 future of,   341, 345–346 
 givebacks,   345 
 history,   335–336, 337 
 industrial,   336 
 membership by state,   346 
 objectives,   340–342  
 organizing campaigns,   338–339 
 picketing,   343–344 
 public sector,   334, 336, 338, 341 
 shop stewards,   342 
 in sports,   333, 343, 348 
 strikes,   233, 343–344 
 tactics used in conflicts,   343–344 
 United Arab Emirates  
 franchises,   69, 142 
 sovereign wealth fund,   72 
 United Nations,   113 
 United States  
 comparative advantage,   64 
 Constitution,   A-15, A-17 
 economic development,   20–21 
 economic system  
 business cycles,   49 
 compared to other systems,   44–45 
 key economic indicators,   45–48  
 mixed economy,   43 
 productivity,   48–49, 242, 243  
 exports,   66 
 free trade agreements,   80–81 
 imports,   62 
 NAFTA and,   80–81  
 standard of living,   5 
 trade deficits,   66 
 trade laws,   67 
 trading partners,   66 
 unemployment,   46–47  
 U.S. dollar, 75, 570;  see also Currencies  
 U.S. government  
 administrative agencies,   A-3 to A-4  
 assistance for exporters,   66, 68, 176  
 budget deficits,   50 
 Bureau of Economic Analysis,   46 
 corporate bailouts,   554 
 debt,   50 
 employees,   43 
 insurance programs,   C-5  
 revenues and expenditures,   49–51 
 role in economy,   43 
 U.S. government bonds,   539, 572  
 United States v. American Tobacco,   A-11 
 United States v. AT&T,  A-11  

SUBJECT INDEX
I-30
 United States v. E.I. du Pont de Nemours, 
 A-11 
 United States v. Microsoft,  A-11 
 United States v. Standard Oil,  A-11 
 Universal Product Codes (UPCs),   
398, 439 
 Universities;  see Colleges and 
universities  
 Unlimited liability,   121–122, 125  
 Unsecured bonds,   521, 540–541  
 Unsecured loans,   516  
 Unsought goods and services,   395 
 UPA;  see Uniform Partnership Act  
 UPCs;  see Universal Product Codes  
 Uruguay, Mercosur,   80 
 Uruguay Round,   79 
 USA Today,  551 
 Usage segmentation,   376, 377  
 Utilities  
 cooperatives,   143 
 deregulation of,   40, A-18  
 electric,  40 
 monopolies,   39–40 
 regulators,   A-4 
 stock,  546 
 Utility  
 defined,   423  
 form,  247, 423  
 information,   424  
 place,   423 
 possession,   424  
 service,  424  
 time,   423 
V 
Value,   390 
 Value chains, 433;  see also Supply-chain  
 Value enhancers,   392  
 Value package;  see Total product offer  
 Value-added taxes,   41 
 Values, corporate, 196, 213;  see also 
Ethics  
 Variable costs,   409 
 Variable life insurance,   D-11 
 Vending machines,   430 
 Vendors;  see Suppliers  
 Venture capital,   522–523 
 Venture capitalists,   170, 516, 522–523  
 Vertical mergers,   135  
 Vestibule training,   314 
 Video games,   453 
 Vietnam,   70, 80  
 Violence in workplace,   353–354 
 Viral marketing,   464 
 Virtual corporations,   227 
 Virtual networking,   B-15 to B-16  
  Virtual private networks (VPNs),   B-10 
 Viruses,   B-18 
 Visions,   189, 196 
 Vocational Rehabilitation Act of 1973,  
 303, 304 
 Volume, or usage, segmentation,   
376, 377 
 Voluntary bankruptcy,   A-15 
 Volunteerism;  see Community service; 
Nonprofit organizations  
 VPNs;  see Virtual private networks  
W
 Wages, 319, 341–342;  see also 
Compensation  
 Wagner Act;  see National Labor Rela-
tions Act of 1935  
 Wall Street Journal,  242, 547, 549, 551  
 Warehouse clubs,   427 
 Warehouses,   438–439 
 Warranties,   A-8, A-9 
 Wars,   18 
 Water transportation,   437  
 Weaknesses;  see SWOT analysis  
 Wealth creation, by entrepreneurs,   
9–10, D-2  
 Web 2.0, B-13;  see also Internet 
 Web 3.0,   B-13 to B-14  
 Web-based businesses;  see E-commerce; 
Internet companies  
 Webinars,   462  
 Western Europe;  see Europe  
 Wheeler-Lea Amendment of 1938,   A-12  
 Whistleblowers,   101–102  
 Whole life insurance,   D-11 
 Wholesale prices,   48  
 Wholesalers;  see also  Marketing 
intermediaries  
 cash-and-carry,   426 
 defined,   418–419 
 difference from retailers,   425 
 exchange efficiency,   420–421 
 full-service,   425 
 limited-function,   425–426 
 merchant,   425 
 Wills,  D-18 
 Wireless technology;  see Mobile 
technology  
 Wisconsin state government,   338, 341 
 Women 
 business owners,   8–9, 140  
 comparable worth,   349 
 in labor force,   349–350, 351 
 managers,   185, 316  
 pay equity,   349–350  
 Word-of-mouth promotion,   463–465  
 Work teams;  see Teams 
 Workers;  see Employees; Labor  
 Workers’ compensation insurance,   
C-10  
 Workforce diversity;  see Diversity  
 Work–life balance,   230  
 Workplace violence,   353–354 
 World Bank,   61, 584, 585 
 World market;  see Global markets  
 World trade;  see Trade  
 World Trade Organization (WTO),   79, 
82, 83  
 World Wide Web (WWW);  see Internet 
 Wrongful discharge lawsuits,   325 
 WTO;  see World Trade Organization  
 WWW (World Wide Web);  see Internet 
Y
 Yankee bonds,   540 
 Yellow Pages,   451 
 Yellow-dog contracts,   337 
Z
 Zaire, bribery in,   110 
 Zippers,   403 

388
 Managing the 
Marketing Mix: 
Product, Price, Place, 
and Promotion 
 A14 
 Learning Objectives 
 AFTER YOU HAVE READ AND STUDIED THIS CHAPTER, YOU SHOULD BE ABLE TO 
 LO A14-1  Explain the concept of a total product offer and summarize the 
functions of packaging. 
 LO A14-2  Contrast brand, brand name, and trademark, and discuss the 
concept of brand equity. 
 LO A14-3  Describe the product life cycle.  
 LO A14-4  Identify various pricing objectives and strategies, and explain why 
non-pricing strategies are growing in importance.  
 LO A14-5  Explain the concept of marketing channels and the value of 
marketing intermediaries. 
 LO A14-6  Discuss the differences between wholesale and retail 
intermediaries, and explain the various kinds of nonstore 
retailing. 
 LO A14-7  Define promotion and list the traditional tools that make up the 
promotional mix. 
 LO A14-8  Assess the effectiveness of various forms of sales promotion.  

389
 Reed Hastings  
 CEO of Netflix 
 Transformed Netflix from DVD 
delivery service to king of 
streaming video 
 www.netflix.com
@netflix 
 W
 
hen it comes to 
executing a corpo-
rate comeback, 
there’s nobody 
quite like Netflix 
CEO Reed Hastings. He’s faced critics 
repeatedly in his career, beginning with 
those who doubted that his DVD-by-mail 
company could compete against tradi-
tional video stores. After almost single-
handedly ending the era of brick-and-
mortar video distribution, Hastings nearly 
lost it all when he split Netflix’s Internet 
streaming and DVD delivery services into 
two separate entities. But the brand 
bounced back in a big way thanks to 
Hastings’s commitment to his company’s 
instant streaming capabilities. In fact, 
now on any given weeknight Netflix is 
responsible for more than a third of all 
Internet traffic. 
 Even before he entered the business 
world, Hastings had an eye for disrupting 
standard procedures in order to improve 
efficiency. While studying mathematics at 
Bowdoin College, he spent his summers 
training with the Marines and continued 
his service after graduation. Although 
Hastings was dedicated to serving his 
country, his inquiring mind didn’t work well 
in a military environment. “I found myself 
questioning how we packed our back-
packs and how we made our beds,” said 
Hastings. “My questioning wasn’t particu-
larly encouraged, and I realized I might be 
better off in the Peace Corps.” The 
Marines granted his transfer, and soon 
Hastings found himself in Swaziland 
teaching geometry and algebra to high 
school students. Three years in the impov-
erished African nation taught Hastings a 
great deal about the world around him 
and his own role within it. “Once you have 
hitchhiked across Africa with 10 bucks in 
your pocket, starting a business doesn’t 
seem too intimidating,” said Hastings. 
 Hastings returned to the United 
States in the late 1980s and earned his 
master’s degree in computer engineer-
ing from Stanford. A few years later he 
founded his first company, a trouble-
shooting and debugging developer 
called Pure Software. A larger tech firm 
soon purchased the profitable start-up 
from Hastings, giving him the opportunity 
and the capital to pursue his riskiest 
venture yet—Netflix. Hastings came up 
with the idea after he racked up a $40 
late fee at a video rental store for a 
VHS copy of  Apollo 13. “I had mis-
placed the cassette,” said Hastings. 
“I didn’t want to tell my wife about it. 
And I said to myself, ‘I’m going to com-
promise the integrity of my marriage 
over a late fee?’ ” Netflix’s concept 
connected with consumers quickly: for 
a monthly fee they could receive and 
return DVDs through the mail with no 
risk of late fees. 
 Despite its success, Hastings saw 
limits to the DVD-mailing game. He 
knew the instant access offered by 
streaming video would eventually put 
him out of business. “Back when we 
were just mailing DVDs, we were think-
ing, ‘Can we be ready for the transfor-
mation to streaming?’” said Hastings. 
“‘Can we know our subscribers well 
enough to show them what they want?’” 
So he and his team worked tirelessly to 
acquire TV and film licenses while also 
developing technology to stream video 
on a mass scale. Netflix rolled out its 
streaming service in the late 2000s to 
great interest, attracting millions of sub-
scribers within a few years. However, 
Hastings made a mistake in 2011 when 
he tried to spin off Netflix’s DVD mailing 
into an entirely different company called 
Qwikster. He backed down following a 
customer revolt, but the brand suffered 
for months. However, with original, criti-
cally acclaimed programs like  House of 
Cards now streaming on Netflix, there’s 
no doubt that Hastings has changed the 
ways many people enjoy entertainment. 
 The four Ps of marketing are product, 
place, promotion, and price. We’ll explore 
all these concepts in this chapter. At the 
end, you will have a much better 
understanding of the many steps 
required to design and get products 
from the producer to the consumers 
who want them. 
 Sources: Michael J. de la Merced, “Netflix Says It 
Opposes Comcast’s Merge Bid,”  The New York 
Times , April 21, 2014; Amy Zipkin, “Out of Africa, 
onto the Web,”  The New York Times , December 
17, 2006; Nancy Hass, “And the Award for the 
Next HBO Goes to . . . ,”  GQ , February 2013; Kevin 
Spacey, “The 2011 Time 100: Reed Hastings,” 
Time , April 21, 2011; and Ashlee Vance, “Netflix, 
Reed Hastings Survive Missteps to Join Silicon Valley’s 
Elite,”  Bloomberg Businessweek , May 9, 2013.   
 Getting to know Reed Hastings

390
 name that company 
 This U.S. company is known for having low prices all the time. One way it keeps 
prices low is by eliminating as many wholesalers as possible and doing the 
wholesale function itself. Name that company. (Find the answer in this chapter.) 
 Explain the concept of a total product offer and summarize the functions of 
packaging. 
PRODUCT DEVELOPMENT AND 
THE TOTAL PRODUCT OFFER  
 The best way for companies to compete today is to design and promote better 
products, meaning products that customers perceive to have the best   value  —
good quality at a fair price.  1 When consumers calculate the value of a product, 
they look at the benefits and then subtract the cost (price) to see whether the 
benefits exceed the costs, including the cost of driving to the store (or shipping 
fees if they buy the product online). 
 Whether consumers perceive a product as the best value depends on 
many factors, including the benefits they seek and the service they receive. To 
satisfy consumers, marketers must learn to listen better and constantly adapt 
to changing market demands.  2 For example, McDonald’s responded to the 
growing number of eaters looking for healthier food by adding items like fruit, 
side salads, and oatmeal to its menu. 
 We’re sure you’ve noticed menu changes at other local fast-food restau-
rants over time. That’s because marketers have learned that adapting products 
to new competition and new markets is an ongoing need. An organization 
can’t do a one-time survey of consumer wants and needs, design a group of 
products to meet those needs, put them in the stores, and then just relax. It 
must constantly monitor changing consumer wants and needs, and adapt 
products, policies, and services accordingly. 
 As a result, product development is a key activity to any modern business, 
anywhere in the world. However, there’s a lot more to it than merely introduc-
ing goods and services to the public. What marketers do to create excitement 
for those products is as important as the products themselves.  
 Developing a Total Product Offer 
 From a strategic marketing viewpoint, a product is more than just the physical 
good or service. A   total product offer   consists of everything consumers evalu-
ate when deciding whether to buy something. Thus, the basic product or ser-
vice may be a washing machine, an insurance policy, or a beer, but the total 
product offer includes some or all of the  value enhancers in  Figure A14.1 . You 
may hear some people call the basic product the “core product” and the total 
product offer the “augmented product.” 
 When people buy a product, they may evaluate and compare total prod-
uct offers on many dimensions. Some are tangible (the product itself and its 
package); others are intangible (the producer’s reputation and the image cre-
ated by advertising). A successful marketer must begin to think like a 
LO A14–1
value
Good quality at a fair price. 
When consumers calculate the 
value of a product, they look at 
the benefits and then subtract 
the cost to see if the benefits 
exceed the costs.
total product offer
Everything that consumers 
evaluate when deciding 
whether to buy something; also 
called a value package.

391
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
consumer and evaluate the total product offer as a collection of impressions 
created by all the factors listed in  Figure A14.1 . It is wise to talk with consum-
ers to see which features and benefits are most important to them and which 
value enhancers they want or don’t want in the final offering.  3 Frito-Lay, for 
instance, had to drop biodegradable bags because they were “too noisy.” Who 
would think of such a thing when developing a product? 
 What questions might you ask consumers when developing the total 
product offer for Very Vegetarian? (Recall the business idea we introduced in 
Chapter 13.) Remember, store surroundings are important in the restaurant 
business, as are the parking lot and the condition of bathrooms. 
 Sometimes an organization can use low prices to create an attractive total 
product offer.  4 For example, outlet stores offer brand-name goods for less. 
Shoppers like getting high-quality goods and low prices, but they must be 
careful. Outlets also carry lower-quality products with similar but not exactly 
the same features as goods carried in regular stores. Different consumers may 
want different total product offers, so a company must develop a variety of 
offerings. 
 Product Lines and the Product Mix 
 Companies usually don’t sell just one product. A   product line   is a group of 
items that are physically alike or intended for a similar market. They usually 
face similar competition. Some organizations produce multiple product lines. 
For example, Procter & Gamble’s product lines include hair care, oral care, 
and household cleaners. 
 A single product line may also contain several competing brands. P&G has 
many brands in its laundry and fabric care product line, which includes the 
product line
A group of products that are 
physically similar or are 
intended for a similar market.
 FIGURE A14.1 POTENTIAL 
COMPONENTS OF A 
TOTAL PRODUCT OFFER 
Guarantee
Speed
of
delivery
Reputation
of
producer
Image
created
by
advertising
Price
Convenience
Package
Brand
name
Store
surroundings
Internet
access
Service
Buyer’s
past
experience

392
 spotlight on small business 
 As a Navy Seal, Randy Hetrick 
had to keep his body in the same 
type of peak physical condition as 
a professional athlete. But during 
a training mission in Southeast 
Asia, Hetrick and his team had to 
remain undercover in a ware-
house for weeks with only enough 
room for pushups and sit-ups. He 
remembered a workout that used 
his body weight as resistance 
rather than barbells, and created 
a “gizmo” out of spare parachute 
harnesses and nylon webbing 
that he attached to the end of a 
door. It worked great for him and 
his Seal team. As time passed, his 
“gizmo” became Hetrick’s pas-
sion. Along with the help of his 
fellow Seals, he worked to 
develop and improve the product. 
 Although Hetrick had a tough 
time convincing people that his 
idea was worth anything, he 
worked on his product with 
conditioning coaches at the 
school’s gym and eventually cre-
ated a refined prototype. His 
“gizmo” had evolved into a 
sophisticated piece of equipment 
featuring three adjustable straps 
attached to a metal ring. It 
allowed users to perform hun-
dreds of different exercises by 
suspending their legs in the air or 
simply by leaning forward. 
 Hetrick’s beloved “gizmo” 
evolved into the TRX Suspension 
Trainer. As his business grew, 
Hetrick wondered if it was time to 
reevaluate his marketing plan to 
take advantage of the company’s 
success. He launched Fitness 
Anywhere and began providing 
classes, instructional DVDs, and 
online videos about suspension 
training. These added services 
launched the company into 
profitability. 
 Today, Fitness Anywhere is a 
$50 million business occupying 
four floors of a San Francisco 
office building. The top floor is a 
2,500-square-foot gym overlook-
ing the city, and kitchens through-
out the office offer an array of 
energy bars and protein shakes. 
“Working out is not only sanc-
tioned, it almost is required,” says 
the former Navy Seal. 
 Sources: Brent Gleeson, “Veteran-Owned 
Businesses: Taking the Country by Storm,” 
Forbes, April 3, 2014; and Katie Lobosco, “Vet 
Turns Military Training into $50 Million Fitness 
Company,”  CNN Money, November 10, 2013. 
www.trxtraining.com
 Sealing the Deal    
s
Cheer, Tide, and Ivory brands. All of P&G’s product lines make up its   product 
mix   , the combination of product lines offered by a manufacturer. 
 Service providers have product lines and product mixes as well. A bank or 
credit union may offer a variety of services ranging from savings accounts and 
ATM access to home loans and insurance. In the end, companies must decide 
what mix is best for their business. That mix may include both goods and ser-
vices to ensure that all of the customer’s needs are met. The Spotlight on Small 
Business box features a story about how an entrepreneur expanded his com-
pany’s product mix by adding new products and services. 
 Product Differentiation 
 Product differentiation   is the creation of real or perceived product differ-
ences. Actual product differences are sometimes quite small, so marketers 
must use a creative mix of branding, pricing, advertising, and packaging 
(value enhancers) to create a unique, attractive image. Numerous bottled 
water companies have successfully attempted product differentiation. The 
companies made their bottled waters so attractive through branding, pricing, 
and promotion that now restaurant customers often order water by brand 
name (e.g., Perrier). 
 There’s no reason why you couldn’t create a similar attractive image for 
Very Vegetarian, your vegetarian restaurant. Small businesses can often win 
market share with creative product differentiation. One yearbook entrepreneur 
product mix
The combination of product 
lines offered by a manufacturer.
product differentiation
The creation of real or 
perceived product differences.

393
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
competes by offering multiple clothing changes, backgrounds, and 
poses along with special allowances, discounts, and guarantees. His 
small business has the advantage of being more flexible in adapting 
to customer needs and wants, and he’s able to offer attractive prod-
uct options. He has been so successful that  companies use him as a 
speaker at photography conventions. How could you respond cre-
atively to the consumer wants of vegetarians?  
 Packaging Changes the Product 
 Consumers evaluate many aspects of the total product offer, 
including the brand. It’s surprising how important packaging 
can be in such evaluations of various goods. Many companies 
have used packaging to change and improve their basic product. 
We have squeezable ketchup bottles that stand upside down; 
square paint cans with screw tops and integrated handles; plas-
tic bottles for motor oil that eliminate the need for funnels; 
 single-use packets of spices; and so forth. In each case, the pack-
age changed the product in consumers’ minds and opened up 
large new markets. 
 In order to be considered successful, packages must perform 
the following functions:
 
1. Attract the buyer’s attention. 
 
2. Protect the goods inside, stand up under handling and 
storage, be tamperproof, and deter theft. 
 
3. Be easy to open and use. 
 
4. Describe and give information about the contents. 
 
5. Explain the benefits of the good inside. 
 
6. Provide information on warranties, warnings, and other consumer 
matters. 
 
7. Give some indication of price, value, and uses. 
 Packaging can also make a product more attractive to retailers. The Uni-
versal Product Codes (UPCs) on many packages help stores control inven-
tory. They combine a bar code and a preset number that gives the retailer 
information about the product’s price, size, color, and other attributes. In 
short, packaging changes the product by changing its visibility, usefulness, or 
attractiveness.  
 The Growing Importance of Packaging  
Today, packaging carries more of 
the promotional burden than in the past. Many products once sold by sales-
persons are now sold in self-service outlets, and the package has acquired 
more sales responsibility. The Fair Packaging and Labeling Act was passed to 
give consumers much more quantity and value information on product 
packaging. 
 Packaging may make use of a strategy called   bundling  , which combines 
goods and/or services for a single price. Virgin Airlines has bundled door-to-
door limousine service and in-flight massages in its total product offer. Finan-
cial institutions are offering everything from financial advice to help in 
purchasing insurance, stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and more. When combin-
ing goods or services into one package, marketers must not include so much 
that the price gets too high. It’s best to work with customers to develop value 
enhancers that meet their individual needs. 
bundling
Grouping two or more 
products together and pricing 
them as a unit.
 Even industrial products 
can benefit from 
innovative packaging. 
This foot-tall High-Tech 
CFO Action Figure is a 
talking doll created by a 
design consulting firm in 
response to a client’s 
request for a written 
report for business 
analysts. Long after a 
report would have been 
filed, the CFO doll is still 
sitting on executives’ 
desks. Can you think of 
other packaging 
innovations for office 
products? 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
394
Contrast brand, brand name, and trademark, and discuss the concept of 
brand equity.
 BRANDING AND BRAND EQUITY 
 A   brand   is a name, symbol, or design (or combination thereof) that identifies the 
goods or services of one seller or group of sellers and distinguishes them from the 
goods and services of competitors. The word  brand includes practically all means 
of identifying a product. As we noted in Chapter 13, a  brand name consists of a 
word, letter, or group of words or letters that differentiates one seller’s goods and 
services from those of competitors. Brand names you may be familiar with 
include Red Bull, Sony, Del Monte, Levi’s, Google, and of course many more. The 
Reaching Beyond Our Borders box discusses product names in more depth. 
 Brand names give products a distinction that tends to make them attrac-
tive to consumers. For the buyer, a brand name ensures quality, reduces search 
time, and adds prestige to purchases. For the seller, brand names facilitate 
new-product introductions, help promotional efforts, add to repeat purchases, 
and differentiate products so that prices can be set higher. 
 A   trademark  is a brand that has exclusive legal protection for both its brand 
name and its design. Trademarks like McDonald’s golden arches are widely rec-
ognized and help represent the company’s reputation and image. McDonald’s 
might sue to prevent a company from selling, say, “McDonnel” hamburgers. 
 People are often impressed by certain brand names, even though many 
claim there’s no difference between brands in a given product category. For 
example, even when people say that all aspirin is alike, if you put two aspirin 
bottles in front of them—one with the Bayer label and one with an unknown 
name—most choose the one with the well-known brand name. 
 Generating Brand Equity and Loyalty 
 A major goal of marketers in the future will be to reestablish the notion of brand 
equity.   Brand equity   is the value of the brand name and associated symbols. 
Usually, a company cannot know the value of its brand until it is sold to another 
company. Brand names with high reported brand equity ratings include Reyn-
olds Wrap aluminum foil and Ziploc food bags. Apple is the undisputed king of 
brands, though, with an estimated brand value of more than $120 billion.  5  
 The core of brand equity is   brand loyalty   , the degree to which customers 
are satisfied, like the brand, and are committed to further purchases. A loyal 
group of customers represents substantial value to a firm, and that value can 
be calculated. One way manufacturers are trying to create more brand loyalty 
is by lowering the carbon footprint of their products. 
 Occasionally companies will try to boost their short-term performance by 
offering coupons and price discounts to move goods quickly. This can affect the 
LO A14–2
brand
A name, symbol, or design 
(or combination thereof) that 
identifies the goods or services 
of one seller or group of sellers 
and distinguishes them from 
the goods and services of 
competitors.
trademark
A brand that has exclusive 
legal protection for both its 
brand name and its design.
brand equity
The value of the brand name 
and associated symbols.
brand loyalty
The degree to which 
customers are satisfied, like the 
brand, and are committed to 
further purchases.
 • What value enhancers may be included in a total product offer?  
 • What’s the difference between a product line and a product mix?  
 • What functions does packaging now perform? 
•
What value enhancers
 test prep 
s may be includ
s m
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

395
 reaching beyond our borders 
 So, you’ve developed a product 
and you’re ready to take it on the 
market. What should you call it? 
America’s favorite cookie, Oreo, is 
said to be a great name because 
the two O’s nicely mirror the 
shape of the cookie itself. Could 
the name be part of the charm? 
Think of other names that come 
to your mind when you think of 
American products: Coke, Nike, 
and Häagen-Dazs. 
 Are you surprised that Häagen-
Dazs is an American product? 
Häagen Dazs was founded in 
1961. Company founder Reuben 
Mattas wanted a name that pro-
jected high quality. 
 Obsessed with Dutch/Swedish 
modern architecture and 
impressed with the quality of 
Duncan Hines products, Mattas 
played around with words until he 
came up with the name Häagen-
Dazs. The name means absolutely 
nothing, but it seemed to project 
another world quality he wanted 
for his premium ice cream. Today, 
the Häagen-Dazs name resonates 
around the globe, including 
nations like Japan where it has 
just introduced innovative veggie 
flavors like tomato cherry and car-
rot orange. 
 At one time, finding a name like 
Häagen-Dazs was relatively sim-
ple. Now, with a couple hundred 
countries on the cyber-platform, 
choosing the right name is a 
global issue. For example, when 
Russian gas company Gazprom 
formed a joint venture with 
Nigeria’s NNPC, the company was 
called NiGaz. Not a great name, 
we’d say. On the other hand, a 
web development company in 
New Zealand chose the name 
hairyLemon. It has been 
estimated that at least a third of 
hairyLemon’s business was 
because of its name. 
 Every once in a while, a suc-
cessful name is created by acci-
dent. Google is a good example. 
The global search engine was 
supposed to be called Googol 
(a scientific name for 1 followed by 
one hundred zeros). However, the 
founders made a typo when regis-
tering the domain name. The error 
resulted in a warm, catchy, 
human-sounding name. Some 
mistakes turn out to be luckier 
than others. 
 Sources: Greg Emerson, “Häagen-Dazs 
Vegetable Ice Cream Flavors to Debut in Japan,” 
Newsday, April 20, 2014; Gwen Moran, “5 
Strategies to Build a Global Brand,”  Entrepreneur, 
May 7, 2013; and Interbrand,  www.interbrand.com , 
accessed April 2014. 
 www.haagendazs.com
 Playing the Name Game 
way consumers perceive the quality of the brand, especially for grocery products. 
For instance, if a grocery store discounts the price of lettuce, consumers may 
assume that it is of lower quality and avoid purchasing it. Many businesses tried 
discounting strategies like these following the financial crisis that began in 2008. 
However, now most companies realize the value of brand equity and are trying 
harder to measure the earning power of strong brand names.  6  
 Brand awareness   refers to how quickly or easily a given brand name 
comes to mind when someone mentions a product category. Advertising helps 
build strong brand awareness. Established brands, such as Coca-Cola and 
Pepsi, are usually among the highest in brand awareness. Sponsorship of 
events, like football’s Orange Bowl and NASCAR’s Cup Series, helps improve 
brand awareness. Simply being there over and over also increases brand 
awareness. That’s one way Google became such a popular brand. 
 Brand Management 
 A   brand manager   (known as a  product manager  in some firms) has direct 
responsibility for one brand or product line, and manages all the elements of 
its marketing mix: product, price, place, and promotion. Thus, you might 
think of the brand manager as the president of a one-product firm. 
brand awareness
How quickly or easily a given 
brand name comes to mind 
when a product category is 
mentioned.
 brand manager  
 A manager who has direct 
responsibility for one brand or 
one product line; called a 
product manager in some 
firms.  

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
396
 One reason many large consumer-product companies created this position 
was to have greater control over new-product development and product promo-
tion. Some companies have brand-management  teams to bolster the overall effort. 
In B2B companies, brand managers are often known as product managers. 
 For example, what do you do with a product that has a well-known brand 
name but fading sales? One solution may be to reinvent the product to satisfy 
the needs of loyal customers in the form of a new and improved version of the 
original product. Companies also need to introduce new products and services 
to satisfy customers’ needs or risk having competitors steal their business. 
In other instances, the decision may be made to abandon the product or ser-
vice and focus on other areas. This was the case when IBM sold its personal 
computer unit in favor of focusing on offering technology and consulting 
services. We’ll review the stages of a product’s life cycle next. 
 • What is the difference between a brand name and a trademark?  
 • What are the responsibilities of a brand manager? 
•
What is the difference
 test prep 
e between a bra
e be
Describe the product life cycle. 
 THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE 
 Once a product has been developed and tested, it goes to market. There it may 
pass through a   product life cycle   of four stages: introduction, growth, matu-
rity, and decline (see  Figure A14.2 ). This cycle is a  theoretical model of what 
happens to sales and profits for a  product class  over time. However, not all 
individual products follow the life cycle, and particular brands may act differ-
ently. For example, while frozen foods as a generic class may go through the 
entire cycle, one brand may never get beyond the introduction stage. Some 
product classes, such as microwave ovens, stay in the introductory stage for 
years. Others, like ketchup, become classics and never experience decline. Fad 
products (think Beanie Babies and mood rings) may go through the entire 
cycle in a few months. Still others may be withdrawn from the market alto-
gether. Nonetheless, the product life cycle may provide some basis for antici-
pating future market developments and for planning marketing strategies.  
 Example of the Product Life Cycle 
 The product life cycle can give marketers valuable clues to successfully promot-
ing a product over time. Some products, like crayons and sidewalk chalk, have 
very long product life cycles, change very little, and never seem to go into decline. 
In fact, Crayola has been successfully selling crayons for more than 100 years! 
 You can see how the theory works by looking at the product life cycle of 
instant coffee. When it was introduced, most people didn’t like it as well as 
“regular” coffee, and it took several years for instant coffee to gain general 
acceptance (introduction stage). At one point, though, instant coffee grew rap-
idly in popularity, and many brands were introduced (growth stage). After a 
while, people became attached to one brand and sales leveled off (maturity 
stage). Sales then went into a slight decline when freeze-dried coffees were 
introduced (decline stage). Now freeze-dried coffee has, in turn, reached 
LO A14–3
product life cycle
A theoretical model of what 
happens to sales and profits for 
a product class over time; the 
four stages of the cycle are 
introduction, growth, maturity, 
and decline.
c
s
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

397
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
 FIGURE A14.2 SALES 
AND PROFITS DURING 
THE PRODUCT LIFE 
CYCLE 
 Note that profit levels start to 
fall  before sales reach their 
peak. This is due to increasing 
price competition. When profits 
and sales start to decline, it’s 
time to come out with a new 
product or to remodel the old 
one to maintain interest and 
profits. 
All-electric
cars
Hybrid cars
Sales
Videocassette
recorders
Smartphones
Profit
Decline
Maturity
Time
Growth
Sales
Introduction
the decline stage as consumers are buying single-serve coffee for beverage 
brewers such as Keurig and bags of coffee beans from places like Starbucks 
and brewing them at home. It’s extremely important for marketers to recog-
nize what stage a product is in so that they can make intelligent and efficient 
marketing decisions about it. 
 Using the Product Life Cycle 
 Different stages in the product life cycle call for different marketing strategies. 
 Figure A14.3  outlines the marketing mix decisions you might make. As you go 
 FIGURE A14.3 SAMPLE STRATEGIES FOLLOWED DURING THE PRODUCT LIFE CYCLE 
Life Cycle Stage
Product
Price
Place
Promotion
Introduction
Offer market tested
product; keep
mix small
Go after innovators with
high introductory price
(skimming strategy) or
use penetration pricing
Use wholesalers,
selective distribution
Dealer promotion and heavy
investment in primary demand
advertising and sales promotion
to get stores to carry the
product and consumers
to try it
Growth
Improve product;
keep product mix
limited
Adjust price to meet
competition
Increase distribution
Heavy competitive advertising
Maturity
Differentiate product
to satisfy different
market segments
Further reduce price
Take over wholesaling
function and intensify
distribution
Emphasize brand name
as well as product beneﬁts
and differences
Decline
Cut product mix;
develop new product
ideas
Consider price
increase
Consolidate
distribution; drop
some outlets
Reduce advertising to
only loyal customers
MARKETING MIX ELEMENTS

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
398
through the figure, you’ll see that each stage calls for multiple marketing mix 
changes. Remember, these concepts are largely theoretical and you should use 
them only as guidelines. 
 As  Figures A14.2  shows, a product in the maturity stage may reach the 
top in sales growth while profit is decreasing. At that stage, a marketing man-
ager may decide to create a new image for the product to start a new growth 
cycle. You may have noticed how Arm & Hammer baking soda gets a new 
image every few years to generate new sales. One year it’s positioned as a 
deodorant for refrigerators and the next as a substitute for harsh chemicals in 
swimming pools. Knowing what stage in the cycle a product has reached helps 
marketing managers decide when such strategic changes are needed. 
 • What is the theory of the product life cycle? 
 • When a product is in the mature stage of the product life cycle, are its 
profits generally increasing or decreasing? 
•
What is the theory of t
 test prep 
the prodduct life
the
 Identify various pricing objectives and strategies, and explain why nonpricing 
strategies are growing in importance.  
 COMPETITIVE PRICING 
 Pricing is so important to marketing and the development of total product 
offers that it has been singled out as one of the four Ps in the marketing mix, 
along with product, place, and promotion. It’s one of the most difficult of the 
four Ps for a manager to control, however, because price is such a critical 
ingredient in consumer evaluations of the product. In this section, we’ll explore 
price both as an ingredient of the total product offer and as a strategic market-
ing tool.  
 Pricing Objectives 
 A firm may have several objectives in mind when setting a pricing strategy. 
When pricing a new vegetarian offering, we may want to promote the prod-
uct’s image. If we price it  high and use the right promotion, maybe we can 
make it the BMW of vegetarian meals. We also might price it high to 
achieve a certain profit objective or return on investment. We could also 
price our product  lower than its competitors, because we want low-income 
people to afford this healthy meal. That is, we could have some social or 
ethical goal in mind. Low pricing may also discourage competition because 
it reduces the profit potential, but it may help us capture a larger share of 
the market. 
 A firm may have several pricing objectives over time, and it must formu-
late these objectives clearly before developing an overall pricing strategy. 
Popular objectives include the following:
 
1.  Achieving a target return on investment or profit.  Ultimately, the goal of 
marketing is to make a profit by providing goods and services to others. 
Naturally, one long-run pricing objective of almost all firms is to 
optimize profit. Some companies try to increase their profits by reducing 
LO A14–4
m
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

399
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
the packaged amount of a product while keeping prices 
the same. Have you noticed this happening to products 
you buy like cereal or tissues?  
 
2.  Building traffic.  Supermarkets often advertise certain 
products at or below cost to attract people to the store. 
These products are called  loss leaders.  The long-run 
objective is to make profits by following the short-run 
objective of building a customer base. 
 
3.  Achieving greater market share.  One way to capture a 
larger part of the market is to offer lower prices, low 
finance rates (like 0 percent financing), low lease rates, 
or rebates. 
 
4.  Creating an image.  Certain watches, perfumes, and 
other socially visible products are priced high to give 
them an image of exclusivity and status. 
 
5.  Furthering social objectives.  A firm may want to price a 
product low so people with little money can afford it. 
The government often subsidizes the price of farm 
products to keep basic necessities like milk and bread 
affordable. 
 A firm may have short-run objectives that differ greatly from its 
long-run objectives. Managers should understand both types at 
the beginning and put both into their strategic marketing plan. 
They should also set pricing objectives in the context of other 
marketing decisions about product design, packaging, branding, distribution, 
and promotion. All these marketing decisions are interrelated. 
 Intuition tells us the price charged for a product must bear some relation-
ship to the cost of producing it. Prices usually  are set somewhere above cost. 
But as we’ll see, price and cost aren’t always related. In fact, there are three 
major approaches to pricing strategy: cost-based, demand-based (target 
costing), and competition-based. 
 Cost-Based Pricing  
Producers often use cost as a primary basis for setting 
price. They develop elaborate cost accounting systems to measure production 
costs (including materials, labor, and overhead), add in a margin of profit, and 
come up with a price. Picture the process in terms of producing a car. You add 
up all the various components—engine parts, body, tires, radio, door locks 
and windows, paint, and labor—add a profit margin, and come up with a 
price. The question is whether the price will be satisfactory to the market 
as well. As we discussed in Chapter 2, in the long run the market—not the 
 producer—determines what the price will be. Pricing should take into account 
costs, but it should also include the expected costs of product updates, the 
marketing objectives for each product, and competitor prices. 
 Demand-Based Pricing  
Unlike cost-based pricing,   target costing   is 
demand based. That means we design a product so it not only satisfies cus-
tomers but also meets the profit margins we set. Target costing makes the final 
price an  input to the product development process, not an outcome of it. You 
first estimate the selling price people would be willing to pay for a product and 
then subtract your desired profit margin. The result is your target cost of pro-
duction, or what you can spend to profitably produce the item. 
 Competition-Based Pricing  
  Competition-based pricing   is a strategy 
based on what all the other competitors are doing. The price can be at, above, 
target costing
Designing a product so that it 
satisfies customers and meets 
the profit margins desired by 
the firm.
 competition-based pricing  
 A pricing strategy based on 
what all the other competitors 
are doing. The price can be set 
at, above, or below competitors’ 
prices.  
 Shoppers around the 
world look for bargains, 
as these consumers in 
Austria are doing. How 
many different ways can 
marketers appeal to 
shoppers’ desires to find 
the lowest price? Do 
online retailers adopt 
different pricing 
strategies? 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
400
or below competitors’ prices. Pricing depends on customer loyalty, perceived 
differences, and the competitive climate.  7   Price leadership   is the strategy by 
which one or more dominant firms set pricing practices all competitors in an 
industry follow. You may have noticed that practice among oil companies and 
some fast-food companies. 8 
 Break-Even Analysis 
Before you begin selling a new vegetarian sandwich, it may be wise to determine 
how many sandwiches you’d have to sell before making a profit. You’d then 
determine whether you could reach such a sales goal.   Break-even analysis   
is the process used to determine profitability at various levels of sales. The 
break-even point is the point where revenues from sales equal all costs. The for-
mula for calculating the break-even point is as follows:
Break-even point (BEP) 5  
Total fixed costs (FC) 
 
 
___________________________________________ 
 
 
 
 
Price of one unit (P) 2 Variable costs (VC) of one unit  
  Total fixed costs   are all the expenses that remain the same no matter 
how many products are made or sold. Among the expenses that make up fixed 
costs are the amount paid to own or rent a factory or warehouse and the 
amount paid for business insurance.   Variable costs   change according to the 
level of production. Included are the expenses for the materials used in 
making products and the direct costs of labor used in making those goods. 
For producing a specific product, let’s say you have a fixed cost of $200,000 
(for mortgage interest, real estate taxes, equipment, and so on). Your variable 
cost (e.g., labor and materials) per item is $2. If you sold the products for $4 
each, the break-even point would be 100,000 items. In other words, you 
wouldn’t make any money selling this product unless you sold more than 
100,000 of them:
BEP 5  FC 
______ 
P2VC   5  $200,000 
___________ 
$4.002$2.00   5  $200,000 
________ 
$2.00   5 100,000 boxes
 Other Pricing Strategies 
 Let’s say a firm has just developed a new line of products, such as 3D printers. 
The firm has to decide how to price these units at the introductory stage of the 
product life cycle. A   skimming price strategy   prices a new product high to 
recover research and development costs and make as much profit as possible 
while there’s little competition. Of course, those large profits will eventually 
attract new competitors. 
 A second strategy is to price the new products low. Low prices will attract 
more buyers and discourage other companies from making similar products 
because profits are slim. This   penetration strategy   enables the firm to pene-
trate or capture a large share of the market quickly. 9 
 Retailers use several pricing strategies.   Everyday low pricing (EDLP)   is 
the choice of Home Depot and Walmart. They set prices lower than competi-
tors and don’t usually have special sales. The idea is to bring consumers to the 
store whenever they want a bargain rather than having them wait until there 
is a sale. 
 Department stores and some other retailers most often use a   high–low 
pricing strategy   . Regular prices are higher than at stores using EDLP, but 
during special sales they’re lower. The problem with such pricing is that it 
encourages consumers to wait for sales, thus cutting into profits. As online 
shopping continues to grow, you may see fewer stores with a high–low strat-
egy because consumers will be able to find better prices online. 10 
 price leadership  
 The strategy by which one or 
more dominant firms set the 
pricing practices that all 
competitors in an industry follow.  
break-even analysis
The process used to determine 
profitability at various levels of 
sales.
 total fixed costs  
 All the expenses that remain 
the same no matter how many 
products are made or sold.  
 variable costs  
 Costs that change according to 
the level of production.  
skimming price strategy
Strategy in which a new 
product is priced high to make 
optimum profit while there’s 
little competition.
penetration strategy
Strategy in which a product is 
priced low to attract many 
customers and discourage 
competition.
everyday low pricing (EDLP)
Setting prices lower than 
competitors and then not 
having any special sales.
 high–low pricing strategy  
 Setting prices that are higher 
than EDLP stores, but having 
many special sales where the 
prices are lower than 
competitors’ prices.  

401
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
 Retailers can use price as a major determinant of the goods they carry. 
Some promote goods that sell for only 99 cents, or for below $5.   Psychological 
pricing  means pricing goods and services at price points that make the prod-
uct appear less expensive than it is. A house might be priced at $299,000 
because that sounds like a lot less than $300,000. Gas stations almost always 
use psychological pricing.  
 How Market Forces Affect Pricing 
 Recognizing that different consumers may be willing to pay different prices, 
marketers sometimes price on the basis of consumer demand rather than 
cost or some other calculation. That’s called  demand-oriented pricing, and you 
can observe it at movie theaters with low rates for children and drugstores 
with discounts for senior citizens. 
 Today, marketers are facing a pricing problem: most customers compare 
prices of goods and services online.  Priceline.com  introduced consumers to 
a “demand collection system” in which buyers post the prices they are will-
ing to pay and invite sellers to accept or decline the price. Consumers can get 
great prices on airlines, hotels, and other products by naming their price. 
They can also get used goods online at places like Craigslist. Clearly, price 
competition is going to heat up as consumers have more access to 
price information from all around the world. As a result, nonprice competi-
tion is likely to increase.  
 NONPRICE COMPETITION 
 Marketers often compete on product attributes other than price. You may 
have noticed that price differences are small for products like gasoline, candy 
bars, and even major products such as compact cars and private colleges. 
Many television ad campaigns don’t use price as a major promotional appeal. 
Instead, marketers tend to stress product images and consumer benefits such 
as comfort, style, convenience, and durability. 
 Many small organizations promote the services that accompany basic 
products rather than price in order to compete with bigger firms. Good service 
will enhance a relatively homogeneous product. In order to charge premium 
prices, small businesses need to watch competitors’ prices  and the services 
they offer. If those small businesses can gain a reputation for providing good 
service, then customers might be willing to pay a higher price. However, larger 
companies often do the same thing. Some airlines stress friendliness, large 
seats, and promptness. Many hotels stress “no surprises,” business services, 
health clubs, and other extras. 
psychological pricing
Pricing goods and services at 
price points that make the 
product appear less expensive 
than it is.
u
s
e
o
l-
et 
.
e
o
i-
 Some products are 
priced high to create a 
high-status image of 
exclusivity and 
desirability. Jimmy Choo 
shoes fall into this 
category. What is the 
total product offer for a 
product like this? 
 • List two short-term and two long-term pricing objectives? Can the two 
be compatible? 
 • What’s a disadvantage of using a cost-based pricing strategy? 
 • Why is increasing focus being placed on nonprice competition? 
•
List two short-term an
 test prep 
nd two long-ter
nd t
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
402
 Explain the concept of marketing channels and the value of marketing 
intermediaries. 
 THE IMPORTANCE OF CHANNELS 
OF DISTRIBUTION 
 It’s easy to overlook distribution and storage in marketing, where the focus is 
often on advertising, selling, marketing research, and other functions. But it 
doesn’t take much to realize how important distribution is. Imagine the challenge 
Timberland faces of getting raw materials together, making millions of pairs of 
shoes, and then distributing those shoes to stores throughout the world. That’s 
what thousands of manufacturing firms—making everything from automobiles 
to furniture and toys—have to deal with every day.  11 Imagine further that there 
has been a major volcano eruption or tsunami that has caused a disruption in the 
supply of goods. Such issues are commonplace for distribution managers.  12  
 Fortunately there are hundreds of thousands of companies and individu-
als whose job it is to help move goods from the raw-material state to produc-
ers, and then on to consumers. Then, as is often the case, the products are sent 
from consumers to recyclers and back to manufacturers or assemblers.  13 Due 
to all these unpredictable factors, managing the flow of goods has become one 
of the most important managerial functions for many organizations. Let’s look 
at how this function is carried out. 
  Marketing intermediaries   are organizations that assist in moving goods 
and services from producers to businesses (B2B) and from businesses to con-
sumers (B2C). They’re called intermediaries because they’re in the middle of a 
series of organizations that join together to help distribute goods from pro-
ducers to consumers. A   channel of distribution  consists of a whole set of 
marketing intermediaries, such as agents, brokers, wholesalers, and retailers, 
that join together to transport and store goods in their path (or channel) from 
producers to consumers. 
  Agents/brokers  are marketing intermediaries who bring buyers and sell-
ers together and assist in negotiating an exchange but don’t take title to the 
goods—that is, at no point do they own the goods. Think of real estate agents 
as an example. 
 A   wholesaler  is a marketing intermediary that sells to other organiza-
tions, such as retailers, manufacturers, and hospitals.  14 Wholesalers are part 
of the B2B system. A   retailer  is a B2C organization that sells to ultimate con-
sumers (people like you and me) who buy for their own use. Some big retailers 
like Walmart are also becoming wholesalers by eliminating independent dis-
tributors in order to reduce costs. That means Walmart provides its own ware-
houses for goods as well as its own fleet of trucks. 
 Channels of distribution help companies communicate with suppliers 
 and ensure that money and title flows to goods and services. They also help 
ensure that the right quantity and assortment of goods will be available when 
and where needed.  Figure A14.4 shows selected channels of distribution for 
both consumer and industrial goods. 
 How Intermediaries Create Exchange Efficiency 
 Manufacturers do not always need marketing intermediaries to sell their 
goods to consumer and business buyers.  Figure A14.4  shows that some man-
ufacturers sell directly to consumers. So why have marketing intermediaries 
at all? The answer is that intermediaries perform certain marketing 
LO A14–5
marketing intermediaries
Organiza tions that assist in 
moving goods and services 
from producers to businesses 
(B2B) and from businesses to 
consumers (B2C).
channel of distribution
A whole set of marketing 
intermediaries, such as agents, 
brokers, wholesalers, and 
retailers, that join together to 
transport and store goods in 
their path (or channel) from 
producers to consumers.
agents/brokers 
Marketing intermediaries who 
bring buyers and sellers 
together and assist in 
negotiating an exchange but 
don’t take title to the goods.
wholesaler
A marketing intermediary that 
sells to other organizations.
retailer
An organization that sells to 
ultimate consumers.

403
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
tasks—such as transporting, storing, selling, advertising, and relationship 
building—faster and more cheaply than most manufacturers could. Here’s a 
simple analogy: You could personally deliver packages to people anywhere in 
the world, but usually you don’t. Why not? Because it’s generally cheaper and 
faster to have them delivered by the U.S. Postal Service or a private firm 
such as UPS. 
 Similarly, you could sell your home by yourself or buy stock directly from 
individual companies, but you probably wouldn’t. Why? Again, because there 
are specialists (agents and brokers) who make the process more efficient and 
easier than it would be otherwise. Marketing intermediaries like these facili-
tate the exchange process. 
 FIGURE A14.4 SELECTED CHANNELS OF DISTRIBUTION FOR CONSUMER AND INDUSTRIAL GOODS AND SERVICES 
Wholesaler
Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Channels for consumer goods
Industrial users
Wholesaler
Wholesaler
Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Manufacturer
Consumers
Farmer
Channels for industrial goods
This is the
common
channel for
industrial
products such
as glass, tires,
and paint
for
automobiles.
This is the
way that
lower-cost
items such as
supplies are
distributed.
The wholesaler
is called an
industrial
distributor.
Retailer
Retailer
Retailer
Store
Service
organization
Broker
Broker
This channel
is the most
common
channel for
consumer
goods
such as
groceries,
drugs, and
cosmetics.
This is a
common
channel for
food items
such as
produce.
This channel
is used by
craftspeople
and
small farmers.
This channel
is used for
cars, furniture,
and clothing.
This is a
common
channel for
consumer
services such
as real estate,
stocks and
bonds,
insurance, and
nonproﬁt
theater groups.
This is a
common
channel for
nonproﬁt
organizations
that want to
raise funds.
Included are
museums,
government
services, and
zoos.
Nonproﬁt
organization
 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
404
 Here is an easy way to see the benefits of using marketing intermediar-
ies. Suppose five manufacturers of various food products each tried to sell 
directly to five retailers. The number of exchange relationships needed to 
create this market is 5 times 5, or 25. But picture what happens when a 
wholesaler enters the system. The five manufacturers would each contact 
the wholesaler, establishing five exchange relationships. The wholesaler 
would then establish contact with the five retailers, creating five more 
exchange relationships. As a result, the number of exchanges is reduced 
from 25 to only 10 thanks to the addition of the wholesaler.  Figure A14.5 
shows this process.  
 Some economists have said that intermediaries add  costs and should be 
eliminated. Marketers say intermediaries add  value, and that the  value greatly 
exceeds the cost.  While marketing intermediaries can be eliminated, their 
activities cannot if consumers are to have access to products and services. 
After all, intermediary organizations have survived because they perform mar-
keting functions faster and more cheaply than others can. 
 FIGURE A14.5 HOW 
INTERMEDIARIES CREATE 
EXCHANGE EFFICIENCY 
 This figure shows that adding 
a wholesaler to the channel of 
distribution cuts the number 
of contacts from 25 to 10. This 
improves the efficiency of 
distribution. 
Retailers
Retailers
Manufacturers
Manufacturers
Wholesaler
 • What is a channel of distribution, and what intermediaries are involved?  
 • Why do we need intermediaries? 
 • Illustrate how intermediaries create exchange efficiency. 
•
What is a channel of d
 test prep 
distribution, and
dist
A
k
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

405
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
 Discuss the differences between wholesale and retail intermediaries, and 
explain the various kinds of nonstore retailing. 
 WHOLESALE AND RETAIL INTERMEDIARIES 
 Let’s stop for a minute and distinguish wholesaling from retailing and 
clearly define the functions of each. Some producers deal only with whole-
salers and won’t sell directly to retailers or to end users (consumers). Some 
producers deal with both wholesalers and retailers, but give wholesalers 
a bigger discount. In turn, some wholesalers sell to both retailers and 
consumers. The office superstore Staples is a good example. It sells office 
supplies to small businesses and to consumers as well. Warehouse clubs 
such as Sam’s Club and Costco are other companies with both wholesale 
and retail functions. 
 The difference is this: A  retail sale  is the sale of goods and services to 
consumers  for their own use.  A  wholesale sale  is the sale of goods and services 
to businesses and institutions, like schools or hospitals,  for use in the busi-
ness, or to wholesalers or retailers  for resale.  Wholesalers make business-to-
business sales.  
 Wholesalers 
 Most people are not as familiar with the various kinds of wholesalers as they 
are with retailers. So, let’s explore a few of these helpful wholesale intermedi-
aries: merchant wholesalers, agents and brokers. Merchant wholesalers are 
independently owned firms that take title to the goods they handle. About 80 
percent of wholesalers fall in this category. Agents and brokers bring buyers 
and sellers together and assist in negotiating an exchange. However, unlike 
merchant wholesalers, agents and brokers never own the products they dis-
tribute. Usually they do not carry inventory, provide credit, or assume risks. 
While merchant wholesalers earn a profit from the sale of goods, agents and 
brokers earn commissions or fees based on a percentage of the sales revenues. 
Agents often maintain long-term relationships with the people they represent, 
whereas brokers are usually hired on a temporary basis. Producers of seasonal 
products like fruits and vegetables often use brokers, as does the real estate 
industry. 
 Retailers 
 Retailers are perhaps the most useful mar-
keting intermediaries you encounter on a 
regular basis. Remember, retailers sell to 
ultimate consumers, the people who will 
actually use the product rather than sell it. 
The United States alone has more than 
2 million retail stores, not including retail 
websites. These organizations, like super-
markets and hardware stores, employ more 
than 5 million people and are one of the 
main employers of marketing graduates.  15 
No doubt you’re aware of the intense 
 competition between “brick-and-mortar” 
retail stores and Amazon. Retail stores are 
LO A14–6
 Agents and brokers are 
a familiar type of 
intermediary. Typically 
they don’t take 
possession of the goods 
they sell. A real estate 
broker, for instance, 
facilitates the 
transaction between 
seller and buyer but 
never holds title to the 
house. What functions 
does a realtor provide in 
a home sale? 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
406
fighting back, but some say that Amazon will win in the end.  16 If so, what 
effect will Amazon’s success have on the number of retail jobs? 
 Figure  A14.6  lists, describes, and gives examples of various kinds of 
retailers. Have you shopped in each kind of store? What seem to be the 
advantages of each? 
 Retail Distribution Strategy 
 Because different products call for different retail distribution strategies, a 
major decision marketers must make is selecting the right retailers to sell their 
products. There are three categories of retail distribution: 
 Intensive distribution   puts products into as many retail outlets as pos-
sible, including vending machines. Products that need intensive distribution 
include convenience goods such as candy, gum, and popular magazines. 
 Selective distribution   uses only a preferred group of the available retail-
ers in an area. Such selection helps ensure producers of quality sales and ser-
vice. Manufacturers of appliances, furniture, and clothing (shopping goods) 
use selective distribution. 
 Exclusive distribution   is the use of only one retail outlet in a given geo-
graphic area. The retailer has exclusive rights to sell the product and is therefore 
likely to carry a large inventory, give exceptional service, and pay more attention 
to this brand than to others. Luxury auto manufacturers often use exclusive dis-
tribution, as do producers of specialty goods such as skydiving equipment.  
 Nonstore Retailing 
 Nothing else in retailing has received more attention recently than electronic 
retailing. Internet retailing (e.g., Amazon) is just one form of nonstore retail-
ing. Other categories include telemarketing; vending machines, kiosks, and 
selective distribution
Distribution that sends products 
to only a preferred group of 
retailers in an area.
exclusive distribution
Distribution that sends products 
to only one retail outlet in a 
given geographic area.
TYPE
DESCRIPTION
EXAMPLE
Department store
Sells a wide variety of products (clothes, furniture, 
housewares) in separate departments
Sears, JCPenney, Nordstrom
Discount store
Sells many different products at prices generally 
below those of department stores
Walmart, Target
Supermarket
Sells mostly food with other nonfood products 
such as detergent and paper products
Safeway, Kroger, Albertson’s
Warehouse club
Sells food and general merchandise in facilities 
that are usually larger than supermarkets and offer 
discount prices; membership may be required
Costco, Sam’s Club
Convenience 
store
Sells food and other often-needed items at conve-
nient locations; may stay open all night
7-Eleven
Category killer
Sells a huge variety of one type of product to 
dominate that category of goods
Toys “R” Us, Bass Pro Shops, Office 
Depot
Outlet store
Sells general merchandise directly from the manu-
facturer at a discount; items may be discontinued 
or have flaws (“seconds”)
Nordstrom Rack, Liz Claiborne, Nike, TJ 
Maxx
Specialty store
Sells a wide selection of goods in one category
Jewelry stores, shoe stores, bicycle shops
 FIGURE A14.6 TYPES OF RETAIL STORES 
intensive distribution
Distribution that puts products 
into as many retail outlets as 
possible.

407
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
carts; and direct selling. Small businesses can use nonstore retailing to open 
up new channels of distribution for their products. 
 Electronic Retailing  
  Electronic retailing   consists of selling goods and ser-
vices to ultimate consumers online. Internet retail sales have risen dramati-
cally over the last few years thanks to website improvements and discounting.  17 
But getting customers is only half the battle. The other half is delivering the 
goods, providing helpful service, and keeping your customers. When elec-
tronic retailers lack sufficient inventory or fail to deliver goods on time (espe-
cially at holidays and other busy periods), customers often give up and go 
back to brick-and-mortar stores. 
 Most online retailers offer e-mail order confirmation. But sometimes they 
are not as good as stores at handling complaints, accepting returns, and pro-
viding personal help. Some online sellers are improving customer service by 
adding help buttons that lead customers to real-time online assistance from a 
human employee. 
 Brick-and-mortar stores that add online outlets are sometimes called 
“brick-and-click” stores. They allow customers to choose which shopping 
technique suits them best. Most companies that want to compete in the future 
will probably need both a real store and an online presence to provide con-
sumers with all the options they want. 
 Telemarketing 
  Telemarketing  is the sale of goods and services by tele-
phone. Many companies use it to supplement or replace in-store selling and 
complement online selling. Many send a catalog to consumers, who order by 
calling a toll-free number. As we noted previously, many electronic retailers 
provide a help feature online that serves the same function. 
 Vending Machines, Kiosks, and Carts  
Vending machines dispense conve-
nience goods when consumers deposit sufficient money. They carry the bene-
fit of location—they can be placed wherever people want convenience items. 
Though the ones you use may carry only soda or snacks, vending machines are 
being used today to distribute all sorts of products. Some American vending 
machines sell iPods, sneakers, and digital cameras while Japanese vending 
machines offer everything from bandages to spiced seafood. An ATM in Abu 
Dhabi even dispenses gold. 
 Kiosks and carts have lower overhead costs than stores do, so they can 
offer lower prices on items like T-shirts, cell phones, and sunglasses. You 
often see vending carts outside stores or along walkways in malls. Some mall 
owners love them because they’re colorful and create a marketplace atmo-
sphere. Plus, kiosk workers often dispense cou-
pons and helpful product information.  
 Direct Selling  
  Direct selling   reaches consumers 
in their homes or workplaces. Because so many 
men and women work outside the home and aren’t 
in during the day, companies that use direct selling 
often sponsor parties at workplaces or at home on 
evenings and weekends. Major adopters of this 
strategy include cosmetics, lingerie, and house-
hold goods producers. Some companies, however, 
such as those in encyclopedia sales, have dropped 
most of their direct selling efforts in favor of online 
selling. 
electronic retailing
Selling goods and services to 
ultimate customers (e.g., you 
and me) over the Internet.
telemarketing
The sale of goods and services 
by telephone.
direct selling
Selling to consumers in their 
homes or where they work.
 Would you like a 
pizzeria that never 
closes? Let’s Pizza 
vending machines bake 
fresh pizza from scratch 
in less than three 
minutes 24/7. The 
process starts as soon 
as a customer inserts 
payment and chooses 
from the four varieties 
available. The machine 
mixes the flour and 
water, kneads the 
dough, rolls it out, adds 
the toppings, and bakes 
while you watch. To see 
it in action, just do a 
YouTube search. 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
408
 Direct Marketing  
  Direct marketing   includes any activity that directly links 
manufacturers or intermediaries with the ultimate consumer. It includes 
direct mail, catalog sales, and telemarketing as well as online marketing. Pop-
ular consumer catalog companies that use direct marketing include Coldwater 
Creek, L.L.Bean, and Lands’ End. Direct marketing has created tremendous 
competition in some high-tech areas as well. 
 Direct marketing has become popular because shopping from home or 
work is more convenient for consumers than going to stores. Interactive online 
selling provides increasing competition for retail stores. For example, L.L.Bean 
put pressure on rivals by eliminating shipping charges. That made L.L.Bean even 
more attractive to people who like to shop by catalog or online. 
 Direct marketing took on a new dimension with interactive video. Com-
panies that use interactive video have become major competitors for those 
who market through static paper catalogs. For example, customers watching a 
video of a model moving and turning around in a dress gets a much better idea 
of the look and feel of the outfit than simply seeing it in a printed photo. 
 To offer consumers the maximum benefit, marketing intermediaries must 
work together to ensure a smooth flow of goods and services. There hasn’t 
always been total harmony in the channel of distribution. As a result, channel 
members have created systems to make the flows more efficient. We’ll discuss 
those next. 
 CHOOSING THE RIGHT DISTRIBUTION MODE 
 A   supply chain (or value chain)   consists of all the linked activities various 
organizations must perform to move goods and services from the sources of 
raw materials to ultimate consumers. Whereas the  channel of distribution
begins with manufacturers, a product’s supply chain is longer because it 
includes all the raw materials needed to make that product. Nevertheless, 
channels of distribution are considered part of the overall supply chain. 
 Included in the supply chain are farmers, miners, suppliers of all kinds 
(parts, equipment, supplies), manufacturers, wholesalers, and retailers. A major 
concern of supply chain managers is selecting a mode of transportation that 
will get these raw materials to the company while minimizing costs and ensur-
ing a certain level of service. In the language of distribution,  modes are the vari-
ous means used to transport goods, whether by truck, train, plane, ship, or 
pipeline. Generally speaking, the faster the mode of transportation, the higher 
the cost.  Figure A14.7 shows the advantages and disadvantages of each mode. 
direct marketing
Any activity that directly links 
manufacturers or intermediaries 
with the ultimate consumer.
supply chain (value chain)
The sequence of linked 
activities that must be 
performed by various 
organizations to move goods 
from the sources of raw 
materials to ultimate 
consumers.
MODE
COST
SPEED
ON-TIME 
DEPENDABILITY
FLEXIBILITY 
HANDLING 
PRODUCTS
FREQUENCY OF 
SHIPMENTS
REACH
Railroads
Medium
Slow
Medium
High
Low
High
Trucks
High
Fast
High
Medium
High
Highest
Pipelines
Low
Medium
Highest
Lowest
Highest
Lowest
Ships (water)
Lowest
Slowest
Lowest
Highest
Lowest
Low
Airplanes
Highest
Fastest
Low
Low
Medium
Medium
FIGURE A14.7 COMPARING TRANSPORTATION MODES
Combining trucks with railroads lowers cost and increases the number of locations reached. The same is true when combining trucks with 
ships. Combining trucks with airlines speeds goods over long distances and gets them to almost any location.

409
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
 However, today supply chains involve more than simply moving products 
from place to place. They involve all kinds of activities such as processing 
orders and taking inventory of products. In other words, logistics systems like 
these involve whatever it takes to see that the right products are sent to the 
right places quickly and efficiently. 
 • What are some of the ways in which retailers compete? 
 • What kinds of products would call for each of the different distribution 
strategies: intensive, selective, and exclusive?  
 • Give examples of nonstore retailing and describe each.  
 • Which transportation mode is fastest, which is cheapest, and which is 
most flexible? 
•
What are some of the
 test prep 
ways in which
wa
 Define promotion and list the traditional tools that make up the promotion mix.  
 PROMOTION AND THE PROMOTION MIX 
 As noted in Chapter 13, promotion consists of all the techniques sellers use to 
motivate people to buy their products or services. Marketers use many differ-
ent tools to promote their products. Traditionally, those tools were advertising, 
personal selling, public relations, and sales promotion. Today they also include 
e-mail promotions, mobile promotions, social networking, blogging, podcast-
ing, tweets, and more. 18 
 The combination of promotional tools an organization uses is called its 
 promotion mix   . In  Figure A14.8 , we show the product in the middle to illus-
trate that the product itself can also be a promotional tool, such as when mar-
keters give away free samples. 
LO A14–7
promotion mix
The combination of 
promotional tools an 
organization uses.
 FIGURE A14.8 THE 
TRADITIONAL 
PROMOTION MIX 
Personal
selling
Public
relations
Sales
promotion
Advertising
Product
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
410
  Integrated marketing communication (IMC)   combines the promo-
tional tools into one comprehensive, unified promotional strategy.  19 With 
IMC, marketers can create a positive brand image, meet the needs of the con-
sumer, and meet the strategic marketing and promotional goals of the firm. 
Emphasis today is on integrating traditional media, like TV, with social media, 
or integrating print media with online sites. 20 
 Let’s start our discussion of promotional tools by looking at advertising—
the most visible tool. 
 Advertising: Informing, Persuading, and Reminding 
  Advertising  is paid, nonpersonal communication through various media 
by organizations and individuals who are in some way  identified in the mes-
sage.  Identification of the sender separates advertising from  propaganda, 
which is nonpersonal communication that  does not have an identified 
sponsor.  
 Analysts estimate that companies spent about $215 billion on advertis-
ing in 2013. So how do we, as consumers, benefit from these advertising 
expenditures? First, ads are informative. Direct mail is full of information 
about products, prices, features, store policies, and more; so is newspaper 
advertising. Second, not only does advertising inform us, but also the money 
that advertisers spend for commercial time pays the production costs of TV 
and radio programs. Advertising helps cover the major costs of producing 
newspapers and magazines as well. Subscriptions and newsstand revenues 
may cover only mailing and promotional costs.  Figure A14.9 compares the 
advantages and disadvantages for marketers of various advertising media. 
Notice that newspapers, radio, and directories are especially attractive to 
local advertisers.  
 Marketers must choose which media will best reach the audience they 
desire. Radio advertising, for example, is less expensive than TV advertising 
and often reaches people when they have few other distractions, such as 
while they’re driving. Recent research has revealed the effectiveness of radio 
integrated marketing 
communication (IMC)
A technique that combines all 
the promotional tools into one 
comprehensive and unified 
promotional strategy.
advertising
Paid, nonpersonal 
communication through various 
media by organizations and 
individuals who are in some 
way identified in the advertising 
message.
 Advertising seems to 
be everywhere as we 
go about our daily 
lives. How many 
advertisements can you 
spot in this photo? Can 
the noise created by so 
many ads interfere with 
the messages the 
advertisers are trying to 
communicate? 

411
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
as a traditional medium.  21 Radio is especially effective at selling services peo-
ple don’t usually read about in print media—banking, mortgages, continuing 
education, and brokerage services, to name a few. On the other hand, radio 
has become so commercial-ridden that many people pay to switch to com-
mercial-free satellite radio. Marketers also search for other places to put 
advertising, such as on video screens mounted in elevators. Have you noticed 
ads on park benches and grocery carts? You’ve certainly seen them on web-
sites you visit. 
 Mobile marketing via smartphones started out mostly as text messages, 
but now stores like Starbucks can send signals to your phone as you approach 
the store, reminding you to stop in for a latte. Kraft Foods developed the 
iPhone Assistant, an iPhone application that serves up recipes for users—
recipes made with Kraft products. Other retailers use e-mail advertisements 
to build brand awareness and drive people to their stores or websites.  
 Television Advertising  
Television offers many advantages to national adver-
tisers, but it’s expensive. Thirty seconds of advertising during the Super Bowl 
telecast can cost $4 million.  22 That’s not including the production costs of the 
ads. How many bottles of beer or automobiles must a company sell to pay for 
 FIGURE A14.9 ADVANTAGES AND DISADVANTAGES OF VARIOUS ADVERTISING MEDIA  
 The most effective media are often very expensive. The inexpensive media may not reach your market. The goal is to use the medium that 
can reach your desired market most effectively and efficiently.  
Advantages
Medium
Disadvantages
Television
Uses sight, sound, and motion; reaches all
audiences; high attention with no
competition from other material.
High cost; short exposure time; takes time
to prepare ads. Digital video recorders skip
over ads.
Radio
Low cost; can target speciﬁc audiences;
very ﬂexible; good for local marketing.
People may not listen to ads; depends on
one sense (hearing); short exposure time;
audience can’t keep ads.
Magazines
Can target speciﬁc audiences; good use of
color; long life of ads; ads can be clipped
and saved.
Inﬂexible; ads often must be placed weeks
before publication; cost is relatively high.
Outdoor
High visibility and repeat exposures; low
cost; local market focus.
Limited message; low selectivity of
audience.
Direct mail
Best for targeting speciﬁc markets; very
ﬂexible; ads can be saved.
High cost; consumers may reject ads as
junk mail; must conform to post ofﬁce
regulations.
Directories (Yellow Pages–type
print and online advertising)
Great coverage of local markets; widely
used by consumers.
Competition with other ads; cost may be
too high for very small businesses.
Internet
Inexpensive global coverage; available
at any time; interactive.
Customers may leave the site before
buying.
Mobile advertising
Great reach among younger shoppers.
Easy to ignore, avoid.
Social media
Wonderful communication tools.
Time drain.
Good coverage of local markets; ads can be
placed quickly; high consumer acceptance;
ads can be clipped and saved.
Ads compete with other features in paper;
poor color; ads get thrown away with
paper (short life span).
Newspapers

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
412
such commercials? A lot, but few media besides television allow advertisers to 
reach so many people with such impact, although not all ads are equally effec-
tive. 23 Of course, advertisers can book cheaper airtime on other TV shows. For 
example, 30 seconds on  America’s Funniest Home Videos costs just over $63,000 
or on  CSI just over $113,000. 24 
 Though Internet advertising and social media are becoming more power-
ful, TV advertising is still a dominant medium. TV is helped by the fact that 
many people tweet about what they have seen on TV, making Twitter a “force 
multiplier” for TV.  25 Given the rise of services like DVRs and video on-demand, 
many marketers are demanding better and more accurate measurements of 
the effectiveness of TV advertising. A number of companies are already 
switching over their marketing efforts to social networks. After all, online ads 
are cheap and more than half of U.S. consumers now own smartphones.  
 Product Placement  
TV advertising isn’t limited to traditional commercials; 
sometimes the products appear in the programs themselves. With   product 
placement  , advertisers pay to put their products into TV shows and movies 
where the audience will see them. One classic example of product placement 
is the trail of Reese’s Pieces in the movie  E.T. In  The Amazing Spiderman, the 
superhero uses a Sony smartphone to make calls, check voicemail, and listen 
to a police radio broadcast. He also plays a game on the phone screen.  26 
Celebrities are party to product placement even when they’re offscreen. Read 
the Making Ethical Decisions box to find out how some public figures get 
paid to tweet. 
 In addition to TV and movies, product placement is also used in video 
games. If you’re a gamer, you’ve likely seen in-game ads, like ads around the 
court in basketball games. Technology allows vending machines in racing 
games to be branded and rebranded over time, depending on whether Coke, 
Pepsi, ExxonMobil, or Shell has purchased ad time. 
 Global Advertising  
Global advertising involves developing a single product 
and promotional strategy that can be implemented worldwide. Certainly, 
product placement
Putting products into TV shows 
and movies where they will be 
seen.
 Product placement is 
often subtle. You can 
see products like the 
ones shown on the table 
in movies and on TV 
shows. The goal is to 
influence you to want 
that product yourself. 
What product 
placements have you 
noticed in your favorite 
TV shows and movies? 

413
global advertising that is the same everywhere can save companies money in 
research and design. In some cases, however, promotions tailored to specific 
countries or regions may be more successful since every nation has its own 
culture, language, and buying habits. 
 Some problems do arise when marketers use one campaign worldwide. 
When a Japanese company tried to use English words to name a popular 
drink, it came up with Pocari Sweat, which doesn’t exactly bring up a good 
image for most English-speaking people. Americans may have similar diffi-
culty with Krapp toilet paper from Sweden. But perhaps worse was when 
Clairol introduced its curling iron the Mist Stick to the German market, 
not realizing  mist in German can mean “manure.” As you can see, getting 
the words right in international advertising is tricky and critical. So is 
 making ethical decisions 
 In the world of Twitter, not 
all tweets are created 
equal. Anyone can join 
the social network for 
free, leading to a user 
base ranging from stu-
dents to celebrities. It’s 
these high-profile person-
alities, however, that can 
really make the most of 
their 140-character 
statements. 
 By teaming up with 
special marketing compa-
nies, people like Justin 
Bieber and Kim Kardashian 
earn thousands of dollars 
simply by mentioning a 
product in their tweets. 
Bieber, for instance, 
urged his millions of fol-
lowers to send Mother’s 
Day flowers through 
 1-800-Flowers.com . 
Celebrities get paid on a 
sliding scale depending 
on how many users “fol-
low” their Twitter account. 
That means a celebrity like Khloe 
Kardashian, who boasts more 
than 9 million followers, can earn 
as much as $13,000 per endorse-
ment of Sugar Bear. In some 
cases celebrities don’t even need 
to worry about writing the tweets 
themselves. Media marketers like 
Ad.ly or IZEA will compose the 
spots themselves in order to max-
imize the message’s 
effectiveness. 
 Of course, celebrities don’t 
want their followers to know that, 
and will hide the fact that 
these are ads within their 
many hashtags. The per-
sonal touch that many 
Twitter users love could 
be lost if more people 
discover that the famous 
figures they admire are 
using the service only to 
shill for other companies. 
On the other hand, it’s 
not like the idea of a 
celebrity spokesperson 
is a brand-new concept 
developed by Twitter. 
People in the public eye 
will always leverage their 
fame to make money. In 
the end, fans will need to 
be wary about what to 
believe in their Twitter 
feeds. Do you think it is 
ethical for celebrities to 
get paid to tweet prewrit-
ten ads that appear to 
be their own personal 
comments without 
using #ad? 
 Sources: Liat Kornowski, “Celebrity Sponsored 
Tweets: What the Stars Get Paid for Advertising in 
140 Characters,”  Huffington Post, May 30, 2013; 
Bryanna Cappadonna, “Celebrities Are Paid How 
Much to Tweet?! Not at Unreal Candy,”  Boston 
Magazine, June 11, 2013; and Melinda Emerson, 
“When Celebrities Tweet about Your Business,” 
Huffington Post, January 24, 2014. 
 Pay-per-Tweet 
s

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
414
understanding the culture, which calls for researching each 
country, designing appropriate ads, and testing them. 
 Even in the United States we have regional differences that 
are important enough to constitute separate market segments. 
Each state has its own history and culture. The large metropoli-
tan areas of New York, Los Angeles, and Chicago are different 
from the rest of the states in which they are located. All require 
their own promotions or advertising. 
 Many marketers today are moving from globalism (one 
ad for everyone in the world) to regionalism (specific ads for 
each country or for specific groups within a country). In the 
future, marketers will prepare more custom-designed promo-
tions to reach even smaller audiences—audiences as small as 
one person.  
 Personal Selling: Providing Personal Attention 
  Personal selling   is the face-to-face presentation and promo-
tion of goods and services, including the salesperson’s search 
for new prospects and follow-up service after the sale. Effective 
selling isn’t simply a matter of persuading others to buy. In fact, 
it’s more accurately described today as helping others satisfy 
their wants and needs (again, helping the buyer buy). 
 It’s costly for firms to provide customers with personal attention, so those 
companies that retain salespeople must train them to be especially effective, 
efficient, and helpful. To attract new salespeople, companies are paying them 
quite well. The average cost of a single sales call to a potential business-to-
business (B2B) buyer is about $500. 27 Surely no firm would pay that much to 
send anyone but a skillful and highly trained professional salesperson and 
consultant. 
 The Business-to-Consumer (B2C) Sales Process  
Most sales to consum-
ers take place in retail stores where knowing the product comes first. Never-
theless, in business-to-consumer (B2C) sales it is important to understand as 
much as possible about the type of people who shop at a given store. Often 
the people who come to a store have already done some research online and 
know exactly what they want.  28 The salesperson needs to focus on the cus-
tomer and refrain from talking to fellow salespeople—or, worse, to friends on 
the phone. 
 The first formal step in the B2C sales process is the approach. Too many 
salespeople begin with a line like, “May I help you?” but the answer too often 
is “No.” A better approach is, “How can I help you?” or, simply, “Welcome to 
our store.” The idea is to show the customer you are there to help and are 
friendly and knowledgeable. 29 
 Discover what the customer wants first, and then make a presentation. 
Salespeople should show customers how the company’s products meet their 
needs and answer questions that help customers choose the right products 
for them. 
 After a salesperson has answered questions and objections, he or she may 
present a   trial close   , a question or statement that moves the selling process 
toward the actual purchase. A salesperson might ask, “Would you like me to 
put that on hold?” or “Will you be paying for that with your store credit card?” 
Selling is an art, and a salesperson must learn how to walk the fine line 
between being helpful and being pushy. Often individual buyers need some 
personal selling
The face-to-face presentation 
and promotion of goods and 
services.
trial close
A step in the selling process 
that consists of a question or 
statement that moves the 
selling process toward the 
actual close.
 This ad is designed for 
African American 
women. There are many 
ads directed toward the 
Latina and Asian 
markets as well. What 
other groups are 
attractive candidates for 
targeted ads? 

415
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
time alone to think about the purchase. The salesperson must respect that 
need but still be clearly available when needed. 
 After-sale follow-up is an important but often neglected step in B2C sales. 
If the product is to be delivered, the salesperson should follow up to be sure it 
is delivered on time. The same is true if the product has to be installed. There 
is often a chance to sell more merchandise when a salesperson follows up on a 
sale.  Figure A14.10 shows the whole B2C selling process. 
 Public Relations: Building Relationships 
  Public relations (PR)   is the function that evaluates public attitudes, changes 
policies and procedures in response to the public’s requests, and executes a 
program of action and information to earn public understanding and accep-
tance. A company’s PR department maintains close ties with the organization’s 
stakeholders, which can include customers, media outlets, government offi-
cials, and other members of the public. The idea is to keep in close contact 
with the community so that the company can quickly respond to any inqui-
ries, complaints, or suggestions. 
 Recent events have emphasized the need for good public relations. Such 
events include GM’s safety crisis, Japan’s nuclear power problems, and the 
issues surrounding some politicians, key actors, and sports personalities.  30 
Besides dealing with media emergencies, public relations is a good alternative 
to advertising. As newspapers cut back on their reporting staff, they are look-
ing for other sources of news information, including publicity releases. Link-
ing up with bloggers has also become an important way to keep company 
names in the news. 
 Publicity: The Talking Arm of PR  
  Publicity  , the talking arm of public rela-
tions, is any information about an individual, product, or organization that’s 
distributed to the public through the media and is not paid for or controlled 
by the seller. Here’s how it works: Suppose you want to introduce your store, 
Very Vegetarian, to consumers, but you have little money to promote it. You 
need to get some initial sales to generate funds. One effective way to reach the 
public is through publicity. 
 It takes skill to write interesting or newsworthy press releases that the 
media will want to publish. You may need to write different stories for differ-
ent media.  31 One story may introduce the new owners. Another may describe 
any unusual product offerings. If a story gets published, news about your store 
will reach many potential consumers (and investors, distributors, and dealers) 
public relations (PR) 
The management function that 
evaluates public attitudes, 
changes policies and 
procedures in response to the 
public’s requests, and executes 
a program of action and 
information to earn public 
understanding and 
acceptance.
publicity
Any information about an 
individual, product, or 
organization that’s distributed 
to the public through the media 
and that’s not paid for or 
controlled by the seller.
 FIGURE A14.10 STEPS 
IN THE BUSINESS-
TO-CONSUMER (B2C) 
SELLING PROCESS 
Ask questions
Make presentation
Close sale
Follow up
Approach
Start

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
416
and you may be on your way to becoming a suc-
cessful marketer.  32 John D. Rockefeller once 
remarked, “Next to doing the right thing, the most 
important thing is to  let people know that you are 
doing the right thing.” What might Very Vegetarian 
do to help the community and thus create more 
publicity? 
 Besides being free, publicity has several fur-
ther advantages over other promotional tools like 
advertising. It may reach people who wouldn’t 
read an ad. It may appear on the front page of a 
newspaper or in some other prominent position, 
or be given air time on a television news show. Per-
haps the greatest advantage of publicity is its 
believability. When a newspaper or magazine 
 publishes a story as news, the reader treats that 
story as news—and news is more believable than 
advertising. 
 Publicity has several disadvantages as well. 
For example, marketers have no control over 
whether, when, or how the media will use the story. 
The media aren’t obligated to use a press release, 
most of which are thrown away. Furthermore, the 
media may alter the story so that it’s not positive. 
Also, once a story has run, it’s not likely to be 
repeated. Advertising, in contrast, can be repeated 
as often as needed. One way to see that the media 
handle your publicity well is to establish a friendly 
relationship with media representatives and be 
open with them. Then, when you need their sup-
port, they may be more willing to cooperate.  
 • What are the four traditional elements of the promotion mix?  
 • Define advertising and explain why advertising today is moving from 
globalism to regionalism. 
 • What is the responsibility of the public relations department?  
 • What are the advantages and disadvantages of publicity versus 
advertising? 
•
What are the four trad
 test prep 
ditional elemen
ditio
 Assess the effectiveness of various forms of sales promotion.  
 SALES PROMOTION: GIVING BUYERS INCENTIVES 
 Sales promotion   is the promotional tool that stimulates consumer purchas-
ing and dealer interest by means of short-term activities. Sales promotion pro-
grams are designed to supplement personal selling, advertising, and public 
relations efforts by creating enthusiasm for the overall promotional program. 
 Figure A14.11 lists some sales promotion techniques. 
LO A14–8
 Some companies will 
race to extremes to 
generate publicity. This 
streaker avoided Super 
Bowl XXXVIII security to 
show off a tattooed 
message for Internet 
casino   GoldenPalace.
com  . Which do you think 
attracts more attention 
for a firm, an appealing 
news story or a paid ad? 
 S
S
i
g
r
 F
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

417
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
sales promotion
The promotional tool that 
stimulates consumer purchasing 
and dealer interest by means of 
short-term activities.
 Sales promotion can take place both within and outside the company. 
Often it is just as important to generate employee enthusiasm about a product 
as it is to attract potential customers. The most important internal sales pro-
motion efforts are directed at salespeople and other customer-contact people, 
such as customer service representatives and clerks. Internal sales promotion 
efforts include (1) sales training; (2) the development of sales aids such as flip 
charts, portable audiovisual displays, and videos; and (3) participation in trade 
shows where salespeople can get leads. 
 After generating enthusiasm internally, marketers want to make distrib-
utors and dealers eager to help promote the product. Trade shows allow 
marketing intermediaries to see products from many different sellers 
and make comparisons among them. Today, virtual trade shows on the 
Internet, called webinars, enable buyers to see many products without 
leaving the office. Such promotions are usually interactive, so buyers 
can ask questions, and the information is available 24 hours a day, 
seven days a week. 
 Once the company’s employees and intermediaries have been 
motivated with sales promotion efforts, the next step is to pro-
mote to final consumers using samples, coupons, displays, store 
demonstrations, contests, rebates, and so on. Sales promotion 
is an ongoing effort to maintain enthusiasm, so sellers use dif-
ferent strategies over time to keep the ideas fresh. You could 
put food displays in your Very Vegetarian store to show custom-
ers how attractive the products look. You could also sponsor 
in-store cooking demonstrations to attract new vegetarians. 
 One popular sales promotion tool is   sampling  —letting 
consumers have a small sample of the product for no charge. 
Because many consumers won’t buy a new product unless 
they’ve had a chance to see it or try it, grocery stores often have people stand-
ing in the aisles handing out small portions of food and beverage products. 
Sampling is a quick, effective way of demonstrating a product’s superiority 
when consumers are making a purchase decision. Standing outside Very Veg-
etarian and giving out samples would surely attract attention.  
 Word of Mouth and Other Promotional Tools 
 Although word of mouth was not traditionally listed as one of the major pro-
motional efforts (it was not considered to be manageable), it is now one of the 
most effective, especially on the Internet.  33 In   word-of-mouth promotion   , 
sampling
A promotional tool in which a 
company lets consumers have 
a small sample of a product for 
no charge.
word-of-mouth promotion
A promotional tool that involves 
people telling other people about 
products they’ve purchased.
 FIGURE A14.11 SALES PROMOTION TECHNIQUES 
•  Coupons 
•  Cents-off promotions
•  Sampling 
•  Premiums
•  Sweepstakes
•  Contests
•  Bonuses (buy one, get one free)
•  Catalogs
•  Demonstrations
•  Special events
•  Lotteries
•  In-store displays
•  Catalogs
•  Conventions
•  Trade shows
•  Portfolios for salespeople 
•  Deals (price reductions)
B2B
B2C
ntact people, 
s promotion
such as flip
tion in trade
ake distrib-
ws allow
sellers
on the
hout 
yers
ay,
Everyone likes a free 
sample. Sampling is a 
promotional strategy 
that lets people try a 
new product, often in a 
situation when they can 
buy it right away if they 
like it. What are some 
advantages of sampling 
food products that 
advertising can’t 
duplicate?

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
418
people tell other people about products they’ve purchased. We’ve already dis-
cussed the role of social media in spreading word of mouth. Beyond word of 
mouth is customer participation, that is, getting customers to provide con-
structive suggestions and share their ideas on how to shape product and ser-
vice offerings. 34 
 Anything that encourages people to talk favorably about an organization 
can be effective word of mouth.  35 Notice, for example, how stores use clowns, 
banners, music, fairs, and other attention-getting devices to create word of 
mouth. Clever commercials can also generate word of mouth. The more that 
people talk about your products and your brand name, the more easily cus-
tomers remember them when they shop. 
 You may enjoy brainstorming strategies for creating word of mouth 
about Very Vegetarian. If your efforts are great, your message may “go viral” 
and be seen by millions of consumers.  36   Viral marketing   includes any strat-
egy that encourages people to pass on a marketing message to others, creat-
ing exponential growth in the message’s influence as the message reaches 
thousands, to millions.  37 Many viral marketing programs give away free prod-
ucts or services, often in exchange for valuable e-mail addresses. Free attracts 
attention; once you have consumers’ attention they can see other products or 
services you offer and buy those. 
 Be careful, though: Word of mouth is so powerful that negative word of 
mouth can hurt a firm badly. Criticism of a product or company can spread 
through online forums, social media, and websites (see the Adapting to Change 
box). Addressing consumer complaints quickly and effectively is one of the 
best ways to reduce the effects of negative word of mouth.  
 Managing the Promotion Mix: Putting It All Together 
 Each target group calls for a separate promotion mix. Advertising is most 
efficient for reaching large groups of consumers whose members share sim-
ilar traits. Personal selling is best for selling to large organizations. To moti-
vate people to buy now rather than later, marketers use sales promotions 
like sampling, coupons, discounts, special displays, and premiums. Public-
ity supports other efforts and can create a good impression among all con-
sumers. Word of mouth is often the most powerful promotional tool. 
Generate it by listening, being responsive, and creating an impression worth 
passing on to others that you spread through blogging, podcasting, and 
tweeting. 
 How do producers move products to consumers? In a   push strategy   , 
the producer uses advertising, personal selling, sales promotion, and all 
other promotional tools to convince wholesalers and retailers to stock and 
sell merchandise,  pushing  it through the distribution system to the stores. If 
the push strategy works, consumers will walk into a store, see the product, 
and buy it. 
 A   pull strategy   directs heavy advertising and sales promotion efforts 
toward  consumers. If the pull strategy works, consumers will go to the store 
and ask for the products. The store owner will order them from the wholesaler, 
who in turn will order them from the producer. Products are thus  pulled 
through the distribution system. 
 It has been important to make promotion part of a total systems approach 
to marketing. The idea is to develop a total product offer that appeals to every-
one: manufacturers, distributors, retailers, and consumers.  www.yelp.com    
viral marketing
The term now used to describe 
everything from paying 
customers to say positive 
things on the Internet to setting 
up multilevel selling schemes 
whereby consumers get 
commissions for directing 
friends to specific websites.
push strategy
Promotional strategy in which 
the producer uses advertising, 
personal selling, sales 
promotion, and all other 
promotional tools to convince 
wholesalers and retailers to 
stock and sell merchandise.
pull strategy
Promotional strategy in which 
heavy advertising and sales 
promotion efforts are directed 
toward consumers so that 
they’ll request the products 
from retailers.

419
 adapting to change 
 Restaurants, carpet cleaning ser-
vices, and car repair services are 
businesses that truly benefit from 
the power of word-of-mouth pro-
motion. In fact, word of mouth is 
perhaps the most important pro-
motional tool small businesses 
have. That’s why businesses from 
bakeries to barbershops were 
happy to greet the introduction of 
 Yelp.com in the early 2000s. At 
Yelp, users can log on and review 
their experiences with a business 
and hopefully spread some love 
that will help the business grow. 
Unfortunately, many businesses 
that live and die by these online 
reviews are now questioning the 
methodology and ethics of Yelp. 
 The Federal Trade Commission 
has received more than 2,046 com-
plaints filed about Yelp since 2008. 
The majority of the complaints are 
from small businesses that claim to 
have received unfair or fraudulent 
reviews after turning down an offer 
to advertise on Yelp. Consumer 
review websites, like Yelp and 
Angie’s List, are protected against 
liability for defamation claims that 
stem from user comments under 
the Communications Decency Act 
passed in 1996. This protection 
riles business owners who say the 
system is stacked against them. 
 Yelp agrees that fake reviews 
are not fair, and boasts that it has 
fought against such reviews 
since its inception. The company 
maintains its “review filter” is the 
most efficient and sophisticated 
in the industry. Yet it will not 
explain exactly how the filter 
works. Ultimately, Yelp is going 
to have to answer three key 
questions: Is it punishing small or 
midsized businesses that do not 
purchase advertising on the site? 
Is it effective at removing fake 
reviews? Is it providing bad 
reviews for competitors of paying 
advertisers? 
 New York’s attorney general 
Eric Schneiderman says the pro-
cess of posting false reviews 
online is “the 21st century’s ver-
sion of false advertising.” His 
department recently completed a 
sting operation that caught 19 dif-
ferent companies that were hired 
to write fake reviews. The compa-
nies were fined varying amounts 
that totaled $350,000. 
 Sources: Daniel Roberts, “Yelp’s Fake Review 
Problem,”  CNN Money, September 26, 2013; 
Angus Loten, “Yelp Reviews Brew a Fight over 
Free Speech vs. Fairness,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, April 2, 2014; and Brian Nichols, “Yelp: 
Will Smoke Lead to a Stock Fire?,”  The Motley 
Fool, April 4, 2014. 
 What Are Companies Yelping About? 
e 
 Explain the concept of a total product offer, and summarize the functions of 
packaging. 
 • 
What’s included in a total product offer? 
 A total product offer consists of everything consumers evaluate when 
deciding whether to buy something. It includes price, brand name, and 
satisfaction in use. 
LO A14–1
i
f
 summary 
 • What are the sales promotion techniques used to reach consumers and 
businesses? 
 • Describe word-of-mouth promotion and list three other promotional 
tools. 
 • How does a push strategy differ from a pull strategy? 
•
What are the sales pro
 test prep 
omotionn techni
om
www.yelp.com
Use LearnSmart to help retain 
what you have learned. Access 
your instructor's Connect course 
to check out LearnSmart, or go to 
learnsmartadvantage.com for help. 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
420
 • 
What’s the difference between a product line and a product mix? 
 A product line is a group of physically similar products with similar com-
petitors. A product line of gum may include bubble gum and sugarless 
gum. A product mix is a company’s combination of product lines. A manu-
facturer may offer lines of gum, candy bars, and breath mints in its prod-
uct mix. 
 • 
What are the seven functions of packaging? 
 Packaging must (1) attract the buyer’s attention; (2) protect the goods 
inside, stand up under handling and storage, be tamperproof, and deter 
theft; (3) be easy to open and use; (4) describe the contents; (5) explain the 
benefits of the good inside; (6) provide information about warranties, 
warnings, and other consumer matters; and (7) indicate price, value, and 
uses. Bundling means grouping two or more products into a unit, through 
packaging, and charging one price for them. 
 Contrast brand, brand name, and trademark, and discuss the concept of 
brand equity. 
 • 
Can you define brand, brand name, and trademark? 
 A  brand is a name, symbol, or design (or combination thereof) that identi-
fies the goods or services of one seller or group of sellers and distinguishes 
them from the goods and services of competitors. The word  brand includes 
all means of identifying a product. A  brand name  consists of a word, letter, 
or group of words or letters that differentiates one seller’s goods and ser-
vices from those of competitors. A  trademark is a brand that has exclusive 
legal protection for both its brand name and design. 
 • 
What is brand equity, and how do managers create brand associations? 
 Brand equity is the value of a brand name and associated symbols. Brand 
association is the linking of a brand to other favorable images such as 
product users, a popular celebrity, or a geographic area. 
 Describe the product life cycle. 
 • 
What is the product life cycle? 
 The product life cycle is a theoretical model of what happens to sales and 
profits for a product class over time. 
 • 
What are the four stages in the product life cycle? 
 The four product life cycle stages are introduction, growth, maturity, and 
decline. 
 Identify various pricing objectives and strategies, and explain why nonpricing 
strategies are growing in importance. 
 • 
What are pricing objectives? 
 Pricing objectives include achieving a target profit, building traffic, 
increasing market share, creating an image, and meeting social goals.  
 • 
Define the break-even point and explain break-even analysis. 
 At the break-even point, total cost equals total revenue. Sales beyond that 
point are profitable. Break-even analysis is the process used to determine 
profitability at various levels of sales.
 
BEP 5  FC 
______ 
P2VC   5  $200,000 
___________ 
$4.002$2.00   5  $200,000 
________ 
$2.00   5 100,000 boxes
LO A14–2
Wh
i
LO A14–3
LO A14–4

421
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
 • 
What strategies can marketers use to determine a product’s price? 
 A skimming strategy prices the product high to make big profits while 
there’s little competition. A penetration strategy uses low price to attract 
more customers and discourage competitors. Demand-oriented pricing 
starts with consumer demand rather than cost. Competition-oriented 
 pricing is based on all competitors’ prices. Price leadership occurs when 
all competitors follow the pricing practice of one or more dominant 
companies. 
 • 
Why do companies use nonprice strategies? 
 Pricing is one of the easiest marketing strategies to copy. It’s often not a 
good long-run competitive tool. Instead, marketers may compete using 
nonprice strategies that are less easy to copy, including offering great ser-
vice, educating customers, and establishing long-term relationships with 
customers. 
 Explain the concept of marketing channels and the value of marketing 
intermediaries. 
 • 
What is a channel of distribution? 
 A channel of distribution consists of a whole set of marketing intermediar-
ies, such as agents, brokers, wholesalers, and retailers, that join together 
to transport and store goods in their path (or channel) from producers to 
consumers. 
 • 
How do marketing intermediaries add value? 
 Intermediaries perform certain marketing tasks—such as transporting, 
storing, selling, advertising, and relationship building—faster and more 
cheaply than most manufacturers could. Channels of distribution ensure 
communication flows and the flow of money and title to goods. They also 
help ensure that the right quantity and assortment of goods will be avail-
able when and where needed. 
 • 
What are the principles behind the use of such intermediaries? 
 Marketing intermediaries can be eliminated, but their activities can’t. 
Without wholesalers and retailers, consumers would have to perform 
the tasks of transporting and storing goods, finding suppliers, and 
establishing communication with them. Intermediaries add costs to 
products, but these costs are usually more than offset by the values they 
create.  
 Discuss the differences between wholesale and retail intermediaries, and 
explain the various kinds of nonstore retailing. 
 • 
What is a wholesaler? 
 A wholesaler is a marketing intermediary that sells to organizations and 
individuals, but not to final consumers. 
 • 
What is a retailer? 
 A retailer is an organization that sells to ultimate consumers. Marketers 
develop several strategies based on retailing. 
 • 
What are three distribution strategies marketers use? 
 Marketers use three basic distribution strategies: intensive (putting prod-
ucts in as many places as possible), selective (choosing only a few stores 
in a chosen market), and exclusive (using only one store in each market 
area).  
LO A14–5
LO A14–6

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
422
 • 
What are some of the forms of nonstore retailing? 
 Nonstore retailing includes electronic retailing; telemarketing (marketing 
by phone); vending machines, kiosks, and carts (marketing by putting 
products in convenient locations, such as in the halls of shopping centers); 
direct selling (marketing by approaching consumers in their homes or 
places of work); and direct marketing (direct mail and catalog sales). Tele-
marketing and online marketing are also forms of direct marketing.  
 Define promotion and list the traditional tools that make up the promotional mix. 
 • 
What is promotion? 
 Promotion is an effort by marketers to inform and remind people in the 
target market about products and to persuade them to participate in an 
exchange. 
 • 
What are the four traditional promotional tools that make up the promotion mix? 
 The four traditional promotional tools are advertising, personal selling, 
public relations, and sales promotion. The product itself can also be a pro-
motional tool—that’s why it is shown in the middle of  Figure A14.8 . 
 Assess the effectiveness of various forms of sales promotion. 
 • 
How are sales promotion activities used both within and outside the 
organization? 
 Internal sales promotion efforts are directed at salespeople and other cus-
tomer-contact people to keep them enthusiastic about the company. Inter-
nal sales promotion activities include sales training, sales aids, audiovisual 
displays, and trade shows. External sales promotions to consumers rely on 
samples, coupons, cents-off deals, displays, store demonstrators, premi-
ums, and other incentives. 
 • 
How is word of mouth used in promotion today? 
 The goal of word of mouth is to get the company’s message to as many 
people as possible. Viral marketing includes any strategy that encourages 
people to pass on a marketing message to others, creating exponential 
growth in the message’s influence as the message reaches thousands, to 
millions. Many viral marketing programs give away free products or ser-
vices, often in exchange for valuable e-mail addresses. 
 • 
What are the major promotional strategies? 
 In a  push strategy, the producer uses advertising, personal selling, sales 
promotion, and all other promotional tools to convince wholesalers and 
retailers to stock and sell merchandise. In a  pull strategy,  heavy advertising 
and sales promotion efforts are directed toward consumers so they’ll 
request the products from retailers. 
LO A14–7
LO A14–8
 key terms 
 advertising 410
 agents/brokers 402
 brand 394
 brand awareness 395
 brand equity 394
 brand loyalty 394
 brand manager 395
 break-even 
analysis 400
 bundling 393
 channel of 
distribution 402
 competition-based 
pricing 399
 direct marketing 408

423
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
 direct selling 407
 electronic retailing 407
 everyday low pricing 
(EDLP) 400
 exclusive distribution  406
 high-low pricing 
strategy 400
 integrated marketing 
communication 
(IMC) 410
 intensive distribution 406
 marketing 
intermediaries 402
 penetration strategy 400
 personal selling 414
 price leadership 400
 product differentiation  392
 product life cycle 396
 product line 391
 product mix 392
 product placement 412
 promotion mix 409
 psychological pricing  401
 publicity 415
 public relations (PR) 415
 pull strategy 418
 push strategy 418
 retailer 402
 sales promotion 417
  sampling 417
 selective distribution 406
 skimming price strategy  400
 supply chain (or value 
chain) 408
 target costing 399
 telemarketing 407
 total fixed costs 400
 total product offer 390
 trademark 394
 trial close 414
 value 390
 variable costs 400
 viral marketing 418
 wholesaler 402
 word-of-mouth 
promotion 417
 1. What value enhancers affected your choice of the school you attend? Did you 
consider size, location, price, reputation, WiFi services, library and research 
services, sports, and courses offered? What factors were most important? 
Why? What schools were your alternatives? Why didn’t you choose them?  
 2. What could you do to enhance the product offer of Very Vegetarian, other 
than changing the menu from time to time? How would pricing fit in?  
 3. Which intermediary do you think is most important today and why? 
If intermediaries were eliminated, would financial returns to the produc-
ers go up or down? Why? 
 4. Experts say that water could become a scarce resource in the future. If you 
could think of an inexpensive way to get water from places of abundance 
to places where it is needed for drinking, farming, and other uses, such as 
fracking, you could become a wealthy marketing intermediary. Pipelines 
are an alternative, but could you also freeze the water and ship it by train 
or truck? Could you use ships to tow icebergs to warmer climates? What 
other means of transporting water might there be? 
 5. As interactive communications between companies and customers grow, 
do you think traditional advertising will grow or decline? What will be the 
effect of growth or decline on the price we pay for TV programs, newspa-
pers, and magazines? 
ou
 critical thinking 
 developing workplace skills 
Key: 
 Team  
 Analytic  
 Communication  
 Technology
 1. Look around your classroom and notice the different types of shoes stu-
dents are wearing. What product qualities were they looking for when they 
chose their shoes? How important were price, style, brand name, and 
color? Describe the product offerings you would feature in a new shoe 
store designed to appeal to college students. 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
424
 2. How important is price to you when buying the following: clothes, milk, 
computers, haircuts, plane tickets? What nonprice factors, if any, are more 
important than price? How much time do you spend evaluating factors 
other than price when making such purchases? 
 3. Compare the merits of buying and selling goods in brick-and-mortar stores 
and on online. What advantages do physical stores have? Has anyone in the 
class tried to sell anything online? How did he or she ship the product?  
 4. Many students shy away from careers in selling, often because they think 
they are not outgoing enough or that salespeople are dishonest or pushy. 
What do you and your classmates think of selling as a career? What kind 
of products do you think you would enjoy selling? Can you imagine your-
self going through the selling process with customers? 
 5. In small groups, list five goods and services most students own or use and 
discuss promotional techniques that prompt you to buy them: advertising, 
personal selling, social media, publicity, sales promotion, or word of 
mouth. Which seems most effective for your group? Why? 
 South by Southwest (SXSW) is an annual music, 
film, and technology festival held in Austin, Texas. 
For 10 days in March, the city welcomes thou-
sands of concertgoers, film buffs, and industry 
insiders. Part trade show and part mega-concert, 
this enormous event not only makes fans of hip 
art happy; it also serves as a meeting point for 
new artists and potential managers, collaborators, 
and industry executives. 
 The music portion of the most recent SXSW 
featured more than 2,000 acts playing for tens of 
thousands of roving guests. With so many people 
 video case   
 SXSW 
 taking it to the net 
 PURPOSE 
 To assess how consumers can use the Internet to shop for various goods.  
 EXERCISE 
 Shopbots are Internet sites for finding the best prices on goods you need. 
No shopbot searches the entire Internet, so it’s a good idea to use more than 
one to get the best deals. Furthermore, not all shopbots quote shipping and 
handling costs. Here are some to try:  MySimon.com ,  PriceGrabber.com , 
 PriceSCAN.com , and  YahooShopping.com .
 1. Which of the shopbots offers the most goods and the most information? 
How helpful are the consumer reviews? The product descriptions? 
 2. Which shopbot is easiest to use? The hardest? Why? 
 3. Write down some of the prices you find on the Internet and then go to a 
local store, such as Walmart or Target, and compare prices. Does either 
source (online or brick-and-mortar) consistently offer the best price?  
 4. Compare shopping on the Internet to shopping in stores. What are the advan-
tages and disadvantages of each? Which has the best total product offer?  

425
Managing the Marketing Mix: Product, Price, Place, and Promotion
CHAPTER A14
in attendance, the event presents ample opportu-
nity for promotions of all types. Each year the fes-
tival teams up with corporate sponsors like 
Doritos, AT&T, and Chevrolet to advertise at the 
event. These business-to-business (B2B) relation-
ships benefit both parties by giving SXSW crucial 
operating income while providing the companies 
with a presence at a cool event. 
 SXSW also features several business-to-
consumer (B2C) promotions. For a lower price, 
attendees can choose to access just a single 
event, like the film festival. But buying a higher-
priced badge not only gets the attendees into all 
events, but also grants them access to VIP key-
note speakers, parties, and workshops. These 
types of deals represent the lifeblood of the event 
and the main source of the festival’s income. 
 With so much to do and see, SXSW naturally 
generates a lot of publicity. Radio stations and 
magazines run dozens of stories in the run-up to 
the festival because they consider the event to be 
news. Each of those stories ends up becoming free 
publicity for SXSW, giving organizers an incentive 
to create as much buzz as possible. To accomplish 
this goal, a public relations team hired by the fes-
tival actively seeks publicity from interested stake-
holders. This includes the city of Austin itself, 
which is more than happy to let SXSW fly banners 
over the streets. As the largest revenue-generating 
event in Austin, the city’s cooperation with the fes-
tival makes a lot of sense. 
 Music is a product that benefits from a personal 
touch, so many bands that attend SXSW rely on 
“street teams” to get the word out. These dedicated 
fans work for free to promote the band and, by 
proxy, the event. The fans are more than happy to 
hand out fliers or talk about the event at local 
record stores and coffee shops in order to make 
people aware of their favorite performers. All of this 
personal selling benefits not only the bands, but the 
event as well. After all, these street teams consist of 
thousands of people  volunteering to talk about the 
festival. You can’t buy promotion like that. 
 That kind of grass-roots publicity is some of 
the most effective and least expensive available. 
Every time a music fan tweets about the event, 
mentions it in a YouTube video or podcast, or 
blogs about the great time he or she had at the 
last SXSW, that positive message spreads to sev-
eral new people. And in today’s social media–
driven world, a dependable word-of-mouth 
recommendation might be the most important 
type of promotion. Still, it’s impossible to com-
pletely control the things that people say about 
you or your company. That’s why SXSW employs 
a number of different promotional strategies in 
its quest to stay cool. 
 THINKING IT OVER 
 1. What are the critical differences between pub-
licity and advertising? 
 2. Identify the four elements of the promotion 
mix. 
 3. On which of the four elements of the promo-
tion mix does SXSW rely most? 
 1. 
Timothy Appel, “A Crib for Baby: Made in China or Made in 
U.S.A.,”  The Wall Street Journal, May 22, 2012. 
 2. 
Dana Mattioli and Miguel Bustillo, “Can Texting Save 
Stores?,”  The Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2012. 
 3. 
Emma K. Macdonald, Hugh N. Wilson, and Umut Konus, 
“Better Customer Insight—in Real Time,”  Harvard Business 
Review, September 2012. 
 4. 
Serena Ng, “At P&G, New Tide Comes In, Old Price Goes 
Up,”  The Wall Street Journal, February 11, 2014. 
 5. 
“The World’s Most Valuable Brands,”  Forbes,  www.forbes.
com , accessed April 2014. 
 6. 
Marine Cole, “Lemkau Chases What Matters—Brand Image,” 
Advertising Age, January 20, 2014. 
 7. 
Geoffrey A. Fowler, “Price Check: Do Online Grocers 
Beat Supermarkets?,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 8, 
2014. 
 8. 
Anne Gasparro, “McDonald’s, Wendy’s in Price Fight,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, May 9, 2013. 
 9. 
Judith Ohikuare, “New Year, No Excuses,”  Inc., February 
2013. 
 10. 
Kerri Anne Renzulli, “People Who Shop on the Web . . . At the 
Store,”  Money, December 2013. 
 11. 
Jens Hansegard and Niclas Rolander, “For IKEA, Online Isn’t 
the Main Showroom,”  The Wall Street Journal, January 29, 
2014. 
 12. 
David Gould, “Risk Gets Sophisticated,”  Bloomberg 
Businessweek, March 4–March 10, 2013. 
 13. 
Patrick Burnson, “Reverse Logistics: Closing the Global 
Supply Chain Loop,”  Logistics Management, February 2013. 
 14. 
Norm Brodsky, “The Wholesalers Dilemma,”  Inc., October 
2012. 
 15. 
Bureau of Labor Statistics,   www.bis.gov , accessed April 
2014. 
 16. 
Shelly Banjo, “Wal-Mart’s E-Stumble,”  The Wall Street 
Journal, June 19, 2013. 
 17. 
James K. Glassman, “Top Dogs in E-tailing,”  Kiplinger’s 
Personal Finance, June 2012. 
 18. 
Caitlin Laluza, “The Explosion of Mobile Audiences: What It 
Means for Public Relations,”  The Public Relations Strategist, 
Fall 2013. 
 19. 
“Coke: Buzz Doesn’t Work, but Social Is Crucial,”  Advertising 
Age, editorial, March 25, 2013. 
 20. Wes Nichols, “The Future of Advertising,”  Harvard Business 
Review, March 2013. 
las Rolander, “For IKEA, Online Isn’t
 notes 

PART 5
 Marketing: Developing and Implementing Customer-Oriented Marketing Plans 
426
 21. 
Benjamin Palmer, “Why Modern Marketers and Creatives 
Need to Reevaluate Radio, the World’s Most Popular 
Medium,”  Advertising Age, September 30, 2013. 
 22. Suzanne Vranica, “And Now, Ads for the Super Bowl Ads,” 
The Wall Street Journal, January 27, 2014. 
 23. Jack Neff, “80% of Super Bowl Ads Flop: Study,”  Advertising 
Age, January 6, 2014. 
 24. Kate Aurthur, “How Much Are These 91 TV Shows Worth to 
Advertisers?,”  BuzzFeed Entertainment,  www.buzzfeed.com , 
accessed December 2014. 
 25. Jeff Bercovici, “Can Twitter Save TV?,”  Forbes, October 28, 
2013. 
 26. John D. Schultz, “New Order, New Opportunities on the 
Rise,”  Logistics Management, July 2013. 
 27. Russ Hill, “What Is the Cost of a B2B Sales Call?,”  CRM 
Insights,  www.crminsights.com , November 4, 2013. 
 28. James Farley, “How to Sell to Customers Who Know 
Everything,”  Harvard Business Review, July–August 2012. 
 29. Katrina Pugh and Laurance Prusak, “Designing Effective 
Knowledge Networks,”  Sloan Management Review, Fall 2013. 
 30. Stephen Dupont, “Understanding the Language of 
Economics Is Critical to Communicating Effectively,”  The 
Public Relations Strategist, Winter 2013. 
 31. 
Lisa Ward, “What to Do after Your 15 Minutes of Fame,”  The 
Wall Street Journal, December 2, 2013. 
 32. Ibid. 
 33. Rakesh Niraj, “Just How Much Is Word of Mouth Worth?,” 
Weatherhead Collection, Fall 2013. 
 34. Michael McCarthy, “Tesla Generates Small Sales, Huge Buzz 
without Paid Ads,”  Advertising Age, June 10, 2013; and Omar 
Merlo, Andreas B. Eisingerich, and Seigyoung Auh, “Why 
Customer Participation Matters,”  Sloan Management Review, 
Winter 2014. 
 35. “Get ’Em Talking,”  Entrepreneur, editorial, August 2012. 
 36. Michael Fitzgerald, “The Myth about Viral Marketing,”  Sloan 
Management Review, Spring 2013. 
 37. Ralph F. Wilson, “The Six Simple Principles of Viral 
Marketing,”  Web Marketing Toda y,   www.webmarketingtoday.
com , May 12, 2012. 
 Page 389, © Richard Brian/Reuters/Landov; 
p. 392, © Spencer Brown/SanFrancisco Business 
Times; p. 393, Courtesy of Future Partners LLC; 
p. 395, © Mbr/MCRT/Newscom; p. 399, © Heinz-
Peter Bader/Reuters/Corbis; p. 401, © Hugh 
Threlfall/Alamy; p. 405, © Fuse/Getty Images RF; 
p. 407, © Let’sPizzaUSA/Splash/Newscom; p. 410, 
© Show Media/AP Images; p. 412, © Sony Pic-
tures Entertainment/PhotoFest; p. 413, © Colin 
Anderson/Getty Images RF; p. 414, © Michael 
Newman/PhotoEdit; p. 416, © Elsa/Getty Images; 
p. 418, © Jeff Greenberg/Alamy Images  
Page 389 © Richard Brian/R
 photo credits 

