
A u st r a l i a  •  B ra z i l  •  J a p a n •  K o r e a  •  M e x i c o  •  S in ga pore  •  Spa in  •  U n ite d Kin gdom  •  U n ite d Sta te s
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS 
IN A CHANGING SOCIETY 
6th Edition
DEBORAH M O R L E Y
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

This is an electronic version of the print textbook. Due to electronic rights restrictions, some third party content may be suppressed. Editorial 
review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. The publisher reserves the right to 
remove content from this title at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it. For valuable information on pricing, previous
editions, changes to current editions, and alternate formats, please visit www.cengage.com/highered to search by
ISBN#, author, title, or keyword for materials in your areas of interest.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Understanding Computers in a Changing Society, 
6th Edition
Deborah Morley
Vice President, General Manager: Dawn Gerrain
Product Director: Kathleen McMahon
Product Team Manager: Donna Gridley
Director, Development: Marah Bellegarde
Product Development Manager: Leigh Hefferon
Senior Content Developer: 
 Michelle Ruelos Cannistraci
Developmental Editor: Pam Conrad
Product Assistant:  Melissa Stehler
Marketing Manager: Gretchen Swann, Kristie Clark
Production Director: Patty Stephan
Content Project Manager: Jennifer Feltri-George
Manufacturing Planner: Fola Orekoya
Rights Acquisition Specialist: Christine Myaskovsky
Production Service: Integra Software Services Pvt. Ltd.
Cover Designer: GEX Publishing Services
Cover Image: ©Artens/Shutterstock
© 2015, 2013 Cengage Learning
ALL RIGHTS RESERVED. No part of this work covered by the copyright herein may 
be reproduced, transmitted, stored, or used in any form or by any means graphic, 
 electronic, or mechanical, including but not limited to photocopying, recording, 
 scanning, digitizing, taping, Web distribution, information networks, or information 
storage and retrieval systems, except as permitted under Section 107 or 108 of the 
1976 United States Copyright Act, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Library of Congress Control Number: 2013958042
ISBN-13: 978-1-285-76771-0
Cengage Learning
200 First Stamford Place, 4th Floor
Stamford, CT 06902
USA
Cengage Learning is a leading provider of customized learning solutions with office 
locations around the globe, including Singapore, the United Kingdom, Australia, 
Mexico, Brazil, and Japan. Locate your local office at: 
www.cengage.com/global
Cengage Learning products are represented in Canada by Nelson Education, Ltd.
To learn more about Cengage Learning, visit www.cengage.com
Purchase any of our products at your local college store or at our preferred online 
store www.cengagebrain.com
Notice to the Reader
Publisher does not warrant or guarantee any of the products described herein or 
perform any independent analysis in connection with any of the product information 
contained herein. Publisher does not assume, and expressly disclaims, any obligation 
to obtain and include information other than that provided to it by the manufacturer. 
The reader is expressly warned to consider and adopt all safety precautions that might 
be indicated by the activities described herein and to avoid all potential hazards. By 
following the instructions contained herein, the reader willingly assumes all risks 
in connection with such instructions. The publisher makes no representations or 
warranties of any kind, including but not limited to, the warranties of fitness for 
particular purpose or merchantability, nor are any such representations implied with 
respect to the material set forth herein, and the publisher takes no responsibility 
with respect to such material. The publisher shall not be liable for any special, 
consequential, or exemplary damages resulting, in whole or part, from the readers’ 
use of, or reliance upon, this material.
Printed in the United States of America  
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 18 17 16 15 14
For product information and technology assistance, contact us at 
Cengage Learning Customer & Sales Support, 1-800-354-9706
For permission to use material from this text or product, submit all 
requests online at www.cengage.com/permissions. 
Further permissions questions can be e-mailed to
permissionrequest@cengage.com
WCN: 02-200-203
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

KEY FEATURES
Just like its previous editions, Understanding Computers in a Changing Society, 6th Edition
provides current and comprehensive coverage of important topics. Flexible organization 
and an engaging presentation, combined with a variety of learning tools associated with 
each chapter, help students master the important computing concepts they will encounter in 
school, on the job, and in their personal lives.
Currency and Accuracy
The state-of-the-art content of this book reflects the latest technologies, trends, and classroom 
needs. To reflect the importance of mobile computing today, the entire text has an increased 
emphasis on smartphones, media tablets, mobile apps, and the issues that surround them, such 
as mobile security. All topics and figures have been updated for currency and, to ensure the 
content is as accurate and up to date as possible, numerous Industry Expert Reviewers pro-
vided feedback and suggestions for improvements to the content in their areas of expertise. 
Throughout the writing and production stages, enhancements were continually made to ensure 
that the final product is as current and accurate as possible.
Comprehensiveness and Depth
Accommodating a wide range of teaching styles, Understanding Computers in a Changing 
Society, 6th Edition provides comprehensive coverage of traditional topics while also covering 
relevant, up-to-the-minute new technologies and important societal issues. This edition has 
an increased emphasis on mobile computing, cloud applications, and social media and 
includes the following new topics:
 
➤New hardware developments, including smartphones, media tablets, smart 
watches, Google Glass, hybrid notebook-tablet computers, tiny PCs like the 
I
n today’s technology-oriented society, computers and technology impact virtually everyone’s life.  Understanding 
Computers in a Changing Society, 6th Edition is designed to ensure that students are current and informed in order to thrive 
in our technology-oriented, global society. With this new edition, students not only learn about relevant cutting-edge technology 
trends, but they also gain a better understanding of technology in general and the important issues surrounding technology 
today. This information gives students the knowledge they need to succeed in today’s world.
This nontechnical, introductory text explains in straightforward terms the importance of learning about computers 
and other computing devices, the various types of devices and their components, the principles by which computers 
work, the practical applications of computers and related technologies, the ways in which the world is being changed 
by these technologies, and the associated risks and other potential implications of computers and related technologies. 
The goal of this text is to provide readers with a solid knowledge of computing fundamentals, an understanding of the 
impact of our technology-oriented society, and a framework for using this knowledge effectively in their lives.
PREFACE 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Raspberry Pi and Chromecast, GPUs, immersion cooling systems, tablet and 
smartphone docks,  personal 3D printers, projector phones, self-driving cars, 
 self-healing devices,  perceptual computing, gesture input, touch mice, eye 
 tracking tablets, tablet storage devices, DNA data  storage, and 4K (Ultra HD) 
 Blu-ray Discs.
 
➤New software developments and issues, including Windows 8, the Google Play 
store, mobile app builders, and the impact of cloud computing.
 
➤New mobile applications, including Bring Your Own Device (BYOD), mobile 
 ticketing, mobile data caps, group messaging, geofencing, Google Now, and mobile 
ergonomics.
 
➤New networking technologies, including new and emerging Wi-Fi standards, 
the Internet of Things (IoT), Bluetooth Smart, software defined networking 
(SDN), and new Wi-Fi-enabled products such as smart thermostats, scales, and 
Wi-Fi locks.
 
➤New security risks, including BYOD security issues, social media hacks, and 
 scareware, ransomware, and chargeware.
 
➤New security precautions, including digital tattoos and other emerging biometric 
systems, soft and hard tokens for OTPs/two-factor authentication, 3D Secure online 
purchase verification, wireless tethers for mobile devices, and  proximity devices and 
apps to automatically lock and unlock a computer.
 
➤New Web applications, including cloud printing, Internet monitors,  virtual currency, 
social commerce, and social media  integration.
Readability
We remember more about a subject if it is made interesting and exciting, as well as 
presented in a straightforward manner. This book is written in a conversational, down-
to-earth style—one designed to be accurate without being intimidating. Concepts are 
explained clearly and simply, without the use of overly technical terminology. More com-
plex concepts are explained in an understandable manner and with realistic examples from 
everyday life.
IV
PREFACE
CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
297
>Two-dimensional (2D) barcode. A barcode that represents data with a matrix of small squares and stores information both horizontally and 
vertically so it can hold significantly more data than a conventional one-dimensional barcode. >Augmented reality. When computer generated 
images are overlayed on top of real-time images, such as to overlay information over the photo or video displayed on a smartphone.
 lare
v
e
s  r
o
f 
w
olla
 y
a
d
ot s
e
n
o
h
ptra
m
s ts
o
m
 otni tliu
b
 s
eitilib
a
p
a
c are
m
a
c latigid
 e
h
T
types of emerging input applications. For instance, they allow gesture input, as well as 
the use of two-dimensional (
) barcodes and augmented reality applications to retrieve 
and display useful information. Two-dimensional (2D) barcodes—such as the QR (Quick
Response) code that represents data with a matrix of small squares—store information 
both horizontally and vertically and so can hold significantly more data than conven-
tional one-dimensional barcodes. Most 2D barcodes today are designed to be used by 
consumers with smartphones. For instance, capturing the image of a QR barcode located 
on a magazine or newspaper ad, poster, or billboard with a smartphone’s camera could 
enable the consumer’s smartphone to load a Web page, dial a phone number or send 
a text message (to enter a contest, for example), display a video clip or photo (stored 
either in the code or online), download a coupon or ticket, or Like a Facebook page (see 
Figure 8-2). QR codes can also be used to transfer contact information to a phone or 
add an event to an online calendar. Augmented reality is another emerging smartphone 
application. With augmented reality, computer-generated images are overlayed on top 
of real-time images. Today, Web-based content is typically displayed over the images 
seen through a smartphone’s camera and displayed on the smartphone. The content is 
FIGURE 8-2
Most smartphones 
can read 2D 
barcodes.
<
Courtesy SPARQCode
Perceptual Computing
In the 2002 futuristic movie Minority Report, Tom Cruise 
changes the images on his display by gesturing with his hands. 
While it was ﬁ ction in the movie, it is now just about a reality. 
Enter the trend of perceptual computing where users control 
their devices with three dimensional (3D) gestures, voice com-
mands, and facial expressions instead of with traditional input 
devices like the keyboard and mouse.
Gesture input itself isn’t new—it’s been used in various forms 
for several years with devices such as the Nintendo Wii, Xbox 
Kinect, and the Apple iPhone and in large screen consumer gam-
ing and advertising applications; it is also an important compo-
nent of the Windows 8 operating system. But the  gesture-input 
systems of the future are expected to be much more sophisti-
cated and combined with other types of input to allow users to 
more naturally control their computers and to allow the devices 
to adapt to each individual’s need. For example, a computer or 
phone could offer to make a game easier if a player appears frus-
trated or could offer to turn the page on a tablet displaying a 
recipe if the hands of the person cooking are covered with ﬂ our. 
One recent step in this direction is the Leap 3D System 
shown in the accompanying photograph. It is an iPod-sized 
box that connects to a computer via a USB port and creates 
an eight-cubic-foot 3D interactive space inside which users can 
swipe, grab, pinch (refer again to the photo), and move objects 
around as if they were using a touch screen, except that they are 
not actually touching the screen. And noncontact systems such 
as this have additional advantages, such as being able to use 3D 
gestures instead of just 2D gestures, avoiding the ﬁ ngerprint and 
germ issues related to public keyboard and touch screen use, 
allowing for full body input, and enabling input to be performed 
from a slight distance (such as from a nearby chair or through a 
glass storefront window).
TR E N D
Courtesy Leap Motion
302
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
initially for mobile phones and other portable devices, IMOD dis-
plays use external light, such as from the sun or artificial light 
inside a building, to display images so images are bright and clear 
even in direct sunlight (refer again to Figure 8-7). And, because 
backlighting isn’t used, power consumption is much less than 
what is needed for LCD displays. In fact, similar to the e-paper 
discussed in the Chapter 7 Inside the Industry box, devices using 
IMOD displays use no power unless the image changes, which 
means they can remain on at all times without draining the device 
battery. Beginning to be used with mobile devices, IMODs could 
eventually be used for outdoor television screens, large digital 
signs, and other outdoor display devices that normally consume a 
great deal of power.
While most displays are designed to be looked at from at 
least several inches away, some displays are designed to be 
wearable. A wearable display usually projects the image from 
a mobile device (such as a smartphone or media tablet) to a 
display screen built into the glasses via a wireless connection. 
Typically, the technology allows the user to see the image as 
if it is on a distant large screen display, and many wearable 
displays overlay the projected image on top of what the user is seeing in real time to 
provide augmented reality. For example, the Google Glass eyeglasses-based display 
shown in Figure 8-8 has a tiny display located where the right lens would be and users 
can see content projected on that screen in front of what they are seeing normally. 
Google Glass is typically connected (via Bluetooth) to a smartphone and then content 
(such as text messages, maps and directions, video calls, and Web pages) is streamed 
from that phone to the Google Glass display. Google Glass also has a built-in Web 
browser and can connect directly to a Wi-Fi hotspot when needed, has a touch-sensitive 
pad on the right side of the frame for input, and a bone-conductive audio output system 
so that audio output is heard only by the user. In addition to consumer wearable dis-
plays that have entertainment and productiv-
ity applications (such as being able to access 
GPS directions as needed or to monitor your 
e-mail during a meeting), there are also wear-
able displays designed for soldiers and other 
mobile workers.
Emerging Storage Devices
Improvements in magnetic disk technol-
ogy are continuing to increase the data that 
can be stored on hard drives. Traditionally, 
the magnetic particles on a hard disk have 
been aligned horizontally, parallel to the 
hard disk’s surface (referred to as longitudi-
nal magnetic recording). To increase capac-
ity and reliability, most new hard drives 
today use perpendicular magnetic recording
(PMR), in which the bits are placed upright to 
allow them to be closer together than is pos-
sible with a horizontal layout. For instance, 
PMR currently allows a recording density up 
to 1 terabit per s uare inch (Tb inch ), which 
results in internal hard drives with capacities 
up to about 4 TB of storage for a 3.5-inch 
Courtesy of Seagate Technology LLC
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Product Planning Manager, 
Seagate Technology
Should my next computer have a magnetic 
hard drive or an SSD?
Your storage options for a new PC include traditional 
hard drives (HDDs), solid-state drives (SSDs), and the 
newer solid-state hybrid drives (SSHDs). Selecting 
what is right for you is a trade-off between price, 
 performance, and capacity.
 
➤SSDs have maximized PC performance and very 
good shock resistance, but are low capacity and 
pricey.
 
➤HDDs have the lowest cost and high capacity but 
have average performance.
 
➤SSHDs have SSD-like performance and high 
capacity, but have a small price premium.
Content from a 
smartphone or the
Internet appears in
your line of vision.
Display is built
into the Glass 
frames.
Courtesy Google
FIGURE 8-8
Google Glass.
<
Chapter Learning Tools
 1.   Outline, Learning Objectives, and Overview: For each chapter, an Outline 
of the major topics covered, a list of student Learning Objectives, and a 
Chapter Overview help instructors put the subject  matter of the  chapter in 
perspective and let students know what they will be reading about.
 2.   Boldfaced Key Terms and Running Glossary: Important terms appear in 
boldface type as they are introduced in the chapter. These terms are defined at 
the bottom of the page on which they appear and in the end-of-text glossary.
 3.   Chapter Boxes: In each chapter, a Trend box provides students with a 
look at current and upcoming technology trends; an Inside the Industry 
box provides insight into some of the practices and issues related to the 
computer industry; a How It Works box explains in detail how a technol-
ogy or product works; and a Technology and You box takes a look at how 
computers and technology are used in everyday life.
 4.  Ask the Expert Boxes: In each chapter, three Ask the Expert boxes 
feature a question about a computing concept, a trend, or how  computers 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

are used on the job or otherwise in the real world along with the 
response from an expert. Experts for this edition include a former Navy 
pilot, a  guitarist from a rock band, and  executives from notable com-
panies like McDonald’s, SONIC, ARM, Seagate, ACM, Rhapsody, 
The Computer Ethics Institute, Sony Animations, D-Link, GreenDisk, 
and Symantec.
 5. Marginal Tips and Caution Elements: Tip marginal elements feature 
time- saving tips or ways to avoid a common problem or terminology mis-
take, or  present students with interesting additional information related to 
the  chapter content. Caution elements warn of a possible problem students 
should avoid.
 6. Illustrations and Photographs: Instructive, current, full-color illustrations 
and photographs are used to illustrate important concepts. Figures and screen-
shots show the latest hardware and software and are annotated to convey 
important information.
 7. Summary and Key Terms: The end-of-chapter material includes a concise, 
section-by-section Summary of the main points in the chapter. The chapter’s 
Learning Objectives appear in the margin next to the relevant section of the 
 summary so that students are better able to relate the Learning Objectives to 
the chapter material. Every boldfaced key term in the chapter also appears in 
boldface type in the summary.
 8. Review Activities: End-of-chapter Review Activities allow students to test 
themselves on what they have just read. A matching exercise of selected 
Key Terms helps students test their retention of the chapter material. 
A Self-Quiz (with the answers listed at the end of the book) consists of ten 
true-false and completion questions. Five additional easily graded match-
ing and short-answer Exercises are included for instructors who would like 
to assign graded homework. Two short Discussion 
Questions for each  chapter provide a springboard 
to jump-start classroom discussions.
 9. Projects: End-of-chapter Projects require stu-
dents to extend their knowledge by doing research 
and activities beyond merely reading the book. 
Organized into six types of projects (Hot Topics, 
Short Answer/Research, Hands On, Ethics 
in Action, Presentation/Demonstration, and 
Balancing Act), the projects feature explicit instruc-
tions so that  students can work through them with-
out  additional directions from instructors and some 
require students to form an opinion about a current 
issue and discuss it in a classroom discussion or short 
paper. A  special marginal icon denotes projects that 
require Internet access.
References and Resources Guide
A References and Resources Guide at the end of the book brings together in one con-
venient location a collection of computer-related references and resources, including a 
Computer History Timeline, a Guide to Buying a PC, A Look at Numbering Systems 
feature, and a Coding Charts feature.
PREFACE
V
Both Facebook and Twitter allow 
you to encrypt your connections—
enable this option when you are 
using a public Wi-Fi hotspot to 
protect your account from hackers.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

NEW and Updated Expert Insight Features
In the exciting Expert Insight feature located at the end of 
the first seven chapters, industry experts provide students 
with personal insights on topics presented in the book, includ-
ing their  personal experiences with technology, key points to 
remember, and advice for students. The experts, professionals 
from these major companies—D-Link, Logitech, Microsoft, 
McAfee, eBay, ACM/Google, and Dell—provide a unique 
perspective on the book’s content and how the topics dis-
cussed in the text impact their lives and their industry, what it 
means for the future, and more!
Student and Instructor Support Materials
Understanding Computers in a Changing Society, 6th Edition 
is available with a complete package of support materials 
for instructors and students. Included in the package are CourseMate, the Instructor 
Companion Site, and, if access to SAM has been purchased, SAM Computer Concepts 
material is available.
CourseMate
The Understanding Computers in a Changing Society, 6th Edition includes CourseMate, 
which helps you make the grade. CourseMate includes: 
 
➤Key Term Matching and Flashcards—allow students to test their knowledge of 
selected chapter key terms.
 
➤Interactive Quiz—allows students to test their retention of chapter concepts.
 
➤Global Technology Watch—provides additional reading on the latest technology 
topics. 
 
➤Beat the Clock—allows students to test how ready they are for upcoming exams.
 
➤Crossword Puzzles—incorporate the key terms from each chapter into an online 
interactive crossword puzzle.
 
➤Online Videos—include several videos per chapter related to the topics in that 
 chapter, as well as practical “How To” information related to chapter topics.
 
➤Further Exploration—includes links to additional information about content 
 covered in each chapter.
 
➤Interactive eBook—includes highlighting, note taking, and search capabilities.
 
➤Engagement Tracker—monitors student engagement in the course.
 
➤Additional Resources—include additional resources that can be viewed or printed, 
such as Expert Insights; an Online Study Guide, Online Summary, and Online 
Glossary for each chapter; a Guide to Buying a PC and a Computer History 
Timeline; and more information about Numbering Systems and Coding Charts.
(Go to cengagebrain.com to access these resources.)
Instructor Companion Site
Everything you need for your course in one place! This collection of book-specific lec-
ture and class tools is available online via www.cengage.com/login. Access and download 
PowerPoint presentations, images, Instructor’s Manual, videos, and more.
VI
PREFACE
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Electronic Instructor’s Manual
The Instructor’s Manual is written to provide instructors with practical suggestions for 
enhancing classroom presentations. The Instructor’s Manual provides: Lecture Notes, 
Teacher Tips, Quick Quizzes, Classroom Activities, Discussion Questions, Key Terms, 
a Chapter Quiz, and more!
Cengage Learning Testing Powered by Cognero 
Cengage Learning Testing Powered by Cognero is a flexible, online system that allows 
you to: 
 
➤Author, edit, and manage test bank content from multiple Cengage Learning 
solutions
 
➤Create multiple test versions in an instant 
 
➤Deliver tests from your LMS, your classroom, or wherever you want
PowerPoint Presentations
This book has Microsoft PowerPoint presentations avail-
able for each chapter. These are included as a teaching aid 
for classroom presentation, to make available to students on 
a network for chapter review, or to be printed for classroom 
distribution. Instructors can customize these presentations to 
cover any additional topics they introduce to the class. Figure 
Files for all figures in the textbook are also available online.
SAM: Skills Assessment Manager
SAM 2013 is designed to help bring students from the class-
room to the real world. It allows students to train and test on 
important computer skills in an active, hands-on environ-
ment. SAM’s easy-to-use system includes powerful interactive 
exams, training, and projects on the most commonly used 
Microsoft Office applications. SAM simulates the Office 2013 
application environment, allowing students to demonstrate 
their knowledge and think through the skills by performing real-world tasks such as bold-
ing text or setting up slide transitions. Add in live-in-the-application projects and students 
are on their way to truly learning and applying skills to business-centric documents.
Designed to be used with the New Perspectives Series, SAM includes handy page 
references, so students can print helpful study guides that match the New Perspectives 
Series textbooks used in class. For instructors, SAM also includes robust scheduling and 
reporting features.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I would like to extend a special thank you to all of the industry professionals who  provided 
their expertise for the Expert Insight features:
Daniel Kelley, Vice President, Marketing, D-Link Systems, Inc.
Ali Moayer, Senior Director of Engineering, Logitech
Stephen Rose, Senior Product Marketing and Community Manager, Windows Commercial, 
Microsoft
Greg Hampton, Vice President, Product Management, McAfee
Jim Griffith, Dean of eBay Education, eBay
Stuart Feldman, Past President of ACM and Vice President, Engineering, Google
Frank Molsberry, Sr. Principal Engineer and Security Technologist, Dell Inc.
PREFACE
VII
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

In addition, I am very grateful to the numerous Industry Expert Reviewers that perform technical reviews and provide helpful 
suggestions each edition to ensure this book is as accurate and current as possible. I would also like to thank the Educational 
Reviewers who have helped to define and improve the quality of this text over the years. In particular, I would like to thank 
the following individuals:
Industry Expert Reviewers
Julie Anne Mossler, Director of Communications, Groupon; Alan Tringham, Senior Marketing Communications Manager, 
ARM; The Wi-Fi Alliance; Mike Hall, Corporate Communications, Seagate Technology; Kevin Curtis, CTO, InPhase 
Technologies; Sriram K. Peruvemba, Vice President, Marketing, E Ink Corporation; Jim Sherhart, Senior Director of 
Marketing, Data Robotics; Jack Dollard, Marketing, Mitek Systems; Joe Melfi, Director of Product Marketing for Cloud 
Solutions, D-Link Systems; Dave Gelvin, President, Tranzeo Wireless USA; Kevin Raineri, Director, Sales and Marketing, 
Innovative Card Technologies; Bill Shribman, Executive Producer, WGBH Interactive; Mike Markham, Vice President of 
Sales, Cadre Technologies; Renee Cassata, Marketing Manager, iDashboards; Russell T. Cross, Vice President of AAC 
Products, Prentke Romich Company; Dr. Kimberly Young, Director, The Center for Internet Addiction Recovery; Jason 
Taylor, Worldwide Director of Corporate Communications, MobiTV; Nicole Rodrigues, Public Relations Manager, 
MobiTV; Stephen Yeo, Worldwide Strategic Marketing Director, IGEL Technology; Bob Hirschfeld, Public Information 
Officer, Lawrence Livermore National Lab; Bryan Crum, Vice President of Communication, Omnilert, LLC; David 
Bondurant, MRAM Product Manager, Freescale Semiconductor, Inc.; Rick McGowan, Vice President & Senior Software 
Engineer, Unicode, Inc.; Margaret Lewis, Director of Commercial Solutions, AMD; Mark Tekunoff, Senior Technology 
Manager, Kingston Technology; Billy Rudock, Customer Service Staff Engineer, Seagate Technology; James M. DePuydt, 
Ph.D., Technology Director, Imation Corporation; Dan Bloom, Sr. PR Manager, SanDisk; Kevin Curtis, CTO, InPhase 
Technologies; Gail Levy, Director of Marketing, TabletKiosk; Novell Marketing; John McCreesh, Marketing Project 
Lead, OpenOffice.org; Jackson Dunlap, ESP Systems; Laura Abram, Director of Corporate Marketing, Dust Networks; 
Kevin Schader, Communications Director, ZigBee Alliance; Mauro Dresti, Linksys Product Marketing Manager; Lianne 
Caetano, Executive Director, WirelessHD, LLC; Brad Booth; Howard Frazier; Bob Grow; Michael McCormack; George 
Cravens, Technical Marketing, D-Link Systems; Christiaan Stoudt, Founder, HomeNetworkHelp.Info; Douglas M. Winneg, 
President, Software Secure, Inc.; Frank Archambeault, Director of Network Services, Dartmouth College; Adam Goldstein, 
IT Security Engineer, Dartmouth College; Ellen Young, Manager of Consulting Services, Dartmouth College; Becky Waring, 
Executive Editor, JiWire.com; Ellen Craw, General Manager, Ilium Software; Michael Behr, Senior Architect, TIBCO; Joe 
McGlynn, Director of Product Management, CodeGear; John Nash, Vice President of Marketing, Visible Systems; Josh Shaul, 
Director of Technology Strategy, Application Security, Inc.; Jodi Florence, Marketing Director, IDology, Inc.; Dr. Maressa 
Hecht Orzack, Director, Computer Addiction Services; Janice K. Mahon, Vice President of Technology Commercialization, 
Universal Display Corporation; Dr. Nhon Quach, Next Generation Processor Architect, AMD; Jos van Haaren, Department 
Head Storage Physics, Philips Research Laboratories; Terry O’Kelly, Technical Communications Manager, Memorex; 
Randy Culpepper, Texas Instruments RFID Systems; Aaron Newman, CTO and Co-Founder, Application Security Inc.; 
Alan Charlesworth, Staff Engineer, Sun Microsystems; Khaled A. Elamrawi, Senior Marketing Engineer, Intel Corporation; 
Timothy D. O’Brien, Senior Systems Engineer, Fujitsu Software; John Paulson, Manager, Product Communications, 
Seagate Technology; Omid Rahmat, Editor in Chief, Tom’s Hardware Guide; Jeremy Bates, Multimedia Developer, R & L 
Multimedia Developers; Charles Hayes, Product Marketing Manager, SimpleTech, Inc.; Rick McGowan, Vice President & 
Senior Software Engineer, Unicode, Inc.; Russell Reynolds, Chief Operating Officer & Web Designer, R & L Multimedia 
Developers; Rob Stephens, Director, Technology Strategies, SAS; Dave Stow, Database Specialist, OSE Systems, Inc.
Educational Reviewers
Marc Forestiere, Fresno City College; Beverly Amer, Northern Arizona University; James Ambroise Jr., Southern University, 
Louisiana; Virginia Anderson, University of North Dakota; Robert Andree, Indiana University Northwest; Linda Armbruster, 
Rancho Santiago College; Michael Atherton, Mankato State University; Gary E. Baker, Marshalltown Community College; 
Richard Batt, Saint Louis Community College at Meremec; Luverne Bierle, Iowa Central Community College; Fariba 
Bolandhemat, Santa Monica College; Jerry Booher, Scottsdale Community College; Frederick W. Bounds, Georgia 
Perimeter College; James Bradley, University of Calgary; Curtis Bring, Moorhead State University; Brenda K. Britt, 
Fayetteville Technical Community College; Cathy Brotherton, Riverside Community College; Chris Brown, Bemidji State 
University; Janice Burke, South Suburban College; James Buxton, Tidewater Community College, Virginia; Gena Casas, 
Florida Community College, Jacksonville; Thomas Case, Georgia Southern University; John E. Castek, University of 
Wisconsin-La Crosse; Mario E. Cecchetti, Westmoreland County Community College; Jack W. Chandler, San Joaquin Delta 
College; Alan Charlesworth, Staff Engineer, Sun Microsystems; Jerry M. Chin, Southwest Missouri State University; 
VIII
PREFACE
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Edward W. Christensen, Monmouth University; Carl Clavadetscher, California State Polytechnic University; Vernon 
Clodfelter, Rowan Technical College, North Carolina; Joann C. Cook, College of DuPage; Laura Cooper, College of the 
Mainland, Texas; Cynthia Corritore, University of Nebraska at Omaha; Sandra Cunningham, Ranger College; Marvin 
Daugherty, Indiana Vocational Technical College; Donald L. Davis, University of Mississippi; Garrace De Groot, University 
of Wyoming; Jackie Dennis, Prairie State College; Donald Dershem, Mountain View College; John DiElsi, Marcy College, 
New York; Mark Dishaw, Boston University; Eugene T. Dolan, University of the District of Columbia; Bennie Allen Dooley, 
Pasadena City College; Robert H. Dependahl Jr.; Santa Barbara City College; William Dorin, Indiana University Northwest; 
Mike Doroshow, Eastfield College; Jackie O. Duncan, Hopkinsville Community College; John Dunn, Palo Alto College; 
John W. Durham, Fort Hays State University; Hyun B. Eom, Middle Tennessee State University; Michael Feiler, Merritt 
College; Terry Felke, WR Harper College; J. Patrick Fenton, West Valley Community College; James H. Finger, University 
of South Carolina at Columbia; William C. Fink, Lewis and Clark Community College, Illinois; Ronald W. Fordonski, 
College of Du Page; Connie Morris Fox, West Virginia Institute of Technology; Paula S. Funkhouser, Truckee Meadows 
Community College; Janos T. Fustos, Metropolitan State; Gene Garza, University of Montevallo; Timothy Gottleber, North 
Lake College; Dwight Graham, Prairie State College; Wade Graves, Grayson County College; Kay H. Gray, Jacksonville 
State University; David W. Green, Nashville State Technical Institute, Tennessee; George P. Grill, University of North 
Carolina, Greensboro; John Groh, San Joaquin Delta College; Rosemary C. Gross, Creighton University; Dennis Guster, 
Saint Louis Community College at Meremec; Joe Hagarty, Raritan Valley Community College; Donald Hall, Manatee 
Community College; Jim Hanson, Austin Community College; Sallyann Z. Hanson, Mercer County Community College; L. 
D. Harber, Volunteer State Community College, Tennessee; Hank Hartman, Iowa State University; Richard Hatch, San 
Diego State University; Mary Lou Hawkins, Del Mar College; Ricci L. Heishman, Northern Virginia Community College; 
William Hightower, Elon College, North Carolina; Sharon A. Hill, Prince George’s Community College, Maryland; Alyse 
Hollingsworth, Brevard College; Fred C. Homeyer, Angelo State University; Stanley P. Honacki, Moraine Valley Community 
College; L. Wayne Horn, Pensacola Junior College; J. William Howorth, Seneca College, Ontario, Canada; Mark W. Huber, 
East Carolina University; Peter L. Irwin, Richland College, Texas; John Jasma, Palo Alto College; Elizabeth Swoope 
Johnson, Louisiana State University; Jim Johnson, Valencia Community College; Mary T. Johnson, Mt. San Antonio 
College; Susan M. Jones, Southwest State University; Amardeep K. Kahlon, Austin Community College; Robert T. Keim, 
Arizona State University; Mary Louise Kelly, Palm Beach Community College; William R. Kenney, San Diego Mesa 
College; Richard Kerns, East Carolina University, North Carolina; Glenn Kersnick, Sinclair Community College, Ohio; 
Richard Kiger, Dallas Baptist University; Gordon C. Kimbell, Everett Community College, Washington; Robert Kirklin, 
Los Angeles Harbor Community College; Judith A. Knapp, Indiana University Northwest; Mary Veronica Kolesar, Utah 
State University; James G. Kriz, Cuyahoga Community College, Ohio; Joan Krone, Denison University; Fran Kubicek, 
Kalamazoo Valley Community College; Rose M. Laird, Northern Virginia Community College; Robert Landrum, Jones 
Junior College; Shelly Langman, Bellevue Community College; James F. LaSalle, The University of Arizona; Chang-Yang 
Lin, Eastern Kentucky University; Linda J. Lindaman, Black Hawk College; Alden Lorents, Northern Arizona University; 
Paul M. Lou, Diablo Valley College; Deborah R. Ludford, Glendale Community College; Kent Lundin, Brigham Young 
University-Idaho; Barbara J. Maccarone, North Shore Community College; Wayne Madison, Clemson University, South 
Carolina; Donna L. Madsen, Kirkwood Community College; Randy Marak, Hill College; Gary Marks, Austin Community 
College, Texas; Kathryn A. Marold, Ph.D., Metropolitan State College of Denver; Cesar Marron, University of Wyoming; 
Ed Martin, Kingsborough Community College; Vickie McCullough, Palomar College; James W. McGuffee, Austin 
Community College; James McMahon, Community College of Rhode Island; William A. McMillan, Madonna University; 
Don B. Medley, California State Polytechnic University; John Melrose, University of Wisconsin—Eau Claire; Dixie Mercer, 
Kirkwood Community College; Mary Meredith, University of Southwestern Louisiana; Marilyn Meyer, Fresno City 
College; Carolyn H. Monroe, Baylor University; William J. Moon, Palm Beach Community College; Marilyn Moore, 
Purdue University; Marty Murray, Portland Community College; Don Nielsen, Golden West College; George Novotny, 
Ferris State University; Richard Okezie, Mesa Community College; Joseph D. Oldham, University of Kentucky; Dennis J. 
Olsen, Pikes Peak Community College; Bob Palank, Florissant Community College; James Payne, Kellogg Community 
College; Lisa B. Perez, San Joaquin Delta College; Savitha Pinnepalli, Louisiana State University; Delores Pusins, 
Hillsborough CC; Mike Rabaut, Hillsborough CC; Robert Ralph, Fayetteville Technical Institute, North Carolina; Herbert 
F. Rebhun, University of Houston-Downtown; Nicholas John Robak, Saint Joseph’s University; Arthur E. Rowland, Shasta 
College; Kenneth R. Ruhrup, St. Petersburg Junior College; John F. Sanford, Philadelphia College of Textiles and Science; 
Kammy Sanghera, George Mason University; Carol A. Schwab, Webster University; Larry Schwartzman, Trident Technical 
College; Benito R. Serenil, South Seattle Community College; Allanagh Sewell, Southeastern Louisiana University; Tom 
Seymour, Minot State University; John J. Shuler, San Antonio College, Texas; Gayla Jo Slauson, Mesa State College; 
Harold Smith, Brigham Young University; Willard A. Smith, Tennessee State University; David Spaisman, Katherine Gibbs; 
Elizabeth Spooner, Holmes Community College; Timothy M. Stanford, City University; Alfred C. St. Onge, Springfield 
PREFACE
IX
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Technical Community College, Massachusetts; Michael L. Stratford, Charles County Community College, Maryland; Karen 
Studniarz, Kishwaukee College; Sandra Swanson, Lewis & Clark Community College; Tim Sylvester, Glendale Community 
College; Semih Tahaoglu, Southeastern Louisiana University; Jane J. Thompson, Solano Community College; Sue Traynor, 
Clarion University of Pennsylvania; William H. Trueheart, New Hampshire College; James D. Van Tassel, Mission College; 
James R. Walters, Pikes Peak Community College; Joyce V. Walton, Seneca College, Ontario, Canada; Diane B. Walz, 
University of Texas at San Antonio; Joseph Waters, Santa Rosa Junior College, California; Liang Chee Wee, University of 
Arizona; Merrill Wells, Red Rocks Community College; Fred J. Wilke, Saint Louis Community College; Charles M. 
Williams, Georgia State University; Roseanne Witkowski, Orange County Community College; David Womack, University 
of Texas, San Antonio; George Woodbury, College of the Sequoias; Nan Woodsome, Araphoe Community College; James 
D. Woolever, Cerritos College; Patricia Joann Wykoff, Western Michigan University; A. James Wynne, Virginia 
Commonwealth University; Robert D. Yearout, University of North Carolina at Asheville; Israel Yost, University of New 
Hampshire; and Vic Zamora, Mt. San Antonio College.
I would also like to thank the people on the Cengage team—their professionalism, attention to detail, and enormous enthu-
siasm make working with them a pleasure. In particular, I’d like to thank Donna Gridley, Michelle Ruelos Cannistraci, 
Jennifer Feltri-George, Christine Myaskovsky, and Pam Conrad for all their ideas, support, and tireless efforts during the 
design, writing, rewriting, and production of this book. I would also like to thank Marissa Falco for the interior design and 
GEX Publishing Services for the cover design. I want to thank Sreejith Govindan and Integra for all their help managing the 
production of the book. Thanks also to Kathleen McMahon.
I am also very appreciative of the numerous individuals and organizations that were kind enough to supply information and 
photographs for this text and the many organizations, as well as Daniel Davis of Tinkernut.com, that generously allowed us 
to use their content for the Online Videos, which can be found on CourseMate.
I sincerely hope you find this book interesting, informative, and enjoyable to read. 
Deborah Morley
X
PREFACE
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface iii
Chapter 1
Introduction to the World of Computers  2
Expert Insight on Personal Computers  44
Chapter 2
A Closer Look at Hardware and Software  46
Expert Insight on Hardware  90
Chapter 3
The Internet and the World Wide Web  92
Expert Insight on Software  140
Chapter 4
Network and Internet Security  142
Expert Insight on Networks and the Internet  186
Chapter 5
Computer Security and Privacy  188
Expert Insight on Web-Based  Multimedia 
and E-Commerce  230
Chapter 6
Intellectual Property Rights and Ethics  232
Expert Insight on Systems  260
Chapter 7
Health, Access, and the Environment  262
Expert Insight on Computers and Society  292
Chapter 8
Emerging Technologies  294
References and Resources Guide R-1
Glossary/Index I-1
BR I E F  C O N T EN T S
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Preface iii
Chapter 1 Introduction to the World 
of Computers 2
Overview 3
Computers in Your Life 3
 
> Why Learn About Computers? 3
 
> Computers in the Home 5
 
> Computers in Education 5
 
> Computers on the Job 6
 
> Computers on the Go 7
What Is a Computer and What Does 
It Do? 8
 
> Data vs. Information 9
 
> Computers Then and Now 10
 
> Hardware 12
 
> Software 14
 
> Computer Users and Professionals 16
Computers to Fit Every Need 17
 
> Embedded Computers 17
 
> Mobile Devices 18
 
> Personal Computers (PCs) 19
 
> Servers 23
 
> Mainframe Computers 24
 
> Supercomputers 24
Computer Networks and the Internet 25
 
> What Are the Internet and the World Wide 
Web? 25
 
> Accessing a Network or the Internet 27
 
> Surfing the Web 31
 
> Searching the Web 32
 
> E-Mail 32
Computers and Society 34
 
> Benefits of a Computer-Oriented 
 Society 34
 
> Risks of a Computer-Oriented 
Society 34
 
> Differences in Online Communications 36
C O N T E N T S
 
> The Anonymity Factor 37
 
> Information Integrity 37
Summary 38
Review Activities 40
Projects 42
TECHNOLOGY AND YOU Restaurant 
iPad Ordering Systems 7
TREND Tiny PCs 18
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY 
Tech Clothing 20
HOW IT WORKS Campus Emergency 
Notification Systems 30
  Expert Insight on 
Personal Computers 44
Chapter 2 A Closer Look at Hardware 
and Software 46
Overview 47
Digital Data Representation 47
 
> Bits and Bytes 47
 
> Numbering Systems and Coding 
 Systems 48
Input Hardware 49
 
> Keyboards 49
 
> Pointing Devices 49
 
> Scanners, Readers, and Digital 
 Cameras 53
 
> Other Input Devices 56
Processing Hardware and Other Hardware 
Inside the System Unit 57
 
> The Motherboard 57
 
> Processors 58
 
> Memory 60
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

XIII
Output Hardware 62
 
> Display Devices 62
 
> Printers 63
 
> Other Output Devices 65
Storage Hardware 65
 
> Storage System Characteristics 65
 
> Hard Drives 67
 
> Optical Discs and Drives 69
 
> Flash Memory Storage Systems 72
 
> Other Types of Storage Systems 74
 
> Evaluating Your Storage Alternatives 77
Communications Hardware 77
 
> Network Adapters and Modems 78
 
> Other Networking Hardware 78
Software Basics 79
 
> Software Ownership Rights 79
 
> Desktop vs. Mobile Software 80
 
> Installed vs. Cloud Software 80
 
> Common Software Commands 81
 
> Working with Files and Folders 83
Summary 84
Review Activities 86
Projects 88
TECHNOLOGY AND YOU Mobile 
 Ticketing 55
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY GPUs 
and Transformers: The Ride 3D at 
 Universal Studios 59
HOW IT WORKS More Storage for Your 
Tablet 74
TREND Mobile App Builders 81
  Expert Insight on 
Hardware 90
Chapter 3 The Internet and the World 
Wide Web 92
Overview 93
Evolution of the Internet 93
 
> From ARPANET to Internet2 93
 
> The Internet Community Today 96
 
> Myths About the Internet 98
Getting Set Up to Use the Internet 99
 
> Type of Device 99
 
> Type of Connection and Internet 
Access 101
 
> Selecting an ISP and Setting Up Your 
Computer 105
Searching the Internet 106
 
> Search Sites 106
 
> Search Strategies 108
 
> Evaluating Search Results 110
 
> Citing Internet Resources 111
Beyond Browsing and E-Mail 111
 
> Other Types of Online 
 Communications 111
 
> Social Networking/Social Media 115
 
> Online Shopping and Investing 117
 
> Online Entertainment 119
 
> Online News, Reference, and 
 Information 122
 
> Online Education and Writing 125
Censorship and Privacy Issues 128
 
> Censorship 129
 
> Web Browsing Privacy 130
 
> E-Mail Privacy 133
Summary 134
Review Activities 136
Projects 138
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY Mobile Data 
Caps 100
HOW IT WORKS Geofencing 113
TECHNOLOGY AND YOU High-Tech 
Workouts 120
TREND The Internet of Things (IoT) 124
Expert Insight on 
Software 140
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

XIV
Chapter 4 Network and Internet 
Security 142
Overview 143
Why Be Concerned About Network 
and Internet Security? 143
Unauthorized Access and Unauthorized 
Use 144
 
> Hacking 144
 
> War Driving and Wi-Fi Piggybacking 146
 
> Interception of Communications 147
Protecting Against Unauthorized Access 
and Unauthorized Use 147
 
> Access Control Systems 147
 
> Firewalls, Encryption, and Virtual Private 
Networks (VPNs) 152
 
> Additional Public Hotspot Precautions 157
 
> Sensible Employee Precautions 157
Computer Sabotage 160
 
> Botnets 160
 
> Computer Viruses and Other Types of 
 Malware 160
 
> Denial of Service (DoS) Attacks 163
 
> Data, Program, or Web Site Alteration 164
Protecting Against Computer 
 Sabotage 165
 
> Security Software 165
 
> Other Security Precautions 166
Online Theft, Online Fraud, and Other 
Dot Cons 166
 
> Theft of Data, Information, and Other 
Resources 167
 
> Identity Theft, Phishing, Social Media 
Hacks, and Pharming 168
 
> Online Auction Fraud 172
 
> Other Internet Scams 172
Protecting Against Online Theft, Online 
Fraud, and Other Dot Cons 173
 
> Protecting Against Data and Information 
Theft 173
 
> Protecting Against Identity Theft, Phishing, 
Social Media Hacks, and Pharming 173
 
> Protecting Against Online Auction Fraud 
and Other Internet Scams 176
Personal Safety Issues 177
 
> Cyberbullying and Cyberstalking 177
 
> Online Pornography 178
Protecting Against Cyberbullying, 
 Cyberstalking, and Other Personal Safety 
 Concerns 178
 
> Safety Tips for Adults 178
 
> Safety Tips for Children and Teens 179
Network and Internet Security Legislation 179
Summary 180
Review Activities 182
Projects 184
HOW IT WORKS Securing a Wireless 
Home Router 153
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY Securing 
BYOD 158
TREND Beyond Fingerprint Readers—
Digital Tattoos and More 167
TECHNOLOGY AND YOU Online 
 Financial Alerts 175
Expert Insight on Networks 
and the Internet 186
Chapter 5 Computer Security and 
Privacy 188
Overview 189
Why Be Concerned About Computer 
 Security? 189
Hardware Loss, Hardware Damage, and 
System Failure 189
 
> Hardware Loss 190
 
> Hardware Damage 190
 
> System Failure and Other Disasters 190
 
> Protecting Against Hardware Loss, 
 Hardware Damage, and System 
 Failure 191
Software Piracy and Digital 
 Counterfeiting 200
 
> Software Piracy 200
 
> Digital Counterfeiting 201
 
> Protecting Against Software Piracy and 
Digital Counterfeiting 202
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

XV
Why Be Concerned About Information 
 Privacy? 204
Databases, Electronic Profiling, Spam, and 
Other Marketing Activities 205
 
> Databases and Electronic Profiling 205
 
> Spam and Other Marketing Activities 208
 
> Protecting the Privacy of Personal 
 Information 209
Electronic Surveillance and Monitoring 214
 
> Computer Monitoring Software 215
 
> Video Surveillance 217
 
> Employee Monitoring 219
 
> Presence Technology 220
 
> Protecting Personal and Workplace 
 Privacy 221
Computer Security and Privacy 
 Legislation 222
Summary 224
Review Activities 226
Projects 228
TREND Self-Healing Devices 192
HOW IT WORKS Self-Destructing 
Devices 194
TECHNOLOGY AND YOU Protecting 
Your PC 198
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY Data 
 Killers 215
  
 Expert Insight on Web-Based 
Multimedia and E-Commerce 230
Chapter 6 Intellectual Property  Rights 
and Ethics 232
Overview 233
Intellectual Property Rights 233
 
> Copyrights 234
 
> Trademarks 235
 
> Patents 237
Ethics 238
 
> Ethical Use of Copyrighted Material 240
 
> Ethical Use of Resources and 
 Information 244
 
> Computer Hoaxes and Digital 
Manipulation  247
 
> Ethical Business Practices and Decision 
Making 249
Related Legislation 253
Summary 254
Review Activities 256
Projects 258
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY New 
 Applications for Digital Watermarking 236
TECHNOLOGY AND YOU Virtual 
 Currency—Real or Not? 239
HOW IT WORKS Digital Copy 
 Movies 244
TREND Social Commerce 249
Expert Insight on 
Systems 260
Chapter 7 Health, Access, and the 
Environment 262
Overview 263
Computers and Health 263
 
> Physical Health 263
 
> Emotional Health 270
Access to Technology 275
 
> The Digital Divide 275
 
> Assistive Technology 277
Environmental Concerns 279
 
> Green Computing 279
 
> Recycling and Disposal of Computing 
Equipment 282
Related Legislation 285
Summary 286
Review Activities 288
Projects 290
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

XVI
TECHNOLOGY AND YOU Tablet 
Docks 267
HOW IT WORKS Augmented 
 Reality 273
TREND Power to Go 282
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY E-Paper 283
  
 Expert Insight on 
Computers and Society 292
Chapter 8 Emerging Technologies 294
Overview 295
The Computer of the Future 295
 
> Emerging Hardware 296
 
> The Impact of Nanotechnology 304
 
> Quantum and Optical Computers 306
Emerging Networking Technologies 307
 
> Monitoring Systems 307
 
> New Wireless and Cloud Applications 308
 
> Wired Networking Standards 308
 
> Wireless Networking Standards 310
Artificial Intelligence (AI) 313
 
> What Is Artificial Intelligence (AI)? 313
 
> AI Applications 314
Technological Advances in Medicine 318
 
> Brain-to-Computer Interfacing (BCI) 319
 
> Telemedicine and Telesurgery 319
Technological Advances in the Military 320
 
> Battlefield Robots 320
 
> Exoskeleton Systems 321
Societal Implications of Emerging 
 Technology 321
Summary 322
Review Activities 324
Projects 326
TREND Perceptual Computing 297
TECHNOLOGY AND YOU “Magic” 
Glass 305
INSIDE THE INDUSTRY Wireless 
Power 311
HOW IT WORKS Self-Driving Cars 315
References and Resources Guide R-1
Computer History Timeline R-2
Guide to Buying a PC R-8
 
> Analyzing Needs R-8
 
> Listing Alternatives R-9
A Look at Numbering Systems R-11
 
> The Decimal and Binary Numbering 
 System R-11
 
> The Hexadecimal Numbering 
System R-11
 
> Converting Between Numbering 
Systems R-12
 
> Computer Arithmetic R-13
 
> Using a Calculator R-14
Coding Charts R-15
 
> ASCII and EBCDIC R-15
 
> Unicode R-16
Answers to Self-Quiz R-17
Glossary/Index I-1
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS
 I N A CHAN G I N G S O C I E T Y
6th Edition
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

outline
Overview
Computers in Your Life
Why Learn About Computers?
Computers in the Home
Computers in Education
Computers on the Job
Computers on the Go
What Is a Computer and What 
Does It Do?
Data vs. Information
Computers Then and Now
Hardware
Software
Computer Users and Professionals
Computers to Fit Every Need
Embedded Computers
Mobile Devices
Personal Computers (PCs) 
Servers 
Mainframe Computers
Supercomputers
Computer Networks and the 
Internet
What Are the Internet and the 
World Wide Web?
Accessing a Network or the Internet
Surﬁ ng the Web
Searching the Web
E-Mail
Computers and Society
Beneﬁ ts of a Computer-Oriented 
Society
Risks of a Computer-Oriented 
Society
Differences in Online 
Communications
The Anonymity Factor
Information Integrity
Introduction to the 
World of Computers
After completing this chapter, you will be 
able to do the following:
1. Explain why it is essential to learn about 
computers today and discuss several ways 
computers are integrated into our business 
and personal lives.
2. Deﬁ ne a computer and describe its primary 
operations.
3. List some important milestones in computer 
evolution.
4. Identify the major parts of a personal com-
puter, including input, processing, output, 
storage, and communications hardware.
5. Deﬁ ne software and understand how it is 
used to instruct the computer what to do.
6. List the six basic types of computers, giv-
ing at least one example of each type of 
computer and stating what that computer 
might be used for.
7. Explain what a network, the Internet, and 
the World Wide Web are, as well as how 
computers, people, and Web pages are 
identiﬁ ed on the Internet.
8. Describe how to access a Web page and 
navigate through a Web site.
9. Discuss the societal impact of computers, 
including some beneﬁ ts and risks related to 
their prominence in our society.
chapter 1
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OV E RV I EW
C
omputers and other forms of technology impact our daily lives in a multitude of 
ways. We encounter computers in stores, restaurants, and other retail establish-
ments. We use computers and the Internet regularly to obtain information, experience 
online entertainment, buy products and services, and communicate with others. Many 
of us carry a mobile phone or other mobile device with us at all times so we can 
remain in touch with others on a continual basis and can access Internet information 
as we need it. We also use these devices to pay for purchases, play online games with 
others, watch TV and movies, and much, much more.
Businesses also use computers extensively, such as to maintain employee and 
customer records, manage inventories, maintain online stores and other Web sites, 
process sales, control robots and other machines in factories, and provide business 
executives with the up-to-date information they need to make decisions. The govern-
ment uses computers to support our nation’s defense systems, for space exploration, 
for storing and organizing vital information about citizens, for law enforcement and 
military purposes, and for other important tasks. In short, computers and computing 
technology are used in an endless number of ways.
Understanding Computers in a Changing Society is a guide to computers and 
related technology, how they are being used in the world today, and their impact on our 
society. It will provide you with an introduction to computer concepts and terminology 
and give you a solid foundation for future computer-related courses. It will also provide 
you with the basic knowledge you need to understand and use computers in school, 
on the job, and in your personal life, as well as give you an understanding of the vari-
ous societal issues related to technology, such as security and privacy issues, ethical 
considerations, and environmental concerns.
Chapter 1 is designed to help you understand what computers are, how they 
work, and how people use them. It introduces the important terms and concepts that 
you will encounter throughout this text and in discussions about computers with oth-
ers, as well as includes an overview of the history of computers. It also takes a brief 
look at how to use a computer to perform basic tasks and to access resources on the 
Internet and the World Wide Web in order to provide you with the knowledge, skills, 
and tools you need to complete the projects and online activities that accompany this 
textbook. The chapter closes with an overview of the societal impact of computers. ■
COMPUTERS IN YOUR LIFE
Computers today are used in virtually every aspect of most individuals’ lives—at home, 
at school, at work, and while on the go. The next few sections provide an overview of the 
importance of computers and some of the most common computer-related activities that 
individuals may encounter every day.
Why Learn About Computers?
Fifty years ago, computers were used primarily by researchers and scientists. Today, com-
puters are an integral part of our lives. Experts call this trend pervasive computing, in 
which few aspects of daily life remain untouched by computers and computing technol-
ogy. With pervasive computing—also referred to as ubiquitous computing—computers are 
Most of the computer concepts 
introduced in this chapter are 
discussed in more detail in 
subsequent chapters of this text.
TIP
© Datacraft/Getty Images
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

4
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Computer literacy. The knowledge and understanding of basic computer fundamentals.
found virtually everywhere and computing technology is integrated into an ever-increasing 
number of devices to give those devices additional functionality, such as enabling them to 
communicate with other devices on an ongoing basis. Because of the prominence of com-
puters in our society, it is important to understand what a computer is, a little about how a 
computer works, and the implications of living in a computer-oriented society.
Prior to about 1980, computers were large and expensive, and few people had access to 
them. Most computers used in organizations were equipped to do little more than carry out 
high-volume processing tasks, such as issuing bills and keeping track of inventories. The 
average person did not need to know how to use a computer for his or her job, and it was 
uncommon to have a computer at home. Furthermore, the use of computers generally required 
a lot of technical knowledge and the use of the Internet was reserved  primarily for research-
ers and educational institutions. Because there were few good  reasons or  opportunities for 
learning how to use computers, the average person was unfamiliar with them.
Beginning in the early 1980s, things began to change. Microcomputers—inexpensive 
personal computers that you will read about later in this chapter—were invented and com-
puter use increased dramatically. The creation of the World Wide Web (WWW) in the late 
1980s and the graphical Web browser in the early 1990s started the trend of individuals 
buying and using computers for personal use. Today, portable computers and mobile phones 
have brought personal computing to a whole new level—nearly 90% of all U.S. households 
have a computer or mobile phone, and most individuals use some type of computer on the 
job. Whether you become a teacher, attorney, doctor, engineer, restaurant manager, salesper-
son, professional athlete, musician, executive, or skilled tradesperson, you will likely use a 
computer to obtain and evaluate information, to facilitate necessary on-the-job tasks, and to 
communicate with others. Today’s  computers are very useful tools for these purposes; they 
are also taking on new roles in our society, such as delivering entertainment on demand. 
In fact, computers and the traditional communications and entertainment devices that we 
use every day—such as telephones, televisions, gaming devices, and home entertainment 
 systems—are converging into single units with multiple capabilities. For instance, you can 
check your e-mail (electronic messages), watch videos, and view other Internet content on 
your living room TV; you can make telephone calls via your personal computer; and you 
can view Internet content and watch TV on your smartphone or other mobile device (see 
Figure 1-1). As a result of this convergence trend, the computer is no longer an isolated pro-
ductivity tool; instead, it is an integral part of our daily lives.
Just as you can learn to drive a car with-
out knowing much about car engines, you can 
learn to use a computer without understanding 
the technical details of how a computer works. 
However, a little knowledge gives you a big 
advantage. Knowing something about cars 
can help you make wise purchasing decisions 
and save money on repairs. Likewise, knowing 
something about computers can help you buy 
the right one for your needs, get the most effi-
cient use out of it, be able to properly upgrade it 
as your needs change, and have a much higher 
level of comfort and confidence along the way. 
Therefore, basic computer  literacy— knowing 
about and understanding computers and their 
uses—is an essential skill today for everyone.
FIGURE 1-1
Convergence. 
Many devices today 
include computing or 
Internet capabilities.
<
TELEVISIONS
Can be used to access Web pages, e-mail,
streaming movies, and other Internet content,
in addition to viewing TV content.
SMARTPHONES
Can be used to access Internet
content, play music and games, take
photos, watch TV shows, and more,
in addition to making phone calls.
More than half of all U.S. 
mobile phone users today are 
smartphone users; that is, their 
mobile phones include Internet 
capabilities and the ability to run 
mobile programs or apps.
TIP
Courtesy Netflix
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
5
Computers in the Home
Home computing has increased dramatically over the last few years as comput-
ers and Internet access have become less expensive and as a vast array of online 
consumer activities have become available. Use of the Internet at home to look 
up information, exchange e-mail, shop, watch TV and videos, download music 
and  movies, research products, pay bills and manage bank accounts, check 
news and weather, store and organize digital photos, play games, make vacation 
plans, and so forth is now the norm for many individuals (see Figure 1-2). Many 
individuals also use a computer at home for work-related tasks, such as to review 
work-related documents or check work e-mail from home.
As the Internet, wireless technology, and devices such as computers, tele-
visions, mobile phones, digital video recorders (DVRs), and gaming consoles 
continue to converge, the computer is also becoming a central part of home enter-
tainment. Wireless networking allows the use of computers in virtually any loca-
tion and both online and offline content to be sent wirelessly from one device to 
another. Both voice and video telephone calls can be made over your Internet 
connection, and your TV can display Internet content.
Computing technologies also make it possible to have smart appliances— 
traditional appliances (such as refrigerators, thermostats, or ovens) with some type 
of built-in computer or communications technology that allows them to be con-
trolled by the user via a smartphone or the Internet, to access and display Internet 
information, or to perform other computer-related functions. Smart homes—
homes in which household tasks (such as watering the lawn, turning the air condi-
tioning on or off, making coffee, monitoring the security of the home and grounds, 
and managing home entertainment content) are controlled by a main computer 
in the home or by the homeowner remotely via a smartphone—have arrived, and 
they are expected to be the norm in less than a decade. Some believe that one pri-
mary focus of smart appliances and smart homes will be energy  conservation—for 
instance, the ability to perform tasks (such as running the dishwasher and watering 
the lawn) during nonpeak energy periods and to potentially transfer waste heat 
from one appliance (such as an oven) to another appliance (such as a dishwasher) 
as needed.
Computers in Education
Today’s youth can definitely be called the computing generation. From handheld 
gaming devices to mobile phones to computers at school and home, most chil-
dren and teens today have been exposed to computers and related technology all 
their lives. Although the amount of computer use varies from school to school and 
from grade level to grade level, most students today have access to computers at 
school—and some schools have completely integrated computers into the curricu-
lum, such as by adopting e-book (electronic) textbooks that run on school-owned 
portable computers, or allowing students to bring in devices to use in class (referred 
to as BYOD or Bring Your Own Device). Many schools (particularly college cam-
puses) today also have wireless hotspots that allow students to connect their per-
sonal computers or mobile devices wirelessly to the Internet from anywhere on 
campus. Today, students at all levels are typically required to use a computer to 
some extent as part of their normal coursework—such as for preparing papers, practicing 
skills, doing Internet research, accessing Internet content (for instance, class Web pages or 
their campus YouTube channel), or delivering  presentations—and some colleges require a 
computer for enrollment. 
Computers are also used to facilitate distance learning—an alternative to   traditional class-
room learning in which students participate, typically at their own pace, from their current 
location (via their computers and Internet connections) instead of  physically going to class. 
Consequently, distance learning gives students greater flexibility to schedule class time around 
FIGURE 1-2
Computer use at 
home.
<
REFERENCE
Retrieving information, obtaining news, viewing
recipes, shopping online, and exchanging
e-mail are popular home computer activities.
PRODUCTIVITY
Home computers are frequently used for editing
and managing digital photos and home videos,
creating and editing work-related documents,
paying bills, and other productivity tasks.
ENTERTAINMENT
Home computers and gaming consoles are 
becoming a central hub for entertainment, such as
the delivery of photos, videos, music, games,
TV shows, instant messages, and social networking
updates.
© tokyoimagegroups/Shutterstock.com
© micro10x/Shutterstock.com
© iStockphoto.com/Ridofranz 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

6
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
FIGURE 1-3
Computer use in 
education.
<
their personal, family, and work commitments, as well as allows individuals located in very 
rural areas or stationed at military posts overseas to take courses when they are not able to 
attend classes physically. Some examples of computer use in education are shown in Figure 1-3.
Computers on the Job
Although computers have been used on the job for years, their role is continually evolving. 
Computers were originally used as research tools for computer experts and scientists and 
then as productivity tools for office 
workers. Today, computers are used 
by all types of employees in all types 
of businesses—including corporate 
executives, retail store clerks, trav-
eling sales professionals, artists and 
musicians, engineers, police offi-
cers, insurance adjusters, delivery 
workers, doctors and nurses, auto 
mechanics and repair personnel, and 
professional athletes. In essence, the 
computer has become a universal 
tool for on-the-job decision mak-
ing, productivity, and communica-
tions (see Figure  1-4). Computers 
are also used extensively for access 
control at many businesses and 
 organizations, such as authentica-
tion systems that allow only autho-
rized individuals to enter an office 
building, punch in or out of work, 
or access the company network via 
an access card or a fingerprint or 
hand scan, as shown in Figure 1-4 
and  discussed in detail in Chapter 4. 
In addition to jobs that require 
the use of computers by employ-
ees, many new jobs have been cre-
ated simply because computers 
exist, such as jobs in electronics man-
ufacturing, online retailing, Internet 
applications, and  technology-related 
computer support.
FIGURE 1-4
Computer use on 
the job.
<
DISTANCE LEARNING
With distance learning, students—such as these
U.S. Army soldiers—can take classes from home
or wherever they happen to be at the moment.
COMPUTER LABS AND CLASSROOMS
Many schools today have computers and
Internet access available in the classroom
and/or a computer lab for student use.
CAMPUS WIRELESS HOTSPOTS
Many students can access the Internet
from anywhere on campus to do research,
check e-mail, and more, via a campus hotspot.
DECISION MAKING
Many individuals today use a computer to help
them make on-the-job decisions.
PRODUCTIVITY
Many individuals today use a computer to perform
on-the-job tasks efﬁciently and accurately.
OFF-SITE COMMUNICATIONS
Many individuals use portable computers or
mobile devices to record data, access data, or
communicate with others when they are out of
the ofﬁce.
AUTHENTICATION
Many individuals are required to use authentication
systems to punch in and out of work, access
facilities, or log on to company computers.
© Goodluz/Shutterstock.com
© iStockphoto.com/sturti 
Denver Makle, 7th Army JMTC
© iStockphoto.com/sturti
© Monkey Business Images/Shutterstock.com
Courtesy Ingersoll Rand
© iStockphoto.com/fstop123
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
7
Computers are also used extensively by military personnel for communications and 
navigational purposes, as well as to control missiles and other weapons, identify terror-
ists and other potential enemies, and perform other necessary national security tasks. To 
update their computer skills, many employees in all lines of work periodically take com-
puter training classes or enroll in computer certification programs.
Computers on the Go
In addition to using computers in the home, at school, and on the job, most people encounter 
and use all types of computers in other aspects of day-to-day life. For example, it is common 
for consumers to use consumer kiosks (small self-service computer-based stations that 
provide information or other services to the public, including those used for ATM transac-
tions, bridal registries, ticketing systems, and more), point-of-sale (POS) systems (such as 
those found at most retail stores to check customers out—see the Technology and You 
box for a look at how you may soon be using iPads to order at restaurants), and self-
checkout  systems (which allow retail store customers to scan their purchases and pay 
Restaurant iPad Ordering Systems
You may have used your iPad or other device to place a pickup 
order at your local eatery; you may also have had a server use 
an iPad to take your order at a restaurant. Nice innovations, but 
guess what’s next? Placing your order yourself at a restaurant 
using an iPad.
This new trend of using iPads and e-menus to have cus-
tomers place their orders in restaurants is growing rapidly. In 
addition to enabling customers to place their orders at their 
convenience without waiting for a server, it also allows the res-
taurant to provide more resources to customers (such as pho-
tographs of menu items, pairing suggestions for appetizers and 
drinks, and so forth). The overall goal is to allow customers to 
control their dining experience from the time they are seated 
until they choose to pay the check. And, yes, they pay via the 
iPad as well (see the credit card reader at the top right of the 
iPad shown in the accompanying photo). 
iPad ordering systems work especially well for restaurants 
that offer customized menu items. For example, Stacked, one 
of the ﬁ rst large-scale adopters of restaurant iPad ordering sys-
tems, offers typical American food (such as pizza, burgers, and 
salads) at its Southern California restaurants but everything on 
the menu is customizable—customers choose from a wide variety 
of ingredients, toppings, and sauces. The iPad systems enable 
customers to build their selections, adding or removing ingredi-
ents, until they are satisﬁ ed with the order (the price adjusts as 
they change their selections). This allows customers to build their 
orders at a comfortable pace without having to remember them 
until a server arrives, or having to make that many decisions with 
a server waiting.
More than 7,000 e-menu-enabled iPads are also arriving at 
airport restaurants in three airports in North America. They will 
be used not only for placing orders but also for providing travel-
ers with free access to Facebook, Twitter, e-mail, games, news, 
and ﬂ ight updates while they wait (for security purposes, all per-
sonal information is wiped from the device as soon as the home 
button is pressed).
The two biggest risks for restaurants introducing iPad order-
ing systems is customer acceptance (most offer assistance from 
servers if the customer desires to help alleviate any customer 
concerns about using the devices) and technology issues. To 
avoid network or Internet outage issues, some restaurants are 
implementing redundant systems, such as multiple routers that 
can be used if the main router goes down or a 4G Internet con-
nection that the system can use to access the Internet via a cel-
lular connection if the main Internet source goes down.
T E C H N O LO GY A N D YOU
Courtesy of Square, Inc. 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

8
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Computer. A programmable, electronic device that accepts data input, performs processing operations on that data, and outputs and stores 
the results. >Input. The process of entering data into a computer; can also refer to the data itself. >Processing. Performing operations on data 
that has been input into a computer to convert that input to output. 
for them without a salesclerk) while 
in retail stores and other public loca-
tions. Individuals may also need 
to use a computer-based consumer 
authentication system to gain access 
to a local health club, theme park, 
or other membership-based  facility 
(see Figure 1-5).
In addition, many individuals 
carry a portable computer or mobile 
device with them on a regular basis 
to remain electronically in touch with 
others and to access information (such 
as stock quotes, driving directions, air-
line flight updates, movie times, news 
headlines, and more) as needed while 
on the go. These portable devices 
are also  commonly used to watch 
TV, download and listen to music, 
access Facebook pages and other 
social networking sites, and perform 
other mobile  entertainment options. 
Smartphones can also be used to pay 
for products and  services (refer again 
to Figure 1-5), as well as remotely 
deposit checks, transfer money to 
others, pay bills electronicially, and 
perform other mobile banking applica-
tions. GPS (global positioning system) 
capabilities are frequently built into 
smartphones, cars, and other devices 
to provide  individuals with driving 
directions and other  navigational aids 
while traveling or hiking.
WHAT IS A COMPUTER AND WHAT DOES IT DO?
A computer can be defined as a programmable, electronic device that accepts data, per-
forms operations on that data, presents the results, and stores the data or results as needed. 
The fact that a computer is programmable means that a computer will do whatever the 
instructions—called the program—tell it to do. The programs used with a computer deter-
mine the tasks the computer is able to perform.
The four operations described in this definition are more technically referred to as 
input, processing, output, and storage. These four primary operations of a computer can be 
defined as follows:
 
➤Input—entering data into the computer.
 
➤Processing—performing operations on the data.
FIGURE 1-5
Computer use while 
on the go.
<
PORTABLE DEVICES
Many people today carry a portable computer or
smartphone with them at all times or when they
travel in order to remain in touch with others and
to access |nternet resources.
CONSUMER KIOSKS
Electronic kiosks are widely available to view con-
ference or gift registry information, print photo-
graphs, order products or services, and more.
MOBILE PAYMENT SYSTEMS
Allow individuals to pay for purchases using a
smartphone or other device.
CONSUMER AUTHENTICATION SYSTEMS
Allow only authorized members, such as theme
park annual pass holders as shown here, access to
facilities.
Courtesy RedBox
© iStockphoto.com/JohnnyGreig
Courtesy Ingersoll Rand
Courtesy Intel
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
9
>Output. The process of presenting the results of processing; can also refer to the results themselves. >Storage. The operation of saving data, 
programs, or output for future use. >Communications. The transmission of data from one device to another. >Data. Raw, unorganized facts. 
>Information. Data that has been processed into a meaningful form.
 
➤Output—presenting the results.
 
➤Storage—saving data, programs, or output for future use.
For example, assume that you have a computer that has been programmed to add two 
numbers. As shown in Figure 1-6, input occurs when data (in this example, the numbers 2 
and 5) is entered into the computer, processing takes place when the computer program 
adds those two numbers, and output happens when the sum of 7 is displayed on the com-
puter screen. The storage operation occurs any time the data, a change to a program, or the 
output is saved for future use.
For an additional example, look at a supermarket barcode reader to see how it fits this 
definition of a computer. First, the  grocery item being purchased is passed over the bar-
code reader—input. Next, the description and price of the item are looked up—processing. 
Then, the item description and price are displayed on the cash register and printed on the 
receipt—output. Finally, the inventory, ordering, and sales records are updated—storage.
This progression of input, processing, output, and storage is sometimes referred to as 
the IPOS cycle or the information processing cycle. In addition to these four primary com-
puter operations, today’s computers almost always perform communications functions, such 
as sending or retrieving data via the Internet, accessing information located in a shared com-
pany database, or exchanging data or e-mail messages with others. Therefore, communica-
tions—technically an input or output operation, depending on which direction the information 
is going—is often considered the fifth primary computer operation.
Data vs. Information
As just discussed, a user inputs data into a computer, and then the computer processes it. 
Almost any kind of fact or set of facts can become computer data, such as the words in a 
letter to a friend, the numbers in a monthly budget, the images in a photograph, the notes in 
a song, or the facts stored in an employee record. When data is processed into a meaningful 
form, it becomes information.
FIGURE 1-6
The information 
processing cycle.
<
7
INPUT
User types in the
numbers 2 and 5.
PROCESSING
Computer adds
2 and 5.
OUTPUT
Computer displays
the results (output).
STORAGE
Computer saves the
output for future use.
2 + 5 = 7
5
7
2
7
© Tatiana Popova/Shutterstock.com; Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

10
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Information is frequently generated to 
answer some type of question, such as how 
many of a  restaurant’s employees work less than 
20 hours per week, how many seats are avail-
able on a particular flight from Los Angeles to 
San Francisco, or what is Hank Aaron’s lifetime 
home run total. Of course, you don’t need a 
computer system to process data into informa-
tion; for example, anyone can go through time 
cards or employee files and make a list of peo-
ple who work a certain number of hours. If this 
work is done by hand, however, it could take 
a lot of time, especially for a company with a 
large number of employees. Computers, how-
ever, can perform such tasks almost instantly, 
with accurate results. Information processing 
(the conversion of data into information) is a 
vital activity today for all computer users, as 
well as for businesses and other organizations.
Computers Then and Now
The basic ideas of computing and calculating 
are very old, going back thousands of years. 
However, the computer in the form in which it is 
recognized today is a fairly recent invention. In 
fact, personal computers have only been around 
since the late 1970s. The history of computers 
is often referred to in terms of generations, with 
each new generation characterized by a major 
technological development. The next sections 
summarize some early calculating devices and 
the different computer generations.
Precomputers and Early Computers (before approximately 1946)
Based on archeological finds, such as notched bones, knotted twine, and hieroglyph-
ics, experts have concluded that ancient civilizations had the ability to count and com-
pute. The abacus is considered by many to be the earliest recorded calculating device; 
it was used primarily as an aid for basic arithmetic calculations. Other early computing 
devices include the slide rule, the mechanical calculator, and Dr. Herman Hollerith’s 
Punch Card Tabulating Machine and Sorter. This latter device (see Figure 1-7) was the 
first electromechanical machine that could read punch cards—special cards with holes 
punched in them to represent data. Hollerith’s machine was used to process the 1890 U.S. 
Census data and it was able to complete the task in two and one-half years, instead of 
the decade it usually took to process the data manually. Consequently, this is considered 
to be the first successful case of an information processing system replacing a paper-
and-pen-based system. Hollerith’s company eventually became International Business 
Machines (IBM).
First-Generation Computers (approximately 1946–1957)
The first computers were enormous, often taking up entire rooms. They were powered 
by thousands of vacuum tubes—glass tubes that look similar to large light bulbs—which 
needed replacing constantly, required a great deal of electricity, and generated a lot of heat. 
First-generation computers could solve only one problem at a time because they needed to 
be physically rewired with cables to be reprogrammed (see Figure 1-7), which typically took 
several days (sometimes even weeks) to complete and several more days to check before 
Rob Bredow, CTO, Sony Pictures Imageworks
What position might a college student 
 graduating with a computer degree qualify for 
at Sony Pictures Imageworks?
We employ a number of talented engineers (typically 
computer science or computer engineering majors) 
at Sony Pictures Imageworks whose specialties 
range from developing completely new computer 
graphics techniques to focusing on our high perfor-
mance networking and disk configurations. A recent 
graduate with experience in computer graphics 
rendering might, for example, help write shaders to 
simulate the lighting in the surface of a new challeng-
ing material like skin or cloth used for both animated 
and live-action films. We recently hired an engineer 
who first joined us as an intern and, because of her 
enthusiastic attitude and technical abilities, is now on 
the front lines of our Linux support team deploying 
new hardware and supporting artists working on our 
films. In summary, a great attitude—along with strong 
 computer, math, and engineering skills—are  qualities 
we love to see in our technology teams at Sony 
Pictures Imageworks.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Courtesy Sony Pictures Imageworks
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
11
the computer could be used. Usually paper 
punch cards and paper tape were used for 
input, and output was printed on paper.
Two of the most significant examples 
of first-generation computers were ENIAC 
and UNIVAC. ENIAC, shown in Figure 1-7, 
was the world’s first large-scale, general-
purpose computer. Although it was not com-
pleted until 1946, ENIAC was developed 
during World War II to compute artillery-
firing tables for the U.S. Army. Instead of 
the 40 hours required for a person to com-
pute the optimal settings for a single weapon 
under a single set of conditions using man-
ual calculations, ENIAC could complete the 
same calculations in less than two minutes. 
UNIVAC, released in 1951, was initially 
built for the U.S. Census Bureau and was 
used to analyze votes in the 1952 U.S. pres-
idential election. Interestingly, its correct 
prediction of an Eisenhower victory only 
45 minutes after the polls closed was not 
publicly aired because the results were not 
trusted. However, UNIVAC became the first 
computer to be mass produced for general 
commercial use.
Second-Generation Computers 
(approximately 1958–1963)
The second generation of computers began 
when the transistor—a small device made 
of semiconductor material that acts like 
a switch to open or close electronic cir-
cuits—started to replace the vacuum tube. 
Transistors 
allowed 
second-generation 
computers to be smaller, less expensive, 
more powerful, more energy-efficient, and 
more reliable than first-generation com-
puters. Typically, programs and data were 
input on punch cards and  magnetic tape, 
output was on punch cards and paper print-
outs, and  magnetic tape (see Figure 1-7) 
was used for storage. Hard drives and pro-
gramming  languages (such  as FORTRAN 
and COBOL) were developed and imple-
mented  during this generation.
Third-Generation Computers (approximately 1964–1970)
The replacement of the transistor with integrated circuits (ICs) marked the beginning of 
the third generation of computers. Integrated circuits incorporate many transistors and 
electronic circuits on a single tiny silicon chip, allowing third-generation computers to be 
even smaller and more reliable than computers in the earlier computer generations. Instead 
of punch cards and paper printouts, keyboards and monitors were introduced for input and 
output; hard drives were typically used for storage. An example of a widely used third-
generation computer is shown in Figure 1-7.
FIGURE 1-7
A brief look 
at computer 
generations.
<
PRECOMPUTERS AND EARLY COMPUTERS
Dr. Herman Hollerith’s Punch Card Tabulating
Machine and Sorter is an example of an early
computing device. It was used to process
the 1890 U.S. Census data.
FIRST-GENERATION COMPUTERS
First-generation computers, such as ENIAC
shown here, were large and bulky, used
vacuum tubes, and had to be physically wired
and reset to run programs.
SECOND-GENERATION COMPUTERS
Second-generation computers, such as
the IBM 1401 mainframe shown here,
used transistors instead of vacuum
tubes so they were smaller, faster,
and more reliable than 
computers.
THIRD-GENERATION COMPUTERS
Third-generation computers used integrated
circuits, which allowed the introduction of
smaller computers such as the IBM System/
360 mainframe shown here.
FOURTH-GENERATION COMPUTERS
Fourth-generation computers, such as
the original IBM PC shown here, are
based on microprocessors. Most of
today’s computers fall into this category.
FIFTH-GENERATION COMPUTERS
Some aspects of 
such as the natural language input and arti cial
intelligence used by the IBM Watson computer
shown competing on Jeopardy! here, already exist.
first-generation
fifth-generation computers,
fi
Courtesy IBM Corporate Archives, Courtesy U.S. Army; Courtesy of IBM Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

12
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Hardware. The physical parts of a computer system, such as the keyboard, monitor, printer, and so forth.
Fourth-Generation Computers (approximately 1971–present)
A technological breakthrough in the early 1970s made it possible to place an increasing 
number of transistors on a single chip. This led to the invention of the microprocessor in 
1971, which ushered in the fourth generation of computers. In essence, a microprocessor 
contains the core processing capabilities of an entire computer on one single chip. The 
original IBM PC (see Figure 1-7) and Apple Macintosh computers, and most of today’s 
traditional computers, fall into this category. Fourth-generation computers typically use 
a keyboard and mouse for input, a monitor and printer for output, and hard drives, flash 
memory media, and optical discs for storage. This generation also witnessed the develop-
ment of computer networks, wireless technologies, and the Internet.
Fifth-Generation Computers (now and the future)
Fifth-generation computers are most commonly defined as those that are based on artifi-
cial intelligence, allowing them to think, reason, and learn (see one example in Figure 1-7). 
Some aspects of fifth-generation computers—such as voice and touch input and speech 
recognition—are being used today. In the future, fifth-generation computers are expected 
to be constructed differently than they are today, such as in the form of optical computers 
that process data using light instead of electrons, tiny computers that utilize nanotechnol-
ogy, or as entire general-purpose computers built into desks, home appliances, and other 
everyday devices.
Hardware
The physical parts of a computer (the parts you can touch and discussed next) are 
called hardware. The instructions or programs used with a computer—called soft-
ware—are discussed shortly. Hardware components can be internal (located inside 
the main box or  system unit of the computer) or external 
(located outside the system unit and connected to the system 
unit via a wired or wireless connection). There are hardware 
devices associated with each of the five computer operations 
previously discussed (input, processing, output, storage, and 
communications), as summarized in Figure 1-8 and illustrated 
in Figure 1-9. Both hardware and software are discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 2.
Input Devices
An input device is any piece of equipment that is used to input 
data into the computer. The input devices shown in Figure 1-9 are 
a keyboard, mouse, and microphone. Other common input devices 
include scanners, digital cameras, digital pens and styluses, 
touch pads and touch screens, fingerprint readers, and gaming 
controllers. 
Processing Devices
The main processing device for a computer is the central process-
ing unit (CPU). The CPU is located inside the system unit and 
performs the calculations and comparisons needed for processing; 
INPUT
PROCESSING
Keyboard
CPU
Mouse
OUTPUT
Microphone
Monitor/display screen
Scanner
Printer
Digital camera
Speakers
Digital pen/stylus
Headphones/headsets
Touch pad/touch screen
Data projector
Gaming controller
STORAGE
Fingerprint reader
Hard drive
COMMUNICATIONS
CD/DVD/Blu-ray disc
Modem
CD/DVD/Blu-ray drive
Network adapter
Flash memory card
Router
Flash memory card reader
USB flash drive
FIGURE 1-8
Common hardware 
listed by operation.
<
For a more detailed timeline 
regarding the development of 
computers, see the “Computer 
History Timeline” located in 
the References and Resources 
Guide at the end of this book.
TIP
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
13
it also controls the computer’s operations. For these reasons, the CPU is often considered 
the “brain” of the computer. Also involved in processing are various types of memory that 
are located inside the system unit and used to store data and instructions while the CPU 
is working with them, as well as additional processors such as the graphics processing 
unit (GPU). 
Output Devices
An output device accepts processed data from the computer and presents the results 
to the user, most of the time on the display screen (monitor), on paper (via a printer), 
or through a speaker. Other common output devices include headphones and headsets 
(used to deliver audio output to a single user) and data projectors (used to project com-
puter images onto a projection screen). 
Storage Devices
Storage devices (such as DVD drives and flash memory card readers) are used to store 
data on or access data from storage media (such as DVD discs and flash memory cards). 
Some storage hardware (such as a hard drive or a USB flash drive) includes both a stor-
age device and storage medium in a single piece of hardware. Storage devices are used 
to save data, program settings, or output for future use; they can be installed inside 
the computer, attached to the computer as an external device, or accessed remotely 
through a network or wireless connection.
SYSTEM UNIT
Case that contains the CPU, memory,
power supply, storage devices, and
all other internal hardware.
HARD DRIVE
Located inside the
system unit; stores
programs and most data.
MONITOR
Lets you see your
work as you go; the
primary output device.
PRINTER
Produces printed
copies of computer
output.
DVD DRIVE
Reads and
writes CD and
DVD discs.
FLASH MEMORY
CARD READER
Reads and writes
ﬂash memory cards.
MICROPHONE
Captures
spoken
input.
SPEAKERS
Produce audio
output.
KEYBOARD
Used to type
instructions into the
computer; a primary
input device.
USB PORTS
Connect external
devices that use the
USB interface.
CD AND DVD DISCS
Used to deliver programs
and store large
multimedia ﬁles.
MOUSE
Used to make on-
screen selections;
a primary input
device.
FLASH MEMORY CARDS
Used to store digital photos,
music ﬁles, and other content.
USB FLASH DRIVE
Used to store documents,
digital photos, music ﬁles, and
other content to be moved
from one PC to another.
MODEM
Connects the computer
to the Internet.
ROUTER
Connects devices so they
can share an Internet
connection and data.
FIGURE 1-9
Typical computer 
hardware.
<
Courtesy of Gateway, Inc.; National Park Service nps.gov screen shot; www.nps.gov/index.htm; 
Courtesy, Hewlett-Packard Company; Courtesy of Logitech; Courtesy Clear; Courtesy of Kingston 
Technology Company, Inc.; © Nomad_Soul/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

14
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Software. The instructions, also called computer programs, that are used to tell a computer what it should do. >Operating system. The main 
component of system software that enables a computer to operate, manage its activities and the resources under its control, run application 
programs, and interface with the user. >Boot. To start up a computer. >Windows desktop. The background work area displayed on the screen 
for computers running Microsoft Windows.
Communications Devices
Communications devices allow users to communicate electronically with others and to 
access remote information via the Internet or a home, school, or company computer 
network. Communications hardware includes modems (used to connect a computer to 
the Internet), network adapters (used to connect a computer to a computer network), 
and routers (used to create a small network so a variety of devices can share an Internet 
connection and data). A variety of modems and network adapters are available because 
there are different types of Internet and network connections—a modem used to connect 
to the Internet via a wireless connection and that also contains a built-in wireless router 
is shown in Figure 1-9. Communications hardware is discussed in more detail in Chapter 2; 
connecting to the Internet is covered in Chapter 3.
Software
The term software refers to the programs or instructions used to tell the computer hard-
ware what to do. Software is traditionally purchased on a CD or DVD or is downloaded 
from the Internet; in either case, the software typically needs to be installed on a computer 
before it can be used. Software can also be run directly from the Internet (via Web pages) 
without being installed on your computer; this is referred to as cloud software, Web-based 
software, Software as a Service (SaaS), and cloud computing and is discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 2.
Computers use two basic types of software: system software and application software. 
The differences between these types of software are discussed next.
System Software
The programs that allow a computer to operate are collectively referred to as system 
software. The main system software is the operating system, which starts up the com-
puter and controls its operation. Common operating system tasks include setting up new 
hardware, allowing users to run other software, and allowing users to manage the docu-
ments stored on their computers. Without an operating system, a computer cannot func-
tion. Common desktop operating systems designed for personal computers are Windows, 
Mac OS, and Linux; mobile operating systems used with mobile phones and other mobile 
devices include Android, iOS, and Windows Phone.
To use a computer, first turn on the power to the computer by pressing the 
power button, and then the computer will begin to boot. During the boot process, 
part of the computer’s operating system is loaded into memory, the computer does 
a quick  diagnostic of itself, and then it launches any programs—such as security 
software—designated to run each time the computer starts up. You may need to 
supply a password to log on to your computer or a computer network to finish the 
boot process.
Once a computer has booted, it is ready to be used and waits for input from the user. 
Most software today uses a variety of graphical objects (such as icons, buttons, and tiles) 
that are selected with the mouse (or with a finger or stylus for a computer that supports 
touch or pen input) to tell the computer what to do. For instance, the Windows desktop 
(the basic workspace for computers running the Windows operating system; that is, the 
place where documents, folders, programs, and other objects are displayed when they are 
being used), along with some common graphical objects used in Windows and many other 
software programs, is shown in Figure 1-10.
While the original release of 
Windows 8 did not include the 
traditional Windows Start button, 
it was reinstated in Windows 8.1 
but displays the Start screen 
instead of the Start menu.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
15
>Application software. Programs that enable users to perform specific tasks on a computer, such as writing letters or playing games; also 
called apps.
Application Software
Application software (see Figure 1-11) consists of programs designed to allow people to 
perform specific tasks using a computer, such as creating letters (word processing software), 
preparing budgets (spreadsheet software), managing inventory and customer databases (data-
base software), playing games (gaming software), watching videos or listening to music 
(multimedia software), editing digital photographs (image editing software), viewing Web 
pages (Web browsers), and exchanging e-mail (e-mail programs). Application software can 
be sold as individual stand-alone programs; related programs are sometimes bundled together 
into a software suite, such as the popular Microsoft Office and Google Docs software suites. 
Application software is launched via the operating system, such as by using the Windows Start 
screen for Windows 8 computers (or the Windows Start menu for older versions of Windows).
There are also application programs that help users write their own programs in a form 
the computer can understand using a programming language like BASIC, Visual Basic, 
COBOL, C++, Java, or Python. Some languages are traditional programming languages 
for developing applications; others are designed for use with Web pages or multimedia 
programming. For overall Web page development, markup languages—such as Hypertext 
Markup Language (HTML) and Extensible Hypertext Markup Language (XHTML)—can 
be used. Markup languages use text-based tags embedded into Web pages to indicate 
where and how the content of a Web page should be displayed. Scripting languages (such 
as JavaScript or VBScript), as well as the most recent version of HTML (HTML5), are 
often used to create interactive Web pages.
FIGURE 1-10
The Windows 
desktop.
<
TOOLBAR
Contains buttons
or icons that can
be used to issue
commands.
ICONS
Represent folders,
documents, or other
items that can be
opened.
WINDOWS
Rectangular areas containing
programs, documents, or other
data. The active window is the
one currently being used.
MENU BAR
Opens menus
that can be used
to issue commands.
DIALOG BOX
Displayed when needed to
request information from
the user.
SIZING BUTTONS
Resize or close a
window.
CHARMS
Allow you to search,
change your settings,
shut down the device,
and more.
WINDOWS DESKTOP
Provides the backdrop for
windows and other
objects.
TASKBAR
Usually located at the
bottom of the desktop.
NOTIFICATION AREA
Shows the clock and
other indicators.
TASKBAR BUTTONS
Correspond to open windows;
can be used to preview
thumbnails of open windows
as well as to change the
active window.
START SCREEN
THUMBNAIL
Opens the Start
screen that is
used to launch
programs.
PINNED PROGRAMS
Represent programs
that can be opened
directly from the
taskbar.
Application software programs are 
also referred to as apps.
TIP
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

16
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Computer Users and Professionals
In addition to hardware, software, data, and procedures (the predetermined steps to be 
carried out in particular situations), a computer system includes people. Computer users, 
or end users, are the people who use computers to perform tasks or obtain information. 
Anyone who uses a computer is a computer user, including an accountant electronically 
preparing a client’s taxes, an office worker using a word processing program to create 
a letter, a supervisor using a computer to check and see whether or not manufacturing 
workers have met the day’s quotas, a parent e-mailing his or her child’s teacher, a college 
student researching a topic online, a doctor updating a patient’s electronic medical record, 
a child playing a computer game, and a person  shopping online.
Programmers, on the other hand, are computer professionals who write the programs 
that computers use. Other computer professionals include systems analysts (who design 
computer systems to be used within their companies), computer operations personnel 
(who are responsible for the day-to-day computer operations at a company, such as main-
taining systems or troubleshooting user-related problems), and security specialists (who 
are responsible for securing the company computers and networks against hackers and 
other intruders who are discussed in more detail in Chapter 4). 
FIGURE 1-11
Examples of 
application 
software.
<
WORD PROCESSING PROGRAMS
Allow users to create written documents,
such as reports, letters, and memos.
MULTIMEDIA PROGRAMS
Allow users to play music or videos and transfer content to
and from CDs, DVDs, and portable devices.
WEB BROWSERS
Allow users to view Web pages and
other information located on the Internet.
E-MAIL PROGRAMS
Allow users to compose, send, receive, and manage electronic
messages; some also include calendars, to-do lists, and
other features.
National Park Service nps.gov screen shot; www.nps.gov/index.htm
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
17
COMPUTERS TO FIT EVERY NEED
The types of computers available today vary from the tiny computers embedded in con-
sumer products, to the mobile devices that do a limited number of computing tasks, to the 
powerful and versatile desktop and portable computers found in homes and businesses, to 
the superpowerful computers used to control the country’s defense systems. Computers are 
generally classified in one of six categories, based on size, capability, and price.
 
➤Embedded computers—tiny computers embedded into products to perform specific 
functions or tasks for that product.
 
➤Mobile devices—mobile phones, small tablets, and other small personal devices that 
contain built-in computing or Internet capabilities.
 
➤Personal computers—fully functioning portable or desktop computers that are 
designed to be used by a single individual at a time.
 
➤Servers—computers that host data and programs available to a small group of users.
 
➤Mainframe computers—powerful computers used to host a large amount of data and 
programs available to a wide group of users.
 
➤Supercomputers—extremely powerful computers used for complex computations 
and processing.
In practice, classifying a computer into one of these six categories is not always easy 
or straightforward. For example, some high-end personal computers today are as powerful 
as servers, and some personal computers today are the size of a mobile phone or smaller 
(see the Trend box). In addition, new trends impact the categories. For example, small 
tablet devices (often called mobile tablets, media tablets, or just tablets) are typically con-
sidered mobile devices because they are only slightly larger than a mobile phone, are typi-
cally used primarily for viewing Web content and displaying multimedia content instead of 
general-purpose computing, and usually run a mobile operating system. However, larger, 
more powerful tablet computers running a desktop operating system are typically consid-
ered personal computers. So even though the distinction between some of the categories 
(particularly mobile devices and personal computers) is blurring, these six categories are 
commonly used today to refer to groups of computers designed for 
similar purposes.
Embedded Computers
An embedded computer is a tiny computer embedded into a product 
designed to perform specific tasks or functions for that product. For 
example, computers are often embedded into household appliances 
(such as dishwashers, microwaves, ovens, coffeemakers, and so forth), 
as well as into other everyday objects (such as thermostats, answer-
ing machines, treadmills, sewing machines, DVD players, and televi-
sions), to help those appliances and objects perform their designated 
tasks. Typically, cars also use many embedded computers to assist 
with diagnostics, to notify the user of important conditions (such as 
an underinflated tire or an oil filter that needs changing), to control the 
use of the airbag and other safety devices (such as  cameras that alert 
a driver that a vehicle is in his or her blind spot—see Figure 1-12—or 
A light indicates that a 
moving vehicle is in the
driver’s blind spot.
A camera located under the
mirror detects moving vehicles
in the driver’s blind spot.
FIGURE 1-12
Embedded 
computers. This car’s 
embedded computers 
control numerous 
features, such as 
notifying the driver 
when a car enters his 
or her blind spot.
<
Courtesy Volvo Cars of North America
>Embedded computer. A tiny computer embedded in a product and designed to perform specific tasks or functions for that product. 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

18
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Mobile device. A very small device that has built-in computing or Internet capability. >Smartphone. A mobile device based on a mobile phone 
that includes Internet capabilities and can run mobile apps. >Media tablet. A mobile device, usually larger than a smartphone, that is typically 
used to access the Internet and display multimedia content.
auto braking systems that engage when a front collision is imminent), to facilitate the car’s 
navigational or entertainment systems, and to help the driver perform tasks. Embedded 
computers are designed for specific tasks and specific products and so cannot be used as 
general-purpose computers.
Mobile Devices
A mobile device is loosely defined as a very small (typically pocket-sized) device that has 
built-in computing or Internet capability. Mobile phones are the most common type of mobile 
device and can typically be used to make telephone calls, send text messages (short text-based 
messages), view Web pages, take digital photos, play games, download and play music, watch 
TV shows, and access calendars and other personal productivity features. Mobile phones 
that include computing and Internet capabilities (such as the one in Figure 1-13) are called 
smartphones (less capable mobile phones are sometimes referred to as feature phones). 
Handheld gaming devices (such as the Nintendo 3DS), portable digital media players (such 
as the iPod Touch), smart watches, and other personal devices that include Internet capabilities 
can also be referred to as mobile devices. As previously mentioned, media tablets (such as the 
More than half of all U.S. adults 
carry an Internet-enabled mobile 
device with them to provide 
Internet access while on the go.
TIP
Larger smartphones that can 
also function as small tablets 
are sometimes referred to as 
phablets.
TIP
Tiny PCs
Computers have shrunk again. Forget tiny notebooks or even 
media tablets if you want portability—today’s newest tiny PCs 
are the size of a USB ﬂ ash drive.
Some of these new computers actually do look just like a 
USB ﬂ ash drive; others are just a small circuit board, some-
times enclosed in a case. Whatever their appearance, the idea 
is  similar—you connect them to a display device and an input 
device (if needed) and you are good to go. 
These emerging tiny PCs are designed to connect in differ-
ent ways and have different capabilities. For example, Google’s 
Chromecast (shown in the accompanying photo) plugs directly 
into an HDTV using its built-in HMDI connector. After connect-
ing Chromecast, you can stream online content (such as videos, 
movies, and music) via Wi-Fi from your smartphone, tablet, or 
laptop to that HDTV. The Raspberry Pi tiny PC can connect 
to an HDTV via HDMI, as well as to a standard TV via RCA 
jacks. Instead of being used in conjunction with another device 
like Chromecast, however, the Raspberry Pi is a stand-alone 
computer that can be used with USB input devices (such as 
a keyboard and mouse) and connects to the Internet via an 
Ethernet port. Another tiny stand-alone PC is the Cstick Cotton 
Candy. This device, the size of a USB ﬂ ash drive, can connect 
to another computer or an HDTV via its built-in HDMI and USB 
ports, to peripheral devices via USB or Bluetooth, and to the 
Internet via Wi-Fi.
The ﬂ exibility of these devices and the apps that can be used 
with them vary from device to device, based on the operating 
system used (most use a version of Linux or Android, though 
Chromecast uses Chrome) and the amount of storage available 
(devices with a USB port typically support USB ﬂ ash drives or 
hard drives for additional storage if needed). But for turning a 
TV at any location into your own personal computer, gaming 
device, or video player, tiny PCs are deﬁ nitely the way to go.
T R E N D
© Tony Avelar/Bloomberg via Getty Images
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
19
>Personal computer (PC). A type of computer based on a microprocessor and designed to be used by one person at a time; also called a 
microcomputer. >Desktop computer. A personal computer designed to fit on or next to a desk.
one shown in Figure 1-13) designed for Web browsing, playing mov-
ies and other multimedia content, gaming, and similar activities are 
also typically considered mobile devices. Mobile devices are almost 
always powered by a rechargeable battery system and typically 
include wireless connectivity to enable the device to connect to a wire-
less hotspot or to a cellular provider for Internet access.
Today’s mobile devices typically have small screens and some, 
but not all, have keyboards. Because of this, mobile devices are most 
appropriate for individuals wanting continual access to e-mail, brief 
checks of Web content (such as doing a quick Web search, check-
ing movie times or weather forecasts, looking up driving directions, 
or getting updates from Web sites like Facebook), and music collec-
tions rather than for those individuals wanting general Web browsing 
and computing capabilities. This is beginning to change, however, 
as mobile devices continue to grow in capabilities, as wireless com-
munications continue to become faster, and as mobile input options 
(such as voice and touch input, and mobile keyboards) continue to 
improve. For instance, many mobile devices can perform Internet 
searches and other tasks via voice commands, some can be used to 
pay for purchases while you are on the go, many can view virtually any Web content, and 
some can view and edit documents stored in a common format, such as Microsoft Office docu-
ments. For a look at how tech clothing can be used to organize your mobile devices while you 
are on the go, see the Inside the Industry box.
Personal Computers (PCs)
A personal computer (PC) or microcomputer is a small computer designed to be 
used by one person at a time. Personal computers are widely used by individuals and 
businesses today and are available in a variety of shapes and sizes, as discussed next. 
Desktop Computers
Conventional personal computers that 
are designed to fit on or next to a desk 
(see Figure 1-14) are often referred to 
as desktop computers. Desktop com-
puters can use a tower case (designed 
to sit vertically, typically on the floor), 
a desktop case (designed to be placed 
 horizontally on a desk’s surface), or 
an all-in-one case (designed to incor-
porate the  monitor and  system unit 
into a single piece of hardware).
SMARTPHONES
MEDIA TABLETS
FIGURE 1-13
Mobile devices.
<
FIGURE 1-14
Desktop computers.
<
ALL-IN-ONE COMPUTERS
TOWER COMPUTERS
Because many mobile devices and personal computers today are continually connected to the 
Internet, securing those devices against computer viruses and hackers—as introduced later in this 
chapter and discussed in detail in Chapter 4—is essential for both individuals and businesses.
For tips on buying a personal 
computer, see the “Guide to Buying 
a PC” in the References and 
Resources Guide located at the end 
of this book.
TIP
Courtesy Amazon
Courtesy HTC
Courtesy Dell Inc.; Courtesy Lenovo
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

20
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Desktop computer systems typically cost between $300 and $1,500 and usually con-
form to one of two standards or platforms: PC-compatible or Mac. PC-compatible comput-
ers (sometimes referred to as Windows PCs or 
IBM-compatible PCs) evolved from the original 
IBM PC—the first personal computer widely 
accepted for business use. They are made by 
companies such as Dell, Hewlett-Packard, 
NEC, Acer, Lenovo, Fujitsu, and Gateway and 
typically run the Microsoft Windows operat-
ing system, although some run an alternative 
operating system (such as Linux). Mac com-
puters are made by Apple and use the Mac OS 
operating system. Windows, Linux, and Mac 
computers all use different software. Although 
PC-compatible computers are by far the most 
widely used in the United States, the Mac is 
traditionally the computer of choice for artists, 
designers, and others who require advanced 
graphics capabilities. Extra powerful desktop 
computers designed for computer users running 
graphics, music, film, architecture, science, 
and other powerful applications are sometimes 
referred to as workstations.
Michael Verdesca, Vice President and Chief 
Information Officer, Jack in the Box Inc.
How long will it be until paying for fast-food 
purchases by mobile phone is the norm?
The technology exists today to allow for the pay-
ment of fast-food purchases by mobile phone and 
it’s being used in Europe and Japan. Though it’s 
being tested in the United States, there are still some 
hurdles, primarily the adoption of the technology by 
cell phone providers and retailers, and consumers’ 
willingness to use it. Another hurdle is consumers’ 
concerns about the technology being secure. It will 
likely be a few years before there is widespread use.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Tech Clothing
The extreme popularity of mobile phones, portable digital media 
players, media tablets, and other mobile devices has led to the 
need to easily and securely carry these devices with you while 
on the go. While a single device can typically just go in your 
pocket, individuals carrying multiple devices may ﬁ nd it easier to 
use tech clothing.
Similar to the way many backpacks today have built-in pockets 
for portable digital media players along with internal channels to 
run earbud cords, clothing manufacturers are increasingly design-
ing products with mobile devices in mind, such as including clear 
pouches for storing and using devices while on the go. The jacket 
shown in the accompanying illustration goes a step further—it has 
24 pockets, including some clear pockets to hold devices as they 
are being used and a pocket large enough to hold an iPad, as well as 
a wire management system to organize earbuds and other cords. To 
use this jacket, ﬁ rst put your devices in the appropriate pockets and 
then run your cables through the appropriate internal channels—
the devices then can be used in the normal fashion. Other items, 
such as keys, a wallet, a digital camera, or airline tickets, can also be 
stored securely in a pocket. In addition to just helping you carry your 
devices, using a tech jacket or vest also has additional advantages. 
For instance, your devices cannot be accidentally dropped and they 
are safe from thieves as long as you are wearing the garment. If you 
are traveling by air, a tech garment can simplify your airport security 
experience and prevent you from losing or forgetting items at the 
security checkpoint because you can just take off the garment and 
have it examined as a single item. So, with tech clothing, at least in 
the area of mobile devices, you can take it with you.
I N S I D E  TH E  I N D U STRY
REGULAR APPEARANCE
X-RAY VIEW
Scottevest
Courtesy of Jack in the Box, Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
21
>Portable computer. A small personal computer, such as a notebook or tablet, that is designed to be carried around easily. 
>Notebook computer. A fully functioning portable computer that opens to reveal a screen and keyboard; also called a laptop computer. 
>Tablet computer. A portable computer about the size of a notebook that is designed to be used with a digital pen. >Hybrid notebook-tablet 
computer. A portable computer designed to function as both a notebook and a tablet PC. >Netbook. A computer that is smaller and has more 
limited features than a notebook computer.
Portable Computers
Portable computers are fully functioning computers designed to be carried around eas-
ily. This portability makes them very flexible. They can be used at home or in the office; 
they can also be used at school, while on vacation, at off-site meetings, and other loca-
tions. Like mobile devices, portable computers are designed to be powered by recharge-
able batteries so they can be used while on the go. While portable computers are essential 
for many workers, such as salespeople who need to make presentations or take orders 
from clients off-site, agents who need to collect data at remote locations, and managers 
who need computing and communications resources as they travel, they are typically also 
the computer of choice today for students and for individuals buying a new home com-
puter. In fact, portable computers now outsell desktop computers in the United States. 
Portable computers are available in a variety of configurations, as discussed next and 
shown in Figure 1-15.
 
➤Notebook computers (also called laptop computers) are about the size of a 
paper notebook and open to reveal a screen on the top half of the  computer and a 
keyboard on the bottom. They are typically comparable to desktop computers in 
features and capabilities. Very thin and very light notebooks are often referred to as 
subnotebooks or ultraportables; ultraportables conforming to Intel’s standards can 
be marketed as Ultrabooks.
 
➤ Tablet computers are typically about the size of a notebook computer and are designed 
to be used with a digital pen/stylus or touch input. Unlike notebooks, they don’t have 
a physical keyboard but they typically can use an on-screen or attached keyboard as 
needed.
 
➤Hybrid notebook-tablet computers (also called convertible tablets) can function as 
either a notebook or a tablet computer. Some (such as the one in Figure 1-15) have a 
display screen that folds shut to resemble a tablet; others are designed to separate the 
display from the keyboard when a tablet is needed.
 
➤Netbooks are similar to notebook computers but are smaller and have more limited 
features, such as relying on cloud software and external DVD drives.
It is important to realize that while a portable computer offers the convenience of 
mobility, it typically isn’t as comfortable to use for a primary home or work computer 
as a  desktop computer is, without additional hardware. For instance, many individu-
als find it more conve nient to connect and use a conventional monitor, keyboard, and 
Computers that allow pen or touch 
input—such as tablet computers—are 
convenient in crowded situations, as 
well as in places where the clicking 
of a keyboard would be annoying to 
others.
TIP
NOTEBOOKS
HYBRID NOTEBOOK-TABLETS
TABLETS
FIGURE 1-15
Portable computers.
<
Tablets are expected to outsell 
laptops by 2016.
TIP
Portable computers (typically 
netbooks) that run the Chrome 
operating system are often referred 
to as Chromebooks.
TIP
Courtesy Dell Inc.
Courtesy Google
Courtesy Lenovo
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

22
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Thin client. A personal computer designed to access a network for processing and data storage, instead of performing those tasks locally. 
>Internet appliance. A device that can be used to access the Internet.
mouse when using a notebook computer at a 
desk for a long computer session. This hard-
ware can be connected individually to many 
portable computers via a wired or wireless 
connection; there are also docking stations
and USB hubs that can be used to connect 
a portable computer easily to the hardware 
devices that are attached to the docking sta-
tion or USB hub. Docking stations and other 
ergonomic-related topics are discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 7.
Thin Clients and Internet 
Appliances
Most personal computers today are sold as 
stand-alone, self-sufficient units that are 
equipped with all the necessary hardware 
and software needed to operate indepen-
dently. In other words, they can perform 
input, processing, output, and storage with-
out being connected to a network, although 
they can be networked if desired. In con-
trast, a device that must be connected to a 
network to perform processing or storage 
tasks is referred to as a dumb terminal. Two 
types of personal computers that may be able to perform a limited amount of indepen-
dent processing but are designed to be used with a network are thin clients and Internet 
appliances.
A thin client is designed to utilize a company network for much of its processing 
capabilities. Instead of using local hard drives for storage, programs are typically accessed 
from and data is stored on a network server. The main advantage of thin clients over desk-
top computers is lower cost because hardware needs to be replaced less frequently, and 
costs are lower for computer maintenance, power, and air conditioning. Additional benefits 
include increased security (because data is not stored on the computer) and easier mainte-
nance (because all software is located on a central server). Disadvantages include having 
limited or no local storage (although this is an advantage for companies with highly secure 
data that need to prevent data from leaving the facility) and not being able to function as 
a stand-alone computer when the network is not working. Thin clients are used by busi-
nesses to provide employees with access to network applications; they are also used in 
school computer labs (such as the one shown in Figure 1-16). 
Ordinary devices that can be used for accessing the Internet can be called 
Internet appliances (sometimes referred to as Internet-enabled devices). Some Internet 
appliances (such as smart TVs and the smart refrigerator shown in Figure 1-16) use 
apps to deliver news, sports scores, weather, music, and other Web-based information. 
Gaming consoles (such as the Nintendo Wii, the Xbox 360 shown accessing a Web page 
in Figure 1-16, and the Sony PlayStation 3) that can be used to view Internet content, in 
addition to their gaming abilities, can also be classified as Internet appliances when they 
are used to access the Internet. 
Martin Smekal, President and Founder, TabletKiosk
Will tablet computers ever replace notebooks?
While we have seen a tremendous rise in awareness 
and popularity of the tablet computer, we believe 
that traditional notebook PCs will still have a place in 
the mobile device market going forward. Tablets and 
tablet PCs are incredibly effective and ergonomically 
advantageous for mobility purposes, but there will 
still be certain applications where a more traditional 
computer with an integrated keyboard makes sense. 
In the end, it will come down to what is the right 
tool for the application. That said, there will likely be 
applications where it makes sense to replace today’s 
notebook with a more mobile-friendly tablet comput-
ing solution. We see some portion of market share 
held today by notebooks shifting in favor of the tablet 
and tablet PC market over time.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Virtually any device (such as 
a smartphone) being used to 
access a company network 
or cloud resource can also be 
referred to as a “thin client” while 
it is being used for that purpose.
TIP
Courtesy of TabletKiosk
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
23
>Server. A computer used to host programs and data for a small network. >Virtualization. Creating virtual (rather than actual) versions of a 
computing resource, such as several separate environments that are located on a single server but function as different servers.
Servers
A server—also sometimes called a midrange server, minicomputer, or midrange com-
puter—is a computer used to host programs and data for a small network. Typically larger, 
more powerful, and more expensive than a desktop computer, a server is usually located in 
an out-of-the-way place and can serve many users at one time. Users connect to the server 
through a network, using their desktop computer, portable computer, thin client, or a dumb 
terminal consisting of just a monitor and keyboard (see Figure 1-17). Servers are often 
used in small- to medium-sized businesses (such as medical or dental offices), as well as in 
school computer labs. There are also special home servers designed for home use, which 
are often used to back up (make duplicate copies of) the content located on all the comput-
ers in the home automatically and to host music, photos, movies, and other media to be 
shared via a home network.
One trend involving servers (as well as the mainframe computers discussed next) 
today is virtualization—creating virtual (rather than actual) versions of a  computing 
resource. Server virtualization uses separate server environments that, although physi-
cally located on the same computer, function as separate servers and do not interact with 
each other. For instance, all applications for an organization 
can be installed in virtual environments on one or more physi-
cal servers instead of using a separate server for each applica-
tion. Using a separate server for each application often wastes 
resources because the servers are typically not used to full 
capacity—one estimate is that only about 10% of server capa-
bility is frequently utilized. With virtualization, companies 
can fulfill their computing needs with fewer servers, which 
results in lower costs for hardware and server management, as 
well as lower power and cooling costs. Consequently, one of 
the most significant appeals of server virtualization today is 
increased efficiency. 
With the wide use of portable computers and mobile 
devices in the workplace, desktop virtualization is a growing 
trend. Desktop virtualization separates the user’s desktop envi-
ronment from his or her physical computer so that each user’s 
desktop (stored on a central server) can be delivered to that 
individual via any authorized device; the user interacts with the 
virtual desktop in the same way he or she would interact with 
THIN CLIENTS
INTERNET-ENABLED GAMING CONSOLES
SMART FRIDGES
FIGURE 1-16
Thin clients and 
Internet appliances.
<
The server is typically
stored in a nearby closet or
other out-of-the way place.
The user connects to the
server using a computer, thin
client, or dumb terminal.
FIGURE 1-17
Servers. Servers are 
used to host data and 
programs on a small 
network, such as a 
school computer lab or 
medical office network.
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Courtesy Ergotron Inc.; Courtesy Dell Inc. 
Courtesy Spoon River College
© Ethan Miller/Getty Images
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

24
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Mainframe computer. A computer used in large organizations (such as hospitals, large businesses, and colleges) that need to manage large 
amounts of centralized data and run multiple programs simultaneously. >Supercomputer. The fastest, most expensive, and most powerful type of 
computer. 
a physical desktop. Desktop virtualization adds flexibility to where and how each worker 
performs daily tasks. Virtualization is also used in other computing areas, such as network-
ing and storage.
Mainframe Computers
A mainframe computer is a powerful computer used by many large organizations—
such as hospitals, universities, large businesses, banks, and government offices—that 
need to manage large amounts of centralized data. Larger, more expensive, and more 
powerful than servers, mainframes can serve thousands of users connected to the main-
frame via personal computers, thin clients, or dumb terminals, in a manner similar to 
the way users connect to servers. Mainframe computers are typically located in climate-
controlled data centers (see Figure 1-18) and are connected to the rest of the company 
computers via a computer network. During regular business hours, a mainframe typi-
cally runs the  programs needed to meet the different needs of its wide variety of users. 
At night, it commonly performs large processing tasks, such as payroll and billing. 
Today’s mainframes are sometimes referred to as high-end servers or enterprise-class 
servers and they usually cost at least several hundred thousand 
 dollars each.
One issue facing businesses today is the high cost of elec-
tricity to power and cool the mainframes, servers, and personal 
computers used in an organization. Consequently, making the 
computers located in a business—particularly mainframes 
and servers—more energy efficient is a high priority today. 
Virtualization is often used today to utilize a company’s main-
frames more efficiently. Another current focus for mainframes 
today is ensuring they can handle new and emerging needs (such 
as having the computational power to process data from smart 
meters and other new technology and having the ability to run 
mobile and social networking applications) for businesses that 
want to offer these apps but want to have the power and security 
of a mainframe.
Supercomputers
Some applications require extraordinary speed, accuracy, and processing capabili-
ties—for example, sending astronauts into space, controlling missile guidance systems 
and satellites, forecasting the weather, exploring for oil, breaking codes, and designing 
and testing new products. Supercomputers—the most powerful and most expensive 
type of computer available—were developed to fill this need. Some relatively new 
supercomputing applications include hosting extremely complex Web sites (such as 
search sites and social networking sites) and three-dimensional applications (such as 
3D medical imaging, 3D image projections, and 3D architectural modeling). Unlike 
mainframe computers, which typically run multiple applications simultaneously to 
serve a wide variety of users, supercomputers generally run one program at a time, as 
fast as possible.
Conventional supercomputers can cost several million dollars each. They tend to be 
very large and contain a large number of CPUs. For  example, the Titan supercomputer 
shown in Figure 1-19 occupies 4,352 square feet of floor space and  contains 299,008 
FIGURE 1-18
Mainframe 
computers. 
Mainframes are used 
to perform large 
processing tasks for 
businesses.
<
Courtesy of IBM Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
25
>Computer network. A collection of computers and other hardware devices that are connected together to share hardware, software, and data, as 
well as to communicate electronically with one another. >Internet. The largest and most well-known computer network, linking millions of computers 
all over the world. >Internet service provider (ISP). A business or other organization that provides Internet access to others, typically for a fee.
CPUs. This supercomputer is being installed at the U.S. 
Department of Energy Oak Ridge National Laboratory and 
is expected to be used for a variety of scientific research, 
including climate change and astrophysics; its speed is 
expected to give researchers unparalleled accuracy in their 
simulations and facilitate faster research breakthroughs. 
At 17.59  petaflops (quadrillions of floating point operations 
or calculations per second) at the present time and expected 
to surpass 20 petaflops when completed, Titan is one of the 
fastest  computers in the world. 
COMPUTER NETWORKS AND THE 
INTERNET
A computer network is a collection of computers and other devices that are con-
nected together to enable users to share hardware, software, and data, as well as to 
communicate electronically with each other. Computer networks exist in many sizes 
and types. For instance, home networks are commonly used to allow home comput-
ers to share a single printer and Internet connection, as well as to exchange files. 
Small office  networks enable workers to access company records stored on a network 
server,  communicate with other employees, share a high-speed printer, and access the 
Internet (see Figure 1-20). School networks allow students and teachers to access 
the Internet and school resources, and large corporate networks often connect all of the 
offices or retail stores in the corporation,  creating a network that spans several  cities or 
states. Public wireless networks—such as those available at some coffeehouses, res-
taurants, public libraries, and parks—provide Internet access to individuals via their 
 portable computers and mobile devices; mobile telephone networks provide Internet 
access and communications capabilities to smartphone users. Most computers today 
connect to a computer network.
What Are the Internet and the World Wide Web?
The Internet is the largest and most well-known computer network in the world. It is tech-
nically a network of networks because it consists of thousands of networks that can all 
access each other via the main backbone infrastructure of the Internet. Individual users 
connect to the Internet by connecting their computers or other devices to servers belonging 
to an Internet service provider (ISP)—a company that provides Internet access, usually 
for a fee. ISPs (which include conventional and mobile telephone companies like AT&T, 
Verizon, and Sprint; cable providers like Comcast and Time Warner; and stand-alone ISPs 
like NetZero and EarthLink) function as gateways or onramps to the Internet, providing 
Internet access to their subscribers. ISP servers are continually connected to a larger net-
work, called a regional network, which, in turn, is connected to one of the major high-
speed networks within a country, called a backbone network. Backbone networks within a 
country are connected to each other and to backbone networks in other countries. Together 
they form one enormous network of networks—the Internet. Tips for selecting an ISP are 
included in Chapter 3.
Millions of people and organizations all over the world are connected to the 
Internet. The most common Internet activities today are exchanging e-mail messages 
FIGURE 1-19
The Titan 
supercomputer. 
Supercomputers are 
used for specialized 
situations in which 
immense processing 
speed is required.
<
Courtesy of Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

26
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>World Wide Web (WWW). The collection of Web pages available through the Internet. >Web page. A document, typically containing 
hyperlinks to other documents, located on a Web server and available through the World Wide Web. >Web site. A collection of related Web 
pages usually belonging to an organization or individual. >Web server. A computer that is continually connected to the Internet and hosts Web 
pages that are accessible through the Internet. >Web browser. A program used to view Web pages.
and  accessing content located on Web pages. While the term Internet refers to the physi-
cal structure of that network, the World Wide Web (WWW) refers to one resource—a 
collection of documents called Web pages—available through the Internet. A group of 
Web pages belonging to one individual or company is called a Web site. Web pages are 
stored on computers (called Web servers) that are continually connected to the Internet; 
they can be accessed at any time by anyone with a computer (or other Web-enabled 
device) and an Internet connection. A wide variety of information is available via Web 
pages, such as company and product information, government forms and publications, 
maps, telephone directories, news, weather, sports results, airline schedules, and much, 
much more. You can also use Web pages to shop, bank, trade stock, and perform other 
types of online financial transactions; access social media like Facebook and Google+ 
social networking sites and blogs; and listen to music, play games, watch television 
shows, and perform other entertainment-oriented activities (see Figure 1-21). Web 
pages are viewed using a Web browser, such as Internet Explorer (IE), Chrome, Safari, 
Opera, or Firefox.
INTERNET
CONNECTION
THE
INTERNET
E-MAIL
(to a customer)
E-MAIL
(to a customer)
SHARED PRINTER
TOM’S PC
WEB PAGE
(for Mary)
BETTY’S PC
NETWORK
SERVER
MARY’S TABLET
FILES
(for Tom)
FILES
(for Tom)
WEB PAGE
(for Mary)
FIGURE 1-20
Example of a 
computer network.
<
© K. Miri Photography/Shutterstock.com; © 300dpi/Shutterstock.com; © Andrew Buckin/Shutterstock.com; © robert_s/Shutterstock.com; 
© kavione/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy Amazon; Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Although some people use 
the terms Internet and Web 
interchangeably, technically 
the Web—the collection of 
Web pages available over the 
Internet—is only one resource 
available via the Internet.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
27
>Internet address. An address that identifies a computer, person, or Web page on the Internet, such as an IP address, domain name, or e-mail 
address.
Accessing a Network or the Internet
To access a local computer network (such as a home network, a school or  company net-
work, or a public wireless hotspot), you need to use a network adapter (either built into 
your computer or attached to it) to connect your computer to the network. With some 
computer networks you need to supply logon information (such as a username and a pass-
word) to log on to a network. Once you are connected to the network, you can access 
network resources, including the network’s Internet connection. If you are connecting to 
the Internet without going through a computer network, your computer needs to use a 
modem to connect to the communications media (such as a telephone line, cable connec-
tion, or wireless signal) used by your ISP to deliver Internet content. Network adapters and 
modems are discussed in more detail in Chapter 2.
Most Internet connections today are direct (or always-on) connections, which means 
the computer or other device being used to access the Internet is continually connected to 
the ISP’s computer. With a direct connection, you only need to open your Web browser to 
begin using the Internet. With a dial-up connection, however, you must start the program 
that instructs your computer to dial and connect to the ISP’s server via a telephone line, 
and then open a Web browser, each time you want to access the Internet.
To request a Web page or other resource located on the Internet, its Internet address—
a unique numeric or text-based address—is used. The most common types of Internet 
addresses are IP addresses and domain names (to identify computers), URLs (to identify 
Web pages), and e-mail addresses (to identify people).
FIGURE 1-21
Some common Web 
activities.
<
LOOKING UP INFORMATION
ACCESSING SOCIAL NETWORKS
WATCHING VIDEOS, TV SHOWS, AND MOVIES
Google screenshot © Google Inc.; Facebook © 2013 - English (US); Courtesy YouTube
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

28
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>IP address. A numeric Internet address used to uniquely identify a computer on the Internet. >Domain name. A text-based Internet address 
used to uniquely identify a computer on the Internet. >Uniform Resource Locator (URL). An Internet address (usually beginning with http://) 
that uniquely identifies a Web page.
IP Addresses and Domain Names
IP addresses and their corresponding domain names are used to identify computers 
available through the Internet. IP (short for Internet Protocol) addresses are numeric, 
such as 207.46.197.32, and are commonly used by computers to refer to other  computers. 
A computer that hosts information  available through the Internet (such as a Web server 
hosting Web pages) usually has a unique text-based domain name (such as microsoft.
com) that corresponds to that computer’s IP address in order to 
make it easier for people to request Web pages located on that 
computer. IP addresses and domain names are unique; that is, 
there cannot be two computers on the Internet using the exact 
same IP address or exact same domain name. To ensure this, 
specific IP addresses are allocated to each network (such as 
a company network or an ISP) to be used with the computers 
on that network, and there is a worldwide registration system 
for domain name registration. When a domain name is regis-
tered, the IP address of the computer that will be hosting the 
Web site associated with that domain name is also registered; 
the Web site can be accessed using either its domain name or 
corresponding IP address. When a Web site is requested using 
its domain name, the corresponding IP address is looked up 
using one of the Internet’s domain name system (DNS) servers 
and then the appropriate Web page is displayed. While today’s IP 
addresses (called IPv4) have four parts separated by periods, the 
newer IPv6 addresses have six parts separated by colons in order 
to have significantly more unique addresses. The transition from 
IPv4 to IPv6 is necessary because of the vast number of devices 
connecting to the Internet today.
Domain names typically reflect the name of the individual 
or organization associated with that Web site and the differ-
ent parts of a domain name are separated by a period. The far 
right part of the domain name (which begins with the rightmost 
period) is called the top-level domain (TLD) and traditionally 
identifies the type of organization or its location (such as .com 
for businesses, .edu for educational institutions, .jp for Web 
sites located in Japan, or .fr for Web sites located in France). 
The part of the domain name that precedes the TLD is called the second-level domain 
name and typically reflects the name of a company or an organization, a product, or an 
individual. There were seven original TLDs used in the United States; additional TLDs 
and numerous two-letter country code TLDs have since been created (see some exam-
ples in Figure 1-22) and more are in the works. More than 250 million domain names 
are registered worldwide.
Uniform Resource Locators (URLs)
Similar to the way an IP address or a domain name uniquely identifies a computer on the 
Internet, a Uniform Resource Locator (URL) uniquely identifies a specific Web page 
(including the protocol or standard being used to display the Web page, the Web server 
hosting the Web page, the name of any folders on the Web server in which the Web 
page file is stored, and the Web page’s filename, if needed).
ORIGINAL TLDS
INTENDED USE
.com
Commercial businesses
.edu
Educational institutions
.gov
Government organizations
.int
International treaty organizations
.mil
Military organizations
.net
Network providers and ISPs
.org
Noncommercial organizations
NEWER TLDS
INTENDED USE
.aero
Aviation industry
.biz
Businesses
.fr
French businesses
.info
Resource sites
.jobs
Employment sites
.mobi
Sites optimized for mobile devices
.name
Individuals 
.pro
Licensed professionals
.uk
United Kingdom businesses
FIGURE 1-22
Sample top-level 
domains (TLDs).
<
Only the legitimate holder of 
a trademarked name (such 
as Microsoft) can use that 
trademarked name as a domain 
name (such as microsoft.com); 
trademarks are discussed in 
detail in Chapter 6.
TIP
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
29
>E-mail address. An Internet address consisting of a username and computer domain name that uniquely identifies a person on the Internet. 
>Username. A name that uniquely identifies a user on a specific computer network.
The most common Web page protocols are Hypertext Transfer Protocol (http://) for 
regular Web pages or Secure Hypertext Transfer Protocol (https://) for secure Web pages 
that can safely be used to transmit sensitive information, such as credit card numbers. File 
Transfer Protocol (ftp://) is sometimes used to upload and download files. The file exten-
sion used in the Web page filename indicates the type of Web page that will be displayed 
(such as .html and .htm for standard Web pages created using HTML or XHTML). For 
example, looking at the URL for the Web page shown in Figure 1-23 from right to left, 
we can see that the Web page is called index.html, is stored in a folder called jobs on the 
Web server associated with the twitter.com domain, and is a secure Web page because the 
https:// protocol is being used.
E-Mail Addresses
To contact people using the Internet, you often use their e-mail addresses. An e-mail 
address consists of a username (an identifying name), followed by the @  symbol, fol-
lowed by the domain name for the computer that will be handling that  person’s e-mail 
(called a mail server). For example,
jsmith@cengage.com
maria_s@cengage.com
sam.peterson@cengage.com
are the e-mail addresses assigned respectively to jsmith (John Smith), maria_s (Maria Sanchez), 
and sam.peterson (Sam Peterson), three hypothetical employees at Cengage Learning, the 
publisher of this textbook. Usernames are typically a combination of the person’s first and 
last names and sometimes include periods, underscores, and numbers, but cannot include 
blank spaces. To ensure a unique e-mail address for everyone in the world, usernames must 
be unique within each domain name. So, even though there could be a jsmith at Cengage 
Learning using the e-mail address jsmith@cengage.com and a jsmith at Stanford University 
using the e-mail address jsmith@stanford.edu, the two e-mail addresses are unique. It is up 
to each organization with a registered domain name to ensure that one—and only one—exact 
same username is assigned to its domain. Using e-mail addresses to send e-mail messages is 
discussed later in this chapter; other forms of online communications—such as text messag-
ing and chat—are covered in Chapter 3. For a look at how online communications are being 
used to help keep college students safe, see the How It Works box.
This is the Web page
document that is to be
retrieved and displayed.
Next comes the folder(s)
in which the Web page is
stored, if necessary.
This part of the URL
identiﬁes the Web server
hosting the Web page.
Web page URLs usually begin
with http:// (for nonsecure
Web pages) or https:// (for secure
Web pages).
https://  twitter.com / jobs
 / index.html
Be sure that any Web page used to 
send sensitive data (such as your 
Social Security number or credit 
card information) is secure. Look for 
a URL that starts with https instead 
of http and a locked padlock icon on 
the Address bar.
TIP
You can also communicate 
directly with your friends via social 
networking sites, such as Facebook 
and Twitter, and mobile phone text 
messages.
TIP
FIGURE 1-23
A Web page URL.
<
© Natalia Siverina/Shutterstock.com; © pryzmat/Shutterstock.com; 
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®; © 2013 Twitter
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

30
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Pronouncing Internet Addresses
Because Internet addresses are frequently given verbally, it is important to know how to 
pronounce them. A few guidelines are listed next, and Figure 1-24 shows some examples 
of Internet addresses and their proper pronunciations.
 
➤If a portion of the address forms a recognizable word or name, it is spoken; other-
wise, it is spelled out.
 
➤The @ sign is pronounced at.
 
➤The period (.) is pronounced dot.
 
➤The forward slash (/) is pronounced slash.
Campus Emergency Notification Systems
Recent emergencies, such as school shootings and  dangerous 
weather, have increased attention on ways organizations can 
quickly and effectively notify a large number of individuals. 
Following the Virginia Tech tragedy in 2007, which involved a 
shooting rampage lasting about two hours and killing more than 30 
individuals, the Higher Education Opportunity Act was signed into 
law. The law provides grants and other assistance to colleges and 
universities to create an emergency communications system that 
can be used to contact students when a signiﬁ cant emergency 
or dangerous situation emerges. In response, colleges across the 
United States are implementing emergency notiﬁ cation systems to 
notify students, faculty, staff, and campus visitors of an emergency, 
severe weather condition, campus closure, or other critical event.
Because nearly all college students in the United States today 
have mobile phones, sending emergency alerts via text message 
is a natural option. To be able to send a text  message to an entire 
campus typically requires the use of a  company that special-
izes in this type of mass communications. One such company is 
Omnilert, which has systems installed in more than 800 colleges 
and universities around the country. With the Omnilert campus 
notiﬁ cation system—called e2 Campus—the contact information 
of the students, faculty, and staff to be notiﬁ ed is entered into 
the system and then the individuals can be divided into groups, 
depending on the types of messages each individual should 
receive. Individuals can also opt in to alerts via text message. 
When an alert needs to be sent, an administrator sends the mes-
sage (via a mobile phone or computer) and it is distributed to 
the appropriate  individuals (see the accompanying illustration). In 
addition to text  messages, alerts can also be sent simultaneously 
and automatically via virtually any voice or text communications 
medium, such as voice messages, e-mail messages, RSS feeds, 
instant messages, Twitter feeds, Facebook pages, school Web 
pages, personal portal pages, desktop pop-up alerts, TTY/TDD 
devices, digital signage systems (such as signs located inside 
dorms and the student union), indoor and outdoor campus public 
address (PA) systems, information hotlines, and more.
To facilitate campus emergency notiﬁ cation systems, some 
colleges now require all undergraduate students to have a mobile 
phone. Some campuses also implement other useful mobile ser-
vices, such as tracking campus shuttle buses, participating in 
class polls, accessing class assignments and grades, and texting 
tips about suspicious activities or crimes to campus security. An 
additional safety feature available at some schools is the ability 
to use the phones to activate an alert whenever a student feels 
unsafe on campus; these alerts automatically send the student’s 
physical location (determined via the phone’s GPS coordinates) 
to the campus police so the  student can be located quickly.
H OW I T WO R K S
Courtesy of Omnilert LLC
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
31
Surfing the Web
Once you have an Internet connection, you are ready to begin surfing the Web—that is, 
using a Web browser to view Web pages. The first page that your Web browser displays 
when it is opened is your browser’s starting page or home page. Often this is the home 
page for the Web site belonging to your browser, school, or ISP. However, you can use 
your browser’s customization options to change the current home page to any page that 
you plan to visit regularly. From your browser’s home page, you can move to any Web 
page you desire, as discussed next.
Using URLs and Hyperlinks
To navigate to a new Web page for which you know the URL, type that URL in the 
 browser’s Address bar (shown in Figure 1-25) and press Enter. Once that page is displayed, 
you can use the hyperlinks—graphics or text linked to other Web pages—located on that 
page to display other Web pages. In addition to Web pages, hyperlinks can also be linked to 
other types of files, such as to enable Web visitors to view or download images, listen to or 
download music files, view video clips, or download software programs.
The most commonly used Web browsers include Internet Explorer (shown in 
Figure 1-25), Chrome (shown in Figure 1-26), Safari, and Firefox. Most browsers today 
include tabbed browsing (which allows you to have multiple Web pages open at the same 
time and to drag a tab to move that window), the ability to search for Web pages using the 
Address bar, and tools for bookmarking and revisiting Web pages, as discussed shortly. 
Browsers today also typically include security features to help notify you of possible 
threats as you browse the Web, download managers to help you manage your downloaded 
files, and crash recovery features, such as the ability to open the last set of Web pages that 
FIGURE 1-24
Pronouncing 
Internet addresses.
<
TYPE OF 
ADDRESS
SAMPLE 
ADDRESS
PRONUNCIATION
Domain name
berkeley.edu
berkeley dot e d u
URL
microsoft.com/windows/ie/default.asp
microsoft dot com slash windows slash i e slash default dot a s p
E-mail address
president@whitehouse.gov
president at white house dot gov
HYPERLINKS
Point to a hyperlink to see the corresponding
URL on the status bar; click the hyperlink to
display that page.
ADDRESS BAR
Type a URL in the
Address bar and
press Enter to
display the
corresponding
Web page.
BACK AND
FORWARD BUTTONS
Move between
Web pages that
have been recently
viewed.
STATUS BAR
Displays URLs as
well as includes zoom
options and security
indicators.
TABS
Click the rightmost tab
to open a new tab.
HOME, FAVORITES, AND
TOOLS BUTTONS
Display your home page,
Favorites list, and Tools menu,
respectively.
FAVORITES LIST
Click a page name to
display that Web page.
FIGURE 1-25
Surfing the Web 
with Internet 
Explorer. URLs, 
hyperlinks, and 
favorites can be used 
to display Web pages.
<
The home page for a Web site is the 
starting page of that particular site; 
the home page for your browser is 
the Web page designated as the first 
page you see each time the browser 
is opened.
TIP
Courtesy NASA
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

32
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Electronic mail (e-mail). Electronic messages sent from one user to another over the Internet or other network.
were open before you accidentally closed your browser or before the browser or computer 
crashed (stopped working). In any browser, you can use the Back button to return to a 
 previous page and the Home button to display your browser’s home page. To print the 
current Web page, click the Tools button in Internet Explorer and select Print from the 
displayed menu.
Using Favorites and the History List
All Web browsers have a feature (usually called Favorites or Bookmarks and accessed 
via a Favorites or Bookmarks menu, button, or bar) that you can use to save Web page 
URLs. Once a Web page is saved as a favorite or a bookmark, you can redisplay that page 
without typing its URL—you simply select its link from the Favorites or Bookmarks list 
(refer again to Figure 1-25). You can also use this feature to save a group of tabbed Web 
pages to open the entire group again at a later time. Web browsers also maintain a History 
list, which is a record of all Web pages visited during the period of time specified in the 
browser settings; you can revisit a Web page located on the History list by displaying the 
History list and selecting that page.
Most Web browsers today allow you to delete, move into folders, and otherwise orga-
nize your favorites/bookmarks, as well as to search your favorites/bookmarks or History 
list to help you find pages more easily. In Windows 8, you can also pin (lock) a Web page 
to keep it handy—drag the site’s icon on the left of the Address bar to pin a site to the 
Windows taskbar; use the Tools menu to add the site to your Start screen.
Because many individuals use multiple devices (such as a personal computer and a 
smartphone) to surf the Web today, it is becoming more common to want to sync your 
browser settings (such as bookmarks, history, passwords, and so forth) across all of your 
devices. Most browsers today have synching capabilities; typically an online account (such 
as your Google account for Chrome or your SkyDrive account for Internet Explorer) is 
used to securely sync the devices.
Searching the Web
People typically turn to the Web to find specific types of 
information. There are a number of special Web pages, called 
search sites, available to help you locate what you are looking 
for on the Internet. One of the most popular search sites—
Google—is shown in Figure 1-26. To conduct a search, you 
typically type one or more keywords into the search box on 
a search site, and a list of links to Web pages matching your 
search criteria is displayed. There are also numerous reference 
sites available on the Web to look up addresses, phone num-
bers, ZIP codes, maps, and other information. To find a refer-
ence site, type the information you are looking for (such as 
“ZIP code lookup” or “topographical maps”) in a search site’s 
search box to see links to sites containing that information. 
Searching the Web is discussed in more detail in Chapter 3.
E-Mail
Electronic mail (more commonly called e-mail) is the pro-
cess of exchanging electronic messages between computers 
FIGURE 1-26
The Google search 
site displayed in the 
Chrome browser.
<
KEYWORD SEARCHES
Because the Search option is selected, type keywords here and press Enter
to see a list of Web pages matching your search criteria.
OTHER SEARCHES
Use these options to search for images, maps, videos, news, video,
products for sale, and more, as well as access your Gmail, Google
Drive, or Google Calendar.
If you accidentally close a 
browser window in Chrome, 
open a new tab and redisplay the 
page using the Recently closed 
list at the bottom of the window.
TIP
Google Chrome screenshot © Google Inc. 
If you get an error message when 
typing a URL, first check to make 
sure you typed it correctly. If it is 
correct, edit the URL to remove 
any folder or filenames and press 
Enter to try to load the home 
page of that site.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
33
over a network—usually the Internet. E-mail is one of the most widely used Internet 
 applications—Americans alone send billions of e-mail messages daily and use of mobile 
e-mail (e-mail sent via a mobile device) is growing at an astounding rate. You can send an 
e-mail message from any Internet-enabled device (such as a personal computer or mobile 
device) to anyone who has an Internet e-mail address. As illustrated in Figure 1-27, e-mail 
messages travel from the sender’s device to his or her ISP’s mail server, and then through 
the Internet to the mail server being used by the recipient’s ISP. When the recipient’s com-
puter retrieves new e-mail (typically on a regular basis as long as the computer is powered 
up, connected to the Internet, and the e-mail program is open), it is displayed on the com-
puter he or she is using. In addition to text, e-mail messages can include attached files, 
such as documents, photos, and videos.
E-mail can be sent and received via an e-mail program, such as Microsoft Outlook 
or Mac OS X Mail, installed on the computer being used (sometimes referred to as con-
ventional e-mail) or via a Web page belonging to a Web mail provider such as Gmail or 
Outlook.com (typically called Web mail). Using an installed e-mail program is convenient 
for individuals who use e-mail often and want to have copies of sent and received e-mail 
messages stored on their computer. To use an installed e-mail program, however, it must 
first be set up with the user’s name, e-mail address, incoming mail server, and outgoing 
mail server information. Web mail does not require this setup and a user’s e-mail can be 
accessed from any device with an Internet connection by just displaying the appropriate 
Web mail page and logging on. Consequently, Web-based e-mail is more flexible than con-
ventional e-mail because it can be accessed easily from any computer or other device with 
an Internet connection. However, Web mail is typically slower than conventional e-mail 
and messages can only be viewed when the user is online and logged on to his or her 
Web mail account, unless an 
e-mail program is used to 
download the e-mail mes-
sages to a computer. 
Web-based e-mail is 
typically free and virtually 
all ISPs used with personal 
computers include e-mail 
service in their monthly 
fee. Mobile e-mail may 
require a fee, depending on 
the data plan being used. 
Other types of mobile com-
munications, such as text 
messages and multimedia 
messages that typically use 
the Short Message Service 
(SMS) 
and 
Multimedia 
Message Service (MMS) 
protocols, respectively, may 
also incur a fee. Messaging 
and other types of online 
communications that can be 
used in addition to e-mail 
are discussed in Chapter 3.
FIGURE 1-27
How e-mail works.
<
SENDER’S
COMPUTER
RECIPIENT’S
MAIL SERVER
SENDER’S
MAIL SERVER
RECIPIENT’S
COMPUTER
The sender  composes a message and
sends it to the recipient via his or her
e-mail address.
The e-mail message is sent
over the Internet through the
sender’s mail server to the
recipient’s mail server.
The recipient requests his or her
messages from the mail server and the 
message is displayed.
© Julia Ivantsov/Shutterstock.com; © 300dpi/Shutterstock.com; © tatniz/Shutterstock.com; Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

34
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
COMPUTERS AND SOCIETY
The vast improvements in technology over the past decade have had a distinct impact on 
daily life, both at home and at work. Computers have become indispensable tools in our 
personal and professional lives, and related technological advancements have changed the 
way our everyday items—cars, microwaves, coffeepots, toys, exercise bikes, telephones, 
televisions, and more—look and function. As computers and everyday devices become 
smarter, they tend to do their intended jobs faster, better, and more reliably than before, as 
well as take on additional capabilities. In addition to affecting individuals, computeriza-
tion and technological advances have changed society as a whole. Without computers, 
banks would be overwhelmed by the job of tracking all the transactions they process, 
moon exploration and the space shuttle would still belong to science fiction, and some 
scientific advances—such as DNA analysis and gene mapping—would be nonexistent. In 
addition, we as individuals are getting accustomed to the increased automation of every-
day activities, such as shopping and banking, and we depend on having fast and easy 
access to information via the Internet and rapid communications via e-mail and mes-
saging. In addition, many of us would not think about making a major purchase without 
first researching it online. In fact, it is surprising how fast the Internet and its resources 
have become an integral part of our society. But despite all its benefits, cyberspace has 
some risks. Some of the most important societal implications related to computers and 
the Internet are introduced next; many of these issues are covered in more detail in later 
chapters of this text.
Benefits of a Computer-Oriented Society
The benefits of having such a computer-oriented society are numerous, as touched on 
throughout this chapter. The capability to virtually design, build, and test new buildings, 
cars, and airplanes before the actual construction begins helps professionals create safer end 
products. Technological advances in medicine allow for earlier diagnosis and more effective 
treatment of diseases than ever before. The benefit of beginning medical students perform-
ing virtual surgery using a computer instead of performing actual surgery on a patient is 
obvious. The ability to shop, pay bills, research products, participate in online courses, and 
look up vast amounts of information 24 hours a day, 7 days a week, 365 days a year via 
the Internet is a huge convenience. In addition, a computer-oriented society generates new 
opportunities. For example, technologies—such as speech rec-
ognition software and Braille input and output devices—enable 
physically- or visually-challenged individuals to perform neces-
sary job tasks and to communicate with others more easily.
In general, technology has also made a huge number of tasks 
in our lives go much faster. Instead of experiencing a long delay 
for a credit check, an applicant can get approved for a purchase, 
loan, or credit card almost immediately. Documents and photo-
graphs can be e-mailed or faxed in mere moments, instead of 
taking at least a day to be mailed physically. We can watch many 
of our favorite TVs shows online (such as the Survivor  episode 
shown in Figure 1-28) and access up-to-the-minute news at our 
convenience. And we can download information, programs, 
music files, movies, and more on demand when we want or need 
them, instead of having to order them and then wait for delivery 
or physically go to a store to purchase the desired items.
Risks of a Computer-Oriented Society
Although there are a great number of benefits from having a computer-oriented society and 
a networked economy, there are risks as well. A variety of problems have emerged from our 
extensive computer use, ranging from stress and health concerns, to the proliferation of spam 
FIGURE 1-28
Episodes of many 
television shows 
are available online 
to be viewed at the 
user’s convenience.
<
CBS Broadcasting Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
35
(unsolicited e-mails) and malware (harmful programs that can be installed on our computers 
without our knowledge), to security and privacy issues, to legal and ethical dilemmas. Many 
of the security and privacy concerns stem from the fact that so much of our personal busi-
ness takes place online—or at least ends up as data in a computer database somewhere—and 
the potential for misuse of this data is enormous. Another concern is the repercussions of 
collecting such vast amounts of information electronically. Some people worry about creat-
ing a “Big Brother” situation, in which the government or another organization is watching 
everything that we do. Although the accumulation and distribution of information is a neces-
sary factor of our networked economy, it is one area of great concern to many individuals. 
And some Internet behavior, such as downloading music or movies from an unauthorized 
source or viewing pornography on an office computer, can get you arrested or fired.
Security Issues
One of the most common online security risks today is your computer becoming infected with 
a malware program, such as a computer virus—a malicious software program designed to 
change the way a computer operates. Malware often causes damage to the infected computer, 
such as erasing data or bogging down the computer so it does not function well. It can also 
be used to try to locate sensitive data on your computer (such as Web site passwords or credit 
card numbers) and send that data to the malware creator or to take control of your computer 
to use as part of a botnet (a network of computers used without their owners’ knowledge) for 
criminal activities. Malware is typically installed by downloading a program that secretly con-
tains malware or by clicking a link on a Web page or in an e-mail message that then installs 
malware. In addition to computers, malware and other security threats are increasingly being 
directed toward smartphones and other mobile devices. To help protect your computer or 
mobile device, never open an e-mail attachment from someone you do not know or that has 
an executable file extension (the last three letters in the filename preceded by a period), such 
as .exe, .com, or .vbs, without checking with the sender first to make sure the attachment is 
legitimate. You should also be careful about what files you download from the Internet. In 
addition, it is crucial to install security software on your computer and mobile devices and to 
set up the program to monitor your devices on a continual basis (see Figure 1-29). If a virus 
or other type of malware attempts to install itself on your computer or mobile device (such 
as through an e-mail message attachment or a Web link), the security program will block it. 
If malware does find its way onto your computer or mobile device, the security program will 
detect it during a regular scan, notify you, and attempt to remove it.
Another ongoing security problem is identity theft—in which someone else uses your 
identity, typically to purchase goods or services. Identity theft can stem from personal 
information discovered from offline means—like discarded papers or stolen mail—or from 
information found online, stolen from an online database, or obtained via a malware pro-
gram. Phishing—in which identity thieves send fraudulent e-mails to people masquerading 
as legitimate businesses to obtain Social Security numbers or other information needed for 
identity theft—is also a major security issue today. Common security concerns and pre-
cautions, such as protecting your computer from malware and protecting yourself against 
identity theft and phishing schemes, are discussed in detail in Chapter 4.
Privacy Issues
Some individuals view the potential risk to personal privacy as one of the most important 
issues regarding our networked society. As more and more data about our everyday activities 
is collected and stored on devices accessible via the Internet, our privacy is at risk because 
the potential for privacy violations increases. Today, data is collected about practically any-
thing we buy online or offline, although offline purchases may not be associated with our 
identity unless we use a credit card or a membership or loyalty card. At issue is not that 
data is collected—with virtually all organizations using computers for recordkeeping, that is 
unavoidable—but rather how the collected data is used and how secure it is. Data collected 
by businesses may be used only by that company or, depending on the businesses’ privacy 
FIGURE 1-29
Security software. 
Security software is 
crucial for protecting 
your computer and 
mobile devices from 
malware and other 
threats.
<
Courtesy Bullguard
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

36
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
policy, may be shared with others. Data shared with others often results in spam, which is 
considered by many to be a violation of personal privacy. Privacy concerns and precautions 
are discussed in detail in Chapter 5.
Differences in Online Communications
There is no doubt that e-mail and other online communications methods have helped 
speed up both personal and business communications and have made them more effi-
cient (such as avoiding the telephone tag problem). As you spend more and more time 
communicating online, you will probably notice some differences between online 
communications methods (such as e-mail and social networking updates) and tradi-
tional communications methods (such as telephone calls and written letters). In gen-
eral, online communications tend to be much less formal and, in fact, many people 
compose and send e-mail messages quickly, without taking the time to reread the mes-
sage content or check the spelling or grammar. However, you need to be careful not to 
be so  casual—particularly in business—that your communications appear unprofes-
sional or become too personal with people you do not know.
To help in that regard, a special etiquette—referred to as netiquette—has evolved 
to guide online behavior. A good rule of thumb is always to be polite and considerate 
of others and to refrain from offensive remarks. This holds true whether you are asking 
a question via a company’s e-mail address, posting a message on someone’s Facebook 
page, or messaging a friend. With business communications, you should also be very 
careful with your grammar and spelling to avoid embarrassing yourself. Some specific 
guidelines for proper online behavior are listed in Figure 1-30.
Another trend in online com-
munications is the use of abbrevia-
tions and emoticons. Abbreviations 
or acronyms, such as BTW for “by 
the way,” are commonly used to save 
time in all types of communications 
today. They are being used with 
increased frequency in text messag-
ing and e-mail exchanged via mobile 
phones to speed up the text entry 
process. Emoticons are illustrations 
of faces showing smiles, frowns, and 
other expressions that are created 
with keyboard symbols—such as 
the popular :-) smile emoticon—and 
allow people to add an emotional 
tone to written online communica-
tions. Without these symbols, it is 
sometimes difficult to tell if the per-
son who sent the online communi-
cation is serious or joking because 
you cannot see the individual’s face 
or hear his or her tone of voice. 
Using your primary e-mail address when shopping online or signing up for a sweepstake or other 
online activity will undoubtedly result in spam being sent to that e-mail address. Use a throw-away 
e-mail address (a free e-mail address from Gmail or another free e-mail provider that you can 
change easily) for these activities instead to help protect your privacy and cut back on the amount of 
spam delivered to your regular e-mail account.
RULE
EXPLANATION
Use 
descriptive 
subject lines
Use short, descriptive subject lines for e-mail messages and online 
posts. For example, “Question regarding MP3 downloads” is much 
better than a vague title, such as “Question.”
Don’t shout
SHOUTING REFERS TO TYPING YOUR ENTIRE E-MAIL MESSAGE 
OR ONLINE POST USING CAPITAL LETTERS. Use capital letters 
only when it is grammatically correct to do so or for emphasizing a few 
words.
Watch what 
you say
Things that you say or write online can be interpreted as being sexist, 
racist, or in just general bad taste. Also check spelling and grammar—
typos look unprofessional and nobody likes wading through poorly 
written materials.
Don’t spam 
your contacts
Don’t hit Reply All to an e-mail when a simple Reply will do. The same 
goes for forwarding e-mail chain letters, retweeting every joke you run 
across, or sending every funny YouTube video you find—to everyone you 
know.
Be cautious
Don’t give out personal information—such as your real name, 
telephone number, or credit card information—to people you meet 
online.
Think before 
you send or 
post
Once you send an e-mail or text message or post something online, you 
lose control of it. Don’t include content (such as compromising photos 
of yourself) that you would not want shared with others, and don’t tag 
people in photos that are unflattering to them. In addition, don’t e-mail 
or post anything if emotions are running high—wait until you calm down.
FIGURE 1-30
Netiquette. Use these 
netiquette guidelines 
and common sense 
when communicating 
online.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
37
While most people would agree that using abbreviations and emoticons with personal 
communications is fine, they are not usually viewed as appropriate for formal business 
communications.
The Anonymity Factor
By their very nature, online communications lend themselves to anonymity. Because recip-
ients usually do not hear senders’ voices or see their handwriting, it is difficult to know for 
sure who the sender is. Particularly on forums (online discussions in which users post mes-
sages and respond to other posts), in virtual worlds (online worlds that users can explore), 
and other online activities where individuals use made-up names instead of real names, 
there is an anonymous feel to being online.
Being anonymous gives many individuals a sense of freedom, which makes them feel 
able to say or do anything online. This sense of true freedom of speech can be beneficial. 
For example, a reserved individual who might never complain about a poor product or ser-
vice in person may feel comfortable lodging a complaint by e-mail. In online discussions, 
many people feel they can be completely honest about what they think and can introduce 
new ideas and points of view without inhibition. Anonymous e-mail is also a safe way for 
an employee to blow the whistle on a questionable business practice, or for an individual to 
tip off police to a crime or potential terrorist attack.
But, like all good things, online anonymity can be abused. Using the Internet as their 
shield, some people use rude comments, ridicule, profanity, and even slander to attack peo-
ple, places, and things they do not like or agree with. Others may use multiple online iden-
tities (such as multiple usernames on a message board) to give the appearance of increased 
support for their points of view. Still others may use multiple identities to try to manipulate 
stock prices (by posting false information about a company to drive the price down, for 
instance), to get buyers to trust an online auction seller (by posting fictitious positive feed-
back about themselves), or to commit other illegal or unethical acts.
It is possible to hide your true identity while browsing or sending e-mail by removing 
personal information from your browser and e-mail program or by using privacy software that 
acts as a middleman between you and Web sites and hides your identity, as discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 5. But, in fact, even when personal information is removed, ISPs and the 
 government may still be able to trace communications back to a particular 
computer when a crime has occurred, so it is difficult—perhaps impossible—
to be completely anonymous online.
Information Integrity
The Web contains a vast amount of information on a wide variety of top-
ics. While much of the information is factual, other information may be 
misleading, biased, or just plain wrong. As more and more people turn to 
the Web for information, it is crucial that they take the time to determine 
if the information they obtain and pass on to others is accurate. There have 
been numerous cases of information intended as a joke being restated on 
a Web site as fact, statements being quoted out of context (which changed 
the meaning from the original intent), and hoaxes circulated via e-mail. 
Consequently, use common sense when evaluating what you read online, 
and double-check information before passing it on to others.
One way to evaluate online content is by its source. If you obtain 
information from a news source that you trust, you should feel confident 
that the accuracy of its online information is close to that of its offline 
counterpart. For information about a particular product, go to the originat-
ing company. For government information, government Web sites are your 
best source for fact checking. There are also independent Web sites (such 
as the Snopes Web site shown in Figure 1-31) that report on the validity of 
current online rumors and stories.
FIGURE 1-31
Snopes.com. This 
Web site can be used 
to check out online 
rumors.
<
© robert_s/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy www.snopes.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

38
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
S U M MARY
COMPUTERS IN YOUR LIFE
Computers appear almost everywhere in today’s world, and most people need to use a 
computer or a computerized device frequently on the job, at home, at school, or while 
on the go. Computer literacy, which is being familiar with basic computer concepts, 
helps individuals feel comfortable using computers and is a necessary skill for every-
one today.
Computers abound in today’s homes, schools, workplaces, and other locations. Most 
students and employees need to use a computer for productivity, research, or other impor-
tant tasks. Individuals often use computers at home and/or carry portable computers or 
mobile devices with them to remain in touch with others or to use Internet resources on a 
continual basis. Individuals also frequently encounter computers while on the go, such as 
consumer kiosks and point-of-sale (POS) systems.
WHAT IS A COMPUTER AND WHAT DOES IT DO?
A computer is a programmable electronic device that accepts input; performs  processing 
operations; outputs the results; and provides storage for data, programs, or output when 
needed. Most computers today also have communications capabilities. This progression 
of input, processing, output, and storage is sometimes called the information processing 
cycle.
Data is the raw, unorganized facts that are input into the computer to be processed. 
Data that the computer has processed into a useful form is called information. Data can 
exist in many forms, representing text, graphics, audio, and video.
One of the first calculating devices was the abacus. Early computing devices that pre-
date today’s computers include the slide rule, the mechanical calculator, and Dr. Herman 
Hollerith’s Punch Card Tabulating Machine and Sorter. First-generation computers, such 
as ENIAC and UNIVAC, were powered by vacuum tubes; second-generation computers 
used transistors; and third-generation computers were possible because of the invention of 
the integrated circuit (IC). Today’s fourth-generation computers use microprocessors and 
are frequently connected to the Internet and other networks. Fifth-generation computers 
are emerging and are, at the present time, based on artificial intelligence.
A computer is made up of hardware (the actual physical equipment that makes up 
the computer system) and software (the computer’s programs). Common hardware com-
ponents include the keyboard and mouse (input devices), the CPU (a processing device), 
monitors/display screens and printers (output devices), and storage devices and storage 
media (such as CDs, DVD drives, hard drives, USB flash drives, and flash memory cards). 
Most computers today also include a modem, network adapter, or other type of communi-
cations device to allow users to connect to the Internet or other network.
All computers need system software, namely an operating system (usually Windows, 
Mac OS, or Linux), to function. The operating system assists with the boot process, and 
then controls the operation of the computer, such as to allow users to run other types of 
software and to manage their files. Most software programs today use a variety of graph-
ical objects that are selected to tell the computer what to do. The basic workspace for 
Windows’ users is the Windows desktop.
Application software (also called apps) consists of programs designed to allow 
people to perform specific tasks or applications, such as word processing, Web browsing, 
photo touch-up, and so on. Software programs are written using a programming language. 
Programs are written by programmers; computer users are the people who use computers 
to perform tasks or obtain information.
Chapter Objective 1:
Explain why it is essential to 
learn about computers today 
and discuss several ways 
computers are integrated into 
our business and personal 
lives.
Chapter Objective 2:
Define a computer and 
describe its primary 
operations.
Chapter Objective 3:
List some important mile-
stones in computer evolution.
Chapter Objective 4:
Identify the major parts of a 
personal computer, includ-
ing input, processing, output, 
storage, and communications 
hardware.
Chapter Objective 5:
Define software and under-
stand how it is used to 
instruct the computer what 
to do.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
39
COMPUTERS TO FIT EVERY NEED
Embedded computers are built into products (such as cars and household appliances) to 
give them added functionality. Mobile devices are small devices (such as mobile phones 
and media tablets) with computing or Internet capabilities; an Internet-enabled mobile 
phone is called a smartphone.
Small computers used by individuals at home or work are called personal computers 
(PCs) or microcomputers. Most personal computers today are either desktop  computers 
or portable computers (notebook computers, laptop computers, tablet computers, 
hybrid notebook-tablet computers, and netbooks) and typically conform to either the 
PC-compatible or Mac standard. Thin clients are designed solely to access a network; 
Internet appliances are ordinary devices that can be used to access the Internet.
Medium-sized computers, or servers, are used in many businesses to host data and pro-
grams to be accessed via the company network. A growing trend is  virtualization, such as 
creating separate virtual environments on a single server that act as separate servers or deliv-
ering each users’ desktop to his or her device. The powerful computers used by most large 
businesses and organizations to perform the information processing necessary for day-to-day 
operations are called mainframe computers. The very largest, most powerful computers, 
which typically run one application at a time, are supercomputers. 
COMPUTER NETWORKS AND THE INTERNET
Computer networks are used to connect individual computers and related devices so that 
users can share hardware, software, and data as well as communicate with one another. 
The Internet is a worldwide collection of networks. Typically, individual users connect 
to the Internet by connecting to computers belonging to an Internet service provider 
(ISP)—a company that provides Internet access, usually for a fee. One resource available 
through the Internet is the World Wide Web (WWW)—an enormous collection of Web 
pages located on Web servers. The starting page for a Web site (a related group of Web 
pages) is called the home page for that site. Web pages are viewed with a Web browser, 
are connected with hyperlinks, and can be used for many helpful activities.
To access a computer network, you need some type of modem or network adapter. 
To access the Internet, an Internet service provider (ISP) is also used. Internet addresses 
are used to identify resources on the Internet and include numerical IP addresses and 
text-based domain names (used to identify computers), Uniform Resource Locators or 
URLs (used to identify Web pages), and e-mail addresses (a combination of a username 
and domain name that is used to send an individual e-mail messages).
Web pages are displayed by clicking hyperlinks or by typing appropriate URLs in the 
browser’s Address bar. Favorites/Bookmarks and the History list can be used to redisplay a 
previously visited Web page and search sites can be used to locate Web pages matching speci-
fied criteria. Electronic mail (e-mail) is used to send electronic messages over the Internet.
COMPUTERS AND SOCIETY
Computers and devices based on related technology have become indispensable tools for 
modern life, making ordinary tasks easier and quicker than ever before and helping make 
today’s worker more productive than ever before. In addition to the benefits, however, 
there are many risks and societal implications related to our heavy use of the Internet and 
the vast amount of information available through the Internet. Issues include privacy and 
security risks and concerns (such as malware, identity theft, phishing, and spam), the dif-
ferences in online and offline communications, the anonymity factor, and the amount of 
unreliable information that can be found on the Internet.
Chapter Objective 6:
List the six basic types of 
computers, giving at least 
one example of each type 
of computer and stating 
what that computer might 
be used for.
Chapter Objective 7:
Explain what a network, 
the Internet, and the World 
Wide Web are, as well as 
how computers, people, 
and Web pages are identi-
fied on the Internet.
Chapter Objective 8:
Describe how to access 
a Web page and navigate 
through a Web site.
Chapter Objective 9:
Discuss the societal impact 
of computers, including 
some benefits and risks 
related to their prominence 
in our society.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

40
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
R EVI EW ACTIVITI E S
Instructions: Match each key term on the left with the definition on the right that best describes it.
 1.       A collection of related Web pages usually belonging to an organization or individual.
 2.       An Internet address, usually beginning with http://, that uniquely identifies a Web 
page.
 3.       A programmable, electronic device that accepts data input, performs processing 
operations on that data, and outputs and stores the results.
 4.       A portable computer about the size of a notebook that is designed to be used with a 
digital pen.
 5.       Performing operations on data that has been input into a computer to convert that 
input to output.
 6.       The operation of saving data, programs, or output for future use.
 7.       The fastest, most expensive, and most powerful type of computer.
 8.       The instructions, also called computer programs, that are used to tell a computer 
what it should do.
 9.       The largest and most well-known computer network, linking millions of computers 
all over the world.
 10.       The physical parts of a computer system, such as the keyboard, monitor, printer, and 
so forth.
Instructions: Circle T if the statement is true, F if the statement is false, or write the best answer 
in the space provided. Answers for the self-quiz are located in the References and Resources 
Guide at the end of the book.
 1. T F A mouse is one common input device.
 2. T F Software includes all the physical equipment in a computer system.
 3. T F A computer can run without an operating system if it has good application software.
 4. T F One of the most common types of home computers is the server.
 5. T F An example of a domain name is microsoft.com.
 6.       is the operation in which data is entered into the computer.
 7. A(n)       computer is a portable computer designed to function as both a notebook and 
a tablet PC.
 8.       is frequently used with servers today to create several separate environments on a 
single server that function as separate servers.
 9. Electronic messages sent over the Internet that can be retrieved by the recipient at his or her 
convenience are called      .
KEY TERM 
MATCHING
 a. computer
 b. hardware
 c. Internet
 d. processing
 e. software
 f. storage
 g. supercomputer
 h. tablet computer
 i. Uniform Resource Locator 
(URL)
 j. Web site
SELF-QUIZ
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
41
 10. Write the number of the term that best matches each of the following descriptions in the blank 
to the left of its description.
 a.       Allows access to resources located on the Internet.
 b.       Supervises the running of all other programs on the computer.
 c.       Enables users to perform specific tasks on a computer.
 d.       Allows the creation of application programs.
 1. For the following list of computer hardware devices, indicate the principal function of each 
device by writing the appropriate letter—I (input device), O (output device), S (storage device), 
P (processing device), or C (communications device)—in the space provided.
 a. CPU  
      
d. Keyboard        
g. Speakers  
     
 b. Monitor       
e. Hard drive        
h. DVD drive       
 c. Mouse 
      
f. Modem 
      
i. Microphone       
 2. Supply the missing words to complete the following statements.
 a. The Internet is an example of a(n)      , a collection of computers and other devices 
connected together to share resources and communicate with each other.
 b. The starting page for a Web site is called the site’s      .
 c. For the e-mail address jsmith@cengage.com, jsmith is the       and cengage.com is 
the       name.
 d. The e-mail address pronounced bill gee at microsoft dot com is written      .
 3. What are three differences between a desktop computer and a portable computer?
 4. List two reasons why a business may choose to network its employees’ computers.
 5. If a computer manufacturer called Apex created a home page for the Web, what would its 
URL likely be? Also, supply an appropriate e-mail address for yourself, assuming that you are 
employed by that company.
 1. There is usually a positive side and a negative side to each new technological improvement. 
Select a technology you use every day and consider its benefits and risks. What benefits does the 
technology provide? Are there any risks involved and, if so, how can they be minimized? If you 
chose not to use this technology because of the possible risks associated with it, how would your 
life be affected? Who should determine if the benefits of a new technology outweigh the poten-
tial risks? Consumers? The government?
 2. The ubiquitous nature of mobile phones today brings tremendous convenience to our lives, but 
will misuse of new improvements to this technology result in the loss of that convenience? For 
instance, camera phones are now banned in many fitness centers, park restrooms, and other simi-
lar facilities because some people have used them inappropriately to take compromising photos, 
and mobile phones are banned in many classrooms because of the disruption of constant text 
messaging and the use of the phone by dishonest students to cheat on exams. Do you think these 
reactions to mobile phone misuse are justified? Is there another way to ensure the appropriate use 
of mobile phones without banning their use for all individuals? Should there be more stringent 
consequences for those who use technology for illegal or unethical purposes?
 1. Application software
 2. Operating system
 3. Programming language
 4. Web browser
EXERCISES
DISCUSSION 
QUESTIONS
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

42
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
P R OJ E CTS
 1. Mobile TV As discussed in this chapter, TV is one of the newest entertainment options avail-
able for smartphones. From live TV to video clips and movies, mobile TV is taking off.
For this project, investigate the mobile TV options available today. Find at least two services 
and compare features, such as cost, compatibility, channels, and programming. Do your selected 
services offer live TV, video-on-demand, or both? If you have a smartphone, are any of the ser-
vices available through your mobile provider? Are there currently Web sites where mobile users 
can view episodes of TV shows for free, like personal computer users can? What is the current 
status of the push by the Open Mobile Video Coalition to have a free mobile TV standard across 
the United States? Have you ever watched TV on a smartphone? If so, how do you rate your expe-
rience and would you do it again? If not, would you want to watch TV on a smartphone? Do you 
think mobile TV is the wave of the future? Why or why not? At the conclusion of your research, 
prepare a one-page summary of your findings and opinions and submit it to your instructor.
 2. Buying a New PC New personal computers are widely available directly from manufacturers, 
as well as in retail, computer, electronic, and warehouse stores. Some stores carry only stan-
dard configurations as set up by the manufacturers; others allow you to customize a system.
For this project, assume that you are in the market for a new personal computer. Give some 
thought to the type of computer (such as desktop, notebook, or tablet computer) that best fits 
your lifestyle and the tasks you wish to perform (such as the application programs you wish to 
use, how many programs you want to use at one time, and how fast you desire the response time 
to be). Make a list of your hardware and software requirements (refer to the “Guide to Buying a 
PC” in the References and Resources Guide at the end of this book, if needed), being as specific 
as possible. By researching newspaper ads, manufacturer Web sites, and/or systems for sale at 
local stores, find three systems that meet your minimum requirements. Prepare a one-page com-
parison chart, listing each requirement and how each system meets or exceeds it. Also include 
any additional features each system has, and information regarding the brand, price, delivery 
time, shipping, sales tax, and warranty for each system. On your comparison sheet, mark the 
system that you would prefer to buy and write one paragraph explaining why. Turn in your com-
parison sheet and summary to your instructor, stapled to copies of the printed ads, specifications 
printed from Web sites, or other written documentation that you collected during this project.
 3. The Internet The Internet and World Wide Web are handy tools that can help you research 
topics covered in this textbook, complete many of the projects, and perform the online activi-
ties available via the textbook’s Web site that are designed to enhance your learning and help 
you prepare for exams on the content covered in this textbook.
For this project, find an Internet-enabled computer on your campus, at home, or at your 
public library and perform the following tasks, then submit your results and printout to your 
instructor. (Note: Some of the answers will vary from student to student.)
 a. Open a browser and the Google search site. Enter the search terms define: Internet to 
search for definitions of that term. Click on one result to display the definition. Use your 
browser’s Print option to print the page.
 b. Click your browser’s Back button to return to the Google home page. Use your browser’s 
Bookmark or Favorites feature to bookmark the page. Close your browser.
 c. Reopen your browser and use its Bookmark or Favorites feature to redisplay the Google 
home page.
 d. Google yourself to see if you can find any information online. On your printout from part a, 
indicate how many hits were returned for this search and if any on the first page of hits really 
contained information about yourself.
HOT TOPICS
SHORT ANSWER/
RESEARCH
HANDS ON
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 1 INTRODUCTION TO THE WORLD OF COMPUTERS
43
 4. Gossip Sites A recent trend on college campuses today is the use of campus gossip sites, 
where students can post campus-related news, rumors, and basic gossip. These sites were 
originally set up to promote free speech and to allow participants to publish comments anony-
mously without repercussions from school administrators, professors, and other officials. 
However, they are now being used to post vicious comments about others. What do you think 
of campus gossip sites? Is it ethical to post a rumor about another individual on these sites? 
How would you feel if you read a posting about yourself on a gossip site? School administra-
tors cannot regulate the content because the sites are not sponsored or run by the college, and 
federal law prohibits Web hosts from being liable for the content posted by its users. Is this 
ethical? What if a posting leads to a criminal act, such as a rape, murder, or suicide? Who, if 
anyone, should be held responsible?
For this project, form an opinion about the ethical ramifications of gossip Web sites and 
be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discussion group, in a class 
chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). You may also be 
asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
 5. Online Education The amount of distance learning available through the Internet and World 
Wide Web has exploded in the last couple of years. A few years ago, it was possible to take an 
occasional course online—now, an entire college degree can be earned online.
For this project, look into the online education options available at your school and 
two other colleges or universities. Compare and contrast the programs in general, including 
whether or not the institution is accredited, the types of courses available online, whether or 
not an entire certificate or degree can be earned online, and the required fees. Next, select 
one online course and research it more closely. Find out how the course works in an online 
format—including whether or not any face-to-face class time is required, whether assign-
ments and exams are submitted online, which software programs are required, and other 
course requirements—and determine if you would be interested in taking that course. Share 
your findings with the class in the form of a short presentation. The presentation should 
not exceed 10 minutes and should make use of one or more presentation aids, such as a 
whiteboard, handouts, or a computer-based slide presentation (your instructor may provide 
additional requirements). You may also be asked to submit a summary of the presentation to 
your instructor.
 6. Should Social Media Activity Cost You a Job? When you apply for a new job, there’s a good 
chance that the company will take a look at your social media activity, such as your Facebook 
page, blog activity, and even Craigslist listings. In fact, many companies now require job 
applicants to pass a social media background check before offering them a job. Companies 
are trying to protect themselves by looking for such things as racist remarks and illegal activi-
ties, as well as get a feel for whether or not an individual would be a good fit for the company. 
But should individuals have to risk losing a job if they post a photo of themselves in a racy 
Halloween costume or make an offhand comment that an employer may misinterpret? What 
if a company denies you a job based on inaccurate information or information they wouldn’t 
be allowed to ask in a job interview, such as information relating to your age, race, gender, 
religion, and so forth? And what if someone else posts and tags a questionable photo of you—
should a potential employer be able to use that or other third-party information to make a 
decision about your future? To be safe, should job applicants have to abstain from social media 
activity in order to protect themselves, even though such sites are typically viewed as places to 
casually interact with others on personal free time? Or is everything a potential employer finds 
online fair game?
Pick a side on this issue, form an opinion and gather supporting evidence, and be pre-
pared to discuss and defend your position in a classroom debate or in a 1–2 page paper, 
depending on your instructor’s directions.
ETHICS IN ACTION
PRESENTATION/
DEMONSTRATION
BALANCING ACT
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Daniel Kelley is the Vice 
President of Marketing 
for D-Link Systems, Inc. 
and is responsible for 
connectivity solutions 
tailored for home and 
business users. He has 
more than 15 years of 
professional marketing 
experience and holds a 
Bachelor of Arts degree 
in communications. As a 
result of Daniel’s leader-
ship and thriving market-
ing programs, many of 
the programs initiated in 
North America, including 
the implementation of 
numerous social media 
campaigns hosted on 
D-Link’s social media 
platforms, have been 
adopted worldwide.
A conversation with DANIEL KELLEY
Vice President, Marketing, D-Link Systems, Inc.
 
“Putting a full-fl edged computer with virtually unlimited 
potential into one’s pocket has changed how we interact 
with information and with others in ways we’re still 
discovering.”
My Background . . . 
As the Vice President of Marketing for D-Link Systems, Inc., I am responsible for the overall mar-
keting and branding of the company and its products. My focus is on creating demand and loyalty 
from customers through a range of disciplines including advertising, sponsorships, press relations, 
social media, and channel marketing. Although I hold a degree in communications, which helped 
launch my career in marketing, I attribute most of my skills to real-world marketing experience and 
constantly challenging myself to learn and stay on top of the latest marketing tactics, platforms, and 
trends. 
It’s Important to Know . . . 
The evolution from the first massively-sized computers to today’s small devices, such as the 
iPhone, has created a major shift in the industry. Once the average consumer could get a power-
ful PC in his or her home, it started what we now view as the natural integration of technology in our 
daily lives. Putting a full-fledged computer with virtually unlimited potential into one’s pocket has 
changed how we interact with information and with others in ways we’re still discovering. 
Software is the interactive way a customer sees and uses a device, such as a PC, tablet, or 
phone. Software—in the form of applications (or apps)—allows us to utilize the hardware of the 
machine itself in ways that are seemingly unending.
Social media’s influence will continue to grow and impact how we communicate. The notice-
able shift from customers trusting impersonal third-party reviews of products and services to those 
of friends, family members, and others via social media sites is changing the way businesses market 
themselves and communicate with customers. We’ve also seen a rapid adoption of short video plat-
forms such as Vine and Instagram, which is a key indicator that individuals are looking to capture and 
share more video for not only entertainment but also for everyday interactions. 
How I Use this Technology . . . 
Growing up, I always had an interest in all things creative and spent much of my time drawing, 
painting, and doing other creative projects. I carried this interest through my education, learning 
design graphics, animation, video, and Web development programs. The knowledge of these pro-
grams and my eye for design helps me provide direction on creative projects and allows me to dive 
in and give more specific examples or direction as needed. Today, I also use a laptop, tablet, and my 
smartphone every day to work and communicate with others from home, the office, and while trav-
eling. My most used app is Catch, which helps me create and keep track of notes and ideas across 
all of my devices.
Personal Computers
expert insight on...
Courtesy of D-Link Systems
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXPERT INSIGHT ON PERSONAL COMPUTERS
45
What the Future Holds . . . 
One of the trends I personally find the most interesting is the rapid evolution 
of wearable technology. With the introduction of Google Glass and wellness-
focused products such as FitBit, I see a very rapid adoption of new solutions 
designed to integrate technology with our clothing and accessories, which 
will lead to an entirely new way of interacting with information in our daily 
lives. We’ve become empowered in ways never dreamed of just decades ago, 
with endless information and new communication vehicles at our fingertips, 
and we’ve seen a rapid and dramatic shift from face-to-face conversations 
and phone calls to texting, e-mail, and social media as preferred ways to 
communicate. This shift will continue to accelerate, with video calls and 
video messages becoming a primary communication medium. However, we 
have to be careful we don’t become more isolated and detached from others in public social 
situations so we can continue to interact positively with each other in the future.
Another concern for the future is privacy. As we put more of ourselves out there in the 
cloud, we make ourselves more vulnerable. With any new technology or service, there are 
going to be those looking to exploit it and cause harm to others for personal gain and we’ve 
seen how private information doesn’t necessarily remain private. This should encourage 
individuals to protect themselves as much as possible, such as using strong online pass-
words and just using common sense when determining what to share online.
I’m hoping that one of the biggest impacts of technology in the future is in the medical 
field or solving big problems like world hunger. Technology advancements, such as the use 
of 3D printers to create live tissue that can be used for replacing lost body parts, can have 
a very positive impact on our health and wellness. This same 3D printing technology has 
the potential to create a large food supply (utilizing protein “ink” from meal worms, for 
instance) for third-world countries where food is desperately needed. As much as technol-
ogy advances our entertainment and social interaction, I am more interested to see how it 
can actually improve how we take care of those in need. 
My Advice to Students . . . 
Jump in with both feet. Take things apart, build things, and constantly learn new things 
through education and resources such as the Internet and books. We are living in a truly 
remarkable time where opportunities abound in the tech field, and those who apply them-
selves and commit to learning, trying, and doing will have an upper hand for building a 
career or leading the next wave of where tech can take us. 
Discussion Question
Daniel Kelley views wearable technology as one of the most interesting trends evolving 
today. Think about the tasks you use your mobile phone and personal computer for today. 
Could they be performed using a wearable mobile device, such as Google Glass or per-
haps a wearable smartphone? If not, what changes would need to be made in the future in 
order to perform these tasks using a wearable device? Is the wearable mobile device the 
computer of the future? Be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class 
discussion group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s 
directions). You may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
>For more information about D-Link, visit the official Web site at dlink.com. D-Link also 
communicates through social sites (facebook.com/dlink and twitter.com/dlink), and has a 
resource center located at resource.dlink.com.
 As we put more 
of ourselves out 
there in the cloud, 
we make ourselves 
more vulnerable. 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

outline
Overview
Digital Data Representation
Bits and Bytes
Numbering Systems and Coding 
Systems
Input Hardware
Keyboards
Pointing Devices
Scanners, Readers, and Digital 
Cameras
Other Input Devices
Processing Hardware and Other 
Hardware Inside the System Unit
The Motherboard
Processors
Memory
Output Hardware
Display Devices
Printers
Other Output Devices
Storage Hardware
Storage System Characteristics
Hard Drives
Optical Discs and Drives
Flash Memory Storage Systems
Other Types of Storage Systems
Evaluating Your Storage Alternatives
Communications Hardware
Network Adapters and Modems
Other Networking Hardware
Software Basics
Software Ownership Rights
Desktop vs. Mobile Software
Installed vs. Cloud Software
Common Software Commands
Working with Files and Folders
A Closer Look at 
Hardware and 
Software
After completing this chapter, you will be 
able to do the following:
1. Understand how data is represented to a 
computer.
2. Identify several types of input devices and 
explain their functions.
3. Explain the functions of the primary hard-
ware components found inside the system 
unit, namely the motherboard, the CPU, 
and memory.
4. List several output devices and explain their 
functions.
5. Understand the difference between storage 
and memory, as well as between a storage 
device and a storage medium.
6. Name several types of storage systems and 
explain the circumstances under which they 
are typically used.
7. Describe the purpose of communications 
hardware.
8. Understand basic software concepts and 
commands.
chapter 2
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

© Tetra Images/
Getty Images
OV E RV I EW
W
 hen you hear the phrase “computer system,” you probably picture  hardware—
a desktop or notebook computer, a printer, or maybe a smartphone. But 
a computer system involves more than just hardware. As you already know from 
Chapter 1, computers need software in order to function. It is the software that tells 
the hardware what to do and when to do it. Computers also need data input, which 
is used to begin the information processing cycle.
This chapter opens with a discussion of data and how it is represented to a 
 computer. Next, we take a closer look at the hardware that makes up a computer 
 system. Because it is not possible to mention all of the hardware products avail-
able today, a sampling of the most common hardware products used for input, 
processing, output, storage, and communications is covered in this chapter. 
Although a complete discussion of software is also beyond the scope of this 
book, the chapter concludes with a brief look at some basic software concepts 
and operations.
The basic hardware and software concepts and terminology covered in this 
chapter are important for all computer users to understand. In addition, these 
concepts will provide you with a solid foundation for discussing the important societal 
issues featured throughout this text. Many of you will apply this chapter’s content 
to conventional personal computers—such as desktop and portable computers. 
However, it is important to realize that the principles and procedures discussed in 
this chapter apply to other types of computers as well, such as those embedded in 
toys, consumer devices, household appliances, cars, and other devices, and those 
used with mobile devices, servers, mainframes, and supercomputers. ■
DIGITAL DATA REPRESENTATION
Virtually all computers today—such as the embedded computers, mobile devices, personal 
computers, servers, mainframes, and supercomputers discussed in Chapter 1—are digital 
computers. Most digital computers are binary computers, which can understand only two 
states, usually thought of as off and on and represented by the digits 0 and 1. Consequently, 
all data processed by a binary computer must be in binary form (0s and 1s) and those 0s 
and 1s can be represented in a variety of ways, such as with an open or closed circuit or two 
different types of magnetic alignment on a storage medium (see Figure 2-1). Fortunately, 
the computer takes care of translating input into the form needed by the computer being 
used and then, after processing, translates and outputs the resulting information into a form 
that can be understood by the user.
Bits and Bytes
The 0s and 1s used to represent data can be represented in a variety of ways, such as 
with an open or closed circuit, the absence or presence of an electronic charge, the 
absence or presence of a magnetic spot or depression on a storage medium, and so on. 
+
–
CIRCUIT
Closed = 1 (on)
Open = 0 (off)
Negative
= 0 (off)
Positive
= 1 (on)
MAGNETIZATION
+
+
–
–
FIGURE 2-1
Ways of representing 
0 and 1. Binary 
computers recognize 
only two states—off 
and on—usually 
represented by 0 and 1.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

48
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Bit. The smallest unit of data a digital computer can recognize; represented by a 0 or a 1. >Byte. A group of 8 bits. >Kilobyte (KB). Approximately 
1 thousand bytes (1,024 bytes to be precise). >Megabyte (MB). Approximately 1 million bytes. >Gigabyte (GB). Approximately 1 billion bytes. 
>Terabyte (TB). Approximately 1 trillion bytes. >Petabyte (PB). Approximately 1,000 terabytes. >Decimal numbering system. The numbering 
system that represents all numbers using 10 symbols (0–9). >Binary numbering system. The numbering system that represents all numbers using 
just two symbols (0 and 1). >ASCII (American Standard Code for Information Interchange). A fixed-length, binary coding system used to 
represent text-based data for computer processing on many types of computers.
Regardless of their physical representations, these 0s and 1s are commonly referred to as 
bits, a computing term derived from the phrase binary digits. A bit is the smallest unit of 
data that a binary computer can recognize. Therefore, the input you enter via a keyboard, 
the software program you use to play your music collection, the term paper stored on your 
USB flash drive, and the digital photos located on your mobile phone are all just groups of 
bits. Consequently, binary can be thought of as the computer’s “native language.”
A bit by itself typically represents only a fraction of a piece of data. Consequently, 
large numbers of bits are needed to represent a written document, computer program, digi-
tal photo, music file, or virtually any other type of data. Eight bits grouped together are 
collectively referred to as a byte. It is important to be familiar with this concept because 
byte terminology is frequently used in a variety of computer contexts, such as to indicate 
the size of a document or digital photo, the amount of memory a computer has, or the 
amount of room left on a storage medium. Because these quantities often involve thou-
sands or millions of bytes, prefixes are commonly used in conjunction with the term byte 
to represent larger amounts of data (see Figure 2-2). For instance, a kilobyte (KB) is equal 
to 1,024 bytes, but it is usually thought of as approximately 1,000 bytes; a megabyte (MB) 
is about 1 million bytes; a gigabyte (GB) is about 1 billion bytes; a terabyte (TB) is about 
1 trillion bytes; and a petabyte (PB) is about 1,000 terabytes (250 bytes). Therefore, 5 KB 
is about 5,000 bytes, 10 MB is about 10 million bytes, and 2 TB is about 2 trillion bytes.
Numbering Systems and Coding Systems
A numbering system is a way of representing numbers. The numbering system we com-
monly use is called the decimal numbering system because it uses 10 symbols—the dig-
its 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, and 9—to represent all possible numbers. Numbers greater than 
nine, such as 21 and 683, are represented using combinations of these 10 symbols. The 
binary numbering system uses only two symbols—the digits 0 and 1—to represent all 
possible numbers. Consequently, binary computers use the binary numbering system to 
represent numbers and perform math computations.
In both numbering systems, the position of each digit determines the power, or exponent, 
to which the base number (10 for decimal or 2 for binary) is raised. In the decimal numbering 
system, going from right to left, the first position or column (the ones column) represents 100 
or 1; the second column (the tens column) represents 10l or 10; the third column (the hun-
dreds column) represents 102 or 100; and so forth. Consequently, 101 represents “one hun-
dred one” in the decimal number system, but it equals “five” (1 × 22 + 0 × 2l + 1 × 20 or 4 + 0 + 
1 or 5) using the binary number system. For more information about numbering systems and 
some examples of converting between numbering systems, see the “A Look at Numbering 
Systems” section in the References and Resources Guide at the end of this book.
To represent text-based data, special fixed-length binary coding systems—namely, 
ASCII and Unicode—were developed. These codes represent all characters that can 
appear in text data, including numeric characters, alphabetic characters, and spe-
cial characters such as the dollar sign ($) and period (.). ASCII (American Stan dard 
Code for Information Interchange) is the coding system traditionally used with per-
sonal computers. ASCII is a 7-digit (7-bit) code, although there are several different 8-bit 
extended versions of ASCII that contain additional symbols not included in the 7-bit ASCII 
code, such as to represent non-English characters, graphics symbols, and mathematical 
symbols. The extended ASCII character sets (see some examples in Figure 2-3) represent 
each character as a unique combination of 8 bits (1 byte), which allows 256 (28) unique 
combinations. Therefore, an 8-bit code (like extended ASCII) can represent 256 characters.
Bit
0 0 1 1 0 0 0 0
Byte
Abbreviation
Approximate
Size
KB
MB
GB
TB
PB
EB
1 thousand bytes
1 million bytes
1 billion bytes
1 trillion bytes
1,000 terabytes
1,000 petabtyes
ZB
1,000 exabytes
YB
1,000 zettabytes
FIGURE 2-2
Bits and bytes. 
Document size, 
storage capacity, and 
memory capacity are 
all measured in bytes.
<
CHARACTER
ASCII
0
00110000
1
00110001
2
00110010
3
00110011
4
00110100
5
00110101
A
01000001
B
01000010
C
01000011
D
01000100
E
01000101
F
01000110
+
00101011
!
00100001
#
00100011
FIGURE 2-3
Some extended 
ASCII code 
examples.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
49
>Unicode. An international coding system that can be used to represent text-based data in any written language. >Input device. A piece of 
hardware that supplies input to a computer. >Keyboard. An input device containing numerous keys that can be used to input letters, numbers, 
and other symbols. >Pointing device. An input device that moves an on-screen pointer, such as an arrow, to allow the user to select objects on 
the screen.
Unlike ASCII, which is limited to only the Latin alphabet used with 
the English language, Unicode is a universal international coding standard 
designed to represent text-based data written in any ancient or modern lan-
guage, including those with different alphabets, such as Chinese, Greek, 
Hebrew, Amharic, Tibetan, and Russian (see Figure 2-4). Unicode uniquely 
identifies each character using 0s and 1s, no matter which language, pro-
gram, or computer platform is being used. It is a longer code, consisting of 
1 to 4 bytes (8 to 32 bits) per character, and can represent over one million 
characters, which is more than enough unique combinations to represent 
the standard characters in all the world’s written languages, as well as thou-
sands of mathematical and technical symbols, punctuation marks, and other 
symbols and signs. The biggest advantage of Unicode is that it can be used 
worldwide with consistent and unambiguous results.
INPUT HARDWARE
As discussed in Chapter 1, input is the process of entering data into a computer. An 
input device is any piece of hardware that is used to perform data input. Traditional input 
devices include the keyboard and mouse, but there are also many other types of input 
devices in use today.
Keyboards
Most computers today are designed to be used with a keyboard—a device used to enter 
characters at the location on the screen marked by the insertion point or cursor (typically 
a blinking vertical line). An integrated keyboard is built into a device, a wired keyboard is 
connected via a cable to the computer’s system unit (typically via a USB port), and a wire-
less keyboard is powered by batteries and connected via a wireless networking connection 
(such as Bluetooth). Most keyboards today contain standard alphanumeric keys along with 
a variety of special keys for specific purposes. However, the order and layout of the keys 
on a mobile device may be different from the order and layout on a conventional keyboard, 
and the keyboard layout may vary from device to device.
Virtually all desktop computers include a keyboard. Notebook and netbook computers 
usually have a keyboard that is similar to a desktop keyboard, but it is typically smaller, 
contains fewer keys (it often has no numeric keypad, for instance), and the keys are typi-
cally placed somewhat closer together. Because of the increasing amount of data 
entered into mobile devices today, most mobile devices have either an integrated 
keyboard (such as a slide-out keyboard that can be revealed when needed and hidden 
when not in use) or an on-screen keyboard (that can be used with pen or touch input, 
as discussed shortly). Some mobile devices can also connect to a portable keyboard, 
or to a keyboard dock or keyboard folio that contains a keyboard, for easier data 
entry. A mobile device with a slide-out keyboard is shown in Figure 2-5; a typical 
desktop keyboard is shown in Figure 2-6.
Pointing Devices
In addition to a keyboard, most computers today are used in conjunction with 
some type of pointing device. Pointing devices are used to select and manipu-
late objects, to input certain types of data (such as handwritten data or edits to 
CHINESE
AMHARIC
GREEK
TIBETAN
HEBREW
RUSSIAN
FIGURE 2-4
Unicode. Many 
characters, such 
as these, can be 
represented by Unicode 
but not by ASCII.
<
FIGURE 2-5
Slide-out keyboards.
<
For more examples of ASCII and 
Unicode, as well as the EBCDIC 
coding system used primarily with 
mainframe computers, see the 
“Coding Charts” section in the 
References and Resources Guide 
at the end of this book.
TIP
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Courtesy Sprint
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

50
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Mouse. A common pointing device that the user slides along a flat surface to move a pointer around the screen and clicks its buttons to make 
selections.
images), and to issue commands to the computer. Two of the most common pointing 
devices are the mouse and the pen/stylus, which are used to click screen objects and 
perform pen input, respectively; a common pointing device that uses touch input is the 
touch screen.
Mice
The mouse is the most common pointing device for a desktop computer. It typically rests 
on the desk or other flat surface close to the user’s computer, and it is moved across the 
surface with the user’s hand in the appropriate direction to point to and select objects on 
the screen. As it moves, an on-screen mouse pointer—usually an arrow—moves accord-
ingly. Once the mouse pointer is pointing to the desired object on the screen, the buttons 
on the mouse are used to perform actions on that object (such as to open a hyperlink 
or to resize an image). Most mice today are optical mice or laser mice that track move-
ments with light. Mice are used to start programs; open, move around, and edit docu-
ments; draw or edit images; and more. There are also mice that support two-dimensional 
gestures, such as touch mice designed for Windows 8 devices. Instead of buttons, these 
mice include a touch surface on top of the mouse in order to support finger swipes and 
other movements for convenient navigation. Some of the most common mouse opera-
tions are described in Figure 2-7. Similar to keyboards, mice today typically connect via a 
USB port or via a wireless connection.
Some keys on a keyboard, like 
the Caps Lock and Number Lock 
keys, are toggle keys, which are 
pressed once to turn the feature 
on and again to turn the feature 
off. If you ever find yourself typing 
in all caps or the numeric keypad 
does not work, check the status 
of these keys.
TIP
ALPHANUMERIC KEYS
Usually arranged in
the same order as the
keys on a standard
typewriter.
FUNCTION KEYS
Perform a different
command or
function in each
program designed
to use them.
ENTER KEY
Used to enter commands
into the computer, end
paragraphs, and insert blank
lines in documents.
BACKSPACE KEY
Erases one
character to the
left of the
insertion point.
INSERT KEY
Toggles between
inserting text and
typing over text in
many programs.
TAB KEY
Moves to the
next tab location.
CAPS LOCK KEY
Turns all caps on or off.
WINDOWS KEY
Opens the Windows
Start screen or menu.
CONTROL AND
ALTERNATE KEYS
Used in combination
with other keys to
enter commands into
the computer.
PAGE UP AND
PAGE DOWN KEYS
Move up or down
one page or screen
in most programs.
ARROW KEYS 
Move the cursor
around a document
without disturbing
existing text.
SHIFT KEY 
Produces uppercase
letters and symbols on
the upper part of certain
keys when the Caps
Lock key is not on.
SPACE BAR 
Enters a blank
space.
DELETE KEY 
Deletes one character
to the right of the
insertion point.
NUMERIC KEYPAD
Used to efﬁciently enter
numerical data.
FIGURE 2-6
A typical desktop 
keyboard.
<
Courtesy Logitech
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
51
>Stylus. An input device that is used to write electronically on the display screen.
Pens/Styluses
Many devices today, including com-
puters, media tablets, and smartphones, 
can accept pen input; that is, input by 
writing, drawing, or tapping on the 
screen with a penlike device called 
a stylus. Sometimes, the stylus (also 
called a digital pen, electronic pen, or 
tablet pen) is simply a plastic device 
with no additional functionality; other 
times, it is a pressure-sensitive device 
that transmits the pressure applied by 
the user to the device that the stylus is 
being used with in order to allow more 
precise input. These more sophisticated 
styluses are typically powered by the 
device that they are being used with, have a smooth rounded tip so they don’t scratch the 
screen, and contain buttons to perform actions such as erasing content or right-clicking.
The idea behind pen-based input and digital writing in general is to make using a com-
puter or other device as convenient as writing with a pen, while adding the functionality that 
pen input can provide (such as converting handwritten pen input to editable typed text). In 
addition to supporting handwritten input (referred to as inking), digital pens can also be used 
to navigate through a document and issue commands to the computer. Pens can also be used to 
provide easier touch input for mobile device users who wear gloves in the winter or who have 
a device with a screen that is too small to have accurate touch input via a finger.
Although their capabilities depend on the type of device and software being used, pen 
input can be used with a variety of computers and mobile devices today (see Figure 2-8). 
Most often, pens are used with mobile devices and tablet computers to input handwritten 
text and sketches, as well as to manipulate objects (such as to select an option from a menu, 
select text, or resize an image). They can also be used with desktop or notebook computers 
if the device supports pen input and they are used increasingly for photography, graphic 
design, animation, industrial design, document processing, and healthcare applications. 
Depending on the software being used, handwritten input can be stored as an image, stored 
as handwritten characters that can be recognized by the computer, or converted to editable, 
typed text. For the latter two options, software with handwriting recognition capabilities 
DRAG-AND-DROP
When the mouse pointer is
over the appropriate object,
press and hold down
the left mouse button,
drag the object to
the proper location
on the screen by
moving the mouse, and
then drop the object by
releasing the mouse button.
hold
hold
CLICK
Press and release the left
mouse button. (To right-click,
click the right mouse button; to
double-click, click the left mouse
button twice, in rapid succession.)
POINT
Move the mouse until the
mouse pointer is at the desired
location on the screen.
click
SCROLL WHEEL/BUTTON
If your mouse has a
wheel or button on top,
use it to scroll through the
displayed document.
spin
SWIPE AND TAP
If your mouse supports
gestures, swipe the surface
with your ﬁngers to scroll, ﬂip,
and zoom; tap on the mouse
to click.
swipe
FIGURE 2-7
Common mouse 
operations.
<
FIGURE 2-8
Examples of digital 
pen use.
<
SMARTPHONES
DESKTOP COMPUTERS
SIGNATURE CAPTURE DEVICES
© steamroller_blues/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy Logitech; Copyright 
© 2015 Cengage Learning®
© iStockphoto.com/Juanmonino
Courtesy Wacom Technology Corp.
© iStockphoto.com/mkurtbas
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

52
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Touch screen. A display device that is touched with the finger to issue commands or otherwise provide input to the connected device.
must be used. The use of handwriting recognition technology in conjunction with digital 
forms (forms that are filled out using a computer or other digital device and a digital pen 
instead of on paper) is growing rapidly and is expected to continue to grow as companies 
increasingly move toward digital records and digital documents, such as electronic health 
records (EHRs). Other devices that use digital pens are graphics tablets (flat, touch-
sensitive tablets used in conjunction with a digital pen to transfer input drawn or written on 
the graphics tablet to the connected computer) and signature capture devices (devices used 
to electronically record signatures for deliveries and to authorize credit card purchases).
Touch Screens
Touch screens allow the user to touch 
the screen with his or her finger to select 
 commands or otherwise provide input to 
the computer associated with the touch 
screen (see Figure 2-9). Touch screens 
are common on portable computers, as 
well as on smartphones and other mobile 
devices to provide easy input. Many 
touch screens today are multi-touch; that 
is, they can recognize input from more 
than one finger at a time. Touch screens 
are also used in consumer kiosks and 
other point-of-sale (POS) systems, and 
they are useful for on-the-job applica-
tions (such as factory work) where it 
might be impractical to use a keyboard 
or mouse. While touch screens make 
many devices today more convenient for 
the majority of individuals to use, there 
is also concern that these devices are not 
accessible to blind individuals and users 
with limited mobility; accessibility and 
pointing devices designed for users with 
limited mobility are discussed in detail in 
Chapter 7.
Other common pointing devices include 
the following (refer again to Figure 2-9):
 
➤Control buttons and wheels—used to select items and issue commands such as on 
portable digital media players and handheld gaming devices.
 
➤Trackballs—have a ball on top, which is rotated to move an on-screen pointer, and 
buttons, which are clicked to make selections.
 
➤Touch pads—rectangular pads across which a fingertip or thumb slides to move 
the on-screen pointer; the most common pointing device for notebook and netbook 
 computers, though stand-alone touch pads are available.
 
➤Gaming devices—joysticks, gamepads, steering wheels, guitars, and other input devices 
used with computer games and gaming consoles like the Wii, Xbox, and PlayStation.
TOUCH SCREENS
Commonly found on mobile devices (left) and increasingly being used with many types of
computers today (right).
TOUCH PADS
Commonly found on notebook and netbook computers
(left); also available as stand-alone devices (right).
TRACKBALLS
An alternative to a mouse that some
individuals ﬁnd easier to use.
FIGURE 2-9
Examples of other 
common pointing 
devices.
<
Courtesy Dell Inc.
Courtesy Dell Inc.
Courtesy Logitech
© byggarn.se/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy Logitech
Extensive touch input works the 
best with hybrid notebook-tablet 
computers, mobile devices, and 
other devices that can be held in 
a more horizontal position.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
53
>Scanner. An input device that reads printed text and graphics and transfers them to a computer in digital form.
Scanners, Readers, and Digital Cameras
Some input devices are designed either to convert data that already exists in physical form 
to digital form or to capture data initially in digital form. Three of the most  common types 
of these input devices—scanners, readers, and digital cameras—are  discussed next.
Scanners and Readers
There are various types of scanners and readers that can be used to capture data from a 
source document (a document containing data that already exists in physical form, such as a 
photograph, check, or product label) and convert it into input that the computer can under-
stand. Capturing data electronically from a source document is widely used today because 
it can save a great deal of time and is much more accurate than inputting that data manually.
A scanner, more officially called an optical scanner, captures the image of a usually 
flat object (such as a printed document or photograph) in digital form and then transfers 
that data to a computer. Typically, the entire document (including both text and images) is 
input as a single image that can be resized, inserted into other documents, posted on a Web 
page, e-mailed to someone, printed, or otherwise treated like any other graphical image. 
The text in the image, however, cannot be edited unless optical character recognition 
(OCR) software is used in conjunction 
with the scanner to input the scanned 
text as individual text characters.
Scanners are frequently used by 
individuals to input printed photographs 
and other personal documents into a 
computer. Businesses are increasingly 
using scanners to convert paper docu-
ments into electronic format for archi-
val or document processing purposes. 
The most common type of scanner is 
the flatbed scanner (see Figure 2-10), 
which is designed to scan flat objects 
one page at a time. Portable scanners 
are designed to capture text and other 
data while on the go. They are typi-
cally powered by batteries, the scanned 
content is stored in the scanner, and the 
content is transferred to a computer (via 
a cable or a wireless connection) when 
needed. The quality of scanned images 
is indicated by resolution, which is usu-
ally measured in the number of dots per 
inch (dpi) and can be specified when an 
item is scanned; the resolution can also 
be reduced if needed (such as to com-
press an image to reduce its file size 
before posting it on a Web page) using 
an image editing program. A higher 
resolution results in a better image but 
also results in a larger file size. A higher 
FLATBED SCANNERS
Used to input photos, sketches, slides, book
pages, and other relatively ﬂat documents into
the computer.
PORTABLE BARCODE READERS
Used to read barcodes when portability is needed.
STATIONARY RFID READERS
Used to read RFID tags, such as to automatically open ski lift entry gates for valid lift ticket holders at a
ski resort in Utah (left) and to process payments via RFID-enabled credit cards (right).
FIGURE 2-10
Scanners and 
readers transform 
data from physical 
form to digital form.
<
© BlueSkyImage/Shutterstock.com
Courtesy of teamaxess.com
Courtesy MasterCard Worldwide
Courtesy United Parcel Service of America, Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

54
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Barcode. A machine-readable code that represents data as a set of bars. >Barcode reader. An input device that reads barcodes. 
>RFID tag. A device containing a tiny chip and a radio antenna that is attached to an object so it can be identified using RFID technology. 
>RFID reader. A device used to read RFID tags.
resolution is needed, however, if the image is to be enlarged significantly or if only one part 
of the image is to be extracted and enlarged.
A barcode is an optical code that represents data with bars of varying widths or 
heights (see Figure 2-11). Barcodes are read with barcode readers, which use either light 
reflected from the barcode or imaging technology to interpret the bars contained in the bar-
code as the numbers or letters they represent. Two of the most familiar barcodes are UPC 
(Universal Product Code)—the barcode found on packaged goods in supermarkets and 
other retail stores—and ISBN (International Standard Book Number)—the type of barcode 
used with printed books. Businesses and organizations can also create and use custom 
barcodes to fulfill their unique needs. For instance, shipping organizations (such as FedEx, 
UPS, and the U.S. Postal Service) use custom barcodes to mark and track packages; hos-
pitals use custom barcodes to match patients with their charts and medicines; researchers 
use custom barcodes to tag and track the migration habits of  animals; and law enforcement 
agencies use custom barcodes to mark evidence. Fixed barcode readers are frequently 
used in point-of-sale (POS) systems; portable barcode readers (such as the one shown in 
Figure 2-10) are also available. Newer two-dimensional (2D) barcodes, such as QR codes 
(refer again to Figure 2-11), store more data than traditional barcodes and are designed to 
be read by smartphones for consumer applications. For a look at how barcodes are being 
used in a new trend—mobile ticketing—see the Technology and You box.
Radio frequency identification (RFID) is a technology that can store, read, and transmit 
data located in RFID tags. RFID tags contain tiny chips and radio antennas and can be attached 
to objects, such as products, ID cards, assets, shipping containers, and more. The data in RFID 
tags is read by RFID readers and can be unique so that each item containing an RFID tag can 
be individually identified. Whenever an RFID-tagged item is within range of an RFID reader 
(from 2 inches up to 300 feet or more, depending on the type of tag and the radio frequency 
being used), the tag’s built-in antenna allows the information located within the RFID tag to 
be sent to the reader. Because RFID tags are read by radio waves (not by light like barcodes), 
the tags only need to be within range (not within line of sight) of a reader. This enables RFID 
readers to read the data stored in many RFID tags at the same time and read them through card-
board and other materials. In addition, RFID chips can be updated during the life of a product 
(such as to record information about a product’s origin, shipping history, and the temperature 
range the item has been exposed to) and that information can be read when needed (such as 
at a product’s final destination). RFID can also be used in conjunction with GPS to include 
location information. Consequently, RFID can be used for many different purposes, including 
for tracking the movement of the items the tags are attached to, for tracking the movement of 
inventory pallets and shipping containers during transit, for ticketing applications, and as part 
of a mobile payment system. Handheld RFID readers look similar to handheld barcode read-
ers, stationary RFID readers are in a fixed location, and portal RFID readers can be used to 
read all the RFID tags inside a shipping box or palette when it passes through the portal. 
Despite all its advantages, RFID growth in the retail industry has been slower than ini-
tially expected. This is primarily because of cost constraints and a number of privacy and 
security issues, such as concerns that others might be able to read the data contained in an 
RFID tag attached to your clothing, passport, or other personal item, or they might be able 
to make fraudulent charges via your smartphone. Privacy advocates are concerned about 
linking RFID tag data with personally identifiable data contained in corporate databases, 
such as to track consumer movements or shopping habits. As of now, no long-term solu-
tion to this issue has been reached. However, precautions against fraudulent use—such as 
using high-frequency tags that need to be within a few inches of the reader and requiring 
a PIN code, signature, or other type of authorization when an RFID credit card or mobile 
Capture QR codes found in 
advertisements, magazines, or 
other printed material with your 
smartphone to easily access 
the associated resources, such 
as to enter a contest, watch a 
video, Like a Facebook page, or 
download a coupon.
TIP
QR CODES
ISBN CODES
UPC (UNIVERSAL
PRODUCT CODE) CODES
Courtesy Motorola Solutions; Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
FIGURE 2-11
Common types of 
barcodes.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
55
>Biometric reader. A device used to input biometric data, such as an individual’s fingerprint or voice. >Digital camera. An input device that 
takes pictures and records them as digital images.
payment system is used—are being developed. Currently, a price limit (such as $25) for 
completely automated purchases (without a signature or other authorization), similar to 
many credit card purchase today, is being debated as a compromise between convenience 
and security.
Biometric readers read biometric data (measurable biological characteristics, such 
as an individual’s fingerprint, hand geometry, face, iris, or voice) in order to identify or 
authenticate individuals, as discussed in more detail in Chapter 4. Biometric readers can be 
stand-alone or built into a computer or mobile device (see Figure 2-12); they can also be 
built into another piece of hardware, such as a keyboard, an external hard drive, or a USB 
flash drive. Other types of readers include optical mark readers (OMRs), which input data 
from special forms to score or tally exams, questionnaires, ballots, and so forth; optical 
character recognition (OCR) readers, which are used to read optical characters printed 
on documents, such as invoices and utility bills; and magnetic ink character recognition 
(MICR) readers, which are used to read the MICR-encoded bank and account information 
on checks, in order to sort and process the checks.
Digital Cameras
Digital cameras work much like conventional film cameras, but instead of recording 
images on film they record them on a digital storage medium, such as a flash memory 
card, built-in hard drive, or DVD disc. Digital cameras are usually designated either as 
Fingerprint reader
Mobile Ticketing
A new trend is mobile ticketing. Mobile ticketing goes beyond 
just using your smartphone or other mobile device to locate and 
purchase tickets that are then mailed to you. From concerts to 
sporting events to transportation to movie tickets, you can now 
use your mobile device as your actual admission ticket. 
To buy a mobile ticket, you typically use a mobile app, such as 
an individual app for a particular application or organization (such 
as the Fandango app for movie tickets) or a generalized app (such 
as StubHub) for tickets to sporting events, concerts, and more. 
In either case, you use the app to make the applicable selections 
(such as the desired event, date, time, and seat location) and pay, 
and then your tickets are either sent to your smartphone or media 
tablet via e-mail or text message, or you use a link to download 
them. Typically, mobile tickets have a barcode on them; to enter 
the venue, you just display the ticket on your device, an attendant 
scans it, and you’re in. For example, the mobile boarding pass 
shown in the accompanying photo allows you to use your smart-
phone or media tablet as your airline boarding pass at airport 
security checkpoints or at the gate during boarding.
There are also Web sites (such as MogoTix) that allow you to 
easily sell and distribute mobile tickets to custom events, such 
as a fundraiser or conference. You just publish an event (includ-
ing details, ticket prices, and payment options) on the ticketing 
Web site and you’re in business!
TE C H N O LO GY A N D YOU
© robert_s/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy American Airlines
FIGURE 2-12
Biometric readers. This 
device has fully integrated 
iris, face, fingerprint, 
and voice biometric 
capabilities.
<
AOptix Stratus MXTM
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

56
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
still cameras (which take individual still photos) or video cameras (which 
capture moving video images), although many cameras today take both 
still images and video. In addition to stand-alone still and video cameras 
(see Figure 2-13), digital camera capabilities are integrated into many 
portable computers and mobile devices today.
Digital still cameras are available in a wide variety of sizes and capa-
bilities, such as inexpensive point-and-shoot digital cameras designed 
for consumers, professional digital cameras with removable lenses, and 
digital cameras integrated into mobile phones and other mobile devices. 
The primary appeal of digital still cameras is that the images are immedi-
ately available for viewing or printing, instead of having to have the film 
developed first as was the case with conventional film cameras. Digital 
still cameras most often use flash memory cards for storage; the number 
of digital photos that can be stored at one time depends on the capac-
ity of the card being used, as well as the photo resolution being used. 
Photos taken with a digital camera are typically transferred to a computer 
or printer via the flash memory card containing the images or by con-
necting the camera to the computer or printer using a wired or wireless 
connection. Once the photos have been transferred to a computer, they 
can be retouched with image editing software; saved, printed, or posted to 
a Web page; or burned onto a CD or DVD disc, just like any other digital 
image. The images on the storage medium can be deleted at any time to 
make room for more photos.
Digital video cameras include digital camcorders (such as the one 
shown in Figure 2-13) and small digital video cameras used in con-
junction with computers and other devices. Both types of digital video 
cameras are commonly used by individuals and businesses today to 
capture or transmit video images. Digital video cameras can also be 
used for identification purposes, such as in conjunction with face recognition tech-
nology to authorize access to a secure facility or computer resource, as discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 4. Digital camcorders are similar to conventional analog cam-
corders, but they store images on digital media—typically on built-in hard drives or 
rewritable DVDs for conventional-sized camcorders or flash memory for pocket-sized 
camcorders. Once a video is recorded, it can be transferred to a computer, edited with 
software as needed, or saved to a DVD or other type of storage medium. It can also 
be compressed (made smaller), if needed, and then uploaded to video sharing sites, 
such as YouTube. Some digital video cameras today can take high-definition (HD) 
video. Video cameras used with personal computers—commonly called webcams or 
PC cams—are typically used to transmit still or video images over the Internet (such 
as during a videoconference or video phone call) or to broadcast images continually to 
a Web page.
Other Input Devices
Other input devices include microphones or headsets (used for voice input, such as issu-
ing commands or dictating documents to a computer (via speech recognition software), 
placing phone calls via a computer (referred to as Voice over IP or VoIP), or recording 
spoken voice for a podcast (a recorded audio file that is distributed via the Internet). 
Music can be input into a computer via a CD, a DVD, or a Web download. For original 
compositions, microphones, keyboard controllers, and guitar controllers can be used. 
Once the music is input into the computer, it can be saved, modified, played, inserted 
into other programs, or burned to a CD or DVD. Adaptive input devices (designed for 
users with a physical disability) and ergonomic hardware (designed to lessen the physi-
cal impact of computer use) are discussed in detail in Chapter 7; types of emerging input 
devices are covered in Chapter 8.
CONSUMER DIGITAL STILL CAMERAS
Typically store photos on ﬂash memory media.
Virtually all digital cameras
let you display and erase
images.
Most cameras use removable
storage media in addition to,
or instead of, built-in storage.
CONSUMER DIGITAL CAMCORDERS
Typically store video on a built-in hard drive (as in
this camera) or on DVD discs.
Courtesy Sony Electronics Inc.; ©MaszaS/Shutterstock.com; 
Courtesy Kingston Technology Company, Inc.
Courtesy Sony Electronics Inc.
Photos or videos taken on a 
device with a built-in camera 
(such as a smartphone) are 
typically stored on the device’s 
internal storage.
TIP
Some digital cameras, flash 
memory cards, and smartphones 
(with the appropriate app) can 
upload photos and videos as they 
are taken to a photo sharing Web 
site via a Wi-Fi connection.
TIP
FIGURE 2-13
Digital cameras.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
57
>System unit. The main box of a computer that houses the CPU, motherboard, memory, and other devices. >Motherboard. The main circuit 
board of a computer, located inside the system unit, to which all computer system components connect.
PROCESSING HARDWARE AND OTHER HARDWARE 
INSIDE THE SYSTEM UNIT
The system unit is the main case of a computer or mobile device. It houses the process-
ing hardware for that device, as well as a few other components, such as storage devices, 
the power supply, and cooling fans. The system unit for a desktop computer often looks 
like a rectangular box, as in Figure 2-14. The system units for all-in-one computers, note-
books, tablets, and mobile devices are much smaller and are usually combined with the 
device’s display screen to form a single piece of hardware. However, these system units 
typically have components that are similar to those found in a desktop computer. As shown 
in Figure 2-14, a system unit contains one or more processors, several types of memory, 
interfaces to connect external peripheral devices (such as printers), and other components 
all interconnected through the motherboard. These components are discussed in detail in 
the next few sections.
The Motherboard
A circuit board is a thin board containing computer chips—very small pieces of silicon 
or other semiconducting material—and other electronic components. The main circuit 
board inside the system unit is called the motherboard. As shown in Figure 2-14, the 
EXPANSION CARD
Connects peripheral
devices or adds new
capabilities to a
computer.
CPU
Performs the calculations
and does the comparisons
needed for processing, as
well as controls the other
parts of the computer
system.
POWER SUPPLY
Converts standard
electrical power into
a form the computer
can use.
HARD DRIVE
Stores data and programs;
the principal storage device
for most computers.
FAN
Cools the CPU.
EXPANSION SLOTS
Connect expansion
cards to the mother-
board to add addi-
tional capabilities.
MOTHERBOARD
Connects all compo-
nents of the computer
system; the computer’s
main circuit board.
MEMORY (RAM) MODULES
Store data temporarily while
you are working with it.
DRIVE BAYS
Hold storage
devices, such as
the DVD and 
hard drives
shown here.
DVD DRIVE
Accesses data
stored on CDs
or DVDs.
FLASH MEMORY
CARD READER
Accesses data
stored on ﬂash
memory cards.
USB PORTS
Connect USB
devices to the
computer.
MEMORY SLOTS
Connect memory
modules to the
motherboard.
FIGURE 2-14
Inside a typical 
system unit. The 
system unit houses 
the CPU, memory, and 
other important pieces 
of hardware.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

58
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Processor. A chip (such as the CPU or GPU) that performs processing functions. >Central processing unit (CPU). The chip located on 
the motherboard of a computer that performs most of the processing for a computer. >Microprocessor. A central processing unit (CPU) for a 
personal computer. >Graphics processing unit (GPU). The chip that does the processing needed to display images on the screen; can be 
located on the motherboard, inside the CPU, or on a video graphics board.
 motherboard has a variety of chips and boards attached to 
it; in fact, all devices used with a computer need to be con-
nected in one way or another to the motherboard. To accom-
plish this, a variety of ports—special connectors exposed 
through the exterior of the system unit case—are either built 
into the motherboard or are created via an expansion card 
inserted into an expansion slot on the  motherboard. These 
ports are used to connect external devices (such as moni-
tors, keyboards, mice, and printers) to the computer. Wireless 
external devices connect to the motherboard either via a wire-
less transceiver that plugs into a port on the computer or via 
wireless networking technology (such as Bluetooth) built into 
the motherboard.
The most common ports for a desktop computer are 
shown in Figure 2-15. Portable computers have ports simi-
lar to desktop computers, but they often have fewer of them. 
Smartphones and other mobile devices have a more limited 
amount of expandability, such as a USB port, an HDMI port, 
or a flash memory card slot.
Processors
Computers and mobile devices today contain one or more 
processors (such as CPUs and GPUs), which consist of a 
variety of circuitry and components that are packaged together and connected directly 
to the motherboard. The primary processor is the central processing unit (CPU)—also 
called the microprocessor when talking about personal computers—and it does the vast 
majority of the processing for a computer. The CPU contains an arithmetic/logic unit 
(ALU), which performs arithmetic (addition, subtraction, multiplication, and division) 
involving integers and logical operations (such as comparing two pieces of data to see if 
they are equal or determining if a specific condition is true or false). Arithmetic requiring 
decimals is usually performed by the floating point unit (FPU). Together, the ALU and 
FPU are the part of the CPU that computes. The control unit coordinates and controls the 
operations and activities taking place within the CPU, such as retrieving data and instruc-
tions and passing them on to the ALU for execution. The most recent CPU designs often 
also include the graphics processing unit (GPU) inside the CPU package. The GPU 
takes care of the processing needed to display images (including still images, animations, 
and video)—and particularly 3D images—on the screen. (For a look at how GPUs were 
used to create the new Transformers: The Ride 3D at Universal Studios, see the Inside the 
Industry box.)
CPUs are typically designed for a specific type of computer, such as for desk-
top computers, servers, portable computers (like notebook and tablet computers), 
or mobile devices (like media tablets and mobile phones). In addition to computers 
and mobile devices, there are also processors incorporated into a variety of products 
today, such as TVs, smart meters, digital media players, gaming consoles, cars, and 
exercise machines. Most personal computers and servers today use Intel or Advanced 
Micro Devices (AMD) CPUs; media tablets and mobile phones often use proces-
sors manufactured by other companies (such as ARM) instead. Most CPUs today are 
USB PORTS
Connect a keyboard,
mouse, scanner,
USB ﬂash drive,
printer, digital camera,
or other USB devices.
AUDIO PORTS
Connect speakers,
headphones, and a
microphone.
HDMI PORT
Connects a
high-deﬁnition
monitor.
EMPTY SLOTS
Ports located on new
expansion cards added
to the computer will be
accessible here.
VGA MONITOR PORT
Connects a VGA 
monitor.
POWER CONNECTOR 
Connects the
computer to a power
outlet.
NETWORK PORT
Connects the computer
to a wired network.
FILLED SLOT 
The ports on this
expansion card are
accessible here.
FIGURE 2-15
Ports are used to 
connect external 
devices to the 
motherboard.
<
The most universal port is the 
USB port, used to connect a 
variety of input, output, and 
storage devices. When buying 
a new computer, be sure it has 
several USB ports.
TIP
Courtesy Dell Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
59
>Multi-core CPU. A CPU that contains the processing components or core of more than one processor in a single CPU. >Dual-core CPU. 
A CPU that contains two separate processing cores. >Quad-core CPU. A CPU that contains four separate processing cores.
multi-core CPUs; that is, CPUs that contain the processing components or cores of 
multiple independent processors on a single CPU. For example, dual-core CPUs con-
tain two cores and quad-core CPUs contain four cores. Up until just a few years ago, 
most CPUs designed for desktop computers had only a single core, and a common way 
to increase the amount of processing performed by the CPU was to increase the speed 
of the CPU. However, heat constraints are making it progressively more difficult to con-
tinue to increase CPU speed, so CPU manufacturers today are focusing on multi-core 
CPUs to increase the amount of processing that a CPU can do in a given time period. 
One measurement of the processing speed for a CPU is CPU clock speed, which is rated 
in megahertz (MHz) or gigahertz (GHz). A CPU with a higher CPU clock speed means 
that more instructions can be processed per second than the same CPU with a lower 
CPU clock speed. For instance, a Core i7 processor running at 3.0 GHz would be faster 
than a Core i7 running at 2.4 GHz, if all other components remain the same. Although 
CPU clock speed is an important factor in computer performance, other factors (such as 
the number of cores, the amount of memory, and the speed of external storage devices) 
greatly affect the overall processing speed of the computer. As a result, computers today 
are typically classified less by CPU clock speed and more by the computer’s overall 
processing speed or performance.
Increasingly, CPU manufacturers are 
integrating other features (such as 
graphics and networking capabilities) 
into processors. A processor that 
contains all the necessary capabilities 
for a single device is sometimes 
referred to as a system-on-a-chip 
(SoC).
TIP
GPUs and Transformers: The Ride 3D at 
Universal Studios
At the Universal Studios Hollywood theme park, passengers 
can take a ride through a Transformers battlescape, thanks to 
the new Transformers: The Ride 3D ride. A motion platform, a 
2,000 foot-long track, 14 huge screens (some of which curve 
around the audience), and 34 projectors ﬁ tted with custom 
3D lenses are used to create the realistic experience, which 
is helped by motion that is synchronized with the action and 
a 14-channel audio system built into the ride vehicle. But 
the star of the show is the ride’s impressive photorealistic 
3D images. 
The Transformers: The Ride 3D imagery uses 4K resolution, 
which is four times greater than the typical movie. The images 
took two years to create at Industrial Light and Magic (ILM) 
and were more difﬁ cult to create than initially expected due to 
their 3D nature, the 4K resolution, and the fact that the images 
had to be associated with the proper perspective for each of 
the screens. According to Chick Russell, show producer at 
Universal Studios, “We were using every single server and 
computer that ILM had. This was the most complex project ILM 
ever worked on.” 
One key, according to Jeff White, the visual effects supervi-
sor at ILM, was being able to see the 3D animations play back 
in real time as they were being developed (see the accompa-
nying photo)—for that, they relied on the speed of NVIDIA’s 
Quadro GPUs. Considering every robot in the ride is over a 
million polygons, a lot of rendering power is needed to pull that 
off and the GPUs delivered.
Total cost: $40 million. Result: The most technically advanced 
ride that Universal Studios has ever produced.
I N S I D E  TH E  I N D U STRY
Courtesy NVIDIA
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

60
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Random access memory (RAM). Chips connected to the motherboard that provide a temporary location for the computer to hold data and 
program instructions while they are needed. >Volatile. A characteristic of memory or storage in which data is not retained when the power to the 
computer is turned off.
Multi-core CPUs (such as the Intel quad-core CPU designed 
for desktop computers that is shown in Figure 2-16) allow com-
puters to work simultaneously on more than one task at a time, 
such as burning a DVD while surfing the Web, as well as to work 
faster within a single application if the software is designed to take 
advantage of multiple cores. Another benefit of multi-core CPUs is 
that they typically experience fewer heat problems than single-core 
CPUs because each core typically runs slower than a single-core 
CPU, although the total processing power of the multi-core CPU is 
greater. In addition to heat reduction, goals of CPU manufacturers 
today include creating CPUs that are as energy- efficient as possible 
(in order to reduce power consumption and increase battery life) 
and that use materials that are not toxic when disposed of (in order 
to lessen the e-waste impact of computers, as discussed in detail in 
Chapter 7).
Memory
Memory refers to chip-based storage. When the term memory is used alone, it refers to 
chip-based storage—typically random access memory or RAM—that is located inside 
the system unit to store data on a short-term, temporary basis. In contrast, the term storage 
refers to the amount of long-term storage available to a computer—usually in the form of 
the computer’s hard drive or removable storage media (such as CDs, DVDs, flash memory 
cards, and USB flash drives, all discussed later in this chapter), but it can also be in the 
form of chip-based internal storage, especially in mobile devices. RAM is used to store 
the essential parts of the operating system while the computer is running, as well as the 
programs and data that the computer is currently using. RAM is volatile, which means its 
content is lost when the computer is shut off. Data in RAM is also deleted when it is no 
longer needed, such as when the program using that data is closed. If you want to retrieve a 
document at a later time, you need to save the document on a storage medium before clos-
ing it. There are several forms of nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM) under development that may 
be a possibility for the future; these and other types of emerging processing hardware are 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
Like the CPU, RAM consists of circuits etched onto chips. 
While smartphones and other mobile devices typically use 
embedded memory chips, the memory chips for servers and per-
sonal computers are typically arranged onto circuit boards called 
memory modules (see Figure 2-17), which, in turn, are plugged 
into the motherboard. RAM capacity is measured in bytes and 
most personal computers sold today have 2 to 8 GB of RAM. 
It is important for a computer to have sufficient RAM because 
more RAM allows more applications to run at one time and the 
computer to respond more quickly when a user switches from 
task to task.
In addition to RAM, computer users should be aware of four 
other types of computer memory. Two of these—cache memory and 
registers—are volatile like RAM; the other two—read-only memory 
(ROM) and flash memory—are nonvolatile.
FIGURE 2-17
RAM memory 
modules.
<
The memory
DESKTOP RAM (DIMM)
NOTEBOOK RAM (SO-DIMM)
module contains
memory chips.
This part of the memory
module is plugged into a
memory slot on the
motherboard.
Four cores
Shared Level 3
cache memory
FIGURE 2-16
CPUs. CPUs today 
typically have multiple 
cores.
<
Courtesy Intel Corporation
Courtesy Kingston Technology Company, Inc.
With devices that use embedded 
memory chips instead of memory 
modules, you typically cannot 
expand or replace the RAM.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
61
Cache memory is a special group of very 
fast memory chips located on or close to the 
CPU. Cache memory is used to speed up pro-
cessing by storing the data and instructions 
that may be needed next by the CPU in handy 
locations. Cache memory level numbers indi-
cate the order in which the various caches 
are accessed by the CPU when it requires 
new data or instructions. Level 1 (L1) cache 
(which is the fastest type of cache but typi-
cally holds less data than other levels of 
cache) is checked first, followed by Level 2 
(L2) cache, followed by Level 3 (L3) cache 
if it exists. If the data or instructions are not 
found in cache memory, the computer looks 
for them in RAM, which is slower than cache 
memory. If the data or instructions cannot 
be found in RAM, then they are retrieved 
from the hard drive—an even slower opera-
tion. Typically, more cache memory results 
in faster processing. Most multi-core CPUs 
today have some cache memory (such as 
L1 and L2 cache) dedicated to each core; 
they may also use a larger shared cache 
memory (such as L3 cache, as shown in 
Figure 2-16) that can be accessed by any core 
as needed.
Registers are another type of high-speed memory built into the CPU. Registers are 
used by the CPU to temporarily store data and intermediary results during processing. 
Registers are the fastest type of memory used by the CPU, even faster than Level 1 
cache. Generally, the more data a register can contain at one time, the faster the CPU 
performs.
ROM (read-only memory) consists of nonvolatile chips that permanently store data or 
programs. Like RAM, these chips are attached to the motherboard inside the system unit, 
and the data or programs are retrieved by the computer when they are needed. An impor-
tant difference, however, is that you can neither write over the data or programs in ROM 
chips (which is the reason ROM chips are called read-only), nor destroy their contents 
when you shut off the computer’s power. Traditionally, ROM was used to store perma-
nent instructions used by a computer (referred to as firmware); ROM is increasingly being 
replaced with flash memory, as discussed next, for any data that may need to be updated 
during the life of the computer.
Flash memory is a type of nonvolatile memory into which data can be stored and 
retrieved. Flash memory chips have begun to replace ROM for storing system informa-
tion, such as a computer’s BIOS (basic input/output system)—the sequence of instruc-
tions the computer follows during the boot process. By storing this information in flash 
memory instead of in ROM, it can be updated as needed. Similarly, firmware for per-
sonal computers and other devices (such as mobile phones and networking hardware) 
are now typically stored in flash memory that is embedded in the device so the firm-
ware can be updated over the life of the product. In addition to built-in flash memory 
chips that are used only by the computer, computers and storage devices can include 
built-in flash memory chips designed to be used by the user for storage purposes, as 
discussed shortly.
Product descriptions for media 
tablets and other devices that use 
built-in flash memory for storage 
sometimes refer to that storage as 
memory—it’s important for shoppers 
to realize that this quantity refers to 
storage, not RAM.
TIP
To avoid confusion, when you are 
referring to the amount of room 
on your hard drive, use the proper 
term—storage space, not memory.
TIP
James Bruce, Lead Mobile Strategist, ARM
 Why does a smartphone need a  dual-core 
processor? 
Dual core processors allow smartphones to deliver 
increased performance, while delivering better 
battery life. The reason for this is that the tasks 
that run on a smartphone have widely different 
performance needs; for instance, compare writing an 
SMS text message with playing a 3D game. 
To provide this scalability of performance and 
power in today’s advanced chip manufacturing 
processes such as 28 nm (1 nm = 1 billionth of a 
meter), it is better to have multiple smaller cores 
versus one large monolithic core. With dual-core 
processors, you can switch one core off for tasks 
such as SMS (to save power), and then you can 
switch both cores on when maximum performance 
is needed.
AS K TH E E X PE R T
Courtesy of ARM
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

62
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Output device. A piece of hardware that presents the results of processing in a form the user can understand. >Display device. An output 
device that contains a viewing screen. >Monitor. A display device for a desktop computer. >Display screen. A display device built into a 
notebook computer, netbook, or other device. >Pixel. The smallest colorable area in an electronic image, such as a scanned image, 
a digital photograph, or an image displayed on a display screen.
OUTPUT HARDWARE
Output hardware consists of all the devices that are used to produce the results of  processing—
usually, output is displayed on a computer screen, printed on paper, or  presented as audio 
output. Hardware devices that produce output are called output devices. The most common 
output devices are discussed next; types of emerging output devices are discussed in Chapter 8.
Display Devices
A display device—the most common form of output device—presents output visually on 
some type of screen. The display device for a desktop computer is more formally called a 
monitor; the display device for a notebook, netbook, tablet, mobile phone, or other device 
for which the screen is built into the device is typically called a display screen. In addition to 
being used with computers and mobile devices (see Figure 2-18), display screens are also built 
into handheld gaming devices, home entertainment devices (like remote controls, televisions, 
and portable DVD players), and kitchen appliances. They are also an important component in 
digital photo frames (stand-alone or wall-mounted photo frames that display digital photos, 
which are typically transferred to the frame via a flash memory card or a wireless network-
ing connection), e-book readers or e-readers (which display e-books), portable digital media 
players, smart watches, and other consumer products. A data projector is a display device 
that projects computer output onto a wall or projection screen for a large group presentation; 
digital signage systems display digital signs (such as for billboards, restaurant menus, and 
advertising signs in retail stores) whose content can be changed throughout the day as needed.
The CRT monitor used to be the norm for desktop computers. CRTs use  cathode-ray 
tube technology to display images; as a result, they are large, bulky, and heavy like con-
ventional televisions. While CRT monitors are still in use, most computers today (as well 
as most television sets) use the thinner and lighter flat-panel display technology. Flat-
panel display technology is also used in the display screens integrated into mobile phones 
and consumer electronics. Flat-panel displays form images by manipulating electronically 
charged chemicals or gases sandwiched between thin panes of glass or other transpar-
ent material. Flat-panel displays consume less power than CRTs. They also take up less 
desk space, which makes it possible to use multiple monitors working together to increase 
the amount of data the user can view at one time. To use multiple monitors, you must 
have the necessary hardware to support this feature, such as an appropriate monitor port. 
Multiple displays can be used with both desktop and portable computers; typically, you 
will use the displays to extend your desktop as in Figure 2-19, instead of duplicate it.
Regardless of the technology used, the screen of a display device is divided into a 
fine grid of small areas or dots called pixels (from the phrase picture element). A pixel 
is the smallest colorable area in an electronic image. The number of pixels used on a dis-
play screen determines the screen resolution, which affects the amount of information that 
can be displayed on the screen at one time. When a higher resolution is selected, such as 
1,600 pixels horizontally by 900 pixels vertically for a standard computer monitor (writ-
ten as 1,600 × 900 and read as 1600 by 900), more information can fit on the screen, but 
everything will be displayed smaller than with a lower resolution, such as 1,280 × 768. The 
screen resolution on many computers today can be changed by users to match their prefer-
ences and the software being used. On Windows computers, display options are changed 
using the Control Panel. When multiple monitors are used, typically the screen resolution 
of each display can be set independently of the others. Very high-resolution monitors are 
available for special applications, such as viewing digital X-rays.
MEDIA TABLETS
SMART WATCHES
FIGURE 2-18
Many consumer 
products today have 
a display screen.
<
© iStockphoto.com/pressureUA
Courtesy Sony Electronics Inc.
Flat-panel displays typically use 
digital signals, which allow for 
sharper images.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
63
>Printer. An output device that produces output on paper. >Laser printer. An output device that uses toner powder and technology similar to 
that of a photocopier to produce images on paper.
Display devices today are 
typically color displays, which 
form colors by mixing combina-
tions of three colors—red, green, 
and blue. Screen size is usually 
measured diagonally from corner 
to corner, in a manner similar to 
the way TV screens are measured. 
As discussed earlier in this chap-
ter, it is increasingly common for 
monitors and display screens to 
support touch input. Touch screen 
displays are commonly used with personal computers, as well as with consumer kiosks, por-
table gaming devices, mobile phones, media tablets, smart TVs, and other consumer devices.
Printers
Instead of the temporary, ever-changing soft copy output that a monitor produces, printers 
produce hard copy; that is, a permanent copy of the output on paper. Most desktop 
 computers are connected to a printer; portable computers can use printers as well. Printers 
designed to be connected to a single computer are referred to as personal printers; network 
printers are designed to be shared by multiple users via a home or an office network.
Printers produce images through either impact or nonimpact technologies. Impact 
printers, like old ribbon typewriters, have a print mechanism that actually strikes the 
paper to transfer ink to the paper. Most printers today are nonimpact printers, meaning 
they form images without the print mechanism actually touching the paper. Impact print-
ers, such as the older dot-matrix printers, are primarily used today for producing multi-
part forms, such as invoices, packing slips, and credit card receipts. Nonimpact printers 
usually produce higher-quality images and are much quieter than impact printers. Both 
impact and nonimpact printers form images with dots, similar to the way monitors dis-
play images using pixels. Because of this, printers are very versatile and can print text 
in virtually any size, as well as print photos and other graphical images. Printers can be 
color printers (see Figure 2-20) or black-and-white printers; color printers either apply all 
of the colors in one pass or go through the entire printing process multiple times, applying 
one color during each pass. In addition, printer quality is measured in dots per inch (dpi) and 
printer speed is measured in pages per minute (ppm). Most personal printers today connect 
to a computer via a USB connection; many also have the option of connecting via a wired 
or wireless networking connection as well. In addition, some personal printers can receive 
data to be printed via a flash memory card or directly from a digital camera. Network print-
ers connect directly to a network and can be used by any device on that network, or via the 
Internet if cloud printing is available and enabled. The two most common types of printers 
today are laser printers and ink-jet printers, both of which are nonimpact printers.
Laser Printers
Laser printers are the standard for business documents and come in both personal and 
 network versions; they are also available as both color and black-and-white printers. To 
print a document, the laser printer first uses a laser beam to charge the appropriate loca-
tions on a drum to form the page’s image, and then toner powder (powdered ink) is released 
from a toner cartridge and sticks to the drum. The toner is then transferred to a piece of 
FIGURE 2-19
Multiple monitors. 
Can be used to extend 
a desktop, which can 
increase productivity.
<
FIGURE 2-20
Color printing. 
Requres multiple 
cartridges or 
cartridges that contain 
multiple colors.
<
Printers that offer more than just 
printing capabilities (such as printing, 
copying, scanning, and faxing) are 
referred to as multifunction devices 
(MFD) or all-in-ones.
TIP
©iStockphoto.com/gl0ck; Used with permission 
from Microsoft Corporation
© Paul Broadbent/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

64
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Ink-jet printer. An output device that sprays droplets of ink to produce images on paper.
paper when the paper is rolled over the drum, and a heating unit fuses the toner powder to 
the paper to permanently form the image (see Figure 2-21). Laser printers print one entire 
page at a time and are typically faster and have better quality output than ink-jet printers, 
discussed next. Common print resolutions for laser printers are between 600 and 2,400 dpi; 
common speeds for laser printers range from about 10 to 70 ppm.
Ink-Jet Printers
Ink-jet printers form images by spraying tiny drops of liquid ink from one or more ink 
cartridges onto the page, one printed line at a time (see Figure 2-22). Some printers print 
with one single-sized ink droplet; others print using different-sized ink droplets and using 
multiple nozzles or varying electrical charges for more precise printing. The printhead for 
ink-jet printers typically travels back and forth across the page, which is one reason why 
ink-jet printers are slower than laser printers (ink-jet printers print up to about 30 ppm). 
Because they are relatively inexpensive, have good-quality output, and can print in color, 
ink-jet printers are often the printer of choice for home use. With the use of special photo 
paper, most ink-jet printers can also print photograph-quality digital photos. Ink-jet print-
ers are typically less expensive than laser printers, although the cost of the replaceable ink 
cartridges can add up, especially if you do a lot of color printing.
Special-Purpose Printers
Although both laser and ink-jet printers can typically print on a variety of media— including 
sheets of labels, envelopes, transparencies, photo paper, and even fabric—in addition to 
1. The paper enters the
printer, and then it is
given an electrical
charge so the toner can
stick to the paper, as
explained in step 5.
2. The printer’s
microprocessor decodes
page data sent from the
computer.
3. Instructions from the printer’s micro-
processor control a laser beam that
charges the appropriate locations on
the drum so the toner will stick to the
drum, as explained in step 4.
4.  Toner powder is applied to the drum
     and sticks only to the charged areas
     on the drum.
5.  The paper rolls over the drum and the
     toner is transferred to the paper, forming
     the image for the entire page.
6.  The paper goes through the fusing unit,
     at which point the toner is permanently
     afﬁxed to the paper through heat and
     pressure.
MEMO
7.  The paper exits the printer.
LASER PRINTER
FIGURE 2-21
How black-and-
white laser printers 
work.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Courtesy, Hewlett-Packard Company
To save money, buy recharged 
(refilled) toner or ink cartridges 
to replace your printer cartridge 
when it runs out of toner or ink 
powder. Recharged cartridges 
typically cost about one-third less 
than new cartridges and last at 
least as long.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
65
>Computer speakers. Output devices connected to computers that provide audio output. 
various sizes of paper, some print-
ers are designed for a particular 
purpose. For instance, photo print-
ers are color printers designed to 
print photographs; barcode print-
ers enable businesses and other 
organizations 
to 
print 
custom 
barcodes on price tags, shipping 
labels, and other documents for 
identification or pricing purposes; 
portable printers are small, light-
weight printers that can be used 
on the go, such as with a notebook 
computer or mobile device; wide-
format ink-jet printers are designed 
to produce charts, drawings, maps, 
blueprints, advertising banners, 
and other large documents; and 3D 
printers form output in layers using 
molten plastic during a series of 
passes to build a 3D version of the 
desired output.
Other Output Devices
Other types of output devices 
include computer speakers, such 
as those that connect to a computer 
and provide audio output for com-
puter games, music, video clips and TV shows, videoconferencing, and other applications. 
Headphones can be used instead of speakers when you don’t want the audio output to 
disturb others (such as in a school computer lab or public library). Headsets are head-
phones with a built-in microphone and are often used for dictating, making phone calls, 
or participating in videoconferences using a computer; wireless headsets are commonly 
used in conjunction with mobile phones. Even smaller than headphones are the earphones 
and earbuds often used with portable digital media players, handheld gaming devices, and 
other mobile devices.
STORAGE HARDWARE
Unlike RAM, which is volatile and holds data only temporarily, storage systems are non-
volatile and are used anytime you want to save a document for future use. The basic char-
acteristics of storage systems are discussed first, followed by a look at the most common 
types of storage systems.
Storage System Characteristics
All storage systems have specific characteristics, such as having both a storage device 
and a storage medium, the portability and volatility of the system, and the type of storage 
technology used.
Each ink cartridge is made up of multiple tiny
ink-ﬁlled ﬁring chambers; to print images, the
appropriate color ink is ejected through the
appropriate ﬁring chamber.
Heating
element
Firing
chamber
Paper
Steam
bubble
1.  A heating element makes
     the ink boil, which causes
     a steam bubble to form.  
Steam
bubble
Ink droplet
2.  As the steam bubble
     expands, it pushes ink
     through the ﬁring
     chamber.
Steam
bubble
Ink droplet
3.  The ink droplet is ejected onto
     the paper and the steam bubble
     collapses, pulling more ink into
     the ﬁring chamber. 
INK-JET PRINTER
FIGURE 2-22
How ink-jet printers 
work.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Courtesy, Hewlett-Packard Company
Emerging types of output devices 
(such as wireless displays, cloud 
printing, 3D printers, and Google 
Glass) are discussed in Chapter 8.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

66
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Storage medium. The part of a storage system, such as a DVD disc, where data is stored. >Storage device. A piece of hardware, such as a 
DVD drive, into which a storage medium is inserted to be read from or written to. 
Storage Media and Storage Devices
There are two parts to any storage system: the 
storage medium and the storage device. A storage 
medium is the hardware where data is actually stored 
(for example, a DVD or a flash memory card); a stor-
age medium is inserted into its corresponding storage 
device (such as a DVD drive or a flash memory card 
reader) in order to be read from or written to. Often 
the storage device and storage medium are two sepa-
rate pieces of hardware (that is, the storage medium 
is removable), although with some systems—such as 
a hard drive or most USB flash drives—the two parts 
are permanently sealed together to form one piece of 
hardware.
Storage devices can be internal (located inside 
the system unit), external (plugged into an external 
port on the system unit), or remote (located on another 
computer, such as a network server or Web server). 
Internal devices have the advantage of requiring no 
additional desk space and are usually faster than their 
external counterparts. External devices, however, can be easily transported from one loca-
tion to another (such as to share data with others, to transfer data between a work computer 
and a home computer, or to take digital photos to a photo store). They can also be removed 
from the computer and stored in a secure area (such as for backup purposes or to protect 
sensitive data). Remote devices are accessed over a network. Some remote storage devices, 
such as those accessed via the Internet, have the additional advantage of being accessible 
from any computer with an Internet connection. Regardless of how storage devices are 
connected to a computer, letters of the alphabet and/or names are typically assigned to 
each storage device so that the user can identify each device easily when it needs to be used 
(see Figure 2-23).
Type of Storage Technology Used
Data is stored magnetically or optically on many types of storage media. With magnetic 
storage systems, such as conventional hard drives, data is stored magnetically on the stor-
age medium, which means the data (0s and 1s) is represented using different magnetic 
alignments. The storage device can change the magnetic alignment when needed, so data 
can be written to the medium, deleted from the medium, or rewritten to the medium. 
Optical storage media (such as CDs and DVDs) store data optically using laser beams. 
On some optical media, the laser burns permanent marks to represent 0s and 1s into the 
surface of the medium so the data cannot be erased or rewritten. With rewritable optical 
media, the laser changes the reflectivity of the medium to represent 0s and 1s but it does 
not permanently alter the disc surface so the reflectivity of the medium can be changed 
back again as needed. Consequently, the data stored on a rewritable optical disc can be 
changed.
Some storage systems use a combination of magnetic and optical technology. Others 
use a different technology altogether, such as flash memory storage systems that represent 
data using electrons. Some of the most widely used storage systems are discussed in the 
next few sections.
CD/DVD drives
are usually
assigned letters
after the hard
drives, such as
D in this
example.
Any storage devices attached to
the computer via USB ports are
typically assigned next, such as
E for this USB ﬂash drive.
Other letters, beginning with F in this
example, are used for any other storage
devices attached to the computer, such as
via this built-in ﬂash memory card reader.
The letter C is
usually
assigned to
the ﬁrst hard
drive.
FIGURE 2-23
Storage device 
identifiers. To keep 
track of storage devices 
in an unambiguous 
way, the computer 
system assigns letters 
of the alphabet or 
names to each of them.
<
Although most computers today 
typically do not include a floppy 
drive (an older type of removable 
storage device not widely used 
today), the drive letters A and B 
are still often reserved for floppy 
drives so you may not have a 
drive A or B on your computer.
TIP
© AS-kom/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
67
>Hard drive. The primary storage system for most computers; used to store most programs and data used with a computer.
>Magnetic hard drive. A hard drive consisting of one or more metal magnetic disks permanently sealed, along with an access mechanism and 
read/write heads, inside its drive.
Hard Drives
With the exception of computers designed to use only network storage devices (such as 
thin clients and some Internet appliances), virtually all personal computers come with 
a hard drive that is used to store most programs and data. Internal hard drives (those 
located inside the system unit) are not designed to be removed, unless they need to be 
repaired or replaced. External hard drives typically connect to a computer via an exter-
nal port (such as a USB or FireWire port) and are frequently used for additional stor-
age (such as for digital photos, videos, and other large multimedia files), to move files 
between computers, and for backup purposes. Hard drives are also incorporated into 
other consumer products, such as mobile phones, portable digital media players, digital 
video recorders (DVRs), gaming consoles, digital camcorders, and more, though some 
mobile devices today use only flash memory chips for internal storage.
For security purposes, both internal and external hard drives today are available with 
built-in encryption that automatically encrypts (essentially scrambles) all data stored on 
the hard drive and limits access to the hard drive to only authorized users, typically via 
a password or fingerprint scan (see Figure 2-24). Encryption, passwords, and fingerprint 
readers are discussed in detail in Chapter 4.
Magnetic Hard Drives
A magnetic hard drive (the traditional type of hard drive) contains metal hard disks or 
platters that are coated with a magnetizable substance. These hard disks are permanently 
sealed inside the hard drive case, along with the read/write heads used to store (write) and 
retrieve (read) data and an access mechanism used to move the read/write heads in and out 
over the  surface of the hard disks (see Figure 2-25). The surface of a hard disk is organized 
into tracks (concentric rings) and pie-shaped groups of sectors (small pieces of a track). 
The read/write heads magnetize particles a certain way on the disk surface to represent 
the data’s 0s and 1s. The particles retain their magnetic orientation until the orientation 
FIGURE 2-24
Encrypted hard 
drives. The data 
stored on this external 
hard drive is accessed 
via a fingerprint 
scanner.
<
Courtesy Apricorn
Courtesy of Hitachi Global Storage Technologies; Courtesy Western Digital
FIGURE 2-25
Magnetic hard 
drives.
<
MOUNTING SHAFT
The mounting shaft spins the hard
disks at a speed of several thousand
revolutions per minute while the
computer is turned on.
SEALED DRIVE
The hard disks and the drive
mechanism are hermetically
sealed inside a case to keep
them free from contamination.
READ/WRITE HEADS
There is a read/write head for
each hard disk surface, and
they move in and out over
the disks together.
HARD DISKS
There are usually several hard
disk surfaces on which to store
data. Most hard drives store
data on both sides of each disk.
ACCESS MECHANISM
The access mechanism moves
the read/write heads in and out
together between the hard disk
surfaces to access required data.
2.5-INCH HARD DRIVE LOCATED
INSIDE A NOTEBOOK COMPUTER
INSIDE A 3.5-INCH HARD DRIVE
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

68
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Solid-state drive (SSD). A hard drive that uses flash memory media instead of metal magnetic hard disks. >Hybrid hard drive. A hard drive 
that contains both a large amount of flash memory and magnetic hard disks.
is changed again, so data can be stored, rewritten to the disk, and deleted as needed. The 
computer uses a file system to record where each document (called a file) is physically 
stored on the hard drive and what filename the user has assigned to it. When the user 
requests a document (always by filename), the computer uses its file system to retrieve it.
Hard drives designed for desktop computers (sometimes referred to as desktop hard 
drives) typically use 2.5-inch or 3.5-inch hard disks and notebook hard drives typically 
use 2.5-inch hard disks. Portable digital media players, mobile phones, and other mobile 
devices that include a magnetic hard drive typically use tiny 1.5-inch or smaller hard drives 
instead. Regardless of the size, one hard drive usually contains a stack of several hard 
disks; if so, there is a read/write head for each hard disk surface (top and bottom), and 
these heads move in and out over the disk surfaces simultaneously.
Solid State Drives (SSDs) and Hybrid Hard Drives
Solid-state drives (SSDs) are hard drives that use flash memory technology instead of spin-
ning hard disk platters and magnetic technology (see Figure 2-26); consequently, SSDs 
have no moving parts and data is stored as electrical charges on the flash memory media 
located within the SSDs. These characteristics mean that SSDs (along with the other types 
of flash memory storage systems discussed later in this chapter) are not subject to mechani-
cal failures like magnetic hard drives and are, therefore, more resistant to shock and vibra-
tion. They also consume less power, generate less heat, make no noise, and are much faster 
than magnetic hard drives. Consequently, SSDs are an especially attractive option for por-
table computers and mobile devices. Although previously too expensive for all but specialty 
applications, prices of SSDs (also sometimes called flash mem-
ory hard drives) have fallen significantly over the past few years 
(although they are still significantly more expensive per GB 
than conventional magnetic hard drives) and they are becoming 
the norm for netbooks, mobile devices, and other very portable 
devices. In addition to cost, another disadvantage of SSDs is that 
flash memory cells can wear out with repeated use.
SSDs are most often 2.5-inch drives so they can easily be used 
instead of conventional magnetic hard drives in notebooks, net-
books, and other personal computers (most come with a bracket 
so the drive can also be used in a 3.5-inch drive bay of a desktop 
computer). There are also smaller 1.8-inch SSDs available that 
can be used when a smaller physical size is needed, such as for 
a portable digital media player or mobile phone. SSDs are also 
available as expansion card drives. SSDs capacities between 128 
GB and 1 TB are the most common today. Hybrid hard drives 
include both flash memory and a magnetic hard drive—this com-
bination is less expensive than an SSD, can extend the battery life 
of portable computers and mobile devices, and can allow encryp-
tion or other security measures to be built into the drive.
Because you never know when a head crash or other hard drive failure will occur—there may be no 
warning whatsoever—be sure to back up the data on your hard drive on a regular basis. Backing up 
data—that is, creating a second copy of important files—is critical not only for businesses but also 
for individuals and is discussed in more detail in Chapter 5.
Data is stored in ﬂash memory
chips located inside the drive;
unlike magnetic drives, there
are no moving parts.
Courtesy Transcend Information USA
Some computers today use two 
types of drives for efficiency—
such as a smaller SSD (for 
the operating system and 
important applications) and a 
larger magnetic hard drive (for 
data storage and lesser-used 
applications).
TIP
FIGURE 2-26
Solid-state drives 
(SSDs).
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
69
>Optical disc. A type of storage medium read from and written to using a laser beam.
Internal vs. External Hard Drives
Internal hard drives are permanently located inside a computer’s system unit and typically 
are not removed unless there is a problem with them. Virtually all computers have at least one 
internal hard drive (either a magnetic hard drive or an SSD) that is used to store programs and 
data. External hard drives are commonly used for transporting a large amount of data from 
one computer to another (by moving the entire hard drive to another computer), for backup 
 purposes, and for additional storage. Today, because of their large capacity, full-sized external 
hard drives (which are typically magnetic hard drives that hold between 1 TB and 4 TB, though 
1 TB SSD external drives are now available) are often used by individuals to store their digital 
photos, digital music, home movies, recorded TV shows, and other multimedia content to be 
distributed to the computers and entertainment devices located in the home. While full-sized 
external hard drives can be moved from computer to computer when needed, portable hard 
drives are smaller external hard drives specifically designed for that purpose (see Figure 2-27). 
Unlike full-sized external hard drives 
(which typically need to be plugged into 
a power outlet to be used), portable hard 
drives are typically powered via the com-
puter they are being used with instead. 
Portable magnetic hard drives typically 
hold up to 2 TB; the capacity of portable 
SSD hard drives at the present time is 
smaller—up to 256  GB. Most external 
desktop and portable hard drives connect 
to the computer via a USB connection. 
However, some can connect via a wired or 
wireless networking connection instead.
Optical Discs and Drives
Data stored on optical discs (such as CDs, DVDs, and Blu-ray Discs (BDs)) is stored and 
read optically; that is, using laser beams. Optical discs are thin circular discs made out of 
molded polycarbonate substrates—essentially a type of very strong plastic—that are topped 
with layers of other materials and coatings used to store data and protect the disc. Data can be 
stored on one or both sides of an optical disc, depending on the disc design, and some types of 
discs use multiple recording layers on each side of the disc to increase capacity. To keep data 
organized, optical discs are divided into tracks and sectors like magnetic disks but use a single 
grooved spiral track beginning at the center of the disc (see Figure 2-28) instead of a series of 
concentric tracks. Data is written to an optical disc in one of two ways. With read-only optical 
discs like movie, music, and software CDs and DVDs, the surface of the disc is molded or 
stamped appropriately to represent the data. With recordable or rewritable optical discs that 
can be written to using an optical drive such as a DVD drive, the reflectivity of the disc is 
changed using a laser to represent the data. In either case, the disc is read with a laser and the 
computer interprets the reflection of the laser off the disc surface as 1s and 0s.
To accomplish this with molded or stamped optical discs, tiny depressions (when viewed 
from the top side of the disc) or bumps (when viewed from the bottom) are created on the disc’s 
surface. These bumps are called pits; the areas on the disc that are not changed are called lands. 
Although many people think that each individual pit and land represents a 1 or 0, that is not com-
pletely accurate—it is the transition between a pit and land that represents a 1. When the disc 
is read, the amount of laser light reflected back from the disc changes when the laser reaches a 
transition between a pit and a land. When the optical drive detects a transition, it is interpreted 
PORTABLE HARD DRIVES
Are about the size of a credit card, but thicker;
this SSD drive holds 256 GB.
FULL-SIZED EXTERNAL HARD DRIVES
Are about the size of a 5 by 7-inch picture frame,
but thicker; this drive contains two magnetic
hard drives, which hold 6 TB total.
FIGURE 2-27
External hard drives.
<
Use the term disks when referring to 
magnetic media; use the term discs 
when referring to optical media.
TIP
To determine how large an external 
drive you need, consider the 
following: Each 100 GB will hold 
up to approximately 20,000 photos, 
7.5 hours of video, or 25,000 songs.
TIP
Courtesy Western Digital
Courtesy Transcend Information USA
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

70
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>CD disc. A low capacity (typically 700 MB) optical disc that is often used to deliver music and software, as well as to store user data. 
>DVD disc. A medium capacity (typically 4.7 GB or 8.5 GB) optical disc that is often used to deliver software and movies, as well as to store 
user data. >Blu-ray Disc (BD). A high-capacity (typically 25 GB or 50 GB) disc that is often used to deliver high-definition movies, as well as 
to store user data. 
as a 1; no transition for a specific 
period of time indicates a 0.
With a disc that is recorded 
using a DVD drive, the recording 
laser beam changes the reflectiv-
ity of the appropriate areas on the 
disc to represent the data stored 
there—dark, nonreflective areas 
are pits; reflective areas are lands, 
as illustrated in Figure 2-28. As 
with molded or stamped discs, 
the transition between a pit and a 
land represents a 1 and no transi-
tion for a specific distance along 
the track represents a 0. Different 
types of optical discs use different 
types of laser beams. Conventional 
CD discs use infrared lasers; 
conventional DVD discs use red 
lasers, which allow data to be 
stored more compactly on the 
same size disc; and high-definition 
Blu-ray Discs (BDs) use blue-
violet lasers, which can store data 
even more compactly on a disc.
Standard-sized optical discs are 120-mm (approximately 4 ½-inch) discs (see Figure 2-29). 
Smaller 80-mm (approximately 3-inch) mini discs typically use either that smaller form factor 
or are surrounded by clear material to be the same physical size as a standard disc to better fit 
in optical disc drives. Because the track starts at the center of the disc and the track just stops 
when it reaches an outer edge of the disc, optical discs theoretically can be made into a variety 
of sizes and shapes—such as a heart, an irregular shape, or a hockey-rink shape appropriate 
for business card CDs—but an ongoing patent battle has resulted in these custom shapes not 
being available by any CD or DVD manufacturer at the present time.
One of the biggest advantages of optical discs is their large capacity. Standard-sized CD 
discs normally hold 700 MB (though some hold 650 MB), standard-sized DVD discs hold 
4.7 GB, and standard-sized BD discs hold 25 GB. To further increase capacity, many discs 
are available as dual-layer discs (also called double-layer discs) that store data in two lay-
ers on a single side of the disc, so the capacity is approximately doubled. Discs can also be 
double sided, which doubles the capacity; however, the disc must be turned over to access 
the second side. Double-sided discs are most often used with movies and other prerecorded 
content, such as to store a widescreen version of a movie on one side of a DVD disc and a 
standard version on the other side. Small optical discs have a smaller storage capacity than 
their larger counterparts: typically, single-layer, single-sided 3-inch mini CD, DVD, and BD 
discs hold about 200 MB, 1.4 GB, and 7.5 GB, respectively, and business-card-sized CD 
and DVD discs hold about 50 MB and 325 MB, respectively.
As with magnetic disks, researchers are continually working to increase the capacity 
of optical discs without increasing their physical size. For instance, the new BD standard 
(BDXL), which uses more layers to boost capacity, supports capacities up to 128 GB, large 
enough to support 4K (Ultra HD) versions of movies.
READING DATA
A low intensity
laser beam reads
the disc. A transi-
tion between a pit
and a land is
interpreted as a 1;
a set period of
time between
transitions is
interpreted as a 0.
SECTORS
The track is divided into
sectors for data organization.
WRITING DATA
When data is writ-
ten to the disc, a
laser beam creates
pits, represented by
dark, nonre ective
areas on the disc.
TRACK
A single track spirals from
the center of the disc
outward; recorded data is
stored on the track.
PIT
LAND
fl
FIGURE 2-28
How recorded 
optical discs work.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Blu-ray Discs containing 4K 
(Ultra HD) movies became 
available in 2013.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
71
Read-Only Discs: CD-ROM, DVD-ROM, and BD-ROM Discs
CD-ROM (compact disc read-only memory) discs and DVD-ROM (digital versatile disc read-
only memory) discs are read-only optical discs that come prerecorded with commercial prod-
ucts, such as software programs, clip art and other types of graphics collections, music, and 
movies. For high-definition content (such as feature films), BD-ROM (Blu-ray Disc read-only 
memory) discs are available. There are also additional read-only disc formats for specific 
gaming devices, such as the proprietary discs used with the Wii, Xbox, and PlayStation gam-
ing consoles. The data on a read-only disc cannot be erased, changed, or added to because 
the pits that are molded into the surface of the disc when the disc is produced are permanent.
Recordable Discs: CD-R, DVD-R, DVD+R, and BD-R Discs
Recordable optical discs (also sometimes called write-once discs) can be written to, but the 
discs cannot be erased and reused. Recordable CDs are referred to as CD-R discs. Single-
layer recordable DVDs are called either DVD-R discs or DVD+R discs, depending on the 
standard being used, and dual-layer recordable DVDs are called DVD+R DL and DVD-R DL 
discs. Recordable BD discs are also available in single-layer, dual-layer, and XL discs (BD-R 
discs, BD-R DL discs, and BD-R XL, respectively). The capacities of recordable optical discs 
are the same as the read-only formats. Recordable optical discs are written to using an appro-
priate optical drive, such as a CD-R drive for CD-R discs or a DVD-R 
drive for DVD-R discs, although optical drives are usually downward-
compatible, meaning that they can be used with lower formats, such as 
using a DVD-R drive to burn a CD-R disc.
Recordable CDs are commonly used for backing up files, sending 
large files to others, and creating custom music CDs (for example, from 
MP3 files legally downloaded from the Internet or from songs located on 
a music album purchased on CD). DVD-Rs can be used for similar pur-
poses when more storage space is needed, such as for backing up large 
files and for storing home movies, digital photos, and other multimedia 
files. BD-R discs can be used when an even greater amount of stor-
age is needed, such as very large backups or high-definition multimedia 
files. Because of their widespread use of CDs and DVDs, most personal 
computers today come with an internal optical drive; one exception is 
netbooks, which typically do not include an optical drive. An external 
optical drive that connects via a USB port (see Figure 2-30) can be used 
with these computers whenever an optical drive is temporarily needed.
STANDARD 120 MM (4.7 INCH) SIZED DISC
MINI 80 MM (3.1 INCH) SIZED DISC
MINI 80 MM (3.1 INCH) SIZED DISC
(with a clear background to be standard size)
Front
of disc
Back
of disc
FIGURE 2-29
Optical discs are 
available in a 
variety of sizes, 
appearances, and 
capacities.
<
FIGURE 2-30
External optical 
drives. Can be 
connected as needed, 
typically via a USB 
port, such as to the 
netbook shown here.
<
Courtesy Adobe
Courtesy Apricorn
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Courtesy Megaladon
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

72
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Flash memory. Nonvolatile memory chips that can be used for storage by the computer or user; can be built into a computer or a storage 
medium. >Embedded flash memory. Flash memory chips embedded into products, such as consumer devices. >Flash memory card. A small, 
rectangular flash memory medium, such as a CompactFlash (CF) or Secure Digital (SD) card; often used with digital cameras and other portable 
devices.
Rewritable Discs: CD-RW, DVD-RW, DVD+RW, and BD-RE Discs
Rewritable optical discs can be written to, erased, and overwritten just like magnetic 
hard disks. The most common types of rewritable optical media are CD-RW, DVD-RW, 
DVD+RW, and BD-RE discs; BD-RE discs are also available as dual-layer discs (BD-RE 
DL discs and XL discs (BD-RE XL)). The capacities of rewritable discs are the same as 
their read-only and recordable counterparts.
CD-RW discs can be written to using a CD-RW drive and can be read by most 
CD and DVD drives. DVD-RW and DVD+RW discs are recorded using a DVD-RW or 
DVD+RW drive, respectively, and can be read by most DVD drives. BD-RE discs are 
recorded and read by rewritable Blu-ray Disc drives. Instead of permanently altering the 
surface of the disc, rewritable optical discs use phase change technology and a heating 
and  cooling  process to make the appropriate areas of the disc nonreflective to function 
as pits (the reflective areas function as lands). To erase the disc, the heating and cool-
ing process is used to change the areas to be erased back to their original reflective 
state. The capacities of rewritable discs are the same as their read-only and recordable 
counterparts.
Rewritable optical discs are used for many of the same purposes as recordable optical 
discs. However, they are particularly appropriate for situations in which data written to the 
optical disc can be erased at a later time so the disc can be reused (such as for transfer-
ring large files from one computer to another or temporarily storing TV shows recorded 
on your computer that you will later watch using your living room TV and DVD player).
Flash Memory Storage Systems
Flash memory is a chip-based storage medium that represents data using electrons. It is 
used in a variety of storage systems, such as the SSDs and hybrid hard drives already dis-
cussed and the additional storage systems discussed next. Flash memory media are rewrit-
able and have a longer expected life than magnetic media, though they are typically more 
expensive per MB.
Embedded Flash Memory
Embedded flash memory refers to flash memory chips embedded into 
products. Because flash memory media are physically very small, they 
are increasingly being embedded directly into a variety of consumer 
products—such as portable digital media players, digital cameras, hand-
held gaming devices, media tablets, mobile phones, and even sunglasses 
and wristwatches—to provide built-in data storage. While embedded 
flash memory can take the form of small SSDs or memory cards, it is 
increasingly being implemented with small stand-alone chips, such as the 
one shown in Figure 2-31.
Flash Memory Cards and Readers
One of the most common types of flash memory media is the 
flash memory card—a small card containing one or more flash 
memory chips, a controller chip, other electrical components, and 
metal contacts to connect the card to the device or reader being used. 
Flash memory cards are available in a variety of formats, such as CompactFlash (CF), 
Secure Digital (SD), Secure Digital High Capacity (SDHC), xD Picture Card (xD), 
MEDIA TABLET 
Contains 64 GB of embedded ﬂash
memory.
EMBEDDED FLASH
MEMORY
Courtesy Apple Inc.; Courtesy of SanDisk Corporation
FIGURE 2-31
Embedded flash 
memory.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
73
>USB flash drive. A small storage device that plugs into a USB port and contains flash memory media.
XQD, and Memory Stick (MS) (see 
Figure 2-32). These formats are not 
interchangeable, so the type of flash 
memory card used with a device 
is determined by the type of flash 
media card that device can accept. 
Flash memory cards come in a vari-
ety of capacities; one of the most 
widely used types of flash memory 
media—Secure 
Digital 
(SD)—is 
also available in different physical 
sizes. For instance, standard-sized 
SD cards are often used in digital 
cameras and computers; the smaller 
miniSD and microSD (about one-half 
and one-quarter the size of a standard 
SD card, respectively) are designed 
to be used with mobile phones and 
other mobile devices. When more 
storage space is needed, higher 
capacity miniSDHC and microSDHC 
cards can be used; adapters can be used with mobile-sized flash memory cards in order 
to use them in a larger, but compatible, memory card slot (such as the microSD-to-SD 
adapter shown in Figure 2-32).
Flash memory cards are the most common type of storage media for digital c ameras, 
portable digital media players, mobile phones, and other portable devices. Flash mem-
ory cards can also be used to store data for a personal computer, as needed, as well 
as to transfer data from a portable device (such as a digital camera, media tablet, or 
smartphone) to a computer. Consequently, most personal  computers and many mobile 
devices today come with a flash memory card reader capable of reading flash  memory 
cards; an external flash memory card reader (such as the ones shown in Figure 2-32) 
that typically connects via a USB port can be used when the destination device doesn’t 
have a built-in reader. The capacity of flash memory cards is continually growing and 
is up to 256 GB at the present time with even higher capacity cards expected in the 
near future.
USB Flash Drives
USB flash drives (sometimes called USB flash memory drives, thumb drives, 
or jump drives) consist of flash memory media integrated into a self-contained 
unit that connects to a computer or other device via a standard USB port and is 
powered via that port. USB flash drives are designed to be very small and very 
portable (see Figure 2-33). In order to be appropriate for a wide variety of appli-
cations, USB flash drives are available in a variety of configurations—including 
those designed to be attached to backpacks or worn on a lanyard around the 
neck; those built into pens, necklaces, wristbands, or wristwatches; those thin 
enough to fit easily into a wallet; and those made into custom shapes for promo-
tional or novelty purposes. To read from or write to a USB flash drive, you just 
plug it into a USB port. If the USB flash drive is being used with a computer, it 
MICROSD-TO-SD ADAPTER
USB MICROSD READER
Has slots for 3 types of
ﬂash memory cards here. USB MULTI-CARD READER
COMPACTFLASH (CF) CARDS
SECURE DIGITAL (SD) CARDS
FIGURE 2-32
Some flash memory 
cards, readers, and 
adapters.
<
FIGURE 2-33
USB flash drives. 
Are often used to store 
data and transfer files 
from one device to 
another.
<
© 2013 Micron Technology, Inc. All 
Rights Reserved. Used with permission.
Courtesy Kingston Technology Company, Inc.
Courtesy Kingston Technology Company, Inc.; © 2013 Micron Technology, Inc. 
All Rights Reserved. Used with permission.
© 2013 Micron Technology, Inc. All 
Rights Reserved. Used with permission.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

74
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
is assigned a drive letter by the computer, just like any other type of attached drive, 
and files can be read from or written to the USB flash drive until it is unplugged from 
the USB port. The capacity of most USB flash drives today ranges from about 4 GB 
to 1 TB. USB flash drive use has become commonplace for individuals, students, and 
employees to transport files from one computer to another, as well as to quickly back 
up important files.
In addition to providing basic data storage and data portability, USB flash drives 
can provide additional capabilities. For instance, they can be used to lock a computer 
and to issue Web site passwords; they can also include biometric features—such as 
a built-in fingerprint reader—to allow only authorized individuals access to the data 
stored on the USB flash drive or to the computer with which the USB flash drive is 
being used.
Other Types of Storage Systems
Two additional types of storage systems that are frequently used are network/cloud 
storage systems and smart cards. Types of emerging storage systems are discussed in 
Chapter 8.
More Storage for Your Tablet
For many users, the internal storage capacity (typically less 
than 64 GB) of a media tablet just doesn’t cut it. While mini-
mizing the built-in ﬂ ash memory of these devices is neces-
sary to keep the cost and size down, many users want more. 
While some users connect their device to a desktop or note-
book computer to transfer content (movies, music, photos, and 
more) to and from their mobile devices, there is another, easier 
option—going wireless.
A number of new storage products are emerging that con-
nect directly to your devices (including tablets, smartphones, 
and computers) via Wi-Fi so you don’t have to worry about 
cables or how to connect to a device that doesn’t have a USB 
port. Sizes and conﬁ gurations vary widely—from the 32 GB 
Kingston SSD Wi-Drive to the 1TB Seagate Wireless Plus 
magnetic hard drive (shown in the accompanying photograph) 
that can hold up to 500 high- deﬁ nition movies. These hard 
drives typically have built-in Wi-Fi capabilities and data can 
be transferred in both directions (such as to stream a movie 
from the hard drive to your tablet or smart TV, or to transfer 
photos or videos taken with your phone to the hard drive). 
Unlike cloud storage, these hard drives can be used in loca-
tions (such as while traveling in a car or an airplane) where you 
don’t have Internet access and, because these hard drives are 
accessed locally, you can play back full HD video without any 
buffering or stuttering. The Wireless Plus even allows up to 
eight devices to access the hard drive at one time and it has 
a 10-hour battery life, which makes it even more useful while 
you are on the go. 
To use one of these wireless hard drives with your mobile 
device, you need to download the appropriate media app from 
your app store (such as the App Store for iPad and iPhone 
users or Google Play for Andriod users) and launch it. You 
should then have quick and easy wireless access to the hard 
drive. You can also connect these hard drives to your computer, 
if you wish, via Wi-Fi.
While carrying an extra device with you may be inconvenient 
at times, until 1 TB mobile devices come along, it works.
H OW I T WO R K S
Courtesy of Seagate Technology LLC
To avoid data loss when you 
are finished using a USB flash 
drive on a Windows PC, first 
double-click the Safely Remove 
Hardware and Eject Media icon 
in the system tray, and then stop 
the drive before removing it from 
the USB port.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
75
>Network storage. Refers to using a storage device that is accessed through a local network. >Cloud storage. Refers to using a storage 
device that is accessed via the Internet; also called online storage.
Network and Cloud Storage Systems
Remote storage refers to using a storage device that is not connected directly to the 
user’s computer; instead, the device is accessed through a local network or through 
the Internet. Using a remote storage device via a local network (referred to as 
network storage) works in much the same way as using local storage (the storage 
devices and media that are directly attached to the user’s computer). To read data from 
or write data to a remote storage device (such as a hard drive being accessed via a 
network), the user just selects it (see Figure 2-34) and then performs the necessary 
tasks in the normal fashion. Network storage is common in businesses; it is also used 
by individuals with home networks for backup purposes or to share files with another 
computer in the home. For a look at how you can use network storage to extend the 
storage or your media tablet and other device with limited internal storage, see the How 
It Works box.
Remote storage services accessed via the Internet are often referred to as cloud storage 
or online storage. Cloud storage can be provided either as a stand-alone service or as 
part of a cloud computing service. For instance, most cloud applications (such as Google 
Docs, the Flickr photo sharing service, and social networking sites like Facebook) provide 
online storage for these services. There are also sites whose primary objective is to allow 
users to store documents online, 
such as Box, Dropbox, Google 
Drive, or Microsoft SkyDrive (see 
Figure 2-34). As shown in this fig-
ure, cloud storage sites are typically 
password protected and allow users 
to share uploaded files or folders 
with others via an e-mail message 
or a link to the shared content. The 
ability to store documents online 
(or “in the cloud”) is growing in 
importance as more and more appli-
cations are becoming cloud based 
and as individuals increasingly want 
access to their files from anywhere 
with any Internet-enabled device, 
such as a portable  computer, media 
tablet, or smartphone. 
Cloud storage is also increas-
ingly being used for backup pur-
poses. In fact, some sites have 
an automatic backup option that 
uploads the files in designated fold-
ers on your computer to your cloud 
account at regular specified inter-
vals, as long as your computer is 
connected to the Internet. Many 
Web sites providing cloud storage to 
individuals offer the service for free 
(for instance, SkyDrive gives each 
LOGGING ON
Users log on to see their
personal ﬁles stored on
the site’s server.
FOLDERS AND FILES
Folders can be private
or shared with
designated individuals.
SYNCING FILES
Many cloud storage services have
a desktop app/sync option, which
creates a cloud folder on your device
once you download the app—you can
just drag items into that folder to upload
them to your cloud account.
FIGURE 2-34
Cloud storage.
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
If you choose to sync your files with 
your cloud storage account, any files 
you delete from your cloud account 
will typically be deleted from the cloud 
folder on your computer, so be sure to 
back up those files to another location 
first if you will still need them.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

76
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Smart card. A credit card-sized piece of plastic containing a chip and other circuitry that can store data.
individual 7 GB of free storage space); others charge a small fee, such as $10 per month for 
25 to 100 GB of storage space. 
Smart Cards
A smart card is a credit card-sized piece of plastic that has built-in computer circuitry 
and components—typically a processor, memory, and storage. Smart cards today store a 
relatively small amount of data (typically 64 KB or less) that can be used for payment or 
identification purposes. For example, a smart card can store a prepaid amount of digital 
cash, which can be used for purchases at a smart card-enabled vending machine or com-
puter—the amount of cash available on the card is reduced each time the card is used. 
Smart cards are also commonly used worldwide for national and student ID cards (for 
example, Bangladesh recently implemented a smart card ID program for workers headed 
to other countries to prevent employment fraud), credit and debit cards, and cards that 
store identification data for accessing facilities or computer networks. Although these 
applications have used conventional magnetic stripe technology in the past, the proces-
sor integrated into a smart card can perform  computations—such as to authenticate the 
card, encrypt the data on the card to  protect its integrity, and secure it against unau-
thorized access—and can allow data to be added to the card or modified on the card 
as needed. Smart cards can also store the identifying data needed to accelerate airport 
security and to link patients to the electronic health records (EHRs) increasingly being 
used by hospitals.
To use a smart card, it must either be inserted into a smart card reader (if it is the type 
of card that requires contact) or placed close to a smart card reader (if it is a contactless 
card) built into or attached to a computer, door lock, ATM machine, vending machine, or 
other device (see Figure 2-35). Once a smart card has been verified by the card reader, 
the transaction—such as making a purchase or unlocking a door—can be completed. For 
an even higher level of security, some smart cards today store biometric data in the card 
and use that data to authenticate the card’s user before authorizing the smart card transac-
tion (biometrics, encryption, and other security procedures are discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 4). An emerging trend is the use of mobile smart cards—smart microSD cards that 
are designed to add smart card capabilities to any computer or mobile device that contains 
a microSD slot.
MAKING A VENDING MACHINE PURCHASE VIA
A CONTACT SMART CARD READER
ACCESSING A SECURE FACILITY VIA A
CONTACTLESS SMART CARD READER
LOGGING ONTO A COMPUTER VIA A CONTACT
SMART CARD READER
Photos by HID Global Corporation
The SIM cards used with mobile 
phones today are a special type 
of smart card.
TIP
FIGURE 2-35
Smart cards.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
77
>Communications device. A piece of hardware that allows one device to communicate with other devices via a network or the Internet.
Evaluating Your Storage Alternatives
Storage alternatives are often compared by weighing a number of product  characteristics 
and cost factors. Some of these product characteristics include speed, compatibility, 
 storage capacity, convenience, and the portability of the media. Keep in mind that each 
storage alternative normally involves trade-offs. For instance, most systems with remov-
able media are slower than those with fixed media, and external drives are typically slower 
than  internal ones. Although cost is a factor when comparing similar devices, it is often 
not the most compelling reason to choose a particular technology. For instance, although 
USB flash drives are relatively expensive per GB compared with optical discs and external 
hard drives, many users find them essential for transferring files between work and home 
or for taking presentations or other files with them as they travel. For drives that use a 
USB interface, the type of USB port is also significant. For example, storage devices that 
connect via a USB port adhering to the original USB 1.0 standard transfer data at up to 
12 Mbps (millions of bits per second)—USB 2.0 devices are about 40 times faster and USB 
3.0 devices are about 10 times as fast as USB 2.0 devices.
With so many different storage alternatives available, it is a good idea to research 
which devices and media are most appropriate for your personal situation. In general, 
most computer users today need a hard drive (for storing programs and data), some type 
of optical drive (for installing programs, backing up files, and sharing files with oth-
ers), and a flash memory card reader (for transferring photos, music, and other content 
between portable devices and the computer). Virtually all computer users today will 
also need at least one convenient free USB port to be used to connect external hard 
drives, USB flash drives, printers, mice, and other USB-based hardware, as well as 
USB devices that contain storage media, such as digital cameras and portable digital 
media players.
COMMUNICATIONS 
HARDWARE
Most computers today include communica-
tions hardware to enable the user to com-
municate with others over a network or the 
Internet. The type of communications device
used depends on the device being used (desk-
top computer, notebook computer, or media 
tablet, for instance), as well as the communi-
cation standard (such as Ethernet for wired 
networks, Wi-Fi or WiMAX for wireless net-
works, Bluetooth for short-range wireless con-
nections, or a cellular standard for a mobile 
phone) being used. Common communications 
devices include network adapters, modems, 
cabling, and other networking hardware as 
discussed next; emerging communications 
standards and devices are discussed in more 
detail in Chapter 8.
Jim Sappington, Senior Vice President, Chief 
Information Officer, McDonald’s Corporation
How has the emergence of Wi-Fi affected 
companies such as McDonald’s?
The emergence of Wi-Fi has fueled our customers’ 
expectations of having immediate access to 
information. Our customers and employees love the 
convenience and relevance of McDonald’s “hotspots.” 
Through wireless connectivity, Wi-Fi is creating a more 
modern and relevant experience for our customers. 
The ability to conveniently check e-mail, Facebook, 
or browse the Internet can be a deciding factor in 
choosing a place to eat—a trend we don’t see ending 
anytime soon.
AS K TH E E X PE R T
Courtesy McDonald’s Corporation
If you will be transferring music, digital 
photos, and other multimedia data on 
a regular basis between your devices, 
be sure to select and use the flash 
memory media that are compatible 
with those devices.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

78
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Network adapter. A network interface, such as an expansion card or external network adapter. > Network interface card (NIC). An 
expansion card through which a computer can connect to a network. >Modem. A device that enables a computer to communicate over analog 
networking media, such as to connect that computer to the Internet via telephone lines.
Network Adapters and 
Modems
A network adapter, also called a 
network interface card (NIC) when 
it is in the form of an expansion card, 
is used to connect a computer to a 
network. A modem (derived from the 
terms modulate and demodulate) is 
used to connect a computer to a net-
work over telephone lines. However, 
in everyday use, the term modem is 
also used to refer to any device that 
connects a computer to a broadband 
Internet connection, such as a cable 
modem used for cable Internet ser-
vice. As a result, there are a number 
of different types of modems in use 
today, each matching a particular type 
of Internet connection, such as con-
ventional dial-up, cable, fixed wire-
less, and DSL (the types of Internet 
services that utilize these modems are 
discussed in detail in Chapter 3).
Most computers and mobile devices today come with a network adapter and/or modem 
built in to the device, typically as a network interface card (NIC), as a chip included on 
the motherboard, or as circuitry built directly into the CPU. The type of network adapter 
and modem used depends on the type of network (such as Ethernet, Wi-Fi, or cellular) and 
Internet access being used. For instance, to connect a computer to an Ethernet network, an 
Ethernet network adapter is used. To connect a computer to a cable Internet connection, typ-
ically both a cable modem (such as the NETGEAR modem shown in Figure 2-36) and an 
Ethernet network adapter are used. To connect a computer to a cellular, Wi-Fi, or WiMAX 
network, a cellular, Wi-Fi, or WiMAX network adapter, respectively, is used. Some exam-
ples of network adapters and modems are shown in Figure 2-36. When a 
new type of networking connectivity is needed (such as wanting to use a 
newer Wi-Fi standard or switching to a different type of Internet connec-
tion), an external adapter or modem can be obtained. The network adapter 
or modem needs to be for the appropriate type of network, as well as sup-
port the type of networking media (such as the type of networking cable or 
wireless signal) being used.
Other Networking Hardware
To connect the devices on a network together, typically a central device 
is needed. This device can be a hub, switch, or router for wired networks; 
networks designed for wireless users typically use a wireless access point 
or wireless router instead (a Wi-Fi wireless router is shown in Figure 2-37). 
To increase the range of a network, repeaters, range extenders, and anten-
nas can be used. To connect the wired devices to the network, cabling 
(typically twisted-pair, coaxial cable, or fiber-optic cable) is used.
PCI EXPRESS GIGABIT ETHERNET
ADAPTERS FOR DESKTOP COMPUTERS
Port for
twisted-pair
Ethernet
cable
Connects to 
USB port
MICRO USB WI-FI ADAPTERS FOR
DESKTOP OR NOTEBOOK COMPUTERS
Connects to
USB port
USB 4G CELLULAR MODEMS FOR DESKTOP
OR NOTEBOOK COMPUTERS
ETHERNET CABLE MODEMS
Incoming coaxial cable
from cable provider and
an Ethernet cable coming
from the computer or
router connect to the back
of the modem.
Courtesy D-Link Systems, Inc.
Courtesy NETGEAR
Courtesy Belkin International, Inc.
Courtesy Verizon Wireless
Courtesy NETGEAR
FIGURE 2-36
Network adapters 
and modems.
<
Wired devices can connect here.
Modem providing Internet access 
connects here.
USB devices (such as a printer or 
external hard drive) can connect 
here to be shared via the network.
Wireless devices
connect wirelessly.
FIGURE 2-37
Wireless routers. 
Enable devices to 
connect to each other 
and to an Internet 
connection.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
79
>Software license. An agreement, either included in a software package or displayed on the screen when the software is installed or launched, 
that specifies the conditions under which the program can be used.
SOFTWARE BASICS
As discussed in Chapter 1, all computers need an operating system (such as Windows, Linux, 
or Mac OS) in order to function. The operating system is used to boot the computer, control 
its operation, and allow users to run application software or apps—the programs used to per-
form specific tasks on the computer. Although features and capabilities vary from program to 
program, most software programs today use similar basic features and operations. While cov-
ering how to use specific software programs is beyond the scope of this book, an understand-
ing of basic software concepts and operations is an important part of becoming familiar with 
computers. An overview of booting a computer, using the Windows user interface, and some 
common types of application software was included in Chapter 1. Other important software 
basics—including software ownership rights, installation options, common software com-
mands, and the concept of file management— are discussed in the remainder of this chapter.
Software Ownership Rights
The ownership rights of a software program specify the allowable use of that program. After 
a software program is developed, the developer (typically an individual or an  organization) 
holds the ownership rights for that program and decides whether or not the  program can be 
sold, shared with others, or otherwise distributed. When a software program is purchased, 
the buyer is not actually buying the software. 
Instead, the buyer is acquiring a software license 
that permits him or her to use the software. This 
license specifies the conditions under which a 
buyer can use the software, such as the number 
of computers on which it may be installed. In 
fact, many software licenses permit the software 
to be installed on only one computer. In addi-
tion to being included in printed form inside 
the packaging of most software programs, the 
licensing agreement is usually displayed and 
must be agreed to by the end user at the begin-
ning of the software installation process.
There are four basic categories of software: 
commercial software (software that is developed 
and sold for a profit), shareware (software that 
is distributed on the honor system), freeware 
(software that is given away free of charge), 
and public domain software (software that is not 
copyrighted). In addition, software that falls into 
any of these four categories can also be open 
source software, which are programs made up of 
source code that is available to the general pub-
lic. An open source program can be copyrighted, 
but individuals and businesses are allowed to 
modify the program and redistribute it—the only 
restrictions are that changes must be shared with 
the open source community and the original 
copyright notice must remain intact.
Stacy Reed, Software Librarian and Editor, Tucows
Why should an individual or business pay 
for shareware?
Ethically and legally, it’s the right thing to do. Software 
publishers offer trial versions of their software for free 
because it allows users ample opportunity to evalu-
ate the software to ensure it meets their needs. After 
the trial period expires, you should either uninstall the 
software or pay for the full version so the developer 
can continue to provide technical support and product 
enhancements. Some software may disable or cripple 
functionality after the trial has ended; others may 
remind you to pay by displaying nag screens, water-
marks, or advertisements. Though there are sneaky 
ways to circumvent licensing, doing so is copyright 
infringement and it is illegal. Conviction could include 
jail time and/or fines for each infringement and, if you 
or your company willfully profit from stolen software, 
you stand to face maximum penalties—in some coun-
tries, that could mean hundreds of thousands of dollars 
in fines per instance or several years in prison. 
AS K TH E E X PE R T
Ownership rights for original 
creative works are referred to as 
copyrights and are discussed in 
more detail in Chapter 6.
TIP
Courtesy Tucows
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

80
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Installed software. Software that must be installed on a computer in order to be used. >Cloud software. Software that is delivered on 
demand via the Web; also referred to as Software as a Service (SaaS) and cloudware.
Desktop vs. Mobile Software
Notebook computers, tablet computers, netbooks, and other portable computers typically 
run the same application software as desktop computers. However, smartphones and other 
mobile devices (such as iPads and other media tablets) typically require mobile software 
(also called mobile apps); that is, software specifically designed for a specific type of 
smartphone or other mobile device, such as an Apple or Android device. A wide range of 
apps is available today. For instance, there are mobile versions of popular programs like 
Word or PowerPoint, games and other entertainment apps, business and reference tools, 
calendars and communications apps, location-based apps, financial and banking apps, 
health and fitness apps, Web browsers, and more. In fact, there are approximately one mil-
lion Android apps available via the Google Play store and the Apple App Store, which has 
over 900,000 apps, hit its 50 billionth download in mid 2013. In addition to having a more 
compact, efficient appearance than desktop software, many mobile apps include features 
for easier data input, such as an on-screen keyboard, a phrase list, voice input capabilities, 
or handwriting recognition capabilities. Some mobile apps are designed to be compatible 
with popular desktop software, such as Microsoft Office or Google Docs (see Figure 2-38), 
to facilitate sharing documents between the two platforms. Many apps are available free of 
charge or for a minimal cost, such as 99 cents. For a look at a new trend in creating mobile 
apps (mobile app builders), see the Trend box.
Installed vs. Cloud Software
Software also differs in how it is accessed by the end user. It can be installed software that 
is installed on and run from the end user’s computer (or installed on and run from a network 
server in a network setting), or it can be cloud software that is accessed by the end user 
over the Internet. Installed desktop software can be purchased in physical form (such as on a 
CD or DVD) or downloaded from the Internet (see Figure 2-39); mobile software is almost 
always downloaded from an app store, such as the App Store or Google Play. Cloud software 
(also referred to as Software as a Service (SaaS) and cloudware) is delivered on demand via 
the Web to wherever the user is at the moment, provided he or she has an Internet connec-
tion (and has paid to use the software if a payment is required). The use of cloud software is 
growing rapidly and research firm IDC estimates that the the enter-
prise SaaS market alone will exceed $67 billion by 2016. Typically, 
documents created using cloud software are stored online.
One advantage of cloud software over installed software is 
that the programs and your documents can be accessed from any 
computer with an Internet connection regardless of the type of 
computer or operating system used; some can also be accessed 
via a smartphone, media tablet, or other type of Internet-enabled 
mobile devices. This makes cloud software especially appropriate 
for applications like shared scheduling and collaboration applica-
tions that are time-critical because documents and other data can 
be shared regardless of an individual’s location or device. Some 
potential disadvantages of cloud software are that online applica-
tions tend to run more slowly than applications stored on a local 
hard drive, that many online applications have a limit regarding 
the file size of the documents you create, and that the cost may 
eventually exceed the cost of buying a similar installed software 
program. In addition, you cannot access cloud software and your 
Downloaded version will be
downloaded to the buyer’s computer.
Packaged version will be
shipped to the buyer.
FIGURE 2-38
Mobile software.
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Google screenshot © Google Inc. and used with permission.; © Chardchanin/Shutterstock.com
FIGURE 2-39
Installed software. 
Is often purchased 
via the Internet.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
81
data if the server on which they reside goes down or if you are in a location with no Internet 
access, such as while traveling or in a rural area. To eliminate this last concern, a grow-
ing trend is for online applications to also function, at least in part, offline. For instance, 
Google Docs includes offline capabilities so that users can access the Google Docs applica-
tions and their documents locally on their computers, when needed. Edits are stored locally 
on the computer when a user is offline and, when the user reconnects to the Internet, the 
changes are synchronized with the documents stored on the Google Docs servers.
Common Software Commands
Application programs today have a number of concepts and commands in common. For 
example, many programs allow you to create a new document (such as a letter, drawing, 
house plan, or greeting card) and then save it. To reopen the document at a later time, you 
use the open command; to print the document, you use the print command. One of the great-
est advantages of using software instead of paper and pencil to create documents is that you 
can make changes without erasing or recreating the entire document because the document 
is created in RAM and then saved on a storage medium, instead of being created directly on 
paper. Consequently, the document can be retrieved, modified, saved, and printed as many 
times as needed. Many programs also include tools to help you as you create documents, 
such as a spelling and grammar check feature to locate and help you correct possible spelling 
and grammar errors in your documents, and a styles feature that allows you to apply a com-
mon format to a series of documents or a group of similar headings within a single document.
Toolbars, Menus, Keyboard Shortcuts, and the Ribbon
Most commands in an application program are issued through menus, keyboard shortcuts, 
or command buttons located on a toolbar or Ribbon. As shown in Figure 1-10 in Chapter 1, 
the menu bar appears at the top of many windows and contains text-based lists (menus), 
Mobile App Builders
Have an idea for a mobile app? Now you can create it easily using 
the growing collection of mobile app development tools. Many of 
the tools are designed to be code-free, though some allow you 
to download the ﬁ nished source code so you can control it and 
modify it as needed. Commonly, the ﬁ nished app can be adapted 
to deploy on the various platforms you want to use, such as iOS 
and Android mobile apps, a Web app, and a desktop app.
While some of these mobile app builders are not appropriate 
for complex apps, most can be used to quickly and easily write 
personal apps, simple games, or apps that coordinate with your 
Web site. One example of a Web-based mobile app builder is 
appsbar (see the accompanying illustration), which allows you 
to build and publish apps for free. To get started, you select 
the type of app you want to create (such as business, music, 
or social networking) and then you create the pages of the app, 
previewing and modifying them as you go along (a wizard helps 
you add buttons, forms, maps, and more). Once you are satisﬁ ed 
with your app, appsbar tests it to identify any potential problems 
that would prevent publication. Once the app meets publication 
requirements, it is then submitted to the major app markets for 
publication. While appsbar only works with apps that will be 
available for free, it is an easy way for individuals and small busi-
nesses to get their apps created and available to the world.
T R E N D
Courtesy of APPSBAR 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

82
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Ribbon. A feature found in recent versions of Microsoft Office that uses tabs to organize groups of related commands. >Editing. Changing the 
content of a document, such as inserting or deleting words. 
which provide access to commands that can be selected to perform actions in that program. 
Many programs also have toolbars—sets of icons or command buttons that are clicked 
with the mouse to issue commands. Keyboard shortcuts are key combinations that corre-
spond to specific commands, such as Ctrl+S for the Save command (this keyboard shortcut 
is issued by holding down the Ctrl key and pressing the S key).
The Ribbon is a tool in recent versions of Microsoft Office starting with Office 2007. 
The Ribbon (see Figure 2-40) consists of tabs, which contain groups of related commands 
for the program being used. For convenience, most programs have a HOME tab that contains 
the most frequently used commands in that program. In addition to the standard Ribbon tabs 
that are available whenever the program is open, additional contextual tabs are displayed as 
needed, depending on the action being taken. For instance, selecting a picture or other graphic 
in Word displays the PICTURE TOOLS tab that contains commands you might use to edit a 
picture, such as to crop, resize, rotate, or recolor it. Clicking a command button on the Ribbon 
either carries out that command or displays a gallery of choices from which the user can select 
the desired action. The FILE tab replaces the Microsoft Office Button and the File menu used 
in older versions of Office and opens the Backstage view, which contains commands com-
monly used with all documents, such as to open, save, print, send, and publish a document.
Editing a Document
Editing a document refers to changing the content of the document, such as adding or delet-
ing text. Most application programs that allow text editing have an insertion point that looks 
like a blinking vertical line on the screen and shows where the next change will be made to 
the document currently displayed on the screen. To insert text, just start typing and the text 
will appear at the insertion point location. To delete text, press the Delete key to delete one 
character to the right of the insertion point or press the Backspace key to delete one charac-
ter to the left of the insertion point. If the insertion point is not in the proper location for the 
edit, it must be moved to the appropriate location in the document by using the arrow keys 
on the keyboard or by pointing and clicking with the mouse. To select an object or block of 
text, click the object or drag the mouse over the text. Usually, once an object or some text is 
selected, it can be manipulated, such as to be moved, deleted, copied, or formatted.
FILE TAB
Contains common
document commands,
such as Save and Print.
QUICK ACCESS TOOLBAR
Contains command buttons for
frequently used commands; can
be modiﬁed by the user.
TABS
Organize related groups of
commands; the HOME tab is
currently selected.
GALLERY
Displays sets of options that can be
selected for a particular feature;
this is the Styles gallery.
SIGN IN
Sign in to store
documents online.
GROUPS
Related commands on the Ribbon are
organized into groups; these are the
Font and Paragraph groups.
DIALOG BOX LAUNCHER
Opens a dialog box or task
pane for that group.
MORE BUTTON
Opens a gallery to
display more options.
HELP BUTTON
Launches the Ofﬁce
Help system.
COMMAND BUTTONS
Issue a command or display a
list of related commands.
FIGURE 2-40
The Microsoft Office 
Ribbon.
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Right-click a command button 
on the Ribbon and select Add to 
Quick Access Toolbar to add that 
command to your Quick Access 
toolbar.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
83
>Formatting. Changing the appearance of a document, such as changing the margins or font size. >File. Something stored on a storage 
medium, such as a program, a document, or an image. >Filename. A name given to a file by the user; it is used to retrieve the file at a later time. 
>Folder. A named place on a storage medium into which the user can place files in order to keep the files stored on that medium organized.
Formatting a Document
While editing changes the actual content of a document, formatting changes the appear-
ance of the document. One common type of formatting is changing the appearance of 
selected text in a document. You can change the font face or typeface (a named collection 
of text characters that share a common design, such as Calibri or Times New Roman), font 
size (which is measured in points), font style (such as bold, italic, or underline), and font 
color. Other common types of formatting include changing the line spacing or margins of 
a document; adding page numbers; and adding shading or borders to a paragraph, image, 
or other item.
Working with Files and Folders
It is important for software users to understand the concepts of files and folders and 
be able to work with them quickly and efficiently. Anything (such as a program, letter, 
digital photograph, or song) stored on a storage medium is referred to as a file. Data 
files are also often called documents. When a document that was just created (such 
as a memo or letter in a word processing program) is saved, it is stored as a new file 
on the storage medium designated by the user. During the storage process, the user is 
required to give the file a name, called a filename; that filename is used to retrieve the 
file later.
To keep files organized, related documents are often stored in folders (also 
called directories) located on the storage medium. For example, one folder might 
contain memos to business associates while another might hold a set of budgets (see 
Figure 2-41). To organize files further, you can create subfolders (subdirectories) within 
a folder. For instance, you might create a subfolder within the Budgets subfolder for 
each fiscal year. In Figure 2-41, both Budgets and Memos are subfolders inside the My 
Documents folder; the Budgets subfolder contains two additional subfolders (Current 
year and Next year).
File management programs (such as Windows Explorer and File Explorer for 
Windows users) allow you to perform file management tasks, such as searching for 
a file or viewing the files stored on a storage medium, as well as copying, moving, 
deleting, and renaming folders and files. For instance, 
you can see the folders and files stored on your hard 
drive, USB flash drive, or any other storage medium 
by clicking the appropriate letter or name for that 
medium in the File Explorer window, and then select-
ing the desired folder if needed. You can copy a file 
or folder by selecting the desired item, issuing the 
Copy command (such as by using the File Explorer’s 
Home tab or by pressing Ctrl+C), displaying the loca-
tion where you want the copy to go, and then issu-
ing the Paste command (such as by pressing Ctrl+V). 
You can delete an item by selecting it and pressing 
the Delete key on the keyboard. You can also create 
new folders (click the New Folder button shown in 
Figure 2-41 or right-click inside a folder and select 
New Folder), and you can move files from one folder 
to another as needed.
When selecting font size in a 
document, 72 points equals 
one-inch-tall text.
TIP
To restore (undelete) a file or folder 
deleted from your computer’s hard 
drive, open your computer’s Recycle 
Bin and restore the file to its original 
location.
TIP
Files in the
Memos folder.
Folders; the Memos
folder is selected.
Click any item to
select it.
Click to create a
new folder.
Use the Home tab to copy, move, or
delete the selected ﬁle or folder.
Click to search for
a ﬁle or folder.
FIGURE 2-41
File Explorer.
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

84
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
S U M MARY
DIGITAL DATA REPRESENTATION
Data must be represented appropriately (using 0s and 1s) in order to be used by a com-
puter. A single 0 or 1 is called a bit; 8 bits together is referred to as a byte. A kilobyte 
(KB) equals 1,024 bytes, a megabyte (MB) is about 1 million bytes, a gigabyte (GB) 
is about 1 billion bytes, a terabyte (TB) is about 1 trillion bytes, and a petabyte (PB) is 
about 1,000 terabytes. To represent numbers and do mathematical operations, computers 
use the binary numbering system instead of the decimal numbering system that peo-
ple are accustomed to using; for representing characters, coding systems, such as ASCII 
(American Standard Code for Information Interchange) and Unicode, are used.
INPUT HARDWARE
An input device is any piece of hardware that is used to input data into a computer. Two 
of the most common input devices are the keyboard and mouse. While a keyboard is 
designed to enter input by pressing keys, a mouse is a pointing device that is used to select 
objects and commands on the screen. Another common pointing device is the stylus (also 
called an electronic pen or digital pen), which is used with computers and other devices 
to input handwritten data and select options. Touch screens are touched with the finger to 
select commands or provide input. Other pointing devices include graphics tablets, gam-
ing devices, buttons and wheels, and touch pads.
To input data that already exists, a scanner (either flatbed or handheld) can be used. 
When used with optical character recognition (OCR) software, the computer system rec-
ognizes scanned text characters and stores them digitally so they can be manipulated by the 
computer. If not, the scanned data is input as an image. Other types of scanners or readers 
include barcode readers (used to read barcodes on consumer products and other objects), 
RFID readers (used to read RFID tags), and biometric readers (used to read biomet-
ric data belonging to an individual). Digital cameras (both still and video cameras) are 
used to capture images in digital form and record images on some type of digital storage 
medium. Microphones, headsets, and MIDI devices can be used for input, as well.
PROCESSING HARDWARE AND OTHER HARDWARE INSIDE 
THE SYSTEM UNIT
Processing hardware is located inside the system unit, along with other important com-
ponents. The motherboard or system board is the main circuit board for a personal 
computer. All hardware used with a computer must be connected to the motherboard, 
either directly or via a port. Every computer has at least one processor (usually a  central 
processing unit (CPU))—also called a microprocessor when referring to personal 
 computers—attached to its motherboard that performs the processing for the computer. 
CPUs today are often multi-core CPUs, such as dual-core (two cores) and quad-core 
(four cores) CPUs. The graphics processing unit (GPU) performs the processing needed 
to display images on the screen; it can be located on the motherboard, inside the CPU, or 
on a video graphics board. The term memory is usually used to refer to random access 
memory (RAM)—groups of chips that are also attached to the motherboard and provide 
temporary storage for the computer to use. RAM is volatile, so all data in RAM is erased 
when the power to the computer goes off. Other types of memory used by the computer 
include cache memory, registers, read-only memory (ROM), and flash memory.
Chapter Objective 1:
Understand how data is 
represented to a computer.
Chapter Objective 2:
Identify several types of input 
devices and explain their 
functions.
Chapter Objective 3:
Explain the functions of the 
primary hardware components 
found inside the system unit, 
namely the motherboard, the 
CPU, and memory.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
85
OUTPUT HARDWARE
Output devices present the result of processing to the user, usually in the form of a  display 
device—also called a monitor or a display screen—or a printer. The common types of 
monitors are CRTs and flat-panel displays. Monitors form images using pixels, and the 
number of pixels used to display an image determines the screen resolution.
The most widely used printers today are laser printers (the standard for business 
documents) and ink-jet printers (used in homes and for inexpensive color printouts). 
Specialty printers, such as photo printers, barcode printers, and portable printers are also 
available. Other output devices include computer speakers, headphones, and headsets.
STORAGE HARDWARE
Storage systems make it possible to save programs, data, and processing results for later 
use. All storage systems have a storage medium (which holds the data) and a storage 
device (which reads from and writes to the medium). Data is stored either magnetically or 
optically on most storage media. Storage devices can be internal, external, or remote. They 
are typically assigned letters by the computer, which are used to identify the drive.
Hard drives are used in most computers to store programs and data. Conventional 
hard drives are magnetic hard drives; a newer type of hard drive that uses flash memory 
instead of magnetic disks is the solid-state drive (SSD). Hard drives can be internal or 
external; external hard drives can be full-sized or portable. Hybrid hard drives are a com-
bination of a magnetic hard drive and an SSD, designed to provide increased performance 
while reducing power consumption.
Optical discs (such as CD discs, DVD discs, and Blu-ray Discs (BDs)) store data 
optically using laser beams, and they can store data much more densely than magnetic disk 
technology. Optical discs can be read-only, recordable, or rewritable.
Flash memory storage systems use nonvolatile memory chips and so have no moving 
parts. Flash memory cards are commonly used with a variety of devices, and come in many 
formats. USB flash drives connect to a computer via a USB port and are a convenient method 
of transferring files between computers; embedded flash memory is built directly into a 
product. Other possibilities for storage include network storage—storage accessed through 
the Internet (cloud storage or online storage) or another network—and smart cards (that 
contain small amounts of data, such as digital cash or personal data, for a variety of purposes).
COMMUNICATIONS HARDWARE
Communications devices, such as network adapters, network interface cards (NICs), 
and modems, enable users to communicate with others over a network. Other networking 
hardware (such as hubs, routers, wireless access points, and cabling) is used to connect the 
devices on a network; repeaters, range extenders, and antennas can be used to extend the 
range of a network.
SOFTWARE BASICS
A program’s software license explains the allowable use of the program. Most software 
today is commercial, shareware, freeware, or public domain and can be either installed 
software or cloud software. Editing refers to making changes to the content of a docu-
ment; formatting refers to changing its appearance. To issue commands to a software 
program, user interface tools such as menus, keyboard shortcuts, toolbar buttons, and the 
Ribbon are used. Anything stored on a storage medium (such as a document, a program, 
or an image) is called a file and is given an identifying filename by the user. To keep files 
organized, related documents can be stored inside folders. Users can open, copy, move, 
and delete files and folders, using a file management program, such as File Explorer.
Chapter Objective 4:
List several output devices 
and explain their functions.
Chapter Objective 5:
Understand the difference 
between storage and 
memory, as well as 
between a storage device 
and a storage medium.
Chapter Objective 6:
Name several types of stor-
age systems and explain 
the circumstances under 
which they are typically 
used.
Chapter Objective 7:
Describe the purpose of 
communications hardware.
Chapter Objective 8:
Understand basic software 
concepts and commands.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

86
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
R EVI EW ACTIVITI E S
Instructions: Match each key term on the left with the definition on the right that best describes it.
 1.       A device that enables a computer to communicate over analog networking media, 
such as to connect that computer to the Internet via telephone lines.
 2.       A group of 8 bits.
 3.      An agreement, either included in a software package or displayed on the screen when the 
software is installed or launched, that specifies the conditions under which a buyer of the 
program can use it.
 4.       An input device containing numerous keys that can be used to input letters, numbers, 
and other symbols.
 5.       An output device that uses toner powder and technology similar to that of a photo-
copier to produce images on paper.
 6.       A small storage device that plugs into a USB port and contains flash memory media.
 7.       A type of storage medium read from and written to using a laser beam.
 8.       Something stored on a storage medium, such as a program, a document, or an image.
 9.       The chip located on the motherboard of a computer that performs most of the 
 processing for a computer.
 10.       The main circuit board of a computer, located inside the system unit, to which all 
computer system components connect.
Instructions: Circle T if the statement is true, F if the statement is false, or write the best answer 
in the space provided. Answers for the self-quiz are located in the References and Resources 
Guide at the end of the book.
 1. T F A storage medium that can hold 256 GB can hold about 256 billion characters.
 2. T F A mouse is an example of a pointing device.
 3. T F An ink-jet printer normally produces a better image than a laser printer.
  4. T F A hybrid hard drive contains both magnetic hard disks and optical discs.
  5. T F Changing the font size in a document is an example of a formatting operation.
  6. A(n)       can be used to convert flat printed documents, such as a drawing or photograph, 
into digital form.
  7. A CPU with four separate processing cores is referred to as a(n)       CPU.
  8. Secure Digital (SD) cards are one type of       storage medium.
  9. Files can be stored inside       to keep them organized.
 10. Match each input device to its input application, and write the corresponding number in the 
blank to the left of the input application.
a.       Pen-based computing 
1. Keyboard
b.       Consumer kiosk 
2. Stylus
c.       Text-based data entry 
3. RFID tag
d.       Secure facility access 
4. Biometric reader
e.       Tracking goods 
5. Touch screen
KEY TERM 
MATCHING
 a. byte
 b. central processing unit (CPU)
 c. file
 d. keyboard
 e. laser printer
 f. modem
 g. motherboard
 h. optical disc
 i. software license
 j. USB flash drive
SELF-QUIZ
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
87
 1. Number the following terms from 1 to 6 to indicate their size from smallest to largest.
 a.       Petabyte 
b.        Kilobyte 
c.        Byte
 d.       Terabyte 
e.        Gigabyte 
f.       Megabyte
 2. For the following list of hardware devices, write the appropriate abbreviation (I, P, O, S, or C) in 
the space provided to indicate whether each device is used for input (I), processing (P), output 
(O), storage (S), or communications (C).
 a.       Biometric reader 
f.       Display device
b.       Modem 
g.       USB flash drive
 c.       Speaker 
h.       Microphone
 d.       Photo printer 
i.       Hard drive
 e.       CPU 
j.      Network adapter
 3. Supply the missing words to complete the following statements.
 a. The smallest piece of data (a 0 or 1) that can be represented by a computer is called 
a(n)      .
 b.       is an international coding system that can be used to represent text-based data in 
any written language.
 c. A(n)       optical disc can hold either 25 GB or 50 GB and is designed for high- 
definition content, such as movies.
 4. List one personal or business application that you believe is more appropriate for a dot-matrix 
printer, instead of another type of printer, and explain why.
 5. Which types of storage media would be appropriate for someone who needed to exchange large 
(5 MB to 75 MB) files with another person? List at least three different types, stating under what 
specific conditions each might be the most appropriate type of storage medium to use.
 1. People send their digital photos over the Internet in different ways. For instance, digital photos 
are often e-mailed to others, posted on Facebook pages and other social networking sites, and 
uploaded to a server (such as one belonging to Snapfish, Walmart, or Costco) in order to order 
prints, enlargements, or other photo-based items. If you have ever sent photos over the Internet, 
were you concerned about someone other than the intended recipient intercepting or viewing 
your photo files? If you have ever uploaded files to a processing service for printing, did you 
check to see if the Web server being used was secure? Should individuals be concerned about 
sending their personal photos over the Internet? There are a number of advantages, but are there 
privacy risks, as well?
 2. The choice of an appropriate input device for a product is often based on both the type of device 
being used and the target market for that device. For instance, a device targeted to college stu-
dents and one targeted to older individuals may use different input methods. Suppose that you 
are developing a device to be used primarily for Internet access that will be marketed to senior 
citizens. What type of hardware would you select as the primary input device? Why? What are 
the advantages and disadvantages of your selected input device? How could the disadvantages 
be minimized?
EXERCISES
DISCUSSION 
QUESTIONS
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

88
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
P R OJ E CTS
 1. Tablet Storage As discussed in the chapter How It Works box, most media tablets have a 
 limited amount of storage and limited ways to connect additional storage.
For this project, select a specific media tablet and determine how much internal storage 
it has and what type of connectivity it offers. Next, determine two options for expanding the 
storage for that tablet and locate at least one product for each option. Determine the amount 
of storage that can be added via your options, as well as the cost. If you owned this tablet, 
would you want to use either of your selected options for additional storage? Why or why not? 
At the conclusion of your research, prepare a one- to two-page summary of your findings and 
 opinions and submit it to your instructor.
 2. Adding Memory Adding additional RAM to a computer is one of the most common computer 
upgrades. Before purchasing additional memory, however, it is important to make sure that the 
purchased memory is compatible with the computer.
For this project, select a computer (such as your own computer, a school computer, 
or a computer at a local store) and then determine (by looking at the computer or asking 
an appropriate individual—such as a lab aide in the school computer lab or a salesperson 
at the local store) the following: manufacturer and model number, CPU, current amount of 
memory, total memory slots, and the number of available memory slots. (If you look inside 
the computer, be sure to unplug the power cord first and do not touch any components inside 
the system unit.) Once you have the necessary information, call a local store or use your 
information and a memory supplier’s Web site to determine the appropriate type of memory 
needed for your selected computer. What choices do you have in terms of capacity and 
configuration? Can you add just one memory module, or do you have to add memory in pairs? 
Can you keep the old memory modules, or do they have to be removed? At the conclusion of 
your research, prepare a one-page summary of your findings and recommendations and submit 
it to your instructor.
 3. Keyboarding Speed Test Although voice and other alternative means of input are emerging, 
most data input today is still performed via the keyboard. Proper keyboarding technique can 
help increase speed and accuracy. Online keyboarding tests can help to evaluate your key-
boarding ability.
For this project, find a site (such as Typingtest.com) that offers a free online typing 
test and test your keyboarding speed and accuracy. At the conclusion of the test, rate your 
keyboarding ability and determine whether a keyboarding course or tutor program, or just 
keyboarding practice, will help you improve if your score is not at least 20 correct words per 
minute (cwpm). Take the test one more time to see if your speed improves now that you are 
familiar with how the test works. If your speed is fast, but accuracy is low, take the test once 
more, concentrating on accuracy. If you still test less than 20 cwpm, locate a free typing tutor 
program or Web site and evaluate it to see if it would help you to increase your speed and 
accuracy. At the conclusion of this task, prepare a short summary of your experience, includ-
ing the typing test site used and your best score.
HOT TOPICS
SHORT ANSWER/
RESEARCH
HANDS ON
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 2 A CLOSER LOOK AT HARDWARE AND SOFTWARE
89
 4. Lost and Found Portable computers, mobile phones, USB flash drives, and other portable 
devices are lost all the time today. They can be dropped out of a pocket or bag, inadvertently 
left on a table, and so forth. If the owner has identifying information (name, phone number, 
or e-mail address, for instance) printed on the device, the individual who finds the device can 
attempt to return it to the owner. But what if there is no identifying information clearly vis-
ible on the device? Should the finder look at the contents of the device to try to determine the 
owner? If the device is lost in a location where there is a responsible party (such as an airplane 
or a restaurant), the finder can turn over the device to that authority (such as a flight attendant 
or manager). But, is it ethical for the responsible party to look at the contents in order to iden-
tify the owner? If you lost a device, would you want someone to look at the contents to try to 
determine your identity? Why or why not? Is looking at the contents on a found device ever 
ethical? Should it be illegal?
For this project, form an opinion about the ethical ramifications of lost devices and be 
prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discussion group, in a class chat 
room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). You may also be asked to 
write a short paper expressing your opinion.
 5. Compatibility Files created by an application program are often upward compatible but not 
always downward compatible. For example, a .docx file created in Microsoft Word 2013 cannot 
be opened in Word 2003, but a Word 2003 .doc file can be opened in Word 2013. Most applica-
tion programs feature a “Save As” option that can be used to save a file in one of several formats.
For this project, select one widely used software program and determine in which file 
formats the program can save documents and which file formats the program can open. If there 
are older versions of the program, are documents upward compatible? Downward compatible? 
Research plain text (.txt), Portable Document Format (PDF), and the Rich Text Format (.rtf) 
and determine their purposes, the programs in which documents saved in each of these formats 
can be opened, and any disadvantages for using these formats. Have you ever experienced a 
compatibility problem with a document? If so, how was the problem resolved? Share your 
findings with the class in the form of a short presentation. The presentation should not exceed 
10 minutes and should make use of one or more presentation aids, such as a whiteboard, hand-
outs, or a computer-based slide presentation (your instructor may provide additional require-
ments). You may also be asked to submit a summary of the presentation to your instructor.
 6. Should Printers Be Used to Print Body Parts? Researchers are looking to ink-jet printers 
and 3D printers as a means to create body parts for the future. Possibilities include replace-
ment joints, blood vessels, skin, muscles, organs, and implants. Instead of ink, these printers 
print with living cells. It is looking like this technology will eventually be feasible, but do 
we want it to be? Possible advantages include quickly printing new skin on a burn victim’s 
wound, printing new organs on demand when needed, and creating custom implants from the 
patient’s cells so they won’t be as easily rejected. But what about the ethical ramifications, 
such as selling manufactured body parts or surgeons adding extra body parts (such as an extra 
ear or arm) on demand for a fashion statement or for added  productivity? What if replacing our 
failing organs as needed leads to virtual immortality—will we end up an overcrowded society 
of essentially mutants? Or are the potential benefits worth the risks?
Pick a side on this issue, form an opinion and gather supporting evidence, and be 
 prepared to discuss and defend your position in a classroom debate or in a 1–2 page paper, 
depending on your instructor’s directions.
ETHICS IN ACTION
PRESENTATION/
DEMONSTRATION
BALANCING ACT
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

90
INTRODUCTION
Hardware
A conversation with ALI MOAYER 
Senior Director of Engineering, Logitech
 
“. 
 . . augmented reality technology in products such as Google 
Glass will transform the way we look at the world and 
interact with each other.”
My Background . . . 
I have been curious about technology from my childhood. I studied engineering and technology 
management in college and then started my career developing office messaging and networking 
equipment. I am now a Senior Director of Engineering in the Logitech for Business (LFB) group. 
As part of my responsibilities, I am the head of engineering for developing audio/video communica-
tions products for the Unified Communications (UC) market; my group also develops webcams and 
security cameras for the electronics retail market. Throughout my career, my college background, 
together with my work experiences developing medical imaging instruments, video cameras, and a 
wide variety of computer peripherals, has helped me be successful in the computer hardware industry. 
I also believe that my ability to understand electronics and consumer needs has been a contributing 
factor in my success in developing some of the best-in-class products for the PC peripheral market.
It’s Important to Know . . . 
The importance of input/output devices. Interface devices used with computers, such as audio/
video capture and playback control devices and human interface control devices like mice and touch 
screens, are essential for providing a good user experience. We will continue to see computer inter-
faces enhanced with voice and gesture recognition, as well as new interfaces evolving to enable the 
human-to-machine interface to be more natural and intuitive. 
Hardware will continue to shrink in size while increasing in capabilities. Computation power 
and memory capacity in devices will continue to increase and hardware systems will have access to 
remote sensors and robots. In addition, expect to see products that accommodate organic shapes with 
forms that no longer have to be rigid.
Our interactions with smart devices will intensify. We will rely on smart devices to act as our 
intelligent personal assistant and we will start to expect much more from computers to relieve us 
from mundane tasks. In addition, augmented reality technology in products such as Google Glass 
will transform the way we look at the world and interact with each other. However, before wearable 
products become mainstream, the industry will need to break technology barriers in the areas of 
miniature electronics, very low energy devices, and wireless connectivity.
How I Use this Technology . . . 
Like most people, I use computer systems for my personal life and, in fact, feel detached from our 
world if I don’t have my smartphone next to me. I use audio/video communications tools, such as 
Skype and FaceTime, with my computing devices to enable me to have closer relationships with 
people around the world. I also use my smartphone to capture audio/video clips and pictures to share 
on social networking sites, as well as to read the latest news and conduct business over interactive 
Web sites. At home, I am starting to build electronic control systems that will be accessed with my 
expert insight on...
Ali Moayer is a Senior 
Director at Logitech and 
the head of engineering 
for developing audio/
video communications 
products for the Unified 
Communications (UC) 
market. He has worked 
on many innovative 
ideas and designs, many 
of which were patented. 
Ali has more than 
30 years of engineering 
experience and holds 
a Bachelor of Science 
degree in Electrical 
Engineering and an 
MBA in Technology 
Management. 
Courtesy Logitech
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXPERT INSIGHT ON HARDWARE
91
phone to make my home smarter and more energy efficient, and I imagine 
that we will all have smart digital homes in the near future that will save us 
money and make our lives easier. 
What the Future Holds . . . 
Electronic systems will continue to expand in many sectors, such as wear-
able electronics, mobile phones and personal computers, smart home and 
business appliances, robotics, and Internet servers. The intelligence and 
capabilities of these systems will grow rapidly and be challenged with being 
energy efficient, compact, and low cost. Audio, video, and control interfaces 
for home and business appliances will improve and Internet servers will pro-
vide analytic capabilities for making decisions and monitoring and control-
ling our environment, in addition to storing, searching, and exchanging data.
Another difference in the future will be in the intelligence and fluid-
ity of the interactions between users and computers. The Internet initially 
provided access to stored data and services that were provided by large 
organizations. Now the majority of information is authored and shared by 
individuals but is still in a pre-recorded or stored form. Soon it will be common for people 
to interact with each other and with computer-generated artificial intelligence in real-time.
One ongoing risk for the future is privacy. Our personal information is now mostly in 
the form of digital records, and our lives are being tracked by electronic sensors and cameras 
all over the world. We all need to understand that our private data can be accessed easily by 
hackers and we should try our best to secure it with passwords, data encryption, and fire-
walls. We should also all be careful not to post sensitive information about our personal lives 
and our family members on social networking websites, and should become educated about 
the “social engineering” techniques that criminals are increasingly using. Unfortunately, 
hackers have become creative in manipulating people as the human interactions shift more 
toward electronic systems and we all should do what we can to protect ourselves.
My Advice to Students . . . 
Participate in as many hands-on projects or internship programs that your time allows. This 
will help you to learn valuable problem-solving techniques, as well as retain the knowl-
edge that you gain in school. 
Discussion Question
Ali Moayer believes that we will rely on smart devices to act as our intelligent personal 
assistant and relieve us from mundane tasks in the near future. Think about the routine tasks 
that you need to do on a daily basis—which tasks could be performed by a smart device? 
Are there any tasks that you wouldn’t feel comfortable trusting to that device? If so, what 
technological improvements would need to be made in order for you to assign those tasks 
to your device? Would a more natural and intuitive human-to-computer interface make a 
difference? Are there some routine tasks that you don’t see ever being turned over to your 
computer? Be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discussion 
group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). 
You may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
>For more information about Logitech, visit www.logitech.com.
 Soon it will be 
common for people to 
interact with each other 
and with computer-
generated artifi cial 
intelligence in 
real-time. 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

outline
Overview
Evolution of the Internet
From ARPANET to Internet2
The Internet Community Today
Myths About the Internet
Getting Set Up to Use the Internet
Type of Device
Type of Connection and Internet 
Access
Selecting an ISP and Setting Up Your 
Computer
Searching the Internet
Search Sites
Search Strategies
Evaluating Search Results
Citing Internet Resources
Beyond Browsing and E-Mail
Other Types of Online 
Communications
Social Networking/Social Media
Online Shopping and Investing
Online Entertainment
Online News, Reference, and 
Information
Online Education and Writing
Censorship and Privacy Issues
Censorship
Web Browsing Privacy
E-Mail Privacy
The Internet and the 
World Wide Web
After completing this chapter, you will be 
able to do the following:
1. Discuss how the Internet evolved and what 
it is like today.
2. Identify the various types of individuals, 
companies, and organizations involved in 
the Internet community and explain their 
purposes.
3. Describe device and connection options 
for connecting to the Internet, as well as 
some considerations to keep in mind when 
 selecting an ISP.
4. Understand how to search effectively for 
information on the Internet and how to 
cite Internet resources properly.
5. List several ways to communicate over the 
Internet, in addition to e-mail.
6. List several useful activities that can be 
 performed via the Web.
7. Discuss censorship and privacy and how 
they are related to Internet use.
chapter 3
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OV E RV I EW
W
ith the prominence of the Internet in our personal and professional lives today, 
it is hard to believe that there was a time not too long ago that few people had 
even heard of the Internet, let alone used it. But technology is continually evolving 
and, in fact, it is only relatively recently that it has evolved enough to allow the use 
of multimedia applications—such as downloading music and movies, watching TV 
and videos, and playing multimedia interactive games—over the Internet to become 
everyday activities. Today, the Internet and the World Wide Web are household 
words, and, in many ways, they have redefined how people think about computers, 
communications, and the availability of news and information.
Despite the popularity of the Internet, however, many users cannot answer some 
important basic questions about it. What makes up the Internet? Is it the same thing 
as the World Wide Web? How did the Internet begin, and where is it heading? What 
is the most effective way to use the Internet to find specific information? This chapter 
addresses these types of questions and more.
Chapter 3 begins with a discussion of the evolution of the Internet, followed 
by a look at the many individuals, companies, and organizations that make up the 
Internet community. Next, the chapter covers different options for connecting to 
the Internet, including the types of devices, Internet connections, and ISPs that are 
available today. Then, one of the most important Internet skills you should acquire—
efficient Internet searching—is discussed. To help you appreciate the wide spec-
trum of resources and activities available over the Internet, we also take a brief look 
at some of the most common applications available via the Internet. The chapter 
closes with a discussion of a few of the important societal issues that apply to 
Internet use. ■
EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
The Internet is a worldwide collection of separate, but interconnected, networks accessed 
daily by millions of people using a variety of devices to obtain information, disseminate 
information, access entertainment, or communicate with others. While Internet has become 
a household word only during the past two decades or so, it has actually operated in one 
form or another for much longer than that.
From ARPANET to Internet2
The roots of the Internet began with an experimental project called ARPANET. The Internet 
we know today is the result of the evolution of ARPANET and the creation of the World 
Wide Web (WWW).
>Internet. The largest and most well-known computer network, linking millions of computers all over the world.
© istockphoto.com/ 
Ximagination
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

94
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>ARPANET. The predecessor to the Internet, named after the Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), which sponsored its development. 
>World Wide Web (WWW). The collection of Web pages available through the Internet.
ARPANET
The U.S. Department of Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA) created 
ARPANET in 1969. One objective of the ARPANET project was to create a computer 
network that would allow researchers located in different places to communicate with each 
other. Another objective was to build a computer network capable of sending or receiving 
data over a variety of paths to ensure that network communications could continue even if 
part of the network was destroyed, such as in a nuclear attack or by a natural disaster.
Initially, ARPANET connected four supercomputers and enabled researchers at a few 
dozen academic institutions to communicate with each other and with government agencies. 
As the project grew during the next decade, students were granted access to ARPANET as 
hundreds of college and university networks were connected to it. These networks consisted 
of a mixture of different computers so, over the years, protocols were developed for tying 
this mix of computers and networks together, for transferring data over the network, and for 
ensuring that data was transferred intact. Additional networks soon connected to ARPANET, 
and this internet—or network of networks—eventually evolved into the present day Internet.
The Internet infrastructure today can be used for a variety of purposes, such as 
researching topics of interest; exchanging e-mail and other messages; participating in 
videoconferences and making telephone calls; downloading software, music, and mov-
ies; purchasing goods and services; watching TV and video online; accessing computers 
remotely; and sharing files with others. Most of these activities are available through the 
primary Internet resource—the World Wide Web (WWW).
The World Wide Web
In its early years, the Internet was used primarily by the government, scientists, and educa-
tional institutions. Despite its popularity in academia and with government  researchers, the 
Internet went virtually unnoticed by the public and the business community for over two 
decades because 1) it required a computer and 2) it was hard to use (see the left image in 
Figure 3-1). As always, however, computer and networking technology improved and new 
applications quickly followed. Then, in 1989, a researcher named Tim Berners-Lee  proposed 
the idea of the World Wide Web 
(WWW). He envisioned the 
World Wide Web as a way to 
organize information in the form 
of pages linked together through 
selectable text or images (which 
are today’s hyperlinks) on the 
screen. Although the introduction 
of Web pages did not replace all 
other Internet resources (such as 
e-mail and collections of down-
loadable files), it became a popu-
lar way for researchers to provide 
written information to others.
In 1993, a group of profes-
sors and their students at the 
University of Illinois National 
Center for Supercomputing Appli-
cations (NCSA) released the 
Mosaic Web browser. Soon after, 
EARLY 1990s
Even at the beginning of the 1990s, using the
Internet for most people meant learning how
to work with a cryptic sequence of commands.
Virtually all information was text-based.
TODAY
Today’s Web organizes much of the Internet’s
content into easy-to-read pages that can contain
text, graphics, animation, video, and interactive
content that users access via hyperlinks.
FIGURE 3-1
Using the Internet:
Back in the “old
days” versus now.
<
© ericlefrancais/Shutterstock.com
© Boris Shevchuk/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy ABC.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
95
use of the World Wide Web began to increase 
dramatically because Mosaic’s graphical 
user interface (GUI) and its ability to display 
images on Web pages made using the World 
Wide Web both easier and more fun than in the 
past. Today’s Web pages are a true multimedia, 
interactive experience (see the Rookie Blue 
Web site shown in Figure 3-1). They can con-
tain text, graphics,  animation, sound, video, 
and three-dimensional virtual reality objects.
A growing number of today’s Web-based 
applications and services are referred to as Web 
2.0 applications. Although there is no precise 
definition, Web 2.0 generally refers to applica-
tions and services that use the Web as a plat-
form to deliver rich applications that enable 
people to collaborate, socialize, and share 
information online. Some Web 2.0 applications 
(such as cloud computing) have been discussed 
in previous chapters; others (such as social net-
working sites, RSS feeds, podcasts, blogs, and 
wikis) are covered later in this chapter.
Although the Web is only part of the 
Internet, it is by far the most widely used part. 
Today, most companies regard their use of the 
Internet and their World Wide Web presence 
as indispensable competitive business tools, 
and many individuals view the Internet—and 
especially the Web—as a vital research, com-
munications, and entertainment medium.
One remarkable characteristic of both 
the Internet and World Wide Web is that they 
are not owned by any person or business, 
and no single person, business, or organization is in charge. Web pages are developed by 
 individuals and organizations, and are hosted on Web servers owned by individuals, schools, 
businesses, or other entities. Each  network  connected to the Internet is privately owned and 
managed individually by that network’s  administrator, and the primary infrastructure that 
makes up the Internet  backbone is  typically owned by communications companies, such 
as telephone and cable  companies. In addition, the computers and other devices used to 
access the Internet belong to  individuals or organizations. So, while individual components 
of the Internet are owned by individuals and organizations, the Internet as a whole has no 
owner or network administrator. The closest the Internet comes to having a governing body 
is a group of organizations that are involved with issues such as establishing the protocols 
used on the Internet, making  recommendations for changes, and encouraging cooperation 
between and coordinating communications among the networks connected to the Internet.
Internet2
Internet2 is a consortium of researchers, educators, and technology leaders from indus-
try, government, and the international community that is dedicated to the development 
of revolutionary Internet technologies. Internet2 uses high- performance networks linking 
over 200 member institutions to deploy and test new network applications and technolo-
gies. Internet2 is designed as a research and development tool to help develop technologies 
that ensure the Internet in the future can handle tomorrow’s applications, and it is now 
being used to deploy advanced applications and technologies that might not be possible 
otherwise with today’s Internet. Much of Internet2 research is focused on speed. In fact, 
Jim Sappington, Senior Vice President, Chief 
Information Officer, McDonald’s Corporation
How important is it for a business to have a 
Web site today if it doesn’t sell products and 
services online?
At McDonald’s, our online presence is about extend-
ing the McDonald’s experience to our customers. 
Our Web sites (www.aboutmcdonalds.com and 
www.mcdonalds.com) allow our  customers another 
channel to engage with our brand  without ever enter-
ing a restaurant. Through our Web sites,  customers 
can find  promotions and  nutritional information on all 
of our products. On the Open for Discussion blog, 
customers are talking about McDonald’s  corporate 
sustainability efforts. In addition, customers can 
download podcasts about food safety.
For McDonald’s, our Web sites allow us the 
opportunity to connect with our customers on  topics 
that are important to them and in the way that they 
want to connect. In addition, in some parts of the 
world you can order off the menu located on our 
Web site and have it delivered to your door. As our 
customers demand even more convenience and con-
trol over the “ordering process,” this may become 
even more prevalent, and mobile, in the future.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Courtesy McDonald’s Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

96
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Internet service provider (ISP). A business or other organization that provides Internet access to others, typically for a fee. >Internet content 
provider. A person or an organization that provides Internet content. 
the Internet2 backbone network was recently upgraded to support 8.8 Tbps. This network 
is the first national network to use 100 Gigabit Ethernet over its entire footprint; it will be 
used to support high bandwidth applications, such as telemedicine and distance learning, 
to schools, libraries, hospitals, and other organizations.
The Internet Community Today
The Internet community today consists of individuals, businesses, and a variety of organiza-
tions located throughout the world. Virtually anyone with a computer or other Web-enabled 
device can be part of the Internet, either as a user or as a supplier of information or services. 
Most members of the Internet community fall into one or more of the following groups.
Users
Users are people who use the Internet to retrieve content or perform online activities, such 
as to look up a telephone number, read the day’s news headlines or top stories, browse 
through an online catalog, make an online purchase, download a music file, watch an 
online video, make a phone call, or send an e-mail message. According to the Pew Internet 
& American Life Project, more than 80% of U.S. adults (and 95% of all U.S. teens) are 
Internet users, using the Internet at work, home, school, or another location. The availabil-
ity of low-cost computers, low-cost or free Internet access (such as at libraries, schools, 
and other public locations), smartphones, and bundled pricing for obtaining Internet ser-
vice in conjunction with telephone and/or television service has helped Internet use begin 
to approach the popularity and widespread use of telephones and TVs.
Internet Service Providers (ISPs)
Internet service providers (ISPs) are businesses or other organizations (see some exam-
ples in Figure 3-2) that provide Internet access to others, typically for a fee. ISPs (sometimes 
called wireless ISPs or WISPs when referring to ISPs that offer service via a wireless network) 
include most communications and media companies, such as conventional and wireless phone 
providers, cable providers, and satellite providers. Some ISPs (such as cable and cellular phone 
companies) offer Internet service over their private networks; other ISPs provide Internet ser-
vice over the regular telephone lines or the airwaves. While many ISPs (such as AT&T and 
EarthLink) provide service nationwide, others  provide  service to a more limited geographical 
area. Regardless of their delivery method and geographical coverage, ISPs are the onramp to 
the Internet, providing their subscribers with access to the World Wide Web, 
e-mail, and other Internet resources. In addition to Internet access, some 
ISPs provide proprietary online services available only to their  subscribers. 
A later  section of this chapter covers ISPs in more detail, including factors 
to consider when selecting an ISP.
Internet Content Providers
Internet content providers supply the information that is available 
through the Internet. Internet content providers can be commercial busi-
nesses, nonprofit organizations, educational institutions, individuals, and 
more. Some examples of Internet content providers are listed next.
 
➤A photographer who posts samples of her best work on a Web page.
 
➤An individual who publishes his opinion on various subjects to an 
online journal or blog.
FIGURE 3-2
Companies that 
provide Internet 
access today 
include telephone, 
cable, and satellite 
companies.
<
Use of the AT&T logo is granted under permission by AT&T Intellectual 
Property.; Courtesy Verizon Communications; Courtesy Comcast; Photo(s) 
courtesy of Hughes Network Systems, LLC; Courtesy EarthLink, Inc.; Courtesy 
Clearwire
Ethernet and other networking 
standards are discussed in 
Chapter 8.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
97
>Application service provider (ASP). A company that manages and distributes software-based services over the Internet. >Web service. A self-
contained business application that operates over the Internet.
 
➤A software company that creates a Web site to provide product information and soft-
ware downloads.
 
➤A national news organization that maintains an online site to provide up-to-the-minute 
news, feature stories, and video clips.
 
➤A television network that develops a site for its TV shows, including episode 
 summaries, cast information, and links to watch past episodes online.
Application Service Providers (ASPs) and Web Services
Application service providers (ASPs) are companies that manage and distribute Web-
based software services to customers over the Internet. Instead of providing access to the 
Internet like ISPs do, ASPs provide access to software applications via the Internet. In 
essence, ASPs rent access to software programs to companies or individuals—typically, 
customers pay a monthly or yearly fee to use each application. As discussed in Chapter 2, 
this software can be called cloud software, Software as a Service (SaaS), and cloudware. 
Common ASP applications for businesses include office suites, collaboration and commu-
nications software, accounting programs, and e-commerce software.
One type of self-contained business application designed to 
work over the Internet or a company network is a Web service. 
A Web service can be added to Web pages to provide a service 
that would otherwise not be feasible (such as the inclusion of 
mapping information on a Web site or in a Web application using 
Microsoft’s MapPoint .NET Web service). For example, Web 
developers for secure Web sites (such as Zappos.com, shown 
in Figure 3-3) can use a new Web service by Amazon to allow 
their customers to log onto those secure Web sites by using their 
Amazon, Facebook, or Google account logon information. A 
Web service can also be used to provide a service via a user’s 
computer and the Internet. For instance, the FedEx QuickShip 
Web service allows users to create a shipment to any Microsoft 
Outlook contact from within Microsoft Outlook. It is important 
to realize that Web services are not stand-alone applications—
they are simply a standardized way of allowing different applica-
tions and computers to share data and processes via a network so 
they can work together with other Web services and be used with 
many different computer systems. A company that provides Web 
services is sometimes referred to as a Web services provider.
Infrastructure Companies
Infrastructure companies are the enterprises that own or operate the paths or “roadways” 
along which Internet data travels, such as the Internet backbone and the communications 
networks connected to it. Examples of infrastructure companies include  conventional and 
mobile phone companies, cable companies, and satellite Internet providers.
Hardware and Software Companies
A wide variety of hardware and software companies make and distribute the products used 
with the Internet and Internet  activities. For example, companies that create or sell the software 
used in  conjunction with the Internet (such as Web browsers, e-mail programs, e-commerce 
Clicking this button logs a
Zappos.com customer in via
an Amazon Web service and
the customer’s Amazon account.
FIGURE 3-3
Web services. This 
Web service enables 
Web developers 
to use Amazon’s 
authentication system 
for users.
<
Courtesy Zappos.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

98
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
and multimedia software, and Web development tools) fall into this category. So, too, do the 
companies that make the hardware (network adapters, modems, cables, routers, servers, com-
puters, and smartphones, for instance) that is used with the Internet.
The Government and Other Organizations
Many organizations influence the Internet and its uses. Governments have the most visible 
impact; their laws can limit both the information made available via Web servers located in 
a particular country and the access individuals residing in that country have to the Internet. 
For example, in France, it is illegal to sell items or post online content related to racist 
groups or activities; in China, there are tight controls imposed on what information is pub-
lished on Web servers located in China, as well as on the information available to its citi-
zens. And in the United States, anything illegal offline (illegal drugs, child pornography, 
and so forth) is also illegal online.
Legal rulings also can have a large impact on the communications industry in general. 
For example, the 1968 Carterfone Decision allowed companies other than AT&T to utilize 
the AT&T infrastructure and the 1996 Telecommunications Act deregulated the entire com-
munications industry so that telephone companies, cable TV and satellite operators, and 
firms in other segments of the industry were free to enter each other’s markets. In addition 
to making these types of decisions, the Federal Communications Commission (FCC) also 
greatly influences the communications industry through its ability to allocate radio frequen-
cies (which are used with most types of wireless communications) and to implement policies 
and regulations related to interstate and international communications via radio, television, 
wire, satellite, and cable. The ability of the government to approve or block potential merg-
ers between communications companies and to break apart companies based on antitrust 
law to prevent monopolies also impacts the Internet and communications industry.
Key Internet organizations are responsible for many aspects of the Internet. For example, 
the Internet Society provides leadership in addressing issues that may impact the future of 
the Internet. It also oversees the groups responsible for Internet infrastructure standards, such 
as determining the protocols that can be used and how Internet addresses are constructed, 
as well as facilitating and coordinating Internet-related initiatives around the world. ICANN 
(Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and Numbers) coordinates activities related to the 
Internet’s naming system, such as IP address allocation and domain name management. For 
instance, it reviews nominations for new top-level domains and determines which new TLDs 
to introduce. The World Wide Web Consortium (W3C) is an international community of over 
450 organizations dedicated to developing new protocols and specifications to be used with 
the Web and to ensure its interoperability. In addition, many colleges and universities sup-
port Internet research and manage blocks of the Internet’s resources.
Myths About the Internet
Because the Internet is so unique in the history of the world—and its content and applica-
tions keep evolving—several widespread myths about it have surfaced.
Myth 1: The Internet Is Free
This myth stems from the fact that there has traditionally been no cost associated with access-
ing online content—such as news and product information—or with e-mail exchange, other 
than what the Internet users pay their ISPs for Internet access. And many people—such as 
students, employees, and consumers who opt for free Internet service or use free access avail-
able at public libraries or other public locations—pay nothing for Internet access. Yet it should 
also be obvious that someone, somewhere, has to pay to keep the Internet up and running.
Businesses, schools, public libraries, and most home users pay Internet service 
 providers flat monthly fees to connect to the Internet. In addition, businesses, schools, 
 libraries, and other large organizations might have to lease high-capacity communications 
lines (such as from a telephone company) to support their high level of Internet traffic. 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
99
Mobile users who want Internet access while on the go  typically 
pay hotspot providers or wireless providers for this access. 
ISPs, phone companies, cable companies, and other organiza-
tions that own part of the Internet infrastructure pay to keep 
their parts of the Internet running smoothly. ISPs also pay soft-
ware and hardware companies for the resources they need to 
support their  subscribers. Eventually, most of these costs are 
passed along to end users through ISP fees. ISPs that offer free 
Internet access typically obtain revenue by selling on-screen 
ads that display on the screen when the service is being used.
Another reason the idea that the Internet is free is a myth is 
the growing trend of subscription or per-use fees to access Web-
based resources. For instance, downloadable music and movies 
are very common today (see Figure 3-4) and some journal or 
newspaper articles require a fee to view them online. In fact, 
many newspapers and magazines have moved entirely online 
and most charge a subscription fee to view the level of content that was previously published 
in a print version. In lieu of a mandatory fee, some Web sites request a donation for use of 
the site. Many experts expect the use of fee-based Internet content to continue to grow at a 
rapid pace.
Myth 2: Someone Controls the Internet
As already discussed, no single group or organization controls the Internet. Governments 
in each country have the power to regulate the content and use of the Internet within their 
borders, as allowed by their laws. However, legislators often face serious obstacles getting 
legislation passed into law—let alone getting it enforced. Making governmental control 
even harder is the “bombproof” design of the Internet itself. If a government tries to block 
access to or from a specific country or Web site, for example, users can use a third party 
(such as an individual located in another country or a different Web site) to circumvent the 
block. This occurred in Iran when the Iranian government blocked access to social net-
working sites after the 2009 elections—some Iranian citizens were able to send and read 
Twitter updates via third-party sites.
Myth 3: The Internet and the World Wide Web Are Identical
Because you can now use a Web browser to access most of the Internet’s resources, many 
people think the Internet and the Web are the same thing. Even though in everyday use 
many people use the terms Internet and Web interchangeably, they are not the same thing. 
Technically, the Internet is the physical network, and the Web is the collection of Web 
pages accessible over the Internet. A majority of Internet activities today take place via 
Web pages, but there are Internet resources other than the Web that are not accessed via a Web 
browser. For instance, files can be uploaded and downloaded using an FTP (File Transfer 
Protocol) program and conventional e-mail can be accessed using an e-mail program.
GETTING SET UP TO USE THE INTERNET
Getting set up to use the Internet typically involves three decisions—determining the type 
of device you will use to access the Internet, deciding which type of connection is desired, 
and selecting the Internet service provider to be used. Once these determinations have been 
made, your computer can be set up to access the Internet.
Type of Device
The Internet today can be accessed using a variety of devices. The type of device used 
depends on a combination of factors, such as the devices available to you, if you need 
FIGURE 3-4
Fee-based Web 
content. The use 
of fee-based Web 
content, such as 
streaming movies via 
Netflix as shown here, 
is growing.
<
Courtesy Netflix, Inc.
Many people use multiple devices 
to access the Internet; according 
to Cisco, there will be nearly three 
times as many Internet-enabled 
devices than people in the world 
by 2017.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

100
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
access just at home or while on the go, and what types of Internet content you want to 
access. Some possible devices are shown in Figure 3-5 and discussed next.
Personal Computers
Most users who have access to a personal computer (such as a desktop or notebook com-
puter) at home, work, or school will use it to access the Internet. One advantage of using 
personal computers for Internet access is that they have relatively large screens for viewing 
Internet content and keyboards for easier data entry. They can also be used to view or other-
wise access virtually any Web page content, such as graphics, animation, music, games, and 
videos. In addition, they typically have a large hard drive and are connected to a printer so 
Web pages, e-mail messages, and downloaded files can be saved and/or printed easily.
Smartphones, Media Tablets, and Other Mobile Devices
Smartphones and other mobile devices are increasingly being used to view Web page con-
tent, exchange e-mail and other messages, and download music and other online content. 
In fact, mobile Web use—or wireless Web, as it is sometimes called—is one of the fastest 
Mobile Data Caps
Mobile data use has increased tremendously recently as indi-
viduals are watching TV and videos, downloading music and 
movies,  playing online multiplayer games, participating in video 
phone calls, and otherwise performing high-bandwidth activi-
ties using their smartphones and media tablets. This has cre-
ated the issue of wireless carriers potentially running out of 
bandwidth available for customers, resulting in outages or 
delays. In response, many wireless carriers have implemented 
data caps and have eliminated unlimited data plans (though 
many plans still have unlimited talk and texts). With a data cap, 
customers either temporarily lose high-speed Internet access 
(such as being slowed down from 4G to 2G speeds—called 
data throttling) or are charged an additional fee if they exceed 
their download limit (often 2 GB per month).
One explanation for the increased data usage is speed—4G 
data speeds are signiﬁ cantly faster than 3G service and the 
results (such as faster Web pages and smoother streaming vid-
eos) make it easier for users to go through a large amount of 
bandwidth in a relatively short period of time. One potential solu-
tion under consideration by wireless carriers is allowing content 
providers or app developers to pay carriers so that their services 
don’t count against a customer’s monthly data limit—essentially 
buying trafﬁ c for their content. However, the Internet is designed 
for all content and services to be treated equally. Because this 
solution would give larger companies an unfair advantage over 
upstarts, it is viewed by some as a net neutrality issue.
So how do you avoid the expensive or annoying ramiﬁ cations 
associated with going over your data cap? The best way is to 
not go over your limit in the ﬁ rst place. To help with this, use 
Wi-Fi for large downloads instead of your cellular connection. It 
is also prudent to monitor your data usage to make sure you stay 
under your data cap (you can also use this information to decide 
if you need to consider upgrading to a higher plan if your usage 
is typical but still over your data cap). Some smartphones have 
an option for viewing your total data usage for the current billing 
period, as well as usage per app or Web site to help you see 
where you are using the most data. 
Another useful tool is third-party apps designed to help you 
monitor your bandwidth usage. One such app is Onavo Extend, 
shown in the accompanying illustration. It gives you a breakdown 
of consumption by app, so you know your worst bandwidth offend-
ers. As a bonus, it compresses your incoming data by up to 500% 
so you can do up to ﬁ ve times more with your data plan without 
going over. Five times more data for free? It’s about time!
I N S I D E  TH E  I N D U STRY
Courtesy Onavo Mobile Ltd.
According to market research 
firm IDC, more people will 
access the Internet through their 
mobile devices than through their 
personal computers by 2015.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
101
growing uses of the Internet today (more than half of American adults now own smart-
phones). While smartphones are convenient to use on the go, they typically have a relatively 
small display screen; media tablets typically have a larger screen size for easier viewing. 
As discussed in Chapter 2, some mobile devices include a built-in or slide-out keyboard for 
easier data entry; others utilize pen, voice, or touch input instead.
Gaming Devices and Televisions
Another option is using a gaming device (such as a gaming console or handheld gaming 
device) to access Web content, in addition to using that device to play games. For instance, 
the Sony PlayStation, Sony PSP, Nintendo Wii, and Nintendo 3DS all have Web brows-
ers that can be used to access Web content. Smart TVs have built-in Internet  capabilities 
in order to display Web pages and other Web content (such as interactive polls and other 
show-specific information, social networking updates, and shopping opportunities, as 
shown in Figure 3-5) without any additional hardware. It is estimated that 400 million 
households worldwide will have smart TVs by 2016.
Type of Connection and Internet 
Access
In order to use the Internet, you need to connect a com-
puter or other device to it. Typically, this occurs by 
connecting the device you are using to a computer or 
a network  (usually belonging to your ISP, school, or 
employer) that is connected continually to the Internet. 
As discussed in Chapter 2, communications hardware 
is used to connect one device to another device. Most 
types of Internet connections today are broadband 
or high-speed  connections. In fact, 90% of all home 
Internet connections in the United States are broadband 
connections, according to a recent study. As applica-
tions requiring high-speed connections continue to 
grow in popularity, access to broadband Internet speeds 
is needed in order to take full advantage of these applications. For instance, high-definition 
video, video chat, video-on-demand (VOD), and other multimedia applications all require 
broadband connections (see Figure 3-6). For a look at an issue related to the increased use 
of multimedia Internet content—mobile data caps—see the Inside the Industry box.
The difference between dial-up and direct Internet connections is discussed next, fol-
lowed by an overview of the most common types of Internet connections used for personal use 
today; these types of Internet connections are also summarized in Figure 3-7. Many providers 
today offer bundles (such as cable TV, telephone, and Internet service) to lower an individu-
al’s overall total cost for the services. Similar to the mobile data caps discussed in the Inside 
the Industry box, some home broadband Internet services have data caps (you typically either 
PERSONAL COMPUTERS
SMARTPHONES
SMART TVS
FIGURE 3-5
A variety of devices 
can be used to 
access the Internet.
<
MINUTES
0
20
40
60
80
100
6430
BoF
(75 Mbps)
Cable
(30 Mbps)
DSL
(10 Mbps)
Dial-up
(56 Kbps)
Satellite
(8 Mbps)
Fixed wireless
(6 Mbps)
4.8 minutes
12 minutes
36 minutes
45 minutes
60 minutes
6429 minutes
(107 hours)
FIGURE 3-6
Approximate time 
to download a 2.7 
GB (about 2-hour 
HD) movie using 
different home 
Internet options.
<
Courtesy Viewsonic Corporation
Courtesy Groupon
Courtesy Yahoo!® Connected TV
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

102
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Dial-up connection. A type of Internet connection in which the computer or other device must dial up and connect to a service provider’s 
computer via telephone lines before being connected to the Internet. >Direct connection. A type of Internet connection in which the computer or 
other device is connected to the Internet continually. 
TYPE OF 
INTERNET 
CONNECTION
AVAILABILITY
APPROXIMATE 
MAXIMUM 
SPEED*
APPROXIMATE 
MONTHLY 
PRICE
Conventional 
dial-up
Anywhere there is 
telephone service
56 Kbps
Free–$20
Cable
Virtually anywhere cable 
TV service is available
3–100 Mbps
$30–110
DSL
Within 3 miles of a 
switching station that 
supports DSL
1–25 Mbps
$20–65
Satellite
Anywhere there is a clear 
view of the southern sky 
and where a satellite 
dish can be mounted and 
receive a signal
5–15 Mbps
$40–100
Fixed wireless
Selected areas where 
service is available
1–12 Mbps
$35–75
Broadband over 
fiber (BoF)
Anywhere fiber has been 
installed to the building
15–150 Mbps
$45–130
Mobile wireless 
(3G/4G)
Virtually anywhere 
cellular phone service is 
available
1–30 Mbps
Varies greatly; often 
bundled with mobile 
phone service
* Download speed; most connections have slower upload speeds.
are throttled down significantly or 
are charged an additional fee when 
you go over your limit), while oth-
ers offer unlimited Internet. 
Dial-Up vs. Direct 
Connections
While some Internet connections 
are dial-up connections (in which 
your computer dials up and con-
nects to your ISP’s computer only 
when needed), most are direct (or 
always-on) connections (in which 
you have a continuous connection 
to your ISP).
Dial-up connections work 
over standard telephone lines. To 
connect to the Internet, your com-
puter dials its modem and then 
connects to a modem attached 
to a computer belonging to your 
ISP via the telephone lines. While 
you are connected to your ISP, 
your computer can access Internet 
resources. To end your Internet 
session, you disconnect from your 
ISP. One advantage of a dial-up  connection is security. Because you are not  continually 
connected to the Internet, it is much less likely that anyone (such as a hacker, as  discussed 
in Chapter 4) will gain access to your computer via the Internet, either to access the data 
located on your computer or, more commonly, to use your computer in some type of ille-
gal or unethical manner. However, dial-up connections are significantly slower than other 
types of connections; they are also inconvenient because you have to instruct your com-
puter to dial up your ISP every time you want to connect to the Internet. Also, your tele-
phone line will be tied up while you are accessing the Internet, unless you have a second 
phone line. The most common type of dial-up Internet service is conventional dial-up.
Direct connections keep you continually connected to your provider and, therefore, 
continually connected to the Internet. With a direct connection (such as cable, DSL, 
satellite, or fixed wireless), you access the Internet simply by opening a Web browser, such 
as Internet Explorer, Chrome, Safari, or Firefox. Direct Internet connections are broadband 
connections, are often available in different tiers (which means you have a choice of 
speeds and the price varies accordingly), are commonly used in homes and businesses, 
and are often connected to a LAN to share the Internet connection with multiple devices 
within the home or business. Because direct connections keep your computer connected to 
the Internet at all times (as long as your computer is powered up), it is important to protect 
your computer from unauthorized access or hackers. Consequently, all computers with a 
direct Internet connection should use a firewall program. Firewall programs block access 
to a computer from outside computers and enable each user to specify which programs on 
his or her computer are allowed to have access to the Internet. Firewalls, as well as other 
network and Internet security precautions, are discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.
FIGURE 3-7
Typical home 
Internet connection 
options. 
<
If you have a direct Internet 
connection, leave your e-mail 
program open to retrieve your 
e-mail on a continual basis.
TIP
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
103
>Conventional dial-up Internet access. Dial-up Internet access via standard telephone lines. >Cable Internet access. Fast, direct Internet 
access via cable TV lines. >DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) Internet access. Fast, direct Internet access via standard telephone lines. >Satellite 
Internet access. Fast, direct Internet access via the airwaves and a satellite dish. >Fixed wireless Internet access. Fast, direct Internet access 
available in some areas via the airwaves. 
Conventional Dial-Up
Conventional dial-up Internet access uses a conventional dial-up modem connected to a 
standard telephone jack with regular twisted-pair telephone cabling. Conventional dial-up 
Internet service is most often used with home computers for users who don’t need, or do 
not want to pay for, broadband Internet service. Advantages include inexpensive hardware, 
ease of setup and use, and widespread availability (including remote areas). The primary 
disadvantage is slow connection speed—a maximum of 56 Kbps.
Cable
Cable Internet access uses a direct connection and is the most widely used type of home 
broadband connection, with over half of the home broadband market. Cable connections are 
very fast (typically between 15 and 50 Mbps, though faster services up to 100 Mbps are avail-
able in some areas for a premium fee) and are available wherever cable TV access is avail-
able,  provided the local cable provider supports Internet access. Consequently, cable Internet 
is not widely available in rural areas. Cable Internet service requires a cable modem.
DSL
DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) Internet access is a type of direct connection that trans-
mits via standard telephone lines, but it does not tie up your telephone line. DSL requires 
a DSL modem and is available only to users who are relatively close (within three miles) 
to a telephone switching station and who have telephone lines capable of handling DSL. 
DSL speeds are slower than cable speeds and the speed of the connection degrades as the 
 distance between the modem and the switching station gets closer to the  three-mile limit. 
Consequently, DSL is usually only available in urban areas. Download speeds can be up to 
about 25 Mbps, but are more typically between 1 and 15 Mbps.
Satellite
Satellite Internet access uses a direct connection, but it is slower and more expensive 
than cable or DSL access (between 5 and 15 Mbps, though around 10 Mbps is typical) 
and almost always has a data cap. However, it is often the only broadband option for rural 
areas. In addition to a satellite modem, it requires a transceiver  satellite dish mounted 
outside the home or building to receive and transmit data to and from the satellites being 
used. Installation requires an unobstructed view of the southern sky 
(to have a clear line of sight between the transceiver and appropriate 
satellite), and  performance might degrade or stop altogether during 
very heavy rain or snowstorms.
Fixed Wireless
Fixed wireless Internet access uses a direct connection and is similar 
to satellite Internet in that it uses wireless signals, but it uses radio 
transmission towers (either stand-alone towers like the one shown 
in Figure 3-8 or transmitters placed on existing cell phone towers) 
instead of satellites. Fixed wireless Internet access requires a modem 
and, sometimes, an outside-mounted transceiver. Fixed wireless 
 companies typically use WiMAX technology to broadcast the wire-
less signals to customers. Speeds are typically up to about 12 Mbps, 
though the speed depends somewhat on the distance between the 
Before using a dial-up access 
number to connect to the Internet, 
verify that it is a local telephone 
number; if it is not, you will incur 
long-distance charges.
TIP
FIGURE 3-8
WiMAX towers. This 
tower is installed at 
the peak of Whistler 
Mountain in British 
Columbia.
<
Courtesy Tranzeo Wireless USA
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

104
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Broadband over fiber (BoF) Internet access. Very fast, direct Internet access via fiber-optic networks; also referred to as fiber-to-the-premises 
(FTTP) Internet access. >Mobile wireless Internet access. Internet access via a mobile phone network. >Wi-Fi hotspot. A location that 
provides wireless Internet access to the public. 
tower and the customer, the types and number of obstacles in the path, and the type and 
speed of the connection between the wireless transmitter and the Internet.
Broadband over Fiber (BoF)
A relatively new type of very fast direct connection available to homes and businesses in 
areas where there is fiber-optic cabling available all the way to the building is generically 
called broadband over fiber (BoF) or fiber-to-the-premises (FTTP) Internet access, 
with other names being used by individual providers, such as Verizon’s fiber-optic service 
(FiOS). These fiber-optic networks are most often installed by telephone companies in order 
to upgrade their overall infrastructures and, where installed, are used to deliver telephone 
and TV service in addition to Internet service. Where available, download speeds for BoF 
service typically range between 15 Mbps and 150 Mbps, though some areas offer speeds as 
fast as 1 Gbps. BoF requires a special networking terminal installed at the building to con-
vert the optical signals into electrical signals that can be sent to a computer or over a LAN.
Mobile Wireless
Mobile wireless Internet access is the type of direct connection most commonly used 
with smartphones and media tablets to keep them connected to the Internet via a cellu-
lar network, even as they are carried from place to place. Some mobile wireless services 
can be used with computers as well as with mobile devices. To add Internet access to a 
mobile device, typically a data plan is needed. The speed of mobile wireless depends on 
the cellular standard being used—
3G networks typically have speeds 
between 1 and 4 Mbps; 4G networks 
are often between 3 and 15 Mbps, 
with speeds up to 30 Mbps avail-
able in some areas. Costs for mobile 
wireless Internet access vary widely, 
with some packages (typically 4G 
WiMAX services) including unlim-
ited Internet, some charging by the 
number of minutes of Internet use, 
and some charging by the amount of 
data transferred. A growing trend is 
prepaid and pay as you go plans, in 
which you purchase service month 
to month (or day to day), instead of 
committing to a lengthy contract.
Wi-Fi Hotspots
While not typically used for pri-
mary home Internet access, another 
option for Internet access is a Wi-Fi 
hotspot—a location with a direct 
Internet connection and a wireless 
access point that allows users to con-
nect wirelessly (via Wi-Fi) to the 
hotspot to use its Internet connec-
tion (see Figure 3-9). Public Wi-Fi 
COFFEEHOUSES AND OTHER PUBLIC LOCATIONS
Often fee-based, though some are available for free.
HOTELS AND CONFERENCE CENTERS
Often free for guests.
HOSPITALS, BUSINESSES, AND OTHER
ORGANIZATIONS
Usually designed for employees but are sometimes
also available free to visitors.
COLLEGE CAMPUSES
Usually designed for students and faculty;
sometimes used directly in class, as shown here.
FIGURE 3-9
Wi-Fi hotspots. 
Hotspots are used 
to wirelessly connect 
to the Internet via the 
Internet connection 
belonging to a 
business, city, school, 
or other organization.
<
© iStockphoto.com/LuckyBusiness
© Burlingham/Shutterstock.com
© iStockphoto.com/CEFutcher
© iStockphoto.com/YanLev
Using a media tablet in 
conjunction with a mobile 
wireless data plan is growing 
at an astounding rate—from 
20 million in 2012, to 40 
million in 2013, to an estimated 
165 million by 2017.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
105
hotpots are widely available today, including at many coffeehouses and restaurants; at 
hotels, airports, and other locations frequented by business travelers; and in or nearby 
public areas such as libraries, subway stations, and parks. Some public Wi-Fi hotspots 
are free; others charge per hour, per day, or on a subscription basis. College campuses 
also typically have Wi-Fi hotspots to provide Internet access to students; many businesses 
and other organizations have Wi-Fi hotspots for use by employees in their offices, as well 
as by employees and guests in conference rooms, waiting rooms, lunchrooms, and other 
 on-site locations.
Selecting an ISP and Setting Up Your Computer
Once the type of Internet access to be used is determined, the final steps to getting con-
nected to the Internet are selecting an ISP and setting up your system. While this discus-
sion is geared primarily toward a home Internet connection used with a personal computer, 
some of the concepts apply to business or mobile users as well.
Selecting an ISP
The type of device used (such as a personal computer or mobile device), the type of Internet 
connection and service desired (such as cable Internet or mobile wireless), and your geo-
graphical location (such as metropolitan or rural) will likely determine your ISP options. 
The pricing and services available often vary within a single ISP, as well as from one ISP 
to the next. The questions listed in Figure 3-10 can help you narrow your ISP choices and 
determine the questions you want answered before you decide on an ISP and a service 
package. A growing trend is for ISPs to offer a number of tiers; that is, different combina-
tions of speeds and/or data caps for different prices so users requiring faster service or a 
more generous data plan can get it, but at a higher price.
Setting Up Your Computer
The specific steps for setting up your 
computer to use your selected type 
of Internet connection depend on the 
type of device, the type of connection, 
and the ISP you have chosen to use. 
Some types of Internet connections, 
such as satellite and broadband over 
fiber, require professional installation, 
after which you will be online; with 
other types, you can install the nec-
essary hardware (typically a modem 
that connects to your computer or 
wireless router via an Ethernet cable) 
yourself (mobile device setup usually 
doesn’t require any additional hard-
ware). You will usually need to select 
a username and your desired payment 
method at some point during the order-
ing or setup process; this username is 
 typically used in your e-mail address 
that will be associated with that 
Internet service.
After one computer is successfully 
connected to the Internet, you may need 
to add additional hardware to connect 
other computers and devices that you 
want to be able to access the Internet. 
AREA   QUESTIONS TO ASK
Services
Is the service compatible with my device?
Is there a monthly bandwidth limit? If so, do I have a choice of tiers?
How many e-mail addresses can I have?
What is the size limit on incoming and outgoing e-mail messages and 
attachments?
Do I have a choice between conventional and Web-based e-mail?
Are there any special member features or benefits?
Does the service include Web site hosting?
Speed
How fast are the maximum and usual downstream (ISP to my PC) 
speeds?
How fast are the maximum and usual upstream (my PC to ISP) speeds?
How much does the service slow down under adverse conditions, such 
as high traffic or poor weather?
Support
Is telephone technical support available?
Is Web-based technical support (such as via e-mail) available?
Is there ever a charge for technical support?
Cost
What is the monthly cost for the service? Is it lower if I prepay a few 
months in advance? Are different tiers available?
Is there a setup fee? If so, can it be waived with a long-term agreement?
What is the cost of any additional hardware needed, such as modem or 
transceiver? Can the fee be waived with a long-term service agreement?
Are there any other services (telephone service, or cable or satellite 
TV, for instance) available from this provider that can be combined with 
Internet access for a lower total cost?
FIGURE 3-10
Choosing an ISP. 
Some questions to ask 
before making your 
final selection. 
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Unlike most home Internet 
connections, mobile wireless service 
is typically tied to a particular device, 
though family plans are often 
available to give discounted rates 
for additional devices and mobile 
hotspots and tethering can often be 
used to share a single connection 
temporarily when needed.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

106
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Search site. A Web site designed to help users search for Web pages that match specified keywords or selected categories. >Search engine. 
A software program used by a search site to retrieve matching Web pages from a search database. 
For instance, to share a broadband connection, you can connect other computers directly 
to the modem (via an Ethernet cable or Wi-Fi connection) if the modem contains a built-in 
switch or wireless router. If the modem does not include switching or wireless routing capa-
bilities, you will need to connect a switch or wireless router to the modem (typically via an 
Ethernet cable) and then connect your devices to the switch or router in order to share the 
Internet connection with those devices.
SEARCHING THE INTERNET
Most people who use the Internet turn to it to find specific information. For instance, you 
might want to find out the lowest price of the latest Star Trek DVD, the flights available 
from Los Angeles to New York on a particular day, a recipe for clam chowder, the weather 
forecast for the upcoming weekend, a video of the last presidential inaugural address, or 
a map of hiking trails in the Grand Tetons. The Internet provides access to a vast array of 
interesting and useful information, but that information is useless if you cannot find it when 
you need it. Consequently, one of the most important skills an Internet user can acquire 
today is how to search for and locate information on the Internet successfully. Basic Internet 
searching was introduced in Chapter 1, but understanding the various types of search sites 
available and how they work, as well as some key searching strategies, can help you per-
form more successful and efficient Internet searches. These topics are discussed next.
Search Sites
Search sites (such as Google, Bing, Yahoo! Search, Ask.com, and so forth) are Web sites 
designed specifically to help you find information on the Web. Most search sites use a 
search engine—a software program—in conjunction with a huge database of information 
about Web pages to help visitors find Web pages that contain the information they are seek-
ing. Search site databases are updated on a regular basis; for example, Google estimates 
that its entire index is updated about once per month. Typically, this occurs using small, 
automated programs (often called spiders or web crawlers) that use the hyperlinks located 
on Web pages to crawl (jump continually) from page to page. At each Web page, the spider 
program records important data about the page into the search site’s database, such as the 
page’s URL, its title, the keywords that appear frequently on the page, and the keywords 
and descriptive information added to the page’s code by the Web page author when the 
page was created. Spider programs can be tremendously fast, visiting millions of pages 
per day. In addition to spider programs, search site databases also obtain information from 
Web page authors who submit Web page URLs and keywords associated with their Web 
sites to the search site. The size of the database used varies with each particular search site, 
but typically includes information collected from several billion Web pages. Designing a 
Web site so it is classified properly by search sites and is listed in the search results when 
appropriate keywords are typed is referred to as search engine optimization (SEO).
To begin a search using a search site, type the URL for the desired search site in 
the Address bar of your browser (alternately, many Web browsers allow you to type 
search terms in the Address bar instead of a URL and the search will be performed 
using whichever search site is specified as the default search site). Most search sites 
today are designed for keyword searches; some sites allow directory searches as well. 
These two types of searches are discussed next. In addition, as the ability to search 
becomes more and more important, new types of searching are being developed. One 
Change the home page of 
your browser to your favorite 
search site to view that page 
automatically whenever you open 
your browser or click its Home 
button.
TIP
If you are using Chrome, you can 
do a voice search by clicking 
the microphone icon next to the 
Google search box and speaking 
your desired search terms; many 
smartphone search apps support 
voice search as well.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
107
>Keyword search. A type of Internet search where keywords are typed in a search box to locate information on the Internet. >Keyword. A word 
typed in a search box on a search site or other Web page to locate information related to that keyword. >Directory search. A type of Internet search 
where categories are selected to locate information on the Internet.
emerging possibility is real-time search engines 
that search the Web live, instead of relying 
on a search site database (one such service—
called MyLiveSearch—is currently in develop-
ment). Another emerging search site—ChaCha 
Search—uses human guides that you can chat 
with via the ChaCha Search page if you can’t find 
the information you are looking for.
Keyword Search
The most common type of Internet search is the 
keyword search—that is, when you type appro-
priate keywords (one or more key terms) describ-
ing what you are looking for into a search box. The 
site’s search engine then uses those keywords to 
return a list of Web pages (called hits) that match 
your search criteria; you can view any one of these 
Web pages by clicking its corresponding hyperlink 
(see Figure 3-11). Search sites differ in determin-
ing how close a match must be between the speci-
fied search criteria and a Web page before a link to 
that page is displayed, so the number of hits from 
one search site to another may vary. To reduce the 
number of hits displayed, good search strategies 
(discussed shortly) can be used. Search sites also 
differ with respect to the order in which the hits 
are displayed. Some sites list the most popular sites (usually judged by the number of Web 
pages that link to it) first; others list Web pages belonging to organizations that pay a fee to 
receive a higher rank (typically called sponsored links) first.
The keyword search is the most commonly used search type. It is used not only on 
conventional search sites like the Google search site shown in Figure 3-11, but also on 
many other Web sites. For instance, many types of Web pages include a keyword search 
box like the one shown in Figure 3-12 so visitors can search that 
Web site to find information (such as items for sale via the site or 
specific documents or Web pages located on that site). These Web 
site searches are typically powered by search engine technology, 
such as by Google Site Search or the open source Lucene search 
application.
Directory Search
An alternate type of Internet search available on some search sites 
is the directory search, which uses lists of categories instead of a 
search box. To perform a directory search, click the category that 
best matches what you are looking for in order to display a list of 
more specific subcategories within the main category. You can then 
click specific subcategories to drill down to more specific topics 
until you see hyperlinks to Web pages matching the information you 
are looking for.
2.  Click the
     hyperlink
     for a Web page
     in the search
     results to display
     that page.
1.  Type appropriate
     keywords in the
     search box to
     display the
     search results.
Sponsored links
Regular hits
FIGURE 3-11
Using a search site. 
<
Search box
FIGURE 3-12
Web page keyword 
searches. Allow users 
to search the Web site 
for the desired content. 
<
Google screenshot © Google Inc. and used with permission.
Courtesy AVG Technologies
Courtesy Internal Revenue Service
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

108
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Search Site Tools
Many search sites contain a 
variety of tools that can be 
used to find specific types 
of information. For instance, 
many search sites include 
links next to the search box 
that allow you to search for 
items other than Web pages, 
such as music files, videos, 
images, maps, news articles, 
products for sale—even files 
on your computer. Google 
is one of the most versatile 
search sites at the present time 
and is continually adding new 
search options. In addition to 
the options just listed, Google 
allows a variety of special 
searches to be conducted by 
typing specific search criteria 
in its search box to find other 
useful information, such as 
to quickly track a shipped 
package, look up a telephone 
number, check on the status 
of an airline flight, or make 
a calculation or conversion. 
Some examples of search 
tools that can be performed 
using the Google search box 
are listed in Figure 3-13.
Search Strategies
There are a variety of strate-
gies that can be used to help 
whittle down a list of hits to a more manageable number (some searches can return billions 
of Web pages). Some search strategies can be employed regardless of the search site being 
used; others are available only on certain sites. Some of the most useful search strategies 
are discussed next.
Using Phrases
One of the most straightforward ways to improve the quality of the hits returned is to use 
phrase searching—essentially typing more than one keyword in a keyword search. Most 
search engines automatically list the hits that include all the keywords first, followed by 
hits matching most of the keywords, continuing down to hits that fit only one of the key-
words. To force this type of sorting, virtually all search engines allow you to use some type 
of character—often quotation marks—to indicate that you want to search for the entire 
phrase together. Because search options vary from site to site, it is best to look for a search 
tips link on the search site you are using; the search tips should explain all of the search 
options available for that site. Examples of the results based on different search phrases to 
find Web pages about hand signals used with dogs and conducted at two search sites are 
listed in Figure 3-14. Notice that while the last two search phrases shown in Figure 3-14 
FIGURE 3-13
Google search tools. 
<
FUNCTION
EXPLANATION
Calculator
Enter a mathematical expression or a conversion to see the result.
Currency converter
Enter an amount and currency types (such as 10 Euro in USD) to see the 
corresponding value.
Dictionary
Enter the term define followed by a term to view definitions for that 
term from online sources.
Earthquakes
Enter the term earthquake to see recent earthquake activity around 
the world.
Flight information
Enter an airline and a flight number to see status information.
Movie showtimes
Enter the term movie followed by a ZIP Code to view movies showing 
in that area.
Number search
Enter a UPS, FedEx, or USPS tracking number; an area code; or a UPC 
code to view the associated information.
Sports scores
Enter a team name or league name to see scores, schedules, and other 
information.
Sunrise/sunset
Enter the term sunrise or sunset followed by a city name to see the time of 
the sunrise or sunset in that city.
Street maps
Enter an address to find a map to that location.
Time 
Enter the term time followed by a city name to see the current time in 
that city.
Weather
Enter the term weather followed by a city name or ZIP Code to view the 
weather for that location.
Yellow pages
Enter a type of business and city name or ZIP Code to view businesses 
in that local area.
EXAMPLES:
Google screenshot © Google Inc. and used with permission. Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
If there is an uncommon word 
that relates to your search, use it 
to help improve your results.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
109
SEARCH PHRASE 
USED
SEARCH SITE
NUMBER OF 
PAGES FOUND 
TITLE OF FIRST TWO NONSPONSORED PAGES 
FOUND*
dogs
Google
1,420,000,000
Dogs – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Dog: Dog Breeds, Adoption, Bringing a Dog Home and Care
Bing
     53,200,000
Dog – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Dog Supplies | Dog Accessories & Dog Products – Dog.com
hand signals
Google
     26,300,000
Hand Signals – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
California Driver Handbook – Safe Driving Practices
Bing
     17,400,000
Hand Signals – Wikipedia, the free encyclopedia
Hand Signs Part 1
dog hand signals
Google
       1,830,000
DDEAF Training Hand Signs – Deaf Dog Education Action Fund
Dog Training Hand Signals – Dog Training Excellence
Bing
       6,500,000
How to Teach a Dog Hand Signals | eHow.com
Dog Training Hand Signals, A Different Type of Communication
“dog hand signals”
Google
        51,500
DDEAF Training Hand Signs – Deaf Dog Education Action Fund
Utilize Dog Hand Signals in Your Training: Dog Obedience Training
Bing
          6,490
How to Teach a Dog Hand Signals | eHow.com
Dog Training Hand Signals, A Different Type of Communication
* Highlighted entries indicate Web pages about dog hand signals.
FIGURE 3-14
Examples of phrase 
searching. Using 
different search 
phrases and different 
search sites can 
significantly change 
the search results.
<
both returned relevant (and similar) Web pages, the number of Web pages found varied 
dramatically (thousands of pages versus millions).
Using Boolean Operators
To further specify exactly what you want a search engine to find, Boolean operators—most 
commonly AND, OR, and NOT—can often be used in keyword searches. For  example, 
if you want a search engine to find all documents that cover both the Intel and AMD 
microprocessor manufacturers, you can use the search phrase Intel AND AMD if the search 
engine supports Boolean operators. If, instead, you want documents that discuss either of 
these companies, the search phrase Intel OR AMD can be used. On the other hand, if you 
want documents about microprocessors that are cataloged with no mention of Intel, micro-
processors NOT Intel can be used. Just as with other operators, the rules for using Boolean 
operators might vary from search site to search site (for instance, Google automatically 
assumes the AND operator as the default operator any time more than one search term is 
listed and Google uses a minus sign (–) instead of the word NOT). Be sure to check the 
search tips for the search site that you are using to see what operators can be used on that 
site. Some search sites also include an Advanced Search option that helps you specify 
Boolean conditions and other advanced search techniques using a fill-in-the-blank form.
Using Multiple Search Sites
Most users have a favorite search site that they are most comfortable using. However, as 
illustrated in Figure 3-14, different search sites can return different results. It is important 
to realize that sometimes a different search site might perform better than the one you use 
regularly. If you are searching for something and are not making any progress with one 
search site, then try another search site.
Using Appropriate Keywords, Synonyms, Variant Word Forms, 
and Wildcards
When choosing the keywords to be used with a search site, it is important to select words 
that represent the key concept you are searching for. For example, if you want to find 
out about bed and breakfasts located in the town of Leavenworth, Washington, a keyword 
phrase (such as Leavenworth Washington bed and breakfast) should return appropriate 
When searching, be efficient—if 
an appropriate Web page is not 
included among the first page or two 
of hits, redo the search using more 
specific criteria, a different search 
site, or a different search strategy.
TIP
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

110
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
results. If your initial search does not produce the results you are hoping for, you can 
try synonyms—words that have meanings similar to other words. For example, you could 
replace bed and breakfast with hotel or lodging. To use synonyms in addition to the  original 
keywords, Boolean operators can be used, such as the search phrase “bed and breakfast” 
OR hotel OR lodging AND Leavenworth AND Washington.
Variant—or alternate—word forms are another possibility. Try to think of a differ-
ent spelling or form of your keywords if your search still does not work as desired. For 
example, bed and breakfast could be replaced or supplemented with the variants bed & 
breakfast and B&B, and the hand signals keywords used in Figure 3-14 could be replaced 
with the variants hand signal and hand signaling. Using alternative spellings is a form of 
this strategy, as well. Another strategy that is sometimes used with keywords is the wild-
card approach. A wildcard is a special symbol that is used in conjunction with a part of a 
word to specify the pattern of the terms you want to search for. For instance, the asterisk 
wildcard (*) is used to represent one or more letters at the asterisk location, so on many 
sites searching for hand sign* would search for hand sign, hand signal, hand signals, hand 
signaling, and any other keywords that fit this specific pattern.
Using Field Searches
Another strategy that can be used when basic searching is not producing the desired results is 
field searching. A field search limits the search to a particular search characteristic (or field), 
such as the page title, URL, page text, top-level domain, or Web site (see Figure 3-15). When 
a field search is performed, only the hits associated with the Web pages that match the speci-
fied criteria in the specified field are displayed. You can also use field searching in conjunc-
tion with regular search terms, such as to search for a particular keyword on just Web sites that 
use a specific domain. Many, but not all, search engines support some type of field searching. 
Check the search tips for the particular search site you are using to see if it has that option.
Evaluating Search Results
Once a list of Web sites is returned as the result of a search, it is time to evaluate the sites to 
determine their quality and potential for meeting your needs. Two questions to ask yourself 
before clicking a link in the search results are as follows:
 
➤Does the title and listed description sound appropriate for the information you are 
seeking?
 
➤Is the URL from an appropriate company or organization? For example, if you want 
technical specifications about a particular product, you might want to start with 
information on the manufacturer’s Web site. If you are looking for government pub-
lications, stick with government Web sites.
After an appropriate Web page is found, the evaluation process is still not complete. 
To determine if the information can be trusted, you should evaluate both the author and the 
source to decide if the information can be considered reliable and whether or not it is biased. 
Be sure to also check for a date to see how up to date the information is—many online 
FIELD TYPE
EXAMPLE
EXPLANATION
Title
title: “tax tips”
Searches for Web pages containing the words “tax tips” in the page title.
Text
text: “tax tips”
Searches for Web pages containing “tax tips” in the text of the page.
Site
forms site:irs.gov
Searches for Web pages associated with the keyword “forms” that are located only on the 
irs.gov Web site.
Domain
tax tips site:*.gov
Searches for Web pages associated with the keywords “tax tips” that are located on government 
Web sites (they can have anything for the first part of the domain name, but must have a .gov TLD).
FIGURE 3-15
Field searching. 
Field searches limit 
search results to just 
those pages that 
match specific field 
criteria, in addition to 
any specified search 
criteria. 
<
To search for a search term and 
its synonyms at the same time 
in Google, type the tilde symbol 
(~) immediately in front of your 
search term, such as ~bed and 
breakfast to have Google search 
for bed and breakfast, as well 
as automatically also search 
for hotels, motels, and other 
synonymous terms.
TIP
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
111
articles are years old. If you will be using the information in a report, paper, or other docu-
ment in which accuracy is important, try to verify the information with a second source.
Citing Internet Resources
According to the online version of the Merriam-Webster Dictionary, the term plagia-
rize means “to steal and pass off the ideas or words of another as one’s own” or to “use 
 another’s production without crediting the source.” To avoid plagiarizing Web page con-
tent, you need to credit Web page sources—as well as any other Internet resources—when 
you use them in papers, on Web pages, or in other documents.
The guidelines for citing Web page content are similar to those for written sources. In 
general, the author, date of publication, and article or Web page title are listed along with a 
“Retrieved” statement listing the URL of the Web page used to retrieve the article. Some cita-
tion examples based on the guidelines obtained from the American Psychological Association 
(APA) Web site are shown in Figure 3-16. If in doubt when preparing a research paper, check 
with your instructor as to the style manual (such as APA, Modern Language Association (MLA), 
or Chicago Manual of Style) he or she prefers you to follow and refer to that guide for direction.
BEYOND BROWSING AND E-MAIL
In addition to basic browsing and e-mail (discussed in Chapter 
1), there are a host of other activities that can take place via the 
Internet. Some of the most common of these Web-based applica-
tions are discussed next.
Other Types of Online Communications
Many types of online communications methods exist. E-mail, 
discussed in Chapter 1, is one of the most common; other types 
of online communications are discussed in the next few sections. 
While the programs that supported the various types of online 
communications discussed next were originally dedicated to a 
single task, today’s programs can typically be used for a variety 
of types of online communications. For instance, the Skype online 
communications program shown in Figure 3-17 can be used to 
exchange instant messages (IMs), make voice and video calls 
via Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), and exchange files with 
your online contacts; the Gmail Web mail service can be used to 
exchange instant messages and make voice and video calls (using 
Google’s Hangouts communications app), in addition to sending 
TYPE OF RESOURCE
CITATION EXAMPLE
Web page article 
(magazine)
Dvorak, J. (2013, June 3). The Google assumption engine. PC Magazine. Retrieved 
 from http://www.pcmag.com/article2/0,2817,2419867,00.asp
Web page article 
(journal)
Dickens, C. (2013, June). Health literacy and nursing: An update. American Journal of Nursing, 113(6), 
  52–57. Retrieved from http://journals.lww.com/ajnonline/Fulltext/2013/06000/Health_Literacy_and_
Nursing___An_Update.29.aspx
Web page article (not 
appearing in a periodical)
Elias, P. (2013, June 01). Judge orders Google to turn over data to FBI. Retrieved from 
 http://www.nbcnews.com/technology/judge-orders-google-turn-over-data-fbi-6C10157219
Web page content 
(not an article)
Security 101 - Internet Security Glossary | Norton. (n.d.) Retrieved from http://us.norton.com/
 security-101
E-mail (cited in text, not 
reference list)
M. Rodriquez (personal communication, March 28, 2014)
FIGURE 3-16
Citing Web sources. 
These examples 
follow the American 
Psychological 
Association (APA) 
citation guidelines.
<
Click to return to your
Home page to select
another contact.
The messages from
both you and your
contact appear here.
Type a new
message here.
Click to start a video or
voice call to this contact.
FIGURE 3-17
Skype. This app can be 
used for a variety of online 
communications.
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation; Courtesy Skype
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

112
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Instant messaging (IM). A way of exchanging real-time typed messages with other individuals; also called chat. >Text messaging. A way of 
exchanging real-time typed messages with other individuals via a cellular network and, typically, cell phones. >Twittering. Sending short status 
updates about your current activities via the Twitter service. 
and receiving e-mail messages. Some e-mail programs (such as Microsoft Outlook) can also 
display your contact’s social networking updates. This online communications  convergence 
trend is found in both personal and business applications; in business, it is referred to as uni-
fied communications (UC). With UC, all of a business’s communications (such as e-mail, 
instant messaging, videoconferencing, customer service center communications, and tele-
phone calls via both in-office landlines and mobile phones) are tied together and work with 
a  single unified mailbox and interface—often via a cloud UC provider.
Instant Messaging (IM) and Text Messaging
Instant messaging (IM), also commonly referred to as chat, allows you to exchange real-
time typed messages with people on your contact list or buddy list—a list of individu-
als (such as family, friends, and business associates) that you specify or with whom you 
have already exchanged messages. Instant messages (IMs) can be sent via computers and 
smartphones via messaging programs or apps (such as AIM, Yahoo! Messenger, the Skype 
program shown in Figure 3-17, or the WhatsApp mobile app shown in Figure 3-18) or via 
Web pages (such as TV show Web sites and social networking sites like Facebook and 
Google+) that support instant messaging. Originally a popular communications method 
among friends, IM has also become a valuable business tool.
In order to send an IM, you must be signed in to your IM service. You can then select 
a contact and send an IM, which then appears immediately on your contact’s device. You 
can also typically engage in other types of activities with your contact via the IM program, 
such as sending a photo or file, starting a voice or video conversation, or starting a group 
call or conversation (refer again to Figure 3-18). Instant messaging capabilities are also 
often integrated into Web pages, such as to ask questions of a customer service representa-
tive or to start a conversation with one of your friends via a social networking site.
Because IM applications typically display the status of your buddies (such as if they 
are online or if they have set their status to “Busy” or “In a meeting”), IM is an example 
of an application that uses presence technology—technology that enables one computing 
device to identify the current status of another device. Presence technology is increasingly 
being integrated into devices and applications and is discussed in more detail in Chapter 5. 
For a look at a growing presence application—geofencing—see the How It Works box.
Text messaging is a form of messaging frequently used by mobile phone users. Also 
called Short Message Service or SMS, text messaging is used to send short (less than 160 
character) text-based messages via a cellular network. If the messages also include photos, 
audio, or video, Multimedia Message Service or MMS is used instead. In either case, the 
messages are typically sent to the recipient via his or her mobile phone number or e-mail 
address (you can also send text messages to a mobile phone from your computer’s e-mail 
program—just use the recipient’s mobile phone number and the appropriate domain for 
their wireless carrier such as 111-555-0000@txt.att.net). Individuals may incur a fee for 
exchanging IMs and text messages, if these services are not included in their wireless plan.
While e-mail is still important for business online communications, messaging is 
beginning to replace e-mail for personal communications—particularly with teenagers 
and other individuals who carry a moble phone with them at all times. According to the 
director of engineering at Facebook, “The future of messaging is more real time, more 
conversational, and more casual.”
Twittering and Social Networking Updates
Twittering refers to posting short (up to 140 character) updates (called tweets) about what 
you are doing or thinking about at any moment to the Twitter social network. The updates 
Many IM apps today offer basic 
features (such as IMs, voice 
calls, and video calls between 
two individuals) for free; more 
advanced features may require 
a fee.
TIP
Though IMs and texts are similar, 
instant messages go through the 
Web and an IM provider, while 
text messages usually go through 
your wireless provider.
TIP
FIGURE 3-18
Group messaging. 
Works the same as 
traditional IM, just with 
more people.
<
Courtesy WhatsApp Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
113
can be sent via text message or the Twitter Web site. Individuals 
see the tweets of people they follow on their Twitter home page; 
they can view other tweets by searching Twitter for key terms 
or hashtags (key terms used on Twitter and that are preceded by 
the symbol #), as shown in Figure 3-19. You can also send direct 
messages to one of your followers, which are then seen only by 
you and the recipient.
Features similar to Twitter tweets (generally referred to 
as status updates) are  available on some social networking 
sites (most notably, Facebook) to keep your friends up to date 
on your current activities, as discussed shortly. The use of 
Twitter and status updates is changing the way some people 
communicate online. Twitter is used today to get updates on 
the weather, to ask for assistance with problems or to conduct 
information searches—even for personal safety purposes. For 
instance, as shown in Figure 3-19, the U.S. State Department 
uses Twitter to issue traveling advisories. Increasingly, peo-
ple turn to Twitter to comment on newsworthy events—such 
as terrorist attacks, natural disasters, and breaking news—as 
they occur.
Geofencing
Using your smartphone’s location to deliver Web content—
sometimes referred to as geobrowsing—is nothing new. Some 
geobrowsing applications and services (such as Foursquare) 
allow you to broadcast your current location to friends or check 
in to share your current location with friends; others (such as 
Eventful) are designed to ﬁ nd entertainment and live events that 
are close to your current location. 
Location-based marketing and geofencing take geobrowsing 
one step further by enabling developers to deliver ads, offers, and 
other marketing resources to users based on their current physical 
location. For instance, a business could set up geofences (pre-
scribed geographical areas) so it is notiﬁ ed when a customer is 
close to a particular store location, as well as when the customer 
enters and exits the store, in order to send appropriate messages 
and offers to that customer via his or her smartphone. Google 
recently released tools to help developers create these types of 
applications—the tools can determine more accurate locations 
faster and without draining the smartphone’s battery; can determine 
if the user is walking, cycling, or driving; and can set up location-
based triggers when someone enters or exists a geofenced area.
While mobile marketing is a common use for geofencing, the 
same technology can be used by individuals for geofences they set 
up for themselves (such as the geofence shown being added in the 
accompanying illustration). For example, you can use a geofencing 
app to turn off your Wi-Fi when you are out of range of a network 
(for security reasons and to save your battery) or an app to remind 
you of tasks you need to accomplish when you enter or exit a spe-
ciﬁ c geofence. And a new Nearby service from Wikipedia displays 
Wikipedia articles based on people’s current location in hopes that 
these individuals will upload photos and otherwise update content 
using their smartphones. Geofencing possibilities are growing and 
appear to be only limited by developers’ imaginations.
H OW I T WO R K S
Click to see the
tweets of the people
you follow.
Type a hashtag in the form
#keyword here to display
tweets that use that hashtag.
State Dept.
tweets; click
to follow.
FIGURE 3-19
Twitter. Allows 
individuals to post and 
view tweets.
<
© 2013 Twitter
Courtesy Checkmark
Creating a geofence from a map location.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

114
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Forum. A Web page that enables individuals to post messages on a particular topic for others to read and respond to; also called a discussion 
group or message board. >Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP). The process of placing telephone calls via the Internet. 
Forums
For asking questions of, making comments to, or initiating discussions with a large group 
of individuals, forums (also called discussion groups and message boards) can be used. 
Forums are Web pages designed to facilitate written discussions on specific subjects, such 
as TV shows, computers, movies, investing, gardening, music, photography, or politics. 
They typically have a moderator who monitors the forum to remove inappropriate posts. 
When a participant posts a message, it is displayed for anyone accessing the forum to read 
and respond to. Messages are usually organized by topics (called threads); participants can 
post new messages in response to an existing message and stay within that thread, or they 
can start a new thread. Forum participants do not have to be online at the same time so par-
ticipants can post and respond to messages at their convenience.
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
Internet telephony is the original industry term for the process of placing telephone calls 
over the Internet. Today, the standard term for placing telephone calls over the Internet or 
any other type of data network is Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) and it can take many 
forms. At its simplest level, VoIP calls can take place from computer to computer, such as by 
starting a voice conversation with an online contact using a messaging program and a headset 
or microphone. Computer-to-computer calls (such as via the popular Skype service shown in 
Figure 3-17, as well as via messaging programs that support voice calls) are generally free. 
Often calls can be received from or made to conventional or mobile phones for a small fee, 
such as 2 cents per minute or $2.99 per month for unlimited calling for domestic calls.
More permanent VoIP setups (sometimes referred to as digital voice or broadband 
phone) are designed to replace conventional landline phones in homes and businesses. 
VoIP is offered through some ISPs, such as cable, telephone, and wireless providers; it is 
also offered through dedicated VoIP providers, such as Vonage. Permanent VoIP setups 
require a broadband Internet connection and a VoIP phone adapter that goes between a 
conventional phone and a broadband router, as shown in Figure 3-20. Once your phone 
calls are routed through your phone adapter and router to the Internet, they travel to the 
recipient’s phone, which can be another VoIP phone, a 
mobile phone, or a landline phone. VoIP phone adapters 
are typically designed for a specific VoIP provider. With 
these more permanent VoIP setups, most users switch-
ing from landline phone service can keep their existing 
telephone number.
The biggest advantage of VoIP is cost savings, such 
as unlimited local and long-distance calls for as little as 
$25 per month, or basic cable and VoIP services bundled 
together for about $50 per month. One of the biggest dis-
advantages of VoIP at the present time is that it does not 
function during a power outage or if your Internet con-
nection (such as your cable connection for cable Internet 
users) goes down.
Web Conferences and Webinars
The term videoconferencing refers to the use of computers 
or mobile devices, video cameras, microphones, and 
other communications technologies to conduct real-time, 
1. A conventional phone is plugged  
 
into a VoIP adapter, which is
 
connected to a broadband modem.
2. Calls coming from the VoIP  
 
phone travel over the Internet 
 
to the recipient’s phone.
THE INTERNET
FIGURE 3-20
Voice over IP (VoIP). 
Permanent VoIP setups 
allow telephone calls 
to be placed via a 
broadband Internet 
connection using a 
conventional telephone.
<
Courtesy Vonage; Courtesy D-Link Systems, Inc.; © S. Bonaime/Shutterstock.com
Some VoIP providers (such 
as Vonage) provide an app 
that enables you to make calls 
from anywhere, using your 
smartphone, a Wi-Fi connection, 
and your home VoIP account.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
115
>Web conference. A face-to-face meeting taking place via the Web; typically uses video cameras and microphones to enable participants to see 
and hear each other. >Webinar. A seminar presented via the Web. >Social networking site. A site that enables a community of individuals to 
communicate and share information. >Social media. The collection of social networking sites and other communications channels used to transmit 
or share information with a broad audience.
face-to-face meetings between people in different locations. 
Videoconferencing that takes place via the Internet is often called 
Web conferencing or online conferencing. Web conferences typically 
take place via a personal computer or mobile device (see Figure 3-21) 
and are used by businesses and individuals. As previously discussed, 
many free messaging programs or services (such as Skype, Google 
Hangouts, and Apple FaceTime) support video phone calls. While 
some of these programs support group calls and other more advanced 
features, business Web conferences that require multiple participants 
or other communications tools (such as a shared whiteboard or the 
ability for attendees to share the content on their computer screens) 
may need to use a Web conferencing service (such as WebEx) or a 
premium service from Skype or another messaging service instead. 
Business Web conferencing is often used for meetings between 
individuals located in different geographical locations, as well as for 
employee training, sales presentations, customer support, and other 
business applications.
Webinars (Web seminars) are similar to Web conferences, but typically have a des-
ignated presenter and an audience. Although interaction with the audience is usually 
included (such as question-and-answer sessions), a Webinar is typically more one-way 
communication than a Web conference. A completely one-way presentation (such as a 
recorded Webinar played back on demand) is sometimes referred to as a Webcast.
Social Networking/Social Media
A social networking site can be loosely 
defined as any site that creates a community 
of individ uals who can communicate with 
and/or share information with one another; the 
collection of social networking sites and other 
communications channels used to transmit 
or share information with a broad audience 
is referred to as social media. Some exam-
ples of social networking sites are MySpace, 
Facebook, and Google+ that allow users to 
post information about themselves for others 
to read; Meetup that connects people in spe-
cific geographic areas with common hobbies 
and interests; Flickr and Fotki and other photo 
sharing sites; Pinterest that allows individuals 
to share ideas and snippets from Web pages, 
organized by topic; and YouTube and other 
video sharing sites. Social networking can be 
performed via personal computers, though the 
use of mobile social  networking—social net-
works accessed with a smartphone or other 
mobile device—is more common today, mak-
ing social networking a real-time, on-the-go 
 activity. Some reasons for this include that 
FIGURE 3-21
Web conferencing.
Allows individuals to 
talk with and see each 
other in real time.
<
Courtesy Cisco Systems
Ryan Baustert, Guitarist, Throw the Fight
What impact has the Internet and social net-
working sites had on your band’s success?
The Internet has had a major impact on us. The 
best marketing is when the distance between  artist 
and audience is short and direct. Due to sites like 
MySpace, Purevolume, and Facebook, we are able to 
stay  better connected and interact with our fans on a 
more  personal level. We can also gauge how our music 
is received by peoples’ reactions and comments online.
It’s much easier to promote shows, tours, and 
album releases, as well. More recently, with the 
explosion of Twitter, we can go one step further 
and give fans more insight into what is going on 
in our lives behind the scenes. This, in turn, helps 
us build brand loyalty.
AS K TH E E X PE R T
Courtesy Throw the Fight www.facebook.com/throwthefight, www.throwthefight.com.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

116
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
most individuals carry a mobile phone with them all the 
time, many individuals like to communicate with  others 
via the Web while they are on the go, and smartphones 
enable location applications to be  integrated into the 
social networking  experience.
Social networking is also increasingly being inte-
grated with other online activities. For instance, you 
can exchange messages or have video calls with your 
friends from within Google+ or Facebook; you can 
share YouTube videos via an e-mail message, a video 
call, or one of your social networking pages from a 
YouTube video page; and you can view your friends’ 
Facebook updates in Skype. In addition, many Web sites 
include Like buttons on their site to allow a visitor to 
Like the business’s Facebook page, Like content (such 
as a video) on the business’s Web site, or share content 
from the business’s Web site on the visitor’s Facebook 
page. A Web site can also integrate an Activity Feed to 
show visitors Likes and comments about the site made 
by the visitor’s Facebook friends. In addition, a Web 
site can allow visitors to easily log in to its Web site using the visitor’s logon credentials 
from Facebook or another social network (see Figure 3-22).
Social networking sites are used most often to communicate with existing friends. 
Facebook (shown in Figure 3-23), for instance, allows you to post photos, videos, music, 
status updates, and other content for your Facebook friends (individuals you have cho-
sen to communicate with via Facebook) to view. You can also chat with your Facebook 
friends who are currently online, and Like or comment on the posts shown on your friends’ 
Facebook pages or in the news feed on your Facebook page. For privacy purposes, you can 
limit access to your Facebook page to the individuals you identify (such as just to your 
Facebook friends). 
In addition to being used to communicate with existing 
friends, social networking sites are also used to learn about 
individuals you currently don’t know. For instance, college-
bound students can use social media to meet other incoming 
freshmen before the school year starts, “facestalk” (view the 
profiles of) other students in their graduating class, look up 
the profiles of their dorm roommates, find fellow students 
with common interests, and more—all before actually setting 
foot on campus. They are also used to share information 
during natural disasters, such as New Yorkers sharing 
transportation updates and gas station availability via Twitter 
during the power outages following Hurricane Sandy.
In addition to being used for personal use, social network-
ing sites today are also viewed as a business marketing tool. 
For instance, Twitter, Facebook, and YouTube are often used 
by businesses, political candidates, emerging musicians, and 
other professionals or professional organizations to increase 
their online presence. There are also business social network-
ing sites designed for business networking. Some of these 
sites (such as LinkedIn) are used for recruiting new employ-
ees, finding new jobs,  building professional contacts, and 
other business activities. Others (such as StartupNation) are 
designed to help entrepreneurs connect with business owners 
and resources, and exchange ideas. Other specialized social 
networking sites include sites designed for children (these 
FIGURE 3-22
Social networks 
are integrated into 
many Web sites.
<
Courtesy Facebook; Courtesy Throw the Fight www.facebook.com/throwthefight, www.throwthefight.com.
Courtesy ABC.com; Courtesy YouTube
FIGURE 3-23
Social networking 
sites. Allow individuals 
to exchange posts, 
photos, videos, 
messages, and more 
with their friends.
<
LOGIN
Log in to a Web site
using social network
credentials.
SHARE
Share Web
content via online
communications
or social networks.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
117
usually work in a manner similar to Facebook, but they have safeguards in place to prevent 
personal information from being posted, to monitor language, and so forth) and families 
(such as to exchange messages, view online tasks lists, and access a shared family calendar).
When using a social networking site, adults and children should be cautious about 
revealing too much personal information via these sites, both for personal safety reasons 
and to prevent the information from being used in personalized, targeted spear phishing 
attacks, discussed in Chapter 4. In addition, social networking content is increasingly 
being monitored by colleges (to find inappropriate behavior by students and to research 
college applicants) and employers (to find unprofessional behavior by current employ-
ees and to research potential job candidates). Because of this, all individuals should be 
careful about the types of photos and other content they post online. There have been 
numerous cases over the past few years of students being disciplined or not admitted to 
a college, and individuals being fired or not hired, due to content posted to a social net-
working site. Consequently, it is a good idea for individuals to take a close look at their 
online posts and photos and remove anything that might be potentially embarrassing if 
viewed by current or future employers, a future partner, or other people important to them 
now or in the future.
Another emerging issue is what happens to social networking content when some-
one dies unexpectedly because family members and heirs cannot access the sites without 
logon information or access to the deceased’s e-mail for password recovery purposes. In 
response, some special services have emerged to help individuals store information about 
their online assets (such as logon information) and to designate a beneficiary—the person 
designated to receive that information or to whom the account ownership will be trans-
ferred upon the individual’s death. Some services can also distribute e-mail messages to 
designated individuals when the member dies, as well as update the person’s bio or change 
his or her status update to one predesignated by the member. An alternative is for individu-
als to leave the necessary online contact and access information, as well as  instructions 
regarding how to notify online friends and sites, with a trusted friend or relative who is 
instructed to use the information only in the event of the individual’s death.
Online Shopping and Investing
Online shopping and online investing are examples of e-commerce—online financial 
transactions. It is very common today to order products, buy and sell stock, pay bills, and 
manage financial accounts online. However, because online fraud, credit card fraud, and 
identity theft (a situation in which someone gains enough personal information to pose as 
another person) are continuing to grow at a rapid pace, it is important to be cautious when 
participating in online financial activities. To protect yourself, use a credit card or online 
payment service (such as PayPal) whenever possible when purchasing goods or services 
online so that any fraudulent activities can be disputed. Also, be sure to enter your payment 
information only on a secure Web page (look for a URL that begins with https instead 
of http) and don’t perform any financial transactions via a public Wi-Fi hotspot. Online 
financial accounts should also be protected with strong user passwords that are changed 
frequently. Internet security and strong passwords are discussed in detail in Chapter 4.
Online Shopping and Online Auctions
Online shopping is commonly used to purchase both physical products (such as cloth-
ing, books, DVDs, shoes, furniture, and more) and downloadable products (such as soft-
ware, movies, music, and e-books) via Web pages. Typically, shoppers locate the items 
>Online shopping. Buying products or services over the Internet. 
Social media today is also used 
by law enforcement. For instance, 
investigators hunting for the second 
bomber in the 2013 Boston 
Marathon attack used the suspects’ 
social networking sites, as well 
as posts and videos uploaded by 
witnesses, in the search.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

118
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Online auction. An online activity where bids are placed for items, and the highest bidder purchases the item. >Online banking. Performing 
banking activities via the Web. >Online investing. Buying and selling stocks or other types of investments via the Web.
they would like to purchase using an online shopping site (such 
as the L.L. Bean Web site shown in Figure 3-24), and then 
they add those items to their online shopping carts or shop-
ping bags. The site’s checkout process—including supplying 
the necessary billing and shipping information—is then used 
to complete the sale. After the payment is processed, the item 
is either shipped to the customer (if it is a physical product), 
or the customer is given instructions on how to download it 
(if it is a downloadable product). Forrester Research predicts 
that U.S. online sales will reach approximately $370 billion 
by 2017.
Online auctions are one of the most common ways to 
purchase items online from other individuals. Sellers list items 
for sale on an auction site (such as eBay) and pay a small list-
ing fee if required, and then pay a commission to the auction 
site if the item is sold. Individuals can visit the auction site 
and enter bids on auction items until the end of the auction. 
At that time, the person with the highest bid is declared the successful bidder (provided 
the minimum selling price, if one was established, was met) and arranges payment for 
and delivery of the item directly with the seller. Another common way to purchase items 
from other individuals is via online classified ads, such as those posted on the popular 
Craigslist site.
Online Banking and Online Investing
Many banks today offer online banking as a free service to their customers to enable 
customers to check balances on all their accounts (such as checking, credit cards, 
mortgage, and investment accounts), view cashed checks and other transactions, 
transfer funds between accounts, pay bills electronically, and perform other activities 
related to their bank accounts. Online banking is continually growing and 
can be performed via a computer or a mobile device. In fact, most banks 
today allow users to view balances, transfer funds, make remote check 
deposits, and more via a mobile Web site, mobile banking app, or text 
message (see Figure 3-25).
Buying and selling stocks, bonds, mutual funds, and other types of 
securities is referred to as online investing. Although it is common to see 
stock quote capabilities on many search and news sites, trading stocks and 
other securities requires an online broker. The biggest advantages of online 
investing include lower transaction fees and the ability to quickly buy or sell 
stock when desired, without having to make a phone call—a convenience for 
those investors who do a lot of trading. Common online investing services 
include the ability to order sales and purchases; access performance histories, 
corporate news, and other useful investment information; and set up an online 
portfolio that displays the status of the stocks you specify. On some Web sites, 
stock price data is delayed 20 minutes; on other sites, real-time quotes are 
available. Like other Web page data, stock price data is current at the time 
it is retrieved via a Web page, but it may not be updated (and you will not 
see current quotes, for instance) until you reload the Web page using your 
browser’s Refresh or Reload toolbar button. 
Courtesy Ally Bank
www.llbean.com. L.L.Bean® is a registered trademark of L.L.Bean Inc. Copyright 2013
FIGURE 3-24
Online shopping. 
Allows you to purchase 
goods and services 
online.
<
FIGURE 3-25
Mobile banking. 
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
119
>Online music. Music played or obtained via the Web. >Online video. Video watched or downloaded via the Web.
Online Entertainment
There are an ever-growing number of ways to use the Web for entertainment purposes, 
such as listening to music, watching TV and videos, and playing online games. Some 
applications can be accessed with virtually any type of Internet connection; others are only 
practical with a broadband connection. Many online entertainment applications require 
the use of a media player program or plug-in (such as QuickTime Player or Silverlight) to 
deliver multimedia content.
Online Music
There are a number of options available today for online music, such as listening to live 
radio broadcasts via an online radio station, watching music videos on MTV.com or Yahoo! 
Music, listening to or downloading music on demand via a monthly online music subscrip-
tion service, or downloading music from online music stores, such as the iTunes Music 
Store or Amazon MP3. Music can be listened to or downloaded via a computer, mobile 
phone, or portable digital media player. Music files downloaded to your computer can be 
played from your computer’s hard drive; they can also be copied to a CD to create a cus-
tom music CD or transferred to a portable digital media player or mobile phone provided 
the download agreement does not preclude it. Most online music is accessed via a mobile 
device and online subscription services are viewed as the fastest growing online music 
market. In fact, Juniper Research predicts the number of mobile online music subscribers 
will hit 178 million users by 2015.
Online TV, Videos, and Movies
Watching TV shows, videos, and movies online is another very popular type of online 
entertainment (see Figure 3-26). Online videos (such as news videos and movie trail-
ers, videos posted to Web sites belonging to businesses and other organizations, personal 
ONLINE TV AND MOVIES
TV shows and movies can be watched online for free via a variety of
Web sites.
VIDEO-ON-DEMAND
Rented or purchased TV shows and movies can be delivered to
your computer, TV, or mobile device.
FIGURE 3-26
TV, videos, and 
movies are 
commonly watched 
online.
<
Courtesy Barnes & Noble, Inc.; © Disney/Pixar. 
All Rights Reserved.
© 2013 Hulu
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

120
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Online TV. Live or recorded TV shows available via the Web. >Online movies. Feature films available via the Web. 
videos posted to blogs and social networking pages, and videos shared via YouTube) are 
widely available (YouTube alone streams one billion video views per day). For a look at 
how online video can be used to help you with your workouts, see the Technology and 
You box.
 Another option is online TV and online movies. Both are available from wire-
less providers, TV networks, and third-party Web sites. TV shows and movies can be 
watched live, which means they are available at the time they are being aired (such 
as news broadcasts and sporting events) or they can be downloaded or viewed at the 
user’s convenience. For example, many wireless providers offer mobile TV, which 
delivers live sports, live news, primetime TV shows, and children’s TV shows to your 
smartphone. A wide variety of recorded TV content (such as episodes of current TV 
shows after they have been aired) is also available through the respective television net-
work Web sites for viewing online. Both TV shows and movies are available through 
a number of Web sites, such as Hulu (shown in Figure 3-26), TV.com, Xfinity TV, and 
High-Tech Workouts
Got a smartphone or media tablet? You now have a personal 
trainer. From apps that remind you when it’s time to work out, 
to apps that use the accelerometer on your smartphone to 
chart your workout progress, to apps that provide you with a 
 personal video workout, mobile video workouts are hot.
A leader in the area of mobile video workouts is PumpOne, 
which offers mobile personal training (see the accompany-
ing illustration). Video workouts are available on demand in a 
variety of areas, such as strength training, weight loss, toning, 
overall conditioning, cardio, ﬂ exibility, and sports conditioning. 
Workouts are streamed to the appropriate device, range from 
10 minutes to over an hour, and can be purchased on an unlim-
ited basis or subscribed to on a month-to-month basis (selected 
workouts are free). Other options include the ability to share 
workouts with others and ask questions of a  personal trainer.
Other popular high-tech workout tools include dumbbells 
that attach to a Wii remote and nunchuk to add resistance 
training to Wii Fit workouts; wristbands and watches that 
track your pace, distance, time, and calories burned on a run 
and that can upload this data in order to chart your programs 
online; and scales that record your weight and BMI and then 
upload this data to a Web site so you can view your weight 
history via a computer or smartphone.
T E C H N O LO GY AN D YOU
© www.pumpone.com
A PumpOne iPad video workout.
Research shows that overall 
streaming video usage is 
climbing rapidly and the trend 
of delivering TV and movie 
content to consumers wherever 
they are and to whatever device 
they prefer to use is expanding 
to traditional TV services, such 
as via the new TV Everywhere 
option available from some TV 
providers.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
121
>Video-on-demand (VOD). The process of downloading movies and television shows, on demand, via the Web. >Online gaming. Playing games 
via the Web. 
Zap2It. In addition, YouTube and the Internet Movie Database (IMDb) have full-length 
TV shows and movies that visitors can watch for free, and Amazon has thousands of 
TV shows and movies that Amazon Prime members can stream at no charge to their 
Kindles and other devices. A new trend is the development of TV shows that are only 
available online (such as the recent seasons of Arrested Development that are only 
available on Netflix and Hulu, and the recent revival of cancelled soap operas, like 
All My Children and One Life to Live, that are only available via the Web). Typically, 
online TV and online movies are streaming media, in which the video plays from the 
server when it is requested. Consequently, you need an Internet connection in order to 
view the video.
While much of the online TV, videos, and movies already mentioned are available 
free of charge (one exception is mobile TV, which is often available on a subscription 
basis), renting movies and TV shows that are delivered to your device at your request—
referred to as video-on-demand (VOD)—is another option. VOD can be ordered through 
an individual’s cable or satellite TV company or, more commonly today, through a cloud 
VOD provider such as CinemaNow, iTunes, BLOCKBUSTER OnDemand, or Amazon 
Instant Video). Rentals typically cost $4.99 or less; purchasing a movie costs around $15. 
In either case, the movies are streamed or downloaded to a computer, to a DVR or other 
device (such as a digital media player, a Blu-ray player, or a gaming console) that is con-
nected to your TV, or to a smartphone or media tablet (refer again to Figure 3-26). Rented 
movies can usually be viewed only for a limited time; some services allow movies down-
loaded to a computer to be transferred to a portable digital media player or other mobile 
device during the allowable viewable period. One popular VOD option is Netflix, which 
offers unlimited video streaming to a TV, gaming console, computer, or mobile device for 
$8 per month.
With the arrival of today’s smart TVs, TV shows and movies can now be delivered 
via the Internet directly to your television, along with other features such as interactive 
polls related to the TV show being viewed (as shown in Figure 3-5 earlier in this chap-
ter), or widgets or gadgets—small pieces of current information such as sport scores, 
news headlines, or product information.
Online Gaming
Online gaming refers to games played over the Internet. Many sites—especially 
children’s Web sites—include games for visitors to play. There are also sites whose sole 
purpose is hosting games that can be played online. Some of the games are designed to 
be played alone or with just one other person. Others, called online multiplayer games, 
are designed to be played online against many other online gamers. Online multiplayer 
games (such as Doom, EverQuest, Final Fantasy, and City of Heroes) are especially 
popular in countries, such as South Korea, that have readily available high-speed 
Internet connections and high levels of Internet use in general. Internet-enabled gaming 
consoles (such as recent versions of the PlayStation, Xbox, and Wii consoles) and 
portable gaming devices (such as the Sony PSP and Nintendo 3DS) that have built-in 
Internet connectivity can also be used for multiplayer online gaming. Online gaming 
is also associated quite often with Internet addiction—the inability to stop using the 
Internet or to prevent extensive use of the Internet from interfering with other aspects 
of one’s life. Internet addiction is a growing concern and is discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 7.
To view streaming video without it 
appearing choppy, Internet service 
that delivers a minimum download 
speed of 1.5 Mbps is recommended.
TIP
According to a recent Sandvine 
report, 33% of peak downstream 
Internet traffic in the United States 
is attributed to Netflix.
TIP
An emerging trend is gamification; 
that is, using gaming elements (like 
the ability to earn points or rewards) 
in a non-entertainment context, 
such as for customer and employee 
engagement.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

122
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Online News, Reference, and Information
There is an abundance of news and other important information available through the 
Internet. The following sections discuss some of the most widely used news, reference, and 
information resources.
News and Reference Information
News organizations, such as television networks, newspapers, and magazines, nearly 
always have Web sites that are updated on a continual basis to provide access to current 
local and world news, as well as sports, entertainment, health, travel, politics, weather, 
and other news topics (see the ABC News Web site in Figure 3-27). Many news sites also 
have searchable archives to look for past articles, although some require a fee to view back 
articles. Once articles are displayed, they can typically be saved, printed, or sent to other 
individuals via e-mail. A growing trend is for newspapers and magazines to abandon print 
subscriptions and to provide Web-only service—primarily for cost reasons. Although some 
subscribers miss the print versions, there are some advantages to  digital versions, such as 
the ability to easily search through content in some digital publications. Other online news 
resources include news radio programs that are broadcast over the Internet, as well as the 
wide variety of news video clips available through many Web sites.
Online news is commonly read on home or business computers, as well as on smart-
phones and media tablets. However, reading full news articles on a small device is some-
times difficult and, consequently, has resulted in the development of news apps (such as 
Summly, recently acquired by Yahoo!) that summarize the news you want to see, such as 
by news sources or by topics, for easier reading on your mobile device. News can also 
be delivered via headlines displayed on smart TVs, as well as via an app (such as the 
Windows 8 News live tile) that can be clicked to display that news story.
Reference sites are designed to provide users access to specific types of useful 
information. For example, reference sites can be used to generate maps (see the MapQuest 
Web site in Figure 3-27), check the weather forecast, look up the value of a home, or provide 
access to encyclopedias, dictionaries, ZIP Code directories, and telephone directories. One 
potential downside to the increased availability of online reference sites is use by criminals. 
For instance, one California lawmaker has introduced a bill requiring mapping sites to blur 
out details of schools, churches, and government buildings after being informed that some 
terrorists have used these maps to plan bombings and other attacks.
NEWS SITES
News organizations typically update their sites several times per day
to provide access to the most current news and information.
REFERENCE SITES
Reference Web sites provide access to speciﬁc types of useful
information, such as the maps and driving directions available
via this Web site.
FIGURE 3-27
Online news and 
reference Web sites.
<
© 2013 MapQuest
Copyright © 2013 ABC News Internet Ventures.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
123
>Portal Web page. A Web page designed to be designated as a browser home page; typically can be customized to display personalized content. 
>RSS (Really Simple Syndication). A tool used to deliver selected Web content to subscribers as the content is published to a Web site. 
>Podcast. A recorded audio or video file that can be played or downloaded via the Web. 
Portal Pages, RSS Feeds, and 
Podcasts
Portal Web pages are Web pages designed to 
be selected as a browser’s home page and used 
as a launching pad to access other Web pages. 
Portal pages (such as the MSN page for Windows 
8 shown in Figure 3-28) typically include search 
capabilities, news headlines, weather, and other 
useful content, and can often be customized by 
users to display their requested content. Once a 
portal page is customized, the specified infor-
mation is displayed each time the user visits the 
portal page. Popular portals include My Yahoo!, 
MSN, and AOL.com.
RSS (Really Simple Syndication) is an 
online tool designed for delivering news articles, 
blogs (discussed shortly), and other content 
regularly published to a Web site. Provided the 
content has an associated RSS feed, individuals 
can subscribe (usually for free) to that feed and then the content will be delivered as it 
becomes available. You can subscribe to an RSS feed by clicking a subscribe link on the 
associated Web page to add the feed content to your browser feed list; if you are using an 
RSS reader (such as Feedly shown in Figure 3-29), you can typically search for new feeds 
using that program. To view the feed content, either select that feed from your browser’s 
feed list (such as on the Feeds tab in the Favorites list in Internet Explorer) or click the 
appropriate link in your RSS reader. RSS readers often allow you to organize your feed 
into categories, as shown in Figure 3-29. In either case, as new content for the subscribed 
feed becomes available, it will be accessible via the feed links. In the future, we will likely 
see RSS feeds delivered directly to watches, refrigerators, and other consumer devices that 
have a display screen.
Another Web resource that can provide you with useful information is a podcast—a 
recorded audio or video file that can be downloaded via the Internet. The term podcast is 
derived from the iPod portable digital media player (the first widely used 
device for playing digital audio files), although podcasts today can also be 
listened to using a computer or mobile phone.
Podcasting (creating a podcast) enables individuals to create self-
published, inexpensive Internet radio broadcasts in order to share their 
knowledge, express their opinions on particular subjects, or share origi-
nal poems, songs, or short stories with interested individuals. Originally 
created and distributed by individuals, podcasts are now also being 
created and distributed by businesses. For instance, some commercial 
radio stations are making portions of their broadcasts available via pod-
casts, and a growing number of news sites and corporate sites now have 
regular podcasts available. In fact, some view podcasts as the new and 
improved radio because it is an easy way to listen to your favorite radio 
broadcasts on your own schedule. Podcasts are also used for educa-
tional purposes. Podcasts are typically uploaded to the Web on a regular 
basis, and RSS feeds can be used to notify subscribers when a new 
podcast is available.
Access to Web
mail and Skype.
News stories
are organized
into story tiles.
Click a story tile
banner to view all
stories in that category.
Click a story
headline to view
that story.
Access to social
networks.
Customized
weather.
Search
capabilities.
FIGURE 3-28
Portal pages. Portal 
pages can contain 
a wide variety of 
customized news 
and information. 
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
FIGURE 3-29
RSS readers. RSS 
feeds (right) can often 
be organized into 
categories (left).
<
Courtesy feedly
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

124
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
The Internet of Things (IoT)
One of the hottest Internet topics today is the Internet of Things 
(IoT). The Internet of Things refers to a world where everyday 
physical objects are connected to, and uniquely identiﬁ able on, 
the Internet so they can communicate with other devices. Also 
called Machine-to-Machine (M2M) because it involves primar-
ily machines talking directly to one another, the IoT is expected 
to greatly impact our lives and the way we get information and 
control objects. The IoT will be created by turning formerly dumb 
objects into smart devices (using sensors and other technol-
ogy) that can send data to a system for analysis. These smart 
devices can range from sensors in your shoes, to smart ﬁ tness 
devices, to healthcare monitors, to home automation systems, to 
smart farm equipment, to smart freeways and trafﬁ c lights. These 
smart devices will communicate with each other (such as over 
low-power Bluetooth Smart technology) to, in theory, provide 
advantages such as making our lives more convenient, saving 
us money, and providing us with better healthcare and other ser-
vices. Businesses will beneﬁ t from getting feedback from equip-
ment (being notiﬁ ed when a machine in the ﬁ eld needs service 
or reﬁ lling, for instance, without an employee having to physi-
cally monitor it), being able to automate more processes, and 
getting faster and more accurate feedback about point-of-sale 
purchases.
One example of a personal application of IoT is home 
 automation—enabling the appliances and other devices in your 
home (such as your alarm system, door locks, and sprinklers) to 
communicate with you and each other so the devices operate 
according to your stated preferences or observed habits, as well 
as be able to give you the power to control devices remotely 
via your smartphone, as discussed in Chapter 8. Fitness sys-
tems are another example. For instance, the Nike+ FuelBand 
uses a sports-tested accelerometer to track your daily activity— 
including running, walking, dancing, and basketball (professional 
basketball player Kevin Durant is wearing a Nike+ FuelBand in 
the accompanying photo)—in steps, time of day, and calories 
burned. It converts your activity into NikeFuel, a universal mea-
surement of activity, and syncs the data with your PC or mobile 
device. You can set a personal goal for yourself (and monitor 
your progress toward that goal by viewing the lights on the edge 
of the band, as well as by looking at your stats on your PC or 
phone). You can also share your data with others via Facebook 
and Twitter. Other Nike+ products can be used for more sports-
speciﬁ c tracking, such as for running (via the Nike+ SportWatch 
GPS) or basketball (via sensors embedded in the soles of the 
Nike+ Basketball shoes). While the IoT is larger than just home 
automation and wearable technology, these two initial IoT appli-
cations may be the ones that impact individuals the most.
T R E N D
1.  Wear the FuelBand on
     your wrist during the day
     (you can recharge it when
     needed via a USB port).
2.  The FuelBand tracks your
     activity—look at the lights on the
     band or press a button to display
     your NikeFuel total to view your
     progress.
3.  The FuelBand syncs your data with your
     PC or smartphone so you can review your
     activity history and monitor your achievement
     streaks for motivation, as well as share and
     compare your progress with others.
Courtesy Nike Inc.
How the Nike+ FuelBand works.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
125
Product, Corporate, Government, and Other 
Information
The Web is a very useful tool for locating product and cor-
porate information. Manufacturer and retailer Web sites often 
include product specifications, instruction manuals, and other 
information that is useful to consumers before or after they 
purchase a product. There are also numerous consumer review 
sites (such as Epinions.com) to help purchasers evaluate their 
options before buying a product online or in a physical store; 
many online stores (such as Amazon.com) also include cus-
tomer reviews on product pages. For investors and consumers, 
a variety of corporate information is available online, from 
both company Web sites and sites (such as Hoovers.com) that 
offer free or fee-based corporate information. For a look at an 
emerging Internet trend that is beginning to impact both busi-
ness and individuals—the Internet of Things (IoT)—see the 
Trend box.
Government information is also widely available on the Internet. Most state and fed-
eral agencies have Web sites to provide information to citizens, such as government publi-
cations, archived documents, forms, and legislative bills. You can also perform a variety of 
tasks, such as downloading tax forms and filing your tax returns online. In addition, many 
cities, counties, and states allow you to pay your car registration fees, register to vote, view 
property tax information, or make an appointment to renew your driver’s license online.
There is also a wide variety of informa-
tion available from various organizations, 
such as nonprofit organizations, conserva-
tion groups, political parties, and more. For 
instance, many sites dedicated to energy con-
servation and saving the environment have 
emerged over the past few years to bring 
awareness to this issue, and there are numer-
ous online resources for learning the positions 
of political candidates and other information 
important to voters. For example, the non-
partisan FactCheck.org Web site shown in 
Figure 3-30 is dedicated to monitoring the 
factual accuracy of what is being said by 
major U.S. political candidates and elected 
officials and reporting it, in an attempt to 
reduce the level of deception and confusion 
in U.S. politics. 
Online Education and Writing
Online education—using the Internet to facil-
itate learning—is a rapidly growing Internet 
application. The Internet can be used to deliver 
part or all of any educational class or program; 
it can also be used to supplement or support 
traditional education. In addition, many high 
school and college courses use Web content—
such as online syllabi, schedules, discussion 
boards, podcasts, and tutorials—as required 
or suggested supplements. For example, the 
Web site that supplements this book contains 
FIGURE 3-30
FactCheck.org. This 
Web site can be used 
to check the accuracy 
of political statements.
<
Courtesy FactCheck.org
Nick Ayres, Manager, Social Marketing, IHG
How important is it for a business to have a 
social media presence today?
Today, customers across every industry and geog-
raphy expect brands to meet them where they are. 
Social media has become table stakes for doing 
business in the 21st century and is no longer a “nice 
to have” marketing tool.
A social media footprint that spans the right 
social channels is an important step toward meet-
ing these expectations. Importantly, however, this 
social media footprint is only the first step because 
its primary relevance comes in its ability to deliver a 
mechanism by which we can activate a robust cus-
tomer engagement and dialog strategy.
Ultimately, we at IHG win when we find ways 
to deliver seamless, interactive, and dynamic hotel 
brand experiences—both on and offline—whether 
it’s an InterContinental® resort or a city-center 
Holiday Inn® hotel, as that is increasingly what our 
customers expect and deserve. And while this is no 
small task, we believe success in this arena can pro-
duce a sustainable competitive advantage. 
AS K TH E E X PE R T
Courtesy of IHG
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

126
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
an online study guide, online quizzes, online hands-on labs, 
Web links, downloadable audio and video podcasts, streaming 
videos, and other online resources for students taking a course 
that uses this textbook. There are also Web-based learning man-
agement systems (such as Blackboard, shown in Figure 3-31) 
that are often used to deliver course content, manage assign-
ments and grades, and more; and the use of student response 
systems—where students use a special device or their mobile 
phone to respond to surveys or review questions during in-class 
lectures is growing. The next few sections take a look at some 
of the most widely used online education applications.
Web-Based Training and Distance Learning
The term Web-based training (WBT) refers to any instruc-
tion delivered via the Web. It is commonly used for employee 
training, as well as for delivering instruction in an educational setting. Distance learning 
occurs whenever students take classes from a location—often home or work—which is 
different from the one where the delivery of instruction takes place. Distance learning 
today typically includes  Web-based training or other online learning tools (and so is 
also called online learning and e-learning) and is available through many high schools, 
 colleges, and universities, as well as organizations that provide professional certifica-
tions. Distance learning can be used to learn just one task or new skill; it can also be 
used to complete an online course or an entire degree online via an accredited college or 
university. Typically the majority of distance learning coursework is completed over the 
Internet via class Web pages, YouTube  videos, Webinars, podcasts, discussion groups, 
e-mail, and learning management systems like Blackboard (refer again to Figure 3-31), 
although schools might require some in-person contact, such as sessions for orientation 
and testing.
The biggest advantage of Web-based training and distance learning is that they are 
typically experienced individually and at the user’s own pace. Online content for Web-
based training components is frequently customized to match the pace of each individual 
user and can be completed at the user’s convenience. Web-based content can be updated 
as needed and online content and activities (such as exercises, exams, and animations) 
typically provide immediate feedback to the student. One disadvantage is the possibility of 
 technological problems—because students need a working device and Internet connection 
to access the material, they cannot participate if they have no access to a computer or an 
appropriate mobile device, or if their device, their Internet connection, or the Web server 
hosting the material goes down. Another concern among educators is the lack of face-to-
face contact, and security issues—such as the difficulty in ensuring that the appropriate 
student is completing assignments or taking exams. Some possible solutions for this latter 
concern are discussed in the next section.
Online Testing
In both distance learning and traditional classes, online testing—which allows students to take 
tests via the Internet—is a growing trend. Both objective tests (such as those containing mul-
tiple choice or true/false questions) and performance-based exams (such as those given in 
computer classes to test student mastery of software applications) can be administered and 
taken online. For instance, there are SAM (Skills Assessment Manager) tests available for use 
>Web-based training (WBT). Instruction delivered on an individual basis via the Web. >Distance learning. A learning environment in which the 
student is physically located away from the instructor and other students; commonly, instruction and communications take place via the Web.
FIGURE 3-31
Blackboard. This 
learning management 
system can be used 
to view and complete 
assignments, view 
grades and 
announcements, 
and more.
<
Courtesy Blackboard
Some distance learning classes 
today use synchronous or live 
online learning, where students 
and instructors are online at the 
same time; this has the benefit 
of encouraging interaction, 
questions and answers, and 
other types of instant feedback.
TIP
Online courses that have no 
tuition and are open to anyone 
via the Internet are sometimes 
referred to as Massive Open 
Online Courses (MOOCs).
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
127
>Blog. A Web page that contains short, frequently updated entries in chronological order, typically by just one individual. 
in conjunction with this textbook to test both Microsoft Office 
software skills and computer concepts. Typically online tests 
are graded automatically, providing fast feedback to the stu-
dents, as well as freeing up the instructor’s time for other activ-
ities. One recent debate focuses on the use of computers to 
automatically grade essay tests after “learning” how to grade 
them by reviewing essay exams that the instructor scored.
One challenge for online testing is ensuring that an 
online test is taken by the appropriate individual and in an 
authorized manner in order to avoid cheating. Some distance 
learning programs require students to go physically to a test-
ing center to take the test or to find an acceptable test proctor 
(such as an educator at a nearby school or a commanding 
officer for military personnel). Other options are using smart 
cards, fingerprint scans, and other means to authenticate 
students taking an online exam from a remote location. For 
instance, one secure testing solution being used at a number 
of schools nationwide to enable students to take online tests 
from their remote locations while still ensuring the integrity 
of the exams is the Remote Proctor PRO system shown in 
Figure 3-32. The Remote Proctor PRO device first authen-
ticates the individual taking the test via a fingerprint scan, 
and then captures real-time audio and video during the exam. 
The device’s camera points to a reflective ball, which allows it to capture a full 360-degree 
image of the room, and the recording is uploaded to a server so it can be viewed by the 
instructor from his or her location. The Remote Proctor PRO software locks down the com-
puter so that it cannot be used for any purpose not allowed during the test (such as per-
forming an Internet search). It also flags suspicious behavior (such as significant noises or 
movements) in the recording so that the instructor can review those portions of the record-
ing to see if any unauthorized behavior (such as leaving the room or making a telephone 
call) occurred during the testing period.
Blogs, Wikis, and Other Types of Online Writing
Some types of online writing, such as e-mail, instant and text 
messaging, and social networking updates, were discussed 
earlier in this chapter. A few additional types of online writ-
ing are discussed next. 
A blog—also called a Web log—is a Web page that contains 
short, frequently updated entries in chronological order, typi-
cally as a means of expression or communication (see the food 
blog shown in Figure 3-33). In essence, a blog is an online per-
sonal journal accessible to the public that is usually created and 
updated by one individual. Blogs are written by a wide variety 
of individuals— including ordinary people, as well as celebrities, 
writers, students, and experts on particular subjects—and can be 
used to post personal commentary, research updates, comments 
on current events, political opinions, celebrity gossip, travel dia-
ries, television show recaps, and more.
FIGURE 3-32
Secure online 
testing.
<
FIGURE 3-33
Blogs. Allow 
individuals to post 
entries to an online 
personal journal.
<
3. The computer is locked down during the exam so it
can only be used for authorized activities.
1. The device authenticates the
individual via a ﬁngerprint scan
before the exam can begin.
2. The device captures real-time
audio and video during the exam.
Courtesy Software Secure, Inc.
Courtesy Amy Sherman
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

128
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Wiki. A collaborative Web page that is designed to be edited and republished by a variety of individuals. >E-portfolio. A collection of an 
individual’s work accessible via the Web. 
Blogging software, which is available via blogging sites such as Blogger.com, is often 
used to easily create and publish blogs and blog updates to the Web. Blogs are also fre-
quently published on school, business, and personal Web sites. Blogs are usually updated 
frequently, and entries can be posted via computers, e-mail, and mobile devices. Blogs 
often contain text, photos, and video clips. With their increased use and audiences, blog-
gers and the blogosphere (the complete collection of blogs on the Internet) are beginning 
to have increasing influence on businesses, politicians, and individuals today. One new 
ethical issue surrounding blogging relates to bloggers who are paid to blog about certain 
products. Although some Web sites that match up bloggers with advertisers require that 
the blogger reveal that he or she receives payment for “sponsored” posts, some believe 
that commercializing blogging will corrupt the blogosphere. Others, however, view it as a 
natural evolution of word-of-mouth advertising.
Another form of online writing sometimes used for edu-
cational purposes is the wiki. Wikis, named for the Hawaiian 
phrase wiki wiki meaning quick, are a way of creating and edit-
ing collaborative Web pages quickly and easily. Similar to a 
blog, the content on a wiki page can be edited and republished 
to the Web just by pressing a Save or Submit button. However, 
wikis are intended to be modified by others and so are espe-
cially appropriate for collaboration, such as for class Web pages 
or group  projects. To protect the content of a wiki from sabo-
tage, the entire wiki or editing privileges for a wiki can be pass-
word protected.
One of the largest wikis is Wikipedia (shown in 
Figure 3-34), a free online encyclopedia that contains over 25 
million articles written in 287 languages, is updated by volun-
teer contributors, and is visited by more than half a billion indi-
viduals every month. While most Wikipedia contributors edit 
articles in a responsible manner, there are instances  erroneous 
information being added to Wikipedia pages intentionally. As 
with any resource, visitors should carefully evaluate the content of a Wikipedia article 
before referencing it in a report, Web page, or other document, as discussed earlier in 
this chapter.
An e-portfolio, also called an electronic portfolio or digital portfolio, is a collection 
of an individual’s work accessible through a Web site. Today’s e-portfolios are typically 
linked to a collection of student-related information, such as résumés, papers, projects, and 
other original works. Some e-portfolios are used for a single course;  others are designed to 
be used and updated throughout a student’s educational career, culminating in a compre-
hensive collection of information that can be used as a job-hunting tool.
CENSORSHIP AND PRIVACY ISSUES
There are many important societal issues related to the Internet. One important issue—
network and Internet security—is covered in Chapter 4. Two other important issues—
censorship and privacy—are discussed next, in the context of Internet use. Other societal 
issues—including computer security, ethics, health, and the environment—related to com-
puter use are discussed in further detail in Chapters 5, 6, and 7.
There are numerous online blog 
directories—such as Technorati 
and Tumblr—to help you find 
blogs that meet your interests.
TIP
FIGURE 3-34
Wikis. Wikis, such 
as the Wikipedia 
collaborative online 
encyclopedia shown 
here, can be edited 
by any authorized 
individual.
<
Courtesy Wikipedia
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
129
>Internet filtering. Using a software program or browser option to block access to particular Web pages or types of Web pages.
Censorship
The issue of Internet censorship affects all countries that have Internet access. In some 
countries, Internet content is filtered by the government, typically to hinder the spread of 
information from political opposition groups, to filter out subjects deemed offensive, or 
to block information from sites that could endanger national security. Increasingly, some 
countries are also blocking information (such as blogs and personal Web pages) from leav-
ing the country, and have occasionally completely shut down Internet access to and from 
the country during political protests to stop the flow of information in and out of that 
 country. For instance, all Internet and cell phone service was shut down in Egypt for about 
one week in 2011 because of mounting political unrest in that country.
In the United States, the First Amendment to the U.S. Constitution guarantees a 
citizen’s right to free speech. This protection allows people to say things to others with-
out fear of arrest. But how does the right to free speech relate to potentially offensive or 
indecent materials available over the Internet where they might be observed by children 
or by people who do not wish to see them? There have been some attempts in the United 
States and other countries to regulate Internet content—what some would view as cen-
sorship—in recent years, but the courts have had difficulty defining what is “patently 
offensive” and “indecent” as well as finding a fair balance between protection and cen-
sorship. For example, the Communications Decency Act, which was signed into law in 
1996, made it a criminal offense to distribute patently indecent or offensive material 
online in order to protect children from being exposed to inappropriate Web content. 
In 1997, however, the Supreme Court overturned the portion of this law pertaining to 
indecent material on the basis of free speech, making this content legal to distribute via 
the Internet and protecting Web sites that host third-party content from being liable for 
that content.
Another example of legislation designed to protect children from inappropriate Web 
content is the Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA). CIPA requires public libraries 
and schools to implement Internet safety policies and technologies to block children’s 
access to inappropriate Web content in order to receive certain public funds. While this 
law was intended to protect children, it was fought strenuously by free speech advocacy 
groups and some library associations on the basis that limiting access to some Internet 
content violates an individual’s First Amendment rights to free speech. While CIPA 
was ruled unconstitutional by a federal court in 2002, the Supreme Court reversed the 
lower court decision in 2003 and ruled that the law is constitutional because the need for 
libraries to prevent minors from accessing obscene materials outweighs the free speech 
rights of library patrons and Web site publishers. However, the Court also modified the 
law to  require a library to remove the technologies for an adult library patron at the 
patron’s request.
One technology  commonly used to conform to CIPA regulations, as well as by 
parents and employees, is Internet filtering—the act of blocking access to  particular 
Web pages or types of Web pages. It can be used on home computers or mobile devices 
by individuals to protect themselves from material they would view as offensive or by 
parents to protect their children from material they feel is inappropriate. It is also com-
monly used by employers to keep employees from accessing non-work-related sites, by 
some ISPs and search sites to block access to potentially objectionable materials, and 
by many schools and libraries to control the Web content that children are able to view 
in order to be in compliance with CIPA. Internet filtering typically restricts access to 
Web pages that contain offensive language, sex/pornography, racism, drugs, or violence 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

130
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
(based on either the keywords contained on each site or a database of URLs containing 
restricted content). It can also be used to block access to specific sites (such as social 
networking sites, YouTube, or eBay), as well as to restrict the total number of hours or 
the time of day that the Internet can be used.
Most browsers include some Internet filtering options. For instance, Internet Explorer’s 
Family Safety options (see Figure 3-35) can be used to filter the Web sites displayed for spe-
cific users of a particular computer (although blocked Web sites can be viewed if the user 
knows the administrator password). More comprehensive Internet filtering can be obtained 
with stand-alone filtering programs, such as NetNanny (also shown in Figure 3-35) or Safe 
Eyes for parents, or Netsweeper for schools and businesses.
Web Browsing Privacy
Privacy, as it relates to the Inter net, encompasses what information about individuals is 
available, how it is used, and by whom. As more and more transactions and daily activities 
are being performed online, there is the potential for vast amounts of private information to 
be collected and distributed without the individual’s knowledge or permission. Therefore, 
it is understandable that public concern regarding privacy and the Internet is on the rise. 
Although personal privacy is discussed in more detail in Chapter 5, a few issues that are of 
special concern to Internet users regarding Web browsing privacy and e-mail privacy are 
discussed in the next few sections.
BROWSER OPTIONS
Set ﬁltering options for each individual
account (such as only allowing Web pages
designed for children as shown here).
THIRD-PARTY SOFTWARE
Set ﬁltering options for anyone using the
device (such as the iPhone that the app
shown here is installed on).
FIGURE 3-35
Internet filtering. 
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Courtesy ContentWatch, Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
131
Cookies
Many Web pages today use cookies—small text files that are stored on your hard drive by 
a Web server—to identify return visitors and their preferences. Some cookies are session 
based (which means they are erased when you close your browser) and about half of per-
sistent cookies (those that are stored on your hard drive) are first-party cookies. First-party 
cookies belong to the Web site you are visiting and are only read by that site. So, while 
some individuals view cookies as a potential invasion of privacy, they can provide some 
benefits to consumers. For example, cookies can enable a Web site to remember prefer-
ences for customized Web site content (such as on a portal page), as well as to save a shop-
ping cart or remember a site password. Some Web sites also use cookies to keep track of 
which pages on their Web sites each person has visited in order to recommend products on 
return visits that match that person’s interests. A use of cookies that is more objectionable 
to some is the use of third-party cookies (cookies placed on your hard drive by a company 
other than the one associated with the Web page that you are viewing—typically a Web 
advertising company). Third-party cookies target advertisements to Web site visitors based 
on their activities on the site (such as products viewed or advertisements clicked).
The information stored in a cookie file typically includes the name of the cookie, its 
expiration date, and the domain that the cookie belongs to. In addition, a cookie  contains 
either personal information that you have entered while visiting the Web site or an ID num-
ber assigned by the Web site that allows the Web site’s server to retrieve your  personal infor-
mation from its database. Such a database can contain two types of information:  personally 
identifiable information (PII) and non-personally identifiable information (Non-PII). 
Personally identifiable information is connected with a specific user’s identity—such as his 
or her name and address—and is typically given during the process of ordering goods or ser-
vices. Non-personally identifiable 
information is anonymous data—
such as which product pages were 
viewed or which advertisements 
located on the site were clicked—
that is not directly associated with 
the visitor’s name or another per-
sonally  identifiable characteristic.
Cookies stored on your com-
puter’s hard drive can be looked 
at, if desired, although sometimes 
deciphering the information con-
tained in a cookie file is difficult. 
Internet Explorer users can view 
and/or delete cookies and other 
temporary files by using Internet 
Explorer’s Internet Options dia-
log box (see Figure 3-36) and 
selecting Delete in the Browsing 
history section on the General 
tab to delete all temporary files 
or Settings to have the option to 
view cookie files. The Privacy 
tab in this dialog box (also shown 
in Figure 3-36) can be used to 
Click to delete all temporary
ﬁles, including cookies.
Click to view
cookies.
Select one of the standard
privacy settings here.
Click to create a custom
privacy setting.
INTERNET OPTIONS GENERAL TAB
INTERNET OPTIONS PRIVACY TAB
FIGURE 3-36
Browser cookie 
management in 
Internet Explorer. 
<
>Cookie. A small file stored on a user’s hard drive by a Web server; commonly used to identify personal preferences and settings for that user.
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

132
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
specify which type of cookies (if any) are allowed to be used, such as permit-
ting the use of regular cookies, but not third-party cookies or cookies using per-
sonally identifiable information. A growing trend (such as with Apple’s Safari 
browser) is to not allow third-party cookies at all.
Turning off cookies entirely might make some features—such as a shop-
ping cart—on some Web sites inoperable. The Medium High privacy option 
in Internet Explorer is a widely used setting because it allows the use of regu-
lar cookies but blocks many types of third-party cookies. Users who want 
more control over their cookies can choose to accept or decline cookies as 
they are encountered in most browsers. Although this option interrupts your 
Web surfing almost continually, it is interesting to see the cookies generated 
from each individual Web site. For example, the two cookie prompts shown 
in Figure 3-37 were generated while visiting the BestBuy.com Web site. 
Although the top cookie request is from the BestBuy.com Web site directly, 
the other is a third-party cookie from an online marketing company. An alter-
native to managing cookies within your browser is using third-party cookie 
management software.
Another alternative is the private browsing option available with many Web browsers, 
including Internet Explorer, Chrome, and Safari. As discussed more in Chapter 5, this option 
allows you to browse the Web without leaving any history (including browsing history, form 
data, cookies, usernames, and passwords) on the computer you are using. Private browsing 
is useful for individuals using school, library, or other public computers to visit password-
protected sites, research medical information, or perform other tasks that the user may prefer 
to keep private. Individuals using a computer to shop for gift or other surprises for family 
members who share the same computer may find the feature useful, as well.
Another Web privacy issue is the privacy of social media data. The best preventative 
measure is to not post anything online that you would not want the general public to view. 
But you can also use the privacy settings in each social network that you utilize to specify 
who can see what in your profile. For instance, Facebook allows you to specify what con-
tent can be seen by the “Public” (anyone) and what can only be seen by “Friends” (your 
Facebook friends).
Spyware and Adware
Spyware is the term used for any software program that is installed without the user’s 
knowledge and that secretly gathers information about the user and transmits it through 
his or her Internet connection. Spyware is sometimes used to provide advertisers with 
information used for marketing purposes, such as to help select advertisements to display 
on each person’s computer. The information gathered by the spyware software is usually 
not associated with a person’s identity. But spyware is a concern for privacy advocates 
>Spyware. A software program that is installed without the user’s permission and that secretly gathers information to be sent to others.
Cookies (typically placed by advertising companies) that attempt to track your activities across 
a Web site or the Web sites belonging to an advertising network are referred to as tracking cookies. 
If your security software includes tracking cookie protection, be sure it is enabled to avoid these 
cookies from being stored on your computer. Setting your browser’s privacy settings to block third-
party cookies can offer you some additional protection against tracking cookies.
Web sites requesting
cookie use.
FIGURE 3-37
Cookie prompts. 
After selecting the 
“Prompt” option in the 
cookie settings, you will 
have to accept or reject 
each cookie request.
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
133
because it is typically installed without a user’s direct knowledge (such as at the same time 
another program is installed, often when a program is downloaded from a Web site or a 
P2P service) and conveys information about a user’s Internet activities. Spyware can also 
be used by criminals to retrieve personal data stored on your computer for use in criminal 
 activities, as discussed in more detail in Chapter 4.
Unfortunately, spyware use is on the rise and can affect the performance of a computer 
(such as slowing it down or causing it to work improperly), in addition to its potential 
security risks. And the problem will likely become worse before it gets any better. Some 
spyware programs—sometimes referred to as stealthware—are getting more aggressive, 
such as delivering ads regardless of the activity you are doing on your computer, chang-
ing your browser home page or otherwise altering your browser settings (referred to as 
browser hijacking), and performing other annoying actions. The worst spyware programs 
rewrite your computer’s main instructions—such as the Windows registry—to change your 
browser settings back to the hijacked settings each time you reboot your computer, undo-
ing any changes you may have made to your browser settings.
A related type of software is adware, which is free or low-cost software that is sup-
ported by on-screen advertising. Many free programs that can be downloaded from the 
Internet include some type of adware, which results in on-screen advertising. The differ-
ence between spyware and adware is that adware typically does not gather information and 
relay it to others via the Internet (although it can), and it is not installed without the user’s 
consent. Adware might, however, be installed without the user’s direct knowledge because 
many users do not read licensing agreements before clicking OK to install a new program. 
When this occurs with a program that contains adware, the adware components are installed 
without the user’s direct knowledge.
Both spyware and adware can be annoying and use up valuable system resources, in 
addition to revealing data about individuals. As discussed in detail in Chapter 4, firewalls 
and antispyware programs can be used to protect against spyware.
E-Mail Privacy
Many people mistakenly believe that the e-mail they send and receive is private and will 
never be read by anyone other than the intended recipient. Because it is transmitted over 
public media, however, only encrypted (electronically scrambled) e-mail can be transmit-
ted safely, as discussed in Chapter 4. Although unlikely to happen to your personal e-mail, 
nonencrypted e-mail can be intercepted and read by someone else. Consequently, from a 
privacy standpoint, a nonencrypted e-mail message should be viewed more like a postcard 
than a letter (see Figure 3-38).
It is also important to real-
ize that your employer and your 
ISP have access to the e-mail you 
send through those organizations. 
Businesses and ISPs typically 
archive (keep copies of) e-mail 
messages that travel through 
their servers and are required 
to comply with subpoenas from 
law enforcement agencies for 
archived e-mail messages.
FIGURE 3-38
You cannot assume 
e-mail messages are 
private, unless they 
are encrypted. 
<
REGULAR (NONENCRYPTED E-MAIL) = POSTCARD
ENCRYPTED E-MAIL = SEALED LETTER
Chris,
The meeting is Monday
at 2 pm. Please bring all
related personnel files
detailing the anticipated
firing of Joe D.
Eve
To: cwilliams@abc.net
From: eve.s@abc.net
From: eve.s@abc.net
To: cwilliams@abc.net
CONFIDENTIAL
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

134
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
S U M MARY
EVOLUTION OF THE INTERNET
The origin of the Internet—a worldwide collection of interconnected networks that is 
accessed by millions of people daily—dates back to the late 1960s. At its start and through-
out its early years, the Internet was called ARPANET. It was not until the development 
of the World Wide Web (WWW) that public interest in the Internet began to soar. Most 
companies have Web sites today and consider the Web to be an indispensable business 
tool. While the Web is a very important and widely used Internet resource, it is not the only 
one. Over the years, protocols have been developed to download files, send e-mail mes-
sages, and perform other tasks, in addition to using Web pages. Today, the term Internet 
has become a household word and, in many ways, has redefined how people think about 
computers and communications. The next significant improvement to the Internet infra-
structure may be the result of projects such as Internet2.
The Internet community is made up of individual users; companies, such as 
Internet service providers (ISPs), Internet content providers, application service pro-
viders (ASPs), infrastructure companies, and a variety of software and hardware com-
panies; the government; and other organizations. Virtually anyone with a computer with 
communications capability can be part of the Internet, either as a user or supplier of infor-
mation or services. Web services are self-contained business functions that operate over 
the Internet.
Because the Internet is so unique in the history of the world—and it remains a rela-
tively new and ever-changing phenomenon—several widespread myths about it have sur-
faced. Three such myths are that the Internet is free, that it is controlled by some central 
body, and that it is synonymous with the World Wide Web.
GETTING SET UP TO USE THE INTERNET
Most Internet connections today are direct connections (always connected to the Internet), 
though some are dial-up connections (which need to dial up and connect to the Internet to 
provide access). Dial-up connections are typically conventional dial-up Internet access; 
common types of direct Internet connections include cable, DSL (Digital Subscriber Line), 
satellite, fixed wireless, mobile wireless, and broadband over fiber (BoF)—also called 
fiber-to-the-premises (FTTP)—Internet access. Individuals can also connect to the 
Internet via a Wi-Fi hotspot. When preparing to become connected to the Internet, you 
need to decide which type of device (personal computer or mobile phone, for instance), 
which type of Internet connection, and which specific Internet service provider to use. 
Once all these decisions are made, you can acquire the proper hardware and software and 
set up your system for Internet access.
SEARCHING THE INTERNET
Search sites are Web sites that enable users to search for and find information on the 
Internet. They typically locate pages using a keyword search (in which the user speci-
fies keywords for the desired information)—a search engine retrieves the list of match-
ing Web pages from a database. A directory search (in which the user selects categories 
corresponding to the desired information) is another possibility. Search site databases are 
generally maintained by automated spider programs.
Chapter Objective 1:
Discuss how the Internet 
evolved and what it is like 
today.
Chapter Objective 2:
Identify the various types of 
individuals, companies, and 
organizations involved in 
the Internet community and 
explain their purposes.
Chapter Objective 3:
Describe device and connec-
tion options for connecting to 
the Internet, as well as some 
considerations to keep in 
mind when selecting an ISP.
Chapter Objective 4:
Understand how to search 
effectively for information on 
the Internet and how to cite 
Internet resources properly.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
135
There are a variety of search strategies that can be used, including typing phrases 
instead of single keywords; using Boolean operators; trying the search at multiple 
search sites; and using synonyms, variant word forms, wildcards, and field searches. 
Once a list of links to Web pages matching the search criteria is displayed, the hits 
need to be evaluated for their relevancy. If the information found on a Web page is 
used in a paper, report, or other original document, the source should be credited 
appropriately.
BEYOND BROWSING AND E-MAIL
The Internet can be used for many different types of activities in addition to basic Web 
browsing and e-mail exchange. Common types of online communications include 
instant messaging or IM (also commonly referred to as chat) and text messaging (sending 
real-time typed messages via a computer or mobile phone, respectively), Twittering (send-
ing short status updates via Twitter), forums (online locations where people post messages 
on a particular topic for others to read and respond to), Web conferences (real-time meet-
ings taking place via the Web that typically use video cameras and microphones to enable 
participants to see and hear each other), and Webinars (seminars presented over the Web). 
Social networking sites (part of the collection of social media available today) also 
allow the members of an online community to communicate and exchange information. 
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP) refers to making voice telephone calls over the Internet.
Common Web activities for individuals include a variety of consumer e-commerce 
activities, such as online shopping, online auctions, online banking, and online investing. 
When performing any type of financial transaction over the Internet, it is very important to 
use only secure Web pages.
Online entertainment applications include online gaming, downloading music 
files and other types of online music, and online TV, online movies, and other types 
of online video. Selecting and receiving TV shows and movies via the Web is called 
video-on-demand (VOD). A wide variety of news, reference, government, product, and 
corporate information are available via the Web as well. News, reference, and search tools 
are commonly found on portal Web pages; RSS (Really Simple Syndication) feeds 
can be used to deliver current news, podcasts, and other Web content to individuals as it 
becomes available.
Online education options include Web-based training (WBT) and distance learning. 
Online testing can be used for both objective and performance-based exams and can be 
secured by a variety of means. Online writing includes blogs (Web pages that contain 
frequently updated entries by individuals), wikis (Web pages designed to be created and 
edited by multiple individuals), and e-portfolios (collections of an individual’s work).
CENSORSHIP AND PRIVACY ISSUES
Among the most important societal issues relating to the Internet are censorship and 
privacy. Web content is not censored as a whole, but Internet filtering can be used by 
parents, employers, educators, and anyone wishing to prevent access to sites they deem 
objectionable on computers for which they have control. Privacy is a big concern for indi-
viduals, particularly as it relates to their Web activity. Cookies are typically used by Web 
sites to save customized settings for that site and can also be used for advertising purposes. 
Another item of possible concern is spyware (software installed without the user’s permis-
sion that sends information to others). Unless an e-mail message is encrypted, it should not 
be assumed to be completely private.
Chapter Objective 5:
List several ways to com-
municate over the Internet, 
in addition to e-mail.
Chapter Objective 6:
List several useful activities 
that can be performed via 
the Web.
Chapter Objective 7:
Discuss censorship and 
privacy and how they are 
related to Internet use.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

136
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
R EVI EW ACTIVITI E S
Instructions: Match each key term on the left with the definition on the right that best describes it.
 1.        A learning environment in which the student is physically located away from the 
instructor and other students; commonly, instruction and communications take place 
via the Web.
 2.        A type of Internet connection in which the computer or other device is connected to 
the Internet continually.
 3.        A small file stored on a user’s hard drive by a Web server; commonly used to 
 identify personal preferences and settings for that user.
 4.        A software program used by a search site to retrieve matching Web pages from a 
search database.
 5.        A type of Internet connection in which the computer or other device must dial 
up and connect to a service provider’s computer via telephone lines before being 
 connected to the Internet.
 6.        A recorded audio or video file that can be played or downloaded via the Web.
 7.        A word typed in a search box on a search site to locate information on the Internet.
 8.       The collection of social networking sites and other communications channels used to 
transmit or share information with a broad audience.
 9.        The collection of Web pages available through the Internet.
 10.        The largest and most well-known computer network, linking millions of computers 
all over the world.
Instructions: Circle T if the statement is true, F if the statement is false, or write the best answer 
in the space provided. Answers for the self-quiz are located in the References and Resources 
Guide at the end of the book.
 1. T F When the Internet was first developed, it was called Mosaic.
 2. T F  On the Internet, an access provider and a content provider are essentially the same 
thing.
 3. T F With a direct connection, you need only open your browser to start your Internet session.
 4. T F A Wi-Fi hotspot is used to provide Internet access to individuals via a wireless connection.
 5. T F A Webinar is a Web site designed to allow individuals to easily create and publish blogs.
 6.        is a type of always-on broadband Internet service that transmits data over standard 
telephone lines but does not tie up your phone line.
 7. With a(n)       search, keywords are typed into the search box; with a(n)       
search, users select categories to find matching Web pages.
 8. A(n)       is a Web site (such as Facebook) designed to enable a community of individuals 
to communicate and exchange information.
KEY TERM 
MATCHING
 a. cookie
 b. dial-up connection
 c. direct connection
 d. distance learning
 e. Internet
 f. keyword
 g. podcast
 h. search engine
 i. social media
 j. World Wide Web (WWW)
SELF-QUIZ
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
137
  9. With a(n)       , people bid on products over the Internet, and the highest bidder purchases 
the item.
10. Match each Internet application to its possible situation, and write the corresponding number 
in the blank to the left of each situation. 
  
a.       To communicate with a friend in a different state.
  
b.       To pay only as much as you specify for an item purchased through the Internet.
  
c.       To pay a bill without writing a check.
  
d.       To find Web pages containing information about growing your own Bonsai trees.
 1.  Match each type of Internet access to its description, and write the corresponding number in the 
blank to the left of each description. 
 
a.        A common type of home broadband connection; does not use standard phone lines.
 
b.        Provides access to the Internet via a very fast fiber-optic network.
 
c.         Accesses the Internet via standard phone lines and ties up your phone; the 
 maximum speed is 56 Kbps.
 2. What would each of the following searches look for?
 
a. hot AND dogs                                         
 
b. snorkel*                                         
 
c.  text: “Internet privacy” domain:*.gov                               
 3.  List three different sets of keywords that could be used to search for information on how to 
maintain a trumpet.
 4. Explain the difference between a blog, a wiki, and a podcast.
 5. List one advantage and one disadvantage of the use of Web site cookies.
1.  Twittering became virtually an overnight sensation, but some question its usefulness. Do you 
want to know the routine activities your friends (or other individuals you choose to follow) are 
doing during the day? Is it useful information to tweet that your bus is stuck in traffic or having 
a bad day? Do you follow anyone on Twitter or tweet regularly? Why or why not? Because 
Twitter updates have to be very short, some may think that twittering on the job does not take 
up enough time to be a concern, but what about the distraction factor? Should employers allow 
employees to use Twitter, Facebook, and other popular online activities during work hours? 
Why or why not?
2.  Some courtrooms today are becoming high-tech, such as using videoconferencing systems to 
allow defendants and witnesses to participate in proceedings from remote locations. Allowing 
defendants to participate remotely from the jail facility saves travel time and expense, as well 
as eliminates any risk of flight. Remote testimony from witnesses can save both time and 
money. But, could having defendants and witnesses participate remotely affect the jury’s 
perspective? If the videoconference takes place via the Internet, can it be assured that 
 proceedings are confidential? Do you think the benefits of these systems outweigh any 
potential disadvantages?
 1. Online banking 
 2. E-mail
 3. Internet searching
 4. Online auction
EXERCISES
 1. Conventional dial-up
 2. BoF
 3. Cable
DISCUSSION 
QUESTIONS
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

138
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
P R OJ E CTS
 1. Social Network Addiction As discussed in the chapter, social networks (such as Facebook 
and Google+) are very popular with individuals. However, it has become apparent recently that 
some individuals are moving from casual social networking use to compulsive or addictive 
behavior.
For this project, investigate either Facebook addiction or Internet addiction. How com-
mon is it? What are some of the warning signs? Is there an actual medical disorder associated 
with it? If so, what is it and how is it treated? Find one example in a news or journal article of 
a person who was “addicted” to using a social networking site or other online activity—why 
was their behavior considered addictive? Were they able to modify their behavior? Have you 
ever been concerned about becoming addicted to any Internet activities? At the conclusion 
of your research, prepare a one-page summary of your findings and opinions and submit it to 
your instructor.
 2. Online Travel Planning Planning and booking travel arrangements online is a very popular 
Internet activity today and there are a number of sites that can be used.
For this project, review two popular travel sites, such as Expedia.com and Travelocity.com, 
to see what services they offer and how easy it is to locate the information needed to plan and 
book a flight via those sites. Select a destination and use one of the sites to obtain a quote for a 
particular flight on a particular day. Next, go to the Web site for the airline of the flight and use 
the site to obtain a quote for the same flight. Is there a difference in price or flight availability? 
Could you make a reservation online through both sites? Would you feel comfortable book-
ing an entire vacation yourself online, or are there services that a travel agent could provide 
that you feel would be beneficial? Do you think these sites are most appropriate for making 
business travel plans or vacation plans, or are they suited to both? At the conclusion of your 
research, prepare a one-page summary of your findings and submit it to your instructor.
 3. Web Searching Search sites can be used to find Web pages containing specific information, 
and there are strategies that can be used to make Web searching an efficient and useful 
experience.
For this project, go to the Google search site and perform the following searches, then 
submit your results and printouts to your instructor. (Note: Some of the answers will vary from 
student to student.)
 
a.  Search for rules. How many pages were found? What is the name of the first page in the list 
of hits? Next, search for backgammon rules. How many pages were found? Use the hits to 
find a picture of how a backgammon board is initially set up, then, print that page.
 
b.  Search to find a recipe for Buffalo Chicken Wings; a map of where your house, apartment, 
or dorm is located; and the ZIP Code for 200 N. Elm Street, Hinsdale, IL, and print the 
pages containing this information.
 
c.  Go to the Advanced Search option. Use the form fields to perform a search for Web pages 
that contain all of the words hiking trails Sierras, do not contain the word horse, and have 
the domain .gov. After the hits are displayed, record the actual search phrase that is listed in 
the search box along with the name and URL of the first page displayed in the list of hits.
HOT TOPICS
SHORT ANSWER/
RESEARCH
HANDS ON
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 3 THE INTERNET AND THE WORLD WIDE WEB
139
 4. Paid Bloggers Blogs are traditionally online personal journals where the blogger expresses 
his or her opinion on desired topics. Unlike professional journalists, bloggers typically post 
because they want to, not because they have been hired to do so. However, as discussed in 
the chapter, bloggers are increasingly being paid or “sponsored” to blog. Is this ethical? If a 
blogger is paid to post his or her honest opinion about a product or service, does that lessen 
the credibility of that post? Does it change your opinion if the blogger reveals that it is a spon-
sored blog? If you based a purchase on a review posted in a blog that you later found out was 
sponsored, would you feel misled? How, if at all, do sponsored posts affect the blogosphere as 
a whole?
For this project, form an opinion about the ethical ramifications of paid blogging and be 
prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discussion group, in a class chat 
room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). You may also be asked to 
write a short paper expressing your opinion.
 5. Advanced Search Most search sites today include advanced features to help you more effi-
ciently find the information you are searching for.
For this project, select one search site (such as Google or Bing) and research the 
advanced search options the site supports. How does the advanced search work—do you 
have to type special symbols or is there a form that can be used? What operators does the 
site support? Are you able to search for only pages that were recently updated? Are you able 
to find pages that link to a specified Web page? Can you search for specified file types, such 
as images or videos? Do you find the advanced search options for your selected site useful? 
Share your findings and opinions with the class in the form of a short presentation. The pre-
sentation should not exceed 10 minutes and should make use of one or more presentation aids, 
such as a whiteboard, handouts, or a computer-based slide presentation (your instructor may 
provide additional requirements). You may also be asked to submit a summary of the presenta-
tion to your instructor.
 6. In a Cyber War, Is it Ethical to Kill Enemy Hackers? Cyber wars are heating up. Foreign 
governments (particularly China) are continually being accused of trying to hack into the 
computer systems of both the U.S. government and high-tech companies. Cybersecurity is a 
very important issue today and is a source of ongoing discussion between countries such as the 
United States and China. For instance, cybersecurity was high on the agenda for the meeting 
between President Obama and Chinese President Xi Jinping in 2013 following a government 
report that found nearly 40 Pentagon weapons programs and almost 30 other defense technolo-
gies were compromised by cyber intrusions from China. And, earlier that year, a cybersecurity 
firm linked a secret Chinese military unit to years of cyberattacks against U.S. companies. 
While China’s government denies any involvement and the countries are not officially at war, 
how do actual wars and cyber wars differ? Is a country hacking into another country’s com-
puter systems an act of war? If so, should those hackers be fair targets for retaliation? Just 
as the military is permitted to kill enemy soldiers attacking its country or its citizens, should 
they also kill enemy hackers? Is cyber warfare any less of an actual conflict than ground or 
air-based physical combat? What about computer programmers that control the drones and 
missles used in combat—are they fair targets?
Pick a side on this issue, form an opinion and gather supporting evidence, and be pre-
pared to discuss and defend your position in a classroom debate or in a 1–2 page paper, 
depending on your instructor’s directions.
ETHICS IN ACTION
PRESENTATION/
DEMONSTRATION
BALANCING ACT
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

140
INTRODUCTION
Stephen Rose is the 
Senior Product Marketing 
and Community Manager 
for the Windows 
Commercial team 
at Microsoft. Before 
joining Microsoft, he 
was the Senior Tech 
Correspondent for Fast 
Company Magazine and 
an IT consultant. He has 
been a Microsoft Certified 
Systems Engineer and 
Microsoft Certified Trainer 
for 20 years, as well as a 
two-time Microsoft Most 
Valuable Professional 
(MVP). Stephen has a 
Bachelor of Arts degree 
and holds multiple 
technical certifications, 
including MCSE, MCP+I, 
MCT, MCTIP, A+, Net+, 
Security+, Linux+, 
Project+, and PMI.
A conversation with STEPHEN ROSE
Senior Product Marketing and Community Manager, Windows Commercial, 
Microsoft
 
“
  
. . . The fact that people want their data to synch across 
multiple devices from the cloud is a huge game changer.”
My Background . . .
It’s funny how things work out. I received a bachelor’s degree in Film and Video production from 
Columbia College in Chicago in the late ’80s. By 1996, I was burned-out and decided to follow my 
passion for computers and IT by becoming a technical trainer with New Horizons. Within two years 
I got my MCT and MCSE, and I started my own IT consulting company that designed, built, and 
managed software and services for companies worldwide (including many Fortune 500 companies) 
for 15 years. I’m now the Senior Product Marketing and Community Manager for the Windows 
Commercial team at Microsoft. There are 22.6 million IT pros in the world and my job is to help sup-
port them within the workplace. I oversee and manage the Windows content on Microsoft TechNet, 
as well as on a number of forums, newsletters, and blogs. I also speak at conferences, roundtables, 
and the North American and European Springboard Series Tours.
It’s Important to Know . . .
Apps are moving to the cloud.  While individuals have used Web mail and other cloud products for 
some time, businesses are now moving into the cloud, which will dramatically change the business 
model for many companies. With Web-based apps, virtualized desktops, and more, the computer is 
becoming just a vessel to connect you to the Internet and your data. Understanding the cloud, as well 
as where and when it makes sense to use it, is key to being a successful IT pro.
Software is not always a one-size-fits-all situation. Apps will need to run on many different form 
factors, such as phones, tablets, and touch-based devices, in addition to laptops and desktops. And 
these devices are not interchangeable. In addition, an overblown app on a device without a keyboard 
can be hard to use—if an app is difficult to use, no one will adopt it.
Computers are inherently secure. It is the choices that users make (such as clicking on links in 
e-mails and downloading music, movies, and software illegally) that make them unsecure. If users 
use their best judgment when surfing the Web, they will be safer. If something sounds too good to 
be true, it usually is. At Microsoft, we are adding many new features to our operating system and 
browser to help users make smart decisions.
How I Use this Technology . . .
I travel around the world and need my computing resources as I travel. One of my favorite features 
in Windows 8 is Direct Access, which automatically connects me to my company intranet without 
having to log into a secure VPN connection with tokens and pin numbers. For instance, I recently sat 
down at a Starbucks in Prague, turned on my Windows 8 laptop, and within seconds I was not only 
connected to the Wi-Fi network but also to my key internal Web sites. From Prague to Redmond in 
a matter of seconds without doing anything but turning on my PC. It is a seamless experience. As I 
have heard from so many end users over the years, “I don’t care how it works. I just want it to work.” 
I also use several laptops, so products like OneNote and Sharepoint are key to ensuring that all my 
data is on multiple devices and synched automatically.
Software
expert insight on...
Courtesy Microsoft, Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXPERT INSIGHT ON SOFTWARE
141
What the Future Holds . . .
The cloud is one of the major technologies changing our future. It is going 
to dramatically change how we do business and how we perceive data. 
The physical PC is no longer part of the equation and the idea of “my 
data anywhere on the planet from any computer” is very powerful. Not 
storing data locally reduces risk, lowers costs, and adds more productivity 
via flexibility. In addition, cloud computing—along with new form factors, 
the need for social media accessibility, the emergence of location-aware 
applications, and the increased availability of app stores—have changed 
how we view devices. The lines between tablets, smartphones, and PCs 
are already blurring. With the addition of system on a chip (SoC), there 
will be an increase in the amount and types of devices that the end user is 
impacted by.
Cloud computing will also impact software development. The fact 
that people want their data to synch across multiple devices from the 
cloud is a huge game changer. Knowing HTML5 will be critical in the 
development of apps located in the cloud. HTML5 will also have a big 
impact on end users.
Tablets and smartphones are currently replacing laptops for many tasks and I expect 
that trend to continue in the future. These smart devices allow us to be more informed 
on many aspects of our life. They allow us to be more nimble and to take advantage of 
opportunities that 10 years ago were unheard of. 
My Advice to Students . . .
Remember that technology shapes us but, like any tool, it’s how we leverage it and use it 
for the better that is important. 
Discussion Question
Stephen Rose believes that cloud computing will impact both individuals and businesses 
and change how we perceive data and do business. Think about the computing and com-
munications tasks you use today. What is the benefit of being able to perform them via 
the cloud? Are there any disadvantages? Do you currently use multiple devices to access 
your data and apps? If so, are the data and apps stored in the cloud, on each device, or 
both? If not, would the ability to access your data and apps via any device, anywhere, be 
an advantage in your life? Would a cloud-based world change how you use data or apps 
on a daily basis? If a person or business decides not to utilize the cloud, will this be a 
disadvantage for that person or business? Why or why not? Be prepared to discuss your 
position (in class, via an online class discussion group, in a class chat room, or via a class 
blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). You may also be asked to write a short 
paper expressing your opinion.
>For more information about Microsoft, visit www.microsoft.com. For resources for 
Windows and other Microsoft software, visit www.microsoft.com/springboard and 
windowsteamblog.com/windows/b/springboard. Follow the Springboard Series on 
TechNet via Twitter @MSSpringboard. 
 . . . technology 
shapes us but, like 
any tool, it’s how we 
leverage it and use it 
for the better that is 
important. 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

outline
Overview
Why Be Concerned About Network 
and Internet Security?
Unauthorized Access and 
Unauthorized Use
Hacking
War Driving and Wi-Fi Piggybacking
Interception of Communications
Protecting Against Unauthorized 
Access and Unauthorized Use
Access Control Systems
Firewalls, Encryption, and Virtual 
Private Networks (VPNs)
Additional Public Hotspot Precautions
Sensible Employee Precautions
Computer Sabotage
Botnets
Computer Viruses and Other Types 
of Malware
Denial of Service (DoS) Attacks
Data, Program, or Web Site Alteration
Protecting Against Computer Sabotage
Security Software
Other Security Precautions
Online Theft, Online Fraud, and 
Other Dot Cons
Theft of Data, Information, and Other 
Resources
Identity Theft, Phishing, Social Media 
Hacks, and Pharming
Online Auction Fraud
Other Internet Scams
Protecting Against Online Theft, 
Online Fraud, and Other Dot Cons
Protecting Against Data and 
Information Theft
Protecting Against Identity Theft, 
Phishing, Social Media Hacks, and 
Pharming
Protecting Against Online Auction 
Fraud and Other Internet Scams
Personal Safety Issues
Cyberbullying and Cyberstalking
Online Pornography
Protecting Against Cyberbullying, 
Cyberstalking, and Other Personal 
Safety Concerns
Safety Tips for Adults
Safety Tips for Children and Teens
Network and Internet Security 
Legislation
Network and 
Internet Security
After completing this chapter, you will be 
able to do the following:
  1.  Explain why computer users should be 
concerned about network and Internet 
security.
  2.  List several examples of unauthorized 
access and unauthorized use.
  3.  Explain several ways to protect against 
unauthorized access and unauthorized 
use, including access control systems, 
ﬁ rewalls, and encryption.
  4.  Provide several examples of computer 
sabotage.
  5.  List how individuals and businesses can 
 protect against computer sabotage.
  6.  Discuss online theft, identity theft, spoof-
ing, phishing, and other types of dot cons.
  7.  Detail steps an individual can take to pro-
tect against online theft, identity theft, 
spooﬁ ng, phishing, and other types of dot 
cons.
  8.  Identify personal safety risks associated 
with Internet use.
  9.  List steps individuals can take to safeguard 
their personal safety when using the 
Internet.
10.  Discuss the current state of network and 
Internet security legislation.
chapter 4
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OV E RV I EW
A
s discussed in the last few chapters, networks and the Internet help many of 
us be more efficient and effective workers, as well as add convenience and 
 enjoyment to our personal lives. However, there is a downside, as well. The wide-
spread use of home and business networks and the Internet increases the risk of 
unauthorized computer access, theft, fraud, and other types of computer crime. In 
addition, the vast amount of business and personal data stored on computers acces-
sible via company networks and the Internet increases the chances of data loss due 
to crime or employee errors. Some online activities can even put your personal safety 
at risk, if you are not careful.
This chapter looks at a variety of security concerns stemming from the use of 
computer networks and the Internet in our society, including unauthorized access 
and use, computer viruses and other types of sabotage, and online theft and fraud. 
Safeguards for each of these concerns are also covered, with an explanation of pre-
cautions that can be taken to reduce the chance that these security problems will 
happen to you. Personal safety issues related to the Internet are also discussed, and 
the  chapter closes with a look at legislation related to network and Internet security. ■
WHY BE CONCERNED ABOUT NETWORK 
AND INTERNET SECURITY?
From a computer virus making your computer function abnormally, to a hacker using 
your personal information to make fraudulent purchases, to someone harassing you 
online in a discussion group, a variety of security concerns related to computer networks 
and the Internet exist. Many Internet security concerns today can be categorized as 
computer crimes. Computer crime—sometimes referred to as cybercrime—includes any 
illegal act involving a computer. Many computer crimes today are committed using the 
Internet or another computer network and include theft of financial assets or information, 
manipulating data (such as grades or account information), and acts of sabotage (such as 
releasing a computer virus or shutting down a Web server). Cybercrime is an important 
security concern today. It is a multibillion-dollar business that is often performed by 
seasoned criminals. In fact, according to the FBI, organized crime organizations in many 
countries are increasingly turning to computer crime to target millions of potential victims 
easily, and phishing attacks and other Internet scams (discussed shortly) are expected to 
increase in reaction to the recent troubled economy. These and other computer crimes that 
are carried out via the Internet or another computer network are discussed in this chapter. 
Other types of computer crime (such as using a computer to create counterfeit currency or 
make illegal copies of a DVD) are covered in Chapter 5.
>Computer crime. Any illegal act involving a computer.
© iStockphoto/Petoo 
According to a recent Norton 
Cybercrime Report, the total cost 
of cybercrime is now estimated to 
be $110 billion per year worldwide 
and nearly $21 billion in the United 
States alone with an average loss 
of $290 per person.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

144
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Unauthorized access. Gaining access to a computer, mobile device, network, file, or other resource without permission. >Unauthorized use. 
Using a computing resource for unapproved activities. >Hacking. Using a computer to break into another computer system.
With some security concerns, such as when a spyware program changes your 
 browser’s home page, the consequence may be just an annoyance. In other cases, such as 
when someone steals your identity and purchases items using your name and credit card 
number, the consequences are much more serious. And, with the growing use of wireless 
networks, social media, cloud  computing, mobile computing, and individuals accessing 
 company networks remotely—paired with an increasing number of security and privacy 
regulations that businesses need to comply with—network and Internet security has never 
been more important. Consequently, all computer users should be aware of the security 
concerns surrounding computer network and Internet use, and they should take appropriate 
precautions. The most common types of security risks related to network and Internet use, 
along with some corresponding precautions, are discussed throughout this chapter.
UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS AND UNAUTHORIZED USE
Unauthorized access occurs whenever an individual gains access to a computer, mobile 
device, network, file, or other resource without permission—typically by hacking into the 
resource. Unauthorized use involves using a computing resource for unauthorized activi-
ties. Often, they happen at the same time, but unauthorized use can occur when a user is 
authorized to access a particular computer or network but is not authorized for the particu-
lar activity the user performs. For instance, while a student may be authorized to access 
the Internet via a campus computer lab, some use—such as viewing  pornography—would 
likely be deemed off-limits. If so, viewing that content from a school computer would be 
considered unauthorized use. For employees of some  companies, checking personal e-mail 
or visiting personal Facebook pages at work might be classi-
fied as unauthorized use.
Unauthorized access and many types of unauthorized 
use are criminal offenses in the United States and many 
other countries. They can be committed by both insiders 
(people who work for the company whose computers are 
being accessed) and outsiders (people who do not work 
for that company). Whether or not a specific act constitutes 
unauthorized use or is illegal depends on the circumstances, 
as well as the specific company or institution involved. 
To explain acceptable computer use to their employees, 
students, or other users, many organizations and educational 
institutions publish guidelines for behavior, often called 
codes of conduct (see Figure 4-1). Codes of conduct typically 
address  prohibited activities, such as playing games, 
installing personal software, violating copyright laws, 
causing harm to computers or the network, and snooping in 
other people’s files.
Hacking
Hacking refers to the act of breaking into a computer or network. It can be performed in 
person by hacking into a computer the hacker has physical access to, but it is more often 
performed via the Internet or another network. Unless authorized (such as when a com-
pany hires a professional hacker to test the security of its system), hacking in the United 
States and many other countries is a crime.
FIGURE 4-1
A sample code of 
conduct.
<
© 2013 Monroe Community College. All Rights Reserved 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
145
Typically, the motivation for hacking is to steal data, sabotage a computer system, or 
perform some other type of illegal act. In particular, the theft of consumer data (such as credit 
card numbers) has increased dramatically over the past several years—more than 1,600 data 
breaches were discovered in 2012. Some of the most notable recent breaches include the 
2013 theft of prepaid debit card numbers, which were then programmed with large bal-
ances and used in simultaneous ATM withdrawals by a gang of hackers and which resulted 
in a $45 million global heist; the 2012 theft of 3.6 million Social Security numbers, along 
with names, addresses, credit card numbers, and other sensitive information, from the South 
Carolina Department of Revenue computer system; and the 2012 Zappos.com data breach, 
which resulted in hackers gaining access to the names, addresses, phone numbers, and the 
last four digits of credit card numbers of 24 million customers. Another growing trend is to 
hack into a computer and “hijack” it for use in an illegal or unethical act, such as taking over 
an individual’s computer, spying via a webcam, generating spam, or hosting pornographic 
Web sites. Hackers are also increasingly aiming attacks at very specific individuals, such as 
product designers and other individuals who have access to valuable corporate data.
In addition to being a threat to individuals and businesses, hacking is also considered 
a very serious threat to national security in the United States. The increased number of sys-
tems that are controlled by computers and 
are connected to the Internet, along with the 
continually improving abilities of hackers, 
has led to an increased risk of cyberterror-
ism—where terrorists launch attacks via the 
Internet. Current concerns include attacks by 
individual terrorists, as well as by other coun-
tries, against the computers controlling vital 
systems; vital systems include the nation’s 
power grids, banks, and water filtration facili-
ties, as well as computers related to national 
defense, the airlines, and the stock market. In 
fact, President Obama and Chinese President 
Xi Jinping began serious discussion about 
cybersecurity in 2013 following a govern-
ment report that found nearly 40 Pentagon 
weapons programs and almost 30 other 
defense technologies were compromised 
by cyber intrusions from China. President 
Obama has declared that “cyber threat is one 
of the most serious economic and national 
security challenges we face as a nation.”
Today, hackers often gain access via 
a wireless network. This is because wire-
less networks are widely used and they are 
easier to hack into than wired networks. In 
fact, it is possible to gain access to a wireless 
 network just by being within range (about 
100 to 300 feet, depending on the Wi-Fi stan-
dard being used) of a wireless access point, 
unless the access point is sufficiently pro-
tected. Although security  features are built 
into wireless routers and other  networking 
hardware, they are typically  not enabled by 
default. As a result, many wireless networks 
belonging to businesses and  individuals are 
left  unsecured. Securing a Wi-Fi network is 
discussed shortly.
Moshe Vardi, Rice University, Co-Chair of the ACM 
Globalization and Offshoring of Software Taskforce
Is there a national security risk to outsourcing/
offshoring software development?
Offshoring magnifies existing risks and creates 
new and often poorly understood threats. When 
businesses offshore work, they increase not only 
their own business-related risks (e.g., intellectual 
property theft) but also risks to national security 
and to individuals’ privacy. While it is unlikely these 
risks will deter the growth of offshoring, businesses 
and nations should employ strategies to mitigate 
the risks. Businesses have a clear incentive to 
manage these new risks to suit their own interests, 
but nations and individuals often have little 
awareness of the exposures created. For example, 
many commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) systems are 
developed offshore, making it extremely difficult 
for buyers to understand all of the source and 
application code in the systems. This creates the 
possibility that a hostile nation or nongovernmental 
hostile agent (such as a terrorist or criminal) could 
compromise these systems. Individuals are also 
often exposed to loss of privacy or identity theft 
due to the number of business processes being 
offshored today and managed under laws that 
are much less restrictive than in most developed 
countries.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Courtesy ACM
According to a recent study, the 
total cost per data breach in the 
United States is $5.4 million—
the highest of any country.
TIP
A number of recent data breaches 
have been performed by the 
hacktivist group Anonymous.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

146
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>War driving. Driving around an area with a Wi-Fi-enabled computer or mobile device to find a Wi-Fi network to access and use without 
authorization. >Wi-Fi piggybacking. Accessing an unsecured Wi-Fi network from your current location without authorization.
War Driving and Wi-Fi Piggybacking
Unauthorized use of a Wi-Fi network is called war driving or Wi-Fi piggybacking, 
depending on the location of the hacker at the time. War driving typically involves  driving 
in a car with a portable device looking for unsecured Wi-Fi networks to connect to. Wi-Fi 
piggybacking refers to accessing someone else’s unsecured Wi-Fi network from the hack-
er’s current location (such as inside his or her home, outside a Wi-Fi hotspot  location, 
or near a local business). Both war driving and Wi-Fi piggybacking are ethically—if not 
legally—questionable acts. They can also lead to illegal behavior, such as individuals 
deciding to use data (credit card numbers, for instance) they run across while war  driving 
for fraudulent purposes, as was the case with two men who illegally accessed a Lowe’s 
wireless network during a war drive and later decided to steal credit card numbers via that 
network. War driving and Wi-Fi piggybacking can also have security risks, both for the 
hacker and the owner of the Wi-Fi network that is being used. For instance, they both risk 
the introduction of computer viruses (either intentionally or unintentionally) and unauthor-
ized access of the data located on their computers. In addition, the owner may experience 
reduced performance or even the cancellation of his or her Internet service if the ISP limits 
bandwidth or the number of computers allowed to use a single Internet connection.
In some countries, such as the UK, the laws are clear that unauthorized access of a 
Wi-Fi connection is illegal. In the United States, federal law is not as clear, although some 
states (such as Michigan) have made using a Wi-Fi  connection without permission illegal. 
In fact, a Michigan man was found guilty, fined, and sentenced to community service in 
2007 for using the free Wi-Fi service offered to customers at a local café because he was 
using the service from his parked car located on the street outside the café to check his 
e-mail on a regular basis. And, at the time of this writing, Google was being accused, via a 
privacy class-action lawsuit, of collecting and storing private data (including e-mails, user-
names, passwords, and documents) from unsecured home Wi-Fi networks in the United 
States and Europe while capturing data for its Street View mapping system.
Advocates of war driving and Wi-Fi piggybacking state that, unless individuals or 
 businesses protect their access points, they are welcoming others to use them. Critics 
compare that logic to that of an unlocked front door—you cannot legally enter a home just 
because the front door is unlocked. Some wireless network owners do leave their access 
points unsecured on purpose and some communities are creating a collection of wireless 
access points to provide wireless Internet access to everyone in that community. However, 
it is difficult—if not impossible—to tell if an unsecured network is that way intentionally, 
unless the hotspot information states that it is a free public Wi-Fi hotspot. To help you 
locate public Wi-Fi hotspots, a number of services are available, such as browser-based 
mapping applications and smartphone apps that identify free and fee-based hotspots for 
a specific geographical location (see the Wi-Fi Finder app in Figure 4-2). Mobile apps 
have the advantage of automatically determining your geographical location to display 
information about hotspots in your current geographical area.
Some feel the ethical distinction of using an unsecured wireless network is deter-
mined by the amount of use, believing that it is acceptable to borrow someone’s Internet 
connection to do a quick e-mail check or Google search, but that continually using a 
neighbor’s Internet connection to avoid paying for your own is crossing over the line. 
Others feel that allowing outsiders to share an Internet connection is acceptable use, as 
long as the subscriber does not charge the outsider for that access. Still others believe 
that an Internet connection is intended for use only by the subscriber and that sharing it 
with others is unfair to the subscriber’s ISP. This issue is beginning to be addressed by 
the courts and ISPs, and some answers regarding the legality of “Wi-Fi borrowing” and 
FIGURE 4-2
Wi-Fi finders. Online 
mapping services and 
smartphone apps can 
show you the available 
Wi-Fi hotspots for a 
particular geographic 
area.
<
© Chardchanin/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy of JiWire
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
147
Internet connection sharing will likely be forthcoming in the near future. However, the 
ethical questions surrounding this issue may take longer to resolve.
Interception of Communications
Instead of accessing data stored on a computer via hacking, some criminals gain unauthor-
ized access to data, files, messages, VoIP calls, and other content as it is being sent over 
the Internet. For instance, unencrypted (unsecured) messages, files, logon information, and 
more sent over a wireless network (such as while using a public Wi-Fi hotspot or over an 
unsecured home or business Wi-Fi network) can be captured and read by anyone within 
range using software designed for that purpose. Once intercepted, the data can be used for 
unintended or fraudulent purposes.
Although it is unlikely that anyone would be interested in intercepting personal e-mail 
or text messages sent to friends and relatives, proprietary corporate information and sensitive 
personal information (such as credit card numbers and Web site logon information) is at risk 
if it is sent unsecured over the Internet or over a wireless home or corporate network. The 
widespread use of wireless networks with both home and office computers, as well as with 
smartphones and other portable devices, has opened up new opportunities for data intercep-
tion. For instance, the data on mobile devices with Bluetooth capabilities enabled can be 
accessed by other Bluetooth devices that are within range and any sensitive data stored on 
a smartphone can be accessed by a hacker if the phone is connected to an unsecured Wi-Fi 
network. With an increasing number of smartphone owners storing sensitive data (such as 
passwords for online banking and social networking sites, and credit card account numbers) 
on their devices (and less than half of owners securing their mobile devices with a pass-
word, according to one estimate), the risk of that data being intercepted is increasing.
A relatively recent trend is criminals intercepting credit and debit card information 
during the card verification process; that is, intercepting the data from a card in real time 
as a  purchase is being authorized. Often, this occurrs via packetsniffing software installed 
at payment terminals (such as restaurant cash registers or gas station credit/debit card 
 readers) by hackers—the packetsniffing software gathers data during transactions and then 
sends it to the hackers, who may then use it for fraudulent purposes.
PROTECTING AGAINST UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS 
AND UNAUTHORIZED USE
The first step in protecting against unauthorized access and unauthorized use of a computer 
system is controlling access to an organization’s facilities and computer networks to ensure 
that only authorized individuals are granted access. In addition, steps need to be taken to 
ensure that authorized individuals access only the resources that they are supposed to access.
Access Control Systems
Access control systems are used to control access to facilities, devices, computer networks, 
company databases, Web site accounts, and other assets. They can be identification systems, 
which verify that the person trying to access the facility or system is listed as an authorized 
user, and/or authentication systems, which determine whether or not the person attempting 
access is actually who he or she claims to be. In businesses, access control systems are 
often integrated into a comprehensive identity management (IDM) system designed to man-
age users’ access to enterprise systems, such as to grant them secure and appropriate access 
to the systems they are allowed to access in as convenient a manner as possible. An emerg-
ing trend is to use single sign-on (SSO) systems that grant employees access to a number 
of secure resources with a single authentication. The three most common types of access 
control systems are discussed next, followed by a discussion of additional considerations 
for controlling access to wireless networks. Some emerging control systems are discussed 
in the Trend box later in this chapter.
To prevent a hacker from obtaining 
your logon info from an unused 
(zombie) online account, delete your 
old accounts if you are no longer 
going to use them.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

148
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Possessed knowledge access system. An access control system that uses information only the individual should know to identify that individual.
>Password. A secret combination of characters used to gain access to a computer, computer network, or other resource.
Possessed Knowledge Access Systems
A possessed knowledge access system is an identification system that requires 
the individual requesting access to provide information that only the authorized 
user is supposed to know. Passwords and cognitive authentication systems fall 
into this category.
Passwords, the most common type of possessed knowledge, are secret 
words or character combinations associated with an individual. They are typi-
cally used in conjunction with a username (often a variation of the person’s 
first and/or last names or the individual’s e-mail address). Username/password 
combinations are often used to restrict access to networks, computers, Web sites, routers, 
and other computing resources—the user is granted access only after supplying the correct 
information. While usernames and e-mail addresses are not secret, passwords are and, for 
security purposes, typically appear as asterisks or dots as they are being entered so they 
cannot be viewed (see Figure 4-3). For some applications (such as ATM machines), a PIN 
or personal identification number—a secret combination of numeric digits selected by 
the user—is used instead of a password. Numeric passwords are also referred to as pass-
codes. Instead of traditional passwords, some systems (such as Windows 8 devices and 
 smartphone lock screens) can use picture passwords—typically gestures or patterns drawn 
on top of an image, such as a grid of dots or a photograph.
One of the biggest disadvantages of password-based systems is that any individual possess-
ing the proper password will be granted access to the system because the system recognizes the 
password, regardless of whether or not the person using the password is the authorized user, and 
passwords can be guessed or deciphered 
by a hacker or a hacker’s computer easily 
if secure password selection strategies are 
not applied. For example, many hackers 
are able to access networking hardware and 
databases because the system administrator 
passwords for those resources are still the 
default passwords (the ones assigned dur-
ing manufacturing) and so are commonly 
known; some insiders gain unauthorized 
access to systems using passwords  written 
down on sticky notes attached to a user’s 
monitor. In addition, passwords can be 
forgotten. Consequently, it is important to 
select passwords that are strong passwords 
but are also easy to remember without writ-
ing them down. Strong passwords are pass-
words that are at least eight characters long; 
use a combination of letters, numbers, and 
symbols; and do not form words found in 
the dictionary or that match the username 
that the  password is associated with. Some 
strategies for creating strong passwords are 
listed in Figure 4-4.
A growing trend in possessed knowl-
edge access systems is the use of cogni-
tive authentication systems instead of, or 
FIGURE 4-3
Passwords. 
Passwords are used 
to log on to computers, 
networks, Web sites, 
and other computing 
resources.
<
PASSWORD STRATEGIES
Make the password at least eight characters and include both uppercase and lowercase 
letters, as well as numbers and special symbols. 
Choose passwords that are not in a dictionary—for instance, mix numbers and special 
characters with abbreviations or unusual words you will remember but that do not 
conform to a pattern a computer can readily figure out.
Do not use your name, your kids’ or pets’ names, your address, your birthdate, or any 
other public information as your password.
Determine a passphrase that you can remember and use corresponding letters and 
symbols (such as the first letter of each word) for your password. For instance, the 
passphrase “My son John is five years older than my daughter Abby” could be used 
to remember the corresponding strong password “Msji5yotMd@”.
Develop a system using a basic password for all Web sites plus site-specific information 
(such as the first two letters of the site and a number you will remember) to create a 
different password for each site, but still ones you can easily remember. For instance, you 
can combine your dog’s name with the site initials followed by a number that is significant 
to you to form a password such as “RoverAM27” for Amazon.com.
Do not keep a written copy of the password in your desk or taped to your monitor. If you 
need to write down your password, create a password-protected file on your computer 
that contains all your passwords or use a password manager program.
Use a different password for your highly sensitive activities (such as online banking or 
stock trading) than for other Web sites. If a hacker determines your password on a low-
security site (which is easier to break into), he or she can use it on an account containing 
sensitive data if you use the same password on both accounts.
Change your passwords frequently—at least every 6 months.
FIGURE 4-4
Strategies for 
creating strong 
passwords.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
149
>Two-factor authentication. Using two different methods to authenticate a user. >Possessed object access system. An access control 
system that uses a physical object an individual has in his or her possession to identify that individual.
 
in conjunction with, usernames and passwords. Cognitive authentication systems use infor-
mation that an individual should know or can remember easily. Some systems use personal 
information about the individual (such as his or her city of birth, first school attended, or 
amount of home mortgage) that was pulled from public databases or the company data-
base and the individual must supply the correct answer in order to be granted access. Other 
systems (such as the password recovery systems used by many secure Web sites to verify 
individuals when they forget their password) allow the individual to supply answers to ques-
tions when the account is created and then the individual can supply those answers again for 
authentication purposes when needed.
Possessed knowledge systems are often used in conjunction with the possessed object 
access systems and biometric access systems that are discussed next. Using two different 
methods to authenticate a user is called two-factor authentication. Typically, the methods 
used are some type of possessed knowledge (something you know) along with either a pos-
sessed object (something you have) or a biometric feature (something you are). Two-factor 
authentication adds an additional level of security to an access control system 
because hackers are much less likely to be able to gain access to two different 
required factors. One emerging type of two-factor authentication uses a con-
ventional username/password combination in conjunction with a soft token (an 
electronic object available via something you already carry with you, such as 
a smartphone or credit card, instead of using a hard token, such as a USB key 
token). A soft token can be generated by a mobile app or by pressing a button 
on a credit card; it can also be sent via text message. A soft token supplies 
a one-time password (OTP), which must be entered in conjunction with your 
username/password in order to log on to the account. Two-factor authentication 
systems are common in many countries and their use is growing in the United 
States. For instance, many banks offer two-factor authentication for online and 
mobile banking, and it is an option for Google, Twitter, and Facebook users. In 
Facebook, for example, once two-factor authentication (called Login Approvals) 
is enabled, you will see the security code screen shown in Figure 4-5 when-
ever you log in with your Facebook logon information using a new browser or 
device; you will need to enter the OTP sent to your phone before you will be 
logged into your Facebook account. The disadvantage of two-factor authentica-
tion for businesses is that only one individual can access the account, unless the 
site (like Facebook) supports multiple users for a single account.
Possessed Object Access Systems
Possessed object access systems use physical objects for identification purposes and 
they are frequently used to control access to facilities (called physical access) and com-
puter systems (called logical access). Common types of possessed objects are smart 
Don’t select answers for the cognitive authentication questions used in the password recovery 
process of many Web sites that a hacker may be able to guess based on information found on your 
Facebook page or other online source. Instead, supply answers that you can remember but that also 
follow secure password rules. For instance, if your dog’s name is Spot, you could enter MDN1s$p0T 
as the answer to a question about your pet’s name and remember it as “My dog’s name is Spot.”
1.  An OTP is 
     sent to your 
     phone.
2.  Enter that code
     here when
     prompted.
Facebook © 2013
FIGURE 4-5
Facebook two-factor 
authentication. The 
first time you log on 
with a new device, you 
must supply the OTP 
sent to your mobile 
phone in addition to 
your conventional 
username/password 
combination.
<
To enable Facebook Login 
Approvals, go to your Security 
Settings on that site.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

150
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Biometric access system. An access control system that uses one unique physical characteristic of an individual (such as a fingerprint, a face, 
veins, or a voice) to authenticate that individual.
cards, RFID-encoded badges, 
 magnetic cards, and smart-
phones that are swiped through 
or placed close to a reader to 
be read (see Figure 4-6)—
emerging options include the 
use of an NFC-enabled ring 
or a  Bluetooth app (as dis-
cussed in Chapter 8) to auto-
matically lock and unlock your 
devices when they are within 
range. Possessed objects also 
include USB security keys or 
tokens (USB flash drives that 
are inserted into a computer 
to grant access to a network, 
to supply Web site usernames 
and passwords, or to provide 
other security  features), access cards, smartphones, and other devices used to supply the 
OTPs used to log on to Web sites. An emerging option is integrating OTP capabilities into 
the hardware of devices, such as laptops that include Intel Identity Protection Technology 
(IPT), in order to automatically authenticate the devices being used to log on to participat-
ing Web sites.
One disadvantage of using possessed objects is that they can be lost or, like passwords, 
can be used by an unauthorized individual if that individual has possession of the object. 
This disadvantage can be overcome by using a second factor, such as a username/password 
combination or a fingerprint or other type of biometric data.
Biometric Access Systems
Biometrics is the study of identifying individuals using measurable, unique physiological 
or behavioral characteristics. Biometric access systems typically identify users by a par-
ticular unique biological characteristic (such as a fingerprint, a hand, a face, veins, or an 
iris), although personal traits are used in some systems. For instance, some systems today 
use keystroke dynamics to recognize an individual’s unique typing pattern to authenticate 
the user as he or she types in his or her username and password; other systems identify an 
individual via his or her voice, signature, or gait. Because the means of access (usually a 
part of the body) cannot typically be used by anyone other than the authorized individual, 
biometric access systems can perform both identification and authentication. Biometric 
access systems are used for both physical and logical access (see Figure 4-7).
To identify and authenticate an individual, biometric access systems typically use a 
biometric reader (such as a fingerprint reader, finger or palm vein reader, or a hand geom-
etry reader) to identify an individual based on his or her fingerprint, veins, or hand image, 
or a digital camera to identify an individual based on his or her face or iris, in conjunc-
tion with software and a database. The system matches the supplied biometric data with 
the biometric data that was stored in the database when the individual was enrolled in the 
system and authenticates the individual if the data matches. To speed up the process, many 
biometric access systems require users to identify themselves first (such as by entering a 
username or swiping a smart card), and then the system uses that identifying information 
to verify that the supplied biometric data matches the identified person.
PHYSICAL ACCESS
The object (in this case a mobile phone containing an
appropriate microSD card) is read by a reader to provide
access to a facility.
LOGICAL ACCESS
The object (in this case a smart card employee badge) is
read by a reader (this reader is integrated into the
computer) to provide access to that computer system.
FIGURE 4-6
Possessed objects. 
Can grant access 
to both facilities and 
computer resources 
(including computers, 
networks, and 
Web sites).
<
Cuts or other changes to a 
finger may prevent access via 
a fingerprint reader. To avoid 
this problem, be sure to enroll 
more than one finger, if possible, 
whenever you are being set up in 
a system that uses a fingerprint 
reader—any of the registered 
fingers may be used for access.
TIP
Photos by HID Global Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
151
Biometric access systems are used to 
control access to secure facilities (such as 
corporate headquarters and prisons); to 
log users on to computers, networks, and 
secure Web sites (by using an external 
reader or camera or one built into the 
computer); to punch employees in and 
out of work; and to confirm consumers’ 
identities at ATM machines and check-
cashing 
services. 
Biometric 
readers 
are also increasingly being built into 
smartphones, external hard drives, USB 
flash drives, and other hardware to prevent 
unauthorized use of those devices.
In addition to being used to control 
access to computers, networks, and other 
resources, biometrics are an important part 
of the systems used by law enforcement 
agencies and the military to identify indi-
viduals. For instance, the border control 
systems in many countries use biometrics 
to identify citizens, travelers, criminal sus-
pects, and potential terrorists, and biometric 
identification systems are used extensively 
by law enforcement agencies and the mili-
tary in areas of conflict. For example, the 
Egyptian Hospital at Bagram Airfield in 
Afghanistan uses biometrics (fingerprints 
and iris scans—see Figure 4-7) to identify 
and track the records of incoming patients. 
In addition, face recognition systems (bio-
metric systems that use cameras and a 
database of photos to attempt to identify 
individuals as they walk by the cameras) are 
used in many airports and other public loca-
tions to help identify known terrorists and 
criminal suspects.
Biometric access systems are very accurate. In fact, the odds of two different individu-
als having identical irises is 1 in 1078 and the statistical probability of two different irises 
being declared a match are 1 in 1.2 million—even identical twins (who have the same DNA 
structure) have different fingerprints and irises. Systems based on biological characteristics 
(such as a person’s iris, hand geometry, face, or fingerprint) tend to be more accurate than 
those based on a personal trait (such as a person’s voice or written signature) because bio-
logical traits do not change, but physical traits might change (such as an individual’s voice, 
which might be affected by a cold, or a written signature, which might be affected by a bro-
ken wrist). In addition, biometric characteristics cannot be lost (like an access card), cannot 
be forgotten (like a password), and do not have to be pulled out of a briefcase or pocket (like 
an access card or other type of possessed object).
The primary disadvantages of biometric access systems are that much of the neces-
sary hardware and software is expensive, and the data used for authentication (such as a 
fingerprint or an iris image) cannot be reset if it is compromised. In addition, fingerprint 
and hand geometry systems typically require contact with the reader device (which some 
users might object to)—vein systems (that use infrared LED light in conjunction with a 
digital camera to identify individuals based on the veins in their fingers or palms) can be 
contactless systems.
FINGERPRINT READERS
Typically used to protect access to work
facilities or computers, to log on to secure Web
sites, for law enforcement identiﬁcation, and to
pay for products or services.
FACE RECOGNITION SYSTEMS
Typically used to control access to highly secure
areas, to identify individuals for law enforcement
purposes, and to log on to devices or apps, as
shown here.
VEIN READERS
Beginning to replace hand geometry readers to
control access to facilities (such as government
ofﬁces, prisons, and military facilities) and to
punch in and out of work.
IRIS RECOGNITION SYSTEMS
Typically used to control access to highly secure
areas and by the military, such as to identify
Afghan patients as shown here.
FIGURE 4-7
Types of biometric 
access and 
identification 
systems.
<
Photo by HID Global Corporation
Courtesy Gérard Vouillon/Morpho/Safran
© Denys Prykhodov/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy Sensible Visidon Ltd
U.S. Air Force photo/Senior Airman Chris Willis
Fingerprint biometrics is an integral 
part of Windows 8.1, supporting 
both touch and swipe fingerprint 
readers for a variety of authentication 
functions. 
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

152
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Firewall. A collection of hardware and/or software intended to protect a computer or computer network from unauthorized access.
Controlling Access to Wireless Networks
As already discussed, wireless networks—such as Wi-Fi networks—are 
less secure, in general, than wired networks. There are Wi-Fi security 
procedures, however, that can be used to protect against unauthorized use 
of a wireless network and to encrypt data sent over the network so that it 
is unreadable if it is intercepted. The original Wi-Fi security standard was 
WEP (Wired Equivalent Privacy). WEP is now considered insecure and 
has been replaced with the more secure WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access) 
and the even more secure WPA2 standards. However, Wi-Fi security 
features only work if they are enabled. Most Wi-Fi hardware today is 
shipped with the security features either switched off or enabled with a 
default password that is public knowledge; many network owners never 
change the default settings, leaving those networks unsecured.
To protect against unauthorized access, Wi-Fi network owners 
should secure their networks by changing the router or access point set-
tings to enable one of the encryption standards and to assign a network key 
or passphrase (essentially a password) that must be supplied in order to 
access the secured network. In addition, the name of the network (called 
the SSID) can be hidden from view by switching off the SSID broadcast 
feature. While hiding the network name will not deter serious hackers, it 
may reduce the number of casual war drivers or neighbors accessing the 
network. Once a network is secured, users who want to connect to that 
network need to either select or supply the network SSID name (depend-
ing on whether or not the SSID is being broadcast) and then enter the 
network key assigned to that network (see Figure 4-8). For an overview of 
how you can secure your wireless home router, see the How It Works box.
Firewalls, Encryption, and Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)
In addition to the access control systems just discussed, there are a number of other tools 
that can be used to prevent access to an individual computer or to prevent data from being 
intercepted in an understandable form during transit. These tools are discussed next.
Firewalls
A firewall is a security system that essentially creates a barrier between a computer or a 
network and the Internet in order to protect against unauthorized access. Firewalls are typi-
cally two-way, so they check all incoming (from the Internet) and outgoing (to the Internet) 
traffic and allow only authorized traffic to pass through the firewall. Personal firewalls are 
software programs designed to protect home computers from hackers attempting to access 
those computers through their Internet connections. All computers with direct Internet con-
nections (such as DSL, cable, satellite, or fixed wireless Internet access) should use a firewall 
(computers using dial-up Internet access only are relatively safe from hackers). Personal fire-
walls can be stand-alone programs (such as the free ZoneAlarm program or the free Comodo 
Firewall program shown in Figure 4-9); they are also built into many operating systems (such 
as the Windows Firewall program). Many routers, modems, and other pieces of networking 
hardware also include built-in firewall capabilities to help secure the  networks these devices 
are used with. Firewalls designed to protect business networks may be software-based, hard-
ware-based, or a combination of the two. They can typically be used both to prevent network 
access by hackers and other outsiders, as well as to control employee Internet access.
The user must supply the
appropriate network key or
passphrase in order to
connect to the network.
Because the SSID is being
broadcast, the user can select
the network from the list.
If the SSID isn’t broadcast, the
user must add the network
manually by using its SSID
in order to log on.
FIGURE 4-8
Accessing a Wi-Fi 
network. To access 
a secure network, 
the appropriate 
passphrase must be 
supplied.
<
If a legitimate application installed 
on your computer needs to access 
the Internet but cannot, check your 
firewall settings—you may need to 
unblock that program.
TIP
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
153
Firewalls work by closing down all external 
communications port addresses (the electronic 
connections that allow a computer to commu-
nicate with other computers) to unauthorized 
computers and programs. While business fire-
walls are set up by the network administrator 
and those settings typically cannot be changed 
by end users, individuals may choose to change 
the settings for their personal firewall. For exam-
ple, the user can choose to be notified when any 
application program on the computer is trying to 
access the Internet, to specify the programs that 
are allowed to access the Internet, or to block 
all incoming connections temporarily. In addi-
tion to protecting your computer from outside 
access, firewall programs also protect against 
any  spyware, computer viruses, or other mali-
cious programs located on your computer that 
are designed to send data from your computer 
FIREWALL SETTINGS
You can specify settings for individual
programs if desired.
FIREWALL ALERTS
You are notiﬁed
when a new
program requests
access.
FIGURE 4-9
A personal firewall.
<
Securing a Wireless Home Router
If you have a home wireless network, it is important to secure 
it properly so it cannot be used by unauthorized individuals. 
To open your router’s conﬁ guration screen to check or mod-
ify the security settings, type the IP address assigned to that 
device (such as 192.168.0.1—check your router’s documenta-
tion for its default IP address and username) in your browser’s 
Address bar. Use the default password to log on the ﬁ rst time, 
and then change the password using the conﬁ guration screen 
to prevent unauthorized individuals from changing your router 
settings. To secure the router, enter the network name (SSID) 
you want to have associated with the router, select the appro-
priate security mode (such as WPA or WPA2) to be used, and 
then type a secure passphrase to be used in order to log on 
to the network.
For additional security, MAC (Media Access Control) address 
ﬁ ltering can be used to allow only the devices whose network 
adapter MAC addresses you enter into your router’s settings 
access to the network. While MAC address ﬁ ltering should not 
be considered an alternative to using WPA or WPA2 encryp-
tion, it does add another layer of protection. Other precautions 
include designating speciﬁ c times (such as when you are away 
from home) that the router will deny access to any device, and 
reducing the strength of the wireless signal if its current strength 
reaches farther than you need.
H OW I T WO R K S
Use the router’s IP address
to display the router’s
conﬁguration screen.
Use this tab to enable
MAC address ﬁltering.
Use this tab to
change the
administrator
password used
to access this
conﬁguration
screen.
Type your
desired SSID
here.
Disable SSID
broadcast
here.
Select the
desired security
mode here.
Type your
desired
network
key here.
Courtesy D-Link Systems, Inc.
Courtesy Comodo Group, Inc.
Configuring a home router.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

154
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Encryption. A method of scrambling the contents of an e-mail message or a file to make it unreadable if an unauthorized user intercepts it. 
>Secure Web page. A Web page that uses encryption to protect information transmitted via that Web page. 
(such as credit card numbers, Web 
site passwords, and other sensitive 
data stored on your hard drive) to a 
hacker at the hacker’s request.
A related type of security sys-
tem increasingly being used by 
businesses today and included in 
many security suites is an intrusion 
prevention system (IPS). Whereas a 
 firewall tries to block unauthorized 
traffic, an IPS continuously moni-
tors and analyzes the traffic allowed 
by the firewall to try to detect pos-
sible attacks as they are occurring. 
If an attack is in progress, IPS soft-
ware can immediately block it.
After installing and setting up 
a firewall (and an IPS if needed), 
individuals and businesses should 
test their systems to determine if 
 vulnerabilities still exist. Individuals 
can use online security tests—such 
as the Symantec Security Check 
shown in Figure 4-10 or the tests at Gibson Research’s ShieldsUP! site—to check their 
computers; businesses may want to hire an outside consultant to perform a comprehensive 
security assessment.
Encryption
Encryption is a way of temporarily converting data into a form, known as a cipher, which 
is unreadable until it is decrypted (unscrambled) in order to protect that data from being 
viewed by unauthorized individuals. As previously discussed, secure Wi-Fi networks use 
encryption to secure data that is transferred over the network. Secure Web pages use 
encryption so that sensitive data (such as credit card numbers) sent via the Web page is 
protected as it travels over the Internet. The most common security protocols used with 
secure Web pages are Secure Sockets Layer (SSL) and Extended Validation Secure Sockets 
Layer (EV SSL). The URL for Web pages using either form of SSL begins with https: 
instead of http:.
Some Internet services, such as Skype (for VoIP calls) and Hushmail (for Web-based 
e-mails), use built-in encryption. Encryption can also be added manually to a file or an 
e-mail  message before it is sent over the Internet to ensure that the content is unreadable if 
the file or message is intercepted during transit. In addition to securing files during transit, 
encryption can be used to protect the files stored on a hard drive so they will be unreadable 
if opened by an unauthorized person (such as if a hacker accesses a file containing sensitive 
data or if a computer containing sensitive files is lost or stolen). Increasingly, computers 
and storage devices (particularly those used with portable computers) are self-encrypting; 
that is, encrypting all data automatically and invisibly to the user, as discussed in Chapter 5. 
Windows, Mac OS, and other current operating systems support encryption and businesses 
are increasingly turning to encryption to prevent data loss if a data breach should occur.
1.  Click to run the
     security scan.
2.  No threats were found.
FIGURE 4-10
Online security 
scans can check 
your system for 
vulnerabilities.
<
Sensitive information (such as 
credit card numbers, account 
numbers, and Web site 
passwords) should only be 
entered on secure Web pages 
to prevent that data from being 
intercepted by a criminal.
TIP
An emerging encryption standard 
that may eventually replace SSL 
is Transport Layer Security (TLS).
TIP
Courtesy Symantec
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
155
The two most common types of encryption in use today are public key encryption 
(often used with content being transmitted over the Internet, such as secure Web pages 
and encrypted e-mail) and private key encryption (most often used to encrypt files or the 
content of a hard drive or other device). Private key encryption, also called symmetric 
key encryption, uses a single secret private key (essentially a password) to both encrypt 
and decrypt the file or message. It is often used to encrypt files stored on an individual’s 
computer because the individual who selects the private key is likely the only one who will 
need to access those files. Private key encryption can also be used to send files securely 
to others, provided both the sender and recipient agree on the private key that will be used 
to access the file. Private key encryption capabilities are incorporated into a variety of 
programs today, including Microsoft Office, the WinZip file compression program, and 
Adobe Acrobat (the program used to create PDF files). To encrypt a document in Microsoft 
Word 2013, for instance, you select Info on the FILE tab, click Protect Document and 
select Encrypt with Password, type the desired password (private key) when prompted, and 
then save the file. To open that document again (or any copies of the file, such as those sent 
via e-mail), the password assigned to that file must be entered correctly.
Public key encryption, also called asymmetric key encryption, utilizes two encryp-
tion keys to encrypt and decrypt documents. Specifically, public key encryption uses a pair 
of keys (a private key and a public key) that are related mathematically to each other and 
have been assigned to a particular individual. An individual’s public key is not secret and is 
available for anyone to use, but the corresponding private key is secret and is used only by 
the individual to whom it was assigned. Documents or messages encrypted with a public 
key can only be decrypted with the matching private key.
Public/private key pairs are generated by the program being used to perform the 
encryption or they are obtained via the Internet through a Certificate Authority, such as 
VeriSign or Thawte. Once obtained, encryption keys are stored in your browser, e-mail 
program, and any other program with which they will be used—this is typically done auto-
matically for you when you obtain your key pairs. Obtaining a business public/private key 
pair usually requires a fee, but free key pairs for personal use are available through some 
Certificate Authorities. If a third-party encryption program is used (such as Pretty Good 
Privacy or PGP), the program typically takes care of obtaining and managing your keys 
for you.
To send someone an encrypted e-mail message or file using public key encryption, 
you need his or her public key. If that person has previously sent you his or her public 
key (such as via an e-mail message), it was likely stored by your e-mail program in your 
address book or contacts list, or by your encryption program in a central key directory used 
by that program. In either case, that public key is available whenever you want to send that 
person an encrypted document. If you do not already have the public key belonging to the 
individual to whom you want to send an encrypted e-mail or file, you will need to request 
it from that individual. Once the recipient’s public key has been used to encrypt the file or 
e-mail message and that document is received, the recipient uses his or her private key to 
decrypt the encrypted contents (see Figure 4-11).
To avoid the need to obtain the recipient’s public key before sending that person an 
encrypted e-mail, Web-based encrypted e-mail can be used. Web-based encrypted e-mail 
works similarly to regular Web-based e-mail (in which e-mail is composed and viewed 
on a Web page belonging to a Web-based e-mail provider), but Web-based encrypted 
e-mail systems use secure Web servers to host the Web pages that are used to compose 
and read e-mail messages. Some Web-based encrypted e-mail systems—such as the 
popular free Hushmail service that automatically encrypts all e-mail sent through the 
>Private key encryption. A type of encryption that uses a single key to encrypt and decrypt the file or message. >Public key encryption. A type 
of encryption that uses key pairs to encrypt and decrypt the file or message. 
Both Facebook and Twitter allow you 
to encrypt your connections—enable 
this option when you are using a 
public Wi-Fi hotspot to protect your 
account from hackers.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

156
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Virtual private network (VPN). A private, secure path over the Internet that provides authorized users a secure means of accessing a private 
network via the Internet.
 service—require both the 
sender and recipient to have 
accounts. 
Others 
require 
only the sender to have an 
account and the recipient is 
sent an e-mail containing 
instructions regarding how 
to view the message on a 
secure Web page.
There are various strengths 
of encryption available; the 
stronger the encryption, the 
more difficult it is to crack. 
Older 40-bit encryption (which 
can only use keys that are 40 
bits or 5 characters long) is 
considered weak encryption 
and is no longer supported by 
Windows. Stronger encryption 
includes strong 128-bit encryp-
tion (which uses 16-character 
keys) 
and 
 military-strength 
2,048-bit encryption (which 
uses 
256- character 
keys), 
although not without some 
objections from law enforce-
ment agencies and the govern-
ment because they state that 
terrorists  routinely use encryp-
tion methods to communicate.
Virtual Private Networks (VPNs)
While e-mail and file encryption can be used to transfer individual messages and files 
securely over the Internet, a virtual private network (VPN) is designed to be used when 
a continuous secure channel over the Internet is needed. A VPN provides a secure private 
tunnel from the user’s computer through the Internet to another destination and is most 
often used to provide remote employees with secure access to a company network. VPNs 
use encryption and other security mechanisms to ensure that only authorized users can 
access the remote network and that the data cannot be intercepted during transit. Because 
it uses the Internet instead of an expensive private physical network, a VPN can provide 
a secure environment over a large geographical area at a manageable cost. Once a VPN is 
set up, the user just needs to log on (such as with a username/password combination or a 
security token) in order to use the VPN.
VPNs are often used by both businesses and individuals at public Wi-Fi hotspots to pre-
vent data interception when connecting to the Internet via the hotspot. While businesspeople 
will typically use a VPN set up by their companies, individuals can create personal VPNs 
using software designed for that purpose. This software automatically encrypts all inbound 
and outbound Internet traffic, including Web pages, e-mail messages, IMs, VoIP calls, and 
3.  The recipient receives the encrypted message
       and opens it using an e-mail program. When
       prompted by the program, the recipient enters
       his or her private key to decrypt the e-mail
       (including any attached ﬁles) so it becomes
       readable again.
Joe’s public key
1.  The e-mail message (including any
       attached ﬁles) is created by the
       sender, who then uses the recipient’s
       public key to encrypt the e-mail
       (including any attached ﬁles) using
       the Security Settings option in the
       Message Options dialog box available
       through the OPTIONS tab.
       
2.  The e-mail (including any
       attached ﬁles) is transmitted
       over the Internet in its
       encrypted form.
Joe’s private key
FIGURE 4-11
Using public key 
encryption to secure 
an e-mail message 
in Microsoft 
Outlook.
<
Unless it is absolutely necessary 
and you are using a VPN, do not 
perform sensitive transactions 
(such as shopping or banking) at 
a public hotspot.
TIP
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation; Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
157
so forth, and also acts as a personal firewall. Using a per-
sonal VPN at a  public hotspot can help individuals from 
becoming the victim of a hacker or an evil twin—a fake 
Wi-Fi hotspot set up to look like a legitimate hotspot.
Additional Public Hotspot Precautions
The precautions already discussed (such as using firewall 
software, secure Web pages, VPNs, and encryption) are a 
good start for protecting against unauthorized access and 
unauthorized use at a public Wi-Fi hotspot. However, 
there are additional precautions individuals can use to 
avoid data (both that which is on their devices and that 
which is being sent over the Internet) from being com-
promised. These precautions are listed in Figure 4-12.
Sensible Employee Precautions
While only about 20% of business security breaches are 
committed by insiders (according to a recent Data Breach 
Investigations Report), they are responsible for the major-
ity (66.7%) of exposed records. In addition, these breaches 
are typically malicious in nature, with an employee delib-
erately performing the act (though other times the breach 
occurs because the employee makes a mistake, such as 
losing a portable computer or removable storage medium, 
or inadvertently providing access to sensitive data). In either case, employers should be 
 cautious. Some suggestions to avoid security breaches by employees are listed next.
Screen Potential New Hires Carefully
Employers should carefully investigate the background of all potential employees. Some 
people falsify résumés to get jobs. Others may have criminal records or currently be 
charged with a crime. One embarrassing mistake made by Rutgers University was to hire 
David Smith, the author of the Melissa computer virus, as a computer technician when he 
was out on bail following the arrest for that crime.
Watch for Disgruntled Employees and Ex-Employees
The type of employee who is most likely to commit a computer crime is one who has 
recently been terminated or passed over for a promotion, or one who has some reason 
to want to “get even” with the organization. Limiting access for each employee to only 
the resources needed for his or her job (referred to as the Principle of Least Privilege) 
and monitoring any attempts to access off-limit resources can help prevent some types of 
problems, such as unauthorized access of sensitive files, unintentional damage like delet-
ing or changing files inadvertently, or sabotage like deleting or changing company files 
intentionally. In addition, it is vital that whenever an employee leaves the company for any 
reason, all access to the system for that individual (username, password, e-mail address, 
and so forth) should be removed immediately. For employees with high levels of system 
access, simultaneously removing access while the termination is taking place is even bet-
ter. Waiting even a few minutes can be too late because just-fired employees have been 
known to barricade themselves in their office immediately after being terminated in order 
to change passwords, sabotage records, and perform other malicious acts. For example, on 
the day he was fired, one computer programmer at Fannie Mae embedded malicious code 
into a routine program on his company laptop before turning it in. The code, designed to 
destroy all data (including financial, securities, and mortgage information), was transmit-
ted to nearly 5,000 Fannie Mae servers. The code was discovered before it was executed 
and the man was sentenced to more than three years in prison for computer intrusion.
PUBLIC HOTSPOT PRECAUTIONS
Turn off automatic connections and pay attention to the list of available 
hotspots to make sure you connect to a legitimate access point (not an 
evil twin).
Use a personal firewall to control the traffic going to and coming from 
your device and temporarily use it to block all incoming connections.
Use a virtual private network (VPN) to secure all activity between your 
device and the Internet.
Only enter passwords, credit card numbers, and other data on secure 
Web pages using a VPN.
If you’re not using a VPN, encrypt all sensitive files before transferring or 
e-mailing them.
If you’re not using a VPN, avoid online shopping, banking, and other 
sensitive transactions.
Turn off file sharing so others can’t access the files on your hard drive.
Turn off Bluetooth and Wi-Fi when you are not using them.
Disable ad hoc capabilities to prevent another device from connecting to 
your device directly without using an access point.
Use antivirus software and make sure your operating system and 
browser are up to date.
FIGURE 4-12
Sensible 
precautions for 
public Wi-Fi hotspot 
users.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

158
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Develop Policies and Controls
All companies should develop policies and controls regarding security matters. As already 
mentioned, employees should be granted the least amount of access to the company 
network that they need to perform their job. Employees should be educated about the 
 seriousness and consequences of hacking, data theft, and other computer crimes, and they 
should be taught what to do when they suspect a computer crime has been committed. 
Employees should also be instructed about proper device usage policies—such as whether 
or not downloading software on company devices is allowed, whether or not employees 
are responsible for updating their devices, and the types of removable storage media that 
may be used with company devices—in order to avoid inadvertently  creating a security 
problem. Policies for removing computers and storage media containing sensitive data 
from the premises should also be implemented, enforced, and updated as needed, and sen-
sitive documents should be shredded when they are no longer needed.
Employees who work from home or otherwise access the company network via the 
Internet also need to be educated about security policies for remote access and the proper 
precautions that need to be taken. These precautions include keeping their operating sys-
tem and security software up to date and using only encrypted storage devices (such as 
 self-encrypting USB flash drives) when transporting documents between work and home. 
Securing BYOD
One growing trend today is BYOD or Bring Your Own Device 
(where students or employees bring their own smartphones, media 
tablets, or other devices to use instead of using issued devices—
see the accompanying photo). Some businesses view BYOD as 
a cost-effective way of supplying employees with the devices 
they want to use; many IT departments view BYOD as a potential 
security nightmare. But it’s here and not going away—research 
ﬁ rm Gartner predicts that about half the world’s companies will 
no longer provide computing devices to their employees by 2017.
BYOD is also changing the way many individuals perceive their 
work—no longer as a place, but as an activity that is indepen-
dent of both location and speciﬁ c technology. Consequently, it 
makes sense (and is more convenient) for individuals to carry with 
them at all times the devices that allow them to perform both work 
and personal functions as needed. For businesses, however, that 
brings the challenge of managing those devices. Disadvantages of 
BYOD from a company perspective include the risk of a malware 
infection via a BYOD device, as well as the potential exposure of 
company data via unsecured or lost personal devices or personal 
cloud storage systems (sometimes referred to as Bring Your Own 
Cloud or BYOC). Potential disadvantages from the employee per-
spective include having  company-mandated restrictions on their 
personal devices (such as not using certain applications or cloud 
services and agreeing to allow the company to erase or reset the 
device remotely if it is lost or stolen), as well as the employer hav-
ing access to personal data or activities performed via the phone. 
In addition, space on the device may be tied up for company data 
or apps that are used only for work.
While some companies use mobile device management 
(MDM) software to control the use of personal devices with cor-
porate networks, one emerging solution is to completely separate 
the business and personal use of the device. For instance, soft-
ware that supports sandboxing or containerization can create an 
isolated virtual environment on the user’s device within which cor-
porate data and applications can safely reside. With this method, 
the company would mandate control  policies for just that portion 
of the device. An option for Windows 8 Enterprise companies is 
to use the Windows To Go feature, which uses a bootable USB 
ﬂ ash drive to create a complete, managed Windows 8 environ-
ment on whatever device the USB ﬂ ash drive is plugged into. 
Consequently, employees can use the Windows To Go environ-
ment on their personal devices at work, and then shut down the 
Windows To Go environment after work to use their devices as 
solely personal devices.
I N S I D E  TH E  I N D U STRY
© Syda Productions/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
159
In addition, telecommuting workers and outside contractors should not be allowed to have 
peer-to-peer (P2P) software on computers containing company documents because data is 
increasingly being exposed through the use of P2P networks. For instance, classified data 
about the U.S. presidential helicopter discovered on a computer in Iran was traced back to a 
P2P network and the computer of a military contractor in Maryland; and the Social Security 
numbers and other personal data belonging to about 17,000 current and former Pfizer work-
ers were once leaked onto a P2P network after an employee installed unauthorized P2P 
software on a company notebook computer provided for use at her home.
Use Software to Manage Employee Devices and Prevent Data Leaks
As employees are increasingly bringing portable devices (such as smartphones and USB 
flash drives) that can interact with business networks to the office, the challenge of secur-
ing these BYOD (Bring Your Own Device) devices (and the company network) has grown. 
While some companies prohibit all portable devices and others allow only company-issued 
portable devices so they can ensure appropriate security measures (such as encryption, pass-
word protection, and the ability to wipe the device clean remotely if it is lost or stolen) are 
implemented, the use of BYOD is growing, as discussed in the Inside the Industry box.
To protect against employees copying or sending confidential data to others either 
intentionally or accidentally, data-leakage (also called data-loss) prevention systems can 
be used. Data-leakage prevention systems are available as software and/or hardware sys-
tems, and have a range of capabilities, but the overall goal is to prevent sensitive data from 
exposure. For instance, some systems control which devices (such as USB flash drives and 
smartphones) can be connected to an employee’s computer in order to prevent sensitive 
data from being taken home inadvertently or intentionally. Mobile 
device management (MDM) software (see Figure 4-13) goes one step 
further by including other protections, such as specifying what apps 
and Web sites can be used with the device, protecting against unau-
thorized access and malware, facilitating remote access (to update 
software or erase a lost device, for instance), and locating a lost or 
stolen device. Other data-leakage prevention systems—sometimes 
also called outbound-content monitoring systems—scan all outgoing 
communications (e-mail, transferred files, and so forth) for docu-
ments containing Social Security numbers, intellectual property, and 
other confidential information and block them if they might contain 
prohibited content. Some can also continually scan network devices 
to locate documents containing sensitive data to ensure that sensitive 
files are not on the computer of an employee who should not have 
access to them. For even stronger protection of confidential company 
documents, enterprise rights-management software, which encrypts 
confidential documents and limits functions such as printing, editing, 
and copying the data to only authorized users with the appropriate 
password, can be used.
Ask Business Partners to Review Their Security
In this networked economy, many organizations provide some access to internal resources 
for business partners. If those external companies are lax with their security measures, how-
ever, attacks through the business partners’ computers (such as via an employee or hacker) 
are possible. Consequently, businesses should make sure that their business partners main-
tain adequate security policies and controls. Regulations increasingly require businesses 
to ensure that adequate controls are in place to protect stored data. This impacts outside 
companies—such as business partners and outsourcing companies (outside vendors for 
specific business tasks)—if they have access to sensitive corporate data. Companies that 
utilize cloud computing also need to ensure that the cloud vendor’s security and privacy 
policies match the company’s requirements.
Deploying a centrally managed 
security solution to all endpoints 
(all user devices connected to the 
company network) is referred to as 
endpoint security.
TIP
Courtesy Airwatch
FIGURE 4-13
Mobile device 
management (MDM) 
software. Secures 
and manages the 
mobile devices used in 
an organization.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

160
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Computer sabotage. An act of malicious destruction to a computer or computer resource. >Bot. A computer that is controlled by a hacker 
or other computer criminal. >Botnet. A group of bots that are controlled by one individual. >Malware. Any type of malicious software.
COMPUTER SABOTAGE
Computer sabotage—acts of malicious destruction to a computer or computer resource—
is another common type of computer crime today. Computer sabotage can take several 
forms, including launching a computer virus or a denial of service (DoS) attack, altering 
the content of a Web site, or changing data or programs located on a computer. A common 
tool used to perform computer sabotage is a botnet, discussed next. Computer sabotage 
is illegal in the United States, and acts of sabotage are estimated to cost individuals and 
 organizations billions of dollars per year, primarily for labor costs related to correcting the 
problems caused by the sabotage, lost productivity, and lost sales.
Botnets
A computer that is controlled by a hacker or other computer criminal is referred to as a bot or 
zombie computer; a group of bots that are controlled by one individual and can work together 
in a coordinated fashion is called a botnet. Millions of U.S. computers are part of a botnet—in 
2013, one operation alone (Operation b54) performed by Microsoft working with the FBI 
cut the communications among 1,462 Citadel botnets (one of the largest botnets in existence 
and responsible for about half a billion dollars in losses) and their 5 million or more infected 
computers. Criminals (called botherders) are increasingly creating botnets to use for computer 
sabotage, such as to spread malware and to launch denial of service (DoS) attacks, discussed 
shortly. Botherders also often sell their botnet services to send spam and launch Internet attacks 
on their clients’ behalf, as well as to steal identity information, credit card numbers, passwords, 
corporate secrets, and other sensitive data, which are then sold to other criminals or otherwise 
used in an illegal manner. Bots are also used to perform click fraud—automatically clicking on 
Internet ads to increase the fees that a company must pay.
Computer Viruses and Other Types of Malware
Malware is a generic term that refers to any type of malicious software. Malware programs are 
intentionally written to perform destructive acts, such as damaging programs, deleting files, 
erasing an entire hard drive, or slowing down the performance of a computer. This damage can 
take place immediately after a computer is infected (that is, the malware software is installed) 
or it can begin when a particular condition is 
met. A malware program that activates when 
it detects a certain condition, such as when a 
particular keystroke is pressed or an employee’s 
name is deleted from an employee file, is called 
a logic bomb. A logic bomb that is triggered by a 
particular date or time is called a time bomb.
Writing a computer virus or other type of 
malware or even posting the malware code on the 
Internet is not illegal, but it is considered highly 
unethical and irresponsible behavior. Distributing 
malware, on the other hand, is  illegal, and virus 
writers who release their  malware are being vigor-
ously prosecuted. Malware can be very costly in 
terms of the labor costs  associated with removing 
the viruses and  correcting any resulting damage, as 
well as the cost of lost productivity of  employees. 
One type of malware often used by computer 
Marian Merritt, Internet Safety Advocate, Symantec 
Corporation
Does a smartphone need virus protection?
Yes, it is increasingly important to secure your 
 smartphone. Begin with a screen lock passcode to 
protect against snooping. Tape a recovery phone 
number to the back of the phone so a finder can 
 contact you. Install or enable tracking software to 
enable you to locate or lock a lost or stolen phone. 
And get mobile security software to keep you from 
installing bad apps or clicking on a dangerous link.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
A group of major U.S. ISPs 
recently committed to work 
together to combat three major 
cybersecurity threats, including 
bots; the FCC predicts this effort 
will have a significant positive 
effect on Internet security.
TIP
Courtesy Symantec
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
161
>Computer virus. A software program installed without the user’s knowledge and designed to alter the way a computer operates or to cause harm 
to the computer system.
criminals to send sensitive data secretly from infected computers to the criminal—spyware—
was discussed in Chapter 3. The most common other types of malware are discussed next.
Computer Viruses
One type of malware is the computer virus—a software program that is installed without 
the permission or knowledge of the computer user, that is designed to alter the way a com-
puter operates, and that can replicate itself to infect any new media it has access to. Computer 
viruses are often embedded into program or data files (often games, videos, and music files 
downloaded from Web pages or shared via a P2P service). They are spread whenever the 
infected file is downloaded, is transferred to a new computer via an infected removable storage 
medium, or is e-mailed to another computer (see Figure 4-14). Viruses can also be installed 
when a recipient clicks a link in an e-mail message (often in an unsolicited e-mail message 
that resembles a legitimate e-mail message that normally contains a link, such as an electronic 
greeting card e-mail that contains a link to view the card); runs a Web app that either contains 
a virus or exploits a vulnerability in Java, Flash, or another common Web technology; or clicks 
a link in a message posted on a social networking site like Facebook. Viruses have also been 
found embedded in photos of bogus Craigslist items sent to potential buyers. Regardless of 
how it is obtained, once a copy of the infected file reaches a new computer it typically embeds 
itself into program, data, or system files on the new computer and remains there, affecting that 
computer according to its programmed instructions, until it is discovered and removed.
1.  A computer virus originates when an
     unscrupulous programmer intentionally creates
     it and embeds it in a ﬁle. The infected ﬁle is
     then posted to a Web page where it will be
     downloaded via the Internet or is sent as an
     e-mail attachment to a large group of people.
2.  When the infected ﬁle is opened on a computer, the virus copies itself to that 
     computer’s hard drive and the computer becomes infected. The virus may then
     e-mail itself to people in the newly infected computer’s e-mail address book or
     copy itself to any removable storage medium inserted into that computer.
3.  A virus can spread very quickly because every
computer that comes in contact with the 
virus—whether through an infected removable 
storage medium, infected downloaded ﬁle, or 
infected e-mail attachment—becomes infected,
unless virus-protection software is used to prevent it.
THE INTERNET
COMPANY
NETWORK
FIGURE 4-14
How a computer 
virus or other 
type of malicious 
software might 
spread.
<
It is common practice for all 
types of malware to be referred 
to generically as “viruses,” even 
though some may not technically 
be computer viruses.
TIP
© 300dpi/Shutterstock.com; © Mr. Aesthetics/Shutterstock.com; © K. Miri Photography/Shutterstock.com; © FikMik/Shutterstock.com; 
Courtesy Kingston Technology Company, Inc.; © Evgeny Karandaev/Shutterstock.com; Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

162
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Computer worm. A malicious program designed to spread rapidly to a large number of computers by sending copies of itself to other computers.
>Trojan horse. A malicious program that masquerades as something else.
Computer Worms
Another common form of malware is the computer worm. Like a computer virus, a com-
puter worm is a malicious program that is typically designed to cause damage. Unlike a 
computer virus, however, a computer worm does not infect other computer files on the 
infected computer in order to replicate itself; instead, it spreads by creating copies of its 
code and sending those copies to other computers via a network. Often, the worm is sent 
to other computers as an e-mail attachment. Usually after the infected e-mail attachment is 
opened by an individual, the worm inflicts its damage and then automatically sends copies 
of itself to other computers via the Internet or a private network, typically using addresses 
in the e-mail address book located on the newly infected computer. When those e-mail 
messages and their attachments are opened, the new computers become infected and the 
cycle continues. Because of its distribution method, a worm can spread very rapidly. For 
instance, the Mydoom worm (which was released in 2004 and is considered one of the fast-
est spreading worms ever) spread so rapidly that, at one point, one out of every 10 e-mails 
contained the worm, and the persistent Conficker worm has infected a total of more than 
12 million computers since it was released in 2008 and it is still active today.
Typically, worms do not require any action by the users (such as opening an e-mail 
attachment) to infect their computers. Instead, a worm scans the Internet looking for com-
puters that are vulnerable to that particular worm and sends a copy of itself to those comput-
ers to infect them. Other worms just require the user to view an infected e-mail message or 
insert an infected removable storage medium (such as a USB flash drive) into the computer 
in order to infect the computer. Still other worms are specifically written to take advantage 
of newly discovered security holes (vulnerabilities) in operating systems and e-mail pro-
grams. Worms and other types of malware that are designed to take advantage of a security 
hole and are released at a time when no security patch to correct the problem is 
available are referred to as zero-day attacks. Unfortunately, as malware writing 
tools become more sophisticated, zero-day attacks are becoming more common.
Trojan Horses
A Trojan horse is a type of malware that masquerades as something else—usually 
an application program (such as what appears to be a game or utility program). 
When the seemingly legitimate program is downloaded or installed, the malware 
part of the Trojan horse infects the computer. Many recent Trojan horses masquer-
ade as normal ongoing activities (such as the Windows Update service or an anti-
malware program telling you to download a file containing program updates) when 
they are installed to try to trick unsuspecting users into downloading another mal-
ware program or buying a useless program. For instance, after a rogue  anti-malware 
app like the one shown in Figure 4-15 is installed (usually without the user’s direct 
knowledge or permission), the malware takes over the device displaying bogus 
warning messages or scan results (see Figure 4-15) indicating the device is infected 
with malware. The rogue program (an example of scareware) typically prompts the 
user to buy a fake anti- malware program to get rid of the “malware.” Usually the 
only malware on the device is the rogue program, but it is often very intrusive (such 
as displaying constant messages on the infected device while hiding the options 
needed to change the hijacked settings back to normal), it often blocks access to 
any Web sites other than its own, and it is extremely hard to remove. An emerging 
related type of Trojan is ransomware, which freezes up the infected device and dis-
plays a message that the device has been used for illegal activity and the user must 
pay a fine (which then goes to the criminal) in order to unlock the device, though 
FIGURE 4-15
Rogue anti-malware 
apps. These programs 
try to trick victims 
into purchasing 
subscriptions to remove 
nonexistent malware 
supposedly installed on 
their devices.
<
Courtesy Sophos
The Stuxnet worm, detected in 
2010 and widely believed to 
have been created by the United 
States and Israel, reportedly 
destroyed 1,000 centrifuges 
in nuclear facilities located 
in Iran—the first instance of 
malware being used to cause 
physical damage to a facility. 
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
163
>Denial of service (DoS) attack. An act of sabotage that attempts to flood a network server or a Web server with so much activity that it is unable 
to function.
paying the fine doesn’t necessarily result in the device being returned to a usable state. Other 
rogue apps are spreading through social networks like Facebook and Twitter, primarily in the 
form of fake offers (such as for a free iPad) that request access to your social network infor-
mation when you click the link—if granted, the scammer can then post that and additional 
scams (and collect information about others) via your account.
Unlike viruses and worms, Trojan horses cannot replicate themselves. Trojan horses are 
usually spread by being downloaded from the Internet, though they may also be sent as an 
e-mail attachment, either from the Trojan horse author or from individuals who forward it, 
not realizing the program is a Trojan horse. Some Trojan horses today act as spyware and are 
designed to find sensitive information about an individual (such as a Social Security number 
or a bank account number) or about a company (such as corporate intellectual property 
like mechanical designs, electronic schematics, and other valuable proprietary information) 
located on infected computers and then send that information to the malware creator to 
be used in illegal activities. One emerging type of Trojan horse is called a RAT (Remote-
Access Trojan). RATs are typically installed via small files obtained from an Internet 
download, such as free software, games, or electronic greeting cards. Once installed, RATs 
are designed to record every keystroke made on the infected computer and then send the 
sensitive information they recorded (such as account numbers and passwords) to criminals.
Mobile Malware
In addition to computers, malware also can infect smartphones, media tablets, printers, 
and other devices that contain computing hardware and software. While more than 90% 
of today’s mobile malware (according to a recent report) is spread via malicious links, 
smartphones with Bluetooth capabilities can also be infected just by being within range 
of an infected device. Some mobile malware is designed to be a nuisance by changing 
icons or otherwise making the device more difficult to use, but most (including half of 
mobile malware created in 2012) is designed to steal information or track the movement 
or activities of the user. Still other malware is money-oriented, such as malware that is 
designed to steal credit card data located on a smartphone and malware that places calls or 
sends text messages to premium rate numbers owned by the thief (for which the owner of 
the device is charged)—sometimes called chargeware. According to IBM, more malware 
will continue to be directed to smartphones and other devices—such as cars—that contain 
embedded computers as those devices continue to incorporate more software components 
and, consequently, become more vulnerable to malware. And mobile malware is getting 
more sophisticated—in 2013, Kaspersky Lab discovered the first ever Android malware 
app designed to infect any PCs or other devices the phone connects to. While the app was 
removed from Google Play, several thousand users had already downloaded it.
Denial of Service (DoS) Attacks
A denial of service (DoS) attack is an act of sabotage that attempts to flood a network server 
or Web server with so many requests for action that it shuts down or simply cannot handle 
legitimate requests any longer, causing legitimate users to be denied service. For example, a 
hacker might set up one or more computers to request nonexistent information continually 
or to ping (contact) a server continually with a request to send a responding ping back to a 
false return address. If enough useless traffic is generated, the server has no resources left to 
deal with legitimate requests (see Figure 4-16). An emerging trend is DoS attacks aimed at 
mobile wireless networks. These attacks typically involve repeatedly establishing and releas-
ing connections with the goal of overloading the network to disrupt service.
About 94% of mobile malware 
today is written for Android phones 
(though Apple devices are still 
vulnerable). 
TIP
The 2013 DDoS attacks on The 
Spamhaus Project created a 
staggering 300 Gbps of traffic.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

164
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
DoS attacks today are often directed toward popular or controversial sites and typi-
cally are carried out via multiple computers (referred to as a distributed denial of service 
attack or DDoS attack). DDoS attacks are typically performed by botnets created by hack-
ers; the computers in the botnet participate in the attacks without the owners’ knowledge. 
Because home devices today typically use direct Internet connections but tend to be less 
protected than school and business computers, hackers are increasingly targeting home 
devices for botnets used in DDoS attacks and other forms of computer sabotage.
Denial of service attacks can be very costly in terms of business lost (such as when 
an e-commerce site is shut down), as well as the time and expense required to bring the 
site back online. Networks that use VoIP are particularly vulnerable to DoS attacks since 
the real-time nature of VoIP calls means their quality is immediately affected when a DoS 
attack slows down the network.
Data, Program, or Web Site Alteration
Another type of computer sabotage occurs when a hacker breaches a computer system in 
order to delete data, change data, modify programs, or otherwise alter the data and pro-
grams located there. For example, a student might try to hack into the school database to 
change his or her grade; a hacker might change a program located on a company server in 
order to steal money or information; or a disgruntled or former employee might perform a 
vengeful act, such as altering programs so they work incorrectly, deleting customer records 
or other critical data, or randomly changing data in a company’s database. Like other forms 
of computer sabotage, data and program alteration is illegal.
Data on Web sites can also be altered by hackers. For instance, social media accounts 
are being increasingly targeted by hackers. In 2013, for instance, the Associated Press 
Twitter account was hacked and used to tweet that the president had been injured 
by explosions at the White House—the stock market tumbled in response. It is also 
 becoming more common for hackers to compromise legitimate Web sites and then use 
those sites to perform malware attacks. Typically, a hacker alters a legitimate site to 
display an official-looking message that informs the user that a particular software pro-
gram must be downloaded, or the hacker posts a rogue banner ad on a legitimate site 
that redirects the user to a malware site instead of the site for the product featured in 
the banner ad. According to a report by security company Websense, more than half of 
the Web sites classified as malicious are actually legitimate Web sites that have been 
compromised.
1.  Hacker's computer sends several simultaneous requests; each request  
       
     asks to establish a connection to the server but supplies false        
    
     return information. In a distributed DoS attack, multiple computers send  
    
     multiple requests at one time. 
2.  The server tries to respond to each request but can't         
  
locate the computer because false return information was  
provided. The server waits for a short period of time  
     
before closing the connection, which ties up the server          
and keeps others from connecting. 
3.  The hacker's computer continues to send new  
     requests so, as a connection is closed by the 
     server, a new request is waiting. This cycle 
     continues, which ties up the server inde nitely.
I can’t 
Hello? I’d like some info...
HACKER’S COMPUTER
Hello? I’d like some info...
WEB SERVER
Hello? I’d like 
some info...
I’m busy, I can’t 
help you right now.
4.  The server becomes so overwhelmed
     that legitimate requests cannot get
     through and, eventually, the server
     usually crashes.
LEGITIMATE COMPUTER
fi
find you, I’ll wait and try again...
FIGURE 4-16
How a denial of 
service (DoS) attack 
might work.
<
© tatniz/Shutterstock.com
© K. Miri Photography/
Shutterstock.com
© tatniz/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
165
>Security software. Software, typically a suite of programs, used to protect your computer against a variety of threats. >Antivirus software. 
Software used to detect and eliminate computer viruses and other types of malware.
PROTECTING AGAINST COMPUTER SABOTAGE
One of the most important protections against computer sabotage is using security software, 
and ensuring that it is kept current.
Security Software
To protect against becoming infected with a computer virus or other type of malware, all 
computers and other devices used to access the Internet or a company network in both 
homes and offices should have security software installed. Security software typically 
includes a variety of security features, including a firewall, protection against spyware 
and bots, and protection against some types of online fraud, discussed shortly. Some also 
include a spam filter, parental controls, password managers, diagnostic software, and 
backup features; mobile security software also often includes antitheft software, discussed 
in more detail in Chapter 5. One of the most important components of security software is 
antivirus software, which protects against computer viruses and other types of malware.
Like most security software components, antivirus software typically runs continu-
ously whenever the computer is on to perform real-time monitoring of the computer and 
incoming e-mail messages, instant messages, Web page content, and downloaded files, in 
order to prevent malicious software and other threats from executing. Many antivirus pro-
grams also automatically scan any devices as soon as they are connected to a USB port in 
order to guard against infections from a USB flash drive, a portable digital media player, or 
other USB device. Antivirus software helps prevent malware from being installed on your 
devices because it deletes or 
quarantines (safely isolates) 
any suspicious content (such 
as potentially infected e-mail 
attachments, downloaded files, 
or apps) as they arrive; regular 
full system scans can detect and 
remove any viruses or worms 
that find their way onto your 
computer (see Figure 4-17).
According to a recent 
Panda Security report, there 
are approximately 125 million 
malware threats in existence, 
and about 27 million new mal-
ware strains were discovered in 
2012 alone. Consequently, it is 
vital that you keep your security 
software up to date. Security 
software is usually set up to 
download new threat definitions 
automatically from its associ-
ated Web site on a regular basis, 
as often as several times per 
day—a very important precau-
tion. Most fee-based security 
To ensure you have the latest 
security updates for your antivirus 
program, enable automatic updates.
TIP
According to a recent Harris 
Interactive survey, less than one-third 
of users have security software 
installed on their mobile devices, 
compared to 91% on their laptops.
TIP
Antivirus software
typically ﬁnds and
removes viruses,
worms, and other
malware.
Antispyware 
software typically
ﬁnds and removes
spyware and tracking
cookies. 
Mobile software
ﬁnds and removes
mobile malware. 
FIGURE 4-17
Security software. 
Different security 
programs will typically 
find different types of 
malware.
<
Courtesy Malwarebytes; Courtesy Lookout; Courtesy SUPERAntispyware
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

166
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
software comes with a year of access to free updates; users 
should purchase additional years after that to continue to 
be protected or they should switch to a free antivirus pro-
gram, such as AVG Free, that can be updated regularly at 
no cost. Schools and businesses should also ensure that 
students and employees connecting to the campus or com-
pany network with personal devices are using up-to-date 
antivirus software so they will not infect the network with 
malware inadvertently. Some colleges now require new 
students to go through a quarantine process, in which stu-
dents are not granted access to the college network until 
they complete a security process that checks their comput-
ers for security threats, updates their operating systems, 
and installs antivirus software. Some additional virus- 
prevention strategies are listed in Figure 4-18.
Many ISPs and Web mail providers today also offer 
some malware protection to their subscribers. Typically, 
antivirus software scans all incoming e-mail messages at 
the mail server level to filter out messages containing a 
virus. If a message containing a virus is detected, it is usu-
ally deleted and the recipient is notified that the message contained a virus and was deleted. 
App stores can help remove a contaminated app when one is identified (by removing the app 
from the store and remotely wiping the app from phones), though that won’t undo any damage 
already done to the phone by the malware. 
Other Security Precautions
Individuals and businesses can protect against some types of computer sabotage (such as 
program, data, or Web site alteration) by controlling access to their computers and net-
works, as discussed earlier in this chapter. Intrusion protection systems can help businesses 
detect and protect against denial of service (DoS) attacks; some personal security software 
includes intrusion protection as well. For additional protection against spyware, rogue anti-
virus programs, and other specialized malware, specialized security programs (such as the 
SUPERAntispyware program shown in Figure 4-17) can be used. In addition, most Web 
browsers have security settings that can be used to help prevent programs from being installed 
on a computer without the user’s permission, such as prompting the user for permission when-
ever a download is initiated. Enabling these security settings is a wise additional precaution.
ONLINE THEFT, ONLINE FRAUD, AND OTHER 
DOT CONS
A booming area of computer crime involves online fraud, theft, scams, and related activi-
ties designed to steal money or other resources from individuals or businesses—these 
are collectively referred to as dot cons. According to a report by the Internet Crime 
Complaint Center (IC3), a joint venture of the FBI and the National White Collar Crime 
Center that receives cybercrime complaints from consumers and reports them to the 
appropriate law enforcement agency, IC3 received and processed more than 24,000 com-
plaints per month in 2012 with reported losses more than 8% higher than in 2011. Some 
of the most common types of dot cons are discussed next.
If you suspect your computer is 
infected with a malware program 
that your regular antivirus 
software cannot detect or 
remove, try a software program 
that specializes in removing hard-
to-remove malware, such as the 
free Malwarebytes Anti-Malware 
program shown in Figure 4-17.
TIP
VIRUS-PREVENTION STRATEGIES
Use antivirus software to check incoming e-mail messages and files, and 
download updated virus definitions on a regular basis.
Limit the sharing of flash memory cards, USB flash drives, and other 
removable storage media with others.
Only download files from reputable sites.
Only open e-mail attachments that come from people you know and that 
do not have an executable file extension (such as .exe, .com, .bat, or 
.vbs); double-check with the sender before opening an unexpected, but 
seemingly legitimate, attachment.
For any downloaded file you are unsure of, upload it to a Web site (such 
as VirusTotal.com) that tests files for viruses before you open them.
Keep the preview window of your e-mail program closed so you will not 
view messages until you determine that they are safe to view.
Regularly download and install the latest security patches available for your 
operating system, browser, Java and other plug-ins, and e-mail programs.
Avoid downloading files from P2P sites.
FIGURE 4-18
Sensible 
precautions can 
help protect against 
computer virus 
infections.
<
>Dot con. A fraud or scam carried out through the Internet.
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
167
Theft of Data, Information, and Other Resources
Data theft or information theft is the theft of data or information located on or being sent from 
a computer. It can be committed by stealing an actual computer (as discussed in more detail in 
Chapter 5); it can also take place over the Internet or a network by an individual gaining unau-
thorized access to that data by hacking into the computer or by intercepting the data in transit. 
(For a look at some emerging biometric systems that may soon be used to help protect access 
to your PC and your Web sites, see the Trend box.) Common types of data and information 
stolen via the Internet or another network include customer data (such as Web site passwords 
or credit card information) and proprietary corporate information. As previously discussed, 
data breaches today frequently result in stolen customer and credit card data. Stolen consumer 
data is often used in fraudulent activities, such as identity theft, as discussed shortly.
Money is another resource that can be stolen via a computer. Company insiders some-
times steal money by altering company programs to transfer small amounts of money—for 
example, a few cents’ worth of bank account interest—from a very large number of trans-
actions to an account controlled by the thieves. This type of crime is sometimes called 
salami shaving. Victims of salami-shaving schemes generally are unaware that their funds 
have been accessed because the amount taken from each individual is very small. However, 
added together, the amounts can be substantial. Another example of monetary theft per-
formed via computers involves hackers electronically transferring money illegally from 
online bank accounts, traditional bank accounts, credit card accounts, or accounts at online 
payment services (such as PayPal).
Beyond Fingerprint Readers—Digital Tattoos and More
Think passwords—even the newer types of passwords that use 
pictures or patterns instead of characters—are ho-hum? Well, 
you’re in luck. A number of new alternatives that can be used to 
protect access to your device or log on to your Web sites are 
about to become available. 
One option that Google is developing uses facial gestures, 
such as unlocking your phone by smiling or winking at it. Instead 
of using a static image (as with face recognition, which has been 
circumvented on phone unlocking systems by using a photograph 
of the authorized user), this new technology includes a “Liveness 
Check” where the user has to prove that he or she is alive and not 
a photo by blinking. In addition, the system requires a match of a 
facial landmark (such as an eye, mouth, or nose) in two different 
but related facial gestures (such as smiling and not smiling). 
Two other more unusual alternatives recently demonstrated by 
Motorola are electronic tattoos and authentication pills. The tattoos 
(called Biostamps and originally developed for remote medical 
monitoring of patients) contain ﬂ exible electronic circuits that are 
attached to the wearer’s skin (see the accompanying photo) using 
a rubber stamp and which then can be covered with a spray-on 
bandage for additional waterprooﬁ ng if needed. The pills (called the 
Proteus Digital Health pill and already approved by the U.S. FDA 
for medication monitoring) are swallowed and then send signals 
from the stomach. Both devices already work with smartphones 
and researchers propose that both technologies could be adapted 
to become authentication systems, automatically logging individu-
als on to their phones or computers and to secure Web sites. The 
downside is that both systems are temporary and would have to be 
replaced on a regular basis, which could lead to hackers stealing 
additional tattoos and pills not yet used and circumventing what-
ever activation system is in place or even kidnapping individuals to 
use their bodies to log in to secure systems. 
Next up? Thought-based authentication where you can 
automatically log on to your wearable devices using only your 
brainwaves.
T R E N D
Courtesy MC10 Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

168
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Identity theft. Using someone else’s identity to purchase goods or services, obtain new credit cards or bank loans, or otherwise illegally 
masquerade as that individual.
Identity Theft, Phishing, Social Media Hacks, and Pharming
A growing dot con trend is obtaining enough information about an individual to perform 
fraudulent financial transactions. Often, this is carried out in conjunction with identity 
theft; techniques frequently used to obtain the necessary personal information to commit 
identity theft are phishing, spear phishing, social media hacking, and pharming.
Identity Theft
Identity theft occurs when someone obtains enough information about a person to be able 
to masquerade as that person—usually to buy products or services in that person’s name (see 
Figure 4-19). Typically, identity theft begins when a thief obtains a person’s name, address, 
and Social Security number, often from a discarded or stolen document (such as a preapproved 
credit card application that was sent in the mail), from information obtained via the Internet 
(such as from a résumé posted online), or from information located on a computer (such as on 
a stolen computer or hacked server, or information sent from a computer via a computer virus 
or spyware program installed on that computer). The thief may then order a copy of the indi-
vidual’s birth certificate, obtain a “replacement” driver’s license, make purchases and charge 
them to the victim, and/or open credit or bank accounts in the victim’s name. 
Assuming the thief requests a change of address for these new accounts after they are 
opened, it may take quite some time—often until a company or collections agency contacts 
the victim about overdue bills—for the victim to become aware that his or her identity has 
been stolen. Although identity theft often takes place via a computer today, information 
used in identity theft can also be gathered from trash dumpsters, mailboxes, and other loca-
tions. Other commonly used techniques are skimming and social engineering. Skimming 
involves stealing credit card or debit card numbers by using an illegal device attached to 
a credit card reader or an ATM machine that reads and stores the card numbers (and used 
in conjunction with a hidden camera to capture ATM PIN numbers) to be retrieved by 
the thief at a later time. Social engineering involves  pretending—typically via phone or 
e-mail—to be a bank officer, potential employer, or other trusted individual in order to get 
the potential victim to supply personal information. Today, social engineering schemes 
often use social media to obtain the needed information and gain the trust of a victim. 
Because of this, social engineering tests are often included when a company runs a secu-
rity evaluation of its company and employees, as discussed in Chapter 5.
2.
Home Loan
Auto Loan
3.
1. The thief obtains information about an 
individual from discarded mail, employee 
records, credit card transactions, Web 
server ﬁles, or some other method.
The thief makes purchases, opens new 
credit card accounts, and more in the 
victim's name. Often, the thief changes 
the address on the account to delay 
discovery.
The victim usually ﬁnds out by being denied credit 
or by being contacted about overdue bills generated 
by the thief. Clearing one’s name after identity theft 
is time consuming and can be very difﬁcult and 
frustrating for the victim.
Bill
FIGURE 4-19
How identity theft 
works.
To help prevent identity theft, do 
not include your Social Security 
number on your résumé or any 
other document posted online.
TIP
At an estimated $388 billion per 
year, identity theft is approaching 
the illegal drug business in 
revenue.
TIP
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
© Ryan McVay/Getty Images
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
169
>Phishing. The use of spoofed communications (typically e-mail messages) to gain credit card numbers and other personal data to be used for 
fraudulent purposes.
Unfortunately, identity theft is a very real 
danger to individuals today. According to the 
Federal Trade Commission (FTC), millions 
of Americans have their identity stolen each 
year and identity theft has topped the list of 
consumer complaints for 13 straight years. 
Identity theft can be extremely distressing for 
victims, can take years to straighten out, and 
can be very expensive. Some identity theft vic-
tims, such as Michelle Brown, believe that they 
will always be dealing with their “alter real-
ity” to some extent. For a year and a half, an 
identity thief used Brown’s identity to obtain 
over $50,000 in goods and services, to rent 
properties—even to engage in drug trafficking. 
Although the culprit was eventually arrested 
and convicted for other criminal acts, she con-
tinued to use Brown’s identity and was even 
booked into jail using Brown’s stolen identity. 
As a final insult after the culprit was in prison, 
U.S. customs agents detained the real Michelle 
Brown when she was returning from a trip to 
Mexico because of the criminal record of the 
identity thief. Brown states that she has not 
traveled out of the country since, fearing an 
arrest or some other serious problem resulting 
from the theft of her identity, and estimates she 
has spent over 500 hours trying to correct all 
the problems related to the identity theft.
Phishing and Spear Phishing
Phishing (pronounced “fishing”) is the use 
of a spoofed communications (typically an 
e-mail message, such as one appearing to come from eBay, PayPal, Google, Bank of 
America, or another well-known legitimate organization, but is actually sent from a phisher) 
to trick the recipient into revealing sensitive personal information (such as Web site logon 
information or credit card numbers). Once obtained, this information is used in identity 
theft and other fraudulent activities. A phishing e-mail typically looks legitimate and it con-
tains links in the e-mail that appear to go to the Web site of the legitimate business, but these 
links go to the phisher’s Web site that is set up to look like the legitimate site instead—an act 
called Web site spoofing. Phishing e-mails are typically sent to a wide group of individuals 
and usually include an urgent message stating that the individual’s credit card or account 
information needs to be updated and instructing the recipient of the e-mail to click the link 
provided in the e-mail in order to keep the account active. If the  victim clicks the link and 
supplies the requested information via the spoofed site, the criminal gains access to all 
information provided by the victim, such as account numbers, credit card numbers, and Web 
site passwords. Phishing attempts can occur today via IM, text messages (called smishing), 
fake messages sent via eBay or Facebook, Twitter tweets, pop-up  security alert windows, 
and phone calls, in addition to e-mail. Phishers also frequently utilize spyware;  typically 
Marian Merritt, Internet Safety Advocate, Symantec 
Corporation
What is the single most important thing 
 computer users should do to protect 
 themselves from online threats?
The single most important step to protect  computer 
users from online threats is to make sure their 
Internet security solution is current and up to date. 
There are several all-in-one security solutions 
 available, such as Symantec’s Norton 360, which 
combine PC security, antiphishing capabilities, 
backup, and tuneup technologies.
It’s also pivotal to maintain a healthy wariness when 
receiving online communications. Do not click on 
links in suspicious e-mails or instant messages (IMs). 
These links will often direct you to sites that will ask 
you to reveal passwords, PINs, or other confidential 
data. Genuine organizations or institutions do not send 
such e-mails, nor do they ask for confidential data (like 
your Social Security number) for ordinary business 
transactions. If you’re unsure whether or not an e-mail 
is legitimate, type the URL directly in your browser or 
call the institution to confirm they sent you that e-mail. 
Finally, do not open attachments in e-mails of ques-
tionable origin because they may contain viruses.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Courtesy Symantec
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

170
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Spear phishing. A personalized phishing scheme targeted at an individual.
clicking the link in the phishing e-mail installs 
the spyware on the victim’s computer, and 
it will remain there (transmitting passwords 
and other sensitive data to a phisher) until it is 
detected and removed.
To fool victims into using the spoofed Web 
site, phishing e-mails and the spoofed Web 
sites often look legitimate (see Figure 4-20). 
To accomplish this, phishers typically use cop-
ies of the spoofed organization’s logo and other 
Web site content from the legitimate Web site. 
For spoofed banking Web pages and other pages 
where the victim would expect to see a secure 
Web page, some criminals use a secure connec-
tion between the victim and the criminal’s server 
so the Web page looks secure with an https: in the Address bar. The domain name of the 
legitimate company (such as ebay for an eBay phishing page) is also often used as part of 
the URL of the phishing link (such as a URL starting with the text ebay even though the 
URL’s domain is not ebay.com) to make it appear more legitimate. Other phishing schemes 
use a technique called typosquatting, which is setting up spoofed Web sites with addresses 
slightly different from legitimate sites. For example, a spoofed Web site using the URL 
www.amazom.com might be used to catch shoppers intending to reach the Amazon.com Web 
site located at www.amazon.com in hopes that customers making this error when typing the 
URL will not notice it and will supply logon information via the spoofed site when they arrive.
Another recent trend is the use of more targeted, personalized phishing schemes, 
known as spear phishing. Spear phishing e-mails are directly targeted to a specific 
 individual and typically appear to come from an organization or a person that the targeted 
individual has an association with. They also often include personalized information (such 
as the potential victim’s name, employer, and other information frequently found on social 
networking sites and other public resources) to make the spear phishing e-mails seem 
even more legitimate. Some attacks use spoofed logon pages for social networking sites 
to obtain an individual’s logon information and password. Because many individuals use 
the same logon information for a variety of sites, once a scammer has a valid username/
password combination, he or she can try it on a variety of common e-commerce sites, such 
as shopping sites, online banking sites, and online payment services like PayPal.
Spear phishers also target employees of selected organizations by posing as someone 
within the company, such as a human resource or technical support employee. These spear 
phishing e-mails often request confidential information (such as logon IDs and passwords) 
or direct the employee to click a link to supposedly reset his or her password. The goal for 
corporate spear phishing attacks is usually to steal intellectual property, such as software 
source code, design documents, or schematics. It can also be used to steal money. For 
instance, in one recent case, a grocery store chain received fraudulent e-mails that appeared 
to come from two approved suppliers. The e-mails instructed the grocery store chain to send 
future payments to new bank accounts listed in the e-mail—the grocery store chain deposited 
more than $10 million into two fraudulent bank accounts before the scam was discovered.
Social Media Hacks
The use of phishing e-mails declined dramatically in 2012, as thieves appeared to shift to 
other online communications, such as social networks, according to a recent Symantec 
This e-mail
looks legitimate,
but the link goes
to a spoofed
Web page.
The link is for a
non-secure Web
page and does
not use the
bank’s domain.
FIGURE 4-20
Phishing. Phishing 
schemes typically use 
legitimate-looking 
e-mails to trick users 
into providing private 
information.
<
Spear phishing attacks are 
expected to increase as a result 
of the Epsilon data breach, 
which exposed names and 
e-mail addresses of individuals 
along with businesses that they 
patronize, such as banks, hotels, 
and stores.
TIP
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
171
Internet Security Threat Report. In addition to obtaining information from social networks 
that can be used in phishing schemes, social media hacks can provide phishers with social 
media logon information that can be used by the phishers to log on to the victim’s account 
and then hijack it—posting comments or sending messages containing phishing links (pos-
ing as the victim) to the victim’s friends, who are much more likely to click on the links 
because they appear to come from a friend. In addition to individuals’ social networking 
accounts being hacked, business accounts have been recent targets as well. For example, 
the Twitter accounts of several businesses (including Burger King and Jeep) were hacked 
in 2013 and erroneous information posted (Burger King being purchased by McDonald’s 
was one tweet made by the hackers). While hacking into a business’s social media account 
and hijacking it temporarily is often a public embarrassment, sometimes (like when the 
stock market dipped after the recent AP Twitter hack that there was an explosion at the 
White House), the consequences of business social media hacking are more severe.
Pharming and Drive-By Pharming
Pharming is another type of scam that uses spoofing—specifically spoofed domain names 
used to obtain personal information for use in fraudulent activities. With pharming, the 
criminal reroutes traffic intended for a commonly used Web site to a spoofed Web site set 
up by the pharmer. Sometimes pharming takes place via malicious code sent to a computer 
via an e-mail message or other distribution method. More often, however, it takes place via 
changes made to a DNS server—a computer that translates URLs into the appropriate IP 
addresses needed to display the Web page corresponding to a URL. This type of pharming 
can take place at one of the 13 root DNS servers (the DNS servers used in conjunction with 
the Internet), but it more often takes place at a company DNS server (the DNS server for 
that company used to route Web page requests received via company Web site URLs to 
the appropriate company server). After hacking into a company DNS server (typically for 
a company with a commonly used Web site), the pharmer changes the IP addresses used 
in conjunction with a particular company URL (called DNS poisoning) so any Web page 
requests made via the legitimate company URL is routed (via the company’s poisoned 
DNS server) to a phony spoofed Web page located on the pharmer’s Web server. So, even 
though a user types the proper URL to display the legitimate company Web page in his or 
her browser, the spoofed page is displayed instead.
Because spoofed sites are set up to look like the legitimate sites, the user typically 
does not notice any difference, and any information sent via that site is captured by the 
pharmer. To avoid suspicion, some pharming schemes capture the user’s account name 
and password as it is entered the first time on the spoofed site, and then display a password 
error message. The spoofed site then redirects the user back to the legitimate site where 
he or she is able to log on to the legitimate site, leaving the user to think that he or she 
must have just mistyped the password the first time. But, by then, the pharmer has already 
captured the victim’s username and password and can use that information to gain access 
to the victim’s account.
A recent variation of pharming is drive-by pharming. The goal is still to redirect victims 
to spoofed sites; however, the pharmer accomplishes this by changing the victim’s designated 
DNS server (which often belongs to the individual’s ISP and is specified in the victim’s router 
settings) to the pharmer’s DNS server in order to direct the victim to spoofed versions of 
legitimate Web sites when the victim enters the URLs for those sites. Typically, the pharmer 
uses malicious JavaScript code placed on a Web page to changes the victim’s DNS settings 
to use the pharmer’s DNS server; this change can only occur on a router in which the default 
administrator password was not changed.
>Social media hack. The act of accessing someone else’s social media account to make changes to the content or to perform an activity as that 
individual. >Pharming. The use of spoofed domain names to obtain personal information in order to use that information in fraudulent activities. 
In 2013, the Department of 
Homeland Security began 
recommending disabling Java on 
Web browsers due to security flaws; 
while not possible for all users, try it—
if your Web sites function fine without 
it, leave it disabled.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

172
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Online auction fraud. When an item purchased through an online auction is never delivered after payment, or the item is not as specified by the 
seller.
Online Auction Fraud
Online auction fraud (sometimes called Internet auction fraud) occurs when an online 
auction buyer pays for merchandise that is never delivered, or that is delivered but it is 
not as represented. It can also occur when an online buyer receives the proper items but 
falsely claims that they never arrived. Like other types of fraud, online auction fraud is 
illegal, but similar to many types of Internet cons, prosecution is difficult for online auction 
fraud because multiple  jurisdictions are usually involved. Although most online auction 
sites have policies that suspend sellers with a certain number of complaints lodged against 
them, it is very easy for those sellers to come back using a new e-mail address and identity.
Other Internet Scams
There is a wide range of other scams that can occur via Web sites or unsolicited e-mails. 
The anonymity of the Internet makes it very easy for con artists to appear to be anyone they 
want to be, including a charitable organization or a reputable-looking business. Common 
types of scams include loan scams, work-at-home cons, pyramid schemes, bogus credit card 
offers and prize promotions, and fraudulent business opportunities and  franchises. These 
offers typically try to sell potential victims nonexistent services or worthless information, 
or they try to convince potential victims to voluntarily supply their credit card details and 
other personal information. Some scammers hack into a system to obtain e-mail addresses 
to use as targets for a scam that is based on something those indviduals have in common in 
order to increase the odds of a potential victim falling for the scam. Others send messages 
to a potential victim impersonating a distant friend or old classmate (typically found via a 
social networking site) and requesting money (such as by saying they are traveling out of 
the country and were just robbed).
One ongoing Internet scam is the Nigerian letter fraud 
scheme. This scheme involves an e-mail message that appears to 
come from the Nigerian government and that promises the poten-
tial victim a share of a substantial amount of money in exchange 
for the use of the victim’s bank account. Supposedly the victim’s 
bank account information is needed to facilitate a wire trans-
fer (but the victim’s account is emptied instead) and/or up-front 
cash is needed to pay for nonexistent fees (but that is kept by the 
con artist). The scams often change to fit current events, such as 
the war in Iraq or a recent natural disaster. However, the scams 
always involve a so-called fortune that is inaccessible to the 
con artist without the potential victims’ help (see Figure 4-21) 
and the victims always lose any money they provide.
Other schemes involve con artists who solicit donations for 
charitable organizations after disasters and other tragic events, 
but who keep the donations instead. Another common scam 
involves setting up a pornographic site that requires a valid credit card, supposedly to 
prove that the visitor is an adult, but which is then used for credit card fraud. A rela-
tively new type of scam involves posting fake job listings on job search sites to elicit 
personal information (such as Social Security numbers) from job seekers. An even more 
recent twist is to hire individuals through online job sites for seemingly legitimate posi-
tions  involving money handling (such as bookkeeping or accounting positions), but then 
use those  individuals—often without their knowledge—to facilitate Internet auction scams 
and other monetary scams.
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
FIGURE 4-21
A Nigerian letter 
fraud e-mail.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
173
PROTECTING AGAINST ONLINE THEFT, ONLINE 
FRAUD, AND OTHER DOT CONS
In a nutshell, the best protection against many dot cons is protecting your identity; that is, 
protecting any identifying information about you that could be used in fraudulent activi-
ties. There are also specific precautions that can help protect against online theft, identity 
theft, online auction fraud, and other types of dot cons, as discussed next. With any dot 
con, it is important to act quickly if you think you have been a victim. For instance, you 
should work with your local law enforcement agency, credit card companies, and the three 
major consumer credit bureaus (Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion) to close any accessed 
or fraudulent accounts, place fraud alerts on your credit report, and take other actions to 
prevent additional fraudulent activity while the fraud is being investigated.
Arrests and prosecutions by law enforcement agencies may also help cut down on 
cybercrimes. Prosecution of online scammers has been increasing and sentences are not 
light. For instance, two Romanian citizens were recently sentenced for their involve-
ment in a phishing scheme (the first time the United States has sentenced a foreigner for 
 phishing)—one received 80 months in federal prison; the other received 27 months.
Protecting Against Data and Information Theft
Businesses and individuals can both help to prevent some types of data and information theft. 
For instance, businesses should use good security measures to protect the data stored on their 
computers. Individuals should be vigilant about protecting their private information by sending 
sensitive information via secure Web servers only and not disclosing personal  information—
especially a Social Security number or a mother’s maiden name—unless it is absolutely nec-
essary and they know how the information will be used and that it will not be shared with 
others. In addition, individuals should never give out sensitive personal information to anyone 
who requests it over the phone or by e-mail—businesses that legitimately need bank account 
information, passwords, or credit card numbers will not request that information via phone or 
e-mail. Encrypting computers and other hardware containing sensitive information, so it will 
not be readable if the hardware is lost or stolen, is another important precaution.
Protecting Against Identity Theft, Phishing, Social Media 
Hacks, and Pharming
Some precautions already discussed (such as dis-
closing your personal information only when nec-
essary and only via secure Web pages) can help 
reduce your risk of identity theft. So can using secu-
rity software (and keeping it up to date) to guard 
against malware that can send information from 
your computer or about your activities (the Web site 
passwords that you type, for example) to a crimi-
nal. In addition, to prevent someone from using the 
preapproved credit card offers and other documents 
containing personal information that are mailed to 
you, shred them before throwing them in the trash. 
To prevent the theft of outgoing mail containing sen-
sitive information, don’t place it in your mailbox—
mail it at the post office or in a USPS drop box.
To avoid phishing schemes, never click a link 
in an e-mail message to go to a secure Web site—
always type the URL for that site in your browser 
(not necessarily the URL shown in the e-mail 
 message) instead. Phishing e-mails typically sound 
urgent and often contain spelling and grammati-
cal errors—see Figure 4-22 for some tips to help 
A PHISHING E-MAIL OFTEN . . .
Tries to scare you into responding by sounding urgent, including a warning that 
your account will be cancelled if you do not respond, or telling you that you 
have been a victim of fraud.
Asks you to provide personal information, such as your bank account number, 
an account password, credit card number, PIN number, mother’s maiden name, 
or Social Security number.
Contains links that do not go where the link text says it will go (point 
to a hyperlink in the e-mail message to view the URL for that link to see 
the actual domain being used—a phisher would have to use a URL like 
microsoft.phisher.com, not microsoft.com).
Uses legitimate logos from the company the phisher is posing as.
Appears to come from a known organization, but one you may not have an 
association with.
Appears to be text or text and images but is actually a single image; it has been 
created that way to avoid being caught in a spam filter (a program that sorts 
e-mail based on legitimate e-mail and suspected spam) because spam filters 
cannot read text that is part of an image in an e-mail message.
Contains spelling or grammatical errors.
FIGURE 4-22
Tips for identifying 
phishing e-mail 
messages.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
When using a public computer, 
always log out of your accounts at the 
end of your session to make sure the 
next user won’t have access to them.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

174
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
you recognize phishing e-mails. Remember that 
spear phishing schemes may include personal-
ized information (such as your name)—do not 
let that fool you into thinking the phishing e-mail 
is legitimate. If you think an unsolicited e-mail 
message requesting information from you may 
be legitimate (for instance, if the credit card you 
use to make an automatic payment for an ongo-
ing service is about to expire and you receive an 
e-mail message asking you to update your credit 
card information), type the URL for that site in 
your browser to load the legitimate site and then 
update your account information. To prevent 
a drive-by pharming attack, all businesses and 
individuals should change the administrator pass-
word for routers, access points, and other net-
working hardware from the default password to 
a strong password. Individuals can also change 
the DNS server for their router to one (such as 
OpenDNS) that uses filtering to block malicious 
sites and protect against pharming attempts.
Keeping a close eye on your credit card bills and credit history is also important to make 
sure you catch any fraudulent charges or accounts opened by an identity thief as soon as possi-
ble. Make sure your bills come in every month (some thieves will change your mailing address 
to delay detection), and read credit card statements carefully to look for unauthorized charges. 
Be sure to follow up on any calls you get from creditors, instead of assuming it is just a mistake. 
Most security experts also recommend ordering a full credit history on yourself a few times 
a year to check for accounts listed in your name that you did not open and any other prob-
lems. The Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA) enables all Americans to get a 
free copy of their credit report, upon request, each year from the three major consumer credit 
bureaus. Ideally, you should request a report from one of these bureaus every four months to 
monitor your credit on a regular basis. These reports contain information about inquiries related 
to new accounts requested in your name, as well as any delinquent balances or other negative 
reports. For another tool that you can use to help detect identity theft—online financial alerts—
see the Technology and You box. You can also use browser-based antiphishing tools and digital 
certificates to help guard against identity theft and the phishing and pharming schemes used in 
conjunction with identity theft, as discussed next. Some additional tips for minimizing your risk 
of identity theft are listed in Figure 4-23.
Antiphishing Tools
Antiphishing tools are built into many e-mail programs and Web browsers to help notify 
users of possible phishing Web sites. For instance, some e-mail programs will disable links 
in e-mail messages identified as questionable, unless the user overrides them; most recent 
browsers warn users when a Web page associated with a possible 
phishing URL is requested (see Figure 4-24); and antiphishing capa-
bilities are included in many recent security suites.
In addition, some secure Web sites are adding additional layers in 
security to protect against identity thieves. For example, some online 
banking sites analyze users’ habits to look for patterns that vary from 
the norm, such as accessing accounts online at an hour unusual for that 
individual or a higher than normal level of online purchases. If a bank 
suspects the account may be compromised, it contacts the owner for veri-
fication. Bank of America and some other financial institutions have also 
added an additional step in their logon process— displaying an image or 
word  preselected by the user and stored on the bank’s  server—to prove 
TIPS FOR AVOIDING IDENTITY THEFT
Protect your Social Security number—give it out only when necessary.
Be careful with your physical mail and trash—shred all documents containing 
sensitive data.
Secure your computer—update your operating system and use up-to-date 
security (antivirus, antispyware, firewall, etc.) software.
Be cautious—never click on a link in an e-mail message or respond to a 
too-good-to-be-true offer.
Use strong passwords for your computer and online accounts.
Verify sources before sharing sensitive information—never respond to e-mail or 
phone requests for sensitive information.
Be vigilant while on the go—safeguard your wallet, smartphone, and 
portable computer.
Watch your bills and monitor your credit reports—react immediately if you 
suspect fraudulent activity.
Use security software or browser features that warn you if you try to view a 
known phishing site.
FIGURE 4-23
Tips to reduce your 
risk of identity theft.
<
FIGURE 4-24
Unsafe Web site 
alerts.
<
You can order your free credit reports 
online quickly and easily via Web 
sites like AnnualCreditReport.com.
TIP
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
175
Online Financial Alerts
Want to know ASAP when a transaction that might be fraudu-
lent is charged to your credit card or deducted from your check-
ing account? Well, online ﬁ nancial alerts might be the answer.
Many online banking services today allow users to set up 
e-mail alerts for credit card and bank account activity over a cer-
tain amount, low balances, and so forth. For individuals wishing 
to monitor multiple accounts, however, online money manage-
ment aggregator services (such as Mint.com) make it easier. 
Once you have set up a free Mint.com account with your ﬁ nan-
cial accounts (including credit cards and checking, savings, and 
PayPal accounts) and their respective passwords, you can see the 
status of all your accounts through the Mint.com interface. You can 
also set up alerts for any of the accounts based on your desired 
criteria, such as any fee charged or an unusual transaction (see 
the accompanying photo). The alerts are sent to you via e-mail or 
text message, depending on your preference, to help notify you as 
soon as possible if a suspicious activity occurs. And timeliness is 
of the essence, because the sooner identity theft is discovered, the 
less time the thief has to make additional fraudulent transactions. 
For security purposes, Mint.com doesn’t store online banking user-
names and passwords; instead, a secure online ﬁ nancial services 
provider is used to connect Mint.com to the appropriate ﬁ nancial 
institutions to update your activity. In addition, the Mint.com Web 
site cannot be used to move money out of or between ﬁ nancial 
accounts—it can be used only to view information.
to the user that the site being viewed is the legitimate (not a phishing) site. In addition, if the 
system does not  recognize the computer that the user is using to log on to the system, the user 
is required to go through an authentication process (typically by correctly answering cognitive 
authentication questions) before being allowed to access the system via that computer. The 
questions used are specifically designed to be “out of wallet” questions—easy for the indi-
vidual to answer but difficult for hackers to guess the correct answer or find in a stolen wallet. 
Bank of America is also one bank offering customers the option of adding the use of one-time 
passwords (autogenerated by a security token sent via text message to the individual’s mobile 
phone, as in Figure 4-5) to their online banking logon procedure.
Digital Certificates and Digital Signatures
The purpose of a digital certificate (also called a digital ID) is to authenticate the identity 
of an individual or organization. Digital certificates are granted by Certificate Authorities 
and typically contain the name of the person, organization, or Web site being certified 
along with a certificate serial number and an expiration date. Digital certificates also 
include a public/private key pair. In addition to being used by the certificate holder to 
encrypt files and e-mail messages (as discussed earlier in this chapter), these keys and the 
digital certificate are used with secure Web pages to guarantee the Web pages are secure 
and actually belong to the stated organization (so users can know for sure who their credit 
TE C H N O LO GY A N D YOU
>Digital certificate. A group of electronic data that can be used to verify the identity of a person or organization; includes a key pair that can be 
used for encryption and digital signatures (also called a digital ID). 
© franckreporter/iStockphoto; Courtesy Mint.com
Facebook, Google, Microsoft, and 
other major technology companies 
are in the process of developing 
a new DMARC (Domain-based 
Message Authentication, Report, and 
Conformance) specification expected 
to make it easier to detect phishing 
e-mails using spoofed domains.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

176
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Digital signature. A unique digital code that can be attached to a file or an e-mail message to verify the identity of the sender and guarantee the 
file or message has not been changed since it was signed.
 
card number or other sensitive data is really being sent to in 
order to protect against some online scams).
Secure Web sites can obtain either a normal SSL digital 
certificate or a newer Extended Validation (EV) SSL digital 
certificate that was developed to provide consumers with a 
higher level of trust while online. While both digital certifi-
cates require an application process, the verification process 
to obtain an EV SSL digital certificate is more thorough, 
requiring the use of reputable third-party sources to verify 
that the company has the right to use the Web site domain 
name in question and that the business requesting the certifi-
cate is authorized to do so. With both types of certificates, individuals can click the secure 
Web page icon in their browser window to view that site’s digital certificate in order to 
ensure that the certificate is valid and issued to the company associated with the Web site 
being viewed. If an EV SSL certificate is used, however, additional information is displayed 
when the Web site is viewed in an EV-compliant browser, such as recoloring the Address 
bar green to indicate a site using a valid EV SSL certificate and displaying certificate infor-
mation in the Security Status bar to the right of the Address bar, as shown in Figure 4-25.
The keys included in a digital certificate can also be used to authenticate the identity 
of a person sending an e-mail message or other document via a digital signature. To digi-
tally sign an e-mail message or other document, the sender’s private key is used and that 
key, along with the contents of the document, generates a unique digital signature; conse-
quently, a digital signature is different with each signed document. When a digitally signed 
document is received, the recipient’s computer uses the sender’s public key to verify the 
digital signature. Because the document is signed with the sender’s pri-
vate key (that only the sender should know) and the digital signature will 
be deemed invalid if even one character of the document is changed after 
it is signed, digital signatures guarantee that the document was sent by a 
specific individual and that it was not tampered with after it was signed.
Individuals can obtain a free digital certificate for personal use from sev-
eral Certificate Authorities (such as Comodo). Once you obtain one, you will 
need to install it on your computer (Windows users can use the Certificates 
option on the Content tab in the Internet Properties dialog box available 
through the Control Panel), and then you can use the digital signature option 
in your e-mail program (such as Microsoft Outlook, see Figure 4-26) to sign 
all or just selected messages. At this time, most Web mail programs (such as 
Gmail and Outlook.com) do not support the use of digital signatures.
Protecting Against Online Auction Fraud and 
Other Internet Scams
The best protection against many dot cons is common sense. Be extremely 
cautious of any unsolicited e-mail messages you receive and realize that 
if an offer sounds too good to be true, it probably is. You should also be 
cautious when dealing with individuals online through auctions and other 
 person-to-person activities. Before bidding on an auction item, check out the 
feedback rating of the seller to see comments written by other auction sell-
ers and buyers as well as the sellers’ return policy. Always pay for auctions 
and other online purchases using a credit card or an online payment service 
(such as PayPal) that accepts credit card payments so you can dispute the 
Click to view
certiﬁcate
information.
Green indicates
a valid EV SSL
digital certiﬁcate.
A red address bar (not shown) would indicate a
problem with the site’s digital certiﬁcate.
FIGURE 4-25
EV SSL certificates. 
The browser’s Address 
bar reflects information 
about the digital 
certificate being used.
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Courtesy Comodo Group, Inc.; Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
1.  Get a
digital ID and
then install it.
2. Use the appropriate
    option in your e-mail
    program to sign your
    e-mail messages.
3.  The recipient can click an option in the message
 to view your digital signature.
FIGURE 4-26
Digitally signing an 
e-mail message in 
Microsoft Outlook.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
177
transaction through your credit card company, if needed. Using an online payment service that 
bills the charge to your credit card, instead of allowing the seller to charge your credit card, 
has the extra advantage of keeping your credit card information private. In addition, some auc-
tion sites and online payment services offer free buyer protection against undelivered items or 
auction items that are significantly different from their description. For instance, most eBay 
purchases paid for via PayPal have at least $200 of buyer protection coverage at no additional 
cost. For expensive items, consider using a reputable escrow service, which allows you to 
ensure that the merchandise is as specified before your payment is released to the seller.
PERSONAL SAFETY ISSUES
In addition to being expensive and inconvenient, cybercrime can also be physically dan-
gerous. Although most of us may not ordinarily view using the Internet as a potentially 
dangerous activity, cases of physical harm due to Internet activity do happen. For example, 
children and teenagers have become the victims of pedophiles who arranged face-to-face 
meetings by using information gathered via e-mail, online games, social networking sites, 
or other online sources. There are also a growing number of incidents in which children 
are threatened by classmates via e-mail, social media posts, or text messages. Adults have 
fallen victim to unscrupulous or dangerous individuals who misrepresent themselves 
online, and the availability of personal information online has made it more difficult for 
individuals to hide from people who may want to do them harm, such as abused women 
trying to hide from their abusive husbands. Two of the most common ways individuals are 
harassed online—cyberbullying and cyberstalking—are discussed next.
Cyberbullying and Cyberstalking
Children and teenagers bullying other children or teenagers via the Internet—such as through 
e-mail, a text message, a social networking site, a blog, or other online communications 
method—is referred to as cyberbullying. Unfortunately, cyberbullying is common today—it 
affects more than one-half of all U.S. teenagers, according to a recent report. Cyberbullying 
can take place via direct online communications (such as with an e-mail or a text message), 
as well as via more subtle means. For instance, there have been cases of students posting 
videos on YouTube of other students being bullied or shown in compromising situations, as 
well as cases of individuals hacking into a student’s social networking account and chang-
ing the content on the student’s pages to harass that student. Unfortunately, there are also 
several instances where teenagers have committed suicide because of cyberbullying, which 
have prompted many states and schools to look at harassment statutes and bullying policies. 
Several antibullying campaigns have been initiated by school districts and government orga-
nizations (see Figure 4-27) and most states have implemented new laws or amended existing 
harassment laws to address electronic harassment. And Web sites (along with the individuals 
or companies responsible for them) that provide the means for the harassment may also be 
at risk for prosecution. In Italy, three Google executives were given suspended jail terms for 
ignoring a parent’s request to remove a video of a boy being bullied, and at the time of this 
writing, Italian prosecutors were investigating whether to sue Facebook for not removing 
harrassing messages that led to a teenage girl’s suicide.
While incidents of online harrassment between adults can be referred to as cyber-
harassment, repeated threats or other malicious behavior that poses a credible threat of 
harm carried out online between adults is referred to as cyberstalking. Cyberstalkers 
sometimes find their victims online; for instance, someone who makes a comment on a 
>Cyberbullying. Children or teenagers bullying other children or teenagers via the Internet. >Cyberstalking. Repeated threats or harassing 
behavior between adults carried out via e-mail or another Internet communications method.
FIGURE 4-27
An anti-cyberbullying 
Web banner.
<
Courtesy National Crime Prevention Council
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

178
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
social networking site that the cyberstalker does not like, or bloggers who are harassed and 
threatened because of their blogging activities. Other times, the attack is more personal, 
such as employers who are stalked online by ex-employees who were fired or otherwise 
left their position under adverse conditions, and celebrities who are stalked online by fans.
Cyberstalking typically begins with online harassment—such as sending harassing or 
threatening e-mail messages or unwanted files to the victim, posing as the victim in order to 
sign the victim up for pornographic or otherwise offensive e-mail newsletters, publicizing the 
victim’s home address and telephone number, or hacking into the victim’s social networking 
pages to alter the content. Cyberstalking can also lead to offline stalking and possibly physi-
cal harm to, and sometimes even the death of, the victim. While there are as yet no specific 
federal laws against cyberstalking, all states have made it illegal (and it is being increasingly 
prosecuted), and some federal laws do apply if the online actions include computer fraud 
or another type of computer crime, suggest a threat of personal injury, or involve sending 
obscene e-mail messages. Many cyberstalkers are not caught, however, due in part to the 
anonymity of the Internet, which assists cyberstalkers in concealing their true identities.
Online Pornography
A variety of controversial and potentially objectionable material is available on the 
Internet. Although there have been attempts to ban this type of material from the Internet, 
they have not been successful. For example, the Communications Decency Act, signed into 
law in 1996—which made it a criminal offense to distribute patently indecent or offensive 
material online—was ruled unconstitutional in 1997 by the U.S. Supreme Court. However, 
like its printed counterpart, online pornography involving minors is illegal. Because of the 
strong link they believe exists between child pornography and child molestation, many 
experts are very concerned about the amount of child pornography that can be found and 
distributed via the Internet. They also believe that the Internet makes it easier for sexual 
predators to act out, such as by striking up “friendships” with children online and convinc-
ing these children to meet them in real life. And this can have devastating consequences, 
as it did for a 13-year-old girl from Connecticut who was strangled to death in 2002 by a 
25-year-old man she met originally online and eventually in person.
PROTECTING AGAINST CYBERBULLYING, 
CYBERSTALKING, AND OTHER PERSONAL 
SAFETY CONCERNS
The growing increase in attention to cyberbullying and cyberstalking is leading to more 
efforts to improve safeguards for children. For instance, social networking sites have 
privacy features that can be used to protect the private information of their members. In 
addition, numerous states in the United States have implemented cyberbullying and cyber-
stalking laws. While there is no surefire way to protect against cyberbullying, cyberstalk-
ing, and other online dangers completely, some common-sense precautions can reduce the 
chance of a serious personal safety problem occurring due to online activities.
Safety Tips for Adults
It is wise to be cautious and discreet online—especially in online profiles, Twitter tweets, 
forums, and other online locations where individuals communicate with strangers. To pro-
tect yourself against cyberstalking and other types of online harassment, use gender-neutral, 
nonprovocative identifying names, such as jsmith, instead of janesmith or iamcute. Be careful 
about the types of photos you post of yourself online and do not reveal personal  information—
such as your real name, address, or telephone number—to people you meet online. In addi-
tion, do not respond to any insults or other harassing comments you may receive online. You 
may also want to request that your personal information be removed from online  directories—
especially those associated with your e-mail address or other online identifiers.
Search for yourself using search 
sites and online telephone books 
to see what personal information 
is available about you on the 
Internet.
TIP
Both adults and children 
should avoid including personal 
information on their social 
networking pages that could be 
used by an online stalker.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
179
Safety Tips for Children and Teens
Most experts agree that the best way to protect children from online dangers is to stay in 
close touch with them as they explore the Internet. Parents should monitor their children’s 
computer and mobile phone activities, and children and teenagers should be told which 
activities are allowed, which types of Web sites are off-limits, and why. In addition, it 
should be made clear that they are never to reveal personal information about themselves 
online without a parent’s permission. They should also be instructed to tell a parent (or 
teacher if at school) if an individual ever requests personal information or a personal meet-
ing, or threatens or otherwise harasses the child, via any type of online communications 
medium. Older children should also be cautioned about sending compromising photos of 
themselves or sexually explicit messages to others—a growing practice referred to as sex-
ting. Part of the problem is that many young people don’t realize they lose control of photos 
and other compromising content once that information has been sent to others. The issue is 
also complicated by sextortion—where someone who sees a teen’s explicit photo in a text 
message or on the Internet threatens 
to expose the teen’s behavior unless 
the teen sends more explicit photos. 
Sexting can result in child pornog-
raphy charges being filed against 
teens, though some states are pass-
ing legislation to make it illegal but 
have lesser charges for a minor’s 
first offense.
NETWORK 
AND INTERNET 
SECURITY 
LEGISLATION
Although new legislation is intro-
duced frequently to address new 
types of computer crimes, it is rarely 
passed due to differences in opinion 
regarding the balance of protection 
vs. civil liberties. In addition, there 
are both domestic and international 
jurisdictional issues because many 
computer crimes affect businesses 
and individuals located in geo-
graphic areas other than the one 
in which the computer criminal is 
located, and hackers can make it 
appear that activity is coming from 
a different location than it really is. 
Nevertheless, computer crime legis-
lation continues to be proposed and 
computer crimes are being prose-
cuted. A list of selected federal laws 
concerning network and Internet 
security is shown in Figure 4-28.
DATE
LAW AND DESCRIPTION
2004
Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act
Adds extra years to prison sentences for criminals who use identity theft (including 
the use of stolen credit card numbers) to commit other crimes.
2003
CAN-SPAM Act
Implements regulations for unsolicited e-mail messages.
2003
Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act (FACTA)
Amends the Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA) to require that the three nationwide 
consumer reporting agencies (Equifax, Experian, and TransUnion) provide consumers, 
upon request, a free copy of their credit report once every 12 months.
2003
PROTECT Act
Includes provisions to prohibit virtual child pornography.
2003
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
Includes a Security Rule that sets minimum security standards to protect health 
information stored electronically.
2002
Homeland Security Act
Includes provisions to combat cyberterrorism, including protecting ISPs against 
lawsuits from customers for revealing private information to law enforcement 
agencies.
2002
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Requires archiving a variety of electronic records and protecting the integrity of 
corporate financial data.
2001
USA PATRIOT Act
Grants federal authorities expanded surveillance and intelligence-gathering powers, 
such as broadening the ability of federal agents to obtain the real identity of Internet 
users, intercept e-mail and other types of Internet communications, follow online 
activity of suspects, expand their wiretapping authority, and more.
1998
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act of 1998
Makes it a federal crime to knowingly use someone else’s means of identification, 
such as name, Social Security number, or credit card, to commit any unlawful activity.
1997
No Electronic Theft (NET) Act
Expands computer piracy laws to include online distribution of copyrighted materials.
1996
National Information Infrastructure Protection Act
Amends the Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984 to punish information theft 
crossing state lines and to crack down on network trespassing.
1984
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act of 1984
Makes it a crime to break into computers owned by the federal government. This act 
has been regularly amended over the years as technology has changed.
FIGURE 4-28
Computer network 
and Internet security 
legislation.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
One controversial bill under 
consideration is CISPA (Cyber 
Intelligence Sharing and Protection 
Act), which would allow for voluntary 
information sharing between private 
companies and the government in the 
event of a cyber attack.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

180
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
S U M MARY
WHY BE CONCERNED ABOUT NETWORK AND INTERNET 
SECURITY?
There are a number of important security concerns related to computers and the Internet. 
Many of these are computer crimes. Because computers and networks are so widespread 
and many opportunities for criminals exist, all computer users should be aware of the risks 
of using  networks and the Internet so they can take appropriate precautions.
UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS AND UNAUTHORIZED USE
Two risks related to networks and the Internet are unauthorized access and  unauthorized 
use. Hacking is using a computer to break into a computer. War driving and Wi-Fi 
 piggybacking refer to the unauthorized use of an unsecured Wi-Fi network. Data can be 
intercepted as it is transmitted over the Internet or a wireless network.
PROTECTING AGAINST UNAUTHORIZED ACCESS 
AND UNAUTHORIZED USE
Access control systems are used to control access to a computer,  network, or other resource. 
These include possessed knowledge access systems that use passwords or other types 
of possessed knowledge; possessed object access systems that use physical objects; and 
biometric access systems that identify users by a particular unique biological characteristic, 
such as a fingerprint. Passwords should be strong passwords; two-factor authentication 
systems that use multiple factors are more effective than single-factor systems.
To protect wireless networks, they should be secured; firewalls protect against unau-
thorized access. Sensitive transactions should be performed only on secure Web pages; 
sensitive files and e-mails should be secured with encryption. Public key encryption uses 
a private key and matching public key; private key encryption uses only a private key. 
A virtual private network (VPN) can be used to provide a secure remote connection to 
a company network, as well as to protect individuals at public Wi-Fi hotspots. Employers 
should take appropriate precautions with current and former employees to limit the risk of 
unauthorized access and use, as well as accidental exposure of sensitive information.
COMPUTER SABOTAGE
Computer sabotage includes malware (computer viruses, computer worms, and Trojan 
horses designed to cause harm to computer systems), denial of  service (DoS) attacks 
(designed to shut down a Web server), and data and program alteration. Computer sabotage 
is often performed via the Internet, increasingly by the bots in a botnet.
PROTECTING AGAINST COMPUTER SABOTAGE
Protection against computer sabotage includes using appropriate access control systems to 
keep unauthorized individuals from accessing computers and networks, as well as using 
security software. In particular, antivirus software protects against computer viruses and 
other types of malware. It is important to keep your security software up to date.
Chapter Objective 1:
Explain why computer users 
should be concerned about 
network and Internet security.
Chapter Objective 2:
List several examples of 
unauthorized access and 
unauthorized use.
Chapter Objective 3:
Explain several ways to 
 protect against unauthorized 
access and unauthorized 
use, including access  control 
systems, firewalls, and 
encryption.
Chapter Objective 4:
Provide several examples of 
computer sabotage.
Chapter Objective 5:
List how individuals 
and businesses can 
protect against computer 
sabotage.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
181
ONLINE THEFT, ONLINE FRAUD, AND OTHER DOT CONS
There are a variety of types of theft, fraud, and scams related to the Internet—collectively 
referred to as dot cons—that all Internet users should be aware of. Data, information, or 
money can be stolen from individuals and businesses. A common crime today is  identity 
theft, in which an individual poses as another individual—typically to steal money or 
make purchases posing as the victim. The information used in identity theft is often gath-
ered via phishing, spear phishing, social media hacking, and pharming. Online auc-
tion fraud is another common dot con.
PROTECTING AGAINST ONLINE THEFT, ONLINE FRAUD, 
AND OTHER DOT CONS
To protect against identity theft, individuals should guard their personal information care-
fully. To check for identity theft, watch your bills and credit history. When interacting with 
other individuals online or buying from an online auction, it is wise to be conservative 
and use a credit card whenever possible. To avoid other types of dot cons, be very wary of 
responding to unsolicited offers and e-mails, and steer clear of offers that seem too good 
to be true. Never click a link in an e-mail message to update your personal information. 
To verify a Web site, a digital certificate (also called a digital ID) can be used. To verify 
the sender of a document, a digital signature can be used. Digital certificates include key 
pairs that can be used to both digitally sign documents and to encrypt files.
PERSONAL SAFETY ISSUES
There are also personal safety risks for both adults and children stemming from Internet 
use. Cyberbullying and cyberstalking—online harassment that frightens or threatens 
the victim—is more common in recent years, even though most states have passed laws 
against it. Cyberbully is a growing risk for children, as are the risks of potential exposure 
to online pornography and other materials inappropriate for children, as well as the grow-
ing sexting and sextortion trends.
PROTECTING AGAINST CYBERBULLING, CYBERSTALKING, 
AND OTHER PERSONAL SAFETY CONCERNS
To protect their personal safety, adults and children should be cautious in online commu-
nications. They should be wary of revealing any personal information or meeting online 
acquaintances in person. To protect children, parents should keep a close watch on their 
children’s online activities, and children should be taught never to reveal personal infor-
mation to others online without a parent’s consent.
NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY LEGISLATION
The rapid growth of the Internet and jurisdictional issues have contributed to the lack of 
network and Internet security legislation. However, computer crime legislation continues 
to be proposed and computer crimes are actively prosecuted.
Chapter Objective 6:
Discuss online theft, 
identity theft, spoofing, 
phishing, and other types 
of dot cons.
Chapter Objective 7:
Detail steps an individual 
can take to protect against 
online theft, identity theft, 
spoofing, phishing, and 
other types of dot cons.
Chapter Objective 8:
Identify personal safety 
risks associated with 
Internet use.
Chapter Objective 9:
List steps individuals can 
take to safeguard their 
personal safety when using 
the Internet.
Chapter Objective 10:
Discuss the current state of 
network and Internet security 
legislation.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

182
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
R EVI EW ACTIVITI E S
Instructions: Match each key term on the left with the definition on the right that best describes it.
 1.        A collection of hardware and/or software intended to protect a computer or computer 
network from unauthorized access.
 2.       A fraud or scam carried out through the Internet.
 3.       A malicious program that masquerades as something else.
 4.        A method of scrambling the contents of an e-mail message or a file to make it 
unreadable if it is intercepted by an unauthorized user.
 5.        A secret combination of characters used to gain access to a computer, computer net-
work, or other resource.
 6.        A software program installed without the user’s knowledge and designed to alter the 
way a computer operates or to cause harm to the computer system.
 7.        An act of sabotage that attempts to flood a network server or a Web server with so 
much activity that it is unable to function.
 8.        The use of spoofed communications (typically e-mail messages) to gain credit card 
numbers and other personal data to be used for fraudulent purposes.
 9.       Using a computer to break into another computer system.
 10.        Using someone else’s identity to purchase goods or services, obtain new credit cards 
or bank loans, or otherwise illegally masquerade as that individual.
Instructions: Circle T if the statement is true, F if the statement is false, or write the best answer 
in the space provided. Answers for the self-quiz are located in the References and Resources 
Guide at the end of the book.
 1. T F A computer virus can only be transferred to another computer via a storage medium.
 2. T F An access control system that uses passwords is a possessed knowledge access system.
 3. T F  Using a password that is two characters long is an example of two-factor 
authentication.
 4. T F Secure Web pages use encryption to securely transfer data sent via those pages.
 5. T F  Cyberstalking is the use of spoofed e-mail messages to gain credit card numbers and 
other personal data to be used for fraudulent purposes.
 6. Driving around looking for a Wi-Fi network to access is referred to as      .
 7.       access control systems use some type of unique physical characteristic of a person 
to authenticate that individual.
 8. A(n)       can be used at a Wi-Fi hotspot to create a secure path over the Internet.
 9. A(n)       can be added to a file or an e-mail message to verify the identity of the sender 
and guarantee the file or message has not been changed.
KEY TERM 
MATCHING
 a. computer virus
 b. denial of service (DoS) attack
 c. dot con
 d. encryption
 e. firewall
 f. hacking
 g. identity theft
 h. password
 i. phishing
 j. Trojan horse
SELF-QUIZ
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
183
10. Match each computer crime to its description, and write the corresponding number in the 
blank to the left of the description. 
 a.        A person working for the Motor Vehicle Division deletes a friend’s speeding 
ticket from a database.
 b.        An individual does not like someone’s comment on a message board and begins 
to send that individual harassing e-mail messages.
 c.        An individual sells the same item to 10 individuals via an online auction 
site.
 d.       A person accesses a computer belonging to the IRS without authorization.
 1. Write the appropriate letter in the blank to the left of each term to indicate whether it is related 
to unauthorized access (U) or computer sabotage (C).
 a.       Time bomb 
c.       Malware 
e.       War driving
 b.       DoS attack 
d.       Wi-Fi piggybacking 
 2. Is the password john1 a good password? Why or why not? If not, suggest a better password.
 3. Supply the missing words to complete the following statements regarding public/private key 
pairs.
 a. With an encrypted e-mail message, the recipient’s       key is used to encrypt the 
message, and the recipient’s       key is used to decrypt the message.
 b. With a digital signature, the sender’s       key is used to sign the document, and the 
sender’s       key is used to validate the signature.
 4. To secure files on your computer so they are unreadable to a hacker who might gain access to 
your computer, what type of encryption (public key or private key) would be the most appropri-
ate? Explain.
 5. List two precautions you can take to protect against someone hacking your social media 
accounts.
 1. The term hacktivism is sometimes used to refer to the act of hacking into a computer system for 
a politically or socially motivated purpose. While some view hacktivists no differently than they 
view other hackers, hacktivists contend that they break into systems in order to bring attention to 
political or social causes. Is hacktivism a valid method of bringing attention to specific causes? 
Why or why not? Should hacktivists be treated differently from other types of hackers when 
caught?
 2. According to security experts, several worms released in past years contain more than just the 
virus code—they contain code to remove competing malware from the computers they infect 
and messages taunting other virus writers. The goal seems to be not only to gain control of an 
increasing number of infected machines—a type of “bot war” to build the biggest botnet—but 
also to one-up rivals. If this trend continues, do you think it will affect how hackers and other 
computer criminals will be viewed? Will they become cult heroes or be viewed as danger-
ous criminals? Will continuing to increase prosecution of these individuals help or hurt the 
situation?
 1. Online auction fraud 
 2. Hacking
 
3. Data or program 
alteration
 4. Cyberstalking
EXERCISES
DISCUSSION 
QUESTIONS
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

184
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
P R OJ E CTS
 1. Wi-Fi Hotspot Safety As mentioned in the chapter, it is possible to inadvertently connect to 
an evil twin instead of the legitimate Wi-Fi hotspot you intended to connect to and, even if 
you are connected to a legitimate hotspot, any data you send unsecured via the hotspot can be 
intercepted by a criminal. In either case, if a thief intercepts your credit card number, Web site 
passwords, or other sensitive data, it can be used for identity theft and other criminal activities.
For this project, research these and any other possible risks you can think of related to 
using a Wi-Fi hotspot. For each risk, identify a possible precaution that can be taken to guard 
against that risk. If you have ever used a Wi-Fi hotspot, were you at risk? Knowing what you 
do now, would you take any different precautions the next time you use one? Is it possible to 
surf safely using a Wi-Fi hotspot? What about activity performed via your smartphone  wireless 
provider—is that safe? At the conclusion of your research, prepare a one-page summary of 
your findings and opinions and submit it to your instructor.
 2. New Viruses Unfortunately, new computer viruses and other types of malware are released 
all the time. In addition to malware targeted toward computers, there is also mobile malware 
 targeted to smartphones, media tablets, and other Internet-enabled devices.
For this project, identify a current virus or worm (most security companies, such as 
Symantec and McAfee, list the most recent security threats on their Web sites) and answer the 
following questions: When was it introduced? What does it do? How is it spread? Is it targeted 
to computers or mobile devices? How many devices have been affected so far? Is there an 
estimated cost associated with it? Is it still in existence? At the conclusion of your research, 
prepare a one-page summary of your findings and submit it to your instructor.
 3. Virus Check There are several Web sites that include a free virus check, as well as other types 
of diagnostic software.
For this project, locate a free virus check (such as one available from Microsoft or from 
a company that makes antivirus software) and run the free virus check. NOTE: If you are on a 
school computer, only run online checks, not downloaded programs. If the check takes more 
than 10 minutes and there is an option to limit the check to a particular drive and folder, redo 
the check but scan only part of the hard drive (such as the Documents folder) to save time. 
After the virus scan is completed, print the page displaying the result. Did the program find 
any viruses or other security threats? At the conclusion of this task, submit your printout with 
any additional comments about your experience to your instructor.
HOT TOPICS
SHORT ANSWER/
RESEARCH
HANDS ON
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 4 NETWORK AND INTERNET SECURITY
185
 4. Teaching Computer Viruses Some college computer classes include instruction on writing 
computer viruses. At one university, precautions for containing code created during this 
course include allowing only fourth-year students to take the course, not having a network 
connection in the classroom, and prohibiting the removal of storage media from the classroom. 
Do you think these precautions are sufficient? Should writing virus code be allowed as part 
of a computer degree curriculum? Some believe that students need to know how viruses work 
in order to be able to develop antivirus software; however, the antivirus industry disagrees, 
and most antivirus professionals were never virus writers. Is it ethical for colleges to teach 
computer virus writing? Is it ethical for students to take such a course? Will teaching illegal 
and unethical acts (such as writing virus code) in college classes help to legitimize the 
behavior in society? Would you feel comfortable taking such a course? Why or why not?
For this project, form an opinion about the ethical implications of writing virus code in 
college classes and be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discus-
sion group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). 
You may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
 5. Virus Hoaxes In addition to the valid reports about new viruses found in the news and on 
antivirus software Web sites, reports of viruses that turn out to be hoaxes abound on the 
Internet. In addition to being an annoyance, virus hoaxes waste time and computing resources. 
In addition, they may eventually lead some users to routinely ignore all virus warning 
messages, leaving them vulnerable to a genuine, destructive virus.
For this project, visit at least two Web sites that identify virus hoaxes, such as the 
Symantec or McAfee Web sites and Snopes.com. Explore the sites to find information about 
recent virus hoaxes, as well as general guidelines for identifying virus hoaxes and other types 
of online hoaxes. Share your findings with the class in the form of a short presentation. The 
presentation should not exceed 10 minutes and should make use of one or more presentation 
aids, such as a whiteboard, handouts, or a computer-based slide presentation (your  instructor 
may provide additional requirements). You may also be asked to submit a summary of the 
 presentation to your instructor.
 6. Is Mobile Banking More Secure than Online Banking? You may have used your smart-
phone to pay a bill or deposit a check. While becoming common today, it is still newer than 
traditional online banking performed via a computer and so does not have as long of a track 
record. While banks are continually upgrading their security systems in response to new threats 
and technologies, is the security of online and mobile banking equal? Some consider traditional 
online banking safer because it has been tested longer, is used with computers that may have 
better security software installed, and is performed via home computers that are not as likely 
to be lost or misplaced as mobile devices. Others view mobile banking as safer because indi-
viduals tend to have their phones with them at all times and so can be notified more quickly of 
security breaches, GPS information can be used to identify transactions that occur in a different 
physical location from the registered location of the phone (and therefore might be fraudulent), 
and mobile banking accounts are often associated with a single phone. Mobile banking can 
be performed via a Web app, mobile Web site, or text messaging. Is one method safer than the 
other? How do the risks associated with mobile banking compare with the risks associated wtih 
traditional online banking? Would you feel safer using one or the other? Why? 
Pick a side on this issue, form an opinion and gather supporting evidence, and be 
 prepared to discuss and defend your position in a classroom debate or in a 1–2 page paper, 
depending on your instructor’s directions.
ETHICS IN ACTION
PRESENTATION/
DEMONSTRATION
BALANCING ACT
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

186
INTRODUCTION
Greg Hampton is the 
Vice President of Product 
Management for the 
Network Security team at 
McAfee. Before  joining 
McAfee, Hampton served 
as the Vice President of 
Marketing at Clearswift 
Corporation, an e-mail 
and Web security 
 company based in the 
UK. He was also a 
founder and the CEO of 
a Silicon Valley start up 
for delivering network 
management solutions. 
Greg has a Bachelor 
of Arts degree in 
Economics and brings a 
broad range of  enterprise 
 software experience to 
the company. 
Networks and the Internet
A conversation with GREG HAMPTON
Vice President, Product Management, McAfee
 
“  
. . . protect your identity and your online reputation—it will 
keep you and your data safe and will improve your career 
prospects.”
My Background . . .
I am the Vice President of Product Management for Network Security at McAfee. In product 
management, our role is to ensure that our product roadmap is forward looking, and to help connect 
users with engineers so that we can build outstanding products that meet user needs. I became involved 
with product management when I was a general manager for a high tech company overseeing its 
Canadian and Latin American operations and I was asked to oversee a newly acquired company. In the 
process, I was exposed to the role of product management and developed an interest in it. I have found 
my experiences in sales management and marketing roles at high tech companies directly applicable 
and useful to my current position. In addition, pursuing my Bachelor of Arts degree was invaluable. 
It helped me develop an interest in and the skills needed to be able to learn new ideas in new areas, 
which is essential for individuals who work in the world of high tech.
It’s Important to Know . . .
How the Internet and other networks work. Because the Internet is so integrated into our society 
today, it is important for people to understand the basic functions of the Internet—how it connects 
devices and resources, how people access it, how data is stored, and what the cloud is—so that they 
may understand how best to use and secure this resource in both their personal and professional lives.
That it is essential to protect your identity. Online theft, identity theft, and other privacy and secu-
rity risks impact what we call our “identity.” Protecting identities is a unique area of security that is 
important because it touches each of us personally—as employees, as students, and as individuals. In 
the digital world, you are your digital identity. What is associated with your digital identity becomes 
associated with you—and that could impact your finances, your legal standing, and your career.
Passwords alone are not an adequate security control. Today, most of our digital identities are 
protected by passwords. Unfortunately, a simple username and password is easy to break. What’s 
worse, many of us use the same username and password over and over again so once one account—
say, an online e-mail account—is breached, all other accounts (such as your bank account) using 
that same combination are then directly accessible. To make matters worse, the password policies 
often implemented to help prevent this (such as using a unique strong password for every account, 
changing them every few months, and telling people not to save them anywhere) increases these 
habits. Implementing better controls, such as two-factor and biometric authentication (e.g. voice 
and facial recognition used with our LiveSafe cloud storage product), is both safer and easier to use!
How I Use this Technology . . .
Because my job involves collecting requirements for Internet Security software and appliances, 
I use this knowledge and these solutions daily in my professional life. But I also use them in my 
personal life. For example, I use antivirus protection for all of my devices and I use two-factor or 
strong authentication to protect my financial and personal e-mail accounts.
expert insight on...
Courtesy McAfee
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXPERT INSIGHT ON NETWORKS AND THE INTERNET
187
What the Future Holds . . .
Today in our connected society, our identity is our most valuable and our 
most vulnerable link. And our society will continue to become more con-
nected. The Internet of Things (IoT) is moving beyond mobile devices and 
networked cars to wearable devices, household items, medical devices, 
and other items we use in our daily lives. In the near future, we will be 
connected in ways we’re just beginning to imagine. As this happens, it 
will become  increasingly important that we—as individuals, students, and 
a business  community—continue to watch the trends around identity pro-
tection; how trust relationships are established between people, systems, 
data and applications; and the laws and governance for personal privacy.
Already, the most vulnerable link in our networks today is our identity, and it will 
become more vulnerable in the even more connected future. And, as the consumerization 
of IT increases the pressure to move business tools and applications to the cloud, busi-
nesses will be more challenged than ever to securely grant remote, mobile, and highly 
social business users and their identities easy access while not compromising their 
 security— especially as the lines between the personal and professional continue to blur. 
To address these challenges, McAfee, Intel, and other companies are actively developing 
solutions like McAfee One Time Password and McAfee LiveSafe for businesses and con-
sumers that use technologies like multi-factor authentication, which combines passwords 
with other methods like biometrics, smartphones, chips in our devices like Intel Identity 
Protection Technology (IPT), or other physical objects. 
In the future, we can expect to see accelerated movement toward these solutions and 
technologies as we leave our weak and difficult-to-keep-track-of passwords behind.
My Advice to Students . . .
Protect yourself by implementing multi-factor authentication and strong passwords—today. 
And all of us, particularly students, should be careful of what we publish in social media. You 
can expose yourself to risk by sharing too much data about where you live, who you know, and 
what you are doing. If you share too much information, it can also impact your online reputa-
tion. Employers are increasing their scrutiny of social presence when considering job applicants 
and you don’t want something you say or post online to hurt your job prospects in the future.
So, protect your identity and your online reputation—it will keep you and your data 
safe, and will improve your career prospects.
Discussion Question
Greg Hampton stresses the importance of protecting your digital identity. Think about the 
systems that contain personal data about you. How would you feel if those systems were 
breached and your information was stolen? Does your viewpoint change if the information 
was monetary (such as credit card information) versus private information (such as grades or 
health information)? What security precautions, if any, do you think should be imposed by 
laws? Are organizations that hold your personal data morally responsible for going beyond 
the minimum requirements? Be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class 
discussion group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s 
directions). You may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
  . . . a simple 
username and 
password is easy 
to break 
>For more information about McAfee, visit www.mcafee.com. For information about specific 
security issues and solutions, visit www.mcafee.com/identity and blogs.mcafee.com.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

outline
Overview
Why Be Concerned About 
Computer Security?
Hardware Loss, Hardware 
Damage, and System Failure
Hardware Loss
Hardware Damage
System Failure and Other Disasters
Protecting Against Hardware Loss, 
Hardware Damage, and System 
Failure
Software Piracy and Digital 
Counterfeiting
Software Piracy
Digital Counterfeiting
Protecting Against Software Piracy 
and Digital Counterfeiting
Why Be Concerned About 
Information Privacy?
Databases, Electronic Proﬁ ling, 
Spam, and Other Marketing 
Activities
Databases and Electronic Proﬁ ling
Spam and Other Marketing 
Activities
Protecting the Privacy of Personal 
Information
Electronic Surveillance 
and Monitoring
Computer Monitoring Software
Video Surveillance
Employee Monitoring
Presence Technology
Protecting Personal and Workplace 
Privacy
Computer Security and Privacy 
Legislation
Computer Security 
and Privacy
After completing this chapter, you will be 
able to do the following:
1. Explain why all computer users should be 
concerned about computer security.
2. List some risks associated with hardware 
loss, hardware damage, and system  failure, 
and understand ways to safeguard a 
 computer against these risks.
3. Deﬁ ne software piracy and digital 
 counterfeiting, and explain how they 
can be prevented.
4. Explain what information privacy is and 
why computer users should be concerned 
about it.
5. Describe some privacy concerns  regarding 
databases, electronic proﬁ ling, spam, 
and telemarketing, and identify ways 
 individuals can protect their privacy.
6. Discuss several types of electronic 
 surveillance and monitoring, and list ways 
individuals can protect their privacy.
7. Discuss the status of computer security and 
privacy legislation.
chapter 5
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OV E RV I EW
T
he increasing use of computers in our society today has many advantages. It also, 
however, opens up new possibilities for problems (such as data loss due to a 
system malfunction or a disaster), as well as new opportunities for computer crime 
(such as hardware theft, software piracy, and digital counterfeiting). In addition, our 
networked society has raised a number of privacy concerns. Although we can appre-
ciate that sometimes selected people or organizations have a legitimate need for 
some types of personal information, whenever information is provided to others there 
is the danger that the information will be misused. For instance, facts may be taken 
out of context and used to draw distorted conclusions, or private information may end 
up being distributed to others without one’s consent or knowledge. And, with the vast 
amount of sensitive information stored in databases accessible via the Internet today, 
privacy is an enormous concern for both individuals and businesses.
Chapter 4 discussed security risks related to network and Internet use. This  chapter 
looks at other types of computer-related security concerns, as well as the computer- 
related privacy concerns facing us today. First, we explore hardware loss, hardware dam-
age, and system failure, and the safeguards that can help reduce the risk of a problem 
occurring due to these security concerns. Next, software piracy and digital counterfeit-
ing are discussed, along with the steps that are being taken to  prevent these computer 
crimes. We then turn to privacy topics, including  possible risks to personal privacy and 
 precautions that can be taken to safeguard one’s  privacy. The  chapter closes with a 
 summary of  legislation related to computer  security and privacy. ■
WHY BE CONCERNED ABOUT COMPUTER SECURITY?
Today, there are a number of security concerns surrounding computers and related tech-
nology that all individuals should be concerned about, including having your computer 
stolen, losing a term paper because the storage medium your paper was stored on becomes 
unreadable, losing your smartphone containing your entire contact list and calendar, or 
running the risk of buying pirated or digitally counterfeited products. The most com-
mon security risks and computer crimes (including hacking, computer viruses, identity 
theft, and cyberbullying) that take place via networks and the Internet were discussed in 
Chapter 4, along with their respective precautions. While these concerns are extremely 
important today, there are additional computer security issues that are not related spe-
cifically to networks and the Internet. These computer security concerns, along with some 
precautions that users can take to reduce the risks of problems occurring due to these 
 security concerns, are discussed in the next few sections.
HARDWARE LOSS, HARDWARE DAMAGE, 
AND SYSTEM FAILURE
Hardware loss can occur when a personal computer, USB flash drive, mobile device, or 
other piece of hardware is stolen or is lost by the owner. Hardware loss, as well as other 
security issues, can also result from hardware damage (both intentional and accidental) 
and system failure.
© iStockphoto.com/
shutter18
New security risks are revealed all 
the time. For instance, it was recently 
discovered that data from some 
unencrypted smart meters can be 
accessed from nearly 1,000 feet 
away, enabling would-be burglars 
to monitor homes to see if they are 
occupied based on electricity usage 
within the homes.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

190
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Hardware theft. The theft of computer hardware. >System failure. The complete malfunction of a computer system.
Hardware Loss
One of the most obvious types of hardware loss is hardware theft, which occurs when 
hardware is stolen from an individual or from a business, school, or other organization. 
Computers, printers, mobile phones, and other hardware can be stolen during a break-in; 
portable computers and mobile devices are also frequently stolen from cars, as well as from 
restaurants, airports, hotels, and other public locations. Although security experts stress that 
the vast majority of hardware theft is done for the value of the hardware itself, corporate 
executives and government employees may be targeted for computer theft for the informa-
tion  contained on their computers. In fact, C-level attacks (attacks aimed at C-level exec-
utives, such as CEOs and CIOs) are rapidly growing as executives are increasingly using 
e-mail and storing documents on their computers and mobile devices, as well as traveling 
more with these devices. And even if the data on a device is not the primary reason for a theft, 
any unencrypted sensitive data stored on the stolen device is at risk of being exposed or used 
for fraudulent purposes, and this is happening at unprecedented levels today.
Hardware loss also occurs when hardware is being transported in luggage or in a pack-
age that is lost by an airline or shipping company or when hardware is stolen during transit 
(for example, two thieves recently used forklifts to steal two pallets containing 3,600 iPads 
from a JFK cargo building); it can also occur when an individual misplaces or otherwise 
loses a piece of hardware. With the vast number of portable devices that individuals carry 
with them today (such as portable computers, media tablets, mobile phones, and USB flash 
drives), this latter type of hardware loss is a growing concern—by one estimate, 70 million 
mobile phones are lost annually in the United States alone. While lost hardware may be 
covered by insurance and the data stored on a lost or stolen device may not be used in a 
fraudulent manner, having to replace the hardware and restore the data—or, worse yet, losing 
the data entirely if it was not backed up—is still a huge inconvenience. If any sensitive data 
(such as Social Security numbers, Web site passwords, or credit card data) was contained on 
the lost hardware, individuals risk identity theft; in fact, one study revealed that 80% of users 
store information that could be used for identity theft on their mobile phones. Businesses 
hosting sensitive data that is breached have to deal with the numerous issues and potential 
consequences of that loss, such as notifying customers that their personal information was 
exposed (as required by nearly all of the states in the United States), responding to potential 
lawsuits, and trying to repair damage to the company’s reputation.
Hardware Damage
Computer hardware often consists of relatively delicate components that can be damaged 
easily by power fluctuations, heat, dust, static electricity, water, and abuse. For instance, 
fans clogged by dust can cause a computer to overheat, dropping a device will often break 
it, and spilling a drink on a keyboard or leaving a mobile phone in the pocket of your jeans 
while they go through the wash will likely damage or ruin it. In addition to accidental dam-
age, computers and other hardware can also be intentionally damaged by burglars, vandals, 
disgruntled employees, and other individuals who have access to the hardware.
System Failure and Other Disasters
Although many of us may prefer not to think about it, system failure—the complete mal-
function of a computer system—and other types of computer-related disasters do happen. 
From accidentally deleting a file to having your computer just stop working, computer 
problems can be a huge inconvenience, as well as cost you a great deal of time and money. 
When the system contains your personal documents and data, it is a problem; when it 
According to one recent 
study, data breaches cost U.S. 
companies nearly $200 per 
compromised personal record.
TIP
To avoid future problems, some 
damaged landline telephone 
lines (such as those on the East 
Coast damaged by Hurricane 
Sandy) are being replaced with 
fixed wireless systems, such as 
Verizon’s Voice Link system.
TIP
According to Norton research, 
35% of people worldwide have 
lost a smartphone and the person 
who finds a lost phone will more 
often than not look through the 
photos and private information 
stored on a found phone, even 
when they intend to return it.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
191
 contains the only copy of your company records or controls a vital 
system—such as a nuclear power plant—it can be a disaster.
System failure can occur because of a hardware problem, soft-
ware problem, or computer virus. It can also occur because of a natu-
ral disaster (such as a tornado, fire, flood, or hurricane), sabotage, 
or a terrorist attack. The terrorist attack on the New York City World 
Trade Center Twin Towers on September 11, 2001, illustrated this all 
too clearly. When the Twin Towers collapsed, nearly 3,000 people 
were killed and hundreds of offices—over 13 million square feet of 
office space—were completely destroyed; another 7 million square 
feet of office space was damaged (see Figure 5-1). In addition to the 
devastating human loss, the offices located in the WTC lost their 
computer systems—including all the equipment, records, and data 
stored at that location. The ramifications of these system failures and 
the corresponding data loss were felt around the world by all the businesses and people 
connected directly or indirectly to these organizations.
Protecting Against Hardware Loss, Hardware Damage, 
and System Failure
To protect against hardware loss, hardware damage, and system failure, a number of pre-
cautions can be taken, as discussed next.
Door and Computer Equipment Locks
Locked doors and equipment can be simple deterrents to computer theft. For instance, doors 
to facilities should be secured with door locks, alarm systems, and whatever other access 
control methods (such as the possessed object and biometric access  systems  discussed in 
Chapter 4) are needed to make it difficult to gain access to hardware that might be stolen. In 
addition, employees should be trained regarding the proper procedures for ensuring visitors 
only have access to the parts of the facility that they are authorized to access. To evaluate 
their employees and security procedures, some companies use social engineering tests, also 
known as vulnerability assessments. For instance, these tests check whether or not employ-
ees will click a phishing e-mail message or give out sensitive information in response to a 
phishing telephone call, will grant a potential thief physical access to the facility, or will plug 
a USB flash drive found in the office or parking lot (and potentially containing malware 
planted by a hacker) into their computers. To perform a social engineering test, one company 
(TraceSecurity) has engineers that typically impersonate pest control workers or fire inspec-
tors in order to gain entry to server rooms and other locations where they can then access 
sensitive data and equipment. They sometimes precede their visit with a spoofed internal 
e-mail to office employees, such as announcing an upcoming pest inspection and requesting 
employees grant the pest control workers full access to check for 
infestation. Once at the office, TraceSecurity personnel attempt to 
talk their way into the building and into a room that allows access 
to the company network. As proof of access, they tag equipment 
with TraceSecurity stickers (see Figure 5-2), take photographs of 
the documents and data they were able to access, and sometimes 
even remove hardware from the building (assuming the business 
requests this and has granted the appropriate permission). The 
business then receives a report detailing which tests employees 
passed and failed, as well as recommendations for precautions 
that should be taken.
To secure computers and other hardware to a table or other 
object that is difficult to move, cable locks can be used. Cable locks 
are frequently used to secure computers, media tablets, monitors, 
external hard drives, and other hardware found in schools and 
FIGURE 5-1
System destruction. 
The 9/11 attacks killed 
nearly 3,000 people 
and destroyed hundreds 
of business offices, 
including critical cables 
located in this Verizon 
office adjacent to 
Ground Zero.
<
FIGURE 5-2
Social engineering 
tests. The red and 
white stickers mark 
equipment accessed 
during a TraceSecurity 
test.
<
Courtesy of Verizon Communications
Courtesy TraceSecurity
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

192
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
businesses. They are also used by college students, business travelers, and other individuals 
while on the go to temporarily secure their portable devices when they are not being used. 
To facilitate using a computer lock, most computers today come with a security slot—a 
small opening built into the system unit case designed for computer locks (see Figure 5-3). 
If a security slot is not available, cable anchors (which attach to a piece of hardware using 
industrial strength adhesive and which contain a connector through which the cable lock can 
be passed) or special security cases (which enclose a device and attach to a cable lock—refer 
again to Figure 5-3) can be used. Computer locks are available in key and number or letter 
combination versions.
As an additional precaution with portable computers, laptop alarm software that emits a 
very loud alarm noise if the computer is unplugged, if USB devices are removed, or if the com-
puter is shut down without the owner’s permission can be used. In addition to physically secur-
ing computers, it is also extremely important 
for  businesses to ensure that employees fol-
low security protocols related to portable 
storage media such as signing in and out por-
table hard drives, USB flash drives, and other 
storage media if required, and keeping those 
devices locked up when they are not in use. 
An emerging option for protecting mobile 
devices from physical damage—self-healing 
devices—is discussed in the Trend box.
Encryption and Self-Encrypting 
Hard Drives
As discussed in Chapter 4, encryption can be 
used to prevent a file from being readable if it 
Self-Healing Devices
Imagine being able to drop your phone or laptop without wor-
rying about permanently damaging it. Or not having to worry 
about getting scratches on a touch screen. Well, you may be 
in luck in the near future. While protective cases and screen 
protectors have been available for quite some time, research-
ers are now going a step further by working on ways for your 
device to heal itself when damaged. For example, researchers 
at the University of Southern Mississippi in Hattiesburg recently 
announced a new type of plastic that mimics our skin’s ability to 
repair itself. When the plastic is scratched or cracked, it breaks 
the tiny molecular links in the material, which results in that area 
turning red. When the plastic is exposed to light or temperature 
changes, it reforms—or “repairs”—itself.
Another example is the Scratch Shield iPhone case devel-
oped by Nissan and shown in the accompanying photograph. 
This case uses a special paint that can slowly return to its origi-
nal state after being damaged, such as when the case receives 
scratches or even deep cuts. Small scratches can heal in as 
little as an hour; deeper scratches can take up to a week. While 
the paint was developed initially for use with Nissan and Inﬁ niti 
cars, this iPhone case is currently being tested and may be 
available in the near future.
T R E N D
This Scratch Shield case from Nissan can repair 
itself when scratched.
Courtesy Nissan
SECURITY CASES
This iPad security case/stand encloses the iPad
and secures it via a keyed cable lock.
NOTEBOOK LOCKS
This combination cable lock connects to the
security slot built into the notebook computer.
FIGURE 5-3
Cable locks secure 
computers and 
other hardware.
<
Courtesy of Kensington Computer Products Group
iPad security cases are 
increasingly being used with 
iPads in retail environments so 
they can be securely used by 
employees and/or customers.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
193
is intercepted or viewed by an unauthorized indi-
vidual. To protect the data on an entire computer 
in case it is lost or stolen, full disk encryption 
(FDE) can be used. FDE systems encrypt every-
thing stored on the drive (the operating system, 
application programs, data, temporary files, and 
so forth) automatically without any user interac-
tion, so users don’t have to remember to encrypt 
sensitive documents and the encryption is always 
enabled. To access a hard drive that uses FDE 
(often referred to as a self-encrypting hard drive), 
a username and password, biometric characteris-
tic, or other authentication control is needed.
While self-encrypting hard drives are used 
most often with portable computers (in fact, 
the U.S. federal government is in the process of 
implementing FDE on all government-owned 
portable computers and mobile devices), they 
are also used with desktop computers and serv-
ers. Because FDE requires no user input to 
enable it and all files are encrypted automati-
cally, these systems provide an easy way to 
ensure all data is protected, provided strong 
passwords are used in conjunction with the encryption system so the system cannot be 
easily hacked. Devices using hardware encryption with hardware authentication, where 
both the encryption and authentication systems are built into hardware (such as the device 
itself or a microSD card) instead of using software, are even more secure 
against hackers. Encrypted devices are used today by individuals, as well 
as businesses. In addition, businesses, such as law firms, are beginning to 
use encryption systems with their mobile phones in order to protect client-
related voice calls and text messages. 
Encryption can also be used to protect the data stored on removable 
media, such as flash memory cards and USB flash drives; a strong password, 
a biometric feature, or a PIN number (such as is used with the device shown 
in Figure 5-4) provides access to the data on the drive. Many encrypted 
devices allow multiple users to be registered as authorized users (by assign-
ing each individual a password or registering his or her fingerprint image, 
for instance); some allow a portion of the device to be designated as unen-
crypted for nonsensitive documents, if desired. Many businesses today are 
requiring that all desktop computers, portable computers, portable storage 
devices, and mobile phones issued to employees be encrypted in order to 
protect against a data breach.
Device Tracking Software and Antitheft Tools
Some software tools are not designed to prevent hardware from being stolen; instead, they 
are designed to aid in its recovery. This can be beneficial because, according to FBI sta-
tistics, 1 in 10 newly-purchased laptops will be stolen within 12 months and only 3% will 
be recovered. One software tool that can be used to help increase the chances of a stolen 
or lost device being recovered is device tracking software. When a device with tracking 
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Craig Miller, Chief Information Officer, Sonic, 
America’s Drive-In
If the computers or software supporting the 
order entry system in one of your restaurants 
fails, can the restaurant still process orders?
Even in this age of dependency on technology, SONIC 
drive-in locations can continue to run should our point-
of-sales (POS) system not function. Each drive-in is 
equipped with a crash kit that includes guest tickets 
for order taking, menus for pricing reference, and a “tax 
chart” so that crew members can manually take orders. 
SONIC crew members also have specific steps that 
our Operations team has set out for them to follow. 
Our main focus is to ensure guest satisfaction remains 
high, even if our system goes down. 
>Full disk encryption (FDE). A technology that encrypts everything stored on a storage medium automatically, without any user interaction. 
>Self-encrypting hard drive. A hard drive that uses full disk encryption (FDE).
FIGURE 5-4
Encrypted devices. 
The data on this encryp-
ted USB flash drive 
cannot be accessed 
until the user enters the 
appropriate PIN.
<
LOK-IT Secure Flash Drive ® 
Courtesy SONIC
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

194
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
software installed is reported lost or stolen, the tracking software sends information 
about the location of the device, typically determined by GPS or the nearest Wi-Fi net-
work, to the tracking software company on a regular basis when the device is connected 
to the Internet so that information can be provided to law enforcement agencies to help 
them recover the device. Some tracking software can even take video or photos of the 
person using the stolen device (via the device’s video camera) to help identify and pros-
ecute the thief. 
 Most tracking software is available on a subscription basis; to protect itself, most 
tracking software can also survive operating system reinstallations and hard drive refor-
mats. Some can also display a message on the screen when the device is lost or stolen. 
This message might be a plea to return the device for a reward or simply a message like 
“THIS DEVICE IS STOLEN” in a big bright banner on the desktop or lock screen to 
call attention to the fact that the device is stolen. Another common option is the ability 
to remotely lock the device and display a message that the device is locked and won’t 
function without the appropriate password (see one example in Figure 5-5). A feature 
included in many device tracking programs is a kill switch—a technology that causes 
the device to self-destruct, as discussed in the How It Works box. A different type of 
kill switch that federal prosecutors are urging smartphone manufacturers to implement 
as part of the 2013 Secure Our Smartphones (SOS) Initiative is technology that would 
make all stolen smartphones inoperable, on any network, anywhere in the world, even 
if the SIM card is removed. This push is due to growing crime—including murder—
related to smartphone theft. In fact, one in every three robberies nationwide involves a 
stolen mobile phone.
Self-Destructing Devices
When a business or an individual is less concerned about 
recovering a stolen device than about ensuring the data located 
on the device is not compromised, devices that self-destruct 
upon command are a viable option. Available as part of some 
device tracking apps, as well as stand-alone utilities, kill switch 
capabilities destroy the data on a device (typically by overwrit-
ing preselected ﬁ les multiple times, rendering them unread-
able) when instructed—see the example in the accompanying 
illustration. Kill switches built into device tracking systems are 
typically activated by the customer or by the tracking company 
upon customer request when the device is determined to be 
lost or stolen. Once the kill switch is activated, all data on the 
device is erased the next time it connects to the Internet or 
when another predesignated remote trigger is activated (such 
as a certain number of unsuccessful logon attempts). Users of 
some cloud services can also use those  services to remotely 
wipe their mobile devices when needed.
Kill switch technology is also beginning to be built into some 
USB ﬂ ash drives and hard drives. For example, some encrypted 
hard drives automatically delete the encryption key (which leaves 
the data unaccessible) after a speciﬁ c number of unsuccessful 
password entry attempts. Not quite Mission Impossible, but when 
hardware containing sensitive data is stolen (which could impact 
an individual’s personal privacy or a business’s legal liability, repu-
tation, and bottom line), kill switch technology could save the day.
H OW I T WO R K S
Courtesy of Lookout Mobile Security
Courtesy Bullguard
FIGURE 5-5
Device tracking 
software.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
195
Another antitheft tool is the use of asset tags on hardware and other expensive assets. 
These labels usually identify the owner of the asset and are designed to be permanently 
attached to the asset. Some tags are designed to be indestructible; others 
are tamper evident labels that change their appearance if someone (such 
as a thief) tries to remove them. For instance, some labels have a printed 
message hidden underneath the label that is etched into the surface of 
the device and is exposed when the label is removed. Both of these 
features alert a potential buyer to the fact that the item is likely stolen.
Additional Precautions for Mobile Users
With the increased use of smartphones and other mobile devices today, 
securing these devices against theft and unauthorized use is becom-
ing increasingly more important. Businesses today often utilize mobile 
device management (MDM) software to manage the various mobile 
devices used by their employees. For instance, MDM software can con-
trol the apps installed or available on a device, or disable the camera 
while on the premises if cameras are not allowed. In addition, the soft-
ware typically includes device tracking software to remotely lock down 
or wipe a lost or stolen phone,  display a message on the phone con-
taining instructions for returning the device, display the current loca-
tion of the device on a map (using GPS coordinates), and/or overrule 
volume settings to play a loud sound to help the owner locate the phone 
if it is nearby. Another option is a wireless tether system that ties your 
phone to a key fob in order to sound an alarm and lock the phone if the 
phone and key fob become further away than the specified allowable 
distance. However, to avoid losing the device in the first place or to 
prevent someone from accessing the data stored on the device, other 
 precautions should be used.
While on the go, the best antitheft measure is common sense. For example, you should 
never leave a portable computer or mobile device unattended in a public location (keep it 
in your line of sight or in physical contact at all times so it cannot be stolen without you 
noticing). When staying in a hotel, take your computer with you, use a cable lock to secure 
it to a piece of furniture, or lock it in a hotel safe (many hotel rooms today have room safes 
large enough to hold a portable computer) when you leave your hotel room for the day. 
Other sensible precautions include using a plain carrying case to make a portable com-
puter less conspicuous and labeling your portable computer (and other portable devices 
and hardware that you take with you on the go) with your contact information so a lost 
or stolen device can be returned to you when it is recovered. One additional possibility 
for protecting data while on the road is using cloud services to store all data online or on 
the company server instead of on your device—if no 
data is stored on the device, then there is no data that 
can be directly compromised if the device is lost or 
stolen. In addition, mobile users should disable wire-
less connections when they are not needed and enable 
password protection for  accessing the device. These 
precautions are summarized in Figure 5-6.
Proper Hardware Care
Proper care of hardware can help to prevent serious 
damage to a computer system. The most obvious pre-
caution is to not harm your hardware physically, such 
as by dropping a device, knocking a piece of hardware 
off a desk, or jostling a desktop computer’s system 
unit. Protective cases (see Figure 5-7) can be used 
MOBILE COMPUTING PRECAUTIONS
Install and use encryption, antivirus, antispyware, 
and firewall software.
Secure computers with boot passwords; set your 
mobile phone to autolock the screen after a short 
period of time and require a passcode to unlock it. 
Use only secure Wi-Fi connections and disable 
Wi-Fi and Bluetooth when they are not needed.
Never leave usernames, passwords, or other data 
attached to your computer or inside its carrying case.
Use a plain carrying case to make a portable 
computer less conspicuous.
Keep an eye on your devices at all times, especially 
when going through airport security.
Avoid setting your devices on the floor or leaving 
them in your hotel room; use a cable lock to secure 
the device to a desk or other object whenever this is 
unavoidable.
Back up the data stored on the device regularly, 
but don’t carry the backup media with your device 
and don’t store unencrypted sensitive data on your 
device.
Consider installing tracking or kill switch software.
FIGURE 5-6
Common-sense 
precautions for 
portable computer 
and mobile device 
users.
<
MOBILE PHONES
MEDIA TABLETS
FIGURE 5-7
Protective cases.
<
Courtesy of OtterBox
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

196
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
FIGURE 5-8
Ruggedized devices.
<
SURGE SUPPRESSOR
UPS
FIGURE 5-9
Surge suppressors 
and uninterruptible 
power supplies 
(UPSs).
<
to help protect portable devices against minor abuse. These cases are usually padded or 
made from protective material to prevent damage due to occasional bumps and bangs; 
they typically also have a thin protective layer over the device’s display to protect against 
scratches. Some protective cases are water resistant to protect the device from rain or dust 
damage. There are also neoprene laptop sleeves available to protect portable computers 
from scratches and other damage when they are carried in a conventional briefcase or bag.
For users who need more protection than a protective case can provide, 
ruggedized devices are available (see Figure 5-8). These devices are designed to with-
stand much more physical abuse than conventional devices and range from semirugged to 
ultrarugged. For instance, semirugged devices typically have a more durable case and are 
spill- resistant. Rugged and ultrarugged devices go a few steps further—they are designed 
to withstand falls from three feet or more onto concrete, extreme temperature ranges, wet 
conditions, and use while being bounced around over rough terrain in a vehicle. Many rug-
ged devices are also cooled without fans to avoid bringing dust into the circuitry; some are 
designed to be used in bright sunlight and while wearing gloves. Ruggedized devices are 
used most often by individuals who work out of the office, such as field workers, construc-
tion workers, outdoor technicians, military personnel, police  officers, and firefighters.
To protect hardware from damage due to power 
fluctuations, it is important for all users to use a 
surge suppressor (see Figure 5-9); the surge suppressor 
should be used to connect a computer and other hard-
ware whenever they are plugged into a power outlet. 
When electrical power spikes occur, the surge suppressor 
prevents them from harming your devices. For the best 
protection, surge suppressors should be used with all the 
powered components that have a wired connection to the 
 computer (such as a monitor or printer). There are small 
surge suppressors designed for use while on the go, and 
others designed for business and industrial use.
Users who want their desktop computers to remain 
powered up when the electricity goes off should use an 
uninterruptible power supply (UPS), which contains 
a built-in battery (see Figure 5-9). The length of time 
that a UPS can power a system depends on the type and 
>Ruggedized device. A device (such as a portable computer or mobile phone) that is designed to withstand much more physical abuse than 
its conventional counterpart. >Surge suppressor. A device that protects hardware from damage due to electrical fluctuations. >Uninterruptible 
power supply (UPS). A device containing a built-in battery that provides continuous power to a computer and other connected components 
when the electricity goes out.
RUGGED LAPTOPS
RUGGED TABLETS
RUGGED PHONES
Courtesy Kyocera
© iStockPhoto.com/aijohn784 
Courtesy Xplore Technologies Corp.
Courtesy of Schneider Electric
Some devices today look 
conventional but have some 
rugged features, such as the 
Sony Xperia Tablet Z media 
tablet and the Kyocera Hydro 
smartphone that can withstand 
being under 1 meter (about 
3 feet) of water for up to 30 
minutes.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
197
number of devices connected to the UPS, the power capacity of the UPS device (typically 
measured in watts), and the age of the battery (most UPS batteries last only 3 to 5 years 
before they need to be replaced). Most UPS devices also protect against power fluctua-
tions. UPSs designed for use by  individuals usually provide power for a few minutes to 
keep the system powered up during short power blips, as well as to allow the user to save 
open documents and shut down the computer properly in case the electricity remains off. 
Industrial-level UPSs typically run for a significantly longer amount of time (such as a 
few hours), but not long enough to power a facility during an extended power outage 
such as those that happen periodically in some parts of the United States due to winter 
storms, summer rotating blackouts, and other factors. To provide longer-term power dur-
ing extended power outages, as well as to provide continuous power to facilities (such 
as hospitals, nuclear power plants, and business data centers) that cannot afford to be 
without power for any period of time, generators can be used.
Dust, heat, static electricity, and moisture can also be dangerous to hardware, so be 
sure not to place your devices in direct sunlight or in a dusty area. Small handheld vacuums 
made for electrical equipment can be used periodically to remove the dust from the key-
board and from inside the system unit of a computer, but be very careful when vacuuming 
inside the system unit. Also, be sure the system unit has plenty of ventilation, especially 
around the fan vents. To help reduce the amount of dust that is drawn into the fan vents, 
raise your desktop computer several inches off the floor. You should also avoid 
placing a portable computer on a soft surface, such as a couch or blanket, 
to help prevent overheating (notebook cooling stands can be used to provide 
air circulation when a soft surface must be used). To prevent static electricity 
from damaging the inside of your computer when installing a new expansion 
card, RAM, or other internal device, turn off the power to the computer and 
unplug the power cord from the computer before removing the cover from the 
system unit. Wearing an antistatic wristband is an additional good precaution. 
Unless your computer is ruggedized (like the one shown in Figure 5-10), do 
not get it wet or otherwise expose it to adverse conditions. Be especially care-
ful with mobile phones and other mobile devices when you are near water 
(such as a swimming pool, lake, or large puddle) so you do not drop them into 
the water (more than 50% of the phones received by one data recovery firm 
are water damaged).
Both internal and external magnetic hard drives also need to be 
protected against jostling or other excess motion that can result in a head 
crash, which occurs when a hard drive’s read/write heads actually touch the surface 
of a hard disk. Unless your portable computer contains a solid-state drive instead of 
a magnetic hard drive, it is a good idea to turn off the computer, hibernate it, or put it 
into standby mode before moving it because magnetic hard drives are more vulnerable 
to damage while they are spinning. In addition, storage media—such as flash memory 
cards, hard drives, CDs, and DVDs—are all sensitive storage media that work well over 
time, as long as appropriate care is used. Don’t remove a USB storage device (such as a 
USB flash drive or USB hard drive) when it is being accessed—use the Safely Remove 
Hardware and Eject Media icon in the system tray on a Windows computer to stop the 
device before unplugging it to avoid data loss and damage to the device. Keep CDs and 
DVDs in their protective jewel cases and handle them carefully to prevent fingerprints 
and scratches on the data sides of the discs (usually the bottom, unprinted side on a 
single-sided disc). A screen protector (a thin plastic film that  covers the display screen 
of a smartphone or other mobile device) can be used to protect the displays of pen-
based and touch devices.
For more tips on how to protect your desktop or portable computer, see the Technology 
and You box. Many of these tips apply to smartphones, media tablets, and other mobile 
devices as well.
FIGURE 5-10
Proper hardware 
care. Unless your 
computer is ruggedized 
(such as the one 
shown here), keep it 
out of the heat, cold, 
rain, water, and other 
adverse conditions.
<
Courtesy General Dynamics Itronix
Use surge suppressors to protect 
all of your sensitive electronics, 
such as televisions and gaming 
consoles in addition to computers, 
from electrical fluctuations.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

198
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Protecting Your PC
All computer users should take speciﬁ c actions to protect their 
computers. In this world of viruses, worms, hackers, spyware, 
and “buggy” (error-prone) software, it pays to be cautious. 
Although safeguards have been covered in detail throughout 
this book, some speciﬁ c precautionary steps all computer 
users should follow are summarized in this box.
Step 1: Protect your hardware.
Be sure to plug all components of your computer system (such as 
the system unit, monitor, printer, and scanner) into a surge sup-
pressor. Be careful not to bump or move the computer when it is 
on. Don’t spill food or drink onto the keyboard or any other piece 
of hardware. Store your ﬂ ash memory cards and CDs properly. 
If you need to work inside the system unit, turn off the computer 
and unplug it before touching any component inside the system 
unit. When taking a portable computer on the road, never leave it 
unattended, and be careful not to drop or lose it.
Step 2: Install and use security software.
Install a good security program and set it up to scan your sys-
tem on a continual basis, including checking all ﬁ les and e-mail 
messages before they are downloaded to your computer. To 
detect the newest viruses and types of malware, keep your 
security program up to date (have it automatically check for and 
install updates) and use a personal two-way ﬁ rewall program 
to protect your computer from unauthorized access via the 
Internet, as well as to detect any attempts by spyware to send 
data from your computer to another party. For additional protec-
tion, enable ﬁ le sharing only for ﬁ les and folders that really need 
to be accessed by other users. Run an antispyware program—
such as Ad-Aware or Spybot Search & Destroy—on a regular 
basis to detect and remove spyware.
Step 3: Back up regularly.
Once you have a new computer set up with all programs 
installed and the menus and other settings the way you like 
them, create a full backup so the computer can be restored to 
that conﬁ guration in case of a major problem with your com-
puter or hard drive. Be sure also to back up your data ﬁ les on 
a regular basis. Depending on how important your documents 
are, you may want to back up all of your data every night, or 
copy each document to a removable storage medium after each 
major revision. If you use local (instead of Web-based) e-mail, 
periodically back up the folder containing your e-mail, such as 
the Outlook.pst ﬁ le used to store Microsoft Outlook mail. To 
facilitate data backup, keep your data organized using folders 
(such as storing all data ﬁ les in a main folder called “Data”). For 
an even higher level of security, use continuous data protection 
(CDP) in conjunction with an external hard drive or an online 
backup service (see the iDrive CDP program in the accompany-
ing illustration)—if your main hard drive ever becomes unstable 
and needs to be reformatted or replaced, you can restore your 
computer using the backup. If an online backup service is not 
used, backup media should be stored in a location that is differ-
ent from the location where your computer is stored, such as in 
a different building or in a ﬁ re-resistant safe. 
Step 4: Update your operating system, browser, and 
e-mail program regularly.
Most companies that produce operating systems, Web brows-
ers, or e-mail programs regularly post updates and patches—
small programs that take care of software-speciﬁ c problems 
or bugs, such as security holes—on their Web sites regularly. 
Some programs include an option within the program to check 
online for updates; for other programs, you will need to go to 
each manufacturer’s Web site directly to check for any critical or 
recommended updates. For any programs—such as Windows 
and most antivirus and ﬁ rewall programs—that have the option 
to check for updates automatically, enable that option. 
Step 5: Test your system for vulnerabilities.
There are several free tests available through Web sites to see 
if your computer’s ports are accessible to hackers or if your 
computer is infected with a virus or spyware. These tests, such 
as the one on the Symantec Web site shown in Figure 4-10 
in Chapter 4 or the ShieldsUP! test available on the Gibson 
Research Web site, should be run to check for any remaining 
vulnerabilities once you believe your antivirus software, ﬁ rewall, 
and any other protective components you are using are set up 
correctly.
T E C H N O LO GY A N D YOU
Continuous data protection (CDP) protects your 
data on an ongoing basis.
© IDrive Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
199
Backups and Disaster Recovery 
Plans
As mentioned in Chapter 1, creating a backup 
means making a duplicate copy of important 
files so that when a problem occurs (such as 
a hard drive failure or a stolen computer), you 
can restore those files using the backup copy. 
Data to be backed up includes company files, 
personal documents, photos, e-mail messages, 
and any other files that are important and the 
owner of the files would miss if they were 
lost. Backups can be performed for personal 
computers, servers, mobile phones, and other 
devices that contain important data. Backing 
up a smartphone often involves syncing the 
data to a cloud account or a computer.
Businesses should make backups of at least 
all new data on a regular basis (at least once per 
day) and include data located on both company 
computers and employer-issued smartphones. 
Individuals should make backups of important 
documents as they are created and back up the 
rest of their data periodically. Businesses and 
individuals that utilize cloud computing should 
also back up important data stored online.
After a backup is performed, the backup 
media used needs to be secured so that it will 
be intact when it is needed. If backup media is 
stored in-house, it should be placed in a fire-
resistant safe; however, it is even better to store 
backup media in a different physical location 
or in the cloud. For instance, many businesses 
today use online backup services or data stor-
age companies that store their backup media at 
a secure remote location; businesses can request 
their backups stored at a data storage facility be 
returned whenever they are needed. To secure the data on the backup media while it is in 
transit and being stored, as well as data stored in the cloud, the data should be encrypted. 
For an even higher level of security than a scheduled backup, continuous data protection
(CDP) can be used. A CDP backup system backs up data in real time as it changes so that 
data can be recovered from any point in time (even just a few minutes ago) with no data loss, 
and recovery can be as fast as five minutes after a failure. Although expensive when used with 
large quantities of data, it is one of the best ways to ensure that company data is protected. In 
addition to business data, CDP is beginning to be used by individuals to safeguard their data 
(one online CDP backup service is shown in the Technology and You box). For extra protection 
against data loss due to a natural disaster or other geographic-specific risk, businesses should 
use cloud providers that are in a physical location that is different from the company’s location.
To supplement backup procedures, businesses and other organizations should have a 
disaster recovery plan (also called a business continuity plan)—a plan that spells out what 
AS K TH E E X PE R T
Mike Cobb, Director of Engineering, 
DriveSavers Data Recovery
Of the hard drives sent to you for recovery, 
what is the most common type of problem 
you see and is there a way that problem can 
be prevented?
We often receive hard drives that have severe media 
damage. That means that the read/write heads have 
come in contact with the platters and scraped off 
portions of the surface and data. This often occurs 
because the hard drive was left powered on after the 
problem occurred. The platters inside a drive spin 
at high speed, so a great deal of damage can occur 
in a very short period of time as the heads bounce 
around and create more debris. Eventually the dam-
age becomes too great for even a professional data 
recovery company to overcome.
The best rule of thumb to prevent the loss of 
critical data is to back up religiously and to verify 
that the backup is really backing up the critical files. 
In addition, if a hard drive exhibits any sign of failure 
including unusual noises (such as repetitive clicking 
or grinding) and if the data is irreplaceable and has 
not been backed up recently, the best solution is 
to immediately shut down the computer and then 
seek the assistance of a professional data recovery 
company like DriveSavers.
>Disaster recovery plan. A written plan that describes the steps a company will take following the occurrence of a disaster.
Courtesy of DriveSavers Data Recovery www.drivesavers.com
Be sure backup generators and 
servers are located in an appropriate 
location; for example, they should not 
be in a basement or in any locations 
prone to flooding. As an extra 
precaution, consider moving primary 
servers or installing remote backup 
servers in regions of the country that 
don’t have the same risk factors as 
the company’s location.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

200
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Software piracy. The unauthorized copying of a computer program.
the organization will do to prepare for and recover from a disruptive event, such as a fire, 
natural disaster, terrorist attack, power outage, or computer failure. Disaster recovery plans 
should include information about who will be in charge immediately after the disaster has 
occurred, what alternate facilities and equipment (including computers and mobile devices) 
can be used, where backup media is located, the priority of getting each operation back 
online, disaster insurance coverage information, emergency communications methods, 
and so forth. If a hot site—an alternate location equipped with the computers, cabling, 
desks, and other equipment necessary to keep a business’s operations going—is to be used 
following a major disaster, it should be set up ahead of time, and information about the hot 
site should be included in the disaster recovery plan. Businesses that host their e-mail on 
site should also consider making arrangements with an emergency mail system provider 
to act as a temporary mail server if the company mail server is not functioning. Copies of 
the disaster recovery plan should be located off site, such as at an appropriate employee’s 
house or at the office of an associated organization located in a different city.
It is important to realize that disaster recovery planning isn’t just for large businesses. 
In fact, disasters such as a fire or computer malfunction can cause a small company to 
go out of business if its data is not backed up. Measures as straightforward as backing 
up data daily and storing the backups in a fire-resistant safe at the owner’s house with 
a plan regarding how that data can be quickly reinstated on a new system or otherwise 
used for business continuity can go a long way in protecting a small business. Companies 
that are evaluating cloud computing services should find out what types of outages are to 
be expected (such as for regular maintenance) and what type of advance notice will be 
sent regarding these outages, as well as what types of disaster recovery services (such as 
switching to alternate servers if the main servers go down) are available.
The importance of a good disaster recovery plan was made obvious following the collapse 
of the World Trade Center Twin Towers in 2001. Minutes after the first airplane hit the towers, 
corporate executives, disaster recovery firms, and backup storage companies began arranging 
for employees and backup data to be moved to alternate sites. Employees at the data storage 
company Recall Corporation spent the day of the attack gathering backup tapes belonging 
to clients located in and near the attacks, using barcode readers to locate the needed 30,000 
tapes out of the 2 million in their secure storage facility. Bond trader Cantor Fitzgerald, which 
lost 700 employees and all the equipment and data located in its WTC offices, relocated to a 
prearranged hot site where employees received backup tapes the day after the attack, and it 
was able to begin trading the next morning. Although Cantor Fitzgerald—like the other orga-
nizations and businesses located in the WTC— suffered enormous human loss, good disaster 
recovery planning enabled Cantor Fitzgerald to restore the records containing client accounts 
and portfolios completely, avoiding an additional economic disaster related to this tragedy.
SOFTWARE PIRACY AND DIGITAL COUNTERFEITING
Instead of stealing an existing computer program, object, or other valuable that belongs 
to someone else, software piracy and digital counterfeiting involve creating duplicates of 
these items, and then selling them or using them as authentic items.
Software Piracy
Software piracy, the unauthorized copying of a computer program, is illegal in the United 
States and many other—but not all—countries. Because of the ease with which computers 
can create exact copies of a software program, software piracy is a widespread problem. 
Be sure to also back up important 
nonelectronic documents in your 
life, such as birth certificates, tax 
returns, passports, and so forth, 
by making copies of them and 
storing the copies in a safe place.
TIP
If you use Web mail and don’t 
automatically download new 
messages to your computer, be 
sure to back up your Web mail 
frequently (such as by using 
Gmail Backup if you are a Gmail 
user) to avoid losing your mail if 
the Web mail service is disrupted.
TIP
The piracy of and ethical use 
of digital music and movies are 
discussed in detail in Chapter 6.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
201
>Digital counterfeiting. The use of computers or other types of digital equipment to make illegal copies of currency, checks, collectibles, and 
other items.
According to a recent study by research firm IDC, at least one-third 
of all software is counterfeit. In addition, 78% of pirated software 
has spyware attached to it and consumers visiting Web sites to obtain 
(typically stolen) activation keys for counterfeit software have a 36% 
chance of being infected with malware in the process. The study also 
estimates that the total annual cost to businesses of dealing with mal-
ware from counterfeit software exceeds $110 billion, and consumers 
worldwide will waste 1.5 billion hours each year dealing with the 
malware resulting from countefeit software.
Software piracy can take many forms, including individuals 
making illegal copies of programs to give to friends, businesses 
installing software on more computers than permitted in the program’s 
end-user license agreement or EULA (see Figure 5-11), computer 
retailers installing unlicensed copies of software on computers sold 
to consumers, and large-scale operations in which the software and 
its packaging are illegally duplicated and then sold as supposedly 
legitimate products. Pirated software—as well as pirated music CDs 
and movie DVDs—are commonly offered for sale at online auctions; 
they can also be downloaded from some Web sites and peer-to-peer 
file sharing services. Creating and distributing pirated copies of any 
type of intellectual property (such as software, music, e-books, and movies) is illegal. 
Intellectual property is discussed in more detail in Chapter 6.
Digital Counterfeiting
The availability of high-quality, full-color imaging products (such as scanners, color print-
ers, and color copiers) has made digital counterfeiting—creating counterfeit copies of items 
(such as currency and other printed resources) using computers and other types of digital 
equipment—easier and less costly than in the recent past. The U.S. Secret Service estimates 
that more than 60% of all counterfeit money today is produced digitally—up from 1% in 1996.
With digital counterfeiting, the bill (or other item to be counterfeited) is either  color-
copied or it is scanned into a computer and then printed. In addition to counterfeiting currency, 
other items that are digitally counterfeited include fake business checks, credit cards, printed 
collectibles (such as baseball cards or celebrity autographs), and fake identification papers 
(such as corporate IDs, driver’s licenses, passports, and visas)—see Figure 5-12.
Counterfeiting is illegal in the United States and is taken very 
seriously. For creating or knowingly circulating counterfeit currency, 
for instance, offenders can face up to 15 years in prison for each 
offense. In spite of the risk of prosecution, counterfeiting of U.S. cur-
rency and other documents is a growing problem both in the United 
States and in other countries. Although the majority of counterfeit 
currency is produced by serious criminals (such as organized crime, 
gangs, and terrorist organizations), the Secret Service has seen an 
increase in counterfeiting among high school and college students. 
This is attributed primarily to the ease of creating counterfeit bills—
although not necessarily high-quality counterfeit bills—using digi-
tal technology. Because the paper used with real U.S. bills is very 
expensive and cannot legally be made by paper mills for any other 
purpose and because U.S. bills contain a number of other character-
istics that are difficult to reproduce accurately, as discussed in more 
This software can be installed on one primary computer, one
additional computer, and two additional devices to be used by a
single user.
FIGURE 5-11
An end-user license 
agreement (EULA). 
Specifies the number 
of computers on which 
the software can be 
installed and other 
restrictions for use.
<
FIGURE 5-12
Digitally 
counterfeited 
documents. 
<
Courtesy of United States Secret Service
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

202
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
detail shortly, the majority of the counterfeit money made by amateurs is easily detectable. 
However, counterfeit bills made by bleaching genuine small denomination bills and printing 
higher denominations on them that don’t include special security features are harder to detect 
because the paper used is authentic.
Protecting Against Software Piracy and Digital Counterfeiting
Software piracy and digital counterfeiting affect individuals, as well as businesses and 
the government. For instance, some software companies charge higher prices and have 
less money available for research and development because of the losses from software 
pirates, which ultimately hurts law-abiding consumers. In addition, individuals and busi-
nesses that unknowingly accept counterfeit currency lose the face value of that currency if 
it is identified as counterfeit while it is in their possession, and they risk legal issues if they 
knowingly pass the counterfeit bills on to others. Some tools currently being used to curb 
software piracy and digital counterfeiting are discussed next.
Software Antipiracy Tools
One tool the software industry is using in an attempt to prevent software piracy is edu-
cation. By educating businesses and consumers about the legal use of software and the 
 possible negative consequences associated with breaking antipiracy laws, the industry 
hopes to reduce the use of illegal software. To counteract piracy performed because of time 
or convenience issues, many software companies offer consumers the option of download-
ing software and, therefore, giving them a legal option for obtaining software that is as 
fast and convenient as downloading a pirated version. Some software manufacturers have 
launched extensive public relations campaigns—such as including information on their 
Web sites, in product information, and in ads—to inform consumers what software piracy 
is, and why they should not commit it or buy pirated software.
Another antipiracy tool is requiring a unique activation code (often called a  registration 
code, an activation key, or a product key) before the software can be installed (for com-
mercial software) or before certain key features of a program are unlocked (for shareware 
or demo software). Typically the activation code is included in the product packaging (for 
software purchased on CD or DVD) or is displayed on the screen or sent to the user via 
e-mail once payment is made (for downloaded software). A related tool is checking the 
validity of a software installation before upgrades or other resources related to the pro-
gram can be accessed. For instance, Microsoft checks a user’s Windows installation before 
the user is allowed to download software from Microsoft’s Web site (such as templates 
or updates for Microsoft Office)—if their operating system is identified as invalid, users 
cannot download the resources. The goal of these techniques is to make pirated software 
unusable enough so that individuals will buy the licensed software.
Other antipiracy techniques used by software companies include watching online 
 auction sites and requesting the removal of suspicious items, as well as buying pirated 
copies of software via Web sites and then filing lawsuits against the sellers. The increase in 
actions against individuals who illegally sell or share software (and other types of digital 
content, such as music and movies) may also help reduce piracy and encourage individu-
als to obtain legal copies of these products. The inclusion of malware in counterfeit soft-
ware may also help with detection. For example, Microsoft recently settled 3,265 software 
piracy cases worldwide—the majority of the cases were reported to Microsoft by custom-
ers unhappy with the included malware or because the software didn’t work correctly. In 
addition, Microsoft continually finds and requests the removal of URLs that are related to 
the distribution of pirated software from search sites.
One new option for software vendors is incorporating code into their programs that is 
designed to inform the vendor when pirated copies of its software are being used or when 
its software is being used in another manner that violates the terms of the software license. 
For instance, commercial software that contains the newest version of V.i Labs CodeArmor 
Intelligence software is designed to detect and report products in use that have been tampered 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
203
with (such as products whose licensing features have been dis-
abled and then resold as legitimate products), as well as prod-
ucts that are being used with more computers than allowed 
by the software license. Once piracy is detected, information 
about the infringement is sent to the software vendor’s piracy 
dashboard. This information includes identifying data about 
the user of the pirated software (such as the business’s domain 
name or IP address and a link to its location on Google Maps—
see Figure 5-13) that can be used to help the vendor contact 
the business to give them the opportunity to come into license 
compliance before pursuing any legal actions. It also provides 
the vendor with useful data about the overall state of piracy of 
their products in order to help the company make appropriate 
business decisions regarding the distribution channels and the 
safeguards used with its products.
Digital Counterfeiting Prevention
To prevent the counterfeiting of U.S. currency, the Treasury Department releases new cur-
rency designs every 7 to 10 years. These new designs (such as the new $100 bill released 
in 2013 and shown in Figure 5-14) contain features (such as microprinting, watermarks, 
a security thread, a security ribbon, color-shifting ink, and raised printing) that make the 
new currency much more difficult to duplicate than older currency. Because the water-
marks, security thread, and security ribbon are embedded in the paper, counterfeiters are 
unable to duplicate those features when creating counterfeit bills either from scratch or 
by bleaching the ink out of existing lower-denomination bills and reprinting them with 
higher denominations. Consequently, counterfeit copies of bills using the new designs 
are easy to detect just by holding them up to the light and looking for the proper water-
mark, security thread, or security ribbon, or by feeling for the raised printing. In addition, 
hardware and software companies that have adopted the counterfeit deterrence system 
(CDS) developed by the Central Bank Counterfeit Deterrence Group (CBCDG) help to 
deter the use of digital counterfeit-
ing of currency. For instance, some 
hardware and software will not allow 
images of currency to be printed and 
many color copiers print invisible 
codes on copied documents, making 
counterfeit money copied on those 
machines traceable. 
Prevention measures for the 
counterfeiting of other types of 
 documents—such as checks and iden-
tification cards—include using RFID 
tags, digital watermarks, and other 
difficult-to-reproduce content. As dis-
cussed in more detail in Chapter 6, a 
digital watermark is a subtle altera-
tion that is not noticeable when the 
work is viewed or played but that 
can be read using special software to 
authenticate or identify the owner of 
the item. Finally, educating consum-
ers about how the appearance of fake 
products differs from that of authen-
tic products is a vital step in the ongo-
ing battle against counterfeiting.
FIGURE 5-13
Antipiracy software. 
<
MICROPRINTING
Extremely small print that is very difﬁcult to
reproduce appears in three different locations on
the front of the bill (on the jacket collar, around the
black space containing the watermark, and along
the golden quill), though it is hard to see without
a magnifying glass. 
WATERMARK
A Benjamin Franklin watermark
located to the right of the portrait is
visible when the bill is held up to the
light.
COLOR-SHIFTING INK
Changes the number 100 in
the lower-right corner and the
bell in the inkwell from copper
to green as the bill is tilted.
SECURITY THREAD
Embedded in the paper
and contains USA and
100s; glows pink when
placed in front of an
ultraviolet light.
SECURITY RIBBON
Woven into the paper
and displays bells and 
then 100s when the
bill is moved.
FIGURE 5-14
Anticounterfeiting 
measures used with 
U.S. currency.
<
Courtesy Vi Labs; Google screenshot © Google Inc. and used with permission.
Photo courtesy of U.S. Department of the Treasury
The new $100 bill also includes a 
large gold 100 on the back to help 
visually-impaired individuals identify 
the denomination.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

204
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Privacy. The state of being concealed or free from unauthorized intrusion. >Information privacy. The rights of individuals and companies to 
control how information about them is collected and used.
WHY BE CONCERNED ABOUT INFORMATION 
PRIVACY?
Privacy is usually defined as the state of being concealed or free from unauthorized intru-
sion. The term information privacy refers to the rights of individuals and companies to 
control how information about them is collected and used. The problem of how to protect 
personal privacy—that is, how to keep personal information private—existed long before 
computers entered the picture. For example, sealing wax and unique signet rings were 
used centuries ago to seal letters, wills, and other personal documents to guard against 
their content being revealed to unauthorized individuals, as well as to alert the recipient if 
such an intrusion occurred while the document was in transit. But today’s computers, with 
their ability to store, duplicate, and manipulate large quantities of data—combined with 
the fact that databases containing our personal information can be accessed and shared via 
the Internet—have added a new twist to the issue of personal privacy. Another new twist 
is the increased ability of electronic surveil-
lance tools used by some government and law 
enforcement agencies.
As discussed in Chapters 3 and 4, one 
concern of many individuals is the privacy of 
their Web site activities and e-mail messages. 
Cookies and spyware are possible privacy risks, 
and e-mail and other documents can be read if 
intercepted by another individual during transit 
unless they are encrypted. For businesses 
and employees, there is the additional issue 
of whether or not Web activities, e-mail, and 
instant messages sent through a company 
network are private. In addition, businesses need 
to make sure they comply with privacy laws 
regarding the protection and the security of the 
private information they store on their servers. 
Recently, there has been an unprecedented 
number of high-profile data breaches—some 
via hacking and other network intrusions 
discussed in Chapter 4, and others due to lost 
or stolen hardware, or carelessness with papers 
or storage media containing Social Security 
numbers or other sensitive data. Because 
every data breach occurring today is a risk to 
information privacy, protecting the data stored 
in databases today is an important concern for 
everyone. Other privacy concerns are spam
and other marketing activities, electronic 
surveillance, and electronic monitoring. These 
concerns, along with precautions that can 
be taken to safeguard information privacy, 
are discussed throughout the remainder of 
this chapter.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Jillian York, Director for International Freedom of 
Expression, Electronic Frontier Foundation (EFF)
What are the biggest Internet-related privacy 
risks for individuals today?
With Internet use on the rise globally, the latest 
threats to privacy come both from companies look-
ing to capitalize on user data and from govern-
ments seeking to track citizens’ conversations 
and movements. But although Internet users have 
good reason to be concerned about the privacy 
practices of corporations like Google, I believe the 
biggest threat facing them today is surveillance by 
government agencies, such as the United States’ 
National Security Agency (NSA). The mass sur-
veillance conducted by such agencies means that 
all of us are being spied on, whether or not we’re 
suspected of committing a crime. It is all too easy 
for governments to abuse this type of power. Even 
if you think you have nothing to hide, your privacy is 
being invaded on a daily basis by governments and 
by big business. To try to protect yourself, mini-
mize the amount of personal data stored on your 
devices, encrypt your data and use secure pass-
words, and use privacy-enhancing browsing tools 
and settings.
Courtesy of EFF
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
205
>Marketing database. A collection of data about people that is stored in a large database and used for marketing purposes.
DATABASES, ELECTRONIC PROFILING, SPAM, 
AND OTHER MARKETING ACTIVITIES
There are marketing activities that can be considered privacy risks or, at least, a potential 
invasion of privacy. These include databases, electronic profiling, and spam.
Databases and Electronic Profiling
Information about individuals can be located in many different databases. For example, 
most educational institutions have databases containing student information, most 
organizations use an employee database to hold employee information, and most 
physicians and health insurance providers maintain databases containing individuals’ 
medical information. If these databases are adequately protected from hackers and other 
unauthorized individuals and if the data is not transported on a portable computer or other 
device that may be vulnerable to loss or theft, then these databases do not pose a significant 
privacy concern to consumers because the information can rarely be shared without the 
individuals’ permission. However, the data stored in these types of databases is not always 
sufficiently  protected and has been breached quite often in the past. Consequently, these 
databases, along with two other types of databases—marketing databases and government 
 databases—that are typically associated with a higher risk of personal privacy violations 
and are discussed next, are of growing concern to privacy advocates.
Marketing databases contain marketing and demographic data about people, such as 
where they live and what products they buy. This information is used for marketing pur-
poses, such as sending advertisements that fit each individual’s interests (via regular mail 
or e-mail) or trying to sign people up over the phone for some type of service. Virtually 
anytime you provide information about yourself online or offline—for example, when you 
subscribe to a magazine, fill out a sweepstakes entry or product registration card, or buy a 
product or service using a credit card—there is a good chance that the information will find 
its way into a marketing database.
Marketing databases are also used in conjunction with Web activities, such as social 
media activity and searches performed via some personalized search services. For instance, 
the data stored on Facebook, MySpace, Google+, and other social networking sites can be 
gathered and used for advertising purposes by marketing companies, and the activities of 
users of personalized search services (where users log in to use the service) can be tracked 
and that data can be used for marketing purposes. And Google, with its vast array of ser-
vices that collect enormous amounts of data about individuals, worries many privacy advo-
cates. For instance, Google may have data stored about your search history (Google search 
site), browsing history (Google Chrome), e-mail (Gmail), appointments (Google Calendar), 
telephone calls (Google Voice), photos (Picasa Web Albums), shopping history (Google 
Checkout), and friends and activities (Google+). While Google allows users to opt out of 
collecting some data (such as by not signing into a service) and states that the data stored 
on separate servers is not combined, the vast amount of collected data is a concern to some.
Other emerging privacy concerns center on location-based services and reward apps. 
Location-based services, such as Foursquare, use the GPS information from your  smartphone 
to provide services such as enabling you to meet up with friends who are close to your cur-
rent location or allowing you to check in to the businesses that you frequent to share your 
location with others or participate in marketing activities. For example, reward apps, such as 
shopkick, offer you rewards or discounts for checking into participating businesses. While 
Judges and police investigators made 
37,196 requests to Microsoft for 
end-user data in the first half of 2013 
alone.
TIP
To download a copy of your data 
stored within Google products, use 
the Google Takeout service.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

206
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Government database. A collection of data about people that is collected and maintained by the government.
popular with many individuals, there is concern about location information being used inap-
propriately (such as by stalkers and home burglars), as well as if and for how long location 
data is stored. In addition, some of these apps (such as Foursquare) can tie into other social 
networks, such as Facebook or Twitter, so your friends on those social networks can access 
your location information even if they are not your friend on the location app.
Information about individuals is also available in government databases. Some informa-
tion, such as Social Security earnings and income tax returns, is confidential and can legally 
be seen only by authorized individuals. Other information—such as birth records, marriage 
certificates, and divorce information, as well as property purchases, assessments, liens, and tax 
values—is available to the public, including to the marketing companies that specialize in cre-
ating marketing databases. One emerging government database application is the creation of a 
national ID system that links driver’s license databases across the country. Although controver-
sial, this system is mandated by the Real ID Act that was passed in 2005, which also requires 
states to meet new federal standards for driver’s licenses and other identification cards (such 
as the inclusion of a barcode or 
other machine-readable technol-
ogy that can be used in conjunc-
tion with the ID database). The 
emerging Federal Services Data 
Hub database that will be used 
to connect healthcare insur-
ance exchanges with numerous 
federal databases containing 
Social Security, IRS, and other 
personal data of Americans in 
order to share data has also been 
controversial due to security and 
privacy concerns.
In the past, the data about 
any one individual was stored 
in a variety of separate loca-
tions, such as at different gov-
ernment agencies, individual 
retail stores, the person’s bank 
and credit card companies, and 
so forth. Because it would be 
extremely time consuming to 
locate all the information about 
one  person from all these dif-
ferent places, there was a fairly 
high level of information pri-
vacy. Today, however, most of 
an individual’s data is stored 
on computers that can com-
municate with each other, and 
some database search services 
are available online for free or 
for a fee (see some examples 
in Figure 5-15). Although often 
PROPERTY VALUE SEARCH
Some local governments permit searches
for property located in that area, such as
displaying the owner’s name, address,
and a link to additional information
including property value and tax
information.
PEOPLE SEARCH
Many sites allow you to look up
information (such as address, phone
number, relatives, and criminal
convictions) about individuals; some
information requires a fee.
VITAL RECORDS SEARCH
Some counties and states allow
searches for documents related to
marriages, divorces, births, legal
judgments, deeds, liens, powers of
attorney, and so forth.
FIGURE 5-15
A variety of searchable 
databases are available 
via the Internet.
<
Copyright ©2013 LexisNexis Risk Solutions. All rights reserved
Courtesy of the Town of Dartmouth, Massachusetts
Office of the Secretary of State of Washington State
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
207
>Electronic profiling. Using electronic means to collect a variety of in-depth information about an individual, such as name, address, income, 
and buying habits. >Privacy policy. A policy, commonly posted on a company’s Web site, that explains how personal information provided to that 
company will be used.
this ability to search online databases is an advantage—such as checking the background 
of a potential employee or looking up a misplaced phone number—it does raise privacy 
concerns. In response to the increased occurrence of identity theft (discussed in detail in 
Chapter 4), some local governments have removed birth and death information from their 
available online database records.
Collecting in-depth information about an individual is known as electronic 
 profiling. Marketing companies often use data acquired from a variety of sources—
such as from product and service purchases that are tied to personally identifiable 
information, as well as from public information like property values, vehicle registra-
tions, births, marriages, and deaths—to create electronic profiles of individuals for 
marketing purposes. Electronic profiles are generally designed to provide specific 
information and can include an individual’s name, current and previous addresses, 
telephone number, marital status, number and age of children, spending habits, and 
product preferences. The information retrieved from electronic profiles is then sold 
to companies upon request to be used for marketing purposes (see Figure 5-16). For 
example, one company might request a list of all individuals in a particular state whose 
street addresses are considered to be in an affluent area and who buy baby products. 
Another company might request a list 
of all SUV owners in a particular city 
who have not purchased a car in five 
years. Still another company may want 
a list of business travelers who fly to 
the East Coast frequently.
Most businesses and Web sites that 
collect personal information have a pri-
vacy policy (see the Facebook privacy 
policy in Figure 5-17) that discloses how 
the personal information you provide 
will be used. As long as their actions 
do not violate their privacy policy, it is 
legal for businesses to sell the personal 
data that they collect. There are some 
When you make an electronic
transaction, information about
who you are and what you buy is
recorded, usually in a database.
Databases containing the
identities of people and
what they buy are sold to
marketing companies.
The marketing companies add the
new data to their marketing data-
bases; they can then reorganize the
data in ways that might be valuable
to other companies.
The marketing companies create
lists of individuals matching the
speciﬁc needs of companies; the
companies buy the lists for their
own marketing purposes.
This section explains how your
information may be used, such
as to provide location services
and to make suggestions based
on Facebook activity.
Scroll to read other sections of
the policy that explain how the
data may be shared, how long
it is kept, and more.
FIGURE 5-16
How electronic 
profiling might 
work.
<
FIGURE 5-17
Privacy policies. 
Web site privacy 
policies explain 
how your personal 
information might be 
used.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Facebook © 2013 · English (US)
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

208
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Spam. Unsolicited, bulk e-mail sent over the Internet.
problems with privacy policies, however, such as the fact that they are sometimes difficult 
to decipher and the reality that most people do not take the time to read them before using a 
site. In addition, many businesses periodically change their privacy policies without warn-
ing, requiring consumers to reread privacy policies frequently or risk their personal infor-
mation being used in a manner that they did not agree to when the information was initially 
provided. Some companies notify customers by e-mail when their privacy policies change 
but, more commonly, they expect customers to check the current policy periodically and 
notify the business if any new actions are objectionable.
Spam and Other Marketing Activities
Spam refers to unsolicited e-mail sent to a large group of individuals at one time. The elec-
tronic equivalent of junk mail (see Figure 5-18), spam is most often used to sell products or 
services to individuals. Spam is also used in phishing schemes and other dot cons and is sent 
frequently via botnets, as discussed in Chapter 4 (the text 
message spam shown in Figure 5-18 is an example of a 
phishing spam message). A great deal of spam involves 
health-related  products (such as medicine or weight 
loss systems), counterfeit products (such as watches 
and medicine), pornography, and new—and often 
fraudulent—business opportunities and stock deals. 
Spam can also be generated by individuals forwarding 
e-mail messages they receive (such as jokes, recipes, or 
notices of possible new privacy or health concerns) to 
everyone in their address books. In addition to spam, 
most individuals receive marketing e-mails either from 
companies they directly provided with their e-mail 
addresses or from other companies that acquired their 
e-mail addresses from a third party to whom that infor-
mation was provided (such as from a partner site or 
via a purchased mailing list). While these latter types 
of marketing e-mail messages do not technically fit 
the definition of spam because they were permission-
based, many individuals consider them to be spam. Spam can also be sent via IM (called 
spim); via text message (called mobile phone spam or SMS spam); to Facebook, MySpace, 
Google+, and Twitter pages and via other social networking communications methods; via 
phone calls; and to fax machines.
While e-mail spam is decreasing as a result of better spam filters and other protec-
tions (discussed shortly), it is still a problem (Kasperkey Labs recently estimated that more 
about 72% of all e-mail messages are now spam). At best, spam is an annoyance to recipi-
ents and can slow down a mail server’s delivery of important messages. At worst, spam 
can disable a mail network completely, or it can cause recipients to miss or lose impor-
tant e-mail messages because those messages have been caught in a spam filter or were 
accidentally deleted by the recipient while he or she was deleting a large number of spam 
e-mail  messages. Most Internet users spend several minutes each day dealing with spam, 
making spam very expensive for businesses in terms of lost productivity, consumption of 
communications bandwidth, and drain of technical support. Spam sent to a mobile phone 
(either via text message or e-mail) is also expensive for end users that have a limited data 
or text message allowance.
E-MAIL SPAM
TEXT MESSAGE SPAM
FIGURE 5-18
Examples of spam.
<
According to the Pew Internet 
& American Life Project, 69% 
of individuals who use text 
messaging on their mobile phones 
receive spam—25% said they face 
problems with spam texts at least 
weekly.
TIP
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
209
>Throw-away e-mail address. An e-mail address used only for nonessential purposes and activities that may result in spam; the address can be 
disposed of and replaced if spam becomes a problem; also called a disposable e-mail address.
One of the most common ways of getting on a spam mailing list is by having your 
e-mail address entered into a marketing database, which can happen when you sign up 
for a free online service or use your e-mail address to register a product or make an online 
purchase. Spammers also use software to gather e-mail addresses from Web pages, online 
posts, and social networking sites. Many individuals view spam as an invasion of pri-
vacy because it arrives on computers without permission and costs them time and other 
resources (bandwidth, mailbox space, and hard drive space, for instance).
Most spam is legal, but there are requirements that must be adhered to in order for it to 
be legal. For instance, the CAN-SPAM Act of 2003 established requirements (such as using 
truthful subject lines and honoring remove requests) for commercial e-mailers, as well as 
specified penalties for companies and individuals that break the law. While the CAN-SPAM 
Act has not reduced the amount of spam circulated today, it has increased the number of 
spammers prosecuted for sending spam. In fact, several spammers have been convicted 
in recent years. They have either been fined or sent to prison, and more are awaiting trial. 
For instance, one spammer was ordered to pay $230 million to MySpace for spamming 
MySpace users and another was ordered to pay Facebook a record $873 million for spam-
ming its members.
Protecting the Privacy of Personal Information
There are a number of precautions that can be taken to protect the privacy of personal 
information. Safeguarding your e-mail address and other personal information is a good 
start. You can also surf anonymously, opt out of some marketing activities, and use filters 
and other tools to limit your exposure to spam. Businesses also need to take adequate mea-
sures to protect the privacy of information stored on their servers and storage media. These 
precautions are discussed next.
Safeguard Your E-Mail Address
Protecting your e-mail address is one of the best ways to avoid spam. One way to accom-
plish this is to use one private e-mail address for family, friends, colleagues, and other 
trusted sources, and use a disposable or throw-away e-mail address—such as a sec-
ond address obtained from your ISP or a free e-mail address 
from Yahoo! Mail, AOL Mail, Outlook.com, or Gmail (see 
Figure 5-19)—for online shopping, signing up for free offers, 
forums, product registration, and other activities that typi-
cally lead to junk e-mail. Although you will want to check 
your alternate e-mail address periodically (to check for online 
shopping receipts or shipping notifications, for instance), this 
precaution can prevent a great deal of spam from getting to 
your regular e-mail account.
Another advantage of using a throw-away e-mail address 
for only noncritical applications is that you can quit using it 
and obtain a new one if spam begins to get overwhelming or 
too annoying. To help with this, some ISPs (such as EarthLink) 
provide disposable anonymous e-mail addresses to their 
 subscribers—e-mail messages sent to a subscriber’s anony-
mous address are forwarded to the subscriber’s account until the 
disposable address is deleted by the subscriber. Consequently, 
individuals can easily change disposable addresses when they 
Click to create
a free account.
FIGURE 5-19
Free e-mail 
accounts. Can be 
used for throw-away 
e-mail addresses.
<
When posting your e-mail address 
online, write it so individuals can read 
it, but spiders and other automated 
programs cannot, such as writing 
johndoe at xyz.com instead of 
johndoe@xyz.com. To send you an 
e-mail, individuals will just need to 
substitute the @ sign for the word “at” 
and the spaces surrounding it.
TIP
Gmail screenshot © Google Inc. and used with permission.; Used with permission 
from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

210
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
begin to receive too much spam or when the disposable address is no longer needed. There 
are also anonymous e-mail services (such as the one provided by Anonymous Speech) that 
allow users to route e-mail messages (and other Web activities if desired) using an anony-
mous domain. These services typically range from free to about $75 per year.
To comply with truth-in-advertising laws, an unsubscribe e-mail address included in 
an unsolicited e-mail must be a working address. If you receive a marketing e-mail from 
a reputable source, you may be able to unsubscribe by clicking the supplied link or oth-
erwise following the unsubscribe instructions. Because spam from less-legitimate sources 
often has unsubscribe links that do not work or that are present only to verify that your 
e-mail address is genuine—a very valuable piece of information for future use—many pri-
vacy experts recommend never replying to or trying to unsubscribe from any spam.
Be Cautious of Revealing Personal Information
In addition to protecting your real e-mail address, protecting your personal information is a 
critical step toward safeguarding your privacy. Consequently, it makes sense to be cautious 
about revealing your private information to anyone. Privacy tips for safeguarding personal 
information include the following:
 
➤Read a Web site’s privacy policy (if one exists) before providing any personal 
information. If the Web site reserves the right to share your information unless you 
specifically notify them otherwise, it is best to assume that any information you 
provide will eventually be shared with others—do not use the site if that is unac-
ceptable to you.
 
➤Avoid putting too many personal details on your Web site or on a social networking 
site. Although complete anonymity would defeat the purpose of using a social net-
work, it is a good idea to be careful about what content you post and who can view 
it. If you would like to post photos or other personal documents on a Web site for 
friends and family members to see, use a photo sharing site that allows you to restrict 
access to your photos (such as Flickr, Snapfish, or Fotki). Avoid using location-based 
services that share your location information with strangers. For more tips related to 
how to protect your privacy on social networking sites, see Figure 5-20.
 
➤When you sign up for free trials or other services that may result in spam, use your 
throw-away e-mail address.
 
➤ Consider using privacy software, such as 
Privacy Guardian, to hide your personal 
information as you browse the Web so it is not 
revealed and your activities cannot be tracked 
by marketers. Also check the privacy settings 
of the cloud services that you use to see what 
control you have over what personal data is 
collected and shared. For instance, Google 
users can use the Google Dashboard to con-
trol the privacy settings of Google services.
 
➤Just because a Web site or registration form 
asks for personal information, that does not 
mean you have to give it. Supply only the 
required information and if you are asked for 
more personal information than you are com-
fortable providing, look for an alternate Web 
site for the product or information you are 
seeking. As a rule of thumb, do not  provide 
an e-mail address (or else use a throw-away 
address) if you do not want to receive offers 
or other e-mail from that company.
If you only need an e-mail address 
for a very short period of time 
(such as to receive a confirmation 
for registering for a free online 
service), use a temporary 
disposable e-mail address, such 
as the ones available through 10 
Minute Mail that are valid for only 
10 minutes.
TIP
Don’t forget that once you post 
content on a Web site or send 
it via e-mail, you cannot control 
how long it will “live” in digital 
form. Be very careful about the 
personal information you post 
and send to avoid the possibility 
of that information creating 
problems for you in the future.
TIP
FIGURE 5-20
Social media 
privacy tips.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Facebook 
(use Privacy Settings)
Limit who can see your posts to Friends only.
Limit who can look you up to Friends or Friends of 
Friends only.
Disable search engines linking to your timeline.
If you allow friends to post on your timeline, enable 
the settings to review the posts first.
On your profile’s About page, click each section and 
limit viewing to Friends only.
Google+
(use Profile Settings)
Organize your contacts into circles based on the 
content you will share with them (such as work, 
friends, and family) and then post or share content 
only with the appropriate circle.
On your profile’s About page, click each section and 
limit viewing to Your circles only.
Twitter
(use Account Settings)
Enable Tweet privacy so only those who you approve 
will receive your tweets.
Keep location information disabled so your location 
won’t be added to your tweets.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
211
>E-mail filter. A tool that automatically sorts your incoming e-mail messages based on specific criteria. >Spam filter. An e-mail filter used to 
redirect spam from a user’s Inbox.
 
➤If you are using a public computer (such as at a school, 
a library, or an Internet café), be sure to remove any per-
sonal information and settings stored on the computer 
during your session. You can use browser options to 
delete this data manually from the computer before you 
leave (use the Browsing history option on the General tab 
of the Internet Options dialog box in Internet Explorer 
to delete this data). To prevent the deleted data from 
being recovered, run the Windows Disk Cleanup pro-
gram on the hard drive, making sure that the options 
for Temporary Internet Files and the Recycle Bin are 
selected during the Disk Cleanup process. An easier 
option is using the private browsing mode offered by 
some browsers, such as Internet Explorer’s InPrivate or 
Chrome’s Incognito modes (see Figure 5-21), that allow 
you to browse the Web without leaving any history (such 
as browsing history, temporary Internet files, form data, 
cookies, usernames, and passwords) on the computer you 
are using. In either case, be sure to log out of any Web 
sites you were using before leaving the computer.
Use Filters and Opt Out
While keeping your personal information as private as possible can help to reduce spam 
and other direct marketing activities, filtering can also be helpful. Some ISPs automati-
cally block all e-mail messages originating from known or suspected spammers so those 
e-mail messages never reach the individuals’ mailboxes; other ISPs flag suspicious e-mail 
messages as possible spam, based on their content or subject lines, to warn individuals 
that those messages may contain spam. To deal with spam that makes it to your computer, 
you can use an e-mail filter—a tool for automatically sorting your incoming e-mail mes-
sages. E-mail filters used to capture spam are called spam filters. Many e-mail programs 
have built-in spam filters that identify possible spam and either flag it or move it to a 
Spam or Junk E-mail folder. Individuals can typically change the spam settings used in 
their e-mail program to indicate the actions that should be taken with suspected spam. 
In addition, they can create e-mail filters in their e-mail program, or they can use third-
party filtering software to customize their spam filtering further. Many spam filters can 
also “learn” what each user views as spam based on the user identifying e-mail messages 
that were classified incorrectly (either spam messages placed in the Inbox or legitimate 
messages placed in the Spam folder) by the spam filter. The user typically provides this 
information by clicking a button such as Report Spam or Not Spam when the message is 
selected; the spam filter uses this input to classify messages from that sender correctly in 
the future. Businesses can set up spam filters in-house, but they are increasingly turning 
to dedicated antispam appliances to filter out spam without increasing the load on the 
company e-mail server.
Custom e-mail filters are used to route messages automatically to particular folders 
based on stated criteria. For example, you can specify that e-mail messages with keywords 
frequently used in spam subject lines (such as free, porn, opportunity, last chance, weight, 
pharmacy, and similar terms) be routed into a folder named Possible Spam, and you can 
specify that all e-mail messages from your boss’s e-mail address be routed into an Urgent 
Indicates private browsing
mode is enabled.
Use this button to enable
private browsing.
FIGURE 5-21
Private browsing 
can protect your 
Web-surfing privacy 
at public computers.
<
Google Chrome screenshot © Google Inc. and used with permission.
To perform Web searches 
anonymously, without being tracked 
for advertising purposes, try the 
DuckDuckGo search site.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

212
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Opt out. To request that you be removed from marketing activities or that your information not be shared with other companies.
folder. Filtering can help you find important messages in your Inbox by preventing it from 
becoming cluttered with spam. However, you need to be sure to check your Possible Spam 
or Junk E-mail folder periodically to locate any e-mail messages mistakenly filed there—
especially before you permanently delete those messages. Creating a new e-mail filter in 
Gmail is shown in Figure 5-22.
Mobile users who receive Web-based e-mail via smartphones can use the filters avail-
able via their Web mail provider to filter out spam. There are also some mobile spam apps 
available to detect or block spam sent via text message or voice calls (see one example in 
Figure 5-23).
Another alternative for reducing the amount of spam you receive is to opt out. Opting 
out refers to following a predesignated procedure to remove yourself from marketing lists, 
or otherwise preventing your personal information from being obtained by or shared with 
others. By opting out, you instruct companies you do business with (such as your bank, 
insurance company, investment company, or an online store) not to share your personal 
information with third parties. You can also opt out of being contacted by direct and online 
marketing companies.
To opt out from a particular company or direct marketing association, you can con-
tact them directly—many organizations include opt-out instructions in the privacy policies 
posted on their Web sites. For Web sites that use registered accounts for repeat visitors, 
opt-out options are sometimes included in your personal settings and can be activated by
modifying your personal settings for that site. Opt-out instructions for financial insti-
tutions and credit card companies are often included in the disclosure statements that 
are periodically mailed to customers; they can also often be found on the company’s 
Web site.
To assist consumers with the opt-out process, there are a number of Web sites, 
such as the Center for Democracy and Technology and the PrivacyRightsNow! Web 
sites, which provide opt-out tools for consumers. For example, some sites help visitors 
1. Click to open
    Settings.
2. Click to create
    a new 
3. Specify the
    
filter.
filter content.
Google screenshot © Google Inc. and used with permission.
© Chardchanin/Shutterstock.com; Courtesy Numbercop
FIGURE 5-23
Mobile spam 
filtering. Can detect 
both spam texts and 
spam calls.
<
FIGURE 5-22
Creating a Gmail 
filter.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
213
>Opt in. To request that you be included in marketing activities or that your information be shared with other companies.
create opt-out letters that can be sent to the companies in order 
to opt out. For online marketing activities, organizations—
such as the Network Advertising Initiative (NAI)—have tools 
on their Web sites to help consumers opt out of online targeted 
ads. Typically, this process replaces an advertiser’s marketing 
cookie with an opt-out cookie. The opt-out cookie prevents any 
more marketing cookies belonging to that particular advertiser 
from being placed on the user’s hard drive as long as the opt-
out cookie is present (usually until the user deletes the opt-out 
cookie file, either  intentionally or unintentionally). You can 
also use the tracking protection options available with some 
browsers; for example, the Internet Explorer tracking protec-
tion is enabled using the Safety settings. Once enabled (see 
Figure 5-24), it will send a “do not track” indicator to Web 
sites, which will then display generic ads instead of targeted 
ads. This process may become easier and more automatic in the future if proposed Do 
Not Track legislation becomes a reality.
At the present time, opting-out procedures are confusing and time consuming, and 
they do not always work well. Consequently, some privacy groups are pushing to change 
to an opt-in process, in which individuals would need to opt in (request participation in) to 
a particular marketing activity before companies can collect or share any personal data (as 
is the case in the European Union). In fact, Walmart recently changed its privacy policy to 
share information with third parties only if customers opt in. However, the general practice 
in the U.S. business community today is to use your information as allowed for by each 
privacy policy unless you specifically opt out.
Secure Servers and Otherwise Protect Personal Information
Any business that stores personal information about employees, customers, or other 
individuals must take adequate security measures to protect the privacy of that infor-
mation. As discussed in Chapter 4, secure servers and encryption can protect the data 
stored on a server; firewalls and access systems can protect against unauthorized 
access. To prevent personal information from being sent intentionally or inadvertently 
via e-mail, organizations can use e-mail encryption systems that automatically encrypt 
or block e-mail messages containing certain keywords. For instance, some hospitals use 
encryption systems that scan all outgoing e-mail messages and attachments and then 
automatically encrypt or block all messages that appear to contain patient-identifiable 
information, such as a Social Security number, medical record number, patient name, 
or medical term like “cancer.” The recipient of an encrypted e-mail message typically 
receives a link to a secure Web site to log in and view the encrypted e-mail message. 
Similar systems are used by banks and other businesses. Businesses also need to be 
very careful with papers, portable hard drives, and other media that contain personal 
data. For instance, many recent data breaches have occurred because of carelessness, 
such as papers containing personal information being found in dumpsters, lost in tran-
sit, or faxed to the wrong individual.
Ensuring that the private data stored by a business is adequately protected is increas-
ingly the responsibility of a chief privacy officer (CPO)—a rapidly growing new  position 
in business today. Typically, CPOs are responsible for ensuring privacy laws are complied 
with, identifying the data in a company that needs to be protected, developing  policies to 
Google recently paid $22.5 million to 
settle a lawsuit regarding its alleged 
circumventing of Do Not Track 
technologies connected to the Safari 
Web browser.
TIP
Register both your landline and 
mobile phone numbers with the 
National Do Not Call Registry by 
going to www.donotcall.gov to 
prevent telemarketing calls from 
companies you do not have a 
business relationship with.
TIP
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
FIGURE 5-24
Enabling tracking 
protection in Internet 
Explorer.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

214
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
protect that data, and responding to any incidents that occur. Another issue that must be 
dealt with by CPOs is the changing definition of what information is regarded as  personal 
and, therefore, needs to be safeguarded. For instance, some privacy advocates 
view the IP address of computers and the location information of mobile 
phones to be personal data. As protecting new types of information becomes 
integrated into privacy laws, these laws impact companies that store or utilize 
that information.
Properly Dispose of Hardware Containing Data
A final consideration for protecting the privacy of personal information 
for both individuals and businesses is protecting the information 
located on paper documents and hardware (such as old backup media, 
used  CDs,  obsolete computers, and old mobile phones) that are to be 
disposed of. Papers, CDs, DVDs, and other media containing sensitive data 
should be shredded (see Figure 5-25), and the hard drives of computers to 
be disposed of should be wiped—overwritten several times using special 
disk-wiping or disk-erasing software—before they are sold or recycled. 
Unlike the data on a drive that has merely been erased or even reformatted 
(which can still be recovered), data on a properly wiped drive is very 
difficult or impossible to recover.
Wiping is typically viewed as an acceptable precaution for deleting sen-
sitive data (such as Web site passwords and tax returns) from hard drives and 
other storage media belonging to individuals, as well as for storage media to be reused 
within an organization. However, before disposing of storage media containing sensitive 
data, businesses should consider physically destroying the media, such as by shredding 
or melting the hardware. To help with this process, data destruction services can be 
used, as discussed in the Inside the Industry box. To ensure that all hardware containing 
business data is properly disposed of, it is important for all businesses today to develop 
and implement a policy (often called a media sanitization or data destruction policy) for 
destroying data that is no longer needed.
ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE AND MONITORING
There are many ways electronic tools can be used to watch individuals, listen in on 
their conversations, or monitor their activities. Some of these tools—such as devices 
used by individuals to eavesdrop on wireless telephone conversations—are not legal 
for individuals to use. Other products and technologies, such as the GPS devices that 
are built into some cars so they can be located if they are stolen or the monitoring 
ankle bracelets used for offenders sentenced to house arrest, are used solely for law 
enforcement purposes. GPS technology can also be used by law enforcement agencies 
to track criminal suspects but, according to a 2012 U.S. Supreme Court ruling, only 
with a search warrant. Still other electronic tools, such as computer monitoring software, 
video surveillance equipment, and presence  technology, discussed next, can often be 
used legally by individuals, by businesses in conjunction with employee monitoring, and 
by law enforcement agencies.
FIGURE 5-25
Media disposal. 
When disposing of 
CDs, DVDs, and 
other storage media, 
the media should be 
shredded to ensure 
the information on the 
media is destroyed.
<
When upgrading your mobile phone, be careful not to expose the personal data stored on your old 
phone to others. Before disposing of or recycling it, be sure to reset your mobile phone to its factory 
settings to clear all personal data from the phone.
Be sure to remove personal data 
from any device containing a 
hard drive before disposing of 
it, including gaming consoles, 
portable digital media players, 
and cars with entertainment 
system hard drives.
TIP
Courtesy Fellowes, Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
215
Computer Monitoring Software
Computer monitoring software is used specifically for the purpose of recording key-
strokes, logging the programs or Web sites accessed, or otherwise monitoring someone’s 
computer activity; some programs also have apps that can be used to monitor media tablet 
and smartphone activity. These programs are typically marketed toward parents (to check 
on their children’s online activities), spouses (to determine if a spouse is having an affair, 
viewing pornography, or participating in other activities that are unacceptable to the other 
spouse), law enforcement agencies (to collect evidence against suspected criminals), or 
employers (to ensure employees are using company computers and time only for work-
related or otherwise approved activities). Computer monitoring programs can keep a log of 
all computer keystrokes performed on a computer, record the activities taking place (such 
as the amount of time spent on and tasks performed via the Web or installed software), 
take screenshots of the screen at specified intervals, and more (see Figure 5-26). Computer 
monitoring software designed for businesses also typically provides a summary of the 
Data Killers
With the vast amount of sensitive and classiﬁ ed data stored 
on personal and business devices today, disposing of those 
devices or removing the data from those devices so they can be 
reused is an important issue. In particular, business computers 
tend to contain a wide variety of sensitive data that needs to be 
removed if the hard drive containing that data needs to be dis-
posed of or will be reused by another employee. Data destruc-
tion services are designed for this purpose.
Data destruction ranges from purging the data (such as wip-
ing a magnetic hard drive clean or degaussing (demagnetizing) 
the drive so the data cannot be restored) to destroying the drive 
physically. The level of destruction needed depends on the type 
of drive (SSDs cannot be as reliably erased as magnetic hard 
drives), the type of data being deleted, and where the hardware 
will go next. For instance, purging might be appropriate for per-
sonal hard drives being sold and for business hard drives that 
will be reused within the company, but all business hard drives 
that will no longer be used within the company and that contain 
sensitive data should be physically destroyed.
While data destruction can be performed by in-house per-
sonnel, there are also external data destruction services (such 
as Data Killers) designed for this purpose. Such services 
typically can purge, degauss, or shred hard drives and other 
media, depending on the customer’s preference. Once a hard 
drive has been shredded (see the accompanying photo), it is 
virtually impossible for any data to be recovered from the pieces. 
However, for extra security, magnetic drives containing extremely 
sensitive data can be degaussed and then shredded. To ensure 
drives are not lost or compromised in transit, most data destruc-
tion companies offer secure transportation to the destruction 
facility using tamper-proof locked cases, and will provide signed 
and dated Certiﬁ cates of Purging or Certiﬁ cates of Destruction, 
when requested. Some even offer destruction on site, if the cus-
tomer desires. Purged hard drives are returned to the customer; 
shredded hard drives are typically recycled.
I N S I D E  TH E  I N D U STRY
>Computer monitoring software. Software that can be used to record an individual’s computer usage, such as capturing images of the screen, 
recording the actual keystrokes used, or creating a summary of Web sites and programs accessed.
Courtesy of Data Killers
Hard drive before (left) and after (right) shredding.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

216
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
activities (such as the programs used or the Web sites visited) performed on all company 
computers (refer again to Figure 5-26). In addition, some computer monitoring software 
can block specific Web sites, as well as notify a designated party (such as the parent or 
computer administrator) if the individual using the computer being monitored uses speci-
fied keywords (such as inappropriate language for children or terms referring to company 
secrets for employees) or visits a Web site deemed inappropriate.
Although it is legal to use computer monitoring software on your own computer or 
on the computers of your employees, installing it on other computers without the own-
ers’ knowledge to monitor their computer activity is usually illegal. A growing illegal use 
of computer monitoring software is the use of a keystroke logging system by hackers. A 
keystroke logging system is typically software-based, but it can also be implemented via 
a small device that is installed between the system unit and the keyboard of a computer. 
In either case, it is used to record all keystrokes performed on the computer in order to 
capture usernames, passwords, and other sensitive data entered into the computer via the 
keyboard. Keystroke logging software can be installed on an individual’s computer via 
malware, or it can be installed on public computers in person if the proper precautions 
are not taken. For instance, in 2008, a Colombian man pled guilty to installing keystroke 
logging software on computers located in hotel business centers and Internet cafés around 
the world; the software collected the personal information he needed to access the bank, 
payroll, brokerage, and other financial accounts of over 600 individuals. He was sentenced 
in mid-2009 to nine years in prison and ordered to pay $347,000 in restitution.
In addition to computer monitoring products designed for individuals and businesses, 
there are also computer monitoring programs available for use only by law enforcement and 
other government agencies. Like wiretapping, electronic monitoring of computer activity 
requires a court order or similar authorization to be legal (although the USA PATRIOT Act 
Records screenshots of monitored
computers, which can be viewed to
re-enact a user’s activities.
Records statistics on application use and Web
sites visited; reports summarize activity, such as
the Top Websites report shown here.
Records all activity by
each user; users can
be locked out of
speciﬁc applications or
Web sites as needed.
FIGURE 5-26
Computer 
monitoring 
software. Can be 
used to monitor 
employee computer 
activity, as shown here.
<
Courtesy of ActivTrak.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
217
does allow the FBI to conduct a limited form of Internet surveillance first, such as to capture 
e-mail addresses or IP addresses used with traffic going to or coming from a suspect’s com-
puter). With proper authorization and cooperation from a suspect’s ISP, law enforcement 
agencies can use computer monitoring software to intercept files and e-mail messages sent 
to or from a suspect’s computer. If the documents are encrypted, keystroke logging software 
can be used to record e-mail messages and documents before they are encrypted, as well 
as to record the private keys used to encrypt messages and files. As recent disclosures have 
revealed, the U.S. National Security Agency (NSA) routinely accesses and monitors Web 
activity (including e-mail messages, Skype calls, cloud documents, browsing activity, and 
other Web-related communications). In fact, the Wall Street Journal recently reported that 
the NSA has the capacity to reach about 75% of all U.S. Internet communications and NSA 
officials recently announced that this surveillance has helped to stop more than 50 terrorist 
plots since 9/11. One tool supposedly used to collect this data is referred to as PRISM; the 
huge new data center being built to house this data is referred to as the Utah Data Center.
Video Surveillance
The idea of video surveillance is nothing new. Many retail stores, banks, office buildings, 
and other privately owned facilities that are open to the public routinely use closed-circuit 
security cameras to monitor activities taking place at those  facilities for security purposes. In 
recent years, however, video surveillance has been expanded to a number of additional public 
locations (such as streets, parks, airports, sporting arenas, subway systems, and so forth) in 
many cities in the United States and other countries for law enforcement purposes (world-
wide, two of the most monitored cities 
are London and New York City). These 
cameras are typically located outside and 
attached to or built into fixtures, such as 
lamp posts (see Figure 5-27), or attached 
to buildings. Video surveillance cameras 
are also commonly installed in schools 
in the United States and other countries 
to enable administrators to monitor both 
teacher and student activities and to have 
a record of incidents as they occur. A 
snapshot of a live video feed from a cam-
era installed at a university in Oregon is 
shown in Figure 5-27.
Public video surveillance systems 
are often used in conjunction with face 
recognition technology to try to identify 
known terrorists and other criminals, to 
identify criminals when their crimes are 
caught on tape, and to prevent crimes 
from occurring. Video surveillance data is 
proving to be valuable to police for catch-
ing terrorists and other types of criminals, 
and it is routinely used to identify the 
individuals and cars used in attacks; this 
benefit is expected to increase as video 
INDOOR SURVEILLANCE
Many cameras are placed inside
businesses, schools, and other
locations; a snapshot from a video
camera located at a university in
Oregon is shown here.
OUTDOOR SURVEILLANCE
Many cameras placed in
public locations are 
designed to blend into their
surroundings to be less intru-
sive, such as the camera
inside this light ﬁxture on a
Washington, D.C., street.
FIGURE 5-27
Examples of public 
video surveillance.
<
>Video surveillance. The use of video cameras to monitor activities of individuals, such as employees or individuals in public locations, for work-
related or crime-prevention purposes.
Courtesy University of Oregon
Image source EPIC.org project Observing Surveillance 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

218
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
surveillance moves to high definition. For example, video surveillance systems helped police 
identify six of the attackers in the deadly 2013 Westgate Mall attack in Kenya. Some public 
video surveillance systems are also beginning to be used in conjunction with software to try 
to identify suspicious behavior (such as an unattended bag or a truck circling a skyscraper) 
and alert authorities to these possible threats before they do any damage.
Many privacy advocates object to the use of video surveillance and face recogni-
tion technology in public locations; their concerns are primarily based on how the video 
captured by these systems will be used. Privacy advocates also have doubts about the 
usefulness of these systems in protecting citizens against terrorism. They also object 
to the fact that, unlike private security video that is typically viewed only after a crime 
has occurred, the images from many public video cameras are watched all the time. In 
addition, networks of police video cameras that feed into a central operations center 
allow the observation of innocent people and activities on a massive scale. Some privacy 
advocates also fear being under perpetual police surveillance and the eventual expan-
sion of these security surveillance systems, such as using them to look for “deadbeat 
dads” or for other applications not vital for national security. However, law enforcement 
agencies contend that face recognition systems and public video surveillance are no dif-
ferent from the many private video surveillance systems in place today in a wide variety 
of public locations, such as in retail stores and banks. They view this technology as just 
one more tool to be used to protect the public, similar to scanning luggage at the airport. 
An emerging privacy issue related to public video cameras is their use with the 
display screens used to project advertisements in public places, such as a mall, health 
club, or retail store. This marketing technique uses tiny video cameras embedded in or 
on the edge of the screen, in conjunction with software, to identify characteristics of the 
individual looking at the screen (such as gender and approximate age) in order to display 
advertising content targeted to each viewer. The video cameras can also be used to deter-
mine if the displayed ads are reaching the intended demographic. Similar technology is 
used with some in-store mannequins to analyze shopper characteristics to help stores 
adjust in-store displays accordingly. While still in the infancy stage, this advertising 
tool is expected to be more prominent in the near future. To alleviate privacy concerns, 
developers state that no images are ever stored and individuals are not personally identi-
fied—only their characteristics. However, the idea of targeted advertisements based on 
physical appearance is a concern for some privacy advocates.
A related privacy concern is the inclusion of imaging capabilities in many mobile devices 
today, such as mobile phones (see Figure 5-28), media tablets, and Google Glass. Although 
digital cameras in mobile devices are increasingly being used to help law enforcement (such 
as being used by citizens to take photos of crimes as they are being committed) and camera 
functions are included for  personal enjoyment and convenience, some fear that the ubiqui-
tous nature of mobile phones will lead to increased privacy violations. In fact, some athletic 
clubs have banned mobile phones entirely to protect the privacy of their members while 
working out and in the dressing rooms. Many YMCAs, city 
parks and recreation departments, and other recreational facili-
ties have banned camera phone use in locker rooms and rest-
rooms to protect the privacy of both children and adults. Camera 
phones are also being banned by some schools to prevent cheat-
ing, by many courthouses to prevent witness or jury intimida-
tion, and by many research and production facilities to prevent 
corporate espionage. Google Glass has the additional issue of 
the user being able to take photos and record videos in an even 
more subtle manner than with a mobile phone. Legally speak-
ing, people typically have few rights to privacy in public places, 
but many believe that new technology—such as camera phones 
and Google Glass—will require the law to reconsider and rede-
fine what is considered to be a public place and where citizens 
can expect to retain particular aspects of personal privacy.
FIGURE 5-28
Camera phones are 
ubiquitous today.
<
© Maridav/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
219
Employee Monitoring
Employee monitoring refers to companies recording or observing the actions of 
employees while on the job. With today’s technology, employee monitoring is very 
easy to perform, and much of it can be done through the use of computers. Common 
employee monitoring activities include screening telephone calls, reviewing e-mail, and 
tracking computer and Internet usage; with the growing inclusion of video cameras in 
computers and monitors today, employee monitoring via webcams may become more 
prominent in the near future. Although many employees feel that being watched at work 
is an invasion of their personal privacy, it is legal and very common in the United States. 
According to the American Management Association (AMA), the vast majority of all 
U.S. companies use some type of electronic surveillance with their employees, and it is 
common for employers to discipline employees for misuse of e-mail or the Internet at 
work. Typically, the primary reason is to monitor Internet usage for legal liability, but 
monitoring employee productivity is another motivating factor. Many employers are 
finding that some employees waste large amounts of time on social networking sites and 
other Web activities. While access to these sites is frequently blocked by employers, many 
believe a better alternative is identifying employees who abuse their Internet access and 
then dealing with those employees directly. This can be accomplished using the computer 
monitoring software discussed in a previous section.
For monitoring the physical locations of employees, video 
cameras (such as video surveillance cameras or webcams) can 
be used, but another possibility is the use of smart or RFID-
enabled ID cards (sometimes called proximity cards). While 
these cards are most often used for access control—such 
as to facilitate access to a building or computer network, to 
 automatically lock an employee’s computer when he or she gets 
a certain distance away from it (to eliminate the problem of nosy 
coworkers), and to automatically unlock the computer when the 
employee returns (to eliminate the need for passwords)—they 
can also be used to track the physical location of employees. 
There are also proximity apps that use the Bluetooth connec-
tion on your smartphone, media tablet, or other Bluetooth-
enabled mobile device to lock or unlock your computer based 
on the phone’s physical location (your phone needs to be within 
Bluetooth range of the computer in order for the computer to be unlocked)—see the 
Keycard app in Figure 5-29. Other types of employee monitoring systems designed for 
tracking an employee’s location are location-based systems, such as those systems that 
track an employee via his or her smartphone or those that notify the employer if the 
employee’s company vehicle exits a prescribed work area. GPS monitoring systems are 
discussed in more detail in Chapter 8.
Although some employees may view workplace monitoring as an invasion of their 
personal privacy, employers have several valid reasons for monitoring employee activities, 
such as security concerns, productivity  measurement, legal compliance, and legal liability. 
For example, management has a responsibility to the  company (and to its stockholders, 
for publicly held corporations) to make sure employees do the jobs that they are being 
paid to do. If any employees are spending too much time away from their desks chatting 
with other employees, answering their personal e-mail, or placing bids at online auctions, 
the company has the right to know and the responsibility to stop that misuse of company 
time and resources. For example, there have been many instances of employees viewing 
FIGURE 5-29
Proximity apps. 
This app locks and 
unlocks your computer 
automatically as your 
iPhone moves in and 
out of range.
<
>Employee monitoring. Observing or reviewing employees’ actions while they are on the job.
© iStockPhoto.com/SKrow; Courtesy Appuous, Inc. Copyright 
© 2013 Appuous, Inc. All rights reserved.; Courtesy Apple
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

220
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
pornography, downloading pirated movies or music, watching live sports video feeds—
even running their own  businesses—on company time and computers. In addition, the 
company needs to protect itself against lost business (due to employee incompetence or 
poor client skills, for example) and lawsuits (such as from employees when offensive 
e-mail messages are circulated within the office or when an employee includes statements 
that defame another business or reveal private information in a company blog). In addition, 
government regulations—such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act, which requires publicly traded 
companies to keep track of which employees look at sensitive documents—may require it. 
However, some employees object to being monitored and some privacy advocates feel that 
some types of employee monitoring cross the line between valid employee monitoring and 
an invasion of privacy.
Comprehensive employee monitoring systems can be expensive; however, many com-
panies view the cost as insignificant compared with the risk of a potential multimillion- 
dollar lawsuit. It is becoming increasingly common for U.S. firms to face sexual harassment 
and/or racial discrimination claims stemming from employee e-mail and Internet use and 
lawsuits can be costly—Chevron was once ordered to pay female employees $2.2 million 
to settle a sexual harassment lawsuit stemming from inappropriate e-mails sent by male 
employees.
To reduce cost and objections from employees, some businesses have found employee 
training and education to be an effective and cost-efficient alternative to continuous moni-
toring. Others use statistical-analysis software to detect unusual patterns in data collected 
about employee computer usage, and then use the reports to investigate only the employ-
ees and situations indicated as possible problems. Regardless of the techniques used, it is 
wise for businesses to inform employees about their monitoring practices (including what 
activities may be monitored and how long records of that monitoring will be archived), 
although they are not required by law in the United States at the current time to do so. 
However, bills have been introduced in several states in the United States that would pro-
hibit employee monitoring without employee notification and some countries—such as in 
the European Union—are much more limiting with respect to the types of employee moni-
toring that can be performed without active notification. In addition, legislation has been 
implemented or is being considered in several states to prevent employers from implanting 
employees with RFID chips without the employee’s consent in order to prevent employers 
from requiring that chips be implanted into employees for monitoring purposes, security 
access, or other work-related functions.
Presence Technology
Presence technology refers to the ability of one computing device (a desktop computer, 
portable computer, or smartphone, for example) on a network (such as the Internet or a 
mobile phone network) to identify another device on the same network and determine 
its status. It can be used to tell when someone on the network is using his or her com-
puter or mobile device, as well as the individual’s availability for communications; that is, 
whether or not the individual is able and willing to take a voice or video call or respond 
to an IM at the present time. For example, when an employee at a company utilizing pres-
ence technology (sometimes called presence management in a business context) has a 
question that needs answering, he or she can check the directory displayed on his or her 
computer or mobile device to see which team members are available, regardless of where 
those team members are physically located. The employee can then call an available team 
member or send an instant message. Presence technology is expected to be used eventually 
The ability of a device to share 
status information (including 
presence and location information) 
across a network is a form of 
context-aware computing.
TIP
>Presence technology. Technology that enables one computing device (such as a computer or mobile device) to locate and identify the current 
status of another device on the same network.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
221
on company Web pages so that visitors—usually potential or current 
customers—can see which salespeople, service representatives, or 
other contacts are currently available. Another  possible application is 
including dynamic presence buttons in e-mail messages—the presence 
button would display one message (such as “I’m online”) if the sender 
is online at the time the e-mail message is read, and a different mes-
sage (such as “I’m offline”) if the sender is not online at that time.
Presence technology today can be implemented via software, as 
well as by GPS, RFID, or other technology. For instance, IM software 
indicates the current status of each buddy on an individual’s contact 
list (based on each buddy’s signed-in status) and chat tools (such as 
in Facebook) reveal which of your contacts are currently online. In 
 addition, the presence technology built into many mobile devices 
today enables individuals to see when a contact is available (see 
Figure 5-30). The GPS capabilities integrated in many smartphones 
today also allow you to keep track of your friends’ physical locations, 
such as by using the Buddy Beacon or GyPSii application to view 
their current locations on a map. The GPS capabilities built into smart-
phones can also be used by law enforcement to determine the location 
of a phone (such as one belonging to a missing individual or a crimi-
nal) when needed.
While some aspects of presence technology are useful and intriguing, such as 
being able to tell that a loved one’s flight arrived safely when you notice that his or 
her  smartphone is on again, knowing if a friend or colleague is available for a phone 
call before dialing the number, or identifying the location of your children at any point 
in time, privacy advocates are concerned about the use of this technology. They are 
concerned about presence technology being used to target ads and information to indi-
viduals based on their current physical location (such as close to a particular restaurant 
at lunchtime) and other activities that they view as potential privacy violations. In addi-
tion, there are concerns about location data being archived and how that archived data 
may be used.
Protecting Personal and Workplace Privacy
There are not many options for protecting yourself against computer monitoring by your 
employer or the government, or against video surveillance systems. However, businesses 
should take the necessary security measures (such as protecting the company network 
from hackers, monitoring for intrusions, and using security software) to ensure that 
employee activities are not being monitored by a hacker or other unauthorized individual. 
Individuals should also secure their home computers to protect against keystroke log-
ging or other computer monitoring software that may be inadvertently installed via an 
electronic greeting card, game, or other downloaded file, and that is designed to provide 
a hacker with account numbers, passwords, and other sensitive data that could be used in 
identity theft or other fraudulent activities. Antispyware software, such as the programs 
discussed in Chapter 4, can be used to detect and remove some types of illegal com-
puter monitoring and spyware software. To prevent location data associated with your 
 smartphone from being available to strangers, change the privacy settings of the services 
you use to limit location data to specific friends, if that option is available. If you don’t 
use location-based services frequently, turn off the GPS feature on your phone until you 
need it, if possible.
The Employer’s Responsibilities
To protect the personal privacy of their employees and customers, businesses and 
organizations have a responsibility to keep private information about their employees, 
the company, and their customers safe. Strong security measures, such as firewalls and 
Online
In a meeting
Ofﬂine
Away
Urgent interruptions only
FIGURE 5-30
Presence 
technology. Presence 
icons indicate the 
status of individual 
contacts.
<
Modality Systems Ltd./Ignition Industries Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

222
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
access- prevention methods for both computer data and facilities, can help to protect 
against unauthorized access by hackers. Businesses and organizations should take 
precautions against both intentional and accidental breaches of privacy by employees. 
Finally, businesses and organizations have the responsibility to monitor their employees’ 
activities to ensure workers are productive. In general, businesses must maintain a safe 
and productive workplace environment and protect the privacy of their customers and 
employees, while at the same time ensure the company is not vulnerable to lawsuits.
All businesses should have an employee policy that informs employees about what 
personal activities (if any) are allowed during company time or on company equipment, as 
well as about what company communications (such as e-mail messages and blog postings) 
and what employee activities (such as Web surfing, e-mail, telephone calls, and download-
ing files to an office computer) may be monitored. Employee policies are usually included 
in an employee handbook or posted on the company intranet.
The Employees’ Responsibilities
Employees have the responsibility to read a company’s employee policy when initially 
hired and to review it periodically to ensure that they understand the policy and do not 
violate any company rules while working for that organization. In addition, because at-
work activities may legally be monitored by an employer, it is wise—from a privacy stand-
point—to avoid personal activities at work. From reading the organization’s employee 
policy, an employee can determine if any personal activities are allowed at all (such as 
checking personal e-mail during the lunch hour), but it is safer to perform personal activi-
ties at home, regardless. Be especially careful with any activity, such as sending a joke via 
e-mail to a coworker, that might be interpreted as harassment. For personal phone calls, 
employees should use their mobile phones during their lunch hour or a rest break.
COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY 
LEGISLATION
The high level of concern regarding computer security and personal privacy has led state 
and federal legislators to pass a variety of laws since the 1970s. Internet privacy is viewed 
as one of the top policy issues facing Congress today, and numerous bills have been pro-
posed in the last several years regarding spam, telemarketing, spyware, online profiling, 
and other very important privacy issues (such as the Do-Not-Track Online Act of 2013 
recently introduced in the U.S. Congress and the Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights unveiled 
recently by the Obama Administration). However, despite a renewed interest in privacy 
legislation, due at least in part to the recent leak of NSA surveillance operations, Congress 
has had difficulty passing new legislation. There are several reasons for this, including that 
it is difficult for the legal system to keep pace with the rate at which technology changes, 
and there are jurisdictional issues because many computer crimes affect businesses and 
individuals located in geographic areas other than the one in which the computer criminal 
is located. In addition, privacy is difficult to define and there is a struggle to balance free-
dom of speech with the right to privacy.
Another issue is weighing the need to implement legislation versus the use of volun-
tary methods to protect computer security and personal privacy. For instance, the Child 
Online Protection Act (COPA) has been controversial since it was passed in 1998, and, 
in fact, it has never been implemented. This legislation prohibited making pornography 
or any other content deemed harmful to minors available to minors via the Internet. This 
law was blocked by the U.S. Supreme Court several times, based on the likelihood that it 
violates the First Amendment and that less-restrictive alternatives (such as Internet filter-
ing) can be used instead to prevent the access of inappropriate materials by minors. A list 
of selected federal laws related to computer security and privacy are shown in Figure 5-31.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
223
DATE
LAW AND DESCRIPTION
2009
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act
Requires HIPAA covered entities to notify patients and/or customers when protected health information has been 
compromised.
2006
U.S. SAFE WEB Act of 2006
Grants additional authority to the FTC to help protect consumers from spam, spyware, and Internet fraud and deception.
2005
Real ID Act
Establishes national standards for state-issued driver’s licenses and identification cards.
2005
Junk Fax Prevention Act
Requires unsolicited faxes to have a highly visible opt-out notice.
2003
CAN-SPAM Act
Implements regulations for unsolicited e-mail messages and lays the groundwork for a federal Do Not E-Mail Registry.
2003
Do Not Call Implementation Act
Amends the Telephone Consumer Protection Act to implement the National Do Not Call Registry.
2003
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA)
Includes a Security Rule that sets minimum security standards to protect health information stored electronically.
2002
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Requires archiving a variety of electronic records and protecting the integrity of corporate financial data.
2001
USA PATRIOT Act 
Grants federal authorities expanded surveillance and intelligence-gathering powers, such as broadening the ability of federal 
agents to obtain the real identity of Internet users and to intercept e-mail and other types of Internet communications.
1999
Financial Modernization (Gramm-Leach-Bliley) Act
Extends the ability of banks, securities firms, and insurance companies to share consumers’ non-public personal information, 
but requires them to notify consumers and give them the opportunity to opt out before disclosing any information.
1998
Child Online Protection Act (COPA)
Prohibits online pornography and other content deemed harmful to minors; has been blocked by the Supreme Court.
1998
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA)
Regulates how Web sites can collect information from minors and communicate with them.
1998
Telephone Anti-Spamming Amendments Act
Applies restrictions to unsolicited, bulk commercial e-mail.
1991
Telephone Consumer Protection Act
Requires telemarketing companies to respect the rights of people who do not want to be called.
1988
Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act
Limits the use of government data in determining federal-benefit recipients.
1988
Video Privacy Protection Act
Limits disclosure of customer information by video-rental companies.
1986
Electronic Communications Privacy Act
Extends traditional privacy protections governing postal delivery and telephone services to include e-mail, mobile phones, 
and voice mail.
1984
Cable Communications Policy Act
Limits disclosure of customer records by cable TV companies; extended in 1992 to include companies that sell wireless services.
1974
Education Privacy Act
Stipulates that, in both public and private schools that receive any federal funding, individuals have the right to keep the 
schools from releasing information such as grades and evaluations of behavior.
1974
Privacy Act
Stipulates that the collection of data by federal agencies must have a legitimate purpose.
1970
Fair Credit Reporting Act
Prevents private organizations from unfairly denying credit and provides individuals the right to inspect their credit records.
1970
Freedom of Information Act
Gives individuals the right to inspect data concerning them that is stored by the federal government.
FIGURE 5-31
Federal legislation 
related to computer 
security and privacy.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

224
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
S U M MARY
WHY BE CONCERNED ABOUT COMPUTER SECURITY?
There are a number of important security concerns related to computers, such as having 
your computer stolen, losing data, and running the risk of buying pirated or digitally coun-
terfeited products online. All computer users should be aware of possible security risks and 
the safeguards they can implement to prevent security problems because these problems 
can cost them time and money, as well as be an inconvenience.
HARDWARE LOSS, HARDWARE DAMAGE, AND SYSTEM 
FAILURE
Hardware loss (perhaps as a result of hardware theft or lost hardware), hardware damage 
(both intentional and unintentional), and system failure are important concerns. System 
failure can occur because of a hardware problem, or it can be the result of a natural or 
 man-made disaster. To protect against hardware theft, door and equipment locks can be 
used. To protect against accidental hardware damage, surge suppressors, uninterruptible 
power supplies (UPSs), proper storage media care, and precautions against excess dust, 
heat, and static electricity are important. Ruggedized devices can be used when necessary. 
To protect against data loss, backups are essential for both individuals and businesses—
most businesses should also develop a disaster recovery plan for natural and man-made 
disasters. Encryption can be used to protect individual files and the content of data stored 
on a storage medium. Full disk encryption (FDE) and self-encrypting hard drives can 
be used to encrypt all the content located on a hard drive automatically.
SOFTWARE PIRACY AND DIGITAL COUNTERFEITING
Software piracy (the unauthorized copying of a computer program) and digital coun-
terfeiting (creating fake copies of currency and other resources) are illegal in the United 
States. They cost manufacturers billions of dollars each year, and some of these costs are 
passed on to law-abiding consumers. Various tools, such as consumer education, holo-
grams, and software activation procedures, can be used to prevent software piracy. Many 
businesses are also aggressively pursuing software pirates in court in an attempt to reduce 
piracy. The government has various methods in place to prevent digital counterfeiting of 
currency, such as using difficult-to-reproduce materials and features like security threads 
and watermarks.
WHY BE CONCERNED ABOUT INFORMATION PRIVACY?
Privacy issues affect the lives of everyone. A number of important privacy concerns are 
related to computers and the Internet. For instance, information privacy refers to the 
rights of individuals and companies to control how information about them is collected 
and used. Other common concerns include the privacy of Web site activities and e-mail 
messages, as well as the high number of security breaches on systems that contain per-
sonal information. Businesses need to be concerned with protecting the privacy of the 
personal information they store because data breaches violate the privacy of their custom-
ers. In addition, data breaches are costly, and they can result in lawsuits and damaged 
reputations.
Chapter Objective 1:
Explain why all computer 
users should be concerned 
about computer security.
Chapter Objective 2:
List some risks associated 
with hardware loss, hardware 
damage, and system failure, 
and understand ways to 
safeguard a computer against 
these risks.
Chapter Objective 3:
Define software piracy and 
digital counterfeiting, and 
explain how they can be 
prevented.
Chapter Objective 4:
Explain what information 
privacy is and why computer 
users should be concerned 
about it.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
225
DATABASES, ELECTRONIC PROFILING, SPAM, 
AND OTHER MARKETING ACTIVITIES
The extensive use of marketing databases and government databases is of concern to 
many privacy organizations and individuals. Information in marketing databases is fre-
quently sold to companies and other organizations; information in some government data-
bases is available to the public. Some public information can be retrieved from databases 
via the Web. Electronic profiling is the collection of diverse information about an individ-
ual. An organization’s privacy policy addresses how any personal information submitted 
to that company will be used. Another privacy issue that individuals need to be concerned 
about centers on the vast amount of spam (unsolicited bulk e-mail) that occurs today.
Protecting your e-mail address is one of the best ways to avoid spam. A throw-away 
e-mail address can be used for any activities that may result in spam; your permanent 
personal e-mail address can then be reserved for communications that should not result 
in spam. Before providing any personal information via a Web page, it is a good idea to 
review the Web site’s privacy policy to see if the information will be shared with other 
organizations. Consider whether or not the Web site is requesting too much personal infor-
mation, and only provide the required data. Do not provide personal details in chat rooms 
and personal Web sites. Unless you do not mind spam or are using a throw-away e-mail 
address, avoid completing online forms, such as those used to enter sweepstakes.
E-mail filters can be used to manage an individual’s e-mail; spam filters are used to 
identify possible spam. To reduce the amount of spam, junk mail, online ads, and telemar-
keting calls received, an individual can opt out of marketing activities. It’s possible that 
future marketing activities will require individuals to opt in in order to participate.
Individuals and businesses should be cautious when disposing of old hardware, such as 
hard drives and CDs, that contain sensitive data. Minimally, hard drives to be reused should 
be wiped clean; CDs, DVDs, and other media to be disposed of should be shredded.
ELECTRONIC SURVEILLANCE AND MONITORING
Computer monitoring software that can record an individual’s computer use is viewed as 
a privacy violation by some, as is the increased use of video surveillance in public loca-
tions. Although it is allowed by law, some employees view employee monitoring (such 
as monitoring computer use, telephone calls, and an individual’s location using a smart 
ID card or video surveillance) as an invasion of their privacy. Presence technology—the 
ability of one device on a network to know the status of another device on that network—
allows users of computers, mobile phones, and other communications devices to determine 
the availability of other individuals before contacting them.
To protect the privacy of employees and customers, businesses have a responsibil-
ity to keep private information about their employees, the company, and their customers 
safe. Firewalls, password-protected files, and encryption can help secure this information. 
Businesses have the responsibility to monitor employee activities in order to ensure that 
employees are performing the jobs they are being paid to do, are not causing lost busi-
ness, and are not leaving the company open to lawsuits. To inform employees of allowable 
activities, an employee policy or code of conduct should be developed and distributed to 
employees. For the highest level of privacy while at the workplace, employees should per-
form only work-related activities on the job.
COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY LEGISLATION
Although computer security and privacy are viewed as extremely important issues, legis-
lating these issues is difficult due to ongoing changes in technology, jurisdictional issues, 
and varying opinions. Some legislation related to computer security has been enacted; new 
legislation is being considered on a regular basis.
Chapter Objective 5:
Describe some privacy 
concerns regarding data-
bases, electronic profiling, 
spam, and telemarketing, 
and identify ways indi-
viduals can protect their 
privacy.
Chapter Objective 6:
Discuss several types of 
electronic surveillance and 
monitoring, and list ways 
individuals can protect their 
privacy.
Chapter Objective 7:
Discuss the status of com-
puter security and privacy 
legislation.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

226
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
R EVI EW ACTIVITI E S
Instructions: Match each key term on the left with the definition on the right that best describes it.
 1.        A device containing a built-in battery that provides continuous power to a computer 
and other connected components when the electricity goes out.
 2.        A device that protects hardware from damage due to electrical fluctuations.
 3.        A written plan that describes the steps a company will take following the occur-
rence of a disaster.
 4.        Technology that enables one computing device (such as a computer or mobile 
device) to locate and identify the current status of another device on the same 
network.
 5.       The complete malfunction of a computer system.
 6.        The rights of individuals and companies to control how information about them is 
collected and used.
 7.        A technology that encrypts everything stored on a storage medium automatically, 
without any user interaction.
 8.       The unauthorized copying of a computer program.
 9.        The use of computers or other types of digital equipment to make illegal copies of 
currency, checks, collectibles, and other items.
 10.       Unsolicited, bulk e-mail sent over the Internet.
Instructions: Circle T if the statement is true, F if the statement is false, or write the best answer 
in the space provided. Answers for the self-quiz are located in the References and Resources 
Guide at the end of the book.
 1. T F  As long as a business owns one legal copy of a software program, it can install that 
 program on as many computers as desired without fear of retribution.
 2. T F  Electronic profiling is the act of using electronic means to collect a variety of in-depth 
information about an individual, such as name, address, income, and buying habits.
 3. T F Encryption can be used for privacy purposes, in addition to security purposes.
 4. T F  One way of safeguarding your e-mail address is to use a single e-mail address for all 
online activity, including personal e-mail and online shopping.
 5. T F Very few major U.S. companies monitor the online activities of their employees.
 6. A(n)       plan can help a business get operational again following a fire, an act of sabo-
tage, or a similar disaster.
 7. Color copying money is an example of      .
 8. An e-mail       can be used to route suspected spam automatically into an e-mail folder.
 9. If you       , you are requesting that you be removed from marketing activities or that 
your information not be shared with other companies; if you      , you are requesting 
to participate.
KEY TERM 
MATCHING
 a. digital counterfeiting
 b. disaster recovery plan
 c. full disk encryption (FDE)
 d. information privacy
 e. presence technology
 f. software piracy
 g. spam
 h. surge suppressor
 i. system failure
 j. uninterruptible power 
supply (UPS)
SELF-QUIZ
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
227
 10. Match each precaution with the security risk it is designed to protect against, and write the 
corresponding number in the blank to the left of each security risk.
 a.       Digital counterfeiting
 b.       Hardware theft
 c.       Privacy breach
 d.       System damage
 e.       Unauthorized computer access
 1. Match each privacy risk with its related phrase, and write the corresponding number in the blank 
to the left of each phrase.
 a.       Throw-away e-mail address
 b.       Computer monitoring software
 c.       Riding public transportation
 2. Supply the missing words to complete the following statements.
 a.       refers to all content on a storage medium being encrypted automatically.
 b.       refers to the ability to locate the current status of an individual via a network.
 3. List two precautions that can be taken while traveling with a portable computer to guard against 
its theft.
 4. Explain the purpose of an uninterruptible power supply (UPS) and how it differs in function 
from a surge suppressor.
 5. Think of one computer-related security or privacy risk you have encountered recently. Describe 
the risk and list at least one precaution that could be taken to minimize that risk.
 1. Some privacy controversies stem from the fact that individuals are automatically included 
instead of having to opt in. For instance, with several new Facebook features over the past few 
years members were automatically enrolled when the feature was introduced until the member 
opted out. Should all online marketing activities be on an opt-in basis? How would you feel 
if your online activities (such as your online purchases) were shared with others without your 
consent? Does it make a difference if the activities are linked to your identity or anonymous? 
Facebook was once ordered to pay $9.5  million ($6.5 million of which was used to fund a pri-
vacy foundation) in response to a lawsuit related to its Beacon advertising program that was 
eventually abandoned due to user privacy complaints—is this justified?
 2. Spam is increasingly being filtered by ISPs and e-mail programs, and pop-up blockers can 
block many Web page advertisements. If this trend continues and these activities are no longer 
viable marketing activities, what will the long-term effect be? Will free Web content begin 
to  disappear? Is paying Internet users to receive spam or view Web ads a viable option? Just 
as with television, some amount of advertising is typically necessary in order to support free 
 content. What do you think is the optimal balance for the Web?
 1. Encryption
 2. Surge suppressor
 3. Security thread
 4. Proximity app
 5. Cable lock
EXERCISES
 1. Employee monitoring
 2. Video surveillance
 3. Spam
DISCUSSION 
QUESTIONS
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

228
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
P R OJ E CTS
 1. Electronic Health Records (EHRs) The use of electronic health records (EHRs) is growing 
rapidly. Proponents view EHRs as a means to deliver better care more efficiently. However, 
some privacy advocates are concerned about the possible security breaches of servers contain-
ing digital private medical information.
For this project, research the current use of EHRs. What are the benefits? Are EHRs 
widely used? Are you concerned about your medical history being stored on a computer that, 
potentially, could be accessed by a hacker or other unauthorized individual? Do you think the 
risk of a privacy breach is higher with EHRs as compared with the records contained in con-
ventional paper file folders? At the conclusion of your research, prepare a one-page summary 
of your findings and opinions and submit it to your instructor.
 2. E-Voting E-voting—casting ballots online or via an electronic e-voting machine—has been 
surrounded by controversy. Concerns include the accuracy and security of e-voting machines, 
the ability of online voting systems to prevent someone from voting as another individual and 
to protect the privacy of votes cast electronically, and the ability to perform an accurate recount.
For this project, research the current status of e-voting. Have universal standards been 
developed for all e-voting machines used in the United States or is that decision made on a 
state-by-state basis? What security measures are being used with e-voting and online voting 
systems to ensure they cannot be hacked and that only the registered voter is permitted to 
cast his or her vote? Form an opinion about the use of e-voting machines and online voting. 
Would you be comfortable casting your vote via an e-voting machine? How about online? At 
some point, do you think online voting will become the norm? If so, how would you suggest 
handling individuals who have no Internet access available to them on Election Day? At the 
conclusion of your research, submit your findings and opinions to your instructor in the form 
of a short paper, no more than two pages in length.
 3. Browser Privacy Settings There are a variety of settings in a Web browser that pertain to pri-
vacy, such as cookie, cache, and history settings.
For this project, find a computer (either your own or one in a school computer lab or at 
your local public library) on which you are permitted to change the Internet options (ask per-
mission first if you are not sure if these actions are allowed) and perform the following tasks:
 a. Open Internet Explorer and use the Internet Options option on the Tools menu or button to check 
the current settings on the General and Privacy tabs. Using the General tab, delete your browsing 
history (temporary files, history, cookies, saved passwords, and Web form information).
 b. Visit at least five different Web sites to build a history and cookie list. You may want to go 
to an e-commerce site and add items to your shopping cart (but don’t check out) or per-
sonalize a portal page, such as MSNBC.com or My Yahoo!.
 c. Display your history list. Are the Web sites you visited listed? Use the Browsing history 
Settings button on the Internet Options dialog box to view the temporary files, including 
your cookie files. Were new cookies added during your session? If so, are they all from 
the Web sites you visited, or are any of them third-party cookies?
 d. Delete all temporary Internet files, sign out of any personalized pages, and close the 
browser window. Prepare a short summary of your work to submit to your instructor.
HOT TOPICS
SHORT ANSWER/
RESEARCH
HANDS ON
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 5 COMPUTER SECURITY AND PRIVACY
229
 4. Security Camera Networks As discussed in the chapter, live surveillance cameras are being 
used at an increasing number of public locations. Some view this as a valid crime prevention 
tool; others think it is an invasion of privacy. Is it ethical for businesses to use video cameras 
to record customers’ activities? If so, for what purposes? Does the government have the 
responsibility to use every means possible to protect the country and its citizens? Or do 
citizens have the right not to be watched in public? One objection stated about these systems is 
“It’s not the same as a cop on the corner. This is a cop on every corner.” What if it were a live 
police officer at each public video camera location instead of a camera? Would that be more 
acceptable from a privacy standpoint? If people do not plan to commit criminal acts in public, 
should they be concerned that law enforcement personnel may see them? Does the risk of 
being recorded deter some illegal or unethical acts?
For this project, form an opinion about the ethical ramifications of public video surveil-
lance and be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discussion group, 
in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). You may 
also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
 5. Privacy Policy Flip-Flops Although a company’s privacy policy may look acceptable when 
you read it before submitting personal information to that company, there is no guarantee that 
the policy will not be changed.
For this project, locate three different privacy policies on Web sites, analyze them, and 
compare them. Do the policies specify what personal information might be shared and with 
whom? Do the organizations reserve the right to change their policies at a later time without 
notice? If so, will they try to notify consumers? Do any of the policies allow for any sharing 
of data to third-party organizations? If so, is the data personally identifiable, and can custom-
ers opt out? Form an opinion regarding a company’s right to change its privacy policy and the 
impact such a change may have on customer loyalty. Share your findings with the class in the 
form of a short presentation. The presentation should not exceed 10 minutes and should make 
use of one or more presentation aids, such as a whiteboard, handouts, or a computer-based 
slide presentation (your instructor may provide additional requirements). You may also be 
asked to submit a summary of the presentation to your instructor.
 6. Should the Government Be Allowed to Prevent Web Site Tracking? The proposed Do-Not-
Track Online Act of 2013 has rekindled the debate surrounding tracking Web site activity 
for advertising purposes. Though the law, if enacted, wouldn’t prohibit tracking, it would 
require the FTC to establish standardized mechanisms that people could use to have their Web 
browser tell Web sites and other online entities if they agree to tracking activities. Advocates 
of do-not-track provisions argue that they just want to protect privacy. Companies with Web 
sites ( particularly small- and medium-sized businesses) state they depend on ad networks and 
other online resources to connect with potential customers and do-not-track provisions may 
create a hardship. If tracking provisions are enabled, should consumers be required to opt in 
to marketing activities or to opt out of them? Who should make the regulations—technology 
companies? Consumers? The government? Are you concerned that some Web sites track your 
browsing activities to display relevant ads and offers or do you like the customization provided 
by the tracking? Is voluntary compliance with standards developed by the industry sufficient 
or does this issue require legislation? If you use social media, how does Web site tracking 
compare with the information you share via your social networking sites in terms of loss of 
privacy? If tracking were illegal unless a consumer opts in, would you? Why or why not? 
Pick a side on this issue, form an opinion and gather supporting evidence, and be 
 prepared to discuss and defend your position in a classroom debate or in a 1–2 page paper, 
depending on your instructor’s directions.
ETHICS IN ACTION
PRESENTATION/
DEMONSTRATION
BALANCING ACT
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Jim Griffith, aka “Griff,” 
is the Dean of eBay 
Education, a roving 
eBay ambassador, an 
eBay spokesperson, 
the host of eBay Radio, 
and the author of The 
Official eBay Bible. An 
enthusiastic eBay buyer 
and seller since 1996, 
Griff spends nearly 
all his waking hours 
teaching others how 
to use eBay effectively, 
safely, and profitably, 
and spreading the word 
about eBay across print, 
radio, and TV. Griff has 
worked for eBay for 17 
years.
A Conversation with JIM GRIFFITH
Dean of eBay Education, eBay
 
“  
. . . the most valuable asset for any business, online or offl ine, 
is the customer. ”
My Background . . .
Although I have many roles at eBay, my most public role—Dean of eBay Education—is unique, 
slightly unorthodox, and best understood in the context of my history with the company. I was origi-
nally a user on eBay in the very early days (1996) and spent a lot of time assisting other buyers and 
sellers on eBay’s one chat board. My posts came to the attention of eBay founder Pierre Omidyar 
who offered me a job as eBay’s first customer support rep. I continued to be an active member of the 
eBay community along with my new duties at the time, which included assisting and teaching buy-
ers, sellers, and eBay employees how to use eBay. Over time, I also became an eBay spokesperson, 
lead instructor of our eBay University program, author of The Official eBay Bible (now in its third 
edition), and host of eBay Radio.
In addition to the obvious knowledge of the eBay Web site, our policies, and the basics of 
business, the skills that proved to be most critical during my seventeen-year tenure at eBay (and 
I should say I am still refining them) would be diplomacy, empathy, civility, and a strong sense of 
self-deprecating humor.
It’s Important to Know . . .
The basic principles behind successful e-commerce are no different than those behind tra-
ditional offline commerce. For example, the most valuable asset for any business, online or offline, 
is the customer. This is especially true for e-commerce where the competition for customers is fierce. 
Although the technologies and transaction experience for the Web and for traditional retail are markedly 
different, the standard, tried-and-true business basics (such as business planning, inventory procurement 
and management, customer acquisition and management, and marketing) are as crucial to e-commerce 
as they are to traditional business.
The importance of an easy-to-use, well-designed, and appealing Web site. All of the inventory 
in the world is for naught if the buyer cannot search through it and purchase it with ease.
Online commerce technologies are constantly changing. What is cutting edge today will soon 
be passé. Anyone who makes his or her living online absolutely must stay on top of all online 
 marketplace technology advances and adopt and implement them as necessary. As an example, 
the recent explosion in the popularity and adoption of social networking sites like Twitter and 
Facebook have created an entire new field of online business called “Social Commerce.” Consumers 
in  general—and online consumers in particular—are much more business and technology savvy 
than they were a mere 5 years ago. Demanding consumers will have little or no patience for online 
 businesses that do not provide the best possible shopping experience.
How I Use this Technology . . .
Besides working for eBay, I am an avid consumer and seller online. I make at least one online pur-
chase a day and I always have a selection of items up for sale (on eBay). My online e-commerce 
Web-Based Multimedia 
and E-Commerce
expert insight on...
Courtesy eBay. The eBay logo is a trademark of eBay Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXPERT INSIGHT ON WEB-BASED MULTIMEDIA AND E-COMMERCE 
231
activity along with my job of instructing and assisting buyers and sellers 
to navigate and utilize eBay and PayPal requires an extensive working 
knowledge of and familiarity with our own Web sites (eBay and PayPal).
What the Future Holds . . .
The Internet revolution has in many ways changed the nature of human 
commerce forever. The most important impact of the Internet revolution 
has been the empowerment of the consumer. Never before has the buyer 
had so much control over the direction of the marketplace. This will only 
increase as time goes on, and the businesses that acknowledge this new 
reality and plan accordingly are the ones that will survive and thrive.
In the future, more brick-and-mortar business owners will adopt 
the Internet as a primary or secondary channel for their businesses. In 
addition, more small businesses will start up solely on the Internet as the 
cost of entry into the online marketplace continues to drop and the gap 
in the costs of starting an online and offline business continues to grow. This will lead to 
even more choices for the online consumer, who will continue to exert increasing service 
demands and pricing pressure on online sellers.
However, as the Internet becomes more a part of our day-to-day lives, the idea of the 
Internet as a unique environment will start to disappear, especially as access to the Internet 
becomes cheaper and more widespread (for example, embedded in appliances, cell phones, 
media devices, and even the walls of our homes!). Just like technologies before it (such as 
telegraph, telephone, radio, and television), we will soon take the Internet for granted as it 
matures and eventually becomes completely entwined within the matrix of our daily lives.
My Advice to Students . . .
Unless you’re interested in pursuing a career in computer science, engineering, or pro-
gramming, an academic study of the inner workings of the Internet or computers will not 
be a requirement for a career in an Internet-based industry. However, Internet companies 
will have an ever-increasing demand for inventive product marketing personnel, product 
designers, and intellectual property attorneys.
That said, whatever career you pursue, never forget that the direction of online com-
merce (and the world in general) is toward more control in the hands of the individual. 
Adjust your career path accordingly!
Discussion Question
Jim Griffith views the online buyer as an extremely influential part of the e-commerce 
marketplace. Think of online purchases you have made. How did your buying decision differ 
from shopping locally? What factors influenced your final decision? How does the increased 
number of online sources for products impact the online marketplace? Do consumers have 
more influence over online stores than over brick-and-mortar stores? Why or why not? If 
you were starting a business, would you have an e-commerce presence? A brick-and-mortar 
presence? Both? Be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discus-
sion group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s direc-
tions). You may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
>For more information on eBay, visit www.ebay.com. For more information about e-commerce, 
read FutureShop by Daniel Nissanoff, and for more information about effective, safe, and 
successful buying or selling on eBay, refer to The Official eBay Bible by Jim “Griff” Griffith.
  Anyone who makes 
his or her living online 
absolutely must stay 
on top of all online 
marketplace technology 
advances . . .  
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

outline
Overview
Intellectual Property Rights
Copyrights
Trademarks
Patents
Ethics
Ethical Use of Copyrighted Material
Ethical Use of Resources 
and Information
Computer Hoaxes and Digital 
Manipulation
Ethical Business Practices 
and Decision Making
Related Legislation
Intellectual Property  
Rights and Ethics
After completing this chapter, you will be 
able to do the following:
1. Understand the different types of 
 intellectual property rights and how they 
relate to computer use.
2. Explain what is meant by the term ethics.
3. Provide several examples of unethical 
behavior in the use of intellectual property 
and in computer-related matters.
4. Explain what computer hoaxes and digital 
manipulation are and how they relate to 
computer ethics.
5. Understand how ethics can impact business 
practices and decision making.
6. Discuss the current status of legislation 
related to intellectual property rights 
and ethics.
chapter 6
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OV E RV I EW
W
hile computers and related technology add convenience and enjoyment to 
our daily lives, they also can make it easier to perform some types of ille-
gal or unethical acts. For example, computers can be used to launch computer 
viruses, create high-quality illegal copies of software programs and music CDs, 
and copy information from a Web page and present it as original work. However, 
just because technology enables us to do something, does that make it right? 
Is legality the only measuring stick, or are there some acts that are legal but still 
morally or ethically wrong? Is there only one set of ethics, or can ethics vary from 
person to person? This chapter continues where Chapter 5 left off by exploring 
computer-related societal issues. Two important issues—intellectual property 
rights and ethics—are discussed in this chapter; other societal issues are included 
in Chapter 7.
The chapter begins with a look at a legal issue that all computer users should be 
aware of—intellectual property rights. The specific types of intellectual property rights 
are discussed, along with examples of the types of property that each right protects. 
Next is a discussion of ethics, including what they are and a variety of  ethical issues 
surrounding computer use by individuals and businesses. Topics include the ethical 
use of copyrighted material, ethical uses of resources and information,  unethical use 
of digital manipulation, ethical business practices and decision making, and the impact 
of cultural differences with respect to ethics and business decisions. The chapter 
closes with a look at legislation related to the issues  discussed in this chapter. ■
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
Intellectual property rights are the legal rights to which the creators of intellectual 
property—original creative works—are entitled. Intellectual property rights indicate 
who has the right to use, perform, or display a creative work and what can legally be 
done with that work. In addition, intellectual property rights determine how long the 
creator retains rights to the property and other related restrictions. Examples of intellec-
tual property include music and movies; paintings, computer graphics, and other works 
of art; poetry, books, and other types of written works; symbols, names, and designs 
used in conjunction with a business; architectural drawings; and inventions. Intellectual 
property rights can be claimed by individuals or by companies or other organizations. 
The three main types of intellectual property rights are copyrights, trademarks, and 
patents. Copyrights, trademarks, and patents are issued by individual countries; U.S. 
intellectual property rights are discussed in more detail next.
>Intellectual property rights. The legal rights to which creators of original creative works (such as artistic or literary works, inventions, 
corporate logos, and more) are entitled.
Masterfile
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

234
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Copyright. The legal right to sell, publish, or distribute an original artistic or literary work; it is held by the creator of a work as soon as it exists in 
physical form. >Digital watermark. A subtle alteration of digital content that is not noticeable when the work is viewed or played but that 
identifies the copyright holder.
Copyrights
A copyright is a form of protection available to the creator of 
an original artistic,  musical, or literary work, such as a book, 
movie, software program, song, or  painting. It gives the copy-
right holder the exclusive right to publish, reproduce, distribute, 
perform, or display the work. The 1976 Copyright Act extends 
copyright protection to nonpublished works, so, immediately 
after creating a work in some type of material form (such as on 
paper, film, videotape, or a digital storage medium), the creator 
automatically owns the copyright of that work. Consequently, 
the creator is entitled to copyright protection of that work and 
has the right to make a statement, such as “Copyright © 2014 
John Smith. All rights reserved.” Although works created in the 
United States after March 1, 1989, are not required to  display a 
copyright notice in order to retain their copyright protection, displaying a copyright  statement 
on a published work (see Figure 6-1) reminds others that the work is protected by copyright 
law and that any use must comply with copyright law. Only the creator of a work (or his or her 
employer if the work is created as a work for hire; that is, within the scope of employment) 
can rightfully claim copyright. Copyrights can be  registered with the U. S. Copyright Office. 
Although registration is not required for  copyright protection, it does offer an advantage if the 
need to prove ownership of a copyright ever arises, such as during a copyright-infringement 
lawsuit. Most countries offer some copyright protection to works registered in other countries.
Anyone wanting to use copyrighted materials must first obtain permission from the 
copyright holder and pay any required fee. One exception is the legal concept of fair use, 
which permits limited duplication and use of a portion of copyrighted material for specific 
purposes, such as criticism, commentary, news reporting, teaching, and research. For exam-
ple, a teacher may legally read a copyrighted poem for discussion in a poetry class, and a 
news crew may videotape a small portion of a song at a concert to include in a news report 
of that concert. Copyrights apply to both published and unpublished works and remain in 
effect until 70 years after the creator’s death. Copyrights for works registered either by an 
organization or as anonymous works last 95 years from the date of publication or 120 years 
from the date of creation, whichever is shorter. One emerging issue is the termination rights 
granted to musicians and songwriters in the 1976 Copyright Act—if they originally gave 
music rights to their publisher, they can request those rights back after 35 years (because the 
law went into effect in 1978, the first set of rights became eligiable for termination in 2013).
It is important to realize that purchasing a copyrighted item (such as a book, painting, 
or movie) does not change the copyright protection afforded to the creator of that item. 
Although you have purchased the right to use the item, you cannot legally duplicate it or 
portray it as your own creation. Some of the most widely publicized copyright-infringement 
issues today center around individuals illegally distributing copyright-protected  content 
(particularly music, movies, and e-books) via the Internet, as discussed later in this chapter.
To protect their rights, some creators of digital content (such as art, music,  photographs, 
and movies) use digital watermarks—a subtle alteration of digital content that is not 
noticeable when the work is viewed or played but that identifies the copyright holder. 
For instance, the digital watermark for an image might consist of slight changes to the 
 brightness of a specific pattern of pixels that are imperceptible to people but are easily 
read by software. Digital watermarks can also be made visible, if desired, such as to add 
the name of a company or Web site URL to a photo being posted online, or to inform 
 individuals that the photo is copyrighted and should not be used elsewhere.
BOOK COPYRIGHT NOTICES
WEB SITE COPYRIGHT NOTICES
FIGURE 6-1
Copyright 
statements. Are often 
included on books, 
Web sites, and other 
original copyrighted 
works.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®; © 2013 Pinterest. 
All rights reserved.
The first copyright termination 
victor was Victor Willis, the lead 
singer of the Village People, who, 
in 2013, was granted control 
of his share of the copyright to 
YMCA and other songs he wrote 
in the late 1970s.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
235
>Digital rights management (DRM) software. Software used to protect and manage the rights of creators of digital content, such as art, 
music, photographs, and movies. >Trademark. A word, phrase, symbol, or design that identifies goods or services.
Digital watermarks can be added to images, music, 
video, TV shows, e-books, and other digital content 
found online or distributed in digital form to identify their 
copyright holders, their authorized distributors, and other 
important information. Digital watermarks are typically 
added with software and, as shown in Figure 6-2, are 
usually invisible until they are read with appropriate 
 software (such as Adobe Photoshop or a proprietary 
reader). The purpose of digital watermarking is to give 
digital content a unique identity that remains intact even 
if the work is copied, edited, compressed, or otherwise 
manipulated. For instance, movies sent to movie theaters 
typically include a digital watermark that can be used to 
trace a pirated movie back to the theater where the pirated 
movie was created in order to help authorities locate and 
prosecute the criminal. Some digital watermark services 
also offer search services that continually scan the Web 
to locate digitally watermarked images and notify the 
copyright holder when those images are found. Because 
of the vast amount of copyrighted content distributed via 
the Internet today, the market for digital watermarking 
technology is growing rapidly. For a look at a new 
application for digital watermarking—linking rich media 
to published content—see the Inside the Industry box.
Another rights-protection tool used with digital content is digital rights management 
(DRM) software. DRM software is used to control the use of a work. For instance, DRM 
software used in conjunction with business documents (called enterprise rights manage-
ment) can protect a sensitive business document by controlling usage of that document, 
such as by limiting who can view, print, or copy it. DRM software used with digital content 
(such as movies, e-books, and music) downloaded or streamed via the Internet can control 
whether or not a downloaded file can be copied to another device, as well as make a video-
on-demand movie or a rented e-book unviewable after the rental period expires.
Trademarks
A trademark is a word, phrase, symbol, or design (or a combination of words, phrases, 
 symbols, or designs) that identifies and distinguishes one product or service from another. 
A trademark used to identify a service is also called a service mark. Trademarks that are claimed 
but not registered with the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO) can use the mark ™; 
nonregistered service marks can use the symbol SM. The symbol ® is reserved for registered 
trademarks and service marks. Trademarks for products usually appear on the product packag-
ing with the appropriate trademark symbol; service marks are typically used in 
the advertising of a service because there is no product on which the mark can be 
printed. Trademarked words and phrases—such as iPod®, Chicken McNuggets®, 
Google Docs™, and FedEx OfficeSM—are widely used today. Trademarked logos 
(see Figure 6-3) are also common. Trademarks last 10 years, but they can be 
renewed as many times as desired, as long as they are being used in commerce.
In addition to protecting the actual trademarked words, phrases, or logos, 
trademark law also protects domain names that match a company’s trademark, 
such as Amazon.com and Lego.com. There have been a number of claims of 
The invisible watermark is
embedded into the photo.
The information contained in the watermark
can be viewed using an image editing program.
FIGURE 6-2
Digital watermarks.
<
FIGURE 6-3
Examples of 
trademarked logos.
<
© Digimarc Corporation. All rights reserved. May not be reproduced without Digimarc’s express written 
consent. For more information, visit www.digimarc.com
Courtesy McDonald’s Corporation; Courtesy SONIC; 
These materials have been reproduced with the 
permission of eBay Inc. © 2011 EBAY INC. ALL 
RIGHTS RESERVED; Courtesy Logitech
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

236
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Cybersquatting. The act of registering a domain name with the intent to profit from the goodwill of a trademark belonging to someone else.
online trademark infringement in recent years, particularly those involving domain names 
that contain, or are similar to, a trademark. For instance, several celebrities—such as 
Madonna and Tracy Morgan—have fought to be given the exclusive right to use what they 
consider their rightful domain names (Madonna.com and TracyMorgan.com, respectively). 
Other examples include Twitter’s complaint against an organization using the domain 
name twitter.org, RadioShack’s objection to a private individual using shack.com for the 
Web site of his design business, and Microsoft being accused by British Sky Broadcasting 
Group of trademark infringement with its SkyDrive service.
While businesses and individuals can file lawsuits to recover a disputed domain name, a 
faster and less-expensive option is to file a complaint with a dispute resolution provider, such 
as the World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO). WIPO is a specialized agency of the 
United Nations and attempts to resolve international commercial disputes about intellectual 
property between private parties. This includes domain name disputes; in fact, WIPO has 
resolved more than 27,000 domain name dispute cases since it was formed. Complainants pay 
a filing fee to start the resolution process, and then WIPO has the power to award the disputed 
domain name to the most appropriate party. If the domain name was acquired with the intent 
to profit from the goodwill of a trademark belonging to someone else (such as by  generating 
revenue from Web site visitors intending to go to the  trademark holder’s Web site or by trying 
to sell the domain name to the trademark holder at an inflated price) or to otherwise abuse a 
trademark, the act of acquiring that domain name is deemed to be cybersquatting and the 
New Applications for Digital Watermarking
While digital watermarks are still used to identify and help protect 
digital content from misuse, new applications for this technology 
are emerging. One such technology is Digimarc Discover™, which 
enables your mobile device to recognize media (such as newspa-
pers, magazines, product packaging, television shows, and music) 
in your immediate surroundings to provide you with online content 
linked to that media, such as downloading a coupon for a product 
shown in a magazine ad, viewing a video related to a magazine 
article, displaying pricing and product information corresponding 
to a product’s packaging, and viewing band information for the 
song currently being played over a restaurant’s sound system.
Available as a mobile app for smartphones and other mobile 
devices, Digimarc Discover uses your phone’s camera and 
microphone to “look and listen” to surrounding media. An app 
recognizes the digital watermarks embedded in the media (such 
as in the textbook shown in the accompanying illustration), and 
then the appropriate options for the available online content and 
services are displayed on the phone (such as a virtual tour of the 
Colosseum, historical photos and other information, or prices for 
upcoming ﬂ ights to Rome).
This emerging digital watermarking application enables pub-
lishers, advertising agencies, and other companies to make a 
variety of rich media available to customers without having to 
give up valuable space in print publications or product packag-
ing (as is required with a QR code or other code that needs to be 
displayed on the printed media in order to be functional).
I N S I D E  TH E  I N D U STRY
© Digimarc Corporation. All rights reserved. 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
237
>Patent. A form of protection for an invention that can be granted by the government; gives exclusive rights of an invention to its inventor for 
20 years.
trademark holder generally prevails. If the current domain name holder has a legitimate reason 
for using that name and does not appear to be a cybersquatter, however, WIPO may allow the 
holder to continue to use that domain name. For instance, WIPO ruled that TracyMorgan.com 
and twitter.org were confusingly similar to the actor’s name and the trademark owned by 
Twitter, respectively, and that neither owner of the disputed domain names had a legitimate 
interest in their respective domain name, so WIPO transferred the disputed domain names to 
Tracy Morgan and Twitter, respectively. However, the owner of the design business (whose 
last name is Shackleton and whose nickname is “Shack”) was allowed to keep the shack.com 
domain name because it was ruled that he had a legitimate interest in that name. In the SkyDrive 
case, Microsoft was not accused of cybersquatting but did lose the case and, therefore, must 
rebrand its SkyDrive service, unless it reaches an agreement with Sky to purchase use of the 
trademark. The Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act, which was signed into law in 
1999, makes cybersquatting illegal and it allows for penalties up to $100,000 for each willful 
registration of a domain name that infringes on a trademark.
Many recent cybersquatting cases deal with typosquatting—registering a domain name 
that is similar to a trademark or domain name but that is slightly misspelled in hopes that 
individuals will accidentally arrive at the site when trying to type the URL of the legitimate 
site. These sites often contain pay-per-click advertising used to generate revenue for the 
typosquatter; they can also be phishing sites that use spoofed Web pages to try to obtain sen-
sitive information from visitors, or they can redirect visitors to sites for competing products 
or services. To prevent typosquatting and to protect their brands and other trademarks, many 
companies register variations of their domain names proactively. For instance, Verizon has 
registered more than 10,000 domain names related to its three most visible brands (Verizon, 
VZ, and FiOS). If a cybersquatter is causing enough damage to 
warrant it, companies can file a lawsuit against the cybersquatter. 
For instance, Verizon once sued a company for unlawfully regis-
tering 663 domain names that were either identical or confusingly 
similar to Verizon trademarks. In late 2008, Verizon was awarded 
more than $33 million in that case—the largest cybersquat-
ting judgment to date. Another form of cybersquatting involves 
individuals not affiliated with a company opening social media 
accounts using the company’s brand names or variations of its 
brand names— typically either to use the account to sell pirated 
goods posing as the legitimate company, or in hopes the company 
will pay them to relinquish control of the accounts.
Patents
Unlike copyrights (which protect artistic and literary works) and 
trademarks (which protect a company’s logo and brand names), 
a patent protects inventions by granting exclusive rights of an 
invention to its inventor for a period of 20 years. A patented inven-
tion is typically a unique product, but it can also be a process or 
procedure that provides a new way of doing something or that 
offers a new technical solution to a problem. Like trademarks, 
U.S. patents are issued by the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office 
(USPTO). A recent patent issued to Google for a new e-book 
menu system is shown in Figure 6-4.
The number of patent applications, particularly those related 
to computer and Internet products, has skyrocketed in recent 
Trademarks and patents are 
territorial, so companies and 
individuals wanting trademark 
or patent protection in multiple 
countries should apply for a 
trademark or patent in all of 
those countries.
TIP
FIGURE 6-4
Patents. The patent 
shown here is for a 
new e-book menu 
system.
<
Courtesy of the Office of the Chief Communications Officer, United States Patent and Trademark Office
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

238
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Ethics. Overall standards of moral conduct. >Computer ethics. Standards of moral conduct as they relate to computer use.
years. In the United States, patents have also been granted for Internet business meth-
ods and models, such as Priceline.com’s  name-your-own-price business model and 
Amazon.com’s one-click purchase  procedure. One controversial patent granted to 
Google in 2013 is for “pay-for-gaze” advertising—a business model for charging 
advertisers according to the number of views an ad receives via a “head mounted gaze 
tracking device” (speculated to be Google Glass). When a product or business model is 
patented, no other organization can duplicate it without paying a royalty to the patent 
holder or risking prolonged patent litigation. Patent issues sometimes interfere with a 
company’s new products or services and tech companies are regularly sued for patent 
infringement. For instance, Apple has been sued in several patent infringement  lawsuits 
related to its iPhone, Microsoft has claimed that Linux infringed on many of its patents, 
and Marvell Technology was recently ordered to pay $1.17 billion for infringing on 
disk drive patents held by Carnegie Mellon University.
Patents can be difficult, expensive, and time consuming to obtain. However, com-
panies routinely seek patents for new inventions (IBM was awarded 6,478 patents in 
2012 and has been the patent leader for 20 years). Patents can also be very lucrative; 
consequently, businesses have been acquired, at least in part, for their patents, and pat-
ents are sometimes purchased outright. For example, Microsoft recently agreed to pay 
AOL $1 billion for 800 undisclosed technology patents.
ETHICS
The term ethics refers to standards of moral 
conduct. For example, telling the truth is a 
matter of ethics. An unethical act is not always 
illegal, although it might be, but an illegal act 
is usually viewed as unethical by most peo-
ple. For example, purposely lying to a friend 
is unethical but usually not illegal, while 
 perjuring oneself in a courtroom as a witness 
is both illegal and unethical. Whether or not 
criminal behavior is involved, ethics guide our 
behavior and play an integral role in our lives.
Much more ambiguous than the law, ethi-
cal beliefs can vary widely from one individual 
to another. Ethical beliefs may also vary based 
on one’s religion, country, race, or  culture. In 
addition, different ethical standards can apply 
to different areas of one’s life. For example, 
personal ethics guide an individual’s  personal 
behavior and business ethics guide an indi-
vidual’s workplace behavior. Computer ethics
relate to an individual’s computer use and are 
significant today because the proliferation of 
computers and mobile devices in the home 
and workplace provides more opportunities 
for unethical acts than in the past. The Internet 
also makes it easy to distribute  information 
that many individuals would view as unethical 
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Dr. Ramon C. Barquin, President, Computer 
Ethics Institute
If a person finds a lost device (such as a USB 
flash drive), is it ethical to look at the contents 
in order to try to determine its owner?
The answer is yes, you do have an ethical  obligation 
to return something of value that you find to its 
 rightful owner. If you find a wallet, it certainly is 
appropriate to look for a document that identifies 
its owner. But, with a USB drive, there has to be 
an element of proportionality. The comparison here 
is more along the lines of finding a briefcase full of 
documents. You can and should try to find the  person 
who lost it, but it is more likely that you could do 
this by looking at the names and addresses on the 
 envelopes than by reading every single letter. The 
key is to remember that your objective in browsing 
through content is to facilitate its return to the  person 
who lost the briefcase (or USB drive) and not to 
 satisfy your personal curiosity about that person’s 
private affairs.
Courtesy of Computer Ethics Institute
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
239
(such as computer viruses and spyware), as well as to distribute copies of software, mov-
ies, music, and other digital content in an illegal and, therefore, unethical manner.
Whether at home, at work, or at school, individuals encounter ethical issues every day. 
For example, you may need to make ethical decisions such as whether or not to accept a 
relative’s offer of a free copy of a downloaded song or movie, whether or not to have a 
friend help you take an online exam, whether or not to upload a photo of your friend to 
Facebook without asking permission, whether or not to post a rumor on a campus gossip 
site, or whether or not to report as taxable income the virtual money you make online, as 
discussed in the Technology and You box.
As an employee, you may need to decide whether or not to print your child’s  birthday 
party invitations on the office color printer, whether or not to correct your boss if he or she 
gives you credit for another employee’s idea, or whether or not to sneak a look at informa-
tion that technically you have access to but have no legitimate reason to view. IT employees, 
in particular, often face this latter ethical dilemma because they typically have both access 
and the technical ability to retrieve a wide variety of personal and professional information 
about other employees, such as their salary information, Web-surfing history, and e-mail.
Virtual Currency—Real or Not?
While Second Life, World of Warcraft, and other virtual worlds only 
exist in cyberspace, there is nothing virtual about the money being 
made. For instance, in 2006, Ailin Graef became the ﬁ rst virtual 
world millionaire when her Second Life assets (measured in the 
virtual currency Linden dollars) topped $1 million in U.S. dollars.
But Linden dollars and World of Warcraft gold aren’t the only 
digital currency (electronic money passed between parties with-
out traditional banking or money transfer systems) in town. For 
instance, digital gift cards like Facebook Credits and Nintendo 
Points can be used to purchase games and apps on Facebook 
or for Nintendo devices, respectively, and Amazon Coins can be 
used to purchase content for Kindle Fire devices. And one of the 
most prominent digital currencies, Bitcoins (see the accompany-
ing photo), can be used to make purchases in numerous online 
games and at some online retailers.
One issue surrounding the growing use of digital currency is 
whether or not it is a real currency and, as such, is subject to existing 
laws. For instance, the U.S. Commodity Futures Trading Commission 
is considering whether virtual currency (such as Bitcoin) should be 
subject to its rules and Bitcoin and several online payment entities 
(including mobile payment processor Square) were issued cease 
and desist letters from states for failing to have proper licensing for 
money transmission. However, a federal judge may have ended the 
controversy in 2013 with an opinion issued in a fraud case related to 
a Bitcoin-based Ponzi scheme worth millions of dollars. The defen-
dant challenged the fraud charges on the basis that Bitcoins do not 
meet the deﬁ nition of currency—the judge disagreed and ruled that 
Bitcoin is a currency or form of money, in the same way that gold and 
silver are commodities that are recognized as money.
Another issue is the taxability of virtual proﬁ ts. When virtual 
goods are cashed out for actual cash, it’s clear that the proﬁ ts 
should be reported as taxable income. But what about taxing vir-
tual proﬁ ts that never leave the virtual world? This issue is compli-
cated by the fact that goods or services obtained through barter 
or as prizes are taxable in the United States under current law, 
and the fact that virtual transactions have real-world value. While 
the IRS has not yet speciﬁ cally addressed the issue of whether 
or not virtual income is taxable in the United States before it is 
exchanged for real-life money and/or for goods or services, the 
issue is being looked into. Some countries have already made 
that decision, such as Australia, which implemented taxes on vir-
tual income in late 2006, and South Korea, which has a value-
added tax (VAT ) on individuals with virtual income over a certain 
amount. Whether the United States and other countries will follow 
suit remains to be seen.
TE C H N O LO GY A N D YOU
These physical Bitcoins each have a unique code that 
can be used to retrieve virtual Bitcoins online.
Courtesy Casascius
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

240
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Business ethics. Standards of moral conduct that guide a business’s policies, decisions, and actions. >Plagiarism. Presenting someone 
else’s work as your own.
Businesses also deal with a variety of ethical issues in the course of normal business 
activities—from determining how many computers on which a particular software pro-
gram should be installed; to identifying how customer information should be obtained, 
used, and shared; to deciding business practices. Business ethics are the standards of con-
duct that guide a business’s policies, decisions, and actions.
Ethical Use of Copyrighted Material
Both businesses and individuals should be very careful when copying, sharing, or otherwise 
using copyrighted material to ensure that the material is used in both a legal and an ethical 
manner. Common types of copyrighted material encountered on a regular basis include 
software, books, Web-based articles, music, e-books, and movies. Software ownership 
rights were discussed in Chapter 2; the rest of these topics are covered next.
Books and Web-Based Articles
Copyright law protects print-based books, newspaper articles, e-books, Web-based articles, 
and all other types of literary material. Consequently, these materials cannot be reproduced, 
presented as one’s own original material, or otherwise used in an unauthorized manner. 
Students, researchers, authors, and other writers need to be especially careful when using lit-
erary material as a resource for papers, articles, books, and so forth, to ensure the material is 
used appropriately and is properly credited to the original author. To present someone else’s 
work as your own is plagiarism, which is both a violation of copyright law and an unethi-
cal act. It can also get you fired, as some reporters have found out the hard way after faking 
quotes or plagiarizing content from other newspapers. Some examples of acts that would 
normally be considered plagiarism or not considered plagiarism are shown in Figure 6-5.
With the widespread availability of online articles and fee-based online term paper 
services, some students might be tempted to create their papers by copying and pasting 
excerpts of online content into 
their documents to pass off as 
their original work. But these 
students should realize that this 
is plagiarism, and instructors can 
usually tell when a paper is cre-
ated in this manner. There are 
also online resources instruc-
tors can use to test the original-
ity of student papers; the results 
of one such test are shown in 
Figure  6-6. Most colleges and 
universities have strict conse-
quences for plagiarism, such as 
automatically failing the assign-
ment or course, or being expelled 
from the institution. As Internet-
based plagiarism continues to 
expand to younger and younger 
students, many middle schools 
and high schools are developing 
strict plagiarism policies as well.
FIGURE 6-5
Examples of what 
is and what is not 
normally considered 
plagiarism.
<
For a review of how to cite online 
material properly, refer to 
Figure 3-16 in Chapter 3.
TIP
PLAGIARISM
NOT PLAGIARISM
A student including a few sentences or a 
few paragraphs written by another author 
in his essay without crediting the original 
author.
A student including a few sentences or a few 
paragraphs written by another author in his 
essay, either indenting the quotation or placing 
it inside quotation marks, and crediting the 
original author with a citation in the text or with 
a footnote or endnote.
A newspaper reporter changing a few 
words in a sentence or paragraph written 
by another author and including the revised 
text in an article without crediting the 
original author.
A newspaper reporter paraphrasing a few 
sentences or paragraphs written by another 
author without changing the meaning of the 
text, including the revised text in an article, 
and crediting the original author with a proper 
citation.
A student copying and pasting information 
from various online documents to create 
her research paper without crediting the 
original authors.
A student copying and pasting information 
from various online documents and using those 
quotes in her research paper either indented 
or enclosed in quotation marks with the proper 
citations for each author.
A teacher sharing a poem with a class, 
leading the class to believe the poem was 
his original work.
A teacher sharing a poem with a class, clearly 
identifying the poet.
Social networks have introduced 
new ethical dilemmas, such as 
whether or not businesses have 
the right to reprimand employees 
over social networking activity 
and whether or not school 
districts have the right to limit 
communications teachers have 
with students via social networks. 
TIP
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
241
Music
There have been many issues  regarding the legal and ethical use of music over the past 
few years. The controversy started with the emergence and widespread use of Napster 
(the first P2P music sharing site that facilitated the exchange of music files from one 
Napster user’s computer to another). Many exchanges via the original Napster service 
violated copyright law and a flood of lawsuits from the music industry eventually shut 
down Napster and other P2P sites that were being used to exchange copyright-protected 
content illegally. Additional issues arose with the introduction of recordable and rewrit-
able CD and DVD drives, portable digital media players, mobile phones, and other 
devices that can be used to duplicate digital music. Some issues regarding the legal and 
ethical use of digital music have been resolved over the years. For instance, download-
ing a music file from a P2P site without  compensating the artist and record label is a 
violation of copyright law and an unethical act; so is transferring legally obtained songs 
to a storage medium to sell or give to others. Today’s wide availability of music stores 
and other onlines sources for legal music downloads and streaming (see the Spotify app 
in Figure 6-7) give individuals a legal alternative for obtaining digital music quickly 
and easily. However, illegal music exchanges are still taking place and law enforcement 
agencies, as well as the Recording Industry Association of America (RIAA), are pur-
suing  individuals who violate music copyrights. For instance, the RIAA won its first 
lawsuit against an individual in late 2007 when a young woman was found guilty of 
sharing music online and was ordered to pay a total of $222,000 to record compa-
nies. At a new trial in 2009, the verdict was the same but the award was increased to 
$1.92 million—$80,000 per downloaded song.
Once an MP3 file or audio CD has been obtained legally, however, most experts agree 
that it falls within the fair use  concept for an individual to transfer those songs to a CD, 
 computer, portable digital media player, or mobile phone, as long as it is for personal, non-
commercial use and does not violate a user agreement. In the past, songs downloaded from 
some online music stores included DRM controls, which prevented the songs from being 
copied to other devices. While this helped prevent the  illegal copying of downloaded songs 
from one user to another, it also prevented users from transferring legally downloaded 
music from one of their devices to another. In response to user protests, many music stores 
today offer their songs in the universal (and DRM-free) MP3 format so they can be played 
on a wide range of devices.
One long-standing controversy related to digital music is the issue of royalties. While 
conventional radio stations pay licensing fees to air music, they have been battling record 
Students submit their papers for
a particular class and assignment
by the due date; the instructor can view
the results online almost immediately.
The percentage of the
paper that is similar to
available online sources.
Identiﬁes the sources
the submitted paper
matched.
The black text was identiﬁed as
being original.
The light purple text was identiﬁed
as matching a Squidoo page.
The dark purple text was identiﬁed
as matching a Webopedia article.
The red text was identiﬁed as
matching a previously submitted
student paper.
The turquoise text was identiﬁed as
matching an online newspaper article.
FIGURE 6-6
Results of an online 
originality test.
<
Courtesy of iParadigms LLC
FIGURE 6-7
Music apps. Allow you 
to legally listen to music 
on demand on your 
devices.
<
Courtesy Spotify
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

242
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
companies for years over whether or not the 
broadcasters should pay a royalty each time a 
song is aired—especially for songs recorded 
before 1972, which is when federal copyright 
law began to protect recordings (songs recorded 
before 1972 are protected only under state law, 
to varying degrees). At the time of this writ-
ing, for example, Sirius XM Radio was being 
sued by several record labels for using pre-
1972 songs without paying for them. Another 
current lawsuit (against Vimeo) focuses on the 
liability of content hosts for posts that include 
copyrighted content without permission. While 
Vimeo argues that it is protected by the safe 
harbor provision included in the Digital 
Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), the law-
suit argues that Vimeo should not be protected 
because it should have known about the copy-
right infringement.
E-Books
The popularity of e-books (for example, sales 
for e-books at Amazon.com surpassed print 
books in 2011) has resulted in legal and ethical 
issues similar to those found in the digital music 
industry, as well as a rapid increase in piracy. In 
fact, some e-books have been shared or down-
loaded illegally more than 100,000 times within 
the first few days of an e-book release.
Movies
Since 1984, when Disney and Universal sued Sony to stop production of the Betamax
(the first personal VCR), concern about movie piracy has increased dramatically. The law-
suit was eventually decided in Sony’s favor—the Supreme Court upheld the consumers’ 
rights to record shows for convenience (called time shifting), as long as it was for personal 
use. As a result of this decision, VCR use became commonplace. Interestingly, in direct 
contrast to the views held by the entertainment industry in 1984, videos have been cred-
ited with boosting Hollywood’s revenues tremendously over the years. Nevertheless, the 
entertainment industry continues to be concerned about the ability of consumers to make 
copies of movies—especially today, because digital content can be 
duplicated an unlimited number of times without losing  quality. The 
Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA) estimates that losses 
due to movie piracy worldwide exceed $18 billion per year.
There are many online services that can be used to download or 
stream movies, TV shows, and similar content (one example is shown 
in Figure 6-8). To prevent individuals from making unauthorized 
copies of feature films  purchased on DVDs or downloaded via the 
Internet, many of these items contain copy  protection or some other 
form of DRM. Movie pirates, however, can often circumvent copy pro-
tection with software and other tools in order to duplicate the movies 
and create illegal copies. Pirated copies of movies are also often cre-
ated today by videotaping them with a camcorder during a prerelease 
screening or on the opening day of a movie. This practice has resulted 
in a vast number of movies becoming illegally available on DVDs 
and via the Internet at about the same time they arrive in theaters. As 
Courtesy Amazon
David Rosenberg, Vice President, Legal and 
Business Affairs, Rhapsody International Inc.
How can an individual know if music or movies 
available via the Internet are legal to download?
Distribution of copyrighted works (including music 
and movies) without permission from the copyright 
owners is illegal. The best way to determine whether 
music available for download is authorized is to 
evaluate the source—is the Web site from which you 
want to download the music reputable? What do 
the terms of use state? If the Web site has a license 
from the copyright owner to distribute the musical 
content, the copyright owner is likely being paid and 
the download is legal. A good legitimacy test is if 
you either have to pay a fee or view advertisements 
in order to obtain the music. If the Web site appears 
to be “too good to be true,” there is a strong likeli-
hood that it is not authorized to distribute the music 
and you could be held personally liable for copyright 
infringement.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Courtesy of Rhapsody International
FIGURE 6-8
Amazon Instant 
Video. Allows you 
to legally download 
(buy) or stream (rent) 
movies and TV shows 
to your TV, computer, 
or mobile device.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
243
a result, Congress passed the Family Entertainment and Copyright Act of 2005, which 
makes transmitting or recording a movie during a performance at a U.S. movie theater ille-
gal. To help identify and prosecute a “cammer,” most movie studios now embed invisible 
digital watermarks in each print released to a theater, as discussed earlier in this chapter. 
The information contained in these watermarks can be used to identify the location where 
the movie was recorded once a bootleg copy of a movie is discovered.
The access to both authorized and unauthorized copies of movies via the Internet, as 
well as the widespread use of DVRs and DVD players today, create new legal and ethical 
dilemmas for individuals. If one individual records a television show and then shares it 
with a friend via the Internet or a DVD disc, does that go beyond the concept of fair use? If 
you run across a Web site from which you can download a copy of a movie not yet out on 
DVD, are you legally at risk if you make the download? What if you watch the movie once 
and then delete it—are you still in the wrong? What if you download a video-on-demand 
movie and then share it with a friend? Is that any different, legally or ethically, from shar-
ing a movie rented from a brick-and-mortar video store with a friend before you return 
it? What about the placeshifting products on the market, such as the Slingbox, that enable 
you to watch recorded content away from home using your portable computer or mobile 
device? If you use such a product to transfer a movie or TV show obtained through your 
cable or satellite TV connection to another location, are you rebroadcasting that content or 
simply placeshifting it? What if you send the content to another individual to watch via his 
or her computer—is that legal?
While the answers to these questions have yet to be unequivocally decided, distrib-
uting bootleg copies of movies via the Internet is both illegal and unethical. There have 
been many local, state, and federal operations in the United States and other countries 
in recent years focused on targeting online piracy of copyrighted 
software, movies, music, and games. To help remind individuals that 
piracy is illegal, the FBI introduced the FBI Anti-Piracy Warning 
Seal (see Figure 6-9) designed to be used in conjunction with movie 
DVDs, music CDs, and other intellectual properties that are com-
monly pirated. Today, this seal is often printed on product packaging 
and it is displayed with additional piracy warnings when many DVD 
movies are played.
The MPAA also recently began pursuing civil litigation against movie pirates. The 
organization is concentrating mainly on the individuals who create illegal DVDs, but 
prosecution of individuals who upload movies to be shared via the Internet is also occur-
ring. To catch people who are sharing movies illegally on the Internet, the MPAA uses 
special software that monitors file sharing networks to find copyrighted movies and then 
identifies the responsible individual by using the IP address of the computer being used 
to share the movie. Members of the movie industry also hire special firms, such as Irdeto, 
that specialize in monitoring P2P networks, Web sites, and other Internet resources in 
order to identify their clients’ copyrighted material (such as documents, graphics, music, 
or movie files) that is being misused on the Internet. When a firm finds a client’s file that 
is being shared illegally, the firm can issue an infringement notice to the violator via his 
or her ISP. The firm also typically collects any data that might be needed in case the client 
(the copyright holder) decides to pursue legal action.
To prevent the sharing of movies that have been downloaded legally (such as 
 video-on-demand movie rentals and movies purchased in downloadable form), many 
downloaded movies include DRM controls. For instance, DRM controls can be used to 
prevent the movie from being copied to another medium or they can allow the movie to 
be used only for a specified period of time (such as a 24-hour period beginning when the 
movie first starts to play). Consumers have some objections to the current movie DRM 
systems, similar to the objections they have with music DRM systems. In response, some 
services (such as TiVo) now allow consumers to transfer content to other devices for con-
venience. For a look at Digital Copy—an option for taking your legally purchased movies 
with you on your computer or mobile device—see the How It Works box.
FIGURE 6-9
The FBI Anti-Piracy 
Warning Seal.
<
Federal Bureau of Investigation. 
Used with permission.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

244
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Digital Copy Movies
Did you ever want to take a copy of a DVD movie you own with 
you on your portable digital media player or smartphone but 
didn’t want to pay to download a second digital copy of the 
movie? Well, now you can, with Digital Copy.
A growing trend in movie delivery available from most 
major movie studios (including Twentieth Century Fox, Warner 
Brothers, Sony Pictures, and Disney), Digital Copy allows 
individuals who purchase a DVD or Blu-Ray Disc movie that 
supports Digital Copy to copy the movie to both a computer 
and a mobile device, such as a portable digital media player, 
media tablet, or smartphone (some also allow you to copy 
to a speciﬁ c gaming device, such as a Sony PSP for Sony 
Digital Copy movies). The DVD package typically includes 
two discs—a conventional DVD disc containing the movie 
that can be played in a computer DVD drive or a DVD player 
as usual, and a Digital Copy disc that can be used to install 
the movie on a computer and mobile device. Some Digital 
Copy movies allow you to download the digital copy instead 
of using a disc.
The general procedure for installing a Digital Copy movie 
is shown in the accompanying illustration. While the process 
varies some from studio to studio, you typically follow these 
steps: First, insert the Digital Copy disc into your computer’s 
DVD drive. Next, use the menus (supplying the activation code 
contained inside the movie case when prompted) to copy the 
movie to the iTunes or Windows Media Player library on your 
computer. (Which library you use depends on the type of mobile 
device the movie will be copied to, as discussed shortly, and 
iTunes users will need to log in to their account in order to acti-
vate the movie.) After the movie is installed in the library on your 
computer, the Digital Copy disc is no longer needed to play the 
movie from the library on your computer, and you can use the 
sync process to transfer the movie to one mobile device.
While Digital Copy movies can only be transferred to 
devices supported by the library being used (such as iPods, 
iPhones, and iPads for iTunes users and devices that support 
DRM Windows Media .wmv ﬁ les for Windows Media Player 
users), for users with devices that work seamlessly with the 
Digital Copy process, Digital Copy gives you an easy ofﬂ ine 
option for taking your movies with you while on the go.
H OW I T WO R K S
1.  The movie includes a Digital
     Copy—insert the disc into
     your computer.
2.  Follow the on-screen instructions to activate your
     Digital Copy and transfer the movie to your
     computer and mobile device.
3.  The movie can be played on your
     mobile device, as well as on your computer.
Ethical Use of Resources and Information
A variety of resources (such as school computers, company computers, and equipment) 
and types of information (such as customer or employee information) can be used in an 
unethical manner. For example, some employees use company computers for personal use, 
some students perform dishonest acts while completing assignments or taking exams, and 
some job applicants provide erroneous or misleading information during the application or 
interview process.
© Chardchanin/Shutterstock.com
Cloudy With a Chance of Meatballs is available on Blu-ray DiscTM 
from Sony Pictures Home Entertainment
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
245
>Code of conduct. A policy, often for a school or business, that specifies allowable use of resources, such as computers and other equipment. 
>Code of ethics. A policy, often for an organization or industry, that specifies overall moral guidelines adopted by that organization or industry.
Ethical Use of School or Company Resources
What is considered proper and ethical use of school or company resources may vary from 
school to school or company to company. To explain what is allowed, many schools and 
businesses have policies that specify which activities are allowed and which are forbidden. 
Often, these policies are available as a written code of conduct that is included in a student 
or employee handbook. They are also often  available online via an organization’s intranet 
or Web site (a code of conduct was shown in Figure 4-1 in Chapter 4). Policies can vary; 
for example, one school may allow the use of school computers to download software and 
another school may not, and one business may allow limited use of the office photocopier 
or printer for personal use while another may forbid it. As a result, all  students and employ-
ees should find out what is considered ethical use of resources at their school or place of 
business, including what types of computer and Internet activities are considered accept-
able, and what personal use (if any) of resources, such as computers, printers, photocopi-
ers, telephones, and fax machines, is allowed. To enforce its policies, businesses may use 
employee  monitoring, which was discussed in Chapter 5.
Another code widely used by various industries and orga-
nizations is a code of ethics. Codes of ethics (see the IEEE 
code of ethics in Figure 6-10) summarize the moral guidelines 
adopted by a professional society or other organization. They 
typically address such issues as honesty, integrity, proper use 
of intellectual property, confidentiality, and accountability. So, 
while codes of conduct usually address specific activities that 
can and cannot be performed, codes of  ethics cover broader ethi-
cal standards of conduct.
Although employees are typically forbidden from revealing 
confidential or proprietary information to outsiders, a dilemma 
exists when that information is related to an illegal, an unethical, or 
a dangerous activity involving the business. Employees who reveal 
wrongdoing within an organization to the public or to authorities 
are referred to as whistle-blowers. These individuals have vary-
ing degrees of protection from retaliation (such as being fired) for 
whistle-blowing. The type and extent of protection depends on the kind of wrongdoing and 
the organization involved, as well as the state in which the company and employee are located. 
The Sarbanes-Oxley Act (also called the Corporate Responsibility Act and signed into law in 
mid-2002) provides federal protection for whistle-blowers who report alleged violations of 
Securities and Exchange Commission rules or any federal law relating to shareholder fraud.
Ethical Use of Employee and Customer Information
While a business may be legally bound by such restrictions as employee confidentiality 
laws, union contracts, and its customer privacy policy, there are gray areas inside which 
ethical decisions need to be made. For example, should an ISP comply with a request 
from a government for customer e-mail records or the identity of a customer matching 
an IP address? Should a company use marketing data that was mined from individuals’ 
social networking sites? Or should a business share or sell customer information, even 
if it is legal to do so? This latter decision is one that many businesses have struggled 
with, especially in challenging economic times when a quick source of revenue gained 
from selling  customer data is tempting. Although some businesses have succumbed to 
this temptation and have sold their customer lists, others believe that any short-term 
FIGURE 6-10
A sample code 
of ethics.
<
© Copyright 2013 IEEE – All rights reserved.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

246
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
gains achieved through ethically questionable acts will adversely affect customer loyalty 
and will ultimately hurt the business in the long run. An emerging issue is who owns an 
employee’s work-related social media accounts. There have been several lawsuits sur-
rounding this issue, such as an employee who took company Twitter followers with him 
to a new company and an employee who discovered that her employer was posting tweets 
from her account when she was in the hospital. It is expected that soon social media laws 
will be developed to resolve these types of issues.
To prepare future employees for these types of decisions, most business schools 
incorporate business ethics into their curriculum. For example, the Giving Voice to Values 
(GVV) business school curriculum, created by the Aspen Institute and Yale School of 
Management and being piloted at over 50 institutions, focuses on ethical implementation 
of values-based leadership. 
Cheating and Falsifying Information
Just as the Internet makes it easier for individuals to plagiarize documents, computers, 
mobile devices, and the Internet also make it easier for individuals to cheat on assignments 
or exams, or to perform other similar unethical acts.
Unfortunately, cheating at all levels is rampant today. Recently, for instance, 78 cadets at 
the Air Force Academy were accused of cheating on an online calculus test, about 70 students 
at Harvard University were required to withdraw from school for one year after nearly half of 
the students in a class were suspected of cheating on a take-home final exam, and three San 
Diego elementary schools lost their standardized API scores for two years after teachers were 
accused of various forms of cheating during the state tests. Acts of cheating commonly per-
formed today include creating a paper from material plagiarized from Web sites, storing notes 
on a smartphone to view during a test, texting answers to another student during a test, or 
taking photos of exam questions to pass on to a student taking the test at a later time. In addi-
tion to technology making it easier to cheat, it also may make it feel less like cheating. During 
one recent study of middle and high school students, for instance, about 25% of the students 
didn’t think storing notes on a mobile phone or texting during an exam constituted cheating.
Traditionally, it was typically weaker students who cheated to prevent failing a course or 
an exam. Today, however, studies have shown that honor students and others with higher GPAs 
are more likely to cheat, possibly due to the increased competition and pressure to succeed—
according to Donald McCabe of Rutgers University, “Students have told me over the years 
they have to get the job done, and they don’t care how.” But whether they realize it or not, stu-
dents who choose to cheat are cheating themselves of an education. They are also being unfair 
to honest students by possibly altering the grading curve. Widespread cheating can also have a 
negative impact on society, such as when underprepared employees enter the workforce.
To explain to students what behavior is expected of them, many schools are devel-
oping academic honor codes. Research has shown that having an academic honor code 
 effectively reduces cheating. For example, one McCabe study found 
that cheating on tests on campuses with honor codes is typically one-
third to one-half less than on campuses that do not have honor codes, 
and the level of cheating on written  assignments is one-quarter to 
one-third lower. To bring attention to their honor codes, some schools 
encourage incoming students to sign their honor codes upon admis-
sion. For instance, all Penn State Smeal College of Business students 
are invited to sign the school’s honor code publicly (see Figure 6-11); 
it was signed by about 3,000 people in 2013. Regardless of whether 
or not students choose to sign the honor code, they are required to 
abide by it.
Like academic cheating, lying on a job application or résumé is 
more common than most of us may think it is. The practice of providing 
false information in an attempt to look more qualified for a job, some-
times referred to as résumé  padding, is both dishonest and unethical. It 
is also widespread. In a recent study by employment screening service 
FIGURE 6-11
Academic honor 
codes. Students at 
Smeal College of 
Business sign the 
honor code during the 
first week of classes.
<
Courtesy Matthew Ross of the Smeal College of Business
Be sure to get authorization from 
your employer for any business-
related social media accounts 
you set up and be sure it is clear 
who will own and control the 
account if you ever leave the 
company.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
247
HireRight, 69% of the companies surveyed reported catching a job candidate lying on his or 
her résumé. In addition to being unethical, providing false information to a potential employer 
can have serious consequences—many companies have a policy that lists termination as the 
appropriate action for employees who were hired based on falsified résumés or applications. 
Being blacklisted from an industry or being sued for breach of contract are also possibilities. 
Résumé writers should remember that background checks are easily available online, which 
means credentials are easy to check and verify. Even if individuals believe they will not be 
caught, applicants should not embellish their résumés or job applications to any extent because 
it is an unethical thing to do. Another recent ethical issue surrounding IT employees is cheat-
ing on IT certification exams. Copies of certification questions and entire certification exams 
are available for purchase online, and some Web sites offer the services of “gunmen” (usually 
located in Asia) who will take certification tests for individuals for a fee. In response, compa-
nies that offer IT certifications are looking at the security of their testing processes to try to put 
a stop to this new type of cheating.
There are personal situations that may tempt some individuals to provide inaccurate 
information, such as when writing online dating profiles, participating in chat rooms, or 
in other situations when individuals may wish to appear to be someone different from 
who they really are. There are differing opinions about how ethical these actions are—
some individuals believe that it is a person’s right to portray himself or herself in any way 
desired; others feel that any type of dishonesty is unethical.
Computer Hoaxes and Digital Manipulation
Most people realize that information in print media can, at times, be misleading and that 
photos can be manipulated. Information found on the Internet may also be inaccurate, 
misleading, or biased. Some of this type of information is published on Web pages; other 
information is passed on via e-mail. Two types of computer-oriented misinformation 
include computer hoaxes and digital manipulation.
Computer Hoaxes
A computer hoax is an inaccurate statement or story—such as the “fact” that flesh- eating 
bacteria have been found in banana shipments or that Applebee’s will send you a gift 
 certificate for forwarding an e-mail—spread through the use of computers. These hoaxes 
are sometimes published on Web pages, but they are more commonly spread via e-mail or 
social media. Common computer hoax subjects include nonexistent computer viruses, serious 
health risks, impending terrorist attacks, chain letters, and free 
prizes or giveaways. Inaccurate information posted online just to 
be misleading can also be  considered a computer hoax. E-mail 
hoaxes are written with the purpose of being circulated to as 
many people as possible. Some are started as experiments to see 
how fast and how far information can travel via the Internet; oth-
ers originate from a joke or the desire to frighten people. Similar 
to spam, e-mail hoaxes can be annoying, waste people’s time, bog 
down e-mail systems, and clog users’ Inboxes. Because computer 
hoaxes are so common, it is a good idea to double-check any 
warning you receive by e-mail or read on a Web site before pass-
ing that warning on to another person, regardless of how realistic 
or frightening the information appears to be (sites like the one 
shown in Figure 6-12 can help you research potential hoaxes).
>Computer hoax. An inaccurate statement or story spread through the use of computers.
When looking for a distance 
learning program, be sure to 
check the school’s accreditation 
because some human resources 
departments view college degrees 
from online diploma mills or other 
nonaccredited organizations as 
another form of résumé padding.
TIP
FIGURE 6-12
Hoax-Slayer. This 
is one site that 
can be used to 
research possible 
computer hoaxes.
<
Courtesy of Hoax-Slayer
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

248
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Digital manipulation. The alteration of digital content, usually text or photographs.
Digital Manipulation
Computers make it very easy to copy or modify text, images, photographs, music, and other 
digital content. In addition to being a copyright concern, digital manipulation (digitally 
altering digital content) can be used to misquote individuals, repeat comments out of con-
text, retouch photographs—even create false or misleading photographs—and so is an ethi-
cal concern, as well. While there are some beneficial, ethical, noncontroversial applications 
of digital manipulation (such as aging photos of missing children to show what they may 
look like at the present time, or altering photos of wanted criminals or suspects to show pos-
sible alternate appearances for law enforcement purposes), the matter of altering photos for 
publication purposes is the subject of debate. Some publications and photographers see no 
harm in altering photographs to remove an offending item (such as a telephone pole behind 
someone’s head), to remove red-eye or otherwise make someone look a little more attrac-
tive, to illustrate a point, or to increase circulation; others view any change in content as 
unethical and a great disservice to both the public and our history. For example, fifty years 
from now, will anyone know that a staged or altered photograph of a historical event was 
not an actual depiction of the event?
Although manipulation of photographs has occurred for quite some time in tabloids 
and other publications not known as being reputable news sources, there have been several 
incidents of more reputable news publications using digitally altered photographs in recent 
years. Many of these became known because the unaltered photograph was used in another 
publication at about the same time. One of the most widely publicized cases occurred in 
1994, just following the arrest of O. J. Simpson. While Newsweek ran Simpson’s mug 
shot unaltered, TIME magazine darkened the photograph, creating a more sinister look 
and making Simpson’s skin color appear darker than it actually is. This photo drew harsh 
criticism from Simpson supporters who felt the photograph made him appear guilty, the 
African-American community who viewed the alteration as an act of racial insensitivity, 
and news photographers who felt that the action damaged the credibility not 
only of that particular magazine but also of all journalists.
A more recent example is the case of a one-time Pulitzer Prize finalist 
who resigned from a Toledo, Ohio, newspaper after it was discovered that he 
had submitted for publication nearly 80 doctored photos in just the 14 weeks 
prior to his resignation, including one sports photo of a basketball game with a 
digitally added basketball placed in midair. Other recent instances of digitally 
manipulated images being printed in news media include a photo of an Iranian 
missile test that appeared in many newspapers but that contained a digitally 
added missile to replace one that did not fire during the test; a photo of a 
Boston Marathon bombing victim that appeared in the New York Daily News 
but that was edited to make the victim’s injuries appear less severe than they 
were; and an altered photo of Michelle Obama at the 2013 Academy Awards—
instead of showing the real sleeveless, scoop neck gown she wore, Iran’s Far 
news agency added sleeves and a higher neckline to the photo that is posted on 
its Web site (see Figure 6-13).
Perhaps the most disturbing thing about known alterations such as these 
is that some may never have been noticed and, consequently, may have been 
accepted as true representations. Adding to the problem of unethical digital 
manipulation is that, unlike film cameras, digital cameras don’t have photo 
negatives that could be used to show what photographs actually looked like at 
the time they were taken. Although some publications allow the use of “photo 
illustrations,” others have strict rules about digital manipulation—especially 
DIGITALLY ALTERED PHOTO
ORIGINAL PHOTO
FIGURE 6-13
Digital manipulation. 
The digitally mani-
pulated photo (bottom) 
added sleeves and 
a higher neckline to 
the real photo (top) of 
Michelle Obama.
<
Chris Pizzello/Invision/AP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
249
for news photojournalists. For instance, the LA Times fired a staff photographer covering 
the war in Iraq when he combined two of his photographs into one to convey a point better.
Ethical Business Practices and Decision Making
Most businesses must make a variety of ethics-related business decisions, such as whether 
or not to sell a product or service that some may find offensive or objectionable; how to 
best utilize social media, such as whether or not to utilize services that mine social net-
working sites for personal data for marketing purposes or whether or not to place targeted 
ads on social networking sites (see the Trend box for a look at the impact of social media 
on e-commerce); whether or not to install video cameras in the workplace for monitoring 
purposes; or whether or not to perform controversial research. In addition, corporate integ-
rity, as it relates to accounting practices and proper disclosure, is a business ethics topic 
that has come to the forefront recently.
Fraudulent Reporting and Other Scandalous Activities
Following the large number of corporate scandals occurring since 2002, business ethics have 
moved into the public eye. The scandals, such as the ones surrounding executives at Enron, 
Tyco International, and WorldCom, involved lies, fraud, deception, and other illegal and uneth-
ical behavior. This behavior forced both Enron and WorldCom into bankruptcy proceedings. 
When asked to comment on the scandals, 3Com Chief Executive Officer Bruce Claflin said on 
CNBC, “I would argue we do not have an accounting problem—we have an ethics problem.”
The widespread use of social media 
has also led to a new ethics dilemma 
in the medical field—whether or 
not to use social networking sites 
to evaluate patient behaviors that 
affect treatment, such as the recent 
incident of a liver transplant team 
finding a photo that a transplant 
candidate had posted on his Twitter 
feed that showed him drinking, which 
contradicted his claims of sobriety.
TIP
Social Commerce
Social commerce—the use of social networking sites (such as 
Facebook, Twitter, and Pinterest) and other social media to pro-
mote online sales—is huge. At perhaps the simplest level, posts by 
individuals about buying products or Liking Facebook pages may 
inﬂ uence their friends’ purchases both online and ofﬂ ine. You can 
also buy gifts within Facebook for your friends and you can use a 
service such as SellPin to sell products on Pinterest. Businesses 
can create custom Amazon Pages and use Amazon Posts to put 
content on their Amazon and Facebook pages simultaneously, as 
well as place ads on social networking sites to generate trafﬁ c to 
their Web site or social media pages. Facebook also allows ads to 
be targeted to speciﬁ c individuals, such as individuals in a speciﬁ c 
geographical area who like cycling. To help determine relevant ads 
for each person, individual ads can be hidden by the user (and then 
different targeted ads appear in their place). A new feature is the 
ability to include downloadable apps in Facebook ads.
A more recent social commerce option includes offering goods 
and services for sale within social networking sites. Dubbed 
F-commerce and F-stores, the number of businesses and individu-
als selling real goods and real services inside Facebook is increas-
ing (see one example in the accompanying illustration). Products 
can either be sold directly within Facebook or the Facebook page 
can contain a link that brings the visitor to the appropriate Web 
page to purchase that item when the link is clicked. 
Another impact of social media on e-commerce is the social 
aspect. In addition to the word-of-mouth effect, businesses can 
also harness social networking information located in an individual’s 
social networking proﬁ le or Facebook page. And the use of social 
media monitoring companies and tools to analyze social media 
activity related to a particular business is a fast-growing market. 
T R E N D
Facebook store; clicking an item brings
you to the store’s Web site to buy it.
Users can click the Like
button to Like this page.
Users can click an ad’s close button to
choose to remove ads they don’t want
to see again.
Sponsored
ads
Facebook © 2013 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

250
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
In reaction to the scandals, Congress passed the Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002. This 
law includes provisions to improve the quality of financial reporting, independent audits, 
and accounting services for public companies; to increase penalties for corporate wrong-
doing; to protect the objectivity and independence of securities analysts; and to require 
CEOs and CFOs to vouch personally for the truth and fairness of their company’s dis-
closures. Businesses need to keep current laws in mind, as well as the businesses’ ethical 
 standards, when preparing financial reports, press releases, and other important documents 
that  represent a company’s position.
Ethically Questionable Business Decisions
One ethical issue a business may run into is whether or not to implement a business pro-
cess or decision that is ethically questionable. For example, Google and Microsoft are in 
an ongoing battle about Microsoft’s decision to offer its own YouTube app (which Google 
blocked shortly after its release because the app violated Google’s terms of service), and 
Microsoft is facing a possible $7 billion fine for its decision not to display a screen that 
would enable European Union Windows users to choose between Internet Explorer and 
other browsers. Other ethically questionable business decisions relate to customer privacy. 
For example, several plastic surgeons have been sued recently for posting pre-op and post-
op photos of patients on their Web sites; in one current case, the photos were posted even 
though the patient signed a statement that she did not give consent to use her photos for 
promotional purposes.
Ethically Questionable Products or Services
Another ethical issue a business may run into is whether or not to sell products or ser-
vices that some people find objectionable. For example, the eBay Web site states that it 
prohibits the sale of some controversial or sensitive items, in addition to illegal items. 
For instance, it will not allow items that promote or glorify hatred; violence; or racial, 
sexual, or religious intolerance. Consequently, it bans Nazi propaganda materials, Ku 
Klux Klan (KKK) memorabilia, crime scene and morgue photographs, and letters and 
belongings of notorious criminals, even though sellers may legally be able to sell such 
items elsewhere.
Another ethical decision for businesses 
that allow individuals to upload content to 
their Web sites (such as social networking 
sites, wikis, classified ad sites, forums, and 
photo or video sharing sites) is how (if at 
all) they should monitor the content posted 
on their sites. For instance, YouTube relies 
on the user community to flag videos that 
might be  inappropriate for some viewers (such 
as the Saddam Hussein execution video posted 
on YouTube shortly after that execution took 
place); videos that remain flagged as age-
restricted first display a warning screen and 
viewers need to verify that they are over 18 
by logging in to their YouTube account before 
they can view the video. In another example, 
Craigslist has been under fire for years for 
numerous crimes (including rape, murder, 
prostitution, and attempted baby-selling) that 
have occurred via ads posted on its site and, 
recently, police investigators announced that 
they believe Facebook pages are being used by 
terrorists to recruit young people in Indonesia. 
Shravan Goli, President, Dice
What is the biggest mistake that applicants for 
technology-oriented jobs make today? 
Mistakes can be made at every step of the process: 
Résumé and application, HR interview, and inter-
viewing with hiring managers. If there is a consistent 
mistake, it’s not understanding the audience for each 
step. When applying for a position, for example, it’s 
important to understand the company and its plans for 
the future and incorporate that into the application. In 
the HR interview, tech professionals should highlight 
their business and soft skills, and not over emphasize 
technical skills. The last step is the tech interview. 
Technologists tend to want each step to be the tech 
interview, but it’s really only the last step in the process.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Courtesy Dice
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
251
In response, Craigslist has eliminated its adult services category and Facebook says it 
removes any reported content that promotes terrorism or contains direct statements of hate 
and disables the account.
Companies that do business in more than one country also have global considerations 
to address. For instance, a Brazilian court once ordered YouTube to shut down access to 
a racy video clip of a Brazilian celebrity and her boyfriend on the beach, even though 
YouTube is a U.S. company. Cultural issues such as these are discussed in more detail 
shortly.
Another decision is the need for age verification. To protect children from predators, 
many states are pushing social networking sites, such as MySpace and Facebook, to imple-
ment age-verification systems. Age-verification procedures also benefit the adults who use 
these sites so they know they are acting appropriately with other members. Businesses that 
offer products or services that are inappropriate for children (such as alcohol, tobacco, 
adult movies and video games, pornography, online gambling, and even movie previews) 
also need to make decisions regarding access; for example, the types of safeguards they 
need to provide in order to ensure children do not have access to these products and ser-
vices. They also need to determine if the company is required legally, or just ethically, to 
provide these safeguards. This is especially significant for businesses with an e-commerce 
presence. In a conventional store, individuals can be asked to show an ID to prove they are 
of the required age before they are allowed to buy tobacco products, alcohol, pornographic 
materials, and other products that cannot legally be sold to minors. But, during an online 
transaction, it is much more difficult to verify that a buyer is the required age.
To comply with state and federal laws, as well as to protect themselves from poten-
tial litigation, Web sites selling or providing adult products and services should imple-
ment adequate age-verification procedures. Some sites require visitors to click a statement 
declaring they are the required age or to enter a valid credit card number before accessing 
or purchasing adult-only content or products. However, these precautions 
can be bypassed easily by underage visitors. Other sites require proof 
of age at delivery, which is a safer precaution for physical goods pur-
chased online and is required by law in some states for certain types of 
shipments. Even safer is using an online age- and identity-verification 
service, such as Veratad (which verifies individuals based on comparing 
submitted personal information with public records from trusted sources) 
or Jumio (which verifies individuals by capturing and validiating an offi-
cial document such as a driver’s license or passport—see Figure 6-14).
The decisions about which products or services to offer online and 
offline are  important—and sometimes difficult—ethical decisions for 
businesses to make. Typically, these decisions are based on the compa-
ny’s overall corporate mission and desired public image. Consequently, 
some businesses may choose not to sell adult-only content at all. Others 
may decide to sell it via the Internet only in conjunction with a third-
party age- and identity-verification service, or to sell those products or 
services online but require an adult to sign for the items when they are 
delivered. Still other businesses may feel that a warning statement or 
similar precaution on their Web sites is all that is needed, and that it is 
the parents’ responsibility to make sure their children do not purchase 
illegal or inappropriate items or view adult-only content via the Internet.
Workplace Monitoring
As discussed in Chapter 5, the majority of businesses in the United States today moni-
tor  employees to some extent. Although businesses have the right and responsibility to 
ensure that employees are productive and that company resources are not being abused, 
many believe that businesses also have an ethical responsibility to inform employees of any 
 monitoring that takes place. This is especially true in countries other than the United States, 
such as in the European Union where companies are much more limited in what types of 
Courtesy of Jumio, Inc.
FIGURE 6-14
Online age- and 
identity-verification 
services. This service 
uses a smartphone 
app that scans a 
customer’s official 
document to verify he 
or she is the required 
age for a transaction.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

252
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
When purchasing goods from another country, it is important to realize that the laws regarding 
the sale of products, as well as the laws regarding the privacy of personal information 
supplied to a vendor during a transaction, vary from one country to another. Avoid purchasing 
questionable goods online and avoid providing personal information to any Web site in a country 
that may have lax privacy laws—as a minimum, be sure to read the privacy statements for any 
Web site carefully before you provide them with any personal information you do not want to be 
shared with others.
monitoring they can do legally without notifying employees. One related issue that is occur-
ring during the hiring process is social media scrutiny. While it is not unusual or viewed as 
unethical for a company to view the public information an applicant posts online, some hir-
ing managers are asking applicants to log on to their social media accounts during interviews 
in order for the manager to review the content, and some require applicants and employees 
to be Facebook friends with their human resources liasions—which is considered by many 
to cross the ethical line.
Cultural Considerations
With today’s global economy, businesses also need to be sensitive 
to the ethical differences that may exist among different businesses 
located in the same country, as well as among businesses located in 
 different countries. Ethics are fundamentally based on values, so when 
beliefs, laws, customs, and traditions vary among businesses, the eth-
ics associated with those businesses will likely differ as well. 
Ethical decisions need to be made whenever a business practice 
or product is legal or socially acceptable in one country but not in 
another. For instance, an individual may be able to purchase a bootleg 
copy of a software program, music CD, or movie (see Figure 6-15) in 
person or online from vendors in countries where copies of these types 
of items are legal or where copyright law is not strongly enforced. This 
raises the question of ethical responsibility. Is it the individual’s responsibility not to make 
these types of unethical purchases, even if technology makes it possible? What legal and 
ethical responsibility do online auction sites and other businesses that may unknowingly 
facilitate illegal transactions have to ensure that customers do not have access to products or 
services that are illegal in their customers’ locations?
In addition to legal issues, organizations conducting business in other countries should 
also take into consideration the ethical standards prevalent in the countries with which they 
do business. Factors such as gender roles, religious beliefs, and cultural customs should be 
considered and respected when corresponding, negotiating, and otherwise interacting with 
businesses located in other countries. For example, some cultures may require a handshake 
or other ritual that is impossible to carry out online in order to close a deal. In this case, 
while the terms of the deal may be carried out online, the deal itself would need to be closed 
in person. Businesses should also be careful not to offend individuals from other countries 
or other cultures that they do business with. Some straightforward questions acceptable in 
the United States—such as a request to verify  certain numbers or double-check a source—
may be viewed as an insult in some cultures. And in some countries, you can be arrested 
for some types of social media posts, such as the man who is currently serving two years in 
prison in Kuwait for posting an insulting tweet about the country’s ruler.
To prepare students properly to succeed in our global economy, some business 
schools include diversity and cross-cultural training in their curriculum. Similarly, some 
international organizations arrange for their employees to have such training prior to trav-
eling out of the country.
When exchanging e-mails with 
individuals in other countries, 
especially business e-mails, 
avoid trying to add humor to your 
messages. Humor can be difficult 
to translate to other languages 
and cultures, and it can be 
misinterpreted if read at a later 
time, such as during an audit or 
legal proceeding.
TIP
Imageinechina via AP Images
FIGURE 6-15
Cultural 
considerations. 
In some countries, 
bootleg copies of 
music CDs and movie 
DVDs are sold openly.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
253
RELATED LEGISLATION
There have been several new laws over the past decade or so (see Figure 6-16) attempting 
to revise intellectual property laws to reflect digital content and the Internet. For instance, 
the Family Entertainment and Copyright Act of 2005 makes it illegal to transmit or record 
a movie being shown at a movie theater. Other recent laws related to intellectual prop-
erty include the U.S. Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act of 1999, which makes 
domain name cybersquatting illegal; the Copyright Term Extension Act, which adds 20 
years to the existing copyright terms; and the Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), 
which makes it illegal to circumvent antipiracy measures built into digital media and 
devices. Other laws, such as ones to increase the penalties for illegally sharing music and 
movies via the Internet, are proposed on a regular basis. 
Legislation regarding ethics has been more difficult to pass—or to keep as law once 
it has passed. For example, as discussed in Chapter 3, the Communications Decency Act 
that was signed into law in 1996 and made it a criminal offense to distribute patently 
indecent or offensive material online was eventually declared unconstitutional on the 
basis of free speech. The courts so far have had difficulty defining what is “patently 
offensive” and “indecent,” as well as finding a fair balance between protection and 
 censorship. Consequently, very few ethically oriented laws have been passed in recent 
years. Some exceptions are the Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA), 
which regulates how Web sites can collect information from minors, and the Sarbanes-
Oxley Act (Corporate Responsibility Act), which includes provisions to improve the qual-
ity of financial reporting and increases penalties for corporate wrongdoing.
DATE
LAW AND DESCRIPTION
2005
Family Entertainment and Copyright Act
Makes it illegal to transmit or record a movie being shown at a movie theater.
2002
Sarbanes-Oxley Act
Requires archiving a variety of electronic records and protecting the integrity of corporate financial data. Also requires CEOs 
and CFOs to vouch personally for the truth and fairness of their company’s disclosures.
2001
Child Internet Protection Act (CIPA)
Requires public libraries and schools to use filtering software to block access to certain Web content in order to receive public funds.
1999
U.S. Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act of 1999
Amends the Lanham Act of 1946 to extend trademark protection to domain names and makes cybersquatting illegal.
1999
Digital Theft Deterrence and Copyright Damages Improvement Act of 1999
Amends federal copyright law to increase statutory and additional damages a court may award for copyright infringement.
1998
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA)
Makes it illegal to circumvent antipiracy measures built into digital media and devices.
1998
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA)
Regulates how Web sites can collect information from minors and communicate with them.
1998
Copyright Term Extension Act 
Extends the duration of copyright in a work created on or after January 1, 1978 by 20 years.
1997
No Electronic Theft (NET) Act
Expands computer antipiracy laws to include distribution of copyrighted material over the Internet and sets penalties for willfully 
infringing a copyright for purposes of commercial advantage or private financial gain.
1996
Communications Decency Act
Makes it a criminal offense to distribute patently indecent or offensive material online. Was declared unconstitutional by the U.S. 
Supreme Court in 1997.
1976
Copyright Act of 1976
Gives the owner of a copyright the exclusive right to publish, reproduce, distribute, perform, or display the work.
1946
Lanham Act (Trademark Act of 1946)
Allows the registration of trademarks for commercial purposes and prohibits the use, reproduction, or limitation of registered trademarks.
FIGURE 6-16
Federal legislation 
related to intellec-
tual property rights 
and ethics. 
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

254
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
S U M MARY
INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS
Intellectual property rights specify how intellectual property, such as original music 
compositions, drawings, essays, software programs, symbols, and designs, may be lawfully 
used. Copyrights protect the creators of original artistic or literary works and are granted 
automatically once a work exists in a physical medium. A copyright can be  registered, 
which provides additional protection should infringement occur. The copyright symbol 
© can be used to remind others that content is copyrighted; digital watermarks can be 
incorporated into digital content so that the copyright information can be viewed, even if 
the work is altered. Digital rights management (DRM) software can be used to protect 
the rights of creators and to manage digital content, such as art, music, photographs, and 
 movies. 
Trademarks are words, phrases, symbols, or designs that identify an organization’s 
goods or services and can be either claimed (and use the symbol ™ or SM) or  registered 
(and use the symbol ®). In addition to logos and text-based phrases, domain names are 
also protected by trademark law. Registering a domain name with the intent to profit from 
someone else’s trademark is called cybersquatting. Patents grant an exclusive right to an 
invention for 20 years. In addition to products, processes and procedures may be patented 
as well.
ETHICS
Ethics are standards of moral conduct. Personal ethics guide one’s personal life,  business 
ethics provide the standards of conduct guiding business decisions, and computer ethics 
provide the standards of conduct with respect to computers and computer use. Computer 
ethics have taken on more significance in recent years because the increased use of 
 computers in the home, in the workplace, and at school provides more opportunities for 
unethical behavior than in the past.
Both businesses and individuals need to make ethical decisions on a regular basis. 
Today one of the most important ethical concerns regarding computers is using someone 
else’s property in an improper way. Books, music, movies, and other types of  intellectual 
property are protected by copyright law, but they are still often used in an illegal or unethical 
manner. Presenting someone else’s work as your own is referred to as plagiarism, which 
is illegal and unethical. Plagiarism can be performed by both students and employees, 
although it can be detected and usually has grave academic or professional consequences.
Movies and music also qualify for copyright protection. The practice of individuals 
sharing movies and music via the Internet has been a primary source of legal and ethical 
copyright debates. There has been increased prosecution against those individuals illegally 
distributing copyright-protected works, as well as end users, in the hopes of reducing this 
type of piracy. Legal alternatives, such as legal online music stores and video-on-demand 
(VOD) services, may help reduce illegal activity related to copyright-protected works. 
Chapter Objective 1:
Understand the different 
types of intellectual property 
rights and how they relate to 
computer use.
Chapter Objective 2:
Explain what is meant by the 
term ethics.
Chapter Objective 3:
Provide several examples of 
unethical behavior in the use 
of intellectual property and in 
computer-related matters.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
255
It is becoming increasingly common for businesses and schools to establish codes 
of conduct to address what behavior is considered ethical and unethical at that particular 
organization. Students and employees should refer to these codes, if they exist, to become 
familiar with the behaviors viewed as ethical and unethical for that particular school 
or business. Some organizations and industries publish codes of ethics listing overall 
standards of conduct, such as honesty, fairness, confidentiality, and more.
Businesses need to determine how they will use employee and customer information, 
based on both legal and ethical guidelines. Because computers make it easier to plagiarize 
and cheat on assignments and exams, students need to make an ethical decision regarding 
their behavior. Some job applicants choose to supply erroneous or misleading information 
on their applications or résumés in hope of gaining an advantage. This action is unethical 
and can result in job termination at many organizations if this deception is discovered at a 
later time.
A computer hoax is an inaccurate statement or story spread through the use of com-
puters, often by e-mail. It is a good idea to make sure questionable information is not a 
computer hoax before passing the information on to others. Digital manipulation is the 
use of computers to modify something in digital form, usually text or a photograph. While 
digitally altering photographs sometimes has a positive or an ethically acceptable use—
such as aging photos of missing children—the use of digital manipulation on photographs 
published in newspapers and magazines is more controversial and is viewed as highly 
unethical by many people.
Ethics are highly intertwined with determining business practices and making busi-
ness decisions. Decisions, such as which financial information to publicize, which prod-
ucts or services to provide, which safeguards (if any) to establish with products or services 
that are illegal for minors or objectionable to some individuals, and whether or not to 
monitor employees, all require ethical consideration.
Because ethics are fundamentally based on values, different types of businesses 
may have different ethics. Furthermore, ethics and moral standards may vary from coun-
try to country and from culture to culture. In addition to legal considerations, businesses 
with global connections should consider the prevailing ethical standards of all countries 
involved when making business decisions.
RELATED LEGISLATION
There are numerous laws in place to protect intellectual property. For example, there are 
laws relating to trademark and copyright terms, and there are a number of laws protect-
ing various types of intellectual property, such as the U.S. Anticybersquatting Consumer 
Protection Act of 1999, which applies patent law to domain names, and the Family 
Entertainment and Copyright Act of 2005, which makes it illegal to record a movie as 
it is being shown in a movie theater. Because moral and ethical standards are more dif-
ficult to agree on, ethical legislation is slower in coming. However, some laws (such as the 
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act or COPPA) have been implemented. 
Chapter Objective 4:
Explain what computer hoaxes 
and digital manipulation are 
and how they relate to com-
puter ethics.
Chapter Objective 5:
Understand how ethics can 
impact business practices 
and decision making.
Chapter Objective 6:
Discuss the current status 
of legislation related to intel-
lectual property rights and 
ethics.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

256
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
R EVI EW ACTIVITI E S
Instructions: Match each key term on the left with the definition on the right that best describes it.
 1.       A form of protection for an invention that can be granted by the government; gives 
exclusive rights of an invention to its inventor for 20 years.
 2.       An inaccurate statement or story spread through the use of computers.
 3.       A subtle alteration of digital content that is not noticeable when the work is viewed 
or played, but that identifies the copyright holder. 
 4.       A word, phrase, symbol, or design that identifies goods or services. 
 5.       Presenting someone else’s work as your own.
 6.       Standards of moral conduct as they relate to computer use.
 7.       Standards of moral conduct that guide a business’s policies, decisions, and actions. 
 8.       The alteration of digital content, usually text or photographs.
 9.       The legal right to sell, publish, or distribute an original artistic or literary work; it is 
held by the creator of a work as soon as it exists in physical form.
 10.       The rights to which creators of original creative works (such as artistic or literary 
works, inventions, corporate logos, and more) are entitled.
Instructions: Circle T if the statement is true, F if the statement is false, or write the best answer 
in the space provided. Answers for the self-quiz are located in the References and Resources 
Guide at the end of the book.
 1. T F All unethical acts are illegal.
 2. T F  Changing the background behind a television newscaster to make it appear that he or 
she is reporting on location instead of from inside the television studio would be an 
example of digital manipulation.
 3. T F Patents are used to protect artistic works, such as music or books.
 4. T F  Copying a song from a CD you own to your computer to create a custom music CD for 
personal use is normally considered fair use.
 5. T F  Résumé padding or lying on a job application would be viewed as unethical by most 
employers.
 6. A software program would be protected by       law, while a corporate logo would be 
protected by       law.
 7. Turning in a copy of a poem you found on a Web site as your original composition for a 
poetry class assignment is an example of      .
 8.        software is used to protect and manage the rights of creators of digital content, 
such as by allowing a digital music file to be copied a limited number of times.
KEY TERM 
MATCHING
 a. business ethics
 b. computer ethics
 c. computer hoax
 d. copyright
 e. digital manipulation
 f. digital watermark
 g. intellectual property rights
 h. patent
 i. plagiarism
 j. trademark
SELF-QUIZ
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
257
 9. The overturning by the U.S. Supreme Court of the      Act, which made it illegal to 
distribute patently indecent or offensive material online, is considered a landmark decision for 
free speech advocates.
 10. Match each term to its description or example, and write the corresponding number in the 
blank to the left of each description or example.
 a.       What the symbol © stands for.
 b.       Can vary from another’s depending on his or her values, culture, and so forth.
 c.       A warning about a nonexistent virus spread via e-mail.
 d.       A subtle alteration of digital content that identifies the copyright holder.
 1. For each of the following situations, write the appropriate letter—E (ethical) or U (unethical)—in 
the blank to the right of the situation to indicate how most individuals would view the act.
Situation
 a. A teenager rips a new CD she just bought and e-mails the MP3 files to all her friends.
 b. A photographer combines two of his photographs to create a new composite artistic piece. 
 c. A physician incorporates another doctor’s research into her journal article submission, 
including the researcher’s name and article in her submission. 
 2. Match each term with its related example, and write the corresponding number in the blank to 
the left of each example.
 a.       Copying and pasting Web page text without recognizing the source.
 b.       Online age-verification systems.
 c.       Service marks.
 3. Assume that you have created a Web site to display your favorite original photographs. Is the 
site and/or your photographs protected by copyright law? Why or why not?
 4. Explain the difference between a copyright and a trademark.
 5. Under what circumstances might a business need to consider cultural differences when creating 
a Web site? List at least two examples.
 1. There are research services available online that can be used by students preparing term papers. 
Is the use of these services ethical? Is the use of programs to detect plagiarism by instructors 
ethical? How can the problem of plagiarism and other forms of cheating at schools today be 
resolved? Whose responsibility is it to ensure students do not cheat themselves out of a proper 
education?
 2. While the Web contains a vast amount of extremely useful information, some content can be 
harmful. Think about suicide Web sites that explain in detail how to kill oneself, Web sites that 
broadcast the beheadings by terrorists, and Web sites that explain how to build bombs. If a Web 
site instructs visitors how to perform an illegal act, should the site’s creators be criminally liable 
if a visitor carries out those instructions? Who, if anyone, is responsible for preventing poten-
tially harmful information from being shared via the Web? Is there any Internet content that you 
believe a government has the right or obligation to censor? If so, what? Where should the line 
between freedom of speech and national or personal safety be drawn?
 1. Computer hoax
 2. Copyright
 3. Digital watermark
 4. Ethics
EXERCISES
Type of Situation
     
     
     
 1. Plagiarism
 2. Intellectual property rights
 3. Business ethics
DISCUSSION 
QUESTIONS
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

258
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
P R OJ E CTS
 1. Ethics and Virtual Worlds As discussed in the chapter, there are a number of ethical issues 
surrounding virtual worlds, such as whether or not virtual money is real currency and whether 
individuals should pay taxes on profits earned in a virtual world.
For this project, consider some of the ethical issues discussed in the chapter (such as 
reporting income from virtual world activities to the IRS, using online age-verification sys-
tems to enable Web site visitors to access age-restricted areas, the possibility that someone 
could pose as another individual online, and the ability to portray oneself differently than who 
you really are) and think about how these virtual world issues relate to real world decisions. 
Select one issue and research it to find out its current status and to form an opinion on that 
issue, including what you think is the ethical thing to do with respect to this issue, what you 
think the majority of individuals do with respect to this issue, the potential ramifications of 
this issue, and any changes you think are needed in the future. At the end of your research, 
prepare a one-page summary of your findings and opinions and submit it to your instructor.
 2. Copyright Registration Think of an original creation (paper, poem, photograph, or song) to 
which you believe you are entitled copyright protection and assume that you would like to reg-
ister a copyright for your creation.
For this project, research how you would obtain a copyright for your chosen creation. 
Visit the U.S. Copyright Office Web site (search for it using a search site) and determine the 
necessary procedure for registration, the required paperwork, and the necessary fee. Use the 
information located on the site to make sure your creation is entitled to copyright protection, 
then find the appropriate online registration form (if one is available online). If possible, open 
and print just one page of the form. From the site, also determine what notice you will receive 
once your copyright claim has been recorded and how long it will take to receive it. Prepare a 
short summary of your findings to submit to your instructor, stapled to the single page of the 
appropriate application if you were able to print it.
 3. Ethical Web Images Many Web sites have free or low-cost clip art, photos, or other images 
available for use on personal or business newsletters, reports, or other printed documents, as 
well as on Web pages. Use of other images located on Web pages, however, may be restricted.
For this project, use a search site to find a Web site that offers free images. Determine the 
types of images and file formats available, as well as if there are any restrictions for use. Next, 
use the Google Images feature to search for an image you might want to use on a personal 
Web site or social networking page. Can you tell from the Web page on which the image is 
located if you are allowed to use that image? If so, is there a fee for its use? If no information 
is available on the Web page, is there contact information that you could use to request per-
mission to use the image? Are similar images available for free or for a nominal fee online? 
If so, is the fee reasonable enough for use on a personal Web page? At the conclusion of your 
research, form an opinion about the availability of free or low-cost images online and the ethi-
cal and legal use of Web page images and make a recommendation for individuals looking for 
images to use on personal Web pages. Prepare a short summary of your findings and recom-
mendations and submit it to your instructor.
HOT TOPICS
SHORT ANSWER/
RESEARCH
HANDS ON
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 6 INTELLECTUAL PROPERTY RIGHTS AND ETHICS
259
 4. Net Neutrality and Your ISP The term net neutrality refers to the equality of data as it is 
transferred over the Internet. For instance, the data from an individual and the data from 
Microsoft are treated the same. A recent controversy surrounding the cable giant Comcast 
brought up the possibility of ISPs interfering with the delivery of Internet data. According to 
complaints by customers, Comcast has been blocking the use of P2P sites like BitTorrent to 
download movies, music, and other large files. Comcast, like most ISPs, includes a statement 
in its terms of service that allows it to use tools to “efficiently manage its networks” in order to 
prevent those customers using a higher than normal level of bandwidth from interfering with 
the access of other customers. However, the Comcast issue was considered by many to be a bla-
tant net neutrality issue—blocking access to multimedia from sources other than its own cable 
sources. Do you think the actions taken by Comcast were ethical? Does an ISP have a right to 
block selected Internet traffic? Why or why not? Was there a more ethical way Comcast could 
have handled the problem of some users consuming a higher than normal level of bandwidth?
For this project, form an opinion about the ethical ramifications of ISPs blocking selected 
Internet traffic and be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discussion 
group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). You 
may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
 5. Your Domain As mentioned in the chapter, domain names are protected by trademark law.
For this project, select a domain name you would like to use for a fictitious Web site. 
Visit at least two domain name registration Web sites (GoDaddy.com and Register.com, for 
instance) to determine how you would register your domain name and the registration cost. 
Which top-level domains (such as .com or .biz) would you be able to use for your Web site? 
Use a lookup feature available on a registration site to see if your chosen domain name is 
available. If not, keep trying variations of that name until you find an appropriate available 
domain name. Would the available name be easy for customers to remember? Next, select a 
well-known company and search for its domain name, as well as a few variations of that name. 
Are the names available, registered to the company, or registered to a different entity? If a 
different entity, do you think it might be cybersquatting? Share your findings with the class in 
the form of a short presentation. The presentation should not exceed 10 minutes and should 
make use of one or more presentation aids, such as a whiteboard, handouts, or a computer-
based slide presentation (your instructor may provide additional requirements). You may also 
be asked to submit a summary of the presentation to your instructor.
 6. Is It Ethical to Post Compromising Photos or Videos of Others? Posting photos and videos 
on Facebook, YouTube, and other social media is an everyday activity for many individuals. 
When you post a photo of just yourself or of others who are aware that the content is going 
online, it isn’t controversial. But what if the photo or video is less than flattering or shows the 
individual in a compromising position? Is it OK to post the content without asking the individ-
ual first? What if you post it but don’t tag the individual so he or she isn’t identified—does that 
make a difference? What if you don’t tag the person but someone else does—is it your fault for 
posting the content originally? What if the individual knows you are posting it but then regrets 
it later—should you remove the item? What if a photo or video you post causes someone else 
a problem (such as an angry parent or a partner, or a lost job opportunity)? Is it ever ethical to 
post potentially compromising photos or videos of others online? Why or why not? 
Pick a side on this issue, form an opinion and gather supporting evidence, and be 
 prepared to discuss and defend your position in a classroom debate or in a 1–2 page paper, 
depending on your instructor’s directions.
ETHICS IN ACTION
PRESENTATION/
DEMONSTRATION
BALANCING ACT
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

260
INTRODUCTION
expert insight on...
Systems
A Conversation with STUART FELDMAN
Past President of ACM and Vice President, Engineering, Google
 
“The types of data to be managed are also shifting—most is 
now visual, audio, unstructured, or executable.”
My Background . . .
I am one of the original computer brats—I learned to program on a vacuum tube machine in the 
early 1960s as a kid at a summer course. I was enthralled by computer programming, and the ability 
to create programs that did new and surprising things. 
Throughout my computer career, I’ve worked as a computer science researcher at Bell Labs, as 
a research manager and software architect at Bellcore, and as Vice President for Computer Science 
at IBM Research. I am now a Vice President at Google (and responsible for engineering activities 
at Google’s offices in the eastern parts of the Americas and in Asia, as well as some specific prod-
ucts). I was also President of ACM (Association for Computing Machinery)—the largest computing 
society in the world. Overall, my career has been spent in research and engineering at very high-tech 
companies, working on the cutting edge of computing. It’s fun and exciting.
It’s Important to Know . . .
The world of data has shifted radically. I can remember when a megabyte was a lot of informa-
tion. Today, tens of gigabytes fit on a thumb drive, a few terabytes fit on an inexpensive disk, and 
large  companies manage petabytes—and even exabytes. The types of data to be managed are also 
shifting—most is now visual, audio, unstructured, or executable. We still access data and informa-
tion on desktop computers, but more often on portable devices—laptops, phones, and tablets.
Programming languages last a long time. While most programmers write in dynamic languages 
(such as Ruby, Python, and JavaScript) today, FORTRAN programs are still being written and Java 
and the C family are still very healthy. Even more people do programming without thinking about it 
by editing spreadsheet formulas and fancy Web pages. We will almost certainly see this continue—a 
hard core of experts supporting basic systems and tools, and millions (soon billions) of people doing 
occasional programming and customization.
The impact of systems on society is tremendous. System capabilities have made enormous increases 
in efficiency possible, and have also opened up new types of business and social activities. Think about 
how finance has changed—how often do you go into a bank or brokerage today?—and about how you 
look up information and find people. Also, think about how personal communication and expectations 
shifted from sending letters with a stamp, to sending e-mail, to staying in touch incessantly with others 
via texting, blogging, and various social networks. Perhaps our attention span has shrunk, but our ability 
to reach out has increased. Information systems support globalization and rapid business change—
sharing of information, shifting of jobs, and the creation of new jobs and whole new types of careers.
How I Use this Technology . . .
I spend a lot of time writing papers and presentations, so I use Google Docs and Microsoft Office applica-
tions—both complex systems that maintain data and perform reliably—to create documents and collabo-
rate with others. I keep my digital information in the cloud and carry a smartphone or tablet everywhere 
to maintain contact with information and communications. I use secure, integrated financial systems 
when I perform online financial transactions and I use the Web dozens of times a day for research, com-
munications, personal interactions, shopping, and amusement.
Courtesy ACM; Image © Google Inc. and used with permission.
Stuart Feldman is a past 
President of ACM and 
is a Vice President of 
Engineering at Google. 
He is a Fellow of the 
IEEE, a Fellow of the 
ACM, and serves on a 
number of government 
advisory committees. 
He is a recipient of the 
2003 ACM Software 
System Award for 
creating a seminal piece 
of software engineering 
known as Make, a 
tool for maintaining 
computer software. 
Stuart has a Ph.D. in 
Mathematics from 
MIT and an honorary 
doctorate from the 
University of Waterloo.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXPERT INSIGHT ON SYSTEMS
261
  Big Data analysis 
and computing in 
the cloud aren’t 
buzzwords, they are 
increasingly common 
paths to results. 
What the Future Holds . . .
The cost of computing, measured in cost of instructions executed or 
information stored or transmitted, will continue to drop. In addition, the 
value of information and knowledge that is encapsulated in computer 
programs and online services will increase: once something is in code, it 
can be used and replicated at low incremental cost. This will continue to 
drive our digitization and automation of activities.
There will also be the increasing ability to do massive amounts 
of computing for enormous numbers of users and to apply computing 
resources to problems that were too expensive to address just a few years 
ago. Big Data analysis and computing in the cloud aren’t buzzwords, 
they are increasingly common paths to results. This will be facilitated by 
the increased use of integration, as well as by dynamic languages and the 
increased use of Web standards.
There will be new service computing models, ranging from enterprise integration to 
service industries like Google search tools and remote medical advice. Mobile apps have 
become a great way to connect information and enhance interactions, and they are a new 
source of revenue for developers. For program development, we see increasing agility—
shifting from waterfall and rigid development methods to more exploratory, agile methods 
with fast trials and iterations. Verification and testing will continue to be essential—lives 
and jobs frequently depend on systems today.
Perhaps the biggest shifts will come from our increasing dependence on information 
and access, the risks when things go wrong, and the possibilities of new applications that 
can improve our lives. For instance, as information arrives and can be examined more easily, 
we can do a better job of managing our health, our activities, and our personal interactions.
My Advice to Students . . .
IT jobs, computer applications, programming languages, approaches to system develop-
ment, and business needs are always changing. The best preparation for a long and suc-
cessful career is to understand the fundamentals of computing deeply, and be able to apply 
them to new situations. You need to become expert in some area—such as a programming 
language, a methodology, or an environment—but you also must always be prepared to 
learn new technologies and gain new expertise, as well as to learn what people want to do 
with computers.
Discussion Question
Stuart Feldman points out how our expectations for the systems we use today have shifted—
for example, we demand faster communications and information retrieval. What are your 
expectations when you send an e-mail message or post a photo or video on a social network? 
Do you expect an immediate response? Are you disappointed if you don’t get immediate feed-
back? How does instant access to communications, news, personal status, and other timely 
information affect our society today? Be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an 
online class discussion group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your 
instructor’s directions). You may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
>For access to Google search tools and applications, visit www.google.com. There are some 
excellent papers available at research.google.com. For more information about ACM or to 
access the ACM Digital Library, visit www.acm.org.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

outline
Overview
Computers and Health
Physical Health
Emotional Health
Access to Technology
The Digital Divide
Assistive Technology
Environmental Concerns
Green Computing
Recycling and Disposal 
of Computing Equipment
Related Legislation
Health, Access, 
and the Environment
After completing this chapter, you will be 
able to do the following:
1. Understand the potential risks to physical 
health resulting from the use of computers.
2. Describe some possible  emotional health 
risks associated with the use of computers.
3. Explain what is meant by the term 
digital divide.
4. Discuss the impact that factors such as 
nationality, income, race, education, and 
physical disabilities may have on computer 
access and use.
5. List some types of assistive hardware that 
can be used by individuals with physical 
disabilities.
6. Suggest some ways computer users can 
practice green computing and properly 
 dispose of obsolete computer equipment.
7. Discuss the current status of  legislation 
related to health, access, and the 
 environment in  relation to computers.
chapter 7
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OV E RV I EW
C
omputers have unarguably changed the way many of us work and live. We typ-
ically use them at work to assist with job-related tasks; at home to shop, pay 
bills, correspond with others, watch TV, and more; and on the go to keep in touch 
with others and get the information we need at any given time. While our extensive 
use of computers often makes daily tasks easier, it also can cause serious health 
and emotional problems, and it can have a negative impact on the environment. 
In addition, although computer use is becoming almost mandatory in our society, 
many believe that access to technology is not equally available to all individuals.
The chapter begins with a look at health-oriented concerns, including the impact 
computers may have on a user’s physical and emotional health, as well as strategies 
 individuals can use to lessen those risks. Next, we turn to the issue of equal access, 
 including a discussion of the digital divide and how other factors—such as gender, 
age, and physical disabilities—may affect computer access and use. We then look 
at the potential impact of computers on our environment and some ways of lessen-
ing that impact. The chapter closes with a look at legislation related to the issues 
 discussed in this chapter. ■
COMPUTERS AND HEALTH
Despite their many benefits, computers can pose a threat to a user’s physical and men-
tal well-being. Repetitive stress injuries and other injuries related to the workplace envi-
ronment are estimated to account for one-third of all serious workplace injuries and cost 
employees, employers, and insurance companies in lost wages, healthcare expenses, legal 
costs, and workers’ compensation claims. Other physical dangers (such as heat burns and 
hearing loss) can be associated with computers and related technology, and there are some 
concerns about the long-term effect of using computers and other related devices. Stress, 
burnout, computer/Internet addiction, and other emotional health problems are more 
difficult to quantify, although many experts believe computer-related emotional health 
problems are on the rise. While researchers are continuing to investigate the physical and 
emotional risks of computer use and while researchers are working to develop strategies 
for minimizing those risks, all computer users should be aware of the possible effects of 
computers on their health, and what they can do today to stay healthy.
Physical Health
Common physical conditions caused by computer use include eyestrain, blurred vision, 
fatigue, headaches, backaches, and wrist and finger pain. Some conditions are classified 
as repetitive stress injuries (RSIs), in which hand, wrist, shoulder, or neck pain is caused 
>Repetitive stress injury (RSI). A type of injury, such as carpal tunnel syndrome, that is caused by performing the same physical 
movements over and over again.
© Billy Hustace/
Getty Images
Many mobile phones today 
contain nickel, which can cause 
an allergic reaction in 10–20% of 
the population. If you get an itchy 
rash on one side of your face, use 
the speakerphone, a headset, or 
a protective cover on your phone 
and check with your doctor about a 
possible nickel allergy.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

264
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS). A painful and crippling condition affecting the hands and wrists that can be caused by computer use. 
>DeQuervain’s tendonitis. A condition in which the tendons on the thumb side of the wrist are swollen and irritated.
by performing the same physical movements over and over again. For instance, extensive 
keyboard and mouse use has been associated with RSIs, although RSIs can be caused by 
 non-computer-related activities, as well. One RSI related to the repetitive finger move-
ments made when using a keyboard is carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS)—a painful and 
crippling condition affecting the hands and wrists. CTS occurs when the nerve in the car-
pal tunnel located on the underside of the wrist is compressed. An RSI associated with 
typing on the tiny keyboards commonly found on smartphones and other mobile devices 
is DeQuervain’s tendonitis—a condition in which the tendons on the thumb side of the 
wrists are swollen and irritated. Another physical condition is computer vision syndrome 
(CVS)—a collection of eye and vision problems associated with computer and mobile 
device use. The most common symptoms are eyestrain or eye fatigue, dry eyes, burning 
eyes, light sensitivity, blurred vision, headaches, and pain in the shoulders, neck, or back. 
Eyestrain and CVS are growing more common as individuals are increasingly reading con-
tent on the small displays commonly built into smartphones and other mobile devices. 
Other conditions related to mobile device use include gorilla arm (a term coined by Apple’s 
Steve Jobs to refer to the arm fatigue associated with the prolonged vertical use of a touch 
screen) and iPad shoulder (a term used to refer to the shoulder and neck injuries that people 
who look down at a tablet in their laps are at risk for).
Some recent physical health concerns center around the heat from devices commonly 
held in the hands or lap. For instance, studies have indicated that the peak temperature on 
the underside of a typical notebook computer can exceed 139° Fahrenheit and an iPad can 
reach 116° Fahrenheit when performing CPU-intensive tasks. Consequently, manufactur-
ers now warn against letting any part of a notebook touch your body, and a variety of 
 laptop desks or notebook cooling stands are available for those occasions when your lap 
must be used as your work surface.
Another growing physical health concern is noise-induced hearing loss, mainly due 
to playing music on mobile devices with the volume turned up high and to the earbud 
headsets typically used with these devices that deliver sound directly 
into the ear. In addition, people often listen to the music stored on these 
devices while they are on the go; as a result, they may increase the vol-
ume in an attempt to drown out outside noise, further posing a risk to 
their  hearing. To protect against hearing loss, experts suggest a 60/60 rule, 
which means using earbuds for only about 60 minutes per day with the 
volume less than 60% of the device’s maximum volume. For extended 
use, noise reduction headphones that help block out external noise to 
allow listeners to hear music better at lower volumes can help, as can 
using  over-the-ear-headphones instead of earbuds and using an external 
speaker whenever possible.
Another danger is text messaging while driving. There have been 
many cases of texting-related car accidents, including many fatalities, 
and nearly 25% of all auto collisions in 2011 involved mobile phones. 
According to an AT&T study, 49% of commuters and 43% of teens 
admit to texting while driving. Currently, 41 states in the United States 
have laws against texting while driving and 12 have laws against using 
a handheld mobile phone while driving. While some feel these laws 
are a step in the right direction, studies have found that using a mobile 
phone with a hands-free device still distracts drivers. One possible solu-
tion is using a service or an app (see Figure 7-1) that disables a mobile 
To avoid gorilla arm, use an 
external keyboard if you need to 
do much typing while your touch 
screen computer or media tablet 
is in a stand.
TIP
A recent study found that 
hearing loss among U.S. teens 
is up 30%—and experts predict 
hearing loss will continue to 
rise because of unsafe use of 
personal audio devices.
TIP
FIGURE 7-1
Safe driving apps. 
Restrict mobile phone 
use when the car is in 
motion.
<
Courtesy Cellcontrol™
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
265
>Ergonomics. The science of fitting a work environment to the people who work there.
phone when the car is in motion. These services and apps are most commonly used by 
parents to protect their children and by employers to protect their employees as well 
as reduce their liability in case of an accident. Typically, the service or app responds 
to all incoming calls and texts to state that the owner is driving; passengers can 
request an override from the administrator of the service or app (typically the parent 
or employer). For safety reasons, virtually all services and apps permit outgoing 911 
calls. In  addition, the U.S. Department of Transportation is requesting that automakers 
incorporate  features in new cars to reduce driver smartphone use, such as disabling 
smartphones that are paired with the car when the car is in motion or including a prox-
imity sensor that sets off an alarm (similar to a seatbelt reminder) whenever the driver 
uses a phone.
An additional health concern is the possible risks due to the radiation emitted 
from wireless devices, such as mobile phones, Wi-Fi and Bluetooth devices, wireless 
peripherals, and so forth. Mobile phones, in particular, have been studied for years 
because of their close proximity to the user’s head. The results of the studies have been 
conflicting, with many experts believing that the possible health risks (such as can-
cer and brain tumors) due to wireless technology have been exaggerated, and others 
believing the risks are very real. It is difficult to study the long-term possible effects of 
having a cell phone close to your body because cell phone usage is constantly chang-
ing and has not been widespread for enough years for a long-term study. However, 
until more conclusive research results are available, some health officials recommend 
keeping the device away from your head as much as possible, such as by using the 
speakerphone mode or a Bluetooth headset, or by texting instead of talking. In addi-
tion, parents may want to limit the amount of time their children spend on a mobile 
phone.
What Is Ergonomics?
Ergonomics is the science of fitting a work environment to the people who work there. It 
typically focuses on making products and workspaces more comfortable and safe to use. 
With respect to computer use, it involves designing a safe and effective workspace, which 
includes properly adjusting furniture and hardware and using ergonomic hardware when 
needed. A proper work environment—used in conjunction with good user habits and pro-
cedures—can prevent many physical problems caused by computer use. A proper work 
environment is important for anyone who works on a computer or mobile device, including 
employees using a computer, media tablet, or smartphone on the job, individuals using one 
of these devices at home, and children doing computer activities or texting while at home 
or at school.
Do not text someone that you know 
is driving; in addition to endangering 
them, you may also be legally liable 
if they crash, according to a recent 
decision by three New Jersey judges.
TIP
Many states have stricter laws for 
specific categories of drivers; for 
instance, 37 states ban mobile phone 
use by novice drivers and 18 states 
prohibit it by school bus drivers.
TIP
When using a mobile phone while on the go (to text or to make voice calls, with or without a 
headset), be sure to be aware of your surroundings. A recent study revealed that participants 
crossing a virtual street while having a phone conversation took 25% longer to cross and were much 
more likely to get virtually run over than participants not talking on a phone. To avoid collisions with 
cars and other objects, be sure to pay attention as you walk and keep the volume down low enough 
to hear surrounding sounds like car horns and sirens.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

266
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Workspace Design
The design of a safe and an effective 
computer workspace—whether it is 
located at work, home, or school—
includes the placement and adjustment 
of all the furniture and equipment 
involved, such as the user’s desk, chair, 
computing device, and peripheral 
devices such as a keyboard and moni-
tor. Workspace lighting or glare from 
the sun also needs to be taken into con-
sideration. Proper workspace design 
can result in fewer injuries, headaches, 
and general aches and pains for com-
puter users. Businesses can reap eco-
nomic benefits from proper workspace 
design, such as fewer absences taken 
by employees, higher productivity, and 
lower insurance costs. For example, 
when one government department in 
New Jersey installed ergonomically 
correct workstations in its offices, 
computer-related health complaints 
fell by 40% and doctor visits dropped 
by 25% in less than one year.
Proper placement and  adjustment 
of furniture is a good place to start 
when evaluating a workspace from an 
ergonomic perspective (see Figure 7-2). The desk should be placed where the sun and 
other sources of light cannot shine directly onto the screen or into the user’s eyes. The 
monitor should be placed directly in front of the user about an arm’s length away, the top 
of the screen should be no more than 3 inches above the user’s eyes once the user’s chair is 
adjusted, and a document holder should be used for individuals who refer to written docu-
ments frequently while working on their computers in order to minimize the movement of 
looking between a document and the monitor. The desk chair should be adjusted so that 
the keyboard is at, or slightly below, the height at which the user’s forearms are horizontal 
to the floor (there are also special ergonomic chairs that can be used, when desired). A 
footrest should be used, if needed, to keep the user’s feet flat on the floor once the chair 
height has been set. The monitor settings should be adjusted to make the screen brightness 
match the brightness of the room and to have a high amount of contrast; the 
screen should also be periodically wiped clean of dust. An emerging trend 
is workspaces that allow the user to stand while working (see Figure 7-3).
The workspace design principles just discussed and illustrated in 
Figure 7-2 apply to users of desktop computers, portable computers, and 
mobile devices like media tablets. However, an ergonomic workspace is 
more difficult to obtain when using a portable computer or mobile device. 
To create a safer and more comfortable work environment, users of these 
devices should work at a desk and attach and use a separate  keyboard and 
mouse whenever possible (travel mice and travel keyboards, which are 
smaller and lighter than conventional models, can make this easier), both 
at home and while traveling. The device should also be elevated whenever 
possible to create a better viewing angle. To help with this and with con-
necting peripheral devices, docking stations as well as notebook and tablet 
stands can be used. For a closer look at tablet docks, see the Technology and 
You box on page 271.
TILT-AND-SWIVEL MONITOR
Adjusts for a comfortable viewing
angle; top of screen should be no
higher than 3 inches above the
user’s eyes.
DOCUMENT HOLDER
Keeps documents close
to the monitor so the user
does not have to turn his
or her head.
PROPER USER POSITION
Sit straight with shoulders
back, about 24 inches away
from the monitor; keep
forearms, wrists, and hands
straight; keep forearms and
thighs parallel to the ﬂoor.
ADJUSTABLE CHAIR
Height is adjustable
and has support for
the lower back.
FOOTREST
Can be
used, if
needed, to
keep legs
properly
positioned.
ADJUSTABLE
TABLE/DESK
Optimal height
is between 25
and 29 inches tall.
Keyboard and mouse
should be at or just
below elbow height;
use a keyboard
drawer if needed.
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
FIGURE 7-2
Ergonomic 
workspace design. 
<
FIGURE 7-3
Standing desks.
<
Courtesy Ergotron Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
267
>Docking station. A device designed to easily connect a portable computer to conventional hardware, such as a keyboard, mouse, monitor, 
and printer.>Notebook stand. A device that elevates the display of a notebook computer to a better viewing height; can contain USB ports to 
connect additional hardware (called a tablet stand when designed for use with a media tablet).
While a keyboard, mouse, monitor, and printer can be connected to a portable computer 
directly, a docking station (see Figure 7-4) is designed to connect a portable computer to 
peripheral devices more easily—the computer connects to the docking station, and then the 
devices connected to the ports on the docking station can be used with that computer. Docking 
stations are often used in homes and offices when a portable computer is used as a primary 
computer—typically, the peripheral devices remain connected to the docking station and the 
computer is just connected and disconnected as needed. For example, the docking station 
shown in Figure 7-4 enables its associated dual-mode (Windows 8 and Android) tablet to be 
used as an all-in-one Windows 8 PC (when the tablet is docked) including all the hardware 
(additional RAM, a hard drive, a DVD drive, a more powerful processor, and additional ports, 
for instance) built into the docking station and as a fully functioning Android media tablet 
(when the tablet is undocked). There are also keyboard docks and folios available for media 
tablets (as shown in Chapter 8) that can be used when a physical keyboard is needed for those 
devices. A notebook stand or tablet stand (shown in Figure 7-4) is designed primarily to 
elevate a notebook computer or media tab-
let to the proper height. If the notebook or 
tablet stand has built-in USB ports, USB 
peripheral devices can be connected to the 
stand; if not, any peripheral devices (such 
as a keyboard and mouse) to be used with 
the device while it is inserted into the stand 
need to be connected directly to the device. 
In addition to helping with screen place-
ment and connectivity, notebook and tablet 
stands also allow air to circulate around the 
bottom of the device. For additional cool-
ing, some notebook stands have a built-in 
cooling fan that is powered (via a USB 
port) by the computer. Docks are also avail-
able for smartphones (refer again to Figure 
7-4) and media tablets (see the Technology 
and You box). Some additional ergonomic 
tips for users of portable computers and 
media tablets are included in Figure 7-5. 
TABLET STANDS
SMARTPHONE DOCKS
DOCKING STATIONS
FIGURE 7-4
Docking stations and 
device stands can 
help create a more 
comfortable working 
environment.
<
Courtesy ASUSTeK Computer Inc.
Courtesy Belkin International, Inc. 
Courtesy Bluelounge
OCCASIONAL USERS
FULL-TIME USERS
Sit with the device on a table and position 
it for comfortable wrist posture, using a 
stand for tablets whenever possible. If no 
table or stand is available, use a laptop 
desk to protect your legs.
Sit with the device on a desk or table 
(use a notebook or tablet stand to attain 
the proper display screen height); use a 
separate keyboard and mouse.
Adjust the screen to a comfortable 
position so you can see the screen as 
straight on as possible. If you will be 
doing extensive touch screen work, tilt the 
device so it is not in a vertical position.
Elevate the device so the screen is at the 
proper height and distance, or connect 
the device to a stand-alone monitor; 
in either case, adjust the screen to the 
proper viewing angle and distance.
Bring a travel keyboard and mouse to use 
with the device, whenever practical.
Use a separate keyboard and mouse, 
either attached directly to the device or 
to a docking station or notebook stand.
When purchasing a new device, pay close 
attention to the total weight of the system if 
you will be using it primarily while traveling.
When purchasing a new device, pay 
close attention to the size and clarity of 
the display screen, as well as the ease 
of connecting the device to a docking 
station or stand and additional hardware.
FIGURE 7-5
Ergonomic tips for 
portable computer 
and media tablet 
users.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

268
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Ergonomic hardware. Hardware, typically an input or output device, that is designed to be more ergonomically correct than its nonergonomic 
counterpart.
Some of these tips apply to smartphones as well; additional smartphone tips include limiting 
the duration of use, reducing keystrokes by using text shortcuts and voice input, avoiding look-
ing down at the device excessively, and switching hands periodically.
Ergonomic Hardware
In addition to the workspace devices (adjustable chairs and tables, footrests, docking sta-
tions, device stands, laptop desks, and so on) already discussed, ergonomic hardware can 
be used to help users avoid physical problems due to extensive computer use or to help 
alleviate the discomfort associated with an already existing condition. Some of the most 
common types of ergonomic hardware are shown in Figure 7-6 and discussed next.
 
➤Ergonomic keyboards use a shape and key arrangement designed to lessen the strain 
on the hands and wrists. They are available in both desktop and mobile versions (see 
Figure 7-6).
 
➤Trackballs are essentially upside-down mice and ergonomic mice use a more ergo-
nomically correct design; both can be more comfortable to use than a conventional 
mouse. The ergonomic mouse shown in Figure 7-6 is a vertical mouse, designed to 
be used in a vertical position.
 
➤Tablet arms connect to a desk or to a monitor and hold a media tablet at the proper 
height for comfortable viewing.
 
➤Document holders can be used to keep  documents close to the monitor, enabling the 
user to see both the document and the monitor without turning his or her head.
 
➤Antiglare screens—also called privacy filters—cover the display screen and can be 
used to lessen glare and resulting eyestrain. Many antiglare screens double as privacy 
screens, preventing others sitting next to you (such as on an airplane) from reading 
what is displayed on your display screen. 
You can also use a USB hub as a 
docking station if your device has 
a USB port—just keep your USB 
devices connected to the USB hub 
and connect the hub to your device 
when you are at home.
TIP
Ergonomic techniques and 
devices designed to help you 
achieve a neutral posture are 
referring to positions when the 
joints are not bent or twisted 
and the muscles are in a resting 
(relaxed) position.
TIP
ERGONOMIC MICE
TABLET ARMS
DESKTOP ERGONOMIC KEYBOARDS
COMPUTER GLOVES
MOBILE ERGONOMIC KEYBOARDS
KEYBOARD DRAWERS/TRAYS
Courtesy Kinesis Corporation; Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation; 
Courtesty Ergotron, Inc.; Courtesy of Brown Medical Industries, Inc.
FIGURE 7-6
Ergonomic 
hardware.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
269
 
➤Keyboard drawers/trays lower the keyboard so it is beneath the desk or table top, 
enabling the user to keep his or her forearms parallel to the floor more easily.
 
➤Computer gloves support the wrists and thumbs while allowing the full use of the hands. 
They are designed to prevent and relieve wrist pain, including carpal tunnel  syndrome, 
tendonitis, and other RSIs.
Good User Habits and Precautions
In addition to establishing an  ergonomic workspace, computer users can  follow a number of 
preventive measures while working on their computers or mobile devices (see Figure 7-7) 
to help avoid physical problems. Finger and wrist exercises, as well as frequent breaks in 
typing, are good precautions for helping to prevent repetitive hand and finger stress injuries. 
Using good posture and periodically taking a break to relax or stretch the body can help 
reduce or prevent back and neck strain. Rotating tasks—such as  alternating between com-
puter work, phone work, and paperwork every 15 minutes or so—is also a good idea. For 
locations where some glare from a nearby window is unavoidable at certain times of the day, 
closing the curtains or blinds can help to prevent eyestrain. All device users should refocus 
their eyes on an object in the distance for a minute or so, on a regular basis, and smartphone 
and mobile device users should increase 
font size and light level when viewing text 
on a small display screen. Eyeglass wear-
ers should discuss any eye fatigue or blur-
riness during computer use with their eye 
doctors—sometimes a different lens pre-
scription or special computer glasses can 
be used to reduce eyestrain while work-
ing on a computer. Computer glasses are 
optimized for viewing in the intermediate 
zone of vision where a computer monitor 
usually falls; that is, closer than glasses 
designed for driving and farther away 
than glasses designed for reading.
Emotional Health
The extensive use of computers and 
mobile devices in the home and office 
in recent years has raised new concerns 
about emotional health. Factors such as 
financial  worries, feelings of being over-
worked, being unable to relax, and infor-
mation overload often  produce emotional 
stress. Decades of research have linked 
stress to a variety of health concerns, 
such as heart attacks, stroke, diabetes, 
and weakened immune systems. Workers 
who report feeling stressed incur more 
healthcare 
costs—according 
to 
the 
American Institute of Stress, stress costs 
U.S. employers more than $300 billion 
each year in healthcare, missed work, 
and stress-reduction services provided to 
employees.
For many individuals, computer use 
or computer-related events are the cause 
A recent study found that 20–30% 
of viruses on a glass surface like a 
smartphone screen will transfer to your 
fingertips—to be safe, don’t touch your 
mouth or eyes while using your phone, 
unless you wash your hands first.
TIP
CONDITION  PREVENTION
Wrist/arm/
hand soreness 
and injury
 
➤Use a light touch on a keyboard and touch screen.
 
➤Rest and gently stretch your ﬁ ngers and arms every 15 minutes or so.
 
➤Keep your wrists and arms relaxed and parallel to the ﬂ oor when using a 
keyboard.
 
➤When using a touch screen for extended periods of time, place the device 
more horizontally than vertically.
 
➤When using a device with a small keyboard, type short messages, take 
frequent breaks, and use a separate keyboard whenever possible.
 
➤Use an ergonomic keyboard, ergonomic mouse, computer gloves, and other 
ergonomic devices if you begin to notice wrist or hand soreness.
Eyestrain
 
➤Cover windows or adjust lighting to eliminate glare.
 
➤Rest your eyes every 15 minutes or so by focusing on an object in the 
distance (at least 20 feet away) for one minute and then closing your eyes 
for an additional minute.
 
➤Make sure your display’s brightness and contrast settings are at an appropri-
ate level and the display is placed at an appropriate distance from your eyes.
 
➤Use a larger text size or lower screen resolution, if needed. You should be 
able to read your display screen from three times the distance at which you 
normally sit.
Sore or 
stiff neck
 
➤Use good posture; never hunch over a keyboard or device.
 
➤Place your display and any documents you need to refer to while using your 
device directly in front of you. 
 
➤Adjust your display to a comfortable viewing angle with the top of the 
screen no higher than 3 inches above your eyes.
 
➤Use a headset if you spend a signiﬁ cant amount of time on the phone; never 
prop a phone between your face and shoulders.
Backache; 
general fatigue
 
➤Use good posture and adjust your chair to support your lower back; use an 
ergonomic chair, if needed.
 
➤Use a footrest, if needed, to keep your feet ﬂ at on the ﬂ oor.
 
➤Walk around or stretch brieﬂ y at least once every hour.
 
➤Alternate activities frequently.
 
➤When traveling, bring lightweight devices and carry only the essentials with 
you.
Ringing in 
the ears; 
hearing loss
 
➤Turn down the volume when using headphones (you should be able to hear 
other people’s voices). 
 
➤Wear over-the-ear-headphones instead of earbuds.
 
➤Limit the amount of time you use headphones or earbuds.
 
➤Use external speakers instead of headphones when possible.
Leg discomfort 
or burns
 
➤Use a laptop desk, cooling stand, or other barrier between a portable com-
puter and your legs when using a computer on your lap.
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
FIGURE 7-7
Good user habits. 
These preventative 
measures can help 
avoid discomfort while 
working on a computer 
or mobile device.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

270
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
of, or at least partially contribute to, 
the stress that they experience. Another 
emotional health concern related to 
computer use is addiction to the Internet 
or another technology.
Stress of Ever-Changing 
Technology
When computers were first introduced 
into the workplace, workers needed to 
learn the appropriate computer skills 
if their jobs required computer use. 
Airline agents, for example, had to learn 
to use computer databases. Secretaries 
and other office employees needed to 
learn to use word processing and other 
office-related software, and customer 
service representatives needed to learn 
how to use e-mail. Today, many people 
entering the workforce are aware of 
the technology skills they will need to 
perform the tasks associated with their 
chosen professions. However, as com-
puters and mobile devices have become 
continually more integrated into our 
society, jobs that did not require the 
use of a computer or a mobile device 
in the recent past frequently require it 
today, and individuals are increasingly 
required to use a computer in day-to-day activities (see Figure 7-8). And, at the rapid pace 
that technology keeps changing, many workers must regularly learn new skills to keep up 
to date. For example, they may need to upgrade to a new version of a software program, 
learn how to use a new software program, or learn how to use a new mobile device feature 
or app. Although some find this exciting, the ongoing battle to stay current with changing 
technology creates stress for many individuals.
Impact of Our 24/7 Society
One benefit of our communications- oriented society is that one never has to be out of touch. 
With the use of smartphones, media tablets, and portable computers, as well as the ability 
to access e-mail and company networks from  virtually anywhere, individuals can be avail-
able around the clock, if needed. Although the ability to be in touch 
constantly is an advantage for some people under certain conditions, 
it can also be a source of stress. For example, employees who feel 
that they are “on call” 24/7 and cannot ever get away from work may 
find it difficult to relax during their downtime (see Figure 7-9). Others 
(about 54% of employees, according to managers in a recent Harris 
Interactive study, and 95% of senior IT professionals, according to 
expert estimates) are expected to be available to do some work while 
on vacation. In either case, individuals may feel like they are always 
“on the job” with no time to recharge, which can affect their personal 
lives, emotional health, and overall well-being. Finding a balance 
between work time and personal time is important for good emo-
tional health. There is also concern about the increasing use of smart-
phones, media tablets, and other devices with bright screens in bed. 
FIGURE 7-8
Ever-growing 
computer use. Many 
jobs and tasks that did 
not require computer 
use in the past require 
it today.
<
RESTAURANT SERVERS
AIRLINE PASSENGERS
FIELD WORKERS
POLICE OFFICERS
Courtesy of DE SANTOS
Courtesy American Airlines
© iStockphoto.com/AzmanL 
© iStockphoto.com/jacomstephens
© iStockphoto.com/asiseeit 
FIGURE 7-9
Our 24/7 society.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
271
In addition to being a distraction (particularly for children and teenagers), studies indicate 
the light from these devices can disrupt sleep.
Information Overload
Although the amount of information available through the Internet is a great asset, it can 
also be overwhelming at times. When you combine Internet information with TV and radio 
news broadcasts; newspaper, journal, and magazine articles; and phone calls, voice mail 
messages, and faxes, some Americans are practically drowning in information. The amount 
of e-mail received each day by some individuals and organizations is almost unfathomable. 
For example, the U.S. Senate receives millions of e-mail messages each day, and one study 
found that workers in small- to medium-sized businesses in the United States spend half 
of their workday dealing with e-mail messages. Several strategies can be used to avoid 
becoming completely overwhelmed by information overload.
For efficiently extracting the information you need from the vast amount of informa-
tion available over the Internet, good search techniques are essential. Perhaps the most 
important thing to keep in mind when dealing with information overload is that you cannot 
possibly read everything ever written on a particular subject. At some point in time when 
performing Internet research, the value of additional information decreases and, eventually, 
it is not worth your time to continue the search. Knowing when to quit a search or when to 
try another research approach is an important skill in avoiding information overload.
Efficiently managing your incoming e-mail is another way to avoid information over-
load. Tools for managing e-mail can help alleviate the stress of an overflowing Inbox, as 
well as cut down the amount of time you spend dealing with your online correspondence. 
As discussed in Chapter 5, e-mail filters can be used to route messages automatically into 
specific folders (such as suspected spam into a Spam folder) based on criteria you set. 
For a review of how to perform 
efficient and effective Internet 
searches, refer again to Chapter 3.
TIP
Tablet Docks
Notebook computer docking stations for use in the home or 
ofﬁ ce have been available for several years. These docking sta-
tions make it easier for users to connect their portable comput-
ers to hardware (such as a second monitor, a wired printer, or 
a wired network connection) that stays behind at the home or 
ofﬁ ce. In response to the unprecedented popularity of mobile 
devices today, new docking options are becoming available. 
For example, tablet docks are emerging to help tablet users 
with productivity in addition to mobility.
Some tablet docks are designed primarily as a stand to hold 
the device for easier, hands-free viewing. But, increasingly, 
tablet docks are including a keyboard for easier data entry; 
these types of docks typically include a special docking port 
to connect the tablet to the dock. Tablet docks can also have 
additional functionality, including ports to connect peripheral 
devices (such as a mouse or an additional monitor) to the tab-
let. Some tablet docks include a second battery to extend the 
battery life of the device; others incorporate battery-charging 
capabilities into the dock so the device can be recharged while 
it is docked. Some tablets—such as the detachable hybrid 
notebook-tablet computers discussed in Chapter 1 and the 
media tablet shown in the accompanying photo—are sold as 
a package with both the tablet and dock included for ﬂ exibility. 
Stand-alone docks are also available for iPads and other tab-
lets that do not come with a dock.
Up next: Docks for your mobile phone.
T E C H N O LO GY A N D YOU
Tablet dock
Tablet
Courtesy ASUSTeK Computer Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

272
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Burnout. A state of fatigue or frustration usually brought on by overwork. 
When you go through your Inbox, first 
delete any messages that you don’t need to 
read (such as advertisements that didn’t get 
sent to your Spam folder) and then you can 
concentrate on the messages remaining in 
your Inbox. If you need to follow up on a 
message at a later time, flag it so you don’t 
have to worry about forgetting to follow up 
at the appropriate time. Many e-mail pro-
grams, such as Microsoft Outlook, allow 
you to flag messages, as well as to add a 
reminder alarm so you will be reminded 
automatically when it is time to respond. 
As shown in Figure 7-10, Outlook also 
has Quick Steps available on the HOME 
tab (which allows you to file messages in 
a specific folder quickly, start a new message to a particular contact, or perform any other 
routine tasks that you specify with a single click), as well as the ability to view all unread 
messages quickly. Because it can take up to 25 minutes after an interruption to concentrate 
fully again on a task, productivity training companies advise treating e-mail like physical 
mail and opening it only a limited number of times per day. To help avoid the temptation of 
checking e-mail more frequently, close your e-mail program, turn off your new e-mail alert 
notifier, or mute your speakers so you do not hear new messages arrive. You may also wish 
to turn off notifications of texts and social networking updates on your smartphone and just 
check it periodically for updates. For a closer look at an emerging trend that may help your 
smartphone assist you more efficiently— augmented reality—see the How It Works box.
Burnout
Our heavy use of computers, combined with information overload and 24/7 accessibility 
via technology, can lead to burnout—a state of fatigue or frustration brought about by 
overwork. Burnout is often born from good intentions—when, for example, hardworking 
people try to reach goals that, for one reason or another, become unrealistic. Early signs 
of burnout include a feeling of emotional and 
physical exhaustion, no longer caring about a 
project that used to be interesting or exciting, 
irritability, feelings of resentment about the 
amount of work that needs to be done, and feel-
ing pulled in many directions at once.
When you begin to notice the symptoms of 
burnout, experts recommend reevaluating your 
schedule, priorities, and lifestyle. Sometimes, just 
admitting that you are feeling overwhelmed is a 
good start to solving the problem. Taking a break 
or getting away for a day can help put the situa-
tion in perspective. Saying no to additional com-
mitments and making sure that you eat properly, 
exercise regularly, and otherwise take good care 
of yourself are also important strategies for cop-
ing with and alleviating both stress and burnout.
View your Inbox as a temporary 
location only; after reading an 
e-mail message, immediately 
delete it, flag it, or file it in an 
e-mail folder to keep your 
Inbox clean.
TIP
Click to ﬂag an e-mail
message.
Use these options to ﬁle
a message into a Quick
Steps folder or start an
e-mail to a Quick Steps
contact.
Click to view all unread
messages.
Press Ctrl+Shift+G to
open this dialog box in
order to set a custom
ﬂag or reminder.
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
FIGURE 7-10
E-mail reminder 
flags can help you 
organize your Inbox.
<
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Shravan Goli, President, Dice
What is the hottest IT-oriented job today and 
what do you expect it to be in the future? 
“Big data” positions now and in the future. There will 
always be more data to mine, as well as the business 
need to use data for insights that drive performance. 
Gartner found that 42% of IT leaders have invested 
in big data technology or plan to within a year. It’s 
still early for companies and talent, which means that 
opportunities abound. 
Courtesy Dice
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
273
>Internet addiction. The problem of overusing, or being unable to stop using, the Internet.
Internet and Technology Addiction
When an individual’s use of the Internet interferes with normal living and causes severe 
stress to family and other loved ones, it is referred to as Internet addiction (also called 
Internet dependency, Internet compulsivity, cyberaddiction, and technology addiction, 
depending on the technology being used). Addictive behavior can include compulsive use 
of the Internet, a preoccupation with being online, lying about or hiding Internet activi-
ties, and an inability to control the behavior. According to Dr. Kimberly Young, an expert 
on Internet addiction and the director of the Center for Internet Addiction Recovery in 
Pennsylvania, Internet addiction is a compulsive behavior that completely dominates 
the addict’s life (see Figure 7-11 for Dr. Young’s list of Internet addiction symptoms). 
Studies suggest that one in eight Americans suffer from problematic Internet use; in China, 
Taiwan, and Korea, it is estimated to be at least 30% of the population. Internet addiction 
is considered a serious disorder and is being considered for inclusion as a new diagnosis 
in the upcoming revision of the Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders 
(DSM-V).
Augmented Reality
Augmented reality refers to overlaying computer-generated 
images on top of real-time images. Some of the earliest applica-
tions were industrial, such as displaying wiring diagrams on top of 
the actual wiring of an airplane or other item via a headset. Today, 
augmented reality is going mobile—being used with smartphones, 
as well as other mobile devices. To accomplish this, content is 
displayed over the images seen through the smartphone’s camera 
and displayed on the smartphone. The content is typically based 
on the user’s location (determined by the phone’s GPS), the video 
feed from the smartphone’s camera, a digital compass, and other 
data obtained from the smartphone. Displaying this information 
requires a mobile AR browser or an appropriate mobile AR app.
Some initial mobile augmented reality apps designed for 
consumers include overlaying home listing information (such as 
pricing and photos) over the video images displayed as a phone 
is pointing at houses in a neighborhood, displaying information 
(such as real-time game stats and player information) as a phone 
is pointing at a sporting event, and displaying activity opportuni-
ties (such as restaurant, movie, museum, or shopping information) 
as a phone is pointing at a business district (see the accompany-
ing illustration). Travelers can use apps designed to overlay direc-
tions on top of a street map corresponding to what the camera 
sees, as well as apps to display sightseeing information as the 
camera is pointing at a historical building, a statue, or another 
landmark. Mobile augmented reality can also work indoors, such 
as identifying displays, concession stands, restrooms, and more 
at conventions or displaying exhibit information at museums. 
Emerging mobile augmented reality opportunities for busi-
nesses include displaying the exact physical location of a  business 
and relevant information or ads when an individual points his or her 
phone in the vicinity of the business. Information displayed could 
include room photos and pricing (for hotels), dining room photos 
and menus (for restaurants), or merchandise photos and specials 
(for stores). And augmented reality is moving beyond smartphones 
to glasses (such as Google Glass) and, eventually, it is expected 
to work in three dimensions, with devices that will be able to rec-
ognize objects and understand their physical properties.
H OW I T WO R K S
Courtesy Nokia
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

274
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Originally, 
Internet 
addiction sufferers were 
stereotyped as younger, 
introverted, socially awk-
ward, computer-oriented 
males. However, with the 
increased access to com-
puters and the Internet 
today, this stereotype is no 
longer accurate. Internet 
addiction can affect any-
one of any age, race, 
or social class and can 
take a variety of forms. 
Some individuals become 
addicted to e-mailing or 
text messaging. Others become compulsive online shoppers or online gamblers, or become 
addicted to social media activities. Still others are addicted to cybersex, cyberporn, or 
online gaming, or struggle with real-world relationships because of  virtual relationships. 
Currently, Internet sex addiction to chat rooms and online pornography are the most com-
mon forms of Internet addiction. 
Like other addictions, addiction to using a computer, the Internet, texting, or other 
technology may have significant consequences, such as relationship problems, job loss, 
academic failure, health problems, financial consequences, loss of custody of children, 
and even suicide. There is also growing concern about the impact of constant use of tech-
nology among teenagers. In addition to texting and posting to Facebook, many teens are 
taking these devices to bed with them, raising 
concerns about sleep deprivation and its con-
sequences, such as concentration problems, 
anxiety and depression, and unsafe driving. 
Internet addiction is also increasingly being 
tied to crime and even death in countries (such 
as China and South Korea) that have high lev-
els of broadband Internet access. For instance, 
Internet addiction is blamed for much of the 
juvenile crime in China, a number of suicides, 
and several deaths from exhaustion by players 
unable to tear themselves away from marathon 
gaming sessions.
Internet addiction is viewed as a grow-
ing problem worldwide. Both China and 
South Korea have implemented military-style 
boot camps to treat young people identified 
as having Internet addiction, and the growing 
number of Internet-addicted youth prompted 
the Chinese government to ban minors from 
Internet cafés. In the United States, there are 
a number of inpatient treatment centers that 
treat Internet addiction, such as the reSTART 
program in the state of Washington and the 
Internet Addiction Recovery and Treatment 
Program at the Bradford Regional Medical 
Center in Pennsylvania—the first hospital-
based Internet addiction treatment and recov-
ery program in the United States.
Do you feel preoccupied with the Internet (think about the previous online activity or anticipate the next 
online session)?
Do you feel the need to use the Internet with increasing amounts of time in order to achieve satisfaction?
Have you repeatedly made unsuccessful efforts to control, cut back, or stop Internet use?
Do you feel restless, moody, depressed, or irritable when attempting to cut down or stop Internet use?
Do you stay online longer than originally intended?
Have you jeopardized or risked the loss of a significant relationship, job, educational, or career 
opportunity because of the Internet?
Have you lied to family members, a therapist, or others to conceal the extent of involvement with the 
Internet?
Do you use the Internet as a way of escaping from problems or of relieving a dysphoric mood (e.g., 
feelings of helplessness, guilt, anxiety, depression)?
Courtesy of Dr. Kimberly Young, Director of the Center for Internet Addiction Recovery 
FIGURE 7-11
Signs of Internet 
addiction. You may 
be addicted to the 
Internet if you answer 
“yes” to at least five of 
these questions.
<
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Tony Onorati, Former Naval Aviator and Former 
Commanding Officer, Strike Fighter Weapons 
School Pacific, NAS Lemoore
What computer experience is needed to be a 
U.S. Navy pilot?
While no computer experience is necessarily required 
to enter flight school, failure to have a solid knowledge 
of the Windows operating system will put the candidate 
well behind his/her contemporaries when they finally do 
reach the fleet as a pilot. All the tactical planning tools 
for preflight preparation, navigation, ordnance delivery, 
and mission planning, as well as all aircraft-specific 
publications, manuals, and training, are all computer 
based. For the FA-18 Hornet, all mission data is 
created on the computer, copied to a mission computer 
card, and plugged into the jet where it is downloaded 
into the aircraft’s computer for use in flight. Becoming 
a naval aviator without computer skills is like entering 
flight school without ever having flown before—it can 
be done but it places you well behind the power curve.
Courtesy Strike Fighter Weapons School Pacific, NAS Lemoore
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
275
>Digital divide. The gap between those who have access to technology and those who do not.
Many experts believe that while Internet addiction is a growing problem, it can be 
treated, similar to other addictions, with therapy, support groups, and medication. Research 
to investigate its impact, risk factors, and treatment possibilities, as well as investigate treat-
ment differences among the various types of technology abuse, is ongoing. New studies 
are also looking at the overall impact of technology and how its overuse or abuse may also 
impact people’s lives in order to identify other potential problems and possible solutions.
ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGY
For many, a major concern about the increased integration of computers and technology 
into our society is whether or not technology is accessible to all individuals. Some believe 
there is a distinct line dividing those who have access and those who do not. Factors such 
as age, gender, race, income, education, and physical abilities can all impact one’s access 
to technology and how one uses it.
The Digital Divide
The term digital divide refers to the gap between those who have access to information 
and communications technology and those who do not—often referred to as the “haves” 
and “have nots.” Typically, the digital divide is thought to be based on physical access to 
computers, the Internet, and related technology. Some individuals, however, believe that the 
definition of the digital divide goes deeper than just access. For example, they classify those 
individuals who have physical access to technology but who do not understand how to use it 
or are discouraged from using it in the “have not” category. Groups and individuals trying to 
eliminate the digital divide are working toward providing real access to technology (includ-
ing access to up-to-date hardware, software, Internet, and training) so that it can be used to 
improve people’s lives. In addition to access to computers and the Internet, digital divides 
related to other technologies may exist as well. For instance, one recent study found that 
hospitals that primarily serve low-income patients are less likely to have adopted electronic 
health records (EHRs) and other safety-related technologies (such as clinical decision sup-
ports and electronic medication lists) than hospitals with more affluent patients.
The digital divide can refer to the differences between individuals within a particular 
country, as well as to the differences between countries. Within a country, use of computers 
and related technology can vary based on factors such as age, race, education, and income.
The U.S. Digital Divide
Although there is disagreement among experts about the current status of the digital divide 
within the United States, there is an indication that it is continuing to shrink. As discussed 
in Chapter 3, more than 80% of the U.S. adult population are Internet users, using the 
Internet at work, home, school, or another location. Free Internet access at libraries, school, 
and other public locations, as well as the availability of low-cost computers and low-cost 
or free Internet access in many areas today, has helped Internet use begin to approach the 
popularity and widespread use of telephones and TVs, and has helped it become more 
feasible for low-income families today than in the past. In general, however, according to 
recent reports by the Pew Internet & American Life Project, individuals with a higher level 
of income or a higher level of education are more likely to go online, and younger indi-
viduals are more likely to be online than older Americans. Some overall demographic data 
about Internet use in the United States is shown in Figure 7-12. Similar trends occur with 
digital divide statistics for other technologies, such as smartphone use. 
Many people today—regardless of 
income level—view having a mobile 
phone as a necessity, not a luxury.
TIP
While the digital divide involves more 
than just Internet use (it can relate 
to any type of technology necessary 
to succeed in our society), the 
growing amount of Internet use is 
an encouraging sign that the digital 
device is shrinking.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

276
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Because the United States is such a technologi-
cally advanced society, reducing—and trying to elim-
inate—the digital divide is extremely important to 
ensure that all citizens have an equal chance to be suc-
cessful in this country. Although there has been lots 
of progress in that direction, more work still remains. 
For instance, the Navajo Nation (a sovereign tribal 
nation with more than 250,000 citizens living across 
27,000 square miles in New Mexico, Arizona, and 
Utah) has lagged significantly behind the rest of the 
United States in terms of technology. Many schools 
lack computers and Internet access, many residents 
have to drive seven or eight miles over roads impass-
able during rain or snow storms to reach the nearest 
telephone, and even some government entities within 
the Navajo Nation have dial-up or no Internet access. 
However, this is slowly changing as a result of the 
Internet to the Hogan project—a project designed to 
end the digital divide in the Navajo Nation. It will 
first provide Internet to tribal colleges and other cen-
tral locations, which will be extended to community-
based chapter houses, and then to schools, medical 
clinics, hospitals, firehouses, and homes.
Many individuals view technology as essen-
tial for all Americans today. For instance, students 
need access to devices and Internet resources to stay 
informed and be prepared for further education and 
careers. As already discussed, most jobs in the United 
States require some sort of computer or Internet 
use. And the Internet is becoming an increasingly 
important resource for older Americans, particularly 
for forming  decisions about health and healthcare 
options. However, it is important to realize that not 
all individuals want to use computers or go online. 
Just as some people choose not to have  televisions, 
mobile phones, or other technologies, some peo-
ple—rich or poor—choose not to have a computer 
or go online. Sometimes this is a religious decision; 
at other times, it is simply a lifestyle choice.
The Global Digital Divide
While the digital divide within a country is about 
some individuals within that country having access to 
technology and others not having the same access, the 
global digital divide is about some countries having 
access to technology and others not having the same 
level of access. It is becoming increasingly important 
for all countries to have access to information and 
communications technology in order to be able to 
compete successfully in our global economy. The global digital divide is perhaps more dra-
matic than the U.S. digital divide. According to InternetWorldStats.com, more than 2.4 billion 
people globally are online—only about 34% of the world’s population. With more than 78% 
of its population online, North America is the leading world region in Internet users; with only 
15.6% of its population online, Africa has one of the lowest percentages of Internet users.
INCOME
AGE
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
14–17
96%
98%
18–29
50–64
83%
65+
56%
30–49
92%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
RACE
White, Non-Hispanic
Hispanic
86%
Black, Non-Hispanic
85%
76%
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
HIGHEST LEVEL OF EDUCATION OBTAINED
College+
59%
78%
92%
<High school
High school diploma
Some college
100%
80%
60%
40%
20%
0%
<$30,000
$30,000–49,999
$75,000+
76%
96%
88%
94%
$50,000–74,999
96%
FIGURE 7-12
Key U.S. Internet use 
statistics. Shows the 
percent of individuals in 
each category who use 
the Internet.
<
Source: Pew Internet & American Life Project; Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
277
>Assistive technology. Hardware and software specifically designed for use by individuals with physical disabilities.
For some, it is difficult to imagine how computers and the 
Internet would benefit the world’s hungry or the 1.2 billion people 
in the world without access to reliable  electricity. Others view tech-
nology as a means to bridge the global digital divide. For instance, 
mobile phones and computers with solar-rechargeable batteries can 
be used in developing countries for education and telemedicine. A 
variety of wireless Internet projects that are designed to bring wire-
less Internet to remote areas of the world are also  helping to bridge 
the gap. These projects provide Internet access to rural schools and 
homes, as well as provide services (such as telemedicine) to remote 
villages that would not otherwise have those services available.
For personal computer use, new products are emerging that 
could help lessen the global digital divide. Perhaps the most widely 
known project in this area is the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) 
project. The goal of OLPC is to ensure that every child in the world 
has access to a rugged, low-cost, low-power connected laptop (see 
Figure 7-13) in order to provide them with access to new channels of learning, sharing, and 
self-expression. The current model of the XO laptop  developed by OLPC is the XO-4 Touch.
The XO laptop is made of thick plastic for durability with a display that can be 
viewed in direct sunlight and the rubber keyboard is sealed to keep out dirt and water. 
The XO is very energy-efficient, and it can be charged via an electrical outlet, as well 
as from a car battery, foot pedal, or pull string. It is Linux-based and includes a Wi-Fi 
adapter, flash memory slot, built-in video camera, microphone, touchpad, 7.5-inch 
touch screen, accelerometer, keyboard, and USB ports; has 1 or 2 GB of RAM; and uses 
4 or 8 GB of flash memory for storage. More than 2 million chil-
dren and teachers in Latin America (plus another 500,000 in Africa 
and the rest of the world) have been provided with an XO laptop. 
According to OLPC, making it possible for students in developing 
countries to have a laptop will greatly impact their education, as well 
as society as a whole. They believe that by empowering  children to 
educate themselves, a new generation will ultimately be better pre-
pared to tackle the other serious problems (poverty, malnutrition, 
disease) facing their societies. An Android tablet version—the XO 
Tablet shown in Figure 7-14—recently became available; it is being 
distributed to schools with  underprivileged children in the United 
States and is also available to the general public.
Assistive Technology
Research has found that people with disabilities tend to use computers and the Internet 
at rates below the average for a given population. Part of the reason may be that some 
physical conditions—such as visual impairment or limited dexterity—make it difficult 
to use a conventional computer system. That is where assistive technology—hardware 
and software specially designed for use by individuals with physical disabilities—fits in. 
While assistive technology is not currently available to help with all types of computer 
content (primarily streaming video and other multimedia content increasingly found on 
Web pages), there has been much improvement in assistive technology in recent years. In 
addition, researchers are continuing to develop additional types of assistive technology, 
such as multimedia accessibility tools to help individuals with visual impairments better 
FIGURE 7-14
The $129 XO tablet.
<
Courtesy One Laptop Per Child
Courtesy One Laptop Per Child
FIGURE 7-13
The OLPC XO laptop.
<
There are also assistive devices 
designed for elderly individuals, such 
as smartphones with large, easy to 
read and press keys.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

278
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
control and experience Web-based multimedia. This growth in assistive tech-
nology is due in part to demands by disabled individuals and disability orga-
nizations for equal access to computers and Web content, as well as Section 
508 of the Rehabilitation Act (which requires federal agencies to make their 
electronic and information technology accessible to people with disabilities) 
and the Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA) (which requires companies 
with 15 or more employees to make reasonable accommodations for known 
physical or mental limitations of otherwise qualified individuals). In order to 
be accessible to users of assistive technology, Web pages need to assign alt 
tags (text-based descriptions) to Web page images and use meaningful text-
based hyperlinks—such as How to Contact Us instead of Click Here.
To help provide individuals with physical disabilities equal access to 
technology, assistive input and output devices—such as Braille keyboards, 
specialized pointing devices, and screen readers—are available for personal 
computers, as well as some smartphones and other mobile devices. In addition, there are apps 
and devices designed to assist people with disabilities with day-to-day tasks. For example, 
mobile apps can identify the price, name, and other data about a product once a product label 
is scanned with a smartphone camera; talking GPS devices can guide blind or low-vision 
individuals; and augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) tablets (see Figure 7-15) 
can help people who are unable to use verbal speech to communicate with others.
Assistive Input Systems
Assistive input devices allow for input in a nontraditional manner (see Figure 7-16). For 
example, Braille keyboards, large-print keyboards, or conventional keyboards with Braille 
or large-print key overlays are available for visually impaired computer users. Keyguards—
metal or plastic plates that fit over conventional keyboards—enable users with limited hand 
mobility to more easily press the keys on a keyboard. One-handed keyboards are designed 
to be used with only one hand, and speech recognition systems allow data and commands 
to be input hands-free. Switches—hardware devices that can be activated with hand, foot, 
finger, or face movement, or with sips and puffs of air—can also be used to input data and 
commands. Some conventional input devices can also be used for assistive purposes, such 
as scanners, which—if they have optical character recognition (OCR) capabilities—can 
input printed documents as text that can be enlarged on the screen or read aloud.
Assistive pointing devices can be used to move and select items; they can also be used 
to enter text-based data when used in conjunction with an on-screen keyboard. Examples 
include foot-controlled mice, head pointing systems that control the on-screen pointer 
using head movement, and eye tracking systems that allow users to select items on screen 
using only their gaze. For example, the eye tracking system shown in Figure 7-16 connects 
to nearly any Windows 8 device and translates eye gazes to Windows 8 touch commands.
ONE-HANDED KEYBOARDS
Each key on this half keyboard contains two letters (one set
for the keys on the right half of the keyboard and one set for
the left half) so all keys can be reached with one hand. 
EYE TRACKING SYSTEMS
Cameras track the user’s eye movements, which are used
to select icons and other objects on the screen.
BRAILLE KEYBOARDS
The keys on this keyboard contain
Braille overlays.
Courtesy of Hooleon Corporation
Courtesy of Matias Corporation
Courtesy Tobii Technology AB
Courtesy DynaVox Mayer-Johnson
FIGURE 7-15
AAC systems help 
individuals with 
speech disabilities 
communicate with 
others.
<
FIGURE 7-16
Assistive input 
devices.
<
Assistive hardware is also used 
by the general population, such 
as voice input systems for voice 
commands and input and head 
pointing systems for gaming and 
virtual reality (VR) applications.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
279
>Green computing. The use of computers in an environmentally friendly manner.>ENERGY STAR. A program developed by the Environmental 
Protection Agency (EPA) to encourage the development of energy-saving devices. 
Assistive Output Systems
Some examples of assistive output devices that can be used by blind and other visually 
impaired individuals are shown in Figure 7-17. A screen reader is a software program that 
reads aloud all text information available via the computer screen, such as instructions, 
menu options, documents, and Web pages. Braille displays are devices that can be attached 
to conventional computers or mobile devices and that continuously convert screen output 
into Braille form. Braille printers (also called Braille embossers) print embossed output in 
Braille format on paper instead of, or in addition to, conventional ink output.
Some operating systems also include accessibility features. For instance, recent  versions 
of Windows and Mac OS include a screen reader, on-screen keyboard, speech recognition 
capabilities, and settings that can be used to magnify the screen, change text size and color, 
convert audio cues into written text, and otherwise make the computer more accessible.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS
The increasing use of computers in our society has created a variety of environmental con-
cerns. The amount of energy used to power personal computers, servers, and computer com-
ponents, as well as the heat generated by computing equipment, is one concern. Another is 
our extensive use of paper, CDs, and other disposables, and how much of it ends up as trash 
in landfills. The hazardous materials contained in computer equipment or generated by the 
production of computers and related technology, as well as the disposal of used computing 
products, are additional concerns. With an increasing amount of attention being focused on 
energy usage and carbon emissions, businesses and individuals are paying more attention to 
energy costs and their carbon footprint (the amount of carbon dioxide produced to support 
activities), as well as the carbon footprints of their suppliers and business partners.
Green Computing
The term green computing refers to the use of computers in an environmentally friendly 
manner. Minimizing the use of natural resources, such as energy and paper, is one aspect 
of green computing. In 1992, the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) introduced 
ENERGY STAR as a voluntary labeling program designed to identify and promote energy-
efficient products to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. Computers and monitors were 
among the first labeled products; an ENERGY STAR-qualified computer will use between 
SCREEN READER SOFTWARE
BRAILLE DISPLAYS
BRAILLE PRINTERS
Courtesy of Freedom Scientfic
Courtesy HumanWare
Courtesy ViewPlus Technologies, Inc.
Courtesy of NanoPac
FIGURE 7-17
Assistive output 
devices.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

280
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Eco-label. A certification, usually by a government agency, that identifies a device as meeting minimal environmental performance specifications.
30% and 65% less energy, depending on how it is used. Today, the ENERGY STAR 
label (see Figure 7-18) appears on office equipment, residential heating and cooling 
equipment, major appliances, lighting, home electronics, and more. Eco-labels—envi-
ronmental performance certifications—are also used in other  countries; Figure 7-18 
show some examples.
Energy Consumption and Conservation
With the high cost of electricity today and the recent increase in data center energy 
usage, power consumption and heat generation by computers are key concerns for 
businesses today. Today’s faster and more powerful computers tend to use more energy 
and run hotter than computers from just a few years ago, which leads to greater cool-
ing costs. Servers, in particular, are power hungry, so consolidating servers (such as by 
the use of virtualization) is a common energy-saving tactic used by businesses today 
(for example, AOL recently decommissioned nearly 10,000 servers and saved about 
$5 million total, with $1.65 million of the savings attributed to energy savings). Other 
strategies include powering down computers when they are not in use, using desktop 
virtualization, and utilizing cloud computing. Green computing can have tremendous 
financial benefits. In fact, the EPA estimates that even a 10% reduction in energy con-
sumption by U.S. data centers would save enough energy to power up to 1 million 
homes per year and save U.S. businesses $740 million annually.
In response to the growing emphasis on green computing today, hardware manufac-
turers are working to develop more energy-efficient personal computers, servers, micro-
processors, storage systems, displays, power supplies, motherboards, and other computer 
components. Some energy- saving features found on computer hardware today include 
devices (such as computers and printers) that can go into very low-power sleep mode 
when not in use, low- power-consumptive chips and boards, high-efficiency power sup-
plies, energy- efficient flat-panel displays, liquid cooling systems, and CPUs that power up 
and down on demand. The energy savings by using more energy-efficient hardware can be 
significant. For instance, moving to an LED flat-panel display instead of a conventional 
LCD display saves around 12% in energy consumption.
While ENERGY STAR-qualified computers deliver substantial energy savings over 
conventional computers, computers can still draw quite a bit of power when they are in 
these modes—particularly with a screen saver enabled. Because of this, it is important for 
businesses, schools, and individuals to power down computers manually or automatically 
(using software or power-saving settings) when they are not in use to save power. Mobile 
phone manufacturers are also working to reduce the environmental impact of their products, 
such as displaying reminders on mobile phones to unplug them from their chargers when 
they are fully charged because chargers can draw up to five watts per hour even if nothing 
is plugged into them. Other devices that draw power when they are turned off (sometimes 
called energy vampires) include computers, home electronics, and home appliances. In fact, 
it is estimated that the average U.S. household spends $100 per year powering devices that 
are turned off or in stand-by mode. To determine how much power a device is using, you 
can use a special device like the Kill a Watt shown in Figure 7-19. This device displays the 
amount of power (in kilowatts or dollar value) any device plugged into it is currently using. 
To save on vampire power costs, unplug your devices when you are not using them (you 
can connect your electronic devices to a power strip and just switch off the power at the 
power strip to make this process easier). However, don’t cut the power to any device (such 
as a wireless router, DVR, or cable box) that will need to be active to perform a needed 
UNITED STATES
EUROPEAN UNION
BRAZIL
AUSTRALIA
KOREA
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, ENERGY STAR program; Courtesy of the European Commission; General 
Courtesy of Korea Environmental Labeling Association (KELA); Courtesy of ABNT - ASSOCIAÇÃO BRASILEIRA DE 
NORMAS TÉCNICAS; Courtesy Good Environmental Choice Australia
FIGURE 7-19
Energy usage 
monitors.
<
FIGURE 7-18
Eco-labels.
<
Courtesy P3 International Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
281
function. Smart power strips that turn off outlets on the strip when it senses those devices 
aren’t being used and smart charging stations that recharge USB devices and shut off when 
the devices are fully charged are other power-saving alternatives.
Alternate Power
In addition to more energy-efficient hardware, other possibilities for greener computing 
are being developed, such as alternate power sources for computers and mobile devices. 
For instance, solar power is a growing alternative for powering electronic devices, includ-
ing mobile phones and portable computers. With solar power, solar panels convert sunlight 
into direct current (DC) electricity, which is then stored in a battery.
Although it has been expensive to implement in the past, improvements in solar tech-
nology are making its use more feasible for a greater number of individuals. Today’s solar 
panels are typically thin-film solar  panels, which are created by printing nanoparticles onto 
rolls of thin, flexible panels and which cost a fraction of the cost of earlier generations. 
Much of the current research is working to develop what is viewed as the next generation 
of solar cells—very low cost printable photo voltaic cells (PVCs) that are printed using 
nanocrystal-based “ink” and may reduce the cost to an even more competitive level. To 
encourage this development, Harvard University recently released a list of 20,000 organic 
compounds that may be viable replacements for silicon. As the flexibility of solar man-
ufacturing increases and the price decreases, solar panels are becoming available for an 
increasing number of applications. For instance, solar panels are built into the covers of 
some computer and tablet cases, and portable solar panels can be attached to backpacks 
and other items (see Figure 7-20). As also shown in this figure, hand-powered chargers can 
be used with portable computers, smartphones, and other mobile devices. While currently 
these devices are most often used wherever dependable electricity is not available, such as 
in developing countries and while outdoors, transparent solar panels are in the research 
stage and are expected to eventually be built into the screens of smartphones, tablets, and 
other devices to charge those devices on a continual basis—they may even be built into car 
sunroofs and the windows of buildings. For a look at other emerging options for powering 
your devices, see the Trend box.
Solar power can be also used to power more permanent computer setups. For instance, 
some Web hosting companies in the United States (including Solar Energy Host and AISO.
Net) are now 100% solar powered and the solar panels that cover most of the rooftops at 
Google’s Mountain View, California, headquarters power 30% of the energy needs for that 
complex. Solar power plants are also being implemented (for example, Apple is building a 
new solar power plant in Reno to continue working toward its goal of all data centers using 
100% renewable energy), and some experts predict that many buildings in the future will 
be solar buildings with solar cells integrated into the rooftop, walls, and windows of the 
building to generate electricity.
Green Components
In addition to being more energy-efficient, computers today are being built to run quieter 
and cooler, and they are using more recyclable hardware and packaging. Many computer 
manufacturers are also reducing the amount of toxic chemicals being used in personal 
computers. For instance, Dell bans the use of some hazardous chemicals, such as cad-
mium and mercury; has reduced the amount of lead used in several desktop computers; 
and meets the European Union requirement of being completely lead-free for all elec-
tronics shipped to the EU. Some mobile phones are also going green, being made out of 
recycled plastics, including solar panels to charge the phone’s battery, and including a 
pedometer and other apps to calculate the volume of CO2 emissions you have avoided by 
not driving.
SOLAR-POWERED CHARGERS
HAND-POWERED CHARGERS
SOLAR COMPUTER AND TABLET BAGS
FIGURE 7-20
Alternate power. 
Can be used to power 
smartphones, portable 
digital media players, 
GPS devices, portable 
computers, and other 
devices.
<
Courtesy Voltaic Systems, Inc.
Courtesy Voltaic Systems, Inc.
Courtesy of SOScharger.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

282
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>E-waste. Electronic waste or trash, such as discarded computer components.
Recycling and Disposal of Computing Equipment
Another environmental concern is the amount of trash—and sometimes toxic trash—gen-
erated by computer use. One concern is paper waste. Despite the increase in the use of 
electronic forms, electronic signatures, e-books, online newspapers and magazines, and 
online bill pay, it appears that the so-called paperless office that many visionaries predicted 
has not yet arrived. Instead, research indicates that global paper use has grown more than 
sixfold since 1950, and one-fifth of all wood harvested in the world today ends up as 
paper. The estimated number of pages generated by computer printers worldwide is almost 
one-half billion a year—an amount that would stack more than 25,000 miles high. One 
possible solution for the future (e-paper) is discussed in the Inside the Industry box. There 
are also utilities, such as GreenPrint and PrintWhatYouLike.com, designed to reduce paper 
consumption. These utilities eliminate images, blank pages, and other non-critical content 
located on documents and/or Web pages in order to print just the necessary content on the 
least number of pages possible.
In addition to paper-based trash, computing refuse includes electronic hardware such 
as used toner cartridges, obsolete or broken computers and peripherals, and discarded 
CDs, DVDs, and other storage media. Mobile phones that are discarded when individuals 
upgrade their phones or switch providers—as well as new disposable consumer  products, 
such as disposable digital cameras—also add to the alarming growth of e-waste (also 
called e-trash) generated today. 
Power to Go
Tired of your smartphone or laptop battery running out of 
power at inopportune times? Well, there are several new por-
table power devices lining up to save the day. Some devices, 
typically the size of a smartphone, consist of a power pack 
with built-in cables to connect your various devices. Most of 
these power packs can be recharged via a USB cable and 
portable computer; some also can be plugged into a wall out-
let for super fast recharging. An option geared toward com-
muters is the PowerCup power inverter that is shaped like a 
large portable coffee container so it ﬁ ts nicely in a car cup 
holder. The PowerCup connects to the car via the car’s 12-volt 
power outlet and can power up to two regular devices (such 
as a laptop or DVD player) using standard AC plugs, as well as 
one USB-powered device (such as a smartphone).
One unique option (shown in the accompanying photo) is 
the PowerTrekk device, which uses fuel cell technology to cre-
ate the energy needed (fuel cells produce electricity using a 
chemical reaction). This pocket-sized device connects to any 
mobile device with a USB connection (such as a smartphone, 
digital media player, or media tablet) to provide nearly instant 
power to the device (the charger uses replaceable hydrogen 
fuel pucks and water—one puck charges approximately one 
smartphone).
T R E N D
Water and puck
power the charger.
The charger powers
yo
yourur dev
evicices.
Courtesy myFC
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
283
E-Paper
Electronic paper (e-paper) is a technology used with ﬂ at panel 
display devices that attempts to mimic the look of ordinary 
printed paper. The purpose of an Electronic Paper Display 
(EPD) is to give the user the experience of reading from paper, 
while providing them with the ability to update the information 
shown on the device electronically. EPDs display content in 
high-contrast, so they can be viewed in direct sunlight. They 
also require much less electricity than other types of dis-
plays because they don’t require a backlight and they don’t 
require power to maintain the content shown on the display—
they only require power to change the content. Because the 
content stored in an EPD can be erased when it is no longer 
needed and then replaced with new content, EPDs are more 
environmentally friendly than conventional paper documents. 
An additional beneﬁ t is portability; an e-reader (such as the 
Amazon Kindle and the Barnes & Noble Nook, shown in the 
accompanying photograph), for instance, can hold thousands 
of books stored in electronic format in a device about the size 
of a paperback novel. In fact, with an e-reader, you could carry 
a small library in your backpack. New e-books are transferred 
to the e-reader via a ﬂ ash memory card or a wireless (typically 
Wi-Fi or 3G) download. E-readers today typically have color 
displays and many support Web browsing, apps, and other 
functions in addition to displaying e-books.
E-paper is also widely used for e-signs, which look like ordi-
nary paper signs but their text can be changed wirelessly. Their 
low power consumption means that e-signs can run off battery 
power for an extended period of time, even with moving data. 
Some e-signs don’t even require a battery; instead, the wire-
less signal used to transmit data to the display is strong enough 
to update the sign content. Other retail applications currently 
on the market include e-paper shelf price tags that can com-
municate electronically with the store’s database so the current 
price is always displayed, e-paper displays on wristwatches 
and USB ﬂ ash drives, and destination displays on trains.
E-paper technology used with fabric, plastic, metal, and 
other materials is in development and is expected to be used 
to enable keyboards to be printed on military uniform sleeves, 
light switches to be printed onto wallpaper, and radio circuitry 
and controls to be printed onto clothing and other everyday 
objects. It may also allow e-paper to be used on billboards, 
T-shirts, and even paint for easy redecorating, as well as 
 regular-sized e-paper that can be inserted into a special 
computer printer to be printed electronically and then reused 
over and over. One improvement that has already occurred is 
the incorporation of touch and pen input with e-paper displays. 
For instance, both touch and pen input can be used with many 
e-readers today to ﬂ ip the “pages” of the book and otherwise 
control the device, as well as to make notes on the pages or 
highlight passages of text.
So how does e-paper work? It is based on a display tech-
nology called electrophoretic, which was invented and is now 
manufactured and marketed by E Ink® Corporation. An electro-
phoretic display contains electronic ink— essentially charged 
ink that consists of millions of tiny beads or microcapsules 
about half the diameter of a human hair. For monochrome dis-
plays, these beads contain positively charged white particles 
and negatively charged black particles suspended in a clear 
ﬂ uid. When voltage is applied to the beads (through the cir-
cuitry contained within the display), either the white or the 
black particles rise to the top and the opposite colored par-
ticles are pulled to the bottom of the bead, depending on the 
polarity of the charge applied. Consequently, the beads in each 
pixel appear to be either white or black (see the accompany-
ing illustration) and remain in that state until another transmis-
sion changes the pattern. Color e-ink displays work in a similar 
manner but typically include a color ﬁ lter to make the images 
appear in color.
I N S I D E  TH E  I N D U STRY
AN E-READER
AN E-INK MICROCAPSULE
The white particles
are at the top, so this
pixel appears white.
Courtesy Barnes & Noble, Inc
Courtesy E Ink Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

284
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Compounding the problem of the amount of e-waste generated 
today is the fact that computers, mobile phones, and related hardware 
contain a variety of toxic and hazardous materials. For instance, a 
single desktop computer may contain up to 700 different chemical ele-
ments and compounds, many of which (such as arsenic, lead, mercury, 
and cadmium) are hazardous and expensive to dispose of properly.
A global concern regarding e-waste is where it all eventually ends 
up. Much of it ends up in municipal landfills that are not designed for 
toxic waste. And, even worse, the majority of all computer equipment 
sent to recyclers in developed countries (at least 80%, according to 
most estimates) ends up being exported to developing countries (such 
as China, India, and Nigeria) with more lax environmental standards, 
legislation, or enforcement than in the United States. Much of the e-waste exported to 
these countries is simply dumped into fields or processed with primitive and dangerous 
technologies that release toxins into the air and water. Unaware of the potential danger of 
these components, rural villagers are often employed to try to repair equipment or reclaim 
metals or plastic (see Figure 7-21)—hardware that cannot be repaired or reclaimed is often 
burned or treated with acid baths to try to recover precious metals but such processes 
release very dangerous pollutants. Activists believe unchecked exportation by the United 
States and other countries—such as England, Japan, Australia, and Canada—has been 
going on for at least 10 years. The primary reason for exporting e-waste is cost—proper 
disposal of a computer in the United States costs between $5 and $10, compared with 
$1 or less in third-world countries. Another reason is that U.S. states are increasingly ban-
ning dangerous computing equipment—such as CRT monitors—from landfills.
While it is difficult—or, perhaps, impossible—to reverse the damage that has already 
occurred from e-waste, many organizations are working to develop ways to protect people 
and the environment from future contamination. For instance, the Basal Action Network has 
worked with industry leaders to create the eStewards Certification program designed to help 
individuals and organizations locate responsible electronics recyclers, and Clean Production 
Action and Greenpeace have created programs to push hardware manufacturers to stop using 
toxic chemicals in their products. Some countries have environmental regulations (such as 
Europe’s regulations that require manufacturers to avoid use of toxic substances and that 
forbid exporting hazardous wastes to developing countries). In Europe, Japan, and increas-
ingly in some U.S. states, laws are based on the policy of extended producer responsibil-
ity (EPR), where manufacturers are responsible for the entire life cycle of their products 
and packaging, including recycling. In response, computer manufacturers are beginning to 
produce more environmentally friendly components, such as system units made from recy-
clable plastic, nontoxic flame-retardant coatings, and lead-free solder on the motherboard.
Even though recycling computer equipment is often difficult because of toxic materi-
als and poor product designs, proper recycling is essential to avoid pollution and health 
hazards. Some recycling centers will accept computer equipment, but many charge a fee 
for this service. Many computer manufacturers have voluntary take-back programs that will 
accept obsolete or broken computer equipment from consumers at a minimal cost. Expired 
toner cartridges and ink cartridges can sometimes be returned to the manufacturer (using 
the supplied shipping label included with some cartridges) or exchanged when ordering 
new cartridges; the cartridges are then recharged (refilled) and resold. Cartridges that can-
not be refilled can be sent to a recycling facility. In addition to helping to reduce e-waste 
in landfills, using recharged printer cartridges saves the consumer money because they are 
less expensive than new cartridges. Other computer components—such as CDs, DVDs, 
USB flash drives, and hard drives—can also be recycled through some organizations, such 
as GreenDisk. GreenDisk accepts shipments of all types of storage media (plus printer 
cartridges, mobile phones, mice, notebook computers, chargers, and more) for a modest 
charge; it reuses salvageable items and recycles the rest. There are also recycling programs 
for mobile phones. These programs typically refurbish and sell the phones; many organiza-
tions donate a portion of the  proceeds to nonprofit organizations.
When donating old computers 
and equipment to nonprofit 
organizations, be sure to verify 
the organizations are actually 
nonprofit—some scammers pose 
as nonprofit organizations to 
obtain equipment for free that 
they then resell for a profit.
TIP
FIGURE 7-21
E-waste. E-waste 
is often exported to 
developing countries.
<
Copyright Basal Action Network [2013]
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
285
In lieu of recycling, older equipment that is still functioning 
can be used for alternate purposes (such as for a child’s computer, 
a personal Web server, or a DVR), or it can be donated to schools 
and nonprofit groups. Some organizations accept and repair donated 
equipment and then distribute it to disadvantaged groups or indi-
viduals in need of the hardware. In the United States, for instance, 
Operation Homelink refurbishes donated computers and sends them 
to families of U.S. military personnel deployed overseas, who then 
use the computers to communicate with the soldiers via e-mail, social 
networks, and video calls (for instance, the family of the soldier about 
to be deployed to Afghanistan and shown in Figure 7-22 will use this 
refurbished laptop to communicate with him while he is overseas).
For security and privacy purposes, data stored on all computing 
equipment should be completely removed before disposing of that 
equipment so that someone else cannot recover the data stored on 
that device. As discussed in Chapter 5, hard drives should be wiped clean (not just erased) 
using special software that overwrites the data on the drive several times to ensure it is 
completely destroyed; storage media that cannot be wiped (such as rewritable DVDs) or 
that contain very sensitive data (such as business hard drives being discarded) should be 
shredded. The shredded media is then typically recycled.
Consumers and companies alike are increasingly recognizing the need for green 
computing, including end-of-life reuse and recycling. Support for nationwide legislation 
is growing, and manufacturers are seeing the 
economic and social advantages of producing 
more easily recyclable and less toxic hard-
ware. So, even though there is a long way to 
go before e-waste stops being an environmen-
tal and health hazard, it is encouraging that the 
trend is moving toward creating a safer and 
less-wasteful environment.
RELATED LEGISLATION
There has been some legislation related to 
health, access, and the environment in the past 
few years. For instance, many states make it ille-
gal to use a mobile phone without a hands-free 
system while driving in an attempt to cut down 
on the number of accidents due to distracted 
drivers. The most significant recent legisla-
tion regarding accessibility has been the 1998 
amendment to Section 508 of the Rehabilitation 
Act requiring federal agencies to make their 
electronic and information technology (includ-
ing Web sites) accessible to people with disabil-
ities. While there are currently no federal U.S. 
computer recycling laws, federal agencies are 
required to purchase energy-efficient electronic 
products. In addition, some federal laws (such as 
the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and HIPAA) have estab-
lished privacy and data protection standards for 
companies disposing of computer hardware that 
contains specific types of data, and some states 
have implemented laws related to e-waste.
AS K TH E E X PE R T
David Beschen, President, GreenDisk Inc.
How large of a problem is e-waste today and 
what can we do about it?
According to a 2010 EPA report, over 5 million tons 
of e-waste were in storage in the United States and 
another 2.5 million tons were prepped for end-of-life 
but only 25% of those devices were recycled. Many 
of these devices contained some of the worst toxins 
on earth, as well as things we do not want “recycled,” 
such as private information belonging to the individu-
als and businesses that used the devices. 
Properly recycling e-waste is important to the 
environment, our health, and our privacy. It keeps our 
electronic waste out of landfills (and our garages). 
However, in our experience at GreenDisk, people 
simply do not know what to do with their obsolete 
technology and they have no sense of urgency to do 
anything with it. And, unfortunately, current e-waste 
solutions are neither easy to use nor well promoted. 
Consequently, we need to keep inventing products 
that use recycled materials, keep implementing 
incentives to promote recycling among both the pro-
ducers and the end users, and keep our old technol-
ogy heading into recycle bins (and, even better, into 
our new stuff).
Courtesy GreenDisk, Inc.
Courtesy Operation Homelink
FIGURE 7-22
Operation 
Homelink. 
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

286
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
S U M MARY
COMPUTERS AND HEALTH
Since the entry of computers into the workplace and their increased use in our society, 
they have been blamed for a variety of physical ailments. Carpal tunnel syndrome 
(CTS), DeQuervain’s tendonitis, and other types of repetitive stress injuries (RSIs) are 
 common physical ailments related to computer use; computer vision syndrome (CVS), eye-
strain, fatigue, backaches, and headaches are additional possible physical risks. Conditions 
related to mobile device use include gorilla arm and iPad shoulder; there are also concerns 
about the heat from these devices, noise-induced hearing loss, and the dangers of texting 
while driving.
Ergonomics is the science of how to make a computer workspace, hardware, and 
environment fit the individual using it. Using an ergonomically correct workspace and 
ergonomic hardware (such as ergonomic keyboards, ergonomic mice, document hold-
ers, antiglare screens, keyboard drawers, wrist supports, and computer gloves) can help 
avoid or lessen the pain associated with some RSIs. In addition, all users should use good 
posture, take rest breaks, alternate tasks, and take other common-sense precautions. For 
portable computers, docking stations can be used to allow easy connections to more ergo-
nomically correct hardware, and notebook stands or tablet stands can be used to elevate 
a notebook computer or tablet, respectively, so its display screen can be set at an ergonomi-
cally correct height, in order to create more ergonomically correct workspaces.
In addition to physical health issues, the extensive use of computers and related tech-
nology in the home and office has raised concerns about emotional side effects of com-
puter use. The stress of keeping up with ever-changing technology, layoffs, always being in 
touch, fear of being out of touch, information overload, and burnout are all possible emo-
tional problems related to computer use. Taking a break, reevaluating your schedule, and 
taking good care of yourself can help you avoid or reduce the stress that these problems 
may cause. To manage all the digital information you encounter, good search techniques, 
e-mail filters, and other tools can be used.
Internet addiction (also referred to as Internet dependency, Internet compulsivity, 
cyberaddiction, and technology addiction) refers to not being able to stop using computers, 
the Internet, or other technology. Many experts believe it is a growing problem and is most 
prominent in countries with high levels of broadband Internet access. It can affect users of 
any age and is treated similarly to other addictions.
ACCESS TO TECHNOLOGY
The digital divide refers to the gap between those who have access to computers and com-
munications technology and those who do not. Although the term digital divide normally 
refers to physical access to technology, its “have not” category is sometimes thought to 
include not only those who do not have access to technology, but also those who have 
physical access to technology but who do not understand it or are discouraged from using 
it. There can be a digital divide within a country or between countries. Globally, the digi-
tal divide separates countries with access to technology from those without access to 
technology.
In the United States, studies show that the digital divide may be lessening, as people 
of every income, education, race, ethnicity, and gender continue to go online at increased 
rates. However, individuals living in low-income households or having little education still 
trail the national average for computer use. While the United States has a high number of 
Internet users, continuing to reduce the digital divide is important to ensure all citizens have 
an equal chance of being successful. 
Chapter Objective 1:
Understand the potential 
risks to physical health 
resulting from the use of 
computers.
Chapter Objective 2:
Describe some possible 
emotional health risks 
associated with the use 
of computers.
Chapter Objective 3:
Explain what is meant by 
the term digital divide.
Chapter Objective 4: 
Discuss the impact that 
factors such as nationality, 
income, race, education, 
and physical disabilities 
may have on computer 
access and use.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
287
There are several programs designed to bring computers, Internet access, and technol-
ogy to developing countries, such as the One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project. Research 
suggests that people with disabilities tend to use computers and the Internet at rates lower 
than the average population. Part of the reason may be because some types of conventional 
hardware—such as keyboards and monitors—are difficult to use with some types of physi-
cal conditions. Assistive technology includes hardware and software that makes conven-
tional computer systems easier for users with disabilities to use.
Examples of assistive input devices include Braille keyboards, keyguards, voice input 
systems, switches, foot-controlled mice, head pointing systems, and eye-tracking systems. 
Assistive output devices include screen readers, Braille displays, and Braille printers. In 
order to be compatible with screen readers and other assistive devices, Web pages need to 
use features, such as alt tags for Web page images and descriptive text-based hyperlinks. 
There are also apps and devices designed to assist people with disabilities with day-to-day 
tasks.
ENVIRONMENTAL CONCERNS
Many people worry about the environmental issues related to computer use, such as high 
energy use and the massive amount of paper computer users consume. Green  computing 
refers to using computers in an environmentally friendly manner. It can include using 
environmentally friendly hardware (such as devices approved by an  eco-label system like 
the ENERGY STAR certification used in the United States), as well as using procedures 
(such as consolidating servers and using power management features to place devices into 
standby or sleep mode when not in use) to reduce energy consumption. Environmentally 
friendly computers (such as those that run quieter and cooler, use more recyclable hard-
ware and packaging, and contain fewer hazardous chemicals) are now on the market, and 
alternate-powered hardware (such as computer bags and other hardware with built-in solar 
panels, solar chargers, and hard-powered chargers) is becoming available.
In addition to practicing green computing when buying and using computer equip-
ment, discarded equipment should be reused whenever possible. Computer equipment that 
is still functioning may be able to be donated and refurbished for additional use, and toner 
and ink cartridges can often be refilled and reused. Hardware that cannot be reused should 
be recycled if possible, or properly disposed of if not recyclable so that it does not end up 
as hazardous e-waste in landfills. Recycling programs and initiatives may help obsolete 
products be disposed of in a more environmentally friendly manner.
For security and privacy purposes, storage media containing personal or sensitive data 
should be disposed of properly, such as wiped or shredded before being reused or recycled.
RELATED LEGISLATION
There are some laws in place to help protect our health, access to technology, and the envi-
ronment. The most significant legislation regarding accessibility is the 1998 amendment 
to the Rehabilitation Act requiring federal agencies to make their electronic and informa-
tion technology accessible to people with disabilities. While there are currently no U.S. 
computer recycling laws, federal agencies are required to purchase energy-efficient prod-
ucts. In the United States, some federal regulations and state laws impact the disposal of 
computer hardware. In addition, some federal laws (such as the Sarbanes-Oxley Act and 
HIPAA) have established privacy and data protection standards for companies disposing 
of computer hardware that contains specific types of data. Some states have implemented 
laws related to e-waste.
Chapter Objective 5:
List some types of assistive 
hardware that can be used 
by individuals with physical 
disabilities.
Chapter Objective 6:
Suggest some ways 
computer users can 
practice green computing 
and properly dispose 
of obsolete computer 
equipment.
Chapter Objective 7: 
Discuss the current status of 
legislation related to health, 
access, and the environment 
in relation to computers.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

288
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
R EVI EW ACTIVITI E S
Instructions: Match each key term on the left with the definition on the right that best describes it.
 1.       A certification, usually by a government agency, that identifies a device as meeting 
minimal environmental performance specifications.
 2.       A condition in which the tendons on the thumb side of the wrist are swollen and 
irritated.
 3.       A device designed to easily connect a portable computer to conventional hardware, 
such as a keyboard, mouse, monitor, and printer. 
 4.       A device that elevates the display of a notebook computer to a better viewing height; 
can contain USB ports to connect additional hardware. 
 5.       A painful and crippling condition affecting the hands and wrist that can be caused by 
computer use. 
 6.       Hardware and software specifically designed for use by individuals with physical 
disabilities.
 7.       Hardware, typically an input or output device, that is designed to be more ergonomi-
cally correct than its nonergonomic counterpart.
 8.       The gap between those who have access to technology and those who do not.
 9.       The use of computers in an environmentally friendly manner. 
 10.       The problem of overusing, or being unable to stop using, the Internet.
Instructions: Circle T if the statement is true, F if the statement is false, or write the best answer 
in the space provided. Answers for the self-quiz are located in the References and Resources 
Guide at the end of the book.
 1. T F A repetitive stress injury is related to the emotional health issue of stress.
 2. T F  The ENERGY STAR program is an energy conservation program developed by the 
United States government.
 3. T F Carpal tunnel syndrome can be caused by using a computer keyboard.
 4. T F  As computer use has become more common, the potential for stress related to computer 
use has decreased.
 5. T F  Assistive technology is hardware and software designed to help all beginning computer 
users learn how to use a computer.
 6. The science of fitting a work environment to the people who work there is called       .
 7. A state of fatigue or frustration usually brought on by overwork is referred to as      .
 8. The       can be used to describe discrepancies in access to technology by individuals 
within a country, as well as to compare access from country to country.
 9. Craving more and more time at the computer can be an indicator of      .
 10.       power refers to electricity generated by the sun.
KEY TERM 
MATCHING
 a. assistive technology
 b. carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS)
 c. DeQuervain’s tendonitis
 d. digital divide
 e. docking station 
 f. eco-label
 g. ergonomic hardware
 h. green computing
 i. Internet addiction
 j. notebook stand 
SELF-QUIZ
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
289
 1. For each of the following situations, write the appropriate letter—Y (yes) or N (no)—in the blank 
to the right of the situation to indicate if the act is an example of green computing.
Situation
 a. You adjust the power settings on your computer to never go into sleep mode.
 b. Your boss requires you to print all of his e-mail messages so he can read them on paper.
 c. You drop your old mobile phone off in a recycling box instead of throwing it in the trash. 
 2. Match each term with its related example, and write the corresponding number in the blank to 
the left of each example.
 a.       Assistive hardware
 b.       Server consolidation
 c.       Docking stations
 d.       E-mail filters and flags
 3. List at least two assistive input or output devices designed for individuals with a visual 
 impairment and explain the function of each.
 4. List three possible negative physical effects that can result from computer use and describe one 
way to lessen each effect.
 5. List three possible negative effects on the environment that can result from computer use and 
describe one way to lessen each effect.
 1. It is becoming increasingly common for biometric devices to be used to grant or deny access 
to facilities, as well as to identify consumers for financial transactions. In order to facilitate 
this, some data about each participant’s biometric features must be stored in a database. How 
do you feel about your biometric characteristics being stored in a database? Does it depend 
on whether the system belongs to your bank, employer, school, or the government? Since 
 biometric features cannot be reset, are you at risk using a biometric ID system? Can the use of 
 biometric systems and other systems that require less actual use of the computer by  individuals 
help the issue of accessibility and lessen the digital divide? If, for instance, the norm for 
 controlling a computer was the voice, would that level the technological playing field for all 
individuals? Why or why not? 
 2. While gaming and texting are both popular pastimes, it is possible to become injured by per-
forming these activities. For instance, some Wii users have developed tennis elbow and other 
ailments from some Wii Sports games and heavy texters have developed problems with their 
thumbs. Think of the devices you use regularly. Have you ever become sore or injured from their 
use? If so, was it the design of the input device being used, overuse, or both? What responsibili-
ties do hardware manufacturers have in respect to creating safe input devices? If a user becomes 
injured due to overuse of a device, whose fault it is? Should input devices come with warning 
labels?
EXERCISES
Green Computing?
     
     
     
 1. Green computing
 2. Ergonomics
 3. Digital divide
 4. Information overload
DISCUSSION 
QUESTIONS
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

290
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
P R OJ E CTS
 1. E-Paper The chapter Inside the Industry box discusses e-paper—an erasable, reusable alterna-
tive to traditional paper and ink. While e-paper has many societal benefits (such as reducing 
the use of traditional paper and ink, as well as the resources needed to create and dispose of 
them), it has been slow to catch on.
For this project, research the current state of e-paper. What products are available now 
and what products are due out soon? When a new technology, such as e-paper, that has obvi-
ous benefits to society is developed, who (if anyone) should be responsible for making sure it 
gets implemented in a timely fashion? Do you think businesses or individuals will choose to 
use e-paper products if the only incentive is a cleaner environment? Or will there need to be 
economic incentives, such as savings on paper and ink surpassing the cost of e-paper? Would 
you be willing to switch to a new technology (such as e-paper) that is beneficial to society if 
it costs more than the existing technology? Is it ethical for an industry or the government to 
mandate the use of new technologies if they create an additional cost or inconvenience to indi-
viduals? At the conclusion of your research, prepare a one-page summary of your findings and 
opinions and submit it to your instructor.
 2. Section 508 Section 508 is a section of the Rehabilitation Act that refers to requirements for 
making electronic and information technology accessible to people with disabilities.
For this project, research Section 508 and the Rehabilitation Act in general to see how the 
law applies to Web site design and to whom the law applies. If you were to set up a personal 
or small business Web site, would you be legally obligated to conform to Section 508 regula-
tions? What types of features or modifications does a Web site need to include to be Section 
508 compliant? How would one go about testing to see if a Web site was Section 508 compli-
ant? Prepare a one-page summary of your findings and submit it to your instructor.
 3. Ergonomic Workspaces Some aspects of an ergonomic workspace, such as a comfortable 
chair and nonglaring light, may feel good right from the beginning. Others, such as using an 
ergonomic keyboard or wrist rest, may take a little getting used to.
For this project, find at least one local store that has some type of ergonomic  equipment—
such as adjustable office chairs, desks with keyboard drawers, ergonomic keyboards, or 
notebook stands—on display that you can try out. Test each piece, adjusting it as needed, and 
evaluate how comfortable it seems. Next, evaluate your usual computer workspace. Are there 
any adjustments you should make or any new equipment you would need to acquire to make 
your workspace setup more comfortable? Make a note of any changes you could make for 
free, as well as a list of items you would need to purchase and the estimated cost. Prepare a 
short summary of your findings to submit to your instructor. If you made any adjustments to 
your regular workspace during this project, be sure to include a comment regarding whether or 
not you think it increased your comfort.
HOT TOPICS
SHORT ANSWER/
RESEARCH
HANDS ON
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 7 HEALTH, ACCESS, AND THE ENVIRONMENT 
291
 4. Toxic Devices As discussed in the chapter, computers, mobile devices, and other hardware can 
contain a variety of toxic and hazardous materials. Is it ethical for manufacturers to continue to 
use hazardous materials in their products? What if a restriction on these compounds severely 
limited the types of electronic equipment that could be manufactured or significantly increased 
the price? Is it ethical for consumers to buy products that are made of hazardous materials or 
are not recyclable? What efforts should be made to recycle e-waste in the United States and 
who is ethically responsible for the cost—the manufacturers, the consumers, or the govern-
ment? Should the government require the recycling of e-waste? Should it ban the exportation 
of e-waste?
For this project, form an opinion about the ethical ramifications of toxic devices and 
e-waste and be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discussion 
group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). You 
may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
 5. Recycle or Trash? As mentioned in the chapter, a great deal of obsolete computing equipment 
eventually ends up in a landfill, even though there may be alternative actions that could be 
taken instead.
For this project, research what options would be available to discard the following: (1) a 
10-year-old computer that is no longer functioning, (2) a 4-year-old computer that still works 
but is too slow for your needs, and (3) a used-up toner cartridge for a laser printer. Check with 
your local schools and charitable organizations to see if they would accept any of these items. 
Check with at least one computer manufacturer and one recycling company to see if they 
would accept the computers, and, if so, what the procedure and cost would be. Check with at 
least one vendor selling recharged toner cartridges to see if it buys old cartridges or requires a 
trade-in with an order. Share your findings with the class in the form of a short presentation. 
Be sure to include any costs associated with the disposal options you found, as well as your 
recommendation for each disposal situation. The presentation should not exceed 10 minutes 
and should make use of one or more presentation aids, such as a whiteboard, handouts, or a 
computer-based slide presentation (your instructor may provide additional requirements). You 
may also be asked to submit a summary of the presentation to your instructor.
 6. Is E-Hording Bad for Us? With large amounts of storage available to us at a reasonable cost 
or even for free, many computers users today are sloppy about deleting e-mails, old  photos, 
and other digital data that they may no longer want or need. The average worker alone sends 
and receives more than 100 e-mails per day and about 90 billion spam e-mails are sent each 
day. With that kind of volume, it’s hard for anyone to keep a clean Inbox. But should we 
try? Most workers are governed by policies regarding what e-mails and documents they are 
allowed to delete, but what about our personal documents? Is there anything wrong with 
saving everything in case it might be needed again? Or does having that much clutter create 
unnecessary stress and waste our time? If we have the necessary storage, are we prudent to 
keep everything in case we need it again? Or are we just lazy? 
Pick a side on this issue, form an opinion and gather supporting evidence, and be 
 prepared to discuss and defend your position in a classroom debate or in a 1–2 page paper, 
depending on your instructor’s directions.
ETHICS IN ACTION
PRESENTATION/
DEMONSTRATION
BALANCING ACT
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

292
INTRODUCTION
expert insight on...
Computers and Society
A conversation with FRANK MOLSBERRY
Sr. Principal Engineer and Security Technologist for Dell Inc.
 
“Social media and cloud-based services are seeing explosive 
growth, but little consideration is given to the use, security, 
and privacy of the personal information stored via these 
services . . .”
My Background . . . 
I’ve been in the field of computer software and hardware development for over 30 years. I joined 
Dell in 1998 after working at IBM for 15 years. I am currently a Sr. Principal Engineer and 
Security Technologist in the End User Computing Office of the CTO. My focus area is on Security 
Architecture and Technology. In that role, I support the current engineering efforts for incorporat-
ing security hardware and software into Dell products, work with the various security technology 
companies to evaluate and influence current and planned offerings, and participate with standards 
organizations, such as the Trusted Computing Group (TCG), in the definition of future security 
standards.
In many cases, the subjects we focus on now (such as security) are not about stand-alone sys-
tems anymore, but instead involve an entire ecosystem of hardware devices, software applications, 
and the infrastructure connecting them. Because this can entail a great deal of breadth and depth of 
knowledge, I’ve found that it is important to have a “big-picture” vision and the ability to rapidly 
drill into the details as needed, but only to the level needed to answer the questions in front of you.
It’s Important to Know . . . 
The recommendations presented in these chapters are not one-time things. Managing your 
security and privacy needs to be a regular routine—like brushing your teeth.
Technology is a double-edged sword and can always have a dark side. As you develop new and 
innovative hardware or software applications, you must always look at the threats that can be brought 
against it and, more importantly, how the technology could be misused beyond its intended purpose. 
By stepping back and identifying these issues up front, the developers and users of the technology 
can be better prepared to combat it. Security is a mindset. In the same way you look at the features, 
usability, and performance of a solution, you need to specifically look at the security characteristics, 
as well.
We now have a global economy. The products and services you provide must consider a global 
culture and have the flexibility to satisfy the varying customs, rules, and requirements of a global 
economy.
How I Use this Technology . . . 
I use all the standard precautions on my personal computer, tablet, and smartphone—such as anti-
virus software, antispyware software, and backing up my data—to avoid data loss. When traveling, 
I use a privacy screen to prevent others from viewing my work and I use encryption software to 
protect the data on my devices and portable media, such as USB flash drives.
Frank Molsberry is a 
Technologist in Dell’s 
Office of the CTO. Prior 
to his current posi-
tion, he helped found 
Dell’s Workstation 
Architecture and 
Development team 
and the Enterprise 
Architecture and 
Technology Group. He 
has over 30 years of 
management and engi-
neering experience in 
the computer industry, 
a Bachelor’s degree 
in Computer Science, 
and several patents in 
the area of computer 
security. Frank is a 
Contributor Advisor to 
the Trusted Computing 
Group Board of 
Directors and does reg-
ular customer briefings 
on security and emerg-
ing technology trends.
Courtesy of Dell Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

EXPERT INSIGHT ON COMPUTERS AND SOCIETY
293
What the Future Holds . . . 
The next big thing is not usually a revolution as much as it is a continued 
progression that, when looked at over a long window of a time, shows up as 
a major change in technology or use model. So the trends of faster, smaller, 
cheaper will continue for the next decade.
The impact of security and privacy technology on society is huge. One 
issue is identity theft and the tremendous effort it takes to recover from it. 
Tasks like monitoring your credit report activity can help prevent identity 
theft or alert you to suspicious activity. Social media and cloud-based ser-
vices are seeing explosive growth, but little consideration is given to the use, 
security, and privacy of the personal information stored via these services, 
or to what happens to it when one of these entities goes out of business. One 
must ask, “Can the collection of information I provide about myself online be 
used to compromise my identity?” And, as we move toward the “Internet of Things” where 
our devices will constantly communicate, authentication of people and devices will become 
paramount. Without a solid security architecture as the base, however, this paradigm will fail.
Methods to protect the environment from the impact of technology will continue to 
expand. Major manufacturers like Dell have implemented initiatives to reduce or elimi-
nate hazardous materials like lead from their systems, and there are major programs for 
computer recycling and for returning consumables, such as printer cartridges. A possible 
development for the future is using more modular architectures, allowing the average user 
to easily change or upgrade the capabilities of a computer, TV, or printer without having to 
purchase an entirely new system.
It’s important to realize that the digital divide is not new. It occurs when each new method 
of information communication is developed, such as with the introduction of radio and televi-
sion. The continued decreases in the cost of computing, new categories of devices like tablets 
and hybrids, and improvements in wireless connectivity will help to close the current divide, 
but there may be new digital divides in the future. However, we must not lose sight of where 
information and communications fit in the hierarchy of needs. For those populations where 
the basic needs of food, clothing, and shelter are not being met, technology should help find 
solutions to those problems before focusing on broad access to computing resources. 
My Advice to Students . . . 
Computers and the ever-changing technology they are based on are just tools. It is impor-
tant not to just focus on the “coolness” of something new, but the problem it is trying to 
solve, the user experience, and the barriers to adoption.
Discussion Question
Frank Molsberry believes that developers must look at how new products could be mis-
used. Think about a few recent new technologies or products. Have they been used in an 
illegal or unethical manner? What responsibility, if any, does a developer have if its product 
is used inappropriately? Be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class 
discussion group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your  instructor’s 
directions). You may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
>For more information on Dell, visit www.dell.com. For security information, visit 
www.trustedcomputinggroup.org and searchsecurity.techtarget.com. For a summary 
of many online tech news sites, visit www.dailyrotation.com.
  Managing your 
security and privacy 
needs to be a regular 
routine—like brushing 
your teeth. 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

outline
Overview
The Computer of the Future
Emerging Hardware
The Impact of Nanotechnology
Quantum and Optical Computers
Emerging Networking 
Technologies
Monitoring Systems
New Wireless and Cloud 
Applications
Wired Networking Standards
Wireless Networking Standards
Artiﬁ cial Intelligence (AI)
What Is Artiﬁ cial Intelligence (AI)?
AI Applications
Technological Advances in 
Medicine
Brain-to-Computer Interfacing (BCI)
Telemedicine and Telesurgery
Technological Advances in the 
Military
Battleﬁ eld Robots
Exoskeleton Systems
Societal Implications of Emerging 
Technology
Emerging 
Technologies
After completing this chapter, you will be 
able to do the following:
1. Describe what the computer of the future 
might look like, including some examples 
of emerging types of hardware.
2. Understand the effect that emerging 
computer technologies, such as nanotech-
nology, quantum computers, and optical 
computers, may have on the computer of 
the future.
3. Name some emerging wired and wireless 
networking technologies.
4. Explain what is meant by the term 
 artiﬁ cial intelligence (AI) and list 
some AI applications.
5. List some new and upcoming technological 
advances in medicine.
6. Name some new and upcoming technologi-
cal advances in the military.
7. Discuss potential societal implications of 
emerging technologies.
chapter 8
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

OV E RV I EW
N
o study of computers would be complete without a look to the future. The rapid 
technological advancements that we’ve seen in the last few decades have 
been extraordinary, but some believe the best is yet to come. New advances are 
being made all the time in areas such as computer hardware, Internet applications, 
and networking technologies. In general, technology is continuing to become more 
user-friendly and more integrated into our daily lives, and that trend is expected to 
continue. For instance, imagine the following scenario: You walk up to your locked 
front door and gain access simply by touching the doorknob or speaking your 
name. When you enter a room, the lights, stereo system, and digital artwork on the 
walls change automatically to reflect your preferences. Your refrigerator and pantry 
keep up-to-the-moment inventories of their contents, and your closet automatically 
selects outfits for you based on the weather and your schedule for the day. Sounds 
like something out of a science fiction movie, doesn’t it? Yet, all the technologies 
just mentioned are either already available or in development.
Many of us are excited to see what new applications and technological improve-
ments the future will bring, as well as how computers, the Internet, and other tech-
nologies will evolve. However, our enthusiasm for this progress should be balanced 
with the understanding that some future applications may not turn out the way we 
expect or may actually have a negative impact on society. One of the biggest chal-
lenges in an era of rapidly changing technologies is evaluating the potential impact 
of new technology and trying to ensure that new products and services do not 
adversely affect our security, privacy, and safety.
This chapter focuses on some of the emerging technologies that are already 
beginning to impact our lives. Topics include the computer of the future, emerging 
networking technologies, artificial intelligence (AI), and technological advances in 
medicine and in the military. The chapter closes with a discussion of the societal 
implications of emerging technologies. ■
THE COMPUTER OF THE FUTURE
While the exact makeup of future computers is anyone’s guess, it is expected that they 
will keep getting smaller, faster, more powerful, and more user-friendly, and that they 
will eventually use voice, touch, gestures, and other alternative input methods more than 
keyboards and mice. Portable  computers and mobile devices will continue to be used as 
primary computing devices at home and work, as well as while on the go. Tomorrow’s 
home and business computers will likely not even look like today’s computers—instead 
they may be built into walls, desks, appliances, and perhaps even jewelry and clothing. In 
addition to their changing appearance, computers are expected to keep converging with 
other devices and to continue to take on multiple roles to serve our personal needs, as 
well as to control our household or office environment. Computers in the future may also 
be able to offer  multisensory output—enabling users to see, hear, feel, taste, and smell 
output—and they will likely become even more environmentally friendly.
Some examples of emerging new hardware are discussed next, followed by a dis-
cussion of some technologies that may change the overall makeup of computers in the 
future—namely, nanotechnology, quantum computers, and optical computers.
© Stockbyte/
Getty Images
Google’s new Handwrite feature 
allows you to use your finger to write 
out search queries on the device’s 
screen in order to perform a mobile 
search more quickly than using an 
on-screen keyboard, and it is likely 
more accurate than using voice input. 
To use the Handwrite feature, just 
write your search terms anywhere on 
the Google home page displayed on 
your smartphone or tablet screen.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

296
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Emerging Hardware
The overall size and appearance of computers 
seem to change on a continual basis. We now 
have fully functioning personal computers that 
are small enough to fit in a pocket or be worn 
on the body. Technologies are continuing to be 
developed to make computers and computer 
components smaller, faster, and more capable. 
Some of the exciting emerging input, process-
ing, output, and storage hardware and technol-
ogies are discussed next.
Emerging Input Devices
Because of the increasing amount of data 
entered into mobile devices today, these 
devices often have a keyboard or can be 
inserted into a keyboard dock or keyboard 
folio (see Figure 8-1) when a keyboard is 
needed. New input methods for mobile 
devices include tiny keyboards (such as on 
smart watches) that automatically zoom in on 
the part of the keyboard you touch to allow you to touch a larger key for your final selec-
tion, and the Swype app used with on-screen keyboards to supply input by continuously 
dragging through the letters in a word to spell that word (refer again to Figure 8-1). In 
addition, voice input and speech recognition capabilities are increasingly being incorpo-
rated into computers, smartphones, car navigation systems, and other devices to enable 
hands-free input. Specialty speech recognition systems are frequently used to control 
robots and other electronic equipment, such as those used by surgeons during surgical 
procedures. Touch, pen, and gesture input is beginning to be used with personal comput-
ers and is becoming the norm for mobile devices. The use of gesture input started with 
motion-sensitive gaming controllers, such as the Wii Remote and the Xbox Kinect. Today, 
gesture input is also used to detect gestures made in conjunction with large screen inter-
active advertising displays and it may soon be incorporated into computers of the future 
(see the Trend box).
One new trend in the area of touch input is the table PC—a large screen computer 
either built into a table or designed to be used on a table (such as the 27-inch table PC 
shown in Figure 8-1) and that allows multi-touch input from multiple users. Table PCs can 
be used by several individuals at once to play games together, work together on a project, 
participate in an interactive museum display together, and so forth. 
Martin Smekal, President and Founder, TabletKiosk
What do you expect to be the optimal input 
device of the future?
The launch of Apple’s iPad has brought unprec-
edented awareness of the tablet form factor and 
created wider market acceptance of touch screen 
technology. As a result, we’ve seen a sharp rise in 
companies looking to incorporate touch technology 
into their business solutions. The optimal device, 
in our opinion, will offer a range of input options 
for total flexibility—multiple touch input options, 
digital inking for handwriting recognition, voice 
 recognition, and, soon, even gesture recognition 
will be the norm.
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Courtesy TabletKiosk
TABLE PCS
KEYBOARD FOLIOS
SWIPE APP
A keyboard
is built into this
portable case.
FIGURE 8-1
Examples of 
emerging input 
devices.
<
Courtesy Logitech
Courtesy Nuance
Courtesy Lenovo
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
297
>Two-dimensional (2D) barcode. A barcode that represents data with a matrix of small squares and stores information both horizontally and 
vertically so it can hold significantly more data than a conventional one-dimensional barcode. >Augmented reality. When computer generated 
images are overlayed on top of real-time images, such as to overlay information over the photo or video displayed on a smartphone.
The digital camera capabilities built into most smartphones today allow for  several 
types of emerging input applications. For instance, they allow gesture input, as well as 
the use of two-dimensional (2D) barcodes and augmented reality applications to retrieve 
and display useful information. Two-dimensional (2D) barcodes—such as the QR (Quick 
Response) code that represents data with a matrix of small squares—store information 
both horizontally and vertically and so can hold significantly more data than conven-
tional one-dimensional barcodes. Most 2D barcodes today are designed to be used by 
consumers with smartphones. For instance, capturing the image of a QR barcode located 
on a magazine or newspaper ad, poster, or billboard with a smartphone’s camera could 
enable the consumer’s smartphone to load a Web page, dial a phone number or send 
a text message (to enter a contest, for example), display a video clip or photo (stored 
either in the code or online), download a coupon or ticket, or Like a Facebook page (see 
Figure 8-2). QR codes can also be used to transfer contact information to a phone or 
add an event to an online calendar. Augmented reality is another emerging smartphone 
application. With augmented reality, computer-generated images are overlayed on top 
of real-time images. Today, Web-based content is typically displayed over the images 
seen through a smartphone’s camera and displayed on the smartphone. The content is 
FIGURE 8-2
Most smartphones 
can read 2D 
barcodes.
<
Courtesy SPARQCode
Perceptual Computing
In the 2002 futuristic movie Minority Report, Tom Cruise 
changes the images on his display by gesturing with his hands. 
While it was ﬁ ction in the movie, it is now just about a reality. 
Enter the trend of perceptual computing where users control 
their devices with three dimensional (3D) gestures, voice com-
mands, and facial expressions instead of with traditional input 
devices like the keyboard and mouse.
Gesture input itself isn’t new—it’s been used in various forms 
for several years with devices such as the Nintendo Wii, Xbox 
Kinect, and the Apple iPhone and in large screen consumer gam-
ing and advertising applications; it is also an important compo-
nent of the Windows 8 operating system. But the  gesture-input 
systems of the future are expected to be much more sophisti-
cated and combined with other types of input to allow users to 
more naturally control their computers and to allow the devices 
to adapt to each individual’s need. For example, a computer or 
phone could offer to make a game easier if a player appears frus-
trated or could offer to turn the page on a tablet displaying a 
recipe if the hands of the person cooking are covered with ﬂ our. 
One recent step in this direction is the Leap 3D System 
shown in the accompanying photograph. It is an iPod-sized 
box that connects to a computer via a USB port and creates 
an eight-cubic-foot 3D interactive space inside which users can 
swipe, grab, pinch (refer again to the photo), and move objects 
around as if they were using a touch screen, except that they are 
not actually touching the screen. And noncontact systems such 
as this have additional advantages, such as being able to use 3D 
gestures instead of just 2D gestures, avoiding the ﬁ ngerprint and 
germ issues related to public keyboard and touch screen use, 
allowing for full body input, and enabling input to be performed 
from a slight distance (such as from a nearby chair or through a 
glass storefront window).
T R E N D
Courtesy Leap Motion
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

298
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
typically based on the user’s location (determined by the smartphone’s GPS), the video 
feed from the smartphone’s camera, a digital compass, and other data obtained from the 
smartphone. Displaying this information requires a mobile AR browser or an appropri-
ate mobile AR app. Some initial mobile augmented reality apps include overlaying home 
listing information over the video images displayed as a phone is pointing at houses in a 
neighborhood, displaying stats and player information as a phone is pointing at a sporting 
event, and displaying activity opportunities (such as restaurant, movie, museum, or shop-
ping information) as a phone is pointing at a business district.
For making electronic payments while on the go, use of Near Field Com munication 
(NFC) technology is expected to grow in the near future. NFC uses RFID technology 
to facilitate communication between devices, including transferring payment information, 
receipts, boarding passes, and other information wirelessly between payment terminals 
and smartphones. Worldwide, vending machines are also increasingly going cashless, sup-
porting only NFC, credit cards, and other electronic payment methods, instead of cash.
Emerging Processing Technologies
Computers and CPU manufacturers are continually working to develop ways 
to make computers work better, faster, more reliably, and more efficiently. 
For example, new designs for motherboards and CPUs are always under 
development, computer components are continually being built smaller so more 
power and capabilities can be contained in the same size package, new materials 
are being used, and new technologies are being developed on a continual 
basis. For instance, the new USB 3.0 standard allows peripheral devices to 
communicate with a computer at more than 10 times the speed of USB 2.0. And, 
for integrating CPUs and other computer components into clothing and other 
flexible materials, as well as for creating flexible devices (such as the flexible 
smartphone screens that are expected to be available soon), flexible electronic 
components (see Figure 8-3) are needed and are currently being developed. 
In addition to the ability to be bent without damaging the circuitry, flexible circuits 
will be thinner, lighter, generate little heat, and consume significantly less energy than 
conventional processors.
For packing an increasing number of components onto small chips, the three-
dimensional (3D) chip is one emerging technology. Typically, 3D chips are created by 
layering individual silicon wafers on top of one another, which cuts down on the surface 
area required. 3D chips are now being used with memory, flash memory, and CPUs. For 
example, recent Intel CPUs (such as third-generation Core processors) include a 3D 
transistor called Tri-Gate (see the illustration in Figure 8-4). Tri-Gate transistors provide 
increased performance and low voltage, making them ideal for use in small devices, such 
as mobile devices. In addition, Samsung recently announced the release of the world’s 
first mass-produced 3D flash memory chip. By using a special 
etching technology to drill down through the chip layers to connect 
them electronically, Samsung plans to eventually produce chips with 
24 layers.
One hurdle in 3D chip development, as well as in other means 
of packing an increasing amount of technology into a smaller system 
unit, is the amount of heat generated. Because heat can damage com-
ponents and cooler chips can run faster, virtually all computers today 
employ fans, heat sinks (small components usually made out of alu-
minum with fins that help to dissipate heat), or other methods to cool 
the CPU and system unit. Mobile device cases today aren’t designed 
for fans and so their cooling systems typically rely on using mobile 
CPUs that run cooler than desktop CPUs and on adapting the speed 
and power of the device’s components to cool the device as needed. 
However, as the speed and capabilities of mobile devices continue to 
© YOSHIKAZU TSUNO/AFP/Getty Images
FIGURE 8-4
3D chips. In this 3D 
transistor, the electrical 
current (represented 
by the yellow dots) 
flows on three sides of 
a vertical fin.
<
FIGURE 8-3
Flexible electronics.
<
Courtesy Intel Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
299
>Nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM). Memory chips that do not lose their contents when the power to the computer is turned off.
increase, additional cooling methods may become necessary and 
are currently under development. Liquid cooling systems consist 
of liquid (often a water solution) filled tubes that draw heat away 
from processors and other critical components, and they can be 
designed to cool between the layers of 3D chips, as well as to 
cool the inside of the system unit. An emerging possibility for 
cooling servers is immersion cooling where the hardware is actu-
ally submerged into units filled with a liquid cooling solution 
(refer to Figure 8-5).
As demand by consumers and businesses for online soft-
ware, services, and  media-rich experiences continues to increase, 
some experts predict that tera-scale computing—the ability of 
a computer to process one trillion floating point operations per 
second ( teraflops)—will eventually be more common. While 
supercomputers currently reach teraflop and petaflop (1,000 tera-
flops) speeds, much of today’s tera-scale research is focusing on 
creating multi-core processors with tens to hundreds of cores used in conjunction with 
multithreaded hardware and  software that can execute multiple streams of instructions—
threads—at the same time in order to achieve teraflop performance. The research also 
includes working on developing higher-speed communications between computers, such 
as between Web servers and high- performance mobile devices or computers, to help facili-
tate high-performance cloud  computing. Intel, one of the leaders in tera-scale research, has 
created a teraflop  processor that contains 80 cores to test strategies for moving terabytes of 
data rapidly from core to core and between cores and memory. It has also developed a 20 
MB SRAM  memory chip that is attached directly to the processor in order to speed up com-
munication between processors and memory. This design allows thousands of intercon-
nections, which enable data to travel at more than one terabyte per second (TBps) between 
memory and the  processor cores. It is expected that this speed will be needed to handle the 
terabytes of data used by applications in the near future. In fact, exascale computers that 
perform 1 million trillion calculations per second and may have as many as 100 million 
CPU cores are expected to appear by 2018.
For memory improvements, several forms of nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM)—that 
is, memory that retains its data when the power to the device is off—are either becom-
ing  available or under development. For instance, magnetic RAM (commonly referred 
to as MRAM) uses magnetic polarization rather than an electrical charge to store data, 
 memristor-based RAM uses memristors (short for memory resistors) that change their resis-
tance in response to current flowing through them, NRAM uses carbon nanotubes (discussed 
later in this chapter), and PRAM (phase change random access memory) has a special coating 
that changes its physical state when heat is applied (similar to the rewritable CDs and DVDs 
discussed in Chapter 2). The most common applications for nonvolatile RAM today include 
storing critical data for enterprise systems as they operate to guard against data loss and sav-
ing the data necessary to help industrial automation and robotics systems recover quickly 
from a power loss. Other emerging applications include “instant-on” computers and mobile 
devices that can be turned on and off like an electric light, without any loss of data. Another 
advantage of nonvolatile RAM is that it doesn’t require power to retain data so, when used in 
mobile devices, it consumes less power, which can extend battery life. It is expected that, in 
the future, a form of nonvolatile RAM will replace volatile RAM, flash memory chips, and 
possibly even hard drives in computers. As capacities increase (Crossbar recently announced 
the development of a 1 TB NVRAM chip), that day may be getting closer.
FIGURE 8-5
Immersion cooling 
systems. Can be used 
to cool servers in large 
data centers.
<
Courtesy Green Revolution Cooling
To more easily fit into the shrinking 
notebook and tablet PC form 
factor, fans the size and thickness 
of a credit card are in development 
and expected to become available 
before 2015.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

300
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
Emerging Output Devices
Some of the most recent improvements in display technology center on more versatile 
output devices and new flat-screen technologies. For instance, recent improvements 
in flat-panel display technology and graphics processing have led to several emerging 
 three-dimensional (3D) output devices, including 3D display screens for computers. 
While traditional 3D displays (and most 3D televisions today) require special 3D glasses, 
the newest 3D computer display products use  filters, prisms, multiple lenses, and other 
technologies built into the display screen to  create the 3D effect and, as a result, do not 
require 3D glasses. Some 3D displays resemble  conventional monitors; others are shaped 
differently, such as the dome-shaped Perspecta 3D display that is used primarily for 
medical imaging. 3D consumer products are increasingly available as well, such as the 
Nintendo 3DS handheld gaming device. 
Another emerging 3D output device is the 3D projector. Some 3D projectors are 
designed to project 3D images that are viewed with 3D glasses, similar to 3D televi-
sions. Others are designed to project actual 3D projections or holograms. For instance, 
holograms of individuals and objects can be projected onto a stage for a presentation, and 
hologram display devices can be used in retail stores, exhibitions, and other locations to 
showcase products or other items in 3D. Another emerging projection option that can be 
used to project content to a small audience while on the go is the pico projector. These 
pocket-sized projectors typically connect to a smartphone or portable computer to enable 
the device to project an image (such as a document, presentation, or movie) onto a wall 
or other flat surface from up to 12 feet away. Pico projectors are also beginning to be 
integrated directly into mobile devices (see the Samsung Beam projector phone shown in 
Figure 8-6).
When permanent 3D output is required, such as to print a 3D model of a new building 
or prototype of a new product, 3D printers (which typically form output in layers using 
molten plastic during a series of passes to build a 3D version of the desired output—see 
Figure 8-6) can be used. 3D printers are becoming available in a variety of sizes, from 
personal printers for printing smartphone cases, toys, jewelry, and other personal objects 
to professional printers for printing working product prototypes or custom manufacturing 
parts. They have even begun to be used to print medical implants using FDA-approved 
3D material. One issue with the increased availability of 3D printers is the risk of them 
being used to print dangerous or illegal items, such as working plastic guns. In fact, after a 
3D-printed gun was recently demonstrated firing standard bullets, lawmakers are consider-
ing enacting legislation to ban plastic weapons created by 3D printers. 
3D PRINTERS
This printer can print objects up to the size of
a standard basketball.
PICO PROJECTORS
Can be stand-alone or built into a mobile device; images
from the mobile device (such as the smartphone shown here)
are projected onto any surface.
INTEGRATED PRINTERS
This printer uses no ink and is integrated into
the digital camera to print digital photographs.
FIGURE 8-6
Some emerging 
output devices.
<
NASA is preparing to launch a 
3D printer into space in 2014 
in order to enable astronauts to 
print tools, spare parts, rocket 
pieces, and even small satellites 
using spools of plastic strands.
TIP
Researchers at Intel Labs predict 
that much of the Internet will use 
realistic-looking 3D applications 
by 2020.
TIP
Courtesy Samsung
Courtesy ZINK Imaging
Courtesy 3D Systems, Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
301
>Organic light emitting diode (OLED) display. A type of flat-panel display that uses emissive organic material to display brighter and sharper 
images than LCDs.
The capabilities of ink-jet printers are also expanding. For instance, ink-jet tech-
nology may eventually be used for dispensing liquid metals, aromas, computer chips 
and other circuitry, and even “printing” human tissue and other organic materials 
for medical purposes. In addition, printers are beginning to be integrated into other 
devices, such as the camera in Figure 8-6 that contains an integrated ZINK printer. 
Unlike conventional printers, ZINK printers use no ink; instead, they use special paper 
that is coated with special color dye crystals. Before printing, the embedded dye crys-
tals are clear, so ZINK Paper looks like regular white photo paper. The ZINK printer 
uses heat to activate and colorize these dye crystals when a photo is printed, creating a 
full-color image.
For display screens used with computers, mobile devices, and other electronic 
devices, there are a number of technologies under development designed to cre-
ate displays that are more visible, while at the same time using less energy. Some of 
these technologies are based on organic light emitting diode (OLED) technology. 
Organic light emitting diode (OLED) displays use layers of organic material, which 
emit a visible light when electric current is applied. While conventional flat-panel displays 
based on LCD (liquid crystal display) technology do not produce light and so require 
backlighting, OLEDs emit a visible light and, therefore, do not use backlighting. This 
characteristic makes OLEDs more energy efficient than LCDs and lengthens the battery 
life of portable devices using OLED displays. Other advantages of OLEDs are that they 
are thinner than LCDs, they have a wider viewing angle than LCDs and so displayed con-
tent is visible from virtually all directions, and their images are brighter and sharper than 
LCDs. Today, OLED displays are incorporated into many digital cameras, mobile phones, 
portable digital media players, Google Glass, and other consumer devices. They are also 
beginning to appear in television and computer displays and are expected to be more 
prominent in the near future.
Special types of OLEDs also support applications not possible with CRT or LCD 
technology. For instance, flexible OLED (FOLED) displays are built on flexible surfaces, 
such as plastic or metallic foil, and so they can roll up when not in use (see Figure 8-7). 
Flexible screens may also be used for integrating displays on military uniform sleeves, as well 
as allowing retractable wall-mounted large screen displays. Transparent OLED (TOLED) 
displays are transparent. 
The portion of the display 
that does not currently have 
an image displayed (and 
the entire display device 
when it is off) is nearly as 
transparent as glass, so the 
user can see through the 
screen. TOLEDs open up 
the possibility of displays 
on 
home 
windows, 
car windshields, helmet 
face shields, and other 
transparent items.
Another emerging flat-
panel display technology is 
interferometric modulator 
(IMOD) displays. Designed 
Another emerging option in display 
technology is the USB monitor, 
which connects to a computer via 
a USB port. Conventional monitors 
can also connect to a computer via 
a USB display adapter, enabling 
multiple monitors to be connected to 
a computer without requiring a new 
video card.
TIP
White OLED displays are in 
development for use with light bulbs.
TIP
FOLEDS
Used to create ﬂexible displays on plastic or another
type of ﬂexible material.
IMODS
Display is bright and readable, even in direct
sunlight.
FIGURE 8-7
Some emerging 
display 
technologies.
<
Courtesy of Universal Display Corporation
Courtesy of QUALCOMM MEMS Technologies, Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

302
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
initially for mobile phones and other portable devices, IMOD dis-
plays use external light, such as from the sun or artificial light 
inside a building, to display images so images are bright and clear 
even in direct sunlight (refer again to Figure 8-7). And, because 
backlighting isn’t used, power consumption is much less than 
what is needed for LCD displays. In fact, similar to the e-paper 
discussed in the Chapter 7 Inside the Industry box, devices using 
IMOD displays use no power unless the image changes, which 
means they can remain on at all times without draining the device 
battery. Beginning to be used with mobile devices, IMODs could 
eventually be used for outdoor television screens, large digital 
signs, and other outdoor display devices that normally consume a 
great deal of power.
While most displays are designed to be looked at from at 
least several inches away, some displays are designed to be 
wearable. A wearable display usually projects the image from 
a mobile device (such as a smartphone or media tablet) to a 
display screen built into the glasses via a wireless connection. 
Typically, the technology allows the user to see the image as 
if it is on a distant large screen display, and many wearable 
displays overlay the projected image on top of what the user is seeing in real time to 
provide augmented reality. For example, the Google Glass eyeglasses-based display 
shown in Figure 8-8 has a tiny display located where the right lens would be and users 
can see content projected on that screen in front of what they are seeing normally. 
Google Glass is typically connected (via Bluetooth) to a smartphone and then content 
(such as text messages, maps and directions, video calls, and Web pages) is streamed 
from that phone to the Google Glass display. Google Glass also has a built-in Web 
browser and can connect directly to a Wi-Fi hotspot when needed, has a touch-sensitive 
pad on the right side of the frame for input, and a bone-conductive audio output system 
so that audio output is heard only by the user. In addition to consumer wearable dis-
plays that have entertainment and productiv-
ity applications (such as being able to access 
GPS directions as needed or to monitor your 
e-mail during a meeting), there are also wear-
able displays designed for soldiers and other 
mobile workers.
Emerging Storage Devices
Improvements in magnetic disk technol-
ogy are continuing to increase the data that 
can be stored on hard drives. Traditionally, 
the magnetic particles on a hard disk have 
been aligned horizontally, parallel to the 
hard disk’s surface (referred to as longitudi-
nal magnetic recording). To increase capac-
ity and reliability, most new hard drives 
today use perpendicular magnetic recording
(PMR), in which the bits are placed upright to 
allow them to be closer together than is pos-
sible with a horizontal layout. For instance, 
PMR currently allows a recording density up 
to 1 terabit per square inch (Tb/inch2), which 
results in internal hard drives with capacities 
up to about 4 TB of storage for a 3.5-inch 
Courtesy of Seagate Technology LLC
AS K TH E E X PE RT
Josh Tinker, Product Planning Manager, 
Seagate Technology
Should my next computer have a magnetic 
hard drive or an SSD?
Your storage options for a new PC include traditional 
hard drives (HDDs), solid-state drives (SSDs), and the 
newer solid-state hybrid drives (SSHDs). Selecting 
what is right for you is a trade-off between price, 
 performance, and capacity.
 
➤SSDs have maximized PC performance and very 
good shock resistance, but are low capacity and 
pricey.
 
➤HDDs have the lowest cost and high capacity but 
have average performance.
 
➤SSHDs have SSD-like performance and high 
capacity, but have a small price premium.
Content from a 
smartphone or the
Internet appears in
your line of vision.
Display is built
into the Glass 
frames.
Courtesy Google
FIGURE 8-8
Google Glass.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
303
>Holographic storage. An emerging type of storage technology that uses multiple blue laser beams to store data in three dimensions.
hard drive, 1 TB for a 2.5-inch hard drive, and 100 GB for a 1-inch hard drive. To allow 
for higher capacities, new hard drive technologies are under development. For instance, 
shingled magnetic recording (SMR), which squeezes more data onto disks by overlap-
ping the data tracks on them like the shingles on a roof, is expected to become available 
sometime in 2014 and offer increased capacities. Another option for the future is Heat-
Assisted Magnetic Recording (HAMR), which uses lasers to temporarily heat the surface 
of the hard disks when storing data in order to pack more data onto the surface than is 
normally possible—it is expected to boost the storage capacity of a 3.5-inch hard drive 
to 60 TB by 2016.
One high-capacity storage possibility that, after many years of research and devel-
opment, is just about a reality is holographic storage. Holographic drives record data 
onto holographic discs or holographic cartridges. To record data, the holographic 
drive splits the light from a blue laser beam into two beams (a reference beam whose 
angle determines the address used to store data at that particular location on the storage 
medium and a signal beam that contains the data). The signal beam passes through a 
device called a spatial light modulator (SLM), which translates the data’s 0s and 1s into 
a hologram—a three-dimensional representation of data in the form of a checkerboard 
pattern of light and dark pixels. The two beams intersect within the recording medium 
to store the holographic image at that location (see Figure 8-9) by changing the optical 
density of the medium.
 Data stored on a holographic medium is arranged into pages of data containing 1.5 
million bits each. An entire page of data can be stored at one time in a single flash of light, 
so holographic storage systems are very fast. And, because the hologram goes through 
Researchers recently demonstrated 
the ability to store data in 5D in 
synthetic crystals—this technology 
may eventually result in discs that 
can store 360 TB each and that are 
stable enough to last essentially 
forever.
TIP
Reference beam
Signal beam
Spatial light
modulator (SLM)
Laser
Storage medium
Detector
1.  A laser beam is used
 
to write or read data.
2.  The beam is split into two beams (a reference
 
 beam and a signal beam) here, which intersect
 
 again at the storage medium.
4.   When data needs to
 
 be read, it is projected
 
 onto a detector to be
 
 reconstructed.
HOW HOLOGRAPHIC
STORAGE WORKS
HOLOGRAPHIC DRIVES AND CARTRIDGES
Holographic
cartridge
Holographic
drive
3.  Data is converted into a
 
 hologram, which is stored
 
 where the beams intersect
 
 in the storage medium.
FIGURE 8-9
Holographic 
storage. Holographic 
drives store more than 
one million bits of data 
in a single flash of light.
<
Courtesy of Signal Lake
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

304
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Nanotechnology. The science of creating tiny computers and components by working at the individual atomic and molecular levels. >Carbon 
nanotubes (CNTs). Tiny, hollow tubes made of carbon atoms.
the entire thickness of the medium, much more data can be stored on a holographic disc 
or cartridge than on a CD, DVD, or BD of the same physical size. In fact, hundreds of 
holograms can be stored in an overlapping manner in the same area of the medium—a 
different reference beam angle or  position is used for each hologram so it can be uniquely 
stored and retrieved when needed. To read data, the reference beam projects the hologram 
containing the requested data onto a detector that reads the entire data page at one time. 
Holographic storage systems will initially use removable recordable holographic discs 
that hold 300 GB to 500 GB per disc; most systems can hold multiple discs for increased 
storage capacity. Holographic data storage systems are particularly suited to applications 
in which large amounts of data need to be stored or retrieved quickly but rarely changed, 
such as for business data archiving, high-speed digital video delivery, and image process-
ing for medical, video, and military purposes.
The Impact of Nanotechnology
Although there are varying definitions, most agree that nanotechnology involves creating 
computer components, machines, and other structures that are less than 100 nanometers in 
size. Consequently, today’s CPUs contain components that fit the definition of nanotech-
nology. However, some experts believe that, eventually, current technology will reach its 
limits. At that point, transistors and other computer components may need to be built at 
the atomic and molecular level; that is, starting with single atoms or molecules to construct 
the components. Prototypes of computer products built in this fashion include a single 
atom transistor, which is a single switch that can be turned on and off like a transistor but 
is made from a single organic molecule, as well as tiny nickel-based nanodots that would, 
theoretically, allow about 5 TB of data to be stored on a hard drive roughly the size of a 
postage stamp. In other nanotechnology developments, prototypes of tiny nanogenerators 
have been developed that can be squeezed to generate power; they are expected to eventu-
ally be able to power mobile devices with low-frequency vibrations, such as a heartbeat or 
a simple body movement like walking. And researchers are looking at DNA as a possible 
long-term high-density archiving storage option and, in fact, have already encoded a 
variety of data—including Shakespeare’s sonnets, a JPEG photo, and an MP3 record-
ing of Martin Luther King Jr.’s “I Have a Dream” speech—into DNA material by trans-
lating the data into binary 0s and 1s and then rewriting that data as strings of DNA’s 
chemical bases and storing it in DNA. For a look at a recent nanotechnology develop-
ment that may lead to new and improved glass on your future mobile phone, see the 
Technology and You box.
One nanotechnology development that is already being used in a variety of 
products available today is carbon nanotubes (CNTs), which are tiny, hollow tubes 
made up of carbon atoms. The wall of a single-walled carbon nanotube is only one 
carbon atom thick and the tube diameter is approximately 10,000 times smaller than 
a human hair. Carbon nanotubes have great potential for future computing products 
because they conduct electricity better than copper, are 100 times stronger than steel 
at one-sixth the weight, conduct heat better than diamonds, and transmit electronic 
impulses faster than silicon. One recent development is carbon nanotube fibers 
that look and act like thread but conduct heat and electricity like a metal wire (see 
Figure 8-10). According to the researchers, these fibers are expected to eventually 
be used in new products for the aerospace, automotive, medical, and smart-clothing 
markets. 
FIGURE 8-10
Carbon nanotubes. 
This light bulb is 
powered and held in 
place by two carbon 
nanotube fibers.
<
© Jeff Fitlow/Rice University
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
305
CNT products currently on the market include lithium ion batteries, and 
several nanotube-based computing products—like nanotube-based display screens 
and memory—are currently under development. In addition, IBM researchers are 
experimenting with a combination of DNA molecules and carbon nanotubes to make 
smaller, more powerful, and more energy-efficient computer chips. Because carbon 
nanotubes can transmit electricity and are transparent, they are also being used for 
product development in the areas of TVs, solar cells, light bulbs, and other similar 
noncomputing applications. In addition, because of their strength and lightness for 
their size, carbon nanotubes are being integrated into products that benefit from those 
characteristics, such as automobile panels, airplanes, tennis rackets, and racing bikes. 
In fact, the Army recently initiated a two-year program to develop carbon nanotube 
products to replace conventional copper-based wires and cables in aircraft. Carbon 
nanotubes are also beginning to be combined with other materials, such as plastic, 
to increase the durability of materials used to produce other consumer items, such as 
surfboards.
Two recent developments are nanofilters that can remove contaminants from water 
sources and nanosensors that can detect cancer-causing toxins or cancer drugs inside 
single living cells. Possible future applications of nanotechnology include disposing of 
e-waste by rearranging dangerous components at the atomic level into inert substances, 
nanosponges that can enter the bloodstream and soak up toxins, improved military uni-
forms that protect against bullets and germ warfare, and computers and sensors that are 
small enough to be woven into the fibers of clothing or embedded into paint and other 
materials. Some of the devices generated by nanotechnology research may contain or be 
constructed out of organic material. 
“Magic” Glass
A smartphone with a non-glare, self-cleaning screen? That 
could be the wave of the future based on a recent development 
by MIT researchers. By creating nano-sized conical patterns on 
the surface of the glass using coating and etching techniques, 
the researchers were able to eliminate its reﬂ ective properties, 
resulting in glass that resists fogging and glare (see the accom-
panying illustration) and is even self-cleaning.
In addition to making it easier to use mobile devices outdoors, 
the technology has a host of other possible applications, such as 
being used for eyeglasses, televisions, car windshields, and even 
windows in buildings. It could also be applied to solar  panels, 
which can lose as much as 40% of their efﬁ ciency within three 
months due to dust and dirt accumulating on their surfaces. 
But, for most people, it will likely be the possibility of a tablet or 
 smartphone with glass that eliminates reﬂ ections and cleans itself 
of ﬁ ngerprints that gets the most attention.
T E C H N O LO GY A N D YOU
MIT GLASS
NORMAL GLASS
MIT “magic” glass vs. normal glass. The normal half of this 
piece of glass (right) can fog up and produce glare; the MIT glass 
half (left) remains clear.
Courtesy KYOO-CHUL PARK and HYUNGRYUL CHOI
Data stored in DNA uses densities 
that are at least 1,000 times greater 
than current storage media—about 
2.2 PB per gram. At that rate, if you 
took everything human beings have 
ever written (an estimated 50 PB of 
text) and stored it in DNA, it would 
weigh less than a granola bar.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

306
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Quantum computing. A technology that applies the principles of quantum physics and quantum mechanics to computers to direct atoms or 
nuclei to work together as quantum bits (qubits), which function simultaneously as the computer’s processor and memory. >Optical computer. 
A computer that uses light, such as from laser beams or infrared beams, to perform digital computations.
Quantum and Optical Computers
Computers a few decades from now will likely use technology that is very different from 
the silicon chips and electronic bits and bytes we are accustomed to today. In addition 
to being miniature—based on nanotechnology—and likely incorporated into a variety of 
everyday devices, computers in the future may be quantum or optical computers.
Quantum Computing
The idea of quantum computing emerged in the 1970s, and it has received renewed 
interest lately. Quantum computing applies the principles of quantum physics and 
quantum mechanics to computers, going beyond traditional physics to work at the 
subatomic level. Quantum computers differ from conventional computers in that they 
utilize atoms or nuclei working together as quantum bits or qubits. Qubits function 
simultaneously as both the computer’s processor and memory, and each qubit can 
represent more than just the two states (one and zero) available to today’s  electronic 
bits; a qubit can even represent many states at one time. Quantum computers can 
perform computations on many numbers at one time, making them, theoretically, 
exponentially faster than conventional computers. Physically, quantum computers in 
the future might consist of a thimbleful of liquid whose atoms are used to perform 
calculations as instructed by an external device.
Even though quantum computers are still in the pioneering stage, working quan-
tum computers do exist. For instance, in 2001 the researchers at IBM’s Almaden 
Research Center created a 7-qubit quantum computer (see Figure 8-11) composed 
of the nuclei of seven atoms that can interact with each other and be programmed 
by radio frequency pulses. This quantum computer successfully factored the  number 
15—not a complicated computation for a conventional computer, but the fact that 
a quantum computer was able to understand the problem and compute the correct 
answer is viewed as a highly significant event in the area of quantum computer 
research. One of the obstacles to creating a fully functional quantum computer has been the 
inability of qubits to hold information for long periods of time. Recently, UCLA scientists 
developed a new technique for cooling molecules, which may be applied to future quantum 
computers in order to bring the molecules to the state at which they can be manipulated to 
store and transmit data. In addition, scientists in Australia have created a silicon quantum bit 
using a single atom—this development is viewed as a big step forward in the development 
of silicon-based quantum computers. These breakthroughs are viewed as significant steps 
toward the ability to create more sophisticated working quantum computers in the future.
Quantum computing is not well suited for general computing tasks but it is ideal for, 
and expected to be widely used in, highly data-intensive applications, such as encryption 
and code breaking.
Optical Computing
Optical chips, which use light waves to transmit data, are also currently in development. A 
possibility for the future is the optical computer—a computer that uses light, such as from 
laser beams or infrared beams, to perform digital computations. Because light beams do not 
interfere with each other, optical computers can be much smaller and faster than electronic 
computers. For instance, according to one NASA senior research scientist, an optical 
computer could solve a problem in one hour that would take an electronic computer 11 
years to solve. While some researchers are working on developing an all-optical computer, 
others believe that a mix of optical and electronic components—or an opto-electronic 
FIGURE 8-11
Quantum computers. 
The vial of liquid shown 
here contains the 
7-qubit computer used 
by IBM researchers 
in 2001 to perform 
the most complicated 
computation by a 
quantum computer to 
date—factoring the 
number 15.
<
Image reproduced by permission of IBM Research, Almaden 
Research Center. Unauthorized use not permitted.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
307
computer—may be the best bet for the future. Opto-electronic technology is already 
being used to improve long-distance fiber-optic communications. Initial opto-electronic 
computer applications are expected to be applied to the area of speeding up communications 
between  computers and other devices, as well as between computer components. In fact, 
IBM recently created chips that have both optical and electrical functions combined on a 
single  silicon chip and that use standard semiconductor processes—a feat that was thought 
to be impossible until recently. One additional benefit of opto-electronic chips is reduced 
power consumption. While increased bandwidth (such as between servers, between CPU 
cores, or between the CPU and memory) increases power consumption using electrical 
connections, the impact is much less with opto-electronic chips because they move data 
with light instead of electricity.
EMERGING NETWORKING 
TECHNOLOGIES
Improvements are being made on a continual basis to both wired and 
wireless networking technologies to increase speed and connectivity 
options for local area networks (LANs) and Internet connections, as well 
as to support the continued growth in Internet-based multimedia and 
communications applications used by computers and mobile devices that 
require fast, dependable connections, such as Voice over IP (VoIP), video-
on-demand (VOD), video calls, mobile TV, and teleconferencing. For 
instance, one new improvement to videoconferencing technology to make 
it more closely mimic a real-time meeting environment is referred to as 
telepresence videoconferencing. Although telepresence videoconferencing 
setups are expensive, with travel becoming increasingly more expensive 
and time consuming, many businesses view videoconferencing as a viable 
replacement for face-to-face meetings. Telepresence videoconferencing 
is also used in educational settings (for instance, the system shown 
in Figure  8-12 is installed at the Wharton School campuses in both 
Philadelphia and San Francisco to hold bicoastal classes).
Monitoring Systems
Some emerging networking applications involve location information, such as the geo-
browsing and geofencing applications  discussed in the Chapter 3 How It Works box and 
monitoring systems that utilize GPS. For instance, vehicle monitor-
ing  systems are available that can be installed in cars by parents and 
employers to monitor the location and use of the vehicles (by teenag-
ers or employees, respectively) using networking technology; child 
monitoring systems allow parents to monitor the physical locations 
of their children. Both types of monitoring systems typically record a 
location history; many also allow the location of a vehicle or child to 
be tracked in real time via a Web site or mobile app (see Figure 8-13). 
Some systems can even be used to set up a “ virtual fence” for a child 
or a car or a maximum allowable car speed; the  parent or employer 
is notified (usually via a text  message) anytime the child or vehicle 
leaves the prescribed geographical area or exceeds the designated 
speed. Child monitoring systems often include additional features, 
such as the ability to have the child’s location pushed to the par-
ent’s device at regular intervals, the ability to have the parent notified 
if the child is within 500 feet of a registered sex offender, and an 
“SOS” button that the child can press if he or she is lost or afraid. 
The child monitoring system shown in Figure 8-13 is also available 
Students in this
classroom see a life-
sized projected image
of the professor.
The instructor sees a projected image
of these students, who appear to be
seated behind the students physically
located in the professor’s classroom.
FIGURE 8-13
GPS-based child 
monitoring systems. 
Allow parents to track 
their children in real 
time.
<
FIGURE 8-12
Telepresence 
videoconferencing.
<
Child’s current (green)
and past (red) locations.
Locations of registered
offenders.
Courtesy Cisco Systems, Inc.
Courtesy Amber Alert GPS; © Chardchanin/Shutterstock.com
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

308
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
as a smartphone app for teenagers. Similar GPS systems are designed to be 
used to track elderly parents or by individuals who are hiking or traveling so 
they can be located if they become lost or injured.
Other monitoring systems are designed for use in the home. For instance, 
home health monitoring systems are designed to monitor elderly or infirm 
individuals (such as by taking the vital signs of the individual or prompt-
ing him or her to answer questions about food or medication consumed that 
day) and to notify someone if a possible problem is detected. Other home 
monitoring systems use sensors—devices that respond to a stimulus (such 
as heat, light, or pressure) and generate an electrical signal that can be mea-
sured or interpreted. For example, smart door locks allow you to unlock your 
front door with your smartphone and the thermostat shown in Figure 8-14 
contains temperature, humidity, activity, and light sensors; can be controlled 
via a mobile app; and can be programmed based on your activity within the 
home. IBM expects to see the use of sensor technology expanding to addi-
tional areas in the future, such as nano-sized sensors embedded in paint that 
help manage the energy use of a building or as a coating applied to plumbing systems to 
detect leaks and other potential problems.
New Wireless and Cloud Applications
Improved networking technology has also created a host of new wireless networking appli-
cations. For instance, wireless displays connect to a computer or other device (such as to a 
smartphone, as in Figure 8-15) using a wireless networking connection. Once connected, 
either all content or selected content from the source device is displayed on the wireless 
display. Printers are also increasingly using a wireless connection and, if your printer has 
Internet access, you can print content from your smartphone, media tablet, or other mobile 
device to your home or office printer from any location with Internet access (refer again 
to Figure 8-15); you can also send printouts wirelessly to public printers, such as those 
located at airports, libraries, office stores, and shipping stores such as FedEx Office and 
the UPS Store.
Wired Networking Standards
Ethernet is the most widely used standard for wired networks. It was invented in the 
mid-1970s and has  continued to evolve over the years to support faster speeds. The most 
 common Ethernet standards for LANs today are Fast Ethernet, which supports data 
 transfer rates of up to 100 Mbps; Gigabit Ethernet, which is even faster at 1,000 Mbps 
(1 Gbps); and 10 Gigabit Ethernet, which supports data transfer rates of 10 Gbps. The 
It has been predicted that 
50 billion devices (essentially 
anything with an on-off switch) 
will be connected to the Internet 
by 2020, creating the Internet of 
Things (IoT ).
TIP
Courtesy Nest Labs
FIGURE 8-14
Smart themostats. 
This thermostat (left) 
contains a variety of 
sensors and can be 
controlled remotely via 
a mobile app (right).
<
WIRELESS DISPLAYS
CLOUD PRINTING
Courtesy HTC
Courtesy Epson America
FIGURE 8-15
New wireless and 
cloud applications.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
309
>Power over Ethernet (PoE). A wired networking standard that allows electrical power to be sent along with data over standard Ethernet 
cables.
newer 40 Gigabit Ethernet and 100 Gigabit 
Ethernet standards were ratified in 2010. 
Development of the even faster 400 Gigabit 
Ethernet and Terabit Ethernet standards are 
currently being explored; if ratified, they are 
expected to be used for connections between 
 servers, as well as for delivering video, digital 
X-rays and other digital medical images, and 
other  high-speed,  bandwidth-intensive Internet 
applications.
A relatively new Ethernet  development 
is Power over Ethernet (PoE), which allows 
electrical power to be sent along the cables in an 
Ethernet network (often referred to as Ethernet 
cables) along with data (see Figure  8-16). 
Consequently, the Ethernet cable, in addition 
to sending data, can be used to supply power to 
the devices on the network. PoE is most often 
used in business networks with remote wired 
devices (such as outdoor  networking hardware, 
security cameras, and other devices) that are 
not located near a power outlet. Using PoE 
requires special hardware and devices designed 
for PoE; regular Ethernet-enabled devices can 
be powered via PoE if a special PoE adapter, 
such as the one shown in Figure 8-16, is used.
For easily creating wired home networks, the Phoneline (also called HomePNA) and 
Powerline (also called HomePlug AV) standards allow computers to be networked through 
ordinary existing telephone jacks and power outlets, respectively. As both of these standards 
have emerged, their speeds 
have increased and now both 
can be used to network home 
entertainment devices in addi-
tion to computers. The G.hn 
standard is a new standard 
designed as a unified world-
wide standard for creating 
home networks over any 
existing home wiring—phone 
lines, power lines, and/or 
coaxial cable. It is viewed as 
the next-generation standard 
for wired home networking 
and it may eventually replace 
the Powerline and Phoneline 
standards. G.hn is fast—up 
to 1 Gbps—and G.hn adapt-
ers and other products are 
expected to be available soon.
NON-PoE
OUTDOOR
WIRELESS
ACCESS POINT
PoE ADAPTER
PoE SWITCH
PoE CAMERA
POWER CABLE
ETHERNET CABLE
Courtesy D-Link Systems, Inc.
Courtesy D-Link Systems, Inc.
AS K TH E E X PE R T
Daniel Kelley, Vice President, Marketing, D-Link 
Systems, Inc.
How will the Internet of Things (IoT) affect 
our daily lives?
The Internet of Things (IoT) is one of the more intrigu-
ing topics on where technology is going and how it 
will impact almost every aspect of our daily lives. We 
are already seeing technology with embedded Internet 
connectivity emerge in things like cars, buildings, and 
more in order to develop a conversation between 
devices, the user, and the devices around them. While 
most IoT applications today are focused on informa-
tion and entertainment, I foresee a big advancement in 
safety when cars are able to not only avoid traffic but 
also avoid accidents by getting “smarter” and having 
constant dialogue with other cars and the environ-
ment around them.
FIGURE 8-16
Power over Ethernet 
(PoE) powers 
devices through an 
Ethernet connection.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

310
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Wi-Fi (802.11). A widely used networking standard for medium-range wireless networks. >WiMAX (802.16). A wireless networking standard 
that is faster and has a larger range than Wi-Fi.
 
Wireless Networking Standards
Developed in the late 1990s, Wi-Fi (for wireless fidelity) is a family of wireless net-
working standards that use the IEEE standard 802.11. Wi-Fi is the current standard for 
wireless networks in the home or office, as well as for public Wi-Fi hotspots. Wi-Fi 
capabilities are built into virtually all portable computers and mobile devices today; 
they are also becoming increasingly integrated into everyday products, such as print-
ers, digital cameras, portable digital media players, external hard drives, baby moni-
tors, gaming consoles, home audio systems, televisions—even bathroom scales (see 
Figure 8-17)—to allow those devices to wirelessly network with other devices or to 
access the Internet. Like Ethernet, the Wi-Fi standard is continually evolving to sup-
port increased speed and other capabilities. The speed of a Wi-Fi network and the area 
it can cover depend on a variety of factors, including the Wi-Fi standard and hardware 
being used, the number of solid objects (such as walls, trees, or buildings) between the 
access point and the computer or other device being used, and the amount of interfer-
ence from cordless phones, baby monitors, microwave ovens, and other devices that 
also operate on the same radio frequency as Wi-Fi (usually 2.4 GHz). In general, Wi-Fi 
is designed for medium-range data transfers—typically between 100 and 300 feet 
indoors and 300 to 900 feet outdoors. There are a number of different versions of the 
802.11 standard; the 802.11g, 802.11n, and 802.11ac standards are the most widely 
used today. Emerging 802.11 standards under development are expected to offer increased 
speed, security, and other factors in the future.
While Wi-Fi is very widely used today, it does have some limitations—particularly 
its relatively limited range. For instance, an individual using a Wi-Fi hotspot inside a 
Starbucks coffeehouse will lose that Internet connection when he or she moves out of 
range of that network and will need to locate another hotspot at his or her next location. 
In addition, other wireless technologies are in development for specific purposes, such as 
multimedia networking. These emerging wireless technologies are discussed next. For a 
look at another emerging wireless  technology—powering your hardware devices via wire-
less power—see the Inside the Industry box.
WiMAX (802.16)
WiMAX (802.16) is a series of standards designed for longer range wireless network-
ing connections. Similar to Wi-Fi, fixed WiMAX (also known as 802.16a) is designed to 
provide Internet access to fixed loca-
tions (sometimes called hotzones), but 
the coverage area is significantly larger 
(a typical hotzone radius is between 2 
and 6 miles, though WiMAX can trans-
mit data as far as 10 miles or more—
see Figure 8-18). With fixed WiMAX, 
it is feasible to provide coverage to an 
entire city or other geographical area by 
using multiple WiMAX  towers (refer 
again to Figure  8-18). Mobile WiMAX 
(802.16e) is the mobile version of the 
WiMAX wireless networking standard. 
It is designed to deliver fast wireless 
networking to mobile users via a mobile 
WiMAX hotzone
Wi-Fi hotspot
FIGURE 8-18
WiMAX vs. Wi-Fi. 
A WiMAX hotzone 
can provide service to 
anyone in the hotzone, 
including mobile users.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Courtesy Withings
Scale
FIGURE 8-17
Smart scales. 
This scale transmits 
readings to a 
smartphone via Wi-Fi.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
311
phone, portable computer, or other WiMAX-enabled device. Mobile WiMAX is capable of 
speeds of approximately 70 Mbps, but speeds of 1 to 6 Mbps are more typical. The newest 
version of mobile WiMAX (802.16m or WiMAX Release 2) supports speeds up to approxi-
mately 120 Mbps.
WiMAX capabilities are beginning to be built into portable computers and other devices, 
and WiMAX is currently being used to provide Internet access to more than 1  billion people 
in about 150 countries. 
Cellular Standards
Cellular standards have also evolved over the years to better fulfill the demand for mobile 
Internet, mobile multimedia delivery, and other relatively recent mobile trends. The  current 
standards for cellular networks today in the United States and many other countries are 3G 
(third generation) and 4G (fourth generation). 3G and 4G networks are designed to sup-
port both data and voice. Users of both 3G and 4G smartphones and other mobile devices 
Wireless Power
Imagine recharging your notebook computer or mobile phone just 
by setting it down in the right place, or using your kitchen blender 
just by placing it on a countertop but not plugging it in. These 
scenarios are possible with wireless power. While wireless power 
products are now becoming available, one of the challenges has 
been creating a standard for wireless power so that multiple devices 
from different manufacturers can be charged at the same time using 
the same technology.
One company working toward this standard is Fulton Innovation. 
This company, along with the more than 100 other companies 
that are members of the Wireless Power Consortium (including 
Panasonic, Verizon Wireless, Sony, Energizer, Motorola Mobility, 
Nokia, and LG Electronics), supports wireless power technology 
that uses magnetic induction to transfer power wirelessly from a 
charging power supply device to a target device containing the 
appropriate receiving technology. Products meeting the consortium 
standard will be able to use the Qi (pronounced “chee”) logo. Qi 
systems are compatible with one another (though not with compet-
ing charging systems that are also under development). They auto-
matically adjust the power transmitted to each device being charged 
to meet the needs of that device, and they deactivate the charg-
ing process when the device is fully charged. Charging works with 
the device’s regular battery (but the device needs an embedded 
receiver) and takes about the same time as a regular wired charger.
Assuming the Qi standard becomes the norm, virtually all 
devices in the future are expected to contain a built-in charging 
receiver; some Nokia, LG, and HTC mobile phones already include 
one. Several cars with Qi charging stations (see the accompanying 
photo) are already on the market. In the near future, charging bases 
are expected to be built into other objects, such as desks, kitchen 
countertops, restaurant tabletops, hotel nightstands, airline tray 
tables—basically anywhere you might normally place your devices—
in order to power all your devices in all of the spaces that you use. 
Qi technology can also be used with household and kitchen appli-
ances. Future wireless power  applications could even include 
charging transmitters built into walls to power all of the devices 
located in the home on a continual basis, as well as into garage 
ﬂ oors and parking lots to wirelessly recharge electric vehicles.
Because there is a cost associated with providing the wireless 
power, it is expected that businesses providing wireless charg-
ing services may eventually charge for these services or include a 
certain amount of recharge with a purchase, similar to when Wi-Fi 
hotspots ﬁ rst started appearing in public locations.
I N S I D E  TH E  I N D U STRY
Courtesy Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A., Inc.
Qi wireless charging stations are available in some 
recent cars, such as the Toyota Avalon shown here.
If your Internet connection slows 
down, try power cycling your modem 
and router: Unplug the modem and 
router and wait for 30 seconds, 
plug in the modem and wait for 30 
seconds, and then plug in the router.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

312
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Bluetooth. A networking standard for very short-range wireless connections; the devices are automatically connected once they get within the 
allowable range. >Wireless USB. A wireless version of USB designed to connect peripheral devices. 
can access  broadband Internet content (such as online maps, music, games, TV, videos, 
and more) at  relatively fast speeds— typically, between 1 and 4 Mbps and 3 to 15 Mbps, 
respectively. Because 3G and 4G speeds are equivalent to the speeds many home  broadband 
Internet users experience, Internet access via a 3G or 4G network is often referred to as 
mobile broadband. Virtually all wireless providers today have both a 3G and a 4G net-
work, though 4G service may not be available in all areas. There are two primary standards 
for 4G networks today: the mobile WiMAX standard already discussed and Long Term 
Evolution (LTE), supported by AT&T Wireless, Verizon Wireless, and T-Mobile. LTE is 
the fastest standard and the Phase 2 LTE network currently being implemented by AT&T 
is expected to double 4G speeds. While mobile WiMAX is not technically a cellular stan-
dard, it is being used by some companies (such as Sprint) to provide 4G wireless service 
to subscribers.
Short-Range Wireless Standards
There are several wireless networking standards in existence or being developed that are 
designed for short-range wireless networking connections (for a summary of these stan-
dards and the standards already discussed, see Figure 8-19). Bluetooth is a wireless stan-
dard that was originally designed for very short-range (10 meters, approximately 33 feet, 
or less) connections, though there is no maximum range and some industrial products have 
a range of 300 feet. Bluetooth is designed to replace cables between devices, such as to 
connect a wireless keyboard or mouse to a desktop computer, to send print jobs wirelessly 
from a portable computer to a printer, or to connect a mobile phone to a wireless headset. 
The Bluetooth standard is continually evolving to be faster and to support new applica-
tions. One of the key enhancements in the newest Bluetooth specification (Bluetooth 4.0, 
also called Bluetooth Smart) is low energy, which enables small devices to run for years 
on a single button-sized battery. Consequently, Bluetooth is increasingly being used with 
consumer devices, such as to connect health and fitness devices to a watch or smartphone, 
to connect a mobile phone to a portable speaker, and to connect 3D glasses to a 3D televi-
sion set. 
Another 
standard 
that is designed to con-
nect peripheral devices, 
similar to Bluetooth, but 
that transfers data more 
quickly is wireless USB. 
The speed of wireless 
USB depends on the 
distance 
between 
the 
devices being used, but 
it is approximately 100 
Mbps at 10 meters (about 
33 feet) or 480 Mbps at 
3 meters (about 10 feet). 
While 
Bluetooth 
and 
wireless USB can be 
used for similar applica-
tions, it is possible they 
might coexist. For exam-
ple, wireless USB might 
FIGURE 8-19
Summary of 
common wireless 
networking 
standards.
<
CATEGORY
EXAMPLES
INTENDED PURPOSE
RANGE
Short range 
Bluetooth 
Wireless USB
To connect peripheral devices to a 
mobile phone or computer.
33 feet–200 feet
Ultra Wideband (UWB)
WirelessHD (WiHD)
TransferJet
WiGig
To connect and transfer multimedia 
content between home consumer 
electronic devices (computers, TVs, 
DVD players, etc.).
1 inch–33 feet
Medium range
Wi-Fi (802.11)
To connect computers and other 
devices to a local area network.
100–300 feet indoors; 
300–900 feet outdoors
Wi-Fi Direct
To connect computers and other 
devices directly together.
600 feet
Long range
WiMAX 
Mobile WiMAX
To provide Internet access to a large 
geographic area for fixed and/or mobile 
users.
6 miles non-line of sight; 
30 miles line of sight
Cellular standards
To connect mobile phones and 
mobile devices to a cellular network 
for telephone and Internet service.
10 miles
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
NFC is also being used for new 
networking applications, such as 
the emerging NFC ring that can 
be used to automatically unlock 
assigned doors or smartphones 
within range of your ring finger.
TIP
The SmartGlass app that enables 
you to have a second Xbox 360 
screen via your smartphone or 
tablet can connect via either 
Wi-Fi or a 3G/4G cellular 
network.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
313
>Wi-Fi Direct. A standard for connecting Wi-Fi devices directly, without using a router or an access point. >Artificial intelligence (AI). When 
a computer performs actions that are characteristic of human intelligence.
be used to connect computer hardware in more permanent setups, while Bluetooth might 
be used in short-range mobile situations with portable computers and mobile devices.
A newer standard also designed to connect devices for short-range communi cations 
is Wi-Fi Direct. Wi-Fi Direct enables Wi-Fi devices to connect directly to each other, 
such as to transfer photos or documents or to tether devices to a Wi-Fi Direct device’s 
Internet connection by creating a hotspot (see Figure 8-20), without needing any addi-
tional networking hardware. Wi-Fi Direct is not designed to replace traditional Wi-Fi 
networks, but it is considered a competitor to Bluetooth because it has the advantage of 
faster speeds (up to 250 Mbps) and a greater range (up to 600 feet).
For transferring multimedia content quickly between nearby devices (such as 
between televisions and DVD players, or between computers and mobile devices), a 
number of different standards are emerging. For instance, Ultra Wideband (UWB) trans-
fers data at speeds from 100 Mbps at 10 meters (about 33 feet) to 480 Mbps at 2 meters 
(about 6.5 feet). Similar, but faster, standards include WiGig, which is being developed 
by the Wi-Fi Alliance and supports short-range data transfers of up to 7 Gbps, and wire-
lessHD (WiHD), which is backed by seven major electronics companies and is designed 
to transfer full-quality uncompressed high-definition audio, video, and data within a 
single room at speeds up to 28 Gbps. A wireless standard designed for fast transfers 
between devices that are extremely close together (essentially touching each other) is 
TransferJet. Developed by Sony, TransferJet is designed to transfer large files (such as 
digital photos, music, and video) quickly between devices as soon as they come in con-
tact with each other (such as to transfer data between smartphones or between digital 
cameras, to download music or video from a consumer kiosk or digital signage system 
to a smartphone or other mobile device, or to transfer images or video from a digital 
camera to a TV or printer). At a maximum speed of 560 Mbps, TransferJet is slower than 
some of the other technologies, but it is fast enough to support the transfer of video files.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
Although they cannot yet think completely on their own, computers and software pro-
grams have become more sophisticated, and computers are being programmed to act in 
an increasingly intelligent manner.
What Is Artificial Intelligence (AI)?
According to John McCarthy, who coined the term artificial intelligence (AI) in 1956 and 
is considered by many to be one of its fathers, AI is “the science and engineering of mak-
ing intelligent machines.” In other words, AI researchers are working to create intelligent 
devices controlled by intelligent software programs; in essence, machines that think and 
act like people and that perform in ways that would be considered intelligent if observed 
in human beings. In 1950, Alan Turing—one of the first AI researchers—argued that if 
a machine could successfully appear to be human to a knowledgeable observer, then it 
should be considered intelligent. To illustrate this idea, Turing developed a test—later 
called the Turing Test—in which one observer interacts electronically with both a com-
puter and a person. During the test, the observer submits written questions electronically 
to both the computer and the person, evaluates the typed responses, and tries to identify 
which answers came from the computer and which came from the person. Turing argued 
that if the computer could repeatedly fool the observer into thinking it was human, then it 
should be viewed as intelligent.
Wi-Fi Direct
phone is a
hotspot.
Wi-Fi phones
can connect to
that hotspot.
FIGURE 8-20
Wi-Fi Direct. Allows 
Wi-Fi devices to connect 
directly to one another.
<
Courtesy Nick Morley
DARPA (Defense Advanced 
Research Projects Agency) is 
experimenting with AI (in conjunction 
with computational linguistics, 
machine learning, and natural 
language technologies) to create 
an automated system to help 
analysts more efficiently evaluate 
and understand the connections 
among large volumes of text-based 
documents.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

314
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Intelligent agent. A program that performs specific tasks to help make a user’s work environment more efficient or entertaining and that 
typically modifies its behavior based on the user’s actions.
Many Turing Test contests have been held over the years, and in 1990, Dr. Hugh 
Loebner initiated the Loebner Prize, pledging a grand prize of $100,000 and a solid gold 
medal (see Figure 8-21) for the developer of the first computer whose responses to a Turing 
Test were indistinguishable from that of a human’s responses. A contest is held every year, 
awarding a prize of $4,000 and a bronze medal to the developer of the most humanlike 
computer but, so far, the gold medal has not been awarded. However, some experts believe 
that a computer will pass the Turing Test within the next 20 years. Although the Turing 
Test is interesting and is still providing grounds for research today, many experts believe 
that the Turing Test provides only one possible test of computer intelligence. These experts 
argue that there could be different definitions of intelligence, and a machine could still be 
considered intelligent without knowing enough about humans to imitate one.
Some of the initial advances in AI were made in the area of game playing—namely, 
chess. Early chess-playing programs were easily defeated by amateur chess players. But, 
as computers became more powerful and AI software became more sophisticated, chess-
playing programs improved significantly. In 1996, IBM’s Deep Blue computer won two 
of six games in a chess match against then world chess champion Garry Kasparov. A land-
mark moment in AI history occurred in 1997 when Deep Blue beat Kasparov in a rematch, 
winning the match 3 ½ to 2 ½ (three of the six games ended in a draw). And in late 2006, 
world chess champion Vladimir Kramnik lost a match to the chess program Deep Fritz (see 
Figure 8-22)—the beginning of the end of humans being able to beat chess programs, in the 
opinion of some AI researchers. One reason for this is because once the human player makes 
a mistake, there is no hope (as there would be with a human opponent) that the computer 
opponent will make its own mistake at a later time to level the playing field in that game.
AI Applications
Today’s AI applications contain some aspect of artificial intelligence, although they tend 
to mimic human intelligence rather than display pure intelligence. Technological advances 
will undoubtedly help AI applications continue to evolve and become more intelligent and 
sophisticated in the future. For instance, one recent  advancement is IBM’s Watson super-
computer that has the ability to analyze complex questions and form answers well enough 
to compete with human beings on the Jeopardy! game show and win (see Figure 8-22)—
Watson’s software is now being applied to other applications, such as medical diagnosis 
systems and business intelligence systems. However, just as the debate about what consti-
tutes intelligence in nonhumans will continue, so will the debate about how far we as a soci-
ety should delve into the area 
of artificial intelligence. AI 
applications that exist in some 
form today include intelligent 
agents, expert systems, neural 
networks, and robotics. For a 
look at the self-driving cars 
you may be using in the future, 
see the How It Works box.
Intelligent Agents
Intelligent 
agents 
(also 
called 
smart 
assistants) 
are programs that perform 
KRAMNIK VS. DEEP FRITZ
Deep Fritz beat world champion Vladimir Kramnik
4 games to 2 in 2006.
WATSON VS. JEOPARDY! CHAMPIONS
Watson easily beat both champions in 2011.
FIGURE 8-22
AI and game 
playing.
<
FIGURE 8-21
The Loebner Prize 
gold medal has yet 
to be awarded.
<
Courtesy of Dr. Hugh Loebner
Courtesy ChessBase.com
Courtesy of IBM Corporation
Self-driving cars generate 1 GB 
of data during each second of 
operation—this and other types of 
fast-moving data that can’t easily 
be handled by existing data tools 
are referred to as big data.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
315
specific tasks to help make a user’s work environment more efficient or entertaining. 
Typically, the agent program runs in the background until it is time for the agent to per-
form a task, and it usually modifies its  behavior based on the user’s actions or instruc-
tions. Intelligent agents are found on Web sites, as well as incorporated into software 
programs and mobile operating systems. Some specific types of intelligent agents include 
the following:
 
➤Application assistants—provide help or assistance for a particular application 
 program. Some can detect when the user might be having trouble with the program 
and automatically offer appropriate advice. Others add speech capabilities to com-
mon programs, such as instant messaging programs.
 
➤Shopping bots—search online stores to find the best prices for specified products.
 
➤Entertainment bots—provide entertainment, such as a virtual pet to take care of 
or an animated character to play games with.
 
➤Chatterbots—carry on written “conversations” with people in a natural 
 language (such as English, Spanish, French, or Japanese). Chatterbots typically 
respond both verbally and with appropriate facial expressions to create the illu-
sion that the exchange is taking place between two thinking, living entities (see 
Figure 8-23).
Intelligent agents are expected to be an important part of the Semantic Web—a 
predicted evolution of the current Web in which all Web content is stored in formats 
FIGURE 8-23
A Web page 
chatterbot.
<
Courtesy of Humanity Online
Self-Driving Cars
Did you ever wish you had a car that could drive itself? Well, you’re 
in luck—self-driving cars are here. Google’s self-driving car (shown 
in the accompanying photo) has already logged half a million 
miles during testing. And, recently, California, Florida, and Nevada 
passed legislation allowing self-driving cars to be tested on state 
roads. To plan for the future, California has directed the DMV to 
work with other state agencies (such as highway patrol, transpor-
tation, and insurance) to determine how autonomous vehicles will 
be allowed to be used in the state once they become available. 
Issues include how the cars and riders should be licensed, any 
limitations on use for safety (such as use in school zones or bad 
weather), any allowable use by blind or underage individuals, how 
the cars will be insured if there is no driver assigned to them, how 
to protect the cars against hackers, and so forth. 
Google autonomous cars are essentially robotic cars. They 
include an onboard computer, cameras, and a roof-mounted 
laser range ﬁ nder; the data generated by these devices is com-
bined with GPS data to enable the cars to avoid obstacles and 
adhere to trafﬁ c laws. Because they are analytical, aren’t capable 
of being distracted, don’t make mistakes, and can’t be impaired 
by alcohol, drugs, or lack of sleep, Google and other autonomous 
vehicle promoters propose that self-driving cars are safer, in 
addition to making driving more enjoyable and more efﬁ cient. In 
addition, these vehicles could use short-range communications 
technology to communicate with each other to avoid collisions—
by one estimate, these cars could prevent, or reduce in severity, 
as many as 80% of crashes involving non-impaired drivers alone. 
Currently, the use of autonomous cars is in the testing phase 
and requires a licensed driver to be in the car, but California 
plans to have regulations in place within a year to prepare for 
autonomous cars coming on the market in the near future, once 
they are deemed safe. It is expected that, initially, a licensed 
driver will be required to be in the car. But, who knows in the 
future? You may be able to send your car out for pizza or to pick 
up a guest arriving at the airport. Only time will tell.
H OW I T WO R K S
Courtesy Google
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

316
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Expert system. A computer system that provides the type of advice that would be expected from a human expert.
that are more easily read by software applications and intelligent agents so those tools 
can perform an increasing number of tasks. To accomplish this, the semantics (struc-
ture) of the data is defined in a standard manner (using tags and other identifying data). 
Whether or not the Semantic Web—viewed as part of the next generation Web 3.0 by 
some—actually arrives, and arrives in the format in which it is now envisioned, remains 
to be seen.
Expert Systems
Expert systems are software programs that can make decisions and draw conclusions, 
similar to a human expert. Expert systems (see Figure 8-24) have two main components: 
a knowledge base (a database that contains facts provided by a human expert and rules 
that the expert system should use to make decisions based on those facts) and an inference 
engine (a software program that applies the rules to the data stored in the knowledge base 
in order to reach decisions). For instance, as shown in Figure 8-24, an expert system used 
to authorize credit for credit card customers would have a knowledge base with facts about 
customers and rules about credit authorization, such as “Do not automatically authorize 
purchase if the customer has exceeded his or her credit limit.”
Expert systems are widely used for tasks such as diagnosing illnesses, making finan-
cial forecasts, scheduling routes for delivery vehicles, diagnosing mechanical problems, 
and performing credit authorizations. Some expert systems are designed to take the place 
of human experts, while others are designed to assist them. For instance, medical expert 
systems are often used to assist physicians with patient diagnoses, suggesting possible 
diagnoses based on the patient’s symptoms and other data supplied to the expert system. 
Because it has access to an extensive knowledge base, the expert system may provide 
more possible diagnoses to the attending physician than he or she may have thought of 
otherwise.
When using an expert system, it is important to realize that its conclusions are based on the 
data and rules stored in its knowledge base, as well as the information provided by the users. 
If the expert knowledge 
is correct, the inference 
engine program is writ-
ten correctly, and the user 
supplies accurate infor-
mation in response to the 
questions posed by the 
expert system, the system 
will draw correct conclu-
sions; if the knowledge 
base is wrong, the infer-
ence engine is faulty, or 
the user provides inaccu-
rate input, the system will 
not work correctly.
Neural Networks
Artificial 
intelligence 
systems that attempt to 
imitate the way a human 
Jones has made two transactions today.
Jones has spent $1,529 in the current period.
Jones has a $5,000 credit limit.
QUERY: Should we approve a
             $700 purchase for
             Mr. Jones?
Authorize purchase
only if the customer
has an active account.
Authorize purchase
only if the customer
has not exceeded his
or her credit limit.
Authorize purchase
automatically if the
customer has made
less than three
purchases today.
RULES
CUSTOMER DATABASE
Jones is customer account 0000-9999.
KNOWLEDGE BASE
The inference engine is the computer
program that runs the expert system.
It processes queries by checking rules
in the knowledge base against the
customer database.
RESPONSE: Yes
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®; © Andrey_Popov/Shutterstock.com
FIGURE 8-24
An expert system 
at work.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
317
>Neural network. An expert system in which the human brain’s pattern-recognition process is emulated by the computer system. 
>Robotics. The study of robot technology. >Robot. A device, controlled by a human operator or a computer, that can move and react 
to sensory input.
brain works are called neural networks. Neural networks (also called neural 
nets) are networks of processors that are connected together in a manner similar 
to the way the neurons in a human brain are connected. They are designed to 
emulate the brain’s pattern-recognition process in order to recognize patterns in 
data and make more progressive leaps in associations and predictions than con-
ventional computer systems. Neural networks are used in areas such as handwrit-
ing, speech, and image recognition; medical imaging; crime analysis; biometric 
identification (see Figure 8-25); and vision systems that use cameras to inspect 
objects and make determinations—for example, the systems that check prod-
ucts for defects at manufacturing plants or that recognize stamps during postal 
processing.
Robotics
Robotics is the field devoted to the study of robots—devices, controlled by 
a person or a computer, that can move and react to sensory input. Robots 
are widely used by the military and businesses to perform high-precision but 
monotonous jobs, as well as to perform tasks that are dangerous or impos-
sible for people to perform. There are also robots designed to perform personal tasks 
for individuals. The appearance of robots varies depending on their purpose, such as 
robot arms permanently connected to an assembly line, robots built on sturdy mobile 
platforms designed to travel over rough terrain, robots with fins for water tasks, robots 
shaped like animals (such as snakes or spiders) for special climbing abilities, and 
robots that resemble pets or human beings for consumer applications. Robots used for 
medical and military applications are discussed shortly; robots used for business and 
consumer applications are discussed next.
Robots are used in business for a variety of purposes, such as for looking for intrud-
ers, gas leaks, and other hazards, as well as working on factory assembly lines and other 
monotonous tasks (see Figure 8-26). Robots are also used for mining coal, repairing oil 
rigs, locating survivors in collapsed mines and buildings, and other dangerous tasks. They 
are also used to facilitate videoconferencing and other remote presence applications by sit-
ting in for a remote participant and relaying video and audio images to and from that par-
ticipant. For instance, the videoconferencing robot shown in Figure 8-26 enables remote 
individuals to more actively participate in meetings and other face-to-face encounters from 
their current location. In addition, robots are used for service tasks such as search and res-
cue missions and fighting fires.
There are also a number of personal robots available or in development to assist 
with personal tasks. Some are primarily entertainment robots and are designed to 
interact with people (such as by reciting phrases, delivering messages, taking photos 
or video, or singing and dancing). Others, such as the toy robot shown in Figure 8-26, 
are designed to be toys or companions for children. Still other personal robots are 
designed for household tasks, such as to mow the lawn (see Figure 8-26) or clean the 
pool.
Household robots that can assist individuals with more complex tasks, such as put-
ting away the dishes or picking up toys before vacuuming the living room, are a little 
further in the future—after robot technology improves to allow for better navigation 
and improved physical manipulation and after prices come down. Expected to have a 
more humanoid form than the household robots currently on the market, these future 
robots could be used to assist the elderly and wheelchair-bound individuals, in addition to 
Courtesy of Crossmatch
FIGURE 8-25
Neural network 
systems. Often 
used in biometric 
identification systems, 
such as to analyze 
fingerprints.
<
Some personal robots can act 
autonomously once they are assigned 
a program; others are designed to be 
controlled remotely—increasingly via 
smartphones.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

318
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
helping with household tasks. In fact, it 
has been reported that the South Korean 
government expects to have at least one 
robot in every South Korean household 
by 2020.
Many would agree that the use 
of robots has numerous benefits to 
 society—such as adding convenience 
to our lives, replacing human beings 
for dangerous tasks, and, potentially, 
monitoring and assisting the disabled 
and the elderly. But some individu-
als are concerned that, as true artificial 
intelligence becomes closer to real-
ity, a class of robots with the poten-
tial for great harm could be created. 
In response, several organizations— 
including the South Korean government 
and the European Robotics Research 
Network (EURON)—are developing 
standards for robots, users, and manu-
facturers concerning the appropriate use 
and development of robots. The U.S. 
military is also studying ways to ensure 
robotic soldiers can be programmed to 
recognize and obey international laws 
of war and the U.S. military’s rules of 
engagement in order to prevent them 
from performing acts such as firing on 
a hospital or crowd of civilians, even if 
enemy forces are nearby. Regardless of 
the progress made in implementing con-
trols on robots, the roles robots should take in our society are likely to be debated for 
quite some time.
TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES IN MEDICINE
Technological advances in the area of medicine in the past several years include comput-
ers that can analyze test results to identify precancerous cells too small for a person to see, 
implanted devices that enhance the functions of a current organ (such as cochlear implants 
that can restore hearing), electronic monitors that detect potentially dangerous medical con-
ditions, and digital cameras the size of a pill that are swallowed to photograph the patient’s 
digestive tract. Other topics in the forefront of medical technology research include brain-
to-computer interfacing (BCI), telemedicine, and telesurgery.
While some robots are designed to be durable and used in adverse conditions, remember that 
robotic devices are electronic. To avoid the risk of electric shock and damage to robotic devices, do 
not use them in the water or in other adverse conditions unless the instructions specifically state that 
the action is safe.
You can download new apps for 
your personal robots at the Robot 
App Store.
TIP
ASSEMBLY LINE ROBOTS
REMOTE PRESENCE ROBOTS
TOY ROBOTS
HELPER ROBOTS
Courtesy iRobot
Courtesy Robomow
Photo courtesy of KUKA Robotics Corporation
Courtesy LEGO
FIGURE 8-26
Business and 
personal robots.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
319
> Brain-to-computer interfacing (BCI). The process of connecting the brain with a computer, such as implanting electrodes directly into the 
brain or using a headset that wirelessly reads and interprets brainwaves. >Telemedicine. The use of networking technology to provide medical 
information and services. 
Brain-to-Computer Interfacing (BCI)
Brain-to-computer interfacing (BCI) is the process of connecting the brain with a com-
puter, such as implanting electrodes directly into the brain or using a headset that wire-
lessly reads and interprets brainwaves. Medical applications of BCI—such as using it to 
restore lost functionality to or facilitate the communications of severely disabled individu-
als—are under development. For instance, after training, a severely paralyzed individual 
can use BCI to move a mouse, click it to type text, and perform other computer-related 
tasks using only his or her thoughts—raising the possibility that paralyzed individuals will 
someday be able to control robot assistants with their thoughts. A recent experiment went 
one step further—human brain-to-brain interfacing. In this experiment, two University of 
Washington researchers were located in separate labs across campus and each wore a spe-
cial cap (one to read electrical brain activity and one to stimulate the motor cortex). As the 
first researcher played a simple video game, using only his mind to visualize his right hand 
hitting the “fire” button, the second researcher involuntarily moved his right hand to push 
the spacebar on the keyboard in front of him, as if to hit the “fire” button.
Despite the potential benefits of 
brain interfacing, there is the concern 
that this technology could be misused. 
Medical ethicists are currently working 
on setting up standards and criteria to 
ensure that brain implant devices allow, 
according to medical ethicist Joseph 
Fins of Cornell University, “. . . patients 
to have control, not be under control.” 
While the focus of brain interfacing 
and thought-controlled computers is 
bringing communications capabilities 
to the severely disabled, gaming appli-
cations are also under development and 
some researchers foresee the technol-
ogy someday becoming mainstream— 
viewing brainwave input as the next step 
in the evolution of the human- computer 
input interface.
Telemedicine and 
Telesurgery
Telemedicine is the use of networking 
technology to provide medical infor-
mation and services. At its simplest 
level, it includes Web sites that patients 
can access to contact their physicians, 
make appointments, view lab results, 
and more. However, more complex tele-
medicine systems (such as the examples 
shown in Figure 8-27) are often used to 
provide care to individuals who may not 
otherwise have access to that care, such 
REMOTE CONSULTATIONS
Using remote-controlled teleconferencing robots, physicians can “virtually” consult with patients or
other physicians in a different physical location; the robot (left photo) transmits video images and audio
to and from the doctor (via his or her computer or mobile device, right photo) in real time.
TELESURGERY
Using voice or computer commands, surgeons can perform operations (such as inserting a catheter
during the heart surgery shown here) remotely via the Internet or a private network; a robotic system
uses the surgeon’s commands to physically operate on the patient.
Courtesy InTouch Health, Inc.
© EMPPL PA Wire/AP Photos
Courtesy InTouch Health, Inc.
FIGURE 8-27
Examples of 
telemedicine 
applications.
<
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

320
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
>Telesurgery. A form of robot-assisted surgery in which the doctor’s physical location is different from the patient’s and robot’s physical location; 
the doctor controls the robot remotely over the Internet or another network. >Battlefield robot. A robot used by the military to ensure that 
locations are safe prior to sending in soldiers.
as allowing individuals living in remote areas to consult with a specialist. For instance, 
physicians can use videoconferencing robots to communicate remotely with other physi-
cians or with hospitalized patients (see Figure 8-27). Physicians can also use telemedicine 
to perform remote diagnosis of patients (for example, healthcare workers at rural locations, 
childcare facilities, and other locations can use video cameras, electronic stethoscopes, 
and other devices to send images and vital statistics of a patient to a physician located at a 
medical facility).
Another example of telemedicine is telesurgery—a form of robot-assisted sur-
gery (where a robot controlled by a physician operates on the patient) in which at least 
one of the surgeons performs the operation by controlling the robot remotely over the 
Internet or another network (refer again to Figure 8-27). Robot-assisted surgery sys-
tems typically use cameras to give the human surgeon an extremely close view of the 
surgical area. As a result, robot-assisted surgery is typically more precise and results 
in smaller incisions than those made by a human surgeon, allowing for less invasive 
surgery (for example, not having to crack through the rib cage to access the heart) 
and resulting in less pain for the patient, a faster recovery time, and fewer potential 
complications.
Telemedicine has enormous potential for providing quality medical care to indi-
viduals who live in rural or underdeveloped areas and who do not have access to 
 sufficient medical care. Telemedicine will also be necessary for future long-term space 
 explorations—such as a trip to Mars and back that may take two years or more—because 
astronauts will undoubtedly need medical care while on the journey. In fact, NASA astro-
nauts and physicians have performed telesurgery experiments in the Aquarius Undersea 
Laboratory 50 feet below the ocean surface to help in the development of a robotic unit 
that will eventually allow physicians to perform surgery remotely on patients who are in 
outer space. Some individuals envision the eventual use of portable robot-assisted tele-
surgery units in space, war zones, and other environments where access to surgeons is 
extremely limited.
TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES IN THE MILITARY
The U.S. military works on a continual basis with technological and research organiza-
tions to improve military equipment, such as weapons, protective gear for soldiers, and 
surveillance tools. The military is also involved in researching many of the other  emerging 
technologies already discussed, such as nanotechnology and artificial intelligence. Two 
specific areas of research related to the military—battlefield robots and exoskeleton 
 systems—are discussed next.
Battlefield Robots
Robots are used extensively by the U.S. military. For instance, battlefield robots are used 
in areas of conflict to investigate caves, buildings, trails, and other locations before soldiers 
enter them to make sure the locations are safe (see Figure 8-28), and to help soldiers locate 
and dispose of bombs, landmines, and other explosive devices. In addition to land-based 
robots, there are also military robots designed for underwater use, such as to detect mines or 
perform underwater surveillance and reconnaissance, as well as Unmanned Aerial Vehicles 
(UAVs) or drones (unmanned planes) used to take surveillance photos. Currently, military 
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
321
>Exoskeleton suit. A wearable robotic system designed to give an individual additional physical capabilities and protection.
robots are controlled remotely by 
soldiers, though researchers are 
working on more autonomous 
robots that can navigate on their 
own, perceiving obstacles and 
determining their course with-
out continuous directions from 
a human operator, to accompany 
soldiers into combat. According 
to national security expert John 
Pike, autonomous armed robotic 
soldiers may become a reality as 
soon as 2020.
Exoskeleton Systems
Another military robotic application is the exoskeleton suit, whose name refers to a hard 
protective or supportive outer structure. Currently being researched and developed by 
several organizations under grants from the Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency 
(DARPA), exoskeleton suits are wearable battery-operated robotic systems designed to 
give an individual additional physical capabilities and protection. For instance, an exo-
skeleton suit can give a soldier the ability to run faster and carry heavier items than he 
or she could without the suit—up to 200 pounds at a top speed of 10 mph for the Human 
Universal Load Carrier (HULC) exoskeleton suit shown in Figure 8-28. Exoskeleton 
suits in the future may include additional capabilities, such as being made of bulletproof 
material that is able to solidify on demand to form a shield or turn into a medical cast 
if a soldier is injured. Other possible features of an exoskeleton suit include changing 
its color automatically for camouflage purposes; relaying information via sensors about 
a soldier’s health, injuries, and location to field headquarters; and administering pain-
killers or applying pressure to a wound when directed by a physician. DARPA is also 
involved with the development of robotic prosthetic arms that feel, look, and perform 
like natural arms—these robotic arms will be used by military personnel who are injured 
in the line of duty.
SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS OF EMERGING 
TECHNOLOGY
A new computing technology usually provides many benefits because it normally would 
not become widely available for consumers if it was not designed to solve a problem or add 
convenience to our lives. However, not all advances are embraced by all individuals. For 
instance, security and privacy issues are areas of continual concern with emerging technol-
ogies. Potential dangers include trusting “intelligent” computers and robots so much that 
they become a personal safety hazard, allowing medical technology to enable people to be 
controlled by others, and spending resources on some areas of research and development 
that might be better spent elsewhere. Some people also worry that technology is advancing 
at such a rapid pace that we cannot possibly envision all the potential repercussions until it 
is too late. It is important to evaluate new and emerging  technologies in terms of the entire 
picture—their benefits, as well as their possible risks and  societal implications.
FIGURE 8-28
Military robotic 
applications.
<
BATTLEFIELD ROBOTS
Designed to investigate dangerous, hostile, or
inaccessible areas prior to human entry.
EXOSKELETON SYSTEMS
Designed to give soldiers enhanced mobility and
endurance while carrying heavy loads.
Courtesy of iRobot
Courtesy of Lockheed Martin
It is expected that personal 
exoskeleton suits designed to 
enhance an individual’s abilities 
(such as to help elderly or disabled 
individuals walk or lift things more 
easily) will become available within 
the next 10 to 15 years.
TIP
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

322
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
S U M MARY
THE COMPUTER OF THE FUTURE
While the exact makeup of future computers is not certain, they will likely continue to 
get smaller, smarter, and more user-friendly. Portable computers will continue to grow 
more powerful and useful; home and business computers may be built into furniture, walls, 
desks, and other objects. Emerging input devices include gesture-based devices; input for 
consumer applications that may soon become the norm include two-dimensional (2D) 
barcodes, augmented reality, and a variety of RFID payment systems. CPU technology 
is continuing to evolve and it is possible that a form of nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM) may 
eventually replace the RAM we know today. Emerging output devices include 3D display 
screens, pico projectors, 3D projectors, wearable personal displays, and displays based 
on variations of organic light emitting diode (OLED) display technology. For storage, 
new formats of USB flash memory drives and flash memory cards are emerging and holo-
graphic storage is expected to be a viable storage alternative in the near future.
Future computers will likely be influenced by nanotechnology research, which 
focuses on building computer components at the individual atomic and molecular levels. 
Both computing and noncomputing products that use carbon nanotubes (CNTs) are being 
developed. Quantum computing (which uses atoms or nuclei working together as quan-
tum bits or qubits) and optical computers (which perform operations using light instead 
of electrical current) are in the early stages of development.
EMERGING NETWORKING TECHNOLOGIES
Improvements are being made on a continual basis to wired and wireless networking 
technologies to increase speed and connectivity options, and to support an ever-growing 
number of new applications. Faster versions of the Ethernet standard are under develop-
ment, and Power over Ethernet (PoE)—which sends both electrical power and data over 
Ethernet cables—is a relatively new option. For easy home networks, the Phoneline or 
Powerline standards can be used; a standard for delivering Internet over existing power 
lines is broadband over power lines (BPL).
New versions of the Wi-Fi (802.11) standard for wireless networks (such as for improved 
speed and security) are being developed on a regular basis. Wi-Fi Direct enables Wi-Fi 
devices to be connected directly, without additional hardware. WiMAX (802.16) is an emerg-
ing wireless standard with a greater range than Wi-Fi; mobile WiMAX is a version of WiMAX 
designed for use with mobile phones and other mobile devices. Bluetooth can be used for very 
short-range applications (such as wirelessly connecting a keyboard to a computer), though 
wireless USB is a new option. Several new wireless standards—such as Ultra Wideband 
(UWB) and wirelessHD (WiHD) are designed for wirelessly delivering multimedia content 
between computers, TVs, digital cameras, DVD players, and other consumer devices.
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE (AI)
When a computer performs in ways that would be considered intelligent if observed in 
people, this is referred to as artificial intelligence (AI). Some of the earliest advances 
in AI were in the area of chess; the most common test for AI is the Turning Test. One 
AI application is the intelligent agent. Examples include application assistants, search 
agents, shopping bots, entertainment bots, and chatterbots. Intelligent agents typically act 
as virtual assistants and modify their behavior based on the user’s actions. They are fre-
quently built into application programs and operating systems and are beginning to be used 
on Web pages. Some—like many chatterbots—use a natural language interface.
Chapter Objective 1:
Describe what the computer 
of the future might look like, 
including some examples of 
emerging types of hardware.
Chapter Objective 2:
Understand the effect that 
emerging computer technolo-
gies, such as nanotechnol-
ogy, quantum computers, and 
optical computers, may have 
on the computer of the future.
Chapter Objective 3:
Name some emerging wired 
and wireless networking 
technologies.
Chapter Objective 4:
Explain what is meant by the 
term artificial intelligence (AI) 
and list some AI applications.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
323
Expert systems perform tasks that would otherwise be performed by a human expert, 
such as diagnosing medical conditions, making financial forecasts, and performing credit 
authorizations. Expert systems use a knowledge base (a database containing specific facts 
and rules about the expert area) and an inference engine (a software program used to apply 
rules to the data stored in the knowledge base to reach decisions).
Neural networks and robotics are two other areas of artificial intelligence. A neural 
network is an AI system that tries to imitate the way the human brain works and is typically 
used for pattern recognition, such as speech analysis, crime analysis, and biometric iden-
tification. Robotics is the study of robots—devices, controlled by a person or a computer, 
that can move and react to sensory input. Robots are commonly used for repetitive and 
dangerous tasks; they are also being used for household tasks, for entertainment purposes, 
and to assist with business and personal tasks.
TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES IN MEDICINE
Technological advances in recent years include computers that analyze test results, 
implanted devices that assist an organ’s functioning, and digital cameras that can be 
ingested to record images of a person’s digestive tract. Brain-to-computer interfacing 
(BCI) is the process of connecting the brain with a computer, such as implanting elec-
trodes directly into the brain or using a headset that wirelessly reads and interprets brain-
waves, and may eventually enable paralyzed individuals to control robot assistants with 
only their thoughts. These and similar technological advances in medicine are embraced 
by some but are not without controversy.
Telemedicine is the use of communications technology to provide medical informa-
tion and services and can take a variety of forms. One application is telesurgery—a form 
of robot-assisted surgery where a robot (controlled by a physician) operates on a patient. 
With telesurgery, the robot is controlled remotely, such as over the Internet. Robots can use 
smaller incisions in some types of surgeries, which results in less pain for the patient and a 
faster recovery period. Other forms of telemedicine include remote professional consulta-
tions and diagnosis, such as via a videoconferencing system.
TECHNOLOGICAL ADVANCES IN THE MILITARY
Recent and expected future technological advances in the military include newly designed 
weapons, protective gear, and surveillance tools. Surveillance tools in the future may 
include an increased use of battlefield robots and the use of autonomous robots that can 
navigate on their own. The uniform of the future may include an exoskeleton suit—a 
wearable robotic system that not only protects the user but also gives him or her additional 
physical capabilities.
SOCIETAL IMPLICATIONS OF EMERGING TECHNOLOGY
There are many potential societal implications associated with emerging technologies, 
such as unexpected results, trusting “intelligent” computers and robots so much that they 
become a personal safety hazard, and allowing medical technology to enable people to be 
controlled by others. Because virtually any new technology could be used for both good 
and evil, we need to weigh the societal risks and benefits of emerging technologies in order 
to make educated and informed decisions about what we would like our lives and society 
to be like.
Chapter Objective 5:
List some new and upcom-
ing technological advances 
in medicine.
Chapter Objective 6:
Name some new and 
upcoming technological 
advances in the military.
Chapter Objective 7:
Discuss potential societal 
implications of emerging 
technologies.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

324
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
R EVI EW ACTIVITI E S
Instructions: Match each key term on the left with the definition on the right that best describes it.
 1.       A computer system that provides the type of advice that would be expected from a 
human expert.
 2.       A computer that uses light, such as from laser beams or infrared beams, to perform 
digital computations.
 3.       A device, controlled by a human operator or a computer, that can move and react to 
sensory input.
 4.       A wireless networking standard that is faster and has a greater range than Wi-Fi.
 5.       An expert system in which the human brain’s pattern-recognition process is emu-
lated by the computer system.
 6.       A wearable robotic system designed to give an individual additional physical capa-
bilities and protection.
 7.       The science of creating tiny computers and components by working at the individual 
atomic and molecular levels.
 8.       The use of networking technology to provide medical information and services.
 9.       When a computer performs actions that are characteristic of human intelligence.
 10.       When computer generated images are overlayed on top of real-time images, such as 
to overlay information over the photo or video displayed on a smartphone.
Instructions: Circle T if the statement is true, F if the statement is false, or write the best answer 
in the space provided. Answers for the self-quiz are located in the References and Resources 
Guide at the end of the book.
 1. T F  Two-dimensional (2D) barcodes can store more data than conventional one-dimensional 
barcodes.
  2. T F  Nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM) chips do not lose their contents when the power to the 
computer is turned off.
  3. T F Computers that process data with light are referred to as quantum computers.
  4. T F Wi-Fi Direct is a wireless version of USB designed to connect peripheral devices.
  5. T F One advantage of robot-assisted surgery is faster recovery time.
  6. In quantum computing,       (which can represent more than two possible states) are 
used instead of electronic bits.
  7. Many products today use carbon       , which are a by-product of nanotechnology 
research.
  8.       is a wired networking standard that allows electrical power to be sent along with 
data over standard Ethernet cables.
KEY TERM 
MATCHING
 a. artificial intelligence (AI)
 b. augmented reality
 c. exoskeleton suit
 d. expert system
 e. nanotechnology
 f. neural network
 g. optical computer
 h. robot
 i. telemedicine
 j. WiMAX (802.16)
SELF-QUIZ
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
325
  9. A(n)       is an expert system in which the human brain’s pattern-recognition process is 
emulated by the computer system. 
 10. A       robot is used by the military in combat, such as to ensure locations are safe prior 
to sending in soldiers.
 1. For the following list of emerging devices or technologies, write the appropriate letter (I, P, O, S, 
or C) in the space provided to indicate whether each device or technology is used for input (I), 
processing (P), output (O), storage (S), or communications (C).
 a.       WiGig 
c.       2D barcode 
e.       NVRAM
 b.       OLED 
d.       PMR 
f.       IMOD
 2. Supply the missing words to complete the following statements.
 a.       storage systems use multiple blue laser beams to store data in three dimensions.
 b.       is a form of robot-assisted surgery in which the doctor’s physical location is 
different from the patient’s and robot’s physical location and the doctor controls the robot 
remotely over the Internet or another communications medium.
 3. Write the number of the networking standard that best matches each of the following descrip-
tions in the blank to the left of each description.
 a.       Used to create a wired home or business network. 
 b.       Used to create a home network via existing telephone jacks. 
 c.       Used to send power along with data over networking cables. 
 d.       Used to connect peripheral devices to a mobile phone or computer.
 4. Would an OLED display or an LCD display use more battery power? Explain why.
 5. Would Wi-Fi or WirelessHD be better for wirelessly networking two computers within a home? 
Explain.
 1. More and more everyday devices—including cars and other vehicles—are being controlled 
by computers. There are advantages, such as avoiding possible driver errors and the ability to 
change the speed of or reroute trains automatically to avoid collisions. But are there potential 
risks, as well? For example, Thailand’s Finance Minister once had to be rescued from inside his 
limousine after the onboard computer malfunctioned, leaving the vehicle immobilized and the 
door locks, power windows, and air conditioning not functioning. Do you think the benefits of 
increased automation of devices that could put us in danger if they malfunction outweigh the 
risks? What types of safeguards should be incorporated into computer-controlled cars, subway 
trains, and other automated vehicles? What about medication dispensers and other automated 
medical devices?
 2. Interference with wireless devices is happening much more often than in the past. For instance, 
unlicensed walkie-talkies used on TV sets have interfered with police radios, and British air 
traffic control transmissions have been interrupted by transmissions from nearby baby monitors. 
If devices that use unlicensed radio frequencies interfere with each other, whose fault is it? The 
individual for buying multiple products that use the same radio frequency? The manufacturers 
for not ensuring their products can switch channels as needed to use a free channel? The govern-
ment for allowing unregulated airwaves? Is there a solution to this problem? Who, if anyone, 
should be responsible for fixing this problem?
EXERCISES
 1. PoE
 2. Bluetooth
 3. Ethernet
 4. Phoneline
DISCUSSION
QUESTIONS
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

326
UNDERSTANDING COMPUTERS IN A CHANGING SOCIETY
P R OJ E CTS
 1. WiMAX vs. Wi-Fi As discussed in the chapter, WiMAX and Wi-Fi are both wireless network-
ing standards.
For this project, research WiMAX and Wi-Fi to determine their current status and the 
differences between the two standards. Are they designed for the same or different purposes? 
Explain. How are they being used today? Home networks? Business networks? Hotspots? 
College campuses? Mobile phone calls? Do you think the standards will coexist in the future, 
or will one eventually replace the other? At the conclusion of your research, prepare a one-
page summary of your findings and opinions and submit it to your instructor.
 2. Today’s Robots As discussed in the chapter, robots can be used today for a variety of activi-
ties in businesses and the military, as well as in the home.
For this project, select one type of robotic device on the market today—for instance, a 
robotic toy, vacuum cleaner, or lawn mower; a security or manufacturing robot; a robot used 
by the military or NASA; a robot used by law enforcement agencies; or a robotic personal 
assistant—and research it. Find out what the product does, what it costs, how it is powered and 
controlled, and if it can be reprogrammed. What are the advantages of the robotics part of the 
product? Do you think this is a worthwhile or beneficial product? At the conclusion of your 
research, prepare a one- to two-page summary of your findings and opinions and submit it to 
your instructor.
 3. Cloud Storage There are a number of cloud storage services (such as ADrive, Microsoft 
SkyDrive, Google Drive, and Box) designed to allow individuals to back up files online and 
share specific files with others; specialty online storage services designed for digital photo 
sharing include Flickr, Photobucket, and SnapFish.
For this project, visit at least one cloud storage site designed for backup and file 
exchange, and at least one site designed for digital photo sharing. You can try the sites listed 
above or use a search site to find alternative sites. Tour your selected sites to determine the 
features each service offers, the cost, the amount of storage space available, and the options for 
sending uploaded files to others. Do the sites password-protect your files, or are they available 
for anyone with an Internet connection to see? What are the benefits for using these types of 
storage services? Can you think of any drawbacks? Would you want to use any of the storage 
sites you visited? Why or why not? At the conclusion of this task, prepare a short summary of 
your findings and submit it to your instructor.
HOT TOPICS
SHORT ANSWER/
RESEARCH
HANDS ON
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

CHAPTER 8 EMERGING TECHNOLOGIES
327
 4. Emotion Recognition Software An emerging application is emotion recognition software, 
which uses camera input to try to read people’s current emotion. The first expected application 
of such a system is for ATM machines because they already have cameras installed. 
Possibilities include changing the advertising display based on the customer’s emotional 
response to displayed advertising, and enlarging the screen text if the customer appears to be 
squinting. Is it ethical for businesses using emotion recognition software to read the emotions 
of citizens without their consent? Proponents of the technology argue that it is no different 
than when human tellers or store clerks interpret customers’ emotions and modify their 
treatment of the customer accordingly. Do you agree? Why or why not? Is this a worthy new 
technology or just a potential invasion of privacy? Would you object to using an ATM machine 
with emotion-recognition capabilities? Why or why not?
For this project, form an opinion about the ethical ramifications of emotion recogni-
tion systems and be prepared to discuss your position (in class, via an online class discussion 
group, in a class chat room, or via a class blog, depending on your instructor’s directions). You 
may also be asked to write a short paper expressing your opinion.
 5. Wired Home Network If you have two or more computers at home and want to share files, an 
Internet connection, or a printer, you will need to set up a home network. Although a wireless net-
work is an option, wired networks still exist and new options for wired networks are emerging.
For this project, suppose that you want to set up a wired home network. Create a scenario 
(real or fictitious) that describes the number of computers and other devices involved, where 
each item is located, and the tasks for which the network will be used. Select a wired network-
ing option (such as Ethernet, Powerline, or Phoneline) and determine the steps and equipment 
necessary to implement that network for your scenario. Be sure to include the cost of the 
necessary hardware and how the network would be physically installed. Share your findings 
(including a diagram of your proposed network) with your class in the form of a presentation. 
The presentation should not exceed 10 minutes and should make use of one or more presen-
tation aids, such as a whiteboard, handouts, or a computer-based slide presentation (your 
instructor may provide additional requirements). You may also be asked to submit a summary 
of the presentation to your instructor.
 6. Should Unlicensed Drivers Be Allowed to Use Self-Driving Cars? As discussed in the 
chapter, self-driving cars are getting closer to becoming a reality. While currently in the test-
ing stage, consumer products could be on the market soon. In anticipation, states are beginning 
to determine regulations for these vehicles. One of the biggest questions is whether or not a 
licensed driver will be required to be in the vehicle. One could argue that a human driver isn’t 
necessary once self-driving cars are declared safe and legal and not requiring one would create 
one new benefit—the ability of unlicensed drivers (such as visually-impaired individuals and 
underage children) to be safely and legally transported without the use of a licensed driver. But 
should these individuals be allowed to use self-driving cars? Will we ever be certain enough 
that autonomous cars are safe to eliminate the need for a human being to be available to take 
control of the car if needed? Is it discrimination if unlicensed individuals aren’t allowed to use 
these cars? If a licensed driver is required, what if that individual is intoxicated or under the 
influence of drugs—should that be illegal even if the car is driving? Should autonomous cars be 
allowed to run errands alone, such as picking up a pizza or parking the car after the passengers 
get out? Would you feel comfortable being driven by an autonomous car? Why or why not?
Pick a side on this issue, form an opinion and gather supporting evidence, and be 
 prepared to discuss and defend your position in a classroom debate or in a 1–2 page paper, 
depending on your instructor’s directions.
ETHICS IN ACTION
PRESENTATION/
DEMONSTRATION
BALANCING ACT
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-1
R-1
INTRODUCTION
When working on a computer or taking a computer course, you often need to look up information related 
to computers, smartphones, and other devices. For instance, you may need to ﬁ nd out when the IBM PC 
was ﬁ rst invented, you may want tips about what to consider when buying a new device, or you may want 
to ﬁ nd out more about how numbering systems work. To help you with the tasks just mentioned and 
more, this References and Resources Guide brings together in one convenient location a collection of 
technology-related references and resources.
Computer History Timeline R-2
Guide to Buying a PC R-8
A Look at Numbering Systems R-11
Coding Charts R-15
Answers to Self-Quiz R-17
REFERENCES AND RESOURCES
GU I D E
OUTLINE
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-2
Precomputers and Early Computers (before 
approximately 1945)
Most precomputers and early computers were mechanical machines that 
worked with gears and levers. Electromechanical devices (using both electricity 
and gears and levers) were developed toward the end of this era.
First Generation (approximately 1946–1957)
Powered by vacuum tubes, these computers were faster than electromechan-
ical machines, but they were large and bulky, generated excessive heat, and had 
to be physically wired and reset to run programs. Input was primarily on punch 
cards; output was on punch cards or paper. Machine and assembly languages 
were used to program these computers.
COMPUTER HISTORY TIMELINE
500 B.C.
1642
1937
The earliest recorded calculating device,
the abacus, is believed to have been
invented by the Babylonians sometime
between 500 B.C. and 100 B.C. It and
similar types of counting boards were
used solely for counting.
Blaise Pascal invented the first
mechanical calculator, called the Pas-
caline Arithmetic Machine. It had the
capacity for eight digits and could add
and subtract.
Dr. John V. Atanasoff and Clifford
Berry designed and built ABC (for
Atanasoff-Berry Computer), the world’s
first electronic, digital computer.
1621
1804
1944
The slide rule, a precursor to the electronic
calculator, was invented. Used primarily to
perform multiplication,
division,
square
roots, and the calculation of logarithms, its
widespread use continued until the 1970s.
French silk weaver Joseph-Marie Jacquard built a
loom that read holes punched on a series of
small sheets of hardwood to control the weave of
the pattern. This automated machine introduced
the use of punch cards and showed that they
could be used to convey a series of instructions.
The Mark I, considered to be the first digi-
tal computer, was introduced by IBM. It
was developed in cooperation with Har-
vard University, was more than 50 feet
long, weighed almost five tons, and used
electromechanical relays to solve addition
problems in less than a second; multipli-
cation and division took about 6 and
12 seconds, respectively.
Precomputers and Early Computers
500, 1642, 1804, 1944: Courtesy of IBM Archives; 1621: Courtesy of Mark Konshak, Curator, sliderulemuseum.com; 1937: Courtesy of Iowa State University
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-3
Second Generation (approximately 1958–1963)
Second-generation computers used transistors instead of vacuum tubes. 
They allowed the computer to be physically smaller, more powerful, more 
reliable, and faster than before. Input was primarily on punch cards and 
magnetic tape; output was on punch cards and paper; and magnetic tape and 
disks were used for storage. High-level programming languages were used 
with these computers.
Third Generation (approximately 1964–1970)
The third generation of computers evolved when integrated circuits (IC)—computer 
chips—began being used instead of conventional transistors. Computers became 
even smaller and more reliable. Keyboards and monitors were introduced for 
input and output; magnetic disks were used for storage. The emergence of the 
operating system meant that operators no longer had to manually reset relays 
and wiring.
1951
1967
1969
1960
The UNIVAC 1, the first com-
puter to be mass produced for
general use, was introduced
by Remington Rand. In 1952,
it was used to analyze votes in
the U.S. presidential election
and correctly predicted that
Dwight D. Eisenhower would
be the victor only 45 minutes
after the polls closed, though
the results were not aired
immediately 
because 
they
weren’t trusted.
IBM unbundled some of its
hardware and software and
began selling them separately,
allowing other software
companies to emerge.
The first floppy
disk  (8 inches in
diameter) was
introduced.
UNIX was developed at AT&T’s Bell Labora-
tories; Advanced Micro Devices (AMD) was
formed; and ARPANET (the predecessor of
today’s Internet) was established.
The COBOL programming
language was developed by
a committee headed by Dr.
Grace Hopper.
1947
1957
1968
1964
The first mouse was invented
by Doug Engelbart.
Robert Noyce and Gordon
Moore founded the Intel
Corporation.
John Bardeen, Walter Brattain,
and William Shockley invented
the transistor, which had the
same capabilities as a vacuum
tube but was faster, broke less
often,
used less power,
and 
created less heat. They won a
Nobel Prize for their invention in
1956 and computers began to be
built 
with 
transistors 
shortly
afterwards.
The FORTRAN programming
language was introduced.
The IBM System/360 computer was intro-
duced. Unlike previous computers, System/360
contained a full line of compatible computers,
making upgrading easier.
Second Generation
Third Generation
First Generation
1951: Courtesy of U.S. Census Bureau; 1960: Courtesy of U.S. Navy; 1964a: Courtesy of SRI International; 1964b, 1969: Courtesy of IBM Archives
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-4
Fourth Generation (approximately 1971–present)
The fourth generation of computers began with large-scale integration (LSI), which resulted in chips that could contain 
thousands of transistors. Very large-scale integration (VLSI) resulted in the microprocessor and the resulting microcomputers. 
The keyboard and mouse are predominant input devices, though many other types of input devices are now available; 
monitors and printers provide output; and storage is obtained with magnetic disks, optical discs, and memory chips.
1971
The first microprocessor,
the Intel 4004, was
designed by Ted Hoff. The
single processor contained
2,250 transistors and
could execute 60,000
operations per second.
1975
Bill Gates and Paul
Allen wrote a version
of BASIC for the Altair,
the first computer 
programming language
designed for a 
personal computer. 
Bill Gates dropped 
out of Harvard to form
Microsoft with 
Paul Allen.
1979
Software Arts’ Visi-Calc, the
first electronic spreadsheet
and business program for
personal computers, was
released. This program is
seen as one of the reasons
personal computers first
became widely accepted
in the business world.
1981
IBM introduced the IBM PC.
This DOS-based PC used a
4.77 MHz 8088 CPU with 
64 KB of RAM and quickly
became the standard for
business personal computers.
1972
The C programming 
language was devel-
oped by Dennis
Ritchie at Bell Labs.
Seymour Cray, called the “father of
supercomputing,” founded Cray Research,
which would go on to build some of the
fastest computers in the world.
1976
Steve Wozniak and
Steve Jobs founded Apple
computer and released the
Apple I (a single-board
computer), followed by
the Apple II (a complete
personal computer that
became an instant success
in 1977). They originally ran
the company out of Jobs’
parents' garage.
1980
Sony Electronics
introduced the 3.5-inch
floppy disk and drive.
Seagate
Technology
announced the
first Winchester
5.25-inch hard
disk drive, revolu-
tionizing computer
storage.
IBM chose Microsoft to
develop the operating
system for its upcoming
personal computer. That
operating system was
PC-DOS.
1982
TIME magazine named
the computer its “Machine
of the Year” for 1982,
emphasizing the
importance of the computer
in our society.
Intel introduced the
80286 CPU.
Fourth Generation
1971, 1982: Courtesy of Intel Corporation; 1972: Photograph courtesy of the Charles Babbage Institute; 1975: Courtesy of the Microsoft Archives; 1979: Courtesy of Dan Bricklin. © www.jimraycroft.com 1982; 1980: Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®; 1981: Courtesy of IBM Archives
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-5
1983
Compaq Corporation released
the first IBM-compatible personal
computer that ran the same
software as the IBM PC, marking
the beginning of the huge
PC-compatible industry.
The first version of
Microsoft Windows,
a graphical environ-
ment, was released.
1985
(
) was
The first general-interest CD-ROM product
Grolier’s Electronic Encyclopedia
released, and computer and electronics
companies worked together to develop a
universal CD-ROM standard.
The first Internet
domain name was
registered.
Intel introduced
the Intel386 CPU.
1989
Tim Berners-Lee of
CERN invented the
World Wide Web.
Intel introduced the
Intel486 chip, the
world’s first million
transistor CPU.
1994
Linus Torvalds created
Linux, which launched the
open source revolution.
The penguin logo/mascot
soon followed.
1997
The number of
Internet users
worldwide
surpassed
100 million.
1984
The Apple Macintosh debuted.
It featured a simple, graphical
user interface, used an 8 MHz,
32-bit Motorola 68000 CPU,
and had a built-in 9-inch black-
and-white screen.
1986
Microsoft was listed on the New York Stock
Exchange and began to sell shares to the
public; Bill Gates became one of the world’s
youngest billionaires.
Apple's Steve Jobs
founded Pixar.
1993
NCSA released the Mosaic
Web browser, developed
by students at the University
of Illinois. Mosaic was one of
the first browsers to support
graphics, and it was the first
to support both Windows and
Macintosh computers. Three
million people were connected
to the Internet.
Intel introduced
the Pentium CPU.
1995
Windows 95 was
released and sold
more than 1 million
copies in 4 days.
Both eBay and
Amazon.com
were founded.
Sun Microsystems
released Java,
which is still 
a popular Web
programming
language.
1983: Courtesy, Hewlett-Packard Company; 1989: Fabian Bachrach, courtesy W3C; 1994: Courtesy Larry Ewing lewing@isc.tamu.edu and The GIMP; 1995a: Courtesy Microsoft Museum; 1995b: The eBay logo is a trademark of eBay Inc; 1995c: Java and the Java Coffee Cup logo 
are trademarks or registered trademarks of Sun Microsystems, Inc.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-6
2000
The first USB
flash drives were
released.
Intel introduced its
Pentium 4 CPU chip.
A popular advertising
campaign, launched
in 2001, featured
the Blue Man Group.
Microsoft shipped
the Office 2003
editions of its
Microsoft Office
System.
2003
AMD released
the 64-bit
Opteron server
CPU and the
Athlon 64, the
first 64-bit CPU
designed for
desktop
computer use.
Digital camera sales in the
United States exceeded
14 million, surpassing film
camera sales for the first time.
2005
Phishing and
identity theft
became household
words.
Intel and AMD both
released their
first dual-core CPUs.
2007
Microsoft
released
Windows
Vista and
Office 2007.
Twitter was
launched.
Apple
released the 
revolutionary
iPhone.
Quad-core
CPUs were
released by
both Intel
and AMD.
2001
Microsoft released
its XP line of
products, including
Windows XP and
Office XP.
Intel’s first
64-bit CPU, the
Itanium, was
introduced.
Apple introduced the iPod
personal music player.
The Internet and wireless
networks enabled people
to work and communicate
with others while on the go. 
2004
2006
Spyware became a
major problem; some
studies indicated that
over 80% of computers
had spyware installed.
1998
Apple released the iMac,
a modernized version of
the Macintosh computer.
Its futuristic design helped
to make this computer
immensely popular.
Microsoft shipped
Windows 98.
Broadband Internet access
approached the norm and
improvements to wireless
networking (such as WiMAX)
continued to be developed.
Use of the Internet for online
shopping and entertainment
continued to grow.
New Internet-
enabled
gaming
consoles, like
the Wii console
shown here,
were released.
2000a: Courtesy of Kingston Technology Company Inc.; 2000b: Courtesy of Intel Corporation; 2001: Courtesy Apple; 2003a: © 2003, 2005, 2006, 2007 Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., Reprinted with permission. AMD, the AMD Arrow logo, AMD Opteron, and combinations thereof are 
trademarks of Advanced Micro Devices, Inc.; 2003b, 2004: Courtesy Microsoft Corporation; 2003c: © iStockphoto.com/kingvald; 2006: © iStockphoto.com/sara_winter; 2007a: Courtesy Belkin International, Inc.; 2007b: Microsoft, Windows and the Windows logo are either registered 
trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-7
Netbooks were introduced.
2008
2010
Microsoft
introduced Kinect,
the first controller-
free interface for
a gaming console;
voice and
movement are
used instead.
Apple released
the iPad, which
started a
mobile tablet
trend.
Pinterest became
available.
Microsoft released Office 2010,
which included cloud versions
for the first time.
Use of social
networking sites
exploded;
Facebook
announced it 
had more than 
100 million users.
Google 
introduced
the Chrome
Web browser.
2012
Microsoft released
Windows 8, Office 2013,
and Office 365.
The availability
and use of Android
phones and media
tablets soared.
Social media took
off; Facebook hit
1 billion active
users.
iPad mini was
released.
Cloud computing
entered the
mainstream for
both individuals
and businesses.
Geobrowsing
applications
became more
prominent; 4G
phones became
available.
2009
Microsoft released
Windows 7.
Notebooks outsold
desktops.
Apple founder Steve Jobs
passed away at the age of 56.
Amazon sold
more e-books
than print books
and released
Kindle Fire, the
first color e-book
reader.
Supercomputer
Watson beat
human players
in Jeopardy!.
2011
The first
Chromebooks
become
available.
2013
HTML5 took off
and started to
change the way
Web pages were
developed.
Touch computing
became common
with a variety of
devices, including
desktop PCs.
Google Glass
became
available.
More than half of
all U.S. adults
owned a 
smartphone;
Apple released
the iPhone 5s
and iOS 7.
Fifth Generation (now and the future)
The fi fth generation of computers is in its infancy stage. Today, they tend to be based on artifi cial intelligence and include 
voice and touch input. In the future, they are expected to be constructed differently, such as in the form of optical computers, 
tiny computers that utilize nanotechnology, and as general-purpose computers built into desks, home appliances, and other 
everyday devices.
Fifth Generation
2008a: Courtesy Dell Inc.; 2008b: 2008c: Google image © Google Inc. and used with permission.; 2009a: Courtesy T-Mobile USA; 2009b: Google image © Google Inc. and used with permission.; 2009c: Microsoft, Windows and the Windows logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks 
of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.; 2010a: Microsoft, Windows and the Windows logo are either registered trademarks or trademarks of Microsoft Corporation in the United States and/or other countries.; 2010b: Courtesy Microsoft Corporation; 2010c: © 
iStockphoto.com/Jill Fromer; 2011a: Courtesy of IBM; 2011b: © iStockphoto.com/pixelfit; 2012a: Courtesy Microsoft Corporation; 2012b: Courtesy Facebook, Inc.; 2012c: Courtesy Samsung; 2012d: Courtesy Pinterest; 2013a: Courtesy Google; 2013b: Courtesy Apple; 2013c: Courtesy Dell
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

B
efore buying a new computer or other computing device, it is important to give 
some thought to what your needs are, including what software you want to run, 
any other devices with which you need to be compatible, how you might want to 
connect to the Internet, and how much portability is needed. This section of the 
References and Resources Guide explores topics related to buying a new personal 
computing device. ■
Analyzing Needs
When referring to a computing device, a need refers to a functional requirement that the 
device must be able to meet. For example, at a video rental store, a computer system 
must be able to enter barcodes automatically from videos or DVDs being checked in and 
out, identify customers with overdue movies, manage movie inventories, and do routine 
accounting operations. Portability is another example of a possible need. For example, if 
you need to take your device with you as you travel or work out of the office, you will need 
a portable computer or a media tablet instead of a desktop computer.
Selecting a device for home or business use must begin with the all-important question 
“What do I want the device to do?” Once you have determined what tasks it will be used for 
and the amount of portability that is needed, you can choose among the software and hard-
ware alternatives available. Making a list of your needs in 
the areas discussed in the next few sections can help you get 
a picture of what type of system you are shopping for. If you 
are not really sure what you want a system to do, you should 
think twice about buying one—you can easily make expen-
sive mistakes if you are uncertain about what you want a 
system to do. Some common decision categories are dis-
cussed next; Figure R-1 provides a list of questions that can 
help you define the type of device that will meet your needs.
Application Software Decisions
Determining what functions you want the system to perform 
will also help you decide which software is needed. Most 
users start with an application suite containing a word pro-
cessor, spreadsheet, and other  programs—either installed 
or cloud software. In addition, specialty programs or apps, 
such as tax preparation, drawing, home publishing, refer-
ence software, games, and more, may be needed or desired.
Not all software is available for all operating systems. 
Consequently, if a specific piece of software is needed, 
that choice may determine which operating system you 
need to use. In addition, your operating system and 
application software decisions may already be made for 
you if your documents need to be compatible with those 
of another computer (such as other office  computers or 
between a home and an office computer).
GUIDE TO BUYING A PC
POSSIBLE QUESTIONS
What tasks will I be using the device for (writing papers, accessing 
the Internet, watching TV, making phone and video calls, composing 
music, playing games, etc.)?
Do I have an operating system preference? Are there any other 
devices I need my documents and storage media to be compatible 
with?
How fast do I need the system to be?
Do I need portability? If so, do I need a powerful desktop replacement 
note book or will a less-powerful notebook or a media tablet suffice?
What size screen do I need? Do I need to be able to connect to a 
second monitor or an HDTV set?
What removable storage media will I need to use (such as DVDs, flash 
memory cards, or USB flash drives)?
What types of Internet access will I be using (such as DSL, cable, 
satellite, or mobile wireless)?
What types of networks will I need to connect to (wired, Wi-Fi, 
cellular)? What type of network adapter is needed to connect to those 
networks?
What additional hardware do I need (scanner, printer, wireless router, 
digital camera, notebook stand, or tablet stand, for example)?
What brand(s) do I prefer? When do I need the device?
Do I want to pay extra for a better warranty (such as a longer time 
period, more comprehensive coverage, or on-site service)?
FIGURE R-1
Questions to 
consider when 
getting ready to buy 
a computing device.
<
R-8
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REFERENCES AND RESOURCES GUIDE
R-9
Platforms and Configuration Options
If your operating system has already been determined, that is a good start in decid-
ing the overall platform you will be looking for—most users will choose between 
the PC-compatible and Apple Macintosh platforms. PC-compatible computers usually 
run either Windows or Linux; Apple computers almost always use Mac OS. Mobile 
devices typically run either Android or iOS.
Configuration decisions initially involve determining the size of the device desired 
(see Figure R-2). For nonportable systems, you have the choice between tower, desk-
top, or all-in-one configurations; in addition, the monitor size needs to be determined. 
Fully functioning personal computers can be notebook or tablet computers. For tablet 
computers, you need to decide if you will require keyboard use on a regular basis; if 
so, a hybrid notebook-tablet computer would be the best choice. If a powerful fully 
functioning computer is not required, you may decide to go with an even more por-
table option, such as a netbook or media tablet.
You should also consider any other specifications that are important to you, such as 
the size and type of internal storage (hard drive or flash memory media, for instance), 
types of other storage devices needed, amount of memory required, and so forth. As 
discussed in the next section, these decisions often require reconciling the features you 
want with the amount of money you are willing to spend.
Power vs. Budget Requirements
As part of the needs analysis, you should look closely at your need for a powerful sys-
tem versus your budgetary constraints. Most users do not need a state-of-the-art sys-
tem. Those who do should expect to pay more than the average user. A device that was 
top of the line six months or a year ago is usually reasonably priced and more than 
adequate for most users’ needs. Individuals who want a device only for basic tasks, 
such as using the Internet and word processing, can likely get by with an inexpensive 
device designed for home use.
When determining your requirements, be sure to identify the features and func-
tions that are absolutely essential for your primary computing tasks (such as a large 
hard drive and lots of memory for multimedia applications, a fast video card for gam-
ing, a fast Internet connection, a TV tuner card for individuals who want to use the 
computer as a TV set, and so forth). After you have the minimum configuration deter-
mined, you can add optional or desirable components, as your budget allows.
Listing Alternatives
After you consider your needs and the questions mentioned in Figure R-1, you should have 
a pretty good idea of the hardware and software you will need. You will also know what 
purchasing options are available to you, depending on your time frame (while some retail 
stores have systems that can be purchased and brought home the same day, special orders 
or some systems purchased online will take longer). The next step is to get enough infor-
mation from possible vendors to compare and contrast a few alternative systems that satisfy 
your stated needs. Most often, these vendors are local stores (such as computer stores, 
warehouse clubs, and electronic stores) and/or online stores (such as manufacturer Web 
sites and e-tailers—online retailers). To compare prices and specifications for possible sys-
tems, find at least three systems that meet or exceed your needs by looking through news-
paper advertisements, configuring systems online via manufacturer and e-tailer Web sites, 
or calling or visiting local stores. A comparison sheet listing your criteria and the systems 
you are considering, such as the one in Figure R-3, can help you summarize your options. 
Although it is sometimes very difficult to compare the prices of systems since they typi-
cally have somewhat different configurations and some components (such as CPUs) are 
difficult to compare, you can assign an approximate dollar value to each extra feature a sys-
tem has (such as $50 for an included printer or a larger hard drive). Be sure to also include 
any sales tax and shipping charges when you compare the prices of each total system.
NOTEBOOKS
HYBRID NOTEBOOK-TABLETS
MEDIA TABLETS
DESKTOPS
FIGURE R-2
Configuration 
options.
<
Courtesy Lenovo
Courtesy Apple
Courtesy Lenovo
Courtesy of Samsung
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-10
REFERENCES AND RESOURCES GUIDE
If your budget is limited, you will have to balance the system you need with extra fea-
tures you may want. But do not skimp on memory or hard drive space because sufficient 
memory can help your programs to run faster and with fewer problems and hard drive space 
is consumed quickly. Often for just a few extra dollars, you can get additional memory, a 
faster CPU, or a larger hard drive, which is significantly cheaper than trying to upgrade any 
of those features later. A good rule of thumb is to try to buy a little higher system than you 
think you need. On the other hand, do not buy a top-of-the-line system unless you fall into 
the power user category and really need it. Generally, the second or third system down from 
the top of the line is a very good system for a much more reasonable price. Some guidelines 
for minimum requirements for a new computer for most home users are as follows:
 
➤A relatively fast multi-core CPU.
 
➤6 GB of RAM for desktop and notebook users.
 
➤500 GB or more hard drive space.
 
➤Recordable or rewritable DVD or Blu-ray Disc drive.
 
➤Network adapter or modem for the desired type(s) of Internet access.
 
➤Sound card and speakers; built-in webcam and microphone.
 
➤At least 2 USB ports.
 
➤A built-in flash memory media reader.
COMPONENT
EXAMPLE OF DESIRED 
SPECIFICATIONS
SYSTEM #1
VENDOR:
SYSTEM #2 
VENDOR:
SYSTEM #3 
VENDOR:
Type of device
Notebook computer
Operating system
Windows 8
Manufacturer
Sony or Dell
CPU
Intel quad core
RAM
8 GB or higher
Hard drive
2 TB or higher
Removable storage
Flash memory card reader
Optical drive
Blu-ray Disc drive
Monitor
Widescreen 17"; touch screen
Video card and video RAM
Prefer video card and HDMI
Keyboard/mouse
Portable USB mouse with scroll wheel
Sound card/speakers
No preference
Modem
None
Networking
Wi-Fi (802.11ac); Bluetooth
Printer
Laser if get a good package deal
Included software
Microsoft Office 365
Warranty
3 years min.
Other features
3 USB ports minimum
Price
Tax
Shipping
TOTAL COST
FIGURE R-3
Comparing 
computing 
alternatives. A 
checklist such as 
this one can help to 
organize your desired 
criteria and evaluate 
possible systems.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A
s discussed in Chapter 2 of this text, a numbering system is a way of represent-
ing numbers. People generally use the decimal numbering system explained in 
Chapter 2 and reviewed next; computers process data using the binary numbering 
system. Another numbering system related to computer use is the hexadecimal num-
bering system, which can be used to represent long strings of binary numbers in a 
manner more understandable to people than the binary numbering system. Following 
a discussion of these three numbering systems, we take a look at conversions 
between numbering systems and principles of computer arithmetic, and then close 
with a look at how to perform conversions using a scientific calculator. ■
The Decimal and Binary Numbering System
The decimal (base 10) numbering system uses 10 symbols—the digits 0, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 
8, and 9—to represent all possible numbers and is the numbering system people use most 
often. The binary (base 2) numbering system is used extensively by computers to represent 
numbers and other characters. This system uses only two digits—0 and 1. As mentioned in 
Chapter 2, the place values (columns) in the binary numbering system are different from 
those used in the decimal system.
The Hexadecimal Numbering System
Computers often output diagnostic and memory-manage-
ment messages and identify network adapters and other 
hardware in hexadecimal (hex) notation. Hexadecimal 
notation is a shorthand method for representing the 
binary digits stored in a computer. Because large binary 
numbers—for example, 1101010001001110—can eas-
ily be misread by people, hexadecimal notation groups 
binary digits into units of four, which, in turn, are repre-
sented by other symbols.
The hexadecimal numbering system is also called the 
base 16 numbering system because it uses 16 different sym-
bols. Since there are only 10 possible numeric digits, hexa-
decimal uses letters instead of numbers for the additional 
6 symbols. The 16 hexadecimal symbols and their decimal 
and binary counterparts are shown in Figure R-4.
The hexadecimal numbering system has a special rela-
tionship to the 8-bit bytes of ASCII and EBCDIC that makes 
it ideal for displaying addresses and other data quickly. As 
you can see in Figure R-4, each hex character has a 4-bit 
binary counterpart, so any combination of 8 bits can be rep-
resented by exactly two hexadecimal characters. For exam-
ple, the letter N (represented in ASCII by 01001110) has a 
hex representation of 4E (see the Binary Equivalent column 
for the hexadecimal characters 4 and E in Figure R-4).
A LOOK AT NUMBERING SYSTEMS
FIGURE R-4
Hexadecimal 
characters and their 
decimal and binary 
equivalents.
<
HEXADECIMAL 
CHARACTER
DECIMAL 
EQUIVALENT
BINARY
EQUIVALENT
0
 0
0000
1
 1
0001
2
 2
0010
3
 3
0011
4
 4
0100
5
 5
0101
6
 6
0110
7
 7
0111
8
 8
1000
9
 9
1001
A
10
1010
B
11
1011
C
12
1100
D
13
1101
E
14
1110
F
15
1111
R-11
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-12
REFERENCES AND RESOURCES GUIDE
Converting Between Numbering Systems
The concept of interpreting binary numbers was discussed in Chapter 2. Specifically, to 
convert from binary to decimal, you need to multiply each digit of the binary number by 
the appropriate power of 2 for that place value, such as by 20 or 1 for the rightmost digit, 
21 or 2 for the next digit, and so forth, and then add those products together. Three other 
types of conversions computer professionals sometimes need to make are discussed next.
Hexadecimal to Decimal
As shown in Figure R-5, the process for converting a hexadecimal number to its decimal 
equivalent is similar to converting a binary number to its decimal equivalent, except the 
base number is 16 instead of 2. To determine the decimal equivalent of a hexadecimal 
number (such as 4F6A, as shown in Figure R-5), multiply the decimal equivalent of each 
individual hex character (determined by using the table in Figure R-4) by the appropriate 
power of 16 and then add the results to obtain the decimal equivalent of that hex number.
Hexadecimal to Binary and Binary to Hexadecimal
To convert from hexadecimal to binary, we convert each hexadecimal digit separately to 4 
binary digits (using the table in Figure R-4). For example, to convert F6A9 to binary, we get
F
6
A
9
1111
0110
1010
1001
or 1111011010101001 in binary representation. To convert from binary to hexadecimal, 
we go through the reverse process. If the number of digits in the binary number is not 
divisible by 4, we add leading zeros to the binary number to force an even division. For 
example, to convert the binary number 1101101010011 to hexadecimal, we get
0001
1011
0101
0011
1
B
5
3
or lB53 in hexadecimal representation. Note that three leading zeros were added to change 
the initial 1 to 0001 before making the conversion.
Decimal to Binary and Decimal to Hexadecimal
To convert from decimal to either binary or hexadecimal, we can use the remainder method. 
To use the remainder method, the decimal number is divided by 2 (to convert to a binary 
number) or 16 (to convert to a hexadecimal number). The remainder of the division opera-
tion is recorded and the division process is repeated using the quotient as the next dividend, 
until the quotient becomes 0. At that point, the collective remainders (written backwards) 
represent the equivalent binary or hexadecimal number (see Figure R-6).
FIGURE R-5
The hexadecimal 
(base 16) numbering 
system. Each digit in 
a hexadecimal number 
represents 16 taken to 
a different power.
<
Decimal
equivalent
163
(4,096)
162
(256)
161
(16)
160
(1)
4
F
6
A
16 taken to
different
powers
means A x 1 or 10 x 1
means 6 x 16
means F x 256 or 15 x 256
means 4 x 4,096
=        10
=        96
=   3,840
= 16,384
20,330
The hexadecimal
number
4F6A
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

REFERENCES AND RESOURCES GUIDE
R-13
A table summarizing all the numbering system conversion procedures covered in this 
text is provided in Figure R-7.
Consider the
decimal number
79
HEXADECIMAL
79   16   =  4   R  15 or F
  4   16   =  0   R    4
Stop at 0
BINARY
Dividends
÷
÷
÷
÷
3.  Collect the remainders
     backwards to get the
     binary number 1001111.
1.  Divide the
     decimal number
     by 2.
2.  Repeat the
     process using
     the quotient from
     the previous
     division until the
     quotient is 0.
1.  Divide the
     decimal number
     by 16.
2.  Repeat the
     process using the
     quotient from the
     previous division
     until the quotient is 0.
3.  Collect the remainders
     backwards to get the
     hexadecimal number 4F.
Stop at 0
79    2   =  39   R  1 
39    2   =  19   R  1
19    2   =    9   R  1
  9    2   =    4   R  1
  4    2   =    2   R  0
  2    2   =    1   R  0
  1    2   =    0   R  1
4F
1001111
Quotients Remainder
Dividends Quotients Remainder
÷
÷
÷
÷
÷ 
FIGURE R-6
The remainder 
method. Used to 
convert decimal 
numbers to binary or 
hex format.
<
TO BASE
FROM BASE
2
10
16
2
Starting at the rightmost 
digit, multiply binary 
digits by 20, 21, 22, etc., 
respectively, and then add 
products.
Starting at the rightmost 
digit, convert each 
group of four binary 
digits to a hex digit.
10
Divide repeatedly by 2 
using each quotient as 
the next dividend until 
the quotient becomes 
0, and then collect the 
remainders in reverse 
order.
Divide repeatedly by 16 
using each quotient as 
the next dividend until 
the quotient becomes 
0, and then collect the 
remainders in reverse 
order.
16
Convert each hex digit 
to four binary digits.
Starting at the rightmost 
digit, multiply hex digits 
by 160, 161, 162, etc., 
respectively, and then 
add products.
FIGURE R-7
Summary of 
conversions.
<
Computer Arithmetic
To most people, decimal arithmetic is second nature. 
Addition and subtraction of binary and hexadecimal 
numbers is not much different from the process used with 
decimal numbers—just the number of symbols used in 
each system varies. For instance, the digits in each col-
umn are added or subtracted and you carry to and borrow 
from the column to the left as needed as you move from 
right to left. Instead of carrying or borrowing powers of 
10, however—as you would in the decimal system—you 
carry or borrow powers of 2 (binary) or 16 (hexadecimal).
Figure R-8 provides an example of addition and sub-
traction with decimal, binary, and hexadecimal numbers.
1
1
1
1
DECIMAL
BINARY
HEXADECIMAL
Addition
 
1
 
144
+ 
27
 
171
 
1 1 1
 
100101
+ 
10011
 
111000
 
1
 
8E
+ 
2F
 
BD
Subtraction
 
3
 
144
- 
27
 
117
 
0 
0
 
1 00101
- 
10011
 
10010
 
7
 
8E
- 
2F
 
5F
FIGURE R-8
Adding and 
subtracting with 
the decimal, binary, 
and hexadecimal 
numbering systems.
<
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-14
REFERENCES AND RESOURCES GUIDE
Using a Calculator
A calculator that supports different numbering systems can be used to convert numbers 
between numbering systems or to check conversions performed by hand. For example, 
Figure R-9 shows how to use the Windows Calculator Programmer option to double-check 
the hand calculations performed in Figure R-6 (the Programmer option must be selected 
using the Calculator’s View menu to display the options shown in the figure). Arithmetic 
can also be performed in any numbering system on a calculator, once that numbering sys-
tem is selected on the calculator. Notice that, depending on which numbering system is 
currently selected, not all numbers on the calculator are available—only the possible num-
bers are displayed, such as only 0 and 1 when the binary numbering system is selected, as 
in the bottom screen in the figure.
WINDOWS
CALCULATOR
The Calculator
program is included
in Windows; select the
Programmer option
using the Calculator’s
View menu.
2. The number is now displayed
in hex notation. To convert it
to binary, select that
numbering system.
3. The number is
now displayed
in binary
representation.
Numbers and operators can be used to
perform arithmetic using the selected
numbering system. Note that not all numbers
on the calculator are available—only the ones
appropriate for the selected numbering system.
1. After entering a number (such as the
decimal number 79 with the decimal
numbering system selected as shown
here), select the numbering system to
which the number should be converted
(hex in this example).
FIGURE R-9
Using a calculator 
to convert between 
numbering systems 
and perform 
arithmetic.
<
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

A
s discussed in Chapter 2 of this text, coding systems for text-based data include 
ASCII and Unicode; EBCDIC is another coding system for text-based data that 
was developed primarily for use with mainframes. ■
ASCII and EBCDIC
Figure R-10 provides a chart listing the 8-digit ASCII and EBCDIC representations (in 
binary) for most of the symbols found on a typical keyboard.
CODING CHARTS
FIGURE R-10
ASCII and EBCDIC 
binary codes for 
typical keyboard 
symbols.
<
SYMBOL
ASCII
EBCDIC
A
0100 0001
1100 0001
B
0100 0010
1100 0010
C
0100 0011
1100 0011
D
0100 0100
1100 0100
E
0100 0101
1100 0101
F
0100 0110
1100 0110
G
0100 0111
1100 0111
H
0100 1000
1100 1000
I
0100 1001
1100 1001
J
0100 1010
1101 0001
K
0100 1011
1101 0010
L
0100 1100
1101 0011
M
0100 1101
1101 0100
N
0100 1110
1101 0101
O
0100 1111
1101 0110
P
0101 0000
1101 0111
Q
0101 0001
1101 1000
R
0101 0010
1101 1001
S
0101 0011
1110 0010
T
0101 0100
1110 0011
U
0101 0101
1110 0100
V
0101 0110
1110 0101
W
0101 0111
1110 0110
X
0101 1000
1110 0111
Y
0101 1001
1110 1000
Z
0101 1010
1110 1001
a
0110 0001
1000 0001
b
0110 0010
1000 0010
c
0110 0011
1000 0011
d
0110 0100
1000 0100
SYMBOL
ASCII
EBCDIC
e
0110 0101
1000 0101
f
0110 0110
1000 0110
g
0110 0111
1000 0111
h
0110 1000
1000 1000
i
0110 1001
1000 1001
j
0110 1010
1001 0001
k
0110 1011
1001 0010
l
0110 1100
1001 0011
m
0110 1101
1001 0100
n
0110 1110
1001 0101
o
0110 1111
1001 0110
p
0111 0000
1001 0111
q
0111 0001
1001 1000
r
0111 0010
1001 1001
s
0111 0011
1010 0010
t
0111 0100
1010 0011
u
0111 0101
1010 0100
v
0111 0110
1010 0101
w
0111 0111
1010 0110
x
0111 1000
1010 0111
y
0111 1001
1010 1000
z
0111 1010
1010 1001
0
0011 0000
1111 0000
1
0011 0001
1111 0001
2
0011 0010
1111 0010
3
0011 0011
1111 0011
4
0011 0100
1111 0100
5
0011 0101
1111 0101
6
0011 0110
1111 0110
7
0011 0111
1111 0111
SYMBOL
ASCII
EBCDIC
8
0011 1000
1111 1000
9
0011 1001
1111 1001
(
0010 1000
0100 1101
)
0010 1001
0101 1101
/
0010 1111
0110 0001
-
0010 1101
0110 0000
*
0010 1010
0101 1100
+
0010 1011
0100 1110
,
0010 1100
0110 1011
.
0010 1110
0100 1011
:
0011 1010
0111 1010
;
0011 1011
0101 1110
&
0010 0110
0101 0000
\
0101 1100
1110 0000
$
0010 0100
0101 1011
%
0010 0101
0110 1100
=
0011 1101
0111 1110
>
0011 1110
0110 1110
<
0011 1100
0100 1100
!
0010 0001
0101 1010
|
0111 1100
0110 1010
?
0011 1111
0110 1111
@
0100 0000
0111 1100
_
0101 1111
0110 1101
´
0110 0000
1011 1001
{
0111 1011
1100 0000
}
0111 1101
1101 0000
~
0111 1110
1010 0001
[
0101 1011
0100 1010
]
0101 1101
0101 1010
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
R-15
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

R-16
REFERENCES AND RESOURCES GUIDE
Unicode
Since consistent worldwide representation of 
symbols is increasingly needed today, use of 
Unicode is growing rapidly. Unicode can be 
used to represent every written language, as well 
as a variety of other symbols. Unicode codes 
are typically listed in hexadecimal notation—a 
sampling of Unicode is shown in Figure R-11.
The capability to display characters and 
other symbols using Unicode coding is incor-
porated into many programs. For instance, 
when the Symbol dialog box is opened using 
the INSERT tab in Microsoft Office Word, the 
Unicode representation (as well as the cor-
responding ASCII code in either decimal or 
hexadecimal representation) can be viewed 
(see Figure R-12). Some programs allow you to 
enter a Unicode symbol using its Unicode hexa-
decimal value. For instance, in Microsoft Office 
programs you can use the Alt+X command 
when the insertion point is just to the right of 
a Unicode hex value to convert that hex value 
into the corresponding symbol. For example, 
the keystrokes
2264Alt+X
result in the symbol corresponding to the 
Unicode code 2264 (the less than or equal 
sign ≤) being inserted into the document; entering 03A3 and then pressing Alt+X inserts the 
symbol shown in the Word screen in Figure R-12.
A
0041
N
004E
a
0061
n
006E
o
0030
(
007B
*
002A
■
25A0
0985
B
0042
O
004F
b
0062
o
006F
1
0031
|
007C
+
002B
▫
25A1
0997
C
0043
P
0050
c
0063
p
0070
2
0032
}
007D
,
002C
25B2
09C7
D
0044
Q
0051
d
0064
q
0071
3
0033
~
007E
-
002D
2105
09F6
E
0045
R
0052
e
0065
r
0072
4
0034
!
0021
.
002E
211E
0685
F
0046
S
0053
f
0066
s
0073
5
0035
“
0022
/
002F
1⁄3
2153
06B4
G
0047
T
0054
g
0067
t
0074
6
0036
#
0023
£
20A4
2⁄3
2154
06AA
H
0048
U
0055
h
0068
u
0075
7
0037
$
0024
Σ
2211
2655
03B1
I
0049
V
0056
i
0069
v
0076
8
0038
%
0025
∅
2205
2602
03B2
J
004A
W
0057
j
006A
w
0077
9
0039
&
0026
√
221A
2750
∆
0394
K
004B
X
0058
k
006B
x
0078
[
005B
’
0027
∞
221E
2742
φ
03A6
L
004C
Y
0059
l
006C
y
0079
\
005C
(
0028
≤
2264
27B2
Ω
03A9
M
004D
Z
005A
m
006D
z
007A
]
005D
)
0029
≥
2265
♥
2665
Ÿ
03AB
FIGURE R-11
Selected Unicode 
codes.
<
FIGURE R-12
Using Unicode.
<
UNICODE REPRESENTATION
The Symbol dialog box shown here lists the Unicode representation
of each symbol as it is selected. If preferred, the ASCII representation
can be displayed. 
Unicode representation
for Greek capital letter
sigma symbol.
1. Type code, and then
press Alt+X.
2. The corresponding
symbol appears.
INSERTING SYMBOLS USING UNICODE
In Microsoft Ofﬁce programs, typing the hexadecimal Unicode code
for a symbol and then pressing Alt+X displays the corresponding
symbol.
Copyright © 2015 Cengage Learning®
Used with permission from Microsoft Corporation
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Chapter 1
1. T 2. F 3. F 4. F 5. T 6. Input 7. hybrid notebook-tablet 8. Virtualization 9. electronic mail or e-mail 
10. a. 4 b. 2 c. 1 d. 3
Chapter 2
1. T 2. T 3. F 4. F 5. T 6. scanner, optical scanner, flatbed scanner, or portable scanner 7. quad-core 
8. flash memory 9. folders 10. a. 2 b. 5 c. 1 d. 4 e. 3
Chapter 3
1. F 2. F 3. T 4. T 5. F 6. Digital Subscriber Line or DSL 7. keyword; directory 8. social network or social 
networking site 9. online auction 10. a. 2 b. 4 c. 1 d. 3
Chapter 4
1. F 2. T 3. F 4. T 5. F 6. war driving 7. Biometric 8. virtual private network or VPN 9. digital signature 
10. a. 3 b. 4 c. 1 d. 2
Chapter 5
1. F 2. T 3. T 4. F 5. F 6. disaster recovery 7. digital counterfeiting 8. filter 9. opt out; opt in 
10. a. 3 b. 5 c. 1 d. 2 e. 4
Chapter 6
1. F 2. T 3. F 4. T 5. T 6. copyright; trademark 7. plagiarism 8. Digital rights management (DRM) 
9. Communications Decency 10. a. 2 b. 4 c. 1 d. 3
Chapter 7
1. F 2. T 3. T 4. F 5. F 6. ergonomics 7. burnout 8. digital divide 9. Internet addiction 10. Solar
Chapter 8
1. T 2. T 3. F 4. F 5. T 6. qubits 7. nanotubes 8. Power over Ethernet (PoE) 9. neural network or neural net 
10. battlefield 
ANSWERS TO SELF-QUIZ
R-17
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

I-1
Special Characters
~ (tilde), 110
* (asterisk), 110
– (minus sign), 109
# (hashtag), 113
A
AAC. See augmentative and alternative 
communication (AAC) tablet
abacus, 10
ABC News, 122
academic honor code, 246
access control system, 147
access mechanism, 67
access to technology, 275–279
assistive technology, 277–279
digital divide, 275–277
acronym, 36
activation key, 202
Activity Feed, 116
ADA. See Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)
adaptive input device, 56
address
e-mail. See e-mail address
Internet, 27–29
IP, 28
Address bar, 31
Advanced Micro Devices (AMD), 58
Advanced Research Projects Agency (ARPA), 94
adware, 133
age verification, 251
AI. See artificial intelligence (AI)
AIM, 112
all-in-one. See multifunction device (MFD)
all-in-one case, 19
alphanumeric key, 50
alt tag, 278
Alternate key, 50
ALU. See arithmetic/logic unit (ALU)
always-on connection. See dial-up connection
Amazon, 238
Amazon Instant Video, 121
Amazon MP3, 119
Amazon Pages, 249
Amazon Posts, 249
American Psychological Association (APA), 111
American Recovery and Reinvestment Act, 223
American Standard Code for Information 
Interchange. See ASCII (American Standard 
Code for Information Interchange)
Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA), 278
analog camcorder, 56
Android, 14
anonymity, 37
Anonymous (hactivist group), 145
Anonymous Speech, 210
antenna, 78
Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act, 237
antiglare screen, 268
anti-malware app, rogue, 162
anti-malware software, 162
antiphishing tool, 174–175
antipiracy software, 202–203
antispam appliance, 211
antispyware software, 221
antitheft software, 165
antivirus software Software used to detect and 
eliminate computer viruses and other types of 
malware. 165–166
AOL.com, 123
APA. See American Psychological Association 
(APA)
app. See application software
App Store, 74
app store, 80
Apple, 238
Apple FaceTime, 115
Apple Macintosh, 12
application assistant, 315
application service provider (ASP) A company 
that manages and distributes software-based 
services over the Internet. 97
application software Programs that enable users 
to perform specific tasks on a computer, such 
as writing letters or playing games; also called 
apps. 15–16
buying a PC, R–8
installed vs. cloud, 80
ownership rights, 79
arithmetic/logic unit (ALU), 58
ARPA. See Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (ARPA)
ARPANET The predecessor to the Internet, 
named after the Advanced Research Projects 
Agency (ARPA), which sponsored its 
development. 94
arrow key, 40
artificial intelligence (AI), 11, 12, 313–318
artificial intelligence (AI) system A system 
in which a computer performs actions that 
are characteristic of human intelligence. 12, 
313–314
ASCII (American Standard Code for 
Information Interchange) A fixed-length, 
binary coding system used to represent text-
based data for computer processing on many 
types of computers. 48
chart, R–15
Ask.com, 106
ASP. See application service provider (ASP)
asset tag, 195
assistive output device, 279
assistive technology Hardware and software 
specifically designed for use by individuals with 
physical disabilities. 277–279
asterisk (*), wildcard, 110
asymmetric key encryption. See public key encryption
audio port, 58
augmentative and alternative communication (AAC) 
tablet, 278
augmented reality When computer-generated 
images are overlapped on top of real-time 
images, such as to overlay information over the 
photo or video displayed on a smartphone. 272, 
273, 297–298
authentication pill, 167
authentication system, 6, 147
autonomous robot, 321
autonomous vehicle, 315
AVG Free, 166
Ayres, Nick, 125
B
backbone network, 25
backing up, 23, 198, 199
backlighting, 301
Backspace key, 50
Backstage view, 82
barcode A machine-readable code that represents 
data as a set of bars. 53
barcode printer, 65
barcode reader An input device that reads 
barcodes. 9, 53, 54
Barquin, Ramon C., 238
Basal Action Network, 284
base number, 48
BASIC, 15
basic input/output system. See BIOS (basic input/
output system)
battlefield robot A robot used by the military to 
ensure that locations are safe prior to sending in 
soldiers. 320–321
Baustert, Ryan, 115
BCI. See brain-to-computer interfacing (BCI)
BD. See Blu-ray Disc (BD)
BD-R disc, 71
BD-R DL disc, 71
BD-R XL disc, 71
BD-RE DL disc, 72
BD-RE XL disc, 72
BD-ROM (Blu-ray Disc read-only memory) 
disc, 71
BDXL standard, 70
Berners-Lee, Tim, 94
Beschen, David, 285
Betamax, 242
big data, 314
binary computer, 47
binary digit, 48
binary numbering system The numbering system 
that represents all numbers using just two 
symbols (0 and 1). R–11, R–12—R–13
Bing, 106
biometric access system An access control system 
that uses one unique physical characteristic of an 
individual (such as a fingerprint, a face, veins, 
or a voice) to authenticate that individual. 148, 
150–151
biometric data, 55, 150
biometric feature, 74, 148
I N D E X
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
I-2
biometric reader A device used to input biometric 
data, such as an individual’s fingerprint or 
voice. 55
biometrics, 150
BIOS (basic input/output system), 61
bit The smallest unit of data a digital computer can 
recognize; represented by a 0 or a 1. 48
Bitcoin, 239
black-and-white printer, 63
Blackboard, 126
BLOCKBUSTER OnDemand, 121
blog A Web page that contains short, frequently 
updated entries in chronological order, 
typically by just one individual. 26, 95, 96, 
127–128
blogging software, 128
blogosphere, 127
Bluetooth A networking standard for very short-
range wireless connections; the devices are 
automatically connected once they get within 
the allowable range. 49, 58, 77, 312
Bluetooth 4.0, 124, 313
Bluetooth Smart, 124, 313
blue-violet laser, 70
Blu-ray Disc (BD) A high-capacity (typically 
25 GB or 50 GB) disc that is often used to 
deliver high-definition movies, as well as 
to store user data. 12, 70
Blu-ray drive, 12
BoF. See broadband over fiber (BoF) Internet 
access
bookmarking, 31
Bookmarks feature, 32
Boolean operator, 109
boot To start up a computer. 14
boot process, 14
border, 83
bot A computer that is controlled by a hacker or 
other computer criminal. 160
botherder, 160
botnet A group of bots that are controlled by one 
individual. 35, 160
Box, 75
Braille display, 279
Braille embosser. See Braille printer
Braille keyboard, 278
Braille printer, 279
brain-to-computer interfacing (BCI) The process 
of connecting the brain with a computer, such 
as implanting electrodes directly into the brain 
or using a headset that wirelessly reads and 
interprets brainwaves. 319
Bredow, Rob, 10
Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC), 158
Bring Your Own Device. See BYOD (Bring Your 
Own Device)
British Sky Broadcasting, 236
broadband Internet service, 78
broadband over fiber (BoF) Internet access 
Very fast, direct Internet access via fiber-optic 
networks; also referred to as fiber-to-the-
premises (FTTP) Internet access. 104
broadband phone, 114
Brown, Michelle, 169
browser, updating, 198
Browsing history option, 211
Bruce, James, 61
budget, buying a PC, R–9
burnout A state of fatigue or frustration usually 
brought on by overwork. 263, 272
business. See also workplace
ethical use of resources, 245
business card CD, 70
business continuity plan. See disaster recovery plan
business ethics Standards of moral conduct that 
guide a business’s policies, decisions, and 
actions. 238, 240, 249–252
button, 14
BYOC. See Bring Your Own Cloud (BYOC)
BYOD (Bring Your Own Device), 5, 158, 159
byte A group of 8 bits. 48
C
C++, 15
cable, 77, 78
Ethernet, 105
cable anchor, 192
cable Internet access Fast, direct Internet access 
via cable TV lines. 103
cable lock, 191–192
cable modem, 78, 103
cache memory, 60, 61
calculator, 108
calculator use, R–14
campus emergency notification system, 30
CAN-SPAM Act of 2003, 179, 209, 223
Cantor Fitzgerald, 200
Caps lock key, 50
carbon footprint, 279
carbon nanotube (CNT) Tiny, hollow tube made 
of carbon atoms. 299, 304–305
carbon nanotube fiber, 304
Carnegie Mellon University, 238
carpal tunnel, 264
carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS) A painful and 
crippling condition affecting the hands 
and wrists that can be caused by computer 
use. 264
Carterfone Decision, 98
cathode-ray tube, 62
CBCDG. See Central Bank Counterfeit Deterrence 
Group (CBCDG)
CD disc A low capacity (typically 700 MB) optical 
disc that is often used to deliver music and 
software, as well as to store user data. 12, 13, 
69, 70
CD drive, 12, 13
CDP. See continuous data protection (CDP)
CD-R disc, 71
CD-R drive, 71
CD-ROM (compact disc read-only memory) disc, 
71
CD-RW disc, 72
CD-RW drive, 72
CDS. See counterfeit deterrence system (CDS)
cell phone. See mobile phone; smartphone
cellular phone. See mobile phone; smartphone
cellular provider, 19
cellular standard, 77, 311–312
censorship, 129–130
Center for Democracy and Technology, 212
Central Bank Counterfeit Deterrence Group 
(CBCDG), 203
central processing unit (CPU) The chip located 
on the motherboard of a computer that 
performs most of the processing for a computer. 
12, 57, 58
Certificate Authority, 154
ChaCha Search, 107
chargeware, 163
chat. See instant messaging (IM)
chatterbot, 315
checking in, 113, 205
checkout process, 118
Chicago Manual of Style, 111
chief privacy officer (CPO), 213–214
child monitoring system, 307–308
Child Online Protection Act (COPA), 222, 223
children
age-verification systems, 251
online pornography, 178
safety tips, 179
Children’s Internet Protection Act (CIPA), 129
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act 
(COPPA), 253
chip. See central processing unit (CPU); graphics 
processing unit (GPU); RFID tag
Chrome, 26
Chromebook, 21
Chromecast, 18
CinemaNow, 121
CIPA. See Children’s Internet Protection Act 
(CIPA)
cipher, 154
CISPA (Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection 
Act), 179
Citadel botnet, 160
citing Web sources, 111
City of Heroes, 121
Claflin, Bruce, 249
Clean Production Action, 284
C-level attack, 190
click fraud, 160
clicking, 50, 51
cloud printing, 63
cloud software Software that is delivered on 
demand via the Web; also referred to as 
Software as a Service (SaaS) and cloudware. 
14, 80, 97
installed software vs., 80
cloud storage Refers to using a storage device that 
is accessed via the Internet; also called online 
storage. 75–76
cloudware. See cloud software
CNT. See carbon nanotube (CNT)
coaxial cable, 78
Cobb, Mike, 199
COBOL, 11, 15
code of conduct A policy, often for a school 
or business, that specifies allowable use 
of resources, such as computers and other 
equipment. 144, 245
code of ethics A policy, often for an organization 
or industry, that specifies overall moral 
guidelines adopted by that organization or 
industry. 245
CodeArmor Intelligence, 202–203
coding system, 48
cognitive authentication system, 148–149
color display, 63
color printer, 63
color-shifting ink, 203
command, 81
command button, 81, 82
commercial software, 79
communications The transmission of data from one 
device to another. 9
unauthorized interception, 147
Communications Decency Act, 129, 178, 253
communications device A piece of hardware 
that allows one device to communicate with 
other devices via a network or the Internet. 14, 
77–78
communications hardware, 77–78
communications port address, 153
communications standard, 77
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Comodo, 176
Comodo Firewall, 152
CompactFlash (CF) card, 72
company DNS server, pharming, 171
compression, images, 56
computer A programmable, electronic device 
that accepts data input, performs processing 
operations on that data, and outputs and stores 
the results. 8
computers and society, 34–37
education uses, 5–6
evolution, 10–12
exascale, 299
future, 297–307
history timeline, R–2—R–7
home uses, 5
impact on society, 34–37
mainframe, 14, 17, 23
mobile devices. See mobile device
optical, 306–307
PC. See personal computer (PC)
programmability, 8
reasons to learn about, 2–3
setting up for Internet access, 105–106
supercomputers, 17, 24–25
workplace, 6
computer arithmetic, R–13
computer chip. See central processing unit (CPU)
computer crime Any illegal act involving a 
computer. 143
computer ethics Standards of moral conduct as they 
relate to computer use. 238–239
Computer Fraud and Abuse Act, 179
computer glasses, 269
computer gloves, 269
Computer History Timeline, R–2—R–7
computer hoax An inaccurate statement or story 
spread through the use of computers. 247
computer literacy The knowledge and 
understanding of basic computer fundamentals. 
4
Computer Matching and Privacy Protection Act, 223
computer monitoring software Software that can 
be used to record an individual’s computer 
usage, such as capturing images of the screen, 
recording the actual keystrokes used, or creating 
a summary of Web sites and programs accessed. 
214, 215–217
computer network A collection of computers 
and other hardware devices that are connected 
together to share hardware, software, and data, 
as well as to communicate electronically with 
one another. 12, 25. See also Internet; Web 
entries; World Wide Web (WWW)
accessing, 27–29
home, 23
networking standards, 308–313
security legislation, 179
computer operations personnel, 16
computer professional, 16
computer sabotage An act of malicious destruction 
to a computer or computer resource. 160–164
protecting against, 165–166
computer speaker Output device connected to 
computers that provides audio output. 65
computer user, 16. See also user
computer virus A software program installed 
without the user’s knowledge and designed to 
alter the way a computer operates or to cause 
harm to the computer system. 35, 143, 160, 161
spread, 161
virus prevention strategies, 166
computer vision syndrome (CVS), 264
computer worm A malicious program designed to 
spread rapidly to a large number of computers by 
sending copies of itself to other computers. 162
computer/Internet addiction, 263
computing generation, 5
Conficker worm, 162
configuration, buying a PC, R–9
consumer authentication system, 8
consumer kiosk, 7, 8
Consumer Privacy Bill of Rights, 222
contactless card, 76
containerization, 158
context-aware computing, 220
contextual tab, 82
continuous data protection (CDP), 198, 199
control, Internet, 99
control button, 52
Control key, 50
control unit, 58
control wheel, 52
conventional dial-up Internet access Dial-up 
Internet access via standard telephone lines. 78, 
102, 103
conventional dial-up modem, 103
conventional e-mail, 33
convergence, 4
conversation, 112
convertible tablet. See hybrid notebook-tablet 
computer
converting between numbering systems, R–12—R–13
cookie A small file stored on a user’s hard drive 
by a Web server; commonly used to identify 
personal preferences and settings for that user. 
131–132
cookie management software, 132
cooling system, 299
COPA. See Child Online Protection Act (COPA)
COPPA. See Children’s Online Privacy Protection 
Act (COPPA)
copyright The legal right to sell, publish, or 
distribute an original artistic or literary work; 
it is held by the creator of a work as soon as it 
exists in physical form. 79, 233, 234–235
ethical use of material, 140–144
Copyright Act of 1976, 235, 253
Copyright Term Extension Act of 1998, 253
Core i7, 59
corporate information, 125
Corporate Responsibility Act. See Sarbanes-Oxley 
Act of 2002
cost
computer crime, 143
data breaches, 145
Internet, 98–99
counterfeit deterrence system (CDS), 203
country code, 28
CPU. See central processing unit (CPU)
CPU chip. See central processing unit (CPU)
CPU clock speed, 59
crash, 32
crash recovery, 31–32
credit card fraud, 117
CRT monitor, 62
Cruise, Tom, 297
Cstick Cotton Candy, 18
CTS. See carpal tunnel syndrome (CTS)
culture, ethics, 252
currency converter, 108
customer information, ethical use, 245–246
CVS. See computer vision syndrome (CVS)
Cyber Intelligence Sharing and Protection Act. 
See CISPA (Cyber Intelligence Sharing and 
Protection Act)
cyberaddiction. See Internet addiction
cyberbullying Children or teenagers bullying other 
children or teenagers via the Internet. 177
cybercrime. See computer crime
cyberharassment, 177
cyberspace, 34
cybersquatting The act of registering a domain 
name with the intent to profit from the goodwill 
of a trademark belonging to someone else. 
236–237
cyberstalking Repeated threats or harassing 
behavior between adults carried out via e-mail 
or another Internet communications method. 
177–178
cyberterrorism, 145
D
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency), 313
data Raw, unorganized facts. 9
alteration, 164
disposal of hardware containing, 214, 285
protecting against theft, 173
data breach, 145
data center, 24
data destruction policy, 214
data destruction service, 214, 215
Data Killers, 215
data plan, 104
data projector, 12, 13
data storage company, 199
data theft, 167
data throttling, 100
database
government, 206
marketing, 205–206
database search service, 206–207
data-leakage (data-loss) prevention system, 159
DDoS attack. See distributed denial of service attack 
(DDoS attack)
decimal numbering system The numbering system 
that represents all numbers using 10 symbols 
(0–9). 48, R–11, R–12—R–13
decryption, 154
Deep Blue, 314
Deep Fritz, 314
Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency. See 
DARPA (Defense Advanced Research Projects 
Agency)
degaussing, 215
Delete key, 50
denial of service (DoS) attack An act of sabotage 
that attempts to flood a network server or a Web 
server with so much activity that it is unable to 
function. 160, 163–164
DeQuervain’s tendonitis A condition in which 
the tendons on the thumb side of the wrist are 
swollen and irritated. 264
desktop case, 19
desktop computer A personal computer designed 
to fit on or next to a desk. 17, 19–20, 51
desktop hard drive, 68
desktop operating system, 14
desktop virtualization, 23–24
detector, 304
device tracking software, 193–194
Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 
Disorders (DSM-V), 273
dial-up connection A type of Internet connection in 
which the computer or other device must dial up 
and connect to a service provider’s computer via 
telephone lines before being connected to the 
Internet. 27, 78, 102
I-3
INDEX
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
I-4
dictionary, 108
Digimarc Discover, 236
digital camcorder, 56
digital camera An input device that takes 
pictures and records them as digital images. 
12, 55–56
digital certificate A group of electronic data that 
can be used to verify the identity of a person 
or organization; includes a key pair that can be 
used for encryption and digital signatures (also 
called a digital ID). 174, 175–176
digital computer, 47
Digital Copy, 243, 244
digital counterfeiting The use of computers or 
other types of digital equipment to make illegal 
copies of currency, checks, collectibles, and 
other items. 201–202
prevention, 203
digital currency, 239
digital divide The gap between those who have 
access to technology and those who do not. 
275–277
digital form, 52
digital manipulation The alteration of digital 
content, usually text or photographs. 248–249
Digital Millennium Copyright Act (DMCA), 242, 
253
digital pen. See stylus
digital photo, 5
digital photo frame, 62
digital portfolio. See e-portfolio
digital rights management (DRM) software 
Software used to protect and manage the rights 
of creators of digital content, such as art, music, 
photographs, and movies. 235
digital signal, 62
digital signature A unique digital code that can be 
attached to a file or an e-mail message to verify 
the identity of the sender and guarantee the file 
or message has not been changed since it was 
signed. 176
digital still camera, 56
Digital Subscriber Line. See DSL (Digital 
Subscriber Line) Internet access
Digital Theft Deterrence and Copyright Damages 
Improvement Act of 1999, 253
digital video camera, 56
digital video recorder (DVR), 5
digital voice, 114
digital watermark A subtle alteration of digital 
content that is not noticeable when the work 
is viewed or played but that identifies the 
copyright holder. 203
digital writing, 51
digitizing tablet. See graphics tablet
direct connection A type of Internet connection in 
which the computer or other device is connected 
to the Internet continually. 27, 102
direct message, 113
directory. See folder
directory search A type of Internet search where 
categories are selected to locate information on 
the Internet. 106, 107
disaster recovery plan A written plan that 
describes the steps a company will take 
following the occurrence of a disaster. 
199–200
discussion group. See forum
disk-erasing software, 214
disk-wiping software, 214
display device An output device that contains a 
viewing screen. 62–63
Braille, 279
display screen, 12, 62
disposable e-mail address. See throw-away e-mail 
address
disposal
e-waste, 282, 284–285
hardware containing data, 214, 285
distance learning A learning environment in which 
the student is physically located away from 
the instructor and other students; commonly, 
instruction and communications take place via 
the Web. 5–6, 126
distributed denial of service attack (DDoS attack), 
164
DL disc. See dual-layer (DL) disc
DMARC (Domain-based Message Authentication, 
Report, and Conformance), 175
DMCA. See Digital Millennium Copyright Act 
(DMCA)
DNA data storage, 305
DNS poisoning, 171
DNS server. See domain name system (DNS) 
server
Do Not Call Implementation Act, 223
Do Not Track legislation, 213
docking port, 271
docking station A device designed to easily connect 
a portable computer to conventional hardware, 
such as a keyboard, mouse, monitor, and printer. 
22, 266, 267
document, 83. See also file; word processing 
software
formatting, 82, 83
document holder, 266, 268
domain name A text-based Internet address 
used to uniquely identify a computer on the 
Internet. 28
cybersquatting, 236–237
domain name system (DNS) server, 28, 171
Domain-based Message Authentication, Report, 
and Conformance. See DMARC (Domain-
based Message Authentication, Report, and 
Conformance)
Do-Not-Track Online Act of 2013, 222
Doom, 121
DoS attack. See denial of service (DoS) attack
dot con A fraud or scam carried out through the 
Internet. 166–172
dot-matrix printer, 63
dots per inch (dpi), 53
double-layer disc. See dual-layer (DL) disc
double-sided disc, 70
download manager, 31
downward compatibility, 71
dpi. See dots per inch (dpi)
dragging-and-dropping, 51
drive bay, 57
drive-by pharming, 171
DRM. See digital rights management (DRM) 
software
drone, 320
Dropbox, 75
DSL (Digital Subscriber Line) Internet access 
Fast, direct Internet access via standard 
telephone lines. 78, 102, 103
DSL modem, 103
DSM-V. See Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of 
Mental Disorders (DSM-V)
dual-core CPU A CPU that contains two separate 
processing cores. 59
dual-layer (DL) disc, 70
DuckDuckGo search site, 211
dumb terminal, 22
Durant, Kevin, 124
DVD disc A medium capacity (typically 4.7 GB or 
8.5 GB) optical disc that is often used to deliver 
software and movies, as well as to store user 
data. 12, 13, 55, 66, 69, 70
DVD drive, 12, 13, 57, 66, 69
DVD+R disc, 71
DVD-R disc, 71
DVD+R DL disc, 71
DVD-R DL disc, 71
DVD-R drive, 71
DVD-RE disc, 72
DVD-ROM (digital versatile disc read-only 
memory) disc, 71
DVD+RW disc, 72
DVD-RW disc, 72
DVD+RW drive, 72
DVD-RW drive, 72
DVR. See digital video recorder (DVR)
E
earbud, 65
earphone, 65
earthquake, 108
eBay, 118
EBCDIC. See Extended Binary Coded Decimal 
Interchange Code (EBCDIC)
e-book, 5, 242
e-book reader, 62
eco-label A certification, usually by a government 
agency, that identifies a device as meeting 
minimal environmental performance 
specifications. 280
e-commerce, 117
editing Changing the content of a document, such as 
inserting or deleting words. 82
education
computer use in, 5–6
online, 125–126
Education Privacy Act, 223
EHR. See electronic health record (EHR)
802.11. See Wi-Fi (802.11)
802.11ac standard, 310
802.11g standard, 310
802.11n standard, 310
802.16. See WiMAX (802.16)
802.16m standard, 311
Eisenhower, Dwight D., 11
e-learning. See distance learning
electron, 66
electronic circuit, 11
Electronic Communications Privacy Act, 223
electronic health record (EHR), 52, 76
electronic link, 283
electronic mail (e-mail) Electronic messages sent 
from one user to another over the Internet or 
other network. 4, 32–33
addresses. See e-mail address
convergence, 4
e-mail program, 15, 16, 198
iPad ordering system, 7
phishing, 35, 143, 169–170, 173–175
privacy, 133
spam, 34–35, 204, 208–209
electronic monitoring, 204
electronic paper (e-paper), 283
Electronic Paper Display (EPD), 283
electronic pen. See stylus
electronic portfolio. See e-portfolio
electronic profiling Using electronic means to 
collect a variety of in-depth information about 
an individual, such as name, address, income, 
and buying habits. 207
electronic surveillance tool, 204
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

electronic tattoo, 167
electronic trash (e-trash). See e-waste
electrophoretic technology, 283
e-mail. See electronic mail (e-mail)
e-mail address An Internet address consisting of 
a username and computer domain name that 
uniquely identifies a person on the Internet. 29
safeguarding, 209–210
throw-away, 36
unsubscribe, 210
e-mail filter A tool that automatically sorts your 
incoming e-mail messages based on specific 
criteria. 211–212
e-mail program, 15, 16
updating, 198
embedded computer A tiny computer embedded in 
a product and designed to perform specific tasks 
or functions for that product. 17–18
embedded flash memory Flash memory chips 
embedded into products, such as consumer 
devices. 72
embedded memory chip, 60
e-menu, 7
emergency mail system provider, 200
emoticon, 36
emotional health, 269–275
burnout, 263, 272
information overload, 271–272
Internet and technology addiction, 263, 273–275
stress, 263, 270
24/7 society, 270–271
employee information, ethical use, 245
employee monitoring Observing or reviewing 
employees’ actions while they are on the job. 
214, 219–220
employee policy, 222
employee precautions, 157–158
employee responsibility, protecting workplace 
privacy, 222
employer responsibility, protecting workplace 
privacy, 221–222
empty slot, 58
encryption A method of scrambling the contents 
of an e-mail message or a file to make it 
unreadable if an unauthorized user intercepts it. 
154–156, 192–193
data on wireless networks, 152
e-mail, 133
hard drives, 67, 193
end user. See computer user; user
end-user development approach, 201
energy
alternate power, 281
consumption and conservation, 280–281
ENERGY STAR A program developed by the 
Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to 
encourage the development of energy-saving 
devices. 279–280
energy vampire, 280
ENIAC, 11
Enron, 249
Enter key, 50
enterprise rights management, 235
enterprise rights-management software, 159
enterprise-class server. See high-end server
entertainment bot, 315
environment
green computing, 279–285
recycling and disposal of computer equipment, 
282, 284–285
e-paper. See electronic paper (e-paper)
EPD. See Electronic Paper Display (EPD)
Epinions.com, 125
e-portfolio A collection of an individual’s work 
accessible via the Web. 128
EPR. See extended producer responsibility (EPR)
Epsilon data breach, 170
Equifax, 173
e-reader, 62, 283
ergonomic chair, 266
ergonomic hardware Hardware, typically an input 
or output device, that is designed to be more 
ergonomically correct than its nonergonomic 
counterpart. 56, 265, 268–269
ergonomic keyboard, 268
ergonomic mouse, 268
ergonomics The science of fitting a work 
environment to the people who work there. 22, 
265–269
escrow service, 177
e-sign, 283
eStewards Certification program, 284
Ethernet, 77, 308–309
Ethernet cable, 105, 309
ethics Overall standards of moral conduct. 238–252
business practices and decision making, 238, 240, 
249–252
computer, 238–239
computer hoaxes, 247
copyrighted material use, 240–244
cultural considerations, 252
digital manipulation, 248–249
personal, 238
resource and information use, 244–247
e-trash. See e-waste
e2Campus, 30
European Robotics Research Network (EURON), 318
EV SSL. See Extended Validation Secure Sockets 
Layer (EV SSL); Extended Validation (EV) 
SSL digital certificate
Eventful, 113
EverQuest, 121
evil twin, 157
e-waste Electronic waste or trash, such as discarded 
computer components. 282, 284–285
exabyte, 48
exascale computer, 299
exoskeleton suit A wearable robotic system 
designed to give an individual additional 
physical capabilities and protection. 321
expansion card, 57
expansion slot, 57, 58
Experian, 173
expert system A computer system that provides the 
type of advice that would be expected from a 
human expert. 316
Extended Binary Coded Decimal Interchange Code 
(EBCDIC) chart, R–15
extended producer responsibility (EPR), 284
Extended Validation Secure Sockets Layer (EV 
SSL), 154
Extended Validation (EV) SSL digital certificate, 
154, 176
extender, 78
extending the desktop, 62
external device, 58
external hard drive, 67, 68
external hardware, 12
external optical drive, 71
external storage device, 66
eye tracking system, 278
F
face recognition system, 151
Facebook, 8, 26, 75, 115, 210, 250–251
Facebook Credit, 239
Facebook friend, 116
facial gesture, 167
FACTA. See Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions 
Act (FACTA)
FactCheck.org, 125
Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions Act 
(FACTA), 174, 179
Fair Credit Reporting Act, 223
fair use, 234
Family Entertainment and Copyright Act of 2005, 
243, 253
family plan, 105
Family Safety, 130
fan, 57, 298
Fandango app, 55
Fast Ethernet, 308
Favorites, 32
FBI Anti-Piracy Warning Seal, 243
FCC. See Federal Communications Commission 
(FCC)
F-commerce, 249
FDE. See full disk encryption (FDE)
feature phone, 18
Federal Communications Commission (FCC), 98
Federal Services Data Hub, 206
FedEx QuickShip Web service, 97
feed list, 123
Feedly, 123
Feeds tab, 123
Feldman, Stuart, 260–261
fiber-optic cable, 78
fiber-optic service (FiOS), 104
fiber-to-the-premises (FTTP) Internet access. See 
broadband over fiber (BoF) Internet access
field searching, 110
fifth-generation computer, 11, 12, R–5—R–7
file Something stored on a storage medium, such as 
a program, a document, or an image. 83
restoring, 83
syncing, 75
File Explorer, 83
file extension, 29, 35
file management, 79
file management program, 83
file system, 68
FILE tab, 82
File Transfer Protocol. See FTP (File Transfer 
Protocol; ftp://)
filename, 67
filled slot, 58
filtering, 211–212
Final Fantasy, 121
Financial Modernization Act, 223
finger swipe, 50
finger vein reader, 150, 151
fingerprint reader, 12, 67, 150, 151
fingerprint scans, hard drives, 67
Fins, Joseph, 319
FiOS. See fiber-optic service (FiOS)
Firefox, 26
firewall A collection of hardware and/or software 
intended to protect a computer or computer 
network from unauthorized access. 102, 133, 
152–154
firmware, 61
first-generation computer, 10–11, R–2
first-party cookie, 131
fixed barcode reader, 54
fixed WiMAX (802.16a), 310
fixed wireless Internet access Fast, direct Internet 
access available in some areas via the airwaves. 
102, 103–104
fixed wireless service, 78
I-5
INDEX
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
I-6
flash memory Nonvolatile memory chips that can 
be used for storage by the computer or user; can 
be built into a computer or a storage medium. 
60, 61, 72–74
flash memory card A small, rectangular flash 
memory medium, such as a CompactFlash (CF) 
or Secure Digital (SD) card; often used with 
digital cameras and other portable devices. 12, 
13, 55, 66, 72–73
flash memory card reader, 12, 13, 57, 66, 73
flash memory hard drive, 68
flash memory media, 12, 68
flash memory storage system, 66
flatbed scanner, 53
flat-panel display, 62
flexible electronic component, 298
flexible OLED (FOLED), 301
Flickr, 75, 115, 210. See also social networking site
flight information, 108
floating point operations per second, 25
floating point unit (FPU), 58
floppy drive, 66
folder A named place on a storage medium into 
which the user can place files in order to keep 
the files stored on that medium organized. 83
FOLED. See flexible OLED (FOLED)
following on Twitter, 113
font face, 83
font style, 83
foot-controlled mouse, 278
formatting Changing the appearance of a 
document, such as changing the margins or font 
size. 82, 83
FORTRAN, 11
40 Gigabit Ethernet, 309
forum A Web page that enables individuals to post 
messages on a particular topic for others to read 
and respond to; also called a discussion group or 
message board. 37, 114
Fotki, 115, 210
4G network, 104
4G (fourth generation) standard, 311–314
4GL. See fourth-generation language (4GL)
400 Gigabit Ethernet, 309
4K (Ultra HD) movie, 70
4K resolution, 59
Foursquare, 113
fourth-generation standard. See 4G (fourth 
generation) standard
fourth-generation computer, 11, 12, R–4
FPU. See floating point unit (FPU)
Freedom of Information Act, 223
freeware, 79
F-store, 249
ftp://. See FTP (File Transfer Protocol; ftp://)
FTP (File Transfer Protocol; ftp://), 29, 99
fuel cell, 282
full disk encryption (FDE) A technology that 
encrypts everything stored on a storage medium 
automatically, without any user interaction. 193
function key, 50
G
gadget, 121
gallery, 82
gamepad, 52
gaming console, 5
Internet-enabled. See Internet appliance
gaming controller, 12
gaming device, 52, 101
Internet access, 5
gaming software, 15
GB. See gigabyte (GB)
generation, computers, 10–12
generator, 197
geobrowsing. See geofencing
geofencing, 112, 113
gesture input, 296
G.hn standard, 309
GHz. See gigahertz (GHz)
Gigabit Ethernet, 308
gigabyte (GB) Approximately 1 billion bytes. 48
gigahertz (GHz), 59
Giving Voice to Values (GVV), 246
global digital divide, 276–277
global positioning system (GPS), 8
Gmail, 33
Gmail Backup, 200
Goli, Shravan, 250, 272
Google, 32, 106, 210, 238, 250
Google+, 26, 115
Google Dashboard, 210
Google Docs, 15, 75
Google Drive, 75
Google Glass, 218, 273, 301, 302
Google Play, 74
Google Site Search, 107
Google Takeout, 205
gorilla arm, 264
government database A collection of data about 
people that is collected and maintained by the 
government. 205, 206
GPS. See global positioning system (GPS)
GPU. See graphics processing unit (GPU)
Gramm-Leach-Bliley Act, 223
graphical user interface (GUI), 95
graphics processing unit (GPU) The chip that 
does the processing needed to display images on 
the screen; can be located on the motherboard, 
inside the CPU, or on a video graphics board. 
13, 58
graphics tablet, 52
green computing The use of computers in an 
environmentally friendly manner. 279–285
alternate power, 281, 282
energy consumption and conservation, 280–281
e-paper, 283
green components, 281
recycling and disposal of equipment, 282, 
284–285
GreenDisk, 284
Greenpeace, 284
GreenPrint, 282
Griffith, Jim, 230–231
group, 82
group call, 112
group messaging, 112
GUI. See graphical user interface (GUI)
guitar, 52
guitar controller, 56
GVV. See Giving Voice to Values (GVV)
H
hacker, 16, 102, 143, 144
hacking Using a computer to break into another 
computer system. 144–145
hactivist, 145
Hampton, Greg, 186–187
HAMR. See Heat-Assisted Magnetic Recording 
(HAMR)
handheld RFID reader, 54
Handwrite feature, 297
handwriting recognition, 51–52
Hangouts, 111
hard copy, 63
hard disk, 67
hard drive The primary storage system for most 
computers; used to store most programs and 
data used with a computer. 11, 12, 13, 55, 57, 67
degaussing, 215
external, 67, 69
internal, 67, 69
portable, 69
hardware The physical parts of a computer system, 
such as the keyboard, monitor, printer, and so 
forth. 12–14. See also specific hardware devices
companies making and distributing, 97–98
containing data, disposal, 214, 285
emerging, 296–298
ergonomic, 56, 265, 268–269
loss, 189–190
processing, 57
proper care, 195–197
protecting, 198
hardware authentication, 193
hardware encryption, 193
hardware theft The theft of computer 
hardware. 190
hashtag (#), 113
HDMI (High-Definition Multimedia Interface) 
port, 58
head pointing system, 278
headphones, 12, 13, 56, 65
headset. See headphones
health. See emotional health; physical health
electronic health record, 52, 76
Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act 
(HIPAA), 179, 223, 285
heat sink, 298
Heat-Assisted Magnetic Recording (HAMR), 303
Help button, 82
hexadecimal numbering system, R–11, R–12—R–13
high-end server, 24
high-tech workout, 120
hijacking, of social media accounts, 171
HIPAA. See Health Insurance Portability and 
Accountability Act (HIPAA)
History list, 32
hit, 107
Hollerith, Herman, 10, 11
hologram, 300, 303–304
holographic cartridge, 303
holographic disc, 303
holographic drive, 303
holographic storage An emerging type of 
storage technology that uses multiple blue 
laser beams to store data in three dimensions. 
303–304
home automation, 124
home computing, 5
home health monitoring system, 308
home network, 23
home page, 31
home server, 23
HOME tab, 82
Homeland Security Act, 179
HomePlug AV standard, 309
HomePNA standard, 309
Hoovers.com, 125
hot site, 200
hotspot, wireless, precautions, 157
hotzone, 310
.htm extension, 29
HTML, 15
.html extension, 29
HTML5, 15
HTTP (Hypertext Transfer Protocol; http://), 29
hub, 78
Hulu, 120
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

humanoid form, 317
Hushmail, 154, 155–156
Hussein, Saddam, 250
hybrid hard drive A hard drive that contains both 
a large amount of flash memory and magnetic 
hard disks. 68
hybrid notebook-tablet computer A portable 
computer designed to function as both a 
notebook and a tablet PC. 21
Hydro, 196
hyperlink, 31
I
IBM. See International Business Machines (IBM)
IBM PC, 12
IBM-compatible PC, 20
IC. See integrated circuit (IC)
ICANN (Internet Corporation for Assigned Names 
and Numbers), 98
icon, 14, 82
IC3. See Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3)
identification system, 147
identity management (IDM) system, 147
Identity Protection Technology (IPT), 150
identity theft Using someone else’s identity to 
purchase goods or services, obtain new credit 
cards or bank loans, or otherwise illegally 
masquerade as that individual. 35, 117, 167, 
169–170
protecting against, 173, 174
Identity Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act, 179
Identity Theft Penalty Enhancement Act, 179
IDM system. See identity management (IDM) 
system
IE. See Internet Explorer (IE)
IM. See instant messaging (IM)
image editing software, 15, 53
IMDb. See Internet Movie Database (IMDb)
immersion cooling, 299
IMOD. See interferometric modulator display 
(IMOD)
impact printer, 63
Incognito mode, 211
information Data that has been processed into a 
meaningful form. 9–10
ethical use, 245–246
government, locating, 125
integrity, 37
privacy. See privacy
product and corporate, locating, 125
protecting against theft, 173
information overload, 271–272
information privacy The rights of individuals and 
companies to control how information about 
them is collected and used. 204
information processing, 10
information processing cycle. See IPOS cycle 
(information processing cycle)
information theft, 167
infrared laser, 70
infrastructure company, 97
ink cartridge, 64
inking, 51
ink-jet printer An output device that sprays droplets 
of ink to produce images on paper. 63, 64
InPrivate mode, 211
input The process of entering data into a computer; 
can also refer to the data itself. 8
input device A piece of hardware that supplies 
input to a compute. 12, 49–56. See also specific 
input devices
assistive, 278
emerging, 296–298
Insert key, 50
insertion point, 49, 82
insider, 144
installed software Software that must be installed 
on a computer in order to be used. 80
installing software, 14
instant messaging (IM) A way of exchanging real-
time typed messages with other individuals; also 
called chat. 111, 112
integrated circuit (IC), 11
integrated keyboard, 49
integrated printer, 300, 301
integrity, online information, 37
Intel, 58
intellectual property, 201, 233
intellectual property rights The legal rights 
to which creators of original creative works 
(such as artistic or literary works, inventions, 
corporate logos, and more) are entitled. 233–238
intelligent agent A program that performs specific 
tasks to help make a user’s work environment 
more efficient or entertaining and that typically 
modifies its behavior based on the user’s 
actions. 314–316
interferometric modulator display (IMOD), 301–302
internal hard drive, 67, 69
internal hardware, 12
internal storage device, 66
International Business Machines (IBM), 10, 14
International Standard Book Number. See ISBN 
(International Standard Book Number)
internet, 94
Internet The largest and most well-known computer 
network, linking millions of computers all over 
the world. 4, 25–26. See also Web entries; 
World Wide Web (WWW)
accessing, 27–29
ASPs, 97
citing sources, 111
connections and access, 101–105
content providers, 96–97
devices, 99–101
evolution, 93–99
government and other organizations, 98
hardware and software companies, 97–98
infrastructure companies, 97
ISPs, 25, 96, 105
myths, 98–99
online banking and investing, 118
online communications types, 111–115
online education and writing, 125–128
online entertainment, 119–121
online news, reference, and information, 122
online shopping, 117–118
privacy issues. See privacy
searching. See searching the Internet
security legislation, 179
setting up computer, 105–106
social networking and social media. See social 
media; social networking site; specific social 
networking sites
users, 96
Web services, 97
World Wide Web vs., 26, 99
Internet addiction The problem of overusing, or 
being unable to stop using, the Internet. 121, 
273–275
Internet address An address that identifies a 
computer, person, or Web page on the Internet, 
such as an IP address, domain name, or e-mail 
address. 27–29
Internet appliance A device that can be used to 
access the Internet. 22, 23
Internet auction fraud. See online auction fraud
Internet backbone, 95
Internet compulsivity. See Internet addiction
Internet content provider A person or an 
organization that provides Internet content. 
96–97
Internet Corporation for Assigned Names and 
Numbers. See ICANN (Internet Corporation for 
Assigned Names and Numbers)
Internet Crime Complaint Center (IC3), 166
Internet dependency. See Internet addiction
Internet Explorer (IE), 26
Internet filtering Using a software program or 
browser option to block access to particular 
Web pages or types of Web pages. 129–130
Internet Movie Database (IMDb), 121
Internet of Things (IoT), 124, 125
Internet Protocol (IP), 28
Internet Protocol Version 4 (IPv4), 28
Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6), 28
Internet scam, 143, 177. See also online auction 
fraud
Internet service provider (ISP) A business or other 
organization that provides Internet access to 
others, typically for a fee. 25, 96, 105
Internet sex addiction, 274
Internet Society, 98
Internet telephony, 114
Internet to the Hogan project, 276
Internet-enabled device. See Internet appliance
Internet2, 95–96
iOS, 14
IoT. See Internet of Things (IoT)
IP. See Internet Protocol (IP)
IP address A numeric Internet address used to 
uniquely identify a computer on the Internet. 28
iPad, restaurant ordering systems, 7
iPad shoulder, 264
iPhone, 192
iPod Touch, 18
IPOS cycle (information processing cycle), 9
IPT. See Identity Protection Technology (IPT)
IPv4. See Internet Protocol Version 4 (IPv4)
IPv6. See Internet Protocol Version 6 (IPv6)
iris recognition system, 151
ISBN (International Standard Book Number), 54
ISP. See Internet service provider (ISP)
iTunes, 121
iTunes Music Store, 119
J
Java, 15, 171
JavaScript, 15
Jeopardy!, 314
joystick, 52
jump drive. See USB flash drive
Junk Fax Prevention Act, 223
K
Kasparov, Garry, 314
KB. See kilobyte (KB)
Kelley, Daniel, 44–45, 309
keyboard An input device containing numerous 
keys that can be used to input letters, numbers, 
and other symbols. 11, 12, 13, 49, 50
assistive, 278
keyboard controller, 56
keyboard dock, 49, 296
keyboard drawer/tray, 29
keyboard folio, 49, 296
keyboard shortcut, 81, 82
Keycard app, 219
keyguard, 278
I-7
INDEX
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
I-8
keystroke dynamics, 150
keystroke logging system, 216
keyword, 32, 109–110
keyword search A type of Internet search where 
keywords are typed in a search box to locate 
information on the Internet. 106, 107
Kill a Watt, 280
kill switch, 194
kilobyte (KB) Approximately 1 thousand bytes 
(1,024 bytes to be precise). 48
Kindle, 283
knowledge base, 316
Kramnik, Vladimir, 314
L
LA Times, 249
LAN. See local area network (LAN)
Lanham Act of 1946, 253
laptop alarm software, 192
laptop computer. See notebook computer
laptop desk, 264
laptop sleeve, 196
laser light, 70
laser mouse, 50
laser printer An output device that uses toner 
powder and technology similar to that of a 
photocopier to produce images on paper. 63–64
LCD (liquid crystal display), 301
Leap 3D System, 297
learning management system, 126
Level 1 (L1) cache, 61
Level 2 (L2) cache, 61
Level 3 (L3) cache, 61
Linden dollar, 239
LinkedIn, 116
Linux, 14
liquid cooling system, 299
liquid crystal display. See LCD (liquid crystal 
display)
live online learning. See synchronous online 
learning
local area network (LAN), 307
local storage, 75
location-based marketing, 113
lock screen, 148
locking remotely, 194
Loebern, Hugh, 314
Loebner Prize, 314
logging on, 14, 17
logic bomb, 160
logical access, 149
Login Approvals, 149
L1 cache. See Level 1 (L1) cache
L2 cache. See Level 2 (L2) cache
L3 cache. See Level 3 (L3) cache
Long Term Evolution (LTE), 312
longitudinal magnetic recording, 302
LTE. See Long Term Evolution (LTE)
Lucene, 107
M
MAC (Media Access Control) address filtering, 153
Mac computer, 20
Mac OS, 14
Machine-to-Machine (M2M), 124
Madonna, 236
“magic” glass, 305
magnetic hard drive A hard drive consisting of 
one or more metal magnetic disks permanently 
sealed, along with an access mechanism and 
read/write heads, inside its drive. 67–68
magnetic induction, 311
magnetic ink character recognition (MICR) reader, 55
magnetic polarization, 299
magnetic RAM (MRAM), 299
magnetic storage media, 66
magnetic stripe, 76
magnetic tape Storage media consisting of plastic 
tape with a magnetizable surface that stores data 
as a series of magnetic spots; typically comes as 
a cartridge. 11
mail server, 29, 33
main memory. See RAM (random access memory)
mainframe computer A computer used in 
large organizations (such as hospitals, large 
businesses, and colleges) that need to manage 
large amounts of centralized data and run 
multiple programs simultaneously. 17, 23, 24
malware Any type of malicious software. 35, 159, 
160–163. See also computer virus
Malwarebytes Anti-Malware, 166
MapPoint .NET Web service, 97
MapQuest, 122
marketing database A collection of data about 
people that is stored in a large database and used 
for marketing purposes. 205–206
markup language, 15
Marvell Technology, 238
Massive Open Online Course (MOOC), 126
McCabe, Donald, 246
MDM. See mobile device management (MDM) 
software
mechanical calculator, 10
Media Access Control address filtering. See MAC 
(Media Access Control) address filtering
media player program (plug-in), 119
media sanitization policy, 214
media tablet A mobile device, usually larger than 
a smartphone, that is typically used to access 
the Internet and display multimedia content. 17, 
18–19, 62
storage capacity, 74
Meetup, 115
megahertz (MHz), 59
Melissa computer virus, 157
memory Chip-based storage. 13, 57, 60–61. See 
also storage
memory module, 57, 60
memory resistor, 299
memory slot, 57
Memory Stick (MS), 73
menu, 81
menu bar, 81
Merritt, Marian, 160, 169
message board. See forum
messaging app, 112
messaging program, 112
MFD. See multifunction device (MFD)
MHz. See megahertz (MHz)
MICR. See magnetic ink character recognition 
(MICR) reader
microcapsules, 283
microcomputer. See personal computer (PC)
microphone, 12, 13, 56
microprinting, 203
microprocessor A central processing unit (CPU) 
for a personal computer. 12, 58
microSD card, 73
microSDHC card, 73
microSD-to-SD adapter, 73
Microsoft, 236, 238, 250
Microsoft Office, 15, 19
Microsoft Outlook, 33
Microsoft Windows. See Windows
midrange computer. See server
midrange server. See server
military-strength 2,048-bit encryption, 156
Miller, Craig, 193
mini disc, 70
minicomputer. See server
miniSD card, 73
miniSDHC card, 73
Minority Report (movie), 297
Mint.com, 175
minus sign (–), Boolean operators, 109
MLA. See Modern Language Association (MLA)
MMS. See Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS)
Moayer, Ali, 90–91
mobile app builder, 81
mobile AR app, 273, 298
mobile AR browser, 273, 298
mobile banking, 8
mobile boarding pass, 55
mobile broadband, 312
mobile data cap, 100, 101
mobile device A very small device that has built-in 
computing or Internet capability. 4, 8, 17, 
18–19. See also specific mobile devices
convergence, 4
security precautions, 195
mobile device management (MDM) software, 
159, 195
mobile e-mail, 33
mobile malware, 163
mobile marketing, 113
mobile operating system, 14
mobile payment system, 54
mobile phone A phone, such as a cellular or 
satellite phone, that uses a wireless network. 4. 
See also smartphone
mobile phone spam, 208
mobile smart card, 76
mobile social networking, 115
mobile software, 80
mobile spam app, 212
mobile tablet. See media tablet
mobile ticketing, 55
mobile TV, 120
mobile WiMAX, 310–311, 312
mobile wireless Internet access Internet access via 
a mobile phone network. 104
modem A device that enables a computer to 
communicate over analog networking media, 
such as to connect that computer to the Internet 
via telephone lines. 12, 13, 14, 77, 78
types, 103
moderator, 114
Modern Language Association (MLA), 111
MogoTix, 55
Molsberry, Frank, 292–293
monitor, 11, 12, 13, 62
monitoring system, 307–308
MOOC. See Massive Open Online Course (MOOC)
More button, 82
Morgan, Tracy, 236, 237
motherboard The main circuit board of a computer, 
located inside the system unit, to which all 
computer system components connect. 57–58
Motion Picture Association of America (MPAA), 
242, 243
mounting shaft, hard drive, 67
mouse A common pointing device that the user 
slides along a flat surface to move a pointer 
around the screen and clicks its buttons to make 
selections. 12, 13, 50, 51
ergonomic, 68
foot-controlled, 278
mouse pointer, 50
movie showtime, 108
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

movies, legal and ethical use, 242–244
MPAA. See Motion Picture Association of America 
(MPAA)
MRAM. See magnetic RAM (MRAM)
MS. See Memory Stick (MS)
MSN, 123
MTV.com, 119
M2M. See Machine-to-Machine (M2M)
multi-core CPU A CPU that contains the 
processing components or core of more than one 
processor in a single CPU. 59
multifunction device (MFD), 63
multimedia, 17
multimedia accessibility tool, 277–278
Multimedia Messaging Service (MMS), 33, 112
multimedia networking, 310
multimedia program, 16
multimedia software, 15
multi-touch screen, 52
music, legal and ethical use, 241–242
My Yahoo!, 123
Mydoom worm, 162
MyLiveSearch, 107
MySpace, 115, 251
N
NAI. See Network Advertising Initiative (NAI)
nanodot, 304
nanofilter, 305
nanogenerator, 304
nanosensor, 305
nanotechnology The science of creating tiny 
computers and components by working at the 
individual atomic and molecular levels. 12, 
304–305
Napster, 241
National Center for Supercomputing Applications 
(NCSA), 94
national ID system, 206
National Information Infrastructure Protection 
Act, 179
National Security Agency (NSA), 217
NCSA. See National Center for Supercomputing 
Applications (NCSA)
Near Field Communication (NFC) technology, 298
Nearby, 113
needs analysis, buying a PC, R–8—R–9
NET Act. See No Electronic Theft (NET) Act
net neutrality, 100
netbook A computer that is smaller and has more 
limited features than a notebook computer. 21
Netflix, 121
netiquette, 36
NetNanny, 130
Netsweeper, 130
network adapter A network interface, such as an 
expansion card or external network adapter. 12, 
14, 77, 78
Network Advertising Initiative (NAI), 213
network key, 152
network port, 58
network printer, 63
network server, 22, 25
network storage Refers to using a storage 
device that is accessed through a local 
network. 75
networked economy, 34
networking technology
emerging, 307–313
neural net. See neural network
neural network An expert system in which the 
human brain’s pattern-recognition process is 
emulated by the computer system. 316–317
neutral posture, 268
news feed, 116
news site, 122
NFC. See Near Field Communication (NFC) 
technology
NFC ring, 312
NFC-enabled ring, 150
Nigerian letter fraud, 172
Nike+ Basketball, 124
Nike+ FuelBand, 124
Nike+ SportWatch, 124
NikeFuel, 124
Nintendo 3DS, 18, 300
Nintendo Point, 239
Nintendo Wii, 22
No Electronic Theft (NET) Act, 179, 253
noise reduction headphone, 264
nonencrypted e-mail, 133
nonimpact printer, 63
non-personally identifiable information 
(Non-PII), 131
Non-PII. See non-personally identifiable 
information (Non-PII)
nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM) Memory chips that 
do not lose their contents when the power to the 
computer is turned off. 60, 299
Nook, 283
notebook computer A fully functioning portable 
computer that opens to reveal a screen and 
keyboard; also called a laptop computer. 21
notebook cooling stand, 197
notebook stand A device that elevates the display of 
a notebook computer to a better viewing height; 
can contain USB ports to connect additional 
hardware (called a tablet stand when designed 
for use with a media tablet). 267
NSA. See National Security Agency (NSA)
number search, 108
numbering system, 48, R–11—R14
binary, R–11, R–12—R–13
calculator use, R–14
computer arithmetic, R–13
converting between, R–12—R–13
decimal, R–11, R–12—R–13
hexadecimal, R–11, R–12—R–13
numeric keypad, 50
NVRAM. See nonvolatile RAM (NVRAM)
O
Obama, Barack, 145
Obama, Michelle, 248
OCR. See optical character recognition (OCR); 
optical character recognition (OCR) reader
OLED. See organic light emitting diode (OLED) 
display
OLPC. See One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project
Omnilert, 30
OMR. See optical mark reader (OMR)
One Laptop Per Child (OLPC) project, 277
one-handed keyboard, 278
100 Gigabit Ethernet, 96, 309
one-time password (OTP), 148
online age- and identity-verification service, 251
online auction fraud When an item purchased 
through an online auction is never delivered 
after payment, or the item is not as specified by 
the seller. 172, 176–177
online backup service, 199
online banking Performing banking activities via 
the Web. 118
online broker, 118
online communications, traditional communications 
compared, 36–37
online conferencing, 115
online course, 126
online education, 125–126
online entertainment, 119–121
online financial alert, 174, 175
online fraud, 117, 165
online gaming Playing games via the Web. 121
online investing Buying and selling stocks or other 
types of investments via the Web. 118
online learning. See distance learning
online movies Feature films available via the Web. 
119, 120–121
online multiplayer game, 121
online music Music played or obtained via the 
Web. 119
online music store, 119
online music subscription service, 119
online payment service, 117
online pornography, 178
online portfolio, 118
online shopping Buying products or services over 
the Internet. 117–118
online storage. See cloud storage
online testing, 126–127
online TV Live or recorded TV shows available via 
the Web. 119, 120–121
online video Video watched or downloaded via the 
Web. 119–121
Onorati, Tony, 274
on-screen keyboard, 49
Open command, 81
OpenDNS, 174
Opera, 26
operating system The main component of system 
software that enables a computer to operate, 
manage its activities and the resources under its 
control, run application programs, and interface 
with the user. 14
Operation b54, 160
Operation Homelink, 285
opt in To request that you be included in marketing 
activities or that your information be shared 
with other companies. 213
opt out To request that you be removed from 
marketing activities or that your information 
not be shared with other companies. 205, 209, 
212–213
optical character, 55
optical character recognition (OCR), 53
optical character recognition (OCR) reader, 55
optical chip, 306
optical computer A computer that uses light, 
such as from laser beams or infrared beams, to 
perform digital computations. 12, 306–307
optical disc A type of storage medium read from 
and written to using a laser beam. 12, 69–71
optical drive, 69
optical mark reader (OMR), 55
optical mouse, 50
optical scanner. See scanner
optical storage media, 66
opto-electronic computer, 306–307
organic light emitting diode (OLED) display A 
type of flat-panel display that uses emissive 
organic material to display brighter and sharper 
images than LCDs. 301
organic light emitting diode (OLED) technology, 301
OTP. See one-time password (OTP)
outbound-content monitoring system, 159
Outlook.com, 33
output The process of presenting the results 
of processing; can also refer to the results 
themselves. 9
I-9
INDEX
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
I-10
output device, 13. See also specific output devices
assistive, 279
emerging, 300–302
outsider, 144
outsourcing company, 159
ownership rights, application software, 79
P
packetsniffing, 147
Page Down key, 50
page number, 83
Page Up key, 50
pages per minute (ppm), 63
palm vein reader, 150
paperless office, 282
passphrase, 148, 152
password A secret combination of characters used 
to gain access to a computer, computer network, 
or other resource. 147, 148
hard drives, 67
strong, 148
patent A form of protection for an invention 
that can be granted by the government; gives 
exclusive rights of an invention to its inventor 
for 20 years. 233, 237–238
pay as you go plan, 104
PayPal, 117, 167
PB. See petabyte (PB)
PC. See personal computer (PC)
PC cam, 56
PC-compatible computer, 20
pen. See stylus
pen input, 49, 50, 51
pen tablet. See graphics tablet
perpendicular magnetic recording (PMR), 302
persistent cookie, 131
personal computer (PC) A type of computer 
based on a microprocessor and designed to 
be used by one person at a time; also called a 
microcomputer. 4, 17, 19–21, 100
buying guide, R–8—R–10
protecting, 198
tiny, 18
personal ethics, 238
personal exoskeleton suit, 321
personal firewall, 152
personal identification number. See PIN (personal 
identification number)
personal printer, 63
personal VPN, 156–157
personally identifiable information (PII), 131
Perspecta, 300
pervasive computing, 2–3
petabyte (PB) Approximately 1,000 terabytes. 48
petaflop, 25, 299
PGP. See Pretty Good Privacy (PGP)
phablet, 18
pharming The use of spoofed domain names to 
obtain personal information in order to use that 
information in fraudulent activities. 171
protecting against, 174
Phase 2 LTE network, 312
phase change random access memory. See PRAM 
(phase change random access memory)
phase change technology, 72
phishing The use of spoofed communications 
(typically e-mail messages) to gain credit 
card numbers and other personal data to be 
used for fraudulent purposes. 35, 143, 169–170
protecting against, 173–175
phishing attack, 143
Phoneline standard, 309
photo printer, 65
phrase searching, 108–109
physical access, 149
physical health, 263–269
ergonomics, 265–269
good user habits and precautions, 269
pico projector, 300
picture element. See pixel
picture password, 148
PICTURE TOOLS tab, 82
PII. See personally identifiable information (PII)
PIN (personal identification number), 148
Pinterest, 115. See also social networking site
pit, 69, 70
pixel The smallest colorable area in an electronic 
image, such as a scanned image, a digital 
photograph, or an image displayed on a display 
screen. 62
placeshifting, 243
plagiarism Presenting someone else’s work as your 
own. 240–241
platform, 20
buying a PC, R–9
platter, 67
PMR. See perpendicular magnetic recording 
(PMR)
podcast A recorded audio or video file that can be 
played or downloaded via the Web. 56, 95, 123
podcasting, 123
PoE. See Power over Ethernet (PoE)
PoE adapter, 309
point, 83
pointing, 51
pointing device An input device that moves an 
on-screen pointer, such as an arrow, to allow the 
user to select objects on the screen. 49–50
point-of-sale (POS) system, 7
pornography, online, 178
port, 58
portable barcode reader, 54
portable computer A small personal computer, 
such as a notebook or tablet, that is designed to 
be carried around easily. 4, 8, 17, 21–22
portable digital media player, 18
portable hard drive, 69
portable keyboard, 49
portable power device, 282
portable printer, 65
portable scanner, 53
portal RFID reader, 54
portal Web page A Web page designed to be 
designated as a browser home page; typically 
can be customized to display personalized 
content. 123
POS system. See point-of-sale (POS) system
possessed knowledge access system An access 
control system that uses information only 
the individual should know to identify that 
individual. 148–149
possessed object access system An access control 
system that uses a physical object an individual 
has in his or her possession to identify that 
individual. 149–150
power connector, 58
Power over Ethernet (PoE) A wired networking 
standard that allows electrical power to be 
sent along with data over standard Ethernet 
cables. 309
power requirement, buying a PC, R–9
power supply, 57
PowerCup power inverter, 282
PowerTrekk, 282
ppm. See pages per minute (ppm)
PRAM (phase change random access memory), 299
precomputer, 10, R–2
prepaid plan, 104
presence management, 220
presence technology Technology that enables one 
computing device (such as a computer or mobile 
device) to locate and identify the current status 
of another device on the same network. 112, 
214, 220–221
Pretty Good Privacy (PGP), 154
Priceline, 238
Principle of Least Privilege, 157
Print command, 81
printable photo voltaic cell (PVC), 281
printer, 12, 13, 63
PrintWhatYouLike.com, 282
privacy The state of being concealed or free from 
unauthorized intrusion. 130–133, 204
adware, 133
cookies, 131–132
databases and electronic profiling, 205–208
e-mail, 133, 209–213
hardware disposal, 214, 285
information, 204
legislation, 222–223
personal information, protecting, 210–211
reasons to be concerned, 204
risks, 35–36
spam and other marketing activities, 208–209
spyware, 132–133
Privacy Act, 223
privacy filter. See antiglare screen
Privacy Guardian, 210
privacy policy A policy, commonly posted on a 
company’s Web site, that explains how personal 
information provided to that company will be 
used. 35–36, 207–208
PrivacyRightsNow!, 212
private browsing, 132, 211
private key, 154
private key encryption A type of encryption that 
uses a single key to encrypt and decrypt the file 
or message. 155
procedure, 16
processing Performing operations on data that has 
been input into a computer to convert that input 
to output. 8
emerging technologies, 298–299
processing device, 12–14
processing hardware, 57
processing speed, 59
processor A chip (such as the CPU or GPU) that 
performs processing functions. 57, 58–60
product information, 125
product key, 202
professional hacker, 144
program, 8. See also software
alteration, 164
programming language, 11, 15
projector phone, 300
PROTECT Act, 179
Proteus Digital Health pill, 167
protocol, 28–29
proximity card, 219
public domain software, 79
public key, 154
public key encryption A type of encryption that 
uses key pairs to encrypt and decrypt the file or 
message. 155, 156
PumpOne, 120
punch card, 10
Punch Card Tabulating Machine and Sorter, 10, 11
PVC. See printable photo voltaic cell (PVC)
Python, 15
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Q
QR (Quick Response) code, 54
quad-core CPU A CPU that contains four separate 
processing cores. 59
quantum bit (qubit), 306
quantum computing A technology that applies 
the principles of quantum physics and quantum 
mechanics to computers to direct atoms 
or nuclei to work together as quantum bits 
(qubits), which function simultaneously as the 
computer’s processor and memory. 306
quarantine, 165
qubit. See quantum bit (qubit)
Quick Access toolbar, 82
Quick Response code. See QR (Quick Response) 
code
Quick Steps, 272
QuickTime Player, 119
R
radiation emission, mobile device, 265
radio frequency identification (RFID), 54–55
RadioShack, 236, 237
raised printing, 203
RAM (random access memory) Chips connected 
to the motherboard that provide a temporary 
location for the computer to hold data and 
program instructions while they are needed. 60
random access memory. See RAM (random access 
memory)
range extender, 78
ransomware, 162–163
Raspberry Pi, 18
RAT (Remote-Access Trojan), 163
read-only memory. See ROM (read-only memory)
read-only optical disc, 69, 71
read/write head, 67
Real ID Act, 206, 223
Really Simple Syndication. See RSS (Really 
Simple Syndication)
real-time search engine, 107
recently closed link, 32
recharged cartridge, 64, 284
recharged toner cartridge, 64
recordable optical disc, 69, 71
Recording Industry Association of America 
(RIAA), 241
Recycle Bin, 83
recycling computer equipment, 282, 284–285
red laser, 70
Reed, Stacy, 79
reference beam, 303
reference site, 32, 122
regional network, 25
register, 60, 61
registration code, 202
remote locking, 194
remote presence, 317, 318
Remote Proctor (PRO), 127
remote storage device, 66
Remote-Access Trojan. See RAT (Remote-Access 
Trojan)
repeater, 78
repetitive stress injury (RSI) A type of injury, 
such as carpal tunnel syndrome, that is caused 
by performing the same physical movements 
over and over again. 263–264
resolution, 53–54
restaurant iPad ordering system, 7
restoring a file, 83
résumé padding, 246–247
rewritable Blu-ray Disc drive, 72
rewritable optical disc, 69, 72
RFID. See radio frequency identification (RFID)
RFID reader A device used to read RFID tags. 
53, 54
RFID tag A device containing a tiny chip and a 
radio antenna that is attached to an object so 
it can be identified using RFID technology. 54
RIAA. See Recording Industry Association of 
America (RIAA)
Ribbon, 81
robot A device, controlled by a human operator or 
a computer, that can move and react to sensory 
input. 317–318
autonomous, 321
military, 320–321
robot-assisted surgery, 320
robotics The study of robot technology. 317
rogue anti-malware app, 162
rogue app, 162–163
ROM (read-only memory), 60, 61
Rookie Blue, 95
root DNS server, pharming, 171
Rose, Stephen, 140–141
Rosenberg, David, 242
router, 12, 13, 14, 78
royalty, digital music, 241–242
RSI. See repetitive stress injury (RSI)
RSS (Really Simple Syndication) A tool used to 
deliver selected Web content to subscribers as 
the content is published to a Web site. 123
RSS feed, 95
RSS reader, 123
ruggedized device A device (such as a portable 
computer or mobile phone) that is designed to 
withstand much more physical abuse than its 
conventional counterpart. 196
Russell, Chick, 59
S
SaaS. See cloud software
Safari, 26
Safe Eyes, 130
safe harbor provision, 242
safety tip, 178–179
salami shaving, 167
SAM (Skills Assessment Manager) test, 
126–127
sandboxing, 158
Sappington, Jim, 77, 95
Sarbanes-Oxley Act of 2002, 179, 220, 223, 245, 
250, 253, 285
satellite Internet access Fast, direct Internet access 
via the airwaves and a satellite dish. 102, 103
satellite modem, 103
satellite phone. See mobile phone; smartphone
scanner An input device that reads printed text and 
graphics and transfers them to a computer in 
digital form. 12, 53–54
scareware, 162
school resource, ethical use, 245
Scratch Shield, 192
screen protector, 197
screen reader, 278, 279
screen resolution, 62
scripting language, 15
scroll wheel/button, 51
SD card. See flash memory card
SDHC card. See Secure Digital High Capacity 
(SDHC) card
sealed drive, 67
search engine A software program used by a search 
site to retrieve matching Web pages from a 
search database. 106
search engine optimization (SEO), 106
search site A Web site designed to help users search 
for Web pages that match specified keywords or 
selected categories. 32, 106–107, 108
searching the Internet
evaluating search results, 110–111
search sites, 32, 106–108
search strategies, 108–110
second-generation computer, 11, R–3
second-level domain name, 28
Section 508 of the Rehabilitation Act, 278, 285
sector, 67, 70
Secure Digital (SD) card, 72
Secure Digital High Capacity (SDHC) card, 72
Secure Our Smartphones (SOS) Initiative, 194
Secure Sockets Layer (SSL), 154
secure Web page A Web page that uses encryption 
to protect information transmitted via that Web 
page. 29, 117, 154
security
access control systems, 147
antitheft tools, 165
backups, 23, 198, 199
botnets, 35, 160
computer equipment locks, 191–192
cyberbullying and cyberstalking, 177–178
data, 173
data, program, or Web site alteration, 164
device tracking software, 193–194
disaster recovery plans, 199–200
DoS attacks, 160, 163–164
employee precautions, 157–158
encryption. See encryption
firewalls, 102, 133, 152–154
hacking, 144–145
hardware. See hardware
identity theft. See identity theft
interception of communications, 147
Internet scams, 143, 177
Java, 171
legislation, 179, 222–223
malware, 35, 159, 160–163. See also specific 
types of malware
mobile devices, 195
online auction fraud, 172, 176–177
online pornography, 178
pharming and drive-by pharming, 174
phishing and spear phishing, 173–175
security software, 35, 165–166, 198
self-healing devices, 192
servers, 213
security case, 192
security hole, 162
security ribbon, 203
security slot, 192
security software Software, typically a suite of 
programs, used to protect your computer against 
a variety of threats. 35, 165–166, 198
security specialist, 16
Security Status bar, 176
security thread, 203
self-checkout system, 7–8
self-encrypting device, 154
self-encrypting hard drive A hard drive that uses 
full disk encryption (FDE). 193
self-healing device, 192
SellPin, 249
Semantic Web, 315–316
semantics, 316
semiconductor, 11
semirugged device, 196
sensor, 309
SEO. See search engine optimization (SEO)
I-11
INDEX
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
I-12
server A computer used to host programs and data 
for a small network. 17, 23–24
DNS. See domain name system (DNS) server
domain name system, 28
home, 23
mail, 29, 33
network, 22, 25
securing, 213
server virtualization, 23
service mark, 235
session-based cookie, 131
sexting, 179
sextortion, 179
shading, 83
shareware, 79
ShieldsUP!, 154
Shift key, 50
shingled magnetic recording (SMR), 303
shopping bag, 118
shopping bot, 315
shopping cart, 118
Short Message Service (SMS), 33, 112
signal beam, 303
signature capture device, 51, 52
signing in, 82
Silverlight, 119
Simpson, O.J., 248
single atom transistor, 304
single sign-on (SSO) system, 147
single-core CPU, 60
Sirius XM Radio, 242
Skills Assessment Manager test. See SAM (Skills 
Assessment Manager) test
skimming, 168
SkyDrive, 75
Skype, 111, 154
slide rule, 10
slide-out keyboard, 49
Slingbox, 243
SLM. See spatial light modulator (SLM)
smart appliance, 5
smart assistant. See intelligent agent
smart card A credit card-sized piece of plastic 
containing a chip and other circuitry that can 
store data. 76
smart card reader, 76
smart charging station, 281
smart door lock, 308
smart home, 5
smart meter, 24
smart power strip, 281
smart refrigerator, 22, 23
smart TV, 22
smart watch, 18, 62
SmartGlass app, 312
smartphone A mobile device based on a mobile 
phone that includes Internet capabilities and can 
run mobile apps. 4, 18, 19, 51, 100–101
convergence, 4
“magic” glass, 305
protecting against damage, 192
security, 194
smartphone dock, 267
Smekal, Martin, 22, 296
Smith, David, 157
SMR. See shingled magnetic recording (SMR)
SMS. See Short Message Service (SMS)
SMS spam, 208
Snapfish, 210
SoC. See system-on-a-chip (SoC)
social commerce, 249
social engineering, 168
social engineering test, 168, 191
social media The collection of social networking 
sites and other communications channels used 
to transmit or share information with a broad 
audience. 26, 115–117. See also Facebook; 
Flickr; Fotki; Google+; LinkedIn; Meetup; 
MySpace; Pinterest; Twitter; YouTube
social media hack The act of accessing someone 
else’s social media account to make changes 
to the content or to perform an activity as that 
individual. 170–171
social media monitoring, 249
social networking site A site that enables a 
community of individuals to communicate 
and share information. 8, 95, 115–117, 249. 
See also Facebook; Flickr; Fotki; Google+; 
LinkedIn; Meetup; MySpace; Pinterest; 
Twitter; YouTube
ethics, 240
society
computer impact, 34–37
24/7, impact, 270–271
soft token, 148
software The instructions, also called computer 
programs, that are used to tell a computer what 
it should do. 12, 14–16
antipiracy, 202–203
antispyware, 221
antitheft, 165
antivirus, 165–166
application. See application software
blogging, 127
cloud. See cloud software
commands, 81
commercial, 79
companies making and distributing, 97–98
computer monitoring, 214, 215–217
desktop, 79
device tracking, 193–194
disk-erasing, 214
disk-wiping, 214
freeware, 79
installed, 80
installing, 14
laptop alarm, 192
malicious. See malware; specific types of malware
mobile, 79
mobile device management, 195
open-source, 79
public domain, 79
security, 35, 165–166
shareware, 79
system. See operating system
Software as a Service (SaaS). See cloud 
software
software license An agreement, either included in 
a software package or displayed on the screen 
when the software is installed or launched, 
that specifies the conditions under which the 
program can be used. 79
software piracy The unauthorized copying of a 
computer program. 200–201
prevention, 202–203
software suite, 15
solar building, 281
solar panel, 281
solar power, 281
solid-state drive (SSD) A hard drive that uses flash 
memory media instead of metal magnetic hard 
disks. 68
Sony PlayStation 3, 22
SOS. See Secure Our Smartphones (SOS) Initiative
source document, 53
space bar, 50
spam Unsolicited, bulk e-mail sent over the 
Internet. 34–35, 204, 208–209
spam filter An e-mail filter used to redirect spam 
from a user’s Inbox. 211–212
spatial light modulator (SLM), 303
speaker, 12, 13. See also computer speaker
spear phishing A personalized phishing scheme 
targeted at an individual. 117, 170
speech recognition, 12
speech-recognition software, 34, 56
spelling and grammar check feature, 81
spider, 106
spim, 208
sponsored link (listing), 107
spoofing, 169–170
sports score, 108
Spotify, 241
spreadsheet software, 15
spyware A software program that is installed 
without the user’s permission and that secretly 
gathers information to be sent to others. 
132–133
SSD. See solid-state drive (SSD)
SSID, 152
SSL. See Secure Sockets Layer (SSL)
SSL digital certificate, 176
SSO system. See single sign-on (SSO) system
standard version movie, 70
standing desk, 266
StartupNation, 116
stationary RFID reader, 53, 54
status update, 113
stealthware, 133
steering wheel, 52
storage The operation of saving data, programs, 
or output for future use. 9, 60. See also flash 
memory; hard drive; memory; optical disc; 
optical drive
storage device A piece of hardware, such as a DVD 
drive, into which a storage medium is inserted to 
be read from or written to. 13, 66
emerging, 302–304
storage medium The part of a storage system, such 
as a DVD disc, where data is stored. 66
storage system, 65–77. See also specific media and 
devices
characteristics, 65–66
stress, 263, 270
strong 128-bit encryption, 156
strong password, 148
strong user password, 117
StubHub, 55
Stuxnet worm, 162
styles feature, 81
stylus An input device that is used to write 
electronically on the display screen. 12, 50, 
51–52
subdirectory. See subfolder
subfolder, 83
subnotebook, 21
subscribe link, 123
Summly, 122
sunrise/sunset time, 108
SUPERAntispyware, 166
supercomputer The fastest, most expensive, and 
most powerful type of computer. 17, 24–25
surge suppressor A device that protects hardware 
from damage due to electrical fluctuations. 
196, 197
swipe (gesture), 51
swipe fingerprint reader, 151
switch, 78, 278
Swype app, 296
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

Symantec Security Check, 154
symmetric key encryption. See private key 
encryption
synchronous online learning, 126
syncing
browser settings, 32
files, 75
synonym, 110
system failure The complete malfunction of a 
computer system. 190–191
system memory. See RAM (random access 
memory)
system unit The main box of a computer that 
houses the CPU, motherboard, memory, and 
other devices. 12, 13, 49, 57
system-on-a-chip (SoC), 59
T
tab (Ribbon), 82
Tab key, 50
tabbed browsing, 31
table PC, 296
tablet. See media tablet
tablet arm, 268
tablet computer A portable computer about the size 
of a notebook that is designed to be used with a 
digital pen. 21
tablet dock, 266, 271
tablet pen. See stylus
tablet stand. See notebook stand
tamper evident label, 195
tap (gesture), 51
TB. See terabyte (TB)
Tb/inch2. See terabit per square inch (Tb/inch2)
Tbps. See terabyte per second (Tbps)
tech clothing, 20
technology addiction. See Internet addiction
Telecommunications Act, 98
telemedicine The use of networking technology 
to provide medical information and services. 
319–320
Telephone Anti-Spamming Amendments 
Act, 223
Telephone Consumer Protection Act, 223
telepresence videoconferencing, 307
telesurgery A form of robot-assisted surgery 
in which the doctor’s physical location 
is different from the patient’s and robot’s 
physical location; the doctor controls the robot 
remotely over the Internet or another network. 
320
television, accessing Internet content, 101
temporary disposable e-mail address, 210
10 Gigabit Ethernet, 308
10 Minute Mail, 210
Terabit Ethernet, 309
terabit per square inch (Tb/inch2), 302–303
terabyte (TB) Approximately 1 trillion bytes. 48
terabyte per second (Tbps), 299
teraflop, 299
teraflop processor, 299
tera-scale computing, 299
termination rights, 234
tethering, 105, 313
text messaging A way of exchanging real-time 
typed messages with other individuals via a 
cellular network and, typically, cell phones. 
18, 112
while driving, 264–265
theft
data, 167
hardware, 190
identity. See identity theft
thin client A personal computer designed to 
access a network for processing and data 
storage, instead of performing those tasks 
locally. 22, 23
thin-film solar panel, 281
third-generation standard. See 3G (third generation) 
standard
third-generation computer, 11, R–3
third-party cookie, 131
thought-based authentication, 167
thread, 114, 299
threat definition, 165
3D chip. See three-dimensional (3D) chip
3D display. See three-dimensional (3D) display 
screen
3D printer, 65, 300
three-dimensional application, 24
three-dimensional (3D) chip, 298
three-dimensional (3D) display screen, 300
three-dimensional (3D) output devices, 300
three-dimensional (3D) projector, 300
3G network, 104
3G (third generation) standard, 311–312
throw-away e-mail address An e-mail address used 
only for nonessential purposes and activities that 
may result in spam; the address can be disposed 
of and replaced if spam becomes a problem. 36, 
209–210
thumb drive. See USB flash drive
tier, 102, 105
tilde (~), Google searches, 110
tile, 14
time, 108
time bomb, 160
time shifting, 242
Tinker, Josh, 302
Titan supercomputer, 24–25
TLD. See top-level domain (TLD)
TLS. See Transport Layer Security (TLS)
toggle key, 50
TOLED. See transparent OLED (TOLED)
toner cartridge, 63
toner powder, 63
toolbar, 81
top-level domain (TLD), 28
touch fingerprint reader, 151
touch input, 49, 50
touch mouse, 50
touch pad, 12, 52
touch screen A display device that is touched with 
the finger to issue commands or otherwise 
provide input to the connected device. 12, 
50, 52
tower case, 19
TraceSecurity, 191
track, 67, 70
trackball, 52, 268
tracking protection, 213
trademark A word, phrase, symbol, or design that 
identifies goods or services. 233, 235–237
Trademark Act of 1946. See Lanham Act of 1946
transceiver satellite dish, 103
TransferJet, 312, 313
Transformers: The Ride 3D ride, 59
transistor, 11
transparent OLED (TOLED), 301
transparent solar panel, 281
Transport Layer Security (TLS), 154
TransUnion, 173
trash, disposal, 282, 284–285
travel keyboard, 266
travel mouse, 266
Tri-Gate, 298
Trojan horse A malicious program that 
masquerades as something else. 162–163
Turing, Alan, 313
Turing Test, 313–314
TV Everywhere, 120
TV.com, 120
twisted-pair cable, 78
Twitter, 164, 171, 210, 236, 237. See also social 
networking site
Twittering Sending short status updates about your 
current activities via the Twitter service. 112–113
2D barcode. See two-dimensional (2D) barcode
two-dimensional (2D) barcode A barcode that 
represents data with a matrix of small squares 
and stores information both horizontally and 
vertically so it can hold significantly more data 
than a conventional one-dimensional barcode. 
54, 297
two-factor authentication Using two different 
methods to authenticate a user. 149
Tyco International, 249
typeface. See font face
typosquatting, 170, 237
U
ubiquitous computing, 2–3
UC. See unified communications (UC)
Ultra HD. See 4K (Ultra HD) movie
Ultra Wideband (UWB), 312, 313
Ultrabook, 21
ultraportable, 21
ultrarugged device, 196
unauthorized access Gaining access to a computer, 
mobile device, network, file, or other resource 
without permission. 144
unauthorized use Using a computing resource for 
unapproved activities. 144
unencrypted message, 147
Unicode An international coding system that can be 
used to represent text-based data in any written 
language. 48, 49
chart, R–16
unified communications (UC), 112
Uniform Resource Locator (URL) An Internet 
address (usually beginning with http://) that 
uniquely identifies a Web page. 28–29
uninterruptible power supply (UPS) A device 
containing a built-in battery that provides 
continuous power to a computer and other 
connected components when the electricity goes 
out. 196–197
U.S. Anticybersquatting Consumer Protection Act 
of 1999, 253
U.S. Census Bureau, 11
U.S. Copyright Office, 234
U.S. Patent and Trademark Office (USPTO), 
235, 237
U.S. SAFE WEB Act of 2006, 223
UNIVAC, 11
Universal Product Code. See UPC (Universal 
Product Code)
Universal Serial Bus (USB) A universal bus used 
to connect up to 127 peripheral devices to a 
computer without requiring the use of additional 
expansion cards. See also USB entries
Unmanned Arial Vehicle (UAV), 320
unsubscribe e-mail address, 210
UPC (Universal Product Code), 54
updating
browsers, 198
e-mail programs, 198
operating systems, 198
status update, 113
I-13
INDEX
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

INDEX
I-14
upgrading, 4
UPS. See uninterruptible power supply (UPS)
URL. See Uniform Resource Locator (URL)
USA PATRIOT Act, 179, 223
USB. See Universal Serial Bus (USB)
USB 1.0 standard, 77
USB 2.0 standard, 77, 298
USB 3.0 standard, 77, 298
USB flash drive A small storage device that plugs 
into a USB port and contains flash memory 
media. 12, 13, 73–74
USB flash memory drive. See USB flash drive
USB key token, 148
USB port, 13, 49, 57, 58
USB security key (token), 150
user
good habits and precautions, 269
Internet, 96
username A name that uniquely identifies a 
user on a specific computer network. 
27, 29, 148
USPTO. See U.S. Patent and Trademark Office 
(USPTO)
Utah Data Center, 217
UWB. See Ultra Wideband (UWB)
V
vacuum tube, 10
value-added tax (VAT), 239
Vardi, Moshe, 145
variant word form, 110
VAT. See value-added tax (VAT)
VBScript (Visual Basic Scripting Edition), 15
vehicle monitoring system, 307
Verdesca, Michael, 20
Verizon, 237
vertical mouse, 269
VGA monitor port, 58
video phone call, 56
Video Privacy Protection Act, 223
video surveillance The use of video cameras 
to monitor activities of individuals, such as 
employees or individuals in public locations, 
for work-related or crime-prevention purposes. 
214, 217–218
videoconferencing The use of computers, video 
cameras, microphones, and networking 
technologies to conduct face-to-face meetings 
over a network. 56, 114–115
video-on-demand (VOD) The process of 
downloading movies and television shows, on 
demand, via the Web. 119, 121
Vimeo, 242
virtual private network (VPN) A private, secure 
path over the Internet that provides authorized 
users a secure means of accessing a private 
network via the Internet. 155–157
virtual world, 37
virtualization Creating virtual (rather than actual) 
versions of a computing resource, such as 
several separate environments that are located 
on a single server but function as different 
servers. 23–24
vision system. See neural network
Visual Basic, 15
Visual Basic Scription Edition. See VBScript 
(Visual Basic Scripting Edition)
VOD. See video-on-demand (VOD)
Voice Link, 190
Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP), 56
voice search, 106
VoIP. See Voice over Internet Protocol (VoIP)
VoIP phone adapter, 114
volatile A characteristic of memory or storage in 
which data is not retained when the power to the 
computer is turned off. 60
Vonage, 114
VPN. See virtual private network (VPN)
vulnerability assessment, 191, 198
W
war driving Driving around an area with a Wi-Fi-
enabled computer or mobile device to find 
a Wi-Fi network to access and use without 
authorization. 146
watermark, 203
WBT. See Web-based training (WBT)
weak encryption, 156
wearable display, 302
weather, 108
Web browser A program used to view Web pages. 
4, 15, 16, 26
Web conference A face-to-face meeting taking 
place via the Web; typically uses video cameras 
and microphones to enable participants to see 
and hear each other. 115
Web conferencing service, 115
web crawler. See spider
Web log. See blog
Web mail, 33
Web page A document, typically containing 
hyperlinks to other documents, located on a Web 
server and available through the World Wide 
Web. 5, 26
Web server A computer that is continually 
connected to the Internet and hosts Web pages 
that are accessible through the Internet. 26
Web service A self-contained business application 
that operates over the Internet. 97
Web services provider, 97
Web site A collection of related Web pages usually 
belonging to an organization or individual. 26
alteration, 164
e-commerce, 117
social networking. See social networking site
Web site spoofing, 169
Web 3.0, 316
Web-based encrypted e-mail, 154
Web-based software. See cloud software
Web-based training (WBT) Instruction delivered 
on an individual basis via the Web. 126
webcam, 56
WebEx, 115
WEP (Wired Equivalent Protocol), 152
whistle-blower, 245
White, Jeff, 59
wide-format ink-jet printer, 65
widescreen display, 70
widget, 121
Wi-Drive, 74
Wi-Fi (802.11) A widely used networking standard 
for medium-range wireless networks. 77, 310
Wi-Fi Alliance, 313
Wi-Fi Direct A standard for connecting Wi-Fi 
devices directly, without using a router or an 
access point. 312, 313
Wi-Fi finder, 146
Wi-Fi hotspot A location that provides wireless 
Internet access to the public. 104–105
Wi-Fi piggybacking Accessing an unsecured Wi-Fi 
network from your current location without 
authorization. 146–147
Wi-Fi Protected Access. See WPA (Wi-Fi Protected 
Access)
Wi-Fi standard, 310
WiGig, 312, 313
Wii Remote, 296
wiki A collaborative Web page that is designed 
to be edited and republished by a variety of 
individuals. 127
Wikipedia, 127
wildcard, 110
Willis, Bruce, 234
WiMAX (802.16) A wireless networking standard 
that is faster and has a greater range than Wi-Fi. 
77, 103–104, 310–311, 312
Windows, 14
Windows desktop The background work area 
displayed on the screen for computers running 
Microsoft Windows. 14
Windows Explorer, 83
Windows Firewall, 152
Windows key, 50
Windows PC, 20
Windows Phone, 14
Windows Start button, 14
Windows Start menu, 15
Windows Start screen, 15
Windows To Go, 158
wiping a disk, 214
WIPO. See World Intellectual Property Organization 
(WIPO)
Wired Equivalency Protocol. See WEP (Wired 
Equivalent Protocol)
wired keyboard, 49
wireless access point, 78
wireless display, 308
wireless Ethernet. See Wi-Fi (802.11)
wireless external device, 58
wireless home router, 153
wireless hotspot, 5
wireless ISP (WISP), 96
wireless keyboard, 49
wireless networking, 5
wireless phone. See mobile phone; smartphone
Wireless Plus, 74
wireless power, 310, 311
Wireless Power Consortium, 311
wireless router, 78
wireless signal, 78
wireless technology, 12
wireless tether, 195
wireless transceiver, 58
wireless USB A wireless version of USB designed 
to connect peripheral devices. 312–313
wireless Web, 100–101
wirelessHD (WiHD), 312, 313
WISP. See wireless ISP (WISP)
word processing software, 15, 16
work for hire, 234
workplace
computer use, 6
employee monitoring, 214, 219–220
employee policy, 222
employee precautions, 157–158
ethical use of employee information, 245
protecting workplace privacy, 221–222
workplace monitoring, 251–252
workspace design, 266–268
workstation, 20
World Intellectual Property Organization (WIPO), 
236–237
World of Warcraft gold, 239
World Wide Web (WWW) The collection of Web 
pages available through the Internet. 4, 26–27, 
94–95. See also Web entries
citing sources, 111
Internet vs., 26, 99
World Wide Web Consortium (W3C), 98
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.

WorldCom, 249
WPA (Wi-Fi Protected Access), 152
write-once disc. See recordable optical disc
WC3. See World Wide Web Consortium (W3C)
WWW. See World Wide Web (WWW)
X
Xbox 360, 22
Xbox Kinect, 296
xD Picture Card (xD), 72
Xfinity TV, 120
XHTML, 15
Xi Jinping, 145
XO laptop, 277
XO tablet, 277
XO-4 Touch, 277
Xperia Tablet Z, 196
XQD card, 73
Y
Yahoo! Messenger, 112
Yahoo! Search, 106
Yahoo!Music, 119
Yellow pages, 108
YMCA (song), 234
York, Jillian, 204
YouTube, 5, 115, 250, 251. See also social 
networking site
Z
Zap2It, 121
Zappos.com, 145
zero-day attack, 162
zettabyte, 48
ZINK Paper, 301
ZINK printer, 301
zombie computer. See bot
zombie online account, 147
ZoneAlarm, 152
I-15
INDEX
Copyright 2015 Cengage Learning. All Rights Reserved. May not be copied, scanned, or duplicated, in whole or in part. Due to electronic rights, some third party content may be suppressed from the eBook and/or eChapter(s). 
Editorial review has deemed that any suppressed content does not materially affect the overall learning experience. Cengage Learning reserves the right to remove additional content at any time if subsequent rights restrictions require it.


