Be 100% anonymous , by fake
Staying anonymous and safe online is crucial wither or not your into fraud, hacking, or otherwise. I 
did not write this guide, however ill add some amendments that I feel are important and missed. 
1.) Where ever any guide ( like this) tells one to use Ubuntu Linux.... do not and  use Ubuntu. The 
reasoning is that with the newest additions of Ubuntu, they index and record your filesystem and 
searching habits for juicy data they sell a dime a dozen to the man.
Some nice alternatives are:
-Debian
-Linux Mint
-Arch Linux
-BSD
2.) Encryption. Its not hard. You have Truecrypt and your silly HTTPS but thats not enough. 
When ever I contact my Darknet buddies I always use GPG encryption 4096 bit RSA to ensure my 
messages, even if my connection got sniffed, never get read by the LE.
Some nice practices are:
-Truecrypt your partitions, VHD's, and other important files you need safe, always use a 
hidden partition with false files and such ... idk go to hackfourms or torrent books about 
backtrack to make it look juciy yet dry.
- Use GPG for contacts
here's a nice link www.madboa.com/geek/gpg-quickstart/
-Encrypt your homefolder when you install the OS of your choice 
3.) Believe it or not, all the encrpytion,tor,vpn, vps's, and proxies will not save you if you don't do 
one simple step... change your fucking mac address everytime.
In linux:
-install macchanger
Code: Select all
ifconfig interface down
                            macchanger -r interface
                            ifconfig interface up
4.) Do not upload pictures online taken by your phone, there have been a few Anonymous hackers 
caught and are rotting in jail atm. Whenever one takes a pic with said phone, it embeds it with a 
GPS cord of where you took that pic. Plus there could be features within the picture itself that can 
give away who you are.

5.) Leave your ego for Call of Duty and your buddies. The more you talk about yourself, the 
more the other guy or LE can build a profile on you. If your talking about how hitler did nothing 
wrong on /pol/ all day while hacking Israel with #OPIsrael ... your gunna get caught real fast. 
Topiary got nailed for bragging on Xbox Live.
6.) A word about DNS.... never use your ISP's even with daily activities.
-Torango
------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------
------------------------------------------------------------------------
That pretty much cover's it, when I get more time and resources i'll post more. Im gunna take 
initative and try rebuilding the content of this website to the best of my ability. Luck for you guys I 
copy pasted a lot of the good tidbits and from other places. Don't expect fraud copy pastes from me 
though, the Wiki is alive and well.
This is a guide with which even a total noob can get high class security for his system and
complete anonymity online. But its not only for noobs, it contains a lot of tips most people will
find pretty helpfull. It is explained so detailed even the biggest noobs can do it^^ :
=== The Ultimate Guide for Anonymous and Secure Internet Usage v1.0.1 ===
Table of Contents:
1. Obtaining Tor Browser
2. Using and Testing Tor Browser for the first time
3. Securing Your Hard Drive
4. Setting up TrueCrypt, Encrypted Hidden Volumes
5. Testing TrueCrypt Volumes
6. Securing your Hard Disk
7. Temporarily Securing Your Disk, Shredding Free Space
8. Installing VirtualBox
9. Installing a Firewall
10. Firewall Configuration
11. Installing Ubuntu
12. Ubuntu Initial Setup
13. Installing Guest Additions
14. Installing IRC (Optional)
15. Installing Torchat (Optional)
16. Creating TOR-Only Internet Environment
17. General Daily Usage
By the time you are finished reading and implementing this guide, you will be able to securely
and anonymously browse any website and to do so anonymously. No one not even your ISP or a
government agent will be able to see what you are doing online. If privacy and anonymity is
important to you, then you owe it to yourself to follow the instructions that are presented here.
In order to prepare this guide for you, I have used a computer that is running Windows Vista.
This guide will work equally well for other versions of Windows. If you use a different operating
system, you may need to have someone fluent in that operating system guide you through this
process. However, most parts of the process are easily duplicated in other operating systems.

I have written this guide to be as newbie friendly as possible. Every step is fully detailed and
explained. I have tried to keep instructions explicit as possible. This way, so long as you
patiently follow each step, you will be just fine.
In this guide from time to time you will be instructed to go to certain URLs to download files.
You do NOT need TOR to get these files, and using TOR (while possible) will make these
downloads very slow.
This guide may appear overwhelming. Every single step is explained thoroughly and it is just a
matter of following along until you are done. Once you are finished, you will have a very secure
setup and it will be well worth the effort. Even though the guide appears huge, this whole
process should take at the most a few hours. You can finish it in phases over the course of
several days.
It is highly recommended that you close *ALL* applications running on your computer before
starting.
=== 1 : Obtaining Tor Browser ===
The first step to becoming secure and anonymous online is to setup and install something called
"TOR". "TOR" is short for"The Onion Router". The concepts behind TOR were first
implemented by the United States Military, and these principles have been used to create an
extremely secure mechanism for being anonymous online. In fact, millions of people world-wide
use TOR to browse the internet and communicate anonymously.
TOR works by heavily encrypting your communications so that no observer can see what
website you are really going to, and what information is really being sent. It all appears as a
bunch of random characters to any observer. You simply use the TOR web browser just as you
use any other web browser. TOR takes care of the rest.
However, TOR by itself is not enough. Even when using TOR, a user can be compromised in a
number of ways. First, some websites can be set up to attempt to reveal someone's true IP
address (their true identity) by tricking their web browser or other software to transmitting that
information. For this reason, anyone who uses TOR will recommend that no one have javascript
or flash turned on while browsing TOR. In this guide however, I will show you a much better
solution.
The second issue is that of human error. Even if you have TOR installed, you may accidentally
forget which browser to put in a link. You may also accidentally click on a link from another
program, such as a chat program. That program might then load the link you clicked on into a
non-TOR browser. When you are using TOR, you must be careful *constantly* that every link
goes into the right browser, and that you do not accidentally click the wrong link.
So then, let's begin. Obtaining the TOR Browser is easy. Simply go to the following website:
http://www.torproject.org
Once here, you may feel free to read more about what TOR is and how it works, or you may
proceed to immediately download TOR.
Here is how to do so:
1. Click on "Download TOR", or "Download".
2. You will see text that says, "The Tor Browser Bundle contains everything you ned ... Just
extract it and run. Learn more >>
3. Click on this "Learn more" link. for the "Tor Browser Bundle"
4. Assuming you are an English speaker, you would choose the top-most link "English (en-US)".
Otherwise, pick the language
best suited to you.
5. The file being saved will be named: tor-browser-1.3.18_en-US.exe
It is ok if the number is not exactly 1.3.18, there are new versions of Tor from time to time. At
the time that this guide was written, 1.3.18 was most current. By the time you are reading this, a
more current version of TOR may exist.
6. Run this file.

7. You will be prompted to extract this to a directory. By default, it will be set to
C:\Users\You\Downloads\ This is perfectly
ok. You can also choose a different directory if you wish.
8. Click "Extract"
That's it. TOR Browser is NOW installed. Time to test it out!
=== 2 : Using and Testing Tor Browser for the first time ===
Now you have successfully downloaded and installed the Tor Web Browser Bundle. You are no
doubt anxious to begin using it. First, click on the "start" menu icon, the icon in the lower left of
your screen with the windows logo. On the top right will be a listing that says "You",
"Documents", "Pictures", "Music"... "You" of course will be replaced by your user name. Click
on "You", the top most link. This will open up your main user folder.
Now, locate the folder called "Downloads" and double click on it.
Now, inside the "Downloads" folder, double click on the folder called "Tor Browser".
Lastly, double click on the application: "Start Tor Browser"
When you do, you will see the Vidalia Control Panel appear, and you will observe as you
connect to the TOR network. When this is complete, your web browser will open up and will
automatically connect to the web address: check.torproject.org
This is to confirm that you are in fact using TOR. If you have followed this guide correctly, then
you will see the following green text, or something similar:
"Congratulations. Your browser is configured to use Tor."
Now you can use this web browser the same as any other. You can go to any website you wish,
and neither your ISP or anyone else will be able to see where you are going, or what you are
doing. However, there are still issues that need to be resolved, so don't begin browsing just yet.
*************************************
******* IMPORTANT SAFETY NOTE *******
*************************************
If you fill out a form containing your email address, your name, or any other sensitive
information while using the TOR browser, be aware that sometimes it is possible for an observer
to see that information. When using TOR, use it to access websites and content that you are
*not* connected to via your real identity or any username or nick name which links to your real
identity. Let TOR be for anonymous browsing solely. Do your online banking, or any other
activities involving your real identity using your normal web browser.
************************************
=== 3 : Securing Your Hard Drive ===
Being able to browse anonymously is one thing. However, you may choose to download and
save sensitive content or material to your computer which you wish to keep private. This may
include reading sensitive documents, viewing pictures, or storing any kind of sensitive data.
If you save *anything* to your computer's harddrive, then it is possible for someone who has
confiscated your computer to determine what it was you saved. This is often true even if you
delete the content. For example, suppose I use the Tor Browser and I navigate to a website
containing a sensitive document that I wish to read. If I saved that document somewhere on my
harddrive, then it is possible for someone else to find it. If I *delete* that document, it may still
be possible for someone to undelete it.
Further, even if I never save it to my harddrive but I simply look at it using my word processing
software, it may still be saved in a number of ways including:
1. Often programs keep records of filenames. The filename alone is often enough to incriminate
someone.
2. Often programs keep parts of the content viewed saved for various reasons, such as for
searching. This can include random excerpts of text, thumbnails of images, and more. Often this
"partial" data is more than enough to prove what the original data was. Often the "partial" data is
itself incriminating.

3. Sometimes, especially if you are running low on system memory, your operating system may
choose to use your hard-disk as a temporary RAM. This is known as "SWAP". Normally,
whenever you turn off your computer, whatever was in RAM is deleted. However, the data that
goes to your SWAP may persist and it may be possible for someone to see what content you had
open in your programs if that informationis saved in RAM.
Generally speaking, you *must* have a plan to secure any content that is saved to your hard disk.
Therefore, this guide would be incomplete if we did not thoroughly address this. First, there are
two kinds of such content:
1. Deliberately saved content.
2. Inadvertently saved content.
Deliberately saved content refers to content that you have chosen to save on your harddisk so
that you can access this content later. We will address how to do this later in the guide.
Inadvertently saved content refers to content that is saved by programs you use, or your
operating system. You have no way to even know what this content might be. Therefore, this is
the most dangerous. You may browse and find a dozen sensitive documents, utterly delete them,
and some program may have saved the file names and excerpts of the data. This will render your
previous efforts futile.
Content that is inadvertently saved to your harddisk comes in two flavors:
1. Content that is saved to your SWAP space.
2. Content that is saved by applications running on your computer, including your operating
system.
The surest way to prevent content from writing to your SWAP space is to disable your SWAP
space altogether. This may result in your computer running a bit slower than normal, and may
mean that you cannot use ram intensive games and applications during the time your SWAP is
disabled.
Therefore, if you use this method, simply turn back on the SWAP when you want to use those
ram intensive applications. Also, you may choose not to take this step.
Here is how to disable your swap space if you are using Windows 7:
*** ADVANCED INSTRUCTIONS BELOW. SKIP THIS IF YOU ARE NOVICE OR 
UNCOMFORTABLE WITH THIS
OPERATION ***
*This step is recommended for advanced users only. If you are not comfortable doing this, you may
safely skip this step.*
Instructions are less verbose than usual, as these steps are intended for advanced users only. If you 
do
not fully understand these instructions, skip this step.
1. From Control Panel, go to "System and Security".
2. Click on "System", and then choose "Advanced system settings" in the left-most menu.
3. Under the "Advanced" tab, under "Performance", click "Settings".
4. Under this "Advanced" tab, under "Virtual Memory", click "Change"
5. Uncheck "Automatically manage paging file sizes for all drives"
6. Select "No paging file"
7. Save, reboot, and follow these same first 5 steps to confirm that "No paging file" is still selected. 
This
means that you have successfully disabled your swap. This means that *nothing* from RAM will be
inadvertently saved to your harddrive.
To resume using SWAP again, simply click "Automatically manage paging file size for all drives." 
You can
switch between these two modes as you desire.
Generally speaking, your computer will run fine without a swap file, provided you have enough 
RAM.

*** END OF ADVANCED INSTRUCTIONS ***
The next issue we need to address is how to prevent applications and/or your operating system from
saving content inadvertently that you do not want saved. For this, we are going to set up a "Virtual
Machine".
A "Virtual Machine" is like a computer inside of your computer. Everything you do inside the 
Virtual
Machine (vm for short) will be fully contained within itself and no one will be able to see what the 
vm
has been doing. Ideally, you want *ALL* of your sensitive computer usage of any kind, TOR or 
NON TOR,
to take place within a vm. In this way, you can keep everything private that you wish while still 
using
your computer fully and getting the most out of it.
Don't be afraid of this sounds complicated. This guide will take you through every step slowly and
methodically. Before we can set up a vm however, we need to take another step.
=== 4 : Setting up TrueCrypt, Encrypted Hidden Volumes ===
If you save anything on your computer, it is likely that you do not want just anyone to be able to see
what you have saved. You want a way to protect that information so that you can access it, and
absolutely no one else except those you trust. Therefore, it makes sense to set up a system which
protects your information and safeguards it against prying eyes.
The best such system for this is called "True Crypt". "True Crypt" is an encryption software 
program
which allows you to store many files and directories inside of a single file on your harddrive. 
Further, this
file is encrypted and no one can actually see what you have saved there unless they know your
password.
This sounds extremely high tech, but it is actually very easy to set up. We are going to do so, right 
now:
1. Go to http://www.truecrypt.org/downloads (or go to www.truecrypt.org, and click on 
"Downloads")
2. Under "Latest Stable Version", under "Windows 7/Vista/XP/2000", click "Download"
3. The file will be called "True Crypt Setup 7.0a.exe" or something similar. Run this file.
4. If prompted that a program needs your permission to continue, click "Continue".
5. Check "I accept and agree to be bound by these license terms"
6. Click "Accept"
7. Ensure that "Install" is selected, and click "Next"
8. click "Install"
9. You will see a dialog stating "TrueCrypt has been successfully installed." Click "Ok"
10. Click "No" when asked if you wish to view the tutorial/user's guide.
11. Click "Finish"
At this point, TrueCrypt is now installed. Now we will set up truecrypt so that we can begin using it 
to
store sensitive information.
1. Click the "Windows Logo"/"Start" button on the lower left corner of your screen.
2. Click "All Programs"
3. Click "TrueCrypt"
4. Click the "TrueCrypt" application
And now we can begin:
1. click the button "Create Volume"
2. Ensuring that "Create an encrypted file container" is selected, click "Next"

3. Select "Hidden TrueCrypt volume" and click "Next".
4. Ensuring that "Normal mode" is selected, click "Next"
5. Click on "Select File"
Note which directory you are in on your computer. Look at the top of the dialog that has opened and
you will see the path you are in, most likely the home directory for your username. An input box is
provided with a flashing cursor asking you to type in a file name. Here, you will type in the 
following
filename:
random.txt
You may of course replace random.txt with anything you like. This file is going to be created and 
will be
used to store many other files inside.
Do NOT use a filename for a file that already exists. The idea here is that you are creating an 
entirely
new file.
It is also recommended though not required that you "hide" this file somewhere less obvious. If it is 
in
your home directory, then someone who has access to your computer may find it easier. You can 
also
choose to put this file on any other media, it doesn't have to be your hard disk. You could
for example save your truecrypt file to a usb flash drive, an sd card, or some other media. It is up to 
you.
6. Once you have typed in the file name, click "Save"
7. Make sure "Never save history" is checked.
8. Click "Next"
9. On the "Outer Volume" screen, click "Next" again.
10. The default Encryption Algorithm and Hash Algorithm are fine. Click "Next"
11. Choose a file size.
In order to benefit the most from this guide, you should have at least 10 gigabytes of free disk 
space. If
not, then it is worth it for you to purchase some form of media (such as a removable harddrive, a 
large
sd card, etc.) in order to proceed. TrueCrypt can be used on all forms of digital media not just your 
hard
disk. If you choose to proceed without obtaining at least ten gigabytes of disk space, then select a 
size
that you are comfortable with (such as 100 MB).
Ideally, you want to choose enough space to work with. I recommend 20 GB at least. Remember 
that if
you do need more space later, you can always create additional TrueCrypt volumes using exactly 
these
same steps.
12. Now you are prompted for a password. THIS IS VERY IMPORTANT. READ THIS 
CAREFULLY
*** READ THIS SECTION CAREFULLY ***
*** The password you choose here is a decoy password. That means, this is the password you 
would
give to someone under duress. Suppose that someone suspects
*** that you were accessing sensitive information and they threaten to beat you or worse if you do 
not
reveal the password. THIS is the password that you

*** give to them. When you give someone this password, it will be nearly impossible for them to 
prove
that it is not the RIGHT password. Further, they cannot
*** even know that there is a second password.
Here are some tips for your password:
A. Choose a password you will NEVER forget. It may be ten years from now that you need it. 
Make it
simple, like your birthday repeated three times.
B. Make sure it seems reasonable, that it appears to be a real password. If the password is 
something
stupid like "123" then they may not believe you.
C. Remember that this is a password that you would give to someone if forced. It is *NOT* your 
actual
password.
D. Do not make this password too similar to what you plan to really use. You do not want someone 
to
guess your main password from this one.
And with all of this in mind, choose your password. When you have typed it in twice, click "Next".
13. "Large Files", here you are asked whether or not you plan to store files larger than 4 
GIGABYTES.
Choose "No" and click "Next"
14. "Outer Volume Format", here you will notice some random numbers and letters next to where it
says "Random Pool". Go ahead and move your mouse around for a bit. This will increase the
randomness and give you better encryption. After about ten seconds of this, click "Format".
15. Depending on the file size you selected, it will take some time to finish formatting.
"What is happening?"
TrueCrypt is creating the file you asked it to, such as "random.txt". It is building a file system 
contained
entirely within that one file. This file system can be used to store files, directories, and more. 
Further, it
is encrypting this file system in such a way that without the right password it will be
impossible for anyone to access it. To *anyone* other than you, this file will appear to be just a 
mess of
random characters. No one will even know that it is a truecrypt volume.
16. "Outer Volume Contents", click on the button called, "Open Outer Volume"
An empty folder has opened up. This is empty because you have yet to put any files into your 
truecrypt
volume.
*** *** DO NOT PUT ANY SENSITIVE CONTENT HERE *** ***
This is the "Decoy". This is what someone would see if you gave them the password you used in the
previous step. This is NOT where you are going to store your sensitive data. If you have been 
forced into
a situation where you had to reveal your password to some individual, then that individual will see
whatever is in this folder. You need to have data in this folder that appears to be sensitive enough to 
be
protected by truecrypt in order to fool them. Here are some important tips to keep in mind:
A. Do NOT use porn. Adult models can sometimes appear to be underaged, and this can cause you 
to
incriminate yourself unintentionally.
B. Do NOT use drawings/renderings/writings of porn. In many jurisdictions, these are just as illegal 
as

photographs.
C. Good choices for what to put here include: backups of documents, emails, financial documents, 
etc.
D. Once you have placed files into this folder, *NEVER* place any more files in the future. Doing 
so may
damage your hidden content.
Generally, you want to store innocent data where some individual looking at it would find no cause
against you, and yet at the same time they would understand why you used TrueCrypt to secure that
data.
Now, go ahead and find files and store them in this folder. Be sure that you leave at least ten 
gigabytes
free. The more the better.
When you are all done copying files into this folder, close the folder by clicking the "x" in the top 
right
corner.
17. click "Next"
18. If prompted that "A program needs your permission to continue", click "Continue"
19. "Hidden Volume", click "Next"
20. The default encryption and hash algorithms are fine, click "Next"
21. "Hidden Volume Size", the maximum available space is indicated in bold below the text box. 
Round
down to the nearest full unit. For example, if 19.97 GB
is available, select 19 GB. If 12.0 GB are available, select 11 GB.
22. If a warning dialog comes up, asking "Are you sure you wish to continue", select "Yes"
23. "Hidden Volume Password"
*** IMPORTANT READ THIS ***
Here you are going to select the REAL password. This is the password you will NEVER reveal to 
ANYONE
else under any circumstances. Only you will know it. No one
will be able to figure it out or even know that there is a second password. Be aware that an 
individual
intent on obtaining your sensitive information may lie to you and claim to be able to figure this out.
They cannot.
It is HIGHLY recommended that you choose a 64 character password here. If it is difficult to 
remember a
64 character password, choose an 8 character password and simply repeat it 8 times. A date 
naturally
has exactly 8 numbers, and a significant date in your life repeated 8 times would do just fine.
24. Type in your password twice, and click "Next"
25. "Large Files", select "Yes" and click "Next".
26. "Hidden Volume Format", as before move your mouse around for about ten seconds randomly, 
and
tehn click "Format".
27. If prompted "A program needs your permission to continue", select "Continue"
28. A dialog will come up telling you that the hidden TrueCrypt volume has been successfully 
created.
Click "Ok"
29. Click "Exit"
Congratulations! You have just set up an encrypted file container on your hard drive. Anything you 
store
here will be inaccessible to anyone except you. Further, you have protected this content with TWO
passwords. One that you will give to someone under threat, and one that only you will know. Keep 

your
real password well protected and never write it down or give it to anyone else for any reason.
Now, we should test BOTH passwords.
=== 5. Testing TrueCrypt Volumes ===
Once you have completed the above section, you will be back at TrueCrypt. Go ahead and follow 
these
steps to test the volumes you have made.
1. Click "Select File..."
2. Locate the file you created in the last section, most likely called "random.txt" or something 
similar.
Remember that even though there is both an outer and
a hidden volume, both volumes are contained in a single file. There are not two files, only one.
3. Click "Open"
4. Choose a drive letter that you are not using (anything past M is probably just fine). Click on that, 
For
example click on "O:" to highlight it.
5. Click "Mount"
6. Now you are prompted for a password. Read the below carefully:
The password you provide here will determine WHICH volume is mounted to the drive letter you
specified. If you type in your decoy password, then O:\ will show all the files and directories you 
copied
that you would reveal if forced. If you type in your real password, then O:\ will show the files and
directories that you never intend anyone to see.
7. After successfully typing in your password, you will see additional detail to the right of the drive 
letter,
including the full path to the file you selected as well as the kind of volume it is (for example, 
hidden).
8. Right click on your "Windows Logo"/"Start Menu" icon, and scroll down to the bottom where 
you can
see your different drive letters. You will see the drive letter you selected, for example: "Local Disk 
(O:)".
Click on that.
9. If you selected your decoy password, you will see all the files and folders that you moved there 
during
the installation phase. If you selected the real password, you will see whatever files and directories 
you
have placed so far into the hidden volume, if any.
If you selected your hidden volume password, you may now begin moving any sensitive 
information you
wish. Be aware that simply moving it from your main hard disk is not enough. We will discuss how 
to
ensure deleted data is actually deleted later in the guide.
"What is happening?"
When you select a file and mount it to a drive, you are telling your computer that you have a new 
drive
with files and folders on it. It is the same thing as if you had plugged in a usb flash drive, a 
removable
harddrive, or an sd card into your computer. TrueCrypt causes your computer to think that there is 
an
entirely new disk drive on your computer. You can use this disk drive just as if it *was* actually a 
usb

flash drive. You can copy files to it, directories, and use it just as you would use a usb flash drive.
When you are done, simply close all open windows/folders/applications that are using your 
truecrypt
drive letter, and then click "Dismount" from within TrueCrypt while you have the drive letter
highlighted. This will once again hide all of this data, accessible only by re-mounting it with the 
correct
password.
*** VERY IMPORTANT SAFETY INFORMATION ***
When a true crypt hidden volume is mounted, someone who has access to your computer can access
anything that is inside that hidden volume. If for example you left your computer running while a
truecrypt volume was mounted, then if someone gained access to your computer they would be able 
to
see everything you have in that volume. Therefore:
*** ALWAYS REMEMBER TO DISMOUNT ANY TRUECRYPT VOLUME CONTAINING 
ANY SENSITIVE
INFORMATION WHEN YOU ARE NOT USING YOUR COMPUTER ***
You can tell that it is dismounted because the drive letter inside of "TrueCrypt"'s control panel will
appear the same as all of the other drive letters, with no information to the right of the drive letter.
You should practice Mounting and Dismounting a few times with both passwords to make sure you
understand this process.
Once you have copied files/folders into the hidden volume, do *NOT* touch the files or folders in 
the
outer volume anymore. Remember that both volumes occupy the same single file, and therefore
changing the outer volume can damage the hidden volume. Once you have copied files/folders into 
the
outer volume during the installation process, that is the last time you should do so. From that point
forward, use ONLY the hidden volume. The outer volume exists only as a decoy if you need it.
=== 6. Securing your Disk ===
This is an involved step which many people may not be able to do right away. If you cannot do this 
step
immediately, then see section 7.
At this point you should understand how to create and use TrueCrypt hidden volumes in order to
safeguard any sensitive information. Therefore, you should *NOT* keep any such sensitive 
information
on your hard disk. At this stage, there are two possibilities:
1. You have never had any sensitive information on your hard disk. In this case, read this section but 
you
can certainly skip it.
2. Up until now, you have stored sensitive information on your hard disk. If so, then you MUST 
read this
section.
If you have ever used this computer to access sensitive information, then all of the security and
precautions in the world are totally useless and futile because all someone has to do is access what 
is
left of that sensitive information. I cannot stress this enough.
You can have the most secure TrueCrypt volumes, use TOR, and be the safest most secure user in 
the
world. If you have not made sure that *ALL* remnants of any sensitive information are UTTERLY
REMOVED from your hard disk, then all of that effort is totally pointless. You MUST take these 
actions to

safeguard your hard disk, or otherwise you might as well throw away this guide and follow none of 
the
advice herein.
First, I understand that it is troublesome to have to re-format a computer, to back everything up, and
reinstall everything. However, if you have ever had sensitive information on your machine, that is 
what
you have to do. Take the following steps:
1. Obtain a removable harddrive or usb flash drive large enough to store anything you need to save.
2. Set up a truecrypt hidden volume on that harddrive big enough to hold all of that information.
3. Set up the truecrypt outer volume as in the previous section. Use the previous section as a guide 
if
you need to.
4. Be sure you the hidden volume will have enough space to store all that you are backing up.
5. Copy ALL data you need to back up/save into that hidden volume.
*** IMPORTANT, READ THIS ***
If you have ever used this system to access sensitive information, then you must assume that the
sensitive information or remnants of it can be *anywhere* on your hard disk. Therefore, you need 
to
move *EVERYTHING* you intend to save into the hidden truecrypt container. You do not know 
where
sensitive data might be, so you are assuming it can be anywhere. This way you still have ALL of 
your data
and you have lost nothing.
A good analogy is toxic waste. You don't know which barrel might contain the toxic waste, so you 
treat
*ALL* the barrels as potentially toxic. This is the surest way you can protect yourself.
You might be saying, "I have family photos, music, movies that I would have to move to the hidden
volume." That is perfectly fine. Remember that you can access that hidden volume just as if it was a
drive letter. In fact, ideally, *ALL* of the content on your computer (assuming you value your 
privacy)
should be protected anyways. You lose nothing by securing all of that data.
6. Once you have copied everything you intend to copy. dismount your hidden volume, reboot your
computer, and re-mount your hidden volume to make sure everything is there.
7. Now it is time to re-format your entire hard drive. Re-install your operating system of choice 
(such as
Windows 7), and start with a clean slate.
8. Once you have reinstalled your operating system from scratch, follow sections one through five 
of this
guide to reach this point, and then proceed.
=== 7. Temporarily Securing Your Disk, Shredding Free Space ===
Like the previous section, this section applies ONLY IF there is some risk that sensitive data has 
ever
been stored or accessed on this computer. If you are 100% sure that sensitive information has never
been accessed using this computer, then you can safely skip this and the previous step.
If you are not prepared to take the actions in the previous step yet, then you should follow the steps 
in
this section until you can. However, you MUST eventually take the actions in step six above. Do 
not
assume you can find/delete all sensitive content. Lists of filenames, image thumbnails, random
data, and more *ARE* sitting on your hard disk. Someone who knows how to find it, WILL. That 
will
render all of your other precautions totally futile.

As soon as you can, follow the instructions in step six.
Meanwhile, here is how you can temporarily safeguard yourself until you are able to follow those
instructions.
1. Go through your hard disk folder by folder, deleting (or moving to a truecrypt hidden volume) 
any
files that you believe are sensitive/risky.
2. When you are totally sure that you have deleted all such files, go to the following URL:
http://www.fileshredder.org
3. Scroll down and look for the button called "Download File Shredder" -- do NOT click any other 
button,
as the page may have ads on it that appear to be download links.
4. Save the file.
5. Run the file, most likely titled: file_shredder_setup.exe
6. "Welcome to the File Shredder Setup Wizard", Click "Next"
7. Select "I accept the agreement" and click "Next"
8. It will choose where to install it, click "Next"
9. Click "Next" again when prompted for the Start Menu folder.
10. "Select Additional Tasks", Click "Next" again
11. Click "Install"
12. Ensuring that "Launch File Shredder" is checked, click "Finish"
13. You should now notice that "File Shredder" is running. You should see the program in your task 
bar.
Click on it to bring up the control panel if it is not up already.
14. On the left is a link that says "Shred Free Disk Space", click it.
15. Choose the drive letter for your hard disk, typically C:\, as well as any other drives you wish to 
shred
the free space.
16. under "Select Secure Algorithm", select "Secure Erasing Algorithm with 7 passes" and click 
"Next"
17. Click "Start"
This will take some time to finish. Once you have finished shredding your free disk space, it will be
impossible or nearly impossible for someone to find one of your deleted files and piece it back 
together
to see what it once was. However, this is NOT enough.
Keep in mind that there may still be records of the filenames that were deleted, partial data from 
those
files, image thumbnails, and more that may be enough to incriminate you. This is only a temporary 
step
you have taken, and you absolutely must take the actions in step 6 above in order to be truly safe.
=== 8. Installing VirtualBox
And now we get to the fun part. We are going to create a secure environment for you to browse the
internet and communicate in a way that is totally anonymous and untraceable. You will have a setup
that is so secure as to be virtually impossible to break.
1. First, go to the following URL: http://www.virtualbox.org
2. Select "Downloads" in the menu on the left
3. Under "VirtualBox platform packages" is "VirtualBox 4.0.4 for Windows Hosts", next to that is
"x86/amd64". Click that.
4. Save the file. It should be titled similar to: "VirtualBox-4.0.4-7011-Win.exe
5. Run the file.
6. "Welcome to the Oracle VM... Setup Wizard", Click "Next"
7. click "Next"
8. Click "Next"

9. "Warning: Network Interfaces", click "Yes" but be aware that your internet connection will be
temporarily reset for a few seconds.
10. Click "Install"
11. A dialog saying "A program needs your permission to continue" may appear, click "Continue".
12. One or more dialogs asking if you want to install "device software" may come up, select 
"Install"
each time.
13. Optionally check the box "Always trust software from Oracle Corporation."
14. "Oracle VM... installation is complete", Click "Finish" ensuring that "Start Oracle VM after
installation" is checked.
Now we have the software we need in order to set up and run virtual machines. On your task bar to 
the
far right, you should notice VirtualBox running. Click on the "VirtualBox" icon if needed in order to 
bring
the VirtualBox control panel into view.
Now it is time to set up a virtual machine. For this, we need to obtain two files. Operating systems, 
such
as windows, are typically installed using a cd or dvd. You put the cd or dvd into your computer, you 
boot
it up, and you follow the instructions in order to install the operating system. Virtual machines
work similarly. Before we can use a virtual machine, we have to install an operating system on it.
However, we are *NOT* going to use Windows! We are going to use Linux. Do not be afraid if you 
have
no experience using Linux. I assure you that this will prove to be painless. We actually need two
different linux operating systems in order to have a secure system. Before we go through the steps 
of
setting this up, I want to describe to you what we are doing.
Remember earlier in the guide I explained that one of the downsides to using Tor Browser from 
your
main computer is that you might accidentally put a link into a non-Tor browser. The problem with 
your
computer right now is that you can access tor sites, or non-tor sites equally well. That means that 
you
have to be extremely careful to ensure that you are using Tor.
An analogy would be to say that you are typing on a keyboard with red and green keys. You have to 
be
careful to only hit the green keys. If you accidentally hit a red key, then you could compromise your
security and anonymity. That is *not* a good position to be in. The purpose of setting up a virtual
machine is to make certain that you cannot accidentally reveal your identity or compromise your
security.
The computer you are using now has two ways of accessing the internet: TOR, and Non-TOR. The 
virtual
machine we are setting up however will only be able to access the internet using TOR. No other 
way
period. That means that no matter what you do, no matter how hard you try, you will NOT be able 
to
accidentally access any website except through TOR. This *guarantees* that whatever you do on 
that
virtual machine is going to be through TOR.
So how do we achieve this? There are a number of ways to do so. The method presented in this 
guide is
not the only good way, however I do believe that it is both easy to set up and also friendly to users 

who
may not have a great deal of RAM.
First, we are going to set up two different virtual machines. One of them will exist for the sole 
purpose
of making sure that the other one does not accidentally connect to the internet except through TOR.
This virtual machine requires very little. You will not be using it for anything. It will simply act as a
gatekeeper to ensure that the other Virtual Machine is safe.
The second virtual machine will be what you use for internet browsing, chatting, etc. This virtual
machine will be configured in such a way that it can only use TOR and nothing else. The way we 
will
achieve this is to force this second virtual machine to go through the first virtual machine for all 
internet
connections.
Do not worry if this seems complicated. As with the rest of this guide, I am going to walk you 
through
step by step exactly what to do.
First, we have to obtain the operating systems we will need. In this case, we are going to use "Damn
Small Linux" (yes that is it's real name) for the firewall and we are going to use "Ubuntu" for the 
main
system. The advantage to using "Damn Small Linux" is that we only need 32 MB of ram and no 
disk
sapce to have an effective
firewall.
Let's set up the firewall first:
=== 9. Installing a Firewall ===
1. First, go to the following URL: http://www.damnsmalllinux.org (three l's)
2. Scroll down until you see a link that says "Download"
3. Under "Current Full Mirror List", click any that work. Some may not work at any given time. If 
one
doesn't work, simply hit back on your browser and try another one.
4. At the time of this guide, the following url worked:
ftp://ftp.is.co.za/linux/distributions/damnsmall/current/
5. Go to the "current" directory if not already in it.
6. Click on the file called: dsl-4.4.10.iso -- If you cannot find this file, choose the file closet to it. A 
higher
version number is fine. The file will probably be about 50 MB
7. The file should take about 5-10 minutes to download based on your connection.
( IF THE ABOVE STEPS WORKED FOR YOU, SKIP THIS MINI-SECTION
(
( If you had trouble with the above steps, read this mini-section
(
( With mirrors, it is often the case that a particular mirror site doesn't work. At the time of this 
writing,
several mirrors worked. I am providing
( detailed instructions for each mirror.
(
( Above I have already provided instructions for the mirror ftp://ftp.is.co.za
(
( MIRROR: http://gd.tuwien.ac.at/opsys/linux/damnsmall
(
( Go to this URL, and under "Subdirectories" click on "current"
( if available, select the file called "current.iso" (provided the file is at least 49 MB in size)

( If not, then choose the closest file to dsl-4.4.10.iso, a higher version # is fine.
(
( MIRROR: http://ftp.belnet.be/packages/damnsmalllinux/
(
( go to "current" directory, obtain either "current.iso" (if 49 MB or higher) or find file closest to 
"dsl-
4.4.10.iso")
(
( MIRROR: http://ftp.heanet.ie/mirrors/damnsmalllinux.org/
(
( go to "current" directory, obtain either "current.iso" (if 49 MB or higher) or find file closest to 
"dsl-
4.4.10.iso")
( MIRROR: http://ftp.heanet.ie/mirrors/damnsmalllinux.org/
(
( go to "current" directory, obtain either "current.iso" (if 49 MB or higher) or find file closest to 
"dsl-
4.4.10.iso")
At this point, you should have the file either "current.iso" or "dsl-4.4.10.iso" (or something similar) 
fully
downloaded and saved into your Downloads directory.
Now, go ahead and open up VirtualBox again, most likely by clicking it on the task bar.
8. Click "New" at the top left, an icon that resembles a many-pointed round star.
9. "Welcome to the New Virtual Machine Wizard", click "Next"
10. "VM Name and OS Type": Under "Name" type in: Firewall
11. For Operating System, choose "Linux"
12. For "Version", choose: "Other Linux"
13. Click "Next"
14. "Memory", select "32 MB" and click Next
15. "Virtual Hard Disk", Uncheck "Boot Hard Disk" and click "Next"
16. If a Warning dialog appears, click "Continue"
17. Click "Finish"
18. Now you will notice "Firewall, Powered Off" visible in your VirtualBox control panel. Make 
sure it is
highlighted (it should be) and then right click it, and select "Settings".
19. Select "Network" in the menu to the left.
20. Click on the "Adapter 2" tab.
21. Check "Enable Network Adapter" and next to where it says "Attached to", select "Internal 
Network"
from the pulldown menu.
22. Click "Ok" at the bottom.
23. Once again, right click "Firewall, Powered Off" and select "Start"
24. Check "Do not show this message again" and click "Ok". This is just letting you know that the 
"RIGHT
CTRL KEY" on your keyboard is the "control" key for this virtual machine.
25. "Welcome to the First Run Wizard", click "Next"
26. "Select Installation Media", under "Media Source" is a pull down menu. To the immediate right 
of
that pull down menu is an icon with a folder. Click that folder icon.
27. Locate "current.iso" or "dsl-4.4.10.iso" (or the similar file name) that you downloaded. When
located, click "Open". It is likely in the "Downloads" directory of your home folder.
28. Click "Next"

29. Click "Finish"
Now the virtual machine will start to boot up. Simply wait... (This may take up to 5 minutes.)
30. One or more new dialogs may come up saying "VirtualBox Information", just click "Do not 
show this
message again" and click "Ok"
After a few minutes, the booting will finish and you will be looking at the desktop for your firewall 
virtual
machine. To the right of the window you will see some stats that look something like this:
Up: 0 k/s - Down: 0 k/s
Processes: 19
CPU Usage: 10%
RAM Usage: 16.2MB/28.8MB
etc.
Congratulations! You now have a firewall running. Now we will set up this firewall to protect you 
so that
you can safely use TOR from your main virtual machine.
=== 10. Firewall Configuration ===
At this stage you should be looking at the desktop for "DSL" (Damn Small Linux).
I need to talk about the mouse first. This particular virtual machine as well as your main operating
system (windows) both want control of your mouse. Both cannot have control of your mouse at the
same time however. Therefore, you have to choose whether the mouse will be used by your virtual
machine, or by Windows. When you click into your virtual machine, it has the effect of passing 
control of
the mouse to the virtual machine. That means you cannot move your mouse cursor past the 
boundaries
of that virtual machine.
In order to give mouse control back to windows, enabling you to move your mouse cursor 
anywhere,
simply press the right ctrl key on your keyboard. That is to say, you have two ctrl keys. One on the 
left of
your keyboard, and one on the right. Press the ctrl key that is on the right of your keyboard. This 
will give mouse control back to windows.
Practice this a bit. Practice clicking into the window, moving the mouse cursor around, pressing 
right
ctrl, and moving the windows mouse cursor around. Get the feel of it.
You should see a window that looks something like a web browser, with some text in it including 
words
such as "Getting Started with DSL". First, close that window.
( If your mouse is not working, read this mini-section.
(
( First, click inside the window that your virtual machine is running in. Now try moving your mouse
cursor. If you do not see the mouse cursor moving around, then press
( RIGHT CTRL + I. Now move your mouse cursor again. If you notice that you are moving your 
"main"
mouse cursor over the window, but you do not see the "DSL" black mouse
( cursor moving, then click again into that window. If you do this a few times, you should notice 
that the
mouse begins to work. You may have to press RIGHT CTRL+I a couple
( of times to get the mouse to work.
1. Once the mouse is working inside of your virtual machine, go ahead and close the window 
entitled
"Getting Started with DSL"

( If you cannot see the full virtual machine window, for example because your screen resolution is 
set so
that some of the window goes too low, read this mini-section.
(
( First, press RIGHT CTRL+I until you have your main windows white mouse cursor back. Now, 
click on
"Machine" in the menu at the top of the window.
( Select "Switch to Scale Mode"
(
( Click "Switch"
( Now you will have converted your firewall window to a smaller size, and you will be able to 
resize it.
You may need to press "right ctrl" to get a windows mouse cursor
( which you will need in order to resize this window. Now simply resize it to the size that works for 
you,
and then click into the window to be able to use the black mouse
( cursor inside the virtual machine. I recommend you maximize this window to make sure you can 
read
everything clearly.
2. Right click anywhere on the desktop, go to System (a red folder), go to Daemons, ssh, and start.
3. Right click again anywhere on the desktop, go to XShells -> Root Access -> Transparent
4. Now you have a window that you can type in. Type exactly as shown below into this window, 
and hit
enter:
passwd
Once you type this and hit enter, it will ask you for a password. This is a password for full access to 
the
firewall. Make it at least 8 characters in size.
*** IMPORTANT: Do not forget your firewall password. You will need it later in the guide. ***
When you have successfully changed your password, it will say "Password changed."
5. Now type exactly as shown below, into the same window:
ifconfig eth1 10.0.3.1
6. It will not say anything after you hit enter, it will just return you back to the prompt.
Now our firewall server is ready. We want to save this state so that we can get back to it easy in the
future.
Press RIGHT CTRL+S
7. Now you will be looking at a window that says "Take Snapshot of Virtual Machine". Just click 
"Ok"
8. Now, let's test this out to confirm it works as we expect. Go ahead and close the virtual machine 
by
clicking the "X" in the top right corner. A menu will come up. Select "Power off the machine" and 
click
ok. Do NOT check the box called "Restore current snapshot".
And now you should be once again at the VirtualBox manager. You will see "Firewall(Shapshot 1),
Powered Off"
9. Make sure that "Firewall (Snapshot 1), Powered Off" is selected. At the top right of your 
VirtualBox
Manager is a button that says: "Snapshots (1)". Click it.
10. Click on "Snapshot 1", the top-most selection. This will highlight it.
11. Now right click it, and click on "Restore Snapshot"
12. A dialog box will come up asking if you are sure, click "Restore"

13. Now click the "Start" button at the top with the large green arrow.
14. Any dialog boxes that come up with a check box saying "Do not show this information again", 
simply
check the check-box, and click ok. Do not worry about any of those.
Remember, if you do not have immediate control of the mouse inside the virtual machine, simply 
press
RCTRL+I (press right ctrl and "I" at the same time) and click into it until you have mouse control.
Now your firewall is good to go. Any time you need it, just go to the VirtualBox Manager and 
follow
steps 9 through 14 above. You do not have to go through the whole setup process again at any time 
in
the future. Your firewall is ready.
=== 11. Installing Ubuntu ===
Now we are going to set up the main machine that you will be using TOR with.
1. First, go to this URL: http://www.ubuntu.com
2. Click on the link "Download Ubuntu"
3. Click "Start Download" (This download should take 10-15 minutes)
4. The filename is going to be similar to: ubuntu-10.10-desktop-i386.iso
Now we wait...
While you are waiting for the file to download, go ahead and make sure that your "hidden volume" 
is
mounted in TrueCrypt to a particular drive letter. For example, O: You will need that for the next 
step.
5. Return to your "VirtualBox Manager". It doesn't matter if the firewall is running or not.
6. Click "New" (the blue round star-icon in the top left) again.
7. "Welcome to the New Virtual Machine Wizard", click "Next"
8. "VM Name and OS Type", under "Name", type "Primary"
9. Next to "Operating System", select "Linux"
10. Next to "Version", select "Ubuntu" and Click "Next"
11. "Memory", by default it selects 512 MB. This is fine. 256 MB is the MINIMUM. The more 
memory
you allocate, the better the virtual machine will function. Click "Next"
12. "Virtual Hard Disk", Make sure "Boot Hard Disk" is checked. Make sure "Create new hard 
disk" is
selected. Click "Next"
13. "Welcome to the Create New Virtual Disk Wizard", click "Next"
14. "Hard Disk Storage Type", select "Fixed-size storage" and click "Next"
15. "Virtual Disk Location and Size", to the right of the text box containing "Primary" is a folder 
icon.
Click the folder icon.
16. Now we have to select a file for the new hard disk image file. On the bottom of this dialog it 
says
"Browse Folders", click on that.
17. Now click on "Computer" in the menu to the left.
18. Scroll to where you see the drive letter you mounted, and double click on it. Ex: Local Disk (O:)
19. Now click "Save"
20. By default 8.00 GB are selected. That is fine. If you have enough space on your hidden volume,
increase this to 10 GB. Otherwise, 8 is fine.
21. Under "Location", it should say O:\Primary.vdi where O: is replaced by whatever drive letter 
you
mounted your TrueCrypt hidden volume to.
22. Click "Next", then click "Finish"

Now we wait for VirtualBox to create the hard drive we asked for. This may take a few minutes.
Keep in mind this entire virtual machine as well as any of its contents are going to reside within the
hidden truecrypt container. This ensures extra security.
23. When this is done, you will see a "Summary" window. Click "Finish".
24. Now, right click on "Primary, Powered Off" in your "VirtualBox Manager", and click "Start"
25. Again we are at the "First Run Wizard", click "Next"
26. "Select Installation Media", under "Media Source" is a pull down menu. Click the "folder icon" 
to the
immediate right of that pulldown menu.
27. Locate "ubuntu-10.10-desktop-i386" (or the similarly named file) from your Downloads 
directory, or
wherever you saved it. Click on it, and click "Open"
28. Click "Next"
29. Click "Finish"
Now simply wait. Your Ubuntu virtual machine will be loading up. This may take a few minutes. 
Don't
worry if you see all kinds of strange messages/text. It is normal.
After a few minutes, you should start to see the Ubuntu desktop load. Unlike your firewall, you will
notice that you do not have to click the mouse inside the window. It automatically happens. This is 
going
to be much easier than the "Firewall" step.
Once everything has loaded, you will be looking at a window that says "Install" with a button that 
says
"Install Ubuntu". If you cannot see everything, press RCTRL+F (to go full screen). You can return 
to
windowed mode by RCTRL+F again. Any dialogs can be closed, and you can check the box that 
says "Do
not show me this again."
30. Click "Install Ubuntu"
31. Check "Download updates while installing"
32. Check "Install this third-party software". Click "Forward"
33. Ensure "Erase and use entire disk" is selected, and click "Forward". Remember, this is NOT 
talking
about your hard disk. It is talking about the 8-10 gigabyte virtual disk.
34. Click "Install Now"
35. Now you will be guided through a series of installation related screens. The first screen asks you 
to
select your timezone/time. Select your choice and click "Forward"
36. Now keyboard layout, again select your choice and click Forward. If you are unsure, leave it as 
is or
click "Figure out keyboard layout"
37. "Who are you?" For "Your name" type in: mainuser
38. When you type in "mainuser" the other boxes will fill in automatically. Now click in the text 
box next
to "Choose a password".
39. Do NOT use the same password as the firewall. Come up with a different password.
40. Ensure that "Require my password to log in" as well as "Encrypt my home folder" are selected 
and
checked and proceed.
Now simply wait until the installation is finished. The installation may take a while, and it may 
appear to

stall at some points. As long as the ubuntu mouse cursor shows an animation that is turning around 
in
circles, the installation *is* working. Simply wait until it is done. If after an hour or two the 
progress bar
hasn't moved at all, then go ahead and re-start the installation starting from step 24 (after closing the
window and powering down the virtual machine).
Depending on your computer, it could take 2-4 hours. Most likely, it will take about an hour. Once
finished, you will see a dialog that says "Installation Complete" with a button that says "Reboot 
Now".
Do NOT press the "Reboot Now" button. Close the 'X' on this window, and Power Down.
41. Now, right click "Primary" and go to "Settings".
42. Click on "Storage" in the left menu. Then click on the "ubuntu-10.10... .iso" under where it says 
"IDE
Controller"
43. To the right it says "Attributes" under that it says "CD/DVD Drive : ..." to the immediate right 
of that
is a cd icon. Click it.
44. Select "Remove disk from virtual drive."
45. Click "Ok"
46. Now, making sure that "Primary" is highlighted, click the "Start" button at the top with the large
green arrow.
Now we wait for your newly installed Ubuntu machine to boot up.
47. After a few minutes, you will see a dialog appear that says "mainuser-VirtualBox". Go ahead 
and click
on "mainuser" which has the "person icon" to the left of it.
48. Now it will prompt you for your password. Enter the password you used in the installation 
process.
49. After a minute or so, you should hear a nice login sound, and you should be fully logged into 
your
virtual machine.
50. Keep waiting, and a dialog will appear that says "Information avialable" and "Record your 
encryption
passphrase" Click on: "Run this action now"
51. Type in the same password you used to log in. After that window closes, click "Close" in the 
dialog
box.
Congratulations! You have now set up a virtual machine as well as a firewall to protect it. Now we 
need
to finish configuring the primary virtual machine.
=== 12. Ubuntu Initial Setup ===
Ok, now that we have installed Ubuntu, we need to set it up so that we can use it fully. This also
means making sure we can see flash on websites such as youtube.
1. First, we have to install any updates that are pending. At the bottom of your screen, you should
notice where it says "Update Manager". Click on that.
2. Now, click on "Install Updates". If you did not see "Update Manager", then skip these two
steps.
3. Any time an administrative task is required, you will need to type in your password. This is
the same password you used to log in.
Now we wait, this is going to download any necessary security updates to make certain we are
using the most current/secure setup possible. This may require downloading hundreds of
megabytes. Just go ahead and let it do that, and when everything is downloaded and updated,

proceed to the next step. While you wait, Ubuntu may go into screensaver mode. If so, just move
the mouse and it will ask you for your password. That will leave screensaver mode.
If the updates are more than a hundred megabytes, it will take quite a while. It may take up to 2-3
hours depending on your computer and internet connection. Nonetheless, this step is critical. Do
not skip the updates. Besides ensuring that your setup will be secure, the updates also ensure that
all of the applications are up to date and thus most likely to function correctly. Just go ahead and
watch a movie for a couple hours, and then return and check on it.
After all of the updates have been downloaded and installed, the "Update Manager" window will
now say "Your system is up-to-date" at the top. Further, it will say: "The computer needs to
restart to finish installing updates.". Go ahead and press the 'X' in the top right corner of the
window, and choose 'Send the shutdown signal". If prompted, click "Shut Down". Once it has
fully shut down, the window will disappear and you will be back at the VirtualBox manager. Go
ahead and right click on "Primary" and click "Start".
This will restart the virtual machine.
If a virtual machine fails to shutdown after 10 minutes or so, then go ahead and close the window
again by pressing the 'X' but this time choose "Power down". If it still will not shut down, then
VirtualBox may have crashed. If so, just follow these instructions:
( Follow the steps in this mini-section if a virtual machine fails to shutdown, or you need to
completely close/restart VirtualBox.
(
( First, press "Ctrl+Alt+Delete", and then click "Task Manager"
( Next, locate the process that is running that starts with "VirtualBox". Right click that process,
and click "End Process Tree"
( This should force the window to close.
(
( Now, restart VirtualBox by going to your start menu, All Programs, Oracle VM VirtualBox
VirtualBOx
(
( Now you will have the VirtualBox manager up again. To restart the Ubuntu machine, simply
right click on "Primary" and click "Start".
Once your Primary vm has rebooted, you will be again at the login screen. Here as before, click
on "mainuser" and then enter in your password. Now your primary machine is fully up to date.
Remember, be patient. It may take a few minutes before your virtual machine has fully booted.
First you will see the background image and a mouse cursor that can move around, next you
should hear the login sound play, and finally you will see the menu at the top and bottom of your
virtual machine window.
Depending on the speed of your computer, this may take 10 minutes or more. Just be patient.
Don't worry if your virtual machine appears to be running too slow, we will speed it up.
Now your Virtual Machine is set up and ready for use.
=== 13. Installing Guest Additions ===
In order to ensure that the Virtual Machine runs smoothly as possible, we are going to install
some additional software to the virtual machine.
1. Go to the "Devices" menu at the top of your virtual machine main window (Machine, Devices,
Help), and go to "Install Guest Additions"
2. Go to the "Places" menu at the top of your virtual machine (Applications, Places, System), and
click on "VBOXADDITIONS_4.0.4_70112" (the number may be different).
3. At the top this new window will be the text "The media has been determined as "UNIX
software". Click on "Open Autorun Prompt"
4. A new dialog may appear saying "This medium contains software intended to be automatically
started. Would you like to run it?" Click "Run"
5. Enter your administrative password (the one you use to log into Ubuntu) and click "Ok"

6. Now the VirtualBox Guest Additions installer will begin. This may take some time, so just
relax and wait. Depending on your computer, this may take 30 minutes or more.
7. When this is finished, you will see the text "Press Return to close this window." Go ahead and
do so.
8. Once that window has closed, go ahead and press the 'X' to close the entire virtual machine
window. Select "Send the shutdown signal" and click "Ok".
9. A dialog box will appear. Click on "Shut Down", the top most option.
At this stage it is a good idea to further optimise our virtual machine. When you initially installed
it, you most likely selected either 256 MB or 512 MB of RAM. If you have enough RAM to
spare, then I highly recommend you increase that to at least 1 GB. Here is how to do so:
1. First, right click on "Primary, Powered off" and go to Settings.
2. Select "System" from the menu on the left.
3. Increase the "Base Memory" to either 1024 MB (1 GB), or some higher value you are
comfortable with.
It is also a good idea to increase the video memory available to the virtual machine.
4. Select "Display" from the menu on the left, still inside of "Settings"
5. Increase the "Video Memory" slider to the right as far as you are comfortable with. For
example, 128 MB.
6. Check the box "Enable 3D Acceleration".
7. Now click "Ok" at the bottom.
Go ahead and start up Ubuntu again by right clicking "Primary, Powered off" and clicking
"Start"
When Ubuntu loads up, go ahead and log in as before using your password. Now wait until
Ubuntu is fully booted and the "Applications Places System" menu is visible.
You will probably notice that your virtual machine loads up and runs faster than before.
How well your virtual machine runs depends on how good your computer is. Primarily, RAM
and processor speed are the most significant factors. If your computer is modern enough, you
should be able to use websites with flash and even watch videos, such as on YouTube, with no
problem. If your computer is not as modern, you will still be able to browse websites but may not
be able to watch videos. You should still be able to use most flash based websites however.
*** IMPORTANT: Do NOT browse sensitive content YET. At this stage, your virtual machine
is not yet configured to use TOR. ***
=== 14. Installing IRC (Optional) ===
*** This section is entirely optional. If you are not interested in installing IRC, skip this section.
***
To install IRC on your new virtual machine, follow these steps:
1. Go to the "Applications" menu, and go to "Ubuntu Software Center"
2. Type "kvirc" in the search box field in the top right.
3. When the results return, select the one called: "KDE-based next generation IRC client" or "KV
Irc".
4. Click "Install"
5. Enter your password when prompted.
6. While it installs, you will notice a progress bar. This may take a few minutes depending on the
speed of your internet connection.
7. Once it is finished installing, the progress bar will go away. Go ahead and close the "Ubuntu
Software Center".
You are probably used to the close/min/max buttons being on the top right, as is the case in
Windows. You will find them in the top left instead. If you don't like this, don't worry. You can
change it later.
Now, let's go ahead and set up KVIrc.
Remember, you are NOT truly anonymous yet.

8. Click on "Applications" in the top menu.
9. Go to "Internet"
10. Click on "KVIrc"
11. "KVIrc Setup" will appear. Go ahead and click "Next" to begin.
12. "Store Configuration in Folder", click "Next"
13. "Please choose a Nickname". You can leave this exactly as is, or you can choose a Nick
name then click "Next".
*** IMPORTANT READ THIS ***
Do NOT pick a nick name you have ever used before, or a nick name that can help someone
determine who you are.
Also, do NOT fill in any other details such as location, age, real name, etc. Leave everything else
as is.
You are NOT an

