
101 Spy Gadgets 
for the 
Evil Genius

Evil Genius™ Series
Bike, Scooter, and Chopper Projects for the Evil Genius
Bionics for the Evil Genius: 25 Build-It-Yourself Projects
Electronic Circuits for the Evil Genius. Second Edition: 64 Lessons with Projects
Electronic Gadgets for the Evil Genius: 28 Build-It-Yourself Projects
Electronic Sensors for the Evil Genius: 54 Electrifying Projects
15 Dangerously Mad Projects for the Evil Genius
50 Awesome Auto Projects for the Evil Genius
50 Green Projects for the Evil Genius
50 Model Rocket Projects for the Evil Genius
51 High-Tech Practical Jokes for the Evil Genius
46 Science Fair Projects for the Evil Genius
Fuel Cell Projects for the Evil Genius
Holography Projects for the Evil Genius
Mechatronics for the Evil Genius: 25 Build-It-Yourself Projects
Mind Performance Projects for the Evil Genius: 19 Brain-Bending Bio Hacks
MORE Electronic Gadgets for the Evil Genius: 40 NEW Build-it-Yourself Projects
101 Outer Space Projects for the Evil Genius
101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
125 Physics Projects for the Evil Genius
123 PIC® Microcontroller Experiments for the Evil Genius
123 Robotics Experiments for the Evil Genius
PC Mods for the Evil Genius: 25 Custom Builds to Turbocharge Your Computer
PICAXE Microcontroller Projects for the Evil Genius
Programming Video Games for the Evil Genius
Recycling Projects for the Evil Genius
Solar Energy Projects for the Evil Genius
Telephone Projects for the Evil Genius
30 Arduino Projects for the Evil Genius
Tiny AVR Microcontroller Projects for the Evil Genius
25 Home Automation Projects for the Evil Genius
22 Radio and Receiver Projects for the Evil Genius

101 Spy Gadgets 
for the 
Evil Genius
Brad Graham
Kathy McGowan
New York  Chicago  San Francisco  Lisbon  London  Madrid
Mexico City  Milan  New Delhi  San Juan  Seoul
Singapore  Sydney  Toronto
Second Edition

Copyright © 2012, 2006 by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. All rights reserved. Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, 
no part of this publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in a database or retrieval system, without the prior 
written permission of the publisher.
ISBN: 978-0-07-177269-3
MHID: 0-07-177269-3
The material in this eBook also appears in the print version of this title: ISBN: 978-0-07-177268-6,    
MHID: 0-07-177268-5.
All trademarks are trademarks of their respective owners. Rather than put a trademark symbol after every occurrence of a trademarked name, we 
use names in an editorial fashion only, and to the beneﬁ t of the trademark owner, with no intention of infringement of the trademark. Where such 
designations appear in this book, they have been printed with initial caps.
McGraw-Hill eBooks are available at special quantity discounts to use as premiums and sales promotions, or for use in corporate training programs. To 
contact a representative please e-mail us at bulksales@mcgraw-hill.com.
Information contained in this work has been obtained by The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGraw-Hill”) from sources believed to be 
reliable. However, neither McGraw-Hill nor its authors guarantee the accuracy or completeness of any information published herein, and neither 
McGraw-Hill nor its authors shall be responsible for any errors, omissions, or damages arising out of use of this information. This work is published with the 
understanding that McGraw-Hill and its authors are supplying information but are not attempting to render engineering or other professional services. 
If such services are required, the assistance of an appropriate professional should be sought.
TERMS OF USE
This is a copyrighted work and The McGraw-Hill Companies, Inc. (“McGrawHill”) and its licensors reserve all rights in and to the work. Use of this 
work is subject to these terms. Except as permitted under the Copyright Act of 1976 and the right to store and retrieve one copy of the work, you may 
not decompile, disassemble, reverse engineer, reproduce, modify, create derivative works based upon, transmit, distribute, disseminate, sell, publish or 
sublicense the work or any part of it without McGraw-Hill’s prior consent. You may use the work for your own noncommercial and personal use; any 
other use of the work is strictly prohibited. Your right to use the work may be terminated if you fail to comply with these terms.
THE WORK IS PROVIDED “AS IS.” McGRAW-HILL AND ITS LICENSORS MAKE NO GUARANTEES OR WARRANTIES AS TO THE 
ACCURACY, ADEQUACY OR COMPLETENESS OF OR RESULTS TO BE OBTAINED FROM USING THE WORK, INCLUDING ANY 
INFORMATION THAT CAN BE ACCESSED THROUGH THE WORK VIA HYPERLINK OR OTHERWISE, AND EXPRESSLY DISCLAIM 
ANY WARRANTY, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO IMPLIED WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR 
FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR PURPOSE. McGraw-Hill and its licensors do not warrant or guarantee that the functions contained in the work will 
meet your requirements or that its operation will be uninterrupted or error free. Neither McGraw-Hill nor its licensors shall be liable to you or anyone 
else for any inaccuracy, error or omission, regardless of cause, in the work or for any damages resulting therefrom. McGraw-Hill has no responsibility 
for the content of any information accessed through the work. Under no circumstances shall McGraw-Hill and/or its licensors be liable for any indirect, 
incidental, special, punitive, consequential or similar damages that result from the use of or inability to use the work, even if any of them has been 
advised of the possibility of such damages. This limitation of liability shall apply to any claim or cause whatsoever whether such claim or cause arises 
in contract, tort or otherwise.

Contents
Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
vii
 
 
PART ZERO   Introduction
Getting Started . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3
PART ONE
Spy Technologies 101
Project
1
Desoldering Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
25
Project
2
Spy Camera Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
35
Project
3
Invisible Light Basics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
43
PART TWO
Peering into the Night
Project
4
Infrared Light Converter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57
Project
5
Simple Infrared Illuminator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
67
Project
6
LED Array Illuminator . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
77
Project
7
Pulsed LED Illuminator. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
89
Project
8
Laser Night Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
99
Project
9
Camcorder Night Vision . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
111
Project 10
Night Vision Viewer . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
121
PART THREE
Telephone Projects
Project
11
Phone Number Decoder . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
143
Project
12
Spammer Jammer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
153
Project
13
Phone Voice Changer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
159
v

PART FOUR
GPS Location Tracking
Project 14
GPS Data Receiver . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
173
Project 15
GPS Tracking Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
193
PART FIVE
Transmission and Interception
Project 16
Laser Spy Device . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
219
Project
17
Basic Spy Transmitter . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
237
Project 18
Remote Control Hijacker . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
251
PART SIX
Personal Protection
Project 19
Camera Flash Taser . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
269
Project 20
Portable Alarm System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
283
PART SEVEN
Digital Camera Spy Projects
Project
21
Camera Trigger Hack . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
305
Project 22
Repeating Camera Timer. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
315
Project 23
Sound-Activated Camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
321
Project 24
Motion-Activated Camera . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
327
Project 25
Camera Zoom Extender. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
335
Project 26
Nikon Clap Snap . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
345
Index . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
365
vi      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius

Acknowledgments
Sincerest thanks always to our Evil Genius collaborator, Judy Bass, Senior and Series Editor at McGraw-Hill 
Professional in New York. Your enthusiasm and support keep us motivated to forge ahead and never give up. 
You are a very special lady.
Also thanks to many people who take an interest in our projects and encourage us to pursue our dreams. 
We would especially like to thank Nathan Seidle, CEO of SparkFun Electronics Inc who sent us a wonderful 
assortment of electronics components and evaluation products to use in our Evil Genius labs! Thanks also 
go out to all of the people that make SparkFun.com a great resource and community for like minded Evil 
Geniuses, hackers, and electronics hobbyists.
vii

Brad Graham is an inventor, robotics hobbyist, founder and host of atomiczombie.com Web site, which 
receives over 2.5 million hits monthly, and a computer professional. He is the coauthor of 101 Spy Gadgets 
for the Evil Genius, Atomic Zombie’s Bicycle Builder’s Bonanza, perhaps the most creative bicycle-building 
guide ever written, and Build Your Own All-Terrain Robot, from McGraw-Hill Professional. Technical 
manager of a high-tech ﬁrm which specializes in computer network setup and maintenance, data storage 
and recovery, and security services, Mr. Graham is also a Certiﬁed Netware Engineer, a Microsoft Certiﬁed 
Professional, and a Certiﬁed Electronics and Cabling Technician.
Kathy McGowan provides administrative, logistical and marketing support for Atomic Zombie’s™ many 
robotics, bicycle, technical, and publishing projects. She also manages the daily operations of their high-tech ﬁrm 
and several Web sites, including atomiczombie.com, as well as various Internet-based blogs and forums. 
Additionally, Ms. McGowan writes articles for ezines, and is collaborating with Mr. Graham on several ﬁlm 
and television projects.
About the Authors

P A R T  Z E R O
Introduction

This page intentionally left blank 

Welcome “Noobs”!
If you have been experimenting with electronics 
for any amount of time, then chances are you 
can skip right past this chapter and start digging 
into some of the projects presented in this book. 
If you are just starting out, then you have a little 
groundwork to cover before you begin; but don’t 
worry, the electronics hobby is well within reach 
for anyone with a creative mind and a desire to 
learn something new.
Like all things new, you have to start from the 
beginning and expect a few failures along the 
way. We electronic “nerds” call that “letting out 
the magic smoke,” and you will fully understand 
this term the ﬁrst time you connect your power 
wires in reverse! Don’t be intimidated by the huge 
amount of technical material available on electronic 
components and devices, because chances are you 
only need a small amount of what is available to 
complete a project. All problems can be broken 
down into smaller parts, and a schematic diagram is 
a perfect example of this. Once you understand the 
basic principles, you will be able to look at a huge 
schematic or circuit and see that it is made up of 
smaller basic building blocks, just like a brick wall 
is composed of individual bricks.
Because of limited space in this book, we will 
cover only the essential basics you need in order 
to get started in this fun and rewarding hobby, 
but there are thousands of resources available to 
research as you move forward one step at a time. 
You have the Evil Genius itch—now all you need is 
a good pile of junk and a few basic tools to set your 
ideas into motion!
The Breadboard
This oddly named tool is probably the most 
important prototyping device you will ever own, 
and it is absolutely essential to this hobby. A 
breadboard or “solderless breadboard” is a device 
that lets you connect the leads of semiconductors 
together without wires so you can test and modify 
your circuit easily without soldering. Essentially, it 
is nothing more than a board full of small holes that 
interconnect in rows so you can complete a circuit. 
In the early days, our Evil Genius forefathers 
would drive a bunch of nails into an actual board 
(like a cutting board for bread) and then connect 
their components to the nails. So you can thank 
those pioneering Evil Geniuses who once sat in 
their workshops with a breadboard full of glowing 
vacuum tubes and wires for the name!
Today’s breadboards look nothing like the 
originals, often containing hundreds of rows to 
accommodate the increasing complexity and pin 
count of today’s circuitry. It is common to have
50 or more complex integrated circuits (ICs)
on a breadboard running at speeds of up to 
100 megahertz (MHz), so a lot can be done with 
breadboards. One of our latest breadboard projects 
was a fully functional 8-bit computer with a 
double-buffered video graphics array (VGA) output 
and complex sound generator. This project ran 
ﬂawlessly on a breadboard at speeds of 40 MHz, 
and had an IC count of over 30, so don’t let anyone 
tell you a breadboard is only for simple 
low-speed prototyping. Let’s have a look at a 
typical solderless breadboard that can be purchased 
at most electronics supply outlets.
3
Getting Started

4      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
A breadboard like the one shown in Figure 0-0 
will typically cost you around $30 and will provide 
years of use. Without a breadboard, you would 
have to solder your components together and hope 
your design worked on the ﬁrst try—something that 
is only a pipe dream in this hobby. The connections 
under the plastic holes are designed so that the 
power strips (marked + and –) are connected 
horizontally, and the prototyping area holes are 
connected vertically. The small gutter between the 
prototyping holes is there so your ICs can press 
into the board with each row of legs on each side 
of the gutter. Figure 0-1 shows a close-up of the 
interconnections underneath the plastic board.
As you can see, the power strip holes connect 
horizontally, and the prototyping holes connect 
vertically. This way, you can have power along the 
entire strip, since ground (GND) and power (VCC) 
often have multiple connection points in a circuit. 
Once you are familiar with a breadboard, it is easy 
to rig up a test circuit in minutes, even one with a 
high component count. Once your circuit is tested 
and working, you can move it to a more permanent 
home such as a copper-clad board or even a real 
printed circuit board (PCB).
To make the connections from one row of 
holes to another, you need wires—many wires. 
Breadboard wires should be solid, not stranded, 
have about ¼-inch of bare wire at the end and come 
in multiple colors and lengths to make tracing 
your circuit easier. You can purchase various 
breadboard-ready wiring packs from electronics 
supply stores, but when you get into larger 
prototyping, it may get expensive to purchase as 
many wires as you need. The best solution we have 
found is to get a good length of “Cat5” wire, which 
is used for computer networking and then strip 
the ends for use on the breadboard. The nice thing 
about Cat5 wire is that it has eight colored wires 
with a solid copper core that are the perfect size to 
ﬁt into the breadboard. Figure 0-2 shows some of 
the Cat5 wiring being cut and stripped for use in 
our breadboard.
Cat5 wiring comes as four twisted pairs, so you 
can just cut a bunch of lengths, unwind the wires, 
  Figure 0-0
A typical solderless breadboard.
  Figure 0-1    Connections between holes on the 
breadboard.  
  Figure 0-2   You can never have enough 
wires.

Getting Started      5
and then strip the ends of the plastic sheathing 
using a dull utility knife. Just place the wire over a 
dull blade and press down with your thumb to score 
the end so it pulls away from the wire. An actual 
wire stripper works just as well, but the dull blade 
seems a lot faster when you want 100 or more 
wires for your breadboard. For starters, you will 
need about 20 wires (each) in lengths of 1 inch (in), 
2 in, 4 in, 6 in, and a few longer wires for external 
devices. The 1-in wires should also include red and 
green (or similar) colors that easily identify your 
power connections. The power wires will be the 
most-used wires on your board, so make sure you 
have enough of them to go around.
Figure 0-3 shows why it is important to have a 
dull blade for stripping the wires if you choose to 
do it this way. We purposely sanded the edge of this 
utility knife so it would be sharp enough to score 
the wiring shield, yet not cut a thumb after repeated 
stripping of hundreds of wires in a row. A wire 
stripping tool also works well, but it is a little slow 
when we need 128 blue bus wires for a circuit we 
want to complete before the end of the night. Now 
that you have a breadboard and an endless supply 
of wires to press into the holes, you can begin 
prototyping your ﬁrst circuit. Learning to look 
at a schematic, identifying the semiconductors, 
and then transplanting the connections to your 
breadboard will open up an entire world of fun, so 
let’s ﬁnd out how it is done. 
  Figure 0-3   Stripping the Cat5 wiring for the 
breadboard. 
Figure 0-4 shows a simple schematic of a 
capacitor and a resistor wired in parallel. This 
wiring is transferred to the breadboard by placing 
the leads of the two components into the holes and 
then using the wires to join the rows. Because the 
holes are all connected to each other in vertical rows, 
the wires can be placed in any one of the ﬁve holes 
that make a row. Although a breadboard circuit may 
have 500 wires, there is not much more to it than 
that. Now you can see why prototyping a circuit 
on a breadboard is easy and lends itself well to 
modiﬁcation. There are, however, a few breadboard 
“gotchas” to keep in mind, and capacitive noise or 
“crosstalk” is one of them.
Crosstalk or capacitive noise can be a real 
problem on a breadboard because the metal plates 
that make up rows of holes are close enough 
together to act as capacitors. This can induce 
noise into your circuit, possibly causing it to fail 
or act differently than expected. Radio frequency 
(RF) or high-speed digital circuits are prone to 
noise and crosstalk, and this can create all kinds 
of Evil Genius headaches. Sometimes you can 
design a high-speed or RF circuit on a breadboard 
and have it work perfectly, only to ﬁnd that it 
completely fails or acts differently when redone on 
a permanent circuit board. The capacitance of the 
plates is actually part of the circuit now! Although 
  Figure 0-4
Learning to use the breadboard.

6      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
enough real estate. But not to worry—you can 
purchase individual breadboard sections and snap 
them together to make a larger prototyping area. 
Figure 0-6 shows 10 breadboard sections snapped 
together and then bolted to a steel cookie sheet in 
order to create a grounding plate. The steel base 
also helps reduce noise, and all breadboards should 
have a metal base. This massive cookie sheet 
breadboard circuit is a fully functional 20-MHz 
video computer that can display high-resolution 
graphics to a VGA monitor and generate complex 
multichannel sound. The entire computer was 
designed on the breadboard shown in Figure 0-6 
and went directly to the ﬁnal design stage based on 
the breadboard circuit. We have built high-speed 
computer systems running at more than 75 MHz 
on a breadboard, as well as high-power video 
transmitters, robot motor controllers, and every 
single project in this book. Until you break the 
100-MHz barrier, there is not much you can’t do 
on a breadboard, so become good friends with this 
powerful prototyping tool!
Electronic Building Blocks
So you’ve just found a cool schematic on the Internet 
and you have a brand new breadboard with 100 
wires waiting to ﬁnd a home, but where do you get 
all of those components? If you have been doing this 
for a while, then your “junk box” is probably well-
you can never really eliminate this error, there are 
ways to greatly reduce noise on a breadboard, and 
it involves adding a few decoupling capacitors on 
your power strips.
Decoupling capacitors act as ﬁlters so RF and 
AC noise don’t leak into your power source, 
causing havoc throughout the entire circuit. When 
working with high-speed logic, microcontrollers 
on a clock source, or RF circuits, decoupling 
capacitors are very important and should not be 
left out. If you look at an old logic circuit board, 
you will notice that almost every IC has a ceramic 
capacitor nearby or directly across the VCC and 
ground pins. These capacitors are nothing more 
than 0.01 microfarads (MF) ceramic capacitors 
placed between VCC and ground on each of 
your power supply rails as shown in Figure 0-5. 
Also notice in the ﬁgure that the power rails need 
to be connected to each other, as each strip is 
independent. If you forget to connect a rail, it will 
carry neither VCC nor be grounded, so your circuit 
will fail. Usually decoupling capacitors on each 
end of the powers strips will be adequate, but in 
a large high-speed or RF circuit, you may need 
them closer to the IC power lines or other key 
components.
When your designs become very large or 
complex, the standard breadboard may not offer 
  Figure 0-5
Fighting breadboard noise.
  Figure 0-6   Breadboard circuits can get 
large!

Getting Started      7
parts from old PCBs. Figure 0-8 shows the hand-
operated solder sucker removing an 8-pin IC from 
an old VCR main board. To operate a solder sucker, 
you press down on a loading lever, heat up the pad 
to desolder, and then press a button to suck up the 
solder away from that pad.
We prefer to desolder using a cheap iron with 
a higher wattage and fatter tip than used for 
normal work because it heats up the solder faster, 
reaching both sides of the board easier. There 
are other tools that can be used to desolder parts, 
such as desoldering wicks, spade tips, and even 
pump vacuums, but the ten-dollar solder sucker 
has always done the job for us, even on ICs with 
as many as 40 pins without any problems at all. 
When you really start collecting parts, you will 
ﬁnd that a giant bowl of resistors is more of a pain 
that having to desolder a new one, so some type 
of organization will be necessary. You will soon 
discover that there are many common parts when it 
comes to resistors, capacitors, transistors, and ICs, 
so having them sorted will make it very easy to 
ﬁnd what you need. Storage bins such as the ones 
shown in Figure 0-9 are perfect for your electronic 
components, and you can easily ﬁll 100 small 
drawers with various parts, so purchase a few of 
them to get started.
We have an entire closet full of these component 
drawers and the larger parts or PCBs are stored in 
equipped, but for those just starting out, you have to 
be resourceful in order to keep your budget under 
control. A simple circuit with 10 small components 
might only cost you $5 at the local electronics shop, 
but often you may need a lot more than 10 parts or 
might need some uncommon semiconductors. The 
best source for free electronic components is from 
old circuit boards. Dead VCRs, fried TVs, baked 
radios, even that broken coffeemaker will have a pile 
of usable components on the circuit board. A small 
radio PCB might have 200 semiconductors soldered 
to it and at 50 cents a piece, that adds up fast. You 
may never use all of the components, but on a dreary 
day when you are in your mad scientist lab in need 
of some oddball resistor value, a box of scrap circuit 
boards is great to have.
We keep several large boxes full of circuit 
boards that we ﬁnd, and often discover that they 
yield most of the common parts we need and often 
have hard-to-ﬁnd or discontinued ICs that we need 
when working on older schematics. Figure 0-7 
shows one of the 20 or more large boxes of 
scrap PCBs we have collected over the years. 
Removing the parts from an old circuit board is 
easy, especially the simple 2 or 3 pin parts, like 
capacitors and transistors. For the larger ICs with 
many pins, you will need a desoldering tool, also 
known as a “solder sucker.” A low-budget soldering 
iron (34 watts [W] or higher) with a blunt tip and 
a solder sucker can make easy work of pulling 
  Figure 0-7
Old PCBs are a goldmine of parts.
  Figure 0-8   Removing parts from an old 
circuit board.

8      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
of resistors populating the board, and even on 
tiny circuit boards with many surface-mounted 
components, resistors will usually make up 
the bulk of the semiconductors. The size of the 
resistor generally determines how much heat it can 
dissipate and will be rated in watts, with ¼ and 1/8 
W being the most common type you will work with 
(the two bottom resistors shown in Figure 0-10). 
Resistors can become very large, and will require 
ceramic based bodies, especially if they are rated 
for several watts or more like the 10-W unit shown 
plastic tubs. It’s a rare day when we can’t ﬁnd the 
parts we need, even for a retro project that needs 
some long-discontinued component. Of course, 
there are always times when you want new parts or 
need something special, so one of the many online 
sellers will be glad to take your money and send 
you the part in a few days. 
The Resistor
If you are new to this hobby, then you have probably 
seen a few schematics and thought that they made 
about as much sense as cave hieroglyphics. Don’t 
worry—that knowledge will come as you use 
schematics more and start to decode the electronic 
component datasheets. If you want to take the fast 
track, then you might consider getting a book on 
basic electronics to get you kick-started, but for 
those who want to learn as you go, here are a few of 
the basics you will need to complete the projects in 
this book.
Resistors, like the ones shown in Figure 0-10, 
are the most basic of the semiconductors you 
will be using, and they do exactly what their 
name implies—they resist the ﬂow of current 
by exchanging some current for heat which is 
dissipated through the body of the device. On 
a large circuit board, you could ﬁnd hundreds 
  Figure 0-9
Organization makes ﬁnding parts a snap.
  Figure 0-10
Resistors with ﬁxed values.

Getting Started      9
can be set from zero ohms to the full value printed 
on the body of the variable resistor.
A variable resistor is also known as a 
“potentiometer,” or “pot,” and it can take the form 
of a small circuit board–mounted cylinder with 
a slot for a screwdriver, or as a cabinet-mounted 
can with a shaft exiting the can for mating with 
some type of knob or dial. When you crank up 
the volume on an ampliﬁer with a knob, you are 
turning a potentiometer. Variable resistors are 
great for testing a new design, since you can just 
turn the dial until the circuit performs as you 
want it to, and then remove the variable resistor 
to measure the impedance (resistance) across the 
leads in order to determine the best value of ﬁxed 
resistor to install. On a variable resistor, there 
are usually three leads—the outer two connect 
to the ﬁxed carbon resistor inside the can, which 
gives the variable resistor its value, and a center 
pin connects to a wiper, allowing the selection 
of  resistance from zero to full. Several common 
variable resistors are shown in Figure 0-12, with 
the top-left unit dissected to show the resistor band 
and wiper.
As mentioned earlier, most ﬁxed value resistors 
will have four color bands painted around their 
bodies, which can be decoded into a value as 
shown in Table 0-0. At ﬁrst, this may seem a bit 
illogical, but once you get the hang of the color 
band decoding, you will be able to recognize most 
at the top of Figure 0-10. To save space, some 
resistors come in packs, like the one in the ﬁgure 
that has multiple legs.
Because of the recent drive to make electronics 
more “green” and power conservative, large, 
power-wasting resistors are not common in 
consumer electronics these days; instead, it is 
more efﬁcient to convert amperage and voltage 
using some type of switching power supply or 
regulator, rather than by letting a fat resistor burn 
away the energy as heat. On the other hand, small-
value resistors are very common, and you will 
ﬁnd yourself dealing with them all of the time for 
simple tasks, such as driving a light-emitting diode 
(LED) with limited current, pulling up an input pin 
to a logical “one” state, biasing a simple transistor 
ampliﬁer, and thousands of other common 
functions. On most common axial lead resistors, 
like the ones you will most often use in your 
projects, the value of the resistor is coded onto the 
device in the form of four colored bands which tell 
you the resistance in ohms. Ohms are represented 
using the Greek omega symbol (7), and will often 
be omitted for values over 999 ohms (7), which 
will be stated as 1 K, 15 K, 47 K, or some other 
number followed by the letter K, indicating the 
value is in kilohms (thousands of ohms). Similarly, 
for values over 999 K, the letter M will be used 
to show that 1 M is actually 1 megohm, or one 
million ohms. In a schematic diagram, a resistor 
is represented by a zigzag line segment, as shown 
in Figure 0-11, and will either have a letter and a 
number such as R1 or V3 relating to a parts list, or 
will simply have the value printed next to it such as 
1 M, or 220 7. The schematic symbol on the left 
of Figure 0-11 represents a variable resistor, which 
  Figure 0-11   Variable (left) and ﬁxed (right) 
resistor symbols.
  Figure 0-12
Common variable resistors.

10      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
resistor would have the colors orange, violet, and 
yellow followed by a gold band. You can check 
the value of the resistor when it is not connected 
to a circuit by simply placing your millimeter on 
the appropriate resistance scale and reading back 
the value. We do not want to get too deep into 
electronics formulas and theory here, since there 
are many good books dedicated to the subject, 
so we will simply leave you with two basic rules 
regarding the use of resistors: (1) put them in series 
to add their values together, and (2) put them in 
parallel to divide them. This second simple rule 
works great if you are in desperate need of a 
20-K resistor for instance, but can only ﬁnd two 
10-K resistors to put in series. In parallel, they will 
divide down to 5 K. Now you can identify the most 
common semiconductor that is used in electronics 
today—the resistor. Now we will move ahead to the 
next most common semiconductor—the capacitor.
The Capacitor
A capacitor in its most basic form is a small 
rechargeable battery with a very short charge and 
discharge cycle. Where a typical AAA battery may 
be able to power an LED for a full year, a capacitor 
of similar size will power it for only a few seconds 
before its energy is fully discharged. Because 
capacitors can store energy for a predictable 
duration, they can perform all kinds of useful 
functions in a circuit, such as ﬁltering AC waves, 
creating accurate delays, removing impurities 
from a noise signal, and creating clock and audio 
oscillators. Because a capacitor is basically a 
battery, many of the large ones available look much 
like batteries with two leads connected to one side 
of a metal can. As shown in Figure 0-13, there 
are many sizes and shapes of capacitors, some of 
which look like small batteries.
Just like resistors, capacitors can be as large as a 
garbage can, or as small as a grain of rice, it really 
depends on the value. The larger devices can store 
a lot more energy. Unlike batteries, some capacitors 
common values at ﬁrst glance without having to 
refer to the chart.
There will almost always be either a silver or 
gold band included on each resistor, and this will 
indicate the end of the color sequence, and will not 
become part of the value. A gold band indicates the 
resistor has a 5 percent tolerance (margin of error) 
in the value, so a 10-K resistor could end up being 
anywhere from 9.5 to 10.5 K in value, although 
in most cases will be very accurate. A silver band 
indicates the tolerance is only 10 percent, but we 
have yet to see a resistor with a silver band that was 
not on a circuit board that included vacuum tubes, 
so forget that there is even such a band! Once you 
ignore the gold band, you are left with three color 
bands that can be used to determine the exact value 
as given in Table 0-0. 
So, let’s assume that we have a resistor with the 
color bands brown, black, red, and gold. We know 
that the gold band is the tolerance band and the 
ﬁrst three will indicate the values to reference in 
the chart. Doing so, we get 1 (brown), 0 (black), 
and 100 7 (red). The third band is the multiplier, 
which would indicate that the number of zeroes 
following the ﬁrst to values will be 2, or the value 
is simply multiplied by 100 7. This translates to 
a value of 1000 7, or 1 K (10 r 100 7). A 370-K 
TABLE 0-0  Resistor Color Codes Chart
 
 
1st
2nd
3rd
Color
band
band
band
Multiplier
Black
0
0
0
1 7
Brown
1
1
1
10 7
Red
2
2
2
100 7
Orange
3
3
3
1 K
Yellow
4
4
4
10 K
Green
5
5
5
100 K
Blue
6
6
6
1 M
Violet
7
7
7
10 M
Grey
8
8
8
White
9
9
9
0.1
Gold 
  
 
 
0.01
Silver 
  
  

Getting Started      11
paper and a smell that was tough to forget. On 
many capacitors, especially the larger can style, 
the voltage rating and capacitance value is simply 
stamped on the case. A capacitor is rated in voltage 
and in farads, which deﬁnes the capacitance of a 
dielectric for which a potential difference of 1 volt 
(V) results in a static charge of 1 coulomb (C).
This may not make a lot of sense until you start 
messing around with electronics, but you will 
soon understand that typically, the larger the 
capacitor, the larger the farad rating will be, 
thus the more energy it can store. Since a farad 
is quite a large value, most capacitors are rated 
in microfarads (MF), such as the typical value of 
4700 MF for a large electrolytic ﬁlter capacitor, 
and 0.1 MF for a small ceramic disc capacitor. 
Picofarads (pF) are also used to indicate very 
small values, such as those found in many ceramic 
capacitors or adjustable capacitors used in radio 
frequency circuits (a pF is one-millionth of a MF). 
On most can-style electrolytic capacitors, the 
value is simply written on the case and will be 
stated in microfarads and voltage along with a 
clear indication of which lead is negative. Voltage 
and polarity are very important in electrolytic 
capacitors, and they should always be inserted 
correctly, with a voltage rating higher than 
necessary for your circuit. Ceramic capacitors will 
usually only have the value stamped on them if 
they are in picofarads for some reason, and often 
no symbol will follow the number, just the value. 
Normally, ceramic capacitors will have a three-
digit number that needs to be decoded into the 
actual value, and this evil confusing scheme works, 
as shown in Table 0-1. 
Who knows why they just don’t write the value 
on the capacitor? It would have the same amount of 
digits as the code! Oh well, you get used to seeing 
these codes, just like resistor color bands, and in 
no time you will easily recognize the common 
values such as 104, which would indicate a 0.1 MF
value according to the chart. Capacitors behave just 
like batteries when it comes to parallel and series 
are nonpolarized, and they can be inserted into 
a circuit regardless of current ﬂow, while some 
cannot. The two different types of capacitors are 
shown by their schematic symbols in Figure 0-14, 
C1 being a nonpolarized type, and C2 a polarized 
type. Although there are always exceptions to 
the rules, generally the disc-style capacitors are 
nonpolarized, and the larger can-style electrolytic 
types are polarized. An obvious indicator of a 
polarized capacitor is the negative markings on 
the can, which can be clearly seen in the larger 
capacitor shown at the top right of Figure 0-13.
Another thing that capacitors have in common 
with batteries is that polarity is very important 
when inserting polarized capacitors into a circuit. 
If you install an electrolytic capacitor in reverse 
and attempt to charge it, the part will likely heat 
up and release the oil contained inside the case 
causing a circuit malfunction or dead short. In 
the past, electrolytic capacitors did not have a 
pressure release system, and they would explode 
like ﬁrecrackers when overcharged or installed 
in reverse, leaving behind a huge mess of oily 
  Figure 0-13
Various common capacitors.
  Figure 0-14
Capacitor symbols.

12      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
device, protect a circuit from a power reversal, and 
even give off light in the case of LEDs. Figure 0-15 
shows various sizes and types of diodes, including 
an easily recognizable LED and the large full-wave 
rectiﬁer module at the top. A full-wave rectiﬁer is 
just a block containing four large diodes inside.
Like most other semiconductors, the size of 
the diode is usually a good indication of how 
much current it can handle before failure, and this 
information will be speciﬁed by the manufacturer 
by referencing whatever code is printed on the 
diode to some datasheet. Unlike resistors and 
capacitors, there is no common mode of identifying 
a diode unless you get to know some of the most 
common manufacturers’ codes by memory, so 
you will be forced to look up the datasheet on the 
Internet or in a cross reference catalog to determine 
the exact value and purpose of unknown diodes. 
connections, so in parallel two identical capacitors 
will handle the same voltage as a single unit, but 
double their capacitance rating, and in series, they 
have the same capacitance rating as a single unit, 
but can handle twice the voltage. So if you need to 
ﬁlter a very noisy power supply, you might want 
to install a pair of 4700-MF capacitors in parallel 
to end up with a capacitance of 9400 MF. When 
installing parallel capacitors, make sure that the 
voltage ratings of all the capacitors used are higher 
than the voltage of that circuit, or there will be a 
failure—ugly, noisy smelly failure!
The Diode
Diodes allow current to ﬂow through them in one 
direction only so they can be used to rectify AC 
into DC, block unwanted current from entering a 
TABLE 0-1  Ceramic Capacitor Value Chart
Value, pF
Marking
Value, KF (pF)
Marking
Value, KF
Marking
10
10 or 100 
0.001
102
0.10
104
12
12 or 120 
0.0012 (1200)
122
0.12
124
15
15 or 150 
0.0015
152
0.15
154
18
18 or 180 
0.0018  (1800)
182
0.18
184
22
22 or 220 
0.0022
222
0.22
224
27
27 or 270 
0.0027
272
0.27
274
33
33 or 330 
0.0033
332
0.33
334
39
39 or 390 
0.0039
392
0.39
394
47
47 or 470 
0.0047
472
0.47
474
58
58 or 580 
0.0056
562
0.56
564
68
68 or 680
0.0068
682
0.68
684
82
82 or 820 
0.0082
822
0.82
824
100
101
0.01
103
1
105 or 1 Kf
120
121
0.012
123
150
151
0.015
153
180
181
0.018
183
220
221
0.022
223
270
271
0.027
273
330
331
0.033
333
390
391
0.039
393
470
471
0.047
473
560
561
0.056
563
680
681
0.068
683
820
821
0.082
823

Getting Started      13
ratings that must not be exceeded in order to avoid 
damaging the device. Reverse voltage and peak 
forward current are very important values that must 
not be exceeded when powering LEDs or damage 
will easily occur, yet at the same time, you will 
want to get as close as possible to the maximum 
values if your circuit demands full performance 
from the LED, so read the datasheets on the device 
carefully. Larger diodes used to rectify AC or 
control large current may need to be mounted to 
the proper heat sink in order to operate at their 
rated values, and often the case style will be a clear 
indication due to the metal backing, or mounting 
hardware that may come with the device. Unless 
you know how much heat a certain device can 
dissipate in open air, your best bet is to mount it 
to a heat sink if it was designed to be installed 
that way. Like most semiconductors, there are 
thousands of various sizes and types of diodes, 
so make sure you are using a part rated for your 
circuit, and double-check the polarity of the device 
before you turn on the power for the ﬁrst time.
The Transistor
A transistor is one of the most useful 
semiconductors available, and often the building 
block for many larger integrated circuits and 
components, such as logic gates, memory, and 
microprocessors. Before transistors became widely 
used in electronics, simple devices like radios 
and ampliﬁers would need huge wooden cabinets, 
consume vast amounts of power, and emit large 
wasteful quantities of heat because of vacuum 
tubes. The ﬁrst general-purpose computer, ENIAC 
(Electronic Numerical Integrator and Computer) 
was a vacuum tube–based computer that used 
17,468 vacuum tubes, 7200 crystal diodes, 1500 
relays, 70,000 resistors, 10,000 capacitors and
had more than 5 million hand-soldered joints. 
It weighed 30 tons and was roughly 8 by 3 by
100 feet, and consumed 150 kW of power! 
A simple computer that would rival the power of 
For example the NTE6248 diode shown in 
Figure 0-15 in the TO220 case (left side of photo) 
has a datasheet that indicates it is a Schottky barrier 
rectiﬁer with a peak reverse voltage maximum of 
600 V and a maximum forward current rating of 
16 amps (A). Datasheets will tell you everything 
you need to know about a particular device, and 
you should never exceed any of the recommended 
values if you want a reliable circuit. The schematic 
symbol for a diode is shown in Figure 0-16, D1 
being a standard diode, and the other a LED (the 
two arrows represent light leaving the device).
The diode symbol shows an arrow (anode) 
pointing at a line (cathode), and this indicates 
which way current ﬂows (from the anode to the 
cathode, or in the direction of the arrow). On 
many small diodes, a stripe painted around the 
case will indicate which end is the cathode, and on 
LEDs, there will be a ﬂat side on the case nearest 
the cathode lead. LEDs come in many different 
sizes, shapes, and wavelengths (colors), and have 
  Figure 0-15   Several style of diodes including 
an LED.
  Figure 0-16   Diode schematic symbol (LED 
on the right).

14      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
current ﬂowing between base and emitter terminals, 
but the ﬂow of current is opposite in each device. 
Today, most transistors are NPN because it is easier 
to manufacture a better NPN transistor than a PNP, 
but there are still occurrences when a circuit may 
use a PNP transistor because of the direction of 
current, or in tandem with an NPN transistor to 
create a matched pair. There is enough transistor 
theory to cover 10 books of this size, so we will 
condense that information in order to help you 
understand the very basics of transistor operation. 
As a simple switch, a transistor can be thought of 
as a relay with no mechanical parts. You can turn 
on a high-current load, such as a light or motor, 
with a very weak current, such as the output from 
a logic gate, or light-sensitive photocell. Switching 
a large load with a small load is very important in 
electronics, and transistors do this perfectly and at 
speed that a mechanical switch such as a relay could 
never come close to achieving. An audio ampliﬁer 
is nothing more than a very fast switch that takes 
a very small current, such as the output from a CD 
player, and uses it as the input into a fast switch 
that controls a large current, such as the DC power 
source feeding the speakers. Almost any transistor 
can easily operate well beyond the frequency of an 
audio signal, so they are perfectly suited for this 
job. At much higher frequencies, like those used in 
radio transmitters, transistors do the same job of 
ampliﬁcation, but they are rated for much higher 
frequencies sometime into the gigahertz range. 
Another main difference between the way a 
mechanical switch and a transistor work is  that 
a transistor is not simply an on/off switch, it can 
operate as an “analog” switch, varying the amount 
of current switched by varying the amount of 
current entering the base of the transistor. A relay 
can turn on a 100-W light bulb if a 5-V current 
is applied to the coil, but a transistor could vary 
the intensity of the same light bulb from zero to 
full brightness depending on the voltage at the 
base of the transistor. Like all semiconductors, the 
transistor must be rated for the job you intend it to 
this power-hungry monster could easily be built on 
a few square inches of perforated board using a few 
dollars in parts today by any electronics hobbyist, 
thanks to the transistor. A transistor is really just a 
switch that can control a large amount of current by 
switching a small amount of current, thus creating 
an ampliﬁer. Several common types and sizes of 
transistors are shown in Figure 0-17.
Depending on how much current a transistor is 
designed to switch, it may be as small as a grain 
of rice or as large as a hockey puck and require a 
massive steel heat sink or fan to operate correctly. 
There are thousands of varying transistor types and 
sizes, but one thing most of them have in common 
is that they will have three connections that can be 
called “collector,” “emitter,” and “base,” and they 
will be represented by one of the two schematic 
symbols shown in Figure 0-18. 
The emitter (E), base (B), and collector (C) on 
both the NPN and PNP transistors do the same job. 
The collector/emitter current is controlled by the 
  Figure 0-17 
Various common transistors.
  Figure 0-18   NPN and PNP transistor 
schematic symbols.

Getting Started      15
to be mounted to a heat sink. The same principle 
applies to maximum switching speed—don’t expect 
a 100-MHz transistor to oscillate at 440 MHz in an 
RF transmitter circuit, since it will have a difﬁcult 
enough time just reaching the 100-MHz level.
RTFM—Read The Flippin’ 
Manual!
Let’s face it, Evil Geniuses don’t often read manuals 
and prefer to learn by trial and error, which really 
is the best way to learn most of the time. When it 
comes to determining the specs on an electronic 
component with more than two pins, you really 
have no choice but to read the datasheet in order 
to ﬁgure out how it works to avoid letting out the 
smoke. For transistors and ICs, this is especially 
do, so maximum current, switching voltage, and 
speed are things that need to be considered when 
choosing the correct part. The datasheet for a very 
common NPN transistor, the 2N2222 (which can be 
substituted for the 2N3904 often used in this book) 
is shown in Figure 0-19.
From this datasheet, we can see that this 
transistor can switch about half a watt (624 mW) 
with a voltage of 6 V across the base and emitter 
junction. Of course, these are maximum ratings, 
so you might decide that the transistor will work 
safely in a circuit if it had to switch on a 120 mW 
LED from a 5-V logic level input at the base. As 
a general rule, look at the maximum switching 
current of a transistor, and never ask it to handle 
more than half of the rated maximum value, 
especially if it was the type of transistor designed 
  Figure 0-19
Datasheet for the common 2N2222 NPN transistor.

16      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
their Web site ﬁrst, or try a large online electronic 
supply site like Digikey.com as they will have 
online datasheets for thousands of components. 
The Internet is also a great source for general 
information on electronics, so if you ﬁnd yourself 
needing to know the basics, consult your favorite 
search engine.
The wealth of information found by searching 
“LED basics” was almost endless. Even the ﬁrst site 
(Figure 0-21) has more than enough information 
on the LEDs presented in a very easy to understand 
format. The fact is that almost all of the information 
you will need when learning electronics can be 
found on the Internet with a little patience.
Asking for Help
When the Internet fails to provide you with answers 
or you really feel you need guidance from those 
who may know the answers, there are countless 
forums that you can join and look for help or 
discuss your projects with other Evil Geniuses. 
Like all things in life, forums have their own 
true as you really have no idea what is inside the 
“black box” without the datasheet. That 8-pin 
IC may be just a simple timer or it could be a 
state-of-the-art 100-Mhz microprocessor with a 
built-in USB port and a video output. Without the 
datasheet, you would never know. There are also 
times when you ﬁnd some cool schematic on the 
Internet and it has a parts list that you determine 
contains mostly discontinued transistors, so you 
will have to compare the datasheets to ﬁnd suitable 
replacements. Once you learn the basics, you will be 
able to make smart substitutions for almost any part.
You can dig up just about any datasheet on any 
device, even those that have been off the market for 
decades, so learn how to ﬁnd them and you will never 
be in the dark when it comes to component specs. 
The datasheet for the very common 2N2222 transistor 
was found by typing  “2N2222 datasheet” into 
Google (Figure 0-20) and looking for the PDF ﬁle. 
Although there are a few bogus datasheet servers 
out there that try to suck you into joining so they 
can spam your e-mail address for life, most of the 
time you will ﬁnd a datasheet with little or no fuss. 
If you know the manufacturer of the device, try 
  Figure 0-20
The Internet is your friend.
  Figure 0-21
Finding the basics online.

Getting Started      17
special rules of etiquette, so before you jump in and 
scream “help me!” please take the time to read their 
posting rules, and consider the following.
Most of the knowledgeable people on a forum 
who would consider answering your question are 
doing so on their own time just to be nice. They do 
this because they remember what it felt like to be 
starting out and in need of a little guidance to make 
that project a success. If you have not bothered to 
cover the basics or given much effort to solve your 
own problems ﬁrst, you will get zero respect in 
a forum and will either be ignored or “spanked” 
publicly. Here is how not to ask for help in a forum 
(we see this a lot):
Urgent: can’t program the microcontroller. Pls 
help me, urgent! i am a noob and don’t know 
how 2 get the code in2 the avr. What do I need 2 
buy? Can some1 pls send me the ﬁle. 
This type of post may never get a response for 
many reasons. First of all, why would your problem 
be of a concern to anyone else? Most people on 
a forum also have a life and a job, so their ﬁrst 
thought will be, “If your problem is so urgent, pay 
someone to solve it.” Be patient, and remember that 
if someone is kind enough to help you in the next 
few days, then you are very lucky. Also, making 
multiple posts of the same or similar request in 
other threads hoping that more posts from you will 
encourage responses will likely get you into trouble 
with moderators and regular members. It may take 
days for a response; but remember that everyone 
else has urgent things in their lives to look after 
before taking the time to help you and others.
The next reason why most forum members will 
ignore this kind of post is because of the sloppy use 
of language. Posting like that would be the same 
as showing up for a formal job interview wearing 
your garage clothes and is a clear indication of 
laziness. The message also indicates that the poster 
has done nothing to help him or herself and expects 
to be “spoon-fed” by those who have done the 
groundwork or have invested in many years of 
formal and informal education. The question also 
has little information, so the forum members are 
left to guess. Here is a much better way to ask the 
same question and likely get a response:
Project X—Question regarding the AVR 
selection—Hello everyone. I’m working on 
the Mind Reader project and was wondering 
if the AVR644p could be used to replace the 
AVR324p? I have read the datasheets on both 
chips but just want to make sure that there aren’t 
some issues with this chip that I should know 
about. Has anyone out there compiled a HEX ﬁle 
for this device yet? If not, I’m probably going 
to give it a try and upload the ﬁle if it works. 
Thanks for your help. 
Now the poster has asked a clear question that 
indicates both the project and the part numbers, as 
well as what he or she has done to help himself or 
herself ﬁrst. People who are willing to try to solve 
their own problems ﬁrst and then ask politely for 
additional help are welcomed in a forum because 
they are likely the type of person to come back later 
and help others when they make the transition from 
newcomer to experienced hobbyist. Consider these 
points before asking for help online.
Tools of the Trade
Once you have a good supply of junk to mess 
around with and a basic understanding of the parts 
and schematic symbols, you can begin to turn 
your ideas into reality. Of course, you will need a 
few basic tools, which can be purchased at most 
electronics suppliers. Much like the breadboard, the 
soldering iron is the workhorse in the electronics 
industry. You can create and test your circuit on a 
breadboard, but to move it to a more permanent 
home, you will have to solder those components 
down. We like to have two soldering irons for 
this hobby—one is a cheap unit to use when 
unsoldering parts from scrap boards and the other 
is a better heat-controlled unit with interchangeable 
tips for ﬁne work. 
The ability to control the heat and replace the 
tips on a soldering iron like the one shown in 

18      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
voltages, so a dual supply makes it easy to just 
dial up the voltage you need. These test-bench 
power supplies also allow you to set the current, 
so you can help eliminate fried components by 
slowly adjusting the voltage while you watch for 
spikes in the current. If you accidentally reverse 
the power pins on your last microcontroller and 
drop on a 1-A “wall wart,” you will most certainly 
see some ﬁreworks. If you limit the current on an 
adjustable supply and slowly turn up the voltage, 
chances are very high that you will catch the error 
before any damage is done to the chip. Having 
an amp meter also lets you ﬁgure out how much 
power your circuit needs when it comes time to 
choose a regulator. An adjustable power supply is 
another one of those “must have” devices for the 
electronics hobby.
A multimeter like the one shown in Figure 0-24 
will also be needed in order to measure component 
values, check voltages, and test your circuits. A very 
basic multimeter will measure voltage, current, and 
resistance, and a more advanced model might also 
include a frequency counter, capacitance tester, 
transistor checker, and even some basic graphing 
functions. You will use your multimeter to check 
voltage and measure resistance most of the time, so 
even a basic model will be ﬁne for most work.
Figure 0-22 makes it easy to work on all types of 
projects. For delicate surface-mounted components, 
you need a sharp point and low heat, but for 
soldering down a large heat sink, you need a blunt 
tip and lots of heat, so the ability to turn a dial and 
switch the tip is very handy. Also shown in 
Figure 0-22 is the “holster” and sponge bath for 
cleaning the tip. You can certainly get away with 
using a ten-dollar soldering iron for most of the 
projects in this book, but if you plan to dive deep 
into this hobby, then consider investing in a quality 
soldering station.
Unless everything you build is going to run 
from a 9-V battery, you will need some type of 
adjustable power supply like the one shown in 
Figure 0-23. Often, a circuit will need two different 
  Figure 0-22   A midrange heat-controlled 
soldering iron.
  Figure 0-23
A variable dual power supply.
  Figure 0-24
A basic digital multimeter.

Getting Started      19
logic gates, a handful of transistors, and your 
usual resistors and capacitors. Now the selection 
of components is so vast that printing a supplier’s 
catalog is almost a dream. If you can dream up 
a use for ones and zeros, there are probably 
10 companies making a chip for it, so the selection 
is massive; often, mass-scale production, ﬁnding 
a single IC may be very difﬁcult. Maybe you just 
tore into a VCR and isolated the on-screen display 
chip, found the datasheet, and thought “Cool, we 
want that for my robot.” After a bit of search you 
ﬁnd that the suppliers minimum-order quantity is 
100,000 units and the programmer needed to make 
the chip work is the same price as a small car. The 
simple fact is that as electronics become more 
complex and the faster the industry moves, the less 
chance us hobbyists have of sourcing the latest 
parts. Sure, transistors, resistors, and the basic 
components will always be available, but complex 
ICs designed for consumer devices will either 
not be available in small quantities, or will have 
packages so small you need a microscope just to 
see all of the pins. Enter the microcontroller.
A microcontroller is like a blank IC ready to be 
made into whatever you want it to be. A ﬁve-dollar 
microcontroller can take on the function of a 
16-input logic gate or become something as complex 
as a fully functional Pong game that will display 
video on your television. A microcontroller is a chip 
that contains a processor, some memory, and a few 
peripherals, such as serial ports or even a high-
speed USB port. There are even microcontrollers 
that have MP3 decoders and high-resolution video 
generators onboard. Although learning to program 
a microcontroller is almost a hobby in itself, it 
does open up a door that allows you to create just 
about any function on a single IC, so you don’t 
have to worry about what the market is doing, or if 
a chip will be available. Sure, there are limits, but 
not that many, and microcontrollers are king in the 
hobby world of electronics. Figure 0-26 shows a 
few microcontrollers with varying pin counts and a 
programmer from Microchip, as well as Parallax.
If you really want to run with this hobby or 
learn electronics on a professional level, you will 
eventually want an oscilloscope (Figure 0-25) for 
your bench. A modern oscilloscope can measure 
just about anything and then display it on a high-
resolution color screen or download the results to 
your computer for analysis. Even an older tube-
based scope can be very useful when you need to 
see instant feedback from a circuit on a screen. 
As your circuits become larger, faster, and more 
complex, a simple multimeter may not be enough 
to debug problems as it cannot respond in real-time 
or detect such high-speed voltage changes. This 
becomes important when designing high-speed 
digital devices that expect a certain sequence of 
digital information to be transmitter or received. 
An oscilloscope lets you “dig deep” into a signal 
and look at it one bit at a time until you ﬁnd the 
bugs. You can also display analog signals in real-
time, compare multiple signals, and even save the 
results to a PC for further analysis. Although you 
will not need an oscilloscope to build the projects 
in this book, we could not have done many of them 
without one, so when you start designing your own 
circuits, a scope is invaluable.
In the time before millions of transistors were 
crammed onto a single IC, you had a few basic 
  Figure 0-25   An oscilloscope for more 
advanced work.

20      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
For small circuits, we usually use the non-
copper-plated perf board and just solder wires 
on the bottom of the board where the component 
leads stick through, as this is easy, quick, and 
inexpensive. Larger circuits become a mess 
quickly, so having copper-plated holes or even 
traces like a solderless breadboard can make 
migration a lot easier. Perforated board is available 
as a large sheet, and it is easy to just cut off a piece 
the size you need using a utility knife to score the 
surface and then break it apart. A perf board circuit 
made correctly is just as good as a manufactured 
PCB, so don’t underestimate what can be done 
with a handful of wires, a few dollars worth of 
perf board, and some hard work. Have a look at 
the complex VGA computer prototype on the huge 
breadboard in the top half of Figure 0-28. The 
prototype now lives on an 8- by 5-in perf board 
(lower half of Figure 0-28) and functions perfectly 
at 20 MHz.
The next step after hardwiring your project to a 
perf board will be an actual printed circuit board 
like the one shown in Figure 0-29. When you are 
using surface-mounted components with very small 
pitch leads, you don’t have many options besides 
a real PCB. A PCB also makes more sense when 
To make a microcontroller do your bidding, you 
ﬁrst write code on your PC using C, Assembly, 
or Basic, and then you compile and send your 
program to the programmer, which ﬁts it into the 
microcontroller onboard ﬂash memory. If your code 
works properly, your microcontroller now becomes 
your own custom IC. Microcontrollers typically cost 
between $5 and $20, depending on ﬂash memory 
size and onboard peripherals, and programmers cost 
between $50 and $200, depending on chip support 
and debug functionality. There are even Web sites 
that show you how to build your own programmers 
for a few bucks, so microcontrollers are certainly 
well within anyone’s budget.
Beyond the Breadboard
Once you have your prototype up and running 
on your breadboard, you will need to move the 
components to a more permanent home so your 
device can ﬁt into a cabinet and become real 
hardware. This migration usually involves moving 
everything to a ﬁberglass board with holes with or 
without copper traces and then adding the wires. 
This perforated board is usually called “perf 
board,” and is available in many sizes with or 
without copper-plated holes or strips that copy the 
connections on a solderless breadboard. 
Figure 0-27 shows an empty and populated 
copper-hole perf board with a dual-stepper motor 
drive prototype soldered and tested.
  Figure 0-26
Microcontrollers and programmers.
  Figure 0-27
Perf board becomes a 
permanent home.

Getting Started      21
you need to duplicate a project or want to get into 
selling your designs. Bringing a professional PCB 
to market is a costly and time-consuming process 
often involving many failed attempts and board 
revisions, but for us hobbyists, there are alternatives 
that may be viable if a real PCB is needed. If you 
search the Internet for “PCB production,” you 
will ﬁnd several companies that will allow you to 
download their free software to design your PCB 
and then order a few boards for around $100. This 
is actually a fair deal considering the amount of 
investment and time it would take to produce your 
own PCB at home using a chemical etching or 
photo-based system. Of course, you will have to 
decide if the cost is worth it.
Now let’s dig into some of the projects and 
have some fun. Remember that we all had to start 
from the beginning, and if something does not 
make sense at ﬁrst, turn off the power supply, 
take a break, and search the Internet for more 
information. Electronics is a great hobby, and with 
a little investment in time and money, you will be 
able to create just about anything. When you start 
to get a good handle on things, feel free to try out 
your own modiﬁcations to the projects presented in 
this book, or mix and match them together to create 
completely new devices. Oh, and don’t feel too bad 
when you accidentally let the smoke out of your 
semiconductors, they won’t feel a thing!
  Figure 0-28
Massive high-speed circuits can 
be built on a breadboard.
  Figure 0-29   A professionally manufactured 
printed circuit board.

This page intentionally left blank 

Chapter 1
Introduction
23
P A R T  O N E
Spy Technologies 101

This page intentionally left blank 

25
P R O J E C T  1
Desoldering Basics
IN ORDER TO build an electronic circuit from 
plans or from scratch, you will need a number 
of semiconductors and components. Often, these 
individual components cost only pennies now, 
but in order to purchase from a large supplier 
a minimum order number or price level has to 
be met. It seems crazy to pay $25 in shipping 
to receive a few 10-cent capacitors or resistors, 
especially when you can salvage them from just 
about any old circuit board. Almost all of the 
components we use are salvaged from old boards. 
We never had to order an odd value resistor or 
capacitor as we have always found what we needed 
by scavenging our huge junk piles.
A few dead TV or VCR circuit boards will 
net you enough raw components to ﬁll an entire 
electronics parts bin and allow you to experiment 
with varying values as you breadboard a new or 
published circuit from a schematic. Almost any 
discarded appliance that includes a power cord 
will become a great source of raw semiconductors, 
so tell everyone you know not to throw out their 
broken appliances and instead send them to your 
mad scientist lab for dissection!
A decent soldering iron will make your work 
so much easier, allowing the heat to be adjusted 
to the job at hand. Sure, you could do a lot with 
a ten-dollar soldering gun, but when it comes 
to removing components or soldering small pin 
devices, the budget soldering iron may not be 
of much use. A ﬁne point and a lot of heat will 
make component extraction very easy, especially 
on multilayered boards, which require the heat 
to reach the inner copper layers in order to melt 
the solder. A soldering station with a heat control 
and interchangeable tips is one of those must-
have items if you plan to invest any time in the 
electronics hobby (Figure 1-1). A decent soldering 
station can be purchased at most electronics 
suppliers, and will range in price from $50 to $200, 
25
  Figure 1-0   Most of your parts inventory can be 
salvaged from old circuit boards.
  Figure 1-1   The basic tools you will require for 
any soldering or unsoldering work.

26      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
working with the larger through-hole components 
and board-mounted hardware, such as switches, 
heat sinks, connectors, and large-pin devices. You 
don’t have to worry too much about damaging a 
component with a soldering iron, as it has been 
designed to withstand a lot more heat during the 
manufacturing process than you will be subjecting 
it to here. When we unsolder, we always crank up 
the station to the highest setting, as this releases the 
part faster, subjecting it to less time under the gun 
(Figure 1-2).
Once you become proﬁcient at arming, aiming, 
and snapping the desoldering tool, you will be able 
to lift a 40-pin IC from a circuit board in about 
60 seconds ﬂat. This tool will allow you to cleanly 
rip up just about any component from a board in such 
a way that the pins look almost brand new again, 
ready to be inserted into a solderless breadboard. 
It does take some practice to get the rhythm down 
though, and there is a split-second where the solder 
sucker must be positioned right over the pin just as 
the solder pools in order to completely evacuate a 
hole (Figure 1-3). If you are too slow or fail to aim 
the top over the hole, you will only pull up part of 
the solder; this will require you to actually use new 
solder to ﬁll the hole back in again so you can try a 
second time. Proﬁciency will come with practice, 
and after your tenth TV circuit board, you will be 
able to wield the soldering gun and desoldering 
depending on what features and accessories are 
included. If your soldering system does not include 
a sponge bath, then just wet an ordinary kitchen 
sponge with some water, as this will be needed in 
order to clean off the tip as it gums up with ﬂux 
and old solder.
Large through-hole semiconductors can often 
be ripped up from old circuit boards using a 
soldering iron and your ﬁngers to lift the parts, but 
there will be limits to this technique, especially 
on smaller components or those with more than 
two or three pins. A desoldering tool, often called 
a “solder sucker” is essential for removing short-
lead semiconductors, as well as those with multiple 
leads, such as integrated circuits (ICs). This simple 
tool contains a spring-loaded plunger that basically 
sucks up the heated solder, clearing the area around 
the lead and hole so that the part can be removed 
from the board. On most boards, it is possible to 
cleanly lift up a 40-pin IC in a few minutes so that 
it can be reused or even placed into a solderless 
breadboard. A solder sucker is also good for 
removing large components that have been placed 
down with a lot of solder to secure them to the 
board or transfer heat.
You will also require a spool of solder, even 
when unsoldering components, as there will be 
times when you have to melt a bit of solder into a 
hole in order to use the solder sucker to clean up 
the hole. Molten solder is a liquid, so the transfer of 
heat between the newly added solder and the hard-
to-reach solder stuck in the center of a multilayer 
board will allow the solder sucker to pull up every 
bit in one shot. For electronics work, you will 
need ﬂux core (rosin core) solder, which is a thin, 
hollow solder with special antioxidizing chemicals 
in the center that clean and protect the copper when 
soldering. There are various diameters of solder, 
with 0.032 inch being a good choice for all-around 
electronics work. The type of solid heavy solder 
used for plumbing is of no use for electronics work!
If your soldering system includes a dial to set the 
heat (amperage), then this will come in handy when 
  Figure 1-2   A higher heat setting is best for 
unsoldering larger components.

Project 1  Q  Desoldering Basics      27
Although the current trend is to reduce the 
size and number of components on a printed 
circuit board to reduce cost, there will always be 
something to salvage, and older boards will be a 
regular gold mine of usable parts. Large capacitors, 
resistors, transistors, light-emitting diodes (LEDs), 
diodes, and any other two- or three-pin through-
hole component can easily be removed using 
only your ﬁngers and a soldering iron by simply 
heating and lifting them free (Figure 1-5). If the 
component is small enough that you can heat all 
of the pads at the same time, then the process is 
very simple—just heat and remove. Larger devices 
require a bit of working to release them from the 
circuit board.
Heat one of the pads as you rock the component 
to one side in order to slide the lead out of the hole 
as much as you can before the part hits the one next 
to it. If the device has more than two pins, then you 
can’t bend it as far, as you may bend one of the 
other pins. Transistors and other large devices need 
to be worked out a small bit at a time, heating each 
pad one at a time.
Once you have melted the solder on one of 
the pads, bend the component as far as you can 
before it hits the one next to it, and then withdraw 
the heat to let the lead settle back in the hole. The 
process is then repeated on the other lead, working 
tool with Jedi reﬂexes. Oh, but your thumb muscles 
will ache for a while as you get used to pressing 
down that button.
Like all products, the desoldering tool will 
range in quality depending on the manufacturer 
and price, and it is worth investing in one that will 
last for some time. Each time you evacuate a hole, 
the molten solder will solidify in the tube and will 
drop back out on the next press of the plunger. Of 
course, a small amount of solder will stick to the 
internal spring or casing, eventually clogging the 
device. To clean the solder sucker, unscrew the two 
halves and then clean the debris out as much as you 
can, ensuring the small rubber ring is also clean. 
A bit of vegetable oil can be used to lubricate the 
unit for continued efﬁciency. This cleaning process 
should be done after a full day of use or when the 
loading system seems to stick (Figure 1-4).
  Figure 1-3   Get used to arming and aiming the 
solder sucker with accuracy.
  Figure 1-4   The desoldering tool will need to 
be cleaned every so often.
  Figure 1-5   Larger components with two or 
three pins are easy to remove 
from a board.

28      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
This lead rocking process only takes a few 
seconds if you have your soldering iron set on 
high, and will not damage the part if done carefully 
(Figure 1-8). Some cleanup of the leads might be 
necessary after, though, as the molten solder may 
stick to the lead as you release the component from 
the board. This lead cleanup is only necessary 
if you plan to place the part in a solderless 
breadboard, as the solder blob may be too wide for 
the slot on the breadboard.
Some devices are inserted into a circuit board 
with very short leads or in such a way that makes 
it impossible to manipulate the part with your 
ﬁngers (Figures 1-9 and 1-10). Resistors that are 
the component out of the board a bit at a time 
(Figures 1-6 and 1-7).
When you are working a component off the 
board using the heat and rock technique, be careful 
not to bend the leads so far that they break right off. 
Some capacitors have such short leads that there 
is no space between the underside and the board, 
so too much movement may rip the lead right out 
of the casing. Also, some devices, such as large 
resistors, transmit heat to their outer bodies, so you 
will need to work fast or use tweezers with this 
technique in order to avoid burning your ﬁngers.
  Figure 1-6   Slide the lead out of the hole a bit 
at a time and then let the solder 
cool.
  Figure 1-7   Keep working each lead until 
the component is freed from the 
board.
  Figure 1-8   After heating the pads several 
times, the part is ﬁnally released.
  Figure 1-9   Smaller components with short 
leads can be heated and pried up.

Project 1  Q  Desoldering Basics      29
the tip while the solder was still molten, then most 
of the hole will be cleared out. Larger pads will 
require a few attempts to clear out all of the solder 
(Figure 1-12).
On larger devices with thick leads, the solder 
sucker may not evacuate the entire hole, leaving a 
small connection between the edge of the solder 
pad and the lead. Often, you can just grip the 
lead with pliers or tweezers to move it away from 
the edge of the hole (Figure 1-13). This is the 
reason that leads should be a straight as possible 
before using the desoldering tool. On smaller 
components, a quick push with your ﬁngernail 
will easily release the lead from the edge of the 
hole. If you cannot free the lead, then it may be 
necessary to ﬁll the hole with fresh solder and 
then use the desoldering tool again.
laid down horizontally are often difﬁcult to lift up 
by hand as there is not much to hold on to, and they 
become extremely hot in a hurry. If you can get a 
hold of the device and pull it quickly, you may be 
able to lift it by hand, but after a while, your ﬁngers 
will start to develop heat blisters. Resistors and 
diodes can be pulled up from a board by heating 
the lead while you pry them up with tweezers or a 
small screwdriver blade. Actually, you only need 
to pry up one end and then you can easily pull the 
component from the board by melting the pad on 
the other lead and pulling it away from the hole.
When there is no way to safely grip or pry up a 
component, you will need to evacuate the hole by 
using the desoldering tool in order to remove the 
part. If the lead has been bent outwards during the 
manufacturing process, try to straighten it as much 
as you can so that the solder sucker can pull out the 
solder evenly around the lead and the hole. Many 
ICs and components are inserted by a machine that 
forces the pins to fall against the edge of the holes. 
This can make solder evacuation more difﬁcult.
Depending on the amount of solder and size of 
the pad, you may need to make multiple strikes 
with the desoldering tool in order to free the part 
(Figure 1-11). Heat up the pad until the color of the 
solder changes (molten solder becomes very shiny), 
and then quickly place the loaded solder-sucker tip 
right over the pin and press the release button. If 
you managed to make a seal between the work and 
  Figure 1-10   Delicate components need to be 
removed carefully.
  Figure 1-11   Timing and aim are the key to 
using the desoldering tool.
  Figure 1-12   Sometimes the lead will be stuck 
to the side of the hole.

30      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
overheat the leads as it may be possible to damage 
the internals now that there are no copper solder 
pads to help dissipate the heat. Only heat up the part 
as much as necessary in order to melt the solder for 
extraction. Another trick that can be used to remove 
solder blobs from the pin is the heat-and-shake 
method, which involves melting the solder and then 
ﬂicking the part to send the molten solder ﬂying off. 
Do this into a garbage pail or onto a surface that 
will not be tarnished by the molten solder.
On larger pin devices, a twisting motion with 
ridged pliers can also help straighten up and 
remove leftover solder from the leads. Since 
the solder is much softer than the lead, it can be 
removed by the grinding action of the pliers. Only 
use enough pressure to remove the solder without 
bending or twisting the lead (Figure 1-16).
The fuse shown in Figure 1-13 couldn’t be pried 
up until one end was already removed from the 
board as the glass was too smooth to get a grip on, 
and any prying might have broken the glass. Large 
ceramic resistors are also similar and made of very 
fragile material that cannot by pried easily.
To prepare a part for reinsertion into a board, 
use the desoldering tool to remove any solder 
blobs from the leads and then press them with 
ﬂat pliers to straighten the leads (Figures 1-14 
and 1-15). This becomes important if you plan 
to install larger pin devices into a solderless 
breadboard as there is a limit to how large a pin 
will ﬁt before causing stress on the internal plates 
that connect the rows.
When cleaning up the leftover solder from 
a larger part like a capacitor, be careful not to 
  Figure 1-13   Once one lead has been freed, the 
fuse can be pulled from the board.
  Figure 1-14   Leads are cleaned and 
straightened after removing a 
part.
  Figure 1-15   Clean the leads with the 
desoldering tool after removal.
  Figure 1-16   A twisting motion can also 
remove the excess solder.

Project 1  Q  Desoldering Basics      31
than enough common components on just about 
any salvage board such as 1-, 10-, and 100-MF
capacitors, 1-, 10-, and 10-K resistors, and small 
NPN signal transistors. As you build projects from 
plans and schematics, common values will become 
obvious, and even resistor color codes will become 
easily recognizable right away. These common 
values will be the starting point for building a 
well-organized inventory that will probably end up 
spanning several multidrawer component bins.
As you desolder and solder, the tip will need 
constant cleaning to allow for a proper transfer of 
heat to the work (Figure 1-19). The wet sponge 
is used to clean the tip by dragging it across the 
surface to remove the old solder buildup. Do not 
let your soldering iron sit in the holster while a 
blob of old solder is stuck to the end as this will 
slowly degrade and pit the tip, making it eventually 
break or deform. Before putting your soldering iron 
down, wipe the tip ﬁrst.
Most soldering stations will include a holster 
and a sponge, but if you only have a basic system, 
any kitchen or bath sponge will work. Just wet the 
sponge until it is saturated (but not dripping) and 
then it will be good for a few days. To clean the 
solder blobs from the tip, drag the hot soldering 
iron across the sponge and spin it as you go 
(Figure 1-20). The solder blobs will be stuck 
on the surface of the sponge and when it ﬁnally 
dries, they can be shaken off into a garbage can. 
Remember to always clean the tip when you are 
For use in a solderless breadboard, leads 
should be cut to a length of no more than 
half an inch. It is also important that leads be 
straightened and positioned so that they ﬁt into 
the holes without stressing the part. For use on 
a perforated board, it may be best to keep leads 
as long as possible as they could be used to help 
form solder points and traces on the underside of 
the board. Trim both leads to an equal length for 
breadboarding (Figure 1-17).
When you are ﬁrst building up your semiconductor 
inventory, there are obvious common values that 
you will need with capacitors, resistors, transistors, 
and logic ICs (Figure 1-18). You will ﬁnd more 
 Figure 1-17   Trim both leads to an equal length 
for breadboarding.
  Figure 1-18   A pair of solderless breadboard 
compatible salvaged capacitors.
  Figure 1-19   Old solder will build up on the tip 
of the soldering iron as it is used.

32      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
tip (Figure 1-22). To work with surface mounted 
semiconductors, you will deﬁnitely need a good 
set of tweezers, a magniﬁer, and a steady hand. 
SMD work is not all that bad once you get past the 
pitfalls, and desoldering components can be done 
with a sharp tip and a pair of good tweezers. The 
desoldering tool is almost useless for SMD work 
as the parts are so small they will end up lost inside 
the vacuum chamber or broken by the force.
SMD components are so small that even static 
electricity can cause havoc as you handle them. 
There are also different types of marking and coding 
used because of the small amount of space available, 
so you will need to learn another facet to this hobby 
when working with SMDs (Figure 1-23). Oh, and 
don’t bother looking around on the ﬂoor if you drop 
one of these parts…the chance of recovering one is 
not worth the effort!
going to shut off or holster the iron for any amount 
of time to avoid ruining the ﬁne point in the tip.
The clean soldering iron tip will have a difﬁcult 
time melting a large blob of solder unless it has a 
bit of solder on it already to help transfer the heat 
to the target. This wetting of the tip or “tinning” 
is important when you are soldering large pads or 
bare copper pads and new leads (Figure 1-21). To 
tin the tip, just melt a small amount of new solder 
to the tip and then run it across the sponge to get 
rid of any excess solder. This process places a 
small coating of solder on the tip, which allows 
the transfer of heat to the work. As you solder, this 
difference will become obvious.
Surface-mounted devices (SMDs) can be 
quite a task to solder by hand because of the fact 
that the capillary action of the molten solder is 
enough to trap them or make them stick to the 
 Figure 1-20   Drag the tip with a turning motion 
to clean off the old solder blobs.
 Figure 1-21   Tinning the tip will help the transfer 
of heat to the work.
 Figure 1-22   Surface-mounted components add 
a level of difﬁculty to soldering.
 Figure 1-23   A surface-mounted resistor is 
smaller than a grain of rice.

Project 1  Q  Desoldering Basics      33
Once the side you are working on has popped 
from the board, stop prying so the pins on the other 
side don’t become bent or broken. The heating 
and sliding process can then be done on the other 
side using tweezers or your ﬁngers to lift the IC 
completely from the board (Figure 1-26).
Once the surface-mounted IC has been fully 
removed from the pads, straighten and clean any 
pins that have been bent or may still have solder 
balls or bridges on them. This method of extracting 
IC packages works well for most ICs that have pins 
on both sides. For ICs that have pins on all four 
sides, this method will probably be of no use, and 
will require a heat gun to be used to evenly heat the 
entire part.
We used to spend hours unsoldering components 
from boards, throwing them all in a huge bin for 
later sorting, but found this to be a huge process 
(Figure 1-27). Looking up datasheets and 
Surface-mounted ICs have many sizes of 
packages and pins, and many are well within the 
realm of hand soldering, so don’t be afraid to try to 
save these parts from a circuit board. Many of the 
common logic ICs or op amps have few enough 
pins that they can be easily lifted from a board 
using only a small screwdriver and a soldering iron 
(Figure 1-24). There are specialty tools available 
for SMD work, but a lot can be done with just the 
basic tools as well.
One easy method of lifting a surface-mounted 
IC is to gently pry up on one end as you drag the 
hot soldering iron tip back and forth across the 
leads on that side. You will need to tin the tip and 
slide it back and forth in order to evenly heat all of 
the pins at once so that end will lift form the pads. 
Don’t pry too hard or push too much on the part or 
it will be damaged (Figure 1-25). When the pins on 
one side become free from the pads, you will hear 
a snap sound and the part will be lifted slightly on 
that side.
 Figure 1-24   Lifting a surface-mounted IC
using the pry method.
 Figure 1-25   One side of the surface-mounted 
IC has lifted from the pads.
 Figure 1-26   Another successful surface-
mounted IC extraction.
 Figure 1-27   Sorting and organizing a huge 
inventory can take some time

34      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
cross-referencing all of these parts took a lot 
longer than the removal process. Instead, now 
we go hunting for certain parts, like a 0.01-MF
disc capacitor and sort them in groups as they are 
extracted. Having a massive tangle of resistors 
is completely useless when you need to ﬁnd 
a speciﬁc value, so sorting after extraction is 
important. Sometimes we just leave resistors on the 
boards, as it would be impossible to sort all but the 
most common values into groups. ICs, capacitors, 
transistors, and larger components are usually easy 
to sort, so they are done as they are extracted.
We have 10 or more large parts cabinets 
completely full of salvaged semiconductors, 
all sorted by value, type, or use (Figure 1-28). 
Although 90 percent of the inventory came from 
free scrap boards, there must be thousands of 
dollars in usable components in there now. Every 
resistor costs something if you have to order it 
from a supplier, so don’t pass up any scrap boards 
for salvage. Tell your friends and family that all 
nonfunctioning and functioning appliances are 
welcome in your lab for dissection, and build up 
that junk pile as much as you can!
 Figure 1-28   Parts cabinets with small drawers 
are perfect for staying organized.

35
P R O J E C T  2
Spy Camera Basics
AT ONE TIME, a decent low-light video camera 
was the size of soda can and cost several hundred 
dollars. Now, you can purchase a decent micro spy 
camera that will ﬁt into a marker cap for well under 
a hundred dollars. Tiny security cameras also offer 
a huge variety of lenses to allow for practically 
any angle of view and covert installation. These 
cameras are also very easy to connect because 
they have used the same basic video standard since 
the invention of the television. This introduction 
to security cameras will give you the required 
basic information needed to install and power up 
practically any type of security camera.
We use these small video cameras for security 
work, machine vision experiments, and robotic 
projects. They range in size from half an inch 
square to quite large depending on the features, 
imaging system, and type of lens installed. For 
most security installations, a small board camera 
with a ﬁxed medium- to wide-angle lens will be 
perfect, but there are times when you need to see a 
much larger area or over great distances, so these 
cameras have several body types that allow the use 
of multiple lens styles. Extremely tiny spy cameras 
will not have this option, as they use a very tiny 
glass or plastic lens built right into the housing. 
There will be a bit of a tradeoff between image 
quality and size.
For most covert work, size will be the key factor 
in camera selection, so you probably won’t be 
dealing with multiple lenses or even have a choice. 
In Figure 2-1, you can see the huge difference 
in size between the long-range motorized lens 
telephoto camera on the left and the tiny spy 
camera at the front of the photo. The tiny spy 
camera has a simple ﬁxed medium-angle lens 
and will run from a 6-volt (V) power source for 
many hours. The larger camera uses a computer 
to control the motorized zoom lens and requires 
multiple power sources and electronic control 
35
 Figure 2-0   Micro spy cameras are inexpensive 
and easy to install in covert 
locations.
 Figure 2-1   A few of the basic security 
cameras in an ever-growing 
collection.

36      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
three-wire cable to allow power, ground, and video 
output connections. We will discuss lux later in this 
section. The large camera is great for daytime long-
range imaging where color quality is important, 
and the tiny camera is perfect for extremely low 
light or infrared night vision imaging in a stealthy 
location.
Larger security cameras designed to be used 
with higher-quality interchangeable lenses like the 
one shown in Figure 2-3 will usually have a C- or 
CS-type mount. C-mount lenses provide a male 
thread, which mates with a female thread on the 
camera. The thread is nominally 1 inch (25 mm) in 
diameter, with 32 threads per inch. A CS lens has 
a ﬂange focal distance of 12.526 millimeters 
(0.4931 in), and is otherwise identical to the 
C-mount. Some camera bodies have a smaller lens 
mount and will often come with an adapter to allow 
the attachment of C or CS lenses, although some 
focal range may be lost. The camera shown in 
Figure 2-3 has been ﬁtted with a C-mount adapter.
With the lens unscrewed form the camera body, 
you can see the charge-coupled device (CCD) 
mounted to the circuit board (Figure 2-4). This IC 
has a top glass window to allow the lens to focus 
the image on the extremely tiny, high-resolution 
array, which forms the image to be displayed. 
When removing a line, be careful not to touch 
the top surface of the CCD sensor or it will 
become smudged and require a proper cleaning. 
systems in order to operate. Of course, the zoom 
lens can see the color of your eyes from 500 feet 
away, but the tiny spy cam can be hidden just about 
anywhere. There will always be a camera available 
to suit your needs as long as you have the budget to 
afford it.
Security cameras and micro spy cameras will 
have a connection point for DC (direct current) 
power and a video output, and some will have an 
audio output or several control lines for onboard 
features such as gain, color, text overlay, and lens 
control. The most basic cameras you will probably 
work with most often will have only power and 
video connectors, or simply include three wires 
coming out of the tiny enclosure. The tiny board 
cameras with three wires will usually follow a 
simply color scheme of black or green  ground, 
red  positive power, and white, yellow, or brown  composite video output. Of course, it is always 
a good idea to check the manual for polarity and 
voltage before making any guesses.
The camera in the left of Figure 2-2 is quite 
advanced, having a built-in on-screen display 
system, many internal function parameters, lens 
control, and audio. This camera is somewhat 
large, so it has many buttons on the back side, 
audio and video jacks, DC power jack, and a 
special connector to control a motorized lens. 
The basic low-lux micro camera on the right of 
Figure 2-2 only has a tiny connector with a 
 Figure 2-2   Camera connections for power, 
ground, and audio.
 Figure 2-3   Large cameras with removable 
lenses have C or CS mounts.

Project 2  Q  Spy Camera Basics      37
are currently the best choice. CMOS imagers are 
used in very high-resolution imaging systems, such 
as digital cameras and scanners, as proper lighting 
is usually not a problem in those situations. If you 
have the choice between a hundred-dollar CCD 
security camera with a 0.5 lux rating and a ﬁfty-
dollar CMOS camera with a 1.5 lux rating, the 
CCD camera will offer a far superior image and 
work well in a low-light or night vision application. 
Resolution is not much concern in a security 
camera, as most are already beyond the actual 
capabilities of the NTSC (National Television 
System Committee) or PAL (Phase Alternate Line) 
composite video standard anyhow. The lux rating 
will probably be the most important speciﬁcation 
on a security camera next to the type of lens and 
ﬁeld of view.
Lux is the measure of light or luminous power 
per area. It is used in photography as a measure of 
the intensity, as perceived by the human eye. The 
lower the lux rating on a camera, the better it will 
see in the dark. For instance, a monochrome camera 
with a lux rating of only 0.5 lux will see much 
better in the dark than you could with your naked 
eye, and with the help of an infrared illuminator 
will be able to see into the darkness and display it 
on a monitor as if it were midday. Color cameras 
require much more light to achieve a decent image, 
and since they usually include infrared ﬁlters, they 
are not the best choice for night vision applications.
The CCD determines the type of image (color 
or monochrome), as well as the resolution in 
horizontal and vertical pixels. Most color cameras 
will also include a special set of ﬁlters to remove 
infrared light, which is why monochrome cameras 
are much better for night vision operations. CCD 
imagers are available in extremely high resolutions, 
but for composite video application, the video 
bandwidth limits the usable resolution to about 720 
by 480 pixels.
When digging into the technical details of a 
security camera, one of the most important aspects 
will be the type of imaging device used, which will 
either be a CCD imager or complementary metal-
oxide semiconductor (CMOS) imager. Both types of 
imagers convert light into voltage and process it into 
electronic signals. In a CCD sensor, every pixel is 
transferred through a very limited number of output 
nodes (often just one) to be converted to voltage, 
buffered, and sent off-chip as an analog signal. All 
of the pixels can be devoted to light capture, and 
the image quality is high (Figure 2-5). In a CMOS 
sensor, each pixel has its own charge-to-voltage 
conversion, and the sensor often also includes 
ampliﬁers, noise-correction, and digitization 
circuits, so that the chip outputs digital bits. These 
other functions increase the design complexity and 
reduce the area available for light capture. 
These various qualities means that for low-
resolution and low-light imaging, CCD cameras 
 Figure 2-4   The CCD or CMOS imager shown 
with the lens removed.
 Figure 2-5   The CCD imaging chip taken from 
a high-quality camcorder.

38      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
are perfect for covert operations as they range in 
size from about an inch square to the size of a 
pencil eraser. These cameras will run for hours 
from a single 9-V battery and have many ﬁxed-lens 
options ranging from the small glass medium-wide-
angle type to the ultra-tiny pinhole type. The only 
downside to these smaller lens types is that they are 
not really adjustable—they are designed to have 
only a single ﬁeld of view and focal range.
With the small lens unscrewed from the 
mounting hardware, the CCD can be seen installed 
on the camera circuit board. This 1/3-inch color 
CCD is no different from the ones found in lower-
end color camcorders. The quality of the image far 
exceeds what is necessary for basic surveillance 
operations. Most micro camera lenses use the same 
thread type and are often interchangeable, although 
they are not easy to source by themselves.
The focus can be set on these micro video 
lenses by loosening the tiny set screw, as shown 
in Figure 2-8, in order to turn the lens clockwise 
or counterclockwise to gain the best focus for 
a certain installation. Most of these lenses will 
see perfectly from about 10 feet to inﬁnity, but 
for closer focus, it will probably be necessary to 
make initial adjustments. Although the optics on 
these tiny lenses range from good to poor, the 
image quality is always decent because of the low 
Although security cameras with removable 
C-type lens mounts are much more expensive 
and bulky than ﬁxed-lens micro cameras, the 
availability of different lens types is vast. If your 
security application requires control over ﬁeld 
of view, zoom, or iris, then you will likely be 
looking for a camera body with a C- or CS-type 
mount to mate to the lens. A long-range zoom 
lens like the large ones shown in Figure 2-6 
may cost upwards of a $1000, but the ability to 
pinpoint the tiniest detail at long distances may be 
the goal. Smaller focusable C-mount lenses range 
in price from $20 to $500 depending on the size 
and style of the optics, but they are always top 
quality, comparable to the optics in high-grade 
camcorders.
The large motorized zoom lenses shown in 
Figure 2-6 are expensive and much larger than the 
camera body, but they allow for ﬁne digital control 
over focus, zoom, and iris through a set of analog 
control lines. It would be next to impossible to hide 
this lens, but since it can see so far away, stealth 
installation is not really necessary. C-mount lenses 
are also available in special pinhole and snake 
conﬁgurations, but these are incredibly expensive 
and bulky compared to the lower-end micro camera 
lenses of this type.
Micro video cameras or board cameras like the 
ones shown in Figure 2-7 are very inexpensive, 
offer good quality, and normally only need a power 
and video connection to operate. These cameras 
 Figure 2-6   C-type lenses offer the highest 
quality and range of features.
 Figure 2-7   Fixed-lens micro cameras are very 
small and easy to conceal.

Project 2  Q  Spy Camera Basics      39
light- emitting diodes (LEDs). By itself, this 
inexpensive security camera is a high-performing 
night vision camera with a range of about 50 feet, 
and has a very good color image for daylight 
operations. As for parts, the camera module is the 
same one as shown in Figure 2-8, and the cost of all 
of the components separately would be a lot more. 
Sadly, we have seen many online spy stores sell the 
bare camera for three or four times the price of this 
entire unit, so shop around and be wary of any site 
claiming that they sell mainly to law enforcement 
agencies.
There are a few different types of connectors 
used on security cameras, but the most common 
type is the RCA jack shown in Figure 2-10. This 
connector is the same one used on the back of a 
television set to connect older video players and 
camcorders. On the back of a TV or monitor, this 
jack will often be labeled “Video Input,” “Line 
Input,” or “External Input,” and will use the same 
connector for audio and video. Most security 
cameras will output composite video in either 
NTSC or PAL format to be connected to any TV 
or monitor that can accept this input. Some of the 
smaller spy cameras may not have any connector, 
just bare wires, so it makes sense to adapt them to 
the RCA jack if you plan to use them with standard 
TVs or monitors.
On the back of the monitor, video recorder, 
or television, the RCA connectors will look like 
resolution of the composite video signal along 
with the high quality of the CCD imaging device 
used. We found that a $30 color board camera 
will exceed the quality of a $1500 camcorder that 
was made ﬁve years earlier. Technology is always 
improving and becoming less expensive, so high-
quality surveillance equipment is becoming more 
and more affordable for the “average” person.
With the price of security gear at an all-time low, 
you can often purchase a complete night vision 
camera like the one shown in Figure 2-9 for well 
under $50. Inside the weatherproof aluminum shell, 
you will ﬁnd a high-quality board camera, power 
supply, and another board with an array of infrared 
 Figure 2-8   Setting the initial focus on a 
simple micro-camera ﬁxed lens.
 Figure 2-9   An outdoor security camera with 
built-in night vision LEDs.
 Figure 2-10   This is the most common type of 
composite video connector.

40      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
back to the more commonly used RCA-style 
connectors. Although the BNC-type connector is 
better for high-frequency signal transmission, this 
means nothing on a composite video camera, which 
will send a low-bandwidth signal. BNC connectors 
are not found on TVs or video recorders, so it 
is pointless to mess around with this type of 
connection unless you already have a complete 
system, including cables.
The BNC-to-RCA adapter is shown hooked to the 
back of the high-quality machine vision camera in 
Figure 2-14. Oddly, the audio output was already 
using an RCA connector, so it seemed like a 
strange move to sell the camera with a BNC-style 
connector. The camera can now feed its video 
output into any video recording system or TV with 
an RCA-style composite input connector.
the ones shown in Figure 2-11, often having two 
inputs for stereo audio along with the video input. 
Although there is no real standard, the color coding 
for the inputs will usually be yellow for video and 
red or white for audio. 
On the larger, more expensive types of security 
cameras, the type of connector may be the BNC 
style as shown in Figure 2-12. Except for the way 
the connector locks together, there is no difference 
between the RCA connector and BNC connector 
for the transmission of the composite video signal. 
It is best to simply add an adapter to the BNC 
connector in order to convert it back to the much 
more commonly available RCA connector.
The inexpensive adapters shown in Figure 2-13 
can be used to adapt the BNC-style connectors 
 Figure 2-11   The back of a composite video 
monitor showing the RCA inputs.
 Figure 2-12   Some security cameras use a 
BNC-style video connector.
 Figure 2-13   Adapting the BNC connector to 
the RCA-style connector.
 Figure 2-14   The camera is now adapted for 
use on any composite monitor.

Project 2  Q  Spy Camera Basics      41
indoors at the location of the video recorder or 
monitor. For short connections of only a few feet, 
just about any coaxial wire will work just ﬁne.
Figure 2-16 shows the various stages of stripping 
down a coax cable to reveal the grounded outer 
shielding, as well as the protected inner signal wire. 
When connecting coaxial cable to an audio or 
video source, the inner wire carried the signal and 
the outer shield is connected to a common ground. 
When using coaxial cable to carry power, the 
positive supply is connected to the inner wire and 
the common ground becomes the outer shield. In 
almost all instances, the ground is common to all 
signals, including the power supply.
A lot of electronics prototyping will be done 
using a solderless breadboard, so it will make your 
job a lot easier if you create a set of breadboard-
pluggable cables for your camera. This way you can 
test various power supplies, audio preampliﬁers, 
and video systems without having to cut and strip 
the wires every time. We have several sets of 
breadboard cables for the various camera models 
in our collection, as well as some standard DC 
connectors and the RCA-style coaxial connectors. 
Figure 2-17 shows how to make a solderless 
breadboard-compatible cable by soldering the ends 
of the cables to a set of header pins. You could also 
just solder the ends of the wires to a set of solid 
copper wires that will push into the breadboard 
sockets.
On the smaller micro spy cams and board cameras, 
the connector will often be like the one shown 
in Figure 2-15, just a small plastic plug with as 
many connection points as needed. The majority 
of small cameras in our collection have a three-pin 
connector with pins for ground, power, and video 
output. The cameras that include audio also have 
an audio output pin. Since these connectors are 
often custom-made or hard to source, it is important 
to ensure that your camera includes the cable and 
connector when purchased. The other end of the 
cable will often break out into a set of female 
RCA connectors for audio and video, as well as a 
coaxial plug for the DC power source. Also make 
sure that you have the correct power supply voltage 
and polarity for your camera.
Because the audio and video signals are prone to 
interference over longer distances, shielded coaxial 
cable is necessary in order to make the connection 
between the camera and the monitor or recording 
device. If your camera has RCA connectors at both 
ends, then you can use any standard patch cable 
to make the connection to your TV or monitor, 
but often you will need longer cables or have to 
install your own connectors. The standard coaxial 
cable type used for security cameras is the RG-59 
type. This cable has a single insulated signal wire 
surrounded by a conductive shield. The “Siamese 
RG-59” version also includes a second shielded 
pair to allow camera power supplies to be located 
 Figure 2-15   The board camera– and micro 
camera–style connector.
 Figure 2-16   Coaxial cable is needed to carry 
the audio and video signals.

42      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
If you are planning to do a lot of work with 
video cameras, then a small liquid crystal 
display (LCD) monitor with a composite input 
is a must-have tool for your kit (Figure 2-19). 
You can often ﬁnd these small video monitors 
at any gaming supply outlet or even in the auto 
department of a hardware store. These small 
monitors are used as portable gaming screens 
or as video displays in recreation vehicles and 
passenger vehicles for rearview cameras. Many 
small televisions also include RCA jacks on the 
back to input composite video sources, and these 
are normally fully compatible with most security 
cameras, too.
Now that you have the basic understanding of 
how to get the video signal out of your security 
camera, you can begin to design your covert spy 
system, machine vision robot, or practically any 
project that requires a video source or video screen. 
We often work with machine vision, robotics, 
and video generation, so it is useful to have the 
ability to drop an NTSC camera right onto our 
solderless breadboard. For this task, we have made 
the necessary power connector for a 9-V battery, as 
well as the necessary three-pin camera connector 
and another RCA cable to feed back to the video 
monitor. With these breadboard-compatible cables, 
it takes only seconds to add a video signal to a 
machine vision project or connect a monitor to our 
video generator (Figure 2-18).
 Figure 2-17   Making a set of breadboard-
compatible connector cables.
 Figure 2-18   A complete set of breadboard-
compatible cables for a micro 
camera.
 Figure 2-19   A micro video camera image 
displayed on a small LCD monitor.

43
P R O J E C T  3
Invisible Light Basics
43
NIGHT VISION IS one of the most important factors 
when considering any kind of video-operated 
spy gadget as this technology allows the viewer 
to see in complete darkness while the subject 
is completely unaware. Because infrared light 
(radiation) falls just below red on the visible light 
spectrum, making up the wavelengths from about 
750 to 1500 nanometers (nm), this light cannot 
be seen by human eyes but it can easily be seen 
by many video cameras, making it useful as a 
covert lighting method in night vision systems. A 
common example of infrared light is the medium 
for communication between your remote control 
and television set. The LED on the end of your 
remote sends out pulses of infrared light, which 
is received by the infrared detector on the TV and 
demodulated back into data. Of course, you cannot 
see the pulses because they are out of our visual 
range, but the infrared receiver in the television can 
see the pulses perfectly.
Security cameras and mini spy cams can also 
see infrared radiation very well. They are easy to 
connect, inexpensive, and can be easily hidden. 
There are many good-quality security cameras 
available on the market that includes a low-lux 
video camera in a weatherproof housing along 
with an array of infrared LEDs for night vision 
applications. Black-and-white security cameras 
and small board cameras are particularly sensitive 
to infrared light. These ultra low lux cameras 
can usually be purchased for about $100 or less, 
especially from online sellers. Add 10 or more 
infrared LEDs, and you now have a night vision 
system that is better than those that were sold for 
thousands of dollars in the 1980s.
The light spectrum shown in the lower half of 
Figure 3-1 covers light from ultraviolet right to 
infrared and shows the small portion of the light 
spectrum that can be seen by human eyes. Light 
is visible to our eyes from approximately 400 nm 
(violet) to approximately 700 nm (red); 550 nm 
(green) is at the midpoint. What is interesting is that 
the imaging system in a video camera can see the 
light extending past both ends of the visible light 
scale, which includes both infrared and ultraviolet. 
Since the infrared portion of the light spectrum 
is not visible to our eyes, the correct term for this 
portion of the spectrum is infrared radiation, not 
infrared light, but often both terms are used.
The infrared portion of the light spectrum 
that can be seen by most video cameras covers 
the range of 700 nm well into 1500 nm, with 
exceptional sensitivity around 800 nm. Video 
cameras can also see ultraviolet radiation, but 
  Figure 3-0   Infrared radiation can illuminate a 
scene for night vision operations.

44      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
remote control applications. The perfect example 
of such an application is your television remote 
control. A television remote control will use 
one or more LEDs to send 40-Kilohertz (KHz) 
modulated bursts of light to the infrared receiver 
module in the TV in order to control the device. 
There are many other uses for infrared LEDs, but 
because of the vast market for consumer remote 
controls, the availability of these LEDs makes 
them the perfect choice for night vision illuminator 
projects. Extremely high-power infrared LEDs are 
also available, but the cost of these devices makes 
them less attractive than simply using an array of 
inexpensive infrared LEDs.
The peak wavelength of an infrared LED will 
determine the wavelength of the radiation. This 
data is important when matching the LEDs to any 
device that expects a narrow bandwidth. Television 
remote controls, for instance, use 940-nm infrared 
LEDs, so the receiver module is matched to that 
region of the light spectrum, often including a dark 
plastic ﬁlter lens that removes all but the required 
light radiation. Because our eyes cannot see into 
the infrared spectrum, some LEDs that include a 
plastic ﬁlter appear completely black, like the one 
shown in the right of Figure 3-2. To the imaging 
system, this dark plastic will appear completely 
infrared radiation is easier to generate and at 
higher output levels will not cause any biological 
dangers as ultraviolet will. Not all video cameras 
will be able to see infrared light, though, especially 
those designed for high-quality color imaging. 
Camcorders and digital still cameras contain a 
glass ﬁlter that essentially blocks out all infrared 
light, leaving only the visible portion of the light 
spectrum so that the image quality is maintained. 
For this reason, camcorders will not be able to 
see the infrared light from an illumination system 
unless you are willing to open up the case and 
remove the tiny glass ﬁlter that has been afﬁxed to 
the CCD imager.
The LEDs shown in Figure 3-2 are all infrared 
types that are commonly used to send pulses in 
  Figure 3-1   The light spectrum, showing the small segment we call visible light.
  Figure 3-2   Infrared LEDs are commonly used 
in remote control applications.

Project 3  Q  Invisible Light Basics      45
transparent as the infrared radiation is picked up as 
normal white light.
The infrared LEDs shown in Figure 3-3 can be 
purchased from many electronics suppliers for just 
pennies each, especially when ordering them in bulk 
quantities. A night vision illuminator made with 32 
infrared LEDs will be quite powerful, and may only 
cost $20 to build if you order your LEDs from an 
online electronics distributor. When you compare the 
cost of a 1-watt (W) high-power infrared emitter to 
the cost of 50 common infrared LEDs, the common 
LEDs will be less expensive and not require any 
special power supply, so they are currently the best 
choice. For extremely size-sensitive applications, 
the high-power emitters are better, but expect to pay 
a premium for both the LED base and the special 
driver circuit needed to power it properly. 
The 5-mm-diameter plastic lead package 
shown in Figures 3-2, 3-3, and 3-4 are the most 
commonly used infrared LED, but there are also 
smaller packages available, including surface 
mount devices (SMDs). Since the goal is to output 
infrared radiation in a controlled manner, the 
5-mm body is ideal as it allows the manufacturer 
to include a beam-shaping lens at the top of the 
body. SMD LEDs are usually nonfocused and for 
this reason not often used in infrared applications. 
Being able to control the focal range of the emitted 
radiation allows infrared LEDs to be tailored to 
the application. Remote control applications use 
a medium-angle focus to allow the remote control 
to operate from various angles, yet output a fairly 
focused and intense beam to the receiver. Infrared 
LEDs designed for use in night vision systems 
may have a wider focal range in order to illuminate 
more of the area being seen by the camera. The 
focal range of the LED will be shown in the 
manufacturer’s datasheet along with all of the other 
important speciﬁcations.
To make an LED emit light, it must be connected 
using the correct polarity. Unlike a ﬂashlight bulb, 
which will function from both AC and DC current, 
LED requires the correct DC current in order to 
function. A new LED that has not had its leads 
trimmed will have one lead longer than the other, 
and this lead may be the positive lead. If you are 
salvaging your parts from an old circuit board, then 
lead identiﬁcation will be impossible, but the good 
news is that there are two other ways to identify the 
polarity of the LED. If you look at the underside 
of the LED, one side of the round base will have a 
ﬂat side near one of the leads to indicate that it is 
the negative lead. Also, the negative lead will be 
connected to the larger cup-shaped carrier inside 
the lead as shown in Figure 3-4, although you may 
not be able to see through all of the various plastic 
colors.
You can make a very simple LED tester that will 
check the polarity and functioning of all visible 
color LEDs by simply keeping a 3-volt (V) coin 
battery (such as a CR2450) on hand to drop across 
the leads (Figure 3-5). If you connect an LED 
  Figure 3-3   These 5-mm axial lead infrared 
LEDs are inexpensive and easy to 
work with.
  Figure 3-4   An LED must be connected using 
the proper polarity.

46      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
discussed later. Since most LEDs will show some 
output between 1.5 and 3 V, this simple LED tester 
becomes very handy, especially when dealing with 
salvaged LEDs that you have no datasheet for.
When hunting for new LEDs from any 
manufacturer, you will need to refer to the datasheet 
in order to choose the appropriate LED for the 
job. The most important speciﬁcations will be 
peak wavelength in nanometers, ﬁeld of view in 
degrees, output power in millicandela (mcd), and 
forward voltage and current. There are many other 
speciﬁcations that you may also need to know such 
as peak pulsed current limitations, package size, 
and lead type. Also note that the brightness of an 
infrared LED is usually not rated in millicandela, 
as that is a rating for visible light. Infrared LED 
brightness is speciﬁed as optical power output in 
milliwatts per steradian (mW/sr). The datasheet 
segment shown in Figure 3-6 indicates that this 
LED is a common remote control type LED, 
operating at 940 nm and requiring a forward voltage 
of 1.2 V.
backwards, it will not give off any light. If you 
connect it properly, it will visibly light up as long 
as the wavelength falls in our human range. The 
3-V lithium coin battery has such low internal 
resistance, that it cannot damage an LED, even 
one rated for less than 3 V, so it makes the perfect 
tester for all visible LEDs. To test an infrared 
LED, you will need to view the output from a 
security camera on a video monitor, as will be 
  Figure 3-5   A 3-V coin battery becomes a 
universal LED tester.
5.0
(.197)
8.6
(.34)
1.0
(.04)
22.0 MIN.
(.866)
0.5 TYP.
(.02)
A
K
1.0 MON.
(.04)
DATE
11.24.93
2.22.94
1.7.98
12.31.02
01.18.07
REV.
E.C.N.  NUMBER AND REVISION COMMENTS
REDRAWN.
PARAMETER
PARAMETER
MIN
TYP
MAX
MAX
PEAK FORWARD CURRENT
STEADY CURRENT
POWER DISSIPATION
DERATE FROM 25°C
OPERATING TEMP.
STORAGE TEMP.
SOLDERING TEMP.
2.0 mm FROM BODY
1
A
mA
mW
mW/°C
°C
°C
°C
3 SEC. MAX
100
150
– 1.2
–  25 TO +85
–  25 TO +100
+260
UNITS
UNITS
TEST COND
A
B
C
D
E
CHG’D INTENSITY AND HALF ANGLE.
E.C.N. # 10 BRDR.
E.C.N. # 10 BRDR. & REDRAWN IN 3D. 
E.C.N. # 11393.
ELECTRO–OPTICAL CHARACTERISTICS TA = 25°C
LIMITS OF SAFE OPERATION AT 25°C
PART NUMBER
OED—EL —1L2
5.85
(.23)
DOT DENOTES CATHODE
3 DIA.
(.118)
2.54 NOM.
(.1) (SEE NOTE 4)
SEE NOTE 3
REV.
E
PEAK WAVELENGTH
SPECTRAL BANDWIDTH
45
60
30
FORWARD VOLTAGE
REVERSE VOLTAGE
RADIANT INTENSITY
HALF ANGLE
EPOXY LENS FINISH:
5.0
1.6
nm
nm
mW/SR
degress
Vf
Ir = 10 μA
If = 100 mA
Vr
940
1.2
WATER CLEAR
If =  20 mA
tp < 10 μs, tp/T = 1% DUTY CYCLE
  Figure 3-6   The datasheet is the ultimate source of information for an LED.

Project 3  Q  Invisible Light Basics      47
well as long-range night vision illuminators once 
their beam has been spread by some type of lens.
If you are looking to purchase a pointer-style 
laser for night vision experimentation, then choose 
one that allows the collimating lens to be adjusted 
or fully removed. The goal will be to spread the 
beam out to an area of several feet in diameter at a 
distance of several hundred feet.
Laser pointers and laser modules are basically 
the same thing—a cylindrical enclosure containing 
a laser diode, front-end optics, and some kind 
of current limiting circuit. In the case of laser 
pointers, the enclosure also makes room for a 
battery pack, which means that the laser driver 
circuitry can be made simpler, or often just run the 
diode directly off of the battery. Laser modules are 
designed with much more robust driver electronics 
and also include power regulation, so they can be 
run from a range of voltages. Laser modules also 
include much higher quality optics, and are often 
fully adjustable so that the beam can be focused or 
spread for a given distance.
This ability to defocus the beam will be the key 
to making a working laser illumination system, 
so the laser module may be the best choice for 
this project if your budget permits. The small 
laser modules shown in Figure 3-8 have various 
wavelengths, and output low-power (5 mW) laser 
radiation in the red, green, and infrared bands. 
LEDs are not the only source of infrared 
radiation. Just like LEDs, laser diodes are 
available in many different wavelengths, visible 
and nonvisible. Laser pointers that are considered 
“high power” can be defocused in order to spread 
out the beam, making them suitable for certain 
night vision illumination systems, especially when 
long-range operation is important. You can easily 
purchase a laser pointer for under $100 from many 
online distributors with enough power to pop a 
balloon at 20 feet and burn electrical tape, but 
make no mistake—these lasers are not toys. Your 
ﬁrst mistake will also be your last as a single shot 
into your eyes will likely permanently damage 
your vision. If you intend to work with high-power 
lasers, purchase a set of laser safety goggles and 
wear them in your lab when experimenting with 
these lasers.
The two laser pointers shown in Figure 3-7 
are both extremely high-power Class IIIb lasers, 
capable of outputting 50 mW and 250 mW of 
infrared laser radiation. Calling these lasers 
“pointers” is really a bad term to use as they are 
completely invisible and not safe for pointing at 
objects. The laser shown in the top of Figure 3-1 
will typically burn a black object from up to 
20 feet away, and has a rated output power of over 
250 mW. The laser shown at the bottom of 
Figure 3-7 will output about 50-mW of power 
and has been converted for infrared operation by 
changing the original visible red laser diode with one 
from a DVD burner. Both of these lasers work very 
  Figure 3-7   Laser pointers are also available 
with infrared output.
  Figure 3-8   Laser modules are small and 
often include quality adjustable 
optics.

48      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
When there are only two connecting leads, that 
means the steel can is tied to ground and the leads 
will be the positive side of the laser diode and the 
optical sensor. With three leads, the wiring is often 
the same as with two leads, but will include a lead 
tied directly to the can. Laser diodes with four 
leads have separate ground connections for both the 
laser diode and the optical sensor. We have not yet 
seen a laser diode with ﬁve leads. The three-lead 
package is by far the most commonly used.
A ﬁlter that blocks out all light except for the 
small portion of the spectrum that falls between 
800 and 1000 nm is called an infrared pass ﬁlter. 
This effect is exactly the same effect seen by 
placing a colored lens over your eyes to see the 
world in a different color tone. If you place a green 
piece of translucent plastic over your eyes, the 
world will look green because only the light from 
the 490- to 560-nm wavelengths will reach your 
eyes. An infrared ﬁlter will do the exact thing, 
but since you cannot see infrared light, the ﬁlter 
material will seem completely dark to your eyes. 
When you place an object made of translucent 
infrared material in front of a video camera, it will 
look completely clear, as if the camera has some 
special ability to see through a solid object.
This infrared pass ﬁlter effect can be exploited 
to create a very powerful infrared illuminator by 
We also have several high-power infrared laser 
modules that we use in night vision systems, 
and they range in power from 50 mW to almost 
1 W in power! A 1-W laser diode is more like a 
weapon than an illuminator, and special care must 
be taken in order to avoid serious eye damage or 
spontaneous ﬁres in the lab!
If you are looking for a less expensive source 
for high-power lasers, then you may consider using 
a bare laser diode along with a home brew driver 
circuit or a simple battery power pack. Laser diodes 
are usually less expensive than laser modules, and 
available at much higher power levels than most 
laser pointers. The downside to using bare laser 
diodes is that some type of current limiting circuit 
needs to be made, and there are no included optics. 
The good news is that for illumination use, optics 
can be found from many salvaged sources and 
often laser diodes can be powered directly from a 
3-V battery without any driver circuitry at all.
You can purchase a used or brand new DVD/CD 
burner combo pretty cheap these days. Inside you 
will ﬁnd a pair of very powerful laser diodes. The 
DVD burner will include a high-power 150-mW or 
better visible red laser diode working in the 650-nm 
bandwidth, and the CD burner will include a 60-mW 
or better infrared laser diode running in the 780-nm 
(infrared) bandwidth. For night vision illumination, 
the infrared laser diode will be the one you want, 
so look for a DVD/CD writer combo, or just a 
CD writer.
The bare laser diode is shown in Figure 3-9. 
Most of them will look exactly the same, regardless 
of wavelength and output power. The small opening 
at the top will usually include a protective glass 
cover, but this is not a focusing lens, just a way to 
protect the actual diode from the elements. There 
will be as few as two connecting leads and as many 
as four, depending on the internal wiring of the 
laser diode, but all of them will function the same 
way. The small can will contain both a laser diode, 
as well as an optical sensor that can be used to 
monitor the output in a closed loop driver circuit. 
  Figure 3-9   This is the bare 60-mW infrared 
laser diode from a CD burner.

Project 3  Q  Invisible Light Basics      49
a tiny fraction of the infrared or ultraviolet light 
spectrum.
The small spy camera shown in Figure 3-11 is 
a model KPC-EX20H from the company KT&C 
in Japan. It’s a very low-lux and high-resolution 
camera that has worked extremely well in our night 
vision experiments. This camera is also distributed 
by SuperCircuits.com under the model name of 
PC182XS, selling for around $100. Decent low-lux 
monochrome cameras can often be purchased for 
much less, but this one has a very low-lux rating 
and higher resolution CCD imager.
Depending on your night vision application, 
your video monitor may be as small as a camera 
viewﬁnder or as large as a television set. Since the 
idea is to operate in complete darkness in a way 
that does not compromise your stealth, a head-
worn screen or camera viewﬁnder will work well, 
but for these simple tests we are using the small 
liquid crystal display (LCD) video screen shown in 
Figure 3-12 so that we can photograph the results. 
Typically, security cameras and small spy cams 
output a composite video signal, which will usually 
be labeled as “line input” or “video input” on the 
back of most TV sets and video monitors.
If you have not yet built any of the infrared 
illuminator projects presented here, then you can 
use a television remote control to test your camera’s 
passing white light through the ﬁlter to extract 
and send out only the infrared light that the video 
camera can see. White light encompasses a broad 
spectral range, including the infrared portion of 
the light spectrum. The beneﬁt to this approach 
over using infrared LEDs is that a very small and 
powerful illuminator can be made, as well as a very 
large and extremely bright illuminator. The objects 
shown in Figure 3-10 all exhibit some infrared 
passing abilities, which will be explored using a 
small black and white security camera and some 
white light from an incandescent ﬂashlight bulb as 
shown later.
To view the infrared radiation, which is 
completely invisible to the human eyes, a security 
camera must be used so that the image can be seen 
on a video monitor. To the video camera, infrared 
radiation appears as white light. This effect forms 
the basis of most night vision systems. These 
inexpensive camera modules run from 9 to 12 V, 
and output a standard composite color or black and 
white video signal. There are many suppliers on 
the Internet. You can expect to pay between $10 
and $100, depending on the quality of the camera. 
Standard camcorders will not work for viewing 
infrared light, though, as they contain infrared 
blocking ﬁlters in their optics in order to achieve a 
higher quality visible light reception. You can try 
a camcorder, but chances are that it will see only 
  Figure 3-10   Infrared passing ﬁlters can 
be made from many different 
materials.
  Figure 3-11   This small black and white spy 
cam will be used to view the 
infrared light.

50      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
Figure 3-14 shows one of the infrared 
illuminations projects using a series-connected 
array of infrared LEDs to form a ring light that will 
slide over the lens on a small spy camera. By using 
10 LEDs rated at 1.2 V each, the series-connected 
chain is able to be powered directly from a 12-V 
battery pack, which is also used to power the 
camera. This illuminator has a decent range of about 
20 feet indoors, and will run for many hours from a 
single 12-V battery pack made up of 8-AA batteries.
To make a simple LED infrared illuminator 
output more radiation, the LEDs can actually be 
run beyond their continuous current rating by using 
pulses that have a short duty cycle (on time). This 
operation is called “pulse mode,” and is often rated 
in the datasheet along with the other speciﬁcations. 
Continuous current for a common infrared LED may 
be rated at 100 mW, but the pulsed current may be 
10 times this value, often reaching a watt or more! 
The simple illuminator shown in Figure 3-14 
is rewired to run in pulsed current mode, and is 
shown in Figure 3-15, running from the small 
circuit board that includes a short pulse oscillator 
feeding a power transistor. Running LEDs in 
pulsed mode requires understanding of the LED’s 
datasheet and some type of oscillator that will send 
short duty cycles pulses to the transistor driving the 
LEDs. Substantial gains can be made in the output 
power using pulsed mode operation, but at a trade-
off of simplicity and power consumption.
response to the infrared radiation (Figure 3-13). You 
won’t get enough infrared power from a TV remote 
to light up a room at night, but you can certainly see 
the bursts on the screen as the pulses are sent to the 
one or more infrared LEDs at the end of the remote 
control. Try the tests with the room completely 
dark and you should be able to light up your face 
using the remote held at a distance of about 2 feet 
in front. You will notice that the infrared radiation is 
sent in bursts from the TV remote, as this is how it 
communicates with the receiving module in the set.
  Figure 3-12   The camera is connected to a 
portable composite video LCD
monitor.
  Figure 3-13   Testing the camera response 
using a television remote 
control.
  Figure 3-14   A simple infrared illuminator in a 
ring conﬁguration.

Project 3  Q  Invisible Light Basics      51
There are times when you may need an extremely 
intense infrared light source, and the use of an 
incandescent-based system may be prohibitive due 
to the massive heat generated. The huge infrared 
array shown in Figure 3-17 is made by soldering 
over 1500 LEDs onto a printed circuit board that 
has been wired to give the LEDs their correct 
forward voltage in a series parallel conﬁguration. 
This massive panel was used for several large 
indoor security jobs where an intense amount of 
infrared radiation was needed along with stealth 
operation. To conceal such a massive array, it was 
placed inside a gutted 20-inch LCD monitor, which 
had a one-way mirror installed to make it look 
like a regular monitor. It was no easy task hand 
soldering all of these LEDs, but when your spy 
mission must succeed, you do whatever it takes to 
acquire the information!
To create a portable night vision viewer that has 
the imaging system and illuminator combined in 
one small package, you will need some kind of tiny 
video output device such as a camcorder viewﬁnder. 
The night vision viewer shown in Figure 3-18 
combines a hacked camcorder viewﬁnder along 
with a small infrared LED array and a low-lux video 
camera to create a handheld night vision device. 
This project is fairly simple to build if you can 
ﬁnd an older camcorder to salvage the CRT based 
viewﬁnder, which is basically a tiny composite 
video monitor. This night vision device has an 
illumination range of about 50 feet, and works as 
To illuminate a larger area for an outdoor 
security camera, more LEDs will be needed in 
order to expand the ﬁeld of view. The illuminator 
shown in Figure 3-16 uses 266 LEDs wired in a 
series and parallel conﬁguration in order to create 
a large bright array of LEDs. This illuminator 
is designed to ﬁt into the shell of an outdoor 
weatherproof security light and will give an 
outdoor security camera the ability to see an entire 
yard in complete darkness. The power supply is a 
12-V DC power pack that has been installed in the 
light case so that the unit can be plugged directly 
into any AC outlet.
  Figure 3-15   Pulsing LEDs with higher current 
will increase the infrared output.
  Figure 3-16   Using a large array of infrared 
LEDs to create a high-power 
illuminator.
  Figure 3-17   This massive infrared LED array 
illuminator contains over 1500 
LEDs.

52      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
low-lux spy camera to bypass the camcorder’s 
internal video system, giving the camcorder the 
ability to record infrared illuminated scenes as 
well as displaying them live on the viewﬁnder. 
This project also includes a small infrared LED 
illuminator to create an all-in-one portable night 
vision recorder and viewing system.
Since many materials can be used to pass only 
infrared light while blocking out most of the 
visible light, a simple illuminator can be made to 
convert a standard ﬂashlight into a medium power 
night vision illuminator. The ﬂashlights shown in 
Figure 3-20 both have ﬁlters placed over the lenses 
that only pass infrared light and block out all of 
the visible light from the incandescent light bulb. 
Materials such as ﬂoppy disk surfaces, 35-mm 
ﬁlm, and even tinted glass bottles can be made into 
infrared pass ﬁlters. By using a powerful white 
light source, a fairly intense source of infrared 
radiation can be made that will form the basis for 
many night vision security projects.
Lasers that output infrared radiation can 
also be used as an illumination source. Lasers 
are exceptionally effective at sending light 
over long distances, and infrared lasers operate 
well as many of the military-grade night visions 
systems that were available only 10 years ago.
Since a color camcorder cannot see infrared light 
due to the inclusion of an infrared blocking ﬁlter 
over the CCD sensor, it cannot be used as the basis 
for an infrared viewer. Of course, there are always 
ways around every problem, and the converted 
camcorder shown in Figure 3-19 uses a small 
  Figure 3-18   A portable night vision viewer 
made from an old camera 
viewﬁnder.
  Figure 3-19   A camcorder converted for 
night vision operation using an 
external camera.
  Figure 3-20   This infrared illuminator 
converts white light into 
infrared light.

Project 3  Q  Invisible Light Basics      53
exactly the same way as visible light lasers. 
The rig shown in Figure 3-21 uses a powerful 
250-mW infrared laser with a beam spreader to 
cast an intense infrared beam several hundred 
feet away so that a camera focused through an 
optical magnification system can view the scene 
in complete darkness. This ultra covert night 
vision system is able to view a distant scene as 
though it was lit by a high-power flood light, yet 
the only limitation is the optical magnification 
power of the camera lens.
The solutions to your night vision applications 
are almost inﬁnite in number, so with a little 
creativity and a good supply of junk, you can hack 
together your own stealthy spy gear.
  Figure 3-21   A long-range night vision 
system using a laser and optical 
magniﬁcation.

This page intentionally left blank 

Peering into the Night
P A R T  T W O

This page intentionally left blank 

57
P R O J E C T  4
Infrared Light Converter
ALTHOUGH INFRARED LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES
(LEDs) are the most common source of invisible 
light for a night vision device, they are certainly not 
the only option available, nor are they always the 
best. Depending on your camera type and setup, you 
may need a hand-held source of infrared light that 
can be rapidly moved around the scene, or possibly 
an infrared light source that differs in wavelength 
from the standard 800 to 950 nanometer (nm) 
wavelength of the standard infrared LEDs.
Infrared light falls just below red on the light 
spectrum, making up the wavelengths from about 
750  to about 1500 nm. This light cannot be seen 
by human eyes, but it can easily be seen by most 
video cameras, making it useful as a covert lighting 
method in night vision systems. Some video 
cameras can even see part of the ultraviolet light 
spectrum from 200 to 400 nm. That will be covered 
here as well. The goal will be to pass white light 
through various materials that will attempt to block 
out all of the visible light and only pass the light 
that is invisible to the human eyes, yet visible to 
most security cameras and spy cameras.
A ﬁlter that blocks out all light except for the 
small portion of the spectrum that falls between 
800 and 1000 nm is called an infrared pass ﬁlter. 
This effect is exactly the same effect seen by 
placing a colored lens over your eyes to see the 
world in a different color tone. If you place a green 
piece of translucent plastic over your eyes, the 
world will look green because only the light from 
the 490 to 560 nm wavelength will reach your eyes. 
An infrared ﬁlter will do exactly the same thing, 
but since you cannot see infrared light, the ﬁlter 
material will seem completely dark to your eyes. 
When you place an object made of translucent 
infrared material in front of a video camera, it will 
look completely clear, as if the camera had some 
special ability to see through a solid object.
This infrared pass ﬁlter effect can be exploited 
to create a very powerful infrared illuminator by 
passing white light through the ﬁlter to extract 
and send out only the infrared light that the video 
camera can see. The beneﬁt of this approach over 
57
  Figure 4-0   This project will explore several 
ways to convert visible light into 
infrared light.
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 Filters: Undeveloped 35-mm ﬁlm, ﬂoppy 
disc surface, UV light bulb, infrared photo 
ﬁlter
Q 
 Light source: Incandescent ﬂashlight bulb, 
black light
Q 
 Camera: Security camera and monitor to 
view infrared

58      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
camcorders will not work for viewing infrared light, 
though, as they contain infrared blocking ﬁlters 
in their optics in order to achieve a higher quality 
visible-light reception. You can try a camcorder, but 
chances are that it will see only a tiny fraction of 
the infrared or ultraviolet light spectrum.
The camera we used is a model KPC-EX20H 
from the company KT&C in Japan. It’s a very low-
lux and high-resolution camera that has worked 
extremely well in our night vision experiments. 
This camera is also distributed by SuperCircuits.com 
under the model name of PC182XS, selling for 
around $100. Decent low-lux monochrome cameras 
can often be purchased for much less, but this one 
has a very low-lux rating and high-resolution CCD
imager. The liquid crystal display (LCD) monitor 
is one of those portable gaming screens, and can be 
connected to any composite video input.
Some of the more obvious materials that can be 
used to pass only infrared light (radiation) can be 
found in remote control devices that use infrared 
LEDs for communication. Older TV remotes 
often place the LEDs behind a small infrared ﬁlter 
window; the same is true for the receiver in the 
actual appliance. This plastic will look perfectly 
black to human eyes, but as you can see in 
Figure 4-3, the video camera sees right through it 
as if made of clear plastic!
The long plastic bezel that is shown perfectly 
clear to the camera in Figure 4-3 is the face plate 
taken from an older infrared wireless headphone 
the use of infrared LEDs is that a very small and 
powerful as well as a very large and extremely 
bright illuminator can be made. The objects shown 
in Figure 4-1 all exhibit some infrared passing 
abilities, which will be explored using a small 
black-and-white security camera and some white 
light from an incandescent ﬂashlight bulb.
To view the invisible (to humans) infrared 
radiation, an ultra low-light (lux) security camera 
will be used so that the infrared light can be viewed 
on a monitor as though the camera was looking at 
white light (Figure 4-2). These inexpensive camera 
modules run from 9 to 12 volts (V), and output a 
standard composite color or black-and-white video 
signal. There are many suppliers on the Internet. 
You can expect to pay between $10 and $100, 
depending on the quality of the camera. Standard 
  Figure 4-1   Infrared pass ﬁlters can be made 
from many different materials.
  Figure 4-2   The test rig will consist of a low-
lux video camera and small LCD
monitor.
  Figure 4-3   The camera can see right through 
any translucent infrared materials.

Project 4  Q  Infrared Light Converter      59
a black light bulb, follow the warnings on the 
package, and remember that just because you can’t 
see much light coming from the bulb, it doesn’t 
mean that there isn’t light. In reality, the most 
dangerous effect of the black light might be the 
intense heat that is generated by the bulb due to 
having most of the visible light blocked by the 
glass. These things get extremely hot in seconds, 
unlike “standard” white light bulbs.
The black light (shown in the monitor in 
Figure 4-4) becomes so transparent that you can 
even see the tungsten ﬁlament and connecting 
wires inside the bulb. To our eyes and the digital 
camera used to take this photo, the black light 
bulb looks completely dark. It is strange to see 
the camera see right through it without any effort 
at all. This means that the black light bulb will 
be an amazing source of illumination for the 
video camera, which is obviously sensitive to the 
ultraviolet light. The downside is that the bulb 
also passes some light in the visible violet end 
of the spectrum, so the area being illuminated 
will have a dull purple glow that can be seen by 
human eyes. Of course, there are ways to block 
the violet light, as well other techniques shown in 
the next few steps.
Once you have a low-lux black-and-white security 
camera connected, you can test all kinds of dark-
looking materials for their ability to perform as 
infrared pass ﬁlters. Some of the materials that pass 
infrared light are shown in Figure 4-5—exposed 
set. To our eyes, the part looks perfectly black. 
We can only see a tiny amount of light through it 
if we hold it up to our room lighting. But to the 
camera, it looks like clear plastic, able to pass all 
of the infrared light to the charge-coupled device 
(CCD) imager, which is then displayed on the LCD
monitor as white light. To a color security camera, 
the infrared light would look slightly reddish, yet 
still appear to be lit from a visible light source. 
Interestingly, the Nikon camera we used to take 
this photo could see through the plastic just enough 
to make it look semitranslucent. To our own eyes, 
though, the plastic is almost completely black.
The bulb shown in Figure 4-4 is called a 
“black light” bulb and will emit mostly ultraviolet 
radiation in the 340 to 400 nm range. These bulbs 
are often used for special-effect lighting, where 
a certain phosphorescent color is made to look 
as though it is glowing in the dark. These bulbs 
are also used for medical purposes, as well as to 
identify the anticounterfeiting security strip on 
money. In this project, the ultraviolet light will be 
used as an illumination source, giving the security 
camera the ability to see the entire room with light 
that human eyes cannot perceive.
As you probably already know, ultraviolet 
radiation in high doses is not healthy for the skin 
or eyes, and although a black light is designed for 
“human safe” operation, it is certainly not a good 
idea to expose your eyes to the light for extended 
periods of time. If you are going to purchase 
  Figure 4-4   An ultraviolet light bulb also looks 
like clear glass to the video camera.
  Figure 4-5   Developed ﬁlm and ﬂoppy 
disk material can be made into 
infrared pass ﬁlters.

60      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
light, so it wouldn’t be the optimal solution for a 
purely covert night vision illuminator. But if we 
placed four strips of the ﬁlm together to form a 
thicker ﬁlter, then most of the visible red light was 
absorbed at the expense of about half of the infrared 
brightness. This makes the camera ﬁlm a good 
candidate for use as an infrared pass ﬁlter, as long 
as several layers are used along with a fairly bright 
white light source. When dealing with thin ﬁlm that 
could be easily melted, care must be taken not to 
use a light source that will radiate a lot of heat.
Since the camera ﬁlm seemed to be a good choice 
of material to make a cheap infrared pass ﬁlter, we 
wanted to see if we could ﬁnd a strong light source 
that would not melt the ﬁlm. Ultrabright white 
LEDs seemed like a logical choice, and they were 
magnitudes brighter than any of the infrared LEDs
we had on hand. Unfortunately, the light given off 
by a white LED is not the same full spectrum of 
radiation given off by a halogen ﬂashlight bulb, as 
we found out. In fact, a white LED is manufactured 
by placing a special ﬂorescent coating over an 
ultrabright blue LED, which makes the coating 
give off white light that has very little infrared 
component. As you can see in Figure 4-7, the 
ultrabright 3 LED closet light is only slightly visible 
to the camera after it passes through the infrared 
pass ﬁlter made by the camera ﬁlm. Results of using 
white LEDs as a possible light source  total fail.
camera ﬁlm and ﬂoppy disk material. Having a 
massive collection of retro junk on hand, we were 
able to ﬁnd some old 5.25-inch (in) ﬂoppy discs to 
hack up, but the smaller 3.5-in types will also give the 
same results. Oh, and don’t worry, we didn’t hack up 
the Commodore Dos 3.3 disks—those are classics!
Exposed ﬁlm is also a good material that will 
block most visible light and pass infrared radiation, 
but we found that the ﬁlm would also pass some 
deep red light as well. The ﬁlm used is just 
common 35-mm ﬁlm that has been exposed and 
then developed. In other words, you load a new 
roll of ﬁlm into your camera, point it at an evenly 
lit surface, and then snap away until you have as 
many frames as you need to cut up and make your 
ﬁlter. Even the ﬁlm from a disposable camera will 
work ﬁne, and remember to tell ﬁlm processors 
that you purposely made blank photos when you 
bring it in for developing, or they may toss out 
your negatives.
As for the light source, a standard halogen bulb 
hand-held ﬂashlight will be used, as these light 
sources also include a large infrared component. 
Because the ﬁlm and the ﬂoppy disk material 
cannot withstand a great deal of heat, the ﬂashlight 
is a better choice than a larger incandescent light 
source. A 60-watt (W) white light bulb might offer 
more illumination, but the thin ﬁlm would certainly 
melt within seconds of being exposed to such 
intense heat. Remember that for a ﬁlter to block 
light, it must also absorb the light, which means a 
great deal of heat must be contained as well.
To test the material for its ability to work as a 
night vision illuminator, it is placed in front of a 
small halogen bulb ﬂashlight and viewed on the 
monitor. As shown in Figure 4-6, the exposed 
camera ﬁlm passes a great deal of infrared light, 
creating a huge bloom on the camera as it shines 
onto the CCD sensor. The camera ﬁlm was so good 
at passing infrared light that it almost looked the 
same is if the ﬂashlight was shone directly at the 
camera. The downside to the camera ﬁlm is that 
it also passes some amount of deep red visible 
  Figure 4-6   The camera ﬁlm allows a lot of 
infrared light to pass through to 
the camera.

Project 4  Q  Infrared Light Converter      61
halogen lights such as those used in auto headlights 
will also offer the same wide spectrum of light, but 
with much increased heat radiation.
The next material tested was the inner ﬁlm 
surface taken from one of the old 5.25-in ﬂoppy 
disks shown in Figure 4-5. As can be seen in 
Figure 4-9, the disk material passes a good amount 
of the visible light from the ﬂashlight, but passes 
almost no visible light that can be seen by human 
eyes or the camera that took the photo. The ﬂoppy 
disk material was actually far superior as an 
infrared pass ﬁlter than the exposed camera ﬁlm, 
as it did not require multiple layers to block out 
visible light. Of course, it is not easy to dig up a 
pile of old ﬂoppy disks unless you are an intense 
junk collector, so the exposed camera ﬁlm may be 
the better choice. To make the camera ﬁlm work 
as well as the ﬂoppy disk material, four layers of 
ﬁlm had to be stacked to block the same amount of 
visible light.
The ﬁrst illuminator we made was using the 
ﬂoppy disk material and the high brightness 
pocket ﬂashlight shown in Figure 4-10. The beam 
from this ﬂashlight is highly focused, but very 
bright so the illuminator would have the same 
characteristics when viewed using the spy camera. 
Because we do a lot of infrared experimentation, it 
was nice to have a small and highly focused source 
of infrared light that could be added to our tool kit.
Incandescent ﬂashlights use incandescent 
lamps like the ones shown in Figure 4-8, which 
consist of a glass bulb and a tungsten ﬁlament. A 
tungsten ﬁlament gives off radiant energy in the 
visible light spectrum as well as the nonvisible 
infrared spectrum. The amount of infrared radiation 
given off by these bulbs is high enough that after 
blocking out all of the visible light, a decent 
amount of illumination can be generated for a night 
vision illuminator. The good news is that the small 
battery-operated bulbs do not give off enough heat 
to melt thin plastic ﬁlters. The bad news is that the 
illumination is not strong enough for outdoor use. 
If your goals are to illuminate a small room for 
covert surveillance, then the ﬂashlight bulb may 
be the perfect source for your illuminator. Larger 
  Figure 4-7   White LEDs were tested but failed 
to produce enough infrared light.
  Figure 4-8   The light given off by an 
incandescent ﬂashlight bulb is 
high in infrared.
  Figure 4-9  T he disk material passes a good 
amount of infrared and blocks 
most visible light.

62      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
Both infrared beam ﬂashlights shown in 
Figure 4-12 work very well in conjunction with 
any security camera or low-lux spy camera. The 
small light is good for close-up work that requires 
a sharp focused beam, and the larger ﬂashlight 
can illuminate an entire room for covert security 
operations. The only drawback to using this type 
of illumination source for stealthy operations is 
that there is a very slight noticeable glow visible at 
close range, so you couldn’t use these illuminators 
in a head-worn night vision illuminator and 
expect to remain completely invisible. For use as 
The 5.25-in ﬂoppy disc had enough area to 
allow a 2-in-diameter circle to be cut, which was 
much more than necessary for the small pocket 
ﬂashlight. Even the disc from a 2.5-in ﬂoppy disc 
would be plenty of material for a small ﬂashlight 
lens. The disc was traced for cutting as shown in 
Figure 4-10.
The small pocket light worked very well and 
was able to illuminate an area about as large as the 
original ﬂashlight would as viewed by the naked 
eye. The ﬂoppy disc material blocked enough of 
the visible light that you could barely see the dull 
red glow when looking at the beam from a few feet 
away. Knowing that the disc material worked so 
well as an infrared pass ﬁlter, we decided to make 
another portable illuminator, but this time using a 
much larger and brighter ﬂashlight.
The ﬂashlight shown in Figure 4-11 has a 
lens diameter of about 4 in, and a much stronger 
beam powered by a 6-V lantern battery. The 
heat produced by the small bulb is still low 
enough that the ﬁlm would not melt, even during 
extended use. Because of the increased diameter 
of the larger lens, we had to cut two half-circles 
from the ﬂoppy disc surface to cover the entire 
lens, but this wasn’t a problem as long as there 
was a slight overlap to block any visible light 
from escaping. The infrared pass ﬁlter was placed 
between the lens and the reﬂector and held in 
place by friction.
  Figure 4-10   Cutting a portion of the ﬂoppy 
disc to ﬁt over the ﬂashlight lens.
  Figure 4-11   Making a larger more powerful 
illuminator using a ﬂashlight.
  Figure 4-12   The two infrared beam ﬂashlights 
made using the disc material.

Project 4  Q  Infrared Light Converter      63
needed to cover the lens area on the ﬂashlight. To 
avoid any visible light leaks, the two half-circles 
are made to slightly overlap. Also notice that in 
Figure 4-14 the camera used to take this photo 
can see through the developed ﬁlm somewhat, 
as compared to not being able to see through the 
ﬂoppy disc material at all. This would indicate that 
the color of the ﬁlm has some overlap between the 
end of the infrared spectrum and the start of the 
visible red spectrum.
With four layers of camera ﬁlm covering the 
ﬂashlight lens shown in Figure 4-15, not much 
of the visible red light escapes, but the deep red 
glow is still more noticeable than when using 
the ﬂoppy disc material as an infrared pass 
ﬁlter. The illumination from this version of the 
handheld infrared illuminator is very bright, but 
the noticeable deep red glow detracts from any 
security camera night vision illuminators, the two 
ﬂashlights will work very well.
Figure 4-13 shows what the security camera 
sees when we turn off all of the room lights and 
point the larger infrared beam ﬂashlight up at the 
ceiling. The beam is so bright to the camera that 
the automatic iris ends up closing to block out the 
overabundance of light. To our eyes and the camera 
taking the photo, there is only a dull red glow 
coming from the center of the ﬂashlight lens, but 
it is not very bright at all. After a few minutes of 
operation, the lens and infrared pass ﬁlter material 
remain cold.
Since we had plenty of ﬁlm on the roll we had 
developed, we decided to make a third infrared 
ﬂashlight using four layers of the exposed camera 
ﬁlm as well. The ﬂoppy disc material worked a bit 
better when it came to blocking visible light, but 
the camera ﬁlm would probably offer a slightly 
brighter beam and shift into the nearer infrared 
spectrum of between 750 and 850 nm. Actually, the 
exact bandwidth of the infrared light depends on 
the type of ﬁlm and how it was developed, so your 
results will probably vary.
A typical D-Cell battery ﬂashlight was used for 
this version of the handheld illuminator, and eight 
slices of ﬁlm were cut up as shown in Figure 4-14 
in order to create the two semicircles that would be 
  Figure 4-13   The large infrared ﬂashlight 
illuminates the ceiling in our lab 
with ease.
  Figure 4-14   Creating a similar infrared beam 
ﬂashlight using the camera ﬁlm.
  Figure 4-15   The completed near-infrared beam 
ﬂashlight using the camera ﬁlm.

64      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
over the end of a steel can that contains a 60-W 
incandescent light source. This infrared illuminator 
throws out a lot of infrared radiation, but also gets 
extremely hot in a short time. For this reason, 
such a system is really only usable outdoors or 
for short controlled intervals. The efﬁciency of 
such a system is also dependant on the infrared 
capabilities of the original light source, with 
halogen being a good choice, followed by a full 
spectrum incandescent bulb. High-efﬁciency 
ﬂorescent lights are not suitable for infrared 
illumination as they do not output much infrared 
radiation.
The completed glass ﬁlter illuminator is shown 
in Figure 4-18, and can plug directly into a 
standard AC outlet. The illumination from this 
version is very strong and does block most of the 
possible stealth night vision use. For infrared 
photography, this illuminator would be ideal, and 
as many have discovered, placing the exposed ﬁlm 
over the lens on your digital camera gives the same 
type of infrared ﬁltering as an expensive infrared 
ﬁlter from a camera shop. By using both the 
infrared illuminator and the infrared pass ﬁlter on a 
digital camera, you can experiment with some very 
interesting infrared photography.
If you have the budget, then you can also 
purchase high-quality infrared pass ﬁlters that 
are designed to attach to various camera lenses. 
The two ﬁlters shown in Figure 4-16 have threads 
on the outside, are made from glass, and have 
very sharp infrared band pass abilities, making 
them ideal for infrared photography as well as 
illumination ﬁlters. The downside to using these 
types of ﬁlters for illuminations is that they are 
expensive, and may cost you between $100 and 
$300, depending on the size and type of material 
used. The beneﬁt to using a glass ﬁlter is that it 
can withstand a lot more heat, so you can send 
a much brighter beam into the ﬁlter to extract 
much more infrared radiation. Most camera 
shops will be able to order infrared ﬁlters in 
various sizes, and some industrial supply centers 
can even cut custom-sized infrared ﬁlters or 
source them in sheets.
The infrared illuminator shown in Figure 4-17 
was made by ﬁtting a glass infrared pass ﬁlter 
  Figure 4-16   These are manufactured infrared 
pass ﬁlters designed to ﬁt 
camera lenses.
  Figure 4-17   A glass infrared ﬁlter is installed 
in front of a 60-W light source.
  Figure 4-18   This illuminator is quite powerful, 
but runs extremely hot.

Project 4  Q  Infrared Light Converter      65
light in our desk lamp as we photographed both 
the light and the scene as viewed on the monitor 
by the low-lux black-and-white security camera. 
The digital camera used to take the photo picked 
up the dull violet glow from the ultraviolet light 
and was able to see right through the bulb to 
capture the lit tungsten ﬁlament. On the monitor, 
the camera easily sees the nearby objects in the 
room as well as the super bright phosphorescence 
of our black sweater. Another interesting effect 
of using the ultraviolet illumination is the ability 
to see right through certain materials, revealing 
what is underneath somewhat. This effect has 
been dubbed “X-ray vision,” and the effect can 
be seen from illumination by both infrared and 
ultraviolet light sources. The X-ray effect can 
almost see through certain types of clothing, but 
the effect really depends on materials, lighting, 
and infrared heat.
The image shown in Figure 4-21 was captured 
by feeding the video input on a standard 
camcorder with the output from our small spy 
cam while illuminating the scene with the small 
handheld infrared ﬂashlight shown in Figure 4-12. 
By looking through the camcorder’s viewﬁnder, 
we essentially have a portable night vision 
viewer that can record everything it sees in pure 
darkness, allowing me to navigate by looking 
at the scene in the viewﬁnder. The handheld 
visible light, but this comes at the cost of running 
extremely hot. This infrared pass ﬁlter will also 
work well with the low-power ﬂashlight bulbs, but 
is a little too large and thick to ﬁt into the ﬂashlight 
lens cover. Another decent light source that was 
tested on this ﬁlter was a round halogen motorcycle 
headlight running from a 12-V DC power source. 
The resulting heat was slightly less than the 
incandescent bulb, but required a less portable 
power supply.
If you don’t mind having a deep purple glow 
around the room, then the black light shown in 
Figure 4-19 will make a ready-to-use night vision 
illumination system right out of the box. Because 
the CCD imager in most security cameras can 
see ultraviolet light in the same way it can see 
infrared light, the black light makes it easy to 
illuminate a scene with light that human eyes 
cannot see. The downside to the ultraviolet light is 
that it also casts a low level of visible violet light 
and will run as hot as a toaster within seconds 
of use. Interesting side effects of the ultraviolet 
illumination include phosphorescence of certain 
materials and the ability for many digital cameras 
to pick up the ultraviolet light, which is strong, 
around 250 nm.
The interesting shot shown in Figure 4-20 was 
taken by running the 60-W incandescent black 
  Figure 4-19   This black light is a plug-and-
play illumination source for 
video cameras.
  Figure 4-20   An interesting night shot using 
the 60-W ultraviolet light bulb.

66      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
  Figure 4-21   Using the small infrared ﬂashlight 
with a portable night vision viewer.
ﬂashlight makes it easy to illuminate the part of 
the room we need to see while we walk around in 
complete darkness.
Some of the other materials that we found had 
some infrared passing abilities were dark glass 
bottles, camera lens caps, thin black plastics, 
some black paints, and even some cloth materials. 
Have fun creating light that only your spy cameras 
can see. If you ﬁnd a new material that has great 
ﬁltering capabilities, stop by the LucidScience.com
forum and tell us about it. 

67
P R O J E C T  5
Simple Infrared Illuminator
67
INFRARED LIGHT FALLS just below red on the light 
spectrum, making up the wavelengths from about 
750 to about 1500 nanometers (nm). This light 
cannot be seen by human eyes, but it can easily be 
seen by many video cameras, making it useful as a 
covert lighting method in night vision systems. A 
common example of infrared light is the medium 
of communication between your remote control 
and television set. The light-emitting diode (LED) 
at the end of your remote sends out pulses of 
infrared light, which are received by the infrared 
detector on the TV and demodulated back into 
data. Of course, you cannot see the pulses because 
they are out of our visual range, but any video 
camera that is not equipped with an infrared ﬁlter 
can see this light easily.
and small-board cameras are particularly sensitive 
to infrared light. These ultra low-lux cameras 
can usually be purchased for about $100 or less, 
especially from online sellers. Add 10 or more 
infrared LEDs, and you now have a night vision 
system that is better than those that were selling for 
thousands of dollars in the 1980s.
This project represents the most basic LED 
illuminator possible, and is nothing more than a 
series string of LEDs running from a DC power 
source or battery pack. You can build this infrared 
illuminator from a single LED and coin battery, or 
add as many LEDs as your power pack can handle. 
With 10 LEDs, you can easily light up a room for a 
video camera, and with 100 LEDs, you could light 
up your entire yard to make it seem like midday to 
a security camera. Our Night Vision Viewer projects 
also use infrared LEDs as an invisible light source.
The most basic example of infrared illumination 
can be found at the end of your TV remote control. 
This 940 nm infrared LED is pulsed on and off at 
  Figure 5-0   Infrared LEDs are invisible to 
humans but visible to security 
cameras.
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 LEDs: 800- to 940-nm, 5-mm body infrared 
LEDs
Q 
 Resistors: Optional current limiter based 
on LED ratings
Q 
 Battery: 9- to 12-V battery or pack
There are many good-quality security cameras 
available in the market that include a low-lux 
video camera in a weatherproof housing along 
with an array of infrared LEDs for night vision 
applications. Of course, you may want to just make 
your own simple infrared illuminator for projects 
that you need to add night vision to. This can be 
done in a few hours with a few dollars worth of 
infrared LEDs. Black-and-white security cameras 

68      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
light to cover a larger area over a given distance, 
whereas a narrow angle lens allows a brighter beam 
to reach a further point. For TV remote controls, a 
medium angle is a good trade-off between distance 
and viewing angle, but for night vision, a wider 
angle is usually better. In this project, we are using 
typical 940-nm TV remote type LEDs with a 
narrow ﬁeld of view. You can see in the images that 
the resulting beam is sharp and focused much like a 
small ﬂashlight.
If you are planning to use your night vision 
system indoors in a small area such as a room, 
then try to match the ﬁeld of view to both the 
camera and the LEDs so that you can illuminate 
the entire scene. For a portable or head mounted 
night vision system, a narrower beam may work 
better as this will give you more light as you look 
around the darkness. The three LEDs shown in 
Figure 5-2 have different colored bodies, but all of 
them are basically the same as far as speciﬁcations. 
The black body on the LED shown in the right of 
Figure 5-2 is actually completely transparent when 
viewed with a video camera as the plastic has been 
manufactured to pass only infrared light, light 
that we cannot see. Field of view, power output, 
voltage, and wavelength are all speciﬁcations stated 
on the datasheet, so consider these when sourcing 
new infrared or visible light LEDs for any project.
A new LED that has not had its leads trimmed 
will have one lead longer than the other, and this 
lead will be the positive lead. If you are salvaging 
40 Kilohertz (KHz) to transmit the control codes to 
the infrared light receiver in the appliance. Take a 
look at the LED and press the button in the remote. 
You will see nothing, even though the light from 
the LED is probably as bright as the light from a 
white LED keychain ﬂashlight. Now, if you view 
this LED light through a monitor connected to a 
video camera, it will look very bright on the screen. 
You might also be able to see the light through 
the viewﬁnder on a camcorder, but it will become 
a very dull purple glow due to the infrared ﬁlters 
being used to correct the color balance.
There are several varieties of infrared LEDs, 
ranging in size, ﬁeld of view, output power, and 
effective light color. The most commonly used 
infrared LED’s output is 940-nm infrared light 
which is far beyond the human visual range, and 
fairly detectable by any nonﬁltered video camera. 
There are also infrared LEDs available for the 800 
to 900 nm range, and these are even better for use in 
night vision applications, but there will be an ever 
so slightly detectable red glow as the human eye 
can faintly detect this band of light. If you have seen 
an outdoor night vision security camera after dark, 
then you are probably familiar with this dull red 
glow. The TV remotes shown in Figure 5-1 all have 
940 nm LEDs, whereas our huge collection of night 
vision LEDs are designed to output 850 nm light. 
At the top of the LED, the thickness and shape 
of the plastic casing forms the optical properties 
of the output lens. A wide angle lens allows the 
  Figure 5-1   Your TV remote control communicates 
over an infrared light beam.
  Figure 5-2   Infrared LEDs are available with 
various lens types and wavelengths.

Project 5  Q  Simple Infrared Illuminator      69
your parts from an old circuit board, then lead 
identiﬁcation will be impossible, but the good news is 
that there are two other ways to identify the polarity 
of the LED. If you look at the underside of the LED, 
one side of the round base will have a ﬂat side near 
one of the leads to indicate that it is the negative 
lead. Also, the negative lead will be connected to the 
larger cup-shaped carrier inside the lead as shown 
in Figure 5-3, although you may not be able to see 
through all of the various plastic colors.
You can make a very easy LED tester that will 
check the polarity and functioning of all visible 
color LEDs by simply keeping a 3-volt (V) coin 
battery (such as a CR2450) on hand to drop across 
the leads. If you connect an LED backwards, it will 
not give off any light. If you connect it properly, it 
will visibly light up as long as the wavelength falls 
in our human range. The 3-V lithium coin battery 
has such low internal resistance, that it cannot 
damage an LED, even one rated for less than 3 V, 
so it makes the perfect tester for all visible LEDs. 
To test an infrared LED, you will need to view the 
output from a security camera on a video monitor.
When hunting for new LEDs from any 
manufacturer, you will need to refer to the 
datasheet in order to choose the appropriate LED 
for the job (Figure 5-4). The most important 
speciﬁcations will be peak wavelength in 
nanometers, ﬁeld of view in degrees, output power 
in millicandela (mcd), and forward voltage and 
current. There are many other speciﬁcations that 
you may also need to know such as peak pulsed 
current limitations, package size, and lead type. 
Also note that the brightness of an infrared LED 
is usually not rated in millicandela as that is a 
rating for visible light. Infrared LED brightness is 
  Figure 5-3   To make an LED emit light, it 
must be connected with proper 
polarity.
5.0
(.197)
8.6
(.34)
1.0
(.04)
22.0 MIN.
(.866)
0.5 TYP.
(.02)
A
K
1.0 MON.
(.04)
DATE
11.24.93
2.22.94
1.7.98
12.31.02
01.18.07
REV.
E.C.N.  NUMBER AND REVISION COMMENTS
REDRAWN.
PARAMETER
PARAMETER
MIN
TYP
MAX
MAX
PEAK FORWARD CURRENT
STEADY CURRENT
POWER DISSIPATION
DERATE FROM 25°C
OPERATING TEMP.
STORAGE TEMP.
SOLDERING TEMP.
2.0 mm FROM BODY
1
A
mA
mW
mW/°C
°C
°C
°C
3 SEC. MAX
100
150
– 1.2
–  25 TO +85
–  25 TO +100
+260
UNITS
UNITS
TEST COND
A
B
C
D
E
CHG’D INTENSITY AND HALF ANGLE.
E.C.N. # 10 BRDR.
E.C.N. # 10 BRDR. & REDRAWN IN 3D. 
E.C.N. # 11393.
ELECTRO–OPTICAL CHARACTERISTICS TA = 25°C
LIMITS OF SAFE OPERATION AT 25°C
PART NUMBER
OED—EL —1L2
5.85
(.23)
DOT DENOTES CATHODE
3 DIA.
(.118)
2.54 NOM.
(.1) (SEE NOTE 4)
SEE NOTE 3
REV.
E
PEAK WAVELENGTH
SPECTRAL BANDWIDTH
45
60
30
FORWARD VOLTAGE
REVERSE VOLTAGE
RADIANT INTENSITY
HALF ANGLE
EPOXY LENS FINISH:
5.0
1.6
nm
nm
mW/SR
degress
Vf
Ir = 10 μA
If = 100 mA
Vr
940
1.2
WATER CLEAR
If =  20 mA
tp < 10 μs, tp/T = 1% DUTY CYCLE
  Figure 5-4   A typical LED datasheet showing the important parameters.

70      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
maximum voltage is a very risky game because 
some LEDs will fry if you exceed the rated voltage 
by a few percent. Slightly lower voltages are 
certainly safe, but the output power will begin to 
roll off rapidly once you start lowering the voltage. 
The goal is to come as close to the rated maximum 
voltage as possible and ensure that you are supplying 
the required current. Our LEDs require 1.2 V for 
maximum operation, so by placing 10 of them in 
series, we can power all 10 from a single 12-V 
battery pack. A series connection means that each 
LED will receive the sum of the battery pack 
voltage divided by the number of LEDs in the chain.
Figure 5-6 shows the simple series wiring 
diagram that is used to divide the 12-V battery 
pack down to 1.2 V per LED. In a series circuit, 
voltage is divided equally by all elements in 
the chain as long as they are drawing the same 
amount of current. For this reason, it is important 
to ensure that all of the LEDs are either exactly 
the same make and model or have identical 
speciﬁcations. LEDs can be chained together like 
this to run from just about any voltage source. For 
LEDs that require 1.5 V, the 12-V battery would 
be able to drive 8 LEDs safely in series, since 
(12 V/8 = 1.5 V). If your division does not work 
out perfectly, then you need to round down to the 
next value to ensure that you do not overpower 
the LEDs. For instance, 1.2-V LEDs running 
from a 9-V battery would require a series chain 
of eight LEDs, but only provide each LED with 
1.125 V. This is less than the rated 1.2 V, but with 
seven LEDs, the maximum voltage rating would 
be exceeded at 1.285 V. You might get away with 
slightly more voltage, though, but expect some 
failures when exceeding device limitations.
speciﬁed as optical power output in milliwatts per 
steradian (mW/sr). The LEDs we are using in this 
project are very common TV remote types, and 
have the following ratings: 950-nm wavelength, 
1.2-V forward voltage, 100-milliamps (mA) 
forward current, 250-mW/sr output power. 
To the human eye, the 950-nm infrared LEDs 
shown in Figure 5-5 look completely black, even 
when held up to a bright light source, but when 
viewed by a video camera, they appear perfectly 
clear, even when not powered. The reason the 
camera can see right through the LEDs is because 
the plastic is made up of materials that only pass 
infrared light, creating a band pass ﬁlter that blocks 
most of the light that is not within the speciﬁed 
wavelength. So, if this LED was outputting light 
between 800 and 1000 nm, the band pass ﬁlter may 
help cut all unwanted light except for the output 
close to 950 nm as speciﬁed in the datasheet. Other 
LEDs are perfectly clear, or have slightly blue 
tinted plastic bodies.
Most LEDs will require between 1.2 and 1.6 V 
to operate at their full capacity. Exceeding their 
  Figure 5-5   Some infrared LEDs include a 
band pass ﬁlter in their casings.
  Figure 5-6   Placing LEDs in series allows a higher voltage to be used.

Project 5  Q  Simple Infrared Illuminator      71
smooth to remove sharp edges using the grinder 
attachment. When designing the LED carrier, keep 
in mind the space needed between the camera 
body and LED leads if you plan to place the disc 
right up against the camera body as we are doing 
in our version of this project. Figure 5-8 shows 
the disc resting on the camera body, and there 
is plenty of clearance between the edge of the 
camera body and the outer edge of the circle in 
order to make room for the LEDs.
Perforated board can be quite brittle when 
drilling or cutting, so you will need to start with 
a small drill bit and then work up to the larger 
one to prevent the edges from chipping or from 
snapping the board right in half. Our LEDs 
required a 3/16-in hole to ﬁt snugly, so we started 
by drilling the holes with a 1/16 bit, followed by 
a 1/8 bit. As you can see in Figure 5-9, the edges 
The goal of this small infrared illuminator is to 
give a micro security camera the ability to view a 
room in complete darkness. One simple solution 
to the placement of LEDs is to form a ring around 
the camera lens so that the light appears uniform 
and directly along the line of sight of the camera. 
Of course, you can arrange the LEDs in any 
pattern or number you need in order to satisfy the 
requirements of your night vision illuminator, but 
keep in mind that there are limits to both the ﬁeld 
of view as well as the ultimate distance that can be 
achieved with LEDs.
Perforated board is a good medium to use as a 
base to support the LEDs as you can either drill 
holes to mount the LEDs or simply stand them 
right off their own leads. Perforated board that 
includes solder pads on one side would be best 
if planning to stand the LEDs on their own leads 
as this will ensure that they are all placed ﬂat on 
the surface. Practically any kind of material from 
cardboard to thin steel can be used for this project. 
The goal is to simply secure the LEDs in a circular 
pattern around your camera lens. Our camera had 
a 1-inch (in) square body and a ½-in wide lens, 
so we traced a 2-in circle out on the perforated 
board shown in Figure 5-7, with a ½-in circle in 
the center for the camera lens. A Dremel tool with 
a small disc cutter will be used to cut around the 
circular markings.
The board was rough cut around the marked 
line using the cutting wheel and then ground 
  Figure 5-7   Making a camera ring to hold the 
10 infrared LEDs.
  Figure 5-8   The perforated board is cut into 
a donut shape to ﬁt around the 
camera lens.
  Figure 5-9   Using a pilot drill bit to stop the 
perf board from chipping.

72      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
circuits and for breadboarding, which is cut and 
stripped Cat5 network wiring.
Following the circuit shown in Figure 5-6, we 
soldered the connecting wires from the positive 
lead on one LED to the negative lead on another 
until every LED minus one was chained to the 
next. The last two unsoldered leads (one positive 
and one negative) were soldered to a long 
connecting wire that will carry the 12-V DC power 
to the series circuit. (See Figure 5-12.) To avoid 
wiring mistakes, we always use a color scheme 
that is obvious such as black or green for ground 
and red or white for power. The good news is 
that if an LED is soldered in backwards or if you 
reverse the power, your illuminator will just fail to 
light, but there will be no damage. The same thing 
is certainly not true for the camera, this we know 
from our painful experience!
To attach the ring light illuminator to our tiny 
camera in a way that would allow it to be removed 
easily, we opted to use a few bits of double-sided 
tape between the top face of the camera body and 
the back of the perforated board. (See Figure 5-13.) 
Double-sided tape is great for holding down circuit 
boards or batteries in project boxes, and is easy 
enough to remove without damaging anything. Hot 
glue will work too, but it is a permanent solution 
that can be difﬁcult to pry apart if needed. Zip ties 
will also work depending on the shape of your 
camera body.
and center of the board have been slightly chipped 
from the cutting process, but the board is still 
usable. A square board would have been much 
easier to make, but that would require a much 
larger enclosure to be used if we wanted to use the 
system outdoors.
If you are planning to place the ring light 
directly against the camera body as shown in 
Figure 5-10, then there needs to be enough 
clearance between the leads and the edge of the 
camera casing. Another option would be to bend 
the leads ﬂat and then place an insulating disc over 
the back of the board so that the leads can rest on 
the camera body.
Connecting up 10 LEDs in series is certainly 
not a lot of work; any kind of wire will work. If 
your LEDs are new, then the long leads can be bent 
to join with each other, and you will only need to 
add the power wires to the circuit. We always use 
the wire shown in Figure 5-11 for our perf board 
  Figure 5-10   Checking the camera body and 
LED lead clearances.
  Figure 5-11   Preparing the connecting wires 
to make the series LED chain.
  Figure 5-12   The underside of the perf board 
with the completed series wiring.

Project 5  Q  Simple Infrared Illuminator      73
or at any electronics store. Basically, any video 
system that offers a composite video input jack 
will work with a security camera or small board 
camera. In Figure 5-15, the camera is powered up 
and looking at the illuminator, which is shown in 
the screen. The small switch on the breadboard is 
connected to the illuminator power line, so we can 
turn it on and off for testing purposes.
When the room lights are on, the infrared 
illuminator makes only a slight difference in the 
well-lit scene, but it is still easy to see the output 
on the video monitor. Figure 5-16 shows the ring 
of LEDs glowing white on the monitor, yet we can 
In case you are interested in the camera we 
are using here, it is a model KPC-EX20H from 
the company KT&C in Japan, and is a very 
low-lux and high-resolution camera that has 
work extremely well in all of our night vision 
experiments. This camera is also distributed by 
SuperCircuits.com under the model name of 
PC182XS, and sells for around $100. Decent low-
lux monochrome cameras can often be purchased 
for far less, but this one has a very low-lux rating 
and a high-resolution CCD imager.
Once the wiring was completed, we dropped the 
power line onto the 12-V battery and had a look 
on the monitor to ensure that the ring light was 
outputting and that all 10 LEDs were brightly lit. If 
you have a bad LED, either none of the LEDs will 
be lit or the bad one will be out, causing the others 
to receive a bit too much voltage. If this happens, 
remove the power and try feeding each LED with 
the required voltage or with 3 V form a lithium 
coin cell until you ﬁnd the problem. Figure 5-14 
shows the completed ring light infrared illuminator 
attached to the small video camera.
We use the small liquid crystal display (LCD) 
video screen shown in Figure 5-15 to test all of 
our projects as it is portable and can run off the 
same 12-V DC power supply that is being used 
for the camera and illuminator. These small video 
monitors can be purchased at video gaming stores 
  Figure 5-13   Fastening the illuminator to the 
camera with two-sided tape.
  Figure 5-14   The completed infrared 
illuminator mounted to the small 
video camera.
  Figure 5-15   To test the infrared illuminator, 
you will need a video source and 
a monitor.

74      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
that we are using to take these photos only sees 
a very slight blue glow from the LEDs because it 
contains an infrared ﬁlter over its image sensor that 
blocks out most of the infrared light. We have not 
been brave enough to dig into the camera to see 
if we can remove the ﬁlter to make a night vision 
camera, but one day that will make for another 
interesting hack.
Figure 5-18 shows the minimal amount of 
infrared light that passes through the infrared ﬁlter 
on the Nikon D90, and shows how well the video 
only see pure black when looking at them. The 
illuminator is certainly working, so the next tests 
will be done in the darkness.
Figure 5-17 shows the intense glow from the 
10 infrared LEDs as they shine directly into the 
camera lens while the room is dark. The LEDs 
seem so bright to the camera in the dark that they 
swamp out everything else completely. This camera 
almost sees in the dark by itself, but with the help 
of the infrared illuminator, it can see an entire room 
in compete darkness. Interestingly, the Nikon D90 
  Figure 5-16   Looking at the infrared output 
on the monitor in a brightly-lit 
room.
  Figure 17   With the lights off, the illuminator 
becomes a very bright source of 
light
  Figure 5-18   The infrared illuminator lights up our camera as we take this photo.

Project 5  Q  Simple Infrared Illuminator      75
The completed Simple Infrared Illuminator 
shown in Figure 5-19 was well worth the minimal 
amount invested in parts and about an hour of 
time it took to build. You can now give your small 
spy camera night vision, test infrared viewers, or 
even give your TV remote super extended range 
by feeding its output through an ampliﬁer that 
feeds the illuminator. Because this illuminator 
is so simple, it can form the output for a number 
of infrared experiments and give practically any 
security camera a decent boost in the darkness.
camera is able to see us as we take this photo. 
Although it is difﬁcult to tell from the photo of 
the monitor, the image on the screen is almost 
as bright as if the room lights were on. Because 
the infrared light is detected by the video camera 
as white light, the images look no different than 
what would be seen if the room lights were turned 
on. At 10 feet (ft) away from the illuminator, 
the image is almost too bright, reﬂecting off the 
camera like the light from a powerful ﬂashlight 
beam. The back wall of the room 20 ft behind me 
is clearly visible.
Further tests revealed that the 10 LED infrared 
illuminator worked well in any room up to about 
30 ft before the light started to fade. The beam 
angle on these LEDs was slightly too narrow, so 
a second row of 10 more LEDs pointing slightly 
outward would have been better. This small 
illuminator is probably not powerful enough for 
much outdoor spy use, but it was certainly good 
enough for use in a portable indoor night vision 
system or spy camera.
  Figure 5-19   The completed Simple Infrared 
Illuminator.

This page intentionally left blank 

77
P R O J E C T  6
LED Array Illuminator
77
THERE ARE TIMES when the small infrared light-
emitting diode (LED) ring built into a security 
camera will not cover the range or ﬁeld of view you 
require, so you will need to ﬁnd another invisible 
light source. Some large infrared illuminators use 
powerful incandescent light sources that are passed 
through an infrared pass ﬁlter, causing only the 
infrared component of the light to come through 
the ﬁlter. These types of infrared illuminators 
create intense heat due to the fact that the white 
light source must be fully enclosed and burn 
the unwanted light energy off as radiated heat. 
Because of this intense heat, incandescent ﬁltered 
illuminators cannot be used indoors and may not be 
suitable for many outdoor installations.
The good news is that LEDs can be used to 
create a very powerful infrared illumination system 
if you use enough of them. Okay, you need a lot 
of them, but these days they can be purchased for 
only pennies a piece if ordered in quantities of 
hundreds or more. The bad news is that you will 
need to do a lot of soldering, even on a small array 
of 16 r 16 LEDs, which will have more than 512 
connection points. Of course, many circuit board 
houses offer proto service, and you could have a 
very large LED array circuit board made for under 
$100 if you shop around. If you are patient and like 
to solder, then any size array can be made on some 
perforated circuit board, resulting in a very high-
power illumination system that will only cost you 
one-tenth of what a manufactured unit would cost.
Before you decide to make a huge array that will 
light up an entire city block, do a little research on 
bulk LED prices and power requirements because 
an array will become hungry on both counts. We 
built two version of the LED array—one using a 
hand-wired perforated board having 13 r 19 LEDs 
and a much larger printed circuit board (PCB) 
version having 32 r 48 LEDs. So the smaller LED 
array has 247 LEDs, and the larger array has a 
whopping 1526 LEDs! Make no mistake—it takes 
a good chunk of power to crank up 1526 LEDs to 
their maximum potential, and even at 10 cents per 
LED, that adds up to $154 just for the LEDs. 
Start by calculating how much infrared 
radiation you will need in order to light your 
scene. Limitations will likely be the focal range of 
your camera since details are lost on most security 
cameras after about 50 ft. This distance is also 
about as far as an LED can reach, no matter how 
many you add to the array, so the equation then 
becomes how wide and how bright do you need 
 Figure 6-0   A long-range infrared illuminator 
can be made using many LEDs.

78      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
Small-to-medium-sized LED arrays can be 
made by placing the leads into the holes and then 
soldering them on the underside using copper strips 
and wires to create the series parallel connections. 
Most infrared LEDs will be available as 5-mm 
wide plastic through hole devices like the ones 
shown in this project, so they can be packed onto a 
perforated board at about 16 LEDs per square inch. 
Yes, we mixed up our units of measure, but that is 
a common thing to do in the electronics industry. 
If you plan on making your own circuit board, then 
your only limitations on the number of LEDs in a 
given area will be the width of the LED bodies—
16 LEDs per square inch is actually very good for 
most illuminators, as it gives a decent range and 
ﬁeld of view.
If you really have a lot of spare time and own 
a Dremel tool or small bench top grinder, you 
could actually grind down one side of the LEDs 
slightly and then pack them down to a smaller 
area. Figure 6-2 shows the LEDs trying to ﬁt into 
the perforated board without having an empty 
hole between them, but without a little grinding, 
they just won’t live together happily. A little buzz 
with a grinder and the LED would have a ﬂat side, 
allowing them to be packed more tightly, but this is 
probably not necessary in this project as the idea is 
to use more LEDs to cover a wider area.
the scene? A 20 r 20 ft interior room will shine 
like midday with an array of 16 r 16 LEDs at 
each corner of the room, but the massive array 
we built is almost too bright to be used indoors. 
If your camera will stay in a ﬁxed position, 
then a single array is best, but for general room 
illumination, it is better to divide up your LEDs 
into two or more arrays for even lighting. Think 
of a 16 r 16 LED array to be about the same as a 
typical hand held ﬂashlight for both output power 
and ﬁeld of view. Our 32 r 48 array acts more like 
a 500-watt (W) halogen light source when placed 
in a small room.
There are several varieties of infrared LEDs, 
ranging in size, ﬁeld of view, output power, and 
effective light color. The most commonly used 
infrared LEDs output 940-nanometer (nm) infrared 
light, which is far beyond the human visual range, 
and fairly detectable by any nonﬁltered video 
camera. There are also infrared LEDs available 
for the 800 to 900 nm range. These are even better 
for use in night vision applications, but there will 
be slightly detectable red glow as the human eye 
can faintly detect this band of light. If you have 
seen an outdoor night vision security camera after 
dark, then you are probably familiar with this 
dull red glow. The LEDs shown in Figure 6-1 are 
commonly available in 940-nm types purchased in 
bulk from an Internet-based supplier.
  Figure 6-1   LEDs purchased in large quantities 
can often be found at bargain 
prices.
  Figure 6-2   When using perforated board, 
the shape of the LED will dictate 
placement.

Project 6  Q  LED Array Illuminator      79
Because the spacing on most prototyping boards 
is the same as the spacing on standard dual inline 
chip packages, you will be able to insert the 5-mm 
LEDs to create arrays with 16 LEDs per square inch, 
skipping one hole between each LED. Using 3-mm 
LEDs would allow insertion without skipping a hole, 
but this size of LED is almost impossible to ﬁnd 
with an infrared output. Your array can also have any 
number of rows and columns, but usually a square 
is best for the most even ﬁeld of view. Another 
idea is to base the size of the array on the wiring 
requirement, using the number of LEDs in series 
as the width or depth of the array. For instance, if 
you have 1.2-volt (V) LEDs, and plan to run 10 of 
them in series to make an even 12-V power supply, 
then you could make your array with 10 or 20 LEDs 
across and as many parallel rows as you have power 
for. A 10 r 10 array will be large enough to light 
up a small room for practically any video camera 
(Figure 6-3).
For our smaller version of the LED array 
illuminator, we decided to use 19 r 13 LEDs for 
a total of 247 LEDs. This choice was completely 
based on the size of the perf board and the 
enclosure that will be used, so the array does 
not have even series rows. Not having an even 
number of LEDs to create a series row or column 
means that the wiring will be a bit more complex 
(and ugly) in the backside of the board, but that 
really is not important. The array has to ﬁt into 
the inside of a halogen work light, so size is the 
only real concern. We were able to ﬁnd LEDs in 
bulk 100 pieces packs, so the cost of 250 LEDs 
was about $30, with 50 to spare. Figure 6-4 shows 
the populated array of 247 LEDs after an hour of 
carefully observing the hole spacing and polarity 
of each LED. On new LEDs, the longer lead is the 
positive lead, and the ﬂat side of the round case is 
the negative side.
 Figure 6-3   Using 5-mm LEDs, you can make 
an array with 16 LEDs per square 
inch.
  Figure 6-4   Making a 19 p 13 LED array on perforated prototyping board.

80      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
When working with series-connected LEDs, the 
amp rating of a single LED is the same requirement 
as the entire chain. So 10 LEDs that consume 
100 mA each in a series chain wired for 12 V will 
only consume 100 mA at 12 V. Since the array 
has 900 LEDs, and 10 of them can be run in a 
series chain, this means that there will be a total 
of 90 series wired chains that contain 10 LEDs 
each. Each of these 90 chains is now connected 
in parallel, since parallel wiring does not alter the 
voltage requirement. Now there are 90 series chains 
each consuming 100 mA each, for a total power 
consumption of 9000 mA, or 9 A, and that’s some 
serious juice! Since Watts  Amps r Volts, the 
9 A becomes 108 W (9 r 12  108). So, consider 
carefully the number of LEDs you intend to run, 
especially if battery power will be your primary 
power source. A large 12-V lead acid security 
battery with a 15 A hour rating would only power a 
30 r 30 LED array for about an hour before it started 
to fade. DC power supplies with this kind of output 
power are not difﬁcult to ﬁnd, though.
The schematic shown in Figure 6-5 shows an 
example of 40 LEDs wired in a series parallel 
combination of four chains of 10 series connected 
LEDs. This would be an ideal wiring diagram 
for 1.2-V LEDs running from a 12-V DC power 
When you are connecting large numbers of 
LEDs that could reach into the many hundreds 
or even thousands, you will have to consider the 
power requirements, which will certainly be quite 
large as well. Since Watts (W)  Amps (A) r Volts (V), powering up 900 LEDs that require 
100 milliamps (mA) each in a 30 r 30 array wired 
to use 12 V would require over 100 W! Let us 
explain how this power requirement is calculated 
for a 30 r 30 LED array based on the series and 
parallel wiring conﬁguration of the LED array.
Let’s start with the forward voltage requirement 
of each LED. A common forward voltage value 
for an infrared LED would be 1.2 V. Since it is 
unlikely that you will ﬁnd a powerful 1.2-V DC 
power supply, the idea is to run as many LEDs in 
series as needed in order to allow the use of a much 
more common voltage source, such as 12 V. Since 
12 V divided by 10 equals 1.2 V, which means that 
you can safely run 10 LEDs in series from a 12-V 
DC power supply or battery. When working out this 
voltage calculation for an uneven number such as 
12-V driving LEDs with a forward voltage of 1.4 V,
always work it out so that the LEDs are slightly 
underpowered rather than slightly overpowered. 
So for 1.4-V LEDs, you can safely power 9 LEDs, 
giving each LED 1.33 V (12/9  1.33).
 Figure 6-5   Series and parallel wiring makes power supply selection easier.

Project 6  Q  LED Array Illuminator      81
run copper wire along the columns to create the 
parallel wiring connection for each series chain 
(Figure 6-7). Remember that the parallel connecting 
wires need to carry the entire amperage of the array, 
so use a copper wire or strip that is appropriate for 
the task. Not sure what wiring size to use? Look at 
the connecting wires from your power pack, or just 
strip down some 30-A copper house wiring and use 
that to solder the connection points.
The plan was to install the 18 r 13 LED array 
into the weatherproof cabinet of the halogen light 
shown in Figure 6-8. Using the light enclosure will 
allow the night vision illuminator to live outdoors 
since the cabinet is sealed from the elements. 
source. If each LED needed 90 mA, then the total 
power requirement for the entire array would be 
4.32 W—not much power at all. On the other hand, 
our massive 48 r 32 LED array requires 180 W 
just to start throwing any decent amount of infrared 
radiation! Current limiting resistors (R1–R4) 
should be added to each series chain to avoid 
damage that could occur if one LED in a chain 
failed to a short circuit. The low-impedance current 
limiting resistors (10 to 50 ohms) should be of a 
size that can handle the current in the chain. A 1-W 
resistor would be a good choice for a chain of 
10 LEDs running from a 12-V DC power source.
NOTE
Thanks to Swink and the 
HackaDay viewers for pointing 
out an error in the previous version of this wiring 
diagram. Sometimes a fresh perspective makes all 
the difference!
Figure 6-6 shows an example of wiring one chain 
of 10 LEDs on the underside of a perforated board 
using the leads as traces. Leads are simply cut short 
and then bent towards each other to form traces. 
This system of wiring works out nicely if your series 
chains are dividable by one dimension of the array. 
If you cannot make even series chains, then you will 
have to use a wire to carry over to the next row in 
order to complete the chain. Having even series rows 
also means that the parallel wiring can be easily 
done by using one continuous copper strip or wire to 
connect them all as shown in the next photo.
When an LED array is wired so that the series 
chains divide evenly by a row, you can simply 
  Figure 6-6   A series chain of 10 LEDs wired on 
the underside of the perforated 
board.
  Figure 6-7   Parallel connections are made 
along the ends of each series 
chain.
 Figure 6-8   The completed 18 p 13 LED array 
will be installed into the light 
cabinet.

82      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
the light may look a little out of place if stealth 
installation is necessary. For a security camera 
covering a large area, two of these units would be 
best for maximum illumination of the scene, but 
depending on the level of ambient light and the 
distance from the lens to the subject, the single 
array may be plenty.
Despite extreme weather where we live, our 
illuminator has lived happily outdoors through rain, 
hail, snow, and temperature ranges that would seem 
normal for the North Pole and some deserts. The 
freezing cold winter scene shown in Figure 6-11 
is lit by only the single illuminator and the small 
amount of ambient light from a distant streetlight. 
Because the LED array is plugged into a switched 
AC outlet, we can turn on the night vision from 
inside if necessary. The low-lux security camera 
Being a long-range illuminator for outdoor use, 
concealment of the LEDs was not such a concern, 
and the light enclosure will not look out of place 
mounted to a wall or pole in a yard. With the 
original AC-lighting components removed from the 
light housing, there will be just enough room for 
the LED array circuit board, as well as an AC-to-
DC power pack. Having the power adapter means 
that the light can be plugged into an AC socket just 
as it was before modiﬁcation.
Once we found a suitable DC adapter to power 
up the LED array, we simply cut the AC wiring 
inside of the light enclosure and afﬁxed it directly 
to the AC power adapter as shown in Figure 6-9. 
The AC wires were connected to the prongs on the 
AC adapter by soldering them directly and then 
sealing the connection using some heat-shrink 
tubing. Since the goal was to mount the array 
on a garage wall, no switch will be added to the 
enclosure as it would be too high to reach. To 
turn the LED array off in the daytime, a standard 
switched outlet will be used to control power to the 
DC power supply inside the light. For automatic 
use, a simple relay controlled by a light sensor 
could switch on the LEDs at dusk, similar to how a 
streetlight control operates.
The nice thing about the LED array illuminator 
shown in Figure 6-10 is that it can plug directly 
into an AC power outlet and live outdoors in most 
weather conditions. Because the LEDs do not give 
off any real heat and are completely invisible to the 
human eyes, indoor use is also possible, although 
 Figure 6-9   The AC-to-DC power pack was 
installed in the light enclosure.
 Figure 6-10   The completed LED array ready 
to withstand the elements.
 Figure 6-11   The all weather illuminator 
survives through hail, rain, snow, 
and the deep freeze.

Project 6  Q  LED Array Illuminator      83
makes more sense to create a circuit board rather 
than trying to wire them all by hand. Since this 
many LEDs will probably cost you at least $150, 
the added cost of having a real printed circuit board 
made is certainly not going to seem high. Many of 
the prototyping board companies will make a board 
like this for under $100 in small quantities, and you 
will only have to spend the time soldering the LEDs 
to the board, which will probably take a few days. 
Hand wiring a board with 1500 LEDs would take 
weeks and the chance of making a mistake will be 
extremely high. Yes, we did it once…only once!
Figure 6-13 shows the backside of the massive 
LED array where the LEDs are wired into series 
does a decent job of seeing at night all on its own, 
but with the addition of the LED illuminator, 
details such as faces or license plates can be 
captured at night in perfect clarity.
There are times when you need to illuminate a 
much larger outdoor area using a single infrared 
light source, or when you want to light up an 
interior scene to look like midday. This kind of 
illuminating power calls for a very large array of 
LEDs, like the massive 48 r 32 LED array shown 
in Figure 6-12. This beast contains 1536 infrared 
LEDs and will gobble up more than 180 W when 
running at full intensity! The infrared radiation 
that comes from this massive array can actually be 
felt like sunlight hitting your face, and will make 
any size interior room look as though a window 
was wide open in a nice sunny day. Outdoors, this 
massive array is capable of lighting up an entire 
back yard like a spotlight, allowing any security 
camera to capture perfect detail in pitch darkness. 
An array like this is probably overkill for most 
stealthy security needs, but we like to take things to 
the limit, so we made a few of these units to use in 
our various spy missions.
So how long do you think it would take to solder 
down the approximately 3000 connecting wires for 
an array of this size? Too long! When working with 
LED arrays spanning more than 32 r 32 LEDs, it 
 Figure 6-12   This massive infrared LED array contains 1536 LEDs!
 Figure 6-13   Using a printed circuit board is a 
much better solution for an array 
of this size.

84      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
type of lens will be needed that will hide the LEDs 
while at the same time passing the infrared light. 
There are several solutions to this problem.
One-way mirror glass, like the sheet shown in 
Figure 6-15 is inexpensive and available to be cut 
into any size or shape. This glass seems to pass 
most of the infrared light, yet completely hides the 
LEDs from human view. There are several types 
of one-way mirror glass, some that look exactly 
like a standard mirror and others that have various 
degrees of shading and opacity. We chose a darker 
shaded one-way mirror glass so that we could 
install the LEDs in an old liquid crystal display 
(LCD) monitor case to make it look “normal.” The 
glass was cut by the supplier into a piece exactly 
the same size as the LCD panel that was removed 
from the monitor.
Figure 6-16 shows how the glass completely 
blocks anything behind it, yet allows the light 
from a visible green LED to shine through it. 
string each containing 10 LEDs for basic 12-V 
DC operation. The series connection traces do not 
carry much current (50 to 100 mA), so they can be 
made small and bounce around the board to make 
the circuit easy to layout. It is the parallel traces 
that will have to endure the massive amounts of 
current to power the entire board, so these must be 
designed using much larger and heavier traces or 
even made using copper strips.
Figure 6-14 shows the topside of the massive 
LED array where the parallel connecting traces join 
up all 153 of the 10 LED series chains together. 
This LED array can consume up to 180 W at 12 V,
so the traces will need to carry 15 A of current! 
Of course, we usually do not run the array at full 
power as it is actually too bright for most indoor 
use, but for some of the jobs we do, having more 
light available is better than falling short. Although 
this massive LED array is 6 times larger than the 
last one, the series and parallel wiring is exactly the 
same, based on the schematic shown in Figure 6-5.
When using an infrared illuminator as a stealthy 
indoor security device, it will be necessary to 
conceal the LEDs somehow, as they will certainly 
look suspicious out in the open. In one of our many 
undercover operations, we had to use the massive 
1536 LED array illuminator in an interior room that 
needed to be extremely well lit in pitch darkness, 
yet hide the illuminator for total stealth operation. 
To conceal a 2-foot square array of LEDs, some 
 Figure 6-14   The parallel connecting traces 
must be large enough to carry 
high current.
 Figure 6-15   This one-way mirror glass can 
be used to conceal an infrared 
illuminator.
 Figure 6-16   The visible green LED is hidden 
by the glass, but the light can still 
pass.

Project 6  Q  LED Array Illuminator      85
Because the LED array was approximately the 
same size and depth as the original LCD panel, 
installation was extremely easy. As shown in 
Figure 6-19, the LED array was simply bolted to 
the back casing, leaving room for the one-way 
glass mirror in the front and the battery pack or DC 
power supply in the rear. There was even plenty 
of room left over for a small wireless pinhole spy 
camera to be installed right into the lower bezel of 
the monitor, creating a stealthy and powerful night 
vision spy system that could be installed in seconds 
just about anywhere.
Depending on how much infrared radiation 
we needed, the lead acid security battery shown 
in Figure 6-20 would run the array for times 
from 30 minutes up to several hours. To limit the 
current and run time, we used several methods, 
This one-way glass mirror only blocks about 
10 percent of the LED light, and seems to block 
even less of the infrared light. Besides the 
reﬂection of the camera taking the photo, nothing 
from the other side of the glass can be seen, so 
the LEDs are completely concealed. Because 
the massive LED array offers so much output, a 
little loss from the shade of the glass is almost 
unnoticeable.
The monitor shown in Figure 6-17 had some 
internal malfunction, so it will become the new 
home of the giant 1536 LED array illuminator, 
concealed behind the one-way glass mirror. This 
monitor was the perfect way to conceal the giant 
illuminator for indoor use as the appliance does not 
look out of place sitting on a desk and completely 
hides all signs of the LED array. The monitor can 
also be pointed towards the scene without looking 
suspicious.
The inside of the monitor shown in Figure 6-18 
would have plenty of room for the massive LED 
array, as well as for a large battery pack or a power 
supply. To allow the monitor to be installed onsite 
in a hurry, we opted for a battery pack and a light-
sensing switch to turn on the LEDs once the room 
lights were turned off. Every security job requires 
a unique solution, but this time a battery was better 
than a hard-wired DC power pack. To acquire 
the information you seek, creativity will be your 
greatest tool.
 Figure 6-17   This broken 19-in LCD monitor 
will soon become a giant stealth 
illuminator.
 Figure 6-18   Removing the front bezel and 
the broken LCD panel from the 
monitor.
 Figure 6-19   Fitting the LED array where the 
LCD screen once lived.

86      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
LCD panel, but the device still looks perfectly 
convincing. Only an evil genius would suspect an 
innocent-looking LCD monitor of being a giant 
high power night vision illuminator, so the device 
was a total success in every operation it took part 
in. The infrared radiation thrown from this giant 
1536 LED array was so intense that we usually 
ended up running the LEDs at less than 50 percent 
of their capacity to light up a large room.
It is difﬁcult to capture the infrared glow using 
a digital still camera due to the infrared ﬁlter of 
the image sensor, so there is only a slight glow 
from the LEDs shown. A security camera, on the 
other hand, has no such ﬁlter and will pick up the 
infrared radiation in the same way it would pick 
up 180 W of pure white light from a ﬂoodlight. 
Figure 6-22 shows the slight glow from the LEDs 
at very low power through a standard digital still 
camera. Besides the fact that the monitor does not 
work, it looks completely normal, and would not 
seem out of place in most installations.
The LCD monitor installation was a great 
success, and offered a very covert method to 
illuminate any room where computer equipment 
would not look out of place. The one-way mirror 
can also be used to hide LED arrays behind 
depending on the installation. Simply adding a 
resistive load would work, but there was some loss 
due to heating. A better solution was to create a 
pulse-width-modulated power supply that would 
allow the duty cycle to be varied. This worked 
well when precise control over brightness was 
necessary. The modulated power supply was based 
on the “pulsed LED illuminator” circuit shown 
earlier, but used an array of larger FET transistors 
as the drivers.
The completed stealth installation is shown in 
Figure 6-21, and turned out very well. The one-way 
glass mirror is a bit more reﬂective that the original 
 Figure 6-20   A rechargeable lead-acid 
security battery will power the 
LED array.
 Figure 6-21   The completed super stealthy 
giant infrared LED illuminator.
 Figure 6-22   The 180 W of intense infrared 
radiation can only be seen by 
video cameras.

Project 6  Q  LED Array Illuminator      87
photo frames, real mirror frames, and even small 
appliances that would have a dark reﬂective front 
panel. Other materials such as dark Plexiglas or 
tinted glass will also work to conceal an LED array, 
and many materials that seem opaque to the human 
eye may actually pass infrared light. Certain papers 
and dark plastics will seem transparent to infrared 
light, but you will need to use an infrared LED and 
video camera in order to test them.
 Figure 6-23   The massive LED array illuminates the small room like a spotlight.
Figure 6-23 demonstrates what the security 
camera would see with the stealth infrared LED 
array running at only 25 percent of its maximum 
capabilities, lighting up a room as if a large 
spotlight was being used. When designing your 
own infrared LED array, the main factors to 
consider are cost of parts and the size of the array, 
so let your imagination run wild and give your spy 
cameras the gift of night vision.

This page intentionally left blank 

89
P R O J E C T  7
Pulsed LED Illuminator
89
ALTHOUGH THERE ARE certain limitations to how 
much light (or infrared radiation) can be emitted 
by a light-emitting diode (LED), there are tricks 
that can be used to push them to their ultimate 
maximum limits. This project will demonstrate 
how a simple infrared illuminator can be “pushed” 
a little more in order to extend the useful range of a 
simple night vision system using a camcorder and 
a low-lux monochrome camera. In order to build 
this project, you will need to have the datasheet 
handy for the LEDs you plan to use so that you 
can determine the amount of current the LED will 
withstand in pulsed-mode operation.
receiver, and many low-voltage consumer devices 
do this with visible LEDs to make them appear 
brighter while at the same time conserving power. 
A pulsed-visible LED may look 10 times brighter, 
yet consume only half the power in pulsed-mode 
operation. Of course, there are limitations to 
pulsing LEDs, and you may ﬁnd that using more 
LEDs or higher current LEDs to be more effective 
than using a pulse-mode driver.
This project will explore the strengths and 
weaknesses of the pulsed-mode operation of both 
visible LEDs and infrared LEDs, and compare both 
using a low-lux monochrome spy camera connected 
to a camcorder and small infrared illuminator.
Most newer outdoor security cameras now include 
an infrared ring light illuminator to enhance their 
ability to see in the dark. Infrared light falls just below 
red on the light spectrum, making up the wavelengths 
from about 750 to 1500 nanometers (nm). This light 
cannot be seen by human eyes, but it can easily be 
 Figure 7-0   An infrared illuminator can be 
pushed to the max using pulsed 
current.
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 IC1: LM555 analog timer IC
Q 
 Resistors: R1  100 K, R3  1 K, R4  1 K
Q 
 Capacitors: C1  0.01 MF
Q 
 Transistors: 2N3904 (version 1), TIP120 
(version 2)
Q 
 Diodes: 1N914
Q 
 Battery: 9- to 12-V battery or pack
Pulsed-mode operation means that the LED will 
be turned on and off at a very fast rate using more 
current than it could withstand continuously. The 
purpose of doing this is to force the LED to output 
short bursts of much brighter light (or infrared 
radiation) than it normally would, and by keeping 
the pulse with duty cycle short, the LED will not 
overheat. Television remotes do this to create sharp 
intense bursts of modulated light to send out to the 

90      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
overheating, causing a massive failure in almost 
all of the transistors in the circuit. Luckily, the 
LEDs survived and found their way into our junk 
collection. We have a very extensive collection 
of infrared-enabled security cameras, and the 
interesting thing is that almost all of the newer 
ones have better night vision capabilities and do 
not use pulsed-mode LED drivers. Maybe the 
manufacturers decided that better LEDs made more 
sense than pushing lower quality LEDs to their 
ultimate maximum ratings? 
There are several varieties of infrared LEDs, 
ranging in size, ﬁeld of view, output power, and 
effective light color. The most commonly used 
infrared LEDs output 940-nm infrared light which 
is far beyond the human visual range, and fairly 
detectable by any nonﬁltered video camera. There 
are also infrared LEDs available for the 800 to 
900 nm range, and these are even better for use in 
night vision applications, but there will be an ever 
so slightly detectable red glow as the human eye 
can faintly detect this band of light. If you have 
seen an outdoor night vision security camera after 
dark, then you are probably familiar with this dull 
red glow. The infrared LEDs shown Figure 7-2 are 
common 940-nm infrared LEDs with a forward 
voltage of 1.2 volts (V).
In order to attempt any kind of pulsed-mode 
operation for visible or infrared LEDs, you need to 
look at the datasheet in order to ﬁnd the maximum 
seen by many video cameras, making it useful as a 
covert lighting method in night vision systems. A 
common example of infrared light is the medium of 
communication between your remote control and 
television set. The LED on the end of your remote 
sends out pulses of infrared light, which is received 
by the infrared detector on the TV and demodulated 
back into data. Of course, you cannot see the pulses 
because they are out of our visual range, but any 
video camera that is not equipped with an infrared 
ﬁlter can see this light easily.
Figure 7-1 shows an infrared LED illuminator 
ring taken from a small outdoor security camera. 
There are 17 infrared LEDs arranged in a series 
parallel conﬁguration around a small hole where 
the camera lens would be installed so that the light 
is spread evenly around the ﬁeld of view. This is 
an older illuminator, and was also a pulse mode 
system, which is why there are semiconductors 
on the rear of the circuit board. An illuminator 
without a pulse-mode driver will not have any 
semiconductors as it is wired directly to the DC 
power source, giving each LED its maximum 
voltage and current all of the time.
You may notice that the semiconductors on 
the back of the illuminator shown in Figure 7-1
are completely fried, which is one of the 
downfalls of having more circuitry—more points 
of failure. This circuit was either zapped by a 
nearby lightning surge, or simply gave it up after 
 Figure 7-1   This is a pulsed-mode illuminator 
taken from an outdoor security 
camera.
 Figure 7-2   Remote control infrared LEDs are 
commonly available.

Project 7  Q  Pulsed LED Illuminator      91
pulse current rating as well as the recommended duty 
cycle. Some LEDs can only handle a small increase 
of current during pulsed-mode operation, making 
them unsuitable for the task. Figure 7-3 shows the 
section of a typical infrared LED that details the 
important values needed for pulse-mode operation.
According to the datasheet segment, this 
LED needs 5 V and has a maximum rating of 
100 milliamps (mA) for normal operation. But, 
in pulsed-mode operation the LED can withstand 
1.5 amps (A), which is 1500 mA, or 15 times the 
current! This is really amazing, but don’t expect 
the LED to output 15 times the amount of light 
or infrared radiation. One of the things you will 
realize when experimenting with pulse-driven 
LEDs is that visible LEDs may appear to be twice 
as bright to your eyes, but the difference is not 
that great when using them to illuminate security 
cameras. There is still a small amount of gain to an 
infrared illuminator, but you may ﬁnd the added 
complexity of the circuit to be not worth the effort.
If your LEDs have a pulse-mode rating that 
is any less than 10 times the continuous current 
rating, then it is probably not worth your time to 
use them in pulsed-mode operation. Also, check 
your datasheet for a recommended on/off time 
(duty cycle), to ensure that you don’t over-drive 
the current in pulsed-mode operation. The circuit 
shown here is probably safe for most LEDs as it 
will deliver a very short pulse of between 8 and 
10 microseconds (μs). In order to drive your LEDs 
up to their ultimate maximum brightness, some 
experimentation will certainly be necessary. Expect 
to send a few LEDs to the graveyard along the way!
The schematic shown in Figure 7-4 is a basic 
LED pulser that can send 800 mA pulses to a few 
LEDs, driving them with between 9 and 12 V. When 
pulsing LEDs, the voltages used go well beyond the 
speciﬁed forward voltages shown in the datasheet, 
and pulse on times (duty cycle) must be kept very 
low. This circuit plays it safe, sending a very short 
repeating pulse of no more than 10 μs from the 
LM555 timer out to the LEDs, with as much current 
as the NPN transistor timer circuit can handle 
(about 800 mA). As you add more LEDs in parallel, 
the current required will increase until the transistor 
can no longer supply all of the LEDs. Depending 
on the speciﬁcation of your LEDs, you may be able 
to drive up to four LEDs, or not even push a single 
LED to its capacity. An LED with a maximum 
pulsed-mode current rating of approximately 1 A 
(1000 mA) is about all the transistor can drive. 
Since the initial experimentation will be done 
using visible LEDs, it is best to start with at least 
four LEDs in parallel and then pull one out at a 
time, checking the overall brightness as well as 
 Figure 7-3   Maximum current pulse will be shown on the datasheet for your LED.

92      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
The LED pulser circuit is shown built on a 
solderless breadboard in Figure 7-5, using the 
values from the schematic shown in Figure 7-4. 
The LEDs used here are visible green LEDs with 
values very close to the infrared LEDs we plan 
to use later. Our LEDs have a forward voltage of 
1.2 V, a continuous current rating of 200 mA, and 
a pulsed-mode current rating of 1000 mA (1 A). 
Because the LEDs’ peak current rating is much 
testing the transistor for heat with your ﬁnger. 
The 10 or 20 ohm (7) resistor (R2) will limit 
the current enough to save your transistor from a 
meltdown, but the circuit should not be allowed 
to run hot continually or the life expectancy of the 
transistor will be short. This initial circuit is just 
a test circuit, and will demonstrate the difference 
between continuous low current as compared to 
pulsed-mode current in the visible LEDs. Later, a 
larger transistor will be added in order to drive a 
much larger infrared LED array.
If you can’t ﬁnd a 2N2222 or 2N3904 transistor, 
then you can substitute practically any small signal 
NPN transistor that will handle current of around 
600 mA. As for the 555 timer, any of the variants of 
this device will work, but be aware that altering the 
timing capacitor or resistor values will also change 
the frequency and duty cycle of the pulses. As it is, 
the circuit is set to deliver the quickest pulse that it 
can (around 10 μs), and the frequency of the pulses 
will be approximately 1.5 Kilohertz (KHz). You 
can certainly alter these values, but be aware that an 
error will usually mean a fried LED or transistor.
 Figure 7-4   This LED pulsing circuit sends 800-mA short duration pulses.
 Figure 7-5   The LED pulser test circuit is 
initially built on a solderless 
breadboard.

Project 7  Q  Pulsed LED Illuminator      93
pulse time of around 10 μs. This extremely short 
duty cycle will ensure that the LEDs do not fail 
from overheating. The fast frequency of the pulses 
will make the light look continuous to both video 
cameras and the human eyes. For comparison, a 
TV remote control pulses the LEDs at 40 KHz and 
drives them up to a similar current level as this 
circuit does.
The three LEDs shown lit up in Figure 7-7 
are running from the pulsing circuit, whereas 
the single LED is running from direct current 
though a current-limiting resistor. Although it 
is difﬁcult to tell in the image, the three LEDs 
running in pulsed mode certainly seem brighter 
to look at, and there is an amazing shift in color 
from pure green to greenish blue. This effect was 
surprising considering all four LEDs are exactly 
the same model. To ensure that we did not have 
a mismatched LED, we replaced the single LED 
with one of the pulsed LEDs, and it was conﬁrmed 
that pulsing this green LED caused a massive 
shift in color from about 500 nm (pure green) to 
somewhere around 470 nm (green-blue).
While doing a little research on why this bizarre 
color shift was happening, we found that a few other 
experimenters have found that sharp pulses to 
higher than the transistor can supply, we know that 
as long as the pulses are kept as short as possible, 
no damage will occur to the LEDs. If the transistor 
failed and created a dead short, then the LEDs 
would also be fried, so it is important to keep 
checking the transistor for heat by touching it after 
a few seconds of operation.
Once you have the timer part of the circuit
built up, you can check the output on an oscilloscope, 
if you have one. Without any LEDs connected, take
a reading from the output of the 555 timer on pin #3.
The output should look like the one shown in 
Figure 7-6, with a frequency near 1.5 KHz and a 
 Figure 7-6   The LED pulsing circuit keeps the 
duty cycle to a minimum.
 Figure 7-7   The three pulsed LEDs are brighter than the single nonpulsed LED.

94      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
KPC-EX20H from the company KT&C in Japan, 
and is a very low-lux and high-resolution camera 
that has work extremely well in all of our night 
vision experiments. This camera is also distributed 
by SuperCircuits.com under the model name of 
PC182XS, and sells for around $100. Decent low-
lux monochrome cameras can often be purchased 
for far less, but this one has a very low-lux rating 
and higher resolution CCD imager.
With the LED pulsing circuit tested and 
working with visible LEDs, the next step is to 
test it using a security camera and some infrared 
LEDs (Figure 7-9). Since our infrared LEDs had 
similar forward current speciﬁcations to the visible 
LEDs can alter their wavelength. Apparently, 450-nm 
blue LEDs can be forced to output ultraviolet light 
by doing this, so this opens a few doors for future 
experimentation.
Overall, the results were fairly obvious to the 
naked eye that the pulsed LEDs were deﬁnitely 
brighter than the nonpulsed LEDs, even if we 
only drove a single LED in pulse mode. We tried 
various colors and styles of LEDs, and the results 
were mixed; sometimes the brightness change 
was dramatic, and sometimes it was mainly a 
color shift. High-brightness LEDs with a narrow 
ﬁeld of view responded very well to the pulsed-
mode operation, whereas low-power LEDs with 
a diffused lens did not. The good news is that 
infrared LEDs are similar in characteristics to 
high-power LEDs with a narrow ﬁeld of view, 
so they should be the type to respond well to the 
pulse-mode operation. Also, since 880-nm infrared 
radiation is slightly better than 940-nm radiation 
for night vision, the slight change in the spectrum 
will work in our favor here (if there is any).
Because the charge-coupled device (CCD) or 
complementary metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) 
imager used in a video camera can see infrared 
light in the same way we can see visible light, night
vision is made possible by illuminating an area with 
infrared light at wavelengths of 800 to 1000 nm. 
This light is undetectable by the human eye, but 
fully detectable by the camera, so it appears as 
though a standard white light source was being used 
to light up the scene. Not all cameras are capable 
of viewing infrared light though, as most color 
camcorders and digital still cameras include an 
infrared blocking ﬁlter to improve the response to 
the visible light spectrum. Spy cameras and security 
cameras on the other hand need to collect as much 
light as possible, so they do not include infrared 
ﬁlters and take advantage of their ability to see this 
invisible light for stealthy night vision operations.
The small spy camera shown in Figure 7-8 
is a very low-lux monochrome camera made 
for security use, and can see any infrared light 
perfectly. The camera we are using here is a model 
 Figure 7-8   A small monochrome video 
camera will be used to detect the 
infrared light.
 Figure 7-9   Testing the pulsing circuit with the 
camera and infrared LEDs.

Project 7  Q  Pulsed LED Illuminator      95
shown in the photo, reﬂecting from a matte surface 
from a 12-inch (in) distance. It also seems that the 
small transistor did not have the ability to drive 
all three LEDs in series, so the pulsed LED also 
looked brighter with the lights on. 
To complete this project, a small ring light 
infrared illuminator with 10 LEDs will be 
connected to a much larger driver transistor and 
tested using the same monochrome camera in 
a completely dark room. By feeding the output 
from the small spy cam into the video input on 
a standard camcorder, the result will be a simple 
night vision system that can capture images 
and record live video. By looking through the 
viewﬁnder, it is possible to navigate a completely 
dark room under infrared light alone.
When using a high-power transistor to drive the 
pulses into the LEDs, care must be taken when 
considering the current that each LED will have to 
endure. The TIP120 transistor that we are going 
to use to drive the larger LED array can switch up 
to 5 A in theory, so you will need to run at least two 
LEDs in series and possibly change the value of the 
current limiting resistor. We ran our system from 
12 V and ran a dual chain of ﬁve parallel LEDs in 
series as shown in Figure 7-11. The current limiting 
resistor was changed from 10 to 75 7, just to play 
it safe.
LEDs used in the last test plus a better pulsed 
current rating, they could be safely placed right 
into the circuit. Most infrared LEDs will have a
decent pulsed rating of 1 A or better because 
it is very common to use them in pulsed-mode 
operation, especially when communication through 
modulation is necessary.
With the camera set to view the LEDs on the 
small liquid crystal display (LCD) monitor, 
the circuit was switched on to see the difference 
between the perceived brightness of the three pulsed 
LEDs as compared to the single continuous current 
LED. Unlike the visible green LEDs tested earlier, 
the difference between pulsed and nonpulsed 
operation as perceived by the video camera was 
almost unnoticeable. Actually, it appeared as though 
the single LED might be emitting more infrared 
radiation than the three pulsed LEDs. Of course, 
this test was done with the room lights on, and the 
camera may actually be compensating for contrast 
around the LEDs, so to be fair, the test must be 
done in absolute darkness and with a single LED in 
both modes.
With the room completely dark, the results of 
the test now work in favor of the pulsed-mode LED 
shown in the left of Figure 7-10. The pulser circuit 
is only driving a single LED now, and it is the same 
model as the one running in continuous-current 
mode. The pulsed LED lights up a larger area as 
  Figure 7-10   The pulsed LED on the left is 
deﬁnitely giving off more light.
 Figure 7-11   The wiring we are using for our 10 
infrared LED array.

96      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
The schematic shown in Figure 7-13 is exactly 
the same as the one shown in Figure 7-4 with the 
exception of the high-current TIP120 transistor 
replacing the 2N2222 transistor and the addition 
of more LEDs. Since this transistor can supply 
much greater current, the LEDs were changed from 
a single parallel chain to a series parallel chain 
to reduce the voltage in half. We were not brave 
This is the point where experimentation could 
lead to an LED going off like a popcorn kernel, 
so don’t be staring down over the LED when you 
ﬁrst apply the power, or you may ﬁnd yourself 
getting hit in the eye with an exploding LED 
case! The larger transistor will run with a bit of 
heat, but unless you are driving a massive array of 
LEDs, you should not require a heat sink. Again, 
experimentation is the goal to reaching the ultimate 
limits. It should be done one step at a time, adding 
more LEDs in series right off the start. There are 
some newer high-power LEDs on the market that 
can be pulsed well into 5 A, so you may require an 
even larger driver transistor.
The 10 LED ring illuminator shown in Figure 7-12 
is from a previous project, but it has been rewired 
to match the schematic shown in Figure 7-11. 
Originally, we just drove this array directly with 12 V, 
which worked out perfectly since all 10 LEDs were 
in series and required 1.2 V each. The array actually 
worked very well with direct current, but we wanted 
to see how much better it would light up an interior 
room using 1 A pulses at 12 V.
 Figure 7-12   This is a 10 LED array based on 
the series parallel wiring.
 Figure 7-13   The pulser schematic is the same but uses a higher current transistor.

Project 7  Q  Pulsed LED Illuminator      97
This input may be labeled VCR Input, or External 
Video, and will basically replace the input from the 
camcorder’s built in video system with your external 
source. This is necessary because all camcorders 
actually block infrared light to improve the quality 
of the visible color image. There is no easy way to 
remove the infrared ﬁlter in a camcorder, so unless 
you are willing to go in deep with your tools, you 
will need an infrared-friendly video source. In our 
case, it is the low-lux monochrome spy camera, 
which has been stuck to the side of the camera with 
a bit of double-sided tape.
The LED array would normally ﬁt over the 
camera lens, but we just taped it to the front of 
the camcorder as shown in Figure 7-16 so that we 
enough to try running all 10 LEDs in parallel as 
we did not want to toss 10 LEDs in the trash just in 
case we exceeded their pulsed current limitations. 
In pulsed mode, we never run as high as the stated 
maximum on the datasheet. Further current limiting 
can be done by adding a power resistor between the 
emitter of Q1 and ground. A value between 10 and 
100 7 will work.
The changes to the new schematic involve only 
swapping out the low-current 2N2222 transistor for 
a high-current transistor such as the TIP120. We 
also removed the current limiting resistor R2 and 
ran our LEDs in a series parallel conﬁguration to 
reduce the pulsed current to each LED slightly. If 
you wanted to make the output variable, you could 
add a 100-K potentiometer in place of R3 in order to 
reduce the drive to the base of the transistor. Some 
experimentation will certainly be necessary if you 
plan to get the maximum output from your LEDs 
(Figure 7-14).
To allow the pulse circuit to be tested around the 
house, we rebuilt the circuit on a bit of perforated 
board as shown in Figure 7-15. All wiring is made by 
connecting the wires on the underside of the board 
to form traces. Perforated board is great for fast 
prototyping of small-to-medium circuits, and changes 
are easily made by simply moving wires around.
Most camcorders have a video input connector 
to allow recording from another video source. 
 Figure 7-14   Building the high-current pulser 
on a solderless breadboard.
 Figure 7-15   The completed infrared pulse 
circuit is made on a bit of 
perforated board.
  Figure 7-16   This is the test rig that will be 
used to compare the LED outputs.

98      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
LED illumination is also very good, with only a 
slight fading of the sharp edges and highlights. 
With no light at all, the camera can still make out 
a bit of the scene, which is more than we can see 
with our eyes. A good low-lux camera goes a long 
way when it comes to night vision projects.
So, the verdict is—in pulsed-mode operation of 
infrared LEDs does offer some improvement, but 
you will have to decide if the added complexity 
of is worth the effort. Depending on the cost 
and output power of your LEDs, it may be more 
effective to simply add more LEDs into your array 
to achieve a higher output. More LEDs also has the 
beneﬁt of illuminating a greater ﬁeld of view, which 
is why most night vision camera manufacturers are 
now opting for the more LEDs over pulsed-mode 
operation. The beneﬁt of pulsed-mode operation is 
that less power is consumed due to the pulse duty 
cycle, and that a brighter illuminator can be made in 
a smaller space. There also appears to be some gain 
due to the mysterious light spectrum shifting of 
running LEDs in pulsed mode as the 940-nm LEDs 
begin to output radiation closer to 840 nm if the 
pulses are very short.
could switch back and forth from the spy camera 
to the original lens on the camcorder. Both the 
external camera and LED pulse circuit are driven 
from a 12-V battery pack.
The ﬁnal results show that the pulsed-mode 
operation of the LEDs does in fact offer a stronger 
illumination than the same LEDs running under 
direct current. In Figure 7-17, (A) shows the 
image as seen by the camera under full room 
lighting. Image (B) shows the same scene using 
the LED array in continuous current mode, 
running all 10 LEDs in series from a 12-V power 
source. Image (C) shows the LED array running 
from the pulsing circuit using the high-current 
transistor. And ﬁnally, Image (D) shows the room 
as seen by the camera with only the ambient 
light coming into the window from the streetlight 
across the street.
The tests clearly show that the pulsed-mode 
operation of the 10 LED array offers the most 
illumination in the interior room. Actually, the 
pulsed-mode illumination is brighter to the camera 
than the 100 watts (W) of light from the ceiling 
light directly overhead! The continuous current 
 Figure 7-17   These images were captured from the camcorder recordings.

99
P R O J E C T  8
Laser Night Vision
99
INFRARED LIGHT-EMITTING DIODES (LEDs) are the 
most widely used source of infrared radiation 
for night vision illuminators because they are 
inexpensive, easy to connect, and possess no safety 
hazards, because they are human eye safe and do 
not radiate much heat. The drawback to LED-based 
night vision illumination systems is that they are not 
really useable at distances of more than 100 feet (ft) 
no matter how many LEDs you use in the array. 
Filter-based night vision illuminators that change 
visible light into infrared light are suitable for much 
greater distances, but they suffer from huge energy 
losses due to massive heating of the ﬁlter material 
and because of this, they require massive amounts 
of current and are only suitable for outdoor use. 
A laser on the other hand, is capable of extremely 
long-distance illumination and is probably the most 
energy efﬁcient source of bright light possible.
of more than 5 milliwatts (mW). Class IIIb and 
Class IV lasers can output as much as 500 mW, 
and they are certainly not eye safe, especially when 
highly focused. A laser that outputs only 50 mW 
may seem like nothing, but be aware that instant 
eye damage could occur if you hit your retina with 
a focused beam. Using infrared lasers makes this 
situation so much more dangerous because you 
cannot see the beam, and your blink reﬂex will not 
help save your vision in the event of an accidental 
exposure to the laser beam.
Do not continue with any of these experiments 
unless you are well-aware of the dangers involved and 
have proper laser safety equipment and experience 
in using higher powered lasers. You can still create 
a usable short-range laser illuminator using a lower 
power 5-mW infrared laser diode or module, so 
consider starting with a Class IIIa laser if you want to 
experiment with laser night vision illumination.
 Figure 8-0   Build a long-range laser night 
vision illuminator.
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 Laser: 5- to 500-mW infrared laser diode 
or module
Q 
 Camera: Low-lux monochrome composite 
camera
Q 
 Optics: Gun site, monoculars or binoculars
Q 
 Battery: 9 to 12 V battery pack
The main problem with using infrared lasers to 
create night vision illuminations systems is that 
there are safety issues that must be addressed, 
especially when using lasers with a rating higher 
than Class IIIa or lasers that have an output power 

100      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
Laser pointers and laser modules are basically 
the same thing—a cylindrical enclosure containing 
a laser diode, front-end optics and some kind 
of current-limiting circuit. In the case of laser 
pointers, the enclosure also makes room for a 
battery pack, which means that the laser driver 
circuitry can be made simpler or that the diode 
can often be run directly off the battery. Laser 
modules are designed with much more robust 
driver electronics and also include power regulation 
so they can be run from a range of voltages. Laser 
modules also include much higher-quality optics 
and are often fully adjustable so that the beam can 
be focused or spread for a given distance.
This ability to defocus the beam will be the key 
to making a working laser illumination system, 
so the laser module may be the best choice for 
this project if your budget permits. The small 
laser modules shown in Figure 8-2 have various 
wavelengths, and output low power (5 mW) laser 
radiation in the red, green, and infrared bands. 
We also have several high-power infrared laser 
modules that we use in night vision systems, and 
they range in power from 50 mW to almost 
1 watt (W) in power! A 1-W laser diode is more 
like a weapon than an illuminator, and special care 
must be taken in order to avoid serious eye damage 
or spontaneous ﬁres in the lab!
If you are looking for a less-expensive source for 
high-power lasers, then you may consider using a 
bare laser diode along with some home brew driver 
Not that long ago, an infrared laser with enough 
power to burn wood was the size of a shoe box and 
took hundreds of watts of power. But today you 
can purchase a laser pointer for under $100 from 
many online distributors with enough power to pop 
a balloon at 20 ft and burn electrical tape. Make 
no mistake though—these lasers are not toys. Your 
ﬁrst mistake will also be your last as a single shot 
into your eyes will likely permanently damage your 
vision. If you intend to work with high-power lasers, 
purchase a set of laser safety goggles and wear them 
in your lab when experimenting with these lasers.
The two laser pointers shown in Figure 8-1 are 
both extremely high-power Class IIIb lasers, capable 
of outputting 50 mW and 250 mW of infrared laser 
radiation. Calling these lasers “pointers” is really a 
bad term to use as they are completely invisible and 
not safe for pointing at objects.  The laser shown 
in the top of Figure 8-1 will burn any black object 
from up to 20 ft away, and has a rated output power 
of over 250 mW. The laser shown at the bottom 
of Figure 8-1 will output about 50 mW of power 
and has been converted for infrared operation by 
changing the original visible red laser diode with one 
from a DVD burner. Both of these lasers work very 
well as long-range night vision illuminators once 
their beam has been spread by some type of lens.
If you are looking to purchase a laser pointer-
style laser for night vision experimentation, then 
choose one that allows the collimating lens to be 
adjusted or fully removed. The goal will be to 
spread the beam out to an area of several feet in 
diameter at a distance of several hundred feet.
 Figure 8-1   Laser pointers are now available 
that output infrared radiation.
 Figure 8-2   Laser modules are often higher 
quality and include adjustable optics.

Project 8  Q  Laser Night Vision      101
circuit or a simple battery power pack. Laser diodes 
are usually less expensive than laser modules, and 
available at much higher power levels than most 
laser pointers. The downside to using bare laser 
diodes is that some type of current-limiting circuit 
needs to be made, and there are no included optics. 
The good news is that for illumination use, optics 
can be found from many salvaged sources, and 
often laser diodes can be powered directly from a 
3-volt (V) battery. The strange-looking blocks 
shown in Figure 8-3 are the laser heads taken from 
several old DVD and CD burners. This is the part 
that slides up and down the two linear bearings to 
allow the laser to read the disc surface.
You can purchase a used or brand-new DVD/CD
 burner combo pretty cheap these days. Inside you 
will ﬁnd a pair of very powerful laser diodes. The 
DVD burner will include a high-power 150 mW 
or better visible red laser diode working in the 
650 nanometer (nm) bandwidth, and the CD burner 
will include a 60 mW or better infrared laser diode 
running in the 780 (infrared) nm bandwidth. For 
night vision illumination, the infrared laser diode 
will be the one you want, so look for a DVD/CD 
writer combo, or just a CD writer. The parts shown 
in Figure 8-3 will be easy to remove from the unit, 
and contain the single or dual laser diodes.
The laser head unit shown in Figure 8-4 was 
pulled from an old DVD/CD writer combo unit, 
and contains both the high-power visible red laser 
diode as well as the infrared laser diode. The 
infrared diode used on the CD burner side is quite 
a bit less powerful than the visible red DVD burner 
diode, but make no mistake, the infrared laser 
diode will still output more than 10× the light than 
any “eye safe” laser pointer, and both will damage 
your eyes if you are not extremely careful. You 
will have to pull the laser unit apart using a small 
set of screwdrivers in order to extract the actual 
laser diodes, and along the way you will ﬁnd an 
array of interesting and useful optical components 
to use in other projects. Some of the parts are just 
epoxied in place, so a little prying with a small 
ﬂat-head screwdriver may be necessary during the 
disassembly process. Be careful not to pry on the 
actual laser diode, though.
The bare laser diode will look like the ones 
shown in Figure 8-5. Often, the diode will be 
  Figure 8-3   DVD and CD burners are a great 
source of high-power laser diodes.
  Figure 8-4   This laser unit contains both an 
infrared and visible red laser diode.
 Figure 8-5   Several laser diodes removed 
from DVD and CD burner units.

102      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
the same as with two leads, but will include a lead 
tied directly to the can. Laser diodes with four 
leads have separate ground connections for both the 
laser diode and the optical sensor. We have not yet 
seen a laser diode with ﬁve leads, and the three-
lead package is by far the most commonly used.
If you are salvaging a laser diode from a DVD 
or CD burner, then you will have to do a little 
hacking to determine how to connect the laser 
diode. If you are purchasing a new laser diode or 
can ﬁnd an Internet source that happens to list the 
part number on the laser diode for whatever device 
you salvaged it from, then you will be able to ﬁnd a 
proper datasheet. The datasheet fragment shown in 
Figure 8-7 shows most of the important parameters 
epoxied or press ﬁt into a small metal block for 
better heat dissipation. It may be best to simply 
leave it connected, as the high-power DVD burning 
diode will generate a lot of heat when powered 
up to full current. If you want to remove the laser 
diode from the heat sink to make your own heat 
sink or to retro ﬁt a laser pointer, it may take a bit 
of prying with a thin screwdriver in order to release 
the diode from the small metal block. The glue 
will be contained in a few small holes along the 
laser diode body. This is where you will have to 
pry using the screwdriver blade. If you have a very 
small drill bit, you can also grind out some of the 
epoxy to help release the diode.
The bare laser diode is shown in Figure 8-6. Most 
of them will look exactly the same, regardless of 
wavelength and output power. The small opening at 
the top will usually include a protective glass cover, 
but this is not a focusing lens, just a way to protect 
the actual diode from the elements. There will be as 
few as two connecting leads and as many as four, 
depending on the internal wiring of the laser diode, 
but all of them will function the same way.
The small can will contain both a laser diode, 
as well as an optical sensor that can be used to 
monitor the output in a closed loop driver circuit. 
When there are only two connecting leads, that 
means the steel can is tied to ground, and the leads 
will be the positive side of the laser diode and the 
optical sensor. With three leads, the wiring is often 
 Figure 8-6   This is the bare 60-mW infrared 
laser diode from a CD burner.
 Figure 8-7   The laser diode datasheet will detail the important parameters.

Project 8  Q  Laser Night Vision      103
because the internal resistance of the battery will 
limit the current to a safe level, creating a built-in 
laser driver without using any electronics at all. 
Although you will not see the full output power 
of a 100 mW or greater laser diode, you will still 
get enough output power to burn objects when 
placing the beam from the DVD burning laser 
close to any dark surface. If you are working with 
CD burner laser diodes, then you must do this 
power testing while viewing the beam on a monitor 
connected to a black and white security camera 
as your eyes cannot see the infrared radiation. 
Also, be extremely careful when working with 
infrared lasers because you can fry your retinas. 
You will not see or feel a thing as the invisible 
infrared radiation does irreversible damage. This is 
especially true when a laser diode is focused by a 
collimating lens.
To test your laser diode using the “brute force 
battery method,” start by connecting the negative 
side of the battery to the can (or can-mounted 
lead) of the laser diode and then try the other leads 
using the positive side of the battery. To avoid an 
accidental eye ﬂash, tape a bit of white paper over 
the output window of the laser diode so that the 
beam will be safely defused. If you do not see any 
visible light after trying all possible combinations 
with the leads and battery, you probably have an 
infrared laser diode, so the test needs to be redone 
using the video camera and monitor so you can see 
the invisible infrared radiation.
At 10-ft away, the intense red glow from the 
visible red DVD burner laser is so intense that 
it is almost impossible to get a good photograph 
(Figure 8-9). This is the output from the laser 
diode without any lens at all, so the beam spreads 
out to about as far as the distance from the laser 
to the object, creating a beam that covers an entire 
8-ft wall at about 10-ft away. The output from the 
infrared laser is almost as powerful when using the 
coin battery, and the beam spread is similar, so we 
will use the visible red laser for all photography in 
this project.
for the laser diode that we pulled from an older 
CD burner. According to the datasheet, pin 1 is 
the positive supply for the laser diode, pin 2 is 
the output from the light-sensing photodiode, and 
the case is a common ground point for both. Also 
shown in the datasheet is the continuous output 
power rating of 50 mW and the peak wavelength of 
780 nm, which will be in the infrared region of the 
light spectrum.
If you have no datasheet for your laser diode, 
then you will need to hack your way to ﬁgure out 
which leads are needed to power up the laser diode. 
The bad news is that laser diodes are extremely 
sensitive so that they can be over-powered to the 
point that they will fail within milliseconds of 
having too much current applied. The good news is 
that you can safely power any CD or DVD burner 
laser diode directly from a 3-V button battery such 
as a CR2032 without any damage at all and without 
needing any laser driver circuitry. Figure 8-8 shows 
the brilliant red glow coming from a random laser 
diode that we grabbed from our parts box. Since 
this output was visible red, we knew that this laser 
diode was from a DVD burner and had a potential 
output of over 200 mW. Yes indeed, you need laser 
goggles and a nonreﬂective matte surface to bounce 
the laser beam off of when doing this!
The reason you can safely power up most 
laser diodes using a 3-V lithium coin battery is 
 Figure 8-8   Powering up a bare laser diode 
using a 3-V coin battery.

104      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
it is certainly not mush use as a pointing device! 
The nice thing about this laser module is the 
adjustable collimating lens that can be ﬁne tuned 
or completely removed by unscrewing it from the 
main body. With a laser of this power level (greater 
than 250 mW), a very long-distance night vision 
illuminator can be made, but the unfocused beam 
coming directly from the laser diode will be lost 
after about 20 ft.
The built-in adjustable lens would allow the 
beam to be defocused to about 10 ft across over a 
50 ft distance, but it was simply not enough beam 
spread for this power level. We wanted to add a 
telescope to a low-lux video camera and make an 
illumination system capable of illuminating an 
entire city block! Having the ability to remove the 
lens completely would allow other optics to be 
tested in order to get the resulting beam spread that 
we needed.
Being a hacker, we do not often have a large 
budget for parts, in fact we usually have no budget 
for parts, and optics are extremely expensive to 
purchase. Luckily, we are also a junk collector 
and have managed to salvage a large bucket full 
of various small and large optics taken from 
old appliances such as projectors, cameras, and 
scanners. Figure 8-11 shows some of the lenses 
we tested with the high-power laser pointer with 
the original lens removed, and many of them 
Since beam spreading is necessary for a night 
vision illumination system, it may be practical to 
simply use the bare laser diode with no optics at all 
if short range and ultrabright illumination are your 
goals. The 50 mW infrared laser diode was actually 
good as an indoor illuminator, as the beam spread 
to cover an entire wall of most rooms we tested it 
in. A 50 mW infrared laser diode taken from an old 
CD burner and powered directly from a 3-V coin 
battery made a night vision illuminator that was 
as good as an array of 32 LEDs, yet needed only a 
fraction of the current.
Of course, the downside to this type of 
illumination system is that it may not be eye 
safe, so do not point it at any living creature or 
person, and only view the illuminated area with 
your viewﬁnder. According to the manufacturers 
of similar laser diode based illuminators, a beam 
spread like this is considered safe, but we would 
not take any chances. It would be best to consider 
the unfocused beam to be as dangerous as a highly 
focused beam. We do not own a laser power 
measuring instrument, so we always play it safe, 
and never allow the radiation to enter our eyes, 
even when completely defocused.
The laser pointer shown in Figure 8-10 is really 
a high-power laser module with a built-in battery 
holder. Being completely invisible and powerful 
enough to start ﬁres at several feet from an object, 
 Figure 8-9   The amazing burst of red light 
form a DVD burner laser diode.
 Figure 8-10   This laser pointer allows the lens 
to be adjusted or removed.

Project 8  Q  Laser Night Vision      105
6-in wide, and across the room, it was about 2-ft 
wide, so this lens seemed to be about right for the 
distance we was hoping to achieve with our night 
vision system. Even with the beam spread out this 
much, we would not take any chances and consider 
this project to be eye safe.
Even across a 25-ft distance, the beam remains 
extremely bright on the wall, with the laser spot 
expanding to around 5 ft across (Figure 8-13).
Some adjustment was possible by moving the lens 
closer to the laser diode, but the optimal spread 
seemed to happen with the lens placed right at the 
resulted in a good beam spread for long-distance 
illumination. The goal was to be able to light up 
an area as large as a house at a distance of about 
200 ft away. It seemed as though the perfect lens 
for the job was a 1-inch (in) diameter focusing lens 
taken from an old HP scanner. 
In order to get a useable photograph, we are 
working with our visible red laser, but will be using 
a similar-power infrared laser module in our night 
vision illuminator. Figure 8-12 shows the intense 
beam spread out to about 6 in by the lens we found 
in our scrap pile. At 10 ft, the beam was about 
 Figure 8-11   A vast assortment of various optics salvaged from old electronic devices.
 Figure 8-12   The beam spread out to 6 in at a 
distance of 10 ft.
 Figure 8-13   Across the room, the laser spot 
spreads to several feet across.

106      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
3-V DC powers source, so the power supply will be 
a pair of 1.5-V alkaline AA batteries wired in series 
for 3 V; 3 V seem to be a save voltage for just about 
any laser module or bare diode that we tested, so 
this worked out well.
Figure 8-16 shows the completed and self-
contained dual laser beam test rig, with a high-
power infrared laser module along with a visible 
red laser for visually targeting a distant point. This 
handy laser system was used in several night vision 
experiments along with our Laser Spy Device, 
a system that allows a conversation to be heard 
by sending the information back to a receiver 
that would catch the moving laser beam bounced 
from the target window. The two toggle switches 
are also specially designed so that they have to 
be pulled up and dropped back in place to turn 
edge of the laser tube, where the original focusing 
lens was mounted.
We wanted to make this laser illumination 
project in several different versions, so that we 
could test various laser diodes, modules, and optics 
using a low-lux security camera to view the scene 
thought a zoom lens or telescope. The ﬁnal version 
ended up using a 4 × 32 zoom gun scope, 250 mW 
infrared laser module and a high-resolution camera, 
but we also made a self-contained dual laser system 
that would allow two different lasers to be aligned 
to the same spot. This dual laser system made it 
easy to interchange various diodes and modules 
without having to realign the camera while pointing 
at a distant scene.
To align two different-sized lasers to a single 
source, a half-inch thick piece of aluminum was 
drilled out to support two sizes of lasers: a small 
module and a typical laser pointer–sized body. 
This would allow many different laser modules and 
pointers to be installed and aligned precisely to the 
same spot without having to move the camera or 
tripod holding the aluminum block. Figure 8-14 
shows the drilled aluminum block and the two laser 
modules that will lock into the holes.
The aluminum block was installed to the top of 
a small box cover that will also include a power 
switch to control each of the lasers (Figure 8-15). 
All of our laser modules and pointers work from a 
 Figure 8-14   Making a support to align two 
lasers to the same position.
 Figure 8-15   Adding power switched to control 
each laser module.
 Figure 8-16   The completed dual laser and 
power supply system.

Project 8  Q  Laser Night Vision      107
of the night vision system would be necessary. The 
adjustable lends shown in Figure 8-19 is made by 
inserting a different glass lens into the existing 
adjustable collimating lens housing on order to 
make a beam spreader. The new glass lens was taken 
from a tiny spy camera lens, and ﬁt nicely into the 
original lens housing so it could be glued in place. 
The projector lens shown spreading the beam in 
Figure 8-12 would have also worked, but having the 
ability to adjust the size of the beam was convenient.
The completed illumination and camera zoom 
system is shown in Figure 8-20, ready to be 
connected to a video monitor in order to see the 
scene lit by the invisible infrared radiation. Having 
the ability to adjust the new beam-spreading lens 
on the lasers. This extra safety would eliminate 
an accidental powering of the lasers if one of the 
switches was hit.
The ﬁnal version of our laser based night vision 
illumination system will include a low-lux high-
resolution camera connected to a 4 × 32 optical 
zoom gun sight in order to magnify the distant scene 
lit by the infrared radiation. The laser that will be 
used for illumination will be an 850 nm infrared 
laser with an output of 250 mW, defocused through 
a modiﬁed adjustable lens. The gun sight used for 
this version of the laser illuminator is shown in 
Figure 8-17. Binoculars or a low-power telescope 
would also work well as a camera zoom system.
Since the sight will no longer be used on a riﬂe, 
the mounting hardware was moved to the front 
of the magniﬁer tube and drilled so that a laser 
could be held in place using a few zip ties. Since 
the mounting hardware ﬁt the gun sight perfectly, 
this would point the laser beam in the exact same 
direction that the magniﬁer was aimed at, making 
alignment of the laser illuminator fully automatic. 
Figure 8-18 shows the two mounting brackets 
installed in the front of the gun sight so that the 
laser would sit in the groove normally reserved for 
the riﬂe barrel.
With the laser tube fastened tightly to the riﬂe 
mounting brackets as shown in Figure 8-19, both 
the gun sight and the laser were now pointing in 
the exact same direction, so no further alignment 
 Figure 8-17   This 4 r 32 zoom gun sight will 
allow the camera to see long 
distance.
 Figure 8-18   Modifying the riﬂe mounts to 
hold the laser in place.
 Figure 8-19   The laser tube is held in place by 
the riﬂe mounting brackets.

108      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
color cams, so you can purchase a great low-lux 
monochrome security camera for under $75 from 
many online security distributors. The camera 
shown in Figure 8-21 is a bit of a specialty security 
camera as it has very high-resolution, low-lux, and 
a fully-adjustable image sensor that will work in 
both color and monochrome. We chose this camera 
because it had a larger C-mount type lens that just 
happened to mount nicely against the viewing 
end of the gun sight, allowing a simple bracket 
to hold the camera in place. The adjustable focus 
of the lens allowed the image to be ﬁne tuned for 
extremely high-detailed night vision imaging.
Figure 8-22 shows how easy it was to set up 
the C-mount lens so that an image would be 
was nice, as the scene could be made either larger 
or brighter, depending on the position of the lens as 
well as the distance to the target. Having the laser 
in line with the gun sight also meant that alignment 
was automatic, so no visible laser was needed in 
this setup.
To see invisible infrared radiation, you need to 
view the scene on a video monitor as seen by a 
low-lux (low-light) security camera. To the security 
camera, infrared radiation that is completely 
invisible to the human eye will be displayed as 
normal white light, making a scene look as though a 
white light source was being used for illumination. 
The lower the lux rating on the camera, the more 
light it will be able to collect, so a camera rated for 
1 lux or even lower will make an excellent imager 
for a night vision system. Unfortunately, camcorders 
and digital still cameras cannot see infrared light 
as they have built-in glass ﬁlters that block out 
almost all of the infrared light in order to allow the 
visual light spectrum to be processed much better. 
The good news is that all security cameras can see 
infrared light, and they are very inexpensive.
Another thing to note is that a black-and-white 
security camera will be better for use in a night 
vision system as they are always rated for lower lux 
operation, and infrared light is only shown as black 
and white on the monitor. Black-and-white security 
cameras are also less expensive than decent-quality 
 Figure 8-20   The completed long-range 
illuminator and camera magniﬁer.
 Figure 8-21   Most security cameras can see 
infrared radiation as white visible 
light.
 Figure 8-22   A steel clamp holds the C-mount
camera lens directly to the gun 
sight.

Project 8  Q  Laser Night Vision      109
care had to be taken to avoid any accidental eye 
exposure of the beam, even at a great distance. 
Window reﬂections can be particularly dangerous, 
and since human eyes cannot detect the intense 
infrared beam, laser safety glasses and careful 
placement of the laser are certainly necessary. This 
night vision illumination system is capable of very 
long distance imaging, but we only use it where 
there will be no danger to people or animals at the 
receiving end. Laser illumination systems that use 
even higher levels of infrared laser radiation are 
commercially available, and although they claim to 
be “eye safe,” we would still not take any risks with 
such a high-powered laser system. At least with the 
beam spread out to such a large spot, this laser is 
no longer capable of starting small ﬁres when the 
beam is highly focused!
Figure 8-25 shows the image captured using 
a high-resolution camera capable of seeing the 
infrared radiation sent from the illumination 
system. At 100 ft, the laser spot can be adjusted 
to a width of about 20 ft across, and is almost too 
bright for the low lux camera. Distances are really 
limited only to the optical range of the zoom lens 
and the camera, not the laser, as it can project an 
intense beam of invisible light even a thousand 
feet away. At distance beyond 200 ft, our 4 × 32 
optical zoom riﬂe scope falls short of being able to 
projected from the gun sight viewing lens right 
onto the camera lens. A single steel clamp was 
placed between the lens and the sight, which 
were the same diameter, making a perfect union. 
Normally, we use micro spy cameras for our night 
vision illuminators, and having extremely small 
lenses means that they need some type of adapter 
tube in order to place them in the correct position 
to see through an output lens like the one on the 
gun sight. Binoculars and small telescopes also 
work well with security cameras once you ﬁnd the 
optimal placement of the camera in relation to the 
viewing end of the magniﬁer.
Since the camera was now fastened to the end of 
the gun sight, it would be impossible to support the 
entire unit from the camera end alone, so a small 
metal bar was drilled out to mount to the camera 
tripod and hold both the video camera and gun 
sight in a balanced position. Having the weight 
balanced in the center would keep any stress away 
from the camera and gun sight, allowing the tripod 
to be adjusted without any risk of damage to the 
optical components (Figure 8-23).
The completed illumination and camera zoom 
system is shown in Figure 8-24, mounted to a 
camera tripod for easy adjustment and stable 
imaging. Now, the output from the camera can 
be viewed on any composite video monitor 
or recorded for later analysis. Because of the 
extremely powerful infrared laser being used, great 
 Figure 8-23   Making a camera tripod 
compatible mounting system.
 Figure 8-24   The completed long-range laser 
illuminator and camera zoom 
system.

110      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
zoom into the scene close enough to capture any 
detail, but the laser illumination is certainly not 
lacking.
For longer-range illumination and imaging, 
a low-lux camera ﬁtted to the end of a 150× 
telescope works well, but you really have to be 
careful with the laser alignment and start with 
power levels of at least 250 mW. Such a system 
would be capable of a 1000-ft range. You could 
probably use the original collimating lens that 
 Figure 8-25   From 100-ft away, the camera can see clearly using the laser illuminator.
came with the laser module because at that 
distance, the beam would have spread out to at 
least a hundred feet. We hope you enjoyed these 
laser illumination experiments, and remember that 
any amount of laser power over 5 mW is more than 
enough power to cause instant and irreversible eye 
damage. Never use a laser illumination system on 
people or animals, and always wear laser safety 
goggles, even when viewing the image on the 
video monitor.

111
P R O J E C T  9
Camcorder Night Vision
CAMCORDERS ARE GENERALLY DESIGNED for well-lit 
scenes, using the light to create a quality color 
image for recording. To ensure that the image is 
seen by the camera in a similar way to our eyes, 
only the portion of the light spectrum that is visible 
to our eyes is processed. Infrared light falls just 
below red on the light spectrum, making up the 
wavelengths from about 750 to 1500 nanometers (nm).
This light cannot be seen by human eyes, but it can 
easily be seen by the charge-coupled device (CCD) 
imaging system in the camera, allowing it to be 
used as a night vision viewer.
can give your camcorder the ability to record 
night vision scenes that have been lit by some 
type of infrared illuminator. This project uses an 
inexpensive camcorder and a twenty-dollar black-
and-white spy cam along with one of the light-
emitting diode (LED) illuminators shown earlier to 
create a portable stealthy night vision camcorder.
Most video camcorders allow an external video 
source to be plugged in, essentially replacing the 
built-in CCD imager with some other compatible 
video source. This video input will often have 
some custom manufactured input jack with a label 
of “external,” “line input,” or “AV input.” You will 
need the cable that came with the camcorder in 
order to make this project, as each manufacturer 
will have its own special cable for that model of 
camera. On the older tape-based camcorders like 
the one shown in Figure 9-1, there was a 1/8 jack 
“standard,” that used a 4-ring 1/8-inch (in) male 
plug like the one shown in Figure 9-1, allowing any 
composite video source to be fed into the camera.
111
 Figure 9-0   This camcorder uses a spy camera 
to see invisible infrared light.
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 LEDs: 8 to 24 infrared LEDs in a 5-mm 
through hole package; wavelength of 
LEDs is 800- to 940-nm infrared
Q 
 Camera: Low-lux black-and-white 
composite video camera
Q 
 Camcorder: Any camcorder with an external 
video input
Q 
 Battery: 6- to 12-V pack depending on 
number of LEDs
Unfortunately, you cannot simply add an 
infrared illuminator to your camcorder and use 
it to capture night vision video because the CCD 
imager contains a glass ﬁlter that blocks out most 
of the infrared light. The good news is that most 
camcorders allow a secondary video input to be 
recorded, and by feeding the output from a small 
black-and-white spy camera into this input, you 

112      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
of standard RCA jacks to allow the camera to be 
plugged into any composite video-compatible 
equipment. This external video jack on most 
camcorders is called a “dubbing jack” as it can be 
used to record video from an external source or 
send video from your camera out to another video 
recorder. Check your camera’s manual to ensure it 
has this function.
We use many small video cameras for security 
work, machine vision experiments, and robotic 
projects. They range in size from half-an-inch 
square to quite large depending on the features, 
imaging system, and type of lens installed. For 
most indoor work, a small-board camera with a 
ﬁxed medium to wide angle lens will be perfect, 
but there are times when you need to see a much 
larger area or over great distances, so these cameras 
have several body types that allow the use of 
multiple lens styles. Extremely tiny spy cameras 
will not have this option, as they use a very tiny 
glass or plastic lens built right into the housing. 
There will be a bit of a trade-off between image 
quality and size.
For most covert work, size will be the key factor 
in camera selection, so you probably won’t be 
dealing with multiple lenses or even have a choice. 
In Figure 9-3, you can see the huge difference 
in size between the long-range motorized lens 
telephoto camera on the left and the tiny spy 
camera at the front of the photo. The tiny spy 
camera has a simple ﬁxed medium angle lens 
You will have to identify both the external 
video input and acquire the proper input cable in 
order to build this project, but if you kept all of 
the accessories from your camcorder, then that 
odd cable will probably be still sitting in the box, 
as it usually not used. Some manufacturers like to 
chisel the customer out of more money by making 
their own special connectors and then charging 
a ridiculous amount for the cable, so check your 
camcorder manual to make sure your camera 
supports video input and that you can acquire the 
necessary cables for a fair price.
Figure 9-2 shows the 1/8-in style connector 
that was popular on many tape-based camcorders. 
This connector is the same size as a typical 1/8-in 
headphone jack, but has four conductor rings, 
rather than the usual three as found on a headphone 
connector. At the other end of this cable is a set 
 Figure 9-2   Our camcorder uses the 4-pin 1/8-in 
connector and is labeled AV. 
 Figure 9-3   A variety of small security video 
cameras.
 Figure 9-1   Any camcorder with an external 
video input will work for this project.

Project 9  Q  Camcorder Night Vision      113
camera on the right of Figure 9-4 only has a tiny 
connector with a three wire cable to allow power, 
ground, and video output connections. Since you 
will be powering the camera from a battery source, 
the smaller camera will be the better choice.
When digging into the technical details of a 
security camera, one of the most important aspects 
will be the type of imaging device used, which 
will either be a CCD imager or complementary 
metal-oxide semiconductor (CMOS) imager. Both 
types of imagers convert light into voltage and 
process it into electronic signals. In a CCD sensor 
like the one shown in Figure 9-5, every pixel is 
transferred through a very limited number of output 
nodes (often just one) to be converted to voltage, 
buffered, and sent off-chip as an analog signal. All 
of the pixels can be devoted to light capture, and 
the image quality is high. In a CMOS sensor, each 
pixel has its own charge-to-voltage conversion, and 
the sensor often also includes ampliﬁers, noise-
correction, and digitization circuits, so that the chip 
outputs digital bits. These other functions increase 
the design complexity and reduce the area available 
for light capture. 
What this means is that for low-resolution and 
low-light imaging, CCD cameras are currently 
the best choice. CMOS imagers are used in very 
high-resolution imaging systems such as digital 
cameras and scanners as proper lighting is usually 
not a problem. If you have the choice between a 
and will run from a 6-volt (V) power source for 
many hours. The larger camera uses a computer 
to control the motorized zoom lens and requires 
multiple power sources and electronic control 
systems in order to operate. For this project, an 
inexpensive black and white mini camera with a 
medium to wide angle lens that will run from a 
6- or 9-V power source will be perfect.
Security cameras and micro spy cameras will 
have a connection point for DC (direct current) 
power and a video output, and some will have an 
audio output or several control lines for onboard 
features such as gain, color, text overlay, and lens 
control. The most basic cameras you will probably 
work with most often will have only power and 
video connectors, or simply include three wires 
coming out of the tiny enclosure. The tiny board 
cameras with three wires will usually follow a 
simply color scheme of black or green  ground, 
red  positive power, and white, yellow, or 
brown  composite video output. Of course, it is 
always a good idea to check the manual for polarity 
and voltage before making any guesses.
The camera in the left of Figure 9-4 is quite 
advanced, having a built-in on-screen display 
system, many internal function parameters, lens 
control, and audio. This camera is somewhat large, 
so it has many buttons on the back side, audio and 
video jacks, DC-power jack, and a special connector 
to control a motorized lens. The basic low-lux micro 
 Figure 9-4   All video cameras will have 
connectors for power and video 
output.
 Figure 9-5   The CCD imager makes video 
by changing light into an analog 
voltage.

114      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
or counterclockwise to gain the best focus for a 
certain installation. Most of these lenses will see 
perfectly from about 10 feet (ft) to inﬁnity, but for 
closer focus, it will probably be necessary to make 
the initial adjustments. Although the optics on these 
tiny lenses range from good to poor, the image 
quality is always decent due to the low resolution 
of the composite video signal, along with the 
high quality of the CCD imaging device used. We 
found that a $30 color board camera will exceed 
the quality of a $1500 camcorder that was made 
ﬁve years earlier. Technology is always improving 
and becoming less expensive, so high-quality 
surveillance equipment is becoming more and more 
affordable for the “average” person.
This project uses the infrared radiation from an 
array of LEDs in order to see in complete darkness, 
and with the price of security gear at an all-time 
low, you can often purchase a complete night vision 
camera like the one shown in Figure 9-7 for well 
under $50. Inside the weatherproof aluminum shell, 
you will ﬁnd a high-quality board camera, power 
supply, and another board with an array of infrared 
LEDs. By itself, this inexpensive security camera is 
a high-performing night vision camera with a range 
of about 50 ft, and has a very good color image 
for daylight operations. If you have not yet built 
an infrared illuminator or have a video camera for 
this project, consider purchasing a camera like the 
one shown in Figure 9-7, as it has all you need to 
complete this project.
hundred-dollar CCD security camera with a 0.5-lux 
rating and a ﬁfty-dollar CMOS camera with a 
1.5-lux rating, the CCD camera will offer a far 
superior image and work well in a low-light or 
night vision application. Resolution is not much 
concern in a security camera, as most are already 
beyond the actual capabilities of the National 
Television System Committee (NTSC) or Phase 
Alternate Line (PAL) composite video standard 
anyhow. The lux rating will probably be the most 
important speciﬁcation on a security camera next to 
the type of lens and ﬁeld of view.
Lux is the measure of light or luminous power 
per area. It is used in photography as a measure 
of the intensity, as perceived by the human eye. 
The lower the lux rating on a camera, the better it 
will see in the dark. For instance, a monochrome 
camera with a lux rating of only 0.5 lux will 
see much better in the dark than you could with 
your naked eye, and with the help of an infrared 
illuminator will be able to see into the darkness 
and display it on a monitor as if it were midday. 
Color cameras require much more light to achieve 
a decent image, and since they usually include 
infrared ﬁlters, they are not the best choice for 
night vision applications.
The focus can be set on these micro video 
lenses by loosening the tiny set screw as shown 
in Figure 9-6 in order to turn the lens clockwise 
  Figure 9-6   Smaller video cameras have a 
ﬁxed focus that can be set.
  Figure 9-7   An outdoor security camera with 
built-in night vision LEDs.

Project 9  Q  Camcorder Night Vision      115
appliances, but the most common type is the RCA 
jack shown in Figure 9-9. This connector is the 
same one used on the back of a television set to 
connect older video players and camcorders. On 
the back of a TV or monitor, this jack will often 
be labeled “Video Input,” “Line Input,” “External 
Input,” and will use the same connector for audio 
and video. Most security cameras will output 
composite video in either NTSC or PAL format to 
be connected to any TV or monitor that can accept 
this input. Some of the smaller spy cameras may 
not have any connector, just bare wires, so it makes 
sense to adapt them to the RCA jack as shown in 
the upper part of Figure 9-9 if you plan to use them 
with standard TVs or monitors.
If your camcorder has a mount for an external 
light like the one shown in Figure 9-10, then you 
can use the slot to create a slide-in adapter for your 
external camera and infrared light source. The 
piece of aluminum shown in Figure 9-10 is the lid 
Because the audio and video signals are prone to 
interference over longer distances, shielded coaxial 
cable is necessary in order to make the connection 
between the camera and the monitor or recording 
device. If your camera has RCA connectors at both 
ends, then you can use any standard patch cable 
to make the connection to your TV or monitor, 
but often you will need longer cables or have to 
install your own connectors. The standard coaxial 
cable type used for security cameras is the RG-59 
type. This cable has a single insulated signal wire 
surrounded by a conductive shield. The “Siamese 
RG-59” version also includes a second shielded 
pair to allow camera power supplies to be located 
indoors at the location of the video recorder or 
monitor. For short connections of only a few feet, 
practically any coaxial wire will work just ﬁne.
You may need to cut, strip, and solder your own 
connections, depending on your camera setup. 
Figure 9-8 shows the various stages of stripping 
down a coax cable to reveal the grounded outer 
shielding, as well as the protected inner signal 
wire. When connecting coaxial cable to an audio 
or video source, the inner wire carried the signal 
and the outer shield is connected to a common 
ground. When using coaxial cable to carry power, 
the positive supply is connected to the inner wire 
and the common ground becomes the outer shield. 
In almost all instances, the ground is common to all 
signals, including the power supply.
There are a few different types of connectors 
used on security cameras and composite video 
 Figure 9-8   Coaxial cable is needed to carry 
the audio and video signals.
 Figure 9-9   This is the most common type of 
composite video connector.
 Figure 9-10   The external light mounting slot 
is going to hold the new camera.

116      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
play. The aluminum is thinner than necessary, so 
the corners will be slightly bent in order to create 
a tighter ﬁt so that the camera does not bounce 
around or fall out of the slot.
When working with thin aluminum or steel, a 
notching tool like the one shown in Figure 9-13 
comes in very handy, as it can cut square bits out 
of the material. This tool can cut square holes and 
shapes out of material as thick as 1/16 in, and is 
great for cutting tabs or holes for liquid crystal 
display (LCD) panels, lights, or controls. A small 
hand ﬁle is also a must-have tool when working 
with thin metal or any type of project box that 
needs to have some type of machining done to it.
Once the slot was cut with the notching tool 
and then cleaned up with the hand ﬁle, it ﬁt 
perfectly into the light mounting slot as shown in 
Figure 9-14. Because the thin aluminum plate was 
from a project box. It will be cut so that it ﬁts into 
the light mounting slot on the camcorder, allowing 
the other components to be positioned over the top 
of the camcorder. If your camcorder does not 
include a light slot, then there are many other 
options available such as using a base that connects 
to the tripod screw hole or simply using Velcro on 
the side of the camera.
Figure 9-11 shows the aluminum lid sitting up 
against the light mounting slot so that two points 
can be marked to begin cutting a slot into the 
aluminum. Practically any thin aluminum, steel, 
or plastic can be used to ﬁt into the slot, but these 
project box lids are nice because there is plenty of 
room to mount the components and they can be cut 
using a notching tool or Dremel cutting wheel.
The slot will be cut as shown in Figure 9-12 so 
that it ﬁts snugly into the camcorder with very little 
  Figure 9-11   Marking the aluminum plate to 
cut the new slot.
  Figure 9-12   The slot to be cut will ﬁt into the 
light mount on the camcorder.
  Figure 9-13   A notching tool and a hand ﬁle is 
used to carve out the slot.
  Figure 9-14   The tab is cut and ﬁts snugly 
into the light mounting slot.

Project 9  Q  Camcorder Night Vision      117
camera on the aluminum and the hole being 
marked for drilling.
Figure 9-17 shows the camera sitting on the 
aluminum mounting plate with the connector 
placed into the quarter-inch hole. Since this 
camera is so lightweight and small, it will only 
need a bit of double-sided tape to hold it onto the 
aluminum plate.
Rather than drilling holes for stand-offs and 
mounting screws, we just placed a bit of double-
sided tape on the aluminum plate to hold the 
camera securely in place (Figure 9-18). The tape 
also creates an insulating barrier to keep the 
camera’s circuit board contacts from shorting out 
on the conductive aluminum surface.
The camera and mounting bracket are shown 
sitting in the camcorder’s light mounting slot in 
Figure 9-19, ready to have the rest of the wiring 
and infrared light source connected. All that is left 
thinner than the slot, it was bent at the front corners 
in order to offer a little more friction when ﬁt into 
the slot.
To offer an area to mount the camera and LED 
illuminator, the plate was bent at a 90 degree angle 
as shown in Figure 9-15 so that the face would 
point forward along with the camera lens. The 
external camera does not have to be perfectly in 
line with the original camera lens, but it does help 
to have both pointing in the same forward direction, 
especially if you plan to navigate a completely 
dark room by looking through the image on the 
camcorder viewﬁnder.
Our small video camera had a connector plug in 
the lower bottom corner, so we had to drill a hole 
into the mounting plate to install the connecting 
wires. Figure 9-16 shows the placement of the 
  Figure 9-15   The aluminum part is bent into a 
90 degree angle.
  Figure 9-16   Marking the position of the 
camera connector to drill the hole.
 Figure 9-17   The connector hole drilled 
through the aluminum plate.
 Figure 9-18   A small piece of double-sided 
tape will fasten the camera.

118      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
brightness. The 940-nm infrared radiation is 
completely invisible to human eyes, yet shows up 
on the low-lux black-and-white camera as typical 
white light. These LEDs are the exact same type 
that are used in remote controls to send bursts of 
infrared radiation to the receiver in your TV. Any 
of the night vision illuminator projects presented 
earlier would work as an invisible light source for 
this project, but the ring light already ﬁt perfectly 
with this small spycam.
A 12 V battery pack with a built-in switch was 
chosen to power both the camera and the infrared 
LED array (Figure 9-22). Having 12 series-
connected LEDs, each requiring 1.2 V, made this 
battery pack the perfect choice, and the camera also 
to do now is ﬁnd a suitable battery pack that will 
power both the camera and the LED illuminator ring.
The small connecting plug used on our board 
camera is shown in Figure 9-20, pushed through 
the hole drilled in the aluminum plate. These 
connectors are custom-made for the cameras, so 
care must be taken when pulling them out of the 
socket. Usually, the small security cameras have 
three connecting wires—ground, power, and video 
output.
The infrared illumination ring light shown in 
Figure 9-21 is an earlier project made to ﬁt over 
the lens of the small spy camera. The 10 LEDs 
are wired in series and powered by a battery pack 
to give each LED the proper voltage for optimal 
  Figure 9-19   The camcorder now has two sets 
of electronic eyes.
 Figure 9-20   This small spy camera uses a tiny 
connecting plug on the back.
  Figure 9-21   Infrared illumination will be 
provided by an LED ring light.
 Figure 9-22   This 12-V battery pack will 
power the camera and the 
illuminator.

Project 9  Q  Camcorder Night Vision      119
Figure 9-24 shows how our completed night 
vision camcorder conversion project looked after 
fastening the battery pack and wiring to the camera 
body. All of the components can be easily removed 
requires 12-V DC to operate. You could probably 
hack into the camcorder and pull the needed power 
right from the built in rechargeable battery, but this 
might be difﬁcult as the lithium pack will probably 
have a lower voltage than necessary to operate 
an external camera. The camera and infrared 
illuminator will run for hours off of this small 
1 amp (A) hour 12-V battery pack.
To get the camcorder to accept the external 
camera as the default video input, we had to jump 
into the onscreen menu system (Figure 9-23) and 
choose “AV Input,” which turned off the camera’s 
built-in color imaging system and replaced it with 
the signal coming from the black-and-white spy 
camera. Some cameras will automatically switch 
to the external input once a sync signal is detected, 
but you may have to play around in the menus to 
get your camera to switch to the external camera. 
Oddly, our camera only records the external source 
when in “playback mode,” which makes it act like 
a mini VCR.
 Figure 9-23   Setting up the camera to use the external camera as an input.
 Figure 9-24   The completed night vision 
camcorder conversion project.

120      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
low-lux black-and-white security camera (bottom 
left image), the camera does a little better in the 
dark since the spy cam has a much better ability 
to see in low-light conditions. With the infrared 
illuminator powered on (bottom right image), the 
scene looks well lit, yet we cannot see anything 
unless we view the scene through the camcorder’s 
viewﬁnder.
The nice thing about using this system as a 
night vision viewer is the ability to record what 
you are viewing, just as you could with the original 
imaging system on the camcorder. Navigating 
a room by looking through the image on the 
viewﬁnder is fairly easy to do as well, so this 
project is both a night vision viewer and stealthy 
security recoding system. For total stealth operation 
in complete darkness, place some black tape 
over the camcorders red indicator LED, but other 
than that, you can see in complete darkness with 
this unit, and your operations will be completely 
invisible to anyone in the room. Have fun on your 
covert spy missions!
if necessary. Switching between color daytime 
recording over to stealthy night vision mode only 
requires a few presses of the menu buttons.
This rig also offers what was once referred to as 
“X-ray vision,” a controversial feature offered on 
some camcorders to remove the built-in infrared 
ﬁlter. We say controversial because it was found 
that in the daytime, certain clothing would appear 
opaque to the camera due to the ability of certain 
fabrics to pass infrared light. The company that 
offered this mode quickly removed it from their 
ﬁrmware, but many hackers ﬁgured out how to 
restore this functionality. Feel free to experiment 
with this “interesting” phenomenon, but be careful 
who you point your camera at!
The completed night vision camcorder is shown 
pointing at our parts closet (Figure 9-25 top left) 
as seen by the camera used to make these project 
photos. The top right image in Figure 9-25 is what 
the camcorder sees with the room lights off when 
using its own built-in color imaging system—not 
much at all. Switching over to the external 
 Figure 9-25   The converted night vision camcorder can see in complete darkness.

121
P R O J E C T  1 0
Night Vision Viewer
THIS EASY-TO-BUILD NIGHT VISION VIEWER lets 
you see deep into the night without detection. This 
covert system can light up a room as if you were 
using a ﬂashlight, yet only you will be able to see 
the light. The performance of this night vision 
viewer is as good as some commercially available 
night vision systems that cost a lot more. Using 
invisible infrared light, the night vision viewer can 
see in total darkness, indoors and outdoors, and 
will operate from a battery pack for several hours. 
This device can also be used to detect other night 
vision systems or as a jammer to hide your face to 
most security cameras. Another interesting effect 
of the night vision system is referred to as “X-Ray 
Vision,” which allows the user to see through 
certain materials (including clothing) that may be 
opaque to infrared light. If covert surveillance or 
countermeasures is your game, then this is one 
piece of equipment you will deﬁnitely want in your 
spy gear arsenal.
The night vision viewer is built around 
commonly available parts, most of which can be 
found new at any electronics store, or taken from 
dead video appliances. This project is well within 
the reach of anyone with a desire to do a little 
hardware hacking, and even includes a basic guide 
to getting started in electronics. There is a lot of 
room to add your own modiﬁcations as well, so you 
can create your own unique spy gear in order to 
further your cause. The truth is out there, and now 
you will be able to see it even in total darkness!
The night vision system consists of three 
main parts: a low-light (lux) camera, an invisible 
light (infrared) illumination system, and a video 
viewﬁnder. The three components work together 
in order to extend your range of vision into the 
infrared spectrum, which is beyond what the 
121
  Figure 10-0   Build the stealthy night vision 
viewer.
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 LEDs: 8 to 24 infrared LEDs in a 5-mm 
through hole package Wavelength of LEDs 
is 800 to 940 nm infrared
Q 
 Camera: Low-lux black-and-white 
composite video camera
Q 
 Camcorder: Any camcorder with a 
CRT-based viewﬁnder
Q 
 Battery: 6- to 12-V pack depending on 
number of LEDs

122      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
rarely hackable, and they can be easily identiﬁed by 
their small size and color screens. CRTs are strictly 
black and white and glow blue when they are ﬁrst 
powered up.
These older tape-based camcorders can often be 
purchased inexpensively from second-hand stores, 
yard sales, or online (check eBay, Kijiji, Craigslist, 
etc.). Even if the tape mechanics are broken, the 
viewﬁnder will probably be ﬁne, and a simple power 
up will tell you right away. If you see the tube begin 
to glow, then it probably works ﬁne. We will now 
cover the viewﬁnder extraction operation, which will 
vary depending on your camera model and age.
The viewﬁnder will be powered by the camera’s 
main circuit board, and normally only requires 
a single DC voltage between 9 and 12 volts (V) 
to operate. The viewﬁnder will also have a video 
input and ground line, as well as several other 
functions such as a power light-emitting diodes 
(LED) or function switch that can be ignored. 
In the end, you will only need three of the wires 
coming from the viewﬁnder (power, ground, and 
video input). Start by removing the multitude 
of tiny screws from the camcorder shell until 
you reveal the main board where the viewﬁnder 
connects as shown in Figure 10-2.
Normally, the viewﬁnder will have a removable 
plug that can be pulled right out of the main board, 
making it easier to probe for voltage if necessary. 
Having removed many of these viewﬁnders, we 
can assure you that there is no standard whatsoever 
human eye can see, allowing you to see in complete 
darkness. Because the camera sees this infrared 
light as if it was visible light, the image looks no 
different on the screen than it would if you lit the 
dark area with a typical ﬂashlight.
The ﬁrst part of this project will be the 
acquisition of the viewﬁnder, which is nothing 
more than a tiny composite video monitor that 
can be powered from a battery. These small video 
screens can be removed from older camcorders or 
purchased new from many security supply outlets. 
Figure 10-1 shows an older tape-based camcorder, 
which includes a cathode ray tube (CRT) based 
viewﬁnder that can be removed from the rest of 
the camera. Also shown in Figure 10-1 is a small 
ready-to-use viewﬁnder purchased from an online 
security store. These ready-to-use viewﬁnders 
are sometimes referred to as “camera testers,” or 
“micro monitors.” These units will have a jack 
(RCA jack) marked “video input” on the back of 
the case, so you can just feed your camera video in 
as if you were connecting to a standard monitor.
If you do plan to hack up an old camcorder for 
the viewﬁnder, it is important that it be a “tube-
based type” that includes all of the electronics in 
the actual viewﬁnder housing. A clear indication 
of this is the 3- or 4-inch (in) long housing and 
the white screen, which is actually made of glass. 
Newer camcorders use an LCD screen, which is 
  Figure 10-1   An older camcorder with a CRT
viewﬁnder.
  Figure 10-2
Identifying the connection point.

Project 10  Q  Night Vision Viewer      123
meaning that we have the correct two power wires, 
but they are reversed according to the colors of the 
jacks on our meter. Sometimes you have to test 
every possible combination of wires to get a voltage 
reading, but if your camera is powered up and ﬁne 
without the viewﬁnder connected, then you will 
eventually ﬁnd the magic pair. If you have a dead 
camera, or one that does not like operating with the 
viewﬁnder out of the circuit, then there are several 
other ways to decode the cryptic viewﬁnder wiring.
Another way to decode the wiring of your 
viewﬁnder if you cannot probe the camera board is 
to use a “brute force” hack attack. This operation 
is a bit more dangerous, as you may apply power 
in reverse to the viewﬁnder circuit, but by using a 
current-limiting resistor or power supply, chances 
of damaging the board are greatly reduced. 
Figure 10-4 shows another CRT viewﬁnder 
connected to a breadboard, which contains a 9-V 
battery and a 100-ohm (7) resistor.
By running the battery in series with the resistor, 
you reduce the current draw in case of a short 
circuit or supply reversal, so damage is not likely to 
occur. Often the internal circuitry in the viewﬁnder 
is very robust and may include a power regulator or 
clamping diode, so this operation is normally safe. 
If using a battery, choose dry cell over an alkaline 
as it will deliver much less current if shorted or 
reversed. Also, a power supply with an amperage 
control is great, as you can limit the current to a 
when it comes to number of wires, or wiring 
colors. Black and red almost always do not indicate 
positive and negative, so a little hardware hacking 
will likely be needed in order to get the viewﬁnder 
to power up and run without the rest of the camera.
If your viewﬁnder is soldered directly to the 
board, cut the wires so there is a bit of wire left on 
the main board in case you need to power up the 
camera to aid you in ﬁnding the power and ground 
lines later. If all the wires are the same color (often 
the case), then ﬁnd some small labels to stick on 
the wires, or make a diagram of each wire so you 
can match it back up to the viewﬁnder.
Figure 10-3 shows one of the many alternative 
methods that you can use to help identify the 
positive (power) and negative (ground) wires of your 
viewﬁnder—by checking every wire on the main 
board while the camera is powered on. This can be 
done with or without the viewﬁnder connected, as 
most cameras will still power up with it disconnected 
from the main board. Figure 10-3 (inset) shows how 
our connector looked, having four white wires and 
one blue wire. Again, there is almost always no logic 
to the colors or even the number of wires, many of 
which are totally redundant. 
Viewﬁnder voltages range from 6 to 12 V, and will 
often run ﬁne from any voltage between 9 and 12 V 
due to the built-in regulation, which make them easy 
to connect to an external battery source. Figure 10-3 
shows our multimeter registering 12 V, but negative, 
  Figure 10-3   Live testing to decode the 
viewﬁnder wiring.
  Figure 10-4   Brute force testing to power up 
the viewﬁnder.

124      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
powers up for the ﬁrst time on battery power. There 
won’t be any image yet, but the glowing blue tube 
is a great sign that you are very close to having 
the viewﬁnder wiring fully decoded. After a few 
seconds of being powered on, remove the battery, 
and then feel around the tiny circuit board for any 
hot spots. If your board seems hot, try a lower 
voltage until the screen no longer glows or until it 
shrinks below the screen borders. Usually 9 to 12 V 
will run these viewﬁnders without any hassle, but 
the odd one may be designed for only 5 V.
If you have failed to decode your viewﬁnder using 
the last two methods, then you will need to explore 
the actual circuit board for clues. Looking for large 
capacitors is a good start, as the negative side of the 
can will always be going to ground. Often, there is 
just one common ground, and it may be connected to 
several wires on your connector. On mine, there were 
four or ﬁve redundant ground connections. Another 
easy way to decipher the wiring is to identify the 
small integrated circuits (IC) on the board and 
then dig up the datasheet to ﬁgure out which pins 
are VCC (positive) and VSS (ground). Almost all 
viewﬁnders will have a single large IC, which will be 
called a “television on a chip” or “complete NTSC 
video processor IC.” We have not found a viewﬁnder 
we could not decode, but sometimes a little hacking 
and experimentation will be needed, especially with 
multiple wires of the same color. Feel free to scan or 
post an image of your viewﬁnder board in our forum, 
and you may ﬁnd someone else with the same unit 
already decoded.
Once you have your viewﬁnder powered up and 
glowing, the next step is to determine which of 
the wires the video input is. The video input will 
accept any composite video signal like the output 
of a VCR, camera, or video game. Cut an old RCA 
jack and bare the wires at one end as shown in 
Figure 10-6 (inset) so you can take the output from 
your video player as a test signal. Don’t worry, 
you won’t hurt your video machine during these 
test since it has a high-impedance input, which is 
protected from DC voltages. Place the jack into the 
hundred milliamps and then look for spikes as you 
randomly test the wiring combinations. A power 
reversal will pin your current reading or meter 
instantly, alerting you of the situation.
To test your viewﬁnder using the brute force 
method, bare all of the wires and plug them into 
a breadboard as shown in Figure 10-4. Using 
a current-limiting power supply, or a dry cell 
(nonalkaline) battery and a 100-7 (or close) 
resistor, start trying combinations until you see 
your viewﬁnder begin to glow. Sometimes you can 
listen for the high-voltage transformer buzzing, but 
seeing the screen light up is your best bet. Also, 
don’t touch the circuit board while the viewﬁnder 
is running, as there are a few kilovolts coming 
from the tiny high-voltage section. Due to the 
extremely low current, you won’t hurt yourself, but 
we guarantee you won’t enjoy a shock from 10,000 V 
either! If you can identify the high-voltage wire, 
then drop a small neon bulb from the output to the 
metal cage on the HV section, and it will glow the 
instant you have power connected properly.
After a bit of brute force hacking, we decoded 
our viewﬁnder’s wiring map as: yellow = power, 
red = ground, and orange = video input. This is 
practically the opposite of what you might expect 
for wiring colors, but hackers like us are not usually 
a concern during the manufacturing process!
The dull blue glow shown in Figure 10-5 is what 
you will see when your CRT viewﬁnder ﬁnally 
  Figure 10-5   The CRT will glow blue once 
powered up.

Project 10  Q  Night Vision Viewer      125
sees infrared as monochrome, a color camera is 
also not necessary, reducing the cost further. What 
does matter is the lux rating of the camera, and 
this should be as low as possible. A lux rating of 
less than 1 will work ﬁne for this project, and you 
should acquire a camera with a nonpinhole lens and 
a lux rating as low as 0.001 lux, which makes the 
camera almost a night vision system already.
One type of camera that will not work in this 
application is a typical camcorder, as it has a ﬁlter 
to block out infrared light for improved image 
quality. You could probably dig into the guts 
and remove the tiny glass infrared ﬁlter, but the 
bulky, power hungry camcorder includes so many 
options you simply do not need, that the best bet is 
certainly a tiny CCD video camera module like the 
ones shown in Figure 10-7.
A web search for “board cameras,” “CCD 
camera” or “camera module” will yield you many 
sources to purchase online, and if you stick to the 
black and white cameras with a standard lens, 
expect to pay under $100 for a very low-light 
camera. Try to ﬁnd a camera that will match the 
power pack you plan to use for your viewﬁnder 
as well; then you can avoid adding a regulator. 
Most board cameras will work on 9 or 12 V and 
only require a few milliamps, so this is an easy 
requirement.
To ensure that your camera is working properly, 
using the manufacturer-supplied cables, plug it into 
“video out” plug and then set your player to send 
video.
The coaxial cable will have a center wire and a 
stranded wire around it, making the stranded wire 
negative (ground) and the center wire the signal 
wire. Connect the stranded wire to your viewﬁnder’s 
ground wire (battery negative), and then try the 
signal wire on all the other viewﬁnder wires until 
you see an image on the tiny screen. Figure 10-6 
shows our small DVD player displaying a movie 
on its screen, as well as onto the viewﬁnder after 
ﬁnding the video input line on the viewﬁnder.
If you fail to see any video, then either your 
power lines are not correct, or your video source is 
not the proper kind of output. The video machine 
will have an RCA jack labeled “Line Out,” “Video 
Out,” or “Composite Out.” This is the signal you 
need to use. 
The second part of your night vision system will 
be the ultra low light (lux) security camera. These 
inexpensive camera modules run from 9 to 12 V, 
and output a standard composite color or black-and-
white video signal. There are hundreds of suppliers 
on the Internet, and you can expect to pay between 
$10 and $100, depending on the quality of the 
camera. 
Since this is a night-only project, a pinhole 
camera is not necessary, and since the camera 
  Figure 10-6   Testing the wires to ﬁnd the 
input line.
Figure 10-7   Several small CCD camera modules.

126      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
be used in a night vision system. To light up a large 
enough area to navigate, a night vision system will 
need at least 10 or more infrared LEDs. The good 
news is that the infrared LEDs are easy to source 
and can be purchased for a few pennies per unit. 
Infrared LEDs are typically found in 5-mm plastic 
cases like the ones shown in Figure 10-10, and 
will have various plastic colors as well as output 
strength and angle of view. Some infrared LEDs 
are completely black, but to the camera, they will 
seem transparent. The pile of infrared LEDs shown 
in Figure 10-10 are the same type that are found in 
TV remotes, although they usually only have one 
or two. Read entire project text to understand the 
effects of adding more LEDs to your system before 
you choose how many you will want to use.
the required power source and a composite monitor 
so you can test the image and focus the tiny lens if 
necessary. Usually, the lens is adjusted for all but 
really close focus, but it doesn’t hurt to loosen the 
tiny set screw (if there is one) and ﬁne tune the 
lens for the sharpest image at a distance of about 
10 feet (ft) or so. The lens will typically have 
threads and you can adjust it by screwing it closer 
or further away from the CCD image sensor.
Figure 10-8 shows our tiny black-and-white 
low-lux camera looking at the battery, which is 
displayed on a small video screen. Our camera is 
rated for 12 V, but runs just ﬁne on a 9-V battery. 
Below 8 V, our camera starts to show a degraded 
image, so it is probably regulated internally for 5 V.
To test your camera’s response to invisible 
infrared light, take any TV or DVD remote control 
and point it at the camera while you view the 
output on a video screen. As shown in Figure 10-9, 
the remote will send bright bursts of infrared light 
into your camera so you can see it on the video 
screen. Your eyes cannot see this light at all, but the 
camera sees it as if you were holding a ﬂashlight. 
This is the general idea of the night vision system, 
although it will use many more infrared LEDs to 
illuminate a much larger area.
The single LED on your TV remote seems bright 
to your camera, but does not cast enough light to 
  Figure 10-8   Testing a camera with a video 
monitor.
  Figure 10-10   An assortment of infrared LEDs.
  Figure 10-9   Testing the CCD cameras 
response to infrared light.

Project 10  Q  Night Vision Viewer      127
advantage is important. If you are using a low-lux 
black-and-white camera, the 940-nm LEDs will be 
just as bright as the slightly visible 880-nm series, 
so they are the best choice for complete stealth.
When choosing your infrared LEDs, it is 
important to check the datasheet for the required 
information. The things you want to know are 
reverse voltage, continuous forward current, 
wavelength, and beam pattern. The reverse voltage 
is the actual voltage you will apply to the LED to 
make it illuminate. Maximum continuous current 
is basically the maximum power rating of the LED. 
This is not to be confused with pulse current. Beam 
pattern is the angle that the light will come from 
the plastic lens, although this is not that important 
since most infrared LEDs have basically the same 
radiation pattern.
Of all of the technical specs, reverse voltage is 
the most important one, since you will be placing 
many LEDs in series in order to run them from a 
single higher voltage source. You need to know 
this voltage because exceeding it will likely 
fry your LEDs, in the same way that being too 
low will greatly reduce your output power. It’s 
also important that all of your infrared LEDs be 
from the same source and have identical ratings. 
The light spectrum diagram shown in 
Figure 10-11 also includes the two far ends of 
the spectrum where our eyes cannot function; 
ultraviolet and infrared. Light as a wave is 
measured in nanometers, with infrared light being 
the longer wave and ultraviolet the shorter. Our 
eyes are most sensitive to green light, and we fail 
to see any light longer than about 740 nm. For 
this reason, stealth night vision devices should 
always use infrared light beyond 750 nm in order 
to achieve complete invisibility to the human eyes. 
Some infrared LEDs are closer to visible red, 
falling in the 800 to 880 nm range, and although 
the camera is also more sensitive to this light, we 
can see it as a dull red glow. Because the low-lux 
cameras are so good at seeing most infrared light, it
is best to stay with the commonly available 940-nm
infrared LEDs that are always used in remote 
control applications.
Some security cameras use the 880-nm infrared 
LEDs for illumination because the slight red glow 
acts as a warning to those who see them, and it 
gives a little bit more illumination over a long 
distance. Security cameras often employ color 
cameras, which are not nearly as good in the dark 
as their black-and-white counterparts, so this 
  Figure 10-11   The visible and infrared light spectrum.

128      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
One advantage to using a pre-made night 
vision camera like the one shown in Figure 10-13 
is that you only need to supply power, which 
is often 12-V DC, so you only need to attach 
the viewﬁnder to make a working system. 
Improvements can be made by replacing the color 
camera with a better black and white camera, and 
you could go as far as replacing the 880-nm LEDs 
Figure 10-12 shows a typical infrared LED 
datasheet, stating a reverse voltage of 5 V and a 
continuous current rating of 100 milliamps (mA). 
Pulse current is shown at 1 amp (A), but you will 
need some fancy electronic trickery in order to get 
that much current into the LED without making a 
mini pyrotechnic show.
There is another source for infrared LEDs that 
you might want to consider if complete covert 
operation is not important to you. As shown 
in Figure 10-13, a typical outdoor night vision 
security camera will have a decent quality color 
camera as well as 20 or more infrared LEDs that 
you can remove from the case. The color camera 
will not work nearly as well in total darkness 
as a black-and-white camera, which is why the 
included LEDs are normally 880 nm rather than 
940 nm. They will certainly work, but there will 
be a dull red glow that is visible to anyone looking 
at your night vision system from less than 20-ft 
away. In a completely dark environment, you will 
compromise your position with 880-nm LEDs.
5.0
(.197)
8.6
(.34)
1.0
(.04)
22.0 MIN.
(.866)
0.5 TYP.
(.02)
A
K
1.0 MON.
(.04)
DATE
11.24.93
2.22.94
1.7.98
12.31.02
01.18.07
REV.
E.C.N.  NUMBER AND REVISION COMMENTS
REDRAWN.
PARAMETER
PARAMETER
MIN
TYP
MAX
MAX
PEAK FORWARD CURRENT
STEADY CURRENT
POWER DISSIPATION
DERATE FROM 25°C
OPERATING TEMP.
STORAGE TEMP.
SOLDERING TEMP.
2.0 mm FROM BODY
1
A
mA
mW
mW/°C
°C
°C
°C
3 SEC. MAX
100
150
– 1.2
–  25 TO +85
–  25 TO +100
+260
UNITS
UNITS
TEST COND
A
B
C
D
E
CHG’D INTENSITY AND HALF ANGLE.
E.C.N. # 10 BRDR.
E.C.N. # 10 BRDR. & REDRAWN IN 3D. 
E.C.N. # 11393.
ELECTRO–OPTICAL CHARACTERISTICS TA = 25°C
LIMITS OF SAFE OPERATION AT 25°C
PART NUMBER
OED—EL —1L2
5.85
(.23)
DOT DENOTES CATHODE
3 DIA.
(.118)
2.54 NOM.
(.1) (SEE NOTE 4)
SEE NOTE 3
REV.
E
PEAK WAVELENGTH
SPECTRAL BANDWIDTH
45
60
30
FORWARD VOLTAGE
REVERSE VOLTAGE
RADIANT INTENSITY
HALF ANGLE
EPOXY LENS FINISH:
5.0
1.6
nm
nm
mW/SR
degress
Vf
Ir = 10 μA
If = 100 mA
Vr
940
1.2
WATER CLEAR
If =  20 mA
tp < 10 μs, tp/T = 1% DUTY CYCLE
  Figure 10-12   A typical infrared LED datasheet.
  Figure 10-13   An alternative to individual LEDs.

Project 10  Q  Night Vision Viewer      129
a lens is to light a large area with infrared light for 
your night vision camera to see. Depending on the 
type of lens (glass or plastic), and the light source, 
you will be able to illuminate areas as small as a 
room or as large as an entire backyard. It really 
depends on how much heat your ﬁlter can take. You 
will have to search various Internet sources and 
scientiﬁc supply stores for the appropriate ﬁlter, 
but start by looking for the phrase “infrared pass 
ﬁlters.”
The glass ﬁlter we sourced was ﬁne with a 
50-watt (W) incandescent light source, so a suitable 
tin can was ﬁtted with a socket as shown in 
Figure 10-15. A lot of heat will be generated by 
this system if it is sealed, so make sure that your 
ﬁlter can withstand the heat or you will have to 
lower the bulb wattage, move it further from the 
ﬁlter, or even make vent holes and install a cooling 
fan. If light escapes the can, then it will be visible 
to your subjects, so keep that in mind. If you want 
to use this type of infrared light source in a portable 
night vision system, then replace the bulb with one 
that runs on batteries. Perhaps one of those million 
candle watt ﬂashlights could be used. (We have not 
tried that yet.)
with 940-nanometer (nm) LEDs, but it is probably 
easier to build your system from scratch since 
LED power requirements will vary.
Before we put the night vision system together, 
we want to jump off the track a bit and show a few 
alternatives that can help build up your covert night 
viewing arsenal. You can generate a lot of infrared 
light by passing a white light bulb or full spectrum 
light source through what is called an “infrared 
pass ﬁlter.” This system works the same way as 
a colored light ﬁlter, except that only the camera 
will see the light that passes through the ﬁlter. In 
the 1990s, Sony released a camcorder that had a 
function they called “night shot,” and it was later 
discovered that this function could actually see 
through some clothing, depending on the material 
and lighting conditions. Although the function was 
removed from all newer camera models, this effect 
became an Internet “cult classic” known as “X-Ray 
video” and several companies began supplying 
adapter lenses they dubbed “X-Ray lenses.” These 
lenses are basically infrared ﬁlters like the one 
shown in Figure 10-14.
Although the X-Ray effect is interesting to 
experiment with, the more useful purpose of such 
  Figure 10-14   A 940-nm infrared pass ﬁlter 
glass.
  Figure 10-15   Making a housing for a bulb and 
the ﬁlter.

130      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
as viewed from the video camera (the only way to 
see that it is working). By unthreading the tiny lens, 
the beam can be made much larger, illuminating 
an area several feet in diameter from about 10-ft
away in total darkness. This illumination is not 
nearly as bright as the LED system, but is good 
for experimenting with directional or longer 
range systems that have zoom lenses or have been 
retroﬁtted to a telescope or binocular. 
An infrared laser with an output power of 
500 mW can illuminate a very large area from 
a 100 ft away or more, but your camera will 
deﬁnitely need to have a long-range zoom or 
be attached to a device such as a telescope or 
binocular to be useful. High-power laser modules 
like the one shown in Figure 10-18 can be 
The lens was ﬁtted to the end of the can as 
shown in Figure 10-16, completing the low-cost 
long-range infrared illuminator. This system 
was great for illuminating an outdoor scene for 
a security camera. To extend the life of the ﬁlter, 
you could also wire the light to a motion-sensing 
security light so that it only runs when there is 
motion detected. Since this type of illuminator is 
power hungry, it is best used in a ﬁxed installation, 
as a large power source would be needed in order 
to make it portable.
Lasers can also make effective night vision 
illuminators, but they are best for very long-range 
systems and will require your camera to have a 
magnifying system or zoom lens. Much like the 
way a visible laser pointer can reach hundreds of 
feet, so can an infrared laser, as it is basically the 
same thing. A tiny point is not much use in a night 
vision system, so the laser collimating lens has to 
be removed so that the beam can be spread out a 
lot more. This has the effect of lowering the output 
power, but also makes it much safer to work with 
when dealing with dangerous laser light. If you do 
not have the appropriate laser safety equipment 
or understand how to work with lasers, then do 
not attempt these experiments as eye damage can 
occur, especially if working with lasers that have an 
output power of more than 5 mW (yes, milliwatts!).
The tiny laser module shown in Figure 10-17 will 
make a 2-mm wide spot on the wall at 20-ft away 
  Figure 10-16   The completed high-power 
illuminator.
  Figure 10-17   A 5-mw infrared laser module.
  Figure 10-18   A very high-power infrared 
laser module.

Project 10  Q  Night Vision Viewer      131
that were found to make a decent beam when 
placed in front of the high-power laser diode 
and viewed on the video screen. Our goal was to 
connect a video camera to a telescope or binocular 
for some long-range covert surveillance at 100 ft 
or more, so it took a bit of experimenting with the 
position of the lens in front of the diode.
The lens was fastened to the high-power laser 
module so that it would light up an area of about 
20 ft2 at a distance of about 50 to 100 ft (Figure 10-20). 
Of course, only a camera connected to a telescope 
would work, but that was the original goal. You 
may also notice that the light cast from the laser 
diode is an odd rectangular shape when cast for 
such a long distance. This effect is normal due 
to the way a laser diode is constructed and will 
actually work in your favor.
The high-power illuminator is hungry for power, 
so a large battery pack was added, and the unit was 
placed into a box with a switch (Figure 10-21). It’s 
ﬁne to use larger batteries of the same amperage, 
but never more voltage. Although the beam is many 
hundreds of times less focused, the illuminator is 
still to be treated with caution, only viewing the 
beam on the monitor and never using it for “live” 
covert operations where living eyes may be in the 
beam. There are actually laser illuminators just like 
purchased at many electronics supply outlets, or 
you can attempt to hack the infrared laser module 
from a green laser pointer as we did. To make 
a green beam, an 808-nm infrared laser is sent 
through a series of lenses, ﬁlters, and crystals in 
order to alter the wavelength, so a much higher 
power laser diode is needed. We broke into a 5-mW 
green laser pointer and ended up with the 500-mW 
808-nm laser module shown in Figure 10-18. It 
took many hours to carefully ﬁle the brass casing 
away to extract the infrared driver module.
Be very cautious when working with any laser 
at power levels beyond 5 mW, as instant and 
inseparable eye damage will occur if you are 
careless. This danger become even worse due to 
the fact that you cannot see the beam, and your eye 
will not blink if you hit yourself. A 500-mW laser 
will give you an instant blind spot, so keep that in 
mind. Read up on laser safety ﬁrst!
It is fairly easy to make a high-power laser 
diode cast a large beam, and although there are 
expensive precision lenses available to do this job, 
we have found great success using random lenses 
taken from scrap cameras and video systems. 
Figure 10-19 shows a few of the assorted lenses 
  Figure 10-19   Various lenses taken from old 
cameras.
  Figure 10-20   Beam spreading lens ﬁt to the 
laser module.

132      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
mounted to the binoculars through the lens cap. 
This is nice because you can still use the other 
side to aim the camera before switching on the 
laser illuminator. You may need to adjust the 
camera focus or carefully choose the spot behind 
the lens to get optimal focus.
If your illumination system can reach a hundred 
feet or more, a telescope will be needed in order to 
zoom into the area that is illuminated by the laser. 
The rig shown in Figure 10-23 works well with 
the high-power laser illuminator and the camera 
is held in place by gluing it to one of the Barlow 
lens adapters. Some focusing of the camera may 
be necessary, and you may only get a small area 
of view, but this system does work well for going 
the long distance, if you can light up the scene. 
Even without infrared illumination, these low-lux 
cameras can outperform the human eye for low 
light viewing any day.
Now, back to the night vision system. Once you 
have collected all of the components that make up 
the night vision system, you can source a cabinet 
that will hold everything, including a battery pack. 
Black is always best when attempting to be stealthy 
as this will avoid reﬂections from any ambient light 
sources if you are moving around. Flat black is 
even better as it ensures a zero reﬂective surface. 
this one for sale on the market the claim to be “eye 
safe,” but we still wouldn’t take any chances.
To work with the long-range laser-based 
illuminators, you will need to extend the range 
of your video camera. Binoculars or a telescope 
work perfectly for this once you determine the 
optimal position and focus for the camera. To 
mount the camera to a pair of binoculars, cut a 
hole in the lens cap and simply glue the camera 
to it. Figure 10-22 shows the small video camera 
  Figure 10-21   Completed high-power laser 
illuminator.
  Figure 10-22   The lens cap makes a good 
camera mount.
  Figure 10-23   A very long-range night vision 
camera.

Project 10  Q  Night Vision Viewer      133
more LEDs, only the width of the area you are 
illuminating. Feel free to experiment with LED 
placement and quantity, but any number of LEDs 
from 10 to 20 will be just ﬁne for the night vision 
viewer.
Look at your LED datasheet and ﬁnd the 
absolute maximum voltage rating. For our infrared 
LEDs, it was 1.4 V. Now, divide your battery (or 
battery pack) voltage by the LEDs’ maximum 
voltage rating, and that number will be your series 
chain quantity. By placing LEDs in series, you 
divide the voltage to a safe level. For our single 
9 V battery: 9/1.4 = 6.428. Of course, we cannot 
have 6.428 LEDs in our system, so the number is 
rounded up to 7 to go slightly under the maximum 
voltage rating rather than exceeding it. It is always 
best to be slightly under the maximum rating 
because slightly over will kill your LEDs in a 
hurry. So with 7 series LEDs, each one will see 
1.23 V (9/7 = 1.285), and that is a safe voltage. 
Since only 7 LEDs might not cast enough light, 
we decided to add another series chain of 7 LEDs 
to the system. Once you have a single series chain, 
you can simply multiply it and add a second chain 
in parallel with the other one. By doing this, both 
chains divide the voltage correctly to the safe 
level, and your system uses twice the current. 
Figure 10-25 shows the two series LED chains 
connected in parallel so that every single LED will 
only see 1.23 V. We could add more series chains in 
parallel with the ﬁrst two, but 14 LEDs was a good 
trade-off between battery life and illumination. 
Again, feel free to experiment, but always be 
mindful of your LEDs’ maximum voltage rating.
You can install your LEDs in any pattern you 
like, but try to spread them out as much as possible 
on your project case for maximum coverage. 
Also remember that you need to leave room for 
the camera and any switches that you plan to 
install. To make the night vision system look more 
professional, a paper template was made using 
a ruler or a computer paint program taped to the 
lid or box shell to help when drilling out the LED 
With proper clothing, you could slip through the 
night completely undetected by your targets, even 
at close range.
One of the typical Radio Shack black boxes was 
found to hold all of the parts, and it is 5 r 2.5 r 2 in 
in size. Remember to account for your battery (or 
battery pack), a few switches as well as a bunch of 
wiring when looking for a project cabinet. It may 
be best to build the entire circuit before looking 
for a cabinet, and then you will know how much 
room you need inside the cabinet. Don’t try to cram 
things in too tight, or it will be highly annoying 
to change the battery or make adjustments later 
(Figure 10-24).
The actual wiring and number of LEDs in your 
system is completely dependent on your battery 
pack voltage and the maximum voltage ratings of 
a single LED. The idea is to have all of your LEDs 
run from the same voltage that is needed for the 
rest of the system, which will most likely be either 
9 or 12 V. Since most LEDs are rated between 1 
and 2.5 V, you will need to wire them in series and 
parallel in order to achieve the best voltage. Also, 
keep in mind that more LEDs will require more 
power from your battery pack, and the range of 
your system will not increase greatly as you add 
  Figure 10-24   Choosing a cabinet for all of 
the parts.

134      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
way up to determine the best size. It’s also best to 
drill all holes initially with the smaller bit in your 
set to keep the drilling aligned to the hole center. 
Figure 10-27 shows the 14 LED holes drilled from 
the lid of our project box. 
holes. Figure 10-26 shows the template taped to the 
lid and ready to be drilled.
If you are not sure which drill bit is needed to 
make a hole that the LEDs will ﬁt snugly into, start 
with an obviously smaller bit and then work your 
  Figure 10-25
Series and parallel LED wiring.
  Figure 10-26   Using a template to drill the 
LED holes.
  Figure 10-27
Drilling the LED holes.

Project 10  Q  Night Vision Viewer      135
on an LED is the negative side, so that makes it 
easier to wire all of the LEDs without having one or 
more in reverse. If you get a single LED in a series 
chain reversed, the entire chain will fail to light. No 
damage will occur, but it simply won’t work.
The LEDs do not have to be evenly spaced 
around the camera as long as the camera points in 
the same direction of the LEDs. We installed the 
camera in the top left corner to allow more room 
for the other components as shown in Figure 10-31. 
One thing to keep in mind when assembling your 
system is which side of your camera as well as 
your viewﬁnder is up. It would be really annoying 
to put the entire project together and then get an 
upside down image! Also, some viewﬁnders have 
a “mirror image” setting, so if you plan to navigate 
a room in complete darkness, make sure that the 
image is not reversed horizontally.
The edges of the drilled holes can be cleaned 
up after drilling by using a much larger bit turned 
by hand to take away the edges a bit. Figure 10-28 
shows the box lid ready to have the 14 LEDs press 
ﬁt into the holes.
It’s a good idea to trim the leads of each LED to 
a minimal length as shown in Figure 10-29 so you 
have more room to work with inside your cabinet. 
You might have known that the longer lead of an 
LED is the positive lead, but there is another way 
to check the polarity of the led. The ﬂat side of the 
bottom edge is the negative side. This is shown in 
Figure 10-30. If your LEDs are all in line with each 
other, you could even bend the leads to each other 
to create some of the series wiring as well.
Install all of the LEDs so that the positive and 
negative connections all face the same orientation. 
As shown in Figure 10-30, the ﬂat side of the case 
  Figure 10-28
LED holes drilled.
  Figure 10-29   LED leads trimmed to a 
minimal length.
  Figure 10-30   Install the LEDs in the same 
orientation.
  Figure 10-31
Installing the camera.

136      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
Figure 10-34 shows the rear of the unit with 
the viewﬁnder installed. When positioning your 
viewﬁnder, you also have to consider your nose, 
as it may end up pressing against the back of the 
box if the viewﬁnder is not back far enough. If you 
can’t make room for your face, a side mount may 
be better.
When you’re at the stage to wire up the 
viewﬁnder, camera, LEDs, and battery pack, take 
your time and consider adding an extra switch to 
turn off the LEDs and the main system separately. 
By doing this, your night vision system becomes 
a multi-purpose device, able to see in the dark, 
as well as hunt down other night vision security 
cameras. As will be shown in following photos, the 
night vision viewer can see other security cameras 
when its own infrared LEDs are turned off, so it 
functions as a kind of night vision camera detector. 
The LEDs have been wired according to the 
schematic shown in Figure 10-35.
Although you can use the viewﬁnder from 
either eye, it is best to position it so that the box 
crosses your face, placing the camera lens in the 
center of view, rather than off to one side. It will 
take some time to easily navigate an obstacle-ﬁlled 
room using only the viewﬁnder, but this task is 
made a lot easier with the camera looking out from 
between your eyes. Also, keep in mind which way 
the picture will be when you install the viewﬁnder 
so that it is not upside down. Figure 10-32 shows 
how our viewﬁnder was installed onto the box—by 
cutting out a slot so that it would slide in and stay 
secure. Hot glue also works well for holding any 
loose parts together or even the circuit board to the 
base of the box.
Our night vision system is a left eye version 
since that is our good eye! The camera is 
positioned so that it will end up between our eyes 
when we have the night vision system up to our 
face. Figure 10-33 shows the basic system with the 
three main components installed.
 Figure 10-32
Installing the viewﬁnder.
 Figure 10-33   The basic hardware installed.
 Figure 10-34   Rear view of the night vision 
system.
 Figure 10-35   Wiring up all of the components.

Project 10  Q  Night Vision Viewer      137
that they often have lower voltages than the type of 
battery they are intended to replace. A rechargeable 
9-V battery outputs around 8.6 V typically.
Once all of the wires and switches were added, 
the box that once looked a bit large was almost 
completely ﬁlled. Figure 10-37 shows all of the 
We also added an RCA output jack so that we 
could record the video output into a camcorder to 
demo this unit on our Web site as well as record 
certain covert activities. Figure 10-35 shows the 
system completely wired, including the two power 
switches, battery clip, and video output jack.
Figure 10-36 shows a typical power wiring 
diagram for the night vision viewer if you decide 
to add switches to both the video section and the 
LED section. Your wiring diagram may differ 
depending on the number of LEDs in your system, 
as well as the required voltages for the camera 
and viewﬁnder. It is certainly okay to use more 
than one battery or even a voltage regulator if 
you need to. A single 9-V alkaline battery will 
power our system for a few hours, but a pack of 
AA batteries would run it for many hours at the 
expense of using a larger cabinet. Rechargeable 
batteries are great for this project, but keep in mind 
 Figure 10-36   Wiring the components to the power source.
  Figure 10-37   Fitting all the parts into the box.

138      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
night vision system, ready to go hunting deep into 
the pitch darkness.
The ﬁrst test you should do with the night 
vision system is to stand in front of a mirror to see 
if the infrared LEDs are working. Figure 10-39 
(Frame 1) shows the brilliant beam of light that 
the camera will see when looking at the LEDs at 
such a close range. Frame 2 shows our lab with 
all of the lights turned off. Frame 3 is a shot of a 
dark parking lot at night and Frame 4 is a vicious, 
yet oblivious watchdog who can only hear us but 
not see us. Okay, that’s just our buddy “The Prince 
of Dogness,” and we don’t recommend you try to 
sneak past any animal because it will probably end 
badly for you!
When traversing an indoor space using only 
night vision, take your time and get used to the 
field of view. It took us a day or two to move 
smoothly around a closed space without banging 
into furniture and door frames, but it can be 
done.
If you added an optional switch to turn the 
LED array on or off, then you can also use your 
night vision viewer to hunt down other sources of 
parts being jammed into the box after checking that 
the unit actually functioned. Loose parts such as 
the viewﬁnder circuit board and battery should be 
secured with a bit of double-sided tape or some other 
means so that they don’t bounce around. Another 
thing to do is insulate any part of the circuit board 
from any other metal parts such as the battery case. 
A bit of tape or cardboard placed on the back of the 
board works well for this. You can also ﬁll voids with 
some bunched-up paper towel or cotton balls.
After precariously cramming all of the components 
into the box, the unit is tested to ensure that 
nothing was shorted or broken during the 
installation. Figure 10-38 shows the completed 
  Figure 10-38   The completed night vision 
system.
  Figure 10-39   A few tests with the night vision viewer.

Project 10  Q  Night Vision Viewer      139
so they cannot see you. By switching off the 
viewﬁnder and just leaving the infrared LEDs on, 
you can simply point the unit at a security camera 
as you walk past and it will completely wash out 
the picture, making it impossible to see who you 
are. This is great when you value your own privacy 
(Figure 10-41).
We hope you enjoyed building the night vision 
viewer, and may all of your covert operations 
succeed! Don’t get into too much trouble with your 
new toy, and if you do, always remember, “You 
never heard of us or this Web site!”
infrared light such as hidden spy cams or security 
cameras. Figure 10-40 shows how a night vision 
camera looks to a still camera (using the ﬂash 
at night) and how it looks using the night vision 
viewer. The still camera sees a dull purple glow 
from the security camera, but the night vision 
viewer sees it as a brilliant beam of white light. 
Covert cameras like this can be spotted from a 
great distance due to the amazing sensitivity of the 
low-lux camera to infrared light.
The night vision viewer actually has a third 
function as well—to swamp out security cameras 
  Figure 10-40   Using the device to hunt down 
security cameras.
 Figure 10-41   Ready to cut through the 
darkness!

This page intentionally left blank 

P A R T  T H R E E
Telephone Projects

This page intentionally left blank 

143
P R O J E C T  1 1
Phone Number Decoder
WHEN YOU PRESS THE NUMBERS on your phone to 
make a call, the tones you hear are called Dual 
Tone Multi Frequency tones (DTMF), and they 
represent 1 of 16 possible numbers on the keypad. 
The DTMF tones are made up of frequency pairs 
ranging from 697 to 1633 Hertz (Hz). There are 
actually eight frequencies that form a 4 × 4 matrix 
of 16 possible tones by mixing the pairs together. 
DTMF signaling has proven to be a very robust 
method of sending data over the telephone system, 
and it has become a universally excepted standard.
decoding. This project is based on one called the 
CM8870 DTMF decoder chip. Several methods of 
decoding DTMF tones back into digital pulses will 
be shown here, allowing devices to be controlled 
over the phone line or allowing you to spy on 
numbers being dialed live over the phone or from 
prerecorded audio clips.
The CM8870 DTMF decoder IC shown in 
Figure 11-1 only needs an external 3.579-megahertz 
143
  Figure 11-0   This device will decode the DTMF 
tones from the phone line or 
audio source.
  Figure 11-1   The CM8870 DTMF decoder chip 
is a standalone DTMF decoding 
solution.
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 IC1: CM8870 DTMF signal decoder
Q 
 IC2 (optional): 74LS154 4 to 16 line decoder
Q 
 IC3 (optional): 74LS240 inverting buffer/
driver
Q 
 X1: 3.58 MHz crystal for CM8860
Q 
 LEDs (optional): 16 low-current LEDs with 
1-K resistors
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 100 K, R2 = 100 K, R3 = 300 K
Q 
 Capacitors: C1 = 0.1 MF ceramic
In order to decode the tones back into a 4-bit 
(16 possible combinations) signal, some type 
of high-speed and accurate signal processor is 
needed. A fast microprocessor can be programmed 
to decode DTMF signals, but it will take a lot of 
processing power and careful analog signal control 
in order to make a reliable DTMF decoder in 
software. There are, however, inexpensive single 
integrated circuit (IC) solutions for touch tone 

144      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
This allows your receiving circuit or device to know 
when a number has been repeated. Without this 
data-receive pin, you would have no way to know 
if the same key has been pressed multiple times as 
the last data on the 4-bit output will simply remain 
the same. So every time a new DTMF tone has been 
decoded and sent to the 4-bit binary port, the data 
ready pin will toggle to high for a short time. On 
our 8870 version, the binary data output pins are 
marked Q1, Q2, Q3, and Q4, and the data-ready pin 
is marked as STD on the DTMF decoder chip.
To get DTMF data into the 8870 decoder chip, 
pins 1, 2, 3, and 4 are set up as an analog input as 
shown in the datasheet example. The audio signal 
is processed by a robust signal processor inside the 
8870, and any DTMF tones heard will be registered 
on the data output port. The input is very versatile 
and can be directly connected to the phone line 
or to any audio playback device such as computer 
sound card or digital recording unit. Basically, any 
device capable of sending an audio signal can be 
fed into the 8870 DTMF decoder, and as long as 
the signal quality is decent, the DTMF tones can be 
decoded. Cordless phones and analog cell phones 
(MHz) crystal oscillator and a few passive 
components in order to decide DTMF signals 
on the ﬂy. There are actually several makers of 
this chip, so when you are scouring for this part, 
the name “8870 DTMF Decoder” will be a close 
enough description. The reason for the odd 
3.579-MHz crystal is that this value is the same 
as the NTSC color burst frequency used in analog 
television and is very common and easy to source. 
The 8870 DTMF decoder does all of the difﬁcult 
work for you, taking an analog audio signal at its 
input and then converting the decoded tones back 
into a 4-bit binary value that can represent 1 of 
16 possible values. Most phones only have nine 
buttons on the keypad, but there are 16 DTMF 
combinations.
The 8870 DTMF decoder sheet shown in 
Figure 11-2 includes an example circuit as well as 
a table showing how the binary output represents 
1 of 16 possible DTMF tones. There are actually 
ﬁve output pins used on the 8870 decoder—four 
of them represent the binary data and a ﬁfth pin 
toggles from low-to-high and then back to low 
every time a valid DTMF signal has been decoded. 
  Figure 11-2   The CM8870 DTMF decoder datasheet showing a recommended circuit.

Project 11  Q  Phone Number Decoder      145
output. You could even run an electret microphone 
into the input and still get a valid DTMF decode by 
simply placing the speaker from an audio recorder 
next to the microphone. The 8870 DTMF decoder 
really works well on a wide range of devices.
To test the 8870 DTMF decoder using your 
phone line, you will need an RJ-11 female socket 
like the one shown in Figure 11-4 running into the 
breadboard. You can also cut the end off a standard 
phone cord and then insert the wires directly into 
the breadboard. A standard residential phone cord 
will have four wires, but only the two innermost wires 
are used. There will be a red wire and a green wire, 
and these two wires will carry the signal to your 
telephone terminal block. Be aware that there is a 
low-amperage 40-volt (V) potential on the phone 
line that jumps up to over 100 V when the phone is 
ringing. There is very little current in the phone 
line, but the high voltage is enough to give you a 
painful tingle if you happen to be touching both 
wires as the phone begins to ring. Keep this in 
mind as you work with live phone cables!
Also shown in the breadboard is a set of ﬁve 
light-emitting diodes (LEDs) that connect through 
1-K current limiting resistors and then to the ﬁve 
output pins on the 8870 DTMF decoder chip. 
When a valid DTMF tone is heard, the data-ready 
LED will ﬂick for a few milliseconds, and then the 
that are not scrambled are particularly vulnerable 
as a cheap radio-frequency (RF) scanner connected 
to the DTMF decoder will show the listener every 
button pressed in real time.
There are several ways you can build your 
DTMF decoder. You can feed a line from the 
telephone jack to the 8870 to decode tones pressed 
on any phone on the same line, or you can feed 
the output from some audio source such as an RF 
scanner, digital recorder, or computer sound card 
directly into the DTMF decoder. You could build a 
DTMF decoder that uses both methods, including 
an RJ-11 telephone jack and an audio input jack. 
For testing purposes, it is much easier to feed the 
signal from your telephone system into the DTMF 
decoder, so that you can use the phone keypad to 
verify the operation of your circuit.
Using the 8870 DTMF decoder IC and a 
breadboard, build up the circuit as recommended 
in the data sheet, which will include a 3.579-MHz 
crystal resonator and a few passive components 
(Figure 11-3). For the 300-K resistor, a more 
common value of 270 or 220 K will work just ﬁne. 
The 0.1-microfarad (μF) ceramic capacitor and 
100-K resistor in the input removes all DC offset, 
leaving only the AC audio signal for the DTMF 
detector. This setup allows a wide range of audio 
devices to be fed into the input without having to 
worry about impedance matching or the level of the 
  Figure 11-3   Breadboarding the DTMF decoder 
circuit using the CM8870 chip.
  Figure 11-4   An RJ-11 telephone jack feeds the 
audio from the phone into the 
decoder.

146      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
4-line to 16-line decoder chip. The 74154 decoder 
takes 4-bit binary data and converts it to a 16-pin 
output port. Unfortunately, the data is inverted 
so that only 1 out of 16 outputs is off at any one 
time, so if you need to use the IO line to switch on 
another device, you will have to invert each of the 
16 IO lines. Looking at the datasheet for the 74154 
decoder shown in Figure 11-5, you can see that 
only one of the 16 outputs will be off at any one 
time. The 74154 is a common logic IC, and will 
have several other part numbers such as 74LS154, 
74HC154, DM54154. For this project, any of the 
4-16 decoder variants will work just ﬁne.
four data LEDs will change to represent a binary 
number from 1 to 16. Figure 11-2 shows the results 
of the binary outputs (Q1 to Q4) and how they 
correspond to one of the 16 DTMF tones.
The output from the 8870 DTMF decoder is 
a 4-bit binary value, which is the perfect method 
of transferring the data to a microcontroller or 
computer. Of course, this binary value is not much 
use for controlling external devices with a relay or 
driver transistor unless you decode it back from 
4-bit binary data to a single digital input-output 
(IO) line. An easy way to get from 4-bit binary data 
back to a single digital IO line is by using a 74154 
  Figure 11-5   The 74154 will decode a 4-bit number back to 1 of 16 outputs.

Project 11  Q  Phone Number Decoder      147
have made your own DTMF tone generating 
system as well. The circuit shown breadboarded 
in Figure 11-7 will switch on one of the 16 LEDs 
each time a digit is pressed on the phone. This 
system forms the basis of a remote control system 
that can turn on devices via telephone command. 
This basic system can also decode incoming touch 
tones and display them in real time once you have 
each LED labeled to show which of the dial pad 
buttons it represents. 
To invert all of the outputs on the 74154 decoder 
so that they can be used to trigger external devices 
such as relays or logic pins, you will need 16 
inverters. You could use any type of logic inverter 
such as a 7404, but the easiest method is to add 
a pair of octal inverting buffers onto the outputs 
to invert them and offer some driving current for 
a small relay or driver transistor. The schematic 
shown in Figure 11-6 uses a pair of octal inverting 
buffers (74LS240) to invert the 74154 output 
signal so that only 1 of the 16 possible outputs is 
high at any given time. Since the 74LS240s have 
8 inverters per chip, you will need two of them to 
invert all 16 IO lines from the 74154 decoder. Now, 
the output from the 8870 can be fed through the 
4-16 decoder and inverters so that only a single IO 
line will be high for each of the 16 possible DTMF 
tones decoded.
Once the 4-16 decoder and inverters are 
connected to the DTMF decoder, you now have a 
system that will turn on 1 of 16 possible IO lines 
corresponding to the numbers on the telephone dial 
pad. Of course, the telephone only has 12 digits, 
so four of the IO lines will be unused unless you 
  Figure 11-6   Decoding the 4-bit binary data back to positive 1 of 16 logic.
  Figure 11-7   Each of the 16 LEDs corresponds 
to a single digit on the telephone 
dial pad.

148      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
or I2C are easy to work with because many 
microcontrollers already support these languages, or 
have routines built into their compilers to add LCD 
support. We had this serial LCD in our parts box, and 
it was a perfect choice to display the data decoded in 
real-time by the 8870 DTMF decoder chip. Now, all 
we had to do was feed the ﬁve IO lines (4-bit binary 
and data ready) into some kind of microcontroller 
and then write a simple program to send out the 
serial data to the LCD screen as tones are decoded.
We decided to leave the 4-16 line decoder, 
inverters, and LEDs on the breadboard and then 
add the LCD screen and microcontroller into the 
mix so that both systems were still functioning at 
the same time. The little breadboard was running 
out of room so we grabbed an Arduino and just 
popped the wires into the breadboard from the 
8870 and then out to the Arduino header. Normally, 
we would use a bare microcontroller on the 
breadboard, but for convenience it’s hard to beat 
these little prototype boards as they are ready to 
rock as soon as you plug them in.
Arduino is an open source hardware platform that 
allows an Atmel microcontroller to be programmed 
through the USB port using a very easy-to-use IDE 
and C-type language (Figure 11-10). We purchased 
the Arduino at SparkFun.com, and had it up and 
running in a few minutes by simply plugging it into 
the USB port on the computer. The pin headers on 
the Arduino board allow access to the AVR digital IO 
DTMF signaling is very robust, so you could 
make a remote control system capable of switching 
16 different devices by using this decoder 
circuit and some type of DTMF generator. A 
microcontroller can easily generate DTMF tones if 
you send a pair of square waves out of the digital 
IO pins based on the frequencies shown in the data 
sheet (Figure 11-2). DTMF tones can be sent over 
low-bandwidth radio links, over long-distance 
wires, or even through the air using infrared pulses. 
The 8870 is able to decode DTMF tones very 
accurately, even when the signal-to-noise ratio is 
very high. This is one of the reasons it has been in 
use on the telephone system for such a long time. 
Figure 11-8 shows one of the 16 LEDs turned on 
after pressing a number on the telephone dial pad.
If you intend to use a microcontroller to respond 
to the DTMF data or want to display it on some 
type of LCD screen, then you do not need to use 
the 4-16 line decoder or the inverters. The 4-bit 
binary data can be sent directly to the input pins 
on any microcontroller as it is, which will reduce 
the number of components needed to make a 
microcontroller-based DTMF control system. The 
next part of this project will take the binary data 
right from the 8870 DTMF decoder and display it 
in real-time on an LCD screen.
LCD screens are very easy to connect to just 
about any microcontroller. The small 16 character 
by two line LCD screen shown in Figure 11-9 
needs only a single serial input in order to display 
characters. LCD screens that use serial, parallel, 
  Figure 11-8   Testing the 16 LED DTMF decoder 
system using the telephone dial pad.
  Figure 11-9   This is an easy-to-interface 16 
character by two line LCD screen 
using a serial input.

Project 11  Q  Phone Number Decoder      149
w
pinMode(4, INPUT);
pinMode(5, INPUT);
// CM8870 BINARY DATA VALID PIN
pinMode(6, INPUT);
// INITIALIZE SERIAL LCD SCREEN
Serial.begin(9600);
delay(100);
// CLEAR THE LCD SCREEN
Serial.print(12, BYTE);
delay(100);
Serial.print(12, BYTE);
delay(100);
// TURN ON BACKLIGHT
Serial.print(17, BYTE);
delay(100);
// SEND THE READY MESSAGE
Serial.print(“* SYSTEM READY *”);
}
// DISPLAY DATA FROM DTMF DECODER
void loop() {
ports so connecting to a breadboard is just a matter 
of plugging in the necessary wires. The program 
is also very simple. It just waits for the data ready 
line on the 8870 to toggle and then reads the 4-bit 
binary data and then writes the corresponding dial 
pad digit out to the LCD screen using the serial write 
command. The program also keeps count of the 
number of DTMF tones decoded since the last reset.
Here is the Phone Number Decoder Arduino 
source code:
////////////////////////////////////////
// CM8870 TOUCH TONE DECODER BY RADBRAD 
FOR LUCIDSCIENCE.COM
////////////////////////////////////////
// PROGRAM VARIABLES
int dtmf;
int cntr;
String dial(16);
void setup() {
dial = “”;
// CM8870 BINARY INPUT PORT
pinMode(2, INPUT);
pinMode(3, INPUT);
 Figure 11-10   An Arduino UNO will receive DTMF data and send serial data to the LCD.

150      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// WAIT FOR DATA VALID SIGNAL
if (digitalRead(6) == HIGH) {
  // DECODE CM8870 DATA
  dtmf = 0;
if (digitalRead(2) == HIGH) dtmf = 
dtmf + 1;
if (digitalRead(3) == HIGH) dtmf = 
dtmf + 2;
if (digitalRead(4) == HIGH) dtmf = 
dtmf + 4;
if (digitalRead(5) == HIGH) dtmf = 
dtmf + 8;
  // CLEAR THE LCD SCREEN
  Serial.print(12, BYTE); 
  delay(100);
  // DISPLAY THE COUNTER 
  Serial.print(“DATA COUNT = “);
  Serial.print(cntr); 
   // CARRIAGE RETURN
  Serial.print(13, BYTE); 
  // DISPLAY DTMF DATA
  if (dtmf == 1) dial = dial + “8”; 
  if (dtmf == 2) dial = dial + “4”; 
  if (dtmf == 3) dial = dial + “#”;
  if (dtmf == 4) dial = dial + “2”; 
  if (dtmf == 5) dial = dial + “0”;
  if (dtmf == 6) dial = dial + “6”;
  if (dtmf == 8) dial = dial + “1”; 
  if (dtmf == 9) dial = dial + “9”;
  if (dtmf == 10) dial = dial + “5”;
  if (dtmf == 12) dial = dial + “3”;
  if (dtmf == 13) dial = dial + “*”; 
  if (dtmf == 14) dial = dial + “7”;
  Serial.print(dial); 
  // INCREMENT THE COUNTER
  cntr++;
}
}
The DTMF display program is extremely 
simple, but does demonstrate how robust and easy 
it is to interface the 8870 DTMF decoder to any 
  Figure 11-11   Decoding DTMF tones from the 
phone and displaying them on 
the LCD screen.
microcontroller. With a few more lines of code 
and an external relay, you could easily look for the 
telephone ring signal, have the microcontroller pick 
up the line, and then wait for DTMF commands 
to be sent, creating an entire telephone-operated 
automation system. A lot can be done with the 
12 digits on a phone dial pad, especially if the 
microcontroller is also sending back some type of 
audio feedback as you dial in your commands. 
The completed DTMF display system is shown 
in Figure 11-11, counting and displaying the 
digits pressed on the LCD as we type them on the 
telephone dial pad. The ﬁve IO lines running from 
the breadboard into the Arduino board are the 4 bits
of data and data-ready lines from the 8870 DTMF 
decoder. We still have the 4-16 line decoder, 
inverters, and LEDs connected on the breadboard, 
but the microcontroller does not need any of that 
hardware in order to operate, just the 8870 and its 
passive components. Even with a very noisy phone 
line, We can press numbers on the dial pad as fast 
as we want, and the LCD never misses a single 
digit. The 8870 DTMF decoder IC is very robust 
and will accept practically any type of audio signal.
If your intent is to “capture” a phone call and 
then later display the DTMF data on the LCD 
screen, then you only need to feed the output from 
your recording device into the input section of the 

Project 11  Q  Phone Number Decoder      151
8870 decoder, and it will operate as if connected 
directly to the phone line. You can even use an 
electret microphone and just let it listen to a nearby 
audio signal that contains a DTMF tone and if 
the signal is loud enough, the 8870 will have no 
problem registering and decoding the data. It’s 
actually quite difﬁcult to make the 8870 DTMF 
decoder fail; you need a really bad signal for it to 
give up on the conversion.
To make a versatile DTMF decoding unit that 
will display digits in real time as they are captured, 
a circuit that includes both an RJ-11 female 
telephone jack and some kind of audio input jack 
as shown in Figure 11-12 will allow decoding from 
a variety of formats. For live telephone use, the 
RJ-11 cord is plugged into any wall jack and will 
show digits pressed from any phone in the house 
or from any remotely located phone on the current 
call. The 1/16 audio jack allows a small digital 
audio recorder or computer sound card to be 
plugged in for decoding of DTMF signals already 
captured and stored for analysis. 
The 8870 DTMF decoder is so robust that we 
were able to feed the audio from our computer into 
the decoder unit and pull telephone numbers out of 
  Figure 11-12   The completed DTMF decoder 
accepts both a phone cord and 
an audio input.
YouTube clips that contained the sound of telephone 
dialing! It was also possible to feed the audio from 
the headphone jack on an RF scanner into the device 
and see people dial telephone numbers on older 
cordless phones that did not include a scrambling 
system to make them secure. So, the next time you 
enter your password or banking information over 
a phone system, ask yourself if your line is secure 
from eavesdropping. You just never know who 
may be listening to your call. With a simple DTMF 
decoder, your passwords and credit card numbers 
are extremely easy to decode. 

This page intentionally left blank 

153
P R O J E C T  1 2
Spammer Jammer
WHY IS IT STILL LEGAL for telemarketers to invade 
a person’s privacy bafﬂes our mind! Here you are 
either trying to relax during dinner or busy with a 
soldering iron on a 144-pin FPGA and then right at 
the worst moment possible…rrrrrring! So, you drop 
whatever you were doing to go get the call and to 
your absolute disgust, it’s another spammer trying 
to sell you some useless product, or worse—an 
automated message telling you to “Hold on for an 
important message.” Can you imagine the nerve? 
They so blatantly destroy your peace and quiet 
to put you on hold as if your time is not nearly as 
important as the cheesy redirect they are about 
to spew into your already angry ears! Oh, did we 
mention that of all things in this life that we ﬁnd 
annoying, phone spammers top our list?
into our own phone line back at them! If you are 
like us and have no mercy for those who choose 
to invade your privacy, then this little box will be 
right up your alley as it sends a very loud warbling 
alarm sound back into your phone lines, giving 
the spammers an earful they won’t forget. You can 
even adjust the tone quality from a steady police-
like siren to a belching screech that sounds like a 
robotic cat ﬁght. Even though the spammers will 
probably continue to call you back regardless of 
being on those useless “Do Not Call” lists, you will 
at least have some enjoyment at their expense with 
this device.
This device can be made in two versions—one 
that jacks right into your home phone line for 
maximum volume level, and a portable unit that just 
feeds sound into the mouthpiece of any portable 
phone. The wired version is certainly the most 
effective version as it can deliver the sound to 
153
  Figure 12-0   This little box will give those pesky 
telemarketers an earful of fun!
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 IC1, IC2: LM555 analog timer
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 10 K, R2 = 10 K, R3 = 4.7 K, 
R4 = 220 K, R5 = 10 K
Q 
 VR1: 50-K variable resistor 
Q 
 Capacitors: C1 = 1 MF, C2 = 0.1 MF, C3 = 
0.01 MF, C4 = 0.1 MF, C5 = 0.1 MF
Q 
 Battery: 9- to 12-V battery or pack
This simple project will give those tele-spammers 
exactly what they are trying to give you—an earful 
of useless and highly annoying noise. “You’re 
mean, they are just doing their jobs.” Well, let 
us tell ya buddy, they can do some other job that 
doesn’t involve ticking us off, otherwise they will 
become victims to whatever we decide to feed 

154      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
Oh, we almost forgot to warn you! The phone 
line carries 40 volts (V) when idle, and over 100 V 
when ringing, so don’t try to strip those wires with 
your teeth with the cord plugged in, or you will get 
a painful lesson in electrical theory! The current is 
very low in a phone system, but the 100-V ringing 
line can still give you a good tingle. Plug the cord 
in after your device is completed.
If you plan to mess around with telephone 
hardware hacks on a regular basis, then the 
schematic shown in Figure 12-3 will be very useful 
as it allows just about any device to send or receive 
audio or data to and from the phone line. The pair 
of 0.1-microfarad (μF) ceramic capacitors block 
any direct current (DC) from passing and allow 
your device to send audio or listen to audio on the 
phone line. This project includes this interface in 
the schematic already, but you may ﬁnd it useful to 
add the capacitors right at the end of your hacked 
phone cord so that you can simply jack into your 
breadboard or any other project that may need to 
connect to your phone system.
the spammer at a level you could not achieve by 
screaming into your phone. Because the spammer 
jammer feeds the audio signal directly into the phone 
line, it bypasses all audio conditioning circuitry in 
your phone handset and spews out the sound at the 
maximum volume possible. Having a direct phone 
line connection also means that it works on every 
phone in the house connected to that line.
If you are not afraid of the “Phone Police,” 
then you can hack into your phone line by simply 
cutting the end of any standard phone cable that 
includes an RJ-11 connector at one end. This four 
conductor connector will be used to connect the 
spammer jammer into the phone line, so you need 
the RJ-11 male jack at one end and bare wires at 
the other end (Figure 12-1).
When you cut the end off your phone cable and 
expose the wires, you will have either two or four 
wires. Only the two center wires are used in most 
residential phone systems. There is a good chance 
these two wires will be red and green in color. You 
can cut the two outer wires short and then melt 
away a bit of the insulation from the two inner 
wires in order to solder them to your device. You 
may ﬁnd it difﬁcult to strip the ends of the wires in 
the phone cord as they are made of some bizarre 
braded wire strands, but it can be done. Melting 
away the insulation is a lot easier than trying to 
strip them with a knife. Figure 12-2 shows the 
phone cable adapted for a breadboard by soldering 
the two innermost wires onto a dual pin header.
  Figure 12-1   This standard phone cord has an 
RJ-11 connector at one end.
  Figure 12-2   Only the two center wires are 
used in most residential phone 
systems.
  Figure 12-3   A very simple and effective way 
to interface “hack” into your 
phone line.

Project 12  Q  Spammer Jammer      155
in other projects. The interface is so simple that 
you could just solder the capacitors right to the 
end of the telephone cord and then place some heat 
shrink tubing over them, leaving the free leads of 
the capacitors to act as plugs for your breadboard. 
Without this interface, 40 or even 100 V would be 
fed directly into your electronic projects, likely 
causing a total failure of any transistors or ICs.
The spammer jammer schematic shown in 
Figure 12-5 is based around a pair of 555 timers 
that work together to create a dual tone siren. The 
ﬁrst 555 oscillator circuit (IC1) acts like a low-
frequency pulse generator, changing the tone of the 
second 555 oscillator circuit (IC2) back and forth 
like an ambulance siren. The rate that the tones are 
changed can be controlled by the variable resistor 
VR1 so that the sound can be slow like a police 
siren or very fast like an angry screech. All of the 
sounds are highly annoying and very loud when fed 
directly into the phone line!
You can mess around with the actual tones of 
the siren as well by changing the values for C3, R4 
and R5 in the second oscillator circuit. The output 
from the second oscillator is then fed through the 
telephone interface capacitors (C4, and C5) to 
Of course, all of this telephone hacking is 
strictly against the rules and terms of service of 
your communications provider, but we are certainly 
willing to break a few rules in order to ﬁght back 
against telephone spammers! It is a good idea to 
leave your evil gadgets disconnected from the 
phone line when not in use, though.
The multipurpose telephone line interface is 
built using a pair of 0.1-μF capacitors to remove 
the DC from the phone line. Figure 12-4 shows the 
interface prepared on a small breadboard for use 
  Figure 12-4   This interface will connect your 
phone line to your breadboard.
  Figure 12-5   The spammer jammer schematic is based on a pair of 555 timers.

156      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
the phone away from your own ear! Figure 12-7 
shows the completed prototype with the phone 
line interface installed on the top right of the 
breadboard.
If you plan on making this project portable for 
use with a cell phone, then take the output from the 
second 555 timer oscillator (IC2) from pin 3 and 
ground out to either a piezo buzzer or small speaker 
(Figure 12-8). For an 8-7 speaker, add a 100-7
resistor in parallel. This will allow you to hold the 
device over the mouthpiece of your phone and blast 
spammers on your cell phone. Of course, the audio 
will not be nearly as loud as a direct connection to 
the phone line, but it will annoy them nonetheless!
Since the spammer jammer will run for a 
long time from a 9-V battery, you can add the 
components, switch, variable, resistor, and 
battery into a small project box for completion 
introduce the sound into the found line as an AC 
audio signal. If you don’t want to interface to your 
phone system and need portable operation, a piezo 
buzzer can be connected from pin 3 on the second 
555 timer (IC2) to ground to produce directly 
audible sounds.
Before you commit to any wiring, build the 
circuit on a solderless breadboard (Figure 12-6) so 
that you can tailor the sound to your liking. As is, 
the sounds can be adjusted from a siren to a digital 
screech, but you could certainly make a lot of 
other sounds by altering some of the components. 
Actually, only one 555 oscillator is needed to 
produce the sound, but it would only be a single 
frequency rather than a warbling siren. Add another 
555 oscillator into the mix and you could produce 
an amazing variety of sounds. When you are testing 
your sound, use a piezo buzzer connected to pin 
3 of the second 555 timer (IC2) and ground, or a 
speaker and 100-ohm (7) resistor.
Once you are happy with the sound quality of 
your noise-making circuit, test the system using 
the adapted telephone cord if you plan to connect 
to your phone system. You don’t have to wait for 
a call, just pick up your phone and then press the 
button to engage your oscillator. The sound from 
the spammer jammer will be so loud that it will 
overpower the dial tone and become the only thing 
that you hear. What you hear is the same thing that 
the person at the other end of the phone line will 
hear so when you are blasting spammers, keep 
  Figure 12-6   The spammer jammer circuit 
built on a solderless breadboard.
  Figure 12-7   The phone line is plugged into 
the breadboard for live testing.
  Figure 12-8   A piezo buzzer or small speaker 
can be used for direct audio 
transfer.

Project 12  Q  Spammer Jammer      157
the parts ready to be installed in the small plastic 
box after building up the circuit on a small bit of 
perforated board.
To make this project more versatile, we added 
the small piezo buzzer into the project box as 
well as a 1/8 mono jack that would connect 
to the adapted RJ-11 telephone cord. With the 
telephone jack plugged in, the switch built 
into the 1/8 jack cuts off the piezo buzzer and 
send the audio directly into the phone line for 
maximum delivery. For portable phone use, the 
small hole on the side of the box is an output 
from the piezo buzzer, allowing the audio to 
be directed into the mouthpiece of the phone 
(Figure 12-11).
Using the circuit shown in Figure 12-5, the 
spammer jammer can be made to emit a sound 
similar to a siren when the variable resistor is 
turned one way, and will continue to speed up 
when turned the other way until the sound that 
comes out is like an annoying digital mess that is 
truly obnoxious to listen to. Having this device 
plugged directly into the phone line allows the 
sound to be fed at maximum volume level to the 
telemarketers for an earful they will not easily 
forget. Don’t get mad, get even!
(Figure 12-9). We made our unit with both the 
piezo buzzer and a jack to plug into the phone 
line so it could work on the home phone system 
as well as cell phone. You will also want to add a 
pushbutton switch between the battery and circuit 
so that it only sends out a tone when you press 
the button. It only takes a few seconds for the 
telemarketers to get the point, so you only need a 
momentary push button switch.
Perforated board is great for small low-
frequency projects like this. This board can be 
purchased in 6-inch square sheets for only a few 
bucks and will allow you to mount all through hole 
semiconductors into the holes for soldering wires 
to the underside. Figure 12-10 shows most of 
  Figure 12-9   Adding the components and 
battery into a project box.
  Figure 12-10   The perforated board circuit is 
installed in the project box.
  Figure 12-11   This versions of the spammer 
jammer has direct audio and a 
phone interface.

This page intentionally left blank 

159
P R O J E C T  1 3
Phone Voice Changer
THIS PROJECT CONVERTS an old desktop telephone 
into a versatile audio mixing station that lets you 
route your telephone calls through an effects 
processor in order to create a state of the art voice 
changer. By using a real-time computer voice ﬁlter 
or a professional quality effect box, you can change 
your voice in ways that will make you sound like 
a completely different person. You can make a 
man sound like a woman, a girl sound like a man, 
a man sound like an elderly lady, or any possible 
combination imaginable with results that will fool 
anyone. Unlike those “spy toy” voice changers that 
make you sound like a funny cartoon, a real vocal 
effects unit or computer vocal ﬁlter will alter a 
voice in a perfectly convincing manner, allowing 
ﬁne control over both the formant (gender) and 
the pitch of your voice. Sure, you can have a lot 
of fun with evil and chipmunk voices as well, but 
if you really want to mask your voice identity in 
a convincing manner, then this useful device will 
allow you to connect any microphone compatible 
audio processing unit into your phone so you can 
alter your voice in real time.
There are many extremely powerful audio 
processing programs available for a computer that 
allow a person to alter his or her voice by talking 
into a microphone. Many of them are inexpensive 
or even free. Music stores also offer digital effect 
boxes that are designed for vocal processing, and 
these have the same functionality as the computer 
programs, but do their processing in a dedicated 
digital signal processor (DSP). We will be using 
both the computer software voice changer as well 
as the “effect box” version of the vocal processor to 
show how each one can be connected to the phone 
system using this project.
To alter your voice in real time, you must have 
a microphone connected to the input of a digital 
signal processor that can break your voice down 
into a digital signal, apply a complex algorithm to 
it, and then feed it back to an audio output without 
any noticeable delay. These audio processors are 
widely available in the form of computer programs 
or musical effect boxes, and all of them will allow 
you to speak into a microphone and hear an altered 
159
  Figure 13-0   This black box allows routing 
effects through your phone system.
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 Phone: Any working corded desktop phone 
for parts
Q 
 Voice changer: Boss-VT1 or similar format 
changer
Q 
 Headphones: Mono or stereo headphones 
with jack
Q 
 Misc: Plastic project box, toggle switch

160      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
note of where they were in case they are needed to 
make the phone function later.
The goal is to tear your phone completely apart 
and reduce it into the smallest functional size 
possible. Remove all of the screws and reduce 
your phone to the bare circuit board as shown in 
Figure 13-3, taking note of any wires you have 
to cut that lead to other smaller printed circuit 
boards. Most phones will only have a single circuit 
board inside, but this one had several as it seemed 
to be an earlier model that was “upgraded” to 
have a hands-free option and built-in calculator. 
If you have to cut the wires leading to the wall 
jack or handset, take special note of the color and 
placement of these wires.
The telephone will be converted into an audio 
mixer device capable of taking the output from 
voice as an output. Okay, that’s great, but how do 
we get this altered voice into the phone system so 
that you can have a conversation with your newly 
disguised voice? Well, we will make a high-quality 
telephone audio input/output mixer using a cheap 
desktop phone, that’s how!
Any hard-wired desktop phone will work for 
this project, and the fewer features the phone has, 
the easier it will be to hack. The cheap desktop 
phone shown in Figure 13-1 is a prime candidate 
for hacking as it has no built-in answering machine, 
and will be easy to take apart. A cordless phone will 
not work for this project—you need a phone that 
plugs directly into the wall. When you are sourcing 
a phone to hack, look for one that has as few extra 
features as possible, and preferably one that does 
not require an external power supply. Just a plain old 
desktop phone that still functions is all you need.
Once you have found a desktop phone that 
works and can be sacriﬁced in order to become 
reborn as something better, remove all of the 
screws and spread the innards all over your 
workbench! Take the phone apart as much as 
you can, taking note of any wires you absolutely 
have to cut in order to get the main circuit board 
removed from the plastic case. The phone we chose 
shown in Figure 13-2 came apart fairly easy, but we 
did have to cut a few wires to remove the plastic 
casing. The good news is that most of the cut wires 
will not be needed in the ﬁnal version, but do take 
  Figure 13-1   This basic desktop phone will be 
converted into an effects mixer.
  Figure 13-2   Test your phone to make sure it 
works and then tear it all apart.
  Figure 13-3   Breaking down the phone until 
only the circuit board remains.

Project 13  Q  Phone Voice Changer      161
so remember the polarity and position of the wires 
on the jack socket if you have to cut it to remove 
the circuit board from the phone. If you reverse the 
“tip” and “ring” wires, you may have a noisy hum 
on your phone when you use it again.
Once you have removed the circuit board 
entirely from the phone, solder any wires back 
where they belong and plug the mess into the 
phone hack to make sure it still functions properly. 
The receiver hook switch will probably be “up” 
already since the receiver no longer has a cradle, 
so the instant you plug the phone into the wall you 
should hear a dial tone. The ugly mess of circuit 
boards and soldered wiring shown in Figure 13-5 
is actually fully functional, just as it was before we 
took everything apart. Now, you can begin reducing 
the phone to the minimal working size.
There are actually several ways you can go about 
converting your phone into a universal telephone 
audio input mixing device, so read through the entire 
project before you continue. We wanted to reduce 
the hacked phone down to a size small enough 
to jam into a small black box, and did not plan to 
make use of the dialer anymore as we would use the 
main phone to make new calls. Our ﬁnal goal is a 
small black box that basically adds an audio input 
and output into the phone system and has a single 
switch to “jack” it into a call in progress. This way, 
we can just use our normal phone as we always do, 
but switch on the voice changer if needed. To make 
your voice processing hardware (or computer) and 
inserting it into the phone line. The device will 
also let you listen to the audio from the phone line 
using a set of standard headphones. So basically, 
the phone will be converted to use a line input in 
place of the receiver’s mouthpiece and a set of 
headphones in place of the receiver’s earpiece. 
You will use the device to talk on the phone by 
speaking into the microphone plugged into your 
voice changer and listen to the call with a set of 
headphones. You will hear the person on the line as 
well as your own altered voice on the headphones 
so that you can hear yourself the same way they 
hear you. To make all of this audio mixing magic 
work as it should, this hack relies on the electronics 
included in the phone.
There are three sets of wires that you need to be 
concerned with: the telephone jack pair, the headset 
earpiece pair, and the headset mouthpiece pair. 
Starting with the telephone jack pair, you can ﬁnd 
them by following the two wires leading from the 
RJ-11 telephone socket as shown in Figure 13-4. 
There are only two wires needed in a residential 
phone system, and these correspond to the two 
center pins on the 4-pin RJ-11 female jack at the 
back of the phone. Some phones don’t have a jack, 
only the cord with a male connector at the end, but 
the wiring is the same, using only the two center 
wires. Usually (but not always), these wires will be 
colored green and red for (tip and ring), 
  Figure 13-4   The RJ-11 telephone jack will 
have a pair of wires leading to 
the main board.
  Figure 13-5   This ugly mess is actually a fully 
functioning desktop telephone!

162      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
we could have left it just the way it was, we wanted 
to remove it completely in order to reduce the 
phone to its smallest possible conﬁguration.
In order to decode the pins on the hook switch, 
you will need to unsolder it from your phone’s 
circuit board so you can test the points using an 
ohmmeter. The hook switch had its own small 
carrier board as shown in Figure 13-7, so we just 
removed the wires connecting it to the main board. 
Remember to take note of the color and position of 
any wires when removing the switch so you know 
which points or wires need to be soldered back in 
order to make your phone stay on the hook when 
complete. The goal will be to decode the on hook 
operation of the switch and short the appropriate 
wires or traces on the main board.
There may be as few as two and as many as eight 
wires coming from the hook switch, so you will need 
an ohmmeter to help decide the pins on the more 
complex hook switch. Since the goal is to emulate 
the on hook position of the switch, it will remain in 
the upright position (receiver off the cradle) when 
decoding the pins. Take an ohmmeter and test all of 
the combinations until you have ﬁgured out which 
wire pairs are tied together. As shown in Figure 13-8, 
a short circuit (zero ohms) means that those two 
pins are tied together when the switch is in the on 
hook position. Basically, you are going to make a 
schematic of your switch and then copy the on hook 
wiring onto your telephone’s circuit board.
a call, we would dial using the normal telephone. 
You can opt to leave the dialing capabilities on your 
hacked phone, which would make it a complete 
working telephone capable of making new calls, as 
well as mixing the voice changer audio.
The receiver “hook switch” will cut the telephone 
from the line when the receiver is pressing down 
on the switch. So, the hook switch is a “normally 
closed” switch that places the phone on the line 
when it is in the on “off hook” position. These hook 
switches are designed with two or more poles, and 
require some object to sit on them to engage them 
into the “off hook” position. Since the completed 
project will no longer make use of the original hand 
held receiver, this hook switch is no longer of any 
use. To allow the new device to be placed on or off 
hook (on or off the line), a single pole toggle switch 
will just be added between one of the telephone line 
wires to cut the circuit from the telephone line.
To remove the function of the original receiver 
hook switch, you have two options: simply leave 
the switch in the up position “on hook,” or 
decode the wiring and solder the necessary wires 
together that will place the phone on the hook. 
Since a new toggle switch will control the phone 
being on or off the hook, you no longer need 
the receiver hook switch, and will need to make 
it permanently “off the hook” so the phone is 
always engaged as long as it is connected to the 
line. The hook switch was attached to the small 
carrier board shown in Figure 13-6, and although 
  Figure 13-6   Identifying the receiver hook 
switch to decode the wiring.
  Figure 13-7   The receiver hook switch is a 
two- or three-pole normally 
closed switch.

Project 13  Q  Phone Voice Changer      163
phone’s circuit board in order to make the phone 
stay on the hook. The phone had a ribbon cable 
leading to a smaller circuit board that carried the hook 
switch, so we just soldered the necessary two pairs 
of wires together at the end of the cable as shown 
in Figure 13-10. Now, when we plug the RJ-11 jack 
into the phone socket, the phone is instantly on the 
hook and we hear a dial tone. Again, you could just 
leave the hook switch in the upright position, as 
that would also leave the phone permanently on the 
hook as well.
After a bit of prodding, we ﬁgured out the 
wiring diagram of the receiver hook switch. 
Figure 13-9 shows that pins A and D as well as 
E and C needed to be shorted together in order 
to ﬁx the phone into the permanently on hook 
conﬁguration. This pinout was actually fairly 
common on several of the phones we hacked for 
this use over the years. 
Once you have decoded the function of your 
receiver hook switch, you can simply bridge 
together the appropriate points or traces on the 
  Figure 13-9   Making a wiring diagram for the receiver hook switch.
  Figure 13-10   Soldering the hook switch points 
together to ﬁx the phone on the 
hook.
  Figure 13-8   Using an ohmmeter to decode 
the pinouts on the hook switch.

164      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
handset microphone, and you will be feeding 
the output from the handset speaker out to a set 
of headphones. So, the result is a telephone that 
works the same as it was originally intended, but 
in a headset conﬁguration rather than with the 
handset. By exploiting the audio mixing circuit 
in the telephone, you do not need to worry about 
designing your own complicated telephone-
compatible audio ampliﬁcation and ﬁltering 
system.
Open the handset as shown in Figure 13-12 so 
you can isolate the two pairs of wires that connect 
the microphone and speaker to the main circuit 
board. Inside a typical desktop telephone handset, 
you will usually ﬁnd a small electret microphone 
in the mouthpiece section, a small speaker in the 
headset section, and a swell block of steel or lead 
in the center. This metal block is installed there 
to make your handset feel heavier, which instills 
a false sense of quality into the minds of the 
gullible (us consumers)! Take note of the color 
and placement each pair of wires so you can trace 
them back to the main circuit board. The goal is to 
replace the original microphone and speaker with 
your own input/output (IO) jacks.
Unless your phone is from the dark ages, it will 
probably have a typical electret microphone for the 
mouthpiece and a tiny speaker for the earpiece. The 
electret microphone is the small metal can shown 
With the receiver hook switch removed from 
the board as well as the other unnecessary ﬁxtures 
such as indicator lights, and even the dialer pad, 
the mess of wires shown earlier in Figure 13-3 
has been transformed into the much neater bundle 
shown in Figure 13-11. If you do not plan on 
using this system to dial the phone, then you can 
probably just remove the dialer pad from the main 
circuit board without affecting the operation of the 
phone. If the dialer pad is on a connector, then pull 
it out and test your phone to ensure you get a dial 
tone and can hear your own voice in the earpiece as 
you talk into the mouthpiece. Some hacking may 
be necessary when removing the other components 
such as the dialer from the main board, but it can 
certainly be done with a little work. On this phone, 
we were able to just cut the bundle of wires that 
wind from the main board to the dialer pad, and 
this had no effect on the operation of the phone.
With the telephone reduced to the smallest 
possible conﬁguration necessary to talk on the 
line, you can now move onto the next step, which 
involves the conversion of the handset into an 
audio input/output device. Since the telephone 
already has a working audio ampliﬁer and mixer 
on the board, all you have to do is remove the 
mouthpiece microphone and the earpiece speaker 
and replace them with input jacks. You will be 
feeding the output from your voice changer 
into the circuit that normally ampliﬁed the 
  Figure 13-11   The ugly mess is growing smaller 
as we hack away at the circuit 
board.
  Figure 13-12   Opening the receiver unit to 
convert it into an input/output 
device.

Project 13  Q  Phone Voice Changer      165
lead. Once you remove the electret microphone to 
install the audio input connector, the signal wire 
from your device will be the positive lead, and the 
shielded ground wire will be the negative lead. 
The small speaker may also have a positive and 
negative lead, but it will actually work ﬁne either 
way around.
The wiring from the headset can easily be traced 
back to the main circuit board, especially if the 
color coding is easily visible. Our headset had 
two silver wires, so we used the ohmmeter again 
(Figure 13-15) to trace the wires back to their points 
on the main circuit board. Once you have identiﬁed 
the points for both wire pairs (microphone and 
speaker), cut away the headset wires and leave 
enough wiring to install your new connectors. If the 
headset wires are not long enough, just solder in a 
new pair of wires for each device.
The phone base hacking is almost complete, but 
before you add the input connectors, it’s a good 
idea to plug the original electret microphone back 
into the system to make sure you installed the new 
wiring properly. With the microphone plugged 
into the end of your input wire pair as shown in 
Figure 13-16, you should be able to hear your voice 
on another phone in the house once the hacked 
phone is plugged into the wall. If you can’t hear 
your voice on the other phone or on this phone with 
the headset speaker reconnected then you probably 
in Figure 13-13. It includes its own high-gain 
ampliﬁer right inside the small metal container. 
Take note of the polarity and color of the wires 
coming from both the speaker and the microphone 
as this will be important when interfacing to your 
effects unit or computer sound card output.
Sometimes there will be an obvious red and 
black wire on a polarized device, but other times 
there will be no logical color scheme or wires of 
all the same color. Rather than guessing that the 
red wire on the microphone is positive, look at the 
underside of the metal can closely and identify the 
pin that also connects to the side of the metal can. 
As shown in Figure 13-14, the pin that is connected 
to the metal can is also the negative or ground 
  Figure 13-13   The electret microphone and 
speaker from the original 
handset.
  Figure 13-14   The electret microphone has a 
positive and negative side.
  Figure 13-15   Tracing back the headset wiring 
to the main circuit board.

166      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
preampliﬁcation circuit, the music that you input 
only needs to be at a very low level. For MP3 
players, the lowest volume setting above zero is 
perfect. Now that your IO functionality has been 
tested, the IO jacks can be installed to ﬁnish the 
telephone audio mixing device.
Compare to the mess of boards and wires shown 
in Figure 13-3, the completed telephone audio 
mixing device shown in Figure 13-18 sure went on 
a successful diet! The device is now small enough 
to mount in a plastic project box, and performs 
the function of mixing an audio input into the 
phone line and at the same time echoing it back 
to the listener along with the audio from the caller 
on the other end of the conversation. This hacked 
phone is now ofﬁcially doing the job of a device 
called a data access arrangement (DAA), which is a 
special mixer that relays audio or data to and from 
the telephone network. You can actually purchase 
DAA modules, but they are somewhat complex to 
connect and will certainly cost you more than a 
cheap old desktop telephone. 
Figure 13-18 shows the completed telephone 
audio mixing device with the two boards taped 
together to save space. The device has a total of six 
wires (three pairs) coming out of it for the audio 
input (was the mouthpiece), audio output (was the 
earpiece), and wall jack plug.
have the microphone polarity reversed. Once you 
have veriﬁed that the hacked phone is still working 
normally, IO connectors can then be installed.
Another test you can do with your system is to 
feed a low-level audio signal into the microphone 
input as shown in Figure 13-17. This basically 
creates a music on hold system, playing the music 
from the MP3 player into the phone system. 
You should be able to hear the music on both the 
headphones jacked into the audio output on your 
hacked phone as well as any phone connected to 
the same telephone jack in your house. If you have 
a cell phone, call your home line and then plug in 
the hacked phone; it will pick up the line, and you 
will hear the music on your cell phone. Because 
the audio mixer in the phone has its own ﬁlter and 
  Figure 13-16   Testing the phone using the 
original electret microphone.
  Figure 13-17   Using an audio source to test the 
functionality of the device.
  Figure 13-18   The completed device has been 
reduced to its smallest possible 
size.

Project 13  Q  Phone Voice Changer      167
choosing a project case for this project, do not 
use a conductive metal box—we learned this the 
hard way after drilling all of the mounting holes 
and installing the board. Because the connectors 
will share a common ground, this could (did in 
our case) cause the system to fail as the phone 
circuitry may not be okay with a common ground 
for the input and output. We had to make a second 
installation, but everything worked ﬁne once in the 
plastic box.
Now that you have your completed telephone 
audio mixing device ready to use, you only need 
to supply a microphone, headphones, and some 
kind of vocal effect that will alter your voice. The 
easiest and least expensive option is to ﬁnd a real-
time voice changer software for your computer and 
run the output from your computer soundcard into 
the input on the telephone audio mixing device. 
The only drawback to using a computer is the fact 
that you have to unplug your computer speakers 
to use the telephone voice changer and portability 
is certainly not so great. Another option is to use a 
dedicated vocal effects unit such as the Boss VT-1 
voice transformer effect box shown in Figure 13-21.
Make no mistake, the Boss VT-1 is no toy, and 
can alter a human voice so realistically that we 
have been able to fool people that have known us 
for years! Imagine their surprise after a 15 minute 
prank call that that elderly lady voice was actually 
us all along! The Boss VT-1 can change a speaker’s 
gender, alter the pitch, add amazingly realistic 
Although your system may differ due to the 
design of the telephone used for parts, the wiring 
diagram will look something like the one shown 
in Figure 13-19, with three sets of wiring pairs 
connecting your completed telephone audio mixing 
device to the audio input, headphone output, and 
telephone wall jack. Notice the toggle switch 
installed in series with one of the RJ-11 connector 
lines—this essentially replaces the built-in receiver 
hook switch, allowing the telephone audio mixing 
device to be switched on or off the hook. You 
can answer calls by ﬂipping the switch to the on 
position.
After a few hours of hacking the old desktop 
phone, the resulting telephone audio mixing device 
is ﬁnally ready for a new home inside the small 
black box shown in Figure 13-20. When you are 
  Figure 13-19   A wiring diagram showing the input output connectors.
  Figure 13-20   The completed telephone audio 
mixing device getting a new 
home.

168      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
back of the effect unit. Most effect devices for use 
with guitars or microphones will have 1/8-inch (in) 
mono audio jacks, labeled “microphone input” 
and “audio output” or something similar. The Boss 
VT-1 also included a stereo audio “line level” RCA 
connector pair as shown in Figure 13-22, so we 
used the left channel to connect to the telephone 
audio mixer. Line level or microphone level 
audio inputs and outputs will work ﬁne with the 
telephone mixer, but do not connect the telephone 
audio mixer to any output designed to directly drive 
a speaker as this will severely overdrive or even 
damage the preampliﬁer in the telephone mixer 
circuit. An output designed for a headphone will be 
okay, but if it has a volume level control, set it all 
the way down at ﬁrst and adjust it later if necessary.
To use a real-time voice-changing software 
with your telephone audio mixing hardware, 
you will need to connect to the “line output” and 
“microphone input” on the computer. Desktop 
computers will have these jacks on the rear as shown 
in Figure 13-23, and laptops will usually have them 
on the side. If the connectors are not clearly marked, 
then usually the pink-colored connector is the 
microphone input, and the green connecter is the 
line output. Since some computer soundcards are 
designed to drive a speaker directly, you should set 
the volume on your computer all the way down at
ﬁrst and then adjust it while you are speaking 
into the microphone in order to set it to the 
room echo, and even make robotic voices. Since 
this thing was designed just for vocal use, it does 
an amazing job as a voice masking device. We 
bought the Boss VT-1 from eBay for about $100, 
but there were similar effects available for about 
the same cost that had very good vocal effects. 
When you are looking for a voice changer, the 
word “formant changer” is the key. “Formant” is 
the shift between the male and female vocal tract 
and this is not just a simple pitch change. Changing 
only the pitch means you can sound like a cartoon 
chipmunk or Satan himself, and although that can 
be great fun as well, it will not convince anyone 
on the phone. Effect units that are designed for 
vocalists will usually have this format control, but 
you should always test the effect at the store or 
at least look for an online review or sound demo 
before spending any money. Effect units called 
“Vocoders” may also have a formant control, and 
they will allow a diverse variety of voice alterations 
to be made. We have several vocal effect boxes as 
well as the best of the best for computer ﬁlters, but 
can honestly say nothing at all touches the Boss 
VT-1 as far as being the best gender-changing and 
most realistic voice-masking effect of all time. If 
you can ﬁnd one for less than $200, it is deﬁnitely 
worth the money.
To connect an external audio effects processor to 
the telephone audio mixing device, you will need 
to identify the input and output connectors on the 
  Figure 13-22   Connecting the telephone audio 
mixing device to an effect box.
  Figure 13-21   The is the amazing Boss VT-1
voice transformer effect box.

Project 13  Q  Phone Voice Changer      169
One of the more popular voice changers 
available at the time of writing this was one called 
“AV VCS Voice Changer,” and it is available as a 
trial download or as a full upgrade for a small fee. 
The quality of this software is actually very good. 
It can change a person’s voice just enough to sound 
different and convincing, or it can warp your voice 
into all sorts of hilarious cartoon characters. This 
software works in real time so you can hear the 
results as you speak into the microphone. Once 
your microphone and volume levels are set up to 
work with the telephone audio mixer, you will 
see the record indicators at the top of the software 
window (Figure 13-24) move as you speak into 
your microphone. You will hear your altered voice 
over the headphones as well as the caller on the 
other end of the line. The voice-changing software 
also lets you design your own voice presets and 
perfect level for the telephone audio mixer. When 
you have the microphone and volume levels 
set correctly, your voice will sound natural and 
distortion free on the telephone to both you and 
the caller on the line.
  Figure 13-23   Connecting the telephone audio 
mixing device to a computer.
  Figure 13-24   Using a real-time computer voice changing software.

170      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
they ever dialed your number when you answer 
them with Satan’s angry voice, and your friends 
will never know when you are pranking them until 
you can’t hold back your laughter! Of course, there 
are also legitimate reasons why you might want 
to keep your identity private to the person on the 
other end of the telephone, and with a good voice 
changer connected to this device, you can make 
that happen (Figure 13-25).
save them so you can become a multitude of 
characters by simply pressing a button.
The completed telephone voice changer allows 
a person to remain anonymous over the phone by 
routing the audio signal through a real-time vocal 
effect unit or computer voice changer. Because the 
audio mixing and ﬁltering are done by the original 
audio processing electronics that came with the 
phone, the conversation sounds completely natural, 
as if using a standard telephone. By using a vocal 
effect box or software program, you can alter 
your voice in very convincing ways that will fool 
anyone, even those who have known your normal 
voice for years. You can also have some fun 
with “over the top” vocal effects such as echoes, 
chipmunk voices, evil voices, and robot voices. 
The audio mixing portion of the telephone voice 
changer is also a very versatile input/output device 
that will allow you to send or receive audio data 
to and from the phone line without needing to 
use a data access arrangement (DAA) or ﬁltering 
system.
If you have ever needed to disguise your 
voice on the telephone for any reason, then this 
device will certainly allow you to do it in a very 
convincing way. Telephone spammers will be sorry 
  Figure 13-25   The completed telephone voice 
changer using the Boss Voice 
Transformer.

P A R T  F O U R
GPS Location Tracking

This page intentionally left blank 

173
P R O J E C T  1 4
GPS Data Receiver
GPS is short for “Global Positioning System.” 
As the name implies, it is a globally available 
positioning and time system that uses a radio ﬁx 
on multiple orbiting satellites. A GPS receiver will 
operate wherever there is an unobstructed view 
(line of sight) to four or more GPS satellites so that 
it can receive the radio signal from each satellite. 
The receiver uses the information it receives in 
the radio signal to determine the distance to each 
satellite. The position of the receiver is calculated 
by an algorithm that includes both the information 
and strength of the radio signal received from each 
satellite. With this information, exact time, and 
position data such as latitude, longitude, height 
from seal level, moving speed, and direction can be 
computed and displayed to the user.
your next project can know exactly what time it 
is, where it is, how fast it is moving, and in what 
direction it is moving at any time. Robots can self-
locate for autonomous operation and surveillance 
equipment can keep track of a person or vehicle 
location in a very precise manner. The good news is 
that you can add GPS capabilities to your project for 
under $100 and there are no licensing fees or user 
fees. The not so good news is that a consumer grade 
GPS is really only accurate to a radius of about 
25 feet (ft), although for the most part the accuracy 
will be much better. If you own a handheld GPS 
unit, then you have already seen the limitations of 
these devices. Of course, even at 25 ft, the accuracy 
is more than enough to track a person or object 
along a city street and then display that data on a 
program such as Google Earth or Google Maps.
A GPS module is a self-contained GPS receiver 
that does all of the difﬁcult signal processing 
and computation for you. These inexpensive and 
173
  Figure 14-0   This project will connect a 
microcontroller to a GPS module.
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 GPS1: Any GPS module with a digital 
serial output 
Q 
 Eval1: Optional sparkfun GPS evaluation 
board
Q 
 IC1: ATMEL ATMega32p or comparable 
microcontroller
Q 
 XT1: 14.755-MHz crystal for microcontroller 
USART clock 
Q 
 LCD 1: 16 character serial input text LCD
Q 
 LED 1: Red LED to display GPS status
Q 
 R1: 1-K current limiting for LED 1
Having all of this location information available 
instantly from anywhere on the planet means that 

174      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
when working with the GPS module as we knew 
any errors in communication would be in our own 
source code rather than in the actual hardware. 
The GPS module (SanJose FV-M8) and evaluation 
board (GPS-08334) we ordered from SparkFun are 
shown in Figure 14-1. The total cost of both items 
was under $140.
The FV-M8 GPS module made by SanJose 
Navigation is a powerful 32-channel GPS receiver 
with a 5-Hertz (Hz) output rate and a built-in 
antenna. This GPS module would be considered 
high end, but for under $100, it is a bargain 
for those who want to add fast response GPS 
navigation to a project. Having a built-in antenna 
also makes things much easier. This GPS was 
able to ﬁnd a ﬁx in less than a minute, even in a 
basement lab. The evaluation board from SparkFun 
allows several GPS modules to plug right in and 
take power from a USB port or external DC source. 
The evaluation board also includes a USB-to-
serial converter and a level translator for serial 
communication with a PC. Using free software such 
as “Mini-GPS” made it extremely painless to get 
the module up and running to verify its operation.
GPS receiver modules have come a long way 
over the last few years. The tiny 1-in square FV-M8
receiver module from San Jose Navigation is 
ready to use as soon as power is supplied (see 
Figure 14-2). Once powered up, the GPS module 
amazing 1-inch (in) square boxes will lock onto all 
of the satellites in range and then start sending out 
the location and time data in a simple-to-read string 
that can be received by a microcontroller using 
a few input-output (IO) lines. This project will 
explore the basics of connecting one of these GPS 
modules to a microcontroller in order to receive the 
data and decode it into a usable format. 
There are many different GPS modules 
available, and like all things, some are good 
and some are not so good. Being a fairly new 
technology, improvements are constantly being 
made, so you must do a little research to ensure 
that you ﬁnd a GPS module that uses the most 
current technology. Some of the more important 
aspects to consider when choosing a GPS module 
will be: the output format, time to ﬁx, antenna type, 
and available support. Support and documentation 
cannot be underestimated when dealing with these 
GPS modules. They will require some very precise 
communication to and from your microcontroller in 
order to operate properly. With good documentation 
and a support community, you should have no 
problem getting your GPS module working in a 
few hours, but don’t expect a happy ending if you 
ﬁnd a budget receiver with little documentation, or 
you plan to be the ﬁrst one to get that latest receiver 
working. We know—this is our second attempt at 
a GPS-based project, and our ﬁst attempt was a 
frustrating failure because to having a module with 
almost no documentation and support!
The best source for GPS receivers and evaluation 
boards that we have found is the Internet-based 
electronics hobby supplier Sparkfun.com. They 
offer a wide range of reasonably priced GPS units 
along with full documentation and a forum where 
users can post questions and offer working source 
code for various models and microcontrollers. 
SparkFun also offers an evaluation board that 
takes care of the power supply, connector issues, 
and level translation between the serial port on 
the GPS and your microcontroller or computer. 
We found the evaluation board to be a great help 
  Figure 14-1   A GPS module and evaluation 
board supplied by SparkFun.

Project 14  Q  GPS Data Receiver      175
needed. If you are planning to use a development 
board that will accept the connector for your 
GPS module, then the IO pin conﬁguration is not 
important at this time, but eventually you will 
probably want to reduce your project down to just 
the GPS module and a microcontroller. Figure 14-3 
shows the section of the datasheet that indicates 
the purpose of all eight wires coming out of the 
GPS module. Out of the eight possible wires, we 
only needed three of them to get the data into the 
microcontroller: power (VIN), ground (GND), and 
transmit (TX1).
A GPS module is fairly easy to connect to a 
microcontroller as long as you supply it with the 
proper DC power source and know exactly what 
type of data to expect from the transmit line. If the
GPS module includes a “heartbeat” IO pin, then 
you can simply add a current-limiting resistor and 
an LED to create a visual indicator that will tell 
you when the GPS module has found a ﬁx and 
is sending serial data. On our GPS module, the 
heartbeat IO line is labeled on the datasheet as 
“1PPS,” which means one pulse per second. On 
power up, this IO line will send out a constant 
voltage and then blink once per second as soon as 
the GPS has locked on to as many satellites as it 
needs in order to create a valid location ﬁx.
To verify the operation of this GPS module, we 
ordered the evaluation board (Figure 14-4) from 
SparkFun, as it included a socket for the GPS 
and several other popular models. This socket 
will supply the required DC power to the GPS 
module and carry all of the other IO lines out to 
both a solder pad header as well as an RS232 level 
translator that will allow the data to be received by 
any computer with a serial port. For PCs without 
a serial port, a USB-to-RS232 converter is also 
included on the board so that data can be received 
on a virtual com port on the PC. Basically, with 
the evaluation board you cannot go wrong when 
it comes to connecting the GPS module up to a 
computer to read the serial data or send commands 
to the module. It’s all plug and play.
will search for satellites and then send a 1-Hz 
“heartbeat” pulse down one of the input/output (IO) 
lines to show that it has a valid ﬁx. The module 
will also send out serial data containing all of the 
relevant GPS information so that a microcontroller 
or terminal can decode the data. So, to add GPS 
capabilities to your project, you really only need 
three wires: one for power (3.3 volts [V]), one for 
ground, and one to receive the serial data! A few 
years ago, we tried to add GPS capabilities to a 
robot project using a much earlier GPS module, and 
failed after wasting a week trying to decode the data 
sheet. Nowadays, things are much easier.
Most GPS modules can also be conﬁgured via 
serial communications, but unless you need to 
change the default settings, the modules can be 
used without any prior setup or conﬁguration. 
Serial communication speed, data transmit rate, 
and data format are some of the more common 
conﬁgurations that can be changed in most GPS 
receivers, but for this project we will simply 
work with the default settings as indicated in the 
datasheet for the GPS module.
The ﬁrst step in connecting a GPS module is 
to supply the needed voltage and then connect 
the receiver and possibly the transmit line to your 
microcontroller. The data sheet will show you 
the pinout of the GPS connector, as well as all of 
the timing and communications parameters that are 
  Figure 14-2   The SanJose FV-M8 from 
SparkFun is a fully functional 
GPS in a tiny box.

176      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
evaluation board. We then plugged the FV-M8 
into the mating socket on the evaluation board 
and then added a 12-V DC jack that had the 
correct polarity as indicated in the evaluation 
board datasheet (Figure 14-5). For USB 
operation, the board will take power from the 
Connecting the GPS module to the evaluation 
board and to a computer was just a matter of 
plugging in the cables. Since we had a 9-pin 
serial cable on our test bench for use with the 
Atmel STK500 programmer, we just moved it 
from the programmer’s socket to the SparkFun 
  Figure 14-5   Connecting the FV-M8 GPS 
module to the evaluation board.
  Figure 14-4   Initial testing will be done using 
the evaluation board.
  Figure 14-3   The datasheet will detail the IO lines as well as default settings.

Project 14  Q  GPS Data Receiver      177
4800 BPS data on power up, and would not retain 
any serial conﬁguration speed changes without 
a backup battery, we began to suspect that the 
evaluation board was nonfunctional.
The next day, we began to simply hack away on 
the project, trying random switch settings and other 
baud rates, and wouldn’t you know it—the data 
sheet was wrong! The FV-M8 GPS module defaults 
to 38400 BPS, not 4800 BPS as stated in the 
datasheet, so we were now up and running. Sadly, 
we cut the cables in frustration and was planning 
to wire up a new RS232 IC when we suspected the 
evaluation board was not working. It’s not often 
that datasheets have bogus information, but if you 
are using this same GPS module, be aware that 
it defaults to 38400,8,N,1 and not 4800,8,N,1 as 
stated in the datasheet.
Once the PC was set to 38400 BPS, the GPS 
data began to display on the screen as shown in 
Figure 14-6. The “Mini-GPS” program presents 
the satellite ﬁx data in a conﬁguration similar to 
many handheld GPS units, showing position and 
signal strength for all satellites it can receive from. 
You can also set the default parameters of the GPS 
module, changing the frequency and speed that 
serial data is sent. We tried changing the serial 
speed back to 4800 BPS, and this worked ﬁne, but 
without a backup battery, the default speed went 
right back to 38400 BPS. We decided to use only 
the default settings that the GPS module had at 
power up, so that if power was lost, it would not 
be a huge task to get the module communicating 
with the microcontroller again. Sure, we could 
set the GPS for 4800 BPS, and program the 
microcontroller for the same speed, but then what 
would happen if the GPS lost power or if the 
backup battery failed? The microcontroller would 
be unable to reprogram or even communicate with 
the GPS module, and it would need to be removed 
and reprogrammed from a terminal set for 
38400 BPS. Consider this issue when adding a GPS 
module permanently to some other project that has 
to communicate with it.
USB bus, so no external DC power source would 
be necessary.
As soon as the power switch was placed in the 
ON position, the status LED on the evaluation 
board lit up, showing that the GPS module had the 
proper DC power applied. Since we were using 
the 9-pin serial connector rather than the USB 
connector, we set the communication switch on 
the evaluation board from “USB” to “RS232.” 
The 9-pin serial port labeled “Port1” was then 
connected to the serial port on our PC using a 
standard “straight through” serial cable, not a “null 
modem” cable.
Once we had the evaluation board connected and 
powered up, the status LED went from solid to a 
1 second pulse within about 60 seconds, indicating 
that the GPS now had a valid ﬁx. Surprisingly, this 
was faster than our handheld Garmin GPS when 
both were powered up at the same time. The GPS 
module was able to gain a ﬁx in under a minute 
even in a basement lab, so this was a good sign that 
it would be quite usable in a robot project or even 
a tracking device. The next step was to display the 
GPS data on the computer. This step was not as 
easy as we thought it would be.
We downloaded several free GPS data display 
programs from the SparkFun website as well as 
from the GPS module manufacturer’s website so 
we could view the data in real time. According to 
the FV-M8 data sheet and sales documentation, 
it would power up and begin to send serial data 
strings at 4800 BPS at a rate of 5 Hz (5 strings per 
second). Well, that seemed simple. The indicator 
LED was already pulsing at 1 Hz, indicating that 
the GPS already had a valid ﬁx. For the next four 
hours, we attempted to receive this 4800 BPS data 
on all of the free GPS programs as well as with 
the built-in HyperTerminal program, but could not 
get any of the programs to receive the serial data. 
We tried several cables, and even went back to the 
USB port, but could not get any terminal program 
to receive the 4800 BPS serial stream. Since the 
datasheet clearly stated that the module would send 

178      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
characters. LCD screens that use serial, parallel, 
or I2C are easy to work with because many 
microcontrollers already support these languages, 
or have routines built into their compilers to add 
LCD support. We had this serial LCD in the parts 
box, and it was a perfect choice to display the 
data sent from the GPS module. Of course, the 
LCD screen cannot accept data directly from the 
GPS module, so a microcontroller must be used 
to ﬁrst read the serial data from the GPS module 
and then send it out to the serial LCD module after 
formatting it into a compatible string.
Once you have veriﬁed that the GPS module is 
working properly and sending out serial data at a 
speed and format that you know, connecting it directly 
to a microcontroller is easy. Any microcontroller
LCD screens are very easy to connect to just 
about any microcontroller. The small 16 character 
by two line LCD screen shown in Figure 14-7 
needs only a single serial input in order to display 
  Figure 14-6   Receiving the GPS data on the “Mini-GPS” PC program.
  Figure 14-7   This is an easy to interface 
two-line serial LCD screen.

Project 14  Q  GPS Data Receiver      179
program memory for expanding the project into 
something more interesting like a robot navigation 
system. In the schematic, “CON-1” shows the 
solder pads on the SparkFun evaluation board and 
how they relate to the connector for the FV-M8 
GPS module. Eventually, the GPS module will 
be connected directly to the microcontroller, but 
for prototyping, the evaluation board ensures that 
there will be no wiring errors while working on the 
microcontroller source code.
Both the microcontroller and the GPS module 
will run from 3.3 V, so no level translation is 
necessary between the RX and TX serial lines. 
If the microcontroller were to be powered from 
5 V, then some GPS modules may require level 
translation in order for serial communications 
that can accept the transmitted serial data at the 
required baud rate can read the data from the GPS 
and then use it internally. Your project could be 
as simple as a Basic Stamp or Arduino reading 
only the TX line from the GPS module to acquire 
location data or more complex, controlling the 
functionality of the GPS module through its serial 
receive IO pin. In this experiment, we will simply 
read the serial stream as sent by the GPS module 
default conﬁguration and then echo the time and 
location data back to the LCD screen.
Figure 14-8 shows the simple schematic 
that will accept GPS data into an Atmel 324P 
microcontroller and then send it back out to a serial 
LCD screen. We chose the ATMega324 because 
it had a dual hardware USART, and plenty of 
  Figure 14-8   Using a microcontroller to receive GPS data and send it to an LCD screen.

180      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
speed or choose a clock frequency that gets closer to 
the desired board rate with fewer timing errors.
I wrote the basic GPS data receiver program 
in C for the ATMega324p microcontroller using 
AVR CodeVision, but it is very easy to follow and 
convert to just about any language. This program 
represents the minimal program needed to decode 
the GPGGA NMEA serial data string into its 
individual parts and then send them back out to 
the serial LCD screen. Most GPS modules output 
data in the NMEA (National Marine Electronics 
Association) format, which is a collection of 
standardized data formats that contain comma 
separated values following an identiﬁer code. You 
will deﬁnitely have to get familiar with the data 
format sent by your GPS module and chose one 
of the many possible strings to decode. A Google 
search for “NMEA strings” or “NMEA sentence” 
will yield all of the information you will ever need 
for every possible NMEA string format.
to work between 5 and 3.3 V. Check your GPS 
module datasheet to ensure that it can be connected 
to your external project at whatever voltage your 
microcontroller is running from; 3.3 to 5 V Level 
translation is probably not necessary for receiving 
date from the GPS as the microcontroller, but 
going to the GPS, you have to be careful, as the 
higher voltage could damage the GPS module.
Since the serial LCD screen needed to 
communicate at 9600 BPS and the GPS module was 
communicating at 38400 BPS (its default setting), 
we needed to choose a microcontroller with a dual 
serial USART and then ﬁnd a clock oscillator that 
would work for both baud rates. When working 
with lower-speed serial communications such as 
2400 BPS or 4800 BPS, you can often get away 
with any clock speed, but for higher data rates 
such as 38400 BPS, there are “magic” frequencies 
that will ensure that you end up with an error-free 
communication system: 14.7456 was one of these 
well-known “magic” serial communication clock 
speeds, so it was easy to source this crystal. The 
canned crystal shown in the breadboard in Figure 
14-9 was one of several that we had in the salvaged 
parts bin, and probably came from an older PC 
modem card.
If you are planning on communicating with your 
GPS at a lower baud rate, then you will not have to 
be so selective of your microcontrollers clock speed, 
but be aware that there will be a certain error level 
that may or may not cause a slowdown in your serial 
link from the GPS module. If you are constantly 
missing serial strings from the GPS module, then 
you may have to either adjust the serial transmit 
  Figure 14-9   An ATMega324p is chosen 
because it has a dual hardware 
USART.
//
***************************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM = SIMPLE GPS DATA RECEIVER (C) 2010 LUCIDSCIENCE.COM
// **** TARGET = ATMEGA88P
// **** CLOCK SPEED = 14.7456 MHZ CRYSTAL
//
***************************************************************************************
#include <mega324.h>
#include <delay.h>

Project 14  Q  GPS Data Receiver      181
//
***************************************************************************************
// **** GLOBAL VARIABLES TO HOLD NMEA DATA
//
***************************************************************************************
char ﬁx[16];
char sats[16];
char height[16];
char utctime[16];
char altitude[16];
char latitude[16];
char longitude[16];
char horizontal[16];
//
***************************************************************************************
// **** SEND USART0 DATA TO SERIAL LCD @ 9600 BPS
//
***************************************************************************************
void LCDWRITE(char lcd) {
while(!(UCSR0A & (1<<5)));
UDR0 = lcd;
}
//
***************************************************************************************
// **** READ USART1 NMEA DATA TO STRINGS @ 38400 BPS
//
****************************************void GPSREAD() {
char cntr;
char data;
// $GPGGA, 223611.000, 4821.9234,N, 08916.4091,W, 1,   8,
    1.17,  190.1,M, -35.0,M, ,*6F
// $GPGGA,
UTCTIME,
LATITUDE,
LONGITUDE,
FIX, SATS, HORIZ, ALTITUDE, HEIGHT
CHECKSUM
// CLEAR LAST STRING DATA
for (cntr = 0; cntr < 16; cntr++) {
ﬁx[cntr] = 32;
sats[cntr] = 32;
height[cntr] = 32;
utctime[cntr] = 32;
altitude[cntr] = 32;
latitude[cntr] = 32;
longitude[cntr] = 32;
horizontal[cntr] = 32;
}

182      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// WAIT FOR STRING MARKER ($GPGGA)
while (cntr != 6) {
cntr = 0; 
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘$’) cntr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘G’) cntr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘P’) cntr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘G’) cntr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘G’) cntr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘A’) cntr++;
}
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
}
// READ UTC TIME STRING
data = 0;
cntr = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
utctime[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
utctime[cntr-1] = 32;
// READ LATITUDE STRING
data = 0;
cntr = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
latitude[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}

Project 14  Q  GPS Data Receiver      183
data = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
latitude[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
latitude[cntr-1] = 32;
// READ LONGITUDE STRING
data = 0;
cntr = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
longitude[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
data = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
longitude[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
longitude[cntr-1] = 32;
// READ SATALITE FIX FLAG
data = 0;
cntr = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
ﬁx[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
ﬁx[cntr-1] = 32;
// READ SATALITE COUNT
data = 0;
cntr = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
sats[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
sats[cntr-1] = 32;

184      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// READ HORIZONTAL STRING
data = 0;
cntr = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
horizontal[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
horizontal[cntr-1] = 32;
// READ ALTITUDE STRING
data = 0;
cntr = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
altitude[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
data = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
altitude[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
altitude[cntr-1] = 32;
// READ HEIGHT STRING
data = 0;
cntr = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
height[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
data = 0;
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
height[cntr] = data;
cntr++;
}
height[cntr-1] = 32;
}

Project 14  Q  GPS Data Receiver      185
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM VARIABLES AND PORT SETUP
// ***********************************************************************************
void main(void) {
// MAIN PORGRAM VARIABLES
char temp;
char ct;
// SET USART0 TO TX @ 9600,8,N,1
UCSR0A=0x00;
UCSR0B=0x08;
UCSR0C=0x06;
UBRR0H=0x00;
UBRR0L=0x5F;
// SET USART1 TO RX @ 38400,8,N,1
UCSR1A=0x00;
UCSR1B=0x10;
UCSR1C=0x06;
UBRR1H=0x00;
UBRR1L=0x17;
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM INITIALIZATION
// ***********************************************************************************
// CLEAR LCD SCREEN
LCDWRITE(12);
delay_ms(500);
// TURN OFF CURSOR
LCDWRITE(22);
delay_ms(500);
// TURN ON BACKLIGHT
LCDWRITE(17);
delay_ms(500);
// STARTUP MESSAGE
LCDWRITE(‘G’);
LCDWRITE(‘P’);
LCDWRITE(‘S’);
LCDWRITE(32);
LCDWRITE(‘S’);
LCDWRITE(‘T’);
LCDWRITE(‘A’);
LCDWRITE(‘R’);

186      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
LCDWRITE(‘T’);
LCDWRITE(‘U’);
LCDWRITE(‘P’);
LCDWRITE(‘.’);
LCDWRITE(‘.’);
LCDWRITE(‘.’);
ct = 0;
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MAIN PROGRAM LOOP
// ***********************************************************************************
while (1) {
// READ GPGGA DATA FROM GPS
GPSREAD();
// CLEAR LCD DATA
LCDWRITE(128);
ct++;
// DISPLAY DATA : FIX STATUS
if (ct == 1) {
LCDWRITE(‘F’);
LCDWRITE(‘I’);
LCDWRITE(‘X’);
LCDWRITE(‘=’);
for (temp = 0; temp < 14; temp++) {
LCDWRITE(ﬁx[temp]);
}
}
// DISPLAY DATA : SATALITE COUNT
if (ct == 2) {
LCDWRITE(‘S’);
LCDWRITE(‘A’);
LCDWRITE(‘T’);
LCDWRITE(‘=’);
for (temp = 0; temp < 14; temp++) {
LCDWRITE(sats[temp]);
}
}
// DISPLAY DATA : UTCTIME
if (ct == 3) {
LCDWRITE(‘U’);
LCDWRITE(‘T’);
LCDWRITE(‘C’);
LCDWRITE(‘=’);

Project 14  Q  GPS Data Receiver      187
for (temp = 0; temp < 14; temp++) {
LCDWRITE(utctime[temp]);
}
}
// DISPLAY DATA : LATITUDE
if (ct == 4) {
LCDWRITE(‘L’);
LCDWRITE(‘A’);
LCDWRITE(‘T’);
LCDWRITE(‘=’);
for (temp = 0; temp < 14; temp++) {
LCDWRITE(latitude[temp]);
}
}
// DISPLAY DATA : LONGITUDE
if (ct == 5) {
LCDWRITE(‘L’);
LCDWRITE(‘O’);
LCDWRITE(‘N’);
LCDWRITE(‘=’);
for (temp = 0; temp < 14; temp++) {
LCDWRITE(longitude[temp]);
}
}
// DISPLAY DATA : HORIZONTAL
if (ct == 6) {
LCDWRITE(‘H’);
LCDWRITE(‘O’);
LCDWRITE(‘R’);
LCDWRITE(‘=’);
for (temp = 0; temp < 14; temp++) {
LCDWRITE(horizontal[temp]);
}
}
// DISPLAY DATA : ALTITUDE
if (ct == 7) {
LCDWRITE(‘A’);
LCDWRITE(‘L’);
LCDWRITE(‘T’);
LCDWRITE(‘=’);
for (temp = 0; temp < 14; temp++) {
LCDWRITE(altitude[temp]);
}
}

188      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// DISPLAY DATA : HEIGHT
if (ct == 8) {
LCDWRITE(‘H’);
LCDWRITE(‘E’);
LCDWRITE(‘I’);
LCDWRITE(‘=’);
for (temp = 0; temp < 14; temp++) {
LCDWRITE(height[temp]);
}
ct = 0;
}
// DELAY ONE SECOND
delay_ms(1000);
// END OF MAIN LOOP
}
}
By default, the FV-M8 GPS module sends 
several strings at a rate of 5 per second and one of 
these strings is the GPGGA string, which we found 
to be easy to understand. The serial data string for 
the GPGGA sentence will look like this:
$GPGGA,223611.000,4821.9234,N,08916.4091
,W,1,8,1.17,190.1,M,-35.0,M,,*6F
Each of the numbers or characters following the 
“$GPGGA” identiﬁers represent the received and 
calculated GPS location data as:
$GPGGA,UTCTIME,LATITUDE,LONGITUDE,FIX,SA
TS,HORIZ,ALTITUDE,HEIGHT,CHECKSUM
So, all your program needs to do is read the 
serial data stream and look for the “$GPGGA” 
identiﬁer text and then parse the comma-separated 
data values until the end of the line. We wrote 
this GPS receiver test program in the most basic 
way possible so that it would be easy to follow 
the string decoding routine for translation into 
another language. There are no time outs or error 
checks being done by the string decoder routine; 
it just waits for the next “$GPGAA” identiﬁcation 
and then reads the following comma-separated 
values into usable string variables. These values 
are then echoed to the serial LCD screen at one 
ﬁeld per second so you can see the data sent from 
the GPS module. As shown in Figure 14-10, the 
program will start by sending the message “GPS 
LOADING…” and then wait for the next GPGGA 
data string to arrive for parsing.
  Figure 14-10   The microcontroller is now 
receiving serial data from the 
GPS module.

Project 14  Q  GPS Data Receiver      189
decimal digit more accuracy than the handheld, but 
this is probably overkill considering the margin of 
error in GPS positioning. So far the GPS module 
was getting a great score, able to perform at least 
as good as or better than a good quality handheld 
GPS unit. The next test to be done will be the 
elimination of the evaluation board to get the GPS 
module talking directly to the microcontroller.
We often do the prototyping on a breadboard. 
The connector on the GPS module was certainly 
too small for any breadboarding work. The female 
connectors shown in Figure 14-13 mate with 
the connector that came with the GPS module, 
and would be perfect for installation onto a 
circuit board. We decided to make a breadboard 
To verify the operation of the FV-M8 GPS 
module and compare its accuracy against a good 
quality handheld GPS unit, we let both GPS 
systems gain a ﬁx and then displayed the data 
side by side as the program ran through its loop. 
Figure 14-11 shows the info screen on the Garmin 
handheld GPS, which is being used to verify 
the data strings received from the FV-M8 GPS 
module and echoed to the LCD screen. Both GPS 
systems managed to lock onto six satellites within 
60 seconds, and the GPS module later found eight 
satellites from our indoor lab while the handheld 
stayed at only six. Both GPS systems show almost 
identical coordinates, but the handheld seemed to 
respond to movement a little quicker than the GPS 
module as we moved them both across the room. 
So far it was a close tie between the handheld 
commercially available GPS unit and the FV-M8 
GPS module.
After moving both across the room and back, the 
latitude values were very close, being 48-21.914-N 
on the Garmin handheld and 48-21.9223-N on 
the FV-M8 GPS module. When we plugged this 
data into Google Earth, it showed the center of 
our house, so it was certainly correct data. The 
difference between the 2 GPS modules was so 
small that we could not determine which one was 
more accurate using Google Earth or Google Maps 
(Figure 14-12). Actually, the GPS module had one 
  Figure 14-11   Comparing the GPS module 
data with the information on the 
handheld GPS.
  Figure 14-12   The GPS module and handheld 
GPS comparing latitude values.
  Figure 14-13   The GPS module came with a 
small 8-pin connector.

190      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
With the evaluation board no longer included in 
the project, the size was greatly reduced as shown 
in Figure 14-16. We removed the LCD routines 
from the original source code and programmed 
a smaller ATMega88 microcontroller to receive 
the NMEA serial data strings from the GPS 
module. The heart beat LED was added from the 
“1PPS” line on the connector so that we could 
see that the GPS module was properly powered 
up and how long it took to get a valid location ﬁx. 
This functionality is built into the GPS module, 
so only a current-limiting resistor was needed 
between the “1PPS” IO line, ground, and the 
LED. The GPS module serial transmit line “TX” 
was connected directly to the serial receive pin on 
the microcontroller so that the hardware USART 
could be used to receive the serial data at 38400 
compatible connector so that we could further 
explore the functionality of the GPS module. 
Warning—ugly cable hacking to come!
The cable that came with the GPS had a male 
8-pin connector at each end, so we decided that 
if we simply cut the cable in half, we could make 
two new cables—one with breadboard-compatible 
pins and another that could later be soldered to 
whatever circuit board we planned to make our 
GPS project on. The cable shown in Figure 14-14 
was cut in half and then one side was separated so 
that each wire could be soldered to a breadboard 
compatible header pin. Since SparkFun also sold 
these small cables and sockets separately, we 
could always acquire another one ifwe decided to 
use the original socket on a printed circuit board 
later on.
Once the eight colored wires were soldered to 
the header pins, the GPS cable was now ready to 
be plugged into any solderless breadboard for rapid 
prototyping. The colors of each wire were fairly 
obvious, with red being VCC and black being 
GND, so it would be difﬁcult to connect the power 
in reverse. Besides power and ground, the only 
other wire we planned to use, from the possible 
eight, was the serial transmit line (white wire). We 
connected all eight wires to the header pins just 
in case we wanted to experiment with changing 
the default parameters on the GPS module using 
the serial receive line. Figure 14-15 shows the 
completed breadboard compatible GPS module 
and cable.
  Figure 14-14   Converting the GPS cable to 
work on a breadboard.
  Figure 14-15   The completed breadboard 
compatible GPS cable.
  Figure 14-16   Interfacing the GPS module 
directly to a microcontroller.

Project 14  Q  GPS Data Receiver      191
a room, the accuracy seemed to be within 20 ft or 
so. Not bad at all!
This project proves that an inexpensive GPS 
module can certainly be used with a microcontroller 
to create a fairly accurate navigational system 
capable of determining time, latitude, longitude, 
direction, height, and location within about 20 ft 
from just about any place on the planet. Along with 
basic machine vision, and an obstacle-avoidance 
system a robot could be made to navigate the 
outdoor environment using the data received from 
the GPS module. A small and accurate stealth 
tracking system could also be made that would 
allow the user to later visually inspect the route on 
Google Maps or Google Earth. The possibilities are 
endless when your projects are given the ability to 
know exactly where they are on the planet at any 
given time, and as GPS technologies become more 
and more accurate, indoor robotic navigation will 
eventually be possible. Thanks for stopping by, 
we must now go back to our secret lab located at 
296407.42 mE, 5350996.54 mN, 1080 ft.
baud. Once again, the “magic” crystal frequency of 
14.7456 was chosen so that serial communications 
would be error free.
The program was modiﬁed so that when we 
pressed the pushbutton, the latitude value from 
the GPGGA string was memorized. Each time the 
memorized latitude value was found to match 
the current received value coming from the GPS 
module, an LED would be lit. We only took 
the ﬁrst 7 digits of the Latitude data, so that the 
accuracy would be about 25 ft in any direction. 
A GPS is capable of higher accuracy, but only 
under ideal conditions such as being outdoors and 
stationary for some time. The goals of this test 
was to determine if the system could remember 
which room in the house we pressed the memorize 
button. After several tests around the house, it was 
determined that yes, this simple prototype could 
indeed remember which room we were in as long 
as we gave it a few seconds to gain a more accurate 
ﬁx. While moving, the accuracy was limited to one 
end of the house or the other, but once stationary in 

This page intentionally left blank 

193
P R O J E C T  1 5
GPS Tracking Device
THIS PROJECT COMBINES an 8-bit microcontroller 
along with a GPS module to create a simple 
tracking device that can record and play back 
location data to a mapping program like Google 
Maps or Google Earth. This project demonstrates 
the basic method of serial communication between 
the GPS module and microcontroller, as well as 
how to decode the data stream being sent from the 
GPS module. To make this project easy to follow, 
the source code and hardware are both made to be 
as minimal as possible, leaving a lot of room to 
build a much more powerful tracking system.
GPS is short for “Global Positioning System.” 
As the name implies, it is a globally available 
positioning and time system that uses a radio ﬁx 
on multiple orbiting satellites. A GPS receiver will 
operate wherever there is an unobstructed view 
(line of sight) to four or more GPS satellites so that 
it can receive the radio signal from each satellite. 
The receiver uses the information it receives in 
the radio signal to determine the distance to each 
satellite. The position of the receiver is calculated 
by an algorithm that includes both the information 
and strength of the radio signal received from each 
satellite. With this information, exact time, and 
position data such as latitude, longitude, height 
from seal level, moving speed, and direction can be 
computed and displayed to the user.
A GPS module is a self-contained GPS receiver 
that does all of the difﬁcult signal processing 
and computation for you. These inexpensive and 
amazing 1-inch (in) square boxes will lock onto 
all satellites in range and then start sending out the 
location and time data in a simple to read string 
that can be received by a microcontroller using 
a few input/output (IO) lines. This project will 
explore the basics of connecting one of these GPS 
modules to a microcontroller in order to receive 
the data and record it for later use in a computer 
mapping program such as Google Earth. 
GPS receiver modules have come a long way 
over the last few years. The tiny 1-in square 
FV-M8 receiver module shown in Figure 15-1 is 
from San Jose Navigation, and is ready to use as 
soon as power is supplied. Once powered up, the 
GPS module will search for satellites and then 
send a 1-Hz “heartbeat” pulse down one of the 
input/output lines to show that it has a valid 
ﬁx. The module will also send out serial data 
containing all of the relevant GPS information so 
that a microcontroller or terminal can decode the 
data. So, to add GPS capabilities to your project, 
193
  Figure 15-0   This project demonstrates a 
simple AVR based GPS tracker.

194      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
According to the FV-M8 datasheet, all of the 
signal lines were either DC or digital, so there 
would be no issues with modifying the connector 
or cable length. The data sheet will show you the 
pinout of the GPS connector, as well as all of 
the timing and communications parameters that are 
needed. If you are planning to use a development 
board that will accept the connector for your 
GPS module, then the IO pin conﬁguration is not 
important at this time, but eventually you will 
probably want to reduce your project down to just 
the GPS module and a microcontroller. Figure 15-3 
shows the section of the datasheet that indicates the 
purpose of all eight wires coming out of the GPS 
module. Out of the eight possible wires, we only 
needed three of them to get the data into the 
microcontroller: power (VIN), ground (GND), and 
transmit (TX1).
The cable that came with the GPS had a male 
8-pin connector at each end, so we decided that 
if we simply cut the cable in half, we could make 
two new cables: one with breadboard-compatible 
pins and another that could later be soldered to 
whatever circuit board we planned to make our 
GPS project on. The cable shown in Figure 15-4 
was cut in half, and then one side was separated so 
that each wire could be soldered to a breadboard 
compatible header pin. Since SparkFun also sold 
these small cables and sockets separately, we 
could always acquire another one if we decided to 
use the original socket on a printed circuit board 
later on.
Once the eight colored wires were soldered to 
the header pins, the GPS cable was now ready 
to be plugged into any solderless breadboard for 
rapid prototyping. The colors of each wire were 
fairly obvious, with red being VCC and black being 
GND, so it would be difﬁcult to connect the power 
in reverse. Besides power and ground, the only 
other wire we planned to use from the possible 
eight, was the serial transmit line (white wire). We 
connected all eight wires to the header pins just in 
case we wanted to experiment with changing the 
you really only need three wires: one for power 
(3.3 volts [V]), one for ground, and one to receive 
the serial data. All of the difﬁcult work of receiving 
the RF signal for triangulation is done inside the 
module for you.
The GPS module came with a small cable and 
connector set that would be perfect for installation 
onto a printed circuit board, but not much use for 
breadboarding work. We decided to convert the 
cable for breadboard use by cutting it in half so that 
we could solder a row of header pins to the wires 
(Figure 15-2). This would essentially give us two 
cables when done, as the GPS compatible connectors 
would remain at one end of each half of the cable 
after cutting. 
  Figure 15-1   The San Jose FV-M8 GPS module 
from SparkFun.
  Figure 15-2   Converting the GPS connector 
for breadboard use.

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      195
at a set rate into the microcontroller’s built-in 
memory so that they can then be played back and 
viewed on a mapping program like Google Earth. 
To get the GPS module to communicate with the 
microcontroller, the hardware serial port (USART) 
on the AVR ATMega324p is set as a transmitter/
receiver for 38,400 baud, which is the default serial 
transmission speed of the GP module on power up. 
default parameters on the GPS module using the 
serial receive line. Figure 15-5 shows the completed 
breadboard compatible GPS module and cable.
The goal of this project is the bare minimal 
simpliﬁed system that will record GPS coordinates 
  Figure 15-3   The datasheet will detail the IO lines as well as default settings.
  Figure 15-4   Converting the GPS cable to 
work on a breadboard.
  Figure 15-5   The completed breadboard 
compatible GPS cable.

196      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
FT232 from FTDIChip will do the same work 
as the MAX232, but for translation between the 
microcontroller’s serial port and the PC’s USB 
port. If you search Google for “FT232 to AVR,” 
you will see that like the MAX232, only a few 
external capacitors and resistors are needed to 
allow a microcontroller to talk to the PC using a 
virtual USB serial port. Choose whichever serial 
communications method is available on your 
PC, but remember—without the level translator 
(MAX232 or FT232), you cannot expect to receive 
serial data from the microcontroller reliably or even 
at all.
Besides the GPS module and serial level 
converter, the schematic only has a few other 
parts: two push button switches and three 
optional indicator light-emitting diodes (LEDs). 
The two buttons trigger record and playback, so 
that GPS location points can be stored into the 
microcontroller’s internal SRAM at set intervals. 
When in playback mode, the GPS information is 
streamed out to the PC at high speed in the standard 
NMEA $GPGGA format so that programs like 
On the 324p, the serial receive pin is on PORTD.2 
as shown in the schematic (Figure 15-6).
To communicate with the computer, the serial 
transmit line on the 324p (PORTD.1) is fed to 
an RS232 level converter so that the voltage 
expected by the PC is correct. The MAX232 from 
Maxim-IC is an easy to use serial level converter 
that will take the 3- or 5-V serial output from 
the microcontroller and boost it up to the correct 
12-V level expected by the computer’s serial port. 
Without the level converter, it is unlikely that 
the PC would be able to receive the serial data, 
and even if it did, there would be a lot of errors 
and bogus data received. As you can see in the 
Schematic shown in Figure 15-6, the MAX232 
level converter only needs three external capacitors 
in order to function, so it is a very easy to use and 
inexpensive solution to allow any microcontroller 
to talk both ways to a PC serial port.
Since the old 9-pin PC serial port is now 
considered retro, you may want to use the USB 
port instead. A similar serial level converter 
and translator integrated circuit (IC) called the 
  Figure 15-6   Basic GPS tracking system schematic using an ATMega324.

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      197
PC communication issues with running them this 
way. If you are a stickler for speciﬁcations, then 
there is actually a low-power (3 V) version of the 
MAX232 level converter available, but only in a 
surface mount package.
Since the FV-M8 module will be sending out 
serial data at 38400 BPS (its default setting), we 
needed to choose a microcontroller with a hardware 
serial USART and then ﬁnd a clock oscillator that 
would allow the serial speed to be set with minimal 
error. When working with lower speed serial 
communications such as 2400 BPS or 4800 BPS, 
you can often get away with any clock speed, but 
for higher data rates such as 38400 BPS, there 
are “magic” frequencies that will ensure that you 
end up with an error free communication system. 
14.7456 was one of these well known “magic” 
serial communication clock speeds, so it was easy 
to source this crystal. The crystal oscillator shown 
in the breadboard in Figure 15-8 was one of several 
that we had in the salvaged parts bin, and probably 
came from an older PC modem card.
Some programming languages such as C, Basic 
or Arduino have built in serial routines that use 
both the hardware USART on the microcontroller 
or simply bit bang the data stream out of an IO 
port. Keep in mind that these built in routines also 
suffer from errors if the master clock frequency 
is not chosen carefully. At 16 MHz, the Arduino 
Google Maps or Google Earth can read and display 
the data. Basically, this project is an ultrasimpliﬁed 
yet functional GPS tracking system that will record 
location points until it ﬁlls whatever memory you 
have available. The status LEDs show both the 
record and playback mode status as well as the 
GPS lock status.
The basic GPS tracking system is shown in 
Figure 15-7, ﬁrst built on a solderless breadboard 
for easy prototyping. If you have not yet read the 
“GPS Data Receiver” project, that would be a good 
start as it offers a good intro on working with GPS 
modules and microcontrollers. As you can see, the 
AVR324p is only using a few of the 32 available 
input/output pins, but we needed a microcontroller 
with a decent amount of internal SRAM in order 
to store the GPS data, so this meant using a large 
IO package. Realistically, you will need a much 
larger storage memory for GPS points than what is 
available on any microcontroller, but this project is 
just a simpliﬁed demonstration that leaves a huge 
amount of room for improvement.
Since both the GPS module and microcontroller 
will run ﬁne on a 3-V power supply, we chose to 
use a pair of AA batteries in order to later create 
a small self contained tracking system that could 
be stuck to a vehicle using a magnet mounting 
system. The MAX232 level converter is being 
underpowered on 3 V, but we have never had any 
  Figure 15-7   The GPS tracking system built on 
a solderless breadboard.
  Figure 15-8   For high-speed serial 
communications, clock speed 
is important.

198      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
If you plan to work with serial communications, 
then the schematic shown in Figure 15-10 will 
be very handy to make on a small circuit board 
or perforated board. We have several boards that 
include the MAX232, as well as the FT232 so 
when we need to send or receive data between 
a microcontroller and PC, it’s just a matter of 
plugging in the board to the project or breadboard. 
The schematic shown in Figure 15-10 is a one 
way system from the microcontroller to the PC, 
but to use it the other way (or both directions), 
was unable to properly receive 38,400 baud the 
serial stream from the GPS module due to the 
resulting error in transmission speed. Using 
CodeVision C, we managed to get somewhat better 
communications at 20 MHz from the GPS module, 
but in reality you will probably need to choose a 
proper clock frequency to satisfy the high-speed 
serial USART if you want reliable communications 
from the GPS module or out to the PC through the 
serial port. These “magic” clock speeds are listed in 
the microcontroller data sheet and on some of the 
compilers (such as CodeVision AVR) when starting 
a new project. Consider this when working with 
serial data rates over 4800 baud.
Besides a few capacitors and a DC power 
supply, the MAX232 does not need any other 
components in order to operate as a serial level 
translator between your microcontroller and any 
PC (Figure 15-9). The USB counterpart (FT232) 
is also a single IC solution for interfacing the 3- or 
5-V digital world to the PC through a virtual USB 
com port. If you only needed to send data to the 
microcontroller, then the level converter would not 
be necessary, but since the microcontroller cannot 
drive the PC serial port with enough voltage, it is 
needed to send data to the PC serial port.
  Figure 15-9   The MAX232 will translate 
voltage levels for PC serial 
communication.
  Figure 15-10   Using the MAX232 to send data to the PC serial port.

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      199
program to your microcontroller. This program 
was done in CodeVision and is made for the 
AVR324p, but it would be very easy to convert it to 
just about any microcontroller. The real limitation 
is the amount of data that can be stored in the 
internal SRAM of the microcontroller, but by 
expanding the program to use a serial EEPROM 
or Flash memory, it could easily store hours or 
days worth of GPS data. For now, just get the 
basic system working so that you can verify that 
the microcontroller can decode, store, and then 
playback GPS data to your PC.
The operation of the microcontroller program 
is very simple. If you press the record button, the 
record indicator LED will stay on as data is stored 
into the internal SRAM. When the record LED 
is out, you can then press the playback button to 
stream out the data to the serial port on the PC. 
The data is formatted so that programs like Google 
Earth and Google Maps think that a standard GPS 
unit is connected. Having only a few kilobytes free, 
the AVR324 can store about 20 full NMEA strings 
before the SRAM is full. This is certainly not much 
data, but enough to test your hardware with a quick 
drive around the block. This GPS tracking test 
program is based on the source code from the GPS 
data reviver project, and is explained in much more 
detail there. 
just connect the input or outputs to the serial 
connector and MAX232 IC. The FT232 USB serial 
translator works the same way, allowing two way 
communications between any low-voltage logic 
and the PC USB virtual serial port.
To receive data on a PC serial port, you need 
to connect only two lines: ground (pin 5) and the 
serial receive line (pin 2). (See Figure 15-11.) 
This assumes that you are using a standard 9-pin 
serial port on your PC. Once these two lines are 
connected, the serial data stream can be sent to the 
PC from the level converter.
Once you have the circuit built on a breadboard 
and have the serial or USB connection to your 
PC ready, compile the simple GPS data logging 
  Figure 15-11   Connecting the 9-pin RS232 PC
serial port connector.
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM = GPS TRACKER (C) 2010 LUCIDSCIENCE.COM
// **** TARGET = ATMEGA324P & FV-M8 GPS MODULE
// **** CLOCK SPEED = 14.7456 MHZ CRYSTAL
// ***********************************************************************************
#include <mega324.h>
#include <delay.h>
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** GLOBAL VARIABLES TO HOLD GPGGA DATA
// ***********************************************************************************
char gpgga[80];
char track[1440];

200      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** SEND USART0 DATA TO SERIAL PORT @ 38400 BPS
// ***********************************************************************************
void DATSEND(char dat) {
while(!(UCSR0A & (1<<5)));
UDR0 = dat;
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** READ USART1 GPGGA DATA TO STRING @ 38400 BPS
// ***********************************************************************************
void GPSREAD() {
unsigned char ctr;
unsigned char data;
// $GPGGA, 223611.000, 4821.9234,N, 08916.4091,W, 1,   8,    1.17,  190.1,M,  -35.0,M, ,*6F
// $GPGGA, UTCTIME,
LATITUDE,    LONGITUDE,    FIX, SATS, HORIZ, ALTITUDE, HEIGHT   CHECKSUM
// CLEAR LAST STRING DATA
for (ctr = 0; ctr < 80; ctr++) {
gpgga[ctr] = 32;
}
// WAIT FOR $GPGGA HEADER
while (ctr != 6) {
ctr = 0;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘$’) ctr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘G’) ctr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘P’) ctr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘G’) ctr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘G’) ctr++;
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
if (data == ‘A’) ctr++;
}

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      201
while (data != ‘,’) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
}
// READ GPGGA DATA UNTIL LINEFEED
data = 0;
ctr = 0;
while (data != 10) {
while (!(UCSR1A & (1<<7)));
data = UDR1;
gpgga[ctr] = data;
ctr++;
}
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM VARIABLES AND PORT SETUP
// ***********************************************************************************
void main(void) {
// MAIN PROGRAM VARIABLES
unsigned char ctr;
unsigned char mode;
unsigned char skip;
unsigned int trk;
// SET USART0 TO TX @ 38400,8,N,1
UCSR0A=0x00;
UCSR0B=0x08;
UCSR0C=0x06;
UBRR0H=0x00;
UBRR0L=0x17;
// SET USART1 TO RX @ 38400,8,N,1
UCSR1A=0x00;
UCSR1B=0x10;
UCSR1C=0x06;
UBRR1H=0x00;
UBRR1L=0x17;
// RECORD BUTTON PIN
DDRC.3 = 0;
PORTC.3 = 1;

202      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// PLAYBACK BUTTON PIN
DDRC.2 = 0;
PORTC.2 = 1;
// RECORD LED PIN
DDRC.1 = 1;
PORTC.1 = 0;
// PLAYBACK LED PIN
DDRC.0 = 1;
PORTC.0 = 0;
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM INITIALIZATION
// ***********************************************************************************
// ERASE TRACK MEMORY
for (trk = 0; trk < 1440; trk++) {
track[trk] = 0;
}
// RESET VARIABLES
mode = 0;
skip = 0;
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MAIN PROGRAM LOOP
// ***********************************************************************************
while (1) {
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** CONTROL MODE BUTTONS
// ***********************************************************************************
// RECORD MODE = 1
if (PINC.3 == 0) {
trk = 0;
mode = 1;
PORTC.1 = 1;
PORTC.0 = 0;
}

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      203
// PLAYBACK MODE = 2
if (PINC.2 == 0) {
trk = 0;
mode = 2;
PORTC.1 = 0;
PORTC.0 = 1;
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** CONTROL STATUS LEDS
// ***********************************************************************************
// IDLE MODE
if (mode == 0) {
PORTC.1 = 0;
PORTC.0 = 0;
}
// RECORD MODE
if (mode == 1) {
PORTC.1 = 1;
PORTC.0 = 0;
}
// PLAYBACK MODE
if (mode == 2) {
PORTC.1 = 0;
PORTC.0 = 1;
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MODE 1 : STORE (1440/80) = 18 POINTS TO TRACK MEMORY
// ***********************************************************************************
if (mode == 1) {
// READ GPGGA DATA FROM GPS
GPSREAD();
// RECORD EVERY 20TH TRACK POINT
skip++;
if (skip == 20){
skip = 0;

204      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// ECHO LIVE GPGGA DATA TO USART
DATSEND(‘$’);
DATSEND(‘G’);
DATSEND(‘P’);
DATSEND(‘G’);
DATSEND(‘G’);
DATSEND(‘A’);
DATSEND(‘,’);
for (ctr = 0; ctr < 80; ctr++) {
DATSEND(gpgga[ctr]);
}
DATSEND(13);
// STORE GPGGA DATA TO TRACK
for (ctr = 0; ctr < 80; ctr++) {
track[ctr+trk] = gpgga[ctr]; 
}
// INCREMENT TRACK POINTER
trk = trk + 80;
// STOP RECORD AT SRAM FULL
if (trk > 1440) mode = 0;
}
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MODE 2 : SEND 18 TRACK POINTS TO USART
// ***********************************************************************************
if (mode == 2) {
// SEND ALL 18 TRACKS
for (trk = 0; trk < 1440; trk = trk + 80) {
// CREATE GPGGA DATA STRING
DATSEND(‘$’);
DATSEND(‘G’);
DATSEND(‘P’);
DATSEND(‘G’);
DATSEND(‘G’);
DATSEND(‘A’);
DATSEND(‘,’);
for (ctr = 0; ctr < 80; ctr++) {
DATSEND(track[ctr+trk]);
}
DATSEND(13);
}

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      205
// END OF TRACK MEMORY
mode = 0;
}
// END OF MAIN LOOP
}
}
Before taking your breadboard on a test journey, 
ﬁrst make sure that your PC can receive the serial 
data stream by opening a terminal program such 
as Hyper Terminal, which is built in to Windows. 
Most compilers and IDEs also include a serial 
terminal, so connect your USB or 9-pin serial 
cable and then open the terminal of your choice 
for receive at the same baud rate that your GPS 
and microcontroller are set to. As shown in 
Figure 15-12, the serial communication settings are 
38400,8,N,1 (38,400 baud, 8 bits, no parity, and 
1 stop bit). “8,N,1” is a common setting from just 
about every device.
Figure 15-13 shows a screen full of various 
NMEA strings received directly from the GPS 
module. This data stream is taken directly from the 
GPS module by moving the TX pin from the GPS 
to the RX pin on the MAX232 chip. Basically, this 
takes the microcontroller temporarily out of the 
loop just so you can verify that your GPS module 
  Figure 15-12   Testing the serial communications using a PC terminal program.

206      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
  Figure 15-13   Displaying the live data stream from the GPS module on the PC.
is spewing out data. By default, the FV-M8 GPS 
module was sending multiple NMEA messages at 
a rate of ﬁve per second. NMEA messages start 
“$GP” and then include a three digit identiﬁer 
code to indicate what format the message is in. The 
screen capture in Figure 15-13 shows ﬁve different 
types of NMEA headers and messages streaming 
in from the GPS module; “$GPGSA,” “$GPGSV,” 
“$GPRMC,” “$GPVTG,” and “$GPGGA.” We will 
only be decoding the GPGGA data string in the 
microcontroller, but the GPS module sends all ﬁve 
by default.
Most GPS modules output data in the NMEA 
(National Marine Electronics Association) format, 
which is a collection of standardized data formats 
that contain comma separated values ﬂowing an 
identiﬁer code. When you are coding your own 
GPS software, you will deﬁnitely need to get 
familiar with the data format sent by your GPS 
module and choose one of the many possible 
strings to decode. A Google search for “NMEA 
strings” or “NMEA sentence” will yield all of the 
information you will ever need for every possible 
NMEA string format.
Once you have determined that your GPS 
module is sending serial data by viewing it directly 
on the PC terminal, move the TX pin back to the 
microcontroller so that the NMEA messages can 
be read and then decoded by the microcontroller 
program. The data streaming in to the computer 
terminal will stop because the microcontroller will 
not send them until one of the buttons has been 
pressed.
Press the record button, and the record indicator 
LED will stay on for a few seconds while it saves 
18 GPS coordinates into the internal SRAM 
memory on the microcontroller. We have set the 
program to save every 20th $GPGGA data string, 
and since the GPS unit sends them once per 
second, the record LED will stay lit for 20 seconds. 
You can easily adjust the frequency of the recorded 
strings by changing “if (skip == 20)” to some other 
value in the record loop. At the same time that data 
is being recorded, it will also be sent out to the 
serial level translator and to your computer terminal 
program. The decoded and rebuilt data will look 
like the data shown in Figure 15-14, having only 
the $GPGGA strings displayed. All other characters 

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      207
You can either move the GPS module TX line 
back to the RX pin like before or just press the 
record or playback button on the breadboard to 
get data to stream out to the computer. Either way, 
Google Earth will detect the data stream and then 
begin to decode whatever NMEA information is 
being sent. It may take a few seconds to get the 
globe to move, but once it starts, you will get to 
ﬂy directly to the exact place on earth that you are 
currently located (give or take 20 feet [ft]).
Within a few seconds of sending the NEMA 
strings out to the PC, Google Earth jumps into 
action and rolls the globe around to zoom into 
our exact location as shown in Figure 15-16. 
Having a simple breadboard circuit able to know 
our whereabouts is both cool and a little creepy at 
the same time! As for accuracy, a GPS is usually 
accurate to about 20 ft, but the little location point 
on the Google Earth image seems to be right over 
our lab on the house roof exactly where expected. 
If we click on one of the “Street View” icons near 
our location, Google Earth zooms down to Street 
View and we are looking at a summer photo of the 
and strings have been stripped away, so the data is 
much more readable now.
This project assumes that you understand the 
workings of your GPS module, and if you are using 
a different GPS module from the FV-M8, you will 
likely need to adjust either the baud rate or the type 
of NMEA data being sent. If you can’t set this on 
the GPS module, then you will need to change these 
parameters in the microcontroller program to match 
your GPS modules settings. More information on 
GPS modules and NMEA string formatting can be 
seen in the “GPS Data Receiver” project.
Now, let’s use Google Earth or Google Maps 
to display our current location in real-time. Open 
Google Earth and then click on the “Tools” 
menu, followed by “GPS” in order to bring up the 
window shown in Figure 15-15. In this window, 
choose “NMEA” as the protocol, and then click 
on “Automatically follow the path” so that Google 
Earth will go directly to the location sent by 
the GPS. Once you press start, the window will 
disappear, and Google Earth will begin to track the 
real-time data received on the serial or USB port. 
  Figure 15-14   Displaying the decoded NMEA string from the microcontroller.

208      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
  Figure 15-15   Setting Google Earth to display real-time NMEA data from a GPS.
  Figure 15-16   Google Earth displays the exact location once the button has been pressed.

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      209
would be lost. A large ﬂash memory would be the 
optimal solution for a long-term GPS data logger.
This GPS module was very good at acquiring a 
lock in under a minute, which was actually a little 
bit faster than the handheld Garmin GPS unit. We 
did several trips around the neighborhood and 
had the handheld GPS along recording as well so 
that we could compare the tracks later on Google 
Earth (Figure 15-18). Both the GPS module and 
handheld GPS units showed an accuracy of about 
the width of the street, only wandering outside the 
street borders around corners. GPS technology is 
not accurate enough for indoor navigation, but an 
outdoor robot would do just ﬁne in a large open 
area with some onboard obstacle avoidance.
Once the trip around the block was completed, 
the breadboard was carefully moved from the 
dashboard of the vehicle back to the lab for data 
downloading. In order to display the trip coordinates 
on the computer, a mapping program that can 
import and decode the NMEA strings saved by the 
program will be used. An easy method of analyzing 
the data is to simply capture the stream to a text 
ﬁle as it is played back from the microcontroller’s 
memory. Figure 15-19 shows the GPS data being 
captured and saved as a text ﬁle from the Windows 
HyperTerminal program. To capture data from a 
terminal program, chose “Capture Text” and then 
select a location on your hard drive for the ﬁle. 
Once the ﬁle is open, press the playback button to 
house, which is nice considering there is snow on 
the ground right now.
Once you have conﬁrmed that the program can 
successfully receive, store, and then play back 
the NMEA data from the GPS module, it is time 
to take your prototype on a test journey. Since 
this version is limited due to the small amount of 
internal SRAM in the microcontroller, you will 
either need to make a short trip or adjust the record 
frequency to gain more time. Either way, you can 
only store 18 points in the AVR324 SRAM, but this 
is only a proof of concept model to expand on later.
We adjusted the record interval time so that we 
could record points as we drove around a two block 
radius. It took a few revisions to get the timing 
down to an even spread of 18 points, but in the 
end it worked out well. Figure 15-17 shows the 
breadboarded GPS tracking device ready to go on 
a trip around the block. As soon as we pulled out 
of the driveway, we pressed the record button and 
then made a loop around the next block over and 
back to the start location. At the end of the trip, the 
record LED was just turning off, so we knew the 
data would look like a round trip on the mapping 
program. Since the project was storing the points 
in the internal microcontroller’s SRAM, we had to 
be careful not to disconnect the power as the data 
  Figure 15-17   Getting set up for a quick trip 
around the block with the 
prototype.
  Figure 15-18   En route around the neighborhood, 
recording GPS points.

210      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
and open (Figure 15-20). Searching Google for 
“NMEA to KML” yielded several GPS data format 
converters including one that worked directly
online at http://www.h-schmidt.net/NMEA/. We 
clicked the box to open the ﬁle on the local hard 
drive after saving it from the Windows terminal 
program. There were a few other options available 
stream the data out to the text ﬁle. When you stop 
the capture, the ﬁle will contain the $GPGGA data 
saved by the microcontroller.
Since the Google mapping programs could not 
read the raw NMEA text ﬁle saved from the terminal 
program, it needed to be converted into a format 
the Google Earth or Google Maps could understand 
  Figure 15-19   Capturing the GPS data for importing into a mapping program.
  Figure 15-20   Converting the text ﬁle NMEA data into compatible KML data.

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      211
LEDs and include a strong magnet so the tracker 
can be stuck to a vehicle in some unnoticeable 
place. If the prototype passes this random “stick 
and run” test, then our next version will include 
during conversion, but we just left them all at the 
default settings.
The online converter read practically any text 
ﬁle that contained valid NMEA strings and then 
converted them to a format (KML) that works 
with Google Maps or Google Earth. Having both 
programs installed gave the option to launch the 
application directly as shown in Figure 15-21. 
Hopefully, newer versions of Google Earth will be 
able to read NMEA text ﬁles directly, but for now 
the many online converters work just ﬁne.
Once Google Earth opened, the KML ﬁle 
was read and the route was displayed as shown 
in Figure 15-22, with 16 points making up our 
entire journey. Comparing this to the data directly 
downloaded from the handheld GPS that was also 
along for the ride proved that this prototype was 
just as accurate as the commercially available 
GPS unit. For a future experiment, we will jam the 
works into a small black box, remove the indicator 
  Figure 15-21   Once conversion was complete, 
the option to save or open 
appeared.
  Figure 15-22   My prototype journey is now displayed as a path in Google Earth.

212      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
reprogramming (if not using ISP programming), or 
for a future project. As for the 9-pin serial port, it 
was too large for the plastic box, so we changed it 
to a 1/8-in mono jack (shown next to the switch in 
Figure 15-24). Since only two wires are used for 
the serial port, any jack would work.
There was just enough room in the plastic box for 
the two switches and serial jack after installing the 
circuit board. This project could certainly be made 
much smaller with a little work, but it is still half the 
size of the pocket GPS, so it can be easily hidden 
under a car or in the box of a truck (Figure 15-25).
The completed GPS tracker prototype is shown 
in Figure 15-26 after ﬁtting all of the components 
and hardware in the plastic box. The box has an 
aluminum lid, but that will be ﬁne since the antenna 
on the GPS is pressed against the empty side of the 
box for optimal reception. It will be important to 
a much larger memory to store GPS data and 
possibly some more advanced NEMA string 
decoding and formatting.
Although a much smaller and cleaner prototype 
could be made using an actual circuit board and 
surface-mounted components, we just wanted a 
quick and easy-to-make boxed version of the GPS 
tracker for real-world testing. There wasn’t much 
to this project besides the GPS module, a 40-pin 
AVR324 DIP, the MAX232 serial converter and a 
few capacitors so a small piece of perforated board 
was chosen to make the circuit board. The indicator 
LEDs were left out this time since they would be 
visible in the dark and use power for nothing during 
a long trip. The small black plastic box shown in 
Figure 15-23 has just enough room inside for the 
battery pack, the GPS module, and the small circuit 
board. Because the GPS has a built-in antenna, it 
cannot be installed in a steel or aluminum case as 
that would block the RF signal from the satellites. 
The black plastic box seemed to have no effect on 
the operation of the GPS as long as the antenna was 
against the plastic, not the other components.
There really wasn’t much wiring to do under 
the small perforated circuit board since the circuit 
was very simple. Solder the components to the 
underside of the board using small wires as traces, 
leaving room between the pins so they can be bent 
at 90 degree angles to secure the components to the 
board. It is also a good idea to use a socket for any 
microcontroller that you may want to remove for 
  Figure 15-23   Using basic prototyping 
components for rapid 
development.
  Figure 15-24   Creating the black box 
prototype circuit on a bit of 
perforated board.
  Figure 15-25   Fitting the circuit board and 
components into the small 
black box.

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      213
communications between the PC and GPS module, 
a 1/8 stereo headphone connector could be used. 
We did not intend to change the default settings on 
the GPS module, so the two wire cable was ﬁne.
To create a very secure mounting system, we 
fastened a 2-in long NIB (Neodymium) magnet 
(Figure 15-28) to the top of the plastic box using 
double-sided tape. This magnet was actually much 
too strong for this application, but we didn’t want 
to lose the GPS on the road. When stuck to a metal 
body, the magnet holds on with such force that 
we need to pry it up with a plastic screwdriver as 
it would tear the lid right off the box if we tried 
to pull it free. A magnet of half the size would be 
just ﬁne, but at least we know the GPS tracker unit 
wouldn’t fall into enemy hands (or a storm sewer).
Installing the stealth GPS tracker is as easy as 
sticking it to any metal surface, but the antenna 
needs to have some room to receive the faint GPS 
signals. We found the unit to work well in most 
installations, including under a vehicle, but the 
license plate compartment was optimal if it included 
a small hiding place like the Chevy S10 shown in 
Figure 15-29. Having the super-strong NIB magnet 
meant that the GPS tracker could be mounted to the 
ﬁberglass parts of a vehicle as long as there was a 
metal object under the nonmetallic surface.
Besides much more storage memory, another 
improvement we will make in the next version is 
keep the plain side of the box facing outwards when 
sticking the unit to a vehicle so that the antenna 
is not blocked by any metal objects. The stealth 
installation of this tracking unit is very simple: turn 
on, wait 1 minute, afﬁx to a vehicle on the outside 
or inside, press the red button. To get the data into 
Google Earth, just plug in the serial port and press 
the black button. All that is lacking in this proof of 
concept model is an external memory with much 
more room to store GPS coordinates.
Since the small plastic box did not have room 
for the DB9 serial connector, we just used a 
1/8-in mono headphone jack inside the box. The 
adapter cable shown in Figure 15-27 has pin 2 of 
the DB9 serial connector going to the tip of the 
1/8 connector and pin 5 of the DB9 going to the 
ground pin on the 1/8 connector. For two-way 
  Figure 15-26   The completed GPS tracker 
prototype ready for action.
  Figure 15-27   To retrieve the data, a 1/8 jack to 
9-pin serial port cable is used.
  Figure 15-28   A ridiculously strong NIB 
magnet will hold the GPS to a 
steel object.

214      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
until the recording starts would be best, so that 
there are no ﬂashing lights on the box. Having a 
blinking red light would be an obvious giveaway 
at night, not to mention that the device would look 
like a small bomb! We are all for pranking our 
friends, but that would be too much!
The stealth GPS logger prototype performed as 
well as the breadboarded version and as well as the 
handheld GPS unit. Only once did the GPS lose 
the signal, but this was because the antenna was 
almost fully blocked by some metal objects in one 
of our test runs. To gain a bit more memory on this 
simpliﬁed prototype, we changed the AVR324p 
(4K internal SRAM) to an AVR1284p (16K internal 
SRAM) so that we could record four times as many 
NMEA strings, allowing about 20 minutes of decent 
resolution recording. This is still far from being much 
use in the real world, but did allow a much longer 
path to be shown on Google Earth (Figure 15-30).
to include the GPS Fix status LED once again so 
that the system can be started up before placement, 
saving time and guaranteeing that the unit will 
begin recording live coordinates as soon as the 
record button is pressed. Having the Fix LED blink 
  Figure 15-29   Finding the perfect hiding 
place that would give the 
antenna a clear view.
  Figure 15-30   The stealth GPS logger prototype can track you around the globe.

Project 15  Q  GPS Tracking Device      215
on the PC, adding features such as scheduling, 
motion detection, light detection, direction, and 
speed logging, and many other features that 
would only take minimal extra hardware. Using 
surface mount components and a lithium battery 
pack, the GPS tracker could be made as small as 
a matchbox, yet run for days using some power-
saving microcontroller features. There is no 
limit to what can be done with this project, so 
warm up that soldering iron and put your ideas in 
motion
The stealthy GPS tracker project was a great 
success. The simple microcontroller program 
can be much expanded on to offer greater control 
over recording frequency and operation. With 
the addition of an external EEPROM memory or 
Flash memory, the GPS tracker could be made to 
store hours or even days worth of information. 
By adding two-way communications between 
the microcontroller and PC, a complete terminal-
based menuing system could easily be made that 
would allow the GPS tracker to be conﬁgured 

This page intentionally left blank 

P A R T  F I V E
Transmission and Interception

This page intentionally left blank 

219
P R O J E C T  1 6
Laser Spy Device
THE LASER SPY SYSTEM is considered by many to 
be the Holy Grail of high-tech spy devices because 
it can give the user the ability to listen in on 
conversations that take place in a distant building 
without having to install a bug or transmitter at 
the location. The laser spy system was said to be 
invented in the Soviet Union by Leon Theremin in 
the late 1940s. Using a non–laser-based infrared 
light source, Theremin’s system could detect sound 
from a nearby window by picking up the faint 
vibrations on the glass surface. The KGB later 
used this device to spy on the British, French, and 
U.S. embassies in Moscow. It is also interesting to 
note that Leon Theremin invented the world’s ﬁrst 
electronic instrument, a wand-operated synthesizer 
named “The Theremin” after him.
similar names. The laser spy certainly works well 
under ideal conditions, but it has many strengths 
and weaknesses that will be discussed in this plan. 
Building your own laser spy is by far the best way 
to experiment with this technology as you can 
adjust the design to suit your needs, rather than 
forking over hundreds or thousands of dollars for 
an assembled kit that will likely be far inferior to 
one that you can build yourself. Many of the kits 
we have seen for sale over the Internet not only use 
dated technology, but they incorrectly state that 
the system uses a modulated laser beam to convert 
window vibrations into sound, which is simply not 
the case. Let’s put the mysteries to rest once and 
for all and build a working laser spy system from 
the ground up and explore the functionality of each 
subsystem that makes a working unit.
We will be starting with an ultra-basic proof of 
concept test system that will show you how the 
laser spy converts vibration into sound and how 
careful alignment of both the laser and receiver 
are required for optimal performance. Ironically, 
219
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 IC1: LM386 1-W audio ampliﬁer IC
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 1 K, R2 = 10 K, VR1 = 50 K 
potentiometer
Q 
 Capacitors: C1 = 0.01 MF, C2 = 10 MF, 
C3 = 470 MF
Q 
 Sensors: Q1 = NPN phototransistor or 
CDS cell 
Q 
 Headphones: Mono or stereo headphones 
and jack
Q 
 Battery: 3- to 9-V battery or pack
  Figure 16-0   Build the long-range laser spy 
system.
The Laser Spy system goes by several names 
such as the Laser Microphone, Laser Listener, 
Laser Bug, Window Bounce Listener, and a few 

220      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
will not allow for covert operation due to the fact 
that it is very easy to pinpoint the source of a laser 
beam, especially at night. For this reason, a visible 
laser is used for initial daytime targeting and then 
an invisible infrared laser is switched for optimal 
long-duration and night-time operation. Of course, 
this all depends on your intended use, and for 
demonstration purposes a visible red laser is best 
(Figure 16-1). 
The ﬁrst time we experimented with a laser 
spying device was in the 1980s when we found 
a DIY article in an electronics magazine. Lasers 
were huge, expensive beasts back then, but we 
were nerdy enough to have one to mess around 
with and followed the instructions in the article. In 
the end, the system was found to be 100% useless, 
and rumor at the time suggested it was all just a 
hoax. What happened was that the article failed 
to mention that as cool as this device was, it was 
extremely difﬁcult to set up in the real world, 
especially when trying to bounce from a distant 
window. Believe us when we say that this device 
does indeed work, but using it to spy across the 
street will require a serious amount of setup, ﬁne-
tuning, and patience. To be perfectly honest, your 
chances of simply beaming toward your neighbor’s 
window and hearing anything are about 1000-to-1 
against you. So many factors have to be in your 
favor, such as the type of window, the alignment 
of the structure, the time of day, the level of sound, 
and mostly, your patience level. We have done 
the most basic conﬁguration may prove to be the 
most useful, and the $20 you spend in parts could 
create a system that works as well (or better) than 
some of the ones that are for sale on the Internet for 
thousands of dollars. As you will ﬁnd out, the key 
to spying with a laser beam is in the alignment and 
reception of the beam, not some magical black box 
full of fancy ﬁlters and optical components.
The obvious ﬁrst component in the laser spy 
system is the laser, which will target a distant 
reﬂective object and send the beam back to your 
receiver for decoding. Before digging deep into 
this project, let us explain how this system works, 
and dispel some of the myths that are circulating 
on the Internet regarding the operation of this 
device. First of all, these laser spying devices do 
not work on modulation of the laser beam like 
some laser-communication devices. Modulation 
of the laser beam is impossible because it would 
take some type of circuitry installed in the laser 
driver to actually modulate the intensity of the 
beam, and the laser is going to be installed at your 
location, not the target location. The principle that 
is at work here is not modulation, but movement! 
As the laser reﬂects from the target window, the 
slight vibrations from conversations or noise that 
vibrate the windows cause a very slight change in 
position of the returning laser beam. This change 
in position is converted into voltage as the sensor 
in the receiver catches the returning laser beam. 
This is why the optimal operation of the receiver 
requires the laser beam to be slightly offset from 
the phototransistor as will be shown. So movement, 
not modulation is the principle on which this 
system operates.
You can use any laser you like for this project, 
and there will be no quality difference whatsoever 
between a state-of-the-art lab laser and a two-dollar 
pointer. The only disadvantage to using a cheap 
laser pointer is that you will have to modify it for 
an external battery pack if you plan to have it on 
for more than a few minutes at a time, but that 
is an easy task. Also, a visible red or green laser 
  Figure 16-1   You will need some type of 
laser to bounce off of the target 
window.

Project 16  Q  Laser Spy Device      221
taken apart to remove the small round mirror from 
the plastic housing. A hot glue gun or even some 
double-sided tape can be used to glue the small 
mirror section to the center of the speaker. The 
size of the mirror is not important since the laser 
beam will only be a few millimeters across when 
it strikes the surface. If you intend to snap a bit off 
a larger mirror, use a cloth or paper towel to wrap 
the corner so that small slivers of glass do not ﬂy 
from the mirror as you break it. A highly reﬂective 
plastic or metal surface will also work for this 
experiment, and even a shiny dime will do the job 
in a pinch.
The speaker needs to be driven by some audio 
source, but the level should be so low that you 
can only hear it when your ear is right next to 
the speaker (Figure 16-4). The goal is to recreate 
the same conditions that you will be dealing 
with during your covert spying operations, so the 
reﬂective surface should just barely be vibrating. A 
portable audio player is perfect for this test because 
it has a low-power ampliﬁer and will run for hours 
at a time. Set your player to loop indeﬁnitely and 
then adjust the volume as low as it will go until you 
can just barely hear the output from the speaker.
The alignment of the laser from the source to 
the target and back is not a trivial task, and as you 
a successful window bounce from across a city 
street, but it was not an easy task, so keep that in 
mind. Any site selling this device in kit or plans 
form claiming that it is point-and-shoot should be 
deleted from your favorites in a hurry!
To create a “test window,” to allow the deﬂection 
of the laser beam, a small speaker is connected 
to some audio source such as a radio or computer 
headphone port (Figure 16-2). Don’t worry about 
how loud the audio source will be; as long as you 
can just barely hear the sound on the speaker, it will 
be good enough. Any small radio or portable music 
system will have a headphone jack that you can 
connect to your speaker. The size of the speaker is 
also not important as long as it is large enough 
that you can glue a small bit of mirror to the center 
cone to allow a surface to deﬂect the laser beam. 
Some speakers already have a chrome dome in 
the center, so if you can ﬁnd one like that, then 
you will not need to use the mirror. Solder the 
appropriate jack to the speaker terminals; this will 
likely be a 1/8-inch headphone jack.
Any small piece of a highly reﬂective surface 
such as a mirror can be used to deﬂect the laser 
beam during these tests (Figure 16-3). A mirror 
works best, and a piece can be snapped from an old 
mirror using pliers or a small dental mirror can be 
  Figure 16-2   A small speaker will be used to 
simulate a vibrating window.
  Figure 16-3   Add a reﬂective surface to the 
center of the speaker.

222      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
project, as it would be next to impossible to try to 
target a distant window without ﬁrst knowing what 
to expect in the captured audio signal or even if the 
unit is functioning properly (Figure 16-6). If the 
original 1980s magazine article had explained this, 
we might have had some success when we ﬁrst 
tried this experiment! 
The purpose of this initial experiment is to verify 
that you can indeed listen to sound that is vibrating 
a nearby reﬂective surface. In our case, it will be 
the small mirror glued to the speaker cone that will 
vibrate due to either sound from the radio feeding 
it, or by having a helper talk directly into the 
speaker as you listen for their voice at the receiver. 
This test receiver will be the most basic system 
possible, consisting of only a CDS cell, “cadmium 
increase the distance from the laser to the target, 
you also increase the error level. At 500 feet, the 
beam will become so sensitive to displacement that 
you will have to be careful when moving around 
the laser because the deﬂection of the ﬂoor inside 
your home will be enough to throw the beam out 
an inch or more. When we ﬁnally managed to 
set up a successful long-range conﬁguration, we 
found that the alignment was so sensitive that even 
a passing car would create waves in the system 
due to the vibrations between the house and the 
road. The laser spy device is certainly capable of 
working from many hundreds of feet away (even 
across a few city blocks), but vibration would 
become so critical that you would probably need 
to have everything mounted on an extremely 
heavy concrete or metal base secured to the 
ground. These are things you will ﬁnd out as you 
experiment with this project.
To make your life easy when experimenting 
with the basic indoor setup, create some kind of 
easily-adjustable speaker stand like mine using 
an old webcam base or adjustable bench vice
(Figure 16-5). The ability to move the speaker to 
any angle and secure it will be key to testing the 
operation of your laser spy device as you build 
it. The targeting laser will also need some kind of 
adjustable base as well.
The adjustable window pane simulator will 
really help when creating and debugging this 
  Figure 16-4   Feeding an audio source into 
the speaker.
  Figure 16-5   Creating an easy-to-align 
speaker base. 
  Figure 16-6   The adjustable window-pane 
simulator ready to use.

Project 16  Q  Laser Spy Device      223
disc behind the plastic lens. The internal circuitry 
of the nightlight is much like the circuit that will 
be used here to convert the light into sound. The 
change in resistance from the photoresistor is fed 
into the base of the transistor or switch that controls 
the current to the small light bulb. In our case, the 
light bulb will become headphones (Figure 16-8).
The laser will need to be installed on some 
type of adjustable stand or held in place at an 
approximately horizontal position so you can 
target the speaker and then catch the reﬂected 
beam at your breadboard. We clipped our red laser 
module into an adjustable bench vice so that it 
could be aimed at the speaker and then locked into 
position (Figure 16-9). When setting up the laser 
sulﬁde photocell,” feeding a simple transistor 
ampliﬁer that will convert the tiny changes in the 
laser beam position into changes in voltage that 
will be sent to your headphones as an audio signal. 
Think of the laser beam as being the “needle” on a 
record player and the vibrating window surface as 
the bumps in the record groove. 
A CDS cell is basically a resistor that will 
change its impedance depending on how much 
light strikes the surface (Figure 16-7). By feeding 
it to a battery connected in series and then into an 
audio ampliﬁer, the result is a light-sensitive audio 
system that will allow you to “listen” to light. 
Because this system has very little gain and no 
ﬁltering, it will be a very minimal system, but will 
certainly let you hear the secret audio signal being 
sent along your test laser beam. This basic system 
would even work from hundreds of feet away if 
you could align the beam properly, which is part of 
the difﬁculty in using a laser spy system. A CDS 
cell can be purchased for a few dollars at most 
electronic suppliers, but if you don’t want to wait 
for delivery or can’t ﬁnd one in stock, just purchase 
a night light and rip it apart to extract the CDS 
cell. The CDS cell will be the small disc with two 
leads and will have a wavy line on its surface. Just 
unsolder the two leads or bend the part back and 
forth until it frees itself from the tiny circuit board.
The photoresistor we are using in the receiver 
experiment was taken from a dollar store night 
light. The CDS cell is easily identiﬁed as the small 
   Figure 16-7   A photoresistor will respond to 
a change in light.
  Figure 16-8   All night lights will contain a 
photoresistor.
  Figure 16-9   Setting up the laser and speaker 
on a test bench.

224      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
not modulated, the principles at work are exactly the 
same with the exception that in this conﬁguration, 
the beam needs to be slightly offset from the center 
of the photoresistor so that when it moves across the 
surface, there is a corresponding change in voltage. 
If the principle at work here was in fact modulation, 
then a direct hit onto the surface of the photoresistor 
would be optimal.
Turn on your audio source and adjust the volume 
so you can barely hear the output on your speaker, 
and then set up the laser and receiver so that the 
beam strikes the front face of the photoresistor 
(see Figure 16-11). As soon as the beam hits the 
photoresistor, the impedance will vary signiﬁcantly, 
and you will hear a pop and probably a bunch of 
noise. Play around with the position of the beam 
to see how the position of the beam on the face of 
the photoresistor alters the reception of the audio 
signal. You will see that the optimal position for the 
beam is just touching the surface of the photocell 
so that any changes in the beam position from the 
vibrations will result in the most signiﬁcant swing 
in voltage at the output of your headphones. If all 
you hear is a loud hum, then you probably have 
too much ambient light in your room. Incandescent 
light bulbs actually vibrate at 50 or 60 Hertz (Hz), 
and you will hear that in your system as a loud 
constant hum. As you have probably guessed, the 
laser spy system will not perform very well in the 
and speaker, remember that according to the law 
of reﬂection, “the angle of incidence equals the 
angle of reﬂection.” In other words, if your beam is 
lower than the speaker mirror, it will be bouncing 
back to you at a higher angle. As the distance from 
the target increases, this deﬂection becomes much 
greater. If you are feeling brave, try to bounce your 
laser back to your breadboard with the speaker at 
the other end of your lab—I dare you! 
The initial experiment using the photoresistor 
will only require a single NPN transistor, resistor, 
and a battery in order to prove that the laser beam 
is deﬁnitely capable of picking up faint vibrations 
and changing them into audio. Any generic NPN 
transistor such as a 2N3904 or 2N2222 will work 
in this circuit. The battery voltage can be anywhere 
from 3 to 9 volts (V). If you really want to go 
basic, then just run a 9-V battery directly into the 
photoresistor and out to the headphones, although 
without the transistor to amplify the signal, the 
audio will be very faint.
This basic light-to-sound converter works because 
any change at the base of the transistor will amplify 
the current to the headphones (see Figure 16-10). 
Since the return laser beam will be bouncing around 
due to the vibration at the speaker, this will cause 
the headphones to respond to the beam as if it was 
an audio signal. Although the laser beam is moving, 
+3 V
+3 V
CDS
Cell
Laser beam
ZN3904
NPN
Headphones
47
  Figure 16-10   Schematic for an ultra-simple 
light-to-sound converter.
  Figure 16-11   Targeting the photoresistor with 
the laser beam.

Project 16  Q  Laser Spy Device      225
thousands of dollars! All they have to offer is some 
built-in audio ﬁltering and a more stable alignment 
hardware base. If you feed the output from your 
test rig into a real-time computer ﬁltering software 
and mount everything to a solid base, you would 
have a system as capable as any available. Scary, 
huh? But we can actually improve the sensitivity of 
the receiver, so let’s do that.
The photoresistor was able to convert the 
movement of the laser into a voltage change, but 
it is actually not the most optimal part for the 
job because it is slow to respond and has such 
a large reception surface. A phototransistor is a 
much better light receiver because it acts like an 
ampliﬁer, has a much faster response time, and 
offers a smaller reception area to help catch the 
very slight changes in motion of the return laser 
beam (see Figure 16-13). A phototransistor is just 
a transistor in a clear case that has a photosensitive 
area feeding its base. In other words, it acts like 
a standard small-signal transistor but has no pin 
connected to its base. 
Any NPN phototransistor will work in this 
project, and they come in a variety of styles and 
shapes. The most common variety will actually 
look identical to a clear LED, but may have a ﬂat 
top to help focus the light onto the photosensitive 
base. This clear ﬂat-top style will be your best bet. 
If you like to salvage your parts, then you can look 
inside an old roller ball computer mouse, as they 
daytime due to ambient light sources competing 
with your laser beam, but this is ﬁne since real 
spies usually operate in the darkness!
If you have your speaker and laser set up on the 
same workbench, then the process of targeting your 
photoresistor was probably only a 10-second job. 
Now, try to place your speaker at the other side of 
your room and see how long it takes to get the beam 
back to the target! We found that the distance across 
a room made the alignment signiﬁcantly more 
difﬁcult and even the deﬂection of the ﬂoor as we 
walked around made huge changes in the position of 
the beam. You will also have noticed that any slight 
vibrations of your desk or speaker stand resulted in 
all sorts of wild and wacky sound effects coming 
through your headphones. At one point, we were 
able to hear our own voices due to the thin surface 
of one of our tables vibrating the speaker stand.
These initial tests become very important so that
you understand how well the laser spy system 
works, but at the same time how incredible ﬁnicky 
it will be to align at any real distance. Even though 
your test rig consists of nothing more than a 
cheap laser pointer and three semiconductors, it is 
actually a fully operational unit that could actually 
listen to a conversation a mile away if you could 
somehow capture the return beam (Figure 16-12). 
Seriously, this two-dollar unit is not much inferior 
to those “professional” laser spy devices you can 
ﬁnd on the Internet being sold for hundreds or 
  Figure 16-12   The test system is basic, but 
fully functional.
  Figure 16-13   A phototransistor is faster and 
more sensitive to light.

226      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
probably want to switch to infrared light, which 
falls between 800 and 1000 nanometers (nm). 
Red lasers usually have a wavelength of around 
650 nm, green lasers have a wavelength of 530 nm, 
and the newer blue lasers have a wavelength of 
around 470 nm. Again, don’t be overly critical of 
the phototransistor wavelength chart as any light 
will create a response, especially laser light due 
to its brightness. Our phototransistor was rated 
for optimal performance in the infrared region but 
worked perfectly with the visible red laser as well 
as the green laser we tested. 
The second version of the light-to-sound circuit 
is a bit more technical, but is still very basic as 
far as schematics go. The phototransistor is set up 
as an ampliﬁer that feeds its output directly into 
the input of an LM386 audio ampliﬁer integrated 
circuit (IC) in order to drive the headphones to a 
decent volume level. Oddly, the level of the output 
is never the issue; it’s always the laser alignment 
will usually have several small phototransistors 
inside. Another source is any appliance that 
includes an infrared remote control.
Since laser light is so bright compared to any 
other type of light, the actual wavelength and lens 
type of the phototransistor is not all that important. 
Some phototransistors are more sensitive to infrared 
light than visible light, but they will still work 
just ﬁne with any color of laser beam. If you are 
choosing a new phototransistor for this project, 
then look at the datasheet to determine the lens 
style, optimal wavelength, and make sure it is an 
NPN type not PNP (see Figure 16-14). There are 
hundreds of manufacturers and part numbers, so just 
go to an online electronics supplier like Digikey and 
enter “NPN phototransistor” to start your search.
If you have a huge selection to choose from, 
try to ﬁnd one that has the best sensitivity to the 
wavelength of your laser, but keep in mind that 
for full covert operation of the laser spy, you will 
  Figure 16-14   Choosing the best phototransistor for your receiver.

Project 16  Q  Laser Spy Device      227
so for very little money you can create a real-time 
post-processing system that will rival anything that 
was available to even the most well-funded spy 
agencies just a few years ago. There are audio-
processing programs available for your PC that can 
restore the faintest conversation from the noisiest 
background (see Figure 16-15).
Before committing any design to hardware, it 
is a good idea to test your circuit on a solderless 
breadboard so that you can work out any bugs 
and add whatever modiﬁcations may be necessary 
(Figure 16-16). We found the new phototransistor-
based light-to-sound circuit performed much better 
than the previous photoresistor version and had 
more than enough ampliﬁcation to hurt our ears 
when turned up to the maximum. There comes a 
point where a louder signal is pointless as you will 
only be amplifying noise, and that is where more 
advanced audio processing may come in handy. 
If you do plan to add some post-processing audio 
ﬁlters into your schematic, then the most useful of 
these would be a 50- or 60-Hz notch ﬁlter to reduce 
the buzz from ambient AC light sources.
Try your new system using various levels of 
sound from your audio source, and even try to catch 
the beam from a reﬂective object across your room. 
As you will see, this is no trivial task! We were able 
that causes the most effort, and we have yet to turn 
up the volume control more than about 10 percent 
of the way. Overpriced rigs from so-called Spy 
Stores will usually include some type of vocal pass 
ﬁlter or noise reduction circuit in the receiver as 
well, but in reality, these are pointless when you 
can simply feed the unﬁltered output from this 
device into a computer sound card and process the 
audio using software that is going to be many times 
more effective than any ﬁltering hardware. Your 
best bet is the recording and storage of the raw 
audio for post work on a computer later, so fancy 
front-end ﬁlter hardware is really a waste of time.
The LM386 is a very common audio ampliﬁer 
IC that requires very few external components to 
operate. It has more than enough output power 
to drive a set of headphones to a very loud level, 
so the variable resistor that controls the volume 
level is often set very low when in use. You could 
certainly feed the output from the phototransistor 
to any audio ampliﬁer or even a computer sound 
card as well. If you do plan to include some type 
of advance real-time audio ﬁltering, then take the 
audio from the output of the phototransistor so 
that no extra noise is included in the signal as it is 
ampliﬁed. Many audio editing programs include 
support for real-time ﬁlters and audio processing, 
+9 V
+9 V
10 K
1 K
50 K
10 μF
Phototransistor
NPN
470 μF
Volume
adjust
OUT
LM 386
+
+
0.010 μF
   Figure 16-15   The laser spy light-to-sound receiver schematic.

228      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
all you need to create a circuit board for the 
device (Figure 16-18). Actually, there are so few 
components that you could just solder the pins 
together and hand them right off the variable 
resistor if you wanted to. This type of installation is 
called a “dead bug” circuit because the IC will look 
like a bug that has died and turned over. We prefer 
to use the perfboard method as it makes it easier 
to alter the circuit later. The LM386 only has to 
share the board with two capacitors and a resistor 
since the other components are placed right on the 
variable resistor terminals. All wiring is made on 
the underside of the small perfboard.
Rather than running a wire from the phototransistor 
to the perfboard and back, a few of the parts were 
soldered right to the variable resistor. When dealing 
with what might be a noisy signal, you need to create 
the most noise-free ampliﬁer possible so that problem 
signals have a chance at being restored on an audio-
processing program at a later date (see Figure 16-19). 
It is amazing what can be done to a noisy signal on 
decent audio-processing software.
Once your small circuit has been completed, 
install all of the hardware onto the project box such 
as the power switch, volume control, headphone 
jack, and the phototransistor. Hopefully, you will 
still have room for the battery as well as the small 
circuit board! We came very close to running out of 
room, but managed to squeeze all of the parts into 
the small plastic box (Figure 16-20).
to tape the mirror to a lampshade and hear music 
from across the room, but this task involved very 
careful adjustment of the beam and the lampshade, 
a luxury you will not have when lurking in the 
shadows on a real covert spy operation.
Once you are happy with the performance of your 
light-to-sound receiver, it will need to be installed 
in some kind of cabinet so that you can mount 
it on a tripod for real-world use (Figure 16-17). 
The optimal installation will place the lens of the 
phototransistor on the front of the cabinet and place 
the headphone jack and volume control on the rear. 
Any square metal or plastic box that has enough 
room for the battery, controls, and the small circuit 
board will do the trick. We found a 3- by 2-inch 
(in) plastic box that had just enough room.
Since the LM386-based light-to-sound circuit 
is so simple, a tiny bit of perforated board is 
  Figure 16-16   Testing the phototransistor-
based circuit on the breadboard.
  Figure 16-17   Finding a suitable project box 
for the light receiver.
  Figure 16-18   Perforated board (perfboard) is 
all you need for this circuit.

Project 16  Q  Laser Spy Device      229
Here is an “ofﬁcial” schematic for those who 
think a hand-drawn schematic is just too damn 
old-school! Personally, we like the look of the 
coffee-stained, hand-drawn schematics with the ink 
smudges and spelling mistakes…there is a certain 
character to them (see Figure 16-21).
The perfboard we used had solder pads on 
the underside so that it would be easy to solder 
the leads as well as the connecting wires. Some 
perfboards are just ﬁberglass wafers with holes, so 
you will have to use wires on the underside or bend 
the leads of the semiconductors to create traces. 
With a circuit as simple as this, any method would 
be just ﬁne (see Figure 16-22). The 9-V battery 
connector and all of the wires that connect to the 
switch, headphone jack, and volume control were 
also added.
If your project box has no slots to fasten the 
battery or circuit board, a bit of double-sided tape, 
Velcro, or hot glue can be used to hold all of the 
parts from bouncing around inside the box (see 
Figure 16-23). Make sure that the underside of 
the small circuit board does not come into contact 
with any of the other components or the metal case 
on the battery, or you might cause a short circuit. 
When installing all of the components, consider 
  Figure 16-19   Keeping components close to 
the source reduces noise.
  Figure 16-20   Installing all of the hardware 
into the cabinet.
  Figure 16-21   The ﬁnal laser spy light-to-sound receiver schematic.

230      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
The laser spy system will require a tripod 
mount for both the laser and the receiver so that 
it can be used in the real world (Figure 16-24). 
To afﬁx a plastic project box to any tripod, drill 
a hole that is slightly smaller than the size of the 
tripod bolt, and then thread it into the hole. Keep 
in mind that the bolt cannot press into any of the 
components, so choose the placement of the bolt 
hole carefully if space is tight in the project box. 
A bit of Velcro can also be used to mount the 
devices to a tripod, but remember that any slight 
change in position can easily throw your beam out 
of alignment, so ensure that all parts are mounted 
securely.
Since the only real obstacle between you and 
some distant eavesdropping mission is alignment, 
you must ensure that nothing moves once you have 
managed to lock onto the return beam. Since most 
camera tripods are fairly lightweight and easy to 
move, the headphone cord should be afﬁxed to the 
base of the tripod leg so that it does not vibrate 
the tripod when you move around while wearing 
the headphones (Figure 16-25). Just use a zip tie 
or tape to hold the headphone cable to the bottom 
of one of the tripod legs, but allow enough slack 
so you can aim the unit. As you will soon ﬁnd 
out, using the laser spy device is only a matter 
of alignment, and is very capable if you can learn 
  Figure 16-22   Installing the connecting wires 
to the circuit board.
  Figure 16-23   Fitting all of the hardware into 
the project box.
the fact that eventually you will have to change the 
battery, so place it in a position that makes it easy 
to remove or insert. It’s also bad luck to put the lid 
on the box before you test the device, as the law 
of Murphy will most certainly make your unit fail 
if you assume everything is done properly! Put on 
the headphones, and just pass the laser across the 
surface of the phototransistor, and if everything 
is working, you will hear a loud thump as the 
ampliﬁer is saturated with voltage. You can also 
“listen” to other light sources such as incandescent 
light bulbs and even your TV remote, which will 
make a blip-blip-blip sound as you point it at the 
unit and press any button.
  Figure 16-24   The completed receiver with a 
tripod mount.

Project 16  Q  Laser Spy Device      231
performance of the receiver, it actually works better 
with the infrared laser, as the collimating lens on 
a real module is usually better than on a pointer, 
and most phototransistors are centered around the 
infrared band. So if you can aim the thing, it will 
perform!
The key to using two lasers is to have them 
pointing in the exact same direction so that you 
don’t have to mess around too much once you have 
a visible target acquired. You could try fastening 
the bodies of the two lasers together using some 
type of clamp, or drill two very accurate holes 
through a half-inch thick piece of aluminum as we 
have done. The distance between the two lasers is 
negligible, but the angle of the two lasers must be 
as precise as possible. Even a degree of error could 
mean 20 feet of error on a beam that is returning 
from a 500-foot round trip! You will need to use a 
drill press to make the holes so that they go through 
the material at exactly the same angle. If you have 
an unlimited budget, have a machine shop do this 
drilling and explain to them that alignment is ultra-
important (Figure 16-26).
The two lasers will also need to be mounted to 
a box that will allow room for a battery pack and a 
switch to turn each laser on or off (Figure 16-27). 
Once you have found a way to mount both lasers so 
that they are pointing in the exact same direction, 
the black art of catching the return beam. Do not 
expect success on every mission especially if the 
target window is above your line of sight.
If you are serious about your covert spy 
operations, then you can’t go around pointing a 
visible laser at your target, or you will instantly 
compromise your position at night. Even if you 
are a mile away, people looking out the window 
can easily pinpoint your exact location if you point 
a laser in their direction, so your only option for 
truly covert operation is to use a laser beam that is 
invisible to the human eyes. A 3-5 milliwatt (mW) 
infrared laser module is no more expensive than a 
typical visible red unit and will work just as well, 
although you certainly increase the complexity of 
catching the return beam.
So how do you send an invisible beam across 
the street and attempt to have it land exactly on 
the 1 millimeter phototransistor when the beam is 
completely invisible? Well, you can’t, so you will 
need two lasers—one to do the initial targeting, 
and the other to do the covert surveillance work. 
Now, this may sound completely impossible, but 
we can assure you that it does work, and we have 
managed to target a window using the infrared laser 
as well. It is much more difﬁcult, but it can be done 
if all of the conditions are in your favor. As for the 
  Figure 16-25   The tripod-mounted light-to-
sound receiver.
  Figure 16-26   Making a dual-laser alignment 
block.

232      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
using a distant target is another story altogether, but 
the system does work if you can just get that laser 
beam back to the same room it came from. We 
would have to say that you have a 1-in-10 chance 
of acquiring a target from a window that visually 
seems to be almost at the same angle and horizontal 
position of your own window. Remember that 
every degree of misalignment adds up to a large 
distance when the target is more than a few feet 
away from your location. Alignment really is a 
black art.
If you are still on good terms with your 
neighbors across the street, and they get a kick 
out of your evil genius experiments, ask them if 
you can set up your mirrored speaker system at 
their house for a long-range test. You will need to 
send the beam through the window and then set up 
the speaker so that the beam returns to your own 
location. All of these tests need to be done at night 
as well, as you will have little chance of seeing the 
low-power laser beam outdoors in the daytime. 
Once you can get the beam back to your receiver, 
verify that you can hear the output from the audio 
system, and then switch off the output so that only 
the sounds from the room are vibrations from 
the speaker. The speaker will act much like the 
window pane, allowing you to see the difference 
between a controlled audio source and one that is 
being driven by vibration alone. As you will see, 
the tonal qualities are very different due to the way 
the object vibrates. Larger objects will produce 
a sound with much more bass, and this is where 
your computer can be used to work magic on the 
received signal.
When you are working with your laser spy 
system in the real world, you may get a lock on the 
beam yet fail to understand the received audio due 
to the effects of vibration and ambient room noises 
(see Figure 16-29). If there is a furnace or fan 
running in the room, huge waves will be produced 
with extremely low frequencies, or maybe a bright 
light is creating a loud AC hum in your audio 
signal. A good audio equalizer or some type of 
afﬁx them to a plastic or metal box that can also 
be attached to a tripod just like the receiver box. 
Since you will have no control over the position 
of the target, you will certainly have to move both 
the laser and the receiver in order to get a lock on 
the beam. Don’t forget to label the infrared laser’s 
switch as you will not be able to see the beam when 
it is operational!
With the two units completely boxed and 
operational, do a few basic tests using your speaker 
and mirror arrangement, starting with only a few 
feet of distance and working your way up to the 
length of your room (see Figure 16-28).We can 
easily get our system aimed and working from any 
distance across a room and even across a street 
if we have total control over the placement of all 
three components. Alignment in the real world 
  Figure 16-27   Mounting the lasers to a box 
with switches.
  Figure 16-28   The completed laser spy 
components.

Project 16  Q  Laser Spy Device      233
source location, and easy to control. If you are 
recording your captured audio, then a simple 60-Hz 
notch ﬁlter will almost eliminate most of the AC 
hum picked up by ambient light sources, and the 
vocal frequencies can be further enhanced using a 
band pass ﬁlter that is set to pass only frequencies 
between 80 and 100 Hz (Figure 16-30). We also 
found that vehicles passing by our location would 
create a bounce in the return beam, adding a thump 
into the signal, but most of this was removed by 
cutting the bass frequencies on the equalizer. 
Again, you will have to try these tests for yourself 
as you will likely encounter very different sources 
of noise at your location.
As the laser beam travels further, the beam 
spread becomes greater (Figure 16-31). Some 
laser pointers have very cheap plastic collimating 
lenses and will end up spreading the beam so wide 
that it will cover your entire wall by the time it 
bounces off a window across the street. For this 
reason, a decent laser module with an adjustable 
lens will always be better for long-range operation. 
Of course, you only need to catch the very edge 
of the return beam, and as long as it strikes the 
photosensor, there will be sound. Sometimes, the 
dull, spread-out beam gave much better results than 
a highly focused point.
real-time computer ﬁltering software can really do 
a lot to clean up these types of ambient background 
noises, so learn how to use notch, band pass, or 
noise-ﬁltering software, and you will be able to 
work magic on some noisy signals.
Once you get used to setting up your laser 
spy system to acquire an audio signal, you can 
then decide if some kind of front-end or post 
ﬁltering will be necessary. We actually found 
that for the most part, ﬁltering was not necessary, 
especially when working with the unit at night. 
A simple 8-band equalizer was a good method of 
removing 60-Hz AC hum or booming bass, but 
these noise sources were mostly present at the 
  Figure 16-29   The completed laser spy 
system ready to use.
  Figure 16-30   Computer software will do wonders for a noisy audio signal.

234      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
saturates the photosensor. When the beam is not 
striking the photosensor properly, there will be a 
crackling sound similar to an FM radio that has 
lost its station and when you oversaturate the 
photosensor, there will be a loud wump followed 
by complete silence. The optimal “noise” you want 
to hear when setting up from a quiet target is a 
slight hiss.
Unless you are on a ground ﬂoor or a concrete 
slab, the laser will probably jump all over the 
place as you walk around the room or when 
nearby vehicles drive past. We found that this laser 
bouncing did not degrade the received audio all 
that much, but there are certainly things you can 
do to reduce this problem. Adding weight near the 
top of the tripod will reduce any oscillations or 
at least slow them down. A 5-pound steel weight 
fastened to the top center of the tripod worked well 
on certain occasions. Of course, you will just need 
to experiment and use creative thinking in order to 
make your installation perform optimally.
The ultimate test of the laser spy system will 
involve listening to a conversation in a room that is 
remotely located from the device. Of course, you 
would “never” try to eavesdrop on an unsuspecting 
party, so you will need to have a helper at the 
remote location to help you test your system. We 
originally built this unit to dispel the many myths 
For alignment, we usually tape a paper target 
on the wall behind the area where we will place 
the receiver so that we can carefully adjust the 
laser beam tripod while looking at the wall, rather 
than waiting to catch the return beam in our eyes. 
A 5-mW laser will not have very much focused 
intensity by the time it travels across a street and 
back, but that does not mean you can ignore laser 
safety. This target is also the only way to verify the 
alignment of an infrared laser if you are using one 
because you will need to view the laser spot using 
a camcorder as the human eyes cannot see infrared 
light. We do all targeting using the visible red beam 
and then switch to the infrared beam once we are 
near the target zone. From that point the ﬁne tuning 
is done looking through a camcorder viewﬁnder 
or security camera on a monitor. This makes 
alignment a tedious chore!
Once you have the beam onto the target area, 
turn on the light-to-sound receiver and place it in 
front of the large laser spot so that the edge of the 
beam is on the photosensor surface. Usually, the 
best reception will be received with the edge of 
the beam on the photosensor, but this will require 
some experimentation (Figure 16-32). If the 
target room is quiet, then there will be no window 
vibrations so you will have to align the system 
based on the pops and clicks you hear as the beam 
  Figure 16-31   The return laser beam will no 
longer be a tiny spot on the 
wall.
  Figure 16-32   The edge of the beam is the 
optimal point for clear audio.

Project 16  Q  Laser Spy Device      235
infrared laser did better than the visible red laser, 
but it was a magnitude more difﬁcult to get proper 
alignment. So, our conclusions are that the laser 
spy device is deﬁnitely a powerful tool, but your 
chances of pulling up in a darkened vehicle to point 
and shoot are almost zero. Set-up and alignment 
require extremely careful and tedious planning, 
often resulting in failure. It’s not the hardware that 
fails; it’s the path of the laser beam.
The completed laser spy system was a great 
demonstration platform, proving that a person with 
enough motivation could potentially eavesdrop 
on a conversation a mile away without access 
to the location (Figure 16-34). The chances of 
this actually happening are extremely rare, but 
nonetheless possible! So, the next time you catch 
the ﬂicker of a laser beam out of the corner of 
your eye, ask yourself, “Was that some kid with a 
keychain pointer, or a highly motivated individual 
who just read this article?” Yes, indeed, a laser 
beam can steal your secrets, so your best bet is 
to be on the receiving end of the beam, not the 
transmitting end.
about its “ease of use,” but were seriously surprised 
at how well it does work if you can actually get the 
return beam aligned properly. In our test, we set 
up the unit and then went to the target location and 
spoke loudly right at the window, expecting that 
the received audio would be barely understandable 
(see Figure 16-33). Well, if you’ve seen the video 
then you can see that the reception was very loud 
and clear, to the point that it almost sounded like a 
radio transmission! We honestly did not expect it to 
work that well.
Of course, make no mistake—alignment from 
across the street is no easy task, and every single 
factor has to be completely in your favor to have 
any chance at all of success. The target window 
must be at a very precise angle to allow the beam to 
come back to your location, and the conversations 
must be loud enough to create a decent vibration 
on the window. Gas-ﬁlled high-efﬁciency windows 
further reduce your chances, and any noise in the 
room may completely overpower the conversations. 
Remember, we were in the totally silent room 
almost yelling directly at the window. Further 
testing proved that lower level conversations 
were also possible, but computer ﬁltering would 
be necessary. In our tests we also found that the 
  Figure 16-33   Beaming a window across the 
street in a controlled test.
  Figure 16-34   The laser spy system is a great 
source of entertainment.

This page intentionally left blank 

237
P R O J E C T  1 7
Basic Spy Transmitter
RADIO FREQUENCY PROJECTS can seem more 
difﬁcult than most electronics projects because 
most of the time you cannot build them on a 
solderless breadboard, and they may use parts that 
are not easy to source, such as coils and adjustable 
capacitors. This project is focused toward those 
who have not yet attempted to build any kind of 
radio frequency (RF) project, and it is laid out in 
such a way as to make it easy to explore the basic 
principles of RF circuitry and ensure a successful 
ﬁnal product. 
depending on the parts used and the quality of 
your ﬁnal product. This circuit is based on one that 
has been around since the 1960s and published 
thousands of times, so it is tried, tested, and 
guaranteed to work if you follow the instructions. 
Performance is “okay,” but since this is the one of 
the most basic transmitter circuits possible, don’t 
expect high quality or rock-solid performance.
Since many of the parts only need to be “close 
enough,” you will probably be able to salvage 
all that you need from any old radio, TV, or 
RF-based circuit board (Figure 17-1). Even the 
two transistors used are generic, and practically 
any small-signal NPN transistor will work here. 
Looking up datasheets on the various transistors 
pulled from old circuit boards is a great way to 
learn the important parameters such as VCEO 
(Collector Emitter Voltage), VCBO (Collector-Base 
Voltage), VEBO (Emitter-Base Voltage), and IC 
237
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 2.2 K, R2 = 22 K, R3 = 22 K, 
R4 = 4.7 K, R5 = 1 K, R6 = 100 7
Q 
 Capacitors: C1 = 0.047 MF, C2 = 10 MF, 
C3 = 0.22 MF, C4 = 0.47 MF, C5 = 10-50 pF 
variable, C6 = 5 pF, C7 = 0.022 MF
Q 
 Transistors: Q1 = 2N3904 or 2N2222A, 
Q2 = 2N3904 or 2N2222A
Q 
 Inductors: L1 = 5 turns of #18 copper wire at 
¼-in diameter 
Q 
 Microphone: Electret 2 wire style microphone
Q 
 Antenna: Antenna is 6- to 12-in insulated 
copper wire
Q 
 Battery: 3- to 9-V battery or pack
This simple two-transistor audio transmitter 
will send the sounds picked up in a room to any 
FM radio tuned to the same frequency as the 
transmitter, somewhere between 80 and 100 
megahertz (MHz). The expected range will be at 
least 100 feet (ft) and could be substantially longer 
  Figure 17-0   Build the two-transistor spy 
transmitter.

238      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
The output from the audio preampliﬁer is then 
sent to the radio frequency stage in order to create 
the needed frequency modulation. To make it easy 
to build and test this project, the audio stage will 
be built ﬁrst and then tested before any of the radio 
frequency components are added to the circuit.
Electret microphones can be salvaged from most 
small consumer electronic devices that records 
audio. Answering machines, old tape decks, 
dictation machines, and even kids’ toys will have 
one inside. The electret microphone is very easy to 
identify—it will be the pencil eraser-sized metal 
can with a felt pad on one side and two wires or 
terminals on the other. Sometimes the microphone 
will be wrapped in a rubber casing, which can 
easily be removed.
(Continuous Collector Current). Anything close to 
the specs shown in the parts we are using for this 
project will be good enough for this transmitter. 
Out of the 10 or more random NPN transistors, we 
tried, only two of them would not transmit onto the 
FM radio band.
Resistors, capacitors, and even the wire needed 
to wind the small coil can also be salvaged from an 
old circuit board if you hunt around for the correct 
values. The only component you may have to order 
from a supplier will be the small 10 to 50 picofarads 
(pF) adjustable capacitor, but we will offer an 
alternative solution to the circuit that will not require 
the trimmer capacitor at all. Read over the entire 
project before heating up your soldering iron so you 
know what parts you may need and how the circuit 
can be modiﬁed to suit your own junk box inventory.
This transmitter can be thought of as two 
independent stages that work together: an audio 
preampliﬁer stage that feeds a radio frequency 
and oscillator stage. The audio preampliﬁer stage 
consists of most of the semiconductors in the 
circuit, including the small electret microphone, 
which is basically a tiny microphone in a can with 
its own built-in ampliﬁcation circuit. Because of 
this built-in ampliﬁer, the electret microphone 
is able to drive the single-transistor preampliﬁer 
circuit to a very decent level, enough to hear just 
about every whisper in a room (Figure 17-2).
  Figure 17-1   You can salvage most of the parts needed from an old radio.
  Figure 17-2   The electret microphone will drive 
the audio preampliﬁer stage.

Project 17  Q  Basic Spy Transmitter      239
the transmitter send the RF signal to an FM radio. 
Five turns seems best for reaching the center of the 
FM radio band, though. Try to get the coil loops as 
close to each other as possible by keeping the wire 
tight as you wrap it around the bolt. Once the ﬁve 
turns are made, just unscrew the bolt from the coil.
Once you unscrew the forming bolt from the 
coil, cut off each end of the wire to about a ¼ in 
in length and then gently press the coil together to 
take up any gaps left between each loop of wire. 
The completed coil will perform just as well as any 
manufactured open-air coil of similar size, and it 
only took 5 minutes to make. Some radio coils are 
much more complex, containing a ferrite bead or 
even some internal circuitry, but for these simple, 
low-power, low-frequency open-air coils, you can 
almost always roll your own if you know how many 
turns are going to be needed (Figure 17-5).
Coils are usually the most difﬁcult part of any 
radio frequency circuit, as most hardware hackers 
do not own equipment to measure and test coils. 
The good news is that there is only a single coil 
in this circuit, and it is so easy to make that it is 
almost impossible to do it wrong! (Figure 17-3) 
All you need is some small enameled copper wire 
and a ¼-inch (in) diameter bolt or dowel to wind 
it on. This copper wire can be pulled from an old 
transformer, toy motor, relay, solenoid, or purchased 
new at most electronics supply outlets. As for the 
wire gage (thickness), don’t worry too much about 
it—1 millimeter (mm) or somewhere near 1 mm is 
close enough. We have built many versions of this 
transmitter using all kinds of varying scrap parts, 
and it usually works. Most times, errors are due to 
wiring, not the parts used in the circuit.
The making of the RF coil is as easy as 
wrapping the enameled wire around the bolt ﬁve 
times and then cutting off the ends (Figure 17-4). 
Leave about ½ in of wire at each end so you can 
scrape the enamel off of the wire and solder the coil 
to your circuit board. That’s all there is to making 
the necessary coil. Practically any wire close to 
1 mm in diameter will work as long as it has the 
protective enamel coating. You could actually get 
away with bare wire, but the coils would have to 
be extremely close together but not touching each 
other or the coil would fail. Enabled copper wire is 
much easier to use. 
At one point we even tried making the coil with 
four and also six turns, and were still able to make 
 Figure 17-3   The radio frequency coil is 
extremely easy to make.
 Figure 17-4   Wrap the bolt ﬁve times and you 
now have your RF coil.
 Figure 17-5   The completed RF coil after 
removing the forming bolt.

240      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
trimmer capacitor (Figure 17-7). Use the following 
schematic as a guide to source the parts, trying to 
keep the values as close as you can. Remember 
that just about any small-signal NPN transistors 
will work, but this will require some searching of 
online datasheets while you scrounge around the 
old circuit boards. If you want to work with all 
new components, you could try an electronics shop 
or online supplier if they deal in small quantities. 
We usually always salvage our parts as it seems 
crazy to pay 20 bucks in shipping for a 10-cent 
component!
The schematic for the two-transistor spy 
transmitter is shown with the audio-preampliﬁer 
stage in green and the radio-frequency stage in red 
(Figure 17-8). As you can see, the audio-preampliﬁer 
In order to use the coil in your circuit, the 
enamel needs to be scraped from a small portion of 
each end so that you can solder the coil into your 
circuit (Figure 17-6). A small razor knife or blade 
can be used to remove the insulating coating by 
scraping it along the edge. You don’t have to get 
all of the coating off the wire, as the heat from the 
soldering process will likely melt away what is left. 
Just make sure that you can see some of the copper 
that is underneath the coating, and you will be able 
to complete the circuit between the solder joint and 
the copper wire.
If you have a good supply of junk circuit 
boards in your scrap bin, then you will be able 
to ﬁnd all of the parts needed for this transmitter 
project, or at least all of the parts minus the small 
 Figure 17-6   The enamel needs to be scraped 
from the end of the coil.
 Figure 17-7   Sourcing the rest of the needed 
components for the transmitter.
Audio-preamplifier
stage
Radio-frequency
stage
 Figure 17-8   The basic two-transistor spy transmitter schematic.

Project 17  Q  Basic Spy Transmitter      241
Commercial transmitters must include a lot more 
circuitry and quality components in order to 
achieve any kind of real stability, and as you will 
see when experimenting with the ﬁnished product, 
this unit is very prone to drifting if the voltage 
changes or if anything comes close to the antenna 
or RF stage. Our little room bug certainly works 
well if left undisturbed, but simplicity is exchanged 
for quality here.
Laying out all of the parts inventory right onto 
the printed schematic is a system we have used for 
many years, and makes it easy when scavenging for 
parts or possible replacement values (Figure 17-9). 
A resistor color chart will be handy unless you 
already have all of the color codes memorized since 
you can’t just drop your ohm meter across any 
resistor that is still soldered into a circuit board and 
expect a valid reading. A small magniﬁer will help 
as well, since resistors and capacitors are so small 
on most modern boards.
As far as capacitor codes go, the numbers state 
the value in microfarads (MF) and include the 
number of places the decimal is moved to the left. 
We know…why not just put the actual value??? 
Hey, that would be too logical and use less ink, so 
stage takes up most of the schematic real estate, 
and parts count. Transistor Q1 forms a simple audio 
ampliﬁer that is fed directly from the output of the 
electret microphone. Since the electret microphone 
also contains its own built-in ampliﬁer, the system 
becomes very sensitive to any nearby sounds, often 
able to hear a whisper in a large room. Most of the 
capacitors in the audio preampliﬁer stage are there to 
stabilize the circuit. Because the transmit frequency 
is so dependent on voltage and loading, changes in 
current consumption from the ampliﬁer would make 
the RF stage unstable without the capacitors to act as 
a buffer. You will see this as you tune up the circuit 
for the ﬁrst time.
The radio frequency stage consists of the 
transistor Q2 and a “tank circuit” made from the 
hand-wound coil (L1) and the variable capacitor 
(C5). The coil and capacitor form a tuned circuit, 
which will oscillate at a frequency somewhere 
in the FM radio band, dependant on the setting 
of the variable capacitor. Since the tuned circuit 
is switched by transistor Q2, which is in turn 
switched by transistor Q1, changes in the audio 
preampliﬁer result in modulation of the RF stage. 
This is about as simple as transmitters get! 
 Figure 17-9   Laying out the parts inventory before the build.

242      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
This is not the case when working with radio 
frequency circuits!
We had to learn this lesson the hard way after 
having so much easy success with our non–RF 
prototyping work. We experimented with RF 
many years later into the hobby and simply did not 
believe that we could not breadboard such a simple 
circuit. Hell, we made a 100-MHz computer on 
a breadboard with no bypass caps! Well, now we 
know that it is basically a waste of time, and we 
will prove it here just for fun.
Before we waste our time on this endeavor, let 
us explain why you have a 1 in 100 chance of ever 
getting any RF circuit to function on a solderless 
breadboard. The reason is capacitance. A look at 
the underside of a solderless breadboard shows that 
it is made up of multiple metal strips that join the 
holes together in rows. These metal strips actually 
act like small-value capacitors, often with more 
capacitance than some of the capacitors you may 
actually need in your circuit. So, imagine taking a 
working circuit and then randomly dropping 20 or 
more randomly placed 5-pF capacitors all over the 
place! As you can imagine, you will either radically 
alter the frequency or get nothing at all as a result. 
Don’t get us wrong…sometimes it may work, but 
usually it’s not worth the attempt!
We added all of the components to a tiny 
solderless breadboard, taking care to isolate the RF 
stage as much as possible and then hooked it all up 
for a test using an FM radio to receive the signal. 
Well, this time we were very lucky as the circuit 
actually made a tiny bit of crackle on the FM band if 
we placed our hand in the right place over the circuit! 
In other words, the stability was so awful that the RF 
circuit was oscillating all over the place and hardly 
sending out any RF energy at all (Figure 17-11).
Even when we ﬁnally managed to hear a faint 
crackle on the FM radio receiver, the output 
was barely registering, and no audio was being 
transmitted, just the carrier wave. It took many 
attempts to even get that far with the breadboard 
circuit, and required that we have a hand almost 
let’s not go there! The capacitor codes will be as 
follows: C1 is 0.047 MF (#473), C2 is electrolytic 
and will be marked as 10 MF, C3 is 0.22 MF (#224), 
C4 is electrolytic and will be marked as 0.47 MF, C6 
is 5 pF and will be simply marked as 5. C5 is 
an adjustable trimmer capacitor (approximately 
10–50 pF), and will probably have no markings at 
all. You may have to order one from a supplier or just 
take one from some old RF circuit board and hope 
for the best. The good news is that most of them will 
work anyway, as they all have very small values.
As an option to avoid having to source an 
adjustable capacitor for C5, you could just use a 
six-turn coil and insert a ferrite slug into it to allow 
the tuning to be done by the coil instead. This will 
also require that you replace C5 with a 10-pF ﬁxed 
capacitor instead of the adjustable capacitor. Try to 
ﬁnd the adjustable capacitor ﬁrst though, as slug coil 
tuning is even more ﬁnicky than capacitor tuning.
Before we show how the completed circuit 
is created, let us take a small diversion and 
demonstrate how “not” to build an RF prototype 
(Figure 17-10)! When we ﬁrst started electronics, 
we made many successful and extremely complex 
projects on large solderless breadboards, sometimes 
reaching digital speeds of 100 MHz in circuits 
containing hundreds of semiconductors. Success is 
almost guaranteed with digital circuitry and slow 
analog projects on a breadboard, so much that we 
often leave out the bypass capacitors altogether. 
 Figure 17-10   This is how “not” to build an RF
circuit.

Project 17  Q  Basic Spy Transmitter      243
about 1 by 2 in in size, and you could even just 
build it on some cardboard by punching holes for 
the component leads if you wanted to. Plain perf 
board is your best bet, and if you are doing a lot 
of prototyping, these boards can be ordered in 
large squares for very little cost at most electronics 
suppliers.
The perf board needed for this circuit is about 
the same size as the side of a 9-volt (V) battery, 
although you could certainly make it larger or try 
to make it much smaller. Remember that the closer 
you jam all of the components, the more stray 
capacitance you will introduce to your circuit. 
If you follow the general size and layout shown 
in the next few steps, then your circuit is almost 
guaranteed to work unless you have bad wiring or 
components far out of speciﬁcation (Figure 17-14). 
right over the entire circuit to add even more 
capacitance to the already confused oscillator! 
(See Figure 17-12.) So the moral of this waste of 
time is to not expect any RF circuit to work on a 
solderless breadboard no matter how much of a 
breadboard Jedi you may be. Of course, don’t let 
us stop you from trying, after all—that’s how we 
hardware hackers learn—from real-world trial 
and error!
To avoid as much stray capacitance as possible, 
the ﬁnal circuit must be built on a bit of perforated 
board (Figure 17-13). There are several types of 
perf board, but you must choose one that does not 
have any soldering pads or strips, or you will be in 
the same boat as with the solderless breadboard—
stray capacitance all over the place. This circuit is 
so simple that it only needs a piece of perf board 
  Figure 17-11   This circuit almost worked…but 
barely!
  Figure 17-12   Tuning was next to impossible 
due to stray capacitance.
  Figure 17-13   The ﬁnal circuit will be built on 
perforated board.
  Figure 17-14   Getting ready to lay out the 
small circuit board.

244      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
Also, take note of which lead is positive so that R1 
can feed the required current to the internal ampliﬁer.
Making a simple circuit on the perforated 
board is just a matter of inserting the components 
and then bending the leads to hold them in place 
(Figure 17-17). If the leads are long enough (as 
with new parts) then you can form the traces 
directly with the leads. Very complex circuits can 
actually be formed this way on perforated board, 
although when your part count rises, the number of 
wires will also rise.
The best way to build this circuit successfully 
is to ﬁrst build up the audio preampliﬁer stage 
and then test it using a pair of headphones or 
an oscilloscope (Figure 17-18). Once all of the 
components on the green side of the schematic are 
Most likely, the electret microphone will have 
no leads if it was salvaged from some appliance. 
A pair of leads can be made by cutting the legs 
off of another component and then soldering 
them to the pads on the underside of the electret 
body (Figure 17-15). Also take note that one of 
the leads has a connection to the outer ring on the 
microphone body; this pad will be the negative 
lead. Polarity is important on an electret mike as 
it needs to have power supplied properly in order 
to power up the small built-in ampliﬁer circuit 
contained in the can. In the schematic, resistor 
R1 supplies this power to the positive lead on the 
electret microphone. If the microphone is inserted 
in reverse, it won’t be damaged, but there will be 
no audio sent to the preampliﬁer stage. It’s a good 
idea to mark the outside of the can with a marker or 
by scratching a point for the positive lead side.
The ﬁrst component to install on the perf board is 
the electret microphone, once it has leads
(Figure 17-16). Insert it near the end of the board so 
that it will not be close to the RF stage or have its 
opening blocked by any of the other components. 
If you want to make the microphone a bit more 
sensitive to higher-frequency sounds, you can peel 
away the top felt cover as it is only there as a “wind 
screen” to block out puffs of air if a person was to 
speak directly into the opening. In a spy transmitter, 
you are hoping that the speaker will not see the 
device, so a wind barrier is not really much use. 
 Figure 17-15   Start by soldering leads to the 
electret microphone.
 Figure 17-16   Insert the electret microphone at 
the end of the perf board.
 Figure 17-17   Components are held to the perf 
board by their bent leads.

Project 17  Q  Basic Spy Transmitter      245
checked, solder a temporary wire to the test point 
(TP1) and add the power and ground wires to allow 
connection to some battery source with a voltage 
between 3 and 9 V. If you hook up the connection 
between TP1 and GND to a set of headphones, you 
should be able to hear a rumbling sound when you 
blow into the electret microphone. An oscilloscope 
will also register the analog waveform from the 
preampliﬁer stage (Figure 17-20).
We like to use two different oscilloscopes in 
our evil genius lab—a nice new digital scope with 
all of the bells and whistles, and this beat-up, 
old clanker from 1970s that does not even have 
a front panel overlay! The old (cathode ray tube) 
CRT-based scope is great for looking at real-time 
low-frequency data from audio sources as it just 
clips on and works every time (Figure 17-21). You 
can often purchase an older scope like this for a 
inserted and wired together, you will hear or see an 
audio output by taking a reading or by connecting 
headphones between test point 1 (TP1) and 
ground. Once you know the audio stage is working 
properly, any dubbing will be limited to the new 
components that make up the RF oscillator stage.
Use as few jumper wires as possible as they will 
add extra capacitance to your completed circuit. 
By connecting the bent leads of each component 
together, you can make traces on the underside of 
the perforated board (Figure 17-19). Small wires or 
even cut-off leads from other components can also 
be added to make solder bridges and traces on the 
underside of the board. The results won’t be pretty, 
but they will be as functional as any professionally 
manufactured board—if wired correctly.
Once all of the components that make up the 
audio preampliﬁer stage have been wired and 
 Figure 17-18   Adding the audio preampliﬁer 
stage components.
 Figure 17-19   Making traces in the underside 
of the perforated board.
 Figure 17-20   Tapping the test point to test 
the audio output.
 Figure 17-21   The oscilloscope shows the 
audio wave in real time.

246      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
offset the frequency slightly. If you offset the 
frequency too much, you will be transmitting 
outside the FM radio band or not at all.
The actual antenna is just a bit of wire, and 
is not critical since it will not be tuned to the 
transmit frequency anyhow. A 2-in long wire 
will probably give you a range of across your 
house and a 6-in antenna may cover the entire 
yard. Again, don’t expect any kind of amazing 
performance out of this device as falsely claimed 
on one too many websites trying to sell them 
off as high-tech law enforcement–grade spy 
transmitters! If you can pick up the audio on your 
receiver from one room to the other, then you 
have done well, but expect static and frequency 
variances as people move around the room. 
Without a more complex stabilizing circuit such as 
a SAW oscillator or crystal-driven oscillator, the 
output will vary when anything like capacitance or 
battery level change.
The completed circuit board looks like a 
random trail of soldering blobs, but it is perfectly 
functional and will work as well as a professionally 
manufactured circuit board providing the wiring is 
all correct (Figure 17-23). Before connecting any 
power to the circuit, check the polarity of transistor 
Q2, as this is about the only component that could 
suffer damage from a reversal. There are not many 
components to add in the RF stage, so it should be 
an easy task.
few bucks at a surplus supply store, and for many 
projects it will be more than adequate. We actually 
prefer the beater scope to our brand-new 400-MHz 
digital scope for looking at live sound data.
If you are not seeing any change on your scope 
or hearing any noise in your headphones when 
you blow into the microphone, recheck all of your 
wiring.  Almost 99 percent of the time, a failure 
will be a wiring problem, so check and recheck 
before claiming that a circuit is no good in a forum! 
Nobody wants to look like a noob when they ﬁnally 
realize that their component is reversed, right? 
If you want to experiment a bit with the audio 
preampliﬁer, changing the value of R1 will affect 
the output from the electret microphone internal 
ampliﬁer. A value of 1 K will push the amp to its 
max, while a value of more than 5 K will reduce 
the output slightly.
Once you have veriﬁed that the audio preampliﬁer 
stage is actually sending out an audio signal, 
complete the rest of the circuit by adding the 
components that make up the RF output stage 
(Figure 17-22). If you have the room on your perf 
board, try to keep the coil and the tuning capacitor 
slightly isolated from the other components by 
giving it a small gap. This isn’t absolutely critical, 
but remember that anything that comes near the 
coil or tuning capacitor will add capacitance and 
 Figure 17-22   Adding the RF output stage to 
the circuit.
 Figure 17-23   The completed circuit board on 
the underside.

Project 17  Q  Basic Spy Transmitter      247
it will likely be transmitting somewhere between 
80 and 110 MHz, but depending on parts used, 
board layout and stray capacitance, who knows 
where it may be. We built two versions of this 
project for this write-up—this one and a smaller 
version shown next. Although we used the same 
exact parts, the output frequency was wildly 
different. The larger version hit about 100 MHz, 
and the smaller one was down to 88 MHz. Oh, and 
remember that as soon as you move your arm away 
from the transmitter, you can expect some kind of 
frequency shift. Hey, that’s why radios have dials! 
Just tune your transmitter back in.
Although we have been warning you about the 
many pitfalls with this ultra-basic transmitter, we 
will say that once it is set and running on a fresh 
battery, it will perform quite nicely. You have to get 
used to all of the variables that can affect the output 
frequency, such as large objects near the unit, 
battery voltage changes, and even people moving 
around a room close to the unit (Figure 17-26). Get 
the transmitter working and then grab hold of the 
end of the antenna and watch the output frequency 
dive to the lower regions of the FM band. Once we 
had our transmitter set up and placed on a table, we 
were able to clearly hear conversations in the room 
from two rooms away, so it does work once it is set 
up and left undisturbed.
To make this project more spy-like, we added 
some double-sided tape to the underside of the 
Tuning of the transmitter is simple…as long as 
it works! You will need some kind of nonferrous 
(nonmetal) tool to adjust the trimmer capacitor as 
any metal objects near the capacitor will throw off 
the frequency, making it highly annoying to adjust 
(Figure 17-24). What will happen is that you will 
get the transmitter adjusted where you want, and 
then removal of the tool will alter the transmitter 
frequency. Actually, this even happens slightly 
with only your hands being near the circuit board, 
so be prepared for a little black magic here! Also, 
when you change the battery voltage, retuning will 
be necessary unless you luck out and end up on a 
totally different dead spot on the FM radio band.
To start the tuning process, ﬁnd a dead spot 
on the FM radio band near 100 MHz. Place your 
transmitter close to the radio and slowly turn the 
trimmer capacitor with the plastic screwdriver 
all the way around. If you are lucky, your radio 
will go from a smooth hiss to a loud thump as you 
hit the exact receiver frequency. Since the tuning 
bandwidth cannot cover the entire FM radio band 
(from 88 to 108 MHz), you will most likely have 
to repeat this process in steps of 10 MHz or so 
until you get luck and catch the correct frequency 
(Figure 17-25). An auto-scanning radio tuner may 
also ﬁnd the transmitter, but it will probably be 
easy to tune the transmitter to the radio.
We kid you not when we say this may seem 
like black magic. If your transmitter is working, 
 Figure 17-24   The tuning must be done with a 
nonferrous tool.
 Figure 17-25   Tuning the transmitter might 
seem like black magic.

248      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
allowing for a cleaner reception. The position of 
the tiny antenna was also important, as any changes 
would throw off the transmit frequency. You may 
actually ﬁnd better performance using a shorter and 
more rigid antenna that is not easily bent around.
The simple transmitter worked fairly well 
considering how few components it has, and from 
a fresh 9-V battery has been running for many 
hours. In fact, we have not run down a battery yet 
in all of our tests, including the time we forgot to 
unplug the battery (Figure 17-29). The transmitter 
uses such a small amount of current that even a 
3-V coin cell will run it for many hours, which is 
what prompted us to make the second size-reduced 
version.
circuit board in order to fasten the circuit board 
to the battery casing and then added the tape to 
the other side of the battery casing so we could 
just walk by our target area and “stick” the unit 
to something the way they do in the spy movies 
(Figure 17-27). Of course, the real spooks have 
frequency hopping, digitally encrypted burst 
transmitters running in the gigahertz bands, but 
this thing was cool nonetheless because it was built 
from a dead radio in one afternoon!
After sticking the circuit board to the battery 
casing, we had to retune the unit again to place it 
back on a nice high dead band on the FM radio 
(Figure 17-28). Higher frequencies are better 
because there is less crackle on the receiver, 
 Figure 17-26   Many factors can cause the 
frequency to drift.
 Figure 17-27   Making the transmitter more 
spy-like.
 Figure 17-28   The completed stick and run 
spy transmitter.
 Figure 17-29   Bugging our own stock room to 
protect it from pirates.

Project 17  Q  Basic Spy Transmitter      249
no larger than a pencil eraser, running from a pair 
of watch batteries (Figure 17-31). Of course, for 
that kind of miniaturization, some kind of copper-
clad board will need to be made—using a Dremel 
tool as perf board will not be of much use for 
surface-mounted components. We will leave you to 
send us a photo of this project made smaller than 
our current 1-in diameter version!
Thanks for tuning in. We hope this project was 
an enjoyable pathway to many more interesting 
and complex radio frequency gadgets. We will 
be adding many more transmitter projects in the 
future as well, including those that can transmit 
video and encoded information. Of course, all 
of these devices are for fun only, and never to be 
used to intrude on anyone’s privacy or operate in 
places where prohibited. Now, we must run, as that 
unmarked van has once again pulled up in front of 
our secret lab, and the men in black are heading to 
the door… (click)!
Having so few components, the project lends 
itself well to miniaturization (Figure 17-30). Of 
course, the tighter you pack the components, the 
more chances of stray capacitance, so beware 
that size reduction may also mean a performance 
reduction—or complete elimination! We managed 
to cram all of the parts on a bit of perforated board 
no larger than the diameter of the nickel-sized 3-V 
coin battery and it worked just as well as the larger 
version with a slight frequency shift. Actually, 
this is version 2 of the mini transmitter as version 
1 seemed extremely unstable. We just moved the 
component around a bit, and the instability was 
magically cured. Welcome to the dark art of RF 
circuit building!
If you have some skill with a soldering iron and 
a steady hand, this pop-top sized version of the spy 
transmitter would look gigantic compared to one 
built using surface mount components. It would be 
possible to make a performing unit that would be 
  Figure 17-30   How small can you make this 
project?
 Figure 17-31   The completed miniature version 
of the transmitter.

This page intentionally left blank 

251
P R O J E C T  1 8
Remote Control Hijacker
THIS FUN PROJECT lets you take control away 
from the person holding the remote control by 
intercepting the invisible signals as they travel 
through the air so you can play them back to the 
TV or video machine. You can also “train” your 
remote hijacker by recording certain button presses 
directly from the remote so that you can play them 
back later on, taking total control over the target 
appliance. Because this project records the remote 
control pulse stream directly, it will work on any 
infrared-based remote control, able to learn a few 
button presses.
genius agenda. Because no interrupts are used, 
the C program could be ported to just about any 
microcontroller, and will work on all of the Atmel 
microcontrollers as is. Larger internal memory 
allows more button presses to be stored, with the 
ATMega88 (1K SRAM) allowing about three 
button presses to be recorded and played back.
Almost every electronic appliance that includes 
an infrared remote control will use a standard 
method of communication over the invisible beam 
called the “RC5 Protocol” (see Figure 18-1). This 
simple protocol works by sending a series of 1.5 to 
2.5 millisecond (ms) long pulses that are modulated 
by a carrier frequency of 36 to 45 kilohertz (KHz). 
The pulses make up a frame of data, which is 
usually 12-bits long, encoded using a system of 
inversion called Manchester Encoding. Of course, 
we won’t have to dig all that deep into any of this 
stuff because this project just records the length 
251
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 IRMOD: rc5 infrared remote control 
decoder module 
Q 
 IC1: ATMEL ATMEGA88P or comparable 
microcontroller
Q 
 Q1: 2N3904 or 2N2222A NPN transistor 
Q 
 LED 1: 940-nm infrared LED 
Q 
 LED 2: Red or green visible LED
Q 
 S1, S2, S3: Normally open pushbutton 
switches
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 100 7, R2 = 10 K, R3 = 1 K
Q 
 Battery: 3-V AA or AAA pack
This project uses a very simple microcontroller 
program that just times the pulses coming into the 
infrared decoder and then stores them in the internal 
SRAM for later playback. The source code is made 
as simple as possible, allowing for plenty of room 
for modiﬁcations and alterations to suit your evil 
 Figure 18-0   This hidden device can intercept 
remote control signals and play 
them back!

252      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
suppliers, and all of them do basically the same 
thing. Some of them are contained in a metal can, 
while others look like transistors with a bubble on 
one side to input the infrared light. All that matters 
is that you can ﬁgure out which pins are power, 
ground, and output on the device. 
In our version of the remote control hijacker, 
we used the Sharp GP1UM26X decoder module, as 
we had a few of them that were salvaged from old 
DVD players and VCRs (see Figure 18-2). If you 
are going to salvage your decoder module, make 
sure to take a look on the board before unsoldering 
so that you can identify the power and ground 
connections as most OEM modules will have no 
markings. The ground wire will be easy to locate, 
but you may have to do a bit of tracing to identify 
the signal pin. If you have to take a wild guess, 
then just connect the unit to a 3-volt (V) coin cell 
with a piezo buzzer and try random combinations 
until you hear a blip-blip-blip on the buzzer when 
you aim a remote control at the device and press 
a button. A coin cell has very low amperage, 
so it will not kill the module if you hook it up 
completely reversed while brute force hacking to 
ﬁnd the pinout.
of pulses and stores them as byte values into 
the microcontroller’s internal memory for later 
playback.
Of course, you could actually decode the data 
and store a lot more, but this would require some 
crafty programming to measure the exact pulse rate 
and then understand the stream that it is seeing at 
the input. We just wanted a quick and dirty hack 
that would allow us to prank the remote control 
user, so we opted to just measure the time between 
pulses and store that value. This allows any remote 
to be recorded and played back as the program does 
not care what the exact frequency or command 
being sent really is.
To deal with the very fast 40-KHz modulation, 
a readymade solution is used that will strip out 
the modulation and leave only the millisecond 
pulse train. These remote-control decoder modules 
are very common as they are used in most of the 
appliances that we are going to hijack. These tiny 
3-pin blocks have a power, ground, and output, 
and do nothing more than look for RC5 pulses in 
order to strip them of their modulation. We have 
collected many of these remote-control modules 
from various dead appliances and electronics 
 Figure 18-1  The remote control signals are ﬁrst decoded by the RC5 module.

Project 18  Q  Remote Control Hijacker      253
infrared LED unless you plan to wreak havoc on 
the entire neighborhood or the TVs in a large area, 
but we will leave that modiﬁcation up to you. A 
single infrared LED will have more than enough 
reach to control any TV or video machine in a 
living room, and since stealth is the goal, size 
matters.
Infrared light has a longer wavelength than any 
of the colors on the visible spectrum, crossing 
into invisibility around 800 nanometers (nm), and 
continuing well beyond 1000 nm (Figure 18-4). 
Most remote controls use 940-nm infrared LEDs, 
which is why those types are most common and 
inexpensive. Of course, you could use any infrared 
LED, even the 800 to 880 nm types often used 
for night vision illuminations as well. Either way, 
your buddy (victim) will not see the invisible 
light so you can hijack the TV or video player in 
complete darkness without compromising your 
funny prank.
If you like to mull over datasheets, then the 
important factors of any infrared LED are the 
As for the playback portion of this project, it 
will utilize the same exact system that is found in 
the remote control, using an infrared light-emitting 
diode (LED) to send out the modulated pulse 
stream (Figure 18-3). You can use practically any 
type or number of infrared LEDs, as the decoder 
module is highly sensitive to the modulated pulse 
stream. In our testing, it was even found that 
visible LEDs would work! You only need a single 
 Figure 18-2  The datasheet for a typical RC5 remote-control decoder module.
 Figure 18-3   The pulses are sent to the 
appliance using an infrared LED.

254      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
pulses. If you really wanted to get long range from 
this project, then look at the datasheet for the value 
of pulsed current rating, which is a much higher 
value than continuous current, allowing the LED 
to be pushed into extremely bright pulsed-mode 
operation. 
center wavelength and the forward continuous 
current, as this will determine what kind of light 
and how much light you can expect (Figure 18-5). 
Of course, for this project, an infrared LED will 
work, so ratings are not important as the current is 
low enough due to the supply as well as the short 
 Figure 18-4  The light spectrum, showing the invisible infrared region.
5.0
(.197)
8.6
(.34)
1.0
(.04)
22.0 MIN.
(.866)
0.5 TYP.
(.02)
A
K
1.0 MON.
(.04)
DATE
11.24.93
2.22.94
1.7.98
12.31.02
01.18.07
REV.
E.C.N.  NUMBER AND REVISION COMMENTS
REDRAWN.
PARAMETER
PARAMETER
MIN
TYP
MAX
MAX
PEAK FORWARD CURRENT
STEADY CURRENT
POWER DISSIPATION
DERATE FROM 25°C
OPERATING TEMP.
STORAGE TEMP.
SOLDERING TEMP.
2.0 mm FROM BODY
1
A
mA
mW
mW/°C
°C
°C
°C
3 SEC. MAX
100
150
– 1.2
–  25 TO +85
–  25 TO +100
+260
UNITS
UNITS
TEST COND
A
B
C
D
E
CHG’D INTENSITY AND HALF ANGLE.
E.C.N. # 10 BRDR.
E.C.N. # 10 BRDR. & REDRAWN IN 3D. 
E.C.N. # 11393.
ELECTRO–OPTICAL CHARACTERISTICS TA = 25°C
LIMITS OF SAFE OPERATION AT 25°C
PART NUMBER
OED—EL —1L2
5.85
(.23)
DOT DENOTES CATHODE
3 DIA.
(.118)
2.54 NOM.
(.1) (SEE NOTE 4)
SEE NOTE 3
REV.
E
PEAK WAVELENGTH
SPECTRAL BANDWIDTH
45
60
30
FORWARD VOLTAGE
REVERSE VOLTAGE
RADIANT INTENSITY
HALF ANGLE
EPOXY LENS FINISH:
5.0
1.6
nm
nm
mW/SR
degress
Vf
Ir = 10 μA
If = 100 mA
Vr
940
1.2
WATER CLEAR
If =  20 mA
tp < 10 μs, tp/T = 1% DUTY CYCLE
 Figure 18-5
An infrared LED datasheet, showing the optimal wavelength.

Project 18  Q  Remote Control Hijacker      255
The push button switches put the microcontroller 
into record or playback mode, allowing the 
interception of a few button presses that are stored 
in the internal SRAM for later playback. The visible 
LED ﬂashes to show that the system is receiving 
pulses when in record mode, but it can also be 
omitted if you want a smaller and stealthier project.
The source code is written in CodeVision C for 
the AVR, and is simple enough to be easily ported 
to just about any microcontroller with an internal 
memory to store the incoming signals. One kilobyte 
(K) of memory will store approximately 3 button 
presses, and a 4 K of memory will store about 
16 button presses. Open the source code in your 
favorite IDE and we will go through it one section 
at a time.
Having a very basic schematic and using a 
microcontroller programmed in C allows the use 
of just about any microcontroller with a bit of 
internal SRAM and a few input/output (IO) lines 
(Figure 18-6). Only ﬁve IO lines are needed for the 
basic version: a digital input for the RC5 decoder, 
an output for the infrared LED, an output for the 
visible indicator LED, and two pushbutton inputs. 
The output to the infrared LED is ampliﬁed though 
an NPN transistor to offer a bit more range, but it 
will also work if you just push the LED directly 
with the output pin of the microcontroller through 
a 500-ohm to 1-K resistor. The timing has been 
calculated using an 8-MHz clock source so that 
the ATMega88 that we are using can run from its 
internal oscillator, further reducing the parts count. 
 Figure 18-6  The Remote Control Hijacker Schematic.

256      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// ************************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM = REMOTE CONTROL HIJACKER (C) 2010 LUCIDSCIENCE.COM
// **** TARGET = ATMEGA88P
// **** CLOCK SPEED = 8 MHZ INTERNAL
// ************************************************************************************
#include <mega88p.h>
#include <delay.h>
// ************************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM VARIABLES
// ************************************************************************************
unsigned char RC5[750];
// ************************************************************************************
// **** RECORD FUNCTION
// ***********************************************************************************
void RECORD(){
unsigned int CTR;
unsigned char TMR;
unsigned char REC;
unsigned char DIV;
// STATUS LED ON
PORTD.5 = 1;
REC = 0;
// ERASE STREAM ARRAY
for (CTR = 0; CTR < 750; CTR++) RC5[CTR] = 0;
// WAIT FOR START BITS
while (PIND.1 == 1) {}
// RECORD RC5 PULSE STREAM
for (CTR = 0; CTR < 375; CTR++) {
// RECORD MODULATED PULSE
TMR = 0;
while (PIND.1 == 0) {
// DIVIDE TIME BY 10
for (DIV = 0; DIV < 10; DIV++) { //$$$
// 40 KHZ DELAY
#asm
ldi r23,66 ;1
DL4:
dec r23 ;1

Project 18  Q  Remote Control Hijacker      257
brne dl4 ;1/2
nop ;1
nop ;1
#endasm
}
TMR++;
}
// STORE TIME VALUE
RC5[CTR] = TMR;
// INCREMENT COUNTER
CTR++;
// RECORD UNMODULATED PULSE
TMR = 0;
while (PIND.1 == 1) {
// DIVIDE TIME BY 10
for (DIV = 0; DIV < 10; DIV++) { //$$$
// 40 KHZ DELAY
#asm
ldi r23,66 ;1
DL5:
dec r23 ;1
brne dl5 ;1/2
nop ;1
nop ;1
#endasm
}
TMR++;
}
// STORE TIME VALUE
RC5[CTR] = TMR;
// STATUS LED FLASH
REC++;
if (REC == 40) REC = 0;
if (REC == 0 ) PORTD.5 = 1;
if (REC == 20 ) PORTD.5 = 0;
}
// STATUS LED OFF
PORTD.5 = 0;
// WAIT FOR BUTTON RELEASE
while (PIND.2 == 0){}
delay_ms(500);
}

258      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** PLAYBACK FUNCTION
// ***********************************************************************************
void PLAYBACK(){
unsigned int CTR;
unsigned char TMR;
unsigned char DIV;
// STATUS LED ON
PORTD.5 = 1;
// PLAYBACK RC5 PULSE STREAM
for (CTR = 0; CTR < 375; CTR++) {
// SEND 40KHZ MODULATION
TMR = RC5[CTR];
while (TMR > 0) {
// DIVIDE TIME BY 10
for (DIV = 0; DIV < 10; DIV++) {
// 40 KHZ MODULATION CYCLE
PORTD.0 = 1;
#asm
ldi r23,33 ;1
DL1:
dec r23 ;1
brne dl1 ;1/2
nop ;1
#endasm
PORTD.0 = 0;
#asm
ldi r23,33 ;1
DL2:
dec r23 ;1
brne dl2 ;1/2
nop ;1
#endasm
}
TMR--;
}
// INCREMENT COUNTER
CTR++;
// SEND NO MODULATION
TMR = RC5[CTR];
while (TMR > 0) {

Project 18  Q  Remote Control Hijacker      259
// DIVIDE TIME BY 10
for (DIV = 0; DIV < 10; DIV++) { //$$$
// NO MODULATION CYCLE
#asm
ldi r23,66 ;1
DL3:
dec r23 ;1
brne dl3 ;1/2
nop ;1
nop ;1
#endasm
}
TMR--;
}
}
// STATUS LED OFF
PORTD.5 = 0;
// REPEAT DELAY
delay_ms(100);
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** IO PORT SETUP
// ***********************************************************************************
void main(void)
{
DDRD.0 = 1; // IR LED OUTPUT
DDRD.1 = 0; // IR SENSOR INPUT
DDRD.2 = 0; // RECORD BUTTON INPUT
DDRD.3 = 0; // PLAYBACK BUTTON INPUT
DDRD.4 = 0; // MODE SWITCH INPUT (NOT USED)
DDRD.5 = 1; // STATUS LED OUTPUT
// ENABLE INPUT PULLUPS
PORTD.1 = 1;
PORTD.2 = 1;
PORTD.3 = 1;
PORTD.4 = 1;
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MAIN PROGRAM LOOP
// ***********************************************************************************
while (1)
{

260      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// CHECK RECORD AND PLAYBACK BUTTONS
if (PIND.2 == 0) RECORD();
if (PIND.3 == 0) PLAYBACK();
// END OF MAIN LOOP
};
}
Under “program variables,” a large 8-bit array 
is created that will store all of the pulse duration 
times into the internal memory. The line “unsigned 
char RC5[750];” sets the largest possible array for 
the microcontroller, which is based on the amount 
of internal SRAM, the compiler needs, and the 
stack. In our case, we have 750 bytes available in 
the 1024 bytes of the ATMega88 available. You will 
have to mess around with this number if you are 
using a different microcontroller, making use of all 
of the free internal memory space.
The “record function” is called when the record 
button is pressed, and it takes care of measuring 
the time between received pulses from the infrared 
decoder module. On entering the routine, the status 
LED is turned on to alert the user that the record 
function is armed. The entire array is then erased. 
To avoid false recording, the routine ﬁrst waits for 
a start pulse from the remote control, sitting in a 
loop until one is received. Remember that the pulse 
stream from the decoder module is stripped of 
all 40-KHz modulation, leaving only the inverted 
pulses, so this is what will be recorded as a timed 
value into the storage array.
Once a pulse stream begins, the recording 
routine then resets a counter and stays in a time-
controlled loop, incrementing the counter until the 
pulse changes polarity. The resulting time is the 
length of the ﬁrst negative-going pulse (modulated 
pulse), which is then stored into the array. The 
following timed loop does much the same, but is 
now recording what will be the duration of the high 
pulse (none-modulated pulse). An inline assembly 
routine is used to mimic the exact timing of the 
40-KHz cycle since this will be needed for the 
playback mode later on.
This recording of low- and high-pulse times 
continues until the entire array is full, ﬂashing 
the status LED so that the user can see that valid 
pulses are being received and stored into the array. 
To avoid wrapping the memory, the record routine 
does not exit until the user has let go of the record 
button. The control is the returned to the main loop, 
which just sits around waiting for buttons to be 
pressed.
The “playback function” is much like the record 
function except that instead of recording pulse 
times to the array, it reads them in series and sends 
back the missing 40-KHz modulation during the 
low pulses, recreating the signal that was originally 
coming into the remote control decoder module. 
The status LED is turned on during playback to 
show the user that the unit is transmitting, and 
continues to read the array contents and send the 
signal until the end of the array. To create a stable 
40-KHz modulation cycle, an inline assembly 
routine is used again during the low-pulse part of 
the routine. At the end of the playback routine, 
the status LED is turned back off, and the control 
returns to the main loop to wait for another button 
press.
“IO port setup” is easily adjusted to suit your 
microcontroller or board layout, and the pull-up 
resistors are enabled for the switches so they are 
active low. In the “main program loop,” the routine 
just sits in a tight loop waiting for either the record 
or playback button to be pressed so it can call the 
corresponding routine.

Project 18  Q  Remote Control Hijacker      261
Notice that the infrared input module and output 
LED are facing the same direction (Figure 18-8). 
This is done so that you always know which side 
of your project should face the TV when trying to 
be sneaky. Since the infrared module is extremely 
sensitive to the RC pulses, it does not need to 
actually face the remote control during recording. 
Infrared pulses reﬂected from walls and other 
objects will be strong enough to allow the record 
circuit to function, but the infrared output needs 
to be at least pointing in the general direction of 
the appliance to be hijacked. When you are testing 
the breadboard circuit, notice how sensitive the 
infrared input module is, even working with your 
ﬁnger covering the input.
Once you have your project on the breadboard 
with the program running in the microcontroller, 
place the infrared section close to the TV so that the 
output from the infrared LED is fed almost directly 
into the sensor on the TV or appliance. The infrared 
(IR) input is often hidden behind a dark-black 
round or square lens near the base of the unit. With 
the TV on, press the record button on the hijacker 
and then use the remote control to operate some 
obvious function like volume or power. As soon as 
the TV begins to respond, the visible LED on the 
hijacker should start to ﬂicker, showing you that 
pulses are being recognized, recoded, and stored 
into the internal memory.
This source code was made as minimal and as 
easy to understand as possible, so there is plenty 
of room for improvement and modiﬁcation. Much 
better use of the array could be made by ﬁrst 
timing the actual start bits so that pulses could be 
stored as single bits (0:off 1:on) instead of time 
values. This would allow many more button presses 
to be recorded into the memory, even on small 
microcontrollers. This type of efﬁcient pulse decoder 
would either have to take advantage of interrupts or 
be done in assembly to achieve maximum accuracy. 
We wanted this to be a simple project, so we will 
leave you to make the improvements!
It’s always a good idea to ﬁrst build your 
projects on a solderless breadboard so that 
modiﬁcations or debugging is easy (Figure 18-7).
This project lends itself well to further 
improvement, since only a small portion of the 
program memory and IO space is used. You will 
also want to test the range, and consider increasing 
the pulse current to the LED for longer range or 
simply removing the driver transistor altogether for 
one room operation. Also shown in the breadboard 
is the 7805 regulator to allow operation from a 9-V 
battery, although we used one that was much too 
large only because that’s what we found in our junk 
bin. You could probably run the system from 3 V as 
well if your microcontroller supports it, allowing 
the use of a tiny 3-V button cell for a highly 
reduced footprint.
 Figure 18-7   The remote control hijacker on a 
breadboard.
 Figure 18-8   The infrared input module and 
output LED.

262      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
stream is sent back to the TV, which will respond 
to the signal just as it did when you used the actual 
remote control. If your TV fails to respond, check 
the output at the infrared LED using a scope or 
with a piezo buzzer to verify that pulses are being 
sent. If you hear pulses but the TV fails to respond, 
compare the time base or sound of the pulses 
coming in to those coming out to ensure that it 
is not a clocking or timing problem. If you are 
modifying this code to work at another frequency, 
then you will have to alter the timing in the 
recording loop.
If you keep holding down the playback button, 
the pulses will continue to loop, which is good 
when hijacking commands like volume, as you can 
keep cranking up or lowering the volume by simply 
holding down the playback button. When you want 
to drive your remote-control-wielding pals crazy, 
adjusting the volume is a good method as they will 
never be able to regain control with you secretly 
working the remote hijacker. The on and off 
command is also a good one to prerecord ahead of 
time as it can  be used to turn on or shut off the TV 
at any time, just like that fun “TV-B-Gone” device.
Once you have veriﬁed the operation of the 
solderless breadboard prototype, it will need to 
move to a more permanent home on a circuit 
board or perforated board (Figure 18-11). There 
are many options to create a stealthy installation, 
ranging from small and unnoticeable to hidden in 
plain sight. If you are good with a soldering iron, 
The indicator LED will stay solid as soon as the 
record button is pressed, but will ﬂash as pulses 
are received to show you that it is working. Once 
the SRAM inside the microcontroller is ﬁlled, the 
LED will stop ﬂashing, indicating that recording 
is now completed. If the LED fails to ﬂash, then 
either the wiring is wrong, or your IR module is not 
sending out pulses properly (see Figure 18-9). You 
can either probe the output pin with an oscilloscope 
to verify pulses are being sent, or just drop a piezo 
buzzer on the output to listen for the blip-blip-blip
sound from the output of the sensor.
Once you have recorded a button press, aim 
the infrared LED toward your TV and then press 
the playback button (Figure 18-10). The visible 
LED will light for a moment as the RC5 pulse 
 Figure 18-9   Initial testing of the prototype 
project (record).
 Figure 18-10   Initial testing of the prototype 
project (playback).
 Figure 18-11   Completed prototype ready for a 
permanent installation.

Project 18  Q  Remote Control Hijacker      263
If your components are new, then the leads will 
be long enough so that you can simply bend them 
around on the underside of the perf board to create 
your traces (Figure 18-14). We also bent the four 
corner socket pins so that it would be held securely 
to the perf board. If you consider your component 
layout ahead of time, you will be able to create the 
connections with minimal wiring, using the leads 
as traces.
Since ground and power connections will make 
up the bulk of the wiring, they are all done ﬁrst 
using color-coded wires (red for VCC and green for 
ground). If there are any mistakes, they will likely 
be made in these wiring paths, so it makes sense to 
do them ﬁrst so that the wiring can be rechecked 
before applying power (Figure 18-15).  Don’t 
forget to tie down the microcontroller reset pin as 
well or your system may behave erratically.
you could try a surface-mount circuit board using a 
small pin microcontroller package and then power 
the unit from a coin battery, making a ﬁnal product 
no larger than a pop lid. We opted for the hidden-
in-plain sight version using a pop can, as there is 
nothing suspicions about holding a can while you 
are sitting there in front of the TV. 
The easiest method to take a small component 
count project off the solderless breadboard is with 
a bit of perforated board (Figure 18-12). The most 
basic perf board is just a wafer with holes, but there 
are also protoboards available with copper pads and 
even interconnected strips just like the breadboard. 
Having only nine parts makes it easy to use any 
method of installation, so we opted for a bit of 
perfboard. Also shown is a pair of smaller sockets 
connected together to make one large enough for 
the 28-pin AVR. We did not want to wait around for 
days to order a new socket, and we always mount 
microcontrollers in sockets in case we need to 
remove them for reprogramming or use in another 
project later on.
Depending upon your installation, the perfboard 
could be square or long to allow for mounting into 
an item such as a marker case along with a few 
coin batteries. We decided to make the board only 
as wide as the AVR socket and then as long as 
needed to install the other few components. If we 
had had a small regulator, the board would be about 
half an inch shorter, but we usually work with what 
we can salvage at the time (Figure 18-13).
 Figure 18-12   Perforated board is good for 
small component count projects.
 Figure 18-13   Laying out the parts to create 
the smallest board.
 Figure 18-14   The pins are bent to form traces 
and hold the components.

264      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
What is less suspicions than sitting by the TV 
with a can of pop? We ﬁgured that the installation 
would be perfect as there is plenty of room for the 
board and battery and all of the switches could be 
operated away from our victims by holding the can 
strategically to conceal its true nature. Also, since 
the infrared signals reﬂect off of walls, the sensor 
and infrared LED could also be hidden from those 
in the room by aiming it away from view. Using 
a pair of scissors, we popped the necessary holes 
and then carefully turned the blade until they were 
the correct size for each external component (see 
Figure 18-18).
The underside of the can is also cut open to 
allow the insertion of the battery and circuit board 
There are quite a few connections that need to 
be made off of the main circuit such as the infrared 
module, infrared LED, two switches, visible 
LED, and battery, so there will be a mess of wires 
coming from the small board (Figure 18-16).  If 
you already know what kind of enclosure you are 
going to use, then many of the external parts could 
be mounted right on the perf board, but we wanted 
ﬂexibility in our ﬁnal enclosure so we opted to 
place all of the parts at the end of the wiring.
We added 10-inch (in) long wiring to all of the 
external components and switches so that we could 
ﬁrst mount them in our enclosure (pop can) and 
then complete the wiring to the circuit board while
working outside of the enclosure (Figure 18-17).
It always helps to use some kind of color 
coordination so you know which pin is ground, 
VCC, or output for each external component.
  Figure 18-15   Starting the wiring with ground 
and power connections.
  Figure 18-16   The completed perfboard is a 
mess of wiring.
  Figure 18-17   Wiring all of the external 
components and switches.
  Figure 18-18   Punching holes in the pop can 
for the external components.

Project 18  Q  Remote Control Hijacker      265
The external components are now wired to 
the circuit board after being stalled into the can 
(Figure 18-21). It is much easier to test and 
trouble-shoot the installation with the circuit board 
hanging out of the can, which is why the wires to 
the external components were made longer than 
necessary. This also makes future updates to the 
microcontroller ﬁrmware easier as well.
To ensure that there are no short circuits, all of 
the components are held inside of the can using a bit 
of double-sided tape (Figure 18-22). The tape keeps 
parts from bouncing around, yet allows the battery 
to be pulled free if it ever needs to be replaced. The 
novelty of your evil prank will probably wear out 
long before the new 9-V alkaline ever will.
after the switches and infrared components have 
been installed (Figure 18-19). To feed the switches 
into the holes, they are guided in place by holding 
onto the wires.
Once we had the switches installed, we found 
the best placement for the infrared components 
so that when we were holding the can with the 
switches hidden from the person next to us, the 
infrared components would have a clear line of 
sight to the front of the room where the TV was 
located (Figure 18-20).
  Figure 18-19   Making an opening for the 
battery and circuit board.
  Figure 18-20   Installation of the infrared 
components.
 Figure 18-21
Installing the circuit board after 
the wiring is completed.
 Figure 18-22   Securing all of the internals into 
the can.

266      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
add a timer mode that would just count down for 
a minute or two and then issue the last recorded 
command. This way you could be out of the room 
and just listen to the cursing from a distance, 
taking away all suspicion from you or your evil 
contraption! (See Figure 18-25.) Another idea for 
modiﬁcation is to just send random pulses on a 
button press to effectively jam the remote control 
so that the user can’t do anything at all after you 
mess with the TV or VCR. Again, there is plenty 
of room for modiﬁcation of the remote control 
hijacker, so feel free to let your evil mind wander 
and send us a few photos of your completed work 
for our gallery!
The completed remote control hijacker is 
now ready to use, and with this stealthy hidden 
installation, it can be used in plain sight without 
detection (Figure 18-23). Of course, if your buddies 
are used to your evil prankster ways, then you might 
be found out sooner or later, but no doubt you will 
have some good fun before anyone suspects that your 
refreshment is stealing the invisible signals from 
the remote control right out of the air! If you really 
want to make it look good, open a real can in front of 
your unsuspecting victim and then do a switch when 
they are not looking so that any suspicion will not be 
towards the can you are now holding.
Give your new toy a few test runs so you can 
get used to using the controls in a nonsuspect 
manner before unleashing your chaos onto the 
world (Figure 18-24). It may even work best if you 
get a hold of the remote beforehand and record the 
power button or mute button so you can enter the 
room already drinking your favorite refreshment 
and then just start hijacking the TV without 
suspicion. Once your victim begins to ﬁddle with 
the remote in frustration, you can then intercept 
new commands just to mess with them even more 
soon after! 
You might have noticed that in our schematic 
there is an extra IO pin connected to a switch that 
is not used in the source code. Our intent was to 
 Figure 18-23   The completed remote control 
hijacker.
 Figure 18-24   The controls are conveniently 
mounted for hidden operation.
 Figure 18-25   Playing back the mute command 
to the TV after a successful 
intercept.

P A R T  S I X
Personal Protection

This page intentionally left blank 

269
P R O J E C T  1 9
Camera Flash Taser
THIS PROJECT SHOWS you how to turn 1.5 volts (V) 
into almost 400 V, creating a hand-held device 
capable of charging high-voltage capacitors or 
delivering a low-current high-voltage shock. Using 
only the tiny circuit board from a cheap disposable 
camera, you can step up the voltage from a single 
AA battery to a level that is three times higher than 
the voltage coming out of your AC wall outlet! Of 
course, the output current is extremely low, but 
make no mistake—the high-voltage output from 
this handheld taser/zapper is painful enough to 
make anyone jump up to the ceiling. 
to make you afraid to test the device on yourself 
more than once!
Any type of disposable camera that has a built-in 
ﬂash will work for this project as they are all based 
on the same type of charged-capacitor operation 
(Figure 19-1). A quality camera or ﬂash unit will 
not be the best choice though as they have a lot 
more circuitry, unlike the disposable camera, which 
is made as simple as possible to keep the costs of 
manufacture low. A new or used camera will be ﬁne, 
but if the camera has taken many ﬂashes, you will 
probably need a new alkaline AA battery to get the 
full potential out of the high-voltage charging circuit.
If you have actual photos that you intend to keep 
then let the store remove the ﬁlm canister and then 
ask for the camera body back. Opening the camera 
in the following steps will destroy the ﬁlm, if it is 
still inside the camera. If you don’t want to destroy 
269
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 Camera: Any disposable camera with a 
built-in ﬂash
Q 
 Battery: Single 1.5-V AA or dual 3-V AA 
pack
Q 
 Terminals: 2- to 4-in long 1/8-in diameter 
bolts
Q 
 Enclosure: Must be large enough for battery, 
PCB and switches 
This circuit can also be used to make a small 
ﬂorescent light inverter, front-end charger for 
a Marx generator, or any other device needing 
several hundred volts of high-frequency power. 
Voltages over 1000 V can also be generated from 
this circuit by increasing the DC power supply 
or by changing the single transistor to one that 
can handle a higher current. Of course, the circuit 
shown here will deliver more than enough voltage 
 Figure 19-0   Build the disposable camera 
ﬂash taser.

270      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
will never forget, so don’t worry about that evil 
high-voltage capacitor lurking inside as you peel 
away the cover. During the next few steps, you may 
want to consider wearing gloves if you have never 
experienced a 400-V shock or have some fear of 
electrical jolts.
Let us warn you before you precede that there 
is a real nasty surprise waiting for you under 
that innocent-looking plastic shell in the form 
of a 360-V capacitor that can hold a charge for 
weeks or even months since the last time the ﬂash 
was charged. The voltage and amperage from 
the capacitor can be a real risk if you somehow 
managed to get your hands across both small 
terminals while it was fully charged, so work 
carefully or wear gloves until the capacitor is 
removed and discharged. We are not using the 
capacitor in the project, so the risk will be removed 
in the next few steps.
A small ﬂat-head screwdriver is used to pry 
open the camera shell by placing the head into the 
plastic clips to snap them apart (Figure 19-3). Work 
carefully and try not to dig around in the circuit 
board area with the screwdriver blade as you may 
damage the circuit or scare yourself out of your 
chair if you sort out a charged capacitor. The end of 
a small screwdriver will also get mangled if it has 
to endure a full capacitor blast, so don’t use your 
good tools as a discharging device! Remove the 
a new disposable camera for this project, then ask 
your local camera shop if they would give you a 
few used camera shells as they normally throw 
them out. Sometimes, they will hand over an entire 
bag of camera shells for you to use in your high-
voltage experiments, and sometimes they will look 
at you like you are some kind of lunatic. Hey, there 
is always the dumpster out back as well for the 
hard-core junk collector!
Many of the disposable cameras are the exact 
same under the paper or plastic branding wrapper, 
so just cut or rip it away to expose the main plastic 
camera shell body (Figure 19-2). At this point, 
you are still safe from an accidental shock you 
  Figure 19-1   You will need a typical 
disposable camera with a ﬂash.
 Figure 19-2   Remove the plastic or paper 
branding cover.
 Figure 19-3   The camera shell will pry open 
into two halves.

Project 19  Q  Camera Flash Taser      271
charge that may be lurking in that ﬂash capacitor. 
If you like to make loud sparks, then charge up the 
ﬂash ﬁrst, but don’t use a good screwdriver to blow 
the charge! A good rule to follow when dealing 
with high voltages is to keep one hand away from 
the danger zone so any shock you may accidentally 
incur will be across your hand, not your entire 
body. A shock to your ﬁnger from the charged ﬂash 
capacitor will feel like a heat burn as compared to 
a zinging blast from the charger circuit since the 
capacitor is pure direct current (DC). You might 
also want to wear ear plugs. 
It is recommended that you discharge the ﬂash 
capacitor before lifting out the circuit board. We 
have shorted the fully charged capacitor while the 
circuit board is exposed so that it can be clearly 
seen where the high-voltage terminals are located 
and what happens to the tip of a small screwdriver 
(Figure 19-5). Okay, we admit, we enjoy making 
loud, angry sparks and have spent a good part of 
the day charging up the capacitor to fry various 
conductive objects with it! A single charge could 
blow several holes in a tinfoil sheet or create two 
small craters in the surface of a coin. After our ears 
stopped ringing from the blasts (ear plugs would 
have been a good idea), it was back to the cause.
Once the ﬂash capacitor has been discharged, 
pull out the circuit board from the camera shell. 
top half of the cover, and set the lower half on your 
bench to inspect the newly exposed circuit board.
This is where the real fun begins! After you 
have exposed the small circuit board and camera 
mechanics, look for the photo ﬂash capacitor and 
locate the two output terminals. The ﬂash capacitor 
will be about the length of an AA battery and about 
the same width, usually with a black covering 
(Figure 19-4). There will be two leads that exit the 
ﬂash capacitor and enter the circuit board. This 
is the high-voltage input and output for the ﬂash 
charging circuit and the place we will be adding 
our high-voltage leads later.
Make no mistake, the ﬂash capacitor can carry 
a 350- to 400-V charge for months after the last 
use, and there is enough power stored there to 
become a health hazard if you found a way to get 
your hands across both terminals. Most likely, the 
only risk will be a bruised elbow after you jump 
from shocking your ﬁnger, but don’t treat any fully 
charged capacity lightly, as you are dealing with 
more than enough power to be dangerous. The 
shock from the charging circuit is just as painful, 
but because it carries such low amperage, it is not 
a risk like the capacitor, which takes time to charge 
and can store real energy.
Now that you have been warned, it is time to 
drop a screwdriver or some metal object across 
the high-voltage terminals to remove any residual 
 Figure 19-4   Identify the capacitor and its two 
output terminals.
 Figure 19-5   Another screwdriver tip is 
sacriﬁced for the cause!

272      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
just replace the capacitor with your high-voltage 
output wires and then solder to the charge switch 
in order to use the circuit board for your taser 
project. If you like to reverse-engineer, then you 
can actually reduce the circuit down to the size of a 
small marble as will be shown later on. A 
400-V shock from a device the size of a marker top 
is always a great demonstration of one’s hardware 
hacking skills to an unsuspecting buddy!
To engage the high-voltage circuit, the camera 
had a “charge” or “ﬂash” button on the front 
(Figure 19-7). This will be seen as two solder or 
copper pads on the underside of the circuit board. 
This is where you will solder the wires that lead to 
your trigger switch, as this will turn in the high-
voltage inverter. The other points of interest are the 
two capacitor high-voltage points, as well as the 
battery connection points.
To remove the ﬂash capacitor from the circuit 
board, unsolder the two points and then pull out 
the two high-voltage leads (Figure 19-8). But, 
before doing so, identify the polarity of each point 
in case you want to use your completed project to 
charge up high-voltage capacitors. The negative 
side of the capacitor case is clearly marked by the 
white-and-black dashed stripe. Use a marker to 
mark the polarity on the small circuit board so you 
can identify the polarity later on. If you attempt to 
charge the capacitor in reverse, it may damage the 
driver transistor or burn out the inverter coil.
It will either lift right out, or there will be a few 
plastic clips that need to be pushed in order to 
release the board. The camera ﬂash circuit board is 
amazingly simple considering what it does, and the 
entire high-voltage circuit can be further narrowed 
down to only four components, if you want to dig 
in and reverse-engineer the circuit. The charging 
circuit is a simple voltage inverter.
The important parts of the high-voltage 
generator circuit are as follows: Q1 is a high 
gain NPN power transistor (see Figure 19-6). 
Some typical part numbers of this transistor are; 
2SD965, 2SD1960, 2SD601A, 2SD879, FXT617
or XN4601. T1 is a tiny step up transformer with 
a primary winding count of 5 or 6 turns and a 
secondary winding count of 1500 to 1800 turns 
with a ﬂyback tap at 15 to 20 turns. One possible 
part number for this transformer would be T-14-013 
(Tokyo Coil). R1 is a resistor of some varying 
value that controls the feedback from the ﬂyback 
tap on the transformer, creating a high-frequency 
oscillator circuit. This value can be changed to 
create different frequencies as well. D1 is a power 
diode that converts the high-voltage AC into 
chopped DC to charge the capacitor. Any diode 
capable of 400 V or more will work.
You will probably want to leave the camera 
ﬂash circuit unmodiﬁed with the exception of the 
removal of the high-voltage capacitor. It is easy to 
 Figure 19-6   Identifying the important parts of 
the circuit board.
 Figure 19-7   Identifying the ﬂash charging 
switch.

Project 19  Q  Camera Flash Taser      273
We have had plenty of shocks from these things, 
and they do burn a little on the ﬁngers, but across 
both hands it is a painful experience that you will 
never want to repeat, so keep one hand to your 
side when dealing with high voltages. There isn’t 
enough energy to cause any metal shrapnel when 
blasting things, but the sound is certainly loud 
enough to make your ears ring. Avoid shorting 
into an inductive load as well or you may end up 
making a high-energy radio frequency (HERF) 
weapon (Yes, a good idea for a future project here).
When fully charged, the ﬂash capacitor will 
easily blow two holes through some tinfoil with a 
load crack and an angry spark (Figure 19-10). We 
were able to blow holes through the foil three times 
on a single charge, which is a good reminder that 
you should double- or triple-check your capacitors 
after a discharge to ensure that they are not holding 
a surprise for you later. Tiny wires were also turned 
into instant vapor if dropped across the charged 
capacitor terminals. Salt water would sizzle, 
steel wool would make huge sparks, and various 
semiconductors would pop or explode violently, 
sending silicon shrapnel in all directions. We would 
be lying if we claimed that blowing stuff up in the 
lab wasn’t a damn fun time waster!
The charged photo ﬂash capacitor had enough 
juice to actually spot weld small bits of metal together 
and make decent craters in the surface of many metal 
Before moving on to the actual taser project 
build, we had to take some more time to mess 
around with the fully charged 360-V ﬂash capacitor 
as it was much fun blowing holes in things! (See 
Figure 19-9.) It was easy to charge the capacitor 
by soldering a temporary wire across the “charge” 
switch pads and then holding the capacitor in place 
to allow it to charge. The faint whizzing sound 
would slowly climb in frequency until the charge 
light-emitting diode (LED) came on, indicating that 
there were at least 250 V now in the ﬂash capacitor. 
To verify this, we used our multimeter set on 
the 1000 VDC setting, which showed anywhere 
between 250 and 350 V, depending on charge time 
and battery condition.
Handle the fully charged capacitor as if you 
were holding a small stick of unstable dynamite! 
 Figure 19-8  Removal of the ﬂash capacitor. 
 Figure 19-9   The little capacitor has more 
voltage than your wall outlet!
 Figure 19-10   Tinfoil is no match for the 
capacitor’s 360-angry volts (V).

274      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
various mechanical bits that might be of some use, 
and a true inventor can never have enough junk to 
mess around with. Also, test the battery to make 
sure it has at least 1.5 V left after being used in 
the camera. A fresh alkaline battery will run your 
completed taser for a very long time.
Out of the 12 or more semiconductors on 
the small camera circuit board, you only need 
the 5 components that make up the high-voltage 
inverter as shown in the schematic (Figure 19-13). 
There are many variations of this circuit, but they 
are all based on the same ﬂyback transformer 
oscillator circuit. The value of R1 can actually be 
experimented with to obtain a much more painful 
shock by lowering the output frequency unto 
the 100 to 200 Hertz (Hz) range. The charging 
frequency is much higher in the nonmodiﬁed 
circuit in order to charge the capacitor quicker. 
If you just plan on putting the circuit board in 
a box as it is, then the schematic is not of much 
importance, as the system will work just ﬁne by 
simply soldering a pair of wires to the charge 
switch to turn it on and then a pair of wires where 
surfaces such as a quarter (Figure 19-11). No 
doubt, this dead shorting of the charged capacitor is 
probably not good for it, but when you can get them 
for free it is not such an issue. We have an entire bag 
full of disposable cameras after asking a few of the 
developing places if we could have them. For some 
serious sparks, 10 charged capacitors in series (like 
a Marx generator) will offer an output of 3600 V, 
but at that power level, you really better know what 
you are doing! Okay, enough destruction…it’s time 
to get back on track!
After removing the capacitor from the circuit 
board, collect all of the other goodies from 
the camera body for use in some later project 
(Figure 19-12). There are a few lenses, springs, and 
 Figure 19-11   Spot welding the surface of a 
quarter.
 Figure 19-12   Salvaging all of the parts in the 
disposable camera.
Flash capacitor
Charge
S1
D1
Q1
T1
R1
220 
C1

 Figure 19-13   The high-voltage inverter 
schematic.

Project 19  Q  Camera Flash Taser      275
so that we could charge up capacitors when we felt 
like making more sparks!
Once you have ﬁgured out which components 
make up the high-voltage inverter circuit, you can 
unsolder the other semiconductors for use in some 
other project (Figure 19-16). There will be a few 
resistors, another transformer, a ﬂash tube, and an 
indicator LED or neon bulb left over.
To use the small high-voltage circuit board 
in your taser project, it will need to have wiring 
added for a battery pack, trigger switch, and the 
high-voltage output probes (Figure 19-17). If you 
know your circuit, then you only need one common 
the ﬂash capacitor used to live to get access to the 
high-voltage output. We decided to trace our board 
and reduce it to the minimal needed parts just to 
learn about the inverter circuit.
The small circuit board is very easy to reverse-
engineer since it is a fairly simple circuit with 
few semiconductors. You won’t need any of the 
ﬂash tube circuitry, which includes another small 
transformer, a few resistors, and a capacitor, and 
you won’t need the charge indicator LED and its 
voltage dropping resistor. By holding the circuit 
board up to a bright light, you can easily see the 
traces under each component and follow the path 
through the inverter section (Figure 19-14). If you 
are removing components, check the high-voltage 
output after each change in case you pull a needed 
part from the inverter circuit. We call this method 
brute force hardware hacking.
The absolute minimal schematic has only ﬁve 
semiconductors: the transistor, transformer, resistor, 
diode, and capacitor, although the capacitor is 
not used in the taser project (Figure 19-15). The 
high-voltage ﬂash capacitor is removed, and the 
outputs are fed to the “probes” on the outside of 
the taser case. If you really wanted a minimal unit, 
the diode can also be removed, leaving on the 
three components that make up the high-voltage 
inverter. With a very small battery, the shocker 
could actually ﬁt into a matchbox. We left the diode 
 Figure 19-14   Hold the circuit board up to a 
light to see the traces.
 Figure 19-15   The absolute basic high-voltage 
schematic.
 Figure 19-16   Removing any components that 
are not needed.

276      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
Depending on the transformer and battery 
quality, the voltage should register between 250 
and 350 V using a multimeter set at the 1000 VDC 
scale (Figure 19-19). An alkaline battery must 
be used as well since a dry cell battery will not 
have enough available current to drive the inverter 
properly when the high-voltage probes are in 
contact with a semiconductive surface such as 
your unsuspecting friend’s hand. If you want to 
experiment with even more output voltage, try a 
pair of batteries to run the high-voltage generator 
from 3 V instead of 1.5 V. At 3 V, we registered 
over 600 V on our meter, and the frequency was 
much higher.
Be careful when upping the voltage from 1.5 V 
as you may actually blow the transistor or the small 
ﬂyback transformer. We have not hurt one using 
3 V, but some of the circuits we tested did not 
survive a 9-V battery. The ones that did spit out a 
crazy 1500 V, more than 10 times the voltage that 
comes out of the wall outlet! Needless to say, those 
units hurt like crazy, could actually light wet paper 
on ﬁre, and cause tiny burns on your ﬁngers. Don’t 
say we didn’t warn you!
When making a shocking device, remember that 
old golden rule: “Don’t do on to others something 
you are too afraid to do unto yourself!” Seriously, 
ground wire and the positive battery, high voltage, 
and switch wires, but it is probably just as easy to 
solder pairs of wires to the three connections points 
as we have done. Remember to mark the polarity 
of the battery, as well as the high-voltage output 
points if you plan to charge up capacitors using the 
output probes later on.
There isn’t much left of the camera circuit board 
after removing the unnecessary components from 
the high-voltage section. With the switch, battery, 
and probe wires installed on the board, you can 
now test the circuit to ensure that it is working 
properly, outputting between 250 and 400 V from a 
single 1.5-V battery (Figure 19-18). 
 Figure 19-17   Adding the needed wiring to the 
circuit board.
 Figure 19-19   The typical output will be 
around 350 V from a battery.
 Figure 19-18   The minimal high-voltage 
generator ready to use.

Project 19  Q  Camera Flash Taser      277
grip enclosure will be shown later that can be 
made from a standard PVC box and some bicycle 
handlebar tubing.
If you have been an evil genius for some time, 
then it is going to be difﬁcult to ﬁnd a buddy who 
will be gullible enough to let you press some kind 
of black box with probes up to his/her body and 
hit the trigger. Hey, they probably know you by 
now! Of course, if the device is not much larger 
than a matchbox or ﬁts inside a large marker, 
then most people will not assume that it could 
generate any kind of real voltage, so reducing the 
circuit to the bare minimum may increase your 
chances of getting one over on your lab buddies 
(Figure 19-22).
you need to zap yourself a few times to not only 
test your unit, but to understand the wrath you 
plan to unleash on your unsuspecting buddies 
(Figure 19-20). Go ahead and take a good grip on 
the high-voltage wires with your ﬁngers and press 
down on that trigger. Go ahead, we will wait for 
you to return…
So? How did 350 V feel as it blasted through 
your knuckles? Yes, sir, it’s like 100,000 carpet 
shocks in a row, and now your ﬁnger will tingle 
for the rest of the day. If you are really brave, 
or have some unnatural tolerance for pain, grab 
a wire in each hand and have someone push the 
trigger so you can feel the full glory of 350 V 
though your body. We guarantee that you will not 
be able to hold on to those wires for more than a 
fraction of a second! Now, do you “really” want to 
up the voltage and try that with 1500 V? We didn’t 
think so.
We have made many versions of this disposable 
camera taser, with varying voltages and enclosures, 
and it is fun to ﬁnd creative ways to mask the 
device as a joke so that an unsuspecting friend 
will come along and pick it up (Figure 19-21). 
Using a motion switch or a sensitive switch on 
the underside of a curious-looking enclosure can 
make for a really fun gag. Since this project was 
designed to look dangerous, we wanted a hand-
held pistol-type enclosure with a set of ominous-
looking probes sticking out front. A simple pistol 
 Figure 19-20   If you can’t handle the shock, 
then don’t zap your friends!
 Figure 19-21   Several different versions in 
various plastic boxes.
 Figure 19-22   The ultimate stealth zapper 
reduced to the bare minimum.

278      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
grabbed the unit to self-administer a painful shock, 
usually dropping the unit instantly after pressing 
the trigger! Because of this “drop effect,” you 
should consider a rugged construction if the device 
is to be picked up.
A nice pistol-grip enclosure can be made 
using a standard PVC box from the electrical 
department of the hardware store (Figure 19-25). 
These enclosures can withstand much abuse and 
offer a place to mount a handle as well as the 
high-voltage contact probes. There are several 
sizes available, so you can experiment with a 
larger battery pack if higher output voltages are 
wanted. You will also need some kind of trigger 
switch, which will be a normally open (NO) 
pushbutton switch.
Using the transformer as a mounting base, solder 
the transistor, resistor, and diode right to the pins 
to make the ﬁnal high-voltage circuit no larger 
than a marble. This type of installation is called 
“dead bugging” since you are using the legs of each 
component to create a circuit board, and often the 
results look like a bug that has died and turned onto 
its back. Now how many geeks would be afraid of 
something this small? Little do they know, the tiny 
block is capable of pushing out 600-V or more on a 
tiny 3-V camera battery. Seriously.
One possible installation for the miniaturized 
taser circuit is installation into a single AA battery 
ﬂashlight body, replacing the bulb with your high-
voltage probes (Figure 19-23). The probes need 
to be insulated from each other or any conductive 
mounting surfaces, and should be placed as far 
apart as possible for maximum shocking pain. If 
the probes are too close together, then the shock 
will not disturb as many nerves, creating less of an 
effect. The most painful effect is a probe in each 
hand followed by a probe on two different ﬁngers, 
but you already know this from your “self-tests,” 
right?
The tiny ﬂashlight taser system looked so 
innocent that we could often trick our victims 
into zapping themselves just by claiming that this 
was an all-powerful shocker (Figure 19-24). The 
miniaturized unit was so unintimidating that most 
who knew something about electronics promptly 
 Figure 19-23   The reduced circuit can easily ﬁt 
in a small ﬂashlight.
 Figure 19-24   Come on, how much could this 
little thing really hurt?
 Figure 19-25   A PVC wiring box makes a for a 
strong enclosure.

Project 19  Q  Camera Flash Taser      279
A pair of wires soldered to the pistol-grip trigger 
switch will run to the two contact pads on the camera 
circuit board to engage the high-voltage generator 
to start. It may be a bit of a task to get the switch fed 
into the tubing and out through the hole, so solder the 
wires to the switch ﬁrst and then use them as a way to 
guide the switch to the hole opening (Figure 19-28).
A rubber handle-grip is slid over the metal 
tubing and switch to create the completed trigger 
handle (Figure 19-29). Make a hole for the switch 
that is about three times larger than the switch 
button so it will be easier to stretch the rubber grip 
over the switch into the correct position. The tubing 
is then glued into the PVC opening after it has been 
ﬁled to allow a snug ﬁt.
The round opening on the PVC box is just the 
right size to jam in a bit of bicycle handlebar tubing 
or plastic PVC pipe. You can use this tubing to 
make a pistol grip by adding a rubber handle-grip 
and a pushbutton switch (Figure 19-26). A ski pole 
grip should also work nicely. We cut off a small 
length from an old mountain bike handlebar tube 
using a pipe cutter.
A small normally open pushbutton trigger switch 
is inserted into the piece of handlebar tuning, which 
will serve as the pistol grip handle (Figure 19-27). 
The tubing ﬁts snugly into the round opening on 
the PVC box one it has been ﬁled a bit with a round 
ﬁle. Epoxy glue will be used to seal the tubing into 
the PCV box.
 Figure 19-26   Making a pistol grip from some 
bicycle handlebar parts.
 Figure 19-27   Fitting the trigger switch into 
the hand grip tubing.
 Figure 19-28   The pushbutton trigger switch 
installed.
 Figure 19-29   The handle grip is placed over 
the metal tubing.

280      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
For maximum voltage delivery, place the probes 
as far apart from each other as your enclosure 
will allow. The plug that is used to ﬁll the open 
gap is just a bit of broom handle cut and sanded 
to ﬁt the opening.
To connect the bolts or probes to the high-
voltage circuit, just wrap the exposed end of the 
wires around the end of the conductors so that 
there is no slack (Figure 19-32). You can solder the 
connection if you want, but it does not have to be 
perfect as high voltage seems to ﬁnd its way a lot 
better than lower voltage. Another nut and washer 
can also be used to squash the end of the wire onto 
the bold head.
When installing the circuit board and battery 
into the cabinet, ensure that nothing is left to 
Even though the hand-held taser is more of a 
novelty than a self-defense device, ergonomics 
are always important. The position of the trigger 
switch should allow easy operation while your 
hand has a ﬁrm grip on the unit (Figure 19-30). 
You might also want to consider a secondary 
“safety switch” on the box in case you want to 
carry the unit in a bag or your pocket. We can tell 
you from painful personal experience that you 
should never carry a high-voltage device with a 
single trigger switch in your pocket! Keep in mind 
that carrying this device around in public may be 
considered a concealed weapon.
On a real taser gun, an explosive charge ﬁres 
a tethered double pointed dart into the victim’s 
skin, allowing the high voltage to bypass the “skin 
effect” and attack the central nervous system 
directly. Our project simply buzzes the skin with 
a very high-voltage, low-current shock through 
a pair of blunt-end conductors (probes). These 
probes are easily made by fastening a pair of 2- 
or 3-inch-long bolts to the end of the device to 
make contact with your target (Figure 19-31). 
These probes can also be used to connect 
capacitors for charging, as long as you have 
clearly marked the polarity of each probe. 
 Figure 19-30   The trigger is placed in an easy-
to-operate position.
 Figure 19-31   The high-voltage probes are just 
long bolts.
 Figure 19-32   Connecting the high-voltage 
circuit to the output probes.

Project 19  Q  Camera Flash Taser      281
of the probes and let your ﬁngers do a real test if 
you think you have the nerve!
The completed unit looks and performs great 
considering it is built from a throw-away camera 
and a two-dollar PVC box. You won’t be using 
this device to save your hide in an emergency 
situation, but it does a great job of showing off 
your command of the screaming electron to 
fellow hardware hackers! Charging the photo ﬂash 
capacitor and then welding it to a coin is also an 
impressive demonstration of the device and how 
the power from a single 1.5-V battery can be 
converted into a real force to be reckoned with 
(Figure 19-35).
Now that your taser project is completed, it is 
mandatory that you zap yourself a few times before 
unleashing the angry electrons on any of your 
unsuspecting fellow hardware hackers (Figure 19-36). 
Don’t be a wimp, get a serious grip on those two 
probes, and give that trigger a good push. If you 
can take it for even a microsecond, then either you 
are the living dead, or your battery is no good! 
If you think it hurts across the ﬁngers, then we 
dare you to take a probe in each hand and feel the 
lightning!
Here are a few warnings and suggestions now 
that you own a new toy. Never zap an unsuspecting 
person, and never point it at anyone you don’t know 
bounce around, or you may short out your circuit 
(Figure 19-33). A bit of double-sided tape will 
easily hold the circuit board to the cabinet, as well 
as the battery pack. Also, install your battery pack 
so that it is easy to change the battery without 
the need to remove the circuit board. If your unit 
might be dropped to the ﬂoor or ground, adding 
cotton balls around the components can help save 
them from damage.
Before putting on the cover screws, test the 
voltage output. It is always bad luck to assume you 
have made no mistakes before putting the lid on 
any project, as Murphy’s Law will come and give 
you trouble (Figure 19-34). Hook up your high-
voltage meter and check the output, or grab a hold 
 Figure 19-33   Fitting all of the parts into the 
box.
 Figure 19-34   The completed circuit board 
and battery installation.
 Figure 19-35   Here is our completed pistol 
style taser.

282      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
tingling sensation in your knuckles goes away. 
The hand-held taser device is a great educational 
unit that demonstrates how the voltage of a single 
1.5-V battery can be stepped up to almost 400 V 
(Figure 19-37). The taser device can also be used 
to charge high-voltage capacitors or serve as a 
handy power supply to drive various high-voltage 
experiments. By adding a second battery, you can 
push the output well beyond 600 V, and by altering 
the value of the ﬂyback resistor, you can adjust the 
output frequency of the high-voltage oscillator. 
Have fun, and remember to respect the screaming 
electron!
very well. It may be considered a weapon, and 
you could end up in legal troubles or worse. Never 
bring this device to any public place, especially an 
airport, school, or your workplace. Don’t try to use 
this device for personal protection as it will just 
piss off your attacker; it’s not nearly as effective as 
tasers used in law enforcement. Never mention our 
name if you get expelled from school or in trouble 
with The Man due to the misuse of this device! 
This project is designed to help you learn about 
electronics, not commit felonies. 
Well, we hope you had fun building this 
project and that by the end of the night that 
 Figure 19-36   Zap yourself before you zap 
your fellow nerds!
 Figure 19-37   Yes, this is three times the 
voltage available at your AC
outlets!

283
P R O J E C T  2 0
Portable Alarm System
THIS PROJECT DETAILS a simple yet effective 
security system that is perfect for temporarily 
protecting an area or building. This portable 
alarm system functions much the same way 
as a typical hard-wired home security system, 
allowing for a timed entry and deactivation via 
numerical keypad. The alarm system will respond 
to practically any type of sensor input such as a 
motion switch, magnetic door switch, window 
break tape, infrared motions sensor, and any other 
sensor that acts like a simple switch. Because the 
main unit contains all of the electronics, alarm, 
keypad, and battery, the alarm trigger sensor 
can be remotely located, making it difﬁcult to 
disarm the system once it has been activated by 
an intruder.
The goal of this project is to demonstrate how 
to connect a keypad matrix to a microcontroller to 
scan the rows and columns for key presses and to 
create a simple security system that can be used 
as the framework to create your own security 
system, leaving a lot of room for modiﬁcations 
and improvements. Practically any type of matrix 
keypad can be used, and the alarm siren used is a 
common and inexpensive pocket alarm that has 
been modiﬁed to allow switching through a relay. 
The microcontroller used is an 8-bit ATMega88, 
but just about any microcontroller can be used, as 
only a few IO pins are needed. The programming is 
done in C for portability and clarity.
The alarm is activated or deactivated by 
entering a secret code on a 12-digit keypad like 
the one shown in Figure 20-1. This keypad is from 
SparkFun.com, part number COM-08653, but any 
keypad will work as long as you know the pinout. 
You could even make this alarm system with no 
283
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 IC1: ATMEL ATMega88P or similar 
microcontroller
Q 
 Keypad: Sparkfun 12 button keypad or 
similar
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 10 K, R2 = 1 K, R3 = 1 K
Q 
 Transistors: Q1 = 2N3904 or 2N2222A NPN 
Q 
 LEDs: LED 1 = red LED, LED 2 = green LED
Q 
 Diodes: D1 = 1N4001 or similar
Q 
 Relay: Any small 3- to 5-V relay
Q 
 Buzzer: Small 2 wire piezo element
Q 
 Alarm: Battery operated pocket alarm
Q 
 Battery: 3- to 9-V battery or pack
  Figure 20-0   This security system works as 
both a permanent or portable 
alarm.

284      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
In a matrix-connected keypad, there is no 
common ground to all button switches since they 
all share a row or column. To decode a matrix 
keypad, you have to turn on a single column at 
a time and then scan the rows for the current 
button press. By doing this, you basically turn 
the keypad into a commonly-connected row of 
switches momentarily. This may seem like a lot of 
work, but it happens in a few microseconds in the 
microcontroller with just a few lines of program 
code as will be seen later.
The SparkFun keypad has a rounded rectangular 
shape, so mounting it into a box will require some 
fancy cutting to make a snug ﬁt. There are several 
methods that can be used to mount this keypad in a 
box: cut the exact rounded rectangular shape as we 
are going to do, cut a smaller 90 degree rectangle 
so that only the keys are visible, or mount the key 
pad on the top of the box, leaving the PCB header 
exposed. The rounded rectangle opening will 
certainly look most professional if it can be made 
accurately, so that is how we decided to proceed. 
Take the basic length and width measurements 
from the key panel as shown in Figure 20-3. If 
you have the same keypad that we do, then the 
dimensions are 46-millimeters (mm) wide and 
57-mm tall with 4-mm radius corners.
When choosing a project case for the numerical 
keypad, consider the width of the main panel 
circuit board because it has to ﬁt between the edges 
keypad at all and just use the microcontroller as a 
simple time delay to allow arming and disarming 
the system, using the power switch to turn the 
alarm on or off.
Unlike a permanent home security system where 
the keypad is right at the door and the alarm is 
hidden, this system places the keypad and alarm 
in the same box, so the goal is to locate it deep 
inside a building and run a wire to the actual 
trigger sensor. In portable mode, the sensor can be 
afﬁxed to the alarm box, allowing it to be propped 
up against a door or placed in a drawer or even 
a suitcase. Having the alarm, battery, and main 
electronics located in the same box means that this 
particular alarm system design is probably not the 
best solution for a permanent installation, but it 
does work very well as a portable system or when 
you just need temporary security for a building.
Although it may look confusing at ﬁrst glance, 
the wiring diagram shown in Figure 20-2 is 
commonly referred to as a “matrix,” as the button 
switches are made of common row-and-column 
connections. It certainly takes a little more work to 
decode a single button press into a microcontroller 
on a matrix system, but if each key had its own 
wire, then this 12 button keypad would need 12 
input/output (IO) lines on the microcontroller. 
Using a matrix, the keypad now only requires 7 IO 
lines, a signiﬁcant savings.
 Figure 20-1   Arming and disarming the alarm 
is done by entering a code on a 
keypad.
CIRCUIT DIAGRAM
ROW 1
ROW 2
ROW 3
ROW 4
COL 1 COL 2 COL 3
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0
 Figure 20-2   Most keypads are wired as a 
matrix of rows and columns.

Project 20  Q  Portable Alarm System      285
size opening with straight edges. The tool is no 
replacement for a CNC mill, but it does a decent 
job for prototyping. You will have to drill starter 
holes at each corner and then work the notching 
tool along the edge until all four corners have been 
connected. A ﬁne pitch ﬂat ﬁle can be used to clean 
up the edge later if necessary. 
Cutting along the edge of the lines, the notching 
tool takes out one small nibble at a time, eating a 
straight line out of the plastic enclosure as shown 
in Figure 20-6. The key to making a smooth cut is 
to keep the tool aligned along the edge of the line 
so that no jagged edges are formed. The cutout can 
be made fairly accurately using this tool, but don’t 
expect perfection.
Figure 20-7 shows the results of using the 
notching tool to cut the opening and then spending 
of the box lid or sides. If you have the SparkFun 
keypad, there is a very detailed drawing and 
printable template on their Web site. Since our hand 
cutting would be the weak link, we just decided to 
trace out the dimensions as shown in Figure 20-4
and then hand-bombed the rounded edges by 
drawing them freehand. Hand cutting the rounded 
rectangle will be okay using a notching tool and 
a small round ﬁle, so perfect accuracy won’t be 
possible.
Whenever you are faced with the task of cutting 
a square or rectangular opening in a thin plastic 
or metal project box, the notching tool shown 
in Figure 20-5 will make the job easy. This tool 
basically nibbles a tiny square bit out of the 
surface each time you close the pliers, so you 
can notch away along a straight line, creating any 
  Figure 20-3   Measuring the dimensions of the 
keypad for mounting.
  Figure 20-4   Marking the dimensions of the 
keypad for cutting.
  Figure 20-5   The notching tool is a great 
addition to your hacking toolkit.
  Figure 20-6   Cutting the rectangular opening 
one nibble at a time.

286      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
keypad has digits you don’t plan to use, it may 
be possible to leave an entire row or column 
unconnected, but you will need to look at the 
datasheet to see how many digits you will lose by 
leaving a row or column unconnected. If we dropped 
row four from the panel, we would lose keys “*,” 
“0,” and “#” according to the matrix mapping shown 
in Figure 20-2. We didn’t care about the symbol 
characters, but wanted to use the zero, so we had to 
connect all of the rows and columns.
To scare trespassers away, a very loud, ear-
piercing siren will be needed. The high-pitch sound 
will travel a great distance and make it almost 
impossible to locate the actual alarm system, 
making it impossible to disable in a hurry. You have 
many choices for alarm hardware, with battery 
voltage being the only consideration. The pocket 
alarm shown in Figure 20-10 is a perfect choice for 
some time with a ﬁne pitch ﬁle to clean up the 
edges and create the rounded corners. The opening 
is not perfect, but once the keypad is inserted, it 
looks like a factory job. We wouldn’t want to do 
10 of these this way, but for this prototype, it did 
the job.
Once inserted, the keypad circuit board has just 
enough room between the box lid edges and the 
edges of the board as shown in Figure 20-8. This is 
why an enclosure with an inside diameter slightly 
larger than the edges of the keypad circuit board 
was necessary. An external mounting of the keypad 
would not be so critical.
You will need to solder a wire for each row 
and column needed on your keypad as shown in 
Figure 20-9. Having four rows and three columns, 
our keypad needed seven wires in total. If your 
  Figure 20-7   The keypad ﬁts like a glove after 
cutting the opening.
  Figure 20-8   The inside edges of the circuit 
board have just enough clearance.
  Figure 20-9   Soldering the keypad matrix 
wires to the circuit board.
  Figure 20-10   This tiny pocket alarm is 
amazingly loud for its size.

Project 20  Q  Portable Alarm System      287
Once you have the wire pair soldered to the battery 
terminals, apply power to verify that the alarm is 
working properly. Drill a small hole in the back or 
side of the alarm casing as shown in Figure 20-13 so 
that you can connect them to the relay that will be 
installed in the alarm system circuit.
This alarm system will work in “self-contained” 
mode where the sensor is afﬁxed to the alarm box 
or in “remote mode” where the intruder sensor 
is installed via wire to another location. In self-
contained mode, this alarm system is great for 
protecting drawers, luggage, and doorways as it 
is as simple as arming the alarm and placing it in 
an area that would be triggered by an intrusion. 
In self-contained mode, the goal of the alarm is to 
this project because it will run from any voltage 
between 3 and 5 volts (V), and can be switched on 
using a small relay or even transistor. The pocket 
alarm is inexpensive (normally retails for under 
$10), even less than a basic DC-operated piezo 
buzzer, so consider it for this project.
Inside the pocket alarm (Figure 20-11) you will 
ﬁnd a few coin batteries, a small circuit board with 
an oscillator and inductor, and the piezo transducer 
that makes the high-pitch siren sound. This thing is 
so loud that it makes our ears ring, which is quite 
impressive given its size and the fact that it runs 
from the low current 4.5-V coin battery source. At 
3 or 5 V, the siren worked the same, so conversion 
to a microcontroller-based project is easy. The 
pocket alarm operation is simple: you pull a rip 
cord pin, which closes a switch and turns on the 
alarm. To convert this alarm for triggering through 
a relay, remove the rip cord pin and replace the 
battery pack with the switched output from a relay.
With the rip cord pin removed, the alarm will 
now be in the on position permanently. To control 
it externally, solder a pair of wires to the battery 
terminals as shown in Figure 20-12, and whenever 
a voltage between 3 and 5 V is applied, the alarm 
will begin to shriek. Use a pair of color-coded 
wires that will make it easy to determine polarity 
so that you don’t accidentally reverse the power to 
the alarm circuit.
  Figure 20-11   Converting the pocket alarm for 
relay operation.
  Figure 20-12   Replacing the internal batteries 
with a pair of wires.
  Figure 20-13   The completed externally 
powered pocket alarm.

288      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
a pair of pins at one end. Ball-bearing switches 
and magnetic switches also work the same way. 
Since this project puts the microcontroller into 
deep power saving mode when activated, a passive 
switch is used so that the alarm can run for a very 
long time off a battery pack. An electronic switch 
would slowly drain the power pack, even if it only 
used a small amount of current, so a passive switch 
is the best choice here.
The schematic for the portable alarm system 
shown in Figure 20-16 is fairly straightforward. 
The rows and columns of the keypad are connected 
directly to the microcontrollers IO pins so that the 
program can switch on one column at a time and 
then scan for row button presses. The input from 
the alarm sensor (switch) is connected directly 
to an input pin, and the relay can be turned on by 
sending voltage from the IO pin connected to the 
base of the driver transistor. The two light-emitting 
diodes (LEDs) and piezo buzzer give an audio and 
visual indication of the various functions of the 
alarm system.
Also note that the wiring shown in the keypad 
matrix may not match your own keypad, so 
you will need to determine which pins are rows 
and which pins are columns, and then make the 
appropriate changes in the code dealing with the IO 
pins on PORT-D that connect to the keypad rows 
and columns. As for VCC, either 5 or 3 V will work 
ﬁne with the ATMega88, but when using 3 V, you 
instantly alert you of an intrusion into your space. 
In remote mode, the alarm can protect several 
windows or doors at the same time by connecting 
magnetic or break switches in a series loop back to 
the alarm unit. Remote mode allows the system to 
act as a semipermanent building alarm that can be 
installed in a few minutes.
This project will be completed by testing the 
alarm in self-contained mode, using a motion-
sensitive switch as the alarm trigger. Motion 
switches come in the form of ball switches, 
mercury switches, or electronic motion detection 
IC packages. We just happened to have a few 
old mercury switches salvaged from some 1980s 
thermostats, so we will use one of them as a 
motion switch. Mercury switches are rather rare 
these days, but the ball bearing switches shown 
in Figure 20-14 next to the mercury switches are 
a fairly decent replacement that does not contain 
toxic liquid metal. Warning: Mercury is poisonous. 
Any motion switch will work as long as it acts like 
a real switch, opening or closing when motion is 
detected.
A passive motion sensor does not require a 
power supply as it is mechanical in nature, opening 
or closing a switch in response to motion on its 
body. You can see in Figure 20-15 that the mercury 
switch is just a blob of liquid metal that can be at 
either end of the sealed tube, making contact with 
  Figure 20-14   A few different motions switches 
for self-contained mode.
  Figure 20-15   Passive switches like this 
mercury switch are optimal 
for this project.

Project 20  Q  Portable Alarm System      289
Power-saving mode is deactivated by any change 
on the alarm sensor pin via pin change interruption, 
allowing this system to run for a very long time 
once set to armed.
will have to ensure that the relay chosen will close 
on this low voltage. Most relays rated for 5 V will 
work just ﬁne on 3 V.
Before committing any permanent circuit 
board wiring, build the circuit on a solderless 
breadboard as shown in Figure 20-17 so that you 
can easily program the microcontroller, make 
source code changes, and alter the circuit to suit 
your needs. Some of the things you will want to 
alter in the source code will include the secret 
password (found under program initialization), 
which is currently set to “1234,” as well as the 
times between activation and triggering. Some 
of the program code is speciﬁc to the ATMega-88, 
allowing it to be sent into deep power-saving 
mode once the alarm has been set to armed. 
  Figure 20-16  The portable alarm system schematic using an ATMega88 microcontroller.
  Figure 20-17   Building the portable alarm system 
on a solderless breadboard.

290      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM = HOME ALARM SYSTEM (C) 2010 LUCIDSCIENCE.COM
// **** TARGET = ATMEGA88P & 12 DIGIT KEYPAD
// **** CLOCK SPEED = 8 MHZ INTERNAL
// ***********************************************************************************
#include <mega88p.h>
#include <delay.h>
#include <sleep.h>
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** SEND SHORT BEEP TO PIEZO BUZZER
// ***********************************************************************************
void BEEP1() {
unsigned char ctr1;
// SINGLE SHORT BEEP
for (ctr1 = 0; ctr1 < 50; ctr1++) {
PORTC.0 = 0;
PORTC.1 = 1;
delay_us(400);
PORTC.0 = 1;
PORTC.1 = 0;
delay_us(400);
}
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** COMMAND CONFIRM BEEP
// ***********************************************************************************
void BEEP2() {
unsigned char ctr1;
// LEDS ON
PORTB.1 = 1;
PORTB.2 = 1;
// BEEP FREQUENCY 1
delay_ms(250);
for (ctr1 = 0; ctr1 < 100; ctr1++) {
PORTC.0 = 0;
PORTC.1 = 1;
delay_us(500);
PORTC.0 = 1;
PORTC.1 = 0;
delay_us(500);
}
delay_ms(100);

Project 20  Q  Portable Alarm System      291
// BEEP FREQUENCY 2
for (ctr1 = 0; ctr1 < 200; ctr1++) {
PORTC.0 = 0;
PORTC.1 = 1;
delay_us(200);
PORTC.0 = 1;
PORTC.1 = 0;
delay_us(200);
}
delay_ms(100);
// BEEP FREQUENCY 3
for (ctr1 = 0; ctr1 < 150; ctr1++) {
PORTC.0 = 0;
PORTC.1 = 1;
delay_us(300);
PORTC.0 = 1;
PORTC.1 = 0;
delay_us(300);
}
delay_ms(250);
// LEDS OFF
PORTB.1 = 0;
PORTB.2 = 0;
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** SEND AVR INTO POWERDOWN MODE
// ***********************************************************************************
void SLEEP() {
// TURN OF LEDS AND BEEP
PORTB.1 = 0;
PORTB.2 = 0;
BEEP2();
// ENTER POWERDOWN MODE
#asm(“sei”)
sleep_enable();
powerdown();
}

292      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** WAKE FROM SLEEP ON ALARM PIN CHANGE
// ***********************************************************************************
interrupt [PCINT2] void pin_change_isr2(void) {
sleep_disable();
#asm(“cli”)
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** READ KEYPAD AND RETURN ASCII VALUE
// ***********************************************************************************
unsigned char KEYPAD() {
unsigned char key;
unsigned char scn;
key = 0;
// SCAN KEYS IN COLUMN 1
PORTD.4 = 0;
delay_ms(1);
scn = (PIND & 15);
PORTD.4 = 1;
// CONVERT KEY TO ASCII
if (scn == 14) key = ‘1’;
if (scn == 13) key = ‘4’;
if (scn == 11) key = ‘7’;
if (scn == 7) key = ‘*’;
// SCAN KEYS IN COLUMN 2
PORTD.5 = 0;
delay_ms(1);
scn = (PIND & 15);
PORTD.5 = 1;
// CONVERT KEY TO ASCII
if (scn == 14) key = ‘2’;
if (scn == 13) key = ‘5’;
if (scn == 11) key = ‘8’;
if (scn == 7) key = ‘0’;
// SCAN KEYS IN COLUMN 3
PORTD.6 = 0;
delay_ms(1);
scn = (PIND & 15);
PORTD.6 = 1;
// CONVERT KEY TO ASCII
if (scn == 14) key = ‘3’;
if (scn == 13) key = ‘6’;
if (scn == 11) key = ‘9’;
if (scn == 7) key = ‘#’;

Project 20  Q  Portable Alarm System      293
// SEND KEY BEEP
if (key != 0){
for (scn = 0; scn < 50; scn++) {
PORTC.0 = 0;
PORTC.1 = 1;
delay_us(200);
PORTC.0 = 1;
PORTC.1 = 0;
delay_us(200);
}
}
// HOLD WHILE KEYDOWN
scn = 0;
while (scn != 45) {
scn = 0;
PORTD.4 = 0;
delay_ms(1);
scn = scn + (PIND & 15);
PORTD.4 = 1;
PORTD.5 = 0;
delay_ms(1);
scn = scn + (PIND & 15);
PORTD.5 = 1;
PORTD.6 = 0;
delay_ms(1);
scn = scn + (PIND & 15);
PORTD.6 = 1;
}
// RETURN KEY VALUE
delay_ms(100);
return(key);
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM VARIABLES AND PORT SETUP
// ***********************************************************************************
void main(void) {
// MAIN PROGRAM VARIABLES
unsigned char ctr1;
unsigned char ctr2;
unsigned int ctr3;
unsigned char mode;
unsigned char code[4];

294      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// 3X4 KEYPAD ROW INPUTS
DDRD.0 = 0;
DDRD.1 = 0;
DDRD.2 = 0;
DDRD.3 = 0;
PORTD.0 = 1;
PORTD.1 = 1;
PORTD.2 = 1;
PORTD.3 = 1;
// 3X4 KEYPAD COL OUTPUTS
DDRD.4 = 1;
DDRD.5 = 1;
DDRD.6 = 1;
PORTD.4 = 1;
PORTD.5 = 1;
PORTD.6 = 1;
// GREEN LED OUTPUT
DDRB.1 = 1;
// RED LED OUTPUT
DDRB.2 = 1;
// PIEZO BUZZER OUTPUTS
DDRC.1 = 0;
DDRC.1 = 1;
// ALARM TRIGGER INPUT
DDRD.7 = 0;
PORTD.7 = 1;
// ALARM SIREN OUTPUT
DDRB.0 = 1;
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** PROGRAM INITIALIZATION
// ***********************************************************************************
// ENABLE PIN CHANGE INTERRUPT
EICRA = 0x00;
EIMSK = 0x00;
PCICR = 0x04;
PCMSK2 = 0x80;
PCIFR = 0x04;

Project 20  Q  Portable Alarm System      295
// SEND STARTUP BEEP
delay_ms(1000);
for (ctr1 = 0; ctr1 < 4; ctr1++) {
BEEP1();
PORTB.1 = 1;
PORTB.2 = 1;
delay_ms(100);
PORTB.1 = 0;
PORTB.2 = 0;
delay_ms(100);
}
// SET SYSTEM TO IDLE MODE
mode = 0;
ctr1 = 0;
ctr2 = 0;
ctr3 = 0;
// SET ACCESS KEYCODE
code[0] = ‘1’;
code[1] = ‘2’;
code[2] = ‘3’;
code[3] = ‘4’;
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MAIN PROGRAM LOOP
// ***********************************************************************************
while (1) {
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MODE 0 : IDLE AND UNARMED
// ***********************************************************************************
while (mode == 0) {
// TURN OFF EXTERNAL ALARM
PORTB.0 = 0;
// TURN ON GREEN LED
PORTB.1 = 1;
PORTB.2 = 0;
// SEARCH FOR KEYCODE
if (ctr1 == 0 && KEYPAD() == code[0]) ctr1 = 1;
if (ctr1 == 1 && KEYPAD() == code[1]) ctr1 = 2;
if (ctr1 == 2 && KEYPAD() == code[2]) ctr1 = 3;
if (ctr1 == 3 && KEYPAD() == code[3]) ctr1 = 4;

296      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
// ARM SYSTEM ON KEYCODE
if (ctr1 == 4) {
ctr1 = 0; 
ctr2 = 0;
ctr3 = 0; 
mode = 1;
}
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MODE 1 : ALARM ARMED WITH 60 SECOND COUNTDOWN
// ***********************************************************************************
while (mode == 1) {
// BEEPS FOR 60 SECONDS
for (ctr1 = 0; ctr1 < 60; ctr1++) {
BEEP1();
PORTB.2 = 1;
delay_ms(500);
PORTB.2 = 0;
delay_ms(500);
}
// ARM SYSTEM AND POWER DOWN
SLEEP();
ctr1 = 0; 
ctr2 = 0;
ctr3 = 0;
mode = 2;
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MODE 2 : ALARM TRIGGERED WITH 60 SECOND COUNTDOWN
// ***********************************************************************************
while (mode == 2) {
// ALARM WARNING BLIP
for (ctr1 = 0; ctr1 < 50; ctr1++) {
PORTC.0 = 0;
PORTC.1 = 1;
PORTB.2 = 1;
delay_us(150);
PORTC.0 = 1;
PORTC.1 = 0;
PORTB.2 = 0;
delay_us(150);
}

Project 20  Q  Portable Alarm System      297
// ACTIVATE SIREN WITHIN 60 SECONDS
ctr3++;
if (ctr3 == 400) mode = 3;
// SEARCH FOR KEYCODE
if (ctr2 == 0 && KEYPAD() == code[0]) ctr2 = 1;
if (ctr2 == 1 && KEYPAD() == code[1]) ctr2 = 2;
if (ctr2 == 2 && KEYPAD() == code[2]) ctr2 = 3;
if (ctr2 == 3 && KEYPAD() == code[3]) ctr2 = 4;
// ENTER IDLE MODE ON KEYCODE
if (ctr2 == 4) {
PORTB.1 = 0;
PORTB.2 = 0; 
ctr1 = 0; 
ctr2 = 0;
ctr3 = 0;
mode = 0;
BEEP2();
}
}
// ***********************************************************************************
// **** MODE 3 : ALARM SIREN ACTIVATED
// ***********************************************************************************
while (mode == 3) {
// TURN ON EXTERNAL ALARM
PORTB.0 = 1;
// POWER DOWN AND WAIT FOR CODE
SLEEP();
ctr1 = 0; 
ctr2 = 0;
ctr3 = 0;
mode = 2;
}
// END OF MAIN LOOP
}
}

298      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
reprogramming if you don’t intend to add an in-circuit 
programming header.
Perforated board is available with solder pads 
like the board shown in Figure 20-19, or with 
unclad holes. Both types will be ﬁne for this project 
since there are so few components to wire. Parts 
are placed on the perforated board, and then small 
wires are soldered on the underside, between 
the component pins to create traces. Since the 
microcontroller and relay will take up most of the 
room, the circuit board does not have to be much 
larger than both parts. The wiring on the keypad 
has also been trimmed so that there is just enough 
slack that the circuit board can be folded around 
and stuck to the back of the keypad, making for a 
compact ﬁnal product.
If you intend to use the alarm system for 
personal protection where you want to be alerted 
instantly to any intrusion, then change the counter 
check value under the section “Mode 2: Alarm 
triggered with 60 second countdown” and in the 
line “if (ctr3 == 400) mode = 3;” from 400 to some 
smaller value like 50. You will of course have to 
experiment with the code to change it to suit your 
needs, but it is well-commented and very easy to 
modify or improve.
Without altering the source code, the operation 
of the portable alarm system is as follows: Once 
powered on, the LEDs will ﬂash to indicate that 
everything is working, and then the green LED will 
stay lit to indicate the system is idle and waiting for 
the secret code to be entered. Once you enter the 
secret code of “1234,” the red LED will ﬂash for 
60-seconds, giving you time to exit the building in 
order to set the alarm trigger switch to the armed 
position. After 60 seconds, the alarm will enter 
a deep power-saving mode, and both LEDs will 
be off. Any change on the alarm trigger switch or 
sensor will wake up the alarm and begin another 
60-second countdown. If you do not enter the 
secret code within 60 seconds, the relay will close, 
sending power to the loud alarm until the entire 
system is powered off. If you do enter the secret 
code within 60 seconds, the system will enter 
the idle state again. This operation is much like a 
typical house alarm system.
Once you have veriﬁed the operation of the 
alarm system and made whatever source code 
changes may be necessary, collect all of your 
required parts and ﬁnd a suitable perforated circuit 
board to hold the six or seven semiconductors, 
including the microcontroller. As shown in 
Figure 20-18, most of the inventory will be 
hardware, and the actual circuit board will 
only take up as much room as needed for the 
microcontroller, relay, and a few resistors. When 
working with microcontrollers, it is always a 
good idea to use a socket on your circuit board 
so that you can remove the microcontroller for 
  Figure 20-18   Getting ready to build the ﬁnal 
version on a circuit board.
  Figure 20-19   Adding the components to a 
small perforated circuit board.

Project 20  Q  Portable Alarm System      299
switch to be removed and swapped with various 
different trigger systems for more versatility.
To get the most volume out of the alarm siren, 
it should be mounted to the outside of the box, or 
at least in a way that places the speaker portion 
outside the enclosure. Figure 20-22 shows the alarm 
siren held to the side of the enclosure with a few 
tiny screws as well as the 3-V battery pack, which 
is held to the bottom of the box with a small bit of 
double sided tape. Keep all wiring long enough so 
that when you remove the lid (and circuit board), 
you can get at the underside of the board easily.
Figure 20-23 shows the completed and working 
system before placing all of the components into 
the enclosure. Having the wiring long enough to 
spread out the components like this means that 
debugging a bad connection will be much easier. 
To make the perforated board design easier, 
start with the VCC and ground connections, using 
red and black or red and green wires so that there 
will be no polarity reversal errors. The rest of 
the connections are easy enough, with the seven 
IO lines from the keypad taking up most of the 
wiring. Figure 20-20 shows our completed circuit 
board, with various colored wires used to make 
debugging easier.
Once your circuit board has been completed and 
tested, some space can be conserved by folding the 
circuit board to the back of the keypad as shown in 
Figure 20-21, holding there with a bit of double-
sided tape. We also added the piezo buzzer to 
the board, making the entire system not much 
larger than the keypad. The 1/8-in jack shown in 
Figure 20-21 is to allow the external alarm trigger 
  Figure 20-20   Creating circuit board traces 
using small wires.
  Figure 20-21   Afﬁxing the circuit board to the 
back of the keypad.
  Figure 20-22   Mounting the alarm siren and the 
battery pack to the enclosure.
  Figure 20-23   Completing all of the hardware 
wiring connections.

300      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
glue was just as effective in hold the panel securely 
to the plastic lid. We also ran a bead of glue around 
the master switch just to ensure it would not come 
loose from the hole. As a travel alarm, you will 
want to make your hardware as durable as possible, 
especially if it will travel in a suitcase. Be warned, 
though, that airport security might not allow you 
to bring the device in your carryon or checked 
luggage—for obvious reasons.
In portable mode, the alarm trigger switch 
is connected to the alarm enclosure so that the 
entire system is one piece. This allows the alarm 
to protect such things as luggage, dresser drawers, 
ﬁling cabinets, doors, and any other object that 
will move when an intrusion occurs. By installing 
the mercury or ball switch on a short piece of stiff 
wire on the connecting jack as shown in Figure 20-26, 
it is easily aligned in any position, allowing the 
alarm box to be “set” at any angle and armed. 
Other types of sensors such as microswitches, 
magnetic switches, or trip wires could also be 
used in portable mode, allowing the alarm to be 
set up to protect just about any area or object from 
intrusion. In this case, you will also want the alarm 
activation countdown timer to be set to a very 
short duration—or none at all—so that the instant 
the alarm is disturbed, the siren begins to wail.
With a roll of double-sided tape handy 
(Figure 20-27), the portable alarm system can 
easily be installed on doors, drawers, or even inside 
There is also plenty of room in the enclosure in 
case later hardware upgrades are needed.
The master power switch will cut power between 
the battery pack and the circuit, and it is also the 
only way to shut off the alarm once it is triggered 
by an intruder. Figure 20-24 shows the rocker 
switch we chose to use as the master power switch. 
The square switch requires the notching tool to be 
used again to cut an accurate square hole, but since 
we had a bunch of these switches salvaged from old 
computer power supplies, it made sense to use one.
To secure the keypad to the inside of the 
enclosure lid, we used a bead of hot glue around 
the edges as shown in Figure 20-25. The keypad 
also had four small mounting holes, but the hot 
  Figure 20-24   Adding the master power 
switch to the system.
  Figure 20-25   Sealing the hardware using a 
hot glue gun.
  Figure 20-26   Creating the motion trigger 
switch for portable mode.

Project 20  Q  Portable Alarm System      301
impossible to open the drawer without setting off 
the alarm, even if you know it is there.
One of the reasons we made this alarm system 
was so that we could bring it on travels and protect 
our rented room or luggage from thieves. It’s not 
fun when a thief slips into your room at night and 
“borrows” your laptop, so this simple alarm will 
scare would-be thieves away before they get to your 
valuables. Sure, this may not be the most high-tech 
security system available, but one thing we have 
learned from the school of hard knocks is that you 
don’t need the best security system in the world, 
just one better than your neighbors’! Seriously, 
thieves normally want an easy target, which 
means a room without any security system at all. 
Figure 20-29 shows the alarm system working to 
protect the interior of an unlocked room by leaning 
it up against the door in motion-activation mode.
We also used this alarm system to protect several 
storage buildings on our property that did not have 
power available. By installing magnetic door and 
window switches via wires to the alarm system, 
it was able to act much like a typical home alarm 
system, allowing time to set or deactivate the alarm 
using the secret code during entry and exit. In this 
mode, the alarm unit needs to be inside the building 
in a place that is out of the way, just in case the 
intruder is brave enough to hunt around for the alarm 
unit as it is screeching away. The intruder will likely 
a vehicle to alert you and scare away potential 
intruders. The motion switch is shown sitting 
on the top of the alarm cabinet in Figure 20-27, 
waiting for any movement of the box to set off 
the extremely loud siren. By adjusting the angle 
of the motion sensor on the stiff wire, you can ﬁne 
tune the alarm sensitivity the way you want it.
Figure 20-28 shows how easy it is to adjust the 
motion sensor on the end of the wire so that the 
alarm can be installed at any angle or position. 
Here it is set to go off if our highly secret electronic 
prototype drawer is inﬁltrated by corporate spies! 
Using the ball switch or mercury switch, it is nearly 
  Figure 20-27   Double-sided tape will help 
install the alarm in portable 
mode.
  Figure 20-28   Protecting our top secret 
prototype storage cabinet 
from spies.
  Figure 20-29   A simple way to scare away 
burglars.

302      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
while the magnetic door sensor is in another room. 
Multiple sensors can be chained in parallel this way 
as long as they are all either “normally open” or all 
“normally closed” circuit.
This project leaves plenty of room for 
improvements and modiﬁcation, and you can 
use just about any sensor imaginable to trigger 
the alarm system. Infrared motions sensors, gas 
sensors, light sensors, sound sensors and even 
radiation sensors can be used as long as you power 
them externally. If you build this project using 
surface mounted components, it could be made 
very small and easily concealed inside another 
object, making it very stealthy. You will never have 
to be without some kind of security system with 
this simple project!
ﬂee the scene right away, and even if he/she does 
try to ﬁnd the alarm box, it will be very difﬁcult as 
the high pitch of the siren is not at all easy to track. 
Figure 20-30 shows the alarm mounted in one room 
  Figure 20-30   A semipermanent installation 
using a magnetic door switch.

P A R T  S E V E N
Digital Camera Spy Projects

This page intentionally left blank 

305
P R O J E C T  2 1
Camera Trigger Hack
THERE ARE TIMES when you need to acquire a 
very high-resolution image, triggered by some 
external event such as movement, time, or 
computer control. Video security cameras are very 
limited in resolution, often to less than 640 × 480 
pixels, which in digital camera terms is less than 
half of 1 megapixel. Nowadays, a small digital 
camera that can take an image with a resolution 
of 4000 × 3000 pixels can be purchased for mere 
pocket change, so even if your subject is at a long 
distance from the camera, the details will still be 
present in the image when zoomed on a computer 
screen. This simple project demonstrates how 
to hack into the camera’s shutter release button 
to add some kind of external control to allow 
automated picture taking.
this hack is fairly easy to do as long as you can 
ﬁnd a way to open the cover on your donor camera. 
Once completed, the resulting relay controller 
will allow any external electronic device to focus 
and then take a photo, essentially duplicating the 
operation of the two-position shutter release trigger 
on your camera. Also, note that your camera will 
not be usable for regular photography after this 
hack as the original shutter release switch will be 
removed.
The sacriﬁcial camera shown in Figure 21-1 is 
an HP Photosmart M547 digital camera with an 
8-megapixel imaging system. This camera has been 
around the world and dropped in an ocean, but 
despite some dents and scratches it still functions 
perfectly, so it will begin a new life as a covert spy 
gadget. To open one of these small digital cameras, 
you will need a set of tiny screwdrivers, a small 
knife, and a whole lot of patience. Since the goal of 
manufacturing is to keep costs to a minimum, the 
cases on these cameras are often snapped together, 
305
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 1 K
Q 
 Diodes: D1 = 1N4001 or similar
Q 
 Transistors: Q1 = 2N3904 or 2N2222A or 
similar NPN
Q 
 Relay: Single pole relay rated for 5 to 12 V
Q 
 Battery: 6- to 12-V battery or pack
Because this project is a hardware hack, you 
should not try this with a good camera, or one that 
you are worried about breaking. There is always 
a possibility of destruction when cracking the 
case open on such a small electronic device that is 
jammed full of tiny components. Of course, if you 
are good with small tools and a soldering iron, then 
  Figure 21-0   This external controller allows 
any device to control the shutter 
release.

306      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
this camera had only two different-sized screws—
silver ones on the outside and black ones on the 
inside. We have seen much worse!
To make your hacking work even more tedious, 
screws may be placed in hard-to-ﬁnd locations, 
behind trap doors (Figure 21-3) or even under logo 
stickers and plates, so if you can’t seem to get the 
case open, look around for those secret screws. 
Remember, these small consumer devices were 
not made to be taken apart, repaired, or hacked by 
us evil geniuses! Work your way around the entire 
camera and try to get all of the obvious screws 
removed from the casing.
Taking out all of the visible screws is the easy 
part, and now comes the real fun—prying the 
plastic casing apart to reveal the internals. Most 
likely, the two or more plastic casing parts will be 
snapped together, held by friction on the inside, so 
you will need to carefully pry open the parts using 
a small knife blade or ﬂat screwdriver blade. If you 
are afraid of damaging your camera then it’s not too 
late to chicken out and put back the screws. If you 
decide to continue, then expect a few scrapes along 
the edges as you pry away with your screwdriver.
To begin to pry apart the casing, carefully 
wedge a small ﬂat screwdriver blade into the edge 
as shown in Figure 21-4 so you can start to force 
the two plastic halves apart. Don’t dig in too deep 
or you run the risk of damaging the electronics. 
which will require some careful prying to open 
them up.
The tiny screws shown in Figure 21-2 are about 
the same size as the head of a pin, so don’t expect 
to recover one that falls on the ﬂoor! A magnetic 
screwdriver really helps out when working 
with these tiny parts, and you can improvise by 
simply placing a small magnet on the shaft of 
the screwdriver to make it temporarily magnetic. 
Also, some camera manufacturers have contests 
between their engineers to see who can use the 
most different sizes of screws in a single camera in 
order to make putting one back together the most 
difﬁcult, so if you start to see multiple screw sizes 
and lengths, make a diagram as you go. Luckily, 
  Figure 21-1   This camera will be converted for 
external shutter control.
  Figure 21-2   This camera will be converted 
for external shutter control.
  Figure 21-3   Often, the screws will be hidden 
behind doors or under labels.

Project 21  Q  Camera Trigger Hack      307
your ﬁngertips. If you can’t see the capacitor, then 
you “may” be safe from the high voltage, but do 
work carefully.
This camera has not been in use for more than a 
month, but after we removed the ﬂash capacitor just 
for fun, it still measured almost 300 V as shown by 
our meter in Figure 21-6! Getting this kind of DC 
voltage across your ﬁnger feels like touching a red 
hot stove element, and getting a shock across both 
hands feels like swimming in a pool full of toasters 
that are plugged into live AC current! In other 
words, it hurts. Don’t do it!
Since these cameras are full to the brim with small 
components, expect that there will be no space 
between the inside of the casing and the circuit 
board. Once you dig in enough to gain some 
leverage, pry the screwdriver until you get the ﬁrst 
plastic latch to pop open. Once you have one gap, 
the rest will be fairly easy, but do take your time 
and try to keep the screwdriver from reaching into 
the cabinet as you go along.
Now is a good time for a warning. Inside any 
camera that includes a ﬂash is a 350-volt (V) 
capacitor that will hold a charge for months at a 
time. We guarantee that once you get your ﬁngers 
across the charged terminal, you will take notice to 
never do it again! How can something so small be so 
dangerous you ask? Well, the capacitor has to hold 
a voltage that is more than three times the voltage 
that you will ﬁnd in your AC outlets in order to ﬁre 
the xenon ﬂash tube in the camera, and although the 
current is kept fairly low, the resulting shock from 
the charged capacitor will wake you up in a way 
you will never forget. Trust us—we have zapped 
ourselves more times than we care to remember. 
Figure 21-5 (inset) shows the beasty you are 
looking to avoid—the small half-inch (in) black 
cylinder with two leads coming out of one end. 
Once you have identiﬁed the capacitor, short a 
screwdriver across the leads, if you can reach them, 
so that you don’t end up taking the voltage with 
  Figure 21-4   The plastic casing will usually 
be snapped together from the 
inside.
  Figure 21-5   There is a danger lurking inside 
every camera that includes a 
ﬂash.
  Figure 21-6   After more than 30 days, the 
capacitor still holds almost 
300 V!

308      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
you may also rip up the thin copper traces, making 
it impossible to install the new wires. Figure 21-8 
shows the four small solder pads left over after 
removing the pushbutton switch from our camera. 
We also added some solder to the pads so it would 
be easier to install the new wiring.
Although we have not seen one for many years, 
older digital cameras may have larger pushbutton 
switches that are soldered as through-hole parts, 
requiring the removal of the small circuit board 
to get at the soldered leads. The camera shown in 
Figure 21-9 is a year 2008 digital camera, and had 
a through-hole pushbutton switch. Even a camera 
this old will acquire an image with a resolution 
Once you have managed to pry apart your 
camera casing, you should be able to identify 
the tiny shutter release switch, which will look 
like a small square with a round center button as 
shown in Figure 21-7. This tiny switch is actually 
a two-position switch that ﬁrst sends the focus 
command to the camera and then the shutter release 
command. If you remember from using the camera, 
you can focus by holding the switch half-way down 
and then take a photo by pressing it all the way. 
For this reason, there will be three or four contact 
points that need to be hacked into in order to bring 
control out to the external relays. From here, there 
are two ways you can continue with this project: 
removal of the switch to add wires or by tapping 
into the circuit to add wires while leaving the 
switch installed. The easiest method is to simply 
unsolder the switch, as you may not be able to 
identify or even tap into the traces leading to the 
switch. On this camera, you can clearly see the 
three connecting traces in Figure 21-7, but we just 
decided to remove the switch since this camera was 
no longer in normal service.
The tiny shutter release switch will probably be 
top-mounted to the small circuit board, so you will 
need to either heat up the contacts and pry one edge 
at a time, or use a solder wick to remove the solder 
on one side at a time. Don’t try to pry up the small 
switch, even if you don’t plan to use it again as 
  Figure 21-7   The camera shutter release 
switch will be mounted to a 
small circuit board.
  Figure 21-8   The traces are revealed on the 
circuit board after removal of 
the small switch.
  Figure 21-9   This older camera required 
removal of the small circuit 
board.

Project 21  Q  Camera Trigger Hack      309
Once we had the battery door in place, the 
camera lens zoomed out, and the liquid crystal 
display (LCD) screen showed that the camera was 
indeed functioning properly. We could now ﬁgure 
out which button was for focusing and which button 
was used to take a photo. Actually, you could get 
away with only a single button as most cameras 
will manage to focus and shoot if you just pressed 
the shutter release button all the way down. The 
exception is when there is a fast-moving target or 
when lighting conditions are suboptimal. All of the 
projects we intend to base this camera interface on 
will assume that both the focus and shoot buttons 
are connected, but it would be easy to modify them 
for just the shoot button alone (Figure 21-12).
many times greater than any security camera, so 
don’t throw out your old digital camera—hack it 
into something better.
Depending on the design of your camera, there 
will be three or four contact points. Most likely, 
you will only need three wires to control both 
functions of the switch (focus and shoot) as there 
will usually be a common ground. If you can still 
get the batteries into the camera with the casing 
apart, it is easy to test which contact points control 
which functions by placing a wire over the points 
to see how the camera responds. In our camera, 
there were four points under the small switch, but 
two of them were a common ground so we soldered 
the needed three wires to the circuit board as shown 
in Figure 21-10. Use the ﬁnest wire you can ﬁnd, 
and leave enough wire to reach whatever connector 
or control box you intend to add to the camera later.
Before you embark on the incredible journey 
of putting the camera all back together, try to feed 
in the batteries and test your new switch wiring 
by placing the wires into a breadboard as shown 
in Figure 21-11. You may have to hold the battery 
door in place just to make the connection, but it 
should be possible to test the camera before putting 
all of the tiny screws back in place. We used a pair 
of small pushbutton switches—one for the focus 
function, and one for the shoot function. Both 
switches share a common ground point.
  Figure 21-10   Adding the wires that will control 
the pushbutton functions.
  Figure 21-11   Testing the connections using a 
pair of pushbutton switches.
  Figure 21-12   The camera powers up and 
takes a photo when the buttons 
are pressed.

310      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
reassembly process. The camera powered up and 
tested just ﬁne once the batteries were installed. 
Oddly, we only had one screw left over after 
putting the camera back together. Normally we 
have more than one! How did you do?
In order to attach the wiring to the external 
triggering device(s), some type of connector will 
be necessary. If your system uses three wires, then 
a 1/8-in stereo-jack pair like the ones shown in 
Figure 21-15 will be perfect. For systems with four 
wires, a telephone-type connector or computer 
network connector would work. You could actually 
avoid using any connectors if you intend to build a 
circuit and have it attached directly to the camera, 
but this would make it difﬁcult to try out multiple 
triggering devices with your system. Since we 
intended to make several triggering devices, we 
opted for the removable jack installation.
Since there is barely enough space inside the 
camera casing for just the wiring, there would be 
no chance of installing the connector inside the 
camera. As shown in Figure 21-16, we just afﬁxed 
the female 1/8-in connector to the camera body 
using a bit of double-sided tape. This position was 
convenient for installation and would not block 
any of the camera controls or sensors. Having the 
connector in this position also meant that the camera 
could function normally if we soldered a pair of tiny 
switches to a male connector to be used manually 
just like the original functionality of the camera.
The last puzzle to solve before putting back all 
of the tiny screws is how to get the wiring out of 
the camera casing. The easiest way we found was 
to cut a small notch into the edge of one half of 
the casing, using a pair of wire cutters so that the 
wires can be placed through the casing as shown 
in Figure 21-13. Since there is no possible way 
you will have room to include a connector in the 
camera case, running the wires through a small 
opening is the only option. Avoid bending the wires 
on an extreme angle from the solder point or you 
may end up lifting the copper traces from the very 
small circuit board.
The assembled camera shown in Figure 21-14 
is retested using the breadboard and switches just 
to make sure that nothing was damaged in the 
  Figure 21-13   The wiring will be placed 
through a slot in the plastic 
casing.
  Figure 21-14   Once reassembled, the camera 
is tested using the breadboard 
and switches.
  Figure 21-15   A three-conductor 1/8-in stereo 
jack will connect the camera to 
the device.

Project 21  Q  Camera Trigger Hack      311
voltage from +3 to +5 V into the control wires will 
trigger an event, but we certainly cannot guarantee 
this. The next few steps will show you how to make 
what we consider a universally safe interface for 
your camera trigger using relays.
Because there is a chance you may damage the 
camera electronics with an overvoltage from say 
a microcontroller, it would be safer to emulate the 
function of the original switch, rather than try to 
trigger the functions using a voltage output. To do 
this, all you have to do is install a relay at the end 
of the signal wires so that when the relay closes, it 
acts just like the original switch, closing the circuit. 
Your external controller is now free to drive the 
relay driver transistor(s) with any positive voltage, 
making it easy to connect your hacked camera to 
any project with zero risk of damage to the internal 
electronics.
Any small voltage relay can be used, and you 
can often salvage relays like the ones shown in 
Figure 21-18 from old modem cards, telephones, 
and answering machines. A relay rated for 5 or 
12 V will be a good choice, and since you are not 
switching any current, the smaller the better. The 
round relays (reed relays) shown in Figure 21-18
need such low current to activate that they 
can be driven directly from the pins on most 
microcontrollers, so you don’t even need the driver 
transistors.
The male connector for the 1/8 stereo jack is 
shown in Figure 21-17, having three conductive 
rings. The larger base area is ground (or common), 
and the two rings at the end are for each camera 
function. Since there are no high-frequency signals 
in this project, you don’t have to use shielded cable 
or worry about how you connect the terminals as 
long as you know which pins control each function.
At this point, the camera trigger hack is 
complete, and you can connect the switch wires to 
any compatible voltage source or digital switch in 
order to control the camera. The only problem is 
that you have no idea what polarity or voltage the 
camera expects to see between the common wire 
and the one or two control wires. Chances are, any 
  Figure 21-16   The female connector is afﬁxed 
to the body of the camera.
  Figure 21-17   Adding the male connector to 
plug in the external controller.
  Figure 21-18   Low-voltage relays can be used 
to make a universal interface.

312      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
tested on a solderless breadboard. We are using 
2N3904 transistors, 1N4001 diodes, 1-K resistors, 
and two 5-V relays pulled from old computer 
modem cards. This controller worked ﬁne on 
voltages from 5 V up to 12 V. An input signal as 
low as 1.5 V was able to engage the relays.
To test the relays using various input voltages, 
we connected the hacked digital camera to the 
solderless bread board as shown in Figure 21-21 
and then used pushbutton switches that would 
switch the positive supply into the resistors driving 
To drive a relay from any microcontroller or 
small voltage signal, you will need only a small 
NPN transistor, a diode, and a resistor. The simple 
schematic shown in Figure 21-19 will drive relays 
from 5 to 12 V with an input of only a few volts. 
The transistor is any common small-signal NPN 
type such as a 2N2222 or 2N3904, and the diode 
is any small-current diode such as a 1N4001 type. 
The value of resistor R1 can be anything from 
1 to 10 K. The circuit is very simple—a voltage 
passed through resistor R1 reaches the base of 
the transistor, switching the current from VCC to 
GND through the relay coil, causing the contacts to 
close. The diode protects the transistor from back 
voltages that can be caused from inductance as the 
relay coil turns off. Since your camera trigger is 
only connected to the relay contacts, the camera 
circuitry is completely isolated and safe from 
your external controller’s electronics. So now you 
could even trigger your camera from a 120-V relay 
running from an AC line powered security device 
such as a motion-activated light.
It’s always a good idea to ﬁrst build a circuit on 
a solderless breadboard so you can test or modify 
it before needing a soldering iron. Figure 21-20 
shows the dual relay controller being built and 
  Figure 21-19  This simple transistor circuit will drive any small DC relay.
  Figure 21-20   Building the relay controller on 
a solderless breadboard.

Project 21  Q  Camera Trigger Hack      313
after completing most of the wiring. This method 
of prototyping creates a reliable circuit that is very 
easy to modify later. Of course, this method isn’t 
nearly as nice as a real circuit board, but it is hardly 
worth waiting 2 weeks and paying $150 to have one 
made for such a simple project. The total time it 
took to build this circuit was measured in minutes.
The completed relay controller circuit board was 
once again connected to the camera and powered 
by a 6-V battery pack. The small solderless 
breadboard shown in Figure 21-24 has two 
pushbutton switches that are connected between the 
relay driver inputs and the positive supply voltage 
so that both relays can be tested with the camera. 
The circuit worked perfectly on the ﬁrst attempt, 
and it was also discovered that this camera did an 
the base of the transistors. The circuit ran ﬁne from 
a wide range of voltages thanks to the general-
purpose 2N3904 or 2N2222 NPN transistors. The 
circuit was now ready for a more permanent home.
Whenever we need to make a proper circuit 
board for a simple circuit like this, we just use 
perforated board since there is very little wiring 
to be done. This relay driver circuit is so simple 
that you could actually just solder the leads of the 
components right to the relay pins and not use any 
circuit board at all. Figure 21-22 shows the small 
2-in square piece of bare perforated board and the 
eight components that will be installed onto it.
To build a simple circuit like this on some plain 
perforated board, insert the components in a logical 
position and then complete the circuit by soldering 
wires on the underside of the board to form traces. 
Figure 21-23 shows the underside of our board 
  Figure 21-21   The hacked digital camera 
is connected to the relay 
controller.
  Figure 21-22   Perforated board is a good 
choice for making simple 
prototypes.
  Figure 21-23   The circuit is made using wires 
on the underside of the board.
  Figure 21-24   Testing the completed relay 
controller using manual 
pushbutton switches.

314      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
of the original dual-stage pushbutton switch that 
was pulled from the camera, the system can be 
interfaced to any external device without risk 
of damage to the camera’s internal electronics. 
This simple hack will allow a multitude of spy 
gadgets to be built, using the high-resolution 
imaging system in the camera to acquire your 
information automatically, triggered by some 
external event.
autofocus if only the “shoot” button was pressed 
without using the “focus” function ﬁrst. That 
means we could have got away with only a single 
relay and switch, but it can’t hurt to have a proper 
timed focus control as well.
This universal camera trigger hack can now be 
controlled with any microcontroller or electronic 
circuit using a low-current, low-voltage signal 
line. Because the relays simulate the operation 

315
P R O J E C T  2 2
Repeating Camera Timer
THIS PROJECT WILL EXTEND the camera trigger hack 
project, allowing a timer to control both the focus 
and shutter release functions on a digital camera 
at an adjustable rate. This method of repeating 
time-delayed image taking is also referred to as 
“time-lapse photography,” and can be used to speed 
up time by piecing together hundreds of photos 
taken over the span of hours or even days. By ﬁrst 
focusing the camera before the shot, the camera 
will be able to acquire moving targets with far 
fewer missed or blurry exposures. In this project, 
a timer feeds a 10-stage counter, allowing up to 10 
individual control points, although only two are 
needed in order to control the camera relay interface.
as solenoids, alarms, lights, or even AC-operated 
appliances. The rate of photo taking can be 
controlled by a variable resistor, and by altering the 
value of the timer capacitor, rates of several photos 
per second, all the way down to single photos every 
hour, can be set. This project assumes that you have 
previously built the hacked camera trigger project, 
although you could certainly interface it to some 
other hardware as well.
The small board shown in Figure 22-1 is a 
previous project called camera trigger hack, and 
it allows any electronic device to issue a focus-
and-shoot command to the camera. We call this a 
hack because it requires removal of the original 
switch from the camera in order to hack into the 
two functions that control the focus and shoot 
signals on the cameras circuit board. You “may” 
be able to build this project without the previous 
project as long as your camera board will accept 
315
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 IC1: LM555 analog timer
Q 
 IC2: 74HC4017B decade counter
Q 
 C1: 1 to 470 MF to control timer
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 1 K, R2 = 1 K, R3 = 1 K, 
R4 = 1 K, R5 = 1 K 
Q 
 VR1: 50-K variable resistor
Q 
 Diodes: D1 = 1N40001 or similar
Q 
 Transistors: 2N3904 or 2N2222A or similar 
NPN
Q 
 Relays: Single-pole relay rated for 5 to 12 V
Q 
 Battery: 3- to 6-V battery or pack
By using the other eight digital-output pins 
on the decade counter, several more cameras can be 
controlled, or more relays can be added to allow the 
controlling of various other electrical devices such 
  Figure 22-0   This system will focus and shoot 
a photo at some repeating 
interval.

316      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
the camera trigger hack. The new components 
include the 555 timer-oscillator and the 4017 
digital-decade counter, which will allow up to 10 
digital devices to be actuated one after the other. 
The operation of this circuit is very simple as it is 
just a variable-rate pulse timer driving the clock 
input on the decade counter. To give the camera 
some time to focus before shooting, the focus relay 
is set off by count 0, and the shoot relay is set off 
by count 5. The counter always counts from 0 to 
9 and then repeats, so this spacing offers the most 
time between functions.
Transistors Q1 and Q2 are relay drivers, which 
are actuated by the digital signal coming from the 
currently active pin on the 4017 decade counter. 
Potentiometer VR1 allows the pulse rate to be 
controlled to a large extent, but the capacitor 
C1 is responsible for setting the overall range of 
time, which could be as fast as several pulses per 
second to only a few pulses per hour. A value of 
1 microfarad (MF) for C1 will allow VR1 to set the 
the 5-volt (V) digital signals from the 4017 decade 
counter into the camera’s board, but to be safe, this 
previous project adds a level of safety to ensure 
your camera will not be damaged by any external 
device or voltages.
Looking at the schematic shown in Figure 22-2, 
you can see that it also includes the two relays and 
driver transistors from a previous project called 
  Figure 22-1   This is the relay interface that 
controls the camera shutter 
switch.
  Figure 22-2  This is the schematic for the repeating camera timer project.

Project 22  Q  Repeating Camera Timer      317
two per second, so for fast time-lapse photography 
or with a very fast camera, this might be a decent 
value to use. With the ﬂash off, the camera was 
actually much more capable of taking photos 
quickly, but at several per second, the memory card 
would be ﬁlled in a hurry. The large capacitor on 
the lower right of Figure 22-4 is 1000 MF, and we 
ended up using that one to set the rate of photo 
taking to about 1 per hour. At this slow rate, the 
4017 taps can be changed from 0 and 5 to 0 and 
1 to keep the focus and photo functions closer 
together.
Figure 22-5 shows the completed relay driver 
board jacked into the solderless breadboard where 
rate from several shots per second and a value of 
1000 MF for C1 will slow down the pulse rate to 
10 minutes or longer. You will have to experiment 
with larger capacitor values if you want to really 
slow down your frame rate. A value of 10 MF is 
probably a good start.
Resistor R5 and the LED are optional, as it is 
just a heartbeat that will show you the rate of pulses 
coming from the timer. It is nice to have the light-
emitting diode (LED) installed during the testing 
phase as it gives some indication of the circuit 
operation. During our build, we also added LEDs 
to the control lines, so we had three LEDs in total.
The ﬁrst capacitor we tested in the circuit shown 
breadboarded in Figure 22-3 was only 1 MF, so it 
gave a fairly quick pulse rate, allowing adjustment 
from about one photo per second to speeds that 
were too fast to control the camera. This rate was 
too fast to be of much use, but made it easy to take 
videos of the circuit in action. Our intention was to 
use this system to perform time-lapse photography, 
so we ended up installing a large 470-MF capacitor 
after we ﬁnished testing. You will have to 
experiment with various values for capacitor C1 to 
ﬁnd the range you are looking for.
The small capacitor shown in the bottom left of 
Figure 22-4 is only 1 MF. This gave a frame rate of 
between 1 and 100 frames per second. The camera 
could only handle taking photos at a speed of about 
  Figure 22-3   Breadboarding the circuit to test 
various capacitor values.
  Figure 22-4   Various capacitor values we 
tried in order to control the 
frame rate.
  Figure 22-5   The complete system is being 
tested with the timer on a 
breadboard.

318      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
breadboard onto the perf board and then solder 
the wires to form traces (Figure 22-7). We decided 
to keep the relay board separate as it may end up 
being connected to some other activation circuit in 
a future project.
The completed project ran ﬁne from any voltage 
between 5 and 12 V, so we decided on a 6-V 
battery pack made up of AA batteries as the power 
supply. The completed rig, including the relay 
board is shown in Figure 22-8, connected to the 
hacked digital camera form a previous project. This 
system works very well for time-lapse photography 
or as a high-resolution security system.
With the camera connected to an external 
power supply, and a large memory card, an 
the timer and counter portion of the circuit are 
being tested. While you are prototyping this project, 
some interesting options might include using a 
beeper on one of the free counter pins to alert you 
before or after a photo has been taken, or possibly 
controlling more relays or multiple cameras. There 
is certainly a lot of room for expansion with only 2 
of the 10 counter outputs in use.
The relay drive board is shown in Figure 22-6. 
This is a previous project called the camera 
trigger hack. The idea behind the relays is that 
no voltage is sent to the camera, only the closing 
of a circuit, which emulates exactly the function 
of the original shutter release switch that has 
been hacked out of the camera. Since most digital 
cameras have a two-position shutter release switch 
(focus and shoot), there are two relays used to 
copy this operation. You could get away with only 
one connection to the shoot function, but at the 
expense of having fast-moving targets possibly 
out of focus.
Once we had the timer working at a rate we 
were happy with, we added the six components 
on a small piece of perforated board and made 
the connections on the underside using some 
small wire. A circuit of this size hardly merits a 
real printed circuit board, and it only took a few 
minutes to move the parts from the solderless 
  Figure 22-6   This is the relay driver board 
that safely controls the camera 
functions.
  Figure 22-7   The timer circuit is built on 
another small perforated board.
  Figure 22-8   The completed repeating 
camera timer project with the 
relay board.

Project 22  Q  Repeating Camera Timer      319
to a regular video security camera, this system 
has more than 10 times the clarity, but this is 
at the trade of frames per second. If high-detail 
long-term surveillance is your goal, then this rig 
will deliver.
entire day of high-resolution image capture can 
be done. Having the ability to take images at 8 
megapixels means that details such as faces and 
license plates are highly visible, even when the 
subject is far away from the camera. Compared 

This page intentionally left blank 

321
P R O J E C T  2 3
Sound-Activated Camera
THIS SIMPLE PROJECT WILL add sound-activated 
control to any digital camera by adding a time-
controlled pulse into a relay board that is connected 
to the dual-stage camera shutter switch. The sound 
is picked up by a sensitive microphone and then 
fed into an operational ampliﬁer that is set up as 
an adjustable comparator so that the sensitivity 
can be controlled. The level of sound activation 
can be adjusted to respond to very faint sounds 
such as voices or footsteps and also adjusted to 
respond only to loud sounds such as music or hand 
claps. As a security device, this project will allow a 
high-resolution image to be captured in response to 
some type of nearby sound.
into the camera shutter switch, but, to be safe, the 
relay adds a level of isolation from the camera 
circuit board. Some cameras also have an external 
remote control jack. This could also be used.
The small board shown in the left of Figure 23-1 
is a previous project called Camera Trigger Hack, 
and it allows any electronic device to issue a focus-
and-shoot command to the camera. We call this a 
hack because it requires removal of the original 
switch from the camera in order to hack into the 
two functions that control the focus and shoot 
signals on the cameras circuit board. You “may” 
be able to build this project without the previous 
project as long as your camera board will accept 
the 5-volt (V) digital signals from the 74121 one-
shot into the camera’s board, but to be safe, this 
previous project adds a level of safety to ensure 
your camera will not be damaged by any external 
device or voltages.
321
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 IC1: 74HC121 one shot
Q 
 IC2: LM358 dual operational ampliﬁer
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 1 K, R2 = 10 K, R3 = 10 K, 
VR1 = 10-K potentiometer
Q 
 Capacitors: C1 = 10 MF
Q 
 LED 1: Low current red LED
Q 
 Microphone: Dual-pin electret microphone
Q 
 Battery: 3- to 9-V battery or pack
This project makes use of a circuit from a 
previous project called Camera Trigger Hack, which 
is a pair of relays and drivers fed into the shutter 
release switch on a digital camera in order to mimic 
the original functionality of the switch. You could 
probably feed the output from this circuit directly 
  Figure 23-0   This circuit will add sound-
activated control to a camera.

322      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
to be taken seriously by the camera. The one-shot 
takes this millisecond input pulse and then sends 
out a digital pulse for a duration that is long enough 
for the camera to respond.
Looking at the schematic shown in Figure 23-2,
you can see that the output from a small 
microphone is sent into the LM358 op-amp, which 
acts like a comparator, responding to changes 
in voltage from the microphone. Because the 
microphone is of the electret type, it includes 
its own high-gain ampliﬁer right inside the tiny 
metal can, further increasing the sensitivity of 
the comparator circuit. The variable resistor VR1 
controls the sensitivity of the comparator so sounds 
as faint as a whisper or as loud as a clap can be 
used to activate the camera switch relays. 
The output from the op-amp comparator is sent 
into a signal-conditioning IC called a one-shot. 
The 74121 one-shot will take any input voltage, no 
matter how short of a duration and send an output 
signal of some calculated time based on the values 
of resistor R3 and capacitor C1. For the camera 
trigger, a time of about 1 second is ﬁne, so the 
The small circuit board shown in the right of 
Figure 23-1 is the board that will be presented here, 
and it consists of a small microphone, an 
op-amp preampliﬁer (LM358), and a digital one-
shot switch (74121), which controls the pulse 
time to the relay board that will trigger the shutter 
release switch. The one-shot is needed, as the 
camera expects the shutter release to be pressed 
down by a human, and the pulses sent from the 
microphone preampliﬁer will be much too short 
  Figure 23-1   This is the relay interface that 
controls the camera shutter 
switch.
  Figure 23-2  This is the schematic for the sound-activated camera trigger.

Project 23  Q  Sound-Activated Camera      323
can be made, although in this application, the 
74121 basically acts like a switch debouncer to 
simulate the operation of a human button press. The 
datasheet (Figure 23-3) shows that the switch is 
controlled by a pair of timing pins and has multiple 
inputs to allow different pulse edges to create the 
output. In this circuit, the one-shot is set up to send 
out a 1-second-long digital pulse every time the 
input goes low. The input is the AC voltage signal 
from the op-amp comparator that is responding to 
changes in sound picked up by the microphone.
Electret microphones are extremely common 
in just about any electronic device that needs to 
hear sound. The small round can microphones are 
extremely sensitive to any sound, and they include 
a built-in electronic audio preampliﬁer right in 
the tiny metal can. What’s interesting about these 
microphones is that they are powered by 3 to 12 V, 
and use the same pin for power as for output, 
so there are only two connections to the can. 
Figure 23-4 shows several electret microphones 
values of 100 (microfarad) μF and 10 K set this 
time. The reason it is necessary to have the one-
shot in the circuit is because the signals from the 
comparator will be modulated by the sound, and 
will likely be too fast to allow the relay to close 
long enough to trigger the camera shutter release. 
The one-shot simply lengthens the pulse, which 
also gets rid of multiple pulses from the same quick 
sound. Since the camera needs to respond quickly 
in this application, both the focus and shoot relays 
are tied together, allowing the image to be taken as 
fast as the camera can respond to the sound. A very 
fast camera would be able to perform stop-motion 
photography, like the capture of a balloon popping 
or water drop.
The 74121 is an interesting and very useful 
integrated circuit (IC), as it can create a pulse 
varying in length from nanoseconds to 30 seconds 
by varying the values of the capacitor and resistor 
used for timing. By having such precise control 
over pulse widths, very accurate timing systems 
  Figure 23-3
Part of the datasheet for the 74121 one-shot IC.

324      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
response, so this helps when setting the maximum 
sensitivity of the system.
When you are testing the circuit, either have the 
output from the 74121 one-shot feeding the relay 
board or another LED through a 1-K resistor so 
you can see or hear the response from the system 
as you adjust VR1 and tap on the microphone with 
your ﬁnger. You will know the circuit is working 
when the relay closes or when the LED ﬂashes for 
1 second in response to some sound. The circuit 
will run ﬁne from 3 to 6 V and will respond to 
sounds as subtle as a ﬁnger snap when adjusted 
properly. If you do not see any activation from sounds 
when adjusting VR1 through the entire range, check 
the polarity of the microphone, as this does matter.
The relay drive board is shown in Figure 23-6. 
This is a previous project called the Camera Trigger 
Hack. The idea behind the relays is that no voltage 
is sent to the camera, only the closing of a circuit, 
which emulates exactly the function of the original 
shutter release switch that has been hacked out of 
the camera. Since most digital cameras have a two-
position shutter-release switch (focus and shoot), 
there are two relays used to copy this operation. 
In this project, however, both functions are tied 
together as the camera will need to respond quickly 
to the sound activation. The downside to this is 
that the camera may not have time to spot focus on 
extremely fast-moving targets.
that we salvaged from various audio appliances. 
You can see that there are two pins or solder points 
on the bottom of the can. Looking carefully at the 
pins, you will be able to see that one pin is also 
connected to the outer can by a small metal strip. 
This will always be the negative terminal.
The sound-activated triggering system is shown 
in Figure 23-5 built on a solderless breadboard for 
initial prototyping and testing. There are not many 
wires or components to this circuit, so it is very 
easy to create. You can actually omit the light-
emitting diode (LED) and resistor R1 if you want 
because it is there only to help set the level of the 
sound activation as VR1 is adjusted. When you are 
adjusting VR1, the LED will turn off right at the 
point where the comparator is set to its maximum 
  Figure 23-4   An electret microphone is both 
a microphone and high-gain 
ampliﬁer.
  Figure 23-5   The sound-activation circuit on 
a solderless breadboard. 
  Figure 23-6   This is the relay driver board 
that safely controls the camera 
functions.

Project 23  Q  Sound-Activated Camera      325
move from the solderless breadboard onto a bit 
of perforated board as shown in Figure 23-9. The 
components are placed through the holes in the 
perf board, and then a circuit board is formed on 
the underside using wires and solder. You could 
certainly include the relay driver board and the 
sound activation board on the same circuit board, 
but having the ability to mix and match various 
projects is nice as well.
Our sound-activated camera was going to be 
installed on location for some security job, so 
we installed the two circuit boards into a small 
project box as shown in Figure 23-10. The plastic 
box will also have enough room to hold a 9-V 
battery and a power switch to turn it on and off. 
Figure 23-7 shows the complete rig, ready to 
take a photo every time it hears any sounds in the 
room. We have the sensitivity adjusted so that we 
can clap or snap anywhere in the room and get the 
camera to take a photo. If there is some ambient 
background noise, then you will have to adjust VR1 
in order to reduce the sensitivity and only respond 
to louder sounds, or your memory card will be 
ﬁlled in a hurry. Being an audio circuit, you could 
also include some type of frequency ﬁlter to help 
deal with background noises, and as luck would 
have it, the LM358 has one free op-amp left over 
for such a function.
Besides having the polarity of your electret 
microphone reversed, there is not much else that 
can go wrong with this simple circuit besides 
a wiring error. If you hear your relay clicking 
in response from the sounds but your camera 
fails to respond, then you can try using a larger 
capacitor for C1 in order to lengthen the pulse time 
from the 74121 on-shot. A simple way to ﬁgure 
out the approximate time needed to have your 
camera respond is to manually drive the relays 
by shorting the base of the transistor to VCC to 
activate the relays. Most cameras should be ﬁne 
with a 1-second switching, but you may have to 
experiment with your camera (Figure 23-8).
There are so few components and wires in this 
simple circuit that it only takes a few minutes to 
  Figure 23-7   The sound activation circuit 
connected to the relay driver 
board.
  Figure 23-8   Our solderless breadboard is 
now spying on us!
  Figure 23-9   The completed sound activation 
system on small circuit board.

326      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
We also included an external 1/8-in audio 
connector so that we could activate the camera 
from an external microphone or some other voltage 
signal. Since the LM358 op-amp comparator 
can be set to respond to just about any changing 
voltage, other devices such as light-operated 
circuits, or motion-activated circuits, could be used 
to trigger the camera. Having a high-resolution 
camera responding to some external event makes 
for a very useful security device, able to pick up the 
smallest details in a scene, even when placed at a 
long distance from the subject.
To run a 5-V circuit from a 9-V battery, you only 
need to include one other component—a 7805 
regulator to step the voltage down to 5 V. If you 
alter the voltage on this circuit, you will also have 
to readjust the sensitivity, but this is made easy by 
using a chassis-mounted variable resistor so that it 
can be set anytime.
Figure 23-11 shows how our completed sound-
activated camera looked after installing the two 
small circuit boards and battery into a plastic 
project box. The knob is attached to the variable 
resistor VR1 to allow easy adjustment of the sound 
sensitivity, and the electret microphone is installed 
on the side of the box so that sound can enter 
through a small hole in the plastic.
  Figure 23-10   Adding the two circuit boards 
into a small project box.
  Figure 23-11   The completed sound-activated 
camera, waiting to spy on 
trespassers.

327
P R O J E C T  2 4
Motion-Activated Camera
THIS PROJECT USES a heat-sensing motion detector 
to trigger the shutter-release button on a hacked 
digital camera so that high-resolution images can 
be captured anytime a person or animal crosses in 
front of the motion-sensing zone. By hacking into 
an old motion-activated ﬂoodlight, the cost is kept 
to a minimum and based on a pre-existing system 
that is known to work well. This project converts the 
motion sensor for DC battery operation, allowing it 
to become portable and safe from high voltages.
This project also makes use of a circuit from a 
previous project called Camera Trigger Hack, which 
is a pair of relays and drivers fed into the shutter-
release switch on a digital camera in order to mimic 
the original functionality of the switch. You could 
probably feed the output from this circuit directly 
into the camera shutter switch, but to be safe, the 
relay adds a level of isolation from the camera 
circuit board. Some cameras also have an external 
remote-control jack. This could also be used.
Motion-sensing lights like the one shown in 
Figure 24-1 use a special heat sensor to detect 
movement of warm-bodied creatures. This sensor 
detects the body heat of the subject as it passes 
across a pair of small sensing elements inside the 
heat sensor. This heat sensor is also known as a 
Passive InfraRed (PIR) sensor and is the magic 
behind every one of those inexpensive outdoor 
security lights as well as most indoor motion-
sensing units. Because these devices are mass 
manufactured, they are easy to ﬁnd as surplus or 
even new for very low cost. Many security lights 
are tossed out when the plastic degrades or when 
the relay that controls the AC lights fails, so you 
can probably salvage the needed parts even from 
one that is deemed to be nonfunctional.
327
  Figure 24-0
  This rig will take a photo 
anytime it senses motion or 
heat changes.
  Figure 24-1
  Any common outdoor motion-
sensor light can be used for this 
project.

328      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
To open these motion-sensor boxes, you will 
need some brute force and ugly hacking since they 
are glued tight to keep out water and never intended 
for repair or modiﬁcation. Of course, that will not 
stop the determined evil genius with a knife in 
hand! The easiest way to split open the plastic box 
is to run a sharp knife along the seal as shown in 
Figure 24-4, breaking the glue so that the parts can 
be pried apart. Once you have one side free, you 
can insert a thin screwdriver blade and split the two 
halves apart. Try to avoid damaging the half with 
the lens as you will be using it again later.
Once you have the front part of the motion-
sensor casing open, you will be able to get at the 
circuit board inside. You can see the Fresnel lens 
in Figure 24-5, glued to the front half of the plastic 
Most motion-sensing security lights will have 
an AC cover plate that includes one or more 
light sockets and a plastic sensor unit that can 
be removed from the base plate. Since you will 
not need any of the AC electric parts, tear down 
the sensor light until you have isolated only the 
motion-sensor box as shown in Figure 24-2. This 
part of the system is a standalone device that uses 
120-volts (V) AC to switch an AC load through 
a mechanical relay. You could actually run this 
system from the AC line by isolating the relay 
contacts to switch your control electronics, but to 
play it safe, it is best to convert the motion sensor 
to run from low-voltage DC so you can power it 
from a battery pack.
If you are not interested in hacking up an AC 
appliance for battery operation, you could just 
purchase a ready-to-use motion-sensor board or kit 
from an electronics supplier. The two motion sensors 
shown in Figure 24-3 are from Sparkfun.com and 
are ready to run directly from 5-V DC. If you do 
plan to order a PIR sensor kit from an electronics 
supplier, ensure that you also receive the small 
Fresnel lens needed to spread out the sensing area 
over a larger area. The PIR sensor by itself is only 
capable of sensing movement a few inches away 
from the tiny window on the device, so the Fresnel 
lens is necessary. This lens will look like a small 
bubble or plastic sheet with tiny grooves on its 
surface.
  Figure 24-2
  Only the motion-sensor part of 
the security light is needed for 
this project.
  Figure 24-3
  Motion sensors are also 
available that run directly from 
DC current.
  Figure 24-4
  Sometimes the term hacking
must be taken literally!

Project 24  Q  Motion-Activated Camera      329
to be cheap, not to be easily taken apart so expect 
some parts to be glued in place or held with friction. 
You may have to do a little more hacking in order to 
free the circuit board.
The circuit board will often be made of two parts 
as shown in Figure 24-7—a main circuit board 
that contains some safety electronics and a relay 
to control the AC lights, and a smaller vertically 
mounted circuit board that will contain the PIR 
sensor and its control electronics. Most of the time, 
you can reduce the circuit down to only the small 
sensor board, as the AC board is not going to be 
needed in this project. Of course, this requires 
some reverse engineering of the circuit board, but 
being such a simple circuit, it does not take much 
effort at all.
Chances are you will not be able to track 
down a schematic for your security sensor, but 
most sensors work the same way and use similar 
components. The schematic shown in Figure 24-8 
is a fairly common example of a motion-sensor 
schematic, using a few op-amps to control the 
ampliﬁcation and sensitivity from the PIR sensor. 
The current trend is to use a single motion-sensor 
duty integrated circuit (IC) on the board, so if 
your electronics look a lot more simple than the 
board shown in Figure 24-7, it is probably one of 
the newer cost-reduced types. Either way, reverse 
engineering the system for DC operation is fairly 
easy.
casing. When you are done hacking the sensor, the 
goal will be to have the lens placed back in the same 
spot ahead of the sensor that it was originally in 
order to keep the ﬁeld of view the same. Usually, 
you can glue the plastic cabinet back together or just 
fasten the front half over the circuit board or onto 
another project box that holds both parts together.
There are usually one or more adjustments on the 
sensor to control time on, sensitivity, and delay, and 
these controls will be placed on the outside of the 
plastic so that they can be set. You may have to pop 
out the small plastic knobs as shown in Figure 24-6 
to remove the circuit board from the casing as there 
will often be a connecting rod between the plastic 
knobs and the small timers soldered to the circuit 
board. Remember that these things are designed 
  Figure 24-5
  The two halves open up to 
reveal the circuit board inside.
  Figure 24-6
  Removing the circuit board 
from the plastic housing.
  Figure 24-7
  This is a typical example of a 
motion-sensor circuit board.

330      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
a battery pack. Of course, this is an ugly hack, and 
it is better to trace back to the regulation system to 
input your power there instead.
A single-sided printed circuit board (PCB) is 
very easy to trace and reverse engineer because 
you have all of your traces on the bottom side and 
can see through the board by holding it in front 
of a bright light as shown in Figure 24-10. Seeing 
the components connected by the traces makes 
If your board has an easily identiﬁable IC such 
as the CD4011B NAND gate shown in Figure 24-9, 
then your reverse-engineering work is already half 
completed. Looking at the datasheet for the 4011B, 
it can be seen that like most logic DIP parts, the 
top left pin is VCC (positive) and the bottom right 
pin is GND (negative). So knowing that, you could 
feed the required DC voltage right into these pins 
and most likely have the entire board working from 
100uF
+
+
+
Gnd
Gnd
Gnd
Gnd
Gnd
Gnd
Gnd
Gnd
Gnd
D
S
G
PIR
TS27L41D
Audio Pbt
“LOW” to “HI” pulse
“HI” to “LOW” Pulse on sensing motion
on sening motion
0.01uF
0.01uF
0.01uF
0.1uF
0.1uF
0.1uF
36K
2.7M
2.7M
36K
100K
36K
36K
36K
47K
4.7M
221K
221K
33uF
33uF
+V
+V
+V
2
3
36 K
5
9
8
4
10
12
11
13
1
2
3
4
TS27L4ID
TS27L4ID
TS27L4ID
Schottky Diode
Schottky Diode
40106B
40106B
14
6
1
U1A
U1B
U2B
U2A
U1C
U1D
7
+
+
–
–
–
–
+
+
  Figure 24-8
An example schematic from a common security-sensor system.
  Figure 24-9
  Identifying one of the board ICs
to trace back the power and 
ground points.
  Figure 24-10
  Reverse engineering is easy 
on a board like this since you 
can see through it.

Project 24  Q  Motion-Activated Camera      331
for the voltage regulators will be 7805, LM7805, 
LM78L05, 7809, LM7809, LM7808, and many 
other variations of the 78xx series of regulators. 
The 78L08 regulator we pulled from the board 
is a common 8-V positive voltage regulator that 
will change voltages from 12 to 20 V back to 8 V, 
which is the DC voltage that the electronic circuit 
was designed to run from. We actually found that 
our circuit ran ﬁne on voltages as low as 5 V, and 
tested it as high as 9 V without any problems. To 
identify your voltage regulator, just look at the 
numbers printed on the components and enter 
them in your favorite Internet search engine to 
see if you can bring up a datasheet. If there is a 
silkscreen on the circuit board, then the regulator 
will be marked as IC1 whereas a transistor would 
be marked as Q1 or T1.
Once the voltage regulator has been identiﬁed, 
you can look at the data sheet in order to ﬁnd the 
pinout diagram as shown in Figure 24-12. On the 
regulator, pin 1 was the output, pin 2 was ground, 
and pin 3 was the input—and this corresponded 
to what we found by following those traces to 
the various components and ICs on the board. 
Capacitors are marked on the negative side of the 
can, and so are diodes, so this can also help when 
trying to ﬁgure out which pins or traces are positive 
or negative.
If you can identify the voltage regulator as well 
as a datasheet to acquire the pinout information, 
it very easy to follow the ground or power lines 
around the board in order to ﬁgure out how the 
circuit is powered. In this photo, you can see that 
there has already been a 3-pin part removed from 
the board—that was the voltage regulator that we 
found by following the lines back from the 4011B 
IC on the board.
The security lighting system runs from a 120-V 
AC power line, but internally needs only 5 or 9 V to 
operate. The goal is to reverse-engineer the board 
so you can locate and bypass the onboard voltage 
regulator in order to power the sensor form a much 
safer DC-battery source. The voltage regulator will 
probably look like a common transistor, having 
three pins like the one shown that was removed 
from the board in Figure 24-11. Common values 
  Figure 24-11
  This is the voltage regulator 
that powered the sensor board.
  Figure 24-12
 The datasheet will show the pin diagram for the regulator.

332      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
need to remove the relay and ﬁgure out which trace 
feeds the relay driver to activate the coil.
Our board had some odd AC supply powering 
the relay through an SCR, so we had to pull the 
relay and then trace back to ﬁgure out which point 
on the board fed the relay driver transistor or 
SCR. This job is easy to do once you know that 
the motion sensor is working because you can just 
probe the obvious pins with a voltmeter. When 
the test LED is on, the voltage will be somewhere 
between 1 and 5 volts as compared to zero volts 
when the test LED is off. This signal will likely 
come directly from the motion-sensor IC or the 
op-amp on the main board. Another sneaky trick 
is to just take this signal from the test LED, as it is 
always on when the relay should be on. It can be 
fed into your own relay driver board. We found a 
point on our board that went into the gate on the 
relay driver SCR and just soldered a wire right 
from there.
With the power running to the board, as well a 
line connected to the relay driver circuit, our hacked 
motion sensor was now self-contained and running 
from a 6-V battery pack. Figure 24-14 shows the 
hacked sensor board with an LED connected to 
the line from the relay driver. Each time we ran 
our hand over the PIS sensor, the LED in our 
small breadboard lights for some amount of time 
depending on the settings of the various adjustment 
then unsolder the regulator from the board, taking 
note of its orientation. You can install a pair of 
wires into the regulator’s place, adding one wire 
for positive and one for negative. Your new power 
supply will feed DC power directly to the board, 
so its positive wire will go into the hole where the 
output of the regulars was, and your new negative 
wire will live in the hole that is marked ground or 
common on the regulator pinout. Basically, you are 
removing the original regulator to replace it with a 
set of wires that will feed DC power right into the 
board.
The board we modiﬁed for direct DC power is 
shown in Figure 24-13, with the new DC power 
supply wires soldered into the holes that once held 
the onboard regulator. Now, the only other lines to 
trace are the ones that come from the relay. There 
are a few different ways you can take this project 
from here. It will depend on the design of your 
motion-sensor board and how you hacked into the 
digital camera trigger. If you hear the relay click 
when you power up your sensor board under your 
new DC power supply, then that is good news 
because you have enough voltage to engage the 
relay coil. If you do not hear a relay click, but the 
motion indicator LED seems to be working, then 
your relay may require more voltage or have been 
supplied from another current-limiting power 
supply on the board. In the later case, you will 
  Figure 24-13
  The hacked board now runs from 
9-V DC rather than 120-V AC.
  Figure 24-14
  Testing the hacked sensor 
circuit board using an LED to 
signal motion.

Project 24  Q  Motion-Activated Camera      333
Fresnel lens like the one shown in Figure 24-16, 
then you can just use a little hot glue to fasten the 
circuit board in the same place it was before you 
hacked the system. The Fresnel lens expands the 
ﬁeld of view, allowing the sensor to see an entire 
room or yard rather than just a few inches in front 
of its tiny glass window. Of course, feel free to test 
the sensor response with no lens as it may work 
perfectly in your own application, if short range is 
all that is needed.
The small relay driver board shown in Figure 24-17 
will create a bridge between your newly hacked 
motion sensor and the hacked digital camera. This 
resistors on the board. From here, the sensor board 
is ready to connect up to our hacked digital camera 
trigger board.
If you enjoy the reverse-engineering aspect 
of this hobby, then you can further reduce your 
motion-sensor board by removing all of the AC 
regulation circuitry and the safety electronics. 
Since only DC is used now the safety circuit is 
pointless as well as the AC regulation components. 
On many of these sensors, the only board you need 
will be vertically mounted to the AC board, and it 
can be reduced to run on its own by doing a little 
creative reverse engineering.
Figure 24-15 shows a pair of sensor boards we 
hacked down to their minimal state by removing 
them from the AC board to run directly from DC 
power. If you take the reverse engineering this far, 
then you will also be losing the relay and driver, 
but the sensor system will still be fully functional. 
Instead of driving a relay, though, the sensor will 
output a 5-V signal whenever motion is detected. 
This will certainly work well with the hacked 
camera trigger relay board built in a previous 
project.
When you are done hacking and reverse 
engineering the motion-sensor board, it will be 
ready for your other projects, but will require the 
Fresnel lens to be attached again. If your sensor 
casing split so that the front half included the 
  Figure 24-15
  Reducing the sensor board 
to their absolute minimal 
conﬁguration.
  Figure 24-16
  Attaching the Fresnel lens to 
the reverse-engineered sensor 
board.
  Figure 24-17
  This is the relay driver board 
that safely controls the camera 
functions.

334      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
so that the PIR window could see the outside 
world. The Fresnel lens part would then be glued 
over the box lid to expand the ﬁeld of view. The 
battery and relay board were also mounted into the 
small plastic box so that the unit would be a fully 
functioning motion trigger system that could be 
plugged into the hacked digital camera or any other 
device we felt like operating under motion-detected 
control.
The completed motion-activated camera is 
shown in Figure 24-19, waiting to capture in high 
detail the next person who dares to wander into 
our living room. As a security system, this project 
works very well, especially when a high level of 
detail is necessary. On a fresh charge, the camera 
can run for hours, snapping photos until the 
batteries are dead or until the memory card is full.
This system also works well in nature photography, 
where a stealthy setup is needed in order to capture 
some elusive creature or one that you don’t want 
to be anywhere near due to danger. We also found 
this project useful when we wanted several group 
photos that we were supposed to be included in 
and did not feel like ﬁddling around with the single 
self-timer on the camera. With this system, you just 
turn it on and the camera will keep on acting like 
your personal paparazzi as long as something is 
moving in its ﬁeld of view!
is a previous project called the Camera Trigger 
Hack. The idea behind the relays is that no voltage 
is sent to the camera, only the closing of a circuit, 
which emulates exactly the function of the original 
shutter release switch that has been hacked out of 
the camera. Since most digital cameras have a two-
position shutter release switch (focus and shoot), 
there are two relays used to copy this operation. 
In this project however, both functions are tied 
together as the camera will need to respond quickly 
to the motion sensor. The downside to this is that 
the camera may not have time to spot focus on 
extremely fast-moving targets.
If you kept the original relay working on the 
motion-sensor board, then you do not need to use 
a separate relay board as you will already have 
the required isolation offered by the relay on the 
motion-sensor board. As long as you are only 
connecting to the contact points on the relay, then 
no voltages will be sent from your motion-sensor 
system, only an open or closed circuit, just like the 
original shutter release switch in the digital camera.
With all of the components working together 
perfectly from the 6-V battery pack, we found a 
suitable black box to create a self-contained unit 
that could be sent into the battle zone. The motion 
sensor was glued to the top of the enclosure as 
shown in Figure 24-18, with a hold drilled out 
  Figure 24-18
  Creating a self-contained 
motion-sensing camera 
system.
  Figure 24-19
  The motion-activated camera 
waiting for the next victim to 
set it off.

335
P R O J E C T  2 5
Camera Zoom Extender
WHEN YOUR JOB is to collect information covertly, 
there are times when you will need to be both 
far from the subject, but at the same time 
collect as much high detail as possible. A typical 
10-megapixel camera will often be able to capture 
a face or license plate from a block away, but there 
are times when you need even great imaging power, 
and the built-in optics will not cut it. Some cameras 
offer a digital zoom function, but this really only 
expands the pixels of the image so no extra detail 
is captured using this function. To collect data from 
a greater distance, your camera needs more optical 
zoom power.
There are basically two ways you can bring your 
digital camera into the extreme zoom zone: using 
a proper interchangeable zoom lens for a single-
lens reﬂex (SLR) camera, or by retro-ﬁtting your 
camera to use a binocular or telescope or gun sight 
like the ones shown in Figure 25-1. The ﬁrst option 
will require you to own a digital camera that allow 
lenses to be changed. These become expensive, 
especially the telephoto zoom lenses—very 
expensive! The second option will work with any 
cheap digital camera, allowing it to see further than 
any costly SLR zoom lens, but at the expense of 
a little quality. By adapting a $100 digital camera 
to one side of a binocular, you will have a camera 
capable of taking images from a great distance, and 
although this setup will have some blurring around 
the edges, it will have similar zoom capabilities to 
those $10,000 lenses used by paparazzi to invade 
the privacy of many entertainment personalities.
If you own a digital SLR (single lens reﬂex) 
camera or some other quality digital camera that 
335
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 Camera: Any digital SLR or pocket camera
Q 
 Optics: Gun site, monocular or binoculars
Q 
 Base: 2-in wide ¼-in thick plywood or 
1/8-in steel
  Figure 25-0   A digital camera can be adapted 
for ultra long range photography.
  Figure 25-1   Digital zoom is never as good as 
true optical magniﬁcation.

336      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
The huge lens shown attached to the Nikon SLR 
digital camera (Figure 25-3) is a 55 to 200 mm 
telephoto lens. It basically takes over where the 
standard 18 to 55 mm leaves off. This lens could 
pull the time off your watch from across the street 
on a clear day. Although it was almost as expensive 
as the actual camera, the results are amazing. 
When we use this lens on Nikon D90 for security 
work, it is amazing how much detail is shown on 
the computer when viewing the images without 
any scaling. Anyone serious about surveillance 
should have an SLR camera with both the standard 
18 to 55 mm lens as well as a telephoto lens like 
this one. It only takes 10 seconds to swap the 
lenses, and the camera is ready to go from imaging 
a block away to seeing as far as you can with your 
naked eyes.
Now that we have explored the expensive way to 
shoot long-range photography, it’s time to 
move into the hacking zone. At the sacriﬁce of a 
little quality, any cheap pocket digital camera can 
be made to see as far away or much further than 
those equipped with expensive telephoto lenses. 
The idea is to have the camera look through the 
eyepieces on a binocular, gun sight, or telescope in 
order to see a distant scene just as you would while 
looking through the optics. The interesting thing 
about retro-ﬁtting a camera to an optical device is 
that the camera can actually see more detail than 
you could, so once the images are viewed full size 
on a computer screen, details you might not have 
allows the changing of lenses, then you can simply 
purchase a telephoto lens that will enhance the 
optical powers of your camera. Of course, these 
quality cameras are not cheap; the lenses are often 
more expensive than the camera itself. The Nikon 
D60 shown in Figure 25-2 is a good-quality 
12-megapixel camera that can be purchased for 
under $500 from many camera stores. This camera 
has many lens options available, including wide 
angle and telephoto lenses. The standard 18 to 
55 mm lens that came with the camera is shown 
removed from the camera body.
A quality camera that can image over 
10 megapixels will often reveal extremely high 
details at long distances as long as you set the 
image quality at the highest possible setting. The 
lower settings take smaller images or use higher 
compression, often blurring extremely ﬁne details 
in distant scenes. Using only the 18 to 55 mm lens, 
this Nikon can easily capture a face or license 
plate a block away as long as we take photos at 
the highest quality and then show them nonscaled 
on a computer program. If you plan to do a lot of 
surveillance work and want a robust camera that 
will bring in the details, then make no mistake—
a good SLR camera with a 10-megapixel imager 
and a standard 15 to 55 mm lens will blow away 
any cheap 20-megapixel camera with an optical 
zoom rated for 16x. There is no comparison at all 
really. The pocket cams can’t even come close to 
capturing the clarity of that a digital SLR can.
  Figure 25-2   SLR digital cameras offer the 
ability to change the lenses.
  Figure 25-3   This telephoto lens will ﬁt onto 
any Nikon SLR camera body.

Project 25  Q  Camera Zoom Extender      337
Figure 25-5 will probably need to be further away 
from the eyepiece to acquire a larger imaging area.
Start by setting your camera zoom to the 
midpoint and then simply look through the 
viewﬁnder or LCD while holding the lens close to 
the eyepiece on the optical device. Aim the optical 
device out of your window and see how the camera 
responds at various distances and zoom levels as 
you watch the live image on the viewﬁnder. It will 
be fairly easy to get an image, but you will likely 
have a large black border around the image or 
see blurring to one side. These errors are usually 
corrected by proper alignment of the camera lens 
with the optical device, but at this point, just mess 
around and try to ﬁnd that best mix of distance and 
zoom to get the largest possible image with the 
least amount of black border. The more powerful 
the optics, the more border you can expect with the 
gun sight having almost no border as compared to 
at least 50 percent border with a telescope.
The gun sight we tested worked well when held 
at about 2 inches (in) in front of the camera lens, 
but the binoculars shown in Figure 25-6 needed to 
be less than half an inch from the lens for optimal 
focal range. Avoid touching the cameras lens with 
any object, even the rubber eyepieces from the 
binoculars or you will have to clean the lens. There 
will be no reason to ever have anything touch 
the camera lens surface, with ¼ in being about as 
close as you will need to get, even when adapting 
been able to see will be visible. A hundred-dollar 
pocket camera connected to the gun sight shown in 
Figure 25-4 will actually see further than the 55 to 
200 mm lens shown in Figure 25-3, but some of the 
edges around the image will be blurred.
We will be using our Nikon D60 as the base 
camera for the remainder of these experiments, 
but any small pocket digital camera would work. 
The smaller the diameter of the lens, the easier it 
will be to adapt to the eyepiece on the binocular or 
telescope. So a cheap digital camera will actually 
be better for these experiments than the SLR 
camera we are using here. The resulting system 
will certainly not offer the kind of quality you need 
to send your photos to a gossip mag for print, but 
you will certainly be able to compete for imaging 
distance with many of the ultra-expensive telephoto 
lenses used by the pros. Any optical system that 
has been designed for you to look through can be 
used as an optical magniﬁer for a digital camera. 
Binoculars work very well for this project.
To adapt an imaging system that was designed 
for human eyes to the cameras lens, you will have 
to mess around with both the zoom settings on the 
camera and the distance from the cameras lens to 
the eyepiece on the optical device. Pocket cameras 
with smaller lenses seem to like a distance about 
the same as your eyes would be from the lens on 
the optical device, so that is a good starting point. 
Larger lenses like the one on the Nikon shown in 
  Figure 25-4   This 3p optical zoom gun sight 
can be used as a makeshift 
camera lens.
  Figure 25-5   Figuring out the optimum focal 
point by trial and error.

338      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
apparatus, then you will need to make your own 
brackets using wood or metal in order to fasten 
it to the base. The base is made from a piece of 
solid wood or metal, and needs to be as straight as 
possible.
Since our gun sight had a pair of mounting 
brackets that would take a bolt, we just placed it on 
the base and then marked the drill hole positions 
as shown in Figure 25-8. It is important to have the 
optical device in line with the base so that it ends 
up aligned with the center of the camera lens. As 
you have probably discovered when holding the 
optical device in front of the camera lens by hand, 
any slight misalignment will result in a blurred or 
shifted image.
for use with a telescope. Don’t worry about the 
side-to-side alignment right now as you will not 
be able to get it right on by simply holding the two 
parts together. Alignment will be corrected later.
Once you have ﬁgured out the optimal zoom 
setting and physical distance from the optical 
device that works best for your camera, the next 
step will be to align the two so that the image is 
not blurred on one side or off center. You may not 
be able to completely eliminate the black borders 
around the image. But, as long as you are getting 
sharp imaging in the center, there will be incredible 
detail available as you take photos using the 
cameras with highest-quality setting.
Alignment of the camera with the optical device 
is easy to do using a sturdy base that will hold 
both components in alignment with each other. 
All cameras have a tripod mounting bolt hole 
in the bottom, so this will be used to fasten the 
camera to the base, but as for the optical device, 
you will have to ﬁnd some way to secure it to 
the base as well. Fastening the gun sight shown 
in Figure 25-7 was easy because the sight already 
had a pair of mounting brackets. The sight was too 
low while just sitting on the base, but that will be 
easy to correct with a few washers once the holes 
are drilled in order to fasten it in place with a pair 
of bolts. If your optical device has no mounting 
  Figure 25-6   The binocular eyepieces need 
to be closer to the lens than the 
gun sight.
  Figure 25-7   Making a solid base to align the 
optical device to the camera 
lens.
  Figure 25-8   Marking the holes on the base to 
mount the gun sight.

Project 25  Q  Camera Zoom Extender      339
with both the camera and optical device installed so 
that you can ﬁnd the center of gravity. Figure 25-11
shows the base balanced on its center over a roll 
of tape while both the camera and gun sight are 
installed.
Once the center of gravity has been found, drill 
the appropriate size hole in the base material and 
then ﬁnd a bolt and nut that will allow your tripod 
platform to be fastened to the base material as 
shown in Figure 25-12. The completed unit should 
balance on the tripod platform, which will keep the 
stress away from the mounting bolt and help keep 
your tripod balanced for easy adjusting.
If you can’t ﬁnd the exact size bolt needed 
to fasten your camera to the base through the 
hole drilled in it, just borrow one from a tripod 
mounting base as shown in Figure 25-9. The 
standard tripod bolt is a ¼-in diameter, 20 threads 
per inch bolt, and will only screw into the camera 
body to a depth of about ¼ in. If you want to 
make your own tripod bolt, ﬁnd one with the same 
threads and saw it off to the length needed to pass 
through your mounting base material and into the 
camera body.
The alignment between the optical device and 
the camera lens has to happen in two dimensions: 
left to right, and up and down. Left-to-right 
alignment is taken care of by the base as long as 
your mounting holes are in the center, but the 
up-and-down alignment may require some work. 
Our gun sight was too low for the camera lens, so 
we added a pair of bolts as shown in Figure 25-
10 that just happened to be the correct thickness 
in order to align the gun sight perfectly with the 
camera lens. You will know when you have found 
the perfect alignment as the image will be centered 
in the viewﬁnder, with an equal amount of black 
border around the edges and no corner blurring.
If you intend to mount the completed system to 
a tripod, then you will have to drill another hole 
in the base for a tripod bolt. To ﬁnd the optimal 
placement for the main tripod bolt, balance the base 
  Figure 25-9   Using the mounting bolt from 
a tripod base to fasten the 
camera.
  Figure 25-10   These bolts will lift the gun 
sight to the level of the camera 
lens.
  Figure 25-11   Finding the center of balance 
with both devices mounted to 
the base.

340      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
The bent length of steel ﬂatbar is shown 
mounted to both the camera and binoculars in 
Figure 25-14 after spending some time ﬁne-tuning 
the alignment. Another thing to consider is which 
eyepiece to use with the camera. Since this digital 
camera had most of the body on the right side of 
the lens, we opted for the right eyepiece so that 
the camera would not be in our way when looking 
through the left eyepiece. Figure 25-14 shows the 
underside of the binoculars, and the camera is 
installed over the right eyepiece.
The completed binocular-cam is shown in 
Figure 25-15, easily grabbing all of the detailed 
text from a scene that was about 500 feet away. 
We were able to zoom the camera in to get rid of 
the entire black border around the image, and the 
Binoculars are particularly good for this 
project as they offer a long range or adjustable 
zoom factor and adapt very well to smaller digital 
cameras with lens diameters of less than 1 in. 
The other beneﬁt is that you can look through the 
unobstructed eyepiece to ﬁnd your target while 
pressing the shutter release button to take an 
image of anything you are looking at. This allows 
the camera viewﬁnder to be turned off, saving 
battery life and helping to keep your viewing area 
dark, which is deﬁnitely a good thing in a stealth 
operation.
Since binoculars have no center tripod mounting 
bolt hole, they can be a challenge to adapt to a 
camera, so you will have to do a little creative 
thinking in order to create a system that holds the 
camera lens in perfect alignment just behind 
the binocular eyepiece. Many binoculars have a 
bolt hole in the front where the two pieces hinge 
together. This can usually be found by popping off 
the plastic cap that is ﬁt over the open end. If your 
binoculars have this bolt hole, then you can ﬁnd a 
small length of steel ﬂatbar like the piece shown 
in Figure 25-13 and then just bend it into a shape 
that will allow it to be mounted to the binocular 
bolt hole at one end while the other end holds the 
camera in place using the tripod mounting hole on 
the camera. It takes a bit of ﬁddling to get the metal 
into the right shape, but this does work well once 
you ﬁnd that perfect alignment.
  Figure 25-12   The completed gun-sight 
adapter sitting on the tripod 
mounting platform.
  Figure 25-13   A piece of bent steel ﬂatbar 
will be made into a binocular 
adapter.
  Figure 25-14   The metal ﬂat bar holds the 
camera over the right eyepiece 
in perfect alignment.

Project 25  Q  Camera Zoom Extender      341
binocular was made into a monocular by removing 
one of the hinged sides and then both the camera 
and monocular were fastened to a steel box that 
would also contain the timer electronics and a 
battery pack. The monocular made for a smaller 
conﬁguration, but focusing had to be done live on 
the viewﬁnder when setting up the scene for the 
ﬁrst time.
The version of the camera zoom extender 
shown in Figure 25-17 can detail a license plate 
from miles away. It does take some effort to set 
up the scene and get the camera to focus, but once 
system worked extremely well, with only a little 
blurring around the outer edge of the image. This 
system does not have the color quality offered by 
the expensive SLR zoom lens shown in Figure 25-3, 
but it can see almost 10r as far and costs 10r less, 
even when you consider the price of the camera and 
binoculars! Not bad at all for a 2-hour hack.
These binoculars also had an adjustable zoom 
with an optical power of 16 r 50, so they were 
great for both medium-distance and very-long-
distance surveillance. You will, of course, be giving 
up the ability to use the camera’s built-in ﬂash, so 
set your camera for no ﬂash but also short exposure 
if you can. Fast-moving scenes need fast exposure, 
but if you are just hunting for license plates or 
small details in a static scene, long exposure will 
also work well as long as you have your system 
mounted some way so it is held steady. If you afﬁx 
your system to a tripod and set the camera for 
night shots or long exposure, you can almost see 
in the dark, bringing in high details in dark scenes 
as long as there is nothing moving. We found that 
the camera could see much better than we could at 
night, just under the ambient light from streetlights.
The version of the zoom extended shown in 
Figure 25-16 is one that we built for time-lapse 
photography using the hacked camera trigger 
project and trigger timer project shown earlier. The 
  Figure 25-15   Testing the binocular-cam with 
a scene that has some detailed 
text.
  Figure 25-16   The camera and monocular 
mounted to a box for 
automatic operation.
  Figure 25-17   For ultra-long-distance 
photography, a telescope 
works well.

342      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
This system allows the acquisition of images with 
ultra-high details from a distance of a block away 
when using the camera at full-quality resolution. 
There is only a slight darkening around the edges 
of the image, but other than that the quality is 
very good considering how easy to build and 
inexpensive this setup was.
To test our gun-sight version of the zoom 
extender, we set the camera for no ﬂash, quick 
exposure, and then shot a scene over 500-feet away 
on a dreary snowy day. The image was bright, 
crisp, and full of detail as shown in Figure 25-19. 
The license plate was huge when we viewed the 
image on the computer screen with no scaling. We 
could have probably seen the color of a person’s 
eyes at this distance using the zoom extender. The 
crosshairs were a bit annoying, so we later removed 
them from the gun sight.
The binocular version of the zoom extender 
did not have the ultra crisp clarity of the gun sight 
system, but this is to be expected since it can see 
a scene at 4× more magniﬁcation. When you look 
further, you will always be trading light and clarity 
for distance, but with a 10-megapixel camera, there 
is still a lot more detail captured than you can see 
with your naked eyes. Figure 25-20 shows both of 
working, this system can see as far away as the 
telescope can, bringing in details that are far out 
of reach from most digital camera lenses. The 
only drawback to using such a large amount of 
magniﬁcation is that the camera has to be triggered 
either by the self-timer or remote control as the 
small movements cause by touching the camera 
would create massive shifts in the scene. With a 
steady tripod and a remotely- or self-timed camera, 
the images are fairly crisp, and the system can 
see at such magniﬁcation levels that moon crater 
photographs are even possible!
To adapt a small digital camera to a telescope, 
use the standard eyepieces that you would need to 
view the image yourself and then afﬁx the camera 
so that the lens is about ¼-in away from the lens 
on the eyepiece. The system shown in Figure 25-17 
uses a small plastic tube with set screws to hold 
the camera to the eyepiece directly, although this 
option only works well if your camera lens sticks 
out of the camera body. The ﬂatbar system shown 
in Figures 25-13 and 25-14 would also work for a 
telescope mounting.
For ultra-high-quality long-distance imaging, 
we use our Nikon SLR along with the gun sight 
mounted to the tripod as shown in Figure 25-18. 
  Figure 25-18   The completed gun-sight zoom 
extender using a digital SLR
camera.
  Figure 25-19   At over 500 feet away, a 
license plate is no problem at 
all for this system.

Project 25  Q  Camera Zoom Extender      343
the long-range zoom cameras being tested on the 
same winter scene. Even with the snow falling and 
lack of bright sunlight, the images captured were 
very high in detail. 
This simple project proves that you don’t have 
to spend thousands of dollars on a high-end camera 
and lens to spy on distant scenes. The quality of 
the images captured with the $50 pocket digital 
camera adapted to the $100 binoculars are very 
good, and the ability to see distant scenes with 
this setup rivals what can be done with a $5,000 
telephoto lens.
  Figure 25-20   Both long range zoom systems 
being tested on the same 
scene.

This page intentionally left blank 

345
P R O J E C T  2 6
Nikon Clap Snap
HAVE YOU EVER WANTED to remotely activate your 
Nikon camera? Maybe you already own the optional 
keychain remote but ﬁnd it to be lacking in features? 
How about complete hands-free remote triggering? 
Yes, our clap snap project will not only allow 
hands-free operation, but it has a continuous 
10-second time-lapse feature built in as well so you 
will never have to mess around with the camera 
menus or be caught pointing that keychain at the lens 
in your photos! This project feeds the output from an 
audio ampliﬁer into the analog-to-digital converter 
on an inexpensive microcontroller that decodes three 
sharp sounds and then issues the infrared signal to 
the camera to take a photo. This project works on all 
of the Nikon SLR cameras we have tested, and may 
work on others as well. Modiﬁcations to the design 
to support different features and makes of cameras 
would certainly be easy.
ﬁt into just about any low-end 8-bit microprocessor 
with a little code reworking. The source code is 
presented in AVR assembly, but would be easy 
enough to convert to C.
It took some time to decode the pulse train 
that came from the original Nikon keychain 
remote control, but in the end it was found to be 
very similar to most of the VCR or TV remote 
controls; using a series of on and off intervals 
of a 40-kilohertz (KHz) carrier signal. This old 
and time-tested protocol is actually called “RC5” 
and although it varies from one manufacturer to 
another, it is basically a modulated 38- to 40-KHz 
carrier wave. The Nikon was found to use a 
40-KHz carrier wave as per the pulse train 
measured on the output of the optional Nikon 
keychain remote control system.
We use our Nikon cameras a lot, and often we 
ﬁnd ourselves pecking at the menus to get that 
345
P A R T S  L I S T
Q 
 IC1: ATMEL ATMega88P or comparable 
microcontroller
Q 
 IC2: LM386 1-W single IC audio ampliﬁer
Q 
 Resistors: R1 = 1 to 10 K to bias electret 
microphone, R2 = 1 K, R3 = 1 K, R4 = 1 K, 
R5 = 1 K, VR1 = 10 K potentiometer
Q 
 Capacitors: C1 = 0.1 μF, C2 = 0.1 μF 
Q 
 Microphone: Electret 2-wire style microphone
Q 
 Buzzer: 2-wire piezo buzzer element
Q 
 Battery: 3- to 9-V battery or pack
  Figure 26-0   Build the nikon clap snap 
remote control.
The clap snap program is designed for an AVR 
ATMega88 microprocessor, but is simple enough to 

346      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
self-timer activated. The issue we have with the 
self-timer is that not all of Nikon cameras allow 
more than a single shot to be taken, and by the time 
we get back into place, the timer seems to already 
be taking the photo! We also have the keychain 
remote, but again, it forces us to point at the camera 
and then attempt to set up the shot with the remote 
in our hands. We wanted hands-free operation as 
well as a continuous 10-second time-lapse system 
that would offer a hint of warning before each shot 
so the clap snap project was born. Our goals were 
to have three claps, snaps, or sharp sounds trigger 
a shutter release while ignoring most background 
sounds. We also wanted to have a nonstop 10-second 
timer mode. A low-cost ATMega88 was chosen 
as it had more than enough power for the job and 
would run from its internal oscillator.
Once we had the timing parameters for the 
pulse train that the Nikon cameras needed, we 
created a very simple ampliﬁer system that would 
send a voltage spike to the analog-to-digital 
input on the microcontroller (Figure 26-1). The 
ampliﬁer responds very well to a short and sharp 
sound, but does only a fair job of ignoring any 
ambient background noise. Further processing 
done in the microcontroller will allow some 
“intelligent” listening to happen, making the 
camera only respond to three sharp claps or snaps 
in a row rather than false triggering every time 
the background noise level is high. To allow some 
feedback on operation, three visible light-emitting 
  Figure 26-1   The original prototype was built on a solderless breadboard.
diodes (LEDs) are added to the circuit. A red LED 
shows the sound spikes on the input of the ADC, a 
blue LED indicates that claps have been heard and 
that the window of opportunity is open, and a green 
LED ﬂashes when the system has heard three claps 
and is about to take a photo. Control of the Nikon 
camera is through an invisible infrared LED, just 
like the optional factory-made remote control.
The schematic is very simple, only using the 
ATMega88, an LM386 audio ampliﬁer, and a few 
other semiconductors (Figure 26-2). Any high-
gain audio ampliﬁer that can boost the output 
from the electret microphone would work, but the 
LM386 seemed to be very good at the task and is 
a common component. An electret microphone 
is a tiny microphone in a can that also includes a 
sensitive ampliﬁer built in, and these can be found 
in just about any consumer device that requires a 
sound input. Old telephones, answering machines, 
tape recorders, and many toys have an electret 
microphone so check your scrap pile before looking 
to purchase a new one. An electret microphone will 
usually be about the size of a pencil eraser and have 
two wires on the underside, or two points to solder 
wires. One point will always be connected to the 
can, and this is the negative or ground side. This 
polarity is very important since the electret requires 
its own power source as shown in the schematic.
The 10-K variable resistor biases the output 
from the LM386 ampliﬁer to VCC so that the level 

Project 26  Q  Nikon Clap Snap      347
+5 V
+5 V
10 K
1 K
1 K 1 K 2 K
2 K
Red
Blue
Green
Infra-red
10 K
+5 V
+5 V
PIEZO
Auto switch
+5 V
ATMEGA88 @ 8 MHz
+5 V
0.1 μF
LM 386
Sound adjust
MIC
−
+
  Figure 26-2  This is the basic clap snap schematic using an ATMega88.
; *************************************************************************************
; ********** NIKON CLAP & SNAP : (C) 2008 BY RAD BRAD FOR LUCIDSCIENCE.COM
; ********** TARGET : ATMEGA-88P WITH INTERNAL OSCILLATOR AT 8 MHZ
; *************************************************************************************
; ATMEGA88 DEFINITION
.include “m88def.inc”
; *************************************************************************************
; ********** REGISTER DEFINITIONS
; *************************************************************************************
.def t1 = r16
.def t2 = r17
.def t3 = r18
.def t4 = r19
.def clap = r20
.def reps = r21
.def lctr1 = r22
.def lctr2 = r23
.def wctr1 = r24
.def wctr2 = r25
of sound can be adjusted to help minimize false 
triggering if there is a lot of ambient background 
noise. The program code does a great job of 
detecting and counting three claps, but if the 
noise is overwhelming the ADC, there will be 
false triggering. The adjustment makes it easy to 
set the unit for proper operation in just about any 
environment. We added our variable resistor, the 
printed circuit board (PCB), and only set it once, 
but we have not yet needed to make any changes. 
Adding it to the cabinet with a knob would allow 
ﬁne tuning at any time.

348      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
; *************************************************************************************
; ********** RESET AND INTERRUPT VECTORS
; *************************************************************************************
; RESET VECTOR
reset:
rjmp startup
startup:
; STACK POINTER
ldi t1 ,low(ramend)
out spl,t1
ldi t1 ,high(ramend)
out sph,t1
; *************************************************************************************
; ********** ADC AND IO PORT SETUP
; *************************************************************************************
; MICROPHONE ANALOG INPUT
cbi ddrc,0
cbi portc,0
; RED STATUS LED
sbi ddrb,0 
; BLUE STATUS LED
sbi ddrd,7
; GREEN STATUS LED
sbi ddrd,6
; INFRARED OUTPUT LED
sbi ddrd,5
; PIEZO BUZZER OUTPUT
sbi ddrd,0
; AUTO SWITCH INPUT
cbi ddrd,1
; SETUP ADC FOR FREE RUNNING
lds t1,ADMUX
cbr t1,(1<<REFS1)
cbr t1,(1<<REFS0)
sbr t1,(1<<ADLAR)
cbr t1,(1<<MUX3)
cbr t1,(1<<MUX2)
cbr t1,(1<<MUX1)

Project 26  Q  Nikon Clap Snap      349
cbr t1,(1<<MUX0)
sts ADMUX,t1
lds t1,ADCSRA
sbr t1,(1<<ADEN)
cbr t1,(1<<ADATE)
cbr t1,(1<<ADIE)
sbr t1,(1<<ADPS2)
cbr t1,(1<<ADPS1)
cbr t1,(1<<ADPS0)
sts ADCSRA,t1
; *************************************************************************************
; ********** STARTUP AND INITIALIZATION
; *************************************************************************************
; FLASH LEDS AND BEEP ON STARTUP
rcall delay
sbi portb,0
sbi portd,7
sbi portd,6
rcall beeper
rcall delay
cbi portb,0
cbi portd,7
cbi portd,6
; RESET REGISTERS
clr t1
clr t2
clr t3
clr clap
clr reps
clr lctr1
clr lctr2
clr wctr1
clr wctr2
clr xl
clr xh
; *************************************************************************************
; ********** MAIN LOOP
; *************************************************************************************
main:
; RUN AUTO MODE IF AUTO SWITCH IS ON
sbic pind,1
rjmp aut1

350      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
; 10 SECOND AUTO TIMER DELAY FLASH
ldi t1,4
adl:
sbi portb,0
sbi portd,7
rcall delay
cbi portb,0
cbi portd,7
rcall delay
dec t1
brne adl
; COMPLETE DELAY AND TAKE PHOTO
sbi portd,6
rcall beeper
rcall delay
rcall photosnap
cbi portd,6
rjmp main
aut1:
; READ ADC INPUT VALUE AND SET CLAP REGISTER
lds t1,ADCSRA
sbr t1,(1<<ADSC)
sts ADCSRA,t1
adcloop:
lds t1,ADCSRA
sbrc t1,ADSC
rjmp adcloop
lds clap,ADCH
; CLAP DETECTION LED CONTROL & COUNT REPS
cpi clap,150
brne cdl1
sbi portb,0
ldi lctr1,20
ldi lctr2,255
cdl1:
cpi lctr1,0
breq cdl2
dec lctr2
brne cdl2
dec lctr1
cdl2:
cpi lctr1,0
brne cdl3
sbic pinb,0
inc reps
cbi portb,0
cdl3:

Project 26  Q  Nikon Clap Snap      351
; TRIPLE CLAP DETECT WINDOW LED CONTROL
cpi clap,150
brne dwl1
sbi portd,7
ldi wctr1,255
ldi wctr2,255
dwl1:
cpi wctr1,0
breq dwl2
dec wctr2
brne dwl2
dec wctr1
dwl2:
cpi wctr1,0
brne dwl3
clr reps
cbi portd,7
dwl3:
; DETECT THIRD CLAP AND TAKE PHOTO
cpi reps,3
brne tcv1
clr reps
clr lctr1
clr lctr2
clr wctr1
clr wctr2
cbi portd,6
cbi portd,7
sbi portd,6
rcall beeper
rcall delay
rcall photosnap
rcall delay
cbi portd,6
tcv1:
; CONTINUE WITH MAIN LOOP
rjmp main
; *************************************************************************************
; ********** 1 SECOND DELAY ROUTINE
; *************************************************************************************
delay:
ldi yl,40
dly1:
ldi xh,high(60000)
ldi xl,low(60000)

352      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
dly2:
sbiw xl,1
brne dly2
dec yl
brne dly1
ret
; *************************************************************************************
; ********** PIEZO BEEPER
; *************************************************************************************
beeper:
; BEEP TONE 1
ldi t1,100
bp1:
sbi portd,0
ldi xh,high(1500)
ldi xl,low(1500)
bp2:
sbiw xl,1
brne bp2
cbi portd,0
ldi xh,high(1500)
ldi xl,low(1500)
bp3:
sbiw xl,1
brne bp3
dec t1
brne bp1
; BEEP TONE 2
ldi t1,100
bp4:
sbi portd,0
ldi xh,high(1200)
ldi xl,low(1200)
bp5:
sbiw xl,1
brne bp5
cbi portd,0
ldi xh,high(1200)
ldi xl,low(1200)
bp6:
sbiw xl,1
brne bp6
dec t1
brne bp4

Project 26  Q  Nikon Clap Snap      353
; BEEP TONE 3
ldi t1,100
bp7:
sbi portd,0
ldi xh,high(1000)
ldi xl,low(1000)
bp8:
sbiw xl,1
brne bp8
cbi portd,0
ldi xh,high(1000)
ldi xl,low(1000)
bp9:
sbiw xl,1
brne bp9
dec t1
brne bp7
ret
; *************************************************************************************
; ********** NIKON REMOTE CONTROL SHUTTER SIGNAL
; *************************************************************************************
photosnap:
ldi t3,2
snaploop:
; CYCLE 1 = 16000 CLK MOD
ldi t1,77
c1:
sbi portd,5
ldi t2,33
m1:
dec t2
brne m1
nop
nop
nop
cbi portd,5
ldi t2,33
m2:
dec t2
brne m2
nop
nop
nop
dec t1
brne c1
nop

354      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
; CYCLE 2 = 222640 CLK PAUSE
ldi xh,high(22264)
ldi xl,low(22264)
dl1:
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
sbiw xl,1
brne dl1
; CYCLE 3 = 3120 CLK MOD
ldi t1,15
c2:
sbi portd,5
ldi t2,33
m3:
dec t2
brne m3
nop
nop
nop
cbi portd,5
ldi t2,33
m4:
dec t2
brne m4
nop
nop
nop
dec t1
brne c2
nop
; CYCLE 4 = 12640 CLK PAUSE
ldi xh,high(1264)
ldi xl,low(1264)
dl3:
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
sbiw xl,1
brne dl3

Project 26  Q  Nikon Clap Snap      355
; CYCLE 5 = 3360 CLK MOD
ldi t1,16
c3:
sbi portd,5
ldi t2,33
m5:
dec t2
brne m5
nop
nop
nop
cbi portd,5
ldi t2,33
m6:
dec t2
brne m6
nop
nop
nop
dec t1
brne c3
nop
; CYCLE 6 = 28640 CLK PAUSE
ldi xh,high(2864)
ldi xl,low(2864)
dl4:
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
sbiw xl,1
brne dl4
; CYCLE 7 = 3200 CLK MOD
ldi t1,15
c4:
sbi portd,5
ldi t2,33
m7:
dec t2
brne m7
nop
nop
nop
cbi portd,5

356      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
ldi t2,33
m8:
dec t2
brne m8
nop
nop
nop
dec t1
brne c4
nop
; CYCLE 8 = 505600 CLK PAUSE
ldi xh,high(50560)
ldi xl,low(50560)
dl5:
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
sbiw xl,1
brne dl5
; CYCLE 8 = 505600 CLK PAUSE
ldi xh,high(50560)
ldi xl,low(50560)
dl6:
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
nop
sbiw xl,1
brne dl6
; REPEAT SEQUENCE TWICE
dec t3
sbrs t3,0
rjmp snaploop
ret
The other components in the schematic make 
up the visible LED status lights and the infrared 
output that the Nikon camera will respond to. The 
visible LEDs are actually optional, but it does 
make it easier to see if the unit is operating and 
how it is responding to the sound. We also added a 
beeper that would alert us as to when the photo was 
being taken just in case we had to get ready for the 
shot. The toggle switch allows the system to work 
in sound-activation mode or nonstop 10-second 

Project 26  Q  Nikon Clap Snap      357
the infrared LED. Again, experimentation is the 
key, so mess around with the values and change the 
design as needed.
To ensure the unit is working properly before 
heating up the soldering iron, real tests should be 
done using your Nikon remote-enabled camera 
(Figure 26-4). If you have never used your camera 
with a remote control, then a little digging in the 
manual will be necessary as the camera needs 
to be set for “remote-control shutter release” or 
something similar. Also, identify the little infrared 
sensor window in your camera body; it will be the 
quarter-inch black plastic circle facing the same 
direction as the lens. If you are not sure where the 
remote window is on your camera body, there is 
always that dusty owners’ manual!
Place the camera near the infrared LED so that 
the output is only a few inches away from the 
Nikon infrared-sensor window. Since you can’t see 
the infrared output, this is the only way to verify 
that the circuit is actually functioning. 
If your camera fails to respond to the signal 
to take a photo, then either you do not have the 
camera set up to receive the infrared signal or your 
circuit is not put together properly. You can try to 
capture the output from the infrared LED on an 
oscilloscope to ensure that there is a pulse train or 
just move the piezo buzzer to the infrared output 
timer mode when you need to do some time-lapse 
photography or just want a lot more than one image.
Even if you plan to build your version of 
the clap snap exactly as shown, it is highly 
recommended that you ﬁrst build it on a solderless 
breadboard before attempting to hard wire the 
circuit (Figure 26-3). This makes it easy to program 
the microcontroller, test the operation of the unit, 
and of course make any necessary modiﬁcations 
to suit your needs. There are several free pins on 
the microcontroller, and the program hardly uses 
any of the ﬂash memory, so there is plenty of 
room for improvements and modiﬁcations to this 
project. Our next version is going to have a full 
liquid-crystal display (LCD) and menuing system, 
but maybe you will beat us to it by expanding this 
project?
The values of the resistors on each LED shown 
in the schematic are based on the operating 
characteristics of the LEDs we have, so you will 
probably have to change them to get optimal 
brightness from your own LEDs. Try the 1-K 
resistor with the infrared LED at ﬁrst, and if you 
ﬁnd that the clap snap does not work within 
10 feet of the Nikon remote control eye, you can 
either study your LED datasheet to calculate the 
optimal value or drive the infrared LED with a 
transistor. Range is not a goal here since the clap 
snap is designed to be within a few feet of the 
camera, so the 1-K value should be enough to drive 
  Figure 26-3   Breadboarding a home-built 
device makes debugging very 
easy.
  Figure 26-4   Testing the prototype with an 
actual Nikon camera.

358      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
cardboard and solder the wires in the underside of 
the cardboard!
We wanted to keep the unit as compact as 
possible, so we found a 2 r 4 inch (in) plastic box 
that had just enough room to ﬁt the battery, small 
perfboard, LEDs, and switch inside (Figure 26-6). 
Always plan ahead, taking into account the space 
needed for things like wiring, battery clip, screws, 
switch leads, and even the box lid when you are 
choosing a project box.
To ensure that the parts will not bounce around 
inside the plastic box, the perfboard was clipped 
on the sides to ﬁt snugly in the plastic box and 
the battery just happened to squeeze in between 
the two plastic screw standoffs. Hot glue or even 
Velcro strips are also a great way to hold down 
loose parts in a project box, if necessary.
Before adding the perfboard, the accessories 
such as LEDs and control switches are added to 
the box by drilling the appropriate holes. To save 
space, all leads are cut short or bent out of the 
way to allow more space for the circuit board and 
battery. Space will be tight, but it looks as though 
all of the parts will ﬁt into this small plastic box. At 
this point, all common ground connections and the 
wires coming from the LEDs and switches can be 
attached (Figure 26-7).
The microcontroller and ampliﬁer integrated 
circuit (IC) are the ﬁrst components to be placed on 
pin on the microcontroller and “listen” for the 
signal. When the microcontroller outputs the pulse 
train, you will hear a faint buzz-buzz-buzz sound 
on the piezo buzzer. If you are certain that your 
camera is ready to respond to the remote control 
signal and you cannot get it to trigger, then you 
have something wrong in your circuit, so backtrack 
and ﬁx it!
Once you have veriﬁed the operation of the circuit 
using a camera, the parts can be soldered to a bit of 
perforated board or a PCB and mounted into some 
kind of project box (Figure 26-5). We decided to 
go with a 9-volt (V) battery as the power supply, so 
we used an LM78C05 regulator to step the voltage 
down to 5 V. The size of the battery will dictate the 
overall size of your project box, so start there.
Perforated board (perfboard) is the perfect 
method of taking your project from the solderless 
breadboard into the real world. Because the circuit 
is fairly simple and contains only a few parts, the 
hand wiring that has to be done will only take a 
few hours. Making a real circuit board for such 
a small project is more work than creating the 
entire project, so unless mass production is your 
goal, the perfboard is certainly the best option. 
We use perfboards that are just a wafer with holes, 
but you can also ﬁnd perfboards with solder pads 
and even strips to match what you have on the 
solderless breadboard. If you are really in a hurry 
and on a budget, just pop the pins through some 
  Figure 26-5   Adding the components into a 
small box.
  Figure 26-6   Fitting the perfboard and 
battery into the project box.

Project 26  Q  Nikon Clap Snap      359
extra 8 pins from another to make a single socket. 
Ugly, we know, but it worked just ﬁne!
The resistors (including the variable resistor) 
were also added to the board at a position that 
allowed one end to be soldered directly to the 
corresponding pin in the ICs, keeping the wiring that 
had to be done clean and minimal. New capacitors 
also come with extra-long leads, so you can also 
bend them around to create makeshift traces when 
using a perfboard to make your ﬁnal circuit.
The input/output (IO) wires can also live next to 
their corresponding pins on the perfboard to help 
keep the ﬁnal wiring job as minimal as possible. 
We added all of the wires needed to connect the 
LEDs, switches, battery, and buzzer to the board 
using wires that were longer than necessary so 
they could be trimmer later (Figure 26-10). Also 
the small perforated board (Figure 26-8). Placing 
the large ICs ﬁrst towards the center of the board 
allows the smaller semiconductors to ﬁnd room 
around the ICs as close to the necessary pins as 
possible. The idea is to cram all of the parts on the 
small board so that all wiring can be kept as short 
as possible. By placing parts close together, it may 
be possible to simply bend the pins and solder them 
together. 
It is a good idea to use a socket for all 
microcontrollers when building a project like 
this since you may want to remove it later for 
reprogramming and upgrades (Figure 26-9). A 
socket makes it very easy to swap out a dead part 
that was fried by making a wiring mistake—not 
that we ever make those! We did not have the odd 
28-pin socket needed for the ATMega88, so we just 
used a standard 20-pin socket and then cut off the 
  Figure 26-7   Adding the visible LEDs and 
control switches.
  Figure 26-8   Laying out the components on 
the small perfboard.
  Figure 26-9   Adding the other components 
on the small perfboard.
  Figure 26-10   Adding the power, LED, and 
switch wires to the board.

360      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
prototype, but does leave plenty of program 
space and free IO pins to make a later upgrade 
(Figure 26-11). The general rule of DIY is that a 
project is never completed, and the monster will 
always need to grow!
Once all of the components have been placed 
onto the perforated board, the leads that are close 
enough to each other are soldered together, and then 
the rest of the circuit is made up of small bits of 
scrap wiring (Figure 26-12). We like to start with the 
power and ground connections ﬁrst, as these always 
make up the bulk of the wiring and will be the 
source of any “dangerous” wiring errors, you know, 
the kind of mistakes that let out the magic smoke?
shown in the perfboard is the small 5-V regulator 
that will cut down the voltage from the 9-V battery. 
As a testament to the robustness of the AVR 
microprocessor, we had the regulator connected 
wrong, and our project was actually functioning ﬁne 
for over a week seeing a full 9 V! We only realized 
the error because the timer was running too fast. To 
this day, we are still using the same microcontroller.
Originally, we considered adding a digital 
countdown display using either an LCD or 7 
segment LED display, but simplicity seemed better 
for this project, not to mention there was almost 
no room left in the small plastic project box. The 
ﬁnal schematic was drawn up based on the original 
  Figure 26-11  The clap snap ﬁnal schematic diagram.

Project 26  Q  Nikon Clap Snap      361
the needle with pin or the short circuit LED will 
come on before any of the components overheat. 
We prefer the excitement, so we just completed the 
wiring and threw the 9-V battery across the plug to 
see what would happen. We played our hand, and 
won—no smoke, and the buzzer greeted us with the 
expected blip-blop sound from the microcontroller. 
Okay, we had to ﬁx the LED connections, though, 
as the colors were completely reversed from what 
we wanted. Not bad!
With everything working as expected, we 
carefully pushed all of the extra wiring into the box 
and ﬁt the lid into place (Figure 26-14). The battery 
Once power and ground paths have all been 
checked for errors, the other semiconductors are 
soldered together as per the original schematic 
diagram. Always triple-check your work, and 
when it comes time to power up your project, use 
a current-limited power supply if you have one just 
to make sure you don’t create a smoke show due 
to a crossed power connection. The clap snap will 
ﬂash its LEDs and send a welcome beep when it 
starts up, so that will give an indication of what is 
working or not working. We also place our ﬁnder 
on the important ICs when power is ﬁrst applied 
to ensure that nothing is getting warm, a clear 
indicator that power is reversed. It sometimes 
amazes us what extreme abuse an IC can take and 
still work!
With all of the wiring on the underside of 
the perfboard completed as well as the external 
component connections, it will be time for the 
moment of truth—will the project work, fail, or 
monumentally fail? We always shoot for instant 
success, but most of the time there are at least a few 
wires either left out or crossed (Figure 26-13). The 
only time a crossed wire is an issue is when it deals 
with VCC or ground, so we always take a great deal 
of time with those connections right from the start. 
Using a current-limited power supply set to clip 
around 50 milliamps (mA) is always a safe way 
to initially power up a hand-wired board because 
  Figure 26-12   Creating a circuit board from a 
mess of wiring.
  Figure 26-13   Final wiring and initial power 
test.
  Figure 26-14   Fitting all of the parts in the 
box one last time.

362      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
camera angles can be used to acquire the same 
image, although we are not sure if one ﬂash is good 
enough for more than one camera yet (Figure 26-16). 
We had our D90 and D60 ﬁring after three claps, 
which was something that we will probably ﬁnd 
useful when wanting more than one angle of the 
subject to be photographed.
It was also found that besides claps, snaps, 
or sharp bangs, spoken words could trigger the 
system, making it seem like it was actually voice 
controlled! We would yell “One, two, three” or 
even “Take my photo,” and the system would 
recognize the burst of sound as three distinct 
voltage spikes into the analog to digital converter. It 
was fun to demonstrate the unit and tell people that 
it was full voice-activated! Of course, that just gave 
us new ideas for later, more advanced versions of 
this project.
One thing that was missing was the ability 
to easily afﬁx the clap snap in an appropriate 
position while using the camera on a tripod. Since 
the clap snap has limited infrared range, it really 
needs to have a line of sight between the infrared 
LED and the Nikon photo sensor, which is located 
on the front of the camera body. To solve this 
problem, we added a small metal band that would 
just clip onto the strap clip, which was perfect since 
we never use a camera strap (Figure 26-17). 
was on top so it would not be a huge hassle to 
change, and the wires coming from the perfboard 
were still long enough to allow the board to be 
removed for debugging without having to unsolder 
any of the wires. The clap snap was now complete, 
although it still needed some method of afﬁxing 
it to the Nikon camera body when we used our 
tripod.
Once the last screw was installed on the box 
cover, the clap snap was tested again to ensure that 
none of the wires became crossed as they went into 
the box (Figure 26-15). Success again! The unit 
performed perfectly, and could trigger the Nikon 
infrared sensor from a distance of over 10 feet, 
although we never designed the output to have any 
real range. The goal was always to have the clap 
snap near the camera and allow the sound system 
to work from a very long distance from the source 
of the claps. The unit beeps as expected when the 
on switch is ﬂipped, and both sound-activated 
mode as well as time lapse photography mode 
worked as expected.
One of the features we found by accident when 
testing various Nikon cameras is that the clap snap 
can trigger any Nikon camera that is within range 
of the infrared output. This means that multiple 
  Figure 26-15   The completed and functional 
clap snap ready for use.
  Figure 26-16   The clap snap can trigger more 
than one camera at once.

Project 26  Q  Nikon Clap Snap      363
had to be bent in such a way that when the clap 
snap was hooked in place, it would not interfere 
with any of the camera controls or focusing 
hardware. 
We also set the project box at an angle so that 
the visible LEDs would be clearly visible across 
a room. This simple mounting system has been 
working perfectly, although it may not be the 
optimal solution for all of the Nikon camera models 
(Figure 26-19). Of course, the clap snap can still 
be placed standing up anywhere near the camera as 
long as the line of site between the infrared sensor 
and LED is not more than 10 feet.
Overall we are very pleased with the way this 
project turned out, and it certainly does the job 
it was designed to do. When we decide to build 
version # 2, we will probably add real voice 
activation, multiple timer modes, a full backlit 
LCD screen, a keypad menu system, and external 
jacks for long-range triggering, and special FX 
modes for time lapse or tricky stop-motion shots. 
For now, we are enjoying the current version, 
which is being used for taking the photos that you 
see on our website.
We also thought about an adapter that would 
connect to the tripod, but the ability to hook it 
directly to the camera meant that we would never 
be messing around when it came time to use the 
clap snap. The metal band is just a 1/16-in thick 
strip of sheet metal cut and ﬁled out to sit in the 
camera strap connector. There are many other ways 
that a mounting device could be made, including 
Velcro or some kind of wire body.
To afﬁx the mounting hook to the project 
box, we had to open the cover, pull out all of the 
components one more time and then drill the 
appropriate bolt holes (Figure 26-18). The steel part 
  Figure 26-17   Adding a clip to allow tripod 
operation.
  Figure 26-18   The mounting hook is bolted to 
the project box.
  Figure 26-19   The mounting hook just drops 
into the strap clip.

364      101 Spy Gadgets for the Evil Genius
We hope you enjoyed this project and ﬁnd 
your new camera toy to be extremely useful 
in those situations where you need hands-free 
operation or nonstop time-lapse photography 
(Figure 26-20). If you make any cool 
modiﬁcations, please stop by our forum or send 
us a photo for our gallery so others can enjoy 
your work! Ideas and suggestions are always 
welcome, and since we are already working 
on the details for Clap Snap II, we are open to 
suggestions.
  Figure 26-20   The clap snap lets you drive 
your Nikon with no hands!

Index
A
AC power:
DC conversion of, 82, 82f, 328, 
332
LED infrared illuminator with, 82
motion sensor conversion from, 
328, 332
regulation circuitry removal 
with, 333
AC-to-DC power pack, 82, 82f
Adjustable capacitors, 237, 242
Adjustable zoom, of binoculars, 341
Alarm system:
breadboard testing of, 289, 289f
components of, 298f
keypad installation in, 284–286, 
300
keypad matrix and 
microcontroller used in, 
283–284, 284f
microcontroller programming 
of, 289–297
motion sensor used in, 288, 301
motion trigger switch on, 300f
perforated board for, 298–299, 
298f–299f
power and ground connections 
of, 299
power-saving mode of, 289
schematic of, 289f
self-contained mode of, 287–288
sensors used in, 300
siren mounted to, 299f
source code alteration of, 298
uses for, 301–302
wiring of, 299–300, 299f
Alignment:
camera and optical 
magniﬁcation, 338–340
of dual lasers, 106f, 231–232, 
231f–232f
of laser spy system, 221–223, 
230–231, 234–235, 234f–235f
Annoying noise, 153
Antennas, 246
Appliances:
remote control hijacking by, 
251
using infrared LEDs, 253f
Arduino hardware platform, 
148–149, 149f, 150
ATMega88, 251, 288–289, 289f,
345
functions and variables of, 
260–261
I/O lines of, 255, 359–360
microcontroller, 190
ATMega324, 179–180, 180f, 196f
Atmel 324P microcontroller, 179
Atmel STK500 programmer, 176
Audio ampliﬁers, 227
electret microphones with built 
in, 241, 323–324, 324f
LM358, 325, 326
LM386, 226–228, 322
Audio mixing device:
Boss VT-1 Voice Transformer 
added to, 167–169, 168f, 170f
project box installation of, 167, 
167f
telephone, 159–162, 166–167
Audio preampliﬁer stage:
output from, 238–239
of spy transmitter, 240–241, 
245–246
testing, 244–245
Audio processing programs, 
159–162, 169f, 228, 233f
AV VCS Voice Changer software, 
169, 169f
AVR324p, 214
AVR1284p, 214
B
Ball bearing switches, 288
Base (B), 14
Base (platform), 338
Batteries:
Clap Snap project using, 358
CR2032, 103
Batteries (continued)
laser diodes powered by, 
103–104, 103f
lead-acid, 86, 86f
LEDs tested with, 69–70
motion sensor conversion to, 
327
9-V, 243, 361
packs for, 118
6-V, 313, 332
3-V coin, 46, 46f
Baud rates, 177, 205, 207
Beam spread, of lasers, 105f
Binoculars:
adapter for, 340f
adjustable zoom of, 341
digital camera used with, 340
Nikon D60 optimal focal point 
with, 337–338, 338f
video cameras mounted to, 
132
Black light bulb, 59, 65–66
BNC-to-RCA adapter, 40
BNC-type connectors, 40f
Board cameras, 35–36, 39, 41f,
112–114, 118, 125
Boss VT-1 Voice Transformer effect 
box, 167–169, 168f, 170f
Breadboard, 4f
alarm system testing on, 289, 
289f
camera testing on, 41
of Clap Snap project, 346f,
357–358, 357f–358f
with CM8870 DTMF decoder 
chip, 145f
compatible cables for, 42f
digital camera testing with, 310, 
310f
electronic components for, 6–8
GPS cable conversion for, 190f,
194–195
GPS tracking system on, 197, 
197f
high-speed circuits on, 21f
365
Note: Page numbers referencing ﬁgures are followed by an “f.”

Breadboard (continued)
laser spy device tested on, 
227–228
LED pulsed-mode test circuit 
on, 92f
phone line connected to, 155f
phototransistors testing on, 228f
as prototyping device, 3–6
reducing noise on, 5–6
relay driver board tested in, 
317–318, 317f–318f
remote control hijacker tested on, 
261, 261f
RF circuits on, 242–243, 242f
sound-activated camera tested 
on, 324, 324f, 325f
Spammer Jammer setup on, 
156f
telephone decoder on, 147f
trimming leads for, 30f–31f
voltage relay tested on, 312, 
312f
Brute force testing method, 103, 
123–124, 123f
Built-in ﬂash, 269–270
C
C. See Collector; Coulomb
C-mounts, 36, 36f, 108–109, 108f
C program, 251, 254–255
C-type lenses, 38f
Cadmium sulﬁde photocell, 
222–223
Camcorders:
CCD system in, 111
CRT monitors of, 122
external lights on, 115–116, 
115f–116f
images captured by, 98f
with infrared illuminator, 
117–120, 118f–119f
infrared LEDs used with, 
118f–119f
infrared light blocked by many, 
44, 94, 111
mounting bracket for, 117–118, 
117f–118f
night vision conversion of, 52f,
119–120, 119f–120f
Sony, 129
spy camera video input to, 95, 
111f
video input to, 95, 111–112, 
111f, 112f, 119f
Camera(s). See also Board 
cameras; Camcorders; 
Digital cameras; Disposable 
cameras; Nikon D60; Nikon 
D90; Nikon SLR camera; 
Security cameras; Spy 
cameras; Video cameras
breadboard testing of, 41
C and CS mounts on, 36, 36f,
108–109, 108f
CCD modules for, 125f–126f
digital SLR, 335–336
ﬁxed-lens micro, 38f–39f
gun sight mounted to, 338–339,
338f–339f
lenses of micro, 38
low-lux micro, 36
monochrome, 37
night vision, 39, 52f
optical device retro-ﬁtting of, 
336–337
optical magniﬁcation alignment 
with, 338–340
optical magniﬁcation mounting 
with, 339
optical zoom extended of, 335
shutter release button hack on, 
305
with telephoto lens, 336f, 337
trigger relay board of, 333
wiring of, 113
Camera, motion-activated:
heat sensors used in, 327, 327f
LED signaling motion in, 332f
project box installation of, 334, 
334f
relay driver board controlling, 
333–334, 333f
testing of, 332–333, 332f–333f
voltage regulator removal and, 
331–332
Camera, sound-activated, 321, 321f
breadboard testing of, 324, 324f,
325f
components of, 322
functioning of, 322–323
motion-activated circuits with, 
326
project box installation of, 
325–326, 326f
relay isolation for, 321, 321f
schematic of, 322f
sensitivity adjustments in, 
325–326
Camera ﬂash taser:
assembly of, 280–282, 280f–282f
high-voltages of, 269–271, 
275–276
power requirements of, 276–277
pushbutton trigger of, 279–280, 
279f–280f
reverse engineering in, 275
small ﬂashlight used in, 278, 
278f
variations of, 277–280, 277f
voltage output of, 276–277
warnings for, 281–282
wiring added to, 276f
Camera timer:
capacitor test in, 317
schematic of, 316, 316f
time-lapse photography with, 
315, 317
variable-rate pulse timer of, 
316–317
Camera trigger hack, 315–318, 321
external control in, 314
perforated board installation of, 
313, 313f
relay controller connected to, 
313, 313f
shutter control button in, 
305–311
small voltage relay used in, 
311–312, 311f
Capacitors, 10–12
adjustable, 238, 242
camera timer test of, 317
ceramic, 11
ceramic value chart of, 12t
codes of, 241–242
decoupling, 6
desoldering of, 29
electrolytic, 11
ﬂash, 272–274, 273f
high-voltage dangers of, 
269–271, 307, 307f
negative side markings of, 331
noise from, 5–6
photo ﬂash, 271
RJ-11phone line with, 155
stray capacitance from, 243
symbols of, 11f
360-V, 270, 273, 273f
trimmer, 240, 247
various, 317f
Cat5 (networking) wiring, 4–5, 
72
366      Index

Cathode ray tube (CRT), 122
CCD. See Charge-coupled device
CD4011B NAND, 330
Center of balance, 339f
Ceramic capacitors, 11
Ceramic capacitors value chart, 12t
Charge-coupled device (CCD), 
36–37, 37f, 113f
camcorders with, 111
cameras with, 125f–126f
low-resolution low-light imaging 
from, 113–114
Circuits. See also High-voltage 
circuitry; Integrated circuits; 
Radio frequency circuits; 
Schematics; Series parallel 
combination
555 oscillator, 155–156, 155f, 316
ﬂyback transformer oscillator, 
274
high-speed, 21f
motion-activated, 326
NPN timer, 91
pulsed-mode, 92f, 97f
series, 70, 70f
sound activation, 325f
timer, 318f
transistor, 312f
Clap Snap project:
battery used in, 358
breadboard testing, 346f,
357–358, 357f–358f
components for, 346, 356–357
future upgrades to, 262
Nikon SLR camera used in, 345, 
345f, 362–364, 364f
on perforated board, 358
power and ground connections 
of, 360–361
programming of, 347–356
project box installation of, 
358–361, 358f–359f
schematic of, 347f, 360f
sounds triggering, 362
Clock oscillator, 197
Clock speed, 180
CM8870 DTMF decoder chip, 143f
breadboard with, 145f
building with, 145
datasheet on, 143–145, 144f
interface for, 150
microcontroller connected to, 148
output of, 146
testing, 145–146
CMOS. See Complementary 
metal-oxide semiconductor
Coaxial cable, 41f, 115, 115f
Code chart, of resistors, 10t
CodeVision C source code, 
255–260
Collector (C), 14
Collimating lenses:
on laser pointers, 104–106, 
130
on lasers, 100
Common components, 31
Complementary metal-oxide 
semiconductor (CMOS), 37, 
37f, 113–114
Components. See also Electronic 
components
of alarm system, 298f
breadboarding electronic, 6–8
for Clap Snap project, 346, 
356–357
common, 31
desoldering, 27–29
of GPS tracking system, 
196–197, 212–213, 
212f–213f
of laser spy system, 223–224
of night vision viewer, 121–122, 
136f–137f
organization of, 8f, 33f–34f
perforated board spacing of, 
79
project box for, 133, 133f
of RF circuits, 241
of sound-activated camera, 322
Spammer Jammer installation 
of, 156–157
of spy transmitter, 240f–241f
Composite video monitor, 122
Computer programs:
C program as, 251, 254–255
CodeVision C source code, 
255–260
Computers:
audio processing programs for, 
159–162, 169f
AV VCS Voice Changer software 
for, 169, 169f
microphone input on, 168–169
Mini-GPS software for, 174, 
177, 178f
roller ball mouse used with, 
225–226
vacuum tube-based, 13
Connector types:
BNC, 40f
RS232 serial port, 175, 196, 199f
of security cameras, 39–40, 115
serial, 213, 213f
Continuous current mode, 95, 98, 
127
Coordinates, GPS, 206–209
Copper wire, 239–240
Coulomb (C), 11
CR2032 batteries, 103
Crosstalk, 5
CRT. See Cathode ray tube
CS-mounts, 36, 36f
Current. See also AC power; Direct 
current (DC)
continuous, 95, 98, 127
continuous mode and, 95
current-limited power supply, 361
diode capacity of, 12–13
pulsed, 89f
transistors for high, 96f–97f
Current-limited power supply, 361
D
DAA. See Data access arrangement
Dangers:
of high-voltage capacitors, 
269–271, 307, 307f
of laser diodes, 101
of laser illumination system, 
109–110
Data access arrangement (DAA), 
166, 170
Data receiver programs, 180–188
Data stream, 206f
Datasheet, 15–16
on CM8870 DTMF decoder 
chip, 143–145, 144f
on FV-M8 GPS module, 176f,
195f
on infrared LEDs, 90–91, 127, 
128f
on laser diodes, 102–103, 102f
LEDs information on, 46f,
69–70, 69f, 91f
NPN transistor, 240
pulsed-mode operation 
information on, 90–91
for RC5 remote control decoder 
module, 253f
of 74121 one-shot, 323, 323f
2N2222 transistor, 15f
DB9 serial connector, 213
Index      367

368      Index
DC. See Direct current
Decoder modules, 252, 253f
Decoder source code, 149–150, 
150f
Decoding, of 4-bit binary data 
pack, 147f
Decoupling capacitors, 6
Defocusing, of lasers, 47–48
Desoldering, 27f–30f
of capacitors and resistors, 29
cleaning leads after, 30, 30f
heat and rock technique in, 28
highest setting for, 26
PCB component, 27–29
Desoldering tool. See Solder sucker
Digital cameras:
binoculars used with, 340
breadboard testing of, 310, 
310f
gun sight adapted to, 342f
infrared light blocked by many, 
44, 94, 111
motion trigger system added to, 
334
opening up, 305–307
shutter release button removal 
on, 308–309, 308f, 324
SLR, 335–336
telescope adapted to, 342–343, 
342f–343f
Diode:
size and current capacity of, 
12–13
types and symbols of, 13f
Direct current (DC), 271
AC power conversion to, 82, 82f,
328, 332
battery conversion to, 327
motion sensor converted to, 328, 
332
Disposable cameras:
built-in ﬂash of, 269–270
ﬂash capacitor removal from, 
272–274, 273f
ﬂash circuit board of, 262
high-voltage circuitry of, 272
parts salvaged from, 274f
plastic body opening of, 
270–271, 270f–271f
Dremel tool, 71
Drill holes, 134–135, 135f
DTMF generator, 148
Dual Tone Multi Frequency tones 
(DTMF), 143
DVD/CD burner, 48
laser differences in, 101, 103
laser diodes in, 101–102, 
101f–102f, 104f
E
EEPROM, 199, 215
Electret microphones, 151
audio ampliﬁer built into, 241, 
323–324, 324f
polarity of, 244f
of telephone, 165f–166f, 238f
telephone removal of, 164–165
wires of, 346–347
Electricity, static, 32
Electrolytic capacitors, 11
Electronic components:
for breadboard, 6–8
inventory of, 31
organization of, 8f, 33f–34f
PCB removal of, 7f
solder blobs on, 30
surface-mounted, 18
Electronics, assistance with, 16–17
Emitter (E), 14
ENIAC (Electronic Numerical 
Integrator and Computer), 13
Equalizer, 8-band, 233
Evaluation board connection, 176f
Exposed ﬁlm:
ﬂashlight with, 60, 63–64, 63f
infrared light passed by, 60, 60f,
64
External control, 305f–306f,
310–311, 314
External lights, 115–116, 115f–116f
F
Field of view, 138–139, 333
555 oscillator circuit, 155–156, 
155f, 316
Fixed-lens micro cameras, 38f–39f
Flash capacitor, 272–274, 273f
Flash circuit board, 262
Flash memory, 215
Flashlights:
camera ﬂash taser using, 278, 
278f
exposed ﬁlm used with, 60, 
63–64, 63f
ﬁlters placed over, 52, 57f
incandescent, 61, 61f
infrared light and, 62–63, 66f
for night vision, 66f
Floodlights, 327
Floppy disk material, 61, 61f–62f
Florescent lights, 64
Flyback tap, 272
Flyback transformer oscillator 
circuit, 274
FM radio receiver, 242, 247
Focal point, 337–338, 337f–338f
Focal range, 45
Focus:
function, 309
on spy camera, 114, 114f
Formant changer, 168
40-KHz modulation, 260, 345
4017 decade counter, 316
Forward voltage, 80
4-bit binary data pack, 147f
Fresnel lens:
ﬁeld of view expanded by, 333
motion sensors location of, 
328–329, 333f, 334
PIR needing, 328
FT232, 196
FV-M8 GPS module, 174, 175f, 194f
datasheet on, 176f, 195f
evaluation board connection of, 
176f
GPGGA sentence and, 188
heartbeat pulse from, 193–194
microcontroller selected for, 
197–198
NMEA strings sent by, 206
operation veriﬁcation of, 189
USB operation of, 176–177
G
Garmin GPS, 177
Global Positioning System (GPS). 
See also FV-M8 GPS module
coordinates in, 206–209
functioning of, 173
Garmin, 177
Google Earth and Maps 
accuracy and, 173, 189, 191
handheld, 189f
Mini-GPS, 174, 177, 178f
satellites for, 173, 175, 189, 193
Google, 16
Google Earth and Maps:
GPS accuracy of, 173, 189, 191
GPS route display using, 
211–212, 211f, 214f
GPS tracking device using, 207, 
208f

Index      369
GPGGA sentence, 188, 206, 210
GPS. See Global Positioning 
System
GPS module:
baud rate default of, 177
breadboard cable conversion for, 
190f, 194–195
data receiver programs for, 
180–188
functioning of, 193
FV-M8 GPS, 174
GPS coordinates tracked by, 
206–209
handheld GPS compared to, 
189f
heartbeat pulse sent by, 175
live data stream from, 206f
microcontroller connected to, 
173f, 175, 188f, 195–196
NMEA strings from, 205–209, 
208f
operation veriﬁcation of, 
175–176
power requirements of, 179–180
schematic of microcontroller 
and, 179f
tracking device with, 193
types of, 174
wiring of, 189f, 194–195
GPS tracking system:
AVR based, 193f
on breadboard, 197, 197f
components of, 196–197, 
212–213, 212f–213f
ﬂash memory of, 215
future improvements in, 213–214
Google Earth route display of, 
211–212, 211f, 214f
NMEA strings from, 205–210
programming of, 198–205
schematic of, 196f
testing, 209–212
Ground connections, 263–264, 
264f, 299, 360–361
Gun sight, 107f–110f
camera mounted to, 338–339,
338f–339f
digital camera adapted with, 342f
Nikon D60 optimal focal point 
with, 337–338, 337f–338f
H
Handheld GPS, 189f
Headset wiring, 165f
Heartbeat pulse, 175, 193–194
Heat and rock technique, 28
Heat sensors, 327, 327f
HERF. See High-energy radio 
frequency
High current transistors, 96f–97f
High-energy radio frequency 
(HERF), 273
High-power Class IIIb lasers, 47
High-speed circuits, 21f
High-voltage circuitry:
of camera ﬂash taser, 269–271, 
275–276
dangerous capacitors in, 
269–271, 307, 307f
of disposable cameras, 272
schematic of, 275f
High-voltage inverter, 274f, 275
Hook switch:
decoding wiring of, 162, 162f
removal of, 163–164
wiring diagram of, 163f
HyperTerminal program, 177, 
205–206, 205f
I
I/O lines, of ATMega88, 255, 
359–360
I/O port setup, 260
IC. See Integrated circuits
Illumination systems. See
Infrared illuminator; Laser 
illumination system; LED 
infrared illuminator
Imaging device types, 113–114
Incandescent ﬂashlights, 61, 61f
Indoor navigation, 209
Infrared illuminator:
camcorder with, 117–120, 
118f–119f
completed, 75f
LEDs in, 77–78
light bulb with ﬁlter for, 64–65, 
64f, 129–130
micro security camera used 
with, 71–73, 71f–72f
for night vision, 130–131
power needs of, 131–132
with spy camera, 72–75, 72f–75f
testing, 73–74, 73f–74f
Infrared input module, 261f
Infrared LEDs, 44f–45f, 57, 126f
appliances using, 253f
array wiring of, 95f
Infrared LEDs (continued)
camcorders using, 118f–119f
datasheet on, 90–91, 127, 128f
focal range of, 45
for night vision, 78, 99
Nikon’s remote control with, 346
940-nm, 44–45, 68, 68f, 90, 118, 
127
in remote controls, 44–45, 68, 
68f, 90f, 118, 127
with security cameras, 67f, 114f
series chain quantity of, 133
series connection of, 70, 70f
3-V coin batteries testing, 46, 
46f
Infrared light:
camcorders and digital cameras 
blocking, 44, 94, 111
exposed ﬁlm passing, 60, 60f, 64
ﬂashlights and, 62–63, 66f
ﬂoppy disk material passing, 61, 
61f–62f
lasers output of, 52–53
LEDs failing to produce, 61f
night vision from video cameras 
and, 94
night vision using, 43, 43f
phototransistor working with, 
226
security cameras seeing, 49–50, 
58
sources of, 47
spy cameras and, 49f
video cameras seeing, 43, 94f
wavelengths of, 253–254
Infrared pass ﬁlter, 57–58, 58f–59f,
61
high-quality glass, 64
light bulb with, 129, 129f
light spectrum passed by, 48–49
materials used for, 49f
Integrated circuits (IC), 3, 124, 196
K
Keypad:
alarm system installation of, 
284–286, 300
alarm system using, 283–284, 
284f
dimension measurements of, 
284–286, 285f–286f
matrix wiring diagram of, 284f,
286
wiring of, 286, 288–289

370      Index
KML data, 210f–211f
KPC-EX20H spy camera, 49, 58, 
73, 94
L
Laser(s):
alignment of dual, 106f, 231–232, 
231f–232f
beam spread of, 105f
classes of, 99–100
collimating lenses on, 100
defocusing of, 47–48
DVD/CD burners differences in, 
101, 103
high-power Class IIIb, 47
infrared radiation output from, 
52–53
invisible infrared, 220
laser spy system alignment of, 
221–223, 230–231, 234–235, 
234f–235f
night vision with optical 
magniﬁcation and, 53f,
107–110
return beam capture of, 225, 
230–231
windows target of, 220f
Laser diodes, 47–48, 48f, 100
brute force testing method of, 
103, 123–124, 123f
dangers of, 101
datasheet on, 102–103, 102f
in DVD/CD burner, 101–102, 
101f–102f, 104f
large beam cast by, 131
3-V button battery powering, 
103–104, 103f
Laser illumination system:
completed, 132f
dangers of, 109–110
defocusing beam in, 100
gun sight used with, 107–110, 
107f–110f
low-lux security camera used 
with, 106
range of, 109–110
Laser modules, 47, 47f, 130f
lens fastened to, 131, 131f
optics in, 100, 100f
power switches added to, 
106f
Laser pointers, 47, 47f, 100f
collimating lenses on, 104–106, 
130
Laser spy system:
audio processing programs used 
in, 233f
breadboard testing, 227–228
completed, 232f–233f
components of, 223–224
experiment verifying, 222–223
improving, 234–235
laser alignment of, 221–223, 
230–231, 234–235, 234f–
235f
laser’s return beam captured by, 
225, 230–231
light-to-sound conversion in, 
223–224, 224f, 227f
LM386 audio ampliﬁer used in, 
226–228, 322
long-range operation of, 233–234
perforated board used in, 228, 
228f
power used for, 229
principles of, 220
project box installation of, 
228–230, 228f–230f
reﬂective surface needed in, 221
sensitivity of, 222, 225, 232–233
sound detected by, 219
speaker as test window for, 221, 
221f–223f
tripod mount for, 230–231
LCD. See Liquid crystal display
Lead-acid battery, 86, 86f
Leads:
cleaning, 30, 30f
trimming, 31, 31f
LED. See Light-emitting diodes
LED infrared illuminator, 49–51, 
50f–51f, 78–79
AC powering, 82
in LCD monitor, 84–87, 85f–86f
massive, 51f, 83–87, 83f–87f
pulsed current used in, 89f
security camera used with, 51–52
series parallel wiring of, 96f
Lenses. See also Fresnel lens
assortment of, 105f, 131f
C-mount, 36, 36f, 108–109, 108f
C-type, 38f
collimating, 100, 104–106, 130
ﬁxed, 38f–39f
laser modules with, 131, 131f
micro camera, 38
spy cameras, 35–36, 35f
telephoto, 336f, 337
Light:
spectrum, 43–44, 44f, 48–49, 
127f, 253–254, 254f
wavelengths of, 253–254
Light bulb:
black, 59, 65–66
infrared illuminator using, 
64–65, 64f, 129–130
infrared pass ﬁlter used with, 
129, 129f
Light-emitting diodes (LEDs), 
9. See also LED infrared 
illuminator
datasheet information on, 46f,
69–70, 69f, 91f
drill hole for, 134–135, 135f
880-nm, 128
green, 84–85
in infrared illuminator, 77–78
infrared light failed by, 61f
motion-activated camera using, 
332f
night vision with, 39f
in perforated board, 78f–79f, 81f
polarity determination of, 
68–69, 135
power requirements of, 80–81
pulsed-mode operation of, 89, 
89f, 93–94
resistor values used with, 357
series parallel combination of, 
80–81, 80f–81f, 134f
3-V coin batteries testing, 
69–70
Light-to-sound conversion, 
223–224, 224f, 227f
schematic of, 229f
tripod mounting for, 231f
Lights. See also Flashlights
external, 115–116, 115f–116f
ﬂood, 327
ﬂorescent, 64
night, 223
security, 327–328, 328f, 331
Liquid crystal display (LCD), 42, 
49, 58, 148f
LED infrared illuminator in, 
84–87, 85f–86f
microcontroller connected to, 
148, 178–180, 178f
LM78C05 regulator, 358
LM358 ampliﬁer, 325, 326
LM386 audio ampliﬁer, 226–228, 322
LM555 timer, 91

Index      371
Long-range operation:
of laser spy system, 233–234
night vision in, 99f
Low-lux:
imaging in, 113–114
monochrome security cameras, 
59–60, 65–66
security cameras, 82–83, 106, 125
spy camera, 62, 89–90, 94
video cameras, 58f
Low-resolution imaging, 113–114
Lucidscience.com, 82
Lux, deﬁning, 37, 114
M
Manchester Encoding, 251
Mapping program, 210f
Marx generator, 269
MAX232 level converter, 196, 198f
Mercury switches, 288, 288f
Micro video cameras, 38, 42f
Microcontrollers, 19–20, 20f
alarm system programming of, 
289–297
alarm system using, 283–284, 284f
ATMega88, 190
Atmel 324P, 179
C program used with, 254–255
CM8870 DTMF decoder chip 
connected to, 148
decoder source code with, 
149–150, 150f
FV-M8 GPS module selection 
of, 197–198
GPS module connected to, 173f,
175, 188f, 195–196
installation of, 358–359
LCD screen connected to, 148, 
178–180, 178f
NMEA strings from, 207f
schematic of GPS module and, 
179f
sockets used for, 359
voltage relay driven by, 312
Microfarads (μF), 11
Microphone input, 168–169. See
also Electret microphones
Mini-GPS, 174, 177, 178f
Mini spy cameras, 43
Mirror, one-way, 84–87
Modulation, 221
Molten solder, 29–30
Monochrome cameras, 37
Monochrome security cameras, 43
Motion-activated circuits, 326
Motion sensors:
AC to DC power conversion of, 
328, 332
alarm system using, 288, 301
DC battery conversion of, 327
Fresnel lens location in, 328–329, 
333f, 334
heat sensors used in, 327
passive, 288
PCB of, 329, 329f
ready-to-use boards available 
of, 328
reducing size of, 333f
schematic of, 329–330, 330f
security lights with, 327–328, 
328f
trigger switch in, 300f
Motion trigger system, 334
Mounting brackets, 117f–118f
Mouse, roller ball, 225–226
Movement, 220
Multimeters, 18f
Music on hold system, 166
N
Negative side markings, 331
NIB (Neodymium) magnet, 213
Night light, 223
Night vision:
AC-to-DC power pack and, 82, 
82f
camcorder converted for, 52f,
119–120, 119f–120f
camera viewﬁnder for, 52f
cameras, 39
infrared ﬂashlight for, 66f
infrared illuminators for, 
130–131
infrared LEDs for, 78, 99
infrared light used in, 43, 43f
laser and optical magniﬁcation 
system for, 53f, 107–110
LEDs for, 39f
long-range, 99f
telescope system for, 132f
video cameras and infrared light 
for, 94
Night vision viewer:
completed, 138f–139f
components of, 121–122, 
136f–137f
composite video monitor for, 
122
Night vision viewer (continued)
ﬁeld of view of, 138–139
schematic of, 137f
security cameras detected by, 
139f
viewﬁnder extraction for, 
122–123, 122f
wiring of, 137f
Nikon D60, 336–337, 362
binoculars optimal focal point 
with, 337–338, 338f
gun sight optimal focal point 
with, 337–338, 337f–338f
Nikon D90, 74–75, 336, 362
Nikon SLR camera:
Clap Snap project using, 345, 
345f, 362–364, 364f
infrared LED remote control of, 
346
project box mounted to, 363, 
363f
pulse train timing needed by, 
346
remote-controlled shutter release 
with, 357–358
940-nm LEDs, 44–45, 68, 68f, 90, 
118, 127
9-V batteries, 243, 361
NMEA strings, 180–188, 190
conversion of, 210f–211f
FV-M8 GPS module sending, 
206
from GPS module, 205–209, 
208f
from GPS tracking system, 
205–210
from microcontroller, 207f
Noise:
generated annoying, 153–154
reducing breadboard, 5–6
Notch ﬁlter, 227–228, 233, 233f
Notching tool, 285, 285f
NPN timer circuits, 91
NPN transistors, 14, 224, 240, 
272
NTSC (National Television System 
Committee), 37, 114
O
Octal inverting buffers, 147
Ohmmeter, 162, 163f
1/8-in stereo jack, 310f
1N4001 diode, 312
Op-amp comparator, 322–323

372      Index
Optical magniﬁcation, 335f
base used with, 338
camera extension of, 335
camera mounted with, 339
camera retro-ﬁtting with, 
336–337
cameras alignment with, 338–340
center of balance mounting, 339f
night vision with lasers and, 53f,
107–110
Optics:
assortment of, 105f
in laser modules, 100, 100f
Organization, of electronic 
components, 8f, 33f–34f
Oscilloscopes, 19f, 93–94, 93f, 244, 
245f
P
PAL (Phase Alternate Line), 37, 
114
Parallel connection. See also Series 
parallel combination
in schematic, 5f
series wiring and, 96f
series with, 80–81, 80f–81f, 134f
voltages in series combination 
with, 133–134
Parts cabinet, 34f
Passive InfraRed sensor (PIR), 
327–328
Passive motion sensor, 288
PCB. See Printed circuit board
Perforated board, 20, 20f
alarm system built on, 298–299, 
298f–299f
camera trigger hack installed on, 
313, 313f
Clap Snap project on, 358
component spacing in, 79
laser spy device using, 228, 228f
LEDs in, 78f–79f, 81f
pulsed-mode circuit on, 97f
remote control hijacker installed 
on, 262–263, 263f–264f
RF circuits build on, 243, 
244f–245f
timer circuit tested on, 318f
working with, 71–72, 71f–72f
Phone line. See RJ-11 phone line
Photo ﬂash capacitor, 271
Photocells, 14
Photocells, cadmium sulﬁde, 
222–223
Photography, long distance, 341f
Photoresistor, 223–224, 223f–224f
Phototransistors, 225–226, 225f
breadboard testing of, 228f
choosing, 226f
infrared light working with, 226
Picofarads (pF), 11
Piezo buzzer, 157, 288
Pinout information:
signal, 252
of voltage regulator, 331–332, 
331f
PIR. See Passive InfraRed sensor
Pistol-grip enclosure, 278, 279f
Plastic body, 270–271, 270f–271f
Playback function, 258
PNP transistors, 14
Pocket alarm, 286–287, 286f–287f
Polarity:
of electret microphones, 244f
LEDs determination of, 68–69, 
135
Pop can, 264, 264f
Potentiometer (pot), 9, 97
Power connections, 113f, 263–264, 
264f, 299, 360–361
Power requirements:
of camera ﬂash taser, 276–277
of GPS module, 179–180
of laser spy device, 229
of LEDs, 80–81
Power-saving mode, 289
Power supplies, 18f, 361
Power switches, 106f
Printed circuit board (PCB), 4, 
20–21, 21f
desoldering components from, 
27–29
of motion sensors, 329, 329f
photo ﬂash capacitor and, 271
prototype with, 83, 83f
removing parts from, 7f
reverse engineering of, 330–331, 
330f–331f
soldering iron used on, 25–26
wiring of, 361f
Programmers, 19–20, 20f
Programming. See also Source code
of alarm system, 289–297
of Clap Snap project, 347–356
of GPS module data receiver, 
180–188
of GPS tracking system, 
198–205
Programming (continued)
languages, 197–198
of remote control hijacker, 
255–261
Programs:
audio processing, 159–162, 
169f, 228, 233f
C language, 251, 254–255
CodeVision, 255–260
data receiver, 180–188
HyperTerminal, 177, 205–206, 
205f
mapping, 210f
variables in, 260
Project box:
audio mixing device installed in, 
167, 167f
Clap Snap installed in, 358–361, 
358f–359f
components installed in, 133, 
133f
GPS tracking system 
components in, 196–197, 
212–213, 212f–213f
laser spy device installed in, 
228–230, 228f–230f
motion-activated camera 
installed in, 334, 334f
Nikon SLR mounted to, 363, 
363f
sound-activated camera installed 
in, 325–326, 326f
Spammer Jammer components 
put in, 156–157
Prototype, 83
device used for, 3–6
with PCB, 83, 83f
Pulse stream, 260
Pulse train timing, 346
Pulsed-mode operation, 50
beneﬁts of, 98
breadboard test circuit of, 92f
continuous current mode 
compared to, 95, 98, 127
datasheet information on, 90–91
800-mA short duration, 92f
high current transistors in, 
96f–97f
LED infrared illuminator and, 
89f
of LEDs, 89, 89f, 93–94
oscilloscope testing output of, 
93–94, 93f
on perforated board, 97f

Index      373
Pulsed-mode operation (continued)
security camera illuminator 
using, 90, 90f
testing, 91–93, 94f
Pushbutton trigger, 279–280, 
279f–280f, 309f
R
Radio frequency circuits (RF), 5, 237
antenna in, 246
breadboarding, 242–243, 242f
components of, 241
on perforated board, 243, 
244f–245f
scanners with, 145
Radios, 238f
RC5 Protocol, 251–252, 252f, 262, 
345
RCA jacks, 39, 40f, 115, 124
Ready-to-use motion sensors, 328
Record function, 260
Reﬂective surface, 221, 221f
Relay driver board, 324, 324f
breadboard testing, 317–318, 
317f–318f
camera functions controlled by, 
333–334, 333f
sound activation circuit 
connected to, 325f
Relays, 14, 305
cameras isolation through, 321, 
321f
controller for, 313f
shutter release button and, 334
Remote control hijacker:
appliance control taken by, 251
breadboard testing of, 261, 261f
CodeVision C source code for, 
255–260
ground and power connections 
of, 263–264, 264f
infrared input module of, 261f
initial testing of, 262f
modiﬁcations to, 266
perforated board installation of, 
262–263, 263f–264f
pop can installation of, 264–266, 
264f–266f
programming of, 255–261
RC5 Protocol used by, 262
schematic of, 255f
sensitivity of, 261
Sharp GP1UM26X decoder 
module used by, 252
Remote controls:
decoder modules, 252, 253f
Nikon shutter release controlled 
with, 357–358
Nikon’s, 346
940-nm infrared LEDs in, 
44–45, 68, 68f, 90, 118, 127
RC5 Protocol used by, 251–252, 
252f
testing security cameras 
response with, 50f
Resistors, 8–10, 8f
color code chart of, 10t
desoldering of, 29
LEDs used with, 357
photo, 223–224, 223f–224f
size of, 8–9, 241
symbols of, 9f
values coded on, 9, 357
variable, 9, 9f
Reverse engineering:
AC regulation circuitry removal 
using, 333
camera ﬂash taser with, 275
of PCB, 330–331, 330f–331f
Reverse voltage, 127
RF. See Radio frequency circuits
RF coils, 239–240, 239f–240f
RG-59 coaxial cable, 41, 115
RJ-11 phone line, 145, 145f
capacitors inserted in, 155
cutting, 154, 154f
hack schematic of, 154f
wires of, 161, 161f
Rosin core solder, 26
RS232 serial connector, 175, 196, 
199f
S
San Jose Navigation, 174
Satellites, for GPS, 173, 175, 189, 
193
Schematics:
of alarm system, 289f
for camera timer project, 316, 
316f
of Clap Snap project, 347f,
360f
of 800-mA LED pulsed-mode 
operation, 92f
GPS module and 
microcontroller, 179f
GPS tracking system, 196f
of high-voltage circuitry, 275f
Schematics (continued)
of high-voltage inverter, 274f
of higher current LED pulsed-
mode operation, 96f–97f
of LEDs series parallel 
combination, 80f
of light-to-sound receiver, 229f
of motion sensor, 329–330, 330f
of night vision viewer, 137f
parallel connection in, 5f
phone line hack, 154f
of remote control hijacker, 255f
of sound-activated camera, 322f
of Spammer Jammer, 155f
for spy transmitter, 240f
Schottky barrier rectiﬁer, 13
Screws, hidden, 306
Security cameras, 35–36, 35f
BNC-type connectors on, 40f
C-mount lens on, 108–109, 108f
connector types on, 39–40, 115
imaging device types of, 113–114
infrared illuminator using, 
71–73, 71f–72f
infrared LEDs with, 67f, 114f
infrared light seen by, 49–50, 58
LED infrared illuminator used 
with, 51–52
low-lux, 82–83, 106, 125
low-lux monochrome, 59–60, 
65–66
monochrome, 43
night vision LEDs on, 39f
night vision viewer detecting, 
139f
pulsed-mode illuminator used 
with, 90, 90f
remote control testing response 
of, 50f
RG-59 coaxial cable used for, 
41, 115
Security lights:
motion sensor part of, 327–328, 
328f
voltage regulator in, 331
Self-contained mode, 287–288, 
288f
Semiconductors, inventory of, 31
Sensitivity:
of laser spy system, 222, 225, 
232–233
of remote control hijacker, 261
sound-activated camera 
adjustments of, 325–326

374      Index
Sensors, alarm system using, 300
Serial communications, 205f
Serial ports (USART), 195, 
197f–198f
connectors for, 213, 213f
receiving data through, 199
RS232 connectors for, 175, 196, 
199f
Series circuits, 70, 70f
Series parallel combination:
connections in, 133
LED infrared illuminator wiring 
in, 96f
of LEDs, 80–81, 80f–81f, 134f
schematic of, 80f
voltages in, 133–134
74121 one-shot, 322, 323, 323f
74154 decoder chip, 146, 146f
78L08 regulator, 331
Sharp GP1UM26X decoder 
module, 252
Shielded coaxial cable, 115, 115f
Shoot function, 309
Shutter release button:
cameras hack of, 305
digital camera removal of, 
308–309, 308f, 324
external control of, 305f–306f,
310–311
relays and, 334
remote controlled, 357–358
removal of, 308–309, 308f
wiring of, 309–310
Signal pin, 252
Siren, 299f
6-V batteries, 313, 332
SMDs. See Surface-mounted 
devices
Solder:
blobs, 28, 30, 31, 32f
molten, 29–30
rosin core, 26
Solder sucker, 7, 26
accuracy with, 27f
techniques with, 29f
using, 29
Soldering:
cleaning soldering iron and, 31
iron, 18f
PCB and, 25–26
SMDs, 32, 32f–33f
station, 25–26, 31–32
tinning in, 32, 32f
Sony camcorder, 129
Sound. See also Camera, 
sound-activated
activation circuits, 325f
Clap Snap project triggered by, 
362
converted from light, 223–224, 
224f, 227f
laser spy system detecting, 219
Source code:
alarm system altering of, 298
CodeVision C, 255–260
decoder, 149–150, 150f
Spammer Jammer:
annoying noise generated by, 
153–154
breadboard setup of, 156f
components installed of, 
156–157
schematic of, 155f
telemarketers deterred by, 153
Sparkfun.com, 174, 177, 194, 283
Speakers, 221, 221f–223f
Spy cameras:
camcorders receiving video 
input from, 95, 111f
focus on, 114, 114f
infrared illuminator with, 72–75, 
72f–75f
infrared light and, 49f
KPC-EX20H, 49, 58, 73, 94
lens size and style of, 35–36, 35f
low-lux, 62, 89–90, 94
mini, 43
wiring of, 36
Spy transmitter, 237f
audio preampliﬁer stage of, 
240–241, 245–246
components of, 240f–241f
miniaturization of, 248–249, 
248f–249f
schematic for, 240f
test points of, 245, 245f
tuning process of, 247–248, 247f
Static electricity, 32
Stray capacitance, 243
Stripping wires, 5f
Surface-mounted devices (SMDs), 
18, 45
coding of, 32
extraction of, 33f
removing, 33
sizes of, 33
soldering, 32, 32f–33f
Switches, 288
Symbols:
of capacitors, 11f
of diode, 13f
of resistors, 9f
of transistors, 14f
Synthesizer, wand-operated, 219
T
Telemarketers, 153
Telephone:
audio processing device for, 
159–162, 166–167
breadboarding decoder for, 147f
decoder source code and, 
149–150, 150f
DTMF used in, 143
electret microphone removed 
from, 164–165
electret microphones of, 
165f–166f, 238f
headset wiring of, 165f
hook switch removal, 163–164
music on hold system for, 166
RJ-11 phone line and, 145, 145f
tearing apart, 160–161, 160f
touch tone, 143
voice changer, 170
wires of, 161, 161f
Telephoto lens, 336f, 337
Telescope:
digital camera adapted to, 
342–343, 342f–343f
long distance photography with, 
341f
night vision system attached to, 
132f
Theremin, Leon, 219
3-V button batteries, 46, 46f
laser diodes powered by, 
103–104, 103f
LED testing with, 69–70
360-V capacitors, 270, 273, 273f
Time-lapse photography, 315, 317–319
Timer circuits, 318f
TIP120 transistor, 95–96
Touch tone telephones, 143
Tracking device, 193
Transformer, step up, 272
Transistors, 13–15
high current, 96f–97f
NPN and PNP, 14, 224, 240, 272
NPN timer circuit with, 91
parameters of, 237–238
TIP120, 95–96

Index      375
Transistors (continued)
2N2222, 15–16, 15f, 92, 96, 
224, 312
2N3904, 92, 224, 312
types and symbols of, 14f
voltage relay driven by, 312f
Trigger relay board, 333
Trimmer capacitors, 240, 247
Tripod mounting, 109, 109f, 339, 
339f, 342
for laser spy device, 230–231
for light-to-sound conversion, 231f
Tungsten ﬁlament, 61
Tuning process, 247–248, 247f
2N2222 transistor, 15–16, 15f, 92, 
96, 224, 312
2N3904 transistor, 92, 224, 312
U
Ultraviolet light, 43, 57, 59, 59f, 65
USB operation, 176–177
V
Vacuum tube-based computers, 13
Values:
of ceramic capacitors, 12t
of resistors, 9, 357
Variable-rate pulse timer, 316–317
Variable resistors, 9, 9f
Vibrations, 225
Video:
camcorders receiving, 95, 
111–112, 111f–112f, 119f
outputs, 113f
viewﬁnders input wire for, 
124–125
Video cameras:
binoculars mounted to, 132
infrared light seen by, 43, 94f
Video cameras (continued)
low-lux, 58f
micro, 38, 42f
night vision from infrared light 
and, 94
power and video outputs of, 113f
selection of, 112–113, 112f
ultraviolet light seen by, 57, 59f
Viewﬁnders:
blue glow of, 123, 124f
installing, 136f
for night vision, 52f
night vision viewer extraction 
of, 122–123, 122f
video input wire of, 124–125
wiring of, 123, 123f
Vocoders, 168
Voice, altering, 159–160
Voltage regulator:
LM78C05, 358
motion-activated camera and, 
331–332
pinout information of, 331–332, 
331f
in security lights, 331
Voltage relay:
breadboard testing, 312, 312f
camera trigger hack using, 
311–312, 311f
microcontroller driving, 312
transistor circuit driving, 312f
Voltages:
of camera ﬂash taser, 269–271, 
275–276
camera ﬂash taser output of, 
276–277
circuitry with high, 272
in series parallel combination, 
133–134
W
Wand-operated synthesizer, 219
Watts (W)  Amps (A) r Volts (V), 
80
Wavelengths, of light, 253–254
Wires:
Cat5, 4–5
copper, 239–240
of electret microphones, 346–347
of RJ-11 phone line, 161, 161f
stripping, 5f
telephone, 161, 161f
viewﬁnders input, 124–125
Wiring:
of alarm system, 299–300, 299f
camera ﬂash taser and, 276f
of cameras, 113
Cat5 networking, 72
of GPS module, 189f, 194–195
headset, 165f
hook switch decoding of, 162, 
162f
hook switch diagram of, 163f
ICs and identiﬁcation of, 124
infrared LEDs array, 96f
of keypad, 286, 288–289
keypad matrix diagram of, 284f,
286
of night vision viewer, 137f
of PCB, 361f
series parallel, 96f
of shutter release button, 
309–310
of spy cameras, 36
of viewﬁnders, 123, 123f
X
X-ray vision, 65, 120
X-ray video, 129

