Polymers 
Properties and Applications 
11 
Editorial Board: 
Prof Hans-Joachim Cantow 
Institut fUr Makromolekulare Chemie der Universitat 
Stefan-Meier-StraBe 31, 
7800 Freiburg/Federal Republic of Germany 
Prof H. James Harwood 
Institute of Polymer Science, University of Akron 
Akron, OR 44325/USA 
Prof Joseph P. Kennedy 
Institute of Polymer Science, University of Akron 
Akron, OR 44325/USA 
Prof Anthony Ledwith 
Dept. of Inorganic, Physical and Industrial Chemistry 
University of Liverpool 
P.O. Box 147, Liverpool L 693 BX/UK 
Prof Joachim MeijJner 
Techn.-Chem. Lab., Eidgenossische Techn. Rochschule 
SonneggstraBe 3, CH-8092 Zurich, Switzerland 
Prof Seizo Okamura 
No. 24 Minami-Goshomachi 
Okazaki 
Sakyo-ku, 606 Kyoto, Japan 
Dr. G. Henrici-Olive/Prof S. Olive 
Department of Chemistry, University of California 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037/USA 

Pericles S. Theocaris 
The 
l\1esophase. Concept 
m ComposItes 
With 170 Figures 
Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg New York 
,----z.y,,"--, London Paris Tokyo 

Professor Dr. Pericles S. Theocaris 
Department of Theoretical 
and Applied Mechanics 
The National Technical 
University of Athens 
P.O. Box 77 230 
GR-175-10 Athens 
Editors: 
Dr. G. Henrici-Olive 
Professor S. Olive 
Chemical Department, University of California 
San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92037jUSA 
This volume continues the series Chemie, Physik and Technologie der Kunst-
stoffe in Einzeldarstellungen, which is now entitled Polymers! Properties and 
Applications. 
Distribution rights for all countries without the socialistic countries: Springer-Verlag 
Berlin Heidelberg New York 
Distribution for all socialistic countries: Akademie-Verlag Berlin, GDR 
ISBN-13:978-3-642-70184-9 
e-ISBN-13:978-3-642-70182-5 
DOl: 10.1007/978-3-642-70182-5 
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data: 
Theocaris, Pericles S., 1921-
The mesophase concept in composites. (Polymers, properties and applications; II) 
Bibliography: p. 1. Composite materials. 
I. Title. 
II. Series. 
TA418.9.C6T456 
1987 
620.1'18 
86-31493 
ISBN-13:978-3-642-70184-9 (U.S.) 
This work is subject to copyright. All rights are reserved, whether the whole or part 
of the material is concerned, specifically the rights of translation, reprinting, reuse of 
illustrations, recitation, broadcasting, reproduction on microfilms or in other ways, 
and storage in data banks. Dnplication of this publication or parts thereof in only 
permitted under the provisions of the German Copyright Law of September 9, 1965, 
in its version of June 24, 1985, and a copyright fee must always be paid. Violations fall 
under the prosecution act of the German Copyright Law. 
© Springer-Verlag Berlin Heidelberg 1987 
Softcover reprint of the hardcover 1st edition 1987 
The use of registered names, trademarks; etc. in this publication does not imply, even 
in the absence of a specific statement, that such names 'are exempt from the relevant 
protective laws and regulations and therefore free for general use. 
Bookbinding: Liideritz & Bauer, Berlin 
2154/3020-543210 

Contents 
I 
Preface .. 
n 
Introduction 
m Models for Composite Materials 
111.1 General Aspects 
. . . . 
111.2 The Three-Layer Model for Particulates 
III.3 The Three-Cylinder Model for Short Fibres. 
IlIA The Unfolding Models for Particulates. . . 
111.5 The Unfolding Models for Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
5 
9 
9 
11 
18 
32 
53 
IV 
Retardation Spectra of Composites Indicating the Existence of a Mesophase 62 
V 
Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 70 
V.l 
Static and Dynamic Moduli in Fiber Composites . . 
70 
V.2 
Influence of the Mesophase on the Loss Tangent of 
Fiber Composites. . . . . '.' . . 
82 
V.3 
Dynamic Properties of Particulates . . . . . . . . 
86 
VA 
Mechanical Properties of Particulates . . . . . . . 
94 
V.5 
Evaluation of Static and Dynamic Moduli in Particulates. 
102 
VI 
The Influence of the Mesophase on the Thermal Behavior of Composites 
110 
VI.1 Thermal Properties of Fiber-Reinforced Composites. . . 
110 
VI.2 Thermal Properties of Particulates and Volume-Fraction 
of the Mesophase. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
117 
VII The Glas Transition of Composites and Influence of the Mesophase . 
125 
VII.1 Variation of the Glass-Transition Temperature with 
Direction of Fibers in Composites. . . . . . . . 
125 
VII.2 Influence of the Mesophase on the Glass Transition 
of Particulates . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
132 
vm Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
140 
IX 
Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting . 
157 
V 

Contents 
IX. 1 Shrinkage Stress in Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
IX.2 Shrinkage Stress in Particulates . . . . . . 
IX.3 Shrinkage Stress Distribution Along a Fiber . . 
157 
170 
178 
X 
Stress Singularities at the Mesopbase due to the Geometry of Inclusions. 
182 
X.l 
General Aspects 
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . 
X.2 
Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
X.3 
Effect of Stress Raisers 
. . . . 
182 
182 
208 
XI 
Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases . 
226 
XI. 1 Order of Singularities at the Apices of Multiwedges 
226 
XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study of Singularities . 
235 
XI.3 Singularities at Crack Tips of General Curvilinear Interfaces 
251 
References. . 
274 
Author Index. 
287 
Subject Index . 
288 
VI 

I. Preface 
The increasing use of advanced composite materials in modem structures of high 
performance calls for a detailed knowledge of their properties. On the other hand, 
these materials possessing intense anisotropy, and in some cases non homogeneity, 
require complicated theories based on homogeneous anisotropic elasticity. Typically, 
such materials either involve fiber-reinforced composites, which are stacked in layers 
and form laminates, or particulate composites, containing a second phase in powder 
form. However, each case must be separately analyzed in terms of the particular 
characteristics of the materials involved and the process of preparation of the com-
posite systems. 
Composite materials consisting of more than one destinct phase are in general use 
in modem industrial applications. Machine parts, structural components and others 
may be manufactured from such materials. Epoxy resins are suitable matrices for 
this class of materials. This is due not only to their general-properties such as linear 
mechanical behavior, transparency, etc., but also to the possibility of modifying their 
mechanical and optical properties in a very wide range by using suitable modifiers. 
Their rheological behavior, as well as their dynamic properties have been extensively 
investigated. 
Moreover second phase reinforcement has the advantage of strengthening the 
composite, enabling, by proper design, to reinforce the matrix in the required 
amount, thus leading to maximum use of the properties of the material. The rein-
forcing phase should have a high melting point, low specific gravity, high strength 
over the whole range of working temperatures, minimum solubility in the matrix, 
high chemical stability, absence of phase transformations over the entire temperature 
range, and non-toxicity during production and servicing. 
The role of the matrix is to protect the filler from the corrosive action of the envi-
ronment and to ensure interactions between the filler units by mechanical and other 
effects. 
However, around inclusions embedded in a matrix a rather complex situation 
develops, with areas of imperfect bonding, mechanical stresses due to shrinkage, 
high stress gradients or even stress singularities due to the geometry of the inclusion, 
voids, microcracks, etc. Moreover, the interactions of the surface of the filler with 
the matrix are usually more complicated and not simply of mechanical nature. The 
filler actually restricts the segmental and molecular mobility of the polymeric matrix, 
as adsorption-interaction in polymer surface-layers occurs with filler particles. Under 
these conditions the quality of adhesion can ha~dly be quantified making further 
investigations necessary. 
Another large set of problems is associated with the relation of the properties of 

1. Preface 
the composite to the individual properties of the fIller and the matrix. The problem 
of predicting the elastic moduli of macroscopically isotropic composites has been 
treated by bounding techniques, using variational principles of the theory of elasticity. 
Methods suitable for arbitrary phase geometry have been given in the literature. 
Finally, another set of problems concerns the macroscopic behavior of the composite 
as a whole under specified loading, static or dynamic. Composite materials prove to 
be superior to other structural materials in applications requiring high-strength, 
high-stiffness, and lightweight components. On the other hand, incorporation of 
fillers in polymers allows to regulate the mechanical and other properties of materials. 
For instance, glass-fiber-reinforced plastics exhibit high strength-to-weight ratios, 
excellent corrosion resistance, and superior damping capacity. The problem is that 
composite materials constitute complicated heterogeneous systems, so that it is 
difficult to theoretically describe their mechanical behavior. Moreover, in the case 
of fiber-reinforced plastics, theoretical approaches appear to be limited due to mathe-
matical complexities introduced by the anisotropic nature of the material. 
Fracture studies of composite materials are much more complex, than those of 
homogeneous, but brittle, engineering materials, since, among others, the singular 
state of stress surrounding the crack tips at an interface is not that of r- 1[2 (r, the 
polar distance from the singularity), and crack extension could be non symmetric, 
despite the geometric symmetry of the problem. 
Transient stress problems may be solved by means of various photomechanical 
techniques. The application of each of these techniques depends on the specific 
problem, as well as on the nature of the investigated material. Conventional high-
speed photography may be used in cases where the materials present low wave-
propagation velocities, enabling dynamic fringes to be photographed. Actual struc-
tural materials may be simulated with stiffer model-materials having relatively high 
wave velocities. In such cases we must use more sophisticated techniques, such as 
streak photography, ultra-high-speed framing cameras, Cranz-Schardin cameras, 
and lasers. 
Introduction of a filler into a matrix-material generally affects most of its mechanical 
properties, because of the stress/strain fields created around the filler particles. 
The stronger the latter fields, the higher is the reinforcement. 
However, points of high stress concentration can always be the origin of fatigue 
cracks or even brittle fracture phenomena, and an optimum solution between the 
two contradicting situations is required. In particular, when one is interested in ob-
taining higher Young's or bulk moduli for the composite, while no higher shear 
modulus is required, constituent materials with limiting shear properties, i.e. nearly 
equal shear moduli, can be applied. 
The stress field created around a filler inclusion under the action of a uniform stress 
at infinity generally decays with the distance from the centre of the inclusion. The rate 
of decay depends on the matrix-to-filler shear moduli ratio. When this becomes 
equal to unity, all terms in the expressions for the stress, containing high powers of 
the inverse of the distance, vanish. 
In this manner, no considerable stress gradients develop in the composite, while 
on the other hand the values of Young's or bulk moduli depend on the relation of 
Poisson's ratios of matrix and filler. 
Besides the singular stress fields created from the crack tips, the presence of hard 
2 

I. Preface 
inclusions generates stress concentrations in the vicinity of the filler-matrix interface 
due to the roughness of the inclusion surface, aswell as to the Poisson ratio differences 
between the two phases. Areas of maximum stress and highest distortion energy are 
also associated with unusually large local stress gradients. These local stress gradients 
affect the modes of fracture of the composite, so that both theoretical and experi-
mental techniques in this research field are important. 
Moreover, another reason for the generation of additional stress fields is the for-
mation of voids in the regions between the two phases. These voids may be formed 
due to chemical or metallurgical reactions between matrix and inclusions. 
As a result of all the above-mentioned causes, the stress field created around in-
clusions, as well as at the tips of running cracks in composite materials is complicated 
and therefore a great need exists for improved experimental techniques in order to 
study these fields. 
Suitable methods for analyzing singular stress fields are the methods of either 
transmitted or reflected caustics. According to these methods the stress singularity 
is transformed into· an optical singularity based on the theory of geometric optics. 
This transformation is achieved by applying a coherent light beam to the specimen 
and by receiving the reflected light rays from the front or rear faces of the specimen, 
or those traversing the specimen, on a reference screen at some distance from the 
specimen. 
The optical method of caustics determines the order of singularity at the crack tip 
touching the interface at any angle. To date this method has been applied to plane 
bi-material models with satisfactory results. It considerably simplifies the evaluation 
of the order of singularities at any characteristic point of the composite as well as 
the values of the components of stress intensity factors there. Moreover, it always 
gives reliable results. A promising extension of the method to three-dimensional 
problems will be very helpful for a further deeper study of the phenomena in compo-
sites. 
In all existing studies, the interface between phases was considered as ideal, assuming 
that the materials of the phases are perfectly bonded along this mathematical surface. 
Also, the analysis of the stress system was a static one and, in principle, it did not 
allow any prediction about the dynamic behavior of a fast-running crack crossing a 
real interface, which is not a mathematical surface separating two materials, but a 
intermediate phase with its own mechanical properties acting as a material discon-
tinuity. 
This boundary layer between phases, lying near the interface, plays the role of a 
barrier to the crack propagation, of a wave- and energy-reflector for the stress waves 
accompanying the propagating cracks, of an attenuator of the fracture phenomenon, 
and a damper of crack propagation. 
Although the strength of a composite is mainly depending on the properties of its 
constituent phases, there is another major parameter determining the properties of 
a composite system. 
This parameter depends on the effectiveness of the bonding between phases in 
transferring stresses across the interfaces of the main phases. This transfer of the 
properties of the one phase to the other is assumed in this study to take place not 
abruptly at the interfaces of the phases but smoothly through a boundary layer of 
infinitesimal dimensions but sufficient to act as a damper between phases. This 
3 

1. Preface 
boundary layer is called mesophase and its effect on the overall thermomechanical 
behavior of polymeric composites must be incorporated. The mechanism of crack 
propagation in a composite is studied and particularly the role of the straight meso-
phase in the deceleration and arrest of cracks propagating in the composite. 
A theoretical model is described, based mainly on the Hashin-Rosen model for 
composites, with the addition of an intermittent cylindrical or spherical layer represent-
ing the mesophase; moreover a further improvement of this model is presented which 
consists of a series of infmitesimallayers with progressively varying properties from 
the inclusions to the matrix. 
Based on these models, an explanation of the various mechanical and physico-
chemical properties of the composites is given. It is shown, in all cases studied, that 
the introduction of the mesophase yields a better and more flexible means for inter-
preting the complicated phenomena appearing in all composites used in practical 
engineering applications. 
The eleven chapters of this monograph are concentrated mainly to studies of the 
mechanical and physicochemical properties of the composites (particulate and fiber-
reinforced), as these can be explained from the respective properties of their consti-
tuent substances. It focusses on the mechanical aspects of composites and only to 
a minor extent on physicochemical considerations. 
The results presented in this book originate to a great part from the scientific 
effort of the author who began his investigations in the field of polymers in 1959 at 
Brown University, Providence, R.I., USA, continuing for some twentyfive years at 
the National Technical University of Athens, Greece. The author takes the opportunity 
to express his gratitude to the many collaborators and co-authors of the papers cited 
in the bibliography. Wholehearted thanks are also addressed to his devoted technicians 
of his laboratory in Athens for their continuous help and dedication. 
Athens, February 1987 
4 
P. S. Theocaris 
Professor and Head 
Department of Engineering Sciences 
Athens Nat. Technical University 

II. Introduction 
Introducing a filler into a polymeric matrix results in the production of a composite 
material with superior strength. However, predicting the properties of the product is 
difficult, since they depend on a great number of parameters. Attempts to predict such 
features may only lead to a rough estimation of the influence of fillers on the overall 
behavior of the composite. For example, a linear increase of the strength of the com-
posite is observed as the filler-volume fraction increases. However, the reinforcing 
action of the filler is limited by the nature, shape and grade of the filler, and, on the 
other hand, by the adhesion efficiency between the two phases and the mechanism of 
failure of the composite system. Also, another important factor affecting the strength 
properties is the interaction between individual filler particles. This last parameter 
is difficult to predict in a real composite. Figure I illustrates the interaction between 
an idealized array of parallel fibers embedded in a softer matrix, which resulted from 
shrinkage stresses developed during casting. A transverse section of this composite 
Fig. 1. Isochromatic patterns for a square array of inclusions. 
5 

II. Introduction 
is shown. The isochromatics in this figure yield the difference of principal stresses due 
to shrinkage of the matrix 1,2). 
The above-mentioned parameters, as e~amples of a whole system of factors in-
fluencing the strength properties of a composite which all interact with each other, 
result in a non-monotonic change of the strength properties of the composite upon 
filling, and lead to an optimum filler-volume fraction, above which the reinforcing 
action of the filler is upset. This reversal of the reinforcing action depends also on 
the temperature and the rate of deformation of the composite system. 
The characterization of a composite system usually requires a great number of 
parameters 3). Referring specifically to a two-phase system, where a filler phase is 
dispersed in a matrix, the physical behavior of the system depends on the geometrical, 
topological, and physical properties of the dispersed phase. 
A most decisive factor for this behavior is the adhesion efficiency at the interface 
of the two phases. In most theoretical models describing the mechanical behavior of 
composite systems, this adhesion is c.onsidered as perfect, i.e., the interface can ensure 
continuity of stresses and displacements. However, such a condition is hardly fulfilled 
in real composites. In reality, around any inclusion embedded in a matrix a boundary 
layer is developed from either the one or from both sides of the interface, accomodating 
smoothly the differences in properties of the two phases 4,5). 
Moreover, the interaction of the surface of the filler with the matrix material is 
usually more than a simple mechanical effect. The filler restricts the segmental and 
molecular mobility of the polymeric matrix, as adsorption interactions of polymer 
surface layers occur with filler particles 6). It is obvious that, under these conditions, 
the quality of adhesion can hardly be quantified, making a more thorough investiga-
tion necessary. 
Attempts have been made to include a parameter, proportional to the adhesion 
efficiency, into the expressions characterizing composite systems, while this par-
ameter is expected to be adjusted on the basis of experimental data 7). However, such 
procedures deal quite inadequately with the physics of the phenomenon and can be 
termed as empirical or semi-empirical. 
Furthermore, in dealing with polymeric composites, it was observed that the 
transition temperature of the material is strongly affected by the adhesion efficiency in 
a way that the latter can be evaluated by means of thermomechanical analysis 8,9). 
An analytical investigation taking into account a zone around the inclusions in which 
all imperfections so far described are contained is of considerable interest. 
In developing a theoretical procedure to characterize the thermomechanical be-
havior of the composite, 'instead of applying the well-known Hashin-Rosen model 
of concentric spheres (see Fig. 1 a in Chapter III, 2) one may adopt an advanced model 
(see Fig. 16) where the representative volume element consists of three phases, i.e. 
three concentric spheres (for the particulates), or three coaxial cylinders (for the fiber-
reinforced materials), with each phase maintaining a constant volume 10). The novel 
element in this model is the third phase, a hybrid lying between the two main phases. 
This hollow cylinder or sphere corresponds to a zone in which transition phenomena 
between the properties of the two phases occur and which characterizes the effective-
ness of bonding between the main phases. 
Then, the mechanical and physical behavior of the composite depends on the cha-
racteristics of all three components: 
6 

II. Introduction 
i) Filler: a) The geometry of the inclusions, b) their size, c) the size distribution, 
d) The orientation of the inclusions, e) the volume fraction, f) the relative positions 
between the inclusions, g) the physical state, etc. 
. 
ii) Matrix: a) the physicochemical state of the matrix, b) the degree ofpolymeriza-
tion (polymeric matrix), c) the crystallinity, d) the degree of cross-linking, etc. 
iii) Mesophase: In this phase there is an interaction between matrix and inclusions. 
The term interaction of phases refers to the degree of contact and the cohesive forces 
which are developed on the interface of the two main phases. This parameter is of 
great importance among the above parameters, and there are many reasons contri-
buting to this importance. 
All present theoretical models attempt to explain the mechanical behavior of com-
posite materials by assuming the surfaces of the inclusions to be perfect mathematical 
surfaces. However, in a real composite, the surfaces of the inclusions are rough. 
The irregularities of the physical surfaces are of the order of microns, and this 
results in stress concentrations near comers. These stress concentrations cannot be 
predicted from the theoretical models, which assume continuity of stresses and dis-
placements at the interfaces. Moreover, due to this roughness of the surfaces of the 
inclusions, the real contact surface between the two phases is greater than the respective 
contact surface predicted from a theoretical model. 
On the other hand, the presence of the inclusion in the matrix material affects 
the rate of polymerization during the formation of the polymeric matrix, as well as 
the mobility of the macromolecules at the contact surface of the two phases. It was 
found that the greater the particle fineness of the filler, the greater its influence on 
the kinetics of polymerization 11). It has also been observed that addition of a filler 
disturbs the polymer concentration as a continuous three-dimensional network 
having high-elastic properties 11). 
These phenomena result in a reduction of the number of possible configurations of 
molecules within the boundary layer and formation of a denser material in this layer, 
than in the bulk. 
On the other hand, during thermal and/or mechanical loading of the composite 
microstresses are developed at the filler-matrix interfaces and, if these stresses exceed 
the strength of bonding of the two phases, this results in the formation of micro-
cracks which, in many cases, are the initial cause of fracture of the composite system. 
An essential cause of the increase of the elastic modulus of the composite with 
filler concentration is the increased density of the polymer material along a surface 
layer at the filler-matrix interface. In such thin fJJms, the polymer is subjected to a bulk 
deformation. In all materials, the bulk modulus is much higher than the shear modulus, 
and, therefore, the increased volume fraction of the surface layer leads to a general 
increase of the modulus of the filled system 11). 
It is further shown 12-14) that the molecular mobility of chains and segments is 
considerably reduced at such surface layers because of these form constraints. 
Moreover, the existence of a harder interlayer may be considered as another cause 
of the increase of the elastic modulus, since there is an apparent increase of the filler 
content due to the addition of the interlayer. 
From the above analysis, it is evident that, around an inclusion embedded in a 
matrix, a rather complex situation develops consisting of areas of imperfect bonding, 
where mechanical stresses are abundantly developed due to shrinkage 1,2) and where 
7 

II. Introduction 
high stress gradients or even stress singularities due to the geometry of the inclusions 4,5) 
are present and, [mally, voids, microcracks, and other similar discontinuities may be 
created. 
In this case, the composite may be considered as consisting of three phases, i.e. 
the two actual phases and a third one, which may also arise during thermal treatment 
of the material due to component interaction 15). This extra phase is what we call the 
mesophase and it is obviously inhomogeneous. 
In previous papers 10,16-18) the author has studied the effect of the boundary 
mesophase and its thermomechanical behavior on the overall thermomechanical 
behavior of particulate composites, as well as on the mechanism of load transfer 
across the mesophase in the case of composites reinforced with fibers. In order to ex-
plain this effect, theoretical models were developed taking into account the existence 
of the boundary mesophase. In these models, the mesophase is considered as a homo-
geneous and isotropic material, so that a three-layered system represents the actual 
situation of the material in the neighborhood of inclusions of a composite. In Ref. 19 
a further improvement of this model was introduced by considering that the meso-
phase material is an inhomogeneous one with elastic properties continuously varying 
with distance from the inclusion boundary. This model is more realistic than the 
previous one and may constitute a criterion of the quality of adhesion between matrix 
and filler. 
From the theoretical point of view one may adopt models describing the structure 
and the mechanical behavior of composite materials both on the macroscopic and 
microscopic scale. This study presents some of these models and their properties. 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
111.1 General Aspects 
Composite materials consist of two or more distinct constituents or phases, which are 
insoluble in one another. 
Particulate composites are composites reinforced with particles, where all dimen-
sions show the same order of magnitude. Particulate composites are produced from 
a polymeric matrix, into which a suitable pulverized substance has been dispersed. 
They exhibit improved mechanical properties, better electrical and thermal conductiv-
ity than either phase, lower thermal expansivity, and improved dimensional stability 
and behavior at elevated temperatures. 
Fiber-reinforced composites are compound substances where the polymeric matrix 
is reinforced with a second phase in cylindrical form. This second phase stabilizes 
the composite. Moreover, by proper design the matrix can be reinforced in the re-
quired direction, which ensures maximal exploitation of the fiber properties. A dis-
advantage of fiber composites is that the fibers are able to transmit loads only in the 
directions of their axis while strengthening is less in the direction perpendicular to 
the axis, and in some cases even weakening may occur. 
The matrix protects the filler from the corrosive action of the environment, and 
ensures interactions between the fillers by mechanical, physical, and chemical effects. 
The mechanical properties of the composite depend on the mutual position of the 
fillers in the matrix material. 
In fiber-reinforced composites, the deformation of the matrix- is used to transfer 
stresses by means of shear tractions at the fiber-matrix interface to the embedded 
high-strength fibers. On the other hand, fibers retard the propagation of cracks and 
thus produce materials of high strength. 
In reality, around an inclusion embedded in a matrix a rather complex situation 
develops, with areas of imperfect bonding, permanent stresses due to shrinkage, high 
stress gradients or even stress singularities due to the geometry of the inclusions, 
voids, microcracks etc. Moreover, the interactions of the surface of the ,filler with 
the matrix are usually more complicated and not simply of mechanical nature. The 
filler actually restricts the segmental and molecular mobility of the polymeric matrix, 
as adsorption-interaction in polymer surface-layers occurs with the filler particles. 
In such a case the quality of adhesion can hardly be quantified making further investiga-
tions necessary. 
The mechanical behavior of two-phase composite systems depends partly on the 
filler characteristics, such as the geometry of inclusions, their size, the size distribu-
tion, the orientation of inclusions, the filler volume fraction, the relative positions 
9 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
between the inclusions, the physical state of the filler, etc., and partly on the matrix 
characteristics, i.e., which are related to the physicochemical state of the matrix, 
its degree of polymerization, crystallinity, degree of cross-linking, etc. 
These parameters must be considered separately for the filler and the matrix. 
However, besides these parameters, there is another major factor, characterizing 
composite systems, being the effectiveness of the bond between matrix and filler in 
transferring stress across the interface. 
All models which have been introduced so far to explain the mechanical behavior 
of composites, have in common that they consider the filler-matrix interface as a 
perfect mathematical surface. However, the situation is really quite different. Indeed, 
all models assume the surfaces of inclusions as perfect mathematical surfaces which 
can ensure a continuity of stresses and displacements. In real composites these sur-
faces are rough, and this roughness results in stress concentrations near the comers, 
and, furthermore, in a significant increase of the real contact surface between phases. 
The rate of polymerization during the setting of the polymer matrix, as well as the 
mobility of the macromolecules in the contact zone, are affected by the presence of 
the filler. This results in a reduction of the number of possible conformations of mole-
cules in the boundary layer, causing the formation of a denser material in the boundary 
layer than in the bulk. As a consequence, a general increase of the modulus of the 
filled system is observed. 
On the other hand, thermal stress concentrations occur at these layers, since the 
thermal properties of either phase are different. The load-carrying capacity of the 
system is affected by these thermal stresses, according to the nature of the stress 
field, developed by the external loads. 
Then, around each inclusion a complex situation develops, with areas of imperfect 
bonding along which mechanical stresses develop due to shrinkage during casting 
and post-curing periods and high stress gradients, or even stress singularities, due to 
abrupt changes in geometry of inclusions. Finally, voids, microcracks, and other 
discontinuities may arise as a result of such anomalies, which further aggravate the 
state of adhesion between the main phases. 
Consequently, the composite may be considered as consisting of three phases: 
the matrix, the inclusions and a third phase, being a layer of variable thickness in-
cluding all these changes and which surrounds each single inclusion. This hybrid 
phase is called the mesophase. 
The existence of the mesophase layer has been shown by infrared spectroscopy, 
ESP, NMR, electron microscopy and other methods. Moreover, it was shown that 
the thickness of this layer depends on the polymer cohesion energy, free surface 
energy of the solid, and on the flexibility of the polymer chains. 
A study of the effect of the mesophase layer on the thermo mechanical behavior 
and the transfer mechanism of loads between phases of composites are presented 
in this study. Suitable theoretical models are developed considering the mesophase 
as an additional intermediate phase. To a first approximation the mesophase material 
is considered as a homogeneous and isotropic, while, in further approximations, more 
sophisticated models are developed, in which the mesophase material is considered 
as an inhomogeneous with progressively varying properties between inclusions and 
matrix. Thus, the basic Rashin-Rosen model is being improved making the new 
models more flexible and suitable to describe the real behavior of composites. 
10 

m.2 The Three-Layer Model for Particulates 
Experimentally observed heat capacity jumps LlCp at the glass-transition tempera-
tures Tq in the matrix material and the composites are intimately related to the thick-
ness of the mesophase. Further, accurate measurements of the overall longitudinal 
elastic modulus of the composites and the matrix allows to evaluate the mode of 
variation of the mesophase modulus and to determine an adhesion coefficient charac-
terizing the quality of adhesion between phases. This parameter is important to define 
the overall strength and the mechanical behavior of the composite. 
This chapter describes models of this boundary layer, which is called the rnesophase. 
This newly described infinitesimal phase may be considered as an independent phase, 
lying between the two major phases, with its own particular mechanical and physico-
chemical properties. 
111.2 The Three-Layer Model for Particulates Based 
on Thermal Expansion Measurements 
In order to characterize the thermo mechanical behavior of a particulate composite, 
instead of applying the well-known Rashin-Rosen model of concentric spheres 
(Fig. I a) one may adopt the three-phase model (Fig. I b). The intermediate phase, 
or mesophase represents the zone of imperfections surrounding the inclusions and 
is considered to consist of a homogeneous and isotropic material of finite thickness. 
Fig. 1. a Principal sections of the Hashin two-phase model ; b its respective three-layer unfolding 
model for a typical particulate composite; c a 0.3 rom iron particle embedded in an epoxy 
matrix surrounded by a mesophase (magnification 200 x ). 
11 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
If the thermomechanical properties of the constituent materials, as well as of the 
composite, are known, the respective properties and the volume fraction of the meso-
phase can be evaluated; however, only under the assumption that, if perfect adhesion 
between the two phases of the composite exists, the thickness of the mesophase may 
be neglected and the mesophase layer may be considered as an interface. 
The existence of the mesophase is not merely a theoretical concept, but has actually 
been observed on several occasions from surface photomicrographs of composites. 
Figure I c presents a typical example of the appearance of a mesophase. The adsorp-
tion interaction is expected to extend to a thickness of a few tens to a few hundreds of 
Angstroms. However, the actual thickness of the mesophase, containing the above 
mentioned mechanical anomalies and affecting the overall thermomechanical be-
havior of the composite, is much more extended. 
In the following, subscripts/, i, m, and c correspond to filler material, mesophase, 
matrix, and composite, respectively. According to Fig. I b, the volume fraction u of 
each of the three phases is calculated as: 
Uf = (rf /rm)3 
Ui = [(rJrf )3 -
1] vf 
um = 1 -
(rJrf )3 vf . 
(1) 
If a temperature increase LI T is applied to the system, thermal stresses and dis-
placements will develop for which the general solution is 11.12): 
2 EIX LIT 
EC 
EC* 
=----+-------_c:_ 
3 1 -
v 
1 -
2v 
(1 + v) r3 
2 EIX LIT 
EC 
EC* 
(f1)1) = -- -- + --- + ---~ 
3 1 -
v 
1 -
2v 
(1 + v) r3 
(2) 
IX LIT r(1 + v) 
C* 
ur = 
+ Cr +-
3(1 -
v) 
r2 
where E is the elastic modulus, v the Poisson ratio, IX the linear thermal expansion 
coefficient, r the radius, while C, C* are integration constants determined from the 
boundary conditions. 
The boundary conditions should account for continuity of stresses and displace-
ments at the respective two interfaces and are as follows: 
U;fl(O) = 0 , 
(f~;)(r m) = 0 
u(j)(r ) = u(i)(r ) 
(J(j)(r ) = (J(i)(r ) 
rf 
rf' 
rrf 
rrf 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(3) 
which provide six equations, containing the integration constants Cf' Cj, Cp C;*, Cm' 
and C::;. 
12 

III.2 The Three-Layer Model for Particulates 
In addition, one obtains for the matrix: 
a !JT r (1 + v ) 
C* 
u(r)_m 
m 
m+Cr+ m 
m 
m 
-
3(1 _ v ) 
m m 
7 
m 
m 
(4) 
which yield: 
c! 
r!(1 + Ym) (ac 
am) 
af AT = 3(1 -
vm) 
aJ -
af . 
Cm 
_ ac 2(1 -
2vm) 
aJ !JT - aJ 3(1 -
vm) 
• 
Now, a composite consisting of N constituents is considered. If Vj is the volume 
fraction of the j-th constituent, the bulk, Kc' and shear, Gc' moduli of the composite 
are related by the self-consistent approach 13) to the respective moduli K j and Gj by: 
N 
(5) 
I vj[t -
b + b(G)G)]-l = t 
j=l 
1 (I + v) 
2(4 -
5v ) 
where a = -
c 
b = 
c 
3 (1 -
v ) , 
15(1 -
v ) 
c 
c 
with the Poisson ratio of the composite as: 
3K -2G 
v = 
c 
c. 
c 
6Kc + 2Gc 
By the same approach, the thermal expansion coefficient of the composite is given 
by: 
N 
ac = I ViKi K c1 aj[l - a + a(K)KJ]-1 . 
j=l 
(6) 
Equations (3b) and (3c) together with Eq. (5) form a nonlinear system with the 
following unknowns: 
ai 
X 2 =-, 
aJ 
c* 
X ---'-
5 -
aJ !JT ' 
(7) 
13 

Ill. Models for Composite Materials 
which, when solved by means of a proper computer program, provides the mechanical 
and thermal properties, as well as the volume fraction of the mesophase. 
The next case considers a composite consisting of a polymeric matrix and an elastic 
filler. The previous procedure allows to determine the mechanical and thermal pro-
perties, as well as the volume fraction of the mesophase. The mesophase is also ex-
pected to exhibit a viscoelastic behavior. The composite consists, therefore, of three 
phases, one of which is elastic and the two others viscoelastic. The presence of a second 
viscoelastic phase, the mesophase: which exhibits a glass-transition temperature 
different than that of the matrix material, obviously affects the behavior of the entire 
composite. 
c: 
0 'iii 
c: 
CI 
Co 
)( 
LLI 
-a 
E 
.... 
QJ 
..c: 
r-
III 
VI 
QJ c: 
0 
. iii 
c: 
QJ 
E 
C5 
0 
t 
<I 
Transition zone 
for the ,compos ite 
Ty; 
T9, T9m 
T (OC)_ 
Fig. 2. A schematic variation of the ther-
mal expansion, reduced to the gauge 
length /, for the components of the com-
posite if corresponds to the elastic filler, 
m to the matrix, i to the mesophase, and 
c to the composite). The ratio (,d//le) of 
the composite changes its slope twice at 
To. and Tg . To is found, close to the 
intersection m of tbe two external linear 
branches of the (,d//IJ = fiT) curve. 
A schematic approach of the glass-transition temperature of the composite can be 
based on the thermal expansion curves of Fig. 2. The elastic filler exhibits a constant 
coefficient of thermal expansion tl.I , and the corresponding curve is a straight line. 
For the matrix, the graph consists of two straight lines intersecting at the glass-transi-
tion temperature T , with the respective thermal expansion coefficients a leT < T ) 
p 
m 
p 
and tl.m2(T > Tqm)' For the mesophase, the corresponding figures are T9i (generally 
lower than Tgm), tl.il and ai2 and the ai-values are very low and strongly dependent 
upon temperature. 
The thermal expansion LJI for each phase is given as a function of the temperature by: 
i) for the filler: 
(8) 
ii) for the matrix: 
(9) 
14 

III.2 The Three-Layer Model for Particulates 
iii) for the mesophase; 
(1.0) 
We assume now that the thermal expansion coefficient of the composite is given 
by the linear mixture equation; 
with 
In particular, ac assumes three different values; 
ac1 = vfaf + vmaml + viail 
for 
ac2 = vfaf + vmaml + viaiZ 
for 
T < Tgi 
T.<T<T 
g. 
gm 
(11) 
(12) 
The thermal expansion curve of the composite consists, therefore, of three recti-
linear parts; 
L11c1 = acl T 
for 
T < Tgi 
L1lcz = aC1 Tgi + acz(T -
Tgi) 
for 
Tgi <: T < Tgm (13) 
L1lc3 = acl Tgi + acz(Tgm -
Tg) + ac3(T -
Tgm) 
for T> Tgm' 
The glass-transition temperature TgC of the composite corresponds to the inter-
section of the first and the last part of the curve, or it is the solution of the equation 
L11c1 = L1lc3 which becomes; 
T = vi(aiZ -
ail) Tgi + vm(am2 -
aml) Tgm . 
gCvlai2 -
ail) + vm(am2 -
aml) 
(14) 
and correlates TgC with the thermal properties of the matrix and the mesophase. 
Obviously, more accurate expressions for the thermal expansion curves and thermal 
~xpansion coefficient of the composite may provide a better approach to TqC than the 
above formula which, however, in many cases was found to apply with satisfactory 
accuracy. Further, actual experimental data may be treated by the outlined procedure, 
and T determined with the highest possible accuracy. 
gc 
The above equation has been applied to a real composite in order to verify the results 
so far outlined. A metal-filled epoxy composite was selected with a matrix material 
consisting of a diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A resin, cured with 8 wt % (referred to 
the resin) triethy1ene tetramine. The epoxy matrix was filled with iron particles of an 
average diameter of 15.0 !lm at a volume fraction of vf = .0 . .05. The properties of the 
15 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
mesophase were evaluated by means of the model developed above. The mechanical 
and thermal properties of the particulate were studied 10.20) and the following values 
obtained. 
i) 
For the iron particles: Ef = 21 X 1010 Nm- 2 '!Xf = 15 x 10-6 °C-I, Vf = 0.05 
(df = 0.150 mm). 
ii) For the matrix material (diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A resin cured with 8 % 
TET hardener); glass-transition temperature Tgm = 130°C: 
a) below Tgm : Eml = 3.35 X 109 Nm- 2 !Xml = 65.30 X 10-6 °C-1 
b) above Tgm : Em2 = 1.80 x 109 Nm- 2 !Xm2 = 168.48 X 10- 6 °C-1 . 
iii) For the composite material a continuous rapid variation of the elastic modulus Ee 
and the thermal expansion coefficient a e appears in the region between T = 100°C 
and T = 130°C. 
The volume fraction of the mesophase was Vi = 0.024 and practically independent 
of temperature. The thermal expansion coefficient !Xi was much lower than the re-
spective figure for the matrix, as presellted in Fig. 3 a, where experimental curves for 
matrix, filler, and composite, plotted against temperature, are also shown. 
The variation of the thermal expansion coefficient may be attributed to the in-
fluence of the mesophase, which presented a much lower glass-transition temperature, 
determined by this procedure as: Tg i = 100°C. It was found that: 
a) below Tgi : Eel = 3.60 X 109 Nm -2 !Xc! = 48.20 X 10-6 (OC- 1) 
b) between Tgi and Tgm : E:2 = 2.05 x 109 !X~ = 48.35 X 10-6 Cc- 1) 
c) above Tgm:Ee3 = 1.96 x 109 Nm- 2 !Xe3 = 122.90xlO- 6 CC- 1) 
By introducing these values for !X into Eqs. (12), the quantities vi' !Xi!' and !Xi2 were 
determined. 
These values are given by: 
Below Tgi:!Xi! = 0.2x 10-6 °C-1 
Above Tgi:!XiZ = 0.5x 10-6 °C-l 
T. = 100°C, g 
= 7.60 Nm- 2 (below T.) 
~. 
~ 
The above-cited values compare well with the results derived by numerically solving 
the systems of Eqs. (6}-(13). As a further check, the value of Tge derived from the 
theory, as Tge = 119°C, coincided well with its experimental value of Tge = 117°C. 
The difference may be explained by the fact that Eq. (14) is only approximate and its 
results contain some error. 
An additional proof is that the linear thermal expansion coefficients of the compo-
site in the glassy region almost coincide. Theory yields !xc! = 48.20 X 10-6 °C-l, 
whereas experiment gives !xc! = ~8.00 x.1O- 6 °C-l. This coincidence does not hold 
beyond glass transition. Indeed it was found that 
~~. = 122.80 X 10-6 °c-1 
while 
!X~. = 158 X 10-6 °C-1 • 
Despite the apparent correspondence of some experimental with theoretical results, 
the values for the thermal expansion coefficients of the mesophase are very small, 
as they should not be, since the mesophase material is very similar to that of the 
matrix, and at least its values should lie between !Xm and !Xr This casts some doubt 
16 

lII.2 The Three-Layer Model for Particulates 
on the reliability of the experimental results 10). For satisfactory results, all measure-
ments in the composite and the phases should be highly accurate. 
Figure 3 a presents the variation of the thermal expansion coefficients IX for in-
clusions f, matrix m, and composite c and the derived values for IX at the mesophase (IXJ 
Similarly, Fig. 3 b gives the variation of the thermal expansions (normalized to the 
unit lengths) of the constituents versus temperature T. 
t 0.8 
~ 0.6 
~ 
f; 0.4 
I< 
0-
0.2 
o 
a. 
20 
t 
15 
0.# 
10 
0 
~ 
I< 
~ 5 
0 
b 
40 
40 
60 
a.-~1 
a~ r--
60 
~jl 
aj 
I 
a~.i 
"I 
JI 
~ 
I LJ I 
at1 
af 
II 
II 
1 20 t 
11 ... 
8O~ 
S! 
I< 
40 
d 
IIgj IH[g. o 
60 
80 
100 
120 
T (OC) -+ 
160 80 
120 
60 t 
80t 4O~ 
0.# 
I< 
S! 
:;;:j 
401< 20 
a 
T~ 
0 
80 
100 
120 
140 
T (OC)-. 
Fig. 3. a Thermal expansion co-
efficients IX for the inclusion (j), 
matrix (m), mesophase (I), and 
composite (c) of a typical iron-
epoxy particulate composite, with 
5 % volume fraction for the in-
clusions, 
versus 
temperature. 
b The reduced longitudinal ex-
pansion of the same elements, 
normalized to the unit-length, 
versus temperature (diameter of 
the inclusions df = 150 j.lm). 
Then, the three-layer model provides an easy method for evaluating the character-
istics of the mesophase, by introducing a significant flexibility in the study of the 
physical behavior of composites. The drawback of the model is the insensibility 
to measure the thermal expansions of the composite, which must be evaluated with 
very high accuracy. Small deviations in measuring the IX and E values may cause the 
balance of characteristic values of the composite to vary considerably. However, 
by taking into account the influence of the mesophase on the physical behavior 
of the composite, our knowledge of its behavior can be expanded. 
17 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
111.3 The Three-Cylinder Model for Short Fibers 
It has been shown 2-4) that, in surface layers, the molecular mobility of chains and 
segments is reduced as a result of conformational restrictions. The existence of such 
a hard layer may be another cause of modulus increase as a result of an apparent 
increase of the fllier size. For a constant fllier amount, this is equivalent to an increase 
in filler concentration. In addition, the filler may absorb moisture; This moisture 
reduces the degree of cure in the boundary layer 1). 
The effect of the mesophase on the overall thermomechanical behavior of parti-
culates has been considered above. Now, we shall study the mechanism of load 
transfer across the interface in the case of composites reinforced with short fibers. 
Theoretical models were developed to explain this effect, taking into account the ex-
istence of the mesophase. In these models the mesophase was considered as an homo-
geneous and isotropic material. Thus, a three-cylindrical layer system will represent 
the actual situation of the material in the nejghborhood of the filler. 
In the case of composites reinforced with fibers, the deformation of the matrix is 
used to transfer stresses by means of shear tractions at the fiber-matrix interface to 
the embedded high-strength fibers. On the other hand, fibers retard the propagation 
of cracks and thereby contributing to produce a material of high strength. 
Not using continuous fibers leads to stress concentrations at the end of fllaments, 
whose flat ends are held in the matrix by adhesion. Particularly, with composites 
consisting of polymeric matrices, the introduction of filler causes the glass-transition 
temperature of the matrix material to increase, and this appears to depend on the 
quality of adhesion between the matrix and the filler inclusion 19,21). 
The thermomechanical behavior of unidirectional composites has been extensively 
investigated. Bolotin and Bolotina 22) have considered the plane thermoelastic.pro-
blem of a circular cylinder of a reinforced multilayer material subjected to a uniform 
temperature rise. The thermoelastic response of a composite beam of a rectangular 
cross section was investigated by Boley and Testa 23). Chamis and Sendeckyj 24) 
give an interesting review of the theories predicting the thermoelastic properties of 
unidirectional fibrous composites. 
Broutman and McGarry 25) examined the stresses in resins and single fibers of 
trapezoidal specimens, where the fibers lie along the axis of symmetry and tested 
in compression. They established that the interfacial stress is a function of the differ-
ence between the ambient temperature and the elevated temperature at which the 
adhesion between resin and glass is stress-free. On the other hand, many theories 
have been developed on the longitudinal stress distribution along the fiber-m51trix 
interface. 
One of the first approaches was developed by Cox 26), who considered an elastic 
fiber of length I, embedded in an elastic matrix, under a general strain B. The author 
assumed perfect bonding between the two phases, as well as equal lateral contraction 
of the fiber and the matrix. From this assumption it follows that there is no load 
transfer through the ends of the fiber. The load transfer from the matrix to the fiber 
is expressed by: 
dP 
dx = c(uf - !!m) 
(15) 
18 

III.3 The Three-Cylinder Model for Short Fibers 
where P is the load in the fiber, uJ and um the axial displacements in the fiber and 
matrix, respectively, and x the distance from the end of the fiber, while c is a constant. 
From (15) follows that: 
d2P = c (dUJ + dUm). 
dx 2 
dx 
dx 
(16.1) 
Moreover, the strain in the fiber can be expressed in terms of the difference in moduli 
E=EJ-Em· 
du 
--'!! = e 
dx 
where A is the cross-sectional area of the fiber. 
Substituting in Eq. (l6.l) leads to: 
d
2P = c (~+ e) 
dx2 
AE 
. 
By solving the above differential equation, we obtain: 
P = EAe + c1 sinh I'/X + c2 cosh I'/X 
where: 
and cl' c2 are constants. 
Next, we can evaluate the constants c1 and c2 from the following conditions: 
P = 0 at x = 0 and x = 1/2, then: 
for 0 < x < 1/2 
which leads to: 
l 
(/)l 
cosh I'J 
-
-
x 
(J J = !... = (E f -
Em) (Je 
1 _ 
2 
. 
A 
E 
I 
m 
cosh 1'/ -
2 
(16.2) 
( 17) 
(18) 
(19) 
(20) 
(21 ) 
19 

Ill. Models for Composite Materials 
!:l:!~sile stresses in the fibers under the condition for x = ~ to have their maximum 
I 
UfmtD; = eEf at x = 2 
(22) 
where Ie is the critical length of the fiber. 
By considering the equilibrium of the forces acting on an element of a fiber as 
indicated in Fig. 4, the shearing stresses in the fiber-matrix interface can be evaluated 
by: 
dP 
dx dx = 2nr;r dx 
where 
1 dP 
'r=---. 
2nrf dx 
P-
~------dx------~·I 
-
P+ (dP/dx)dx 
(23) 
(24) 
Fig. 4. Forces acting on an 
element of a fiber. 
From Eqs. (20) and (24) we obtain the final -result for the shearing stresses: 
I 
cosh 11 '2 
The distribution of both the tensile and shearing stresses is shown in Fig. 5. 
(25) 
Rosen 27) analyzed the shear stress field interaction and force transfer between 
parallel fibers in a composite loaded in tension along the fibers in an approximate but 
useful manner. The corresponding model is shown in Fig. 6 and consists of a fiber 
surrounded by a matrix, which in turn is imbedded within a composite material 
exhibiting average composite properties. The fiber is assumed to carry only extension 
and the matrix to transmit only shear stresses. No stress is transmitted axially from 
the fiber end to the average material. Shear stresses in the average material are con-
20 

III.3 The Three-Cylinder Model for Short Fibers 
t . 
\. shear stress 
'( 
\ 
E, 
. tensile stress 
, 
'\ 
.1 
. 
/ 
~. 
1---
1./2 -----1 
.I 
1.12 
/ 
/ . 
Fig. 5. Distribution of tensile and shear stresses. 
z 
a 
Fiber ---ir--t-~?"A 
Matrix -i-
+o 
Average 
material 
a 
Fig. 6. The model used by Rosen. 
sidered to decay at a negligible distance from the inclusion interface. At equilibrium 
the following relation applies: 
(26) 
where, is the shear stress on the cylindrical surface of the fiber, and (Jf the tensile 
stress in the fiber as indicated in Fig. 7. 
For equilibrium in the axial direction : 
(27) 
where (Ja is the axial stress in the average material, and (J the applied axial stress. 
21 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
1 
dz 
1 
Fig. 7. Stresses in a fiber element. 
In this analysis the axial strains in the matrix are considered negligible, Em = O. 
However, the shear strain ')1m is determined from the displacements along the outer 
surface of the fiber and the inner surface of the average material: 
(28) 
Differentiating this equation twice, and using the stress-strain relations, yields: 
1 da aIda 
f 
-----
Ea dz 
Ef dz 
(29) 
Next, differentiating Eq. (27) and substituting the result into Eq. (26) yields: 
(30) 
where: 
The solution of Eq. (30) follows: 
A sinh rJZ + B cosh rJZ . 
The constants A and B can be evaluated from the boundary conditions: 
22 

111.3 The Three-Cylinder Model for Short Fibers 
Therefore: 
B=O 
Hence: 
G ur sinh "IZ 
't' = 
m 
a 
"IEa(rm -
rf ) (r! - r,) cosh "II 
(31) 
Equations (26) and .(31) lead to: 
(32) 
If r a ~ r m' then: 
(33) 
and: 
u = _ uEJ [COSh '7Z - IJ. 
J 
Ea 
cosh "II 
(34) 
The maximum axial stress is: 
(35) 
The stress at a point at distance (j from a fiber end is: 
uE J [COSh "1(/ -
(j) 
] 
u J{l -
(j) = - -
- 1 . 
Ea 
cosh '71 
(36) 
The ratio of the stress at a point at distance (j from the fiber-ends to the stress in the 
center of a continuous fiber is given by: 
(37) 
For large I: 
Therefore: 
(38) 
23 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
from which: 
cosh '1D = [1 + (1 -
4'»2]/2(1 -
4'» 
(39) 
and: 
D 
1 [-1/2 
Ef J1/2 
-1 [1 + (l - 4'»2J 
- = -
(v f 
-
1) -
cosh 
. 
Df 
2 
Gm 
2(1 -
4'» 
(40) 
At this point it is useful to define an ineffective fiber length by the condition that the 
elastic stress ratio af/afmax is equal to 4'>. The length D, at which the stress in the fiber, 
measured from the end, has reached a value 4'>afmax (4'> < 1) is given by Eq. (40). 
Rosen points out that the choice of a value for 4'> is somewhat arbitrary while suggesting 
a value of 4'> = 0.9 as suitable and useful. The ineffectivefiber length ratio D/df indicates 
the length over which the force is transferred from the matrix to the fiber. On the 
other hand, the effective length is the part of the fiber in which the average axial 
stress is greater than 4'> times the stress, which would exist for infinite fibers. 
A more general case is obtained when the load is applied to both fiber and matrix. 
This has been evaluated by Dow 28). The model used in this theory was similar to 
that considered by Cox, except that no matrix was present at the end of the fiber. 
He also assumed a perfect bonding between the fiber and the matrix, as well as straight 
lines before and after deformation. According to this theory, the following expressions 
are valid: 
where: 
dz 
sinh -
df 
dl 
cosh -df 
is the load producing shear deformation, and: 
A,z = 4 W = constant 
24 
(41) 
(42) 
(43) 
(44.1) 

III.3 The Three-Cylinder Model for Short Fibers 
where: 
(44.2) 
We shall now consider the effect of the mesophase on the thermo mechanical behavior 
of composites reinforced with unidirectional short fibers. 
x 
a 
Fig. 8. a Axonometric view and b principal transverse section of the three-layer model for a 
typical fiber-reinforced composite. 
A three-cylinder model is considered as the model described by Hashin and Rosen 
(Fig. 8). In this model the fiber is surrounded by the mesophase, and this in turn is 
surrounded by the matrix. The main difference from Rosen's model is that the new 
model takes the mesophase material into account, which allows for a better evaluation 
of the real situation. In addition the following assumptions are made: 
(i) Perfect bonding at successive interfaces. 
(ii) Fiber and matrix materials only carry tensile stresses. 
(iii) The mesophase bears only shear stresses. 
(iv) The mesophase is homogeneous and isotropic. 
(v) Both matrix and fibers are homogeneous isotropic materials. 
(vi) Ifperfect adhesion between the two main phases ofthe composite exists, the thick-
ness of the mesophase is expected to reduce, the mesophase layer thus tending to some 
limiting thickness. 
Next, the model presented in Fig. 9 shall be subjected to a uniform temperature 
rise LI T and, at the same time, to an external stress (J c parallel to the direction of the 
fiber. The equilibrium of forces for an element of the model length dz is expressed by: 
(45) 
where Nf is the tensile force in the fiber, u the displacement, r the radius, and G the 
shear modulus. 
25 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
II 
Fig. 9. Basic model of the present theory. 
According to Hooke's law: 
(46) 
or: 
(47) 
From Eqs. (46) and (47) the following differential equation is derived: 
(48) 
where: 
(49) 
By solving Eq. (48) we obtain: 
Uf = urn ± A sinh rJZ + B cosh rJZ • 
(50) 
In order to determine the constants A and B, the following boundary conditions are 
used: 
26 

111.3 The Three-Cylinder Model for Short Fibers 
For 
du 
z = ± 1/2 ~ ~ 
= 6J 
(51) 
where 6J is the thermal strain developed in the fiber. Thus: 
(52.1) 
B= O. 
(52.2) 
From Eqs. (50) and (52) it follows that: 
du 
du 
=:::J.. = -!!! + A'1 cosh '1Z 
dz 
dz 
(53) 
and from Hooke's law: 
(54) 
From Eqs. (52.1), (53), and (54), the tensile stress in the fiber can be expressed by: 
[
dUm ( 
cosh '1Z) 
T cosh '1Z] 
Gf=Efx 
-
\-
+sf 
. 
dz 
'11 
'11 
cosh -
cosh-
2 
2 
(55) 
The variation of shear stress 't" along the mesophase is obtained by considering the 
equilibrium of the forces acting on an element of the fiber: 
1 dNf 
't"=-----
2nrf dz 
(56) 
or: 
't" = _ ~ 
sinh '7Z 
[6~ _ dUm]. 
ri - r f 
'11 
dz 
'7 cosh 2 
(57) 
In polymeric composites, the modulus of elasticity of the matrix depends on the tem-
perature. This.variation for the case of an epoxy resin is given in Fig. 10. 
Taking this variation into account we can consider the strain of the matrix to consist 
of two teryts; the first depends on the mechanical loading, as well as indirectly on 
the temperature, and the second one is the thermal strain of the matrix: 
(58) 
27 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
5 
t 4 
N 
~ 3 
z 
q> 
~ 2 
E 
w 
o 
~ 
.........., ~ 
).. 
~ 
~ 
~I 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
160 
180 
T(OC) -
Fig. 10. Modulus of elasticity 
of an epoxy matrix vs. tem-
perature. 
By differentiating Eq. (58) with respect to T, we obtain: 
(59) 
where am expresses the linear thermal expansion coefficient of the matrix. The equi-
librium of forces in the direction of the applied uniaxial tensile stress (J c gives: 
Table I. Properties of constituents for a E-glass, epoxy composite. 
Young's modulus, 
N/m2 a) 
Poisson ratioa) 
Density, g/cm3 
Thermal expansion 
coefficient, °C-1 
(1[1 
(1[2 
a) Measured at 20°C 
28 
E-glass 
(fibers) 
6.99 X 1010 
0.20 
2.55 
5 X 10- 6 
Epoxy 
(matrix) 
0.3 X 1010 
0.35 
1.20 
52.5 X 10- 6 
109 X 10- 6 
Composite 
Longitudinal 
direction 
[) = 0° 
4.84 X 1010 
0.125 
2.059 
6.5 X 10- 6 
9.0 X 10-6 
Transverse 
direction 
[) = 90° 
1.50 X 1010 
0.285 
2.059 
25.8 X 10- 6 
76 X 10-6 
(60) 

Ill.3 The Three-Cylinder Model for Short Fibers 
t 
N 
1.540 1------1-----+---....,...,.~_l 
z=O 
oc=1.109 N/m2 
l =60 Ii 
-€ 1.530 f----,--~~-+----__1 
~ 
~ 
IC 
d" 1.5201----::;H----+-----I 
1.510 '--_---1. ____ 
...1-___ 
---1 
20 
50 
100 
150 
T COC) --+ 
z=O 
0.02210 
Oc = 1.109 N/m2 
f 
£=60 Ii 
0.022001-----r-----j------,.CJC-=----l 
~ 0.02190f----+---rY'~+------l 
E 
~ 
" 
O'021801---:l-F-~---+------I 
t 
N e Z 
... 
~ 
x 
6 
50 
l~ '\ 
~ 
7.0 
6.0 
5.0 
100 
T COC) -
z=o 
at = 1.109 N/m2 _ 
f = 60 Ii 
150 
, 
4.0 
3.0 
2.0 
1.0 
o 
20 
50 
~ 
"-, 
'"' 
100 
150 
T (OC) --+ 
Fig. 11. Longitudinal strain in the 
matrix vs. temperature. 
Fig. 12. Tensile stress in the fiber vs. 
temperature. 
Fig. 13. Tensile stress in the matrix vs. 
temperature. 
29 

Ill. Models for Composite Materials 
From Eqs. (55), (59), and (60) we derive: 
(1, -
E v [ct.", AT (I -
cosh '1= ) + 81' ( cosh '1= )] 
f f 
cosh 1'/1/2 
f 
cosh 111/2 
(1 = 
(61) 
m 
Ef 
( 
I 
lfE",(T) 
) ( 
cosh '1= ) 
v +Vf -- I-----AT 1----
m 
E",(T) 
E",(T) 
dT 
cosh 1/1/2 
_4 
~ 
0c= 109 N/m2 
T=2O"C 
-
~ 
£=6011 
x 
0-
F 
1. .. 
"t, 
1.4 
1.3 
1.2 
1.1 
-30 
-20 
-10 
o 
10 
20 
30 
z (11) -
Fig. 14. Distribution of the tensile stress along the fiber. 
~t 
at = 109 N/m2 ---j 
~ 
T = 20° ( 
t;"'$! 
t = 6011 --
x 
r5 
SO 
40 
30 
20 
i. 
10 
j 
u.... 
-30 
-20 
-10 
o 
10 
20 
30 -
z (11) -
Fig. 15. Distribution of the tensile stress in the matrix along the fiber length. 
30 

III.3 The Three-Cylinder Model for Short Fibers 
where vm is the real volume fraction of the matrix. For a given composite it is possible 
to calculate the values of Vi' lXi' Gi, ri, and 11 by means of the theory developed in the 
previous paragraphs. 
To verify the results of this theory it shall be applied to a real composite consisting 
of an epoxy matrix reinforced with glass-fibers of fmite length. The properties of the 
constituent materials are given in Table 1. The mechanical and thermal behavior 
of the matrix was investigated earlier 16-20). Figure 10 presents a decrease of Em with 
t 
(\I 
~ 
N 
0=1.109 N/m2 
~12 
~ 
T=2()OC 
"0 
1=60\1 
.... 10 
8 
6 
4 
~ 
~ 
2 
-30 
-20 
-10 
o 
10 
20 
30 
Z (\1)-
Fig. 16. Distribution of the tensile strain in the matrix along the fiber length. 
1 
11 1 
at =1.10' 
1§1 
T=20oC 
:z 
2f=60\1 
.... ... 
1 
1 
-30 
-20 
10 
20 
30 
zl\11 --. 
1----1--''#-+--104 1---1---1----1 
-108 1---+--+---1 
Fig. 17. Distribution of the shear stress in the 
mesophase material along the fiber length. 
31 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
increasing temperature of the matrix. This is accompanied by an increase of strain 
in the matrix upon loading (see Fig. 11). 
The tensile stress in the fiber increases with temperature (Fig. 12), while that in 
the matrix decreases with temperature (Fig. 13). The tensile stress in the fiber builds 
up to a maximum value and remains constant through the central portions of the 
fiber, but decays rapidly at the ends of the fiber (Fig. 14), while the tensile stress in 
the matrix shows an opposite behavior (see Fig. 15). This is similar for the strain 
developed in the matrix (Fig. 16). Finally, the shear stress at the mesophase reaches 
a maximum near the fiber ends and then decays rapidly towards the center (Fig. 17). 
111.4 The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
A rigorous mathematical representation of a composite system consisting of a polymer 
matrix in which particulate fillers have been dispersed presents unsurmountable 
difficulties even for the cases where both constituent phases are considered as elastic. 
Although many geometric, topological, mechanical, and physical parameters in-
fluence the average properties of a particulate, it has been shown that the representative 
volume element, consisting of a series of concentric spheres, adequately describes 
the mechanical and physical behavior of the composite. In the two-sphere model of 
particulates, introduced by Hashin 29), variable sizes of spheres are anticipated, 
corresponding to the particular filling volume content of the composite. Hashin 
gave an expression for the bulk modulus, Kc' of the composite. He considered the 
effective homogeneous bulk modulus for the particulate in terms of the bulk moduli 
KJ and Km of the filler spheres and the matrix material enveloping the spheres, as 
well as of the filler and matrix volume contents vJ and vm (vJ + vm = 1). On the other 
hand, the homogeneous shear modulus was determined by bounded values. 
All of the two-phase models assume ideally smooth and mathematically described 
interfaces between phases as well as perfect adhesion between them, thus accommo-
dating the different mechanical properties between phases. 
Analyses are generally based on variational principles of mechanics and yield 
upper and lower limits of approximations for the effective moduli of the composites. 
The results are valid only for rather low filler contents, since they ignore, for reasons 
of efficiency, all mechanical interactions between neighboring filler particles, as well 
as physicochemical effects between phases. 
Various empirical and semi-empirical expressions exist for the effective moduli 
which express some kind of law of mixtures, or attempt to match theoretical expressions 
to experimental data by defining the existing constants in these expressions. In all 
these models perfect adhesion between phases is assumed. 
The most important models were described in Refs. 30 and 31. These express the ratio 
of the moduli of the composite and the matrix in terms of constants and the filler 
volume fraction vJ' while completely ignoring the influence of the value of the elastic 
modulus EJ Of the filler. 
Only the models by Takahashi et al. 32) and by Takayanagi 33) explicitly introduce 
the filler modulus EJ into the expression of the Ec modulus. Indeed, in Tagayanagi's 
models A and B, the elements of the composite, weighed by their respective volume 
32 

I1I.4 The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
fractions, were arranged to units in series or in parallel, with one of the units having 
its elements disposed in parallel or in series. In this way a combination of units in 
parallel and in series was devised, suitable for each case studied. In this model the 
matrix was divided into two parts, the one belonging to the one part, and the second 
contributing, together with the inclusion, to the other part. 
It was shown 34) that the relationships obtained with these models are derived from 
the exact expressions for the moduli of the components of the composite, by simplifica-
tion with compared values of the mechanical constants of the constituents (e.g. 
Ef ~ Em > Gm, Vm = vc' etc.). Kerner 35) introduced another model based on multi-
phase particulates with three consecutive phases as concentric spheres, the external 
one being infmite. The spherical filler is surrounded by a concentric spherical layer 
having the properties of the matrix, which in turn is embedded in ·the infmite medium 
having the properties of the composite. Van der Poel 36) used a similar model, but 
with different boundary conditions. Maurer 6) derived interesting results by using 
the Van der Poel model. 
The Kerner and Van der Poel models may be applied to meso phase phenomena. 
Lipatov 11) seriously considered the mesophase and gave relations between heat-
capacity jumps at the glass transition temperatures of the matrix and the composite 
with the thickness of this boundary layer. 
In all these models the phase boundaries were idealized as smooth surfaces described 
by exact mathematical expressions. However the existence of a mesophase was proved 
experimentally and its extent evaluated among others by Lipatov 11). The mesophase 
may also be calculated by dynamic measurements of the storage and the loss moduli 
as well as of the loss factors all over the viscoelastic spectrum of the composite and 
particularly at the vicinity of the Tg-temperatures ofthe matrix and the composite 37). 
Although the extent of the mesophase may be accurately determined from thermo-
dynamic measurements, the influence of this pseudophase on the mechanical behavior 
of the composites has not been extensively studied. 
The multi-layer model was introduced for particulate and fiber-reinforced com-
posites including consideration of the influence of the mesophase on the properties 
of the composite 10,17). Thereafter, a model was presented in which the elastic mo-
dulus of the mesophase (variable with polar distance) was described as the sum of 
one constant and two variable terms, expressed as modifications of the moduli of 
the filler and the matrix by negative power laws 19,38). The two-term improvement of 
the previous model 39), where the variable mesophase modulus was expressed by a 
negative power term for the variation of the Ef modulus and a linear term for the 
variation of the Em modulus, gives more consihent results 40). 
All these models were based on an improved law of mixtures, where the composite 
modulus was considered as the sum of filler, mesophase, and matrix moduli, each 
multiplied by its respective volume fraction in the composite. This law can be simply 
applied to fiber-reinforced composites, in which the components of the moduli are 
connected in parallel and are additive. However, for particulates a new form of im-
proved law of mixtures should be sought, since the contributing moduli should not be 
assumed as acting in parallel. 
The models of Kerner and Van der Poel, which can be used on three-phase systems, 
may be adapted to derive an improved law of mixtures for particulates by replacing 
the intermediate phase representing the matrix in the Kerner model by the mesophase, 
33 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
and by restricting the infinite medium with unknown composite properties to an 
external phase having the shape of a sphere and the properties of the matrix 40.41). 
Some attempts have been made to derive, in a simplified manner, an expression for 
the elastic modulus Ee of a particulate composite, by considering the existence of the 
mesophase. One such expression was given by Lipatov 42), who attributed this simple 
model to Sagalaev and Simonov-Emeljanov 43). 
According to this model, the matrix phase of the Kerner model becomes a meso-
phase when the composite attains its critical content of filler, i.e. the content above 
which no further changes in the density of the composite appear. In this case the 
compliance of the composite is expressed by the sum of compliances of the constituent 
phases, multiplied by their respective volume contents. Although this model was not 
practically tested, it seems conceptually incompatible with the real behavior of 
composites, since it is impossible to assume a composite with an overall compliance, 
Dc' larger than the compliance attributed to the matrix. 
Another approximate model which considers the influence of the mesophase for 
evaluating the elastic modulus of the composite was introduced by Spathis, Sideridis, 
and Theocaris 44). In this model the elastic modulus of the composite is expressed 
as the sum of the filler, mesophase, and matrix moduli, mUltiplied with their respective 
volume fractions. The term for the filler modulus was further multiplied by a factor k 
for the quality of adhesion. This latter factor was determined from the mesophase 
volume fraction Vi and its modulus by measuring the Ee values for different volume 
contents. Measurements at two different filler contents are sufficient to evaluate k. 
Further tests at different V f values, served to check the constancy of the values of k. 
This procedure gave a lower limit for the composite modulus Ee' 
These models attempt to define relationships connecting the composite compliance 
(Dc = liE) with the compliances of the matrix, mesophase, and filler. Then, by meas-
uring the compliance of the composite and the matrix materials and knowing the 
compliance of the filler, the compliance of the mesophase can be determined. Intro-
ducing a two-term "unfolding model" for the compliance, the adhesion coefficient 
between phases can be determined by evaluating the mode of variation of the elastic 
compliance or modulus of the mesophase, to match the limits of D or E of filler and 
matrix. The new model gave reasonable results for particulates, just as for fiber 
composites, and thus characterize the quality of adhesion of the composite. 
To determine the Ee modulus of a particulate the representative volume element 
can be considered to consist of three concentric spheres, having the radii rf' rp and r m 
respectively. The external radius of the representative volume element (RVE) was 
chosen in order for this model to correspond to the average properties of the respective 
particulate. All quantities are normalized to the volume of the outer sPhere; n";', 
taken as unity. 
Further, we assume that all phases are elastic, homogeneous, and isotropic, with 
the exception of the mesophase layer, which has a variable modulus, changing with 
the polar distance between the values of Ef and Em at its boundaries. However, 
this layer is also averaged, so that E; corresponds to its mean E~ value. 
Moreover, it was assumed that the fillers are perfect spheres, their distribution 
uniform and their intercenter distance large enough to ascertain a negligible inter-
action between neighboring filler particles. Finally, it was assumed that the RVE 
34 

lIlA The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
is submitted to a radial pressure of magnitude Pm' so that, at the other boundaries, 
equal radial pressures of magnitudes Pi and PI are exerted, which is responsible for 
the interaction between successive phases. The representative volume element de-
scribed above is presented in Fig. 18. 
* 
a 
b 
c 
Fig. 18. a, b, c Principal sections of the three concentric spheres forming the representative 
volume element (RVE) of a typical particulate and the forces applied to their boundaries. 
Because of the spherical symmetry, spherical (r,.9,qJ)-coordinates are introduced, 
with the simplification that, from all the components of the spherical displace.ment 
vector, the ur-radial displacements are non-zero, due to the geometry and loading. 
The solution may be derived from the stress functions cP. = fir) (with j = f, i, m 
J 
for the filler, mesophase, and matrix, respectively), which are expressed by: 
cPo = A.r- 1 + B.? 
J 
J 
J 
(62) 
with the constants A j and Bj defined by the boundary conditions between phases 
with A I = 0 for finiteness of stresses at r = o. 
The components of displacements are given by: 
with the other components: 
UlJj = U",j = O. 
The component urI is expressed by: 
Br 
U 
=:::.L 
rl 
G 
I 
since AI = o. 
The components of stresses are given by : 
2A . 
2(1 + v.) 
0"=----1+ 
JB 
r j 
r3 
(1 -
2 v .) j' 
J 
(63) 
(64) 
(65) 
(66) 
35 

Ill. Models for Composite Materials 
The boundary conditions yield: 
i)Atr = r/ arl = ar; = -PI 
ii) At r = r;: ar; = arm = -Pi 
iii) At r = rm: arm = -Pm 
(67) 
The solution of the system derived from the boundary conditions (67) yields the va-
lues of the constants Ai' B/ 
(68) 
where the index j + 1 means the layer next to a layer j, with the succession from the 
filler outwards; j = 1 corresponds to the filler, j = 2 to the mesophase, and j = 3 to 
thematrixoftheparticulate;ro = rj _ 1 = Oforj = 1 andrj = rf'rprmforj = 1,2,3, 
.respectively. 
The equations for the radial displacements are: 
(69) 
(70) 
(71 ) 
The components of strains in the three layers are given by: 
du r ; 
A; 
B; 
Gri = -- = -3- + - , 
dr 
r G; 
G; 
Uri 
Ai 
Bi 
elli = etp; = -
= - 2 3G +-G 
r 
r 
i 
; 
(72) 
The boundary conditions, implying continuity of displacements at the boundary 
between filler and mesophase, yield: 
For r = rl uri = UrI then: 
-pi l -
2v I) 
(1 - 2v;) (PIB -
p;) 
(I + v;) (PI - pJ 
-~--~= 
+ ----~--
E f 
E; 
1 -
B 
2(1 -
B) Ei 
(73) 
36 

IlIA The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
in which the ratio 1/r~ is replaced by the quantity B: 
v 
B=_f_ 
vf + Vi 
Solving Eq. (73) with respect to the ratio Afi = Pf/Pi gives: 
(74) 
(75) 
Now, the second boundary condition concerning the compatibility of the radial 
displacements at the second interface between mesophase and matrix is considered. 
For this boundary it is valid that uri = u rm which leads to: 
A. 
= 3(1 -
vm) -
2vm{1 -
2vm) _ Emvm (1 + Vi) 
1m 
3{1 -
Vm) 
Ei 
3{1 -
Vm) 
(76) 
To evaluate the elastic modulus Ee of the composite, we define the elastic strain-
energy balance on the representative volume element: 
which yields: 
(77) 
where Ke is the bulk modulus of the composite, related to the elastic modulus Ee by 
the well-known relationship: 
E 
K = 
e 
. 
e 
3{1 -
2v) 
(78) 
The elastic strain energies for each layer of the particulate may be defined by: 
Introducing the appropriate values for the components of stresses and strains for 
each phase leads to: 
(79) 
(80) 
37 

Ill. Models for Composite Materials 
and: 
(81) 
By now introducing the values for Winto Eq. (77) it follows that: 
(82) 
where: 
P 
Pf 
Af ,· 
A. 
= ~ and 
'm 
Pi 
Pm 
Aim 
(83) 
and: 
(84) 
Equation (82) yields the bulk modulus Kc of the composite in terms of the bulk and 
shear moduli of the phases and the stress ratios Ali and Aim which, on the other hand, 
depend on the elastic moduli and Poisson ratios of the phases. 
Since the mesophase is derived from the matrix material, it is reasonable to accept 
that: 
(85) 
while for the Poisson ratio Vc of the composite a modified relationship is used 45), 
interconnecting the values of the Poisson ratios. This is given by: 
(86) 
This equation completes the number of relationships necessary for evaluating the 
characteristic properties of the composite. 
Equation (82), which interconnects the inverses of the bulk and shear moduli of 
the phases and the composite, constitutes an improved law o/mixtures for particulate 
composites. It indicates that some relation between compliances, instead of moduli, 
should hold for particulates. Indeed, Eq. (82) shows that the composite bulk compli-
ance (or simply any compliance, since the material is assumed at a thermal equili-
brium, where the reduced elastic relations between moduli should hold, provided the 
actual values of Poisson ratios at this temperature level are known, together with 
the values of any modulus at the same temperature or time level) equals the sum of 
38 

IlI.4 The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
the bulk compliance of the fiber,. the bulk and shear compliances of the mesophase, 
and the bulk and shear compliances of the matrix material. All these terms are multi-
plied by convenient factors, depending on the volume fractions of the phases and the 
ratios of the elastic moduli of filler and matrix, normalized to the elastic modulus 
of the mesophase through the factors Ari and Aim. 
The simple improved law of mixtures for fiber-reinforced composites which is: 
(87) 
is not valid for particulates. 
The reason is the following: the contributions of the moduli of the phases in the 
RYE of the fiber-composite are assumed as separate, these component moduli co-
operate through their interfaces, considered to be parallel to the direction of application 
of the external load. This cooperation results from the lateral surfaces of cylinders 
developing shears between the phases. Thus, in this model the moduli of the phases 
must be added, each multiplied by a convenient weight-factor, i.e., their respective 
volume content. In analogy to electric circuits, the weighted moduli correspond to 
capacitances connected in parallel, which explains the validity of Eg. (87). 
For particulates the situation is different. The component phases are interconnected 
through consecutive spherical surfaces of the filler, mesophase and matrix. The 
dominant transverse interconnection through shear, in the case of fiber-composites, 
is now insignificant, the adhesion being achieved by a continuously varying combina-
tion of shear and normal forces at the interfaces, derived as variable components of 
the hydrostatic pressure mainly applied on the surfaces. It more closely reflects a 
real situation of force-distribution to assume that the contribution of phases results 
from superimposed layers of phases, lying on top of each other in the direction of 
application of the external load. 
In this case the compliances, instead of the moduli, should be added to derive the 
compliance of the composite, since now the capacitances of the respective electrical 
analog are connected in series. This explains the necessity of adding in this case the 
compliances of phases, instead of moduli. 
p 
p 
b 
p 
Fig. 19. Schematic of the difference in the cooperation of the phases in a) a fiber unidirectional 
composite and b) a spherical particulate. 
39 

Ill. Models for Composite Materials 
Figure 19 presents the difference between the two cases in a RVE of fiber (a) and 
particulate (b) composites. The surfaces between phases illustrate the above reasoning. 
Hence, in the case of particulates, Eq. (82) is much more complex than Eq. (87), 
holding for fiber-reinforced materials, since the connecting surfaces are not flat, 
engendering almost equal distributions of shear forces (except at singularities and 
discontinuities), but spherical, with variable contributions for the boundary condi-
tions. 
Several models express the Ec modulus of particulates, based on simple relations 
interconnecting the matrix with the filler through a mesophase. One interesting 
model is that introduced by Sagalaev and Simonov-Emiljanov 43), formulated as: 
(88) 
which may be reduced to: 
(89) 
The latter interrelates the extension compliance of the composite (Dc) to the com-
pliances (D) of the phases multiplied by their respective volume fractions (v) 
(j = f, i, m). 
This model is analogous to the respective model for the elastic moduli of fiber 
reinforced composites expressed by Eq. (87). However, as has already been stated 
and proved by several authors, this relation oversimplifies the real situation in par-
ticulates. 
The model introduced by Spathis, Sideridis, and Theocaris 44) sets an upper limit 
for the elastic modulus of the composite. This model is expressed by: 
(90) 
where the adhesion factor k between filler and matrix takes into account the influence 
of the shape (approximately spherical) and number of filler particles and their inter-
action on the average elastic modulus of the mesophase. Its value is determined by 
DSC measurement of the heat capacity jumps at Tg for various filler contents and 
different diameters. Results are satisfactory for low values Vr Maurer 34) examined 
the influence of the mesophase on the viscoelastic behavior of a composite containing 
spherical inclusions. The influence of discrete amounts and qualities of mesophases 
on the overall mechanical properties of the particulate composite was exhaustively 
studied, concerning the two principal simple modes of loading, i.e., hydrostatic 
pressure and pure shear. 
This study, among others, has shown the influence of a third phase between the 
two main phases, be it a real phase or a pseudophase developed during polymerization 
of the matrix in presence of the filler. 
It was shown that, for the bulk modulus of such three-phase materials, the following 
relation holds: 
K = (KJvJ + KiviR + KmvmS) 
c 
vJ + ViR + VmS 
(91) 
40 

IlIA The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
where Rand S are functions of the bulk and shear moduli of the three phases. For 
the shear modulus of the composite, a (10 x 1O)-matricial expression is anticipated. 
Equation (90) can be shown to be a simplified version of Eq. (91) incorporating 
the influence of Rand S into factor k. Then, Eq. (90) may be considered as a reasonable 
upper limit for the Kc or Ec moduli. 
In completing this discussion on moduli, the Kerner-Kerner model 35) should be 
mentioned, where the classical Kerner model was used twice, once for the filler-
mesophase material, and, again for the internal heterogeneous material and the matrix. 
In this model again we have the expression for the shear modulus Gc of the particulate 
composite in the form: 
G = Gfvf + GiVik + Gmvml 
c 
(vf + Vik + vm!) 
(92) 
which is similar in concept to Eqs. (90) and (91). The expressions for K and I are 
complicated expressions of the shear moduli Gj and Poisson rations Vj of the phases. 
A similar expression is also given by the Kudykina/Pervak model 46), where the 
shear modulus ofthe composite is given by: 
G = G1vf + GiViS + Gmvm 
c 
(vfr + ViS + vm) 
(93) 
All these expressions are more or less similar, displaying the correction factors between 
two of the three phases. 
A different expression for the composite moduli is given by the Takano/Sakanishi 
model, which includes the concept of a mesophase. The ratio G)Gm of the shear 
moduli is given by 34): 
Gc _ [T -
3/2(v1 + V) rPml 
Gm -
[T + (Vf + v) r'Qml 
(94) 
where T, r' and Pm' Qm are complicated functions of the bulk and shear moduli. 
The Takayanagi models 33,47) introduce convenient combinations of the two 
limiting arrangements, parallel and in series, and express very effectively and with high 
accuracy the elastic moduli of particulate composites. While these models are designed 
mainly for two-phase materials, they could be extended to incorporate the influence 
of a mesophase 48). It seems that the concept of using mixed-mode connections, 
parallel and in series, for the elements representing the mechanical properties of the 
particulate is very promising, since the model can readily be adapted to the real 
behavior of the substance. However, in Eq. (82), expressing Kc' it appears that the 
terms on the right-hand side cannot be strictly considered as connected in series. 
A decisive factor for the physical behavior of a particulate composite is the adhe-
sion efficiency at the phase boundaries. All theoretical models consider this adhesion 
as perfect, assuming that the interfaces ensure continuity of stresses and displacements 
between phases. However, such conditions do. not exist in reality. Rather, there is 
imperfect bonding between phases with variable adhesion. The mesophase layer is 
considered to smoothly combine the interfaces. 
41 

Ill. Models for Composite Materials 
The model for the representative volume element of a particulate consists of a 
unit of three concentric spheres with the respective radii rl' ri, and r m; their volume 
contents are expressed by: 
r· -
rf 
r 
-
r· 
( 3 3) 
( 3 3) 
Vj = 
I r;' 
, and 
Vm = 
m r;' 
I 
• 
(95) 
Assuming appropriate boundary conditions between the internal sphere and any 
number of layers surrounding it in the RYE of the composite, assuring continuity 
of radial stresses and displacements, it is possible to relate the compliances or moduli 
between phases and composite by an energy balance between phases. This situation 
is given by Eq. (82), where the quantity Ei corresponds to the average value of the 
modulus of the mesophase, in the following denoted as E:. However, this effective 
or average value of the mesophase modulus, which is necessary for introducing the 
contribution of the mesophase to the modulus of the composite, does not really 
exists, except in a very thin layer. 
In order to describe the actual situation a bit better we assume that the mesophase 
consists of a material with progressively variable mechanical properties which match 
the respective properties of the two main phases surrounding the mesophase. We can 
then define a variable elastic modulus for the mesophase, which, for reasons of sym-
metry, depends only on the polar distance from the fiber-mesophase boundary. In 
other words, the mesophase layer is assumed to consist of a series of concentric 
layers, whose constant mechanical properties differ by a quantity sufficiently small 
defined by the law of variation of Ej(r). In this way the elastic modulus of the meso-
phase is "unfolding" between two limits, from the Ef to the Em modulus. 
The unfolding model for the mesophase may be expressed in two forms: 
In the first form, the Elr) modulus is expressed by the sum of three terms, i.e.: 
i) a constant one and equal to the Em modulus, 
ii) a variable one, depending on the modulus of the filler (Ef ), which should be added 
to the first one, and 
iii) a third variable one, which should depend on the Em modulus, and should be 
antagonistic to the second teryn. 
The two variable terms should yield very abrupt variations of the Ej(r) modulus, 
since the generally large differences between the moduli of the fillers and the matrix 
must be accommodated in very thin layers for the mesophases. The appropriate 
functions for such steep variations. are power functions of r with large exponents. 
Then, the Ej(r) modulus may be expressed by: 
(96) 
In Eq. (96) the average value, E:, along the thickness of the mesophase of the vari-
able ElY) modulus, which connects the two phases with highly different mechanical 
properties and elastic moduli, must interconnect and span these differences. Indeed, 
for hard-core composites it is the case that Ef ~ Em' while for rubbery fillers we have 
the opposite relation, Em ~ Er However, Ef ~ Em is never observed. 
42 

IIIA The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
Equation (96) expresses the mesophase variable modulus for fiber-reinforced 
composites and excellent results have been obtained 39,41). 
In Eq. (96) the second right-hand term expresses the contribution of Ef to the 
variation of Ei(r), while the third right-hand term defines the counterbalancing con-
tribution of Em to correct the contribution of Ef and insert the influence of the matrix 
to the outer layers of the mesophase. 
From the compatibility conditions for the moduli at the boundaries between 
filler, mesophase, and matrix it can be seen that, for r = rf , Eq. (96) yields Ell') 
= Ef and therefore satisfies the boundary condition at the filler-mesophase interface. 
However, at the boundary between mesophase and matrix, i.e., for r = rp we obtain 
E;<r) = Em' if the following relation holds 40): 
(97) 
The constant A = ('11 -
'12), which depends on the ratio of the moduli of the two 
phases and the ratio of the radii of the mesophase and the filler, characteri~es the 
adhesion quality of the composite, because for large values of A the extent of the meso-
phase layer is reduced and the adhesion is less effective. The constant A is called 
the adhesion parameter, 
Higher values of A indicate worse adhesion for a particular composite, as they 
imply small differences in ri and rr For hard-core materials, where Ef ~ Em' the 
radius ri must always be larger than rf , therefore the logarithm of the ratio rJrf is 
a positive number; since log (Ef/Em) > 0 the values of A are always positive. For 
hard-core composites this means that '11 > '12 is always valid. On the contrary, for 
rubber-core composites log (Ef/Em) is negative and therefore '11 < '12' 
A simple and more consistent version of the previous model for the variation of 
the Ei(r) modulus is given by the two-term form of this model. 
Since the third term of the right-hand side of Eq. (96) accommodates the influence 
of the matrix modulus Em on the variation of Ei(r) and since for strong-core composites 
this contribution is generally secondary, Eq. (96) may be simplified by assuming that 
this third term varies linearly with the radius r along the meso phase. This means 
that the exponent '12 may be assumed to be unity without loosing generality, the first 
right-hand side term comprising the total change of slope of Ei(r). 
Then Eq. (96) becomes: 
(98) 
Equation (98) contains only two terms on the right-hand side, since the contribution 
of Em in Eq. (96) is now incorporated into the second linear right-hand side term 
of Eq. (98). The boundary conditions for this equation are satisfied: for r = rf we 
have the second right-hand term of Eq. (98) equal to zero and the first term equal to 
Ef as expected. Moreover, for r = ri, Eq. (98) automatically yields Ek) = Em and 
this satisfies the exterior boundary condition . 
. Equation (98) has the advantage to contain only one unknown exponent and there-
43 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
fore considerably simplifies the evaluation of the unknown quantities in the defini-
tion of the variable Ei(r). 
Moreover, it was established during the numerical evaluation of the unknown 
quantities in Eqs. (96) and (98) that the definition of the two exponents '11 and '12 
in Eq. (96) is rather unstable, depending on small variations of Ec' On the contrary, 
the single unknown exponent 2'1, defming Eq. (98), yields rather stable and reliable 
results. 
In the two-term unfolding model the exponent 2'1 characteristic parameter defming 
the quality of adhesion and therefore this exponent may be called the adhesion co-
efficient. This quantity depends only on the ratios of the main-phase moduli (Ef/Em)' 
as well as on the ratio of the radii of the mesophase and filler. 
It was shown that, for the same volume fraction vf of the filler, an increase of Tg 
indicates an increase of the total surface of the filler 42). This is because an increase 
in T may be interpreted as a further formation of molecular bonds and grafting 
9 
between polymer chains of the matrix and the solid surface of the inclusions, thus 
restricting significantly the mobility of neighboring chains. This increase leads to 
a change of the overall viscoelastic behavior of the composite, by increasing the 
volume fraction of the strong phase of inclusions. 
Various analyses indicate an increase of T in composites with an increase of the 
9 
filler content 42). However, the degree of this variation and the mode of its change may 
differ between composites and even for one and the same composite, it depends on 
the method of measurement 49,50). However, in many cases a shift of Tg to lower 
values has been detected, but here the bad quality of adhesion between phases may be 
the main reason for this opposite 42,51). 
If calorimetric measurements are carried out around the glass transition zone, it 
is easy to show that energy jumps appear within this temperature range. These jumps 
are very sensitive to the amount of filler added to the matrix polymer, and have been 
used for evaluating the boundary layers developed around fillers. The experimental 
data show that the magnitude of the heat capacity (or similarly of the specific heat), 
under adiabatic conditions, decreases regularly with the increase of filler content. 
This phenomenon may result from the fact that the macromolecules pertaining to 
the mesophase layers are totally or partly excluded from participating in the cooper-
ative process taking place in the glass-transition zone due to their interactions with 
the surfaces of the solid inclusions. 
As the filler-volume fraction is increased, the proportion of macromolecules 
participating in this boundary layer having reduced mobility is also increased, so 
that the number of macromolecules participating in Tg is reduced 52,53). This is equi-
valent to a relative increase of v .. 
Lipatov 42) pointed out the r~lationship between a weight factor A, defining the 
mesophase volume-fraction Vi' and the heat capacity jumps JC: of the filled composite 
and J C~ of the unfilled polymer for particulate composites: 
JCf 
A = 1- ~p 
(99) 
JCo 
p 
where A is a real constant, which multiplies the filler volume fraction vf' taking into 
account the contribution of the mesophase volume fraction Vi to the mechanical be-
havior of the composite. 
44 

I1I.4 The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
In order to define the volume fraction Vi of the mesophase for the studied iron-
epoxy particulate composite, a series of dilatometric measurements were carried out 
by differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) over a range of temperatures including 
the glass transition of the epoxy polymer used as matrix, and with a series of samples 
of composites containing different amounts of iron particles of three different dia-
meters (dJ = 150,300, and 400 /lm) varying between vJ = 5% to vJ = 25%. 
The graphic representations show two linearly increasing regions separated by 
the glass transition zone (compare Ref. 51). While the glassy linear regions presented 
a positive and significant slope, the rubbery linear regions were almost horizontal. 
The LI C values were calculated by ignoring the smooth protrusions B' BC appearing 
in the C p = fin curves, as indicated in Fig. 20, where the variation of the specific 
p 
heat, and its jumps in the region of the glass-transition temperature Tgc' was plotted 
versus the temperature, for an iron-epoxy particulate with dJ = 400 f..lill and for 
various v;S. Next were measured the distance of the intersection A of the tangents AA' 
of the glassy curve and AB of the transition curve from the almost horizontal tangent 
CC' of the rubbery part of the curve LlC = fin. The LlC values for the different 
p 
p 
composites are listed in Table II. 
Indeed, the smooth protrusions in the LlCp-curres are due to inertial phenomena of 
variation of the enthalpy of the sample and their size and shape depend on the heating 
speed of the sample. They may be reduced and totally extinguished for sufficiently 
slow heating rates. Therefore, their contribution to the evaluation of LlCp may be 
neglected. 
It should also be noticed that there is an almost 10 degree shifting of Tg-values to 
lower values of temperature for the composites, as compared with the pure matrix 
material. This unusual shifting indicates clearly that the state of adhesion between 
inclusions and matrix is rather poor, otherwise these Tg-values for composites should 
be higher than the Tg of the matrix. The radius ri of the spericallayer corresponding 
to the mesophase can be defined in terms of r i = (rJ + Llr) and we use the respective 
relationship given by Lipatov 41) for particulates: 
(r, + Llr)3 _ I = ~ 
r;. 
1 -
vJ 
(100) 
which yields: 
B=~=~= I-vJ 
V + v. 
1 -
v 
I -
v (1 -
A) 
J, 
m 
J 
(101) 
The constant B depends only on the filler-volume fraction and the coefficient A, and 
it is critical for evaluating the exponents 17 1 and 172. Introducing the values of A from 
Table II, we can define the values of Llr for the various filler-volume contents vJ 
for the iron-epoxy particulates. Then, it is easy to evaluate the volume fraction Vi 
for the mesophase layer. 
Figure 21 shows the variation of the differences of the radii, Llri' of the mesophases 
and inclusions, (Llri = (ri -
rJ», versus the filler-volume content vJ for the three 
iron-epoxy particulates with filler diameters of dJ = 150,300, and 400/lm, as they 
have been derived from Eq. (100). 
45 

.J;:. 
Table II. Values of the characteristic parameters of a series of iron-epoxy particulates for various fIller volume contents vf 
-
0'1 
::l 
Vf 
Vi 
Vrn 
LlCp 
A 
rf 
ri 
EeL 
E'; 
'h 
'1z 
A 
2t/ 
~ 
0 p.. 
~ 
% 
Cal/g °C 
/-lm 
/-lm 
/-lm 
109 Nm- 2 
109 Nm- 2 
1iJ 
0' 
.., 
5 
0.048 
94.95 
0.0660 
0.185 
75.24 
3.60 
7.60 
14239 
12976 
1263 
11114 
\J 
10 
0.386 
89.61 
0.0525 
0.352 
75.96 
4.22 
12.50 
1783 
1464 
319 
1520 
0 S 
15 
1.270 
83.73 
0.0410 
0.494 
75 
77.12 
4.75 
19.34 
459 
313 
146 
424 
." 
0 
20 
2.828 
77.17 
0.0330 
0.593 
78.53 
5.34 
30.00 
163 
75 
88 
158 
~. 
25 
5.098 
69.90 
0.0280. 
0.654 
80.10 
6.06 
43.00 
74 
12 
62 
74 
~ 
~ 
I" ... 
5 
0.052 
94.48 
0.065 
0.198 
150.5180 
3.98 
11.00 
7981 
6796 
1185 
6584 
~ 
.., 
10 
0.413 
89.59 
0.0305 
0.377 
150 
152.0632 
4.37 
17.00 
1108 
809 
299 
1002 
p;. 
En 
15 
1.348 
83.65 
0.0385 
0.525 
154.4935 
4.82 
25.00 
317 
170 
138 
302 
20 
2.968 
77.03 
0.0305 
0.623 
157.4199 
5.38 
36.00 
125 
41 
84 
124 
25 
5.457 
69.54 
0.0240 
0.704 
160.9148 
6.11 
49.00 
63 
1 
62 
64 
5 
0.050 
94.95 
0.0655 
0.191 
200.6691 
4.09 
15.00 
5354 
4131 
1223 
4744 
10 
0.399 
89.60 
0.0515 
0.364 
202.6621 
4.20 
20.00 
935 
626 
309 
866 
15 
1.333 
83.67 
0.0390 
0.519 
200 
205.9229 
4.84 
27.00 
293 
153 
140 
282 
20 
2.940 
77.06 
0.0310 
0.617 
209.7998 
5.39 
38.00 
119 
34 
85 
118 
25 
5.280 
69.72 
0.0260 
0.679 
214.0751 
6.10 
51.00 
62 
2 
60 
58 

I1I.4 The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
0.6.-----.-----.--------.-----, 
t 
d, = 400 IlfTl 
C' 
~ 0.4t=:=::t~=;;::::r:::;~~r=F~~~n 
~Ol~~~~~~ 
\),=0.15 
\I, =0.20 
\I, =0.25 
O ~ 
______ 
~ 
________ 
~ 
________ J-______ 
~ 
50 
75 
100 
125 
150 
T (O()
_ 
Fig. 20. Variation of heat capacity C of iron-epoxy particulates vs. temperature, for four 
different filler volume fractions Vf and for a particle diameter df = 0.40 x 10-3 m. 
e 
::I. 
i: 
15 r----------,-----------.------~---, 
o 
d,=1S0 I'm 
x 
d, =300 lUll 
I:> 
d, =400 IJ.1T1 
~ 5 ~----------+---~~~--;---~~----~ 
O~~~=-~------~------~ 
o 
10 
20 
30 
\If (%) -+ 
Fig. 21. Variation of the dif-
ference Llrj of the radii of 
mesophase and inclusion (Llr 
= (rj -
rf » versus the inclu-
sion volume content vf for 
three different diameters of 
inclusions in iron-epoxy par-
ticulate composites. 
The variation of the heat-capacity jumps LJ c~ at the respective glass-transition 
temperatures of the particulates, versus the filler volume content oJ' for the three 
different fillers (dJ = 150, 300, and 400 !lm) is presented in Fig. 22. The same figure 
plots the variation of the coefficient A and the volume fractions for the mesophase 
and the matrix versus vJ' as they result from Eq. (101). It follows from these graphs 
that the mesophase volume content 0; for the three different diameters of inclusions 
varied only insignificantly and, therefore, it can be considered as independent of the 
filler diameter. 
Figure 22 shows the variation of the heat-capacity jump as a smoothly decreasing 
curve in dependence of the filler-volume content. This was expected, since addition 
47 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
~----,-----r-----. 100 
o 
d, =150 I-lm 
x 
d, = 300 I-lm 
I 
~k----I--------'p....;::--------i 75 '" 
C> -
>C 
.-< .. 
u • 
o 
~ 
x 50 ~~-~~~;::--~f---r--T--~ SO c 
~ 
u 
E 
;:> 
251---
----.f/--t--
+-t---""'~---t 25 
L-__ ~~~------~------~O 
10 
20 
30 
\i, (%J ---+ 
.., 
C> 
..... 
>C 
-
a. 
U 
<I 
Fig. 22. Variation of the specific heat jumps at the glass-transition temperature of iron-ep0l'Y 
particulate composites versus the filler volume content vf : including values for the factor A, 
the mesophase (v) volume fraction, and the matrix (vm) volume fraction versus vf ' as derived 
from the values of the respective values of LI Cpo 
of iron particles makes the composite more rigid 42). It is also worth noting that, 
for various filler diameters, the LlC~ = f(vf ) curves differ only slightly. This fact 
indicates that the filler diameter plays only a secondary role in the variation of the 
heat-capacity jumps, which are primarily influenced by the filler-volume content. 
A similar behavior was expected for the variation of the coefficient A (see Fig. 22). 
It should be noted that the Vi values fitted excellently a third-degree curve expressed 
by: 
(102) 
where the constant C was evaluated experimentally as C = 3.5. 
The Vi values, together with the respective values for Ee were introduced iry the per-
tinent models and gave excellent coincidence with experimental data based on the 
cubic relation between Vi and vr The values of the characteristic quantities for the 
three-term unfolding model, as derived by this procedure, are included in Table II. 
In order now to evaluate the exponents 111 and 112 of the model, we refer back to ' 
the law of mixtures given for spherical particulates by Eq. (82). 
Once the Llr and r i values are determined, the values of the adhesion parameter A 
may be readily obtained using Eq. (97). The values of A for the different filler-volume 
48 

lIlA The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
contents are given in Table II for the iron-epoxy particulates with different amounts 
of filler, up to 25 % 51). 
In order to obtain the exponents 111 and 112' it is necessary to make use of a second 
equation, besides Eq. (101), for evaluating ri' and Eq. (97) for defining the difference 
111 -
112' For this purpose Eq. (96) is used, inserting the value for E;, as derived from 
Eq. (82). Indeed, all other quantities in Eq. (82) are either known, or can be measured, 
just as the bulk modulus Kc of the composite and its Poisson ratio vc' The values for 
the Poisson ratios of the various composites may be derived from Eq. (86) and by 
applying the values of v for the known phases and composites. It was shown that the 
values of the Poisson ratios for the mesophase, Vi' are close to vm and they may be 
found by calculating the Poisson ratio for the composite, vc' 
For known values of the average modulus of meso phase, E;, derived from Eq. (82), 
the variation of the mesophase modulus along its thickness may be defmed by Eq. (96) 
for the three-term unfolding model. It is valid that: 
(103) 
Integrating Eq. (103) from r = rf to r = ri leads to: 
Equation (104) uses the value of E;, derived from Eq. (82), and interrelates the two 
unknown exponents 111 and 112, Then, Eqs. (97) and (104) form a system of two equa-
tions and two unknowns, which can be solved yielding the values of the exponents 
111 and 112 and their difference A, which expresses the quality of adhesion; this is called 
the adhesion parameter. The values of the exponents 111 and 112, as well as of their 
difference are given in Table II and the difference is plotted in Fig. 23 for the iron-
epoxy particulate composites. 
Figure 24 presents the variation of the terms E/rf /r)q1 and Em(rf /r)q2 in the meso-
phase layer for a 25 % iron-epoxy particulate, as they have been derived from Eq. (103). 
A smooth transition of E. into E is observed at r ~ r .. A similar behavior is shown 
,m 
, 
for all other compositions investigated. 
It is interesting to plott the variation of Ei(r) versus the polar distance around a 
typical filler. In Fig. 25 this transition of the modulus from that of the filler to that 
of the matrix is shown, exemplifying the important role of the mesophase to the overall 
mechanical behavior of the composite. 
The variation of the various moduli of the composite and its constituents for various 
volume fractions of the series of iron-epoxy particulates is given in Fig. 26. The 
small variation of the average value of the variable Ei(r) modulus of the mesophase 
reflects the uniformity of the adhesion quality in this series of composites, which 
is also indicated by the almost linear variation of the longitudinal composite modulus, 
versus the filler-volume content. 
49 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
1~~----~--~~----+-----+---~ 
t 
t:; 
~1~r---~+----+~--~----+---~ 
F 
I 
F 
t 
~ 
z 
OL-__ ~ 
____ -L ____ ~ 
____ ~ 
__ ~ 
o 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
0.25 
",1%)-
E,lrl = E.+Ef Irf/rI11,- E. Irf/rl112 
"f -; 0.25 
'11=74 
'12=12 
12 'OO r----Q-r------~----_r----_;------, 
)( 
50~---4~~/~----1-----+---~ 
O~~~~~~~~ 
o 
to 
2.0 
3.0 
4.0 
5.0 
50 
Fig. 23. Variation of the adhesion 
parameter A for the three-term unfold-
ing model, and the adhesion coeffi-
cient 21'/ for the two-term model, versus 
the filler volume fraction U f' 
Fig. 24. Mode of evolution of the 
variable 
terms 
Eirfjr)~1 
and 
Em(rf/r)~2, contributing to the de-
finition of the mesophase modulus, 
versus the polar distance r from 
the filler boundary for a 25 % iron-
epoxy particulate composite. 

t 
':' e 
z 
... 
~ 
)( 
&: 
uJ 
TII.4 The Unfolding Models for Particulates 
~O r------.-------'-------'------'-------' 
A 
d, =150 ~m 
+ 
d,=300 ~m 
0 
d, =400 ~m 
6r x 10'(m}--+ 
0.4 
8.0 
11.2 
0.5 
10.0 
14.0 
Fig. 25. Variation of the mesophase ~oduli versus the polar distance Llr for different filler 
volume contents vf for the three-term unfolding model. 
t 
210 
~ 
4 0 
20 
10 
o o 
V 
0.05 
E{ 
;.. 
I V 
j 
/' / 
Ec'\, 
f1 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
0.25 
v, (%) --+ 
Fig. 26. Variation of the moduli of 
the particulate composite Ec and 
the average mesophase moduli E;" 
versus the filler volume fraction v f, 
as derived from the models. 
51 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
In the two-term unfolding model the integral on the right-hand side of Eq. (103) 
must be replaced by the integral corresponding to the two-term model derived from 
Eq. (98): 
(105) 
Here the only unknown is the exponent 211, since the value for the average modulus 
of the meso phase, E:, is derived from Eq. (82). Integration of Eq. (105) leads to: 
3Ef vf 
[ 
.:.r! -1] 
Vf ( 
~) [ 
_~ 
_~ 
] 
E~v. = 
1 - B 3 
-
-
E - E B3 
1- B 
3 + B 
3 - 3B- 1 
!! 
(211 - 3) 
4 
m 
f 
(106) 
which yields the value of 211, also tabulated in Table II for all iron-epoxy particulates 
studied. Figure 23 contains also the plot of the adhesion coefficient 211 versus the 
filler volume fraction for the iron-epoxy particulates. 
The three 211 = f(vf ) curves for the three different filler diameters are almost co-
incident. Furthermore, there is an equivalence between the mode of variation of the 
two adhesion coefficients A and 211 corresponding to the two versions of the unfolding 
model. 
Figure 27 shows the variation of the mesophase moduli Ei(r) for the various in-
clusion volume fractions versus the extent of the mesophase Jr, normalized to the 
highest inclusion volume fraction of 25 %. This allows to demonstrate the similarity 
240 
t 
'1 
120 
~ 
... 
~ 
,. 
Iii e 
... 
60 
0 z 
to 
0 
\/f : 0.25 
I:> 
\/f :; 0.20 
+ \/f :; 0.15 
* 
\/f :; 0.10 
• \/f :; 0.05 
2.0 
3 .0 
flr ,. 1061ml---+ 
4.0 
5.0 
Fig. 27. Variation of the mesophase moduli, normalized to the mesophase thickness Llr of the 
25 ~~ filler volume content composite versus polar distance Llr for the two-term unfolding model. 
52 

III.S The Unfolding Models for Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
of the variation of E; for the various values of U J for this series of composites, possessing 
the same adhesion properties. These normalized patterns are equivalent with those 
presented in Fig. 25 for the three-term unfolding model, since the differences between 
corresponding values of the two versions of the model are insignificant. 
111.5 The Unfolding Models 
for Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
A three-layer model for fiber composites is developed from the theory of self-con-
sistent models by adapting this theory to a three-layered cylinder, delineating the 
representative volume element for the fiber composite. 
The self-consistent model averages the stresses and strains in either phase of a two-
phase material, and determines them by solving separate problems, where super~ 
position yields the final configuration of the model 54). 
In the self-consistent model, the matrix material outside the inclusion is assumed 
to possess the effective macroscopic properties of the composite. Moreover, two con-
secutive problems were solved by assuming that the phases of the composite occupy 
their position being surrounded by this average material. In both cases the average 
values of the composite are determined from the values of the characteristic properties 
of either phase. Then, the solution of the two individual problems allows to evaluate 
the average properties of the composite by knowing the respective properties of either 
phase. The self-consistent model was applied to composites by Budiansky 54) and 
separately by Hill 55). 
An important variation of the self-consistent model is the three-phase model, intro-
duced by Kerner 35), according to which the inclusion is enveloped by a matrix 
layer, which in turn is embedded in an infinite medium with the unknown macro-
scopic properties of the composite. 
A better approach than the Hashin-Rosen models is to adopt models, whose repre-
sentative volume element consists of three phases, which are coaxial cylinders for 
fiber-composites, with each phase maintaining its constant volume fraction 17). 
The novel element in these models is the third phase in the Hashin-Rosen model, 
which lies between the two main phases (inclusions and matrix) and contributes to 
the progressive unfolding of the properties of the inclusions to those of the matrix, 
without discontinuities. Then, these models incorporate all transition properties 
of a thin boundary layer of the matrix near the inclusions. Thus, this pseudophase 
characterizes the effectiveness of the bonding between phases and defines an adhesion 
factor of the composite. 
These models are improvements of a similar model 17), where the third phase was 
assumed with constant mechanical properties, lying between the two main phases, 
as represented in Fig. 19. This model is defined by the thermomechanical properties 
of the main phases as boundary values for this layer. In considering the contribution 
of the mesophase these models prove to be descendants of the simple Kerner model 35) 
or the Van der Poel model 36), where the matrix phase is reduced to the crust phase 
of the mesophase, and the infinite medium is replaced by the matrix phase, which 
now, according to the concepts of the Hashin-Rosen models, shrinks to a thick con-
centric layer of an appropriate thickness. 
53 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
The three-layer model, as previously mentioned, as well as the multi-layer model, 
have been used to study the behavior, especially of fiber composites 16,17). The three-
layer model, based on the self-consistency of phases, gave relationships between 
stresses and displacements between phases which may give the extent and the charac-
teristic properties of the mesophase. However, these relationships are based on loading 
conditions of the composite, created by a thermal potential applied to the unit. 
Measurements of the thermal expansion and evaluation of Tg for the composite 
and its phases yield all necessary information for solving the problem, as has been 
shown in the previous section for particulates. 
However, since measurements of Tg and the thermal expansion coefficients are 
not very sensitive and accurate, the results derived from such models present some 
scattering and need further proof for validity. Therefore, in the following we shall 
concentrate on the unfolding models for fiber composites, as they are derived from 
the respective models for particulates, which present significant stability and un-
questioned reliability. 
For the representative volume element of a unidirectional fiber-reinforced com-
posite, consisting of a cluster of three coaxial cylinders of equal height, and equal to 
unity, the following relations hold (Fig. 8): 
. = (r? - r;) 
VI 
2' 
rm 
(r2 - r~) 
and 
vm = 
m r;, 
I 
• 
(107) 
Assuming the appropriate boundary conditions between the internal cylinder and 
any number of cylinders surrounding it in the R VE of the composite, which assure 
continuity of radial stresses and displacements in the loading case considered, we 
may again establish, in analogy with the theory of particulates, and by an energy 
balance between phases, the well-known law of mixtures, valid for the longitudinal 
modulus ECL == Ee of the composite: 
2) 
( 2 
2) 
2 
2) 
r f 
r· -
r f 
r - r· 
Ee = E f (2 + Ei 
I 
2 
+ Em ( mI. 
rm 
r m 
rm 
(108) 
This relation may be extended to any desired number of coaxial cylinders. 
If, in analogy with particulates, the meso phase cylinder c~nsists of a material with 
progressively variable mechanical properties, in order to match the respective pro-
perties of the two main phases limiting the mesophase, we can define a variable 
elastic modulus for the mesophase, which, for reasons of symmetry, depends only 
on the radial distance from the fiber-mesophase surface. In other words, we assume 
that the mesophase cylinder consists of a series of elementary cylinders, whose con-
'stant mechanical properties differ from each other by a quantity (sufficiently small) 
defined by the law of variation of Ei(r). 
For the three-term unfolding model in fiber composites, Ei(r) of the mesophase 
is again expressed by Eq. (96). 
The exponents 111 and 112 in Eq. (96) should be defined by the type of adhesion 
existing between phases. Higher values of 111, ~nd consequently of 112' yield very steep 
variation curves for Ei(r) and, therefore, indicate worse adhesion, since, in such cases, 
the thickness of the mesophase cylinder, .dr, is more and more reduced. 
54 

III.S The Unfolding Models for Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
In fact, one should find ''It > 'h for hard-core composites and ''It < 'h for rubber-
core composites. The limiting value ''It = 'h indicates no adhesion, since it implies 
immediately that Llr -+ 0, which can be derived from Eq. (96). But, from Eq. (96) 
and for ''It ~ '12 one finds ri ~ rf and the mesophase thickness approaches zero, 
whereas the difference in Ef and Em must now strongly strain the interface. This 
means that a zero interaction of the two main phases, with much different elastic 
moduli, presupposes a non-existent adhesion, which should be responsible for 
all shear stress between phases submitted to equal longitudinal deformations (8:m 
= 8:f ). This equality of strains implies large differences in the respective stresses in 
the two phases with (J 
::f:. (J f and therefore absence of adhesion to sustain these 
:m 
: 
shears and make the composite react as a single material. 
The definition of the extent of the mesophase and the evaluation of its radius ri 
is again based on the thermodynamic principle introduced by Lipatov 11), and on 
measurements of the heat-capacity jumps of the matrix material (LlC~) and the fiber 
composites (LlC:) with different fiber volume contents. These jumps appear at the 
glass-transition temperatures TgC of the composites and they are intimately related, 
as with particulates, to the volume fraction of the mesophase. 
Therefore, the entire theory, derived previously for particulates, is also valid for 
fiber composites, the only difference being in the evaluation of the radius rj of the 
mesophase. Indeed, in order to define the radius ri of the cylindrical layer, correspond-
ing to the mesophase for the fiber composites, it shall be expressed as ri = (rf + Llr) 
and the respective relation by Lipatov 11) for particulates modified to the appropriate 
relation for cylindrical inclusions. For unidirectional fiber-reinforced composites, 
the following relation may hold: 
(109) 
This is because the representative volume element for a unidirectional fiber-re-
inforced composite consists of a cluster of three coaxial' cylinders of equal height, 
taken equal to unity, and therefore the volume fractions of the phases are proportional 
to the squares of the radii of the respective cylinders. 
The quantity B, defined in Eq. (101), when introduced in the calculations, depends 
again on vf and the experimental factor A. given by Eq. (99). Thus, introducing the 
values of A. from Eq. (99) and the values of LlC , the Llr's for various fiber-volume 
contents vf can be evaluated for a cOmposite with glass fibers with radius rf = 6 f.Ull. 
It thus becomes easy to evaluate the volume fraction Vi for the mesophase layer, as 
derived from Fig. 22 where LlCp and Vi values are plotted for various values of vf; 
LI C p values decrease slightly with V f and the mesophase volume-fractions Vi progressive-
ly increase. This behavior coincides with similar measurements of other composites. 
Once the Llr and ri values are found, the values of the adhesion parameter A may be 
readily determined by Eq. (97). The values of A for the different fiber-volume contents 
studied are given in Table III for E-glass fiber epoxy resin composites with different 
amounts of fillers, up to 70 % 56). 
The values of the composite moduli in the direction of the fibers were taken from 
Ref. 56 for various fiber-volume contents, whereas the mesophase volume fractions Vi 
were experimentally determined for certain values of V l' by applying the approximate 
55 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
multilayer model introduced in Ref. 17. These values fitted excellently a second-
degree curve, expressed by: 
(110) 
with C2 = 0.123. 
For spherical particulates a similar relation holds, (Eq. 102), but with a tl.llrd-
degree relationship between Vi and vr This suggests that generally the mesophase 
volume is proportional to the respective inclusion volume depending on the Gaussian 
curvatures of the surfaces, i.e., this dependence is of third degree for spherical parti-
culates but is reduced to the second degree for cylindrical fibers. 
The thus defined values for Vi' together with the respective values for the moduli 
of the composites, were introduced into adequate models expressing the mechanical 
properties of the composites in terms of their constituents, with excellent coincidence 
with experimental values based on the parabolic variation of v, with vr The values 
of the characteristic quantities for the unfolding model, as derived from the above 
procedure, are included in Table III. 
Table m. Values of the characteristic parameters of a series of E-g1ass fiber/epoxy resin unidirec-
tional composites, for various fiber volume contents Of 
Vf 
v/ 
vm 
LlCp 
1 
r/ 
EeL 
Et 
'11 
'12 
A 
2'1 
% 
Cal/g °C 
lim 
1()9 Nm- 2 
109 Nm- 2 
0 0 
100.00 
0.081 
0.1220 6.000 
3.445 
10 0.123 89.877 
0.072 
0.1110 6.036 10.32 
21.70 
629 
121 
508 436 
20 0.492 79.508 
0.073 
0.0984 6.071 17.23 
19.97 
350 
87 263 220 
40 1.960 58.040 
0.075 
0.0735 6.145 31.l2 
16.60 
203 
76 
127 
114 
50 3.075 46.925 
0.076 
0.0615 6.182 38.11 
16.37 
166 
65 
101 
96 
60 4.428 35.572 
0.077 
0.0492 6.217 45.12 
15.70 
144 
60 
84 
78 
65 5.200 29.800 
0.0775 
0.0431 6.235 48.62 
15.40 
135 
58 
77 
72 
70 6.03.0 23.970 
0.078 
0.0369 6.254 52.15 
15.40 
128 
55 
73 
68 
The variation of the adhesion parameter A versus the filler content VI is plotted in 
Fig. 28 for a fiber diameter of dl = 12 Jlm. Here, the strong variation of this quantity 
with the filler content is obvious and once again confirms the role of the mesophase. 
The longitudinal elastic modulus of the composite, Ee, is now expressed by: 
ri 
Ee = Efvf + -; f 
Ei(r) [(r + dr)2 -
r 2] + Emvm 
rm 
(111) 
rl 
The second right-hand term ofEq. (Ill) expresses the contribution ofthe mesophase, 
with the volume fraction Vi' to the modulus Ee' If Et is the average value of the meso-
phase modulus, then Eq. (Ill) may be written as: 
(112) 
56 

III.5 The Unfolding Models for Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
600r------r------.------,------, 
t '-00 f-4\--+---t-----r----j 
r£! 
I 
~ 
200 1----~:"c:", ~-f~---+_----1 
" 
~ 
Fig. 28. Variation of the adhesion 
parameter A = ('11 -
'12) for the 
three-term unfolding model and 
the exponent 2'1 for the two-term 
model ofa series ofE-glass/epoxy 
fiber composites versus the fiber 
volume content, ufo 
OL-____ 
~ 
______ 
~ 
______ 
~ 
______ -J 
o 
20 
'-0 
60 
80 
VI (%)-
From Eq. (112) and by measuring in a tension test the longitudinal modulus of the 
composite, Ec' the average meso phase modulus Et can be determined. The values 
of Et, together with the other moduli, are listed in Table III and plotted in Fig. 29. 
t 
80...------.------y---,----, 
E,=72x109 Nm'2 
60 ~-----+------4-----~r------1 
~ 
t.O l----+----+-~~-----I 
E 
Fig. 29. Variation of the moduli 
of the constituent phases and 
the composite, versus the fiber 
volume content for a series of 
fiber-reinforced 
E-glass/epoxy 
composites. (Ef , Et and Em de-
note the moduli of the fibers the 
average values of the moduli of 
the mesophases and the moduli 
of the matrix respectively, where-
as ECL and ECT denote the re-
spective values of the longitudinal 
(parallel to the fibers) and trans-
verse moduli of the composite). 
~ 
... 
$! x 
.;; 
OL-__ 
~ 
____ -L ____ ~ 
___ 
~ 
o 
60 
80 
The integral in Eq. (Ill) is approximated by: 
2 fr
i 
2 fr
i 
[ 
(r )~1 
(r )~2J 
[~ ~ 2" 
Ei(r) r dr = -:z 
Em + E J 
-.!... 
- Em 
/ 
r dr . 
rm 
1 m 
r 
I 
rJ 
r / 
( 113) 
57 

Ill. Models for Composite Materials 
By integrating the terms of thg..integrand between the limits rJ and rp it follows that : 
which, when introduced into Eq. (111), yields: 
(115) 
Again, Eqs. (97) and (l15) form a system of two equations with two unknowns, 
which can be solved to yield the values of the exponents ''It and '12' Their difference 
A = '11 -
'12' which expresses the quality of adhesion, is called the adhesion para-
meter. The values of the exponents '11 and '12' as well as of their difference A are given 
in Table III and plotted in Fig. 28 for certain glass-fiber composites 56). 
Figure 30 shows the variation of EirJ/r)q1 and Em{rf /rr2 in the mesophase layer 
for a 65 % E-glass fiber-reinforced epoxy resin, as derived from Eq. (l15). (Note the 
smooth transition of Ei into Em in the region r = ri, as found for all other compo-
sitions). 
The variation of Ei(r) is plotted versus the polar distance around a typical fiber in 
Fig. 31. This proves the transition of the moduli from fiber to matrix, illustrating the 
important role of the mesophase in the overall mechanical behavior of the composite. 
Edr): Em+E, (r, /r jill_E. (r,/r)'112 
1-+ ___ -1-__ \),:0.65, 111: 138, lb=59 ___ 
-l 
t 
1: 
~ ~ ~~~--+-------4--------,~------~ 
~ 
x 
20 I----~!-.: 
~~~E~m~(~~;/r~)~~2~~~~~::~E§~~t::t::i 
EIIO'( 
-+-+-+ 
o 
6 
12 
18 
24 
~ r x 10'2 
(11m ) --+ 
Fig. 30. Mode of evolution of the variable terms E Jr f /r)ql and Em(r f /r)Q2, contributing to the 
definition of the mesophase modulus, versus the polar distance r from the fiber boundary for a 
65 % E-glass fiber/epoxy composite. 
58 

III.5 The Unfolding Models for Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
Now, we consider the conditions for the appearance of an absolute minimum in the distribu-
tion of E;<r). An eventual minimum of Ei may appear at a distance ro from the fiber interface 19): 
This yields 
Introducing Eq. (97) leads to: 
1 
r min = (~)~I-q2 . 
r i 
'12 
(116) 
This indicates that, for hard-core composites with,1t > 'h, r min is always outside the mesophase 
cylinder, as indicated by examples given in Refs. 19 and 21. 
Moreov.er~ this minimum cannot be on either side of the fiber for r min < r" because, from 
Eq. (116), It IS clear that: 
(117) 
which again shows that since ri > rf and"l > "2 for hard-core composites the right-hand side 
ofEq. (116) is always larger than unity and therefore always rmin > rr 
The above theory for the three-term unfolding model holds also for the two-term 
model, with the exception that the integral Ii in the second right-hand side term of 
Eq. (111) must be replaced by the integral I;: 
(118) 
which after integration by terms yields: 
( 1 - Bq-I) 
I~ = Efvf 
+ Ef vf Bq(1 + B- 1_ 2B- I /2) 
11 - 1 
1 
- 3 Emv Jl + B- 1 -
2B- I / 2) 
(119) 
If this value for I; is introduced into Eq. (112), expressing the interrelation between 
the elastic moduli of the composite and its constituents, it yields: 
59 

III. Models for Composite Materials 
t 
<:'E 
z 
80 r-------~--------~-------,--------~ 
14 
Fig. 31. Variation of the elastic moduli of the mesophases versus the polar distance r from the 
fiber-matrix boundary, for a series of fiber-reinforced E-glassjepoxy composites with different 
fiber volume fraction. 
t 
~ 
M ~-------r------~--------'--------' 
• 
0.70 
+ 0.60 
• 
0.50 
~~------r---------t-
0 
040 
t::. 0.20 
* 0.10 
~ 40 ~----~~---------+---------r------~ 
... 
$:! 
x 
iii 
§ 20 ~--------t-----~~t---------t-------~ 
o 
z 
E~ ~-------+--------+--------4----~~~ 
OL-____ 
~L-____ 
~ 
______ 
~ 
______ _J 
o 
6 
18 
24 
Fig. 32. Variation of the elastic moduli of mesophases, normalized to the mesophase thickness 
corresponding to a fiber volume fraction v f = 70 %, versus the polar distance r from the fiber-
matrix boundary. 
60 

IlL5 The Unfolding Models for Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
The only unknown in this relation is 1'/. Then, by solving this equation, the value of 1'/ 
can be derived for each fiber-volume content. The values of the adhesion coefficient 21'/ 
were plotted in Fig. 28 and included in Table III. By plotting the variation of Ei(r), 
expressed by the three terms of the three-term unfolding model for a particular fiber-
volume content, say for vf = 0.65, as in Fig. 30, and by plotting the same variation 
for Ei(r) as expressed by the two-term model, it is found that, although the contributing 
terms are different in each case, the derived values for Elr) are identical as they 
should be. This indicates that the two-term model should be preferred, as it is simpler. 
Furthermore, the variation of Ek) for the various values of vf ' as derived from the 
two-term unfolding model, is exactly the same as the variation given by the three-
term model plotted in Fig. 31, and therefore it is omitted. Instead, the variation of 
Ei(r), normalized to the meso phase thickness of the highest fiber-volume fraction 
of 70 %, was plotted in Fig. 32 versus the polar distance r from the fiber-mesophase 
boundary for the different fiber-volume contents studied. The absolute coincidence 
of all these curves strongly indicates that all these composites possess the same ad-
hesion characteristics, as expected, since they have been prepared under similar 
experimental conditions. 
61 

IV. Retardation Spectra of Composites 
Indicating the Existence of a Mesophase 
An enhanced description of the actual behavior of composites is given by an improved 
composite model, which considers the mesophase to consist of an infmite number 
of concentric thin layers (cylinders or spheres) around inclusions (fibers or particles) 
allowing progressively different mechanical properties for each cylinder or sphere, 
changing from those of the inclusion to those of the matrix. 
The nature of the progressive change of Ei(r) with the distance from the inclusion 
phase could depend on the stress field developed in a thin layer around the inclusion 
and/or, at the other extreme, it could extend into the bulk around the inclusion as 
a physicochemical disturbance. 
The extent of these two mechanisllls is expected to vary for different kinds of in-
clusions and matrices according to the chemical affinity, the nature of the surfaces, 
the geometry, etc., of the constituents. Thus, for any particular composite, the question 
is on the nature and thickness of this interlayer region. To answer each particular 
case one must describe the polymeric constituent of the composite at the molecular 
level, so that the actual response of the structure of the composite can be conclusive. 
It is well known that the molecular network-structure of a crosslinked polymer 
determines its mechanical resp(imse and, inversely, mechanical response experiments 
have been used extensively to yield information on the network-structure of polymers 
in a composite. 
Dynamic-response experiments are considered as the most suitable tests for this 
kind of investigation of the network structure of the composite. To avoid, as much as 
possible, the viscoelastic effects masking the behavior of the polymer network struc-
ture, tests were made very close to the rubbery region of the viscoelastic behavior 
of the matrix material. By measuring the dynamic storage and loss compliances in 
a convenient experimental arrangement at a range of frequencies extending over three 
decades in the logarithmic scale, it was possible to evaluate the retardation spectra 
of the composite with different types of adhesion between phases. A comparison of 
retardation spectra for composites and equivalent specimens made of the material 
of the matrix, showed that the junction motions of the polymeric network in the long-
range motion zone are activated due to physicochemical rearrangements in the vicinity 
of the boundaries of inclusions 21). 
In order to study the cause of the development of the mesophase layer, three sets 
of experiments were performed. All specimens had the same dimensions; they were 
standard cylindrical tensile specimens, convenient for dynamic testing in a Dynastat 
or Dynalizer apparatus. 
The first set of specimens contained a central cylindrical core consisting of a steel 
wire with a diameter of de ~ 80 !lm. The lateral surface of the core was smooth and 
62 

IV. Retardation Spectra of Composites Indicating the Existence of a Mesophase 
thoroughly cleaned before casting the surrounding matrix. The matrix material was 
prepared from an epoxy polymer, plasticized with 15% Thiokol LP3 polysulfide. 
Adding the plasticizer resulted in a reduction of the rubbery plateau temperature to 
be attained by the experimental design. 
The second set of specimens was identical with the first, with the only exception 
that before casting the matrix the lateral surfaces of the core-bars were covered with 
a thin silicon layer to reduce the adhesion between inclusion and matrix. The third 
set were simple cylindrical specimens without core-bars, made of the same material 
as the matrices of the two previous series. 
This arrangement was effective, since it was not possible otherwise to control the 
quality of bonding in a quantitative way between inclusion and matrix. The details 
of the preparation of specimens and a description of the dynamic experiments may 
be found iIi Ref. 2l. 
By raising the temperature to a convenient level, it was possible to activate short-
range and long-range motions of the network in the transition region. This region 
was previously established 30) to include the. transition zone to the rubbery plateau 
and the plateau itself, where the bead-spring model was valid 31). This model predicts 
a square-root law for the retardation spectra, and was assumed valid for the evaluation 
of the retardation spectra of the composites. 
Since the contribution of the filler, consisting always of a core-steel bar, was elastic, 
it was eliminated by subtracting its contribution from the moduli of both types of 
composites. The remaining part corresponded to the viscoelastic part of the composite. 
If the contribution of the elastic storage modulus VIE; (or, respectively, the com-
pliance) of the fiber is deducted from the modulus (or compliance) of the composite 
E;, the remaining part yields the contribution of the part vmE~ or vmE;'; of the matrix 
material. Here, E' and E" are the storage and loss components of the dynamic 
modulus (or D' and D" for the respective compliances), and the subscripts/, m, and c 
correspond to fiber, matrix, and composite, respectively, whereas the V values express 
the respective volume fractions of each phase. 
The effective compliances for each component of the composite were derived by 
using the well-known relations: 
. 
(121.1) 
(121.2) 
Figure 33 presents the storage compliance D;(w) versus the frequency, for the re-
maining phase of the composite after the contribution of the elastic fiber is substrated. 
This quantity has been derived by applying Eq. (121.1). Similarly, Fig. 34 gives·the 
respective loss compliance D;'(w) versus the frequency as derived from Eq. (121.2). 
In both figures these quantities were plotted for type-I and type-II composites, 
whereas for type-III specimens the plotted curves correspond simply to their storage 
or loss compliances of their matrix. 
63 

IV. Retardation Spectra of Composites Indicating the Existence of a Mesophase 
1S ~~r-----------~--------------~~--------~ 
t 
: z10 ~-------\------~-----------------t----------~ 
6 
o ~ (type I) 
x 
0; (type n) 
o 
O~ (matrix po(ymer) 
i~ 5 ~-=~~~------~~-----------------r----------~ 
O
~ 
______________ 
~ 
________________ L-________ 
~ 
-1.0 
0 
1.0 
1.S 
logw 
-
Fig. 33. Variation of the storage compliance D~ for type-III specimens (0), and D;(w) for the 
remain: ng phase of the composites oftype I (6) and type II ( x ) , after subtracting the contribu-
tion of the elastic fiber, versus the frequency w. 
1S.----------------,---------------.r----------, 
;~ 
6 
0; (type I ) 
~E 
X 
0; nype n) 
...... 
~~ 
0 
0;' (matrix polymer) 
x 
;~S 
(0-
o 
1.0 
1.5 
logw -
Fig. 34. Variation of the loss compliances D~ (type III) (0) and D;'(w) (type I (6) and type II 
( x)) vs. frequency. 
The first approximation of the retardation spectrum of a substance in the frequency 
range w, when the polymer is assumed as linear viscoelastic, is expressed by 30) : 
L(l jw) ~ -dD'(w)jd(ln w) 
(i22) 
64 

IV. Retardation Spectra of Composites Indicating the Existence of a Mesophase 
where L(1/w) is the ftrst approximation of the retardation spectrum, and D'(w) the 
storage compliance in extension of the material as a function of the frequency w. 
The ftrst approximations of the retardation spectra L(l/w) for types I and II of 
composites and type III of pure matrix material are plotted versus the frequency in 
Fig. 35. 
it 
6 
Lr 11/W) (type 1) 
E 
X 
Lr (lIw) (type II) 
... 
Lift (1/w) (matrix polymer) 
$! 
0 
)( 
~ 5 
E 
...J 
~ 
-' 
0 
to 
1.5 
Fig. 35. The retardation spectrum for the three types of specimens with respect to the logarithm 
of frequency: (6) Lr(l/w) (type I); (x) L.(l/w) (type II) ; (0) Lm(l/w) (matrix polymer). 
In order to evaluate the experimental results of Fig. 35, a simplified bead-spring 
model, introduced by Gross and Fuoss 31l, was applied. It was found to be convenient 
for dynamic response and was modified to take into consideration the long-range 
motions of the junctions of the network 32). 
This model shows some slight differences from other theoretical models discussed 
in Ref. 30. However, a more refmed approximation was considered not necessary 
for the test purposes and therefore these reftnements were not introduced here. 
If v is the number of macromolecules per unit volume and P an integer expressing 
the number of macromolecules joined together per junction-point of the network, 
the retardation time for long-range motions, due to the junction motion, can be 
expressed as: 
, =, R2p 
p 
If' 
(123) 
where '1 is the retardation time of the ftrst mode and 'p the retardation time of the 
plh mode of vibration. 
Then, the retardation time for a single Voigt element, 'p' is given by: 
(124) 
and the expression for the storage compliance D'(w) is given by: 
D'(w) = _1_ [fp-2 
1 
dp +fp-p 
1 
dP] 
3vkT 
I + W 2'lP-2 
1 + w2,tf32P 
(125) 
where k and T are the Boltzmann constant and absolute temperature, respectively. 
65 

IV. Retardation Spectra of Composites Indicating the Existence of a Mesophase 
For low frequencies, w < 1, the ftrst right-hand term of Eq. (125) becomes negli-
gible. Then, from Eqs. (122), and (125) we derive: 
where: 
1 
-
= r = r. p • 
w 
p 
1 
P 
Introducing the quantity A: 
1 
r1/2 
A- ____ 
l_ 
- 3vkT In f32 . 
and using Eqs. (126), (127), and (128), leads to: 
(126) 
(127) 
(128) 
(129) 
For high frequencies with w > 1, the second term in Eq. (125) becomes negligible 
and in this case from Eqs. (122), and (125) it follows that: 
with 
1 
. 
L(1jw ) ~ -- r-1/2r1/2 
p 
6vkT 1 
p 
Introducing: 
I 
__ r- 1/2 = B 
6vkT 1 
into Eqs.(129), (130), and (131) leads to: 
(130) 
(131) 
(132) 
(133) 
Equations (129) and (133) describe the behavior of the retardation spectra for low 
(w < 1) and high (w > 1) frequencies, respectivelx. 
The following conclusions may be drawn from the spectra plotted in Fig. 35: 
i) The retardation spectra of the polymeric phases of type-II composite and the pure 
matrix specimens are almost identical. This means that the physicochemical charac-
66 

IV. Retardation Spectra of Composites Indicating the Existence of a Mesophase 
teristics, i.e., the degree of cross-linking (v) and the effect of junction-motion, expressed 
by the parameter {3, are identical for both spectra. Hence, the structure of the polymeric 
phase of the composite as an average does not deviate from the structure expected 
for the polymer itself. 
ii) Moreover, the imposed separation between the two main phases in the type-II 
specimens releaves the stresses between phases; therefore, in this type of composite, 
the two constituents do not interact and there are no stress concentrations or singu-
larities due to the interaction of phases. Therefore, a comparison between the type-II 
composite and the type-III matrix-polymer does not yield a decisive answer on which 
of the two constituents causes the development of the mesophase. 
iii) The retardation spectrum of the type-I composite deviates from that of the matrix-
polymer spectrum in the low-frequency range, while it tends to become identical with 
the other spectra as the frequency 0) increases (for 0) > 1). 
The deviations observed between the spectra in the low-frequency range in Fig. 35 
are explained in Fig. 36, where log L(1/O) versus log 0) were plotted for the three 
types of specimens in an expanded ordinate scale. Accordingly, the retardation spectra 
of all specimens have a slope of (-1/2) for frequencies larger than unity. This is ex-
pected from Eq. (133) describing the simple model, which yields the retardation 
spectrum from the first term of Eq. (125) (0) > I). According to the Gross-Fuoss 
model 31), this term, related to high frequencies, corresponds to short-range motions 
of the macromolecule chains. But Fig. 36 implies that the short-range motions 
(0) > 1) of the chains and therefore the physicochemical structure of the polymer 
for the three types of specimens are almost identical. 
iv) On the other hand, for 0) ~ 1 the first approximation of the retardation spectrum 
log L(1/O) shows a significant difference between the type-I specimens, with good 
8 ~----------------.-----------------r-----------. 
r6 ~--------------r---------------r---~----~ 
6 
log Lr (l/w) (type I) 
x 
log Lr/l/w) (type n) 
0 
log L. ( l/w) (matri x 
polymer) 
5 
-lD 
0 
to 
1.5 
log w -.. 
Fig. 36. Logarithm of the retardation spectrum for the three types of specimens vs. the logarithm 
of frequency: (L:,.) log L,(l /w) (type I); (x) log L,(1/w) (type II); (0) log Lm(1/w) (matrix 
polymer). 
67 

I V. Retardation Spectra of Composites Indicating the Existence of a Mesopbase 
adhesion between phases, and the type-II specimens with poor adhesion as well as 
the matrix-polymer specimens. Indeed, while the slope of the spectra for types II 
and III are almost (-1/2), the slope for the spectrum of type I is (1/2). 
This part of the spectra is approximated by Eq. (129) which yields a slope for 
log L(1/w) of 1/2. The retardation spectrum of Eq. (129) is derived from the second 
term of Eq. (125), which corresponds to low frequencies (w < 1), and therefore 
describes long-range motions of the junction points of the polymeric network. Hence, 
it can be inferred from the above discussion that, in the polymeric phase of type-I 
specimens, only"the long-range motions, due to the motion of the network junctions, 
playa predominant role in this range offrequencies (w < 1). 
v) The fact that the contribution of the motion of the network junctions is predominant 
and controls the process only in type-I composites, as compared to the two other 
types of specimens, may be explained by the following mechanism. The existence of 
stress concentrations, and in some places stress singularities at the surface separating 
the filler from the matrix, because of a substantial frictional adhesion for this type 
of composites, only forces the network junctions of the matrix polymer to follow 
the motions of the fiber steel wire and thus to make a significant contribution to the 
specific values of the spectrum of the matrix at low frequencies. However, for high 
frequencies this effect is diminished progressively and substantially, because only 
short-range motions of chains are significant in this range. 
Thus, a comparison of the first approximations of retardation spectra for three 
types of models representing either good, or poor adhesion between a single fiber 
steel wire centered along the axis of cylindrical polymeric specimens, or pure-matrix 
polymeric specimens, respectively, yielded the following results: 
i) Substantial differences were observed in the storage and loss compliances derived 
from dynamic tensile tests between the two types of composites with good and bad 
adhesion between the single filament and the matrix. These results support the idea 
that a third term in the law of mixtures must be assumed, which is related to the quality 
of adhesion of the composite 33). 
ii) By calculating the retardation spectra from the dynamic compliances along a rather 
wide range of frequencies close to the rubbery plateau of the polymers, it was derived 
that a substantial difference between the respective spectra exists only in the low-
frequency range. 
A reasonable explanation of these discrepancies is that only the long-range motion 
of the polymer network, related to low frequencies, is affected by the presence of the 
fiber steel wire reinforcement. 
iii) The differences observed between the retardation spectra in storage and loss 
compliances cannot arise from a different physicochemical structure of the matrix, 
since the matrix in the plain polymeric specimen behaves identically with its compo-
site counterparts, where the adhesion between fiber and matrix is loose. 
iv) Moreover, if this difference exists, the discrepancies observed in the low-frequency 
range and therefore in the long-range motion of the polymer network should extend 
along the entire spectrum of frequencies. But the short-range motions, corresponding 
to high frequencies, are approximately equal and independent of the quality of ad-
hesion. Therefore, these differences cannot be attributed to a different physico-
68 

IV. Retardation Spectra of Composites Indicating the Existence of a Mesophase 
chemical structure of the matrix material as a bulk. The existence ofa mesophase 
layer, playing the role of a regulator of the junction motions of the polymeric network, 
is the only alternate sound explanation. 
Finally, it is clear from the above discussion that deviations observed in storage 
and loss compliances, although indicative, are not sufficient to completely explain 
the mechanism of deformation of the composite. Some further retardation-spectrum 
analysis is necessary to reveal the nature of the mesophase, developed between in-
clusions and the matrix in each particular composite. 
69 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties 
of Composites as Influenced 
by the Mesophase 
V.1 Static and Dynamic Moduli in Fiber Composites 
Approximate equations have been established 57) for determining the transverse 
modulus of elasticity in a unidirectional fiber-reinforced composite material from its 
constituent material properties. The classical theory of elasticity was applied to the 
simplified model of a composite unit-cell. Stress functions were applied to the fiber 
and matrix with boundary conditions requiring continuity of displacements across 
the fiber-matrix interface, and perfe~t bonding was assumed. Graphical results are 
presented for glass-epoxy composites. The numerical results were compared with 
experimental data. The transverse elastic modulus, derived by applying the model 
introduced in this chapter, is in good agreement with experimental results. 
Moreover, by using this simple model and assuming viscoelastic behavior of the 
matrix, the correspondence principle has been applied to the relationship of the 
transverse modulus of elasticity. In this way, the storage and loss moduli of the com-
posite have been calculated. ~hese theoretical values are also compared with experi-
mental data. 
However, this study did not consider the influence of the mesophase on the values 
of the moduli of the composite. The only study evaluating the elastic longitudinal 
modulus and the longitudinal Poisson ration of a f1ber composite by taking into 
account the contribution of the mesophase is found in Ref. 58. There, the main para-
meter affecting the elastic behavior of composite materials is the mesophase between 
fiber and matrix, having different physicochemical properties than the constituent 
phases. Since the elastic modulus of the mesophase is assumed not to have a constant 
value throughout the mesophase, according to the multiple cylinder model 19), it is 
reasonable to accept a progressive variation along the radial distance of the meso-
phase. 
Hashin and Rosen 59) and Tsai 60) used a variational principle based on theorems of mini-
mum potential energy, to find upper and lower limits of the elastic constants. For certain 
cases these limits coincide, thus giving a single solution. Two cases were considered: in the first, 
the fibers were of identical cross section and formed an hexagonal array in the transverse plane; 
in the second, the fibers might have different diameters but the same ratio of fiber to matrix 
diameter, and were randomly located in the transverse plane. In both cases the composite was 
macroscopically homogeneous and transversely isotropic and had five elastic constants. The 
problem then was to find expressions for the effective elastic moduli of the reinforced material 
in terms of the elastic moduli and the geometric parameters of its constituents. Typical numerical 
results were presented for several moduli. The work of Whitney and Riley 61) is analogous to 
that of Hashin and Rosen, but is much less rigorous mathematically and is written to appeal 
70 

V.I Static and Dynamic Moduli in Fiber Composites 
to the engineer. The transverse elastic modulus calculated by them was compared to those of 
HashinjRosen and Tsai. 
The present study proceeded in a s imilar manner. Introducing a new model, the transverse 
elastic modulus for different fiber-volume contents was calculated. The expression for this 
modulus differed from the relations given in the above references, but it was in good agreement 
with experimental data. Moreover, the effective moduli of the viscoelastic composite, which 
can be obtained from the effective elastic moduli by applying the correspondence principle for 
linear viscoelasticity, were also determined. 
In the present analysis it was assumed that the fibers are circular in cross section 
and continuous through the composite. In order to avoid complex numerical solu-
tions, simplified models representing the geometry of a repeating element were used. 
In this model, the classical theory of elasticity was applied, yielding closed-form 
solutions. Both fiber and matrix are considered as isotropic. Assuming the composite 
material to be macroscopically homogeneous and to ob,ey Hooke's law, the stress-
strain relationships for ~n anisotropic body are applicable. 
Fig. 37. Basic model for the calculation of the stress 
distribution (for a, b, Po, PI see text). 
The representative volume element (RYE) of the model is shown in Fig. 37. The 
assumption of gross homogeneity was applied, as customary, although the composite 
is microscopically heterogeneous and the resin is viscoelastic. In order to find the 
relationships which give the expression for the longitudinal elastic modulus, it will 
be assumed that the representative volume element can be represented by a cylindrical 
fiber surrounded by a cylindrical matrix as shown in Fig. 37. This model was introduc-
ed by Hashin and Rosen for a random array 59). If an axial force is applied to this 
element, so that the axial strain e of the composite is a constant, the stress distribution 
in the fiber and the matrix can be found by solving a modified-plane strain elasticity 
problem; this requires the radial and tangential displacements to be functions of r 
and 8 only, whereas the axial displacement is a linear function of z only. Since this 
particular problem is axisymmetric, the displacements, strains, and stresses will 
obviously not be functions of 8. The expression for EL is given by Eq. (16) of Ref. 61. 
Since the transverse modulus of the composite is the main concern, a hollow cylinder, 
as in Fig. 37, is considered with an inner radius r = a. and an outer radius r = b. 
Let a pressure Po be applied on the inner surface, and a pres,urePI on the outer surface. 
This simulates the matrix. A solid cylinder of radius a, to which a pressure Po is applied, 
simulates the inclusion. Pressure Po is the interaction between matrix and filler, and 
PI is the applied pressure on the matrix. 
By using the principles of compatibility of stresses and displacements along the 
boundaries of the inclusions and the matrix, and neglecting terms of higher order, 
71 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
after a long analysis, it may be derived that the expressions for the longitudinal 
modulus EL and longitudinal Poisson ratio Vc of the composite are expressed by 61): 
where: 
L t =l-vm -2v!, 
Li=l-vf -2v}, 
VXY = v.rDf + vm(l -
vf )· 
(136) 
Moreover, the transverse modulus ET and the bulk modulus of the composite are 
derived by: 
and 
(138) 
where EL and ET are the longitudinal and transverse elastic moduli, Vc and VXY the 
major and minor Poisson ratios of the fiber-reinforced composite material, K the 
bulk modulus, and r is given by: 
(139) 
In order to find the storage (E') and loss (E") moduli of the composite, the above 
relationships are transformed by applying the correspondence principle of visco-
elasticity and assuming that the matrix is viscoelastic and the filler is elastic. This 
means that the complex modulus Em of the matrix ma)' be expressed by: 
Em = E~(t) + iE;':(t) 
(140) 
where E~(t) and E;':(t) are the storage and loss moduli, whereas the modulus Ef of 
the filler is assumed as elastic. 
72 

V.I Static and Dynamic Moduli in Fiber Composites 
By introducing Eq. (134) into Eq. (140) for the dynamic longitudinal modulus, 
after neglecting terms of higher order and separating the real from the imaginary 
parts leads to: 
E' = [2(v,- Vm)2 Ep -
v,) v,] {[(1- v,) LzE;;] + [Liv, + (1 + vJ] E~~} 
L 
{(I -
v,) LzE~ + [Liv, + (1 + vm) E,W 
+ E~ + Efvf -
E~vf 
(141) 
E" = [2(vf -
vm)Z Ep -
v,) Vf] [Livf + (1 + Vm)] E,E;:' _ 
/I 
/I 
L 
{(I -
v,) LzE~ + [Liv, + (1 + Vm) E,W 
Emvf + Em . 
(142) 
Next, the expressions for the storage and loss moduli of the transverse modulus ET 
may be derived. Assuming that. the matrix is only viscoelastic and substituting its 
modulus Em by the complex modulus E~ + iE;:', we derive the following expressions 
for rand r z, after neglecting terms of higher order: 
The values of rand rZ are now substituted into Eq. (137), and after some algebra 
and neglecting terms of higher order, the following equations are obtained by se-
parating real and imaginary parts of this new equation: 
_ ~ 2rT"v v + f '  
f 
E" [ 
2(v + 1) v rTI! - 4r"v ] 
E; 
f m 
1 - vf 
(145) 
(146) 
73 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
These relationships allow to determine the values of E~ and E;, after introducing the 
values of E{ and E;:, with the aid of Eqs. (141) and (142). 
Using the above-derived relationships we calculated for various fiber contents the 
transverse static modulus of a glass-epoxy composite, as well as its dynamic longi-
tudinal and transverse storage and loss moduli for various volume fractions of the 
fibers and various temperatures. The results derived from these relations are in good 
agreement with theoretical values derived from the law of mixtures, as well as with 
experimental data given by Clements and Moore 62). 
~! 
u'" 
.-
E 
3.0r------.-----.----, 
+++ 
Er (Thl!orl!tical) 
Er (Mixture law ) 
Expl!riml!ntal 
~z 
_ _ 
2.01--- ---1-----1--.;-'----1 
.... 0 
.... ":" 
o~ 
III 
" 
.ai.S 
:::> 
~ 
o l: 
l OI----i--.....,.......,::;F----j 
O L---~ ___ ~ ___ 
~ 
0.55 
0 .65 
0.75 
0.85 
u, _ 
8.0 
t 
1 
- -
Theoretical 
--- Expl!rimental 
32 
t 
z 
~ 6.0 
E 
24~ 
~ 
.~ 
.... 
.; 
-= 
:::> 
"C 
0 l: 
Qj 
CI 
a .. 
0 
Vi 
CI 
c .3 
74 
4.0 
2.0 
o 
o 
--<>-"'0--0- >-"0-0-"'0..., 
),.,-0... 
"'Q..o<"\.-" 
E~ 
80 
'b 
~ 
01'\, ."./ ~ \ 
160 
T ("C) ---+ 
o 
240 
z 
Fig. 38. Theoretical and experimental 
values of the transverse modulus of elastic-
ity ET plotted vs. the filler volume frac-
tion. 
Fig. 39. Theoretical and experimental 
values of longitudinal dynamic storage 
modulus EL and longitudinal loss mo-
dulus EL' plotted vs. temperature. 

V.I Static and Dynamic Moduli in Fiber Composites 
Reference 57 gives a detailed comparison between the values of moduli derived from 
the simple law of mixtures, those derived from the above formulas, and the existing 
experimental values. Here, a graphical comparison between the theoretical and ex-
perimental values of the transverse modulus ET is given (Fig. 38). Moreover, in 
Figs. 39 and 40 the variations of E~ , E~' and E~, E:;, respectively, as a function of 
temperature were plotted together with the respective experimental data taken from 
Ref. 118. 
... 
6.0 
24 
.E 
z 
t~ 
~t 
Theore ti cal 
" 
Experimental 
'l' 
- >-
..... 
~ 
4.0 
16 " 
VI 
,>-
~ 
..... 
"5 
~ 
"0 
0 
VI 
~ 
.3 
~ 
C1I 
_~E ~ 
"0 
8' 2.0 
B 
0 
Fig. 40. Theoretical and experi-
~ 
'-
mental values of transverse dyna-
0 
VI 
Vi 
VI 
0 
mic storage modulus E~ and trans-
..: 
....J 
l-
e..: 
verse ross modulus E:j plotted vs. 
I-
temperature. 
0 
0 
0 
ao 
160 
240 
T I DC I ...... 
As Fig. 39 shows, the maximum for both experimental and theoretical values of 
E~' appears at 180 °C. This means that Eq. (141) is suitable for calculating the glass-
transition temperature Tg of a fiber-reinforced material in the longitudinal direction. 
The values for the transverse storage and loss mopuli l E~ and E:;, are presented 
in Fig. 40 as a function of the temperature. These val{lc;;.s are closely approximated by 
Eqs. (145) and (146) of the present model. Thus, this fiiure shows a good approxima-
tion between the theoretical valueS'"derived by this model and the experimental ones 
given in Ref. 18. However, a difference is observed between experimental and theo-
retical calculations for the temperature-at which the m~imum value of E:; appears. 
This deviation is due to the fact that the Poisson ratio of the matrix', which plays 
an essential role especially when a tensile load on a specimen is applied in the trans-
verse direction of the fibers, is not considered as a complex variable. 
Apart from this deviation between the temperatures at which the maximum values 
ofE:; occur, Eq. (142) expla.ins the difference in glass-transition temperatures in the 
two directions, with a value of T in the transverse direction lower than the T value 
9 
9 
in the longitudinal direction. Ho\\oever, this difference of lO °C between the Tg of 
E~ and E:; is rather small and may be accepted as caused by simplifications in the 
model. 
We have already established the reasons for introducing the concept of a meso-
phase in composite materials as well as proof that the introduction of this phase 
yields results which are closer to real characteristic values of the composites. Having 
75 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
accepted this statement, the problem arises now to define the way in which the pro-
perties of the mesophase change. In the model developed in Refs. 10, 16, 19 the meso-
phase was considered as a homogeneous and isotropic material. In a closer approxi-
mation to reality 63) the multiple-layer model was introduced, according to which 
the inclusion was surrounded by a series of successive layers, each with a different 
elastic modulus differing slightly from those of its neighbor layers. Then, the meso-
. phase elastic modulus was assumed a step-function of the radius from the center 
of the fiber. Although this latter model is closer to reality, the law of variation of the 
elastic modulus of the mesophase has still to be determined. In oder to define such a 
law, it is indispensable to have a correct experimental value of the equivalent modulus 
of the mesophase. 
In order to check the superiority of the multiple-cylinder model of Refs. 63, 40 and 
concurrently to show that, for an average thickness of the mesophase and for good 
adhesion between phases, the model predicts a small dependence of the longitudinal 
modulus and Poisson ratio of the composite on the particular law of selection of the 
successive diameters of the hollow cylinders of the me soph,\:se , we again use the 
simple three-cylinder model from Ref. 17. The longitudinal elastic modulus EL and 
Poisson ratio VXY is determined for this model assuming that the material properties 
for the fiber and matrix cylinders are well-defined, while the properties of the inter-
mediate hollow cylinder of the me so phase are variable along its radius and compatible 
with those of the adjacent cylinders. 
Four laws of variation for the mesophase material were considered: a linear, 
a parabolic, a hyperbolic, and a logarithmic variation. The thickness of the mesophase 
material was evaluated by using accurate thermal analysis methods 51). The longi-
tudinal elastic modulus and Poisson ratio of the fiber-reinforced composite were 
evaluated from the individual moduli of the fiber, the matrix, and the mesophase, 
whose thickness was already calculated and whose variation of the mechanical pro-
perties followed the introduced tyIlical laws of variation. 
By defining rf' ri, and r m as the outer radii of the fiber, mesophase, and matrix-
circular sections, respectively, as indicated in Fig. 41, the filler-volume fractions of 
the respective material will be given by: 
[) = (? -
?)j? = (1 -
vf -
vJ 
m 
m 
l 
m 
(147) 
where [) denotes the volume fraction, while indicesf, i, and m correspond to the filler, 
mesophase, and matrix, respectively. 
y 
76 
x 
Fig. 41. Cross-sectional area of the model used for the 
representative volume element of a unidirectional fiber 
composite (the radii of the fiber r J, mesophase ri, and the 
matrix rn. are indicated). 

V.I Static and Dynamic Moduli in Fiber Composites 
Moreover, as the filler-volume fraction is increased, the proportion of macro-
molecules characterized by a reduced mobility is also increased. This is equivalent 
to an increase in the mesophase-volume fraction and leads to the conclusion, already 
stated, that there is a relation between an abrupt change in the specific heat capacity 
at the glass-transition region LI C p and the mesophase-volume fraction Vj: 
(148) 
where the parameter A.i is given by Eq. (76). 
Consider now a cylindrical element of a cross section shown in Fig. 41 and of a 
sufficient length I, which is subjected to an external extension applied parallelly to 
the Oz-axis. The problem is an axisymmetric one, so that the displacements, strains, 
and stresses depend only on the r-coordinate and are independent of the polar angle 9. 
By applying the appropriate boundary conditions between the interfaces of the 
successive cylinders of the element to a convenient expression of the Airy stress func-
tion for the elastic problem and the energy balance for the element 58), one arrives, 
after some algebra, at the expression EL for the longitudinal elastic modulus of the 
model which is given by: 
rm 
r f 
f ELlh dr = ~f f 
[8C 2(l - vf 
-
2v}) + E;8 2 ] r dr 
o 
0 
f
ri 1 [2K2 
2 
2 
2 2J 
d 
+ 
Ei 7 
(1 + v;) + 8M (1 -
Vj -
v;) + E j 8 
r r 
Yf 
1 I
rm [2F2 
2 
2 
2 2J d 
+ Em 
7 
(1 + Vm) + 8H (1 -
Vm - 2vm) + Em8 
r r. 
rj 
(149) 
In this relation, C, F, H, K, and M are integration constants, which can be defined 
from the boundary conditions at the extremities of the mesophase for each particular 
case treated separately. Moreover, the elastic modulus Ei and the Poisson ratio Vi of 
the mesophase material are functions of the distance from the fiber. To integrate the 
second term, we shall try four different laws of variation, expressing Ei and Vi in the 
meso phase zone. 
Moreover, for the Poisson ratio vL in the longitudinal direction of the composite 
we find: 
(150) 
77 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
i) Linear Law 
The first variation law is a linear one for Ei and vi" According to this variation, these 
quantities are given as: 
Ei(r) = A + Br and 
vier) = A' + B'r with rf ~ r ~ ri 
(151) 
where A, B, A I, B' are functions of the moduli and the radii of the main phases of the 
composite. Solving this particular problem we find: 
1 
EL = Efvf + Emvm + "3 [(Ef + 2Em) (1 -
vrn) -
(2Ef + Em) Vf 
+ (Ef -
Em) {vii -
VmW/Z] 
(152) 
1 
VL = VfVf + VmVm + "3 [(Vf + 2v,,.) (1 -
Vrn) -
(2vf + Vm) Vf 
+ (Vf -
Vm) {vii -
V,rrW/Z], 
(153) 
ii) Parabolic Law 
Next, we consider a parabolic-variation law for Ei and Vi given by: 
Ei(r) = A? + Br + C and 
v;Cr) = A'? + B'r + C' 
with r :s; r :s; r 
f -
-
m 
(154) 
with A, A', B, B', and C, C' as appropriate constants. This leads to: 
EL = Efvf + Emvm + 
+ {3(Ef -
Em) {(l -
Vm)3/Z + vyz(l -
Vrn) + vii -
Vm)I/2 + V}l2} 
-
8(Ef -
Em) (1 -
Vm)I/2 [1 -
Vrn + Vf + (Vf{l -
Vm»I/2] 
+ 6[E/l -
Vm) + Emvf -
2Em(VfO -
Vm»1/2] [(1 -
Vm)I/2 + vy2]) 
X {6(l -
Vm)I/2 -
vy2}-1 
(155) 
and: 
VL = VfVf + VmVm + 6(1 _ v )1/2 _ V1/2 X 
111 
f 
X {3(v -
V ) [(1 -
V ?/2 + V1/2(1 -
V ) + v (1 -
V )1/2 + V3/2 ] 
f 
m 
m 
f 
m 
f 
m 
f 
-
8(Vf -
Vm) {1- Vm)1/2 (1- Vm + Vf + [vf {1- VmW/2) 
+ 6{~'J(1 -
Vm) + VmVf -
2vm[v/1 -
VmW/2} [{1- Vm)1/2 + vy2]}. 
iii) Hyperbolic Law 
(156) 
For a hyperbolic variation for Ei and Vi given by: 
B 
E.(r) = A + -
and 
v,.(r) = A' + B'lr, with r :s; r :s; r 
(157) 
' r  
f-
-
m 
78 

V.l Static and Dynamic Moduli in Fiber Composites 
we have: 
EL = EfuJ + Emu", + [Em(1 -
Um)1/2 -
EJu}/2] [(1 -
Um)1/2 + U}'2] 
+ 2(EJ -
Em) [uP -
Um)]1/2 
(158) 
and: 
v -
v U + v U + [v (1 -
v )1/2 -
V u1/2] [(1 -
U \1/2 + Uf1/2] 
L-
JJ 
mm 
m 
111 
JJ 
m) 
+ 2(vJ -
v,) [u}/2(1 -
Um)1/2]. 
(159) 
iv) Logaritiunic Law 
For a logarithmic law of variation of E and v: 
and: 
[
V'" 
VJ 
J 
(1 - V",)2(VJ-V",) 
(I - V",)2(VJ-Vm) 1 
x (I-v)ln --
-v In --
+-(I-v -v). 
"'. 
J 
2 
'" 
J 
vJ 
vf 
(161 ) 
In order to test the accuracy of the models, a series of experiments were performed 
to define EL and vL. For this purpose, a unidirectional glass-fiber composite was used 
which consisted of an epoxy matrix (Permaglass XEB/l, Permali Ltd., U.K.), re-
inforced with long E-glass fibers. The matrix material was based on a diglycidyl ether 
of bisphenol A, together with an aromatic amine hardener (Araldite MY 750/HT972, 
Ciba-Geigy, U.K.). The gla:"s fibers had a diameter of 1.2 x 10- 5 m and occupied 
a 65 % volume fraction. A compl~te description of the material and its tensile creep 
properties can be found in Ref. 17. Table IV presents the properties of the constituent 
materials, as well as those of the mesophase. 
On the other hand, specimens with 4 mm diameter and thicknesses varying between 
1.0-1.5 mm were tested on a differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) thermal analyzer 
in order to determine the specific heat capacity values of the composite. Similar tests 
were carried out for specimens made from the matrix material without fibers. 
79 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
Table IV. Properties of the constituent materials 
Elastic modulus, N/m2*) 
Poisson ratio*) 
Thermal expansion coefficient, 
°C- 1 
a 1 
a2 
*) Measured at 20°C 
V .. 
t 
<: 
":>-
r, 
rj 
a 
r_ 
E-glass 
69.9 X 109 
0.20 
5 X 10- 6 
E, 
t 
z 
w 
Em 
r, -i r; 
b 
Matrix 
3.2x 109 
0.35 
52.5 X 10-6 
109.0 X 10- 6 
Em 
mesophase 
45.8 X 109 
0.29 
2.4 X 10- 6 
Fig. 42a, b. Variation of (a) the mesophase Poisson ratio v,(r) and (b) modulus Elr) versus the 
polar radius r. 
Figures 42a and 42b present the four different variations of EL and Vv considered 
in our analysis. In order to decide which is the more appropriate fof describing the 
actual variation of these quantities in the mesophase, we have applied the theoretical 
results to real composites and compared the various values of EL and vL from the 
different distribution laws. Moreover, the volume fraction of the mesophase was 
calculated after evaluation of the specific heat capacity of the composite by· DSC 
measurements. For the specimens used in these tests, the measured value of LIe was 
p 
0.078 cal/g. DC, while the volume fraction of the mesophase was 5.1 %. 
Tables V and VI show the values for EL and Vv respectively, as calculated from the 
present theory, togeti,er with the experimental values obtained. The results show 
good agreement between theory and experiment. However, as seen from Tables V 
and VI, all the approximations made in the present theory concerning the law of 
variation of EL and vL of the mesophase material, give almost the same results for the 
overall EL and v L of the composite; so it seems that the final results are insensitive 
to a particular law of variation and that the main parameter affecting EL and vL is 
the mesophase. 
80 

00 
Table V. The Eccmodulus, the mesophase volume fraction Vj, and its maximum polar radius (r) for a E-glassjepoxy composite 
ECL 
Mesophase Dimensions 
Volume 
Radius 
vf 
Fraction 
(v) 
rj (/lm) 
0.0 
0 
6.0 
0.10 
1.2 x 10- 3 
6.036 
0.20 
4.92 x 10- 3 
6.097 
0.30 
11.07 x 10- 3 
F.110 
0.40 
19.68 x 10- 3 
6.146 
0.50 
30.75 x 10- 3 
6.182 
0.60 
44.2 x 10- 3 
6.217 
0.65 
52.0 x 10- 3 
6.235 
0.70 
60.27 x 10- 3 
6.254 
0.80 
78.72 x 10- 3 
6.288 
0.90 
99.63 x 10- 3 
6.323 
Longitudinal Elastic Modulus ECL (GNjm2 ) 
Mixture Linear 
Hyperbolic 
Logarithmic 
Law 
Law 
Law 
Law 
3.50 
3.50 
3.50 
3.50 
10.35 
10.39 
10.39 
10.39 
17.20 
17.37 
17.37 
17.37 
24.05 
24.43 
24.43 
24.43 
30.90 
31.57 
31.57 
31.58 
37.75 
38.80 
38.79 
38.81 
44.60 
46.11 
46.09 
46.10 
48.03 
49.75 
49.73 
49.74 
51.45 
53.50 
53.47 
53.48 
58.30 
60.98 
60.93 
60.95 
65.15 
68.53 
68.47 
68.49 
Parabolic 
Law 
3.50 
10.38 
17.31 
24.30 
31.35 
38.45 
45.60 
49.13 
52.81 
60.08 
67.39 
Unfolding 
Ref. 56 
Ref. 62 
model 
10.32 
17.23 
38.11 
45.12 
48.62 
52.15 
3.45 
10.4 
17.38 
38.28 
45.24 
48.14 ± 0.82 
52.15 ± 0.89 
56.16 ± 0.96 
Ref. 38 
3.50 
10.36 
17.22 
24.07 
30.92 
37.77 
44.62 
48.13 
51.47 
58.31 
65.16 
:< 
C/:l 
~. 
'" 8-
t:I 
'< 
::: 
'" 
~. 
~ 
o § 
S· 
'Tj 
0' 
<> .., 
n 
o 
S 
'"0 o 
~. 
Ii 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
Table VI. Values of the Poisson ratio of the E-glass epoxy composite 
vI 
Major Poisson Ratio VeL 
Mixture 
Linear 
Hyperbolic 
Logarithmic 
Parabolic 
Ref. 56 
Ref. 38 
Law 
variation 
variation 
variation 
variation 
0.0 
0.350 
0.350 
0.350 
0.350 
0.350 
0.350 
0.350 
0.10 
0.335 
0.335 
0.335 
0.335 
0.335 
0.330 
0.332 
0.20 
0.320 
0.320 
0.320 
0.320 
0.320 
0.320 
0.315 
0.30 
0.305 
0.304 
0.304 
0.304 
0.304 
0.300 
0.40 
0.290 
0.289 
0.289 
0.289 
0.289 
0.286 
0.50 
0.275 
0.273 
0.273 
0.273 
0.273 
0.280 
0.273 
0.60 
0.260 
0.257 
0.257 
0.257 
0.258 
0.260 
0.262 
0.65 
0.253 
0.249 
0.249 
0.249 
0.250 
0.256 
0.70 
0.245 
0.241 
0.241 
0.241 
0.242 
0.251 
0.80 
0.230 
0.224 
0.224 
0.224 
0.226 
0.241 
0.90 
0.215 
0.208 
0.208 
0.208 
0.210 
0.232 
The reason for this lack of sensitivity is that, at the ambient temperature of our 
tests, the extent of the mesophase region is too small, so that the law of variation of 
its mechanical properties is of secondary importance. However, 1t is believed that 
at higher temperatures, where the effect of the mesophase material on the overall 
behavior of the composite is more pronounced, the law of variation of the mechanical 
properties of the mesophase would be of cardinal importance and the deviations 
between theory and experiment would greatly depend on this law. 
It was also observed that, from the four proposed laws of variation, the parabolic 
one gives values for EL and vL which are in better agreement with the respective ex-
perimental data. 
In this study, the effect of the filler volume fraction, as a variable parameter, on the 
prediction of EL and vL has not been examined. On the other hand, the proposed 
model does not consider the effect ofthe interaction ofthe fibers. However, since the 
predicted values are in good agreement with experimental, this model constitutes 
a decisive step for a more extensive future study of the effect of the mesophase material 
on the overall mechanical behavior of fiber-composites. 
Finally, it may be concluded that, for good adhesion between phases, where the 
extent of the mesophase is limited, it suffices to assume a smooth transition of the 
mechanical properties from the fiber material to the matrix along the mesophase zone, 
without introducing any particular law of variation of these quantities. Furthermore 
the multiple-cylinder model, with a series of cylindrical shells of varying properties 
constituting the mesophase, is a valid and satisfactory model. 
V.2 Influence of the Mesophase on the Loss Tangent 
of Fiber Composites 
The subtile nature of the mesophase influences the mechanical behavior of a compo-
site. Theoretical solutions and the various models introduced attempted to describe 
the mechanical response of a composite. However, these attempts gave no information 
82 

V.2 Influence of the Mesophase on the Loss Tangent of Fiber Composites 
about what actually happens in the mesophase region. Information is needed about 
the actual structure of the mesophase in order to decide which model to use for de-
scribing the composite. On the other hand, a direct examination of the physicochemical 
structure of the mesophase is difficult to perform, since the isolation of the mesophase 
for a separate study is a difficult, if not impossible, task. 
In this paragraph a method is presented for experimentally detecting the mesophase 
by macroscopic dynamic experiments. By measuring the dynamic moduli in perfectly-
adhered and partly-adhered composite models, the deviations between the compo-
nents of dynamic moduli in the two types of gpecimens may be attributed to the in-
fluence of the different types of mesophase. The differences in the loss tangent of the 
two systems, which was calculated by these tests, indicates the degree of adhesion 
of the phases. 
' 
A variety of theories of adhesion have been developed to correlate the mechanical 
response of a composite in the way that the two materials interact across the interface 
boundary. The two most important types of bonding action can be classified as 
mechanical and chemical interactions. 
The mechanical interaction depends mainly on a frictional resistance due to the 
squeezing of the matrix around an inclusion. Differential thermal expansion in com-
posites can develop compressive forces around inclusions with relatively high frictional 
adhesion. 
The chemical interaction at a mesophase is developed by wetting the solid surface 
with a fluid. Two types of molecular bonding are developed : the primary, due to ionic, 
covalent, and metallic bonding, and the secondary bonding, due to dipole interactions 
and Van der Waals forces. 
The type of bonding which actually takes place around the inclusion strongly 
affects the structure of the bulk of the surrounding polymer matrix 11). A good ex-
planation for this phenonfenon may be that a variable number of fixed points is 
developed right on the surface due to the various types of surface adhesion. The num-
ber of fixed points, which are the boundary molecules that are not freely oriented 
and do not follow a Gaussian distribution, determines the form of the configuration 
unction of the material at the interface and is variable. This variation at the inter-
steel fiber 
epoxy 
matrix 
e 0.8 .... 
OU m .. 
silicon 
coated 
area 
E 
E 
o .... 
Type-I 
Type-IT 
Pure matrix 
Fig. 43. Types and dimensions of specimens used 
for the experiments. 
83 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
face accounts for the different mechanical properties of the matrix in the vicinity 
of inclusions. Furthermore, the shrinkage and the thermal stresses developed in the 
vicinity of inclusions strongly affect the polymerization process of the prepolymer 
and the degree of crosslinking of the matrix 29). 
In this section we consider the composite as a three-phase system consisting of 
a continuous fiber, considered as the elas'tic part, an epoxy polymer matrix correspond-
ing to the viscoelastic part, and an interlayer region includmg all the physicochemical 
irregularities 64). 
The effective modulus of elasticity of the composite, Ee, is given by: 
(162) 
Applying the correspondence principle for linear viscoelasticity, as developed 
by Hashln 29), the dynamic modulus of the mesophase may be related to the corre-
sponding moduli of matrix and fiber by: 
(163) 
(164) 
where primes and double primes denote the storage and loss moduli. 
If a dynamic experiment is performed near the glass-transition temperature for a 
composite specimen, by applying on this system a sinusoidal driving force of amplitude 
0"0 cos rot, the response of the system will be the sum of the responses of its various 
elements, and then the total dynamic modulus of the system will be defined from 
Eqs. (163) and (164). By solving these equations with respect to E; and E;', i.e., the 
dynamic moduli of the mesophase, the loss factor tan bi of the mesophase can be 
calculated: 
E~' 
E" -
E"V 
tan b. = _, = 
e 
m m 
, 
E: 
E' -
E v -
E'v 
, 
c 
II 
mm 
(1.65) 
The values of the various moduli E' and E" of the composite were measured with 
modulus-E' and -E" Dynastat and Dynalizer apparatuses. These apparatuses can 
apply a sinusoidal load of a maximum amplitude of 10 Kp on a cylindrical specimen 
mounted between a long, upper rod connected to a load cell, and a short, lower rod 
coupled to a displacement transducer. By passing a servocontrolled current through 
the coil of the transducer, the specimen is subjected to a sinusoidal load of prescribed 
amplitude and frequency. The frequency range selected was from 0.1 to 200 Hz for 
all specimens and the temperature was 110°C. 
The two types of specimens prepared for the tests were cylindrical containing a 
cylindrical steel wire core of a of 0.8 mm diameter. The shapes and dimensions of 
,the specimens are indicated in Fig. 43. The matrix of both specimens was made of an 
epoxy polymer plasticized with 15 % Thiokol LP-3 polysulfide. 
Since it is not possible to control the quality of bonding in a quantitative manner, 
care was taken to construct all the specimens under the same polymerization conditions 
with different areas of bonding between the metallic cylindrical inclusion and the 
84 

V.2 Influence of the Mesophase on the Loss Tangent of Fiber Composites 
epoxy matrix. In fact, in some specimens the area of the interface was prevented 
from a direct adhesion by coating it with a thin silicon film, as described earlier. 
This was the only difference between the two types of specimens. All specimens were 
subjected to a sinusoidal vibration mode of loading of prescribed amplitude at a 
temperature of 110 0 C. 
to,-----r--------;-----, 
t 
Ii 
00 
c 
x} 
{\r-
tan Ii;[ type -II 
' -
e:. 
Uj ;:u. 
tan lim! matrix) 
.E0.5 
..0 
c 
.E 
OL-____ ~ 
______ ~ 
______ _L ____ ~ 
-to 
o 
to 
2.0 
3.0 
logw -
Fig. 44. The loss-tangents tan c5m, tan c5i (Vi = O), tan c5i (Vi = vm) of the matrix and mesophase 
region vs. frequency. 
E 
Z 
0;-
0 " 
~ 
:r 
~ 
..., 
-5 
I 
8' 
_e 
..., 
t 
.e 
..., 
1.0 
t 
0.5 
0 
logw -
Fig. 45. The storage modulus E:n of the 
matrix, the expression (E; -
vtEt ) for 
type-I and -II specimens, and the ex-
pression viE; vs. frequency. Also, the va-
riation of the loss moduli E~ and E;' for 
type-I and -II specimens vs. frequency. 
85 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
The dynamic storage and loss moduli .of the pure epoxy matrix were also measured 
separately from specimens prepared from the same type of epoxy polymer with the 
same dimensions as those of the composites shown in Fig. 43. 
Assuming that the composite behaves like a three-phase system whose component 
moduli obey Eq. (162), and applying the correspondence principle, the dynamic 
constants of the mesophase can be related to the dynamic moduli of the rest of the 
matrix and the fiber. 
Some discrepancy is found between the storage modulus of the matrix and that 
of the well-adhered type-I composite, when the contribution of the fiber is subtracted. 
On the other hand, no discrepancy is observed between the storage modulus of the 
matrix and the storage modulus of poorly-adhered type-II composite, also after 
the contribution of the fiber is subtracted. 
The loss tangent of the mesophase material, given from Eq. (165), is shown in 
Fig. 44, plotted for the two extreme values of the volume fraction Vi of the mesophase. 
The first value of Vi was taken as Vm, i.e., the volume fraction of the pure matrix which 
physically expresses that the total matrix around the fiber is assumed to be affected. 
In this extreme case a discrepancy between tan 15m and tan (ji is observed. 
The second value of Vi was taken to approach zero, which physically means that 
a very small portion of the polymer matrix is affected around the fiber. In this case, 
the discrepancy between tan 15 i and tan 15m is increased. Any other value for Vi between 
these extreme values leads to a value of tan (ji which must lie between the values of 
tan (ji for the two extreme cases described above. 
From the values of storage and loss moduli of the adhered fiber specimen of type-II, 
shown in Figs. 45a and 45b, it is obvious that tan (ji is identical to tan 15m, An ex-
planation for such a behavior could be that there is no discrete region existing between 
the fiber and. the matrix, or that there is no stress transfer from the fiber to the matrix. 
However, type-I well-adhered fiber specimens reveal the existence of a discrete value 
for tan 15 i in the mesophase with separate mechanical properties. 
V.3 Dynamic Properties of Particulates 
This paragraph describes the effect of the filler content on the viscoelastic properties 
of particulates, using six different filler concentrations. Measurements were carried 
out at frequencies between 0.1 and 100 Hz and temperatures from 50°C to 120°C. 
Composite curves for both the storage and the loss moduli along a wide frequency 
range are traced by applying the time-temperature superposition principle. Moreover, 
the Takayanagi model was used for predicting the filler contribution on the storage 
compliance (D') at the transition region. Finally, the effect of the filler content on 
the relaxation spectra (H) and the glass-transition temperature were examined 65). 
Much research has been conducted on the dynamic mechanical properties of 
epoxy resins filled with various mineral fillers and glass beads 66). Using a rigid epoxy 
polymer matrix containing glass spheres, one observes that the relative shear moduli 
are lower than those predicted by the Mooney equation, but greater than those 
assumed by the Kerner equation 67). 
Relative moduli are lower for rigid matrices than for rubbery matrices because: 
(i) the modulus of the filler shows fewer differences than the modulus of the rigid 
86 

V.3 Dynamic Properties of Particulates 
matrix; (ii) the Poisson ratio is less than 0.5 for a rigid matrix; (iii) the thermal stresses 
in the matrix surrounding the particles reduce the apparent modulus of the polymer 
matrix, which is due to the nonlinear stress-strain behavior of the matrix. 
The effect of fillers on the mechanical properties in the transition zone was measured through 
the dynamic shear compl~ance and modulus of an uncrosslinked polyisobutylene (PIB), con-
taining small glass heads as a noninteracting filler 68). Also, the influence of the filler on the 
relaxation time spectra of epoxy resins, crosslinked with 10% polyethyleneamine, filled with 
quartz powder and hardened-resin powder at various concentrations, was examined 8). 
The dynamic properties of metal-filled epoxy resins were studied 69). Storage moduli and 
loss factors of a large number of composites were determined along with the effect of filler volume 
fraction and particle size, in particular for specimens exhibiting imperfect interfacial adhesion 
between matrix and filler. This dynamic analysis, however, was not extended over a wide frequen-
cy range; so the behavior of the particulates was limited to the glass-like state only, where the 
influence of the various amounts of filler was examined. 
The series of tests presented here were made over a wide range of temperatures 
and frequencies, covering the rubbery, glassy, and the transition regions. Especially, 
in the transition region it was found that the influence of the filler on the properties 
of the composite deviated from the corresponding behavior in the glass-like state. 
Moreover, the effect of the filler concentration on the dynamic storage and loss 
moduli of a particulate composite was examined, and the relaxation spectra, as 
functions of frequency, were set up for varying filler-volume fractions. 
The matrix material used was a diglycidylether of bisphenol A with a molecular 
weight between 370 and 384 g/mole and a viscosity of IS x 103 CP at 25 °C. The resin 
was cured with 8 wt. % triethylenetetramine, postcured at 100 °C for 48 hrs, and 
subsequently filled with iron particles of an average diameter of 150 j..lm 8). Six filler 
concentrations (0, 5, 10, 15,20, and 25 %) were used. A Dynastat and a Dynalizer 
apparatus were used for measuring E'(w) and E"(w). 
The measuring frequencies were from 0.1 to 100 Hz and temperatures ranged from 
3.0..------r----,-----, 
logw -
Fig. 46. The storage modulus E' versus 
frequency, plotted on a logarithmic scale, 
for various parametric values of tempera-
tures in the matrix. 
87 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
50 DC to 130 DC, in order to cover the entire viscoelastic spectrum for all filler con-
centrations. 
Figure 46 shows the values of the storage modulus E', measured along a logarithmic 
frequency scale with varying temperatures for the pure matrix 70). Results for the 
filled systems were similar: the storage modulus generally increases with increasing 
10.--------.,-------~---------, 
t 
t 
o....J 
en 
..2 
9 t-------CF1'O+_ 
i& 
uF = 0 
• 
u F = 0.05 
X 
UF = 0.10 
0 
uF = 0.15 
6 
UF = 0.20 
0 
UF = 0.25 
7 ~------~L-______ ~ 
________ ~ 
-4 
0 
4 
8 
12 
log w -. 
Fig. 47. Composite curves for the 
storage modulus E' versus fre-
quency, plotted on a logarithmic 
scale and reduced to To = 110 °C, 
for various filler volume fractions. 
9.5 r--------
--,------------,------------, 
8.5 
~ 
1Jf = 0 
• 
Uf = 0.05 
x 
u f = 0.10 
0 
Uf = 0.15 
6 
V f = 0.20 
0 
Uf = 0.25 
6.5 
-4 
0 
4 
8 
logw -. 
Fig. 48. Composite curves for the loss modulus Elf versus frequency, plotted on a logarithmic 
scale and reduced to To = 110°C, for various filler volume fractions. 
88 

V.3 Dynamic Properties of Particula tes 
filler concentration and frequency for a given temperature. By using the time-tem-
perature superposition principle 30), the data were reduced to a reference tempera-
ture of 110°C. 
The superposed data for each filled system are shown in Fig. 47. The same procedure 
was followed for the loss moduli E", which are illustrated in Fig. 48. From Fig. 47 
one can observe an increasing effect of the filler contribution on the storage modulus 
in the glass-like, as well as in the rubber-like state. A similar effect was not detected 
the transition zone. 
Moreover, the storage compliances D' of the composite materials were calculated 
from the experimental data of storage and loss moduli E' and E" by using the simple 
transformation relationship. The values of D'(w) are plotted against the logarithmic 
frequency in Fig. 49. Also, this figure contains a comparison between experimental 
values of D' with those obtained from the Takayanagi model 47). Dashed lines corre-
spond to VI = 0.05, 0.l0, 0.20 and 0.25. Full lines pertain to VI = 0 and VI = 0.15 
respectively. 
Finally, the first approximation of the relaxation spectra H for the storage com-
pliance D' were calculated from the composite curves of Fig. 47 by applying the first 
approximation method 70). Since a comparison of the relaxation spectra for the filled 
composite and the corresponding pure epoxy resin should be made on the basis of 
the effective or deformable volume, this comparison should be made in terms of the 
number of polymer chains per unit effective volume. Therefore, the values of the 
first-approximation spectra H(w) must be corrected by the factor vr Figure 50 shows 
the values of Hr(w) for each filler content in the range of log w between -4 and 
+ 5 and the result of this reduction, representing the difference between Hm(w) for 
a pure matrix and Hr(w) for each respective composite system. The spectra are essen-
tially shifted toward lower frequencies with increasing filler concentration, but the 
t 
"3 
b 
01 
~ 
-7 
Exper. Points 
• \)t = 0.05 
x 
\)f = 0.10 
{!,. 
\)f = 0.20 
-8 
0 
\If = 0.25 
-9 
-10 '-------'-------'------' 
-2 
o 
2 
4 
6 
8 
log w -. 
Fig. 49. Variation of the storage 
compliance D' versus freq uency, 
plotted on a logarithmic scale 
for various filler volume frac-
tions. The experimental points 
are compared with the results 
derived from Takayanagi's mo-
del (Eq. (166». Dashed lines 
correspond to vf = 0.05, 0.10, 
0.20 and 0.25 whereas full lines 
pertain to vf = o and vf = 0.15. 
89 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
8.5 r--------,,-----
-
----,---------. 
t 7.5 
3 
6.5 t-I"'--a--h~~__f----
~ \)f = 0 
• 
\)f = 0.05 
X \)f" 0.10 
o 
\)f = 0.15 
£> 
\)f = 0.20 
o \)f = 0.25 
5.5 ~------'---------'-----------' 
-4 
o 
4 
8 
log w ---+ 
Fig. 50. Relaxation spectra, reduced by vf, plotte<;l versus frequency for farious filler volume 
fractions. 
slope of the curves seem to have a value near 0.5, which approaches zero in the transi-
tion region for each system. 
For describing the viscoelastic properties of a two-phase system, Takayanagi 47) 
introduced an equivalent model representing the mixing state of a polymeric mixture. 
There, the gross complex modulus E* of a system in which particles are dispersed 
is expressed by 
[ 
q> 
1 - q>]-l 
E* = 
* 
* + --*-
(I-A)Em+AEf 
Em 
(166) 
where E! and Ej are the complex moduli of the matrix and the dispersed particles, 
respectively; A and ffJ are parameters representing the state of the mixture and the 
composition of the sample, of which only one is independent ; the other must be cal-
culated from AffJ =: vf' where vf is the volume fraction of the dispersed phase, as 
indicated in Fig. 51. 
If Eq. (166) is required to satisfy at the same time the Kerner equation 71 , 72) for 
the reinforcing a.:tion of spherical fillers, the parameters A and ffJ take the special 
values: 
(167) 
But, from the experimental results of Fig. 47, it follows that Kerner's equation is 
not satisfied in the transition region, because the increasing effect of the filler contribu-
tion on the respective moduli of the composite material is not annihilated, as Kerner's 
90 

IT 
• : Inclusions 
~
: layer attached 
to the inclusion 
V.3 Dynamic Properties of Particulates 
Fig. 51. Schematic of the mixing state 
of the filled system (left side) and its 
equivalent model (right side), according 
to the Takayanagi model. 
e.quation predicts and requires. Then the quantities A and rp are chosen to satisfy 
only the relationship Arp = vf and Eq. (166) in order to be in good agreement with 
the experimental data. 
Another important point is that the Guth-Smallwood equation for the reinforce-
ment of rubber is not applicable in this case 73,74). Indeed, this equation is not able 
to attribute the experimental data for the filled system to those of the matrix. There-
fore, this sufficiently indicates that strong bonds exist between filler and matrix. 
The above-mentioned reasons make clear that neither the Kerner nor Guth-Small-
woqd equations are applicable in the case studied. Thus, only the Takayanagi model 
remains for sufficiently describing the behavior of these materials. 
Applying this model, the following remarks should be made: 
From Fig. 47 it follows that there is a filler-volume fraction (15 %) yielding a maximum 
contribution in the storage modulus, while higher filler-volume fractions, lying in 
the range of20 and 25 % again yield lower contributions than the IS'-percent fraction. 
By taking this fact into account, the equivalent model, representing the two-phase 
system, considers as a dispersed phase not only the iron particles, but a composite 
system consisting of fillers and a part of the matrix strongly connected with particles, 
as indicated in Fig. 51 by the hatched circles. This dispersed phase with maximum 
contribution to the storage modulus is then considered as occupying the total volume 
of the specimen. Hence the dynamic modulus of this dispersed phase II is taken as 
that corresponding to the IS-percent composite. As the filler-volume fraction in-
creases, the amount of matrix necessary to form a highly crosslinked region around 
each particle is reduced. This fact inverses the effect of the filler on the viscoelastic 
properties, i.e., it prevents the shifting Of the transition region to lower frequencies. 
By taking this into account when analyzing the experimental data from the equi-
valent model, an interchange of the phases should be made. This means that for the 
Table vn. Values of parameters A a;}d qJ 
0.05 
0.10 
0.20 
0.25 
0.34 
0.7 
0.7 
0.35 
rp 
0.95 
0.9 
0.93 
0.9 
91 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
20-percent and 2S-percent filler-volume fractions the dispersed phase II must be taken 
as the pure matrix, while phase I is interchanged with the previous phase II. 
Applying Eq. (166) in the case of S- and 10-percent filler contents, the following 
assumptions relative to A and qJ should be made (Table VII): 
i) The dispersed phase II for the S- and lO-percent content is considered to have 
volume fractions of v2 = 0.33 and v2 = 0.66, respectively. 
ii) The volume fraction of the dispersed phase, f, increases linearly with respect 
to the filler-volume fraction vf and takes a maximum value, equal to unity, for vf 
= O.1S. 
iii) An analogous procedure is followed for 20- and 2S-percent volume-fractions. 
By using Eq. (166), the complex moduli for the S- and lO-percent volume-fractions 
were calculated, where E:: and E; are assumed to be the complex moduli of the pure 
matrix and the composite with IS-percent volume-fraction, respectively. In order 
to apply Eq. (166) to the 20- and 2S-percent volume-fractions, the pure matrix is 
interchanged with the dispersed phase, while the matrix phase I is now assumed to 
have the properties of the IS-percent volume-fraction. Consequently, E:: takes the 
value of the IS-percent composite and E; takes the value of the pure matrix. Then: 
cp 
(l-cp) 
E' + iE" 
(l -
A) (E~ + iE:~) + ACEi + iEI) + E~ + iE~ 
( 168) 
After separating real and imaginary parts of the compliance D*( w) from Eq. (168), 
the expression for the storage compliance takes the form: 
,E' 
cp[AE{ + (1 - 1) E:,,] 
(1 -
cp) E~ 
D = 
= '  
+ ----,-:,-------c-
£,2 + E"2 
[lEi + (1- 1) E;"r + [AE, + (1 - l)E~y 
E~2 + E? 
(169) 
Figure 49 shows a comparison between the experimental compliances D'(w) and 
those calculated from Eq. (169). 
To explain the parallel shifting of the relaxation spectra, presented in Fig. SO, 
towards lower frequencies, the following may apply: 
The presence of filler causes the development of a separate region in the polymer 
matrix which is strongly connected with the iron particles, being characterized by a 
lower degree of mobilization as compared to the bulk polymer. 
This new redistribution of phases may be explained on the basis of strong adhesion 
bonds developed around fillers, without necessarily creating large differences in the 
degree of crosslinkiLlg in the two regions. If this latter effect also exists, then a variation 
of the slope in the relaxation spectra would appear towards lower frequencies. The 
individual plots in Fig. SO seem to preserve the slope of O.S only up to the transition 
regIOn. 
The shifting of the relaxation spectra with varying filler contents reflects a shift of 
the transition zone on a frequency scale and, therefore, a varying of the magnitude 
of the internal friction coefficient, which can be calculated from the square-root law 
for H(w) 71). 
92 

V.3 Dynamic Properties of Particulates 
It is obvious from Fig. 50 that the friction coefficient is increased with filler-volume 
fractions up to 15 %. From the same figure one may conclude, however, that this 
increasing effect is reversed for 20- and 25-percent volume-fractions. What actually 
happens in this case is that increasing filler concentration reduces the diffusional 
effects, which control the formation of the structure of the polymer network and, 
consequently, causes a reduction of the degree of crosslinking. This fact results in 
an increment of the mobility of the chains with a parallel reduction in the magnitude 
of the monomeric friction coefficient. From Figs. 47 and 48, it may follow that in 
the transition region where log OJ varies between -2.0 and 2.0 the storage and loss 
moduli decrease for filler concentrations over 15 %. 
The reinforcement effect of fillers in the rubbery state is adequately explained by 
the Guth-Smallwood equation 73,74): 
(170) 
where Of is the volume fraction of the filler particles. 
Actually, this equation, which is based on the assumption that there is no inter-
action between filler and matrix, shows the increasing effect with respect to the filler-
volume fraction or By applying this equation to the rubbery state, it is possible to 
reduce the moduli E' of the composite specimens to the modulus E~ of the pure matrix. 
This is a good indication that a strong interaction between filler and matrix exists. 
The Kerner equation is also often used to describe the reinforcement action of 
spherical filler particles 73), which shows how the modulus of a filled material increases 
with filler concentration. Therefore, this equation could be applied to the glass-like 
state, where this increasing effect is experimentally testified. In the transition region, 
however, the Kerner equation, as well as the Guth-Smallwood equation, could not 
be applied to explain our experimental data. 
The most convenient model describing the anomalous behavior of the storage 
modulus, as far as the transition region concerns, appears then to be the Takayanagi 
model 47). Applying this model to the transition region, it is possible to obtain data 
which are in good agreement with experiment, as it is shown in Fig. 49. Deviations 
appearing in this figure in the high-frequency range were expected because this range 
concerns the glassy region. 
The influence of the filler on the glass-transition temperature Tg is referred to in 
Figs. 47 and 48. In dynamic measurements, Tg is correlated with the particular fre-
quency, where a maximum value for the loss modulus, E", occurs. It is known that 
an increase of the frequency OJg, where this maximum occurs, corresponds to a de-
crease of Tg• Figure 48 shows that as the filler concentration increases up to 15 % 
a shifting of OJg to lower frequencies appears. For filler concentrations of 20 and 25 %, 
the reverse is observed. 
An analogous conclusion could "le drawn from Fig. 34, where the a~pearance of 
the transition region against a frequency scale follows the same behavior. This fact 
means that Tg increases with an increasing filler concentration, taking a maximum 
around a volume fraction of 15 %. For larger amounts of filler a lowering effect in 
the glass-transition temperature was apparent. 
This effect, theoretically studied in Ref. 75, occurs in highly crosslinked materials 
with strong interactions between filler and matrix which are characterized by the 
93 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
formation of two separate regions with different segmental mobilities, as was men-
tioned above for relaxation spectra and different glass-transition temperatures. 
It is a matter of combining the mobilities of the two separate regions in order to 
determine T of the composite. Up to a IS-percent volume-fraction the polymer 
g 
region around the filler is characterized by a lower mobilization than the bulk of the 
matrix and, consequently, by a higher T . For higher concentrations, this region has a 
9 
larger mobilization, for the reasons mentioned in the relaxation spectra analysis, 
and this effect causes a lowering of the T values for the composite material. 
g 
. 
V.4 Mechanical Properties of Particulates 
The stress-strain behavior of particulates is quite complicated and, except for the 
case of filled rubbers, there is no satisfactory theory predicting the response of such 
materials. Especially in the case of glassy polymers reinforced with rigid fillers, there 
are many unexplained phenomena, due to a large number of parameters affecting 
their mechanical behavior. 
Amongst these parameters are the strength of the bond between filler particles 
and the surroun~ing viscoelastic matrix, the filler volume fraction, the size and size 
distribution of the fillers, the tensile rate of deformation, the shape of the inclusions, 
and others. 
Most theoretical conceptions of particulates consider filler particles as spheres of 
approximately uniform size with smooth surfaces. However, in reality the particle 
size is nonuniform and the particle surfaces not generally smooth. Rather, the sur-
faces have many crevices in which portions of the macromolecules of the polymeric 
matrix are trapped. This situation results in a nonuniform strain in the vicinity of 
the filler particle as well as to a nonhomogeneous localized behavior. 
The degree of roughness of particle surfaces, as well as the strength of the existing 
chemical bonds and that of van-der-Waals forces determine the adhesion efficiency 
between the filler particles and the polymeric matrix. Depending on the adhesion 
quality, fillers may cause a dramatic decrease in the elongation at fracture and a 
respective increase of the elastic modulus in cases with strong bonds. Altermatively, 
fillers may cause opposite phenomena in cases with weak bonds. On the other hand, 
there are few published measurements of the effect of the rate of extension in tensile-
rupture tests. 
In this paragraph the strain-rate dependency of the tensile mechanical properties 
of iron-epoxy composites 31) will be investigated. 
Many semi-empirical equations have been developed predicting the elastic modulus 
of spherical-particle reinforced materials. In most, a perfect adhesion between phases 
was considered. 
One of the theories concerning inclusions in a viscous matrix was put forth by Einstein 76), 
who considered rigid-spherical, non-solvated particles in a Newtonian viscous fluid and expressed 
the modulus in the form: 
E 
--". = I + au 
E 
f 
m 
(171 ) 
94 

V.4 Mechanical Properties of Particulates 
where IX is a constant. As usual, subscript c denotes a composite property, subscript m a matrix 
property, and sUbscript fa filler property. The constant IX was found to be 2.5 when the viscosity 
was considered to be independent of the size of the spheres. On the other hand, Guth 73) and 
Smallwood 74) suggested Eq. (170), and Kerner 72) gave the relation: 
{ 
vfG f 
} 
{ 
rill 
} 
(7 -
5\'111) Gill + (8 -
IOvIII) G f 
+ 
15( 1 -
VIII) 
{ 
v fGIII 
} 
{ 
t'III 
} 
(7 - 5 VIII) Gill + (8 -
IOvIII) Gill + 15(1 -
"m) 
(172) 
which, for inclusions more rigid than matrices, simplifies to: 
(173) 
where v is the Poisson ratios of the various phases and G the shear modulus of the material. 
For cases where there is no adhesion between the two phases, Einstein proposed: 
E 
~ = I + v 
E 
f 
m 
(174) 
while Kerner suggested: 
(175) 
A relation taking into account the effect of adhesion efficiency between the two phases was 
suggested by Sato and Furukawa 7,77,78) 
(176) 
where y = V}/3 and k is an adhesion factor, which becomes zero for perfect adhesion and I for 
zero adhesion. 
Many other attempts were largely empirical, requiring undetermined constants in order 
to fit an experimental curve. Mooney 79) gave the equation: 
Ec 
( 2.5vf ) 
-=exp ---
Em 
1 - pVf 
(177) 
where P is a hydrodynamic interaction factor, defined as the ratio of the apparent volume 
occupied by the filler over the true volume of the filler. This factor takes values from I to 2, 
depending on the type of particle dish~bution into the matrix material. 
On the other hand, in the equation proposed by Eilers 79), expressed by: 
(178) 
k and S' are constants, usually taken as 1.25 and 1.20, respectively. 
95 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
The effect of the filler concentration on the elastic modulus is also expressed by an empirical 
relation proposed by Bills et aI. 81): 
EcfEm = 1 + [2.5u,/(l -
Bu,)] + (1/2!) [2.Su,/(l -
Bu,)f + ... 
which is similar to Eq. (170) and to the Eilers relation 79.80), given by: 
where k and S' are experimental constants. 
(179) 
(180) 
A semi-empirical single-parameter equation, describing the moduli of particulate systems, 
has been formulated by Narkis 82) as follows: 
(181) 
where k* is an empirical parameter related to a stress concentration factor with usual values in 
the range of 1.4 to 1.7. 
Analytical equations for the elastic modulus of a composite containing spherical fillers have 
also been developed by Takahashi et al. 32), for perfect adhesion: 
(182) 
and for free slipping: 
For spherical fillers with cavities around their surfaces, the same authors proposed: 
E, 
3 
(6+lOvm)(1-vm)Ef +(9+Svm)(l-v,)Em 
(184) 
Em = 1- 2 (1- vm) S(I + vm)(I- vm) E, + (7 -
Svm) (1- v,) Em Vf" 
The effect of adhesion between phases on the elastic modulus has also been studied in Ref. 6S. 
The concept of the mesophase has been used to predict the elastic modulus of a particulate 44). 
According to the' latter, the modulus of elasticity is given by: 
(18S) 
where subscript i refers to ,nesophase properties and k is a parameter describing the degree of 
bonding between filler and mesophase. For perfect bonding, with k = 1, this relation coincides 
with Eq. (162). 
Various other equations have been developed for the elastic modulus of materials filled with 
spherical inclusions. However, none of them takes into account the effect of strain rate. The 
only study made to date which gives evidence of a dependency of the mechanical properties 
on the tensile rate of deformation, is Ref. 83. 
96 

V.4 Mechanical Properties of Particulates 
Moreover, several theories have been developed on the strength of filled polymeric systems. 
Leidner and Woodhams 84) and Pigott and Leidner 85) proposed a semi-empirical equation: 
(186) 
where (J uc is the ultimate strength of the composite, a and b are constants, where b can assume 
either positive or negative values. Nicolais and Mashelkar 86) proposed: 
(187) 
where n < I, (J 
is the strength of the unfilled matrix, and b is a constant, which can assume 
only positive va.'rues. They found b = 1.21 (Jum and n = 2/3, which are more appropriate values 
for the two constants. Schrager 87) introduced a model resulting in an· equation different in 
nature from either of the two previous ones. According to this model, a volume of matrix IJ/ 
is associated with each embedded spherical particle, which is affected by the presence of the 
embedded particle, with: 
(188) 
where the experimental constant r was found to be 2.66. However, this model is valid only over 
a limited range of volume fraction. 
Equation (188) is similar to that proposed by Passmore et al. 88) for porous systems: 
(Joe = (JrIJ exp (-aP). 
(189) 
Here, (J uc is the tensile strength of the composite, (J rIJ the tensile strength when the material is 
nonporous, a is a constant, and P the porosity, defined as the volume fraction of holes in the 
material. 
The deformation of particulates at fracture has been treated by several theories, all being 
similar in nature. Smith 89), using a model of spheres in a close-packed array, suggested: 
(190) 
where ec is the ultimate strain of the composite. In the absence of fiUer, this equation reduces 
to ec = em and, on the other hand, when the volume-fraction of spheres in a cubic close-packed 
array is IJ, = 0.74, then ec = O. 
In a similar equation Bueche 90) used a model of cubic particles apparently in a cubic array: 
(191) 
Finally, Ziegel et al. 91), have taken into account the effect of bound or immobilized matrix 
at the interface, resulting in: 
(192) 
where .1r is the increase in particle radius, R, due to surface interactions. It was found that 
[1 + (.1r/RW] is of the order of 1.75, while in Ref. 87 the same quantity was found to be 1.66. 
The relations derived from the models presented to date are based largely on ex-
perimental evidence rather than theory and they summarize the general behavior 
of the stress-strain properties of particulates. These relations also predict the effects 
of several factors, such as filler-volume fraction, particle size, conglomeration, as 
well as the effects of interfacial adhesion on the mechanical behaviour of particulates. 
The large number of equations on this subject indicates that none of these adequately 
describes the complicated phenomenon of the mode of fracture of particulates. 
97 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
Furthermore, most of the relations given in the literature are semi-empirical, while 
none predicts the effect of the rate of deformation on the stress-strain behavior of 
particulates. Moreover, the various factors influencing the mechanical behavior of 
this class of composites are difficult to separate and evaluate in a quantitative manner. 
The above-described difficulties call for a comparison between theories and experi-
ments, to elucidate some aspects of the mechanical behavior of particulates. Here, 
experimental stress-strain results in particulates are compared with the respective 
theoretical predictions, in order to study the effect of the rate of deformation on their 
mechanical properties. This investigation penetrates into the microstructure of these 
materials with the help of fracture t9pography studies, giving some qualitative in-
sight into their rupture behavior. 
In all tests performed for this purpose the matrix material was a cold-setting system 
based on a diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A, cured with 8 % triethylenetetramine. The 
epoxy matrix was filled with metal particles of average diameter 150 J..lffi. (For details 
on the manufacturing procedures and the composites thermomechanical behavior 
also see Refs. 8,9 & 51). 
Tensile measurements were carried out with a conventional Instron-type tester 
at room temperature. The specimens were tested at five different extension rates. 
Seven different filler concentrations were used. Ten specimens per strain-rate and per 
filler-volume fraction were tested and the values given correspond to their arithmetic 
mean value. Scanning reflection electron micrographs and optical micrographs 
elucidated the fracture topography. 
From the series of families of stress-strain curves in tensile tests executed on the 
iron-epoxy composites the effect of the filler-volume fraction on the mechanical 
behavior of particulates can be derived for the entire range of strain rates. The form 
2.25.----.-----'1----.----.----, 
• 
C:: 10-4 m/min 
2.00 
0 
C :2x10-4 m/min 
--;-----:. ..... ,.------1 
x 
c =5x10-4 
" 
" 
C :10x10-4 
o 
c :20x10-4 
~ 
150 ~ ..... ci~~~;~~~~i~~~L}:~:::.::qr3J1 
tOO 
I 
~ 
1 Sato-Furukawa 
I 
0. 50 L----.l...-----'------'------L:----~ 
o 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
0.25 
\Jf
-
Fig. 52. Effect of filler volume fraction on relative modulus of elasticity for different values 
of the rate of extension and a comparison with various theoretical predictions: Guth-Small-
wood, Mooney (/1 = 1.4), Kerner (Eq. (173)), Einstein, Sato-Furukawa, and Kerner (Eq. (175)). 
98 

V.4 Mechanical Properties of Particulates 
of these curves suggests that the gross behavior of the composite exhibits an obvious 
degree of nonlinearity. Because of the high stress- and strain-concentrations, which 
exist locally between fillers, the elastic limit of the matrix material may be exceeded 
long before the gross behavior of the composite exhibits the nonlinear response. 
On the other hand, the observed nonlinear response may be due, at least in part, 
to viscoelastic effects. Moreover, as the applied loading exceeds the yield point of the 
composite, the material may exhibit a nonlinear time-independent deformational 
response. It is obvious that an elastic analysis is only valid for the initial portion 
of the stress-strain response. 
Furthermore, as the filler-volume fraction is increased, a increased linear elastic 
response is observed. This was expected, since the fJ11er material is strongly elastic, so 
that, as the filler-volume fraction is increased, the viscoelastic response of the com-
posite decreases. 
In Fig. 52 the moduli Ee of the composite, normalized to the respective moduli Em 
of the matrix material, were plotted against the filler-volume fraction for varying 
rates of extension. Theoretical curves are also plotted in the same diagram for com-
parison. The experimental results lie within the range of prediction by the semi-
empirical models. 
The dependence of the normalized elastic moduli of the various particulates on 
the strain rate is presented in Fig. 53. These relative moduli decrease slightly with 
the rate of extension in the low region, with a minimum at c = 0.001 m min -1, and 
then increase progressively above this value. This behavior is observed for all filler 
concen trations. 
Figure 54 shows the stress at fracture, normalized to the stress at fracture of the 
matrix material, plotted against the filler-volume fraction for different values of the 
rate of extension. The results show a very complex behavior of the values of the 
relative breaking stress. However, all experimental points lie within theoretical 
predictions, as it may be observed from the theoretical curves plotted in the same 
diagram. The observed scattering of experimental data is due to the large number 
of parameters affecting the ultimate tensile stress. One of the most important para-
2.0..------.-----, 
'Uf =0.20 
Uf = 0.10 
... 'Uf =0.05 
OL-------~--------~ 
o 
10 
20 
c x104(m/min) ---+ 
Fig. 53. Effect of the rate of deformation 
on the relative modulus of elasticity Eel Em 
for various filler volume fractions. 
99 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
1.5 
• ( = 10'4 
m/min 
0 
c =2)(10-4 
X 
C :5)(10'4 
(;. 
c = 10)(10'4 
0 
C =20 xl0-~ 
i 
E !l 
tf 
0.5 
(() (E) 
O L-------~--------~--------~------~ 
o 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
Fig. 54. Effect of the filler volume fraction on the relative breaking stress for different values 
ofrate of extension and a comparison with various theoretical predictions, A Schrager, Eq. (188) ; 
B Nielsen ; C Bueche-Kerner; D Bueche-Eilers-Van Dyck; E Leidner-Woodhams, Eq. (186). 
meters is the bond strength between the filler particles and the matrix. Depending 
on this parameter, several mechanisms of failure may develop. 
Another factor affecting both the reinforcing action of fillers and the crack-pro-
pagation mode with change in the rate of deformation and constant temperature, 
1.5 
• c ; 10'4 m/min 
0 
c = 2)(10'4 m/min 
x 
c = 5)(10'4 m/min 
(;. 
c = 10)( 10-4 m/min 
0 
c =20)(10'4m/min 
& " 
~ 
~ • 
u 
(71) 
" 
w 
( 89) 
b L--------L--------~--------~------~ 
o 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
lJf 
-
Fig. 55. Effect of filler volume fraction vf on the relative ultimate elongation for different values 
of rate of extension (solid curves derived from theories of Smith [89] and Nielsen [71]). 
100 

V.4 Mechanical Properties of Particulates 
is the ratio of the particle diameter to the diameter of the fracture zone developed at 
the crack tip. The smaller the particle diameter compared to the dimensions of the 
fracture zone, the smaller the particle effect on the path of the crack. On the contrary, 
the possibility of a crack arrest is greater as the particle size becomes larger. Crack 
arrest is also observed at aggregations. 
The dependence of the relative ultimate elongation on the filler-volume fraction 
is presented in Fig. 55, where the two curves (with full lines) derived from the theories 
of Smith 89) and Nielsen 71) are also plotted for comparison. Most of experimental 
points lie above the theoretical predictions, showing the same trend of dependency 
as the respective, theoretically predicted values. Composites subjected to high rates 
of deformation have relative ultimate elongations which are much greater than anti-
cipated by the theory given by Egs. (190) and (191). 
t 
-.i 
t 
e i 
1.0..------..,-------, 
..... "1 = 0.03 
--.-----"Y 
r ____ ~ 
..... vl ;0.05 
i---=~---_'t==--=~,..ul =0.10 
,."1 = 0.20 
OL-______ -L ______ 
~ 
o 
10 
c)(104(m/min) --+ 
20 
Fig. 56. Effect of rate of extension on 
relative ultimate elongation for various 
filler volume fractions v f. 
15 ,....-----~----.------------, 
• (= 10-~ 
0 
c = 2,,10-4 m/min 
x 
c= 
5)(1O -~ 
D. 
c = 10,,10-4 
10 
0 
( = 20,,10-4 
:; 0.5 \---" 
• 
O L-------~----______________ ~ 
________ ~ 
o 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
V, 
_ 
Fig. 57. Effect of filler volume fraction on relative work of rupture for different values of rate 
of extension c. 
101 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
The relative ultimate elongation decreases as the rate of deformation increases, 
as shown in Fig. 56, where relative ultimate elongations are plotted against rates of 
deformation for various filler-volume fractions. 
The change in the work of rupture per unit volume by the incorporation of the 
filler may be taken as a basic characteristic of the reinforcing action of fillers in poly-
mers, which are in the high elastic state. Figure 57 shows the variation of the relative 
work of fracture of the iron-epoxy composites against the filler-volume fraction. 
Fillers which do not increase the work of rupture count as inactive, while those which 
do increase it count as active 11). According to this definition, our fillers must be 
characterized as inactive, since the relative work of rupture decreases with increasing 
filler-volume fraction. The magnitude of this effect depends on the nature of the filler. 
Broutman and Sahu 92), using glass beads of an average diameter of 30 J.1.m in an 
epoxy resin, found that, as the filler-volume fraction increases, the fracture energy 
increases, until at some critical volume fraction it begins to decrease. However, 
in own studies no maximum of the fracture energy was found. 
Another factor affecting the fracture energy is the adhesion between the filler and 
the resin; a modification of the adhesion can have a strong effect on the fracture 
energy, although here the results are somewhat conflicting 90-93). 
V.5 Evaluation of Static and Dynamic Moduli 
in Particulates 
Here we examine the static and dynamic elastic moduli of particulate composites 
consisting of two phases, one of which has isotropic-elastic and the other linear-
viscoelastic properties. The model used defines the approximate equations for deter-
mining the elastic modulus of a composite from the properties of the constituent 
materials. 
The theoretical analysis presented in this section is based on the following assump-
tions 30): 
i) The matrix and the fillers are elastic, isotropic, and homogeneous. 
ii) Fillers are perfectly spherical in shape. 
iii) Fillers are large in number and their distribution is uniform, so that the composite 
may be regarded as a quasi-homogeneous, isotropic material. 
iv) The volume fraction of fillers is sufficiently small so that the interaction among 
fillers may be neglected. 
v) The deformations applied to the composite are small enough to maintain linearity 
of stress-strain relations. 
In order to find tii~ relationships expressing the elastic modulus, the classical 
theory of elasticity is app;ied to the representative volume element, whose mechanical 
properties equal the average properties of the particulate and which can be represented 
by two concentric spheres as introduced by the Hashin and Rosen model 59). 
A hollow sphere is considered, with an inner radius rf = IX and an outer radius 
r m = {3. Let a pressure Po be applied to the inner surface and a pressure PIon the outer 
surface. This simulates the matrix. A solid sphere of radius rf = IX, to which a pressure 
102 

V.5 Evaluation of Static and Dynamic Moduli in Particulates 
Po is applied, simulates the inclusion, as is indicated in Fig. 37. Pressure Po is the inter-
action between matrix and filler and PI is the applied pressure on the matrix. Because 
of the spherical symmetry, it is advantageous to use spherical coordinates (rp, 9, r); 
then, of the three components of the displacement vector U , Un, U , only U is different 
tp 
Q' 
r 
r 
from zero. 
The solution to this problem is furnished by a stress function expressed by 16): 
q, = Lr- I + M? . 
Applying this function for matrix and filler, separately, leads to: 
To avoid infinite stresses at r = 0, the constant A must assume A = O. 
Thus: 
The displacements are expressed by: 
Uy • f = BrIG f' 
and: 
The stresses are given by: 
2(1 + vf) 
(Jllf= 
B, 
2(1+Vf) 
(J 
= 
B 
. 
1 - 2v f 
cp.f 
1 - 2v f 
2C 
2(1 + vrn) 
(Jy m = --:3 + 
D, 
. 
r 
1 - 2v .. 
C 
2(1 + vm) 
(Jcp,m = -
3 + --- D . 
r 
1 -
2vm 
The boundary conditions are: 
At 
r = [3: (Jr, .. = -PI' 
(193) 
(194) 
(195) 
(196) 
(197) 
103 

V. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
The solution of this system gives the constants B, C, and D as follows: 
(198) 
(199) 
(200) 
By substituting these values into Eqs. (193) and (194), the following expressions for 
the displacements result: 
U 
- _r_ [_ (1 -
2v J) 
] __ Po(1 -
2v J) r 
r,J -
2GJ 
1 + vJ 
Po 
-
EJ 
(201) 
a3b3(po -
PI) (1 + v"J 1 
(1 -
2vm) (a 3po -
b3pd 
ur• m = 
-
+ 
r 
2(b3 -
a3) Em 
r2 
Em 
(b 3 _ 
a 3) 
• 
(202) 
The boundary conditions must account for continuity of displacements at the inter-
face and therefore must satisfy the following relations: 
For r = a: U 
= U 
r,m 
r.f 
and 
where the ratio ~ /b3 , expressing the filler-volume fraction vJ' was introduced. Solving 
Eq. (203) with respect to the ratio A of pressures (A = PO/PI) leads to: 
The elastic modulus Ee of the composite can be derived by balancing the energies 
applied to a representative volume element. Then the strain energy applied to the 
composite must be equal to the sum of the strain energies in the filler and matrix, i.e. : 
+ ~ f 
(CTr.mer,m + CTS,meS,m + CTrp,merp,m) dVm 
(205) 
Vm 
where Ke is the bulk modulus of the composite. 
104 

V.5 Evaluation of Static and Dynamic Moduli in Particulates 
By introducing the relations holding for the spherical components of stresses and 
strains in the inclusion and the matrix materials into Eq. (205), one obtains after 
some algebra 30): 
2(1 - 2vJ 
Ee 
EJ 
+ _1 {VJCI -
A)2 (1 + vm) + 2(AVf -
1)2 (1 -
2Vm)} 
(206) 
Em 
I -
vf 
where the Poisson ratio v c for the composite can be calculated by a simple relation 
already derived, which is based on the law of mixtures: 
v = 
vmvJ 
C 
vfvm + umv, 
(207) 
This relation is a good approximation for ve and is given in Ref. 45 for the case of 
small differences between vJ and vm• 
When a viscoelastic material is SUbjected to a sinusoidal strain, the relation between 
complex stresses and strains developed in the specimen is formally the same as that 
between stresses and strains in an elastic material, but the moduli are now complex 
quantities. Thus, any algebraic expression for the moduli of an elastic composite, 
derived from the fundamental equations of elasticity, also applies to the complex 
moduli of a linear-viscoelastic composite with the same geometry. 
A considerable amount of literature on the dynamic properties of particle-reinforced compo-
sites has appeared during recent years 2.94.95), therefore a detailed review need not be given 
here. The main problem in these studies is the determination of the dynamic properties of the 
composites in terms of the respective properties of the constituent materials. Two main groups 
of methods have been developed: 
i) direct methods for deriving the overall moduli of the composite from the micromechanical 
stress fields developed around filler particles by means of energy considerations; a large number 
of simplifying assumptions are tisually required 96) and 
ii) methods based on the variational principles of elasticity, providing upper and lower limits 
for the moduli 97). 
While the latter method has been used for determining the complex moduli of viscoelastic 
composites .19 ), the former one has not yet been used. In order to find the storage and loss moduli 
of a particle-reinforced composite, the same model described in previous sections with a trans-
formation of Eqs. (204) and (206) is used, by applying the above-mentioned correspondence 
principle of viscoelasticity, with the assumption that the matrix is viscoelastic and the filler is 
elastic. In this way expressions were developed for the storage and loss moduli of the composite 
in terms of the properties of filler and matrix. 
The behavior of a composite material can be described by the complex frequency-dependent 
moduli E:;(w) and Ec*(w), where ,,-, = 2rrfis the angular frequency. The following well-known 
expressions hold: 
E:;(w) = E~(w) + iE~'(w) and Ec*(w) = E;(w) + iE;'(w) 
where E~(w) and E;(w) are the storage moduli, and E;:(w) and E;:(w) are the loss moduli of 
the matrix and composite, respectively. The expression for the loss factor is: 
105 

v. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
where bE is the phase-lag between stresses and strains in extension. For isotropic, viscoelastic 
materials the complex Poisson ratios v:(w) and v:(w) can be expressed by: 
V:(w) = v~(w) -
iV;';(w) and v:(w) = v;(w) -
iv;'(w) . 
In substituting the complex moduli in the elastic relationship between the shear moduli, 
G*(w), the elastic moduli £*(w) and Poisson ratios v*(w) it is deduced that: 
(208) 
The solution of this system gives for v~(w) and v;';(w) the expressions: 
(209) 
(210) 
By applying the correspondence principle, Eq. (204) can be written as: 
2* = {3(l- v~ + iv~)Ef}{[(2vf + 1) Ef + v~(l-4vf)Ef + 2(1-2vf )(l- vf)E.;;J 
-llv~(l -
4vf ) Ef -
2(1 -
2vf ) (l -
Vf) E,;;n -1 
(211) 
where A>II expresses the complex quantity given by: 
with: 
A = 3Ef [(1 -
v~} A -
v;';B] 
1 
A2 + & 
A = 3Ef [(1 -
v~} B + v;';A] 
2 
A2 + & 
and the quantities A and B expressed by: 
A = (2vf + I) Ef + v~(l -
4vf } Ef + 2(1 -
2vf } (l -
vf ) E~ 
B = [v~(l -
4vf ) Ef -
2(1 -
2vf } (1 -
vf ) E';;] 
By applying the correspondence principle, Eqs. (206) and (207) can be written as: 
2(1 -
2v~) 
[2VAI - 2vf ) 
I vf + ~:vf + 2v; - 4V:V;] *2 
---=:;:-- = 
+ -
A 
E: 
Ef 
E: 
(1 -
vf) 
Sv:vf - 6vf * 
(vf + v:vf - 4v: + 2) 
+ * I 
A + --'---:-:-* -----
Em{ - vf ) 
Em(l - vf ) 
with: 
106 
(212) 
(213) 
(214) 
(215) 
(216) 

V.S Evaluation of Static and Dynamic Moduli in Particulates 
Replacing Eq. (216) on the left side of Eq. (21S), and after some algebra, leads to: 
with: 
2(PE' + QE") 
2(PE" -
OE') 
c 
c 
_ i 
c 
c 
(217) 
R(E;2 + E;<2) 
R(E;2 + E;<2) 
P = (vfvm + v~vf)2 + v~v} -
2vfv~(vfvm + v~vf) -
2vfv~2Vf 
Q = 2vf[v~(vfvm + v~vf) -
v~v~vf] 
R = (vfvm + v~vf)2 +'V~2V~. 
(218) 
Then, Eq. (21S) becomes: 
with: 
C = vf + 2v~ + v~(vf -
4v}) , 
F = 6viv~ -
1) E~ -
6vfv"E;:', 
G = 6vf(v~ -
1) En + 6vfv~E~ , 
H = (vf + 2) + v~(vf -
4) and 
K = (vf -
4) v~ , 
L = C(Ai -
}.~) + 2DA.IA2 ' 
M = 2CA1~ -
D(Ai -
~). 
(220) 
The solution of this complex equation gives the storage and loss moduli of the composite ma-
terial: 
E' = 2(PT -
QU) 
c 
R(T2 + U 2) 
(221) 
En = 2(PU + Qn 
c 
R(T2 + U2) 
(222) 
with 
(223) 
In order to verify the theort:tical values given by Eq. (206), experiments were 
carried out with metal-particle c:omposite materials, as described in Section V.4. 
Dogbone specimens with constant dimensions at the measuring area of 0.006 
x 0.003 m2 and a length of 0.045 m were used during the tests. Tensile measurements 
were carried out with a conventional Instron-type tester at room temperature. The 
specimens were tested at three different rates of extension (c = 0.1, 0.5, and 1.0 
x 10-3 m/min). Four filler concentrations (5%,10%,15%, and 20%) were used. 
107 

v. Static and Dynamic Properties of Composites as Influenced by the Mesophase 
Eight specimens per strain-rate and per filler-volume fraction were tested and the 
values presented in the graphs correspond to their arithmetic mean values. 
Figure 58 shows the values of the elastic modulus of the composite calculated by 
Eq. (206) for different extension rates. The increase of this rate also gives increased 
t 
e 
z 
0.7r---------,-----,---------, 
Exper. points 
o 
c = 1.0 >< 10.3 m/min 
D. 
c= O.s >< 10.3 m/min 
o 
c =0.1 >< 10-3 m/min 
0.6 
Solid lines: Eq.(206)--_<-t-.....,~-----I 
~ 0.5 f------~+-~;L7''----+------_j 
o x 
Ul 
0.4 b"'r----t------t---------j 
0.3 '--__ -'--_---''--_----' __ ----' __ 
---.l. __ 
----' 
o 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
0.25 
0.30 
Fig. 58. Effect offiller volume 
fraction on the modulus of 
elasticity of the composite for 
different values of rate exten-
sion (Solid lines: calculated 
from Eq. (206». 
values for the theoretical and experimental results of the elastic modulus of the com-
posite material. For lower filler-volume fractions the experimental values are slightly 
below the theoretical values, while for higher volume fractions the experimental 
values are slightly above the theoretical ones. 
It can be also observed from Fig. 58 that, as the filler volume fraction is increased, 
a more linear elastic response is obtained. This behavior is caused by the filler material, 
which is strongly elastic, so that, as its volume fraction is increa~ed, the viscoelastic 
response of the composite decreases. 
In Fig. 59 Ee values, normalized to the respective moduli Em of the matrix material, 
were plotted against the filler volume fraction for c = 0.5 X 10-3 m/min. Theoretical 
curves obtained by other theories are also plotted in the same diagram as a compari-
son. From this figl're we can observe that the experimental results fit best Eq. (206) 
and second best the Kerner model denoted by curve C 72). The theoretical curves 
labelled A, B, D, E do nut coincide with the experimental results. 
Thus, one can conclude that Eq. (206) yields satisfactory results for the elastic 
modulus of particulate composites for low filler volume fractions. For higher volume 
fractions its validity is rather limited. For these cases, a theory is necessary, which 
considers the adhesion efficiency and the interaction between inclusion and matrix, 
to obtain reliable values for the elastic modulus of the composite. 
108 

V.5 Evaluation of Static and Dynamic Moduli in Particulates 
2.25 .--------r------r------r-----.---------, 
2.00 
t 1.50 
A: Guth-SmaUwood Eq. (170) 
(A) 
S: Money, Eq.(177), 
13=1.4 ---+----r-t------1 
e: Kerner, Eq. (173) 
( B) 
0: Einstein, Eq.(1741, a =1 
E: Sato-Furukawa, Eq. (176) 
____ : Eq. (206) 
0 : Experimental values 
for c=0.sx10'3 mimi 
(e) 
1 _~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~(~0~)--_1 
100 r 
IE) 
0.50 L-___ 
....I.-_
__ 
--'-___ 
--'-___ 
---' _
__ 
~ 
o 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
0.25 
\If -
Fig. 59. Effect of filler volume fraction on relative modulus of elasticity for a rate of extension 
c = 0.5 X 10-3 m/min and a comparison with various theoretical predictions (experimental 
points fit best Eq. (206), as well as Kerner's model (curve C) . 
The analysis presented here for the dynamic moduli may be regarded as a step 
toward a theoretical prediction of the viscoelastic properties of a particle-filled 
composite material. 
109 

VI. The Influence of the Mesophase 
on the Thermal Behavior of Composites 
VI.1 Thermal Properties of Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
In studying the thermal behavior of composites it was assumed that the mesophase 
material is an inhomogeneous substance with properties varying continuously from 
the inclusion boundary to the bulk matrix, i.e., the multiple-layer model was intro-
duced. In this way, the variation of the thermal expansion coefficient in the meso-
phase zone was investigated. Two components of this coefficient were derived for 
fiber-reinforced composites, the one along the longitudinal direction and the other 
along the transverse direction of these laterally isotropic materials. The corrections 
inserted by introducing the influence of mesophase led to agree satisfactorily with 
Schapery's experimental results 98). 
The filler, apart from having a reinforcing effect, also plays an important role in 
reducing the thermal expansion coefficient of the composite, thus giving better 
structural stability especially at elevated temperatures. 
Epoxy polymers are suitable matrices. This is not only due to their general pro-
perties, such as linear mechanical behavior, transparency etc., but also to the possibil-
ity of modifying their mechanical and optical properties 99). Their rheologic behavior, 
as well as their dynamic properties have been extensively investigated 100). 
Unidirectional composites, consisting of a polymeric matrix containing long fibers 
of a reinforcing material aligned in parallel, are strongly orthotropic, and not only 
their mechanical moduli, but also their thermal expansivities vary with the direction 
of the filler in relation to the orthotropic axes. 
Only in the case of a strictly unidirectional composite, where all fibers are aligned 
along the same axis of orientation their anisotropy is further reduced and the material 
becomes transversely isotropic. This depends on five constants only: the longitudinal 
elastic modulus Ev the Poisson ratio Vu the transverse elastic modulus Ep the re-
spective Poisson ratio vT ' and fmally the shear modulus G along any plane containing 
the axis of symmetry of the substance 101). 
Heating of the ~omposite leads to an increased volume according to the thermal 
expansion coefficients of the matrix and filler. Thermal expansion in monolithic 
inhomogeneous materials produces internal thermal stresses. The magnitude of 
these stresses is proportional to the differences between the thermal expansion coeffi-
cients of its components. The thermal expansion of a glass fiber is only 1/15 to 1/12 
of that of the epoxy between room temperature and the point of its vitrification. 
Thermal expansion in materials with oriented fibers is consequently anisotropic; 
for unidirectional composites it is transversely isotropic. 
110 

VI.l Thermal Properties of Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
The anisotropic thermal expansion coefficient (Xij of a unidirectional composite 
can be shown to be a tensor of rank two. A transformation law of (Xij for an off-axis 
angle <p in the Oxz plane is as follows: 
(224) 
where I = cos 'P, rn = sin 'P, and (Xx corresponds to the transverse direction of the 
composite «(Xx = (XT)'Pand (X% to the longitudinal direction «(X% = (XL)' 
A similar equation is valid for the transformation in the Oxy plane, which is normal 
to the Oxz plane, i.e.: 
(225) 
where fa. = cos 8, rna. = sin 8, and the angle 8 denotes the rotation angle on the Oxy 
plaJ;le from the Ox axis. 
Equation (224) has been used by Fahmi and Ragai 102) for unidirectional graphite-
epoxy composites, with good agreement between theoretical and experimental 
results. 
The thermomechanical behavior of unidirectional composites has been thoroughly investigat-
ed. An interesting survey was given by Chamis and Sendeckyj 24) on the theories predicting the 
thermoelastic properties of unidirectional fibrous composites, covering all existing methods, 
such as netting analysis, mechanics of materials, self-consistent models, variational, exact, 
statistical, discrete elements and semi-empirical methods, as well as theories accounting for 
microstructure. Schapery 98) obtained limits for the effective thermal expansion coefficients 
both for isotropic and anisotropic composites consisting of isotropic phases by employing 
extremum principles of thermoelasticity. Exact solutions were derived in particular cases. For 
a unidirectional composite, the longitudinal thermal expansion coefficient IXL is given by: 
_ E",IX",v", + EflXfvf 
IXL -
E",v", + Efvf 
The transverse component of this coefficient IXT is expressed as: 
(226) 
(227) 
These expressions were developed by considering the axial constrain of the fibers and their 
dependence on the length of the fibers, provided that this is lower than a critical limit 103). 
Different predictions have been given by Van Fo Fy 104). The same quantities are expressed as 
follows: 
i) For the longitudinal thermal expansion coefficient: 
(228) 
ii) For the transverse coefficient: 
v'" -
V21 
IXT = IX", + (IX", -
IXJ v21 -
(IX", -
IXf ) (1 + vf) v _ v 
(229) 
where Ell and V21 are the elastic modulus and Poisson ratio fof the direction of the fibers, 
respectively, and the rest of the notation is as above. However, the values predicted by these 
expressions are very sensitive to variations of Ell' and deviations well within the experimental 
error may cause considerable discrepancies. 
111 

VI. The Influence of the Mesophase on the Thermal Behavior of Composites 
Using variational principles, Levin 105) investigated the problem in its general form. He 
considered the viscoelastic behavior of the material during thermal expansion, whereas Fahmi 
and Ragai-Ellozy 106) investigated the case of thermal expansion oflaminated-fiber composites 
only along the thickness direction. 
The concept of the mesophase, as well as the thermomechanical properties of this 
mesophase in metal-filled epoxy resins have been previously investigated 10.16). It 
was shown that the material of the mesophase is viscoelastic with thermal properties 
differing from those of both the matrix and the inclusion. Furthermore, it was found 
that, as the temperature of the composite is changing, the mesophase has a dramatic 
effect on the overall behavior of the composite, due to the different thermomechanical 
and viscoelastic properties of the mesophase. On the other hand, the mesophase 
volume fraction influences' the quality of adhesion between matrix and filler. More-
over, in a recent publication 17), the effect of the mesophase on the mechanism of 
the thermomechanical load transfer across the interface, in the case of composites 
reinforced with short fibers, was theoretically investigated. In order to explain these 
thermal effects, a modified Rosen model was used. In this model, the fiber was sur-
rounded by the mesophase material and this, in turn, was surrounded by the matrix. 
The model considered here shows many deviations from the real behavior of a 
composite. However, the assumptions in this model are necessary in order to simplify 
the respective mathematical problem. In reality the following phenomena are apparent: 
i) The strength of the fibers is weakened in the composite fabrication process due 
to temperature and/or contact with other fibers and the matrix material, or simply 
as a result of handling and abrasion. 
ii) The fiber and matrix interact chemically to form a new compound, which may 
influence the composite behavior because of its brittleness and/or weakness. 
iii) As a result of the conditions of fabrication (including the presence of various 
kinds of surface films), the relative surface energies of the fibers and matrix material 
partially prevent the wetting spread of the matrix and its adhesion to the fibers. 
iv) The matrix structure is influenced by the fiber surface to which it is attached, 
which alters its behavior, as compared with the bulk matrix material. 
v) The method of infiltrating or impregnating the matrix material around the fibers 
leads to flaws, weak areas, and voids in the matrix material. 
vi) The service or test environment, including stress, may attack one or both consti-
tuents, or the fiber-matrix bond. 
Each of these deviations from a respective model composite destroys the unit 
structural behavior of the composite. However, there is no model up to now taking 
into account all the above-mentioned complications of the composite structure. 
To avoid some of the aforementioned difficulties, a more realistic multiple-cylinder 
model has been used 63) (see Chapt. III). Let us first consider a simple model con-
sisting of three concentric cylinders representing the filler, the mesophase, and the 
matrix. The mesophase material is homogeneous and isotropic in nature. In this 
case, the longitudinal thermal expansion coefficient of the composite is given by: 
rl.L = rl.fEfvf + rl.iEivi + rl.mEmvm 
C 
EfvJ + Eivi + Emvm 
(230) 
112 

VI.l Thermal Properties of Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
where !x, E, and u are the thermal expansion coefficient, the elastic modulus, and the 
volume fraction, respectively. 
If we consider now that the fiber is surrounded by an infinite number of cylinders 
of radius r and thickness dr, and that each one of these has an elastic modulus E(r) 
and a thermal expansion coefficient !X(r), then Eq. (230) takes the following integrated 
form: 
rm 
!XJEJvJ + ~ fo:(r)E(r)dr 
rm 
!X~ = _____ 
r-'-J ____ 
_ 
rm 
EJvJ + 22 f E(r) r dr 
rm 
rJ 
(231) 
where !X(r) , which describes the change of the thermal expansion coefficient with 
the distance r from the fiber axis needs to be defined. At this point of the analysis it 
should be made clear that !X(r) cannot be found from a micro mechanical analysis 
of the behavior of the matrix, localized in the close vicinity of the inclusions. Thus, 
such a function will be introduced starting from a phenomenological aspect and 
then by trying, in the rest of the analysis, to establish its properties in agreement with 
the conditions in the composite. The idea is that the thermomechanical behavior of 
the composite system is affected by the existence of the mesophase, which surrounds 
each one of the inclusions. The mesophase, having a different thermomechanical 
behavior than the respective behaviors of the matrix and filler, modifies the overall 
behavior of the composite. 
The main assumption is that the thermal expansion coefficient !X(r) varies in such 
a way that the product of !X(r) with the elastic modulus function E(r) is a function 
of r only, i.e.: 
!X(r) E(r) = fer) 
for 
r ~ rJ 
(232) 
From dimensional consideratioris it may follow that this function fir) depends on 
the constants Em' !Xm' EJ, and !XJ' as well as on r in the following way: 
(233) 
In addition, fer) should tak~ such a form so that Eq. (231) satisfies the following 
restrictions: 
I· 
L 
1m Ct. c = 
Ct. J 
vJ~l 
lim o:~ = !Xm 
v f-40 
(234) 
while o:(r) satisfies the limiting condition: 
lim et.(r) = Ct. m 
(235) 
113 

VI. The Influence of the Mesophase on the Thermal Behavior of Composites 
where the actual meaning of the limit (r --+ (0) is that the volume fraction of the filler 
tends towards zero (vJ --+ 0). 
We are now in a position to propose a simple function for j{r), which satisfies the 
imposed properties: 
(236) 
Substituting Eq. (236) into Eq. (232) leads to: 
(237) 
Using this expression along with Eq. (231), the longitudinal thermal coefficient aL 
e 
of the composite material can be expressed by: 
(238) 
where EeL is given by: 
E~ = Em + (EJ -
Em) VJ + VJ [1 ~J2jh (V~~l-l) - 1 
~';I1z (V~"Z-I - 1)J. 
(239) 
This expression is an improved equation for the law of mixtures of the longitudinal 
modulus of the composite, coinciding with relation (115). 
We shall try now to use the above model to determine the transverse thermal 
expansion coefficient a~. In the case of the three separate cylinders, i.e., filler, meso-
phase, and matrix, this coefficient is given by: 
a~ = (1 + vm) amvm + (1 + Vi) aivi + (1 + VJ) aJvJ 
-
a~(VmVm + ViVi + VJVJ) 
(240) 
where Vm' Vi' and vJ are Poisson ratios of the matrix, mesophase, and filler, respectively, 
and am' ap and aJ are the thermal expansion coefficients of the respective regions. 
Introducing the inhomogeneous model will give the thermal expansion coefficient 
a~ along the transverse U:irection: 
(241) 
114 

VI.l Thermal Properties of Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
The difficulty in this expression is that the integral: 
'm f {l + vm) Ct,r dr 
'I 
contains the Poisson ratio of the matrix, which, according to the multiple-cylinder 
model, should not be a constant. To avoid this difficulty, we take the mean value 
v~ between the two values of vI and vm ' This is a good approximation if one considers 
that, according to the law of mixtures, the Poisson ratio is a linear function of vr 
On the other hand, the contribution of the Poisson ratio is very small. It is now possible 
to proceed to the calculafion of the coefficient Ct~, since the function Ct(r) is a known 
function (Eq. 237), and the integral may be evaluated numerically. 
60 
t 40 
~ 
u o 
... 
S2 " 20 
~w 
.......... 
t. 
.... ..... 
~\ 
.......... A 
~<: 
~ 
.................... 
\ \ 
1' ..... 
\ \ 
\ ~ 
......... 
............. 
j""-..., 
\ l:\:' Y 
"><,~ ~ .... D 
'1-- -
---x ..... __ 
-
'-'1.--
o 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
'U,_ 
~ ..... ........ ......... 
.............. ...... 
-,..-
0.8 
1.0 
Fig. 60. Longitudinal thermal expansion coefficient, as predicted by: A The ideal rule of mix-
tures; B Schapery's equation, based on KaIK; C Schapery's equation, based on Ea/E; and D The 
model of an inhomogeneous boundary mesophase. 
The inhomogeneous model is now applied to the case of a real E-glass-epoxy com-
posite in order to verify the results so far outlined. Figure 60 shows the variation of 
the longitudinal thermal expansion coefficient against the filler volume fraction. 
From this figure, one can observe that the model introduced here yields a curve which 
lies between Schapery's curves based on the following relationships 98): 
This observation confirms the theory that the inhomogeneity of the mesophase is 
the main reason for the deviations of the various models from experimental' results. 
Figure 61 shows the variation of the thermal expansion coefficient Ct(r) of the meso-
phase against the distance r from the fiber surface. From this curve, the extension 
of the region of the mesophase can be estimated. 
115 

VI. The Influence of the Mesophase on the Thermal Behavior of Composites 
t 
L 
o 
ror------.-------.-------.------~ 
,..,. 
Fig. 61. Variation of the ther-
mal expansion coefficient a(r) 
of the mesophase material 
against the normal distance r 
from the fiber surface, accord-
ing to Eq. 237. 
70 r_----~r_------r_------r_------r_----~ 
u 
o 
O ~----~------~------~------~----~ 
o 
0.2 
0." 
0.6 
0.8 
1.0 
"U f 
-
Fig. 62. Transverse thermal-expansion coefficient of a fiber-reinforced composite as predicted 
by: A Schapery's equation, based on F;.iF;; B The ideal rule of mixtures; and C The model of 
an inhomogeneous boundary mesophase. 
In Fig. 62, the variation of the transverse thermal expansion coefficient IX; versus 
filler volume fraction is plotted (curve C). The corresponding curves derived both 
from the ideal rul~ of mixtures (B) and Schapery's upper limit (A) are bounding 
curve C, thus indicating the validity of its results. For vr larger than 0.6 the three curves 
in Fig. 62 present a tenoency to coalesce thus suggesting a trend of coincidence of 
their results. Indeed, the differences between respective values are very small compared 
to the experimental accuracy. 
Finally, a comparison of the results in Fig. 61 and 62 shows that the model fits 
the reality well and that the inhomogeneous mesophase does affect the thermo-
mechanical behavior of the composites. 
116 

VI.2 Thermal Properties of Particulates and Volume-Fraction of the Mesophase 
VI.2 Thermal Properties of Particulates 
and Volume-Fraction of the Mesophase 
The mesophase, having a different thermo mechanical and viscoelastic behavior than 
the polymeric matrix, considerably affects the respective behavior of the composite. 
For an heterogeneous solid made up of two or more materials, such as an elastic 
matrix containing particles of another elastic solid, the elastic constants will be a 
function of the properties of the constituent materials, their volumetric or weight 
contents, and possibly the internal microstructure of the composite. If the thermo-
mechanical properties of the constituent materials and those of the composite are 
known, the respective properties and the volume fraction of the mesophase can be 
evaluated. 
In the present investigation, it is assumed that: 
i) the mesophase is an homogeneous and isotropic material of finite thickness 
exhibiting perfect adhesion with both main phases; 
ii) both the matrix and the inclusions are homogeneous, isotropic materials; 
iii) if poor adhesion between the two main phases of the composite exists, the 
mesophase is expected to be nonexistant, the mesophase becoming an interface; 
iv) the filled polymer is considered as a collection of many spherical composites 
of various sizes. Each of the spherical composites co.t}tains a filler particle and two 
concentric spherical shells corresponding to the mesophase and to the matrix, 
respectively. The volume fraction of the filler in each spherical composite is the same 
as the total volume fraction of the filler in the filled polymer. In addition, each of the 
elements can be a representative volume element with its average properties coinciding 
with the macroscopic ones of the composite. 
It was experimentally confirmed that the main residual stresses in epoxy resin 
matrices are due to the differences between the thermal expansion coefficients of 
the filler and the polymer matrix. Thermal expansion involves the transmission of 
stresses across an interface and should thus reflect the adhesion between the phases. 
For spherical particles, many theories have been developed, but in all of them the 
adhesion between the phases is considered as perfect. 
For a two-phase composite material and, if there is no adhesion between the two 
phases, we distinguish two types of expansion of the composite system 107): 
i) If tl.f < tl.m and T < To (or if tl.f > tl.m and T > To), a negative mismatch will be 
created at the interface; In this case, To is the temperature at which the composite 
is free from thermal stresses and T is the temperature of interest. . 
ii) If tl.f > tl.m and T < Tc (or if tl.f < tl.m and T > To), on heating the composite 
the matrix will expand away froin the filler particles and a positve mismatch is created 
at the interface. In this case r:t. = tl.m and tl.c is independent of the filler content. 
On the other hand, the linear mixture equation (LME) is in most cases the best 
empirical approach; under certain conditions it may be derived theoretically. The 
values of tl.c -
the thermal expansion coefficient of the composite, derived from the 
LME - form an upper limit, as compared to the values derived from all other theories, 
as well as to the experimentally derived ones. 
117 

VI. The Influence of the Mesophase on the Thermal Behavior of Composites 
Actually, the situation is more complicated. When a composite is heated, micro-
stresses will develop at the interface between two phases. If these stresses exceed the 
corresponding bonding strength of the composite, cracks will result, so that a meso-
phase will develop between the two main phases consisting of areas of imperfect 
bonding, voids, stress singularities, etc. 
In this study we try to determine the thermal expansion coefficient and volume 
fraction of this mesophase of a large number of real composites with the aid of the 
model mentioned above. It will be attempted to derive a relation similar to the mixture 
law, contanining an additional term expressing the properties of the mesophase. 
In Fig. 63 three hypothetical cases of thermal expansion behavior have been plotted 
qualitatively. The line AB expresses the case mentioned above, where CXc = cxm is 
independent of the composition. The line AC shows the linear mixture equation, 
while the curve AD is an hypothetical, "experimental" one. 
No adhesion 
B 
Ar-------------------
t 
'Uf ---. 
Fig. 63. Three hypothetical cases of 
thermal expansion behavior. 
If cx,:",P and rx!h are the experimental and theoretical values of the thermal expansion 
coefficients derived from the experimental and· LME curves, respectively, we can 
suppose that the deviation of these two values is due to the existence of the mesophase. 
In the ensuing analysis it will be assumed that the thermal expansion coefficient 
of the mesophase, rxi' is expressed by: 
cx. = CX lh _ 
cxexp 
lee • 
(242) 
In order to derive expressions for the respective volume fractions, new matrix volume 
fraction v~ is defir.~d as: 
v' = v-v. 
m 
m 
, 
(243) 
where vm = (1 -
vi)' and Vi is the mesophase volume fraction. Hence, an expression 
similar to the mixture law can be written by taking the mesophase into account: 
(244) 
118 

VI.2 Thermal Properties of Particulates and Volume-Fraction of the Mesophase 
Thus, Eq. (244) may be regarded as as a refined mixture rule for the linear thermal 
expansion coefficient of the composite system. 
Substituting the expression of oci and urn into Eq. (244), we obtain the following 
form for ui : 
0c'h _ 
ocexp 
U -
c 
c 
i -
oc=p + oc _ 0c'h • 
c 
m 
c 
(245) 
According to Fig. 1, the volume fraction of each of the three phases for particulates 
is calculated as follows (cf. Section IIL2): 
rt - r; 
Vi = --3-
r", 
(246) 
Substituting the expression for um and ui into Eq. (245), we obtain the following form 
for ri : 
(247) 
For the experimental verification of the above analysis, a series of tests were under-
taken, where particulate composites were formed from an epoxy matrix filled either 
with an aluminum powder of one particle size having the form of spheroidal grains, 
or three particle sizes of iron powder. In the case of the aluminum particles, where 
the small particle size may result in poor adhesion or particle agglomeration, "improv-
ed" specimens were also produced by means of more careful stirring and degassing, 
for comparison. 
Thermal expansion coefficients for these composites have been previously deter-
mined 107). Therefrom it can be shown that, as the filler volume fraction is increased 
also the contact area between matrix and filler, and consequently the mesophase 
volume fraction, increase. This is referred to in Figs. 64 and 65. 
A comparison between the respective values of ui for "ordinary" and "improved" 
aluminum-epoxy composites leads to the conclusion that the mesophase volume 
fraction in "improved" specimens fall below the "ordinary" ones. This could be 
explained from the fact that "odinary" aluminum-epoxy composites exhibit poor 
adhesion, while with "improved" ones, no large aggregates develop, and individual 
particles are surrounded by the matrix with good adhesion conditions. In other words, 
the mesophase volume fraction is a criterion of the quality of adhesion. 
The same phenomenon appears with the thermal expansion coefficient of the 
mesophase for aluminum-epoxy composites, when the latter is plotted against the 
filler volume fraction, as shown in Figs. 64 and 65. From Eq. (247) it is clear that the 
119 

VI. The Influence of the Mesophase on the Thermal Behavior of Composites 
20 
10 
t 
0 
'" 
0 .... x .. 
I..J 
0 
a 
Fig. 64. Mesophase volume fraction Vi and 
linear thermal expansion coefficient ai of 
the mesophase of aluminum-epoxy com-
posites for temperatures above glass-
transition temperature Tg plotted vs. the 
L-___ 
--'-____ 
....L..._.-J 0 
filler volume fraction. 
t 
0.101----1--:'-----11--:---120 t 
~ 
o 
x 
+ 
L 
-
O'051--~-I---F-+----1----110 '!. 
~ 
~ 
"improved" AI 
x 6 "ordinary" AI 
T>Tg 
OL----~~-~~~ 
o 
0.10 
0.20 
Uf -.. 
)( a 
Fig. 65. Mesophase volume fraction Vi and 
linear thermal expansion coefficient, ai' 
of the mesophase of "improved" alumi-
num-epoxy composites for temperatures 
below glass-transition temperature Tg 
plotted vs. filler volume fraction. 
thermal expansion coefficient ocj of the mesophase is proportional to the mesophase 
volume fraction. 
On the other hand, with "ordinary" aluminum-epoxy composites, the existing 
mesophase is full of VG~ds, while with "improved" ones the respective mesophase 
material is more condensed, due to the good adhesion conditions between the two 
main phases. 
In Fig. 66a, predictions of the thermal expansion coefficient ocj for iron-epoxy 
composites for temperatures below Tg and for all three particle sizes are plotted 
against the filler volume fraction, while the respective values of ocj for temperatures 
above Tg are given in Fig. 66 b. 
120 

VI.2 Thermal Properties of Particulates and Volume-Fraction of the Mesophase 
t 
T<Tg 
25 0 
Fe 0.15 mmf-----++-i 
• 
Fe 0.30 mm 
.to 
Fe 0.40 mm 
20r------1r-~~~~~ 
~10r-----~~4---------~~ 
d 
5r--------+--------~~ 
OL-________ -L ________ ~~ 
o 
0.10 
0.20 
a 
10 
t 8 
b 
2 
o 
o 
T>Tg 
0 
Fe 0.15 mm 
• 
Fe 0.30 mm 
.to Fe? ---
/ 
- • ./ V 
--...-< ?\ 
~ 
0.05 
0.10 
0.15 
0.20 
Fig. 66 a, b. Linear thermal expansion coefficient a, of the mesophase of iron-epoxy composites, 
for temperatures below and above the glass-transition temperature Tq plotted versus filler volume 
fraction. 
The quality of adhesion is considerably affected by the particle size. As with dynamic 
measurements, at 0.3 mm particle size, the quality of adhesion acquires the highest 
value corresponding to a maximum of the overall thermal expansion coefficient. 
It can be seen from Figs. 67 and 68 that, indeed, the thermal expansion coefficient 
of the mesophase decreases, as the filler volume fraction is increased. This is proof 
that, for epoxy composites filled with iron particles of 0.3 mm diameter, there exists 
an optimum adhesion. This behavior is less pronounced at temperatures below T . 
. 
9 
t 
'" 
~ 
)( 
L., 
~ 
d 
28 
T<Tg 
20 
1Jf :0.20 
10 
"'--0.05 
OL-____ ~ 
____ ~ 
__ ~ 
____ ~ 
o 
0.15 
0.30 
0.40 
0.55 
df (mm) -
Fig. 67. Linear thermal expansion coefficient 
of the mesophase of iron-epoxy composites 
and for temperatures below Tg plotted vs. 
particle diameter. 
121 

VI. The Influence of the Mesophase on the Thermal Behavior of Composites 
The effect of the iron particle size on the thermal expansion coefficient lXi appears 
to increase with filler volume fraction, and it is more pronounced when T > Tg, in 
particular for high filler volume concentrations, where agglomeration phenomena 
occur (see Figs. 67 and 68). On the other hand, the mesophase volume fraction of 
iron-epoxy composites follows a similar variation with increasing filler volume 
fraction (see Figs. 69 and 70). 
Finally, the effect of the iron particle size on the mesophase volume fraction is 
given in Figs. 71 and 72, for temperatures below and above T, respectively. The 
9 
reasons explaining such a behavior are the same as those discussed above. 
12.0 
10.0 
t 
8.0 
'" 
6.0 
~ 
x 
'\" 
4.0 
u 
0 
a 
2.0 
0 
0 
0.15 
0.30 
T >Tg 
o 
0.40 
0.50 
Fig. 68. Linear thermal expansion coefficient 
of the mesophase of iron-epoxy composites and 
for temperatures above Tg plotted vs. particle 
diameter. 
0.70.-------r-------,------.------. 
0.50 
t 
;> 
0.30 
0 
Fe 0.15 mm 
0 
Fe 0.30mm 
c; 
Fe 0.40mm 
0.10 
T<Tg 
0 
0.10 
0.20 
0.30 
1J f ~ 
Fig. 69. Mesophase volume fraction of iron-epoxy composites and for temperatures below Tg 
plotted vs. filler volume fraction. 
122 

VI.2 Thermal Properties of Particulates and Volume-Fraction of the Mesophase 
0.06..--------r-----.--------, 
0.051---~~~=--+-----l 
0.041-----.~-1-----~1--------l 
t 0.031-----+--~-~=-=-----1 
Fe 0.15 mm 
.. 
Fe 0.30 mm 
0.021------.'.""""'--
Fe 0.40 mm 
0.011------I__----"Io.--I__---___l 
OL-______ -J ________ -L ________ 
~ 
o 
0.10 
0.20 
0.30 
Fig. 70. Mesophase volume frac-
tion of iron-epoxy composites and 
for temperatures above Tg plotted 
vs. filler volume fraction. 
We have examined in this study the variation of the thermal expansion coefficient 
and the volume fraction of the mesophase in a large number of real metal-filled 
particulates. The well-known linear mixture equation for two-phase materials was 
extended by an additional term depending on the properties of the mesophase. 
It was shown that the mesophase volume fraction is a parameter of the quality 
of adhesion between matrix and filler. In particular, with aluminum-epoxy composites, 
where two groups of specimens with different adhesion conditions were examined, 
it was shown that the effect of the mesophase volume fraction is an important factor 
far determining the quality of adhesion. 
On the other hand, the particle size affects indirectly the quality of adhesion. In 
particular, with iron-epoxy composites, the adhesion has an optimum value for a 
0.3 mm particle size. 
0.75,....---.-----.-------,r-l 
0.601-------1-¥-::L---=r-=---------+---l 
0.501-------1----+-+---P--+---l 
t 0.401----~.----t---+--1 
;; 0.301------1"*"-.:----+.....".,"'--+---1 
0.201-------1-----;:-+---::-::-::-+-; 
0.101-------1-----+----+-; 
O~--~----~----~~ 
o 
0.15 
0.30 
0.40 
Fig. 71. Mesophase volume fraction of iron-epoxy 
composites and for temperatures below Tg plotted 
vs. particle diameter. 
123 

VI. The Influence of the Mesophase on the Thermal Behavior of Composites 
0.Q1 
0.06 
0.05 
t 
0.04 
;:l 0.03 
0.Q2 
0.01 
0 
0 
0.15 
0.30 
0.45 
d (mm)-' 
0.60 
Fig. 72. Mesophase volume fraction of 
iron-epoxy composites and for tempera-
tures above Tq plotted vs. particle dia-
meter. 
Finally, the thermal expansion coefficient of the mesophase for the above-mentioned 
composites and for temperatures above and below Tg was investigated. It was shown 
that the mesophase material is viscoelastic with different thermal properties above 
and below T . Thus, it is clear that, as the temperature of a composite changes, the 
9 
mesophase has an important effect on the overall behavior of the composite due to 
the different thermo mechanical, as well as the viscoelastic, properties of the meso-
phase. 
124 

VII. The Glass Transition of Composites 
and Influence of the Mesophase 
VI1.1 Variation of the Glass-Transition Temperature 
with Direction of Fibers in Composites 
The glass-transition temperature Tg is the threshold at which the slope of the specific 
volume vs. temperature curve changes abruptly. It marks the region between rubbery-
and glassy-polymer behavior. An increase by a factor of one hundred to one thousand 
in the stiffness or modulus usually occurs in this temperature region, and physically 
it is the temperature at which the secondary bonding forces overcome the thermal 
disruptive forces 108). 
The glassy region in most high polymers is thermodynamically not well-defined, 
but under certain circumstances, pseudo-equilibrium conditions can be assumed and 
thermodynamic arguments may be employed 109). 
Secondary transitions, such as the glass transition, are accompanied by changes 
in physical properties, such as the heat capacity, expansivity, elastic properties; and 
damping. Many discrepancies and anomalous results concerning the measurement 
of Tg appear in the literature, but these may usually be explained in terms of the 
measuring method, polymer history, instrument design, and the sensitivity of the 
apparatus 110). All techniques available for studying the glass transition involve 
time dependence in some form or another, since the static tests are time dependent 
through the rate of temperature change, while dynamic tests use a time-depending 
force field and so they have two superimposed time dependencies. The glass transition 
is also sensitive to frequency, increasing as the frequency increases; however, it 
decreases with increasing amounts of plasticizer 111). 
The problem of relating dynamic data to thermomechanical scanning data remains 
unsolved, as does the very practical problem of deriving a transition temperature 
suitable for material specifications from dynamic data. The question of how Iowa 
frequency is necessary to correlate with dilatometry has never really been answered. 
Often an arbitrary frequency is chosen. Glass-transition temperature data, quoted 
in various references, tend to 1)e a mixture of information obtained by using all 
possible techniques with little or no formal correlation between measuring con-
ditions 112). 
In composites, the added reinforcing agent often reduces the magnitude of changes 
in physical properties, thus reducing the ability to measure them by classical techni-
ques. Because the elastic properties defined by moduli, and the damping properties 
measured by dynamic mechanical analysis (DMA), change much more dramatically 
than the heat capacity or thermal expansion, DMA is more sensitive to secondary 
125 

VII. The Glass Transition of Composites and Influence of the Mesophase 
transitions. There is considerable disagreement as to the effect of the filler on the 
glass-transition temperature 108). From the extensive literature included in Ref. 18), 
it follows that the filler of the composite has a noticeable and complex effect on the 
glass-transition temperature of filled-polymer systems and that the problem is still 
open. 
Figure 73 shows typical thermal expansion curves of a fiber composite along 
the longitudinal direction (bottom curve), as well as long the transverse direction 
(top curve) and at an angle 9 to the direction of the fibers. 
t 
<i 
c o 
'iii 
c " 
Q. 
x 
UJ 
Fig. 73. Thermal expansion curves 
for a fiber composite, in direc-
tion parallel to the fibers (9 = 0°), 
transverse to the fibers (9 = 90°), 
and at an angle 9 to the direction of 
the fibers plotted vs. temperature. 
In the longitudinal direction 9 = 0°, the curve exhibits a glass-transition tempera-
ture, Tgy' with respective thermal expansion coefficients iXYI (T < Tn) and iXy2(T > Tg). 
In the direction transversely to the fibers (9 = 90°) the material behaves with TgX < Tgy' 
with respective thermal expansion coefficients iXxl (T < T gx) and iXx2(T > T gx)' 
Similarly, in the 9 direction, the glass-transition temperature, Tg[), lies between the 
two limiting values, i.e.: T gx < Tg[) < Tgy. 
Moreover, in the transverse direction, where the coefficient of thermal expansion 
begins to increase rapidly above TgX' the transition region is limited and thus we can 
consider a sharp change in the expansion coefficient in passing through the glass-
transition temperature. On the other hand, in the longitudinal direction, where the 
composite is much more elastic, the longitudinal coefficient shows a weak dependence 
on temperature variations. However, in the intermediate angular directions, the 
transition occurs at a temperature range in which the thermal expansion coefficient 
has a continuously, nvnlinearly varying value, while below and above the transition 
region the coefficient ofthermal expansion has a standard mean value, i.e.: the expan-
sion curve in these regions is linear. In this case, the value of Tg can be determined as 
the intersection of the two extrapolated linear parts of the expansion curve. 
The only basic assumption made in this study, though having no influence on the 
final result, is that the thermal expansion coefficient in the transition region would 
have a standard mean value. 
126 

VII.l Variation of the Glass-Transition Temperature 
With this assumption, the glass-transition temperature in the {) direction can be 
determined in the three following temperature ranges by the relations: 
Region I (T < Tg): 
. 2 (l 
2 (l 
()(I/ll = ()(xl SIll 
i7' + ()(yl cos 
i7' 
(248) 
where ()(I/ll is the thermal expansion coefficient of the composite i~ the:). direction 
and for T < T . Moreover, the equation for the front linear section bf the expansion 
gx 
curve, is given by: 
(249) 
Region II (T < T < T ): In this region -
where the thermal expansion coefficient 
gx 
gy 
in the :}. direction is ()(1/12 -
the following equations may be analogously derived: 
. 2 (l 
2 (l 
()(1/12 = ()(x2 SIll 
i7' + ()(yl cos i7'. 
(250) 
(251) 
Region III (T > T ): Here, the respective thermal expansion coefficient in the 9 
gy 
direction is ()(1/22 and the following equations are valid: 
(252) 
(253) 
According to our assumption, the glass-transition temperature Tgl/ corresponds to 
the point of intersection of the two extrapolated linear sections of the expansion 
curve: 
(254) 
Introducing the values for ,11.91 and ,1/I/II from Eqs. (249) and (253) leads to: 
To test the validity of this relation, a series of experiments were undertaken with 
a unidirectional glass-fiber composite, consisting of an epoxy matrix reinforced with 
long E-glass fibers. The matrix material was based on a diglycidyl ether ofbisphenol-A 
together with an aromatic antine hardener. The glass fibers had a diameter of 1.2 
x 10- 5 m and were contained at " 79.6 % volume fraction. A complete description 
of the material and its tensile creep properties can be found in Ref. 17. 
Specimens with dimensions 0.3 x 0.3 x 0.0065 m3 were cut at various angles to 
the direction of the fibers, namely 0°, 15°, 30°, 45°, 60°, 75°, and 90° and tested on 
a viscoelastometer, which determines independently the storage and loss-moduli of 
the material at various temperatures. On the other hand, specimens with dimensions 
0.0085 x 0.0065 x 0.003 m3 were cut at the same angles to the direction of the fibers 
127 

VII. The Glass Transition of Composites and Influence of the Mesophase 
and tested on a thermomechanical analyzer (TMA), in order to determine linear 
thermal-expansion coefficients and glass-transition temperatures. Similar tests were 
carried out for pure-matrix material specimens for comparison. 
Additional tests were also carried out in order to determine static moduli and Poisson 
ratios of the component materials. These were necessary to verify the theoretical 
predictions. 
Experimental values of Tg were first obtained by means of the thermomechanical 
analyzer (TMA). For the matrix material it was found that T (Jm = 155°C. This value 
decreases for the longitudinal and the transverse of the composite directions. For 
the longitudinal direction it is T91 = 130°C while for the transverse direction 
Tgt = 110 °C. For the intermediate directions, corresponding to an angle 9 in relation 
to the directions of the fibers, 110°C < Tgl}. < 130°C. Hence, the glass-transition 
temperature appears to be a function of the direction along which the thermal expan-
sion measurements are carried out. The observed variation of Tg with the orientation 
may be explained by the existence of a mesophase. 
For explaining the concept of the mesophase we consider the components of a composite 
to combine at high temperatures, and the process of combination to occur by mutual diffusion 
of the components and the adhesive forces acting between matrix and fIller. The interface in 
a fiber-matrix composite is a surface which is common to both fiber and matrix and the imme-
diate environment around this surface. It has physical and mechanical properties which are 
neither those of the fiber, nor those of the matrix 113). In general, the interface is normally ide-
alized by assuming perfect bonding, which neglects the influence of properties changing with 
position in the bonded region 114). 
A more strenuously characterized behavior of composite materials is the property often termed 
polymer-filler interaction. This term broadly includes the interfacial forces between the filler 
and the matrix, the orientation of the matrix in the immediate vicinity of the filler surface, the 
formation of the mesophase, whose properties and dimensions affect the properties of the 
composite, especially nucleation of crystallization, and other physicochemical phenomena 115). 
The composition and properties of the resin next to the coatiBg, normally applied to glass 
inclusions before casting the composite, differ from those of the bulk material. The whole 
interfacial region is about 10-2 J.lm thick or greater 116). On the other hand, upon thermal or 
mechanical loading of the composite, micro-stresses will develop at the interface between the 
various constituents. If these stresses exceed the corresponding bonding of the composite, 
they will result in crack formation. Such interface cracking is the earliest form of damage and 
is frequently observed in composite structures 117). 
In this analysis it is convenient to first consider the behavior of a two-layer model and then 
to introduce the features responsible for the loss of perfect adhesion. Actual composites may 
differ from this model in many ways, but, on the other hand, the study by models is a useful 
tool for describing quantitatively the behavior of real composites. 
If the mesophase is considered as a concentric layer surrounding each one of the 
inclusions, the actual thickness of the mesophase will be a function of the orientation, 
because the section of two coaxial bodies (cylinders or spheres) by a plane at any 
arbitrary angle prcvides two ellipses with different principal axes. If the actual 
thickness of the mesoph:.'lse and that of the inclusion depend in the same way on tem-
perature variations, then the ratio of the respective cross sections of the two materials 
would be the same for all directions. 
However, in reality, the variation of the cross section of the mesophase can be 
considered to have two components. The first component expresses the variation of 
the cross section, due to the different geometry of each section and it is only a function 
of the angle of orientation, whereas the second component expresses the variation 
128 

VIl.t Variation of the Glass-Transition Temperature 
of the cross section of the mesophase, due to the thermal expansion. This second 
component is a function of temperature and orientation, since the thermal expansion 
coefficient of the mesophase is a function of the thermal expansion coefficient of 
the composite and the latter is a function of the orientation. Thus, the variation of 
the cross section of the mesophase depends directly on the orientation through the 
first component, and indirectly through the second component. 
On the other hand, the variation of the cross section of the inclusion depends only 
on the orientation, through its geometry, while its indirect dependence on the orienta-
tion, through temperature variations, is negligible. 
In order to verify the dependence of Tg, observed by dilatometric measurements, 
on the fiber orientation, the specimens were tested on a viscoelastometer, where the 
dynamic properties of the individual specimens can be determined over a wide tem-
perature range. 
The viscoelastometer applied a sinusoidal tensile strain of constant and fixed 
frequency to one end of the sample and the response of stress was measured at the 
other end. One can read directly both, complex modulus IE*I and tan £5, by reading 
simultaneously data from two transducers. Dynamic measurements were performed 
at 110 Hz with strain amplitudes varying between 0.4-0.6 %. During the experiments 
the specimens were heated at a rate of 1°C/min in a nitrogen atmosphere, under 
relaxed conditions. 
The ratio E" /E' is a useful damping term called the dissipation factor or loss tangent 
and is proportional to the ratio of energy dissipated per cycle to the maximum poten-
tial energy stored during a cycle. The dissipation factor takes a maximum value at 
a specific frequency, which shifts with temperature; the higher the temperature, the 
higher the frequency at which this maximum occurs. 
A number of loss peaks characterize the dynamic mechanical spectrum of the com-
posite specimens, out of which the major damping peak represents the glass transition 
of the material, and it is easily detected. 
The glass-transition temperatures determined by the present method for the indi-
vidual specimens tested were compared with the respective values derived from thermal 
expansion measurements carried out in a thermo mechanical analyzer (TMA). 
From this comparison, it is seen that Tg values derived from dynamic measurements 
are higher than the respective values derived from TMA measurements. This difference 
in the values of both groups is because there is afrequency effect on the location of Tg • 
Moreover, Tg values are influenced by the conditions of deformation of the polymer, 
which exist between fillers, and the restriction in the molecular mobility due to ab-
sorption interactions in polymer-surface layers of the filler. 
The introduction of filler into a polymeric matrix creates additional strain fields, 
thus increasing viscous losses. On the other hand, voids, microcracks, etc. may 
increase energy dissipation, while additional losses can originate from mechanical 
friction at the fiber-matrix interf&Ge. 
The respective dispersion and absorption curves of the individual specimens are 
shown in Figs. 74 to 76. These curves show an orientation dependence of the maximum 
damping peak, i.e., at Tg • 
In Fig. 77 the theoretical results for Tg, derived from Eq. (255), are compared with 
experimental data. The theoretical data agree reasonably well with the experimental 
values obtained from TMA measurements. 
129 

VII. The Glass Transition of Composites and Influence of the Mesophase 
t 
e 
3 
~ 
g 
x 
Lu 
VI 
:l 
'5 
"C 
0 
::I: 
.... 
CI 
d 
6.0 
4.0 
2.0 
Matrix 
t 
~ 
r-------~--------~ ---~ 20 z 
16 ~ 
x . 
UJ 
12 
VI 
:!' 
'5 
"C 
8 ~ 
.E 
VI 
~ 
Fig. 74. Temperature dependence of the 
4.3 
tensile dynamic storage modulus E~ 
and the 1. 'ss modulus E::' for the matrix 
material at a frequency of 110 Hz. 
0 
0 
80 
160 
240 
B.O r-----r---------,;--------, 32 
t 
" 45· 
• 30· 
o 15· 
• o' 
;::- 6.01------+-----I-tt-----I 
E 
"-
Z 
'" , 
~ 
x 
..... 
,3' 4.0 1::ti~D4~::t:2:=_------1tM'""',--1 
::::J 
"C 
o 
E 
.... 
CI e 
.2 
VI 2.0 1----------+--~~~-H__W'l_----__l 
24 t 
Ne 
"-z 
... 
0 
~ 
x 
VI 
.3 
:l 
"C 
0 
E 
VI 
VI 
0 
...J 
B 
Fig. 75. Temperature depend-
ence of the tensile dynamic 
storage modulus E' and the 
loss modulus E" for a uni-
directional composite arrang-
ed at angles 9 = 0°, 15°, 30°, 
and 45° to the direction of 
the fibers. 
The same figure also presents values of TgfJ• obtained from dynamic measurements, 
i.e., from longitudinal vibration tests (at 110 Hz). These graphs indicate that similar 
patterns to those obtained by TMA measurements are followed even in this case, 
although TgfJ appears to be considerably frequency-dependent. 
130 

VII. I Variation of the Glass-Transition Temperature 
6~ r------'r------'-------' 24 
QI g 
... 
.2 
VI 
O ~-----L------~~~~
O 
o 
80 
160 
240 
lao 
~160 
5 
e 
! 140 
:s 
::: 
" 
T lOCI ---+ 
• Fr~m longitudinal vibrations ( 110 Hzl 
~o From TMA measurements 
'"" 
Nheoretical pattern from eq. (255) 
.~ 
a .: 
~ 120 
a 
G 
100 
00 
~ 
~ 
0 
,.., 
900 
Angle 3 -. 
Fig. 76. Temperature dependence of 
the tensile dynamic storage modu-
lus E' and the loss modulus En for 
unidirectional composites arranged 
at angles 9 = 60°, 75°, and 90° to 
the direction of the fibers. 
Fig. 77. Theoretical and experimen-
tal (TMA) values of the glass-transi-
tion temperature Tg plotted vs. the 
angle 9, as compared with the values 
obtained from longitudinal vibra-
tion tests. 
For the actual glass-fiber epoxy composite studied in these experiments, it was 
found that the matrix material has a significantly higher Tg value than the correspond-
ing values of the composite material, and that the values for the composite depend 
on the direction of orientation of the fibers. In a great number of composites, the 
relation between the Tg values of the constituent phases is similar. Therefore, for all 
these materials the observations made here are valid. 
Such a behavior can be perfectly explained by the mesophase, which usually 
develops around the inclusions of the filler material in composites, and which has 
different thennomechanical properties than the matrix and the inclusions, therefore 
affecting the overall thennomechanical behavior of the composite. 
131 

VII. The Glass Transition of Composites and Influence of the Mesophase 
A theoretical expression for the glass-transition temperature of the composite 
was established for a generic direction forming an angle 8 with the direction of the 
fibers. Experimental values for the glass-transition temperature were found to be 
in good agreement with theoretical predictions. Furthermore, the values for Tg, 
obtained by longitudinal vibration tests, indicated a similar behavior as that found by 
experimental procedures, based on TMA measurements although the actual values 
were different -
as expected. 
VII.2 Influence of the Mesophase 
on the Glass Transition of Particulates 
In the glassy region, polymeric composites behave almost elastically up to a limit 
defined by the glass transition temperature Tg, where their glassy behavior ends. 
Beyond this limit and for higher temperatures strong viscoelastic phenomena appear. 
Therefore, the glass-transition temperature is a sensitive parameter with respect 
to every aspect of the material microstructure, or any factor related to the external 
conditions, or the loading mode. 
There are many experimental data showing the changes in T of a polymer under the influence 
of the surface of a filler 11). These data have been obtained t:y applying various methods, i.e., 
dilatometric and dynamic measurements of the mechanical properties or specific heat, NMR, 
dielectric relaxation, radiothermoluminescence, etc. Since each of these methods has its own 
particular limitations, the results obtained are not always comparable. While the general cha-
racter of the change in T with increased filler concentration is maintained, the rate of change 
is nonidentical. This rateg of change presents a maximum when low-frequency methods (dilato 
metry or calorimetry) are used. As the frequency is raised, LlTg decreases. 
In Ref. 118 an extensive experimental study was carried out on an epoxy matrix 
in which various miers, such as different types of glass microspheres and fibers, were 
embedded. It was found that, at all occasions, T increased with the amount of filler, 
9 
-
at least to a certain extent. A similar behavior was observed with a rubber-carbon 
systems 119-122) in which the rubber molecules are attached to the filler particles by 
strong forces approaching the nature of chemical bonds 123). Moreover, it was found 
that the rise of Tg with any particular filler content depends on the total surface of the 
filler and the way in which the contact between filler and polymer is formed 124). 
Contradicting results, however, come from investigations 8,95) on an epoxy resin 
cured with 8 % triethylene-tetramine and filled with either aluminum particles or 
three different particle-sizes of iron powders. The samples of these composites were 
tested by means of flexural vibrations, or examined in a thermomechanical analyzer. 
As may be seen fiom Figs. 10-12 in Ref. 8, the glass-transition temperature in all 
cases was found to be ~onsiderably lower for the composite than for the respective 
matrix. As a rule, Tg was found to decrease with increasing particle size, while no 
such behavior was observed for the storage moduli and loss factors of the composite. 
Reduced Tg was also found by Molotkov et al. 125) for resin matrices filled with finely 
cut fiber glass and aluminum particles. 
The mesophase can explain this contradicting behavior concerning the glass-
transition behavior by poor adhesion. The variations of the glass transition were 
132 

VII.2 Influence of the Mesophase on the Glass Transition of Particulates 
theoretically estimated and again proved the important role of the mesophase on the 
properties of the composite 71). 
For this purpose the three-phase model was used, as it has already been outlined previous-
ly 10,16). The first phase is the polymeric matrix, which is considered as viscoelastic, and is 
characterized by its elastic modulus Em' The second phase is occupied by dispersed particles, 
inclusions or fillers, and have an elastic modulus Er The third phase is created around the fillers 
by macromolecules of the polymer, having different physicochemical properties than those of 
the polymeric matrix. In some cases these molecules create strong bonds with the filler particles 
and this is described by a large adhesion coefficient, expressing the adhesion efficiency between 
the polymer matrix and the filler. In other cases, however, the bonds between filler and matrix 
are weak, and this corresponds to a low value of the adhesion parameter A. 
The mesophase is considered as consisting of an homogeneous and isotropic material of 
finite thickness, with a different modulus of elasticity, Ep than the two other moduli. Thus, the 
representative volume element of this model is composed of three separate regions with the 
respective vm' Vf' Vi volume fractions of the three phases, i.e., matrix, fJller, and mesophase. 
The composite is assumed to consist of a polymeric matrix and an elastic filler as main phases, 
whose mechanical and thermal properties may be evaluated according to the three-layer model 
developed in Chapter III. This calculation also allows to evaluate the volume fraction of the 
mesophase, which is expected to behave viscoelastically. The presence of the second visco-
elastic phase, the mesophase, obviously affects the overall behavior of the composite, which 
exhibits a glass-transition temperature different than that of the matrix material. Since the prop-
erties of the mesophase are directly related to the adhesion efficiency between matrix and filler, 
the effect on the glass-transition temperature of the composite should be anticipated. 
A simplified approach to find the glass-transition temperature of a composite can 
be based on thermal expansion curves such as shown in Fig. 2 (Section III,2). The 
elastic filler (subscript 1) exhibits a constant coefficient of thermal expansion rxI' 
and the corresponding curve is a straight line. For the matrix (subscript m), it consists 
of two straight lines intersecting at the glass-transition temperature Tgm with respective 
thermal expansion coefficients rx l(T < T ) and rx 2(T> T ). For the mesophase, 
m 
gm 
m 
gm 
the corresponding figures are T . (generally less than T ), rx'l and rx'2 (rx. is in reality 
g1 
gm 
1 
1 
1 
a low figure, strongly dependent upon temperature). 
The thermal expansion LJl for each phase is given as a function of the temperature 
by the following relations: 
for the filler: 
(256) 
for the matrix: 
(257) 
(258) 
for the mesophase: 
(259) 
LJl.= 
, 
(T> T.) 
g' 
(260) 
133 

VII. The Glass Transition of Composites and Influence of the Mesophase 
Now, the thermal expansion coefficient of the composite is given by the simple 
relation of the linear mixture equation: 
where uf' um' and ui are the volume fractions of the three constituents, with: 
In particular, C(e assumes three different values as follows: 
C(el = ufC(f + umC(ml + UiC(il 
for 
T < T9i 
C(e2 = ufC(f + u mC(ml + UiC(i2 
for 
T9i < T < Tgm 
C(e3 = uPf + um~m2 + UiC(i2 
for 
T > Tgm 
(261) 
(262) 
(263) 
(264) 
(265) 
Therefore, the thermal expansion curve of the composite may be approximated by 
three rectilinear parts with the following equations: 
(266) 
(267) 
The glass-transition temperature Tge of the composite corresponds to the inter-
section of the first and last section of the curve, or it is the solution of the equation 
Aiel = Ale3, from which, after some algebra, one obtains: 
T 
= 
u/C(a -
C(il) T9i + u m(C(m2 -
C(m) Tgm 
gc 
Vi(CXi2 -
exil ) + vm(cxm2 -
cxm1 ) 
(269) 
which exactly correlates TgC with the thermal properties of the matrix and mesophase. 
Obviously, more accurate expressions for the thermal expansion curves or the 
thermal expansion coefficient of the composite may provide a better approach to Tge 
than the above formula, which however, in many cases, was found to apply with 
satisfactory accuracy. Furthermore, actual experimental data may be treated by the 
procedure already outlined, and Tge be determined with the highest possible accuracy. 
The above theory has been confirmed by experiment. Namely, two metal-filled 
epoxy composites were tested, both based on the same matrix material 8). 
i) An iron-filled epoxy resin: The epoxy matrix was filled with iron particles of an 
average diameter of 150 11m at a volume fraction of U = 0.05. The mechanical and 
thermal behavior of this composite was investigated 8, f!;,). The properties of the meso-
phase were evaluated as follows: 
In the temperature range between 30° ahd 130°C the mechanical properties, i.e., 
the elastic modulus Ei and Poisson ratio Vi of the mesophase were practically equal 
134 

VII.2 Influence of the Mesophase on the Glass Transition of Particulates 
to the respective figures for the matrix. The volume fraction of the mesophase was 
Vi = 0.024 and practically independent of the temperature. The thermal expansion 
coefficient !Xi was much lower than the respective figure for the matrix, as presented 
in Fig. 3 a (Section 111.2), where experimental curves for matrix, filler, and composite, 
are plotted against temperature. In Fig. 3 b the corresponding dimensionless thermal 
expansion curves are plotted against temperature. For the matrix, filler, and composite 
these curves were based on the experimentally determined values of the thermal ex-
pansion coefficients, while for the mesophase they were obtained as outlined above. 
Application of Eq. (269) yields a glass-transition temperature for the composite 
of TgC = 120°C, while the experimentally determined value was TgC = 117°C. 
Although these values are very close, it is obvious that the deviation is due to the 
simplified model of the linear mixture Eq. (261) on which Eq. (269) is based. Indeed, 
Eq. (261) yields for the thermal expansion coefficient of the composite, at T < TgC' 
!xc! =; 48.2 X 10-6 °C-1, against the experimental value of 48 x 10-6 °C-1• However, 
at T> TgC 
!Xc1 = 122.78 X 10-6 °C-1 against the experimental 158 x 10-6 °C-l, 
for reasons explained elsewhere 8). One may conclude, therefore, that Eq. (269) 
can provide a satisfactory approximation to the glass-transition temperature, in spite 
of the simplifying assumptions on which it is based. 
ii) Two aluminum-filled epoxy resins: From the same matrix material, two series 
of aluminum-filled specimens were manufactured. One of them was termed "ordinary", 
i.e., no particular care was taken to obtain good adhesion efficiency, while the other, 
termed "improved", was carefully prepared for better adhesion, as it was proved by 
means of mechanical measurements. 
The present theory was applied to both materials for one temperature, e.g., T 
= 80°C, and the thermomechanical Prol'l'r! ics of the mesophase were evaluated. 
The results were as follows: 
Ordinary material 
Improved material 
Matrix material 
E(Njm") 
0.42 x 1010 
1.47 X 1010 
0.43 X 1010 
Vc 
0.384 
0.450 
0.382 
!Xl CC- 1) 
1.28 x 10-6 
1.66 X 10-6 
65.26 x 10-6 
From this last example, the contribution of the mesophase to the average properties 
of the composite can readily be deduced. Indeed, for an improved material with higher 
ll;dhesion between phases, the mechanical properties of the composite are much higher, 
though the components were identical for both ordinary and improved samples. 
According to previous analyses, a simple relationship was established connecting 
the moduli of elasticity ofthe composite material to the particular moduli of the phases, 
which is given by: 
(270) 
This equation is a generalized form of the well-known law of mixtures for composites 
with three phases, 
The simplifications made to establish this relation, reduce to zero all secondary-
effect terms, containing Poisson ratios for each phase. However, the contribution of 
tbe mesophase to the elastic modulus of the composite was retained through the term 
Eivi, since it was assumed that this contribution always plays a significant role in the 
135 

VII. The Glass Transition of Composites and Influence of the Mesophase 
definition of the transition region of the composite. Now, by applying the corre-
spondence principle of linear viscoelasticity and starting from Eq. (270), we may 
obtain an expression for the loss factor of the composite material, 1'1( w), which depends 
on the frequency W of the applied vibrational load. The loss factor is a convenient 
parameter for determining Tg, since its maximum value corresponds to the center 
of the transition region and expresses the amount of energy dissipated as a fraction 
of the energy stored in the system. At the transition frequency Wg' the loss factor 
assumes its maximum value, hence: 
a'1(W) I 
= 0 
aw 
"'="'g 
(271) 
Applying the correspondence principle to Eq. (270) and using the following well-
known expressions: 
1'1m(W) = E::,(w)/E~(w) (272) 
1'1i(w) = E;'(w)/E;(w) 
(273) 
results in an expression for the loss factor '1(w) of the composite: 
(274) 
If Wg and Wgm represent the transition frequencies of the composite material and the 
matrix, respectively, the relative magnitude of these quantities may define any relation 
between the glass-transition temperatures of the matrix, Tgm, and of the composite, 
T g• Indeed, if Wg ;;;; w gm' then Tg ~ Tgm and inversely, if Wg > Wgm' then Tg < Tgm. 
This result is based on the fact that the loss factor has its peak value in the middle of 
the transition zone defined as the glass transition. In the same area, the creep com-
pliance master curves acquire their maximum slope. 
61) (wI 1 
<0 
I (1) (wI 1 
> 
t 
aw w=Wgm t 
I all) 
W=~ 
Wg <Wgm 
~ 
Wgm <Wg 
I 
~ 
] 
F 
a 
b 
Fig. 78. Typical curves for the loss factors of the matrix and the composite in their transition 
region in terms of frequency W a) for Wg < Wgm and b) for Wgm < wg• 
136 

VII.2 Influence of the Mesophase on the Glass Transition of Particulates 
The relative position of the transition frequencies W 9 and W m could now be deter-
mined by finding the derivative 8,,(w)/8w and derming its vafue at W = wgm. Then, 
if this value is negative, it is valid that W 9 < W gm' because, in this case, the loss factor 
,,(w) has already reached its maximum. Inversely, if [8,,(w)/8w] I = 
> 0, then 
(0 
COgm 
the loss factor fleW) will still be in the zone where its value is increasing and so it will 
have its peak: value at W 9 > W gm. The two cases of relative values of the loss factor 
are schematically presented in Figs. 78(a) and (b). 
Now, following the same reasoning, we define the derivative of Eq. (236) and 
obtain: 
(275) 
where: 
(276) 
(277) 
and: 
8'1m(w) I 
= O. 
aw 
W=Wgm 
(278) 
In Eq. (275) the quantities (8Em' /8w) I = 
and (aE:/8w) I = 
always have positive 
.CO 
COgm 
l 
Q). CDgm 
values, because the storage moduli are always increasing functions with frequency in 
the transition zone. 
The contribution of the term 8E;/8w is very small, as compared to the contribution 
of the term 8E~/8w, because it is multiplied by the volume fraction ofthe mesophase, 
Vi' which al~ays takes values smaller than 5 percent of the total volume of the com-
posite. For better illustration of this reasoning, we define the ratio: 
(8E;/8w) "iVi _ (8E;/8w) (E;'/E;) Vi 
(8E~/8w) '1mvm -
(8E~/8w) (E::'/E~) vm . 
(279) 
By now expressing the loss and storage moduli of the matrix and the mesophase as 
functions of the frequency w, these quantities are generally expressed by: 
(280) 
l37 

VII. The Glass Transition of Composites and Influence of the Mesophase 
where hew) and hew) are model-dependent and particular for each model. Thus, 
for a Maxwell model they become: 
(281) 
whereas, for the Voigt model, they are expressed by: 
hew) = 1, 
hew) = w,. 
In these expressions, it was assumed that the relaxation time, of the matrix and the 
meso phase are approximately equal. 
After introducing these functions into Eq. (239), this ratio takes the form: 
(oE;/ow) (E;'jE;) 
Vi 
(oE~/ow)(E~.IE~,) vm 
where, according to Ref. 124, v;/vm < 0.05 and E;/Em ~ 7, so that this ratio has a 
value smaller than 0.35. 
The positive quantity AE also yields a small contribution in Eq. (277) as it takes 
the following form: 
with: 
and: 
a log (E; E~) I 
>0 
ow 
W=W gm 
[E;'(wgm) -
E';;(wgm)] = h(wgm) (Ei -
Em) > 0 
0< vmvi ~ 1. 
(283) 
(284) 
However, the quantity AE has a negative contribution in Eq. (237), because it is 
always positive and it is subtracted from the rest of Eq. (277). 
After introducing these simplifications into Eq. (277), we come to the conclusion 
that the sign of the expression (art jaw) I; 
depends mainly on the terms 
W 
Wgm 
(aE' jaw) I; 
and (art·jaw) I; . The first is always positive, whereas the value 
In 
()) 
Wgm 
l 
W 
Wgm 
of the second depends on the relative position of the glass transition of the mesophase. 
If T. > T , then w . > w . This means that the loss factor of the mesophase has 
gl 
gm 
gl 
gm 
reached its peak value at a frequency smaller than Wgm and it has already started to 
decrease with (art·j ow) I _ 
< O. This case is examplified in Fig. 79 (a). If T . < T , 
1 
OJ-COgm 
91 
gm 
the opposite behaviour takes place and this is indicated in Fig. 79 (b). 
138 

a 
VII.2 Influence of the Mesophase on the Glass Transition of Particulates 
t 
W-+ 
b 
Wgm<Wg j 
Tgm> Tgj 
Fig. 79. Typical curves for the loss factors of the matrix and the mesophase in their transition 
region a) for Wgi < Wgm and b) for Wgm < wgi• 
So, what exactly occurs in a composite material is defined by the mesophase region 
of the polymer around the fillers. Namely, in materials where there are strong bonds 
between the fillers and the polymeric matrix, the mesophase should have glass-
transition temperatures larger than the test of the matrix and the composite presents 
a higher value for Tg• On the contrary, for composite materials with weak bonds 
between fillers and matrix, i.e., with poor adhesion between them and with a lot of 
impurities around the fillers, the glass transition of the mesophase should be smaller 
than that of the rest of the matrix and, consequently, the glass-transition temperature 
T of the composite is reduced. 
g 
By comparing the two previous terms, we can also derive important results about 
the contribution of the volume content of the filler on Tg of the composite. According 
to Ref. 125, the volume fraction of the mesophase increases nonlinearly as the volume 
fraction of the filler increases. This means that the contribution of the term 
(8rf-/8w) I = 
becomes larger with increasing content of filler, because it is multiplied 
1 
.CO 
Wgm 
by the volume fraction vi' while the contribution of the positive term aE~/aw will 
decrease linearly as vrn decreases. 
Then, according to the previously developed theory and the extensive experimental 
evidence existing in the literature, we may conclude that the introduction of a rein-
forcing filler into a polymeric matrix causes Tg of the latter to increase in some cases, 
and to decrease in others. 
Based on a model defining the elastic modulus of the particle-composites, an ex-
planation of this anomalous behavior of T.q was given. In the case where Tgi of meso-
phase is larger than T gm of the matrix, the composite increases its glass transition, as 
compared to the respective T ,whereas, in the case where T . < T ,the particle-
grn 
g •. gm 
composite possesses a lower glass transition than T gm. This phenomenon, which 
depends on the mechanical imperfections between matrix and filler particles, presents 
different degrees of importance and may counterbalance, partially or totally, the 
reinforcing effect of the dispersed particles of the composite material. 
139 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption 
in Composites 
Moisture absorption is a main parameter affecting the thermomechanical behavior 
of composites 126). Absorbed moisture causes plasticization of the polymer matrix 
with a concurrent swelling and decrease of its glass transition temperature Tg 127-130). 
Thermal expansion and swelling of a composite, due to temperature and moisture 
variations, influence significantly their mechanical behavior through residual stresses 
between filler and matrix 131). Moreover, incorporation of fillers into polymeric 
matrices leads to changes in their glass-transition temperature Tg 132), probably 
because of the immobilization, by absorption of polymer segments close to the surface 
of the filler particles 133). 
Some discrepancies in the effect of the filler-volume fraction on T were also detected. Some 
authors have found a linear relationship between increasing fIller coJtent and increasing T/ 32 ), 
while others have found that T is not affected appreciably oy the filler-volume fraction 134-136). 
However, dilatometric and dlorimetric measurements have shown that Tg values of metal-
filled epoxy composites were strongly"-dependent on the filler content 8) and, in some cases, 
a decrease with the amount of filler was detected 51) (see preceding chapter). 
A parameter affecting the position of the transition temperature in calorimetric or dilato-
metric measurements is the heating rate. Differences as large as 15°C in glass-transition tem-
peratures were observed in differential scanning calorimetry (DSC) measurements, depending 
on the heating rate 51,137-139). Furthermore, moisture diffusion characteristics in epoxy com-
ponents are critical factors for predicting the mechanical response and durability of epoxy 
composites in a given environment 140). The second Fick's law of diffusion may be successfully 
applied to evaluate sorption and desorption of moisture in epoxy composites 141-145). 
The mechanical behavior of glassy polymers, reinforced with rigid particles, is affected by 
a large number of parameters: the strength of bonds between fillers and surrounding visco-
elastic matrix, the filler-volume fraction, size and size distribution of fillers, tensile rate of 
deformation, shape of inclusions, and others. Moreover, moisture absorption leads to a re-
duction of the modulus and strength of the composites, which, in many cases, may be very 
large. 
This chapter describes the effect of moisture absorption of metal-filled epoxy 
composites at ambient temperature on their mechanical properties and the resultant 
lowering of the glass-transition temperature 146-148). The fraction of voids contained 
in the composite is evaluated from free-volume considerations 149). Furthermore, 
the influence of moisture absorption on the extent of the mesophase in particulate 
composites is examined. 
It was found that, during moisture absorption, there is a variation of the extent 
of the mesophase, closely related to the degradation of the mechanical behavior of 
the composite, as well as of the percentage amount of moisture absorbed. A theoretical 
mechanism of absorption has been proposed 146). 
The matrix material used in the tests was again a diglycidyl ether of bisphenol A 
140 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
epoxy prepolymer, with an epoxy equivalent of 185-192, a molecular weight of 
370-384, and a viscosity of 15 x 103 cP at 25°C. Triethylenetetramine was employed 
as a curing agent with 8 wt. % epoxy. The epoxy matrix was filled with iron particles 
with an average diameter of 150 )lm. (For a description of the manufacturing process 
refer to Ref. 8). Five filler concentrations (0 %, 5 %, 10 %, 16 %, 20 %) were used 
to study the effect of the filler-volume fraction on the properties of the composites. The 
thermomechanical behavior of these composites was investigated 8.9.31.51.95.150). 
For the weight percent change due to moisture absorption, specimens in the form 
of thin plates with 3 rom thickness, 12 mm width, and 50 mm length were used, in 
order to have one-dimensional modes of diffusion. Before placing the test specimens 
into the water bath, they were dried in an oven at 50°C, until their weight loss was 
stabilized. The dried specimens were then placed in a high vacuum for 24 h to obtain 
fully dried specimens and their weights were measured with an analytical balance. 
Then, the specimens were immersed in it distilled-water bath at a constant temperature 
of20 ± 0.5 0C. The specimens, conditioned in water, were than removed periodically, 
wiped, air-dried for 5 min, and then weighed. 
The tensile properties of the materials were determined by using dogbone tension 
specimens with standard dimensions: 3 mm thickness, 6 mm width, and 42 mm length. 
During the tests, the elastic moduli and the ultimate strengths were measured in an 
Instron tester with a crosshead speed of 0.5 mm/min. 
The glass-transition temperature of the composites was measured with a thermal 
analyzer, combined with a DSC analyzer. Large-diameter, hermetically sealed alu-
minum pans were used in all runs. The specimens used for the DSC tests had the follow-
ing dimensions: 1 mm thickness, 4 mm width, and 4 mm length. Scans were made 
at a 5°C/min heating r~te. 
The percent moisture content, M(n, of the composite, or weight percent gain, 
was defined as the difference in weights of the moist, Wm , and dry, Wd' materials, 
normalized to Wd according to: 
W -W 
M(t) = 
m 
d X 100 . 
Wd 
(285) 
A series of measurements of the moisture content of the samples was executed at 
different time intervals. The experimental values of the moisture content for various 
parametric values of the filler-volume fraction IJf are plotted in Fig. 80 versus the 
square root of time. Each of these data points corresponds to the average value of 
20 to 25 specimens. 
In order to verify the respective Fickian diffusion theory, developed in Refs. 143 
and 151, the experimental values of M = fiJIt) were used to evaluate the diffusivity D 
of the material for various values of IJ f in a direction normal to the lateral faces of the 
samples; this was done by using the relation established in Refs. 143 and 151: 
(286) 
In this relation, h is the thickness of the sample, M m the maximum moisture content 
for each case, and Mi (i = 1,2) the moisture contents at times Ii' respectively. 
141 

VUI. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
0 
\}f=O 
• 
\}f = 0.05 
X 
\}f = 0 .10 
6 
\}f=0.16 
t 2.01"----+----l--
a 
\}t ::0.20 
lr~ 
" 1.01------
_--x-
O~~~--~--------~--______ ~ 
______ __J 
o 
5 
10 
15 
20 
ti me 112 I days Ill, --+ 
Fig. 80. Variation of the percent moisture content versus the square root of time for different 
filler volume fractions. Solid lines: theoretical curves acc. to Eq. (288). 
The values of diffusivity D, determined from Eq. (286), were introduced into the 
following equation yielding the time-dependent coefficient G(t): 
[ 
(Dt)3/4] 
G = 1 - exp 
- 7.3 7" 
(287) 
where s is the thickness of the specimen for samples exposed on both sides to the same 
environment, while s = 2h for samples insulated on one of the faces. 
The values of the time-dependent coefficient may now be introduced into the simple 
relation expressing the instantaneous value of the moisture content of the material 
during both absorption and desorption, according to the diffusion theory developed 
in Refs. 143 and 151: 
(288) 
where Mi is the initial moisture content of the sample and M = M(t) the percent 
moisture content of the composite. 
The values of M, defined from Eq. (288), were also plotted in Fig. 80 by continuous 
lines. There is a satisfactory coincidence between theoretical and experimental values, 
indicating the validity of the theory. 
From the shapes of the isothermal absorption curves, plotted in Fig. 80, one may 
observe that, initially, each one of them is linear with time, with less than 1 wt. % gain 
and this suggests that in the respective initial time interval the absorption process 
is diffusion-controlled. 
However, as time proceeds, the specimens begin to fill with moisture, leading to 
a decrease in the moisture absorption rate. As the equilibrium moisture content is 
approached, the rate of approach becomes extremely low, so that the actual equi-
142 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
librium is not achieved even after 230 days. Such an anomalous behavior also has 
been reported for numerous other polymer diluent systems 152-159). An explanation 
is that the anomalous behavior shown in highly humid environments could, in prin-
ciple, be due to an effective concentration dependence of the diffusion coefficients 160). 
Moreover, any damage induced in the epoxy resin, or epoxy composite, can cause 
deviations from the Fickian diffusion and accelerate moisture absorption. 
Concerning the effect of the filler-volume fraction on the moisture absorption 
behavior, one may observe from Fig. 80 that, as the filler-volume fraction is increased, 
the linear variation of weight gain with time is limited to lower values, while, on 
the other hand, the equilibrium moisture content decreases. This may be explained 
by a transport model for systems in which sorbed molecules can be divided into two 
populations, one formed by completely immobilized molecules and the other by 
freely diffusing molecules 160). As the filler-volume fraction is increased, the free 
volume decreases and the equilibrium is reached faster. 
On the other hand, the area surrounding each one of the inclusions is characterized 
by voids, microcracks, and other defects, which, as previously stated, result in an 
anomalous moisture absorption behavior. Since this kind of irregularities are more 
pronounced for high filler-volume. fractions, it is reasonable to accept that at high 
filler concentrations the behavior will be more anomalous. Indeed, as it is shown in 
Fig. 80, the composites with 0.2 filler-volume fraction show such an anomalous be-
havior. More precisely, although these materials seem to have reached their equi-
librium moisture content after 200 days of immersion in distilled water, suddenly 
they start to absorb more moisture. 
Another explaination could be that moisture initially enters rapidly into the speci-
men, ftlling the microcracks existing in the surface and inside the material 162). How-
ever, after a few hours of exposure to the moisture, resin particles are actually lost 
into the water. This way, there is a simultaneous loss of material and a weight gain 
due to moisture absorption. The weight of the specimen increases if the weight gain 
is greater than the material loss, while, in the opposite case, the weight of the specimen 
decreases. 
As a result of this mechanism, the measured weight change of the specimen does 
not always correspond to the moisture content of the material. At this point it should 
be noted that such a behavior is more pronounced at high temperatures. Impurities 
in fluids or differences in material composition may also contribute to differences 
in the weight change 162). 
Anomalous diffusion also has been observed in polymers 163) in which the diffusion 
coefficient becomes time- and concentration-dependent. Figure 81 shows the varia-
tion of the diffusion coefficient, D, versus the filler-volume fraction Vj as it has been 
calculated from Eq. (287). This figure shows that the diffusion coefficient of iron-
epoxy composites is strongly dependent on the filler-volume fraction. 
This dependence may be caused by many factors, e.g., by interactions between the 
composite and the penetrant 164-171) by voids in the composite 172-176), and clustering 
of the penetrant in the polymer 162,177-181). Microvoids or microcracks resulting 
from swelling, stresses induced by sorbed moisture, craze cavitation, formation of 
water clusters and high surface tensile stresses, due to temperature and moisture 
gradients are also factors of predominant importance for anomalous diffusion in 
epoxy composites 182,183). 
143 

VITI. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
i 
>-a 
"t:J -
N 
E 
E 
m 
~ 
" 
c 
22 
18 
14 
o 
o 
... ........ 
/ 
10 
~ 
20 
Fig. 81. Effect of the filler volume 
fraction on the diffusion coeffi-
cient D. 
The stress-strain behavior of the dry composites under consideration has been 
previously studied 31) and is presented in Chapter VII, where the dependency of the 
mechanical properties of dry iron-epoxy composites, such as the elastic modulus, 
the maximum load, the ultimate strain and ultimate energy at failure on the rate of 
deformation, as well as on the filler-volume fraction were examined. Here, the effect 
of the absorbed moisture on the mechanical properties of the same composites shall 
be investigated. 
It is well known that absorbed moisture causes a reduction of modulus strength 
of the composite, similar to that of the matrix. However, the strength loss is more 
severe for the composite than for the matrix, as shown in Fig. 82, where the values 
t 
2.5 
2.0 
~ 
~x.: 
,..... 
1.0 
o o 
~ 
x ~ 
~ 
" 
)( 
50 
100 
150 
time (days) --. 
• Uf = 0.05 
x 
u f = 0.10 
c,. 
uf = 0.16 
0 
uf = 0.20 
-
c,. 0 
I 
Xc,. 
---
200 
250 
Fig. 82. Effect of time exposure in water on relative modulus of elasticity for different filler 
volume fractions. 
144 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
of the modulus, Ee, of the composite, normalized to the respective modulus, Em' of 
the matrix, were plotted against time for varying filler-volume fractions. For the 
first fifty days of immersion, a slight increase of the ratio Ee/Em is observed, followed 
by a decrease and levelling off of all curves, and this behavior appears to be more 
pronounced for higher filler-volume fractions. 
Residual stresses due to swelling, and eventual interface degradation due to mois-
ture, are mechanisms possibly inducing the ultimate strength loss. These mechanisms 
are most prevalent at room temperature or below, where the composite is brittle 184). 
The dependence of the relative :work at rupture, the relative ultimate strain, as well 
as the relative ultimate stress on the time of immersion, for different filler-volume 
fractions, is presented in Fig. 83 for a typical volume fraction of the filler of VI = 0.20. 
In this case, and in all similar cases with different volume fractions, a general decrease 
is observed as the time of immersion is increased 149). 
t 1.0 
E i 
i 
c 
o ~ 
o 
100 
time (days I -+ 
Uf = 0.20 
-
200 
Fig. 83. Effect of time exposure in water 
on a) relative work at rupture b) ultimate 
elongation and c) tensile strength for a 
filler volume fraction IJ r = 0.20. 
However, there does not seem to be a clear correlation between the strength losses 
and the weight change. Thus, a unique relationship between the weight change and 
the change in other properties cannot be readily established 162). 
A more detailed analysis of these experimental results yields the following interest-
ing conclusion: The deterioration of the mechanical properties of iron-epoxy compo-
sites due to moisture absorption, is more pronounced after immersion for 100 days 
in water, than after immersion for 180 days. 
This fact is better shown in Fig. 84, where the relative degradations of the ultimate 
tensile properties LI Wu' Lieu, and Llu u of composites with different VI are plotted against 
145 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
the mler-volume fraction, for varying time of immersion. Here, A Wu expresses the 
percent degradation of the ultimate strain energy, defined as: 
AW = (_W_u_/_W
_"'_nl_,=_o_-_(_W_"_/_W_u_m_l_, =_' 
1 
u 
(T¥,,/w.'m)' = 0 
(289l 
and the definitions of the percent degradation of the ultimate strain, Aeu' and the 
ultimate tensile stress, Auu' are analogous to A Wu' 
It follows from Fig. 84 that a minimum degradation occurs for filler-volume frac-
tions in the region of v J = 10-15 %. This is determined by several parameters effecting 
the ultimate mechanical properties of the composite. 
t 100 
~ 
0 
-$ 50 
<J 
0 
t 
100 
0 
~ 
0 
" 
50 
w 
<J 
0 
t 
100 
-~. 
0 
~ 
~ 50 
IS 
<J 
o 
.. " 
10 
~ 
10 
_.--
~ 
.. 
10 
I 
0 
t=100 days 
• t=180 days 
~ 
20 
~ 
20 
'::::...---
20 
Fig. 84. Effect of filler volume fraction 
on the percent degradation of breaking 
energy A Wu, ultimate elongation A~u' and 
ultimate tensile stress A 0" U' 
One of these parameters can be considered to be the inhomogeneous distribution 
of water molecules within the composite, reSUlting in craze initiation in the matrix, 
and the formation of water clusters in the polymer. These phenomena may lead to 
preferentially highly plasticized zones, which would lower the local shear stresses 
and favor cavitation. 
Moreover, during preparation of the specimens, particles may aggregate to form 
larger particles, often containing holes. On the other hand, in areas where voids exist, 
these voids originate from holes in the original granular particles and form incomplete 
contacts between particles. These voids and holes formed in the polymeric matrix 
146 

Vill. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
are of cardinal importance in determining the degradation of the mechanical response 
of composite specimens due to moisture absorption. 
Glass-transition temperature values from heat-capacity measurements for dry 
iron-epoxy composites have been presented in Chapter VII 51). There, the effect of 
the heating rate, the filler-volume fraction, and the particle diameter on Tg was also 
investig~ted. Now, lets consider the effect of absorbed moisture on Tg of the same 
composites. 
Moisture absorption leads to an increase of the free volume, and consequently of 
the molecular mobility, of epoxy-matrix macromolecules. This is because water 
molecules disrupt hydrogen bonds and dipole-dipole bonds within the epoxy matrix. 
This increase of the molecular mobility of the epoxy matrix moisture system causes 
a lowering of the glass-transition temperature. 
The Kelley-Bueche equation for Tg of the polymer-diluent system is given by 169): 
(290) 
where Tgp and T9d are the glass-transition temperatures for the polymer and the diluent, 
respectively; oc and OCd are their respective thermal expansion coefficients, and v is 
p 
. 
p 
the volume fractlOn of the polymer. For water OCd = 3.66 X 10-3 cm3/cm3 DC and 
T9d = 4 DC. 
The volume fraction of the polymer, v , is given by: 
p 
(291) 
where (Jp and (Jd are the densities of the polymer and the diluent, respectively. 
In the case of composite-diluent systems and for relatively small filler-volume 
fractions, the above theoretical relationships can be used, where the experimental 
values of thermal expansion coefficients in the glassy and the liquid state of the com-
posites are taken from Ref. 8. 
The variation of the glass-transition temperature as a function of the absorbed 
moisture for the matrix material and for vf = 0.20 is given in Fig. 85. Similar curves 
150,.--------,r-------,-------, 
Uf :0.20 
t 
-100~----~~kd~------~------~ 
:r 
expo 
50~------L--------~----__ ~ 
o 
0.5 
1.0 
M(%) --. 
1.5 
Fig. 85. Effect of moisture content 
on the glass-transition temperature 
for filler volume fraction v f = 0.20. 
147 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
for other values of vf are included in Ref. 149. Experimental points obtained from 
DSC measurements are plotted with full circles, whereas theoretical values based 
on the above-mentioned equations are indicated with open circles. 
In this figure, deviation between theoretical and experimental points is seen, which 
may be attributed to a large number of parameters affecting the prediction of Tg, 
and which have not been taken into consideration in the theory, one of them being 
the moisture absorption. _ 
Many factors affect the diffusion of penetrant molecules into polymers 138), most 
importantly the size of holes created in the polymer network, which is a measure of 
the free volume available within the polymer for occupation by the penetrant mole-
cules 126) and the difference in chemical nature of the penetrants versus that of the 
polymer 139). 
An example of the latter is the relatively high water-absorption capacity of epoxy 
polymers, due to the presence of -OH groups in the epoxy chains. The -OH groups 
attract polar water molecules, which form hydrogen bonds and thereby disrupt 
interchain hydrogen bonds with the net effect of increasing the intersegmental hydro-
gen bond length 140,141). The disruption of interchain hydrogen bonds results in 
volumetric changes of the specimen, i.e., the so-called swelling. 
It has been shown from thermodynamic considerations that the liquid penetrant 
molecules can combine with polymer molecules in the glassy state, thus establishing 
an equilibrium between the liquid and the glassy state 18). 
For studying the morphology of epoxy polymers, we define the terms occupied 
volume and free volume, which characterize the polymer network. The occupied volume 
is the volume occupied by the actual mass of the molecules plus the thermally depend-
ent vibrational volume: 
where Voc' V mol' and .fvibr are the occupied, the actual-mass, and the vibrational 
volumes, respectively. 
Besides these volume components, there is also a volume corresponding to the 
holes or voids formed in the bulk polymer, created from incomplete degassing during 
manufacture, which is termed Vvoid' Thus, the free volume may now be defined by: 
(292) 
where Vmea• is the measured volume of the polymer. A similar relation holds for the 
case of a polymer having absorbed a volume of water V H20 ' with: 
(293) 
where symbols with primes refer to the new values of V'ree' VVOid' and V mea. when 
the polymer has absorbed water molecules. 
The water molecules absorbed by the polymer may be divided into two subgroups. 
The water molecules of the first subgroup are called unbound molecules, because they 
are contained in the free volume as well as into the voids, so that are free to move 
148 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
into these volumes. The water molecules of the second group are called bound mole-
cules, since they are immobilized 131). Thus: 
where: 
and: 
Equations (292) and (293) yield: 
11,' 
-
v: 
- (V' 
-
V 
) 
(V 
-
V' ) 
free 
free -
meas 
meas + 
void 
void 
or: 
(294) 
Since in the tests the weight percent gain is very small (~ 1.5 %), L1 VVOid is considered 
negligible, so that Eq. (294) may be written as: 
However, from the above equations it follows that: 
(295) 
Adamson 131), states that the free volume equals the difference between the measured 
volume of a polymer and the occupied volume, and also that the difference is the 
result of "holes" or "Voids", caused by packing irregularities. Moreover, voids are 
also created during the manufacturing procedure of the composite and these voids 
have large dimensions when compared to those of the intermolecular domains 186). 
At this point it is important to distinguish between the volume occupied by the voids 
and that occupied by the intermolecular domains, which is the actual free volume. 
Equation (295) may be extended to filled polymers. However, for the filled polymer, 
the influence exerted by the filler particles probably is not limited to the immediate 
vicinity of the particle surface. Then, the mechanism is not clear by which the ad-
sorption of polymer molecules onto the filler surface reduces the number of possible 
configurations of the polymer molecules in a substantial portion of the polymer 
sample. It may be compared to a mechanical chain with two ends anchored on two 
filler particles, each polymer coil being depicted as a link in the chain. The mobility 
of such a mechanical chain is greatly reduced 133). Thus, the free volume changes 
with the filler-volume fraction and, consequently, the void volume should be also 
a function of the filler-volume fraction. An experimental evidence for the above 
149 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
statement is that the volume of water absorbed by composite specimens with different 
filler-volume fractions is not the same. 
The total volume change, due to swelling from a dry state to a moisture-equilibrium 
state, can be calculated on the basis of the ideal law of mixtures 187): 
(296) 
where Moo the percent absorbed moisture at equilibrium, Q the specimen density, 
and V the specific volume of water V = 1 cm3 jg. The variation of swelling of an iron-
epoxy composite against the filler-volume fraction is plotted in Fig. 86. Accordingly, 
the swelling decreases as the filler-volume fraction increases. 
t 
.. 
~ 
~ 
~ 
" 
~ 
>8 
<I 
t 
:S' 
~ 
'C 
'0 
-> 
150 
25 
20 
15 ~ 
10 o 
1.5 
~ 
"----• 
0.10 
1.0 \ 
~ 
~ 
0.5 
0.20 
0.30 
OL-______ ~L-______ ~ 
________ ~ 
o 
10 
20 
30 
Ut(%) -
Fig. 86. Effect of filler volume fraction 
on swelling. 
Fig. 87. Effect of filler volume fraction 
on void content. 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
Furthermore, Fig. 87 depicts the variation of the percent void content against 
filler-volume fraction, as it is calculated from Eq. (295). The results indicate that the 
maximum void content appears in the net polymer and the void content, VvOid' de-
creases as a function of the filler-volume fraction. 
While the preceding dealt with the influence of moisture absorption on the thermo-
mechanical properties of composites, we shall now concentrate on the variation of 
the mesophase in particulate composites due to moisture absorption. However, no 
model has been developed at this stage. Moreover, the change of the mechanical 
properties of a composite is compared with the simultaneous change of the meso-
phase volume fraction during the time of immersion. For studying the effect of the 
filler volume fraction, as one of the parameters affecting the overall behavior of 
composites, specimens with five filler volume fractions (0, 5, 10, 16, 20 %) were used. 
To measure the weight percent change due to moisture absorption, again specimens 
in the form of thin plates were used. However, the dimensions of these series of speci-
mens were slightly different. The thickness of the plates was the same with d = 3 
±O.l mm, whereas the width was w = 12 mm and their length 1= 50 mm. Before 
placing the specimens into the water bath, they were submitted to the same treatment 
previously described. 
The physical behavior of a two-phase composite system depends on a combination 
of several parameters, some of which are filler-dependent, whereas others are matrix-
dependent. Amongst the first group of parameters, one may include the geometry 
of the inclusions, their size and the size distribution, their volume fraction, and relative 
position, etc.; whereas, in the second group, one may include the physicochemical 
state of the matrix, the degree of polymerization, the crystallinity, the degree of 
cross-linking and others. Moreover, there is also a parameter depending on features 
of both filler and matrix. This parameter is the adhesion efficiency between the two 
0.6 
t 0.4 
'-' 
o 
!:!' 
a 
u 
..:: 0.2 
o 
u-
v 
x~-
<:-" 
30 
50 
I 
Vf = 0.10 I 
0 
t =10 days of immersion 
x 
t =72 
.. 
.. 
" 
• t=172 
.. 
.. 
.. 
~..n. 
...,l'" 
~ -::-.. 
~----.x 
-.:.;"..--
-
70 
90 
"0 
'25 
TIOC) -
Fig. 88. Variation of Cp with temperature and time of immersion in distilled water for a filler 
volume fraction v f = 0.10. 
151 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
phases, i.e., the degree of contact and cohesion, expressed by the extent of the meso-
phase. 
As stated in Chapter III, polymers exhibit a sudden change in heat capacity, Llcp' 
in their glass-transition region, which progressively decreases as the filler volume 
fraction is increased 51). This phenomenon is closely related to the existence of the 
mesophase. 
More precisely, as the filler volume fraction is increased, the number of macro-
molecules which are in direct contact with the filler surface, and thus characterized by 
a reduced mobility, also increases. This means that the volume fraction of the meso-
phase is increased. 
The Lipatov theory 11) expresses the mesophase volume fraction by the quantity Vi' 
expressed by: 
(297 a) 
where Vi is the mesophase volume fraction, Llri the thickness of the boundary meso-
phase, vf the filler volume fraction, and rf the average radius of the filler particles. 
Moreover, according to the same theory, the thickness of the mesophase Llri' 
appearing in Eq. (297a), is given by Eq. (76), repeated here as: 
where A.i is expressed by: 
LlCf 
A.. = I _--1!.. 
, 
LlCo 
p 
(297 b) 
(297 c) 
with LlCf and LlCo expressing the changes in the specific heat for the filled and the 
P,P 
unfilled polymers. 
The temperature and humidity dependence of the specific heat, Cp' of iron-epoxy 
composites was extensively studied by DSC 149). The results allowed to calculate the 
variation of the specific heat Cp versus temperature. Figure 88 shows a representative 
DSC curve for a typical filler concentration of ~f = 0.10. From this figure the sudden 
change LlCp can be evaluated, which appears in the zone of the glass-transition tem-
perature, with varying time of immersion into the water (cf. Fig. 20). Figure 88 also 
shows that Cp increases with increasing time of immersion. 
The variation of LlCp with time of immersion of the specimens in distilled water 
for various filler volume fractions is presented in Fig. 89. Here, each data point is 
the mean-statistic value derived from ten tests. All measurements were highly accurate 
and the results ranged within the experimental error standard deviation, which was 
of the order of maximally ± I % and of ±0.6% on the average. 
According to this figure, LlCp increases linearly as a function of time. Moreover, 
as the filler volume fraction is increased, a reduction of the 'sudden change of the heat 
capacity in the glass-transition region is observed. This may be explained by the fact 
that, at higher filler volume fractions, there appears an increase of the macromole-
152 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
cules absorbed along the filler surface and they are, therefore, characterized by a re-
duced mobility. In addition, the rate of increase of LIe decreases as the filler volume 
p 
fraction is increased. An explanation may be that, as the filler volume fraction is in-
creased, the free volume decreases and an equilibrium is reached at a shorter time of 
immersion. 
The reduction of the time of equilibrium is better shown in Fig. 90 where, by follow-
ing a standard procedure used by many authors (see, e.g., Ref. 188), we have plotted 
0.10 
i 
.... 
~0 .05 
"8 
a-
u 
<J 
o 
~ 
~ 
----c;---
~ 
/,: 0.05 
...-
• 
• 
J\Jf =0.10 
- x-
\J, =0.1'" 
---
-x 
1\ 
t.T 
L> 
~ 
, \JI =0.20 
u 
o 
50 
100 
150 
200 
immersion time (days) _ 
Fig. 89. Variation of LlCp with time of immersion in distilled water for various filler volume 
fractions. 
3.0 ,--------,r-------,-------r--------r----~ 
o 
\Jf = 0 
• 
\J, " 0.05 
x 
'Vf " 0.10 
CJ. 
\J, = 0.16 
o 
\Jf :: 0.20 
t 
_2.01------+-----+-----+-------1f-------1 
'* 
immersion t ime (days) -
Fig. 90. Variation of the wt.- % change due to moisture absorption vs. immersion time for 
different filler volume fractions. 
153 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
the weight percent change of specimens with different filler volume fractions as a 
function of time of immersion. Figure 90 shows that, at 150 days of immersion, 
although all of the composite specimens have reached their equilibrium, the pure 
matrix specimen has only absorbed 93.3 % of its final equilibrium value. 
The experimental values of the moisture content as a function of time have been 
used to evaluate the diffusivity D of the materials, and a satisfactory coincidence 
between experimental and theoretical values was found by assuming that the moisture 
diffusion was following the second Fick's law of diffusion. 
Moisture absorption causes degradation of the mechanical properties of polymeric 
composites. This degradation is closely related to the variation of the extent of the 
mesophasewith the time of immersion. In Fig. 91, the variation of Ee of the composite, 
normalized to the respective modulus Em of the matrix, and that of the thickness Llri 
of the mesophase is plotted against the time of immersion for certain values of v I 
(VI = 0.16 and 0.20). These latter curves were derived from Eq. (297b). It is obvious 
from this and similar curves for other values of v I that, after an initial period of 
immersion of about 60-70 days, where a slight increase of the ratio Eel Em is observed, 
it is followed by a decrease. Moreover, at the same time, Llri has an inverse behavior, 
i.e., Llri decreases initially, and then increases. 
This may be explained by considering the following mechanism: As is shown in 
Fig. 90, during the initial period of immersion, moisture is absorbed by the specimens 
with a decreasing moisture absorption rate and finally an equilibrium is reached. 
In addition, since the area surrounding each one of the inclusions is characterized 
by voids, microcracks, and other defects, which create a preferential diffusion 
path 140,189), it is obvious that, during the initial time interval of immersion, absorbed 
moisture occupies the empty spaces available in the mesophase region, leading to 
25 
6.0 
\If =0.20 
2.0 
X~ 
5.0 
• 
t 
t 1.5 
• 
4.0 
"* 
.. 1,0 
3.0 ~ 
-
2.5 
4.5 -
• 
\If :0.16 
~ 
~ 
W 2.0 
)( 
-~~ 3.5 
1.5 
2.5 
1.0 
1.5 
0 
50 
100 
150 
200 
Immersion time (days) ---+ 
Fig. 91. Variation ofthe experimental values of the relative moduli Ec/Em of the composites and 
the thickness L1rj of the mesophase with time of immersion for various filler volume fractions. 
154 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
a plasticization of the mesophase material. Thus, within this period, the mesophase 
shrinks, because of the stresses exerted on it from the bulk matrix. However, the 
decreasing of the meso phase thickness leads to a better adhesion between filler and 
matrix and therefore to an increase of the ratio Ee/Em' 
Consequently, after some time, the absorbed moisture plasticizes the bulk matrix, 
and thus the mesophase expands. The increase of the mesophase thickness leads to 
a weaker bonding of the two main phases and consequently to a respective decrease 
of Ee/Em' 
Finally, as the equilibrium is reached, both EcfEm and Llr; take again their initial 
values and remain constant durmg the rest of immersion. The variation of the thick-
ness Llr; of the mesophase is proportional to the variation of the mesophase volume 
fraction. 
t 
o 
100 
time (days) --. 
200 
Fig. 92. Dependence of the mesophase volume 
fraction on the time of immersion for various 
filler volume fractions. 
Figure 92 shows the dependence of the mesophase volume fraction v; on the time 
of immersion, as it was calculated from Eqs. (297). Accordingly, during the initial 
period of immersion there is a strong variation of v; with time, this variation being 
analogous to the respective variation of Llr;- Moreover, the higher the filler volume 
fraction, the stronger the variation of vr 
The above description was concerned with the effect of moisture absorption on 
the extent of the mesophase. It was shown that during the initial period of absorption 
155 

VIII. Mechanisms of Moisture Absorption in Composites 
there is an inverse change of the ratio EclEm' as compared with the respective change 
of the thickness Llr; of the mesophase. The observed inverse change was explained 
by means of an absorption mechanism related to the real structure of the particulate 
composites. It was also shown that the observed variation of the extent of the meso-
phase with moisture affects the mechanical deterioration of the composites. 
156 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase 
Developed During Casting 
IX.1 Shrinkage Stress in Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
Among the most important factors determining the viscoelastic behavior of polymeric 
composite systems, are the adsorption of polymer macromolecules onto filler particles, 
as well as the adhesion between matrix and inclusions. The adsorption of polymer 
molecules onto filler particle~ is the main cause of the different conformations of 
macromolecules in the close vicinity of inclusions. Moreover, the change of shape 
of the macromolecules at the interface determines a region around the filler particles, 
which has different structure and properties than those of the bulk matrix. Thus, 
the presence of the filler in the polymeric matrix results in an imperfectness of the 
polymer network. 
On the other hand, adhesion of the matrix material to the dispersed phase in the 
composite creates the bonding between the phases and this increases the strength 
of the composite. 
The properties of composites can be divided into two main groups, that is the group 
where the hard inclusions constituting the dispersed phase are virtually incompressible 
when compared to the polymer of the matrix, and the group where both components 
possess approximately the same compressibility. In both groups, shrinkage stresses 
are developed around the dispersed inclusions. The resulting stress fields are of 
considerable intensity. 
Shrinkage stress is best studied by photoelastic techniques, since analytic solutions 
of even the simplest case of an isolated cylindrical fiber, or an isolated spherical 
particulate, present unsurmountable difficulties. Photoelastic techniques have been 
successfully applied to many shrinkage-stress fields (two- and three-dimensional). 
The constrained zone surrounding each inclusion forces the material of the matrix 
to deform extensively; this influences the polymerization procedure in this zone, and 
creates differences in the arrangement of the side branches of the evolving macro-
molecules. Where an isolated solid inclusion is surrounded by the setting matrix, 
this boundary layer is uniform for slowly developing polymerization processes. 
However, it is apparent that when inclusions lie close to and interact with each other, 
variable stress-fields form around each inclusion, with possible changes of signs of 
the stress from normally compressive to tensile. These regions around the inclusions 
are the nuclei of potential microcracks. Then, these boundary layers created around 
inclusions, due to adsorption interaction of the polymer with the solid surface, are 
characterized by a variable thickness and possess properties differing from those of 
the bulk of the matrix. 
157 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
The thickness of these layers depends on the cohesive energy of the polymer, on 
the actual state of the boundary of the inclusion and of its free surface energy, as well 
as on the flexibility of the backbone and side chains of the macromolecules of the 
matrix polymer. 
As a result of these adsorption and adhesion interactions between the constituents 
of the composite, a boundary layer is developed between phases, being the mesophase. 
This mesophase depends, among others, on the mode of polymerization of the matrix 
and the shrinkage stress fields developed during setting. 
Shrinkage stresses develop in most multiphase systems. Shrinking matrices can 
be either polymeric materials during curing, melted metals and thermoplastics, or 
concrete setting through cooling or drying. The resulting stress fields are of consider-
able intensity, exceeding sometimes the tensile strength of the matrix material. When 
this happens cracking takes place, even in the absence of an external load. A typical 
example is shrinkage microcracking in concrete 190), due to the tensile stress-field 
developed around the closely packed particles of the aggregate. A two-dimensional 
concept of shrinkage stresses has been used by several authors, e.g., Tyson and 
Davies 191), to determine the inter-fiber stresses in filament composites under load. 
Photoelastic techniques have been applied to three-dimensional models, simulating 
unidirectional fiber composites with long parallel metal or plastic cylinders embedded 
in a suitable resin matrix. Stress fields, due to polymerization shrinkage and also to 
differential thermal expansion, have been determined both experimentally and theo-
retically 192,193). 
A complete study of the two-dimensional normal section of a unidirectional fiber-reinforced 
material possessing square or hexagonal arrays of disc-like inclusions has been given in Refs. 1 
and 194. Therein, a detailed survey of previous attempts to tackle the two-dimensional case are 
included. 
. 
Shrinkage stresses have also been treated in three-dimensional form 2); the composite system 
was simulated by a body-centered cubic arrangement of nine identical spheres of unplasticized 
hot-setting epoxy resin, around which a plasticized matrix was cast. Finally, a photoelastic 
study of the matrix material surrounding a long fiber has yielded important results 195). 
For arbitrary dimensions and concentrations of inclusions, it is very difficult to study the 
internal stress distribution in a reinforced material, while it is less difficult when the inclusions 
are of a single material, with a simple geometry, arranged in predetermined shape. While the 
boundary conditions at each inclusion, in this case, can be readily specified with respect to the 
inclusion itself, they cannot be determined with respect to other inclusions, since they are also 
influenced by the boundary conditions of the neighboring inclusions. 
Hill 196) developed a general theory for evaluating the macroscopic elastic properties of fiber-
reinforced materials. Crossley 197) solved the case where the axes of the fibers are arranged at 
the nodes of a square lattice, while Hashin and Rosen 198) presented a solution for the case 
where the axes of fibers form a regular hexagonal lattice. 
All these studies tried to evaluate the mechanical characteristics of composites of different 
arrangements considering the idealized case of an elastic medium being stress-free before load-
ing. Similar theoretical studies were conducted by many researchers, who evaluated stress 
intensities at the matrix of a filament composite material when it was loaded in transverse 
direction to the filament 199). Again, all these studies considered the composite as a stress-free 
material before loading. An experimental study by Marloff and Daniel 200), considered the 
three dimensional case of a unidirectionally fiber-reinforced material subjected to normal 
transverse load. Again, here the material was considered as stress-free by subtracting the residual 
stresses produced in the specimen during the restrained shrinkage of the matrix setting period. 
However, commercial fiber-reinforced composites always contain residual stresses created 
during the setting period of the matrix, due to its restrained shrinkage. Knowledge of the stress 
158 

IX.l Shrinkage Stress in Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
distribution created by restrained shrinkage at the interfaces of a composite is of great import-
ance, these stresses are superimposed on the actual stress fields, due to the applied external loads 
or variations of temperature. 
Since the fiber-reinforced material is a multi-connected body, in which the forces acting on 
each of its boundaries are in static equilibrium, it has been suggested that the evaluation of 
strain and stress distribution, due to restrained shrinkage, may be studied by mechanical means 
applying prescribed displacements of the interfaces which simulate the restrained shrinkage. 
The stress distribution due to restrained shrinkage was experimentally determined 
by the method described in Ref. 194. The stress distribution in the matrix of a uni-
directional composite material due to shrinkage of the matrix was simulated by a 
photoelastic plane model corresponding to a transversal section of the material. The 
specimen was prepared with the circular inclusions made from a hard, cold-setting 
epoxy resin and the matrix from the same but plasticized epoxy resin. Previous ex-
perimental evidence 201) showed that addition of plasticizer to the epoxy resin dras-
tically changed the mechanical properties of the polymer (elastic moduli and Poisson 
ratios), while it did not considerably affect the thermal expansion coefficient. For 
preparing the photoelastic plane specimens, we took advantage of this property and, 
from the same polymer, specimens were made with any ratio between the elastic 
moduli of inclusions and matrix. In the designation of the composition of each poly-
mer, the first number denotes the wt. % of the epoxy pre-polymer, while the second 
number shows the wt. % of Thiokol LP3 polysulfide plasticizer. For polymerization, 
tri-ethylene-tetramine hardener was added, the amount of which was always 8 wt. % 
of the epoxy pre-polymer, and therefore this quantity was omitted in the abbreviated 
designation of the mixtures. 
Large sheets were cast of pure epoxy resin (without plasticizer), designated as 
100.0, with a thickness of 5 mm. Circular discs with a diameter D = 30 mm were 
cut and submitted to a full cycle of curing. The discs were placed between the two 
lateral sheets of the mould in a square 190.194) or triangular array 1). In order to study 
the influence of the ratio dj D on the stress concentration, where d is the minimum 
distance between inclusions, three different ratios were used: 0.05, 0.20, and 0.50. 
Those ratios correspond to 71, 55, and 35 % inclusion volume fraction for the square 
array, respectively, and to 83, 63, and 40 % inclusion volume fraction for the triangular 
array. 
The matrix made from a plasticized epoxy resin, was cast to completely fill the space 
between the inclusions. Two types of matrices were studied, with the inclusions made 
of pure epoxy polymer (100.0) in both cases. These matrices contained plasticizer 
at 40 and 50 wt. %. Immediately after the complete setting of the matrix, and before 
the starting of the curing cycle, it was observed that all photoelastic composite speci-
mens were in a stress-free state. The curing cycle consisted of a continuous heating 
at 110 °C for 6 hours and a subsequent cooling at room temperature. The curing was 
accelerated to minimize relaxation phenomena and to leave stress patterns with the 
largest possible number of fringes. 
The thermal expansion coefficient of the epoxy polymer remained practically un-
changed 201) with the addition of plasticizer up to 60 wt. %. Thus, the heating and 
cooling cycle before testing did not introduce any significant thermal stresses, and 
therefore the influence of the elastic moduli of different matrices on the stress con-
centration due to shrinkage in the composite material could be evaluated. 
159 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
The stress distribution created from restrained shrinkage in the matrix is generally 
a function of the evolving shrinkage coefficient during curing. Relevant information 
concerning the variation of the shrinkage coefficient for matrix materials during the 
curing process is given in Fig. 93. 
This figure shows the variation of the stress difference (at -
a,) of the tangential 
at and the radial a, components of stress at the interface of a single inclusion specimen, 
related to the corresponding shrinkage coefficients or the variable elastic moduli 
during curing as derived from the photoelastic tests. Accordingly, during the transient 
period of curing, where both the matrix elastic modulus Em and the shrinkage coeffi-
cient Q( are varying with time, the stress difference (at -
a,) depends on the constant 
elastic modulus of the inclusion Ef and the variable elastic modulus of the matrix Em' 
Furthermore, the coincidence of all points of the curve (at -
a,) = f{Em) in a straight 
line (for each Ef' and up to Em ~ 0.6 X 105 psi), indicates that this stress difference 
depends linearly on Em' Thus, it is valid that (at -
a) = kErn' where the coefficient k 
depends only on Er This coefficient increases with increasing Er 
At the end of the development of the matrix shrinkage, where the shrinkage co-
efficient Q( takes almost constant values, the stress difference (at -
a,) depends again 
linearly on the variation of Em' though with a smaller slope. 
The cured specimens were examined in a polariscope at room temperature, imme-
diately after they have been cooled down to ambient temperature. Photographs of 
the isochromatic patterns were taken in circularly polarized monochromatic light, 
while the isoclinic patterns were obtained in linearly polarized white light. The com-
ponents of stresses at the interior of the field were separated by using the shear-
difference method. 
Two types of specimens were cast simultaneously in the same plate and tested. The 
one part of the plate contained a single inclusion in an extended matrix. The remaining 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 0 
0 .2 
0 .4 
0 .6 
0 .8 1.0 
Shrinkage coefficient 
Em x 10-5 (psi I 
ax 104 
Fig. 93. Shrinkage coefficient and elastic modulus of matrix containing a single inclusion vs. 
the stress difference (CTr -
CT,) at the mesophase. 
160 

IX.1 Shrinkage Stress in Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
fOo 
o~o 
OClfE)O 
000 
Fig. 94. Arrangement of inclusions in a triangular array for the photoelastic specimen. 
part contained a number of inclusions disposed in square or regular triangular arrays, 
sufficient to create a typical stress field between inclusions (Fig. 94). 
All specimens were submitted to the same curing process and examined simultane-
ously in order to relate the stress intensity of the composite specimens to the stress 
intensity of the single inclusion specimen, and thus to evaluate the stress concentration 
factor in the square or triangular arrangement. 
Standard tension specimens were also cut from each matrix material, which were 
submitted to the same curing treatment as each composite specimen. The tension 
specimens served in evaluating the instantaneous elastic modulus and the correspond-
ing stress optical coefficient of the matrix material. The ratios of the elastic moduli 
EmlEf corresponding to the two matrices 100.40 and 100.60 were 0.40 and 0.085, 
respectively. 
For correlating the data obtained from the plane model with the three-dimensional 
stress distribution created in the same specimen, a series of experiments were carried 
out with simple three-dimensional specimens. These specimens, of a thickness t, 
contained either a single inclusion of diameter D and a ratio tiD of 1 and 2.5, or an 
array of inclusions with a ratio tiD = 15 and they were prepared from the same 
materials as the plane specimens. 
Figure 95 shows the variation of isochromatics along a generic radius (AC) on 
the mid-plane (Oxy) of the specimen for a single-inclusion specimen with tiD = 1. 
The distribution of isochromatics along a generic generator of the matrix-inclusion 
interface (line AB) is included. From the distribution n of the photoelastic fringe order 
along (AB), it can be seen that the order of the isochromatic fringe observed along 
the axis (AB) through the thickness of the specimen, and normalized to the thickness 
(real fringe order), is approximately equal to the order of the isochromatic normalized 
to the thickness existing at the intersection of the mid-plane Oxy and any generator 
of the interface (average fringer order). Moreover, the isochromatic distribution 
observed along any radius of the specimen through the thickness of the specimen, 
and normalized to the thickness (real fringe order), is approximately equal to the 
isochromatic distribution normalized to the thickness along the radius (AC) of the 
mid-plane (average fringe order). 
161 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
1.0 
B 
tx 
tx 
25 1--1-
c 
~20'1--~--4---~ 
... o 
~ 10 
(5 
~ 5 
o A 
o 
0.1 
~~ ._ ._. C 
z 0 
1/0=1 
Malrix 100.40 
Inclusion 100.0 
I 
C 
~ ~ M 
~ M 
~ M 
M 
ill 
Normal ized dislance lo(AC) 
Fig. 95. Real and average fringe order along the interface AB or the radius AC if a single-
inclusion triaxial specimen. 
On the other hand, from the three-dimensional specimen containing a triangular 
array of cylindrical rods, as well as a single and isolated rod, it was deduced that the 
form of isochromatics on planes normal to the axes of the rods and far from the ex-
tremities of the rod is similar to the isochromatic distribution in the plane model. 
Consequently, the distribution of isochromatics observed in the plane models, 
normalized to the thickness, coincides with the distribution of isochromatics on the 
plane of symmetry, also normalized to the thickness, in the case where the specimen 
is considered as three-dimensional. Then, the analysis of stresses was limited to the 
plane of symmetry of the plane models, where the distribution of isochromatics is 
known. However, since the analysis of shrinkage stresses is a three-dimensional 
problem, it is necessary for a complete evaluation of the stress distribution to know 
also the distribution of isochromatics on planes normal to the mid-plane. 
From a preliminary study of the stresses on the mid-plane of the three-dimensional 
specimens, it followed that the ratio of the re~l radial stress (Jr or the tangential stress (Jt 
at any point to the real stress (J? or (J? at the point of the interface is approximately 
equal to the ratio of the stresses (J; or (J; to the respective (J;o and (J;o corresponding 
to the same points but evaluated from data taken from the plane problem. This 
approximate interrelation between the ratios of stresses is satisfied with sufficient 
accuracy in the vicinity of inclusions of the single-inclusion specimens, while it is 
less accurately satisfied far from the inclusions. 
Under the above conditions, the stress on the multiple-inclusion specimens related 
to the corresponding stress at the interface in the single-inclusion specimen, was 
defined from data obtained from the plane models. Thus, it becomes evident that 
the results on the stress concentration have a qualitative character, because of the 
assumptions mentioned above. 
The photoelastic analysis of the stress field around a single inclusion consisted 
in derming the principal stress-difference distribution along a radius, derived from 
162 

IX.! Shrinkage Stress in Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
Fig. 96. Isochromatic fringe patterns for a single 
inclusion. 
Fig. 97. Isochromatic fringe patterns for a triangular array of inclusions with diD = 0.20 
(see Fig. 94). 
163 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
the isochromatic pattern, and the angle of orientation of principal stresses, derived 
from the isoclinic curves (curves of equal inclination of the principal stres-
ses). Figures 96 and 97 present typical isochromatic patterns of a single in-
clusion, as well as of an array of triangularly disposed inclusions in a matrix 
100.40. On the other hand, all isoclinics ended at the interfaces at angles which coincid-
ed with their characteristic inclination. Moreover, from Fig. 98, where the dimension-
less fringe distribution along a radius of a single inclusion in an extended matrix 
was plotted, it follows that the stress distribution in the matrix of a single inclusion 
specimen is different than the classical Lame's solution of elastic cylinders and it is 
slightly dependent on the mechanical properties of the matrix material. The differ-
ences between fringe values, derived from different matrix materials and the Lame 
solution, cannot be attributed to the exclusive influence uf the matrix-material pro-
perties on the stress distribution. Therefore, it can be accepted that the stress distribu-
tion is independent of the ratio ErnlEf and the shrinkage coefficient of the matrix for 
the types of materials investigated. 
.. 
c: -
c: 
1.0 r---r------,r------,r------,r-___ ----, 
0.8 Q\-----f---+---+ 
o Matrix 100.40 
0.2 1--r-~i~::;9;·~M~~~
tr~
ix~1:0:0.:60J 
O L---L--~L--~L--~L--~ 
, 
1.S 
2.0 
2.5 
3.0 
IS 
Normalized to the radius D/2 polar distance r 
Fig. 98. Dimensionless fringe distri-
bution along a radius of a single in-
clusion in an extended matrix. 
From the photographs of isochromatics shown in Figs. 96 and 97, it can be deduced 
that the stress distribution in the matrix depends on the ratio diD for a generic value 
of the ratio ErnlEr The evaluation of the components of stresses in the matrices of 
the composite specimens was made along the axes of symmetry of the array and is 
extended in the region AKBC (Fig. 94), which constitutes the basic element of the 
matrix for the triangular array. A similar basic element exists for a square array. 
The distribution of isochromatics along the AK and KB axes of the triangular array, 
normalized to the corresponding values of isochromatics at points A and B, respective-
ly, is given in Fig. 99. 
The difference of principal stresses and, consequently, the maximum shear stress 
on the axisAKis a function ofthe ratio diD, and it is roughly independent of the elastic 
modulus of the matrix. In contrast, the maximum shear stress along the KB and.BC 
axes is a function of both ratios diD and ErnlEr The influence of the ratio ErnlEf 
decreases for increasing ratios diD. Therefore, it can be concluded that the ratio 
EmlEf does not substantially influence the distribution of the maximum shear stress 
along the AKB and BC axes for values of diD> 0.5. 
164 

IX.! Shrinkage Stress in Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
1.8 
<> 
~ 
c 
i1.2 ~--+----+----~--1----+----t---~---i----t---~ 
~ 
o 
"a .. . 
~ o 
~~h+----4-----~---+----~----~~~-----r----t=~-i 
e 0.6 
L-o 
Z 
o A 
o 
dID = 0.50 
0.5 
1.0 0 
B 
C 
0.5 
to 0 
0.5 
1.0 
Normalized distances on I AK) or I KB) or I BC) -
Fig. 99. Dimensionless fringe distribution along the axes AK, KB, BC, normalized to the values 
of the isochromatic no at the matrix of the corresponding single inclusion specimen (points A, 
K, C, B are defined also in Fig. 94). 
Studies of the isoclinics indicate that the directions of the axes of the principal 
stresses depend mainly on the ratio diD and, to a lesser extent, on the ratio EmlEr 
Figure lOO shows the position of the isoclinics on the interface for the triangular 
array of inclusions. For an increase of the ratio diD, the curves of the points of inter-
sections of isoclinics with the interface become more and more flat and tend towards 
a straight line, corresponding to the limiting case of the ratio diD -+ 00, where all 
u 
oCt 
c o 
300~------'--------'~~7----' 
m 200 r-~~~~---­
.!! 
K 
C'I 
c " 
u 
c 
oo ~A~ 
______ ~ 
______ ~ 
______ ~. 
o 
2 
4 
6 
Angular distance from A on AC Ix ~) 
Fig. 100. Position of isoclinics along the 
interface on the side of the matrix in a 
triangular array of inclusions. 
165 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
isoclinics are straight lines passing through the center 0 of the inclusions. For small 
values of the ratio diD, the influence of the ratio EmlEf on the distribution ofisoclinics 
is apparent, while for larger values of the ratio dID,.t!te influence of EmlEf is insig-
nificant. 
If the distance between inclusions is reduced, the isoclinic of a generic parameter 
recedes rapidly from the points of intersection of the interfaces and the intercenter 
line. The most receded isoclinic from its initial position, when diD -+ 00, is marked 
in Fig. 100 with a dotted line. This movement of the isoclinics with the reduction of 
the ratio diD results in a respective movement of the maximum value of the shear 
stress along the interface and in the same direction. This recession of the shear stress 
from point C, due to the recession of isoclinics, is restrained from the slight inverse 
movement of isochromatics toward the minimum distance. 
The stress intensity due to shrinkage of the matrix at characteristic points of the 
specimen with a triangular array of inclusions has been related to stress intensity 
developed in the corresponding single-inclusion specimen submitted to the same 
curing cycle. The stress concentration was derived from the interrelation between 
the two stress intensities. Therefore, all components of stresses were normalized to 
the stress CT~ (compression), CT? (tension), or 'I'~ax (shear) at the interface of the corre-
sponding single inclusion, and the results are presented in dimensionless form. 
The strong influence of the ratio diD and the weak influence of the ratio EmlEf on 
the value of the shear stresses at the interface as related to the maximum shear stress 
of the corresponding single-inclusion specimen are shown in Fig. 101. 
The distribution of the normalized stresses CTr and CTt along the axes AK, K11, and BC 
for the case of diD = 0.5 is given by Fig. 102. The matrix materials were plasticized 
epoxy polymers 100.40 and 100.60. The stress distributions for the ratios diD were 
similar to the stress distributions in Fig. 102. It becomes apparent that both ratios 
diD and EflEm influence the stress distributions. 
" " 
oE 
.., 
~ 
u « 
c: 
0 
'" 
0 
:0: 
c 
r... 
'" '" 
GJ 
r... .... 
'" 
r... 
C 
GJ 
.J:. 
VI 
166 
0.6.-------r--:;or.,.----....,------, 
0.4 
0.3 
0.2 
0.1 
2 
4 
100.40 
100.60 
6 
Angular distance from A on AC (x Tt/36) 
Fig. 101. Shear stresses along the inter-
face, normalized to the maximum shear 
stress '!~ax on the side of the matrix for 
the corresponding single-inclusion spec-
imen. 

t 
~-
~ 
~ 
~ 
11'1 
o 
:;: 
a ... 
IX.l Shrinkage Stress in Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
1.5 r-----~----------r---TI 
diD = 0.50 
o Matrix 100.40 
1.0 
• Matrix 100.60 4-----t-lf 
arlarO 
B 
( 
11'1 - 0.51------; 
11'1 
(II ... -
In -to I---+---i-t------=T'"'$;;;;~-+--__ H 
0.2 
0 .4 
0 .6 
x/D -
0.8 
1.0 1.05 
Fig. 102. Stress ratios (Jrf(J~ and o"rl(J~ along the axes AK, KB, and BC, versus the normalized to 
the diameter of inclusion D, distances x along these axes. 
The evolution of the stress concentrations at the four characteristic points A, E, C, 
and Kis given in Fig. 103 as a function of the ratio diD, for a ratio of the elastic moduli 
of inclusion and matrix of EJIEm = 11.75. The limiting values of these curves for the 
case of diD -> 00 are also given. 
<>-
~ 
0-
~ 
~ 
11'1 
0 :;: e 
11'1 
11'1 
~ -
In 
10r--'r--'---.--~---r--, 
2.0 
1.0 
0 
-to 
X ar laro 
;< 
+ a, JatO 
0 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0.4 
0 .5 
0 .6 
diD 
I 
, 
I 
0.83 
0.63 
0.40 
"t-
Fig. 103. Stress ratios (J,/(J~ and (JJ(J? at 
points A, B, C, and K in a triangular array 
of inclusions for Eff Em = II. 75. 
167 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
It was also shown that for different ratios EflEm' the stress components (Jr and (Jt 
retain their signs over the entire field, except perhaps at point A, where the (Jr stress 
changes from a tension to a compression, as the ratio diD increases. In fact, the radial 
stress (J r passes through zero for values of the ratio diD of either 0.15 or 0.08 for the 
matrix materials 100.60 and 100.40, respectively. It is therefore reasonable to conclude 
that, for a value of the ratio EflEm larger than 2.50, the radial stress at A is always 
compressive. 
The stresses developed in the neighborhood of the isotropic point K are always 
tensile, creating a state of hydrostatic tension at point K. This hydrostatic tension 
tends to zero if the ratio diD tends to infinity. Moreover, while the radial components 
of stress at Band C are compressive, all the tangential components are tensile stresses. 
It can be generally stated that there is an intense variation of the stresses (Jr and (Jt 
for ratios diD < 0.2. Furthermore, with an increasing free distance between inclusions, 
a decrease of the absolute values of stresses is evident, with the exception of the radial 
stresses at point A and of the radial and tangential stresses at point C. Moreover, 
an increase of the value of the ratio EflEm generally results in an absolute increase 
of the corresponding stresses, which tend to the same limiting values when the ratio 
diD tends to infinity. 
For the case of a square array of inclusions similar results may be deduced 194). 
Figure 104 presents the radial and tangential stress ratios (J)(J~ and (Jtl(J~ at the four 
characteristic points A, B, C, and K, versus the variation of diD or vf' It follows 
that, while at the minimum interfiber distance the stresses are always of opposite 
sign with compressive radial stresses and tensile tangential stresses, there is a region 
between inclusions around point K which is in a state of biaxial tension. This area, 
4.0 
3.0 
t 
2.0 
~ to 
0-. 
0 
~ 
ti" 
VI -to 
<II 
VI 
VI 
~ -2.0 
iii 
"t:I 
<II 
N 
-3.0 
., 
E 
L. -4.0 
0 z 
0 
78 
168 
(f 
0.10 
67 
diD 
0.20 
0.30 
0.40 
0.50 
0.60 
50 
40 
33 
"1-
Fig. 104. Stress ratios at points A, B, C, 
and K in a square array of inclusions for 
Ef/Em = 11.4 (points A, B, C and K are 
defined also in Fig. 94). 

IX.1 Shrinkage ·Stress in Fiber-Reinforced Composites 
while it never extends to points A and B, includes point C and its neighborhood when 
diD is smaller than 0.25. The state of stress at point Kis always a hydrostatic tension, 
since this point is isotropic. 
From this and similar figures for different EflEm ratios, it also follows that, again, 
a decrease of diD results in an increase of the compressive radial stress at points A 
and B. This stress increases very rapidly for higher values of EfiEm. It is therefore 
expected that, for a combination of low diD and high EflEm' the compressive radial 
stress will exceed the strength of the matrix and initiate a crack. 
The tensile stress O"t at point B again decreases rapidly with decreasing diD. This 
stress may become compressive for small diD and high EflEm' creating a biaxial com-
pression at point B. A tensile stress, O"r' is developed at point C when diD ~ 0.27 and 
EflEm = 2.4, or for diD ~ 0.24 and EflEm = 11.4. This compares favorably with 
a va.lue of diD ~ 0.225 for rigid inclusions, given by Hsu 202). The O"rIO"~ curve at 
point C becomes steeper for increasing EflEm and decreasing diD. This stress will 
rapidly become very large for high EfiEm. For rigid inclusions, this curve becomes 
asymptotic to the y axis 202). Thus, the tensile radial stress may' initiate a bond crack 
at the interface. Since the tangential stress distribution curve runs parallel to the radial 
stress-distribution curve, the hoop stress may also be large enough to initiate a crack 
in the radial direction. 
In conclusion, it may follow from this study that, as the unidirectional two-phase 
material becomes more and more close-packed, the most vulnerable region is in 
the vicinity of point A (Figs. 102 and 103). There are two possibilities of crack initia-
tion in the matrix in this region. If the tangential stress at this point exceeds the tensile 
strength of the matrix material, a crack will be developed, which can propagate radial-
ly because of the stress concentration developed at the crack tip. The other possibility 
is linked to the tensile radial stress at the interface between two phases. If this stress 
exceeds the adhesion-strength between matrix and inclusion, it is possible that a 
disruption between inclusion and matrix may happen at A and propagate along the 
interface. However, the evolution of this disruption is limited, in comparison with 
the evolution of a radial crack in the matrix, because the disruption between inclusion 
and interface will be stopped by radial compressive stress developed at the interfaces, 
while, in the case of a radial crack in the matrix, this crack is propagating in a region 
which is in a state of tensile stress. Furthermore, for a value of the ratio EflEm ~ 2.50 
for the triangular array, and ~ 2.40 for the square array, the radial stress at the inter-
face is expected to steadily become a compressive stress. Therefore, from the two 
possibilities of initiation of a crack, for such ratios of EflEm' there only remains the 
case of a crack initiated by tangential stress. 
Finally, it should be mentioned that imperfections of the matrix material, e.g., 
voids, impurities, etc., may be the cause of nucleation of microcracks in regions with 
stress concentrations smaller than the stresses at point A, as are the points B, C, etc. 
Moreover, for any type of array of inclusions, the stress distribution around the 
inclusions depends on the elastic moduli of the two phases, as well as on the degree 
of shrinkage. It was shown that, for small distances between inclusions, large compres-
sive stresses develop at the smallest interfiber distance, while tensile stresses at the 
center of the largest interfiber distance can extend to parts of the interface. These 
tensile stresses may cause initiation of cracks in this area. The biaxial tensile area 
increases with decreasing EflEm and decreasing diD. 
169 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
IX.2 Shrinkage Stress in Particulates 
The spatial behavior of spherical closed-packed inclusions, arranged to a body-
centered cluster and submerged in a homogeneous matrix, presents many difficulties, 
and the interaction of the neighboring inclusions can be studied only experimentally. 
A three-dimensional array of close-packed inclusions is shown in Fig. 105. The packing 
a 
b 
Fig. 105. a The geometry of the three-dimensional composite model with spherical inclusions 
arranged in a cubic body-centered arrangement. b Geometry of the triangular element OAF 
lying on a principal diagonal plane of the cube. 
factor m is defined as the ratio of the least possible distance, d, between the surfaces 
of two spheres, in this arrangement, and the diameter D of the spheres. By use of the 
notation shown in Fig. 105 b, this results in: 
(298) 
where diD = m, and for the inclusion volume concentration vI' i.e., the ratio of the 
total volume of inclusions contained in the cube formed by the centers of the eight 
outer spheres to the volume of the cube itself: 
0.68 
v = ---c=-
f 
(1 + m)3 . 
(299) 
Obviously, m is eliminated when the central inclusion comes in contact with the 
outer inclusions, in which case the inclusion volume concentration acquires its maxi-
mum value vf = 0.68. 
In the present study, three different values of the packing factor m were applied, 
namely 0.05, 0.2, and 0.5, corresponding to volume concentrations of 0.587, 0.394, 
and 0.201, respectively. Furthermore, each one of the packing-factor values was 
combined with two different values of the ratio of matrix modulus to inclusion 
modulus. 
The polymers used for preparing the composites were as follows: As prepolymer, 
liquid diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A was used, with an epoxy equivalent of 185-192 
and a viscosity of about 15.000 cP at 25 °C. Phthalic anhydride was used as the curing 
170 

1X.2 Shrinkage Stress in Particulates 
agent. This forms with the above resin a hot-setting system, which was suatable 
under the employed conditions. Dibutyl-phthalate was used as a plasticizer. 
Combinations of diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A, phthalic anhydride, and dibutyl 
phthalate produce materials of ideal transparency and excellent photoelastic pro-
perties. 
An unplasticized hot-setting resin system designated as H-IOO-0-40 was used for 
the inclusions. For the matrix, two different hot-setting systems were used, designated 
H-100-30-50 and H-100-0-40, with ratios of inclusion modulus to matrix modulus 
of 1.6 and 1.00, respectively. (In the above notation H stands for hot-setting system 
and the numbers following stand for wt. % of prepolymer, plasticizer, and curing 
agent.) 
Spherical inclusions, conveniently machined, were suspended by strings stretched 
with springs on a frame to assure the exact position of the inclusions before casting 
(Fig. 106). Then, the matrix material was cast into cylindrical metal moulds, in which 
the inclusion-carrying frame was subsequently immersed, and the whole system 
cured. After curing, the casting was removed from the mould, and the parts of the 
metal frame removed from the casting, which was then machined into a cubical form 
corresponding to the arrangement of the inclusions. The cube was of sufficiently large 
size for the shrinkage-stress field not to be affected by machining (with an edge length 
Fig. 106. Spherical inclusions suspended in a 
body-centered cubic arrangement. 
about four times the diameter of the inclusions). The cube was further subjected to 
annealing in order to effect a complete cure and to remove from the faces any frozen 
stresses generated during polymerization near the mould surface and the parts of the 
metal frame. The proper cube size and the annealing procedure, for the shrinkage-
stress field to remain unaffected, were determined by a series of tests. Subsequently, 
the cube was sliced with a fine disc saw on a lathe. 
The separation of the principal stresses was performed by the general three-di-
mensional shear-difference method, as developed by Frocht and Guernsey 203). In 
particular, the analysis along axes of symmetry was greatly simplified :by applying 
Tesar's method 204). Computerized procedures for three-dimensional photoelastic 
analysis are outlined in Ref. 205. 
171 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
For a single inclusion, an attempt to simulate the phenomenon of shrinkage by 
a model based on thermal stresses developed in a system consisting of two elastic 
materials with different thermal expansion coefficients leads to 206) : 
(300) 
where O'rO is the radial stress component at the surface of the inclusion, O'r and O't 
are the radial and tangential stress components in the matrix, D/2 the radius of the 
inclusion, and A a function of the mechanical and thermal properties of the materials 
of the matrix and inclusion and also of the amount of polymerization shrinkage of 
the matrix. Finally, r is the polar distance from the center 0 of the inclusion. 
'0 
Fig. 107. Isochromatic pat-
terns (dark and light field) 
for a single-inclusion spec-
imen. 
Figure 107 shows the isochromatic pattern for a single-inclusion specimen for 
inclusion H-100-0-40 and matrix H-100-30-50, with Ef/Em = 1.6, at a slice thickness 
of 3 nun; Fig. 108 shows the radial and tangential stress distributions in the radial 
direction for inclusion H-100-0-40 and matrices H-100-0-40 and H-100-30-50. Here, 
we no longer find agreement with the above theory (Eqs. 300). There is a considerable 
discrepancy, which is a function of the amount of plasticizer and also of the distance 
from the surface of the sphere. 
Concerning the transient period of curing, no experimental investigation of the 
three-dimensional problem is possible. However, it is reasonable to assume that the 
phenomenon proceeds in the same manner as in the two-dimensional case presented 
in Refs. 194 and I. 
Figure 109 presents a typical isochromatic fringe pattern for the dark field, for a 
diagonal section, for Ef/Em = 1.6 and a packing factor of m = 0.2. The fringe-order 
distribution is plotted in Fig. 110 for the horizontal section with fringe-order values 
normalized to the corresponding fringe order No at the interface, either along the LZ 
axis of symmetry or along the MG axis. 
The normal stress distribution in the vicinity of inclusions depends not only on the 
difference of the secondary principal stresses, as given by the isochromatic fringe 
patterns on the slices, but also on the orientation of the secondary principal-stress 
axes. The study of isoclinics indicates that the position of each isoclinic depends both 
on the packing factor and the ratio of the moduli. 
A typical isoclinic pattern of the diagonal section for m = 0.05 is given in Fig. Ill. 
172 

<> 
z 
Z 
... 
AI 
~ 
... 
0 
AI 
C7I 
C 
.;: 
"-
III 
III 
AI 
C; 
0 .;;; 
C 
AI 
E 
i5 
0 
1.0 
a 
0 .-
" 
a:: 
VI 
VI 
Q/ 
!:: 
VI 
b 
1.S 
t 
<> 
~ 
ti" 
t 
<> 
b -
b 
2.0 
2rlD-
Ef /E .. =1.6 
Ef/E.= to 
IX.2 Shrinkage Stress in Particulates 
2.S 
Fig. 108. Dimensionless distribu-
tion for a single-inclusion spec-
imen of a) fringe order and b) ra-
dial and stresses in the radial 
direction r, normalized to the 
radius D/2 of the inclusion. 
Fig. 109. Isochromatic fringe pattern (dark 
field) on a diagonal section. 
173 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
,~------~----~ 
& 
0 
E,/E.=1.6 
f 1.51---~lllo)l\:--+----· E,/E.=1.0 
tI 
QI j 
'" 
c 
~ 
C 
OL-________ -L ________ ~ 
______ __J 
1.00 
1.25 
1.50 
e. 
2r/D~ 
~ to r--------,-----------.----------r----, 
z .. 
QI 
'C 
.... 
o 
QI 
en 
C £ 
'" '" 
~ 
.2 
j O~----~------~------~~ 
1.00 
1.25 
1.50 
1.75 
b 
2r/D~ 
Fig. 110. Dimensionless fringe-
order distribution on a hori-
zontal section (a) along the LZ-
axis of symmetry and (b) along 
the MG-axis in terms of the 
polar distance r normalized to 
the radius D/2 of the inclusion. 
A complete photoelastic analysis intended at determining the stare of stress along 
two axes of symmetry, namely the LZ and MG axes, was conducted. In Figs. 112(a) 
and (b) the principal-stress distribution along the LZ axis of symmetry is presented. 
The radial stress and the (equal) tangential stresses are normalized to the radial 
stress component at the interface. It can be seen that for increasing packing factors, 
the effect of the ratio of the moduli gradually decreases, tending to the values of the 
one-inclusion specimens. 
Figures 113 and 114 give the principal-stress distribution along the MG axis of 
symmetry, normalized to the radial stress component at the interface, for Ef/Em 
= 1.6 and Ef/Em = 1.0 for two different packing factors. 
From Figs. 113 and 114, the following conclusions can be drawn: 
i) The radial stress is compressive along the MG axis and the tangential stresses, 
although tensile at the interface, also eventually become compressive. 
ii) A tensile radial stress can only be developed in plane two-phase systems, where 
a portion of the matrix material, practically isolated between closely packed inclusions, 
may exert radial tractions on the inclusions during shrinkage. For the configuration 
examined here, no such isolation is possible. 
174 

~ 
t> -b 
~ 0.5 
a 
.... 
III 
III 
'" 
!: 
VI 
0 
a 
tOO 
t 
!?o 
0-
0 :-= a 
"-
III 
III 
'" 
.... 
+--
VI 
b 
o E, 1Em: 1.6 
Q;~tO 
1.25 
1.50 2 riD ---+ 1.75 
Radial Stresses tT~1 compressive) 
1.25 
1.50 
1.75 
2r/D ---+ 
Tangential Stresses cry and a, (tensile) 
IX.2 Shrinkage Stress in Particulates 
Fig. 111. A typical isoclinic pattern 
on a diagonal section. 
Fig. 112. Dimensionless distri-
bution of (a) radial stresses and 
(b) tangential stresses along the 
LZ-axis of symmetry for various 
packing-factors, normalized to 
the radial stress (J,{) • 
175 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
o :;: 
o 
a: 
'" '" 
QI 
.... -
VI 
o 
:;: 
o 
a: 
'" '" 
QI 
!: 
VI 
21-----+--
. 
Et /E .. =1.6 
o 
E,/E .. =1.0 
m=0.2 
2r 10 ----
_2 L-------~---------L------~ 
2.--------.---------,--------. 
o 
• 
Ef /E. =1.6 
Ef IE., = to 
m= 0.5 
--... --
2r/O -
4 
_2 L-____ 
L-____ L-___ 
~ 
Fig. 113. Dimensionless principal-
stress distribution along the MG-
axis of symmetry for packing factor 
m = 0.2. 
Fig. 114. Dimensionless principal-
stress distribution aiong the MG-
axis of symmetry for packing factor 
m = 0.5. 
iii) The effect of the ratio of the moduli decreases with increasing packing factor, 
tending to values similar to those of the one-inclusion specimens for very large packing 
factors. 
iv) For low values of the modulus ratio, the tangential stresses, initially tensile, 
tend to become compressive more rapidly. 
176 

IX.2 Shrinkage Stress in Particulates 
v) Owing to the high tangential stresses, the system has a tendency to develop cracks 
in the radial direction. This can be visualized by the method employing thermally 
crazed surfaces developed in Ref. 207. Phthalic anhydride, when present in quantities 
greater than 18 %, is incompatible with diglycidyl ether of bisphenol-A at high tem-
peratures, and so crazing appears, which follows patterns perpendicular to tensile-
stress trajectories. Specimens may be fabricated from such a material, or can also 
be applied as a surface coating in the form of a thin layer. In the present case, a H -100-
30-40 material was applied as matrix material around a cluster of inclusions, and 
plane sections were produced by ma~hining. Specimens thus formed h~re subjected 
to a temperature of 130°C for a few hours. Figure 115 shows the crazes thus developed 
for a single inclusion, and Fig. 116 shows the craze pattern of a section through the 
outer spheres, which also cuts the central sphere at a plane not passing through its 
center. 
From all this experimental evidence, it may be concluded that the generation of 
shrinkage stresses during curing of a polymeric matrix is too complex a process to 
be simulated by mechanical models (such as oversized inserts in holes of an already 
cured material), or by thermomechanical models (by considering the differential 
thermal expansion of the inclusions and the matrix), or finally, by any mechanical 
model, assuming elastic behavior of the constituent materials. 
For a single inclusion, it was shown that the stress distribution depends on the 
moduli of the phases. The effect of the ratio of the moduli is more pronounced away 
Fig. 115. Thermal crazing pattern developed on 
a cross section of a single-inclusion specimen. 
Fig. 116. Thermal crazing pattern, 
developed on a cross section of a 
specimen with a body-centered cubic 
array of inclusions. 
177 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
from the inclusion, but gradually decreases towards the interface. The divergence 
of theoretical results based on a thermo mechanical model varies in a completely 
analogous manner. 
For a cluster of inclusions, it was shown that the stress field depends both on the 
moduli of the phases and the degree of packing. The effect of the ratio of the moduli 
is more pronounced when the inclusions are closely packed; as the degree of packing 
decreases, this effect also decreases, tending towards the figures for a single inclusion. 
No tensile radial stress develops in the three-dimensional problem, as it does in 
a two-dimensional system. On the contrary, large tensile stresses are developed in the 
tangential direction and crack initiation usually takes place at the inclusion interface 
and propagates in the radial direction. 
IX.3 Shrinkage Stress Distribution Along a Fiber 
Finally, we consider the shrinkage-stress distribution along the length of a fiber 161). 
The shrinkage-stress distribution in a transverse section of the unidirectional fiber 
composite existing at some distance from the extremities of a single long fiber or 
an array of such fibers has been examined in Section IX.l. However, along the length 
of the fiber, the stress distribution developed at the neighboring matrix layers surround-
ing the fiber is not uniform. The importance of this stress variation increases by the 
fact that, where this stress distribution presents local maxima, stress singularities 
exist because of the eventual edges at the extremities of fibers. 
This pinching effect, where any transverse thin-layer stress distribution varies with 
the position of each section along the longitudinal axis of a fiber, is exemplified by 
the isochromatic fringe distribution of a thin meridional section of a fiber and sur-
178 
Fig. 117. Isochromatic fringe pattern around a 
meridional section of a fiber embedded in the 
matrix material. 

T 
~ I 
.... 
tTl 
" 
~wl~~~~~ 
__ ~~ 
__________ ~ 
.~ 
)( 
CI 
K r------ -- ·-·-·-r 
I 
I 
cylindrical inclusion 
o 
~ 
• 
.J::. 
B' 
IX.3 Shrinkage Stress Distribution Along a Fiber 
z 
Fig, 118, Configuration of the experi-
mental three-dimensional model of a 
single cylindrical fiber embedded in a 
soft matrix. 
Fig. 119, Isoclinic pattern for a meridio-
nal section of the specimen with the 
cylindrical fiber in the matrix (one 
quarter of the specimen of Fig. 118 is 
5 
shown). 
r '" 
isoclinic parameter 
179 

IX. Shrinkage Stress at the Mesophase Developed During Casting 
rounding matrix material shown in Fig. 117. The increase of the number of isochroma-
tics at the extremities of the fiber is a clear indication of this effect. 
In order to experimentally study this effect, a three-dimensional model of a single 
cylindrical fiber, imbedded in a soft matrix, was prepared as indicated in Fig. 118. 
The inclusion with a diameter D = ~5 mm was cast in advance from cold-setting pure 
epoxy polymer (100-0-8) set with 8 % triethylene-tetramine. After its complete curing, 
a bigger cylinder of a diameter d = 130 mm of an epoxy polymer with 40 % Thiokol 
LP3 plasticizer was cast around the fiber. The height of this model was h = 37 mm. 
The structure was left to cure at ambient temperature and the stress distribution around 
the cylindrical inclusion developing in the shrinking matrix material was studied 
by the frozen-steps method of three-dimensional photoelasticity 278). 
Figure 119 presents the isoclinics in a meridional section of the specimen. The 
graph indicates only the upper half of the symmetric right-side pattern of isoclinics 
indicated by the hatched part, KOCBAL, in Fig. 118. It is obvious from the isoclinics 
that not only at the extremities A and A' of the interface between the fiber and the 
matrix there is a singular line at the comer of the fiber, but also another set of singular 
points, placed along the periphery of a circle normal to the fiber axis, where all iso-
clinics pass (points S, S' Fig. 118). The circumferences with centers M and M' and 
radii MS and M'S' (MS = M'S'), respectively, correspond to isotropic lines, where 
both components of principal stresses are equal and having an hydrostatic pressure 
without shear. Figures 120 and 121 present the isochromatic pattern in the matrix 
o -
C 
I 
~ 
x 
iii 'x " 
180 
K IT·-·-·-·_·_·-·---Z 
i 
~ cyllndricol inclusion 
j. J 
interfoce 
0~==2~~
/
~4~S;.0~6===f8~~10 
4.0T 
~~ 
Ir' 
__ ,-__ +-3~~~'_--,~/) 
! 
2.0' 
/ 
51 
r + 
maximum shear stress 
Fig. 120. Isochromatic pattern in the 
matrix corresponding to the maximum 
shear stress distribution III the one 
quarter of a three-dimensional photo-
elastic model of a monofilament com-
posite. 

t 
~ 
0 
I 
~ 
" 
>-. 
'-.... 
Q/ e e 
>-. 
11\ -
0 
.~ 
)( ., 
IX.3 Shrinkage Stress Distribution Along a Fiber 
Kit---'-'--- '-' 
z 
i § 
cylindrical inclusion 
o! 
~~~~~~~-n~~ 
2 
4 
s~~~~~~~~--~ 
i 
"tzr - shear stress 
Fig. 121. Isochromatic pattern in the 
matrix corresponding to the 'tzr-shear 
stress distribution for the same model as 
in Fig. 120. 
corresponding to the maximum shear-stress distribution and the .zr shear-stress 
along the r, z axes, dermed in Fig. 118, distribution on a meridional section of the unit, 
respectively. It is clear from both these patterns that beyond this zone, shear compo-
nents of stresses remain insignificant. Therefore, this zone included by the cylinder 
SSS'S' in Fig. 118 represents the zone of perturbation of each fiber. Beyond this 
neighborhood, the matrix is uniformly strained. 
Moreover, the singular points Sand S' define the length along each fiber where 
full adhesion without perturbations is developed between inclusions and matrix. 
181 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase 
due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
X.1 General Aspects 
One of the main factors contributing to the degree of adsorption developed between the 
setting matrix and an inclusion is the surface quality of the inclusion. An ideal spherical 
inclusion, or a cylindrical one terminating in two half-spheres, with a polished -
or at least smooth -
boundary is considered an ideal interface, along which sufficient 
factors leading to a mesophase may arise. The absence of cavities, abrupt edges, 
singularities, and sudden variations of the shape of the enveloping surface of an 
inclusion warrant a surface where stress concentrations or stress singularities are 
minimized, not yielding ground for anomalous developments of constrained regions 
of the setting matrix. Then, the quality ofthe surface of the inclusions is very important, 
as it contributes to the structure of the surface and to the adjacent boundary layer 
of the matrix. 
As repeatedly mentioned, the number of possible conformations of macromolecules 
on the surface is reduced due to their interaction with the surface of solid inClusions. 
This affects the viscoelastic behavior of the polymer at its boundary layer and the 
packing density of the inclusions, by increasing their characteristic dimensions 11). 
This interaction with the filler surface is one of the main factors regulating the size 
of the mesophase. 
Among the other types of discontinuities of the filler surface, sharp edges of fiber-
like fillers, or other irregularities due to the relative roughness of the surface, play 
by far the most important role as regions of stress concentration, favorable for 
developing microcracks which may lead to failure of the conwosite. 
This chapter examines the phenomena of crack initiation and eventual propagation 
from singular regions of inclusions and especially from the edges of fibers. 
X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
In order to study the dynamic mode of fracture of fiber composites, a simple model 
was considered, in which a thin layer of the composite, corresponding to a central 
section of a fiber, oriented in the direction of an impUlsive applied load was removed. 
In this way, the thin-plane stress model replaced the behavior of the composite along 
this axisymmetric plane. The model was loaded by a uniformly distributed stress 
pulse, created from a falling weight along the protruding transverse face of the in-
clusion. The fracture behavior of the interface between the inclusion and the surround-
ing matrix due to dynamic loadings can thus be studied. 
182 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
The propagation mechanisms of transverse cracks along composites have fre-
quently been studied in plane models, in cases where a crack propagated either inside 
the matrix or in the inclusion, and approached the mesophase or any other obstacle 
of the material, such as voids, impurities, or microcracks inside or along the meso-
phase. However, it is important to consider the phenomenon of cracks emanating 
from the edges of fibers, when a significant tensile or compressive load is applied to 
the fiber because of the general loading of the composite and the deformation pro-
perties of its phases. 
The following will treat the initiation and slow propagation of cracks from the 
edges of fibers, by using the method of reflected caustics 208). Applying the modified 
minimum-strain energy density criterion 209), it is possible to evaluate the angle of 
crack initiation at the edge of a biwedge of the fiber-matrix material, as well as the 
values of the components K[ and K[ [ of the stress intensity factor during crack initia-
tion when this biwedge is submitted either to an overall tension or to compression 210). 
This is followed by a study in which the propagating crack inside the matrix, created 
under the influence of a dynamic compressive or tensile load in the composite unit 
behpeen fiber and surrounding matrix, advances inside the matrix, following a zig-zag 
path of subsequent steps and following different directions 211-213). 
To completely understand the problem of singularities due to geometric disconti-
nuities, stress intensity factors in a plate containing reentrant, asymmetrically loaded 
edges will be described. Although the influence of roughness of the fiber boundary 
faces is a three-dimensional problem, this seemingly unsurmountable problem is 
overcome by a simplifying consideration of a principal section of the fiber passing 
symmetrically by the irregularity of the surface 214). 
For a Cartesian Oxy frame, as in Fig. 122, with its origin at the tip of the notch, the 
components of stresses in the close vicinity of the root of the notch depend on the 
stress singularities ,11 and ,12 existing there. It has been shown 215) that, close to the 
C1 
y 
x 
1=0.2 m 
Fig. 122. Geometry of a V-notched plate with an angle of 60°. 
C1 
183 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
notch, the stress singularity dominates the stress field and the respective complex 
stress functions may be expressed in an asymptotic form 216): 
(301) 
(302) 
(303) 
In these relations, KI and AI (i = 1,2) are complex quantities expressing generalized 
complex stress intensity factors, and Ai and A2 are the orders of singularity near the 
root of the notch. 
From these relations it may be derived that, in order to evaluate the stress intensity 
factors at the notch, it is necessary that measurements must be made close to the root, 
where the stress singularity dominates the stress field. Furthermore, in a expansion 
series of the complex stress functions, as many terms must be taken into account, 
as are deemed necessary. 
The first requirement is satisfied by the method of caustics, since, for this method, 
all experimental data are taken from the periphery of a small circle surrounding the 
notch root, whose radius is defined from the requirements of the singularity and 
which unequivocally defines the singular region 217). The second requirement is ful-
filled by more than one measurement of the caustics, which improves the accuracy 
of the results 218,219). 
Moreover, it was shown 216,220) that the orders of singularities Ai 2 in sharp notches 
may be expressed in terms of the angle rp of the notch by the simple relation: 
sin (fll 2rp) = ±fll 2 sin rp 
, 
, 
(304) 
where: 
(305) 
with A varying between -0.5 ~ A < O. 
The unknown complex coefficients Kl and ~ may be evaluated from measure-
ments of the caustics. If the angle rp of the notch is rp < n/2, then the order of singular-
ity at the notch root does not differ much from 1/2 221), which is the value of the order 
of singularity for a crack, that is for a sharp notch of zero angle. This approximation 
gave satisfactory results for notch angles between 0 and 90°. However, for angles of 
n/2 < rp ~ n, the order of singularity deviates drastically from 1/2, and its exact 
value must be considered in order to accurately evaluate the stress intensity factor 
of the notch 222). An exact method for evaluating the stress intensity factor at a notch 
for angles larger than n/2 is given in Ref. 223 for cases of symmetric loading, where 
the stress intensity factor is always real. 
For asymmetric loading, both K J and KII are operative. In the following, an exact 
solution is given, by taking into account the accurate value of the strongest singularity 
at the notch and by introducing the influence of the second strongest singularity in 
184 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
the vicinity of the notch. In this way, the results obtained are much more accurate 
than those from any other experimental method. 
The stress intensity factor is a quantity conceived to determine the state of stresses 
near the singular point at a crack tip and it corresponds to the factor of the flrst and 
singular term in the asymptotic expansion series of the complex stress function, 
If>(z). However, the concept may be extended to any type of singularity in a stress 
fleld and, therefore, to the singularity at the root of the notch. 
For the case of reentrant edges, symmetrically loaded, the complex stress function 
If>(z) takes the asymptotic form in the vicinity of the singularity 216): 
(306) 
where the factor K is a real number. The stress intensity factor for this case is expressed 
by 223): 
K J = (2n)1/2 lim [r-Aa.u(r, 0)] 
r~O 
(307) 
where {axx(r, O)}r~O is the component of stress along the axis of symmetry of the 
notch, as the polar radius r approaches the origin (the root of the notch). 
The same stress intensity factor, K l' is given in terms of K in Eq. (306) by the expres-
sion 219): 
[ 
(AW)! 
{(A + 2) W}] 
KJ = ± (A + 2) (2n)1/2 
I - cos 2 
cos 
2 
K 
(308) 
where W is given by: 
w = (2n -
rp) 
(309) 
and rp is the angle of the notch. 
The respective stress intensity factor for the symmetric case of a notch has been 
theoretically determined 224) and is given by the approximate relation: 
(310) 
where a is the stress applied to the plate at inflnity, and all the other quantities are 
as indicated in Fig. 122. 
Therefore, for the cases where the stress intensity factor KI is real (A1 -# 0, A2 = 0), 
this factor may be evaluated experimentally from Eq. (308) after determining K 
from Eq. (306), or theoretically, by using the approximate Eq. (307). In this way, 
a comparison of the experimental results with theory is possible for symmetric 
loading of the notched plate. 
For the experimental determination of the stress intensity factors at the roots of 
notches, the optical method of caustics has been used 218,219,224). According to this 
method, a mechanical singularity is transformed into an optical one by means 
185 

x. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
of a suitable experimental mapping, based on simple principles of geometrical optics. 
A coherent light beam, impinging on a thin transparent plate, is partially reflected 
from the front and rear faces of the plate, while a part of the light beam traverses it. 
In the presence of a stress gradient, respective gradients of thickness variation and 
refractive index variation occur, causing the reflected rays to deviate and concentrate 
along a strongly illuminated singular curve, thus forming a caustic. Here, the method 
of caustics is applied to the study of the constrained zones created in the vicinity 
of an inhomogeneity in a plate under generalized plane stress conditions. In this 
case, a boundary discontinuity exists with or without singularities. 
Consider a coherent monochromatic light beam, emitted from a He-Ne gas laser, 
impinging normally on the lateral faces of a stressed thin plate made of a transparent 
and optically isotropic material (such as PMMA), and which is partially reflected 
from the front and rear faces of the plate. Only light rays traversing the plate, or 
reflected from the front and rear faces once, and having sufficient intensity to yield 
satisfactory caustics, are taken into account. 
The material properties for polymethylmethacrylate are given by 217): 
E = 3.15 X 109 N/m2 , 
v = 0.34 
cf = -1.08 X 10- 10 m2/N , 
c, = -3.24 X 10- 10 m2/N 
(311) 
where E is the elastic modulus of the material and v its Poisson ratio, whereas cf 
and c, are the optical constants of the material for light rays traversing and reflected 
from the rear face, respectively. 
Zo grad S 
(w=P'P"j 
Specimen 
Screen 
Fig. 123. Geometry of plate with inclusion and relative position of specimen and reference 
plane. 
The emerging light traversing the plate or being reflected on the rear face, is deviated 
and the vector w (w = P' P") which expresses the displacement of a generic point, P, 
on the plate, as it is projected on a reference plane at distance Zo from the mid-plane 
of the plate (Fig. 123) is given by: 
(312) 
186 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
where 0"1 and 0"2 are the principal stresses at the point P and the overall constant C 
is expressed by: 
C = Ct = zOdct 
(for transmitted rays) 
(313) 
C = C, = zodc, 
(for reflected rays from the rear face) . 
An additional value for C is : 
C = Cf = zOdcf 
(for reflected rays from the front face) 
where cf = viE, derived from: 
wJ = zo(vdlE) grad (0"1 + 0"2) • 
(314) 
Consider now an infmitely thin plate containing an inclusion determined by a 
closed, simply connected boundary and subjected to a plane state of stress at infinity. 
A Cartesian frame Kxy is associated with the inclusion. Following the nomenclature 
of Muskhelishvilli 215), the state of stress in the plate in the vicinity of the inclusion 
can be expressed in terms of two functions, <1>(z) and '1'(z), of the complex variable 
z = x + iy. The function <1>(z) = u(x, y) + iv(x, y) is of interest in the present 
problem as: 
(315) 
where Re means the real part of the complex stress function <1>(z). 
The quantity w expresses the projections on the screen of the deviations of the 
reflected or transmitted rays at the constrained zone surrounding the inclusion, 
due to the lateral contraction, by different amounts depending on the slope, as we~l 
as on the variation of the refractive index of the constrained zone. These rays are 
concentrated at an envelope, which is thus strongly illuminated and forms a caustic. 
This limiting envelope represents a singular curve for w. The condition of the existence 
of a singularity is the zeroing of the Jacobian determinant J = 9(x', y')19(x, y) = o. 
This equation, after some algebra, yields: 
14C<1>"(z)1 = 1 
This latter yields the form of the initial curve, i.e., the curve on the surface of the 
specimen creating the caustic curve on the reference screen. The equation of the caustic 
is given by: 
W = z + 4C<1>'(z) 
where <1>'(z) is the complex conjugate of the derivative of the function <1>(z) with respect 
to z. 
The above relations are valid for a parallel light beam impinging on the specimen. 
For the case of a divergent or convergent light beam, the above relations become: 
1C*<1>"(z)1 = 1 
(316) 
187 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
and: 
(317) 
In these relations, Am is the optical magnification factor given by: 
A = Zo + Zi 
m 
Z. , 
where Zo and Zi are the distances between the specimen and the reference ~creen, 
and between the focus of the light beam and the specimen. Moreover, the new overall 
constant C* is expressed by: 
C* = 4CA . 
m 
In most cases, the function cP(z) is replaced by the function lfJ(z) which is given by: 
cP(z) = d<p(z) . 
dz 
For the general case of asymmetric loading of the plate, the stress function cP(z) of 
Eq. (303) becomes 214): 
'K 
) - "I + (K 
'K) - "2 
I III Z 
[2 -
I 
1I2 Z 
• 
(318) 
For the symmetric type ofloading, Kn i= 0, K[2 i= 0, and Km = KIl2 = 0, whereas, 
for the asymmetric case, all four coefficients are not zero. While the symmetric case 
has been solved theoretically and experimentally, the general case of asymmetric 
loading has not yet been solved. 
For the solution of the general case, where all four coefficients are operative, 
the equations for the caustic and its initial curve are used, and the relations for the 
coordinates x and y of the caustic and the equation for the initial curve are derived 
as: 
188 
x = rAm cos 8 -
4CA l r-("1 +1)(Kll cos 8(AI + 1) - KlJ1 sin 8(AI + 1» 
-4CA2r-(A2+ 1)(KI2 COS8(Az + 1)- KIl2 sin 8(A z + 1» 
Y = rAm sin 8 - 4C AI/"-(AI + 1)(KIll cos 8(AI + I) + Kll sin 9(Al + 1» 
- 4CAzr-(-<z+1)(K1l2 cos 9(A2 + 1) + KI2 sin 9(A2 + 1)) 
(319) 
{4CA 1(A I + 1)]2 r- 2(Al+ 2)(K;1 + K;d + {4CA2(A2 + 1)}2 r2(Ki2 + Kid 
+ 8CAI (AI + 1) 4CA2(A2 + 1) r-(-<I+"2+4 ) 
x {cos 9(A2 -
)'1) (Kn K [2 + KmKm) 
+ sin 9(A2 -
AI) (KnKII2 -
KmK[2)} = 1 . 
(320) 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
From the nonlinear equation (320) it follows that the initial curve is no longer a 
circle, as was previously found for all cases of cracks in elastic, isotropic, and homo-
geneous media 208). Here, the polar radius of the initial curve depends on the angle 9. 
Furthermore, for each of the three caustics, which depend on different global con-
stants C, we have different initial curves and, therefore, caustics differing in shape and 
size. However, Eqs. (319) and (320) are valid for all points of whatever caustic we 
choose to evaluate the stress intensity factor. Generally, the caustics formed from 
reflections from the rear face are the largest and the sharpest and, therefore, yield the 
most accurate results. 
The above-developed theory was applied to an experimental study of the singularity 
at the edge of a fiber, embedded in a softer matrix. A meridional section of the fiber 
was considered. The fiber material was steel, whereas the matrix material was of 
plexiglas. 
E 
.-: 
0 
" -
t 
y 
C1 
1+ + + ~ 
~ + J 
F 
G 
1 ~ 
j 
~ 11 
1 t 
0 
" 11 
J t 
B 
.c 
N 
1 1 L-za=o.ozmJ ~~ 
o· 
:B/{)1 = -900 
x 
A 
w=0.1m 
t 
t 
t t t 
t 
Fig. 124. Geometry of an assembly 
of a Plexiglas plate and fitted steel 
inclusion containing an orthogonal 
strip of width 2a subjected to pure 
compression at infinity. 
Figure 124 presents the form and dimensions of the specimen. The thickness d of 
the plate was 3 mm. The matrix plate and the fiber were subjected to pure compres-
sion under a uniformly distributed load (J along the side IJ of the fiber, counter-
balanced by a uniformly distributed load (J p on the side CD of the matrix plate. Since 
the matrix and the fiber were of equal thickness and since good contact was assured 
between the boundaries of cont.act of the two constituents, it was assumed that, in 
addition to the uniform compression, transmitted from the inclusion to the plate 
through the side 00', pure shear loads acted along the sides 0' F and OG of the 
two constituents. The uniform distribution of loading along these two sides was 
checked from the pseudocaustics formed along these boundaries, which indicated 
a uniform distribution of deformation there. 
189 

x. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
a 
b 
-4.0 
4.0 X (10-2 m) 
' 8(.;)2=20") 
Fig. 125. a) Experimental and b) theoretical forms of the caustics obtained at the tip of the right-
hand corner of the orthogonal strip (Fig. 124), subjected to a combination of direct force and 
shear. 
The magnification ratio for this test was Am = 4.77 and the distance Zo = 0.980 m. 
The caustics formed at the corner 0 of the plate by a compressive load 
(j = 4.9 X 106 N/m2 applied through the fiber are given in Fig. 125. The orders of 
the singularity at the root of the orthogonal notch are: 
A1 = 0.45552 and 
A2 = 0.09147 . 
In order to define in advance the two reference points where the coordinates of 
the external caustic would be evaluated, two thin radial marks were traced on the 
rear face of the notched specimen at angles 81 = -90° and 82 = 20° (cf. Fig. 124). 
Deformation of the specimen changed these radial lines into curves near the notch 
root, where deformation was severe. The intersections of these marks with the external 
caustic defined the points of reference for applying the system of Eqs. (319) and (320). 
190 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
The radius Yo of the initial curve of the caustic, given in Eq. (320), may be approxi-
mated by: 
Yo = ICKA(A -
1)1 1/(2-;.) . 
(321) 
The radius ro of the initial curve for a cracked plate, made of an elastic isotropic 
material, is always a circle. It depends only on Am and zo' since the other quantities 
remain constant. So, the radius Yo can be reduced by a suitable combination of Zo 
and Am and the unknown stress intensity factors can be determined in known, very 
small, distances Yo from the crack tip. 
The caustic formed from light rays reflected from the rear face of the plate may 
be approximated by a circle, whereas for the rays reflected from the front face, the 
caustic is a cusp-like curve, located at the interior or the circular caustic. For a mixed-
mode deformation of the cracked plate, the caustics are rotated by an angle Q. The 
angle Q is subtended by the axis of descontinuity (crack, boundary) and the axis 
of the internal caustic which passes through its center and its cusp point (see definition 
of Q in Fig. 128 (a, b)). By measuring the maximum transverse diameter D, of the 
external caustic and the angle of rotation Q, we can determine the stress intensity 
factors K[ and Kll from the following relations 222): 
(322) 
(323) 
m = Kll/K[ = tan w = cot f3 
(324) 
w = -AQ 
(325) 
where (j ;.( q;) is a correction factor depending on the order of the singularity A, which 
takes the value (jiq;) = 0.0745 for singularities A = -0.5. Equation (324) also 
yields: 
w + f3 = 90 deg or f3 -
AQ = 90 deg . 
(326) 
Thus, angle f3 at the crack tip defined by Eq. (324) can be determined from Eq. 
(326) for an arbitrary loading of the plate, by measuring the rotation angle of the 
experimental caustic. In this way, from each experimental caustic it is possible to 
obtain the value of the rotation angle Q and the maximum transverse diameter D,. 
From these two elements and by using Eqs. (322, 325), we can evaluate the stress 
intensity factors ~ and ~[ under loading conditions of combined tension and shear, 
as well as the direction of the external loading. 
The caustics from front- and rear-face reflections and the points A and B of inter-
section of the radial reference marks with the external caustic were shown in Fig. 125. 
The coordinates of these points were 
Xl = -0.0067 m , 
X2 = 0.0150 m 
191 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
and 
Y1 = -0.0083 m , 
Y2 = -0.0005 m . 
Introducing these values into the system of Eqs. (319) and (320) for the respective 
angles 81 = -90° and 82 = 20°, and solving it numerically, the values of the coeffi-
cients K 1,ll(1,2) are readily obtained as: 
and 
Kn = 1.81 x IOSNjm3/2 
Kl2 = -0.54 X 105 Njm3/2 
Klll = 3.49 X 105 Njm3/2 
. 
1\5 
3/2 
Kll2 = 0.67 x Iv~ Njm 
. 
Since a theoretical solution for this complicated problem does not exist, the only 
way of checking the accuracy of the coefficients K1,ll(1,2) is by introducing these 
values into the complex stress function 4>(z) [Eq. (316)] and by using Eqs. (316) and 
(317) to trace with these values the initial curves and the respective caustics. The 
thus traced caustics (Fig. 125 b) maybe compared in size and form with the experimen-
tal curves. A comparison wi~ the experimental curves of Fig. 125a shows a satis-
factory coincidence. 
In this way it is possible to evaluate the stress intensity and the order of singularity 
at a reentrant wedge of a fiber, by assuming the respective simplified plane-stress 
problem and using the experimental method of caustics. 
After studying the type of singularities and the respective stress intensity factors 
developed along any abrupt change of shape of the lateral face of an inclusion of 
a 
a 
F .. 
( 
H 
r 
hard 
strip 
2b= 0.06 m 
B,l 
I 
Attttt 
H~H 
K 
H.----;.t 
o 
t-T---...,D 
K 
h=O.15m 
2a=O.02m 
Soft matrix 
Soft matrix 
w=O.15m 
+0 
E 
b Z~--------~-a--------~E 
Z 
a 
Fig. 126. Propagation of cracks emanating from the comers A and B of a composite plate con-
taining an orthogonal strip of width 2a subjected to a) pure tension at infinity and b) pure com-
pression. 
192 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
a composite, terminating in a deep or shallow reentrant edge, we now concentrate 
on the opposite phenomenon of a fiber, where the reentrant edge is formed in the 
matrix material. These edges are very important, because microcracks and cracks 
develop in general in their neighborhood in the matrix material, they propagate in it, 
and become catastrophic above some limit of loading. 
An accurate elastic solution of the stress distribution over a biwedge, loaded 
to an overall tension or compression, is a formidable task, has not been achieved to 
date (Fig. 126). For the present purposes, a simp,lified model for the mode of loading 
of the unit is used. A bimaterial model is given in Fig. 126, which is appropriate 
for investigating both mode-I and mode-II stress conditions in cracked plates. 
Figure l26a shows a hard orthogonal strip, cemented into a plexiglas plate of the 
same thickness. A mildly plasticized epoxy polymer, whs used for cementing, leading 
to a satisfactory adhesion of inclusion and matrix. 
If this composite is submitted to a tension load, the lateral interfaces AF and Be 
are submitted to shear stresses, whereas the interface AB undertakes normal extension 
stresses. Since the cement is resistant to shear stresses, fracture is expected along the 
interface AB, which, as loading is continued, becomes a crack of length 20c submitted 
to mode-I deformation, which then propagates along its axis. In this case, the crack 
propagates along the direction IABK, which means that the fracture angle 80 becomes 
zero. This fact is in accordance with all fracture criteria. 
If the same specimen is subjected to a compressive loading (Fig. l26b), the interface 
AB becomes submitted to the compressive load, whereas the lateral interfaces AF 
and Be are liable to pure shearing loads. Since the cement is resistant to compression 
stresses, (and perhaps is not even necessary if perfect contact exists between the two 
surfaces), fracture is expected now to take place along the interfaces AF and Be. 
These fractured interfaces behave like edge cracks of length 2b, loaded in pure shear; 
hence, with this type of loading only mode-II streSS is operative. In this case, cracks 
emanate from the comers of the orthogonal notches of the matrix. These cracks have 
the directions AI and BK, and the angles between them and the interfaces AF and 
Be are the fracture angles 80 • Thus, by measuring the instantaneous angles 80 , when 
the cracks AI and BK slowly propagate, the criterion for the fracture angle at the 
edge can be established. 
In the model shown in Fig. 126, the fractured interfaces between the matrix and 
strip AB, for the first caSe (Fig. 1 26a), and AF and Be, for the second caSe (Fig. l26b), 
Were considered as cracks, where the order of singularity is A. = -0.5. In reality, 
this assumption is only partially correct, because the order ofthe singularity is A. = -0.5 
only when a crack exists in an homogeneous and isotropic material. When the crack 
is along an interface of two materials with different mechanical properties, the order 
of singularity is no longer A. = -0.5. Only cases where the matrix is plexiglas and 
the embedded strip is steel, aluminum, or copper are considered here. 
The order of singularity at the tip of a crack along an interface may be found by 
using the Dundurs parallelogram 225). By this parallelogram, the order of singularity 
can be found from the values of the two Dundurs parameters oc and 13, which depend 
on the elastic moduli and Poisson ratios of the two phases of the bimaterial plane 
and on the angles of the wedges. The value of A. for the above combinations of materials, 
which are extreme, varies as -0.50 ~ A. ~ -0.46; see also papers by Bogy 226) 
and Theocaris and Gdoutos 227). 
193 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusious 
The order of singularity lies in the same region for aolarge number of material 
combinations. When the strip and the matrix are of the same material (e.g., plexiglas), 
witharatioofthemoduliofelasticityofE./Em = 1, the order of singularity is A. = -0.5. 
For a steel strip and a matrix of plexiglas; this ratio is E./Em ~ 60 and A. = -0.46. 
Therefore, for large differences in elastic constants of the two materials and for an 
angle of the one wedge of n/2, the error in the singularity is small enough for this 
special problem and, therefore, without any considerable error, this singularity can 
be assumed as A. = -0.5. 
The distributions of the stresses on the interfaces AB, AF, and Be, and around 
the singular points A and B (Figs. 126a and 126b), need not be taken into aCCOl,lDt, 
since the stress intensity factors at the crack tips are determined by the optical method 
of reflected caustics, which does not require any knowledge of the stress field near the 
boundaries or the singular points, since the size and the orientation of the caustics yield 
sufficient information to evaluate K. First, we consider bimaterial plane-specimens, 
composed of an orthogonal steel strip cemented in an elastic plexiglas matrix, loaded 
in tension, as in Fig. 126a. Both materials have the sa.me thickness d = 3 mm, while 
the other dimensions are: AB = 20 mm, AF = Be = 60 mm, and HZ = ZE 
= 150mm. 
These specimens were submitted to a tension load, initiating fracture along the 
interface AB, which, as loading progressed, became a crack of length 2a, submitted 
to mode-I deformation. Then, this crack propagated along its axis, as seen in Fig. 127a. 
From the symmetry of the caustics at the tips of the two arrested cracks, it is easy to 
derive that the case of mode-I crack extension is operative at these crack tips. 
Then, the experimental evidence from mode-I deformation of the composite speci-
men allows to conclude that the slowly advancing cracks of Fig. 127a propagate 
along the direction IABK of Fig. 126a, while the fracture angle 80 was zero and con-
sequently the stress fields at the tips of these cracks were of mode-I. The experimental 
results in the above case absolutely coincide with those of all fracture criteria. 
The second experiment employed the same specimen as in the previous test, except 
that the external loading was a compressive load (Fig. 126b). The lateral interfaces 
AF and Be were submitted to pure shear loads. This uniform distribution of loading 
along the interfaces was checked from the pseudocaustics formed along the 
boundaries, which indicated a uniform distribution of deformation at that site. In 
order to define this, a system of tracings, parallel and perpendicular to the boundaries 
of the interface, were scratched into the rear surface of the specimen when it was 
unloaded (u = 0). Under loading (u # 0), deformations caused these lines to become 
curved near the bottom of the notch. Near the interfaces AF and Be, the lines parallel 
to these sides remained straight, while the perpendicular lines became curved. This 
means that the loading .at these sides was pure shear. Consequently, as the loading 
was increased, the fractured interfaces behaved like cracks with K[ = 0 and KII # O. 
For a critical value of the external compressive load, cracks appeared emanating 
from the edges of the orthogonal notch (Fig. 127b). These cracks had the directions 
AI and BK in Fig. 126b, and the fracture angles 80 were measured to be always 84 deg 
(± 30') for matrices made of plexiglas (v = 0.33). These results corroborate those 
determined by the modified strain-energy-density criterion 209). 
With increased loading and as the cracks propagated inside the matrix, the mode of 
deformation prevailing at the crack was no longer a simple shear, since the interfaces 
194 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
Fig. 127. Cracks formed in the corners A and Bofa specimen, loaded as in Fig. 126: a) in tension, 
and b) in compression. The orthogonal strip is steel and the matrix is Plexiglas. 
AF and Be were eccentric, relatively to the instantaneous positions of the crack tips. 
This complicated loading with K] and KJI operative, gave the cracks a tendency 
to progressively approach the stable mode of propagation, that is the K]-mode. 
These unknown values of K] and K]] at the crack tip can be determined by the 
generalized method of caustics 208). For the plexiglas, matrix the mechanical and 
optical constants of the specimen and the dimensions of the optical set-up were: 
=- -0.5, [),.(rp) = 0.0745, ICJ = 0.22898 X 10- 12 m2 N-I, Am = 11.37, d = 3 mm. 
Furthermore, from the orientation of the internal and external caustics relative 
to the instantaneous crack axes, indicated in Fig. 128a, it is possible to measure the 
external transverse diameter, Dt , and the rotation angle, {!, of the caustic. These 
quantities for the case in Fig. 128 a are: Dt = 37 mm and {! = 45 deg. From these 
195 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
a 
Y(cm) 
b 
( 
Fig. 128. Caustics formed at the tip of a propagated crack emanating from the corner B: a) 
experimental, b) theoretical. In this bimaterial wedge the strip is steel and the matrix is Plexiglas. 
data and from Eqs. (322-326), it can be readily derived that the stress intensity 
factors are : 
In addition, from Eqs. (322-326), it was found that w = 22.5 deg, from which 
the angle P between the direction of the load and the direction of the crack AB at 
its tip was determined as P = 67.5 deg. 
So, the applied initial external loading of the specimen (Fig. 126b) for the crack 
of Fig. 128a, with its tip at the position indicated, corresponds to an oblique loading 
in the direction CD. 
The accuracy of the experimental results may also be tested by plotting the corres-
ponding theoretical caustics for the data given above and by Eqs. (316) and (317), 
and then compared with the experimentally obtained caustics. Figures 128a and 128b 
give this comparison; both caustics are presented on the same scale. 
196 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
Thus, the composite model developed here allows to evaluate the quantities K[' 
KI l' 13, and 90 for any plane crack, by using the method of caustics. 
Lets now consider the propagation of cracks emanating from the edges of a fiber 
when the composite model is subjected to a compressive impulsive load. All specimens 
have the form indicated in Fig. 126. 
The hard strip representing the fiber was made from a steel plate 
(E = 2.06 x 1011 Nm- 2, v = 0.29), while the soft matrix was of plexiglas (E 
= 3.34 x 109 Nm2 , v = 0.33). The dimensions of all the specimens are indicated in 
Fig. 126, while the uniform thickness of the bimaterial plate was d = 3.3 mm. 
The compression load was applied by using an impact load, PI' applied along the 
upper transverse boundary of the steel strip, by a falling weight. The form of the 
weight and the length of the strip, FCBA, were selected to assure an initially uniform 
stress pulse. The height of fall and the falling weight were selected to assure at all 
times an initiation and propagation of cracks in the matrix from the corners A and B, 
respectively. In this way, the lateral interfaces AF and BC of the specimen were sub-
mitted to shear loading and behaved like edge cracks with A = -0.5 when the ad-
hesion between the two phases was disrupted. For a critical value of the energy trans-
ferred to the strip from the external compressive impact load, the cracks appeared, 
emanating from the corners A and B of the orthogonal notch. The fracture angles 
of a matrix made of plexiglas were 84 deg (± 30'). This is in agreement with the 
respective values determined by the modified strain energy-density criterion. These 
cracks were propagated in the interior of the matrix under complicated load condi-
tions. The initial velocities of the cracks were always high, but these velocities dimin-
ished rapidly as the cracks propagated. Moreover, variable velocities, with eventual 
crack arrests, were detected during their propagation and before the complete fracture 
of the specimen. 
A high-speed Cranz-Schardin camera was used, having a maximum frequency 
of 107 frames per second. This camera was operated at a suitable and variable speed, 
convenient for recording the whole interval of the slowly propagating cracks. The 
mode of triggering and necessary adjustments of the camera are described in Ref. 228. 
The reference plane -
consisting of a ground glass -
where the caustics were 
formed, was placed at a distance Zo = 0.4 m. The magnification factor was Am = 0.88 
and the optical constant of the specimen was ICI = 0.691 X 10-6 m4 N- 1• The 
thickness of the specimens was d = 3.3 mm and the distance (zo + z;) was 3.4 m. 
Figure 129 shows the caustics created at the tip of a propagating crack subjected 
to mixed-mode loading conditions. While the exact position of the crack tip and the 
respective crack length can be readily evaluated from the instantaneous position 
of each caustic, the position and the magnitude of the maximum transverse diameter 
D and the longitudinal diameters Dl 
and Dl . may be determined from the angle 
t 
max 
mIn 
sub tended by the axis of symmetry of each caustic and the respective instantaneous 
crack axis. These quantities yield the data necessary for calculating the instantaneous 
values of KI and KIf' 
At this point, we only consider the crack initiated first from the corner B of the 
notch, since the symmetry of loading assures that the phenomena appearing at B 
will also appear at corner A for a symmetric propagation of cracks emanating simul-
taneously from both corners of the notch F ABC. 
197 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
t = 2 liS 
t =132 \1S 
t = 12 liS 
t=196 \1S 
t=24 liS 
t=260 \1s 
t= 324 1lS 
Fig. 129. Propagating cracks from the corners A and B of the notch (Fig. 126 b) in the Plexiglas 
plate under mixed-mode deformation. 
198 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
For each of the twenty-four successive caustics, recorded by the high-speed camera 
and which represent successive instants of the propagating crack, the diameters Dt' 
D/ max' D/ min of the caustic and the crack lengths. (X were determined. All these values 
were used to derme the ratio q, = (D/ 
-
D, . )/D, 
and, from the diagrams 
max 
mIn 
max 
of Fig. 5 in Ref. 229, the ratios f1. = KIl/Kr at each instant. Also, from the respective 
crack lengths a and the known time interval between successive frames, the propaga-
tion velocity of the crack was evaluated. 
The variation of the length of the running crack versus time is plotted in Fig. 130. 
The change of the crack length with time reflects the propagation and the arrest 
periods of the crack and conforms with the respective crack velocity c, as shown 
in the corresponding curve of Fig. 131. 
The variation of the stress intensity factors KI and KIf' and of the crack velocity c 
in terms of the crack length a is given in Fig. 132. It may be observed that a large 
variation of Kl' KIl, and c at the initiation period of the propagation of the crack 
takes place. 
After the first kink of the crack at the zone AB in Fig. 131 whose period is rather 
small the crack stops for a time interval BC in Fig. 131, during which the values 
of Kr and Kll are strongly oscillating and KJI takes also negative values for some 
period of time. 
Then the crack starts to propagate again (region CD in Fig. 131) and its velocity c 
increases smoothly, it remains constant and afterwards decreases until it stops for 
a long period of time (DE in Fig. 131). In this time period both stress intensity factors 
increase initially; afterwards, KJI decreases and tends slowly to zero, whereas KI 
remains constant. This means that the stress conditions at the crack tip, which initially 
are of a mixed mode, change progressively to simple mode I as the crack propagates. 
It is of interest to point out that during the periods of crack rest, after the first 
short and the second longer kink, at the time intervals AB and CD in Fig. 131, (zones 
BC and DE in Fig. 131), the respective KI and Kll oscillate strongly, will amplitudes 
indicated by the vertical lines BF and DG in Fig. '132. 
12 
t 8 
e 
'1' o ..-
" 
CI 
4 
I 
o o 
I~ 
/ 
~ 
100 
200 
300 
400 
tillS) -. 
Fig. 130. Variation of the crack length a vs. time t of crack propagation. 
199 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
2.4 ~-------,---------.---------r--------, 600 
1.8 
t 
N 
1.2 
'" 
'E 
Z 
III 
E 
'" 
~ 
I< 
'" 
~--~~-+~--~~~--~--~r-------~ 150 u 
~ 
.;z 
0 A 8 . 
- 0.6 
0 
100 
200 
300 
400 
t (\1s) ---
Fig. 131. Variation of the stress intensity factors K[, KII and the crack velocity c vs.,time t of 
crack propagation. 
L4 
600 ------F--r---------.---------~--------~ 
1.8 450 -4,.-tlP--#-+---------.::~+------r___t-------r:1 
i 
1.1 300--J.11----!l--.y::==---------+~,.__----_+------r+'r+._1 
rg-
rr:: 
z 
U"\-
o .... 
I< .r 
0.6 150.f-6:r-{l---l----------b---o-----.::~_f_;=:::::::=__H 
~ 0.0 
-O,6L-____ ~B~,C~~ 
___
_____ :_-------_7-------~ 
o 
3 
6 
9 
12 
QI<10-3(ml_ 
Fig. 132. Variation of the stress intensity factors K/ , KII and' the crack velocity c vs. crack 
length a. 
With the computed values for the stress intensity factors Kp KII and from tan w 
= KIIIKp we can determine the angle w of the variation of the orientation of the 
crack axis with time. The variation of the obliqueness of the crack with time and its 
path along the crack length a are given by Fig. 133. The impact load PI' creating a 
planestress pulse along the strip, i s propagated and transferred to the matrix material 
surrounding the strip. 
200 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
During the first period of loading, where the stress pulse is still propagating without 
any reflection at the interior of the soft matrix, a crack is initiated at the bottom B 
of the reentrant corner, propagates in the matrix for 20 I.I.s, and stops when the pulse 
has already passed through the area of the crack. In this period of time, the caustic 
at the crack tip passes through a maximum and starts to diminish, while its orientation 
angle w rapidly changes. These phenomena correspond to the area ABC in Fig. 133. 
When the stress pulse attains the bottom boundary of the soft matrix, it is reflected 
and propagates backward. This reflected stress pulse, impinging at the arrested crack 
tip, changes the stress field in the vicinity of the crack tip, so that the KI I stress-
intensity factor changes sign and the caustic is rotated drastically. Indeed, this reflected 
stress pulse is partly reflected on the closer lip of the crack and is partly acting on its 
upper lip. This new loading of the crack has as a result the reinitiation of the crack 
propagation along a path which continuously changes its angle of orientation, as 
indicated in Fig. 133 (region BD). 
1000 
E 
r~ r---... 
Ie 
............ ~ 
A 
~ 
50° 
t 
3 
D 
( 
-50 0 
o 
3 
6 
9 
12 
ax10-3 (m) _ 
Fig. 133. Variation of the crack angle orientation w vs. crack length a. 
This behavior of the propagating crack is also indicated in Figs. 129-132, where 
the variation of Kp KIP a, and c, in terms of time t, is a result of this complex pattern 
of loading of the matrix. 
A further check is that the time of propagation of the stress pulse from the boundary 
AB to the boundary ZE (Fig. 126) and back to the crack tip is approximately equal 
to the time elapsed for the angular inversion of the caustic at the point B of Fig. 132. 
From these tests, it follows that the crack is always initiated at an angle of 
84 deg., in agreement with the modified elastic-strain energy-density criterion 209). 
However, the crack-propagation angles, as the crack penetrates into the matrix, 
change continuously in such a way that finally the stress state, acting at the crack 
tip, should be of mode-I. Finally, the cracks stop several times before complete 
failure of the elastic matrix. 
201 

x. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
This mechanism of crack propagation by kinks has as a result that the impact 
energy transferred by the moving cracks is dissipated completely each time the crack 
stops and new energy should be accumulated for each next kink for the propagation 
of the newly formed crack. Thus, cracks emanating from the comers of inclusions in 
a composite submitted to an impact load behave like dissipators of energy and decel-
erators or arresters of propagating cracks in the material. 
Furthermore, this behavior of the composite during its fracture under an applied 
impulsive compressive load is similar to the corresponding case where the applied 
load is static 210). Consequently, the fracture of a biphase material with rectangular 
inclusions loaded in compression depends on the mode of application of the load, 
static or dynamic, and it is characterized by the fact that the formed cracks stop 
propagating several times, immediately after their formation, so that the complete 
failure of the elastic matrix is either retarded or avoided. 
Similar results may be obtained if, instead of applying compressive impulsive loads 
to the composite, extensive impulses are applied to it. This mode of crack propagation 
from the corners of fibers, when the composite is submitted to extensional impulsive 
loads, will now be studied 213). 
The problem is again simplified to a plane-stress model. The bimaterial plates 
used for this series of experiments were identical with those used for compressive 
impulses. Details of the preparation of specimens and of the loading mode are given 
in Ref. 213. 
In the bimaterial plates subjected to tensile pulses, the lateral interfaces AF and BC 
are assumed to be submitted to pure shear stress, whereas the interface AB undergoes 
normal extension stress (see Fig. 126a). Since the cement is resistant to shear stress, 
fracture is expected along the interface AB, which, as the loading progresses, becomes 
a crack of length 2ao submitted to a mode-I deformation. For a further increase of 
the load, this crack propagates along its axis. In this case, the crack propagates along 
the transverse direction IABK, and therefore the fracture angle 80 remains always 
zero. 
Thus, in the specimens of our tests, the fractured interface AB between the matrix 
and the strip were considered as cracks, where the order of singularity is A. = -0.5. 
As mentioned before, this assumption may be considered only as approximately 
correct, because the order of singularity is A. = -0.5 only for the case of a crack 
existing in an homogeneous and isotropic material. When the crack is along an 
interface of two materials with different mechanical properties, the order of singularity 
is no longer A. = -0.5. However, it was found that, for large differences in elastic 
constants of the two materials and for an angle of the one wedge of n12, the error in 
the .value of the singularity is small enough for this special problem and therefore, 
without any considerable error, we can take the order of this singularity as A. = -0.5. 
The distributions of the stresses on the interfaces AB, AF, and BC and around the 
singular points A and B, in Fig. 126a, need not be taken into account, since the stress 
intensity factors at the crack tips are determined by the optical method of reflected 
caustics, which does not require any knowledge of the stress field near the boundaries 
or the singular points 208). 
The specimens were submitted to an impulsive tensile load, so that fracture was 
initiated along the interface AB, which became a crack of length 2a, submitted to 
mode-I deformation. Then, this crack propagated along its axis, as is shown in 
202 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
t:2 ~s 
t=76 ~s 
• 
t =28 ~s 
t: 44 ~s 
t:108 ~s 
t= 52 ~s 
t=140 liS 
t = 60 ~s 
t=1S6 I.Ls 
Fig. 134. Non-symmetrically propagating cracks from the corners A and B of the notch 
(Fig. l26a) in the epoxy resin matrix plate under mode-I deformation. 
203 

X. Stress Singularities at tbe Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
Figs. 134 and 135, from which it is easy to derive that the case of mode-I crack extension 
is operative for all positions of the crack tips. 
The velocity of these propagating cracks changed quickly, and in a short time 
period of 20-40 IlS after initiation ofthe cracks in the matrix, they promptly propagated 
with a stable high velocity until fracture of the specimen was completed. 
The specimens were subjected to a dynamic load up to fracture by a hydropulse 
high-speed testing machine (Carl Schenk Co.) with a maximum dynamic load of 
t=24 IJ.S 
• 
td6IJ.S 
t=88 IJ.S 
• 
t =112 IJ.S 
t=S2 IJ.S 
t= 136 IJ.s 
I 
• 
.' 
t:60 IJ.S 
t=144 IJ.S 
Fig. 135. Symmetrically propagating cracks from the corners A and B of the notch (Fig. 126 a) 
in the epoxy resin plate under mode-I deformation. 
204 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
40 kN and a maximum possible strain rate, for specimens with a length of 0.25 m, 
of e = 80 S- I. 
A series of tests were performed to evaluate the stress-intensity factors and the 
velocity of the propagating crack. In the present experimental study, the reference 
plane was taken at a distanct: Zo = 1.0 m. The magnification factor was A.m = 0.78, 
the optical constant of the specimen was letl = 3.27 x 10- 12 m4 N- 1 , the thickness 
of the specimen was d = 3.3 mm and the distance .czo + z) = 3.6 m. Mechanical 
and optical constants were applied to the corresponding static cases 230), the low 
velocities of the crack propagation of the tests justifying such an approximation 231) 
In two test series, the same type of specimen was used. In the first case, both cracks, 
emanating from the corners A and B, did not start simultaneously. One crack started 
first to propagate from the right corner B, while the second crack began to propagate 
from corner A after about 80 J.l.s. This nonsymmetric starting of fracture was due 
evidently to the non symmetric loading of the specimen. In the other case, both cracks 
started to propagate simultaneously from both corners A and B. 
Figures 134 and 135 show the caustics created at a propagating crack tip correspond-
ing to both above cases, SUbjected to mode-I loading conditions. The angle of orienta-
tion of the caustics relative to the instantaneous crack axes is seen to remain zero. 
Then, we can readily define the position and the magnitude of the maximum transverse 
diameter Dt , as well as of the longitudinal diameters D/ 
= D/ . , and the crack 
length a. 
. 
max 
m.n 
For each of the 24 successive caustics created around each crack tip, the stress 
intensity factor K[ was evaluated by using Eq. (322). Also, from the respective crack 
length a and the known time interval between two frames, the propagation velocity 
of the crack was evaluated. 
The variation of the length a of the running crack, the vt;locity c of propagation 
600 6-----,,------.-------.-------.------, 15 
(! 
• 
10 t 
~ 
E 
z: 
~ 
c. 
400 4f-
t 
~ 
0;-
N 
<=> 
III 
.... 
e 
" 
" 
5 ~ 
d 
u 
200 2 
o ~ 
____ ~ 
______ ~ 
______ ~ 
______ ~ 
____ ~
o 
o 
40 
80 
120 
160 
200 
t Ills) -
Fig. 136. Variation of the crack length a, the stress intensity factor KJ> and the crack velocity c 
versus time t for the case of non-symmetrically propagating cracks. 
205 

x. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
of the crack, and the stress intensity factor K j versus time t are presented in Fig. 136 
for a case of nonsymmetric crack propagation. In this figure, the values of the quantities 
corresponding to the right crack (index r) which first started to propagate from 
corner B, are lower than those for the left crack (index l) which began to propagate 
later from the other corner A. 
The difference between the velocities means that, after the separation of the interface 
AB, the stress intensity at tip B became higher than at tip A. The stress concentration 
at tip B first reached a critical value, which initiated crack propagation. Since the 
initial impulsive load was distributed over a larger section of the specimen, the stress 
state at tip B was lower for the first crack, and consequently the first crack propagated 
with a lower velocity than the second. 
The initiation of the second crack coincides substantially with the starting of a new 
fracture process. This new fracture takes place under the same loading conditions. 
The external load, which initiated fracture in the specimen, remains approximately 
constant during the very long period of crack propagation. The instantaneous length 
of the already cracked plate, including the initial length 2ao, functions as an initial 
crack for the second crack emanating from tip A. Therefore, while the initial length 
of the first crack was 2ao' the respective initial length for the second crack is much 
larger, and thus the velocity of propagation of the second crack must be higher 232). 
The stress intensity factor K j takes higher values for the fastest crack, being in 
agreement with recent results 211). The strain-energy-density function dW/dV was 
found to be analogous to the transverse diameter Dt of the caustic 211). Consequently, 
a larger caustic means a higher quantity for the strain energy and conversely. Since 
the initiation of the second crack takes place under higher stress intensity, the dimen-
sions of the caustic are also expected to be higher. 
0;-", 
E 
800 8------.------.------Ir------.------,------,16 
"'l--------I 12 
200 2 ---+- ':'{.c~~~--___jr-----I-------r-----I 
4 
O L-----~------~------·~------~------~----~O 
20 
40 
60 
80 
100 
120 
140 
t (I-Is) ---+ 
t 
.. o ..-
x 
!><: 
Fig. 137. Variation of the crack l~ngth a, the stress intensity factor KT, and the crack velocity c 
versus time t for the case of symmetrically propagating cracks. 
206 

X.2 Effect of Singularities at the Extremities of Fibers 
The variation of the respective quantities for a case of symmetric crack propagation 
is plotted in Fig. 137 versus the time t. Both cracks have approximately the same 
velocity of crack propagation and the difference between the stress intensity factors 
for the two cracks is smaller than in the corresponding case of nonsymmetric propaga-
tion of cracks. These small differences are due to the fact that the cracks never start 
simultaneously from the corners A and B, because of a slight asymmetry of the speci-
men or because of a loading asymmetry. But, these differences are so small that 
they are eliminated quickly after crack initiation. 
The photographs for t = 136 JlS and t = 144 JlS in Fig. 135 show the caustics 
reflected from the longitudinal boundaries, which present the reflected energy from 
the boundaries HZ and DE of the matrix after complete failure of the plate. The 
returning caustics for both cracks moved along the crack lips with velocities of 
crr = crl = 1100 ms -1. These velocities, as expected, are of the same order of magni-
tude as the velocity of the Rayleigh waves for the material. 
The impulsive load in all these tests was always applied along the ZE boundary 
of the matrix. The stress pulse was a long tensile pulse with a longitudinal wave velocity 
c1 = 1690 mis, the matrix being an epoxy resin. 
This pulse first met the interface AB between the steel strip and the matrix, where 
part of the pulse propagated along the rest of the matrix, until it met the matrix 
boundaries HF and CD, where it was also reflected back as a longitudinal compressive 
pulse of the same velocity, since it impinged perpendicularly to the boundaries HF 
and CD of the matrix. 
The interface AB is the most sensitive part of the specimen, where the materials 
of the two phases separate first, since there the tensile strength of adhesion was always 
lower than that inside the matrix. On the other hand, if this interface were not to crack, 
the propagating pulse might lead to cracks along the weakest points of the matrix 
rather than along the interface AB. The debonding then takes place simultaneously 
along the entire interface AB. However, because the cementing of the interface AB 
is not perfect, the debonding perhaps may start from any point along the interface, 
even for when the external load is applied symmetrically. If the crack starts from the 
middle of the interface AB, the effect would correspond to that of a central crack in 
a specimen to which an impulsive extensional load has been applied perpendicularly 
to the crack length. As this crack propagates, it reaches the corners A and B at the 
same time. This crack enters the matrix from points A and B and continues to pro-
pagate as two cracks, until the complete fracture of the specimen. 
When debonding does not start from the middle of interface AB, the crack will 
extend unsymmetrically, and first reach the nearest of the two points A or B. So, 
from either comer of the matrix, a crack starts to propagate. The first one moves at a 
lower velocity than the other. Moreover, when the external load is applied unsymmet-
rically to the interface AB, the disproportionate propagation of the cracks increases 
anq the nonsymmetry is more intense than for the case when the starting point of 
the crack is located outside the middle point of the interface AB. 
We shall, therefore, describe the mode of propagation of a crack initiated first from 
one corner of the matrix; the symmetry ofloading assures that the phenomena appear-
ing at this corner will appear also at the other corner with symmetric propagation 
of cracks emanating simultaneously from both corners A and B of the notch FABC. 
So, the crack starts to propagate from a generic point of the interface AB and 
207 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
reaches fIrst the singular point B. At this point the singularity is different than at the 
crack tip, for which it is A. = -0.5. Also, when the crack reaches the interface AC at 
point A (Fig. 126), shear stresses are developed in this area 233). For these two reasons, 
and, furthermore, because of the direction of the impulsive longitudinal wave, the 
crack deviates from its straight transverse path of propagation AB towards the bottom 
boundary ZE of the matrix. Furthermore, this crack enters the matrix under the 
influence of the initial and reflected impulsive waves. The crack then deviates from 
its straight path when it is reached by the reflected pulse on the boundary CD of the 
matrix. . 
This deviation of the propagating crack is continued until complete fracture of 
the specimen. So, the crack takes approximately the form of a sigmoid curve. This 
type of fracture could be considered as the result of a superposition of fractures in 
static and dynamic extension. 
Consequently, the propagating crack under mode-l stress conditions (K1 =F 0, 
KII = 0) and under an impUlsive extension can be considered to oscillate around 
the plane of a central crack, which would develop under static external load. 
Brittle materials submitted to compressive stresses are more resistant than in 
extensive stresses. So, for a compressive load in the strip fracturing of a brittle matrix 
will differ from that of a fIber under extensive external load. This results .from experi-
mental evidence with extensive pulses. For compressive pulses it was shown that the 
length a of a propagating crack changes singularly versus time t. The velocity of the 
propagating crack fIrst was very high, but, later, changed and sometimes became 
zero when the crack arrested for a small time period. The stress intensity factors 
KI and KII changed continuously and sometimes the factor KII took negative values. 
On the other hand, nothing similar is observable under extensive stress pulse. As seen 
from Figs. 134 and 135, the direction of crack propagation changes slowly and follows 
a sigmoid curve; the crack axis and the axis of symmetry of the caustic always remain 
perpendicular to the direction of the resultant of the external load, until complete 
fracture of the matrix. 
The size of the caustic increases initially, but, as the crack propagates, it attains a 
constant value. Also, the orientation of the caustic, relative to the axis of the symmetric-
ally propagating crack, remains constant and coincident with the instantaneous crack 
axis. This leads to the conclusion that the stress conditions at the crack tip remain 
a mode-I-type deformation. Similar results are derived from Figs. 136 and 137. 
First, the crack emanates from the right corner B of the matrix and, after a time interval, 
another crack starts to propagate from the left corner. 
The same is observed from Figs. 134 and 135, which also indicate that, after a stable 
increase of Kl' this latter quantity remains constant until complete fracture of the 
matrix. Also, the crack length a increases at a steady rate, so that the propagating 
velocity c of the cracks remains constant along much of the crack path. 
X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
Another source of anomalous behavior between phases in composites are the stress 
raisers existing at various points of the interface due to geometric discontinuities of 
the inclusions. These stress raisers may create stress concentration fIelds with or with-
208 

X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
out singularities. Indeed, the filler particles used for the production of actual compos-
ites are hardly of regular shape. To reinforce metal, plastic, or other matrix materials, 
very often hard, sharp-edged filler particles are employed, such as whiskers or fibers 
of polygonal or irregular cross section, platelets, lamellae, or rods, and generally 
particles of arbitrary shape. Metal or boron ftlaments, metal oxides, various inorganic 
fillers, mica, asbestos, high-modulus carbon fibers, aggregate or sand particles in 
concrete, etc. are typical examples. 
Within such composites, a great number of points exist at which stress singularities 
develop, corresponding to high stress gradients as well as to elastic energy concentra-
tions. 
Theoretical predictions of the composite moduli, or of establishing failure criteria, 
usually based on energy principles, can thus be considerably influenc,ed by the existance 
of stress singularities. Such singularities may, of course, also develop with regularly-
shaped inclusions, e.g., when inclusions contact each other or when imperfect adhesion 
exists between matrix and filler particles, etc. Fatigue failure or brittle fracture will 
generally originate from such points. 
Therefore, it is interesting to investigate in detail the state of stress at singular points 
of inclusion boundaries, in particular, by using such an effective experimental tool 
as the method of caustics. 
In the following, the general problem of an inhomogeneity in an isotropic elastic 
matrix under generalized plane-stress conditions is examined. Furthermore, a distinc-
tion is made between size singularities, i.e., those produced by very small inhomo-
geneities irrespective of shape, and shape singularities, created by sharp-angled forma-
tions at the boundary of larger inclusions. 
In the analysis carried out here only cases of rigid inclusions are consi9ered, 
because reinforcing fillers are usually very stiff compared to the matrix material. 
Irregularly-shaped inclusions are simulated here by areas bounded by closed 
curves of the cusp-like family. These curves were produced from the unit circle by 
means of a suitable conformal titapping. 
Such stress concentrations are best studied by the experimental method of 
caustics 208). The method of caustics was initially aimed to investigate the state at stress 
in the vicinity of stress singularities. It is, however, generally applicable in cases where 
important stress gradients appear. Inhomogeneities in a generalized plane-stress 
system, in the form of inclusions of any shape embedded in a plate of a mechanic-
ally and optically isotropic material, produce stress fields perfectly detectable by 
the method of caustics. The form and geometry of the caustics were studied for the 
general inclusion shape, which is generated from the unit circle by a suitable conformal 
mapping 'and were related to the particular parameters of the stress fields around 
the inhomogeneities. Applications for circular, elliptical, and other shapes of in-
homogeneities are given elsewhere 234). 
Assume now that the two complex variables z and, are related by the transforma-
tion: 
(327) 
where R denotes the constant of transformation defined by Eq. (332a). 
209 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
This transformation maps the unit circle 1(' = (} = I, where ( = (} exp (i9) in 
the (-plane into a closed curvilinear contour S in the z-plane, so that points outside 
the circle (} = I are mapped uniquely into points outside of S, for appropriate restric-
tions of the mn coefficients 215). The following is based on the assumption that the 
mapping [Eq. (327)] is properly restricted. 
Stresses and displacements may be determined in terms of the transformed functions 
eP(O and P(O in the (-plane where: • 
eP = eP(w(m = rp'«()/w'(O = drp(z)/dz = eP(z) 
P«() = p(w(m = P'(O/w'(O = dIJ'(z)/dz =. P(z) . 
The polar variables (} and 9 for the (-plane form now a curvilinear coordinate 
system for the z-plane, with (} = I corresponding to the curvilinear contour S. 
From the above general relations, it follows that the eP«() and P(O functions, as 
well as the components of stresses, are in general singular at points (, satisfying the 
condition: 
w'(O = o. 
(328) 
If this condition holds, the mapping relation of Eq. (327) is not conformal and no 
single-valued correspondence between z and ( exists. Moreover, the trivial case for 
R tending to zero may be derived from Eq. (328), which means that a stress singularity 
is generated by an infinitesimal inclusion of any shape. 
Therefore, two kinds of singularities due to inclusions can be produced; one is 
associated with the size of the inclusion, corresponding to powder particulates, 
and the other with the shape of larger inclusions related to the geometric disconti-
nuities at the contour S, and this corresponds to larger inclusions and especially 
fibers. 
Assume that the functions rp(O and w(O are known. Then, Eqs. (316) and (317) 
of the initial curve and its caustic in the z-plane transform to the following equations 
in the (-plane: 
W-,.l, { (()+ *[ I (q/(O)']} 
-
In 
w 
C 
w'(n 
w'(O 
(329) 
I 
' [I (CfJ'(O)']' I 
c*/w (0 w'(n 
w'(O 
= 1. 
(330) 
These equations yield the caustic and the initial curve for the curvilinear coordinates 
«(}, 9) in the z-plane, which are related to the z-plane by the conformal mapping 
z = w(() and ( = (} exp (i9), and must not be confused with polar coordinates (r, rp) 
where z = r exp (irp) in the z-plane. Only when all mn coefficients are zero, then 
(} = r/Rand9 = rp. 
This theory is applied to the study of inclusions by considering an infinite matrix 
containing a single curvilinear elastic inclusion whose boundary S is an ellipse with 
the major a semi-axis on the x-axis in the z = (x + iy) plane and the minor b semi-
axis coinciding with the y-axis. 
210 

X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
The conformal mapping of the unit circle lei = e = I in the C-plane into the ellipse 
S is given by: 
(331) 
where, for the real parameter m, the limits are defined by 0 ~ m ~ I; this is because 
for an ellipse: 
and 
R=a+b 
2 
a-b 
m=--. 
a+b 
(332a) 
(332 b) 
When perfect bonding is assumed at the interface S along with a uniform stress field 
a;, a';, a:, at infinity, and if SUbscripts I and 2 for the elastic quantities respectively 
refer to matrix and inclusion, the induced state of stress within the elliptic inclusion 
will be constant and 'P1 (0 inside the matrix is then given by: 
where: 
I 
_ 
'P1(z) = 'P1(C) = 4 (a;' + a';) {z + 2RDL (M -
I) (I -
m2) mC 1} 
I 
Dm 
- 2 (a'; -
a;') (I -~) RDLC1 + a:'i 1 _ Dm2 z 
oo.RD(1 -
m2) 
-1 
+ ax,' (I _ Dm2) C 
L = 1/(1 -
D~ + 2DM~) 
D = (1 -
W(eX1 + I) 
M = e(X1 + 1)/(2e + X2 -
1) 
(333) 
(334) 
(335) 
(336) 
and e = J1.2/J1.1 is the inclusion-to-matrix shear-moduli ratio. Finally X1•2 are the 
Muskhelishvili relations for the displacement field, which are expressed by: 
X 1,2 = 3 -
4V1,2 
for plane-strain conditions, 
3 -
V1 2 
X 
-
'for plane-stress conditions, 
1,2 -
I + 
V1•2 
where v1 2 is the Poisson ratio. For uniaxial tension a OO along the y-axis (aoo = a OO 
, 
y 
x 
x 
= 0), Eq. (333) becomes: 
a OO 
'P1(C) = -t Rg + [m + 2DL(1 -
m2)(mM -
I -
m)]C-1} 
(337) 
21I 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesopbase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
Particular cases can subsequently be derived as follows: 
i) For an elliptic hole Jl,. = 0, hence e = ° 
and M = 0, D = 1, L = 1/(1 -
m2), 
and therefore 'Pt (0 is expressed by: 
(338) 
ia) For a circular hole with radius R it is found that m = 0, and Eq. (338) becomes: 
(339) 
ib) For a Griffith crack of length I = 4R we fmd m = 1, and thus: 
u;l { 
3} 
cptK) = -
,- -
. 
16 
, 
(340) 
ii) For a rigid elliptic core 112 -+ 00, hencee -+ 00 andD = -1/k!, M = (kt + 1)/2, 
L = 1/(1 -
~), thus 'Pt (') is expressed by: 
(341) 
iia) For a rigid circular core of radius Ragain m = 0, and Eq. (341) becomes: 
(342) 
iib) For a rigid rectilinear stringer of length 1= 4R we have m = 1, thus: 
(343) 
All the above 'Pt (n functions are of the form: 
(344) 
where constants A and B assume appropriate values for each particular case. As 
mentioned before, the stress field inside the elliptic inclusion is constant, thus 'P2(z) 
for the inclusion is a linear function of z. From the equation for the initial curve 
[Eq. (330)] it follows that this condition is not fulfilled for any z, so that no initial 
curve exists for the inclusion and, therefore, no caustic appears on the screen for light 
reflected on, or traversing from the elliptic inclusion. On the contrary, Eq. (330) can 
be fulftlled inside the matrix, so that caustics may be obtained from the region of the 
matrix surrounding the inclusion. 
212 

X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
Moreover, pseudocaustics from the boundaries of the matrix neighboring any 
inclusion can be created. Such pseudocaustics appear in Fig. 138, where crazes, 
developed in specimens, indicate the elliptic shape and the non-loading mode of 
the boundaries of crazes. 
Fig. 138. Pseudocaustics created from crazes developed in PC-tensile specimens. 
For an elliptic elastic inclusion, Eqs. (229) and (230) yield: 
(345) 
and 
(346) 
for the caustic and the initial curve, respectively, inside the matrix, that is for I~I ~ I. 
There, the real constants A and B, for a uniaxial tension applied to the composite 
plate (500 at infinity along the y-axis, take values according to Eqs. (344) and (337), 
y 
whereas, for the particular cases described above, these constants take values derived 
from Eq. (344) and one of Eqs. (338) to (343), according to each particular case 
studied. 
For the initial curve, Eq. (346) cannot be solved in a closed form for the general 
case, only for the particular case of a circular elastic inclusion where m = 0. Generally, 
Eq. (346) is computed numerically. Then, by inserting the obtained values for ~ with 
1(1 ~ 1 into Eq. (345), we obtain the caustic generated by the region of the matrix 
surrounding the inclusion. 
Circular elastic inclusions: For the special case of circular elastic inclusions, occurring 
in fiber composites, it is found that m = 0, and the conformal mapping w(~) is linear, 
i.e., Z = w(O = R~. For this case, the equations of the initial curve and the caustic 
c':m be obtained in closed form in the z-plane. 
213 

x. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
Indeed, from Eq. (346) with m = 0 it follows that: 
16C* ABiP(41 = 1 
ro = Izl = (6C* ABR)I/4 . 
(347) 
The initial curve for circular inclusions is represented in the z-plane by a circle with 
radius roo The constants A and B take the values: 
(fOO R 
A = -Y-
and 
4 
(348) 
For the particular case of either a circular hole or a circular rigid core, the constant B 
takes the values B = -2 and B = 2(1 + vl )/(3 -
VI)' respectively. 
The equation for the caustic results from Eq. (345) for m = 0 and: 
ro = Izl = IR(I = (6C* ABR)I/4 , 
(349) 
which yields in the z-plane: 
(350) 
where: 
z = roeicp 
and 
Il = sign (C* AB). 
(351) 
Equation (347) was first derived for a circular hole in traction, differing only by the 
radius ro 235). This difference depends on the inclusion-to-matrix shear-moduli 
ratio e and on the value of the Poisson ratio V I of the matrix material. The variation 
of the radius of the initial curve for a circular elastic inclusion, normalized to the re-
spective radius for a circular hole, has been related to the ratio e of the shear moduli 
of the two phases; for e = 1 (i.e., when the shear moduli of the inclusion and the 
matrix are equal) the caustic vanishes, whereas for rigid inclusions the size of the 
caustic depends only on the value of the Poisson ratio of the matrix 234). 
In order to show the existence of such singularities around infinitesinal inclusions 
or discontinuities of the matrix, a series of experiments were performed with PMMA 
plates under simple tension at infinity, which contained one or more inhomogeneities, 
e.g., elastic inclusions or simply holes of different shapes. The width of the plates 
was b = 45 mm and the thickness d = 2 mm. 
The first series of experiments was concerned with Eq. (328), Le., the condition of 
existence of a stress singularity. As has been mentioned, this condition is fulfilled for 
very small inhomogeneities, irrespectively of shape. To prove this, small-sized holes 
of three different shapes -
triangular, circular, and square -
were formed on a 
specimen, which was subsequently subjected to a tensile load of p = 2.18 x 107 N 1m2 
along the common axis of the holes. Two such specimens were prepared; the one 
contained small holes with an average diameter da = 3.5 mm and the other had 
a diameter da = 3.0 mID. The caustics formed around these discontinuities are shown 
in Figs. 139 a, b. An analysis showed good agreement between theory and experimental 
results derived from caustics 234). 
214 

X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
Fig. 139a, b. Caustics created a) by holes of an average diameter da = 3.5 mm and b) by in-
clusions of a diameter da = 3.0 mm. 
To this point, only cases have been considered for which Eq. (328) is fulfilled. If 
this relation (w'(O = 0) is satisfied for R ----+ 0, this would correspond to singularities 
generated by infinitesimal inclusions, irrespectively of their shape. 
215 

x. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
Consider now the following transformation, which, although less general than 
Eq. (327), generates many of the known closed-boundary curves: 
(352) 
where: 
o ~ m ~ l/n 
and R is given by: 
IX 
R = -:-:----:-
(1 + m) 
(353) 
where IX is the radius of the circle in which the inclusion is inscribed. 
The existence of singular points at the boundary is governed by Eq. (328) which, 
with reference to Eq. (352), becomes: 
(1 -
mnC(n+l») = 0 
(354) 
and for' = exp (i9) (or 1'1 = 1) gives: 
{I -
mn exp [-i(n + 1) 9n = 0 
or the set of simultaneous equations: 
sin (n + 1) 9 = 0 and cos (n + 1) 9 = I/mn 
(355) 
leaoing, respectively, to the following equations: 
2jn 
. 
9. = -- (j = 1,2, ... , n) 
J 
n + 1 
(356) 
and: 
o ~ m ~ I/n. 
(357) 
For example, a hypocycloidal curve is produced from the unit circle for n = 2, 
namely, as the parameter m of Eq. (352) assumes different values from 0 to 1/2. The 
generation of hypocycloid curves from the unit circle is shown in Fig. 140 for various 
values of m. These curves present three cusp points at the boundary at angles 9. = 0°, 
120°,240°. 
J 
For n = 3 and 0 ~ m ~ 1/3, an astroidal curve with four cusp points at 9j = 0°, 
90°, 180°,2700 is produced. 
For studying the state of stress in the close vicinity of the singularity, we introduce 
a local coordinate system with its origin at the singular point. Such a reference frame 
is displaced both linearly and angularly, in relation to the original global frame. 
216 

a 
1\ 
~-plane 
I~I = p 
unit 
circle 
1.5 
2.0 
y 
b 
X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
Fig. 140. Generation of the boundary of 
a hypocycloidal inclusion from the unit 
circle with n = 2 and different values of 
the parameter m. 
XJ 
z-plane 
Iz 1= r 
x 
Fig. 141 a, b. Local co-ordinate systems at the singular points a) on the initial and b) on the 
transformed plane. 
Figure 141 gives a new coordinate system, corresponding to the jth cuspidal point 
of the inclusion, both for the initial (0 and transformed (z) planes. It is obvious that: 
z = z . + z .eirpj = w(,) = w(, . + C-eiSj) 
~ 
} 
,.~, 
(358) 
where 'OJ = eiSj(I'o) = 1), and according to Eq. (352) it follows that: 
na 
iSj 
e 
( 
-inSj) 
ZOj =;+J e + -n-
(359) 
thus, Eq. (358) becomes: 
Z 
. + Z .e'rp} = --
e's} + Y. e's} + -- x 1 -
nY. + 
y2 
., 
na [.. 
.. 
e-inSj 
( 
n(n + I) 
)] 
OJ} 
n + 1 
<, J 
n 
<,} 
2 
<, j ... 
(360) 
217 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
from which, by neglecting powers of'i higher than 2, as 1') ~ 1, or, alternatively, 
Iz) ~ ex, one obtains: 
,. = (2z .Jnex)1/2 
J 
J 
(361) 
which is the simplified form of Eq. (352), applicable for small arguments. 
According to Muskhelishvili 215) r = pJ4 and r' = -(PJ2) e-2ia, where p is a 
principal tensile stress at infinity, directed at an angle ex to the x-axis. For a sealed-in 
rigid rectilinear segment of length 2ex, one has 236): 
ex 
-
qJ(') = 2: [n + (2fl£i + r + r') "'1 
(362) 
where B = P sin 2aJ4J1. is the angle of rotation of the inclusion, due to the external 
load, J1. is the shear modulus of the matrix material, and " = (3 -
v)J(l + v) for 
generalized plane stress with v as the Poisson ratio of the matrix. 
Equation (360) can be written as: 
pex 
qJ(O = gK + qJ'1 
(363) 
where q = (1 -
2 cos 2ex)J". Referring now the function qJm to the local reference 
frame with an origin, for instance. at the first cusp point (i.e., the end of the rectilinear 
segment at zo' = + ex or '0' = + 1, j = 0, :). = 0), one obtains, by considering Eq. 
J 
. 
J 
J 
(361) and neglecting powers of'i higher than one: 
thus: 
cP(z) = qJ'(z) = ~ (1 -
q) (2ziex)-1/2 
cP'(z.) = qJ"(z.) = - ~ 
(1 -
q)(2Z.Jex)-3/2 
J 
J 
8ex 
J 
Equation (195), combined with Eq. (244), yields: 
-
=--(l-q) 
1
2Zi\5/2 
3p1C*1 
ex 
2ex2 
and the radius of the initial curve, which is a circle, is given by: 
r. = 1.0607 ( C * K*)O.40 
J 
218 
(364) 
(365) 
(366) 
(367) 
(368) 
(369) 

X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
where K* = KJ -
iKIl is the complex stress intensity factor, whose components are 
given by 236): 
P~(X-l 
) 
KJ = -- -- + cos 2a 
2x 
2 
(370 a) 
and 
K II = -
P vTa> (sin 2a _ 4J.lB). 
2x 
e 
(370 b) 
Consequently, Eq. (316) yields for the caustic: 
W = Zj ± ~ 
(1 -
q) (2z/a)-3/2 = Zj ± C*K*(2z)-3/2 (c > 0) 
(371) 
or, in parametric form: 
(. _2.3) 
v=r. smx.+-sm-XJo 
-
J 
J 
3 
2 
(372) 
which is a generalized epicycloid, identical to the one for cracks, except as regards 
the values of rj" 
For an embedded rigid hypocycloidal inclusion (n = 2) 236): 
When referred to the first cuspidal point (j = 0), this equation yields: 
pa [ 
2e2ia 1 ( 
2eifl._ 1) (zo) 
] 
qJ(z j) = 6 
1 - -x - + 2x + 1 + 
x 
~ +... 
° 
For Iz) ~ a, this yields the values of the derivatives: 
p ( 
2 
e2ifl. - 1) (Zo)-1/2 
!/J(Zj) = qJ'(z) ="6 1 + 
x 
: 
p ( 
2e2ia_l)(Zo)-3/2 
!/J'(z 0) = qJ"(Zj) = - -
I + 
--.!.. 
J 
12a 
x 
a 
_ p (1 + 2e2ia _l) (z)o)-S/2. 
!/J"(zo) = tp'''{zo) = 
) 
) 
24a2 
x 
a 
(373) 
(374) 
(375) 
(376) 
(377) 
219 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
Combining Eq. (316) with Eq. (377) gives us the radius of the initial curve of the 
caustic. This radius is a constant, independent of angle 8, and, therefore, the initial 
curve is a circle. The radius rj is given by: 
r. = 1.0607[C*IK*I]2/5 . 
J 
(378) 
Here again, the global optical constant C* = 4,\C where Ai is the magnification 
ratio and Cis expressed by Eq. (313)]. Moreover, the complex stress intensity factor K* 
is given by K* = Kr -
iKrI" For a simple tension at the crack tip where only Kr 
is operative: 
(.) 
~ [X-l 
(4nj 
)] 
K I = -- p -- + cos -
-
2/X 
3x 
2 
3 
and 
~ . (4ni 
) 
. 
K}'] =--p sm -
-
2/l( 
for J = O. 
3" 
3 
0.80.--------,-------,--------, 
t 
~ 0.40 
.e-
*" 
:10:: 
iii 0.20 
n=2 
O~-~~-~--~--~--~-~ 
300 
600 
Fig. 142. Stress- intensity factor for a rigid hypocycloidal inclusion. 
(379) 
Equations (316) and (376) lead again to Eq. (372). In Fig. 142, the dimensionless 
parameter 3 IK*I/n V 
(2/X) is plotted against angle /l( for various values of v and for 
the first mode (j = 0). 
A four-cusp astroidal inclusion with n = 3 is now considered 236). The stress func-
tion qJ(z) is given by: 
3/X [ 
3X(4 + 1 
-
9x 
3r' 
] 
cp(Q = 4 r 
3,,(3 
+ r' (9x2 _ I) ( -
(9x 2 _ 1) ( . 
(380) 
220 

X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
Referred to the first cusp point, this equation for small arguments (Zj ~ ()() yields: 
cp(') = -
1 - .; + -
+ 1 + .; _ _ 
_1 
3p()( [ 
1 
( 
1 ') (2Z.)1/2J 
16 
3x 
x 
3()( 
where: 
Its derivatives with respect to Zj take the forms: 
, 
3p ( 
1) 
1/2 
<P(z.) = cp (z .) = -
1 + .; - -
(2z}/3()()-
J 
1 
16 
x 
, 
" 
3p ( 
1 ) 
3/2 
<P (z) = cp (z) = -
16()( 
1 + .; - -; (2z/3()()-
<P"(Z) = rp"'(Zj) = 1:~2 (1 +.; -~) (2z/3()(r S/2 . 
Equations (316) and (384) yield: 
r. = l.0607IC*K*lo.40 
1 
i.e., the same expression as in Eqs. (369) and (378), where: 
. 
V0a) 
[X - 1 
3% 
J 
Kji) = -- P -- + 
cos (nj -
2()() 
4x 
2 
3% + 1 
V(3a) 
3 
. 
KW = --p --- sm (n,' -
2()() 
for 
J' = 0 
II 
4 
3x - l' 
. 
and 
(381) 
(382) 
(383) 
(384) 
(385) 
(386) 
Equations (316) and (383) lead to Eq. (372). In Fig. 143, the dimensionless para-
meter 41K*l/p V(3a) is plotted against angle ()( for various values of Poisson ratio v 
and for j = O. 
Equations (369), (378), and (385) appear to be generally valid for singular points 
at the boundaries of rigid inclusions so far considered. It is interesting to compare 
these with the respective expression for an internal crack, given by 237): 
(387) 
where: 
(388) 
221 

X. Stress ~ingularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
0.6 
0.6 
t 
~ 0.4 
0-
~ 
~ 
y 
• 
~ 
j-I 
0.2 
-& 
& 
j.7 
).0 X 
)_3 
n::3 
0 
0° 
15° 
30° 
45° 
60° 
75° 
900 
aO ----. 
Fig. 143. Stress intensity factor for a rigid astroidal inclusion. 
It is worth noting, that Eq. (387) differs from Eq. (369) by a factor n- O•20 = 0.79537. 
Respective expressions for elastic inclusions must, therefore, differ by a respective 
factor, being a function of the inclusion-to-matrix shear-moduli ratio t'7./11-1' but 
with limiting values 1 and n- O.2 for 11-2/11-1 = 00 and 0, respectively. 
In Fig. 144, the radius of the initial circle is plotted in dimensionless form, as 
rJpC Vfa)p/2, against the Poisson ratio v of the matrix material for the three different 
forms of rigid inclusions so far examined for angles IX = 0° and 90°. Experimental 
1.30 ,-------,-----,----, 
t 1.00 
~ 
u 
~-- r --
crack (a::900) 
n=1, a=Oo 
n=2, a=Oo 
n=3, a:: 00 
~ 0.50 I------+---+:::J~~ 
o 
0.1 
0.2 
0.3 
0 .4 
0.5 
v ---+ 
222 
Fig. 144. Dimensionless radius of initial circle 
plotted vs. the Poisson ratio of the matrix for 
the three forms of rigid inclusions (n = I, 2, 3) 
and an internal crack for a = 0° and 90° 
(experimental points are given for v = 0.37). 

X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
points for v = 0.375 are also presented. Respective results for hypocycloidal, astroidal, 
and other type holes can be obtained by inserting x ' = -I in the present expressions 
for rigid inclusions 236). 
Finally, the orientation of the caustic can be used for determining the directions of 
the principal-stress axes at the singular points, as caustics tend to orient their axes 
of symmetry along the principal stress axes 208). 
In order to study the shape of the caustics created at irregular points of inclusion 
contours, specimens of an epoxy matrix were prepared in which aluminum inclusions 
of various shapes were embedded. Namely, a diglycidyl ether ofbisphenol-A (Epikote 
828, Shell Co.), with 8 % thriethylene tetrarnine as curing agent and 10 % of a poly-
sulfide of Thiokol LP-3 type as plasticizer, was cast in 5 mm-thick sheets. Aluminum 
inclusions, with a shear modulus Jl = 2.60 X 1010 Njm2 , are about 22 times stiffer 
than the above resin, with Jl = 1.186 X 109 Njm2 , and can be considered as rigid. 
The excellent adhesion of the resin on the aluminum surface ensures continuity of 
stresses and displacements at the interface. However, the specimens thus produced 
were not optically flat, and additional processing was required. Therefore, after fine 
machining of the surface of each specimen, the surface was subjected to lapping and 
optical polishing. 
Fig. 145a-d. Caustics at the ends of a rectilinear aluminium segment of approximate length 
2a = 19 mm under the action of a vertical load (a, b) 3.399 MN(m2 on a horizontal inclusion 
in a 4.389 mm thick epoxy specimen, (c) 5060 MN(m2 on an inclusion inclined at about 40° 
with the horizontal axis in a 4.167 mm thick epoxy specimen, (d) isochromatics indicating the 
shrinkage-stress field developed at the ends of an embedded rectilinear aluminium inclusion 
(Epoxy specimen: 3.375 mm thick) 
223 

X. Stress Singularities at the Mesophase due to the Geometry of Inclusions 
In this way, only caustics from reflections on the front surface of the material were 
produced. The respective optical constant for the matrix material is cf = -viE 
= -0.37/3.25 x 109 = -1.138 X 10- 10 m2/N. 
The caustics created at the ends of rectilinear inclusions under uniaxial tension are 
presented in Figs. 145a-c. The dependence of the stress intensity factor is clearly 
demonstrated by the caustics created with inclusions at various orientations with 
respect to the load, namely 90°, 0°, and 45°. With cracks aligned in the direction 
of the load (0°), no caustic appears as the stress intensity factor vanishes in this case. 
With rectilinear inclusions aligned in the same direction, a caustic of considerable 
size develops (Fig. l45b) and the stress intensity factor does not vanish. 
The size of the caustics agrees within 5 % with the theory (Fig. 144), although 
considerable sources of discrepancies may develop in the physical system. One of them 
is the shrinkage-stress fields developing around the inclusion during setting or cooling 
of polymeric matrices, etc. Such stress fields are not negligible at all, as can be con-
cluded from Fig. l45d, where the corresponding field of isochromatics in one of the 
specimens is presented due to shrinkage. However, by means of the caustic, an 
experimental stress intensity factor can be directly determined, taking into account 
all possible deviations from the theoretical solution. 
Fig. 146a-d. Caustics at the apices (1) of an hypocycloidal aluminum inclusion inscribed in 
a circle of diameter 2a = 20 mm in a 3.09 mm-thick epoxy specimen under the action of a 
vertical load a) 1.051 MNjm2 and, b) 5.081 MNjm2 (magnification ratio }'i = 5.643) and, 
(2) of an astroidal aluminum inclusion inscribed in a circle of diameter 2a = 21.1 mm embedded 
in a 3.164 mm-thick epoxy specimen under the action of a vertical load which is c) nearly zero 
and d) equal to 3.358 MN/m2 (Magnification ratio Ai = 5.435). 
224 

X.3 Effect of Stress Raisers 
The caustics correspo'lding to a hypocycloidal inclusion are presented in 
Fig. 146a, b, while the ones for an astroidal inclusion are given in Fig. 146c, d. 
Si;zes of caustics are in both cases in satisfactory agreement with the theory (better 
than 5 %, again). 
The state of stress developed at singular points of the boundaries of rigid inclusions 
in an elastic matrix under conditions of generalized plane stress was determined by 
the method of caustics. Correlation of the size and shape of the caustics at the partic-
ular points with the stress intensity factor allowed a direct experimental determination 
of the latter. Also, the orientation of the caustics yields the direction of the respective 
principal-stress axes. 
Caustics developing around singular points of rigid-inclusion contours are generaliz-
ed epicycloids, i.e., they have the same form as with cracks, but different size. This 
size depends mainly on the geometry of the system (i.e., shape of the rigid inclusion) 
and on the Poisson ratio of the matrix. The effect of the Poisson ratio is particularly 
important when the load is directed transversely to the polar vector defining the cusp 
point (the polar vector of which is tangent to the boundary). On the other hand, the 
Poisson ratio of the matrix has little influence when the load is acting in the direction 
of the polar vector to the cuspidal point. 
Having the results for rigid inclusions and for holes (i.e., inclusions with zero 
rigidity), one may draw qualitative conclusions for systems with finite rigidity, e.g., 
elastic inclusions in an elastic matrix, which are intermediate between the previous 
two cases. In analogy wi~h the effect of the Poisson ratio, one may conclude that, 
with an elastic system, the matrix-to-inclusion moduli ratio has its maximum effect 
on the size of the caustic if the load is acting in the direction of the polar vector derming 
the cuspidal point. 
With an increasing number of cusp points, both with inclusions and openings, the 
size of the caustics decreases, because the boundary increasingly approaches a regular 
circular shape and the stress intensity factor tends to zero. 
Finally, the method can be applied under actual conditions of manufacture of 
a particular composite and it can also cope with other cases of singularities occurring 
at interfaces with inclusion particles. 
225 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
XI.1 Order of Singularities at the Apices 
of Multiwedges 
The previous chapter described the stress concentrations and stress singularities 
developed in the composite because of geometric discontinuities in the inclusions. 
We now concentrate on singularities developed in the matrix. Since in the preparation 
of the composite the viscous matrix is generally cast around the solid inclusions, the 
matrix material is impelled to fill all cavities and protrusions of the inclusions and to 
adhere firmly along the interfaces of the inclusions. 
Since the matrix material is generally softer than the inclusions, geometric dis-
continuities along the boundaries between matrix and inclusions are rather weak 
stress raisers. Therefore, the only important problem with the matrix is when a stress 
singularity is developed on the matrix side due to the approach of a crack propagating 
in it. In particular, we here want to study the singularities developed at the tips of 
cracks terminating at the matrix-inclusion interface. 
While the dynamic phenomenon of crack propagation and passage of the crack 
from one phase to the other is studied separately 234>, this chapter considers eventual 
static cracks and microcracks terminating on the. interface ,separating the two 
phases. 
For an analysis of the stress singularity at the tip of a crack lying on the interface, 
we make use of the theory developed for singularities in a multiwedge 216). 
Solutions of boundary-value problems usually present singularities at sharp corners 
of plates or at points of discontinuous boundary conditions. Typical problems of 
this kind, among others, are those related to cracks in homogeneous plates and 
composites, bonded joints, as well as the contact and punch problems. Solutions of 
these problems are included in a monograph on the complex formulation of the two-
dimensional stress problem by Muskhelishvili 215). These singularities correspond 
physically to regions of high stress concentrations, or to regions in which plastic 
flow occurs, so that the linear elastic theory is inadequate to solve the problem. 
Regions where stress fields present singularities are of primary interest in boundary-
value problems, and thus it is of particular importance to know the type and order 
of stress singularities at such regions. Of special importance are the stress singularities 
developed at the corners of multi wedges and bimaterial wedges, constituting elements 
of the various types of composites. 
The boundary-value problem of a bimaterial wedge was first considered by 
Bogy 238-240). He considered the problem of two perfectly bonded isotropic wedges, 
226 

XI. I Order of Singularities at the Apices of Multiwedges 
whose remaining faces were loaded by prescribed tractions. For its solution, he used 
a technique based on the Mellin transform. While with this technique Bogy was able 
to determine the whole stress field in the bimaterial composite, he restricted his solu-
tion, however, to the close vicinity of the apex of the biwedge, due to the complexity 
in the numerical calculations involved. Dundurs 225), in a discussion of Bogy's early 
papers (see also Ref. 241), showed that the stress field in a bimaterial composite 
depends on only the two composite constants (X and {3, incorporating the four elastic 
constants of the two materials of the biwedge. He, furthermore, showed that all the 
physically relevant material combinations of the two bodies of the composite plate can 
be depicted in a parallelogram traced in the (X -
{3 plane. After this statement by 
Dundurs, Bogy gave his results for the bimaterial wedge in these parallelograms for 
various geometrical configurations. 
Afterwards, Theocaris 216) used the method of complex potentials for the study 
of the asymptotic behavior of the stress field in the vicinity of a multiwedge corner. 
According to this method, the two functions of the complex formulation of the plane 
elastic stress problem are expressed in their asymptotic form as sums of powers of 
complex exponents and their conjugates. The order of the elastic stress singularity 
was defined by the boundary conditions along the interfaces of the wedges, as well 
as along the free faces of the multi wedge composite. This method was applied after-
wards to the study of a series of singular stress fields developed at the vertex of a 
biwedge, whose two wedges were perfectly bonded, whereas its other two faces were 
loaded by prescribed tractions. 
The biwedge was considered as containing a crack either along a part of the inter-
face, or traversing one of its phases. Moreover, the important case of a partial de-
bonding at the interface of a circular inclusion was thoroughly studied. All these 
studies led to a potential method, based on the theory of caustics 208), where, without 
necessating a particular solution of complicated problems with interior singularities, 
one could measure and evaluate the order of the stress singularity at a geometric 
discontinuity or load concentration in the stress field and the respective stress intensity 
factor at the singular region, by measuring only some geometric characteristics of 
the caustic 242-256). 
The theory and experimental techniques described to determine the order of sin-
gularity and the stress intensity factor in biwedge materials is closely related to the 
study of composites, since, in general, we have biwedges scattered all over the field 
of fiber- or particulate composites at corners of inclusions. Moreover, if a crack is 
developed in one of the phases of the composite and terminates at an interface, then 
the biwedge is changed to a multiwedge, where the void between the lips of the crack 
is a third material, with a sector angle of zero degrees. Then, the theory for singularities 
at the comers of multiwedges also containing cracks is of paramount importance. 
The basic problem ofthe multiwedge is now considered; from this, all other problems 
may be derived. 
First, lets consider the plane problem of a number of n dissimilar wedges of arbitrary 
angles perfectly bonded at their interfaces and such that all interfaces coalesce at the 
same vertex 0, which was taken as the origin of the reference frame Oxy, as indicated 
in Fig. 147. Each of the wedges was denoted by Sj' wherejvaried between one and n, 
and the Sj sector was between the E J and EU+1) interfaces, with E(n+1) = E 1. The 
angles subtended between the x-axis and each interface in the positive direction are 
227 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
Fig. 147. Geometry of a multi-
wedge plate. 
denoted by 9j' while the corresponding interfaces are characterized by Ej' with inter-
face E1 separating sectors S1 and S n. The interfaces Ej may have the form of any type 
of curve, provided that they are tangents at the straight lines sub tending angles 9j 
in the near vicinity of the vertex. The thickness of all sectors was taken as d and being 
very small in comparison with other dimensi.ons of the sector for the generalized 
plane-stress problem or very large for the corresponding plane-strain problem. 
Since such corners (0) may exist in various places inside, or at any boundary of 
the composite plate, the study of the dependence of singularities on the geometry and 
the material properties of the coalescing wedges at every comer of the plate can be 
applied to the general composite, where many such types of corners exist. 
The boundary conditions at the interface Ek , concerning the normal and tangential 
components of stresses and displacements, yield 216): 
(389) 
where the variable tk = reilJ.k expresses points along the tangent to the interface Ek 
and the subscript k defines quantities or functions referred to the medium k. 
Expressions for the eigenfunctions 'Pk(z) and t/lk(Z) (z E Sk) are assumed to be: 
228 
'Pk(Z) = a1kzA + a2ki 
tfik(z) = b1kz'· + b2kzi 
(390) 

XLI Order of Singularities at the Apices of Multiwedges 
which must satisfy the homogeneous boundary conditions on the interfaces in the 
vicinity of the vertex O. For these purposes, it suffices to determine the eigenvalue, 
for which Re A becomes a minimum. This value gives the order of the dominant term 
in the eigenfunction expansion near the vertex. Continuity of the displacement field 
in the vicinity of the vertex requires that Re A > O. Furthermore, Re A > 1 implies 
that the stresses remain finite at z = 0, as is readily seen from the expressions of 
stresses derived from Eq. (389). We therefore seek eigenvalues in the range: 
0< Re A < I 
(391) 
, 
which implies unbounded stresses and strains near the vertex of the multiwedge 
material. 
The number A was taken explicitly or implicitly as a real number 256-258) in order 
to satisfy the boundary conditions (see, e.g., relations (2.3) in Ref. 255), which is not 
always the case. This unjustified assumption is caused by the form of the asymptotic 
expressions considered for the analysis, which otherwise cannot satisfy the boundary 
conditions (compare relations (24) in Ref. 255 with Eqs. (390)). 
Introducing Eqs. (390) into Eq. (389) yields the boundary conditions along any 
of the interfaces of each sector of the multi wedge. 
When one of the sectors, say sector S., is devoid of material, the boundary conditions become: 
(392) 
or 
(393) 
Either of these relations is valid along the tangent to the interface EI , depending on what 
type of boundary conditions are given along the line EI • If the displacements are given, then 
Eq. (392) is valid; if the normal and shear tractions are given, then Eq. (393) is adequate. In 
both cases the right-hand terms corresponding to the ~mpty sector are equal to zero, since the 
displacements and stresses are not considered to become infinite for 'I .... 0, as it is supposed 
in Eq. (391) for the displacements and stresses on the material side of the interface EI . 
In an exactly similar way, it is found that, for the interface E.: 
u 
a 
t1+u 
a 
tI 
Xii 
tt(I-I) 
b-
-tI 
-b 
-(10 
(.-1) 1(.-1). 
(.-1) 2('-1).-
1(.-1) •• 
-
1(.-1).-
2(n-I).=:, 
(394) 
or 
(395) 
Either of Eqs. (392) and (393), as well, either of Eqs. (394) and (395), replaces the general 
relations for the straight boundaries EI and E., if the sector Sn is devoid of material. 
Equations (394) and (395) may be further transformed by taking into account the relations: 
(396) 
These relations must hold for every value of the variable r, and the coefficients for r1 and ,;: 
must be equal to zero, which yields for the coefficients of the terms of r1: 
J!k[U(k-l)a1(k-l) e i18k -
2a2(k_1) ei(2-1)8k -
h 2(k-l) e- i18k] 
= J!(k-l)[ uka 1k e i18k -
20 2k e i (2-1) 8k -
h2k e- i18k] 
(397) 
229 

Xl. Stress Singularities in Cracked· Phases 
[ 
[lSk 
1-
[(2-l)Sk 
b-
-[).Sk] 
0I(k-I) e 
+ "a2(k_I) e 
+ 2(k-I{ 
= [alk ei!.!!k + ,1.a2k ei(2-l)Sk + /i2k e- iASk] 
(398) 
while for the coefficients of the terms with rr: 
(399) 
and 
(400) 
When A becomes a real number, Eqs. (390) may take the form: 
The coefficients aw a2k, b2k in this case are not each defined uniquely, only their partial sums 
(alk + 02k) and (blk + b2k) can be uniquely defined. Uniqueness of the expressions, when A is 
real or complex, is reached by defining a lk, a Zk' bw b2k , so that Eqs. (397}-(400) are valid, 
while, normally for real A, relations expressing the sums of Eqs. (397), (399), and (398), (400) 
should be valid. Nevertheless, the results are the same and with the above Eqs. (390), the cases 
for complex A are also included. 
Multiplying Eqs. (397) and (398) with eUlik , and the complex conjugates of Eqs. (399) and 
(400) with e - illik leads to a system of relations for each sector S.' occupied by the medium n, 
where the subscript k must change from 1 up to n. Therefore, we have 4n equations, homogeneous 
for the unknown coefficients aw {i2k' E2k, blk (k = 1,2,3, ... , n), which are usually complex. 
For a nontrivial solution of the set of 4n equations, the determinant LI of the coefficients of the 
unknowns must be equal to zero. This yields one further equation from which A can be deter-
mined 216). 
When the medium n is devoid of material, we have 4(n -
2) equations, and four equations 
derived from either Eq. (399) or (393) and either Eq. (394) or (395), depending on the boundary 
conditions. These relations become: 
From Eq. (394) 
(.-1) 1(.-1). 
2(.-1) 
. 
2(.-1) -
{ u 
a 
e 2i ).S. -
,1.a 
e2i!!. - b 
- 0 
U(n_I)a2(n_I) e-2ll9n -
,1.a l (n_I) e- 2lSn -
bI(n-I) = 0 . 
{ 
2i!.S. 
,1.-
2iSn 
b 
0 
From Eq. (395) 
a1(._I) e . + a2(._I) e 
.+ 
2(n-1) = 
a 
-21).S. + 1 
-211i. 
b 
0 
2(.-1) e 
"aI(n-I) e 
+ 
1(.-1) = 
. 
(401.1) 
(401.2) 
(402.1) 
(402.2) 
(403.1) 
(403.2) 
(404.1) 
(404.2) 
Thus, in total there are 4(n -
2) + 4 = 4(n -
1) equations with 4(n -
I) unknown coeffi-
cients a w aw blk, b2k [(k = 1,2,3, ... , (n -
I)]. From the determinant of the coefficients of 
the unknowns in this set of equations, a similar relation to the determinant LI = 0 is obtained, 
which yields the value for A 216). 
230 

XLI Order of Singularities at the Apices of Multiwedges 
As a ftrst application of the above general theory to a multiwedge, we consider the 
case of a homogeneous wedge. The origin is placed at the vertex of the wedge and the 
axes are selected so that the faces of the wedge coincide with lines 9 = arg z = 0, 
and a, using the polar coordinates z = rei8• The stress field in the vicinity of the 
vertex due to continuous boundary conditions on the faces are taken as arg z = 0 
or a. This problem has been previously solved 257,259,260). If the stresses are prescribed 
at the faces 91 = 0 and 92 = a, then Eqs. (402) yield: 
(405) 
For a non-zero solution, these equations imply that: 
1 
1 
0 
il 
0 
1 = O. 
A= e2O .• 
ile2ia 
I 0 
(406) 
ile- 2i• 
e- 2iA• 
0 
This determinant reduces to the characteristic equation: 
sin ila = ±il sin a . 
(407) 
This equation is the same as Eq. (15) given by Williams 257), Kalandiia 259), and 
England 260). 
A fundamental and important proof of the theory is provided by the case of a 
homogeneous and isotropic plate containing an edge crack. Indeed, for an angle 
a = 2n it is found that sin 2nil = 0 and il = 1/2, which yields (il -
I) = -1/2. 
This angle a = 2n corresponds to the case of an infinite plate containing a semi-
infinite transverse crack, for which it is known' that the order of singularity at the 
crack tip is -1/2. Since the functions tp(z) and l/J(z) must be differentiated once for 
the stress components, the number (A -
I) expresses the singularity at the crack tip. 
If, instead of stresses at the edges E1 with 9 = 0 and E2 with 9 = a, the displace-
ments are known, a simpler determinant is derived, reducing to the characteristic 
equation: 
u sin Aa = ± 1 sin a . 
(408) 
This equation coincides with Ref. 254 for x = (3 -
4v). Again, for a = 2n: 
A = 1/2 and (1 -
1) = -1/2. 
(409) 
The third case examines the mixed boundary conditions with prescribed stresses 
at the edge E1 and prescribed displacements at the edge E2. The corresponding deter-
minant yields the characteristic equation: 
1 + x2 + 2x cos 2Ac( = 2A.2(1 -
cos 2a) . 
(410) 
231 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
Equation (410) may be written in a form analogous to Eqs. (407) and (401): 
A,z 
(I + xl 
sin2 Ao( + - sin2 0( = --:--
X 
4x 
(411) 
Equation (411) for 0( = 1t, representing the half-plane, becomes: 
. 
(1 + x) 
sm An = ± 
1 r.. 
2V X 
(412) 
where 1 < u < 3. The dominant eigenvalue for Eq. (412) is: 
I 
i 
A = - + -logx 
2 
2n 
. 
(413) 
The latter indicates that, for the half-plane at the point of its boundary where stress 
and displacement boundary conditions coincide, a stress singularity of the order 
[(1/2) + (i/2n) log x] is expected, as demonstrated by Muskhelishvili 215). 
For the case of a semi-infinite crack in an elastic medium with stress-displacement 
conditions at its lips, which corresponds to 0( = 2n, Eq. (412) yields 261): 
. 
(1 + x) 
sm 2A1t = ± 
1 r.. 
2VX 
(414) 
with a dominant eigenvalue given by A = 1 -
Y2' where Y2 = [(3/4 + (log x/4ni)]. 
This yields A = [(1/4) -
(log x/4m)], which is equivalent to A. = [(1/4 + (i/4n) log x]. 
The above expression for Y2 is also given in Ref. 215. 
The following case is that of two dissimilar wedges of arbitrary angle, bonded along 
an interface El and subjected to some general form ofloading, as indicated in Fig. 148. 
Wedge 1, with the mechanical properties 111 and Xl' occupies the sector with angle 81 
between arg z = 0 and arg z = 81, while wedge 2, with the mechanical properties 112 
232 
Fig. 148. Geometry of a bimaterial 
wedge. 

XLI Order of Singularities at the Apices of Multiwedges 
and %2, occupies the sector with angle 82 between arg z = (2n -
82) and arg z = 2n. 
Here J.l1,2 denote the shear moduli for phases 1 and 2, respectively; J.l1,2 are given by 
J.l1,2 = (3 -
4 V1.2) and %1,2 = (3 -
VI ,2\1 + v1,21 for plane-strain or plane-stress prob-
lems; V1,2 are Poisson ratios for phases 1 and 2, respectively. 
In this case, it is difficult to develop the general determinant A (relation (13) of 
Ref. 216) which is of the eighth order for this problem. It is preferable to work directly 
with Eqs. (397)-(400) and (402), when considering the first fundamental problem for 
8 = 81 and 8 = 82 , in the same way as in Ref. 257. 
For 9 = 0, the relations for displacements yield 216): 
and: 
["I all -
Aa21 - E21] = J.lI ["2a12 -
Aa22 - Ed 
J.lz 
["laZI -).all -
bll] = J.lI ["2a22 -
Aa12 - bd 
J.lz 
[all + Atizl + E21] = [a12 + ).oz2 + E22] 
[a21 + ),all + bll] = [a22 + Aal2 + b12] . 
For 9 = 91, Eqs. (402) become: 
(417) 
(418a) 
Similarly, for 9 = 92 , Eqs. (402) yield: 
(418 b) 
Introducing the values for bu , 5zl , b12, and 5zz from Eqs. (41Sa) and. (418b) into Eqs. (416) 
and (417) we obtain: 
{[ 
Zi)'.'II] 
'[ 
ZiSl ] _ 
} 
r 
Zi)'.'12 
Zi.'lZ 
_ 
"I + e 
au -
/I, 1 -
e 
aZI 
= (J.lI/l1z) (["z + e 
1 a12 -
A[l -
e 
] aZZ} 
{["I + e -2i)'.'I11 a21 -
A[l -
e -2i811au } 
= (111/I1Z){["2 + e -2i'\.'I2] a2Z -
A[l -
e -Zi.'I21 a12} 
(4l9a) 
and: 
The characteristic equation for determining A is derived by sefting the determinant of the 
coefficients of Eqs. (4l9a) and (4l9b) equal to zero, with the quantities all> aZI , a12' a22 as un-
known, so that the set of equations has a nontrivial solution. The determinant .dz 
(1 _ e2iA81) 
A(l -
eZi.'ll) 
(l_e-U.'II) 
(1 - eW . .'IZ) 
A(l- e- 2i8Z ) 
A(l -
e2WZ) 
(1 _ e-Zi,\.'I Z) 
A(l _ e-Zi.'ll) 
,1 Z = 
("I + /;,\.'11) 
-A(I- e- zwI ) 
= O. 
-A( 1 -
e2i9 l ) 
("I + e-ziml) 
(J.ld I1z) ("z + e2iA.'IZ) 
-(I1t1J.lz) A(l- e- mZ) 
-(I1t!l1z) A(l - eZiSZ ) 
(J.lt! I1z) ("z + e - 2imZ) 
(420) 
233 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
cannot be simplified further and gives a complicated transcendental function, which can be 
solved only numerically. However, in special cases, such as in the important case of a transverse 
semi-infinite crack running along a part of the interface of a bimaterial body, the determinant 
,13 may be reduced even further. In this case, 91 = -92 = nand ,13 becomes: 
(1 - e2i1n) 
0 
(I - e- 2iln) 
0 
0 
(1 - e-2i!.n) 
0 
(1 _ e2ii.n) 
Ll3 = 
(XI +/ ~iln) 0 
(1l1/ 1l2) (X2 + e -2ii.n) 0 
= O. 
0 
(XI + e -2iln) 0 
(Jld 1l2) (X2 + 
~iln) 
Developing this determinant, after some algebra, leads to: 
(l -
e-2iln) (l -
~iln) [«IlI/jlz) u2 + I) ~iln 
+ «lldIl2) + XI)] [«IlI/1l2) XI + I) e-2ii.n + «lldIl2) + X2)] = O. 
(421) 
Finally, the determinant Ll2 (420) can be written in an equivalent real form: 
[(1- cos 2A9 1) + A(1 - cos 29 1)] 
.1 = - (sin 2A.9 1 + A sin 29 1) 
[(Xl + cos 2291) -
2(1 - cos 2.91)] 
(sin 2A9 1 + 2 sin 2.9 1) 
[(1 - cos 2A.9 2) + A(1 - cos 29 2)] 
- (sin 22.9 2 + A sin 2.9 2) 
-(sin 2A.9 1 -
A sin 29 1) 
-[(1 - cos 2A.9t> ~ ).(1 - cos 29 1)] 
(sin 2A9 1 -
A sin 29t> 
-[(Xl + cos 22.91) + 2(1 - cos 2.91)] 
-(sin 2A.9 2 -
A sin 292) 
-[(1 - cos 2A.92) -).(1- cos 29 2)] 
(IlI/1l2) (sin 2292 - 2 sin 29 2) 
(Jld 1l2)[X2 + COS2A.92) - 2(l-cos2.92)] 
(1lt/1l2) (sin 2A9 2 + A sin 292) 
=0 
-(Ild 1l2) [(X2 + .cos 2)..92) + },(l -
cos 292)] 
(422) 
The real form of this determinant .1 indicates that, if the number A is a root of .1, then the 
number:l: is also a root ofthe same equation. The terms of this determinant resemble the terms 
of the characteristic equation for the same case of a bimaterial with a semi-infinite crack along 
a part of the interface given by Bogy 238). 
. 
Equations (390) for the eigenfunctions rp(z) and ljJ(z) allow for the constant}, to obtain either 
real or complex values, without having as a consequence to derive complex values for the com-
ponents of stresses or strains when complex values for A are accepted. 
The results Refs. 257-260 do not allow for values of this quantity, which are different from 
real (i.e., complex or imaginary), because, otherwise, complex values for stresses and strains 
would be obtained, which are unacceptable. For example, Williams 257) implicitly accepts that A 
is real, and further seeks any values of A (or its real part, if A is complex) which represent the 
minimum roots for the characteristic equation (15) of his paper. Ifwe accept that}, is complex, 
then A = (AI + iAz), and William's equation (7) becomes: 
(AI + 1) 
. • 
X = r 
[cos (,1.2 In r) + Ism (}'2 In r)] F(9; A) . 
(423) 
For constant [) and variable r, function X clearly takes complex values, which are unacceptable, 
except for ,1.2 = 0, that is if A is real. Therefore, any complex values for A must be rejected. 
Moreover, Hein and Erdogan 262), in their relation (2.11), take the same form for function X, 
in order to obtain real values for X and for the components of stresses. Furthermore, these latter 
authors stll:te that expressions (3.3) and their complex conjugates yield a determinant of fourth 
order for the bimaterial wedge (p. 323). The determinant derived from these four equations is 
given in Eq. (420) and coincides with the determinant of the herein presented study. Finally, 
Kalandiia 259) explicitly accepts real values for },. 
234 

XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study of Singularities 
XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study 
of Singularities 
Before applying this theory to particular aspects of composites, we will attempt to 
correlate it with the optical method of caustics. The method was sketched in a previous 
chapter (also refer to Ref. 208). However, Eqs. (316) and (317) express the equations of 
the generatrix curve of the caustic of the specimen, which is called the initial curve, and 
the caustic itself in space, for the case where the complex stress function cfl(z) for the 
particular problem is known. Anyhow, for studying the singularity in the stress field, 
it is sufficient to know only the first and singular term in the Taylor series expansion 
of cfl(z) 208). 
Due to the very small contribution of the second terms in Eqs. (390), expressing 
the eigenfunctions rp(z) and I/I(z),.in determining the order of the elastic stress singular-
ity at the particular vertex of the multiwedge plate 216) the function cfl(z) -
defining 
the caustics -
can be considered to take the form: 
(424) 
where indices 1,2 correspond to either of the wedges of the biwedge to which the com-
plex function <P(z) is applied; Kl 2 is the complex stress intensity factor, which is 
different for either wedge; P (p =' PI + iP2) expresses the order of the elastic stress 
singularity at the particular vertex considered, and is related to Ii by: 
P = (l -
Ii). 
(425) 
While the order of singularity P is a function of the elastic constants of the sectors 
and is independent of the loading conditions of the multiwedge, the coefficients K 
in the expression for <P(z) are related to the applied loads and may be complex Or real, 
depending on the orientation of the applied loads·. Equation (420) thus yields: 
(426) 
I'" (lid 
-K-
--(p+ 1) 
t '1"'1.2 Z1.2 
Z = -p 1,2Z 1,Z 
(427) 
(428) 
Introducing these latter into Eq. (316), gives the radius of the initial CUrve: 
r 
=Iz 1=14C 
K 
p(p+l)ePZ<PI.211/(Pl+2). 
1,2 
1.2 
1,2 
1,2 
(429) 
The equation for the caustic is obtained by Eq. (317) if we introduce the value for 
the conjugate of the first derivative of cfl(z) given by Eq. (427). This then yields: 
(430) 
235 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
For the most common case where P is real (real values of p cover the largest parts 
in Bogy's 263) and Dundurs' 226) parallelograms) Eq. (430) becomes: 
(431) 
By writing the coefficient Kin the form KI ,2 = IKI •2 1 eiY1,2, Eq. (431) can be expressed 
as: 
(432) 
which yields the following parametric equations for the caustic: 
xI 2 =rI 2 [cosqJI2=+= 
1 
, 
, 
, 
(PI + 
YI2 = rl 2 [sin qJI 2 =+= 
1 
sin [(PI + I) qJI,2 - YI.2JJ, 
, 
, 
, 
(PI+I) 
\) cos [(PI + \) qJI,2 - YI,2J] 
(433) 
Equation (430), together with Eq. (429), define the caustic for a complex stress 
singularity at the corner of the biwedge, while Eqs. (433) yield the form of the caustic 
for a real stress singularity. It is clear from these relations that, while for the real stress 
singularities the initial curve is a circle and there is a linear dependence of the charac-
teristics of the caustic and the radius of its initial curve, this linearity ceases to exist 
for complex stress singularities where the initial curve depends on the polar angle rp. 
If K becomes real, then Y = 0, the parametric equations for the caustic become: 
X I 2 = r I 2 [cos qJ I 2 =+= 
\ 
cos (p I + 1) m I 2J 
' 
, 
, 
(PI + 1) 
'1', 
YI 2 = r I 2 [sin qJ I 2 =+= 
1 
sin (PI + 1) m I 2J . 
, 
, 
, 
(PI + 1) 
'I' , 
(434) 
For the case of a crack in an homogeneous and isotropic material, where the singular-
ity is of the order of r-I/2, that is PI = 0.5, Eqs. (433) and (434), which yield the 
equations of the caustic for the obilque or the transverse crack to the axis of loading 
in a plate, are identical with the equations given in Ref. 208. 
From the above analysis of the asymptotic behavior of the state of stress at the 
singular vertex of a multi wedge plate by the method of caustics, it may be concluded 
that the characteristic dimensions of the caustic and its initial curve depend on the 
complex constant K, entering in the expression of the stress function <P(z), on the order 
of the stress singularity p, as well as on the mechanical and optical properties of the 
sectors, and, finally, on the characteristics of the experimental arrangement. However, 
due to the negligible influence of the latter factors -
included in the global con-
stant C -
upon the shape of the caustic -
as has been proven by defining the caustics 
for certain limits of the constants C -
we here study the dependence of the charac-
236 

XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study of Singularities 
teristic properties of the caustics on the other two factors, i.e., the factor K and the 
order of singularity p. 
For complex values of the elastic stress singularity p, the transformation of the 
stress singularity into the optical singularity represented by the caustic, as determined 
by Eqs. (429) and (430), is quite different than for real values of p. Thus, while the 
radius of the initial curve for real values of p is constant (Eq. (429) for Pz = 0), it 
becomes dependent on the polar angle rp for complex values. Furthermore, while 
a linear relation between the characteristics of the caustic and the radius r of its initial 
curve exists for real singularities (Eq. (431», this linearity ceases to exist for complex 
values ofp (Eq. (430». Thus, if the caustic is considered to be formed by the rotation 
ofthe vector of deviation of the light rays, reflected from the initial curve, this vector 
for complex values of p is variable, while for real values of p is of constant magnitude 
(Eq. (424». 
For real values of the elastic stress singularity, which correspond to the most 
common cases with real materials used in applications, the equations of the caustic 
are influenced by the factor K, as well as by p, in a different manner. Indeed, while p 
influences the magnitude of the initial curve, as well as the vector of deviation of light 
rays given by KI(Pi + 1) IK], the factor K, if it is real, influences only the magnitude 
of the initial curve, while for complex K the caustic is also distorted (Eqs. (433) and 
(434». 
These relationships indicate that, for identical shapes and magnitudes of initial 
curves, the dimensions of caustics decrease as p increases, because the vector of 
deviation ofthe light rays, given by the second terms of Eqs. (434), decreases. 
By plotting the caustics, corresponding to values of p varying between zero and 
unity, the variation of their characteristic dimensions with p can be determined. 
p ...... 
Fig. 149. Variation of the charac-
teristic dimensions of the caustic 
with the order of the elastic stress 
singularity p (p varying between 
zero and unity). 
237 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
y 
p = (0.5+0.1il 
x 
Fig. 150. Caustic and its geo-
metrical construction for a 
complex order of the stress 
singularity, p = (0.5 + O.li). 
Figure 149 presents a nomogram of the variation of the longitudinal diameter of the 
caustic Dl' its transverse diameter Dri from the singular apex of the internal part, the 
distance r min from the vertex to the point with the minimum distance (all these quan-
tities normalized to the radius r of the initial curve), as well as the distance between 
the points corresponding to the minimum and maximum positions from the apex 
(Dmid) (normalized to 2r), and the variation of the radius-, of the initial curve (normal-
ized to (2CK)1 /(p+2»), versus the value of the elastic stress singularity at the apex (P). 
Moreover, Fig. 150 presents the caustic and its geometric construction for an ar-
bitrary value of p, which is taken as complex and equal to p = (0.5 + 0.1 i) and a real 
value of K. The value of the imaginary part for p is chosen to lie in the range ofvariation 
of the mechanical properties of the constituent materials of the multiwedge. From 
Bogy's (a -
fJ)-diagrams 238-240,263), one can estimate that the imaginary part for p 
cannot exceed 0.15. For complex p, the caustic is distorted with a discontinuity between 
its lips. 
As a first application of the general study of the state of stress singularities at the 
comer of a multiwedge, we shall examine the important case of a crack along a part 
of an interface of the composite. 
From the viewpoint of fracture of composite materials, the eventual manufacturing 
flaws developed during bonding or casting of composites are of great importance. 
Therefore, a good estimate for the state of stress developed by these flaws is necessary 
in designing with composite materials. These localized imperfections may be idealized 
by plane cracks, voids, and inclusions, with different degrees of relative stiffness. 
In composites consisting of perfectly bonded elastic phases, it is usually assumed that 
the most important imperfections are those located near to interfaces. These imper-
fections may be idealized as cracks or flat inclusions. 
238 

XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study of Singularities 
Problems of dissimilar linearly-elastic materials with cracks in various positions have been 
considered recently. Williams 264) has shown that stress singularities may exist in plates under 
conditions of plane strain, contaning angular comers, by applying the eigenvalue technique for 
presenting the boundary conditions. Rice and Sih 265) obtained closed-form solutions in terms 
of Goursat functions for bonded dissimilar plates containing a single internal crack at the inter-
face. England 266) treated the two-dimensional elastic problem of a crack lying at the interface 
of two bonded dissimilar half-planes. Erdogan 267,268) and Erdogan and co-workers 269-272), 
studied the singular behavior of the solution around isolated imperfections resulting from the 
stress perturbation technique, formulated in terms of a system of singular integral equations. 
These authors also examined cracks parallel or perpendicular to interfaces of composites, 
as well as cracks running along a part of an interface. They defined for each particular case the 
order and type of singularity and the stress intensity factor. 
Willis 273) formulated the plate problem of a plane crack along the interface between two 
bonded dissimilar anisotropic elastic half-spaces, in terms of the theory of a continuous distribu-
tion of dislocations, and by also applying Griffith's virtual work argument obtained from crack 
propagation conditions. Toya 274) considered the case of a crack in a part of the interface of a 
rigid circular inclusion, embedded in an infinite elastic solid, which was opened by normal 
pressures on its lips. The problem was reduced to a mixed boundary-value problem of a circular 
boundary for a plane with a hole, which was completely solved by Muskhelishvili 215). 
Finally butt-joined epoxy-aluminum composite plates, containing a single internal crack 
along the bond surface, were tested in tension by Wang and co-workers 275). A characteristic 
crack length was found, above which fracture is entirely controlled by the stress intensity factor 
at the crack tip, in complete agreement with results given by Rice and Sih 265) and Erdogan 267). 
It is now necessary to solve the problem of an internal crack running along the inter-
face of two bonded, dissimilar, elastic materials, by considering it as a Hilbert prob-
lem. Stress intensity factors and the power of singularity at the crack tip were deter-
mined by the method of caustics 244). 
Consider a Cartesian system of coordinates Oxy and two isotropic and elastic 
half-planes Sl and S2' the latter two occupying the regions y > 0 and y < 0, respective-
ly. These materials are bonded together along their interface, which coincides with 
the x-axis. A part of the interface -
symmetrically placed to both sides of the origin 0 
and with a length 2a -
is unbonded; uniform tractions (J and shears r are applied 
along the entire length of this internal crack. Otherwise, the plane is considered as 
y 
L" 
L' 
t t t t 
t t t {p 
- - -
x 
Fig. 151. Geometry of the problem of 
a finite crack along the interface of two 
bonded, dissimilar elastic half-spaces. 
239 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
free of applied external loads, i.e., everywhere and especially at infinity, as indicated 
in Fig. 151. L' is the crack length and L" the remainder of the interface, which is 
bonded, while the whole boundary along the x-axis is indicated by L. 
The holomorphic functions <1>1 z(z) and QI z(z), in the regions SI Z' respectively 
satisfy the boundary conditions: " 
, 
(435) 
since no load is applied at infinity. The complex functions <1>1 (z) and Qz(z) are refetred 
to the half-plane Sl' while the functions <1>/z) and QI (z) to the half-plane Sz. 
For the points of the real axis: 
<1>7(t) + Q;(t) = (J -
i'r = S 
} 
on L' 
<1>;(t) + Q;(t) = (J -
i'r = S 
(436) 
(437) 
(438) 
where I1l,z are the shear modili of the materials of SI,2' respectively; "I,Z are Muskhe-
lishvili's constants expressed by: 
"1,2 = (3 
4V1,2) for plane-strain 
(439) 
or 
"I.Z = (3 -
vI.Z)/(l + v1•2) 
for generalized plane-stress. 
(440) 
In these relations, vI •Z are the Poisson ratios of each of the phases. 
Relations (436), and (438) express the equality of the components of stresses on L' 
and L" and the equality of displacements u'(t) and v'et) along L". From the relations 
expressing the conditions for stresses along the entire real axis L = L' UL", it follows 
that: 
(441) 
By defining: 
(442) 
we obtain: 
[<1>(t) -
Q(tW -
[<1>(t) -
Q(t)r = o. 
(443) 
Equations (435), (442), and (443) indicate that [<1>(z) -
Q(z)] = 0, and therefore: 
Q(z) = <1>(z) . 
(444) 
240 

XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study of Singularities 
The latter together with Eq. (442) cause (436.1) and (438) to become: 
Introducing now the new constant 9 for the two media: 
changes Eq. (446) into: 
+ 
1_ 
cfJ (t) -
- cfJ (t) = 0 on L" . 
9 
The function cfJ (z) can be defined by: 
cfJ(z) 
cfJ(z)/g 
Then, Eqs. (445) and (448) take the form: 
cfJ;(t) + gcfJ~(t) = r 
on L' , 
cfJ; (t) -
cfJ~ (t) = 0 
on L" . 
From Eqs. (436.1), (442), and (449) it follows that: 
This is a simplified form of the Hilbert problem on L, expressed by: 
where: 
and: 
cfJ; (t) -
G(t) cfJ~ (t) = j(t) 
G(t) = {-g on L' 
1 on L" 
{ son L' 
j(t) = 
0 
on L" 
(445) 
(446) 
(447) 
(448) 
(449) 
(450) 
(451) 
(452) 
(453) 
(454) 
The solution of this problem has been given in Ref. 215, and its solution is expressed 
by the integral equation (111.6) given in this reference: 
x o(z) J f(t) dt 
cfJo(z) = --. 
+ X o(z) P(z) 
2m 
xt(t) (t - z) 
(455) 
L 
241 

Xl. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
where P(z) is an arbitrary polynomial in z. Introducing Eqs. (453) and (454) into 
Eq. (455) leads to: 
cPo(z) = --.-
+ X o(z) P(z) . 
x o(z) S f 
dt 
2m 
X;j(t) (t - z) 
(456) 
L 
Furthermore, by applying relations (110.2) and (110.5) of Ref. 215 it follows that: 
(457) 
where: 
In (-g) 
y = (ex. + if3) = 
.' 
2m 
(458) 
Since 9 > 0 and according to Eq. (447): 
y = (ex. + 1f3) = -. +-
. 
[In 9 
1 J 
2m 
2 
from which we derive: 
I 
In 9 
ex. ="2 and 
f3 = - 2; . 
Then, Eq. (457) becomes: 
-(++iP) 
. -(+-iP) 
X o(z) = (z + a) 
(z -
a) 
, 
(459) 
which yields: 
I 
[Z - aJiP 
Xo(z) = 
--
[(z + a) (z - a)]1/2 
z + a 
. 
(460) 
Equation (456) together with the function for Xo(z), given by Eg. (459), completely 
define the complex function cPo(z). However, for the functions [(z + a) (z _ a)]1/2 
and [(z -
a)/(z + a)JiP, which are holomorphic along the crack length, and for 
large \z\, it is valid that: 
Z-I[(Z + a) (z -
a)]1/2 ~ 1 and 
[(z -
a)/(z + a)]ifJ ~ 1 
(461) 
and because cPo(z) = O(l/~) forlarge \z\, it is concluded that P(z) must be equal to zero. 
Integration of Eq. (456), and following Muskhelishvili's development 215), leads to: 
cPo(z) = --
1 -
(z + 2icx.f3) --
S [ 
(Z - a)iP 
I 
J 
I + 9 
z + a 
[(z + a) (z _ a)]1/2 . 
(462) . 
242 

XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study of Singularities 
By the transformation' = (z -
a), and taking only the singular terms in the 
Taylor-series expansion of Eq. (462), as of the close vicinity of the crack tip, we can 
express the complex functions IPI (z) and IPiz) of either of the half-planes as: 
-s(1 + 2iP) ( z )-O.S±iP 
IP I (z) = 
2(1 + g) 
2a 
' 
s(l + 2iP) g (z )-O.S±ifJ 
IP2(z) = -
2(1 + g) 
2a 
(463) 
Thus, for the close vicinity of the crack tip, where z = ±a, and from Eqs. (463), 
it can be concluded that the components of stresses vary according to a law of the 
form O(C 1/2 ± iP). This generally applies to composites with cracks along their interface. 
The same result has been found by Bogy 240), who gave the relations: 
i l l  
j 
I + Po 
-I + PI = -I + 0.5 ± - tanh- Po = -
- ± -In--
n 
2 
2n 
I - Po 
(464) 
where, according to Dundurs 241): 
P = Vt2/IlI) ("I -
1) -
("2 -
1), 
o 
(ill/Ill) ("I + 1) + ("2 + I) 
(465) 
whic~ yields: 
I + Po 
"11l2 + III 
1 - P = "21l1 + 112 = g . 
(466) 
Then: 
1 
i 
I 
(-I + P ) = -
- + -In g = -
- + iP 
I 
2 -
2n 
2 -
(467) 
as previously found. 
The law ofthe form O(Z-I/2±i/l) may be written by its argument as follows, by setting r = Izl: 
0{r-1/2[cOS (P In r) or sin Pin r)]} 
(468) 
which coincides with the results of Bogy 240). 
For identical materials (g = 1 and P = 0), Eqs. (463) may be written as: 
(/1 -
ir) v;;-
I 
4>t(z) = 4>2(Z) = -
--
2 
~ 
(469) 
and by using: 
K[ = /1 V;; and Kll = 1" V;; 
(470) 
a well-known relation is obtained 276): 
(471) 
243 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
This is Westergaard's solution of the crack problem, where Z(z) = 2tP(z) and Z(z) is Wester-
gaard's complex stress function. K J and KII are the opening-mode and sliding-mode stress 
intensity factors and K*(K* = KJ -
iKII) the complex stress intensity factor for the inrmite 
plate with a central crack of length 2a. 
The singular stress field in the vicinity of the tip of the crack between the two 
dissimilar isotropic elastic half-spaces can be determined experimentally by the optical 
method of caustics 208). 
The equations for the initial curve and the corresponding caustic are given by 208): 
(472) 
and 
d4>J.2(Z) 
WI 2 = Z ± 4C 1 2 
d 
. 
. 
z 
(473) 
respectively; the SUbscripts 1 and 2 indicate either half-space; WI 2 is the complex 
coordinate of a generic point of the caustic from origin 0', the projeCtion of the crack 
tip on the reference screen; CI 2 is the global constant of either half-space: 
v 
C 
=z~d 
1,2 
, E 
1,2 
(474) 
for light rays reflected from the front surface of the specimen and: 
(475) 
for light rays either traversing the specimen (index t) or reflected from its rear face 
(index r). Furthermore, z, is the distance between the plate and the reference screen, 
VI ,2 and E I ,2 are the Poisson ratio and the elastic modulus of either half-space, ct " the 
optical constants for the light rays either traversing or reflected from the rear face 
of the specimen, and d the thickness of the pl!lte. 
By inserting Eq. (463) and after making the appropriate differentiations of Eqs. (472) 
and (473), a relation for the radius r 1,2 of the initial curve is obtained: 
I 
I 
18 C 
,* ,* 
A2'P121 2/ 5 
/'1.2 = Z1,2 = 
a 1,2A (A + 1) K1,2 e 
' 
while for the caustic: 
where: 
244 
0' ( 1 - i ~ ) (1 + 2ip) 
K I = - --2"-(-1 -+-g-)--
K2 = gKI 
(476) 
(477) 

XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study of Singularities 
A* = A1 + iA2 = 0.5 ± i{3 
(478) 
z 
= r 
eiqJ1 ,2 
1,2 
1,2 
For a crack of length 2a in an infinite plate, with the normal and shear stresses 
(J and T applied along its length, use of Eq. (476) yields the radius of the initial curve: 
I' = 1'1 = 1'2 = C2C~ly15 
and for the caustic: 
W _ 
[iqJ + 2 
i(1.5'1'-£O)J 
--I' e 
-e 
-
3 
where w is defined by: 
K* = IK*I eiro • 
Equation (480) yields the following parametric equations for the caustic: 
x = r [ cos ~ ± ~ cos c; + w) J 
y = I' [sin ~ ± ~ sin c: + w ) ] . 
Equations (479) and (480) are identical to those given in Ref. 229. 
(479) 
(480) 
(481) 
(482) 
From the above analysis of the asymptotic behavior of the state of stress in the 
vicinity of the tip of the crack between the two dissimilar half-media, it can be con-
cluded that the characteristic dimensions of the caustic and its initial curve depend 
on the composite material parameter g, given by Eq. (447), on the mechanical and 
optical properties of the two half-spaces, on the type of loading along the crack axis, 
on the crack length, and, finally, on the characteristics of the experimental arrange-
ment. However, since the latter factors, for normal loading along the crack axis, 
influence mainly the size and not the form of the caustic, it can be concluded that the 
characteristic properties of the caustic depend only on the parameter g. This para-
meter, which varies between one third and three, influences the size, as well as the 
shape of the caustic. When the role of the two materials is interchanged, the para-
meter g takes the inverse value. Thus, the variation of the characteristic properties 
of the caustic for g varying between unity and three have been studied. The value 
g = I corresponds to identical materials, while g = 3 relates to material 1 having a 
Poisson ratio of zero, while material 2 is incompressible (J12 -> 00). 
Figure 152 presents the caustics as they are defined by Eqs. (476)-(478) at the tip 
of a crack between two dissimilar half-spaces for g = 1.6 (a), 2.4 (b), and 3.0 (c). 
All these figures correspond to the same values of all other parameters, which in-
fluence the caustics, except g. These figures indicate that, while for g = 1 (identical 
materials) the caustics at the two half-spaces are identical and form one closed and 
245 

Xl. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
a 
c 
b 
C' 
Fig. 152a-c. Caustics and 
their initial curves for a) 
g = 1.6, b) g = 2.4, and 
c)g = 3.0. All caustics corre-
spond to the same values of 
the material constants and 
the characteristic dimen-
sions of the experimental 
arrangement (for descrip-
tion of symbols see text). 
periodical curve of a period 4n, for g i= I the two caustics are separated. Besides 
this separation, each caustic is distorted depending on g. Also the size of each caustic 
is different, the caustic in the weakest material becoming larger than the caustic in 
the stronger one. 
From Eq. (476), which defines the initial curve of the caustic, it can be shown 
246 

XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study of Singularities 
that for identical materials (g = 1) the initial curve is a circle, while for different 
materials (g =f= 1) this circle is distorted, the distortion becoming stronger as 9 is 
increased. The larger difference in the radii of the initial curve corresponds to angles 0° 
and 1800 , and the variation of this difference in radii Llrmax and ~rmin to the caustics 
of the two half-spaces, normalized to the radius r of the initial curve corresponding 
to identical materials, as presented in Fig. 153. The same figure also includes the 
variation of the diameter of the initial curve along the crack axis for the two caustics 
Dmax and I?min' normalized to the corresponding quantity for identical materials. 
The figure indicates that, as 9 increases, the deviation of these two diameters from the 
diameter of the initial curve for identical materials becomes larger. 
From the initial curve, defined to the surface of the specimen and in close vicinity 
of the interface, two caustics are created, the one of which corresponds to the light 
rays reflected from the front face of the specimen, while the other corresponds to 
those reflected from its rear face. However, this is the case for identical optical con-
stants for these two groups of rays. If the optical constants for the light rays reflected 
from the front and the rear face of the specimen are different, the initial curves corre-
sponding to these two groups of light rays are different, depending on the values of 
the optical constants. 
In the caustics of Fig. 152, it is possible to distinguish I -
the initial curves (cross-
marks) for the two half-spaces extending between rp = 0° and 180° for the stronger 
material, and between rp = 0° and -180° for the weaker one, II -
the exterior, 
AKB, and the interior, CLD, parts of the caustic for the stronger material (open 
circles), and III -
the corresponding parts, A'K'B' and e'L'D', for the caustic of 
the weaker material (triangles). 
The evolution and distortion in shape and dimensions of the caustics is also shown 
in Fig. 152 for 9 varying between unity and three, as well as their deviation from the 
3.0.------.-----...,-------,------,-------.0.3 
~ 
____ 
~ 
____ . __ ~ 
________ ~ 
______ ~ 
______ ~O 
1.4 
1.8 
2.2 
2.6 
3.0 
9 -+ 
Fig. 153. Variation of the half-diameters Dmin/2, Dmax/2 of caustics, Llr min' Llr max of initial curves, 
and the maximum and minimum distances Ymax and Ymin along the normal to the crack axis of 
the two caustics, all these quantities normalized to the radius r of the initial curve for identical 
materials versus the composite material parameter 9 (1 ~ 9 ~ 3). 
247 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
typical caustic with identical materials in both half-spaces. Furthermore,. Fig. 153 
also presents the variation of the distances Y max and Ymin of the most remote points 
of the exterior parts of the caustics from the crack axis. These quantities are nor-
malized to the radius r of the initial curve for the case of identical materials. Finally, 
the coordinates XA , YA , XB , YB , XC' XD, XA" YA" YB" Xc' XD, of the extreme points 
A, B, C, D, of the caustic in the stronger material, and A', B', C', D' of the extremities 
of the caustic in the weaker material, normalized to r, versus g are presented in Fig. 
154a, b. 
1.5f-----==!"""""'----4--.-------1-----+------j 
t 
xl ... 1.0~====-----+_--~<!!..i___---__t----+_--=-..;j 
x~ 
~~ 
x~ 
~l0.5t~~::~~~st=~f=-1 
x~ 
a 
t 
"'I 2.0 
x'" 
~~ 
~~ 
~~ 
:>t~ 1.0 i"=-----=-=-:!+-.2!!!:...::::::::::;::17~=;;;:::t:::::===~--1 
Xc /r 
1.4 
1.6 
2.2 
2.6 
3.0 
b 
9-
Fig. 154. a Variation of the coordinates XA, YA , XB, YB, Xc, Xv of the characteristic points A, 
B, C, and D of the caustic in the stronger material, normalized to the radius r of the initial curve 
foridentical materials versus g (1 ::'£ g ::'£ 3). b Variation of the coordinates X A" YA " YB" Xc, Xv' 
of the characteristic points A', B', C', and D' of the caustic in the weaker material, normalized 
to the radius r of the initial curve for identical materials versus g (1 ::'£ g ::'£ 3). 
248 

XI.2 The Optical Method of Caustics for the Study of Singularities 
For tangential stresses 't, in addition to the normal stresses 0' along the crack axis, the complex 
functions <PI 2(Z), defining the caustic, are multiplied by the complex factor (0' -
h) = AeiP• 
Thus, a new'distortion of the caustic will occur, besides the distortion previously referred to, 
and which is due to the different mechanical and optical properties of the materials of the two 
half-spaces. This additional distortion of the caustic is proportional to the ratio of the shear 
to normal loads along the crack line. The influence of the shear stress 't on the size and shape 
of the caustic is analogous to that studied in Ref. 229. 
For studying the singular stress field in the vicinity of the tip of a crack along the 
interface of two dissimilar media, thin specimens of epoxy resin with different amounts 
of plasticizer were prepared. The first material was a cold-setting epoxy polymer 
of the type C-IOO-20 (20% Thiokol LP3 plasticizer), while the other material was 
composed of varying amounts of'epoxy polymer C-lOO-lO and C-100-100. Thus, the 
ratio ofthe shear moduli of the two materials of the composite plate varied between 
1.0 and 40.0. However, in order to obtain larger differences in the mechanical pro-
perties of the two materials, another bimaterial plate was prepared with pure epoxy 
polymer and steel; in this case, the ratio of the shear moduli of the bimaterial plate 
was 400. One of the materials, namely the epoxy resin of the first case and the metal 
of the latter, was prepared in appropriate dimensions and the other material was 
cast, so that the two materials had the same thickness when completely bonded. 
Along the straight interface of the two materials, a central crack was made. The 
thickness of the specimens was always 4 mm, their width 50 mm, and the crack length 
10 mm, so that the ratio of the width of the specimens to the crack length was 0.2. 
The front faces of the specimens were polished and thus highly reflecting. Since we 
are interested only in the singular stress field in the vicinity of the crack tip, the speci-
mens were subjected to a uniform tension at infmity, instead of imposing a tension 
stress along the crack length, since the stress field for these two types of loading 
differ only by a constant quantity, which did not influence the type of singularity at 
the crack tip. 
Figure 155 a shows the caustics at the tip of a crack between two similar half-spaces 
made of epoxy resin C-lOO-20, while Fig. 155b shows the caustics when the one 
phase was made of epoxy polymer C-l 00-20 and the other of epoxy polymer C-l 00-60. 
In both cases, only the one part of the caustic corresponding to the light rays reflected 
from the front face of the specimen was obtained, since the front face was made 
completely reflective and no light did pass through the specimen. 
The caustics of identical materials are similar and symmetric, while for different 
materials a discontinuity between the two caustics exists, the caustic in the weaker 
material being larger than the corresponding caustic in the stronger phase. The case 
of Fig. 155b with El = 26,580 Kp/cm2 , 
VI = 0,34, E2 = 8860 Kp/cm2, and v2 
= 0.39 corresponds to a value ofthe composite parameter g of 1.34, whereas Fig. 155 c 
shows the caustic at the crack tip for the same case as Fig. 155b, but now formed by 
light rays traversing the specimen. 
The analysis of the state of stress in the vicinity of the tip of a crack along the inter-
face of the two dissimilar half-spaces by the method of caustics is based only on differ-
ent elastic properties of the two half-spaces for the definition of the complex stress 
functions of the problem, but it considers equal optical constants for the two materials 
for the definition of caustics. In considering the influence of the difference in the 
optical constants of the two materials on size and shape of the caustics, the radius 
249 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
Fig. 155a-c. Caustics at the tip of a crack lying along the interface of two half-spaces. Case a) 
corresponds to similar half-spaces made of epoxy resin type C-100-20, while case b) with the 
upper material made of epoxy resin C-100-60 and the other as in a). Cases a) and b) correspond 
to light rays reflected from the front face of the specimen, while case c), with the same materials 
as in case b), to light rays traversing the specimen. 
of the initial curve for the caustic in material 1 must be multiplied by (c;,r.J/c?"r.Jt 5, 
as defined by Eq. (476). From this new initial curve, the corresponding caustic can 
be established by applying Eq. (477). Thus, in order to compare the caustics of 
Fig. 155b with the corresponding theoretical forms, the caustic in the stronger ma-
a 
) 
9 =1.34 
b 
9 =1.34 
Fig. 156a, b. Theoretically obtained caustics for g = 1.34 and (c}. ,/c},,) = 3.0 as plotted by 
computer and corresponding to the same biphase plate shown Figs. 155b, c. The difference 
between Figs. ISS b and ISS c is that Fig. 155 b corresponds to reflected light rays, while Fig. ISS c 
to traversing light rays. In case a), the magnification ratio is equal to unity, in case b), it is equal 
to ten. Open circles represent points of the caustic derived from experiments with Am = 10.0, 
whereas crosses represent the initial curves. 
250 

XL3 Singularities at Crack Tips of General Curvilinear Interfaces 
terial must become smaller by a factor of (C}/C;)2/5 = «v1/E1)/(v2/E2)2/5 = 2.~/5 
= 1.53 compared to the corresponding theoretical one. From measurements of the 
optical constant C:,2 247) for the light rays traversing the specimen, it follows that 
their ratio is ~/c: = 3.0. Thu~, the relative position of the two caustics in this case 
must be almost the same as in the case of Fig. 155b. 
Figure 156(a, b) presents the caustics, as well as their initial curves, for the cases 
of Figs. 155b, c with g = 1.34 and (c1,rlC;It) = 3.0, as plotted by.computer. While 
Fig. 156a refers to a magnification ratio 208) equal to unity, Fig. 156b shows a mag-
nification ratio often, and caustics formed by traversing light rays. The points corre-
sponding to the experimental caustics are also traced in the latter figure. The points 
of the experimentally defined caustic prove to be very close to the corresponding 
theoretical ones. 
XI.3 Singularities at Crack Tips 
of General Curvilinear Interfaces 
We try now to extend the method to solve problems of cracks lying along curvilinear 
boundaries between the two phases of a composite. 
The problem of an arc-shaped crack lying along the interface of a circular inclusion 
embedded in a matrix and subjected to a uniaxial tension at infinity, has been variously 
investigated 266,274,277). However, the conventional optical techniques fail to yield 
reliable results. This problem may be efficiently solved by the method of cau-
stics 253,254). 
The geometry of the problem is shown in Fig. 157. The complex functions 4>l(Z) 
and 4>2(Z), with respect to the Cartesian system Ax'y', are given by 253): 
4>\«() = 1 -
fJ K*r,<-1/2)-ilJ 
2 
4>2«() = 1 + fJ K*«-1/2)-iij 
2 
a 
(483) 
(484) 
Fig. 157. Geometry of a circular crack lying along the interface 
of two dissimilar materials forming a composite plate, loaded 
by a uniform tensile stress at infinity. 
(1 
251 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
with: 
K*- (K 
'K) _ 
-i(3-+1<)/2 
,;1I 
[(-1/2)+io]ln(Zsinll) 
-
1-l 11 -e 
e 
e 
[ 
(J 1 -
~ 
. 
] 
x (2i> + i) sin 9 C1 + 2" ~ 
eZoll e,(2w-3-) 
(485) 
These expressions for 1[>1 (z) and 1[>2(Z) yield the following parametric equations for 
the caustic, with respect to the Cartesian system Ax'y': 
X = (J2/5IAI2/5 A1.z 
X [cos q>I,2 ± 4C 1.2g1,2 e2,jtpl,zAt:~/2 ( - ~ cos T 1,2 -
i> sin T 1.2) J 
(486) 
If' = (JZ/5 I A 12/5 A1.2 
X [sin q>1,2 ± 4C1,2g1,2 e2ii<P1.2A1,5£2 (- ~ sin T1,2 + f> cos T I.Z) J 
(487) 
where the quantities appearing in the above expressions are defined by: 
I-fJ 
gl = -2-' 
1 + fJ 
g2 = -2-' 
K* = (JA 
A 
= /4C 
g 
7 (- ~ 
-
if» (_ .l_ib)/Z/5 e(Z/5),j'Pl,Z 
1.Z 
1,2 1,-
2 
2 
(488) 
T1,2 = ~ f> (In (J + In IAI - t + f 
q>1,2 + b In A1.2) 
and: 
From Eqs, (486) and (487) it follows that: 
(489) 
where Dl and Dz are the radu of the caustic along the Ay'-axis of the inclusion and 
the matrix, respectively. In Eq. (489), quantity B is expressed by: 
. 
4C 
Z,j'PIA- 5/2 ( 
1 . T 
~ 
T ) 
Sill q> 1 ± 
1 g 1 e 
1 
- '2 Sill 
1 + u cos 
1 
B = 
. 
(490) 
. 
4C 
7')<P2A- 5/ 2 ( 
1 . T 
-' 
T ) 
S111 q>z ± 
zgz e-
2 
- '2 S111 
2 + u cos 
2 
252 

XL3 Singularities at Crack Tips of General Curvilinear Interfaces 
Next, the constants D1 and D1[ are defined by: 
with 
DeJ 
D*=-
I 
K1
' 
(491) 
(492) 
where D1 and D2 are the radii of the caustic along the Ay'-axis of the inclusion and the 
matrix, respectively. Moreover, eJ is the applied stress and K[ and KJ[ the two compo-
nents of the complex stress intensity factor K*, characterizing the stress field near 
the crack tip. The constants D1 and D11 depend only on the angles w, 9 and Dundurs' 
constants rx, [3. Here, the ang;les wand 9 define the direction of loading and the angle 
of the crack, respectively, while rx and f3 are characteristic constants of the two materials 
of the composite defined hy: 
piX1 + 1) -
111(X2 + 1) 
rx =~.~--~~~~~--~ 
112(X1 + I) + 111\X2 + 1) 
[3 = 112(X1 -
1) -
I1/X2 -
1) 
112(X1 + 1) + 111(X2 + I) 
. 
t 
where Xl and x2 an~ given by Eqs. (440). 
(493) 
(494) 
For a given material combination of the composite, the two constants Dj and Dj! 
may be defined from the rx -
f3 nomograms introduced by Dundurs 225). Moreover, 
Fig. 158a, b. Caustics at the tip of a circular crack of angle 29 (cf. Fig. 157), lying along the 
interface of a circular inclusion made of C-I 00-0 epoxy polymer and a matrix made of a plasticiz-
ed epoxy polymer C-100-40. The composite plate was loaded by a uniform tensile stress (J 
subtending an angle w with the axis of symmetry of the crack. Case a) corresponds to 
(J = 23.40Kp·cm- 2, w = 0,29 = 45°, while case b) toO" = 23.13 Kp·cm- 2, w = 30°,29 = 90°. 
253 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
the ratio D of the diameters of the caustics formed at the crack tip may be determined 
experimentally. Then the relations in Eq. (491) allow to determine the real (K[) and 
imaginary (KIl) parts of the complex stress intensity factor K*. 
Figure 158 shows the caustic at the one tip of circular crack, lying along the inter-
face between the inclusion and the matrix in a composite plate prepared from unplasti-
cized and plasticized epoxy polymers and for two distinct cases. 
Fig. 159. Geometry of a crack along a bimaterial 
interface. 
For the general curvilinear interface crack (Fig. 159), the asymptotic expressions 
of the cQmplex potentials q>1,2(Z) (in the media S1 and S2) are to be used, together 
with Eqs. (316) and (317) for the initial curve and the caustic. These expressions are: 
q> 
(z) = K 
Z-(1/2)-iP 
1,2 
1,2 
(495) 
where K 1,2 are the complex stress intensity factors at the crack tip, related by: 
(496) 
and the constants g and f3 are defined by Eqs. (447) and (459). 
By successively differentiating Eq. (495) twice with respect to z and introducing 
the appropriate quantities into Eqs. (316) and (317), the initial curve of the caustic 
is determined as: 
(497) 
Subscript 1 corresponds to angles qJ in the interval 0 ~ qJ ~ n, whereas subscript 2 
indicates angles qJ given by 0 ~ qJ > -n; R is defined by z = R exp (iqJ). 
Equation (497) suggests that the equation of the initial curve does not give the 
circumference of a circle, as is the case with cracks in isotropic elastic media. Further-
more, this curve presents a jump for qJ = 0°. Only when the crack lies along the inter-
face of a duplex plate of the same material, this jump vanishes. 
254 

XL3 Singularities at Crack Tips of General Curvilinear Interfaces 
The equation of the caustics can be written as: 
x exp [i~I'2 (~-iP)]} . 
(498) 
By setting: 
(499) 
one finds that Eqs. (497) and (498) take the form: 
(500) 
and 
x exp [i~I'2 (~- iP)] . 
(501) 
If: 
(502) 
where 91,2 is the argument of the stress intensity factor, Eq. (50l) yields: 
2/5 
(2 ). 
(1. ) 
W1,2/Am = H 1,2 IKI,21 
exp 5' P~I,2 exp (Z~l,2) + C1,2 "2 - zp 
x IK I [H 
IK 12/ 5]-3/2+ iP exp (- ~ P~ ) 
1,2 
1,2 
1,2 
5 
1,2 
{ 
[ 
2/5 
2 
2 
3 
]} 
xexp i -91,2+Pln(H1,2I K I,21 
)+5P~I,2+2~I,2 . 
(503) 
The above equation can be written in a convenient form by setting: 
_ 
2/5 
2 
2 
3 
T1,2 - -91,2 + PIn (H1,2 IK1,21 
) + "5 P QJl,2 + 2 ({Jl,2 
(504) 
255 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
and writing the complex Eq. (503) of the caustics in real form, as: 
x 1,2/ Am = H 1,2 1 K l, 212/5 exp (f /3fPl, 2) COS fPl,2 
+ C1,2IKl,21 [Hl,2IK1,212/5r3/2 
X exp (f /3fPl,2) [~ COS T 1,2 + /3 sin T 1,2 J 
Y1,2/A m = H 1,2 IK1,212/5 exp (f /3fP1,2) sin fPl,2 
+ Cl ,2 1 K1,21 [H1,2 I K1,21 2/5]-3/2 
x exp (f /3fP 1,2) [~ sin T 1 , 2 -
/3 cos T 1,2 J ' 
(505) 
(506) 
Before trying to determine the stress intensity factors K l ,2 from Eqs, (505) and (506), 
our results can be checked by considering the simple case of a crack lying in a simple 
plane elastic medium. For this case g = I, /3 = 0, HI = H2 = 1(3/4) q2/5, Tl = T2 
= -9 + (3/2) rp and Eqs. (505) and (506) reduce to the well-known parametric 
relations for the caustic at the tip of a crack inside an isotropic medium 208). 
The stress intensity factors Kl 2 at the crack tips can be experimentally determined 
by using Eqs. (505) and (506) together with Eq. (496). For this purpose, we can 
use several points of the caustic. Among them, for convenience, we select the end-
points, which correspond to points lying either on the interface or on the crack flanks. 
These points correspond to values of rp = 0 and rp = TC for the one medium and rp = 0 
and rp = -TC for the other, as indicated in Fig. 160. If: 
y 
256 
(507) 
Fig. 160. Two curves of caustics, 
AB from medium SI and CD from 
medium S2' 

XI.3 Singularities at Crack Tips of General Curvilinear Interfaces 
then the constant ~ is defined by: 
~ = v2E1 • 
v1E2 
Introducing Eqs. (507) and (508) in this relation leads to: 
and from the above equation and Eq. (504): 
(508) 
(509) 
(51 v) 
Because of Eqs. (507) and (509), Eqs. (505) and (506) can be written separately for 
each medium as follows: 
XI/Am = HI IKI12/S exp (~fJqJI)COSqJI + CIH13/2IKI12/s 
X exp (~ fJqJ I) (~ cos T I + fJ sin T I ) 
(511) 
Yt/Am = HI IK I12/S exp (~PqJI) sin qJI + CIH13/2IKd2/s 
x exp (~fJqJI) (~sin TI + fJ cos TI) 
for the one medium and for the other: 
X 2/Am = (eg)z/s HI IKI12/S exp (~fJqJZ) cos qJz + (~g)Z/5 CIH13/zIKlI2/5 
x exp (~ PqJ2) (± cos T 2 + P sin T 2) 
(512) 
Y2/Am = (~g)2IS HI IKI12/S exp (f PqJ2) sin qJ2 + (~g)2/5 CIHi3/2IKI12/5 
x exp (~ fJqJ2) (± sin T 2 - fJ cos T 2) . 
Equations (511) for 'PI = 0 and 'PI = 1t take the forms: 
X\O)/Am = HI IK1 12,s + CIH13/2IKI12/s (± cos T\O) + P sin T~O») 
(513) 
257 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
and: 
X\"Ij)'m = -H I IK I 12/ S exp (~P1t) + CIH!3/2 IKt/2/s 
x exp (~ P1t) (~ cos T\"I + P sin TTl) 
(514) 
YP'I/Am = CIH!3/2 IK I 12/S exp (~ P1t) (~ sin T\"I - P cos T~"I) . 
Moreover, Eqs. (512) for '1'2 = 0 and '1'2 = -1t take the forms: 
X~OI/Am = (l;g)2/S H1 jKd 2/s + (l;g)2/S C1H13/2IKI12/s 
x (~cos 'P~I + P sin T~OI) 
(515) 
and: 
X';"l/Am = _(l;g)2/S H1 IK I 12/S exp (- ~ P1t) + (eg)2/S C1H13/2IKtl2/5 
x exp ( - ~ P1t) (~cos T~-"I + P sin T~-"l) 
(516) 
Yl-"l/Am = (eg)2/S C1H13/2 IK11 exp ( - ~ P1t) (f sin 'P2-"1 - P cos 1"';"1) . 
As seen from Fig. 160, the distances d1 and d2 between the end-points A and B, and 
C and D, which belong to media S1 arid S2' respectively, and correspond to angles 0 
and 1t, can be written as: 
[ X\OI _ XTlJ2 + [YfOI _ YI")]2 = di 
Am 
Am 
Am 
Am 
A; 
[
X~OI _ X~-"IJ2 + [y~OI _ Yt"I]2 = d~ 
Am 
Am 
Am 
Am 
Am 
(517) 
Equations (517) constitute a system of two equations with two unknowns: IKll and 81• 
This system can be solved by computer, and after numerical determination of IKll 
and 81 from Eq. (511), it is possible to determine K,.. This evaluation completes the 
procedure of determining the complex stress intensity at the tip of a crack lying 
along an arbitrary curvilinear interface of two dissimilar media. 
As a fIrst application we consider now the problem of a simple crack along the 
straight interface of two isotropic elastic half-planes S1 and S2 under tension at 
infmity. The materials ofthe two half-planes were, for phase I, an epoxy resin C-100-20 
(Sl)' and for phase 2, an epoxy resin C-100-60 (S2). The mechanical properties of 
these materi3Is were: Jl1 = 97294.7 x Hf"Nm- 2 , v1 = 0.34, and Xl = 1.98 (for 
258 

XI.3 Singularities at Crack Tips of General Curvilinear Interfaces 
generalized plane-stress conditions) and J1.2 = 31264.0x let Nm- 2, v2 = 0.39, and 
x2 = 1.87, respectively. The thickness of two media was tl = t2 = 3.7 mm and the 
mechanical-optical constants were 
ci = 1.32x 10-10 m2 N- I 
and 
c2 = 4.48 
X 10-10 m2 N- I for the light rays reflected from the front face of the specimen. 
TI ~ constants g and /3 were found to be g = 0.74 and /3 = -0.046, while the charac-
teristic dimensions of the experimental set-up were: Zo = 1.30 m and A.m = 10. Then, 
the overall constants CI 2 were C1 = 25.58 X 10-14 m4 N- 1 and C2 = 86.54 
X 1(J-14 m4 N- 1. The specimen was subjected to a tensile load by an Instron tester. 
Fig. 161. a Caustic at the tip of a crack lying along the interface of two half-spaces; b Caustic 
at the tip of a circular arc along the interface of a circular inclusion and a matrix. 
At each loading step, the caustic on the screen was photographed. Figure 161 a 
shows the caustics on the screen when the specimen was loaded by a tensIle stress 
of (J = 232.6 x let Pa. The distance between the end-points of the caustic formed in 
medium Sl was dl = 18 mm and the same distance in medium S2 was d2 = 29 mm. 
Then, solving the system of Eqs. (517), we found KI = (56.46 -
i9.95) x let Nm-2 
and K2 = (42.05 -
i7.41) x 104 Nm-2. The theoretical values for these factors are 
Kl = (66.66 -
i6.25) x let Nm-2 and K2 = (49.64 -
i4.65) x let Nm-2 244). 
Sometimes it is more convenient to consider, instead of the extremity points of 
the caustics on both sides of the interface of the composite, their maximum distance 
from the interface. By defining dl and d2 as the maximum distances of the respective 
caustics from the interface, it is found that: 
where the ordinates Yl 2 of the caustics are expressed by Eqs. (506). This derivative 
yields the relation: 
. 
2 
[ 
13 
,-I 
( 3 
2/32) 
] 
'3/3 sin CP1,2 + 2' + i/3 
sin '2 + 5 
CP1,2 + '1.2 
[ 
1 3 
,- 1 ( 2 
2/32) 
] 
+ cos CPI.2 + '2 + i/3 
'3 + 5 
CPl.:/> + (1,2 = O. 
(518) 
259 

)(1. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
Then, it is easy to find the distances d1 and d2 : 
d1,2 = ±Am {I(~ + ifJ) (~+ ifJ) C1,2K l,2\ exp ({JCP1,2)YIS 
x sin CPl,2 + \(~ + ifJ)\-1 sin {(~ + 2!2) CPl,2 + '1,2} 
(519) 
where '1,2 are expressed by: 
(1,2 = arg [( - ~ + ifJ) C1,2K1,2] 
+ 2: 10 {\(~ + ifJ) (% + ifJ) Cl.2Kl.21}. 
(520) 
The system of Eqs. (519) together with Eqs. (518) can be solved by computer, 
since it can be reduced to one nonlinear equation with one unknown, and yields the 
value of the one stress intensity factor, say Kr The other stress intensity factor Ka 
is related to Kl through Ka = gKl . 
" 
As an application of this possibility to evaluate K's from Y 
, we consider the 
, ""'" 
problem of a simple crack along the straight interface of two isotropic elastic half-
planes Sl and S2 under tension at infinity, the same as the one treated above for the 
case of a crack along a straight interface. In this case, Kl •2 at the crack tip were deter-
mined graphically by using properly designed nomograms. The materials of the two 
half-planes were an epoxy resin C-l00-20 for Sl' and an epoxy resin C-100-60 for S2' 
The mechanical properties of these materials were III = 97294.69 N/em2 , v = 0.34, 
and "1 = 1.98 (for generalized plane-stress conditions) and 112 = 31264,47 N/cm2, 
v2 = 0.39, and "2 = 1.82, respectively. Moreover, the thicknesses of the two media 
were 11 = 12 = 0.37 cm, whereas the mechanical-optical constants were cl = 1.32 
X 10-6 cm2/N and c2 = 4.48 X 10-6 em2/N. From Eq. (473) it follows that g = 0.74 
and fJ = -0.0468. The crack length was 2a = 0.5 em, while the constants of the 
experimental set-up were:, Zo = 1.30 cm and the magnification ratio of the optical 
set-up Am = 1.0. Then, it" was found that C1 = 25.6 X 10-6 em4/N and C2 = 86.5 
X 10-6 cm4/N. 
By comparing Eqs. (495) with Eqs. (471), it is found that, for a tensile loading at 
infmity of intensity u and a direction normal to the direction of the crack, the complex 
stress intensity factors Kl 2 at the right crack tip take the values: 
Kl = (66.594 - i6.2509) N/cm3/2 and K2 = (49.649 - i4.6558) N/cm3/2 . 
To experimentally determine the values of these factors, the distance d1 and d2 
were measured on the caustic on the screen and were found to be dl = 1.00 cm and 
~ = 1.60 em. Moreover, the quantity fJ takes the value fJ = 0".0468. Then, from 
Eq. (518), 81 ~ 46.56° and 82 ~ -79° and from Eqs. (519), 0 = 9.52°. Thus, we 
may derive the experimental values Kl = (66.6 -
i6.27) N/cm3/2 and K2 = (49.5 
-
i4.6764) N/cm3/2; while Eq. (497) gives arg Kl •2 = 10.60°. The agreement between 
the theoretical and experimental values for Kl ,2 is satisfactory. 
260 

XI.4 Composites Plates with Cracked or Notched Phases 
By comparing the experimental results of this example with those of the previous 
one, where the stress intensity factors were evaluated by measuring the coordinates 
of the extremities of the caustics, it was easily found that the results of the former are 
much closer to the theoretical values. The higher accuracy obtained by measuring the 
maximum distances d1, fh. of the caustics from the average crack-axis is due to the fact 
that errors in defining the extremities of the caustics are excluded with this procedure. 
A second application deals with a curVilinear crack along the interface of a circular 
inclusion embedded in a matrix and subjected to a uniaxial tension at infmity 253). 
The materials of these media were epoxy resin C-I000-0 for the inclusion Sl' and 
epoxy resin C-100-40 for the matrix S2. The mechanical properties of these elastic 
media were J1.J. = 12.08 X 108 Nm- 2 , V1 = 0.34, and "1 = 1.98 for Sl' and JJ.2 = 6.17 
x lOS Nm-·2 , v2 = 0.43, and "2 = 1:79 for S2. The thicknesses were 11 = 12 = 4 mm, 
the charactenstic quantities of the experimental set-up were Zo = 2 m and A.m = 3. 
Figure 161 b shows the caustic formed from the tip of the curvilinear crack for a 
tensile stress U = 229.55 x l(f Pa, the arc of the crack was 28 = 45°; the direction 
of the load was along the axis of symmetry of the crack (w = 0) 253). The lengths 
between the end-points of the caustics, formed from the media Sl and S2' were d1 
= 11 mm and d2 = 17 mm, respectively. Solving the system of Eqs. (517) lead to 
K1 = (107.77 -
i32.95)x Hf Nm- 3/2 , while the theoretical value of this factor 
(Ref. 253, Eq. (6»was K1 = (111.15 - i41.01) x l(f Nm- 3/2 • Comparison between ex-
perimental and theoretical results of the above two examples shows a good agreement. 
XI.4 Composites Plates with Cracked or Notched 
Phases 
We consider now the important case of a bimaterial full-plane with a crack 
terminating at the bonded interface of its two wedges 250). Figure 162 indicates the 
geometry of the multiwedge in the vicinity of the crack tip ending at the interface. 
As the two wedges of the full-plane are bonded along their interface, coinciding with 
the x-axis, it is obvious to assume a continuity of stresses and displacements along this 
interface. The stresses and displacements ux' u", 't"x" and u, v, respectively, according 
to the complex variable method of Muskhelishvili 215), are expressed by the two 
complex stress functions ljJ(z) and ",(z) as follows: 
Ux + u" = 4 Re [1jJ'(z)] 
u" -
Ux + 2i't"x" = 2[zljJ"(z) + ""(z)] 
(521) 
2G(u + iv) = "1jJ(z) -
zljJ'(z) -
",(z) 
y 
x 
Fig. 162. Geometry of the cracked composite full-
plane. 
261 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
and the prescribed boundary tractions along a curve S are expressed in terms of func-
tions qJ(z) and tfJ(z) by: 
cp(z) + zcp'(z) + tfJ(z) = i I (Xn + iYn) ds + constant 
s 
(522) 
where (Xn, Yn) are the Cartesian coordinates of the applied traction. 
For the case of stress-free crack lips (first fundamental problem), the boundary 
conditions along the crack lips are given by Eqs. (522)withz = reiq> andz = re- i(21t-q», 
while for the displacement-free crack lips (clamped lips, second fundamental problem), 
the appropriate boundary conditions are given by the third relation in Eqs. (521) with 
z = reiq> and z = re- i(21t-q». Finally, for the mixed fundamental problem, where 
the face of the first wedge is clamped, while the face of the second wedge is stress-
free, appropriate boundary conditions are expressed by the third relation of Eqs. (521) 
with z = reiq>, and Eq. (522) with z = re- i(21t-q». 
As the region near the crack tip is the issue of our concern, only the first term in the 
asymptotic expansion of the functions cp(z) and tfJ(z) is to be considered; here, both 
materials are assumed to have the forms given in Eqs. (390). 
Substituting these forms of the stress functions qJ(z) and tfJ(z) into the appropriate 
boundary conditions for the first, second, and third boundary-value problems, we 
obtain the respective characteristic equations in the form of determinants 250); for 
the first fundamental problem: 
Lll = 0 + x2f H(cp, 1, A) + r 20 + xi) H(cp -
2n, 1, A) 
+ 4(r -
1) F(cp -
In, X2 , A) H(cp, 1, A) 
- 4r(r -
1) F(cp, Xl' A) H(cp -
In, 1, A) + r(1 + Xl) (1 + X2) 
[H(ln, 1, A) -
H(cp, 1, A) -
H(cp -
In, 1, A») = 0 
(523) 
for the second fundamental problem: 
Ll2 = (I + XI )2 H(cp -
In, ~, A) + r2(1 + x2i H(cp, ~, A) 
+ 4(r -
1) F(cp, Xl' A) H(cp -
In, ~, A) -
- 4r(r -
1) F(cp -
In, X2, A) H(cp, xi, A) + ro + Xl) (1 + x2) 
x [H(ln, XIX2 , A) -
H(cp, X I X 2 , A) -
H(cp -
In, X I X2 , A») = 0 (524) 
for the third fundamental problem: 
262 
Ll3 = (1 + xd2 (1 + x2? - 4(1 + Xl)2 F(cp -
In, X2 , A) 
-
4(1 + x2i F(cpl> Xl> A) + 4ro + Xl) (1 + x2 ) 
x [F(cp, X2' A) + F(cp -
In, Xl> A) -
F(ln, Xl, A») 
+ 16r(r -
1) H(cp, xi, A) H(cp -
In, 1, A) 
-
16(r -
1) F(cp, Xl' A) F(cp -
2n, X2' A) = 0 
(525) 

XI.4 Composites Plates with Cracked or Notched Phases 
The functions F(x, ", A,) and H(x, ", A,) are dermed by: 
F(x, ", A) = "sin2 Ax + A,2 sin2 X 
H(x, ", A) = "sin2 Ax -
A,2 sin2 X 
and r expresses the ratio of the shear moduli of the two phases: 
r= G2 == fl.2. 
G1 
fl.l 
(526) 
(527) 
Equations (523)-(525) allow for determining A; in terms of the geometry of the 
cracked full-plane expressed by angle rp and the material constants "1' "2 and r 
= (JJ".I fl.l) of the two wedges for the cases of the first, second, and third boundary-
value problems. 
For "1 = "2 = 1, it was shown that Eq. (523) of the first fundamental problem 
coincides with Eq. (511) of the secolid fundamental problem if r is substituted by 
(l/F), i.e., when the order of materials 1 and 2 is interchanged. For the special case 
ofr = 0, i.e., when the material of wedge lis rigid (PI -+ (0),orthematerialofwedge2 
has zero shear modulus (JJ". = 0), Eqs. (523), (524), and (525) can be rewritten; for 
the first fundamental problem: 
(528) 
for the second fundamental problem: 
(529) 
for the mixed fundamental problem: 
[(1 + "1)2 -
4F( rp, "1' A)] [(1 + "2)2 -
4F( rp -
2n, "2' A)} = o. 
(530) 
In the latter three equations, each of their two terms expresses the equation determin-
ing the order of singularity for a single wedge of angle rp, or (rp -
2n), under stress, 
displacement-free, or mixed boundary conditions. For example, the first part of 
Eq. (528) gives the characteristic equation of a single wedge of angle (rp -
2n) under 
mixed boundary conditions, whereas the second part of this equation expresses the 
characteristic equation of a single wedge of angle rp under stress-free boundary con-
ditions. Indeed, Eq. (528) is obtained when fl.l -+ 00 or fl.2 = O. For the first case, 
wedge 2 is under mixed boundary conditions and gives the first term of Eq. (528), 
whereas for fl.2 = 0, wedge 1 is under stress-free boundary conditions and gives the 
second term of this equation. 
Similarly, when r -+ 00 (PI = 0 or fl.2 -+ 00), the same conditions as in Eqs. (528) 
to (530) are obtained, in which the role of materials I and 2 has been interchanged. 
For rp = n, i.e., for a crack lying along the interface of two different elastic half-
planes, Eqs. (523)-(525) yield for the first fundamental problem: 
II. = - + -
cosh 
- 1 
1 
1. 1 
-1 [[(r"l + "2) + (r + 1)]2 
] 
2 -
2n 
2{r,,! + 1) (r + "2) 
(531) 
263 

Xl. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
for the second fundamental problem: 
(532) 
for the mixed fundamental problem: 
16x1(rx1 + 1) (r + x2) sin2 A1t -
4[x1(1 + X2)2 + x~(1 + X1)2 
+ 2rx1 (1 + Xl) (1 + x2)] sin2 A1t + (1 + X1)2 (1 + x2i = 0 . 
(533) 
For the special case of equal Poisson ratio half-planes (Xl = x2 = X), Eqs. (531) 
and (532) of the first and second boundary value problems coincide. 
For Xl = x2 = X and r = 1, i.e., for a crack in a single isotropic material, Eqs. 
(523)-(525) yield for the first and second fundamental problems: 
and for the third fundamental problem: 
A = ! + Inx; 
2 -
41t 
The latter equation coincides with equation (120.44) of Ref. 215 (p. 523). 
(534) 
(535) 
In order to visualize the dependence of the order of the stress singularity on the 
angle rp, the mechanical properties of the two wedges of the cracked composite full-
plane, and the boundary conditions along the lips of the crack, Eqs. (523)-(525) were 
solved numerically for certain values of <p and the constants Xl' x2 with r = (jl2/ J.L1)' 
Of the various roots of these equations, only those are of interest having the smallest 
real part of A (A == Al + iA2 , 0 < Al < 1), giving the strongest values of the stress 
singularity expressed by (1 -
2). 
Figures 163-165 present the variation of A versus the ratio r = (jl2/J.L1) of the 
shear moduli J.l2 and J.L1 of the two materials of the full-plane (0.01 < r < 1,000) 
for the case of equal Poisson ratios Xl = x2 = X under the first (8 -
S), second 
(D -
D), and mixed (D -
S) boundary value problems and for the angles rp = 30°, 
rp = 90°, and rp = 180°. Continuous lines represent real values of A, dashed lines 
imaginary values of A. The values of the constants Xl = x2 = X were taken as X = 2.2 
and 1.0. The value X = 2.2 corresponds to v = 0.20 for plane-strain and v = 0.25 
for plane-stress, whereas X = 1.0 corresponds to v = 0.5 for plane-strain. These 
figures also give the variation of A versus r for Xl =1= x2 ' namely Xl = 2.2, x2 = 1.0 
(case a), and x\ = 1.0, x2 = 2.2 (case b). 
The following conclusions can be derived : 
(i) The order of singularity, expressed by (1 -
A), diminishes with r = (jl2/J.Ll) 
for the first (8 -
S) fundamental problem, whereas it increases with r for the second 
(D -
D) and the mixed (D -
S) fundamental problems. 
(ii) The dependence of the stress singularity on the boundary conditions along the 
crack lips becomes more severe for mixed boundary conditions. For Xl = x2 and 
264 

tOO 
0.75 
® 
XI.4 Composites Plates with Cracked or Notched Phases 
'11., = 2.2 
'11.2= 2.2 
~ 
~ 
_____ -+-,S::..-..:::;S....::t..:...::;D....::-D~_-+ __ 
..-..j 0.16 t 
,< 
0.25 
a 
0 
100 
0.75 
to.50 
,< 
0.25 
b 
100 
0.75 
to.5O 
-< 
0.25 
a 
0 
1.00 
0.75 
t 050 
-< 
0.25 
a 
0.Q1 
b 
0.1 
~ 
2 
, 
® I 
D-D 
0 -0 
0.1 
100 
'It, = 2.2 
'11.2 = 2.2 
0.08 
1000 
. ..P.:!L. 0.08 
1000 
'" 
.< 
Fig. 163a, b. Variation of the 
real Al (continuous lines) and 
imaginary A2 (dashed lines) 
parts of the singularity A ver-
sus the ratio r = (j12/ Ill) of 
the shear moduli of the mate-
rials of a cracked composite 
full-plane for an angle of the 
inclination of the crack axis 
to the bonded interface equal 
to<p = 30° and XI = X2 = 2.2 
(a) and XI = x2 = 1.0 (b). Val-
ues of A for the first (S- S), 
second (D- D), and mixed 
(D-S) fundamental problems 
are shown. 
Fig. 164. As in Fig. 163, with 
<p = 90° and XI = X2 = 2.2 (a) 
and Xl = X2 = 1.0 (b). 
265 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
x, = 2.2 
11.2= 2.2 
x, = 1.0 
11.2= 1.0 
1000 
Fig. 165a, b. As in Fig. 163, 
with <p = 180° and "I = "2 
= 2.2 (a) and "1 = "2 = 1.0 
(b). 
~/ 
111) < 1, the order of singularity is greater for the first than the second fundamental 
problem, whereas the contrary occurs for (p.2/111) > 1. For XI #. :11:2, the same is 
valid, with the value of (p.2/111) a little displaced relatively to (p.2/111) = 1. This value 
of (p.2/111) lies to the left or right of (p.2/111) = 1, depending on the inequalities Xl > x2 
or XI < x2' respectively. 
(iii) For Xl = x2 = X, the curves A = A(r) pass through the point r = 1, A = 0.5 
for the first and second fundamental problems, whereas for the third fundamental 
problem, these curves pass through r = 1, A = 0.25. Indeed, Xl = x2 = X and r = 1 
correspond to a crack in a single isotropic material for which A = 0.5 for the first and 
second fundamental problems and A = 0.25 for the third fundamental problem. As 
it was shown above for Xl = x2 = X, curves A = A(r) for the first and second funda-
mental problems are symmetric to the point r = 1. Comparing the variation of A 
with XI = x2 = X for a given angle rp of the crack line to the bonded interface, indicates 
that A increases with X for the third fundamental problem, whereas it diminishes for 
r < 1 and increases for r > 1 for the first fundamental problem. Exactly the contrary 
happens for the second fundamental problem. 
(iv) Comparing the variation of the extreme values of A at points r = 0 and r -+ 00 
with the variation of the angle rp of the crack axis to the bonded interface, allows to 
conclude that these extremities pass through a maximum value as angle rp varies 
between 0° and 180°. Thus, for the first fundamental problem, the value of A at point 
r -+ 00 equals that of a single wedge of angle cp under mixed boundary conditions, 
or that of a wedge of angle (2n -
cp) under stress-free boundary conditions. 
266 

Xl.4 Composites Plates with Cracked or Notched Phases 
(vi) For r -+ 0, curves A. = ),(r) for the first and mixed fundamental problems 
tend to A. = 0.25, which corresponds with the value obtained for a crack in an isotropic 
medium under mixed boundary conditions. 
Another effect in composites and especially in fiber composites is of great import-
ance: the so-called skin effect. The outer surfaces of the composite constructions 
present mechanical properties different from those of the rest of the bulk of the material. 
At the surfaces of composites, endings of fiber matrix bimaterial wedges develop 
stress singularities. 
An appropriate model for describing such situations is a biwedge with a total 
angle of the apex equal to n. The one phase of the biwedge represents the termination 
of the fiber, the other the termination of the matrix. The relative angle between the 
wedges may vary from close to 0° up to 90°, when the fibers terminate normally to 
the boundary of the body. 
Wedges with angles (qJl + qJ2) = n, both varying between zero and n have been 
considered 242). Equation (425) indicates that the order of singularity, defined by 
the root )" depends on the geometrical configuration of the wedge (qJl' qJ2)' as well 
as on the two Poisson ratios of the wedges Xl = flV1) and x2 = flV2) and the ratio 
of their shear moduli r = 112/111, Thus, for any combination of two bodies with 
various mechanical properties, which have the particular geometric configuration 
considered, it is possible to calculate A. by solving Eq. (425). It is emphasized again 
that the value of the root A. is independent of the type of loading at the two free faces 
of the biwedge. As pointed out by Dundurs 225,241), the stress field in a bimaterial 
wedge under plane-stress or plane-strain conditions depends only on two combinations 
of the elastic constants. These two parameters are given by 225): 
(536) 
reX -
1) -
(x -
1) 
fi = 
1 
2 
reX1 + 1) + (X2 + 1) 
where, as already mentioned, x and r are expressed by Eq. (533) and the ratio of the 
shear moduli 
for all elastic materials (0 ~ V1 2 ~ 0.5), x varies between unity and three 
(1 ~ Xl 2 ~ 3) and r is always positive (r > 0). Furthermore, Dundurs 226) pointed 
out that all combinations of two elastic materials forming a biwedge in plane-strain 
can be represented in the (ex, fi)-plane into a parallelogram whose sides pass through 
the points (-1.0, 0), (1.0, 0.5) and (1.0, 0), (-1.0, -0.5). While there is a one-to-one 
correspondence between any particular biwedge with elastic constants V1,2 and 111,2 
and a single point in the (ex, fi)-plane, the inverse is not valid, that is, for any point in 
the Dundurs' parallelogram there exists an infinity of material combinations for a 
certain biwedge. 
Although, as can readily be proved, all physically relevant material combinations 
occupy a small region in the Dundurs' parallelogram, we shall calculate here A. for all 
267 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
possible material combinations and for plane-strain conditions. For this pupose, 
a square network is traced covering the whole area of the Dundurs' parallelogram 
and having pitches ofO.lcx and 0.1[3, respectively; furthermore, the order of singularity 
A for each knot of the network is evaluated. Since it is unimportant from what particular 
selection of the values of mechanical constants of the two phases each value for A 
was derived, we choose arbitrarily convenient values for the ratio r covering the whole 
spectrum in the (cx,[3)-plane. For each pair of values for cx and [3, corresponding to 
each knot of the network, the corresponding values of Xl 2 are defined. By inserting 
these values of r, xl' x2 into Eqs. (533), the order of snigularity A was determined 
for all knots of the network, and then the contour lines of A were drawn. Furthermore, 
for restricted regions of the (cx, [3)-parallelogram, of particular interest for the study 
of the singularity, t9.e network is condensed by increasing the density of knots in 
this area. 
Figure 166a presents the contour lines of A for the cases of biwedges with equal 
angles 'PI = -
'P2 = n12. Since the wedge configuration considered in this figure is 
symmetric, the diagram is also symmetric with respect to the origin cx = [3 = O. It 
follows from this figure (and similar figures for values of angles qJI = -qJ2 varying 
between zero and n12, which are not traced here), that, when the angle of the wedges 
increases, the area in which a real singularity may exist in the Dundurs' parallelogram 
a 
90 0 tcD\ 
90'~ 
A=1.00 
0.95 
0.85 
0.80 
0.75 
0.70 
0.65 
a 
Xl =.5000 IT144-t--1t-i-----T--\----------=.L_ 
.5750 
(, 5482 + . 574i) 
('5476 + .1021 i ) 
(.5474+ .1443i ) 
(.5467 + .1892i) 
Ln 
g~~ 
oc-=oo 
\I 
,< 
b 
a 
Fig. 166. Contour lines of the roots A for biwedges forming a half-plane a) with <PI = <P2 = n/2 
and b) <PI = 15°, <P2 = 165°. 
268 

XI.4 Composites Plates with Cracked or Notched Phases 
is increased and A takes extreme values, which become continuously smaller and, 
therefore, the order of singularity increases. 
There is no singularity (A = 1) for the limiting case of 'PI = - 'P2 = n12, indicated 
in Fig. 166a, which corresponds to the area of the parallelogram ,between the [3-axis 
(IX = 0) and the one diagonal of the Dundurs' parallelogram ({3 = 1X/2). Equations 
(536) show that this is the case for materials of the biwedge with mechanical properties 
111 2 and "1 2 under the restriction 112(1 -
VI) = 111(1 -
v2) for the line IX = 0, and 
vl i l11 = v2/~2 for the line [3 = al2 under plane-strain conditions. The angle <PI is 
now varied between nl2 ;::;; 'PI ;::;; n, while 'P2 = (n -
'PI) remains constant. 
Figure 166b presents the contour lines of roots A in the (IX, (3)-parallelogram for 
an arbitrary combination of angles, say 'PI = 15° and 'Pz = 165°. From a series of 
such plots, where 'PI varies between zero and n12, resulting from Eq. (533) with 
'P2 = (n -
'PI)' it follows that IX = [3 = 0 in the Dundurs' parallelogram is a point 
through which the contour line A = I always passes. As 'PI tends to zero, this line 
tends to coincide with the [3-axis, while for increasing 'PI' the line A = 1 rotates counter-
clockwise about the origin. For 'PI = n14, the (A = I)-line coincides with the IX-axis, 
while for 'PI = n12, the same line (A = 1) coincides with the other diagonal of the 
parallelogram (see Fig. 167). The lines A = 1 for each value of angle 'PI present a 
second branch, which, for 'PI = 0, coincides with the side IX = -1 of the parallelo-
gram. This branch is displaced parallelly, as the angle 'PI increases, and, for 'Pz = n12, 
it coincides with the line IX = O. The movement of this branch for angles 'PI between 
'PI = nl3 and 'PI = nl2 covers almost three-fourths of the half of the (IX, (3)-parallelo-
gram. This indicates the slow movement of this boundary for small angles 'PI' which 
increases rapidly as 'PI tends to n12. Fig. 167 indicates the evolution of the singularity 
boundaries for varying angles of 'PI from zero to n12. 
Furthermore, the cases of composite half-planes with either 'PI = 0 or 'PI = nl2 
correspond to limiting cases, where in the (IX, (3)-parallelogram there is no area of 
roots ), # I for 'PI = 0 and of complex roots A = (AI + iAz) for 'PI = n12. In-between, 
_-r- SOO 
Q 
Fig. 167. Evolution of the singularity boundaries for the biwedge forming a half-plane as angle CPI 
of the biwedge varies between zero and nl2 (for each value of angle CPI two branches of the 
singularity boundary appear, one is marked with full lines and the other with dashed lines). 
269 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
as 'PI increases from zero to n/4, the complex singularity area starts from a narrow 
strip along the line (X = -1 and, as the angle increases, the width of the strip increases 
and the strip becomes a triangle with its sides on the lower oblique side of the parallelo-
gram and the respective second branch of the singularity boundary. This triangle 
for the case of 'PI = n/3 evolves to a small quadrangle, having its sides on the lower 
oblique side and the line (X = -1 of the parallelogram, and, on the other side, at 
both singularity boundaries (lines A = 1). For higher values of 'Pl' this quadrangle 
degenerates again and is reduced to the line (X = 1 for <PI = n/2. 
Figure 168 presents the lines of roots A = ..1.1 + iA2 for various values of 'PI between 
zero and n/2. The contour lines ..1.1 appear as full lines, the contour lines ..1.2 are dotted. 
The variation of the order of the singularity at the origin ex = 0, f3 = 0 and comer 
ex = 1, f3 = 0 of the parallelogram for both groups of biwedges can be derived. 
These points correspond to either identical materials or to a combination of materials, 
one of which is rigid, while the other is soft and incompressible. Figure 169 presents 
the variation of the order of the singularity (1 -
A) at the origin (identical materials, 
curve 1) and the comer ex = 1, f3 = 0 of the parallelogram (curve 2) for a biwedge 
with equal angles <p, as the angle <P varies between 0 and n. 
This figure indicates that the point ex = 1, f3 = 0 with the most severe singularity, 
(1 -
A) = 0, the stresses are bounded for all angles between 0 and n/4 (curve 2), 
while this limit for (1 -
A) #- 0 is doubled, for identical materials (curve 1). The 
variation of the order of singularity A at (X = 1, f3 = 0, for the biwedge forming 
a half-plane, is presented by the same curve as for the case of the biwedge with equal 
angles. This means that, when the material of one wedge is rigid while the other is 
a 
e 
I 
)., =0.503 
0.606 
c 
.. , = 0.80 0.85 0.90 0.95 tOO 
f 
Ill, = 600 
Fig. 168. Lines of the roots A = Al + iA2 for various values of CfJI between zero and n/2. 
270 

XI.4 Composites Plates with Cracked or Notched Phases 
0.5 
0.4 
t 0.3 
1 0.2 
0.1 
0 
0° 
30° 
60° 
90° 
120° 
150° 
180° 
<I> ---+ 
Fig. 169. Variation of order of singularity s = I -
A at the origin (curve 1) and the comer 
(0£ = I, P = 0; curve 2) of the (0£ -
fJ) parallelogram in biwedges of equal angles for different 
values of the angle qJ of one of the wedges. 
soft and incompressible, the singularity depends only on the angle of the rigid body 
and is independent of the angle of the soft and incompressible material. 
It is interesting that for the equal-angle biwedge with 'P1 = - 'P2 = 'P where 'P = n, 
again the solution is obtained for the linear crack existing along the interface of two 
different materials, a problem which has already been solved in detail early in this 
chapter. However, using an asymptotic analysis for the case of an equal-angle biwedge 
with 'P1 > n/2, it follows from the respective Dundurs' parallelogram that a smali 
area in this parallelogram appears where the singularity becomes complex. This area 
increases as 'P1 is increased. The increase of the area of complex singularity is slow 
at the beginning of the increase of 'P and becomes faster as 'P1 tends to n. For 'P1 = -'P2 
= n, the entire area of the Dundurs' parallelogram is complex, except the a-axis, 
where the singularity is real. This case corresponds to a bimaterial composite with 
mechanical properties of the two phases satisfying the relation /12//11 = (1/2 -
v2)/ 
(1/2 -
v1) for plane-strain, which contains an edge crack along the interface of the 
two phases. For this particular case, the order of singularity at the crack tip is always 
0.5 for any value of the ratio T. 
The evolution of the singularity boundary is shown in Fig. 170a for increasing 
angles qJ1 = -qJ2 of the biwedge from zero and n/3, while Fig. 170b shows the evolu-
tion of the complex singularity boundary as the angles 'P1 = -'P2 of the biwedge vary 
between n/2 and n. The maximum value for A2 , occurring at points ± 1, ± 1/2, is 
A2 = 0.17485. Furthermore, for 'P1 = -'P2 = n, the values for A are independent 
ofa. 
Finally, the biwedge forming a full-plane is also of interest to composites, as the 
corners of fibers inside the matrix have meridional sections forming full-plane bi-
wedges. Here, both sides of both wedges are cemented together, creating two interfaces. 
The solution ofEq. (533) yields the values of roots A, which define the order of singular-
ity. The solution was obtained for several values of angle 'Pi' varying between zero 
and n; interesting results were obtained. It was found that the line a = f3 of the 
parallelogram is always a limit line, along which A = 1, which is the one boundary 
dividing the (a, f3)-parallelogram into a real and a complex root region. The other 
271 

XI. Stress Singularities in Cracked Phases 
a 
b 
a 
Fig. 170. Evolution of the com-
plex singularity boundaries in a 
full-plane biwedge as the angle <PI 
of the smaller wedge varies be-
tween zero .and nl3 (a) and be-
tween nl2 and n (b). 
boundary is the positive a-axis for values of f/Jl lying between zero and nl2 and for 
the a > {3 region of the parallelogram. The wedge bounded by these two boundaries, 
for negative {3, defines the area of complex roots. For this range of angles f/JI ' there 
is also another region of complex roots A, which is bounded by the line a = {3 and 
a counterlockwise rotating line, as the angle f/Jl increases, which lies in the region 
{3 > a and positive {3. In Fig. 170 the evolution of the complex singularity boundary 
was shown for values of CPl between zero and n13, where both areas of complex roots 
A appear in the parallelogram. 
For values of f/Jl between nl3 and n12, the upper area of complex singularities 
disappears, while the lower area shrinks toward the stable line a = {3. Indeed, as 
f/Jl increases, the right internal side of the triangle is rotating clockwise and tends to 
coincide with line a = {3 as f/Jl tends to n. Figure 170b also shows the evolution of 
the complex singularity boundary for f/Jl between nl2 and n. 
As expected, while f/Jl tends to zero, most of the (a, {3)-parallelogram becomes 
covered with contour A-lines, which are very close to unity, but as the lines a = ± I 
are approached, the value for A tends to 0.5. As f/Jl tends to n, A tends to lover the 
entire (a,{3)-parallelogram. The smallest value of A, for the case of f/Jl = 175°, is 
A = 0.945, being very close to unity. Indeed, for the case of two half-planes bonded 
together, a characteristic equation is obtained for defining the roots A by inserting 
f/Jl = n into Eq. (533). After some calculations the following equation results: 
From this it is seen that no singular stresses exist for this case. Moreover, the case of 
a semi-infinite crack into a homogeneous medium can be obtained from Eq. (533) 
by inserting f/Jl = 2n. After some algebra, it follows that: 
4(X; + r 2"i - 2r"1"2) sin4 2An = O. 
272 

XI.4 Composites Plates with Cracked or Notched Phases 
This implicates the well-known result that A = 0.5. 
Finally, the smallest values for roots A (which are always real) occur always to 
points along the line r:t. = 1. This indicates that all full-plane biwedges present less 
severe singularities than the corresponding single wedge the with same angle ((J2' 
The variation of A at points with r:t. = 1 is presented by the curve 2 of Fig. 169b with 
((J2 = 2((J. 
The methods developed in this chapter, and based on the eigenfunction expression 
for the stress field near the singularity, may alsobe applied to cases where the sectors 
of a muItiwedge are not bonded, but cooperate by friction. The theory is similar, 
with the only exception that the friction coefficient intervenes in the expressions for 
the eigenvalues (for further details refer to Refs. 227, 246 and 248). 
273 

References 
1. Theocaris, P. S., Marketos, E.: Shrinkage Stress Concentrations in Plane Two-Phase 
Systems, Fiber Sci. and Techn. 3, pp. 21-38, (1970) 
2. Theocaris, P. S., Paipetis, S. A.: Shrinkage Stresses in Three-Dimensional Two-Phase 
Systems, J. Strain Analysis 8, (4), pp. 286-293, (1973) 
3. Holliday, L., Robinson, J. V.: The Thermal Expansion of Composites Based on Poly-
mers,1. Material Sci. 8, pp. 301-311, (1973) 
4. Theocaris, P. S., Paipetis, S. A.: State of Stress Around Inhomogeneities by the Method 
of Caustics, Fiber Sci. and Techn. 9, (1), pp. 19-39, (1976) 
5. Theocaris, P. S., Paipetis, S. A.: Constrained Zones at Singular Points of Inclusion 
Contours, Int. J. Mech. Sci. 18, (11-12), pp. 581-587, (1976) 
6. Lipatov, Yu. S., Babich, V. F., Rosovizky, V. F.: Effect of Filler on the Relaxation 
Time Spectra of Filled Polymers, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 20, pp. 1787-1794, (1976) 
7. Sato, Y., Furukawa, J. : A molecular Theory of Filler Reinforcement Based on the Concept 
of Internal Deformation, Rubber Chern. and Techn. 35, pp. 857-876, (1962) 
8. Papanicolaou, G. c., Paipetis, S. A., Theocaris, P. S.: Thermal Properties of Metal-
Filled Epoxies, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 21, (3), pp. 689-701, (1977) 
9. Theocaris, P. S., Paipetis, S. A., Papanicolaou, G. C.: Indentation Studies in Aluminium-
Filled Epoxies, 1. Appl. Polym. Sci. 22, (8), pp. 2245-2252, (1978) 
10. Papanicolaou, G. C., Paipetis, S. A., Theocaris, P. S.: The Concept of Boundary Int«r-
phase in Composite Mechanics, Kolloid Zeit. und Zeit. fUr Polymere 256, (7), pp. 625-630, 
(1978) 
11. Lipatov, Y. S.: Physical Chemistr) of Filled Polymers, published by Khimiya (Moscow 
1977). Translated from the Russian by R. J. Moseley, International Polymer Science 
and Technology, Monograph No.2; see also Lipatov, Y. S., Adv. Polym. Sci. 22, pp. I-59, 
(1977) 
12. Lipatov, Yu. S., Sergeeva, L. M.: Adsorption of Polymers, Wiley, New York (1974) 
13. Lipatov, Yu., Sergeeva, L.: Adsorption of polymers from concentrated solutions, Adv. 
Colloid and Interface 6 (1) pp. 1-93 (1976) 
14. Lipatov, Y. S. and Fabulyak, F. G.: Relaxation Processes in the Surface of Polymers 
at the Interface, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 16, pp. 2131-2139, (1972) 
15. Frantsevich, I. N., Karpinos, D. M.: Fibrous Composites, Translated from Russian, 
Israel Program for Scientific Translations (Jerusalem 1972) 
16. Papanicolaou, G. C., Theocaris, P. S.: Thermal Properties and Volume Fraction of the 
Boundary Interphase in Metal-Filled Epoxies, Kolloid Zeit. und Zeit. fUr Polymere 257, 
(3), pp. 239-246 (1979) 
17. Theocaris, P. S., Papanicolaou, G. C.: The Effect of the Boundary Interphase on the 
Thermomechanical Behaviour of Composites Reinforced with Short Fibers, J. Fibre 
Sci. and Techn. 12 (6), pp. 421-433, (1979) 
18. Theocaris, P. S., Papanicolaou, G. C.: Variation of Glass Transition Temperature with 
Direction in Unidirectional Glass Fiber-Reinforced Composites, Kolloid Zeit. und Zeit. 
fUr Polymere 258 (9), pp. 1044-1051, (1980) 
19. Papanicolaou,G.C., Theocaris,P.S., Spathis,G.D.: Adhesion Efficiency Between 
Phases in Fiber-Reinforced Polymers by Means of the Concept of Boundary Interphase, 
Coli. and Polym. Sci. 258, pp. 1231-1237, (1980) 
274 

References 
20. Paipetis, S. A., Papanicolaou, G. c., Theocaris, P. S.: Dynamic Properties of Metal-
Filled Epoxy Polymers, J. Fibr. Sci. Techn. 8 (3), pp. 221~242 (1975) 
2l. Theocaris, P. S., Spathis, G. D., Kefalas, B. A.: The Adhesion Coefficient of Fiber-
Reinforced Polymers Evaluated by Dynamic Measurements, Kolloid Zeit. und Zeit. fUr 
Polymere 260 (9), pp. 837~841 (1982) 
22. Bolotin, V. V., Bolotina, K. S. : Thermoelastic Problem For a Circular Cylinder of Re-
inforced Multilayer Material, Polymer Mech. (Mekh. Pol.), 3(1}, pp. 93~96 (1967) 
23. Boley, B. A., Testa, R. B.: Thermal Stresses in Composite Beams, Int. J. Solids Structures, 
5 (1O), pp. 1153~1169 (1969). 
24. Chamis, C. C., Sendeckyj, G. P.: Critique on Theories predicting properties of Fibrous 
Composites, J. Compo Mat. 2 (3), pp. 332~358 (1968) 
25. Broutman, L. J., McGarry, F. J.: Glass-resin joint strength studies, Mod. Plastics 40 (I), 
pp. 161~2, 166, 168, 170,238,242 (1962) 
26. Cox, H. L.: The Elasticity and Strength of Paper and Other Fibrous Materials, British J. 
Appl. Physics 3, pp. 72-79 (1952) 
27. Rosen, B. W.: Mechanics of Composite Strengthening, Fibre Composite Materials, 
Amer. Soc. for Metals, Metals Park, Ohio, pp. 37~75 (1965) 
28. Dow, N. F.: Study of Stresses Near a Discontinuity in a Filament-Reinforced Composite 
Metal, General Electronic Compo Report TIS R63SD6l (1963) 
29. Hashin, Z.: The Elastic Moduli of Heterogeneous Materials, J. Appl. Mech. 29, Trans. 
ASME 84, Series E, pp. 143~150 (1962) 
30. Theocaris, P. S., Sideridis, E. P.: The Elastic Moduli of Particulate Filled Polymers, J. 
Appl. Polym. Sci. 29, pp. 2997~30Jl (1984) 
3l. Theocaris, P. S., Papanicolaou, G. C., Kontou, E. A.: The Effect of Filler-Volume Frac-
tion and Strain Rate on the Tensile Properties of Iron-Epoxy Particulate Composites, J. 
Rein. Plast. and Compo 1, pp. 206-224 (1982) 
32. Takahashi, K., Ikeda, M., Harakawa, K., Tanaka, K., Sakai, T.: Analysis of the Effect 
ofInterfacial Slippage on the Elastic Moduli ofa Particle Filled Polymer, J. Polym. Sci., 
Pol. Phys. Ed. 16, pp. 415-425 (1978) 
33. Takayanagi, M., Harima, H., Iwata, Y.: Viscoelastic Behavior of Polymer Blends and 
its Comparison with Model Experiments, Jnl. Soc. Mat. Sci. Japan (ZAIRYO), 12, 
pp. 129-134 (1963) 
34. Maurer, F.: Zur Beschreibung des elastischen und viscoelastischen Verhaltens teilchen-
gefiillter Verbundwerkstoffe mit einer Zwischenschicht, Ph. D. Thesis, University of 
Duisburg, FRG (1983) 
35. Kerner, E. H.: The Elastic and Thermo-Elastic Properties of Composite Media, Proc. 
Phys. Soc. London, B69 (2), pp. 808~813 (1956) 
36. Van der Poel, c.: On the Rheology of Concentrated Dispersions, Rheologica Acta 1, 
. pp. 198-205 (1958) 
37. Theocaris, P. S., Kefalas, B., Spathis, G.: Retardation Spectra for the Existence ofInter-
phase in Fiber Composites, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 28 (12), pp. 3641~3649 (1983) 
38. Theocaris, P. S.: The Unfolding Model for the Representation of the Mesophase Layer 
in Fiber Composites, Proc. Nat. Acad. of Athens 59 (1), pp. 122~147 (1984) 
39. Theocaris, P. S.: On the Evaluation of Adhesion Between Phases in Fiber Composites, 
Coil. and Polym. Sci. 262 (12), pp. 929~938 (1984) 
40. Theocaris, P. S.: The Mesophase and its Influence on the Mechanical Properties of Com-
posites, New Developments in the Characterization of Polymers in the Solid State, Adv. 
Polym. Sci., Kausch, H. H., Zachmann, H. G. (Eds.), Springer-Verlag, 66, Chap. 6, 
pp. l49~187 (1985) 
4l. Theocaris, P. S.: Mesophase Characterization in Composite Materials, Proc. Intern. 
Conf. Interface-Interphase in Composite Materials, Liegeois, J., Okuda, S. (Eds.), SPE 
publications, T1~T28 (1983) 
42. Lipatov, Yu.: Relaxation and Viscoelastic Properties of Heterogeneous Polymeric Com-
positions, Adv. Polym. Sci. 22, pp. 1~59 (1977) 
43. Sagalaev, G. V., Simonov-Emel'yanov, I. D.: Properties of the interphase layer in filled 
Polymers, Plast. Massy, (2), pp. 48~52 (1973) 
44. Spathis, G. D., Sideridis, E. P., Theocaris, P. S.: Adhesion Efficiency and Volume Frac-
275 

References 
tion of the Boundary Interphase in Metal-Filled Epoxies, Int. J. of Adhesion and Adhesives 
1 (1), pp. 195-201 (1981) 
45. Jones, R. M.: Mechanics of Composite Materials, McGraw-Hill, New York, (1975) 
46. Pervak, I. G., Kudykina, T. A.: Evaluation of the properties of the interphase layer in 
filled polycarbonate, Plast. Massy, (8), pp. 19-21 (1977) 
47. Takayanagi, M., Uemura, S., Minami, S.: Application of Equivalent Method to Dynamic 
Rheooptical Properties of Crystalline Polymer, J. Polym. Sci. Part C, 5, pp. 113-122 (1964) 
48. Spathis, G., Kontou, E., Theocaris, P. S.: Dynamic Mechanical Properties of an lron-
Epoxy Particulate Composite, J. Rheology 28 (2), pp. 161-175 (1984) 
49. Landel, R. F., Smith, T. L.: Viscoelastic Properties of Rubberlike Composite Propellants 
and Filled Elastomers, Am. Rocket Soc. J. 31, pp. 599-608 (1961) 
50. Droste, D. H., DiBenedetto, A. T.: The Glass Transition Temperature of Filled Polymers 
and its Effect on Their Physical Properties, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 13, pp. 2149-2168 (1969) 
51. Theocaris, P. S., Papanicolaou, G. C., Sideridis, E. P.: Structural Integrity Studies in 
Particulate Composites by Means of Thermal Capacity Measurements, J. Reinf. Plast. 
and Compo 1 (I), pp. 92-106 (1982) 
52. E. Price, D. M. French, A. S. Tompa: The Glass Transition Temperature of a Filled 
Binder by Nuclear Magnetic Resonance and Thermal Mechanical Analysis, J. Appl. 
Polym. Sci. 16 (2), pp. 157-161 (1972) 
53. Kwei, T. K.: Polymer-Filler Interaction: Thermodynamic Calculations and Proposed 
Model, J. Polym. Sci. A3, pp. 3229-3240 (1965) 
54. Budiansky, B.: Thermal and Thermoelastic Properties of Isotropic Composites, J. Compo 
Mat. 4, pp. 286-295 (1970) 
55. Hill, R.: A Self-Consistent Mechanics of Composite Materials, J. Mech. Phys. Solids 13, 
pp. 213-222 (1965) 
56. Sih, G. C., Hilton, R. D., Badaliance, R., Shenberger, P. S., Villareal, G.: Fracture Me-
chanics for Fibrous Composites, Analysis of the Test Methods for High Modulus Fibers 
and Composites, ASTM STP 521, pp. 98-132 (1973) 
57. Theocaris, P. S., Spathis, G. D., Sideridis, E. P.: Elastic and Viscoelastic Properties of 
Fibre-Reinforced Composite Materials, Fiber Sci. and Techn. 17 (3), pp. 169-181 (1982) 
58. Theocaris, P. S., Sideridis, E. P., Papanicolaou, G. C.: The Elastic Longitudinal Modulus 
and Poisson's Ratio of Fiber Composites, J. Reinf. Plast. and CO.mp. 4 (4), pp. 396-418 
(1985) 
59. Hashin, Z., Rosen, B. W.: The Elastic Moduli of Fiber-Reinforced Materials, J. Appl. 
Mech. 31, 223-232 (1964) 
60. Tsai, S. E.: Composite Stiffness of Fiber-Reinforced Media, Aeronutronic Publication 
U-1699 (1962) 
61. Whitney, J. M., Riley, M. B.: Elastic Properties of Fiber Reinforced Compostie Mate-
rials, AIAA Journal 4 (9), pp. 1537-1542 (1966) 
. 
62. Clements, L. L., Moore, R. L.: Composite Properties for E-Glass Fibers in a Room 
Temperature Curable Epoxy Matrix, Composites 1, pp. 93-99 (1978) 
63. Theocaris, P. S., Papanicolaou, G. c., Spathis, G. D.: A Physical Model for the Thermal 
Expansion Behavior of Fiber-Reinforced Viscoelastic Composites, Fiber Sci. and Techn. 
15, pp. 187-197 (1981) 
. 
64. Spathis, G. D., Kefalas, B. A., Theocaris, P. S.: The Loss-Tangent Behavior at the Inter-
phase of Fiber Composites, Materials Science Monographs No 21, Interrelations Between 
Processing Structure and PrOpeil1t:~ of Polymeric Materials, Athens 1982, Seferis, J. C., 
Theocaris, P. S (Eds.), Elsevier, pp. 391-400 (1984) 
65. Theocaris, P. S.: Phase Transformations at the Boundary Layers Between Polymers and 
Solid Surfaces, Coil. and Polym. Sci. 263 (11), pp. 863-872 (1985) 
66. Hirai, T., Kline, D. E.: Effects of Heat Treatment on Dynamic Mechanical Properties 
of Nonstoichiometric Amine-Cured Epoxy Resins, J. Compo Mat. 7, pp. 160-177 (1973) 
67. Lewis, T. B., Nielsen, L. E.: Dynamic Mechanical Properties of Particulate-Filled Com-
posites, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 14, 1449-1471 (1970) 
68. Landel, R. F.: The Dynamic Mechanical Properties of a Model Filled-System: Polyiso-
butylene-Glass Beads, Trans. Society of Rheology 2, pp. 53-75 (1958) 
276 

References 
69. Theocaris, P. S., Paipetis, S.: Stress Concentrations in Elastic Composites with Limiting 
Shear Properties, J. Compo Mat. 9 (3), pp. 244-250 (1975) 
70. Theocaris, P. S.: Viscoelastic Properties of Epoxy Resins Derived From Creep and Relaxa-
tion Tests at Different Temperatures, Rheolog. Acta 2 (2), pp. 92-97 (1962) 
71. Nielsen, L. E.: Mechanical Properties of Particulate-Filled Systems, J. Compo Mat. 1, 
pp. 100-119 (1967) 
72. Kerner, E. H.: The electrical conductivity of composite media, Proc. Phys. Soc. 69B, 
pp. 802-807 (1956) 
73. Guth, E.: Theory of Filler Reinforcement, J. Appl. Phys. 16, 20-25 (1945) 
74. Smallwood, H. M.: Limiting Law of the Reinforcement of Rubber, J. Appl. Phys. 15, 
pp. 758-766 (1944) 
75. Theocaris, P. S., Spathis, G. D. : Glass-Transition Behavior of Particle Composites Mo-
deled on the Concept of Interphase, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 27 (8), pp. 3019-3025 (1982) 
76. Einstein, A. : Eine neue Bestimmung der Molekiildimensionen, Ann. Phys. 19, pp. 289-306 
(1906) 
77. Sato, Y., Furukawa, J.: A Molecular Theory of Filler Reinforcement Based Upon the 
Conception of Internal Deformations (A Rough Approximation of the Internal Defor-
mation) J. of the Faculty of Textile Science and Technology, No. 35, Series F, Phys. and 
Math., No.1, pp. 1-26 (1962) 
78. Sato, Y., Furukawa, J.: A Molecular Theory of Filler Reinforcement Based Upon the· 
Conception ofInternal Deformation (A Rough Approximation of the Internal Deforma-
tion), Rubber Chem. and Techn. 36, pp. 1081-1106, (1963) 
79. Eilers, H.: Die Viskositiit von Emulsionen hochviskoser Stoffe als Funktion der Konzen-
tration, Kolloid Zeit. und Zeit. fUr Polymere 97, pp. 313-321 (1941) 
80. Robinson, J. V.: The Viscosity of Suspensions of Spheres: III Sediment Volume as a 
Determining Parameter, Trans. Soc. Rheology 1 (I), pp. 15-24 (1957) 
81. Bills, K., Sweeny, K., Salcedo, F.: The Tensile Properties of Highly Filled Polymers, 
Effect of Filler Concentrations, J. Appl. Polymer Sci. 12, pp. 259-268 (1960) 
82. Narkis, M.: Crazing in Glassy Polymers: Studies on Polymer-Glass Bead Composites, 
Polym. Engng. and Sci. 15 (4), pp. 316-320 (1975) 
83. Yokouchi, M., Uchiyama, H., Kobayashi, Y.: Effect of Tensile Strain Rate on the Mecha-
nical Properties of Polystyrene and High-Impact Polystyrene, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 25, 
pp. 1007-1015 (1980) 
84. Leidner, J., Woodhans, R. T.: The Strength of Polymeric Composites Containing Spherical 
Fillers, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 18, pp. 1639-1654 (1974)-
85. Piggot, M. R., Leidner, J.: Misconceptions About Filled Polymers, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 
18, pp. 1619-1623 (1974) 
86. Nicolais, L., Mashelkar, R. A.: The Strength of Polymeric Composites Containing 
Spherical Fillers, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 20, pp. 561-563 (1976) 
87. Schrager, M.: The Effect of Spherical Inclusions on the Ultimate Strength of Polymer 
Composites, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 22 (8), p. 2379-2381 (1978) 
88. Passmore, E. M., Springs, R. M., Vasilos, T.: Strength-Grain Size-Porosity Relations in 
Alumina, J. Amer. Ceram. Soc. 48, pp. 1-7 (1965) 
89. Smith, T. L.: Volume Changes and Dewetting in Glass Bead-Polyvinyl Chloride Elasto-
metric Composites Under Large Deformations, Rubber Chemistry and Technology 34, 
pp. 23-140 (1961), Trans. Society Rheology 3, pp. 113-136 (1959) 
90. Bueche, F.: Molecular Basis for the Mullins Effect, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 6 (10), pp. 107-114 
(1960) 
91. Ziegel, K. D., Frensdorff, H. K., Fogiel, A. W.: Strain Magnification in Polymer Com-
posites, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 13, pp. 867-869 (1969) 
92. Broutman, L. J., Sahu, S.: A New Theory to Predict Cumulative Fatigue Damage in 
Fiberglass Reinforced Plastics, Composite Materials: Testing and Design, ASTM STP 
497, pp. 170-188 (1972) 
93. Richardson, M. o. W.: Polymer Engineering Composites, General Introduction, Chapt. I, 
pp. 1-44, in Richardsdn, M. O. W. (Ed.), Materials Science Series, Appl. Sci. Publ., 
London, (1977) 
277 

References 
94. Theocaris, P. S.: Interrelation Between Dynamic Moduli and Compliances in Polymers, 
Kolloid Zeit. und Zeit. fUr Polymere 235 (I), pp. 1182-1192 (1969) 
95. Sideridis, E., Theocaris, P. S., Kontou, E.: Dynamic Mechanical Properties of Particulates: 
Application to Iron-Epoxy Composites, Polymer Composites, 7(1), pp. 1-8 (1985) 
96. Holliday, L. (Ed.): Composite Materials, Elsevier, Amsterdam (1966) 
97. Hashin, Z., Shtrikman, S.: A Variational Approach to the Theory of the Elastic Behavior 
of Multiphase Materials, J. Mechanics and Physics of Solids 11, pp. 127-140 (1963) 
98. Schapery, R. A.: Thermal Expansion Coefficients of Composite Materials Based on 
Energy Principles, J. Compo Mat. 2 (9), pp. 380-404 (1968) 
99. Theocaris, P. S.: Rheologic Behavior of Epoxy Resins in their Transition Region, J. App!. 
Polym. Sci. 8 (1), pp. 399-412 (1964) 
100. Hirai, T., Kline, D. E.: Effects of Heat Treatment on Dynamic Mechanical Properties 
of Nonstoichiometric, Amine-Cured Epoxy Resins, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 17, pp. 31-44 
(1973) 
101. Lekhnitskii, S. : Theory of Elasticity of an Anisotropic Elastic Body, translated by P. Fern, 
Holden-Day Inc., San Fran. (1963) 
102. Fahmi, A. A., Ragai, A. N.: Thermal Expansion of Graphite Epoxy Composites, J. App!. 
Phys. 41, pp. 5112-5115 (1970) 
103. Maron, G., Weinberg, A.: The Effect of Fiber Critical Length on the Thermal Expansion 
of Composite Materials, 1. Materials Sci. 10, pp. 1005-1010 (1975) 
104. Van Vo Fy, G. A.: Thermal Strains and Stress in Glass-Fiber Reinforced Media, Prik!. 
Mekh. i Theor. Fiz. (in Russian) 4, pp. 101-118 (1965) 
105. Levin, V. M.: Thermal Expansion Coefficients of Heterogeneous Materials, Mechanika 
Tverdogo Tela 2 (1), 88-94 (Mechanics of Solids, pp. 58-65) (1967) 
106. Fahmi, A. A., Ragai-Ellozy, A. N.: Thermal Expansion of Laminated Fiber Composites 
in the Thickness Direction, J. Compo Mat. 8, pp. 90-92 (1974) 
107. Wang, T. T., Kwei, T. K.: Effect of Induced Thermal Stresses on the Coefficients of 
Thermal Expansion and Densities of Filled Polymers, 1. Polymer Sci. Part A-2, 7, pp. 
889-896 (1969) 
108. Broutmann, L. J., Krock, R. H. (Eds.): Modem Composite Materials, Chapt. 4, Kro-
kovsky, E.: Behavior of Time-Dependent Composite Materials, pp. 120-145, Addison-
Wesley, Reading, Mass. (1967) 
109. Richardson, M. J., Savill, N. G.: Derivation of Accurate Glass Transition Temperature 
by Differential Scanning Calorimetry, Polymer 16, pp. 753-757 (1975) 
110. Grassie, N., Gilks, J.: Thermal Analysis of Polystyrenes Crosslinked by p-Di (chi oro-
methyl) benzene, J. Polymer Sci. Part AI, 11, pp. 1985-1994 (1973) 
111. Paipetis, S. A., Theocaris, P. S., Marchese, A.: The Dynamic Properties of Plasticized 
Epoxies over a Wide Frequency Range, Kolloid Zeit. und Zeit. fUr Polymere 257, (5), 
pp. 478-485 (1979) 
112. Phyllips, P. J.: The Relation Between Dilatometric and Dielectric Glass-Transition 
Temperatures, J. Polym. Sci., Pol. Phys. Ed. 17, pp. 409-420 (1979) 
113. Chamis, C. C.: Mechanics of Load Transfer at the Interface, in: Composite Materials, 
Interfaces in Polymer Matrix Composites, Broutmann, L. J., Krock, R. H. (Eds.), Academic 
Press, Vol. 6, Chapt. 2, pp. 31-77 (1974) 
114. Schmiedeshoff, F. W.: Elastic Interface in Mechanics of Composite Materials, Proc. 
of the Fifth Symposium of Naval Structural Mechanics, Wendt, F. W., Liebowitz, H., 
Perrone, N. (Eds.), Pergamon Press, pp. 739-745 (1967) 
115. Ziegel, K. D., Romanov, A.: Modulus Reinforcement in Elastomer Composites I, In-
organic Fillers, J. Polym. Sci. 17, pp. 1119-1131 (1973) 
116. Parkin, B.: Glass Reinforced Plastics, Iliffe Books, London, pp. 206-215 (1970) 
117. Nayfeh, A. H.: Thermomechanically Induced Interfacial Stresses in Fibrous Composites, 
Fiber Sci. and Techn. 10, pp. 195-209 (1977) 
118. Jennes, Jr., J. R., Kline, D. E.: Dynamic Mecha'nical Properties of Some Epoxy Matrix 
Composites, J. App!. Polym. Sci. 17, pp. 3391-3422 (1973) 
119. Becker, G. W.: Uber Das Dynamisch-Elastische Verhalten gefUllter Kautschuk-Vulkani-
sate, Acustica 11, pp. 264-269 (1961) 
278 

References 
120. Payne, A. R.: The Dynamic Properties of Carbon Black-Loaded Natural Rubber Vu1cani-
zates, Part I + II, J. App!. Polym. Sci. 6,57-63 (1962) and 6, pp. 368-372 (1962) 
121. Payne, A. R., Watson, W. F.: Carbon Black Structure in Rubber, Rubber Chern. and 
Techn. 36, pp. 147-155 (1963) 
122. van Amerongen, G. J.: Influence of Carbon Black on Oxidation, Hysteresis, and Wear of 
Rubber, Trans. Inst. Rubber Ind., 31, pp. 70-88 (1955). 
123. Bueche, A. M.: Filler Reinforcement of Silicone Rubber, J. Polym. Sci. 25, pp. 139-146 
(1957) 
124. Lipatov, Yu. S.: The Mesophase Phenomena in Polymers, Naukova Dumka, Kiev (1980) 
125. Molotkow, A. P., Moskvin, V. P., Zelenev, Yu. V., Bartenev, G. M.: Mechanical Losses 
in Polymers Containing Hard Fillers, Problems Prochnosti 3(7), pp. 793-795 (1971) 
126. McKague, E. L., Reynolds, J. D., Halkias, 1. E.: Life Assurance of Composite Structures, 
Moisture Effects, AFML-Technical Report, pp. 51-75 (1975) 
127. Fried, N.: Degradation of Composite Materials: The Effect of the Water on Glass-
Reinforced Plastics in Mechanics of Composite Materials, Proc. of the Fifth Symposium 
of Naval Structural Mechanics, Wendt, F. W., Liebowitz, H., Perrone, N. (Eds.), Pergamon 
Press, pp. 813-837 (1967) 
128. Hertz, J.: Space Shuttle Materials, Proc. Soc. Aerospace Mat. and Process Engineers 3, 
pp. 9-16 (1970) 
129. Browning, C. E., Whitney, J. M.: Fillers and Reinforcements for Plastics, Adv. in Chern. 
Series, No. 134, Amer. Chern. Soc., pp. 137-154 (1974) 
130. Browning, C. E., Hartness, J. T.: Effects of Moisture on the Properties of High Per-
formance Structural Resins and Composites, Composite Materials: Testing and Design 
(Third Conference), ASTM STP 546, pp. 284-302 (1974) 
131. Adamson, M. J.: Thermal Expansion and Swelling of Cured Epoxy Resin used in Gra-
phite-Epoxy Composite Materials, J. Materials Sci. 15, pp. 1736-1745 (1980) 
132. Blatz, P. J.: Rheology of Composite Solid Propellants, Indust. Engng. Chern. 48, pp. 727 
to 729 (1956) 
133. Kwei, T. K., Kumins, C. A.: Polymer-Filler Interaction, Vapor Sorption Studies, J. 
App!. Polym. Sci. 8, pp. 1483-1490 (1964) 
134. Turner, S.: A Study of Plastic Composites, App!. Mat. Res., 10, pp. 10-19, (1965) 
135. Van Der Wal, C. W., Bree, H. W., Schwarzl, F. R.: Mechanical Properties of Highly 
Filled Elastomers II Relationship Between Filler Characteristics, Thermal Expansion and 
Bulk Moduli, J. App!. Polym. Sci. 9, pp. 2145-2166 (1965) 
136. Kumins, C. A., Roteman, J.: Effect of Solid Polymer Interaction on Transition Tempera-
ture and Diffusion Coefficients, J. Polym. Sci. I-A, pp. 527-540 (1963) 
137. Strella, S., Erhardt, P. F.: Rate Effects in the Measurement of Polymer Transitions by 
Differential Scanning Calorimetry, J. App!. Polym. Sci. 13, pp. 1373-1380 (1969) 
138. Strella, S.: Differential Thermal Analysis of Polymers I, The Glass Transition, J. App!. 
Polym. Sci. 7, pp. 569-579 (1963) 
139. StrelIa, S.: Differential Thermal Analysis of Polymers II, Melting, J. App!. Polym. Sci. 
7, pp. 1281-1289 (1963) 
140. Morgan, R. J., O'Neal, J. E.: The Durability of Epoxies, Polym. and Plast. Techn. and 
Engin. 10 (1), pp. 49-116 (1978) 
141. Manson, J. A. and Chiu, E. H.: Permeation of Liquid Water in a Filled Epoxy Resin, J. 
Polym. Sci., Polym. Sym., 41, pp. 95-108, (1973) 
142. McKague, E. L., Halkias, J. E., Reynolds, J. D.: Moisture in Composites: The Effect of 
Supersonic Service on Diffusion, J. Composite Mat. 9, pp. 2-9 (1975) 
143. Shen, C. H., Springer, G. S.: Moisture Absorption and Desorption of Composite Ma-
terials, J. Composite Mat. 10, pp. 2-9 (1976) 
144. McKague, E. L., Reynolds, J. D., Halkias, J. E.: Moisture Diffusion in Fiber-Reinforced 
Plastics, Trans. Amer. Soc. of Meehan. Engin. 98, Series H, pp. 92-95 (1976) 
145. Mehta, B. S., Dibenedetto and Kardos, J. L.: Sorption and Diffusion of Water in Glass 
Ribbon-Reinforced Composites, J. App!. Polym. Sci. 21, pp. 3111-3127 (1977) 
146. Theocaris, P. S., Papanicolaou, G. C., Kontou, E. A.: Interrelation Between Moisture 
Absorption, Mechanical Behavior and Extent of the Boundary Interphase in Particulate 
Composites, J. App!. Polym. Sci. 28 (10), pp. 3145-3153 (1983) 
279 

References 
147. Kontou, E. A, Papanicolaou, G. C., Theocaris, P. S.: Degradation of the Thermo-
mechanical Prop~rties of Viscoelastic Particulate Composites due to Moisture Absorption, 
Mat. Sci. Monographs, No. 21, Interrelations Between Processing Structure and Pro-
perties of Polymeric Materials, Seferis, J., Theocaris, P. S. (Eds.), Elsevier, pp. 687-702 
(1984) 
148. Theocaris, P. S., Papanicolaou, G. C., Kontou, E. A: Mechanism of Moisture Absorp-
tion in Metal-Filled Epoxies, Proc. Europ. Meeting on Polymer Processing and Properties, 
Capri, Italy, pp.439-447 (1983) 
149. Theocaris, P. S., Kontou, E. A, Papanicolaou, G. C.: The Effect of Moisture Absorption 
on the Thermomechanical Properties of Particulates, Coil. and Polym. Sci. 261 (5), pp. 394 
to 403 (1983) 
150. Theocaris, P. S., Papanicolaou, G. C., Papadopoulos, G. A: The Effect of Filler-Volume 
Fraction on Crack-Propagation Behavior of Particulate Composites, J. Compo Mat. 15 
(I), pp. 41-54 (1981) 
151. Springer, G. S.: Moisture Content of Composite Under Transient Condition, in: Environ-
mental Effects on Composite Materials, Springer, G. S. (Ed.), Technomic Publication, 
63-78 (1981) 
152. Le Grand, P. G., Kambour, R. P., Haaf, W. R.: Low Angle X-Ray Scattering from 
Crazes and Fracture Surfaces in Polystyrene, J. Polym. Sci. A2, pp. 1565-1574 (1972) 
153. Hopfenberg, H. B., Holley, R. H., Stannett, V.: Effect of Penetrant Activity and Tem-
perature on the Anomalous Diffusion of Hydrocarbon and Solvent-crazing in Polystyrene. 
I. Biaxially-oriented Polystyrene, Polym. Eng. Sci., 9 (4), pp. 242-249 (1969) 
154. Thomas, N., Windle, A. H.: Transport of Methanol in Poly(Methylmethacrylate), Poly-
mer 19 (3), pp. 255-265 (1978) 
155. Nicolais, L., Drioli, E., Hopfenberg, H. B., Caricati, G.: Diffusion-Controlled Penetra-
tion of Poly methyl Methacrylate Sheets by Monohydric Normal Alcohols, J. Membrane 
Sci. 3, pp. 231-245 (1978) 
156. Nicolais, L., Drioli, E., Hopfenberg, H. B., Apicella, A: Effects of Orientation on the 
Penetration, Crazing and Dissolution ofPolysterene by n-hexane, Polymer 20 (4), pp. 459 
to 464 (1979) 
157. Kambour, R. R., Ramagosa, E. E., Gruner, G. L.: Swelling, Crazing and Cracking of 
an Aromatic Copolyether-Sulfone in Organic Media, Macromolecules 5 (4), pp. 335-340 
(1972) 
158. Apicella, A., Nicolais, L., Astarita, G., Drioli, E.: Hygrothermal History Dependence of 
Moisture Sorption Kinetics in Epoxy Resins, Polymer Engin. and Sci. 21 (1), pp. 18-22 
(1981) 
159. Garfagma, C., Apicella, A, Nicolais, L.: The Effect of the Prepolymer Composition of 
Amino-Hardened Epoxy Resins on the Water Sorption Behavior and Plasticization, J. 
Appl. Polym. Sci. 27, pp. 105-112 (1982) 
160. Apicella, A, Nicolais, L., Astarita, G., Drioli, E.: Effect of Thermal History on Water 
Sorption Elastic Properties and the Glass Transition of Epoxy Resins, Polymer 20, pp. 1143 
to 1148 (1979) 
161. Wieth, W. R., Sladek, K. J.: A Model for Diffusion in a Glassy Polymer, Coil. Sci. 20, 
pp. 1014--1033 (1965) 
162. Springer, G. C., Sanders, B. A., Tung, R. W.: Environmental Effects on Glass Fiber-
Reinforced Polyester and Vinylester Composites, J. Compo Mat. 14, pp. 213-232 (1980) 
163. Crank, J., Park, G. S.: Diffusion- in PolyIilers, Academic Press, London, Chap. 5 (1958) 
164. Russel, E. W.: Crazing of Cast Polymethyl Methacrylate, Nature 165, p. 91 (1950) 
165. Narisawa, I.: Crazing of Glassy Polymers in Alcohols and Hydrocarbons, J. Polymer Sci. 
A-2, 10, pp. 1789-1797 (1972) 
166. Backadder, D. A, Keniry, J. S.: Difficulties Associated with the Measurement of the 
Diffusion Coefficient of Solvating Liquid or Vapor in Semicrystalline Polymer I Permea-
tion Methods, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 17, pp. 351-363 (1973) 
167. Jacques, C. H. M., Hopfenberg, H. B., Stannet, V.: Vapor Sorption and Liquid Inter-
actions with Glassy Polyblends of Polystyrene and Poly(2,6-dimethyl-I,4-phenylene 
oxide), Polym. Engin. Sci. 13 (2), 81-87 (1973) 
280 

References 
168. Monks, C. C., Ellis, B.: The Characterization of Anomalous Adsorption Sites on Silica 
Surfaces, Colloid Interface Sci. 44, pp. 37-49 (1973) 
169. Yasuda, H., PeterIin, A: Diffusive and Bulk Flow Transport in Polymers, J. Appl. 
Polym. Sci. 17, pp. 433-442 (1973) 
170. Chang, Y. J., Chen, C. T., Tobolsky, A V.: Correlations Between Types of Adsorbed 
Water Molecules and Water Permeability in Swollen Polymer Membranes, J. Polym. Sci., 
Pol. Phys. Ed. 12, pp. 1-6 (1974) 
171. Skirrow, G., Young, K. R.: Sorption, Diffusion and Conduction in Polyamide-Penetrant 
Systems: Sorption Phenomena, Polymer 15, pp. 771-776 (1974) 
172. Paul, D. R.: Effect ofImmobilizing Adsorption on the Diffusion Time Lag, J. Polymer 
Sci. A-2, 7, pp. 1811-1818 (1969) . 
173. DrioIi, E., Nicolais, L., Ciferi, A: Mechanically Induced Permeability in Glassy Poly-
mers, J. Polymer Sci., Polymer Chern. Ed. 11, pp. 3327-3329 (1973) 
174. Hoso, H., Findley, W. H.: Effect of Gas Diffusion on Creep Behavior of Polycarbonate, 
Polym. Eng. Sci. 13 (4), No.4, pp. 255-265 (1973) 
175. Stern, S. A., Sen, S. K., Rao, A. K.: Permeation of gases through symmetric and asym-
metric [Loeb type] cellulose acetate membranes, J. Macromol. Sci., Phys. BIO (3), pp. 507 
to 528 (1974) 
176. Miyagi, Z., Tanaka, H.: Sorption of Water Vapour by Atactic and Isotactic Poly(Methyl-
Methacrylate), Polymer 16, pp. 441-444 (1975) 
177. Rouse, P. E.: Diffusion of Vapors in Films, J. Amer. Chern. Society 69, pp. 1068-1073 
(1947) 
178. Barrer, R. M., Barrie, J. A: Sorption and Diffusion in Ethyl Cellulose (Part IV), Water 
in Ethyl Cellulose, J. Polym. Sci. 28, pp. 377-386 (1958) 
179. Barrie, J. A., Machin, D.: Diffusion and Association of Water in some Polyalkylmetha-
crylates, Trans. Faraday Soc. 67, pp. 244-256 (1971) 
180. Matsushige, K., Baer, E., Radcliffe, S. V.: The Environmental Stress-Crazing and Crack-
ing in Polystyrene under High Pressure, J. Macromolecular Sci., Phys., B, 11 (4), pp. 565 
to 592 (1975) 
181. Bair, H. E., Johnson, G. E.: Analytical Calorimetry 4, Porter, R. S., Johnson, J. F. (Eds.), 
Plenum, New York, (1976) 
182. Morgan, R. J., O'Neal, J. E.: The Microscopic Failure Processes and Their Relation to 
the Structure of Amine-Cured Bisphenol-A-Diglicidyl Ether Epoxies, J. Mat. Sci. 12 (10), 
pp. 1966-1980 (1977) 
183. Morgan, R. J., O'Neal, J. E.: The Relation Between the Chemical and Physical Structure 
and the Mechanical Response of Polymers, Final Scientific Report UDC Q0653 McDonnel-
Douglas Research Labs. (1979) 
184. Browning, C. E., Husman, G. E., Whitney, J. M.: Moisture Effects in Epoxy Matrix 
Composites, Composite Materials: Testing and Design (Fourth Conf.) ASTM STP 617, 
pp. 481-496 (1977) 
185. Kelley, F. N., Bueche, F.: J. Polymer Sci. 50, pp. 549-552 (1961) 
186. Seferis, J. C.: Private Communication, August (1982) 
187. McKaghe, E. L., Reynolds, J. D., Halkias, J. E.: Swelling and Glass Transition Relations 
for Epoxy Matrix Material in Humid Environments, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 22, pp. 1643-1654 
(1978) 
188. Springer, G. S., Saunders, B. A, Tung, R. W.: Environmental Effects on Glass Fiber-
Reinforced Polyester and Vinylester Composites, J. Compo Mat. 14, pp. 213-232 (1980) 
189. AFMLjAFOSR, Mechanics of Composites Review, Dayton, (1976) 
190. Theocaris, P. S., Koufopoulos, T.: Photoelastic Analysis of Shrinkage Microcracking in 
Concrete, Magazine of Concrete Research 21 (66), pp. 15-22 (1969) 
191. Tyson, W. R., Davies, G.: A PhotoeIastic Study of the Shear Stresses Associated with 
the Transfer of Stress During Fibre-Reinforcement, Brit. J. Appl. Phys. 10, pp. 199-216 
(1963) 
192. Asamoah, N. K., Wood, G.: Thermal Self-Straining of Fiber-Reinforced Materials, J. 
Strain Analysis 5, pp. 88-97 (1970) 
193. Asamoah, N. K., Wood, G.: Shrinkage Stresses Near a Discontinuity in a Fiber Compo-
site Material, J. Strain Analysis 7, pp. 54-60 (1970) 
281 

References 
194. Koufopoulos, T., Theocaris, P. S.: Shrinkage Stresses in Two-Phase Materials, J. Compo 
Mat. 3, pp. 308-320 (1969) 
195. Theocaris, P. S.: Photoelastic Investigation of Cast Plates with Inclusions, Discussion 
on a paper by Javornicky, J., Proc. 4th Intern. Conf. on Stress Analysis Cambridge Eng-
land, pp. 69-81 (1970) 
196. Hill, R. : Theory of Mechanical Properties of Fibre-Strengthened Materials, J. Mech. and 
Phys. of Solids 12, pp. 199-212 (1964) 
197. Crossley, A.: M.Sc. Thesis, University of Nottingham (1962) 
198. Hashin, Z., Rosen, B. W.: The Elastic Moduli of Fibre-Reinforced Materials, J. Appl. 
Mech. 31, pp. 223-232 (1964) 
199. Adams, D. F., Doner, D. R.: Transverse Normal Loading ofa Unidirectional Composite, 
J. Composite Mat. 1, pp. 152-164 (1967) 
200. Marioff, R. H., Daniel, I. M.: Three Dimensional Photoelastic Analysis of a Fiber-
Reinforced Composite Model, Exp. Mech. 9, pp. 156-162 (1969) 
201. Theocaris, P. S., Hadjijoseph, C.: Viscoelastic Behavior of Plasticized Epoxy Polymers 
in their Transition Region, Proc. of 4th Int. Congr. on Rheology 3, pp. 485-500 (1965) 
202. Hsu, T. T. C.: Mathematical Analysis of Shrinkage Stresses in a Model of Hardened 
Concrete, Proc. Amer. Concr. Inst. 60 (3), pp. 371-390 (1963) 
203. Frocht, M. M., Guernsey, R.: Studies in Three Dimensional Photoelasticity, Proc. of 
1st U.S. Congr. Appl. Mech., 1952 (American Society of Mechanical Engineers); see 
also: Further work on the General Three-Dimensional Photoelastic Problem, J. Appl. 
Mech. (Trans. Amer. Soc. Mech. Engrs.) 77, pp. 183-189 (1955) 
204. Allison, I. M.: Analysis of Photoelastic Data for Three-Dimensional Stress Separation, 
Strain, pp. 177-181 (1970) 
205. Thomson, R. A.: The Use of Digital Computers in the Photoelastic Solution of the 
General Space Problem by the Shear-Difference Method, Proc. Soc. Exp. Stress AnalYSIS 
16, pp. 11-16 (1959) 
206. Timoshenko, S., Goodier, J. N.: Theory of Elasticity, McGraw-Hill, New York (1951) 
207. Theocaris, P. S., Paipetis, S. A.: Thermal Crazing of Hot-Setting Plasticized Epoxy 
Polymers, Fiber Sci.-and Techn. 6 (2), pp. 64-75 (1973) 
208. Theocaris, P. S.: Elastic Stress Intensity Factors Evaluated by Caustics, Experimental 
Determination of Crack-Tip Stress Intensity Factors, in: Mechanics of Fracture, Vol. VII, 
Sih, G., (Ed.) Nijhoff Publ., The Hague, Chap. 3, pp. 189-252 (1980) 
209. Theocaris, P. S., Adrianopoulos, N. P.: A Modified Strain-Energy Density Criterion 
Applied to Crack-Propagation, J. Appl. Mechan. 49 (1), pp. 81-86 (1982): see also: 
discussion by Sih, G. and Gdoutos, E. and authors reply, J. Appl. Mech. 49 (3), pp. 680 
to 681 (1982) 
210. Theocaris, P. S., Prassianakis, J. N.: Fracture Criteria in Cracked Bimaterial Elastic 
Plates, J. Physics D: Appl. Phys. 14, pp. 613-623 (1981) 
211. Theocaris, P. S., Prassianakis, J. N.: The Evaluation of the Elastic Strain-Energy Density 
in Slowly Propagating Cracks by Using a Bi-Phase Model, Res. Mechanica 5 (1), pp. 31-47 
(1982) 
212. Theocaris, P. S., Prassianakis, J. N.: Slowly Propagating Cracks Emanating from the 
Comers of Inclusions in Composite Materials, J. Compo Mat. 16 (I), pp. 65-78 (1982) 
213. Theocaris, P. S., Prassianakis, J. N.: Propagation of Cracks from Strip Inclusions in 
Composite Plates under ImpUlsive Tensile Load, Fiber Sci. and Techn. 17 (4), pp. 273-278 
(1982) 
214. Theocaris, P. S., Prassianakis, J. N.: Stress Intensity Factors in Elastic Plates with Re-
entrant Comers Asymmetrically Loaded, J. Strain Analysis 15 (4), pp. 195-200 (1980) 
215. Muskhelishvili, N. I.: Some Basic Problems of the Mathematical Theory of Elasticity, 
Noordhoff, Croningen, 4th ed. (1963) 
216. Theocaris, P. S.: The Order of Singularity at a Multi-Wedge Comer in a Composite Plate, 
Internatl. J. Engineering Sci. 12 (2), pp. 107-120 (1974) 
217. Theocaris, P. S.: The Reflected Shadow Method for the Study of Constrained Zones in 
Cracked Plates, Appl. Optics 10, pp. 2240-2247 (1971) 
218. Theocaris, P. S.: Local Yielding Around a Crack Tip in Plexiglas, Trans. Amer. Soc. 
Mech. Engrs. Ser. E, J. Appl. Mechanics 37, pp. 409-415 (1970) 
282 

References 
219. Theocaris, P. S., Ioakimidis, N.: The V-Notched Elastic Half-Plane Problem, Acta Me-
chanica 32, pp. 125-140 (1979) 
220. Theocaris, P. S.: Stress and Displacement Singularities Near Corners, Zeitsch. Ang. 
Math. Phys. 26, pp. 79-98 (1975) 
221. Theocaris, P. S.: Plastic Strains at the Roots of Sharp Notches in Perspex, Experimental 
Stress Analysis and its Influence on Design, Proc. 4th Int. Conf. Stress Analysis, Cambridge 
England, pp. 513-523 (1970) 
222. Prassianakis, J. N., Theocaris, P. S.: Stress Intensity Factors at V-Notched Elastic Sym-
metrically Loaded Plates by the Method of Caustics, J. Phys. D: Appl. Physics 13, pp. 1043 
to 1053 (1980) 
223. Gross, B., Mendelson, A.: Plane Elastostatic Analysis of V-Notched Plates, Int. J. Fracture 
Mech. 8, pp. 267-276 (1972) 
224. Ioakimidis, N. I., Theocaris, P. S.: A Note on Stress Intensity Factors for Single Edge 
V-Notched Plates in Tension, Engin. Fracture Mech. 10, pp. 685-686 (1978) 
225. Dundurs, J.: Discussion of Paper by Bogy, D. B.: Edge-Bonded Dissimilar Orthogonal 
Elastic Wedges under Normal and Shear Loading, J. Appl. Mech., Trans., ASME 36, 
pp. 650-652 (1969) 
226. Bogy, D. B.: Edge-Bonded Dissimilar Orthogonal Elastic Wedges Under Normal and 
Shear Loading, J. Appl. Mech. 35, pp. 460-466 (1968) 
227. Theocaris, P. S., Gdoutos, E. E.: The Bimaterial Full-Plane with a Crack at any Angle 
to the Interface, Materialpriifung 18, No. 12, pp. 472-473 (1976) 
228. Theocaris, P. S.: Developments in Stress Analysis I (Edited by Holister, G.), Chap. 2, 
pp. 27--63 (1979) 
229. Theocaris, P. S:, Gdoutos, E. E.: An Optical Method for Determining Opening-Mode 
and Edge Sliding-Mode Stress-Intensity Factors, J. Appl. Mech. 39 (2), pp. 91-97 (1972) 
230. Theocaris, P. S., Prassianakis, J. N.: Interrelation of Mechanical and Optical Properties 
of Plasticized Epoxy Polymers, J. Appl. Polym. Sci. 22, pp. 1725-1734 (1978) 
231. Theocaris, P. S., Papadopoulos, G.: The Minimum Elastic Energy Density Criterion in 
Dynamic Problems of Propagating Cracks, J. Engin. Materials and Techn. 104, pp. 207 
to 214 (1982) 
232. Theocaris, P. S., Katsamanis, F.: Response of Cracks to Impact by Caustics, Engin. 
Fract. Mechan. 10, pp. 197-210 (1978) 
233. Theocaris, P. S., Milios, J.: Dynamic Crack Propagation in Composites, Int. J. Fracture 
16, pp. 31-51 (1980) 
234. Theocaris, P. S.: Concept of Mesophase, Mechanisms of Crack Propagation, in: Metal 
Filled Polymers: Properties and Applications, Battacharya, S. K. (Ed.), Dekker, N. Y., 
Chap. 5, pp. 259-333 (1986) 
235. Theocaris, P. S.: Optical Stress Rosette Based on Caustics, Appl. Optics 12, pp. 380-387 
(1973) 
236. Panasyuk, V. V., Berezhnitskii, L. T., Trush, I. I.: The stress distribution in the vicinity 
of discontinuities due to hard inclusions with corners, Problemy Prochn. 7, pp. 3-9 
(1972) 
237. Paris, P. C., Sih, G. C.: Stress Analysis of Cracks, Fracture Toughness Testing and its 
Application, ASTM, STP No. 381, pp. 30--83 (1964) 
238. Bogy, D. B.: On the Problem of Edge-Bonded Elastic Quarter Planes Loaded at the 
Boundary, Int. J. Solids and Struct. 6, pp. 1287-1313 (1970) 
239. Bogy, D. B.: Two Edge-Bonded Elastic Wedges of different Materials and Wedge Angles 
Surface Tractions, J. Appl. Mech., Trans. ASME 38, pp. 377-386 (1971) 
240. Bogy, D. B.: On the Plane Elastostatic Problem of a Loaded Crack Terminating at a 
Material Interface, J. Appl. Mech., Trans. ASME 38, pp. 911-918 (1971) 
241. Dundurs, J.: Effect of Elastic Constants on Stress in a Composite under ·Plane Defor-
mation, J. Compo Mat. 1, pp. 310--322 (1967) 
242. Theocaris, P. S.: Stress Singularities in a Bi-Wedge, Revue Roumaine des Sci. Tech.: 
Mecanique Appliquee 21 (I), pp. 129-146 (1976) 
243. Theocaris, P. S.: On the Singular Stress-Field at a Multiwedge Corner, Revue Roumaine 
des Sci. Tech.: Mech. Appl. 23, (5), pp. 673--685 (1978) 
283 

References 
244. Theocaris, P. S.: Partly Unbonded Interfaces Between Dissimilar Materials under Normal 
and Shear Loading, Acta Mechanica 24 (2), pp. 95-115 (1976) 
245. Gdoutos, E. E., Theocaris, P. S.: Stress Concentrations at the Apex of a Plane Indenter 
Acting on an Elastic Half-Plane, J. Appl. Mech., Trans., ASME 42 (3), pp. 688-692 (1975) 
246. Theocaris, P. S., Gdoutos, E. E.: Stress Singularities at Equal Angle Bi-Wedges and Two-
Material Composite Half-Planes with Rough Interfaces, J. Appl. Mech. 43 (I), pp. 64-68 
(1976) 
247. Theocaris, P. S., Gdoutos, E. E.: An Interferometric Method for the Direct Evaluation 
of Principal Stresses in Plane-Stress Fields, J. Phys. D: Appl. Phys. 7, pp. 472-482 (1974) 
248. Theocaris, P. S., Gdoutos, E. E.: Stress Singularities at Vertices of Composite Plates with 
Smooth or Rough Interfaces, Arch. Mech. 28 (4), pp. 693-704 (1976) 
249. Theocaris, P. S. : Optical Methods Applied to Composite Materials Research, in: Develop-
ments in Composite Materials-2, Holister, G. S. (Ed.), Appl. Sci. PubIs., Backing, Essex, 
England, Chapt. 6, pp. 165-201 (1981) 
250. Theocaris, P. S., Gdoutos, E. E.: Stress Singularities in Cracked Composite Full-Planes, 
Int. J. Fracture 13 (6), pp. 763-773 (1977) 
251. Theocaris, P. S., Paipetis, S. A., Stasinakis, C. A.: Effect of Geometry and Imperfect 
Bonding in Composite Systems with Limiting Shear Properties, Fiber Sci. and Techn. 11 
(5), pp. 335-351 (1978) 
252. Theocaris, P. S., Gdoutos, E. E., Thireos, C. G.: Stress Singularities in a Biwedge under 
Various Boundary Conditions, Acta Mechanica 29 (2), pp. 55-73 (1978) 
253. Theocaris, P. S., Stassinakis, C. A.: Experimental Solutions of the Problem of a Curvi-
linear Crack in Bonded Dissimilar Materials, IntI. J. Fracture 13 (I), pp. 13-26 (1977) 
254. Theocaris, P. S., Stassinakis, C. A.: Complex Stress Intensity Factors at Tips of Cracks 
Along Interfaces of Dissimilar Media, Eng. Fracture Mech. 14 (2), pp. 363-372 (1981) 
255. Theocaris, P. S., Joakimides, N.: The Inclusion Problem in Plane Elasticity, Quart. J. 
Mech. and Appl. Math. 30 (4), pp. 437-448 (1977) 
256. Theocaris, P. S., Gdoutos, E. E.: The Influence of Boundary Conditions on the Stress 
Singularities in a Bi-Wedge, Theoret. and Appl. Mech. Bulg. Acad. of Sci. 8 (4), pp. 
42-51 (1977) 
257. Williams, M. L.: Stress Singularities Resulting from Various Boundary Conditions in 
Angular Corners of Plates in Extension, J. Appl. Mech. 19, pp. 526-528 (1952) 
258. Zak, A. R., Williams, M. L.: Crack Point Stress Singularities at a Bi-Material Interface, 
J. Appl. Mech. 30, pp. 142-143 (1963) 
259. Kalandiia, A. I.: Remarks on the Singularity of Elastic Solutions near Corners, J. Appl. 
Math. and Mech. 33, pp. 127-131 (1969) 
260. England, A. H.: On Stress Singularities in Linear Elasticity, Int. J. Eng. Sci. 9, pp. 571-585 
(1971) 
261. Milne Thomson, L. M.: Plane Elastic Systems, Springer-Verlag, Berlin, Chap. IV, pp. 
75-109 (1960) 
262. Hein, Y. L., Erdogan, F.: Stress Singularities in a Two-Material Wedge, Int. J. Fract. 
Mech. 7, pp. 317-330 (1971) 
263. Bogy, D. B., Wang, K. C.: Stress Singularities at Interface Corners in Bonded Dissimilar 
Isotropic Elastic Materials, Int. J. Solids and Struct. 7, pp. 993-1005 (1971) 
264. Williams, M. L.: The Stresses Around a Fault or Crack in Dissimilar Media, Bull. Seis-
molog. Soc. Amer. 49 (2), pp. 199-204 (1959) 
265. Rice, J. R., Sih, G. C.: Plane Problems of Cracks in Dissimilar Media, J. Appl. Mech. 
32, pp. 418-423 (1965) 
266. England, A. H.: A Crack Between Dissimilar Media, J. Appl. Mech. 32, pp. 400-402 
(1965) 
267. Erdogan, F.: Stress Distribution in Bonded Dissimilar Materials with Cracks, J. Appl. 
Mech. 32, pp. 403-410 (1965) 
268. Erdogan, F.: Bonded Dissimilar Materials Containing Cracks Parallel to the Interface, 
Eng. Frac. Mech. 3, pp. 231-240 (1971) 
269. Erdogan, F., Gupta, G. D.: The Stress Analysis of Multi-Layered Composites with a 
Flaw, Int. J. Solids and Struct. 7, pp. 39-61 (1971) 
284 

References 
270. Erdogan, F., Gupta, G. D.: Layered Composites with an Interface Flaw, Int. J. Solids 
and Struct. 7 (II), pp. 1089-1107 (1971) 
271. Erdogan, F., Ozbec, T.: Stresses in Fiber Reinforced Composites with Imperfect Bonding, 
J. Appl. Mech. 36, pp. 865-869 (1969) 
272. Cook, T. S., Erdogan, F.: Stresses in Bonded Materials with a Crack Perpendicular to 
the Interface, Int. J. Eng. Sci. 10, pp. 677-697 (1972) 
273. Willis, J. R.: Fracture Mechanics of Interfacial Cracks, J. Mech. and Phys. of Solids 19, 
pp. 353-368 (1971) 
274. Toya, M. : A Crack Along the Interface of a Rigid Circular Inclusion Empeded in an Elastic 
Solid, Int. J. Fracture 9, pp. 463-470 (1973) 
275. Wang, T. T., Kwei, T. K., Zupko, H. M.: Tensile Strength of Butt. Joined Epoxy-Alu-
miniumPlates, Int. J. Fra«t. Mech. 6 (2), pp. 127-137 (1970) 
276. Paris, P. c., Sih, G. C.: Stress Analysis of Cracks, ASTM STP No. 381, pp. 30-83 (1965) 
277. Perlman, A. B., Sih, G. C.: Elastostatic Problems of Curvilinear Cracks in Bonded Dis-
similar Materials, Int. J. Eng. Sci. 5, pp. 845-867 (1967) 
278. Frocht, M. M.: Photoelasticity, J. Wiley, N. York, Vol. II, Chap. 11,364-376 (1948) 
285 

Author Index 
Adamson, M. J. 
149 
Bills, K. 96 
Bogy, D. B. 
193, 226, 227, 
234, 236, 238, 243 
Boley, B. A. 
18 
Bolotin, Y. Y. 
18 
Bolotina, K. S. 
18 
Broutman, L. J. 
18, 102 
Budiansky, B. 
53 
Bueche, F. 97, 147 
Chamis, C. C. 
18, 111 
Clements, L. L. 74 
Cox, H. L. 
18, 24 
Crossley, A. 
158 
Daniel, I. M. 
158 
Davies, G. 
158 
Dow, N.F. 24 
Dundurs, J. 
193, 227, 236, 
243,253,267,269,271 
Eilers, H. 96 
Einstein, A. 95 
England, A. H. 231,239 
Erdogan, F. 234,239 
Fahmi, A. A. 
111, 112 
Frocht,M. M. 
171 
Furukawa, J. 95 
Gdoutos, E. E. 
193 
Guernsey, R. 
171 
Guth, E. 91, 93, 95 
Hashin, Z. 6, 10, 11,25,32, 
53, 70, 71, 84, 102, 158 
Hein, Y. L. 
234 
Hill, R. 53, 158 
Hsu, T. T. C. 
169 
Kalandija, A. I. 
231,234 
Kelley, F. N. 
147 
Kerner, E. H. 33,41,53,86, 
90, 93, 95, 108 
Kudykina, T. A. . 41 
Leidner, J. 97 
Levin, Y. M. 
112 
Lipatov, Y. S. 
33, 55 
Marloff, R. H. 
158 
Mashelkar, R. A. 
97 
Maurer, F. 33,40 
McGarry, F. J. 
18 
Molotkow, A. P. 
132 
Moore, R. L. 74 
Muskhelishvili, N. I. 187, 
211,218,226,232,239,240, 
242,261 
Narkis, M. 96 
Nicolais, L. 97 
Nielsen, L. E. 
101 
Passmore, E. M. 
97 
Pervak, I. G. 41 
Pigott, M. R. 
97 
Ragai-Ellozy, A. N. 
111,112 
Rice, J. R. 
239 
Riley, M. B. 
70 
Rosen, B. W. 
6, 10, 11, 20, 
24, 25, 53~ 79, 71, 102, 112, 
158 
Sagalaev, G. 34,40 
Sahu, S. 
102 
Sato, Y. 
95 
Schapery,R.A. 1l0, Ill, 116 
Schrager, M. 97 
Sendeckyj, G. P. 
18, III 
Sideridis, E. P. 34,40 
Sih, G. C. 239 
Simonov-Emeljanov, I. 34, 
40 
Smallwood, H. M. 
92, 93, 95 
Smith, T. L. 97, 101 
Spathis, G. D. 34,40 
Takahashi, K. 32 
Takayanagi, M. 32, 41, 86, 
90,91,93 
Testa, R. B. 
18 
Theocaris, P. S. 
34, 40, 193, 
227 
Toya, M. 239 
Tsai, S. W. 
70, 71 
Tyson, W. R. 
158 
Van der Poe!, C. 
33, 53 
Van Fo Fy, G. A. 
111 
Wang, T. T. 239 
Whitney, J. M. 
70 
Williams, M. L. 231, 234, 
239 
Willis, J. R. 239 
Woodhans, R. T. 97 
Ziege!, K. D. 97 
287 

Subject Index 
Abrasion 
112 
Absorption 
182 
Adhesion 
1,5,6,10,18,39,54,62,68,79,82, 
92,96,102,117,120,135,139,157,197,223 
-
characteristics 61 
-
coefficient 
11, 34, 44, 48, 52, 61, 133 
-
efficiency 6,41,94,95 
-
factor XV, 40,53,95 
-
frictional 68, 83 
-
imperfect 209 
-
parameter 43, 49, 55, 56, 58, 133 
-
perfect 12,32,55,94,117,128 
-
quality 9, 18, 34, 43, 44, 49, 58, 68, 94, 
112, 123 
-
strength 
169 
Airy's stress function 
77 
Ambient temperature 
18 
Astroidal curve 216 
Attenuator 3 
Average composite properties 20 
Axial stress 21 
Barrier 3 
Bead-spring model 
63, 65 
Bimaterial 3 
-
body 234 
-
interface 8 
-
plate 249 
-
wedge 226, 234, 267 
Biwedge 227,235,236,267,269,271 
Bogy's parallelogram 236 
Boltzmann's constant 65 
Bound molecule 
149 
Boundary layer 
10,11 
Bueche's model 97 
Bulk modulus 7, 32, 37, 38, 49, 72 
Capacity 
-
jump 
11 
Caustic 
184, 186, 187, 205, 208, 214, 223, 
237, 245, 247, 249, 251 
-
curve 
187 
-
experimental 
191 
-
external 
191, 195 
288 
-
internal 
195, 3, 184, 185, 195, 197, 209, 
225, 235, 236, 239, 244, 249 
-
orientation 205 
-
parametric equations 245 
-
reflected 3, 202 
-
theory 227 
Chemical 
-
affinity 62 
-
interaction 83 
Coherent light 
186 
Cohesion energy 
10 
Complex potential method 227 
Compliance 34, 39, 42, 87 
-
composite 34 
-
elastic 34 
Composite 
-
fiber 9, 34, 53, 54 
-
fiber-reinforced 
2, 9, 33, 39, 40, 43, 54, 
55, 70, 110-158 
-
glass-epoxy 70, 74 
-
glass-fiber 58, 79 
-
graphite-epoxy III 
-
hard-core 42, 55, 59 
-
isotropic 2 
-
material 1,2,8,9, 13,40,70,97 
-
model 62 
-
modulus 34 
-
particle-reinforced 
105 
-
particulate 1,9,33,34, 102, 119 
-
real 15,31 
-
reinforced 2, 18 
-
rubber-core 43, 55 
-
spherical 
117 
-
strong-core 43 
-
two-phase 9,117,151 
-
type I 86 
-
type II 86 
Conformal mapping 209,210,213 
Correction factor 41, 191 
Correspondene principle 70, 71, 105, 106, 
136 
Crack 
-
arc-shaped 251 
-
axis 200, 261 
-
curvilinear 261 

-
direction 8 
-
edge 231 
-
fast-running 3 
-
internal 239 
-
lip 201, 262, 264 
-
propagation 3, 4, 8, 183, 197, 206, 207, 
226 
-
semi-infinite 232,272 
-
tip 2,3,191,194,204,208,231,245,251, 
256,260 
-
velocity 8,205,207,208 
Critical length 20 
Cross-linking 10,67,84,92, 151 
Cuspidal point 217,219,225 
Cusp-like curve 
191 
Damper 3 
Diffusion 
-
coefficient 
143 
-
Fick's law 
140, 154 
Diffusivity 141, 154 
Dissipation factor 
129 
Dogbone specimen 
107, 141 
Dundurs', 
-
constant 253 
-
parallelogram 
193, 236, 267, 269, 271 
-
parameters 
193 
Dynalizer apparatus 62, 84, 87 
Dynamic modulus 63 
Dynastat apparatus 62, 84, 87 
Effective 
-
compliance, 63 
-
length, 
24 
Eiler's relation 96 
Elastic 
-
modulus 7,33,37,56, 102 
-
-
effective 70 
-
strain energy 37 
Electron 
-
micrograph 98 
-
microscopy 
10 
Energy reflector 3 
Epoxy 
-
aluminum-filled 
135 
-
iron-filled 
134 
-
matrix 31,79 
-
resin 
1 
Failure criteria 209 
Fatigue crack 2 
Fault 
Fiber 9, 18,32,39 
-
length 32 
-
matrix material 25 
-
volume 
-
-
content 55,61 
Subject Index 
-
-
fraction 
61 
-
reinforced plastic 2 
Filler 1,6, 7, 8, 9, 14,32, 34, 36,40,44,72, 
103 
-
active 
102 
-
concentration 18, 132 
-
modulus 32 
-
spherical 33 
-
volume 
-
content 45,47,49 
-
-
fraction 32,45,52,77,82,87,91,93, 
94,98,102,104,115,121,140,141,143, 
150,155 
First 
-
approximation spectra 89 
-
fundamental problem 233, 262, 263, 264 
Fracture 2 
-
criteria 
194 
Free volume 148, 149 
Frequency effect 
129 
Friction coefficient 273 
Frozen-steps method 
180 
Generalized epicyc10id 219,225 
Geometric discontinuity 183,226 
Glass 
-
bead 86 
-
fiber 31, 110, 131 
-
like state 87, 89, 93 
-
transition 
16,45, 125, 129, 138 
-
behavior 132 
-
region 77, 152 
-
temperature 
11, 14, 16, 18,33,45,55, 
75,84,86,93, 125, 126, 128, 129, 132, 
139, 140, 147 
-
zone 44 
Glassy 
-
polymer behavior 125, 140 
-
region 
16,45,87,93, 125, 132 
Goursat's function 239 
Griffith's crack 212 
Gross-Fuoss' model 
67 
Guth-Smallwood's equation 91,93 
Handling 
112 
Hard-core material 43 
Hashin-Rosen model 
6, 10, 53, 71, 102 
Heat 
-
capacity 33 
-
-
jump 44, 55 
Hilbert's problem 239,241 
Hole 
148, 149 
-
circular 212,214 
-
elliptic 212 
Hooke's law 26, 27, 71 
Hypocyc1oidal curve 216 
289 

Subject Index 
Immersion 
145, 151 
-
period of 154 
-
time of 152 
Inclusion 
1,6,7, 10,33,44,62,83,94, 110, 
151, 169,202,208,213,224,238,254,261 
-
spherical 40, 96, 171 
-
volume 52, 56 
Independent phase 11 
Ineffective fiber length 24 
-
ratio 24 
Infrared spectroscopy 
10 
Initial 
-
circle 222 
-
curve 
187, 189, 191, 210, 213, 214, 218, 
220, 235, 236, 237, 244, 245, 254 
Interface 
3, 7, 12, 25, 37, 39, 117, 178, 194, 
226, 227, 229, 232, 238, 243, 247, 258 
-
boundary 83 
-
fiber-matrix 9, 18,20, 70 
-
filler-matrix 
10 
Interfacial 
-
adhesion 87,97 
Interlayer 7 
-
region 
62 
Isochromatic 6, 161, 162, 164,224 
-
pattern 160, 164, 172, 180 
Isoclinic 
161,164,165,172,180 
-
pattern 
160 
Isotropic 
-
line 
180 
-
point 168, 169 
Kelley-Bueche's equation 
147 
Kerner's model 33,41, 53 
Kerner's equation 86, 90, 93 
Kudykina's model 41 
Law of 
-
mixtures 32, 33, 38, 39, 48, 54, 68, 74, 
105, 114, 115, 118, 135, 150 
-
variation, 
-, hyperbolic 76, 78 
-
-, linear 76, 78 
-
-, logarithmic 76,78 
-
-, parabolic 76, 78 
Linear 
-
mixture equation 
123 
-
thermal expansion coefficient 
12, 16, 28 
Lipatov's theory 
152 
Load-carrying capacity 10 
Loss 
-
factor 87, 132, 136, 137, 138 
-
modulus 72, 73, 75, 86, 89, 93, 105, 107, 
127, 137 
-
-
dynamic 86, 87 
-
tangent 
129 
290 
Matrix 1,2,3,7,9, 10, 16, 31, 37,40,43,62, 
70,72,99 
-
phase 
34 
-
volume 32 
Maxwell's model 
138 
Mechanical interaction 83 
Mesophase 4,8,10,14,18,32,34,39,42,49, 
62, 82, 96, 110, 118, 128, 152 
-
layer 41,44,49,62,69 
-
material 
10, 80 
-
modulus 
11, 42, 49 
-
region 
139, 154 
-
thickness 
11, 155 
-
volume 
-
content 47 
-
-
fraction 44,77,86,112,117,120,139, 
152, 155 
-
zone 77 
Microcrack 1,8,9, 10, 157,226 
Mixed fundamental problem 262, 264 
Modified strain energy criterion 
183, 194, 
201 
Moisture 
18 
-
absorption 
140, 142, 143, 147, 148, 151, 
154 
content 142, 143, 154 
-
diffusion 
140 
Molecular 
-
mobility 9, 18 
-
network-structure 62 
Mooney's equation 86 
Motion 
-
long-range 
63 
-
short-range 63 
Multiple cylinder model 70,76,82, 112, 115 
Multilayer model 33, 56, 76, 110 
Multiphase 
-
particulate 33 
-
system 
158 
Multiwedge 226,231,235,238,261,273 
-
corner 227 
-
material 229 
-
plate 236 
Muskhelishvili's 
-
complex variable method 261 
-
constants 240 
-
relations 211 
Network-structure 62 
Newtonian viscous fluid 94 
Occupied volume 
148 
Optical 
-
constant 249 
-
micrograph 98 

Particulate 39,54,55,94,97, 117, 170 
-
dynamic properties 86 
-
filler 
32 
-
iron-epoxy 45, 49 
-
mechanical properties 94 
Perfect mathematical surface 
10 
Pervak's model 41 
Phase 1,9, 14,33,34,39,41 
-
interaction 7 
Photoelastic 
-
analysis 
162, 171, 174 
-
plane model 
159, 161, 162 
-
technique 
157, 158 
Pinching effect 
178 
Plane 
-
model 
161, 162, 183 
-
stress model 202 
Plasticizer 159 
Poisson's ratio 
12, 38, 49, 106 
Polymer-filler interaction 128 
Polymeric 
-
composite 27 
-
matrix 9, 14, 18, 32 
Polymerization 7, 10, 157, 158 
-
rate 
10 
Pseudocaustic 
189, 194,213 
Pseudophase 33, 40, 53 
Radial pressure 35 
Rayleigh wave 207 
Real constant surface 7 
Reflected caustics method 183 
Reinforcement 1 
Reinforcing action 5 
Relaxation 
-
phenomena 159 
-
spectra 87,92,94 
Retardation 
-
spectra 62, 64, 66, 68 
-
spectrum analysis 69 
-
time 65 
Rigid 
-
circular core 212 
-
elliptic core 212 
-
matrix 86 
-
rectilinear stringer 212 
Rosen's model 25, 112 
Rubber-carbon system 132 
Rubber-like state 89 
Rubbery 
-
behavior 125 
-
filler 42 
-
matrix 86 
-
plateau 63, 68 
-
region 62, 87 
-
linear 45 
-
state 93 
Subject Index 
Sagalaev's model 40 
Sakanishi's model 41 
Schapery's curve 
115 
Schrager's model 97 
Second 
-
fundamental problem 262, 264, 266 
Self-consistent model 
53 
Shape singularity 209 
Shear 
difference method 
160 
-
modulus 7,38 
-
strain 22 
-
stress 20, 21 
-
traction 
18 
Shrinkage 6, 7, 9, 84, 157, 158, 159, 172 
-
coefficient 
160, 164 
-
stress 
157, 158, 162, 170, 177,224 
-
-
intensity 166 
Sideridis-Spathis' model 34, 40 
Sigmoid curve 208 
Silicon layer 63 
Simonov-Emiljanov's model 40 
Singular 
-
point 180, 185, 194, 202, 208, 216, 221, 
225 
-
region 
184 
Singularity 214,216,225,228,235 
-
boundaries 275, 271 
-
kind 210 
-
order 3,84, 190, 191, 193, 194,202,226, 
227,231,235,236,239,263,264,270,271 
Size singularity 209 
Skin effect 267 
Specific 
-
frequency 
129 
-
volume 
125 
Storage 
-
compliance 89,92 
-
modulus 72, 73, 74, 86, 87, 88, 91, 93, 
105, 107, 127, 132, 137 
-
-
dynamic 86, 87 
Strain energy-density criterion 
197 
Stress 
-
concentration 2,7,68,166,167,206,210, 
226 
-
-
factor 
161 
-
distribution 
166, 169, 178 
-
field 
184,212,235 
-
-
singular 244, 249 
-
function 
188 
-
-
complex 184, 185, 187,235 
-
gradient 
I, 8, 209 
-
intensity factor 
183, 184, 185, 189, 191, 
194,199,205,207,208,224,227,239,255, 
261 
-
complex 219,220,244,253,260 
-
-
opening-mode 244 
291 

Subject Index 
-
sliding-mode 244 
optical coefficient 
161 
raisers 208 
Singularity 
1, 8, 9, 68, 178, 184, 209, 210, 
214, 226, 227, 232, 235, 237, 238 
Superposition principle 86, 89 
Surface 
-
layer 
18 
Swelling 
148, 150 
Takayanagi's model 41,86,89,91,93 
Takano's model 
51 
Tensile stress 20 
Tesar's method 
171 
Theocaris'model 34,40 
Thermal 
-
expansion 
14 
-
coefficient 
13, 15, 16, 54, 110, 112, 
114, 115, 117, 120, 126, 129, 133, 147, 
159 
-
curve 
15 
stress 
12 
Thermomechanical 
-
analyser 
128, 129, 132 
-
behaviour 
18, 25 
-
properties 
12 
Three 
-
cylinder model 
18,25, 76 
-
cylindrical layer system 
18 
dimensional model 
158, 180 
layer model 
11, 17, 54, 133 
phase model 53, 133 
phase system 33, 84, 86 
term model 61 
Third fundamental problem 262, 266 
Time-dependent coefficient 
142 
Transition 
frequency 
136, 137 
phenomena 6 
region 87,90,92,93, 126, 136 
temperature 6, 125, 140 
292 
-
zone 63, 89, 137 
Transport model 
143 
Transverse modulus 
72 
Trapezoidal specimen 
18 
Two 
-
layer model 
128 
-
phase 
material 
169 
-
model 32 
-
system 6,90,91 
sphere model 32 
term 
model 
61 
-
unfolding model 61 
Unbound molecule 
148 
Unfolding model 42, 49, 53 
Van der Poe1's model 33, 53 
Van der Waal's force 83,94 
Variable elastic modulus 42 
Variational principle 32, 70, 112 
Viscoelastic 
-
behavior 14,157 
-
effect 62 
Viscoelastometer 129 
Void 1,3,8,9, 10, 148, 149,238 
-
content 
lSI 
-
volume 149 
Voigt 
-
element 65 
-
model 
138 
Volume fraction 76,92,97, 133, 1~7 
Wave reflector 3 
Wedge 261,263 
Weight factor 
39 
Westergaard's 
-
complex stress function 244 
-
solution 244 

