


Cover images 0 
Murray Robertsodvisual elements 1998-99, taken from the 
109 Visual Elements Periodic Table, available at www.chemsoc.org/viselements 
ISBN 0-85404-667-4 
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library 
0 
The Royal Society of Chemistry 2002 
All rights reserved 
Apart from any fair dealing for the purposes of research or private study, or criticism or 
review as permitted under the terms of the UK Copyright, Designs and Patents Act, 
1988, this publication may not be reproduced, stored or transmitted, in any form or by 
any means, without the prior permission in writing of The Royal Society of Chemistry, 
or in the case of reprographic reproduction only in accordance with the terms of the 
licences issued by the Copyright Licensing Agency in the UK, or in accordance with the 
terms of the licences issued by the appropriate Reproduction Rights Organization out- 
side the UK Enquiries concerning reproduction outside the terms stated here should be 
sent to The Royal Society of Chemistry at the address printed on this page. 
Published by The Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, Science Park, 
Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Registered Charity No. 207890 
For further information see our web site at www.rsc.org 
Typeset in Great Britain by Wyvern 21, Bristol 
Printed and bound by Polestar Wheatons Ltd, Exeter 

Preface 
Spectroscopy is taught at many different levels within the general subject 
of Chemistry, Physics or Chemical Physics. Before writing the present text 
I had written two books on spectroscopy: “High Resolution Spectro- 
scopy” is aimed at the postgraduate level, and “Modern Spectroscopy” is 
aimed at a fairly advanced undergraduate level. Both are referred to as 
“Further Reading” in association with the present book. 
The general level at which the Tutorial Chemistry Texts are aimed is 
that of the first or second year of a degree course in a British university. To 
introduce spectroscopy at this level is a considerable challenge. It was my 
policy during the writing of this book not to be influenced by any existing 
books (including my own!), but to try to put myself in the position of an 
undergraduate student early in their course. I assumed that he or she has 
only limited mathematical knowledge. Consequently, advanced mathemat- 
ics is avoided as far as possible, appearing only in “boxes” which may be 
bypassed without sacrificing the understanding of the main text. 
It is a truism to say that spectroscopy and quantum mechanics are inti- 
mately connected. Quantum mechanics is the theory which attempts to 
explain, or even to predict, the experimental observations of spec- 
troscopy. However, I have used only the results of quantum mechanics. 
For many purposes, I want the reader to visualize an atom or molecule as 
a physical entity rather than a series of mathematical equations. 
As a consequence of the various ways in which spectroscopy is com- 
monly encountered, within physical and organic chemistry for example, a 
student may have the impression that high-resolution (structural) and 
low-resolution (analytical) spectroscopy can be separated. It has been one 
of my aims in this book to encompass both, and to show that they are 
closely interrelated. Another, related, aim has been to integrate the spec- 
troscopy of small and large molecules, thereby trying to avoid the impres- 
sion that high resolution spectroscopy is mainly concerned with atoms or 
small, particularly diatomic, molecules. 
I would like to express my thanks to Martyn Berry who helped to make 
the text clearer and more grammatical than it would otherwise have been. 
I would also like to thank Professor Walter Balfour, for Figures 11.5 and 
11.6, and Professor Ben van der Veken, for Figures 10.2 and 10.10, who 
very kindly provided the original spectra. 
J Michael Hollas 
Reading 
iii 

E D I T O R - I N - C H I E F  
E X E C U T I V E  E D I T O R S  
E D U  C A T  I0 N A L C O N S  U LTAN T 
Professor E W Abel 
Professor A G Davies 
Professor D Phillips 
Professor J D Woollins 
Mr A4 Berry 
This series of books consists of short, single-topic or modular texts, concentrating on the funda- 
mental areas of chemistry taught in undergraduate science courses. Each book provides a 
concise account of the basic principles underlying a given subject, embodying an independent- 
learning philosophy and including worked examples. The one topic, one book approach ensures 
that the series is adaptable to chemistry courses across a variety of institutions. 
TITLES IN T H E  S E R I E S  
F O R T H C O M I N G  TITLES 
Stereochemistry D G Morris 
Reactions and Characterization of Solids 
Main Group Chemistry W Henderson 
d- and f-Block Chemistry C J Jones 
Structure and Bonding J Barrett 
Functional Group Chemistry J R Hanson 
Organotransition Metal Chemistry A F Hill 
Heterocyclic Chemistry M Sainsbury 
Atomic Structure and Periodicity J Barrett 
Thermodynamics and Statistical Mechanics 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Organic Synthetic Methods J R Hanson 
Aromatic Chemistry J D Hepworth, 
S E Dann 
J M Seddon and J D Gale 
J M Hollas 
D R Waring and M J Waring 
Mechanisms in Organic Reactions 
Quantum Mechanics for Chemists 
Molecular Interactions 
Reaction Kinetics 
X-ray Crystallography 
Lanthanide and Actinide Elements 
Maths for Chemists 
Bioinorganic Chemistry 
Chemistry of Solid Surfaces 
Biology for Chemists 
Multi-element NMR 
Further information about this series is available at www.chemsoc. orgltct 
Orders and enquiries should be sent to: 
Sales and Customer Care, Royal Society of Chemistry, Thomas Graham House, 
Science Park, Milton Road, Cambridge CB4 OWF, UK 
Tel: +44 1223 432360; Fax: +44 1223 426017; Email: sales@rsc.org 

Contents 
1.1 What is a Spectrum? 
1 
Spectrophotome ter? 
2 
1.3 What are Absorption and Emission Spectra? 
5 
1.2 What is a Spectroscope, Spectrograph, Spectrometer or 
2.1 What Lies Beyond the Red Region? 
8 
2.2 What Lies Beyond the Violet Region? 
9 
2.3 Why Electromagnetic? 
9 
2.4 Units of Wavelength, Frequency, Wavenumber and Energy 
10 
2.5 The Effect of Radiation on Atoms and Molecules 
14 
2.6 Subdivisions of Spectroscopy 
15 
3.1 What is Quantization? 
17 
3.2 Quantization of Energy in the Hydrogen Atom 
18 
3.3 Results of Applying Quantum Mechanics to the 
Hydrogen Atom 
26 
4.1 
31 
4.2 The Helium Atom 
35 
4.3 Other Polyelectronic Atoms 
38 
4.4 Selection Rules in Spectra of Polyelectronic Atoms 
48 
Effects of More Than One Electron in an Atom 

vi 
Contents 
5.1 
5.2 
5.3 
6.1 
6.2 
6.3 
6.4 
7.1 
7.2 
7.3 
8.1 
8.2 
8.3 
8.4 
9.1 
9.2 
9.3 
9.4 
10.1 
Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules 
Heteronuclear Diatomic Molecules 
Polyatomic Molecules 
Introduction 
Vibration in a Diatomic Molecule 
Vibration in Polyatomic Molecules 
Vibration in Excited Electronic States 
Introduction 
Diatomic and Linear Polyatomic Molecules 
Non-linear Polyatomic Molecules 
52 
64 
68 
75 
76 
82 
88 
91 
92 
95 
Microwave, Infrared, Visible and Ultraviolet Spectroscopy 
100 
Raman Spectroscopy 
106 
Spectral Line Widths 
107 
Spectroscopy in Various Phases 
107 
Introduction 
110 
Rotational Spectroscopy of Diatomic and Linear 
Microwave, Millimetre Wave and Far-infrared 
121 
Molecular Structure Determination 
123 
Polyatomic Molecules 
111 
Spectroscopy of Non-linear Polyatomic Molecules 
Introduction 
126 
10.2 Infrared Spectra of Diatomic Molecules 
10.3 Raman Spectra of Diatomic Molecules 
10.4 Infrared and Raman Spectra of Linear Polyatomic 
127 
131 
Molecules 
132 

Contents 
vii 
10.5 Infrared and Raman Spectra of Symmetric Top 
10.6 Infrared and Raman Spectra of Asymmetric Top 
Molecules 
136 
Molecules 
139 
1 1.1 Introduction 
1 1.2 Electronic Spectra of Diatomic Molecules 
1 1.3 Electronic Spectra of Polyatomic Molecules 
146 
147 
160 

Fundamental Constants 
Quantity 
Symbol 
Value and unitsa 
~~ 
Speed of light (in vacuo) 
Vacuum permittivity 
Charge on proton 
Planck constant 
Molar gas constant 
Avogadro constant 
Boltzmann constant 
Atomic mass unit 
Rest mass of electron 
Rest mass of proton 
Rydberg constant 
C 
&O 
e 
h 
R 
NA Or L 
k (= RN~-’) 
u (= 1 0-3 kg mol-’ NAP1) 
2.997 924 58 x 1 O8 m s-l (exactly) 
8.854 187 81 6 x 1 0-l2 
F rn-l (exactly) 
1.602 176 462(63) x 1 0-19 C 
6.626 068 76(52) x 1 0-34 
J s 
8.31 4 472(15) J mol-’ K-’ 
6.022 141 99(47) x 1 023 
mol-l 
1.380 650 3(24) x 1 0-23 
J K -’ 
1.660 538 73(13) x 1 0-27 
kg 
9.109 381 88(72) x 1 0-31 kg 
1.672 621 58(13) x 1 Op27 kg 
1.097 373 156 854 8(83) x 1 O7 rn-’ 
a Values taken from P Mohr and 6. N. Taylor, J. Phys. Chem. Ref. Data, 1999,28, 171 5 and Rev. 
Mod. fhys., 2000, 72, 351 . The uncertainties in the final digits are given in parentheses. 

What is Spectroscopy? 
I .I What is a Spectrum? 
The word 
is often used in everyday conversation. For example, 
we may speak of a spectrum of opinions, meaning a range or spread of 
opinions. This spectrum of opinions may be broad or narrow, depend- 
ing on the group of people concerned. 
In a scientific context, the word spectrum also applies to a range or 
spread but, in physical chemistry and physics, it applies specifically to a 
range or spread of 
or 
An everyday example of 
a spectrum of frequencies is apparent on our radios. If you look at the 
various frequency ranges that are available you will see that the range, 
or spectrum, of FM (frequency modulated) frequencies covered by the 
radio is typically 88-108 MHz (megahertz). This is a portion of 
the radiofrequency spectrum. The MW (medium wave) part of the 
radiofrequency spectrum covers the range 530-1 600 kHz (kilohertz). 
Since the prefixes “mega” and “kilo” indicate lo6 and lo3, respectively, 
the FM range is in a higher frequency region of the radiofrequency spec- 
trum than the MW range. 
1 

2 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
For the purposes of this book, an important example of a spectrum is 
that of visible light produced by a 
In 1667, Sir Isaac Newton start- 
ed his experiments on 
of white light, particularly light from 
the sun, using a glass prism. He showed that a prism can separate, or 
white light into its component colours. These are commonly 
classified as red, orange, yellow, green, blue and violet, although there 
are no sharp divisions between them. 
Figure 1.1 shows how a glass prism can separate white light into its 
various colours by the process of 
Light of different colours 
travels at different speeds through the glass material. Violet light travels 
most slowly and has the largest 
relative to the beam 
incident on the prism face, whereas red light travels the fastest and has 
the smallest angle of deviation. The prism produces a spectrum, the vis- 
ible part of which consists of the colours to which the eye is sensitive. A 
rainbow comprises a similar spectrum of colours, and is produced by 
refraction and reflection of sunlight within the raindrops. 
Figure 1.1 Dispersion of white 
light by a prism 
I .2 
What is a Spectroscope, Spectrograph, 
Spectrometer or Spectrophotometer? 
As we shall see in Chapter 2, the 
as it is called, 
extends far beyond both the red and the violet, and the various regions 
of the spectrum are characterized by their wavelengths. 

What is Spectroscopy? 
3 
The recommended unit of wavelength is the nanometre (nm), where 
1 nm = 
m. There is another unit of wavelength, the Angstrom (A), 
where 1 A = 
m, which has been superseded by the nanometre. 
However, familiarity with it is useful when reading some of the older 
literature. The extent of the visible region of the electromagnetic 
spectrum is approximately 350 nm (violet) to 750 nm (red), or 3500 to 
7500 A. 
The simple prism in Figure 1.1 separates the wavelengths only very 
crudely, and it was not until 1859 that Bunsen and Kirchhoff invented 
the 
in order to analyse the light falling on the prism more 
accurately. They were then able to use this instrument for chemical 
analysis. 
Figure 1.2 shows the optical arrangement in a typical spectroscope. 
The light source is behind the entrance slit S 1. The light from S 1 passes 
through the lens L1 to the prism which, as in Figure 1.1, disperses the 
light. Figure 1.2 shows just two light rays 1 and 2, of different colours, 
with the exit slit S2 positioned so that only ray 1 passes through to be 
detected by the eye. To direct other colours through S2, the prism is 
rotated about an axis perpendicular to the figure and through the centre 
of the prism. 
Figure 1.2 The optical 
arrangement in a simple prism 
spectroscope 
Even this simple visible-light spectroscope can demonstrate two prin- 
ciples which are important throughout spectroscopy: 
1. If the wavelengths of the two rays in Figure 1.2 are A and A + d l ,  
where dA is a very small increment of wavelength, and the two rays 
can be just observed separately, the two wavelengths are said to be 
resolved and dA is the 
of the spectroscope. A small value 
of dA corresponds to 
In fact the resolution of which a glass prism is capable varies 
with wavelength: it is higher in the violet than in the red region. 
2. The eye sees the radiation emerging from the slit S2 as a 
and this line is an image of the entrance slit S 1. Therefore if the 
slit Sl is too wide it will restrict the resolution. Ultimately, though, 
the resolution is determined by the size of the prism. In particular, 
the resolution is proportional to the length of the base of the prism, 
and a large value to 

4 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
provided the f x e  of the prism on which the light is incident is filled 
with the source radiation. If the source of radiation is very weak, it 
may be necessary to widen the slit Sl in order to let through sufficient 
radiation to be detected. Then the resolution may be 
and 
not limited by the size of the prism. 
If the exit slit S2 is replaced by a photographic plate detector, the instru- 
ment is called a 
but photographic detection is rarely used. 
Other types of detector, usually some kind of electronic device which 
records the intensity of radiation falling on it as a function of wave- 
length, are more useful, and the instrument is then a 
or 
Another major difference between a modern spectrometer and one 
based on Figure 1.2 is the use of a 
in place of the 
prism as the dispersing element. A diffraction grating consists of a series 
of very close, parallel grooves ruled onto a hard glassy or metallic sur- 
Face. The surface is usually reflecting, so that the grating not only dis- 
perses the light fklling on it but reflects it as well. Since the resolving 
power of a diffraction grating is proportional to the number of grooves, 
to obtain high resolution it is necessary for the grooves to be ruled very 
close together and to cover a large area. 

What is Spectroscopy? 
5 
1.3 
What are Absorption and Emission Spectra? 
From what has been discussed so far it will be apparent that 
is the study of experimentally obtained spectra. In general, these spectra 
may be of two general types, 
and 
spectra. 
An aqueous solution of copper(I1) sulfate, viewed with a white light 
source passing through it, appears blue because it 
some of the 
visible light. If the light passing through the solution is dispersed by a 
spectroscope or spectrometer it can be shown that it is the red light which 
has been absorbed. This is because 
white light - red light = blue light 
and red and blue are said to be 
An absorption spectrum of great historical importance is that of the sun. 
The core of the sun acts as a white light source and the absorption is by 
gases in the outer regions. Wollaston, in 1802, and, later, Fraunhofer 
observed this spectrum, which consists of sharp, dark 
These lines are images of the narrow slit of the spectroscope or spectro- 
meter, and occur at specific wavelengths which are characteristic of the 
atom or molecule which is absorbing the light. The strongest absorption 
lines were identified, by comparison with absorption spectra obtained in 
the laboratory. as being due to 0,, H, Na, Fe, Mg, Ca and Ca'. Of 
particular interest was an absorption at a wavelength, now measured 
accurately as 587.5618 nm, which had not been observed in laboratory 
experiments but which we now know to be due to helium, an element 
which was first discovered in the sun. 
Many spectra are observed in emission rather than absorption. For 
example, if the radiation emitted from a sodium discharge lamp, similar 
to those used for street lighting, is directed into a spectroscope, various 
lines in the emission spectrum can be observed. However, the spectrum 
is dominated by two intense yellow lines of similar wavelengths, 589.592 

6 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
588.995 589.592 illnm I 
Figure 1.3 The D lines in the 
emission spectrum of sodium 
and 588.995 nm, known as the sodium D lines. Figure 1.3 shows how 
these lines might appear to the eye in a spectroscope, or on a photo- 
graphic recording made with a spectrograph. The width of each line is 
a consequence of the width of the entrance slit. 
There is a rather important principle illustrated by using Unm for 
labelling the wavelength scale in Figure 1.3. This symbolism indicates 
that the wavelengths are given in units of nanometres. You might have 
expected the labelling to be il (nm) and, indeed, you will often find this 
in books and journals. However, the style used in Figure 1.3 is that which 
is generally recommended. The logic of this is apparent when we see that, 
from Figure 1.3 for example: 
Multiplying both sides by the unit, nm, gives: 
il = 588.995 nm 
(1.3) 
In other words, the unit, which happens to be nm in equation (1.2), can 
be treated algebraically in the way that we could treat y in: 
to give: 
xly = 588.995 
x = 588.995~ 
If a d.c. voltage is applied between two electrodes made from iron by 
bringing them into contact, and the two electrodes are then moved a few 
millimetres apart, a brilliant bluish-white 
will be struck between them. 
Dispersion of this visible radiation shows that there are hundreds of lines 
in the emission spectrum of the Fe atom. Indeed, there are so many, 
spread fairly evenly throughout the spectrum, that their wavelengths have 
often been used to calibrate other spectra. If two carbon electrodes are 
used, a brilliant white arc is produced. Although this is similar in colour 
to that of the iron arc, dispersion shows a very different emission spec- 
trum. The principle species responsible for the emission are the diatom- 
ic molecules C, and CN, the nitrogen originating from that present in 
the air. Spectra-of diatomic molecules are characterized by 
of very 
close, regularly spaced lines rather than the more widely separated, and 
more randomly spaced, lines which are typical of an atomic spectrum. 
One of the purposes of this book will be to explain why atomic and 
molecular spectra are so different in their appearance. 

What is Spectroscopy? 
7 

The Electromagnetic Spectrum 
2.1 
What Lies Beyond the Red Region? 
In Chapter 1 a general discussion of spectroscopy considered only the 
visible region, from the longer wavelength red region to the shorter wave- 
length violet region. In fact, as Figure 2.1 shows, the visible region con- 
stitutes only a relatively minor portion of the 
The reason why this region assumes such great importance is because 
the human eye is uniquely sensitive to it. However, spectroscopy in 
general is concerned with all regions of the spectrum. 
Figure 2.1 shows that the electromagnetic spectrum stretches far 
beyond the red region. The 
(IR) is an extensive region which is 
commonly subdivided into three parts. In the longer wavelength direc- 
tion these are, in order, the 
and 
regions. At even 
longer wavelengths, beyond the infrared, lies the 
region, 
which partly overlaps the far infrared, followed by the 
region 
and then the 
region, which includes not only the region 
used for radio transmission but also, at the shorter wavelength end, that 
used for television. 

The Electromagnetic Spectrum 
9 
2.2 
What Lies Beyond the Violet Region? 
Figure 2.1 shows that there are four regions that lie to shorter wave- 
length than the violet region of the electromagnetic spectrum. The 
(UV) region is subdivided into the 
and the 
The far ultraviolet is sometimes called the 
region, because experiments using it have to be performed in a vacuum. 
At even shorter wavelengths lie the 
and 
regions. 
2.3 
Why Electromagnetic? 
All 
in whatever region of the spectrum it falls, 
can be thought of as consisting of small packets of energy, or 
which can behave both like particles or 
It is the wave-like behav- 
iour which readily illustrates the dual 
and 
character of 
the radiation. 
Figure 2.2 shows the wave-like character associated with a single pho- 
ton of radiation. The electric and magnetic character are represented by 
two waves which are 
and in mutually perpendicular planes. One 
wave represents an oscillating electric field of strength EJ, in the xy-plane, 
and the other an oscillating magnetic field of strength H- in the xz-plane. 
The wave (or photon) is travelling in the x-direction. 
When a photon in the visible region falls on the human eye, it is the 
interaction of the electric component with the retina which results in 
Figure 2.1 The electromagnetic 
spectrum 

10 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 2.2 The electric and 
magnetic components associated 
with a single photon acting as a 
wave 
detection. It is also the electric character of electromagnetic radiation 
which is most commonly involved in spectroscopy. NMR (nuclear mag- 
netic resonance) and ESR (electron spin resonance) spectroscopies are 
important exceptions, but will not be considered in this book. 
All electromagnetic radiation travels, in a vacuum, with the 
c, which has the exactly defined value: 
c = 2.997 924 58 x lo8 m s-l 
(2.1) 
When radiation is 
and it is conventional to refer to the plane of the oscillating electric 
field. In the case illustrated in Figure 2.2, the polarization is in the 
xy-plane. 
this usually refers to 
2.4 
Units of Wavelength, Frequency, Wavenumber 
and Energy 
In Figure 2.1 the 
of radiation is expressed primarily in terms 
of the base unit of length, the 
However, for general use, it is 
much more convenient to use units derived from the metre using prefix- 
es indicating various powers of ten. For units in general the prefixes most 
frequently encountered are: 
10l2 tera (T), lo9 giga (G), lo6 mega (M), lo3 kilo (k), 
centi (c), 
milli (m), lop6 micro (p), 1 0 - ~  nano (n), 
pic0 (p), lopi5 femto 
(0 
(2.2) 
Wavelength can be used to indicate a particular position in the electro- 
magnetic spectrum which, in future, we shall refer to simply as “the spec- 
trum”. Indeed, wavelength is often what is measured experimentally in 
a spectrometer since it is related relatively simply to, say, the angle of 
rotation of a prism or of a diffraction grating used in the spectrometer. 

The Electromagnetic Spectrum 
I 1  
Exceptions are microwave and millimetre wave spectroscopy, in which 
it is the frequency which is measured directly. 
In general, when it comes to analysing spectra, it is either frequency 
or wavenumber which is the most useful. 
- In Figure 2.2, the meaning of wavelength is clear: it is simply the dis- 
tance, along the x-axis, between adjacent positive (or adjacent negative) 
peaks. If the wave is travelling in the x-direction and observed at any 
point, as shown, the number of waves which pass per second can be 
counted. This is then the 
in units of s-I; this unit is usually 
referred to as the hertz, where 1 s-I = 1 Hz. 
Alternatively, the number of waves in 1 m of distance along the x- 
axis can be counted and this gives the 
of the radiation in 
units of m-I. It is more usual to express a wavenumber in units of cm-I, 
the number of waves per centimetre, and it is only this unit which we 
shall use subsequently. 
The symbols used for wavelength, frequency and wavenumber are it, 
v and V, respectively. They are related in the following way: 
where c is the speed of light (see equation 2.1), and: 
The wavelength of radiation depends on the medium through which it 
is travelling, and, in spectroscopy, it is necessary to convert all wave- 
lengths, which are usually measured in air, to vacuum wavelengths using 
the relation: 

12 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
where tzair is the 
in the two media by: 
of air, and is related to the speed of light 
- 
'vac - 'air'air 
Frequency is independent of the medium in which it is measured because: 
Wavenumber, however, is not independent of the medium but, in spec- 
troscopy, is invariably taken to be defined as: 
Strictly, it should be referred to as the vacuum wavenumber but is usu- 
ally referred to, simply, as the wavenumber. 
In millimetre wave and microwave spectroscopy, frequency rather than 
wavenumber is usually used, and the approximate limits of these regions 
are given in Figure 2.1 in units of GHz. 

The Electromagnetic Spectrum 
13 
E, is associated with all electromagnetic radiation and is simply 
related to the frequency or wavenumber of the radiation by: 
where h is the 
which has the value: 
h = 6.626 068 76 x 
J s 
(2.10) 
The energy given by equation (2.9) is that associated with a single photon 
of radiation of frequency v or wavenumber V, and is extremely small. 

14 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Another unit of energy which is commonly used, particularly in the far 
ultraviolet and X-ray regions, is the electronvolt (eV) which is defined 
as the kinetic energy acquired by an electron which has been accelerat- 
ed by a potential difference of 1 volt (V). The electronvolt is related to 
the more usual unit of energy by: 
1 eV = 1.602 18 x lO-I9 J = 96.485 kJ mol-' 
(2.12) 
and is related to wavenumber and frequency by: 
1 eV = hc(8065.54 cm-I) = h(2.417 99 x lOI4 s-') 
(2.13) 
2.5 
The Effect of Radiation on Atoms and 
Molecules 
- 
Equation (2.9) shows that, in moving from the radiofrequency to the 
y-ray region of the spectrum, the photon energy increases. This is 
apparent when we contrast the benign nature of radio waves, which are 
everywhere around us, with the extremely dangerous y-rays. 
Similarly, when atoms or molecules are subjected to radiation they 
suffer more drastic consequences as the frequency of the radiation 
increases. For example, Figure 2.1 shows that the energy in the far-ultra- 
violet and X-ray regions is sufficient to ionize an atom or molecule M 
by the process: 
M + hv -+ M' + e- (an electron) 
(2.14) 
A typical 
10 eV, or 960 kJ mol-I. 
the energy required for this process, is about 

The Electromagnetic Spectrum 
15 
Figure 2.1 also indicates that radiation in the visible and ultraviolet 
regions is typically sufficient to promote an electron from a lower to a 
higher energy orbital in an atom or molecule by an 
Vibrational motion in a molecule is excited typically by infrared radia- 
tion, while rotational motion requires only the lower energy of far 
infrared, millimetre wave or microwave radiation. 
process. 
Only molecules have 
and 
of 
2.6 
Subdivisions of Spectroscopy 
Figure 2.1 illustrates the two general ways by which the subject of spec- 
troscopy is commonly divided. One of these is referred to by indicating 
the region of the electromagnetic spectrum involved. For example, we 
may refer to microwave, infrared, visible or ultraviolet spectroscopy, 
depending on the type of the source of radiation used in obtaining an 
absorption spectrum, or the radiation emitted in obtaining an emission 
spectrum. Clearly these subdivisions are based on the experimental tech- 
nique employed and, therefore, the type of spectrometer used. 
Of much greater fundamental importance in spectroscopy than the 
nature of the radiation involved is the type of process induced in the 
atom or molecule which is either subjected to or emits the radiation. The 
processes with which we shall be concerned in this book, and which have 
been introduced in Section 2.4, are, in order of increasing energy, rota- 
tional, vibrational, electronic and ionization. In this way, spectroscopy 
can be subdivided into rotational, vibrational, electronic and ionization 
spectroscopy. One type of ionization spectroscopy, involving the ioniza- 
tion process in equation (2.14), is called 
The 
electron ejected when the atom or molecule encounters the photon of 
energy hv is referred to as a 
There is a further type of spectroscopy, involving neither an absorp- 
tion nor ail emission process, which will concern us: that is 
by the sample. The source 
radiation used in Raman spectroscopy may be in the near-ultraviolet, 
visible or near-infrared region. 
in which radiation is 

16 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 

Quantization and the 
Hydrogen Atom 
3.1 
What is Quantization? 
The D lines in the emission spectrum of atomic sodium, illustrated in 
Figure 1.3, are an example of what appeared to be, in the earliest days 
of spectroscopy, a remarkable phenomenon. The yellow colour of the 
sodium emission would have been expected to cover a broad band of 
wavelengths in the yellow region of the spectrum. Instead, there are only 
two lines in this region, with precise, 
If we think in energy terms, we can see that each of the sodium D 
lines represents the 
of the sodium atom. It is the discrete character of energy levels in both 
atoms and molecules which is referred to as 
Figure 3.1 shows such a pair of energy levels, E, and E2, where E7 > 
El. The energy difference, AE, is given by: 
wavelengths. 
between two discrete 
AE = E., - El 
(3.1) 
17 

18 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 3.1 shows that, in general, a 
between two energy lev- 
els may be an emission or absorption process. Each photon emitted or 
absorbed is referred to as a 
of radiation. 
Figure 3.1 Absorption and 
emission processes between two 
discrete energy levels E, and E2 
3.2 
Quantization of Energy in the Hydrogen Atom 
One of the earliest examples of an experimental observation which 
showed that an atom can have only discrete amounts of energy was that 

Quantization and the Hydrogen Atom 
I 9  
of the emission spectrum of the hydrogen atom, part of which was 
observed in the visible region by Balmer in 1885. The spectrum can be 
obtained by producing an electrical discharge in hydrogen gas at very 
low pressure. The hydrogen molecules are dissociated into hydrogen 
atoms by collisions with electrons produced in the discharge. The hydro- 
gen atoms are formed with a wide range of energies, and the Balmer 
series extends from the visible into the near ultraviolet region; it is illus- 
trated in Figure 3.2. 
Figure 3.2 The Balmer series of 
lines in the emission spectrum of 
the hydrogen atom 
Like the spectrum of sodium in Figure 1.3, this spectrum also shows 
that the atom emits energy in discrete amounts, giving rise to sharp lines 
in the spectrum. More importantly, unlike the spectra of nearly all other 
atoms, it shows a remarkable series of lines converging smoothly to short- 
er wavelengths. The series is now known as the 
Beyond 
the convergence limit there are no discrete lines but a 
in which 
energy is emitted over a continuous range of wavelengths. 
Balmer was not able to observe the shorter wavelength region of this 
spectrum, but the longer wavelength lines that he observed were suffi- 
cient to show the smooth convergence. This prompted him to search for 
a mathematical relationship between the wavelengths, A, and a running 
number, n', labelling each of the lines. The relationship which he 
obtained is: 
A = n'2G/(n'2 - 4) 
(3.2) 
where G is a constant and n' is an integer which can take the values 3, 
4, 5, ... for successive lines. For the first line, at 656.3 nm, n' = 3. 
Equation (3.2) represented an important landmark in spectroscopy. It 
was the first successful attempt to apply theory to experimental obser- 
vations, and marked the beginning of a very close relationship between 
the results of experimental spectroscopy and theory. 
Using the relationship between wavelength and frequency in equation 
(2.3), equation (3.2) can be rewritten as: 

20 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
where R, is the 
for hydrogen, and is given by: 
In this equation the fundamental constants e, h and E~ are the charge on 
the electron, the Planck constant and vacuum permittivity, respectively. 
The quantity p is the 
of the system (proton plus electron) 
given by: 
where me and mP are the masses of the electron and the proton, 
respectively. 
In terms of wavenumber, the positions of members of the Balmer series 
are given by: 
where: 
Q = k, (1122 - lIn’2) 
R, = R,lc 

Quantization and the Hydrogen Atom 
21 
Equation (3.6) represents the difference between two terms, each of the 
form -kH/n2. Conversion of these terms from wavenumber to energy 
gives: 
E = -RH hdn2 = -(pe4/8h2c~~)/n’ 
(3.8) 
These are the quantized energy levels of atomic hydrogen, where the 
n, can take any integral value n = 1 ,  2, 3,4, ... 00, and 
are shown in Figure 3.3. 
Transitions between the energy levels occur with energies given by: 
AE = (pe4/8h2c~,,’)/( 
lln”’ - l/nI2) 
(3.9) 
Figure 3.3 Energy levels and 
transitions of the hydrogen atom 

22 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
or, alternatively, with wavenumbers given by: 
Q = ri,, ( 1/d2 - l/n’?) 
(3.10) 
where n” and 12’ are the quantum numbers for the lower and upper levels, 
respectively, of a transition. 
Figure 3.3 shows that there is an infinite number of series in the spec- 
trum of hydrogen with izl’ = 1, 2, 3, 4, ... -. Those series with ti’’ = 1, 2, 
3,4 and 5 have the names of their discoverers, Lyman, Balmer, Paschen, 
Brackett and Pfund, respectively, attached to them. The series appear in 
various regions of the spectrum, ranging from the Lyman series, in the 
far ultraviolet, to series with very high values of nrr in the radiofrequency 
region. 
ionization of the hydrogen atom in the process: 
The convergence limit of the energy levels, at n = -, corresponds to 
H + Izv = H+ + e 
(3.11) 
in which a quantum of radiation, Izv, has sufficient energy to remove the 
electron. Since the ejected electron may have any amount of kinetic ener- 
gy, the energy levels are no longer discrete but form a continuum beyond 
the ionization limit. 
Members of series with very high values of i f  are particularly impor- 
tant in observing the large amount of atomic hydrogen which is found 
throughout the universe. For example, the transition with nrr = 166 and 
12’ = 167 has been observed in the regions between stars, the interstellar 
medium, with a frequency of 1.425 GHz. 
It shows that 
transitions with all values of An (= n1 - n”) are allowed: 
Figure 3.3 also illustrates an example of a 
A n =  1 , 2 , 3 , 4 , 5  ,... - 
(3.12) 
so that each series consists of an infinite number of lines. 
troscopy and is unusual in that it is completely unrestrictive. 
This selection rule is the first of many that we shall encounter in spec- 

Quantization and the Hydrogen Atom 
23 
An important extension of the theory of the hydrogen atom, going far 
beyond the fitting of the Balmer series in equation (3.2), was due to Bohr. 
The Bohr theory regarded the electron classically as a particle travelling 
in circular orbits around the nucleus, each orbit characterized by a value 
of the quantum number n. The fact that it can only be in certain orbits 
is due to its angular momentum, po, where 8 is the angle of rotation 
around the nucleus, taking only certain values given by: 
p e  = nhl2n; 
(3.13) 
The discovery of the 
in 1887 resulted in further evi- 
dence for the quantization of energy. The original experiment was per- 
formed on the surface of solid sodium, in vacuo, which was subjected to 
radiation of varying wavelength from the visible to the near ultraviolet. 

24 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 3.4 Graphical illustration 
of the photoelectric effect 
As the frequency of the radiation was increased, nothing happened until 
the 
, vth, was reached. Beyond the threshold fre- 
quency, photoelectrons are emitted from the surface with kinetic energy 
which increases linearly with the frequency, as shown in Figure 3.4. This 
observation was clear evidence of the quantization of the radiation falling 
on the surface, each incident photon having an energy hv. .4bove the 
threshold frequency, this energy is sufficient to eject a photoelectron from 
the surface and provide it with kinetic energy +mev2, where: 
hv = I + jm,v2 
(3.14) 
and me and v are the mass and velocity, respectively, of the photoelec- 
tron. I is the ionization energy of a sodium atom at the surface of the 
metal. Although the SI unit of ionization energy is the joule, the unit of 
electronvolt is commonly used (see equations 2.12 and 2.13). 
In 1900, Planck rationalized experimental observations, such as the spec- 
trum of the hydrogen atom and the photoelectric effect, by the intro- 

Quantization and the Hydrogen Atom 
25 
duction of quantum theory, the quantization of energy, and the Planck 
constant, h. 
A further important step in the development of theory in relation to 
spectroscopy was the introduction of the 
in 1924. 
Not only can all electromagnetic radiation be regarded as consisting of 
either waves or particles, but very light “particles” can also behave as 
waves. One of the most important examples is the electron. Although we 
often think of the electron as a particle, the phenomenon of 
shows that it can also behave as a wave. 
The de Broglie equation reconciles, in a remarkably simple way, this 
dual particle-wave nature as follows: 
p = hlk 
(3.15) 
where k is the wavelength of the wave andp the momentum of the particle. 
For example, for an electron travelling in a straight line with velocity V: 
p = mev 
(3.16) 
where me is the mass of the electron. 
The concept of a particle, such as an electron, acting as both a parti- 
cle and a wave gave rise to the 
formulated by 
Heisenberg in 1927. The principle states that, if the momentum, p,, or 
wavelength, of a particle moving in the x-direction is known exactly, the 
position, x, is completely uncertain. Conversely, if the position is known 
exactly, the momentum is completely uncertain. The uncertainties, Ap-x 
and Ax, are related by: 
Ap,Ax 2 hI2x 
(3.17) 

26 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
The discovery of the dual wave-particle nature of the electron prompt- 
ed a rethink of the classical Bohr picture in which the electron in the 
hydrogen atom behaves as a particle moving in circular orbits, rather 
like a planet orbiting a star. In fact, the wave picture of the electron 
explains beautifully the restricted nature of these orbits. The electron can 
be only in orbits in which the wave is a 
- 
This means that 
the orbit, of circumference 2nr, where r is the radius of the orbit, must 
contain an integral number of wavelengths A: 
nA = 2nr 
(3.18) 
The integer n, the 
2, 3, 4, ... 00, and is the quantum number introduced by Bohr. 
In the wave picture of the electron, the orbits are referred to ;is 
Figure 3.5 illustrates the standing wave in the orbital with n = 12. 
can take the values n = 1, 
Figure 3.5 The standing wave 
in an atomic orbital with n = 12 
3.3 
Results of Applying Quantum Mechanics to 
the Hydrogen Atom 
The behaviour of an electron as a wave rather than as a particle requires 
a quite different theoretical approach to that of, for example, Bohr as 
applied to the hydrogen atom. This approach is that of 
sometimes referred to as 
The basis of the subject of quantum mechanics is the 
which can be written in the deceptively simple form: 
Hty= Ety 
(3.19) 
in which E represents the discrete energy levels of the system, atom or 
molecule which is under consideration. These values of E are also 
called 
The quantity ty represents the 
or 
corresponding to each eigenvalue. This function describes 
the form of the wave for each energy level. 
The Schrodinger equation may be used to obtain the wave functions 

Quantization and the Hydrogen Atom 
27 
corresponding to the energy levels which are known from spectroscopic 
measurements. On the other hand, assumed forms of the wave functions 
may be used to predict the energy levels of an atom or molecule. The 
close relationship between quantum mechanics and spectroscopy is a 
consequence of this interrelation between wave functions and energy 
levels. 
is 
the sum of the 
-e2/4m0r, due to coulombic attraction 
between the electron and nucleus a distance r apart, and the quantum 
tnechanical equivalent of the 
The simplicity of equation (3.19) is misleading: H, the 
H = -(e2/4m0r) - (tz2/2p)V2 
(3.20) 
where ,u is the reduced mass of the electron and proton, given in equation 
(3.5). The significance of V2, and the solution of the Schrodinger equa- 
tion for E and y, are described in books listed under “Further Reading”. 
Some of the most important wave functions resulting from solution 
of the Schrodinger equation are illustrated in Figure 3.6. This figure 
shows the wave functions for the so-called Is, 2ps, 2pJ,, 2p-, 3d-2, 3dvz, 
3drr, 3d.v2-J,2 
and 3ds!, atomic orbitals. The wave functions are drawn in 
the form of boundary surfaces, within which there is a high probability 
(say 90%) of finding the electron. These wave functions appear very dif- 
ferent from that in, for example, Figure 3.5 in which the electron was 
confined to moving in a circle rather than in three-dimensional space. 
The labels for the orbitals indicate the relevant values of various quan- 
tum numbers. The 1, 2 or 3 label is the value of the principal quantum 
number n, as in the Bohr theory of the hydrogen atom. The s, p or d 
label indicates the value of the 
-
-
 
l where: 
l = O ,  1,2, 3, ... ( n -  1) 
(3.21) 
and therefore can take n values. This quantum number describes the dis- 
Crete values that the 
of the electron can take. 
The association between the s, p, d, ... labels and the values of! is as 
follows: 
e = o  1
2
 3 4 5 
s
p
d
f
g
h
 
(3.22) 
There is a further quantum number, inp, associated with the orbital angu- 
lar momentum and known as the 
It can take 
2Q + 1 values, given by: 
ngI = 0, k l ,  k2, k3, ... kl 
(3.23) 

28 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 3.6 Wave functions 
various atomic orbitals of the 
hydrogen atom 
for 
The orbital angular momentum of the electron is a 
quantity: it 
has not only magnitude but also direction. When the atom is in a mag- 
netic field, this vector can lie only in certain directions in relation to the 
field. For example, for P = 3, in, can take the values 3, 2, 1, 0, -1, -2, 
-3. The directions that the angular momentum vector can take for a 
magnetic field in the z-direction, corresponding to the seven values of 
m,, are illustrated in Figure 3.7. 
The 2p and 3d orbitals illustrated in Figure 3.6, in which the z-axis is 
taken, arbitrarily, to be the unique axis, are distinguished by subscripts 
which refer to the values of m, as indicated in the figure. The 2p- and 
3d-2 orbitals correspond uniquely to m, = 0, but those involving the 
s-and/or y-axes do not correspond to unique values of inL. Although it 
is conventional to draw the 3d orbitals as if the z-axis is unique, the 
spherically symmetrical nature of the atom dictates that either the x- or 
y-axis could be taken to be unique. 

Quantization and the Hydrogen Atom 
29 
In the absence of a magnetic (or electric) field, all the 2p orbitals are 
This means that they have the same energy but different wave 
functions. Similarly, all the 3d orbitals are degenerate. Because there are 
three 2p orbitals and five 3d orbitals, they are said to be three-fold and 
five-fold degenerate, respectively. 
The hydrogen atom (and all one-electron atoms, such as He+ and Liz+) 
is unusual in two respects: one is that the Schrodinger equation can be 
solved exactly for it, and the other is that all orbitals with the same value 
of n, for example 2s, 2p-\, 2py and 2pz, are degenerate, as Figure 3.3 indi- 
cates. For all other atoms, even for He which has only two electrons, 
this is not the case. 
There are two further angular momenta in the hydrogen atom which 
give rise to quantized energy. These angular momenta are due to 
In the particle picture of the electron, the concept 
of it spinning on its own axis is a valid one, but this is not the case in 
the wave picture. Nevertheless, there is an electron spin quantum num- 
ber s associated with the electron, and it can take only one value, 3. This 
applies also to each electron in all atoms. The quantum number I, asso- 
ciated with nuclear spin, takes the value 3 for the hydrogen atom ('H) 
but its value depends on the particular nucleus. For example, for 2H, I 
= 1, for I2C, I = 0, and for I3C, I = J- 2 -  
In a magnetic field the electron spin and nuclear spin angular momen- 
tum vectors may take up only certain orientations with respect to the 
field, in a similar way to the orbital angular momentum vector, as shown 
in Figure 3.7. These directions are determined by the values that the 
quantum numbers ms and mi can take, where: 
and 
Figure 3.7 In a magnet,c fie,d, 
the angular momentum vector, 
for 
= 3, can take Seven different 
orientations 
m,s = 3, S - 1, . . . --s = +3 and -3, for one electron 
(3.24) 
and 
mi = I, I - 1, .. . -I = ++ and -3, for the 'H and 13C nuclei 
and 1, 0 and -1, for the 2H nucleus 
(3.25) 
The effects of nuclear spin are of great importance in nuclear mag- 
netic resonance (NMR) spectroscopy; in atomic spectra, the effects are 
extremely small and will not concern us further. 

30 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 

Quantization in Polyelectronic 
Atoms 
4.1 
Effects of More than One Electron in an Atom 
The comparative simplicity of the spectrum of the hydrogen atom, and 
one-electron ions, and of the theoretical interpretation is lost as soon as 
a second electron is present. The Schrodinger equation is no longer 
exactly soluble, which means that the electronic energy levels are not 
exactly calculable: approximations must be made. So far as the experi- 
mentally observed spectrum is concerned, perhaps the most important 
difference from a one-electron atom is that the (2! + 1)-fold degeneracy 
of the s, p, d, ... orbitals is removed. This is shown by the typical set of 
orbital energies illustrated in Figure 4.1. 
31 

32 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 4.1 Orbital energy levels 
typical of a polyelectronic atom 
When there is just one electron in the atom there is only one 
present, the force of 
between the positively charged nucle- 
us and the negatively charged electron. The introduction of a second 
electron, as in the helium atom, or more electrons, as in any other poly- 
electronic atom, adds a second type of coulombic force, that of 
between the negatively charged electrons. One very important result 
of this is that, unlike the case of one-electron atoms, orbital energies and 
wave functions can no longer be calculated exactly. 
The orbital energies illustrated in Figure 4.1, up to the 5s orbital, are 
not quantitative and, indeed, are different for different atoms. However, 
a useful simplifying factor is that the order of the orbital energies is main- 
tained for most atoms. 
For polyelectronic atoms in their lowest energy state (the ground 
state), the available electrons are fed into the available orbitals, in order 
of increasing energy, according to the 
or building-up 
principle. In addition, the 
must be adhered to. 
This principle states that no two electrons may have the same set of quan- 
tum numbers n, e, m, and ms. Therefore the 1s orbital, and any other s 
orbital, can accommodate only two electrons for which k' = 0, m, = 0, 
and ms = &+. The two electrons are said to have their spins paired or to 
have anti-parallel spins. Similarly, any p orbital can accommodate six 
electrons for which k' = 1, m, = 0, f 1 ,  and m( = ki, and any d orbital 
can accommodate ten electrons for which Q = 2, m, = 0, f l ,  +2, and mJ 
- 
- ++. 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
33 
Using the aufbau and Pauli principles, a very useful picture of the 
of the elements may be built up by feeding all the avail- 
able electrons into the orbitals to give the 
(the low- 
est energy electron configuration, corresponding to the ground state) for 
each element. Examples of these are: 
He 
1s' 
or K 
Li 
1s22s' 
or K2s' 
B 
ls'2s22p' 
or K2s22p' 
Ne 
ls22s22p6 
or KL 
Na 
ls22p63s' 
or KL3s' 
or [Ne]3s1 
Mg Is22s'2p63s2 
or KL3s2 
or [Ne]3s2 
K 
1 s22p63s23p64s' 
or K L 3 s 3 p64s 
or [Ar]4s1 
Ti 
1 s22s22ph3s23p63d'4s2 
or KL3s23p63d24s2 
or [A r] 3 d24s2 
Cr 
1 s'2s22p63s23p63ds4s' 
or KL3s23p63d54s' 
or [Ar]3ds4s' 
Cu 
I s22s'2p63s23p63d104s' 
or KLM4s' 
o r [A r] 3 d O4s 
Zr 
1 s'2s'2p63s'3p63d I04s24p64d25s2 or KLM4s24p64d25s2 
or [ K r]4d 5 s 
Nd 
1 s'2s'2p63s~3p63d104s24p64d104f45~25p66s2 
or 
or [ Xe] 6 s2 
or [He]2s1 
or [He]2s22p' 

34 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
The post-superscript attached to an orbital symbol indicates the number 
of electrons in that orbital. 
From these examples some important points emerge: 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
10. 
Orbitals with the same value of the principal quantum number n 
comprise a 
Sometimes, but mostly in older texts, filled shells with n = 1, 2, 3, 4, 
... are abbreviated to K, L, M, N, ... This leads to somewhat abbre- 
viated configuration labels. 
Configurations can be abbreviated more fully by indicating the con- 
figuration of a noble gas (He, Ne, Ar, Kr, Xe ...) by [He], [Ne], [Ar], 
Orbitals with the same values of n and !, for example the Is, 2p, 3p 
and 3d orbitals, are referred to as 
The 
He, Ne, Ar, . . ., have completely filled p sub-shells 
or, in the case of helium, a filled 1s shell, and these configurations 
confer extreme unreactivity on these elements. 
The alkali metal atoms, Li, Na, K, ..., are characterized by a single 
electron in an outer s orbital. This configuration explains the ability 
of these elements to form monopositive ions (ie. to be monovalent). 
The 
atoms, Be, Mg, Ca, ..., are characterized 
by two electrons in an outer s orbital. This explains their ability to 
form dipositive ions (ie. to be divalent). 
The 
atoms are characterized by electrons in incom- 
plete d subshells. The 3d sub-shell can accommodate 10 electrons. 
As a result, there are 10 members of the first transition series of ele- 
ments, Sc, Ti, V, ... However, the first member, Sc, has only one 3d 
electron and does not possess the properties typical of a transition 
metal. Figure 4.1 shows that the 3d and 4s orbitals are very similar 
in energy so that, in some transition metal elements, it is touch-and- 
go whether the 4s orbital is filled first. In Ti, with an outer 3d24s2 
configuration, the 4s orbital is filled first, but in Cr, with an outer 
3d54s1 configuration, it is favourable for the 3d sub-shell to be half- 
filled in preference to filling the 4s orbital. This innate stability asso- 
ciated with a half-filled sub-shell is typical and is a result of the 
electrons preferring to be distributed with one in each of the 3d 
orbitals with parallel spins. There is also a greater stability associat- 
ed with a filled 3d sub-shell than with a filled 4s shell. As a result, 
the outer configuration for the ground state of Cu is 3dI04s’. 
In the second transition series, Y, Zr, Nb, . . ., the 4d sub-shell is par- 
tially occupied. 
In the 
elements, Ce, Pr, Nd, ..., the 4f sub-shell is par- 
tially occupied, while in the 
elements, Pa, U, Np, ..., the 5f 
sub-shell is partially occupied. 
[Krl, [Xel, . 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
35 
4.2 
The Helium Atom 
In many ways the helium atom behaves as a prototype for the spectro- 
scopic behaviour of other polyelectronic atoms, and even of some mol- 
ecules, particularly those with ground electronic states which arise from 
configurations, that is configurations in which all the elec- 
trons are in filled orbitals. 
Helium, in its ground configuration Is’, is the simplest closed shell 
atom. There is an important rule that, for all closed shells, the result of 
the addition of the angular and spin momenta of all the electrons in the 
shell is that: 
1. There is no net orbital angular momentum, i.e. L = 0, where the 
azimuthal quantum number ! 
for a one-electron atom (see equation 
3.21) is replaced by L for a polyelectronic atom. 
2. There is no net electron spin angular momentum, i.e. S = 0, where 
the quantum number s for a one-electron atom is replaced by S for 
a polyelectronic atom. 
There is only one 
that with L = 0 and S = 0, arising from this 
ground configuration. The conventional label for this term is ‘S. The pre- 
superscript “1” is the value of the 
where: 
electron spin multiplicity = 2 s  + 1 
(4- 1) 
This is the number of values that M, can take, and these values are: 
M ,  = s, s- 1, ... -s 
(4 3 

36 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
The number of values that M, can take is also the number of compo- 
nents into which the term might be split in a magnetic field. In this case 
the multiplicity is I ,  and the 'S term is said to be a 
Analogous to the labelling of s, p, d, f, ... orbitals, indicated in equa- 
tion (3.22), states of polyelectronic atoms are labelled according to the 
value of L as follows: 
term. 
L =  0 
1 2 3 4 . . .  
S P D F G . . .  
(4.3) 
Consequently, the ground term of helium is an S term. 
of one of the elec- 
trons from the 1s to a higher energy orbital. The probability of both 1s 
electrons being promoted is sufficiently low, and requires such a large 
amount of energy, that such excited terms will not concern us here. 
When one electron is promoted, the spin quantum number nzl (= ki) 
may be unchanged or change sign. Then the electrons are said to have 
spins, respectively. When they are antiparallel, 
the two spins cancel, S = + - + = 0, and: 
Excited terms of helium result from the 
or 
electron spin multiplicity = 2 s  + 1 = 1 
(4.4) 
Therefore the term is, like the ground term, a singlet term. When the 
electron spins are parallel, S = 3 + 3 = 1, the multiplicity is 3 and the 
resulting term is a 
term. Such singlet and triplet terms are illus- 
trated in Figure 4.2. The case in Figure 4.2(d), in which both electrons 
are in the same orbital with parallel spins, is forbidden by the I'auli prin- 
ciple as they would both have the same set of quantum numbers. 
Figure 4.2 Possible distribution 
of electron spins between two 
orbitals to give (a) a ground 
singlet term, (b) an excited singlet 
term, (c) an allowed excited triplet 
term and (d) a forbidden triplet 
term 
We can see now that all the electronic terms of the hydrogen atom 
have the same multiplicity. Since S can onIy be 3, 2 s  + 1 = 2, and they 
are all 
terms. However, in the case of helium, there are two sets 
of terms, a 
of singlet terms, including the ground term, and a 
manifold of triplet excited terms. Some of the lower energy terms in these 
manifolds are illustrated in Figure 4.3. The labelling of the terms is by 
the multiplicity, 1 or 3, as a pre-superscript and by S, P, D, ... to indi- 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
37 
cate the value of L: for excited terms, this is simply the value of ci for 
the promoted electron, since ! 
= 0 for the electron remaining in the 1s 
orbital. The terms included in Figure 4.3 are of the type IS, 'P, ID, 3S, 
3P and 3D. 
For the hydrogen atom we saw that the only selection rule, govern- 
ing transitions between terms, that we required was that An is unre- 
stricted. For transitions in the helium atom the corresponding selection 
rules are: 
An is unrestricted, A! = +1, A S  = 0 
(4.5) 
Figure 4.3 Energy level dia- 
gram showing singlet and triplet 
terms of the helium atom 
The Aci selection rule refers to the change of orbital angular momentum 
for the promoted electron, assuming that the other one remains in the 
1s orbital. The result of the A S  selection rule is that no transitions are 
allowed between singlet and triplet terms. Some of the lower energy 
allowed transitions are indicated in Figure 4.3. 
Typically, for terms of any atom which differ only in their multiplic- 
ity, the term of highest multiplicity lies lowest in energy. In the case of 
helium, Figure 4.3 shows that each triplet term lies below the corre- 
sponding singlet term. 
Figure 4.3 also shows that no transitions occur between the triplet and 
singlet term manifolds. As a result of, say, an electrical discharge in 
helium gas the atoms will be excited into a wide range of singlet or triplet 
terms. Many of them will arrive in either of the lowest energy excited 
terms, 2s'S or 2s3S, as a result of emission or collision processes. The 
transition from the 2s'S to the ground term is forbidden by the A! selec- 
tion rule. The 2s'S atom is therefore unusually long-lived and is said to 
be 
The transition from the 2s3S term is doubly forbidden, by 

38 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
the At and A S  selection rules, and the 2s'S atom is also metastable with 
an even longer lifetime, of about 1 ms, in a typical discharge. 
Figure 4.3 shows only the lower energy transitions which are found in 
the emission spectrum of helium, but they form series of lines, each series 
converging at high wavenumber to the ionization limit. This smoothly con- 
vergent behaviour is reminiscent of the spectrum of hydrogen but, because 
of the problems associated with repulsion between the two electrons, their 
wavenumbers are much more difficult to obtain theoretically. 
The wavenumbers of possible transitions between singlet and triplet 
terms can be predicted very accurately from the known singlet and triplet 
energy levels. However, very careful search for such transitions has been 
unsuccessful: the A S  = 0 selection rule is very rigidly obeyed in the helium 
atom. 
4.3 
Other Polyelectronic Atoms 
4.3.1 Coupling of Orbital Angular Momenta 
In the examples of the hydrogen and helium atoms, in either the ground 
or any of the excited electronic terms that we have encountered, there 
has been, at most, only one electron with non-zero angular momentum, 
i.e. with Q # 0, for example the ls'2pl configuration of helium. In some 
doubly excited configurations of helium, such as 2p13d1, both electrons 
may have 0 f 0, but these are of such high energy that they have not 
concerned us. 
In other polyelectronic atoms, however, there is a possibility of there 
being two or more electrons with 0 # 0 in a much lower energy config- 
uration. Such an example is the excited configuration: 
C 
ls22s22p13dl 
(4.6) 
of the carbon atom. In this case, the 2p electron has PI = 1 and the 3d 
electron has Q2 = 2. The 1s and 2s electrons all have Q = 0, and need 
not be considered further, 
to give 
the 
This is also quantized, and the 
quantum number associated with it is L which can take the values: 
In such a case, the two orbital angular momenta are 
L = 0, + I,, PI + e2 - 1, ... I!, 
- [,I 
(4.7) 
where I 0, - 0? I is the 
I is defined 
as P, - .P2 or f2 - I,, whichever is the positive quantity; in this case, it is 
0, - I , .  Therefore for the configuration in equation (4.6), L = 3, 2 and 
1, and, according to equation (4.3), F, D and P terms result. 
of P, - t2. The quantity I e2 - 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
39 
Figure 4.4 Vector diagrams for 
the coupling of the orbital angular 
momenta of a p and a d electron 
to give (a) an F, (b) a D and (c) a 
P term 
Although this treatment tells us which terms arise from a particular 
configuration, it does not tell us anything about the relative energies 
of these terms. It would require a quantum mechanical calculation to do 
this. 

40 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
4.3.2 Coupling of Electron Spin Angular Momenta 
We have seen in Section 4.2, for the simple case of ths two-electron 
helium atom, that the excited terms may be singlet or triplet, depending 
on whether the two electron spins are antiparallel, when S = 3 - -; 
= 0 
and the multiplicity (2s + 1) is I ,  or parallel, when S = 3 + 4 = 1 and 
the multiplicity is 3. The electron spins are coupled to give either a singlet 
or a triplet excited term. 
Analogous to the total orbital angular momentum quantum number 
L in equation (4.7), the 
quantum number 
S can, in general, take the values: 
S = s , + s , , s , + s , - l ,  ... I s , - s *  I 
(4.10) 
which, in the case of two electrons, can be only 1 or 0. 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
41 
Figure 4.5 Vector diagrams for 
the coupling of two electron spin 
angular momenta to give (a) a 
triplet and (b) a singlet term 
For polyelectronic atoms in general, electrons in filled sub-shells can be 
regarded as being in pairs with antiparallel spins so that they do not con- 
tribute anything to the overall spin quantum number S. However, there 
may be more than two unpaired electrons in unfilled sub-shells. For 
example, the ground configuration of the phosphorus atom is: 
P 
[Ne]3s23p3 
(4.13) 
Only the electrons in the 3p sub-shell contribute to S. In the case of 
helium we have seen that, typically, for two excited terms which differ 
only in their multiplicity, that of higher multiplicity lies lower in energy. 
For ground configurations which give rise to states of different multi- 
plicity this is always the case: this is one of 
Figure 4.6(a) shows that, in the ground term of phosphorus, the three 
3p electrons are distributed so that there is one in each of the 3p,, 3py 
and 3p- orbitals with parallel spins. Then, S = $ + 3 + 3 = 1 and 2 s  + 
1 = 4, giving a quartet term. Figure 4.6(b) shows that the Pauli princi- 
ple also allows two of the electrons to be in the same orbital, say 3px, 
with antiparallel spins. For the resulting term, S = 3, and it is a doublet 
term. Because Hund’s rule tells us it cannot be the ground term, it must 
be a low-lying excited term; it is low-lying because it takes very little 
energy to reverse the direction of one electron spin. 

42 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 4.6 Three electrons in 
3p orbitals may give (a) a quartet 
or (b) a doublet term 
Figure 4.7 Five electrons in a 
4d and one electron in a 5s 
orbital may give (a) a septet, (b) a 
quintet, (c) a quintet, (d) a triplet, 
(e) a triplet or (f) a singlet term 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
43 
4.3.3 Terms Arising From Two or More Electrons in the 
Same Sub-shell 
Electrons in different unfilled sub-shells, for example in the configura- 
tion 2p13p', 3p13d' or 2p13d', are known as 
they have different values of either n or !, or both. The coupling of the 
orbital angular momenta, and of the spin angular momenta, for any non- 
equivalent electrons can be carried out as in Sections 4.3.1 and 4.3.2. 
Electrons in the same unfilled sub-shell, having the same values of n and 
t, are known as 
We consider the simplest example of two electrons in the 2p orbital, 
as in the ground configuration of the carbon atom, ls22s22p2. There is no 
spin or orbital angular momentum contributed by the 1s or 2s electrons: 
it is only the 2p electrons which contribute. Both these electrons have the 
same set of quantum numbers n (= 2), f (= 1) and s (= 3). Consequently, 
the Pauli principle would be violated if they did not have different Val- 
ues of m, (= 0, +1) or ms (= *+). In fact, there are 15 different possible 
combinations of (wz,)l and (rnJl, for one of the electrons, and of (wzc)2 and 
(m02, for the other electron. These 15 combinations can be divided into 
five which constitute a ID term, nine a 3P term and one a 'S term. 
and must be treated differently. 

44 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Box 4.3 shows how lengthy is the procedure necessary for deriving the 
terms from two equivalent p electrons. The procedure becomes even more 
lengthy, and the number of terms more numerous, when more electrons, 
and particularly d electrons, are involved. For example, a d2 configura- 
tion gives rise to IS, ”, ID, 3F and lG terms, and a d3 configuration 
gives rise to 2P, 4P, 2D (2 terms), 2F, 4F, 2G and ’H terms. 
To determine which of the various terms arising from equivalent elec- 
trons, such as the p2, d2 and d3 examples we have encountered, is the 
ground term we need to apply Hund’s rules, which are: 
1. Of the terms arising from equivalent electrons, those with the high- 
est multiplicity lie lowest in energy. 
2. Of these, the lowest is that with the highest value of L. 
From these rules it follows that the ground term of the carbon atom (p2) 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
45 
is 3P, the ground term of the titanium atom (d’) is ”, and that of the 
vanadium atom (d3) is 4F. 
There is another useful rule regarding terms which arise from equiv- 
alent electrons. This is that a vacancy in an orbital behaves, in respect 
of the terms which arise, like an electron. Therefore the ground term of 
the oxygen atom (p4) is, like that of the carbon atom (p2), 3P. Also, the 
ground term of the nickel atom (d8) is ”, like that of the titanium atom 
(d?). 
4.3.4 Multiplet Structure in Atomic Spectra 
We have seen how the orbital angular momenta of all the electrons in 
an atom are coupled to give the total angular momentum, and the spin 
momenta are coupled to give the total orbital and the total spin angu- 
lar momenta, as illustrated by equations (4.7) and (4. lo), respectively. In 
fact, this treatment of orbital and spin angular momenta is an approxi- 
mation known as the 
approximation. The 
approximation involved is the complete neglect of any coupling between 
the orbital angular momentum of an electron to its own spin angular 
momentum, namely the t s  coupling. 
An alternative approximation is the JJ coupling approximation. This 
is the opposite to the Russell-Saunders approximation in that the orbital 
and spin momenta of each electron are regarded as being strongly 
coupled, and coupling of all angular momenta, and of all the spin 
momenta, is neglected. The Russell-Saunders approximation is appro- 
priate for most states of most atoms, and is the only one that we shall 
consider here. 
In the Russell-Saunders approximation the total orbital angular 
momentum and the total spin angular momentum couple together to 
give the 
The quantum number associated with 
this is J which can take the values: 
J =  L + S, L + S -  1, ... IL-Sl 
(4.14) 

46 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 4.8 Vector diagrams for 
the coupling of orbital and spin 
angular momenta for a 3D term 
The number of values that J can take determines the number of states 
that arise from a particular term. In the case of the 3P term, L, = 1, S = 
1 and therefore J = 2, 1 and 0. States are labelled with the value of J as 
a post-subscript so that these three states are labelled 3P2, 3P, and 3P,, 
respectively. 
In the Russell-Saunders approximation we have neglected 
the Ls coupling between the spin and orbital motion of the same 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
47 
electron. This coupling is caused by the interaction of the magnetic 
moments associated with the spin and orbital motions of the electron. One 
effect of spin-orbit coupling is to split apart the states with different val- 
ues of J arising from a particular term. The splitting, AE, in terms of ener- 
gy, between the Jth and the ( J -  1)th energy levels is given by: 
AE = EJ - EJ-, = AJ 
(4.16) 
for most, but not all, 
states. The quantity A is constant for a 
particular multiplet and, in general, may be positive or negative. The fact 
that AE is proportional to J in equation (4.16) is known as the 
In general, the rule holds for atoms in which spin-orbit 
coupling is small. Since this coupling is proportional to Z4, where 2 is 
the charge on the nucleus, the rule holds best for atoms with low 2, i.e. 
light atoms. The helium atom, for which the interval rule does not hold, 
is an important exception. 
Figure 4.9 shows two examples of multiplets split by spin-orbit 
coupling. In Figure 4.9(a), the splitting of a 3P term into three states, 
with a positive value of A ,  has the state with the smallest value of J the 
lowest in energy. Such a multiplet, with a positive value of A ,  is known 
as a 
The multiplet of four states, arising from a 4D 
term and shown in Figure 4.9(b), is an 
with a nega- 
tive value of A. 
Figure 4.9 Multiplet states 
arising from (a) a 3P and (b) a 4D 
term 
There are no general rules regarding the normal or inverted nature of 
multiplets arising from excited terms, but there are two useful rules 
regarding multiplets arising from ground terms: 
1 .  When an orbital is partially filled with equivalent electrons, and is 
less -than half full, the multiplet that arises is normal. 
2. When an orbital is partially filled with equivalent electrons, and is 
more than half full, the multiplet that arises is inverted. 

48 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
For example, the ground 3P term of carbon, resulting from two equiva- 
lent p electrons, forms a normal multiplet, like that in Figure 4.9(a), and 
the ground state is 3P,. On the other hand, the ground ’P term of oxy- 
gen, resulting from four equivalent p electrons, forms an inverted mul- 
tiplet, and the ground state is 3Pp,. 
For atoms having a ground configuration with an exactly half-filled 
orbital, the ground term is always an S term, for which only one state, 
the ground state, can arise. For example, the ground term of the chromi- 
um atom is 7S but, because the quantum numbers L = 0 and S = 3, J 
can take only the value 3, and the ground state is 7S,. 
4.4 
Selection Rules in Spectra of Polyelectronic 
Atoms 
For the relatively simple case of the helium atom, considering only 
the promotion of one of the 1s electrons and not taking into account the 
splitting of the ”, ,D, ”, ... terms into multiplets, the selection rules 
for transitions between terms are given in equation (4.5). For poly- 
electronic atoms in general, and taking into account multiplet splitting, 
these selection rules must be expanded as follows: 
1. 
2. 
An is unrestricted. This selection rule applies to all atomic spectra. 
A,!, = 0, kl except that L = 0 +I+ L = 0, where tt, implies that this 
type of transition is forbidden. This selection rule is quite general 
and applies to the promotion of any number of electrons. 
3. AJ = 0, kl, except that J = 0 +I+ 
J = 0. This restricts transitions 
between components of multiplets. 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
49 
4. 
5. 
Ae = +I, for the promotion of a single electron. One important con- 
sequence of this rule is that transitions are forbidden between states 
arising from the same configuration, For example, the excited con- 
figuration ls22s22p13d1 
of carbon gives rise to IF, 'D, 'P, ,F, 
and 
3P terms. The 
term gives rise to ,F,, 3F3 and 3F, states, and the 
3D term gives rise to ,D,, ,D, and ,D, states. The 3F3-3D7 transition, 
for example, would be allowed by the AL, A S  and AJ selection rules 
but, because both states arise from the same configuration, A! would 
be zero which forbids the transition. 
A S  = 0. This selection rule must be treated with caution because it 
does not apply universally: it is broken down by spin-orbit coupling. 
We have seen in Section 4.3.4 that this coupling is proportional to 
2, and, therefore, the heavier the atom, the more the selection rule 
tends to break down. The intensity of such 
transi- 
tions depends on the extent of spin-orbit coupling. For example, no 
transitions between singlet and triplet states have been found in the 
helium atom, whereas the 63P,-61S, transition is one of the strongest 
in the emission spectrum of the mercury atom, for which 2 (= 80) 
is sufficiently high to break down completely the A S  = 0 selection 
rule. 
Like all selection rules, these apply to either absorption or emission of 
radiation, although, usually, electronic spectra of atoms are observed in 
emission. 
The sodium atom, like all alkali metal atoms, has a relatively simple 
ground configuration, with one electron, the valence electron, in an outer 
s orbital: 
Na 
1 s22s22p63s1 
(4.17) 
and the ground state is 32S,12. Promotion of the 3s electron to the low- 
est p orbital, the 3p orbital, results in two states, 32P,,2 and 32P11,. In this 
case the ?P multiplet is normal, having the state with the higher value of 
J higher in energy. Figure 4.10(a) shows these two states, and the two 
transitions between them and the ground state which are allowed by the 
selection rules. Comparison of this figure with Figure 1.3 shows that the 
doublet structure of the sodium D lines, which occur with very high 
intensity in the emission spectrum of sodium and are responsible for the 
predominantly yellow colour of a sodium discharge lamp, is due to 
spin-orbit coupling which splits the 62P3,2 and 62P,, states. All 2P-2S 
transitions shbw similar doublet structure. 
Figure 4.10(b) shows how a 2D-2P transition, in this case 62D-62P, is 
split into a triplet by spin-orbit coupling. The general rule that spin-orbit 
splitting decreases as L increases is reflected in the smaller splitting shown 
in the 'D than in the 2P multiplet. 

50 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 4.10 Multiplet structure 
in (a) a 2P-2S and (b) a 2D-2P 
transition 

Quantization in Polyelectronic Atoms 
51 

Electronic States of Diatomic 
and Polyatomic Molecules 
5.1 
Homonuclear Diatomic Molecules 
5.1 .I Molecular Orbitals and Ground Electron 
Configurations 
In Chapter 4 we moved from the comparative simplicity of the spectrum 
of the hydrogen atom, and its interpretation, to helium and other 
polyelectronic atoms, in which the presence of more than one electron 
introduces electron-electron repulsions. The effects of the presence of 
more than one electron and of these repulsions are far-reaching. In exper- 
imental terms, the simple elegance of the hydrogen atom spectrum is lost 
and, in theoretical terms, the calculation of the energy levels and wave 
functions becomes increasingly approximate as the number of electrons 
increases. 
In diatomic molecules, a further electrostatic interaction is introduced, 
that of repulsion between the positively charged nuclei. For all except 
52 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
53 
the simplest molecules, particularly H,+ and H,, which have only one or 
two electrons, the calculation of energy levels and wave functions 
becomes still more difficult. Here, we shall be concerned only with 
pictorial representations of wave functions and the relative ordering of 
energy levels, and shall treat them only semi-quantitatively. 
There are two approximate theoretical approaches, using 
or 
However, it is molecular orbital 
theory which is the most generally useful, and it is only this that we shall 
use here. 
(MO). These MOs are constructed from atomic orbitals (AOs) by assum- 
ing that, in a homonuclear diatomic molecule, A,, the MO resembles an 
A 0  of atom A when the electron is in the vicinity of either of the nuclei. 
This is taken account of in the construction of MO wave functions, at 
the lowest level of approximation, by the method of 
of 
(LCAO). 
wave functions, ly, of the form: 
In a diatomic molecule an electron is said to be in a 
In general, for any diatomic molecule, the LCAO method gives MO 
where x1 and x2 are A 0  wave functions for atoms 1 and 2, and cl and 
c, are constants reflecting the proportions of xI and x2 which constitute 
the MO. In the case of a homonuclear diatomic molecule, x1 = x2 and 
c, = fc,, and we have: 
w = NolI 
x2) 
where N replaces c and is a 
concern us here. 
whose value will not 

54 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 5.1 shows the simplest case of MO wave functions arising from 
1s AOs on each atom. In Figure 5.l(a) the MO wave function illustrat- 
ed is N(xls + xl,). Since the electron charge density at any point in space 
is proportional to y2, it is high in the 
of the AOs and 
therefore the MO is a 
The MO wave function shown in 
Figure 5.l(b) is N(XI, - x,J, in which the wave functions cancel in the 
region midway between the nuclei. The region in which y = 0, and in 
which there is zero electron density, is called a 
and the MO 
is 
combination and that in Figure 5.l(b) an 
met hod : 
The linear combination in Figure 5.l(a) is an 
combination. 
There are two important rules which must be obeyed in the LCAO 
1. The AOs being combined must have the same symmetry with respect 
to the internuclear axis. For example, a linear combination of a 2s 
and a 2p, AO, illustrated in Figure 5.2(a), is not allowed. This fig- 
ure shows that, if the nuclei were moved closer together in an attempt 
to form a bond, any overlap of the orbitals in the upper half of the 
figure would be exactly cancelled by that in the lower half. 
Figure 5.1 (a) In-phase and (b) 
out-of-phase combinations of 1 s 
A 0  wave functions to form a 
bonding and antibonding MO, 
respectively 
Figure 5.2 Forbidden linear 
combinations of (a) a 2s and 2px 
and (b) a I s  and a 2s A 0  
2. The AOs being combined must have the same energy. For example, 
although the 1s and 2s AOs in Figure 5.2(b) have the same symmetry 
with respect to the internuclear axis, they have very different energies 
and do not form MOs. 
Solution of the Schrodinger equation (equation 3.19) with LCAO wave 
functions of the type given in equation (5.2) gives the energies, E,, - 
associated with the two MOs as: 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
55 
where EA is the energy associated with the A 0  on atom A. The relative 
energies of the two resulting MOs are shown in Figure 5.3. The quantity 
pis the 
and, as the figure shows, is a negative quantity. 
The two MOs are separated in energy by approximately 2p. The 
magnitude of the resonance energy is an indicator of the difference 
between the AOs and the MOs which are formed from them. For 
example, if we had tried to form MOs from a 1s A 0  on one atom and 
a 2s A 0  on the other, we would have found that, although the AOs have 
the same symmetry with respect to the internuclear axis, the resonance 
energy p = 0 because the AOs are of very different energies. 
Figure 5.3 Energy levels for 
two MOs resulting from LCAO 
treatment of two AOs 
The quantity S in equation (5.4) is the 
As the 
name implies, it is a measure of the extent to which the two AOs over- 
lap. For example, the hatched area in Figure 5.l(a) shows a region of 
overlap between two 1s AOs. For total overlap, S = 1, but typically S 
= 0.2. Although this value is far from negligible, it can be neglected in 
a very approximate calculation of MO energies. Equation (5.4) then 
becomes: 
Ert = EA f p 
(5.5) 
and the MO energies are symmetrically disposed abut the A 0  energy EA, 
as shown in Figure 5.3. 
Figure 5.4 shows pictorial representations of MOs formed from Is, 2s 
and 2p AOs. In every case in which we make a linear combination of 
AOs, two MOs result. As with a linear combination of 1s AOs, shown 
in Figure 5.1, there is always an in-phase and an out-of-phase combi- 
nation, resulting, respectively, in a bonding and an antibonding MO. In 
the figure the corresponding wave functions are labelled I,V+ and yr. The 
antibonding MO is always higher in energy than the bonding MO. This 
is a consequence of there being an additional nodal plane in the anti- 
bonding orbital. The nodal plane is halfway between the nuclei and 

56 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
normal to the figure in all cases. There is a general rule that the intro- 
duction of a nodal plane increases the energy of the MO. 
Figure 5.4 MOs formed from 
Is, 2s and 2p AOs for a 
homonuclear diatomic molecule 
There are four components of the labels attached to the MOs: 
1. The AOs from which the MOs are formed, in these cases Is, 2s and 
2P- 
2. The G or n designation. This can be regarded as indicating the sym- 
metry of the MO with respect to rotation around the internuclear 
axis. The CT MOs are cylindrically symmetric, i.e. the MOs are 
unchanged by any rotation about the axis, whereas the ‘II: MOs are 
not: they have one nodal plane through the z-axis. The G and n: MOs 
are also distinguished by their degeneracy. The CT MOs are non- 
degenerate whereas the n: MOs are doubly degenerate. Double degen- 
eracy implies that there are two different MOs which have different 
wave functions but the same energy. For example, as well as the nu2p 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
57 
MO shown in Figure 5.4, there is an otherwise identical one which 
is in a plane normal to the figure. If the one in the figure is formed 
from 2px AOs, the one normal to the figure is formed from 2py AOs. 
3. Those MOs marked with an asterisk (*) are antibonding while those 
which are unmarked are bonding. 
4. The subscripts g and u, standing for “gerade” (even) and “ungerade” 
(odd), indicate that an MO is either symmetric or antisymmetric, 
respectively, to inversion through a point at the centre of the mole- 
cule. The operation of inversion involves going from any point in 
the molecule to another point an equal distance on the opposite side 
of the centre point. If, as a result of inversion, the MO changes sign, 
it is a “u” MO; if it does not, it is a “g” MO. 
Figure 5.5 shows an energy level diagram for the MOs formed from Is, 
2s and 2p AOs. The diagram shows that an antibonding orbital is always 
higher in energy than the corresponding bonding orbital, and has been 
drawn showing the 0,2p orbital higher in energy than the xU2p orbital. 
Although the relative energies are only semi-quantitative, the diagram 
has been drawn so that the two 02s and the two 02p MO energy levels 
are not quite symmetrically disposed about the 2s and 2p A 0  energy 
levels, respectively. The reason for the asymmetry is that the 0,2s and 
0,2p MOs would, otherwise, be fairly close together. Because they have 
the same symmetry, they push each other apart, thereby losing the sym- 
metrical disposition of the bonding and antibonding energy levels of 
equation (5.5). For diatomic molecules consisting of atoms from the first 
and second periods of the Periodic Table (H to Ne), this is the case for 
almost all of them. Important exceptions are 0, and F,. In these two 
Figure 5.5 Energy level 
diagram for MOs formed from Is, 
2s and 2p AOs for a 
homonuclear diatomic molecule 

58 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
molecules the pushing apart of the og2s and og2p MOs is much less pro- 
nounced, and the order of the og2p and nu2p MOs is reversed compared 
to that in Figure 5.5. 
To obtain the electronic ground configuration of a particular mole- 
cule, all the available electrons are fed into the orbitals, in order of 
increasing energy. This procedure employs the aufbau principle, as in 
atoms (see Section 4.1). Each o orbital is non-degenerate and may accom- 
modate two electrons. They have antiparallel spins (see Section 4.3.2) 
and therefore do not make any contribution to the overall electron spin 
quantum number S. The n orbitals are doubly degenerate and can accom- 
modate four electrons; their spins comprise two antiparallel pairs, and 
also do not contribute to S. 
For the ground configuration of H,, both electrons are in the 01s 
orbital, giving the configuration (0~1s)~. 
Since both electrons are in a 
bonding orbital, H, is a stable molecule in its ground state. We know 
that the bond is a single bond. Alternatively, we say that the 
is one. In general, the definition of bond order is: 
Bond order = (net number of bonding electrons) + 2 
(5.6) 
The cation H,+ has only one electron in the ogls orbital. It is also a stable 
molecule in its ground state but has a weak bond; the bond order is 4. 
We would not expect He, to have a stable ground configuration since 
He is a noble gas. The molecule has four electrons, and the ground 
configuration is ( ~ ~ l s ) ~ ( o ~ l s ) ~ .  
It is a general rule that the bonding char- 
acteristics of an electron in a bonding orbital are cancelled by the anti- 
bonding characteristics of an electron in an antibonding orbital. The net 
result therefore is that, overall, the four electrons are non-bonding and 
the molecule is not stable. It is interesting to note, however, that, if an 
electron is promoted from the oul s to the og2s orbital, the resulting excit- 
ed configuration (o,l S ) ~ ( O ~ ~ S ) ~ ( O ~ ~ S ) ~  
gives a stable molecule with a bond 
order of one. This is confirmed by the observed electronic spectra of He,. 
Similarly, we can see that H2 
is unstable in the excited configuration 
In Figure 5.5 are indicated the highest energy orbitals (sometimes 
called the 
which are fully or partially occupied in the 
ground configurations of all homonuclear diatomic molecules formed 
from first-row atoms. For example, in N, there are 14 electrons, and the 
ground configuration is: 
(og 1 s)I (ou 
1 s ) I .  
N, 
(og 1 s)2(ou 1 s)2(og2s)2(ou2s)2(7cu2p)~(og2p)~ (5.7) 
There are six (net) electrons in bonding orbitals, giving a bond order of 
three, consistent with the triple bond with which we are familiar. 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
59 
In 0,, there are 16 electrons, and the ground configuration is: 
0, (og 
1 s),(o, 1 s)2(og2s)2(o,2s)2(og2p)2(nu2p)4(ng2p)2 
(5.8) 
The net number of bonding electrons is four, giving a bond order of two, 
consistent with a double bond. However, the two electrons in the outer, 
doubly degenerate, ng2p orbital may go either into the same orbital with 
antiparallel spins, giving S = 0, or into different orbitals with parallel 
spins, giving S = 1. These give, respectively, a singlet or a triplet term, 
as in the case of atoms (see Section 4.2 on the helium atom, for example). 
As for atoms, one of Hund’s rules applies. This tells us that, of the terms 
that arise from a ground electron configuration, that with the highest 
multiplicity lies lowest in energy. Therefore the ground term of 0, is a 
triplet. One result of this is that 0, is 
This magnetic 
character can be demonstrated by observing a stream of liquid oxygen 
flowing between the poles of a large magnet. The stream tends to be 
drawn into the magnetic field, whereas a 
material would 
deviate away from the field. 

60 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
5.1.2 Ground and Excited Electronic States 
In Section 4.3.4 we have seen that the Russell-Saunders coupling approx- 
imation is appropriate to the derivation of most states of most atoms. 
In this approximation the orbital angular momenta of all the electrons 
are coupled to give the total angular momentum, and all the spin momen- 
ta are coupled to give the total spin angular momentum. For each 
electron, coupling between its own orbital and spin angular momenta is 
neglected. In molecules, also, the Russell-Saunders coupling approxi- 
mation applies in most cases, and it is only that approximation that we 
shall consider here. 
Associated with each electron in the molecule is an orbital angular 
momentum quantum number !. There is a correspondence, as follows, 
between the value of! and the label used for the MO: 
e 0 1 2 ... 
CJ 
n: 6 ... 
(5.9) 
The symbols 0, n, 6 ... (sigma, pi, delta, ...) are the Greek equivalents 
of s, p, d ... used for atoms. As in atoms, the orbital angular momenta 
are strongly coupled to give the total orbital angular momentum, and 
the electron spin angular momenta are coupled to give the total spin 
angular momentum with the associated quantum number S. 
The presence of the two positively charged nuclei introduces an 
electrostatic field. If they do not have a high nuclear charge, coupling 
between the total orbital and total spin angular momenta, spin-orbit 
coupling, can be neglected. This is the 
in which the total orbital and total spin momenta are coupled, 
independently, to the internudear axis. The coupling of the orbital 
angular momentum to the axis is very strong, and one important effect 
of this is that L is not a “good” quantum number, i.e. it does not have 
integer values. Because the spin angular momentum is not so strongly 
coupled to the axis, S remains a good quantum number. 
The introduction of a second nucleus, compared to the situation in 
an atom, introduces two new quantum numbers, A and Z. 
The compo- 
nent of the orbital angular momentum along the intemuclear axis may 
take only the values Ah, where A can take the values: 
A =  0 1 2 3 4 ... 
z n A Q, r ... 
(5.10) 
The upper case symbols C, n, A, .... (sigma, pi, delta, ...) are the Greek 
equivalents of the symbols S, P, D, ... used for states of atoms. 
The component of the spin angular momentum may take only the val- 
ues ZX, where Z can take the values: 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
61 
~~ 
z= s, s- 1, ..., -s 
(5.1 I )  
Figure 5.6 Vector diagram for 
Hund's case (a) coupling of total 
orbital and total spin angular 
momenta to the internuclear axis 
of a diatomic molecule 
The symbolism used for electronic states is of the form 2s+1Ag/u' for 
example 'Cg, 
311u and 2Ag. 
To obtain the electronic states that arise from a particular con- 
figuration is not always straightforward, and we shall deal with only a 
few cases. 
Simple examples are the ground configurations of H,+ and H,. H,+ 
has just one electron in the ogls MO. In a o MO there is no orbital angu- 
lar momentum and therefore A = 0. Since the MO is a g orbital the state 
is a Cg state. There is only one electron; therefore S = 3 and the state is 
a doublet state, ,Cg. To complete the symbolism, we need to know 
whether the MO wave function is symmetric or antisymmetric (changes 
sign) on reflection through any plane containing the internuclear axis. If 
it is symmetric, we add a post-superscript "+"; if it is antisymmetric, we 

62 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
add "-". Since the o,ls MO is cylindrically symmetrical, it is a "+" orbital 
and the ground state of H,' is ,Cg+. 
Similarly, the ground state of H,, in 
which the two electron spins are antiparallel, is ICg+. 
As for atoms, when we derive states from configurations, filled orbitals 
can be ignored; they do not make any contribution to either the total spin 
or total orbital angular momentum. Therefore the ground state of Li,+ (see 
Worked Problem 5.1 for this, and other, ground configurations) is, like that 
of H,+, ,Cg+. F, has all MOs filled and therefore has a IZg+ 
ground state. 
The case of the ground configuration of B, is not so straightforward. 
The only contributors to the overall orbital and spin angular momenta 
are the two electrons in the n,2p MO. The case of two electrons in 
the same n orbital is analogous to the case in an atom of two electrons 
in the same p orbital, the complexity of which is illustrated in Box 4.3 
in Chapter 4. Derivation of the states arising from a (nu)2 or (Q2 
config- 
uration requires an advanced use of symmetry, which is beyond the scope 
of this book. We shall require only the results, which are as follows: 
Configuration 
States arising 
(5.12) 
Two simple symmetry rules which have been used in obtaining these 
results are: 
g x g = g  
and 
u x u = g  
(5.13) 
These rules become clear when we remember that g and u indicate sym- 
metry and antisymmetry to inversion through the centre of the molecule. 
We can see now that the states that arise from the [Be,](1r,2p)~ ground 
configuration of B, are 3Cg, 
ICg+ and IAg. Application of Hund's rule, 
which applies to molecules as well as atoms (see Section 4.3.2), tells us 
that the state of highest multiplicity lies lowest in energy. Therefore the 
ground state is ?Zg-, and the other two states are low-lying excited states. 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
63 
If one of the electrons in the n,2p MO of B, is promoted to the og2p 
MO to give the excited configuration: 
(5.14) 
there are two states that arise, a singlet and a triplet state, depending on 
whether the two unpaired electron spins are antiparallel or parallel, 
respectively. Using the rule in equation (5.13), we can see that both states 
must be u states. Since only the nu2p electron contributes to the overall 
orbital angular momentum (see equation 5.9), both states must be n 
states. Therefore the two states are Tiu and 311u. Hund's rule applies only 
to states arising from a ground configuration; therefore we cannot say 
which state will have the lower energy. 
The excited configuration: 
(5.15) 
gives rise to several states. Using a further symmetry rule that: 
g x u = u  
(5.16) 
tells us that they are all u states. The two electron spins may be anti- 
parallel or parallel, giving singlet and triplet states. Similar to the case 
of two electrons in the same n-type MO (see equation 5-12), two elec- 
trons in different n-type MOs give rise to C-, C+ and A states. Therefore 
all the states arising from the configuration in equation (5.15) are lCU-, 
'Eu+, 
IAU, 3Eu-, 3Zu+ and 3Au. 
Although the states arising from various electron configurations can 
be derived in this way, it does not tell us anything about their relative 
energies. Much more sophisticated, state-of-the-art MO calculations are 
needed to do that. 

64 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
5.2 
Heteronuclear Diatomic Molecules 
5.2.1 Molecular Orbitals and Ground Electron 
Configurations 
Heteronuclear diatomic molecules comprise a wide range of types. The 
simplest, at this level of approximation, are those such as CN and NO 
which have sufficiently similar nuclear charges for the molecules to be 
treated in a way rather similar to that for homonuclear diatomics. At 
the other extreme are molecules such as HCl, in which the nuclei differ 
substantially. 
For heteronuclear diatomic molecules containing atoms from the sec- 
ond period of the Periodic Table, and formed from atoms with similar 
nuclear charges, it is useful to assume a set of MOs similar to those for 
homonuclear diatomics in Figure 5.5. There are three main differences: 
1. The g or u symmetry with respect to inversion through the centre of 
the molecule is lost. 
2. The energies of the two 1s AOs, the two 2s AOs, etc., are now slight- 
ly different; the greater the difference in the nuclear charges of the 
two atoms, the greater is this energy difference. 
3. Because the g/u symmetry is lost, it is now essential to include the 
(*) notation to indicate an antibonding orbital in order to distinguish 
it from the corresponding bonding orbital. 
With the order of MO energies in Figure 5.5, the corresponding MOs 
for different nuclei are, in order of increasing energy: 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
65 
01s < a*ls < 02s < 0*2s < n2p < 02p < n*2p < 0*2p 
(5.17) 
The formation of these MOs from AOs follows the rules which apply to 
homonuclear diatomic molecules. These rules are that the AOs, used in 
the LCAO method to form MOs, must (a) have the same symmetry with 
respect to rotation about the internuclear axis and (b) have comparable 
energies. 
with, Le. has the 
same number of electrons as, N2. In the ground configuration the elec- 
trons are fed into the MOs as follows: 
The CO molecule has 14 electrons; it is 
co (0 
1 s)2(0* 1 s)2(02s)2((r*2s)2(7c2p)4(02p)2 
(5.18) 
The net number of bonding electrons is six, giving a bond order of three. 
Like nitrogen, it has a triple bond, but four of the bonding electrons 
have come from the oxygen and two from the carbon atom. 
The NO molecule has 15 electrons, giving the ground configuration: 
NO 
(01 Q2((r* 1 .~)~(~2~)~(0*2s)~(n2p)~((~2p)~(n*2p)~ 
(5.19) 
In this case there are five net bonding electrons, resulting in a bond order 
of 2+. 

66 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscbpy 
For heteronuclear diatomic molecules in which both atoms are very dis- 
similar, no useful generalizations can be made regarding the construc- 
tion of their MOs, except that the two rules which we have used for all 
molecules so far are still valid. These rules are that the AOs used in 
the LCAO method of constructing MOs must have the same symmetry 
with respect to the internuclear axis, and that they must have similar 
energies. 
In HCl, for example, the hydrogen and chlorine atoms have the 
ground A 0  configurations 1 s1 and [Ne]3s23p5, respectively. The ioniza- 
tion energy (see equation 2.14) of H is 13.598 eV while that of C1, for 
the removal of a 3p electron, is 12.967 eV. Therefore these two AOs are 
of comparable energies. The ionization energies for the 3s, 2p, 2s and 1s 
AOs of Cl are very much higher, and these AOs take no part in the for- 
mation of MOs. The electrons in them remain in AOs that are almost 
unchanged in the molecule, and are referred to as 
When we consider the symmetry requirement for the formation of 
MOs we can see that only the 3p, A 0  of Cl can combine with the 1s A 0  
of H to form an MO, as shown-in Figure 5.7. This MO is cylindrically 
symmetrical about the internuclear axis and is therefore a o-type MO. 
Although the 3p, and 3p,, AOs are of energy comparable to the 1s A 0  
of H, they do not have the same symmetry and cannot combine with it 
to form MOs. The 3p, and 3py AOs are almost unchanged in the mole- 
cule, but, when we consider their symmetry with respect to the inter- 
nuclear axis, are clearly n-type MOs. The four electrons in them are 
The ground configuration for the outer MOs of 
HCl is therefore ( 0 ) ~ ( 7 r ) ~ .  
Figure 5.7 Formation of a 0 
MO in HCI 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
67 
Figure 5.8 Formation of MOs 
from (a) 2px and 3d, and (b) 2pz 
and 3 4  AOs 
5.2.2 Ground and Excited Electronic States 
The method for deriving electronic states from MO configurations is very 
similar to that used for homonuclear diatomic molecules. The main dif- 
ference is that the g or u symmetry is lost. 
In the ground configuration of CO, in equation (5.18), all occupied 
MOs are filled, and the ground state is therefore %+. The partially occu- 
pied MOs in the first excited configuration are (~2p)'(z*2p)~. 
The two 
unpaired electrons give rise to singlet and triplet states. The only con- 
tributor to the orbital angular momentum is the x*2p electron. The excit- 
ed states arising are therefore I l l  and 311. 
In the ground configuration of NO, in equation (5.19), the single elec- 
tron in the n*2p MO gives rise to a 211 ground state. If this electron is 
promoted to the a*2p MO, the resulting excited state is 2Z+. 

68 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
In the first excited configuration of HCl, an electron is promoted from 
a non-bonding n MO to the a* MO which is antibonding between the 
two atoms, to give the outer MO configuration (~T)~(o*)*. 
The vacancy 
in the n orbital behaves like a single electron so that the states arising 
are Ill and 311. 
5.3 
Polyatomic Molecules 
5.3.1 Molecules Containing a Carbon-Carbon Multiple 
Bond 
Linear polyatomic molecules are the simplest in respect of their electronic 
structure. The reason for this is their similarity, particularly so far as 
their symmetry is concerned, to diatomic molecules. 
Ethyne (acetylene), H-GC-H, 
is linear and has a carbon-carbon 
triple bond. A useful way of visualizing the makeup of the MOs 
Concerned is to consider each carbon atom as having two sp 
at 180" to each other. These overlap with the 1s AOs of the 
hydrogen atoms to form a-type MOs, as shown in Figure 5.9. Two elec- 
trons fed into each of these comprise the C-H single bonds. The other 
two sp hybrid orbitals, one on each carbon atom and each containing 
one electron, overlap to form the CT component of the triple bond. This 
leaves each carbon with 2p, and 2py AOs which overlap to form the two 
n-type MOs. The one shown in the figure is n2p,; the n2py MO is at 90" 
to the one shown. Two electrons are fed into each of the n MOs to form 
the other two components of the triple bond. 
In this simple treatment of MOs the LCAO method has been 
Figure 5.9 Formation of MOs 
in ethyne (acetylene) 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
69 
employed, as in diatomic molecules, to form the MOs from the atomic 
orbitals (or hybrid orbitals) on each of the atoms. 
In the ground configuration of ethyne, all the electrons are in filled 
MOs and the ground state is IZg+, the g subscript implying symmetric 
behaviour with respect to inversion through the centre of the molecule. 
If, say, a fluorine atom is substituted for one of the hydrogen atoms 
to give fluoroethyne (fluoroacetylene), F-C=C-H, the centre of symme- 
try is lost and the ground state becomes %+. 
The lowest excited MO in ethyne and fluoroethyne is a n* type. This 
is antibonding and similar to such MOs in diatomic molecules. As in a 
homonuclear diatomic molecule, promotion of an electron from a n to 
a n* MO results in six excited states. These are 193Zu+, 1+3Zu- and '93Au for 
ethyne and l-,X+, I9,X- and 193A for fluoroethyne [see Worked Problem 5.3 
for the C, molecule in the .... (n,2~)~(n,2p)' excited configuration in 
Section 5.1.21. 
Propyne, CH,-C=C-H, presents greater problems in assigning labels 
to electronic states. Not only is there no centre of symmetry but the 
cylindrical symmetry has been lost also. The symmetry classification of 
the molecule, and consequent labelling of electronic states, is beyond the 
scope of this book. However, this molecule does behave electronically in 
a rather similar way to, say, fluoroethyne, and it is still useful to think 
of the C-H and C-CH, bonds as comprising pairs of electrons in o-type 
MOs and the C=C bond as consisting of one o- and two n-type 
components. 
There is a similar situation in ethene (ethylene), H,C=CH2. Again, the 
symmetry properties of the skeleton of the molecule are important 
but will not be considered here. The overall MO picture of ethene is of 
four o-type C-H bonds and a o-type component of the C=C bond. The 
second component of the double bond is a n-type MO. This, and the 
corresponding antibonding n*-type MO, are illustrated in Figure 5.10. 
In the ground state the o- and n-type MOs are filled, giving a singlet 
state. The lowest energy excited states result from the promotion of an 
electron from the n to the n;* MO, giving a singlet and a triplet state. 
Figure 5.10 K and K* MOs in 
ethene (ethylene) 
It is a useful shorthand to refer to such states as nn* states. Similarly, 
when x, n*, o or o* MOs are involved, we can refer to on* or no* excit- 
ed states. However, because electrons in o-type MOs are more tightly 
bound than in n-type MOs, such excited states usually lie at relatively 
high energies. 

70 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Another useful shorthand notation is to refer to the lowest, second 
lowest, etc., singlet excited states as S,, S,, etc., and the lowest, second 
lowest, etc., triplet excited states as T,, T,, etc. This type of notation is 
particularly useful for closed shell molecules, i. e. those having a ground 
configuration in which all the occupied MOs are filled. The ground state 
is labelled So, and T, is invariably lower in energy than S,. 
If the ethynyl or ethenyl group is attached to an unsaturated group, 
as 
in, 
say, 
CH,C=C-H, 
CH,CH,C=C-H, 
CH3CH=CH2 or 
CH,CH,CH=CH,, only the localized MOs of the C=C or C=C group 
need be considered when we are concerned only with the ground or low- 
lying excited electronic states. This is because the electrons in the o-type 
MOs in the rest of the molecule are sufficiently tightly bound for them 
to play only a minor part. 
5.3.2 Molecules Containing a Carbonyl Group 
We consider here only the ground and lowest lying excited states of 
molecules which contain a C=O group but do not contain any other n- 
electron-containing group. Examples are methanal (formaldehyde), 
H,C=O, ethanal (acetaldehyde), CH,CHO, and propanone (acetone), 
(CH,),C=O. For these purposes the MOs localized in the C=O group 
can be considered in isolation. 
The 0 component of the double bond in methanal is formed by over- 
lap of an sp3 hybrid orbital on carbon and a 2p orbital on oxygen. This 
leaves one electron in a 2p orbital on C and three electrons in 2p orbitals 
on 0. Figure 5.1 1 shows the overlap of 2p orbitals to form the n: com- 
ponent of the double bond. In the ground state, this n: MO contains two 
electrons. The remaining two electrons are in an MO which is virtually 
unchanged from a 2p A 0  on oxygen. These form a non-bonding pair, 
and such an orbital is often labelled an “n” MO to indicate this non- 
bonding character. 
The ground state, So, is clearly a singlet state with all the electrons in 
filled orbitals. The lowest energy excited MO is a n* MO, similar to that 
shown in Figure 5.10. The lowest energy excited states result from the 
promotion of a non-bonding, n, electron into the n:* MO to give a triplet 
state, T,, the lowest energy excited state, and a singlet state, S,. These 
states are referred to as nn* states. The T, and S, nn* states are 
analogous to those of ethene, and are at higher energies. 
Figure 5.11 MOs of methanal 
(formaldehyde) 
5.3.3 Molecules Containing Conjugated n-Electron 
Systems 
A conjugated n-electron molecule contains alternating single and 
multiple bonds. We shall consider only alternating single and double 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
71 
bonds. The simplest example is buta- 1,3-diene, CH2=CH-CH=CH2. The 
lower energy MOs are, again, the n-type MOs. For our present purposes 
we can regard the carbon chain as linear, although the CCC angles are 
approximately 120". An LCAO treatment of the four 2p AOs, one on 
each carbon atom, in a plane normal to the plane of the carbon atoms, 
produces four MOs. These are delocalized over the carbon chain. The 
three MOs of lowest energies, nl, n2 and n3, are illustrated in Figure 5.12. 
Because the n2 MO has one nodal plane perpendicular to the carbon 
chain, it is at higher energy than nl. 
The n3 has two and the n4 MO has 
three such nodal planes, and have successively higher energies. 
Figure 5.12 Lower energy n 
MOs of buta-l,3-diene 
In the ground configuration the four 2p electrons are in the n, and n2 
MOs, giving the outer MO configuration (n1)2(n2)2. 
The ground state, So, 
is a singlet state. The lowest energy excited states are nn* states, S, and 
TI. These result from promotion of an electron from the n2 to the n3 MO 
to give the outer MO configuration (n1)2(n2)1(n3)1. 
One of the most important conjugated n-electron systems is that in 
the benzene molecule. Once the skeleton of six o-type C-C bonds and 
the six C-H bonds has been taken account of, there remain six electrons 
in 2p AOs perpendicular to the carbon ring. LCAO treatment of these 
results in six MOs, n, to n6, with 0 to 3 nodal planes perpendicular to 
the ring. These are shown in Figure 5.13. The lowest and highest energy 
MOs, nl and n6, are non-degenerate, but the n2,n3 and nq,n5 MOs form 
doubly degenerate pairs. 
In the ground MO configuration the six n electrons are accommo- 
dated to give the outer MO configuration (7~,)~(n?,~)~ 
and a singlet ground 
state So. The lowest energy excited configuration is one in which an 
electron is promoted from n2,3 to n4,5 
to give (nl)2(n2,3)3(n4,,>'. 
The vacancy 
in the n2,3 MO behaves like a single electron, so far as deriving the result- 
ing electronic states is concerned. Similar to the case of two electrons in 

72 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 5.13 ~t MOs of benzene 
different ~r: 
MOs in a diatomic molecule (see, for example, equation 5.15 
et seq.), three singlet (S,, S, and S,) and three triplet (Tl, T, and T,) excit- 
ed states result. All are ZIT* states, the n4,, being more antibonding than 
the n,,, MOs. 
In the pyridine (azabenzene) molecule, C,H,N, one of the CH groups 
of benzene has been replaced by a nitrogen atom. The orbitals on the 
nitrogen atom can be regarded as comprising three sp2 hybrid MOs, two 
of which are bonded to adjacent carbon atoms, leaving a 2p orbital per- 
pendicular to the ring and taking part in IT MOs which are similar to 
those of benzene. The remaining sp2 orbital is in the plane of the ring 
and takes two electrons. The orbital is a non-bonding, n, orbital which 
is the highest energy occupied orbital, sometimes labelled with the 
acronym HOMO (highest occupied molecular orbital). Promotion to the 
lowest energy unoccupied orbital (LUMO) results in a singlet and a 
triplet nn* state, S, and T,, the lowest energy excited states. There are 
also m* 
singlet and triplet excited states at higher energies. These are 
similar to m* 
states of benzene, except that the lower symmetry of pyri- 
dine results in the loss of the double degeneracies of the IT MOs in Figure 
5.13. 

Electronic States of Diatomic and Polyatomic Molecules 
73 

74 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 

Molecular Vibrations 
6.1 
Introduction 
The fact that in this chapter we are able to discuss vibrational motion 
independently of the motion of the electrons, which was discussed in 
Chapter 5, is due to the general usefulness of the 
The validity of this approximation follows from the fact 
that the nuclei in a molecule are very much heavier than the electrons 
and, therefore, move much more slowly. An important result of this is 
that the total wave function, vtota,, 
can be factorized into electronic and 
nuclear contributions, we and v,, respectively: 
A further approximation involves the factorization of yn into vibrational 
and rotational contributions, yv and vr, respectively, giving: 
75 

76 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
This factorization results in the total energy of a molecule being the sum 
of the contributions from the electrons, the vibrations and the rotations: 
The approximations which result in the simplicity of this equation are 
not always valid, but such cases will not concern us in this book. 
Molecules are held together by electrons in bonding molecular 
orbitals, the nature of which has been discussed in Chapter 5. Although 
the representation of bonds by straight lines between atoms tends to give 
the impression that the bonds behave like rigid rods, this is not so. They 
are much better represented, for spectroscopic purposes, by springs 
connecting the atoms. This is illustrated, for a diatomic molecule 
(homonuclear or heteronuclear), in Figure 6. I (a). 
The strength of the spring varies from one molecule to another; in 
particular, it increases with the multiplicity of the bond. Clearly, the 
spring is stronger for a triple bond, such as that in N,, than for the double 
bond in 0,. For a single bond, as in F, and HCl, the spring is weaker 
still. 
For a linear polyatomic molecule such as HCN (Figure 6.lb) there 
are springs representing each bond, a strong one for the triple bond and 
a much weaker one for the single bond. A further complication is that 
the molecule can also bend about the carbon atom. It is principally the 
hydrogen atom which is involved in this motion, because it is much 
lighter than the nitrogen atom. This bending motion is represented by a 
Figure 6.1 Ball-and-spring 
model for vibrations of (a) a 
diatomic molecule and (b) H-C-N 
further, very weak spring. 
From our consideration of just these two types of molecule we have 
encountered two types of 
The first is a 
mode, 
as in the diatomic example and in the C-H and C-N stretching modes 
in HCN. The second type is the 
mode of vibration in HCN. 
6.2 
Vibration in a Diatomic Molecule 
6.2.1 Treated as a Harmonic Oscillator 
The vibration in a diatomic molecule can be treated as behaving like the 
stretching and compression of a spring. Stretching or compressing a 
spring produces 
When the spring is released, this ener- 
gy is translated into a 
which results in vibration about 
the equilibrium length of the spring. Similarly, when a bond is stretched 
or compressed, and then released, vibrational motion occurs. 
If the vibration involves only small displacements of the bond length, 

Molecular Vibrations 
77 
r, from the equilibrium bond length, re, the restoring force,J; is propor- 
tional to the displacement, x, of the bond length from its equilibrium 
value, where: 
This law of proportionality is known as 
f = -kx 
(6.5) 
This law is also obeyed for small displacements of a so-called Hooke’s 
law spring. Any oscillator, such as a molecule undergoing vibrational 
motion which obeys Hooke’s law, is a 
The quanti- 
ty k in equation (6.5) is the 
and is large for strong bonds 
(springs) and small for weak bonds. This is illustrated by the values for 
k of 328.6, 1177 and 2296 N m-’ for Cl,, 0, and N,, having a single, 
double and triple bond, respectively. 
The potential energy, V(x), resulting from the displacement x is given 
by: 
The energy associated with vibration is quantized: like the electronic 
energy, it can only taks specific values. These discrete vibrational ener- 
gy levels are obtained by solution of the Schrodinger equation of equa- 
tion (3.19), which also gives the vibrational wave functions, v/,. The 
resulting vibrational energy levels, Ev, 
are given by: 
Ev = hV(v + +) 
(6.7) 
where v is the Vibrational quantum number, which can take any integral 
value 0, 1, 2, 3, . . ., and v is the vibration frequency given by: 
The quantity p is the reduced mass, and is given by: 
p = m,m2/(m, + m,) 
(6.9) 
where m, and m2 are the masses of atoms 1 and 2. 
The unit which is used for atomic mass is the 
for 
which the symbol is “u”. This unit is defined in terms of the mass of an 
atom (ma) of the “C isotope of carbon, which is taken to be exactly 12 
u, so that: 

78 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
1 u = ma('2C)/12 
(6.10) 
This equation shows that 1 u is the mass of one atom of 12C9 for which 
the best value we have is: 
1 u = 1.660 538 73 x 
kg 
(6.1 1) 
The accuracy to which this value is known is limited by the accuracy to 
which the Avogadro constant, NA, is known. 
Figure 6.2 shows a plot of the potential energy, V(r), against the 
internuclear separation, r. Equations (6.6) and (6.4) show that the rela- 
tionship produces a parabola with the minimum potential energy at the 
equilibrium internuclear separation, re. Also shown are the vibrational 
energy levels with v = 0-3. A very important aspect of these is that 
the lowest level, that with v = 0, is not at the zero of energy. According 
to equation (6.7), the energy of the v = 0 level is ihv, known as the 
The fact that the vibrational energy can never be 
less than the zero-point energy, even when the sample is cooled to 
0 K, is a consequence of the uncertainty principle of equation 
(3.17). 
Equation (6.7) shows that, above the v = 0 level, the levels have equal 
spacings of hv. In terms of wavenumber, which is used invariably in 
vibrational spectroscopy, the vibrational spacing is hco (= hv), where o 
is the vibration wavenumber and c is the speed of light. In terms of 

Molecular Vibrations 
79 
Figure 6.2 Potential energy 
curve, and a few vibrational levels 
and wave functions, for a diatom- 
ic molecule acting as a harmonic 
oscillator 
wavenumber, the energy levels, or 
now called, are given by: 
values as they are 
Solution of the Schrodinger equation for the harmonic oscillator also 
gives the vibrational wave functions, yv. These are shown for the v = 
&3 levels in Figure 6.2. 
6.2.2 Treated as an Anharmonic Oscillator 
When a spring is compressed or stretched beyond certain limits, Hooke’s 
law is no longer obeyed. Similarly, for large displacements the stretch- 
ing and contraction of the bond of a diatomic molecule do not obey 
Hooke’s law. The vibration no longer behaves like that of a harmonic 
oscillator but like that of an 
Figure 6.3 shows how the potential energy curve is changed from that 
for the harmonic oscillator in Figure 6.2. At shorter bond lengths, little 
further shortening occurs when the potential energy of compression is 
increased: the curve rises steeply. At longer bond lengths, the bond begins 
to weaken: the force constant decreases. Eventually, when it is stretched 
even further, the bond breaks, and 
The vibrational energy levels within an anharmonic potential curve 
are no longer equally spaced above the zero-point level. As shown in 
Figure 6.3, they converge smoothly towards the dissociation limit. It is 
important to remember that, for a molecule in the ground electronic 
state, dissociation always produces 
even in a such a highly 
polar molecule as HF. 
The smooth convergence of the energy levels is taken into account by 
adding successively smaller terms to the term value expression of 
equation (6.12) to give: 
occurs. 

80 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 6.3 Potential energy 
curve for a diatomic molecule 
acting as an anharmonic 
oscillator 
G(v) = o,(v + +) - I,(V + +)? + ye(. + 9 3  + ... 
(6.13) 
The quantities s,, ye, ... are 
The negative sign is 
placed in front of the second term for convenience; this ensures that all 
values of xe are positive. 

Molecular Vibrations 
81 
Figure 6.3 shows that the dissociation energy can be measured relative 
to that at equilibrium, giving De, or at the zero-point level, giving Do. 
Since a molecule can never be at equilibrium, only Do may be obtained 
directly. De can be obtained from it by adding the zero-point energy. 
There have been various attempts to modify the expression for the 
potential energy of a harmonic oscillator, given in equation (6.6), to take 
account of anharmonic behaviour. One of the most frequently used is 
the 
V(x) = De[l - exp(-ax2)] 
(6.14) 
where x = r - re and a is a constant. This potential is approximate, but 
has the great virtue that V(x) + De as x + -, i.e. as the bond breaks. 
One possible method of obtaining the dissociation energy is through 
the observation of as many vibrational levels as possible. The separa- 
tions, AGv++ [= G(v + 1) - G(v)], 
of successive vibrational levels are plot- 
ted against v + +. Figure 6.3 shows that: 
(6.15) 
i.e. Do is the sum of all the vibrational level separations. Therefore Do 
is 
given by the area under the graph, when it has been extrapolated to AGv++ 
= 0. 
However, this is not as straightforward as it might appear. Firstly, 
only a limited number of vibrational levels can be observed experimen- 
tally: usually observations cease far below the dissociation limit. This 
means that the graph must be extrapolated to AGV+$ = 0, a so-called 
Secondly, the graph is a straight line only 
if all the anharmonic constants, other than xe, are zero. Consequently 
there may be a long extrapolation of a non-linear graph, as illustrated 
in Figure 6.4. This figure shows that the true curve usually bends 
-V++ 
Figure 6.4 Birge-Sponer 
extrapolation (dotted line) for 
obtaining the dissociation energy 
of a diatomic molecule 

82 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
“downwards”, so that an extrapolation from levels far below the disso- 
ciation limit will tend to overestimate the value of Do. 
6.3 
Vibration in Polyatomic Molecules 
A diatomic molecule has only one vibration, a stretching vibration. 
Figure 6.l(b) shows an example of a linear triatomic molecule having 
two stretching and one bending vibrations. The H,O molecule is non- 
linear, but also has three vibrations: these are shown in Figure 6.5. The 
vibrational modes, labelled v,, v, and v3, are represented by arrows 
attached to the atoms. The lengths of the arrows indicate the relative 
magnitudes of the motions of the atoms in the directions shown. In all 
three vibrations the movement of the oxygen atom is very small com- 
pared to that of the much lighter hydrogen atoms. 
Figure 6.5 The three normal 
modes of vibration of the H,O 
molecule 
The H,O molecule has two 0-H bonds, each of which can stretch and 
contract, as in a diatomic molecule. However, because the bonds are 
identical, the symmetry of the situation dictates that these motions are 
either in-phase, as in v,, or out-of-phase, as in v3. These vibrations are 
referred to as the 
and 
vibrations, 
respectively. v2 is the bending vibration. 
When we consider polyatomic molecules containing more than three 
atoms, it is no longer obvious how many modes of vibration they have. 
In fact, a linear molecule has 3N - 5 
of vibration, and a 
non-linear molecule has 3N - 6, where N is the number of atoms in the 
molecule. 

Molecular Vibrations 
83 
The linear molecule ethyne (acetylene) has four atoms and therefore 
seven normal modes, illustrated in Figure 6.6. Like H20, the molecule 
has two identical bonds which can stretch in-phase, v,, or out-of-phase, 
v3, the symmetric and asymmetric stretching vibrations, respectively. v2 
is the C-C stretching vibration. 
The remaining four normal modes are all bending vibrations. v4 is the 
trans and v5 the cis bending vibration. Figure 6.6 shows two forms of 
v,, in which the bending is in either the xz- or the yz-plane. The vibra- 
tion is doubly degenerate because it requires the same energy for 
vibration in either plane, but the wave functions for the two forms are 
not the same: one is a function of x and z, while the other is a function 
of y and z. Similarly, v5 is also doubly degenerate. 
In Figures 6.5 and 6.6 the wavenumber of the v = 1-0 interval is given 
for each of the vibrations of water and ethyne. These wavenumbers illus- 
trate some very important facts regarding vibrations in polyatomic 
molecules. For example, the wavenumbers of stretching vibrations 

84 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 6.6 The normal modes 
of vibration of ethyne (acetylene) 
involving hydrogen atoms, such as v, and v, of both water and ethyne, 
are very high, in excess of 3000 cm-I. The wavenumber for the stretch- 
ing of a multiple bond, such as the triple bond involved in v, of ethyne, 
is much lower. The examples of water and ethyne also illustrate the fact 
that bending vibration wavenumbers are relatively low; this is particu- 
larly true in ethyne, where the fairly heavy carbon atoms are involved. 
These few examples serve to introduce the very important concept of 
in polyatomic molecules. In ethyne, for example, the 
strengths of the C-H and CrC bonds are sufficiently different for the 
stretching vibrations to be almost independent, involving either the C-H 
bonds (vl and v,) or the CrC bond (v,). Because of this independence it 
is not surprising that the wavenumber of the stretching vibration of a 
C=C bond in, for example, CH,C=CH and C,H,C=CH is very similar 
to that in ethyne. In other words, the C-C stretching mode is a well- 
behaved group vibration with a wavenumber which can be transferred, 
with a reasonable degree of approximation, to other molecules contain- 
ing the same group. Similarly, in ethene and ethane, the C=C and C-C 
stretching vibration wavenumbers are 1623 and 993 cm I ,  respectively, 
and are useful group vibrations. The use of such group vibrations does 
not extend to molecules containing conjugated multiple bonds, such as 
the C=C-C-C group, in which the stretching of all three bonds is not 
even approximately independent. 
The concept of a group vibration is extremely important in the appli- 
cation of vibrational spectroscopy to chemical analysis. If, for example, 
one stage in an organic synthesis involves the introduction of a C=O 
group, the observation in the vibrational spectrum of a band typical of 
this group will be important evidence that the reaction has been 
successful. 

Molecular Vibrations 
85 
The calculation of the forms of the vibrations of a polyatomic mole- 
cule, as illustrated by the arrows for the various vibrations of water and 
ethyne in Figures 6.5 and 6.6, is a difficult classical, rather than a 
quantum mechanical, problem. The methods used in these calculations 
will not concern us in this book. 
A potential energy curve, such as that in Figure 6.3, for a diatomic 
molecule is two-dimensional, one dimension for the internuclear distance, 
r, and the other for the potential energy, V(r). For a polyatomic mole- 
cule, with 3N - 5 or 3N - 6 vibrational modes, the potential energy curve 
is replaced by a 
in which potential energy is plotted against 
all the vibrational coordinates. It is, of course, impossible to represent 
such a surface pictorially. Instead, we can treat each vibration in isola- 
tion, by making a two-dimensional plot of potential energy against the 
appropriate vibrational coordinate. Such a plot is an approximation, par- 
ticularly in regions of high potential energy, and is obtained by making 
a two-dimensional cross-section in the multidimensional hypersurface. 
The potential energy curve for any stretching vibration, such as the 
C-H stretch in HCN, is expected to resemble that for a diatomic mole- 
cule. Such a curve is shown in Figure 6.7(a), in which the coordinate r 
for a diatomic molecule is replaced by the general coordinate Q, which 
is known as the 
The potential energy curve is that of 
an anharmonic oscillator, showing the dissociation limit when the 
hydrogen atom is removed. 
Figure 6.7 Potential energy 
curves for (a) a stretching, (b) a 
bending, (c) an inversion and (d) 
a torsional vibration 

86 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
In a classical, as opposed to a 
quantum mechanical, treatment 
of an inversion vibration, the 
barrier must be surmounted in 
order to go from one minimum in 
the potential to the other. In a 
quantum mechanical treatment, 
tunnelling may occur below the 
top of the barrier. This tunnelling 
takes time to occur. The 
narrower the barrier, and/or the 
lighter the tunnelling atoms, the 
faster is the tunnelling and the 
larger the splitting of energy 
levels. For example, tunnelling is 
much slower, and the splittirigs 
much smaller, in N2H, than in 
N‘H,. 
However, we should not pursue this approximate way of treating 
stretching vibrations too far. Consider, for example, the symmetric C-H 
stretching vibration, v,, of ethyne. If sufficient energy is put into this 
vibrational mode, does it dissociate into C2 + 2H? The intuitive answer 
is “no”, because it would require an excessive amount of energy to break 
both C-H bonds simultaneously. Intuition suggests that the lowest ener- 
gy dissociation limit will correspond to the loss of only one hydrogen 
atom to give C,H + H, and this is what happens. At increasingly high 
energy the stretching motion becomes concentrated in one of the C-H 
bonds. The normal mode treatment of the vibration breaks down, and 
a local mode treatment becomes more appropriate. In this treatment the 
stretching of only one C-H bond is treated rather like that of a diatomic 
molecule. We shall not consider this local mode treatment any further, 
but it is particularly appropriate in molecular dynamics, in which disso- 
ciation processes in polyatomic molecules are very important. 
For a bending vibration, such as v, of HCN (Figure 6.1b), or v, or 
v5 of ethyne (Figure 6.6), it is clear that increased potential energy can 
never lead to dissociation. The corresponding potential energy curve is 
quite different from that in Figure 6.7(a). Because the bending motion 
can take place to either side of the internuclear axis and encounters 
increasing resistance at large amplitudes, the curve is symmetrical and 
steep-sided, as shown in Figure 6.7(b). 
There are other types of vibration which do not lead to dissociation. 
One of these is the inversion vibration. The examples shown are of 
ammonia, in Figure 6.8(a), and phenylamine (aniline), in Figure 6.8(b). 
Both molecules are non-planar. The hydrogen atoms can move above 
and below the plane that the molecule would have if it were planar; in 
other words, the planar conformation does not correspond to an energy 
minimum. There are two identical energy minima corresponding to the 
hydrogen atoms being above or below the “plane”. The planar con- 
formation is at the top of the energy barrier. The resulting W-shaped 
potential energy curve is shown in Figure 6.7(c). Whereas the vibrational 
energy levels within the potentials in Figure 6.6(a) and (b) are similar to 
those we have encountered previously, smoothly converging to high 
energy in Figure 6.6(a), or more equally spaced in Figure 6.6(b), those 
within a W-shaped potential are very different. Energy levels below the 
barrier in Figure 6.7(c) are split due to quantum mechanical tunnelling 
through the barrier. The splitting increases as the top of the barrier is 
approached. Immediately above the barrier the energy levels are still 
irregular, but at higher energy they settle down to become evenly spaced. 
A torsional vibration involves the internal twisting, clockwise or anti- 
clockwise, of one group of atoms in the molecule relative to another. 
Figure 6.8(c) shows the example of the torsional vibration in 1-fluoro-2- 
methylbenzene (2-fluorotoluene) in which the CH, group is twisting 

Molecular Vibrations 
87 
relative to the benzene ring. In this case, the potential energy repeats for 
every rotation by an angle # of 120°, and there is a three-fold energy 
barrier to the torsional motion. In this molecule the minima in the poten- 
tial correspond to the so-called pseudo-trans conformation in which a 
hydrogen atom of the CH, group is trans to the fluorine atom. The poten- 
tial energy curve is shown in Figure 6.7(d). 
Figure 6.8 The inversion 
vibration of (a) ammonia and 
(b) phenylamine (aniline), and 
(c) the torsional vibration of 
1 -fluoro-2-methylbenzene 
(2-fluorotoluene) 
As for an inversion vibration, tunnelling through torsional barriers may 
occur, resulting in the splitting of energy levels. In the case of an n-fold 
barrier the levels are split into n components, but some of these may be 
degenerate. The example in Figure 6.7(d) shows a three-fold barrier. In 
principle, tunnelling through the barrier splits the vibrational levels into 
three components, but two of these are degenerate, having the same 
energy but different wave functions. For energy levels above a torsional 
barrier, 
occurs. 
If each of the vibrations of a polyatomic molecule is treated in the 
harmonic oscillator approximation, the vibrational term values, for each 
vibration i, are given by: 
G(v,) = cc'i(vi + 3) 
(6.16) 
This is the same as equation (6.12) for a diatomic molecule, but if vibra- 
tion i is degenerate, + is replaced by d/2, where d, is the degree of degen- 
eracy of the vibration. For example, d, = 2 for each of the vibrations v4 
and v5 of ethyne in Figure 6.6. 
The inclusion of the effects of anharmonicity introduces a further com- 
plication. The vibrations are no longer independent. As a result, no 
expression can be given for the term values for each vibration separate- 
ly, only an expression for the sum of all vibrational term values, C,G(v,). 

88 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
When there are no vibrational degeneracies, or unusual vibrational types 
such as inversion or torsion, this is given by: 
where vibrations are labelled by i or j, and xu are anharmonic constants. 
When i = j, the term values are similar to those of equation (6.13) for a 
diatomic molecule. It is the terms involving xv when i c j, which result 
in the term values for each vibration no longer being independent. For 
example, for H20 (see Figure 6.5), contributions to the vibrational term 
values due to the anharmonic constants xl,, x23 and x , ~  
must be taken 
into account. 
6.4 
Vibration in Excited Electronic States 
In Chapter 5 we were concerned not only with the ground electronic 
state of diatomic and polyatomic molecules, but also with excited 
electronic states. So far in this chapter, molecular vibration has been 
assumed to be in the ground electronic state. However, vibration may 
occur in any electronic state and, using the Bom-oppenheimer approx- 
imation, these motions can be considered separately and their associated 
energies can be added together, as in equation (6.3). 
For a diatomic molecule, a typical vibrational potential function 
associated with an excited electronic state appears qualitatively like that 
in Figure 6.3 for the ground state. Quantitatively, the dissociation energy, 
Do, and the equilibrium bond length, re, are different, the latter very often 
being greater in the excited state, as shown in the example in Figure 6.9. 
The fundamental vibration wavenumber, oe of equation (6.13), and the 
anharmonic constants are also different. 
In cases where an excited or a ground electronic state is unstable, as, 
for example, the (ogls)l(ouls)l excited state of H, or the (o,ls)2(a,ls)2 
ground state of He, (see Section 5.1.1), the potential curve appears like 
that in Figure 6.10. Such a curve does not support any discrete 
vibrational levels but leads directly to dissociation. 
In excited electronic states of polyatomic molecules, there is a poten- 
tial energy hypersurface, resembling that for the ground state, corre- 
sponding to the 3N - 5 (linear) or 3N - 6 (non-linear) modes of vibration. 
Approximate two-dimensional cross-sections can be made in this surface 
for each vibrational mode. Each of these two-dimensional curves sup- 
ports vibrational levels. 
We shall consider vibration in excited electronic states in more detail 
in Chapter 11. 

Molecular Vibrations 
89 
Figure 6.0 Potential energy 
curves for the ground and a 
bound excited electronic state of 
a diatomic molecule 
Figure 6.1 0 Potential energy 
curve for an unbound electronic 
state 

90 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 

Molecular Rotation 
7.1 
Introduction 
We have seen in Chapters 5 and 6 that molecules have internal energy 
due to the orbital motions of the electrons and the vibrational motions 
of the nuclei. Both types of energy can take only discrete values, i.e. they 
are quantized. A further source of energy is in the overall rotation of the 
molecule. This energy is quantized also, but quanta of rotational ener- 
gy are, in general, small compared to those of vibrational energy which 
are, in turn, small compa.red to those of electronic energy. 
When considering their rotational energy, it is useful to divide mole- 
cules into five categories: diatomic, linear, symmetric tops, spherical tops 
and asymmetric tops. 
91 

92 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
7.2 
Diatomic and Linear Polyatomic Molecules 
7.2.1 Rigid Rotor Approximation 
Equation (6.3) shows that, to an approximation which is generally a good 
one, electronic, vibrational and rotational energies, Ee, Ev and Er, can be 
treated independently. To obtain Er it is necessary to solve the 
Schrodinger equation of equation (3.19), but this is well beyond the scope 
of this book; we shall require only the results. 
In considering molecular rotation, it is a useful approximation to 
regard the bonds as rigid rods, and the molecule as a 
Then, 
the rotational energy for a diatomic or linear polyatomic molecule is 
given by: 
where the rotational quantum number J = 0, 1, 2, 3, ... . The quantity 
I is the 
of the molecule for rotation about any axis 
through the 
and at 90" to the internuclear axis. This is 
illustrated, for a homonuclear and a heteronuclear diatomic molecule, in 
Figure 7.l(a) and (b), respectively. The moment of inertia is given by: 
in which p is the reduced mass of the two nuclei of masses m, and m2: 
and r is the bond length. 
For a linear polyatomic molecule also, rotation can occur about any 
axis through the centre of mass and at 90" to the internuclear axis. In 
the case of a symmetrical, linear polyatomic molecule, such as ethyne 
(acetylene), H-C=C-H (Figure 7.lc), the centre of mass is at the centre 
of the molecule. In an unsymmetrical molecule, such as hydrogen 
cyanide, H-C=N, this is not so. In both types of molecule, the moment 
of inertia is given by: 
I = Emf: 
(7.4) 
i.e. the sum of all'quantities m?', 
where mi is the mass of atom i and ri 
Figure 7.2 shows a typical set of rotational energy levels, given by 
equation (7.1 ), for a diatomic or linear polyatomic molecule, diverging 
smoothly as the quantum number J increases. 
Figure 7.1 Rotation of (a) a 
homonuclear diatomic, (b) a bet- 
eronuclear diatomic and (c) a 
linear 
polyatomic 
molecule 
its distance from the Centre Of mass. 

Molecular Rotation 
93 
Figure 7.2 Rotational energy 
levels for a diatomic or linear 
polyatomic molecule 
In any kind of spectroscopy which involves rotational energy levels it 
is usually the wavenumbers or frequencies, rather than energies, that are 
measured. The energy levels of equation (7.1) can be converted to fre- 
quencies (see equation 29), giving: 
F(J) = Er/h = (h/8.n21)J(J + 1) = BJ(J + 1) 
(7.5) 
or to wavenumbers, giving: 
F(J) = Ejhc = (h/8n2cI)J(J + 1) = BJ(J + 1) 
(7.6) 
The quantities F(J) are 
It is unfortunate, but traditional, that the symbol B is used 
whether it refers to a rotational constant in terms of wavenumber or fre- 
quency. Because B is proportional to l/p, the term values increase more 
slowly, as J increases, for heavier molecules. 
and B is the 

94 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
7.2.2 Treatment as a Non-rigid Rotor 
In Chapter 6 we saw that the bonds between atoms should be thought 
of as springs rather than rigid rods. This applies when considering rota- 
tion also. The rigid rotor approximation in Section 7.2.1 applies only to 
low speeds of rotation, i.e. to energy levels with low values of J. At high- 
er speeds of rotation the spring-like bonds expand due to the centrifu- 
gal forces which throw the atoms outwards. This slight expansion of the 
bond in a diatomic molecule (or bonds in a linear polyatomic molecule) 
is known as 
It is taken account of by adding high- 
er order terms in J(J + 1) to the term values of equation (7.5) or (7.6) 
to give: 
F(J) = BJ(J + 1) - DP(J + 1)’ + ... 
(7.7) 
where D is the 
Equation (7.7) indicates 
that further terms may be included, but these are too small to concern 
us here. 

Molecular Rotation 
95 
7.3 
Non-linear Polyatomic Molecules 
7.3.1 Introduction 
In order to consider the rotational energy levels of non-linear polyatomic 
molecules, we must classify the molecules according to their 
In general, the moment of inertia I (with reference 
to rotation of the molecule about uny axis passing through the centre of 
mass) is given by equation (7.4), where r, is the distance of an atom of 
mass 177~ from the axis. The summation, Ci, is over all the atoms. In any 
non-linear molecule there are two unique axes about which the moment 
of inertia is a minimum or a maximum; conventionally, these are labelled 
the u- or c*-axis, respectively. These are two of the so-called 
and are at 90" to each other. The corresponding moments of iner- 
tia, I,, and I',, are two of the principal moments of inertia. There is a third 
principal moment of inertia, I,,, about the h-axis, which is at 90" to the 
Li- and c-axes. All three axes pass through the centre of mass of the mol- 
ecule. In general: 
I', I 
Ih I 
I', 
7.3.2 Symmetric Top Molecules 
A 
molecule is defined as one which 
has two equal principal moments of inertia. From equation (7.8) we can 
see that there are two possibilities: (a) that I,, c I,, = I,. and (b) that I,, = 

96 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 7.3 (a) Fluoromethane, 
a prolate symmetric top, and 
Ib < Ic. Such molecules are called (a) 
and (b) 
symmetric 
tops. 
Figure 7.3(a) shows an example of a prolate and Figure 7.3(b) of an 
oblate symmetric top. In the fluoromethane molecule, in Figure 7.3(a), 
it is clear that the moment of inertia about the a-axis is the minimum 
moment of inertia. This is because the only atoms which are not on this 
axis, and which therefore contribute to the moment of inertia about this 
axis, are the light hydrogen atoms. It would require a little trigonometry 
to show that Ih = Ic. 
The benzene molecule, shown in Figure 7.3(b), is an oblate symmet- 
ric top, with the axis of maximum moment of inertia, the c-axis, per- 
pendicular to the figure. Again, it would require trigonometry to show 
that IN = Ib. 
For non-linear molecules there are now three rotational constants. 
Analogous to the B rotational constant for a diatomic molecule (see 
equations 7.5 and 7.6), these rotational constants are given by: 
(b) benzene, an oblate symmetric 
top 
with units of frequency, or by: 
(7.9) 
(7.10) 
with units of wavenumber. 
In symmetric tops a second quantum number, K, is introduced in addi- 
tion to J. The equation for the rotational term values, F(J,K), analogous 
to that of equation (7.5) (or 7.6) for a diatomic molecule, becomes: 
F(J,K) = BJ(J + 1) + ( A  - B ) P  
(7.1 1) 
for a prolate symmetric top, for which C = B, and: 
F(J,K) = BJ(J + 1) + (C - B ) P  
(7.12) 
for an oblate symmetric top, for which A = B. The quantum number K 
can only be less than or equal to J, i.e. K = 0, 1, 2, 3, ... J. 
Figure 7.5(a) and (b) show sets of rotational energy levels for a pro- 
late and an oblate symmetric top, respectively. For each value of K there 
is a stack of J-dependent levels which resemble those for a diatomic mol- 
ecule, except that the lowest level in each stack is that with J = K. The 
main difference between the levels for the two types of symmetric top is 
that, for a particular value of J ,  the levels diverge for a prolate sym- 
metric top but converge for an oblate symmetric top. The reason for this 
is apparent from equations (7.11) and (7.12). For a prolate symmetric 

Molecular Rotation 
97 
Figure 7.4 Vector representa- 
tion of rotation in (a) a heteronu- 
clear diatomic molecule and (b) a 
prolate symmetric top molecule, 
such as fluoromethane 
Figure 7.5 Rotational energy 
levels for (a) a prolate and (13) an 
top the value Of A - B is positive, but for an oblate symmetric top the 
value of C - B is negative. 
As with a diatomic or linear polyatomic molecule, centrifugal distor- 
tion occurs increasingly as the rotational quantum number(s) increase. 
oblate symmetric top molecule 

98 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 7.6 (a) Sulfur hexa- 
fluoride and (b) methane are 
spherical top molecules 
Figure 7.7 Methanal (formalde- 
hyde) is an asymmetric top 
molecule 
To take account of these relatively small effects, extra terms must be 
added to the rotational term value expressions of equations (7.1 1) and 
(7.12), but they will not concern us here. 
7.3.3 Spherical Top Molecules 
For any molecule having the structure of a regular octahedron, such as 
SF, (Figure 7.6a), or a regular tetrahedron, such as CH, (Figure 7.6b), 
all three principal moments of inertia are equal, i.e. Iu = Ih := I,. Such 
molecules are 
The rotational term 
values are given by: 
F(J) = BJ(J + 1) 
(7.13) 
when the effects of centrifugal distortion are neglected. The rotational 
constant, B, is given by the same expression as in equation (7.9) or (7.10). 
The term value expression is the same as that for a diatomic or linear 
polyatomic molecule, and the pattern of rotational energy levels is the 
same as that in Figure 7.2. 
7.3.4 Asymmetric Top Molecules 
For an 
moments of inertia are unequal: 
molecule, all the principal 
The vast majority of molecules are asymmetric tops, of which methanal 
(formaldehyde), shown in Figure 7.7, is an example. 
Unfortunately, there are no simple formulae for the rotational term 
values for asymmetric tops. J is still a good quantum number, i.e. takes 
integral values, but K is not. Approximate expressions for those with low 
values of J have been derived, and also for molecules which approximate 
to either a prolate or oblate symmetric top, i.e.: 
or I, = Ih < I, 
(7.15) 
Accurate term values can be obtained only by the use of matrix algebra, 
which is beyond the scope of this book. 

Molecular Rotation 
99 

How Spectra are Obtained 
8.1 
Microwave, Infrared, Visible and Ultraviolet 
Spectroscopy 
In this book we are concerned primarily with the patterns of transitions 
in various types of spectra and the information which may be obtained 
from them. Most of the experimental techniques employed to obtain 
these spectra will be described in outline only, except for Raman 
spectroscopy for which the technique is very different from those used 
for microwave, infrared, visible and ultraviolet spectroscopy. 
The majority of spectra to be discussed will be absorption spectra. 
The general experimental arrangement to obtain such a spectrum is 
shown, symbolically, in Figure 8.1. The radiation from the source passes 
100 

How Spectra are Obtained 
101 
Figure 8.1 Symbolic 
representation of the principal 
components used in obtaining an 
absorption spectrum 
through the sample cell, containing the absorbing sample, to a 
This element disperses and resolves the radiation falling on it. 
It may be a prism, as shown, but is usually a diffraction grating; these 
dispersing elements have been described in Sections 1.1-1.2. 
The 
radiation is detected as the wavelength or wavenumber (see equation 2.4) 
is changed smoothly by rotating the prism or diffraction grating. The 
spectrum is shown as a plot of 
A, against wavenumber, V. 
Absorbance is of the greatest importance in electronic (usually visible or 
ultraviolet) spectroscopy and is a measure of the degree of absorption 
by the sample. It is defined as: 
where, as shown in Figure 8.2, I, is the intensity of radiation of a par- 
ticular wavelength entering the cell of length I, and I is the intensity of 
the radiation after absorption has taken place. 
Figure 8.2 Absorption of 
radiation by a sample in a cell of 
length I 
According to the Beer-Lambed law the absorbance is proportional to 
I and to the concentration, c, of the sample in the cell: 
The quantity E is a measure of the absorbing power of the sample at a 
particular wavenumber, V, and is called the 
or the 
Since absorbance has no units, the units of E 
must be those of concentration-' x length-', and are usually mol-' dm3 
cm-' (it is usual for the cell length to be measured in centimetres). 

102 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
The absorption intensity of the band shown in Figure 8.3 is the total 
area under the curve. However, the value of the molar absorption 
coefficient, E
~
~
~
,
 
at the maximum absorbance is often used as an approx- 
imate measure of the total absorption intensity. The quantity E~~~ is very 
useful when spectroscopy is used for analytical purposes, usually in the 
liquid phase in solution. If E~~~ is known for the spectrum of a molecule 
in a particular solvent, and the cell length I is known, the concentration 
follows simply from the measured absorbance A and equation (8.2). 
Figure 8.4 shows the visiblehltraviolet absorption spectrum of trans- 
dimethyldiimide [(a- 
1 ,Zdirnethyldiazene] in solution in hexane. Typical 
of many such spectra in solution, it shows very little structure. 
Nevertheless, measurement of the absorbance exhibited by either, or 
both, of the maxima at 42 700 and 28 200 cm-l can be used to measure 
the concentration of the trans-dimethyldiimide, provided that E~~ is 
known for these maxima. 
Figure 8.3 A broad absorption 
band 

How Spectra are Obtained 
103 
Figure 8.4 Visible and 
near-ultraviolet absorption 
spectrum of trans-dimethyldiimide 
in solution in hexane (after 
G. Kortum and H. Rau, Be/: 
Bunsenges. Phys. Chem., 1964, 
@, 973) 
Quantitative absorption intensities are much less important in microwave 
and infrared spectroscopy, and will not be discussed here. 
The experimental methods involved in obtaining microwave, infrared, 
visible or ultraviolet absorption spectra each have unique features, but 
are generally based on the arrangement in Figure 8.1. The reader is 
referred to Section 2.1 for definitions of the various regions of the elec- 
tromagnetic spectrum . 
The source of radiation used for microwave and millimetre wave 
spectroscopy is a 
or a 
These are elec- 
tronic devices that produce radiation which is highly monochromatic, 
i.e. having a very narrow band width, and are smoothly tuneable through 
a specific wavelength range. The radiation differs from infrared, visible 

104 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
and ultraviolet radiation in that it travels inside metal tubing. This tub- 
ing has a rectangular cross-section. It is known as 
and guides 
the radiation, around corners if necessary, from the source to the 
detector. The absorption cell forms a part of the waveguide, having 
windows at each end to contain the sample. Because the source is mono- 
chromatic and tuneable, a dispersing element is not required. The type 
of detector used is a 
Far-infrared spectroscopy is the most difficult of the infrared spec- 
troscopies, mainly due to the fact that water vapour, which is always 
present in air, absorbs the radiation very strongly. Water vapour must 
be excluded from the complete optical path from the source, such as a 
mercury discharge in a quartz envelope, to the detector. This may be 
partly achieved by flushing the whole spectrometer with dry nitrogen, 
but complete evacuation is preferable. Polymeric materials, such as 
poly(pheny1ethene) (polystyrene), transmit far-infrared radiation and are 
used for cell windows. One type of detector which is used is a 
which relies on the heating of an aluminium film inside a flexible con- 
tainer filled with xenon gas. A light beam falls on a mirror deposited on 
the outside of the container and is deflected according to the degree of 
heating in the cell, i.e. according to the intensity of the far-infrared radi- 
ation falling on it. Other types of detectors include thermocouples and 
semiconductors. 
The dispersing element which is used for far-infrared radiation is either 
a diffraction grating or an 
The details of how an inter- 
ferometer works will not concern us here but, briefly, the beam of radi- 
ation emerging from the absorption cell is split into two parts. One part 
strikes a fixed mirror in the interferometer and the other part strikes a 
moving mirror. When the two parts are recombined, interference occurs 
between them. The degree of interference depends on the difference 
between the lengths of the paths traversed by the two beams. Higher 
resolution (see Section 1.2) may be achieved with an interferometer than 
with a diffraction grating. Another advantage of using an interferometer 
is that it allows the observation of all the spectrum all the time, the so- 
called 
whereas the use of a diffraction grating rejects 
most of the spectrum most of the time. For this reason, an interferometer 
is used in preference to a diffraction grating when the speed of recording 
a spectrum is important, or for the observation of weak spectra. 
In mid- and near-infrared spectroscopy, evacuation of the optical line 
is unnecessary. The source is either a heated 
consisting 
of mixed rare earth oxides, or a heated, silicon carbide 
The dis- 
persing element may be either a diffraction grating or an interferometer. 
Cell windows are made from either sodium chloride or potassium bro- 
mide. If the sample is in solution, the solvent must not absorb the radi- 
ation in the region of interest. Solvents such as carbon disulfide and 
an electronic device. 

How Spectra are Obtained 
105 
tetrachloroethene are used. A solid sample may be ground into a fine 
powder and made into a mull with 
(a liquid paraffin). 
Alternatively, it may be ground together with potassium bromide and 
compressed to form a 
Types of detectors used, such as a Golay 
cell, thermocouple or semiconductor, are the same as those for the far 
infrared. 
For visible or near-ultraviolet spectroscopy the source may be a 
or a 
respectively. A 
more intense source is a high-pressure xenon arc 
Glass (for the 
visible region only) or fused quartz are used for cell windows. For Sam- 
ples in solution, the solvent must be transparent in the region of inter- 
est; a saturated hydrocarbon, such as pentane or hexane, is suitable. 
In addition to observing spectra by an absorption process, they may 
also be observed by an emission process (see Section 1.3). Such emission 
spectra are observed most commonly in the visible and near-ultraviolet 
regions. Preceding any emission process, energy must be transferred to 
the atom or molecule to get it into an excited electronic state. This energy 
transfer may be indiscriminate, as in the case of an electrical discharge 
induced in the gaseous material at very low pressure. One example of 
this is the sodium discharge lamp (see Section 1.3), in which many 
different wavelengths in the emission spectrum are observed. An electri- 
cal discharge in very low-pressure nitrogen gas produces a complex emis- 
sion spectrum of N,, consisting of discrete bands throughout the visible 
and near-ultraviolet regions. 
Alternatively, a monochromatic (single wavelength) source of energy 
may be used to excite the atom or molecule into a single excited energy 
level, from which an emission spectrum may be observed. Single intense 
lines from an atomic discharge, such as is produced from a mercury dis- 
charge lamp, have been used, but a 
is a much more useful source. 
Not only is the radiation from a laser monochromatic, it also contains 
a much narrower band of wavelengths than is contained in an atomic 
line. In addition, the radiation is very much more intense, and there is 
a more flexible choice of wavelengths. 
In the far-ultraviolet region, the principal experimental problem 
follows from the fact that oxygen in the air absorbs strongly at wave- 
lengths below 185 nm, necessitating evacuation of the complete optical 
line from the source to the detector. Sources of far-ultraviolet radiation 
include microwave-induced discharges in argon, krypton or xenon, which 
cover the range 200-105 nm. The only window material that can be used 
for the absorption cell is lithium fluoride, which absorbs radiation below 
105 nm. At these wavelengths, differential pumping must be used, instead 
of cell windows, to prevent the sample leaking from the absorption cell 
into the rest of the optical line. Detection of the radiation is usually by 
a photomultiplier . 

100 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
8.2 
Raman Spectroscopy 
As was mentioned briefly in Section 2.5, Raman spectroscopy involves 
neither absorption nor emission, but scattering of radiation by the sample. 
When radiation falls on a gaseous sample it may be absorbed, but if 
the wavelength of the radiation does not correspond to that of an absorp- 
tion process, it is scattered. The scattered radiation is mostly of 
unchanged wavelength, and this is known as 
The 
intensity, Is, of this scattering varies strongly with wavelength: 
One result of this preferential scattering at shorter wavelengths is that a 
cloudless sky appears blue. The radiation observed is scattered radiation 
from particles in the atmosphere, and equation (8.3) shows that the inten- 
sity is greatest at the shortest wavelengths. 
A very small proportion of scattered light is of slightly increased or 
decreased wavelength, and is called 
That of increased 
or decreased wavelength is known as 
or 
respectively. It is the observation of this weak R.aman scat- 
tering that forms the basis of Raman spectroscopy. 
Lasers are ideal sources of radiation for obtaining Raman spectra: 
they are monochromatic, which allows the Raman scattering to be 
separated from the Rayleigh scattering, and are very intense. A heli- 
um-neon or an argon ion laser, in which emission is from Ne or Ar+ at 
wavelengths of 632.8 or 514.5 nm, respectively, is often used. The dis- 
persing element is usually a diffraction grating, but the use of an inter- 
ferometer (see Section 8.1) has enabled the use of a neodymium-YAG 
laser source in which emission is from Nd3+ at a wavelength of 1064 nm, 
in the near infrared. 
The wavelength dependence of the intensity of scattering intensity, 
illustrated by equation (8.3), would seem to mitigate against the use of 
a wavelength as high as 1064 nm. However, there are compensating 
advantages. The use of an interferometer allows the observation of all 
the spectrum all the time, and is ideal for collecting weak spectra. A 
further advantage of using a wavelength of 1064 nm is that it is much 
less likely to fall in a region in which the sample absorbs; absorption of 
the source radiation, and subsequent emission, precludes the observation 
of the very weak Raman scattering. 
There are several possible optical arrangements of the sample cell in 
order to optimize the production and collection of the Raman scatter- 
ing. Figure 8.5 shows one which is commonly used. The lens L, focuses 
the laser beam into the cell, C. The concave mirror, M,, sends the emerg- 
ing beam back into the cell to produce further scattering. The scattered 

How Spectra are Obtained 
107 
Figure 8.5 Experimental 
arrangement for the observation 
of Raman scattering 
radiation is directed by the lens L, into the dispersing device of the 
spectrometer; the mirror M, serves to double the intensity of the scat- 
tered radiation which is collected. 
The detector used is one which is suitable for the wavelength range in 
which the laser operates. 
8.3 
Spectral Line Widths 
~~ 
~ 
The width of a sharp spectral line, such as the D lines of sodium illus- 
trated in Figure 1.3, may be limited by the width of the entrance slit of 
the spectrometer, as discussed in Section 1.2. This limitation can be 
removed by the slit being sufficiently narrow, but the lines will still 
have finite widths. For spectra of atoms or molecules in the gas phase, 
there are three main causes of line broadening: 
1. 
2. 
due to collisions between the atoms or mole- 
cules. This broadening can be minimized by minimizing the pressure. 
due to the atoms or molecules travelling in dif- 
ferent directions relative to the detector. Removal of Doppler broad- 
ening can be achieved, but with some difficulty. 
is what remains of the line width when the 
other two sources of broadening have been removed. This broaden- 
ing is inherent in the spectrum of the atom or molecule, and cannot 
be removed. 
3. 
8.4 
Spectroscopy in Various Phases 
For the most detailed spectroscopic investigation of the structure of 
atoms and molecules, the 
is by far the most informative. This 
is because each atom or molecule, under ideal conditions, behaves 
independently of its nearest neighbours. These ideal conditions include 
a gas pressure which is sufficiently low for no collisions to occur during 

108 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
the time taken for a transition between energy levels to take place. 
In general, though, much of molecular spectroscopy, particularly for 
analytical purposes, is carried out in the 
The sample may 
be the pure liquid, but is often a dilute solution in a solvent which is 
transparent in the region of the spectrum being investigated. 
This 
may be a crystalline or amorphous pure solid, but most studies are 
carried out with the sample embedded in a solid, spectroscopically 
transparent matrix. The technique is 
This 
is usually carried out at very low (liquid nitrogen or liquid helium) tem- 
perature, one effect of which is to sharpen the spectrum. The sample is 
in very low concentration in order to minimize interactions between 
nearest neighbour sample molecules, thereby imitating a low-pressure 
gas. Interactions with the matrix are unavoidable and may complicate 
the spectra; in particular, there are frequency shifts compared to the gas 
phase spectrum. 
An important advantage of matrix isolation spectroscopy is that a 
short-lived molecule, such as a radical, may be deposited in, or created 
in, a matrix. At very low temperatures, and under the conditions of iso- 
lation in the matrix, the short-lived species remains sufficiently stable for 
spectra to be obtained. 
Spectroscopy of molecules is also carried out in the 

How Spectra are Obtained 
109 

Rotational Spectroscopy 
9.1 
Introduction 
In Chapter 7, rotational energy levels (term values) for diatomic mole- 
cules and linear, symmetric top, spherical top and asymmetric top 
polyatomic molecules were discussed. In general, the rigid rotor approx- 
imation was assumed, but the effects of centrifugal distortion were intro- 
duced for diatomic and linear polyatomic molecules. 
In the present chapter we shall discuss the transitions between these 
I10 

Rotational Spectroscopy 
11 1 
levels which are observed in rotational spectroscopy. Of prime impor- 
tance are the 
these determine which transitions are 
of these transitions. The most important contribution to the relative 
intensity of a transition is from the relative 
of the initial state. 
In highly symmetrical molecules, such as homonuclear diatomics, nuclei 
with non-zero 
also have an important effect on transition 
intensities. 
and which are 
In addition, we shall consider the 
9.2 
Rotational Spectroscopy of Diatomic and 
Linear Polyatomic Molecules 
9.2.1 Microwave, Millimetre Wave and Far-infrared 
Spectroscopy 
The rotational term values for a diatomic or linear polyatomic molecule 
were given in equations (7.5) and (7.6) and the energy levels illustrated 
in Figure 7.2. A similar set of energy levels is shown in Figure 9.1. 
Figure 9.1 Rotational energy 
levels of a diatomic or linear 
polyatomic molecule showing 
allowed transitions in (a) 
microwave, millimetre wave or 
far-infrared and (b) Raman 
For rotational transitions between these energy levels that occur in 
the microwave, millimetre wave or far-infrared region, the selection rule 
is: 
A J =  J’ - J” = +I 
(9.1) 
spectroscopy 

1 12 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
where J’ and J” are the rotational quantum numbers for the upper and 
lower state, respectively, of the transition. Such transitions are shown, 
in absorption, in Figure 9.l(a). The conventional method for labelling a 
transition is J‘-J”, so that the transitions in Figure 9.l(a) are 1-0 to 7-6. 
In addition to this selection rule, there is a further important condi- 
tion for there to be a rotational absorption (or emission) spectrum: this 
is that the molecule must have a non-zero 
p. For 
example, F,, for whichp = 0, has no such spectrum, while HF, for which 
p f 0, does have a rotational spectrum. 
Treating the molecule as a rigid rotor and neglecting any effects of 
centrifugal distortion (see Section 7.2.2), the rotational term values F(J), 
from equation (7.5) or (7.6), are BJ(J + 1). Applying the selection rule 
of equation (9.1) gives: 
F(J + 1) - F(J) = B(J + 1)(J + 2) - BJ(J + 1) = 2BJ + 2B (9.2) 
where J is understood to be the lower state quantum number, 1’. 
The 
rotational constant B is given by: 
B = h/8n21 or h/8n2cI 
(9.3) 
with units of frequency or wavenumber, respectively; I is the moment of 
inertia given by equation (7.4). 
The result in equation (9.2) shows that the transition with J = 0 occurs 
at a frequency (or wavenumber) of 2B and that subsequent transitions 
occur at intervals of 2B. These transitions are shown in the energy level 
diagram in Figure 9.l(a), and the resulting spectrum is shown below the 
diagram. Whether the transitions are in the far-infrared, millimetre wave 
or microwave region of the spectrum depends on the value of B. Because 
of the inverse relationship between the moment of inertia and the B- 
value, a heavy molecule, having a large moment of inertia, has a small 
B-value. Consequently, the rotational spectrum appears in the microwave 
and/or millimetre wave region. For a light molecule, having a large B- 
value, the transitions are more likely to fall in the far-infrared region. 
Much greater accuracy of measurement of transition frequencies can be 
achieved in the microwave and millimetre wave regions, where the exper- 
imental resolution (see Section 1.2) obtainable is very much higher than 
in the far infrared. 
The most important aspect of the intensity of a rotational transition, 
or any type of spectroscopic transition, is whether it is sufficiently high 
for the transition to be observed. In any absorption spectrum the 
most important contribution to the intensity comes from the relative 
population of the initial state of the transition, i.e. what proportion of 
the molecules are in that state. 

Rotational Spectroscopy 
1 13 
Energy level populations are governed, principally, by the 
n is related to the population, Nm, of a lower state m by: 
which states that the population, Nn, of an upper state 
NJNm = (gJgm)exp(-AE/kT) 
(9.4) 
where g, and g, are the degeneracies of the lower and upper states, 
respectively, AE is the energy separation of the two states, k is the 
Boltzmann constant and Tis the temperature of the sample. 
In the absence of an external electric or magnetic field, rotational 
energy levels of a diatomic molecule are (2J + 1)-fold degenerate. A 
magnetic field, for example, splits each J-level into 2J + 1 components, 
identified by the 
MJ, where: 
MJ = J, J- 1, ... -J 
If we take the lower state, m, to be that with 
becomes: 
NjN0 = (2J + l)exp[-hBJ(J + 
(9.5) 
J = 0, equation (9.4) 

1 14 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
where the rotational term values, in units of frequency, have been con- 
verted to energy by multiplying by the Planck constant, h. There are four 
particularly important features of this equation: 
1. As J increases, the exponential factor decreases and, because of the 
exponential relationship, this decrease is rapid. 
2. As we go to heavier molecules, B decreases and the decline of the 
exponential factor becomes less pronounced: the population distri- 
bution moves to higher J-values. 
3. As the temperature increases, the population distribution shifts 
towards levels with higher J-values. 
4. Whereas the effect of the negative exponential factor is to impose a 
smooth, and relatively rapid, decline in population with increasing 
J, the effect of the (2J + 1) degeneracy factor is to tend to reverse 
this decline owing to the imposition of an increase which is linear. 
The net effect of the competing negative exponential and linear terms 
is that the population increases initially as J increases, but eventu- 
ally the more effective exponential factor wins and the population 
declines to zero. Since relative populations have the greatest effect 
on transition intensities, rotational spectra show an intensity distri- 
bution which rises to a maximum as J increases, then falls smooth- 
ly to zero. This effect is shown in the rotational spectrum in Figure 
9.1 (a). 

Rotational Spectroscopy 
1 15 
The general appearance of rotational spectra of linear polyatomic mol- 
ecules is similar to that of diatomics, showing a series of lines separated 
by 2B, in the rigid rotor approximation, and with intensities rising from 
the J = 1-0 transition to a maximum then falling smoothly to zero. The 
B-value of a linear polyatomic molecule may be very small as a 
consequence of the length of the chain of atoms and, possibly, the inch- 
sion of heavy atoms. One such example is H-CrC-C=C-C&-C+l 
(hepta-2,4,6-triynenitrile, cyanohexatriyne), for which part of the 
J. Mol. Spectrosc., 980, 83, 
microwave spectrum is shown in Figure 9.2. 
Figure 9m2 Part of the 
microwave rotational spectrum of 
hepta-2,4,6-triynenitrile (cyano- 
hexatriyne) (after c. 
Kroto and D. R. M. Walton, 
261) 
H. w. 
39 
38 
37 
36 vIGHz 
I 
I 
I 
I 
J =  3 3 4 3 2  
J =  3 2 ~ 3 1  'I 
For this long and heavy molecule, B = 564.000 74 MHz, and the rota- 
tional spectrum lies in the microwave region. The figure shows that the 
intensity of the transitions falls with increasing J; the intensity maximum 
occurs at lower J. It is clear from the spectrum that there is not just a 
single line associated with each rotational transition but a complex group 
of lines. This is characteristic of a polyatomic linear molecule; the reason 
for this will be discussed in Section 9.3. 

118 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
9.2.2 Raman Spectroscopy 
In Section 8.2 we have seen that Raman spectroscopy involves a scat- 
tering process. Rayleigh scattering is of unchanged wavelength, and will 
not concern us further. Raman scattering is of increased or decreased 
wavelength, and is known as Stokes or anti-Stokes Raman scattering, 
respectively. Raman scattering by molecules may involve transitions 
between rotational, vibrational or, very rarely, electronic states. Here we 
consider transitions between rotational states. 
For Raman scattered radiation involving rotational transitions, the 
selection rule is: 
AJ=O,H 
(9.7) 
Figure 9.1 (b) shows the overall results of transitions with AJ = f2; those 
with AJ = 0 are coincident with the Rayleigh scattering, and are of no 
further consequence. 
In order for scattering to occur, the incident radiation must not be 
absorbed by the sample molecules. So what does the radiation do to the 
sample? It 
it, which means that, to some extent, it tends to sep- 
arate positive and negative charges, the nuclei and the electrons. The 
of the molecule is a measure of the degree to which it can 
be polarized. For a molecule to have a rotational Raman spectrum it 
is essential that the polarizability is 
All molecules except 
spherical tops, such as methane, have anisotropic polarizability and show 
a rotational Raman spectrum. This is an important difference from the 
more stringent requirement that a molecule must have a dipole moment 
in order to show a microwave, millimetre wave or far-infrared rotation- 
al spectrum. For homonuclear diatomic molecules, such as N, and O,, 
and symmetrical linear polyatomic molecules, such as H-GC-H and 
N=C-C=N, only Raman spectroscopy can be used for investigation of 
the rotational spectrum. For molecules having a dipole moment, the 
advantage of using microwave or millimetre wave spectroscopy is that 
they are higher resolution techniques, leading to the determination of 
parameters such as B-values with very much higher accuracy. 
Consider the two J = 2-0 transitions shown in Figure 9.l(b). That 
with an increased wavelength (decreased wavenumber), compared to that 
of the monochromatic (laser) radiation used, is the Stokes transition. 
Initially, the molecule is in the J = 0 level. One quantum of the incident 
radiation can be considered to take the molecule into an excited 
Vo. Then, obeying the selection rules in equation (9.7), it may revert 
to the J = 0 level, a transition which is coincident with the Rayleigh scat- 
tering, or, in a Stokes transition, to the J = 2 level. On the other hand, 
in the anti-Stokes transition, one quantum of the radiation takes the mol- 

Rotational Spectroscopy 
1 17 
ecule from the J = 2 level to a virtual state, V,. The transition back to 
J = 2 is coincident with the Rayleigh scattering while that to J = 0 is an 
ant i-S to kes transition. 
Since AJ is defined as J’-J”, the separations of the AJ = 2, Stokes and 
anti-Stokes lines from that of the incident radiation are given, in terms 
of wavenumber, by: 
I AVI = F(J + 2) - F(J) = B(J + 2)(J + 3) - BJ(J + 1) = 4BJ + 6B (9.8) 
where IAVI is the magnitude, irrespective of the sign, of AV. Therefore 
the rotational transitions are observed at wavenumbers given by: 
V =  Vo f (4BJ + 6B) 
(9.9) 
where Vo is the wavenumber of the incident laser radiation. Figure 9.1 (b) 
shows the resulting pattern of Stokes and anti-Stokes lines in the spec- 
trum. The first member of each set of lines is separated from the Rayleigh 
scattered radiation, at Vo, by 6B and subsequent spacings are 4B. 
Figure 9.3 shows a rotational Raman spectrum of N,, which was 
obtained with 632.8 nm wavelength radiation from a helium-neon laser. 
This spectrum, and the one illustrated in Figure 9.l(b), both show the 
rise and fall in intensities which are a consequence of the Boltzmann pop- 
ulation distribution among rotational levels in equation (9.6). Each anti- 
Stokes transition is rather less intense than the equivalent Stokes 
transition because the initial rotational level of the anti-Stokes transition 
is at a higher energy and therefore less highly populated. 
In addition to the effect on the intensities of initial state populations, 
the rotational Raman spectrum of 14N2 in Figure 9.3 also shows an alter- 
nation of the intensities with J. Careful measurement of intensities shows 
that the alternation is in the ratio 2: 1. This is a consequence of the lower 
Figure 9.3 Rotational Raman 
levels of transitions with even values of J having twice the population of 
spectrum Of the nitrogen 
molecule (after H. W. Kroto, 
those with odd J. This effect is due to nuclear spin, which will now be 
Molecular Rotation sDectra, 
discussed further. 
Dover, New York, 1992, p.. 11 1) 
-9 
-1 50 
-I 00 
-50 
0 
50 
100 
150 A9krn-l 

1 18 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
9.2.3 Effects of Nuclear Spin 
Nuclear spin, and the associated angular momentum, were introduced 
in Section 3.3 in the context of the hydrogen atom. For example, the 
nuclear spin quantum number Z = 3 for 'H and the quantum number rn, 
= ++ or -3 (see equation 3.25). 
All nuclei contain protons and neutrons. For each of these, Z = +, and 
the value of Z for the nucleus is the result of the vector slim of all the 
associated angular momenta. In general, Z may be 0, 1, 2, ..., and the 
nuclei are said to be 
or bosons or it may be +,3,+, . , . , in 
which case the nuclei are said to be Kermi particle! or fermionD 
Consider the two nuclei in IH,. For each of them, rn, = ++ so that 
there are four possible combinations: ++,++; -+,-+; 
+-+,-+; -f,++. 
Associated with these combinations are four nuclear sp~n wave 
functions yns, 
of which three are symmetric to nuclear exchange and one 
is antisymmetric. Equation (6.2), giving the breakdown of the total 
molecular wave function, ytota,, 
into the electronic, vibrational and rota- 
tional contributions, did not include the possibility that Z + 0 for one of 
more of the nuclei. When this is the case, the total wave function 
becomes: 
~artich 
(9.10) 
where yns 
is the wave function due to nuclear spin. 
It is only the wryns 
part of the wave function which concerns us here. 
For fermions, such as 'H, this part must be antisymmetric to nuclear 
exchange. For all homonuclear diatomic molecules, yr is symmetric to 
nuclear exchange for all even J and antisymmetric for all odd J. 
Therefore, in IH,, the single antisymmetric yns combines only with yr 
for even J, and the three symmetric yns with y,. for odd J. The result is 
that there is a nuclear spin statistical weigh1 alternation of 1:3 for J 
even:odd. This alternation is reflected in any rotational spectrum of IH, 
(or 19F2, since Z = 3 for 19F) showing an intensity alternation of 1:3 for 
the lower state J-value even:odd, superimposed on the rise and fall in 
intensity due to the Boltzmann population distribution. 
For the 14N nucleus Z = 1, and m, = 1, 0 or -1. For the two nuclei in 
14N2 there are nine possible combinations of the two values of m, and 
nine associated yns 
wave functions. Three of these are symmetric and six 
are antisymmetric to nuclear exchange. Because 14N is a boson, wryns 
must be symmetric and therefore the nuclear spin statistical weights of 
the rotational levels are 6:3 for J even:odd. The resulting intensity alter- 
nation in the rotational Raman spectrum is clear from Figure 9.3. There 
is an identical nuclear spin statistical weight alternation in the popula- 
tions of rotational levels of ,H2, since Z = 1 for ,H. 

Rotational Spectroscopy 
1 19 
Nuclear spin statistical weights for the J = 0-3 levels of some diatomic 
molecules are summarized in Figure 9.4. 
Figure 9.4 Nuclear spin 
statistical weights for the J = 0 to 
3 rotational energy levels of some 
homonuclear diatomic molecules 

120 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
9.2.4 Spectra of Molecules in Vibrationally Excited 
States 
Vibrational energy levels of diatomic molecules have been discussed in 
Section 6.2 and illustrated, for an anharmonic oscillator, in Figure 6.3. 
The relative populations of these vibrational levels are determined by the 
Boltzmann distribution law of equation (9.4), in the same way as the 
populations of rotational levels. For the population of a vibrational ener- 
gy level with quantum number V, relative to that of the zero-point level 
with v = 0, equation (9.4) becomes: 
N,!No = exp{-hc[G(v) - G(O)]/kT} 
(9.11) 
where the vibrational term values G(v) are given by equation (6.12), for 
a harmonic oscillator, or equation (6.13), for an anharmonic oscillator; 
the vibration is non-degenerate (go = gv = 1). This relationship 
shows that the population of, say, the v = 1 level is very small for a light 
molecule, with a large vibration wavenumber w, compared to a heavy 
molecule with a relatively small value of w. It also shows that the 
population of this level can be increased by increasing the temperature, 
but, because of the exponential nature of the relationship, it requires a 
very large increase in temperature to increase the population appreciably. 

Rotational Spectroscopy 
121 
Figure 6.9 shows that there are rotational energy levels associated with 
each vibrational level. If the molecule has a sufficiently low vibration 
wavenumber, m, any rotational spectrum may show rotational transi- 
tions within the v = I ,  as well as within the v = 0, level. These additional 
rotational transitions obey the same selection rules of equation (9.1) or 
(9.7) for microwavelinfrared or Raman spectra, respectively. However, 
as will be discussed in more detail in Chapter 10, the rotational constant, 
B, varies with the vibrational energy level in which the rotational ener- 
gy levels occur. Consequently, the rotational transitions in the v = 1 level 
are slightly displaced from those in the v = 0 level, and they are weak- 
er because of the population difference. 
A linear polyatomic molecule has 3N - 5 vibrational modes (see 
Section 6.3), where N is the number of atoms. Some of these modes may 
have low vibration wavenumbers and may be appreciably populated, 
resulting in groups of rotational transitions accompanying those with 
all v = 0. The microwave spectrum of the linear molecule hepta-2,4,6- 
triynenitrile (cyanohexatriyne) (Figure 9.2) shows such groups of lines. 
Although the molecule is linear, it is extremely flexible about the 
various atoms of the chain. The large number of lines in each group 
is due to the resulting low-lying energy levels involving the various 
bending motions. 
9.3 
Microwave, Millimetre Wave and Far-infrared 
Spectroscopy of Non-linear Polyatomic 
Molecules 
9.3.1 Symmetric Top Molecules 
Symmetric top molecules, both prolate and oblate, were introduced in 
Section 7.3.2. Typical rotational energy levels are shown in Figure 7.5(a) 
for a prolate, and in Figure 7.5(b) for an oblate, symmetric top. 
For a symmetric top molecule to show a microwave, millimetere wave 
or far-infared rotational spectrum it must have a non-zero dipole 
moment. Therefore, the prolate symmetric top fluoromethane (Figure 
7.3a) shows a rotational spectrum, while benzene, an oblate symmetric 
top (Figure 7.3b), does not. 

122 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
The rotational term values for prolate and oblate symmetric top mol- 
ecules are given in equations (7.1 l) and (7.12), respectively. The selec- 
tion rules are: 
A J = + l  
and A K = O  
(9.12) 
and the molecule must have a permanent dipole moment. For both pro- 
late and oblate symmetric tops (equations 7.1 1 and 7.12): 
F(J + 1,K) - F(J,K) = 2BJ + 2B 
(9.13) 
These separations of adjacent transitions are independent of K, and 
are the same as those given in equation (9.2) for a diatomic or linear 
polyatomic molecule. 
Figure 9.5 shows part of the far-infrared rotational spectrum of the 
prolate symmetric top C'H,'H in which the C-'H 
bond lies along the 
a-axis of inertia. The spectrum shows seven transitions, from J = 6-5 to 
12-1 1, with separations of 2B. 
Figure 9.5 Part of the 
far-infrared rotatlona' 
spectrum Of 
CIH,*H 
(monodeuteromethane) 
(after I .  Ozier, W. Ho and G. 
Birnbaum, J ,  Chern. P ~ Y S . ,  1969, 
51, 4872) 
tn nhcerve. 
The most remarkable feature of this spectrum is that it has been 
observed at all. C'H,'H has an extremely small dipole moment of only 
5.68 x 10 D, compared to, say, HF which has a dipole moment of 
1.91 D. This results in a very weak absorption spectrum which is difficult 

Rotational Spectroscopy 
123 
structure associated with each transition, such as that shown in Figure 
9.2, is not observed. There might be fine structure due to rotational 
transitions in vibrationally excited states, although this molecule does 
not have vibrations with sufficiently low wavenumbers to be apprecia- 
bly populated. A more important source of fine structure results from 
centrifugal distortion, a factor which has been neglected in equations 
(7.11) and (7.12) and, consequently, in equation (9.13). We shall not 
consider this effect further except to note that it has the effect of dis- 
placing, slightly, transitions with differing values of K and constant J. 
9.3.2 Spherical Top Molecules 
Bearing in mind that a molecule must have a non-zero dipole moment 
in order to show a microwave or far-infrared rotational spectrum, we 
would not expect a spherical top such as methane (CH,) or silane (SiH,) 
to show such a spectrum. However, rotation about one of the C-H or 
Si-H bonds causes the molecule to distort very slightly, and produces an 
extremely small dipole moment. For example, the dipole moment pro- 
duced in SiH, is only 8.3 x 
D; the resulting rotational spectrum is 
weak but the far-infrared spectrum has been observed. 
9.3.3 Asymmetric Top Molecules 
The majority of molecules are asymmetric tops, all three principal 
moments of inertia being unequal (see Section 7.3.4). Microwave and 
millimetre wave spectra of such molecules are therefore of great impor- 
tance. However, the complexity of the rotational energy levels and tran- 
sitions takes the subject beyond the scope of this book. 
9.4 
Molecular Structure Determination 
The accurate determination of molecular structure, bond lengths and 
bond angles is one of the principal end-products of high-resolution 
(gas phase) spectroscopy. In a diatomic molecule, this involves using a 
precise value of the rotational constant B to determine the moment of 
inertia I from the relationships in equation (9.3). Then the bond length 
r follows from equation (7.2) using the reduced mass p from equation 
(7.3). 
However, we have seen that the value of B varies with the vibrational 
quantum number V. Unless we are dealing with rotational spectra in a 
vibrationally excited state, the value determined will be B,, the value of 
B in the zero-point vibrational state, and hence the bond length r,. The 
potential curve shown in Figure 6.3 indicates that what we would really 
like to determine is Be, and hence re, corresponding to the bottom of the 

124 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
curve where no vibration is taking place. We shall return to this problem 
in Chapter 10. 
For polyatomic molecules the determination of bond lengths and 
angles is more complex. For example, as equation (9.13) indicates, the 
rotational spectrum of a symmetric top molecule produces the value of 
Bo only, and not A, or Co. Isotopic substitution, and the assumption that 
the structure does not change with such substitution, is necessary to 
obtain more than one geometrical parameter. 
Rotational spectra of asymmetric top molecules are more productive. 
Analysis of the spectrum of a planar molecule results in two rotational 
constants which can give two geometrical parameters; the spectrum of a 
non-planar molecule gives three rotational constants. 

Rotational Spectroscopy 
125 

Vibrational Spectroscopy 
10.1 Introduction 
Vibrational motion in diatomic and polyatomic molecules has been dis- 
cussed in Chapter 6. The only vibration of a diatomic molecule can be 
treated in the harmonic oscillator approximation or, more accurately, as 
that of an anharmonic oscillator. Linear and non-linear polyatomic 
molecules, with N atoms, have 3N - 5 and 3N - 6 vibrations, respec- 
tively (see Section 6.3). To a fairly good approximation, each vibration 
can be treated independently, and that is what we shall do here. 
126 

Vibrational Spectroscopy 
127 
Vibrational spectroscopy, whether infrared or Raman, can be divid- 
ed into two general types. When vibrational spectra of diatomic and 
small polyatomic molecules are obtained at high resolution in the gas 
phase, rotational fine structure may be resolved and interpreted to give 
important structural information, namely bond lengths and bond angles. 
On the other hand, it is much more difficult to resolve the rotational fine 
structure for large molecules, and to obtain detailed structural informa- 
tion. In addition, it may be impracticable to get the molecule into the 
gas phase with sufficiently high vapour pressure for a spectrum to be 
obtained. For these molecules, vibrational spectroscopy is commonly 
used as an analytical tool. For example, it may be used to identify a mol- 
ecule, or to confirm that a particular group has been substituted as a 
result of a chemical reaction. Then, it is much more convenient for the 
sample to be in the form of a pure liquid, a solution or, for an infrared 
spectrum, a compressed powdered solid in a spectroscopically transpar- 
ent material. 
10.2 Infrared Spectra of Diatomic Molecules 
The potential energy curve, and the associated vibrational levels, for a 
diatomic molecule are illustrated in Figure 6.3. Treating the molecule in 
the harmonic oscillator approximation (see Section 6.2.1) gives the vibra- 
tional selection rule: 
Av = +1 
(10.1) 
In an absorption spectrum, which is the only type that we shall consid- 
er here, the most prominent absorption will be from v = 0 to v = 1. The 
reason for this is that the population of the v = 0 level is higher than 
that of any other level (see the application of the Boltzmann distribu- 
tion law to vibrational energy levels in equation 9.1 1). 
When the molecule is treated more accurately as an anharmonic oscil- 
lator (see Section 6.2.2), the selection rule relaxes to allow, in principle, 
all vibrational transitions: 
Av = +1, f2, 53, ... 
(10.2) 
In practice, though, the harmonic oscillator approximation is sufficient- 
ly good that transitions with AV = 32, 
+3, ..., the so-called vibrational 
The potential energy curves shown in Figure 6.9 indicate that there 
are rotational energy levels associated with all vibrational levels. Figure 
10.1 shows some of the rotational levels within the v = 0 and 1 levels, 
and the 
which are allowed between them. The 
are usually very weak. 

128 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
vibrational selection rule allows the v = 1-0 transition provided the mol- 
ecule has a non-zero dipole moment. 
Figure 10.1 Rotational energy 
levels and infrared-allowed 
transitions for the v = 0 and 1 
levels of a diatomic molecule (the 
'C+ symbols refer only to an 
electronic transition: see Chapter 
11) 
The rovibrational transitions in the infrared spectrum obey the 
selection rule: 
AJ = f l  
( 10.3) 
The transitions with AJ = +I and -1 constitute the 
respectively, and are labelled R(J) and P(J), where J is understood to be 
the lower state quantum number 7. 
It was mentioned in Section 9.2.4 that the rotational constant, B, 
varies with the vibrational quantum number, v. If at this stage we neglect 
this small variation, and also centrifugal distortion, the wavenumbers, 
Q[R(J)], of the R-branch transitions are given by: 
Q [R(J)] = m0 + BJ(J + 1)(J + 2) - BJ(J + 1) = a0 + 2BJ + 2B (10.4) 
where wo is the wavenumber separation of the J = 0 levels and B is the 
rotational constant, assumed to be the same for both vibrational levels. 

Vibrational Spectroscopy 
129 
Similarly, the wavenumbers, Q[p(J)], for the P-branch transitions are 
given by: 
Q[p(J)] = a0 + B(J- l)J- BJ(J + 1) = a0 - 2BJ 
(10.5) 
Equations (10.4) and (10.5) show that, within the limitations of the 
approximations we have used, the separations within both the R and P 
branches are 2B, but the first R- and P-branch lines are separated by 2B 
from the position of the forbidden J = 0 to J = 0 transition: there is a 
as it is called, of 4B in the band centre, as shown in Figure 
10.1. 
The rotational fine structure of the overlapping v = 1 4  bands of 
1H35Cl and 1H37Cl are shown in Figure 10.2. As shown by equations 
(10.4) and (10.9, this structure is approximately symmetrical about the 
band centre. The rise and fall of the intensity along both the R- and P- 
branches reflects the Boltzmann populations of the rotational levels for 
the v = 0 level, as discussed in Section 9.2.1. The relative intensity of the 
two overlapping bands reflects the natural abundance ratio of 3:l of the 
35Cl and 37Cl isotopes. The lH3’Cl band is slightly displaced to low 
wavenumber owing to the larger reduced mass (see equation 6.9). 
Figure 10.2 Rotational fine 
structure of the v = 1-0 infrared 
spectrum of HCI 

130 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Close inspection of the spectrum in Figure 10.2 shows that the separa- 
tions between adjacent R- and P-branch lines are not constant: the R- 
branch lines converge, and the P-branch lines diverge, with increasing J. 
Although centrifugal distortion does cause some irregularity in the band 
structure, the fact that Bo and B,, the values for the v = 0 and 1 levels, 
are not equal has a much larger effect. The rotational constant, B,, varies 
with v according to: 
B, = Be - a(v + 3) 
(10.6) 
where Be is the rotational constant corresponding to the equilibrium 
internuclear distance at the bottom of the potential energy curve in 
Figure 6.3. a i s  the 
which is pos- 
itive for all diatomic molecules. To determine Be, therefore, it is neces- 
sary to determine a. This requires two values of B,, for example Bo and 
To determine B, we choose pairs of transitions which have a common 
lower state, for example R(l) and P(1). Because both transitions origi- 
nate with J" = 1 their wavenumber separation, Q[R(l)] - Q[P(l)], must 
depend only on the value of B,. In general: 
4. 
Q[R(J)] - Q[P(J)] = u . ) ~  + B,(J + 1)(J + 2) - BoJ(:J + 1) - 
[ao + B,(J - 1)J - BoJ(J + l)] = 4B,(J + 3) 
(10.7) 

Vibrational Spectmscopy 
131 
Obtaining as many values as possible of Q[R(J)] - Q[p(J)] from the spec- 
trum and plotting these against J + + gives a straight line with a slope 
of 4B,. Any curvature of the graph, particularly apparent at high J, is 
d we to centrifugal distortion. 
Similarly, to determine Bo we can take wavenumber differences of 
pairs of transitions, U[R(J - l)] - Q[p(J + l)], which have an upper state 
in common; for example, R(2) and P(4) both have J' = 3 in common. 
Such differences must depend only on Bo: 
Plotting values of Q[R(J - l)] - Q[P(J + l)] against J + + gives a straight 
line (except for slight curvature at high J) with a slope of 4B0. 
With these values of B, and B,, equation (10.6) can be used to give a 
and Be. From Be, the equilibrium bond length, re, can be calculated. As 
discussed in Section 9.4, this is the most important bond length, not least 
because, since it corresponds to the bottom of the potential energy curve 
where no vibration is taking place, it is independent of isotopic substi- 
tution. For example, re is the same for 2H35Cl as for 1H35Cl. 
10.3 Raman Spectra of Diatomic Molecules 
Raman scattering by molecules is very weak, and scattering involving 
vibrational transitions is particularly weak. Consequently, vibrational 
Raman spectroscopy in the gas phase, and with sufficiently high resolu- 
tion to observe rotational fine structure, is not a commonly used tech- 
nique. However, it is important for homonuclear diatomic molecules, 
which have no infrared vibrational spectrum. For a vibration to be 
allowed in the Raman spectrum, there must be a change of polarizabil- 
ity accompanying the vibration: this is the case for a22 diatomic molecules. 
The vibrational selection rule for Raman scattering is the same as for 
an infrared process (see equations 10.1 and 10.2). The v = 1-0 transition 
is dominant, but this may occur as a Stokes or anti-Stokes process, as 
shown in Figure 10.3. In the Stokes process, the intense, monochromatic 
laser radiation takes the molecule from the v = 0 state to a virtual state, 
Vo, from which it falls back to the v = 1 state. Similarly, in the anti-Stokes 
process, the ,virtual state V, is involved in the overall transfer of the 
molecule from the v = 1 to the v = 0 state. The Stokes and anti-Stokes 
transitions lie to low and high wavenumber, respectively, of the exciting 
radiation. The intensity of the anti-Stokes, relative to that of the Stokes, 
transition is very low because of the lower population of the v = 1, com- 
pared to that of the v = 0, state. Consequently, vibrational Raman spec- 
troscopy is concerned, usually, only with the Stokes transitions. 

132 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 10.3 Mechanisms for 
Stokes and anti-Stokes vibrational 
transitions in the Raman spec- 
trum of a diatomic molecule 
If the resolution is sufficiently high, each vibrational transition shows 
rotational fine structure. The rotational selection rule is: 
AJ = 0, +2 
(10.9) 
giving rise to a central Q branch (AJ = 0), and an S (AJ = +2) and an 
0 (AJ = -2) branch to high and low wavenumber, respectively. In the 
approximation that Bo = B, = B, all the Q-branch lines are coincident. 
The first S-branch transition, S(O), is 6B to high wavenumber with sub- 
sequent S-branch transitions having spacings of 4B. The first 0-branch 
transition is 6B to low wavenumber of the Q-branch, with subsequent 
spacings of 4B. 
10.4 Infrared and Raman Spectra of Linear 
Polyatomic Molecules 
Figure 6.6 shows the normal vibrations of the linear molecule ethyne 
(acetylene). To see which vibrations are allowed in the infrared spectrum 
(infrared active) is relatively straightforward. We look for. those vibra- 
tions during which there is a change of dipole moment. Ethyne has no 
permanent dipole moment but, when it vibrates in the v3 mode, the 
asymmetric C-H stretching vibration, a dipole moment results from 
the unequal C-H bonds. Similarly, a dipole moment is produced during 
the cis bending vibration, v5. Therefore, both v3 and v5 are infrared active, 
as indicated on the left-hand side of the figure. 

Vibrational Spectroscopy 
133 
To determine whether a vibration is Raman active is not so straight- 
forward. Polarizability can be imagined as a three-dimensional ellipsoid 
centred on the centre of the molecule, as shown in Figure 10.4. A cross 
section in the plane of the figure is elliptical but, for the polarizability 
of any linear molecule, a cross section in a plane perpendicular to the 
figure is circular. When the molecule vibrates in the v, mode, the sym- 
metric C-H stretching vibration, we can imagine the polarizability 
ellipsoid breathing in and out: the polarizability is changing, and the 
vibration is Raman active. Similarly, v,, the C-C stretching vibration, is 
Raman active. Although this is not so easy to see, v3 is not Raman active 
because the effect on the ellipsoid of the stretching of one C-H bond is 
Figure 10.4 A polarizability 
cancelled by the contraction of the other one. During the trans bending 
ellipsoid 
vibration, v4, the polarizability ellipsoid is distorted, and the vibration 
is Raman active. The distortions produced by the motions of the carbon 
and hydrogen atoms during the cis bending vibration, v5, cancel, and the 
vibration is not Raman active. 
This 
states that the infrared and Raman activity of vibrations in any mole- 
cule which has a centre of symmetry are mutually exclusive. Vibrations 
which are active in the infrared spectrum are not active in the Raman 
spectrum and vice versa. 
Before we consider the rotational fine structure of only infrared vibra- 
tional spectra, it is necessary to understand the concept of a 
When an infrared vibrational transition takes place, there is a 
change of dipole moment. Consider the simple example of HCI. 
Vibration causes an oscillating dipole moment which has a maximum 
value when the bond is at its longest and a minimum when it is at its 
shortest. The magnitude of the transition moment, which determines the 
intensity of the transition, is determined by the magnitude of the oscil- 
lating dipole moment. Its direction is clearly along the internuclear axis, 
and we say that the transition moment is 
Ethyne provides a good example of the 
along that axis. 

134 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
In the case of a linear polyatomic molecule the oscillating dipole moment, 
and therefore the transition moment, may be polarized along the inter- 
nuclear axis, to give a 
band. In the case of a parallel band, the rotational selection 
rule is the same as for a diatomic molecule: 
band, or perpendicular to it, to give a 
AJ=fl 
(10.11) 
resulting in a P-branch (AJ = -1) and an R-branch (AJ = +l), as illus- 
trated in Figure 10.1. 
Figure 10.5 shows a parallel band of the linear molecule CO,. The 
vibration responsible is vj, the asymmetric stretching vibration for which 
the transition moment is polarized along the internuclear axis. The band 
shows P- and R-branch structure similar to that of HCl in Figure 10.2. 
There is a typical rise and fall in the intensities along the P- and 
R-branches. There is a slight convergence in the R-branch and a 
divergence in the P-branch owing to the inequality of Bo and B,: B, is 
slightly less than Bo. 
Figure 10.5 Parallel band, 
involving the v = 1-0 transition in 
the asymmetric stretching 
vibration, in the infrared spectrum 
of CO, (after G. Duxbury, Infrared 
Vibration- Rotation SpectroscopV, 
Wiley, New York, 2000, p. 176) 

Vibrational Spectroscopy 
135 
For a perpendicular band, in which the transition moment is perpendi- 
cular to the internuclear axis, the rotational selection rule is: 
AJ = 0, *1 
(10.12) 
resulting in a P-branch (AJ = -l), a Q-branch (AJ = 0) and an R-branch 
(AJ = +l). 
Figure 10.6 shows the stacks of rotational energy levels associated with 
the v = 0 and 1 levels for a perpendicular band. A transition causing 
such a band is the v = 1-0 transition involving the cis bending vibration, 
v5, of the linear molecule ethyne, shown in Figure 6.6. The stack for the 
v = 1 level differs from that for v = 0 in that the J = 1 level is missing, 
and the other rotational levels are split into doublets, the splitting increas- 
ing with J. Both these differences are a result of the double degeneracy 
of v5. The double degeneracy confers on the vibration one quantum of 
vibrational angular momentum. Since J represents the number of quan- 
ta of total angular momentum, its value can never be less than 1. 
Consequently, the first members of the R- and P-branches are R(0) and 
P(2), respectively. 
There is a small splitting of the rotational levels of the v = 1 state. 
This is due to a force, known as a 
connecting the two 
components of v,, which will not be considered further here. However, 
we shall see, in Section 11.2.3, that a similar splitting in an electronic 
spectrum is typically much larger. 
The P- and R-branch wavenumbers can be used to obtain Bo and B,, 
as in equations (10.8) and (10.7), respectively. 

136 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 10.6 Rotational energy 
levels 
infiard-allowd trmsi- 
tions for a perpendicular band of 
a linear 
molecule 
’=+ and In 
symbols refer only to an electron- 
ic 
Figure 10.7 shows the v = 1 - 0  transition involving the trans bending 
vibration v, of ethyne (see Figure 6.6). Ignoring the curvature in the base- 
line and the weak, overlapping hot bands, the main band can be seen to 
have a central Q-branch, with R- and P-branches to high and low 
wavenumber, respectively. The lines of the Q-branch are nearly coinci- 
dent because of the near equality of the rotational constants Bo and B,. 
There is an observable intensity alternation in the R- and P-branches of 
3: 1 for J odd:even. This is due to the two symmetrically equivalent hydro- 
gen atoms having non-zero nuclear spin, with the nuclear spin quantum 
number I = 3 (see Section 9.2.3). 
- 
Chapter 11) 
10.5 Infrared and Raman Spectra of Symmetric Top 
Molecules 
Symmetric top molecules have two equal principal moments of inertia 
(see Section 7.3.2). The rotational term values are given in equations 
(7.11) and (7.12) for a prolate and an oblate symmetric top, respective- 
ly, and are illustrated in Figure 7.5. 
To be active in the infrared spectrum, the vibration must involve a 
change of dipole moment. Then, similar to the situation in a linear 
polyatomic molecule, the transition moment may be along the unique 
axis of the molecule (the a-axis in a prolate, the c-axis in an oblate 

Vibrational Spectroscopy 
137 
Figure 10.7 Perpendicular 
band, involving the 
= 1-0 tran- 
sition in the trans bending vibra- 
tion, in the infrared spectrum of 
ethyne (acetylene) (after 
G. Duxbury, lnfrared Vibration- 
Rotation Spectroscopy, Wiley, 
New York, 2000, p. 181) 
SyIlXlletriC top), to give a parallel band, Or at 90" to it, to give a per- 
pendicular band. 
For a parallel band, the rotational selection rules are: 
AK = 0 and AJ = +1, for K = 0 
AK = 0 and AJ = 0, +I, for K f 0 
(10.13) 
The result is that there is a P-, Q- and R-branch for all values of K, 
except for K = 0 which has no Q-branch. For a typical vibrational tran- 
sition the changes of rotational constants are very small. As a result, the 
P-, Q- and R-branches for all values of K tend to lie on top of each 
other, making the band appear similar to that of a linear molecule. 
Figure 10.8 shows a parallel band, centred at about 1048 cm-I, of the 
prolate symmetric top fluoromethane, shown in Figure 7.3(a). The vibra- 
tion responsible for this band is v3, the C-F stretching vibration, for 
which the dipole moment change is clearly along the a-axis. 
The spectrum in Figure 10.8 also shows a perpendicular band centred 
at about 1182 cm-l and due to v6, a vibration involving a rocking motion 
of the hydrogen atoms. The dipole moment change is in a direction at 
90" to the a-axis. 
The selection rules for a perpendicular band are: 
AK= f l  and A J =  0 , f l  
(10.14) 

138 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
1 om 
1100 
Wavenum ber /cm- 
1 200 
Figure 10.8 Parallel (vJ and 
perpendicular (vd bands in the 
infrared spectrum of fluoro- 
The effect of the AK = +I selection rule, compared to AK = 0 for a par- 
allel band, is to spread out the P-, Q- and R-branches with different Val- 
methane (after J. 
Resolution Spectroscopy, 2nd 
edn., Wiley, New 
230) 
Hollasi High 
1gg8, p. 
ues of K. Because the rotational constants for different vibrational states 
tend to be very similar, the Q-branches consist of nearly coincident lines 
and therefore dominate the spectrum. This is the case for v6 in Figure 
10.8, where the Q-branches are labelled with the corresponding value of 
K" in the zero-point level. 

Vibrational Spectroscopy 
139 
Raman spectra of symmetric top molecules in the gas phase are difficult 
to obtain with sufficiently high resolution to show rotational fine struc- 
ture, and we shall not consider them further. However, liquid phase 
Raman spectra with lower resolution and showing just the vibrational 
bands are much more readily observed. Such spectra are of particular 
importance when used as an analytical tool for identifying either indi- 
vidual molecules or groups within a molecule. These important aspects 
Figure 10.9 Infrared (upper) 
and Raman (lower) sDectra of lig- 
of vibrational spectroscopy will be discussed further in Section 10.6, but 
the vibrational spectrum of benzene (see Figure 7.3b), which is a sym- 
metric top, is shown here in Figure 10.9. This figure shows both the 
Raman and infrared spectra of liquid benzene, in which any rotational 
structure is removed owing to intermolecular interactions. 
uid benzene ‘(after’B.’ Schrader, ’ 
Rarnan/lnfrared Atlas Of Organic 
Compounds, VCH, Weinheim, 
,989, p, F1-ol) 
~~~~~ 
~ 
Of particular interest in the case of benzene is the importance of the 
mutual exclusion rule, introduced in Section 10.4. A consequence of the 
molecule having a centre of symmetry is that vibrations which are active 
in the infrared spectrum are inactive in the Raman spectrum, and vice 
versa. 
10.6 Infrared and Raman Spectra of Asymmetric 
Top Molecules 
For small asymmetric top molecules, such as H,O, the rotational fine 
structure of vibrational bands in the infrared spectrum is readily resolved. 
However, in line with the policy adopted elsewhere in this book, the 

140 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
rotational energy levels and transitions of asymmetric tops will not be 
considered further. Suffice it to say that the rotational constants and 
geometrical structure of many small asymmetric top molecules have been 
obtained using high-resolution, gas phase, infrared vibrational spec- 
troscopy. High-resolution Raman vibrational spectra are much less often 
studied . 
The vast majority of molecules are relatively large and heavy 
asymmetric tops. Consequently, the rotational constants A, B and C (see 
equations 7.9 and 7.10) are small, resulting in very congested rotational 
fine structure of vibrational bands. In order to observe the rotational 
structure, the molecule must be in the gas phase with a sufficiently high 
vapour pressure, which is not possible with many solid materials. Even 
if the spectrum can be obtained, the rotational transitions in a high- 
resolution, gas phase, infrared spectrum may be so congested that only 
a 
or envelope, of the underlying, unresolved rotational struc- 
ture is observed. 
Figure 10.10 shows part of the infrared absorption spectrum of fluo- 
robenzene in the gas phase. The molecule is an asymmetric top with such 
small rotational constants that only rotational contours can be observed 
for each vibrational band. Although the molecule is an asymmetric top, 
it has unique axes, defined by the symmetry of the molecule, which also 
correspond to the unique inertial axes, a, b and c, as shown in Figure 
10.10. 
Figure 10.1 0 Mid-infrared 
spectrum of fluorobenzene in the 
gas Phase 

Vibrational Spectroscopy 
141 
Therefore, the transition moment for any vibrational transition is polar- 
ized along one of these axes: a type A, B or C band is polarized along the 
a, b or c axis, respectively. The rotational selection rules are different for 
each band type. Because rotational constants vary very little from the 
zero-point level to excited vibrational levels, all three band types exhibit 
characteristic rotational contours, irrespective of the molecule or the vibra- 
tional transition. A type A band typically shows an intense, sharp central 
spike with quite intense, broad wings on either side. The band at about 
1156 cm-I in Figure 10.10 is a typical type A band. The transition moment 
is polarized along the axis containing the C-F bond. The band at about 
1067 cm-' is a typical type B band, showing a central, deep minimum and 
broad wings resembling those of a type A band. The transition moment 
is along the b-axis. A type C band shows an intense, sharp central spike, 
rather like a type A band. It also shows broad wings on either side but of 
lower intensity, relative to the central spike, than in a type A band. The 
band at about 893 cm-* is a typical type C band; the transition moment 
lies along the c-axis, perpendicular to the plane of the molecule. 
One of the aims of obtaining a gas phase spectrum, showing character- 
istic rotational contours, is to identify the direction of the transition 
moment and use this to aid the attribution of a band as being due to a 
particular vibrational motion. For example, the transition moment cor- 
responding to the type A band of fluorobenzene, at 11 56 cm-l, lies along 
the a-axis (see Figure 10.10). Therefore the change of dipole moment 
during this vibration is along that axis. This is consistent with the expec- 
tation of a C-F stretching vibration (a group vibration: see Section 6.3) 
having a wavenumber of this magnitude. The identification of the type 

142 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
A contour confirms the assignment of the C-F stretching vibration. The 
high intensity of the band is a result of a relatively large change of dipole 
moment accompanying the stretching and contraction of the C-F bond. 
Figure 10.11 shows the infrared and Raman spectra of cyanobenzene 
(benzonitrile). Like the spectra of benzene in Figure 10.9, these spectra 
are of a pure liquid for which only a small amount of sample is required. 
The path lengths used for the infrared spectra A, B and C of benzene 
are 40, 500 and 1500 pm, respectively, and, for the infrared spectra A 
and B of benzonitrile, 25 and 1000 pm, respectively. 
Figure i O . l i  Infrared (upper) 
and Raman (lower) spectra of 
The spectra in Figures 10.9 and 10.1 1 illustrate some important fea- 
liquid cyanodenzene ‘(benzonitrile) 
B. Schrader Raman’lnfrared 
Atlas of Organic Compounds, 
VCH, Weinheim, 1989, p. F1-06) 
tures of infrared and Raman spectra of molecules in a condensed phase. 
Here, the spectra are of the pure liquid but are also observed, commonly, 
either in solution in a transparent solvent or in the form of a fine pow- 
der, mixed with potassium bromide, and compressed into a 
Although the infrared and Raman spectra of benzene show the mutual 
exclusion characteristic of a molecule with a centre of symmetry (see 
Section 10.5), the spectra of benzonitrile, which does not have a centre 
of symmetry, show many bands which appear in both spectra. These 
spectra show how molecules of this size have very many characteristic 
bands, particularly molecules with no centre of symmetry. 
Group vibrations are particularly important as an aid to identifica- 
tion of a molecule. For example, the success of the incorporation of a 
C=O group into a molecule by a chemical reaction may be judged by 
the appearance of a very strong band in the infrared spectrum in the 

Wbrational Spectroscopy 
143 
~~ 
region 1650-1830 cm-*, due to stretching of the C=O bond. Although 
this is quite a large range, the stretching motion involves such a large 
change of dipole moment that the band often dominates the infrared 
spectrum to such an extent that there can be little doubt that the mole- 
cule contains a C=O group. 
Although many stretching vibrations show typical wavenumbers, this 
applies also to some bending vibrations. Table 10.1 shows typical 
wavenumbers of some stretching and bending vibrations. 
Table 10.1 Some typical bond stretching and bending vibration wavenumbers 
~ 
~~ 
Group 
Wavenumberlcm-I 
Group 
Wavenumber/cm-l 
\ 
7 C - H  stretch 
=C< 
stretch 
=C-H 
stretch 
-C-C- 
stretch 
C=C 
stretch 
\
/
 
/
\
 
\
/
 
/
\
 
-C=C- 
stretch 
\ 
,C=O 
stretch 
-C=N 
stretch 
2960 
3020a 
3300 
900 
1650 
2050 
1700 
2100 
\ 
7 C - F  stretch 
-0-H 
stretch 
>N-H 
stretch 
-C,-H 
f=HH bend 
H 
=-< 
bend 
=C-H 7 
bend 
>ca; 
bend 
C=F-C 
bend 
1100 
36Wb 
3350 
1000 
1100 
700 
1450 
300 
~~ 
~ 
~~~ 
a Except in the CHO group when a typical wavenumber is 2800 cm-l. 
This is considerably reduced in a hydrogen-bonding solvent. 
The wavenumbers of the three types of C-H stretching vibrations show 
how these differ according to the hybridization of the 2s and 2p atom- 
ic orbitals on the carbon atom. When the carbon atom of the C-H group 
takes part in three single, one double or one triple bond, the hybridiza- 
tion is assumed to be sp3, sp2 or sp, respectively. A bond involving a 
hybrid orbital is stronger the more s-character it has and consequently 
has a larger stretching wavenumber. This is consistent with the C-H 
group having the largest wavenumber when including a carbon atom 
involved in a triple bond, and the smallest when it is involved in three 
other single bonds. Similarly, the stretching wavenumber of a carbon- 
carbon bond increases with the multiplicity of the bond, being largest 
for a triple bond. 
In general, angle bending vibrations are not such useful group vibra- 
tions as stretching vibrations. Table 10.1 shows five bending group 
vibrations involving carbon and hydrogen atoms. 

144 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Assignment of bands in an infrared or Raman spectrum to particular 
vibrational motions in the molecule is more readily achieved at wave- 
numbers above about 1500 cm-'. 
Below this, the region 1500-600 cm-' 
is referred to as the fingerprint region. This is a region where many vibra- 
tional motions are not localized, even approximately, in a particular 
group in the molecule. We can regard the hypothetical localized motions 
as being coupled so that the delocalized vibrational motion involves more 
atoms in the molecule. The fingerprint region is so-called because the 
wavenumbers of these delocalized vibrations tend to be characteristic of 
a particular molecule. Consequently, the fingerprint region is very impor- 
tant in the unique identification of a molecule rather than of individual 
groups within a molecule. 
The spectra of benzene and benzonitrile, in Figures 10.9 and 10.1 1, show 
bands due to C-H stretching vibrations in the region of 3050 an--'. 
These 
are characteristic of a carbon atom attached to a carbon atom with sp2 
hybridization. The fingerprint region, below about 1500 cm-l, is more com- 
plex, particularly for benzonitrile, because of its much lower symmetry. The 
infrared and Raman spectra of benzonitrile show, very strongly, the C=N 
stretching group wavenumber at 2226 cm-l, and the infrared spectrum of 
fluorobenzene in Figure 10.10 shows a C-F stretching group wavenumber 
of 1 165 cm-I. 

Vibrational Spectroscopy 
145 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
I I .I Introduction 
In Chapter 5, the orbitals and electronic states of diatomic and poly- 
atomic molecules were discussed. In the present chapter, the investiga- 
tion of these states by the observation of transitions between them, by 
electronic spectroscopy, will be described. As was the case for rotation- 
al and vibrational spectroscopy in Chapters 9 and 10, discussion of 
electronic spectroscopy will be mainly concerned with absorption spectra. 
Associated with each electronic state are vibrational and rotational 
energy levels, as illustrated for a diatomic molecule in Figure 6.9. The 
146 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
147 
rotational fine structure of electronic spectra has much in common with 
that of vibrational spectra, but the vibrational coarse structure is more 
complex. 
Electronic spectroscopy is employed as an analytical tool, particular- 
ly for large molecules. As in analytical vibrational spectroscopy, such 
electronic spectra are usually obtained in the liquid phase. However, the 
unique character of a vibrational spectrum, allowing the identification 
of a molecule, or a group within a molecule, is not so apparent in 
an electronic spectrum. On the other hand, the application of the 
Beer-Lambert law, discussed in Section 8.1, to an electronic spectrum 
allows the measurement of concentration of a molecule whose molar 
absorption coefficient (see equation 8.2) is known. 
1 1.2 Electronic Spectra of Diatomic Molecules 
I I 
.2.1 Electronic States and Selection Rules 
In Sections 5.1.2 and 5.2.2 the symbolism for ground and excited elec- 
tronic states of homonuclear and heteronuclear diatomic molecules was 
developed. There are two quantum numbers which will concern us and 
which feature in these symbols: A refers to the component of the orbital 
angular momentum of the electrons along the internuclear axis, and S 
is the total electron spin quantum number. The main symbol for an elec- 
tronic state is Z, n, A, @, ... and indicates the value of A, as shown in 
equation (5.10). The pre-superscript on the main symbol is the multi- 
plicity, 2S + 1, of the state. 

148 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
As discussed in Section 5.1.2, the electronic wave function for a C state 
may be symmetric or antisymmetric to reflection through any plane 
containing the internuclear axis: such states are labelled C’ or C-, respec- 
tively. For homonuclear diatomic molecules the electronic wave function 
is either symmetric or antisymmetric to reflection through the centre of 
the molecule. This is indicated (see Section 5.1.1) by a post-subscript “g” 
or “u”, respectively, as in, for example a 3Cg+ and a ,nu 
state. 
All molecules have many excited electronic states, in addition to the 
ground state. For diatomic molecules, we shall be concerned only with 
bound states. These have a deep minimum in the potential energy curve, 
like those in Figure 6.9, unlike unbound, repulsive states such as that in 
Figure 6.10. 
The selection rule in the quantum number A is: 
AA = 0, +1 
(11.1) 
For example, C-C, ll-I3 and II-C transitions are allowed, but A-C and 
@-ll transitions are forbidden. 
Concerning electron spin, the selection rule is: 
AS = 0 
(1 1.2) 
but this rule breaks down when one or more heavy atom is present. For 
example, a 311u-1Cg+ 
transition is observed only very weakly in 02, 
but 
strongly in I,. 
The symmetry selection rule: 
+ H +, - w - and + w - 
(11.3) 
where t) and +i+ 
signify allowed and forbidden transitions, respectively, 
applies to C-E transitions: only C+-C+ and C--C- transitions are allowed. 
For homonuclear diatomic molecules, there is an additional selection 
rule: 
g-u, 
g w g a n d u - u  
(11.4) 
For example, TI$P+ 
and lC,,--lC; 
transitions are forbidden but 
311u-311g and ‘Ag-lllU transitions are allowed. 
In Section 11.2.3 we shall see that, in cases where the lower state of an 
electronic transition is the ground state, the rotational constant, B, and 
consequently the bond length, r, can be obtained. However, provided the 
electronic transition is allowed, this method has an important advantage 
over the use of rotational or vibrational infrared spectroscopy in that it 
can be used for both homonuclear and heteronuclear diatomic molecules. 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
149 
11.2.2 Vibrational Coarse Structure 
As indicated in Figure 6.9, each bound electronic state, whether it is the 
ground state or an excited state, has its own potential function charac- 
terized by the equilibrium internuclear distance, re, and the dissociation 
energy, Do (or De). 
Each function is also characterized by a set of vibra- 
tional energy levels, converging smoothly towards the dissociation limit, 
with term values given by: 
q v )  = o,(v + 3) - x,(v + *)I + y,(v + 9 3  + ... 
(11.5) 
This is the same as equation (6.14), which we applied only to the ground 
electronic state. When applied to other electronic states, the values of 
me, xe, ye, ... apply uniquely to each state. 
The vibrational transitions which accompany all allowed electronic 
transitions are referred to as 
If we are concerned 
with an absorption process, most of the molecules will be, initially, in 
the v” = 0 state of the ground electronic state. 
The selection rule governing these vibronic transitions is completely 
unrestrictive: 
Av = 0, fl, +2, +3, ... 
(11.6) 
In an absorption spectrum, the vibronic transitions from V” = 0 form a 

150 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Although the selection rule allows transitions with all values 
of v', it is the intensity distribution along the progression that determines 
which transitions are sdliciently intense to be observed. This distribu- 
tion is governed by the 
Initially, it was Franck who considered the intensities of vibronic 
transitions using only classical, as opposed to the quantum mechanical, 
considerations. Classically, there is no zero-point energy level, and the 
extremities of each vibrational energy level, where it meets the potential 
energy curve, are classical turning points of the vibration. At these points 
the nuclei are momentarily stationary, at a position of either maximum 
extension or compression of the bond. Since electrons are much lighter 
than nuclei, an electronic transition takes place much more rapidly than 
vibrational motion. Consequently, the vibronic transition with the 
greatest probability is that which starts from the bottom of the ground 
state potential energy curve, at which point the nuclei are stationary, and 
goes to a point on the excited state potential energy curve where the 
nuclei are also stationary, Le. the bond length r remains constant dur- 
ing the transition. Such a transition is said to be a 
because, on a figure showing the ground and excited state potential 
energy curves, the transition is represented by a vertical line. 
Figure 11.1 shows two examples of vertical transitions. In Figure 
1 l.l(a) the equilibrium internuclear distance, re, is the same in both 
electronic states. As a result, the most probable vertical transition, 
indicated by B-A, is to the minimum of the excited state potential energy 
curve. Any other possible vertical transition, such as C-A, would be to 
a point in the vibrational level C which is far away from the classical 
turning points and at which the nuclei would be moving at maximum 
speed. As a result, this transition is highly improbable. 
The situation illustrated in Figure 1 l.l(b) is one in which re' > re''. 
Then, the most probable transition, B-A, is to the turning point of an 
excited vibrational level. Vertical transitions, such as C-A, to vibrational 
levels above and below B are less probable, and therefore less intense, 
because the nuclei are not stationary. 
Condon considered the consequences of quantum mechanical treat- 
ment of vibrational motion. As shown in Figure 11.2, the lowest vibra- 
tional energy level is not at the minimum of the potential energy curve: 
flgure 11 .l Transitions &A 
we the most probable (classid) 
vibronic t r d i o n s  when (a) re' = 
ren and (b) re' > re)) 
v = 0 corresponds to the zero-point energy. In addition, the molecule no 
longer spends most of the time exactly at the classical turning point of 
a vibration, but where the vibrational wave function has its maximum 
value. This is at the centre of the zero-point level, as shown in the figure. 
For the v = 1, 2 and 3 vibrational levels it is quite far from the classical 
turning points, but as v increases the maximum in the wave function 
moves closer to the classical turning point. 
Figure 11.2 shows the quantum mechanical equivalents of the situa- 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
151 
Figure 11.2 Most probable 
(quantum mechanical) vibronic 
transitions when (a) re‘ = r: and 
(b) re’ > re)) 
tions in Figure 11.1. In Figure 11.2(a) the most probable transition is 
from the mid-point of the v” = 0 level of the ground electronic state to 
the mid-point of the v’ = 0 level of the excited electronic state, but in 
Figure 11.2(b) it is to a point close to the classical turning point of the 
V‘ = 4 level. 
The Franck-Condon principle states that the most probable vibron- 
ic transition is a vertical transition between positions on the vibrational 
levels of the upper and lower electronic state at which the vibrational 
wave functions have maximum values. 
Because of the smeared-out nature of the vibrational wave functions, 
vibronic transitions such as the 0-0 and 4-0 in Figure 1 1.2(a) and 1 1.2(b), 
respectively, are not the only transitions with non-zero intensity. For the 
case illustrated in Figure 11.2(a) there is a short progression in which 
the intensity decreases rapidly with increasing v’, as shown in Figure 
11.3(a). When there is an appreciable increase of r in the excited state, 
as in Figure 11.2(b), there is a longer progression which shows an inten- 
sity maximum, in this case at v‘ = 4; this is shown in Figure 11.3(b). 
The example in Figure 11.3(b) shows how electronic absorption 
spectroscopy of diatomic molecules can allow access to many vibrational 
levels of an excited electronic state. This is dependent on re in the excit- 
ed state being appreciably different from that in the ground state. For 
example, re is 0.2666 and 0.3025 nm (2.666 and 3.025 A) in the ground 
and first (triplet) excited states, respectively, of I, (the absorption spec- 
trum which gives iodine vapour its characteristic violet colour). In this 

152 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Flgure 11.3 Typical intensity 
distribution along a vibrational 
progression when (a) re‘ = r: and 
(b) re’ > re” 
case, the increase of bond length in the excited state is so large that the 
maximum intensity in the progression from v” = 0 is at about v’ = 30, 
and the 0-0 transition is so weak that it has not been observed. From a 
large number of observed vibrational levels it is possible to construct the 
vibrational potential function and to determine the dissociation energy, 
Do or De, in an excited electronic state. 
with AS = 0, 
where S is the electron spin quantum number, or 
with 
A S  = +1, corresponding information relating to the ground electronic 
state may be obtained. Again, the length of an observed progression 
depends on the difference in re between the two electronic states. If it is 
allowed by the selection rules, an emission spectrum may be observed 
between a pair of excited electronic states. 
If the difference in bond length between the ground and excited elec- 
tronic states is sufficiently large, the v” = 0 progression in an absorption 
spectrum may extend up to, and beyond, the excited state dissociation 
limit. 
Accurate measurements of the intensity distribution along a vibra- 
tional progression may be used to calculate a value of Ar, the change of 
bond length between two electronic states. However, we shall see in 
Section 11.2.3 that this is more readily obtained from the rotational fine 
structure accompanying the electronic transition. 
In Section 9.2.4 it was explained that the v” = 1 level, and even high- 
er vibrational levels in the ground electronic state, may be appreciably 
populated if the level is sufficiently low-lying (or if the temperature is 
sufficiently high). In this case, 
groups of bands with 
constant Av, may be observed in the electronic absorption spectrum. The 
sequences with AV = 0 and 1 are illustrated in Figure 11.4. 
Such sequences consist of closely spaced groups of bands. The spac- 
ings within a sequence result from the difference in vibration wave- 
In electronic emission spectra, whether 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
153 
Figure 11.4 Sequence bands 
with Av = 0 and 1 
numbers in the two electronic states. In the case illustrated, the vibra- 
tion wavenumber is higher in the ground state than in the excited state, 
leading to sequence bands being on the low wavenumber side of the main 
bands. Sequence band spacings are small compared to the separations 
of bands in a progression. 
I I .2.3 Rotational Fine Structure 
Typical potential energy curves for the ground and an excited electron- 
ic state of a diatomic molecule were shown in Figure 6.9. The figure 
shows the vibrational energy levels associated with each state and 
indicates also that there is a stack of rotational energy levels associated 
with each of these. Consequently, h e  structure, consisting of rotational 
transitions, accompanies all electronic and vibronic transitions. 
The rotational h e  structure has much in common with that found in 
vibrational spectra, discussed in Section 10.2. The main difference 
concerns the change of the rotational constant, B, from the lower to the 
upper state of a transition. The constants B: and B1”, for the V“ = 0 and 

154 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
1 levels of the ground electronic state, are very similar, i.e. a in equa- 
tion (10.4) is very small. On the other hand, there is typically a relatively 
large change of B from one electronic state to another. In forming an 
excited electronic state it is often the case that an electron is promoted 
from a bonding to an antibonding (or, at least, less strongly bonding) 
orbital, as discussed in Sections 5.1.2 and 5.2.2. This causes an increase 
in bond length and a decrease in the value of B, which is typically a 
much larger change than between B,," 
and B,". 
During an electronic transition there is a change of dipole moment, 
similar in principle to the change of dipole moment when an infrared 
vibrational transition takes place, as discussed in Section 10.4. Associated 
with this is a transition moment, Re, and the transition intensity is pro- 
portional to RZ. As for a vibration of a linear polyatomic molecule (see 
Section 10.4), this transition moment may be polarized along the inter- 
nuclear axis, resulting in a parallel band, or perpendicular to it, to give 
a perpendicular band. We shall consider the rotational fine structure 
associated with only two types of electronic transition, lZ+-lZ+ and 
IH-lZ+, in heteronuclear diatomic molecules. The rotational fine struc- 
ture is the same for ,,+-lEg+ 
and lrIU-'Eg+ 
transitions in homonuclear 
diatomic molecules. It is also the same for all members of vibrational 
progressions and sequences built on these electronic transitions. 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
155 
IX+-lX+ (or lv-lXg+) Electronic or Vibronic Transition 
For this type of transition the transition moment is polarized along the 
internuclear axis. The rotational selection rule is: 
N = f l  
(11.10) 
This is the same rule as for rotational transitions accompanying a vibra- 
tional infrared transition, as given in equation (lO.l), and results in an 
R-branch, with Lw = + 1, and a P-branch, with Lw = -1. The energy level 
diagram and the allowed transitions shown in Figure 10.1 apply also to 
a IZ+-'Z+ 
electronic transition, as indicated by the symbols on the right- 
hand side of the figure. 
Figure 11.5 shows the rotational h e  structure of the *Z+-lE+ 
pure 
electronic transition, from v" = 0 to v' = 0 (the 0-0 band), of the short- 
lived molecule RhN (rhodium mononitride). Although the rotational 
selection rules are the same as for the v = 1-0 transition of HCl, shown 
in Figure 10.2, the spectrum of RhN appears significantly different. 
However, the R-branch is still on the high wavenumber (low wavelength) 
side and the P-branch on the low wavenumber (high wavelength) side of 
the zero gap. The zero gap is the comparatively wide spacing between 
the first line of the P-branch, P(1), and the first line of the R-branch, 
R(0). Although the spectrum of HC1 is slightly unsymmetrical, showing 
some convergence in the R-branch and divergence in the P-branch, that 
of RhN is very unsymmetrical: there is much greater convergence in the 
R-branch and divergence in the P-branch. The convergence in the R- 
branch is so extreme that it converges to a 
where several lines 
are almost coincident, and then reverses, continuing to low wavenum- 
ber. In fact, two weak lines of the reversed R-branch are clearly visible 
in the zero gap. 
Irrespective of the degree of asymmetry of the band, the method sum- 

156 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 11.5 Rotational fine 
structure Of a ’z+-’E+ 
marized in equations (10.7) and (10.8) may be used to obtain the B-value 
for the upper and lower states, respectively. For the 0-0 band of an elec- 
tronic spectrum, m0 is the wavenumber of the pure electronic transition, 
and these equations become: 
transition of RhN 
Q[R(J)] - Q[P(J)] = 4B0’(J + 3) 
Q[R(J - l)] - Q[P(J + l)] = 4B,”(J + i) 
(1 1.1 1) 
(11.12) 
and 
where Bo’ and B,” are the B-values for the zero-point levels of the upper 
and lower electronic states, respectively. Plotting values of Q[R(J)] - 
Q[P(J)] against (J + 3) gives a straight line of slope 4B0‘: and plotting 
Q[R(J- l)] -Q[P(J + l)] against (J + 3) gives a straight line of slope 4B;. 
We saw in Section 11.2.2 that vibrational progressions may be observed 
if the Franck-Condon principle confers sufficient intensity. In an 
absorption spectrum, this allows access to more vibrational levels in the 
excited electronic state. All the bands in a progression associated with a 
W Z  type of electronic transition have the same kind of rotational fine 
structure as the 0-0 band. The only difference is caused by B’ varying with 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
157 
V' in exactly the same way (see equation 10.4) as it does in the ground elec- 
tronic state: 
B,' = Be' - &(v' + 3) 
(1 1.13) 
Determination of as many values as possible of B,' gives values of the 
vibration-rotation interaction constant, a', and Be', from which the equi- 
librium bond length, re', follows. 
Similarly, observation of the rotational fine structure of members of 
a progression in an electronic emission spectrum to the ground electronic 
state gives values of B,". Then, since: 
a", Be" and therefore r l  can be determined. 
We have seen in equation (10.4) that a" and Be" can be determined 
also from the vibration-rotation spectrum, usually from the observation 

I58 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
of only B: and B,". Determination of d and Be" from values of B," 
obtained from the members of a vibrational progression, preferably a 
lengthy one, in an electronic emission spectrum results in more accurate 
values for these parameters. 
'II-'Z+ (or 'q-'Z:) 
Electronic or Vibronic Transition 
For this type of transition, the transition moment is polarized perpen- 
dicular to the internuclear axis. The rotational selection rule is: 
AJ = 0, f l  
(11.15) 
and is the same as for the rotational transitions accompanying a vibra- 
tional infrared transition of a linear polyatomic molecule, as in equation 
(10.12). The energy level diagram for a lH-lZ+ (or lIIu-lZJ 
transition 
is like that in Figure 10.6, but using the symbols on the right-hand side 
of the figure. Just as for a vibrational transition, there are P-, Q- and R- 
branches. The rotational levels of the upper, TI, state start with J = 1, 
and they are all doubled. 
For a ll electronic state, the quantum number A, associated with the 
component of the orbital angular momentum along the internuclear axis, 
is 1 (see equation 5.10). Such a state is doubly degenerate, which can be 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
159 
thought as being due to the same energy being associated with clockwise 
or anticlockwise motion of the electrons around the internuclear axis. 
However, interaction between the orbital motion of the electrons and the 
rotation of the molecule causes a splitting, 4 4 ,  of the rotational lev- 
els given by: 
4 4  = qJ(J + 1) 
(11.16) 
where q is constant for a particular electronic state. The effect is known 
as 
The doubling increases with J, as shown by equa- 
tion (1 1.16) and Figure 10.6, but whereas the doubling is typically very 
small for a vibrational state, it is more likely to be appreciable for an 
electronic state. 
Figure 11.6 shows the rotational fine structure of the 1-0 vibronic 
transition associated with a 'n-'X+ electronic transition of 187ReN (rhe- 
nium mononitride). The band shows typical P-, Q- and R-branch struc- 
ture and is slightly complicated by the presence of a similar band due to 
the isotopic species lssReN displaced by 0.33 cm-' to high wavenumber. 
There is convergence in the R-branch and divergence in the P-branch, 
owing to a decrease of B (an increase in the bond length) from the ground 
to the excited state, although this is less pronounced than in the spectrum 
Figure 11.6 Rotational fine 
structure of a l W Z +  vibronic 
transition of la7ReN (and lBReN) 

160 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
These values of B, ' and 9, ' are 
for the v = 1 vibrational level of 
the 
electronic state. 
Irregularities in the rotational 
structure of the 0-0 band in this 
electronic band system of ReN 
precluded a determination of the 
values of B; and qo'. 
In Section 5.3.1 a useful 
shorthand labelling for electronic 
states of polyatomic molecules 
was .explained. The symbols and 
S and T refer to singlet and triplet 
states, respectively. So and S, 
are the ground and first excited 
singlet states, respectively. 
of RhN in Figure 11.5. The slight divergence of the Q-branch to low 
wavenumber is also due to the decrease of the value of B. 
state is 
that there are two effective B-values, one for the lower set of levels, Bql,', 
and one for the upper, Bqu)'. Figure 10.6, indicating that the P- and R- 
branch transitions go to the lower set, shows that equation (1 1.10) can 
be used, in the same way as for a 
transition, by plotting Q[R(J)] - 
Q[P(J)] against (J + +), to obtain Bq,,' from the wavenumbers of these 
transitions. Bqu,' can be obtained from the Q-branch transitions, and q, 
in equation (1 1.16), follows from Bq0' and Bocu,'. From the spectrum of 
lS7ReN shown in Figure 11.6 it was found that B,' = 0.466 63 cm-l and 
ql' = -0.000 13 cm-l. 
The value of B; = 0.481 122 3 cm-I, for the IE+ ground electronic 
state, had been determined from the 0-0 band of another electronic 
transition. 
One result of the splitting of all the rotational levels in the 
1 1.3 Electronic Spectra of Polyatomic Molecules 
1 1.3.1 Vibrational Coarse Structure 
It was shown in Section 6.3 that linear and non-linear polyatomic 
molecules have 3N - 5 and 3N - 6 normal vibrations, respectively, where 
N is the number of atoms in the molecule. In electronic spectra of these 
molecules the dominant active vibrations are usually those which retain 
the symmetry of the molecule, so-called 
The 
selection rule which applies to each of these vibrations is the same as for 
a diatomic molecule, namely: 
Av = 0, kl, 32, 
k3, ... 
(1 1.17) 
as in equation (1 1.6). The selection rule is unrestrictive but, as in the 
electronic spectra of diatomic molecules, the Franck-Condon principle 
(explained in Section 1 1.2.2) applies. In polyatomic molecules the 
Franck-Condon principle applies to each vibration, separately. If there 
is a change of molecular geometry from the ground (or lower) to an 
excited (or upper) electronic state, vibrational progressions are observed 
in any vibrations which tend to take the molecule into its new geometry. 
There is a clear example of the Franck-Condon principle applying to 
an electronic spectrum of a polyatomic molecule in the S,-S, absorption 
spectrum of benzene. This occurs in the near-ultraviolet region and is 
shown, in the gas phase at low resolution, in Figure 11.7. The transition 
involves the promotion of an electron from the lt2,1t3 pair to the n4,1t, 
pair of orbitals shown in Figure 5.13. In comparison with the former 
pair, the latter pair show an additional nodal plane perpendicular to the 

Electronic Spectmscopy 
161 
L 
I 
I 
I 
I 
I 
230 
240 
250 
260 
270 
Unm 4 
molecule, resulting in a uniform expansion of the carbon ring from So 
to S,. In fact, all the C-C bond lengths increase from 0.1397 nm (1.397 
A) in So to 0.1434 nm (1.434 A) in S,. The vibration which tends to 
take the molecule into this S, geometry is the so-called ring-breathing 
vibration, labelled vl, a vibration in which the carbon ring breathes 
symmetrically in and out from its conformation in So. The progression, 
built on the band labelled X, shows six members, labelled l;, where 
n = 1-6. 
On the high-wavelength side of each member of the progression in 
Figure 11.7 are a series of weaker, sequence bands. Just like sequence 
bands in electronic spectra of diatomic molecules, discussed in Section 
11.2.2 and illustrated in Figure 11.4, they are bands with Av = 0 
originating in vibrational levels in the ground electronic state which are 
significantly populated at ambient temperature. The Boltzmann 
distribution of molecules among these levels is given by equation (9.4). 
The lowest wavenumber vibrations have the highest populations and 
therefore are responsible for the most intense sequences. 
The electronic spectra of large molecules with lower symmetry than 
benzene show more complex vibrational structure. This is partly due to 
the fact that more vibrations retain the symmetry of the molecule and 
are allowed to form progressions. It is also due to the fact that a geometry 
change in the excited electronic state may involve more than one nor- 
mal vibration. For example, in fluorobenzene there is a general expansion 
of the benzene ring, similar to that in benzene itself, and a small 
contraction of the C-F bond in the S, state. There are now several 
Figure 1 1 .I Low-resolution, 
near-ultraviolet absorption spec- 
trum of benzene in the gas phase 
(after J. M Hollas, Modem 
Spectroscopy, 3rd edn., Wiley, 
New Yo&, 1996, p. 245) 

162 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
vibrations which, although retaining the symmetry of the molecule, 
involve some ring breathing or C-F stretching character. According to 
the Franck-Condon principle, each of these may form a progression. 
In a large molecule the various possible progressions arid numerous 
sequences result in a very complex, and crowded, gas-phase absorption 
spectrum. 
1 I .3.2 Rotational Fine Structure 
Rotational fine structure of electronic and vibronic transitions in poly- 
atomic molecules is a vast subject, which we shall only touch on here. 
Linear polyatomic molecules show rotational structure in their elec- 
tronic spectra which is closely related to that of diatomic molecules. The 
structure associated with ' S I Z  and lrI-lZ 
types of transitions is of the 
same type as for a diatomic molecule; the former show a P- and R-branch 
and the latter a P-, Q- and R-branch. The main difference is a tenden- 
cy for greater congestion of rotational transitions for longer and heavier 
molecules. There is a problem in respect of determination of molecular 
structure in that there is only one rotational constant, B, for any 
electronic state, which gives only one structural parameter. If several 
bond lengths are required, isotopic substitution, where possible, is 
necessary (see Section 9.4). 
Electronic and vibronic transitions in symmetric top molecules give 
rise to parallel or perpendicular bands, in which the electronic or vibronic 
transition moment (see Box 11.2) may be parallel or perpendicular to 
the unique axis of the molecule (see Section 10.4 for a discussion of 
parallel and perpendicular bands in the vibrational spectra of symmet- 
ric tops): the a-axis in a prolate or the c-axis in an oblate symmetric top 
(see Section 7.3.2). The rotational selection rules are the same as for a 
parallel or perpendicular band in the infrared vibrational spectrum of 
a symmetric top. These are given in equations (10.13) and (10.14) for 
parallel and perpendicular bands, respectively. 
Although the selection rules for parallel and perpendicular bands of 
symmetric tops are the same as for infrared vibrational spectra, the 
rotational fine structure of electronic spectra usually has a1 significantly 
different general appearance. The reason for this is that the changes of 
rotational constants, A and B for a prolate and C and B for an oblate 
symmetric top, are typically much larger than for a vibrational transi- 
tion. In addition, these changes vary from one electronic transition to 
another, even in the same molecule. We can no longer think of a typi- 
cal parallel or perpendicular band in the electronic spectrum of a sym- 
metric top. As for linear molecules, there is an increasing congestion of 
rotational transitions for larger and heavier symmetric tops. 
The complex energy levels and selection rules that apply to infrared 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
163 
vibrational spectra of asymmetric top molecules (see Section 10.6) apply 
also to their electronic spectra. In a molecule of sufficiently high sym- 
metry, the electronic (or vibronic) transition moment may be polarized 
along the a, b or c inertial axis, resulting in a type A, B or C band, respec- 
tively. In an asymmetric top molecule of lower symmetry, bands may be 
mixtures of these types, so-called 
Whereas, in infrared vibrational spectra, changes of rotational con- 
stants, A, B and C, from the lower to the upper state are typically very 
small, resulting in bands having a symmetrical appearance, changes in 
electronic spectra are usually relatively large, resulting in bands having 
an asymmetrical shape. We can no longer think of typical type A, B or 
C bands, as we could for infrared vibrational spectra (see, for example, 
the vibrational spectrum of fluorobenzene in Figure 10.10). 
For relatively large molecules the rotational fine structure in the elec- 
tronic spectra of asymmetric tops may be so congested that all we are 
able to observe is a contour of the underlying, unresolved rotational 
structure. This was the case also for the vibrational spectrum of fluo- 
robenzene in Figure 10.10. Figure 11.8 shows type A, B and C bands for 
aniline for the S,-So electronic transition. The spectrum in Figure 11.8(a) 
shows the rotational contour of the 0-0 band, observed in the absorp- 
tion spectrum and containing tens of thousands of unresolved rotation- 
al transitions. That in Figure 11.8(b) shows a contour which was 
computed with values of rotational constants, A, B and C, which pro- 
duce the best agreement with the observed contour. The contours in 
Figure 11.8(c) and 11.8(d) have been computed with the same rotation- 
al constants, but with type A and C selection rules, respectively. Although 
no type A or C bands have been observed in this electronic spectrum, 
the computed contours serve to show how different are the contours of 
the three band types. It is also informative to note how different these 
contours are from those in the infrared vibrational spectrum of fluo- 
robenzene in Figure 10.10. Although the ground state constants A", B" 
and C" are very similar for both molecules, it is the much larger changes 
in the electronic excited state of aniline than occur in the vibrationally 
excited states of fluorobenzene which produce the considerable differ- 
ences between the contours in Figures 10.10 and 11.8. 
11.3.3 Electronic Spectra of Molecules in Solution 
An example of an electronic spectrum of a molecule in solution is that 
of trans-dimethyldiimide [(a- 
1,2-dimethyldiazene] in hexane, shown in 
Figure 8.4. Typical of many such spectra, each electronic band system, 
centred here at about 28 200 (S,S,,) 
and 42 700 cm-' (S1--S& shows no 
coarse vibrational structure. The vibrational energy levels are broadened 
to such an extent, by energy exchange due to collisions with the solvent 

164 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 11.8 (a) Observed type 
B and computed (b) type B, (c) 
type A and (d) type C rotational 
contours for aniline, using rota- 
tional constants for the 0-0 band 
(after J. Christoffersen, J. M. 
Hollas and G. H. Kirby, Mol. 
Phys., 1969, 16, 448) 
75 
50 
0 
50 
F 
P o  
C 
0 
.3 
2 2 50 
0 
50 
0 
10 
0 
-10 
-20 
-30 
Wavenumbedcm-I 
molecules, that they merge together. Nevertheless, as was discussed in 
Section 8.1, such spectra are very useful in chemical analysis. If the molar 
absorption coefficient, E, is known at a particular wavelength, measure- 
ment of the absorbance, A, at that wavelength gives the concentration, 
c (see equation 8.2). 
This is probably the most important use of electronic spectra in 
analytical chemistry. However, electronic spectra in solution are used 
also to indicate the presence of groups within a molecule. For example, 
a carbonyl (C=O) group or a benzene ring confers absorption at a 
characteristic wavelength and intensity. Such a group is called a chro- 
In Figure 8.4, for example, the weak absorption ait 28 200 cm-1 
(354.6 nm) is characteristic of the N=N chromophore. 
The lowest energy, S,-So, electronic transition of ethene (CH,=CH,) 
shows a broad absorption centred at about 162 nm. The transition involves 
an electron promotion from the IT to the n* orbital, shown in Figure 5.10, 
to give a m* 
S, state, as discussed in Section 5.3.1. This intense absorp- 
tion is characteristic of molecules containing an electronically isolated 
C=C group. If, however, the C=C group is conjugated to another CC 
multiple bond, as in buta-1,3-diene discussed in Section 5.3.3, there is a 
considerable shift to high wavelength of the S,-So transition. The S, state 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
165 
in buta-1,3-diene is also a m* 
state in which an electron is promoted from 
the n2 to the n3 orbital, shown in Figure 5.12. The absorption spectrum 
of penta-1,3-diene in solution in heptane (Figure 11.9) shows that the effect 
of conjugation of the two double bonds is to shift the S,-So system from 
162 nm in ethene to 224 nm. In fact, it is a quite general observation that 
the greater is the delocalization of the 11: orbitals in a molecule, the more 
is the S,-So system shifted to low energy (high wavelength). 
A characteristic of a transition to a nn* state is a large value of E
~
~
~
,
 
resulting in a high intensity. In the 224 nm system of penta-1,3-diene, 
'max = 2.6 x lo4 mol-' dm3 cm-l. 
The presence of the methyl 
group in penta-l,3-diene results 
in only a very small shift of the 
S,-S 
s stem from that of buta- 
1,3-diene. 
?
y
 
Figure 1 1.9 Near-ultraviolet 
absorption spectrum of penta- 
1,3-diene in solution in heptane 
(after H.-H. Perkampus, in UV 
Atlas of Organic Compounds, 
Butterworths, London, 1966, 
p. A3/1) 

166 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
Figure 11.10 shows the electronic absorption spectrum of benzene in 
solution in hexane. The shift of the S,-So system to about 260 nm, com- 
pared to 224 nm for penta-1,3-diene, is caused by the greater degree of 
n-electron delocalization in benzene. The much lower intensity (em = 
250 mol-l dm3 cm-l) is due to the fact that, although S, is a m* 
state, 
the electronic transition is forbidden and appears only by virtue of being 
Figure 1 1 .l 
0 Near-ultraviolet 
absorption w
m
 
of benzene 
in solution in hexane (after ti.-ti. 
vibrationally induced, as discussed in Section 1 1.3.1. The S,-S, system, 
1 
v
-
 
perkampus and G- 
Kassebeer, in 
W Atras of organic Compounds, 
Buttmorths. London. 1966. 
and the S2-So system at about 204 nm, involve promotion of an electron 
from the n2n3 to the n4ns pairs of orbitals in Figure 5.13. 
p. D1/1) 
The sp&t& 
in Figuf.e 11.10 is rather unusual in that, although it is 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
167 
in solution, it shows considerable vibrational structure (compare the gas- 
phase spectrum in Figure 11.7). In general, there is a greater tendency 
for vibrational structure to be observed in a solution spectrum when the 
solvent is non-polar. 
The spectrum of phenol in solution in light petroleum (Figure 1 1.1 1) 
shows two electronic transitions. These correspond to those of benzene 
,l 
absorDtion SDWtrum of Dhenol in 
in Figure 11.10, but are shifted to 278 and 21 1 nm. The reason for these 
shifts to lower energy (longer wavelength) is that there is some delocal- 
ization of the n; orbitals over the oxygen atom, and this is greater in the 
excited than in the ground electronic state. The value of E~~~ for the S,-So 
solution in light petroleum (after 
E- A* 
Organic Compounds, 
Buve,,,,,odhs, 
London, 1966, 
p. D5/4) 
in 
Of 

168 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 
system is 2.2 x lo3 mol-* dm3 m-l, higher than that for benzene, but still 
low for a m* 
state. This is due to the fact that, although the electronic 
transition is allowed, it still retains some of the forbidden character of 
the corresponding benzene system. 
mure 11.12 N~-uItraviolet 
absorption sDBctrum of butan-2- 
The spectrum of butan-2-one in solution in water (Figure 11.12) is 
one in solution in water (after 
organic Compounds, 
Buttennrorths, London, 1966, 
p. W 7 )  
typical of a molecule having a C=O group. The electron promotion 
involved in the S,-S, transition, in this case at 267 nm, is from a non- 
bonding, n, orbital on the oxygen atom to an anti-bonding n* orbital 
on the C=O group. These orbitals are localized, and are similar to those 
perkampusy in wAtras Of 

Electronic Spectroscopy 
169 
of methanal (formaldehyde), shown in Figure 5.1 1; they are little affected 
by the substitution of the hydrogen atoms by methyl and ethyl groups. 
The S, state is an nz* state, as discussed in Section 5.3.2. Such an elec- 
tronic transition of a molecule containing a C=O group occurs in the 
region of 275 nm, which is typical for the C=O chromophore. The 
intensity of the transition is typically very low, having a value of E,,, 
of 
only about 20 mol-' dm3 cm-'; in the spectrum in Figure 11.12 it is 
21 mol-l dm3 cm-l. 
Although a transition to an nn* state is very weak, it occurs at lower 
energy than the lowest energy transition to a ICIC* 
state. (In the spectrum 
of butan-2-one in Figure 11.12, this latter transition is at a wavelength 
below 182 nm.) Consequently, it is not likely to be buried under a much 
more intense transition to a m* 
state. 
We have seen that an electronic spectrum, such as that in Figure 1 1.12, 
can be used to indicate the presence of a chromophore, but it may not 
give much information about any attached groups, in this case the methyl 
and ethyl groups. The discussion in Section 10.6 shows that vibrational 
spectroscopy is a more powerful tool for this purpose. 
In summary, for the purposes of chemical analysis, vibrational spec- 
troscopy is the more valuable for the identification of a molecule. 
Electronic spectroscopy is useful for indicating the presence of a chro- 
mophore, such as a C=O group or a benzene ring, but its greater strength 
is in the determination of the concentration of a molecule in solution, 
when the value of 
is known. 

170 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 

Further Reading 
1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 
9. 
P. W. Atkins and J. de Paula, Physical Chemistry, 7th edition, Oxford 
University Press, Oxford, 2002. (Quantum mechanics, all spectro- 
scopy, symmetry) 
C. Banwell and E. McCash, Fundamentals of Molecular 
Spectroscopy, 4th edition, McGraw-Hill, London, 1994. (All molec- 
ular spectroscopy) 
J. C. D. Brand, Lines of Light: the Sources of Dispersive Spectroscopy, 
1800-1 930, Gordon and Breach, Amsterdam, 1995. (Historical devel- 
opment of spectroscopy) 
J. M. Brown, Molecular Spectroscopy, Oxford University Press, 
Oxford, 1998. (Spectroscopy of diatomic molecules) 
J. R. Ferraro and K. Nakamoto, Introductory Raman Spectroscopy, 
Academic Press, London, 1994. (Raman spectroscopy) 
J. M. Hollas, High Resolution Spectroscopy, 2nd edition, Wiley, 
Chichester, 1998. (All spectroscopy, symmetry) 
J. M. Hollas, Modern Spectroscopy, 3rd edition, Wiley, Chichester, 
1996. (All spectroscopy, symmetry) 
H. W. Kroto, Molecular Rotation Spectra, Dover, New York, 1992. 
(Rotational spectroscopy) 
W. Kemp, Organic Spectroscopy, 3rd edition, Freeman, San 
Francisco, 1995. (Spectroscopy for analysis) 
10. T. P. Softley, Atomic Spectra, Oxford University Press, Oxford, 1994. 
11. B. Stewart, Modern Infrared Spectroscopy, Wiley, Chichester, 1995. 
(Atomic spectroscopy) 
(Infrared spectroscopy for analysis) 
171 

Answers to Problems 

Answers to Problems 
I73 

i 74 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 

Answers to Problems 
175 

176 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 

Answers to Problems 
177 

178 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 

Answers to Problems 
179 

180 
Basic Atomic and Molecular Spectroscopy 

Answers to Problems 
181 

Subject Index 
Absorbance 
1 0 1 
Absorption coefficient 
101, 168 
Absorption line 5 
Analytical spectroscopy 
102, 127, 142, 147, 
168 
Angle of deviation 2 
Angstrom 
3, 94 
Angular momentum 23 
electron spin 29, 40, 
nuclear spin 29, I18 
orbital 
27, 38, 45, 
60, 147 
rotational 97 
total 45, 60 
Anharmonic oscillator 
79, 87 
Anisotropic 
116 
Arc 6 
Asymmetric top 98 
Atomic mass unit 
77 
Atomic orbital 27 
Aufbau principle 
32, 58 
Avogadro constant 
13, 
45, 60 
energy 31 
18 
Backward wave oscillator 
103 
Balmer series 19 
Band 6 
head 
160 
hot 
135 
hybrid 
167 
parallel 
134, 137, 
158, 166 
perpendicular 134, 
137, 158, 166 
type A, B. C 
141. 
167 
Beer-Lambert law 
101, 
147 
Birge-Sponer extrapola- 
tion 81 
Bohr theory 23 
Boltzmann distribution 
Bond order 58 
Bo rn-Oppen heimer 
law 
11 3, 120, 127 
approximation 75, 
88 
Boson 
118 
Broadening 
107 
Doppler 107 
natural 
107 
pressure 
107 
Centrifugal distortion 
94, 97, 123 
Chromophore 169, 173 
Combination differences 
Combination level 
135 
Complementary colour 
Conjugation 70 
Continuum 
19, 22 
Core electron 
66 
Coriolis force 
135 
Coulombic force 32 
131 
5 
de Broglie equation 25 
Debye unit 
123 
Degeneracy 29 
electronic 
163 
rotational 
113 
vibrational 
83, 87 
Delocalization 7 1 
Deuterium lamp 105 
Diamagnetism 
59 
Diffraction grating 4, 
I06 
Dipole moment 
I 12, 
122, 133, 158 
Dispersion 
2, 101 
Dissociation 79, 149 
energy 
14, 81, 152 
Eigenfunction 26 
Eigenvalue 26 
Electromagnetic spec- 
trum 2, 8 
Electron diffraction 25 
Electronic spectra 
diatomic molecules 
polyatomic molecules 
147 
164 
Electronvolt 
14 
Energy 
13 
barrier 
86 
dissociation 
14, 81, 
152 
level 
17 
photon 
13 
zero-point 
78, 150 
Equivalent electrons 43 
182 

Subject Index 183 
Extinction coefficient 
101 
Felgett advantage 104 
Fermion 118 
Fingerprint region 144 
Fluorescence 152 
Force constant 77 
Franck-Condon 
principle 150, 165, 
166 
Frequency 1, 10 
‘y-ray region 9 
Gerade 57 
Globar 104 
Golay cell 104 
Group vibration 84, 
1 42 
Hamiltonian 27 
Harmonic oscillator 76, 
Helium atom 5, 35 
Hooke’s law 77 
Hund’s rules 41, 59, 
87 
62 
case (a) 60 
case (c) 74 
Hydrogen atom 18 
Infrared region 8 
Intensity 
electronic 158 
rotational 
112 
vibronic 159 
Interferometer 104, 106 
Inversion 86 
Ionization 14, 22 
Isoelectronic 65 
Isotropic 116 
energy 14, 24, 66 
KBr disk 105, 142 
Klystron 103 
A-type doubling 163 
Landk interval rule 47 
Laser 105, 106, 117, 
LCAO method 53 
Local mode 86 
131 
Magnetic moment 38, 
Matrix isolation 108 
Metastable atom 39 
Microwave region 8 
Millimetre wave region 
Molecular orbital 52 
47 
8 
diatomic molecule 52 
hybrid 68 
polyatomic molecule 
Molecular structure 123 
Moment of inertia 92 
principal 95 
Morse potential 81 
Multiplet, in atomic 
68 
spectrum 45 
inverted 47 
normal 47 
Multiplicity 35 
Mutual exclusion rule 
133 
Nernst filament 104 
Nodal plane 54 
Non-bonding electron 
66, 70, 72, 170 
Non-equivalent electrons 
43 
Non-rigid rotor 94 
Normal coordinate 85 
Normal mode 82 
Nuclear spin 11 8 
statistical weight 
118, 136, 138 
Nujol mull 105 
Overlap, of orbitals 54 
Overlap integral 
electronic 55 
vibrational 159 
Overtone 127 
P, Q, R branches 128 
Paramagnetism 59 
Pauli exclusion principle 
32, 36, 41, 43 
Periodic Table 33 
Phosphorescence 152 
Photoelectric effect 23 
Photoelectron 15, 24 
spectroscopy 15 
Photon 9 
Planck constant 13 
Polarizability 1 16, 133 
Polarization 
of light 10 
of transit ion moment 
134, 136, 141, 158, 
163, 166 
Potential energy 76, 78 
hypersurface 85, 88 
Precession 6 1 
Prefixes, for units 10 
Prism 2 
Probability 53 
Progression 150 
Quantization 17 
Quantum 18 
Quantum mechanics 26 
Quantum number 21 
azimuthal 27 
electron spin 29 
magnetic 27, 113 
nuclear spin 29, 118 
principal 26 
rotational 92 
vibrational 77 
Radiofrequency region 
Raman scattering 106 
anti-Stokes 106 
Stokes 106 
Raman spectroscopy 
15, 106 
123 
136, 139 
8 
rotational 116, 121, 
vibrational 13 1, 132, 
Rayleigh scattering 106 
Reduced mass 20, 77, 
92 
Refraction 2 
Refractive index 12 
Resolution 3 
Resolving power 4 
Resonance energy 55 
Rigid rotor 92 
Rotation 15, 91 
asymmetric top 
molecule 98, 123 

184 
Subject Index 
diatomic and linear 
molecules 92, 112 
internal 87 
spherical top molecule 
98, 123 
symmetric top mole- 
cule 95, 121 
Rotational constant 93, 
96 
Russell-Saunders 
coupling 45, 60 
Rydberg constant 20 
Schrodinger equation 
26, 54, 77 
Selection rule 22 
electronic 148, 165 
rotational 
1 1 1, 1 16, 
132, 134, 137, 141, 
159, 163, 166 
vibrational 
127, 13 1, 
149, 164 
Sequence band 
157, 165 
Shell 34 
Sodium D lines 6, 17, 
Spectrograph 4 
Spectrometer 4 
Spectrophotometer 4 
closed 35 
49 
Spectroscope 3 
Spectrum 
1 
electromagnetic 2, 8 
Spin-orbit coupling 46, 
147 
Standing wave 26 
State 35 
Sub-shell 34 
Symmetric top 95 
oblate 96 
prolate 96 
Symmetry 54, 62, 140 
Term 35 
Threshold frequency 
Transition moment 
133, 
Tungsten lamp 105 
Tunnelling 86, 87 
24 
158 
Ultraviolet region 9 
Uncertainty principle 
25 
Ungerade 57 
Vector 97 
Vertical transition 
150 
Vibration 
15 
diatomic molecule 76 
inversion 86 
polyatomic molecule 
torsion 86 
Vibration-rotation 
82 
interaction 
130, 
162 
Vibronic transition 
149 
Virtual state 
1 16, 131 
Wave function 26 
diatomic molecule 
normalization 
53 
nuclear spin 11 8 
polyatomic molecule 
56, 75 
68 
Waveguide 104 
Wavelength 1, 3, 10 
Wave mechanics 26 
Wave nature, of electron 
Wavenumber 
11 
9 
Xenon lamp 105 
X-ray region 9 
Zero gap 127, 160 
Zero-point energy 78, 
150 



