
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF 
THE ARABIC VERB
Structure and Function of the Arabic Verb is a corpus-based study that unveils the
morpho-syntax and the semantics of the Arabic verb.
Approaches to verbal grammatical categories – the constituents of verbal
 systems – often rely on either semantic–pragmatic or syntactic analyses. This
research bridges the gap between these two distinct approaches through a detailed
 analysis of Taxis, Aspect, Tense, and Modality in Standard Arabic. This is
 accomplished by showing, first, some basic theoretical concerns shared by both
schools of thought and, second, the extent to which semantic structures and
 invariant  meanings mirror syntactic representations.
Maher Bahloul’s findings also indicate that the basic constituents of the verbal
system in Arabic, namely the Perfect and the Imperfect, are systematically
 differentiated through their invariant semantic features in a markedness relation.
Finally, this study suggests that the syntactic derivation of verbal and nominal
clauses are sensitive to whether or not verbal categories are specified for their  feature
 values, providing therefore a principled explanation to a long-standing debate.
This reader-friendly book will appeal to both specialists and students of Arabic
linguistics, language, and syntax.
Maher Bahloul is Assistant Professor of English and Linguistics at the American
University of Sharjah.

ROUTLEDGE ARABIC LINGUISTICS SERIES
General Editor: Clive Holes, University of Oxford
Editors:
El-Sa’id Badawi, American University in Cairo
Adrian Gully, University of Exeter
Yasir Suleiman, University of Edinburgh
Keith Walters, University of Texas
The Routledge Arabic Linguistics Series publishes high-quality, academically
 rigorous research on Arabic linguistics to two main readerships: non-Arabist  general
linguists with an interest in Arabic, and students and researchers already in the field
of Arabic language and linguistics. Both synchronic and diachronic  studies of Arabic
are welcome which aid our understanding of the historical  evolution and the present
state of Arabic, whether dialectal or standard. Works written from a  sociolinguistic
(e.g. language variation), socio-historical (e.g.  language history), sociological
(e.g. language planning), or psycholinguistic (e.g. language acquisition) perspective
are welcome, as are studies of Arabic  stylistics, pragmatics, and discourse analysis.
Descriptive dialectological works also fall within the scope of the Series, as do works
which focus on the evolution of medieval Arabic linguistic thought. Proposals or
scripts for the Series will be welcomed by the General Editor.
Previously Published by Curzon:
MEDIEVAL ISLAMIC  PRAGMATICS
Sunni legal theorists’ model of textual communication
Mohamed Mohamed Yunis Ali
JEWISH AND MUSLIM DIALECTS OF MOROCCAN ARABIC
Jeffrey Heath
LANGUAGE CONTACT AND LANGUAGE CONFLICT 
IN ARABIC
Variations on a sociolinguistic theme
Edited by Aleya Rouchdy
Published by Routledge:
STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION OF THE ARABIC VERB
Maher Bahloul

STRUCTURE AND 
FUNCTION OF THE 
ARABIC VERB
Maher Bahloul

First published 2008
by Routledge
2 Park Square, Milton Park, Abingdon, Oxon OX14 4RN
Simultaneously published in the USA and Canada
by Routledge
270 Madison Ave, New York, NY 10016
Routledge is an imprint of the Taylor & Francis Group, 
an informa business
All rights reserved. No part of this book may be reprinted or 
reproduced or utilised in any form or by any electronic, mechanical, 
or other means, now known or hereafter invented, including 
photocopying and recording, or in any information storage or 
retrieval system, without permission in writing 
from the publishers.
British Library Cataloguing in Publication Data
A catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library
Library of Congress Cataloging in Publication Data
Bahloul, Maher, 1963–
Structure and function of the Arabic verb / Maher Bahloul.
p. cm. – (Routledge Arabic linguistics series)
Includes bibliographical references and index.
1. Arabic language – Verb. I. Title.
PJ6145.B34 2007
492.7'5–dc22
2007003135
ISBN10: 0–415–77215–X (hbk)
ISBN10: 0–203–94556–5 (ebk)
ISBN13: 978–0–415–77215–0 (hbk)
ISBN13: 978–0–203–94556–8 (ebk)
This edition published in the Taylor & Francis e-Library, 2007.
“To purchase your own copy of this or any of Taylor & Francis or Routledge’s
collection of thousands of eBooks please go to www.eBookstore.tandf.co.uk.”
ISBN 0-203-94556-5 Master e-book ISBN
© 2008 Maher Bahloul

TO AMAL, NOUR, AND RAYAN


CONTENTS
List of illustrations
xi
Foreword
xiii
Acknowledgments
xv
List of abbreviations
xvii
List of symbols
xix
1
Introduction
1
The language and the data 2
Background assumptions 3
Organization of the study 4
2
Verbal categories, clause structure, and modality
7
Introduction 7
Verbal categories and sentence structure 8
Verbal categories and modality 18
Concluding remarks 27
3
Verbal morphology, structure, and function
29
Introduction 29
Identifying verbal morphemes 29
The Perfect paradigm 31
The Imperfect paradigm 35
Previous analyses of verbal forms 37
Summary 43
4
The Perfect, use, and invariant meaning
44
Introduction 44
The Perfect construction 45
vii

The Perfect and temporal relations 47
Summary and proposal 62
Contextual variants and markedness 63
The Perfect within the ATM system 64
The Perfect and the invariant 68
Conclusion 70
5
The Compound Perfect, and the modal QAD
72
Introduction 72
Previous analyses 73
Conclusion 77
An alternative approach 77
The syntactic distribution of QAD 78
The invariant function of QAD 85
More on the characteristics of QAD 89
QAD and the coordinators WA, LA, and FA 89
Towards a solution 96
QAD as an ATM category 96
QAD and invariance 101
Conclusion 102
6
The Imperfect, use, and invariant meaning
104
Introduction 104
The Imperfect and temporal relations 104
Present time reference 104
Gnomic interpretation 108
Futurity and modality 113
The Imperfect and future time 121
The Imperfect and past time 126
Summary and proposal 131
Variation and invariance 132
The Imperfect within the ATM system 135
The Imperfect and negation 137
The Imperfect vs. the Perfect 140
Concluding remarks 147
7
ATM categories, derivation, and the verbal clause
149
Introduction 149
The derivation of ATM categories 150
CONTENTS
viii

The structure of Taxis–Aspect and tense 152
Taxis–Aspect, tense, and negation 154
Taxis–Aspect, tense, and conditionals 156
Taxis–Aspect, tense, and compound tenses 157
Conclusion 166
8
ATM categories, derivation, and the nominal clause
167
Introduction 167
Nominal clauses and modality 169
Some properties of modality 170
Verb movement into modality 171
The copula in wh-contexts 173
The copula and modality 176
Co-occurrence relation between ATM categories 179
Summary and conclusion 183
9
Conclusion
185
Appendix
188
Notes
201
Bibliography
212
Index
225
CONTENTS
ix


xi
ILLUSTRATIONS
Figure
6.1
The dynamic relationship between the Perfect and 
the Imperfect
144
Tables
3.1
Morphophonemic shapes of agreement morphemes 
within the Perfect
34
3.2
Morphophonemic shapes of agreement morphemes 
within the Imperfect
37
3.3
Summary of agreement morphology
37
3.4
Summary of previous analyses of the Perfect and the 
Imperfect in Arabic
43
4.1
Verbal forms according to Sibawayhi
45
4.2
Contextual meanings of the Perfect
62
4.3
The Perfect constructions
64
5.1
The frequency of initial QAD in newspaper articles
79
5.2
The frequency of initial QAD in scholarly articles
79
5.3
The frequency of initial QAD in short stories
80
5.4
Summary of the frequency of QAD in initial position
80
5.5
Frequency of QAD in initial and non-initial positions
81
5.6
The frequency of QAD across discourse genres
82
5.7
Frequency of QAD within the Perfect constructions
86
5.8
The frequency of WA, FA-, LA-, and Ø in front of QAD
95
5.9
Frequency of the compound perfect
103
6.1
The distribution and frequency of sawfa/sa-
121
6.2
The frequency of QAD, laʕalla, and rubbamaa
124
6.3
The contextual variants of the Imperfect
133
6.4
The contextual meanings of the Imperfect
133
6.5
The Imperfect constructions
136
6.6
The structure of negators
138

ILLUSTRATIONS
xii
6.7
The frequency of negators: laa, lam, lan, and maa
139
6.8
Semantic values of the Perfect and the Imperfect
140
6.9
Frequency of the Perfect/Imperfect in sentence initial 
clauses (newspaper articles)
143
6.10
The frequency of the Perfect/Imperfect in sentence 
initial clauses (scholarly articles)
144
6.11
The frequency of the Perfect and the Imperfect
147
6.12
The frequency of the Perfect/Compound Perfect in 
sentence initial clauses
147

xiii
FOREWORD
There are many publications on tense–mood–aspect (TMA) characteristics, traits,
and interrelationships, in general and in specific languages and/or language
 families, or as Dr Bahloul prefers, ATM categories. However, ATM studies
 having to do with Modern Standard Arabic (MSA) or Arabic dialects are few in
number. The present work utilizes parallels in Chomskyan Principles and
Parameters theory and the “Theory of Enunciative Operations,” as formulated in
a variety of works by Antoine Culioli (see Bahloul’s bibliography) to comment on
MSA clausal and verbal structure. It is always beneficial, I believe, to see where
different linguistic approaches can be amalgamated, since I have always held that
good scholarship should be eclectic and choose the best parts of various theories
or hypotheses that serve to integrate all kinds of explanatory adequacy and
explanatory parameters. After all, linguistics is, first and foremost, an explanatory
science – we linguists want to explain coherently and in an organized fashion the
macro- and micro-details of languages and dialects.
What Dr Bahloul achieves in this work, as he so succinctly puts it, is a suc-
cessful “bridg[ing of] the gap between both syntax and semantics, an achievement
which is empirically motivated and theoretically desirable” (p. 27). I am of the
opinion that he has succeeded beyond any reader’s expectation of what  descriptive
and explanatory adequacy are all about. A great strength of the present volume is
that the author has sifted through much of the linguistic literature dealing with the
semantics of the MSA verbal system – comparing and contrasting the views of
many household names in Arabic and general linguistics – luminaries such as
A.F.L. Beeston, Noam Chomsky, Bernard Comrie, Östen Dahl, Charles Fillmore,
Henri Fleisch, Roman Jakobson, Jerzy Kury„owicz, John McCarthy, Mohammad
A. Mohammad, Linda R. Waugh, William Wright, and the first grammarian to
deal with Arabic, the Iranian Sibawayhi. Thus, this tome is for Arabists and
Semitists as well as general linguists, who should always be interested in broad-
ening their linguistic horizons and getting involved with non-Indo-European
 linguistic data.
Let me emphasize that this book does not offer generalizations without first
examining the primary linguistic evidence based on the premises of what has
come to be labeled corpus linguistics. Bahloul has based his conclusions on a

FOREWORD
xiv
sizeable MSA corpus. It consists of the following: (1) 13 articles from 3 widely
read newspapers: Asharq Al-Awsat, Al-Quds Al-Arabi, and Al-ʕAlam Al-Yawm);
(2) 5 scholarly articles from 2 journals; and (3) 5 contemporary short stories on
a variety of interesting themes. These 23 texts form a prototypical corpus of
MSA as used throughout the Arab world today. All 13 newspaper  articles are
included in an appendix for ease of reference by the seasoned Arabist. Thus, it can
be appreciated that the MSA “perfect,” although generally referring to a past
 context, also incorporates what is called by the author “anteriority” and “dimen-
sionality.” The former designation is backed up by the Jakobsonian idea of
“taxis,” whereas the latter term is aspectual. The idea that MSA is basically
taxis–aspectual is quite an improvement over the tense and/or aspectual
 viewpoints. To explain the MSA “imperfect,” it basically involves tense, but in its
invariant meaning involves taxis.
Another major contribution of Bahloul’s book is the thorough treatment of the
modal particle QAD, which has a variety of meanings depending on the context.
Indeed no other publication has offered so many details on this complicated
 lexeme. The author unveils its historical development, demystifies its semantico-
pragmatic function within the verbal system, and spells out the role it plays in the
syntax of the MSA verbal clause.
Let me conclude my remarks here by endorsing Bahloul’s summation that
“...the overall results show that while Tense is certainly present within the Arabic
clause, the value of this category is less likely to take part in the values of the
invariant of both the Perfect and the Imperfect” (p. 185). There can be little doubt
that Structure and Function of the Arabic Verb provides numerous innovative
analyses and much food for thought for future research by Arabists, morphologists,
and language typologists alike. If I may hazard a prediction, this tome will soon
become a standard work and remain as such for years to come.
Alan S. Kaye
Department of English and Linguistics
California State University
Fullerton, CA 92834
USA

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
I am indebted to the series editor, Clive Holes, who took great interest in my
book, and the editing team, whose endless patience and support, especially Joe
Whiting and Natalja Mortensen, went well beyond a regular call of duty. I would
also like to acknowledge my debt to the valuable comments and suggestions of
the two anonymous reviewers.
I also wish to express my deepest thanks to Professor Mushira Eid, who
 generously assisted in providing space for me during the Spring of 2006 at the
University of Utah as a Visiting Scholar. I thus had access to one of the most
resourceful libraries. Since the origin of this book can easily be traced to my PhD
dissertation, I wish to reexpress my endless recognition and gratitude to Professor
Linda Waugh, Professor Wayne Harbert, and Professor John Whitman at Cornell
University, whose support and advice continued way beyond my graduate years.
I can never thank enough my mother and express appreciation for my two
brothers and three sisters for the moral support they constantly provide.
My children had to bear with a dad not available on demand. To Amal, Nour,
and Rayan, I express my gratitude and full admiration for their intentional and
unintentional support.
For the endless understanding, constant encouragement, and invaluable moral
support of my wife Raja, I express most gratefulness, offer my earnest love, and
give tremendous respect.
xv


ABBREVIATIONS
acc.
accusative
AgrP
Agreement Phrase
asp.
aspect
AspP
Aspect Phrase
AsrtP
Assertive Phrase
ATM
Aspect, Tense, and Modality
atr.
article
AUX
Auxiliary
CP
Complementizer Phrase
d.
dual
EALL
Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics
ECP
Empty Category Principle
f.
feminine
Freq.
frequency
fut.
future
GB
Government and Binding
gen.
genitive
imp.
imperfect
INFL
The Inflectional Constituent
IP
Inflectional Phrase
M
Modality
m.
masculine
MLA
Modern Literary Arabic
MoodP
Mood Phrase
MP
Modal Phrase
MSA
Modern Standard Arabic
NA
Newspaper Articles
Nb.
number
NegP
Negative Phrase
nom.
nominative
NP
Noun Phrase
P
Proposition
xvii

p.
plural
Part.
particle
pf.
perfect
pres.
present
Pst.
past
Q.
question marker
RM
Relativized Minimality
S
Sentence
s.
singular
S/P
Subject/Predicate
SA
Scholarly Articles
SS
Short Stories
SVO
Subject Verb Object
Tax–AspP  Taxis–Aspect Phrase
tns.
tense
TP
Tense Phrase
Voc.
vocative
VP
Verb Phrase
ABBREVIATIONS
xviii

SYMBOLS
s
() ﺺemphatic voiceless dental fricative
t
()ﻃemphatic voiceless dental stop
d
()ضemphatic voiced dental fricative
*
()ﻆemphatic voiced interdental fricative
ʁ
()غvoiced pharyngeal fricative
x
()خvoiceless velar fricative
ʔ
() أvoiceless glottal stop
ʕ
()عvoiced pharyngeal stop

() ثvoiceless interdental fricative
ð
()ذvoiced interdental fricative
q
()قvoiceless uvular stop
∆
()ﺞvoiced palato-alveolar fricative
m
()شvoiceless palato-alveolar fricative
ɦ
() حvoiceless pharyngeal fricative
aa
long vowel [a]
ii
long vowel [i]
uu
long vowel [u]
xix


1
INTRODUCTION
Since the earliest and most seminal authority on the grammar of Classical Arabic,
Alkitaab “The Book” by the Persian grammarian Sibawayhi in the eighth century,
and until some of the latest and most comprehensive works on Arabic (Fassi Fehri
1993; Badawi et al. 2004; Holes 2004; Ryding 2005; Versteegh 2006 – the
 general editor of the mammoth Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics
EALL), studies of the Arabic verb system have always been at the forefront of any
major grammatical endeavor. Thus, the Arabic verb has been under scrutiny and
microscopic investigations for the past 13 centuries.1 These investigations are
mottled and include scholars belonging to diverse eras and myriad schools of
thought from Arab and Western linguistic traditions.2 However, the wealth of
information has been tainted with a major methodological flaw, in our opinion,
represented in the full reliance of decontextualized samples of language. In other
words, the overwhelming majority of investigations of the Arabic verb system
from the era of Sibawayhi onward kept analyzing verbal forms and their
 corresponding meanings on the basis of isolated samples represented in a very
limited inventory of examples. This shortcoming, in our opinion, which relates to
the total absence of any corpus on the basis of which the verbal system is unveiled
and analyzed, undermines to a large extent the degree of accuracy of any
 conclusions relevant to the meaning and function of Arabic verbal forms.
This book constitutes a major breakthrough in the history of studies relevant to
the verbal system of Arabic. Thus, it departs from previous approaches through
the use of a corpus from a representative sample of actual use of the Arabic
 language. As such, not only do we examine the text, but we also relate the verbal
form to its context of use. In addition, we pay close attention to the modal  dimension,
reminiscent of writers’ opinions and attitudes toward the  propositional content.
At the heart of the Arabic verbal system, and most other verbal systems, are the
issues of Aspect, Tense, and Modality (ATM). These verbal categories appear to
have puzzled every single relevant research for a number of reasons at the
 forefront of which might figure (i) the morphological opacity of the Arabic verb,
(ii) the mixing of various historical eras of the Arabic language, and (iii) the
absolute lack of authentic texts. It is our strong belief that, with the current state
of linguistic theory, it is hard to do justice to the study of ATM categories not
1

 relying on corpora and using only the principles of one theoretical framework.
This is only natural given the logical limitations of isolated sentences and 
any theoretical approach, respectively. In this work, we subscribe to two different
 theoretical frameworks, hoping to offer a comprehensive treatment of the ATM
categories. One theory is functionally and semantically oriented, and the other is
syntactically oriented. The aim of this work is therefore to provide both semantic
and syntactic analyses of verbal categories, with particular reference to Aspect,
Tense, and Modality. It is hoped that two fundamental objectives could be
achieved in this work: first, to give a characterization of the ATM system of
Standard Arabic; second, to bridge the apparent gap between syntax and semantics,
through showing the extent to which semantic structures are mapped into  syntactic
representations.
The language and the data
The form of Arabic under investigation is Standard Arabic (henceforth Arabic), also
known as Modern Standard Arabic (MSA), and Modern Literary Arabic (MLA).
It is the uniform variety of Arabic which is used all over the Arabic-speaking
world as the usual medium of written communication in books, periodicals, journals,
magazines, newspapers, signs, business, and personal  letters. It is also the formal
means of communication in radio, television, lectures, sermons, debates,
 interviews, and in general on occasions accompanied by some degree of formality
and solemnity, that is, it covers most forms of the formal  spoken  language.
In many ways, SA continues, but only to a certain degree, the phonology,
 morphology, syntax and largely the vocabulary of Classical Arabic, the revered
language of the Holy Koran, pre-Islamic and post-Islamic poetry, literature,
 philosophy, theology, mathematics, sciences, and so on. It should be stressed,
however, that although there is no clear-cut distinction between Classical Arabic,
on the one hand, and SA, on the other hand, there are cases where a distinction
should be made. Indeed, the more we read classical Arabic grammar books
(e.g. Sibawayhi 796, Ibn-Hishaam 1359, among many others) the more we notice
differences rather than similarities (see verbal forms and negation p. 50).3 This
interrelatedness is best characterized through a continuum with Classical Arabic
on one end, and SA on the other end. Each end contains the defining characteristics
of each form, with various degrees of interaction in-between.
Standard Arabic is also in constant interaction with all spoken dialects in the
Arab world. This has resulted in a context of variation, highly limited to the lexicon.
This interaction has given rise to a variety of spoken and written levels and styles –
on which see Belazi (1984); Ferguson (1996); Eid (2006) among others.
One of the reasons we have chosen SA for study in this book relates to its
 relative stability, on the one hand, and to the large number of Arabists who are
more familiar with the standard language than the dialects, on the other hand.
As for the sources of the corpus, we have selected a relatively representative
body of illustrative examples from three different written genres. The governing
INTRODUCTION
2

principle is to minimize the degree of restrictiveness, maximizing, therefore, the
chances of a thorough investigation. Accordingly, three salient discourse genre-types
were selected. They include newspaper articles, scholarly articles, and short stories.
We believe that each one of these types has a unique set of defining  characteristics
which have great bearing on the overall understanding of the issues in question. With
respect to the category of tense, and in particular to its interaction with  temporality,
for example, it is shown that each genre has its own characteristics, and unless every
factor is taken into account, the analysis remains partial and the results might be
misleading.
More specifically, the corpus embodies 13 Newspaper Articles (henceforth
NA), which vary in length and context, taken from three newspapers: Asharq
Al-awsat, Al-quds Al-Arabi, and Al-ʕaalam al-yawm (see Appendix for details);
five Scholarly Articles (henceforth SA) from two different journals: the first four
are from AL-INSAAN of August 1990, classified as follows: (SA#l) by Driss
Ridha min ʔa∆li mustaqbalin li-nadwati al-mustaqbali al-ʔislaamii, pp. 5–10
(SA#2) by Turaabii Hasan ʔawlawiyyaat at-tayyaari al-ʔislaamii li-alaaa
ʕuquudin qaadimaat, pp. 11–15 (SA#3) by Madanii ʕabbaas ɦaa∆aati an-nidaam
at-tarbawii ʔilaa al-ʔislaaɦ, pp. 33–37 (SA#4) by ɦi∆aazii Mu∆aahid ɦawla
ʔaʕdaadi al-muhaa∆iriina al-yahuud as-sufyaat ʔilaa falastiin, pp. 65–70; and
the fifth (SA#5) from Al-ma∆alla al-masriyya li-ddiraasaati an-nafsiyyati of
September 1991 by Yuusuf ∆umʕa Sayyid tartiib ʔaɦdaai al-ɦayaati al-muiirati
li-l-mamaqqati, pp. 33–59, and finally five contemporary Short Stories
 (henceforth SS): (SS#l) baytun min laɦm “A House Of Flesh,” (SS#2) Al-Maʔtam
“The Funeral Ceremony,” (SS#3) ʔakaana laabudda “yaa liilii” ʔan tudiiʔii annuur
“Lili, did you have to turn the light on?,” (SS#4) ʔarxas layaalii “The Cheapest
nights,” and (SS#5) ʔassaaʔil wa-l-masʔuul “The questioner and the questionee”
(the first four are by Yusuf Idris, the fifth by Abu-Al-maʕaatii Abu an-na∆aa). This
gives a total of 23 texts upon which most of our data is based. We should stress
the fact that, besides the principled desire to vary the corpus, the texts were randomly
selected. The rest of the data in this work comes from three different sources:
(i) there are examples from previous work by various authors ranging from
eighth century linguists to modern writings, most of which we have not modified
(except for corrections to typographical errors, grammar mistakes and the like);
(ii) the second source of examples is the author of this work himself; that is,
whenever there are types of examples that do not appear in the corpus, or are
deemed necessary to advance an argument, we provided the appropriate examples,
to the best of our native knowledge; (iii) the third source includes various  newspapers
and magazines; these were used to provide both French and English examples.
Background assumptions
In this book we assume a general familiarity with, on the one hand, speaker-sensitive
French enunciative theories, and at least a basic knowledge of current syntactic
practices, as proposed by Chomsky (1991, 1995, 2002b), on the other hand.
INTRODUCTION
3

The former is referred to as “Theory of Enunciative Operations” (the Culiolian
school), and the latter is currently called “The Principles and Parameters Approach”
(the Chomskian school). Although the two approaches might be  evaluated as two
opposing poles, we will show a convergence in the thinking of the two schools.
Both schools seem to subscribe to some of the same general  linguistic principles,
yet their adherents fail to recognize any common ground. The very fact that
 utterances or surface structures are only analyzable in light of a deeper level of
representation and interpretation within both schools supports our view of their
convergence.
Theories of enunciation assume that an utterance is ultimately a final product,
a result of certain enunciative operations. The role of the linguist is, therefore, to
define those operations and reconstruct the utterance. By doing so, questions as
to why the enunciator chooses this form, uses this construction, and so on, are
straightforwardly accounted for. Likewise, the Principles and Parameters
approach interprets surface structures and meanings as a result of deeper
 representations. The question becomes, therefore, which deep structure is to be
assigned to which surface structures. It is our contention that there are common-
alities between these two approaches and that, therefore, they can be combined
into an overall approach to ATM systems.
Organization of the study
In Chapter 2, we present an approach to clausal structure based on insights from
various prevailing schools of thought. We begin with a discussion of the most
salient theoretical aspects of sentence structure from such authors as Fillmore
(1968), Culioli (1970, 1971, 1973, 1976, 1978, 1982, 1987), Adamczewski
(1982a,b, 1986), and Pollock (1989), Chomsky (1991, 1995, 2002b), Koopman
and Sportiche (1991), among several others as the basis for defining a syntactic
representation sensitive to clausal semantic structure. The claim put forward
argues that a clause is best analyzed as composed of a Modality constituent
 followed by a propositional constituent. We then layout the basic aspects of the
Modality constituent. In so doing, we will discuss the question of its internal
 constituents, the question of its defining characteristics, and the methodological
issues which underlie the treatment of the relevant categories, with a particular
reference to those of Aspect, Tense, and Modality.
In Chapter 3 we start with a brief sketch of Arabic verbal morphology, where
we show that the first vowel within both the Perfect and the Imperfect carries
semantic features, which will be later identified as denoting a Taxis–Aspect
 category. We then present the problem relative to the semantic function of these
features through laying out the most relevant competing hypotheses.
In the following Chapters 4–8, we conduct our own investigation of the
so-called Aspect–Tense categories, and present an alternative approach to previous
analyses, with a particular emphasis on their semantic–pragmatic functions, on
the one hand, and their syntactic structures, on the other hand. Chapter 4 focuses
INTRODUCTION
4

on the Perfect. We discuss its semantic–pragmatic functions through examining
its contextual variants from the point of view of temporality. We then propose a
classification of the variants according to markedness. Finally, we outline its
place within the ATM system as a whole, and propose an invariant meaning which
straightforwardly accounts for its temporal and nontemporal features.
In Chapter 5 we undertake the issue of the Compound Perfect, which reduces
to unveiling the semantic–pragmatic functions of the modal particle QAD. We
begin with a brief review of previous analyses, outline their claims, and discuss
their shortcomings and inconsistencies. We then present the most relevant aspects
which detail its syntactic distribution and unveil the modal system of which it is
a part. Finally we discuss its subtle semantic properties and argue that it is an
assertive particle which shares common features with both the English DO and
the French (BEL ET) BIEN.
In Chapter 6 we investigate the semantic–pragmatic functions of the second
member of the opposition within the verbal system, namely the Imperfect. These
functions are traced out from the perspective of temporality. Here, an effort is
made to sort out the major contextual variants of this verbal form. These variants
are then hierarchically classified/organized according to their markedness. The
basic meaning of the Imperfect corresponds to its unmarked use, while its
 specific meaning represents the marked use. After discussing the sub-system of
which the Imperfect is a part, and its occurrence with such particles as negators,
conditional particles, and auxiliaries, we define the invariant features which
underlie the use of this verbal form in all different contextualizations. Finally, we
confront the two verbal forms, highlight the semantic features which systematically
distinguish one from the other, and discuss some aspects relative to their similarities.
Contrary to previous analyses, we shall maintain that the two categories of Taxis
and Aspect (Taxis–Aspect) constitute the defining features of the verbal system.
In Chapter 7 we turn to a discussion of the syntax of Taxis–Aspect and Tense where
we show an important implication of the results outlined in Chapters 4, 5, and 6
for issues concerning constraints on movement. These involve the inability of the
thematic verb to move into Tense. Accordingly, the verb stays under Taxis–Aspect,
which we argue is a phrasal projection. Empirical evidence from facts of  negation,
subject position, compound tenses, and conditional particles is then  presented to
support the above claim. We finally discuss the syntax of the assertive particle
QAD, and present evidence for treating it as a head of a phrasal projection
which we call Assertive Phrase (AsrtP). This category is also shown to include
negation.
Then in Chapter 8 we confront the syntax of nonverbal sentences in Arabic.
Here, we show that there are instances where the Modality component shows no
surface traces whatsoever. We discuss the conditions under which these modal
traces appear and highlight the salient role which the content of the Modality
component plays in determining the type of argument it selects. In the final
 chapter of this work, Chapter 9, we review the main achievements developed in
the preceding chapters of this book, and express the need for further research.
INTRODUCTION
5

An appendix is provided which contains for convenient reference all
13 newspaper articles. Unfortunately, we could not include both magazine  articles
and short stories because of their length. In fact, unlike newspaper  articles, these
modal traces appear and highlight the salient role while the content of the latter
are easier to obtain and consult.
INTRODUCTION
6

2
VERBAL CATEGORIES, CLAUSE 
STRUCTURE, AND MODALITY
Introduction
Halliday (1994) correctly observes that the current opposition between theories of
language is no longer “structuralists” versus “generativists” rather between those
that are primarily formal and syntagmatic in orientation (i.e. syntacticians), and
others that are paradigmatic (i.e. functional) and semantic in orientation. Our
approach is a crosscurrent for it makes use of insights borrowed from one to the
other. Thus, while generative syntacticians have been clearly advocating a maximally
general phrase structure analysis of nonlexical/functional categories such as
tense, aspect, modality, mood, negation and so on (Chomsky 1986, 1995; Pollock
1989; Ouhalla 1989, 1991; Whitman 1989; Bowers 1991; Carstens 1991;
Benmamoun 1992, 2000; Fassi Fehri 1993 among several others), which used to
be generated under a single structural node, namely Inflectional Phrase (IP),
enunciativists and discourse analysts have been trying to advance systematic and
uniform accounts for those same verbal categories, especially the ones expressing
aspect, tense, and modality (Guillaume 1964; Benveniste 1966, 1970; Culioli 1970,
1976, 1982; Waugh 1975, 1987, 1990; Adamczewski 1982a,b, 1986, 1991; Givón
1982; Dahl 1985, 2000; Pica 1985; Delmas 1987; Joly and Roulland 2001 among
many others) on the basis of their salience in any particular speech  production.
Despite their different theoretical constructs, they appear therefore to share a
common objective the essence of which is to do justice to the structure and func-
tion of these verbal categories, which, for decades, have been put aside and con-
sidered the least salient items in language. As investigators have realized the
extent to which the presence of these categories shapes the syntactic
 representation of the clause and governs its semantic interpretation, more
research has recently focused on the behavior of these categories, and even on
their universal nature.1 In addition, the study of such verbal categories as ATM
within two different theories of language has theoretical and empirical implications.
On the theoretical level, this move enhances the cognitive status of these verbal
categories as a fundamental component of human thinking. On the empirical side,
it has had a major effect on clausal syntactic representations, on the one hand, and
their semantic interpretations, on the other hand.
7

This chapter focuses, in particular, on the status and characteristics of these
 verbal categories, elements of a chief component. Its objective is twofold: to
reveal, first, the formal/structural properties of the verbal categories, and then to
investigate their major inherent semantic features. Accordingly, while the first
section focuses on the syntactic status of these functional categories relative to
clausal structure, the second section unveils the semantic principles with which
they are associated.
Verbal categories and sentence structure
In order to substantiate the universal nature of grammatical categories, relative to
the structural properties of sentences, one should probably argue that all
 languages have a common clause structure whereby these categories constitute
one of its basic components. In what follows, the most relevant approaches to
clausal  structure will be reviewed, and an attempt to suggest a generalized
 sentence  structure will be made. Accordingly, four basic structural models will be
presented and  discussed. We will first present Fillmore’s (1968, 2003) suggestion
as to the nature of basic clausal constituents. Second, we will outline Culioli’s
(1968, 1976) fundamental sentential model. Third, Adamczewski’s (1978, 1982a)
metalinguistic configuration, based on his “Metaoperational Grammar Theory,”
will be reviewed. And finally we will discuss the recent developments within the
latest Principles and Parameters framework as advocated by the various
 syntacticians based on the thrust of Chomsky’s (1991, 1995) insights, which
 constitutes, in our view, a salient attempt to reanalyze sentence structures, and
 abandon the very early Noun Phrase-Auxiliary-Noun Phrase (NP-AUX-NP)
model.
Fillmore’s analysis
One could not agree more with Wasow’s observation that Fillmore’s (1968)
insightful generalizations relevant to the formal machinery of grammar “remain
relevant to current research” (2006: 169). In his “Case for Case,” Fillmore (1968
[republished 2003]) proposes that the basic syntactic structure of sentences
is made up of two constituents corresponding to a MODALITY and a
 PROPOSITION. The Modality constituent includes such modalities on the
 sentence-as-a-whole as negation, tense, mood, and aspect.2,3 The proposition, on
the other hand, is said to include a tenseless set of relationships involving verbs
and nouns (and embedded sentences if there are any). Thus, the first base rule
Fillmore suggests is given in (1a) and (1b) (this corresponds to (28) and (28)
respectively in his paper).
(1)  a  Sentence →
Modality  Proposition
b  S
→
M  P
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
8

It should be noted that this representation was by no means a common practice
or popular among linguists at that time, a period during which the Chomskian school
was growing, and the representation of basic clauses as a combination of three
elements: a Noun Phrase (NP), an Auxiliary (AUX), and a Verb Phrase (VP), as
illustrated in (2), was getting standardized.4
(2)  S →NP  AUX  VP
This raises the question as to what motivated Fillmore’s syntactic approach.
The answer seems to be that since Fillmore was developing a “case” theory; he
was more interested in the arguments that would relate to the verb, and thus in
getting them assigned a particular “case.” He therefore claimed that Modality should
be kept separate, since it does not have a verbal case relation. Moreover, modal
cases are sometimes called the “adverbial cases,” and range, therefore, over a wide
selection of verbs. As such, they are not, by definition, related to the proposition
but to the Modality of the sentence as a whole. In other words, they are not related
to the central verb as arguments to a predicate, but related to the entire proposition
as a Modality. Another characteristic of these modal cases, along with those of
Time, Place, Manner, Cause, Purpose, Accompaniment, and Benefactive is the
fact that they are generally optional in the structures in which they occur. If a verb
is an action verb, for example, this action may be optionally represented in a
 particular time, place, and circumstantial setting. These details may be added
or omitted. An action may be “for someone” (benefactive), “with someone” (accom-
paniment), “done in a certain way” (manner), “at a certain time” (temporal), “at a
certain place” (locative), “for a certain purpose” (purpose), and so on. Thus,
according to Fillmore, all of these cases are modal cases; they are outside the case
frame of the verb. A modal case accounts, therefore, for every phrase in the
 sentence which does not already have a role assigned to it from the case frame of
the verb. In addition, it has been suggested that modal cases should be relegated to
higher predications. According to this theory, the adverbial represents a higher
 predication in which some event, X, took place. For example, in a sentence
such as (3),
(3)  He came yesterday.
the event, “he came,” would be considered to be one predication, and this
 predication would be included in a higher predication expressing the time of the
event, that is, X took place yesterday. Thus, we can see the extent to which modal
cases are different from the propositional case roles demanded by the meaning of
the verb. In addition, modal cases differ from propositional cases in that there is
no question of a fit between case feature and noun feature. Since modal cases are
indifferent to particular verbs, no case role feature is read into the modal case
from the verb. Rather, the modal cases depend entirely upon their lexical content
for interpretation and differentiation. One associates words like now, then, with
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
9

time, here, there, with location, alone, together, with accompaniment, and so on.
Modal cases can, therefore, be distinguished in terms of general classes of  features.
Thus, one may speak of locatives, for example, as source, goal, path, extent, area,
or point locatives. But these features are derived from an analysis of the meanings of
these locatives and are not read into the modal case from elsewhere. In sum, there
seems to have been more than one reason which led Fillmore since the late  1960s
to reject the then-popular NP-Aux-VP model. Of particular interest to our vision
of clausal structure is Fillmore’s attempt to include semantic principles within
clausal structural projectional representations. Interestingly, and within a different
theoretical framework, a similar analysis of the formal machinery of language
production has been suggested by a number of French enunciativists among
whom we shall examine the works of two prominent and very influential figures,
namely Antoine Culioli and Henri Adamczewski.
Culioli’s analysis
The shift between the development of modal logic since the beginning of this
 century (Von Wright 1951, among others) and the special interest in the notion
of Modality in linguistics during the second half of the century illustrates the
 independent directions of these two disciplines. Having established that
 communication is the basic function of language (Jakobson 1963; Benveniste
1966, among others), linguists came to the conclusion that the transmission of
any  message is not usually an end in itself. When we communicate some propo-
sition to another person, we do so normally because we wish to influence in
some way or another the beliefs, attitudes, behavior, and so on of that person.
To produce an utterance, therefore, is to engage in a certain kind of socio-cultural
interaction. Such production is not restricted to communication by means of
spoken language. Indeed, written language, that is, narratives, newspaper and
scholarly articles, among others, obey the same principles (cf. Fleischman
1991). We shall refer to Culioli (1968, 1970, 1971, 1973, 1974, 1975/76, 1978,
1982, 1987) who, on the basis of what we have just mentioned, developed a
 corresponding theory which explicates the internal grammar machinery and in
which the concept of Modality plays a major role, a mirror image of the
 language functions outlined in Jakobson and Benveniste. His objective is,
 therefore, to construct “un système de représentations métalinguistiques
 manipulable qui permet d’établir une correspondance entre des configurations
(agencements de marque dans le texte oral et écrit) et des opérations” [a flexible
metalinguistic configurational system which establishes correlations between
configurations and their corresponding operations] (Culioli 1974: 56). Most
importantly, within this configurational system, Modality plays a salient role.
The three basic and essential articulations of Culioli’s representational system
are as follows: First, at a prelexical level, there is (i) on the one hand, a three
place schema of Lexis (i.e. an empty schema) of the form {0, { 1, л which
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
10

reads: first argument (or departure point of the relation), second argument (or
end point of the relation) and a predicate (or relation between the two points),
(ii) on the other hand, three lexical terms: R, X, Y (i.e. (eat), (cat), (mouse))
selected by a lexical filter. Second, a first operation, called a “Summon’s
 operation,” which results in, given the primitive relationship which exists
between the three terms, the insertion of these terms within the empty schema
( . . . ). Third, we  therefore obtain a Lexis X, Y, R (i.e. mouse, cat, eat)
which is defined as follows:
(4)  Lexis “...où les termes sont compatibles avec un ordre, mais ne sont pas
encore ordonnés, en outre, la Lexis est pré-assertive et le passage a l’assertion
(au sens de ‘énonciation par un sujet’) implique une Modalisation” [whereby
lexical items are compatible within a particular order, but have yet to be
ordered; in other words, Lexis describes a pre-assertive stage, and
Modalization is the very act of assertion (in the sense of uttering by a speaker)]
(Culioli 1968: 6–8).
The Lexis component appears, therefore, as a restrictive domain, to which both
the verb and its basic arguments belong. Most important is the fact that the Lexis
component represents the preassertive level, a stage which is prior to the utterance.
In contradistinction to the preassertive level, the assertive level, achieved
through the very act of enunciation, necessarily implies a Modalization. Having
 distinguished the Lexis component from the Modal component, Culioli (1968: 8)
explains further the notion of Modality, which includes four major domains, as
summarized in (5) as follows:
(5)  a  affirmative, negative, injunctive, and so on;
b  certain, probable, necessary, and so on;
c  appreciative: it is sad that... , fortunately, and so on;
d  pragmatics: in particular, illocutionary mood, causative, and so on.
Within such an approach, it appears that “Modalization” is an operation by
which the enunciator appropriates the utterance’s arguments, that is the
Proposition in Fillmore’s terms. The propositional content, which defines the
Lexis component, lacks, however, an orientational aspect (e.g. active/passive), a
qualificational aspect with respect to the type of processes (e.g. aspectual
 characteristics), and any anchorage (repérage) with respect to the moment of
enunciation (e.g. temporal relations) (Culioli 1987). These several operations
that participate in the construction of an enunciation on the basis of a Lexis define
the basic components of Modalization. Thus, any enunciation is a consequence
of the systematic interaction between both the Lexis component and the Modality
component. Modality is therefore an inherent characteristic of an utterance.
Accordingly, at some deeper level, utterances are said to be composed of these
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
11

two components as represented in (6) here:
The representation in (6) clearly illustrates the binary compositional structure
of the utterance. The two constituents, Modality and Lexis, constitute the two
sides of a single coin. While Lexis represents the primitive domain of both verbs
and arguments, Modality is the assertive domain which characterizes the
 enunciator’s appropriation of the Lexis. This implies that the utterance is a
 complex linguistic construct, as it is the result of the interaction between both
domains. Desclès (1980: 8) summarizes this composite nature as follows:
“L ‘énoncé a en fait un double statut, c’est l’object le plus directement
observable, mais c’est aussi un objet déja chargé de théorie et produit par
la théorie” [the utterance has in fact a double status, it is, on the one
hand, the most tangible product, but it is also a construct immersed in
and reminiscent of theory]
In fact, the metaterm “enunciative operations” is specifically used to refer to
the speaker’s activities upon the Lexis. In other words, the utterance is the
 ultimate result of the various types of operations which the enunciator performs
over the Lexis. Culioli’s theory is therefore referred to as Théorie des opérations
énonciatives [Theory of Enunciative Operations]. In sum, the binary nature of the
utterance with the Modality component as a major configurational constituent
reminiscent of  cognitive processes not only, in our opinion, does echo Fillmore’s
proposal, but also lends support to the spirit within which our proposal will be
articulated.
Adamczewski’s analysis
A student of Culioli, Adamczewski was largely inspired by the principles of the
Theory of Enunciation (as developed first by Benveniste then elaborated further
by Culioli5). Although Adamczewski’s work belongs to the enunciative theory
(Adamczewski 1976, 1978, 1982a,b, 1983, 1986/7, 1991), he founded his own
school in the late 1970s and developed a new approach that came to be known as
Théorie des Phases “Theory of Phases,” or Théorie de la Grammaire
Métaoperationnelle “Metaoperational Grammar Theory.”6 Discussing the
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
12
Utterance
Modality
Lexis
(6)

 fundamentals of the theory would take us too far afield. We will, therefore,
restrict the presentation to those basic elements which are most relevant to our
discussion. In particular, we will discuss the spirit within which the analysis of
the clause is conducted. Consider the example in (7), as represented in (8) as
 follows:
(7)  I wish he would take it
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
13
|
I wish
|
Metaoperational  level 
would
|
He/take it
S(ubject) (S/P level) P(redicate) level 
E(nunciator)
From the perspective of sentence structure, the binary distinction between the S/P
level and the metaoperational level constitutes the most relevant aspect of the
above approach. While the basic level contains the subject “he,” along with the
predicate “take it,” the metaoperational level is reminiscent of the metalinguistic
level where various modalities are realized, that is, tense, wish, and so on. The
spirit behind this representation seems to parallel those we have discussed earlier.
It aims at establishing a sentence production machinery with two different
 components: the metaoperational/modal component, on the one hand, and the
S/P/Lexis/Proposition component, on the other hand. Looking closely at the
 representation in (8), we notice the extent to which the constituents are hierarchically
organized. More specifically, it shows the precedence and the dominance of the
metaoperational level over the S/P level. In fact, Adamczewski’s approach
accords well with this hierarchical structure, as it explicitly foregrounds the scope
of the metaoperational level over the S/P level. This entails that metaoperators,
such as would in the aforesaid example, have scope over the S/P. More generally,
“grammatical categories, that is, DO, BEING, MAY, WILL, BUT, THE, BIEN,
AUSSI, -AIT, etc ... have scope over the predicative relation” (Adamczewski
1983: 5–6), and as such are evaluated with respect to its realization. This correlation
between the sentential structure and its semantic interpretation is best summarized
in Delmas’s observation that construire une syntaxe, c’est construire du sens
“constructing a syntax is constructing meaning” (1987: 8).
(8)

Principles and parameters approach
Operating within a formal syntactic theory of language, Chomsky defines syntax
as “the study of the principles and processes by which sentences are constructed”
(1957/2002: 1). In other words, Chomsky explains, “in order to satisfy the  condition
of explanatory adequacy, a theory of language must show how each particular
language can be derived from a uniform initial state” (2000: 7).7 In relation to
clausal structure and the order of constituents, recent developments within the
Principles and Parameters Approach (Chomsky 1991, 1995, 2002b), formally
known as Government and Binding (GB) theory (Chomsky 1981, 1986), have
emphasized two major aspects. The first relates to the position of subjects, while
the second extends the X-bar (henceforth X’) status of phrases to include  functional
categories such as Tense, Aspect and Modality, among several others. With
respect to the issue of subjects, we shall underscore the early proposals which
suggested the inclusion of subjects within the projection of the VP (Kuroda 1986;
Koopman and Sportiche 1988; Mohammad 1988, 1989). As for the independent
syntactic status of inflectional and functional categories, the early proposals of
Bresnan (1970, 1972), Fassi Fehri (1980, 1988), Chomsky (1981, 1986), Abney
(1985), and Pollock (1989) have been instrumental in shaping the syntactic
 structures of such categories. Without going into much detail, it was widely
assumed that the clausal structure typically expands into three basic constituents:
the NP subject, the Inflectional constituent (INFL), and the VP constituent, as in
(9a) (Chomsky 1981: 25). These constituents are hierarchically ordered according
to a binary branching principle, yielding the representation in (9b):
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
14
a
S      NP INFL VP
b
IP(S)
/ 
\ 
NP
I’
/ 
\ 
Io
VP
(9)
In (9), the NP is the base generated position of subjects, INFL is where auxiliaries,
modals, and negation are base generated, and the thematic verb along with its
complement appear within the VP. Notice that this representation straightforwardly
accounts for Subject-Verb-Object (SVO) structures where the subject appears
first, followed by the verb, then, if transitive, selects for a direct object. Additional
 provisions were, therefore, made to accommodate other language types, such as
Verb-Subject-Object (VSO) and Subject-Object-Verb (SOV).8

This position has recently been challenged by various linguists, whose suggestions
came to be known as “The Internal Subject Hypothesis” (Kuroda 1986; Speas 1986;
Mohammad 1989; Koopman and Sportiche 1991 among several others). Without
going into details concerning the various factors which motivate the above
hypothesis, we simply observe that its outcome amounts to separating the INFL
constituent from both the NP and VP constituents. In Koopman and Sportiche,
for example, it is claimed that the NP subject appears within the maximal
 projection of the VP, which they call Vn, while the INFL constituent appears
 outside of the argument structure of the thematic verb.9 This is illustrated in (10),
where the structural positions of both the subject NP and the VP are within a single
small clause Vn.
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
15
(10)
IP
Spec
I’
Io
Vn
 NP            VP
(subject)
Even though the authors did not intend the separation of the INFL constituent
from the Vn constituent to be an analysis parallel to those discussed earlier, one
should stress their significant attempt to draw some sort of correspondence
between syntax and semantics, from the point of view of clausal structure.
Pushing this argument to its logical limits, it might be argued that a clause has a
fundamental binary structure, an INFL constituent which contains various types
of modalities including tense and aspect, on the one hand, and a small clause (Vn)
constituent, which hosts the verb and its arguments, namely a subject, and possibly
a direct object, on the other hand. This might be represented in (11) (with the
arrow →interpreted as: contain).
(11)  a  S
→
(NP) INFL Vn
b  INFL
→
Tense, Aspect, Modality, Negation, Mood, and so on
c  Vn
→
Subject, Verb, Direct Object, and so on
In fact, this hierarchical order of basic clausal constituents has been enjoying near
unanimity among linguists operating within the Principles and Parameters approach.

Ouhalla and Shlonsky (2002) provide further details with all clause layers. Thus,
they observe that clauses are organized on the basis of three layers: a VP layer, an
IP layer, and a Complementizer Phrase layer (CP). While the VP includes the verb
and its arguments, IP contains all functional categories such as tense, aspect,
mood, and modality, and the CP which includes operator layer and clause typing
(i.e. wh-operators, focus operators, and declaratives, interrogatives, exclamatives
respectively). The three clausal strata are represented in (12) as follows:
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
16
(12)
(14)
CP
IP
VP
(Ouhalla and Shlonsky 2002: 2)
With a fully articulated structure of the clause, the extent to which proposals
within the Principles and Parameters approach parallel those of Fillmore, Culioli,
and Adamczewski, becomes clear despite their theoretical differences (i.e. IP/INFL
corresponds to Fillmore’s Modality constituent, and [NP VP (Vn)/VP] to his
proposition). In what follows, we shall present some aspects of a more  articulated
version of the IP component.
The articulated IP structure
The IP component has been assumed to be the host of tense and agreement. In
addition, it is also assumed to be the position where mood, modality, aspect, and
negation originate “by means of particles, auxiliaries and inflectional affixes, and
in which the verb and its arguments are licensed” (Ouhalla and Shlonsky 2002: 5).
Accordingly, given a sentence like (13), it turns out that (14) is a possible structure
of INFL in English, and presumably in other languages as well:
(13)  The president should not have declared the war
INFL
Agreement    Tense    Aspect    Modal
Negation

Unlike modals and negation, agreement, aspect and tense appear in all finite
clauses. In most cases, especially in simple tense contexts, they are inflectional,
and are therefore part of the verbal complex. This raises the question of how to
derive them in the syntax, and eventually how to derive the optional categories as
well. In the late 1980s and early 1990s, various linguists, such as Ouhalla (1988,
1990), Pollock (1989), Chomsky (1991) among many others, have suggested that
these categories should receive a treatment in accordance with the X’  template
where each grammatical category heads its own phrasal projection.10 As radical
as it may sound, the suggestion has been a highly welcome addition to the
 syntactic theory in general and to the phrase structure in particular. Since then,
grammatical categories are integrated, not only within the clausal structure, but also
within the underpinnings of the theory. The order of constituents aside, INFL is
thus assigned the structure in (15) (where MP  Modal Phrase, NegP  Negative
Phrase, TP  Tense Phrase, AspP  Aspect Phrase, AgrP  Agreement Phrase,
and the “0” notation refers to the head):
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
17
(15)
MP11
M0
NegP
Neg0
TP
INFL
T0
AspP
Asp0
AgrP
Agr
On the theoretical level, this approach enhances the fundamentals of X’ theory, as
it militates against any flat structure analysis of INFL within a hierarchical
approach, on the one hand, and extends to apply equally to both lexical and
 nonlexical categories, that is, verbs, nouns, and adjectives as well as modals,  negators,
aspects, and tenses respectively, on the other hand. On the empirical level, it
shows the extent to which these categories participate in the internal dynamics of
the clause, given the active syntactic role they typically play (see Chapters 7 and 8).

This is also illustrated in Abney (1987) where he shows that nonlexical categories,
which he calls “functional elements,” deserve a parallel treatment to lexical
 categories.12 The articulated and autonomous role of the  functional component
lends important support to earlier claims which attempt, not only to separate the
Modality component (INFL here), but also to emphasize its fundamental role in
the interpretation and the derivation/orientation of the clause.
To summarize the above sections, we have tried to illustrate some of the
achievements of various approaches vis-à-vis a unified account of clausal or
utterance structure. Independently of the major theoretical differences between all
four approaches, we have observed striking similarities as to the underlying
 constituency of the clause. These approaches can further be classified as being
either more, or less, syntactically oriented. To the former belongs those of
Fillmore and the Principles and Parameters Approach, to the latter the enunciativists,
especially those of Culioli and Adamczewski. Thus, while the first group stresses
clause compositionality, composed of a Modality/INFL constituent and a
 propositional/  [NP VP] constituent, the second group proposes a binary division
of clausal structure: a Modality/metaoperational level versus a Lexis/(S/P) level.
The very fact that these two groups share a fundamental orientation, namely their
strong conviction as to the basic clausal constituents, constitutes strong evidence
for the salience of these components. As for what is involved in each component,
we have shown that while the Lexis/lexical component contains the verb along
with its arguments, the Modality/nonlexical component includes such  categories
as tense, aspect, modality, negation, agreement, mood, among several others.13
While the presentation afore focuses more on the syntactic aspect of the sentential
structure, the following section will present and discuss some semantic aspects
of the Modality component, being the one that is closely related to the issue
of ATM.
Verbal categories and modality
To utter is to take a stand on a content of thought in front of an addressee. That
stand will be realized within the utterance thanks to Modality. Modality is not,
therefore, a static operation. It might be the case that the enunciator proposes a
content of thought as true with himself as the guarantor for the truth, a hypothesis
that he/she posited, or as a question for the coenunciator. It might also be the case
that the message is neither a true nor a false statement, but rather an order, an
obligation, a wish or a desire addressed to the listener. Despite these varieties, two
basic notions seem to play a major role. First, the relation of the enunciator to the
content of what is said (propositional content), which we will refer to as the
 evaluation of the predicative relation. Following Delmas (1987: 9), this interaction
might metaphorically be represented as in (16), where the two elements ＜a＞and
＜b＞correspond to the subject and predicate, respectively, while  ＜relation＞
corresponds to the predicative relation echoing Leech and Short’s metaterm
“discoursal point of view.”14
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
18

As for the second, it relates to the intersubjective relationship, that is, the
 relation of the enunciator (speaker, writer) to the coenunciator (hearer, reader).
In discourse, any expression of modality, that is, tense, aspect, modals, mood, and
so on, will privilege either one of these two, without total neglect of the other. In
what follows, we shall first present a brief review of the dynamics of the Modality
constituent, with a particular reference to the Culiolian school, then the most
 relevant criteria which have been proposed to characterize and sharpen Modality
will be introduced.
As for the scope of Modality, it is argued within the enunciativist framework to
be composed of four components, numbered a to d, as shown in (5) p. 11, and
summarized briefly in Bouscaren and Chuquet (1987: 36–37), as follows:
(i) Modality of type I which is also called “Assertive Modality” where enunciators
define their propositional content (represented by the predicative relation) as
valid: either true or false. In case they choose to validate that content, they will
make use of the assertion (affirmative or negative). If, on the other hand, they
think that the content can be validated, but as far as they are concerned, they are
not in a position to accomplish that validation, they will then use interrogation.
Thus, Assertive Modality would allow enunciators (i) to define the content of
their utterances as true or false (but nothing else and necessarily one or the other),
(ii) to not “personally” take a stand between either one, hence the value of  scanning
associated with interrogation, and (iii) to suggest to the hearer to make a decision
(to validate), hence the intersubjective value of interrogation. In English, for
example, such stands are realized through surface markers such as DO (which is
usually combined with tense markers), HAVE and BE (which combine tense and
aspect). Moreover, one might also notice that, besides positive assertion that might
not need any marker whereby the assertion might be taken in charge by any
speaker (general truth, attribution of properties, etc.), any activity upon the
 predicative relation leaves a trace or a special marker: marker of negation, question,
anaphor, contradiction, and so on. Finally, it should be noted that injunction
belongs to this modality, as the enunciator takes a simulated position with respect
to the validation of the predicative relation, hence supposition and hypothesis;
(ii) Modality of type II which is also called “epistemic modality.” The particular
value of such modality is that it expresses the lack of the enunciator’s certainty
concerning the validation of the predicative relation. The enunciator does not
choose between valid/nonvalid, but evaluates the chances of realization of the
predicative relation. That evaluation is basically quantitative. Markers of such an
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
19
<a>
<b>
<relation>
(16)

operation can be either adverbs (perhaps, possibly, certainly, etc.) or modal
 auxiliaries, such as, the nondeictic “may” and “must.” Moreover, this lack of
 certainty often has an argumentative value: it is registered through an “implicit
dialogue” with what the speaker assumes that the hearer is thinking about;
(iii) Modality of type III which is quite often called “Appreciative Modality” where
the question of the validation of the predicative relation is irrelevant. Utterances
are analyzed beyond the problematic of true and false. Such modality deals with
appreciative values, such as: good, bad, normal, abnormal, happy, sad, and so on,
of the content of the predicative relation. It is basically a qualitative modality; and
(iv) Modality of type IV which focuses on the relationship between the thematic
subject and the predicate inside the predicative relation. It is  congruent to the
so-called radical/deontic modality. Here, the question of validation of the predicative
relation becomes irrelevant, not because it does not exist, but because the enunciator
is situated outside that domain. Such a relation can not be considered from the point
of view of true or false: the validation of such a relation is  necessarily filtered by
other factors, such as the will of the grammatical subject, or better the will, the
pressure, the demand that the enunciator exercises on the grammatical subject,
hence the “deontic” values of this modality (order, permission, wish, suggestion,
will, causation, capability, etc.). It should be stressed, however, that this division is
only for convenience, and that these four types are not  completely independent.
Modalities do overlap, just as functional categories belong in most cases to more
than one grammatical type. Injunction, for example, belongs to both type I and
type IV (a stand vis-à-vis assertion and intersubjective relations). In both types I
and IV, Modality is more concerned with the  relationship between the enunciator
and the coenunciator. In a question, for  example, the task of whether to validate the
 predicative relation or not is assigned to the coenunciator.
At first sight, one might think that the analysis above raises similar questions
to those addressed by Jesperson (1924: 320), Rescher (1968: 24), and Searle
(1983: 166), which focus entirely on sentential modality with almost no connection
to matters relative to aspect and tense. Although there are some points of interaction,
the point of view developed earlier is extended to cover questions inherent to the
categories of tense and aspect. Since the use of these categories is bound up with
the enunciator, and in particular with the assessment of the predicative relation,
tense and aspect are offspring of Modality, and as such, should be considered
within the system it constitutes. In other words, within Culioli’s theory, the clausal
derivational process involves necessarily two types of underlying operations.
First, the predicative operations (opérations prédicatives), which structure the
Lexis into a predicative relationship that is active or passive, that has a specific
thematic organization, and so forth. Second, the enunciative operations
 (opérations énonciatives), which are designed to anchor the variables associated
with tense, aspect, modality as well as nominal determination and quantification.
In order to anchor those variables, it is necessary to locate the Lexis with respect
to the enunciator, and the time of the speaker (Bourdin 1991: 272). Thus, it is easy
to see the extent to which sentential modality is bound up with questions of aspect
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
20

and tense.15 In what follows, a few other facets of Modality will be investigated, as
they relate directly to the understanding of the verbal categories of tense, aspect,
and modality.
Subjectivity
It is our contention that Modality in language, especially when marked
 grammatically, is essentially subjective. As such, Modality is concerned with
 subjective characteristics of an utterance, and should therefore be associated
with subjectivity (Parret 1991; Herslund 2005). It could be further argued that
subjectivity is an essential criterion for Modality, its “unmarked feature” (Herslund
2005: 46). This latter could, therefore, be defined as the grammaticalization of the
speaker’s  (subjective) attitude and opinion.16 Various uses of the grammatical
 categories of tense and aspect are reanalyzed as surface traces of the enunciators’
subjectivity, providing evidence, therefore, for the higher importance of emotive
and subjective language over cognitive and objective language. We will show,
for example, that the difference between the use of the Simple Perfect and the
Compound Perfect in Arabic involves quite often the degree to which the enunciator
is involved within the verbal process (see the discussion of QAD, pp. 72–103).
Similarly, Waugh (1986: 12) argues that the Simple Past in French has an expressive
function, as it presents the verbal event as independent of the writer’s subjectivity.17
Smith (1983: 497) demonstrates that “sentential aspect” presents a situation
(event, state, etc.) from a particular point of view, which in turn represents the
enunciator’s choice of perspective: a situation is presented from different
 perspectives or viewpoints. Along these same lines, Fleischman (1990: 215)
 considers the category of tense as an expressive device for carrying out evaluation.
Blyth (1990: 104–08) discusses the accelerative effects of the Present in narrative
discourse, while maintaining its expressive function. The overall thrust of these
observations is to stress the subjective characteristic of Modality, through the
use of aspect and tense categories, among others. Another notion that seems to
have a direct relationship to subjectivity is what Dahl (1985: 3) calls “impreciseness
and focusing.” As enunciators tend not to restrict the use of these categories to
one single domain, there has been serious concern about the impreciseness of the
borderline between the cases when the category can or should be used. In the
following section, we argue that grammatical categories, constituents of the Modality
component, are to a certain degree interrelated, since they tend to interact with each
other in various ways. The tense category, for example, interacts with those of
aspect and modality, and vice versa. We shall, therefore, introduce the term
cross-categorial for those categories which exhibit similar behavior.
Cross-categoriality
By a cross-categorial category, we mean a category whose set/subset of features
do not necessarily fall under only one category; instead, they might fall under
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
21

more than one category. This implies that a careful investigation of tense, aspect,
and modal categories, for example, might show that each category has certain
 features which belong to the other category. For the sake of illustration, let us take
the English simple past morpheme “ED,” and call it x. Assume, for the sake of
discussion, that x represents the set of past time features [a,b,c,d...]. Let us now
consider a modal category, such as “WISHING,” call it y, where y represents the
set of modal features [1,2,3,4...]. To start with, recall that past time features, as
represented by letters of the alphabet, are regarded as entirely dissociated from
WISH features, represented by numerals. Thus x and y denote different categories,
as represented in (17):
(17)  x  [a,b,c,d,...]  [...4,3,2,1]  y
Now, consider the following examples:
(18)  a  He left yesterday
b  I wish he left yesterday
It is generally assumed that the contrast between examples (18a) and (18b) is
reminiscent of the past time features of the simple past (18a) and its modal
 features (18b), as it expresses both a factual and a non-factual event, respectively.
The representation of both the tense category x, and the modal category y
in (17) fails to account for the semantic contrast in (18), however, as it does not
predict some degree of interaction between the set of features in x and those in y.
In order to accommodate such cases, a provision needs to be made. This latter
must ensure that the features in x and those in y are no longer discrete. Instead,
they share a common ground, call it z. Thus, z represents the area of interaction
between x and y, as represented in (19):
[ z ]
(19)  x  [a,b,c,d,......4,3,2,1]  y
It is easy to see, now, the principle underlying cross-categoriality. It clearly
shows the extent to which grammatical categories are not discrete and/or
 compact, but have boundaries which are rather open and allow for interaction of
tense and aspect. Some cross-categorial cases in Arabic will be investigated and
discussed, with a particular focus on the categories of tense and aspect. Other
cases, such as tense and negation, tense and modality, negation and mood, are also
observed. The traditional conceptualization of grammatical categories as discrete
categories of tense, aspect, mood, modality, and so on fails to capture the
 widespread interrelationships among these categories.18 Lyons (1977: 809–23)
discusses various instances of interaction between tense and modality, and  concludes
that “there is not, and can not be, in universal grammar any sharp  distinction
between tense and aspect, on the one hand, and between tense and modality, on
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
22

the other.” Likewise, Waugh (1979: 229), analyzing the French verbal morphology,
concludes: “All of the four tenses studied [present, imperfect, future, and
 conditional] have uses which fall in the domain of tense (temporal uses), of aspect
(shape of the event), and of mood (subjective evaluation of the speaker): there is
no difference between tense/aspect/mood – it is all one category”; or at least, they
all overlap with one another with perhaps some systematic differences based on
basic vs. marginal uses (Waugh, personal communication). Palmer (1986: 208–25),
notices that modality seems sometimes to appear in the same formal system as
either tense or aspect, and investigates cases of interaction between modality and
tense, modality and negation, and modality and agreement (person) from a broad
range of languages. The facts are such that we must agree with Wallace (1982:
202), when he says that “Time, aspectuality, and modality – the semantic fields to
which the formal categories of tense, aspect and mode are supposed to refer – are
almost inextricably scrambled together.” This conclusion is similarly echoed in
Bhat’s (1999) statement that “the variation that has been observed among languages
concerning the representation of tense, aspect, and mood derive primarily from
the fact that the three categories are closely interconnected” (p. 93). This has led
many linguists to create a new metalanguage in order to mark a certain distance
from traditional categorization. Instead grammatical categories are referred to as
TAM categories (Givón 1982; Dahl 1985, 2000; Fassi Fehri 1993; Bybee et al. 1994),
T-A categories (Waugh 1987, 1991b), or ATM categories (Bahloul 1994). Once
we have accepted the cross-categorial nature of these categories, we are led to the
more difficult question of how to account for this type of interaction, and cross-
categoriality in general. In the following section, we shall suggest that the concept
of continuum might be the most appropriate way to deal with cross- categoriality.
The case of aspect and tense will be discussed, and tested against the proposal.
Modality and continuum
The members of the Modality constituent prove to be less discrete and more
 connected. This is only natural if Modality is interpreted as a system whose
 functioning relies on its constituents. Unless they are interconnected, these
 constituents will not function, nor will the system. The concept of continuum is
introduced here to organize these interconnections, and show the degree to which
grammatical  categories might be partly discrete and partly related. In what
 follows, the categories of tense and aspect will be examined, with respect to the
above  criterion.
Having carefully and thoroughly examined the features related to tense and
aspect within and across several languages and language groups, Dahl (1985: 25)
confesses that “the distinction between tenses and aspects is by no means clear,
although everyone knows what the typical cases are like.” Although these gram-
matical categories are interrelated in several ways, and to various degrees, as
shown earlier, we believe that it is crucial to maintain the conceptual distinction
between tense and aspect, and to have a terminology that is capable of maintaining
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
23

this distinction; yet, one should be able to accommodate cases of interactions
where such dissociation is not only dubious, but also theoretically undesirable.
We therefore subscribe to a continuum analysis, which in effect presents Tense
and Aspect as distinct from each other, but not to the extent of exclusion. Thus, if
Tense and Aspect are the two end points of the continuum, a middle position is
necessarily present, as represented in (20):
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
24
(20)
Aspect 
Tense
(A,0)
(A/T)
(T,0)
The representation in (20) allows for various possibilities of interaction between
both categories ranging from (A,0), where Aspect is the basic feature of the  verbal
system, while Tense is derivative, as indicated by (the presence of) “0,” to (T,0)
where the roles are reversed; that is with Tense as the basic feature, and Aspect the
derivative one. Both poles are then mediated by a third type, where the two
 grammatical categories play an equal role within the verbal system. For ease of
reference, the three possible cases will be referred to as in (21)
(21)  Type I
Aspect, 0
(A, 0)
Type II
Tense, 0
(T, 0)
Type III  Aspect/Tense  (A/T)
If this characterization is adequate, then all three possibilities should be found
among languages. From this typological point of view, MSA and Russian, are
Aspect-oriented languages. In addition, as will be shown in the following examples,
MSA combines Aspect with Taxis, not Tense. French on the other hand is most
likely a Tense-oriented language, with a well-knit system of “primary” tenses
(Waugh 1975: 479, 1987, 1990). Type III is also found in various languages such
as Sinhala, Bantu languages, Quechua, and Kinyarwanda where both aspect and
tense are realized within the verbal complex, as shown in the following examples:
(22)  a
Mtsuko
u-na-gw-a
waterpot
SP-Past-fall-Asp
“The waterpot fell.”
(Baker (1988))
b
Umwaana  y-a-taa-ye
igitabo mu maazi
child
SP-Past-throw-Asp
book in water
“The child has thrown the book into the water.”
c
Juma a-ta-kuwa
a-me-pika
chakula
Juma 1agr-Fut-be  1agr-Perf-cook  food
“Juma will have cooked food.”
(b,c: Carstens and Kinyalolo (1989))

From a methodological point of view, the advantage of the continuum analysis
lies in its ability to predict the possible occurrence of such complex cases as
English, where the verbal system oscillates between both categories. With two
tense markers, that is, [Ø,S] and [-ED], on the one hand, and two aspectual markers,
that is, [BE  ING] and [HAVE  EN], on the other hand, which all interact in
various ways, English is more likely to subscribe to all three types. In his crosslin-
guitic study, Bhat (1999) concludes that “it is apparently useful to classify  languages
into tense-prominent, aspect-prominent, and mood-prominent types” (p. 7) which
appears to concur with the continuum analysis. It should be noted, however, that
this approach to the study of verbal categories, although it is very popular among
a large number of linguists and schools of linguistics (e.g. enunciativists, function-
alists, structural functionalists, and discourse analysts), remains problematic for
other schools, and in particular those which rely on formal logic (e.g. generative
semanticists, Montague grammar, and various approaches to logical form).
Indeed, the basic difference between the two approaches can be reduced to the
restrictive nature of the latter vs. the unrestricted characteristic of the former.
With respect to tense categories, for example, while the former incorporates all
temporal and nontemporal uses of tenses in the analysis, the latter restricts its
domain of study to the temporal ones, and either neglects the other uses, or
 considers them marginal and deserving, therefore, a separate treatment.
With respect to the subjective value of these categories, while it has received
 serious consideration from enunciativists, functionalists, structural functionalists, and
discourse analysts, it has been overlooked by formal logicians, and those who have
contributed to the study of logical form. In other words, while formal approaches in
general have restricted their account to the pure referential values of these gram-
matical categories, others have opted for a more inclusive account which hosts both
 referential and nonreferential uses of these categories. Hence, the partial nature of
 formal accounts, and the much thorough characteristic of nonformal accounts.19 As
attempts have been made to account for all occurrences of these  categories, serious
analytical and methodological issues require particular attention. In the next section,
we will  discuss two basic concepts which have played a leading role in unveiling the
 functioning of verbal categories: the notions of Invariant and Markedness.
Modality and invariance
Despite linguistic fossils and small variations, linguists have assumed that  language
must be very largely regular. Any adequate description should, therefore, reflect
this regularity (Guillaume 1919, 1929, 1952; Jakobson 1932, 1957). Verbal
 categories, for example, despite their compatibility with a large number of
 unrelated contexts (see Chapters 4, 5, 6), reminiscent of their cross-categorial
characteristics, are believed to have stable features. Thus, Guillaume writes:20
Une forme de langue a, dans la langue même, une valeur fondamentale,
unique, dont un caractère est de permettre une grande diversité de valeurs
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
25

d’emplois, qui, si différentes soient-elles, apparemment ne sont pas en
contradiction avec une valeur fondamentale existante [a language form
exhibits within its linguistic system a fundamental value and allows for
a number of different uses which, no matter how unrelated, are not
apparently in contradiction with the existing fundamental value]
It is worth noting that the Guillaumian opposition between “fundamental
value” valeur fondamentale and “use values” valeurs d’emplois is basically the
same as the Jakobsonian and the Prague School distinction between “invariance”
and “contextual variation.” Invariance is inherent to a particular category, while
variation is related to the context. In other words, the invariant is Generic in
nature and is determined by the relational system of which it is part; the variants,
however, are more Specific and determined in addition by the context of which
they are a part (Waugh 1976: 72). This approach militates against building up a
catalogue of different uses, with two or three basic uses and tens of exceptions
(see Grévisse 1969: 1287–302). Instead, it attempts to collect together pieces
which have previously been seen as different. Moreover, it emphasizes the
 regularity and coherence of language, and has the psychological effect of making
the analysis of verbal categories, or others, seem more logical and more manageable.
Likewise, Garcia (1991: 54) observes that “it is only by postulating invariants that
lend themselves to creative-imaginative interpretation that we can do justice to
the dynamic character of language, and avoid falling into a static listing of an
arbitrarily finite list of qualitatively arbitrary uses.”21 On the level of the verbal
categories, we shall demonstrate the degree to which the category of taxis–aspect,
for example, shows that type of regularity within the verbal system. It is worth
mentioning that the scope of the problem of invariance in linguistics is not limited
to the mere description of intralingual patterns. Such descriptions naturally lead
us to a further task, the search for linguistic universals (interlingual invariance)
(Jakobson 1971: 225). Finally, it should be stressed that the invariant is quite often
composed of more than one semantic component, and as such, it is a composite
concept. Waugh (1991b: 242) argues that the invariant can be composed of specific
meanings, and does not always have to be of a general value. Another concept
which, along with the Invariant, seems to have a major role in analyzing and
describing grammatical categories is Markedness. In what follows, we discuss
some of its basic aspects.
Modality and markedness
Verbal systems typically involve more then one category (e.g. taxis, aspect, tense,
modality, negation, etc.), which, as indicated earlier, establish various degrees of
interrelationships. We have already suggested that the two concepts of continuum
and invariance are meant to elucidate the functioning of these categories. Nothing
has been said, however, about the direct relationship between members of the
 system, and in particular those which constitute clear cases of opposition. Indeed,
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
26

the concept of markedness helps to hierarchize the system, through unveiling the
markedness status of each member inside it. Therefore, any system is made up of
hierarchical relations, and markedness is one of the relations that help to hierarchize
that system. In what follows, the importance of markedness will become clear as
we examine the relationship between the terms of any grammatical opposition,
that is, the Perfect and the Imperfect, and so on. We will, however, attempt a
 general introduction here. The underlying idea is that while one member of a
binary opposition is marked, the other is unmarked. Waugh (1982: 301) describes
this as follows:
...there is a constraining, focusing characteristic for the marked term of
any grammatical opposition: the marked term necessarily conveys a
more narrowly specified and delimited conceptual item than the
unmarked. As a consequence, (. . .) the marked term of any grammatical
opposition specifies a particular unit of information x, while the unmarked
term does not necessarily specify that particular unit of  information.
It is easy to see the degree to which a grammatical system should rely on markedness
to evaluate the hierarchical relationships between its members. More specifically,
it evaluates the hierarchical relationship of pairs within the system. Any investi-
gation of any verbal grammatical category must take this dialectic into account if
it is to correctly characterize one of the ways in which human beings create
 symbolic and conceptual frameworks (Waugh 1982: 315). Both the marked and
the unmarked terms of any opposition have both invariants and contextual
 variants of meaning. However, the invariant of the unmarked category is more
general than the invariant of the marked category.
Concluding remarks
We have proposed in this chapter that clauses have a complex structure, and as such
they are underlyingly compositional. We have argued that the two constituents of
Modality and Proposition constitute the clausal underlying structural components.
An utterance results, therefore, from the interplay between both constituents. This
interplay defines the enunciative operations which underlie the use of grammatical
categories. It has been argued throughout that the advantage of this approach to
clausal structure is its mapping of semantic constituents into syntactic structures,
hence it bridges the gap between both syntax and semantics, an achievement
which is empirically motivated and theoretically desirable. Thus, our proposal is
based on the works of various linguists belonging to different schools of thought:
an American-based syntactic approach, represented by Fillmore (1968) and
rooted within the Chomskian Principles and Parameters on the one hand, and an
enunciative approach, represented by Culioli and Adamczewski and inspired by
the early works of Guillaume and Benveniste. The very fact that such different
theories seem to share basic intuitions with respect to the constitutional structure
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
27

of the clause, is very indicative, in our opinion, of the adequacy and the basis of
this orientation, on the one hand, and the destiny of linguistics, on the other hand.
Of course, these implications might be too strong, but we have reason to believe
they will lead to substantial theoretical and analytical progress. The second part
of the chapter discussed some issues relative to the modal component. First, it
presented Culioli’s analysis of Modality; second, it reviewed such concepts as
subjectivity, cross-categoriality, and continuum, which play major roles in
 elucidating the functioning of grammatical categories. Finally, the notions of
invariance and markedness were brought to light, as they constitute the most
 adequate tools for analyzing members of the system and the verbal system as
a whole.
VERBAL FORMS, CLAUSES, AND METHODOLOGY
28

3
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE,
AND FUNCTION
Introduction
The most prevalent approach to the characteristic features of Arabic inflectional
morphology has been to delineate: first, its consonantal root basis as the origin of
all inflectional and derivational morphology; and second, the semantic opposition
between its two basic verbal forms: the Perfect and the Imperfect as they are
 generally called.1 This is reflected in the contemporary works of McCarthy (1979,
1982), Travis (1979), Fischer (2002), Holes (2004) among many others. In this
section, we will first outline the core of this approach, then examine its extent on
both verbal forms: the Perfect and the Imperfect.
Identifying verbal morphemes
Without going into the details of previous analyses, the fundamental assumption
about verbal morphology emphasizes the fact that all inflected verbal forms
(and by extension all lexemes) are related to an invariable root. This latter consists
of consonants, one to five in number, but usually three, associated with a basic
meaning and occurring always in the same relative order in a number of lexical
items. Inflectional morphemes are then attached to the root to derive various verbal
forms, such as the Perfect and the Imperfect.2This is illustrated in (1) where the root
ktb denotes the basic notion of “writing,” ∆1s “sitting,” and sʔl “questioning.”
(1)  Root  Perfect Active
Imperfect Active
ktb
kataba “he wrote”
yaktubu “he writes/is writing”
∆ls
∆alasa “he sat”
ya ∆lisu “he sits/is sitting”
sʔl
saʔala “he asked”
ya sʔalu “he asks/is asking”
Crucial to our analysis is the fact that the affixes and the root are mutually
dependent, given that neither of them can occur as a free morpheme. The root
(lexical meaning) needs various grammatical means (e.g. verbal inflections
 studied here) in order to be expressed. Their grammatico-semantic characteristics
are mirrored at the formal level by the fact that the verbal root requires those
29

VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
30
affixes to provide it with the necessary vowels that would syllabify its consonants
which are non-pronounceable otherwise; while these affixes need the verb to which
they attach because they cannot occur as free morphemes, hence the ill-formedness
of the examples in (2a) and (3a), and the grammaticality of both (2b) and (3b).3
(2)  a  (*ktb) (*-a-a-a)  al-waladu  darsa-hu
(*write) (*PF)
the-boy
lesson-his
b
kataba
al-waladu
darsa-hu
write.Pf.3m.s
the-boy
lesson-his
“The boy wrote his lesson.”
(3)  a  (*ktb)
(*ya-u-u)
al-waladu  darsa-hu
(*write)
(*IMPF)
the-boy
lesson-his
b
yaktubu
al-waladu  darsa-hu
write.Imp.3m.s  the-boy
lesson-his
“The boy writes/is writing his lesson.”
This raises at least two questions: first, as to what grammatical categories these
affixes denote; and second, as to how this attachment process is achieved. Below,
we will first concentrate on the denotational properties of these verbal affixes, and
therefore on the grammatical category each affix or cluster of affixes represent.
Having done this, we will then tackle the basic issue of their meaning, with a
 particular emphasis on both the Perfect and the Imperfect. As for the attachment
process, we will return to this issue in Chapters 7 and 8 where we discuss the syntax
of verbal categories. Turning our attention to the question of the semantic
 characterization of the affixes which get attached to verbs, we should note that,
according to standard assumptions, both the suffix and the prefix that distinguish
the Perfect from the Imperfect, as illustrated in (4a) and (4b) respectively, are said
to correspond to both tense and agreement morphology.
(4)  a  katab-a
(Perfect)
write-Pst.3ms
“He wrote.”
b
ya-ktubu
(Imperfect)
Pres.3ms-write
“He writes/is writing.”
This position has been recently challenged, however, in more detailed analyses
by Er-Rayyan (1986), R. Bahloul (1991), Benmamoun (1992), and Fassi Fehri
(1993). Er-Rayyan (1986: 75–122), who is mostly interested in identifying
semantic classes, argues that the /-a-/ first vowel in the Perfect form, that is, k-a-taba,
designates the actual or completed occurrence of the action denoted by the verbal
root. In the Imperfect form, however, the /-u/ last vowel, that is, yaktub-u, designates
recurrence in the actual world. R. Bahloul (1991, 1994) considers the /-a-/ first

vowel in the Perfect to be the morpheme which denotes both Aspect and Tense
(Aspect–Tense). Agreement morphology is carried solely by the suffix, that is,
katab-a. She disagrees, however, with Er-Rayyan, and argues instead that it is
both the prefix – and specifically the vowel within the prefix – along with the
zero morpheme or the absence of the first vowel in the Imperfect stem, that is,
y-a-k-ø-tubu, that denotes the Aspect–Tense category. Agreement morphology, on
the other hand, appears on both sides of the verb: the prefix and the suffix, that is,
ya-ktub-u. Benmamoun (1992, 2000) takes a rather radical position concerning
the morphological realization of Tense and/or Aspect. In particular, he argues that
the /-a/, the last vowel in the perfect, that is, katab-a, is a pure agreement
 morpheme, and therefore there is no morphological realization of the past tense.
As for the prefix in the Imperfect, that is, ya-ktubu, Benmamoun considers that it
is a purely default morphological form of the verb, and therefore that it does not
correspond to a temporal or aspectual form. He therefore concludes that “the
past tense is an abstract morpheme that does not have any specific phonological
realization” (2000: 27).4 A similar claim is found in Fassi Fehri (1993) who argues
that Arabic tense morphemes are “rather abstract” (p. 145). These differences
 concerning the morphological identification of grammatical categories, such as
Aspect and/or Tense morphemes within both the Arabic Perfect and Imperfect
verbal forms, are probably reminiscent of the very opaque nature of “one of the
more complicated systems in natural languages” (Kinberg 2001: 151), and call
for a much carefully detailed analysis of the morphological structure of both
forms. Below, we briefly examine the function of each single affix within the
Perfect paradigm first, then within the Imperfect.
The Perfect paradigm
In the tradition of Arabic grammar, the verb form for any root or semantic  concept
is represented by the same form of the root f ʕl which carries the semantic
 concept of “doing.” As such, the Perfect verb consists of that root and three vowel
morphs dispersed among the consonants in a consonant-vowel-consonant-vowel-
consonant-vowel (CV1CV2CV3) pattern. While the lexical meaning of the verb is
generally carried by the consonantal root, each vowel can be argued to behave to
some extent as an independent morpheme, carrying its own semantic features.
Thus, depending on the features involved, and the rules that govern their combi-
nations, the three vowel-morphs represent a regular pattern which, along with the
verbal root, form a simple and well-formed finite verbal form. Accordingly, three
different patterns are observed within the Perfect paradigm, as shown in (5):
(5)  a  faʕala
(-a-a-a)
b
faʕila
(-a-i-a)
c
faʕula
(-a-u-a)
Each vowel will now be examined, and its function will be discussed.
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
31

The first vowel
In contradistinction to both the second and the third vowels, we assume, following
Er-Rayyan (1986: 75) and R. Bahloul (1991), that the first vowel /-a-/ expresses
the Aspect–Tense properties of the verbal event, and thus, it is the morpheme
which denotes this particular category within the morphological verbal structure.5
Consider, for example the cases in (6),
(6)  a  kataba
al-walad-u
risaalat-an
write.Pf
the-boy-nom
letter-acc
“The boy wrote a letter.”
b
ʁa*iba
al-walad-u
got upset.Pf
the-boy-nom
“The boy got upset.”
c
kaburat
al-bint- u
become old.Pf
the-girl-nom
“The girl got older.”
When carefully examined, the contrast between the three examples above clearly
indicates a fundamental difference between the first vowel /-a-/ and both the
 second and the third vowels. This difference involves the insensitivity in the first
vowel, with respect to certain features which are related to both the second and the
third vowels. This morpho-semantic insensitivity is indicated by lack of alternants
to the first vowel. Indeed, it is argued below that the second and the third vowels
express transitivity and agreement, respectively, and neither category has a direct
bearing on the first vowel. Further evidence for treating the first vowel as the
morpheme which represents the Aspect–Tense category comes from passive
 constructions. Consider the examples in (7):
(7)  a  kutibat
ar-risaalatu
written.Pf.Passive  the-letter
“The letter is written.”
b
ruqisa
fii  al-bayti
dance.Pf.Passive
in
the-house
“It is danced in the house/there was dancing in the house.”
As the cases in (7a) and (7b) indicate, passivization in Arabic is achieved
through the two-morph pattern /-u-i-/, independently of the type of verb involved.
In other words, passivization is achieved by converting the first vowel to /-u-/ and
the second vowel to /-i-/, hence the /-u-i-/ passive pattern. This seems to suggest
that the first vowel is indicative of the active voice, in contradistinction to its
apparent alternant /-u-/, which along with the affix /-i-/ marks passive morphology.6
Although this might be a reasonable suggestion, it is still unclear as to the degree
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
32

to which the first vowel /-a-/ represents the active voice, and whether any other
vowel is similarly involved. It will be shown later when the second vowel-morphs
have been discussed that valence underlies their proper choice. It is, therefore
unlikely that activization plays any role. However, the vowel /-i-/ proves to be
more compatible with [/ intransitives], which accords slightly with its obligatory
presence in passives.
Another way to interpret the above observations is to say that the /-a,u-/
 alternation in the first vowel emphasizes the aspectual–temporal properties of the
verbal event, from the perspective of the agent or the patient. In other words, if
Aspect–Tense evaluates the predictive relation, and if passivization reduces to the
choice of the first term of this relation (e.g. the agent or the patient), it should be
reasonable to dissociate both operations, without excluding a possible morpho-
logical overlap. Hence the naturalness of the second interpretation. Moreover, it
should be stressed that the affix /-u-/ is the only alternant to the first vowel /-a-/.
Accordingly, we would like to suggest that the /-a,u-/ alternation indicates the
Aspect–Tense features of the verbal event. This latter is presented, however, either
from the agent, or from the patient point of view, hence the past indicative (6), or
the past passive (7), respectively.
The second vowel
The second vowel in the CVCVCV-pattern can be one of three: /a/, /i/, or /u/, as
shown in example (5). The choice between these vowels is mostly determined by
the verb’s valence. Accordingly, while the /a/ vowel morpheme represents most
frequently [transitive] action verbs, the /u/ vowel morpheme represents
 [transitive/stative] verbs, and the /i/vowel morpheme typically denotes  mental
and psychological states with [/transitive] verbs. The relevant examples are
given in (8), (9), and (10) respectively.
(8)
*araba
“to hit”
(9)
kabura
“to become big”
wa*aʕa
“to put”
saʁura
“to become small”
masaka
“to hold”
kaura
“to be numerous”
makara
“to thank”
qasura
“to become short”
kataba
“to write”
kaufa
“to become dense”
ʔaɦabba
“to love”
karuma
“to be noble”
ʔakala
“to eat”
kasuda
“to be stagnant”
qaraʔa
“to read”
labuqa
“to be clever”
matama
“to insult”
laduna
“to be soft”
salaba
“to afflict”
nabula
“to be of noble birth”
(10)  ɦasiba
“to think”
fariɦa
“to become happy/pleased”
kariha
“to hate”
ʔamila
“to hope”
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
33

qabila
“to accept”
fahima
“to understand”
ʁa*iba
“to get angry”
ra*iya
“to become satisfied”
ʕalima
“to learn”
mari*a
“to become sick”
The third vowel
As for the third vowel in the CVCVCV-pattern, it signals agreement for all phi
 features, that is person, number and gender, between the thematic subject of the
clause and the lexical verb. This is illustrated in the examples as follows:
(11)  a  taɦadda-a
speak.Pf-3.s.m
“He spoke.”
b
taɦadda-uu
speak.Pf-3.p.m
“they spoke.”
c
taɦadda-tunna
speak.Pf-2.p.f
“You spoke.”
Table 3.1 here summarizes the various morphophonemic shapes in which that
morpheme appears.
Thus far, I have shown that the Perfect in Arabic is a complex form, whose
 verbal morphology is based on vowel patterning where each vowel represents one
or more grammatical categories. The first vowel is shown to denote Aspect–Tense,
the second valence, and the third agreement. As a final remark, I would like to
briefly state that the fact that both aspect and valence are more internal to the root
than agreement follows straightforwardly from Bybee (1985, 1994) where such
categories are shown to be more intrinsic to the verb than others. Let us now
examine the other member of the opposition, the Imperfect.
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
34
Table 3.1 Morphophonemic shapes of agreement morphemes within the Perfect
Person
Gender
Number
Singular
Dual
Plural
Third
m/f
-a/-at
-aa/-ataa
-uu/-na
Second
m/f
-ta/-ti
-tumaa
-tum/-tunna
First
ø
-tu
ø
-naa

The Imperfect paradigm
Turning now to the Imperfect form and to its inflectional morphology, and  leaving
aside the discussion about whether the Imperfect is derived from the perfect or
outside the perfect, I will assume that similar to the Perfect form, the Imperfect is
composed of a verbal root and a number of affixes, as shown in (1) and (3) above
(pp. 29–30). The root hosts the consonants and denotes the general semantic
meaning (or the notional domain). The affixes, as in the perfect, represent various
grammatical categories. Unlike the perfect, however, the Imperfect makes use of
a CV prefix, a second and a third vowel, but no first vowel intervening between the
first and second consonants, as shown in (12) where the verbal root is fʕl “do.”
(12)  a  ya fʕ a l u
(ya-a-u)
b
CVCC VCV
The prefix and the first vowel
It might seem natural that the Imperfect would not preserve the first vowel, given
the fact that that vowel denotes the Aspect–Tense properties of the Perfect. But,
as we examine the function of Imperfect affixes, we notice that the same vowel
that denotes Aspect–Tense features of the Perfect performs similar functions in
the Imperfect, with the only difference that in the Imperfect form, the vowel is
part of the prefix, and occurs, therefore, outside the root. The claim being made
here is that the morpheme that denotes the Aspect–Tense category is the vowel
which occurs within the prefix. The most compelling argument comes from the
passive form, where both vowels exhibit similar alternation. Accordingly, both
the /-a-/ first vowel in the Perfect, and the /-a-/ first vowel (within the prefix) in
the Imperfect change to /-u-/, as illustrated in (13) and (14), respectively.
(13)  a  mariba
al-maaʔ-a
drink.Pf
the-water-acc
“He drank the water.”
b
muriba
al-maaʔ-u
drink.Pf.Passive
the-water-nom
“The water is drunk.”
(14)
a
yamrabu
al-maaʔ-a
drink.Imp
the-water-acc
“He drinks/is drinking the water.”
b
yumrabu
al-maaʔ-u
drink.Imp.Passive
the-water-nom
“The water is being drunk.”
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
35

The medial vowel
As for the medial vowel in the CVCCVCV-pattern, its function is not as
 straightforward and as easy to discern as the one for the Perfect. Thus, even
though the three different vowels, namely {a,i,u}, appear medially, as illustrated
in (15b), there does not seem to be any correlation between each one of those
 vowels and the verb’s valence.
(15)  a  Perfect
b
Imperfect
*araba
(to hit)
ya*ribu
makara
(to thank)
yamkuru
kataba
(to write)
yaktubu
laʕiba
(to play)
yalʕabu
The prefix and the last vowel
Agreement morphology, on the other hand, is realized in the Imperfect on both
sides of the verb, that is, not only on the last vowel but also on the initial consonant
of the prefix, as illustrated in (16),
(16)
a
y-aktub-u
3.m-write-s
“he writes.”
b
t-aktub-uuna
2-write-m.p
“you write.”
c
t-aktub-na
2-write-f.p
“you write”
Table 3.2 shows the various shapes in which agreement morphemes appear on
the verb (where the root is: fʕl “do,” N stands for Number, P for Person, G for
Gender, s for singular, p for plural, d for dual, m for masculine, and f for feminine).
Looking closely at the Table 3.2, we notice the following:
1
person morphology is always encoded in the prefix;
2
number is encoded in the suffix, except for first person;
3
gender is on the suffix when plural or on the prefix when singular except for
first person).
These results are further summarized in Table 3.3.
Having examined the functions of various affixes to which verbal roots
get attached to derive finite verbal forms, such as the Perfect and the Imperfect,
among other categories, it seems quite obvious that both Aspect/Tense and
 agreement morphologies are overtly realized within both verbal forms. While
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
36

VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
37
Table 3.2 Morphophonemic shapes of agreement morphemes
within the Imperfect
Person
N/P
Stem
N/G
First
(s.)
ʔ-a
-fʕal-
-u
(p.)
n-a
-fʕal-
-u
Second
(s.m)
t-a
-fʕal-
-u
(s.f)
t-a
-fʕal-
-iina
(d.f/m)  t-a
-fʕal-
-aani
(p.m)
t-a
-fʕal-
-uuna
(p.f )
t-a
-fʕal-
-na
Third
(s.m)
y-a
-fʕal-
-u
(s.f )
t-a
-fʕal-
-u
(d.f )
t-a
-fʕal-
-aani
(d.m)
y-a
-fʕal-
-aani
(p.m)
y-a
-fʕal-
-uuna
(p.f )
y-a
-fʕal-
-na
Table 3.3 Summary of agreement morphology
Person
Number
Prefix
Suffix
First
(s.p)
P, N
ø
Second
(d)
P
N
(s.p)
P
N,G
Third
(s.d)
P,G
N
(p)
P
N,G
the /-a-/ first vowel represents both the Perfect and the Imperfect within the two
CVCVCV- and CVCCVCV-patterns, the last vowel of the Perfect (CVCVCV)
and both the consonant in the prefix along with the last vowel in the Imperfect
(CVCCVCV) denote all the various phi features, namely Person, Number, and
Gender.7 Other processes, such as voice and passivization, are also observed.
Discussion of them is beyond the scope of this book. It should be noted, however,
that their interaction with the Aspect–Tense category, for example, follows from
the common modal domain to which they all belong: the Modality constituent.
Previous analyses of verbal forms
Our primary interest in this section is to shed some light on the semantico-pragmatic
properties of the Perfect and the Imperfect in MSA. We will show that despite the
systematic differences which typically distinguish each verbal form from the
other, the boundary between both forms remains unclear and hard to discern. This
is only natural if grammatical categories are said to belong to the same modal
domain and therefore are the result of common enunciative operations in the

VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
38
Culiolian sense. In what follows, we will review the basic claims concerning the
nature of the difference between both forms.8 The shortcomings of these analyses
will be highlighted and an alternative approach will then be presented.
Consider the examples in (17):
(17)  a  daras-a
(Perfect)
study.Pf-3s.m
“He studied.”
b
y-a-drus-u
(Imperfect)
3.m-Imp-study-s
“He studies/is studying.”
While there is agreement on the morphological distinction between (17a) and
(17b), there is little unanimity on the semantic characterization of this opposition.
There seems to be some dispute in the literature regarding the essence of the
opposition darasa/yadrusu. The question remains whether these verbs represent
past/nonpast tense, perfective/imperfective aspect, both tense and aspect combined,
or something else. This controversy has been apparent in varying degrees over
the past century of scholarship about Arabic, although the idea of perfective/
 imperfective has always been the dominant one. In the next section, we will present
the different views that have attempted to characterize the above verbal forms.
Proponents of the aspect view
In his introduction to “the states (senses) of the verb,” Wright9 (1859, V.I: 51)
claims that the two Arabic forms, as in (17a) and (17b) above, express actions
which are finished or unfinished with “no reference to the temporal relations of the
speaker (thinker or writer) and of other actions which are brought into juxtaposition
with it. It is precisely these relations which determine in what sphere of time
(past, present, future) a Semitic perfect or imperfect lies, and by which of our
tenses it is to be expressed – whether by our past, Perfect, Pluperfect, or future
perfect; by our present, imperfect, or future.” However, Wright does not offer any
grammatical term except “state,” to which he does not otherwise refer again, to
cover this nontemporal category. The term “aspect” does not occur in Wright’s
grammar, but it is clear that he does not consider “state” as deictic in any sense.
Similarly, Jusmanov (1961) observes that the Semitic verb has no tenses in the
European sense: “Instead of the triple division of action and state in relation to
time into past, present, and future, the Semite uses a double division according to
completed and incompleted.” Along the same line, Tritton (1943: 53) states that:
“the verb has no tenses. Apart from the imperative, there are two finite forms
which denote respectively completed and incompleted action.” Accordingly, Tritton
suggests that it is convenient to call them the perfect and the imperfect, where the
perfect “indicates a finished and therefore past act while the imperfect denotes

an unfinished and therefore present or future act.” Likewise, Blachère and
Gaudefroyes-Demombynes (1952: 245–46) introduce psychology into the under-
standing of the verb, speaking for example of the psychological bond between an
action deemed “completed” and one presented in the “past.” Following Cohen
(1924), they name this verb system phenomenon “aspect.” This is made to accom-
modate the fact that the Semitic verb “does not express the ‘situated time’ (i.e. to
say the time in which a process is located in relation to another moment of time
which is the one where the speaker is located), but only the degree of realization
of the process in time” (op. cit. 246). In contrast to Indo-European languages,
Cohen argues that while the tense values in these languages are more transparent
with reference to the speech situation, the Arabic tenses are more action-oriented
and therefore fail to present the notion of tense from a definite point of view.
Time specification is then expressed through a multitude of lexical and syntactic
means. Arabic demonstrates therefore a purely aspectual system with tense being
contextually determined.
In like fashion, Fleisch (1957, 1968, 1974) argues at considerable length for the
“aspectual” nature of the Arabic verb. His studies attempt to demonstrate and
defend the following three characteristic of the Arabic verb: (i) first, in principle,
the perfect presents a finished process; (ii) second, the imperfect presents a
process (state or action) in course of realization; (iii) third, the tense emerges
from the sentence. The last parameter is the most important for Fleisch.
Accordingly, he argues that the verbal form itself is consistent in describing the
development or accomplishment of the action, regardless of its temporal relation
to the speaker. Any specific tense-marking is the property of the syntagmatic
 context. Arabic is therefore an “aspect language which expresses ‘different
 modalities of duration’ through the two primary verbal forms” (1968: 111).
The same line of analysis is also found in Beeston (1970) where it is recog-
nized that time reference is not the essential value of the Arabic verb. More
important than time, according to Beeston again, is a factor which he calls aspec-
tual. Thus, the Perfect expresses a dynamic aspect, and the Imperfect a static
aspect. Dynamic aspect is shown to be time-marked as past, while for static
aspect the time factor may or may not be relevant; it is nevertheless shown to be
 inherently non-time-marked. Likewise, McCarus (1976) suggests that the
 primary feature of the Perfect and the Imperfect in Arabic is the expression of
Perfective and Imperfective aspects respectively. He further shows that the
form of the verb in Arabic does not indicate the tense of the action, but only
 indicates whether it (the action) is prior to the moment of speaking or, in case of
the Imperfect, occurs simultaneously with the utterance or with the main verb
of the utterance. Al-Mansouri’s (2002: 37) conclusion that Arabic verbal
clauses focus on the very occurrence of the event and do not call for temporality 
[
]
might summarize the wide held view that the Arabic Perfect does not encode
 temporality; instead, it is Aspect that is shown to be the inherent feature. Fischer
(2002: 102) similarly and confidently states “The Perfect indicates completed
	
	 !"#$%&
' 
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
39

action,” and adds that it is used to refer to prior events and to “established facts.”
This is, however, what supporters of the tense view intuitively reject.
Proponents of the tense view
The Arabic grammatical tradition began with Abul-Aswad al-Du’ali in the  seventh
century around 688, but the first well documented written record only appeared
a century later after the death of its author Sibawayhi in 796 (Carter 2004).
Without going into much detail, we note that the early Arabic grammarians were
extremely cautious in their approach to verbal tense categories. Sibawayhi, for
instance, uses formal and functional criteria to classify verbal forms. Accordingly,
three morphologically distinct verbal forms are said to express three disparate
temporal distinctions: (i) buniyat li-maa ma*aa “constructed for what has
elapsed,” as the examples in (18); (ii) maa yakuunu wa lam yaqaʕ “what is going
to be and has not happened,” as illustrated in (19); (iii) maa huwa kaaʔinun lam
yanqatiʕ “what is being, not having ceased,” as shown in (20).
(18)  a  ðahab-a
(Sibawayhi 696: 1)
leave.Pf-3s.m
“He left.”
b
samiʕ-a
hear.Pf-3s.m
“He heard.”
(19)
a
ʔi-ðhab
(Sibawayhi 696: 1)
2.m/f-Imp-leave
“Leave”
b
ʔi-*rab
2.m/f-Imp-beat
“Hit”
(20)
a
y-a- ðhab-u
(Sibawayhi 696: 1)
3.m-Imp-leave-s
“He is leaving.”
b
y-a-*rib-u
3.m-Imp-hit-s
“He is hitting.”
Note that in addition to the Perfect and Imperfect verbal forms, the imperative
is included as a similarly competing form in terms of temporality and potential
occurrence of the event. Most important is the temporal characterization in its
 tripartite form, namely the past “what has elapsed” (18), the present “what is
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
40

going on” (20), and the future “what is yet to occur” (19). The temporal parameter
is independently confirmed by Sibawayhi’s use of temporal adverbs such as
“today” and “tomorrow” to cast doubt on the well-formedness of verbal sentences
with the Perfect and the Imperfect (see Owens 1988: 228). Eight centuries later
Am-mirbiinii (1570) suggests that the difference between the two verbal forms is
based solely on time. That is, while the Perfect denotes an event and an elapsed
time (maa dalla ʕalaa hadain wa zamaanin inqa*aa), the Imperfect denotes an
event and an unelapsed time (maa dalla wa*ʕan ʕalaa hadain wa zamaanin
lam yanqa*i).10 On the basis of Sibawayhi’s approach along with Am-mirbiinii
among others, Aartun (1963) attempts to demonstrate that the Arabic verbal
 system is wholly time-based. He therefore argues that the examples in (17a) and
(17b) above express a “past” versus “nonpast” tense. Likewise, Khrakovsky
(1965) argues that the Arabic verbal forms are separate tenses, not aspects.
Furthermore, he considers sa-yaktubu “will-write” a separate form along with
kataba “wrote” and yaktubu “writes/writing.” Accordingly, he concludes that
kataba is a past, sa-yaktubu an independent future, and yaktubu, in fact, neither.
That is, the opposition of past and future is neutralized in yaktubu. In his latest
work, Benmamoun (2000: 24–28) also argues that the Perfect expresses “past
tense.” Finally, it is worth noting that current Arabic grammar handbooks tend to
favor the Tense view. Thus, Wightwick and Gaafar (1998: 13) introduce both
 verbal forms as “the past” and “the present”; Banat (2001: 49–61) similarly
uses “the present tense,” and “the past tense” for the Imperfect and the Perfect
respectively.11 It is therefore clear that proponents of the Tense view are quite
rooted in the history of the Arabic grammatical tradition. Other proposals,
 dissatisfied with the either Tense or Aspect views, propose a much more synthesized
suggestion where the two features are shown to co-occur.
Combined tense and aspect
Comrie (1976: 78–81) sees a combined tense/aspect system in Arabic. He rightly
finds this double-pronged opposition questionable, since neither tense nor aspect
is clearly the central feature with the other merely accessory.12 Having developed
the notion of “relative tense,” by which one is to understand a process relative to
another process rather than to the speech situation, Comrie cites a typical instance
of a subordinate clause with ʔiðaa “when,” when only the perfect is possible:
(21)  ʔa∆iiʔu-ka
ʔiðaa ɦmarr-a
l-busru
come.lmp.1s.-you  when become-red-Pf.3sm.  the-dates
“I shall come to you when the unripe date ripens.”
The clearly temporal reference of the perfect ɦmarra “ripen” is a consequence
of the knowledge of the season, but it is nonetheless “past” relative to the
expected arrival. Comrie concludes that: “the perfective indicates both perfective
meaning and relative past time reference, while the imperfective indicates  everything
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
41

else (i.e. either imperfective meaning or relative non-past tense). The Arabic
opposition Imperfective/Perfective incorporates both aspect and (relative) tense”
(op. cit. 80). In a recent paper, Comrie (1991: 7) reiterates his position suggesting
again that the usual interpretation of the opposition, in the absence of contextual
factors to the contrary, is that the Perfect encodes past tense and perfective
aspect, while the Imperfect encodes present (or more generically nonpast) tense
and imperfective aspect. Messaoudi (1985: 241–43) agrees partially with
Comrie’s analysis, but adds that “only compound tenses present some symmetry
for they equally express tense and aspect” [seuls les “temps composés” présentent
une certaine symétrie et expriment de manière égale temps et aspect]. The aspect/
tense claim is similarly found in much recent work. Fassi Fehri (1993), for
instance, argues that “Arabic inflected verbs alternate Tense and Aspect uses”
(p. 150), and so does Fischer “Both perfect and imperfect refer to time and
aspect” (1997: 207). In the same vein, Bateson (2003) writes in an Arabic  language
handbook that the Arabic Perfect “refers to past time (or completed action) and
the Imperfect to present or future time (and incompleted action)” (p. 23).13 In
sum, the suggestion that Arabic verbal forms, namely the Perfect and the Imperfect,
combine the two features of Tense and Aspect marks a tendency among several
Arabists and shows potential from both theoretical and empirical perspectives.
Neither tense nor aspect
Kurylowicz (1973: 118) claims that neither the category of Aspect (as in Slavic)
nor detailed time reference (as in Romance) exist in Arabic. Instead, the value of
the opposition is one of the “anteriority” of darasa “he studied” (20a) versus the
“simultaneity” of yadrusu “he is studying” (20b).14 The necessary corollary to
this statement, according to the author again, is that neither form is aspectual, and
neither form indicates particular time reference. Accordingly, the functions of
Arabic verbal forms are neither tense nor aspect. According to the author again,
the two member system darasa/yadrusu can not admit aspect, since aspect can
exist only if there is already tense.15 Furthermore, there can not even be talk of
tense, since yaktubu can have both present and past time reference. Therefore, the
value of these forms is strictly relational, anteriority versus simultaneity.
Benmamoun (1992: 215) partially agrees with Kurylowicz, suggesting that the
morpheme that is traditionally analyzed as the imperfective does not correspond
to a temporal or aspectual form but rather to a purely default morphological form
of the verb and the temporal interpretation results from an abstract morpheme
that has no phonetic content (2000: 27). The neither/nor view is echoed in a much
recent pedagogical Arabic grammar book by Schulz who observes that the Perfect
“does not actually express a certain tense; it merely states the action” (2004: 12).
As for the Imperfect, it is “neutral regarding tense and merely describes the  verbal
action in its course” (op. cit. 13). Mere stating of the action and mere description
of the verbal action do not appear to mark any particular aspectual concept, hence
the lack of both Tense and Aspect features.
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
42

Summary
In this overview, we have presented the basic claims of various views concerning
the semantic basis of the Arabic verbal system. These presentations illustrate
 confusions in the literature as to how to characterize the underlying nature of the
opposition as illustrated in examples (17a) and (17b). Thus, it is shown that at
least four hypotheses have been suggested to determine the basic feature of the
Arabic verbal system. These suggestions are summarized in Table 3.4 here.
One might argue that this divergence over the semantic basis of the Arabic
 verbal system is due to the complex nature of the system itself. Although it might
be complex, it is not so complex, in our estimation, as to give rise to contradictory
results, as the analyses suggested earlier seem to imply. As a matter of fact the
alternative analysis suggested below amounts to showing that when a large body
of data is examined, and the entire verbal system is analyzed, which hopefully will
unveil the characteristics of the entire Arabic verbal system, the underlying
 feature(s) of the opposition Perfect/Imperfect straightforwardly follows. In other
words, we believe that unless the whole verbal system is carefully considered and
many (types of) examples are considered, claims pertaining to some of its aspects
remain merely speculative and partial at best.
VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
43
Table 3.4 Summary of previous analyses of the Perfect and the Imperfect in Arabic
Semantic interpretation
Nature of the opposition
Claims made by
Aspect
Perfective/Imperfective
Wright, Jusmanov, Tritton,
Blachere and Gaudefroys,
Fleisch, Beeston, 
Al-Mansouri, Fischer
Tense
Past/Non-past
Sibawayhi, Aartun,
Khravosky, Wightwick and
Gaafar, Benmamoun, Banat
Aspect and Tense
Perfective-Relative Past/
Comrie, Messaoudi,
Imperfective-
Fischer, Fassi Fehri,
Relative-nonpast
Bateson
Neither Aspect nor Tense
Anteriority/Simultaneity
Kurylowicz, Benmamoun,
Schulz

4
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT
MEANING
Introduction
The previous attempts which tried to capture the semantic essence of both the
Perfect and the Imperfect in Arabic have been inconclusive and/or unsuccessful
for at least two basic reasons: one theoretical and another empirical. On the
 theoretical level, they have dealt too much in individual variants and not sought
out semantic invariants, which are to be differentiated from the range of contextual
variations found for a particular form. In order to do so, one should carefully
study all the uses of the verbal form in question, and try to extract from the range
of reference of that form a common denominator (a Gesamtbedeutung, or an
invariant) of meaning upon which these various uses are based.1 Moreover, little,
if anything at all, has been said concerning the verbal forms in relation to each
other, and from and within the entire verbal system. In other words, a common
denominator of meaning is usually not extractable in isolation: that is, it is never
extractable for one form alone, but rather only for one form as opposed to other
forms which constitute the verbal system.2 On the empirical level, not having
based their analyses on actual data, previous analyses have failed to recognize the
contribution of the surrounding context to the particular variation of the meaning
of the form they examined. That is, whenever it is possible to attribute a usage of
the form to automatic syntactic government they do so without looking for the
semantic motivation for such government rules, or they attribute to the general
meaning, semantic values which come from the use of the form in context, that
is, from contextual meanings. In other words, most generalizations relative to the
function of the verbal forms from Sibawayhi until the most recent studies
 mentioned in our previous chapters remain extremely hasty for the very limited
sample of language they rely on.3
In the following analysis, we will first present the most relevant characteristics
of each verbal form, with particular reference to temporality, and then isolate the
system of oppositions they constitute in terms of the enunciative operations we
believe they represent, comparing them with English, French, and other verbal
systems whenever such comparison is deemed instructive.
44

The Perfect construction
The Perfect in Arabic, or the suffixed form as it is referred to by many linguists
(Messaoudi 1985; Belazi 1993 among others), is found in a broad range of  contexts,
some of which, as will be shown later, lack systematic correspondences in other
languages (see also Comrie 1976: 78–80; Dahl 1985: 80). Moreover, Sibawayhi
(796: vol. 1: 460) notices that the Perfect in Arabic appears in three different
forms: it occurs either by itself, or preceded by the particle QAD yielding the
complex [QADPerfect], or preceded by the complex particle LA-QAD yielding
[LA-QADPerfect]. This is evidenced by the fact that each verbal form exhibits
a different negator: LAM, LAMMAA, and MAA respectively, as shown in Table 4.1
(kataba “he wrote”).
It should be stressed that Sibawayhi’s three-way distinction applies mainly to
Classical Arabic.4 In MSA, however, the second negator lammaa seems to have dis-
appeared, as its use is not observed anywhere in the language, that is, is not attested
in our corpus. Moreover, although the negator of the third form maa is still
observed, its frequency is too low to gain statistical significance and to make it as
operative as lam (see pp. 139–40 for more details). Thus, all three verbal complexes
are currently negated with lam, and very rarely with maa.5 Moreover, there is prob-
ably no need to consider these forms as independent, as they might have been
 during an earlier stage. The use of QAD prior to the Perfect remains, however, an
intriguing issue to which we will devote the next chapter. Accordingly, one may
argue that two forms of the Perfect are attested in MSA: a simple form (henceforth:
the Simple Perfect), and a complex form (henceforth: the Compound Perfect).6 In
what follows, we will first examine the contextual variants of the Simple Perfect
with a particular emphasis on its interpretations  relative to the temporal context in
which it occurs. We then attempt to discern the ATM system of which it is part,
and finally discuss the basic components which constitute its invariant marks. Our
conclusions remain, however, partial, until we discuss both the Compound Perfect
and the Imperfect, the subjects of the two  following chapters respectively.
Daily newspapers are meant to provide the latest news in as much detail as
 possible (see also Engel 1990: 9). Therefore, writers and reporters are generally
required to present extensive but very informative texts. Moreover, presenting the
latest news generally imposes certain constraints as to what type of verbal form
should be used. If reports are mostly concerned with elapsed events, it is more
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
45
Table 4.1 Verbal forms according to Sibawayhi
Verbal forms
Negation
Semantic interpretation
1 kataba
lam yaktub
he did not write
2 qad kataba
lammaa yaktub
he has not written (yet)
3 la-qad kataba
maa kataba
he DID not write

likely that the Perfect, whose temporal interpretation accords well with this function,
would be the best candidate. Consider the following examples:7
(1)
waʕadat
ad-duwalu
as-sinaaʕiyyatu
al-ʁaniyyatu
fii al-ʕaalami
promise.Pf
the-countries
the-industrial
the-rich
in the-world
bi-taqdiimi 150 milyuun
duulaar
ka-maʕuunatin
ʕaažilatin
with-giving 150 million
dollar
like-help
urgent
li- ʔalbaaniyaa...
to-Albania
“The rich industrial countries in the world promised to provide 150 million
 dollars in urgent help to Albania...” (NA#6)
(2)
ʔittahama
“Nikuulaas Briidii,”
waziiri al-xizaanati al-ʔamriikii,
accuse.Pf
“Nicholas Brady,”
minister the-treasury the-american
sunduuqa an-naqdi
ad-dawlii,
bi-al-butʔi
fii musaaʕadati
bank the-monetary
the-internationa
with-the-slow
in helping
al- ʔittihaadi
as-sufyaatii...
the-union
the-soviet
“‘Nicholas Brady’, minister of the US treasury, accused the International
Monetary Fund of slowing the aid process to the Soviet Union...” (NA#7)
(3)
waafaqat
ad-duwalu
al-ʁaniyyatu al-ʔaʕ*aaʔu
bi-naadii baariis
agree.Pf yesterday the-countries the-rich
the-members in-club Paris
ʕalaa ʔiʕaadati
žadwalati
ad-duyuuni al-mustaɦaqqati ʕalaa
Biiruu
on
redoing
scheduling the-debts
the-demanded
on
Peru...
“The rich countries, members of the Paris Club, agreed yesterday to
reschedule the debts payment agenda of Peru...” (NA#8)
The sentences in (1), (2), and (3) illustrate the use of the Perfect at the very
beginning of each article for reporting about past events; the promise in (1), the
accusation in (2), and the agreement in (3). Notice that while (3) contains a
 temporal adverb ʔams “yesterday” which specifies the time in which the event
took place, both (1) and (2) bear no time specification whatsoever. The past time
interpretation is nevertheless salient. The question that arises is the following: is
the temporal interpretation, that is, past time, inherent to the temporal properties
of the Perfect or to the immediate or general context, or is it a result of the
 interaction of both factors, and perhaps others as well? In order to determine which
underlying factor or cluster of factors govern the temporal interpretation of the
Perfect, one needs to investigate the semantic–pragmatic and discourse functions/
properties of this form. In what follows, we will briefly present the various uses
of the Perfect according to the above criteria.
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
46

The Perfect and temporal relations
In this section, I address the question of the interaction between the Perfect and
temporality with a particular emphasis on its semantic–pragmatic interpretations
from the point of view of its contextual categorization. The Perfect might be
 categorized in the following way, where its major contextual variants are: (i) “past
time” (with no further specification as to whether the verbal event is close or
remote in time); (ii) “present time,” (iii) “gnomic” utterances, and (iv) “future time.”
Past time reference
In his cross-language examination of various ATM systems, (Dahl 1985: 79)
 correctly notices a general tendency for the Perfect to refer to past time events. In
MSA, the Perfect is quite often used to refer to events which have occurred prior
to the moment of enunciation in discourse, or to the moment of writing in narratives,
journalistic or literary. Consider the examples in (4), (5), and (6):
(4)
a  A:
ʔayna
a*-*uyuufu
allaðiina
kaanuu
hunaa?
where
the-guests
who
were
here
“Where are the guests who were here?”
b  B: at-tabiibu
ʔamara bi-xuruuži-him
ɦirsan ʕalaa raaɦati-ka
the-doctor ask.Pf
with-leaving-them caring on
comfort-your
“The doctor ordered them to leave for your own comfort” (SS#5)
(5)
a
fa-fii ʕaami 1988
qaama
sunduuqu
an-naqdi
ad-dawlii
so-in year 1988
do.Pf
bank
the-monetary
the-world
bi-taʕliiqi
al-quruu*i
li-l-ʔaržantiin...
with-suspending
the-debts
to-the-argentina
“In 1988, the International Monetary Fund suspended the loans to
Argentina...” (NA#10)
b
wa fii mahri yuuniyuu al-maa*ii
ʔaxaða
‘Duuminguu
and in month January the-last
take.Pf
‘Domingo
kaafluu’ waziira
al-ʔiqtisaadi
al-ʔaržantiini
bi-nasiiɦati
Kaflo’ minister
the-economy
the-argentinian
with-advice
al-banki ad-dawlii...
the-bank the-world...
“Last January, the Argentinean minister of economy ‘Domingo Kaflo’
followed the suggestions of the World bank...” (NA#l0)
(6)
a
wa-l-ɦaqiiqatu
ʔanna
laaʔiikiyyatu
at-tarbiyati *aharat fii
and-the-truth
that
laicity
the-education appear.Pf in
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
47

THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
48
faransaa
fii ʕahdi
žuul ferrii
ɦallan li-mumkilati
as-siraaʕi
france
in era
Jules Ferri
solving the-problem the-conflict
al-maðhabiyyi...
the-factional...
“In reality, secular educational systems in France appeared during the
era of Jules Ferry to put an end to the problem of conflicts between
 factions.” (SA#3)
b
wa (qad)
tabayyana
min
baʕ*i
ad-diraasaati
allatii
and (QAD)
appear.Pf
from
some
the-studies
that
ʔihtammat
bi-muqaaranati
al-ʔansaaqi
al-qiimiyyati
focus.Pf
on-comparing
the-types
the-qualities
bayna
al-mužtamaʕi
al-masrii
wa
al-mužtamaʕi
between
the-people
the-egyptian
and
the-people
al-ʔamriikii
wužuuda
tafaawutin fii tartiibi
al-qiyami
fii
the-american
existance
disparity in classifying
the-values
in
kullin
mina
al-mužtamaʕayn,
ɦayu
tafawwaqa
at-tullaabu
both
from
the-countries,
where
excel.Pf
the-students
al-masriyyuun
ʕalaa
at-tullaabi
al-ʔamriikiyyiin
fii
the-egyptians
on
the-students
the-americans
in
al-qiimati
al- ʔižtimaaʕiyyati.
the-values
the-social
“Some comparative studies which investigated the difference in values
between the Egyptian and the American societies (had) revealed
 differences in the hierarchical classification of values between both
 societies; the Egyptian students excelled in social values.” (SA#5)
The conversation in (4) describes a situation where the enunciator wonders
about where his friends are after he awoke from a deep sleep. He knows for a fact
that they were standing next to him a moment before. This is illustrated by the
 relative clause in (4a) allaðiina kaanuu hunaa “who were here” which relates to
a past time state during which his guests were there. No temporal adverbs which
refer to earlier states are used, and the only indicator of past time is the perfect
form of the copula kaanuu “were.” The co-enunciator is aware of what has
 happened, and responds accordingly. In (4b), she – the coenunciator – informs
him that the doctor ʔamara “ordered” his friends to leave. Once again the Perfect
form acts alone as the only vehicle of describing a previous event, without the
mediation of any other past temporal adverbs. In short, the examples in (4) illustrate
the use of the Perfect in discourse, locating the previous presence of the guests
and the order of the doctor in the past. The examples in (5) are taken from
 a newspaper article. Both (5a) and (5b) describe past events which occurred

a long time prior to the moment of narration. In (5a) the narrator-enunciator
informs the readers/coenunciators about an action that the International Monetary
Fund took against Argentina. The use of the temporal adverb fa-fii ʕaami 1988
“in 1988” to describe the time of the decision, clearly “detaches” the event
described from the present moment (1992). Moreover, the verb which describes
the decision appears in the Perfect, which is a clear indication of the compatibility
between this verbal form and these temporal adverbs. This conclusion is supported
by the example in (5b) where the temporal adverb wa fii mahri yuuniyuu al-maa*ii
“last January” co-occurs with the perfect verb ʔaxaða “took.”
The examples in (6) are from different scholarly journals. In (6a) the enunciator-
narrator discusses secular education systems from a historical perspective. Thus,
he informs the reader-coenunciator about the era during which the first secular
educational system daharat “appeared” in France along with the underlying
 reason for its appearance. Both the whole historical context which involves the
participation of a nineteenth century major figure “Jules Ferry” (1832–1893), and
the Perfect are used by the enunciator-narrator to encode a past time event,
namely the appearance of the first secular system in France. In (6b), the enunciator
evaluates previous research relative to the social differences between the
United States and Egypt. Similar to the example in (6a), the Perfect is again used
in order to refer to previous research and outline previous results. In sum, the
examples in (4), (5), and (6) demonstrate that, independent of the type of enunciation,
the Perfect in Arabic, whether accompanied by temporal adverbs or not, denotes
a past time event, that is an event located prior to the time of narration. Closely
related to the issue of “past time” reference is the question of “remoteness,”
which involves the possibility of encoding various degrees of “pastness” with
respect to the moment of enunciation. The question is therefore whether Arabic is
capable of encoding such “past time” distinctions. Although the resolution of this
question is bound up in an intimate way with the question of how the ATM system
is structured, and with the related question of the more complex temporal relations
which involve the analysis of Compound Tenses, a quite straightforward answer
can be offered once we compare MSA to languages such as Haya which distinguish
degrees of remoteness in its ATM system. This can be established by observing
that while the temporal adverbs alyawma “today,” ʔamsi “yesterday,” and ʔawwala
ʔamsi “the day before yesterday” are compatible with the Perfect in Arabic, as
shown in (7), only nyeigolo “yesterday” is compatible with the past tense verb
tukomile “tied” in Haya, as shown in (8).8
(7)
rabat-tu-hu
alyawma/ʔamsi/ʔawwala ʔamsi
tie up.Pf-I-him
today/yesterday/two days ago
“I tied him up today/yesterday/two days ago.”
(8)
tukomile
nyeigolo/*mbweenu/*ijo
tied.I
yesterday/*today/*the day before yesterday
“I tied yesterday/*today/*the day before yesterday.”
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
49

THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
50
The examples in (7) and (8) demonstrate that unlike languages such as Haya,
the Perfect in MSA is not sensitive to temporal distance. Thus, there is no specific
verbal form sensitive to the relative temporal distance of the actual event – its
closeness or its remoteness – with respect to the enunciator in MSA, just as there
is no such form in other languages. Finally, I would like to stress that the Perfect’s
ability to encode past time is not restricted to its syntactic position, namely its
appearance in main clauses, as in the cases aforesaid. Indeed, the Perfect is
 frequently used in relative and complement clauses, as illustrated in (9) and (10)
respectively.
(9)
wa sarraɦa
waziiru al-maaliyyati fii ɦukuumati
biiruu “Karluus
and declare.Pf minister the-finance
in
government Peru
“Carlos
Buuluunaa”
ʕaqiba
al-ʔižtimaaʕi
bi-ʔanna am-muruuta
allatii
Buluna”
after
the-meeting
with-that the-conditions
which
ʕara*a-haa
naadii
Baariis
ʔaf*ala
mina
am-muruuti
allatii
present.Pf -it
club
Paris
better
than
the-conditions
that
wa*aʕa-haa
an-naadii
bi-n-nisbati
li-Buulandaa...(NA#8)
present.Pf-it
the-club
with-the-respect
to-Poland...
“The minister of finance in Peru ‘Carlos Buluna’ announced after the meet-
ing that the conditions which the ‘Paris Club’ (had) presented are better
than those put forward for Poland...”
(10)
fii nafsi al-waqti sarraɦa
safiiru
al-braaziil “Ruubnin
in same the-time announce.Pf ambassador
the-Brazil “Rubnin
Riikbiiruu” bi-ʔanna tilka
al-buldaana
qaddamat ʔakara mimmaa
Rikbiro”
with-that those the-countries present.Pf more
than
yanbaʁii
ʔan
tuqaddima...
must
that
present.Imp...
“At the same time the ambassador of Brazil ‘Rubnin Rikbiro’ declared
that those countries gave/had given more than they should...” (NA#9)
In both examples (9) and (10) above, the Perfect continues to refer to events
occurring prior to the time of narration and to some other events. Thus, the
 presentation of the conditions for Poland put forward by the Paris Club took place
prior to the Minister of Finance’s announcement in (9), and the “countries giving”
in (10) occurs prior to the ambassador’s declaration. Notice that both the announce-
ment in (9) and the declaration in (10) occur prior to the enunciator’s writing of
the article, and therefore denote past time. Thus, the Perfect in both subordinate
clauses refers naturally to events which took place prior to those in the main
clause. Nevertheless, it is the Perfect, and not the pluperfect for example, which

the enunciator chose to use. In English and French, for example, such contexts
typically trigger the use of the pluperfect, a tense which refers to events which
occur before a particular point in past time (Lewis 1986: 78), as illustrated in
(11) and (12) respectively.9
(11)
The Marines denied saying anything about Clinton. And defense
attorneys said Pridgen had picked a fight and had met his match.
(Ithaca Journal. April 14, 1993, p. 7A)
(12)
La Maison Blanche a confirmé, hier, que des missiles américains
avaient été tirés contre une installation liée au programme
nucléaire irakien proche de Bagdad. (Tunis Hebdo January 18, 1993, p. 1)
Thus far, our investigation shows that the Arabic Perfect is used to refer to events
occurring prior to the time of the reporting speech independently of how distantly
remote they are or whether or not they occur prior to other events. Within a
Reichenbachen’s framework where E  Event time, R  Reference time,
SSpeech time, the comma “,” represents associativity, and the underscore
 symbol “_” represents linearity, the Arabic Perfect appears to conform to two
 representations: (i) E,R_S, and (ii) E_R_S typically used for the simple past,
where both the reference and the event are prior to the speech time, and for the
past perfect, where the event is prior to the reference point which is also prior to
the speech time, respectively in English. Now, we shall investigate another
 contextual variant of the Perfect in Arabic, namely “present time.”
Present time interpretation
Unlike the earlier contexts in which there is a clear distinction between the
moment at which the event occurs and the moment of enunciation, other contexts
are more oriented towards the situation of enunciation, and are therefore tied to
the present time. The Perfect continues, however, to be observed and preferred
over the Imperfect. Consider the following examples:
(13)
a
ʔuriidu-ka
ʔan taʕtaniya
bi-ʔixwati-ka,
hal fahim-ta?
want.1s-you
that care
of-brothers-your,
Q.understand.Pf-you
“I would like you to take care of your brothers, do you understand?”
b
naʕam,
fahim-tu
yes,
understand.Pf-1s
“Yes, I do/understand/I’ve understood.”
(14)
ʔundur,
wažad-tu
saaʕat-ii
look,
find.Pf-ls
watch-my
“Look, I found my watch.”
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
51

THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
52
(15)  a  ʔayna
Nabiil
where
Nabil
“Where is Nabil?”
b
ʔinna-nii
xaraž-tu
wa
sa-ʔaržiʕu
laylan
ʔINNA-1s
leave.Pf-1s
and
will-return.Imp
night
“I am leaving and I will be back at night.”
The examples in (13), (14), and (15) represent different contexts in which the use
of the Perfect is observed. In (13) for example, the Perfect refers to a mental
 activity fahim “understood”; in (14) it denotes a sudden event wažad “found”;
in (15) it expresses a physical activity xaraž “left.” Generally speaking, each verb
has a set of semantic features which distinguish it from the other two. To account for
such semantic differences, the tradition uses the criterion of “verb classification”
(see Vendler 1967; Dowty 1972 among many others). It is beyond the scope of
this section to include a discussion of “verb classification”; nevertheless, it should
be emphasized that, although we acknowledge the salient role which lexical aspect
plays in the semantic interpretation of many (types of) verbs, we believe that
 previous attempts have led to suspicious and quite often misleading results, which
made language rather opaque, while its use dictates otherwise. Stative verbs in
English, for example, are typically distinguished from non-stative verbs through
their resistance to the ING-construction. They include verbs which express
 emotions, such as love, hate, like, and so on, and those which denote mental
states, such as understand, know, believe, and so on. Accordingly, sentences such
as (16) and (17) which follow are said to be ungrammatical:
(16)  *The FBI are loving the cult members.
(17)  *Clinton is understanding the difficulties which people face.
The examples in (16) and (17) are shown to be ungrammatical for the purpose of
distinguishing them from non-stative verbs, such as work, do, write and so on
which are compatible with the progressive form, illustrated as follows:
(18)  The FBI is working to end the stand off in Waco.
(19)  The police are doing the best they can to stop the riot in LA.
(20)  They are writing the speech for the president.
The grammatical contrast between the examples in (16), (17), (18), (19), and (20),
as traditionally observed to argue for verb classification, is very simplistic and
superficial at best. This contrast disappears as soon as (16) and (17) are used in
the appropriate context in which both “stative verbs” are evaluated differently by

the enunciator, as illustrated in (21) and (22):
(21)  The FBI are loving more and more the cult members.
(22)  Clinton is understanding more and more the difficulties which people face.
In short, it is not clear to what extent Vendler’s criterion and alike account
 adequately for the temporal relations which each verb represents. Besides, the
 criteria upon which various tests of verb classification are conducted are too
strong to account for the salient differences involved. We therefore resist such
analyses and suggest that unless more consideration is given to the context, that
is, to the situation of enunciation (sito), one’s analysis remains weak and partial at
best. The question we wish to address here focuses on the relationship that each verb
establishes between the moment of enunciation and the verbal event,  independently
of the semantic class to which each verb is said to belong.
The example in (13) is taken from a conversation between a mother and her son
during which the mother tries to explain the guidelines which the boy should
 follow during his organized trip. The mother was still elaborating on a few points
when she stopped and asked him (13a), that is, whether he is following her and
understand what she is saying or not. The son’s positive response in (13b) assures
her; thus, she carries on her conversation. What concerns us most here is the use
of the Perfect in both (13a) and (13b). In (14a) the verbal event fahimta “you
understood” concerns the son’s understanding of the mother’s instructions. The
boundaries of this understanding include previous and current instructions up to
the point she asked the question. If we were to use the concept of interval to  represent
the verbal process, we should be able to represent both the first point and the last
point of the interval. Notice that the last point, which corresponds to the last word
the mother says, has a very close tie with the moment of utterance of (13a), if it
does not coincide with it.
Likewise, the boy’s answer which uses the Perfect fahimtu “I understood” is
quite revealing. Indeed, the boy might still be processing the mother’s instructions,
and might not be very clear as to his mother’s intentions. The use of the Perfect
basically expresses the son’s obedience and agreement with his mother up to the
moment the question in (13a) is uttered, and most probably include this latter.
Here again, it is not clear whether the use of the Perfect imposes some sort of
detachment from the moment of enunciation. In other words, it is not clear that the
use of the Perfect fahimtu “I understood” blocks the interpretation which  suggests
that the process of understanding is still in progress when the utterance is being
uttered. In fact, the boy can follow up his answer by laakin maaðaa taqsidiina?
“but what do you mean?,” which then suggests that the use of fahimtu “I understood”
does not result from a full understanding, but rather from a partial one. In sum,
there seem to be reasons to believe that the use of the Perfect in both (13a) and
(13b) has a present time interpretation, or better, lacks an exclusively past time
interpretation. This conclusion is supported by the compatibility between the
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
53

THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
54
Perfect and a present time adverb, such as alʔaana “now”; while the presence
of a past time adverb such as munðu qaliilin “earlier” renders the sentence
 unacceptable, or at least extremely odd in this particular context. This is illustrated
in (23a) and (23b) respectively.
(23)  a  hal
fahim -ta
alʔaana ?
Q.
understand.Pf-you
now
“Do you understand now?”
b
*hal
fahim-ta
munðu qaliilin ?
Q.
understood-you
during little
“*Do you understand earlier?”
More evidence for the present time interpretation of the Perfect comes from the
use of the present tense in both English and French in similar contexts. Consider
the examples in (24) and (25):
(24)
a
I would like you to take care of your brothers, do
you understand?
b
Yes, I do.
(25)
a
Je voudrais que tu prennes soin de tes frères, tu comprends?
b
Oui, je comprends.
Although the fact of understanding refers to something which has already been
uttered, and is therefore about a past time event, the enunciator and the coenunciator
in both (24) and (25) use the present tense form of the verb. Note, however, that
the use of the past tense in similar contexts is also observed. The possibility of
using the past tense in both English and French in these contexts is certainly not
excluded. It should be stressed, however, that this use is the marked case, and
appears, therefore, in rather specific contexts. In fact, in both (24) and (25), the
enunciator could also have said “did you understand,” “est-ce que tu as compris,”
and the coenunciator would have answered accordingly “yes I did understand/
understood,” “oui j’ai compris.” It seems, however, that the use of the present as
in (24) and (25) is reminiscent of its unmarked nature with respect to past tense.
In addition, the resultative properties of the verbal event, namely the process of
understanding, which extends to the present time, that is to the time of enunciation,
forces the emergence of the present interpretation, hence the use of the present
tense. We take the contrast between the examples in (23) from Arabic, and those
in (24) and (25) from English and French, respectively as more evidence for the
compatibility of the Perfect in Arabic with present time interpretations.
Now, consider the example in (14). Here the enunciator is looking for his watch
inside the room. Suddenly, he sees a little part of the watch band from underneath

the sofa. Delighted, he announces to his brother, while he is leaning to pick it up,
that he found his watch. This raises the question of the temporal relationship
between the verbal event, namely finding the watch, and the moment of enunciation
of (14). Two possible scenarios might result in two different answers. In one case,
one would argue that the moment of enunciation in (14) follows chronologically
the finding of the watch, hence the past time interpretation of the Perfect wažadtu
“I found.” In the second, one could show that although the finding of the watch
precedes the moment of enunciation, the process of finding the watch has not
come to a complete certainty, and is therefore perceived as simultaneous with the
moment of enunciation, that is, the relationship between the utterance and the
finding process are temporally too close to separate, hence the present time inter-
pretation of the Perfect. To decide between these two competing hypotheses, one
can apply a time adverbial test and see whether (14) is compatible with present or
past time adverbs. Indeed, similar to the examples in (13a) and (13b), (14) only
co-occurs with ʔalʔaana “now” type adverbs, and does not admit “before now”/
“earlier” type adverbs, that is, munðu lahdatin “a second ago.” This is illustrated
in (26a) and (26b) respectively.10
(26)  a  ʔundur,
wažad-tu
saaʕat-ii
ʔalʔaana
look,
find.Pf-1s
watch-my
now
“Look, I (have) found my watch now.”
b
*ʔundur,
wažad-tu
saaʕat-ii
munðu
laɦdatin
look,
found-1s
watch-my
since
second
“*Look, I found my watch a second ago.”
Likewise, the examples in (15) earlier show the use of the Perfect xaražtu “I left”
in a context where the use of the present progressive in English is appropriate.
Indeed, Nabil was still on his way to the exit door when he uttered (15b), and the
choice of the Perfect does not imply that the event has already occurred and
 therefore has a past time interpretation; instead, it expresses an ongoing activity
which has not come to its end. This is not particular to Arabic, however. Consider
the French examples in (27):
(27)
a
Vous fermez à quelle heure ce soir?
“What time do you close this evening?”
b
Nous sommes pratiquement fermés maintenant.
“We are practically closed now.”
The following incident, despite its anecdotal attribute, appears to lend further
support to the claim at stake. I was inside a drug store (pharmacie) when a gentle-
man came in. Thinking he was late, he asked the young lady in the store what time
the pharmacy closes (27a). Interestingly, the door of the pharmacy was still wide
open and people were still entering the store when she uttered (27b), strongly stating
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
55

THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
56
that the store is officially closed, as suggested by the use of the auxiliary être “be”
and the past participle fermés “closed.”11 This case resembles the one in (15), where
the use of the Perfect is not associated with a past time event. This suggests that the
present time interpretation of both the Perfect and the past participle shows
the compatibility of these verbal forms with such time intervals. More evidence
for the present time interpretation of the Perfect is found in its use in present
 conditional clauses, as illustrated in (28):
(28)  ʔiðaa
ʔataa
ʔax-ii
al-ʔaana,
sa-ʔaxružu
maʕa-hu
if
come.Pf
brother-my
now,
will-leave.1s
with-him
“If my brother comes (came) now, I will go out with him.”
Since conditional constructions require more theoretical background and
 careful examination as they operate within a noncertain domain (Culioli 1987),
qualitatively different from the indicative whose domain is actual and certain, we
limit the discussion to a simple comparison between Arabic and English. Thus, a
closer look at the contrast between the use of the Perfect ʔataa “came,” and the
use of the present tense comes in the English translation in (28), reveals that the
present time interpretation of the Perfect is most appropriate.12 This latter is further
supported by the presence of the present temporal adverb alʔaana “now” on the
one hand, and by the use of ʔiðaa, which typically expresses an actual possibility/
realis present, in contrast to law “if” which expresses an irrealis past (see pp. 156–57
for further details).13 Other cases of the present time interpretation of the Perfect
involve its use in such contexts as in (29) and (30).
(29)
a  ʔiðan,
nusaafiru
žamiiʕan
ʁadan!
so,
travel.Imp.1p
together
tomorrow
“So we travel together tomorrow!”
b
ʔittafaqnaa
agree.Pf.1p
“Lit. we agreed (it is fine with met OK/I agree).”
(30)
a
hal taqbalu
ʕimriina diinaaran?
Q. accept.Imp.2s.m
twenty dinars
“Do you accept 20 dinars?”
b
biʕtu-ka
ʔiyyaahaa
sell.Pf-you
it
“Lit. I’ve sold it to you (you take it/OK sold).”
In both (29b) and (30b), the coenunciator is forced to make a decision in
response to the enunciator’s questions (29a) and (30a), respectively. Although
expressing one’s instant agreement with somebody (29b) and accepting an offer (30b)
are activities which are temporally bound within the present time interval/boundaries,

it is the Perfect which is observed rather than the Imperfect. In other words, the
verbal events ʔittafaqnaa “we agreed” and biʕtu “I sold” are simultaneous with
the moment of enunciation, and therefore have a present time interpretation. This is
further illustrated through the use of the present in English, as shown in the trans-
lation in both (29b) and (30b), and French, as in (31b) and (32b) respectively.
(31)  a  Donc, nous partons ensemble demain?
b
Je suis d’accord.
(32)  a  Tu acceptes 20 dinars?
b
Oui, je te la laisse/vends.
Finally, while examining various translated versions of Arabic short stories,
I have quite often noticed that the Perfect is rendered a present in various contexts
in the English translation. This is illustrated in (33).
(33)
maaðaa ʔafʕalu
wa qad
raawadanii
as-sabiyyu
ʕan
what do.Imp
and QAD
seduce.Pf
the-boy
on
nafsii
ɦiina
ʔarsala-hu
al-muʕallimu
bi-l-xu*ari
wa
myself
when
send.Pf-him
the-instructor
with-vegetables
and
ʁalabanii
am-maitaanu
ʔamaaðaa
ʔafʕalu
wa
qad ɦalimtu
win.Pf
the-devil
what
do.Imp
and
QAD dream.Pf
bi-ka yaa
mawlaanaa? (SS#3)
with-you
Voc.Part. sir?
“What can I do when the boy whom the greengrocer sends with the vegeta-
bles leads me astray, and I succumb to the temptation? what can I do, Sir,
when I dream about you?!”
In sum, we have shown that the Perfect in Arabic, which typically refers to
past time events, is observed in a broad range of cases with a present time inter-
pretation. In other words, the Speech, the Reference, and the Event times are all
simultaneous, and may therefore be represented in Reichenbach’s terms as close
to contemporaneous if not indeed contemporaneous (i.e. S,R,E). In what follows, we
will examine another contextual variant of the Perfect in so-called gnomic  contexts.
Gnomic interpretation
Consider the examples in (34)–(38):
(34)
man
žadda
wažada
wa
man
zaraʕa
ɦasada
whoever
strive.Pf
find.Pf
and
whoever
cultivate.Pf
harvest.Pf
“whoever works hard succeeds, and whoever cultivates harvests.”
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
57

THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
58
(35)  man
saara
ʕalaa
ad-darbi
wasala
whoever
walk.Pf 
on
the-path
arrive.Pf
“whoever gets going on the (right) path attains success.”
(36)
man
ʕamila
saaliɦan
fa-li-nafsi-hi
whoever
do.Pf
good
than-for-self-his
“It’s for one’s own benefit to do the right thing.”
(37)
ʔittaqi
marra man
ʔaɦsan-ta
ʔilay-hi
fear
evil whoever
treat.Pf-well-you
to-him
“Fear (the evil of) whoever you treat (him) well.”
(38)
xayru-kum man
taʕallama al-ʕilma
wa
ʕallama-hu
best-you who(ever)
learn.Pf knowledge
and
teach.Pf-it
“The best among you is the one who acquires knowledge and passes it on.”
The examples in (34)–(38) illustrate a peculiar use of the Perfect in Arabic.
Despite the fact that they all belong to the category/class of proverbs, which are
generally atemporal/timeless, the use of the Perfect appears as the unmarked case
in Arabic. This peculiarity is revealed through its sharp contrast with other verbal
forms in other languages, such as English, as shown in the translation. The example
in (34), for instance, is a famous Arabic proverb to which most educators in the
Arab world refer when teaching children social values such as work, endurance,
and success. These values are not temporally bound, and are therefore valid at
only one point in time. Their validity is certainly based on previous and current
human experience(s). As for future experience, although it remains unknown, its
validity is taken for granted and is thus considered equivalent to previous and
 current experiences. Being interpreted as gnomic, that is, valid anywhere anytime
(34) is meant to enhance the capabilities of children, build confidence and trust
in themselves and encourage younger generations to work and to work hard in
order to succeed. The use of the Perfect to express such timeless conceptual values
illustrates its unrestrictedness to past time events. Not only does it refer to present
time activities, as shown in the previous section, but also to temporally boundless
concepts. A comparison with French is instructive with respect to the use of the
perfect here. Consider the French proverb below:
(39) a
qui sème récolte [whoever cultivates harvests]
b
*qui sèmait récoltait [whoever is cultivating is harvesting]
c
*qui a sèmé a récolté [whoever has cultivated has harvested]
Although the semantic–pragmatic interpretation of the example in (39) corresponds
to the second part of the example in (34), it differs with respect to the verbal form
used to express this concept. Thus, while French uses exclusively the present

tense, as illustrated by the ungrammaticality of (39b) and (39c), Arabic uses the
Perfect, typically described as a past tense. This illustrates that the Perfect in
Arabic is equivalent to the present tense in French in at least two of its functions:
(i) its ability to encode present time events, that is, performatives, and so on, and
(ii) its capability of expressing boundless time, that is, proverbs (34) and (39).
More evidence for the Perfect’s second function is illustrated by its frequent use
in these contexts. The examples in (35), (36), (37), and (38) bear witness to such
usage. Indeed, most proverbs in Arabic make use of the Perfect while English and
French, for example, use the present tense. What makes Arabic more peculiar is
the mere fact that while other verbal forms are possible in similar contexts
(see the use of the Imperfect, pp. 108–13), other languages restrict such uses to a
certain verbal form, namely the present tense. It might be argued that a possible
interpretation of this use follows from what we shall call the “subjective value”
of verbal forms (see also Aronson 1991: 125), that is, when their deictic features
become less relevant; instead they are used to characterize the grammatical subject
(Adamczewski’s 1982: 46–48).14 When one looks closely at the aforesaid examples,
it is easy to see that all of them are indeed oriented toward the grammatical
 subject whether to qualify its current or potential property. The frequentative
use of the Perfect is another instance of this more general value. This is
 illustrated in (40):
(40)  kullamaa
saʔal-tu-hu
qaal-a
laa ʔadrii
whenever
ask.Pf-1s-him
say.Pf-3s.m
neg know.Imp.1s
“whenever I ask(ed) him, he says (would say) I don’t know.”
This claim, that the use of the Perfect in these cases is more to characterize the
grammatical subject than anything else in the clause, is further evidenced by
 common interpretations of similar clauses, for example, huwa min nawʕi laa ʔadrii
“he is an I-don’t-know-type person,” hence the irrelevance of the temporal inter-
pretation. It should be noted that this function of the Perfect is quite operative in
narratives where characters are subject to detailed descriptions. We will finish our
discussion of the Perfect in Arabic by showing that in addition to the aforesaid
uses, the Perfect is capable of referring to future time events.
Future time interpretation
Another contextual variant of the Perfect in Arabic is observed in certain  conditional
and hypothetical contexts where the future interpretation is predominant. Consider
the following examples:
(41)  ʔin
daras-ta
nažaɦ-ta
if
study.Pf-you
succeed.Pf-you
“If you study, you will succeed.”
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
59

THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
60
(42)  ʔažiiʔu-ka
ʔiðaa
ʔiɦmarr-a
al-busru
I come-you
when
ripen.Pf-it
the-unripe date
“I shall come to you when the unripe dates ripen (shall ripen).”
(43)
ʔiðaa taɦassal-a
al-waladu
ʕalaa al-maali
sa-yamtarii
if get.Pf-3s.m
the-boy
on the-money
will-buy .3s.m
hadiyyatan
li-l-binti
gift
to-the-girl
“If the boy gets the money, he will buy a present for the girl.”
Examples (41), (42), and (43) share the common feature of belonging to the same
modal domain, namely the “hypothetical/irrealis,” as given contextually by the
conjunction. This is illustrated by the use of the irrealis/fictive markers ʔin “if”
in (42), and ʔiðaa “if, when” in both (42) and (43). The example in (41), although
very complex, is presented in Abboud and McCarus (1992: 178) as the prototypical
example of a conditional clause in MSA. Its complexity stems from its frequent
use of the Perfect when compared to (42) and (43) for example. Thus, while both
examples in (42) and (43) use the Perfect in the if-clause only, this latter is
observed in both the main clause nažah-ta “you will succeed,” and in the if-clause
ʔin darasta “if you study” in (41). It should be stressed, however, that ʔin darasta
is only interpreted as in the English translation “if you study,” that is, involving
an actualized “from now on” reading suggesting a likely-to-occur condition for
which the present tense is appropriate in English.15 As for the use of the Perfect
nažah-ta in the main clause, it expresses a future event, whose realization
depends on the actual validation of the predicative relation you/study as
described in the if-clause. Thus, the Perfect nažah-ta follows the if-clause, and
has, therefore, a future time interpretation. We take the difference between
English and Arabic in (41) as an indication of a difference in the range of possible
uses of verbal forms. Accordingly, while English makes use of a present tense
verbal form study, and a future tense verbal form will succeed in hypothetical
contexts, Arabic only uses the Perfect verbal form to express both an actualized
present hypothesis ʔin darasta, and a prediction nažah-ta with a clear future time
interpretation.
The future time interpretation of the Perfect is further supported by the examples
in (42) and (43). Comrie (1976: 79) refers to the example in (42) to show that the
use of the Perfect ʔihmarra “ripened,” as it appears in the subordinate clause, has
a future time reference since the dates have not yet ripened. Likewise, Dahl
(1985: 80) uses the example in (43) to demonstrate that the Perfect “may refer to
the future in certain subordinate clauses.”16 This is not particular to Arabic, however.
The Perfect in other languages, such as Japanese, Modem Greek, some Bantu and
most Slavic languages, exhibits similar behavior (Dahl 1985: 80). Likewise,
Lewis (1986: 69) observes that the English simple past has some uses which refer
to future time, as illustrated in (44).

(44)  If you did this for me next week, I would pay you much money.
Another illustration of the use of the Perfect with future time interpretation in
Arabic is found within the maa “as long as” construction, as illustrated in (45):
(45)  sa-ʔamkuru
la-ka
fa*la-ka
maa
ɦayiit-u
will-thank.ls
to-you
kindness-your
as long as
live.Pf-ls
“I will be thankful to you for your kindness as long as I live.”
The future time interpretation of the Perfect ɦayiitu “I (will) live” comes from
both the syntagmatic context set by sa-ʔamkuru “I will be thankful,” and the presence
of the adverbial particle maa “as long as.” This latter is used in other contexts,
known as “indefinite conditionals” in the Arabic grammatical tradition, where the
Perfect exhibits a similar function. Such cases are given in (46) and (47):
(46)  kayfa-maa kaan-a
al-ʔamru
fa-ʔinnanii
ʔastatiiʕu ʔan ʔaxruž-a
how-ever be.Pf-3.s.m the-matter than-indeed can
to
leave.Imp-ls
“However that may be, I will manage to leave.”
(47)  ɦafi*a-ka
allaahu
ʔayna-maa
ðahabt-a
protect.Pf-you
God
where-ever
go.Pf-2s.m
“May God protect you wherever you go.”
The examples in (46) and (47) show another use of the perfect with a future
time interpretation. This latter is forced by the immediate context which implies
and favors such a reading, that is, possibility in (46) and wish in (47). Indeed,
good wishes are most often expressed with the Perfect in Arabic, while French,
for example, uses the present subjunctive, and English the modal auxiliary may.
This is illustrated in (48) and (49) respectively:
(48)
a  ɦafi*a-ka
allaahu
yaa
walad-ii17
protect.Pf-you
God
Voc.Part.
boy-my
“May God protect you, son!”
b
raɦima-ka
allaahu
bless.Pf-you
God
“(May God) bless you!”
c
mafaa-ka
allaahu
yaa
ʔax-ii
cure.Pf-you
God
Voc.Part.
brother-my
“May God cure you, my brother/have a good recovery!”
(49)
a
Que Dieu te guarde, mon petit!
“May God protect you, son!”
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
61

b
Que Dieu te bénisse!
“May God bless you!”
c
Que Dieu te guérisse!
“May God cure you!”
The contrast between the examples in (48) and those in (49) again illustrates the
broader contextual distribution of the Perfect in Arabic. Although the French
 subjunctive exhibits both present and past verbal forms, it is the present tense
form that is appropriate in contexts such as “good wishes” (49), while Arabic uses
the Perfect (48), a verbal form typically described as a past tense. Despite their
apparent differences, they occur in identical contexts in which the future time
interpretation is preponderant.
Summary and proposal
In this section, we have examined the contextual variants of the so-called Perfect
in Arabic. We have shown that when a wider range of data is examined, it appears
that this verbal form is not temporally restricted, as some researchers were led to
believe, and may therefore occur with either a clear temporal indication, with past,
present and future time interpretations, as indicated earlier, or with a nontemporal
indication. This latter is typically found in gnomic contexts where the enunciator
is located outside of the time line with almost no interaction between him and the
verbal temporality. Again, the focus here is in many instances on the grammatical
subject. Table 4.2 here summarizes the major contextual variants of the Perfect.
The question becomes therefore how to characterize the Perfect given its broad
range of uses. In other words, is it feasible to search for the invariant given all
these contextual variants whose functions seem to be at times in contradiction
with each other? Before answering this question, two issues, at least, need to be
discussed. First, all contextual variants of the Perfect should be evaluated within
a hierarchy which stresses their markedness status. Second, the Perfect needs to
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
62
Table 4.2 Contextual meanings of the Perfect
Contextual meanings
Prototypical examples 
Past time
Wasala (ʔamsi)
“He arrived (yesterday)”
Present time
ʔittafaqnaa
“Deal/I agree”
Gnomic (time)/omnitemporal
man žadda wažada
“Whoever works/has worked
seriously succeeds/has succeeded”
Future time
ʔiðaa ʕamilta nažaɦta
“If you work, you will succeed”

be evaluated within the verbal system of which it is a part, with particular  reference
to complex Perfect forms.18
Contextual variants and markedness
In order to ascertain the invariant of any particular grammatical category, it is
important to attempt a hierarchization of its corresponding contextual variants.
This not only makes the task easier, but also sheds more light on the grammatical
category in question. Various criteria have therefore been put forward for such a
classification. The most important, for our purposes, is basic (nuclear or core) vs.
marginal, literal vs. figurative, the marginal uses often being divided into more
general/generic and more specific. The most straightforward cases of the Perfect
are those with a past time interpretation. A closer look at all the contextual variants
of the Perfect examined earlier shows that contrary to the past time uses, all present,
gnomic, and future time cases are contextually conditioned. In other words, while
past time obtains within the most neutral contexts, as further illustrated in (50a),
all other interpretations are impossible (50b), as they require rather specific
 contexts.
(50)  a  katab-tu
risaalatan
write.Pf-1s
letter
“I wrote a letter.”
b  *I am writing (present)/* I write (gnomic)/* I will write (future)
The cases discussed earlier involving a present time interpretation of the
Perfect are restricted to certain types of verbs, such as: fahima “understand,”
ʔittafaqa “agree,” baaʕa “sell,” xaraža “leave,” which, within certain contexts, bear
close ties to the moment of enunciation, weakening therefore their past time
 features. The cases involving a gnomic interpretation belong either to the class of
proverbs with an omnitemporal reading, where the verb is interpreted as encom-
passing a period of time beginning in the past and extending into the future, or to
iterative/ frequentative uses involving the use of such adverbs as kullamaa
“whenever.” As for the future time interpretation, we have shown that typically it
is found either in conditional and hypothetical contexts, or in “good wishes” contexts.
Accordingly, with respect to its temporal meanings, we analyze the Perfect in the
following way: (i) the basic meaning is past time (anteriority with respect to the
moment of enunciation); (ii) there is a general/generic meaning which is gnomic
(omnitemporal/atemporal); and (iii) there are two kinds of  specific, non-basic
meanings: (a) done in the past, and (b) done in the past of the future. The issue
naturally arises as to whether the reference to time in the Perfect is deictic or not.
It would seem to be in the past time usage (the basic one), but in the future use,
for example, it is not, since what is there at stake is the anteriority of one event
before another future event.
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
63

This brings up the concern as to whether it is strictly tense which is a problem
in the Perfect, that is, whether it is invariantly a deictic indicator of time. We will
return to this problem later. But there is more, since each of these temporal inter-
pretations is also bound up with aspectual and modal meanings. All of these uses for
the most part also entail that the action is seen as complete(d) at some point in
time which is either the moment of enunciation, as in the basic use, or some moment
which is contextually given, as in the gnomic, present, and future uses. Moreover,
there is an implication of the relevance of the completeness of that action, relevance
either at the moment of enunciation for the present time usage, and relevance for
some time in the future for the future time usage. This means that another issue
is whether the Perfect also combines its temporal meaning with aspect invariantly.
And finally, the future time uses also combine modality with the temporality and
aspectuality, since it is used in conditional, hypothetical, and “good wishes” contexts.
The combination of futurity and modality is perhaps easiest to explain since many
others (e.g. Comrie) have pointed out that future time reference and modalities
such as hypotheticality and prediction as well as possibilities and probabilities,
even wishes about the future, are more often than not related to each other. The
modality of the Perfect is, then, easiest to explain, but the issue of deixis in its
temporal meanings, and of the place of its completeness (aspectual) meaning
have to be discussed further. But before discussing these issues further, and in
order to provide further data for the analysis to be proposed, we will take a
closer look at the Perfect within the Perfect paradigm, a subset of the Arabic
 verbal  system.
The Perfect within the ATM system
The advantage of examining any verbal form within its ATM system is to determine
the extent to which it is stable. This linguistic stability relates to its formal
 characteristics, that is, its morphological structure, as well as its denotational
properties, that is, its semantic–pragmatic values. Table 4.3 here shows the Perfect
within the ATM system:
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
64
Table 4.3 The Perfect constructions
Modals
Auxiliaries
Verbs
Semantic interpretation
—
—
ʔakal-tu
“I ate”
eat.Pf.-1s
—
Knu-tu
ʔakal-tu
“I had eaten”
be.Pf.-1s
eat.Pf.-1s
(Sawfa)
ʔakuunu
ʔakal-tu
“I will have eaten”
(will)
be.lmp.1s
eat.Pf.-1s
(Qad)
ʔakuunu
ʔakal-tu
“I might have eaten”
(may)
be.lmp.1s
eat.Pf.-1s

Table 4.3 raises the following points: (i) first, it should be stressed that the dash
/-/ sign does not necessarily imply the total absence of the corresponding features;
(ii) second, the Perfect acts alone within the system as a simple verbal form;
(iii) third, while in compound tenses there is in addition an auxiliary, the Perfect
remains stable and does not change according to the relative complexity of the
verbal structure, as exemplified in (51).
(51)  a  ɦiina
wasaltu
kaan-a
ʔittalaʕ-a
ʕalaa
al-waaaʔiqi
when
arrived.l.s
be.Pf-3s.m look.Pf-3.s.m on
the-documents
“When I arrived, he had examined the documents.”
b
ɦiina
ʔasilu (sawfa)
y-a-kuun-u
ʔittalaʕ-a
ʕalaa
when
arrive.ls (will)
be.Pf-3s.m
examine.Pf-3.s.m
on
al-waaaʔiqi
the-documents
“When I arrive, he will have examined the documents.”
c
ɦiina
ʔasilu
qad
y-a-kuun-u
ʔittalaʕ-a
ʕalaa
when
arrive.ls
might
be.Pf-3s.m
examine.Pf-3.s.m
on
al-waaaʔiqi
the-documents
“When I arrive, he might have examined the documents.”
In (51), while the main verb ʔittalaʕa “examined” stays unchanged in (51a),
(51b), and (51c), the auxiliary appears as the basic controller of tense, that is,
kaana “was” in (51a), and yakuunu “is/will” in (51b).19 In other words, while
 auxiliaries ensure deictic temporality of the verbal event: past with respect to the
moment of enunciation in (51a) (AuxT0), and future in (51b) (AuxT0), the
Perfect emphasizes its aspectual features, namely its completeness (see also
Waugh 1987 and the discussion earlier). And, as we shall see (Chapter 6), the
same results obtain within the Imperfect constructions.
With the aim of being suggestive rather than exhaustive, we will now turn to a
brief discussion of the points raised earlier. With respect to the first point, we have
already shown that the Perfect has various contextual variants, including the
expression of futurity and good wishes, which are reminiscent of its modal
 features. Accordingly, although no overt morpheme is realized, it should always
be assumed that such features are present to a certain degree. As for the second
observation, it is only when compared to other ATM systems, such as French
which exhibits three verbal forms, that questions about the unicity of the Perfect
arise. Notice that English has only two verbal forms: the Preterite and the Present
Perfect. For the sake of comparison, consider the following examples:
(52)
ʔinfažarat
al-qunbulatu
explode.Pf
the-bomb
“The bomb exploded.”
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
65

THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
66
(53)  a  The bomb exploded.
b
The bomb has exploded.
(54)  a  La bombe explosa.
b
La bombe explosait.
c
La bombe a explosé.
The contrast between the example in (52) and those in (53) and (54) shows that
while Arabic uses a single verbal form, the Perfect, to describe the occurrence of
an extralinguistic event, namely the explosion of the bomb, English has two  verbal
forms, the preterite (53a) and the present perfect (53b), and French has three verbal
forms: the simple past (54a), the Imperfect (54b), and the passé  composé (54c).20
Discussing the differences between these various uses and the discourse
 constraints which govern the occurrence of each verbal form would take us too
far afield. However, it should be stressed that the broad range of uses of the
Perfect in Arabic, as shown earlier, demonstrates its capability of being used for
various nuances for which both English and French use separate verbal forms.
This course of events raises the question as to whether the Perfect in MSA
behaves like other perfects, which typically establish a relationship between
 previous events and the moment of enunciation, and expresses therefore the
 current relevance of such events. Previous analyses are not conclusive, and  therefore
do not provide a clear answer to this question. Thus, the Perfect is  randomly
 translated either as a simple past, as in (55), or a present perfect, as in (56):
(55)
naam-a
muddata
saaʕatin
sleep.Pf-3s.m
period
an hour
“He slept for an hour.”
Al-Aswad (1983: 43)
(56)
ʔihtaw-a
al-maʕra*u
ʕalaa
ʕimriin
lawɦa
contain.Pf-3s.m
the-exhibition on
twenty
painting
“The exhibition has contained twenty paintings”21
Hassan (1987: 74)
The example in (55) is from Al-Aswad’s thesis in which he compares the
 aspectual and temporal system of MSA to that of English. According to
Al-Aswad, the English past tense corresponds to the Arabic Perfect, while the
English present perfect is equivalent to the Perfect when preceded by the  particle
QAD, as illustrated in the contrast between (57a) and (57b) (Al-Aswad 1983: 38):
(57)
a
qad
kataba
ar-risaalata
qad
he wrote
the-letter
“He has written the letter.”

b
kataba
ar-risaalata
he wrote
the-letter
“He wrote the letter.”
The issue of QAD is rather complex, and will therefore be considered in the
following chapter. It should be stressed, however, that if Al-Aswad were correct,
there would not be cases where [QAD  Perfect] was observed where the present
perfect in English is impossible. This prediction is not borne out, as shown in the
contrast between (58a) and (58b):
(58)  a
qad žaaʔ-a
al-waladu
ʔamsi
qad come.Pf-3s.m
the-boy
yesterday
“The boy came yesterday.”
b
*The boy has come yesterday
What is of interest to our discussion here is Al-Aswad’s implicit suggestion that
the Arabic Perfect is more like the simple past than the present perfect in English,
a suggestion to which we will come back later in our discussion (Chapter 6). As
for the example in (56) from Hassan (1990: 74), the author offers no explanation
as to why the Perfect is rendered by a present perfect as shown in the rather peculiar
English translation. This lack of justification is further observed in the translations
he offers for examples (59) and (60): a present perfect for the former, and a
preterite for the latter (op. cit. 77), while attempting to show that both verbs share
similar semantic features, that is, they are accomplishment verbs.
(59)
rasam-tu
daaʔiratan
draw.Pf-l.s
circle
“I have drawn a circle.”
(60)
sanaʕ-tu
kursiyyan
make.Pf-.l.s
chair
“I made a chair.”
In ascertaining whether the Perfect in Arabic corresponds to the preterite or to
the present perfect in English, one should be cautious and avoid simplistic and
misleading generalizations. Unlike English and French, the Perfect in Arabic acts
by itself to refer to various types of past time events. Accordingly, while English
uses the preterite and the present perfect (53), and French the simple past, the
imperfect, and the passé composé (54), Arabic would use the Perfect in all of
these contexts (52). This does not necessarily imply that the Perfect in Arabic
expresses the various nuances which all of these other verbal forms in English and
French denote. Instead, it simply shows that some semantic–pragmatic interpre-
tations are not grammaticalized in Arabic, while they are in both English and
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
67

French, and vice versa. More important is the fact that some of these interpretations
are not inherent to the Perfect in Arabic, but rather to the context in which this  latter
is used. Current relevance, and resultative states, for example, while inherent to
the present perfect in English and to one type of passé composé in French,22
are in most cases expressed through the context and verbal lexical properties
in Arabic.
This course of events obviously raises the salient question concerning the
nature of the basic value(s) of the Perfect. Recall that according to previous
 analyses, as presented earlier (p. 43), four possibilities remain: the temporal
hypothesis, the aspectual hypothesis, the temporal–aspectual hypothesis, and
finally the neither–nor hypothesis and the temporal nature of each of these could
be deictic or not. Having discussed the contextual variants of the Perfect, the
sub-system of which it is part, and some related issues, we will now attempt to
discuss the components of its invariant with the aim of being rather suggestive
than exhaustive. A holistic account involves necessarily a discussion of the
Imperfect, the other member of the opposition. In other words, the Perfect  possesses
its invariant meaning insofar as it is opposed to the Imperfect (cf. Waugh 1991a: 3)
and thus an examination of the entire verbal system (Chapter 6).
The Perfect and the invariant
The claim being put forward here is that the Perfect in Arabic signals a unique
operation by which the enunciator evaluates the predicative relation as represented
by the verbal event. This operation has a set of invariant properties which underlie
all the contextual variants. After a careful examination of all variants, we were led
to conclude that the use of the Perfect involves systematically the two semantic
concepts of anteriority and dimensionalization (cf. Waugh and Monville-Burston
1986: 851–53; Waugh 1987). This means that the verbal event is presented as
anterior with respect to a particular moment, and dimensionalized: that is evaluated
by the enunciator as global whole, a figure with clear-cut contours or dimensions.
It should be emphasized that, although the two semantic features are syncretically
combined, one or the other is dominant in particular contexts. This means that the
two give different but interwined semantic information.
Now, if this is the correct characterization, then how does it account for the
contextual variants? It is easy to see how anteriority and dimensionalization are
inherent to the basic meaning of the Perfect, namely the expression of deictic
 temporality. In all of its basic uses, the Perfect systematically refers to past time
events. The predicative relation is, therefore, evaluated by the enunciator as being
anterior to the moment of enunciation (T0). In fact, the expression of past time
results from the anteriority of the verbal event with respect to T0. This is exem-
plified in our corpus by cases where, although no past time expressions are
 present, for example, dates, adverbs, and so on, the Perfect denotes anteriority to T0.
Further evidence for this invariant feature of the Perfect comes from the Perfect
constructions, where an auxiliary verb is added to the thematic verb to refer to
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
68

more complex cases (Table 4.3, p. 64). In like fashion, the Perfect denotes
 invariantly anteriority, the only difference being the location of the point of
 reference. That is, when used by itself, the Perfect expresses anteriority with
respect to a present moment, hence the simple past. On the other hand, when it is
used with auxiliaries, the Perfect denotes anteriority either with respect to a past
reference established by the auxiliary kaana “was,” hence the past perfect
 interpretation; or with respect to a future reference established by the auxiliary
yakuunu “will,” hence the anterior future.
In addition to anteriority, the Perfect presents the verbal event with clear-cut
dimensions, without referring to its internal dynamics. That is, it is blind to its
individual instances, namely to its beginning, to its development, and to its end.
As such, the process is represented as punctual, given the irrelevance of the
notion of continuity which normally exists between the boundaries of the event.
The event can be represented as in (61), where the right and left boundaries of the
interval are coalesced so that, no matter what its duration in the real world, the
enunciator views the verbal process as a global whole:23
(61)
[]
The invariant dimensionalized feature of the Perfect is further evidenced by the
compatibility of this verbal form with dates: fafii ʕaami 1988 “in 1988” (6),
 temporal adverbs: ʔamsi “yesterday” (52), and so on, which in most cases trigger
the visualization of verbal processes in their entirety rather than in their continuity.
In various discourse genre-types, and narratives, in particular, this very feature
underlies the use of the Perfect for advancing main events, or for entities which
are foregrounded (Wallace 1982; Waugh 1986: 852). As we shall see, in Chapter 6,
the lack of this feature in the Imperfect allows it to be used for evaluation,
description, and entities which are backgrounded. Now, as we turn our attention
to uses of the Perfect for hypothetical and conditional cases, on the one hand, and
good wishes, on the other hand, we should like to argue that they can be explained
in the same way as earlier, the only difference being the degree to whether it is
anteriority and/or dimensionalization which is dominant. In other words, we
would like to emphasize that one or the other is more important, but neither is
absent. Accordingly, one feature might be the dominant in certain contexts, while
the other gets reduced. Moreover, we should like to stress that the focus on
either invariant feature applies at the level of the enunciator’s perception and eval-
uation of the predicative relation, as represented by the verb. This entails that a
non-dimensionalized verbal process might be evaluated by the enunciator as a
 dimensionalized entity, the same way that a stative type verb is sometimes  evaluated
as involving some degree of progressivity (see p. 53).
Turning now to the future/modal meanings of the Perfect, it is easy to see that all
conditional cases involve, indeed, anteriority, as illustrated by the temporal interde-
pendency between every two verbal processes in question (see examples (41)–(43)).
In (41), for example, studying occurs prior to succeeding. Moreover, both verbal
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
69

processes are presented as global wholes with no focus whatsoever on the  internal
aspect–temporal dynamics of each verbal form, hence the naturalness of the
Perfect. As for the “good wishes” cases, the enunciator stresses there more the
invariant dimensionalized features of the Perfect, and much less the anteriority ones.
In other words, the wish is evaluated as bounded from within (Waugh 1986: 851),
as if it were completed and realized, which, in fact, accords well with the
 enunciator’s actual intentions. In like fashion, dimensionalization proves quite
transparent within the specific meaning of the perfect, the present time interpre-
tation, in particular. Again, the enunciator presents the events with clear-cut
dimensions, although the verbal process did not come to a complete end, as in
((13)–(15)) earlier. Various discourse–pragmatic factors underlie the dimension-
alization of the process. Such factors might include, fear (13), anticipation (14),
and so on. What’s important in (15) is the anteriority of xaražtu “leave” before the
later ʔarž iʕu “return.” Likewise, with agree and sell type verbs, as in (29) and (30),
the enunciator presents the event as a dimensionalized process, most likely, to
express a (full) satisfaction. Having evaluated the verbal process as bounded, the
enunciator seems to consider it anterior with respect to a point which is psycho-
logically established, hence the sense effect of completeness. As for the gnomic
cases ((34)–(38)), both anteriority and dimensionalization prove to play a salient
role, underlying therefore the use of the Perfect. What is important in (34) and (35),
for example, is the relationship between work and success, cultivating and
harvesting, walking on the path and reaching the goal. The underlying principle
is the anteriority of one process over the other, the completion of one before the
other, hence the naturalness of the Perfect. Notice, however, that even with
 movement type verbs, saara “walk,” as in (35), the verbal process is evaluated as
bounded and dimensionalized.
Thus, the invariant of the Perfect in Arabic is shown here to be made up of two
main components: anteriority and dimensionalization, where the latter relates to
its boundedness, that is, closed interval, clear-cut dimensions, punctuality, and
lack of dynamicity, while the former refers to its anteriority with respect to a point
of reference independently of both its temporal location (present, past, or future),
and its linguistic status: real or fictitious. In its basic use it is anterior to the time
of enunciation (T0) and real. The other uses differ from this in specific ways. The
overall thrust of these observations is that the analysis of any ATM system must
be rich enough to admit all possible cases, and provide a principled explanation
to those uses which might appear to be marginal within the internal dynamics of
the system.24
Conclusion
In sum, we have examined here the functioning of the Perfect in Arabic. The main
concern was to determine the basic values of this verbal form through the search
for the invariant. Based on data from both the corpus and outside, we first
 presented the various uses of the Perfect showing its nonrestrictedness with
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
70

respect to the type of temporal interpretations it receives. This latter appears
highly contextualized, that is, relative to the context in which the Perfect participates,
although in the absence of a constraining context, the Perfect is typically interpreted
as past (the basic use). We then briefly presented the system within which the
Perfect operates, and finally suggested an account as an alternative to the previous
analyses discussed at the beginning of the chapter. Our alternative suggests that
the Perfect has an invariant which is made up of two components, which naturally
account for the broad range of uses which we first presented: anteriority and
dimensionality. Since anteriority is not always deictically defined, it is not an
example of tense but rather of taxis (as defined in Jakobson 1957, see footnote 11,
p. 69); and dimensionality is the realization of aspect. Arabic has, therefore,
a taxis–aspect system, a choice not envisaged earlier. We will return to these
issues later. Some other issues related to the Perfect will be raised and discussed
in the following chapters which attempt a similar investigation for the Compound
Perfect and the Imperfect.
THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
71

5
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE
MODAL QAD
Introduction
Consider the contrast between the examples in (1) and (2):
(1)
wa Ø sarraɦa
Karlus Buuluunaa
bi-ʔanna
am-muruuta
and announce.Pf
Carlus Buluna
with-that
the-conditions
allatii ʕara*a-haa naadii
baariis
ʔaf*ala mina
am-muruuti
which present-them club
Paris
better than
the-conditions
allatii
wa*aʕa-haa
an-naadii
li-Buulandaa.
that
put-them
the-club
for-Poland
“Carlos Buluna declared that the conditions outlined by the Club in Paris
are far better than those it had outlined for Poland.” (NA#8)
(2)
wa QAD sarraɦa
Frans Andersin
bi-ʔanna al-mažmuuʕata 24
and QAD announce.Pf
Franz Andersin
with-that the-group 24
sa-tuzawwidu
Albaaniyaa
bi-ʔakara min 250.000 tun.
will-supply
Albania
with-more from 250.000 Ton
“Franz Anderson declared that the group of 24 will supply Albania with
more than 250.000 tons.” (NA#6)
While the verb sarraɦa in (1) is only preceded by wa, a coordinating conjunction
which typically relates the current context to the previous one, the verb sarraɦa
in (2) is preceded by both the coordinating conjunction wa and the particle QAD.1
This raises the question as to why the writer–enunciator would resort to the use
of a complex verbal structure, that is, [QAD[Verb]], when a simpler form, that is,
[Verb] is available. The following sections are devoted to answering this question.
In order to do so, a deeper investigation relative to the characteristics of QAD is
essential. Accordingly, we organize the discussion as follows: the first part
 presents and discusses the major competing hypotheses concerning the properties
and functions of QAD. The second part outlines the shortcomings of previous
72

analyses, and presents an alternative based on the wide range of data on which
our study was conducted and on the results of various tests which have helped to
unveil the syntactic and semantic properties of QAD.
Previous analyses
Early and medieval Arabic grammarians scantly wrote about the function of QAD
classified among the set of “particles”; besides, recent scholarship has not suffi-
ciently addressed issues relevant to its syntactic and semantic properties. Thus,
a complete and thorough investigation has never been conducted as far as I know.
Previous descriptions can be divided into three major approaches. The first type
of approach considers QAD to be a temporal particle, and therefore outlines its
interaction with verbal temporal structures (Ibn Hishaam 1359; Gaudefroy and
Blachère 1952; Noureddine 1980; Al-Aswad 1983; Er-Rayyaan 1986; Hassan
1990; Al-Mansouri 2002). The second one analyzes QAD as an aspectual marker
and incorporates it within the major aspectual oppositions inside the verbal  system
(Reckendorf 1921; Beeston 1970; Al-Aswad 1983; Fradkin 1985; Wright 1989;
Hassan 1990; Fischer 2002). As for the third hypothesis, probably the most
 popular one among the Arab grammarians as well as most Orientalists, it relates
to the emphatic function of QAD. It is advocated by several linguists such as
Sibawayhi (796), Ibn Hishaam (1359), Diver (1964), Dahl and Talmoudi (1979),
Hassaan (1979), Messaoudi (1985), Azmi (1988), Fassi Fehri (1993), Ryding
(2005), among others.
QAD and the temporal hypothesis
Although the literature presents several inconsistencies as to what temporal
 functions QAD might have, the general assumption as described in Gaudefroy and
Blachère (1952: 212) is either to accentuate the remoteness meaning of the Perfect
or to highlight its use for the recent past.2 Indeed, the latter function can be traced
back to Ibn Hishaam (1359), who shows that one of the functions of QAD when
it occurs with the perfect is to highlight a recent past.3 Consider the following
examples:
(3)
a
qaama
Zaydun
stand.Pf up
Zayd
“Zayd stood up.”
b QAD
qaama
Zaydun
QAD
stand.Pf up Zayd
“Zayd (has) just stood up.”
According to Ibn Hishaam again (vol. 1: 294), example (3a) makes no specific
temporal indication other than the fact that the event occurred prior to the speech time.
Accordingly, the event is either very remote or quite recent, thus the ambiguity of (3a).
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
73

THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
74
Example (3b) indicates, however, a recent past, as shown through the use of “just”
in the English translation. This contrast is attributed to the presence of QAD,
described therefore as a temporal indicator of a recent past. Along the same lines,
Sayed (1983: 24) suggests that when QAD precedes the Perfect, as in (3b) here, it
denotes “a past ending at present” (recent past). Likewise, Hassan (1990: 127)
notes that when used with the past form of a full verb, QAD indicates very recent
events or incidents. Whether it is a recent past or a past ending at present, propo-
nents of this view suggest that QAD interacts with the temporal interpretation of
the event. In other words, it plays the same role as the English adverb “just,”
“just...now,” as in (4),4 and their French counterparts “venir de,” “venir juste
de...,” as shown in (5):
(4)
a
I have just finished.
b
I just woke up now.
(5)
a
Je viens d’arriver.
b
Je viens juste de finir.
In compound tenses where the auxiliary kaana “was” is used along with the
main verb, the particle QAD is usually used to derive the equivalent of the English
past perfect, that is, at an earlier time than the established time in question
(Al-Aswad 1983: 36; Er-Rayyaan 1986: 149; Fischer 2002: 107). Consider the
examples in (6),
(6)
a
kaana ðakara
Xaalidun
maa
ɦada.
be.Pf mention.Pf
Xaalid
what
happen.Pf
“Xalid (has) mentioned what happened.”
b
kaana
QAD
ðakara
Xaalidun
maa
ɦada.
be.Pf
QAD
mention.Pf
Xaalid
what
happen.Pf
“Xalid had mentioned what happened.”
According to Er-Rayyaan again, the verbal complex [kaana QAD  ðakara]
stands as the counterpart of the English past perfect, as illustrated in the English
translation (6b). Without the particle QAD, [kaana  ðakara] is ambiguous
between the past and the present perfect, as shown in (6a).5
QAD and the aspectual hypothesis
The most explicit characterization of QAD as an aspectual particle is best found
in Fradkin (1985: 215–16). Consider the following examples,
(7)
a
hal
qaraʔ-ta
“al-ʔayyaam” (a novel by Taha Hussein)
Q.
read.Perf-2s.m
“al-ʔayyaam”
“Have you read ‘al-ʔayyaam’?”

b
naʕam
qaraʔ-tu-hu
yes
read.Perf-Is-it
“Yes I (have) read it.”
According to Fradkin, the answer in (7b) is ambiguous. The question of
“reading to the end” or “casually leafing through” is still open-ended. (7b) could
simply imply “yes, I have looked at it but put it down half way through.” The
question is therefore whether Arabic provides any mean to specify further the
nature of the reading. According to Fradkin again, the answer is positive, and it is
through the use of QAD which creates the impression of telic completion by relating
the process to the given situation, as illustrated in (8).6
(8)
a
LA-QAD
qaraʔ-tu
haaðaa
al-kitaab
LA-QAD
read.Pf-ls
this
the-book
“I have (now) read this book.”
b
LA-QAD
ʔakmal-tu
qiraaʕata-hu
LA-QAD
finish.Pf-ls
reading-its
“I have finished reading it.”
Compared to (7b), the example in (8a) is more straightforward. Not only does
it state that the book is being read, but it also implies that its reading is being
 completed. This implication is shown to follow from the presence of LA-QAD.
This is further supported by the example in (8b), given to illustrate the logical
extension of (8a).7 Although the aspectual function of QAD does not appear to be
central in several other analyses, it is nevertheless mentioned every now and then.
Wright (1989, II: 3) first notices that, when preceded by QAD, “the Perfect implies
that the act is really finished and completed just at the moment of speaking.”
Al-Aswad (1983: 47) adds that QAD  Perfect “usually expresses a completed
action in present time.” Likewise, Er-Rayyaan (1986: 149) mentions that the
 particle QAD “denotes the factual completion of a situation.” Besides this apparent
function of completion, Hassan (1990: 127–9) suggests another aspectual  function,
called the “Experiential Perfect,” which, according to Hassan again, is similar to
the English experiential perfect found in examples like the one in (9), shouted by
somebody who saw a flash of lightning.8
(9) I’ve seen it as well.
QAD and the emphatic hypothesis
In his first volume, Ibn Hishaam (1359, I: 297) observes that Emphasis is one of
the functions of the particle QAD, that is introduced to stress the occurrence of
the event daxalat litawkiidi alɦadai. Indeed, the same function can be traced
back to Sibawayhi (Vol. I: 460), where he shows that the verbal complex
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
75

THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
76
[La-QAD  Perfect] requires a different negator than the Perfect. Consider the
examples in (10) and (11) below,
(10)
a
faʕal-a
do.Pf-3s.m
“He did (it).”
b
LAM
yafʕal
Neg
do.lmp.3.s.m
“He did not do (it).”
(11)
a
LA-QAD faʕal-a
LA-QAD do.Pf-3s.m
“He (really) did (it)/or He DID (it).”
b
MAA
faʕal-a
Neg
do.Pf-3s.m
“He (really) did not do (it)1 or He did NOT do (it).”
According to Sibawayhi again, the difference between the examples in
(10) and (11) can further be illustrated through the insertion of wallaahi, “By God”
an oath word, in front of both (11a) and (11b). Accordingly, the examples in (11) are
far more emphatic than those in (10). Recent analyses such as Diver (1964), Dahl
and Talmoudi (1979), Hassaan (1979), Messaoudi (1985), Azmi (1988), Hassan
(1990), and Ryding (2005) have shown, one way or another, that the presence of
QAD in front of the Perfect is basically to add emphasis and stress the occurrence
of the action. Accordingly, Diver and Hassaan would equate QAD with the English
emphatic DO, which also expresses a degree of “certainty” that comes nearest to
factual assertion, as shown in the examples in (12):9
(12)
a
ibtasam-a
Zaydun
smile.Pf-3s.m
Zayd
“Zayd smiled”
b
LAQAD
ibtasam-a
Zaydun
LAQAD
smile.Pf-3s.m
Zayd
“Zayd did smile”
Likewise, Dahl and Talmoudi (1979: 55) argue that the main function of QAD
is to indicate that the speaker does have adequate evidence for his statement.
Azmi (1988: 94) states that QAD expresses the fact that certain things (whether
expected or unexpected) actually have happened. He therefore suggests that it be
translated by already, really, and now. Messaoudi (1985: 166) refers to QAD
as an assertive particle expressing assertive modality. Hassan (1990: 126–30)
 suggests that QAD indicates both emphasis and recent past or experiential perfect.

Ryding (2005) adds “The use of qad (. . .) serves to confirm the meaning of the
past tense by emphasizing that the action did indeed happen” (p. 450). In examples
with compound tenses, as shown in (13), the meaning of anteriority in the past is
 conveyed, according to Hassan again, by the verb kaana “to be” not the particle
QAD. What QAD does in such a structure is to add emphasis.10
(13)
kaana al-qitaaru
QAD
intalaqa
ʕindamaa
wasaltu
al-maɦattata
be.Pf the-train
QAD
leave.Pf
when
arrive.Pf
the-station
“The train had already gone when I reached the station.”
Conclusion
Since the eighth century, remarkably few specific synchronic studies on the
 linguistic behavior of the verbal particle QAD have been conducted. Moreover,
there seems to be some dispute in the literature regarding the function of QAD.
The question remains whether this verbal particle interacts with the temporal,
aspectual, or modal (emphatic) interpretation of the verbal event. The Tense,
Aspect, or Modal argument seems to have escalated somewhat in recent years.11
However, even those few who have shown a specific interest in the question of
QAD, have never produced empirical studies based on empirical data. Their
results have relied solely on the theoretical assumptions with which the question
of QAD was approached. This has led to further confusions. All of these
 observations underscore the need for a different perspective on QAD in MSA.
The different perspective that we wish to follow is to consider the problem of
QAD as both a problem of syntactic distribution and semantic/pragmatic
 interpretation.
An alternative approach
From an empirical point of view, the issue seems to be defined essentially by the
interaction of QAD with the verb in the Perfect.12 Two questions are therefore in
order. First, how frequently and under which conditions does this interaction take
place; second, why does a speaker resort to using a verbal structure involving the
use of QAD, when a simpler form is sometimes available? Although the two
issues address different facets of the problem under consideration, they are closely
related. Frequency and distributional properties of verbal categories such as QAD
are best viewed within a speaker-based framework which accurately addresses
issues related to linguistic variation and salience. Accordingly, the  discussion will
be presented in the following order. First, we will begin with a brief presentation
of the syntactic distribution of QAD. Second, we will present and discuss the
results of the distributional properties of QAD within the framework of markedness.
Having determined the status of QAD within the system of Arabic, we will then
examine its functions within the parameters of Invariance.
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
77

THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
78
The syntactic distribution of QAD
According to the results of our corpus, the verbal particle QAD appears in a broad
range of contexts, but not in every context where a perfect verb occurs.13 These
contexts can be divided into three major types, according to their relative
salience: (i) the sentence initial type, (ii) the sentence medial type, (iii) and inside
the verbal complex. We will demonstrate that the semantico-pragmatic function
of QAD differs according to each one of those contexts.
QAD in sentence initial position
Whether one is reading a newspaper article, a paper in a scholarly journal, or a
short story in MSA, one notices the use of the verbal particle QAD every now and
then in front of the Perfect near the beginning of the clause (preceded only by WA
or LA), whether that clause is at the beginning of a paragraph or inside it. This is
illustrated in the examples ((14)–(16)),
(14)
a
wa QAD qaala
raadiyuu
ʔisraaʔiil
and QAD say.Pf
radio
Israel
“Radio Israel announced ...” (NA#12)
b
wa Ø
qaala
masʔuuluuna
kibaar
and
say.Pf
officials
high
“Some high officials said...” (NA#12)
(15)
a
wa QAD tabayyana
min baʕ*i
ad-diraasaat...
and QAD appear.Pf
from some
the-studies
“A number of studies suggest...” (SA#5)
b
wa Ø
tabayyana mina al-žadwali
as-saabiqi...
and
appear.Pf from the-table
the-previous
“The previous table suggests...” (SA#5)
(16)
a
LA-QAD
ɦadaa
fii
ɦayaati-naa
mayʔun
fa*iiʕun
LA-QAD
happen.Pf
in
life-our
something
terrible
“Something terrible happened in our life.” (SS#5)
b
Ø ʔintahaa
ʕasru
al-muʕžizaat
finish.Pf
era
the-miracles
“The era of miracles is gone.” (SS#5)
The examples in (14a) and (14b) are taken from an article which describes the
situation in the southern region of Lebanon where recent fighting between Israeli
troops and the resistance forces had forced the local residents to leave their
homes. The entire article contains 11 short paragraphs. Each paragraph starts with
a verb in the Perfect, which is quite common in this type of discourse. Of these 11
perfect verbs, there are six uses of the reporting verb qaal “to say/announce”

among which only one is preceded by the verbal particle QAD. Leaving the
 puzzling question concerning its semantic/pragmatic interpretation aside, this use of
QAD appears marginal given its low frequency. Indeed, when every occurrence
of the Perfect in initial position within all 13 newspaper articles – with and
 without QAD – is taken into account, we counted 141 cases among which only 19
are preceded by QAD, while 122 occur without it. This represents 13 percent of
the total number of Perfects (with and without QAD), which although is a small
number, requires a principled explanation. Table 5.1 below provides more details
for the frequency of QAD in initial position.
The examples in (15) are taken from a paper which appeared in The Egyptian
Review for Psychological Studies, where the author deals with the classification
of life events which lead to stress. There were 24 cases of verbs in the Perfect in
 initial position, among which seven cases were preceded by QAD. Compared to
the frequency in newspaper articles as shown, this number is relatively high.
Indeed, this higher frequency is maintained throughout the other four scholarly
articles. This is illustrated in Table 5.2.
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
79
Table 5.1 The frequency of initial QAD in newspaper articles
NA.Nb
Nb.Pfs (qad )
Nb.Pfs (qad)
Total (qad)
1
22
4
26
2
12
0
12
3
29
1
30
4
3
1
4
5
1
1
2
6
3
3
6
7
1
1
2
8
4
1
5
9
7
1
8
10
6
0
6
11
7
2
9
12
10
1
11
13
17
3
20
Total
122
19
141
Frequency (%)
87
13
100
Table 5.2 The frequency of initial QAD in scholarly articles
NA.Nb
Nb.Pfs (qad)
Nb.Pfs (qad)
Total (qad)
1
5
4
9
2
8
5
13
3
3
5
8
4
17
4
21
5
17
7
34
Total
50
25
75
Frequency (%)
66
34
100

Similar to the examples in (14) and (15), while the a-example contains QAD,
the b-example does not. In narratives, the use of QAD is extremely limited. Its
 frequency is very low compared to the two other types of discourse, namely news-
paper articles and the scholarly articles. In this short story for example, there were
44 verbs in the Perfect in sentence initial position, in which only one case is  preceded
by QAD, however. This very low frequency of QAD turns to be a feature of this
type of discourse, as illustrated in Table 5.3.
The foresaid results are summarized in Table 5.4.
To conclude, the study of the distribution and frequency of QAD in initial  position
reveals that its occurrence is genre-sensitive. Accordingly, it is more frequent in
scholarly articles than newspaper articles and much less used in narratives. The
overall thrust of the aforesaid presentation is to show that the use of QAD is  subject
to discourse constraints which need to be addressed and discussed, among other
things, in order to adequately ascertain its functioning within the modal system
within which it is a part. The said results are, however, partial and the question
now is whether similar results are observed in other contexts, namely, non-initial
positions, which is the subject of the following section.
QAD in non-initial position
The verbal particle QAD is far more frequent in non-initial position, that is,
66 percent of the total number, as shown in Table 5.5. In addition, its distribution
is much more complex. There are various contexts, for instance, where the use of
QAD is quite systematic and a few other cases where its use appears much
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
80
Table 5.3 The frequency of initial QAD in short stories
SS.Nb
Nb.Pfs (qad )
Nb.Pfs (qad)
Total (qad)
1
13
0
13
2
15
0
15
3
32
1
33
4
18
3
21
5
43
1
44
Total
121
5
126
Frequency (%)
96
4
100
Table 5.4 Summary of the frequency of QAD in initial position
Discourse genre
Nb.Pfs (qad)
Nb.Pfs (qad)
Total (qad)
Journalistic
122
19
141
Academic
50
25
75
Fiction
121
5
126
Total
293
49
342
Frequency (%)
86
14
100

less systematic. We will therefore present the distribution of QAD according to
the most relevant and transparent contexts.
The high frequency of QAD in non-initial position is due to the broad range of
contexts with which it is compatible, and to the specific constructions within which
it appears.
QAD inside the verbal complex
As mentioned earlier (p. 74), QAD appears between the auxiliary and the
 thematic verb. This use is observed in all three types of discourse: journalistic,
academic, and literary. This is illustrated in examples (17), (18), and (19)  respectively.
(17)
wa kaana
yaamku QAD
ʔablaʕa
haaðihi ad-duwal (. . .)
and be.Pf
Yaamku QAD
inform.Pf
these the-countries
ʔanna
al-ʔatfaala
yuʕaanuuna
min
mažaaʕatin...
that
the-children
suffer.Imp
from
starving
“Yamku had informed these countries that the children suffer from
 starvation...” (NA#6)
(18)
wa yuqaddimu
(John Diwi)
badiilan
yatamaalu
fii
and present.Imp
J.D.
alternative
represents
in
“at-tarbiyati at-taqaddumiyyati”
allatii
kaana
Qad
naadaa
the-education the-revolutionary
that
be.Pf
QAD
call.Pf
bi-haa
Barker
wa William James...
upon-it
Barker
and W.J.
“John Dewey puts forward an alternative called “revolutionary education”
which Barker and William James had already suggested.” (SA#3)
(19)
wa baynamaa
al-žamiiʕu saažiduuna...,
kuntu Qad tasallaltu
and while
the-majority praying,
be.Pf QAD slip out.Pf
ʔabra
an-naafiðati
al-mulaasiqati
li-l-qiblati...
through
the-window
the-next
to-the-Qibla
“While they were all praying..., I slipped out through the window next to
the Qibla.” (SS#3)
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
81
Table 5.5 Frequency of QAD in initial and non-initial positions
Context
N  140
%
Initial position
48
34
Non-initial position
92
66

The verbal complex in (17) appears within the matrix clause, while it occurs
inside a relative clause in (18) and in a subordinate clause in (19). This distribution
does not seem to have any particular effect on the appearance of QAD inside the
verbal complex. Its frequency relative to the type of discourse shows, however,
different results from those observed in the previous section. The majority of
cases are found in narratives, while one single case is observed in scholarly
 articles. This is illustrated in Table 5.6.
QAD in complement clauses
The use of the verbal particle QAD is also observed in complement clauses
headed by the complementizer ʔanna/ʔinna “that.” This use is not particular to any
discourse genre-type. The examples in (20), (21), and (22) illustrate this particular
use in scholarly articles, narratives, and newspaper articles, respectively.
(20)
fa-kayfa
yumkinu al-qawlu
bi-ʔanna al-ʔamhura
and-how
possible the-saying
with-that the-months
at-taaliyata
QAD mahidat mawžaata
hižratin mu*aaʕafatin...
the-last
QAD witness.Pf vague
immigration doubled
“How could it be possible that during the past months the number of
 immigrants has dramatically increased...” (SA#4)
(21)
ʔaɦsastu
ʔanna
mayʔan
li-i
QAD
ɦadaa...
feel.Pf.1s
that
something
to-me
QAD
happen.Pf
“I felt (that) something had happened to me...” (SS#3)
(22)
ʔaʕtaqidu
ʔanna al-waqta QAD ɦaana
li-yufakkira
raaʔiyan
believe.Imp.1s
that the-time QAD come.Pf
to-think
considering
al-muɦaadaaati
wa-l-ʕaalama
bi-židdiyyatin...
the-talks
and-the-world
with-seriousness
“I believe that the time to consider seriously the talks and the world had
come...” (NA#3)
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
82
Table 5.6 The frequency of QAD across discourse genres
Discourse genre
N  25
%
Fiction
14
56
Journalistic
10
40
Academic
1
04

Although the number of cases in this context is limited to nine, it is statistically
significant for it represents 10 percent of the total number of QAD used in
non-initial position.
QAD within the “ʔammaa...fa...” construction
Another typical use of the verbal particle QAD is observed within a particular
type of topic construction, the ʔammaa...fa “As for...” construction. This use is
attested within all three types of discourse genres: academic, fiction, and  journalistic
as illustrated in (23), (24), and (25), respectively.
(23)
wa ʔammaa
al-maqsuudu
bi-haa
fa-QAD kaana duʕaatu
and as for
the-intention
of-it
fa-QAD be.Pf preachers
fasli
ad-diini
ʕani
ad-dawlati
fii firansaa wa ruusiyaa
separation
the-religion from the-government in France and Russia
al-bulmiifiyya
yuriiduuna
ʔi*ʕaafa
sultata ad-diini...
the-bolchevic
want.Imp
weakening
power the-religion...
“As for the intentions, those who were calling for the separation between
the government and the church in France and in Bolshevik Russia wanted
to weaken the power of the Church...” (SA#3)
(24)
ʔammaa
al-ʔaʁlabiyya
fa-QAD
badaʔa
mayʔun
mina
As for
the-majority
fa-QAD
start.Pf
something
from
al-ʔistiʁraabi
al-qaliili
yuxaaližu-haa.
the-surprise
the-little
feel-it
“As for the majority, they started feeling somehow surprised.” (SS#3)
(25)
ʔammaa al-xilaafaat
al-wizaariyya fa-QAD saqata
haamimu-haa...
As for the-differences
the-ministerial fa-QAD fall.Pf
irrelevant-it
“As for the disagreements between the ministers, most trivial ones were
 settled...” (NA#2)
As the English translation of each one of the three examples suggests, it is quite
clear that this Arabic topic construction highly resembles its “As for...” English
counterpart for it seems to induce the same semantic effect. As for the frequency
of QAD in this particular context, we counted eight occurrences among a total
number of 92 (relative to the use of QAD in non-initial position), which is a little
less than 10 percent.
QAD in emphatic contexts
Another use of QAD that is quite revealing occurs within what could generally be
described as Emphatic Contexts. These contexts are not particular to any specific
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
83

THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
84
construction. They tend, however, to center around periphrastic modality.
Accordingly, QAD is found in a broad range of environments where various
degrees of emphasis are expressed. This is illustrated in the examples (26)–(29).
(26)
Laabudda
ʔanna
mayʔan
QAD
ɦadaa
wa
manaʕa
necessary
that
something
QAD
happen.Pf
and
prevent.Pf
am-mayxa
min
ʔitmaami
as-saždati.
the-Sheik
from
completing
the-prostration
“Something must have happened to prevent the Sheik from completing
the prostration.” (SS#3)
(27)
wa li-maziidin mina at-taʔkiidi
ʕalaa ðaalika,
FA-QAD bayyanat
and for-more from the-emphasis
on that,
FA-QAD show.Pf
al-ʔanbaaʔu...
the-news...
“And to stress that again, the news has/had shown...” (SA#4)
(28)
...fa-ʔinna
kasba-hu
(. . .) QAD taxallafa ʕan
muwaazaati ðaalika
and-indeed
winning-its (. . .) QAD fail.Pf
about equivalence that
al-mustawaa
wa
muwaafaati
ɦaažaati-hi...
the-Ievel
and
fulfillment
needs-its
“Its earnings have really dropped and could not keep up with that standard
in order to fulfill its needs...” (it  the Islamic movement) (SA#2)
(29)
ʔakkada
ʔanna
ad-daaʔiniin al-ɦukuumiyyiin
QAD waafaquu
confirm.Pf
that
the-creditors the-governmental
QAD agree.Pf
bi-ʕaddi
al-barnaamiž
allaðii
ʔaʕlanat-hu
biiruu...
with-preparation
the-program
that
announce.Pf-it
Peru
“(the report) confirmed that the official creditors have agreed to prepare
the program that Peru had made public...” (NA#8)
The example in (26) demonstrates the co-occurrence between epistemic
modality laa-budda “it must be/it is necessary” in the matrix clause and QAD in
the complement clause. In (27) the use of QAD is preceded by an adverbial phrase
which emphasizes the truth value of the proposition. The example in (28) begins
with the emphatic particle ʔinna generally described as a “particle introducing a
main clause,” and translated sometimes as “verily, truly,” and so on. Likewise, the
example in (29) starts with the verb ʔakkada meaning “to stress, to confirm.”
Note that the adverbial constructions typically found in all these cases whose
main verb is preceded by QAD are those which express in one way or another

some form of assertive modality. As for the frequency of such contexts where the
verbal particle QAD co-occurs with assertive adverbials, we counted 15 obvious
cases distributed among the three types of discourse genres. In sum, the number
of cases which we have accounted so far represents almost two-thirds of the total
number of QAD in non-initial position, that is 62 percent. The remaining 38 percent
are found in a variety of contexts inherent to the logical construction of the
 argumentation. In these cases, the use of QAD in front of the perfect to mark
a logical transition or a resultative event is often accompanied by coordinating
conjunctions like FA- and WA.14
In conclusion, we have shown that the verbal particle QAD appears in a broad
range of syntactic contexts. It is used in both matrix and relative clauses, between
an auxiliary and a thematic verb, and after various assertive adverbials. This
investigation not only shows the discourse constraints which underlie the use of
QAD, but also presents supportive evidence for the invariant meaning of this
 latter, as will be discussed later. Finally, we have noticed that the appearance of
QAD is not attested after various temporal adverbs such as lammaa “after,
since, when,” ʕindamaa “as soon as,” ɦiinamaa “while; when, as.” Indeed, its
appearance is banned in such contexts, as illustrated in the following
 examples below.15
(30)
a
Lammaa
žaaʔ-a
Muhammad
xaraž-naa
after/when
come-Pf.3.s.m
Muhammed
leave-Pf.1.p
“We left when Muhammed came.”
b
*Lammaa
QAD žaaʔ-a
Muhammad xaraž-naa
after/when
QAD come-Pf.3.s.m
Muhammed leave-Pf.l.p
(31)
a
ʕindamaa istayqad-naa
badaʔ-naa am-muʁl
as soon as wake up-Pf.l.p
start-Pf.l.p the-work
“We started working as soon as we woke up.”
b
*ʕindamaa QAD istayqad-naa
badaʔ-naa
am-muʁl
as soon as QAD wake up-Pf.l.p start-Pf.l.p
the-work
The invariant function of QAD
Having briefly presented the syntactic distribution of the verbal particle QAD
along with the structures with which it typically interacts, we can now discuss its
semantico-pragmatic functions. In order to offer an adequate account, however,
we must digress somewhat to discuss some aspects of the system within which
the use of QAD is involved. In other words, unless an accurate representation of
the system and the major oppositions between QAD and other grammatical terms
is discussed, our study would fail to provide a plausible account of the properties
of QAD. We therefore suggest discussing the functioning of QAD within the
 principles of markedness.
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
85

QAD and markedness
In light of what has already been presented in relation to the concept of
“markedness” (see pp. 44–46), it seems necessary to elaborate an analysis of QAD
that incorporates the major oppositions between all members of the system. In the
following section, we motivate this analysis and discuss the major oppositions.
QAD vs. Ø
In MSA, and according to our data, QAD can safely be considered and analyzed
as a verbal particle. If that is the case, it follows that no adverbial element or other
element of any sort intervenes between QAD and the verb.16 This is indeed the
case as the examples in (32) illustrate.
(32)
a
LAQAD (*musriʕan) (*baakiran)
xaraž-a
(musriʕan) (baakiran)
LAQAD (*quickly)
(*early)
left-3s.m (quickly) (early)
“He left (quickly) (early)”
b
LAQAD (*daaʔirnan)
kaan-a
(daaʔirnan)
sadiiq-ii
LAQAD (*always)
was-3s.m
(always)
friend-my
“He has always been my friend.”
Thus, we may say that there exists an opposition between the Verb Phrase with
QAD (that is, [QAD  Perfect]), on the one hand, and the Verb Phrase without
(that is, [Ø  Perfect]), on the other hand. In other words, the grammatical
 opposition in this case consists of the Compound Perfect as opposed to the Simple
Perfect, respectively. This raises the question as to which member of the opposition
is marked and which one is unmarked. Recall that it is often the case that the
unmarked member has a higher frequency over the marked; the marked term is
more likely to be found in a smaller number of different contexts; the marked
term tends to be less universal than the unmarked (see also Waugh 1982). Now,
consider the results outlined in Table 5.7 here.
Table 5.7 shows that the verbal form which contains QAD is far less frequent
than the other form without QAD. This is certainly due to its marked nature. This
is also supported by the fact that it occurs in a small number of different contexts,
as shown in the previous section. Thus, the dynamic dialectic between the
unmarked member [Ø Perfect] and the marked member [QAD Perfect] predicts
that the former is of a more general meaning while the latter is more narrowly
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
86
Table 5.7 Frequency of QAD within the Perfect constructions
Verbal form
N  1721
%
[Ø Perfect]
1581
92
[QAD Perfect]
140
8

specified, and more contextually conditioned. The wider distribution and  frequency
of the unmarked member is an illustration of its more general meaning. The
 limited distribution of [QAD Perfect] and the specific constructions within which
it appears illustrate the extent to which it is contextually conditioned. Moreover,
if we consider that the unmarked member of an opposition has generally both a
“a more generic/general interpretation” and a “more specific interpretation”
(Waugh 1982: 302–04), and might have a “plus interpretation,” which is simply
that interpretation that could also be signaled by the marked term, it can be argued
that the unmarked member [Ø Perfect] can also have a “plus interpretation.”
Consider the following examples:
(33)
a
kaanat
quraa
ɦuduudiyya
lubnaaniyya
Ø ʔinhaalat
be.Pf
villages
border
Lebanese
bombard.Pf
ʕalay-haa
al-qaðaaʔif
fii al-ʔayymi
al-ʔaxiirati...
on-it
the-rockets
in the-days
the-last
“Some border Lebanese villages have been heavily bombarded the past
few days...” (NA#2)
b
kaanat
ʔisraaʔiil
QAD ʔanðarat
sukkaana
alaaa
be.Pf
Israel
QAD warned
residents
three
quraa
žanuubiyya...
villages
southern
“Israel had already warned the residents of three southern villages...”
The presence of QAD between the auxiliary verb and the thematic verb is
 generally believed to be obligatory (see among others, Comrie 1991: 8; Doss
1984: 362), or highly desirable. The contrast between the example in (33a) and
the one in (33b) clearly demonstrates that the presence of QAD in these contexts
is not obligatory, a conclusion also supported in Cuvalay-Haak (1997: 210–34).
For now, it suffices to say that the general meaning, namely the signal of anteriority
and dimensionalization, is equally expressed, yet to be determined the subtleties
between both cases. It should be stressed, moreover, that there were 25 cases of
compound tenses in our corpus among which five did not include QAD, a total of
20 percent. The lack of QAD in these cases might be due to the unmarked status
of the verbal form [Ø Perfect].
QAD vs. LA-, ʔINNA
When a wider range of facts is examined, it appears that QAD is only one facet
of a triangular system where at least two other particles are involved. These
 particles are the verbal prefix LA-, and the sentence initial ʔINNA. Consider first
the examples in (34) and (35),
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
87

THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
88
(34)
a
wa Ø
sarraɦ-a
waziiru
al-maaliyyati...
and
announce-Pf
minister
the-finance
“The minister of finance announced...” (NA#8)
b
wa QAD sarraɦa
Franz Anderson...
and QAD announce-Pf
Franz Anderson
“Franz Anderson affirmed...” (NA#6)
(35)
a
wa Ø
maa
yatahaddadu
at-tayyaara
al-ʔislaamli...
and
what
threaten.lmp
the-movement
the-islamic
“What threatens the Islamic movement...” (SA#2)
b
wa ʔINNA
maa tuqbilu
ʕalay-hi
al-bilaadu...
and ʔINNA
what faces
on-it
the-country
“What will indeed face the country...” (SA#2)
The examples in (34) and (35), despite the varying contexts in which they occur,
share a common grammatical feature. The absence vs. the presence of QAD and
ʔINNA in (34) and (35) respectively demonstrates a striking parallelism between
the two sets of sentences. The nature of this parallelism is both syntactic and
semantico-pragmatic. While the syntactic parallelism involves common structural
properties (see pp. 164–66), the semantico-pragmatic one is illustrated through
the assertive features with which both QAD and ʔINNA are associated.
The only apparent difference seems to involve the scopal properties of each
category. While the grammatical subject is not necessarily under the scope of QAD
in  subject initial clauses, that is, a SVO structure, it is always under the scope of
ʔINNA, as this latter is obligatorily followed by an NP subject (see also
Mohammad 1988 and Ghazali, forthcoming). The scopal difference might be due
to the fact that both word orders are attested in MSA. This raises the question of
whether QAD and ʔINNA can occur in the same context/clause. Examples of their
co-occurrence are quite abundant, as illustrated in (36).
(36)
...fa-ʔinna
kasba-hu(. . .)
QAD taxallafa ʕan
muwaazaati ðaalika
and-indeed
earning-its(. . .) QAD fail.Pf
about equivalence that
al-mustawaa
wa
muwaafaati
ɦaažaati-hi...
the-level
and
fulfillment
needs-its
“Its earnings have really dropped and could not keep up with that standard
in order to fulfill its needs...” (it  the Islamic movement) (SA#2)
Although this may appear at first to be a complex result, I believe it is exactly
the right prediction, given that the scope of each category ranges over different
elements inside the clause. Note, however, that QAD in (34b) and (36) is followed
by a perfect verb, which raises the question of whether an Imperfect can similarly

be modalized. As a matter of fact, the use of the verbal prefix LA- with the Imperfect
seems to assume this very function, as illustrated in (37).
(37)
ʔINNA
haaðaa
al-ʔistirsaala
fii at-tan*iiri (. . .)
LA-yaɦmilu
ʔINNA
this
the-continuation
in the-envisionment
LA-carries
fii tayyaati-hi
ʔistiiʕaaban
li-l-muʕtayaati (. . .). (SA#l)
in inside-its
understanding
of-the-facts
“This ease of envisioning DOES reveal an understanding of the facts...”
To recapitulate the main argument in this section: after having shown the
 contrast which exists between both the simple perfect and the compound perfect,
we have demonstrated that there exists some type of complementary distribution
between the use of QAD and ʔINNA in sentence initial contexts, followed by a
co-occurrence possibility of both within the sentence. Finally, we noted an
 opposition involving the use of both QAD and LA- in the presence of ʔINNA. This
seems to suggest that the verbal particle QAD is part of a modal system, and as
such, it should be evaluated according to its status within that system in order to
discern its distinctive function.
More on the characteristics of QAD
Having shown various syntactic aspects of the particle QAD along with the major
particles and oppositions with which it interacts, we would like now to examine
the basic functions of this verbal particle. The challenging question to which
 previous analyses failed to provide an adequate answer is why a speaker or a
writer would resort to using a modal particle such as QAD? Although this  question
is empirical, its answer requires more careful examination. The first question we
would like to address concerns the role and functions of the connectors and
 conjunctions which precede or get prefixed to QAD in a variety of contexts.
QAD and the coordinators WA, LA, and FA
The fact that QAD is usually preceded by one of these three coordination particles
invites us to inquire deeply into their functions. In fact each particle seems to have
one or more functions according to the context in which it can be used. The use
of QAD along with each coordination particle results quite often in a semantic
interdependence between both categories.
QAD and the coordinator WA
WA is typically used as a conjunction in coordinate structures with an additive
function, as shown in (38).
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
89

THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
90
(38)
a
qadim-a
maahir
WA
ražaa
come-Pf.3s.m
Maher
and
Raja
“Maher and Raja came.”
b
al-waladu
WA
ʔaxuu-hu
fii al-bayti
the-boy
and
brother-his
in the-house
“The boy and his brother are in the house.”
Another discourse function of the coordinator WA is frequently observed in
MSA. Although WA never appears at the very beginning of any discourse, that is,
the beginning of an article, a short story, and so on, it is consistently used to
 associate and connect sections (i.e. paragraphs, sentences) to previous ones,
independently of the type of semantic relationship holding between both  discourses
and with no apparent additive power. The examples in (39a), (39b), and (39c),
which show a series of paragraph initial verbs from newspaper articles, scholarly
articles, and short stories, respectively, all preceded by the coordinator WA,  illustrate
this type of use.
(39)
a
WA qaala...,
WA ʔa*aafa...,
WA rafa*a...,
WA ðakara...
and said...,
and added...,
and refused..., and said...(NA#l)
b
WA taʔtii...,
WA yaraa...,
WA yantahii...,
WA mimmaa...
and comes...,
and sees...,
and gets...,
and what...(SA#l)
c
WA laakin..., WA taɦawwala..., WA ʔatfaʔat...,
WA lam...
and but...,
and changes...,
and turns off..., and not...(SS#1)
In almost all cases, this type of discourse connection is altogether absent in
other languages.17 This is certainly due to the fact that the flow of discourse itself
in these languages is capable of establishing these semantic connections between
various parts of the discourse, that is, paragraphs in a large text, independently of
their specific logical relations. The use of QAD along with the coordination
 particle WA in this context is not obligatory, however. This is shown in (34) earlier,
repeated as (40) now for convenience.
(40)
a
wa Ø
sarraɦa
waziiru
a1-maaliyyati...
and
announce.Pf
minister
the-finance
“The minister of finance announced...” (NA#8)
b
wa QAD sarraɦa
Franz Anderson...
and QAD announce.Pf
Franz Anderson
“Franz Anderson affirmed...” (NA#6)
As noted earlier, the frequency of QAD in this context is not particularly high
(14 percent). This is not, however, the only context where QAD co-occurs with the
coordinator WA. In fact, they are also found inside the clause, as illustrated in
(41) and (42).

(41)
a
maaðaa ʔafʕalu WA QAD raawadanii(Pf) assabiyyu ʕan nafsii...
wa ʁalabanii (Pf) am-maytaanu?
“What can I do when the boy leads me astray, and I succumb to the
temptation” (SS#3)
b
wa zaʕama (Pf) Isɦaaq maamiir ʔams al-ʔawwal ʔanna Am-muubkii
wa Al-ɦuuraanii laysaa bi-l-fiʕli ʕi*wayni fii
al-wafdi al-filistiinii WA QAD ʔirtakabaa (Pf)
muxaalafaatin li-l-qaanuuni.
“Izhaq Shamir claimed two days ago that Al-Shubki and AI-Hurani are
not indeed members of the Palestinian delegation, since they have
violated the law...” (NA#3)
(42)
a
...wa yazuumu
WA QAD ʔatbaqa
fama-hu...
...and mutter.Imp
AND QAD clench.Pf
mouth-his...
“He muttered, clenching his teeth,..” (SS#4)
b
wa maaðaa
fii az-zuqaaqi
a*-*ayyiqi
WA QAD laffa
and what
in the-street
the-narrow
AND QAD clasp.Pf
yada-hu waraaʔa
dahri-hi...
hand-his behind
back-his
“(he) hurried down the narrow street, one hand clasping the other
tightly behind his back.” (SS#4)
Note that the use of both WA and QAD in (41) marks a logical correspondence
between cause and effect, that is, the wondering and its cause in (41a) and the
decision taken and its basis in (41b), hence the causal function of WA QAD. In
both cases, WA QAD could easily be replaced by a causal conjunction such as
because of. As for the cases in (42a) and (42b), the use of WA QAD introduces a
circumstantial description. The use of the participle in English seems to fulfill
similar functions, as suggested in the English translations. In addition to these
examples of specific use, our corpus contains (but less often) uses of WA QAD in
discourse elaboration contexts to mark parts of the development. In all these
cases, the use of WA QAD is always felt to be contextually required for semantico-
pragmatic considerations. This requirement leaves almost no room for optionality,
as in the case of QAD in initial position. As for the frequency of QAD preceded
by the coordinator WA, our corpus shows that they represent the highest percentage,
that is, 39 percent of the total occurrences of QAD (see also Ghazali “forthcoming”
for similar statistical results).
QAD and the coordinator FA-
Like the coordinator WA, FA- is typically used to associate a coordinated phrase
with its antecedent. The type of relationship which the coordinator FA-mediates
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
91

differs substantially from the one in which WA typically appears, however. Thus,
the coordinator FA marks, with very few exceptions, consequential/resultative,
explicatory and topic/comment relationships. This is illustrated in (43), (44), and
(45) respectively.
(43)
wa lam yanfaʕ
sawtu-hu
al-ʔaxnaf
al-haadiʔ FA-QAD
and not profits
voice-his
the-twangy
the-calm FA-QAD
*aaʕa
nidaaʔu-hu
fii haalati
ar-raniini...
lost
calling-his
in hum
the-sound
“His twangy and calm voice was useless, his callings were lost in the midst
of humming sounds...” (SS#2)
(44)
a
wa li-maziidin
mina at-taʔkiidi
ʕa1aa ðaalika,
FA-QAD
and for-more
from the-emphasis
on that,
FA-QAD
kamafat
al-ʔanbaaʔu...
revealed
the-news
“And to stress that, it was made public in the news...” (SA#4)
b
wa maʕa ðaalika
FA-QAD
ʔakkada Yuumi Biiliin ʔanna
and with that
FA-QAD
confirmed Yushi Beelen that
iqtisaada
ʔisraaʔiila
qaadirun ʕalaa
320.000 muhaažir
economy
Israel
capable of
320.000 immigrant...
“In spite of that, Yushi Belen insisted that Israel’s economy is capable
of accommodating 320.000 immigrants...” (SA#4)
(45)
ʔammaa al-xilaafaat
al-wizaariyya FA-QAD saqata
haamimu-haa.
As for the-differences
the-ministerial FA-QAD fell
marginal-its
“As for the disagreements between the ministers, most trivial ones were
 settled...” (NA#2)
The example in (43) is about a voice which was lost in the hum that rose from
the prostrated worshippers. The obvious cause was its being twangy and calm.
The obligatory use of FA-QAD between the cause and effect is meant to mediate
such relationship. The examples in (44a) and (44b) illustrate the frequent use of
FA-QAD in elaboration, that is, in mediating extensive argumentation. This
 argumentation involves in many cases the overt use of various expressions of
emphasis such as the underlined ones. The example in (45) shows the obligatory
use of FA-QAD in topic/comment contexts, a context where a certain degree of
emphasis through the construction itself is implied. According to our corpus,
35 percent of the total cases of FA-QAD are found within this construction. The
frequency of FA-QAD, however, is only 16 percent of the total number of cases
involving the use of QAD.
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
92

QAD and the assertive particle LA-
As noted earlier, the use of the verbal prefix LA- in front of the Imperfect marks
some degree of emphasis when compared to the unmarked use of the Imperfect.
Consider the examples in (46).
(46)
a
ʔinna
haaðaa
al-ʔistirsaala
fii at-tandiiri (. . .)
LA-yaɦmilu
Pinna
this
the-continuation in the-envisonrnent
LA-carries
fii tayyaati-hi
ʔistiiʕaaban
li-l-muʕtayaati (. . .).
in inside-its
understanding
of-the-facts
“This ease of envisioning does reveal an understanding of the facts.”
(SA#1)
b
ʔinna haaðaa
al-ʔistirsaala
fii at-tandiiri (. . .)
Ø-yaɦmilu
Pinna this
the-continuing
in the-envisonrnent
Ø-carries
fii tayyaati-hi
ʔistiiʕaaban
li-l-muʕtayaati (. . .).
in inside-its
understanding
of-the-facts
“This ease of envisioning reveals an understanding of the facts.”
Although this use of the verbal prefix LA- is highly marked given its extremely
poor frequency (two cases in the entire corpus), its modal function as an assertive
particle is perfectly inherent to the verbal system in MSA (Kinberg 2001: 89–90),
as noted in an earlier section (see pp. 163–66). This is also supported by its
co-occurrence with QAD, which is capable of assuming similar functions. This is
illustrated in (47) and (48)
(47)
a
LA-QAD
ɦadaa
fii
ɦayaati-naa
mayʔun
fa*iiʕun...
LA-QAD
happen.Pf
in
life-our
something
awful
“Something awful did happen to our life.” (SS#5)
b
LA-QAD
taɦattamat
ʕarabatu-ki
wa taɦattamat
maxaawifi-i...
LA-QAD
destroy.Pf
car-your
and destroy.Pf
fears-my
“Your car was indeed destroyed and so are my fears.” (SS#5)
(48)
a
....ʕafwu-ka
yaa ʔilaahi-i...
fa-LA-QAD ʔaxfaytu ʕank-i
forgiveness-your
oh God-my
fa-LA-QAD hide.Pf from-you
al-ɦaqiiqata.
the-truth
“Forgive me, God! I DID conceal/Concealed the truth from you.”
(SS#3)
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
93

b
haaðaa
wa LA-QAD
ʔaaara
haaðihi
a1-qa*iyyata
this
and LA-QAD
bring up.Pf
this
the-issue
murabbuuna
kaiiruun... (SA#3)
educators
numerous
“Besides, many educators DID bring up this issue.”
Note that the use of LA-QAD in (47) and (48) is optional. In other words, there
do not seem to be any structural or semantico-pragmatic constraints which render
its use obligatory. However, the interpretation of each one of the above examples
is in sharp contrast with their counterparts without both LA and QAD, that is, the
unmarked interpretation with no additional assertion of the very occurrence of
verbal events. The cases in (47a), (47b), and (48a) occur within narrative  discourse:
(47a) appears in a direct discourse context, and so do both (47b) and (48a). This
lends considerable support to the fact that LA-QAD is frequently used in conver-
sational discourse. In fact, a typical answer to a question involving the use of
QAD is very likely to contain LA-, as illustrated in (49).
(49)
a
maaðaa
faʕalt-i
ʔamsi?
what
do-Pf.2s.f
yesterday
“What did you do yesterday?”
b
(*WA)-( *FA) LA-QAD nimt-u
tuula
al-yawmi
(*WA)-(*FA) LA-QAD sleep-Pf.1s
all
the-day
“I slept all day long.”
Note that both coordinators WA and FA- are banned from occurring in this
 context, and in sentence/text initial contexts in general. This is only natural since
there is no previous coordinating context. This conclusion is further supported by
the presence of the coordinators FA- in (48a) and WA in (48b), given the existence
of a preceding context. The use of the assertive particle LA-, on the other hand,
does not crucially depend on a coordinating context, hence its natural use in
 sentence/text initial contexts. As for its frequency along with QAD, there were
17 cases in the corpus, which represents 12 percent of the total number of QAD.
QAD with no preceding particles
There are two contexts in which the verbal particle QAD occurs without any
 preceding particle of any sort. These bare contexts are (i) the verbal complex  context,
and (ii) the subject initial context, as exemplified in (50) and (51)  respectively.
(50)
a
wa
lam yasmaʕ-hu
ʔaɦadun, fa-ʔabdulmutawallii  kaana (Pf)
and
not hear.lmp-him
one, because-Abdelmutwalli
be.Pf
QAD
ʔixtafaa (Pf)  bi-l-lafaafati
fii zaɦmati an-naasi.
Qad
disappear.Pf
with-the-bundle  in crowd the-people
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
94

“But nobody heard him because Abdou’l Metwalli and his bundle had
already vanished in the crowd.” (SS#2)
b
kuntu
QAD
badaʔtu ʔaʁriqu.
Be.Pf
QAD
start.Pf.ls drown.Imp.1s
“I had started to drown.” (SS#3)
(51)
a
umma...
ʔal-masaaʔu
QAD daxala...
besides...
the-afternoon
QAD enter .Pf
“Besides, it was indeed late...” (SS#3)
b
ʔaʕtaqidu ʔanna al-waqta QAD ɦaana (Pf) li-yufakkira
raaʕiyan al-muɦaadaaati wa-l-ʕaalama bi-židdiyyatin...
“I believe the time had indeed come for him to seriously consider the
talks and the world...” (NA#3)
The examples in (50) and (51) show that the verbal particle QAD is not preceded
by any of the particles discussed earlier, that is, the additive and causal
 conjunctions WA and FA-, respectively, in addition to the assertive particle LA-. In
fact, our corpus does not provide any single exception to this generalization, and
it can be said therefore that there is a ban on the occurrence of these particles in
the two contexts described earlier. Note that in SV(O) contexts it does not make
a difference whether the presence of QAD is in a matrix clause (51a) or a
 complement clause (51b). Likewise, the use of QAD is not sensitive to whether
the subject is a lexical or a pronominal NP. As for the frequency of QAD in each
construction, we counted 25 cases within the verbal complex (i.e. [kaana QAD
Perfect]), and 21 within SV(O) contexts (i.e. NP QAD Perfect]). Combined
together, there are 46 cases which represent 33 percent of the total number of bare
QAD cases. Table 5.8 below summarizes the frequency of the various particles
which precede QAD including the null cases.
The aforesaid results show that none of the particles which precede the use of
QAD can be considered marginal or statistically insignificant. Instead, the occur-
rence of each particle with QAD should be considered while searching for its
invariant, and integrated within the analysis of its functioning in discourse in
 general and the verbal system in particular. An attempt to characterize QAD is
thus made in the following section.
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
95
Table 5.8 The frequency of WA, FA-, LA-, and Ø in front of QAD
Particles
N  141
%
WA (QAD)
55
39
FA-(QAD)
23
16
LA-(QAD)
17
12
Ø-(QAD)
46
33

THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
96
Towards a solution
In light of the above results and considerations, it seems necessary to elaborate an
analysis of QAD which incorporates its syntactic and semantico-pragmatic
 characteristics into the modal system of MSA. As noted earlier (pp. 87–89), the
verbal particle QAD is only a part of a larger system which includes other particles
such as ʕINNA, and LA-. However, unlike other particles, QAD seems to interact
with a broad range of grammatical categories, such as Tense, Aspect, and Modality.
In this sense it may be argued that QAD has a cross-categorial status. In what
 follows, we will show that the verbal particle QAD is indeed an ATM category.
QAD as an ATM category
If QAD were an ATM category, the prediction would be that it carries features of
each individual term of the triad. In other words it combines semantico-pragmatic
features of temporal, aspectual, and modal character. It is further assumed that,
universally or nearly so, an ATM category, although it has an invariant and  contextual
meaning, combines very often some features which remain in serious competition
resulting in various degrees of dominance relative to appropriate contexts in
which the category is involved. In other words, the modal features of QAD,
for example, might at times be the dominant features within a given context; but they
would appear to be less dominant in other contexts, and instead either the temporal
or the aspectual features appear as more dominant. Nevertheless, independently of
the competition between features, it should always be the case that some common
denominator of QAD is maintained. Let us now look at the individual terms of the
triad, starting by giving paradigmatic examples. Consider the following examples,
(52)
a
wa OAD qaala
raadiyu
ʔisraaʔiil
(. . .)ʔanna ʕadadan kabiiran
and QAD say.Pf
Radio
Israel
(. . .) that
number big
mina as-sukkaani
fii mamaali
ʔisraaʔiil
ʔam*aw
al-layla
from the-residents
in East
Israel
spend.Pf
the-night
fii al-malaažiʔ.
in the-shelters
“Radio Israel did announce that a large number of residents in East
Israel spent the night in shelters.”
b
wa Ø qaala
masdarun
siyaasiyyun
muwaalin
li-ʔiiraan
and say.Pf
source
political
associated
with-Iran
li-ruytir
ʔanna ar-radda
yažibu
ʔan yakuuna hužuuman
to-Reuters
that the-reply
necessary
that be.Imp.3.s.m attack
fii mustawaa
ʔiʁtiyaali
am-mayxi
Al-musawii.
in level
assassination
the-Sheikh AL-Musawii
“Some political source linked to Iran said to Reuters that the retaliation
should be an attack as serious as the assassination of Sheikh Al-Musawii.”

Examples (52a) and (52b) are taken from an article where 12 cases of the Perfect
are observed. Six of these cases use the verb qaala “announced” preceded by the
coordination conjunction WA “and.” The use of QAD is observed, however, only
once (52a). Recall that this is a case where the use of QAD is not obligatory, that
is not triggered by any syntactic context (see also Ghazali “forthcoming” for such
triggers). In other words, there does not seem to be any structural constraint
which would trigger its use. The question remains therefore why would the writer
of this article resort to using QAD in this particular context, but not in
others. Put differently, what is the type of constraint or requirement which
 triggers its use?
When a wide range of data is examined, we noticed that some considerations
of salience are indeed involved. That is to say, the importance of the reported
event within the entire discourse seems to play a major role in the choice of QAD.
In this article, for example, which deals with the continuous fights between Israel
and the fighters in South Lebanon, the example in (52a) is the only official Israeli
report among various other reports from other sources. This might be considered
as a discourse constraint which led the writer of this article to include QAD along
with the reporting verb. In contradistinction to (52b) and similar examples, (52a)
highlights the relevance of this radio report by adding more emphasis and therefore
foregrounding it for a number of pragmatic effects. This is not particular to this
article or to this type of discourse, however. Similar examples from other
 discourse genres also support such conclusion. Consider the following passage
from a scholarly magazine (SA#5, p. 48),
(53)
tamma
tatbiiqu
ʔistimaaratu
al-baɦi (. . .) tatbiiqan
fardiyyan
finish.Pf
application questionnaire the-research
in-a-way
single
fii makli istixbaar.
wa QAD qum-naa...
wa QAD
badaʔ-a...
wa
in form inquiry.
and QAD do.Pf-1p.
and QAD start.Pf-3.s.m. and
QAD qum-naa...
wa
QAD bada-a...
QAD do.Pf.lp.
and
QAD
seem-Pf.3.s.m
“The questionnaire was conducted on an individual basis in a form of
inquiry. We did do...We did start...We did do...It did seem...”
In this passage, the author of the article, in which he deals with the classification
of the events which trigger stress, outlines the methodology of the research he
conducted. Although the whole passage consists of five sentences which all begin
with a Perfect, four of these Perfects are preceded by the modal particle QAD.
This is rather unusual, giving the “normal” distributional pattern of QAD. The
empirical question is: why did the author choose in this particular paragraph to
use QAD, while he did not use it in a similar way in summarizing his findings,
for example, or in other contexts within the article? We believe that it is probably for
the same reason as the use of QAD in the previous article, namely to demonstrate
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
97

THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
98
the relevance and the salience of these major methodological steps. Such measures
are indeed meant to boost the credibility of the author before the readers, hence
the naturalness of foregrounding such methodological steps. This modal function,
which is assertive in nature, seems to be central to the basic meaning of the  verbal
particle QAD. Further support for this conclusion comes from the frequent use of
QAD in assertive contexts such as those in (54).
(54)
a
Laabudda
ʔanna
mayʔan
QAD ɦadaða
wa
manaʕa
must
that
something
QAD occur.Pf
and
prevent.Pf
am-mayxa
min
ʔitrnaami
as-saždati.
the-sheik
from
finishing
the-prostration
“Something must have happened to prevent the Sheik from completing
the prostration.” (SS#3)
b
fa-ʔinna
kasba-hu
(....) QAD taxallafa
ʕan
muwaazaati
and-indeed
earning-its
(...) QAD fail.Pf
about
equivalence
ðaalika
al-mustawaa
wa
muwaafaati
ɦaažaati-hi...
that
the-Ievel
and
fulfillment
needs-its
“Its earnings have really dropped and could not keep up with that
 standard in order to fulfill its needs...” (it  the Islamic movement)
(SA#2)
c
...ʕafwu-ka
yaa ʔilaahi-i...
fa-LA-QAD ʔaxfaytu
ʕank-a
forgiveness-your
oh God-my
fa-LA-QAD hide.Pf
from-you
al-ɦaqiiqata.
the-truth
“Forgive me, God! I did conceal/concealed the truth from you.” (SS#3)
The examples in (54a), (54b), and (54c) contain modal elements such as Laabudda
“certainly,” ʔinna “indeed,” and the assertive particle LA-. These  elements express
a certain degree of the authors’ commitment to the truth and certainty of the
events involved. These contexts constitute a powerful trigger for the appearance
of QAD, as illustrated earlier. Such results follow naturally only if the verbal
 particle QAD is analyzed as part of the modal system of MSA denoting assertive
modality. Note that this is not particular to MSA. The English auxiliary DO and
the French adverb BIEN share common features with QAD. This is illustrated in
(55) and (56) respectively:
(55)
a
Observers say Mr. Chirac DOES indeed want to deliver a knockout
blow to Noir. (The Christian Science Monitor, Vol. 85, No. 76, p. 6,
March 1993)

b
“Chirac Ø wants to kill [Noir] as a message against any more wavering
in the ranks,” says one right wing senator. (same page/the following
paragraph)
(56)
a
Jean a
gagne le
premier
prix.
Jean has
won the
first
prize.
“Jean won the first prize.”
b
Jean a
BIEN gagne le
premier
prix.
Jean has
BIEN won the
first
prize
“Jean did win the first prize.”
c
Les travaux ont BEL ET BIEN commencé (underneath a picture of
a man working) (Tunis Hebdo September 28, 1992, p. 5)
“The work has indeed started.”
d
Xenophobie pour 1es uns, racisme pour les autres. Peu importe le
terme, le phénomène s’installe BEL ET BIEN dans toute l’Europe ou
presque et prend des dimensions fort inquiétantes.
(Tunis Hebdo November 30, 1992, p. 1)
“Xenophobia for some, racism for others. Irrespective of used terms,
the phenomenon is indeed surfacing in all Europe or so and taking
a quite alarming magnitude.”
In contradistinction to (55b) and (56a), both (55a) and (56b–d) contain the modal
elements, DOES/DID and BIEN/BEL ET BIEN respectively. In these and other
similar contexts, we propose that like the modal QAD, DID and BIEN signal an
“Emphatic Affirmation,”18 and should therefore be incorporated into the modal
system of both English and French (see also Aronson 1991: 113–19). Further
examples (57) from Adamczewski (1991: 156–58) support our conclusion and
demonstrate once again the parallelism between the function of both modals.19
(57)
a
Le Président Reagan a confirmé que des avions de l’US Air Force
avaient BIEN abattu un avion de ligne iranien au-dessus du Golfe
Persique. (France Inter)
b
President Reagan confirmed in a press-conference that the US Air
Force DID shoot down an Iranian liner.
The contexts in which DID and BIEN are used in both (57a) and (57b) are
 strikingly similar to those of QAD in (54a) and (54b). While there are several
 differences between each of these modal elements, however, we may note that
their striking similarities are an indication of a common underlying principle by
which they are governed. This principle is reminiscent of the speaker’s intention
to foreground a particular event through the use of assertive modality. Let us now
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
99

THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
100
examine the other terms of the triad, and here is an example which illustrates a
typical Aspect–Tense distinction.
(58)
kaana as-sawtu QAD ʔistaɦaala ʔilaa ʕitrin
nafaaðin
ʔaliifin
be.Pf
the-voice QAD change.Pf
to
perfume penetrating intimite
“The voice had changed into an intimite penetrating perfume.” (SS#3)
The use of the modal particle QAD between the auxiliary verb kaana “was” and
the thematic verb ʔistaɦaala “changed” in this and other similar cases calls for a
principled explanation. In order to adequately discern its exact function in these
contexts, it seems necessary to first analyze its frequency and the conditions of
its use. In response to the first question and according to our corpus, it is indeed
the case that the modal particle QAD tends quite often to occur inside the verbal
complex, that is, between the auxiliary verb and the thematic verb,20 as in (58)
above. Similar examples are given here,
(59)
Lam
ʔakun
QADʕaraftu
ʔanna
al-ʕiffata
muʁriyatun
Neg
be.Imp
QAD know.Pf.1s
that
the-chastity
tempting
ʔilaa haaðaa
al-ɦaddi.
till this
the-limit
“I had never realized that chastity could provide such a temptation.”
(SS#3)
(60)
ʔin
kaana
basar-ii
QAD 
aaʕa,
fa-laaziltu
ʔamtaliku
if
be.Pf
sight-my
QAD loose.Pf,
so-still.Pf.1s
own.Imp.1s
as-sawta wa al-ɦunžurata.
the-voice and the-throat
“If I indeed lost my sight, I would still have a voice left and a throat.”
(SS#3)
(61)
wa ɦabbaðaa law kaana QAD baqaa
mayʔun
mina al-fatiirati...
and luckily
if
be.Pf
QAD remain.Pf something from the-pie
“With luck there might be a piece of pie left over too...” (SS#5)
Although this tendency is quite noticeable, it is not absolute, contrary to
 widespread belief (e.g. Doss 1984: 362; Comrie 1991: 8; among others). In our
corpus, there are 30 cases of compound tenses. Among these cases, 25 contain the
modal particle QAD, yielding the verbal complex [kaan QAD Perfect] and 5 do not.
Thus the frequency of the VP comprising the auxiliary and the main verb
(i.e. [kaan Ø Perfect]) represents 20 percent of the total occurrences of such
 compound structures. Some examples are given in (62), (63), and (64).

(62)
wa yabduu
ʔanna
Baw3ir
lam
yakun Ø
ʔittalaʕa
ʕalaa tasriiɦi
and seems
that
Boucher Neg
be.Imp
look.Pf
at declaration
(. . .)
ʔaɦmad
Ahmad
“It seems that Boucher did not look at Ahmad’s declaration.” (NA#3)
(63)
kaanat quraa
ɦuduudiyya
lubnaaniyya Ø
ʔinhaalat
ʕalay-haa
be.Pf
villages
border
Lebanese
bombard.Pf on-them
al-qaðaaʔif
fii al-ʔayyaarni
al-ʔaxiirati
the-rockets
in the-days
the-last
“Some border Lebanese villages have been heavily bombarded lately.”
(NA#12)
(64)
law
kaana
Ø maat-a
if
be.Pf
die.Pf.3.s.m
“(what) if he had died” (SS#l)
The rare absence vs. the frequent presence of the modal particle QAD inside
the verbal complex raises the following question: why would a writer or a speaker
resort to using or not using the modal QAD? Previous analyses either neglected
the possibility of not having QAD in similar contexts, given its modest frequency,
and therefore equated the verbal complex [kaana  QAD  Perfect] with the
English past perfect [had  Past Participle] (Al-Aswad 1983: 36; Comrie 1991: 8),
or avoid discussing its use in this context (Fradkin 1985: 215–16; Sayed 1983:
150–54). We believe, however, that QAD maintains an invariant function throughout
its various and varying uses.
QAD and invariance
Although it has temporal, aspectual, and modal variants, we would like to suggest
that the use of QAD invariantly asserts the occurrence of the verbal process, and
as such, it is inherently assertorial. Now, if this is the correct characterization,
how do the variants derive from our claimed invariant. First and foremost, it is
easy to see that all uses of QAD in emphatic contexts, as discussed earlier, follow
straightforwardly. Being assertorial, it is only consistent that QAD shows a strong
compatibility with such cases where the enunciator intends to stress the validity
of the predicative relation. The aspectual interpretation of QAD can be derived
from its invariant assertive function. Similar to the English “have-en constructions,”
which typically involve an accomplished event (past participle) evaluated with
respect to the present time (have), and to the French passé composé “compound
tense,” which through the use of the present of the auxiliary avoir “have” and the
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
101

past participle of the verb is able to convey the same information as the present
perfect in English, the use of QAD in similar contexts can be argued to assume
similar functions. In other words, emphasizing the very occurrence of the event
can be reinterpreted as asserting its current relevance.21 In this sense, QAD seems
to be establishing a relationship between an anterior and dimensionalized event
and the present context. As such, it represents the present relevance of the verbal
process (see also Waugh 1986 for an extensive discussion). In Culioli’s terms,
QAD signals an operation of differentiation in which the “event time” (T1) differs
from the “point of view time” (T2) (reference time) (T1	T2). Most important, is
the fact that the mise en relation interconnectedness of these two times expresses a
certain evaluation of the verbal event with respect to the present  reality of the
enunciator/narrator.
In like fashion, the temporal interpretation of QAD whereby it signals immediate
past, can be syncretically combined with the aspectual one, and one or the other
is dominant in particular contexts. This means that current relevance can be
inferred from immediate past when this latter is the dominant feature, and
vice versa. Again, asserting the occurrence of the event in certain contexts is
 reinterpreted as emphasizing its immediacy, hence the temporal interpretation of
QAD. As for the cases involving the use of QAD within the verbal complex, we
believe that while the modal particle QAD retains its assertive function, the assertion
itself has a wider scope over the aspectual–temporal properties of the event than
just the event itself. That is, if the Perfect preceded by the auxiliary invariantly
expresses anteriority and dimensionalization, than it may be argued that QAD
emphasizes these Taxis–Aspect properties of the verbal complex, namely the
invariant features of the Perfect. This might be the reason for which several
 investigators would rather equate this construction with the past perfect in English
or the pluperfect in French, neglecting therefore the possibility of the verbal
 complex without QAD. It goes without saying that the absence of QAD either
 signals the speaker’s intention not to include, or to exclude, the corresponding
features of QAD from that particular context or is more neutral neither assertion
or non-assertion. The example in (62) for instance, where the verb of the matrix
clause yabduu “it seems” is far from being assertive like ʔakkada “confirm/insist”
illustrates the point in question, hence the naturalness of the absence of QAD.22
Conclusion
In this chapter, we have examined the co-occurrence of QAD with the Perfect in
MSA from the perspective of possible syntactic and semantico-pragmatic
 restrictions on the type of constructions in which it is involved. The data, based
on authentic corpus, reveals that while the Compound Perfect ([QAD  Perfect])
occurs in various constructions, it remains a marked form when contrasted to the
Simple Perfect. This is shown in Table 5.9:
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
102

Table 5.9 Frequency of the compound perfect
Discourse genres
N [Ø Perfect]
N [QAD Perfect]
Total
Journalistic
296
28
324
Academic
478
64
542
Fiction
806
49
855
Total
1580
141
1721
Frequency (%)
92
08
100
However, it is well integrated within the verbal system of MSA and therefore
can not be treated as a marginal category. Furthermore, we have shown that QAD
shares many features with ATM categories. Its invariant centers around assertive
modality, and extends to embody some aspect–tense distinctions.
THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
103

6
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND 
INVARIANT MEANING
Introduction
In this chapter, we examine the second member of the morphological opposition in
the verbal system in MSA, namely the Imperfect. Our investigation concentrates
on its semantico-pragmatic and discourse properties in order to determine its
invariant meaning through the basic components of which it is typically composed.
We will therefore discuss its aspectual, temporal, and modal properties, through
examining (i) the major temporal contexts in which it participates, and (ii) its status
and representation within the Arabic verbal ATM system. Then, we will suggest
an alternative analysis to those discussed in Chapter 3, and defend the nature of
the invariant features which underlie the functioning of the two verbal forms,
the Perfect and the Imperfect, the basic dichotomy of which the verbal system
is composed.
The Imperfect and temporal relations
There are several ways to examine the semantico-pragmatic and discourse  functions
of a particular verbal form. If we have chosen to investigate these functions
through examining the relations which the form establishes with temporality, it is
for methodological and empirical reasons, as evidenced by the findings in the
 previous chapters. Moreover, we believe that, given the close ties which the verb
has with evoking questions of a temporal nature, especially in simple verbal
 affirmative structures, it would be (more) accurate to examine the form from that
particular angle. In what follows, we will therefore scan the various functions of
the Imperfect according to its relation to present time, future time, gnomic time,
and past time. Meanwhile, questions of a modal and aspectual nature will be
addressed and partially discussed.1
Present time reference
Unlike the Perfect, only some of the uses of which evolve around present time
interpretations (see pp. 51–57), the Imperfect typically refers to present time events,
104

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
105
that is, processes which are simultaneous with the moment of enunciation.
Consider the following examples:
(1)
a
maaðaa
tafʕalu
yaa
nabiil?
what
do.Imp.2s.m
Voc.Part.
Nabil
“Nabil, what are you doing?”
b
ʔataɦaddau
maʕa
sadiiq-ii
talk.Imp.1.s
with
friend-my
“I am talking with my friend.”
(2)
a
yataqaddam...
yataqaddam...
wa
yaqðif...
wa
hadaf!
advance.Imp...
advance.Imp
and
shoot.Imp.
and goal
“He advances...advances...he shoots...goal!”
b
ta*aʕu
al-laɦma...umma
ta*aʕu
al-xu*ara...
put.Imp.2.s.m
the-meat...then
put.Imp.2.s.m
the-vegetables.
“You put the meat, then you put the vegetables...”
(3)
a
ʔuʕlinuku-maa
zaw∆un wa zaw∆atun
declare.Imp.l.s-you.dual
husband and wife
“I declare you husband and wife.”
b
ʔarfu*u
haaðaa
as-suluuka
disapprove.Imp.l.s
this
the-behavior
“I object to this behavior.”
Although the examples in (1), (2), and (3) represent different types of enunciations,
they all make use of the same verbal form, the Imperfect. This is indicative of the
compatibility of this verbal form with these three types of enunciations. The
examples in (1), for example, describe a dialogue between the mother and her
son Nabil. The mother is inside the house, but is wondering why her son has not
entered yet. The use of the Imperfect in her question maaða tafʕalu... “what are
you doing...” (1a), has an identificational value between the moment of enunci-
ation (T0) and the moment of the event (T1). That is, the relationship between the
subject nabiil “Nabil” and the predicate yafʕalu-mayʔan “doing-something” is
evaluated as simultaneous with the situation of enunciation. Nabil’s response, as
in (1b), accords well with the mother’s intentions, namely her concern about the
present situation. Thus, the use of the Imperfect in (1b) ensures the felicity and
the well-formedness of his utterance. This is achieved through the identificational
value between the moment of enunciation and the moment of the event which the
Imperfect expresses. The enunciator nabiil actualizes in his present time the
 predicative relation (ʔanaa)/ʔataɦaddau-maʕa- sadiiqii “(I)/speaking-with-my-
friend.” It might be said, therefore, that the Imperfect has the value of actualizing
the predicative relation, along with that of identification between the moment of

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
106
enunciation and the moment of the event. In Monville-Burston and Waugh terms
(see 1991), the Imperfect expresses the “present present” (PrPr), that is synchronicity
between the verbal process and “now,” the deictic zero point. Metaphorically, if we
represent the event by an interval, its right boundary should be open, and the process
is evaluated as not having come to its end (non-accomplished), while the left
 boundary is indifferent.2 This is represented in (4):
(4)
——]------------[——
(T0  T1)
←
T1
→
(verbal process)
←
T0
→
(enunciative process)
Similar uses of the Imperfect are most often triggered by the situation of
 enunciation, as illustrated in the following examples:
(5)
ʔundur!
ʁazaalatun
taʕburu
at-tariiqa
look
deer
cross.Imp.3.s.f  the-road
“Look! A deer is crossing the road!”
(6)
ʔaɦmil saɦaabata-ka;  al-mataru  yanzilu
bi-ʁazaaratin
take umbrella-your
the-rain
fall.Imp.3.s.m  with-heavily
“Take your umbrella; it is raining very hard.”
In both (5) and (6), the use of the Imperfects taʕburu “crossing” and yanzilu
“raining” is triggered by characteristics of the situation of enunciation. This latter
indicates that the predicative relation has already been evaluated by the enunciator.
For example, in (5), ʔundur “look” is the trace of that evaluation.
Accordingly, it can be argued that the Imperfect has an anaphoric value, as it is
used to describe situations which were already observed by the enunciator at
some prior moment. The predicative relation is presupposed, and its status is
therefore thematic (Adamczewski 1982a: 64).3 Similar to the examples in (1), the
enunciator in (5) and (6) actualizes in his present time the predicative relation. In
contradistinction to the Perfect, the process is evaluated as non-anterior to the
moment of enunciation, but simultaneous with it, hence the sense effect of
 progressivity and non-completeness.
Another use of the Imperfect which is bound up with the question of present
time interpretation is observed among the speech of reporters, and demonstrators
as illustrated in (2a) and (2b) respectively. In (2a), the football game reporter
describes the actions of the players as they are performed. Thus, while the player
is advancing yataqaddam with the ball, the reporter is describing his action. The
aim is to faithfully represent what is happening during the game, the extralin-
guistic world, for those who are sitting next to their radios so that they can recon-
struct the events in as lively a manner as possible. It is important to note, however,
that unlike its use in (1), the Imperfect in these contexts represents more the

occurrence of the event than its temporal interpretation. In other words, although
the moment of enunciation is simultaneous with the moment of the event, the focus
is more oriented towards the event itself. Bouscaren and Chuquet (1987: 12)
 suggest that the Imperfect has an “eventive value” (valeur d’évènement) in such
cases. Indeed, this value is more transparent in yaqðif “kicks” where the
Imperfect can not be represented by an interval with boundaries. This is due to the
punctual characteristic of the action.
A similar account can be given for (2b) where the demonstrator, as he/she
appears on TV, or other places, addresses an audience while performing the actual
actions and demonstrating the various steps of a recipe. The focus of the Imperfect
is again on the event itself rather than its temporal properties. It should be stressed,
however, that both the identification and the actualization values of the Imperfect,
as noticed earlier, are present, but their relevance is reduced to a certain minimum.
The enunciator focuses more on the validation of the predicative relation. The
English translation lends significant support to the analysis advanced earlier, as
indicated by the use of the present tense instead of the present progressive,
 especially with verbs such as advance which admit a progressive interpretation.
Another example is given in (7) where the description of the Queen’s walking
to the throne is rendered by the simple present.
(7)
And now the Queen walks to the throne...
(Adamczewski 1982a: 44)
Likewise, French soccer reporters quite often describe a kick in soccer through
the use of a noun phrase, as illustrated in (8):
(8)
Coup de pied de Rocheteau
Kick of foot of Rocheteau
“Rocheteau kicks the ball.”
(Bouscaren and Chuquet 1987: 13)
The examples in (8), (7), and (2) illustrate a specific use of the Imperfect, which,
although describes a situation simultaneous with the moment of enunciation,
relates to the occurrence of the event, hence its “eventive value” (see also
Benmamoun 2000: 6; Al-Mansouri 2002: 37). As for the examples in (3), they are
generally called performatives, that is language acts, which are performed by
virtue of the sentence having been uttered. In (3a), for example, the man and the
woman became husband and wife as the sheick “priest” declares it, using the
 performative verb ʔuʕlinu “declare.” In like fashion, the enunciator announces his
resentment and rejection of a particular behavior, as he expresses his disapproval
through the verb ʔarfu*u “disapprove/reject.” A full discussion of the semantic
properties of performatives is above the scope of the present work. It should be
stressed, however, that (i) their close ties with the moment of enunciation is inherent
to their contextual use, and (ii), similar to its use in (2), the Imperfect is more
 oriented towards the event or the process in question than to temporality. In (3a)
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
107

it is the marriage declaration itself which is at stake, and so is the disapproval
in (3b). Thus, even though performatives constitute a separate type of enunciation
than demonstrations and reporting, the use of the Imperfect with either type
shows that they share certain features. Indeed, in both cases, the enunciator aims
at validating the predicative relation at the moment of enunciation, with a
 particular emphasis on the occurrence of the event. Thus, notions such as
 progressiveness, incompleteness, and durativity are not relevant in these cases.
Metaphorically, one might represent the event as it is expressed by the Imperfect
in examples (2), (3), and the like, with no internal structure, that is the lack of the
interval altogether, as represented by the vertical line in (9) here.
(9)
——|——
(T0  T1)
-- T1-- (verbal process)
-- T0-- (enunciative process)
In what follows, we will examine another set of cases where the Imperfect is
used for habitual, generic, and atemporal processes. We will use the term Gnomic
to refer to all such cases, since any potential distinction between them is not
 pertinent in Arabic.
Gnomic interpretation
Consider the following examples:
(10)
a
ʕindamaa
yartakibu
ʔaɦadun muxaalafatan li-l-qaanuuni
when
commit.Imp.3.s.m
someone violation
to-the-law
fa-min
waa∆ibi
as-sulutaati
al-qab*a
ʕalay-hi.
so-from
duty
the-authorities
the-catching
on-him
“When someone commits a violation, it is the duty of the authorities to
catch him.” (NA#3)
b
wa
ʕallaqat
as-saɦiifatu
ʕalaa
al-ʕadadi
al-ʔi∆maalii
and
comment.Pf
the-paper
on
the-number
the-total
bi-ʔanna-hu
yusaawii
ʕadada
al-muhaa∆iriina
with-that-it
equals.Imp
number
the-immigrants
al-qaadimiina
tiwaala
ʕaami 1988.
the-coming
during
year 1988
“The paper made a comment about the number of immigrants, stating
that it equals the number of new immigrants during 1988.” (SA#4 )
c
at-taʁyiiru
al-ɦa*aariyyu
huwa
ʕamaliyyatun
the-change
the-civilizational
it
process
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
108

tabiiʕiyyatun
tax*aʕu
li-muruutin
taariixiyyatin.
natural
observe.Imp
to-constraints
historical
“A civilizational change is a natural process which is subject to historical
constraints.” (SA#3)
d
yamiilu
at-tafkiiru
ʁaaliban
ʔilaa
at-tabsiiti
wa
tend.Imp
the-thinking
usually
to
the-simplification
and
at-taʕmiimi
wa
ʔistiʕaarati ɦuluuli
al-maa*ii
li-mamaakili
the-generalization and borrowing solutions the-past
to-problems
al-ɦaa*iri
wa
al-mustaqbali.
the-present
and
the-future
“Thinking generally tends to oversimplify, overgeneralize, and adopt
previous solutions to current and future problems.” (SA#l)
e
wa
liðaa
fa-ʔinna
am-maxsa
allaðii
yattasifu
and
therefore
so-ʔINNA
the-person
who
characterize.Imp
bi-ʔinxifaa*i
al-muruunati
huwa
am-maxsu
allaðii
with-decrease
the-flexibility
he
the-person who
yaʕ∆izu
ʕani
at-takayyufi
ʔaw at-tawaafuqi
maʕa
incapacitate.Imp from
the-integration
or
the-conformity with
al-mawaaqifi
al- ʔi∆timaaʕiyyati.
the-situations
the-social
“Therefore, the person who lacks flexibility is the one who fails to
adapt to or to cope with social situations.” (SA#5)
f
fii
ad-dalaami
taʕmaa
al-ʕuyuunu
in
the-dark
blind.Imp.3.s.f
the-eyes
“In the dark, eyes can’t see.” (SS#1)
g
kullu
laylatin
ʔaðʕanu
every
night
concede.Imp.l.s
“I concede (voluntarily) every night.” (SS#3)
The examples in (10) make use of the Imperfect to describe a broad range of
 situations from various discourse genres. Despite their contextual differences,
however, we would like to suggest that they not only share the use of the
Imperfect, but also its basic value which bears on the semantic interpretation of
the sentence. The fundamental value of the Imperfect, we propose, relates to the
enunciator’s perception of the predicative relation. This latter is presented as
 independent of any particular point of view, that is, the verbal event is not relative
to any particular enunciative situation.4 In (l0a) for example, the use of the
Imperfect does not relate to any particular situation, that is, it is neither evaluated
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
109

with respect to the moment of enunciation nor with respect to any other moment.
The presence of ʕindamaa “when,” interpreted here as “whenever,” at the beginning
of the sentence, illustrates this type of detachment, and as such it is reanalyzed as
a surface trace of the Imperfect’s gnomic value. This value is further illustrated by
the example in (10b), where the Imperfect is used to simply establish an equivalence
between two elements, that is, numbers. In fact, the Imperfect verb yusaawii
“equals,” is typically used in Mathematics/Calculus for equations. As such, it is
represented by the symbol (), as illustrated in the following examples:
(11)
a
1

1

2
waaɦid
wa
waaɦid
yusaawii
ʔinaani
one
plus
one
equal.Imp
two
“One plus one equals two.”
b
X

5
iks
yusaawii
xamsatun
X
equal.Imp.
five
“X equals five.”
Thus, the examples in (l0b) and (11) clearly show the correlation between the use
of the Imperfect and the necessary lack of any particular point of view, given the
irrelevance of this latter. These cases and others are generally referred to as  general
truths, for which English and French use the present tense. This is illustrated
in (12) and (13) respectively:
(12)
a
The sun rises in the East
b
oil floats on water
c
Dogs bark
(13)
a
La terre est ronde
“The earth is round.”
b
L “huile flotte sur l”eau
“Oil floats on water.”
c
Un plus un egalent deux
“One plus one equals two.”
The gnomic value of the Imperfect is similarly attested in a large number of
Arabic proverbs.5 This is shown in (14).
(14)
a
al-ɦaqqu
yaʕluu
wa
laa
yuʕlaa
ʕalay-hi
the-truth
rise.Imp
and
not
rise.Imp.Passive
above-it
“The truth prevails and nothing overcomes it.”
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
110

b
man
yuɦibbu
laa
yaʕrifu
al-kurha
whoever
love.Imp.3.s.m
not
know.Imp.3.s.m
the-hate
“If you love you can not hate.”
All of the aforesaid cases share the common feature of being independent of
any point of view. That is, the validation of the predicative relation does not relate
to any particular moment of enunciation from which utterances are generally
evaluated. Moreover, the role of the enunciator in these cases is certainly reduced
to zero, that is, to a non-quantifiable level. The same analysis advanced above
applies to the examples in (10c–g).
Similar to the aforesaid cases, which characterize the general and the
non-restricted character of the verbal event with respect to any temporal anchor,
whether it be in a generic or habitual manner, the Imperfect is used to characterize
the grammatical subject. Such cases are given in (15):
(15)
a
wa
an-nufuuðu
al-ʔiiraanii
ʔaqwaa
maa
yakuunu fii
and
the-influence
the-Iranian
stronger
what
be.Imp in
taa∆ikstaan
allatii
tataɦaddau
al-faarisiyyata...
Tajikistan
that
speak.Imp
the-persian
“Iranian influence is most observed in Tajikistan which speaks
Persian.” (NA#l)
b
wa
maa
raʔyu-ka
fii al-kutubi
allatii
tastawɦii
and
what
opinion-your in the-books
which
inspire.Imp
ta∆aariba
al-waaqiʕi
experiences
the-reality
“And what do you think of books which derive their inspiration from
genuine experiences.” (SS#5)
c
hum
allaðiina
yamlikuuna
niʕmata
al-yaqiini
they
who
possess.Imp
blessing
the-certainty
“It is they who possess the blessing of certainty.” (SS#1)
d
wa
al-ʔatqiyaaʔu
tamaaman
yufa**iluuna
∆aamaʕa
and
the-devouts
fully
prefer.Imp
mosque
al-Azhari
al-qariibi.
the-Azhar
the-nearby
“The devout believers prefer to go to the nearby Al-Azhar Mosque.”
(SS#3)
e
fa-l-ɦiwaaru
laa
yamtaritu
at-tamaahii
wa ʔinnamaa
so-the-discussion Neg necessitate.Imp the-agreement and but
yaquumu
ʕalaa ʔar*iyyati
al-xilaafi.
wa
laakin
laysa
revolve.Imp
on
background
the-difference. and
but
Neg
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
111

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
112
li-yuwassiʕa
hawiyyata-haa
wa
ʔinnamaa
li-yabɦaa
to-increase
sphere-its
and
but
to-search.Imp
duuna-haa
ʕammaa
ya∆maʕu
wa
yuwaɦɦidu.
without-it
about
assemble.Imp
and
unify.Imp
“A debate does not stipulate agreement. On the contrary, it is based on
disagreement. However, the intention is not to widen its sphere, but to
search for whatever assembles and unifies.” (SA#l)
f
xaaʔifun
ʔanaa.
ʔanaa
xaaʔifun.
laa
mina
am-maytaani
scared
I.
I
scared.
not
from
the-devil
xaaʔifun...
min
nafs-ii
ʔaxaafu
scared...
from
self-my
fear.Imp.1.s
“scared I am...scared I am...not from the devil I am scared...I fear
myself.” (SS#3)
As one reads the set of examples in (15a–f), one immediately realizes the
extent to which actual use of verbal forms goes beyond temporality, resisting
therefore, operator-type analyses (Enç 1986 among others), Reichenbachan and
neo-Reichenbachan models, and the like.6 What the Imperfect denotes in this
 particular context is basically an inherent property or properties of the grammatical
subject, where time is irrelevant (Monville-Burston and Waugh 1991: 88;
Benmamoun 2000: 6; Al-Mansouri 2002: 37 among others). In (15a), it is the
 language which the residents of Tajikistan speak; in (15b), it is the property of
particular books; in (15c–d) the property of a particular people; and in (15e) it is
the definition of al-ɦiwaar “the debate” which the enunciator outlines. Note that
none of these examples is presented relative to any particular enunciative situation.
The enunciator presents the event as if it were classified in a catalogue or an
 encyclopedia whose objective is to define and present the inherent characteristics
of linguistic elements. The absence of a particular point of view characterizes the
use of the Imperfect in these and similar contexts, as further illustrated here:
(16)
a
maaðaa
tamtaʁilu?
what
work.Imp.2.s.m
“What do you do?”
b
ʔudarrisu
teach.Imp.1.s
“I teach.”
c
ʔanaa
mudarrisun
I
teacher
“I (am) a teacher.”
The example in (16a) is a typical question when inquiring about the profession of any
individual. The use of the bare Imperfect, with no further temporal adverbs of

any sort, indicates the irrelevance of temporal distinctions given the subject-oriented
nature of the utterance. The coenunciator’s answer in (16b) denotes the type of
professional activity in which he is involved. The use of the Imperfect ʔudarrisu
“I teach” reveals not only the type of activity, but also one of his defining properties.
This latter is not only evaluated as being simultaneous with the moment of
 enunciation, or indicating undifferentiated moments of a state (Smith 1983: 490),
but also as denoting an inherent property of the coenunciator. This is further
 supported by the availability of (16c) which represents the value of the Imperfect
in such contexts. In other words, the property that is attributed to the coenunciator
mudarrisun “teacher” appears outside of any temporal locator, as indicated by the
total absence of any realized verbal or temporal element in the utterance.7 It
should be stressed that even though the implication is, “this is valid of me now,”
the enunciator places no emphasis on the actual validity of the  utterance, hence
the irrelevance of that particular factor. We, therefore, interpret the absence of the
copula in Arabic as direct evidence for the analysis advanced for the Imperfect.
A similar case is noted in (15f) where the enunciator uses both the Imperfect and
the active participle to describe and characterize himself  “fearing himself.”
In sum, whether the Imperfect denotes a general truth, a definition, a habitual
action, or a property of the grammatical subject, it should be stressed that the
 gnomic interpretation results from its value of being capable of encoding events
with respect to no particular point of view. In what follows, we will investigate the
use of the Imperfect in other contexts where it receives a future time  interpretation.
Futurity and modality
Unlike the past and the present time interpretation, whose realization is typically
ensured by the Perfect and the Imperfect respectively, future time is generally
expressed through modal elements, such as sawfa “will” and its elided prefixal
form sa- “-”ll’. Although this similarity with English might be coincidental, it
indicates at least the independent status of the future expression. The peculiar
properties of future time follow from its predictive nature. As such, it differs from
both the present and the past, as it belongs to a different operative domain, namely
non-certainty. In Arabic, the future interpretation does not always require the
presence of the modal particles sawfa and sa-, however. In this section, we will
show that the Imperfect receives similar interpretations in various contexts
involving future time. In order to conduct a deeper investigation, we would like
to digress and present first an analysis of the modal particles which are typically
used to denote future time.
The modal particles sawfa/sa-
Consider the contrast between (17) and (18):
(17)
a
ʔaɦmad,
maaðaa
tafʕalu
Ahmad,
what
do.Imp.2.s.m
“Ahmad, what are you doing?”
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
113

b
ʔaktubu
dars-ii
write.Imp.1.s
lesson-my
“I am writing my lesson.”
(18)
a
ʔaɦmad,
maaðaa
sa-tafʕalu
Ahmad,
what
will-do.Imp.2.s.m
“Ahmad, what are you going to do?”
b
sawfa/sa-ʔaktubu
dars-ii
will/’ll-write.Imp.1.s
lesson-my
“I will write my lesson.”
The difference between the examples in (17) and those in (18) resides in the  different
types of relationships which exist between the enunciators and the  predicative
 relations. In other words, while the relationship between the subject Ahmad and the
predicate ʔaktubu darsii “write my lesson,” for example, is validated with respect to
the moment of enunciation in (17b), it is only intended to occur in (18b). This inten-
tion follows from the use of sawfa/sa-, which expresses Ahmad’s will to validate the
predicative relation, namely “write his lesson.” The future time interpretation in
(18b) results from the interaction between the intentional and predictive value of the
modal sawfa/sa- and the moment of  enunciation. The modal value of this latter
derives therefore from the scope it has over the realization of the predicative relation.
As such, both sawfa and sa- are analyzed similar to the modal QAD “may/might”
which also bears on the possible realization of the predicative relation.8 The questions
in both (17a) and (18a) are analyzed along the same line as the answers in (17b) and
(18b), with an additional modal feature, namely the interrogation which denotes the
lack of (taking) a stand with respect to the predicative relation.
In order to identify the salience of the modal sawfa as a grammatical category,
one should not only investigate its semantico-pragmatic functions, but also define
its place within the system of which it is a part. Having already suggested a
 characterization of the value of sawfa, at least two empirical questions remain
unanswered: first, to what extent its presence is obligatory, and second, whether
there is a semantic difference between sawfa and the elided form sa-. As for the
first question, a consideration of certain cases largely comparable to the examples
in (17) and (18) provides evidence for a rule-governed approach to the use of
sawfa. This use appears to be either obligatory, optional, or illicit. An exhaustive
investigation is certainly needed to isolate the various contexts in which sawfa
appears and those in which it does not, and to determine the basic governing
 factors. An attempt to provide an answer is made here on the basis of both our
data and our strong intuitions about the use of sawfa.
Consider the examples in (19) and (20):
(19)
a
ʔaɦmad,
maaðaa
tafʕalu
Ahmad,
what
do.Imp.
“Ahmad, what are you doing?”
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
114

b
(*sawfa)
ʔaktubu
dars-ii
(*will)
write.Imp
lesson-my
“I (*will) am writing my lesson.”
(20)
a
ʔaɦmad,
maaðaa
sa-tafʕalu
Ahmad,
what
will-do.Imp
“Ahmad, what are you going to do?”
b
*(sawfa/sa-)
ʔaktubu
dars-ii
*(will/’11-)
write.Imp
lesson-my
“I *(will) write my lesson.”
The contrast between the cases in (19) and those in (20) shows that while the
 presence of sawfa is not tolerated in (19b), it is obligatory in (20b). Given the
 discourse context in both (19) and (20), which is a dialogue involving both
 participants (the enunciator and the coenunciator), one can argue that the  constraints
on the presence of sawfa follow from a violation of the felicity conditions for both
(19b) and (20b). The fact that this contrast relates entirely to the occurrence of the
modal sawfa provides strong evidence for its salient role. It is yet to be determined
whether these constraints relate to the expression of future time or depend largely on
the context. In other words, is it possible to express future time without resorting to
using the modal sawfa, and if so, what are the basic factors? In developing an answer
to the questions in the aforesaid examples, let us first examine the  examples in (21):
(21)
a
wa
sa-tabdaʕu
biiruu
fii al-waqti
ar-raahini
and
will-start
Peru
in the-period
the-current
mubaaðaaatin
mutaʕalliqatin
bi-masʔalati
al-mutaʔaxxiraati
discussions
concerning
with-problem
the-delays
al-mustaɦaqqati
wa
allatii
tabluʁu
6.6 miilyaar duulaar
the-demanded
and
that
amount.Imp
6.6 billion dollars
li-fatrati
amaani
sanawaatin.
to-period
eight
years
“Peru will start during this period discussions relative to the late
6.6 billion dollar payments in eight years.” (NA#8)
b
wa
(Ø)yabdaʔu
al-barlamaanu
baɦa-haa
fii ʔuktuubar
and
start.Imp
the-parliament
discussing-it
in October
al-qaadima
wasata
tawaqquʕaatin
bi-ʔidxaali
the-coming
within
predictions
with-introducing
taʕdiilaatin
ʕalay-haa.
amendments
on-it
“The Parliament (will) start examining it next October under some
possible predictions of amending it.” (NA#9)
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
115

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
116
The examples in both (21a) and (21b) are very compelling, as they show a
rather surprising asymmetry, as indicated by the use of sa- in (21a) and its
absence in (21b). What seems to be puzzling in the aforesaid examples is the
apparently uneven distribution of the temporal expressions. At first sight, one
might think that the temporal fii ʔuktuubar al-qaadima “next October,” should
co-occur with the Imperfect preceded by sa- in (21b), while the one in (21a)
fii al-waqti ar-raahini “during this period” makes a better fit with the Imperfect
in (21b). The question which immediately arises is why the enunciator did not use
the modal sa- in (21b), where the sentence shows a clear future time reference,
while it appears in (21a) where the future time interpretation is less straightforward.
Two possible answers can be suggested. The first would claim that the use of the
modal sa- is free, and the enunciator can either use it or just ignore it, hence (21a)
and (21b) respectively. As for the second hypothesis, it argues that the  presence
of the temporal expression fii ʔuktuubar al-qaadima “next October” in (21b) is
sufficient to express future time, while the presence of sa- in (21a) results from
the lack of clear future time reference. While both hypotheses account for the
contrast observed in (21), the first one fails to account for the contrast between
(19b) and (20b) where the use of sa- is not free, and therefore should be rejected
on empirical grounds. As for the second hypothesis, it requires careful examination,
as it relates the appearance of sa- to some contextual governing principles.
In order to determine these principles, we have scanned many future time
 contexts and focused on those cases which contain the modal sa-, on the one hand,
and those which exclude it, on the other hand. A representative set of  examples is
given in (22) and (23) respectively:
(22)
a
kaanat
tuʔminu
tamaaman
ʔanna-haa
yawman
maa
be.Pf
believeImp
strongly
that-her
day
what
sa-tusbiɦu
sittu
as-sittaati,
wa
sa-yas∆udu
la-haa
will-become.Imp
lady
the-ladies,
and
will-bow.Imp
to-her
al-ʕaalama...
wa
takuunu
ʔamhara
wa
the-world
and
be.Imp
more. famous and
ʔamtaʕa
ʔimraʔatin
fii-hi.
satisfied
lady
in-it.
“She used to deeply believe that one day she will become the first lady,
the whole world will bow before her, and she will be the most famous
and satisfied lady.” (SS#3)
b
Lan
yaqdima
ʕalaa haaðihi
al-muxaataratiʔ
Pillaa
fii ʔaaxiri
Neg
take.Imp
on
these
the-risks
until
in
last
laɦdatin:
fii
a-aaniyati
allatii
yataʔakkadu
fii-haa
mill
moment
in
the-second
which make.sure.Imp in-it
from

ʔanna-hum
sa-yarawna-hu!
that-them
will-see.Imp-him
“He will not take this risk until the last second: the moment when he is
sure they will see him.” (SS#5)
c
thumma
ʔakkada
ʔanna
al-mutawaqqaʕa
wusuulu-hum
than
confirm.Imp
that
the-expected
arrival-their
sa-yabluʁu
100.000 faqat
will-be.Imp
100.000 only
“then, he confirmed that the number of those expected to come will
reach 100.000 only.” (SA#4)
d
wa
maa
daama
maɦruuman
min-hu
fa-sa-yadallu
and
what
last.Pf
deprived
from-it
so-will-remain.Imp
maɦruuman
mina al-yaqiini...(-hu  vision)
deprived
from the-certainty
“And as long as he is deprived of it (his sight), he will remain deprived
of faith...” (SS# 1)
(23)
a
qaala
meifer
ʔanna
al-masʔuuliina
al-ʔiiraaniyyiina
say.Pf
Sheifer
that
the-delegates
the-iranians
yatafaawa*uuna
li-miraaʔi
xamsa
ʁawwaasaatin
negotiate.Imp
to-bying
five
submarines
saʁiiratin
li-taʕmala
ʔilaa
∆aanibi
ʁawwaasatayni
small
to-work.Imp
to
next
submarines
(Ø) tatasallamu-haa
ʔiiraan
min
muuskuu
fii
waqtin
receive.Imp-it
Iran
from
Moscow
in
time
laaɦiqin
mina
al-ʕaami
al-ɦalii.
coming
from
the-year
the-current
“Sheifer said that the Iranian delegates are negotiating the purchase of
five small submarines to operate next to two submarines which Iran
(will) receive from Moscow soon this year.” (NA#1)
b
wa
ʁadan
(Ø) ta∆ðibu
a*-*aɦakaatu
ar-ri∆aala.
and
tomorrow
attract.Imp
the-laughs
the-men
“and tomorrow, the laughs (will) attract men.” (SS#1)
c
ʁadan
(Ø) ya∆iiʔu
ar-ri∆aalu
wa
(Ø) yaɦillu al-ʕirsaanu.
tomorrow
come.Imp
the-men
and
appear
the-grooms
“Tomorrow men (will) come, and grooms (will) settle in.” (SS#1)
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
117

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
118
d
wa
(Ø) tastaʔnifu
muɦaadaaati
as-salaami
al-ʕarabiyyati
and
resume.Imp
talks
the-peace
the-Arab
al-ʔisraaʔiiliyyati
fii
waaminton
al-ʔusbuuʕa
al-muqbila.
the-Israeli
in
Washington
the-week
the-coming
“The Arab-Israeli peace talks in Washington (will) resume next week.”
(NA#3)
Looking carefully at the examples in both (22) and (23), one notices a clear
 correlation between the presence of sa- and the lack of “conspicuous” future time
reference on the one hand, and its absence and the presence of future time  adverbials,
such as ʁadan “tomorrow” in both (23b) and (23c), on the other hand. One might
therefore be tempted to suggest the following governing principle (24) to capture
the use of the modal sa-:
(24)
The more future time is lexically specified in the clause, the less likely the
modal sa- is used, and vice versa.
The principle in (24) would adequately account for the complementary distribution
between the use of sa- and the temporal adverbs, as observed in (22) and (23).
Moreover, the ungrammaticality of (20b) can be shown to follow from the
 aforesaid principle, as the presence of sa- is required when temporal adverbs are
missing. This complementary distribution is not particular to Arabic, and is also
observed in other languages.9 In fact, Comrie (1985: 50–51) notes a more rigid
complementary distribution between tense and time adverbials in Jamaican
Creole, where the presence of the past morpheme en is highly questionable when
the past temporal adverb yeside “yesterday” is inserted. This is illustrated in (25):
(25)
a
mi
en
a
sing
I
past
progressive
sing
“I was singing.”
b
?*yeside
mi
en
a
sing
yesterday
I
past
progressive
sing
This line of analysis would certainly be promising if the modal sa- were a pure
temporal marker, with no other modal function. Indeed, when a broader range of
cases is closely examined, the results show that the future time interpretation of
sa- derives from its general value, which is based upon the enunciator’s beliefs,
predictions, intentions or factual statements. In fact, the examples under (22)
involve a strong presence of one of these modal elements in each example: a strong
belief in (22a), a certainty in (22b), a confirmation in (22c), and a logical
 entailment in (22d). More examples which illustrate the modal interpretation of
sa- are given under (26).

(26)
a
wa
yu*iifu
al-masʔuulu
ʔanna
mila
haaðihi
al-∆uhuudi
and
add.Imp
the-official
that
like
these
the-efforts
law
qaama
bi-haa
al-banku
ad-dawlii
fa-ʔinna
ðaa1ika
if
do.Pf
with-it
the-bank
the-world
so-ʔINNA that
sawfa
yuɦassinu
min
suurati-hi
al-ʕaalamiyyati
wa
will
improve.Imp
from
picture-its
the-international
and
xaassatan
fii
duwali
al-ʕaalami
a-aalii, wa
yastadriku
especially in
countries
the-world
the-third,
and digress.Imp
qaaʔilan
ʔinna-hu
mina
al-muʔakkadi
ʔin
ʕaa∆ilan
ʔaw
saying
ʔINNA-it
from
the-certain
whether
sooner
or
ʔaa∆ilan
fa-sawfaa
takuunu
mila
haaðihi
al-mahaammi
later
so-will
be.Imp
like
these
the-issues
matruuɦatan
ʕalaa
raʔiisi
al-banki
ad-dawlii.
facing
on
president
the-bank
the-world
“The official adds that if the World Bank makes similar efforts, it will
improve its international image especially before Third World  countries.
He then digresses saying that, sooner or later, such concerns will for
sure be a subject matter for the President of the World Bank.” (NA#l0)
b
wa
ɦasba
ʔaqwaali
“raayx”
fa-ʔinna
a*-*aʁta
and
according
declarations
“Reich”
so-ʔINNA
the-pressure
sa-yatazaayadu
ʕalaa
ʔaʕ*aaʔi
al-kuungris
al-ʔamriikii
will-increase.Imp
on
members
the-congress
the-American
kullamaa
ʔintamarat
fii
al-wilaayaati
al-muttafiidati
fikratu
whenever
spread.Imp
in
the-states
the-united
idea
ʔanna
ʔisraaʔiila
ʁayru
muhayyaʔatin
li-muwaa∆ahati
that
Israel
not
ready
to-face
ʔistiiʕaabi
al-hi∆rati
mina al-ʔittiɦaadi
as-suvyaatiyyi.
accommodating the-immigration from the-united
the-Soviet
“According to Reich, the pressure on the members of the Congress in
the United States will increase whenever the idea that Israel is not
ready to accommodate the Soviet immigrants spreads out.” (SA#4)
c
wa
ʔa*aafa
“ʔinna-naa
sa-nutaalibu
al-ʔixwata
al-ʕaraba
and add.Pf
ʔINNA-us
will-demand.Imp the-brothers
the-Arab
bi-al-wafaaʔi
bi-ltizaamaati-him
allatii
ʕuqidat
fii
with-the-keeping with-promises-their
which
occur.Pf.Passive
in
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
119

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
120
qimmati tuunis”...
summit Tunis ...
“He added ‘we will ask the Arab brothers to keep their promises made
during the summit in Tunis’.” (NA#2)
In (26a), for example, the modal sawfa appears within the conditional construction
law “if,” in (26b) it has a habitual interpretation, as in the English would, and
finally in (26c) it has a performative interpretation, which is the same as in the
present tense in English.10
Before closing this digression, we would like to stress, with respect to the
 second question we addressed at the very beginning of this section, that
the semantico-pragmatic differences between the use of sa- and sawfa involve the
enunciator’s degree of commitment to his utterance. This is illustrated in the
 following examples:
(27)
a
A:
sa-ʔusaafiru
ʔilaa
misr
will-travel.Imp.ls
to
Egypt
“I’ll go to Egypt.”
b
B:
maaðaa
taquul?
what
say.Imp.2s.m
“What are you saying?”
c
A:
sawfa ʔusaafiru
ʔilaa
misr
will travel.Imp.ls
to
Egypt
“I WILL go to Egypt.”
The conversation between A and B in (27) presents a particular context which
clearly indicates the nature of the difference which governs the use of each modal
form. Since the coenunciator (B) does not understand the decision made by the
enunciator (A), this latter resorts to using the modal sawfa to show his greater/
stronger commitment to going to Egypt. We contend that the use of the elided
form sa- is TO INFORM, while the use of sawfa is TO CONFIRM. Accordingly,
the elided form behaves as a weaker form of the modal sawfa. If this is the  correct
characterization of the difference between both forms, it follows that sawfa will
only appear in specific and highly marked contexts, and its frequency should not
therefore be higher than the elided form sa-. This conclusion is born out, as
 illustrated in Table 6.1 where sawfa shows a very low frequency of six percent
compared to its counterpart sa- with 94 percent. Table 6.1 summarizes the
 frequencies relative to the three different discourse genres, while sa- (6%), when
compared to sa- (94%).
The very fact that the frequency of the elided form is much higher than the  regular
form might be an indication of its unmarked status, which might explain, among
other things, why unlike sa-, the appearance of sawfa is banned in certain syntactic
contexts, for example, the compound tense constructions, as illustrated in Table 6.1.

(28)
a
Kaana
sa-yusaafiru
ʔilaa
misr
be.Pf
will-travel.Imp
to
Egypt
“He was going to travel to Egypt.”
b
*Kaana sawfa
yusaafiru
ʔilaa
misr
A detailed discussion of the various factors which govern the difference
between the two forms would be very fruitful. Unfortunately, it is beyond the
scope of this work. It is enough to indicate, however, that similar phenomena are
observed in a large variety of languages. Turning now to our main concern, it
seems that the modal sa- interacts with both temporality and modality. While
 temporality involves the expression of future time, its modal features are bound
up with predictability, intentionality, and factuality. In either case, the fundamental
value of sa- is to characterize the chances of realization of the predicative
 relation. In what follows we will provide more evidence for the use of the
Imperfect with a future time interpretation.
The Imperfect and future time
It has already been established that the Imperfect appears in contexts where future
time is lexically specified. This is illustrated earlier in (21b) and (23a–d). This
compatibility is further illustrated in good wishes or curse contexts which are
interpreted as projected to occur in the future. Such cases are shown in (29) and (30)
respectively.
(29)
a
ruuɦii
allaahu
yaʁfiru
la-ki
wa
yusahhilu
la-ki
Go.2.s.f
God
forgive.Imp
for-you and
ease.Imp
for-you
“Go! May God forgive you and ease (things) for you!” (SS#3)
b
allaahu
ya∆maʕu
mamla
al-ʕaaʔilati
God
unite.Imp.3.s.m
whole
the-family
“May God reunite the whole family!”
(30)
a
allaahu
yaxribu
bayta-ka
yaa
tantaawii
God
destroy.Imp
house-your
Voc.
Tantaawii
“Tantaawii, may God destroy your house!” (SS#4)
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
121
Table 6.1 The distribution and frequency of sawfa/sa-
Discourse genres
N  6 (sawfa)
%
N  106 (sa-)
%
Journalistic
3
50
45
42.45
Academic
2
33.33
31
29.25
Fiction
1
16.66
30
28.30

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
122
b
allaahu
yu∆ɦimu
ruuɦaka
yaa
tantaawii...
God
frown.Imp
soul-your
Voc.
Tantaawii
“Tantaawii, may God frown on your soul!” (SS#4)
A brief comparison with the English parallel construction of the Imperfect in
these contexts is fruitful, as it helps elucidate its basic values. As the translation
of the examples in (29) and (30) shows, it is clear that the Imperfect is rendered
by the “may  verb” construction. This construction is typically used to express
all types of possible future events and processes, as shown in the following
 examples:
(31)
a
The Congress may pass this law very soon
b
I may finish next month
c
The ceremony may begin tomorrow
Thus, both sets of examples in (29), (30), and (31) express future possibilities
with the only difference that in the former case, another modal feature is present,
namely the wish. Moreover, the presence of may is necessary in these contexts, as
it expresses a possible realization of the predicative relation. Such obligatoriness
follows from the fact that in the least marked contexts, the examples in (32) are
either ill-formed – for a particular semantic interpretation – or have a different
interpretation.
(32)
a
(?)God protects you from evil.
b
(?)God reunites the whole family.
We can safely say therefore that the modal features which may represent in the
“good wishes construction” are expressed by the Imperfect in Arabic. The future
time interpretation of the utterance results from the interaction between
the Imperfect and the construction in question. Further insights into the future
time interpretation of the Imperfect can be gleaned from its occurrence in
 hypothetical and conditional contexts, as in (33) and (34).
(33)
a
maaðaa
yaɦdou ʔiðaa
kaana
haaðaa?...
what
happen.Imp if
be.Pf
this
“What will happen if this occurs?” (SS#4)
b
hal
tantaqilu
al-maɦttatu
min
makaani-haa?!...
Q.
move.Imp
the-station
from
place-its
“Will the station be moved from its place?!” (SS#4)
c
wa
hal
yaʕmalu
al-ʕumdatu
laylatan
li-wa∆hi
al-laahi?...
and
Q.
work.Imp
the-mayer
one.night
to-face
the-God
“And will the mayor work one night for free?” (SS#4)

d
wa
hal
tantabiqu
as-samaaʔu
ʕalaa
∆urni
al-qamɦi?
and
Q.
fall.Imp
the-sky
on
bin
the-grain
“And will the sky fall down on the grain bin?” (SS#4)
(34)
a
ʔin
yadrus
yan∆aɦ
if
study.Imp
succeed.Imp
“If he studies, he will succeed.”
(Abboud and McCarus 1992: 178)
In the first set of examples, the narrator-enunciator wonders about what will
happen if the wife of his main character starts to behave and serve her husband
like any ordinary wife. Nothing will happen and everything will stay the same.
The three rhetorical questions in (33b–d) are meant to ensure that the future world
will not differ from the present one. It is, therefore, the interaction between the
hypothetical context, as indicated by the presence of the modal particle ʔiðaa, and
the Imperfect which confines the future time interpretation to this latter.
Likewise, in (34), it is the presence of the conditional marker ʔin “if” along with
the Imperfect which enhances the future time reading of the main clause yan∆aɦ
“he will succeed.” The conclusion that emerges from this discussion is that the
Imperfect might receive a future time interpretation without having to resort to
the presence of the modal sawfa/sa-. Note, however, that in similar contexts the
presence of the modal will in English is preferred, if not necessary, as suggested
in the translation of the examples aforesaid. Further evidence for the future time
interpretation of the Imperfect comes from its co-occurrence with the modal
 particles qad/laʕalla/rubbamaa “may/might” to express possible future events;
consider the examples in (35), (36), and (37).
(35)
a
qad
yuwaasiluuna
as-sayra
∆aaniban,
wa
qad
may
continue.Imp
the-walking
aside,
and
may
yuwaasiluuna
ad-dawaraana.
continue.Imp
the-circling
“They may continue walking on the side, and they may continue
 turning around.” (SS#5)
b
wa
qad
yuʔaddii
haaðaa
al-qaraaru (. . .)
ʔilaa
far*i
and
may
lead.Imp
this
the-decision (. . .) to
imposing
ʕuquubaatin
mumaddadatin
ʕalaa
waaridaati
al-ɦaafilaati
sanctions
strong
on
imports
the-buses
al-yaabaaniyyati
as-saʁiirati...
the-Japanese
the-small...
“and this decision may lead to imposing serious sanctions on Japanese
imports of mini-buses...” (NA#13)
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
123

c
...waðaalika bi-ttixaaði
tadaabiira
qad
yakuunu
...and that
with-taking
measures
may
be.Imp
la-haa  taʔiiraatun
ʕalaa  at-ti∆aarati...
to-it
impacts
on
the-commerce...
“...and this is through taking some measures which may have impacts
on commerce...” (NA#9)
(36)
laʕalla
baʕ*u-hum
yahtadii.
may
some-them
repent.Imp
“Some of them may repent.” (SA#2)
(37)
fii
al-badʔi
kaanat
an-nuktatu,
wa
fii
an-nihaayati
in
the-beginning
be.Pf
the-joke,
and
in
the-end
rubbamaa
ʔaydan
takuunu,
may
also
be.Imp
“It all began as a joke; and it may end as one too.” (SS#3)
The aforesaid examples illustrate the use of the Imperfect along with the modal
particles qad in (35), laʕalla in (36), and rubbamaa in (37). Although all three
modals express possibility, that is the possible realization of the predicative  relation,
there are some pragmatic and structural factors which govern the use of each
modal. These differences are not relevant to our discussion and will not therefore
be investigated here.11 It is, nevertheless, noteworthy that the modal QAD has a
higher frequency than both laʕalla and rubbamaa in all types of  discourse
 genres.12 This is illustrated in Table 6.2.
For the moment, let us have a close look at the temporal interpretation
 attributed to the Imperfect in the aforesaid examples. In (35), the enunciator is
certainly interested in the future outcome of the verbal processes, whether that
outcome is immediate or rather remote. The case in (35a) for example,
describes a soldier who plans to throw a hand grenade at the enemy’s border
patrol troops. His assessment of their next move is expressed through the use
of the modal QAD “may” along with the Imperfect. The expression of futurity,
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
124
Table 6.2 The frequency of QAD, laʕalla, and rubbamaa
Discourse genres
N  54
N  35 (QAD)
N  13 (laʕalla)
N  6 (rubbamaa)
Journalistic
7
0
1
Academic
19
12
2
Fiction
9
1
3
Frequency (%)
65
24
11

however, is not inherent to the modal QAD but rather to the Imperfect. This can
be demonstrated (i) through showing the neutrality of the modal QAD with
respect to the temporal interpretation of the verbal process, (ii) through the
basic interpretation of this latter when the verbal complex [QAD  Verb]
appears in the least context dependent form. This is illustrated in (38) and (39)
respectively:
(38)
a
qad
yakuunu
al-waladu
yalʕabu
might
be.Imp
the-boy
play.Imp.
“The boy might be playing.”
b
qad
yakuunu
al-waladu
laʕiba
might
be.Imp
the-boy
play.Pf.
“The boy might have played.”
(39)
qad
yalʕabu
al-waladu
alyawma/ʁadan/*ʔamsi
might
play.Imp.
the-boy
today/tomorrow/*yesterday
“The boy might play today/tomorrow/*yesterday.”
The contrast between (38a) and (38b) shows that the temporal interpretation of
each clause relies on the verbal complex yakuunu yalʕabu “(will) be playing” in
(38a) and yakuunu laʕiba “(will) have played” in (38b), yielding a future time
interpretation and a past time interpretation respectively. The modal QAD remains
outside of the temporal domain, and expresses possibility, whether it belongs to
the past or to the future. As for the case in (39), the exclusion of the temporal
adverb ʔamsi “yesterday” suggests that only a nonpast interpretation is available.
Moreover, the natural interpretation of the clause disallows the simultaneous
reading, which in turn leaves future time as the only possible interpretation of the
clause. Thus, having already shown that the modal QAD operates outside of
 temporality, it is safe to conclude that the future time interpretation results from
the use of the Imperfect. The same analysis can be extended to account for the
future time interpretation of the Imperfect in both (35b) and (35c). Likewise, the
modals in (36) and (37), laʕalla and rubbamaa respectively, express the possible
realization/validation of the predicative relation. Moreover, they can be combined
with both verbal forms: the Perfect and the Imperfect, denoting in each case a past
and a present/future possibility. Thus, similar to the case in (35), the Imperfect
receives a future time interpretation. This is further supported by the fact that the
modal particles QAD, laʕalla, and rubbamaa do not exhibit verbal properties,
that is, they do not inflect for any verbal features such as aspect, taxis, tense, and
agreement, and as such they do not participate in the temporal evaluation of the
sentence. Having shown that the Imperfect might receive a present, a gnomic,
and a future time interpretation according to the context in which it appears,
we will now investigate its use in other environments where it bears a past time
interpretation.
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
125

The Imperfect and past time
Independently of the type of discourse, the Imperfect is sometimes used to refer
to verbal events, actions, states, and processes which have occurred prior to the
moment of enunciation, whether in the real or the fictional world. Consider the
following examples:
(40)
a
ʔamriikaa tattahimu
sunduuqa an-naqdi
bi-l-butʔi
fii
America
accuse.Imp bank
the-monetary with-the-slowing in
musaaʕadati
al-ʔiqtisaadi
as-sufyaatii.
helping
the-economy the-Soviet
“America accused the International Monetary Fund of slowing the aid
process to Russia.” (NA#7)
b
al-qalaqu
yaʕuudu
ʔilaa
ʔa∆waaʔi
al-ʔiqtisaadi
fii
the-anxiety
return.Imp
to
spheres
the-economy
in
waaminton
maʕa
taraa∆uʕin
∆adiidin.
Washington
with
decrease
new.
“Anxiety about the economy came back to Washington following a
new decline.” (NA#13)
c
“diitruuyt”
tattahimu
al-yaabaaniyyiina
bi-muɦaawalati
“Detroit”
accuse.Imp
the-Japanese
with-trying
kasbi
as-suuqi
al-ʔamriikii.
winning
the-market
the-American
“Detroit accused the Japanese of trying to win over the American
 market.” (NA#13)
d
yataɦaddau
ʔakbaru
masrafiyyin
fii
ʔifriiqiyaa
ʕalanan
speak.Imp
biggest
banker
in
Africa
openly
ʕan
ɦulmin
laa
yuraawidu
ʔillaa
ʕadadan
*aʔiilan...
about
dream
Neg
share.Imp
only
number
small
“The biggest banker in Africa talked openly about a dream which only
few people share.” (NA#13)
e
yaquulu
“ruubirt
maakinmaaraa”
ar-raʔiisu
as-saabiqu
say.Imp
“Robert
McNamara”
the-president
the-previous
li-l-banki
ad-dawlii...
wa yu*iifu
al-masʔuulu
ʔanna mila
to-the-bank the-world... and add.Imp the-responsible that like
haaðihi
al-∆uhuudi
these
the-efforts...
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
126

“The previous president of the World Bank “Robert McNamara”
said...(and) the official added that such efforts...” (NA#10)
The examples in (40) share two basic characteristics: (i) they all belong to the
same discourse genre, namely journalistic discourse, (ii) they all make use of the
Imperfect to refer to events which have already occurred at the time the writer-
enunciator reported them, (iii) they all refer to events which are still relevant since
they are presented as having news value. Moreover, there do not seem to be strong
constraints as to the specific news context to which the use of the Imperfect is
confined. While the first three cases (40a–c), for example, appear as titles, high-
lighting the occurrence of major events: the accusation against the International
Monetary Fund (40a), the reappearance of anxiety in Washington (40b), and
Detroit’s accusation of Japan (40c); the cases in (40d–e) are part of the main text,
and report about actions that have already been performed: the words of the most
important banker (40d), and the speech of the previous president (40e). When
compared to other languages, a similar use of the Imperfect is generally mirrored
by the use of the present tense. The examples in (41) and (42), from both French
and English, respectively, illustrate this phenomenon (the plain text is the  headline,
and the italic is the article).
(41)
a
Le chef de l’état inaugure la Foire internationale de Tunis
“Le président Ben Ali a inauguré samedi après-midi la Foire
 lntemationale de Tunis...”
(Tunis Hebdo October 26, 1992, p. 2)
b
En avion, il rentre dans le salon pour voir sa belle
“Randy est fou amoureux et mercredi dernier il a employé
les grands moyens. Il a jeté son avion dans la salle a manger de son
inaccessible dulcinée.”
(Tunis Hebdo September 28, 1992, p. 10)
c
Un accident d’un bus tunisien fait un mort en Algérie
“...l’accident a cause la mort d’un des voyageurs...”
(Tunis Hebdo November 16, 1992, p. 7)
d
Elle porte plainte contre celui qui lui a restitué sa virginité
“...le médecin est accusé ‘coups et blessures volontaires
avec préméditation.’”
(Tunis Hebdo September 21, 1992, p. 7)
(42)
a
Delegates approve dues increase
“The RA delegates overwhelmingly approved a constitutional  amendment
that increases dues by 3 percent in each of the next two years.”
(New York Times May 17, 1993, p. l0)
b
Union convention focuses on school violence...(The Assembly took
place from April 29 to May 1, and the article appeared on May 17)
(New York Times May 17, 1993, p. 2)
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
127

c
Professor details existence of UFOs, alien abductions
(A Temple University history professor discussed his belief that
 abduction by UFOs is an actual and prevalent phenomenon in two
three–hour lectures Friday and Saturday night)
(Cornell Daily Sun April 12, 1993, p. 7)
d
Residents of Campton, Calif. march in a “Keep It Good in the Hood”
rally yesterday in hopes of abating the possibility of violence following
the verdicts in the Rodney King beating case.
(Cornell Daily Sun April 12, 1993, p. l)
The sets of examples in both (41) and (42) constitute clear evidence for the use
of the present tense in both French and English to report on past time verbal
events, actions and processes (see also Monville-Burston and Waugh 1991). The
past time interpretation is further supported by the sentences in italics which
 provide the appropriate temporal context of each clause. In (41a), for example,
the inauguration of the President took place on Saturday, while the report in the
paper appeared the following Monday, that is two days later. The event belongs
therefore to the past at the time the paper appeared, as illustrated by the use of the
passé composé a inauguré in the clause in italics. Moreover, the co-occurrence
between the present tense march and the temporal adverb yesterday in (42d),
presents additional evidence for the apparent insensitivity of the present tense to
past time events.13 This insensitivity is equally observed in the English cases (42)
and in the Arabic examples (40). The empirical question is, therefore, why the
writer-enunciator would use the present tense or the Imperfect to present a past
time verbal event. Before answering such a intriguing question, we would like to
present similar cases from other text types, namely academic articles and narratives.
Consider the examples in (43) and (44):
(43)
a
wa
yumiiru
ʔaablii wa trumbaal...
ʔanna-hu
laa
and
point.out.Imp
Apply and Trumball...
that-him
Neg
yuu∆adu
munabbih
yumailu
mamaqqatan
li-kulli
exist.Imp
stimulus
represent.Imp
stress
to-all
al-ʔafraadi
allaðiina
yataʕarra*uuna
la-hu.
the-individuals
who
subject.Imp
to-it.
“Apply and Trumball point out (. . .) to the non-presence of a stimulus
which represents stress for all individuals who are subjected to it.” (SA#5)
b
ʔammaa
∆aan
diiwii
fa-yaraa
ʔanna
al-madrasata...
As for
John
Dewey
so-argue.Imp
that
the-school...
tanmuu
fii-haa
al-muyuulu
al-ʔi∆timaaʕiiyyatu...
wa
grow.Imp
in-it
the-tendencies
the-social...
and
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
128

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
129
yantahii
∆aan
diiwii
bi-naqdi-hi
haaðaa
ʔilaa
conclude.Imp
John
Dewey
with-criticisim-his
this
to
ʔiqaamati
al-ɦu∆∆ati
ʕalaa famali
ðaalika
al-namuuða∆i
building
the-argument
on
failure
that
the-type
al-tarbawii
al-ʔamriikii
at-taqliidii
wa
yuqaddimu
the-educational
the-American
the-traditional
and
present.Imp
badiilan
yatamaalu
fii
“at-tarbiya
at-taqaddumiyya”
alternative
correspond.Imp
in
“the-education
the-progressive.”
“As for John Dewey, he argues that social tendencies start to grow at
school...and he (John Dewey) reaches the point where he establishes
an argument for the failure of the traditional American educational
model, and presents an alternative represented in ‘progressive
 education’.” (SA#3)
(44)
a
wa
yandafiʕlu
bi-surʕatin
xaatifatin
li-yartamii
ʔilaa
and
rush.Imp
with-quick
sudden
to-plunge
Imp in
∆aanibi
at-talli
ar-ramlii...
yamuddu
ðiraaʕa-hu
ʔilaa
side
the-dune
the-sandy...
extend.Imp
arm-his
to
al-waraaʔi...
wa
yam*ii
ʔaɦmad
haadiʔan
fii
the-back...
and
continue.Imp
Ahmad
confident
in
ʔitti∆aahi
al-ʕarabati!
towards
the-car
“Quickly he runs and hides behind the sand dune ... he extends his
arm behind him...confidently, he walks away towards the car!” (SS#5)
b
wa
al-ʕamaaʔu
ya∆iiʔu...
wa
am-maabbu
yunakkitu
and
the-dinner
come.Imp..
and
the-young man
joke.Imp
laa
yazaalu,
wa
yuʁannii
wa
ya*ɦaku...
wa
Neg
still,
and
sing.Imp
and
laugh.Imp...
and
tataʔammalu
al-kubraa
ðaata
yawmin
xaatama
ʔummi-haa
observe.Imp
the-eldest
some
day
ring
mother-her
fii
ʔisbiʕi-haa, wa
fii
samtin
tasɦabu-hu
min
ʔisbiʕi-haa
in
finger-her,
and in
silence
take.off.Imp-it from finger-her
“. . . Dinner comes...and the young man is still telling jokes, singing
and laughing...One day the eldest looks at the ring on her mother’s
finger...and silently, she takes it off . .” (SS#1)
The examples in (43) illustrate another use of the Imperfect, whose function is yet
to be investigated. In (43a), for example, although Apply and Trumball’s suggestion

was presented years before the author-enunciator brings it about, to use the
Imperfect to report on the existence of such a past event is not only possible, but
also highly recommended in this academic discourse. Likewise, in (43b), the
author-enunciator uses the Imperfect while he evaluates Dewey’s work on education,
which goes back to the beginning of the century. In fact, in most scholarly
 writings, the Imperfect is often observed whenever previous ideas, claims,
 suggestions, and statements are presented and discussed. Generally, it is even
 recommended and preferred over the Perfect. This is not particular to Arabic,
however. French and English, for example, also make use of the present tense to
evaluate and discuss previous work, especially written work which is still
 available. This is illustrated in (45) and (46) respectively:
(45)
a
Quirk (1972: 775) dans sa présentation tend à diluer le fonctionnement
sous-jacent de cet opérateur (ENOUGH).
(Delmas 1983: 85)
b
Rien ne résume mieux cette “réflexibilité” de la langue que la définition
que nous en donne Robert Lafont (1972: 5) dans Le Travail et la
Langue...
(Bahloul 1986: 5)
(46)
a
Grimes (1975: 55–60) defines background more restrictively;
Longacre and Levinsohn 1978 and Langacre 1979b use the term
“backbone” rather than foreground.
(Waugh and Monville-Burston 1986: 847)
b
Arabic is generally classified among the tenseless languages, for  example,
in the tradition of French orientalists such as Fleisch 1979,
Cantineau 1960, who argue that the finite verb denotes mainly aspect
and not tense.
(Belazi 1993: 1)
Now, if we take a close look at the examples in ( 44a) and ( 44b ) here, we notice
a similar pattern relative to the use of the Imperfect. Example (44a) is taken from
a short story about a soldier’s adventures next to the enemy’s border line. The
main events center around the soldier’s movements and actions while he is on
duty. The narrator-enunciator presents the character’s main movements from the
point of view of either the Perfect or the Imperfect. This latter is illustrated in (44a).
In (44), the narrator-enunciator explores issues relative to family relations,
through detailed descriptions of each member’s finest actions and activities.
Similar to the aforesaid case, the use of the Imperfect is again observed. It should
be noted, however, that the general theme of narratives usually relates to previous
experiences (whether they be fictional or other), and according to standard
assumptions, the Perfect or past tenses are the most “typical” verbal forms with
which a short story is narrated. The use of the Imperfect is seen as some type of
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
130

“intrusion” or “deviation,” and should therefore be isolated and treated according to
its odd behavior. I would argue that the metaterm “historical present” that the gram-
matical tradition has for a long time assigned to the Imperfect or the present tense
is a direct result of the feeling of oddity which has been linked to its  specific use in
narrative contexts and fiction in general. Finally, it is worth noting that this partic-
ular use of the Imperfect tends to be found among various languages and language
groups.14 The empirical question it raises, however, relates to the reason or reasons
for which the narrator-enunciator switches from using the Perfect to the Imperfect.
The major hypotheses, as summarized in Blyth (1990: 94–114), widely recognize
that the historical present is an internal evaluation device. Accordingly, Fleischman
(1990: 210), for example, suggests that the historical present has an accelerative
function: “the diegetic present is used to speed up the pace of narration, particularly
when present tense verbs cluster,” Although this might hold true for certain
 contexts, where acceleration is involved, it can not be an inherent feature of the
Imperfect. In fact, the case in (44a) shows a rather slow process, where the soldier’s
fear slows down all his movements. In any case, I would argue that, unless the
analysis of the Imperfect takes into consideration its major contextual variants, its
use in most major discourse genre-types, along with its place within the ATM
 system, any value confined to it remains superficial and partial at best.
Summary and proposal
Thus far, we have unveiled another contextual variant of the Imperfect. Having exam-
ined its use in journalistic articles, scholarly writings, and narratives, we have noticed
again the unrestricted temporal characteristic of the Imperfect. This is demonstrated
through its capability of appearing in a past time context. This appearance is usually
termed as atypical, given its intrusive character. As such, the Imperfect competes
with the other member of the opposition, namely the Perfect, creating therefore a
subtle and complex case on which we will comment later (see pp. 140–47).
To summarize, we have sought in this section to deepen our understanding with
respect to the functioning of the Imperfect, with particular reference to temporality.
In order to do so, we have looked closely at the use of the Imperfect within the
four major temporal contexts: present, gnomic, future, and past. The conclusion
that emerges from this discussion clearly stresses the compatibility and the
 unrestricted nature of this verbal form. With respect to present time, our discussion
stresses both the actualization and the identificational values of the Imperfect, on
the one hand, and its eventive value, on the other hand. While the former results in
the present time interpretation of the verbal event, the latter is predicate-oriented
and emphasizes therefore the occurrence of the verbal event. It should be noted
again, that the presence of temporal reference, that is, temporal adverbs, in both
cases is almost irrelevant, given the simultaneous relationship which obtains
between the moment of enunciation and the moment of the verbal event. In gnomic
contexts, the use of the Imperfect relates to the lack of any particular point of
view; that is, the predicative relation is not evaluated with respect to any particular
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
131

 situation of enunciation. Accordingly, the Imperfect either characterizes the
nontemporal nature of the verbal event, that is, omnitemporal, atemporal, habitual,
generic, and so on, or denotes an inherent property of the grammatical subject.
As for the future time interpretation which the Imperfect receives, it should be
emphasized that this latter is highly contextualized, and is, therefore, an inherent
property of the linguistic context, that is, the utterance, rather than a feature of the
Imperfect, it is not given invariantly by the tense itself (Waugh 1976: 451). What is
important, however, is the fact that the Imperfect in such contexts continues to
express the enunciator’s perception of the verbal event, denoting either simultaneity,
a property of the grammatical subject, or the occurrence of the event. The only
factor which differentiates the Imperfect here from the one before is the domain
within which it operates. While it belongs to the Non certain domain in the  latter
case, that is, possibility, probability, it functions within the Certain domain in the
former case, that is, validation, truth, and so on.
Finally, the use of the Imperfect in past time contexts, whether to present past
time events in journalistic discourse, or previous ideas, claims, and theories in
scholarly articles, or to describe foregrounded events in narratives, should come
as no surprise given the unmarked nature of the Imperfect within the verbal
 system, as will be shown later. Temporality remains a property of the context, and,
at times, inherent to the type of enunciation, that is, historical texts, and so on.
Adamczewski considers that the temporal information in such contexts is
 presupposed, and that it therefore does not interact with the verbal form the same
way a new temporal information would do. Accordingly, the temporal adverb, for
instance, becomes either a “built-in” part of the predicate (thematic: when it is
presupposed), or an independent element which bears on the enunciator’s perception
of the verbal event (rhematic: when it is not presupposed), resulting in an
 obligatory semantic interdependence between the verbal form and the temporal
information. This amounts to saying that the temporal information, whether it be
a date, a temporal adverb, a temporal expression, or other, is evaluated with
respect to its status in the sentence, which results from the enunciator’s perception
of the verbal event according to the relationship this latter establishes with both
the moment and the situation of enunciations. These contextual variants of the
Imperfect are further summarized in Table 6.3.
Variation and invariance
The conclusion that emerges from the above characterization of the Imperfect is
not only that its use evidences a broad variety of possible contextualizations, but
questions also the actual existence of any invariant meaning, which might underlie
this variation and yet, it is only invariance that provides a principled analytic
 control for the description of observable variation (see also Garcia 1991), and
offers a natural explanation for the variety in the variation. However, unless
 variation is internally structured according to the organizing principles of hierarchy,
the search for invariance becomes harder if not impossible.
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
132

Similar to the analysis advanced for the Perfect in Chapter 4, we would like to
suggest that the contextual variants of the Imperfect are best evaluated according
to the criterion which differentiates between a basic meaning, a general/generic
meaning, and a specific meaning. This is illustrated in Table 6.4.
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
133
Table 6.3 The contextual variants of the Imperfect
Temporal context
Variants
Prototypical examples
Present time
Actualization and
ʔaktubu risaalatan
Identification
“I am writing a letter.”
Eventive value
yataqaddam wa yaqðif
“He advances and shoots.”
Gnomic
Atemporal
X yusaawii xamsatun
“X equals 5.”
Omnitemporal
azzaytu yatfu fawqa almaaʔi
“Oil floats on water.”
Subject-
Tajikistan tataɦaddau
characterization
al-faarisiyyatu
“Tajikistan speaks Persian.”
Future time
Modal value
ʔallaahu yaɦmiika
“May God protect you.”
Predictive value
qad yan∆aɦu
“He might succeed.”
Future value
yaʔtii ʁadan
“He comes tomorrow.”
Past time
Historical Present
wa-l-ʕamaaʔu ya∆iiʔu
Evaluation device and
“and dinner comes.”
stylistic
Table 6.4 The contextual meanings of the Imperfect
Types of contextual meanings
Contextual meanings
1 Basic meaning
a present time
[past] ([future])
b eventive value
2 General/genetic meanings
Gnomic
a Omnitemporal
[past] ([future])
b Subject characterization
[0 past] ([0 future])
c Atemporal
[0 past] ([0 future])
3 Specific meanings
a past time
[past]
b future time
[future]
Note
‘’ refers to relevant presence of the feature,
‘’ refers to the negative presence of the feature,
‘0’ refers to the absence and/or irrelevance of the feature.

The question may fairly be raised, now, concerning the features the invariant
meaning of the Imperfect is composed of. Given the relational and oppositional
nature of the invariant (Waugh 1991a: 3), we argue that the Imperfect and Perfect
are in an unmarked–marked relationship, with the Imperfect being unmarked and
the Perfect being marked. This means that if the marked Perfect signals
both [anteriority] and [dimensionalization], then the unmarked Imperfect
can signal on the one hand [anterior] (the opposite of [anteriority]) and
[dimensionalization] (the opposite of [dimensionalization]), and on the other
hand, [anteriority] and [dimensionalization], that is the combination of each
of the opposites. In addition, when the Imperfect signals [anteriority], it also
signals its conceptual counterpart, namely, [unbounded], that is, the lack of
(closed) boundaries of the verbal process. This is its basic meaning. It accounts
for the ability of the Imperfect to refer to present time ([simultaneous], with the time
to which it is simultaneously normally being given by the moment of  enunciation)
and for its ability to give “eventive value” ([unbounded] and thus, by inference,
in progress). With respect to the latter, where verbal events are being narrated as
they are performed, simultaneity obtains with respect to the moment of enunciation,
and unboundedness relates to the ongoing process.15 Moreover, depending on the
type of narration, the enunciator may implicitly or explicitly express the beginning
of the verbal process, in which case the presence of a  temporal adverb, such as
alʔaana “now,” is deemed necessary, as illustrated in the following example:
(47)
wa
alʔaana
t-a-taqaddamu
naɦwa
at-taawilati
and
now
3f-Imp-move
towards
the-table
“And now, she moves towards the table.”
In other cases, the verbal process is typically simultaneous with (non-anterior
to) the moment of enunciation, on the one hand, and unbounded with no focus
whatsoever on any initial or final boundary, on the other hand. Typically, the
enunciator evaluates the predicative relation, as expressed by the verbal process,
as [simultaneous] and [unbounded], yielding the equivalent of the present
progressive interpretation in English, as illustrated in the relevant data in our corpus.
Notice that, while simultaneity necessarily involves a second anchor with which
the verbal process is evaluated (in the typical case, it is the moment of enunciation),
the concept of boundedness is self contained, as it only focuses on the internal
quality of the verbal process. In other words, simultaneity is relational, but
unboundedness is not – and neither one is deictic, at least inherently.
As for the generic meaning of the Imperfect, these involve the gnomic contexts
which are divided into three sub-types: omnitemporal, subject characterization,
and atemporal; it should be stressed that in all three contexts, both [anterior]
and [dimensionalization] are relevant: that is, the process is evaluated neither as
being placed in any particular time, nor as pertaining to actions which are
 inherently bounded. In the omnitemporal interpretation, therefore, the predicative
relation is presented as valid over all time, and as such, there is a total lack of
 temporal specification, and the process is also presented as not being inherently
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
134

bounded. The same analysis applies to subject characterization, since the Imperfect
denotes a property of the subject as valid all the time and thus also unbounded.
The atemporal uses may also receive a similar interpretation: neutralization with
respect to time and the total lack of boundaries of the verbal process. And in all
cases, the validity of the predicative relation may be ascertained at the present
moment, but it is not assumed to be specific to the present moment only.
As for the use of the Imperfect in past and future time contexts, there does not
seem to exist any type of overlap between the validation of the predicative  relation,
as described by the verbal event, and the present moment. This results in specific
meanings consisting of both a future time interpretation and typically some type of
modality. All three types of future give an event as possible in some future time,
given what one knows (or wants) in the present. Thus the knowing/ wanting is simul-
taneous with the moment of speaking. The unboundedness is less focused upon.
That is, the enunciator presents the wishes without specifying any boundaries which
may restrict its extensions.16 The past time interpretation is also very specific.
It designates an event that happened in the past but whose relevance for the present
is more important, thus, it is [anterior] (both anterior and  simultaneous). Its
 neutrality with respect to boundedness is also linked to current relevance: whether
or not it was bounded in the past, its relevance to the present is unbounded.
It should also be emphasized that the use of the Imperfect to express both  futurity
and pastness is fully predictable, since the Imperfect constitutes the unmarked
member in the verbal system, and thus, it is not incompatible with such temporal
references. However, while it is true that this usage of the Imperfect could be
characterized as [past] and [future] respectively, there is a major difference
between these contextual variants and those given earlier: namely, that the Imperfect
does not and can not make an explicit and direct reference to past or future time
in the same way it can be used to denote present time (Monville-Burston and
Waugh 1991: 89). In the case of past time, for example, simultaneity is achieved
through the enunciator’s desire to actualize the verbal process within the present
moment of the coenunciator. In newspaper articles, for instance, this is typically
illustrated by the use of the Imperfect while commenting on past photographed
events. In all these cases, it is important to stress that it is the context which
 specifies past time or future time, not the verbal form itself, which does not in
itself refer to either the past or the future. The next question to be addressed is
whether or not there is any independent evidence to confirm this line of analysis.
In what follows, we will show that our conclusions are further supported by the
basic constituent structure of the Imperfect in both its simple and compound
forms within the ATM system.
The Imperfect within the ATM system
Similar to the behavior of the Perfect within the ATM system, the Imperfect
 functions as a stable verbal form, from both the formal, that is, morphological,
and the semantico-pragmatic perspectives. Consider Table 6.5 here.
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
135

Table 6.5 shows the basic compositional characteristic of complex temporal
relations in Arabic. This compositionality is marked by a system of combinations
whose nucleus is the thematic verb and whose periphery are auxiliaries and modal
particles. We will now focus on the use of the Imperfect in this system. The table
clearly demonstrates that the complex temporal relations, present, past, or future,
do not affect and are not affected by the basic verbal form. Instead, these relations
are entirely governed by auxiliaries and modals. This amounts to saying that,
while auxiliaries and modals control the temporal and modal features of the
 verbal complex, the verbal form denotes basic invariant features. The only difference
between simple and compound verbal structures, however, resides in the  temporal
anchor from which the verbal event is evaluated, whether it is a past as in
(Table 6.5, b) or a future as in (Table 6.5, d). The fact that verbal forms are  neutral
with respect to  temporality in compound tenses, a feature which then becomes a
property of  auxiliaries, is not particular to Arabic, however. Both English and
French ATM systems, for example, exhibit a similar phenomenon. The examples
in (48) and (49), respectively, illustrate this similarity.17
(48)
a
I
am
playing.
b
I
was
playing.
c
I
will be
playing.
(49)
a
J’
ai
joué.
b
J’
avais
joué.
c
J’
aurais
joué.
Turning now to the Imperfect itself, we have already discussed the simple
 progressive reading (Table 6.5, a). Now, consider the cases in (Table 6.5, b) and
(Table 6.5, d), as illustrated in the following examples:
(50)
a
Kuntu
ʔalʕabu
ɦiina
wasalat
zaw∆a-tii
be.Pf
play.Imp
when
arrive.Pf
wife-my
“I was playing when my wife came in.”
b
(sawfa/sa- )
ʔakuunu
ʔalʕabu
ɦiina
tasilu
zaw∆a-tii
(will/’ll)
be.Imp
play.Imp
when
arrive.Imp
wife-my
“I will be playing when my wife comes in.”
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
136
Table 6.5 The Imperfect constructions
Modal
Auxiliary
Verb
Semantic Interpretation
a —
—
ʔalʕabu
“I play/I am playing.”
b —
kuntu
ʔalʕabu
“I used to play/ I was playing.”
c (sawfa/sa-)
—
ʔalʕabu
“I will play.”
d (sawfa/sa-)
ʔakuun
ʔalʕabu
“I will be playing.”
e qad
ʔakuunu
ʔalʕabu
“I might be playing.”

The examples in (50a) and (50b) illustrate the use of the Imperfect in both a past
time context, as indicated by the auxiliary kuntu “I was” in (50a), and in a future time
context, as indicated by the auxiliary ʔakuunu “I will be” in (50b).
Crucial to our analysis is the fact that while auxiliaries control the temporal
interpretation of clauses, the Imperfect invariantly signals the simultaneity and
the unboundedness of the verbal process. In both cases, the moment with which
the process is simultaneous is given by the auxiliary. Moreover, nothing is said
about the boundaries of the verbal process, that is, the playing is presented with
no specific beginning or ending. This follows naturally from the unbounded  feature
inherent to the verbal form. Now, consider the second set of contextual variants
in both (Table 6.5, a) and (Table 6.5, b), as illustrated in the following examples:
(51)
a
Maher
y-a-lʕabu
kurata
al-qadam
Maher
3m-Imp-play
ball
the-foot
“Maher plays soccer.”
b
Kaana
Maher
y-a-lʕabu
kurata
al-qadam
was
Maher
3m-Imp-play
ball
the-foot
“Maher used to play soccer.”
In both cases, the Imperfect characterizes the grammatical subject; thus, (51a) can
be paraphrased as “Maher is a soccer player,” and (51b) as “Maher was a  soccer
player.” Here, it is the generic interpretation that is uppermost, but in (51b) that
genericity is confined to past time.18 Finally, the analysis of the cases in
(Table 6.5, c) and (Table 6.5, e) which involve the use of modal elements such as
sawfa/sa- “will/’ll” and qad “may/might” in front of the Imperfect,19 follows
the same line of explanation as advanced earlier for its future and predictive
 values. In what follows, we will discuss some aspects relative to the use of
 negative particles with the Imperfect.
The Imperfect and negation
Consider the examples in (52):
(52)
a
wa
tamammaa
Abd-Alkariim
fii
al-waasiʕati
wa
ʔuðnu-hu
and
walk.Imp
Abd-Alkarim
in
the-desert
and
ear-his
laa
tasmaʕu
hissan
wa
laa
ɦarakatan
Neg
hear.Imp
sound
and
Neg
noise
“Abd-Alkarim walked in the desert; his ear does not hear any sound
or noise...” (SS#4)
b
wa
baʕda
ʔusbuuʕin
saafara,
wa
baʕda-haa
lam
and
after
week
travel.Pf,
and
after-it
Neg
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
137

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
138
Table 6.6 The structure of negators
Negation
Tense
Interpretation (with do)
LA
A (present)
LAA “does not”
LA
M (past)
LAM “did not”
LA
N (future)
LAN “will not”
yaʕud!
maata
fii
al-ɦarbi
return.Imp
die.Pf
in
the-war
“He left after a week, and he did not come back afterwards! he died in
the war.” (SS#3)
c
ʔabadan...
LAN
yaɦdua
mayʔun
min
haaðaa
never...
Neg
happen.Imp
something
from
this
“never... none of this will happen.” (SS#4)
If we take a close look at the contrast between all three examples in (52a), (52b),
and (52c), we notice that while the verbal form remains unchanged, it is rather the
morphological shape of the negative particles which undergo changes according
to the temporal context, present in (52a), past in (52b), and future in (52c). It is
not a coincidence that this verbal form happens to be the Imperfect. It is probably
expected given the analysis advanced earlier. In negative contexts, the Imperfect
becomes entirely blind to temporality, and can be used in contexts with present,
past, and future reference. On the strength of the evidence, we suggest that the
very possibility of occurrence of the Imperfect in these contexts implies that
 temporality is not a necessary feature of the verb (see also Benmamoun 2000 for
a similar conclusion). In this particular context, temporality is associated with the
negative particles: laa in (52a), lam in (52b), and lan in (52c). Accordingly,
I would like to stipulate that each particle is morphologically complex, and
expresses therefore both negation and temporality. Thus, given the morphological
structure of these particles, we suggest the following reanalysis, as illustrated
in Table 6.6.
This analysis illustrates another type of interaction between grammatical
 categories, namely between tense and negation. It should be noted, however, that
MSA has another negator, maa, whose behavior might constitute a challenge to
the claims advanced earlier. Consider the examples in (53).
(53)
a
ʔinna
al-manðuumaati
at-tarbawiyyati
al-ʔislaamiyyati
ʔINNA
the-systems
the-educational
the-Islamic
maa
taʔaxxarat
ʕan
rakbi
al-ɦayaati
Neg
fall behind.Pf
from
stirrup
the-life
“The Islamic educational systems did not become old fashioned.” (SA#3)

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
139
Table 6.7 The frequency of negators: laa, lam, lan, and maa
Negators
N  455
%
Laa
281
62
Lam
150
30
Lan
19
4
Maa
5
1
b
ʔinna-hu
maa
ya∆uuzu
la-naa
ʔan
nataɦaddaa
ʔINNA-it
Neg
approve.Imp
for-us
to
talk.Imp
ʕan
mustaqbali
al-ʕaalami wa
al-ha*aarati
muta∆aahiliina
about
future
the-world
and
the-civilization neglecting
waa∆iba-naa
fii
al-musaahamati
al-faʕʕaalati
fii
sunʕi-hi.
duty-our
in
the-participation
the-effective
in
creation-its
“We can not talk about the future of the world and civilization while we
are neglecting the duty of our effective participation.” (SA#1)
The examples in (53a) and (53b) show that, unlike the negators laa, lam, and lan,
maa does not seem to control the temporal interpretation in either example. This
is illustrated first, by the fact that it can be followed by both the Perfect and the
Imperfect, as indicated in (53a) and (53b), and second, by its invariable morphology.
Instead, it is the Perfect which controls the past time interpretation in (53a), while
the present time interpretation in (53b) results from the use of the Imperfect. This
seems to suggest that negation and temporality are not necessarily interrelated.
Although the negator maa constitutes a clear problematic case for the earlier
argument, we would like to suggest that its statistical insignificance makes its
case too weak to constitute a real challenge. Consider Table 6.7.
The results of our quantitative investigation show that the frequency of the
negator maa is very low, that is, 1 percent, which makes it very marginal. As for
its distribution between the Perfect and the Imperfect, we have counted one  single
occurrence with the former, and four with the latter. That is, among 151 perfect
verbs, 150 are negated by lam, and one by maa; and among 285 imperfect verbs,
281 are negated by laa, and only four by maa. Notice, moreover, that the  negator
maa is temporally restricted to both the present and the past, and does not negate
any form of future events, as illustrated in Table 6.7.
(54)
a
(sawfa)
ʔusaafiru
ʁadan
(will)
travel.Imp
tomorrow
“I (will) leave tomorrow.”
b
(*maa sawfa)
*maa ʔusaafiru
ʁadan

In addition to its low frequency, and to its temporal restrictedness, the use of
maa seems also to be restricted to some discourse genres. In our corpus, we have not
encountered any single use of maa in newspaper articles. The five occurrences of
maa are only found in scholarly articles and narratives: two uses in the former,
and three in the latter. It is easy to see now the reasons for which the negator maa
does not qualify as a competing form which could have resulted in a case of
 variation, which in turn would have required a more careful consideration. Maa,
I would argue, is a marginal negator which was probably more used in Classical
Arabic, and, similar to the other three negators, lammaa, ʔin and, laata, which are
no longer attested in MSA,20 the use of maa is probably in its disappearing stage,
as the system of negation is getting stabilized. A final piece of evidence might
come from the fact that the majority of Arabic dialects have adopted the negator
maa, some as a full negative form and others as a discontinuous form along with
the suffix /-m/ (see Benmamoun 2000: 67–118). On the basis of the above  evidence,
we would like to claim that, within the ATM system in Arabic, the temporal
 interpretation is controlled basically by both auxiliaries and negators. Now, we
would like to present some final remarks concerning the contrast between both
verbal forms in Arabic, the Perfect and the Imperfect, discuss their frequencies,
markedness and show the degree to which the presence of semantico-pragmatic
and discourse factors favor or disfavor the occurrence of a particular alternative.
The Imperfect vs. the Perfect
As we investigated some relevant aspects inherent to the semantico-pragmatic
and discourse characteristics of both the Perfect and the Imperfect, we have noted
the basic similarities and differences which characterize both members of the
 verbal system. We have demonstrated, for example, that while each verbal form
may appear in a broad range of temporal contexts, that is, present, past, future,
and so on, there are some systematic differences which distinguish each verbal
form from the other. These differences are reminiscent of their relative invariant
meanings. Table 6.8 summarizes these differences.
Table 6.821 captures a straightforward generalization as to the oppositional nature
which underlies the use of both verbal forms. Accordingly, the Perfect is characterized
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
140
Table 6.8 Semantic values of the Perfect and the Imperfect
Verbal forms
Semantic
Values
Perfect
Anteriority
Dimensionalization
(Simultaneity)
( Unboubdedness)
Imperfect
Anteriority and
Dimensionalization
/Ø Anteriority
and /Ø Dimensionalization
(and  Anteriority)
(andDimensionalization)

by anteriority and the lack of simultaneity [anteriority, simultaneity], on
the one hand, and by dimensionalization and the lack of unboundedness
[dimensionalization, unboundedness], on the other hand. The Imperfect
appears both as the Perfect’s corollary, since it is characterized by simultaneity
and the lack of anteriority [simultaneity, anteriority], and by boundedness and
the lack of dimensiona1ization [unbounded, dimensionalization], and as more
general than the Perfect since it gives [anterior], [Ø anterior], and [dimen-
sionalization] [Ø dimensionalization]. Moreover, the table shows that, although
they exhibit systematic differences, their semantic values are interconnected
with each other. In fact, it is the relational aspect of the two verbal forms, and 
the contrast which they represent, that governs both their differences and their
similarities.
Having discussed the differences between the two verbal forms, we than pass
on and examine some aspects of their similarities. Consider the contrast between
the following pair of examples:
(55)
a
ʔinna
ʕar*an
sariiʕan
li-l-ʔarqaami
allatii
ʔINNA
presentation
quick
of-the-numbers
which
tadaawalat-haa
wasaaʔili
al-ʔiʕlaami...
circulate.Pf-it
means
the-media
“A brief presentation of the numbers which the media circulated...”
(SA#4)
b
ʔinna
at-tamwii1i
al-ʔamriikii... laa
yadaʕu
ma∆aalan
ʔINNA
the-financing
the-American
Neg
leave.Imp
way
li-m-makki
fii
al-ʔarqaami
allatii
tatadaawalu-haa
to-the-doubt
in
the-numbers
which
circulate.Imp-it
wasaaʔilu
al-ʔiʕlaami..
means
the-media...
“American financing...does not leave any doubt about the numbers
which the media has been circulating...” (SA#4)
(56)
a
wa
yatabayyanu
mina
al-∆adwali
as-saabiqi
ʔanna...
and
appear.Imp
from
the-tab1e
the-previous
that...
“It appears from the previous table that...” (SA#5)
b
wa
tabayyana
mina
a1-∆adwali
as-saabiqi
ʔanna...
and
appear.Pf
from
the-table
the-previous
that...
“It appeared from the previous table that..” (SA#5)
(57)
a
wa
taquulu
ruuytir
ʔinna
marikaatin
and
say.Imp
Reuters
that
corporations
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
141

musannaʕatin
li-s-sayyaaraati
fii
diitruuyt
ʔittahamat
producing
of-the-cars
in
Detroit
accuse.Pf
a1-yaabaaniyyiina
bi-bayʕi
as-sayyaaraati
fi
as-suuqi
the-Japanese
with-selling
the-cars
in
the-market
al-ʔamriikiyyati
bi-saʕrin
ʔaqalla
min
saʕri-haa
fii
the-American
with-price
less
than
price-its
in
a1-yaabaani.
the-Japan.
“Reuters says that some automobile makers in Detroit accused the
Japanese of selling cars in the American market below their cost in
Japan.” (NA#13)
b
wa
qaalat
al-wazaaratu
ʔinna
maazdaa
tabiiʕu
and
say.Pf
the-ministry
that
Mazda
sell.Imp
al-ɦaafilaati
as-saʁiirati
bi-saʕrin
yaqilly
bi-nisbati 12.7
the-buses
the-small
with-price
lessen.Imp
with-ratio 12.7
fii
al-miʔati
ʕani
as-saʕri
as-saaʔidi
wa
tuuyuutaa
in
the-hundred
from
the-price
the-usual
and
Toyota
bi-nisbati
6.75
fii al-miʔati
wa
marikaatin
yaabaaniyyatin
with-ratio
6.75
in
the-hundred
and firms
Japanese
ʔuxraa
bi-nisbati
9.88
fii
al-miʔati.
others
with-ratio
9.88
in
the-hundred.
“The ministry said that Mazda sells mini-buses for 12.7% less than
their average price, Toyota for 6.75% less, and other Japanese firms for
9.88% less.” (NA#13)
The cases in (55), (56), and (57) are a straightforward illustration of a kind of
 neutralization whereby an extralinguistic event could be referred to equally by
either verbal form, the Perfect or the Imperfect. In (55), for example, the writer-
enunciator discusses the issue of the recent Russian Jews immigrating to Israel,
with a particular focus on the accurate numbers released. Although the numbers
of the new immigrants have already been released by the media, the enunciator
presents this particular event from the point of view of the Perfect first,
(55a) tadaawalat “presented,” then from the point of view of the Imperfect (55b)
tatadaawalu “present,” since the numbers are still being circulated and still
 relevant. In (56), a similar alternation is observed. The evaluation of the previous
table is also presented from either point of view: the Imperfect in (56a)
yatabayyanu “appears,” since they are still relevant (and being discussed), and the
Perfect in (56b) tabayyana “appeared.” In (57) the writer-enunciator chooses the
reporting verb in the Imperfect first, taquulu “says” (57a), then in the Perfect,
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
142

qaala “said” (57b).22 This raises an empirical question as to why the enunciator
would resort to using the Imperfect in a context where the Perfect is quite likely
to be used. More important is the question about the extent to which this alternation
is rule-free or rule-governed. These questions are of major theoretical concern
since the frequency of this alternation is far from being marginal. Indeed, we
looked at all newspaper articles in our corpus, and when we counted the number
of occurrences of both the Perfect and the Imperfect in sentence initial position,
a context where the use of reporting verbs, such as qaala “to say,” ðakara “to
mention,” ʔakkada “to confirm,” bayyana “to show” and so on are only governed
by the writer-enunciator, our results have shown that more then one-fifth of the
total number of verbal forms appear in the Imperfect. The relative details are
 summarized in Table 6.9.
In scholarly articles, our results show an even distribution between the Perfect
and the Imperfect with slightly more of the latter. This is only natural given the
characteristics of this discourse genre which includes less reporting and more
evaluation and presentation. Table 6.10 summarizes the results.
Now, it is easy to see the number of cases which previous analyses have either
deliberately left out, or said too little about.23 In our opinion, unless the analysis
includes and accurately accounts for these cases, the characterization of the major
opposition within the Arabic verbal system remains misleading, and partial at best.
In order to best characterize this major opposition, we suggest that it be evaluated
both from within and from without. Evaluation from without relates to the broader
context in which the verbal form is used, and in particular to the expressive, prag-
matic, textual, and discourse factors which in effect have greater influence on the
use of each verbal form. Evaluation from within involves seeing the Perfect and
Imperfect in relation to each other. This is represented schematically in Figure 6.1.
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
143
Table 6.9 Frequency of the Perfect/Imperfect in sentence initial
clauses (newspaper  articles)
Article Nb.
Nb.Pfs
Nb.Imps
1
26
7
2
12
3
3
30
1
4
4
1
5
2
5
6
6
0
7
2
1
8
5
2
9
8
5
10
2
4
11
9
1
12
11
0
13
20
10
Total
136
40
Frequency (%)
77
23

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
144
Table 6.10 The frequency of the Perfect/Imperfect in sentence
 initial clauses (scholarly articles)
Article Nb.
Nb.Pfs
Nb.Imps
1
9
29
2
13
21
3
8
9
4
21
13
5
24
22
Total
75
97
Frequency (%)
44
56
Divergence
Perfect
Imperfect
+ Anteriority
–  Anteriority
+ Dimensionalization
–  Dimensionalization
(= Basic use)
(= Basic use)
Imperfect
±/Ø Anteriority
±/Ø Dimensionalization
(= Gnomic/Generic use)
Perfect
Imperfect
+ Anteriority                Near-Convergence               + Anteriority
+ Dimensionalization   (Near-Synonymy)      + Dimensionalization
(= Special use (=“Plus”
Interpretation))
Figure 6.1 The dynamic relationship between the Perfect and the Imperfect.
In other words, the Imperfect may be either the opposite of the Perfect (the
basic use), or closer to the Perfect because it encompasses both the meaning of
the Perfect and its opposite (the gnomic/generic use), or nearly synonymous with the
Perfect when both can refer to past, bounded events. This is a special use of

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
145
the Imperfect, and highly contextually conditioned. There is always some difference
in interpretation between the Imperfect and Perfect in such contexts. Consider the
case in (55). While the use of the Perfect tadaawalat “circulated” in (55a)
 invariantly expresses anteriority and dimensionalization and focuses on one past
event, the use of the Imperfect tatadaawalu “has been circulating” in (55b)
denotes simultaneity and unboundedness, and is much more generic in its scope:
it includes various numbers which have been, and continue to be, circulated. One
more provision is needed to the basic components of the Imperfect. This  provision
should relativize both simultaneity and unboundedness to the reality of the writer-
enunciator, to the intentions and the point of view vis-à-vis the type of message
the latter would like to present. Now, if we look closely at the immediate context,
we notice that the writer-enunciator rejects the numbers that the media circulated
in (55a) and agrees with the other numbers which the media circulates/has been
circulating in (55b). Thus, there is a strong correlation between the use of the
Perfect, and the context, as much as there is cohesion between the Imperfect and
the enunciator’s intentions. The rejection correlates with anteriority and dimen-
sionalization, hence the use of the Perfect, while appropriateness correlates with
simultaneity and unboundedness, hence the choice of the Imperfect.
Pursuing the same line of reasoning, the fact that in both “good wishes” and
omnitemporal cases, the two verbal forms are observed, we believe that they
should be accounted for in a similar way. The examples in (58) and (59) illustrate
this use.
(58)
a
raɦima-hu
al-llaahu
bless.Pf-him
the-God
“May God bless him!”
b
al-laahu
y-a-rɦamu-hu
the-God
3m-Imp-bless-him
“May God bless him!”
(59)
a
ʔin
daras-ta
na∆aɦ-ta
if
study.Pf-you
succeed.Pf-you
“If you study, you (will) succeed.”
b
ʔin
t-a-drus
t-a-n∆aɦ
if
2m-Imp-study
2m-Imp-succeed
“If you study, you (will) succeed.”
Although the examples in (58) and those in (59) shoot at the same target, the
results are very close but not exactly the same. In other words, while the choice
of the Perfect in (58a) and (59a) implies some type of distancing inferred by
the invariant meaning of this verbal form, namely anteriority and the lack of
simultaneity; the use of the Imperfect in (58b) and (59b) implies more sympathy
 suggested by its possible reference to simultaneity and the lack of anteriority.

Again, even when there is a choice, this latter is motivated by the invariant
 meaning of these verbal forms. Finally, we would like to stress, with respect to the
marked status of each member of the opposition, that the Imperfect remains
unmarked, while the Perfect is marked. The Imperfect appears in a broader range
of contexts, as shown in our discussion earlier. In addition, it is observed in contexts
where infinitival forms in both English and French, for example, appear. This is
illustrated in the following examples.
(60)
a
kaana
ʕalay-hi
ʔan
yaxmida
ʔanfaasa-hu
wa
yanaama
be.Pf
on-him
to
suppress.Imp breathings-his
and
sleep.Imp
“He had to stay silent and go to sleep.”
b
fa-laabudda
min
takiifi
musaahamati-naa
ɦattaa
so-necessary
to
intensifying
participations-our
in order to
yartafiʕa
rasiidu-naa
fii
sunʕi
ar-raʔyi
al-ʕaammi
increase.Imp
share-our
in
creation
the-opinion
the-general
al-ʕaalarniyyi...
the-international
“We have to intensify our participation in order to increase our
 influence on the international point of view.” (SA#1)
c
yumkinu
ʔan
naquula...
possible
to
say.Imp
“It is possible to say...” (SA#1)
d
nuriidu
ʔan
naqifa...
want Imp
to
stand up.Imp
“We would like to stand up...” (SA#1)
e
ðahaba
yusaaliɦu
ʔirnraʔata-hu
min
xaali-haa
go.Pf
reconcile.Imp
wife-his
from
uncle-her
“He went to reconcile with his wife through her uncle.” (SS#4)
f
ʔanaa
allaði
∆aaʔa
yatrudu
min
hunaa
am-maytaan...
I
who
come.Pf
chase.Imp
from
here
the-devil...
“I am the one who came to chase away the devil.” (SS#3)
g
Lam
yabdaʔ
an-naasu
yastayqiduuna li-ʔanna
sawta-hu
Neg
start.Imp
the-people
wake up.Imp
because-that voice-his
al-ʕaalii
ʔaqlaqa
manaama-hum.
the-loud
disturb.Pf
sleep-their
“People did not start waking up because his loud voice has disturbed
their sleep.” (SS#3)
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
146

THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
147
Table 6.11 The frequency of the Perfect and the Imperfect
Verbal form
N  4618
Frequency (%)
Imperfect
2897
63
Perfect
1721
37
Table 6.12 The frequency of the Perfect/Compound Perfect in
sentence initial clauses
Discourse genres
Nb.Pfs
Nb.Comp.Pfs
Journalistic
136
19
Academic
75
35
Fiction
127
5
Total
308
49
Frequency (%)
85
15
h
wa
lasnaa
nuxfii
mayʔan
fii
∆amiiʕi
haaðihi
and
Neg
hide.Imp
something
in
all
these
al-ʕalaaqaati.
the-relationships
“And we are not hiding anything in all these relationships.” (NA#l)
In fact, when the number of occurrences of each verbal form is tabulated for
the corpus, our results clearly show the higher frequency of the unmarked Imperfect
over the marked Perfect. This is illustrated in Table 6.11.
It should also be noted, however, that within the Perfect, the Compound Perfect
constitutes another case of concern. Its frequency is low, but not marginal, and its
presence should therefore be addressed, just as carefully as the alternation
between the Perfect and the Imperfect (see Chapter 5). The frequency of the
Compound Perfect in sentence initial clauses, a context where the use of QAD is
primarily governed by the enunciator, is summarized in Table 6.12.
The Compound Perfect, a sub-category of the Perfect, appears in certain
 specific contexts, as its low frequency might suggest. Although its use is not fully
predictable, we argue that it should be analyzed and interpreted according to its
invariant features, as discussed in Chapter 5.
Concluding remarks
The focus of this chapter has been the complex nature of both the Imperfect and
the verbal dichotomy, namely the Perfect and the Imperfect. It shows the
 multifunctional aspect of both verbal forms, from a temporal perspective. Thus,
each verbal form is shown to display various degrees of compatibility with both

temporal and non-temporal events, actions and processes. The temporal aspect of the
verbal forms clearly shows their unrestrictedness as to the temporal interpretation
they both receive. This is demonstrated through their appearance in present time,
future time, and past time contexts. As for their nontemporal characteristics, it is
shown to follow from their occurrence in modal and gnomic contexts where
 temporality is not involved. Moreover, independently of the temporal context, it
has been demonstrated that the Imperfect either denotes a characteristic of the
grammatical subject, or represents the verbal event, and as such, it is either
 subject-oriented or event-oriented. This means that reference to time, or better,
reference to a variety of time periods can be understood in the following way:
simultaneity is not deictic and thus can be defined as simultaneity with any
moment, whether past, present, or future. Thus, it is similar to Jakobson’s Taxis.
However, the basic interpretation of simultaneity is simultaneity with the present
moment, that is, as present time. So, in its basic meaning, it is tense, but in its
invariant meaning it is Taxis; and in all cases there is aspect (see also Fassi Fehri
1993: 141; Kinberg 2001: 132–52).
On the basis of the aforesaid results, we are led to disagree with traditional
approaches to verbal grammatical categories. For the last decades, these approaches
have stressed the referential properties of verbal grammatical categories, that is,
past/nonpast, perfective/imperfective, finished/unfinished, completed/uncompleted,
and have overlooked, or considered marginal, cases which do not seem to  conform
to their respective assumptions and hypotheses. Our analysis can not, in fact, deny
the capability of the verbal forms to express each one of those concepts, but stresses
the fact that they are misleading, since they only cover certain interpretations;
hence the shortcoming of their characterization of the verbal dichotomy. In
 particular, they do not allow for a category other than tense or aspect; but we have
shown that Taxis is more basic than tense to the Arabic verbal system. Having shown
the degree to which the verbal forms express temporality, aspectuality and modality,
we were led to dissociate them from any pure notion of tense in the traditional
sense, that is, present, past, future, or aspect, that is, perfective, imperfective and
so on. Instead, we argued for an invariant meaning with a cluster of features
proper to each verbal form. These features combine the category of Taxis, as
defined in Jakobson (1971: 135), which contains the features of simultaneity and
anteriority, and the category of Aspect, an enunciator-based approach, from which
the  evaluation of features of unboundedness and dimensionalization follow.
THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
148

7
ATM CATEGORIES, DERIVATION, AND
THE VERBAL CLAUSE
Introduction
Recent Arabic syntactic analyses, such as, Ouhalla (1988, 1991, 1997, 2002),
Benmamoun (1992, 1999, 2000), Fassi Fehri (1989, 1993, 2004), Mohammad
(1989) among others have devised an analysis of the Arabic clause structure
within the framework of Principles and Parameters as first suggested in Ouhalla
(1988), Pollock (1989), Chomsky (1991), Johnson (1991) among several others.
Accordingly, the INFL node (which corresponds to Modality in this work) is no
longer analyzed as a singular host to multiple grammatical categories, such as
aspect, tense, agreement, modality, and so on; instead, each morphological  category
is argued to head its own projection. This chapter is a refinement and extension
of this line of inquiry. On the basis of our findings, as outlined in the previous
chapters, and on the general assumption that verbal inflectional  morphology is
achieved at S-structure through verb movement into each phrase of which the
 corresponding affix is the head, we argue that, in MSA simple root clauses, both
perfect and imperfect verb forms are derived first through (i) obligatory verb
movement into Taxis–Aspect Phrase (henceforth Tax-AspP) of which the mor-
phological hybrid affix is the head,1 (ii) then, whenever possible, into a TP headed
by a morphologically null To. The so called V(erb) to I(nfl) movement is  therefore
reanalyzed as “V to Tax-Aspo to To movement.”2
The chapter is divided into two sections in which an attempt will be made to
motivate the aforesaid analysis in some depth. The first section demonstrates that
facts from compound tenses, negation, conditionals and subject position in Arabic
provide empirical evidence for the decomposition of the Infl node into two
 projections, namely a Tax–AspP and a TP. The last section examines recent
claims, relative to the syntax of negation, and suggests that the NegP hypothesis,
should be extended in favor of a more general category, which we call AsrtP.
This claim is supported, in large, by the functioning of the modal partficle QAD,
 discussed in Chapter 5. Meanwhile, we will show that further motivation for these
results comes from various other nonrelated languages such as Chichewa,
Kinyarwanda, Swahili and Welsh among many others.
149

It should also be noted that the lack of either one of the categories, or both,
results in ill-formedness, as illustrated in (3):
(3)
* m(*a)rib-(*a)
al-walad-u
al-maaʔ-a
Thus, the representation in (2) correctly predicts that verbs in Arabic must
always carry both Taxis–Aspect morphology and agreement morphology. If the
corresponding morphemes belong to the Modality component, then the verbal
complex [Verb[Taxis/Aspect[Agreement]]] results, therefore, from an attachment
process of the verbal root mrb “drink” to the corresponding vowel-pattern of which
Taxis/Aspect and Agreement are a part. This is typically achieved through the
movement of the verbal root from its base generated position, that is, the  proposition
constituent or the VP, to Modality.4 This is illustrated in (4), where (4a) represents
the underlying level, and (4b) the surface level.
The derivation of ATM categories
We have argued in the beginning of Chapter 3 that the morphological structure of
Arabic verbs carries, among other things, Aspect/Tense, which we reanalyzed
later as Taxis–Aspect, and agreement features. Thus, given a sentence like (1), it
follows that (2) is a possible structure of INFL/Modality in Arabic.3
(1)
marib-a
al-walad-u
al-maaʔ-a
drink.Pf-3.s.m
the-boy-nom
the-water-acc
“The boy drank the water.”
150
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
(2)
Modality
Taxis–Aspect
Agreement
MP
/
\
Spec
M’
/
\
Mο
VP
Tax–Asp AGR      /    \
-a-i-a Spec      V
alwaladu    /
\
Vο
NP
šrb      almaa?a
(4)
a

In the same spirit, Benmamoun (2000) assumes that Mood and Negation are
generated under INFL, together with taxis–aspect and agreement, yielding the
structure in (5).
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
151
ti      almaa a 
MP
/
\
Spec         M’
/
\
Mο
VP
Tax–Asp AGR      /    \
V
alwaladu   / \
Vο
NP
šariba Spec
INFL/Modality
Taxis–Aspect 
Agreement 
Modals 
Negation 
(5)
It is easy to see the dead end to which this approach is leading, especially when
faced with cases where a flat structure of this type fails to derive their surface
structures. Indeed, within the Chomskian approach, flat structures have always
been disfavored in favor of hierarchical representations. This raises the question
as to whether the constituents of Modality should be treated just like lexical
 elements, such as verbs, nouns, and adjectives. During the past seven or eight
years, various linguists, working on a broad range of languages, have attempted
an analysis of the Modality constituent where it is strongly argued that, indeed, each
of the Modality elements participates in the projection of the clausal argument
structure. Later, we shall present an alternative analysis to the structure in (5b),
where each functional category is shown to head its own projection. In particular, we
will argue that not only the category of Taxis–Aspect head its phrasal projection,
the category of Tense should also be incorporated within the clausal structure. We
base our claim for this splitting of the tree on the syntactic characterization of
both verbal forms: the Perfect and the Imperfect. Our argumentation includes
facts from Negation, compound tenses, conditionals, and the position of subjects.
This characterization will be shown to correlate with the semantico-pragmatic
functioning of the verbal system as a whole. As for the derivation of agreement
b

morphology, the reader is advised to refer to Harbert and Bahloul (2002), for a
detailed analysis of the agreement facts in Arabic. Our discussion is therefore
restricted to the derivation of both taxis–aspect and tense, with a brief account of
negation, since it interacts with the category of tense.
The structure of Taxis–Aspect and tense
Recall that according to the Aspect–Tense typology we have developed in Chapter 2
(pp. 40–42), based on the concept of continuum, three basic types are assumed to
be found across languages, and probably language groups. These types are
repeated here for convenience:
(6)
Type I (A, 0):
where Aspect is omnipresent and Tense
reduced to zero/inferred
Type II (T, 0):
where Tense is omnipresent and Aspect
reduced to zero/inferred
Type III (A/T):
where both categories are equally present
It should be stressed that while Type III is probably more straightforward,
types I and II present a specific challenge since they are based on Salience, and
require therefore deeper investigations. In fact, Chapters 4 and 6 are devoted to
discuss various issues related to the semantic features of these categories within
the  verbal system. There, we argue that Taxis and Aspect are the in variant
 features which underly the distinction between the two verbal forms. By process
of elimination, Arabic is less likely to belong to type II, where tense is the basic
category upon which the verbal system is based. Type III is mostly found among
languages which separately mark Aspect and Tense on the thematic verb. Arabic
falls more likely within type I, with an additional provision, however. This latter
extends the category of Aspect to include Taxis, as our findings  suggest. As for
the category of Tense, we argue that, as a sentential category, it is not always
 available to host the thematic verb. From a syntactic point of view, we will show
that the movement of the thematic verb to tense is highly restricted.
It is therefore safe to conclude that the two categories should in principle be
generated within the constituent structure of the clause in order to license both the
taxis–aspectual features of the verbal process and the temporal interpretation of
the clause. On the basis of these results, we would like to suggest that this is
 mirrored in the syntax through an obligatory movement of the verbal root
to Tax–AspP of which the verbal morpheme is the head, then to TP headed
by To. Accordingly, example (1), repeated here under (7), would have the
 configuration in (8).
(7)
marib-a
al-walad-u
al-maaʔ-a
drink.Pf-3.s.m
the-boy-nom
the-water-acc
“The boy drank the water.”
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
152

The representation in (8) shows that the verbal root along with its arguments
start out inside the VP (e.g. the NP subject alwaladu “the boy” in Spec VP in
accordance with the subject internal hypothesis, the NP object almaaʔa “the water,”
a complement of Vo). The Modality component (INFL) contains the two projec-
tions of Taxis–Aspect and Tense. Given the primacy of the taxis–aspectual
 features in the Arabic verb, we suggest that the Taxis–Aspect morphology is base
generated under Taxis–Aspect (Tax–Aspo) leaving To phonologically null, which
does not imply that it is void of features, rather its features are not strong enough
to have a phonetic content. This metaphoric representation accords well with its
semantic status within the verbal system. Now, the question is what motivates
verb  movement into Tax–Aspo and to To, as shown in (8). In the analysis of
clausal structure we have advanced in Chapter 2, we have demonstrated that a
well-formed utterance is governed by an enunciative operation which results in an
interaction between the VP/lexis constituent and the Modality/INFL constituent.
In (8), this interaction results in the attachment of the verbal root with the  relevant
taxis–aspectual morpheme. The verbal complex moves then to To in accordance
with syntactic principles, namely the lack of syntactic barrier.5 More evidence
for the verb movement into Tax–Aspo comes from the general ban on stranded
affixal morphemes, as defined in (Anderson 1988), among others. This ban is
again a well formed condition which regulates proper morphological attachments
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
153
(8)
TP
/ 
\
Spec 
 T’
pro    /
\
Tο
Tax–AspP
\
Spec
Tax–Asp’
alwaladuj
/ 
\
Tax–Aspο
VP
ti
/
\
Spec
V’
tj
/
\
Vο
NP
ti
almaa a
šaribai
 /

at S-structure. On the theoretical level, this suggestion enhances the status of
 movement theory as a component of Universal Grammar which treats and
 constrains the structural representation of all categories, that is both substantive
(e.g. lexical categories) and functional (e.g. grammatical categories). On the
empirical level, we will show that this line of analysis accounts for the distribution
of both Taxis–Aspect and Tense elements in a wide range of contexts in Arabic,
and probably in a variety of languages.
Closely related to the issue of derivation is the order of constituents within the
Modality component. Up to now, we have assumed that Taxis–Aspect is closer to
the verbal root than Tense, as illustrated in the aforesaid representations. In
 accordance with our findings in the previous chapters, we would like to suggest
that this is the correct order. This order is further supported by the fact that while
Taxis–Aspect relates typically to the thematic verb, Tense exhibits a rather different
behavior, appearing therefore on various other phrasal heads. Later, we shall
 present evidence which, we hope will clearly show that Taxis–Aspect and Tense
must head their own projections, on the one hand, and unless Taxis–Aspect is
closer to the thematic verb than Tense, structural ill-formed/ungrammaticality
results, on the other hand.
Taxis–Aspect, tense, and negation
Assuming that affixes carrying taxis–aspect and tense are affixed to their hosts
via head movement, which we take following Chomsky (1986) to be subject to the
Empty Category Principle (ECP) in (9), and that this gives rise to the locality effects
characterized by Relativized Minimality (RM) (Rizzi 1990), as in (10) and (11),
the prediction is that both RM along with the ECP impose a strict cyclic movement
of the verb, thus guaranteeing that only a specific order, that is the attested order, of
the constituent elements of the verbal complex is derived.
(9)
A nonpronominal empty category must be properly governed.
(10)
X antecedent-governs Y only if there is no Z such that
(i)  Z is a typical potential antecedent-governor for Y, and
(ii)  Z m-commands Y and does not m-command X.
(11)
X antecedent-governs Y if
(i)  X and Y are coindexed
(ii)  X c-commands Y
(iii)  no barrier intervenes
(iv)  Relativized Minimality is respected
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
154

Now, consider the following examples:
(12)
a
laa
y-a-naam-u
NegPres.
3m-Imp-sleep-s
“He does not sleep.”
b
lam
y-a-nam-Ø
NegPst.
3m-Imp.-sleep-s
“He did not sleep.”
c
lan
y-a-naam-a
NegFut.
3m-Imp.-sleep-s
“He will not sleep.”
In (12a–c), the negative morpheme carries tense and varies in form according
to the type of tense (present, as in (12a), past as in (12b), and future as in (12c)).
In all three clauses, however, the lexical verb appears in the Imperfect form  carrying
therefore imperfect morphology. It is easy to see here that, while taxis–aspect
morphology appears on the thematic verb, tense appears on another phrasal
 category, namely negation. This seems to suggest that the presence of negation
results in preventing the verb from being associated with tense, in the same way
that negation in English prevents the verb from being associated with tense and
AGR. Such a blocking effect is accounted for in a principled way if we assume
that negation in Arabic is base generated below Tense, a position from which it
raises and gets attached to Tense, as illustrated in (13).
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
155
TP
/
\
Spec
T’
pro
\
Tο
NegP
laa/lam/lani
/
\ 
Spec     Neg’
 /
\
Negο
Tax–AspP
ti
/
\
Spec         Tax–Asp’
/
\
Tax–Aspο
VP
yanamk
tk
/
(13)

ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
156
Interestingly, it is the verb and not the negative that carries Taxis–Aspect. This is
direct evidence for separating tense and taxis–aspect. Notice that in an analysis
where both tense and taxis–aspect are subsumed under the same inflectional
 projection (INFL, TP, or Tax–AspP), the aforesaid sentences should not be possible,
since it is the negative that gets tense and the verb that gets taxis–aspect
 morphology, as illustrated earlier.6
Taxis–Aspect, tense, and conditionals
Another context where the tense category proves to be independent from the
 thematic verb is observed in conditional constructions. Consider the examples as
follows:
(14)
a
ʔiðaa
ʔataa
xara∆-naa
if
come.Pf.3.m.s
leave.Pf.-l p
“If he comes, we will go out.”
b
Law
ʔataa
la-xara∆-naa
if
come.Pf.3.m.s
LA-leave.Pf-1.p
“If he had come, we would have gone out.”
The contrast between the example in (14a) and the one in (14b) shows that
both verbs ʔataa “came” and xara∆naa “left,” do not intervene in both the mood
and temporal interpretations of the clause. Although both forms are in the
Perfect, it is the present/future interpretation that arises in (14a), and the past
perfect/future-past interpretation that (14b) conveys. Moreover the prefix LA-
which appears along with xara∆naa “left” in (14b) is an emphatic particle, and
does not interact therefore with the observed temporal contrast. Thus, it seems
reasonable to assume that tense relates somehow to the conditional particles.
Indeed, the very fact that the particle changes according to the temporal
 interpretation is strong evidence for their interrelatedness. In light of this
 conclusion, we suggest that the conditional particles ʔiðaa and law “if ” should
be reanalyzed as conditional–  temporal particles, with ʔiðaa encoding the present
“If  present,” and law encoding the past “if  past.” One way to capture this
generalization is to base-generate the conditional particles above Tense, under
a separate projection which we call Mood Phrase (MoodP), allowing therefore
for a principled  attachment process. In other words, unlike the negative
 particles, the conditional particles select for different values of tense. While the
mood particle ʔiðaa selects for a [ present] tense, law selects for a [ past]
tense. The  configuration in (15), where selection is marked through coindexation,
 illustrates this process.

In what follows, we present another supportive argument which militates
against the treatment of both Taxis–Aspect and Tense as elements which belong
to a single syntactic node, the compound tense constructions.
Taxis–Aspect, tense, and compound tenses
Consider the examples in (16) and (17):
(16)
a
kaana
katab-a
darsa-hu
was
write.Pf-3sm
lesson-his
“He has written his lesson.”
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
157
MoodP
/  
\
Spec           Mood’
/  \
 Moodο        TP 
i  aaj/lawi
\
\
Spec
 T’
pro
\
\
Tax–AspP
[+pres.]j/[+pst]i
\
\
Spec
Tax–Asp’
        /  
\
Tax–Aspο
VP
zaa ak
tk
Tο
(15)

ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
158
b
yakuunu
katab-a
darsa-hu
is
write.Pf-3sm
lesson-his,
“He will have written his lesson.”
(17)
a
kaana
y-a-ktub-u
darsa-hu
was
3m-Imp-write-s lesson-his
“He was writing his lesson.”
b
yakuunu
y-a-ktub-u
darsa-hu
is
3m-Imp-write-s
lesson-his
“He will be writing his lesson.”
The data here illustrates the fact that in compound tenses both Taxis–Aspect
and Tense are present. The latter appears, however, attached to an auxiliary
verb, while the former appears on the thematic verb. Accordingly, while the
main verb in both (16) and (17) stays in the perfective and imperfective form
respectively, temporal relations are solely controlled by the auxiliary, kaana
“was” in (16a–b) and yakuunu “is” in (17a–b). The question that suggests itself
is why taxis–aspect and tense morphology can’t both appear on the thematic
verb of a compound tense? We would like to suggest that this is due to the overt
presence of the  auxiliary kaana. If that is indeed the case, how would their
 presence interact with both Taxis–Aspect and Tense? Recall that under standard
belief (that is. Pollock (1989); Chomsky (1988)) auxiliaries are argued to orig-
inate inside VP and move to To to acquire the tense features. Following Ouhalla
(1990), we argue against such analysis, and maintain that the fundamental
 distinction between auxiliaries and main verbs is mainly categorial. Unlike
 lexical verbs, auxiliaries seem to belong to closed class elements (i.e. kaana and
its sisters), which we would like to analyze as aspectuals,7 and as such they
project an AspP rather than a VP. I will refer to this projection as AspP.
Moreover, the fact that they control the  temporal interpretation of the clause
suggests that they are base-generated between TP and Tax–AspP, then raised
into To. This is illustrated in the  configuration (18) which corresponds to the
sentence in (17a). The difference between (8) and (18) resides, however, in the
selectional properties of To. While in (8) To selects a Taxis–Aspect complement,
it selects an AspP in (18) of which the auxiliary is the head. If this is correct,
one could still ask why it is the case that in (4b) the verb moves all the way to
support the abstract tense features, while in (18) the verb stays in its
Taxis–Aspect position. The answer is as follows: whereas in (4b) verb
 movement to Tax–Aspo and to To does not give rise to any violation of either the
ECP or Relativized Minimality, if the verb were to move to To in (18) it would
be crossing over an Aspect category (i.e. kaana) which is a  violation of both
principles (9) and (10), the ECP and RM respectively. This  conclusion is borne
out as the ungrammaticality of (19) illustrates.

(19)
*ya-ktub-ui
kaana [t]i
darsa-hu.
Imp.3m-write-s
was
lesson-his.
Indeed, in compound tenses, it is the auxiliary instead that rises to acquire the
tense features. Such rising is licensed by the auxiliary’s ability to host tense
 features in accordance with both the ECP and RM. If such rising occurs previous
to S-structure, this in turn leaves no place for the verb to move to since the
 auxiliary is in To and Tax–Aspo is occupied by its trace. The claim being made
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
159
(18)
TP
\
\
Spec       T’
pro       /
\
Tο
AspP
kaanaj      /
\
 Spec       Asp’
 Spec       Tax–Asp’
   /
\
Aspο
Tax–AspP
 /
\
          / 
\
Tax–Aspο
VP 
yaktubui
\
\
Spec
V’
          /
\
Vο      NP 
darsahu
ti
tj

ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
160
here is that aspectual auxiliaries belong presumably to the same class of
 categories as the verbal morphemes discussed earlier, with the simple difference
that while auxiliaries are free morphemes, the latters are bound morphemes. As
such they are basically functional categories which differ from verbs in that they
lack a thematic grid, the property that accounts for their inability to subcategorize
for arguments. Moreover, auxiliaries can not be members of the argument structure
of main verbs, in the sense that they do not bear any thematic relation to the main
verb or to any of its arguments, and therefore are excluded from VP. In sum,
 evidence from compound tenses shows that raising of the complex [Tax–Asp  V]
to To is blocked for reasons having to do with the ECP and RM. Thus, various
temporal relations are expressed by the auxiliary, which becomes the only
 candidate that raises and supports the tense features (see Ouhalla (1990) and
Carstens and Kinyalolo (1989) for different analyses). A final argument in favor
of this split between Taxis–Aspect and the Tense category as separate phrasal
 projections comes from the positionality of subjects in compound tenses.
Consider the sentences in (20):
(20)
a
kaan-at
t-a-ktub-u
al-bint-aani
darsa-humaa
be.past-3s.f
3.f-Imp-write-s
the-girl-d.
lesson-3.f.d
“The two girls were writing their lesson.”
b
kaan-at
al-bint-aanii
t-a-ktub-aani
[t]i darsa-humaa
be.past-3s.f
the-girl-d.
3.f-Imp-write-s
lesson-3.f.d
“The two girls were writing their lesson.”
c
al-bint-aanii
kaan-ataa [t]i
t-a-ktub-aani [t]i
darsa-humaa
the-girl-d.
be.past-3d.f
3.f-Imp-write-s
lesson-3.f.d
“The two girls were writing their lesson.”
Given the structure of a compound tense clause in (18) here, I would like to
note first that I am assuming with Mohammad (1991), that there is a null
 expletive subject in Spec TP (Spec IP, in Mohammad’s terms), and that the
 thematic subject position is internal to VP (cf. Stowell (1983); Speas (1985);
Kuroda (1986)). The auxiliary kaanat occupies To and the thematic verb  taktubaani
occupies a lower position in the structure, namely Tax–Aspo. As for the subject
albintaani in (20a), it is clear that it can stay in its D-structure  position, namely
specifier of VP. When the subject is preposed, as in (20b), it occurs in a spec
 position between the auxiliary kaanat and the verb taktubaani. In (20c), the
 subject is preposed all the way to Spec To. What is relevant to our analysis here is
the fact that the lexical subject appears between the verb and the auxiliary. If both
Taxis–Aspect and Tense were not separated, no possible spec position would be
available for the thematic subject, and therefore the derivation of (20b) would
either be impossible or very complex. Under our analysis, the subject in (20b)
raises to the specifier position of the taxis–aspect. This constitutes one more piece
of evidence in support of the split between both categories.

From a cross-linguistic point of view, the aforesaid claim is less likely to be
 particular to Arabic. If we consider the grammatical categories of Tense and
Aspect, we notice that several languages and language groups are even more
articulate as to the separation between both categories. Consider the following
examples:
(21)
a
Juma
a-ta-kuwa
a-me-pika
chakula
Juma
lagr-Fut-be
lagr-Perf-cook
food
“Juma will have cooked food.”
b
Juma
a-li-kuwa
a-ki-pika
chakula
Juma
1agr-Pst-be lagr-Cont-cook
food
“Juma was cooking food.”
c* Juma
a-ta-me-pika
chakula
Juma
lagr-Fut-Perf-cook
food
“Juma will have cooked food.”
(Carstens and Kinyalolo (1989))
The data in (21) illustrate the fact that a Swahili verb can not be inflected
for both Aspect and Tense, as the ungrammaticality of (2lc) shows. Instead,
Aspect and Tense affixes appear to be distributed over two separate verbal
complexes. Although this type of separation between Aspect and Tense is
 common within compound tenses, it is not always the case, since it might
occur within simple tenses. Indeed, the interpretation of the example from
Hindi below suggests that this pattern is observed in the simple present/
 progressive tense/aspect:
(22)
Raam
baith-taa
hai
Ram
sit-Imp.
AUX
“Ram sits/is sitting.”
(Gair and Wali 1988: 92)
Note that the very availability of the two interpretations follows straight–  forwardly
if we assume, similar to the Imperfect in Arabic, that the structure  provides the
necessary syntactic environment, namely Aspect and Tense. On the assumption
that this analysis is correct, the difference between languages like Arabic on the
one hand, and those like English and French, on the other hand, reduces to a
 minimal morphological difference of the Taxis–Aspect and Tense categories.
In other words, while maintaining the fact that all these languages can be
 considered to have identical D-structures, as in (8), the only difference between
them is the extent to which tense and/or (taxis)–aspect morphemes have
phonological content, and therefore are overtly realized at S-structure. This analysis
is supported by the fact that this difference is not only observed between various
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
161

ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
162
languages and/or language groups, but also within the same language, as
 illustrated in (23) from Swahili (Carstens and Kinyalolo 1989).
(23)
a
Juma
a-li-pika
chakula
Juma
1agr-Pst-cook
food
“Juma cooked food.”
b
Juma
a-me-pika
chakula
Juma
1agr-Perf-cook
food
“Juma has cooked food.”
However, given the fact that in Bantu languages, Chichewa and Kinyarwanda
examples (24a–b), the verb appears with both aspect and tense morphology on its
opposite sides, contrary to Swahili examples (21a–c), where Aspect and Tense
appear on different complexes, we are led to the conclusion which can be
 summarized in the generalization in (25):
(24)
a
Mtsuko
u-na-gw-a
waterpot
SP-Past-fall-Asp
“The waterpot fell.”
(Baker (1988))
b
Umwaana
y-a-taa-ye
igitabo
mu
maazi
child
SP-Past-throw-Asp
book
in
water
“The child has thrown the book into the water.”
(25)
Finite lexical verbs are derived through their obligatory movement to both
(Taxis)–Aspect and Tense, whenever they can.
Now, the above generalization, if correct, depends crucially on the assumption
that both Aspect and Tense head their own maximal projections. The failure of
the verb movement to Tense in Swahili is due therefore to failure on the part of the
verbal complex (Aspect–Verb) to move to Tense. These constraints are made to
follow from both principles: the Head Movement Constraint, on the one hand, and
RM, on the other hand.
In sum, the data from both Arabic and other languages provide empirical
 evidence for treating (Taxis)–Aspect and Tense as two separate categories, which
in turn militates strongly against representations where both are subsumed under
the same syntactic node. This latter fails to predict: (i) that (Taxis)–Aspect and/or
Tense can appear in different complexes; (ii) that there might be a hierarchical
order between both categories, that is one element might be inside or outside the
other. Before ending this chapter, we would like to offer a brief account for the
syntactic behavior of the modal particle QAD, when it precedes the Perfect.
Having established that QAD interacts with assertive modality, affirmative in

 particular, we would like to suggest that its syntax is indeed related to its  semantic
values. Consider the examples in (26):
(26)
a
qad
ʔaʕ∆aba-nii
haaðaa
al-film
QAD
please.Pf-me
this
the-film
“I did like this movie.”
b
maa
ʔaʕ∆aba-nii
haaðaa
al-film
Neg
please.Pf-me
this
the-film
“I did not like this movie.”
If assertiveness might either have a positive or a negative value, yielding
 therefore a positive assertion, and a negative assertion, respectively, the contrast
between the examples in (26a) and (26b) might as well be interpreted as illustrative
of this particular operation. In other words, while positive assertion is illustrated
through the use of the modal particle QAD, negative assertion is indicated by the
presence of the negator maa. If this is indeed the case, the prediction would be
that QAD and maa should not occur in the same context, and as such they are in
a complementary distribution, since they constitute the two sides of one single
coin. This prediction is borne out as the ungrammaticality of both (27a) and (27b)
illustrates.
(27)
a
*qad maa ʔaʕ∆aba-nii haaðaa al-film
b
*maa qad ʔaʕ∆aba-nii haaðaa al-film
The idea here is that, if QAD were simply an emphatic particle, there would be
nothing to prevent an emphatic negation. In English, for example, emphatic negation
is typically realized through an additional stress on the emphatic DO/DID, and
the use of the full form of the negator NOT, as illustrated in the contrast between
(28a) and (28b):
(28)
a
I didn’t do it.
b
I DID NOT do it.
Thus, the unavailability of the co-occurrence between QAD and maa
 suggests that they share similar syntactic properties. This is a quite reliable
 criterion when determining whether two or more elements are part of the same
syntactic  category. Given that QAD and maa satisfy the above criterion, it is
safe to  conclude that they are two elements of the same set, rather than
 categories of their own. We shall, therefore, suggest that both QAD and maa are
surface traces of a more abstract operation, Assertion, and as such they are
generated in the same position in the Phrase Marker, which we shall call AsrtP.
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
163

Sentences such as those in (26a) and (26b) are therefore represented as in (29)
as follows:
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
164
(29)
AsrtP
 / 
\
Spec         Asrt’
 /  \
Asrtο
TP
QAD/maa      /      \
Spec       T’
 /  
\
Tο
Vο
NP
Tax–AspP
a zabaniii
ti
ti
   /    \
Spec
Tax–Asp’
al-film
Tax–Aspο
/      \
VP 
       /      \
 Spec       V’
     /  \
The claim that AsrtP is an independent projection is further evidenced by facts
from a similar alternation between the sentential emphatic particle ʔinna “indeed,
really,” and the sentential negator maa in nonverbal clauses. Consider first the
examples in (30):
(30)
a
al-walad-u
fii al-madrasat-i
the-boy-nom
in the-school-gen
“The boy is at school.”
b
ʔinna
al-walad-a8
fii al-madrasat-i
ʔINNA
the-boy-acc
in the-school-gen
“The boy IS at school.”

The difference between the examples in (30a) and (30b) resides in the presence
of the emphatic particle ʔinna. This latter is typically used to express “affirmation”
(Gully 1995: 125) in contexts where English, for example, puts stress on the
 copular verb, as indicated by the bold capital letters “IS.” Most important is the
fact that the emphatic particle ʔinna does not co-occur with negation, similar to
QAD above. This is illustrated in (3):
(31)
a
maa
al-walad-u
fii al-madrasat-i
Neg
the-boy-nom
in the-school-gen
“The boy is not at school.”
b
*ʔinna maa al-walad-u fii al-madrasat-i
The ungrammaticality of (31b) shows that ʔinna and maa are indeed in com-
plementary distribution, and as such they share certain syntactic distributional
values. Similar to the treatment of QAD, we would like to suggest that a nonverbal
clause can also be headed by an AsrtP with either a positive value, hence the use
of ʔinna, or a negative value, hence the use of the negator maa. This is
 represented in (32) here:
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
165
(32)
AsrtP 
/      \
Spec
Asrt’
/ 
\
Asrtο
PP
inna/maa        /  
\
Spec      P’
alwalada     /   \
 pο
 NP
fii         almadrasati 
Thus far, facts from both types of clauses in Arabic, verbal and nonverbal,
 provide empirical evidence for the AsrtP projection, as a principled explanation
for the deep syntactic similarity between negation and affirmation. It should be
noted, however, that other languages show similar behavior with respect to Assertion.
Laka (1990: 84–168), for example, argues at length that the behavior of negative
and affirmative markers in both English and Basque provide enough evidence for
the AsrtP projection (which she calls “Sigma Phrase”). Likewise, Pinon (1993)

shows that Hungarian has an emphatic particle which is in complementary
 distribution with negation, suggesting therefore that, similar to English and
Basque, Hungarian also has a “Sigma Phrase.” The overall thrust of these
 observations is to abandon the NegP projection in favor of a more general/abstract
projection which also includes other sentence operators, such as affirmation and
emphasis, an effort which underlies a desire to minimize phrasal projections,
within the principles and parameters approach. The AsrtP is one step toward that
direction (see also Mitchell 1991 for a similar claim for Finnish).
Conclusion
In this chapter, we started with the assumption that the Modal node should no
longer be analyzed as a host for multiple grammatical categories, such as
Taxis–Aspect, Tense, Modals, Negation, and Agreement; instead each category
should head its own phrasal projection. On conceptual and empirical grounds, we
have argued for the existence of a phrasal category called Taxis–Aspect Phrase
which occurs between TP and VP. Accordingly “Vo to Io movement” is reanalyzed
as a “Vo to Tax–Aspo to To movement.” Ample evidence from various languages
is shown to support this conclusion. In compound tenses, however, facts from
Arabic and Swahili are shown to support the fact that the realization of
(Taxis)–Aspect and Tense appear on two different complexes. In accordance with
the conclusions in Chapters 4 and 6 above concerning the inherent semantic
 features of verbal forms, the category of Taxis–Aspect is shown to always appear
on the thematic verb which can be derived from its selectional properties, while
Tense is argued to appear attached to the auxiliary as a result of a syntactic
 movement. Facts from negation, conditional particles, and subject positionality
are also shown to argue in favor of this split. The fact that Taxis–Aspect and Tense
elements appear in different head complexes, along with various other syntactic
phenomena, constitutes empirical evidence for having them as separate syntactic
categories rather than as elements which belong to a single syntactic node.
Finally, we touched upon the syntactic properties of the modal particle QAD,
showing that it patterns with negation. Evidence is therefore brought from
 nonverbal clauses, which altogether suggest that both negation and emphatic/
assertive elements belong to a broader category, which we called the AsrtP.
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE VERBAL CLAUSE
166

8
ATM CATEGORIES, DERIVATION, AND
THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
Introduction
The purpose of this chapter is to provide an analysis for the contrast between two
types of main root clauses in MSA, shown in (1) and (2).
(1)
qadima
al-walad-u
come.Pf.3s.m
the-boy-nom
“The boy came.”
(2)
al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
“The boy (is) at home.”
Whereas the sentence in (1) contains a verb qadima inflected for Taxis–Aspect
and Agreement, (2) appears without any lexically realized verbal element.1
To account for this contrast, the analysis proposed in this chapter explores the
range of possible arguments that the Modality component is allowed to select.
More precisely, it assumes that the content of Modality imposes some restrictions as
to what type of complement Modo takes. Accordingly, the feature [ taxis–Aspect]
in Modality for instance is shown to be crucial as to whether Modo selects for a
VP complement headed by a lexical verb as in (1), or for a pp complement headed
by a preposition as in (2).
The analysis we propose differs fundamentally from previous analyses; some of
these have relied crucially on deletion processes (Bakir 1980; Abdul- Ghany 1981;
Farghal 1986; Al-Waer 1987), on the presence of phonetically unrealized or abstract
heads (Fassi Fehri 1982, 1993), and on Small Clauses (Mouchaweb 1986). A full
discussion of these analyses will take us too far afield (see Benmamoun 2000:
39–50 and Bahloul 2006a for informative discussions). But it is important to note
that an analysis that derives sentences like (2) from underlyingly verbal ones, where
the verb undergoes a deletion process under present/timeless reference as, for  example
in Farghal (1986: 51), can not provide the most  adequate account, since it fails to
account for the ungrammaticality of sentences such as (3b), where the presence of
the copula in a present/timeless context is not even optional, but obligatory.
167

(3)
a
qad
takuunu
al-ʔar*-u
mustadiirat-an
may be
the-earth-nom
round-acc
“The earth may be round.”
b
*qad
al-ʔar*-u
mustadiirat-un
may
the-earth-nom
round-nom
The obligatory presence of the copula is also observed in nonpresent time
 contexts, such as those referring to remote or forthcoming events, as illustrated in
(4) and (5), respectively.
(4)
a
kaana
al-walad-u
fii
al-madiinat-i
bi-al-ʔamsi
was
the-boy-nom
in
the-city-gen
in-the-yesterday
“The boy was in the city yesterday.”
b
*al-walad-u
fii
al-madiinat-i
bi-al-ʔamsi
the-boy-nom
in
the-city-gen
in-the-yesterday
(5)
a
sa-yakuunu
al-ɦall-u
∆aahiz-an
ʁadan
fut-be
the-solution-nom
ready-acc
tomorrow
“The solution will be ready tomorrow.”
b
*al-ɦall-u
∆aahiz-an
ʁadan
the-solution-nom
ready-nom
tomorrow
Given the obligatory presence of the copula in (3)–(5), we suggest that
 temporal information is not the only factor to which the presence of the copula is
sensitive. If the presence of the copula becomes obligatory in present, past, and
future time contexts, it becomes less likely that specific temporal contexts are
playing a crucial role in determining the presence and/or absence of the copula.
But, if this is indeed the case, why would the occurrence of the copula always be
impossible in clauses such as those in (6)–(8)?2
(6)
a
al-bayt-u
kabiir-un
the-house-nom
big-nom
“The house (is) big.”
b
*yakuunu
al-bayt-u
kabiir-an
is
the-house-nom
big-acc
(7)
a
zayd-un
mudiir-un
zayd-nom
director-nom
“Zayd is a director.”
b
*yakuunu
zayd-un
mudiir-an
is
zayd-nom
director-acc
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
168

ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
169
(10)
ModP
 /  \
Spec 
Mod’
/  \
Modο
XP(VP, NP, AP, PP) 
(8)
a
al-walad-u
fii
al-madiinat-i
the-boy-nom
in
the-city-nom
“The boy is in the city.”
b
*yakuunu
al-walad-u
fii
al-madiinat-i
is
the-boy-nom
in
the-city-gen
In answering this question, the present chapter will consider selectional
 properties of functional categories from the perspective of recent developments
within the Principles and Parameters Approach, as discussed in Chapter 2,
pp. 24–30, with particular attention to the Modality component. In the next
 section, we will outline the general outlines of our proposal. Subsequent sections
will deal with various apparently problematic constructions where the presence of
the copula is found to be obligatory. We show that the suggested analysis would
straightforwardly account for such cases.
Nominal clauses and modality
Consider now the sentences in (9):
(9)
a
al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
“The boy is at home.”
b
kaana
al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
was
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
“The boy was in the house.”
c
sa-yakuunu
al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
fut-be
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
“The boy will be at home.”
The absence of any overt verbal form in (9a) is, we suggest, related to the type
of features on the Modality constituent. Modality, like all other heads, can take
any phrasal category as a complement, as illustrated in (10).3

Accordingly, whereas in (9a) Modo selects a PP complement, it selects a VP in
both (9b) and (9c). Now, if we acknowledge that (10) is the correct representation,
two issues need to be addressed. First, having assumed that the content of
Modality determines the type of complement it selects, it becomes crucial to
investigate the featural composition of Modality, and the distribution of its
 specified and unspecified feature values.4 The second issue concerns the features
involved in the selection of each complement since complements in general are
neither randomly selected, nor can they all co-occur at once.
Some properties of modality
If both lexical and nonlexical categories are composed of features, as it is generally
assumed, it is quite important to note that the featural composition of nonlexical
categories (Aspect, Taxis, Tense, C, DP, etc.) differs in many ways from that of
lexical categories (Nouns, Verbs, Adjectives, Adverbs). This is best demonstrated
by the fact that while lexical heads are generally fully specified for the values of
their features, nonlexical heads are mainly unspecified for some of their feature
values, or are specified for none. For example, while the lexical NP al-ʔawlaadu
“the boys” is always specified for its feature values (person, gender, number of
3m.p),5 nonlexical Modality, containing modal categories such as tense,
taxis–aspect, negation, interrogation (wh), mood and modality, may either be
specified for some of the feature values of these categories or for none, as
 illustrated in (11) and (12).6
(11)
a
kaana al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
was
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
“The boy was at home.”
b
Modality →[tense, PST]
(12)
a
al-waladu
fu
al-bayt-i
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
“The boy is at home.”
b
Modality →[tense, Ø]
However, if features of lexical items are generally specified in the lexicon, how
does Modality get its features (including its null features)? Following Dubinsky
(1988), we shall assume that Modality’s modal features are directly instantiated
on the structure without the mediation of the lexicon. They are features whose
values are set in accordance with the pragmatic context. Under this assumption,
the Modality node would encode modal features such as taxis–aspect, tense,
negation, interrogation, mood, modality, hierarchically ordered, or would be
empty, as shown in (13) according to the input of pragmatic information.7
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
170

(13)
Modality →[TNS, ASP, NEG, INT, MOOD, MOD]
[Ø]
To illustrate, unless the feature value NEG, for instance, is specified on
Modality, the sentence can be all but negative. Accordingly, if the feature value
TNS is not present in Modality, Modality can select any complement but a VP.
Therefore, the presence or absence of a VP complement is somehow licensed by
the tense features in Modality,8 as represented in (14).
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
171
a
Modality---> [+/-F(eatures)] (F=TNS) 
b
(i) 
ModP 
(ii) 
ModP 
/
\
/
\
Spec      Mod’
Spec
Mod’
/
\
/
\
Modο [+F]
VP 
Modο [-F]     NP/AP/PP 
(14)
As will be shown later, there are independent reasons to believe that the  content
of Modality plays a salient role in accounting for various syntactic phenomena,
and for the contrast between the two constructions under consideration.
Verb movement into modality
I will assume with Mohammad (1989), Fassi Fehri (1989, 1993), and
Benmamoun (2000) that SA is under1yingly an SVO language, and that VSO
word order is achieved through verb movement to To.9 Such movement is
 rendered obligatory in SA in order for verbs to pick up the taxis–aspect and/or
tense features, thus “creating a finite verb” (Holmberg 1986: 132). There is good
evidence of such a movement across languages (See Emonds 1978 and Pollock 1989
for French; Morikawa 1989 for Japanese; Holmberg 1986 for Scandinavian
 languages; Sproat 1985 for VSO languages; and our discussion in Chapter 7).
We argue that verb movement to Tax–Aspo and/or To is determined by the
 following principle:10
(15)
a
All verbs include in their theta grid an event features that must be
 saturated by the head Tax–Aspo and/or To in the syntax
b
Verbs obligatorily move to Tax–Aspo and/or To to support those
 features.

ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
172
b 
TP 
c TP 
           /    \
   /    \
Spec      T’
Spec      T’
/  \
       /    \
 VP 
 VP 
V+Tº
Tº
    [TNS]     /     \
katabai
/
\
NP      V’
NP      V’
alwaladu     / 
\
alwaladu     /    \
V     NP 
V     NP 
 ktb      tamriinahu 
ti
tamriinahu
Having argued that taxis–aspect and tense features head their own projections
(Chapter 7), it follows that verbs are base-generated without both features, as
shown in (16b). Thus, (16a) is derived through verb movement into To, as illustrated
in (16c).11 This is supported by the fact that in MSA, as in other languages, both
verb and inflectional morphology are bound morphemes, hence neither of them
can appear by itself.12 This is shown in (17).
a  
ktb + -a-a-a    kataba  
“He wrote.”
‘‘write’’ ‘‘ perfect active’’
b 
ktb + ya-u-u yaktubu  
“He writes/is writing.”
‘‘write’’ ‘‘ imperfect active’’
(17)
Principle (15) can be evaluated as a criterion of clause well formedness, defining
how finite verbs are derived at S-structure as illustrated in (16).
(16)
a
kataba
al-walad-u
tamriin-a-hu
write.Pf
the-boy-nom
exercise-acc-his
“The boy wrote his exercise.”

ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
173
So far we have established that the content of Modality, specifically tense
 features (and of course taxis–aspect features), is the main trigger for verb
 movement and the lack of such features result in verbless clauses. I now extend
this hypothesis to account for various cases of the copula occurring in the present
tense case which are also discussed in Bahloul (1994, 2006a).
The copula in wh-contexts
Another context where the copula is obligatory involves certain wh-phrases,
 illustrated in (18).
(18)
a
abuu-ka
fii
al-bayt-i
father-your
in
the-house-gen
“Your father is at home.”
b
*mataa
abuu-ka
fii
al-bayt-i
When
father-your
in
the-house-gen
c
mataa
yakuunu
abuu-ka
fii
al-bayt-i?
when
is
father-your
in
the-house-gen
“When is your father at home?”
Other cases requiring the presence of the copula involve what we call
“temporal complementizers” such as ʕindamaa, lammaa, ɦiina all meaning
“when, whenever, as.” These are illustrated in (19).
(19)
a
abuu-ka
fii
al-bayt-i
father-your
in
the-house-gen
“Your father is at home.”
b
*ʕindamaa l*ɦiina/*lammaa
abuu-ka
fii
al-bayt-i,...
when
father-your
in
the-house-gen
c
ʕindamaa/ɦiina/lammaa
yakuunu
abuu-ka
fii
al-bayt-i,...
when
is
father-your
in
the-house-gen
“When/whenever your father is at home,...”
The question we raise then is: Why would a wh-phrase or a temporal
 complementizer require the presence of the copula, as can be seen from the
ungrammaticality of (18b) and (19b)? According to our proposal, both (18c) and
(19c) involve a structure where Modality is tensed, and therefore selects for a VP
complement headed by a verbal element that obligatorily moves to support the
tense features in To. Having said this, we ask how the tense features would relate
to the presence of complementizers such as mataa, ʕindamaa, ɦiina and lammaa.
This apparent interdependency between complementizers, on the one hand,
and tense features in To, on the other, we would suggest, follows from two

 principles: agreement in the domain of Comp and feature percolation. The former
ensures agreement of Co with its specifier and with its complement ( TP) with
respect to the relevant features [WH/TNS] (see also Rizzi 1990: 57); the latter
transmits the features to To. If complementizers are in head positions of CPs, they
would pass their inherent features to the complement through government. In the
case at hand, a closer examination of the complementizers involved reveals that
they all share the [TNS] feature. Accordingly, Co would acquire that same
 feature and would transmit it to its complement. So the question now becomes:
How does To acquire the feature [TNS]? One can argue that Co selects the
 feature values of its complement (TP), namely, a tensed complement so that To
would in its turn receive these same features via feature percolation.13 With tense
features in it, To in accordance with principle (15) selects a VP complement since
a verb would be forced to move and pick up these tense features. This process can
be represented as in (20).
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
174
CP (F = TNS) 
/   \
 Spec      C’
/ \
Co [+F]
To [+F]
TP [+F]      } government 
/ \
/ \
Spec       T’
Feature Percolation {
XP [+F]       } selection 
VP
(20)
Adjunct How-clauses behave in a similar way, although some educated native
speakers of Arabic felt the obligatoriness of the copula here represents a more
elaborate and preferred style, as in (21).
(21)
a
a*-*uʕf-u
quwwat-un
fii
baʕ*i
al-aɦyaani
the-weakness-nom
strength-nom
in
some
the-times
“weakness is sometimes strength.”
b
?*kayfa
a*-*uʕf-u
quwwat-un
fii
baʕ*i
al-aɦyaani
How
the-weakness-nom
strength-nom
in
some
the-times

c
kayfa
yakuunu
al;l-l;lu’lf-u
quwwat-an
fii
baJ.l;li
how
is
the-weakness-nom
strength-acc
in
some
al-afiyaani.
the-cases
“How weakness is a strength sometimes?”
The case in (21) raises an interesting question as to whether the occurrence of
the copula is related to the presence of tense features in To or to some other
 principles of grammar. At this point, it is not clear why a wh-phrase like kayfa
“how” should carry tense features. There are, however, two competing alternative
explanations: (a) the Selectional Hypothesis, or (b) the F(eature)-Movement
Hypothesis. Alternative (a) ensures that just as verbs in English select either a
[wh] or a [-wh] complement (e.g. wonder -[wh], say -[-wh]), the wh-feature
in Co will similarly select either a [TNS] complement or a [-TNS] complement.
Alternative (b) is based on work by both Rizzi (1989) and Whitman (1989), who
argue that wh-features originate in INFL and move into Comp at S-structure.
Having features in it, INFL then requires a verb to move and pick up those
 features. Both alternatives would correctly account for the data in (21). The
Selectional Hypothesis will force the wh-feature in Co to select a tensed TP which
in turn will pass its feature to its head. Having tense features, To would obligatorily
select for a VP, as shown in (22).
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
175
CP
/     \
Spec      C’
kayfa     /   \
Co
TP [+F] (F = TNS) 
 [+wh]     /   \
     Spec    T’
      /    \
To[+F]    VP 
(22)
The F-Movement Hypothesis, on the other hand, goes one step further by
assuming that not only tense features trigger verb movement into To, but wh-features
can also do so. Having features such as [TNS] or [WH] in it, To will then require
a lexical head to support such features. In the absence of other heads, a VP
 complement is thus selected, as shown in (23).

How do we decide among these two competing hypotheses? Recall that we have
assumed earlier that modal features such as TNS, TAX–ASP, INTER (WH), MOOD,
NEG, and MOD must, in principle, head their own phrasal  projections. Such an
assumption is part of alternative (b), the F-Movement Hypothesis, thus making it the
more attractive route to take. The obligatoriness of feature support and verb movement
can now be made more concrete. We have argued that tense features, being generated
in To, require verbal support, thus making verb  movement obligatory as stated earlier
in principle (15). But if we assume that wh-features originate in To, then these features
would also  trigger verb movement, and  therefore To would select for a VP. Accordingly,
(15a) should be modified so as to generate wh-features in To, as in (24a), which in its
turn would trigger verb movement. The principle in (24) should now  modify (15).
(24)
a
Tense and wh-features are base-generated in To.
b
Copular Verbs obligatorily move to support those features.
The copula and modality
Another environment where the copula is required in the present tense involves
modality with qad “may,” ya∆ibu ʔan “must,” yastatiiʕu ʔan ‘can.’14 These are
illustrated in (25)–(27), respectively.
(25)
a
al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
“The boy is at home.”
b
*qad
al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
may
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
c
qad
yakuunu
al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
may
is
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
“The boy may be at home.”
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
176
CP
/
\
Spec      C’
kayfa    /
\
TP
Co
[+wh]i
     /
\
 Spec     T’
/   \
To
VP
[-t-]i
(23)

(26)
a
*ya∆ibu ʔan
al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
must
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
b
ya∆ibu ʔan
yakuuna
al-walad-u
fii
al-bayt-i
must
be
the-boy-nom
in
the-house-gen
“The boy must be at home.”
(27)
a
huwa
mudiir-un
he
director-nom
“He is a director.”
b
*yastatiiʕu ʔan
mudiir-un
can
director-nom
c
yastatiiʕu ʔan
yakuuna
mudiir-an
can
is
director-acc
“He can be a director.”
The examples here indicate that just like wh-phrases, modals do seem to require
the copula to move into To. A closer look into the internal structure of modals in
English, for example, shows that they are tensed, and therefore base generated in
To. Thus, one might argue that modals in To will count as a feature context.
Therefore, a verb has to move to support those features. There is no clear evidence,
however that in SA modals are base generated in To. While in English, verbs  following
modals are nonfinite, as in (28), they are finite in MSA, as shown in (29). This
would clearly suggest that if in English tense and modals are  generated under one
node, they are clearly generated under different nodes in MSA.
(28)
a
He can work.
b
He could work.
c
She may come.
d
They might come.
(29)
a
qad
yakuunu
fii
al-bayt-i
may
is
in
the-house-gen
“He may be at home.”
b
rubbamaa
kaana
fii
al-bayt-i
might
was
in
the-house-gen
“He might have been at home.”
The fact that modals in (29)15 head their clauses and do not inflect for tense, a
feature carried by the copula, suggests that there are fundamental differences
between the syntactic position of modals in MSA and their position in English.
I will propose that modals are the “highest” category in the clause, heading a MP
above tense, as shown in (30).
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
177

Under this analysis, the MP has its own projection which is in a position higher
than Tense. Interestingly, Whitman (1989: 345) argues that Mood is the highest
 category in Modality in Korean and Japanese just as Tense is the highest category
in the clause structure of Germanic and Romance. Such results do in fact support
our previous conclusion and would suggest that the identity of the head category
is subject to parametric variation: it is TP in English and French, but MP in MSA,
Korean and Japanese. We now address the question of the obligatoriness of the
copula in MPs, and whether it can be related to the content of To. We suggest that
the content of To remains crucial in these structures, and that the case of modals is
no different from that of temporal complementizers, the only difference being that
CP is replaced by MP. Accordingly, Mo would select for a tensed MP, which in turn
will pass its features to To. The presence of tense features in To triggers  principle
(24), which when applied yields (25c), (26b), and (27c). In other words, once a
tensed To is selected by a modal phrase, it instantiates the tense feature on its head,
as in (31), thus triggering the movement of the copula to support the tense features.
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
178
MP
/  \
Spec       M’
Spec       T’
Mo
TP
/
\
/
\
/
\
To
VP 
(30)
(31)
MP
Spec      M’
Spec      T’
 Mo
TP [+F] 
/
\
/
\
/
\
/
\
To [+F]       VP 

Some other cases involving Mood Phrases include conditional ʔin “if” in (32)
and imperative laa “don’t” in (33) both of which also require the presence of the
copula are accounted for in accordance with the Selectional Hypothesis by which
the head of the Mood Phrase selects a tensed TP which in turn passes its TNS fea-
tures into To. This latter will then obligatorily select a VP.
(32)
a
ʔanta
kasuul-un
you
lazy-nom
“You are lazy.”
b
* Laa
kasuul-an
Imperative
lazy-acc
c
Laa
takun
kasuul-an
Imperative
is
lazy-acc
“Don’t be lazy.”
(33)
a
al-ʔamr-u
xatiir-un
the-matter-nom
dangerous-nom
“The situation is serious.”
b
?? ʔin
al-ʔamr-u
xatiir-un,16
if
the-matter-nom
dangerous-nom
c
ʔin
kaana/yakun
al-ʔamr-u
xatiir-an,...
if
was/is
the-matter-nom
dangerous-acc
“If the situation is serious,...”
Co-occurrence relation between ATM categories
What is more interesting from our perspective here is that MPs, Mood Ps,
Temporal Complementizers, and Wh-Phrases never occur together, as (34) shows.
(34)
a
qad/*kayfa/*ɦiina/*ʔin
yakuunu
fii
al-bayt-i
may/*how/*while/*if
is
in
the-house-gen
b
kayfa/*qad/*ɦiina/*ʔin
yakuunu
al-ʔamr-u
sahl-an
how/*may/*while/*if
is
the-matter-nom
easy-acc
c
ʔin/*qad/*ɦiina/*kayfa
yakun
al-ʔamr-u
sahl-an
if/*may/*while/*how
is
the-matter-nom
easy-acc
d
ɦiina/*qad/*kayfa/*ʔin
yakuunu
al-ʔamr-u
sahl-an
while/*may/*how/*if
is
the-matter-nom
easy-acc
They seem to occur in complementary distribution, which suggests that
 perhaps they should be generated under the same syntactic node. Under current
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
179

assumptions, one might argue that they are all under CP, if this category is
extended to house different types of functional categories. Another competing
hypothesis might favor the modal phrase approach (Whitman 1989), which would
be more attractive if the notion of modality is extended to cover all modal
 categories as discussed at the beginning of this work. The structures suggested in
(35a) and (35b) leaves the door open for either possibility.
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
180
a
CP (MP)
b 
CP
 /
\
 /
\
 /
\
 /
\
Spec        C’ (M’)
Spec        C’
Co(Mo)       IP
Co
MP
(35)
To sum up, we have argued so far that the occurrence and non-occurrence of
the copula is very sensitive to the content of Modality, and in particular to tense
features. Contrary to previous analyses, this alternative approach assumes that in
nonverbal sentences, a VP is altogether absent. Principle (15) along with its
revised version in (24) clearly attribute the presence or the absence of the copula
and probably any verbal element, copula or otherwise, to the features that
Modality contains. If Modality is empty or featureless, other categories than VP
would occur (NP, AP, or PP). On the other hand, if Modality contains features
such as TNS or WH, a copular verb is needed to move into Modality (To) to
 support those features. We were able to show that this is achieved by adopting
either the Selectional Hypothesis or the F-Movement Hypothesis, thus providing
a straightforward account for the co-occurrence of the copula with modal/mood
phrases and with temporal complementizers. Those phrases were shown to select
a tensed TP, which in turn instantiates its features on its head To thereby triggering
verb movement. Certain types of modal and Wh-Phrases, however, require a word
of caution. These are addressed in the next section.
Why and yes/no questions
Rizzi (1990) observes that a contrast exists in French between pourquoi “why”
and other Wh-Phrases. Unlike the syntactic behavior of quoi “what,” and
comment “how,” pourquoi “why” is only possible in a sentence initial position as
illustrated in (36).
(36)
a
il a [ par1é de quoi ]
“He spoke about what”

b
il a [ parlé comment ]
“He spoke how”
c
*? il a [ parlé ] pourquoi
“He spoke why”
d
Pourquoi a-t-il parlé ?
“Why did he speak?”
To account for the ungrammaticality of (36c), Rizzi argues that the Wh-Phrase
pourquoi “why” is base-generated in Comp, as il1lustrated in (36d). Now consider
the following cases from Arabic:
(37)
a
abuu-ka
fii
al-bayt-i
father-your
in
the-house-gen
“Your father is at home.”
b
hal
abuu-ka
fii
al-bayt-i
Q.
father-your
in
the-house-gen
“Is your father at home?”
(38)
a
al-walad-u
fariɦ-un
the-boy-nom
happy-nom
“The boy is happy.”
b
hal
al-walad-u
fariɦ-un
Q.
the-boy-nom
happy-nom
“Is the boy happy?”
(39)
a
al-mudiir-u
fii
al-qism-i
the-director-nom
in
the-classroom-gen
“The director is in the classroom.”
b
limaaðaa
al-mudiir-u
fii
al-qism-i
why
the-director-nom
in
the-classroom-gen
“Why is the director in the classroom?”
Both (37) and (38) are well formed yes/no questions. Contrary to what has
been observed earlier, the Wh-Phrase hal does not seem to have left any feature
in To; hence no copular verb is required to move and support them. Tense is,
 therefore, empty, with a nonverbal category as its complement: a PP in (37) and
an AP in (38). Following Rizzi’s earlier suggestion, I would like to suggest that in
such cases and others in (39), the Wh-Phrase is base-generated in the Spec of CP.
Thus, it does not get to leave any feature in To, and no verb is therefore needed.
This is shown in (40).
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
181

There are many advantages to this analysis. First, it provides a straightforward
account for this apparent asymmetry; second, the asymmetry is claimed to follow
from a positional difference; and third, it does not weaken our main claim that the
occurrence and/or non-occurrence of the copula is related to the content of Tense.
Moreover, it makes a clear cut distinction between different types of Wh-Phrases
whereby some are base-generated in the Spec of CP and others are generated in
TP. In the former case, since a wh-feature is needed to license the Wh-Phrase
Rizzi (1989), the assumption is that the wh-feature is also base-generated in
Comp. In the latter case, however, we assume that the wh-feature has originated
in Tense and subsequently moved into Comp to license the Wh-Phrase. If the
position of features is free, we would reach the contradictory result that the same
wh-phrase would originate in two different positions, as the well-formedness of
both (41)17 and (42) shows. In order to solve this apparent contradiction, it would
be necessary to allow some kind of optionality and allow wh-features to be
optionally base-generated either in Comp or in Tense.
(41)
a
pourquoi l’a-t-i1 prise ?
“Why did he take it?”
b
il l’a prise pourquoi ?
“He took it why?”
(42)
a
kayfa
at-taqs-u
fii
al-xariif-i?
how
the-weather-nom
in
the-fall-gen
“How is the weather in the fall?”
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
182
CP
/
\
Spec       C’
hal/limaaðaa     /
\
      TP 
[+wh]     /     \
Spec       T’
NP        /
\
To
Co
AP/PP
(40)

b
kayfa
yakuunu
at-taqs-u
fii
al-xariif-i ?
how
is
the-weather-nom
in
the-fall-gen
“How is the weather in the fall?”
Even though (42a) and (42b) are about the same fact, namely, the state of the
weather in the Fall, native speakers can have different interpretations. There is a
subtle ambiguity that the English translation can not convey: while (42a) has a
factual interpretation, (42b) seems to involve a modal interpretation, that of
 possibility. In (42a), the enunciator presupposes that his interlocutor knows fully
about the weather situation. In (42b) this presupposition is weaker. This distinction
is accounted for, in line with the conditions governing the occurrence of the
 copula outlined in this chapter, if we assume that (42b) differs from (42a) in that
it has a MP headed by an abstract operator which, just like other modals, has
selected a tensed TP. Recall that with complementizers such as mataa “when,”
ʕindamaa/ɦiina/lammaa “when,” we argued (pp. 173–75) that even though they
are base-generated in CP, they get to pass their inherent TNS features to TP. Why
would the same mechanism fail to apply in (43a)? One can say that the wh-feature
in kayfa does not encode any temporality and fails therefore to select a tensed
complement once it is in Comp. By allowing wh-features or others to be in Comp
and to select a tensed or a nontensed complement, we straightforwardly
account for all argument wh-phrases inside TP that fail to select a tensed phrase,
as shown in (43).
(43)
a
maa
(*yakuunu)
haaðaa ?
what
is
this
“What (is) this?”
b
man
(*takuunu) ʔanti ?
who
is
2s.f
“Who (are) you?”
We are therefore led to the conclusion that the base generation of WH-features
along with the Selectional Hypothesis complement each other and should be
allowed to operate in a principled way.
Summary and conclusion
This chapter began with the observation that in MSA, two types of main root
clauses are observed, one with a verb inflected for taxis–aspect and the other
without any lexically realized verbal element. It then briefly discussed the
 shortcomings of previous accounts, which rely crucially on either deletion
processes or the invisible nature of the copula to account for this contrast. An
alternative approach was suggested whereby this contrast is shown to derive from
the inherent temporal features of the copula and the properties of the sentential
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
183

phrasal head (To). Accordingly, we have demonstrated that while the presence of
both TNS and WH features in To force this latter to select for a VP complement,
their absence imposes selectional restrictions on To, which will be allowed to
select for only non-VP complements. Thus, the naturalness of verbless clauses is
directly related to the selectional properties of Tense. The adequacy of this
 analysis is revealed through its ability to extend and account for a large number
of cases involving the occurrence of the copula in wh-contexts, with temporal
complementizers as well as modals and mood phrases. We then demonstrated that
even cases which at first seem problematic can be accounted for within the same
framework of the suggested analysis, if we allow the two hypotheses, Selectional
and F-Movement, to operate together in a principled way. The view that the
absence or the presence of an overt verbal element can be related to the nature of
Modality and to its content sounds attractive and less likely to prove controversial.
This chapter sheds some light on a very traditional and controversial dichotomy
in Arabic grammar, the nominal and the verbal sentences. More research is
 certainly needed to develop the insights suggested in this work and to extend the
analysis so as to cover a larger body of data.
ATM CATEGORIES AND THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
184

9
CONCLUSION
The main contribution of the book resides in three groups of chapters. The first
group consists of Chapter 2, where a discussion of clause structure unveils
 common insights of two different schools of thought: one syntactically oriented,
the other semantico-pragmatic and discourse-based. The second group consists of
Chapters 4, 5, and 6. There we conducted a semantico-pragmatic and discourse
analysis of the basic verbal forms: the Perfect and the Imperfect, the main
 components of the verbal system in Arabic. This investigation included a detailed
analysis of the modal element QAD when it occurs with the Perfect, yielding
a complex structure we called the “Compound Perfect.” The third and last group
includes Chapters 7 and 8, where a syntactic analysis of the two verbal and
 nominal clauses in Arabic is presented. The overall thrust of these chapters
stresses the fact that the basic semantic features of the Arabic verb combine the
ATM categories of Taxis and Aspect. As for the category of Tense, we have shown
that, although it is not a necessary feature of the verb (i.e. it is subsidiary), it is an
obligatory feature of the clause. This claim is largely instantiated through
a detailed investigation of the basic constituents of the Arabic verbal system
(e.g. the paradigms of the Perfect, Imperfect and the assertive modal QAD).
In simple declarative contexts, for example, both verbal forms, the Perfect and the
Imperfect, host Taxis and Aspect features, as evidenced by both their invariant
values (e.g. Taxis–Aspect interpretations) and their syntactic structures (e.g. their
ability to move to Tax–Aspo). In negative contexts, however, while Taxis and
Aspect show close ties to the verb, Tense gets attached to negation, and similarly
it attaches to conditional particles and to auxiliaries. In sum, the overall results
show that while Tense is certainly present within the Arabic clause, the value of
this category is less likely to take part in the values of the invariant of both the
Perfect and the Imperfect.
The second issue we address in this work is the relationship between both
members of the opposition within the verbal system: the Perfect and the
Imperfect. Our results show that their divergence is not absolute, admitting therefore
convergence tendencies; in other words, despite their systematic differences, they
have some similarities. While their differences relate to their invariant meanings
and basic uses, their similarities reside from the gnomic and specific uses of the
185

Imperfect when the enunciator’s subjective evaluation of the verbal process, as
shown by their uses in journalistic contexts, is salient. This is related to the fact that,
as shown by the relative frequencies of the Imperfect (63%) and the Perfect (37%),
the Imperfect is unmarked and thus can take on uses which encompass in whole
or in part the semantic values of the Perfect.
This work has also addressed the issue of the modal particle QAD. As far as we
know, this book has a leading role in investigating in some detail its distributional
properties, its frequency, and its semantics, along with its syntax. With respect to its
semantics, empirical evidence suggests that its invariant meaning relates to
assertive modality, a conclusion which is highly supported by its syntactic behavior.
Here, QAD is shown to alternate with negation, which indicates that they both
share the same syntactic position. Accordingly, we suggested that both QAD and
maa (negator) are part of a more general phrasal category, Assertive Phrase
(AsrtP) of which they are its heads.
The first and last issues to which this book pays particular attention are bound
up with the question of clausal structure and the Modality constituent. With
respect to clausal structure, it argues against syntactic representations which do
not separate the VP component from the INFL component, and suggests that
 syntactic representations should mirror clausal semantic structures. The Modality
component is theoretically the domain where surface traces of enunciative
 operations, that is, Taxis, Aspect, Tense, Modals, Negation, Assertion, and so
on..., are supposed to be generated, hence its salience within the structure. In
accordance with recent developments within the Principles and Parameters
Approach, we argue that the syntactic structure of the clause in Arabic must
include phrasal projections such as Tax–AspP, TP, AsrtP, and so on, hierarchically
ordered according to their selectional properties. Facts from negation, subject
position, compound tenses, and conditionals are brought to light to support the
aforesaid conclusion. The presence of these syntactic projections proves to be
 reminiscent of clausal well formedness conditions, since they are subject to the
ECP and RM
In contradistinction to verbal clauses are those cases where no lexical verb
appears. Chapter 8 looks into those cases, and suggests that they should be treated
similar to those which contain verbs, hence the rationale behind including them
in this book whose main focus is the verb. One major common feature they do
share, for instance, with the verbal clauses is the Modality constituent. As such,
it emphasizes that the difference between clauses with verbs and clauses without
reduces to the feature compositionality of Modality, which determines its
selectional properties. Accordingly, the lack of Taxis–Aspect and Tense features, in
particular, results in a nonverbal clause, while the presence of these and other modal
features that is, wh-features, temporal features, and so on, result in a verbal clause.
Finally, it is hoped that this book has contributed to a better understanding of
both the semantics and the syntax of the Arabic verbal system, with the ultimate
goal of contributing even minimally, not only to linguistic theory, but also to
closely interrelated disciplines as well. When compared to other languages, that is,
CONCLUSION
186

English, French, Russian, and so on, Arabic is still considered an exotic language.
Further research is certainly needed in all major areas of Arabic  linguistics, since
very little research has been conducted on such a language which has important
things to say to the linguistic world at large (Comrie 1991: 4); this is illustrated
in the structure and function of the Arabic verb as treated in this book.
CONCLUSION
187

APPENDIX
188
Source: Newspaper Article #1 / AL-QUDS AL-ʕARABI (02/20/92)

APPENDIX
189
Source: Newspaper Article #2 / ASHARQ AL-AWSAT (07/05/92)

APPENDIX
190
Source: Newspaper Article #3 / AL-QUDS AL-ʕARABI (02/20/92)

APPENDIX
191
Source: Newspaper Article #4 / AL-ʕAALAM AL-YAWM (09/19/91)

APPENDIX
192
Source: Newspaper Article #5 / AL-ʕAALAM AL-YAWM (09/19/91)

APPENDIX
193
Source: Newspaper Article #6 / AL-ʕAALAM AL-YAWM (09/19/91)

APPENDIX
194
Source: Newspaper Article #7 / AL-ʕAALAM AL-YAWM (09/19/91)

APPENDIX
195
Source: Newspaper Article #8 / AL-ʕAALAM AL-YAWM (09/19/91)

APPENDIX
196
Source: Newspaper Article #9 / AL-ʕAALAM AL-YAWM (09/19/91)

APPENDIX
197
Source: Newspaper Article #10 / AL-ʕAALAM AL-YAWM (09/19/91)

APPENDIX
198
Source: Newspaper Article #11 / AL-QUDS AL-ʕARABI (02/20/92)

APPENDIX
199
Source: Newspaper Article #12 / AL-QUDS AL-ʕARABI (02/20/92)

APPENDIX
200
Source: Newspaper Article #13 / AL-ʕAALAM AL-YAWM (09/19/91)

NOTES
1 INTRODUCTION
1 It is worth noting that in Sibawayhi’s eighth-century book, verbal categories such as
tense and aspect appear in the first book’s opening paragraph as he describes the
 correlation between three verbal forms, namely the perfective, imperfective, and
imperative and the ways their occurrence relates to time and completion of events
(for more details on Sibawayhi’s work, see Carter (2004)). Leech (2004) observes that
some of the most fascinating issues in English relate to tense, aspect, mood, and modality.
Despite the  historical gap, the apparent convergence between the two linguists appears
to highlight the salience of verbal categories.
2 See Versteegh (1997) and Suleiman (2003) for a stimulating description of the major
landmarks of the Arabic linguistics tradition along with their counterparts in the West.
3 See in particular Cowan (1968: 29–34), McLoughlin (1972: 57–73), Blau (1973, 1976)
for an extensive presentation and discussion of this issue. See also Eid (2006) for an
analysis of current mixing of MSA with colloquial forms of language in media  discourse.
2 VERBAL CATEGORIES, CLAUSE STRUCTURE, 
AND MODALITY
1 See in particular Bybee et al. (1994) whose work aims at identifying the universal
 features of Tense, Aspect, and Mood across 76 unrelated languages. See also Dahl
(1985, 2000), whose initial work on the universal nature of these categories relies on a
corpus of more than 60 languages from various language groups and group types; the
latest work focuses much more on the European group, however. Comrie (1976, 1985)
and Kinberg (2001: 132–52) are similarly recommended for advancing the treatment
of such verbal categories within TMA systems.
2 Throughout the chapter and the rest of the book, we shall write Modality with a  capital
letter “M”, to distinguish it from the other metaterm “modality” which refers to the
 category of modals.
3 In his footnote #28, Fillmore throws out the idea that “there are probably good reasons
for regarding negation, tense and mood as associated with the sentence as a whole, and
the perfect and progressive ‘aspects’ as features on the verb.” Nevertheless, his first
intuition is to include aspect within the modality component.
4 For a detailed review of both pre-Chomskian and Chomskian approaches to sentence
structure, see in particular Newmeyer (1980, 1996).
5 In fact, many of the principles of the enunciation theory find their roots in the writings
of Jakobson, although, for some unknown reasons, most enunciativists of this school
refer to Benveniste as its Godfather; Gustave Guillaume’s (1963) Psychomechanical
201

NOTES
202
Theory of Language appears to have had a large influence on French-based enunciative
 theories. It is, however, somewhat a less acknowledged source of inspiration.
6 See, in particular, Adamczewski (1983: 5–16), where a brief and concise discussion
unveils various aspects of the theory. See also Bahloul (1986: 18–22, 1987: 7–28), for
an extended discussion.
7 It is easy to see the great extent to which Chomsky’s statements echo the previously
reviewed analyses, namely those of Fillmore, Culioli, and Adamczewski. They all
appear to share the desire to develop a sentence-representational machinery that
 transcends beyond any particular language.
8 See Chomsky (1981: 27–28), Sproat (1985), Mohammad (1988b, 1989) in particular,
for such accommodations; see Comrie (1989: 86–104), Hawkins (1990) for an  extensive
discussion of issues related to word order.
9 It should be noted that, according to Koopman and Sportiche again, while the internal
subject position is restricted to D-structure for class 1 languages, such as English,
French, Vata, and so on, it may not be so for class 2 languages, such as Italian, Welsh,
Japanese, Chinese, and so on (see Koopman and Sportiche for more details).
10 The metaterm X’ is reminiscent of “‘X’ Theory” which was developed in the 1970s and
plays an important role in the early stages of the Principles and Parameters Approach
(see Radford (1988); Haegeman (1991); Adger (2003) among others for a general
 characterization). Central to this theory is the notion of head. In the present context,
the head of the tense category, for example, is the tense affix itself.
11 Each phrasal projection is assumed to generate a specifier position above the head. We
have omitted that position for ease of exposition.
12 Ever since, there have been myriad studies on the syntax of functional categories
within and across a large number of languages and language groups. For Arabic, we
especially note the valuable works of Benmamoun (1992, 2000), Fassi Fehri (1993),
Ouhalla (1993, 1997), Harbert and Bahloul (2002), M. Bahloul (2006a,b) for their
thorough and detailed analyses of a variety of Arabic functional categories. For English
and Spanish, see Cowper (2005).
13 In relation to modality, Ingham (1994), for example, cites 12 different modal verbs in
Najdi Arabic. This is an illustration of how rich and how complex this component
might be.
14 We borrowed this term from Leech and Short (1981: 272), where it is used to refer to
the relationship expressed between the implied author and fiction. We believe that it
can be generalized to characterize similar relationships in all types of discourses,
whether they are written or oral.
15 For further details of the formal representations of these operations, see Bourdin (1991:
273–77).
16 Interestingly, Nuyts (2005) suggests to replace the term “modality” with “attitude”
showing it to be the “cleanest solution” (p. 28).
17 See also Monville-Burston and Waugh, 1985, 1991, Waugh and Monville-Burston,
1986, Waugh 1987, 1991b for analyses of various context-sensitive meanings and
functions of tense and aspect with a particular focus on modal, affective, pragmatic,
and textual considerations.
18 It should be stressed here that degrees of interaction vary from 0 to 1, with 0 for far
less obvious cases and 1 for more transparent ones. Thus, one could safely say that
 categories can be discrete and still interact.
19 We use the term “non-formal” here for non-mathematical accounts vs. mathematical
accounts, such as Predicate Calculus Semantics (Chierchia and McConnell-Ginet
1990, among others); both types of approaches have their own formalism otherwise.
20 Cited in Lancri (1984: 3).
21 For a detailed discussion relevant to the question of Invariance, see the volume New
Vistas in Grammar: lnvariance and Variation Waugh and Rudy (eds), pp. 11–223.

3 VERBAL MORPHOLOGY, STRUCTURE, AND FUNCTION
1 This binary characteristic of the Arabic verbal system contrasts sharply with other
non-binary verbal systems such as French, for example, where three distinct
 morphological verbal categories, a present tense form, as in je marche (I walk), a past
tense form, as in je marchais (I walked/was walking), and a future tense form, as in
je marcherai (I will walk), constitute the heart of its verbal system, along with the
 periphrastic  perfects and go-future. For a detailed discussion of the French verbal
 system, the reader is referred to Waugh (1975: 436–85, 1987: 1–47, 1991: 241–59).
2 For detailed studies of all various derived verbal forms, see Er-Rayyan (1986: 74–141),
Fischer (2002: 35–184). For a competing view which advocates a stem-based approach
to Arabic verbal morphology, see in particular Moutaouakil (1988), McCarthy (1993),
Cuvalay-Haak (1997), Benmamoun (1999), Ratcliffe (1998), Gafos (2002).
3 This approach accords well with the clausal structure outlined in Chapter 2. Accordingly,
the verbal root belongs to the proposition/lexis component, and as such, it has not been
appropriated. Recall that an utterance results from the interaction between the
Modality component, and the lexis component, through enunciative  operations. Since
grammatical categories belong to the Modality component, it is only natural that,
unless they are properly appropriated, they fail to otherwise appear, and so does the
verbal root.
4 Benmamoun rightly observes that the vocalic melody is involved in passive and active
verbs; he therefore rejects that one form carries more than one function, especially that
voice is derivational while tense is inflectional. In addition, he notes that the /a-a/ vocalic
melody is limited to active verbs. On the one hand, it is not clear why the entire
vocalic melody is assumed to express tense and/or passive. On the other hand, there was no
discussion of such possible cases of morphological homonymy or polysemy in  addition
to the “hierarchy of meaning” along the line found in Kinberg (1991, 2001: 133–51).
5 Until we present the results of our semantico-pragmatic investigation, we will keep
using the aspect–tense denotation to refer to the relevant morphemes.
6 We refer the reader to Al-Shalan (1983: 188–254) where various issues related to
 passivization in Arabic are discussed.
7 The realization of phi features is subject to configurational constraints. For relevant
discussions, see Fassi Fehri (1993: 34–44), Benmamoun (2000: 119–55), Harbert and
Bahloul (2002).
8 Throughout this review, we will use the examples of the authors in question to  illustrate
the difference between the basic verbal forms. Note that most of them, if not all, are
samples of language taken out of context, a methodology that we believe contains
 various shortcomings related to adequacy and reliability; hence our reliance on a
 representative corpus.
9 Note that Wright’s work (1859) still serves as the traditional basis for various descriptive
studies pertaining to both Classical and MSA within Western-based scholarship.
10 Although Am-mirbiinii’s analysis is based on the notion of Time, it differs in many ways
from that of Sibawayhi. While Sibawayhi, for example, refers to the tridimensional
characteristic of time, namely, past, present and future; Am-mirbiinii considers the
dynamic binary nature of time more relevant in characterizing verbal tenses.
Accordingly, time is evaluated either as elapsed, as in past time; or as unelapsed, as in
present and future times (see also Guillaume 1973: 184–219 for a similar approach).
11 It is worth noting that textbooks used for native speakers throughout the Arab world
refer to the Perfect and the Imperfect in temporal terms. Thus, while the former is referred
to as al-maa*ii and defined to denote “past tense,” the latter is referred to as
al-mu*aariʕu referring to “present and future tense” (Abu-Obaida et al. 2005).
12 See Al-Aswad (1983: 20) for a different characterization. There, he suggests, contrary
to Comrie, that “aspect” is the primary feature of the Arabic verb.
NOTES
203

13 Even though the aspectual features are expressed parenthetically and inconsistently
with “or” for the Perfect and “and” for the Imperfect, the very fact that they are
included in the definition is a sufficient indication that they are prominent.
14 Jakobson (1957) incorporates this distinction within a larger category which includes
such notions as simultaneity, anteriority, interruption, concessive connection, and so on.
He names this category “Taxis,” and defines it as follows: “Taxis characterizes the
 narrated event in relation to another narrated event and without reference to the speech
event.” We will show that such a notion plays a salient role in characterizing the
 semantico-pragmatic function of the verbal system.
15 This particular point of view, although it might hold true in some languages, does not
seem to be supported by facts from Arabic as will be clarified in this book. In
 particular, we will demonstrate that the dynamics of the ATM categories allows for full
dissociation.
4 THE PERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
1 For an extensive discussion, see Waugh (1975: 438–40). Note that the invariant might
be made up of various components. Among others, see Waugh and Monville-Burston
(1986), Waugh (1991a,b), for such claims.
2 See Cowper (2005) for a principled account of the Tense systems in English and
Spanish on the basis of recent works in morphosyntactic feature geometry which
makes use of such relational concepts as “distinctiveness” and “opposition” which in
essence militates against treating verbal grammatical categories in isolation.
3 In relation to the use of corpus for writing grammars, Dash (2005: 27) sensibly notes
that early (pre-corpus) grammarians used to “depend on the works of their predecessors
as well as the examples collected by them” to analyze grammatical forms. This is
indeed the case for most early, medieval, and contemporary Arabic grammarians tend
to use exactly the same examples (i.e. qatala/yaqtulu “killed/kills”) while illustrating
the contrast in question.
4 As for the semantic interpretation of these three negators, we had to reply on
Sibawayhi’s analysis of both the first and the third forms, that is, kataba, and laqad
kataba, respectively, and on Ul-Haq’s (1984: 203) characterization of the negative
 particle lammaa for the negation of the second form qad kataba.
5 This diachronic change, which has eliminated more complex forms in favor of simpler
ones, accords well with the principle of “simplification” which underlies some types
of language change (Hock 1988: 254–58).
6 The metaterm Compound Perfect is a mere a heuristic device to clearly distinguish the
Perfect preceded by QAD from the bare form. It should therefore not be interpreted as
an attempt to introduce a new verbal form to the existing morphologically grammaticalized
ones, namely the Perfect and the Imperfect.
7 Irrelevant details are omitted from examples for convenience.
8 The example in (8) is cited in Comrie (1985: 47). Grammaticalizing temporal distance
is similarly mentioned in Dahl (1985: 120–28) with data from a number of languages
such as Kamba (a Bantu language), Hixharyana (a Carib language). It is worth noting
that this tendency in some languages has led Bhat (1999) to classify languages as
tense-prominent, aspect-prominent, or mood-prominent.
9 It should be stressed here that the use of the Pluperfect in general not only requires an
event occurring before another event, but also a relational aspect within which the two
events are evaluated. But see Triki and Bahloul (2001) and Bahloul (forthcoming) for
a different characterization of the past-in-the-past hypothesis that has been long
assumed to trigger the use of the Past Perfect.
10 The example in (26b) is only possible in a context where the enunciator has not only
seen the watch, but also certain to have got it.
NOTES
204

11 With respect to the temporal properties of the French past participle, it is generally
argued that it typically refers to completed events. The event in the following example,
for example, is usually interpreted as having already taken place (see also Waugh
(1987: 18–19) for a similar view).
(i)
je suis tombé(e)
I am fallen.
s.m.(f)
“I fell down.”
12 Note that came is also possible in English, but it has a more hypothetical value, which
is not the case here.
13 Having taught Arabic as a foreign language to English native speakers, I have noticed
the difficulties they encounter when they study the conditional, and in particular when
they have to use a Perfect verb with a present time interpretation, as in (28); they
always want to translate it as an irrealis past.
14 Indeed, Jakobson (1932: 6) cites Aksakov and Nekrasov who proposed a similar
 interpretation of the Russian preterite observing that “...this form expresses, in fact,
no particular time, but solely a break in the direct connection between the subject and
the action (. . .) the action, properly speaking, loses its character of action and becomes
simply the distinguishing property of the subject.”
15 This raises the questions of (i) whether a present verbal form, that is, the Imperfect, is
possible in such conditional contexts, and (ii) how Arabic would express an unlikely
non-actualized condition if the Perfect expresses a likely condition. An answer to the
first question is given in Chapter 6, pp. 234–36. As for the second question, see our
discussion of Tense and conditional particles in Chapter 7, pp. 304–06.
16 I made some appropriate changes to Dahl’s example involving a typographical mistake
bi-l-waali “to the money”  ʕalaa al-maali “with the money,” and a poor choice of the
verb in the subordinate clause ʔittasala  taɦzassala “to get.” The meaning remains
the same, however.
17 Notice that in Arabic when someone is directly addressed by name or title, the  vocative
particle yaa is used right before the noun.
18 Of course the results remain partial until the Compound Perfect and the Imperfect are
discussed, then all three forms are contrasted (see pp. 140–47). For a similar approach,
see Kinberg (2001: 132–52).
19 The optionality of the presence of the modal sawfa “will” results from the capability
of the Imperfect to refer to future time events (but see our discussion relative to the use
of the modal sawfa “will” in Chapter 6). As for the modal QAD “might” in (45c), it has
the effect of neutralizing the temporal interpretation of the auxiliary (nonpast, past).
Therefore, the context disambiguates as to whether it is a past or a nonpast event.
20 Waugh points out that Russian typically uses the perfective past in similar contexts,
although it does not exclude the imperfective past (personal communication). The
availability of both forms suggests that the contrast has little to do with temporality,
and more with the enunciator’s subjective assessment of the verbal process.
21 It is unclear to me why would the author choose the present perfect “has contained” to
translate the Perfect, where the present is more appropriate.
22 Waugh argues that there are two types of passé composé in French: passé composé
I and passé composé II. While type I relates to the moment of enunciation acting
 therefore like a perfect, type II does not. The one to which we refer here is type I.
23 These properties have often been associated with the aspectual definition of the
 meaning of the perfective (Comrie 1976: 16).
24 We depart from the traditional belief which assumes that “the exception confirms the
rule.” In most cases, it is the existing generalization that is at fault, and a better
 characterization ought to be sought (see among others Triki and Bahloul 2001).
NOTES
205

NOTES
206
5 THE COMPOUND PERFECT, AND THE MODAL QAD
1 In similar contexts, that is, sentence initially, the coordinating conjunction wa “and”
also precedes prepositions, adverbs, and imperfect verbs; in such cases, it is never
translated. For a discussion of this conjunction, see Fischer (2001: 175–76), Kinberg
(2001: 85–88), Ghazali (forthcoming).
2 The fact that the two functions are quite contradictory illustrates the opaque nature of
QAD. The reason for this confusion will become clearer as we progress in the analysis
of this particle.
3 It is particularly interesting from a historical point of view to notice that while some
functions of QAD are still observed in MSA to a certain extent, that is, the assertive
function, other functions have totally disappeared; See especially Ibn Hishaam
(vol. 1, 289–92) for the pre-nominal QAD, Kinberg (2001: 112–20) for a special
 function of LA-QAD, and Cuvalay-Haak (1997: 150–63) for unusual classical, medieval,
and modern uses of QAD along with its current reflexes.
4 It should be noted that (4b) is not attested, or is marginal, in British English. However,
it is commonly used in American English.
5 In all of his work, AI-Aswad never discussed or even mentioned the verbal complex
[kaanaPerfect]. This is probably due to an erroneous belief which considers that
QAD is obligatorily used between kaana and the main perfect verb (see also Doss
1984: 362 and Comrie 1991: 8). Therefore [kaana  Perfect] is assumed to be not a
well formed verbal complex. This is simply a false characterization according to my
own findings, where among 25 cases of compounds with kaana, five occur without the
particle QAD, which represents 20%, a proportion which can not be disregarded or
overlooked.
6 Although the particle QAD is not used alone, and is preceded by LA, WA, or FA, this
has no bearing on the analysis suggested for QAD. We will therefore use QAD to refer
to all of its prefixed forms whose functions will be discussed later (see pp. 89–94).
7 The contrast observed between (7b) and (8a) is not particular to Arabic. Indeed, a
 similar contrast is observed in Chinese through the use of various particles. According
to Iljic (1986: 28–29) this contrast is illustrated through the two verbal suffixes -LE
and -GUO. Consider the following examples,
(i)
*wo kan-le
zhei ben xiaoshuo,
keshi mei kanwan.
I read (-LE)
this (CI.) short story
but (Neg) read.finish
“I’ve read this short story but have not finished it.”
(ii)
wo kan-guo
zhei ben xiaoshuo,
keshi mei kanwan.
I read (-GUO)
this (CI.) short story
but (Neg) read.finish
“I’ve read this short story but have not finished it.”
The use of the verbal complex [VerbGUO] in (ii) would correspond to the Perfect in
Arabic without the particle QAD, since the two verbal forms are neutral as to the
 resultative nature of the action involved. The use of the verbal suffix -LE, however, as
in (i), accords more with the function of (LA)QAD, given that both verbal forms imply
the completion of the action in question. But see (Li and Thompson 1981: 226–32) for
a  different characterization of this contrast in Chinese.
8 The verbal particle GUO in Chinese is also assumed to denote experiential aspect, as
shown in (i) as follows:
(i)
wo
chi
GUO
Riben
fan
I
eat
(EXP)
Japan
food
“I’ve eaten Japanese food (before).”
(Li and Thompson 1981: 226)

9 We have no way of knowing whether the contrast between (12a) and (12b) involves
 factual assertion, since both examples were given out of context.
10 The Emphasis Hypothesis is the one found in several Arabic teaching manuals and
textbooks. In Bishai (1971: 74) for instance, it is suggested that “QAD and sometimes
LA-QAD may introduce a perfect verb only for purposes of emphasis without any tense
significance.” This interpretation is not, however, maintained throughout the book. In
p. 76, for example, we read “QAD: with Perfectalready.” In some other grammar
 textbooks, the occurrence of QAD with the Perfect is fully absent while its occurrence
with the Imperfect is attested (see Schulz 2004: 12–14 for example).
11 Readers are referred to Culavay-Haak (1997: 150–65), Kinberg (2001: 121–31),
Ghazali (forthcoming), for recent discussions.
12 The cooccurrence of QAD with the Imperfect is far less problematic, since it expresses
possibility (see pp. 124–25).
13 There are several contexts in which the use of QAD is disallowed, that is, with the
 coordination particle umma “then, afterwards”; and adverbs such as lamma. ɦiinamaa,
ʕindamaa, kullamaa “when, whenever.” This ban is due to various syntactic, semantic/
pragmatic and stylistic constraints, some of which will be discussed later in the
 chapter. Along the same line, Kinberg (2001: 121–22) mentions a number of contexts
such as negative clauses, questions initiated by hal, protases of conditional sentences
initiated by in, and contexts which exhibit different degrees of negativity, in which the
use of QAD is not attested.
14 For more details on the function of coordinating conjunctions, see pp. 89–94.
15 This ban might be due to some type of semantico-pragmatic and modal conflicts the
specifics of which require deeper investigation. But see pp. 179–80 for a possible
account. See also Kinberg (2001: 121–31) for the analysis of some other contexts
where the use of QAD is blocked.
16 The only apparent exception to this is the oath word wallaahi “by God” which can
appear between QAD and the Perfect (see among others Ibn Hishaam vol. I, 291–92).
This is only attested for Classical Arabic, however, and there seems to be no indication
that this still occurs in MSA. This phenomenon is not particular to MSA, however. In
Chinese there is a similar verbal particle LE which always follows the verb to express
aspect–tense distinctions, and which allows no element to intervene in-between (see,
among others, Li and Thompson (1981: 184–202).
17 We have noticed that both the French conjunction puis “then,” quite often reduced to
pis in oral discourse, and the conjunction and in English reduced to ‘n, are redundantly
used just like the Arabic wa “and.” In written discourse, however, such redundant use
in French and English is not attested.
18 Jakobson (1971: 134) refers to DO as a marker of an “affirmative assertion” (assertorial),
and classifies it within a larger category he calls “STATUS,” which basically “defines
the logical quality of the event.”
19 Adamczewski (1982: 104, 1991: 268–72) considers the emphatic DO and BIEN/BEL
ET BIEN des métaopérateurs de prédication “predication metaoperators” whose main
function is to saturate, thematize, and confirm the truth of the predicative relation.
20 The cases where the thematic verb which follows the auxiliary is other than a Perfect
are excluded here, given that neither the Imperfect nor the Active Participle can be
 preceded by the verbal particle QAD in compound tenses.
21 Our thanks to Wayne Harbert for suggesting this line of analysis.
22 Ghazali (forthcoming) shows a number of cases of QAD used with yabduu “it seems”
type verbs. Such finding does not necessarily constitute a challenge to our analysis.
Within our speaker-based approach, what might appear at first contradictory should find
a principled explanation within the various mystification strategies and the factors
determining the use or otherwise of such modal tools.
NOTES
207

NOTES
208
6 THE IMPERFECT, USE, AND INVARIANT MEANING
1 Some ATM issues will be left out but will be discussed in the last section of this  chapter
where both verbal forms, the Perfect and the Imperfect, are contrasted and discussed.
2 Note that the left boundary does not always remain indifferent. Indeed, it differs  according
to whether the beginning ‘of the event is relevant or not. Thus, if adverbs like munðu
“since/for” are used, as follows in (i), the left boundary is represented as closed.
(i)
al-wilaayaatu
al-muttaɦidatu
tuʕaari*u
munðu
waqtin
tawiilin...
the-states
the-united oppose.
Imp.3.s.f
Since
time
long.
“The United States has for a long time opposed...” (NA#3)
3 Adamczewski holds the view that the predicative relationship is either “thematic” or
“rhematic.” In the former case, it is typically a secondary assertion either referring
back to a primary predication (e.g. when a young lady marries an old man, she is
 marrying him for money), or reflecting the situational given (e.g. Look! your neighbor
is washing his car). In the latter case, events lack any anaphoric value, and are  therefore
presented in a rather neutral way (e.g. my grandmother goes to church every Sunday
morning, etc.). (See also Delmas 1990.)
4 Notice the extent to which the semantic difference between the Imperfect and the
Perfect might be reduced in these particular contexts, a convergence on which we will
comment later.
5 Recall that many proverbs make use of the Perfect as well (see pp. 57–62). The  capability
of both the Perfect and the Imperfect to express similar processes will be later shown
to follow from the common characteristics which they both share (see the discussion
in pp. 140–47).
6 See in particular Hornstein (1990) who labels his theory of tense “Neo-
Reichenbachan”; that is, a revised version of the 1947 theory put forward by the
 logician Hans Reichenbach. Each tense in this theory corresponds to a representation
like the one which follows:
(i)  E,R-S
where E,R, and S are ‘event time’, ‘reference time’, and ‘moment of speech’, respectively.
A comma between two points indicates that they are ‘contemporaneous’, while a line,
as in R-S, indicates that the first point precedes the second one. For a critical survey,
see Dahl’s (1992) review of Hornstein’s work.
7 For more details, see our discussion of the nominal constructions in Chapter 8.
8 The modal QAD presents a complex case of polysemy, as it is capable of asserting both
the certainty of the realization of the predicative relation (e.g. when used with the
Perfect), as well as its uncertainty (e.g. when it precedes the Imperfect), as will be
shown later (see pp. 124–25) (see also Dahl and Talmoudi 1979: 54–55; Kinberg 2001:
121–31).
9 In English, for instance, it is generally observed that fixed time adverbials such as
yesterday, two days ago, and alike are not compatible with the present perfect.
10 Notice that the modal will in English has a similar performative interpretation in
 examples like the following:
(i)  Now, I will ask everybody to leave the court room
(ii)  We will suggest that there is indeed need to refer independently to future time
 reference, but it is of course possible that subsequent work may lead to revision
of this claim...
(Comrie 1985: 78)
11 For a discussion of the difference between these modals, see Sayed (1983).

12 The higher frequency of the modal QAD might be due to some morphological reasons
having to do with QAD being the simplest form, that is, one syllable, compared to
Laʕalla and rubbamaa which are both trisyllabic. The privileged status of QAD might
also be associated with its frequent use with the Perfect as well.
13 For an extensive discussion on the functioning of the temporal adverb “YESTERDAY,”
in newspaper articles, see Delmas (1984: 77–93).
14 See Declerck (1991) for English, Waugh (1991a,b) for French, Belazi (1993) for
Tunisian Arabic. Needless to say that the term “Historical Present” has been used as a
label to either isolate this function of the Imperfect or completely ignore it, while most
stories we hear daily tend to use this form rather than the Perfect or the past tense.
Adamczewski (1982a: 45) expresses a strong rejection of this term: “Inutile de dire que
l’étiquette ‘présent historique’ est absolument inutile.”
15 It should be stressed, however, that the unboundedness of the event receives different
interpretations depending on the lexical properties of the verb, and might therefore get
reduced to its logical limit.
16 Recall that when used in similar contexts, the Perfect presents the wish as dimension-
alized, as if it were realized.
17 See Kharma and Hajjaj (1997) for more details of contrastive analysis of Arabic and
English, Blyth (2005) for French, Cowper (2005) for English.
18 Notice that the context may locate the verbal event relative to another one, bringing
therefore simultaneity into the scene, that is, Kaana Maher y-a-lʕabu kurata al-qadam
ɦiina kaana saʁiiran “Maher used to play soccer when he was a kid.”
19 For a general presentation and discussion of both types of modals in Arabic,
 periphrastic and others, see Sayed (1983), Cuvalay-Haak (1997), Kinberg (2001).
20 For a recent discussion of these negators, see UI-Haq (1984: 188–204).
21 Special thanks to Linda Waugh for suggesting the form and content of this table.
22 Notice that, unlike the French and English examples discussed earlier where a similar
variation is observed within the headline/article alternation (see pp. 127–28), all the
examples here are only observed within the article. See Ghazali (forthcoming) for
findings relevant to this issue.
23 Linda Waugh informed us that these results are compatible with the findings concerning
the historical present in various European languages.
7 ATM CATEGORIES, DERIVATION, AND 
THE VERBAL CLAUSE
1 See our discussion of Arabic verbal morphology in Chapter 3, pp. 29–43, for specific
details.
2 It should be stressed that the movement of the thematic verb to Tense does not mean
that it is inherently temporal. In fact, we will show that the category of Tense is a prop-
erty of the clause and can be realized within various other categories.
3 We will use Modality instead of INFL for reasons discussed in Chapter 2. Recall that
Modality should not be confused with modals (see Chapter 2 for details).
4 Throughout this chapter and the following one, we will use Modality Phrase (MP) as
a heuristic device, when we do not refer individually to the relevant categories.
Accordingly, MP has the same X’ status as other phrasal projections.
5 Note that this attachment process may also obtain in the lexicon. However, the syntactic
constraints which might block such attachment, provides evidence for deriving the
 relevant affixes in the syntax.
6 More details about negation are discussed in Chapter 6, pp. 137–40.
7 Treating auxiliaries as aspectual elements is theoretically desirable, not only because
they interact with Aspect, that is, being “progressive aspect”; haveen “prospective
aspect” in English; but also because of the salient role they play as surface traces of
NOTES
209

the enunciator’s point of view. In this context, the fact that they are aspectuals and
 controllers of temporality at the same time should not be interpreted as inconsistent,
rather the opposite since they follow the same pattern observed here for negators and
conditional particles, being also controllers of temporality despite their categorial
 differences. Moreover, this type of interaction follows straightforwardly from their
intrinsic cross- categorial characteristics (see pp. 21–23).
8 Note that the particle ʔinna assigns accusative case to the NP that it governs, a  property
that typically defines phrasal heads. This property follows naturally if ʔinna is shown
to head a phrasal projection.
8 ATM CATEGORIES, DERIVATION, AND 
THE NOMINAL CLAUSE
1 It is worth noting that this contrast is not particular to MSA. Indeed, languages such
as: Spoken Sinhala (Sumangala 1991), Russian (Babby 1980), Hebrew (Doron 1983;
Borer 1986; Rapoport 1987; Shlonsky 2000; Greenberg 2002), and various other
 languages and language groups (cf. Hagège 1984) also demonstrate the absence of the
copula. These languages seem to differ as to whether the copula is altogether absent in
the language (e.g. Spoken Sinhala) or only missing in certain contexts (e.g. MSA) as
we will show later.
2 Given the unmarked nature of the Imperfect in MSA (see Chapter 6), the verbal form
yakuunu is subject to different interpretations given the various contexts in which it can
occur. The reading with which we are concerned, and under which each of the b-examples
in (6)–(8) is ungrammatical is a present stative reading, where neither futurity nor
habituality are involved. Example (8a) should be interpreted as the only possible
answer to the question: ʔayna alwaladu? “Where is the boy?”
3 For similar claims and discussions, see Gair and Paolillo (1988) and Eid (1991).
4 We adopt the proposals made in Gazdar et al. (1985), where they argue that a feature
consists of a feature name/feature value pair. In other words, one can say that a
 particular feature is part of the composition of a category X, whether or not that  feature
has a specified feature value in a particular case.
5 In fact, unlike person and gender, in Bahloul and Harbert (1993) and Harbert and
Bahloul (2002), we argue that number is syntactically derived through movement of the
lexical head to Numo (for more details, see Bahloul and Harbert 1993; Harbert and
Bahloul 2002).
6 The use of the term “modal” for the categories found under the INFL node is inspired
partly by Fillmore’s (1968) suggestion, discussed in Chapter 2, pp. 8–10, that the basic
syntactic structure of sentences is made up of two constituents corresponding to a
MODALITY and a PROPOSITION. Recall that Fillmore includes within the  modality
constituent modalities such as negation, tense, mood, and aspect.
7 Notice that we omit reference to agreement features (AGR) because they are of a
 different type under this hypothesis. However, agreement features can be assumed to
be a property of Spec–Head relations.
8 Although it takes a deeper investigation to decide whether the invariant features of the
copular verb kaan “be” in Arabic are similar to other verbs which, as we have shown
in earlier chapters, combine taxis and aspect or are basically temporal; here, we will
assume that in accordance with its function in compound tense constructions, the  copular
verb kaan denotes temporality, and as such will be analyzed as a simple tense marker.
9 But unlike Mohammad, I assume that Subjects in Arabic are internal to VP and base
generated in their specifier positions. It is only at that level where no movement has
occurred that SVO order is achieved.
10 For ease of exposition, we will omit Tax-AspP. Recall that this latter is systematically
selected by To.
NOTES
210

11 A similar claim is found in Abd El-Moneim (1989: 17–26) among several others.
12 Because of the nonconcatenative nature of Arabic morphology, the triconsonantal root
KTB is not pronouncable unless the vowels representing the “aspect-tense, and
 agreement morphemes” are present (see our discussion of verbal morphology in
Chapter 3, pp. 29–43). Viewed this way, other languages, for example, English and
French, are no exception (Lasnik 1981).
13 Feature percolation is simply a mechanism that ensures, minimally, that all features
associated with a maximal projection will appear on its head, and vice versa.
14 MSA uses the periphrastic modals ya∆ibu ʔan “it is obligatory that,” yastatiiʕuʔran
“it is possible that.” For ease of reference, I have glossed them as “must” and “can,”
respectively.
15 Unlike qad, Rubbamaa and laʕalla, both meaning “may,” optionally select either a
tensed or a nontensed complement, as shown in (i):
(i)
a
ʔayna axuu-ka
where brother-your
“Where is your brother?”
(ii)
b
rubbamaa/laʕalla-hu
(yakuunu)
fii al-bayt-i
may
(is)
in the-house-gen
“He may be in the house.”
16 Both ʔin and iðaa “if” can also select a nontensed TP. But this usage is viewed as
being a rather less elegant style.
17 Contrary to what Rizzi had observed, native speakers of French that I consulted did
accept (4Ib). They were, however, in agreement with Rizzi’s claim that pourquoi “why”
is impossible with the verb parler “to speak.” To explain this discrepancy, one might
allow some optionality in the behavior of pourquoi “why.”
NOTES
211

BIBLIOGRAPHY
212
Aartun, K. (1963) Zur Frage Altarabischer Tempora, Oslo: Universitetsforlaget.
Abboud, P.F. and McCarus, E.N. (1992) Elementary Modern Standard Arabic 1 and 2,
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Abd EI-Moneirn, A. (1989) “The role of INFL,” unpublished thesis, University of
Connecticut.
Abdul-Ghany, M. (1981) “Government binding in classical Arabic,” unpublished thesis,
University of Texas at Austin.
Abney, S. (1985) “Functor theory and licensing conditions: Toward the elimination of the
base,” ms, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
—— (1987) “The English noun phrase in its sentential aspect,” unpublished thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Abousch, D. (1985) “On verbs and time,” unpublished thesis, Massachusetts Institute of
Technology.
Abu-Obaida, S.M., Khaatir, M., and Al-Khaadim, M. (2005) Arabic Language,
United Arab Emirates: Khadamaat Express littibaaʕa (Express Printing Services).
Adamczewski, H. (1976) “Le Faire et le Dire,” Theoretical Approaches in Applied
Linguistics. Bruxelles, Paris: Didier.
——  (1978) BEING dans la grammaire de l’Anglais Contemporain, Paris: Champion.
——  (1982a) Grammaire Linguistique de l’Anglais, Paris: A. Colin.
——  (1982b) “L’ aspect en anglais et dans les langues slaves,” Saint Etienne: CIEREC
XXXV.
——  (1983) “Pour une grammaire métaoperationnelle: linguistique, analyse métaopera-
tionnelle de I’ Anglais,” TREMA, 8: 5–16, Paris III.
——  (1986/7) Personal notes from his graduate seminars, Paris: Sorbonne University.
——  (1991) Le Franrçais Déchiffré: clé du Language et des Langues, Paris: Armand
Colin Editeur.
Adger, D. (2003) Core Syntax: A Minimalist Approach, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Al-Aswad, M. (1983) “Contrastive analysis of Arabic and English verbs in tense, aspect,
and structure,” unpublished thesis, University of Michigan.
Al-Mansouri, A.J. (2002) Ad-dalaala az-zamaniyya fi-l-∆umla al-ʕarabiyya, Amman:
Addaar al-ʕilmiyya ad-dawliyya & daar a-aqaafa linnamr wattawziiʕ.
Al-Seghayar, M.S. (1988) “On the syntax of small clauses in Arabic,” unpublished MA
thesis, University of Ottawa.
Al-Shalan, A. (1983) “Word order and passivization in Arabic,” unpublished thesis,
University of Washington.

BIBLIOGRAPHY
213
Al-Waer, M. (1987) Toward a Modern and Realistic Sentential Theory of Basic Structures
in Standard Arabic, Damascus: Tlass Publishing House.
Al-Zamaxsharii (1143) (new edition, 1971) Al-Mufassal fii ʕilmi Al-ʕarabiyya, Beirut:
Daar Al-∆iil li-n-našr wa-t-tawziiʕ.
Anderson, S.R. (1988) “Inflection,” in M. Hammond and M. Noonan (eds), Theoretical
Morphology, pp. 23–43, Orlando: Academic Press.
Anwar, M.S. (1979) Be and Equational sentences in Egyptian Colloquial Arabic.
( Studies in Language Companion Series 2.), Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Aronson, H.I. (1991) “Towards a typology of verbal categories,” in L.R. Waugh and
S. Rudy (eds), Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, 49: 111–31, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Aš-širbiini, M. (1570) Arab Linguistics: An Introductory Classical Text with Translation
and Notes, translated by M.G. Carter with comments, 1981, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Azmi, M. (1988) Arabic Morphology, A Study in the System of Conjugation, Hyderabad,
AP, India: Azizia Print Press.
Babby, L.H. (1980) Existential Sentences and Negation in Russian, Ann Arbor: Karoma
Publishers.
Badawi, S., Carter, M., and Gully, A. (2004) Modern Written Arabic: A Comprehensive
Grammar, New York, London: Routledge.
Bahloul, M. (1986) “Le Fonctionnement des modaux en Anglais et en Chinois
 contemporains,” unpublished BA thesis, Sorbonne University (Paris III).
—— (1987) “Introduction au problème du temps et de l’ aspect en Anglais et en Chinois
contemporains,” unpublished MA thesis, Sorbonne University (Paris III).
—— (1993) “The copula in Modern Standard Arabic,” in M. Eid and C. Holes (eds),
Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, 101: 209–29, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
—— (1994) The Syntax and Semantics of Taxis, Aspect, Tense, and Modality in Standard
Arabic, Cornell University: Department of Modern Languages and Linguistics
Publications.
—— (2006a) “Copula,” in K. Versteegh and M. Eid (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic
Language and Linguistics, 1: 506–11, Leuven: Brill Academic Publishers.
—— (2006b) “Agreement,” in K. Versteegh and M. Eid (eds), Encyclopedia of Arabic
Language and Linguistics, 1: 43–48, Leuven: Brill Academic Publishers.
—— (forthcoming) “Real tense usage and the tense we teach,” to appear in The Journal of
the Utah Academy.
Bahloul, M. and Harbert, W. (1993) “Agreement asymmetries in Arabic,” in J. Mead (ed.),
The Proceedings of the Eleventh West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics,
pp. 15–31, Stanford: Center for the Study of Language and Information.
Bahloul, R. (1991) “Morphology of the verbal system in Arabic,” ms, Cornell University.
—— (1994) “Inflectional morphology, negation and the clausal structure in Tunisian
Arabic,” unpublished MA thesis, Cornell University.
Baker, M. (1988) Incorporation: A Theory of Grammatical Function Changing, Chicago:
The University of Chicago Press.
Bakir, M. (1980) “Aspects of clause structure in Arabic: A study of word order variation
in literary Arabic,” unpublished thesis, Indiana University.
Banat, M. (2001) Teaching Arabic for Foreigners, Jordan: Dar Osama.
Bateson, C. (2003) Arabic Language Handbook, Washington, DC: Georgetown University
Press.

Beeston, A.F.L. (1970) The Arabic Language Today, London: Hutchinson.
Belazi, H. (1984) “Diglossia and the situation of Arabic in Tunisia,” unpublished MA
 thesis, Cornell University.
Belazi, N. (1993) “Semantics and pragmatics of the Tunisian tenses and aspects,”
 unpublished thesis, Cornell University.
Benmamoun, E. (1992) “Functional and inflectional morphology: Problems of projection,
representation and derivation,” unpublished thesis, University of Southern California.
——  (1999) “Arabic morphology: The central role of the imperfective,” Lingua, 108:
175–201.
——  (2000) The Feature Structure of Functional Categories: A Comparative Study of
Arabic Dialects, New York, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Benveniste, E. (1966) Problème de Linguistique Générale, Paris: Gallimard.
——  (1970) “L’appareil formel de l’énonciation,’’ Languages, 17: 12–18.
Bhat, S. (1999) The Prominence of Tense, Aspect and Mood, Amsterdam, Philadelphia:
John Benjamins.
Bishai, W. (1971) Concise Grammar of Literary Arabic, Duboque, Iowa: Kendall Hunt
Publishing Co.
Blachère, R. and Gaudefroy-Demombynes, M. (1952) Grammaire de l’Arabe Classique
(Morphologie et Syntaxe), 3rd edn, Paris: Editions G. -P. Maisonneuve.
Blau, J. (1973) “Remarks on some syntactic trends in Modern Standard Arabic,” Israeli
Oriental Studies III: 172–231.
——  (1976) “Some additional observations on some syntactic trends in Modern Standard
Arabic,” Israeli Oriental Studies VI: 158–90.
Blyth, C.J. (1990) “Evaluation in oral Quebecois narratives: The function of non-referential
meaning in discourse,” unpublished thesis, Cornell University.
——  (2005) “From empirical findings to the teaching of aspectual distinctions,” in
D. Ayoun (ed.), Tense and Aspect in Romance Languages: Theoretical and Applied
Perspectives, pp. 211–52, Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Bourdin, P. (1991) “Some issues in the metalinguistic representation of French tense and
aspect,” Canadian Journal of Linguistics, 36.3: 269–94.
Bouscaren, J. and Chuquet, J. (1987) Grammaire et Texte Anglais: Guide pour I’analyse
linguistique, Paris: OPHRYS.
Bowers, J. (1991) “The syntax of predication,” Linguistics Inquiry, 24: 591–656.
Bresnan, J.W. (1970) “On complementizers: Toward a syntatctic theory of complement
types,” Foundations of Language, 6: 297–321.
——  (1972) “Theory of complementation in English syntax,” unpublished thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Bybee, J.L. (1985) Morphology: A Study of the Relation Between Meaning and Form,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Bybee, J.L., Perkins, R., and Pagliuca, W. (1994) The Evolution of Grammar: Tense, Aspect
and Mood in the Languages of the World, Chicago: University of Chicago Press.
Carstens, V. (1991) “The morphology and syntax of Determiner Phrases in Kiswahili,”
unpublished thesis, University of California, Los Angeles.
Carstens, V. and Kinyalolo, K. (1989) “On IP structure: Tense, aspect, and agreement,” ms,
Cornell University and University of Southern California, Los Angeles.
Carter, M.G. (2004) Sibawayhi, London, New York: I.B. Tauris.
Chierchia, G. and McConnell-Ginet, S. (1990) Meaning and Grammar, Cambridge: MIT
Press.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
214

Chomsky, N. (1957) Syntactic Structures, The Hague: Mouton.
——  (1965) Aspects of the Theory of Syntax, Cambridge: MIT Press.
——  (1976) Studies on Semantics in Generative Grammar, The Hague: Mouton.
——  (1981) Lectures on Government and Binding, Dordrecht: Foris Publications.
——  (1986) Barriers, Cambridge: MIT Press.
——  (1988) “Transformational grammar: Past, present, future,” paper presented in Kyoto,
January 1987, ms, Cambridge: MIT Press.
——  (1991) “Some notes on the economy of derivation and representation,” in R. Freidin (ed.),
Principles and Parameters in Comparative Grammar, pp. 417–54, Cambridge: MIT
Press.
——  (1995) The Minimalist Program, Cambridge: MIT Press.
——  (2000) New Horizons in the Study of Language and Mind, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——  (2002a) Syntactic Structures, 2nd edn, Berlin and New York: Walter de Gruyter.
——  (2002b) On Nature and Language, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Cohen, M. (1924) “Verbes déponents internes (ou verbes adhérents) en Sémitique,”
Mémoire de la société de Linguistique XXIII, 4, Paris.
Comrie, B. (1976) Aspect, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——  (1985) Tense, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
——  (1989) Language Universals and Linguistic Typology, 2nd edn, Chicago: The University
of Chicago Press.
——  (1991) “On the importance of Arabic for general linguistic theory,” in B. Comrie and
M. Eid (eds), Current Issues in Linguistic Theory, pp. 3–30, Amsterdam:
John Benjamins.
Cowan, W. (1968) “Notes toward the definition of Modern Standard Arabic,” Language
Learning, 18: 29–34.
Cowper, E. (2005) “The geometry of interpretable features: Infl in English and Spanish,”
Language, 81.1: 10–46.
Culioli, A. (1968) “La Formalisation en Linguistique,” Les Cahiers pour l’Analyse, 9:
106–17.
——  (1970) “Considérations théoriques à propos du traîtement formel des langues
naturelles,” Document de Linguistique Quantitative 7. Saint Sulpice de Favieres:
Association Fean Favard.
——  (1971) “A propos d’opérations intervenant dans le traitement formel des langues
naturelles,” Mathématiques et Sciences Humaines, 34: 7–15.
——  (1973) “Sur quelques contradictions en linguistique,” Communication, 20: 83–91,
Paris: Seuil.
——  (1974) “A propos d’énoncés exclamatifs,” Langue Française, 22: 6–15.
——  (1975/6) “Transcriptions du séminaire de DEA de Mr. A. Culioli,” Recherche en
 linguistique, théorie des opérations énonciatives. Paris VII: DRL.
——  (1978) “Valeurs aspectuelles et opérations énonciatives: l’aoristique,” in S. Fischer,
and J.J. Franckel (eds), Linguistique, énonciation, Aspect et Détermination, pp. 99–113,
Paris: Editions de l’EHESS.
——  (1982) “Prèface,” in Catherine Fuchs, La Genèse du Texte. Les Modèles
Linguistiques, Paris: CNRS.
——  (1987) “Personal notes from Culioli’s graduate seminars,” unpublished, Paris VII.
Cuvalay-Haak, M. (1997) The Verb in Literary and Colloquial Arabic, Berlin, New York:
Mouton de Gruyter.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
215

Dahl, O. and Talmoudi, F. (1979) “Qad and Laqad – tense/aspect and pragmatics in Arabic,”
in T. Petterson (ed.), Aspectology Workshop at the Fifth Scandinavian Conference of
Linguistics, pp. 51–68, Stockholm: Almqwist & Wiksell.
——  (1985) Tense and Aspect Systems, Oxford: Oxford University Press.
——  (1992) Review of “As Time Goes By: Tense and Universal Grammar” by
Norbert Hornstein. Cambridge, MA: the MIT Press, 1990, In Language, 68.3: 645–50.
——  (ed.) (2000) Tense and Aspect in the Languages of Europe (Empirical approaches to
language typology 20), Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter.
Dash, N.S. (2005) Corpus Linguistics and Language Technology, New Delhi, India: Mittal
Publications.
Declerck, R. (1991) Tense in English: Its Structure and Use in Discourse, London:
Routledge.
Delmas, C. (1983) “ENOUGH et ASSEZ,” TREMA 8: 85–98, Paris III, Sorbonne Nouvelle.
——  (1984) “Le curseur yesterday dans les quotidiens britanniques: place ou structura-
tion,” RANAM, 17: 77–93. Strasbourg, France.
——  (1987) Structuration Abstraite et Chaine Linéaire en Anglais Contemporain, Paris:
CEDEL.
——  (1990) “Les homologues de BEING en français,” paper presented at Cornell
University, Ithaca, New York.
Descles, J.P. (1980) “Recherches sur les opèrations constitutives du langage,” unpublished
thesis, University of Louis Pasteur.
Diver, W. (1964) “The modal system of the English verb,” Word, 20: 322–52.
Doron, E. (1983) “Verbless predicates in Hebrew,” unpublished thesis, University of Texas,
Austin.
Doss, M. (1984) “Sur l’évolution de qad dans le système des particules verbales de
l’arabe,” GLECS, 28.2: 359–64.
Dowty, D.R. (1972) “Studies in the logic of verb aspect and time reference in English,”
unpublished thesis, University of Texas at Austin.
——  (1977) “Toward a semantic analysis of verb aspect and the English imperfective
 progressive,” Linguistic and Philosophy 1.1: 45–77.
Dubinsky, S. (1988) “Toward the characterization of non-lexical categories,” in D. Brentari,
G. Larson, and L. Macleod (eds), CLS, 24: 54–70, Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Eid, M. (1991) “Verbless sentences in Arabic and Hebrew,” in B. Comrie and M. Eid (eds)
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics III, Current Issues In Linguistic Theory, 80: 31–61,
Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
——  (2006) “Arabic on the media: Hybridity and styles,” paper presented at the CASL
Colloquium, University of Maryland, June 1.
Emonds, J.E. (1978) “The verbal complex V’-V in French,” Linguistic Inquiry, 9: 151–75.
Enç, M. (1986) Tense Without Scope: An Analysis of Nouns as Indexicals, Indiana: Indiana
University Linguistic Club.
Engel, D. (1990) Tense and Text: A Study of French Past Tenses, London, New York: Routledge.
Er-Rayyan, M.R. (1986) “Toward the construction of a temporal system for natural
 language in the light of the Arabic and English languages,” unpublished thesis,
University of Pennsylvania.
Ewald, H. (1831) Grammatic Critica Linguae, Arabicae, Lipsiae: Sumtibus Librarie
Hahnianae.
Farghal, M. (1986) “The syntax of WH-questions and related matters in Arabic,”
 unpublished thesis, Indiana University, Bloomington.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
216

Fassi Fehri, A. (1980) “Some complement phenomena in Arabic, the Complementizer
Phrase hypothesis and the non-acceptability condition,” Analyse/Théorie, Université de
Paris-VIII Vincennes, pp. 54–114.
——  (1982) Linguistique Arabe: forme et interprétation, Rabat, Morocco: Publication de
la Faculté des Lettres et Sciences Humaines.
——  (1988) “Arabic passive affixes as aspectual predicates,” ms, MIT, Cambridge, and
Faculty of Letters, Rabat.
——  (1989) “Generalized IP structure, case, inflection and VS word order,” in I. Laka
and A. Mahajan (eds), MIT Working Papers in Linguistics, 10: 75–113, MIT: Department
of Linguistics and Philosophy.
——  (1993) Issues in the Structure and Function of Arabic Clauses and Words, Dordrecht,
Boston, London: Kluwer Academic Publishers.
——  (2004) “Temporal/aspectual interaction and variation across Arabic heights,” in
J. Gueron and J. Lecarme (eds), The Syntax of Time, pp. 235–58, Cambridge: MIT Press.
Ferguson, C. (1996) “Epilogue: diglossia revisited,” in A. Elgibali (ed.), Understanding
Arabic, Essays in Contemporary Arabic Linguistics in Honor of El-Said Badawi,
pp. 49–67, Cairo: American University Press.
Fillmore, C. (1968) “The case for case,” in E. Bach and R. Harms (eds), Universals in
Linguistic Theory, pp. 1–88, New York: Holt, Rinehart & Winston.
——  (ed.) (2003) Form and Meaning in Language, vol. 1: Papers on Semantic Roles,
Stanford: CSLI Publications.
Fischer, W. (1997) “Classical Arabic,” in R. Hetzron (ed.), The Semitic Languages,
pp. 187–219, London, New York: Routledge.
——  (2002) A Grammar of Classical Arabic, New Haven, London: Yale University Press.
Fleisch, H. (1957) “Etudes sur le verbe Arabe,” Mélanges Louis Massignon, 2: 153–81.
Damascus: Institut Français de Damas.
——  (1968) L ‘Arabe Classique: Esquisse d’une Structure Linguistique, Beirut:
Dar EI-Machreq.
——  (1974) “Sur l’ aspect dans le verbe Arabe,” Arabica, 21: 11–19.
——  (1979) Traité de Philologie Arabe (Vol. II): Morphologie Verbale, Particules,
Beyrouth: Dar Al-Mashreq.
Fleischman, S. (1990) Tense and Narrativity: From Medieval Performance to Modern
Fiction, Austin: University of Texas Press.
——  (1991) “Verb tense and point of view in narrative,” in L. Waugh and S. Fleischman (eds),
Discourse Pragmatics and the Verb, pp. 26–54, London, New York: Routledge.
Fradkin, R.A. (1985) “Markedness theory and the verb system of Russian and Arabic:
Aspect, tense, and mood,” unpublished thesis, Indiana University.
Fuchs, C. (1978) “L’ aspect, un problème de linguistique générale: éléments de réponse
dans une perspective énonciative,’’ DRLAV, 16: 1–30.
Gafos, A. (2002) “An argument for a stem-based view of Arabic morphology: Double
verbs revisited,” in D. Parkinson and E. Benmamoun (eds), Current Issues in Linguistic
Theory, 230: 59–86, Amsterdam, Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Gair, J.W. and Kashi, W. (1988) “On distinguishing AGR from agr: Evidence from
South Asia,” in D. Brentari, G. Larson, and L. Macleod (eds), CLS, 24: 87–104,
Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
Gair, J.W. and Paolillo, J.C. (1988) “Sinhala non-verbal sentences and argument structure,”
Cornell Working Papers in Linguistics, 8: 39–77, Cornell University: Department of
Modern Languages and Linguistics.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
217

Garcia, E. (1991) “Grasping the nettle: variation as proof of invariance,” in L.R. Waugh
and S. Rudy (eds), New Vistas in Grammar: lnvariance and Variation, pp. 33–59,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Gaudefroy, D. and Blachere, R. (1952) Grammaire de l’Arabe Classique, Paris:
G.P. Maisonneuve.
Gazdar, G., Klein, E., Pullum, G., and Sag, I. (1985) Generalized Phrase Structure
Grammar, Cambridge, MA: Harvard University Press.
Ghazali, S. (forthcoming) “Corpus-based linguistic analyses: Testing intuitions about
Arabic structure and use,” in Benmamoun (ed.), Current Issues in Linguistic Theory,
John Benjamins.
Givón, T. (1982) “Tense-aspect-modality: The Creole proto-type and beyond,” in
P. Hopper (ed.), Tense Aspect: Between Semantics and Pragmatics, pp. 115–66,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Greenberg, Y. (2002) “The manifestation of genericity in the tense aspect system of
Hebrew nominal sentences,” in J. Ouhalla and U. Shlonsky (eds), Themes in Arabic
and Hebrew Syntax, pp. 267–98, Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer Academic
Publishers.
Grevisse, M. (1964) Le Bon Usage, 8th edn, Gembloux: J. Duculot.
——  (1969) Le Bon Usage, 9th edn, Gembloux: Duculot.
Grimes, J.E. (1975) The Thread of Discourse, The Hague: Mouton.
Guillaume, G. (1919) Études de grammaire logique comparée. Les passés de l’indicatif
français, allemands et russes, Paris: Fischbacher.
——  (1929); (2nd edn, 1970) Temps et verbes: théorie des aspects, des modes et des
temps, Paris: Champion.
——  (1952) La langue est-elle ou n’est-elle pas un système?, Québec: Presses de
l’Université Laval.
——  (1964) Langage et Science du Langage, Paris: Nizet.
——  (1973) Langage et Sciences du Language, Paris, Laval, Nizet: PUL Laval.
Gully, A. (1995) Grammar and Semantics in Medieval Arabic, Richmond: Curzon Press.
Haegeman, L. (1991) Introduction to Government and Binding Theory, Cambridge: Basil
Blackwell and Cambridge University Press.
Hagège, C. (1984) “Du concept à la fonction en linguistique, ou la polarité verbo-nominale,”
La Linguistique, 20.1: 15–29.
——  (1985) L’homme de Paroles, Contribution Linguistique aux Sciences Humaines,
Paris: Fayard.
Halliday, M.A.K. (1994) An Introduction to Functional Grammar, 2nd edn, London,
Melbourne and Auckland: Edward Arnold.
Harbert, W. and Bahloul, M. (2002) “Posverbal subjects in Arabic and the theory of
 agreement,” in J. Ouhalla and U. Shlonsky (eds), Themes in Arabic and Hebrew Syntax,
pp. 45–70, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
Hassaan, T. (1979) Arabic Language: Its Meaning and Structure, Cairo: The National
Organization for Publishing.
Hassan, M.H. (1990) “A contrastive study of tense and aspect in English and Arabic with
special reference to translation,” unpublished thesis, University of Bath, England.
Hawkins, J.A. (1990) “A parsing theory of word order universals,” Linguistic Inquiry, 21.2:
223–61.
Herslund, M. (2005) “Subjective and objective modality,” in A. Klinge and H. Müller (eds),
Modality: Studies in Form and Function, pp. 39–48, London: Equinox.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
218

Hirtle, W.H. (1985) “Linguistics and the dimension of language: An overview of
Guillaume’s theory,” Lingua, 67: 65–83.
Hock, H.H. (1988) Principles of Historical Linguistics, Berlin, New York and Amsterdam:
Mouton de Gruyter.
Holes, C. (2004) Modern Arabic, Structures, Functions and Varieties, Georgetown:
Georgetown University Press.
Holmberg, A. (1986) “Word order and syntactic features,” unpublished thesis, University
of Stockholm.
Hornstein, N. (1990) As Time Goes By: Tense and Universal Grammar, Cambridge: The
MIT Press.
Hornstein, N. and Lightfoot, D. (1987) “Predication and PRO,” Language, 63.1: 23–52.
Ibn-Hisham, J.A. (1359; edn 1964) Muʁni al-labiib ʕan luʁat al-ʔiʕrab. M. Mubarak
et al. (eds), Damascus: Dar al-Fikr.
Iljic, R. (1986) “Les deux [le] du chinois contemporain: Aspect et modalité,” Collection
ERA, 642: 23–40, Paris: CNRS.
Jakobson, R. (1932) “Zur struktur des russischen verbums,” Selected Writings II: 3–15.
——  (1957) “Shifters, verbal categories and the Russian verb,” SWII: 130–47.
——  (1963) Essai de Linguistique Générale (I) (Les fondements du langage), Paris:
Editions de Minuit.
——  (1971) “Shifters, verbal categories and the Russian verb,” in Roman
Jakobson Selected Writings II: Word and Language, pp. 130–47, The Hague and Paris:
Mouton.
Jesperson, O. (1922) Language, its Nature, Development and Origin, London: George
Allen & Unwin.
——  (1924) The Philosophy of Grammar, London: Allen & Unwin.
Johnson, K. (1991) “Object positions,” Natural Language and Linguistics Theory, 9.4:
577–636.
Joly, A. and Roulland, D. (2001) “Pour une approche psychomécanique de l’énonciation,”
in P. Carvalho, N. Quayle, L. Rosier, and O. Soutet (eds), La psychomécanique aujourd’hui.
Actes du 8e Colloque international de psychomécanique du langage, Seyssel, 1997,
pp. 343–55, Paris: Champion.
Jusmanov, N. (1961) The Structure of the Arabic Language, Washington, DC: Center For
Applied Linguistics.
Kharma, N. and Hajjaj, A. (1997) Errors in English Among Arabic Speakers: Analysis and
Remedy, Beirut: York Press.
Khrakovsky, V.S. (1965) “O Xaraktere oppozicii form kataba/yaktubu v arabskom jazyke,”
Kratkie Soobscenija Instituta Narodov Azii, 86: 155–63, Moscow: Akademija Nauk.
Kinberg, N. (1991) “Figurative uses, polysemy and homonymy in systems of tense, mood
and aspect,” Lingua, 83.2/3: 281–300.
——  (2001) Studies in the Linguistic Structure of Classical Arabic, in the series Studies in
Semitic Languages and Linguistics, L. Kinberg and K. Versteegh (eds), Leiden, Boston,
Köln: BRILL.
Koopman, H. and Sportiche, D. (1991). “The position of subject,” Lingua, 85: 211–58.
Kovalev, A.A. (1952) “K Voprosu o vremennyx formax arabskogo glagola,” Trudy
Vojennogo Instituta Inostrannyx Jazykov, 1: 72–85.
Kuroda, S.Y. (1986) “Whether you agree or not: Rough ideas about the comparative  syntax
of English and Japanese,” ms, University of California, San Diego.
Kury„owicz, J. (1973) “Verbal aspect in Semitic,” Orientalia, New Series, 42: 114–20.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
219

Laka, I. (1990) “Negation in syntax: On the nature of functional categories and projections,”
unpublished thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Lancri, A. (1984) Contribution à une Etude Métaopérationnelle des Quantifieurs en
Français et en Anglais, unpublished thesis, Sorbonne University, Paris III.
Lasnik, H. (1981) “Restricting the theory of transformations: A case study,” in
N. Hornstein and D. Lightfoot (eds), Explanation in Linguistics: The Logical Problem
of Language Acquisition, pp. 152–73, London: Longman.
Leech, G. (2004) Meaning and the English Verb, Harlow, England, New York:
Pearson/Longman.
Leech, G. and Short, M. (1981) Style in Fiction, London: Longman.
Lewis, M. (1986) The English Verb: An Exploration of Structure and Meaning, London:
Language Teaching Publications.
Li, C.N. and Thompson, S.A. (1981) Mandarin Chinese: A Functional Reference
Grammar, London: University of California Press.
Lyons, J. (1968) Introduction to Theoretical Linguistics, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
——  (1977) Semantics I and II, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
McCarthy, J. (1979) “Formal problems in Semitic phonology and morphology,”
 unpublished thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
——  (1982) Formal Problems in Semitic Phonology and Morphology, Indiana: Indiana
University Linguistics Club.
——  (1993) “Generalized alignment,” in B. Geert and J.V. Marle (eds), Yearbook of
Morphology, pp. 79–153, Dordrecht: Kluwer.
McCarus, E. (1976) “A semantic analysis of Arabic verbs,” in L. Orlin (ed.), Studies
Presented to G. Cameron, pp. 1–30, Ann Arbor: University of Michigan Press.
McLoughlin, L.J. (1972) “Towards a definition of Modern Standard Arabic,” Archivum
Linguisticum, 3: 57–73.
Martin, R. (1971) Temps et Aspect: essai sur l’emploi des temps narratifs en moyen
Français, Paris: Klincksieck.
Mel’cuk, I.A. (1991) “Towards a universal calculus of inflectional categories: On Roman
Jakobson’s trail,” in L.R. Waugh and S. Rudy (eds), Current Issues in Linguistic Theory,
49: 85–110, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Messaoudi, L. (1985) Temps et Aspect: Approche de la Phrase Simple en Arabe Ecrit,
Paris: Librairie Orientaliste, Paul Geuthner.
Mitchell, E. (1991) “Evidence from Finnish for Pollock’s theory of IP,” Linguistic Inquiry,
22.2: 373–79.
Mohammad, M.A. (1988a) “Nominative case, I-subjects and subject-verb agreement,”
Proceedings of CLS Parasession on Agreement and Grammatical Theory, pp. 223–35,
Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
——  (1988b) “On the parallelism between IP and DP,” in H. Borer (ed.), Proceedings
of the Seventh West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, pp. 241–54, Stanford:
CSLI.
——  (1989) “The sentence structure of Arabic,” unpublished thesis, University of
Southern California, Los Angeles.
——  (1990) “The problem of subject-verb agreement in Arabic: Towards a solution,” in
M. Eid (ed.), Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics I, pp. 95–125, Amsterdam and
Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
220

Monville-Burston, M. and Waugh, L.R. (1985) “Le passé simple dans le discours
 journalistique,” Lingua, 67: 121–70.
——  (1991) “Multivalency: The French historical present in journalistic discourse,” in
S. Fleischman and L. Waugh (eds), Discourse Pragmatics and the Verb, pp. 86–119,
London, New York: Routledge.
Morikawa, M. (1989) “Abstract case and its morphological realization in Japanese with a
focus on genetive case,” unpublished thesis, University of Washington, Seattle.
Moutaouakil, A. (1988) Essais en Grammaire Fonctionelle, Rabat: Société Marocaine des
Editeurs Réunis.
Nakajima, T. (1990) “The identification of empty categories in Japanese,” ms, Cornell
University.
Newmeyer, F.J. (1980) Linguistics Theory in America, New York: Academic Press.
——  (1996) Generative Linguistics, London: Routledge.
Noureddine, I. (1984) Al-fiʕlu wa z-zaman, Beirut: Al-muʔassasa Al-∆aamiʕiyya
 liddiraasaat wannamr wattawziiʕ.
Nuyts, J. (2005) “The modal confusion: On terminology and the concepts behind it,” in
A. Klinge and H. Müller (eds), Modality: Studies in Form and Function, pp. 5–38,
London: Equinox.
Ouhalla, J. (1988) “The syntax of head movement: A study of Berber,” unpublished thesis,
University College, London.
——  (1989) “The structure of negative clauses and word order variations,” ms, University
College, London.
——  (1990) “Sentential negation, relativized minimality and the aspectual status of
 auxiliaries,” The Linguistic Review, 7: 183–231.
——  (1991) Functional Categories and Parametric Variation, London: Routledge.
——  (1993) “Negation, focus and tense: The Arabic maa and laa,” Rivisita di linguistica,
5: 275–300.
——  (1997) “Remarks on focus in Standard Arabic,” in M. Eid and R. Ratcliffe (eds),
Perspectives on Arabic Linguistics X, pp. 9–45, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Ouhalla, J. and Shlonsky, U. (2002) “Introduction,” in J. Ouhalla and U. Shlonsky (eds),
Themes in Arabic and Hebrew Syntax, pp. 1–43, Dordrecht, Boston, London: Kluwer
Academic Publishers.
Owens, J. (1988) The Foundations of Grammar: An Introduction to Medieval Arabic
Grammatical Theory, Amsterdam/Philadelphia: John Benjamins.
Palmer, F.R. (1986) Mood and Modality, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Parret, H. (1991) “Deixis and shifters after Jakobson,” in L.R. Waugh and S. Rudy (eds),
New Vistas in Grammar: Invariance and Variation, pp. 321–40, Lisse: The Peter de
Ridder Press.
Pica, P. (1985) “Sujet, temps et contenu propositionnel: Pour une conception modulaire
des phénomènes de liage,” Modèles Linguistiques, 7.1: 159–93.
Piñón, C. (1993) “SigmaP and Hungarian,” in J. Mead (ed.), The Proceedings of the
Eleventh West Coast Conference on Formal Linguistics, pp. 388–404, Stanford: Center
for the Study of Language and Information.
Plunkett, B. (1991) “The position of subjects in Modern Standard Arabic,” Paper Presented
at the Fifth Annual Symposium on Arabic Linguistics, March 1–2, Ann Arbor, Michigan.
Pollock, J.Y. (1989) “Verb movement, universal grammar, and the structure of IP,”
Linguistic Inquiry, 20: 365–424.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
221

Quirk, R. (1972) A grammar of contemporary English, London: Longman.
Radford, A. (1988) Transformational Syntax, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Rapoport, T. (1985) “Copular constructions in Hebrew,” in W.H. Eilfort, P.D. Kroeber, and
K.L. Peterson (eds), CLS, 21: 354–70, Chicago: Chicago Linguistic Society.
——  (1987) “Copular, nominal, and small clauses: A study of Israeli Hebrew,”
 unpublished thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Ratcliffe, R. (1998) The ‘Broken’ Plural Problem in Arabic and Comparative Semitic:
Allomorphy and Analogy in Non-concatenative Morphology, Amsterdam: John
Benjamins.
Reckendorf, H. (1921) Arabische Syntax, Heidelberg: Carl Winter.
Reichenbach, H. (1947) Elements of Symbolic Logic, New York: Macmillan.
Rescher, N. (1968) Topics in Philosophical Logic, Dordrecht: Reibel.
Rizzi, L. (1989) “Speculation on verb second,” ms, Université de Genève.
——  (1990) Relativized Minimality, Cambridge: The MIT Press.
Ryding, K. (2005) A Reference Grammar of Modern Standard Arabic, London, New York:
Cambridge University Press.
Sayed, H.Z. (1983) “A pragmatic approach to modality and the modals with application to
literary Arabic,” unpublished thesis, University of Edinburgh.
Schulz, E. (2004) A Student Grammar of Modern Standard Arabic, Cambridge: Cambridge
University Press.
Searle, J.R. (1983) Intensionality, Cambridge: Cambridge University Press.
Shlonsky, U. (2000) “Subject positions and copular constructions,” in H. Bennis,
M. Everaert, and E. Reuland (eds), Interface Strategies, pp. 325–47, Amsterdam:
Royal Netherland Academy of Arts and Sciences.
Sibawayhi, A.B.Q. (796; edn, 1938) (Eighth Century) Al-Kitaab, Cairo: Buulaaq.
Smith, C.S. (1983) “A theory of aspectual choice,” Language, 59.3: 479–501.
Speas, M. and Pukui, N. (1986) “Specifiers and projections,” MIT Working Papers, 8,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Speas, M.J. (1986) “Adjuncts and projections in syntax,” unpublished thesis,
Massachusetts Institute of Technology.
Sproat, R. (1985) “Welsh syntax and VSO structure,” Natural Language and Linguistic
Theory, 3: 173–216.
Stowell, T. (1983) “Null antecedents and proper government,” in P. Sells and C. Jones (eds),
Proceedings of the Thirteenth Annual Meeting, NELS, GLSA, University of
Massachusetts, Amherst.
Stuurman, P. (1985) Phrase Structure Theory in Generative Grammar, Dordrecht: Pons.
Suleiman, Y. (ed.) (2003) Arabic Grammar and Linguistics, London: RoutledgeCurzon.
Sumangala, L. (1991) “ ‘Inner’ and ‘outer’ subjects in Sinhala,” Cornell University
Working Papers in Linguistics, 9: 229–57, Cornell University.
Tobin, Y. (1993) Aspect in the English Verb: Process and Result in Language, London,
New York: Longman.
Travis, A. (1979) “Inflectional affixation in transformational grammar: Evidence from the
Arabic paradigm,” unpublished thesis, University of Puerto Rico.
Triki, M. and Bahloul, M. (2001) “The reported speech revisited: A question of self and
expression,” Academic Research, 1: 135. Sfax, Tunisia: Faculty of Letters and
Humanities.
Tritton, A.S. (1943) Teach Yourself Arabic, London: The English Universities Press.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
222

UI-Haq, Z. (1984) “Negation in Arabic: A morphosyntactic and semantic description,”
unpublished thesis, Indiana University.
Vendler, Z. (1967) Linguistics in Philosophy, Ithaca: Cornell University Press.
Versteegh, K. (1997) Landmarks in Linguistic Thought: The Arabic Linguistic Tradition,
London, New York: Routledge.
——  (ed.) (2006) Encyclopedia of Arabic Language and Linguistics, Leuven: Brill
Academic Publishers.
Von Wright, G.H. (1951) An Essay in Modal Logic, Amsterdam: North-Holland.
Wallace, S. (1982) “Figure and ground: The interrelationships of linguistic categories,” in
P. Hopper (ed.), Tense Aspect: Between Semantics and Pragmatics, pp. 201–23,
Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Wasow, T. (2006) Review of Form and meaning in language, vol. 1: papers on semantic
roles, by Charles J. Fillmore, CSLI Publications (2003), in Language, 82.1: 169–71.
Waugh, L.R. (1975) “A semantic analysis of the French tense system,” Orbis, 24.2:
436–85.
——  (1976) Roman Jakobson’s Science of Language, Lisse: The Peter de Ridder Press.
——  (1979) “Markedness and phonological systems,” in W. Wölck and P. Garvin (eds),
The Fifth LACUS Forum 1978, pp. 155–65, Columbia, SC: Hornbeam Press.
——  (1982) “Marked and unmarked: A choice between unequals in semiotic structure,”
Semiotica, 38: 299–318.
——  (1987) “Marking time with the passé composé: Towards a theory of the perfect”
Lingvisticae Investigationes, XI.1: 1–47. Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
——  (1990) “Discourse function of tense-aspect: Dynamic synchrony,” Verbal Aspect in
Discourse, 5: 159–87.
——  (1991a) “Introduction,” in L. Waugh and S. Rudy (eds), Current Issues in Linguistic
Theory, 49: 1–7, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
——  (1991b) “Tense-aspect and hierarchy of meaning: Pragmatic, textual, modal,
 discourse, expressive, referential,” in L. Waugh and S. Rudy (eds), Current Issues in
Linguistic Theory, 49: 241–60, Amsterdam: John Benjamins.
Waugh, L.R. and Monville-Burston, M. (1986) “Aspect and discourse function: The
French simple past in newspaper usage,” Language, 62.4: 846–77.
Whitman, J. (1989) “Topic, modality and IP structure,” Harvard Studies in Korean
Linguistics III, pp. 341–56, Cambridge, Massachusetts: Department of Linguistics,
Harvard University.
Wightwick, J. and Gaafar, M. (1998) Arabic: Verbs and Essentials of Grammar, New York:
McGraw Hill.
Wright, W. (1989) A Grammar of the Arabic Language, Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.
BIBLIOGRAPHY
223


225
INDEX
Aartun, K., tense view of verb 41
Abney, S., nonlexical categories 18
action verbs, in Fillmore’s theory 9
Adamczewski, Henri: analysis of verbal
categories 12–13; predicative
relationship 208n; temporality of
imperfect 132
adverbs, temporal 118
agreement morphology 36–37
Al-Aswad, M.: comparison of 
perfect and simple past 66–67;
functions of QAD 75; 
kaanaperfect 206n
Al-Mansouri, A.J., aspectual nature of
verb 39
anteriority: of imperfect 134; of perfect
68–69
Am-mirbinii: binary nature of time 203n;
tense view of verb 41
Asmi, M., functions of QAD 76
aspect-tense continuum 24, 40–42,
152–54
ATM (aspect, tense, modality) system: 
as basis of Arabic verbal system 
1–2; co-occurrence between 
categories 179–83; derivation of
categories 150–52; and perfect 
64–68; QAD as category 96–102;
why questions 180–83; yes/no
questions 180–83
auxiliaries: as aspectual elements 209;
compound tenses 158–59; functions
with imperfect 136–37
Bahloul, R., agreement morphology
30–31
Beeston, A.F.L., aspectual nature of 
verb 39
Benmamoun, E.: anteriority-simultaneity
opposition 42; generation of mood 
and negation 151; morphological
realization of tense 30–31;
tense view of verb 41; vocalic 
melody 203n
Blachère, R.: temporal functions of QAD
73–74; understanding of verb 39
Bouscaren, J., eventive value of 
imperfect 107
categories, not discrete 21–23
Chinese language, verbal particles
206–07n
Chomsky, N., analysis of verbal categories
14–16
Chuquet, J., eventive value of 
imperfect 107
clauses: derivation 20; and modality
169–70; structure 186
Cohen, M., contextual determination of
tense 39
complementizer phrase (CP) 16
compound perfect 45
Comrie, B., combined tense/aspect 
system 41–42
conditional constructions 56–57; of
perfect 69–70
contextual variation 26; of perfect 68
This index preserves the structure and terminology used throughout the text, although
initial capitals are used only for proper names. French and English examples are used as
comparators throughout the text and are not indexed. Substantive endnotes are indexed
with the suffix ‘n’.

INDEX
226
continuum: aspect-tense 24, 40–42,
152–54; and modality 23–25
copula: and modality 176–79; obligatory
presence 167–69, 173–76
cross-categoriality 21–23
Culioli, A.: analysis of verbal categories
10–12; clausal derivation 20
Dahl, O.: functions of QAD 76; universal
nature of ATM 201n
dimensionalization: of imperfect 134; 
of perfect 68, 69–70
Diver, W., QAD and emphatic 
hypothesis 76
emphatic hypothesis 207n; and QAD
75–77
Empty Category Principle 154
enunciation, and verbal event 53–55
enunciative operation 20
Enunciative Operations, Theory 
of 11–12
enunciator, relation to content 18–19
Er-Rayyan, M.R.: agreement morphology
30–31; functions of QAD 74, 75
FA, and QAD 91–92
Fehri, Fassi: combined tense/aspect 
system 42; tense morphemes 31
Fillmore, C., analysis of verbal categories
8–10, 201n, 210n
Fischer, W.: aspectual nature of verb
39–40; combined tense/aspect 
system 42
Fleisch, H., aspectual nature of verb 39
Fleischman, S., accelerative function of
historical present 131
Fradkin, R.A., functions of QAD 74–75
fundamental value (valeur 
fondamentale) 26
futurity, and imperfect 113–21
Gaudfroye, D.: temporal functions of 
QAD 73–74; understanding of 
verb 39
Government and Binding Theory 14–16
Guillaume, G., values 25–26
Hassaan, T., QAD and emphatic
hypothesis 76
Hassan, M.H., functions of QAD 74, 75,
76–77
Haya language 49–50
hierarchies 27, 63
Hornstein, N., Neo-Reichenbachen theory
of tense 208n
hypothetical mode 60, 69
Ibn-Hishaam, A.J.: functions of 
QAD 73–74; QAD and emphatic
hypothesis 75
imperfect: anaphoric value 106;
anteriority 134; within ATM system
135–37; characterizing grammatical
subject 111–12; dimensionalization
134; eventive value 107, 134;
frequency of use 140–47; function of
auxiliaries 136–37; function of modals
136; and future time 121–25, 135;
futurity and modality 113–21; gnomic
interpretation 108–13, 134–35; ‘good
wishes’ construction 122; independent
of point of view 110–12; and modal
particles sawfa/sa 113–21; and modal
QAD 124–25; and negation 137–40;
and past time 126–31, 135; present
time reference 104–08; relationship to
perfect 140–47, 185–86; simultaneity
134; and temporal relations 104;
temporality 131–32, 147–48; as
unmarked 134, 146; variation and
invariance 132–35
imperfect paradigm: medial vowel 36;
prefix and first vowel 35; prefix and
last vowel 36–37
indefinite conditionals 61
INFL constituent 14–18
inflection phrase (IP) 16–18
Internal Subject Hypothesis 15
invariance: and imperfect 132–35; and
modality 25–26; and perfect 68–70;
and QAD 85–89, 101–02
irrealis mode 60
Jakobsen, R., taxis 204n
Jusmanov, N., semitic verb as 
tenseless 38
Khrakovsky, V.S., tense view of 
verb 41
Koopman, H., Internal Subject 
Hypothesis 15
Kurylowicz, J., anteriority-simultaneity
opposition 42

INDEX
227
LA, and QAD 87–89, 93–94
Laka, I, Sigma Phrase 165–66
language: acts 107; coherence 26;
function of 10; subjectivity 21;
theories of 7
lexis: binary division of clausal structure
18; in Culioli’s theory 10–12
locatives, in Fillmore’s theory 9–10
McCarus, E., aspectual nature of verb 39
markedness: in classification 5, 62; and
contextual variants 26, 63–64; perfect
and imperfect 146; and QAD 86–87
markedness, and modality 26–27
Messaoudi, L.: combined tense/aspect
system 42; functions of QAD 76
metalanguage, in linguistics 23
Metaoperational Grammar 
Theory 12–13
methodology: background assumptions
3–4; described 2–3; flaws in earlier
studies 1; structure of research 4–6
modal particles: functions 118–20; and
imperfect 113–21, 136
modality: analysis of 151; appreciative
20; assertive 19; and clausal structure
186; combined with aspect 63;
combined with temporality 63; and
continuum 23–25; and copula 176–79;
in Culioli’s theory 10–12; in
enunciative framework 19; epistemic
19–20; in Fillmore’s theory 8–10; and
imperfect 113–21; and invariance
25–26; in linguistics 10; and
markedness 26–27; and nominal
clauses 169–70; not static 18;
properties 170–71; radical/deontic 20;
sentential 20–21; subjectivity 21;
taking a stand 18; types I-IV 19–20;
verb movement 171–73; and verbal
categories 18–27; verbal root 150
modalization see modality
mood phrases 177–79
morphemes: affixal 153–54; agreement
34, 36, 37; aspect-tense 30–31;
bound 160, 172; free 160; identifying
verbal 29–31; modality 150; 
taxis–aspect 161
morphology: agreement 30–31, 36, 37,
150; approaches to 29; of imperfect
35; of perfect 34; taxis–aspect 150,
153, 158; tense 158
newspapers, use of perfect 45–46
nominal clauses, and modality 169–70
non-stative verbs 52–53
nonlexical categories 18
operation: enunciative 20; predicative
operation 20
Ouhalla, J., clausal strata 16
paradigms: imperfect 35–37; perfect
31–34
particles: emphatic 87–89, 165; negative
138–40, 163–64
passive constructions, first vowel 32–33
passivization 32–33
past participle 205n
perfect 31; anteriority 68–69; aspect 
and modal meanings 63; within ATM
system 64–68; basic meaning 68;
conditional constructions 69–70;
construction 45; contextual variants
68; dimensionalization 68, 69–70;
equivalence to present tense 59;
expression of timelessness 58;
frequency of use 140–47; frequentive
use 59; future time interpretation
59–62, 63; gnomic interpretation
57–59, 63; ‘good wishes’ cases 70;
hierarchization 63; hypothetical mode
69; interaction with QAD 77; and the
invariant 68–70; not temporally
restricted 62; past time reference
47–51; present time interpretation
51–57, 63; relationship to imperfect
140–47, 185–86; temporality 147–48;
use in newspaper reports 45–46
perfect paradigm 31–34: first vowel
32–33; second vowel 33–34; third
vowel 34
Phrases, Theory of  12–13
pluperfect 50–51
predicative operation 20
principles and parameters approach to
verbal categories 14–16; 149
proposition: in Culioli’s theory 11; in
Fillmore’s theory 8–9
psychology, of understanding of verb 39
QAD: within ‘as for’ construction 83; in
assertive contexts 98–99; and assertive
particle LA 93–94; as assertorial
101–02, 186; as ATM category 96–102;

QAD (Continued)
in complement clauses 82–83; and
coordinator FA 91–92; and coordinator
WA 89–91; disallowed usage 207n; 
in emphatic contexts 83–85; and
emphatic hypothesis 75–77;
and emphatic particles 87–89; and FA
91–92; frequency of use 80–82, 85; 
and imperfect 124–25; inside the 
verbal complex 81–82; interaction 
with perfect 77; and invariance
101–02; invariant function 85–89;
versus LA 87–89; and markedness
86–87; in non-initial position 80–81;
with no preceding particles 94–95;
versus Ø (unmarked member) 86–87;
polysemy 208n; in sentence initial
position 78–80; syntactic behavior
162–66; syntactic distribution 78–85;
and temporal hypothesis 73–74; usage
triggers 97; used with yabduu 207n;
and WA 89–91
relationships, oppositional 27
Relativized Minimality 154
Ryding, K., functions of QAD 77
Sayed, H.Z., functions of QAD 74
Schulz, E., anteriority-simultaneity
opposition 42
sentence structure, and verbal categories
8–18
sentences, hierarchical structure 13
Shlonsky, U., clausal strata 16
Sibawayhi, A.B.Q.: cautious use of 
tense categories 40–41; QAD and
emphatic hypothesis 75–76;
three way distinction 45; verbal
categories 201n
Sigma Phrase 165
simple perfect 45
Sportiche, D., Internal Subject 
Hypothesis 15
stative verbs 52–53
subjectivity, of modality 21
suffixed form see perfect
Swahili 161–62
Talmoudi, F., functions of QAD 76
taxis–aspect: structure 152–54; and 
tense 152–54; tense and compound
tenses 157–66; tense and conditionals
156–57; tense and negation 154–56
temporal adverbs 118
temporal hypothesis, and QAD 73–74
tense: and taxis–aspect 152–54;
taxis–aspect and compound tenses
157–66; taxis–aspect and conditionals
156–57; taxis–aspect and negation
154–56; value of 185
theories: enunciation 201–02n; of
Enunciative Operations 10–12;
Government and Binding 14–16; of
language 7; Metaoperational Grammar
Theory 12; of Phases 12; X’ 202n
thinking, role of verbal categories 7
Tritton, A.S., semitic verb as tenseless
38–39
use value 26
utterances, binary structure 11–12
valeurs d’emploi 26
variation, contextual 26, 63–64
verb classification 52–53
verbal categories: Adamczewski’s analysis
12–13; aspect view 38–40; binary
system 203n; combined tense/aspect
system 41–42; critique of semantic
theories 44; Culioli’s analysis 10–12;
Fillmore’s analysis 8–10; Government
and Binding Theory 14–16;
implications of 7; and modality 18–27;
neither tense nor aspect 42; perfect 31;
Principles and Parameters approach
14–16; in semantic interpretation 7;
and sentence structure 8–18;
tense view 40–41
verbal event, and enunciation 53–55
verbal morphemes, identifying 29–31
verbal phrase (VP) 16
verbal root: appropriation 203n; and
modality 150
verbs: importance in study of Arabic 1;
movement into modality 171–73;
stative and non-stative 52–53
WA, and QAD 89–91
wallaahi 207n
Waugh, L.R. 27; passé composé 205n;
perfective past 205n
Wright, W.: functions of QAD 75; states
of the verb 38
X’ template 14, 17
X’ theory 202n
INDEX
228

